---
reference_id: "PMID:37479139"
title: "Efficacy and safety of givosiran for acute hepatic porphyria: Final results of the randomized phase III ENVISION trial."
authors:
- Kuter DJ
- Bonkovsky HL
- Monroy S
- Ross G
- Guillén-Navarro E
- Cappellini MD
- Minder AE
- Hother-Nielsen O
- Ventura P
- Jia G
- Sweetser MT
- Thapar M
- ENVISION Investigators
journal: J Hepatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2023.06.013
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Young Adult
- "Acetylgalactosamine/administration & dosage, adverse effects, analogs & derivatives, analogs & derivatives"
- Double-Blind Method
- "Porphyrias, Hepatic/drug therapy"
- "Pyrrolidines/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Quality of Life
- Treatment Outcome
- Porphobilinogen Synthase/deficiency
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of givosiran for acute hepatic porphyria: Final results of the randomized phase III ENVISION trial.
**Authors:** Kuter DJ, Bonkovsky HL, Monroy S, Ross G, Guillén-Navarro E, Cappellini MD, Minder AE, Hother-Nielsen O, Ventura P, Jia G, Sweetser MT, Thapar M, ENVISION Investigators
**Journal:** J Hepatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jhep.2023.06.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2023.06.013)

## Content

1. J Hepatol. 2023 Nov;79(5):1150-1158. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2023.06.013. Epub
2023  Jul 20.

Efficacy and safety of givosiran for acute hepatic porphyria: Final results of
the randomized phase III ENVISION trial.

Kuter DJ(1), Bonkovsky HL(2), Monroy S(3), Ross G(4), Guillén-Navarro E(5),
Cappellini MD(6), Minder AE(7), Hother-Nielsen O(8), Ventura P(9), Jia G(10),
Sweetser MT(10), Thapar M(11); ENVISION Investigators.

Author information:
(1)Hematology Division, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
Electronic address: dkuter@mgh.harvard.edu.
(2)Atrium Wake Forest Baptist Health, Winston-Salem, NC, USA.
(3)Instituto Nacional de Pediatría, Mexico City, Mexico.
(4)Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(5)Medical Genetics Section, Virgen de la Arrixaca University Hospital, IMIB
Pascual Parrilla, University of Murcia (UMU), Murcia, Spain; CIBERER-ISCIII,
Madrid, Spain.
(6)University of Milan, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(7)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Porphyria, Stadtspital Zürich,
Triemli, Zürich, Switzerland.
(8)Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark.
(9)Department of Surgical and Medical Sciences for Children and Adults, Internal
Medicine Unit, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
(10)Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(11)Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Acute hepatic porphyria (AHP) is caused by defects in hepatic
heme biosynthesis, leading to disabling acute neurovisceral attacks and chronic
symptoms. In ENVISION (NCT03338816), givosiran treatment for 6 months reduced
attacks and other disease manifestations compared with placebo. Herein, we
report data from the 36-month final analysis of ENVISION.
METHODS: Ninety-four patients with AHP (age ≥12 years) and recurrent attacks
were randomized 1:1 to monthly double-blind subcutaneous givosiran 2.5 mg/kg
(n = 48) or placebo (n = 46) for 6 months. In the open-label extension (OLE)
period, 93 patients received givosiran 2.5 or 1.25 mg/kg for 6 months or more
before transitioning to 2.5 mg/kg. Endpoints were exploratory unless otherwise
noted.
RESULTS: During givosiran treatment, the median annualized attack rate (AAR) was
0.4. Through Month 36, annualized days of hemin use remained low in the
continuous givosiran group (median, 0.0 to 0.4) and decreased in the placebo
crossover group (16.2 to 0.4). At end of OLE, in the continuous givosiran and
placebo crossover groups, 86% and 92%, respectively, had 0 attacks. AAR was
lower than historical AAR in 98% and 100%, respectively (post hoc analysis), and
there were 0 days of hemin use in 88% and 90%, respectively. The 12-item
short-form health survey physical and mental component summary scores increased
by 8.6 and 8.1, respectively (continuous givosiran) and 9.4 and 3.2,
respectively (placebo crossover). EQ-5D health-related questionnaire scores
increased by 18.9 (continuous givosiran) and 9.9 (placebo crossover). Lower
urinary delta-aminolevulinic acid and porphobilinogen levels were sustained.
Safety findings demonstrated a continued positive risk/benefit profile for
givosiran.
CONCLUSIONS: Long-term monthly givosiran treatment provides sustained and
continued improvement in clinical manifestations of AHP.
GOV IDENTIFIER: NCT03338816.
EUDRACT NUMBER: 2017-002432-17.
IMPACT AND IMPLICATIONS: Acute hepatic porphyria (AHP) is a group of rare,
chronic, multisystem disorders associated with overproduction and accumulation
of neurotoxic heme intermediates (delta-aminolevulinic acid and
porphobilinogen), sometimes resulting in recurrent acute attacks and long-term
complications. Givosiran, a small-interfering RNA that prevents accumulation of
delta-aminolevulinic acid and porphobilinogen, is approved for the treatment of
AHP. These final 36-month results of ENVISION, a phase III study of givosiran in
patients with AHP and recurrent attacks, show that long-term monthly treatment
with givosiran leads to continuous and sustained reductions in annualized attack
rate and use of hemin over time, as well as improved quality of life, with an
acceptable safety profile. These results are important for physicians, patients,
families, and caregivers who are grappling with this debilitating and
potentially life-threatening disease with few effective and tolerable treatment
options.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2023.06.013
PMID: 37479139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
