---
reference_id: "PMID:39322396"
title: Vanishing white matter.
authors:
- van der Knaap MS
- Bugiani M
- Abbink TEM
journal: Handb Clin Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-323-99209-1.00015-6
keywords:
- Humans
- Animals
- "Leukoencephalopathies/genetics, pathology"
- Eukaryotic Initiation Factor-2B/genetics
- White Matter/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vanishing white matter.
**Authors:** van der Knaap MS, Bugiani M, Abbink TEM
**Journal:** Handb Clin Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/B978-0-323-99209-1.00015-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-99209-1.00015-6)

## Content

1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2024;204:77-94. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-323-99209-1.00015-6.

Vanishing white matter.

van der Knaap MS(1), Bugiani M(2), Abbink TEM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Child Neurology, Amsterdam Leukodystrophy Center, Emma 
Children's Hospital, Amsterdam University Medical Center, and Amsterdam 
Neuroscience, Cellular & Molecular Mechanisms, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands. Electronic address: ms.vanderknaap@amsterdamumc.nl.
(2)Department of Pathology, Amsterdam Leukodystrophy Center, Amsterdam 
University Medical Centers, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Child Neurology, Amsterdam Leukodystrophy Center, Emma 
Children's Hospital, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Amsterdam 
Neuroscience, Cellular & Molecular Mechanisms, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.

"Vanishing white matter" (VWM) is a leukodystrophy caused by autosomal recessive 
pathogenic variants in the genes encoding the subunits of eukaryotic initiation 
factor 2B (eIF2B). Disease onset and disease course are extremely variable. 
Onset varies from the antenatal period until senescence. The age of onset is 
predictive of disease severity. VWM is characterized by chronic neurologic 
deterioration and, additionally, episodes of rapid and major neurologic decline, 
provoked by stresses such as febrile infections and minor head trauma. The 
disease is dominated by degeneration of the white matter of the central nervous 
system due to dysfunction of oligodendrocytes and in particular astrocytes. 
Organs other than the brain are rarely affected, with the exception of the 
ovaries. The reason for the selective vulnerability of the white matter of the 
central nervous system and, less consistently, the ovaries is poorly understood. 
eIF2B is a central regulatory factor in the integrated stress response (ISR). 
Genetic variants decrease eIF2B activity and thereby cause constitutive 
activation of the ISR downstream of eIF2B. Strikingly, the ISR is specifically 
activated in astrocytes. Modulation of eIF2B activity and ISR activation in VWM 
mouse models impacts disease severity, revealing eIF2B-regulated pathways as 
potential druggable targets.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text 
and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-323-99209-1.00015-6
PMID: 39322396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]