---
reference_id: "PMID:39509507"
title: Regulated N-glycosylation controls chaperone function and receptor trafficking.
authors:
- Ma M
- Dubey R
- Jen A
- Pusapati GV
- Singal B
- Shishkova E
- Overmyer KA
- Cormier-Daire V
- Fedry J
- Aravind L
- Coon JJ
- Rohatgi R
journal: Science
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1126/science.adp7201
keywords:
- Glycosylation
- Humans
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
- Protein Transport
- "Hexosyltransferases/metabolism, genetics"
- "Membrane Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- Molecular Chaperones/metabolism
- "Receptor, IGF Type 1/metabolism"
- "HSP90 Heat-Shock Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- Animals
- Wnt Signaling Pathway
- Mice
- Protein Folding
- HEK293 Cells
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Regulated N-glycosylation controls chaperone function and receptor trafficking.
**Authors:** Ma M, Dubey R, Jen A, Pusapati GV, Singal B, Shishkova E, Overmyer KA, Cormier-Daire V, Fedry J, Aravind L, Coon JJ, Rohatgi R
**Journal:** Science (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.adp7201](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.adp7201)

## Content

1. Science. 2024 Nov 8;386(6722):667-672. doi: 10.1126/science.adp7201. Epub 2024
 Nov 7.

Regulated N-glycosylation controls chaperone function and receptor trafficking.

Ma M(1), Dubey R(1), Jen A(2), Pusapati GV(1), Singal B(3), Shishkova E(4)(5), 
Overmyer KA(2)(5), Cormier-Daire V(6), Fedry J(7), Aravind L(8), Coon 
JJ(2)(4)(5)(9), Rohatgi R(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Medicine, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(2)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 
53506, USA.
(3)Stanford SLAC CryoEM Initiative, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(4)National Center for Quantitative Biology of Complex Systems, Madison, WI 
53706, USA.
(5)Morgridge Institute for Research, Madison, WI 53515, USA.
(6)Université Paris Cité, Génétique clinique, INSERM UMR 1163, Institut Imagine, 
Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades (AP-HP), Paris, France.
(7)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK.
(8)Computational Biology Branch, Division of Intramural Research, National 
Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, MD 20894, USA.
(9)Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53506, USA.

One-fifth of human proteins are N-glycosylated in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
by two oligosaccharyltransferases, OST-A and OST-B. Contrary to the prevailing 
view of N-glycosylation as a housekeeping function, we identified an ER pathway 
that modulates the activity of OST-A. Genetic analyses linked OST-A to HSP90B1, 
an ER chaperone for membrane receptors, and CCDC134, an ER luminal protein. 
During its translocation into the ER, an N-terminal peptide in HSP90B1 templates 
the assembly of a translocon complex containing CCDC134 and OST-A that protects 
HSP90B1 during folding, preventing its hyperglycosylation and degradation. 
Disruption of this pathway impairs WNT and IGF1R signaling and causes the bone 
developmental disorder osteogenesis imperfecta. Thus, N-glycosylation can be 
regulated by specificity factors in the ER to control cell surface receptor 
signaling and tissue development.

DOI: 10.1126/science.adp7201
PMCID: PMC7617332
PMID: 39509507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.