---
reference_id: "PMID:36797513"
title: "TELO2-related syndrome (You-Hoover-Fong syndrome): Description of 14 new affected individuals and review of the literature."
authors:
- Albokhari D
- Pritchard AB
- Beil A
- Muss C
- Bupp C
- Grange DK
- Delplancq G
- Heeley J
- Zuteck M
- Morrow MM
- Kuentz P
- Palculict TB
- Hoover-Fong JE
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63142
keywords:
- Humans
- Brain Diseases/complications
- Epilepsy/complications
- Intellectual Disability/pathology
- Microcephaly/pathology
- Syndrome
- Telomere-Binding Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TELO2-related syndrome (You-Hoover-Fong syndrome): Description of 14 new affected individuals and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Albokhari D, Pritchard AB, Beil A, Muss C, Bupp C, Grange DK, Delplancq G, Heeley J, Zuteck M, Morrow MM, Kuentz P, Palculict TB, Hoover-Fong JE
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.63142](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.63142)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2023 May;191(5):1261-1272. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63142. Epub 
2023 Feb 16.

TELO2-related syndrome (You-Hoover-Fong syndrome): Description of 14 new 
affected individuals and review of the literature.

Albokhari D(1)(2), Pritchard AB(3), Beil A(3), Muss C(4), Bupp C(5), Grange 
DK(6), Delplancq G(7)(8), Heeley J(6), Zuteck M(5), Morrow MM(9), Kuentz 
P(7)(10), Palculict TB(9), Hoover-Fong JE(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Taibah University College of Medicine, Medina, 
Saudi Arabia.
(2)Mckusick-Nathan Department of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(3)Division of Pediatric Genetics, Metabolism, and Genomic Medicine, Department 
of Pediatrics, C.S. Mott Children's Hospital, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA.
(4)Department of Genetics, Nemours Children's Hospital, Wilmington, Delaware, 
USA.
(5)Spectrum Health, Helen Devos Children's Hospital, Medical Genetics and 
Genomics, Grand Rapids, Michigan, USA.
(6)Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, 
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis Children's Hospital, St. 
Louis, Missouri, USA.
(7)Oncobiologie Génétique Bioinformatique, PCBio, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Besançon, Besançon, France.
(8)Service de Neuropédiatrie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Besançon, 
Besançon, France.
(9)GeneDx, Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA.
(10)INSERM - Université de Bourgogne Franche-Comté, UMR 1231 Equipe GAD, 
Génétique des Anomalies du Développement, FHU TRANSLAD, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France.

You-Hoover-Fong syndrome (YHFS) is an autosomal recessive condition caused by 
pathogenic variants in the TELO2 gene. Affected individuals were reported to 
have global developmental delay, intellectual disability, microcephaly, 
dysmorphic facial features, ocular involvement including cortical visual 
impairment, strabismus, cataract and rotatory nystagmus, movement disorder, 
hypertonia and spasticity, balance disturbance and ataxia, and abnormal sleep 
pattern. Other features reported include poor growth, cleft palate, cardiac 
malformations, epilepsy, scoliosis, and hearing loss. To date, 12 individuals 
with YHFS have been reported in the literature. Here we describe 14 new 
individuals with YHFS from 10 families. Their clinical presentation provides 
additional support of the phenotype recognized previously and delineates the 
clinical spectrum associated with YHFS syndrome. In addition, we present a 
review of the literature including follow-up data on four previously reported 
individuals with YHFS.

© 2023 The Authors. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63142
PMID: 36797513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]