---
reference_id: "PMID:19232111"
title: Osteopetrosis.
authors:
- Stark Z
- Savarirayan R
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-4-5
keywords:
- Adult
- "Bone Marrow Diseases/epidemiology, genetics, pathology, therapy"
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Fractures, Spontaneous/epidemiology, genetics, pathology, therapy"
- "Genes, Dominant"
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Osteoclasts/pathology
- "Osteopetrosis/epidemiology, genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Prevalence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteopetrosis.
**Authors:** Stark Z, Savarirayan R
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-4-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-4-5)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2009 Feb 20;4:5. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-4-5.

Osteopetrosis.

Stark Z(1), Savarirayan R.

Author information:
(1)Genetic Health Services Victoria, and Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, 
Melbourne, Australia. zornitza.stark@ghsv.org.au

Osteopetrosis ("marble bone disease") is a descriptive term that refers to a 
group of rare, heritable disorders of the skeleton characterized by increased 
bone density on radiographs. The overall incidence of these conditions is 
difficult to estimate but autosomal recessive osteopetrosis (ARO) has an 
incidence of 1 in 250,000 births, and autosomal dominant osteopetrosis (ADO) has 
an incidence of 1 in 20,000 births. Osteopetrotic conditions vary greatly in 
their presentation and severity, ranging from neonatal onset with 
life-threatening complications such as bone marrow failure (e.g. classic or 
"malignant" ARO), to the incidental finding of osteopetrosis on radiographs 
(e.g. osteopoikilosis). Classic ARO is characterised by fractures, short 
stature, compressive neuropathies, hypocalcaemia with attendant tetanic 
seizures, and life-threatening pancytopaenia. The presence of primary 
neurodegeneration, mental retardation, skin and immune system involvement, or 
renal tubular acidosis may point to rarer osteopetrosis variants, whereas onset 
of primarily skeletal manifestations such as fractures and osteomyelitis in late 
childhood or adolescence is typical of ADO. Osteopetrosis is caused by failure 
of osteoclast development or function and mutations in at least 10 genes have 
been identified as causative in humans, accounting for 70% of all cases. These 
conditions can be inherited as autosomal recessive, dominant or X-linked traits 
with the most severe forms being autosomal recessive. Diagnosis is largely based 
on clinical and radiographic evaluation, confirmed by gene testing where 
applicable, and paves the way to understanding natural history, specific 
treatment where available, counselling regarding recurrence risks, and prenatal 
diagnosis in severe forms. Treatment of osteopetrotic conditions is largely 
symptomatic, although haematopoietic stem cell transplantation is employed for 
the most severe forms associated with bone marrow failure and currently offers 
the best chance of longer-term survival in this group. The severe infantile 
forms of osteopetrosis are associated with diminished life expectancy, with most 
untreated children dying in the first decade as a complication of bone marrow 
suppression. Life expectancy in the adult onset forms is normal. It is 
anticipated that further understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of these 
conditions will reveal new targets for pharmacotherapy.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-4-5
PMCID: PMC2654865
PMID: 19232111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]