---
reference_id: "PMID:22929189"
title: Inherited cobalamin malabsorption. Mutations in three genes reveal functional and ethnic patterns.
authors:
- Tanner SM
- Sturm AC
- Baack EC
- Liyanarachchi S
- de la Chapelle A
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-56
keywords:
- "Anemia, Megaloblastic"
- Ethnicity/genetics
- Female
- Founder Effect
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Genetic Testing
- Humans
- "Intrinsic Factor/genetics, metabolism"
- "Malabsorption Syndromes/ethnology, genetics"
- Male
- Membrane Proteins
- Mutation
- Proteins/genetics
- "Proteinuria/ethnology, genetics"
- Vitamin B 12/metabolism
- "Vitamin B 12 Deficiency/ethnology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inherited cobalamin malabsorption. Mutations in three genes reveal functional and ethnic patterns.
**Authors:** Tanner SM, Sturm AC, Baack EC, Liyanarachchi S, de la Chapelle A
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-7-56](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-7-56)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2012 Aug 28;7:56. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-56.

Inherited cobalamin malabsorption. Mutations in three genes reveal functional 
and ethnic patterns.

Tanner SM(1), Sturm AC, Baack EC, Liyanarachchi S, de la Chapelle A.

Author information:
(1)Human Cancer Genetics, Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. smtrmn@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Inherited malabsorption of cobalamin (Cbl) causes hematological and 
neurological abnormalities that can be fatal. Three genes have been implicated 
in Cbl malabsorption; yet, only about 10% of ~400-500 reported cases have been 
molecularly studied to date. Recessive mutations in CUBN or AMN cause 
Imerslund-Gräsbeck Syndrome (IGS), while recessive mutations in GIF cause 
Intrinsic Factor Deficiency (IFD). IGS and IFD differ in that IGS usually 
presents with proteinuria, which is not observed in IFD. The genetic 
heterogeneity and numerous differential diagnoses make clinical assessment 
difficult.
METHODS: We present a large genetic screening study of 154 families or patients 
with suspected hereditary Cbl malabsorption. Patients and their families have 
been accrued over a period spanning >12  years. Systematic genetic testing of 
the three genes CUBN, AMN, and GIF was accomplished using a combination of 
single strand conformation polymorphism and DNA and RNA sequencing. In addition, 
six genes that were contenders for a role in inherited Cbl malabsorption were 
studied in a subset of these patients.
RESULTS: Our results revealed population-specific mutations, mutational 
hotspots, and functionally distinct regions in the three causal genes. We 
identified mutations in 126/154 unrelated cases (82%). Fifty-three of 126 cases 
(42%) were mutated in CUBN, 45/126 (36%) were mutated in AMN, and 28/126 (22%) 
had mutations in GIF. We found 26 undescribed mutations in CUBN, 19 in AMN, and 
7 in GIF for a total of 52 novel defects described herein. We excluded six other 
candidate genes as culprits and concluded that additional genes might be 
involved.
CONCLUSIONS: Cbl malabsorption is found worldwide and genetically complex. 
However, our results indicate that population-specific founder mutations are 
quite common. Consequently, targeted genetic testing has become feasible if 
ethnic ancestry is considered. These results will facilitate clinical and 
molecular genetic testing of Cbl malabsorption. Early diagnosis improves the 
lifelong care required by these patients and prevents potential neurological 
long-term complications. This study provides the first comprehensive overview of 
the genetics that underlies the inherited Cbl malabsorption phenotype.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-56
PMCID: PMC3462684
PMID: 22929189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]