---
reference_id: "PMID:16554735"
title: Estrogen receptor-beta is expressed in stromal cells of fibroadenoma and phyllodes tumors of the breast.
authors:
- Sapino A
- Bosco M
- Cassoni P
- Castellano I
- Arisio R
- Cserni G
- Dei Tos AP
- Fortunati N
- Catalano MG
- Bussolati G
journal: Mod Pathol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1038/modpathol.3800574
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Estrogen receptor-beta is expressed in stromal cells of fibroadenoma and phyllodes tumors of the breast.
**Authors:** Sapino A, Bosco M, Cassoni P, Castellano I, Arisio R, Cserni G, Dei Tos AP, Fortunati N, Catalano MG, Bussolati G
**Journal:** Mod Pathol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/modpathol.3800574](https://doi.org/10.1038/modpathol.3800574)

## Content

1. Mod Pathol. 2006 Apr;19(4):599-606. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.3800574.

Estrogen receptor-beta is expressed in stromal cells of fibroadenoma and 
phyllodes tumors of the breast.

Sapino A(1), Bosco M, Cassoni P, Castellano I, Arisio R, Cserni G, Dei Tos AP, 
Fortunati N, Catalano MG, Bussolati G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Science and Human Oncology, University of Torino, 
Torino, Italy. anna.sapino@unito.it

An estrogen dependency has been suggested for the growth of fibroadenomas: 
however, thus far, none of the steroid hormone receptors acting on breast 
tissues has been demonstrated in the stroma of breast fibroepithelial lesions. 
In this study, the expression of estrogen receptor (ER)-alpha and -beta was 
investigated by immunohistochemistry in 33 fibroadenomas and in 30 benign, three 
borderline and seven malignant phyllodes tumors, all with spindle cell growth 
and in one distant metastasis. In addition, the presence of ER-beta mRNA and its 
variants was evaluated by RT-PCR in microdissected stroma. The possible 
correlation between hormone receptor expression and differentiation processes of 
stromal cells was investigated by smooth muscle actin and calponin 
immunostaining. ER-beta was the only hormone receptor expressed by stroma of 
fibroadenomas and phyllodes tumors, both at protein and mRNA level. The highest 
percentage of ER-beta was observed in fibroadenomas with cellular stroma and in 
phyllodes tumors. In both lesions, ER-beta-positive stromal cells showed 
expression of smooth muscle actin and/or calponin, as demonstrated by double 
immunostaining. In addition, the mean age at diagnosis was significantly lower 
in patients with ER-beta-positive vs ER-beta-negative fibroadenomas. In 
contrast, in phyllodes tumors, ER-beta expression was higher in older patients. 
In conclusion, (i) only ER-beta is detected in the stroma of fibroadenomas and 
phyllodes tumors; (ii) its expression correlates with the expression of smooth 
muscle markers and suggests a role of ER-beta in myofibroblastic differentiation 
of stromal cells. These two results, together with the young age of patients 
carrying fibroadenomas with highly ER-beta-positive stroma cells, may further 
indicate a hormone-receptor mechanism involved in regulating the growth of 
fibroadenomas. Conversely, the older age of patients with ER-beta-rich phyllodes 
tumors suggests that mechanisms, probably independent from estrogen stimulation, 
act on the growth of these tumors.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.3800574
PMID: 16554735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]