---
reference_id: "PMID:38631219"
title: Elevated microRNA-214-3p level ameliorates neuroinflammation after spinal cord ischemia-reperfusion injury by inhibiting Nmb/Cav3.2 pathway.
authors:
- Xia GQ
- Xu M
- Sun C
- Zhang ZL
- Li XQ
journal: Int Immunopharmacol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2024.112031
keywords:
- Animals
- Male
- Rats
- "Calcium Channels, T-Type/genetics, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Interleukin-1beta/metabolism
- "MicroRNAs/genetics, metabolism"
- "Neuroinflammatory Diseases/immunology, drug therapy"
- "Rats, Sprague-Dawley"
- Reperfusion Injury/metabolism
- Signal Transduction
- Spinal Cord/metabolism
- "Spinal Cord Ischemia/metabolism, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Elevated microRNA-214-3p level ameliorates neuroinflammation after spinal cord ischemia-reperfusion injury by inhibiting Nmb/Cav3.2 pathway.
**Authors:** Xia GQ, Xu M, Sun C, Zhang ZL, Li XQ
**Journal:** Int Immunopharmacol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.intimp.2024.112031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intimp.2024.112031)

## Content

1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2024 May 30;133:112031. doi:
10.1016/j.intimp.2024.112031.  Epub 2024 Apr 16.

Elevated microRNA-214-3p level ameliorates neuroinflammation after spinal cord
ischemia-reperfusion injury by inhibiting Nmb/Cav3.2 pathway.

Xia GQ(1), Xu M(2), Sun C(2), Zhang ZL(3), Li XQ(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, The First Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang 110001, Liaoning, China.
(2)Department of Pain Medicine, The First Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang 110001, Liaoning, China.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, The First Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang 110001, Liaoning, China. Electronic address: zhangzaili333@sina.com.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology, The First Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang 110001, Liaoning, China. Electronic address: shirley037305@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Neuromedin B (Nmb) plays a pivotal role in the transmission of
neuroinflammation, particularly during spinal cord ischemia-reperfusion injury
(SCII). However, the detailed molecular mechanisms underlying this process
remain elusive.
METHODS: The SCII model was established by clamping the abdominal aorta of male
Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats for 60 min. The protein expression levels of Nmb,
Cav3.2, and IL-1β were detected by Western blotting, while miR-214-3p expression
was quantified by qRT-PCR. The targeted regulation between miR-214-3p and Nmb
was investigated using a dual-luciferase reporter gene assay. The cellular
localization of Nmb and Cav3.2 with cell-specific markers was visualized by
immunofluorescence staining. The specific roles of miR-214-3p on the Nmb/Cav3.2
interactions in SCII-injured rats were explored by intrathecal injection of
Cav3.2-siRNA, PD168368 (a specific NmbR inhibitor) and synthetic miR-214-3p
agomir and antagomir in separate experiments. Additionally, hind-limb motor
function was evaluated using the modified Tarlov scores.
RESULTS: Compared to the Sham group, the protein expression levels of Nmb,
Cav3.2, and the proinflammatory factor Interleukin(IL)-1β were significantly
elevated at 24 h post-SCII. Intrathecal injection of PD168368 and Cav3.2-siRNA
significantly suppressed the expression of Cav3.2 and IL-1β compared to the SCII
group. The miRDB database and dual-luciferase reporter gene assay identified Nmb
as a direct target of miR-214-3p. As expected, in vivo overexpression of
miR-214-3p by agomir-214-3p pretreatment significantly inhibited the increases
in Nmb, Cav3.2 and IL-1β expression and improved lower limb motor function in
SCII-injured rats, while antagomiR-214-3p pretreatment reversed these effects.
CONCLUSIONS: Nmb protein levels positively correlated with Cav3.2 expression in
SCII rats. Upregulating miR-214-3p ameliorated hind-limb motor function and
protected against neuroinflammation via inhibiting the aberrant Nmb/Cav3.2
interactions and downstream IL-1β release. These findings provide novel
therapeutic targets for clinical prevention and treatment of SCII.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2024.112031
PMID: 38631219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
