---
reference_id: "PMID:20517292"
title: Pathophysiology and treatment of cystinuria.
authors:
- Chillarón J
- Font-Llitjós M
- Fort J
- Zorzano A
- Goldfarb DS
- Nunes V
- Palacín M
journal: Nat Rev Nephrol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1038/nrneph.2010.69
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cystinuria/genetics, physiopathology, therapy"
- Humans
- Secondary Prevention
- "Urinary Calculi/genetics, physiopathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology and treatment of cystinuria.
**Authors:** Chillarón J, Font-Llitjós M, Fort J, Zorzano A, Goldfarb DS, Nunes V, Palacín M
**Journal:** Nat Rev Nephrol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrneph.2010.69](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrneph.2010.69)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2010 Jul;6(7):424-34. doi: 10.1038/nrneph.2010.69. Epub 2010
Jun 1.

Pathophysiology and treatment of cystinuria.

Chillarón J(1), Font-Llitjós M, Fort J, Zorzano A, Goldfarb DS, Nunes V, Palacín
M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Biology, Universitat de Barcelona,
Diagonal 645, Barcelona 08028, Spain.

Cystinuria is a primary inherited aminoaciduria caused by mutations in the genes
that encode the two subunits (neutral and basic amino acid transport protein
rBAT and b(0,+)-type amino acid transporter 1) of the amino acid transport
system b(0,+). This autosomal recessive disorder (in which few cases show
dominant inheritance) causes a failure in the reabsorption of filtered cystine
and dibasic amino acids in the proximal tubule. The clinical symptoms of this
disease are caused by the loss of poorly soluble cystine, which precipitates to
form stones. Although rare, the prevalence of cystinuria is sufficiently high
that the disease results in a substantial contribution to pediatric renal
lithiasis. A thorough understanding of cystine transport processes over the past
15 years and the genetic abnormalities responsible for the disease has led to a
new classification of cystinuria and recognition that some cases result from an
autosomal dominant etiology with incomplete penetrance. This Review examines the
molecular and mechanistic effects of some of the mutations that cause cystinuria
based on our current understanding of the structural and cellular biology of
system b(0,+). This Review also describes the current treatments to prevent
recurrent cystine lithiasis.

DOI: 10.1038/nrneph.2010.69
PMID: 20517292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
