---
reference_id: "PMID:22569581"
title: "Pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 6 caused by mutations in RARS2: definition of the clinical spectrum and molecular findings in five patients."
authors:
- Cassandrini D
- Cilio MR
- Bianchi M
- Doimo M
- Balestri M
- Tessa A
- Rizza T
- Sartori G
- Meschini MC
- Nesti C
- Tozzi G
- Petruzzella V
- Piemonte F
- Bisceglia L
- Bruno C
- Dionisi-Vici C
- "D'Amico A"
- Fattori F
- Carrozzo R
- Salviati L
- Santorelli FM
- Bertini E
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-012-9487-9
keywords:
- Arginine-tRNA Ligase/genetics
- "Cerebellum/enzymology, pathology, physiology"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Intellectual Disability/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, genetics"
- "Lactic Acid/blood, cerebrospinal fluid"
- Lennox Gastaut Syndrome
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- "Microcephaly/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, genetics"
- Mitochondria/genetics
- Mutation
- Neuroimaging/methods
- "Olivopontocerebellar Atrophies/diagnosis, enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- Psychomotor Disorders/genetics
- "Seizures/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, genetics"
- "Spasms, Infantile/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 6 caused by mutations in RARS2: definition of the clinical spectrum and molecular findings in five patients.
**Authors:** Cassandrini D, Cilio MR, Bianchi M, Doimo M, Balestri M, Tessa A, Rizza T, Sartori G, Meschini MC, Nesti C, Tozzi G, Petruzzella V, Piemonte F, Bisceglia L, Bruno C, Dionisi-Vici C, D'Amico A, Fattori F, Carrozzo R, Salviati L, Santorelli FM, Bertini E
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-012-9487-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-012-9487-9)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2013 Jan;36(1):43-53. doi: 10.1007/s10545-012-9487-9.
Epub  2012 May 8.

Pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 6 caused by mutations in RARS2: definition of 
the clinical spectrum and molecular findings in five patients.

Cassandrini D(1), Cilio MR, Bianchi M, Doimo M, Balestri M, Tessa A, Rizza T, 
Sartori G, Meschini MC, Nesti C, Tozzi G, Petruzzella V, Piemonte F, Bisceglia 
L, Bruno C, Dionisi-Vici C, D'Amico A, Fattori F, Carrozzo R, Salviati L, 
Santorelli FM, Bertini E.

Author information:
(1)IRCCS Fondazione Stella Maris, Pisa, Italy.

Recessive mutations in the mitochondrial arginyl-transfer RNA synthetase (RARS2) 
gene have been associated with early onset encephalopathy with signs of 
oxidative phosphorylation defects classified as pontocerebellar hypoplasia 6. We 
describe clinical, neuroimaging and molecular features on five patients from 
three unrelated families who displayed mutations in RARS2. All patients rapidly 
developed a neonatal or early-infantile epileptic encephalopathy with 
intractable seizures. The long-term follow-up revealed a virtual absence of 
psychomotor development, progressive microcephaly, and feeding difficulties. 
Mitochondrial respiratory chain enzymes in muscle and fibroblasts were normal in 
two. Blood and CSF lactate was abnormally elevated in all five patients at early 
stages while appearing only occasionally abnormal with the progression of the 
disease. Cerebellar vermis hypoplasia with normal aspect of the cerebral and 
cerebellar hemispheres appeared within the first months of life at brain MRI. In 
three patients follow-up neuroimaging revealed a progressive pontocerebellar and 
cerebral cortical atrophy. Molecular investigations of RARS2 disclosed the 
c.25A>G/p.I9V and the c.1586+3A>T in family A, the c.734G>A/p.R245Q and the 
c.1406G>A/p.R469H in family B, and the c.721T>A/p.W241R and c.35A>G/p.Q12R in 
family C. Functional complementation studies in Saccharomyces cerevisiae showed 
that mutation MSR1-R531H (equivalent to human p.R469H) abolished respiration 
whereas the MSR1-R306Q strain (corresponding to p.R245Q) displayed a reduced 
growth on non-fermentable YPG medium. Although mutations functionally disrupted 
yeast we found a relatively well preserved arginine aminoacylation of 
mitochondrial tRNA. Clinical and neuroimaging findings are important clues to 
raise suspicion and to reach diagnostic accuracy for RARS2 mutations considering 
that biochemical abnormalities may be absent in muscle biopsy.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-012-9487-9
PMID: 22569581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]