---
reference_id: "PMID:39160676"
title: "Targeting ALK receptors in non-small cell lung cancer: what is the road ahead?"
authors:
- Maione P
- Palma V
- Pucillo G
- Gridelli C
journal: Expert Opin Ther Targets
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/14728222.2024.2389192
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, pathology, genetics"
- "Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology, genetics"
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology
- Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- Quality of Life
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm"
- Gene Rearrangement
- Animals
- Survival Rate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeting ALK receptors in non-small cell lung cancer: what is the road ahead?
**Authors:** Maione P, Palma V, Pucillo G, Gridelli C
**Journal:** Expert Opin Ther Targets (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14728222.2024.2389192](https://doi.org/10.1080/14728222.2024.2389192)

## Content

1. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2024 Aug;28(8):659-668. doi:
10.1080/14728222.2024.2389192. Epub 2024 Aug 19.

Targeting ALK receptors in non-small cell lung cancer: what is the road ahead?

Maione P(1), Palma V(2), Pucillo G(2), Gridelli C(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, S.G. Moscati Hospital, Avellino, Italy.
(2)Division of Medical Oncology of S.G. Moscati Hospital,Università degli Studi
della Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Avellino, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene-rearrangements are
identified in about 3-5% of non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC), and
ALK-rearranged NSCLC is to be considered an oncogene-addicted cancer with
peculiar clinical characteristics.
AREAS COVERED: Several ALK inhibitors have been studied and approved for use in
the treatment of advanced ALK-rearranged NSCLC with reported superiority in
terms of efficacy and safety profile compared with chemotherapy. Second- and
third-generation ALK inhibitors (alectinib, brigatinib, and lorlatinib) offer to
NSCLC patients a clinically meaningful prolongment of survival with a very good
quality of life profile. However, resistances to these agents always occur, with
less satisfying options for second-line treatments. Direct comparisons among
these agents are not available, and the choice among brigatinib, alectinib, and
lorlatinib as first-line treatment remains challenging. Very recently, alectinib
has been demonstrated to improve efficacy outcomes compared with chemotherapy
also in resected stage IB-IIIA ALK-rearranged NSCLC, extending the clinical
benefit offered by ALK inhibitors also to the adjuvant setting.
EXPERT OPINION: Future development of ALK inhibitors in NSCLC treatment includes
the search for optimal management of acquired resistance to first-line
treatments and the extension of use of ALK inhibitors also to neoadjuvant and
preferably to perioperative setting.

DOI: 10.1080/14728222.2024.2389192
PMID: 39160676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
