---
reference_id: "PMID:29493981"
title: Second-Degree Atrioventricular Block.
authors:
- Mangi MA
- Jones WM
- Mansour MK
- Napier L
year: '2026'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Second-Degree Atrioventricular Block.
**Authors:** Mangi MA, Jones WM, Mansour MK, Napier L

## Content

1. Second-Degree Atrioventricular Block.

Mangi MA(1), Jones WM(2), Mansour MK(3), Napier L.

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2026 
Jan–.
2023 Aug 14.

Author information:
(1)University of Toledo
(2)Advocate Christ Medical Center
(3)Sheikh Shakhbout Medical City (in partnership with Mayoclinic), Abu-Dhabi, 
United Arab Emirates

An electrical impulse from the sinoatrial node has to travel through the atria, 
to the atrioventricular node, and down the His-Purkinje system to reach the 
ventricles and create a ventricular contraction. This process is reflected on 
ECG as the PR interval which leads to a QRS complex. A delay in conduction in 
this system results in an atrioventricular conduction block or a prolongation of 
the PR interval on ECG. Conduction blocks are classified as either first-degree 
block, second-degree block, or third-degree block. The second-degree 
atrioventricular block is the focus of this activity. There are two types of 
second-degree atrioventricular blocks: Mobitz type I, also known as, Wenckebach 
and Mobitz type II. In general, patients with second degree AV block may have no 
symptoms or may experience symptoms like syncope and lightheadedness.The second 
degree heart block may be temporary or permanent, depending on the impairment of 
the conduction system. The mobitz type ll block does have the potential to 
progress to a complete heart block and if unrecognized, can lead to death.

Copyright © 2026, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 29493981

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Muhammad Asif Mangi declares no 
relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Wesley 
Jones declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: Mohamed Mansour declares no relevant financial relationships with 
ineligible companies. Disclosure: Laura Napier declares no relevant financial 
relationships with ineligible companies.