---
reference_id: "PMID:25996915"
title: "Alternating Hemiplegia of Childhood: Retrospective Genetic Study and Genotype-Phenotype Correlations in 187 Subjects from the US AHCF Registry."
authors:
- Viollet L
- Glusman G
- Murphy KJ
- Newcomb TM
- Reyna SP
- Sweney M
- Nelson B
- Andermann F
- Andermann E
- Acsadi G
- Barbano RL
- Brown C
- Brunkow ME
- Chugani HT
- Cheyette SR
- Collins A
- DeBrosse SD
- Galas D
- Friedman J
- Hood L
- Huff C
- Jorde LB
- King MD
- LaSalle B
- Leventer RJ
- Lewelt AJ
- Massart MB
- Mérida MR 2nd
- Ptáček LJ
- Roach JC
- Rust RS
- Renault F
- Sanger TD
- Sotero de Menezes MA
- Tennyson R
- Uldall P
- Zhang Y
- Zupanc M
- Xin W
- Silver K
- Swoboda KJ
journal: PLoS One
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127045
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- "Hemiplegia/genetics, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Registries
- Sodium-Potassium-Exchanging ATPase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alternating Hemiplegia of Childhood: Retrospective Genetic Study and Genotype-Phenotype Correlations in 187 Subjects from the US AHCF Registry.
**Authors:** Viollet L, Glusman G, Murphy KJ, Newcomb TM, Reyna SP, Sweney M, Nelson B, Andermann F, Andermann E, Acsadi G, Barbano RL, Brown C, Brunkow ME, Chugani HT, Cheyette SR, Collins A, DeBrosse SD, Galas D, Friedman J, Hood L, Huff C, Jorde LB, King MD, LaSalle B, Leventer RJ, Lewelt AJ, Massart MB, Mérida MR 2nd, Ptáček LJ, Roach JC, Rust RS, Renault F, Sanger TD, Sotero de Menezes MA, Tennyson R, Uldall P, Zhang Y, Zupanc M, Xin W, Silver K, Swoboda KJ
**Journal:** PLoS One (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0127045](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0127045)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2015 May 21;10(5):e0127045. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127045. 
eCollection 2015.

Alternating Hemiplegia of Childhood: Retrospective Genetic Study and 
Genotype-Phenotype Correlations in 187 Subjects from the US AHCF Registry.

Viollet L(1), Glusman G(2), Murphy KJ(1), Newcomb TM(1), Reyna SP(1), Sweney 
M(1), Nelson B(1), Andermann F(3), Andermann E(3), Acsadi G(4), Barbano RL(5), 
Brown C(6), Brunkow ME(2), Chugani HT(7), Cheyette SR(8), Collins A(9), DeBrosse 
SD(10), Galas D(11), Friedman J(12), Hood L(2), Huff C(13), Jorde LB(14), King 
MD(15), LaSalle B(16), Leventer RJ(17), Lewelt AJ(18), Massart MB(19), Mérida MR 
2nd(20), Ptáček LJ(21), Roach JC(2), Rust RS(22), Renault F(23), Sanger TD(24), 
Sotero de Menezes MA(25), Tennyson R(1), Uldall P(26), Zhang Y(27), Zupanc 
M(28), Xin W(29), Silver K(30), Swoboda KJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Motor Disorders Research Program, Departments of Neurology and 
Pediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America.
(2)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, Washington, United States of America.
(3)Neurogenetics Unit, Montreal Neurologic Institute and Hospital, McGill 
University, Montreal Quebec, Canada.
(4)Departments of Pediatrics and Neurology, Connecticut Children's Medical 
Center and University of Connecticut School of Medicine, Hartford, CT, United 
States of America.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of Rochester School of Medicine, 
Rochester, New York, United States of America.
(6)Diablo Valley Child Neurology, an affiliate of Stanford Health Alliance, 
Pleasant Hill, California, United States of America.
(7)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Children's Hospital of Michigan, Wayne State 
University, Detroit, Michigan, United States of America.
(8)Department of Child Neurology, Palo Alto Medical Foundation Redwood City 
Clinic, Redwood City, California, United States of America.
(9)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Children's Hospital Colorado, University 
of Colorado Hospital, Aurora, Colorado, United States of America.
(10)Departments of Genetics and Genome Sciences, Pediatrics, and Neurology, Case 
Western Reserve University and University Hospitals Case Medical Center, 
Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.
(11)Pacific Northwest Diabetes Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, United 
States of America.
(12)Departments of Neuroscience and Pediatrics, University of California San 
Diego, San Diego, California, United States of America.
(13)Department of Epidemiology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America.
(14)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, 
United States of America.
(15)Departments of Pediatrics and Neurology, University College Dublin School of 
Medicine and Medical Science, Dublin, Ireland.
(16)Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Utah School of Medicine, 
Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America.
(17)Children's Neuroscience Centre, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, 
University of Melbourne Department of Paediatrics, The Royal Children's Hospital 
Melbourne, Parkville Victoria, Australia.
(18)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine Jacksonville, University of 
Florida, Jacksonville, Florida, United States of America.
(19)Department of Family Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(20)Stevens Henager College, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America.
(21)Department of Neurology, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, United States of America.
(22)Center for Medical Ethics and Humanities in Medicine, University Of Virginia 
UVA health system, Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of America.
(23)Departement de Neurophysiologie. Hopital Armand Trousseau APHP, Paris, 
France.
(24)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, California, United States of America.
(25)Swedish Neuroscience Institute, Swedish Medical Center, Seattle, Washington, 
United States of America.
(26)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Juliane Marie Centre, 
Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(27)Study Design and Biostatistics Center, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, 
Utah, United States of America.
(28)Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital Orange County, and Department 
of Pediatrics, University of California, Orange, California, United States of 
America.
(29)Center for Human Genetic Research, Department of Neurology, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(30)Departments of Pediatrics and Neurology, University of Chicago and Comer 
Children's Hospital, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015 Aug 31;10(8):e0137370. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137370.

Mutations in ATP1A3 cause Alternating Hemiplegia of Childhood (AHC) by 
disrupting function of the neuronal Na+/K+ ATPase. Published studies to date 
indicate 2 recurrent mutations, D801N and E815K, and a more severe phenotype in 
the E815K cohort. We performed mutation analysis and retrospective 
genotype-phenotype correlations in all eligible patients with AHC enrolled in 
the US AHC Foundation registry from 1997-2012. Clinical data were abstracted 
from standardized caregivers' questionnaires and medical records and confirmed 
by expert clinicians. We identified ATP1A3 mutations by Sanger and whole genome 
sequencing, and compared phenotypes within and between 4 groups of subjects, 
those with D801N, E815K, other ATP1A3 or no ATP1A3 mutations. We identified 
heterozygous ATP1A3 mutations in 154 of 187 (82%) AHC patients. Of 34 unique 
mutations, 31 (91%) are missense, and 16 (47%) had not been previously reported. 
Concordant with prior studies, more than 2/3 of all mutations are clusteredin 
exons 17 and 18. Of 143 simplex occurrences, 58 had D801N (40%), 38 had 
E815K(26%) and 11 had G947R (8%) mutations [corrected].Patients with an E815K 
mutation demonstrate an earlier age of onset, more severe motor impairment and a 
higher prevalence of status epilepticus. This study further expands the number 
and spectrum of ATP1A3 mutations associated with AHC and confirms a more 
deleterious effect of the E815K mutation on selected neurologic outcomes. 
However, the complexity of the disorder and the extensive phenotypic variability 
among subgroups merits caution and emphasizes the need for further studies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127045
PMCID: PMC4440742
PMID: 25996915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.