---
reference_id: "PMID:24528986"
title: Fetoscopic approach to amniotic band syndrome.
authors:
- Derderian SC
- Iqbal CW
- Goldstein R
- Lee H
- Hirose S
journal: J Pediatr Surg
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2013.05.013
keywords:
- Adult
- "Amniotic Band Syndrome/diagnosis, surgery"
- Female
- Fetoscopy/methods
- Humans
- Male
- Pregnancy
- Pregnancy Outcome
- Retrospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fetoscopic approach to amniotic band syndrome.
**Authors:** Derderian SC, Iqbal CW, Goldstein R, Lee H, Hirose S
**Journal:** J Pediatr Surg (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2013.05.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2013.05.013)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Surg. 2014 Feb;49(2):359-62. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2013.05.013.

Fetoscopic approach to amniotic band syndrome.

Derderian SC(1), Iqbal CW(1), Goldstein R(2), Lee H(1), Hirose S(3).

Author information:
(1)Fetal Treatment Center, the University of California, San Francisco, CA
94143-0570, USA; Department of Surgery, the University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94143-0570, USA.
(2)Fetal Treatment Center, the University of California, San Francisco, CA
94143-0570, USA; Department of Radiology, the University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94143-0570, USA.
(3)Fetal Treatment Center, the University of California, San Francisco, CA
94143-0570, USA; Department of Surgery, the University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94143-0570, USA. Electronic address:
Shinjiro.Hirose@ucsfmedctr.org.

BACKGROUND: Amniotic band syndrome (ABS) is an uncommon complication of
pregnancy that can result in fetal demise.
METHODS: We present our experience with fetoscopic amniotic band release.
RESULTS: Five patients underwent fetoscopic amniotic band release for
preoperatively diagnosed ABS involving at least one extremity. Four of five
patients were found to have involvement of the umbilical cord at the time of
fetoscopy. One of these four did not have the band released and underwent fetal
demise at 24 weeks. All four survivors had good functional outcomes of affected
limbs. Two patients developed membrane separation and had preterm deliveries at
32 weeks gestation whereas the other two carried to term. No maternal
complications were noted.
CONCLUSIONS: Fetoscopic amniotic band release is safe. Umbilical cord
involvement is difficult to assess preoperatively, but when it is present should
be treated to reduce the risk of fetal demise.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2013.05.013
PMID: 24528986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
