---
reference_id: "PMID:33666657"
title: Outcomes and Mortality Among Adults Hospitalized With COVID-19 at US Medical Centers.
authors:
- Nguyen NT
- Chinn J
- Nahmias J
- Yuen S
- Kirby KA
- Hohmann S
- Amin A
journal: JAMA Netw Open
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.0417
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcomes and Mortality Among Adults Hospitalized With COVID-19 at US Medical Centers.
**Authors:** Nguyen NT, Chinn J, Nahmias J, Yuen S, Kirby KA, Hohmann S, Amin A
**Journal:** JAMA Netw Open (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.0417](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.0417)

## Content

1. JAMA Netw Open. 2021 Mar 1;4(3):e210417. doi:
10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.0417.

Outcomes and Mortality Among Adults Hospitalized With COVID-19 at US Medical 
Centers.

Nguyen NT(1), Chinn J(1), Nahmias J(1), Yuen S(1), Kirby KA(2), Hohmann S(3), 
Amin A(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University of California, Irvine Medical Center, 
Orange.
(2)Department of Statistics, University of California, Irvine, Orange.
(3)Vizient, Centers for Advanced Analytics, Chicago, Illinois.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of California, Irvine Medical Center, 
Orange.

This cohort study assesses characteristics and outcomes among adults 
hospitalized with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) at US medical centers as 
well as COVID-19–related mortality over the initial 6 months of the pandemic.

DOI: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.0417
PMCID: PMC8547263
PMID: 33666657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Amin 
reported serving as principal investigator or coinvestigator of clinical trials 
sponsored by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases/National 
Institutes of Health, NeuroRx Pharma, Pulmotect, Blade Therapeutics, Novartis, 
Takeda, Humanigen, Eli Lilly and Company, PTC Therapeutics, OctaPharma, Fulcrum 
Therapeutics, and Alexion and serving as speaker and/or consultant for BMS, 
Pfizer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Portola, Sunovion, Mylan, Salix, Alexion, 
AstraZeneca, Novartis, Nabriva, Paratek, Bayer, Tetraphase, Achogen LaJolla, 
Millenium, HeartRite, Aseptiscope, and Sprightly. Dr Nguyen reported serving as 
a speaker for Olympus and Endogastric Solutions. No other disclosures were 
reported.