---
reference_id: "PMID:39366996"
title: Pre-ciliated tubal epithelial cells are prone to initiation of high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma.
authors:
- Flesken-Nikitin A
- Ralston CQ
- Fu DJ
- De Micheli AJ
- Phuong DJ
- Harlan BA
- Ashe CS
- Armstrong AP
- McKellar DW
- Ghuwalewala S
- Ellenson LH
- Schimenti JC
- Cosgrove BD
- Nikitin AY
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-52984-1
keywords:
- Female
- Animals
- Fallopian Tubes/pathology
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/pathology, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Epithelial Cells/pathology, metabolism"
- "Cystadenocarcinoma, Serous/pathology, metabolism"
- "Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/metabolism, genetics"
- "Cilia/pathology, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/pathology"
- "Retinoblastoma Protein/metabolism, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pre-ciliated tubal epithelial cells are prone to initiation of high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma.
**Authors:** Flesken-Nikitin A, Ralston CQ, Fu DJ, De Micheli AJ, Phuong DJ, Harlan BA, Ashe CS, Armstrong AP, McKellar DW, Ghuwalewala S, Ellenson LH, Schimenti JC, Cosgrove BD, Nikitin AY
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-024-52984-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-52984-1)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2024 Oct 5;15(1):8641. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-52984-1.

Pre-ciliated tubal epithelial cells are prone to initiation of high-grade serous
ovarian carcinoma.

Flesken-Nikitin A(#)(1), Ralston CQ(#)(1)(2), Fu DJ(1), De Micheli AJ(3), Phuong
DJ(1)(4), Harlan BA(1), Ashe CS(1), Armstrong AP(1), McKellar DW(2), Ghuwalewala
S(4), Ellenson LH(5), Schimenti JC(1)(4), Cosgrove BD(2), Nikitin AY(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.
(2)Meinig School of Biomedical Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Oncology and Children's Research Center, University Children's
Hospital Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY,
USA.
(5)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
(6)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.
an58@cornell.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Nat Commun. 2024 Nov 20;15(1):10053. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-54465-x.

The distal region of the uterine (Fallopian) tube is commonly associated with
high-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC), the predominant and most aggressive form of
ovarian or extra-uterine cancer. Specific cell states and lineage dynamics of
the adult tubal epithelium (TE) remain insufficiently understood, hindering
efforts to determine the cell of origin for HGSC. Here, we report a
comprehensive census of cell types and states of the mouse uterine tube. We show
that distal TE cells expressing the stem/progenitor cell marker Slc1a3 can
differentiate into both secretory (Ovgp1+) and ciliated (Fam183b+) cells.
Inactivation of Trp53 and Rb1, whose pathways are commonly altered in HGSC,
leads to elimination of targeted Slc1a3+ cells by apoptosis, thereby preventing
their malignant transformation. In contrast, pre-ciliated cells (Krt5+, Prom1+,
Trp73+) remain cancer-prone and give rise to serous tubal intraepithelial
carcinomas and overt HGSC. These findings identify transitional pre-ciliated
cells as a cancer-prone cell state and point to pre-ciliation mechanisms as
diagnostic and therapeutic targets.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-52984-1
PMCID: PMC11452611
PMID: 39366996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
