---
reference_id: "PMID:31350823"
title: Skin fibroblasts of patients with geleophysic dysplasia due to FBN1 mutations have lysosomal inclusions and losartan improves their microfibril deposition defect.
authors:
- Piccolo P
- Sabatino V
- Mithbaokar P
- Polishchuk E
- Hicks J
- Polishchuk R
- Bacino CA
- Brunetti-Pierri N
journal: Mol Genet Genomic Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.844
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Extracellular Matrix
- Female
- Fibrillin-1/genetics
- "Fibroblasts/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Losartan/pharmacology
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- Male
- Microfibrils/metabolism
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- "Skin/metabolism, pathology"
- Transforming Growth Factor beta/metabolism
- Adipokines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Skin fibroblasts of patients with geleophysic dysplasia due to FBN1 mutations have lysosomal inclusions and losartan improves their microfibril deposition defect.
**Authors:** Piccolo P, Sabatino V, Mithbaokar P, Polishchuk E, Hicks J, Polishchuk R, Bacino CA, Brunetti-Pierri N
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomic Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mgg3.844](https://doi.org/10.1002/mgg3.844)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2019 Sep;7(9):e844. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.844. Epub 2019
Jul  27.

Skin fibroblasts of patients with geleophysic dysplasia due to FBN1 mutations
have lysosomal inclusions and losartan improves their microfibril deposition
defect.

Piccolo P(1)(2), Sabatino V(1), Mithbaokar P(1), Polishchuk E(1), Hicks J(3),
Polishchuk R(1), Bacino CA(4), Brunetti-Pierri N(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, Italy.
(2)Department of Translational Medicine, Federico II University of Naples,
Naples, Italy.
(3)Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.
(4)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas.

BACKGROUND: Geleophysic dysplasia (GPHYSD) is a disorder characterized by
dysmorphic features, stiff joints and cardiac involvement due to defects of
TGF-β signaling. GPHYSD can be caused by mutations in FBN1, ADAMTLS2, and LTBP3
genes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Consistent with previous reports, we found intracellular
inclusions of unknown material by electron microscopy (EM) in skin fibroblasts
of two GPHYSD individuals carrying FBN1 mutations. Moreover, we found that the
storage material is enclosed within lysosomes and is associated with the
upregulation of several lysosomal genes. Treatment of GPHYSD fibroblasts
carrying FBN1 mutations with the angiotensin II receptor type 1 inhibitor
losartan that inhibits TGF-β signaling did not reduce the storage but improved
the extracellular deposition of fibrillin-1 microfibrils.
CONCLUSION: Losartan is a promising candidate drug for treatment of GPHYSD due
to FBN1 defects.

© 2019 Telethon Foundation. Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.844
PMCID: PMC6732269
PMID: 31350823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
