---
reference_id: "PMID:36078942"
title: "Evaluation of Glycosylated Ferritin in Adult-Onset Still's Disease and Differential Diagnoses."
authors:
- Guerber A
- Garneret E
- El Jammal T
- Zaepfel S
- Gerfaud-Valentin M
- Sève P
- Jamilloux Y
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/jcm11175012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of Glycosylated Ferritin in Adult-Onset Still's Disease and Differential Diagnoses.
**Authors:** Guerber A, Garneret E, El Jammal T, Zaepfel S, Gerfaud-Valentin M, Sève P, Jamilloux Y
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm11175012](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm11175012)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2022 Aug 26;11(17):5012. doi: 10.3390/jcm11175012.

Evaluation of Glycosylated Ferritin in Adult-Onset Still's Disease and 
Differential Diagnoses.

Guerber A(1)(2), Garneret E(1)(2), El Jammal T(1), Zaepfel S(3), 
Gerfaud-Valentin M(1), Sève P(1)(4), Jamilloux Y(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, University Hospital Croix-Rousse, Hospices Civils de Lyon, 
69004 Lyon, France.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Claude Bernard University Lyon 1, 69622 Villeurbanne, 
France.
(3)Biochemistry Department, University Hospital Croix-Rousse, Hospices Civils de 
Lyon, 69004 Lyon, France.
(4)Research on Healthcare Performance (RESHAPE), INSERM U1290, Université Claude 
Bernard Lyon 1, 69373 Lyon, France.
(5)Lyon Immunopathology Federation (LIFE), 69000 Lyon, France.

Glycosylated ferritin (GF) has been reported as a good diagnostic biomarker for 
adult-onset Still’s disease (AOSD), but only a few studies have validated its 
performance. We performed a retrospective study of all adult patients with at 
least one GF measurement over a 2-year period in one hospital laboratory. The 
diagnosis of AOSD was based on the expert opinion of the treating physician and 
validated by two independent investigators. Patients’ characteristics, disease 
activity, and outcome were recorded and compared. Twenty-eight AOSD and 203 
controls were identified. Compared to controls, the mean GF was significantly 
lower (22.3% vs. 39.3, p < 0.001) in AOSD patients. GF had a high diagnostic 
accuracy for AOSD, independent of disease activity or total serum ferritin (AUC: 
0.674 to 0.915). The GF optimal cut-off value for AOSD diagnosis was 16%, 
yielding a specificity of 89% and a sensitivity of 63%. We propose a modified 
diagnostic score for AOSD, based on Fautrel’s criteria but with a GF threshold 
of 16% that provides greater specificity and increases the positive predictive 
value by nearly 5 points. GF is useful for ruling out differential diagnoses and 
as an appropriate classification criterion for use in AOSD clinical trials.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm11175012
PMCID: PMC9456550
PMID: 36078942

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.