---
reference_id: "PMID:32858054"
title: "Pharmacological treatment of eating disorders, comorbid mental health problems, malnutrition and physical health consequences."
authors:
- Himmerich H
- Kan C
- Au K
- Treasure J
journal: Pharmacol Ther
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2020.107667
keywords:
- "Antipsychotic Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Avitaminosis
- Clinical Decision-Making/methods
- Drug Monitoring/methods
- "Feeding and Eating Disorders/drug therapy, epidemiology, physiopathology, psychology"
- Humans
- "Malnutrition/drug therapy, epidemiology"
- "Mental Disorders/drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Patient Care Planning
- Pharmacogenomic Testing/methods
- "Sleep Wake Disorders/drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Trace Elements/deficiency
- Water-Electrolyte Balance/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pharmacological treatment of eating disorders, comorbid mental health problems, malnutrition and physical health consequences.
**Authors:** Himmerich H, Kan C, Au K, Treasure J
**Journal:** Pharmacol Ther (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pharmthera.2020.107667](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pharmthera.2020.107667)

## Content

1. Pharmacol Ther. 2021 Jan;217:107667. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2020.107667.
Epub  2020 Aug 25.

Pharmacological treatment of eating disorders, comorbid mental health problems,
malnutrition and physical health consequences.

Himmerich H(1), Kan C(2), Au K(3), Treasure J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Medicine, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology &
Neuroscience, King's College London, London SE5 8AF, UK; South London and
Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, Bethlem Royal Hospital, Monks Orchard Road,
Beckenham, Kent BR3 3BX, UK. Electronic address: hubertus.himmerich@kcl.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Psychological Medicine, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology &
Neuroscience, King's College London, London SE5 8AF, UK; South London and
Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, Bethlem Royal Hospital, Monks Orchard Road,
Beckenham, Kent BR3 3BX, UK.
(3)South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, Bethlem Royal Hospital, Monks
Orchard Road, Beckenham, Kent BR3 3BX, UK.

The pharmacological treatment of patients with an eating disorder (ED) often
includes medications to treat their ED, comorbid mental health problems,
malnutrition and the physical health problems resulting from it. The currently
approved pharmacological treatment options for EDs are limited to fluoxetine for
bulimia nervosa (BN) and - in some countries - lisdexamfetamine for binge eating
disorder (BED). Thus, there are no approved pharmacological options for anorexia
nervosa (AN), even though study results for olanzapine and dronabinol are
promising. Topiramate might be an additional future option for the treatment of
BN and BED. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI), mirtazapine and
bupropion could be considered for the treatment of comorbid unipolar depression.
However, AN and BN are contraindications for bupropion. For ED patients with a
manic episode, we recommend olanzapine in AN and risperidone in BN and BED;
whereas for bipolar depression, olanzapine (plus fluoxetine) seems appropriate
in AN and lamotrigine in BN and BED. Acute anxiety or suicidality may warrant
benzodiazepine treatment with lorazepam. Proton-pump inhibitors,
gastroprokinetic drugs, laxatives and hormones can alleviate certain physical
health problems caused by EDs. Therapeutic drug monitoring, pharmacogenomic
testing, a more restrictive use of "pro re nata" (PRN) medication, an
interdisciplinary treatment approach, shared decision making (SDM) and the
formulation of common treatment goals by the patients, their family or carers
and clinicians could improve treatment success and safety. Novel genetic,
immunological, microbiome and brain imaging research as well as new
pharmacological developments like the use of psychedelics, stimulants, novel
monoaminergic drugs, hormone analogues and drugs which enhance the effects of
psychotherapy may extend our therapeutic options in the near future.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2020.107667
PMID: 32858054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no conflict of interest.
