---
reference_id: "PMID:22865651"
title: "Ossicular fusion and cholesteatoma in auriculo-condylar syndrome: in vivo evidence of arrest of embryogenesis."
authors:
- Propst EJ
- Ngan BY
- Mount RJ
- Martin-Munoz D
- Blaser S
- Harrison RV
- Cushing SL
- Papsin BC
journal: Laryngoscope
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1002/lary.23492
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Cholesteatoma, Middle Ear/diagnosis, surgery"
- "Ear/abnormalities, surgery"
- "Ear Diseases/diagnosis, surgery"
- "Ear Ossicles/embryology, pathology, surgery"
- Humans
- "Imaging, Three-Dimensional"
- Male
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- Tympanoplasty
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ossicular fusion and cholesteatoma in auriculo-condylar syndrome: in vivo evidence of arrest of embryogenesis.
**Authors:** Propst EJ, Ngan BY, Mount RJ, Martin-Munoz D, Blaser S, Harrison RV, Cushing SL, Papsin BC
**Journal:** Laryngoscope (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/lary.23492](https://doi.org/10.1002/lary.23492)

## Content

1. Laryngoscope. 2013 Feb;123(2):528-32. doi: 10.1002/lary.23492. Epub 2012 Aug
2.

Ossicular fusion and cholesteatoma in auriculo-condylar syndrome: in vivo 
evidence of arrest of embryogenesis.

Propst EJ(1), Ngan BY, Mount RJ, Martin-Munoz D, Blaser S, Harrison RV, Cushing 
SL, Papsin BC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, Canada. evan.propst@utoronto.ca

Auriculo-condylar syndrome (ACS) is a rare condition affecting first branchial 
arch structures. The types of hearing loss and temporal bone findings in ACS 
have not been reported. We describe a 14-year-old male with constricted pinnae, 
mandibular dysostosis, glossoptosis, a high-arched palate, hearing loss, and 
cholesteatoma. Computed tomography imaging demonstrated malleoincudal joint 
ankylosis. The fused malleoincudal complex was removed during mastoidectomy for 
cholesteatoma. Electron microscopy and histopathology of the joint suggested the 
fusion was congenital. This is the first report of ossicular fusion and 
cholesteatoma in ACS and the most detailed in vivo evidence of disruption of 
embryogenesis during malleoincudal joint formation.

Copyright © 2012 The American Laryngological, Rhinological, and Otological 
Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.23492
PMID: 22865651 [Indexed for MEDLINE]