---
reference_id: "PMID:11181578"
title: Increased bone density in sclerosteosis is due to the deficiency of a novel secreted protein (SOST).
authors:
- Balemans W
- Ebeling M
- Patel N
- Van Hul E
- Olson P
- Dioszegi M
- Lacza C
- Wuyts W
- Van Den Ende J
- Willems P
- Paes-Alves AF
- Hill S
- Bueno M
- Ramos FJ
- Tacconi P
- Dikkers FG
- Stratakis C
- Lindpaintner K
- Vickery B
- Foernzler D
- Van Hul W
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/10.5.537
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increased bone density in sclerosteosis is due to the deficiency of a novel secreted protein (SOST).
**Authors:** Balemans W, Ebeling M, Patel N, Van Hul E, Olson P, Dioszegi M, Lacza C, Wuyts W, Van Den Ende J, Willems P, Paes-Alves AF, Hill S, Bueno M, Ramos FJ, Tacconi P, Dikkers FG, Stratakis C, Lindpaintner K, Vickery B, Foernzler D, Van Hul W
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/10.5.537](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/10.5.537)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Mar 1;10(5):537-43. doi: 10.1093/hmg/10.5.537.

Increased bone density in sclerosteosis is due to the deficiency of a novel 
secreted protein (SOST).

Balemans W(1), Ebeling M, Patel N, Van Hul E, Olson P, Dioszegi M, Lacza C, 
Wuyts W, Van Den Ende J, Willems P, Paes-Alves AF, Hill S, Bueno M, Ramos FJ, 
Tacconi P, Dikkers FG, Stratakis C, Lindpaintner K, Vickery B, Foernzler D, Van 
Hul W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1, 
2610 Antwerp, Belgium.

Sclerosteosis is a progressive sclerosing bone dysplasia with an autosomal 
recessive mode of inheritance. Radiologically, it is characterized by a 
generalized hyperostosis and sclerosis leading to a markedly thickened and 
sclerotic skull, with mandible, ribs, clavicles and all long bones also being 
affected. Due to narrowing of the foramina of the cranial nerves, facial nerve 
palsy, hearing loss and atrophy of the optic nerves can occur. Sclerosteosis is 
clinically and radiologically very similar to van Buchem disease, mainly 
differentiated by hand malformations and a large stature in sclerosteosis 
patients. By linkage analysis in one extended van Buchem family and two 
consanguineous sclerosteosis families we previously mapped both disease genes to 
the same chromosomal 17q12-q21 region, supporting the hypothesis that both 
conditions are caused by mutations in the same gene. After reducing the disease 
critical region to approximately 1 Mb, we used the positional cloning strategy 
to identify the SOST gene, which is mutated in sclerosteosis patients. This new 
gene encodes a protein with a signal peptide for secretion and a cysteine-knot 
motif. Two nonsense mutations and one splice site mutation were identified in 
sclerosteosis patients, but no mutations were found in a fourth sclerosteosis 
patient nor in the patients from the van Buchem family. As the three 
disease-causing mutations lead to loss of function of the SOST protein resulting 
in the formation of massive amounts of normal bone throughout life, the 
physiological role of SOST is most likely the suppression of bone formation. 
Therefore, this gene might become an important tool in the development of 
therapeutic strategies for osteoporosis.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/10.5.537
PMID: 11181578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]