---
reference_id: "PMID:37468577"
title: A biallelic variant in COX18 cause isolated Complex IV deficiency associated with neonatal encephalo-cardio-myopathy and axonal sensory neuropathy.
authors:
- Ronchi D
- Garbellini M
- Magri F
- Menni F
- Meneri M
- Bedeschi MF
- Dilena R
- Cecchetti V
- Picciolli I
- Furlan F
- Polimeni V
- Salani S
- Pezzoli L
- Fortunato F
- Bellini M
- Piga D
- Ripolone M
- Zanotti S
- Napoli L
- Ciscato P
- Sciacco M
- Mangili G
- Mosca F
- Corti S
- Iascone M
- Comi GP
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41431-023-01433-6
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Cytochrome-c Oxidase Deficiency/genetics
- "Electron Transport Complex IV/genetics, metabolism"
- HEK293 Cells
- Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics
- Muscular Diseases
- Mutation
- Membrane Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A biallelic variant in COX18 cause isolated Complex IV deficiency associated with neonatal encephalo-cardio-myopathy and axonal sensory neuropathy.
**Authors:** Ronchi D, Garbellini M, Magri F, Menni F, Meneri M, Bedeschi MF, Dilena R, Cecchetti V, Picciolli I, Furlan F, Polimeni V, Salani S, Pezzoli L, Fortunato F, Bellini M, Piga D, Ripolone M, Zanotti S, Napoli L, Ciscato P, Sciacco M, Mangili G, Mosca F, Corti S, Iascone M, Comi GP
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41431-023-01433-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-023-01433-6)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2023 Dec;31(12):1414-1420. doi: 10.1038/s41431-023-01433-6. 
Epub 2023 Jul 19.

A biallelic variant in COX18 cause isolated Complex IV deficiency associated 
with neonatal encephalo-cardio-myopathy and axonal sensory neuropathy.

Ronchi D(1)(2), Garbellini M(2), Magri F(2), Menni F(3), Meneri M(1)(2), 
Bedeschi MF(4), Dilena R(5), Cecchetti V(6), Picciolli I(6), Furlan F(3), 
Polimeni V(6), Salani S(2), Pezzoli L(7), Fortunato F(1), Bellini M(7), Piga 
D(2), Ripolone M(8), Zanotti S(8), Napoli L(8), Ciscato P(8), Sciacco M(8), 
Mangili G(9), Mosca F(6)(10), Corti S(1)(8), Iascone M(7), Comi GP(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Dino Ferrari Center, Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, 
University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(2)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Neurology Unit, 
Milan, Italy.
(3)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Regional Clinical 
Center for expanded newborn screening, Milan, Italy.
(4)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Medical Genetics 
Unit, Milan, Italy.
(5)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, UO 
Neurofisiopatologia, Milan, Italy.
(6)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Neonatal Intensive 
Care Unit, Milan, Italy.
(7)ASST Papa Giovanni XXIII, Laboratorio di Genetica Medica, Bergamo, Italy.
(8)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Neuromuscular and 
Rare Disease Unit, Milan, Italy.
(9)ASST Papa Giovanni XXIII, Neonatology and NICU, Bergamo, Italy.
(10)Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy.
(11)Dino Ferrari Center, Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, 
University of Milan, Milan, Italy. giacomo.comi@unimi.it.
(12)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Neurology Unit, 
Milan, Italy. giacomo.comi@unimi.it.

Comment in
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2023 Dec;31(12):1344-1345. doi: 10.1038/s41431-023-01466-x.
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2023 Dec;31(12):1343. doi: 10.1038/s41431-023-01491-w.

Pathogenic variants impacting upon assembly of mitochondrial respiratory chain 
Complex IV (Cytochrome c Oxidase or COX) predominantly result in early onset 
mitochondrial disorders often leading to CNS, skeletal and cardiac muscle 
manifestations. The aim of this study is to describe a molecular defect in the 
COX assembly factor gene COX18 as the likely cause of a neonatal form of 
mitochondrial encephalo-cardio-myopathy and axonal sensory neuropathy. The 
proband is a 19-months old female displaying hypertrophic cardiomyopathy at 
birth and myopathy with axonal sensory neuropathy and failure to thrive 
developing in the first months of life. Serum lactate was consistently 
increased. Whole exome sequencing allowed the prioritization of the unreported 
homozygous substitution NM_001297732.2:c.667 G > C p.(Asp223His) in COX18. 
Patient's muscle biopsy revealed severe and diffuse COX deficiency and striking 
mitochondrial abnormalities. Biochemical and enzymatic studies in patient's 
myoblasts and in HEK293 cells after COX18 silencing showed a severe impairment 
of both COX activity and assembly. The biochemical defect was partially rescued 
by delivery of wild-type COX18 cDNA into patient's myoblasts. Our study 
identifies a novel defect of COX assembly and expands the number of nuclear 
genes involved in a mitochondrial disorder due to isolated COX deficiency.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to European Society of Human 
Genetics.

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-023-01433-6
PMCID: PMC10689781
PMID: 37468577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.