---
reference_id: "PMID:39978321"
title: "The Inflammatory Pathogenetic Pathways of Fabry Nephropathy and Agalopathy: <italic>GLA</italic> Variant Induction of Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress."
authors:
- Feriozzi S
- Feriozzi S
- Rozenfeld P
journal: Nephron
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1159/000544760
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Inflammatory Pathogenetic Pathways of Fabry Nephropathy and Agalopathy: <italic>GLA</italic> Variant Induction of Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress.
**Authors:** Feriozzi S, Feriozzi S, Rozenfeld P
**Journal:** Nephron (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000544760](https://doi.org/10.1159/000544760)

## Content

1. Nephron. 2025;149(10):591-596. doi: 10.1159/000544760. Epub 2025 Feb 20.

The Inflammatory Pathogenetic Pathways of Fabry Nephropathy and Agalopathy: 
<italic>GLA</italic> Variant Induction of Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress.

Feriozzi S, Feriozzi S(1), Rozenfeld P(2).

Author information:
(1)Nephrology, Campus Bio Medico University, Rome, Italy.
(2)Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, Instituto de Estudios Inmunológicos y 
Fisiopatológicos (IIFP), UNLP, CONICET, asociado CIC PBA, La Plata, Argentina.

BACKGROUND: Fabry disease (FD) is a monogenic disease with highly variable 
clinical features. This variability suggests that additional pathogenetic 
pathways may exist besides the intra-lysosomal deposition of 
globotriaosylceramide (Gb3) and its deacylated form globotriaosylsphingosine 
(LysoGb3) caused by an enzyme deficiency.
SUMMARY: It has been demonstrated that intralysosomal accumulation of Gb3 and 
LysoGb3 triggers an inflammatory response. Monocytes, macrophages, and dendritic 
cells overexpress the adhesion molecules, and cytokines release occurs, 
including interleukin β, tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFα), and transforming 
growth factor beta. These processes determine the activation of inflammation 
processes associated with chronic inflammation and tissue fibrosis. The 
pathogenetic mechanisms stimulated by Gb3 and LysoGb3 deposition could break 
free from the original activation, causing an irreversible effect, in which 
Fabry disease-specific therapy can play a limited role. A new disease mechanism, 
"Agalopathy" would coexist with enzyme deficiency. Missense variants in the 
coding sequence of the GLA gene would generate the misfolding of the altered 
protein alpha-galactosidase A. Emergence of misfolded proteins may generate 
stress of the endoplasmic reticulum, leading to induction of the unfolded 
protein response (UPR). The UPR causes the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines 
and contributes to inflammatory status. This mechanism could be activated 
independently of glycolipid deposition, and its relationship with inflammatory 
pathways deserves more research. Strikingly, a zebrafish GLA knockout model that 
naturally lacks the enzyme that synthesizes Gb3 shows many alterations in 
lysosomal functions.
KEY MESSAGES: These pieces of evidence suggest the involvement of alternative 
pathways independent of Gb3 in FD pathogenesis. This review aims to describe 
these processes' role in the pathogenesis of renal damage in FD or Agalopathy 
nephropathies.

© 2025 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000544760
PMID: 39978321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]