---
reference_id: "PMID:22556422"
title: "Matrix disruptions, growth, and degradation of cartilage with impaired sulfation."
authors:
- Mertz EL
- Facchini M
- Pham AT
- Gualeni B
- De Leonardis F
- Rossi A
- Forlino A
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.116467
keywords:
- Animals
- Anion Transport Proteins/genetics
- Cartilage/metabolism
- Chondrocytes/cytology
- Collagen/chemistry
- Extracellular Matrix/metabolism
- Femur/pathology
- Glycosaminoglycans/metabolism
- Growth Plate/metabolism
- Membrane Transport Proteins/chemistry
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Models, Statistical"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Spectrophotometry, Infrared/methods"
- Sulfate Transporters
- Sulfates/chemistry
- Sulfur/chemistry
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Matrix disruptions, growth, and degradation of cartilage with impaired sulfation.
**Authors:** Mertz EL, Facchini M, Pham AT, Gualeni B, De Leonardis F, Rossi A, Forlino A
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.116467](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.116467)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jun 22;287(26):22030-42. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.116467. Epub 
2012 May 3.

Matrix disruptions, growth, and degradation of cartilage with impaired 
sulfation.

Mertz EL(1), Facchini M, Pham AT, Gualeni B, De Leonardis F, Rossi A, Forlino A.

Author information:
(1)Section on Physical Biochemistry, Eunice Kennedy Shriver NICHD, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. mertze@mail.nih.gov

Diastrophic dysplasia (DTD) is an incurable recessive chondrodysplasia caused by 
mutations in the SLC26A2 transporter responsible for sulfate uptake by 
chondrocytes. The mutations cause undersulfation of glycosaminoglycans in 
cartilage. Studies of dtd mice with a knock-in Slc26a2 mutation showed an 
unusual progression of the disorder: net undersulfation is mild and normalizing 
with age, but the articular cartilage degrades with age and bones develop 
abnormally. To understand underlying mechanisms, we studied newborn dtd mice. We 
developed, verified and used high-definition infrared hyperspectral imaging of 
cartilage sections at physiological conditions, to quantify collagen and its 
orientation, noncollagenous proteins, and chondroitin chains, and their 
sulfation with 6-μm spatial resolution and without labeling. We found that 
chondroitin sulfation across the proximal femur cartilage varied dramatically in 
dtd, but not in the wild type. Corresponding undersulfation of dtd was mild in 
most regions, but strong in narrow articular and growth plate regions crucial 
for bone development. This undersulfation correlated with the chondroitin 
synthesis rate measured via radioactive sulfate incorporation, explaining the 
sulfation normalization with age. Collagen orientation was reduced, and the 
reduction correlated with chondroitin undersulfation. Such disorientation 
involved the layer of collagen covering the articular surface and protecting 
cartilage from degradation. Malformation of this layer may contribute to the 
degradation progression with age and to collagen and proteoglycan depletion from 
the articular region, which we observed in mice already at birth. The results 
provide clues to in vivo sulfation, DTD treatment, and cartilage growth.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.116467
PMCID: PMC3381162
PMID: 22556422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]