---
reference_id: "PMID:34754533"
title: "Persistence of communicating hydrocephalus post choroid plexus tumor resection: Case reports and review of literature."
authors:
- Basindwah SA
- Alzahrani BS
- Ajlan AM
- Alkhalidi H
journal: Surg Neurol Int
year: '2021'
doi: 10.25259/SNI_681_2021
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Persistence of communicating hydrocephalus post choroid plexus tumor resection: Case reports and review of literature.
**Authors:** Basindwah SA, Alzahrani BS, Ajlan AM, Alkhalidi H
**Journal:** Surg Neurol Int (2021)
**DOI:** [10.25259/SNI_681_2021](https://doi.org/10.25259/SNI_681_2021)

## Content

1. Surg Neurol Int. 2021 Sep 30;12:483. doi: 10.25259/SNI_681_2021. eCollection
2021.

Persistence of communicating hydrocephalus post choroid plexus tumor resection:
Case reports and review of literature.

Basindwah SA(1), Alzahrani BS(2), Ajlan AM(1), Alkhalidi H(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Neurosurgery, King Saud University,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Surgery, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, Al-Khobar,
Eastern Province, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Pathology, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Hydrocephalus is the most common presentation of choroid plexus
tumors; it is thought to be caused either by mass effect obstructing the
cerebrospinal fluid pathways or secretory properties of the tumor. In these case
reports, we present two cases of choroid plexus tumors with persistence of
communicating hydrocephalus postoperatively and review similar reports in the
literature.
CASE DESCRIPTION: Case 1: a 2-month-old baby girl presented with bulging
fontanelle, sunsetting eyes. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed large third
ventricle mass with communicating hydrocephalus. She underwent complete excision
of tumor through transcortical approach with perioperative intraventricular
hemorrhage. Hydrocephalus persisted postoperatively and the patient required
permanent ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt. Case 2: a 16-year-old boy presented
decreased visual acuity, papilledema, and morning headaches. MRI showed a tumor
in the right ventricle and communicating hydrocephalus. He underwent
transparietal resection of the tumor. In both cases, hydrocephalus persisted
postoperatively and patients required permanent VP shunt. Review of similar
cases showed the majority of cases required permanent shunting.
CONCLUSION: Choroid plexus tumor patients can present with communicating
hydrocephalus that may persist post tumor resection for different etiologies.
Careful follow-up to determine the need for cerebrospinal fluid diversion
through a permanent VP shunt is important.

Copyright: © 2021 Surgical Neurology International.

DOI: 10.25259/SNI_681_2021
PMCID: PMC8571326
PMID: 34754533

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.
