---
reference_id: "PMID:36355599"
title: "Experiences of Mothers Living With HIV in a South African Prevention of Mother-to-Child Transmission of HIV Programme: A Qualitative Descriptive Study."
authors:
- Velapi L
- Mayers PM
- Frantz J
journal: J Assoc Nurses AIDS Care
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/JNC.0000000000000372
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Experiences of Mothers Living With HIV in a South African Prevention of Mother-to-Child Transmission of HIV Programme: A Qualitative Descriptive Study.
**Authors:** Velapi L, Mayers PM, Frantz J
**Journal:** J Assoc Nurses AIDS Care (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/JNC.0000000000000372](https://doi.org/10.1097/JNC.0000000000000372)

## Content

1. J Assoc Nurses AIDS Care. 2023 Mar-Apr 01;34(2):188-197. doi: 
10.1097/JNC.0000000000000372. Epub 2022 Nov 8.

Experiences of Mothers Living With HIV in a South African Prevention of 
Mother-to-Child Transmission of HIV Programme: A Qualitative Descriptive Study.

Velapi L(1), Mayers PM, Frantz J.

Author information:
(1)Linda Velapi, M Nursing, is a Lecturer, School of Nursing, Faculty of 
Community and Health Sciences, University of the Western Cape, Cape Town, South 
Africa. Pat M. Mayers, PhD, MSc (Med Psych), BA Nursing is an Associate 
Professor, School of Nursing, Faculty of Community and Health Sciences, 
University of the Western Cape, Cape Town, South Africa. Jose M. Frantz, PhD, 
MSc Physiotherapy, is the Deputy Vice-Chancellor, Research and Innovation at the 
University of the Western Cape, Cape Town, South Africa.

More than 90% of all HIV infections in children result from mother to child 
transmission. Elimination of mother-child transmission is a global priority and 
vital for the improvement of child survival in high-burden, limited resource 
settings. Retention in HIV care is vital to reduce transmission risk. This 
qualitative study explored the experiences and adherence challenges of mothers 
living with HIV of the Prevention of Mother-to-Child Transmission of HIV (PMTCT) 
programme in Khayelitsha, Cape Town, South Africa. Interviews were conducted 
with purposively selected participants enrolled in a PMTCT programme at a 
primary care facility. Thematic analysis generated six themes. Findings 
demonstrate the complexity of living as a woman with HIV in a socioeconomically 
disadvantaged and marginalized periurban community. For each woman, there is a 
set of concerns relating to person, home, community, and clinic which may affect 
her understanding, acceptance of, and adherence to the PMTCT programme.

Copyright © 2022 Association of Nurses in AIDS Care.

DOI: 10.1097/JNC.0000000000000372
PMID: 36355599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]