---
reference_id: "PMID:19309693"
title: "Phenotypic spectrum of STRA6 mutations: from Matthew-Wood syndrome to non-lethal anophthalmia."
authors:
- Chassaing N
- Golzio C
- Odent S
- Lequeux L
- Vigouroux A
- Martinovic-Bouriel J
- Tiziano FD
- Masini L
- Piro F
- Maragliano G
- Delezoide AL
- Attié-Bitach T
- Manouvrier-Hanu S
- Etchevers HC
- Calvas P
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1002/humu.21023
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Anophthalmos/complications, genetics"
- Fatal Outcome
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Membrane Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- Sequence Alignment
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypic spectrum of STRA6 mutations: from Matthew-Wood syndrome to non-lethal anophthalmia.
**Authors:** Chassaing N, Golzio C, Odent S, Lequeux L, Vigouroux A, Martinovic-Bouriel J, Tiziano FD, Masini L, Piro F, Maragliano G, Delezoide AL, Attié-Bitach T, Manouvrier-Hanu S, Etchevers HC, Calvas P
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.21023](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.21023)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2009 May;30(5):E673-81. doi: 10.1002/humu.21023.

Phenotypic spectrum of STRA6 mutations: from Matthew-Wood syndrome to non-lethal 
anophthalmia.

Chassaing N(1), Golzio C, Odent S, Lequeux L, Vigouroux A, Martinovic-Bouriel J, 
Tiziano FD, Masini L, Piro F, Maragliano G, Delezoide AL, Attié-Bitach T, 
Manouvrier-Hanu S, Etchevers HC, Calvas P.

Author information:
(1)INSERM, U563, Centre de Physiopathologie de Toulouse Purpan, Toulouse, 31300 
France.

Matthew-Wood, Spear, PDAC or MCOPS9 syndrome are alternative names used to refer 
to combinations of microphthalmia/anophthalmia, malformative cardiac defects, 
pulmonary dysgenesis, and diaphragmatic hernia. Recently, mutations in STRA6, 
encoding a membrane receptor for vitamin A-bearing plasma retinol binding 
protein, have been identified in such patients. We performed STRA6 molecular 
analysis in three fetuses and one child diagnosed with Matthew-Wood syndrome and 
in three siblings where two adult living brothers are affected with combinations 
of clinical anophthalmia, tetralogy of Fallot, and mental retardation. Among 
these patients, six novel mutations were identified, bringing the current total 
of known STRA6 mutations to seventeen. We extensively reviewed clinical data 
pertaining to all twenty-one reported patients with STRA6 mutations (the seven 
of this report and fourteen described elsewhere) and discuss additional features 
that may be part of the syndrome. The clinical spectrum associated with STRA6 
deficiency is even more variable than initially described.

Copyright 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.21023
PMID: 19309693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]