---
reference_id: "PMID:21062345"
title: Recessive RYR1 mutations cause unusual congenital myopathy with prominent nuclear internalization and large areas of myofibrillar disorganization.
authors:
- Bevilacqua JA
- Monnier N
- Bitoun M
- Eymard B
- Ferreiro A
- Monges S
- Lubieniecki F
- Taratuto AL
- Laquerrière A
- Claeys KG
- Marty I
- Fardeau M
- Guicheney P
- Lunardi J
- Romero NB
journal: Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2990.2010.01149.x
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Cell Nucleus/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- Child
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Male
- "Microscopy, Electron, Transmission"
- Mutation
- Myofibrils/ultrastructure
- "Myopathy, Central Core/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recessive RYR1 mutations cause unusual congenital myopathy with prominent nuclear internalization and large areas of myofibrillar disorganization.
**Authors:** Bevilacqua JA, Monnier N, Bitoun M, Eymard B, Ferreiro A, Monges S, Lubieniecki F, Taratuto AL, Laquerrière A, Claeys KG, Marty I, Fardeau M, Guicheney P, Lunardi J, Romero NB
**Journal:** Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2990.2010.01149.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2990.2010.01149.x)

## Content

1. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2011 Apr;37(3):271-84. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2990.2010.01149.x.

Recessive RYR1 mutations cause unusual congenital myopathy with prominent 
nuclear internalization and large areas of myofibrillar disorganization.

Bevilacqua JA(1), Monnier N, Bitoun M, Eymard B, Ferreiro A, Monges S, 
Lubieniecki F, Taratuto AL, Laquerrière A, Claeys KG, Marty I, Fardeau M, 
Guicheney P, Lunardi J, Romero NB.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Myologie, Unité de Morphologie Neuromusculaire, Groupe 
Hospitalier-Universitaire Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.

AIMS: To report the clinical, pathological and genetic findings in a group of 
patients with a previously not described phenotype of congenital myopathy due to 
recessive mutations in the gene encoding the type 1 muscle ryanodine receptor 
channel (RYR1).
METHODS: Seven unrelated patients shared a predominant axial and proximal 
weakness of varying severity, with onset during the neonatal period, associated 
with bilateral ptosis and ophthalmoparesis, and unusual muscle biopsy features 
at light and electron microscopic levels.
RESULTS: Muscle biopsy histochemistry revealed a peculiar morphological pattern 
characterized by numerous internalized myonuclei in up to 51% of fibres and 
large areas of myofibrillar disorganization with undefined borders. 
Ultrastructurally, such areas frequently occupied the whole myofibre cross 
section and extended to a moderate number of sarcomeres in length. Molecular 
genetic investigations identified recessive mutations in the ryanodine receptor 
(RYR1) gene in six compound heterozygous patients and one homozygous patient. 
Nine mutations are novel and four have already been reported either as 
pathogenic recessive mutations or as changes affecting a residue associated with 
dominant malignant hyperthermia susceptibility. Only two mutations were located 
in the C-terminal transmembrane domain whereas the others were distributed 
throughout the cytoplasmic region of RyR1.
CONCLUSION: Our data enlarge the spectrum of RYR1 mutations and highlight their 
clinical and morphological heterogeneity. A congenital myopathy featuring ptosis 
and external ophthalmoplegia, concomitant with the novel histopathological 
phenotype showing fibres with large, poorly delimited areas of myofibrillar 
disorganization and internal nuclei, is highly suggestive of an RYR1-related 
congenital myopathy.

© 2011 The Authors. Neuropathology and Applied Neurobiology © 2011 British 
Neuropathological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2990.2010.01149.x
PMID: 21062345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]