---
reference_id: "PMID:38876267"
title: Hepatic ketogenesis is not required for starvation adaptation in mice.
authors:
- Feola K
- Venable AH
- Broomfield T
- Villegas M
- Fu X
- Burgess S
- Huen SC
journal: Mol Metab
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2024.101967
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- Liver/metabolism
- Starvation/metabolism
- "Hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA Synthase/metabolism, genetics"
- Male
- Ketosis/metabolism
- Endotoxemia/metabolism
- "Adaptation, Physiological"
- Ketone Bodies/metabolism
- Blood Glucose/metabolism
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Fasting/metabolism
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Anorexia/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatic ketogenesis is not required for starvation adaptation in mice.
**Authors:** Feola K, Venable AH, Broomfield T, Villegas M, Fu X, Burgess S, Huen SC
**Journal:** Mol Metab (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molmet.2024.101967](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmet.2024.101967)

## Content

1. Mol Metab. 2024 Aug;86:101967. doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2024.101967. Epub 2024
Jun  12.

Hepatic ketogenesis is not required for starvation adaptation in mice.

Feola K(1), Venable AH(2), Broomfield T(2), Villegas M(3), Fu X(3), Burgess
S(4), Huen SC(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine (Nephrology), University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
(3)Center for Human Nutrition, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA; Center for Human Nutrition, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
(5)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA; Department of Internal Medicine (Nephrology), University
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. Electronic address:
sarah.huen@utsouthwestern.edu.

OBJECTIVE: In response to bacterial inflammation, anorexia of acute illness is
protective and is associated with the induction of fasting metabolic programs
such as ketogenesis. Forced feeding during the anorectic period induced by
bacterial inflammation is associated with suppressed ketogenesis and increased
mortality. As ketogenesis is considered essential in fasting adaptation, we
sought to determine the role of ketogenesis in illness-induced anorexia.
METHODS: A mouse model of inducible hepatic specific deletion of the rate
limiting enzyme for ketogenesis (HMG-CoA synthase 2, Hmgcs2) was used to
investigate the role of ketogenesis in endotoxemia, a model of bacterial
inflammation, and in prolonged starvation.
RESULTS: Mice deficient of hepatic Hmgcs2 failed to develop ketosis during
endotoxemia and during prolonged fasting. Surprisingly, hepatic HMGCS2
deficiency and the lack of ketosis did not affect survival, glycemia, or body
temperature in response to endotoxemia. Mice with hepatic ketogenic deficiency
also did not exhibit any defects in starvation adaptation and were able to
maintain blood glucose, body temperature, and lean mass compared to littermate
wild-type controls. Mice with hepatic HMGCS2 deficiency exhibited higher levels
of plasma acetate levels in response to fasting.
CONCLUSIONS: Circulating hepatic-derived ketones do not provide protection
against endotoxemia, suggesting that alternative mechanisms drive the increased
mortality from forced feeding during illness-induced anorexia. Hepatic ketones
are also dispensable for surviving prolonged starvation in the absence of
inflammation. Our study challenges the notion that hepatic ketogenesis is
required to maintain blood glucose and preserve lean mass during starvation,
raising the possibility of extrahepatic ketogenesis and use of alternative fuels
as potential means of metabolic compensation.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier GmbH.. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molmet.2024.101967
PMCID: PMC11246062
PMID: 38876267 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
