---
reference_id: "PMID:32568377"
title: "PTEN hamartoma tumour syndrome: what happens when there is no PTEN germline mutation?"
authors:
- Yehia L
- Eng C
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddaa127
keywords:
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Germ-Line Mutation
- "Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- PTEN Phosphohydrolase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PTEN hamartoma tumour syndrome: what happens when there is no PTEN germline mutation?
**Authors:** Yehia L, Eng C
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddaa127](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddaa127)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2020 Oct 20;29(R2):R150-R157. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddaa127.

PTEN hamartoma tumour syndrome: what happens when there is no PTEN germline 
mutation?

Yehia L(1), Eng C(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Genomic Medicine Institute, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, OH, USA.
(2)Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(3)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, Case Western Reserve University 
School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(4)Germline High Risk Cancer Focus Group, Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case 
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA.

Hereditary cancer syndromes represent ~10% of all incident cancers. It is 
important to identify individuals having these disorders because, unlike 
patients with sporadic cancer, these patients require specialised life-long 
care, with implications for their families. Importantly, the identification of 
alterations in cancer-predisposing genes facilitates gene-informed molecular 
diagnosis, cancer risk assessment and gene-specific clinical management. 
Moreover, knowledge about gene function in the inherited cancers offers insights 
towards biological processes pertinent to the more common sporadic cancers. 
Conversely, without a known gene, clinical management is less precise, and it is 
impossible to offer predictive testing of family members. PTEN hamartoma tumour 
syndrome (PHTS) is an umbrella term encompassing four overgrowth and cancer 
predisposition disorders associated with germline PTEN mutations. With time, it 
became evident that only a finite subset of individuals with PHTS-associated 
phenotypes harbour germline PTEN mutations. Therefore, non-PTEN aetiologies 
exist in PTEN wildtype patients. Indeed, gene discovery efforts over the last 
decade elucidated multiple candidate cancer predisposition genes. While a subset 
of genes (e.g. AKT1, PIK3CA) are biologically plausible as being key effectors 
within the PTEN signalling cascade, other genes required meticulous functional 
interrogation to explain their contribution to PHTS-related phenotypes. 
Collectively, the extensive phenotypic heterogeneity of the clinical syndromes 
typically united by PTEN is reflected by the genetic heterogeneity revealed 
through gene discovery. Validating these gene discoveries is critical because, 
while PTEN wildtype patients can be diagnosed clinically, they do not have the 
benefit of specific gene-informed risk assessment and subsequent management.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddaa127
PMCID: PMC7574959
PMID: 32568377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]