---
reference_id: "PMID:31321757"
title: Epidemiology, pathogenesis, and diagnosis of Addison's disease in adults.
authors:
- Betterle C
- Presotto F
- Furmaniak J
journal: J Endocrinol Invest
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s40618-019-01079-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology, pathogenesis, and diagnosis of Addison's disease in adults.
**Authors:** Betterle C, Presotto F, Furmaniak J
**Journal:** J Endocrinol Invest (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40618-019-01079-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40618-019-01079-6)

## Content

1. J Endocrinol Invest. 2019 Dec;42(12):1407-1433. doi:
10.1007/s40618-019-01079-6.  Epub 2019 Jul 18.

Epidemiology, pathogenesis, and diagnosis of Addison's disease in adults.

Betterle C(1), Presotto F(2)(3), Furmaniak J(4).

Author information:
(1)Endocrine Unit, Department of Medicine (DIMED), University of Padova, Via 
Ospedale Civile 105, 35128, Padua, Italy.
(2)Endocrine Unit, Department of Medicine (DIMED), University of Padova, Via 
Ospedale Civile 105, 35128, Padua, Italy. fabio.presotto@unipd.it.
(3)Unit of Internal Medicine, Ospedale dell'Angelo, via Paccagnella 11, 30174, 
Mestre-Venice, Italy. fabio.presotto@unipd.it.
(4)FIRS Laboratories, Llanishen, Cardiff, UK.

BACKGROUND: Addison's disease (AD) is a rare disorder and among adult population 
in developed countries is most commonly caused by autoimmunity. In contrast, in 
children genetic causes are responsible for AD in the majority of patients.
PURPOSE: This review describes epidemiology, pathogenesis, genetics, natural 
history, clinical manifestations, immunological markers and diagnostic 
strategies in patients with AD. Standard care treatments including the 
management of patients during pregnancy and adrenal crises consistent with the 
recent consensus statement of the European Consortium and the Endocrine Society 
Clinical Practice Guideline are described. In addition, emerging therapies 
designed to improve the quality of life and new strategies to modify the natural 
history of autoimmune AD are discussed.
CONCLUSIONS: Progress in optimizing replacement therapy for patients with AD has 
allowed the patients to lead a normal life. However, continuous education of 
patients and health care professionals of ever-present danger of adrenal crisis 
is essential to save lives of patients with AD.

DOI: 10.1007/s40618-019-01079-6
PMID: 31321757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]