---
reference_id: "PMID:29279550"
title: "Anaplastic large cell lymphoma: pathology, genetics, and clinical aspects."
authors:
- Tsuyama N
- Sakamoto K
- Sakata S
- Dobashi A
- Takeuchi K
journal: J Clin Exp Hematop
year: '2017'
doi: 10.3960/jslrt.17023
keywords:
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase
- Animals
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- Cyclophosphamide/therapeutic use
- Doxorubicin/therapeutic use
- Humans
- "Ki-1 Antigen/analysis, genetics"
- "Lymphoma, Large-Cell, Anaplastic/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Mutation
- Prednisolone/therapeutic use
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/analysis, genetics"
- Vincristine/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anaplastic large cell lymphoma: pathology, genetics, and clinical aspects.
**Authors:** Tsuyama N, Sakamoto K, Sakata S, Dobashi A, Takeuchi K
**Journal:** J Clin Exp Hematop (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3960/jslrt.17023](https://doi.org/10.3960/jslrt.17023)

## Content

1. J Clin Exp Hematop. 2017;57(3):120-142. doi: 10.3960/jslrt.17023.

Anaplastic large cell lymphoma: pathology, genetics, and clinical aspects.

Tsuyama N(1), Sakamoto K(2), Sakata S(2), Dobashi A(2), Takeuchi K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pathology, Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for Cancer
Research.
(2)Pathology Project for Molecular Targets, Cancer Institute, Japanese
Foundation for Cancer Research.

Anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) was first described in 1985 as a
large-cell neoplasm with anaplastic morphology immunostained by the Ki-1
antibody, which recognizes CD30. In 1994, the nucleophosmin (NPM)-anaplastic
lymphoma kinase (ALK) fusion receptor tyrosine kinase was identified in a subset
of patients, leading to subdivision of this disease into ALK-positive and
-negative ALCL in the present World Health Organization classification. Due to
variations in morphology and immunophenotype, which may sometimes be atypical
for lymphoma, many differential diagnoses should be considered, including solid
cancers, lymphomas, and reactive processes. CD30 and ALK are key molecules
involved in the pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment of ALCL. In addition,
signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3)-mediated mechanisms
are relevant in both types of ALCL, and fusion/mutated receptor tyrosine kinases
other than ALK have been reported in ALK-negative ALCL. ALK-positive ALCL has a
better prognosis than ALK-negative ALCL or other peripheral T-cell lymphomas.
Patients with ALK-positive ALCL are usually treated with anthracycline-based
regimens, such as combination cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and
prednisolone (CHOP) or CHOEP (CHOP plus etoposide), which provide a favorable
prognosis, except in patients with multiple International Prognostic Index
factors. For targeted therapies, an anti-CD30 monoclonal antibody linked to a
synthetic antimitotic agent (brentuximab vedotin) and ALK inhibitors
(crizotinib, alectinib, and ceritinib) are being used in clinical settings.

DOI: 10.3960/jslrt.17023
PMCID: PMC6144189
PMID: 29279550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The authors do not have
any conflicts of interest to declare.
