---
reference_id: "PMID:40598289"
title: "Unmet needs of adults living with mucopolysaccharidosis II: data from the Hunter Outcome Survey."
authors:
- Muenzer J
- Amartino H
- Giugliani R
- Harmatz P
- Lin SP
- Link B
- Molter D
- Ramaswami U
- Scarpa M
- Botha J
- Audi J
- Burton BK
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03464-8
keywords:
- Humans
- "Mucopolysaccharidosis II/drug therapy, therapy"
- Adult
- Male
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy/methods
- Young Adult
- Middle Aged
- Iduronate Sulfatase/therapeutic use
- Adolescent
- Female
- Surveys and Questionnaires
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unmet needs of adults living with mucopolysaccharidosis II: data from the Hunter Outcome Survey.
**Authors:** Muenzer J, Amartino H, Giugliani R, Harmatz P, Lin SP, Link B, Molter D, Ramaswami U, Scarpa M, Botha J, Audi J, Burton BK
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-024-03464-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-024-03464-8)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2025 Jul 1;20(1):319. doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03464-8.

Unmet needs of adults living with mucopolysaccharidosis II: data from the Hunter
Outcome Survey.

Muenzer J(1), Amartino H(2), Giugliani R(3), Harmatz P(4), Lin SP(5), Link B(6),
Molter D(7), Ramaswami U(8), Scarpa M(9), Botha J(10), Audi J(10)(11), Burton
BK(12).

Author information:
(1)University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, 27514, USA.
muenzer@med.unc.edu.
(2)Hospital Universitario Austral, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)Department of Genetics UFRGS, Medical Genetics Service HCPA, INAGEMP, DASA
Genomica and Casa Dos Raros, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(4)UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital Oakland, Oakland, CA, USA.
(5)Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)University Children's Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland.
(7)Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(8)Lysosomal Storage Disorders Unit, Royal Free London NHS Foundation Trust,
London, UK.
(9)Udine University Hospital, Udine, Italy.
(10)Takeda Pharmaceuticals International AG, Zurich, Switzerland.
(11)Takeda Pharmaceuticals International AG, Ultragenyx Europe GmbH,
Lichstrasse, Basel, Switzerland.
(12)Ann & Robert H Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Northwestern
University, Chicago, IL, USA.

BACKGROUND: Mucopolysaccharidosis II (MPS II) is a rare, life-limiting lysosomal
storage disease caused by deficient iduronate-2-sulfatase activity. The current
standard of care for MPS II is intravenous enzyme replacement therapy (ERT),
which has been shown to improve somatic signs and symptoms and to increase life
expectancy by approximately 12 years. This study reported on the somatic disease
burden and clinical requirements of adult male patients in the Hunter Outcome
Survey (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03292887).
RESULTS: Of the 373 patients in the analysis, 88 (23.6%) had cognitive
impairment and 332 (89.0%) had received ERT. Almost half of all ERT-treated
patients (47.0%) had undergone surgery in adulthood; the most common surgery was
hernia repair (17.8% of patients). Over one-third (38.6%) reported hearing aid
use. The median 6-min walk test distance for 151 treated patients was 436.0 m at
the latest assessment after 18 years of age. Cardiovascular signs and symptoms
were present in 71.6% (192/268) of patients and 27.3% (60/220) reported oxygen
dependency after 18 years of age. Approximately half (50.9%) of ERT-treated
patients experienced at least one serious adverse event in adulthood, with the
most common being respiratory disorders. Intravenous ERT was well tolerated,
with a rate of serious infusion-related reactions in adulthood of 0.03 per 10
patient-years.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, adult patients with neuronopathic and non-neuronopathic
MPS II had a high disease burden and requirement for surgeries, emphasizing the
need to continue multidisciplinary management and regular assessments in
adulthood. Further research into the differences in care needs of adult patients
with MPS II is warranted. Trial registration NCT03292887 .

© 2025. Takeda Pharmaceuticals International AG.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-024-03464-8
PMCID: PMC12211871
PMID: 40598289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to
participate: Independent Review Board/Ethics Committee approval was obtained for
all participating centers. The Hunter Outcome Survey is conducted in accordance
with Good Pharmacoepidemiology Practice (GPP), Good Research for Comparative
Effectiveness principles, and the relevant principles of the International
Conference on Harmonisation (ICH) Good Clinical Practice guidelines (ICH E6).
Each patient, their parents, or a legal representative provided signed and dated
written informed consent for participation in the Hunter Outcome Survey. All
patient information is managed in accordance with national data protection
standards. Consent for publication: Not applicable. Competing interests: J.
Muenzer has received consulting fees and/or participated in advisory boards for
Denali Therapeutics, JCR Pharmaceuticals, REGENXBIO, Sanofi Genzyme, and Takeda.
He is a Principal Investigator for a post-trial access program for intrathecal
ERT for the neuronopathic form of MPS II (sponsored by Takeda), a phase 1/2 gene
editing trial for adults with MPS II (sponsored by Sangamo Therapeutics), and
phase 1/2 and phase 2/3 trials of IV ERT for MPS II (sponsored by Denali
Therapeutics). H. Amartino has received consulting fees, fees for service,
and/or participated in advisory boards for Amicus Therapeutics, BioMarin
Pharmaceutical, Janssen Pharmaceuticals, PTC Therapeutics, Sanofi Genzyme,
Ultragenyx, and Takeda. He has performed contracted research for Allievex,
Amicus Therapeutics, bluebird bio, JCR Pharmaceuticals, Minoryx Therapeutics,
PTC Therapeutics, Sanofi Genzyme, and Takeda. R. Giugliani has received
consulting fees, fees for service, speaker fees, and/or travel expenses from,
and/or participated in advisory boards for Abeona Therapeutics, Alnylam
Pharmaceuticals, Amicus Therapeutics, BioMarin Pharmaceutical, Chiesi
Farmaceutici, Inventiva Pharma, Janssen Pharmaceuticals, JCR Pharmaceuticals,
Novartis, Orphan Disease Center, Praxis Precision Medicines, PTC Therapeutics,
REGENXBIO, Sanofi Genzyme, Sigilon Therapeutics, Swedish Orphan Biovitrum,
Takeda, and Ultragenyx. He has performed contracted research for or received
research grants from Allievex, Amicus Therapeutics, BioMarin Pharmaceutical, GC
Pharma, Idorsia, Janssen Pharmaceuticals, JCR Pharmaceuticals, Lysogene, Sanofi
Genzyme, Takeda, and Ultragenyx. P. Harmatz has received consulting fees/other
remuneration from Aeglea, Alexion Pharmaceuticals, ArmaGen, Audentes, AVROBIO,
BioMarin Pharmaceutical, Capsida Biotherapeutics, Chiesi, Denali Therapeutics,
EdiGene, Enzyvant, Fondazione Telethon, Grace Science, Inventiva Pharma, JCR
Pharmaceuticals, Neurogene, Novel Pharma, Orchard Therapeutics, Orphazyme,
Paradigm Biopharma, PTC Therapeutics, Rallybio, REGENXBIO, Renovion, Sangamo
Therapeutics, SalioGen, Sanofi Genzyme, Takeda, and Ultragenyx Pharmaceutical;
and has received research support from Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Adrenas,
ArmaGen, Amicus, Ascendis, ASPA, Azafaros, BioMarin Pharmaceutical, Calcilytics,
Denali, Enzyvant, Homology, Inventiva Pharma, JCR, Orphazyme, Prevail, QED,
RegenXbio, Sangamo Therapeutics, Swedish Orphan Biovitrum, Takeda, and
Ultragenyx Pharmaceutical. S.-P. Lin has received fees for service from BioMarin
Pharmaceutical, Sanofi Genzyme, and Takeda. B. Link has received fees for
service and/or travel expenses from BioMarin Pharmaceutical, Chiesi
Farmaceutici, Sanofi Genzyme, and Takeda. D. Molter has received fees for
service and/or travel expenses from BioMarin Pharmaceutical and Takeda. U.
Ramaswami has participated in advisory boards for Amicus Therapeutics, JCR
Pharmaceuticals, Sanofi, and Takeda. She has received research grants from
Amicus Therapeutics, IntraBio, and Takeda. M. Scarpa has received consulting
fees, fees for service, and/or participated in advisory boards for Actelion
Pharmaceuticals, Alexion Pharmaceuticals, BioMarin Pharmaceuticals, Chiesi
Farmaceutici, Orchard Therapeutics, Orphazyme, Paradigm Biopharma, PTC
Therapeutics, Sanofi Genzyme, Takeda, and Ultragenyx. He has performed
contracted research for Alexion Pharmaceuticals, BioMarin Pharmaceutical, CTD,
Orchard Therapeutics, Orphazyme, Paradigm Biopharmaceuticals, PTC Therapeutics,
Sanofi Genzyme, and Takeda. J. Botha is a full-time employee of Takeda and
stockholder of Takeda Pharmaceuticals Company Limited. J. Audi was an employee
of Takeda and stockholder of Takeda Pharmaceuticals Company Limited at the time
of this analysis (current affiliation is Ultragenyx Europe GmbH, Allschwil,
Basel, Switzerland). B.K. Burton has received consulting fees and/or
participated in advisory boards for Agios Pharmaceuticals, Alexion, Alltrna,
Amgen, Aro, Applied Therapeutics, BioMarin Pharmaceutical, Chiesi Farmaceutici,
JCR Pharmaceuticals, Jnana Therapeutics, Moderna, Orchard Therapeutics, Passage
Bio, Sanofi Genzyme, Takeda, Travere, and Ultragenyx. She has performed
contracted research for Takeda and has been involved in company-sponsored
clinical trials with BioMarin Pharmaceutical, Denali Therapeutics, Homology
Medicines, JCR Pharmaceuticals, Jnana Therapeutics, Sangamo Therapeutics,
Synlogic, Takeda, and Ultragenyx.
