---
reference_id: "PMID:20525503"
title: Cilia dysfunction.
authors:
- Gudis DA
- Cohen NA
journal: Otolaryngol Clin North Am
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.otc.2010.02.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cilia dysfunction.
**Authors:** Gudis DA, Cohen NA
**Journal:** Otolaryngol Clin North Am (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.otc.2010.02.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.otc.2010.02.007)

## Content

1. Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2010 Jun;43(3):461-72, vii. doi: 
10.1016/j.otc.2010.02.007.

Cilia dysfunction.

Gudis DA(1), Cohen NA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of 
Pennsylvania, Ravdin Building, 5th Floor, 3400 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 
19104, USA.

Cilia are complex and powerful cellular structures that serve a multitude of 
functions across many types of organisms. In humans, one of the most critical 
roles of cilia is defense of the airway. The respiratory epithelium is lined 
with cilia that normally carry out an integrated and coordinated mechanism 
called mucociliary clearance. Mucociliary clearance, the process by which cilia 
transport the viscous mucus blanket of the upper airway to the gastrointestinal 
tract, is the primary means by which the upper airway clears itself of 
pathogens, allergens, debris, and toxins. The complex structure and regulatory 
mechanisms that dictate the form and function of normal cilia are not entirely 
understood, but it is clear that ciliary dysfunction results in impaired 
respiratory defense. Ciliary dysfunction may be primary, the result of genetic 
mutations resulting in abnormal cilia structure, or secondary, the result of 
environmental, infectious or inflammatory stimuli that disrupt normal motility 
or coordination.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.otc.2010.02.007
PMID: 20525503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]