---
reference_id: "PMID:23065822"
title: "Insulin resistance and the polycystic ovary syndrome revisited: an update on mechanisms and implications."
authors:
- Diamanti-Kandarakis E
- Dunaif A
journal: Endocr Rev
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1210/er.2011-1034
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Insulin Resistance
- Phenotype
- "Polycystic Ovary Syndrome/diagnosis, etiology, metabolism"
- Reproduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Insulin resistance and the polycystic ovary syndrome revisited: an update on mechanisms and implications.
**Authors:** Diamanti-Kandarakis E, Dunaif A
**Journal:** Endocr Rev (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1210/er.2011-1034](https://doi.org/10.1210/er.2011-1034)

## Content

1. Endocr Rev. 2012 Dec;33(6):981-1030. doi: 10.1210/er.2011-1034. Epub 2012 Oct
12.

Insulin resistance and the polycystic ovary syndrome revisited: an update on
mechanisms and implications.

Diamanti-Kandarakis E(1), Dunaif A.

Author information:
(1)Medical School, University of Athens (E.D.-K.), Athens GR-14578, Greece.

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is now recognized as an important metabolic as
well as reproductive disorder conferring substantially increased risk for type 2
diabetes. Affected women have marked insulin resistance, independent of obesity.
This article summarizes the state of the science since we last reviewed the
field in the Endocrine Reviews in 1997. There is general agreement that obese
women with PCOS are insulin resistant, but some groups of lean affected women
may have normal insulin sensitivity. There is a post-binding defect in receptor
signaling likely due to increased receptor and insulin receptor substrate-1
serine phosphorylation that selectively affects metabolic but not mitogenic
pathways in classic insulin target tissues and in the ovary. Constitutive
activation of serine kinases in the MAPK-ERK pathway may contribute to
resistance to insulin's metabolic actions in skeletal muscle. Insulin functions
as a co-gonadotropin through its cognate receptor to modulate ovarian
steroidogenesis. Genetic disruption of insulin signaling in the brain has
indicated that this pathway is important for ovulation and body weight
regulation. These insights have been directly translated into a novel therapy
for PCOS with insulin-sensitizing drugs. Furthermore, androgens contribute to
insulin resistance in PCOS. PCOS may also have developmental origins due to
androgen exposure at critical periods or to intrauterine growth restriction.
PCOS is a complex genetic disease, and first-degree relatives have reproductive
and metabolic phenotypes. Several PCOS genetic susceptibility loci have been
mapped and replicated. Some of the same susceptibility genes contribute to
disease risk in Chinese and European PCOS populations, suggesting that PCOS is
an ancient trait.

DOI: 10.1210/er.2011-1034
PMCID: PMC5393155
PMID: 23065822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
