---
reference_id: "PMID:17529973"
title: A genome-wide association study identifies alleles in FGFR2 associated with risk of sporadic postmenopausal breast cancer.
authors:
- Hunter DJ
- Kraft P
- Jacobs KB
- Cox DG
- Yeager M
- Hankinson SE
- Wacholder S
- Wang Z
- Welch R
- Hutchinson A
- Wang J
- Yu K
- Chatterjee N
- Orr N
- Willett WC
- Colditz GA
- Ziegler RG
- Berg CD
- Buys SS
- McCarty CA
- Feigelson HS
- Calle EE
- Thun MJ
- Hayes RB
- Tucker M
- Gerhard DS
- Fraumeni JF Jr
- Hoover RN
- Thomas G
- Chanock SJ
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1038/ng2075
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A genome-wide association study identifies alleles in FGFR2 associated with risk of sporadic postmenopausal breast cancer.
**Authors:** Hunter DJ, Kraft P, Jacobs KB, Cox DG, Yeager M, Hankinson SE, Wacholder S, Wang Z, Welch R, Hutchinson A, Wang J, Yu K, Chatterjee N, Orr N, Willett WC, Colditz GA, Ziegler RG, Berg CD, Buys SS, McCarty CA, Feigelson HS, Calle EE, Thun MJ, Hayes RB, Tucker M, Gerhard DS, Fraumeni JF Jr, Hoover RN, Thomas G, Chanock SJ
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng2075](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng2075)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2007 Jul;39(7):870-4. doi: 10.1038/ng2075. Epub 2007 May 27.

A genome-wide association study identifies alleles in FGFR2 associated with risk 
of sporadic postmenopausal breast cancer.

Hunter DJ(1), Kraft P, Jacobs KB, Cox DG, Yeager M, Hankinson SE, Wacholder S, 
Wang Z, Welch R, Hutchinson A, Wang J, Yu K, Chatterjee N, Orr N, Willett WC, 
Colditz GA, Ziegler RG, Berg CD, Buys SS, McCarty CA, Feigelson HS, Calle EE, 
Thun MJ, Hayes RB, Tucker M, Gerhard DS, Fraumeni JF Jr, Hoover RN, Thomas G, 
Chanock SJ.

Author information:
(1)Channing Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. 
dhunter@hsph.harvard.edu

We conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of breast cancer by 
genotyping 528,173 SNPs in 1,145 postmenopausal women of European ancestry with 
invasive breast cancer and 1,142 controls. We identified four SNPs in intron 2 
of FGFR2 (which encodes a receptor tyrosine kinase and is amplified or 
overexpressed in some breast cancers) that were highly associated with breast 
cancer and confirmed this association in 1,776 affected individuals and 2,072 
controls from three additional studies. Across the four studies, the association 
with all four SNPs was highly statistically significant (P(trend) for the most 
strongly associated SNP (rs1219648) = 1.1 x 10(-10); population attributable 
risk = 16%). Four SNPs at other loci most strongly associated with breast cancer 
in the initial GWAS were not associated in the replication studies. Our summary 
results from the GWAS are available online in a form that should speed the 
identification of additional risk loci.

DOI: 10.1038/ng2075
PMCID: PMC3493132
PMID: 17529973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]