---
reference_id: "PMID:36004012"
title: "Clostridium difficile Infection During Palliative Capecitabine Chemotherapy: A Case Report."
authors:
- Bhattar K
- Agrawal P
journal: Cureus
year: '2022'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.27102
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clostridium difficile Infection During Palliative Capecitabine Chemotherapy: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Bhattar K, Agrawal P
**Journal:** Cureus (2022)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.27102](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.27102)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2022 Jul 21;14(7):e27102. doi: 10.7759/cureus.27102. eCollection 2022 
Jul.

Clostridium difficile Infection During Palliative Capecitabine Chemotherapy: A 
Case Report.

Bhattar K(1), Agrawal P(2).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Dr. Sampurnanand Medical College, Jodhpur, IND.
(2)Pediatrics, Joe DiMaggio Children's Hospital, Miami, USA.

Capecitabine has been used for triple-negative metastatic breast cancers both as 
monotherapy and in combination with other agents. However, its gastrointestinal 
side effects are one of the biggest challenges for its patient compliance, and 
often result in permanent drug withdrawal. There have been reports of it causing 
enterocolitis (mainly terminal ileitis) and even ischaemic colitis, but it has 
not frequently been directly associated with Clostridium difficile infection. We 
describe a case of a 65-year-old woman with triple-negative breast cancer on 
palliative capecitabine who presented with blood-streaked watery diarrhea and 
abdominal pain and was diagnosed with chemotherapy-induced severe colitis with 
superimposed Clostridium difficile infection.

Copyright © 2022, Bhattar et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.27102
PMCID: PMC9392427
PMID: 36004012

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.