---
reference_id: "PMID:27518661"
title: Two Phase 3 Trials of Adalimumab for Hidradenitis Suppurativa.
authors:
- Kimball AB
- Okun MM
- Williams DA
- Gottlieb AB
- Papp KA
- Zouboulis CC
- Armstrong AW
- Kerdel F
- Gold MH
- Forman SB
- Korman NJ
- Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ
- Crowley JJ
- Lynde C
- Reguiai Z
- Prens EP
- Alwawi E
- Mostafa NM
- Pinsky B
- Sundaram M
- Gu Y
- Carlson DM
- Jemec GB
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1504370
keywords:
- "Adalimumab/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Adult
- "Anti-Inflammatory Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Hidradenitis Suppurativa/drug therapy
- Humans
- Intention to Treat Analysis
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Treatment Outcome
- "Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha/antagonists & inhibitors"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two Phase 3 Trials of Adalimumab for Hidradenitis Suppurativa.
**Authors:** Kimball AB, Okun MM, Williams DA, Gottlieb AB, Papp KA, Zouboulis CC, Armstrong AW, Kerdel F, Gold MH, Forman SB, Korman NJ, Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ, Crowley JJ, Lynde C, Reguiai Z, Prens EP, Alwawi E, Mostafa NM, Pinsky B, Sundaram M, Gu Y, Carlson DM, Jemec GB
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1504370](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1504370)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2016 Aug 4;375(5):422-34. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1504370.

Two Phase 3 Trials of Adalimumab for Hidradenitis Suppurativa.

Kimball AB(1), Okun MM(1), Williams DA(1), Gottlieb AB(1), Papp KA(1), Zouboulis 
CC(1), Armstrong AW(1), Kerdel F(1), Gold MH(1), Forman SB(1), Korman NJ(1), 
Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ(1), Crowley JJ(1), Lynde C(1), Reguiai Z(1), Prens 
EP(1), Alwawi E(1), Mostafa NM(1), Pinsky B(1), Sundaram M(1), Gu Y(1), Carlson 
DM(1), Jemec GB(1).

Author information:
(1)From Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital (A.B.K.) and 
Tufts Medical Center (A.B.G.) - all in Boston; AbbVie, North Chicago, IL 
(M.M.O., D.A.W., E.A., N.M.M., B.P., M.S., Y.G., D.M.C.); Probity Medical 
Research and K Papp Clinical Research, Waterloo, ON (K.A.P.), and the Lynde 
Centre for Dermatology and Probity Medical Research, Markham, ON (C.L.) - both 
in Canada; the Departments of Dermatology, Venereology, Allergology and 
Immunology, Dessau Medical Center, Dessau, Germany (C.C.Z.); University of 
Southern California, Los Angeles (A.W.A.), and Bakersfield Dermatology, 
Bakersfield (J.J.C.) - both in California; Florida Academic Dermatology Centers, 
Miami (F.K.), and Forward Clinical Trials, Tampa (S.B.F.) - both in Florida; 
Tennessee Clinical Research Center, Nashville (M.H.G.); University Hospitals 
Case Medical Center, Cleveland (N.J.K.); 4th Department of Internal Medicine, 
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Medical School, Athens 
(E.J.G.-B.); CHU de Reims, Hôpital Robert Debré, Service de Dermatologie, Reims, 
France (Z.R.); Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands 
(E.-P.P.); and the Department of Dermatology, Roskilde Hospital, and Health 
Sciences Faculty, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen (G.B.E.J.).

Comment in
    Evid Based Med. 2017 Mar;22(1):34. doi: 10.1136/ebmed-2016-110581.
    Br J Dermatol. 2017 Feb;176(2):281-282. doi: 10.1111/bjd.15255.
    Cutis. 2017 Aug;100(2):100.

BACKGROUND: Hidradenitis suppurativa is a painful, chronic inflammatory skin 
disease with few options for effective treatment. In a phase 2 trial, 
adalimumab, an antibody against tumor necrosis factor α, showed efficacy against 
hidradenitis suppurativa.
METHODS: PIONEER I and II were similarly designed, phase 3 multicenter trials of 
adalimumab for hidradenitis suppurativa, with two double-blind, 
placebo-controlled periods. In period 1, patients were randomly assigned in a 
1:1 ratio to 40 mg of adalimumab weekly or matching placebo for 12 weeks. In 
period 2, patients were reassigned to adalimumab at a weekly or every-other-week 
dose or to placebo for 24 weeks. The primary end point was a clinical response, 
defined as at least a 50% reduction from baseline in the abscess and 
inflammatory-nodule count, with no increase in abscess or draining-fistula 
counts, at week 12.
RESULTS: We enrolled 307 patients in PIONEER I and 326 in PIONEER II. Clinical 
response rates at week 12 were significantly higher for the groups receiving 
adalimumab weekly than for the placebo groups: 41.8% versus 26.0% in PIONEER I 
(P=0.003) and 58.9% versus 27.6% in PIONEER II (P<0.001). Patients receiving 
adalimumab had significantly greater improvement than the placebo groups in 
rank-ordered secondary outcomes (lesions, pain, and the modified Sartorius score 
for disease severity) at week 12 in PIONEER II only. Serious adverse events in 
period 1 (excluding worsening of underlying disease) occurred in 1.3% of 
patients receiving adalimumab and 1.3% of those receiving placebo in PIONEER I 
and in 1.8% and 3.7% of patients, respectively, in PIONEER II. In period 2, the 
rates of serious adverse events were 4.6% or less in all the groups in both 
studies, with no significant between-group differences.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with adalimumab (40 mg weekly), as compared with placebo, 
resulted in significantly higher clinical response rates in both trials at 12 
weeks; rates of serious adverse events were similar in the study groups. (Funded 
by AbbVie; ClinicalTrials.gov numbers, NCT01468207 and NCT01468233 for PIONEER I 
and PIONEER II, respectively.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1504370
PMID: 27518661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]