---
reference_id: "PMID:38565173"
title: "Prevalence, Incidence, and Treatment Pattern of Wilson's Disease Using National Health Insurance Data From 2010-2020, Korea."
authors:
- Jang ES
- Choi HY
- Ki M
- Kim BH
- Kim KA
- Jeong SH
journal: J Korean Med Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3346/jkms.2024.39.e115
keywords:
- Humans
- "Child, Preschool"
- Child
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Adult
- "Hepatolenticular Degeneration/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Prevalence
- Incidence
- Chelating Agents/therapeutic use
- Republic of Korea/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence, Incidence, and Treatment Pattern of Wilson's Disease Using National Health Insurance Data From 2010-2020, Korea.
**Authors:** Jang ES, Choi HY, Ki M, Kim BH, Kim KA, Jeong SH
**Journal:** J Korean Med Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3346/jkms.2024.39.e115](https://doi.org/10.3346/jkms.2024.39.e115)

## Content

1. J Korean Med Sci. 2024 Apr 1;39(12):e115. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2024.39.e115.

Prevalence, Incidence, and Treatment Pattern of Wilson's Disease Using National 
Health Insurance Data From 2010-2020, Korea.

Jang ES(#)(1), Choi HY(#)(2), Ki M(2), Kim BH(3), Kim KA(4), Jeong SH(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of 
Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, Korea.
(2)Department of Cancer Control and Population Health, Graduate School of Cancer 
Science and Policy, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Korea.
(3)Center for Liver and Pancreatobiliary Cancer, Division of Gastroenterology, 
National Cancer Center, Goyang, Korea.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Inje University Ilsan Paik Hospital, Goyang, 
Korea.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of 
Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, Korea. 
jsh@snubh.org.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Wilson's disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive disorder in which 
copper (Cu) accumulates in organs, particularly in the liver and central nervous 
system. This study aimed to investigate the prevalence, incidence, and treatment 
patterns of WD patients in Korea.
METHODS: National Health Insurance System (NHIS) claims data from 2010 to 2020 
were analyzed. patients with WD as a primary or additional diagnosis at least 
once were identified using the International Classification of Diseases (ICD)-10 
disease code E83.0 and a record for a registration program for rare intractable 
diseases in Korea.
RESULTS: The average age- and sex-adjusted prevalence and incidence of WD 
between 2010 and 2020 were 3.06/100,000 and 0.11/100,000, respectively. The mean 
age of the patients with newly diagnosed WD was 21.0 ± 15.9 years. Among the 622 
WD incident cases during the study period, 19.3% of the patients had liver 
cirrhosis and 9.2% had received liver transplantation. Psychological and 
neurological diseases were present in 40.7% and 48.1% of the patients, 
respectively. Regarding the diagnosis of WD, liver biopsy was performed in only 
51.6% of new cases. D-penicillamine, trientine, or zinc were prescribed in 81.5% 
of the incident cases, and the treatment uptake rates decreased with increasing 
age.
CONCLUSION: The prevalence of WD in Korea is 3.06/100,000 and approximately 
1,800 patients use medical services annually. A significant proportion of 
patients are diagnosed at the cirrhotic stage and not treated with Cu-chelating 
therapeutics, suggesting the need for early diagnosis and adequate treatment to 
improve prognosis.

© 2024 The Korean Academy of Medical Sciences.

DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2024.39.e115
PMCID: PMC10985507
PMID: 38565173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no potential conflicts of 
interest to disclose.