---
reference_id: "PMID:22513045"
title: Clinical utility of diagnostic guidelines and putative biomarkers in lymphangioleiomyomatosis.
authors:
- Chang WY
- Cane JL
- Blakey JD
- Kumaran M
- Pointon KS
- Johnson SR
journal: Respir Res
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-13-34
keywords:
- Adult
- Biomarkers/blood
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Humans
- "Lymphangioleiomyomatosis/blood, diagnosis"
- Matrix Metalloproteinase 2/blood
- Matrix Metalloproteinase 9/blood
- Middle Aged
- Peptidyl-Dipeptidase A/blood
- Practice Guidelines as Topic/standards
- Respiratory Function Tests/standards
- Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor D/blood
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical utility of diagnostic guidelines and putative biomarkers in lymphangioleiomyomatosis.
**Authors:** Chang WY, Cane JL, Blakey JD, Kumaran M, Pointon KS, Johnson SR
**Journal:** Respir Res (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1465-9921-13-34](https://doi.org/10.1186/1465-9921-13-34)

## Content

1. Respir Res. 2012 Apr 18;13(1):34. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-13-34.

Clinical utility of diagnostic guidelines and putative biomarkers in 
lymphangioleiomyomatosis.

Chang WY(1), Cane JL, Blakey JD, Kumaran M, Pointon KS, Johnson SR.

Author information:
(1)Division of Therapeutics and Molecular Medicine, National Centre for 
Lymphangioleiomyomatosis and Nottingham Respiratory Biomedical Research Unit, 
Queen's Medical Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.

BACKGROUND: Lymphangioleiomyomatosis is a rare disease occurring almost 
exclusively in women. Diagnosis often requires surgical biopsy and the clinical 
course varies between patients with no predictors of progression. We evaluated 
recent diagnostic guidelines, clinical features and serum biomarkers as 
diagnostic and prognostic tools.
METHODS: Serum vascular endothelial growth factor-D (VEGF-D), angiotensin 
converting enzyme (ACE), matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) -2 and -9, clinical 
phenotype, thoracic and abdominal computerised tomography, lung function and 
quality of life were examined in a cohort of 58 patients. 32 healthy female 
controls had serum biomarkers measured.
RESULTS: Serum VEGF-D, ACE and total MMP-2 levels were elevated in patients. 
VEGF-D was the strongest discriminator between patients and controls 
(median = 1174 vs. 332 pg/ml p < 0.0001 with an area under the receiver 
operating characteristic curve of 0.967, 95% CI 0.93-1.01). Application of 
European Respiratory Society criteria allowed a definite diagnosis without 
biopsy in 69%. Adding VEGF-D measurement to ERS criteria further reduced the 
need for biopsy by 10%. VEGF-D was associated with lymphatic involvement 
(p = 0.017) but not the presence of angiomyolipomas.
CONCLUSIONS: Combining ERS criteria and serum VEGF-D reduces the need for lung 
biopsy in LAM. VEGF-D was associated with lymphatic disease but not lung 
function.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-13-34
PMCID: PMC3431996
PMID: 22513045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]