---
reference_id: "PMID:40692561"
title: "Comparative cohort study of post-acute COVID-19 infection with a nested, randomized controlled trial of ivabradine for those with postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (the COVIVA study)."
authors:
- Saunders D
- Arnold TB
- Lavender JM
- Bi D
- Alcover K
- Hellwig LD
- Leazer ST
- Mohammed R
- Markos B
- Perera K
- Shaw D
- Kobi P
- Evans M
- Mains A
- Tanofsky-Kraff M
- Goguet E
- Mitre E
- Pratt KP
- Dalgard CL
- Haigney MC
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2025.1550636
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparative cohort study of post-acute COVID-19 infection with a nested, randomized controlled trial of ivabradine for those with postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (the COVIVA study).
**Authors:** Saunders D, Arnold TB, Lavender JM, Bi D, Alcover K, Hellwig LD, Leazer ST, Mohammed R, Markos B, Perera K, Shaw D, Kobi P, Evans M, Mains A, Tanofsky-Kraff M, Goguet E, Mitre E, Pratt KP, Dalgard CL, Haigney MC
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2025.1550636](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2025.1550636)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2025 Jul 7;16:1550636. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2025.1550636. 
eCollection 2025.

Comparative cohort study of post-acute COVID-19 infection with a nested, 
randomized controlled trial of ivabradine for those with postural orthostatic 
tachycardia syndrome (the COVIVA study).

Saunders D(1), Arnold TB(1)(2)(3), Lavender JM(1)(2)(3), Bi D(1)(3)(4), Alcover 
K(1), Hellwig LD(1)(4)(5), Leazer ST(1)(2)(3), Mohammed R(1)(2)(3), Markos 
B(1)(2)(3), Perera K(1)(2)(3), Shaw D(1)(4), Kobi P(1)(4), Evans M(6), Mains 
A(1)(2)(3), Tanofsky-Kraff M(1)(3), Goguet E(1)(4), Mitre E(1), Pratt KP(1), 
Dalgard CL(1)(5), Haigney MC(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Uniformed Services University School of Medicine, Bethesda, MD, United 
States.
(2)The Metis Foundation, San Antonio, TX, United States.
(3)Military Cardiovascular Outcomes Research, Uniformed Services University, 
Bethesda, MD, United States.
(4)Henry M Jackson Foundation for the Advancement of Military Medicine, Inc., 
Bethesda, MD, United States.
(5)Center for Military Precision Health, Uniformed Services University, 
Bethesda, MD, United States.
(6)Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver Spring, MD, United States.

BACKGROUND: Significant clinical similarities have been observed between the 
recently described "Long-Haul" COVID-19 (LHC) syndrome, Postural Orthostatic 
Tachycardia Syndrome (POTS) and Inappropriate Sinus Tachycardia (IST). Shared 
symptoms include light-headedness, palpitations, tremulousness, generalized 
weakness, blurred vision, chest pain, dyspnea, "brain-fog," and fatigue. 
Ivabradine is a selective sinoatrial node blocker FDA-approved for management of 
tachycardia associated with stable angina and heart failure not fully managed by 
beta blockers. In our study we aim to identify risk factors underlying LHC, as 
well as the effectiveness of ivabradine in controlling heart rate dysregulations 
and POTS/IST related symptoms.
METHODS/DESIGN: A detailed prospective phenotypic evaluation combined with 
multi-omic analysis of 200 LHC volunteers will be conducted to identify risk 
factors for autonomic dysfunction. A comparator group of 50 volunteers with 
documented COVID-19 but without LHC will be enrolled to better understand the 
risk factors for LHC and autonomic dysfunction. Those in the cohort who meet 
diagnostic criteria for POTS or IST will be included in a nested prospective, 
randomized, placebo-controlled trial to assess the impact of ivabradine on 
symptoms and heart rate, assessed non-invasively based on physiologic response 
and ambulatory electrocardiogram. Additionally, studies on catecholamine 
production, mast cell and basophil degranulation, inflammatory biomarkers, and 
indicators of metabolic dysfunction will be measured to potentially provide 
molecular classification and mechanistic insights.
DISCUSSION: Optimal therapies for dysautonomia, particularly associated with 
LHC, have yet to be defined. In the present study, ivabradine, one of numerous 
proposed interventions, will be systematically evaluated for therapeutic 
potential in LHC-associated POTS and IST. Additionally, this study will further 
refine the characteristics of the LHC-associated POTS/IST phenotype, genotype 
and transcriptional profile, including immunologic and multi-omic analysis of 
persistent immune activation and dysregulation. The study will also explore and 
identify potential endotheliopathy and abnormalities of the clotting cascade.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: https://clinicaltrials.gov/, identifier 
NCT05481177.

Copyright © 2025 Saunders, Arnold, Lavender, Bi, Alcover, Hellwig, Leazer, 
Mohammed, Markos, Perera, Shaw, Kobi, Evans, Mains, Tanofsky-Kraff, Goguet, 
Mitre, Pratt, Dalgard and Haigney.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2025.1550636
PMCID: PMC12278775
PMID: 40692561

Conflict of interest statement: DB, LH, DSH, PK, and EG were employed by Henry M 
Jackson Foundation for the Advancement of Military Medicine, Inc. TBA, JML, STL, 
RM, BM, KP, and AM were employed by Metis Foundation, Inc. The remaining authors 
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or 
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.