---
reference_id: "PMID:35195253"
title: "A central role for amyloid fibrin microclots in long COVID/PASC: origins and therapeutic implications."
authors:
- Kell DB
- Laubscher GJ
- Pretorius E
journal: Biochem J
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1042/BCJ20220016
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A central role for amyloid fibrin microclots in long COVID/PASC: origins and therapeutic implications.
**Authors:** Kell DB, Laubscher GJ, Pretorius E
**Journal:** Biochem J (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BCJ20220016](https://doi.org/10.1042/BCJ20220016)

## Content

1. Biochem J. 2022 Feb 17;479(4):537-559. doi: 10.1042/BCJ20220016.

A central role for amyloid fibrin microclots in long COVID/PASC: origins and 
therapeutic implications.

Kell DB(1)(2)(3), Laubscher GJ(4), Pretorius E(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Systems Biology, Institute of Systems, 
Molecular and Integrative Biology, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, 
University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 7ZB, U.K.
(2)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Centre for Biosustainability, Technical 
University of Denmark, Kemitorvet 200, 2800 Kgs Lyngby, Denmark.
(3)Department of Physiological Sciences, Faculty of Science, Stellenbosch 
University, Stellenbosch Private Bag X1 Matieland, 7602, South Africa.
(4)Mediclinic Stellenbosch, Stellenbosch 7600, South Africa.

Post-acute sequelae of COVID (PASC), usually referred to as 'Long COVID' (a 
phenotype of COVID-19), is a relatively frequent consequence of SARS-CoV-2 
infection, in which symptoms such as breathlessness, fatigue, 'brain fog', 
tissue damage, inflammation, and coagulopathies (dysfunctions of the blood 
coagulation system) persist long after the initial infection. It bears 
similarities to other post-viral syndromes, and to myalgic 
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). Many regulatory health 
bodies still do not recognize this syndrome as a separate disease entity, and 
refer to it under the broad terminology of 'COVID', although its demographics 
are quite different from those of acute COVID-19. A few years ago, we discovered 
that fibrinogen in blood can clot into an anomalous 'amyloid' form of fibrin 
that (like other β-rich amyloids and prions) is relatively resistant to 
proteolysis (fibrinolysis). The result, as is strongly manifested in 
platelet-poor plasma (PPP) of individuals with Long COVID, is extensive fibrin 
amyloid microclots that can persist, can entrap other proteins, and that may 
lead to the production of various autoantibodies. These microclots are 
more-or-less easily measured in PPP with the stain thioflavin T and a simple 
fluorescence microscope. Although the symptoms of Long COVID are multifarious, 
we here argue that the ability of these fibrin amyloid microclots (fibrinaloids) 
to block up capillaries, and thus to limit the passage of red blood cells and 
hence O2 exchange, can actually underpin the majority of these symptoms. 
Consistent with this, in a preliminary report, it has been shown that suitable 
and closely monitored 'triple' anticoagulant therapy that leads to the removal 
of the microclots also removes the other symptoms. Fibrin amyloid microclots 
represent a novel and potentially important target for both the understanding 
and treatment of Long COVID and related disorders.

© 2022 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BCJ20220016
PMCID: PMC8883497
PMID: 35195253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: E.P. is a named inventor on a patent application 
covering the use of fluorescence methods for microclot detection in Long COVID.