---
reference_id: "PMID:36962532"
title: "Prevalence of elevated blood lead levels and risk factors among children living in Patna, Bihar, India 2020."
authors:
- Brown MJ
- Patel P
- Nash E
- Dikid T
- Blanton C
- Forsyth JE
- Fontaine R
- Sharma P
- Keith J
- Babu B
- Vaisakh TP
- Azarudeen MJ
- Riram B
- Shrivastava A
journal: PLOS Glob Public Health
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgph.0000743
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of elevated blood lead levels and risk factors among children living in Patna, Bihar, India 2020.
**Authors:** Brown MJ, Patel P, Nash E, Dikid T, Blanton C, Forsyth JE, Fontaine R, Sharma P, Keith J, Babu B, Vaisakh TP, Azarudeen MJ, Riram B, Shrivastava A
**Journal:** PLOS Glob Public Health (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgph.0000743](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgph.0000743)

## Content

1. PLOS Glob Public Health. 2022 Oct 5;2(10):e0000743. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pgph.0000743. eCollection 2022.

Prevalence of elevated blood lead levels and risk factors among children living 
in Patna, Bihar, India 2020.

Brown MJ(1), Patel P(2), Nash E(3), Dikid T(2), Blanton C(4), Forsyth JE(5), 
Fontaine R(4), Sharma P(3), Keith J(3), Babu B(2), Vaisakh TP(2), Azarudeen 
MJ(2), Riram B(2), Shrivastava A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Social and Behavioral Sciences, Harvard Chan School of Public 
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(2)National Center for Disease Control India, New Delhi, India.
(3)Pure Earth, New York, New York, United States of America.
(4)Division of Global Health Protection, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America.
(5)Stanford Woods Institute for the Environment, Stanford University, Stanford, 
California, United States of America.

Childhood lead exposure remains a key health concern for officials worldwide, 
contributing some 600,000 new cases of intellectually disabled children 
annually. Most children affected by high exposure to lead live in low- and 
middle-income countries. The leaded gasoline phase out in India was completed in 
2000. Yet, in 2020, an estimated 275 million children aged 0 to 9 years had 
blood lead levels (BLLs) ≥ 5 μg/dL known to adversely affect intelligence and 
behavior. Lead sources reported in India include spices, cookware, paint, 
traditional medicines and cosmetics, and lead-acid battery recycling and repair. 
However, their relative contribution has not been characterized. More than 200 
lead pollution sites related to battery recycling and repair activities were 
identified in Bihar and Jharkhand, India. Ninety percent of the recycling sites 
had soil lead concentrations exceeding the US Environmental Protection Agency's 
standards. We compared blood and environmental lead levels in two groups of 
children in Patna, Bihar. Households in proximity to battery recycling 
operations (Proximal n = 67) versus households distal to these operations 
(Distal n = 68). The average age of children was 40 months; 46% were female. 
Overall, the geometric mean (GM) BLL was 11.6 μg/dL. GM BLLs of children in 
Proximal and Distal households were not significantly different (10.2 μg/dL vs. 
13.1 μg/dL respectively; p≤0.07). About 87% children, 56 Proximal and 62 Distal 
had BLLs ≥5 μg/dl. Lead concentrations in environmental samples were 
significantly higher in Proximal households (soil mean 9.8 vs. 1.6 μg/ft2; dust 
mean 52.9 vs. 29.9 μg/ft2 p<0.001; Proximal vs. Distal respectively) whereas 
concentrations in all spices were higher in Distal households (mean 46.8 vs 
134.5 ppm p<0.001; Proximal vs. Distal respectively), and turmeric (mean 59.4 
vs. 216.9 ppm Proximal vs. Distal respectively). In multivariate analyses for 
all children lead in spices and turmeric and number of rooms in the house were 
significant while for the Proximal group only lead in spices remained in the 
model. The predictive value of these models was poor. For the Distal group, a 
model with lead concentration in spices, turmeric and soil and number of rooms 
in the house was a much better fit. Of the 34 water samples collected, 7 were 
above the Indian standard of 10 ppb for lead in drinking water (2 in the 
Proximal area, 5 in the Distal area). Children in Patna, Bihar, India are 
exposed to multiple sources of lead, with lead levels in house dust and loose, 
locally sourced spices the most likely to increase blood lead levels. A holistic 
approach to blood lead testing and source identification and remediation are 
necessary to prevent lead exposure.

Copyright: This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be 
freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise 
used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the 
Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgph.0000743
PMCID: PMC10021519
PMID: 36962532

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal’s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests, Mary Jean Brown has 
paid consultancy with Magellan Scientific makers of the blood lead point of care 
instrument LeadCareII. There are no patents, products in development or marketed 
products associated with this research to declare. This does not alter our 
adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.