---
reference_id: "PMID:31969461"
title: Age and sex prevalence estimate of Joubert syndrome in Italy.
authors:
- Nuovo S
- Bacigalupo I
- Ginevrino M
- Battini R
- Bertini E
- Borgatti R
- Casella A
- Micalizzi A
- Nardella M
- Romaniello R
- Serpieri V
- Zanni G
- Valente EM
- Vanacore N
- JS Italian Study Group
journal: Neurology
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000008996
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/epidemiology, genetics"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Age of Onset
- Cerebellum/abnormalities
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Databases, Genetic"
- "Eye Abnormalities/epidemiology, genetics"
- Female
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- Infant
- Italy/epidemiology
- "Kidney Diseases, Cystic/epidemiology, genetics"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prevalence
- Retina/abnormalities
- Sex Factors
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Age and sex prevalence estimate of Joubert syndrome in Italy.
**Authors:** Nuovo S, Bacigalupo I, Ginevrino M, Battini R, Bertini E, Borgatti R, Casella A, Micalizzi A, Nardella M, Romaniello R, Serpieri V, Zanni G, Valente EM, Vanacore N, JS Italian Study Group
**Journal:** Neurology (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000008996](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000008996)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2020 Feb 25;94(8):e797-e801. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000008996.
Epub  2020 Jan 22.

Age and sex prevalence estimate of Joubert syndrome in Italy.

Nuovo S(1), Bacigalupo I(1), Ginevrino M(1), Battini R(1), Bertini E(1), 
Borgatti R(1), Casella A(1), Micalizzi A(1), Nardella M(1), Romaniello R(1), 
Serpieri V(1), Zanni G(1), Valente EM(2), Vanacore N(2); JS Italian Study Group.

Collaborators: Accorsi P, Alfei E, Andreucci E, Ardissino G, Avola E, Barone R, 
Benedicenti F, Bigoni S, Boccone L, Bonati MT, Bova S, Briguglio M, Briuglia S, 
Calabrese O, Cantalupo G, Caridi G, Cazzagon M, Celle ME, Cilio MR, Coppola G, 
D’Amico A, D’Arrigo S, De Brasi D, de Leva MF, Del Giudice E, Di Giacomo MC, Di 
Sabato ML, Dallapiccola B, Devescovi R, Digilio MC, Donati I, Donati MA, Dotti 
MT, Emma F, Fabretto A, Fazzi E, Ferlini A, Ferraris A, Ferrero GB, Ficcadenti 
A, Fiori S, Fischetto R, Freri E, Garavelli L, Gentile M, Giordano L, Greco D, 
Izzi C, Leuzzi V, Lucarelli E, Majore S, Mancardi MM, Mari F, Marra G, Mazzanti 
L, Melis D, Micaglio E, Mirabelli-Badenier M, Moroni I, Nardocci N, Nosadini M, 
Orcesi S, Pagani G, Pantaleoni C, Papadia FP, Parisi P, Patricelli MG, Peruzzi 
C, Pessagno A, Piccione M, Pini A, Pisano T, Pisciotta L, Pollazzon M, Rivieri 
F, Romano A, Romano C, Salviati L, Salpietro CD, Santucci M, Scarano E, Scelsa 
B, Sensi A, Seri M, Signorini S, Silengo M, Simonati A, Sirchia F, Spaccini L, 
Stanzial F, Stringini G, Trevisson E, Trivelli A, Uliana V, Uziel G, Vasco G, 
Vascotto M, Vitiello G, Zibordi F.

Author information:
(1)From the Neurogenetics Unit (S.N., M.G., E.M.V.), IRCCS Fondazione Santa 
Lucia, Rome; Department of Medicine and Surgery (S.N.), University of Salerno; 
National Center for Disease Prevention and Health Promotion (I.B., N.V.), 
National Institute of Health, Rome; Department of Molecular Medicine (M.G., 
A.C., V.S., E.M.V.), University of Pavia; IRCCS Stella Maris Foundation (R. 
Battini); Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine (R. Battini), 
University of Pisa; Laboratory of Molecular Medicine (E.B., M.N., G.Z.), Unit of 
Neuromuscular and Neurodegenerative Disorders, Department of Neurosciences, and 
Laboratory of Medical Genetics (A.M.), IRCCS Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, 
Rome; and Neuropsychiatry and Neurorehabilitation Unit (R. Borgatti, R.R.), 
Scientific Institute IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini, Lecco, Italy.
(2)From the Neurogenetics Unit (S.N., M.G., E.M.V.), IRCCS Fondazione Santa 
Lucia, Rome; Department of Medicine and Surgery (S.N.), University of Salerno; 
National Center for Disease Prevention and Health Promotion (I.B., N.V.), 
National Institute of Health, Rome; Department of Molecular Medicine (M.G., 
A.C., V.S., E.M.V.), University of Pavia; IRCCS Stella Maris Foundation (R. 
Battini); Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine (R. Battini), 
University of Pisa; Laboratory of Molecular Medicine (E.B., M.N., G.Z.), Unit of 
Neuromuscular and Neurodegenerative Disorders, Department of Neurosciences, and 
Laboratory of Medical Genetics (A.M.), IRCCS Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, 
Rome; and Neuropsychiatry and Neurorehabilitation Unit (R. Borgatti, R.R.), 
Scientific Institute IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini, Lecco, Italy. 
enzamaria.valente@unipv.it nicola.vanacore@iss.it.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2020 Feb 25;94(8):337-338. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000008992.

OBJECTIVE: To estimate the prevalence of Joubert syndrome (JS) in Italy applying 
standards of descriptive epidemiology and to provide a molecular 
characterization of the described patient cohort.
METHODS: We enrolled all patients with a neuroradiologically confirmed diagnosis 
of JS who resided in Italy in 2018 and calculated age and sex prevalence, 
assuming a Poisson distribution. We also investigated the correlation between 
proband chronological age and age at diagnosis and performed next-generation 
sequencing (NGS) analysis on probands' DNA when available.
RESULTS: We identified 284 patients with JS: the overall, female- and 
male-specific population-based prevalence rates were 0.47 (95% confidence 
interval [CI] 0.41-0.53), 0.41 (95% CI 0.32-0.49), and 0.53 (95% CI 0.45-0.61) 
per 100,000 population, respectively. When we considered only patients in the 
age range from 0 to 19 years, the corresponding population-based prevalence 
rates rose to 1.7 (95% CI 1.49-1.97), 1.62 (95% CI 1.31-1.99), and 1.80 (95% CI 
1.49-2.18) per 100,000 population. NGS analysis allowed identifying the genetic 
cause in 131 of 219 screened probands. Age at diagnosis was available for 223 
probands, with a mean of 6.67 ± 8.10 years, and showed a statistically 
significant linear relationship with chronological age (r 2 = 0.79; p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: We estimated for the first time the age and sex prevalence of JS in 
Italy and investigated the patients' genetic profile. The obtained 
population-based prevalence rate was ≈10 times higher than that available in 
literature for children population.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000008996
PMCID: PMC7136056
PMID: 31969461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]