---
reference_id: "PMID:28926830"
title: A Distinctive Ictal Amplitude-Integrated Electroencephalography Pattern in Newborns with Neonatal Epilepsy Associated with KCNQ2 Mutations.
authors:
- Vilan A
- Mendes Ribeiro J
- Striano P
- Weckhuysen S
- Weeke LC
- Brilstra E
- de Vries LS
- Cilio MR
journal: Neonatology
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1159/000478651
keywords:
- Anticonvulsants/therapeutic use
- "Brain/drug effects, physiopathology"
- Brain Waves/drug effects
- Carbamazepine/therapeutic use
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Electroencephalography
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Infant, Newborn, Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- KCNQ2 Potassium Channel/genetics
- Mutation
- Netherlands
- Phenotype
- Portugal
- Predictive Value of Tests
- "Seizures/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Distinctive Ictal Amplitude-Integrated Electroencephalography Pattern in Newborns with Neonatal Epilepsy Associated with KCNQ2 Mutations.
**Authors:** Vilan A, Mendes Ribeiro J, Striano P, Weckhuysen S, Weeke LC, Brilstra E, de Vries LS, Cilio MR
**Journal:** Neonatology (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000478651](https://doi.org/10.1159/000478651)

## Content

1. Neonatology. 2017;112(4):387-393. doi: 10.1159/000478651. Epub 2017 Sep 20.

A Distinctive Ictal Amplitude-Integrated Electroencephalography Pattern in 
Newborns with Neonatal Epilepsy Associated with KCNQ2 Mutations.

Vilan A(1), Mendes Ribeiro J, Striano P, Weckhuysen S, Weeke LC, Brilstra E, de 
Vries LS, Cilio MR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neonatology, Centro Hospitalar São João, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.

BACKGROUND: Recurrent and prolonged seizures are harmful for the developing 
brain, emphasizing the importance of early seizure recognition and effective 
therapy. Amplitude-integrated electroencephalography (aEEG) has become a 
valuable tool to diagnose epileptic seizures, and, in parallel, genetic 
etiologies are increasingly being recognized, changing the paradigm of the 
workup and management of neonatal seizures.
OBJECTIVE: To report the ictal aEEG pattern in neonates with KCNQ2-related 
epilepsy.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: In this multicenter descriptive study, clinical data and 
aEEG findings of 9 newborns with KCNQ2 mutations are reported.
RESULTS: Refractory seizures occurred in the early neonatal period with similar 
seizure type, including tonic features, apnea, and desaturation. A distinct aEEG 
seizure pattern, consisting of a sudden rise of the lower and upper margin of 
the aEEG, followed by a marked depression of the aEEG amplitude, was found in 8 
of the 9 patients. Prompt recognition of this pattern led to early treatment 
with carbamazepine in the 2 most recent cases.
CONCLUSION: Early recognition of the electroclinical phenotype by using aEEG may 
direct genetic testing and a precision medicine approach with sodium channel 
blockers in neonates with KCNQ2 mutations.

© 2017 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000478651
PMID: 28926830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]