---
reference_id: "PMID:26130954"
title: Disease-specific Growth Charts of Marfan Syndrome Patients in Korea.
authors:
- Kwun Y
- Kim SJ
- Lee J
- Isojima T
- Choi DS
- Kim DK
- Huh J
- Kang IS
- Chang M
- Cho SY
- Sohn YB
- Park SW
- Jin DK
journal: J Korean Med Sci
year: '2015'
doi: 10.3346/jkms.2015.30.7.911
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disease-specific Growth Charts of Marfan Syndrome Patients in Korea.
**Authors:** Kwun Y, Kim SJ, Lee J, Isojima T, Choi DS, Kim DK, Huh J, Kang IS, Chang M, Cho SY, Sohn YB, Park SW, Jin DK
**Journal:** J Korean Med Sci (2015)
**DOI:** [10.3346/jkms.2015.30.7.911](https://doi.org/10.3346/jkms.2015.30.7.911)

## Content

1. J Korean Med Sci. 2015 Jul;30(7):911-6. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2015.30.7.911. Epub 
2015 Jun 10.

Disease-specific Growth Charts of Marfan Syndrome Patients in Korea.

Kwun Y(1), Kim SJ(2), Lee J(1), Isojima T(3), Choi DS(4), Kim DK(5), Huh J(1), 
Kang IS(1), Chang M(1), Cho SY(1), Sohn YB(6), Park SW(7), Jin DK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Myongji Hospital, Goyang, Korea.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan 
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(5)Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(6)Department of Medical Genetics, Ajou University Hospital, Suwon, Korea.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Jeil Hospital, Kwandong University School of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Patients with Marfan syndrome (MFS) presents with primary skeletal 
manifestations such as tall stature, chest wall abnormality, and scoliosis. 
These primary skeletal manifestations affect the growth pattern in MFS. 
Therefore, it is not appropriate to use normal growth charts to evaluate the 
growth status of MFS. We aimed to develop disease-specific growth charts for 
Korean MFS patients and to use these growth charts for understanding the growth 
patterns in MFS and managing of patients with MFS. Anthropometric data were 
available from 187 males and 152 females with MFS through a retrospective review 
of medical records. Disease-specific growth charts were generated and 3, 25, 50, 
75, and 97 percentiles were calculated using the LMS (refers to λ, μ, and σ, 
respectively) smoothing procedure for height and weight. Comparisons between MFS 
patients and the general population were performed using a one-sample t-test. 
With regard to the height, the 50th percentile of MFS is above the normative 
97th percentile in both genders. With regard to the weight, the 50 percentile of 
MFS is above the normative 75th percentile in male and between the normative 
50th percentile and the 75th percentile in female. The disease-specific growth 
charts for Korean patients with MFS can be useful for monitoring growth 
patterns, planning the timing of growth-reductive therapy, predicting adult 
height and recording responses to growth-reductive therapy.

DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2015.30.7.911
PMCID: PMC4479945
PMID: 26130954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DISCLOSURE: All authors report no conflicts of 
interests and have nothing to disclose.