---
reference_id: "PMID:37031630"
title: Do cardiovascular disease comorbidities affect the cognitive function of Multiple Sclerosis patients?
authors:
- Giannopapas V
- Stavrogianni K
- Christouli N
- Kitsos D
- Sideri E
- Bakalidou D
- Voumvourakis K
- Papagiannopoulou G
- Tzartos J
- Paraskevas G
- Tsivgoulis G
- Giannopoulos S
journal: J Clin Neurosci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2023.04.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Do cardiovascular disease comorbidities affect the cognitive function of Multiple Sclerosis patients?
**Authors:** Giannopapas V, Stavrogianni K, Christouli N, Kitsos D, Sideri E, Bakalidou D, Voumvourakis K, Papagiannopoulou G, Tzartos J, Paraskevas G, Tsivgoulis G, Giannopoulos S
**Journal:** J Clin Neurosci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jocn.2023.04.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocn.2023.04.005)

## Content

1. J Clin Neurosci. 2023 Jun;112:20-24. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2023.04.005. Epub
2023  Apr 7.

Do cardiovascular disease comorbidities affect the cognitive function of 
Multiple Sclerosis patients?

Giannopapas V(1), Stavrogianni K(2), Christouli N(2), Kitsos D(2), Sideri E(2), 
Bakalidou D(3), Voumvourakis K(2), Papagiannopoulou G(2), Tzartos J(2), 
Paraskevas G(2), Tsivgoulis G(2), Giannopoulos S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Attikon University Hospital Greece, School of 
Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece; Department of 
Physical Therapy, University of West Attica, Greece; Laboratory of Neuromuscular 
and Cardiovascular Study of Motion-LANECASM, University of West Attica, Greece.
(2)Department of Neurology, Attikon University Hospital Greece, School of 
Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece.
(3)Department of Physical Therapy, University of West Attica, Greece; Laboratory 
of Neuromuscular and Cardiovascular Study of Motion-LANECASM, University of West 
Attica, Greece.
(4)Department of Neurology, Attikon University Hospital Greece, School of 
Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece. Electronic 
address: sgiannop@uoi.gr.

INTRODUCTION: Cognitive impairment is a core symptom of multiple sclerosis, 
leading to disability in 40-70% of patients. The most common cognitive domains 
affected by MS are information processing speed, complex attention, executive 
functions and less frequently, episodic declarative memory. Cardiovascular 
disease comorbidities have been shown to increase the decline rate in many 
neurological conditions. Our study aims to examine the possible impact of CVD 
risk factors in the cognitive decline rate of PwMS.
METHODS: Over the course of a year, 248 PwMS with and without Cardiovascular 
comorbidity were cognitively evaluated using the written version of SDMT and the 
MoCA.
RESULTS: Compared to control, MS patients with comorbid CVD had greater general 
cognitive decline and decreased processing speed. Patients with comorbid 
diabetes and dyslipidemia had the highest impairment, followed by those with 
hypertension, compared to the control group and those patients with a high BMI.
CONCLUSION: The presence of cardiovascular comorbidities and especially 
dyslipidemia increases the rate of cognitive decline in MS patients. In such 
cases, patients should be evaluated every 6 months instead of a year and the use 
of the SDMT is advised since it's time efficient,it requires minimal training 
and correlates with MRI findings.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2023.04.005
PMID: 37031630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.