---
reference_id: "PMID:34171205"
title: "Dengue virus: epidemiology, biology, and disease aetiology."
authors:
- Roy SK
- Bhattacharjee S
journal: Can J Microbiol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1139/cjm-2020-0572
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue virus: epidemiology, biology, and disease aetiology.
**Authors:** Roy SK, Bhattacharjee S
**Journal:** Can J Microbiol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1139/cjm-2020-0572](https://doi.org/10.1139/cjm-2020-0572)

## Content

1. Can J Microbiol. 2021 Oct;67(10):687-702. doi: 10.1139/cjm-2020-0572. Epub
2021  Sep 3.

Dengue virus: epidemiology, biology, and disease aetiology.

Roy SK(1)(1), Bhattacharjee S(1)(1).

Author information:
(1)Cell and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Department of Zoology, University of 
North Bengal, Raja Rammohunpur, P.O. North Bengal University, Raja Rammohunpur, 
District: Darjeeling, West Bengal, 734 013, India.

Dengue is a vector-borne viral disease caused by the flavivirus dengue virus 
(DENV). Approximately 400 million cases and 22 000 deaths occur due to dengue 
worldwide each year. It has been reported in more than 100 countries in tropical 
and subtropical regions. A positive-stranded enveloped RNA virus (DENV) is 
principally transmitted by Aedes mosquitoes. It has four antigenically distinct 
serotypes, DENV-1 to DENV-4, with different genotypes and three structural 
proteins and seven non-structural proteins. Clinical symptoms of dengue range 
from mild fever to severe dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) or dengue shock 
syndrome (DSS), with thrombocytopenia, leucopenia, and increased vascular 
permeability. Although primary infection causes activation of immune responses 
against DENV serotypes, the severity of the disease is enhanced via heterotypic 
infection by various serotypes as well as antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE). 
The first licensed DENV vaccine was tetravalent CYD Denvaxia, but it has not 
been approved in all countries. The lack of a suitable animal model, a proper 
mechanistic study in pathogenesis, and ADE are the main hindrances in vaccine 
development. This review summarizes the current knowledge on DENV epidemiology, 
biology, and disease aetiology in the context of prevention and protection from 
dengue virus disease.

DOI: 10.1139/cjm-2020-0572
PMID: 34171205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]