---
reference_id: "PMID:20301543"
title: Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- So JY
- Teng J
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, So JY, Teng J

## Content

1. Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex.

So JY(1), Teng J(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
1998 Oct 7 [updated 2022 Aug 4].

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBS) is characterized 
by fragility of the skin (and mucosal epithelia in some instances) that results 
in non-scarring blisters and erosions caused by minor mechanical trauma. EBS is 
distinguished from other types of epidermolysis bullosa (EB) or non-EB skin 
fragility syndromes by the location of the blistering in relation to the 
dermal-epidermal junction. In EBS, blistering occurs within basal keratinocytes. 
The severity of blistering ranges from limited to hands and feet to widespread 
involvement. Additional features can include hyperkeratosis of the palms and 
soles (keratoderma), nail dystrophy, milia, and hyper- and/or hypopigmentation. 
Rare EBS subtypes have been associated with additional clinical features 
including pyloric atresia, muscular dystrophy, cardiomyopathy, and/or 
nephropathy.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of EBS is established in a proband by: the 
identification of a heterozygous dominant-negative variant or biallelic 
loss-of-function variants in KRT5, KRT14, or PLEC; a heterozygous pathogenic 
variant in KLHL24; or biallelic pathogenic variants in CD151, DST, or EXPH5; 
and/or presence of characteristic findings on examination of a skin biopsy using 
transmission electron microscopy and/or immunofluorescent mapping.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Supportive care to protect the skin 
from blistering; use of dressings that will protect the skin and promote healing 
of wounds. Encourage activities that minimize trauma to the skin; appropriate 
footwear and physical therapy to preserve ambulation; lance and drain without 
unroofing new blisters. Dressings consist of three layers: a primary nonadherent 
contact layer; a secondary layer that provides stability, adds padding, and 
absorbs drainage; and a tertiary layer with elastic properties. Aluminum 
chloride (20%) applied to palms and soles can reduce sweating and therefore 
minimize blister formation in some individuals with EBS. In addition, botulinum 
toxin, cyproheptadine (Periactin®), tetracycline, erythromycin, diacerein, 
sirolimus, apremilast, cannabidiol oil, and gentamicin have all been reported to 
be beneficial. Keratolytic agents for palmar and plantar hyperkeratosis may 
reduce skin thickening and cracking. Topical and/or systemic antibiotics or 
silver-impregnated dressings or gels can be used to treat skin infection or 
reduce bacteria colonization, thereby promoting wound healing. Identification 
and management of specific causes of pain and itching; management with a pain 
specialist as needed. Management of fluid and electrolyte imbalance in severely 
affected infants may be critical during the postnatal period. Nutritional 
support including vitamin and mineral supplementation, feeding via gastrostomy 
tube, guided feeding therapy, and Haberman feeder may be necessary for infants 
and children with oral manifestations of EBS. Iron supplementation for those 
with anemia as a result of chronic inflammation from blistering and wounding. 
Weight management and treatment of obesity in older individuals. Standard 
treatment for basal cell carcinomas in individuals with severe EBS. Psychosocial 
support when needed. Standard treatments for additional features reported in 
rare subtypes including pyloric atresia, muscular dystrophy, cardiomyopathy, and 
nephropathy. Surveillance: Dermatologic assessment for blisters, oral disease, 
hyperkeratosis, hyperhidrosis, signs and symptoms of wound infection, as well as 
pruritus and pain. At each visit, assessment of hydration status, growth, 
nutrition, weight, motor development and mobility, and psychosocial well-being. 
Consider serum B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) and creatinine kinase in those 
with EBS, intermediate with cardiomyopathy; serum renal function studies and 
urinalysis for those with nephropathy; and neurologic assessment for those with 
muscular dystrophy as needed. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Excessive heat 
exposure may exacerbate blistering and infection. Avoid poorly fitting or 
coarse-textured clothing/footwear and activities that traumatize the skin. Avoid 
adhesives from regular medical tapes or Band-Aids®.
GENETIC COUNSELING: EBS is typically inherited in an autosomal recessive or an 
autosomal dominant manner. Autosomal recessive EBS is associated with either 
biallelic loss-of-function variants in KRT5, KRT14, or PLEC or biallelic 
pathogenic variants in CD151, DST, or EXPH5. Autosomal dominant EBS is 
associated with either a heterozygous dominant-negative variant in KRT5, KRT14, 
or PLEC or a heterozygous pathogenic variant in KLHL24. In rare instances, EBS 
is caused by the presence of heterozygous pathogenic variants in both KRT5 and 
KRT14 and is inherited in a digenic manner. Autosomal recessive EBS. If both 
parents are known to be heterozygous for an EBS-related pathogenic variant, each 
sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of inheriting 
biallelic pathogenic variants being affected, a 50% chance of being 
heterozygous, and a 25% chance of inheriting neither of the familial pathogenic 
variants. Autosomal dominant EBS. In families with autosomal dominant 
inheritance, each child of an affected individual has a 50% chance of inheriting 
the pathogenic variant and (most likely) being affected with EBS (penetrance 
appears to be <100% for known heterozygous dominant-negative KRT5 and KRT14 
variants). Once the EBS-related pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in an 
affected family member, molecular genetic testing for at-risk family members and 
prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301543