---
reference_id: "PMID:28600132"
title: "Brentuximab vedotin or physician's choice in CD30-positive cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (ALCANZA): an international, open-label, randomised, phase 3, multicentre trial."
authors:
- Prince HM
- Kim YH
- Horwitz SM
- Dummer R
- Scarisbrick J
- Quaglino P
- Zinzani PL
- Wolter P
- Sanches JA
- Ortiz-Romero PL
- Akilov OE
- Geskin L
- Trotman J
- Taylor K
- Dalle S
- Weichenthal M
- Walewski J
- Fisher D
- Dréno B
- Stadler R
- Feldman T
- Kuzel TM
- Wang Y
- Palanca-Wessels MC
- Zagadailov E
- Trepicchio WL
- Zhang W
- Lin HM
- Liu Y
- Huebner D
- Little M
- Whittaker S
- Duvic M
- ALCANZA study group
journal: Lancet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31266-7
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols
- Brentuximab Vedotin
- Humans
- Immunoconjugates
- "Lymphoma, T-Cell, Cutaneous"
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local"
- Quality of Life
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brentuximab vedotin or physician's choice in CD30-positive cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (ALCANZA): an international, open-label, randomised, phase 3, multicentre trial.
**Authors:** Prince HM, Kim YH, Horwitz SM, Dummer R, Scarisbrick J, Quaglino P, Zinzani PL, Wolter P, Sanches JA, Ortiz-Romero PL, Akilov OE, Geskin L, Trotman J, Taylor K, Dalle S, Weichenthal M, Walewski J, Fisher D, Dréno B, Stadler R, Feldman T, Kuzel TM, Wang Y, Palanca-Wessels MC, Zagadailov E, Trepicchio WL, Zhang W, Lin HM, Liu Y, Huebner D, Little M, Whittaker S, Duvic M, ALCANZA study group
**Journal:** Lancet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31266-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31266-7)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2017 Aug 5;390(10094):555-566. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31266-7.
Epub  2017 Jun 7.

Brentuximab vedotin or physician's choice in CD30-positive cutaneous T-cell
lymphoma (ALCANZA): an international, open-label, randomised, phase 3,
multicentre trial.

Prince HM(1), Kim YH(2), Horwitz SM(3), Dummer R(4), Scarisbrick J(5), Quaglino
P(6), Zinzani PL(7), Wolter P(8), Sanches JA(9), Ortiz-Romero PL(10), Akilov
OE(11), Geskin L(12), Trotman J(13), Taylor K(14), Dalle S(15), Weichenthal
M(16), Walewski J(17), Fisher D(18), Dréno B(19), Stadler R(20), Feldman T(21),
Kuzel TM(22), Wang Y(23), Palanca-Wessels MC(23), Zagadailov E(24), Trepicchio
WL(24), Zhang W(24), Lin HM(24), Liu Y(24), Huebner D(24), Little M(24),
Whittaker S(25), Duvic M(26); ALCANZA study group.

Collaborators: Trotman J, Joske D, Prince HM, Taylor K, Lewis ID, Jonak C,
Trautinger F, Bechter O, Wolter P, Bron D, de Lima VCC, Sanches JA Junior, Klasa
R, Bagot M, Beylot-Barry M, Dalle S, D'Incan M, Dreno B, Grange F, Nicolay J,
Stadler R, Weichenthal M, Wobser M, Assaf C, Loquai C, Quaglino P, Spina M,
Zinzani PL, Bosi A, Fattori PP, Grzanka A, Walewski J, Lopez-Hernandez A,
Ortiz-Romero PL, Roca JJR, Canales SN, Dummer R, Illidge T, Johnson R, Whittaker
S, Morris S, McKay P, Scarisbrick J, Duvic M, Feldman T, Akilov O, Geskin L,
Horwitz S, Kim YH, Pro B, Kuzel T, Lerner A, Eradat H, Sokol L, Fisher DC,
Hughey S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cancer Medicine, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, The University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia; Sir Peter MacCallum Department of
Oncology, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia; Epworth
Healthcare, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia. Electronic
address: Miles.Prince@petermac.org.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA, USA; Stanford Cancer Institute, Stanford, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY,
USA.
(4)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(6)Department of Medical Sciences, Dermatologic Clinic, University of Turin,
Turin, Italy.
(7)Institute of Haematology, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(8)Department of General Medical Oncology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium.
(9)Department of Dermatology, University of São Paulo Medical School, São Paulo,
Brazil.
(10)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital 12 de Octubre, Institute i+12
Medical School, University Complutense, Madrid, Spain.
(11)Department of Dermatology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(12)Department of Dermatology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA;
Department of Dermatology, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(13)Department of Haematology, Concord Repatriation General Hospital, University
of Sydney, Concord, NSW, Australia.
(14)ICON Cancer Care, South Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(15)Department of Dermatology, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Claude Bernard Lyon 1
University, Lyon, France.
(16)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital of Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel,
Germany.
(17)Maria Sklodowska-Curie Institute and Oncology Centre, Warsaw, Poland.
(18)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.
(19)Faculty of Medicine, Nantes University, Nantes, France.
(20)University Clinic for Dermatology, Johannes Wesling Medical Centre, Minden,
Germany.
(21)John Theurer Cancer Center at Hackensack University Medical Center,
Hackensack, NJ, USA.
(22)Division of Hematology/Oncology/Cell Therapy, Department of Medicine, Rush
University, Chicago, IL, USA.
(23)Seattle Genetics Inc, Bothell, WA, USA.
(24)Millennium Pharmaceuticals Inc, Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Ltd,
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(25)St John's Institute of Dermatology, Guys and St Thomas NHS Foundation Trust,
London, UK.
(26)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2017 Aug 5;390(10094):533-534. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31473-3.

BACKGROUND: Cutaneous T-cell lymphomas are rare, generally incurable, and
associated with reduced quality of life. Present systemic therapies rarely
provide reliable and durable responses. We aimed to assess efficacy and safety
of brentuximab vedotin versus conventional therapy for previously treated
patients with CD30-positive cutaneous T-cell lymphomas.
METHODS: In this international, open-label, randomised, phase 3, multicentre
trial, we enrolled adult patients with CD30-positive mycosis fungoides or
primary cutaneous anaplastic large-cell lymphoma who had been previously
treated. Patients were enrolled across 52 centres in 13 countries. Patients were
randomly assigned (1:1) centrally by an interactive voice and web response
system to receive intravenous brentuximab vedotin 1·8 mg/kg once every 3 weeks,
for up to 16 3-week cycles, or physician's choice (oral methotrexate 5-50 mg
once per week or oral bexarotene 300 mg/m2 once per day) for up to 48 weeks. The
primary endpoint was the proportion of patients in the intention-to-treat
population achieving an objective global response lasting at least 4 months per
independent review facility. Safety analyses were done in all patients who
received at least one dose of study drug. This trial was registered with
ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01578499.
FINDINGS: Between Aug 13, 2012, and July 31, 2015, 131 patients were enrolled
and randomly assigned to a group (66 to brentuximab vedotin and 65 to
physician's choice), with 128 analysed in the intention-to-treat population (64
in each group). At a median follow-up of 22·9 months (95% CI 18·4-26·1), the
proportion of patients achieving an objective global response lasting at least 4
months was 56·3% (36 of 64 patients) with brentuximab vedotin versus 12·5%
(eight of 64) with physician's choice, resulting in a between-group difference
of 43·8% (95% CI 29·1-58·4; p<0·0001). Grade 3-4 adverse events were reported in
27 (41%) of 66 patients in the brentuximab vedotin group and 29 (47%) of 62
patients in the physician's choice group. Peripheral neuropathy was seen in 44
(67%) of 66 patients in the brentuximab vedotin group (n=21 grade 2, n=6 grade
3) and four (6%) of 62 patients in the physician's choice group. One of the four
on-treatment deaths was deemed by the investigator to be treatment-related in
the brentuximab vedotin group; no on-treatment deaths were reported in the
physician's choice group.
INTERPRETATION: Significant improvement in objective response lasting at least 4
months was seen with brentuximab vedotin versus physician's choice of
methotrexate or bexarotene.
FUNDING: Millennium Pharmaceuticals Inc (a wholly owned subsidiary of Takeda
Pharmaceutical Company Ltd), Seattle Genetics Inc.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31266-7
PMID: 28600132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
