---
reference_id: "PMID:28457350"
title: "Ebola Virus Disease: An Update on Epidemiology, Symptoms, Laboratory Findings, Diagnostic Issues, and Infection Prevention and Control Issues for Laboratory Professionals."
authors:
- Brown CS
- Mepham S
- Shorten RJ
journal: Clin Lab Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.cll.2017.01.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ebola Virus Disease: An Update on Epidemiology, Symptoms, Laboratory Findings, Diagnostic Issues, and Infection Prevention and Control Issues for Laboratory Professionals.
**Authors:** Brown CS, Mepham S, Shorten RJ
**Journal:** Clin Lab Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cll.2017.01.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cll.2017.01.003)

## Content

1. Clin Lab Med. 2017 Jun;37(2):269-284. doi: 10.1016/j.cll.2017.01.003.

Ebola Virus Disease: An Update on Epidemiology, Symptoms, Laboratory Findings, 
Diagnostic Issues, and Infection Prevention and Control Issues for Laboratory 
Professionals.

Brown CS(1), Mepham S(2), Shorten RJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Weston Education Centre, King's Sierra Leone Partnership, King's Centre for 
Global Health, King's Health Partners, King's College London, London SE5 9RJ, 
UK; National Infection Service, Public Health England, London, UK. Electronic 
address: colinbrown@doctors.net.uk.
(2)Department of Infection, Royal Free London NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(3)Public Health Laboratory Manchester, Manchester Royal Infirmary, Manchester, 
UK; Department of Infection, Centre for Clinical Microbiology, University 
College London, London, UK.

The 2014 to 2016 Ebola virus disease (EVD), through the sheer size of the 
outbreak and combined experience within both resource-rich and resource-poor 
settings, allowed for more information to be gained about the clinical and 
pathologic features of EVD. This review highlights the range of aspects of EVD 
that the authors find are relevant to laboratory medicine, including the need 
for robust prediagnostic and laboratory processing algorithms to inform sampling 
of suspect patients, the vast majority of whom, in resource-rich settings, will 
have another diagnosis.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cll.2017.01.003
PMID: 28457350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]