---
reference_id: "PMID:18818946"
title: A novel non-sense mutation in the SLC2A10 gene of an arterial tortuosity syndrome patient of Kurdish origin.
authors:
- Zaidi SH
- Meyer S
- Peltekova VD
- Lindinger A
- Teebi AS
- Faiyaz-Ul-Haque M
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1007/s00431-008-0839-2
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Arteries/abnormalities
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Connective Tissue/abnormalities
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- "Glucose Transport Proteins, Facilitative/deficiency, genetics"
- Hip Dislocation/genetics
- Humans
- Infant
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Stomach/abnormalities
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel non-sense mutation in the SLC2A10 gene of an arterial tortuosity syndrome patient of Kurdish origin.
**Authors:** Zaidi SH, Meyer S, Peltekova VD, Lindinger A, Teebi AS, Faiyaz-Ul-Haque M
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00431-008-0839-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00431-008-0839-2)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 2009 Jul;168(7):867-70. doi: 10.1007/s00431-008-0839-2. Epub
2008  Sep 26.

A novel non-sense mutation in the SLC2A10 gene of an arterial tortuosity
syndrome patient of Kurdish origin.

Zaidi SH(1), Meyer S, Peltekova VD, Lindinger A, Teebi AS, Faiyaz-Ul-Haque M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University Health Network &
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. Syed.Zaidi@uhnres.utoronto.ca

Arterial tortuosity syndrome (ATS) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder in
which patients display tortuosity of arteries in addition to hyperextensible
skin, joint laxity, and other connective tissue features. This syndrome is
caused by mutations in the SLC2A10 gene. In this article we describe an ATS girl
of Kurdish origin who, in addition to arterial tortuosity and connective tissue
features, displays stomach displacement within the thorax and bilateral hip
dislocation. Clinical details of this patient have been reported previously.
Sequencing of the SLC2A10 gene identified a novel homozygous non-sense c.756C>A
mutation in this patient's DNA. This mutation in the SLC2A10 gene replaces a
cysteine encoding codon with a stop signal. This is believed to cause a
premature truncation of GLUT10 protein in this patient. We conclude that
patients of Kurdish origin who display arterial tortuosity associated with skin
hyperextensibility, joint hypermobility, and characteristic facial features may
carry mutations in the SLC2A10 gene.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-008-0839-2
PMID: 18818946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
