---
reference_id: "PMID:40817122"
title: CCR7(+) dendritic cells expressing both IL-23A and IL-12B potentially contribute to psoriasis relapse.
authors:
- Sun Y
- Lou F
- Cai X
- Wang Z
- Yang X
- Sun L
- Xu Z
- Deng S
- Wu Z
- Liu Z
- Shi YL
- Ginhoux F
- Wang H
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-62874-9
keywords:
- "Psoriasis/immunology, pathology, metabolism, genetics"
- Animals
- Humans
- "Dendritic Cells/metabolism, immunology"
- Mice
- "Receptors, CCR7/metabolism, genetics, immunology"
- Recurrence
- "Interleukin-23 Subunit p19/metabolism, genetics, immunology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Interleukin-12 Subunit p40/metabolism, genetics, immunology"
- "Keratinocytes/metabolism, immunology"
- "Skin/pathology, immunology"
- Interleukin-23/metabolism
- Interleukin-17/metabolism
- Female
- Male
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CCR7(+) dendritic cells expressing both IL-23A and IL-12B potentially contribute to psoriasis relapse.
**Authors:** Sun Y, Lou F, Cai X, Wang Z, Yang X, Sun L, Xu Z, Deng S, Wu Z, Liu Z, Shi YL, Ginhoux F, Wang H
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-025-62874-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-62874-9)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2025 Aug 15;16(1):7581. doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-62874-9.

CCR7(+) dendritic cells expressing both IL-23A and IL-12B potentially contribute
to psoriasis relapse.

Sun Y(#)(1)(2), Lou F(#)(1)(2), Cai X(1)(2), Wang Z(1)(2), Yang X(1)(2), Sun
L(1)(2), Xu Z(1)(2), Deng S(1)(2), Wu Z(3), Liu Z(4), Shi YL(5), Ginhoux
F(1)(4)(6), Wang H(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Precision Research Center for Refractory Diseases, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University Pioneer Research Institute for Molecular and Cell Therapies, Shanghai
General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai,
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Innovative Immunotherapy, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(4)Shanghai Institute of Immunology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Shanghai Skin Disease Hospital, Tongji University
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(6)Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.
(7)Precision Research Center for Refractory Diseases, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University Pioneer Research Institute for Molecular and Cell Therapies, Shanghai
General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai,
China. honglin.wang@sjtu.edu.cn.
(8)State Key Laboratory of Innovative Immunotherapy, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
honglin.wang@sjtu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Interleukin (IL)-23 is the master pathogenic cytokine in psoriasis and
neutralization of IL-23 alleviates psoriasis. Psoriasis relapses after the
withdrawal of anti-IL-23 antibodies, and the persistence of IL-23-producing
cells potentially contributes to such recurrence, but the cellular source of
IL-23 is unclear. Here we show that IL4I1+CD200+CCR7+ dendritic cells (CCR7+ DC)
are the main producer of IL-23 by concomitantly expressing the IL-23A and IL-12B
subunits in human psoriatic skin. Deletion of CCR7+ DC completely abrogates
IL-23 production in a mouse model of psoriasis, while enforced expression of
IL-23a in CCR7+ DC elicits not only αβT cell-driven psoriasis-like skin disease,
but also arthritis. CCR7+ DC co-localize with CD161+ IL-17-producing T cells and
KRT17+ keratinocytes, which are located in the outermost layers of psoriatic
epidermis and exhibit IL-17 downstream signatures. Our data thus identify CCR7+
DC as the source of IL-23 in psoriasis, and paves the way for IL-23-targeting
therapy for suppressing the relapse of chronic inflammatory disorders like
psoriasis.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-025-62874-9
PMCID: PMC12356920
PMID: 40817122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no
competing interests.
