---
reference_id: "PMID:30442189"
title: "Enzyme replacement therapy: efficacy and limitations."
authors:
- Concolino D
- Deodato F
- Parini R
journal: Ital J Pediatr
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s13052-018-0562-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Enzyme replacement therapy: efficacy and limitations.
**Authors:** Concolino D, Deodato F, Parini R
**Journal:** Ital J Pediatr (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13052-018-0562-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13052-018-0562-1)

## Content

1. Ital J Pediatr. 2018 Nov 16;44(Suppl 2):120. doi: 10.1186/s13052-018-0562-1.

Enzyme replacement therapy: efficacy and limitations.

Concolino D(1), Deodato F(2), Parini R(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Science, Pediatric Unit, University "Magna 
Graecia", Catanzaro, Italy.
(2)Division of Metabolic Disease, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, 
Italy.
(3)UOS Malattie Metaboliche Rare, Clinica Pediatrica dell'Università Milano 
Bicocca, Fondazione MBBM, ATS Monza e Brianza, Via Pergolesi 33, 20900, Monza, 
Italy. rossella.parini@unimib.it.
(4)San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (SR-TIGET), IRCCS San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy. rossella.parini@unimib.it.

Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) is available for mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) I, 
MPS II, MPS VI, and MPS IVA. The efficacy of ERT has been evaluated in clinical 
trials and in many post-marketing studies with a long-term follow-up for MPS I, 
MPS II, and MPS VI. While ERT is effective in reducing urinary 
glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) and liver and spleen volume, cartilaginous organs such 
as the trachea and bronchi, bones and eyes are poorly impacted by ERT probably 
due to limited penetration in the specific tissue. ERT in the present 
formulations also does not cross the blood-brain barrier, with the consequence 
that the central nervous system is not cured by ERT. This is particularly 
important for severe forms of MPS I and MPS II characterized by cognitive 
decline. For severe MPS I patients (Hurler), early haematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation is the gold standard, while still controversial is the role of 
stem cell transplantation in MPS II. The use of ERT in patients with severe 
cognitive decline is the subject of debate; the current position of the 
scientific community is that ERT must be started in all patients who do not have 
a more effective treatment. Neonatal screening is widely suggested for treatable 
MPS, and many pilot studies are ongoing. The rationale is that early, possibly 
pre-symptomatic treatment can improve prognosis. All patients develop anti-ERT 
antibodies but only a few have drug-related adverse reactions. It has not yet 
been definitely clarified if high-titre antibodies may, at least in some cases, 
reduce the efficacy of ERT.

DOI: 10.1186/s13052-018-0562-1
PMCID: PMC6238252
PMID: 30442189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: RP 
participated as principal investigator in the phase III trial for ERT in MPS IVA 
(BioMarin) and has recently participated as subinvestigator to the phase I/II 
trial for intrathecal ERT in MPS IIIA (Shire). RP has received honoraria for 
consulting or speaking engagement from BioMarin, Sanofi Genzyme, SOBI, and 
Shire. DC has received honoraria for speaking engagements from Shire and Sanofi 
Genzyme. FD has received honoraria for speaking engagements from Sanofi Genzyme 
and Shire. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.