---
reference_id: "PMID:24113144"
title: Ataxia and hypogonadism caused by the loss of ubiquitin ligase activity of the U box protein CHIP.
authors:
- Shi CH
- Schisler JC
- Rubel CE
- Tan S
- Song B
- McDonough H
- Xu L
- Portbury AL
- Mao CY
- True C
- Wang RH
- Wang QZ
- Sun SL
- Seminara SB
- Patterson C
- Xu YM
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt497
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/enzymology, genetics"
- Adolescent
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- COS Cells
- "Cerebellar Ataxia/enzymology, genetics"
- "Cerebellum/metabolism, pathology"
- Chlorocebus aethiops
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- "Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone/deficiency, genetics"
- Humans
- "Hypogonadism/enzymology, genetics"
- Male
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Phenotype
- "Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/deficiency, genetics"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ataxia and hypogonadism caused by the loss of ubiquitin ligase activity of the U box protein CHIP.
**Authors:** Shi CH, Schisler JC, Rubel CE, Tan S, Song B, McDonough H, Xu L, Portbury AL, Mao CY, True C, Wang RH, Wang QZ, Sun SL, Seminara SB, Patterson C, Xu YM
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddt497](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddt497)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Feb 15;23(4):1013-24. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt497. Epub 2013
Oct  9.

Ataxia and hypogonadism caused by the loss of ubiquitin ligase activity of the U 
box protein CHIP.

Shi CH(1), Schisler JC, Rubel CE, Tan S, Song B, McDonough H, Xu L, Portbury AL, 
Mao CY, True C, Wang RH, Wang QZ, Sun SL, Seminara SB, Patterson C, Xu YM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450000, China.

Gordon Holmes syndrome (GHS) is a rare Mendelian neurodegenerative disorder 
characterized by ataxia and hypogonadism. Recently, it was suggested that 
disordered ubiquitination underlies GHS though the discovery of exome mutations 
in the E3 ligase RNF216 and deubiquitinase OTUD4. We performed exome sequencing 
in a family with two of three siblings afflicted with ataxia and hypogonadism 
and identified a homozygous mutation in STUB1 (NM_005861) c.737C→T, p.Thr246Met, 
a gene that encodes the protein CHIP (C-terminus of HSC70-interacting protein). 
CHIP plays a central role in regulating protein quality control, in part through 
its ability to function as an E3 ligase. Loss of CHIP function has long been 
associated with protein misfolding and aggregation in several genetic mouse 
models of neurodegenerative disorders; however, a role for CHIP in human 
neurological disease has yet to be identified. Introduction of the Thr246Met 
mutation into CHIP results in a loss of ubiquitin ligase activity measured 
directly using recombinant proteins as well as in cell culture models. Loss of 
CHIP function in mice resulted in behavioral and reproductive impairments that 
mimic human ataxia and hypogonadism. We conclude that GHS can be caused by a 
loss-of-function mutation in CHIP. Our findings further highlight the role of 
disordered ubiquitination and protein quality control in the pathogenesis of 
neurodegenerative disease and demonstrate the utility of combining whole-exome 
sequencing with molecular analyses and animal models to define causal disease 
polymorphisms.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddt497
PMCID: PMC3900109
PMID: 24113144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]