---
reference_id: "PMID:36217295"
title: "Hyperostosis Frontalis Interna and a Question on Its Pathology: A Case Report."
authors:
- Stiene JM
- Frank PW
journal: Am J Case Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.12659/AJCR.937450
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hyperostosis Frontalis Interna and a Question on Its Pathology: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Stiene JM, Frank PW
**Journal:** Am J Case Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.12659/AJCR.937450](https://doi.org/10.12659/AJCR.937450)

## Content

1. Am J Case Rep. 2022 Oct 11;23:e937450. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.937450.

Hyperostosis Frontalis Interna and a Question on Its Pathology: A Case Report.

Stiene JM(1), Frank PW(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Toledo, Toledo, OH, USA.
(2)Department of Medical Education/Neurosciences, College of Medicine and Life 
Sciences University of Toledo, Toledo, OH, USA.

BACKGROUND Hyperostosis frontalis interna is a boney overgrowth of the inner 
side of the frontal bone of the skull caused by overgrowth of the endocranial 
surface. It is most often found in women after menopause. It is also associated 
with hormonal imbalance, being overweight, history of headaches, and 
neurocognitive degenerative conditions. Female gender, advanced age, extended 
estrogen stimulation, and elevated leptin levels may also play a role. The 
thickening is usually confined to the frontal bone, but it can spread as far as 
the anterior parietal and temporal bones. CASE REPORT During a medical school 
dissection course, an extensive boney overgrowth in the frontal regions covering 
the inside of the frontal bone of the skull of a 90-year-old female donor, who 
died of a cerebrovascular infarction, was identified. This boney overgrowth was 
mainly confined within the frontal region, but there was some boney overgrowth 
that extended to the temporal bones. The overgrowth in the endocranium of the 
temporal bone was not as severe as the overgrowth of the frontal bone. The 
morphology of the overgrowth was rigid, uneven, and bumpy. Based upon the 
physical characteristics, we concluded that this presentation was consistent 
with hyperostosis frontalis interna. CONCLUSIONS Our female donor was found to 
exhibit a phenomenon which could be clinically underdiagnosed due to its 
internal nature and asymptomatic presentation. Insight into the potential causes 
of HFI and its identification during clinical evaluation offers a path for 
future research to better identify and manage cases of HFI.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.937450
PMCID: PMC9575136
PMID: 36217295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None declared