---
reference_id: "PMID:36168091"
title: "Clinical phenotypes study of 231 children with Williams syndrome in China: A single-center retrospective study."
authors:
- Li FF
- Chen WJ
- Yao D
- Xu L
- Shen JY
- Zeng Y
- Shi Z
- Ye XW
- Kang DH
- Xu B
- Shao J
- Ji C
journal: Mol Genet Genomic Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.2069
keywords:
- Humans
- "Williams Syndrome/epidemiology, genetics, diagnosis"
- Retrospective Studies
- Hypercalcemia
- "Hernia, Inguinal"
- Hypercalciuria
- Hoarseness
- "Aortic Stenosis, Supravalvular/genetics"
- Phenotype
- "Heart Septal Defects, Ventricular"
- Hypothyroidism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical phenotypes study of 231 children with Williams syndrome in China: A single-center retrospective study.
**Authors:** Li FF, Chen WJ, Yao D, Xu L, Shen JY, Zeng Y, Shi Z, Ye XW, Kang DH, Xu B, Shao J, Ji C
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomic Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mgg3.2069](https://doi.org/10.1002/mgg3.2069)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2022 Dec;10(12):e2069. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.2069. Epub
2022  Sep 27.

Clinical phenotypes study of 231 children with Williams syndrome in China: A 
single-center retrospective study.

Li FF(1), Chen WJ(1), Yao D(1), Xu L(1), Shen JY(1), Zeng Y(1), Shi Z(2), Ye 
XW(3), Kang DH(4), Xu B(5), Shao J(1), Ji C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Child Health Care, The Children's Hospital, Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Child Health, 
Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Pediatric Cardio-Thoracic Surgery, The Children's Hospital, 
Zhejiang University School of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for 
Child Health, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Stomatology, The Children's Hospital, Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Child Health, 
Hangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, The Children's Hospital, Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Child Health, 
Hangzhou, China.
(5)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-head and Neck Surgery, The Children's 
Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, National Clinical Research 
Center for Child Health, Hangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Williams syndrome (WS) is a multisystem neurodevelopmental disorder 
caused by microdeletions in 7q11.23. This study aims to characterize the 
clinical phenotypes of Chinese children with WS to help for the early diagnosis 
and intervention of this disease.
METHODS: 231 children diagnosed with WS were retrospectively recruited to the 
study. Clinical data were analyzed to obtain the incidence of different clinical 
phenotypes. The occurrence of phenotypes and the influence of gender and age on 
the incidence of different phenotypes were analyzed.
RESULTS: All WS exhibited facial dysmorphism (100.0%). The majority had 
neurodevelopmental disorder (91.8%), hoarseness (87.4%) and cardiovascular 
anomalies (85.7%). The incidence of short stature (46.9%), inguinal hernia 
(47.2%), hypercalciuria (29.10%), hypercalcemia (9.1%), subclinical 
hypothyroidism (26.4%) and hypothyroidism (7.4%) were relatively higher. Gender 
differences were found in supravalvular aortic stenosis (SVAS, p < .001), 
ventricular septal defect (VSD, p < .05), inguinal hernia (p < .001), superior 
pulmonary stenosis (SVPS, p < .05) and neurodevelopmental disorder (p < .05). 
The incidence of neurodevelopmental disorder in WS increased with age (p < .05) 
while cardiovascular anomalies (p < .001), short stature (p < .001), 
hypercalciuria (p < .001) and hypercalcemia (p < .01) decreased with age.
CONCLUSIONS: Facial dysmorphism, neurodevelopmental disorder, hoarseness and 
cardiovascular anomalies were the most common phenotypes. Genetic testing should 
be suggested to confirm the diagnosis for children with the above abnormalities. 
Gender and age should be taken into account when making diagnosis and 
intervention.

© 2022 The Authors. Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.2069
PMCID: PMC9747549
PMID: 36168091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No financial have been received or will be 
received from any party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this 
article.