---
reference_id: "PMID:30843782"
title: Low human parvovirus B19 (B19V) DNA prevalence in blood donors from Central-West Brazil.
authors:
- Slavov SN
- Gonçalves de Noronha LA
- Gonzaga FAC
- Pimentel BMS
- Kashima S
- Haddad R
journal: J Med Microbiol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.000957
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Low human parvovirus B19 (B19V) DNA prevalence in blood donors from Central-West Brazil.
**Authors:** Slavov SN, Gonçalves de Noronha LA, Gonzaga FAC, Pimentel BMS, Kashima S, Haddad R
**Journal:** J Med Microbiol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1099/jmm.0.000957](https://doi.org/10.1099/jmm.0.000957)

## Content

1. J Med Microbiol. 2019 Apr;68(4):622-626. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.000957. Epub 2019 
Mar 7.

Low human parvovirus B19 (B19V) DNA prevalence in blood donors from Central-West 
Brazil.

Slavov SN(1)(2), Gonçalves de Noronha LA(3), Gonzaga FAC(3)(4), Pimentel BMS(5), 
Kashima S(1)(6), Haddad R(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Blood Center of Ribeirão Preto, Faculty of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, 
University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, 
University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Faculty of Ceilândia, University of Brasilia, Federal District, Brazil.
(4)Center for Tropical Medicine, University of Brasilia, Federal District, 
Brazil.
(5)Blood Center of Brasilia, Federal District, Brazil.
(6)Department of Clinical, Toxicological and Bromatological Analyses, Faculty of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão 
Preto, São Paulo, Brazil.

Parvovirus B19 (B19V) transmission may occur through blood transfusion as a 
result of asymptomatic viral persistence in blood donors. Our study evaluated 
the prevalence and viral load of B19V in blood donors from Brasilia, Federal 
District, Central-West Brazil. B19V DNA detection and quantification were 
performed in 477 blood donors. The positive samples were also tested for 
anti-B19V IgG and haemoderivative recipients were investigated for adverse 
effects following transfusion. B19V DNA prevalence was 0.21  % (n=1/477). The 
positive B19V DNA sample was also anti-B19 IgG-positive (probably persistent 
infection). The viral load was low and no adverse effects following blood 
transfusion were registered in the recipients. This study demonstrated that the 
B19V DNA prevalence in blood donors from Central-West Brazil is low. 
Nevertheless, the mere presence of B19V DNA in blood donors strengthens the need 
for viral molecular screening, especially in haemoderivatives that that will go 
to susceptible recipients.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.000957
PMID: 30843782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]