---
reference_id: "PMID:32743560"
title: Pattern of Relapse and Treatment Response in WNT-Activated Medulloblastoma.
authors:
- Nobre L
- Zapotocky M
- Khan S
- Fukuoka K
- Fonseca A
- McKeown T
- Sumerauer D
- Vicha A
- Grajkowska WA
- Trubicka J
- Li KKW
- Ng HK
- Massimi L
- Lee JY
- Kim SK
- Zelcer S
- Vasiljevic A
- Faure-Conter C
- Hauser P
- Lach B
- van Veelen-Vincent ML
- French PJ
- Van Meir EG
- Weiss WA
- Gupta N
- Pollack IF
- Hamilton RL
- Nageswara Rao AA
- Giannini C
- Rubin JB
- Moore AS
- Chambless LB
- Vibhakar R
- Ra YS
- Massimino M
- McLendon RE
- Wheeler H
- Zollo M
- Ferruci V
- Kumabe T
- Faria CC
- Sterba J
- Jung S
- López-Aguilar E
- Mora J
- Carlotti CG
- Olson JM
- Leary S
- Cain J
- Krskova L
- Zamecnik J
- Hawkins CE
- Tabori U
- Huang A
- Bartels U
- Northcott PA
- Taylor MD
- Yip S
- Hansford JR
- Bouffet E
- Ramaswamy V
journal: Cell Rep Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2020.100038
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/metabolism"
- Cerebellar Neoplasms/drug therapy
- Child
- Cyclophosphamide/therapeutic use
- Female
- Humans
- Ifosfamide/therapeutic use
- Male
- "Medulloblastoma/drug therapy, metabolism"
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/drug therapy, metabolism"
- Progression-Free Survival
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pattern of Relapse and Treatment Response in WNT-Activated Medulloblastoma.
**Authors:** Nobre L, Zapotocky M, Khan S, Fukuoka K, Fonseca A, McKeown T, Sumerauer D, Vicha A, Grajkowska WA, Trubicka J, Li KKW, Ng HK, Massimi L, Lee JY, Kim SK, Zelcer S, Vasiljevic A, Faure-Conter C, Hauser P, Lach B, van Veelen-Vincent ML, French PJ, Van Meir EG, Weiss WA, Gupta N, Pollack IF, Hamilton RL, Nageswara Rao AA, Giannini C, Rubin JB, Moore AS, Chambless LB, Vibhakar R, Ra YS, Massimino M, McLendon RE, Wheeler H, Zollo M, Ferruci V, Kumabe T, Faria CC, Sterba J, Jung S, López-Aguilar E, Mora J, Carlotti CG, Olson JM, Leary S, Cain J, Krskova L, Zamecnik J, Hawkins CE, Tabori U, Huang A, Bartels U, Northcott PA, Taylor MD, Yip S, Hansford JR, Bouffet E, Ramaswamy V
**Journal:** Cell Rep Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.xcrm.2020.100038](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2020.100038)

## Content

1. Cell Rep Med. 2020 Jun 23;1(3):100038. doi: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2020.100038.

Pattern of Relapse and Treatment Response in WNT-Activated Medulloblastoma.

Nobre L(1)(2)(3), Zapotocky M(4)(3), Khan S(5)(6), Fukuoka K(7), Fonseca A(1), 
McKeown T(1), Sumerauer D(4), Vicha A(4), Grajkowska WA(8), Trubicka J(8), Li 
KKW(9), Ng HK(9), Massimi L(10), Lee JY(11), Kim SK(11), Zelcer S(12), 
Vasiljevic A(13), Faure-Conter C(14), Hauser P(15), Lach B(16), van 
Veelen-Vincent ML(17), French PJ(18), Van Meir EG(19), Weiss WA(20)(21), Gupta 
N(20), Pollack IF(22), Hamilton RL(23), Nageswara Rao AA(24), Giannini C(25), 
Rubin JB(26), Moore AS(27)(28), Chambless LB(29), Vibhakar R(30), Ra YS(31), 
Massimino M(32), McLendon RE(33), Wheeler H(34), Zollo M(35), Ferruci V(35), 
Kumabe T(36), Faria CC(37), Sterba J(38), Jung S(39), López-Aguilar E(40), Mora 
J(41), Carlotti CG(42), Olson JM(43), Leary S(44), Cain J(5), Krskova L(45), 
Zamecnik J(45), Hawkins CE(46)(47), Tabori U(1)(47)(2)(48), Huang A(1)(47)(48), 
Bartels U(1), Northcott PA(49), Taylor MD(47)(50)(48), Yip S(51), Hansford 
JR(5)(6), Bouffet E(1), Ramaswamy V(1)(47)(50)(48)(52).

Author information:
(1)Division of Haematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, The Hospital for 
Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)These authors contributed equally.
(4)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Second Faculty of Medicine, 
University Hospital Motol, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.
(5)Monash Children's Cancer Centre, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, 
Australia.
(6)Children's Cancer Centre, Royal Children's Hospital, Murdoch Children's 
Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(7)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Saitama Children's Medical Center, 
Saitama, Japan.
(8)Department of Pathology, The Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, 
Poland.
(9)Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, The Chinese University of 
Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong.
(10)Fondazione Policlinico A. Gemelli IRCCS, Catholic University Medical School, 
Rome, Italy.
(11)Department of Neurosurgery, Division of Pediatric Neurosurgery, Seoul 
National University Children's Hospital, Seoul, South Korea.
(12)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Western University, London, ON, 
Canada.
(13)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Division of Anatomical 
Pathology, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, Institut d'Hemato-Oncologie Pediatrique, Lyon, 
France.
(15)Second Department of Pediatrics, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
(16)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Division of Anatomical 
Pathology, McMaster University and Department of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine, Hamilton General Hospital, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(17)Department of Neurosurgery, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, 
the Netherlands.
(18)Department of Neurology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(19)Departments of Neurosurgery, Hematology, and Medical Oncology, School of 
Medicine and Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(20)Departments of Neurological Surgery and Pediatrics, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(21)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(22)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Pittsburgh School of 
Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(23)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(24)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(25)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
USA.
(26)Departments of Pediatrics, Anatomy, and Neurobiology, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(27)Queensland Children's Medical Research Institute, Children's Health 
Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(28)Division of Oncology, Children's Health Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, 
Australia.
(29)Department of Neurological Surgery, Vanderbilt Medical Center, Nashville, 
TN, USA.
(30)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO, USA.
(31)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Ulsan, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, 
South Korea.
(32)Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy.
(33)Department of Pathology, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(34)Kolling Institute of Medical Research, The University of Sydney, Sydney, 
NSW, Australia.
(35)Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche DMMBM, 
Università di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy.
(36)Department of Neurosurgery, Kitasato University School of Medicine, 
Sagamihara, Kanagawa, Japan.
(37)Division of Neurosurgery, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Norte, Hospital de Santa 
Maria, Lisbon, Portugal.
(38)Department of Pediatric Oncology, School of Medicine, Masaryk University, 
Brno, Czech Republic.
(39)Department of Neurosurgery, Chonnam National University Research Institute 
of Medical Sciences, Chonnam National University Hwasun Hospital and Medical 
School, Hwasun-gun, Chonnam, South Korea.
(40)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Hospital Pediatría Centro Médico 
Nacional Century XXI, Mexico City, Mexico.
(41)Developmental Tumor Biology Laboratory, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Esplugues 
de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.
(42)Department of Surgery and Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, 
University of Sao Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(43)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, 
WA, USA.
(44)Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA, 
USA.
(45)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, University Hospital Motol, 
Second Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.
(46)Division of Pathology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(47)The Arthur and Sonia Labatt Brain Tumour Research Centre, The Hospital for 
Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(48)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(49)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA.
(50)Developmental & Stem Cell Biology Program, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(51)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(52)Lead Contact.

Over the past decade, wingless-activated (WNT) medulloblastoma has been 
identified as a candidate for therapy de-escalation based on excellent survival; 
however, a paucity of relapses has precluded additional analyses of markers of 
relapse. To address this gap in knowledge, an international cohort of 93 
molecularly confirmed WNT MB was assembled, where 5-year progression-free 
survival is 0.84 (95%, 0.763-0.925) with 15 relapsed individuals identified. 
Maintenance chemotherapy is identified as a strong predictor of relapse, with 
individuals receiving high doses of cyclophosphamide or ifosphamide having only 
one very late molecularly confirmed relapse (p = 0.032). The anatomical location 
of recurrence is metastatic in 12 of 15 relapses, with 8 of 12 metastatic 
relapses in the lateral ventricles. Maintenance chemotherapy, specifically 
cumulative cyclophosphamide doses, is a significant predictor of relapse across 
WNT MB. Future efforts to de-escalate therapy need to carefully consider not 
only the radiation dose but also the chemotherapy regimen and the propensity for 
metastatic relapses.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2020.100038
PMCID: PMC7394286
PMID: 32743560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DECLARATION OF INTERESTS The authors declare no 
competing interests.