---
reference_id: "PMID:29258554"
title: KBG syndrome.
authors:
- Morel Swols D
- Foster J 2nd
- Tekin M
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-017-0736-8
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/genetics, metabolism"
- Chromosome Deletion
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- Facies
- Female
- "Haploinsufficiency/genetics, physiology"
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- "Repressor Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Seizures/genetics, metabolism"
- "Tooth Abnormalities/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# KBG syndrome.
**Authors:** Morel Swols D, Foster J 2nd, Tekin M
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-017-0736-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-017-0736-8)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2017 Dec 19;12(1):183. doi: 10.1186/s13023-017-0736-8.

KBG syndrome.

Morel Swols D(1), Foster J 2nd(2)(3), Tekin M(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical and Translational Genetics, Dr. John T. Macdonald 
Foundation Department of Human Genetics, University of Miami Miller School of 
Medicine, 1501 NW 10th Avenue, BRB-336 (M-860), Miami, FL, 33136, USA.
(2)John P. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami Miller 
School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.
(3)Department of Graduate Education, School of Medicine, 130 Mason Farm Road, 
CB7108, Chapel Hill, 27599, USA.
(4)Division of Clinical and Translational Genetics, Dr. John T. Macdonald 
Foundation Department of Human Genetics, University of Miami Miller School of 
Medicine, 1501 NW 10th Avenue, BRB-336 (M-860), Miami, FL, 33136, USA. 
mtekin@miami.edu.
(5)John P. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami Miller 
School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA. mtekin@miami.edu.

CLINICAL DESCRIPTION: KBG syndrome is characterized by macrodontia of upper 
central incisors, distinctive craniofacial features such as triangular face, 
prominent nasal bridge, thin upper lip and synophrys; skeletal findings 
including short stature, delayed bone age, and costovertebral anomalies; and 
developmental delay/intellectual disability sometimes associated with seizures 
and EEG abnormalities. The condition was named KBG syndrome after the initials 
of the last names of three original families reported in 1975.
EPIDEMIOLOGY: The prevalence of KBG syndrome is not established. There are over 
100 patients reported in the literature. It is likely that KBG syndrome is 
underreported due to incomplete recognition and very mild presentations of the 
disorder in some individuals. KBG syndrome is typically milder in females.
ETIOLOGY: Causative variants in ANKRD11 have been identified in affected 
individuals. The vast majority of identified variants are loss of function, 
which include nonsense and frameshift variants and larger deletions at 16q24.3. 
Haploinsufficiency appears to be the mechanism of pathogenicity.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Familial and de novo cases have been reported. Causative de 
novo variants occur approximately one third of the time. Transmission follows an 
autosomal dominant pattern. The syndrome displays inter- and intra-familial 
variability.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-017-0736-8
PMCID: PMC5735576
PMID: 29258554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Written informed consent was obtained from 
the patients or their guardian/parent/next of kin for the publication of this 
report and any accompanying images. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare 
that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains 
neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.