---
reference_id: "PMID:34093774"
title: "PD-L1 expression and immune cells in anaplastic carcinoma and poorly differentiated carcinoma of the human thyroid gland: A retrospective study."
authors:
- Cameselle-García S
- Abdulkader-Sande S
- Sánchez-Ares M
- Rodríguez-Carnero G
- Garcia-Gómez J
- Gude-Sampedro F
- Abdulkader-Nallib I
- Cameselle-Teijeiro JM
journal: Oncol Lett
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3892/ol.2021.12814
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PD-L1 expression and immune cells in anaplastic carcinoma and poorly differentiated carcinoma of the human thyroid gland: A retrospective study.
**Authors:** Cameselle-García S, Abdulkader-Sande S, Sánchez-Ares M, Rodríguez-Carnero G, Garcia-Gómez J, Gude-Sampedro F, Abdulkader-Nallib I, Cameselle-Teijeiro JM
**Journal:** Oncol Lett (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3892/ol.2021.12814](https://doi.org/10.3892/ol.2021.12814)

## Content

1. Oncol Lett. 2021 Jul;22(1):553. doi: 10.3892/ol.2021.12814. Epub 2021 May 24.

PD-L1 expression and immune cells in anaplastic carcinoma and poorly 
differentiated carcinoma of the human thyroid gland: A retrospective study.

Cameselle-García S(1), Abdulkader-Sande S(2), Sánchez-Ares M(2), 
Rodríguez-Carnero G(3), Garcia-Gómez J(1), Gude-Sampedro F(4)(5), 
Abdulkader-Nallib I(2)(5), Cameselle-Teijeiro JM(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, University Hospital Complex of Ourense, 
Galician Healthcare Service, 32005 Ourense, Spain.
(2)Department of Pathology, Clinical University Hospital of Santiago de 
Compostela, Health Research Institute of Santiago de Compostela, Galician 
Healthcare Service, 15706 Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition, Clinical University Hospital of 
Santiago de Compostela, Health Research Institute of Santiago de Compostela, 
Galician Healthcare Service, 15706 Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Clinical University Hospital of Santiago de 
Compostela, Health Research Institute of Santiago de Compostela, Galician 
Healthcare Service, 15706 Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(5)School of Medicine, University of Santiago de Compostela, 15782 Santiago de 
Compostela, Spain.

Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) and poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma 
(PDTC) have limited treatment options, and immune profiling may help select 
patients for immunotherapy. The prevalence and relevance of programmed death-1 
ligand (PD-L1) expression and the presence of immune cells in ATC and PDTC has 
not yet been well established. The present study investigated PD-L1 expression 
(clone 22C3) and cells in the tumor microenvironment (TME), including 
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) and 
dendritic cells, in whole tissue sections of 15 cases of ATC and 13 cases of 
PDTC. Immunohistochemical PD-L1 expression using a tumor proportion score (TPS) 
with a 1% cut-off was detected in 9/15 (60%) of ATC cases and 1/13 (7.7%) of 
PDTC cases (P=0.006). PD-L1 expression in TILs was limited to the ATC group 
(73.3 vs. 0% in ATC and PDTC, respectively). In the ATC group, the TPS for tumor 
positive PD-L1 expression revealed a non-significant trend towards worse 
survival, but no difference was observed when investigating PD-L1 expression in 
TILs and TAMs. In addition to increased PD-L1 expression, all ATC cases 
exhibited significantly increased CD3+ and CD8+ T cells, CD68+ and CD163+ 
macrophages, and S100+ dendritic cells compared with the PDTC cases. Loss of 
mutL homolog 1 and PMS1 homolog 2 expression was observed in one ATC case with 
the highest PD-L1 expression, as well as in the only PDTC case positive for 
PD-L1. Notably, the latter was the only PDTC case exhibiting positivity for p53 
and a cellular microenvironment similar to ATC. The current results indicated 
that PD-L1 expression was frequent in ATC, but rare in PDTC. In addition to 
PD-L1, the present study suggested that microsatellite instability may serve a 
role in both the TME and the identification of immunotherapy candidates among 
patients with PDTC.

Copyright: © Cameselle-García et al.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2021.12814
PMCID: PMC8170268
PMID: 34093774

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.