---
reference_id: "PMID:15138899"
title: The NPHP1 gene deletion associated with juvenile nephronophthisis is present in a subset of individuals with Joubert syndrome.
authors:
- Parisi MA
- Bennett CL
- Eckert ML
- Dobyns WB
- Gleeson JG
- Shaw DW
- McDonald R
- Eddy A
- Chance PF
- Glass IA
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1086/421846
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The NPHP1 gene deletion associated with juvenile nephronophthisis is present in a subset of individuals with Joubert syndrome.
**Authors:** Parisi MA, Bennett CL, Eckert ML, Dobyns WB, Gleeson JG, Shaw DW, McDonald R, Eddy A, Chance PF, Glass IA
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1086/421846](https://doi.org/10.1086/421846)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2004 Jul;75(1):82-91. doi: 10.1086/421846. Epub 2004 May 11.

The NPHP1 gene deletion associated with juvenile nephronophthisis is present in 
a subset of individuals with Joubert syndrome.

Parisi MA(1), Bennett CL, Eckert ML, Dobyns WB, Gleeson JG, Shaw DW, McDonald R, 
Eddy A, Chance PF, Glass IA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics and Developmental Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Washington, Seattle, 98195, USA. mparisi@u.washington.edu

Joubert syndrome (JS) is an autosomal recessive multisystem disease 
characterized by cerebellar vermis hypoplasia with prominent superior cerebellar 
peduncles (the "molar tooth sign" [MTS] on axial magnetic resonance imaging), 
mental retardation, hypotonia, irregular breathing pattern, and eye-movement 
abnormalities. Some individuals with JS have retinal dystrophy and/or 
progressive renal failure characterized by nephronophthisis (NPHP). Thus far, no 
mutations in the known NPHP genes, particularly the homozygous deletion of NPHP1 
at 2q13, have been identified in subjects with JS. A cohort of 25 subjects with 
JS and either renal and/or retinal complications and 2 subjects with only 
juvenile NPHP were screened for mutations in the NPHP1 gene by standard methods. 
Two siblings affected with a mild form of JS were found to have a homozygous 
deletion of the NPHP1 gene identical, by mapping, to that in subjects with NPHP 
alone. A control subject with NPHP and with a homozygous NPHP1 deletion was also 
identified, retrospectively, as having a mild MTS and borderline intelligence. 
The NPHP1 deletion represents the first molecular defect associated with JS in a 
subset of mildly affected subjects. Cerebellar malformations consistent with the 
MTS may be relatively common in patients with juvenile NPHP without classic 
symptoms of JS.

DOI: 10.1086/421846
PMCID: PMC1182011
PMID: 15138899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]