---
reference_id: "PMID:33724294"
title: "Mitophagy: An Emerging Target in Ocular Pathology."
authors:
- Skeie JM
- Nishimura DY
- Wang CL
- Schmidt GA
- Aldrich BT
- Greiner MA
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1167/iovs.62.3.22
keywords:
- Animals
- Diabetic Retinopathy/physiopathology
- "Fuchs' Endothelial Dystrophy/physiopathology"
- "Glaucoma, Open-Angle/physiopathology"
- Humans
- Macular Degeneration/physiopathology
- Mitochondria/physiology
- Mitochondrial Diseases/physiopathology
- Mitophagy/physiology
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitophagy: An Emerging Target in Ocular Pathology.
**Authors:** Skeie JM, Nishimura DY, Wang CL, Schmidt GA, Aldrich BT, Greiner MA
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1167/iovs.62.3.22](https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.62.3.22)

## Content

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2021 Mar 1;62(3):22. doi: 10.1167/iovs.62.3.22.

Mitophagy: An Emerging Target in Ocular Pathology.

Skeie JM(1)(2), Nishimura DY(1)(2), Wang CL(1), Schmidt GA(2), Aldrich BT(1)(2),
Greiner MA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Iowa Carver
College of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa, United States.
(2)Iowa Lions Eye Bank, Coralville, Iowa, United States.

Mitochondrial function is essential for the viability of aerobic eukaryotic
cells, as mitochondria provide energy through the generation of adenosine
triphosphate (ATP), regulate cellular metabolism, provide redox balancing,
participate in immune signaling, and can initiate apoptosis. Mitochondria are
dynamic organelles that participate in a cyclical and ongoing process of
regeneration and autophagy (clearance), termed mitophagy specifically for
mitochondrial (macro)autophagy. An imbalance in mitochondrial function toward
mitochondrial dysfunction can be catastrophic for cells and has been
characterized in several common ophthalmic diseases. In this article, we review
mitochondrial homeostasis in detail, focusing on the balance of mitochondrial
dynamics including the processes of fission and fusion, and provide a
description of the mechanisms involved in mitophagy. Furthermore, this article
reviews investigations of ocular diseases with impaired mitophagy, including
Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy, primary open-angle glaucoma, diabetic
retinopathy, and age-related macular degeneration, as well as several primary
mitochondrial diseases with ocular phenotypes that display impaired mitophagy,
including mitochondrial encephalopathy lactic acidosis stroke, Leber hereditary
optic neuropathy, and chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia. The results
of various studies using cell culture, animal, and human tissue models are
presented and reflect a growing awareness of mitophagy impairment as an
important feature of ophthalmic disease pathology. As this review indicates, it
is imperative that mitophagy be investigated as a targetable mechanism in
developing therapies for ocular diseases characterized by oxidative stress and
mitochondrial dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.62.3.22
PMCID: PMC7980050
PMID: 33724294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: J.M. Skeie, (N); D.Y. Nishimura,
(N); C.L. Wang, (N); G.A. Schmidt, (N); B.T. Aldrich, (N); M.A. Greiner, (N)
