---
reference_id: "PMID:38888005"
title: "Efficacy and safety of add-on antiseizure medications for focal epilepsy: A network meta-analysis."
authors:
- Zhang H
- Ou Z
- Zhang E
- Liu W
- Hao N
- Chen Y
- Liu Y
- Ye H
- Zhou D
- Wu X
journal: Epilepsia Open
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/epi4.12997
keywords:
- Humans
- "Anticonvulsants/therapeutic use, adverse effects, administration & dosage"
- "Epilepsies, Partial/drug therapy"
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of add-on antiseizure medications for focal epilepsy: A network meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Zhang H, Ou Z, Zhang E, Liu W, Hao N, Chen Y, Liu Y, Ye H, Zhou D, Wu X
**Journal:** Epilepsia Open (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/epi4.12997](https://doi.org/10.1002/epi4.12997)

## Content

1. Epilepsia Open. 2024 Aug;9(4):1550-1564. doi: 10.1002/epi4.12997. Epub 2024
Jun  18.

Efficacy and safety of add-on antiseizure medications for focal epilepsy: A
network meta-analysis.

Zhang H(1), Ou Z(1), Zhang E(1), Liu W(1), Hao N(1), Chen Y(1), Liu Y(2), Ye
H(2), Zhou D(1), Wu X(1).

Author information:
(1)Neurology Department, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu,
Sichuan, China.
(2)Ignis Therapeutics (Shanghai) Limited, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: Several antiseizure medications (ASMs) have been approved for the
treatment of focal epilepsy. However, there is a paucity of evidence on direct
comparison of ASMs. We evaluated the comparative efficacy and safety of all
approved add-on ASMs for the treatment of focal epilepsy using network
meta-analysis.
METHODS: Data through extensive literature search was retrieved from PubMed,
Embase, Cochrane, and ClinicalTrial.gov databases using predefined search terms
from inception through March 2023. PRISMA reporting guidelines (CRD42023403450)
were followed in this study. Efficacy outcomes assessed were ≥50%, ≥75%, and
100% responder rates. Patient retention rate and safety outcomes such as overall
treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs) and individual TEAEs were assessed.
"Gemtc" 4.0.4 package was used to perform Bayesian analysis. Outcomes are
reported as relative risks (RRs) and 95% confidence interval (CI).
RESULTS: Literature search retrieved 5807 studies of which, 75 studies were
included in the analysis. All ASMs showed significantly higher ≥50% responder
rate compared with placebo. Except the ≥75% seizure frequency reduction for
zonisamide (2.23; 95% CI: 1.00-5.70) and 100% for rufinamide (2.03; 95% CI:
0.54-11.00), all other interventions showed significantly higher ≥75% and 100%
responder rates compared with placebo. Among treatments, significantly higher
100% responder rate was observed with cenobamate compared to eslicarbazepine
(10.71; 95% CI: 1.56-323.9) and zonisamide (10.63; 95% CI: 1.37-261.2). All ASMs
showed a lower patient retention rate compared to placebo, with the least
significant value observed for oxcarbazepine (0.77; 95% CI: 0.7-0.84).
Levetiracetam showed a lower risk of incidence (1.0; 95%CI: 0.94-1.1; SUCRA:
0.885067) for overall TEAE compared with other medications.
SIGNIFICANCE: All approved ASMs were effective as add-on treatment for focal
epilepsy. Of the ASMs included, cenobamate had the greatest likelihood of
allowing patients to attain seizure freedom.
PLAIN LANGUAGE SUMMARY: This article compares the efficacy and safety of
antiseizure medications (ASMs) currently available to neurologists in the
treatment of epileptic patients. Several newer generation ASMs that have been
developed may be as effective or better than the older medications. We included
75 studies in the analysis. In comparison, all drugs improved ≥50%, ≥75% and
100% responder rates compared to control, except for Zonisamide and Rufinamide
in the ≥75% and 100% responder rate categories. Retention of patients undergoing
treatment was lower in drugs than placebo. All drugs were tolerated, the
levetiracetam showed the best tolerability. Cenobamate more likely help
completely to reduce seizures.

© 2024 The Author(s). Epilepsia Open published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on
behalf of International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1002/epi4.12997
PMCID: PMC11296132
PMID: 38888005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have read and approved the
manuscript. Yutong Liu and Hui Ye are employees of Ignis Therapeutics (Shanghai)
Limited, China. The other authors report no other potential conflicts of
interest in this work. We confirm that we have read the Journal's position on
issues involved in ethical publication and affirm that this report is consistent
with those guidelines.
