---
reference_id: "PMID:34556413"
title: Development and characterization of a mouse model for Acad9 deficiency.
authors:
- Sinsheimer A
- Mohsen AW
- Bloom K
- Karunanidhi A
- Bharathi S
- Wu YL
- Schiff M
- Wang Y
- Goetzman ES
- Ghaloul-Gonzalez L
- Vockley J
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.09.002
keywords:
- "Acidosis/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase/deficiency, genetics"
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/metabolism"
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- Animals
- "Cardiomyopathies/etiology, genetics"
- "Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Electron Transport Complex I/genetics
- Mice
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Muscle Weakness/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Development and characterization of a mouse model for Acad9 deficiency.
**Authors:** Sinsheimer A, Mohsen AW, Bloom K, Karunanidhi A, Bharathi S, Wu YL, Schiff M, Wang Y, Goetzman ES, Ghaloul-Gonzalez L, Vockley J
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.09.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.09.002)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2021 Sep-Oct;134(1-2):156-163. doi:
10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.09.002. Epub 2021 Sep 14.

Development and characterization of a mouse model for Acad9 deficiency.

Sinsheimer A(1), Mohsen AW(2), Bloom K(3), Karunanidhi A(3), Bharathi S(3), Wu
YL(4), Schiff M(5), Wang Y(3), Goetzman ES(2), Ghaloul-Gonzalez L(2), Vockley
J(6).

Author information:
(1)University of Pittsburgh, Graduate School of Public Health, Human Genetics,
Pittsburgh, PA, United States of America.
(2)University of Pittsburgh, Graduate School of Public Health, Human Genetics,
Pittsburgh, PA, United States of America; University of Pittsburgh, School of
Medicine, Pediatrics, Pittsburgh, PA, United States of America.
(3)University of Pittsburgh, School of Medicine, Pediatrics, Pittsburgh, PA,
United States of America.
(4)Department of Developmental Biology, University of Pittsburgh, and UPMC
Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States of America.
(5)University of Pittsburgh, School of Medicine, Pediatrics, Pittsburgh, PA,
United States of America; Inserm UMR_S1163, Institut Imagine, Paris, France.
(6)University of Pittsburgh, Graduate School of Public Health, Human Genetics,
Pittsburgh, PA, United States of America; University of Pittsburgh, School of
Medicine, Pediatrics, Pittsburgh, PA, United States of America. Electronic
address: gerard.vockley@chp.edu.

Acyl CoA Dehydrogenase 9 (ACAD9) is a member of the family of flavoenzymes that
catalyze the dehydrogenation of acyl-CoAs to 2,3 enoyl-CoAs in mitochondrial
fatty acid oxidation (FAO). Inborn errors of metabolism of all family members,
including ACAD9, have been described in humans, and represent significant causes
of morbidity and mortality particularly in children. ACAD9 deficiency leads to a
combined defect in fatty acid oxidation and oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS)
due to a dual role in the pathways. In addition to its function in mitochondrial
FAO, ACAD9 has a second function as one of 14 factors responsible for assembly
of complex I of the electron transport chain (ETC). Considerable controversy
remains over the relative role of these two functions in normal physiology and
the disparate clinical findings described in patients with ACAD9 deficiency. To
better understand the normal function of ACAD9 and the pathophysiology of its
deficiency, several knock out mouse models were developed. Homozygous total body
knock out appeared to be lethal as no ACAD9 animals were obtained. Cre-lox
technology was then used to generate tissue-specific deletion of the gene.
Cardiac-specific ACAD9 deficient animals had severe neonatal cardiomyopathy and
died by 17 days of age. They had severe mitochondrial dysfunction in vitro.
Muscle-specific mutants were viable but exhibited muscle weakness. Additional
studies of heart muscle from the cardiac specific deficient animals were used to
examine the evolutionarily conserved signaling Intermediate in toll pathway
(ECSIT) protein, a known binding partner of ACAD9 in the electron chain complex
I assembly pathway. As expected, ECSIT levels were significantly reduced in the
absence of ACAD9 protein, consistent with the demonstrated impairment of the
complex I assembly. The various ACAD9 deficient animals should serve as useful
models for development of novel therapeutics for this disorder.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.09.002
PMCID: PMC8588265
PMID: 34556413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None.
