---
reference_id: "PMID:39328241"
title: "A case report of Cogan's syndrome with recurrent coronary stenosis."
authors:
- Na G
- Nan Z
- Jingjing M
- Lili P
journal: Front Cardiovasc Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2024.1451113
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case report of Cogan's syndrome with recurrent coronary stenosis.
**Authors:** Na G, Nan Z, Jingjing M, Lili P
**Journal:** Front Cardiovasc Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcvm.2024.1451113](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2024.1451113)

## Content

1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2024 Sep 12;11:1451113. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2024.1451113. 
eCollection 2024.

A case report of Cogan's syndrome with recurrent coronary stenosis.

Na G(1), Nan Z(2), Jingjing M(3), Lili P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Capital Medical University Affiliated Anzhen 
Hospital, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Radiology, Capital Medical University Affiliated Anzhen 
Hospital, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Capital Medical University Affiliated Anzhen 
Hospital, Beijing, China.

Cogan's syndrome (CS) is recognized as a form of variable vasculitis. This 
report presents the case of a middle-aged woman experiencing recurrent coronary 
artery stenosis, accompanied by a history of non-syphilis keratitis, vestibular 
auditory symptoms, and venous thrombosis. Positron emission tomography/computed 
tomography revealed an elevated uptake of (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose in the 
subclavian artery, common carotid artery, aortic arch, and thoracic aorta. A 
diagnosis of Cogan's syndrome was made. The aim of this study was to increase 
clinicians' awareness of the vascular manifestations in CS and to emphasize the 
importance of thorough history taking. CS should be included in the differential 
diagnosis when patients present with recurrent coronary artery stenosis.

© 2024 Na, Nan, Jingjing and Lili.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2024.1451113
PMCID: PMC11424433
PMID: 39328241

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.