---
reference_id: "PMID:37655965"
title: Structural Basis of PML-RARA Oncoprotein Targeting by Arsenic Unravels a Cysteine Rheostat Controlling PML Body Assembly and Function.
authors:
- Bercier P
- Wang QQ
- Zang N
- Zhang J
- Yang C
- Maimaitiyiming Y
- Abou-Ghali M
- Berthier C
- Wu C
- Niwa-Kawakita M
- Dirami T
- Geoffroy MC
- Ferhi O
- Quentin S
- Benhenda S
- Ogra Y
- Gueroui Z
- Zhou C
- Naranmandura H
- de Thé H
- Lallemand-Breitenbach V
journal: Cancer Discov
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-23-0453
keywords:
- Humans
- Arsenic/pharmacology
- Promyelocytic Leukemia Nuclear Bodies
- Cysteine
- Arsenicals/pharmacology
- Oxides/pharmacology
- Arsenic Trioxide/pharmacology
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- Oncogene Proteins
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Structural Basis of PML-RARA Oncoprotein Targeting by Arsenic Unravels a Cysteine Rheostat Controlling PML Body Assembly and Function.
**Authors:** Bercier P, Wang QQ, Zang N, Zhang J, Yang C, Maimaitiyiming Y, Abou-Ghali M, Berthier C, Wu C, Niwa-Kawakita M, Dirami T, Geoffroy MC, Ferhi O, Quentin S, Benhenda S, Ogra Y, Gueroui Z, Zhou C, Naranmandura H, de Thé H, Lallemand-Breitenbach V
**Journal:** Cancer Discov (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1158/2159-8290.CD-23-0453](https://doi.org/10.1158/2159-8290.CD-23-0453)

## Content

1. Cancer Discov. 2023 Dec 12;13(12):2548-2565. doi:
10.1158/2159-8290.CD-23-0453.

Structural Basis of PML-RARA Oncoprotein Targeting by Arsenic Unravels a
Cysteine Rheostat Controlling PML Body Assembly and Function.

Bercier P(#)(1)(2), Wang QQ(#)(3)(4)(5), Zang N(4)(6), Zhang J(#)(4)(6), Yang
C(3)(4)(5), Maimaitiyiming Y(3)(4)(5), Abou-Ghali M(1)(2), Berthier C(1), Wu
C(1)(2), Niwa-Kawakita M(1)(2), Dirami T(1)(2), Geoffroy MC(1)(2), Ferhi
O(1)(2), Quentin S(2), Benhenda S(2), Ogra Y(7), Gueroui Z(8), Zhou C(#)(4)(6),
Naranmandura H(#)(3)(4), de Thé H(#)(1)(2)(9), Lallemand-Breitenbach V(#)(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Interdisciplinary Research in Biology (CIRB), Collège de France,
CNRS, INSERM, Université PSL, Paris, France.
(2)GenCellDis, Inserm U944, CNRS UMR7212, Université Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(3)Department of Hematology of First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(4)Public Health, School of Medicine and Department of Toxicology, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China.
(5)College of Pharma-ceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(6)Department of Pathology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Zhejiang University
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(7)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan.
(8)Department of Chemistry, École Normale Supérieure, PSL University, Sorbonne
Université, CNRS, Paris, France.
(9)Hematology Laboratory, Hôpital St Louis, AP/HP, Paris, France.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Cancer Discov. 2023 Dec 12;13(12):2505-2506. doi:
10.1158/2159-8290.CD-23-1004.

PML nuclear bodies (NB) are disrupted in PML-RARA-driven acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL). Arsenic trioxide (ATO) cures 70% of patients with APL, driving
PML-RARA degradation and NB reformation. In non-APL cells, arsenic binding onto
PML also amplifies NB formation. Yet, the actual molecular mechanism(s) involved
remain(s) elusive. Here, we establish that PML NBs display some features of
liquid-liquid phase separation and that ATO induces a gel-like transition. PML
B-box-2 structure reveals an alpha helix driving B2 trimerization and
positioning a cysteine trio to form an ideal arsenic-binding pocket. Altering
either of the latter impedes ATO-driven NB assembly, PML sumoylation, and
PML-RARA degradation, mechanistically explaining clinical ATO resistance. This
B2 trimer and the C213 trio create an oxidation-sensitive rheostat that controls
PML NB assembly dynamics and downstream signaling in both basal state and during
stress response. These findings identify the structural basis for arsenic
targeting of PML that could pave the way to novel cancer drugs.
SIGNIFICANCE: Arsenic curative effects in APL rely on PML targeting. We report a
PML B-box-2 structure that drives trimer assembly, positioning a cysteine trio
to form an arsenic-binding pocket, which is disrupted in resistant patients.
Identification of this ROS-sensitive triad controlling PML dynamics and
functions could yield novel drugs. See related commentary by Salomoni, p. 2505.
This article is featured in Selected Articles from This Issue, p. 2489.

©2023 The Authors; Published by the American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-23-0453
PMCID: PMC10714139
PMID: 37655965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
