---
reference_id: "PMID:27992012"
title: "Conduct protocol in emergency: Acute adrenal insufficiency."
authors:
- Fares AB
- Santos RA
journal: Rev Assoc Med Bras (1992)
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1590/1806-9282.62.08.728
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Conduct protocol in emergency: Acute adrenal insufficiency.
**Authors:** Fares AB, Santos RA
**Journal:** Rev Assoc Med Bras (1992) (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1590/1806-9282.62.08.728](https://doi.org/10.1590/1806-9282.62.08.728)

## Content

1. Rev Assoc Med Bras (1992). 2016 Nov;62(8):728-734. doi: 
10.1590/1806-9282.62.08.728.

Conduct protocol in emergency: Acute adrenal insufficiency.

Fares AB(1), Santos RA(2).

Author information:
(1)Medical Student, 6th year, Faculdade de Medicina de São José do Rio Preto 
(Famerp), São José do Rio Preto, SP, Brazil.
(2)Degree in Endocrinology and Metabology from Sociedade Brasileira de 
Endocrinologia e Metabologia (SBEM). Assistant Physician at the Internal 
Medicine Service of Hospital de Base. Researcher at Centro Integrado de Pesquisa 
(CIP), Hospital de Base, São José do Rio Preto. Endocrinology Coordinator of the 
Specialties Outpatient Clinic (AME), São José do Rio Preto, SP, Brazil.

INTRODUCTION: Acute adrenal insufficiency or addisonian crisis is a rare 
comorbidity in emergency; however, if not properly diagnosed and treated, it may 
progress unfavorably.
OBJECTIVE: To alert all health professionals about the diagnosis and correct 
treatment of this complication.
METHOD: We performed an extensive search of the medical literature using 
specific search tools, retrieving 20 articles on the topic.
RESULTS: Addisonian crisis is a difficult diagnosis due to the unspecificity of 
its signs and symptoms. Nevertheless, it can be suspected in patients who enter 
the emergency room with complaints of abdominal pain, hypotension unresponsive 
to volume or vasopressor agents, clouding, and torpor. This situation may be 
associated with symptoms suggestive of chronic adrenal insufficiency such as 
hyperpigmentation, salt craving, and association with autoimmune diseases such 
as vitiligo and Hashimoto's thyroiditis. Hemodynamically stable patients may 
undergo more accurate diagnostic methods to confirm or rule out addisonian 
crisis. Delay to perform diagnostic tests should be avoided, in any 
circumstances, and unstable patients should be immediately medicated with 
intravenous glucocorticoid, even before confirmatory tests.
CONCLUSION: Acute adrenal insufficiency is a severe disease that is difficult to 
diagnose. It should be part of the differential diagnosis in cases of 
hypotensive patient who is unresponsive to vasoactive agents. Therefore, 
whenever this complication is considered, health professionals should aim 
specifically at this pathology.

DOI: 10.1590/1806-9282.62.08.728
PMID: 27992012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]