---
reference_id: "PMID:34407199"
title: Testicular Microvascular Flow Is Altered in Klinefelter Syndrome and Predicts Circulating Testosterone.
authors:
- Carlomagno F
- Pozza C
- Tenuta M
- Pofi R
- Tarani L
- Sesti F
- Minnetti M
- Gianfrilli D
- Isidori AM
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1210/clinem/dgab605
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Testicular Microvascular Flow Is Altered in Klinefelter Syndrome and Predicts Circulating Testosterone.
**Authors:** Carlomagno F, Pozza C, Tenuta M, Pofi R, Tarani L, Sesti F, Minnetti M, Gianfrilli D, Isidori AM
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1210/clinem/dgab605](https://doi.org/10.1210/clinem/dgab605)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2022 Jan 1;107(1):e236-e245. doi: 
10.1210/clinem/dgab605.

Testicular Microvascular Flow Is Altered in Klinefelter Syndrome and Predicts 
Circulating Testosterone.

Carlomagno F(1), Pozza C(1), Tenuta M(1), Pofi R(1), Tarani L(2), Sesti F(1), 
Minnetti M(1), Gianfrilli D(1), Isidori AM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, 00161, 
Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Sapienza University of Rome, 00161, Rome, Italy.

CONTEXT: Experimental studies on Klinefelter syndrome (KS) reported increased 
intratesticular testosterone (T) levels coexisting with reduced circulating 
levels. Abnormalities in testicular microcirculation have been claimed; however, 
no studies investigated in vivo testicular blood flow dynamics in humans with 
KS.
OBJECTIVE: To analyze the testicular microcirculation in KS by contrast-enhanced 
ultrasonography (CEUS) and correlate vascular parameters with endocrine 
function.
DESIGN AND SETTING: Prospective study. University setting.
PATIENTS: Sixty-eight testicular scans, 34 testes from 19 T-naïve subjects with 
KS and 34 testes from age-matched eugonadal men (control) who underwent CEUS for 
incidental nonpalpable testicular lesions.
MAIN OUTCOMES: CEUS kinetic parameters.
RESULTS: CEUS revealed slower testicular perfusion kinetics in subjects with KS 
than in age-matched controls. Specifically, the wash-in time (P = 0.018), mean 
transit time (P = 0.035), time to peak (P < 0.001), and wash-out time 
(P = 0.004) were all prolonged. Faster testicular blood flow was associated with 
higher total T levels. Principal component analysis and multiple linear 
regression analyses confirmed the findings and supported a role for reduced 
venous blood flow as independent predictor of total T levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Testicular venous blood flow is altered in KS and independently 
predicts T peripheral release.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Endocrine Society. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1210/clinem/dgab605
PMID: 34407199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]