---
reference_id: "PMID:24090799"
title: Sarcoidosis.
authors:
- Valeyre D
- Prasse A
- Nunes H
- Uzunhan Y
- Brillet PY
- Müller-Quernheim J
journal: Lancet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(13)60680-7
keywords:
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Diagnostic Imaging/methods
- Exercise Test
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Granuloma/physiopathology
- HLA-D Antigens/physiology
- Humans
- Inflammation/physiopathology
- Long-Term Care
- Prognosis
- "Sarcoidosis/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sarcoidosis.
**Authors:** Valeyre D, Prasse A, Nunes H, Uzunhan Y, Brillet PY, Müller-Quernheim J
**Journal:** Lancet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(13)60680-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(13)60680-7)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2014 Mar 29;383(9923):1155-67. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(13)60680-7.
Epub  2013 Oct 1.

Sarcoidosis.

Valeyre D(1), Prasse A(2), Nunes H(3), Uzunhan Y(3), Brillet PY(4), 
Müller-Quernheim J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pneumology, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Avicenne 
University Hospital, Bobigny, France; University Paris 13, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 
Bobigny, France. Electronic address: dominique.valeyre@avc.aphp.fr.
(2)Department of Pneumology, University Hospital, Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Pneumology, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Avicenne 
University Hospital, Bobigny, France; University Paris 13, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 
Bobigny, France.
(4)Department of Radiology, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Avicenne 
University Hospital, Bobigny, France; University Paris 13, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 
Bobigny, France.

Sarcoidosis is a systemic disease of unknown cause that is characterised by the 
formation of immune granulomas in various organs, mainly the lungs and the 
lymphatic system. Studies show that sarcoidosis might be the result of an 
exaggerated granulomatous reaction after exposure to unidentified antigens in 
individuals who are genetically susceptible. Several new insights have been 
made, particularly with regards to the diagnosis and care of some important 
manifestations of sarcoidosis. The indications for endobronchial ultrasound in 
diagnosis and for PET in the assessment of inflammatory activity are now better 
specified. Recognition of unexplained persistent disabling symptoms, fatigue, 
small-fibre neurological impairment, cognitive failure, and changes to health 
state and quality of life, has improved. Mortality in patients with sarcoidosis 
is higher than that of the general population, mainly due to pulmonary fibrosis. 
Predicted advances for the future are finding the cause of sarcoidosis, and the 
elucidation of relevant biomarkers, reliable endpoints, and new efficient 
treatments, particularly in patients with refractory sarcoidosis, lung fibrosis, 
and those with persistent disabling symptoms.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(13)60680-7
PMID: 24090799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]