---
reference_id: "PMID:25024191"
title: Rapid innovation diffusion in social networks.
authors:
- Kreindler GE
- Young HP
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1400842111
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rapid innovation diffusion in social networks.
**Authors:** Kreindler GE, Young HP
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1400842111](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1400842111)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jul 22;111 Suppl 3(Suppl 3):10881-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1400842111. Epub 2014 Jul 14.

Rapid innovation diffusion in social networks.

Kreindler GE(1), Young HP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Economics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 
02139; gek@mit.edu.
(2)Department of Economics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3UQ, United 
Kingdom; andThe Institute for New Economic Thinking at the Oxford Martin School, 
University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3BD, United Kingdom.

Social and technological innovations often spread through social networks as 
people respond to what their neighbors are doing. Previous research has 
identified specific network structures, such as local clustering, that promote 
rapid diffusion. Here we derive bounds that are independent of network structure 
and size, such that diffusion is fast whenever the payoff gain from the 
innovation is sufficiently high and the agents' responses are sufficiently 
noisy. We also provide a simple method for computing an upper bound on the 
expected time it takes for the innovation to become established in any finite 
network. For example, if agents choose log-linear responses to what their 
neighbors are doing, it takes on average less than 80 revision periods for the 
innovation to diffuse widely in any network, provided that the error rate is at 
least 5% and the payoff gain (relative to the status quo) is at least 150%. 
Qualitatively similar results hold for other smoothed best-response functions 
and populations that experience heterogeneous payoff shocks.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1400842111
PMCID: PMC4113916
PMID: 25024191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.