---
reference_id: "PMID:29224677"
title: Diagnostic and prognostic tests in systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Vasquez-Canizares N
- Wahezi D
- Putterman C
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.berh.2017.10.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic and prognostic tests in systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Vasquez-Canizares N, Wahezi D, Putterman C
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.berh.2017.10.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.berh.2017.10.002)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 2017 Jun;31(3):351-363. doi: 
10.1016/j.berh.2017.10.002. Epub 2017 Nov 6.

Diagnostic and prognostic tests in systemic lupus erythematosus.

Vasquez-Canizares N(1), Wahezi D(1), Putterman C(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Rheumatology, Children's Hospital at Montefiore and 
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.
(2)Division of Rheumatology and Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 
Albert Einstein College of Medicine and Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, NY, 
USA. Electronic address: chaim.putterman@einstein.yu.edu.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic autoimmune inflammatory disease 
characterized by autoantibodies directed against numerous self-nuclear antigens. 
Because of the heterogeneous nature of lupus, it has been challenging to 
identify markers that are sensitive and specific enough for its diagnosis and 
monitoring. However, with the sequencing of the human genome, rapid development 
of high-throughput approaches has allowed for a better understanding of the 
etiopathogenesis of complex diseases, including SLE. Here we present a review of 
the latest advancements in biomarker discovery during the "omics" era, using 
these novel technologies, for assisting in the diagnosis and prognosis of 
patients with SLE.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.berh.2017.10.002
PMCID: PMC5776716
PMID: 29224677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]