---
reference_id: "PMID:17015493"
title: "The natural history of juvenile or subacute GM2 gangliosidosis: 21 new cases and literature review of 134 previously reported."
authors:
- Maegawa GH
- Stockley T
- Tropak M
- Banwell B
- Blaser S
- Kok F
- Giugliani R
- Mahuran D
- Clarke JT
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1542/peds.2006-0588
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Gangliosidoses, GM2/diagnosis"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Prospective Studies
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The natural history of juvenile or subacute GM2 gangliosidosis: 21 new cases and literature review of 134 previously reported.
**Authors:** Maegawa GH, Stockley T, Tropak M, Banwell B, Blaser S, Kok F, Giugliani R, Mahuran D, Clarke JT
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.2006-0588](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2006-0588)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2006 Nov;118(5):e1550-62. doi: 10.1542/peds.2006-0588. Epub 2006
Oct  2.

The natural history of juvenile or subacute GM2 gangliosidosis: 21 new cases and
literature review of 134 previously reported.

Maegawa GH(1), Stockley T, Tropak M, Banwell B, Blaser S, Kok F, Giugliani R,
Mahuran D, Clarke JT.

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Hospital for Sick Children, 555
University Ave, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1X8.

Erratum in
    Pediatrics. 2007 Oct;120(4):936.

OBJECTIVE: Juvenile GM2 gangliosidosis is a group of inherited neurodegenerative
diseases caused by deficiency of lysosomal beta-hexosaminidase resulting in GM2
ganglioside accumulation in brain. The purpose of this study was to delineate
the natural history of the condition and identify genotype-phenotype
correlations that might be helpful in predicting the course of the disease in
individual patients.
METHODS: A cohort of 21 patients with juvenile GM2 gangliosidosis, 15 with the
Tay-Sachs variant and 6 with the Sandhoff variant, was studied prospectively in
2 centers. Our experience was compared with previously published reports on 134
patients. Information about clinical features, beta-hexosaminidase enzyme
activity, and mutation analysis was collected.
RESULTS: In our cohort of patients, the mean (+/-SD) age of onset of symptoms
was 5.3 +/- 4.1 years, with a mean follow-up time of 8.4 years. The most common
symptoms at onset were gait disturbances (66.7%), incoordination (52.4%), speech
problems (28.6%), and developmental delay (28.6%). The age of onset of gait
disturbances was 7.1 +/- 5.6 years. The mean time for progression to becoming
wheelchair-bound was 6.2 +/- 5.5 years. The mean age of onset of speech problems
was 7.0 +/- 5.6 years, with a mean time of progression to anarthria of 5.6 +/-
5.3 years. Muscle wasting (10.6 +/- 7.4 years), proximal weakness (11.1 +/- 7.7
years), and incontinence of sphincters (14.6 +/- 9.7 years) appeared later in
the course of the disease. Psychiatric disturbances and neuropathy were more
prevalent in patients with the Sandhoff variant than in those with the Tay-Sachs
variant. However, dysphagia, sphincter incontinence, and sleep problems occurred
earlier in those with the Tay-Sachs variant. Cerebellar atrophy was the most
common finding on brain MRI (52.9%). The median survival time among the studied
and reviewed patients was 14.5 years. The genotype-phenotype correlation
revealed that in patients with the Tay-Sachs variant, the presence of R178H and
R499H mutations was predictive of an early onset and rapidly progressive course.
The presence of either G269S or W474C mutations was associated with a later
onset of symptoms along with a more slowly progressive disease course.
CONCLUSIONS: Juvenile GM2 gangliosidosis is clinically heterogeneous, not only
in terms of age of onset and clinical features but also with regard to the
course of the disease. In general, the earlier the onset of symptoms, the more
rapidly the disease progresses. The Tay-Sachs and Sandhoff variants differed
somewhat in the frequency of specific clinical characteristics. Speech
deterioration progressed more rapidly than gait abnormalities in both the
Tay-Sachs variant and Sandhoff variant groups. Among patients with the Tay-Sachs
variant, the HEXA genotype showed a significant correlation with the clinical
course.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2006-0588
PMCID: PMC2910078
PMID: 17015493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
