---
reference_id: "PMID:23151135"
title: Targeting the ubiquitin E1 as a novel anti-cancer strategy.
authors:
- Xu W
- Lukkarila JL
- da Silva SR
- Paiva SL
- Gunning PT
- Schimmer AD
journal: Curr Pharm Des
year: '2013'
doi: 10.2174/1381612811319180004
keywords:
- Animals
- Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology
- Drug Design
- Humans
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- "Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology"
- Proteasome Endopeptidase Complex/metabolism
- "Ubiquitin-Activating Enzymes/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Ubiquitination
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeting the ubiquitin E1 as a novel anti-cancer strategy.
**Authors:** Xu W, Lukkarila JL, da Silva SR, Paiva SL, Gunning PT, Schimmer AD
**Journal:** Curr Pharm Des (2013)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1381612811319180004](https://doi.org/10.2174/1381612811319180004)

## Content

1. Curr Pharm Des. 2013;19(18):3201-9. doi: 10.2174/1381612811319180004.

Targeting the ubiquitin E1 as a novel anti-cancer strategy.

Xu W(1), Lukkarila JL, da Silva SR, Paiva SL, Gunning PT, Schimmer AD.

Author information:
(1)The Princess Margaret Hospital, The Ontario Cancer Institute, Toronto, ON, 
M5G 2M9 Canada.

The proteasomal pathway of protein degradation involves two discrete steps: 
ubiquitination and degradation. Blocking protein degradation by inhibiting the 
proteasome has well described biologic effects and proteasome inhibitors are 
approved for the treatment of multiple myeloma and mantle cell lymphoma. In 
contrast, the biological effects and potential therapeutic utility of inhibiting 
the ubiquitination cascade and the initiating enzyme UBA1 are less well 
understood. UBA1 is the initial enzyme in the ubiquitination cascade and 
initiates the transfer of ubiquitin molecules to target proteins where they are 
degraded by the proteasome. Here, we review the biological effects of UBA1 
inhibition and discuss UBA1 inhibitors as potential anti-cancer agents. Similar 
to proteasome inhibition, blocking UBA1 elicits an unfolded protein response and 
induces cell death in malignant cells over normal cells. Chemical UBA1 
inhibitors have been developed that target different regions of the enzyme and 
inhibit its function through different mechanisms. These molecules are useful 
tools to understand the biology of UBA1 and highlight the potential of 
inhibiting this target for the treatment of malignancy.

DOI: 10.2174/1381612811319180004
PMID: 23151135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]