---
reference_id: "PMID:39201545"
title: "Emerging Therapeutic Approaches and Genetic Insights in Stargardt Disease: A Comprehensive Review."
authors:
- Ghenciu LA
- Hațegan OA
- Stoicescu ER
- Iacob R
- Șișu AM
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25168859
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Emerging Therapeutic Approaches and Genetic Insights in Stargardt Disease: A Comprehensive Review.
**Authors:** Ghenciu LA, Hațegan OA, Stoicescu ER, Iacob R, Șișu AM
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25168859](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25168859)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Aug 14;25(16):8859. doi: 10.3390/ijms25168859.

Emerging Therapeutic Approaches and Genetic Insights in Stargardt Disease: A 
Comprehensive Review.

Ghenciu LA(1), Hațegan OA(2), Stoicescu ER(3)(4)(5), Iacob R(3)(6), Șișu AM(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Functional Sciences, "Victor Babeș" University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy Timișoara, Eftimie Murgu Square No. 2, 300041 Timișoara, Romania.
(2)Discipline of Anatomy and Embriology, Medicine Faculty, Vasile Goldis Western 
University of Arad, Revolution Boulevard 94, 310025 Arad, Romania.
(3)Field of Applied Engineering Sciences, Specialization Statistical Methods and 
Techniques in Health and Clinical Research, Faculty of Mechanics, 'Politehnica' 
University Timișoara, Mihai Viteazul Boulevard No. 1, 300222 Timișoara, Romania.
(4)Department of Radiology and Medical Imaging, 'Victor Babeș' University of 
Medicine and Pharmacy Timișoara, Eftimie Murgu Square No. 2, 300041 Timișoara, 
Romania.
(5)Research Center for Pharmaco-Toxicological Evaluations, 'Victor Babeș' 
University of Medicine and Pharmacy Timișoara, Eftimie Murgu Square No. 2, 
300041 Timișoara, Romania.
(6)Department of Anatomy and Embriology, 'Victor Babeș' University of Medicine 
and Pharmacy Timișoara, 300041 Timișoara, Romania.

Stargardt disease, one of the most common forms of inherited retinal diseases, 
affects individuals worldwide. The primary cause is mutations in the ABCA4 gene, 
leading to the accumulation of toxic byproducts in the retinal pigment 
epithelium (RPE) and subsequent photoreceptor cell degeneration. Over the past 
few years, research on Stargardt disease has advanced significantly, focusing on 
clinical and molecular genetics. Recent studies have explored various innovative 
therapeutic approaches, including gene therapy, stem cell therapy, and 
pharmacological interventions. Gene therapy has shown promise, particularly with 
adeno-associated viral (AAV) vectors capable of delivering the ABCA4 gene to 
retinal cells. However, challenges remain due to the gene's large size. Stem 
cell therapy aims to replace degenerated RPE and photoreceptor cells, with 
several clinical trials demonstrating safety and preliminary efficacy. 
Pharmacological approaches focus on reducing toxic byproduct accumulation and 
modulating the visual cycle. Precision medicine, targeting specific genetic 
mutations and pathways, is becoming increasingly important. Novel techniques 
such as clustered regularly interspaced palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/Cas9 offer 
potential for directly correcting genetic defects. This review aims to 
synthesize recent advancements in understanding and treating Stargardt disease. 
By highlighting breakthroughs in genetic therapies, stem cell treatments, and 
novel pharmacological strategies, it provides a comprehensive overview of 
emerging therapeutic options.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25168859
PMCID: PMC11354485
PMID: 39201545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.