---
reference_id: "PMID:15108197"
title: "Growth, behavior, and clinical findings in 27 patients with Kabuki (Niikawa-Kuroki) syndrome."
authors:
- White SM
- Thompson EM
- Kidd A
- Savarirayan R
- Turner A
- Amor D
- Delatycki MB
- Fahey M
- Baxendale A
- White S
- Haan E
- Gibson K
- Halliday JL
- Bankier A
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.20674
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/pathology, physiopathology"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Australia
- Behavioral Symptoms/pathology
- Birth Weight
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Face/pathology
- Female
- Growth/physiology
- Head/pathology
- Humans
- Infant
- "Intellectual Disability/pathology, physiopathology"
- Male
- New Zealand
- Phenotype
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Growth, behavior, and clinical findings in 27 patients with Kabuki (Niikawa-Kuroki) syndrome.
**Authors:** White SM, Thompson EM, Kidd A, Savarirayan R, Turner A, Amor D, Delatycki MB, Fahey M, Baxendale A, White S, Haan E, Gibson K, Halliday JL, Bankier A
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.20674](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.20674)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Jun 1;127A(2):118-27. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.20674.

Growth, behavior, and clinical findings in 27 patients with Kabuki 
(Niikawa-Kuroki) syndrome.

White SM(1), Thompson EM, Kidd A, Savarirayan R, Turner A, Amor D, Delatycki MB, 
Fahey M, Baxendale A, White S, Haan E, Gibson K, Halliday JL, Bankier A.

Author information:
(1)Genetic Health Services Victoria, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, 
Australia. swhite@ich.ucl.ac.uk

This study was undertaken to document the phenotype of Kabuki (Niikawa-Kuroki) 
syndrome in patients from Australia and New Zealand, with particular emphasis on 
growth patterns, behavior, and relationship between head circumference and 
intellectual level. Data on 27 children and adults with Kabuki (Niikawa-Kuroki) 
syndrome from Australia and New Zealand were collected by questionnaire and 
clinical assessment. The patients ranged in age from 7 months to 36 years with a 
mean age of 7 years and 2 months. The mean age at diagnosis was 3(5/6) years, 
but in most cases, the facial phenotype was evident from infancy. The minimum 
birth prevalence was calculated at 1 in 86,000. Three of our patients died. 
Parents reported a behavior phenotype characterized by an excellent long-term 
memory and avoidance of eye contact. No correlation was found between head 
circumference and severity of intellectual disability. Eight of 14 patients over 
the age of 5 years were overweight or obese. Six of these eight patients had 
failure to thrive in infancy. One patient developed insulin-dependent diabetes 
mellitus in adolescence. Some individuals with Kabuki (Niikawa-Kuroki) syndrome 
show a characteristic growth profile with failure to thrive in infancy 
progressing to obesity or overweight in middle childhood or adolescence. A 
behavior phenotype was noted which requires further investigation. Head size is 
not a predictor of degree of intellectual disability.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.20674
PMID: 15108197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]