---
reference_id: "PMID:21663470"
title: BRAF mutations in hairy-cell leukemia.
authors:
- Tiacci E
- Trifonov V
- Schiavoni G
- Holmes A
- Kern W
- Martelli MP
- Pucciarini A
- Bigerna B
- Pacini R
- Wells VA
- Sportoletti P
- Pettirossi V
- Mannucci R
- Elliott O
- Liso A
- Ambrosetti A
- Pulsoni A
- Forconi F
- Trentin L
- Semenzato G
- Inghirami G
- Capponi M
- Di Raimondo F
- Patti C
- Arcaini L
- Musto P
- Pileri S
- Haferlach C
- Schnittger S
- Pizzolo G
- Foà R
- Farinelli L
- Haferlach T
- Pasqualucci L
- Rabadan R
- Falini B
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1014209
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Extracellular Signal-Regulated MAP Kinases/metabolism
- Female
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Hairy Cell/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Lymphoma, B-Cell/genetics, pathology"
- MAP Kinase Kinase Kinases/metabolism
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BRAF mutations in hairy-cell leukemia.
**Authors:** Tiacci E, Trifonov V, Schiavoni G, Holmes A, Kern W, Martelli MP, Pucciarini A, Bigerna B, Pacini R, Wells VA, Sportoletti P, Pettirossi V, Mannucci R, Elliott O, Liso A, Ambrosetti A, Pulsoni A, Forconi F, Trentin L, Semenzato G, Inghirami G, Capponi M, Di Raimondo F, Patti C, Arcaini L, Musto P, Pileri S, Haferlach C, Schnittger S, Pizzolo G, Foà R, Farinelli L, Haferlach T, Pasqualucci L, Rabadan R, Falini B
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1014209](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1014209)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2011 Jun 16;364(24):2305-15. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1014209. Epub
2011  Jun 11.

BRAF mutations in hairy-cell leukemia.

Tiacci E(1), Trifonov V, Schiavoni G, Holmes A, Kern W, Martelli MP, Pucciarini
A, Bigerna B, Pacini R, Wells VA, Sportoletti P, Pettirossi V, Mannucci R,
Elliott O, Liso A, Ambrosetti A, Pulsoni A, Forconi F, Trentin L, Semenzato G,
Inghirami G, Capponi M, Di Raimondo F, Patti C, Arcaini L, Musto P, Pileri S,
Haferlach C, Schnittger S, Pizzolo G, Foà R, Farinelli L, Haferlach T,
Pasqualucci L, Rabadan R, Falini B.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Hematology, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2011 Sep 8;365(10):961; author reply 961-2. doi:
10.1056/NEJMc1108130.
    N Engl J Med. 2011 Sep 8;365(10):960-1; author reply 961-2. doi:
10.1056/NEJMc1108130.

BACKGROUND: Hairy-cell leukemia (HCL) is a well-defined clinicopathological
entity whose underlying genetic lesion is still obscure.
METHODS: We searched for HCL-associated mutations by performing massively
parallel sequencing of the whole exome of leukemic and matched normal cells
purified from the peripheral blood of an index patient with HCL. Findings were
validated by Sanger sequencing in 47 additional patients with HCL.
RESULTS: Whole-exome sequencing identified five missense somatic clonal
mutations that were confirmed on Sanger sequencing, including a heterozygous
mutation in BRAF that results in the BRAF V600E variant protein. Since BRAF
V600E is oncogenic in other tumors, further analyses were focused on this
genetic lesion. The same BRAF mutation was noted in all the other 47 patients
with HCL who were evaluated by means of Sanger sequencing. None of the 195
patients with other peripheral B-cell lymphomas or leukemias who were evaluated
carried the BRAF V600E variant, including 38 patients with splenic marginal-zone
lymphomas or unclassifiable splenic lymphomas or leukemias. In immunohistologic
and Western blot studies, HCL cells expressed phosphorylated MEK and ERK (the
downstream targets of the BRAF kinase), indicating a constitutive activation of
the RAF-MEK-ERK mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway in HCL. In vitro
incubation of BRAF-mutated primary leukemic hairy cells from 5 patients with
PLX-4720, a specific inhibitor of active BRAF, led to a marked decrease in
phosphorylated ERK and MEK. CONCLUSIONS; The BRAF V600E mutation was present in
all patients with HCL who were evaluated. This finding may have implications for
the pathogenesis, diagnosis, and targeted therapy of HCL. (Funded by
Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro and others.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1014209
PMCID: PMC3689585
PMID: 21663470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
