---
reference_id: "PMID:24963049"
title: Reversible LSD1 inhibition interferes with global EWS/ETS transcriptional activity and impedes Ewing sarcoma tumor growth.
authors:
- Sankar S
- Theisen ER
- Bearss J
- Mulvihill T
- Hoffman LM
- Sorna V
- Beckerle MC
- Sharma S
- Lessnick SL
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-0072
keywords:
- Apoptosis/genetics
- "Bone Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Proliferation
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/genetics"
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- "Histone Demethylases/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- Humans
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- Proto-Oncogene Protein c-ets-1/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Protein c-fli-1/genetics
- RNA-Binding Protein EWS/genetics
- "Sarcoma, Ewing/genetics, pathology"
- Trans-Activators/genetics
- Transcriptional Regulator ERG
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reversible LSD1 inhibition interferes with global EWS/ETS transcriptional activity and impedes Ewing sarcoma tumor growth.
**Authors:** Sankar S, Theisen ER, Bearss J, Mulvihill T, Hoffman LM, Sorna V, Beckerle MC, Sharma S, Lessnick SL
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-0072](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-0072)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Sep 1;20(17):4584-97. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-0072.  Epub 2014 Jun 24.

Reversible LSD1 inhibition interferes with global EWS/ETS transcriptional
activity and impedes Ewing sarcoma tumor growth.

Sankar S(1), Theisen ER(2), Bearss J(3), Mulvihill T(4), Hoffman LM(5), Sorna
V(3), Beckerle MC(6), Sharma S(7), Lessnick SL(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, Utah.
(2)Center for Investigational Therapeutics at Huntsman Cancer Institute,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah. Department of Pharmaceutics and
Pharmaceutical Chemistry, College of Pharmacy, University of Utah, Salt Lake
City, Utah.
(3)Center for Investigational Therapeutics at Huntsman Cancer Institute,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
(4)University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah.
(5)Department of Biology, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt
Lake City, Utah.
(6)Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, Utah. Department of Biology, Huntsman Cancer Institute,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
(7)Center for Investigational Therapeutics at Huntsman Cancer Institute,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah. Division of Medical Oncology,
University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah.
(8)Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, Utah. Center for Children's Cancer Research at Huntsman Cancer
Institute, Salt Lake City, Utah. Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology,
University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah.
stephen.lessnick@hci.utah.edu.

PURPOSE: Ewing sarcoma is a pediatric bone tumor that absolutely relies on the
transcriptional activity of the EWS/ETS family of fusion oncoproteins. While the
most common fusion, EWS/FLI, utilizes lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1) to
repress critical tumor suppressors, small-molecule blockade of LSD1 has not yet
been thoroughly explored as a therapeutic approach for Ewing sarcoma. We
therefore evaluated the translational potential of potent and specific LSD1
inhibition with HCI2509 on the transcriptional program of both EWS/FLI and
EWS/ERG as well as the downstream oncogenic phenotypes driven by EWS/ETS fusions
in both in vitro and in vivo models of Ewing sarcoma.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: RNA-seq was used to compare the transcriptional profiles of
EWS/FLI, EWS/ERG, and treatment with HCI2509 in both EWS/FLI- and
EWS/ERG-containing cell lines. We then evaluated morphologic phenotypes of
treated cells with immunofluorescence. The induction of apoptosis was evaluated
using caspase-3/7 activation and TUNEL staining. Colony forming assays were used
to test oncogenic transformation and xenograft studies with patient-derived cell
lines were used to evaluate the effects of HCI2509 on tumorigenesis.
RESULTS: HCI2509 caused a dramatic reversal of both the up- and downregulated
transcriptional profiles of EWS/FLI and EWS/ERG accompanied by the induction of
apoptosis and disruption of morphologic and oncogenic phenotypes modulated by
EWS/FLI. Importantly, HCI2509 displayed single-agent efficacy in multiple
xenograft models.
CONCLUSIONS: These data support epigenetic modulation with HCI2509 as a
therapeutic strategy for Ewing sarcoma, and highlight a critical dual role for
LSD1 in the oncogenic transcriptional activity of EWS/ETS proteins.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-0072
PMCID: PMC4155010
PMID: 24963049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: S.L.L is on the scientific
advisory board for and S.Sh. is a founder and Chief Medical Officer of Salarius
Pharmaceuticals, a company focused on epigenetic therapies for cancer.
