---
reference_id: "PMID:15577070"
title: "[Cartilage proteoglycan aggregate: structure and function]."
authors:
- Watanabe H
journal: Clin Calcium
year: '2004'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Cartilage proteoglycan aggregate: structure and function].
**Authors:** Watanabe H
**Journal:** Clin Calcium (2004)

## Content

1. Clin Calcium. 2004 Jul;14(7):9-14.

[Cartilage proteoglycan aggregate: structure and function].

[Article in Japanese]

Watanabe H(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Molecular Science of Medicine, Aichi Medical University.

The proteoglycan aggregate is the major structural component of the 
extracellular matrix of the cartilage, composed of aggrecan, hyaluronan (HA) and 
link protein (LP). The aggregates provide cartilage with unique gel-like 
property and resistance to deformation through water absorption. Natural 
knockout mice of aggrecan, termed cartilage matrix deficiency, and LP-null mice 
exhibit decreased levels of aggrecan depositon in cartilage and correspond well 
with their phenotypes such as dwarfism and spinal misalignment, demonstrating in 
vivo roles of the aggregate in cartilage development and homeostasis. Our recent 
studies demonstrate that versican/PG-M, another member of aggrecan family with a 
similar domain structure, binds both HA and LP, forming an aggregate. Further 
functional analyses of domains and subdomains showed distinct interaction of 
versican/PG-M with LP from aggrecan, suggesting that the versican/PG-M aggregate 
may have different function in cartilage.

PMID: 15577070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]