---
reference_id: "PMID:16467704"
title: Osteoprotegrin knockout mice demonstrate abnormal remodeling of the otic capsule and progressive hearing loss.
authors:
- Zehnder AF
- Kristiansen AG
- Adams JC
- Kujawa SG
- Merchant SN
- McKenna MJ
journal: Laryngoscope
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1097/01.mlg.0000191466.09210.9a
keywords:
- Acoustic Stimulation
- Animals
- "Bone Remodeling/genetics, physiology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Disease Progression
- "Ear, Inner/physiopathology"
- "Evoked Potentials, Auditory, Brain Stem"
- "Glycoproteins/deficiency, genetics, physiology"
- "Hearing Loss/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Osteoprotegerin
- "Receptors, Cytoplasmic and Nuclear/deficiency, genetics, physiology"
- "Receptors, Tumor Necrosis Factor/deficiency, genetics, physiology"
- Temporal Bone/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteoprotegrin knockout mice demonstrate abnormal remodeling of the otic capsule and progressive hearing loss.
**Authors:** Zehnder AF, Kristiansen AG, Adams JC, Kujawa SG, Merchant SN, McKenna MJ
**Journal:** Laryngoscope (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.mlg.0000191466.09210.9a](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.mlg.0000191466.09210.9a)

## Content

1. Laryngoscope. 2006 Feb;116(2):201-6. doi: 10.1097/01.mlg.0000191466.09210.9a.

Osteoprotegrin knockout mice demonstrate abnormal remodeling of the otic capsule 
and progressive hearing loss.

Zehnder AF(1), Kristiansen AG, Adams JC, Kujawa SG, Merchant SN, McKenna MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otology and Laryngology, Harvard Medical School, and the 
Department of Otolaryngology, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Boston, MA 
02114-3096, USA.

OBJECTIVES: The otic capsule, when compared with other bones in the body, is 
unique in that it undergoes no significant remodeling of bone after development. 
We previously demonstrated that osteoprotegerin (OPG), which inhibits formation 
and function of osteoclasts, is produced at high levels in the inner ear of 
normal mice and secreted into the perilymph from where it diffuses into the 
surrounding otic capsule bone through a lacunocanalicular system. To test our 
hypothesis that the high level of OPG may be important in the inhibition of otic 
capsule remodeling, we studied the light microscopic histology of the otic 
capsule in OPG knockout mice for evidence of abnormal remodeling of bone. We 
also tested the hearing in OPG knockout mice to determine whether OPG and its 
influence on surrounding bone is important for auditory function.
METHODS: Temporal bone histopathology and pathophysiology were compared in 
homozygous OPG knockout mice and C57BL/6 (B6) mice, the background strain for 
the knockouts. Auditory function in age-matched animals from each group was 
evaluated at approximately 4-week intervals from 8 to 21 weeks using 
frequency-specific auditory brainstem responses (ABR) and distortion product 
otoacoustic emissions (DPOAE). After each of the last three evaluations, the 
cochleae from one mouse of each group were harvested, processed, and examined by 
light microscopy.
RESULTS: Osteoprotegerin knockout mice demonstrated abnormal remodeling of bone 
within the otic capsule with multiple foci showing osteoclastic bone resorption 
and formation of new bone. Such changes were not seen in the age-matched B6 
controls. The active bone remodeling process in the knockout animals showed many 
similarities to otosclerosis seen in human temporal bones. Over the time period 
that we monitored, auditory function was significantly and progressively 
compromised in the knockout animals relative to B6 controls. At the earliest age 
of test (8 wk), the loss was apparent as a mild, high-frequency reduction in 
sensitivity by ABR. In contrast, DPOAE losses in the knockouts were substantial 
even at 8 weeks, and by 21 weeks, these losses exceeded our equipment limits. 
Results of ABR testing showed hearing sensitivity changes in the animals of the 
background strain were confined largely to the high frequencies, whereas OPG 
knockouts demonstrated substantial low-frequency shifts in addition to those at 
high frequencies.
CONCLUSIONS: The histopathological and pathophysiological findings in OPG 
knockout mice support the hypothesis that OPG is important in the inhibition of 
bone remodeling within the otic capsule and the maintenance of normal auditory 
function. This mouse may provide a valuable animal model of human otosclerosis.

DOI: 10.1097/01.mlg.0000191466.09210.9a
PMCID: PMC2563156
PMID: 16467704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]