---
reference_id: "PMID:28244676"
title: "What is gluten?"
authors:
- Biesiekierski JR
journal: J Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/jgh.13703
content_type: abstract_only
---

# What is gluten?
**Authors:** Biesiekierski JR
**Journal:** J Gastroenterol Hepatol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jgh.13703](https://doi.org/10.1111/jgh.13703)

## Content

1. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017 Mar;32 Suppl 1:78-81. doi: 10.1111/jgh.13703.

What is gluten?

Biesiekierski JR(1).

Author information:
(1)Translational Research Center for Gastrointestinal Disorders, KU Leuven, 
Leuven, Belgium.

Gluten is the main storage protein of wheat grains. Gluten is a complex mixture 
of hundreds of related but distinct proteins, mainly gliadin and glutenin. 
Similar storage proteins exist as secalin in rye, hordein in barley, and avenins 
in oats and are collectively referred to as "gluten." The objective was to 
discuss the biochemical and functional properties of the gluten proteins, 
including structure, sources, and dietary intakes. Literature was reviewed from 
food science and nutrition journals. The gluten protein networks vary because of 
different components and sizes, and variability caused by genotype, growing 
conditions, and technological processes. The structures and interactions of this 
matrix contribute to the unique properties of gluten. The resulting functions 
are essential to determining the dough quality of bread and other baked 
products. Gluten is heat stable and has the capacity to act as a binding and 
extending agent and is commonly used as an additive in processed foods for 
improved texture, moisture retention, and flavor. Gliadin contains peptide 
sequences that are highly resistant to gastric, pancreatic, and intestinal 
proteolytic digestion in the gastrointestinal tract. The average daily gluten 
intake in a Western diet is thought to be 5-20 g/day and has been implicated in 
several disorders. Gluten containing grains (wheat, rye, barley, and oats) are 
important staple foods. Gluten is among the most complex protein networks and 
plays a key role in determining the rheological dough properties.

© 2017 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and John Wiley & 
Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jgh.13703
PMID: 28244676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]