---
reference_id: "PMID:39543566"
title: "The Breathing Struggle: A Case Study of Congenital Lung Malformation in a Young Child."
authors:
- Moradkhani A
- Abasi A
- Nejad FB
- Kalmarzi RN
- Mohammadi S
journal: BMC Pulm Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12890-024-03265-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Breathing Struggle: A Case Study of Congenital Lung Malformation in a Young Child.
**Authors:** Moradkhani A, Abasi A, Nejad FB, Kalmarzi RN, Mohammadi S
**Journal:** BMC Pulm Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12890-024-03265-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12890-024-03265-6)

## Content

1. BMC Pulm Med. 2024 Nov 14;24(1):569. doi: 10.1186/s12890-024-03265-6.

The Breathing Struggle: A Case Study of Congenital Lung Malformation in a Young 
Child.

Moradkhani A(1), Abasi A(1), Nejad FB(1), Kalmarzi RN(2), Mohammadi S(3).

Author information:
(1)Student of the Research Committee, Kurdistan University of Medical Sciences, 
Sanandaj, Iran.
(2)Cellular & Molecular Research Center, Kurdistan University of Medical 
Sciences, Sanandaj, Iran.
(3)Pediatrics Department, Medical Faculty, Kurdistan University of Medical 
Sciences, Sanandaj, Iran. Shilanm3256@gmail.com.

Erratum in
    BMC Pulm Med. 2024 Dec 18;24(1):624. doi: 10.1186/s12890-024-03436-5.

BACKGROUND: Congenital lung malformations (CLMs) are among the rare anomalies 
that can be diagnosed by bronchoscopy and imaging. They can cause various 
respiratory symptoms and complications, especially in children with congenital 
heart disease. This is an interesting case report of a child with a rare 
combination of congenital anomalies affecting the airway.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report a case of a 3.5-year-old boy with multiple 
congenital anomalies and respiratory problems since birth. He had a history of 
mild autism, developmental delay, and sensitivity to smell and smoke. He 
presented with hoarseness, shortness of breath, severe coughing, and severe 
wheezing, which worsened with the flu. He underwent bronchoscopy and other 
diagnostic tests, which revealed a posterior laryngeal cleft, a tracheal 
bronchus, and a very narrow distal trachea. He was treated with nebulizers, 
antibiotics, and serum therapy and showed improvement. This case illustrates a 
rare combination of airway malformations that require a multidisciplinary 
approach.
CONCLUSIONS: We presented a case of rare pulmonary malformations and chronic 
respiratory symptoms that improved with conventional pharmacotherapy. Increased 
awareness and understanding of these anomalies among healthcare providers can 
lead to earlier diagnosis and improved patient outcomes.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-024-03265-6
PMCID: PMC11566488
PMID: 39543566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Ethical approval The study was 
reviewed and approved by the Research Ethics Committees of Kurdistan University 
of Medical Sciences Medicine. The project was found to be by the ethical 
principles and the national norms and standards for conducting Medical Research 
in Iran. Written informed consent to participate in this study was provided by 
the participant’s legal guardian. Consent for publication Informed consent was 
obtained from the patient’s parents for the publication of this case report. 
Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.