---
reference_id: "PMID:17935237"
title: Posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy is associated with TCF8 gene mutations and abdominal hernia.
authors:
- Aldave AJ
- Yellore VS
- Yu F
- Bourla N
- Sonmez B
- Salem AK
- Rayner SA
- Sampat KM
- Krafchak CM
- Richards JE
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31978
keywords:
- "Corneal Dystrophies, Hereditary/genetics, pathology"
- "DNA/chemistry, genetics"
- Female
- "Hernia, Abdominal/genetics, pathology"
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Zinc Finger E-box-Binding Homeobox 1
- Zinc Fingers/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy is associated with TCF8 gene mutations and abdominal hernia.
**Authors:** Aldave AJ, Yellore VS, Yu F, Bourla N, Sonmez B, Salem AK, Rayner SA, Sampat KM, Krafchak CM, Richards JE
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.31978](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.31978)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Nov 1;143A(21):2549-56. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31978.

Posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy is associated with TCF8 gene mutations 
and abdominal hernia.

Aldave AJ(1), Yellore VS, Yu F, Bourla N, Sonmez B, Salem AK, Rayner SA, Sampat 
KM, Krafchak CM, Richards JE.

Author information:
(1)The Jules Stein Eye Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los 
Angeles, CA 90095, USA. aldave@jsei.ucla.edu

Mutations in the two-handed zinc-finger homeodomain transcription factor gene 
(TCF8) have been associated with posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy (PPCD) 
and extraocular developmental abnormalities. We performed screening of TCF8 in 
32 affected, unrelated probands, affected and unaffected family members of 
probands identified with a TCF8 mutation, and in 100 control individuals. Eight 
different pathogenic mutations were identified in eight probands: four 
frameshift (c.953_954insA, c.1506dupA, c.1592delA, and c.3012_3013delAG); three 
nonsense (Gln12X, Gln214X, Arg325X); and one missense (Met1Arg). Screening of 
TCF8 in affected and unaffected family members in six families demonstrated that 
each identified mutation segregated with the disease phenotype in each family; 
two probands did not have additional family members available for analysis. None 
of the eight TCF8 mutations was identified in 200 control chromosomes. The 
prevalence of hernias of the abdominal region in affected individuals with PPCD 
associated with TCF8 mutations was significantly higher than the prevalence in 
both individuals with PPCD not associated with a TCF8 mutation and in unaffected 
individuals. Therefore, PPCD is associated with TCF8 mutations in one quarter of 
affected families in this study, or about one third of all PPCD families that 
have been screened thus far. In these families, the presence of apparently 
causative TCF8 mutations is associated with abdominal and inguinal hernias.

Copyright 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31978
PMID: 17935237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]