---
reference_id: "PMID:19941667"
title: The relationship of interacting immunological components in dengue pathogenesis.
authors:
- Nielsen DG
journal: Virol J
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-6-211
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The relationship of interacting immunological components in dengue pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Nielsen DG
**Journal:** Virol J (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1743-422X-6-211](https://doi.org/10.1186/1743-422X-6-211)

## Content

1. Virol J. 2009 Nov 27;6:211. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-6-211.

The relationship of interacting immunological components in dengue pathogenesis.

Nielsen DG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tulane University, New Orleans, 
Louisiana 70112-2699, USA. dnielsen@tulane.edu

The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that there are over 50 million 
cases of dengue fever reported annually and approximately 2.5 billion people are 
at risk. Mild dengue fever presents with headache, fever, rash, myalgia, 
osteogenic pain, and lethargy. Severe disease can manifest as dengue shock 
syndrome (DSS) or dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF). Symptoms of DSS/DHF are 
leukopenia, low blood volume and pressure encephalitis, cold and sweaty skin, 
gastrointestinal bleeding, and spontaneous bleeding from gums and nose. 
Currently, there are no therapeutics available beyond supportive care and 
untreated complicated dengue fever can have a 50% mortality rate. According to 
WHO DSS/DHF is the leading cause of childhood mortality in some Asian countries. 
Dendritic cells are professional antigen presenting cells that are primary 
targets in a dengue infection. Dengue binds to Dendritic Cell-Specific 
Intercellular adhesion molecule-3-Grabbing Non-integrin (DC-SIGN). DC-SIGN has a 
high affinity for ICAM3 which is expressed in activating T-cells. Previous 
studies have demonstrated an altered T-cell phenotype expressed in dengue 
infected patients that could be potentially mediated by dengue-infected 
DCs.Dengue is enhanced by three interacting components of the immune system. 
Dengue begins by infecting dendritic cells which in immature dendritic cells is 
mediated by DC-SIGN. In mature dendritic cells, antibodies can enhance dengue 
infection via Fc receptors. Downstream of dendritic cells T-cells become 
activated and generate the very cytokines implicated in vascular leak and shock 
in addition to activating effector cells. Both the virus and the antibodies are 
involved in release of complement and anaphylatoxins which can cause or 
exacerbate DHF/DSS. These systems are inextricable and strongly associated with 
dengue pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-6-211
PMCID: PMC2789730
PMID: 19941667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]