---
reference_id: "PMID:30682496"
title: "Primary coenzyme Q10 Deficiency-6 (COQ10D6): Two siblings with variable expressivity of the renal phenotype."
authors:
- Yuruk Yildirim Z
- Toksoy G
- Uyguner O
- Nayir A
- Yavuz S
- Altunoglu U
- Turkkan ON
- Sevinc B
- Gokcay G
- Kurkcu Gunes D
- Kiyak A
- Yilmaz A
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2019.01.011
keywords:
- "Ataxia/genetics, pathology"
- Child
- Female
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Kidney/metabolism, pathology"
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- "Muscle Weakness/genetics, pathology"
- Mutation/genetics
- "Nephrotic Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- Phenotype
- Siblings
- "Ubiquinone/analogs & derivatives, deficiency, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary coenzyme Q10 Deficiency-6 (COQ10D6): Two siblings with variable expressivity of the renal phenotype.
**Authors:** Yuruk Yildirim Z, Toksoy G, Uyguner O, Nayir A, Yavuz S, Altunoglu U, Turkkan ON, Sevinc B, Gokcay G, Kurkcu Gunes D, Kiyak A, Yilmaz A
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2019.01.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2019.01.011)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2020 Jan;63(1):103621. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2019.01.011. Epub
2019 Jan 22.

Primary coenzyme Q10 Deficiency-6 (COQ10D6): Two siblings with variable
expressivity of the renal phenotype.

Yuruk Yildirim Z(1), Toksoy G(2), Uyguner O(2), Nayir A(3), Yavuz S(4),
Altunoglu U(2), Turkkan ON(3), Sevinc B(2), Gokcay G(5), Kurkcu Gunes D(5),
Kiyak A(4), Yilmaz A(3).

Author information:
(1)Istanbul University, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Pediatric Nephrology
Department, Istanbul, Turkey. Electronic address: znyuruk@gmail.com.
(2)Istanbul University, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical
Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Istanbul University, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Pediatric Nephrology
Department, Istanbul, Turkey.
(4)Kanuni Sultan Suleyman Research and Training Hospital, Pediatric Nephrology
Department, Istanbul, Turkey.
(5)Istanbul University, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Pediatric Nutrition and
Metabolism Department, Istanbul, Turkey.

Primary coenzyme Q10 deficiency-6 (COQ10D6) is a rare autosomal recessive
disorder caused by COQ6 mutations. The main clinical manifestations are
infantile progressive nephrotic syndrome (NS) leading to end-stage renal disease
and sensorineural deafness. A 7-year-old girl was diagnosed with
steroid-resistant NS (SRNS) and an audiological work-up revealed bilateral
sensorineural deafness. A renal biopsy demonstrated focal segmental
glomerulosclerosis. Despite immunosuppressive therapy, her serum levels of
creatinine increased and haemodialysis was indicated within 1 year after the
diagnosis. Living-donor kidney transplantation was performed in the eighth month
of haemodialysis. A diagnostic custom-designed panel-gene test including 30
genes for NS revealed homozygous c.1058C > A [rs397514479] in exon nine of COQ6.
Her older brother, who had sensorineural hearing loss with no renal or
neurological involvement, had the same mutation in homozygous form. COQ6
mutations should be considered not only in patients with SRNS with sensorineural
hearing loss but also in patients with isolated sensorineural hearing loss with
a family history of NS. The reported p.His174 variant of COQ8B was suggested to
be a risk factor for secondary CoQ deficiency, while p.Arg174 appeared to
improve the condition in a yeast model. Family segregation and the co-occurrence
of biallelic p.Arg174 of COQ8B in a brother with hearing loss implied that the
interaction of the altered COQ8B with the mutant COQ6 alleviated the symptoms in
this family. CoQ10 replacement therapy should be initiated for these patients,
as primary CoQ10 deficiency is considered the only known treatable mitochondrial
disease.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2019.01.011
PMID: 30682496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
