---
reference_id: "PMID:34481993"
title: "Secondary immunodeficiencies: An overview."
authors:
- Tuano KS
- Seth N
- Chinen J
journal: Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.anai.2021.08.413
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Secondary immunodeficiencies: An overview.
**Authors:** Tuano KS, Seth N, Chinen J
**Journal:** Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.anai.2021.08.413](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anai.2021.08.413)

## Content

1. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2021 Dec;127(6):617-626. doi: 
10.1016/j.anai.2021.08.413. Epub 2021 Sep 3.

Secondary immunodeficiencies: An overview.

Tuano KS(1), Seth N(1), Chinen J(2).

Author information:
(1)Section of Allergy, Immunology and Retrovirology, Department of Pediatrics, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; Texas Children's Hospital, The 
Woodlands, Texas.
(2)Section of Allergy, Immunology and Retrovirology, Department of Pediatrics, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; Texas Children's Hospital, The 
Woodlands, Texas. Electronic address: jchinen@bcm.edu.

OBJECTIVE: To review the different causes of secondary immunodeficiencies and 
provide clinicians with an updated overview of potential factors that contribute 
to immunodeficiency.
DATA SOURCES: Recent published literature obtained through PubMed database 
searches, including research articles, review articles, and case reports.
STUDY SELECTIONS: PubMed database searches were conducted using the following 
keywords: immunodeficiency, antibody deficiency, immunosuppressive drugs, 
genetic syndrome, malignancy, HIV infection, viral infection, secondary 
immunodeficiency, nutrition, prematurity, aging, protein-losing enteropathy, 
nephropathy, trauma, space travel, high altitude, and ultraviolet light. Studies 
published in the last decade and relevant to the pathogenesis, epidemiology, and 
clinical characteristics of secondary immunodeficiencies were selected and 
reviewed.
RESULTS: Researchers continue to investigate and report abnormal immune 
parameters in the different entities collectively known as secondary 
immunodeficiencies. Immunodeficiency might occur as a consequence of 
malnutrition, metabolic disorders, use of immunosuppressive medications, chronic 
infections, malignancies, severe injuries, and exposure to adverse environmental 
conditions. The neonate and the elderly may have decreased immune responses 
relative to healthy adults. Each of these conditions may present with different 
immune defects of variable severity. The acquired immunodeficiency syndrome 
results from infections by the human immunodeficiency virus, which targets CD4 T 
cells leading to defective immune responses. Rituximab is a monoclonal antibody 
that targets CD20 B cells, and its use might result in persistent 
hypogammaglobulinemia.
CONCLUSION: Clinicians should consider secondary immunodeficiencies in the 
differential diagnosis of a patient with recurrent infections and abnormal 
immunologic evaluation. The use of biological agents for the treatment of 
inflammatory conditions and malignancies is an increasingly important cause of 
secondary immunodeficiency.

Copyright © 2021 American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anai.2021.08.413
PMID: 34481993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]