---
reference_id: "PMID:37177784"
title: "Di-valent siRNA-mediated silencing of MSH3 blocks somatic repeat expansion in mouse models of Huntington's disease."
authors:
- "O'Reilly D"
- Belgrad J
- Ferguson C
- Summers A
- Sapp E
- McHugh C
- Mathews E
- Boudi A
- Buchwald J
- Ly S
- Moreno D
- Furgal R
- Luu E
- Kennedy Z
- Hariharan V
- Monopoli K
- Yang XW
- Carroll J
- DiFiglia M
- Aronin N
- Khvorova A
journal: Mol Ther
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2023.05.006
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- Corpus Striatum/metabolism
- "Huntingtin Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- "Huntington Disease/genetics, therapy, metabolism"
- Neostriatum/metabolism
- "RNA, Double-Stranded"
- "RNA, Small Interfering/genetics, metabolism"
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion/genetics
- MutS Homolog 3 Protein/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Di-valent siRNA-mediated silencing of MSH3 blocks somatic repeat expansion in mouse models of Huntington's disease.
**Authors:** O'Reilly D, Belgrad J, Ferguson C, Summers A, Sapp E, McHugh C, Mathews E, Boudi A, Buchwald J, Ly S, Moreno D, Furgal R, Luu E, Kennedy Z, Hariharan V, Monopoli K, Yang XW, Carroll J, DiFiglia M, Aronin N, Khvorova A
**Journal:** Mol Ther (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymthe.2023.05.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymthe.2023.05.006)

## Content

1. Mol Ther. 2023 Jun 7;31(6):1661-1674. doi: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2023.05.006. Epub
2023 May 12.

Di-valent siRNA-mediated silencing of MSH3 blocks somatic repeat expansion in
mouse models of Huntington's disease.

O'Reilly D(1), Belgrad J(1), Ferguson C(1), Summers A(1), Sapp E(2), McHugh
C(3), Mathews E(3), Boudi A(2), Buchwald J(1), Ly S(1), Moreno D(1), Furgal
R(1), Luu E(1), Kennedy Z(1), Hariharan V(1), Monopoli K(1), Yang XW(4), Carroll
J(5), DiFiglia M(2), Aronin N(6), Khvorova A(7).

Author information:
(1)RNA Therapeutics Institute, University of Massachusetts Chan Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01605, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114,
USA.
(3)Behavioral Neuroscience Program, Psychology Department, Western Washington
University, Bellingham, WA 98225, USA.
(4)Center for Neurobehavioral Genetics, Jane and Terry Semel Institute of
Neuroscience and Human Behavior, University of California Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA; Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences,
David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(5)Behavioral Neuroscience Program, Psychology Department, Western Washington
University, Bellingham, WA 98225, USA; Department of Neurology, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98104-2499, USA.
(6)RNA Therapeutics Institute, University of Massachusetts Chan Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01605, USA; Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts
Chan Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.
(7)RNA Therapeutics Institute, University of Massachusetts Chan Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01605, USA. Electronic address: anastasia.khvorova@umassmed.edu.

Erratum in
    Mol Ther. 2023 Nov 1;31(11):3355-3356. doi: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2023.09.016.

Comment in
    Mol Ther. 2023 Jun 7;31(6):1509-1511. doi: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2023.05.010.

Huntington's disease (HD) is a severe neurodegenerative disorder caused by the
expansion of the CAG trinucleotide repeat tract in the huntingtin gene.
Inheritance of expanded CAG repeats is needed for HD manifestation, but further
somatic expansion of the repeat tract in non-dividing cells, particularly
striatal neurons, hastens disease onset. Called somatic repeat expansion, this
process is mediated by the mismatch repair (MMR) pathway. Among MMR components
identified as modifiers of HD onset, MutS homolog 3 (MSH3) has emerged as a
potentially safe and effective target for therapeutic intervention. Here, we
identify a fully chemically modified short interfering RNA (siRNA) that robustly
silences Msh3 in vitro and in vivo. When synthesized in a di-valent scaffold,
siRNA-mediated silencing of Msh3 effectively blocked CAG-repeat expansion in the
striatum of two HD mouse models without affecting tumor-associated
microsatellite instability or mRNA expression of other MMR genes. Our findings
establish a promising treatment approach for patients with HD and other repeat
expansion diseases.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2023.05.006
PMCID: PMC10277892
PMID: 37177784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests A.K. and N.A. are
co-founders of Atalanta. A.K. and N.A. are on the scientific advisory board of
Atalanta. N.A. is on the scientific advisory board of Huntington’s Disease
Society for America and that of Biogen and has licensing to Spark Therapeutics.
A.K. has a financial interest in Atalanta. The authors have patents on MSH3 as a
therapeutic target and the methodology described in the paper.
