---
reference_id: "PMID:37126691"
title: Intestinal bile acids provide a surmountable barrier against C. difficile TcdB-induced disease pathogenesis.
authors:
- Icho S
- Ward JS
- Tam J
- Kociolek LK
- Theriot CM
- Melnyk RA
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2301252120
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intestinal bile acids provide a surmountable barrier against C. difficile TcdB-induced disease pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Icho S, Ward JS, Tam J, Kociolek LK, Theriot CM, Melnyk RA
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.2301252120](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2301252120)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2023 May 9;120(19):e2301252120. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2301252120. Epub 2023 May 1.

Intestinal bile acids provide a surmountable barrier against C. difficile 
TcdB-induced disease pathogenesis.

Icho S(1)(2), Ward JS(1)(2), Tam J(1), Kociolek LK(3)(4), Theriot CM(5), Melnyk 
RA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Medicine Program, The Hospital for Sick Children Research 
Institute, Toronto, ON M5G 0A4.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8.
(3)Ann & Robert H. Lurie, Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60611.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, 
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611.
(5)Department of Population Health and Pathobiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27606.

Intestinal bile acids play an essential role in the Clostridioides difficile 
lifecycle having been shown in vitro to modulate various aspects of 
pathogenesis, including spore germination, vegetative growth, and more recently 
the action of the primary virulence determinant, TcdB. Here, we investigated 
whether physiological levels of the total pool of intestinal bile acids in mice 
and humans protect against TcdB action. Small molecules extracted from the 
lumenal contents of the small intestine, cecum, colon, and feces were found to 
inhibit TcdB in accordance with the differential amounts of total bile acids in 
each compartment. Extracts from antibiotic-treated and germ-free mice, despite 
harboring dramatically altered bile acid profiles, unexpectedly also prevented 
TcdB-induced cell rounding to similar extents. We show that protection, however, 
is surmountable and can be overcome at higher doses of TcdB-typical to those 
seen during severe C. difficile infection-suggesting that the protective 
properties of intestinal bile acids are operant primarily under low to moderate 
toxin levels. Taken together, these findings demonstrate a role for intestinal 
bile acids in attenuating virulence, provide insights into asymptomatic carriage 
of toxigenic C. difficile, and inform strategies to manipulate bile acid levels 
for therapeutic benefit.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2301252120
PMCID: PMC10175849
PMID: 37126691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: C.M.T. consults for Vedanta Biosciences, Inc., 
Summit Therapeutics, and Ferring Pharmaceuticals, Inc.