---
reference_id: "PMID:33208597"
title: Histopathology of Pemphigus Vulgaris Revisited.
authors:
- Manocha A
- Tirumalae R
journal: Am J Dermatopathol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000001838
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Cohort Studies
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Pemphigus/diagnosis, pathology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Histopathology of Pemphigus Vulgaris Revisited.
**Authors:** Manocha A, Tirumalae R
**Journal:** Am J Dermatopathol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1097/DAD.0000000000001838](https://doi.org/10.1097/DAD.0000000000001838)

## Content

1. Am J Dermatopathol. 2021 Jun 1;43(6):429-437. doi:
10.1097/DAD.0000000000001838.

Histopathology of Pemphigus Vulgaris Revisited.

Manocha A(1), Tirumalae R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, St. John's Medical College, Bangalore, India .

Pemphigus vulgaris (PV) is a severe, potentially life-threatening autoimmune 
blistering disease, which is common in India. Although there is abundant 
literature on clinical and immunologic features, comprehensive studies on its 
histopathology are lacking. The aim of this study was to describe the 
histopathologic and immunofluorescence features as well as discuss various 
diagnostic pitfalls of PV. Histopathologic and immunofluorescence (DIF/IIF) 
findings were reviewed for 169 biopsies from 2007 to 2017 (11 years). The 169 
samples included 152 skin, 16 oral mucosal, and 1 corneal biopsy. Maximum 
prevalence was noted in the fifth decade (57%) with a slight male preponderance. 
Vesicles were seen in 149 cases (88%), the level of which was suprabasal in 
91(61%) and both suprabasal and intraepidermal in 50 cases (33.5%). Acantholytic 
cells were present in 142 cases (95%). Acantholytic keratinocytes showed rounded 
and polygonal acantholysis. 86 (51%) cases showed evidence of regeneration. 
Adnexal involvement was seen in 92 cases, commonest in the hair follicles. 
Unusual histologic findings included: intraepidermal bulla, absence of dermal 
inflammation, free floating hair shafts, multinucleated epithelial cells, 
eosinophil predominance; all of which are discussed. DIF was performed in 166 
cases, of which 163 were positive (98%), and IgG was the commonest 
immunoreactant (96%). IIF was performed in 11 cases, of which 9 cases were 
positive for Dsg3. Although the diagnosis of PV rests on combined clinical, 
histologic, and IF features, histopathology as the sole means is also a powerful 
tool. It is important to be aware of the diagnostic pitfalls to optimize its 
utility.

Copyright © 2020 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000001838
PMID: 33208597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.