---
reference_id: "PMID:20949568"
title: Consistent MYC and FLT4 gene amplification in radiation-induced angiosarcoma but not in other radiation-associated atypical vascular lesions.
authors:
- Guo T
- Zhang L
- Chang NE
- Singer S
- Maki RG
- Antonescu CR
journal: Genes Chromosomes Cancer
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/gcc.20827
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/metabolism"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Murine-Derived"
- "Blotting, Western"
- Breast Neoplasms/radiotherapy
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Female
- Gene Amplification
- Gene Expression Profiling
- "Genes, myc"
- "Hemangiosarcoma/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Neoplasm Proteins/metabolism
- "Neoplasms, Radiation-Induced/etiology, genetics, metabolism"
- Protein Isoforms/metabolism
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-myc/genetics, metabolism"
- Radiotherapy/adverse effects
- "Vascular Diseases/etiology, genetics, metabolism"
- "Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Receptor-3/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Consistent MYC and FLT4 gene amplification in radiation-induced angiosarcoma but not in other radiation-associated atypical vascular lesions.
**Authors:** Guo T, Zhang L, Chang NE, Singer S, Maki RG, Antonescu CR
**Journal:** Genes Chromosomes Cancer (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/gcc.20827](https://doi.org/10.1002/gcc.20827)

## Content

1. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2011 Jan;50(1):25-33. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20827.

Consistent MYC and FLT4 gene amplification in radiation-induced angiosarcoma but
not in other radiation-associated atypical vascular lesions.

Guo T(1), Zhang L, Chang NE, Singer S, Maki RG, Antonescu CR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
NY, USA.

Angiosarcoma (AS) is a distinct group of sarcomas characterized by upregulation
of vascular-specific receptor tyrosine kinases, including TIE1, KDR, TEK, and
FLT1. In keeping with the clinical heterogeneity, gene-expression profiling
distinguishes two AS genomic clusters, which correlate with anatomical location
and prior exposure to radiation. Furthermore, a high percentage of secondary AS,
but not primary AS, shows distinct 8q24 chromosomal gains, due to MYC
amplification. In this study, we mined the transcriptional output of 10
secondary and 11 primary AS to better define the dichotomy in the pathogenesis
of these two clinical subsets. The oncogenic role of MYC was investigated
further in secondary AS as well as in radiation-induced atypical vascular
lesions (AVL) and other radiation-associated sarcomas. High-level MYC
amplification was found in 100% of secondary AS, but in none of the AVL or other
radiation-associated sarcomas. Coamplification of FLT4 (encoding VEGFR3) was
identified in 25% of secondary AS, but not in other types. Our findings
reinforce the distinct pathogenesis of AS subtypes, with MYC amplification being
an early, but necessary event in secondary AS. Secondary genetic hits, such as
FLT4 gene coamplification or KDR mutations, may play a role in tumor progression
as well as potential therapeutic targeting.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/gcc.20827
PMCID: PMC3150534
PMID: 20949568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
