---
reference_id: "PMID:36382108"
title: Phase I dose escalation and expansion trial of single agent ONC201 in pediatric diffuse midline gliomas following radiotherapy.
authors:
- Gardner SL
- Tarapore RS
- Allen J
- McGovern SL
- Zaky W
- Odia Y
- Daghistani D
- Diaz Z
- Hall MD
- Khatib Z
- Koschmann C
- Cantor E
- Kurokawa R
- MacDonald TJ
- Aguilera D
- Vitanza NA
- Mueller S
- Kline C
- Lu G
- Allen JE
- Khatua S
journal: Neurooncol Adv
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/noajnl/vdac143
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phase I dose escalation and expansion trial of single agent ONC201 in pediatric diffuse midline gliomas following radiotherapy.
**Authors:** Gardner SL, Tarapore RS, Allen J, McGovern SL, Zaky W, Odia Y, Daghistani D, Diaz Z, Hall MD, Khatib Z, Koschmann C, Cantor E, Kurokawa R, MacDonald TJ, Aguilera D, Vitanza NA, Mueller S, Kline C, Lu G, Allen JE, Khatua S
**Journal:** Neurooncol Adv (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/noajnl/vdac143](https://doi.org/10.1093/noajnl/vdac143)

## Content

1. Neurooncol Adv. 2022 Sep 13;4(1):vdac143. doi: 10.1093/noajnl/vdac143.
eCollection 2022 Jan-Dec.

Phase I dose escalation and expansion trial of single agent ONC201 in pediatric
diffuse midline gliomas following radiotherapy.

Gardner SL(1)(2)(3), Tarapore RS(4)(5), Allen J(1), McGovern SL(3), Zaky W(3),
Odia Y(6), Daghistani D(6), Diaz Z(6), Hall MD(6)(7)(8), Khatib Z(9), Koschmann
C(10), Cantor E(10)(11), Kurokawa R(10), MacDonald TJ(12), Aguilera D(12),
Vitanza NA(13)(14), Mueller S(15), Kline C(16)(17), Lu G(4), Allen JE(4)(5),
Khatua S(18).

Author information:
(1)NYU Langone Medical Center and School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(3)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Clinical Development, Oncoceutics, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Clinical Development, Chimerix Inc., Durham, NC, USA.
(6)Miami Cancer Institute, Baptist Health South Florida, Miami, FL, USA.
(7)Department of Radiation Oncology, Nicklaus Children's Hospital, Miami, FL,
USA.
(8)Department of Radiation Oncology, Miami Cancer Institute, Baptist Health
South Florida, Miami, FL, USA.
(9)Department of Neuro-Oncology, Nicklaus Children's Hospital, Miami, FL.
(10)Michigan Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI,
USA.
(11)University of Connecticut School of Medicine, Farmington, CT.
(12)Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Emory University School of Medicine,
Atlanta, GA, USA.
(13)Ben Towne Center for Childhood Cancer Research, Seattle Children's Research
Institute, Seattle, WA, USA.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, Seattle Children's Hospital, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(15)Department of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Pediatrics, University of
California San Francisco.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA.
(17)Department of Neurology, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA.
(18)Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.

BACKGROUND: ONC201, a dopamine receptor D2 (DRD2) antagonist and caseinolytic
protease P (ClpP) agonist, has induced durable tumor regressions in adults with
recurrent H3 K27M-mutant glioma. We report results from the first phase I
pediatric clinical trial of ONC201.
METHODS: This open-label, multi-center clinical trial (NCT03416530) of ONC201
for pediatric H3 K27M-mutant diffuse midline glioma (DMG) or diffuse intrinsic
pontine glioma (DIPG) employed a dose-escalation and dose-expansion design. The
primary endpoint was the recommended phase II dose (RP2D). A standard 3 + 3 dose
escalation design was implemented. The target dose was the previously
established adult RP2D (625 mg), scaled by body weight. Twenty-two pediatric
patients with DMG/DIPG were treated following radiation; prior lines of systemic
therapy in addition to radiation were permitted providing sufficient time had
elapsed prior to study treatment.
RESULTS: The RP2D of orally administered ONC201 in this pediatric population was
determined to be the adult RP2D (625 mg), scaled by body weight; no
dose-limiting toxicities (DLT) occurred. The most frequent treatment-emergent
Grade 1-2 AEs were headache, nausea, vomiting, dizziness and increase in alanine
aminotransferase. Pharmacokinetics were determined following the first dose: T
1/2, 8.4 h; T max, 2.1 h; C max, 2.3 µg/mL; AUC0-tlast, 16.4 hµg/mL. Median
duration of treatment was 20.6 weeks (range 5.1-129). Five (22.7%) patients, all
of whom initiated ONC201 following radiation and prior to recurrence, were alive
at 2 years from diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: The adult 625 mg weekly RP2D of ONC201 scaled by body weight was
well tolerated. Further investigation of ONC201 for DMG/DIPG is warranted.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press, the Society for
Neuro-Oncology and the European Association of Neuro-Oncology.

DOI: 10.1093/noajnl/vdac143
PMCID: PMC9639395
PMID: 36382108
