---
reference_id: "PMID:35528826"
title: "Natural History of Obesity Due to POMC, PCSK1, and LEPR Deficiency and the Impact of Setmelanotide."
authors:
- Wabitsch M
- Farooqi S
- Flück CE
- Bratina N
- Mallya UG
- Stewart M
- Garrison J
- van den Akker E
- Kühnen P
journal: J Endocr Soc
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1210/jendso/bvac057
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural History of Obesity Due to POMC, PCSK1, and LEPR Deficiency and the Impact of Setmelanotide.
**Authors:** Wabitsch M, Farooqi S, Flück CE, Bratina N, Mallya UG, Stewart M, Garrison J, van den Akker E, Kühnen P
**Journal:** J Endocr Soc (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jendso/bvac057](https://doi.org/10.1210/jendso/bvac057)

## Content

1. J Endocr Soc. 2022 Apr 15;6(6):bvac057. doi: 10.1210/jendso/bvac057.
eCollection  2022 Jun 1.

Natural History of Obesity Due to POMC, PCSK1, and LEPR Deficiency and the
Impact of Setmelanotide.

Wabitsch M(1), Farooqi S(2), Flück CE(3), Bratina N(4), Mallya UG(5), Stewart
M(5), Garrison J(5), van den Akker E(6), Kühnen P(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Center for Rare Endocrine
Diseases, Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University of Ulm,
Ulm, Germany.
(2)Wellcome-MRC Institute of Metabolic Science and NIHR Cambridge Biomedical
Research Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Paediatric Endocrinology, Diabetology and Metabolism, Department of
Paediatrics and Department of BioMedical Research, Bern University Hospital
Inselspital and University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, University
Children's Hospital, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(5)Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, Sophia
Children's Hospital and Obesity Center CGG, Erasmus University Medical Center,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)Institute for Experimental Pediatric Endocrinology, Charité
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

CONTEXT: Rare homozygous or biallelic variants in POMC, PCSK1, and LEPR can
disrupt signaling through the melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) pathway, resulting
in hyperphagia and severe early-onset obesity. In pivotal Phase 3 clinical
trials, treatment with the MC4R agonist setmelanotide reduced hunger and weight
in patients with obesity due to proopiomelanocortin (POMC), proprotein
convertase subtilisin/kexin type 1 (PCSK1), or leptin receptor (LEPR)
deficiency.
OBJECTIVE: To characterize the historical weight trajectory in these patients.
METHODS: This analysis included data from 2 pivotal single-arm, open-label,
Phase 3 trials (NCT02896192, NCT03287960). These were multicenter trials.
Patients had obesity due to POMC/PCSK1 or LEPR deficiency. During the trial,
patients were treated with setmelanotide. Historical data on measured weight and
height were obtained during screening.
RESULTS: A total of 17 patients (POMC, n = 8; PCSK1, n = 1; LEPR, n = 8) with
historical weight and height data were included in this analysis. Before
setmelanotide treatment, patients with obesity due to POMC/PCSK1 or LEPR
deficiency were above the 95th percentile for weight throughout childhood,
demonstrated continuous weight gain, and did not show long-term weight loss upon
interventions (eg, diet, surgery, exercise). Setmelanotide treatment attenuated
weight and body mass index trajectories over the observation period of 1 year.
CONCLUSION: In patients with POMC, PCSK1, or LEPR deficiency, traditional
interventions for weight loss had limited impact on the trajectory of severe
early-onset obesity. However, setmelanotide treatment attenuated weight and body
mass index trajectories and led to weight loss associated with health benefits
in most individuals.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Endocrine Society.

DOI: 10.1210/jendso/bvac057
PMCID: PMC9070354
PMID: 35528826
