---
reference_id: "PMID:39163469"
title: Acute Flaccid Myelitis.
authors:
- Yarovaya K
- Rayi A
year: '2026'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute Flaccid Myelitis.
**Authors:** Yarovaya K, Rayi A

## Content

1. Acute Flaccid Myelitis.

Yarovaya K(1), Rayi A(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2026
Jan–.
2024 Jul 14.

Author information:
(1)Odessa national medical university
(2)Charleston Area Medical Center

Acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) is a rare disabling condition that primarily
targets the anterior horns of the spinal cord and, less commonly, the gray
matter of the brainstem. This condition occurs mostly in patients younger than
21 years and, occasionally, in immunocompromised adults. The first AFM case was
reported in California in 2012. AFM is now recognized worldwide. AFM cases
commonly emerge in geographical clusters marked by a seasonal biennial
pattern. The exact cause of AFM is not fully understood, but the link to certain
viruses (eg, enterovirus D68, enterovirus A71, West Nile virus, adenovirus) has
been observed.  AFM clinically presents with acute asymmetric lower motor neuron
paralysis with spared sensation. The involvement of oculomotor, facial palsy,
and/or bulbar musculature is observed on rare occasions. The onset of symptoms
in most patients follows after a 1- to 10-day period of upper respiratory tract
infection. The classic symptoms of AFM comprise muscle weakness in the arms
and/or legs, decreased or loss of muscle tone, and decreased or absent reflexes.
In severe cases, respiratory insufficiency due to paralysis of respiratory
muscles requires intubation and mechanical ventilation. AFM is diagnosed based
on a combination of a distinctive clinical presentation and diagnostic
tests. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis findings demonstrate lymphocytic
pleocytosis and elevated protein levels. The radiological hallmark of AFM
includes focal lesions of the anterior horns of the spinal cord. The long-term
prognosis for AFM is still being studied. Rehabilitation, physical therapy, and
psychological support play an indispensable role in maximizing recovery for
patients with AFM. Vigilant surveillance and reporting of suspected cases are
essential for better understanding the epidemiology and pathogenesis of AFM,
thereby guiding public health interventions. Collective efforts to combat AFM
and mitigate its impact on affected individuals and communities are enhanced by
fostering collaboration and knowledge-sharing among healthcare professionals,
researchers, and public health officials.

Copyright © 2026, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 39163469

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Ksenia Yarovaya declares no relevant
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Appaji Rayi
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.
