---
reference_id: "PMID:35248143"
title: "Musculoskeletal diseases in Marfan syndrome: a nationwide registry study."
authors:
- Andersen NH
- Hauge EM
- Baad-Hansen T
- Groth KA
- Berglund A
- Gravholt CH
- Stochholm K
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02272-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Musculoskeletal diseases in Marfan syndrome: a nationwide registry study.
**Authors:** Andersen NH, Hauge EM, Baad-Hansen T, Groth KA, Berglund A, Gravholt CH, Stochholm K
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-022-02272-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-022-02272-2)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2022 Mar 5;17(1):118. doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02272-2.

Musculoskeletal diseases in Marfan syndrome: a nationwide registry study.

Andersen NH(1), Hauge EM(2)(3), Baad-Hansen T(4), Groth KA(5), Berglund A(6)(7), 
Gravholt CH(7)(8), Stochholm K(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Aalborg University Hospital, Hobrovej 18-22, 9000, 
Aalborg, Denmark. n.holmark@rn.dk.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, Aarhus University Hospital, Palle Juul-Jensens 
Boulevard, 8200, Aarhus, Denmark.
(3)Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Incuba Skejby, Palle 
Juul-Jensens Boulevard, 8200, Aarhus, Denmark.
(4)Department of Orthopedics, Aarhus University Hospital, Palle Juul-Jensens 
Boulevard, 8200, Aarhus, Denmark.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Aalborg University Hospital, Hobrovej 18-22, 9000, 
Aalborg, Denmark.
(6)Department of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University Hospital, Palle 
Juul-Jensens Boulevard, 8200, Aarhus, Denmark.
(7)Department of Molecular Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital, Palle 
Juul-Jensens Boulevard, 8200, Aarhus, Denmark.
(8)Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine, Aarhus University 
Hospital, Palle Juul-Jensens Boulevard, 8200, Aarhus, Denmark.
(9)Center for Rare Diseases, Aarhus University Hospital, Palle Juul-Jensens 
Boulevard, 8200, Aarhus, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Marfan syndrome is associated with abnormalities in the 
musculoskeletal system including scoliosis, pectus deformities, protrusio 
acetabuli, and foot deformities. Over a life span, many patients with Marfan 
syndrome will need treatment; however, the musculoskeletal morbidity over a life 
span is not well described. The aim of the present study was to assess the 
overall burden of musculoskeletal disease in patients with Marfan syndrome.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A registry-based, nationwide epidemiological study of 
patients with a Ghent II verified Marfan syndrome diagnosis from 1977 to 2014. 
Each patient was matched on age, and sex with up to 100 controls from the 
background population.
RESULTS: We identified 407 patients with Marfan syndrome and 40,700 controls and 
compared their musculoskeletal diagnoses and surgical treatments using Cox 
proportional hazards ratio (HR). The risk of a registration of a musculoskeletal 
diagnosis in patients with Marfan syndrome was significantly increased compared 
to controls (HR: 1.94 (1.69-2.24). One out of six with Marfan syndrome was 
registered with scoliosis (HR: 36.7 (27.5-48.9). Scoliosis was more common in 
women with Marfan syndrome compared to men (HR: 4.30 (1.73-1.08)). One out of 11 
were registered with a pectus deformity HR: 40.8 (28.1-59.3), and one out of six 
with a deformity of the foot. Primarily pes planus (HR: 26.0 (15.2-44.3). The 
proportion of patients with Marfan syndrome (94/407) that underwent 
musculoskeletal surgery was also significantly higher (HR: 1.76 (1.43-2.16)). 
The major areas of surgery were the spine, pectups correction, and surgery of 
the foot/ankle. Ten patients with Marfan syndrome had elective orthopedic 
surgery without being recognized and diagnosed with Marfan syndrome until later 
in life. None of these had scoliosis, pectus deformity or a foot deformity. 
Among patients with an aortic dissection, the age at dissection was 34.3 years 
in those with at least one major musculoskeletal abnormality. In patients 
without a major abnormality the age at dissection was 45.1 years (p < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The extent of musculoskeletal disease is quite significant in 
Marfan syndrome, and many will need corrective surgery during their life span. 
Surgeons should be aware of undiagnosed patients with Marfan syndrome when 
treating patients with a Marfan syndrome like-phenotype.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-022-02272-2
PMCID: PMC8898450
PMID: 35248143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no financial and non-financial 
competing interests to disclose.