---
reference_id: "PMID:29855039"
title: "Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia: clinical and molecular review."
authors:
- Reyes-Reali J
- Mendoza-Ramos MI
- Garrido-Guerrero E
- Méndez-Catalá CF
- Méndez-Cruz AR
- Pozo-Molina G
journal: Int J Dermatol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/ijd.14048
keywords:
- Anodontia/etiology
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia 1, Anhidrotic/complications, diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Ectodysplasins/genetics
- Edar Receptor/genetics
- Edar-Associated Death Domain Protein/genetics
- Humans
- Hypohidrosis/etiology
- Hypotrichosis/etiology
- I-kappa B Kinase/genetics
- Mutation
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia: clinical and molecular review.
**Authors:** Reyes-Reali J, Mendoza-Ramos MI, Garrido-Guerrero E, Méndez-Catalá CF, Méndez-Cruz AR, Pozo-Molina G
**Journal:** Int J Dermatol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ijd.14048](https://doi.org/10.1111/ijd.14048)

## Content

1. Int J Dermatol. 2018 Aug;57(8):965-972. doi: 10.1111/ijd.14048. Epub 2018 May 
31.

Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia: clinical and molecular review.

Reyes-Reali J(1), Mendoza-Ramos MI(1), Garrido-Guerrero E(2), Méndez-Catalá 
CF(3), Méndez-Cruz AR(1), Pozo-Molina G(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Inmunología, Facultad de Estudios Superiores Iztacala, 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Tlalnepantla, Mexico.
(2)Laboratorio de Investigación en Biología Molecular y Celular del Cáncer, 
Departamento de Genética y Biología Molecular, Centro de Investigación y de 
Estudios Avanzados del Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Ciudad de México, Mexico.
(3)Laboratorio Nacional de Enfermedades Crónico-Degenerativas/Unidad de 
Biomedicina (UBIMED), Facultad de Estudios Superiores Iztacala, Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México, Tlalnepantla, Mexico.
(4)Carrera de Médico Cirujano, Facultad de Estudios Superiores Iztacala, 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Tlalnepantla, Mexico.

Hypohidrotic Ectodermal Dysplasia (HED) is a genetic human disorder which 
affects structures of ectodermal origin. Although there are autosomal recessive 
and dominant forms, X-linked (XL) is the most frequent form of the disease. This 
XL-HED phenotype is associated with mutations in the gene encoding the 
transmembrane protein ectodysplasin-1 (EDA1), a member of the TNFα-related 
signaling pathway. The proteins from this pathway are involved in signal 
transduction from ectoderm to mesenchyme leading to the development of 
ectoderm-derived structures in the fetus such as hair, teeth, skin, nails, and 
eccrine sweat glands. The aim of this review was to update the main clinical 
characteristics of HED regarding to recent molecular advances in the 
comprehension of all the possible genes involved in this group of disorders 
since it is known that Eda-A1-Edar signaling has multiple roles in ectodermal 
organ development, regulating their initiation, morphogenesis, and 
differentiation steps. The knowledge of the biological mechanisms that generate 
HED is needed for both a better detection of possible cases and for the design 
of efficient prevention and treatment approaches.

© 2018 The International Society of Dermatology.

DOI: 10.1111/ijd.14048
PMID: 29855039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]