---
reference_id: "PMID:36937732"
title: "Role of allopregnanolone-mediated γ-aminobutyric acid A receptor sensitivity in the pathogenesis of premenstrual dysphoric disorder: Toward precise targets for translational medicine and drug development."
authors:
- Gao Q
- Sun W
- Wang YR
- Li ZF
- Zhao F
- Geng XW
- Xu KY
- Chen D
- Liu K
- Xing Y
- Liu W
- Wei S
journal: Front Psychiatry
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1140796
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of allopregnanolone-mediated γ-aminobutyric acid A receptor sensitivity in the pathogenesis of premenstrual dysphoric disorder: Toward precise targets for translational medicine and drug development.
**Authors:** Gao Q, Sun W, Wang YR, Li ZF, Zhao F, Geng XW, Xu KY, Chen D, Liu K, Xing Y, Liu W, Wei S
**Journal:** Front Psychiatry (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1140796](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1140796)

## Content

1. Front Psychiatry. 2023 Mar 2;14:1140796. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1140796. 
eCollection 2023.

Role of allopregnanolone-mediated γ-aminobutyric acid A receptor sensitivity in 
the pathogenesis of premenstrual dysphoric disorder: Toward precise targets for 
translational medicine and drug development.

Gao Q(1)(2)(3), Sun W(1)(2), Wang YR(1)(2)(3), Li ZF(1)(2), Zhao F(1)(2), Geng 
XW(1)(2)(3), Xu KY(1), Chen D(1), Liu K(1)(2)(3), Xing Y(1)(2)(3), Liu W(4), Wei 
S(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Experimental Center, Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 
Jinan, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Traditional Chinese Medicine Classical Theory, Ministry of 
Education, Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan, China.
(3)Chinese Medicine and Brain Science Core Facility, Shandong University of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan, China.
(4)Department of Encephalopathy, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Shandong 
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan, China.

Premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) can be conceptualized as a disorder of 
suboptimal sensitivity to neuroactive steroid hormones. Its core symptoms 
(emotional instability, irritability, depression, and anxiety) are related to 
the increase of stress sensitivity due to the fluctuation of hormone level in 
luteal phase of the menstrual cycle. In this review, we describe the emotional 
regulatory effect of allopregnanolone (ALLO), and summarize the relationship 
between ALLO and γ-aminobutyric acid A (GABAA) receptor subunits based on rodent 
experiments and clinical observations. A rapid decrease in ALLO reduces the 
sensitivity of GABAA receptor, and reduces the chloride influx, hindered the 
inhibitory effect of GABAergic neurons on pyramidal neurons, and then increased 
the excitability of pyramidal neurons, resulting in PMDD-like behavior. Finally, 
we discuss in depth the treatment of PMDD with targeted GABAA receptors, hoping 
to find a precise target for drug development and subsequent clinical 
application. In conclusion, PMDD pathophysiology is rooted in GABAA receptor 
sensitivity changes caused by rapid changes in ALLO levels. Targeting GABAA 
receptors may alleviate the occurrence of PMDD.

Copyright © 2023 Gao, Sun, Wang, Li, Zhao, Geng, Xu, Chen, Liu, Xing, Liu and 
Wei.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1140796
PMCID: PMC10017536
PMID: 36937732

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.