---
reference_id: "PMID:35123444"
title: "An innovative approach in monitoring oral cholera vaccination campaign: integration of a between-round survey."
authors:
- Ateudjieu J
- Yakum MN
- Goura AP
- Tembei Ayok M
- Guenou E
- Kangmo Sielinou CB
- Kiadjieu FF
- Tsafack M
- Douanla Koutio IM
- Tchio-Nighie KH
- Tchokomeni H
- Ntsekendio PN
- Sack DA
journal: BMC Public Health
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s12889-022-12610-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An innovative approach in monitoring oral cholera vaccination campaign: integration of a between-round survey.
**Authors:** Ateudjieu J, Yakum MN, Goura AP, Tembei Ayok M, Guenou E, Kangmo Sielinou CB, Kiadjieu FF, Tsafack M, Douanla Koutio IM, Tchio-Nighie KH, Tchokomeni H, Ntsekendio PN, Sack DA
**Journal:** BMC Public Health (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12889-022-12610-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-022-12610-5)

## Content

1. BMC Public Health. 2022 Feb 5;22(1):238. doi: 10.1186/s12889-022-12610-5.

An innovative approach in monitoring oral cholera vaccination campaign: 
integration of a between-round survey.

Ateudjieu J(1)(2)(3), Yakum MN(1), Goura AP(1), Tembei Ayok M(1), Guenou 
E(1)(4), Kangmo Sielinou CB(1), Kiadjieu FF(1), Tsafack M(1), Douanla Koutio 
IM(1), Tchio-Nighie KH(5)(6), Tchokomeni H(1), Ntsekendio PN(1)(2), Sack DA(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Research, M.A. SANTE (Meilleur Accès aux soins de 
Santé), Yaounde, Cameroon.
(2)Department of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
University of Dschang, Dschang, Cameroon.
(3)Division of Health Operations Research, Ministry of Public Health, Yaoundé, 
Cameroon.
(4)Faculty of Sciences, University of Buea, Buea, Cameroon.
(5)Department of Health Research, M.A. SANTE (Meilleur Accès aux soins de 
Santé), Yaounde, Cameroon. ktchio@masante-cam.org.
(6)Department of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
University of Dschang, Dschang, Cameroon. ktchio@masante-cam.org.
(7)Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, USA.

BACKGROUND: Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) is essential in ensuring 
population's access to immunization. Surveys are part of this M&E approach but 
its timing limits the use of its results to improve the coverage of the 
evaluated campaign. An oral cholera vaccination campaign was organized in a 
health district of the Far North region of Cameroon and involved an innovative 
M&E approach. The aim of this project was to assess the feasibility and effect 
of using recommendations of a community-based immunization and communication 
coverage survey conducted after the first round of an OCV campaign on the 
coverage of the second-round of the campaign.
METHODS: Two community-based surveys were included in the M&E plan and conducted 
at the end of each of the campaign rounds. Data were collected by trained and 
closely supervised surveyors and reported using smartphones. Key results of the 
first-round survey were disseminated to campaign implementing team prior to the 
second round. The two rounds of the pre-emptive campaign were organized by the 
Cameroon Ministry of Public Health and partners with a two-week interval in the 
Mogode Health District of the Far North region of Cameroon in May and June 2017.
RESULTS: Of 120 targeted clusters, 119 (99.1%) and 117 (97.5%) were reached for 
the first and second rounds respectively. Among the Mogode population eligible 
for vaccination, the immunization coverage based on evidence (card or finger 
mark) were estimated at 81.0% in the first round and increased to 88.8% in the 
second round (X2=69.0 and p <0.00). For the second round, we estimated 80.1% and 
4.3% of persons who were administered 2 doses and 1 dose of OCV with evidence 
respectively, and 3.8% of persons who have not been vaccinated. The distribution 
of campaign communication coverage per health area was shared with the campaign 
coordination team for better planning of the second round campaign activities.
CONCLUSIONS: It is feasible to plan and implement coverage survey after first 
round OCV campaign and use its results for the better planning of the second 
round. For the present study, this is associated to the improvement of OCV 
coverage in the second-round vaccination. If this is persistent in other 
contexts, it may apply to improve coverage of any health campaign that is 
organized in more than one round.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12889-022-12610-5
PMCID: PMC8817499
PMID: 35123444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.