---
reference_id: "PMID:38165367"
title: Sensitivity and Specificity of the Boston Criteria Version 2.0 for the Diagnosis of Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy in a Community-Based Sample.
authors:
- Zanon Zotin MC
- Makkinejad N
- Schneider JA
- Arfanakis K
- Charidimou A
- Greenberg SM
- van Veluw SJ
journal: Neurology
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000207940
keywords:
- Humans
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy/diagnostic imaging
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- Alzheimer Disease
- Aging
- Cerebral Hemorrhage
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sensitivity and Specificity of the Boston Criteria Version 2.0 for the Diagnosis of Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy in a Community-Based Sample.
**Authors:** Zanon Zotin MC, Makkinejad N, Schneider JA, Arfanakis K, Charidimou A, Greenberg SM, van Veluw SJ
**Journal:** Neurology (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000207940](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000207940)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2024 Jan 9;102(1):e207940. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000207940. Epub 
2023 Dec 13.

Sensitivity and Specificity of the Boston Criteria Version 2.0 for the Diagnosis 
of Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy in a Community-Based Sample.

Zanon Zotin MC(1), Makkinejad N(1), Schneider JA(1), Arfanakis K(1), Charidimou 
A(1), Greenberg SM(1), van Veluw SJ(1).

Author information:
(1)From the J. Philip Kistler Stroke Research Center (M.C.Z.Z., N.M., A.C., 
S.M.G., S.J.V.), Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston; Center for Imaging Sciences and Medical Physics 
(M.C.Z.Z.), Department of Medical Imaging, Hematology and Clinical Oncology, 
Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of São Paulo, Brazil; Rush Alzheimer's 
Disease Center (J.A.S., K.A.), Rush University Medical Center; and Department of 
Biomedical Engineering (K.A.), Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: The Boston criteria are a set of clinical and 
neuroimaging features that enable accurate diagnosis of cerebral amyloid 
angiopathy (CAA) without invasive methods such as brain biopsies or autopsy. The 
last updates to the Boston criteria, named version 2.0, were recently released 
and incorporated new nonhemorrhagic MRI features. These criteria have been 
validated in symptomatic samples, with improved diagnostic yield. We set out to 
investigate the accuracy of the Boston criteria v2.0 for the diagnosis of CAA in 
a community-based sample.
METHODS: Participants were recruited from longitudinal clinical-pathologic 
studies of aging conducted at the Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center in Chicago: 
the Religious Orders Study and the Rush Memory and Aging Project. Deceased 
participants with in vivo 3T MRI and detailed pathologic data available were 
included in the analysis. We compared the diagnostic yield of the current and 
earlier versions of the Boston criteria in our sample. Among those classified as 
probable CAA according to the Boston criteria v2.0, we investigated the ability 
of each neuroimaging marker to distinguish between false-positive and 
true-positive cases.
RESULTS: In total, 134 individuals were included in the study (mean age = 82.4 ± 
6.0 years; 69.4% F), and 49 of them were considered pathology-proven definite 
cases with CAA (mean age = 82.9 ± 6.0 years; 63.3% F). The Boston criteria 
versions 1.0 and 1.5 yielded similar sensitivity (26.5%, both), specificity 
(90.6% and 89.4%, respectively), and predictive values (negative: 68.1% and 
67.9%; positive: 61.9% and 59.1%, respectively). The recently released Boston 
criteria v2.0 offered higher sensitivity (38.8%) and slightly lower specificity 
(83.5%). Among those classified as probable CAA (v2.0), pathology-proven 
true-positive cases had higher numbers of strictly cortical lobar microbleeds 
compared with false-positive cases (p = 0.004).
DISCUSSION: Similar to findings from symptomatic samples, the inclusion of 
nonhemorrhagic neuroimaging markers in the updated Boston criteria offered a 
12.3% gain in sensitivity among community-dwelling individuals, at the expense 
of a 5.9% drop in specificity. In cases with probable CAA, the cortical location 
of microbleeds may represent a promising distinguishing feature between 
true-positive and false-positive cases. Despite its improved performance, the 
diagnostic sensitivity of the updated criteria in a community-based sample 
remains limited.
CLASSIFICATION OF EVIDENCE: This study provides Class II evidence that the 
Boston criteria v2.0 accurately distinguishes people with CAA from those without 
CAA.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000207940
PMCID: PMC10834125
PMID: 38165367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no relevant disclosures. Go 
to Neurology.org/N for full disclosures.