---
reference_id: "PMID:32484281"
title: Epigenetics and genomics in Klinefelter syndrome.
authors:
- Skakkebaek A
- Viuff M
- Nielsen MM
- Gravholt CH
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31802
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epigenetics and genomics in Klinefelter syndrome.
**Authors:** Skakkebaek A, Viuff M, Nielsen MM, Gravholt CH
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.31802](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.31802)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2020 Jun;184(2):216-225. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.c.31802. Epub 2020 Jun 2.

Epigenetics and genomics in Klinefelter syndrome.

Skakkebaek A(1)(2), Viuff M(2)(3), Nielsen MM(3), Gravholt CH(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus N, 
Denmark.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine, Aarhus University 
Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus N, 
Denmark.

Since the first description of Klinefelter syndrome (KS) was published in 1942 
in The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology, large inter-individual variability in 
the phenotypic presentation has been demonstrated. However, our understanding of 
the global impact of the additional X chromosome on the genome remains an 
enigma. Evidence from the existing literature of KS indicates that not just one 
single genetic mechanism can explain the phenotype and the variable 
expressivity, but several mechanisms may be at play concurrently. In this 
review, we describe different genetic mechanisms and recent advances in the 
understanding of the genome, epigenome, and transcriptome of KS and the link to 
the phenotype and clinical heterogeneity. Future studies are needed to unite 
clinical data, genomic data, and basic research attempting to understand the 
genetics behind KS. Unraveling the genetics of KS will be of clinical relevance 
as it may enable the use of polygenic risk scores to predict future disease 
susceptibility and enable clinical risk stratification of KS patients in the 
future.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31802
PMID: 32484281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]