---
reference_id: "PMID:25114012"
title: Bacterial shedding in household contacts of cholera patients in Dhaka, Bangladesh.
authors:
- Weil AA
- Begum Y
- Chowdhury F
- Khan AI
- Leung DT
- LaRocque RC
- Charles RC
- Ryan ET
- Calderwood SB
- Qadri F
- Harris JB
journal: Am J Trop Med Hyg
year: '2014'
doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.14-0095
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bacterial shedding in household contacts of cholera patients in Dhaka, Bangladesh.
**Authors:** Weil AA, Begum Y, Chowdhury F, Khan AI, Leung DT, LaRocque RC, Charles RC, Ryan ET, Calderwood SB, Qadri F, Harris JB
**Journal:** Am J Trop Med Hyg (2014)
**DOI:** [10.4269/ajtmh.14-0095](https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.14-0095)

## Content

1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2014 Oct;91(4):738-42. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.14-0095. Epub
2014  Aug 11.

Bacterial shedding in household contacts of cholera patients in Dhaka, 
Bangladesh.

Weil AA(1), Begum Y(1), Chowdhury F(1), Khan AI(1), Leung DT(1), LaRocque RC(1), 
Charles RC(1), Ryan ET(1), Calderwood SB(1), Qadri F(1), Harris JB(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts; Department of Medicine, Department of Microbiology and 
Immunobiology, and Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts; Centre for Vaccine Sciences, International Centre for Diarrhoeal 
Disease Research, Bangladesh, Dhaka, Bangladesh; Department of Immunology and 
Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts; Department of Medicine, Department of Microbiology and 
Immunobiology, and Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts; Centre for Vaccine Sciences, International Centre for Diarrhoeal 
Disease Research, Bangladesh, Dhaka, Bangladesh; Department of Immunology and 
Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts 
jbharris@partners.org.

Multiple Vibrio cholerae infections within the same household are common. 
Household contacts of patients with cholera were observed with daily clinical 
assessments and collection of rectal swab cultures for nine days after 
presentation of the index case. During the follow-up period, 71 (24%) of 294 
household contacts developed a positive V. cholerae rectal swab, signifying 
bacterial shedding. The average length of bacterial shedding was 2.0 days (95% 
confidence interval 1.7-2.4). However, 16 (5%) of 294 contacts shed V. cholerae 
for ≥ 4 days. In a multivariate analysis, malnutrition was predictive of 
long-term shedding (odds ratio = 1.4, 95% confidence interval = 1.3-13, P = 
0.02). High rates of V. cholerae infection and bacterial shedding among 
household contacts of cholera patients represent an opportunity for intervention 
to reduce V. cholerae transmission.

© The American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.14-0095
PMCID: PMC4183396
PMID: 25114012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]