---
reference_id: "PMID:27467543"
title: "The role of local ablative therapy in oligometastatic non-small-cell lung cancer: hype or hope."
authors:
- Bansal P
- Rusthoven C
- Boumber Y
- Gan GN
journal: Future Oncol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.2217/fon-2016-0219
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of local ablative therapy in oligometastatic non-small-cell lung cancer: hype or hope.
**Authors:** Bansal P, Rusthoven C, Boumber Y, Gan GN
**Journal:** Future Oncol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.2217/fon-2016-0219](https://doi.org/10.2217/fon-2016-0219)

## Content

1. Future Oncol. 2016 Dec;12(23):2713-2727. doi: 10.2217/fon-2016-0219. Epub 2016
 Jul 28.

The role of local ablative therapy in oligometastatic non-small-cell lung 
cancer: hype or hope.

Bansal P(1)(2), Rusthoven C(3), Boumber Y(1)(4), Gan GN(1)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, University 
of New Mexico School of Medicine, University of New Mexico Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA.
(2)Hematology/Oncology Fellowship Program, University of New Mexico School of 
Medicine, University of New Mexico Comprehensive Cancer Center, Albuquerque, NM 
87131, USA.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, 
University of Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA.
(4)Cancer Genetics, Epigenetics & Genomics Research Program, University of New 
Mexico Comprehensive Cancer Center, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA.
(5)Section of Radiation Oncology, University of New Mexico Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA.
(6)Cancer Therapeutics: Technology, Discovery & Targeted Delivery Program, 
University of New Mexico Comprehensive Cancer Center, Albuquerque, NM 87131, 
USA.

In recent years, the emergence of the oligometastatic state has called into 
question whether patients found to have a limited or low metastatic tumor burden 
may benefit from locally ablative therapy (LAT). In the past two decades, 
stereotactic body radiation therapy has been increasingly used to safely deliver 
LAT and provide high local control in nonoperable non-small-cell lung cancer 
patients. Mostly retrospective analyses suggest that using LAT for 
oligometastatic disease in non-small-cell lung cancer offers excellent local 
control and may provide an improvement in progression-free survival. Any 
meaningful improvement in cancer-specific survival remains debatable. We examine 
the role of integrating LAT in this patient population and the rationale behind 
its use in combination with targeted therapy and immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.2217/fon-2016-0219
PMID: 27467543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]