---
reference_id: "PMID:21700266"
title: Using VAAST to identify an X-linked disorder resulting in lethality in male infants due to N-terminal acetyltransferase deficiency.
authors:
- Rope AF
- Wang K
- Evjenth R
- Xing J
- Johnston JJ
- Swensen JJ
- Johnson WE
- Moore B
- Huff CD
- Bird LM
- Carey JC
- Opitz JM
- Stevens CA
- Jiang T
- Schank C
- Fain HD
- Robison R
- Dalley B
- Chin S
- South ST
- Pysher TJ
- Jorde LB
- Hakonarson H
- Lillehaug JR
- Biesecker LG
- Yandell M
- Arnesen T
- Lyon GJ
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.05.017
keywords:
- Acetylation
- "Acetyltransferases/deficiency, genetics"
- "Chromosomes, Human, X/genetics"
- Exons
- "Genes, X-Linked"
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mutation
- N-Terminal Acetyltransferase A
- N-Terminal Acetyltransferase E
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Using VAAST to identify an X-linked disorder resulting in lethality in male infants due to N-terminal acetyltransferase deficiency.
**Authors:** Rope AF, Wang K, Evjenth R, Xing J, Johnston JJ, Swensen JJ, Johnson WE, Moore B, Huff CD, Bird LM, Carey JC, Opitz JM, Stevens CA, Jiang T, Schank C, Fain HD, Robison R, Dalley B, Chin S, South ST, Pysher TJ, Jorde LB, Hakonarson H, Lillehaug JR, Biesecker LG, Yandell M, Arnesen T, Lyon GJ
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.05.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.05.017)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Jul 15;89(1):28-43. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.05.017. Epub
 2011 Jun 23.

Using VAAST to identify an X-linked disorder resulting in lethality in male
infants due to N-terminal acetyltransferase deficiency.

Rope AF(1), Wang K, Evjenth R, Xing J, Johnston JJ, Swensen JJ, Johnson WE,
Moore B, Huff CD, Bird LM, Carey JC, Opitz JM, Stevens CA, Jiang T, Schank C,
Fain HD, Robison R, Dalley B, Chin S, South ST, Pysher TJ, Jorde LB, Hakonarson
H, Lillehaug JR, Biesecker LG, Yandell M, Arnesen T, Lyon GJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake
City, 84112, USA.

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Aug 12;89(2):345.

We have identified two families with a previously undescribed lethal X-linked
disorder of infancy; the disorder comprises a distinct combination of an aged
appearance, craniofacial anomalies, hypotonia, global developmental delays,
cryptorchidism, and cardiac arrhythmias. Using X chromosome exon sequencing and
a recently developed probabilistic algorithm aimed at discovering
disease-causing variants, we identified in one family a c.109T>C (p.Ser37Pro)
variant in NAA10, a gene encoding the catalytic subunit of the major human
N-terminal acetyltransferase (NAT). A parallel effort on a second unrelated
family converged on the same variant. The absence of this variant in controls,
the amino acid conservation of this region of the protein, the predicted
disruptive change, and the co-occurrence in two unrelated families with the same
rare disorder suggest that this is the pathogenic mutation. We confirmed this by
demonstrating a significantly impaired biochemical activity of the mutant
hNaa10p, and from this we conclude that a reduction in acetylation by hNaa10p
causes this disease. Here we provide evidence of a human genetic disorder
resulting from direct impairment of N-terminal acetylation, one of the most
common protein modifications in humans.

Copyright © 2011 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.05.017
PMCID: PMC3135802
PMID: 21700266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
