---
reference_id: "PMID:34573385"
title: "The Phenotypic Spectrum of Patients with PHARC Syndrome Due to Variants in ABHD12: An Ophthalmic Perspective."
authors:
- Nguyen XT
- Almushattat H
- Strubbe I
- Georgiou M
- Li CHZ
- van Schooneveld MJ
- Joniau I
- De Baere E
- Florijn RJ
- Bergen AA
- Hoyng CB
- Michaelides M
- Leroy BP
- Boon CJF
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/genes12091404
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Ataxia/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Belgium
- "Cataract/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Cohort Studies
- "Eye/pathology, physiopathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Monoacylglycerol Lipases/genetics
- Netherlands
- Phenotype
- "Polyneuropathies/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Pseudophakia/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Retrospective Studies
- United Kingdom
- Visual Acuity/physiology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Phenotypic Spectrum of Patients with PHARC Syndrome Due to Variants in ABHD12: An Ophthalmic Perspective.
**Authors:** Nguyen XT, Almushattat H, Strubbe I, Georgiou M, Li CHZ, van Schooneveld MJ, Joniau I, De Baere E, Florijn RJ, Bergen AA, Hoyng CB, Michaelides M, Leroy BP, Boon CJF
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes12091404](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes12091404)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Sep 11;12(9):1404. doi: 10.3390/genes12091404.

The Phenotypic Spectrum of Patients with PHARC Syndrome Due to Variants in 
ABHD12: An Ophthalmic Perspective.

Nguyen XT(1)(2), Almushattat H(2), Strubbe I(3), Georgiou M(4)(5), Li CHZ(6)(7), 
van Schooneveld MJ(2), Joniau I(3), De Baere E(8), Florijn RJ(9), Bergen 
AA(9)(10), Hoyng CB(6)(7), Michaelides M(4)(5), Leroy BP(3)(8)(11)(12), Boon 
CJF(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Leiden University Medical Center, 2333 ZA 
Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Amsterdam UMC, Academic Medical Center, 1105 AZ 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital, 
Corneel Heymanslaan 10, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.
(4)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London EC1V 9EL, 
UK.
(5)Moorfields Eye Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, 162 City Road, London EC1V 2PD, 
UK.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, Radboud University Medical Center, 6525 GA 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(7)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, 6525 HR Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.
(8)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital, 
9000 Ghent, Belgium.
(9)Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam UMC, Academic Medical Center, 1105 
AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(10)Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, Institute of the Royal Netherlands 
Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW), 1105 BA Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(11)Division of Ophthalmology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(12)Center for Cellular & Molecular Therapeutics, The Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

This study investigated the phenotypic spectrum of PHARC (polyneuropathy, 
hearing loss, ataxia, retinitis pigmentosa and early-onset cataract) syndrome 
caused by biallelic variants in the ABHD12 gene. A total of 15 patients from 12 
different families were included, with a mean age of 36.7 years (standard 
deviation [SD] ± 11.0; range from 17.5 to 53.9) at the most recent examination. 
The presence and onset of neurological, audiological and ophthalmic symptoms 
were variable, with no evident order of symptom appearance. The mean 
best-corrected visual acuity was 1.1 logMAR (SD ± 0.9; range from 0.1 to 2.8; 
equivalent to 20/250 Snellen) and showed a trend of progressive decline. 
Different types of cataract were observed in 13 out of 15 patients (87%), which 
also included congenital forms of cataract. Fundus examination revealed macular 
involvement in all patients, ranging from alterations of the retinal pigment 
epithelium to macular atrophy. Intraretinal spicular hyperpigmentation was 
observed in 7 out of 15 patients (47%). From an ophthalmic perspective, clinical 
manifestations in patients with PHARC demonstrate variability with regard to 
their onset and severity. Given the variable nature of PHARC, an early 
multidisciplinary assessment is recommended to assess disease severity.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12091404
PMCID: PMC8467809
PMID: 34573385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors has any conflicting 
interests to disclose. The funders had no role in the design of the study; in 
the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the 
manuscript, or in the decision to publish the results.