---
reference_id: "PMID:28768552"
title: A mild form of adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency in absence of typical brain MRI features diagnosed by whole exome sequencing.
authors:
- Macchiaiolo M
- Barresi S
- Cecconi F
- Zanni G
- Niceta M
- Bellacchio E
- Lazzarino G
- Amorini AM
- Bertini ES
- Rizza S
- Contardi B
- Tartaglia M
- Bartuli A
journal: Ital J Pediatr
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s13052-017-0383-7
keywords:
- "Adenylosuccinate Lyase/deficiency, genetics"
- "Autistic Disorder/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Child
- "Developmental Disabilities/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- "Epilepsy/diagnosis, etiology"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- "Purine-Pyrimidine Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Rare Diseases
- Severity of Illness Index
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A mild form of adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency in absence of typical brain MRI features diagnosed by whole exome sequencing.
**Authors:** Macchiaiolo M, Barresi S, Cecconi F, Zanni G, Niceta M, Bellacchio E, Lazzarino G, Amorini AM, Bertini ES, Rizza S, Contardi B, Tartaglia M, Bartuli A
**Journal:** Ital J Pediatr (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13052-017-0383-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13052-017-0383-7)

## Content

1. Ital J Pediatr. 2017 Aug 2;43(1):65. doi: 10.1186/s13052-017-0383-7.

A mild form of adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency in absence of typical brain MRI
features diagnosed by whole exome sequencing.

Macchiaiolo M(1), Barresi S(2), Cecconi F(3), Zanni G(2), Niceta M(2),
Bellacchio E(2), Lazzarino G(4), Amorini AM(4), Bertini ES(2), Rizza S(3),
Contardi B(5), Tartaglia M(2), Bartuli A(2).

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Rare Diseases, Research Division, Bambino Gesù Children's
Hospital, Piazza Sant'Onofrio 4, 00164, Rome, Italy.
marina.macchiaiolo@opbg.net.
(2)Genetics and Rare Diseases, Research Division, Bambino Gesù Children's
Hospital, Piazza Sant'Onofrio 4, 00164, Rome, Italy.
(3)Unit of Cell Stress and Survival Danish Cancer Society Research Center,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Institute of Biochemistry and Clinical Biochemistry, Catholic University of
Rome, Rome, Italy.
(5)Pharmacist Mother of a Patient affected by Adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency,
Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Adenylosuccinate lyase (ADSL) deficiency is a defect of purine
metabolism affecting purinosome assembly and reducing metabolite fluxes through
purine de novo synthesis and purine nucleotide recycling pathways. The disorder
shows a wide spectrum of symptoms from slowly to rapidly progressing forms. The
most severe form is characterized by neonatal encephalopathy, absence of
spontaneous movement, respiratory failure, intractable seizures, and early death
within the first weeks of life. More commonly, ADSL presents purely neurologic
clinical picture characterized by severe psychomotor retardation, microcephaly,
early onset of seizures, and autistic features (type I) or a more slowly
progressing form with later onset, and major features including slight to
moderate psychomotor retardation, and transient contact disturbances (type II).
Diagnostic markers are the presence of succinylaminoimidazole carboxamide
riboside (SAICAr) and succinyladenosine (SAdo) in extracellular fluids. ADSL is
a rare disorder, although its prevalence remains unknown. Of note, the wide
range of essentially nonspecific manifestations and lack of awareness of the
condition often prevent diagnosis.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present here the case of particularly mild, late onset
ADSL that has been unsuccessfully investigated until whole exome sequencing
(WES) was performed.
CONCLUSIONS: Besides emphasizing the valuable diagnostic value of WES, this
report provides new data further documenting the relatively wide clinical
manifestation of ADSL.

DOI: 10.1186/s13052-017-0383-7
PMCID: PMC5541734
PMID: 28768552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: No
ethics approval was required for the type of report. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION:
Informed consent for publication was required and obtained from the parents.
COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
