---
reference_id: "PMID:40776598"
title: Outcomes After Tonsillectomy in Children With Angelman Syndrome.
authors:
- Chopra M
- Siu JM
- Sell E
- Summers J
- Chiang J
- Propst EJ
- Pankiv E
- Wolter NE
journal: J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1177/19160216251364759
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcomes After Tonsillectomy in Children With Angelman Syndrome.
**Authors:** Chopra M, Siu JM, Sell E, Summers J, Chiang J, Propst EJ, Pankiv E, Wolter NE
**Journal:** J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1177/19160216251364759](https://doi.org/10.1177/19160216251364759)

## Content

1. J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2025 Jan-Dec;54:19160216251364759. doi: 
10.1177/19160216251364759. Epub 2025 Aug 8.

Outcomes After Tonsillectomy in Children With Angelman Syndrome.

Chopra M(1), Siu JM(1), Sell E(2), Summers J(3), Chiang J(4), Propst EJ(1), 
Pankiv E(5), Wolter NE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Division of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, University of 
Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Paediatrics, The Hospital for 
Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(5)Department of Anesthesia and Pain Medicine, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

ImportanceAngelman syndrome is a rare genetic disorder characterized by 
developmental delay, sleep disturbances, and a happy demeanor. Tonsillectomies 
are common procedures for individuals with Angelman syndrome, and their 
postoperative recovery may be complicated by challenging pain assessments, 
respiratory complications, or feeding difficulties. Inappropriate laughing may 
mask perioperative pain and anxiety.ObjectiveThe objective of this study is to 
review postoperative outcomes and complications of children with Angelman 
syndrome undergoing tonsillectomy.Methods (Design, Setting, Participants, 
Intervention, Measures)We conducted a retrospective review of patients with 
Angelman syndrome undergoing tonsillectomies from 2000 to 2024 in a quaternary 
pediatric hospital. Demographic, clinical, and surgical outcome variables were 
collected.ResultsTwelve children with Angelman syndrome underwent tonsillectomy: 
7 for sleep-disordered breathing, 4 for sialorrhea, and 1 for recurrent 
tonsillitis. Median (IQR) duration of stay was 4.0 (3.0-5.3) days. The most 
common reason for prolonged hospital stay was inadequate oral intake. Nine 
(75.0%) children experienced postoperative complications, most frequently 
pooling of secretions and oxygen desaturations. Three children (25.0%) 
experienced severe postoperative complications, including 1 opioid overdose, 1 
respiratory distress, and 1 aspiration pneumonia. Two patients were readmitted 
to the hospital: 1 for irregular breathing and poor pain control, and 1 for 
epistaxis.ConclusionThe postoperative course following tonsillectomy in children 
with Angelman syndrome can be complicated by a prolonged recovery, inadequate 
pain control, opioid toxicity, respiratory complications, and poor oral intake. 
Caregiver input on pain behavior is critical to develop an effective 
postoperative management strategy.RelevanceBased on our results and a literature 
review, we have created recommendations for post-tonsillectomy care in children 
with Angelman syndrome.

DOI: 10.1177/19160216251364759
PMCID: PMC12334819
PMID: 40776598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting InterestsThe 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.