---
reference_id: "PMID:25159007"
title: "Lung hyperinflation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: mechanisms, clinical implications and treatment."
authors:
- Langer D
- Ciavaglia CE
- Neder JA
- Webb KA
- O'Donnell DE
journal: Expert Rev Respir Med
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1586/17476348.2014.949676
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lung hyperinflation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: mechanisms, clinical implications and treatment.
**Authors:** Langer D, Ciavaglia CE, Neder JA, Webb KA, O'Donnell DE
**Journal:** Expert Rev Respir Med (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1586/17476348.2014.949676](https://doi.org/10.1586/17476348.2014.949676)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2014 Dec;8(6):731-49. doi:
10.1586/17476348.2014.949676.  Epub 2014 Aug 27.

Lung hyperinflation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: mechanisms, 
clinical implications and treatment.

Langer D(1), Ciavaglia CE, Neder JA, Webb KA, O'Donnell DE.

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Investigation Unit, Queen's University & Kingston General 
Hospital, 102 Stuart Street, Kingston, ON K7L 2V6, Canada.

Lung hyperinflation is highly prevalent in patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease and occurs across the continuum of the disease. A growing body 
of evidence suggests that lung hyperinflation contributes to dyspnea and 
activity limitation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and is an important 
independent risk factor for mortality. In this review, we will summarize the 
recent literature on pathogenesis and clinical implications of lung 
hyperinflation. We will outline the contribution of lung hyperinflation to 
exercise limitation and discuss its impact on symptoms and physical activity. 
Finally, we will examine the physiological rationale and efficacy of selected 
pharmacological and non-pharmacological 'lung deflating' interventions aimed at 
improving symptoms and physical functioning.

DOI: 10.1586/17476348.2014.949676
PMID: 25159007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]