---
reference_id: "PMID:40426774"
title: "WT1-Related Nephropathy in a Phenotypically Female Child: A Case of Clinical and Genetic Discordance."
authors:
- Costin M
- Cinteză EE
- Croitoru A
- Popa IL
- Stanciu A
- Popescu I
- Petre N
- Olivotto B
- Căpitănescu A
- Resceanu S
- Cotfasa E
- Bologa C
journal: Children (Basel)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/children12050595
content_type: abstract_only
---

# WT1-Related Nephropathy in a Phenotypically Female Child: A Case of Clinical and Genetic Discordance.
**Authors:** Costin M, Cinteză EE, Croitoru A, Popa IL, Stanciu A, Popescu I, Petre N, Olivotto B, Căpitănescu A, Resceanu S, Cotfasa E, Bologa C
**Journal:** Children (Basel) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/children12050595](https://doi.org/10.3390/children12050595)

## Content

1. Children (Basel). 2025 May 2;12(5):595. doi: 10.3390/children12050595.

WT1-Related Nephropathy in a Phenotypically Female Child: A Case of Clinical and 
Genetic Discordance.

Costin M(1)(2), Cinteză EE(1)(3), Croitoru A(1)(2), Popa IL(1)(2), Stanciu A(2), 
Popescu I(4), Petre N(5), Olivotto B(6), Căpitănescu A(6), Resceanu S(2), 
Cotfasa E(2), Bologa C(2).

Author information:
(1)"Carol Davila" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 050474 Bucharest, 
Romania.
(2)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, "M.S. Curie" Emergency Clinical Hospital 
for Children, 077120 Bucharest, Romania.
(3)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, "M.S. Curie" Emergency Clinical Hospital 
for Children, 077120 Bucharest, Romania.
(4)Department of Pediatric Radiology, "M.S. Curie" Emergency Clinical Hospital 
for Children, 077120 Bucharest, Romania.
(5)Clinical Hospital of Nephrology "Dr. Carol Davila", 010731 Bucharest, 
Romania.
(6)Department of Dialysis, "M.S. Curie" Emergency Clinical Hospital for 
Children, 077120 Bucharest, Romania.

WT1-related disorders comprise a spectrum of conditions resulting from mutations 
or deletions of the WT1 gene. Alteration in this gene have been associated with 
many syndromes, including WAGR syndrome, Denys-Drash syndrome (DDS), Frasier 
syndrome (FS) and Meacham syndrome. We present the case of an 8-year-old 
phenotypically female child with symptoms of end-stage kidney disease (ESKD), 
hypertension and anasarca, requiring renal replacement therapy. This case is 
distinctive due to its unusual onset, the presence of thrombotic microangiopathy 
(TMA), and the detection of a heterozygous missense mutation in the WT1 gene 
(c.1298G>A, p.Cys433Tyr) located in exon 8, in association with a 46 XY 
karyotype. The kidney biopsy indicated advanced focal segmental 
glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) with characteristics of TMA, implying a possible 
alternative diagnosis. In light of the heightened malignancy risk, the patient 
had preventative laparoscopic gonadectomy, which revealed rudimentary testicular 
tissues. The identified genotype points toward a diagnosis of DDS. However, the 
clinical presentation is more consistent with features typically seen in FS. 
This discrepancy highlights the significant phenotypic and genotypic overlap 
between the two syndromes. As a result, there is ongoing discussion in the 
literature about whether DDS and FS should be considered distinct clinical 
entities or rather variable expressions along a shared disease spectrum.

DOI: 10.3390/children12050595
PMCID: PMC12110725
PMID: 40426774

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.