---
reference_id: "PMID:38731922"
title: "Autoimmunity, New Potential Biomarkers and the Thyroid Gland-The Perspective of Hashimoto's Thyroiditis and Its Treatment."
authors:
- Tywanek E
- Michalak A
- Świrska J
- Zwolak A
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25094703
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmunity, New Potential Biomarkers and the Thyroid Gland-The Perspective of Hashimoto's Thyroiditis and Its Treatment.
**Authors:** Tywanek E, Michalak A, Świrska J, Zwolak A
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25094703](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25094703)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Apr 26;25(9):4703. doi: 10.3390/ijms25094703.

Autoimmunity, New Potential Biomarkers and the Thyroid Gland-The Perspective of 
Hashimoto's Thyroiditis and Its Treatment.

Tywanek E(1)(2)(3), Michalak A(4), Świrska J(3), Zwolak A(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Internal Medicine in Nursing, Medical 
University of Lublin, Witold Chodźki Street 7, 20-093 Lublin, Poland.
(2)Doctoral School, Medical University of Lublin, 20-093 Lublin, Poland.
(3)Endocrinology Department with Nuclear Medicine Department, Center of Oncology 
of the Lublin Region St. Jana z Dukli, Kazimierz Jaczewski Street 7, 20-090 
Lublin, Poland.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, Medical University of Lublin, Poland, 
Jaczewski Street 8, 20-954 Lublin, Poland.

Autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD) is the most common organic specific illness of 
the thyroid gland. It may manifest as the overproduction or the decline of 
thyroxine and triiodothyronine. Hyperthyroidism develops due to the 
overproduction of hormones as an answer to the presence of stimulatory 
antibodies against the TSH receptor. Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT) is generally 
characterized by the presence of thyroid peroxidase and thyroglobulin 
antibodies, with a concomitant infiltration of lymphocytes in the thyroid. Due 
to the progressive destruction of cells, AITD can lead to subclinical or overt 
hypothyroidism. Pathophysiology of AITD is extremely complicated and still not 
fully understood, with genetic, environmental and epigenetic factors involved in 
its development. Due to increasing incidence and social awareness of this 
pathology, there is an urgent need to expand the background concerning AITD. A 
growing body of evidence suggests possible ways of treatment apart from 
traditional approaches. Simultaneously, the role of potential new biomarkers in 
the diagnosis and monitoring of AITD has been highlighted recently, too. 
Therefore, we decided to review therapeutic trends in the course of AITD based 
on its pathophysiological mechanisms, mainly focusing on HT. Another aim was to 
summarize the state of knowledge regarding the role of new biomarkers in this 
condition.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25094703
PMCID: PMC11083198
PMID: 38731922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.