---
reference_id: "PMID:41423785"
title: Revisiting the impact of BRCA1 pathogenic variants on the aggressiveness of prostate cancer.
authors:
- Sasagawa H
- Narita S
- Matsuda K
- Kosaka T
- Momozawa Y
journal: JNCI Cancer Spectr
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1093/jncics/pkaf118
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- "Prostatic Neoplasms/genetics, pathology, blood, mortality"
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- Prostate-Specific Antigen/blood
- BRCA1 Protein/genetics
- Neoplasm Grading
- Early Detection of Cancer
- Heterozygote
- "Genes, BRCA1"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Revisiting the impact of BRCA1 pathogenic variants on the aggressiveness of prostate cancer.
**Authors:** Sasagawa H, Narita S, Matsuda K, Kosaka T, Momozawa Y
**Journal:** JNCI Cancer Spectr (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jncics/pkaf118](https://doi.org/10.1093/jncics/pkaf118)

## Content

1. JNCI Cancer Spectr. 2026 Jan 9;10(1):pkaf118. doi: 10.1093/jncics/pkaf118.

Revisiting the impact of BRCA1 pathogenic variants on the aggressiveness of
prostate cancer.

Sasagawa H(1)(2), Narita S(2), Matsuda K(3), Kosaka T(4), Momozawa Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Genotyping Development, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences, Yokohama, Japan.
(2)Department of Urology, Akita University Graduate School of Medicine, Akita,
Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Clinical Genome Sequencing, Department of Computational Biology
and Medical Sciences, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Urology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

BRCA1 pathogenic variants are associated with a lower risk of developing
prostate cancer than BRCA2, but aggressiveness remains unclear. Therefore,
screening criteria are insufficiently established. Here, we reanalyzed the
impact of BRCA1 pathogenic variants on aggressiveness using 11 300 prostate
cancer patients, adjusting for age and area. The proportion of aggressive
prostate cancer was higher in BRCA1 carriers (86.7%) than in noncarriers (61.1%)
(odds ratio = 4.87; 95% confidence interval = 1.05 to 22.60). The proportion of
high prostate-specific antigen levels was higher in BRCA1 carriers (66.7%) than
in noncarriers (27.9%) (P = 7.61 × 10-3). BRCA1 carriers had a worse tendency
than noncarriers for T classification (T3-4: BRCA1, 36.4%; noncarriers, 23.2%)
and Gleason score (GS8-10: BRCA1, 53.3%; noncarriers, 31.0%). Moreover, we
observed the first case of BRCA1-related aggressive prostate cancer showing
long-term survival through early detection and multidisciplinary treatment.
These results suggest that recommendations for early prostate cancer screening
might need to be reconsidered for BRCA1 carriers.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/jncics/pkaf118
PMCID: PMC12803783
PMID: 41423785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.
