---
reference_id: "PMID:38235884"
title: Holt-Oram syndrome.
authors:
- Skwarek-Dziekanowska A
- Wójtowicz-Ściślak A
- Sobieszek G
journal: Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.26355/eurrev_202401_34921
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Holt-Oram syndrome.
**Authors:** Skwarek-Dziekanowska A, Wójtowicz-Ściślak A, Sobieszek G
**Journal:** Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.26355/eurrev_202401_34921](https://doi.org/10.26355/eurrev_202401_34921)

## Content

1. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2024 Jan;28(1):336-341. doi: 
10.26355/eurrev_202401_34921.

Holt-Oram syndrome.

Skwarek-Dziekanowska A(1), Wójtowicz-Ściślak A, Sobieszek G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, 1st Military Clinical Hospital with the Outpatient 
Clinic, Lublin, Poland. anetask@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is a rare genetic illness, which concerns 
disturbances in the appearance of the upper limbs, congenital heart 
malformations, and cardiac conduction diseases. HOS usually requires the 
implantation of a pacemaker, because of cardiac conduction disturbances.
CASE REPORT: We present the case of a patient with HOS qualified for pacemaker 
implantation due to overt bradycardia. To prevent the development of heart 
failure in the future, the His-bundle pacing technique was used. The 
implantation was successful. In the control, after one year, the man remains in 
good condition. The pacing was over 90%, and the left ventricular ejection 
fraction (LVEF) was stable (60%).
CONCLUSIONS: So far, there are no reports on which methods of stimulation are 
required when it comes to patients with HOS. His-bundle pacing technique is a 
new type of physiological pacing, which can avoid heart failure.

DOI: 10.26355/eurrev_202401_34921
PMID: 38235884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]