---
reference_id: "PMID:30619331"
title: How Should We Classify Kawasaki Disease?
authors:
- Marrani E
- Burns JC
- Cimaz R
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02974
content_type: abstract_only
---

# How Should We Classify Kawasaki Disease?
**Authors:** Marrani E, Burns JC, Cimaz R
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2018.02974](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2018.02974)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2018 Dec 14;9:2974. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02974. eCollection 
2018.

How Should We Classify Kawasaki Disease?

Marrani E(1), Burns JC(2), Cimaz R(1).

Author information:
(1)Rheumatology Unit, Department of Neurosciences, Psychology, Drug Research and 
Child Health, Meyer Children's Hospital, University of Florence, Florence, 
Italy.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Kawasaki Disease Research Center, Rady Children's 
Hospital, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA, United States.

The exact classification of Kawasaki disease (KD) has been debated. Infectious 
disease specialists have claimed it as an infection with a classic immune 
responses to an as yet unidentified pathogen that localizes to the coronary 
arteries. Others have favored an autoreactive hypothesis that KD is triggered by 
an antigen that shares homology with structures in the vascular wall, and 
molecular mimicry resulting in an immune response directed to that tissue. 
Rheumatologists have classified it as a systemic vasculitis, while some 
immunologists have stressed the robust nature of the innate immune response that 
causes both systemic inflammation as well as damage to the coronary arterial 
wall and questioned whether KD falls within the spectrum of autoinflammatory 
diseases. This review will describe the evidences available up to now regarding 
these hypotheses.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02974
PMCID: PMC6302019
PMID: 30619331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]