---
reference_id: "PMID:36701843"
title: Clinical Significance of bZIP In-Frame CEBPA-Mutated Normal Karyotype Acute Myeloid Leukemia.
authors:
- Ahn SY
- Kim T
- Kim M
- Song GY
- Jung SH
- Yang DH
- Lee JJ
- Kim MY
- Jung CW
- Jang JH
- Kim HJ
- Moon JH
- Sohn SK
- Won JH
- Kim SH
- Kim HJ
- Ahn JS
- Kim DDH
journal: Cancer Res Treat
year: '2023'
doi: 10.4143/crt.2022.1407
keywords:
- Humans
- CCAAT-Enhancer-Binding Protein-alpha/genetics
- Clinical Relevance
- Disease-Free Survival
- Nucleophosmin
- "Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute/genetics, therapy"
- Mutation
- Prognosis
- Karyotype
- CCAAT-Enhancer-Binding Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Significance of bZIP In-Frame CEBPA-Mutated Normal Karyotype Acute Myeloid Leukemia.
**Authors:** Ahn SY, Kim T, Kim M, Song GY, Jung SH, Yang DH, Lee JJ, Kim MY, Jung CW, Jang JH, Kim HJ, Moon JH, Sohn SK, Won JH, Kim SH, Kim HJ, Ahn JS, Kim DDH
**Journal:** Cancer Res Treat (2023)
**DOI:** [10.4143/crt.2022.1407](https://doi.org/10.4143/crt.2022.1407)

## Content

1. Cancer Res Treat. 2023 Jul;55(3):1011-1022. doi: 10.4143/crt.2022.1407. Epub 
2023 Jan 26.

Clinical Significance of bZIP In-Frame CEBPA-Mutated Normal Karyotype Acute 
Myeloid Leukemia.

Ahn SY(1), Kim T(2)(3), Kim M(1), Song GY(1), Jung SH(1), Yang DH(1), Lee JJ(1), 
Kim MY(4), Jung CW(5), Jang JH(5), Kim HJ(6), Moon JH(7), Sohn SK(7), Won JH(8), 
Kim SH(9), Kim HJ(1)(4), Ahn JS(1)(4), Kim DDH(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Chonnam National University Hwasun 
Hospital, Hwasun, Korea.
(2)The Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(3)Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(4)Genomic Research Center for Hematopoietic Diseases, Chonnam National 
University Hwasun Hospital, Hwasun, Korea.
(5)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.
(6)Department of Hematology, Cancer Research Institute, Seoul St. Mary's 
Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.
(7)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Kyungpook National University Hospital, 
Daegu, Korea.
(8)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Soon Chun Hyang University Hospital, 
Seoul, Korea.
(9)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Dong-A University College of Medicine, 
Busan, Korea.
(10)Department of Medical Oncology and Hematology, Princess Margaret Cancer 
Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

PURPOSE: We evaluated the characteristics of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein α 
(CEBPA) mutations and the significance of a basic leucine zipper in-frame 
mutation (bZIPin-f) of CEBPA in patients with acute myeloid leukemia with a 
normal karyotype.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Based on updated knowledge of CEBPA mutations, we 
conducted next-generation sequencing analyses in a previously established 
real-world cohort.
RESULTS: Among 78 of a total of 395 patients (19.7%), 50 had bZIPin-f CEBPA, and 
28 had non-bZIPin-f CEBPA. In the multivariate analysis, patients with NPM1mut, 
those with bZIPin-f CEBPA, and those who underwent allogeneic hematopoietic cell 
transplantation (allo-HCT) had favorable overall survival (OS), but FLT3-ITDmut 
was a poor prognostic indicator. For relapse-free survival (RFS) and cumulative 
incidence of relapse, bZIPin-f CEBPA, and allo-HCT were associated with 
favorable outcomes; FLT3-ITDpos was associated with worse outcomes. In the CEBPA 
double-mutated group (CEBPAdm), bZIPin-f CEBPA was associated with superior 
outcomes in terms of OS (p=0.007) and RFS (p=0.007) compared with non-bZIPin-f 
CEBPA. Of 50 patients with bZIPin-f CEBPA, 36 patients had at least one 
mutation. When grouped by the presence of mutations in chromatic/DNA modifiers 
(C), cohesion complex (C), and splicing genes (S) (CCS mutations), CCS-mutated 
bZIPin-f CEBPA was associated with poor OS (p=0.044; hazard ratio [HR], 2.419) 
and a trend in inferior RFS (p=0.186; HR, 1.838).
CONCLUSION: Only bZIPin-f CEBPA was associated with favorable outcomes in 
patients with CEBPAdm. However, some mutations accompanying bZIPin-f CEBPA 
showed inferior OS; thus, further studies with larger numbers of patients are 
required for clear conclusions of the significance of bZIPin-f CEBPA.

DOI: 10.4143/crt.2022.1407
PMCID: PMC10372603
PMID: 36701843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest Conflict of interest 
relevant to this article was not reported.