---
reference_id: "PMID:32333448"
title: EFTUD2 missense variants disrupt protein function and splicing in mandibulofacial dysostosis Guion-Almeida type.
authors:
- Thomas HB
- Wood KA
- Buczek WA
- Gordon CT
- Pingault V
- Attié-Bitach T
- Hentges KE
- Varghese VC
- Amiel J
- Newman WG
- "O'Keefe RT"
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/humu.24027
keywords:
- Computational Biology
- Exons
- Haploinsufficiency
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Mandibulofacial Dysostosis/genetics
- Microcephaly/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Peptide Elongation Factors/genetics
- RNA Splicing
- "Ribonucleoprotein, U5 Small Nuclear/genetics"
- Spliceosomes/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EFTUD2 missense variants disrupt protein function and splicing in mandibulofacial dysostosis Guion-Almeida type.
**Authors:** Thomas HB, Wood KA, Buczek WA, Gordon CT, Pingault V, Attié-Bitach T, Hentges KE, Varghese VC, Amiel J, Newman WG, O'Keefe RT
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.24027](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.24027)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2020 Aug;41(8):1372-1382. doi: 10.1002/humu.24027. Epub 2020 May 3.

EFTUD2 missense variants disrupt protein function and splicing in 
mandibulofacial dysostosis Guion-Almeida type.

Thomas HB(1), Wood KA(1), Buczek WA(1), Gordon CT(2)(3), Pingault V(2)(3)(4), 
Attié-Bitach T(3)(4)(5), Hentges KE(1), Varghese VC(6), Amiel J(2)(3)(4), Newman 
WG(1)(7), O'Keefe RT(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Evolution and Genomic Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, 
Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester, 
Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, UK.
(2)Laboratory of Embryology and Genetics of Human Malformation, Institut 
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) UMR 1163, Institut 
Imagine, Paris, France.
(3)Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité University, Institut Imagine, Paris, 
France.
(4)Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Paris, 
France.
(5)INSERM UMR 1163, Institut Imagine, Paris, France.
(6)All Wales Medical Genomics Service, Cardiff, UK.
(7)Division of Evolution and Genomic Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, 
Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, Center for Genomic Medicine, St. Mary's 
Hospital, The University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science 
Centre, Manchester, UK.

Pathogenic variants in the core spliceosome U5 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein 
gene EFTUD2/SNU114 cause the craniofacial disorder mandibulofacial dysostosis 
Guion-Almeida type (MFDGA). MFDGA-associated variants in EFTUD2 comprise large 
deletions encompassing EFTUD2, intragenic deletions and single nucleotide 
truncating or missense variants. These variants are predicted to result in 
haploinsufficiency by loss-of-function of the variant allele. While the 
contribution of deletions within EFTUD2 to allele loss-of-function are 
self-evident, the mechanisms by which missense variants are disease-causing have 
not been characterized functionally. Combining bioinformatics software 
prediction, yeast functional growth assays, and a minigene (MG) splicing assay, 
we have characterized how MFDGA missense variants result in EFTUD2 
loss-of-function. Only four of 19 assessed missense variants cause EFTUD2 
loss-of-function through altered protein function when modeled in yeast. Of the 
remaining 15 missense variants, five altered the normal splicing pattern of 
EFTUD2 pre-messenger RNA predominantly through exon skipping or cryptic splice 
site activation, leading to the introduction of a premature termination codon. 
Comparison of bioinformatic predictors for each missense variant revealed a 
disparity amongst different software packages and, in many cases, an inability 
to correctly predict changes in splicing subsequently determined by MG 
interrogation. This study highlights the need for laboratory-based validation of 
bioinformatic predictions for EFTUD2 missense variants.

© 2020 The Authors. Human Mutation published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.24027
PMID: 32333448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]