---
reference_id: "PMID:20301362"
title: "Wolf-Hirschhorn Syndrome – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY."
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Battaglia A
- Carey JC
- South ST
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wolf-Hirschhorn Syndrome – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Battaglia A, Carey JC, South ST

## Content

1. Wolf-Hirschhorn Syndrome – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY.

Battaglia A(1), Carey JC(2), South ST(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2002 Apr 29 [updated 2015 Aug 20].

Author information:
(1)The Stella Maris Clinical Research Institute for Child and Adolescent 
Neurology and Psychiatry, Calambrone (Pisa), Italy
(2)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah, 
Salt Lake City, Utah
(3)Division of Clinical Pathology, Department of Pathology, University of Utah, 
Salt Lake City, Utah

NOTE: THIS PUBLICATION HAS BEEN RETIRED. THIS ARCHIVAL VERSION IS FOR HISTORICAL 
REFERENCE ONLY, AND THE INFORMATION MAY BE OUT OF DATE.
CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) is characterized by 
typical craniofacial features in infancy consisting of "Greek warrior helmet" 
appearance of the nose (wide bridge of the nose continuing to the forehead), 
microcephaly, high anterior hairline with prominent glabella, widely spaced 
eyes, epicanthus, highly arched eyebrows, short philtrum, downturned corners of 
the mouth, micrognathia, and poorly formed ears with pits/tags. All affected 
individuals have prenatal-onset growth deficiency followed by postnatal growth 
retardation and hypotonia with muscle underdevelopment. Developmental 
delay/intellectual disability of variable degree is present in all. Seizures 
occur in 90% to 100% of children with WHS. Other findings include skeletal 
anomalies (60%-70%), congenital heart defects (~50%), hearing loss (mostly 
conductive) (>40%), urinary tract malformations (25%), and structural brain 
abnormalities (33%).
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of WHS is established by the finding of a 
heterozygous deletion of the Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome critical region (WHSCR) on 
chromosome 4p16.3 by chromosomal microarray (CMA), conventional G-banded 
cytogenetic analysis, or fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH).
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment includes: rehabilitation, 
speech/communication therapy and sign language; valproic acid for atypical 
absence seizures; benzodiazepines for status epilepticus; special feeding 
techniques, gavage feeding, and/or gastrostomy for feeding difficulties. 
Standard care is recommended for skeletal anomalies, ophthalmologic 
abnormalities, congenital heart defects, hearing loss, sleep disturbance, and 
hepatic adenomas. Prevention of secondary complications: Antibiotic prophylaxis 
for vesicoureteral reflux; IVIG infusions or continuous antibiotics for those 
with antibody deficiencies. Surveillance: Systematic follow up to monitor 
rehabilitation and treatment as needed; annual complete blood count and renal 
function testing; consideration of routine liver ultrasounds. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Carbamazepine may worsen atypical absence 
seizures.
GENETIC COUNSELING: WHS is caused by deletion of the WHSCR of chromosome 4p16.3 
by one of several genetic mechanisms. About 50%-60% of individuals with WHS have 
a de novo pure deletion of 4p16 and about 40%-45% have an unbalanced 
translocation with both a deletion of 4p and a partial trisomy of a different 
chromosome arm. These unbalanced translocations may be de novo or inherited from 
a parent with a balanced rearrangement. The remaining have other complex 
rearrangements leading to a 4p16.3 deletion (e.g., ring 4). Risks to family 
members depend on the mechanism of origin of the deletion. Prenatal testing is 
possible for families in which one parent is known to be a carrier of a 
chromosome rearrangement involving 4p16.3.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301362