---
reference_id: "PMID:14653404"
title: Friedreich ataxia.
authors:
- Pandolfo M
journal: Semin Pediatr Neurol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/s1071-9091(03)00025-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Friedreich ataxia.
**Authors:** Pandolfo M
**Journal:** Semin Pediatr Neurol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1071-9091(03)00025-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1071-9091(03)00025-1)

## Content

1. Semin Pediatr Neurol. 2003 Sep;10(3):163-72. doi:
10.1016/s1071-9091(03)00025-1.

Friedreich ataxia.

Pandolfo M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Erasme Hospital, Brussels Free University, Brussels, 
Belgium.

There has been rapid progress in the understanding of several aspects of 
Friedreich's ataxia (FA) since the gene mutation was identified in 1996. At the 
clinical level, now it is possible to confirm that the majority of patients 
fullfilling clinical criteria for classic FA have the FA gene mutation but some 
do not, indicating genetic heterogeneity. Also, the phenotype associated with 
the FA mutation is much wider than that defined by clinical criteria and 
includes ataxia with retained or brisk reflexes as well as late onset ataxia 
with or without retained reflexes. It is now clear that the unstable GAA 
expansion that underlies FA causes a deficiency of the mitochondrial protein 
frataxin, leading to potentially harmful oxidative injury associated with 
excessive iron deposits in mitochondria. In addition, pathogenesis may involve a 
primary defect in synthesis of iron-sulfur cluster containing enzymes. 
Therapeutic attempts are already using anti-oxidant strategies and such efforts 
are likely to be enhanced by the rapid availability of animal models of the 
disease.

DOI: 10.1016/s1071-9091(03)00025-1
PMID: 14653404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]