---
reference_id: "PMID:19454061"
title: "Menière's disease."
authors:
- James AL
- Thorp MA
journal: BMJ Clin Evid
year: '2007'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Menière's disease.
**Authors:** James AL, Thorp MA
**Journal:** BMJ Clin Evid (2007)

## Content

1. BMJ Clin Evid. 2007 Mar 1;2007:0505.

Menière's disease.

James AL(1), Thorp MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Southmead Hospital, Bristol, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Menière's disease causes recurrent vertigo, hearing loss, 
tinnitus, and fullness or pressure in the ear, which mainly affects adults aged 
40-60 years. Menière's disease is at first progressive but fluctuating, and 
episodes can occur in clusters. Vertigo usually resolves but hearing 
deteriorates, and symptoms other than hearing loss and tinnitus usually improve 
regardless of treatment.
METHODS AND OUTCOMES: We conducted a systematic review and aimed to answer the 
following clinical questions: What are the effects of treatments for acute 
attacks of Menière's disease; and of interventions to prevent attacks and delay 
disease progression of Menière's disease? We searched: Medline, Embase, The 
Cochrane Library and other important databases up to January 2006 (Clinical 
Evidence reviews are updated periodically, please check our website for the most 
up-to-date version of this review). We included harms alerts from relevant 
organisations such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the UK 
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA).
RESULTS: We found 17 systematic reviews, RCTs, or observational studies that met 
our inclusion criteria. We performed a GRADE evaluation of the quality of 
evidence for interventions.
CONCLUSIONS: In this systematic review we present information relating to the 
effectiveness and safety of the following interventions: anticholinergics, 
benzodiazepines, betahistine, cinnarizine, dietary modification, diuretics, 
phenothiazines, psychological support, trimetazidine, vestibular rehabilitation.

PMCID: PMC2943800
PMID: 19454061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]