---
reference_id: "PMID:39357070"
title: "Inherited Predispositions to Myeloid Neoplasms: Pathogenesis and Clinical Implications."
authors:
- Liu YC
- Eldomery MK
- Maciaszek JL
- Klco JM
journal: Annu Rev Pathol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1146/annurev-pathmechdis-111523-023420
keywords:
- Humans
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Germ-Line Mutation
- "Myeloproliferative Disorders/genetics, pathology"
- "Myelodysplastic Syndromes/genetics, pathology"
- "Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inherited Predispositions to Myeloid Neoplasms: Pathogenesis and Clinical Implications.
**Authors:** Liu YC, Eldomery MK, Maciaszek JL, Klco JM
**Journal:** Annu Rev Pathol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev-pathmechdis-111523-023420](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-pathmechdis-111523-023420)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Pathol. 2025 Jan;20(1):87-114. doi: 
10.1146/annurev-pathmechdis-111523-023420. Epub 2025 Jan 2.

Inherited Predispositions to Myeloid Neoplasms: Pathogenesis and Clinical 
Implications.

Liu YC(1), Eldomery MK(1), Maciaszek JL(1), Klco JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, 
Tennessee, USA; email: jeffery.klco@stjude.org.

Myeloid neoplasms with and without preexisting platelet disorders frequently 
develop in association with an underlying germline predisposition. Germline 
alterations affecting ANKRD26, CEBPA, DDX41, ETV6, and RUNX1 are associated with 
nonsyndromic predisposition to the development of myeloid neoplasms including 
acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome. However, germline 
predisposition to myeloid neoplasms is also associated with a wide range of 
other syndromes, including SAMD9/9L associated predisposition, GATA2 deficiency, 
RASopathies, ribosomopathies, telomere biology disorders, Fanconi anemia, severe 
congenital neutropenia, Down syndrome, and others. In the fifth edition of the 
World Health Organization (WHO) series on the classification of tumors of 
hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues, myeloid neoplasms associated with germline 
predisposition have been recognized as a separate entity. Here, we review 
several disorders from this WHO entity as well as other related conditions with 
an emphasis on the molecular pathogenesis of disease and accompanying somatic 
alterations. Finally, we provide an overview of establishing the molecular 
diagnosis of these germline genetic conditions and general recommendations for 
screening and management of the associated hematologic conditions.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-pathmechdis-111523-023420
PMCID: PMC12048009
PMID: 39357070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]