---
reference_id: "PMID:15057119"
title: "Tibial aplasia, lower extremity mirror image polydactyly, brachyphalangy, craniofacial dysmorphism and genital hypoplasia: further delineation and mutational analysis."
authors:
- Wechsler SB
- Lehoczky JA
- Hall JG
- Innis JW
journal: Clin Dysmorphol
year: '2004'
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Craniofacial Abnormalities/pathology
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- "Foot Deformities, Congenital/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Humans
- Infant
- Polydactyly/pathology
- Radiography
- "Tibia/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tibial aplasia, lower extremity mirror image polydactyly, brachyphalangy, craniofacial dysmorphism and genital hypoplasia: further delineation and mutational analysis.
**Authors:** Wechsler SB, Lehoczky JA, Hall JG, Innis JW
**Journal:** Clin Dysmorphol (2004)

## Content

1. Clin Dysmorphol. 2004 Apr;13(2):63-69.

Tibial aplasia, lower extremity mirror image polydactyly, brachyphalangy, 
craniofacial dysmorphism and genital hypoplasia: further delineation and 
mutational analysis.

Wechsler SB(1), Lehoczky JA, Hall JG, Innis JW.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases Department of Human 
Genetics, University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA 
Departments of Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Congenital anomalies involving tibial aplasia are rare. Recently, four children 
with an unusual combination of limb anomalies, facial dysmorphism and genital 
hypoplasia have been reported. All affected children reported were male. One 
case noted father to son transmission, implying autosomal dominant inheritance. 
We report the first female patient with this syndrome. The patient had tibial 
aplasia, mirror image preaxial polydactyly involving her feet, brachyphalangy, 
genital hypoplasia as well as facial dysmorphism including telecanthus, 
blepharophimosis, a flat nasal bridge with a small nose and a small mouth. 
Consistent with reports in males of a micropenis and hypoplastic scrotum, our 
patient had absent labia minora and a very small clitoris. Her father had very 
minor anomalies suggestive of somatic mosaicism or marked variability. Mouse 
models affecting limb development are powerful tools in the study of human 
syndromes. The clinical phenotype of patients with this syndrome is reminiscent 
of some luxoid mouse mutants suggesting Alx4 and related members of the paired 
homeodomain class as candidate genes. ALX4 haploinsufficiency in humans causes 
parietal foramina, which one patient with this syndrome was reported to have. 
Sequencing of coding exons of ALX4 and its related homologue, ALX3, in the 
proband failed to reveal coding sequence alterations. Our father/daughter pair 
is the second family reported, supporting a dominant mode of inheritance. 
Moreover, the very mild phenotype in the father suggests the need for very 
careful attention to parental examination in such cases.

PMID: 15057119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]