---
reference_id: "PMID:23101639"
title: "[Domestic hypersensitivity pneumonitis]."
authors:
- Caillaud D
- Raobison R
- Evrard B
- Montcouquiol S
- Horo K
journal: Rev Mal Respir
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.rmr.2012.03.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Domestic hypersensitivity pneumonitis].
**Authors:** Caillaud D, Raobison R, Evrard B, Montcouquiol S, Horo K
**Journal:** Rev Mal Respir (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rmr.2012.03.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rmr.2012.03.008)

## Content

1. Rev Mal Respir. 2012 Oct;29(8):971-7. doi: 10.1016/j.rmr.2012.03.008. Epub
2012  Sep 28.

[Domestic hypersensitivity pneumonitis].

[Article in French]

Caillaud D(1), Raobison R, Evrard B, Montcouquiol S, Horo K.

Author information:
(1)Service de pneumologie, hôpital Gabriel-Montpied, CHU de Clermont-Ferrand, 
rue Montalembert, 63003 Clermont-Ferrand, France. 
dcaillaud@chu-clermontferrand.fr

INTRODUCTION: Domestic hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP) cases are relatively 
widespread, with an overall annual incidence of approximately 1/100,000 reported 
in a British study covering several million patients. All-causes mortality is 
three times higher within HP-affected patients than amongst the general 
population.
STATE OF THE ART: Cases of HP are usually diagnosed as 'farmer's lung' (FL) and 
'bird fancier's lung' (BFL) diseases, however we suggest that other domestic 
causes, such as humidifier lung, hot tub pneumonitis, feather duvet and domestic 
exposure to moulds may be more frequent than widely suggested. Usually, the 
diagnosis is established on the basis of characteristic clinical, functional, 
radiological and broncho-alveolar lavage findings or recurrence of respiratory 
symptoms after returning home.
PERSPECTIVES: In the absence of a common cause (FL or BFL), physicians must have 
a high index of clinical suspicion and should consider an environmental antigen 
source. Detailed questioning of HP patients on their living conditions and, 
where appropriate, a home inspection conducted by an environmental health expert 
are necessary for identifying causative antigens.
CONCLUSION: The cornerstone of therapy is antigen avoidance.

Copyright © 2012 SPLF. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmr.2012.03.008
PMID: 23101639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]