---
reference_id: "PMID:34052215"
title: "Human Laterality Disorders: Pathogenesis, Clinical Manifestations, Diagnosis, and Management."
authors:
- Soofi M
- Alpert MA
- Barbadora J
- Mukerji B
- Mukerji V
journal: Am J Med Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.amjms.2021.05.020
keywords:
- "Dextrocardia/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, surgery"
- Disease Management
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, surgery"
- "Heterotaxy Syndrome/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, surgery"
- Humans
- "Situs Inversus/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human Laterality Disorders: Pathogenesis, Clinical Manifestations, Diagnosis, and Management.
**Authors:** Soofi M, Alpert MA, Barbadora J, Mukerji B, Mukerji V
**Journal:** Am J Med Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amjms.2021.05.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjms.2021.05.020)

## Content

1. Am J Med Sci. 2021 Sep;362(3):233-242. doi: 10.1016/j.amjms.2021.05.020. Epub
2021 May 28.

Human Laterality Disorders: Pathogenesis, Clinical Manifestations, Diagnosis,
and Management.

Soofi M(1), Alpert MA(2), Barbadora J(1), Mukerji B(3), Mukerji V(4).

Author information:
(1)Boonshoft School of Medicine, Wright State University, Dayton, OH, USA.
(2)University of Missouri School of Medicine, Columbia, MO, USA. Electronic
address: alpertm@health.missouri.edu.
(3)Boonshoft School of Medicine, Wright State University, Dayton, OH, USA;
Dayton VA Medical Center, Dayton, OH, USA.
(4)Boonshoft School of Medicine, Wright State University, Dayton, OH, USA;
Dayton VA Medical Center, Dayton, OH, USA; Kettering Medical Center, Kettering,
OH, USA.

Human laterality disorders comprise a group of diseases characterized by
abnormal location (situs) and orientation of thoraco-abdominal organs and
vessels across the left-right axis. Situs inversus totalis is mirror image
reversal of thoraco-abdominal organs/great vessels. Situs ambiguus, better known
as heterotaxy, is abnormal arrangement of thoraco-abdominal organs across the
left-right axis excluding situs inversus totalis. Heterotaxy, also referred to
as atrial or atrial appendage isomerism, is characterized by abnormal location
of left-sided or right-sided organs with loss of asymmetry of normally paired
asymmetric organs. It is associated with a variety of anomalies involving the
heart, great vessels, lungs and intra-abdominal organs. Right and left atrial
isomerism are associated with multiple complex congenital cardiac and vascular
anomalies, many of which are lethal when untreated. Isomerism may also affect
the lungs, spleen, liver, gall bladder, and intestines. Innovative surgical
therapy of heterotaxy/isomerism has reduced early mortality and markedly
improved long-term prognosis.

Copyright © 2021 Southern Society for Clinical Investigation. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjms.2021.05.020
PMID: 34052215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None of the
authors report conflicts of interest or competing interests.
