---
reference_id: "PMID:21178627"
title: Emphysema and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in coal miners.
authors:
- Santo Tomas LH
journal: Curr Opin Pulm Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1097/MCP.0b013e3283431674
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Emphysema and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in coal miners.
**Authors:** Santo Tomas LH
**Journal:** Curr Opin Pulm Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MCP.0b013e3283431674](https://doi.org/10.1097/MCP.0b013e3283431674)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2011 Mar;17(2):123-5. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0b013e3283431674.

Emphysema and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in coal miners.

Santo Tomas LH(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Medical College of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA. lsantot@mcw.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Coal mining remains a major industry that has workers at risk 
for developing chronic lung disease. Aside from simple coal workers' 
pneumoconiosis and progressive massive fibrosis, the development of emphysema 
and obstructive lung disease independent of smoking may be underappreciated. 
This article reviews more recent studies that may help rectify this faulty view.
RECENT FINDINGS: Cumulative exposure to coal dust is a significant risk factor 
for the development of emphysema and has an additive effect to smoking. 
Increased coal dust exposure is associated with increased risk of death from 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). In newly employed coal miners, 
bronchitic symptoms are associated with a rapid decline in lung function within 
2 years after starting work. In evaluating impairment, the chest radiograph may 
be helpful as a marker of exposure but the diffusing capacity is most correlated 
with dyspnea, whereas the emphysema computed tomography score has good 
association with expiratory flow limitation.
SUMMARY: Latest studies further support the association of emphysema and COPD 
with coal dust exposure. Increased cumulative exposure may also increase risk of 
death from these diseases.

DOI: 10.1097/MCP.0b013e3283431674
PMID: 21178627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]