---
reference_id: "PMID:19092443"
title: "Population screening in a Druze community: the challenge and the reward."
authors:
- Falik-Zaccai TC
- Kfir N
- Frenkel P
- Cohen C
- Tanus M
- Mandel H
- Shihab S
- Morkos S
- Aaref S
- Summar ML
- Khayat M
journal: Genet Med
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e31818d0e0f
keywords:
- Argininosuccinate Lyase/genetics
- Argininosuccinic Aciduria
- "Carbamoyl-Phosphate Synthase I Deficiency Disease/diagnosis, genetics, prevention & control"
- Consanguinity
- "Dipeptidases/deficiency, genetics"
- Female
- Genetic Counseling
- Genetic Testing
- Humans
- Middle East/ethnology
- "Population Groups/ethnology, genetics"
- "Xanthomatosis, Cerebrotendinous/diagnosis, genetics, prevention & control"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Population screening in a Druze community: the challenge and the reward.
**Authors:** Falik-Zaccai TC, Kfir N, Frenkel P, Cohen C, Tanus M, Mandel H, Shihab S, Morkos S, Aaref S, Summar ML, Khayat M
**Journal:** Genet Med (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1097/GIM.0b013e31818d0e0f](https://doi.org/10.1097/GIM.0b013e31818d0e0f)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2008 Dec;10(12):903-9. doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e31818d0e0f.

Population screening in a Druze community: the challenge and the reward.

Falik-Zaccai TC(1), Kfir N, Frenkel P, Cohen C, Tanus M, Mandel H, Shihab S,
Morkos S, Aaref S, Summar ML, Khayat M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Western Galilee Hospital-Nahariya, Israel.
Tzipora.Falik@naharia.health.gov.il

PURPOSE: The Druze community is characterized by consanguinity and endogamy, and
by reluctance to genetic testing and technological interventions for the
prevention of birth defects. Multiple patients with four rare and severe inborn
errors of metabolism cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis, prolidase deficiency,
argininosuccinate lyase deficiency, and carbamyl phosphate synthetase I
deficiency were identified in an isolated Druze village in northern Israel. The
aims of this study were to identify couples at risk for four inherited diseases,
and to prevent birth defects in a community presenting religious and cultural
obstacles to genetic testing.
METHODS: A genetic screening and counseling program in a high-risk community.
RESULTS: The 1425 residents who attended group genetic counseling sessions
between 2003 and 2007 consented to genetic testing. We identified 217 carriers
for either one or two disease causing mutations. High carrier frequencies for
cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis, prolidase deficiency, argininosuccinate lyase
deficiency, and carbamyl phosphate synthetase I deficiency were identified as
1:11, 1:21, 1:41, and 1:95, respectively. Fifty-eight percent (125) of the
carriers' spouses agreed to genetic counseling and testing. Ten couples at risk
for affected offspring were identified and offered prenatal genetic counseling
and diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: The genetic screening program, the first of its kind reported in a
Druze community, was well received. We expect this program to increase awareness
of genetic counseling, to contribute to disease prevention, and to serve as a
model for other isolated communities.

DOI: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e31818d0e0f
PMID: 19092443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
