---
reference_id: "PMID:20301519"
title: APC-Associated Polyposis Conditions.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Yen T
- Stanich PP
- Axell L
- Patel SG
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# APC-Associated Polyposis Conditions.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Yen T, Stanich PP, Axell L, Patel SG

## Content

1. APC-Associated Polyposis Conditions.

Yen T(1), Stanich PP(2), Axell L(1), Patel SG(1)(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
1998 Dec 18 [updated 2022 May 12].

Author information:
(1)University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Center, Aurora, Colorado
(2)The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio
(3)Veterans Affairs Hospital, Denver, Colorado

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: APC-associated polyposis conditions include (classic 
or attenuated) familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and gastric adenocarcinoma 
and proximal polyposis of the stomach (GAPPS). FAP is a colorectal cancer (CRC) 
predisposition syndrome that can manifest in either classic or attenuated form. 
Classic FAP is characterized by hundreds to thousands of adenomatous colonic 
polyps, beginning on average at age 16 years (range 7-36 years). For those with 
the classic form of FAP, 95% of individuals have polyps by age 35 years; CRC is 
inevitable without colectomy. The mean age of CRC diagnosis in untreated 
individuals is 39 years (range 34-43 years). The attenuated form is 
characterized by multiple colonic polyps (average of 30), more proximally 
located polyps, and a diagnosis of CRC at a later age than in classic FAP. For 
those with an attenuated form, there is a 70% lifetime risk of CRC and the mean 
age of diagnosis is 50-55 years. Extracolonic manifestations are variably 
present and include polyps of the stomach and duodenum, osteomas, dental 
abnormalities, congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE), 
benign cutaneous lesions, desmoid tumors, adrenal masses, and other associated 
cancers. GAPPS is characterized by proximal gastric polyposis, increased risk of 
gastric adenocarcinoma, and no duodenal or colonic involvement in most 
individuals reported.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of an APC-associated polyposis condition is 
established by identification of a heterozygous germline pathogenic variant in 
APC.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Resection of all colonic polyps larger 
than 5 mm found on colonic surveillance. There is an absolute indication for 
colectomy when CRC is diagnosed or suspected, or when there are significant 
symptoms (e.g., bleeding, obstruction). Relative indications for colectomy 
include presence of multiple adenomas larger than 10 mm that cannot be 
reasonably removed endoscopically, a significant increase in adenoma number 
between surveillance exams, presence of adenomas with high-grade dysplasia, or 
inability to adequately survey the colon (e.g., due to innumerable diminutive 
adenomas or limited access to or compliance with colonoscopy). Endoscopic or 
surgical removal of duodenal adenomas is considered if polyps exhibit villous 
change or severe dysplasia, exceed 1 cm in diameter, or exhibit advanced stage 
using Spigelman scoring system. Gastrectomy is considered if advanced gastric 
neoplasia is found on upper endoscopy. Osteomas may be removed for cosmetic 
reasons. Desmoid tumors may be surgically excised or treated with nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), anti-estrogens, cytotoxic chemotherapy, and/or 
radiation if at advanced stage. Standard treatment when needed for adrenal 
masses and thyroid carcinoma. Several studies have shown that NSAIDs and 
erlotinib have caused regression of adenomas and decreased the polyp burden in 
individuals with FAP, though there are currently no FDA-approved chemopreventive 
agents for FAP, given an unclear effect on subsequent cancer risk. Prevention of 
primary manifestations: Colectomy to reduce the risk for CRC in individuals with 
classic FAP. For individuals with attenuated FAP, colectomy may be necessary, 
but in approximately one third of individuals, the colonic polyps are limited 
enough in number that surveillance with periodic colonoscopic polypectomy is 
sufficient to prevent CRC. It is currently unknown if prophylactic gastrectomy 
should be considered in individuals with GAPPS. Surveillance: Colorectal 
screening by colonoscopy every one to two years beginning at age ten to 15 years 
for classic FAP and in late adolescence for attenuated FAP; 
esophagogastroduodenoscopy with visualization of the ampulla of Vater by age 20 
to 25 years or prior to colon surgery, with consideration of complete small 
bowel visualization in the setting of advanced Spigelman stage. Annual thyroid 
palpation, thyroid ultrasound, neurologic examination, and abdominal examination 
(for desmoids). Liver palpation, liver ultrasound, and measurement of serum 
alpha-fetoprotein every three to six months until age five years for 
hepatoblastoma. The efficacy of screening for gastric cancer in individuals with 
GAPPS is currently unknown. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Multistage surgeries 
in those at high risk for desmoids; total colectomy with ileal pouch anal 
anastomosis in women prior to childbearing. Evaluation of relatives at risk: 
Molecular genetic testing for early identification of at-risk family members 
improves diagnostic certainty and reduces the need for costly screening 
procedures in those at-risk family members who have not inherited the pathogenic 
variant.
GENETIC COUNSELING: APC-associated polyposis conditions are inherited in an 
autosomal dominant manner. Approximately 75%-80% of individuals with an 
APC-associated polyposis condition have an affected parent. Offspring of an 
affected individual are at a 50% risk of inheriting the pathogenic variant in 
APC. Prenatal testing and preimplantation genetic testing are possible if a 
pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301519