---
reference_id: "PMID:12368912"
title: The K-Cl cotransporter KCC3 is mutant in a severe peripheral neuropathy associated with agenesis of the corpus callosum.
authors:
- Howard HC
- Mount DB
- Rochefort D
- Byun N
- Dupré N
- Lu J
- Fan X
- Song L
- Rivière JB
- Prévost C
- Horst J
- Simonati A
- Lemcke B
- Welch R
- England R
- Zhan FQ
- Mercado A
- Siesser WB
- George AL Jr
- McDonald MP
- Bouchard JP
- Mathieu J
- Delpire E
- Rouleau GA
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1038/ng1002
keywords:
- Agenesis of Corpus Callosum
- Animals
- "Blotting, Southern"
- Brain/pathology
- Canada
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 15"
- Corpus Callosum/embryology
- Exons
- Gene Deletion
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Haplotypes
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Immunoblotting
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Microscopy, Fluorescence"
- "Models, Genetic"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Open Reading Frames
- Peripheral Nervous System Diseases/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- "Recombination, Genetic"
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Sodium-Potassium-Chloride Symporters/genetics
- Spinal Cord/pathology
- "Symporters/genetics, physiology"
- Time Factors
- Xenopus
- K Cl- Cotransporters
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The K-Cl cotransporter KCC3 is mutant in a severe peripheral neuropathy associated with agenesis of the corpus callosum.
**Authors:** Howard HC, Mount DB, Rochefort D, Byun N, Dupré N, Lu J, Fan X, Song L, Rivière JB, Prévost C, Horst J, Simonati A, Lemcke B, Welch R, England R, Zhan FQ, Mercado A, Siesser WB, George AL Jr, McDonald MP, Bouchard JP, Mathieu J, Delpire E, Rouleau GA
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1002](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1002)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2002 Nov;32(3):384-92. doi: 10.1038/ng1002. Epub 2002 Oct 7.

The K-Cl cotransporter KCC3 is mutant in a severe peripheral neuropathy
associated with agenesis of the corpus callosum.

Howard HC(1), Mount DB, Rochefort D, Byun N, Dupré N, Lu J, Fan X, Song L,
Rivière JB, Prévost C, Horst J, Simonati A, Lemcke B, Welch R, England R, Zhan
FQ, Mercado A, Siesser WB, George AL Jr, McDonald MP, Bouchard JP, Mathieu J,
Delpire E, Rouleau GA.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Research in Neuroscience, McGill University and the Montreal
General Hospital Research Institute, 1650 Cedar Ave., Montreal, Quebec H3G 1A4,
Canada.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet 2002 Dec;32(4):681.

Peripheral neuropathy associated with agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACCPN) is
a severe sensorimotor neuropathy associated with mental retardation, dysmorphic
features and complete or partial agenesis of the corpus callosum. ACCPN is
transmitted in an autosomal recessive fashion and is found at a high frequency
in the province of Quebec, Canada. ACCPN has been previously mapped to
chromosome 15q. The gene SLC12A6 (solute carrier family 12, member 6), which
encodes the K+-Cl- transporter KCC3 and maps within the ACCPN candidate region,
was screened for mutations in individuals with ACCPN. Four distinct
protein-truncating mutations were found: two in the French Canadian population
and two in non-French Canadian families. The functional consequence of the
predominant French Canadian mutation (2436delG, Thr813fsX813) was examined by
heterologous expression of wildtype and mutant KCC3 in Xenopus laevis oocytes;
the truncated mutant is appropriately glycosylated and expressed at the cellular
membrane, where it is non-functional. Mice generated with a targeted deletion of
Slc12a6 have a locomotor deficit, peripheral neuropathy and a sensorimotor
gating deficit, similar to the human disease. Our findings identify mutations in
SLC12A6 as the genetic lesion underlying ACCPN and suggest a critical role for
SLC12A6 in the development and maintenance of the nervous system.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1002
PMID: 12368912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
