---
reference_id: "PMID:25662299"
title: "Paediatric mastocytosis: a systematic review of 1747 cases."
authors:
- Méni C
- Bruneau J
- Georgin-Lavialle S
- Le Saché de Peufeilhoux L
- Damaj G
- Hadj-Rabia S
- Fraitag S
- Dubreuil P
- Hermine O
- Bodemer C
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/bjd.13567
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- Biopsy/methods
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Mastocytosis, Cutaneous/genetics, pathology"
- Mutation/genetics
- Pregnancy
- Prognosis
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-kit/genetics
- Urticaria Pigmentosa/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Paediatric mastocytosis: a systematic review of 1747 cases.
**Authors:** Méni C, Bruneau J, Georgin-Lavialle S, Le Saché de Peufeilhoux L, Damaj G, Hadj-Rabia S, Fraitag S, Dubreuil P, Hermine O, Bodemer C
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bjd.13567](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjd.13567)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2015 Mar;172(3):642-51. doi: 10.1111/bjd.13567. Epub 2015 Feb
8.

Paediatric mastocytosis: a systematic review of 1747 cases.

Méni C(1), Bruneau J, Georgin-Lavialle S, Le Saché de Peufeilhoux L, Damaj G, 
Hadj-Rabia S, Fraitag S, Dubreuil P, Hermine O, Bodemer C.

Author information:
(1)Service de Dermatologie de l'Adulte et de l'Enfant, Faculté de Médecine et 
AP-HP, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Centre de Référence des Mastocytoses, 
CEREMAST, Université Paris Descartes, Paris Sorbonne Cité, 149 Rue de Sèvres, 
75743, Paris Cedex 15, France.

Paediatric mastocytosis was previously considered to be a benign and 
spontaneously regressing disease. However, this evolution is impossible to 
predict. To clarify the characteristics and course of paediatric mastocytosis, 
we performed a literature review of 1747 cases published between 1950 and April 
2014. Lesions occurred before the age of 2 years in 90% of cases, and presented 
as urticaria pigmentosa (75% of cases), mastocytoma (20%) or diffuse cutaneous 
mastocytosis (5%). The male-to-female ratio was 1·4. KIT D816V mutation was 
detected in 34% of 215 tested patients. Clinical regression (complete or 
partial) occurred in 67% of cases and stabilization in 27%. However, the outcome 
was fatal in 2·9% of patients.

© 2015 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/bjd.13567
PMID: 25662299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]