---
reference_id: "PMID:21461962"
title: Physical, occupational, speech and swallowing therapies and physical exercise in Parkinson's disease.
authors:
- Ransmayr G
journal: J Neural Transm (Vienna)
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s00702-011-0622-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Physical, occupational, speech and swallowing therapies and physical exercise in Parkinson's disease.
**Authors:** Ransmayr G
**Journal:** J Neural Transm (Vienna) (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00702-011-0622-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00702-011-0622-9)

## Content

1. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2011 May;118(5):773-81. doi: 
10.1007/s00702-011-0622-9. Epub 2011 Apr 3.

Physical, occupational, speech and swallowing therapies and physical exercise in 
Parkinson's disease.

Ransmayr G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Psychiatry, General Hospital of the City of Linz, 
Linz, Austria. gerhard.ransmayr@akh.linz.at

Former studies on the effects of physical exercise, physical and occupational 
therapy (PT, OT) and speech and swallowing therapy (ST, SwT) in Parkinson's 
disease (PD) have demonstrated little or uncertain effects. New 
pathophysiological concepts have been developed. Recent controlled high-level 
studies demonstrate improvement of mobility and balance after training of 
muscular strength and endurance, trunk control, and amplitude and rhythmicity of 
movements (treadmill). Attentional and cognitive strategies were found to 
enforce body awareness and improve movement sequences. Dance, sensory (auditory, 
visual, tactile) and cognitive cueing are effective for problems of gait and 
balance. Whether PT and OT reduce the risk of falls remains uncertain. ST 
including Lee Silverman Voice Treatment has been shown to relieve speech 
problems. SwT and OT are frequently applied, however, further studies are 
necessary. Therapeutic interventions need to be evaluated with regard to 
consistency, intensity, frequency, duration, side effects, home versus 
institution based and standardized versus individualized training, quality 
standards, practicability in real life, and cost-effectiveness. Parkinson 
patients should resume or continue physical exercise as long as possible. There 
is hope that regular sport may modify PD risk and progression.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-011-0622-9
PMID: 21461962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]