---
reference_id: "PMID:34818478"
title: Belzutifan for Renal Cell Carcinoma in von Hippel-Lindau Disease.
authors:
- Jonasch E
- Donskov F
- Iliopoulos O
- Rathmell WK
- Narayan VK
- Maughan BL
- Oudard S
- Else T
- Maranchie JK
- Welsh SJ
- Thamake S
- Park EK
- Perini RF
- Linehan WM
- Srinivasan R
- MK-6482-004 Investigators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2103425
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Belzutifan for Renal Cell Carcinoma in von Hippel-Lindau Disease.
**Authors:** Jonasch E, Donskov F, Iliopoulos O, Rathmell WK, Narayan VK, Maughan BL, Oudard S, Else T, Maranchie JK, Welsh SJ, Thamake S, Park EK, Perini RF, Linehan WM, Srinivasan R, MK-6482-004 Investigators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2103425](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2103425)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2021 Nov 25;385(22):2036-2046. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2103425.

Belzutifan for Renal Cell Carcinoma in von Hippel-Lindau Disease.

Jonasch E(1), Donskov F(1), Iliopoulos O(1), Rathmell WK(1), Narayan VK(1), 
Maughan BL(1), Oudard S(1), Else T(1), Maranchie JK(1), Welsh SJ(1), Thamake 
S(1), Park EK(1), Perini RF(1), Linehan WM(1), Srinivasan R(1); MK-6482-004 
Investigators.

Collaborators: Jonasch E, Zurita-Saavedra AJ, Shah A, Gao J, Araujo JC, Campbell 
MT, Tannir N, Goswami S, Lim Z, Cotton I, Pham O, Shaw L, Rathmell K, Beckerman 
KE, Ancell KK, Wallace DE, Srinivasan R, Hawkins DK, Davis NB, Kaiser E, 
Schaffer K, Linehan WM, Chittiboina P, Zaghloul K, Friend J, Choyke P, Chew E, 
Wiley H, Elinoff J, Ball M, Romero VV, Bottaro DP, Vocke C, Purcell E, Al Harthy 
M, Iliopoulos O, Leger P, Mac L, Gurski C, Lee R, Markt DA, Meneely E, 
Michaelson D, Olivier K, Saylor P, Smith M, Maughan B, Agarwal N, Phunrab T, 
Greenberg S, Gupta S, Thorley J, Batten J, Lowrance W, O'Neil B, Dechet C, Else 
T, Alva A, Demirci H, Hafez K, Osborne J, Quinonez S, Stoffel E, Maranchie J, 
Hrebinko R, Davies B, Jacobs B, Bishop K, Narayan V, Vaughn D, Mamtani R, 
Balzer-Haas N, Nathanson K, Takvorian S, Dahan M, Jones J, Ciconte J, Welsh S, 
Maher E, Eisen T, Denholm M, Fife K, Matakidou A, Donskov F, Iversen A, Agerbaek 
M, Oudard S, Thibault C, Vano YA, Medioni J, Richard S.

Author information:
(1)From the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston (E.J.); 
Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark (F.D.); Massachusetts General 
Hospital Cancer Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston (O.I.); Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville (W.K.R.); University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia (V.K.N.); the University of Utah, Salt Lake City (B.L.M.); Hôpital 
Européen Georges-Pompidou, University of Paris, Paris (S.O.); the University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor (T.E.); the University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh (J.K.M.); 
Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom 
(S.J.W.); Merck, Kenilworth, NJ (S.T., E.K.P., R.F.P.); and the Center for 
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD (W.M.L., R.S.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2021 Nov 25;385(22):2090-2091. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe2114846.
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2022 Feb;19(2):72. doi: 10.1038/s41571-021-00587-w.
    Nat Rev Nephrol. 2022 Apr;18(4):205-206. doi: 10.1038/s41581-022-00544-5.

BACKGROUND: Patients with von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease have a high incidence 
of renal cell carcinoma owing to VHL gene inactivation and constitutive 
activation of the transcription factor hypoxia-inducible factor 2α (HIF-2α).
METHODS: In this phase 2, open-label, single-group trial, we investigated the 
efficacy and safety of the HIF-2α inhibitor belzutifan (MK-6482, previously 
called PT2977), administered orally at a dose of 120 mg daily, in patients with 
renal cell carcinoma associated with VHL disease. The primary end point was 
objective response (complete or partial response) as measured according to the 
Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors, version 1.1, by an independent 
central radiology review committee. We also assessed responses to belzutifan in 
patients with non-renal cell carcinoma neoplasms and the safety of belzutifan.
RESULTS: After a median follow-up of 21.8 months (range, 20.2 to 30.1), the 
percentage of patients with renal cell carcinoma who had an objective response 
was 49% (95% confidence interval, 36 to 62). Responses were also observed in 
patients with pancreatic lesions (47 of 61 patients [77%]) and central nervous 
system hemangioblastomas (15 of 50 patients [30%]). Among the 16 eyes that could 
be evaluated in 12 patients with retinal hemangioblastomas at baseline, all 
(100%) were graded as showing improvement. The most common adverse events were 
anemia (in 90% of the patients) and fatigue (in 66%). Seven patients 
discontinued treatment: four patients voluntarily discontinued, one discontinued 
owing to a treatment-related adverse event (grade 1 dizziness), one discontinued 
because of disease progression as assessed by the investigator, and one patient 
died (of acute toxic effects of fentanyl).
CONCLUSIONS: Belzutifan was associated with predominantly grade 1 and 2 adverse 
events and showed activity in patients with renal cell carcinomas and non-renal 
cell carcinoma neoplasms associated with VHL disease. (Funded by Merck Sharp and 
Dohme and others; MK-6482-004 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03401788.).

Copyright © 2021 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2103425
PMCID: PMC9275515
PMID: 34818478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]