---
reference_id: "PMID:21921002"
title: Stiff person syndrome.
authors:
- Hadavi S
- Noyce AJ
- Leslie RD
- Giovannoni G
journal: Pract Neurol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1136/practneurol-2011-000071
keywords:
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- GABA Agents/therapeutic use
- Glutamate Decarboxylase/immunology
- "History, 20th Century"
- Humans
- Immunomodulation/physiology
- "Stiff-Person Syndrome/complications, diagnosis, history, therapy"
- gamma-Aminobutyric Acid/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stiff person syndrome.
**Authors:** Hadavi S, Noyce AJ, Leslie RD, Giovannoni G
**Journal:** Pract Neurol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1136/practneurol-2011-000071](https://doi.org/10.1136/practneurol-2011-000071)

## Content

1. Pract Neurol. 2011 Oct;11(5):272-82. doi: 10.1136/practneurol-2011-000071.

Stiff person syndrome.

Hadavi S(1), Noyce AJ, Leslie RD, Giovannoni G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Trauma, Blizard Institute of Cell and 
Molecular Science, Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen 
Mary University of London, London, UK. shahrzadhadavi@doctors.org.uk

Stiff person syndrome (SPS) is a rare disorder, characterised by fluctuating 
rigidity and stiffness of the axial and proximal lower limb muscles, with 
superimposed painful spasms and continuous motor unit activity on 
electromyography. Although rare in general neurology practice, once observed it 
is unforgettable. The general neurologist may see only one or two cases during 
his or her career and as such it remains underdiagnosed. Left untreated, SPS 
symptoms can progress to cause significant disability. Patients have a poor 
quality of life and an excess rate of comorbidity and mortality. The severity of 
symptoms and lack of public awareness of the condition create anxiety and 
uncertainty for people with the disease. This review aims to raise awareness of 
SPS and to improve the likelihood of its earlier diagnosis and treatment.

DOI: 10.1136/practneurol-2011-000071
PMID: 21921002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]