---
reference_id: "PMID:24936175"
title: "Serotonin-prefrontal cortical circuitry in anxiety and depression phenotypes: pivotal role of pre- and post-synaptic 5-HT1A receptor expression."
authors:
- Albert PR
- Vahid-Ansari F
- Luckhart C
journal: Front Behav Neurosci
year: '2014'
doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00199
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serotonin-prefrontal cortical circuitry in anxiety and depression phenotypes: pivotal role of pre- and post-synaptic 5-HT1A receptor expression.
**Authors:** Albert PR, Vahid-Ansari F, Luckhart C
**Journal:** Front Behav Neurosci (2014)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00199](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00199)

## Content

1. Front Behav Neurosci. 2014 Jun 6;8:199. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00199. 
eCollection 2014.

Serotonin-prefrontal cortical circuitry in anxiety and depression phenotypes: 
pivotal role of pre- and post-synaptic 5-HT1A receptor expression.

Albert PR(1), Vahid-Ansari F(2), Luckhart C(2).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, University of Ottawa 
Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(2)Neuroscience, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, University of Ottawa 
Ottawa, ON, Canada ; Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University 
of Ottawa Ottawa ON, Canada.

Decreased serotonergic activity has been implicated in anxiety and major 
depression, and antidepressants directly or indirectly increase the long-term 
activity of the serotonin system. A key component of serotonin circuitry is the 
5-HT1A autoreceptor, which functions as the major somatodendritic autoreceptor 
to negatively regulate the "gain" of the serotonin system. In addition, 5-HT1A 
heteroreceptors are abundantly expressed post-synaptically in the prefrontal 
cortex (PFC), amygdala, and hippocampus to mediate serotonin actions on fear, 
anxiety, stress, and cognition. Importantly, in the PFC 5-HT1A heteroreceptors 
are expressed on at least two antagonist neuronal populations: excitatory 
pyramidal neurons and inhibitory interneurons. Rodent models implicate the 
5-HT1A receptor in anxiety- and depression-like phenotypes with distinct roles 
for pre- and post-synaptic 5-HT1A receptors. In this review, we present a model 
of serotonin-PFC circuitry that integrates evidence from mouse genetic models of 
anxiety and depression involving knockout, suppression, over-expression, or 
mutation of genes of the serotonin system including 5-HT1A receptors. The model 
postulates that behavioral phenotype shifts as serotonin activity increases from 
none (depressed/aggressive not anxious) to low (anxious/depressed) to high 
(anxious, not depressed). We identify a set of conserved transcription factors 
including Deaf1, Freud-1/CC2D1A, Freud-2/CC2D1B and glucocorticoid receptors 
that may confer deleterious regional changes in 5-HT1A receptors in depression, 
and how future treatments could target these mechanisms. Further studies to 
specifically test the roles and regulation of pyramidal vs. interneuronal 
populations of 5-HT receptors are needed better understand the role of serotonin 
in anxiety and depression and to devise more effective targeted therapeutic 
approaches.

DOI: 10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00199
PMCID: PMC4047678
PMID: 24936175