---
reference_id: "PMID:39218077"
title: "Ferroptosis in Parkinson's disease -- The iron-related degenerative disease."
authors:
- Yao Z
- Jiao Q
- Du X
- Jia F
- Chen X
- Yan C
- Jiang H
journal: Ageing Res Rev
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.arr.2024.102477
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ferroptosis in Parkinson's disease -- The iron-related degenerative disease.
**Authors:** Yao Z, Jiao Q, Du X, Jia F, Chen X, Yan C, Jiang H
**Journal:** Ageing Res Rev (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.arr.2024.102477](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2024.102477)

## Content

1. Ageing Res Rev. 2024 Nov;101:102477. doi: 10.1016/j.arr.2024.102477. Epub 2024
 Aug 31.

Ferroptosis in Parkinson's disease -- The iron-related degenerative disease.

Yao Z(1), Jiao Q(1), Du X(1), Jia F(1), Chen X(1), Yan C(1), Jiang H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Pathogenesis 
and Prevention of Neurological Disorders and State Key Disciplines: Physiology, 
School of Basic Medicine, Medical College, Qingdao University, Qingdao, China.
(2)Qingdao Key Laboratory of Neurorehabilitation, University of Health and 
Rehabilitation Sciences, Qingdao, 266113, China. Electronic address: 
jianghong@uor.edu.cn.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a prevalent and advancing age-related 
neurodegenerative disorder, distinguished by the degeneration of dopaminergic 
neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc). Iron regional deposit in 
SNpc is a significant pathological characteristic of PD. Brain iron homeostasis 
is precisely regulated by iron metabolism related proteins, whereas disorder of 
these proteins can damage neurons and glial cells in the brain. Additionally, 
growing studies have reported iron metabolism related proteins are involved in 
the ferroptosis progression in PD. However, the effect of these proteins in the 
ferroptosis of PD has not been systematically summarized. This review focuses on 
the roles of iron metabolism related proteins in the ferroptosis of PD. Finally, 
we put forward the iron early diagnosis according to the observation of iron 
deposits in the brain and showed the recent advances in iron chelation therapy 
in PD.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arr.2024.102477
PMID: 39218077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.