---
reference_id: "PMID:35770070"
title: Characterization of the B-Cell Epitopes of Echinococcus granulosus Histones H4 and H2A Recognized by Sera From Patients With Liver Cysts.
authors:
- Maglioco A
- Agüero FA
- Valacco MP
- Valdez AJ
- Paulino M
- Fuchs AG
journal: Front Cell Infect Microbiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2022.901994
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of the B-Cell Epitopes of Echinococcus granulosus Histones H4 and H2A Recognized by Sera From Patients With Liver Cysts.
**Authors:** Maglioco A, Agüero FA, Valacco MP, Valdez AJ, Paulino M, Fuchs AG
**Journal:** Front Cell Infect Microbiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcimb.2022.901994](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcimb.2022.901994)

## Content

1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2022 Jun 13;12:901994. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2022.901994. eCollection 2022.

Characterization of the B-Cell Epitopes of Echinococcus granulosus Histones H4 
and H2A Recognized by Sera From Patients With Liver Cysts.

Maglioco A(1)(2), Agüero FA(1)(2), Valacco MP(3), Valdez AJ(1), Paulino M(4), 
Fuchs AG(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Universidad Abierta Interamericana (UAI), Centro de Altos Estudios en 
Ciencias Humanas y de la Salud (CAECIHS), Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Buenos 
Aires, Argentina.
(3)Centro de Estudios Químicos y Biológicos por Espectrometría de Masas 
(CEQUIBIEM), Instituto de Química Biológica Ciencias Exactas y Naturales- 
Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (IQUIBICEN-CONICET), 
Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales- Universidad de Buenos Aires (UBA), 
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(4)Departamento de Experimentación y Teoría de la Estructura de la Materia y sus 
Aplicaciones, Facultad de Química, Bioinformatica DETEMA- Udelar, Universidad de 
la República, Montevideo, Uruguay.
(5)Instituto Nacional de Parasitología "Dr Mario Fatala- Chaben", 
(Administración Nacional de Laboratorios e Institutos de Salud )ANLIS-Malbrán, 
Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Cystic echinococcosis (CE) is a zoonotic disease worldwide distributed, caused 
by the cestode Echinococcus granulosus sensu lato (E. granulosus), with an 
incidence rate of 50/100,000 person/year and a high prevalence in humans of 
5-10%. Serology has variable sensitivity and specificity and low predictive 
values. Antigens used are from the hydatid fluid and recombinant antigens have 
not demonstrated superiority over hydatid fluid. A cell line called EGPE was 
obtained from E. granulosus sensu lato G1 strain from bovine liver. Serum from 
CE patients recognizes protein extracts from EGPE cells with higher sensitivity 
than protein extracts from hydatid fluid. In the present study, EGPE cell 
protein extracts and supernatants from cell colonies were eluted from a protein 
G affinity column performed with sera from 11 CE patients. LC-MS/MS proteomic 
analysis of the eluted proteins identified four E. granulosus histones: one 
histone H4 in the cell extract and supernatant, one histone H2A only in the cell 
extract, and two histones H2A only in the supernatant. This differential 
distribution of histones could reflect different parasite viability stages 
regarding their role in gene transcription and silencing and could interact with 
host cells. Bioinformatics tools characterized the linear and conformational 
epitopes involved in antibody recognition. The three-dimensional structure of 
each histone was obtained by molecular modeling and validated by molecular 
dynamics simulation and PCR confirmed the presence of the epitopes in the 
parasite genome. The three histones H2A were very different and had a less 
conserved sequence than the histone H4. Comparison of the histones of E. 
granulosus with those of other organisms showed exclusive regions for E. 
granulosus. Since histones play a role in the host-parasite relationship they 
could be good candidates to improve the predictive value of serology in CE.

Copyright © 2022 Maglioco, Agüero, Valacco, Valdez, Paulino and Fuchs.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2022.901994
PMCID: PMC9234146
PMID: 35770070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.