---
reference_id: "PMID:38098552"
title: "Atypical presentation of hyperthyroidism complicated complete hydatidiform mole in a 24-year-old female: a case report."
authors:
- Mansour M
- Almasri R
- Amin N
- Hamwi G
- Attoum R
- Kanbour IM
- Jeniat SMT
- AlKhrait S
journal: Ann Med Surg (Lond)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/MS9.0000000000001381
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atypical presentation of hyperthyroidism complicated complete hydatidiform mole in a 24-year-old female: a case report.
**Authors:** Mansour M, Almasri R, Amin N, Hamwi G, Attoum R, Kanbour IM, Jeniat SMT, AlKhrait S
**Journal:** Ann Med Surg (Lond) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MS9.0000000000001381](https://doi.org/10.1097/MS9.0000000000001381)

## Content

1. Ann Med Surg (Lond). 2023 Oct 4;85(12):6173-6177. doi: 
10.1097/MS9.0000000000001381. eCollection 2023 Dec.

Atypical presentation of hyperthyroidism complicated complete hydatidiform mole 
in a 24-year-old female: a case report.

Mansour M(1), Almasri R(2), Amin N(1), Hamwi G(3), Attoum R(1), Kanbour IM(4), 
Jeniat SMT(4), AlKhrait S(4).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Tartous University, Tartous.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Damascus University.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Tishreen University, Latakia, Syrian Arab Republic.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Maternity Hospital, Damascus.

INTRODUCTION AND IMPORTANCE: Molar pregnancy is the most common type of 
gestational trophoblastic disease. It manifests as vaginal bleeding, accompanied 
by high levels of β-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-HCG). This case aims to 
highlight the importance of considering gestational trophoblastic disease as a 
potential diagnosis and its serious complications.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 24-year-old female presented with vomiting, nausea, and no 
complaint of vaginal bleeding. Laboratory tests indicated hyperthyroidism as a 
complication requiring challenging preoperative prophylactic management. 
Initially, the patient underwent suction and curettage, but a total hysterectomy 
had to be performed later. The histological study concluded with the diagnosis 
of a complete hydatidiform mole. Post-surgery follow-up evaluations revealed 
high blood pressure values, and the patient was appointed for further cardiology 
assessment.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: Although uncommon, complications of a molar pregnancy 
include anaemia, severe cardiac distress, and hyperthyroidism. Trophoblastic 
Hyperthyroidism is a result of extremely high levels of β-HCG levels due to 
molecular cross-reactivity. History, clinical examination, and ultrasound, in 
addition to measuring β-HCG levels, could all help in diagnosing a molar 
pregnancy, but the definitive diagnosis is based on histopathology and a 
karyotype study. Management procedures include dilation, suction and curettage, 
and hysterectomy. The treatment depends on the patient's age, desire for future 
pregnancies, and risk of developing gestational trophoblastic neoplasia. A 
follow-up with serial β-HCG measurement is recommended to monitor possible 
complications. Attaining and maintaining euthyroidism is a life-saving procedure 
before molar pregnancy surgery. Methimazole, Propranolol, Lugol's iodine, and 
hydrocortisone can all be used in the prophylactic management of the thyroid 
storm.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MS9.0000000000001381
PMCID: PMC10718378
PMID: 38098552

Conflict of interest statement: None.Sponsorships or competing interests that 
may be relevant to content are disclosed at the end of this article.