---
reference_id: "PMID:32544272"
title: Factor VIII binding affects the mechanical unraveling of the A2 domain of von Willebrand factor.
authors:
- Cao W
- Cao W
- Zhang W
- Zheng XL
- Zhang XF
journal: J Thromb Haemost
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/jth.14962
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Factor VIII binding affects the mechanical unraveling of the A2 domain of von Willebrand factor.
**Authors:** Cao W, Cao W, Zhang W, Zheng XL, Zhang XF
**Journal:** J Thromb Haemost (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jth.14962](https://doi.org/10.1111/jth.14962)

## Content

1. J Thromb Haemost. 2020 Sep;18(9):2169-2176. doi: 10.1111/jth.14962. Epub 2020 
Jul 23.

Factor VIII binding affects the mechanical unraveling of the A2 domain of von 
Willebrand factor.

Cao W(1)(2), Cao W(3), Zhang W(1)(2), Zheng XL(3), Zhang XF(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Mechanical Engineering and Mechanics, Lehigh University, 
Bethlehem, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of Kansas 
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, USA.

BACKGROUND: Proteolytic cleavage of von Willebrand factor (VWF) by ADAMTS13 is 
crucial for normal hemostasis. Our previous studies demonstrate that binding of 
coagulation factor VIII (or FVIII) to VWF enhances the proteolytic cleavage of 
VWF by ADAMTS13 under shear.
OBJECTIVES: Present study aims to determine the mechanism underlying 
FVIII-mediated enhancing effect on VWF proteolysis by ADAMTS13 under force.
METHODS: Single molecular force spectroscopy, atomic force microscopy, and 
surface plasmon resonance are all used.
RESULTS: Using single molecule force spectroscopy, we show that an addition of 
FVIII (~5 nmol/L) to D'D3 or D'D3A1 does not significantly alter force-induced 
unfolding of these fragments; however, an addition of FVIII at the same 
concentration to D'D3A1A2 eliminates its long unfolding event at ~40 nm, 
suggesting that binding of FVIII to D'D3 and/or A2 may result in force-induced 
conformational changes in A2 domain. Atomic force spectroscopy further 
demonstrates the direct binding between FVIII and D'D3 (or A2) with an intrinsic 
2-dimensional off-rate (k0 ) of 0.02 ± 0.01/s (or 0.3 ± 0.1/s). The direct 
binding interaction between FVIII and A2 is further confirmed with the surface 
plasmon resonance assay, with a dissociation constant of ~0.2 μmol/L; no binding 
is detected between FVIII and A1 under the same conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that binding of FVIII to D'D3 and/or A2 may 
alter the mechanical property in the central A2 domain. The findings provide 
novel insight into the molecular mechanism underlying FVIII-dependent regulation 
of VWF proteolysis by ADAMTS13 under mechanical force.

© 2020 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

DOI: 10.1111/jth.14962
PMCID: PMC7789802
PMID: 32544272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of conflict of interest XZ is a 
speaker for Alexion and Sanofi, and serves as a consultant for Sanofi and 
Takeda. XZ is also the founder of Clotsolution, Inc. All other authors declare 
no relevant conflict of interest.