---
reference_id: "PMID:16098032"
title: "Epidermolysis bullosa simplex: recurrent and de novo mutations in the KRT5 and KRT14 genes, phenotype/genotype correlations, and implications for genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis."
authors:
- Pfendner EG
- Sadowski SG
- Uitto J
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1111/j.0022-202X.2005.23818.x
keywords:
- Cohort Studies
- Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex/genetics
- Genetic Counseling
- Genotype
- Humans
- Intermediate Filament Proteins/genetics
- Keratin-14
- Keratin-5
- Keratins/genetics
- Phenotype
- Plectin
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- Recurrence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidermolysis bullosa simplex: recurrent and de novo mutations in the KRT5 and KRT14 genes, phenotype/genotype correlations, and implications for genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis.
**Authors:** Pfendner EG, Sadowski SG, Uitto J
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.0022-202X.2005.23818.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0022-202X.2005.23818.x)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 2005 Aug;125(2):239-43. doi: 
10.1111/j.0022-202X.2005.23818.x.

Epidermolysis bullosa simplex: recurrent and de novo mutations in the KRT5 and 
KRT14 genes, phenotype/genotype correlations, and implications for genetic 
counseling and prenatal diagnosis.

Pfendner EG(1), Sadowski SG, Uitto J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Jefferson Medical College, 
Jefferson Institute of Molecular Medicine, Thomas Jefferson University, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

Epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBS) is a mechano-bullous disorder characterized 
by intraepidermal blistering within the basal keratinocytes as a result of 
trauma to the skin. As part of the DNA diagnostics program, our laboratory has 
analyzed a cohort of 57 patients with the initial referral diagnosis of EBS. 
Among these patients, 18 were found to harbor heterozygous mutations in the 
keratin 5 or keratin 14 genes, KRT5 and KRT14, respectively, whereas in 14 
cases, the disease was associated with mutations in both alleles of the plectin 
gene. Among the keratin mutations, 12 were distinct and six were novel, and in 
most cases there was no family history of a blistering disease. Prenatal 
diagnosis of eight pregnancies with keratin gene mutations, at risk for EBS 
either because one of the parents was affected (three cases) or history of a 
previously affected child as a result of a de novo mutation (five cases), 
predicted two fetuses being affected and six being normal. No recurrence of the 
de novo mutations in these pregnancies was disclosed. Collectively, the data 
suggest that a significant number of cases diagnosed as EBS are due to plectin 
mutations, and many cases result from de novo mutations in KRT5 and KRT14 genes. 
These findings have implications for genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis 
for EBS.

DOI: 10.1111/j.0022-202X.2005.23818.x
PMID: 16098032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]