---
reference_id: "PMID:39867042"
title: "Squamous Cell Carcinoma Originating From Mature Cystic Teratoma of the Ovary Diagnosed 10 Years After Initial Tumor Detection: A Case Report."
authors:
- Ohira S
- Kitano R
- Yokoi Y
- Kitamura F
- Hayashi A
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.76470
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Squamous Cell Carcinoma Originating From Mature Cystic Teratoma of the Ovary Diagnosed 10 Years After Initial Tumor Detection: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Ohira S, Kitano R, Yokoi Y, Kitamura F, Hayashi A
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.76470](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.76470)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Dec 27;16(12):e76470. doi: 10.7759/cureus.76470. eCollection 2024
 Dec.

Squamous Cell Carcinoma Originating From Mature Cystic Teratoma of the Ovary 
Diagnosed 10 Years After Initial Tumor Detection: A Case Report.

Ohira S(1), Kitano R(1), Yokoi Y(1), Kitamura F(1), Hayashi A(1).

Author information:
(1)Obstetrics and Gynecology, Marunouchi Hospital, Matsumoto, JPN.

Malignant transformation is a rare complication of ovarian mature cystic 
teratoma that occurs in 1-3% of cases. We herein report a case of squamous cell 
carcinoma originating from mature cystic teratoma of the ovary diagnosed 10 
years after initial tumor detection. A 69-year-old woman presented to the 
Department of Internal Medicine with a seven-month history of abdominal 
fullness. Magnetic resonance imaging performed at another Department of Internal 
Medicine 10 years ago revealed a left ovarian teratoma measuring 8 cm; however, 
she refused referral to the Department of Gynecology. The current plane magnetic 
resonance imaging showed a large pelvic-abdominal cystic tumor measuring 17 cm, 
consisting of fat, fluid-fluid level, and a hair ball. Although the anterior 
wall of the cyst was slightly thick, the tumor had no solid projection into the 
cyst. She was referred to our Department of Gynecology. Contrast-enhanced 
abdominal computed tomography showed the lack of an enhanced solid component in 
the tumor. Laparotomy presented a large cystic tumor originating from the left 
ovary. A left salpingo-oophorectomy was performed without the intraperitoneal 
spillage of cyst fluid. Macroscopically, the left ovary was a unilocular cyst 
containing hair and sebaceous yellow fluid. A histological examination revealed 
that part of the thickened cyst wall was lined by squamous cell carcinoma in 
situ. Although the area of carcinoma in situ was dominant, nests of squamous 
cell carcinoma partially invaded the stroma. We diagnosed this tumor as squamous 
cell carcinoma originating from mature cystic teratoma of the left ovary. We 
speculate that the reason for the lack of enhancing solid components in the 
present case may be the abundance of squamous cell carcinoma in situ. The time 
required for mature cystic teratoma to become malignant remains unclear; 
therefore, the further accumulation of cases is needed to elucidate the 
mechanisms underlying the malignant transformation of mature cystic teratoma of 
the ovary.

Copyright © 2024, Ohira et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.76470
PMCID: PMC11769704
PMID: 39867042

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent for treatment and open 
access publication was obtained or waived by all participants in this study. 
Marunouchi Hospital Ethical Review Board issued approval 24-13. Conflicts of 
interest: In compliance with the ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors 
declare the following: Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no 
financial support was received from any organization for the submitted work. 
Financial relationships: All authors have declared that they have no financial 
relationships at present or within the previous three years with any 
organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work. Other 
relationships: All authors have declared that there are no other relationships 
or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.