---
reference_id: "PMID:41632731"
title: "Diabetic Kidney Disease: From Pathophysiology To Treatment Perspectives."
authors:
- Varda L
- Vreča N
- Ekart R
- Bevc S
- Piko N
journal: Kidney Blood Press Res
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1159/000550085
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diabetic Kidney Disease: From Pathophysiology To Treatment Perspectives.
**Authors:** Varda L, Vreča N, Ekart R, Bevc S, Piko N
**Journal:** Kidney Blood Press Res (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000550085](https://doi.org/10.1159/000550085)

## Content

1. Kidney Blood Press Res. 2026 Feb 3:1-31. doi: 10.1159/000550085. Online ahead
of  print.

Diabetic Kidney Disease: From Pathophysiology To Treatment Perspectives.

Varda L, Vreča N, Ekart R, Bevc S, Piko N.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) presents an extensive healthcare burden globally. 
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is the most prevalent cause of CKD and end-stage kidney 
disease (ESKD), requiring renal replacement therapy (RRT). Type II DM remains 
the most prevalent subtype, as it is closely related to metabolic syndrome, 
whose prevalence is also rising with a sedentary lifestyle and Western diet. 
Therefore, understanding the pathophysiology of diabetic kidney disease (DKD), 
its early recognition and early initiation of the currently available therapy 
remains an important measure to slow the progression of the disease. 
Pathophysiology of DKD is a complex process, where all the mechanisms are still 
being elucidated on preclinical animal and in-vitro models as well as in 
clinical studies. Changes in glomerular hemodynamics, glomerular and tubular 
hypertrophy, hyperfiltration, overactivation of the 
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS), podocyte injury, inflammation, 
oxidative stress, renal hypoxia, mitochondrial injury, and epigenetic changes 
are the main mechanisms leading to albuminuria, glomerulosclerosis and fibrosis. 
In the latter years, the importance of gut microbiota in DKD has also been 
shown. Understanding the mechanisms behind DKD is important, especially for 
researching current and possibly future pharmacological treatment of DKD. While 
angiotensin convertase enzyme inhibitors (ACEi) and angiotensin receptor 
blockers (ARB) alongside nonpharmacological measures have been the pillars of 
DKD treatment and reduction of albuminuria for many decades, novel 
pharmacological agents are emerging. Starting with sodium-glucose transporter 2 
(SGLT2) inhibitors, which have been proven to affect many of the 
pathophysiological mechanisms, continuing with novel non-steroidal 
mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (MRAs), which are a new anti-inflammatory 
and antifibrotic possibility, and finishing with glucagon-like peptide 1 
receptor antagonists (GLP1RA) which have recently joined the therapeutic options 
for DKD. This comprehensive review focuses on the main pathophysiological 
mechanisms of DKD and current available pharmacological and non-pharmacological 
possibilities.

The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000550085
PMID: 41632731