---
reference_id: "PMID:27679736"
title: Novel insights into the polycythemia-paraganglioma-somatostatinoma syndrome.
authors:
- Därr R
- Nambuba J
- Del Rivero J
- Janssen I
- Merino M
- Todorovic M
- Balint B
- Jochmanova I
- Prchal JT
- Lechan RM
- Tischler AS
- Popovic V
- Miljic D
- Adams KT
- Prall FR
- Ling A
- Golomb MR
- Ferguson M
- Nilubol N
- Chen CC
- Chew E
- Taïeb D
- Stratakis CA
- Fojo T
- Yang C
- Kebebew E
- Zhuang Z
- Pacak K
journal: Endocr Relat Cancer
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1530/ERC-16-0231
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Adrenal Gland Neoplasms/complications, diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
- Adult
- Child
- Cohort Studies
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasms, Multiple Primary/complications, diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
- "Pancreatic Neoplasms/complications, diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
- "Paraganglioma/complications, diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
- "Polycythemia/complications, diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Somatostatinoma/complications, diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
- Syndrome
- Young Adult
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Novel insights into the polycythemia-paraganglioma-somatostatinoma syndrome.
**Authors:** Därr R, Nambuba J, Del Rivero J, Janssen I, Merino M, Todorovic M, Balint B, Jochmanova I, Prchal JT, Lechan RM, Tischler AS, Popovic V, Miljic D, Adams KT, Prall FR, Ling A, Golomb MR, Ferguson M, Nilubol N, Chen CC, Chew E, Taïeb D, Stratakis CA, Fojo T, Yang C, Kebebew E, Zhuang Z, Pacak K
**Journal:** Endocr Relat Cancer (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1530/ERC-16-0231](https://doi.org/10.1530/ERC-16-0231)

## Content

1. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2016 Dec;23(12):899-908. doi: 10.1530/ERC-16-0231. Epub
2016 Sep 27.

Novel insights into the polycythemia-paraganglioma-somatostatinoma syndrome.

Därr R(1), Nambuba J(1), Del Rivero J(1), Janssen I(1), Merino M(2), Todorovic
M(3), Balint B(4), Jochmanova I(1)(5), Prchal JT(6), Lechan RM(7), Tischler
AS(8), Popovic V(9), Miljic D(9), Adams KT(1), Prall FR(10), Ling A(11), Golomb
MR(12), Ferguson M(13), Nilubol N(14), Chen CC(15), Chew E(16), Taïeb D(17),
Stratakis CA(18), Fojo T(19), Yang C(20), Kebebew E(14), Zhuang Z(20), Pacak
K(21).

Author information:
(1)Section on Medical NeuroendocrinologyEunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)Laboratory of PathologyNational Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland,
USA.
(3)Institute of HematologyClinical Center of Serbia and Medical Faculty
University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
(4)Institute of Transfusiology and Hemobiology of Military Medical Academy and
Institute for Medical ResearchUniversity of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
(5)1st Department of Internal MedicineFaculty of Medicine, Pavol Jozef Safarik
University in Kosice, Kosice, Slovakia.
(6)Division of HematologyUniversity of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(7)Tupper Research Institute and Department of MedicineDivision of
Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Tufts Medical Center, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.
(8)Department of Pathology and Laboratory MedicineTufts Medical Center, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.
(9)Institute of EndocrinologyClinical Center of Serbia, Medical Faculty,
University Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
(10)Department of OphthalmologyEugene and Marilyn Glick Eye Institute, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(11)Department of Radiology and Imaging SciencesClinical Center, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(12)Division of Child NeurologyDepartment of Neurology, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(13)Riley Hospital for Children at Indiana University HealthIndianapolis,
Indiana, USA.
(14)Endocrine Oncology BranchNational Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(15)Division of Nuclear MedicineDepartment of Radiology and Imaging Sciences,
Clinical Center, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(16)Division of Epidemiology and Clinical ApplicationsNational Eye Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(17)Department of Nuclear MedicineLa Timone University Hospital & CERIMED &
Inserm UMR1068 Marseille Cancerology Research Center, Institut Paoli-Calmettes,
Aix-Marseille University, Marseille, France.
(18)Division of Intramural ResearchEunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA.
(19)Medical Oncology BranchNational Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(20)Neuro-Oncology BranchCenter for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(21)Section on Medical NeuroendocrinologyEunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA karel@mail.nih.gov.

Worldwide, the syndromes of paraganglioma (PGL), somatostatinoma (SOM) and early
childhood polycythemia are described in only a few patients with somatic
mutations in the hypoxia-inducible factor 2 alpha (HIF2A). This study provides
detailed information about the clinical aspects and course of 7 patients with
this syndrome and brings into perspective these experiences with the pertinent
literature. Six females and one male presented at a median age of 28 years
(range 11-46). Two were found to have HIF2A somatic mosaicism. No relatives were
affected. All patients were diagnosed with polycythemia before age 8 and before
PGL/SOM developed. PGLs were found at a median age of 17 years (range 8-38) and
SOMs at 29 years (range 22-38). PGLs were multiple, recurrent and metastatic in
100, 100 and 29% of all cases, and SOMs in 40, 40 and 60%, respectively. All
PGLs were primarily norepinephrine-producing. All patients had abnormal
ophthalmologic findings and those with SOMs had gallbladder disease. Computed
tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging revealed cystic lesions at
multiple sites and hemangiomas in 4 patients (57%), previously thought to be
pathognomonic for von Hippel-Lindau disease. The most accurate
radiopharmaceutical to detect PGL appeared to be
[18F]-fluorodihydroxyphenylalanine ([18F]-FDOPA). Therefore, [18F]-FDOPA PET/CT,
not [68Ga]-(DOTA)-[Tyr3]-octreotate ([68Ga]-DOTATATE) PET/CT is recommended for
tumor localization and aftercare in this syndrome. The long-term prognosis of
the syndrome is unknown. However, to date no deaths occurred after 6 years
follow-up. Physicians should be aware of this unique syndrome and its diagnostic
and therapeutic challenges.

© 2016 Society for Endocrinology.

DOI: 10.1530/ERC-16-0231
PMCID: PMC5096964
PMID: 27679736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interest The authors declare that
there is no conflict of interest that could be perceived as prejudicing the
impartiality of the research reported.

Pheochromocytomas (PHEOs) and paragangliomas (PGLs) are rare catecholamine-producing neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) arising in or outside the adrenal medulla, respectively (Lenders et al. 2005). By definition, a PHEO is an intraadrenal PGL. To date, it has been recognized that up to 35%–40% of these tumors are hereditary, with about 19 causally linked mutated genes (Crona et al. 2013; Pacak and Wimalawansa 2015). Among these genes, much attention has been directed to those affecting hypoxia-signaling pathways because many of the associated tumors express a so called “pseudohypoxic signature” and most of them converge on the hypoxia-signaling pathway (Jochmanova et al. 2013).

Germline mutations in the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) gene trigger overexpression of hypoxia inducible factor (HIF) proteins and cause VHL disease, which may predispose to various tumors such as multiple PHEOs/PGLs, hemangioblastomas of the retina and central nervous system, as well as kidney cysts, renal cell carcinoma, and polycythemia, among others (Haase 2009; Taïeb et al. 2016). Mutations in another HIF-regulating protein gene, prolyl hydroxylase domain protein 2 (PHD2) and, more recently, PHD1, which hydroxylate HIF and enable its VHL-mediated degradation, have been associated with secondary polycythemia and multiple PGLs (Yang et al. 2014). Nevertheless, the occurrence of PGL together with polycythemia is rare (Dionne et al. 2006).

Somatic mutations in HIF2A (EPAS1), affecting PHD hydroxylation and subsequent VHL degradation, were recently recognized to cause a syndrome consisting of PGL and/or somatostatinoma (SOM) associated with polycythemia in females (Pacak et al. 2013). Since then, more patients with the syndrome have been described carrying the mutations in this gene. Nevertheless, at present, the triad of PGL, SOM, and polycythemia has been exclusively found in females. Furthermore, normal tissues genomic DNA mosaicism of HIF2A mutations has recently been detected in two out of four initial patients specifically presenting with this syndrome (Yang et al. 2015).

The clinical dyad/triad of PGLs and/or SOMs associated with polycythemia, also referred to as “Pacak-Zhuang syndrome” (Toyoda et al. 2014), may be regarded as a new tumor syndrome, similar to multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndromes, VHL disease, Carney-Stratakis syndrome, Carney triad, Cowden syndrome, or the PHEO-PGL syndrome, among others (Gaal and de Krijger 2010; Ni et al. 2012). From the first studies published by our group, additional new clinical phenotypes have been identified through the follow-up of previously described and newly diagnosed patients with this syndrome.

In the present study, we provide detailed clinical information on 7 patients with the PGL, SOM, and polycythemia syndrome carrying the somatic HIF2A mutation, including a teenage boy, diagnosed and followed at the NIH for 6 years. New clinical information particularly pertains to aspects of genetics, tumor imaging, organ involvement, disease progression, and patient outcomes. We also searched the literature for studies and reports on related tumor syndromes and diseases with activating mutations of the HIF2A gene and discuss our findings in the context of this other data. As a result, we propose strategies for diagnosis and therapy of patients with PGL, SOM, and polycythemia syndrome.

Patients were evaluated under protocol (00-CH-0093) approved by the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Institutional Review Board. All patients provided written informed consent. We carefully reviewed all patients’ demographics, clinical manifestations, biochemical and hematological profiles, radiographic findings, and outcomes based on frequent follow-ups and very close interactions with outside physicians (Supplementary Table 1).

All laboratory analyses, mutation analysis, hydroxylation assays, real-time polymerase chain reaction, and chromatin immunoprecipitation were performed, as previously described (Pacak et al. 2013).

Anatomical imaging using computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis were performed as previously described, along with positron emission tomography (PET)/CT studies using [18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose ([18F]-FDG), [18F]-fluorodopamine ([18F]-FDA), [18F]-fluorodihydroxyphenylalanine ([18F]-FDOPA), and [68Ga]-(DOTA)-[Tyr3]-octreotate ([68Ga]-DOTATATE) as radiopharmaceuticals (Supplementary Table 2) (Janssen et al. 2015). In addition, CT scans with negative enteric contrast were used to better detect duodenal tumors, as performed in our previous studies (Pacak et al. 2013).

Gender, mutation status with evidence of mosaicism of HIF2A, ages at the latest outpatient visit, and ages at diagnosis of polycythemia, occurrence of PHEO/PGL, SOM and number of lesions, recurrence of lesions, as well as surgical and other treatment modalities for individual patients in chronological order are shown in Fig. 1. None of the family members had any history of polycythemia, PHEO/PGL, or SOM. Detailed clinical presentations are described in Supplementary Table 1. Patients received regular follow-up at the NIH for a median of 6 years (range 1–11) since their first tumor resection. The median age of patients at the time of their last follow-up at the NIH was 28 years (range 11–46).

Polycythemia was detected in patients in early childhood (median 2 years, range from birth to 7 years). Erythropoietin (EPO) levels were an average of 5 times above the upper limit of normal in all patients. For patient number (No.) 3, EPO levels are plotted together with levels of hemoglobin and hematocrit over the course of the patient’s visits at the NIH (Fig. 2). There was no long-term normalization of EPO levels even after surgery in any patient.

PGL developed later in life at a median age of 17 years (range 8–38) in all patients. PGLs were predominantly of the norepinephrine-producing biochemical phenotype. After surgery, levels of normetanephrine dropped significantly (not shown). Patients were found to have multiple (100%), recurrent (100%), and metastatic (29%) PGLs, with adrenal involvement in four cases.

Five of 7 patients had a manifestation of SOM at a median of 29 years (range 22–38). No patient was found to have SOM diagnosed before the occurrence of PGL. Patient No. 5, an 11-year-old girl, and No. 7, a 17-year-old-boy have not yet developed SOM. SOM was confirmed either histologically and/or biochemically. In the case of patient No. 4, the diagnosis of SOM was based solely on elevated levels of somatostatin along with retroperitoneal abdominal nodules on imaging studies, but without histological confirmation of the diagnosis to date since the patient has refused to have an operation. For patient No. 6, we found elevated levels of gastrin that remained high after surgery, as well as slightly elevated levels in vasoactive intestinal peptide for patient No. 3.

In four patients, we had histological proof of SOM. We found solitary (40%), multiple (40%), recurrent (40%), and metastatic SOMs in 3 cases (60%). All patients with SOM were diagnosed with gallbladder disease, with four having chronic cholecystitis and two, cholelithiasis, usually in early adulthood at a median of 29 years (range 19–39). Two patients, No. 3 and 6, were diagnosed with noninsulin-dependent diabetes at the ages of 26 and 38, respectively, which may be regarded as manifestation of PGL (Lenders et al. 2005), and which resolved in patient No. 3 after her second surgery (Supplementary Table 1).

All patients received an ophthalmology consultation because of known ocular complications occurring with this syndrome (Pacak et al. 2014). The results are summarized in Table 1. We observed optic disc fibrosis in all patients (Supplementary Figure 1). Three patients had macular changes and three peripheral retinal changes. For patient No. 5, ophthalmologic changes were noticed even before polycythemia was diagnosed and prior to the occurrence of PGL.

Anatomical and functional imaging characteristics are summarized in Table 2. On anatomical imaging, we found cystic lesions in 4 out of 7 patients. Cysts were localized to the kidneys, breasts, lungs, pericardium, cervix, and pancreas. In addition, patient No. 4 was found to have a liver hemangioma. Overall, the most suitable functional imaging modality that detected most of tumor lesions was [18F]-FDOPA PET/CT (according to our chosen “gold standard”, see Supplementary Table 2) closely followed by [18F]-FDA PET/CT, as exemplified by the images of patients No. 2 and 4 (Fig. 3 and Supplementary Figure 2). In contrast, overall sensitivities and positive predictive values obtained were considerably lower for [18F]-FDG PET/CT and [68Ga]-DOTATATE PET/CT, respectively.

Supplementary Table 3 provides an overview of the current literature on patients with HIF2A gain-of-function mutations and summarizes pertinent information about position and type of the mutations, presence of mosaicism, mode of inheritance, phenotypic expression, and gender distribution. Apart from the 7 patients described in the present investigation, 56 additional patients with activating HIF2A mutations were identified in prior published studies and reports between the years 2008 and 2016: one additional female patient with Pacak-Zhuang syndrome, 7 patients (3 females, 4 males) with polycythemia and PHEO/PGL but without SOM, 16 patients (12 females, 2 males) with PHEO/PGL including 2 females with gangliocytic PGL (GPGL) without polycythemia or SOM, 2 patients (1 female, 1 male) with central nervous system hemangioblastomas without polycythemia, PHEO/PGL or SOM, and 28 patients (15 females, 12 males, no record of gender in 1) with isolated sporadic or familial polycythemia plus one female offspring with inherited HIF2A mutation, but without polycythemia. One other female patient without any signs of organic disease was found to be a carrier of an activating HIF2A mutation, which she passed to her 50 year-old son who had polycythemia and PHEO/PGL. There was a remarkable partial overlap of position and type of mutations between patients with PHEO/PGL with or without polycythemia, and patients with Pacak-Zhuang syndrome. Identical mutations were also described in patients with isolated sporadic and familial polycythemia. However, there was no overlap of mutations in these latter two groups of patients compared with the former, indicating mutation specific fundamental differences in downstream signaling pathways of HIF2A leading to either isolated polycythemia or PHEO/PGL with or without polycythemia or Pacak-Zhuang syndrome.

This report provides comprehensive new information on a 6-year follow-up of 7 patients carrying activating somatic HIF2A mutations who presented with the syndrome of PGL and/or SOM associated with polycythemia (Pacak-Zhuang syndrome), and brings these experiences into perspective with the pertinent literature. The involvement of the downstream HIF2A signaling pathway in the pathophysiology of this new syndrome is strongly supported by its association with distinct HIF2A mutations as well as by the occurrence of closely related clinical phenotypes described in some reports of patients with VHL syndrome (Karasawa et al. 2001; Haase 2009), and of polycythemia and PGL in patients with mutated PHD1 and PHD2 (Yang et al. 2014).

As a hallmark of the syndrome in all of our patients, polycythemia was diagnosed either at birth or in early childhood, and always before PHEO/PGL and/or SOM, which is typically discovered after the development of PHEO/PGL. All patients were found to have eye involvement at manifestation of the disease (Pacak et al. 2014). Furthermore, EPO levels were elevated in all patients and did not return to normal after surgical tumor removal, making paraneoplastic EPO production less likely. Mosaicism with HIF2A gain-of-function mutations in EPO-producing renal interstitial cells or hepatocytes (Haase 2013) leading to continuous stimulation of EPO synthesis may be a reasonable alternative explanation. Although, in our series, mosaicism was only found in two patients (Patients No. 1 and 3; see also Yang et al. 2015). On the other hand, there is evidence from studies in patients with familial or sporadic polycythemia harboring HIF2A gain-of-function mutations to suggest that polycythemia does not necessarily rely on increased EPO (Martini et al. 2008; Percy et al. 2012; Perrotta et al. 2013), indicating that the link between polycythemia and EPO in patients with Pacak-Zhuang syndrome may be less direct than intuitively expected. Other genetic abnormalities, including the timing of when HIF2A mutations occur, may further contribute to the full spectrum of this disease as in other hereditary syndromes.

In our patients PHEOs/PGLs were detected at a median age of 17 years, some 15 years after the diagnosis of polycythemia, and similar time intervals have been reported in other studies on patients with Pacak-Zhuang syndrome with or without established SOMs (Taïeb et al. 2013; Comino-Mendez et al. 2013; Buffet et al. 2014; Toyoda et al. 2014), as well as in one patient with familial polycythemia and PGL (Lorenzo et al. 2013). Together, these observations are in support of the concept that activating HIF2A mutations predispose to, but may not be sufficient for, the development of PHEOs/PGLs (Lorenzo et al. 2013). Of note, sporadic PHEOs/PGLs and other solid tumors with activating somatic HIF2A mutations occurring in the adult age do not appear to be preceded or accompanied by polycythemia, despite largely overlapping genetic changes compared to patients with Pacak-Zhuang syndrome or familial polycythemia with PHEO/PGL (Favier et al. 2012; Comino-Mendez et al. 2013; Toledo et al. 2013; Welander et al. 2014; Taïeb et al. 2016). It is therefore conceivable, that patients with Pacak-Zhuang syndrome and familial polycythemia with PHEO/PGL may harbor additional, yet unidentified tumor promoting aberrations, which are not present in sporadic PHEOs/PGLs later in life, the most obvious phenotypic reflections of which are polycythemia and increased EPO. Another explanation may be due to the precise timing of when an activating HIF2A mutation occurs during embryogenesis. It is anticipated that deep sequencing may allow a more definitive answer.

Considerations such as the above may also explain the distinct clinical features of SOMs in the patients described in the present study and by others (Buffet et al. 2014), which resemble those seen in conjunction with hereditary tumor syndromes, specifically neurofibromatosis type 1 (von Recklinghausen disease-NF1), MEN type 1, and VHL disease. Similarities include the nearly two decades earlier age of onset, lower rate of malignancy (despite early metastases in regional lymph nodes), and the preferential duodenal localization compared to sporadic SOMs (Klöppel et al. 2004; Marini et al. 2009), with the notable exception of VHL disease, where SOMs are predominantly found in the pancreas (Hammel et al. 2000). However, sporadic SOMs and SOMs associated with NF1, MEN1 or VHL gene mutations are clearly distinguished from SOMs in patients with Pacak-Zhuang syndrome by their substantially lower incidence and equal gender distribution. Therefore, even assuming the presence of an acquired genetic predisposition, the observation of a highly efficient and exclusive expression of SOMs in women remains a puzzling feature of Pacak-Zhuang syndrome.

Tumor location and biochemical phenotype of our patients fit well into the entity of “pseudohypoxic” cluster 1 tumors, as is the case for VHL, PHD, and for patients harboring succinate dehydrogenase (SDHx) mutations (Eisenhofer et al. 2011; Jochmanova et al. 2013; Richter et al. 2013). As in these patients (Neumann et al. 2002), HIF2A gain-of-function mutations may manifest with head and neck PGL. This was the case in patient No. 2 with an undefined skull-based lesion (Fig. 3).

Patients with SDHB mutations are especially prone to malignant disease (Gimenez-Roqueplo et al. 2003). In contrast, expression of tumor promoting genes seems to be less pronounced in patients with activating HIF2A mutations (Favier et al. 2012), resulting in a less aggressive PHEO/PGL phenotype. Indeed, none of our patients with metastatic PGLs thus far required chemotherapy or repeated radiotherapy, and none have died even 11 years after the first surgery. Therefore, these patients can be reassured that their overall outlook is favorable, although recurrent disease at multiple sites is highly probable and will require repeated surgeries, beginning at a young age.

The best functional imaging tracer for localization of tumors within Pacak-Zhuang syndrome in our series was [18F]-FDOPA, and in line with recent recommendations for localization of NETs with a low Ki-67 Index (van Essen et al. 2014). [18F]-FDG appeared to perform best in patients with mainly metastatic NET (Supplementary Table 2). In contrast, accuracy of [68Ga]-DOTATATE was low. This finding points to substantial differences in tumor biology between patients with HIF2A and SDHB mutations, where [18F]-FDG PET/CT and now [68Ga]-DOTATATE PET/CT provide superior results (Timmers et al. 2007; Timmers et al. 2009; Janssen et al. 2015). The demonstration of cystic and hemangiomatous lesions in all of our patients but the two teenage subjects suggests shared phenotypic features in patients harboring mutated VHL (Haase 2009; Taïeb et al. 2016).

Although limited by a small number of patients in this case series, our findings call for several recommendations (Neumann and Eng 2009): a) consider genetic testing for HIF2A mutations in congenital polycythemia; b) screen for PHEO/PGL starting from the age of about eight; c) perform yearly measurement of plasma or urine metanephrines; d) perform regular (every 1–2 years) whole body or at least abdominal imaging, MRI in children; e) consider a surgical approach since no specific therapies are currently known; f) PGLs are predominantly norepinephrine-producing and, therefore, patients should preferably be on an α-adrenoceptor blockade; g) screen for SOM starting from about the age of 20; h) measure somatostatin levels in all patients with HIF2A mutations; i) in all SOMs larger than 1 cm metastatic potential is high and therefore, attempt early endoscopic or surgical removal; j) use a negative enteric contrast CT scan or endoscopic examination for SOMs; k) base follow-up for SOMs on the measurement of plasma somatostatin levels and imaging; l) search for other, especially gastrin- but also other neurohormone-secreting NETs.

In summary, we present the most updated follow-up of 7 patients with HIF2A mutations and Pacak-Zhuang syndrome consisting of PHEO/PGL and/or SOM associated with polycythemia, and discuss these experiences in the context of the pertinent literature. We conclude that due to its multi-facetted manifestations an interdisciplinary approach to the patient with this syndrome is imperative in order to allow for the best possible outcome. Current treatment options are exclusively surgical.
