---
reference_id: "PMID:20301752"
title: PAFAH1B1-Related Lissencephaly / Subcortical Band Heterotopia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Brock S
- Dobyns WB
- Jansen A
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PAFAH1B1-Related Lissencephaly / Subcortical Band Heterotopia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Brock S, Dobyns WB, Jansen A

## Content

1. PAFAH1B1-Related Lissencephaly / Subcortical Band Heterotopia.

Brock S(1), Dobyns WB(2), Jansen A(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2009 Mar 3 [updated 2021 Mar 25].

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel;, Neurogenetics 
Research Group, Vrije Universiteit, Brussels, Belgium
(2)Department of Pediatrics (Genetics), University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota
(3)Pediatric Neurology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Universitair Ziekenhuis 
Brussel;, Neurogenetics Research Group, Vrije Universiteit, Brussels, Belgium

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: PAFAH1B1-related lissencephaly / subcortical band 
heterotopia (SBH) comprises a spectrum of severity. Affected newborns typically 
have mild-to-moderate hypotonia, feeding difficulties, and poor head control. 
During the first years, neurologic examination typically demonstrates poor 
visual tracking and response to sounds, axial hypotonia, and mild distal 
spasticity that can transition over time to more severe spasticity. Seizures 
occur in more than 90% of individuals with lissencephaly and often include 
infantile spasms. Seizures are often drug resistant, but even with good seizure 
control, the best developmental level achieved (excluding the few individuals 
with partial lissencephaly) is the equivalent of about age three to five months. 
In individuals with PAFAH1B1-related lissencephaly/SBH, developmental delay 
ranges from mild to severe. Other findings in PAFAH1B1-related lissencephaly/SBH 
include feeding issues and aspiration (which may result in need for gastrostomy 
tube placement), progressive microcephaly, and occasional developmental 
regression.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of PAFAH1B1-related lissencephaly/SBH is 
established in a proband with a heterozygous pathogenic variant in PAFAH1B1 
identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Standard treatment with anti-seizure 
medication based on the specific seizure type and frequency; polytherapy with 
valproic acid and lamotrigine appears most effective in reducing drug-resistant 
seizures; placement of a gastrostomy tube for those with failure to thrive, 
dysphagia, and/or recurrent aspiration pneumonia; treatment with stool 
softeners, prokinetics, osmotic agents, or laxatives for constipation; standard 
treatment for developmental delay/intellectual disability, spasticity, visual 
impairment, and hearing loss. Surveillance: At each visit: measure growth 
parameters and evaluate nutrition status and safety of oral intake; monitor for 
signs and symptoms of constipation, aspiration, and respiratory insufficiency; 
monitor those with seizures as clinically indicated; assess for new 
manifestations, such as unusual spells or developmental regression; assessment 
of developmental progress and educational needs; assessment of mobility and 
self-help skills. Annually or as clinically indicated: ophthalmologic and 
audiologic evaluations.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Individuals diagnosed with isolated PAFAH1B1-related 
lissencephaly/SBH typically have the disorder as the result of a de novo genetic 
alteration (an intragenic PAFAH1B1 pathogenic variant or, rarely, a chromosome 
rearrangement that disrupts PAFAH1B1). In rare families, an individual with 
PAFAH1B1-related lissencephaly/SBH has the disorder as the result of autosomal 
dominant inheritance of a PAFAH1B1 pathogenic variant from a parent. If the 
intragenic PAFAH1B1 pathogenic variant identified in the proband is not 
identified in either parent, the recurrence risk for a future pregnancy is 
slightly greater than that of the general population because of the possibility 
of parental germline mosaicism. If a parent of a proband is known to have the 
intragenic PAFAH1B1 pathogenic variant or a balanced translocation that disrupts 
PAFAH1B1, the recurrence risk is 50% with each future pregnancy. Once the 
causative genetic alteration has been identified in the proband, prenatal 
testing may be offered to parents of an affected child because of the recurrence 
risk associated with the possibility of parental mosaicism or a balanced 
chromosome rearrangement.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301752