---
reference_id: "PMID:38747166"
title: Longitudinal adaptive behavioral outcomes in Ogden syndrome by seizure status and therapeutic intervention.
authors:
- Makwana R
- Christ C
- Marchi E
- Harpell R
- Lyon GJ
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63651
keywords:
- Humans
- "Seizures/genetics, physiopathology, therapy"
- Female
- Male
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Adult
- Infant
- Adolescent
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Young Adult
- "Neurodevelopmental Disorders/genetics, therapy"
- N-Terminal Acetyltransferase E/genetics
- N-Terminal Acetyltransferase A/genetics
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Longitudinal adaptive behavioral outcomes in Ogden syndrome by seizure status and therapeutic intervention.
**Authors:** Makwana R, Christ C, Marchi E, Harpell R, Lyon GJ
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.63651](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.63651)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2024 Sep;194(9):e63651. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63651. Epub 2024
 May 15.

Longitudinal adaptive behavioral outcomes in Ogden syndrome by seizure status 
and therapeutic intervention.

Makwana R(1), Christ C(1), Marchi E(1), Harpell R(1), Lyon GJ(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, New York State Institute for Basic Research in 
Developmental Disabilities, New York, New York, USA.
(2)George A. Jervis Clinic, New York State Institute for Basic Research in 
Developmental Disabilities, New York, New York, USA.
(3)The Graduate Center, The City University of New York, New York, New York, 
USA.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2024 Feb 24:2024.02.23.24303144. doi: 10.1101/2024.02.23.24303144.

Ogden syndrome, also known as NAA10-related neurodevelopmental syndrome, is a 
rare genetic condition associated with pathogenic variants in the NAA10 
N-terminal acetylation family of proteins. The condition was initially described 
in 2011 and is characterized by a range of neurologic symptoms, including 
intellectual disability and seizures, as well as developmental delays, 
psychiatric symptoms, congenital heart abnormalities, hypotonia, and others. 
Previously published articles have described the etiology and phenotype of Ogden 
syndrome, mostly with retrospective analyses; herein, we report prospective data 
concerning its progress over time. The current study involves a total of 58 
distinct participants; of these, 43 caregivers were interviewed using the 
Vineland-3 and answered a survey regarding therapy and other questions, 10 of 
whom completed the Vineland-3 but did not answer the survey, and 5 participants 
who answered the survey but have not yet performed the Vineland-3 due to 
language constraints. The average age at the time of the most recent assessment 
was 12.4 years, with individuals ranging in age from 11 months to 40.2 years. 
Using Vineland-3 scores, we show decline in cognitive function over time in 
individuals with Ogden syndrome (n = 53). Sub-domain analysis found the decline 
to be present across all modalities. In addition, we describe the nature of 
seizures in this condition in greater detail, as well as investigate how 
already-available non-pharmaceutical therapies impact individuals with 
NAA10-related neurodevelopmental syndrome. Additional investigation between 
seizure and non-seizure groups showed no significant difference in adaptive 
behavior outcomes. A therapy investigation showed speech therapy to be the most 
commonly used therapy by individuals with NAA10-related neurodevelopmental 
syndrome, followed by occupational and physical therapy, with more severely 
affected individuals receiving more types of therapy than their less-severe 
counterparts. Early intervention analysis was only significantly effective for 
speech therapy, with analyses of all other therapies being non-significant. Our 
study portrays the decline in cognitive function over time of individuals within 
our cohort, independent of seizure status, and therapies being received, and 
highlights the urgent need for the development of effective treatments for Ogden 
syndrome.

© 2024 The Authors. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63651
PMCID: PMC11315639
PMID: 38747166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests or personal relationships that could have 
influenced the work reported in this paper.