---
reference_id: "PMID:31264968"
title: Residual β cell function and monogenic variants in long-duration type 1 diabetes patients.
authors:
- Yu MG
- Keenan HA
- Shah HS
- Frodsham SG
- Pober D
- He Z
- Wolfson EA
- "D'Eon S"
- Tinsley LJ
- Bonner-Weir S
- Pezzolesi MG
- King GL
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1172/JCI127397
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Residual β cell function and monogenic variants in long-duration type 1 diabetes patients.
**Authors:** Yu MG, Keenan HA, Shah HS, Frodsham SG, Pober D, He Z, Wolfson EA, D'Eon S, Tinsley LJ, Bonner-Weir S, Pezzolesi MG, King GL
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI127397](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI127397)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2019 Jul 2;129(8):3252-3263. doi: 10.1172/JCI127397.
eCollection  2019 Jul 2.

Residual β cell function and monogenic variants in long-duration type 1 diabetes 
patients.

Yu MG(1)(2), Keenan HA(1)(2), Shah HS(1)(2), Frodsham SG(3), Pober D(1), He 
Z(1)(2), Wolfson EA(1), D'Eon S(1), Tinsley LJ(4), Bonner-Weir S(1)(2), 
Pezzolesi MG(1)(2)(3), King GL(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Division, Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, 
Utah, USA.
(4)Clinic Administration, Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2019 Jul 2;129(8):3045-3047. doi: 10.1172/JCI130310.

BACKGROUNDIn the Joslin Medalist Study (Medalists), we determined whether 
significant associations exist between β cell function and pathology and 
clinical characteristics.METHODSIndividuals with type 1 diabetes (T1D) for 50 or 
more years underwent evaluation including HLA analysis, basal and longitudinal 
autoantibody (AAb) status, and β cell function by a mixed-meal tolerance test 
(MMTT) and a hyperglycemia/arginine clamp procedure. Postmortem analysis of 
pancreases from 68 Medalists was performed. Monogenic diabetes genes were 
screened for the entire cohort.RESULTSOf the 1019 Medalists, 32.4% retained 
detectable C-peptide levels (>0.05 ng/mL, median: 0.21 ng/mL). In those who 
underwent a MMTT (n = 516), 5.8% responded with a doubling of baseline C-peptide 
levels. Longitudinally (n = 181, median: 4 years), C-peptide levels increased in 
12.2% (n = 22) and decreased in 37% (n = 67) of the Medalists. Among those with 
repeated MMTTs, 5.4% (3 of 56) and 16.1% (9 of 56) had waxing and waning 
responses, respectively. Thirty Medalists with baseline C-peptide levels of 0.1 
ng/mL or higher underwent the clamp procedure, with HLA-/AAb- and HLA+/AAb- 
Medalists being most responsive. Postmortem examination of pancreases from 68 
Medalists showed that all had scattered insulin-positive cells; 59 additionally 
had few insulin-positive cells within a few islets; and 14 additionally had 
lobes with multiple islets with numerous insulin-positive cells. Genetic 
analysis revealed that 280 Medalists (27.5%) had monogenic diabetes variants; in 
80 (7.9%) of these Medalists, the variants were classified as "likely 
pathogenic" (rare exome variant ensemble learner [REVEL] >0.75).CONCLUSIONAll 
Medalists retained insulin-positive β cells, with many responding to metabolic 
stimuli even after 50 years of T1D. The Medalists were heterogeneous with 
respect to β cell function, and many with HLA+ diabetes risk alleles also had 
monogenic diabetes variants, indicating the importance of genetic testing for 
clinically diagnosed T1D.FUNDINGFunding for this work was provided by the Dianne 
Nunnally Hoppes Fund; the Beatson Pledge Fund; the NIH, National Institute of 
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK); and the American Diabetes 
Association (ADA).

DOI: 10.1172/JCI127397
PMCID: PMC6668678
PMID: 31264968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: GLK received a research 
grant from Sanofi-Aventis.