---
reference_id: "PMID:3287161"
title: Prevention of skin cancer in xeroderma pigmentosum with the use of oral isotretinoin.
authors:
- Kraemer KH
- DiGiovanna JJ
- Moshell AN
- Tarone RE
- Peck GL
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '1988'
doi: 10.1056/NEJM198806233182501
keywords:
- "Administration, Oral"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/prevention & control"
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/prevention & control"
- Child
- Clinical Trials as Topic
- Female
- Humans
- Isotretinoin
- Male
- Prospective Studies
- "Skin Neoplasms/prevention & control"
- "Tretinoin/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Xeroderma Pigmentosum/complications
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevention of skin cancer in xeroderma pigmentosum with the use of oral isotretinoin.
**Authors:** Kraemer KH, DiGiovanna JJ, Moshell AN, Tarone RE, Peck GL
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJM198806233182501](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJM198806233182501)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 1988 Jun 23;318(25):1633-7. doi: 10.1056/NEJM198806233182501.

Prevention of skin cancer in xeroderma pigmentosum with the use of oral 
isotretinoin.

Kraemer KH(1), DiGiovanna JJ, Moshell AN, Tarone RE, Peck GL.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, 
Md 20892.

To confirm reports that skin cancer can be prevented with retinoids, we 
conducted a three-year controlled prospective study of oral isotretinoin (also 
called 13-cis retinoic acid) in five patients with xeroderma pigmentosum who had 
a history of multiple cutaneous basal-cell or squamous-cell carcinomas. Patients 
were treated with isotretinoin at a dosage of 2 mg per kilogram of body weight 
per day for two years and then followed for an additional year, without the 
drug. Before, during, and after treatment, biopsies of all suspicious lesions 
were performed, and skin cancers were surgically removed. The patients had a 
total of 121 tumors (mean, 24; range, 8 to 43) in the two-year interval before 
treatment. During two years of treatment with isotretinoin, there were 25 tumors 
(mean, 5; range, 3 to 9), with an average reduction in skin cancers of 63 
percent (P = 0.019). After the drug was discontinued, the tumor frequency 
increased a mean of 8.5-fold (range, 2- to 19-fold) over the frequency during 
treatment (P = 0.007). Although all patients experienced mucocutaneous toxic 
effects, and triglyceride, liver-function, or skeletal abnormalities developed 
in some, high-dose oral isotretinoin was effective in the chemoprophylaxis of 
skin cancers in patients with xeroderma pigmentosum.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJM198806233182501
PMID: 3287161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]