---
reference_id: "PMID:22753675"
title: "Hypothalamo-pituitary sarcoidosis: a multicenter study of 24 patients."
authors:
- Langrand C
- Bihan H
- Raverot G
- Varron L
- Androdias G
- Borson-Chazot F
- Brue T
- Cathebras P
- Pinede L
- Muller G
- Broussolle C
- Cotton F
- Valeyre D
- Seve P
journal: QJM
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/qjmed/hcs121
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Biopsy
- Case-Control Studies
- "Central Nervous System Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Child
- Drug Monitoring
- Female
- "Glucocorticoids/administration & dosage"
- Humans
- "Hypothalamic Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy, metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Hypothalamic Hormones/analysis, metabolism"
- "Hypothalamo-Hypophyseal System/drug effects, physiopathology"
- "Hypothalamus/metabolism, pathology"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- "Pituitary Gland/metabolism, pathology"
- "Pituitary Hormones/analysis, metabolism"
- "Prednisone/administration & dosage"
- "Sarcoidosis/diagnosis, drug therapy, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypothalamo-pituitary sarcoidosis: a multicenter study of 24 patients.
**Authors:** Langrand C, Bihan H, Raverot G, Varron L, Androdias G, Borson-Chazot F, Brue T, Cathebras P, Pinede L, Muller G, Broussolle C, Cotton F, Valeyre D, Seve P
**Journal:** QJM (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/qjmed/hcs121](https://doi.org/10.1093/qjmed/hcs121)

## Content

1. QJM. 2012 Oct;105(10):981-95. doi: 10.1093/qjmed/hcs121. Epub 2012 Jun 30.

Hypothalamo-pituitary sarcoidosis: a multicenter study of 24 patients.

Langrand C(1), Bihan H, Raverot G, Varron L, Androdias G, Borson-Chazot F, Brue
T, Cathebras P, Pinede L, Muller G, Broussolle C, Cotton F, Valeyre D, Seve P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Fédération d’Endocrinologie, Groupement
hospitalier Est, and University of Claude Bernard Lyon 1, 59 Boulevard Pinel
69677 Bron Cedex, France.

AIM: To assess clinical features, treatment and outcome of Hypothalamo-pituitary
(HP) sarcoidosis and to determine whether HP is associated with a particular
clinical phenotype of sarcoidosis.
DESIGN: Multicentric retrospective study.
METHODS: Retrospective chart review. Each patient was matched with two controls.
RESULTS: Twenty-four patients were identified (10 women, 14 men). Their median
age at the sarcoidosis diagnosis was 31.5 years (range: 8-69 years). HP
involvement occurred in the course of a previously known sarcoidosis in 11 cases
(46%), whereas it preceded the diagnosis in 13 patients (54%). All but two
patients had anterior pituitary dysfunction, 12 patients presented with diabetes
insipidus. The most common hormonal features were gonadotropin deficiency
(n=21), TSH deficiency (n=15) and hyperprolactinemia (n=12). Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (MRI) revealed infundibulum involvement (n=8), pituitary stalk thickness
(n=12) and involvement of the pituitary gland (n=14). All but two patients
received prednisone. After a mean follow-up of 4 years, only two patients
recovered from hormonal deficiencies. MRI abnormalities improved or disappeared
in 12 cases under corticosteroid. There was no correlation between the hormonal
dysfunctions and the radiologic outcomes. Patients with HP sarcoidosis had
significantly more frequent sinonasal localizations and neurosarcoidosis and
required a systemic treatment more frequently than controls.
CONCLUSION: Although HP sarcoidosis is unusual, physicians should be aware that
such specific localization could be the first manifestation of sarcoidosis. HP
involvement is associated with general severity of sarcoidosis. MRI
abnormalities can improve or disappear under corticosteroid treatment, but most
endocrine defects are irreversible.

DOI: 10.1093/qjmed/hcs121
PMID: 22753675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
