---
reference_id: "PMID:30480471"
title: Patisiran, an RNAi therapeutic for the treatment of hereditary transthyretin-mediated amyloidosis.
authors:
- Kristen AV
- Ajroud-Driss S
- Conceição I
- Gorevic P
- Kyriakides T
- Obici L
journal: Neurodegener Dis Manag
year: '2019'
doi: 10.2217/nmt-2018-0033
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Patisiran, an RNAi therapeutic for the treatment of hereditary transthyretin-mediated amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Kristen AV, Ajroud-Driss S, Conceição I, Gorevic P, Kyriakides T, Obici L
**Journal:** Neurodegener Dis Manag (2019)
**DOI:** [10.2217/nmt-2018-0033](https://doi.org/10.2217/nmt-2018-0033)

## Content

1. Neurodegener Dis Manag. 2019 Feb;9(1):5-23. doi: 10.2217/nmt-2018-0033. Epub 
2018 Nov 27.

Patisiran, an RNAi therapeutic for the treatment of hereditary 
transthyretin-mediated amyloidosis.

Kristen AV(1)(2), Ajroud-Driss S(3), Conceição I(4), Gorevic P(5), Kyriakides 
T(6), Obici L(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, D-69120, 
Germany.
(2)Cardiovascular Center Darmstadt, Darmstadt, 64287, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurology, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
(4)Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Norte, Hospital de Santa Maria, Universidade de 
Lisboa, Faculdade de Medicina, 1649-028, Portugal.
(5)Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai Medical Center, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(6)The Cyprus Institute of Neurology & Genetics, Nicosia, 1683, Cyprus.
(7)Amyloidosis Research & Treatment Centre, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San 
Matteo, Pavia, 27100, Italy.

Hereditary transthyretin-mediated amyloidosis is a rapidly progressive, 
heterogeneous disease caused by the accumulation of misfolded transthyretin 
protein as amyloid fibrils at multiple sites, and is characterized by peripheral 
sensorimotor neuropathy, autonomic neuropathy and/or cardiomyopathy. Current 
treatment options have limited efficacy and often do not prevent disease 
progression. Patisiran is a novel RNA interference therapeutic that specifically 
reduces production of both wild-type and mutant transthyretin protein. In Phase 
II, III and long-term extension studies in patients with hereditary 
transthyretin-mediated amyloidosis, patisiran has consistently slowed or 
improved progression of neuropathy. In addition, the Phase III trial 
demonstrated significant improvements in quality of life measures and indicators 
of cardiomyopathy. Here, we highlight efficacy and safety data from the 
patisiran clinical trial programme.

DOI: 10.2217/nmt-2018-0033
PMID: 30480471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]