---
reference_id: "PMID:18184959"
title: Sirolimus for angiomyolipoma in tuberous sclerosis complex or lymphangioleiomyomatosis.
authors:
- Bissler JJ
- McCormack FX
- Young LR
- Elwing JM
- Chuck G
- Leonard JM
- Schmithorst VJ
- Laor T
- Brody AS
- Bean J
- Salisbury S
- Franz DN
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa063564
keywords:
- Adult
- "Angiomyolipoma/drug therapy, etiology, pathology"
- Brain/pathology
- Female
- Humans
- "Immunosuppressive Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Kidney Diseases/pathology
- Liver Diseases/pathology
- "Lung/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- "Lung Neoplasms/complications, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Lymphangioleiomyomatosis/complications, pathology, physiopathology"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Protein Kinases/metabolism
- Radiography
- Respiratory Function Tests
- "Sirolimus/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases
- "Tuberous Sclerosis/complications, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sirolimus for angiomyolipoma in tuberous sclerosis complex or lymphangioleiomyomatosis.
**Authors:** Bissler JJ, McCormack FX, Young LR, Elwing JM, Chuck G, Leonard JM, Schmithorst VJ, Laor T, Brody AS, Bean J, Salisbury S, Franz DN
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa063564](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa063564)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2008 Jan 10;358(2):140-51. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa063564.

Sirolimus for angiomyolipoma in tuberous sclerosis complex or 
lymphangioleiomyomatosis.

Bissler JJ(1), McCormack FX, Young LR, Elwing JM, Chuck G, Leonard JM, 
Schmithorst VJ, Laor T, Brody AS, Bean J, Salisbury S, Franz DN.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Cincinnati Children's Hospital 
Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA. john.bissler@cchmc.org

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2008 Jan 10;358(2):190-2. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe0707153.
    N Engl J Med. 2008 May 1;358(18):1963-4; author reply 1964. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMc086040.

BACKGROUND: Angiomyolipomas in patients with the tuberous sclerosis complex or 
sporadic lymphangioleiomyomatosis are associated with mutations in tuberous 
sclerosis genes resulting in constitutive activation of the mammalian target of 
rapamycin (mTOR). The drug sirolimus suppresses mTOR signaling.
METHODS: We conducted a 24-month, nonrandomized, open-label trial to determine 
whether sirolimus reduces the angiomyolipoma volume in patients with the 
tuberous sclerosis complex or sporadic lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Sirolimus was 
administered for the first 12 months only. Serial magnetic resonance imaging of 
angiomyolipomas and brain lesions, computed tomography of lung cysts, and 
pulmonary-function tests were performed.
RESULTS: Of the 25 patients enrolled, 20 completed the 12-month evaluation, and 
18 completed the 24-month evaluation. The mean (+/-SD) angiomyolipoma volume at 
12 months was 53.2+/-26.6% of the baseline value (P<0.001) and at 24 months was 
85.9+/-28.5% of the baseline value (P=0.005). At 24 months, five patients had a 
persistent reduction in the angiomyolipoma volume of 30% or more. During the 
period of sirolimus therapy, among patients with lymphangioleiomyomatosis, the 
mean forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) increased by 118+/-330 ml 
(P=0.06), the forced vital capacity (FVC) increased by 390+/-570 ml (P<0.001), 
and the residual volume decreased by 439+/-493 ml (P=0.02), as compared with 
baseline values. One year after sirolimus was discontinued, the FEV1 was 
62+/-411 ml above the baseline value, the FVC was 346+/-712 ml above the 
baseline value, and the residual volume was 333+/-570 ml below the baseline 
value; cerebral lesions were unchanged. Five patients had six serious adverse 
events while receiving sirolimus, including diarrhea, pyelonephritis, 
stomatitis, and respiratory infections.
CONCLUSIONS: Angiomyolipomas regressed somewhat during sirolimus therapy but 
tended to increase in volume after the therapy was stopped. Some patients with 
lymphangioleiomyomatosis had improvement in spirometric measurements and gas 
trapping that persisted after treatment. Suppression of mTOR signaling might 
constitute an ameliorative treatment in patients with the tuberous sclerosis 
complex or sporadic lymphangioleiomyomatosis. (ClinicalTrials.gov number, 
NCT00457808.)

2008 Massachusetts Medical Society

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa063564
PMCID: PMC3398441
PMID: 18184959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No other potential conflict of interest relevant 
to this article was reported.