---
reference_id: "PMID:14679180"
title: Neurofibromin-deficient Schwann cells secrete a potent migratory stimulus for Nf1+/- mast cells.
authors:
- Yang FC
- Ingram DA
- Chen S
- Hingtgen CM
- Ratner N
- Monk KR
- Clegg T
- White H
- Mead L
- Wenning MJ
- Williams DA
- Kapur R
- Atkinson SJ
- Clapp DW
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1172/JCI19195
keywords:
- Animals
- Bone Marrow Cells/cytology
- Cell Movement
- Culture Media/pharmacology
- Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
- Flow Cytometry
- "Genes, Neurofibromatosis 1"
- Heterozygote
- Homozygote
- Mast Cells/metabolism
- Mice
- Mutation
- Neurofibroma/metabolism
- "Neurofibromin 1/genetics, physiology"
- Plasmids/metabolism
- Retroviridae/genetics
- Schwann Cells/metabolism
- Signal Transduction
- Stem Cell Factor/metabolism
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurofibromin-deficient Schwann cells secrete a potent migratory stimulus for Nf1+/- mast cells.
**Authors:** Yang FC, Ingram DA, Chen S, Hingtgen CM, Ratner N, Monk KR, Clegg T, White H, Mead L, Wenning MJ, Williams DA, Kapur R, Atkinson SJ, Clapp DW
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI19195](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI19195)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2003 Dec;112(12):1851-61. doi: 10.1172/JCI19195.

Neurofibromin-deficient Schwann cells secrete a potent migratory stimulus for
Nf1+/- mast cells.

Yang FC(1), Ingram DA, Chen S, Hingtgen CM, Ratner N, Monk KR, Clegg T, White H,
Mead L, Wenning MJ, Williams DA, Kapur R, Atkinson SJ, Clapp DW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2003 Dec;112(12):1791-3. doi: 10.1172/JCI20503.

The NF1 tumor suppressor gene encodes a GTPase-activating protein called
neurofibromin that negatively regulates Ras signaling. Mutations in NF1 cause
neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1). The development of neurofibromas, which are
complex tumors composed of multiple cell types, is a hallmark of NF1. Somatic
inactivation of murine Nf1 in Schwann cells is necessary, but not sufficient, to
initiate neurofibroma formation. Neurofibromas occur with high penetrance in
mice in which Nf1 is ablated in Schwann cells in the context of a heterozygous
mutant (Nf1+/-) microenvironment. Mast cells infiltrate neurofibromas, where
they secrete proteins that can remodel the ECM and initiate angiogenesis. Thus,
identification of mechanisms responsible for mast cell migration to tumor
microenvironments is important for understanding tumorigenesis and for designing
potential therapies. Here, we show that homozygous Nf1 mutant (Nf1-/-) Schwann
cells secrete Kit ligand (KitL), which stimulates mast cell migration, and that
Nf1+/- mast cells are hypermotile in response to KitL. Furthermore, we link
hyperactivation of the Ras-class IA-PI3K-Rac2 pathway to increased Nf1+/- mast
cell migration. Thus, these studies identify a novel interaction between Nf1-/-
Schwann cells and Nf1+/- mast cells that is likely to be important in
neurofibroma formation.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI19195
PMCID: PMC296994
PMID: 14679180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
