---
reference_id: "PMID:37770946"
title: "Late-onset cblC defect: clinical, biochemical and molecular analysis."
authors:
- Ding S
- Ling S
- Liang L
- Qiu W
- Zhang H
- Chen T
- Zhan X
- Xu F
- Gu X
- Han L
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02890-4
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Child, Preschool"
- Humans
- Child
- Young Adult
- Adult
- Homocystinuria/diagnosis
- Oxidoreductases/genetics
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- "Carnitine/analogs & derivatives"
- Mutation/genetics
- Methylmalonic Acid
- Vitamin B 12
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Late-onset cblC defect: clinical, biochemical and molecular analysis.
**Authors:** Ding S, Ling S, Liang L, Qiu W, Zhang H, Chen T, Zhan X, Xu F, Gu X, Han L
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-02890-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-02890-4)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 Sep 28;18(1):306. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02890-4.

Late-onset cblC defect: clinical, biochemical and molecular analysis.

Ding S(#)(1), Ling S(#)(1), Liang L(1), Qiu W(1), Zhang H(1), Chen T(1), Zhan
X(1), Xu F(1), Gu X(1), Han L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Genetic Metabolism, Xinhua
Hospital, Shanghai Institute of Pediatric Research, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, 1665 KongJiang Road, Shanghai, 200092, China.
(2)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Genetic Metabolism, Xinhua
Hospital, Shanghai Institute of Pediatric Research, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, 1665 KongJiang Road, Shanghai, 200092, China.
hanlianshu@xinhuamed.com.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: cblC defect is the most common type of methylmalonic acidemia in
China. Patients with late-onset form (>1 year) are often misdiagnosed due to
heterogeneous symptoms. This study aimed to describe clinical characteristics
and evaluate long-term outcomes of Chinese patients with late-onset cblC defect.
METHODS: A total of 85 patients with late-onset cblC defect were enrolled.
Clinical data, including manifestations, metabolites, molecular diagnosis,
treatment and outcome, were summarized and analyzed.
RESULTS: The age of onset ranged from 2 to 32.8 years old (median age 8.6 years,
mean age 9.4 years). The time between first symptoms and diagnosis ranged from a
few days to 20 years (median time 2 months, mean time 20.7 months).
Neuropsychiatric symptoms were presented as first symptoms in 68.2% of cases,
which were observed frequently in schoolchildren or adolescents. Renal
involvement and cardiovascular disease were observed in 20% and 8.2% of cases,
respectively, which occurred with the highest prevalence in preschool children.
Besides the initial symptoms, the disease progressed in most patients and
cognitive decline became the most frequent symptom overall. The levels of
propionylcarnitine, propionylcarnitine / acetylcarnitine ratio, methylmalonic
acid, methylcitric acid and homocysteine, were decreased remarkably after
treatment (P<0.001). Twenty-four different mutations of MMACHC were identified
in 78 patients, two of which were novel. The c.482G>A variant was the most
frequent mutated allele in this cohort (25%). Except for 16 patients who
recovered completely, the remaining patients were still left with varying
degrees of sequelae in a long-term follow-up. The available data from 76 cases
were analyzed by univariate analysis and multivariate logistic regression
analysis, and the results showed that the time from onset to diagnosis
(OR = 1.025, P = 0. 024) was independent risk factors for poor outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: The diagnosis of late-onset cblC defect is often delayed due to
poor awareness of its various and nonspecific symptoms, thus having an adverse
effect on the prognosis. It should be considered in patients with unexplained
neuropsychiatric and other conditions such as renal involvement, cardiovascular
diseases or even multiple organ damage. The c.482G>A variant shows the highest
frequency in these patients. Prompt treatment appears to be beneficial.

© 2023. Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-02890-4
PMCID: PMC10536707
PMID: 37770946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.
