---
reference_id: "PMID:20410501"
title: Variant of TYR and autoimmunity susceptibility loci in generalized vitiligo.
authors:
- Jin Y
- Birlea SA
- Fain PR
- Gowan K
- Riccardi SL
- Holland PJ
- Mailloux CM
- Sufit AJ
- Hutton SM
- Amadi-Myers A
- Bennett DC
- Wallace MR
- McCormack WT
- Kemp EH
- Gawkrodger DJ
- Weetman AP
- Picardo M
- Leone G
- Taïeb A
- Jouary T
- Ezzedine K
- van Geel N
- Lambert J
- Overbeck A
- Spritz RA
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0908547
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variant of TYR and autoimmunity susceptibility loci in generalized vitiligo.
**Authors:** Jin Y, Birlea SA, Fain PR, Gowan K, Riccardi SL, Holland PJ, Mailloux CM, Sufit AJ, Hutton SM, Amadi-Myers A, Bennett DC, Wallace MR, McCormack WT, Kemp EH, Gawkrodger DJ, Weetman AP, Picardo M, Leone G, Taïeb A, Jouary T, Ezzedine K, van Geel N, Lambert J, Overbeck A, Spritz RA
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa0908547](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa0908547)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2010 May 6;362(18):1686-97. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0908547. Epub
2010  Apr 21.

Variant of TYR and autoimmunity susceptibility loci in generalized vitiligo.

Jin Y(1), Birlea SA, Fain PR, Gowan K, Riccardi SL, Holland PJ, Mailloux CM, 
Sufit AJ, Hutton SM, Amadi-Myers A, Bennett DC, Wallace MR, McCormack WT, Kemp 
EH, Gawkrodger DJ, Weetman AP, Picardo M, Leone G, Taïeb A, Jouary T, Ezzedine 
K, van Geel N, Lambert J, Overbeck A, Spritz RA.

Author information:
(1)Human Medical Genetics Program, School of Medicine, University of Colorado, 
P.O. Box 6511, Mailstop 8300, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

BACKGROUND: Generalized vitiligo is an autoimmune disease characterized by 
melanocyte loss, which results in patchy depigmentation of skin and hair, and is 
associated with an elevated risk of other autoimmune diseases.
METHODS: To identify generalized vitiligo susceptibility loci, we conducted a 
genomewide association study. We genotyped 579,146 single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) in 1514 patients with generalized vitiligo who were of 
European-derived white (CEU) ancestry and compared the genotypes with publicly 
available control genotypes from 2813 CEU persons. We then tested 50 SNPs in two 
replication sets, one comprising 677 independent CEU patients and 1106 CEU 
controls and the other comprising 183 CEU simplex trios with generalized 
vitiligo and 332 CEU multiplex families.
RESULTS: We detected significant associations between generalized vitiligo and 
SNPs at several loci previously associated with other autoimmune diseases. These 
included genes encoding major-histocompatibility-complex class I molecules 
(P=9.05x10(-23)) and class II molecules (P=4.50x10(-34)), PTPN22 
(P=1.31x10(-7)), LPP (P=1.01x10(-11)), IL2RA (P=2.78x10(-9)), UBASH3A 
(P=1.26x10(-9)), and C1QTNF6 (P=2.21x10(-16)). We also detected associations 
between generalized vitiligo and SNPs in two additional immune-related loci, 
RERE (P=7.07x10(-15)) and GZMB (P=3.44x10(-8)), and in a locus containing TYR 
(P=1.60x10(-18)), encoding tyrosinase.
CONCLUSIONS: We observed associations between generalized vitiligo and markers 
implicating multiple genes, some associated with other autoimmune diseases and 
one (TYR) that may mediate target-cell specificity and indicate a mutually 
exclusive relationship between susceptibility to vitiligo and susceptibility to 
melanoma.

2010 Massachusetts Medical Society

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa0908547
PMCID: PMC2891985
PMID: 20410501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]