---
reference_id: "PMID:39203843"
title: Nutritional Management of Patients with Fatty Acid Oxidation Disorders.
authors:
- Peña-Quintana L
- Correcher-Medina P
journal: Nutrients
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/nu16162707
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nutritional Management of Patients with Fatty Acid Oxidation Disorders.
**Authors:** Peña-Quintana L, Correcher-Medina P
**Journal:** Nutrients (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/nu16162707](https://doi.org/10.3390/nu16162707)

## Content

1. Nutrients. 2024 Aug 14;16(16):2707. doi: 10.3390/nu16162707.

Nutritional Management of Patients with Fatty Acid Oxidation Disorders.

Peña-Quintana L(1)(2), Correcher-Medina P(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition Unit, Insular Materno-Infantil 
University Hospital Complex, Asociación Canaria de Investigación Pediátrica, 
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de la Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y 
Nutrición ISCIII, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, 35016 Las Palmas de 
Gran Canaria, Spain.
(2)Asociación Española para el Estudio de los Errores Congénitos del Metabolismo 
(AECOM), 28221 Majadahonda, Spain.
(3)Metabolic and Nutrition Unit, Hospital Universitari i Politècnic la Fe, 46026 
Valencia, Spain.

Treatment of fatty acid oxidation disorders is based on dietary, pharmacological 
and metabolic decompensation measures. It is essential to provide the patient 
with sufficient glucose to prevent lipolysis and to avoid the use of fatty acids 
as fuel as far as possible. Dietary management consists of preventing periods of 
fasting and restricting fat intake by increasing carbohydrate intake, while 
maintaining an adequate and uninterrupted caloric intake. In long-chain 
deficits, long-chain triglyceride restriction should be 10% of total energy, 
with linoleic acid and linolenic acid intake of 3-4% and 0.5-1% (5/1-10/1 
ratio), with medium-chain triglyceride supplementation at 10-25% of total energy 
(total MCT+LCT ratio = 20-35%). Trihepatnoin is a new therapeutic option with a 
good safety and efficacy profile. Patients at risk of rhabdomyolysis should 
ingest MCT or carbohydrates or a combination of both 20 min before exercise. In 
medium- and short-chain deficits, dietary modifications are not advised (except 
during exacerbations), with MCT contraindicated and slow sugars recommended 20 
min before any significant physical exertion. Parents should be alerted to the 
need to increase the amount and frequency of carbohydrate intake in stressful 
situations. The main measure in emergency hospital treatment is the 
administration of IV glucose. The use of carnitine remains controversial and new 
therapeutic options are under investigation.

DOI: 10.3390/nu16162707
PMCID: PMC11356788
PMID: 39203843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.