---
reference_id: "PMID:21839471"
title: "Liver transplantation for classical maple syrup urine disease: long-term follow-up in 37 patients and comparative United Network for Organ Sharing experience."
authors:
- Mazariegos GV
- Morton DH
- Sindhi R
- Soltys K
- Nayyar N
- Bond G
- Shellmer D
- Shneider B
- Vockley J
- Strauss KA
journal: J Pediatr
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2011.06.033
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liver transplantation for classical maple syrup urine disease: long-term follow-up in 37 patients and comparative United Network for Organ Sharing experience.
**Authors:** Mazariegos GV, Morton DH, Sindhi R, Soltys K, Nayyar N, Bond G, Shellmer D, Shneider B, Vockley J, Strauss KA
**Journal:** J Pediatr (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpeds.2011.06.033](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2011.06.033)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 2012 Jan;160(1):116-21.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2011.06.033. Epub 
2011 Aug 11.

Liver transplantation for classical maple syrup urine disease: long-term 
follow-up in 37 patients and comparative United Network for Organ Sharing 
experience.

Mazariegos GV(1), Morton DH, Sindhi R, Soltys K, Nayyar N, Bond G, Shellmer D, 
Shneider B, Vockley J, Strauss KA.

Author information:
(1)University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. 
george.mazariegos@chp.edu

OBJECTIVE: To assess clinical and neurocognitive function in children who have 
undergone liver transplantation for classical maple syrup urine disease (MSUD).
STUDY DESIGN: A total of 35 patients with classical MSUD (age 9.9 ± 7.9 years) 
underwent liver transplantation between 2004 and 2009. Six patients donated 
their liver to recipients without MSUD ("domino" transplant). We analyzed 
clinical outcomes for our cohort and 17 additional cases from the national 
United Network for Organ Sharing registry; 33 patients completed IQ and adaptive 
testing before transplantation, and 14 completed testing 1 year later.
RESULTS: Patient and graft survival were 100% at 4.5 ± 2.2 years of follow-up. 
Liver function was normal in all patients. Branched-chain amino acid levels were 
corrected within hours after surgery and remained stable, with leucine tolerance 
increasing more than 10-fold. All domino transplant recipients were alive and 
well with normal branched-chain amino acid homeostasis at the time of this 
report. Patient and graft survival for all 54 patients with MSUD undergoing 
liver transplantation in the United States during this period were 98% and 96%, 
respectively. One-third of our patients were mentally impaired (IQ ≤ 70) before 
transplantation, with no statistically significant change 1 year later.
CONCLUSION: Liver transplantation is an effective long-term treatment for 
classical MSUD and may arrest brain damage, but will not reverse it.

Copyright © 2012 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2011.06.033
PMCID: PMC3671923
PMID: 21839471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.