---
reference_id: "PMID:37743332"
title: "[Oligodendroglioma, IDH Mutation and 1p/19q Codeletion]."
authors:
- Matsutani T
journal: No Shinkei Geka
year: '2023'
doi: 10.11477/mf.1436204822
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Oligodendroglioma, IDH Mutation and 1p/19q Codeletion].
**Authors:** Matsutani T
**Journal:** No Shinkei Geka (2023)
**DOI:** [10.11477/mf.1436204822](https://doi.org/10.11477/mf.1436204822)

## Content

1. No Shinkei Geka. 2023 Sep;51(5):811-820. doi: 10.11477/mf.1436204822.

[Oligodendroglioma, IDH Mutation and 1p/19q Codeletion].

[Article in Japanese]

Matsutani T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, Chiba University Graduate School of 
Medicine.

Oligodendrogliomas were clearly defined as tumors with IDH mutations and 1p/19q 
codeletion by the World Health Organization(WHO)in 2016. Their prognosis is 
better than that of morphologic oligodendrogliomas, which might include some 
other gliomas according to WHO in 2016 and 2021. The term "low-grade gliomas" 
does not exist in the WHO classification and has changed in meaning over time; 
prior to WHO 2016, it meant grade I and II gliomas; subsequently, it changed to 
"lower-grade gliomas," including grade II and III gliomas, with the same 
molecular features. In the current classification, IDH wild-type grade II and 
III gliomas have been eliminated, and "lower-grade gliomas" now only include 
gliomas with IDH mutations. Maximal safe resection is necessary for a proper 
molecular diagnosis and survival, and awake craniotomy should be aggressively 
considered to prevent permanent postoperative neurologic deficits for tumors in 
the eloquent region. Supramarginal resection is an attractive approach for 
neurosurgeons to improve survival outcomes, but the evidence is still lacking. 
Chemoradiotherapy with procarbazine, CCNU, and vincristine is recommended for 
both grade 2 and 3 oligodendrogliomas. However, the risk of radiation-induced 
neurotoxicity is a concern in long-term survivors, and several clinical trials 
have tested the efficacy of chemotherapy alone in terms of cognitive function. 
Since CCNU is not approved in Japan, ACNU-containing regimen as PAV, or 
temozolomide are commonly used for the tumor.

DOI: 10.11477/mf.1436204822
PMID: 37743332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]