---
reference_id: "PMID:39470508"
title: "Cronkhite-Canada syndrome: A case report and literature review."
authors:
- Wang N
- Xiang Y
- Tao L
- Ming W
- Ren L
- Huang T
- Yang G
- Gao J
- Ren Q
- Zhu P
- Huang M
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000040242
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cronkhite-Canada syndrome: A case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Wang N, Xiang Y, Tao L, Ming W, Ren L, Huang T, Yang G, Gao J, Ren Q, Zhu P, Huang M
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000040242](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000040242)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2024 Oct 25;103(43):e40242. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000040242.

Cronkhite-Canada syndrome: A case report and literature review.

Wang N(1)(2)(3), Xiang Y(4), Tao L(1)(2), Ming W(1)(2), Ren L(5), Huang T(1)(2), 
Yang G(1)(2), Gao J(3), Ren Q(1)(2), Zhu P(6), Huang M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Affiliated Hospital of North Sichuan Medical 
College, Nanchong, Sichuan, China.
(2)The North Sichuan Medical College, Nanchong, Sichuan, China.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of ChongQing 
Medical University, ChongQing, China.
(4)Department of Pathology, Affiliated Hospital of North Sichuan Medical 
College, Nanchong, Sichuan, China.
(5)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of North Sichuan 
Medical College, Nanchong, Sichuan, China.
(6)Department of General Surgery, Nanchong Gaoping District People's Hospital, 
Nanchong, Sichuan, China.

RATIONALE: Cronkhite-Canada syndrome (CCS) is a nonhereditary, rare polyposis 
condition, first documented by Cronkhite and Canada in 1955. The primary 
distinct features of this syndrome include ectodermal abnormalities and diffuse 
gastrointestinal polyp changes accompanied by protein loss. The primary clinical 
manifestations of CCS include hair loss, excessive pigmentation of the skin, and 
malnourishment of fingernails or toenails. Other notable symptoms include weight 
loss, protein-losing enteropathy, diarrhea, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, 
taste abnormalities, and atrophic glossitis, which predominantly occur in 
middle-aged and older males. CCS is characterized by an extremely rare, 
nonfamilial hamartomatous polyposis syndrome, in which polyps are distributed in 
the stomach and colon (90%), small intestine(80%), and rectum (67%), while 
sparing the esophagus.
PATIENT CONCERNS: This report describes a 72-year-old female, initially treated 
for intestinal obstruction, followed by a small intestine resection. She 
reported diarrhea, emaciation, and loss of appetite across various hospitals.
DIAGNOSES: Endoscopic examination of the stomach and colon, plus capsule 
endoscopy, revealed multiple polyps throughout her gastrointestinal tract, 
except in the esophagus.
INTERVENTIONS: Treatment included hormones with antiallergic medication, 
acid-suppressing drugs, salicylates, and nutritional support with zinc sulfate, 
adding trace elements and amino acids.
OUTCOMES: posttreatment, the patient demonstrated significant improvement in 
appetite and taste. Atrophic glossitis, upper limb pigmentation, and frequency 
of diarrhea also notably decreased. reexamination through endoscopy after 3 
months of treatment revealed a substantial decrease in the number and size of 
gastrointestinal polyps.
LESSONS: In this case, from the lower esophageal sphincter to the rectum, there 
is an increasing trend of eosinophil and mast cell infiltration. These lesions 
can cause a positive IgG result. Pathological analysis indicates that the extent 
and severity of lesions in the middle and lower gastrointestinal tract are more 
substantial than in the upper tract. During treatment, endoscopic observations 
reveal that lesions in the middle and lower tract tend to resolve faster than 
those in the upper tract. Hormone therapy has demonstrated significant efficacy 
in treating this disease. Early treatment and regular follow-up for this disease 
can reduce the risk of cancerous changes and related complications.

Copyright © 2024 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000040242
PMCID: PMC11521078
PMID: 39470508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.