---
reference_id: "PMID:34698909"
title: Effectiveness of a surveillance program of upper endoscopy for upper gastrointestinal cancers in Lynch syndrome patients.
authors:
- Ceravolo AH
- Yang JJ
- Latham A
- Markowitz AJ
- Shia J
- Mermelstein J
- Calo D
- Gerdes H
- Ludwig E
- Schattner MA
- Stadler ZK
- Kantor E
- Du M
- Mendelsohn RB
journal: Int J Colorectal Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00384-021-04053-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effectiveness of a surveillance program of upper endoscopy for upper gastrointestinal cancers in Lynch syndrome patients.
**Authors:** Ceravolo AH, Yang JJ, Latham A, Markowitz AJ, Shia J, Mermelstein J, Calo D, Gerdes H, Ludwig E, Schattner MA, Stadler ZK, Kantor E, Du M, Mendelsohn RB
**Journal:** Int J Colorectal Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00384-021-04053-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00384-021-04053-y)

## Content

1. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2022 Jan;37(1):231-238. doi: 10.1007/s00384-021-04053-y.
 Epub 2021 Oct 26.

Effectiveness of a surveillance program of upper endoscopy for upper 
gastrointestinal cancers in Lynch syndrome patients.

Ceravolo AH(1), Yang JJ(2), Latham A(3), Markowitz AJ(2), Shia J(4), Mermelstein 
J(5), Calo D(2), Gerdes H(2), Ludwig E(2), Schattner MA(2), Stadler ZK(3)(6), 
Kantor E(7), Du M(7), Mendelsohn RB(2).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 
USA. Amandacer1212@gmail.com.
(2)Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition Service, Department of Medicine, 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Clinical Genetics Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering 
Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY, USA.
(5)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Cooper University 
Health Care, Camden, NJ, USA.
(6)Gastrointestinal Oncology Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan 
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
(7)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Lynch syndrome (LS) is the most common cause of hereditary 
colorectal cancer and is associated with an increased lifetime risk of gastric 
and duodenal cancers of 8-16% and 7%, respectively; therefore, we aim to 
describe an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) surveillance program for upper 
gastrointestinal (GI) precursor lesions and cancer in LS patients.
METHODS: Patients who either had positive genetic testing or met clinical 
criteria for LS who had a surveillance EGD at our institution from 1996 to 2017 
were identified. Patients were included if they had at least two EGDs or an 
upper GI cancer detected on the first surveillance EGD. EGD and pathology 
reports were extracted manually.
RESULTS: Our cohort included 247 patients with a mean age of 47.1 years (SD 
12.6) at first EGD. Patients had a mean of 3.5 EGDs (range 1-16). Mean duration 
of follow-up was 5.7 years. Average interval between EGDs was 2.3 years. 
Surveillance EGD detected precursor lesions in 8 (3.2%) patients, two (0.8%) 
gastric cancers and two (0.8%) duodenal cancers. Two interval cancers were 
diagnosed: a duodenal adenocarcinoma was detected 2 years, 8 months after prior 
EGD and a jejunal adenocarcinoma was detected 1 year, 9 months after prior EGD.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that surveillance EGD is a useful tool to help 
detect precancerous and cancerous upper GI lesions in LS patients. To our 
knowledge, this is the first study to examine a program of surveillance EGDs in 
LS patients. More data are needed to determine the appropriate surveillance 
interval.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00384-021-04053-y
PMCID: PMC8760159
PMID: 34698909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest/competing interests: 
A.H.C., J.J.Y., A.L., A.J.M., J.S., J.M., D.C., H.G., E.L., M.A.S., E.K., M.D., 
and R.B.M. declare no conflicts of interest. Z.K.S. reports that an immediate 
family member holds consulting/advisory roles with Allergan, Adverum, 
Genentech/Roche, Gyroscope Tx, Novartis, Neurogene, Optos Plc, Regeneron, 
Regenxbio.