---
reference_id: "PMID:20301759"
title: Congenital Dyserythropoietic Anemia Type I.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Tamary H
- Dgany O
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital Dyserythropoietic Anemia Type I.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Tamary H, Dgany O

## Content

1. Congenital Dyserythropoietic Anemia Type I.

Tamary H(1), Dgany O(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2009 Apr 21 [updated 2021 Jul 29].

Author information:
(1)Professor of Pediatrics Director, Hematology Diagnostic and Research 
Laboratory Schneider Children's Medical Center of Israel Petah Tiqva, Israel
(2)Director, Pediatric Hematology Diagnostic Laboratory Felsenstein Medical 
Research Center Beilinson Campus Petah Tiqva, Israel

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Congenital dyserythropoietic anemia type I (CDA I) is 
characterized by moderate-to-severe macrocytic anemia presenting occasionally in 
utero as severe anemia associated with hydrops fetalis but more commonly in 
neonates as hepatomegaly, early jaundice, and intrauterine growth restriction. 
Some individuals present in childhood or adulthood. After the neonatal period, 
most affected individuals have lifelong moderate anemia, usually accompanied by 
jaundice and splenomegaly. Secondary hemochromatosis develops with age as a 
result of increased iron absorption even in those who are not transfused. Distal 
limb anomalies occur in 4%-14% of affected individuals.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of CDA I is suspected based on hematologic 
findings and established with identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in 
CDAN1 or CDIN1.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Intramuscular or subcutaneous 
injections of interferon IFN-α2a or IFN-α2b are given two or three times a week 
or peginterferon-α2b once a week to increase hemoglobin and decrease iron 
overload. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation should be considered only in 
transfusion-dependent persons who are resistant to IFN therapy. Treatment of 
iron overload using iron chelation as necessary; laparoscopic cholecystectomy 
for biliary stones; treatment of scoliosis per orthopedist; calcium and vitamin 
D supplementation for osteoporosis; treatment of extramedullary hematopoiesis 
including regular blood transfusions, surgical debulking, or low-dose radiation; 
treatment of vision issues per ophthalmologist. Surveillance: Measurement of 
hemoglobin every three to six months and more frequently at the time of 
infections, measurement of bilirubin, iron, transferrin, and serum ferritin 
concentration every six to 12 months starting at age ten years to monitor anemia 
and iron overload; annual myocardial and liver T2-weighted MRI starting at age 
ten years (if available). Annual abdominal ultrasound beginning at age five 
years; examination for scoliosis with orthopedist as needed; bone densitometry 
for osteoporosis as recommended by bone specialist; annual assessment of visual 
acuity and fundoscopic examination by ophthalmologist beginning at age 40 years 
or earlier if symptomatic. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Any preparation 
containing iron.
GENETIC COUNSELING: CDA I is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If both 
parents are known to be heterozygous for a CDA I-causing pathogenic variant, 
each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being 
affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of 
being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the pathogenic variants have been 
identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk relatives 
and prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301759