---
reference_id: "PMID:36178555"
title: "Monogenic diabetes clinic (MDC): 3-year experience."
authors:
- Rapini N
- Patera PI
- Schiaffini R
- Ciampalini P
- Pampanini V
- Cristina MM
- Deodati A
- Bracaglia G
- Porzio O
- Ruta R
- Novelli A
- Mucciolo M
- Cianfarani S
- Barbetti F
journal: Acta Diabetol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00592-022-01972-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monogenic diabetes clinic (MDC): 3-year experience.
**Authors:** Rapini N, Patera PI, Schiaffini R, Ciampalini P, Pampanini V, Cristina MM, Deodati A, Bracaglia G, Porzio O, Ruta R, Novelli A, Mucciolo M, Cianfarani S, Barbetti F
**Journal:** Acta Diabetol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00592-022-01972-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00592-022-01972-2)

## Content

1. Acta Diabetol. 2023 Jan;60(1):61-70. doi: 10.1007/s00592-022-01972-2. Epub
2022  Sep 30.

Monogenic diabetes clinic (MDC): 3-year experience.

Rapini N(1), Patera PI(1), Schiaffini R(1), Ciampalini P(1), Pampanini V(1), 
Cristina MM(1), Deodati A(1), Bracaglia G(2), Porzio O(2)(3), Ruta R(4), Novelli 
A(4), Mucciolo M(4), Cianfarani S(1)(5)(6), Barbetti F(7).

Author information:
(1)Diabetology and Growth Disorders Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, 
IRCCS, 00164, Rome, Italy.
(2)Clinical Laboratory Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Piazza S Onofrio 
4, 00165, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Experimental Medicine, Univerisity of Rome 'Tor Vergata', 
00131, Rome, Italy.
(4)Translational Cytogenomics Research Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, 
IRCCS, 00146, Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome 'Tor Vergata', 00131, 
Rome, Italy.
(6)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet, 17177, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)Clinical Laboratory Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Piazza S Onofrio 
4, 00165, Rome, Italy. fabrizio.barbetti@uniroma2.it.

Erratum in
    Acta Diabetol. 2023 Jan;60(1):71. doi: 10.1007/s00592-022-01998-6.

AIM: In the pediatric diabetes clinic, patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus 
(T1D) account for more than 90% of cases, while monogenic forms represent about 
6%. Many monogenic diabetes subtypes may respond to therapies other than insulin 
and have chronic diabetes complication prognosis that is different from T1D. 
With the aim of providing a better diagnostic pipeline and a tailored care for 
patients with monogenic diabetes, we set up a monogenic diabetes clinic (MDC).
METHODS: In the first 3 years of activity 97 patients with non-autoimmune forms 
of hyperglycemia were referred to MDC. Genetic testing was requested for 80 
patients and 68 genetic reports were available for review.
RESULTS: In 58 subjects hyperglycemia was discovered beyond 1 year of age (Group 
1) and in 10 before 1 year of age (Group 2). Genetic variants considered 
causative of hyperglycemia were identified in 25 and 6 patients of Group 1 and 
2, respectively, with a pick up rate of 43.1% (25/58) for Group 1 and 60% (6/10) 
for Group 2 (global pick-up rate: 45.5%; 31/68). When we considered probands of 
Group 1 with a parental history of hyperglycemia, 58.3% (21/36) had a positive 
genetic test for GCK or HNF1A genes, while pick-up rate was 18.1% (4/22) in 
patients with mute family history for diabetes. Specific treatments for each 
condition were administered in most cases.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that MDC may contribute to provide a better diabetes 
care in the pediatric setting.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00592-022-01972-2
PMCID: PMC9813184
PMID: 36178555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors have no financial or non-financial 
interests directly or indirectly related to the work submitted for publication.