---
reference_id: "PMID:35945463"
title: Multiplatform molecular analyses refine classification of gliomas arising in patients with neurofibromatosis type 1.
authors:
- Lucas CG
- Sloan EA
- Gupta R
- Wu J
- Pratt D
- Vasudevan HN
- Ravindranathan A
- Barreto J
- Williams EA
- Shai A
- Whipple NS
- Bruggers CS
- Maher O
- Nabors B
- Rodriguez M
- Samuel D
- Brown M
- Carmichael J
- Lu R
- Mirchia K
- Sullivan DV
- Pekmezci M
- Tihan T
- Bollen AW
- Perry A
- Banerjee A
- Mueller S
- Gupta N
- Hervey-Jumper SL
- Oberheim Bush NA
- Daras M
- Taylor JW
- Butowski NA
- de Groot J
- Clarke JL
- Raleigh DR
- Costello JF
- Phillips JJ
- Reddy AT
- Chang SM
- Berger MS
- Solomon DA
journal: Acta Neuropathol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00401-022-02478-5
keywords:
- Adult
- Astrocytoma/genetics
- Brain Neoplasms/genetics
- "Glioma/genetics, pathology"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Neurofibromatosis 1/complications, genetics"
- Sequence Deletion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiplatform molecular analyses refine classification of gliomas arising in patients with neurofibromatosis type 1.
**Authors:** Lucas CG, Sloan EA, Gupta R, Wu J, Pratt D, Vasudevan HN, Ravindranathan A, Barreto J, Williams EA, Shai A, Whipple NS, Bruggers CS, Maher O, Nabors B, Rodriguez M, Samuel D, Brown M, Carmichael J, Lu R, Mirchia K, Sullivan DV, Pekmezci M, Tihan T, Bollen AW, Perry A, Banerjee A, Mueller S, Gupta N, Hervey-Jumper SL, Oberheim Bush NA, Daras M, Taylor JW, Butowski NA, de Groot J, Clarke JL, Raleigh DR, Costello JF, Phillips JJ, Reddy AT, Chang SM, Berger MS, Solomon DA
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00401-022-02478-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-022-02478-5)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol. 2022 Oct;144(4):747-765. doi: 10.1007/s00401-022-02478-5.
Epub  2022 Aug 9.

Multiplatform molecular analyses refine classification of gliomas arising in
patients with neurofibromatosis type 1.

Lucas CG(1)(2), Sloan EA(1)(3), Gupta R(1), Wu J(1), Pratt D(4), Vasudevan
HN(5)(6), Ravindranathan A(1), Barreto J(1), Williams EA(1), Shai A(6), Whipple
NS(7), Bruggers CS(7), Maher O(8), Nabors B(9), Rodriguez M(10), Samuel D(11),
Brown M(12), Carmichael J(13), Lu R(1), Mirchia K(1), Sullivan DV(1), Pekmezci
M(1), Tihan T(1), Bollen AW(1), Perry A(1)(6), Banerjee A(14), Mueller
S(6)(14)(15), Gupta N(6)(16), Hervey-Jumper SL(6), Oberheim Bush NA(15)(17),
Daras M(15)(17), Taylor JW(15)(17), Butowski NA(15)(17), de Groot J(15)(17),
Clarke JL(15)(17), Raleigh DR(5)(6), Costello JF(6), Phillips JJ(1)(6), Reddy
AT(6)(14), Chang SM(15)(17), Berger MS(6), Solomon DA(18).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Francisco, 513
Parnassus Ave, Health Sciences West 451, San Francisco, CA, 94143, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Medstar Georgetown University Hospital, Washington,
DC, USA.
(4)Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(5)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California San Francisco,
San Francisco, CA, USA.
(7)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(8)Department of Oncology, Nicklaus Children's Hospital, Miami, FL, USA.
(9)Division of Neuro-Oncology, Department of Neurology, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(10)Douglass Hanly Moir Pathology, Macquarie Park, Australia.
(11)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Valley Children's Hospital, Madera, CA,
USA.
(12)Department of Neurosurgery, Valley Children's Hospital, Madera, CA, USA.
(13)Department of Medical Genetics and Metabolism, Valley Children's Hospital,
Madera, CA, USA.
(14)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(15)Department of Neurology, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA.
(17)Division of Neuro-Oncology, Department of Neurological Surgery, University
of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(18)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Francisco, 513
Parnassus Ave, Health Sciences West 451, San Francisco, CA, 94143, USA.
david.solomon@ucsf.edu.

Gliomas arising in the setting of neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) are
heterogeneous, occurring from childhood through adulthood, can be histologically
low-grade or high-grade, and follow an indolent or aggressive clinical course.
Comprehensive profiling of genetic alterations beyond NF1 inactivation and
epigenetic classification of these tumors remain limited. Through
next-generation sequencing, copy number analysis, and DNA methylation profiling
of gliomas from 47 NF1 patients, we identified 2 molecular subgroups of
NF1-associated gliomas. The first harbored biallelic NF1 inactivation only,
occurred primarily during childhood, followed a more indolent clinical course,
and had a unique epigenetic signature for which we propose the terminology
"pilocytic astrocytoma, arising in the setting of NF1". The second subgroup
harbored additional oncogenic alterations including CDKN2A homozygous deletion
and ATRX mutation, occurred primarily during adulthood, followed a more
aggressive clinical course, and was epigenetically diverse, with most tumors
aligning with either high-grade astrocytoma with piloid features or various
subclasses of IDH-wildtype glioblastoma. Several patients were treated with
small molecule MEK inhibitors that resulted in stable disease or tumor
regression when used as a single agent, but only in the context of those tumors
with NF1 inactivation lacking additional oncogenic alterations. Together, these
findings highlight recurrently altered pathways in NF1-associated gliomas and
help inform targeted therapeutic strategies for this patient population.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-022-02478-5
PMCID: PMC9468105
PMID: 35945463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.P. and D.A.S. are members of the editorial
board for Acta Neuropathologica. They were not involved in the assessment or
decision-making process for this manuscript. The other authors declare that they
have no competing interests related to this report.
