---
reference_id: "PMID:27264777"
title: Management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease beyond the lungs.
authors:
- Vanfleteren LEGW
- Spruit MA
- Wouters EFM
- Franssen FME
journal: Lancet Respir Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(16)00097-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease beyond the lungs.
**Authors:** Vanfleteren LEGW, Spruit MA, Wouters EFM, Franssen FME
**Journal:** Lancet Respir Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2213-2600(16)00097-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(16)00097-7)

## Content

1. Lancet Respir Med. 2016 Nov;4(11):911-924. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(16)00097-7.
 Epub 2016 Jun 2.

Management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease beyond the lungs.

Vanfleteren LEGW(1), Spruit MA(2), Wouters EFM(3), Franssen FME(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Research and Education, CIRO, Horn, Netherlands; Department of 
Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, 
Netherlands. Electronic address: lowievanfleteren@ciro-horn.nl.
(2)Department of Research and Education, CIRO, Horn, Netherlands.
(3)Department of Research and Education, CIRO, Horn, Netherlands; Department of 
Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, 
Netherlands.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is an umbrella term that covers 
many clinical subtypes with clearly different pulmonary and extra-pulmonary 
characteristics, but with persistent airflow limitation in common. This insight 
has led to the development of a more personalised approach in bronchodilator 
therapy, prevention of exacerbations, and advanced treatments (such as 
non-invasive ventilation and lung volume reduction techniques). However, 
systemic manifestations and comorbidities of COPD also contribute to different 
clinical phenotypes and warrant an individualised approach as part of integrated 
disease management. Alterations in bodyweight and composition, from cachexia to 
obesity, demand specific management. Psychological symptoms are highly 
prevalent, and thorough diagnosis and treatment are necessary. Moreover, 
prevention of exacerbations requires interventions beyond the lungs, including 
treatment of gastro-oesophageal reflux disease, reduction of cardiovascular 
risks, and management of dyspnoea and anxiety. In this Review, we discuss the 
management of COPD beyond the respiratory system and propose treatment 
strategies on the basis of the latest research and best practices.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(16)00097-7
PMID: 27264777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]