---
reference_id: "PMID:34013739"
title: Clinical Implications of Estimated Glomerular Filtration Rate Dip Following Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter-2 Inhibitor Initiation on Cardiovascular and Kidney Outcomes.
authors:
- Xie Y
- Bowe B
- Gibson AK
- McGill JB
- Maddukuri G
- Al-Aly Z
journal: J Am Heart Assoc
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1161/JAHA.120.020237
keywords:
- Aged
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/epidemiology, etiology, physiopathology"
- Cause of Death/trends
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/complications, drug therapy"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Glomerular Filtration Rate/drug effects
- Humans
- Incidence
- Kidney/drug effects
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/epidemiology, etiology, physiopathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- "Sodium-Glucose Transporter 2 Inhibitors/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Survival Rate/trends
- United States/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Implications of Estimated Glomerular Filtration Rate Dip Following Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter-2 Inhibitor Initiation on Cardiovascular and Kidney Outcomes.
**Authors:** Xie Y, Bowe B, Gibson AK, McGill JB, Maddukuri G, Al-Aly Z
**Journal:** J Am Heart Assoc (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1161/JAHA.120.020237](https://doi.org/10.1161/JAHA.120.020237)

## Content

1. J Am Heart Assoc. 2021 Jun;10(11):e020237. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.120.020237. Epub 
2021 May 20.

Clinical Implications of Estimated Glomerular Filtration Rate Dip Following 
Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter-2 Inhibitor Initiation on Cardiovascular and Kidney 
Outcomes.

Xie Y(1)(2)(3), Bowe B(1)(2)(3), Gibson AK(1)(3), McGill JB(4), Maddukuri G(5), 
Al-Aly Z(1)(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Epidemiology Center Research and Development Service VA Saint Louis 
Health Care System Saint Louis MO.
(2)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics College for Public Health and 
Social Justice Saint Louis University Saint Louis MO.
(3)Veterans Research and Education Foundation of Saint Louis Saint Louis MO.
(4)Department of Medicine Washington University School of Medicine Saint Louis 
MO.
(5)Nephrology Section Medicine Service VA Saint Louis Health Care System Saint 
Louis MO.
(6)Institute for Public Health Washington University in Saint Louis Saint Louis 
MO.

Background The frequency of the initial short-term decline in estimated 
glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), eGFR dip, following initiation of 
sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors (SGLT2i) and its clinical implications 
in real-world practice are not clear. Methods and Results We built a cohort of 
36 638 new users of SGLT2i and 209 025 new users of other antihyperglycemics. 
Inverse probability weighting was used to estimate the excess rate of eGFR dip, 
risk of the composite cardiovascular outcome of nonfatal myocardial infarction, 
nonfatal stroke, hospitalization for heart failure, or all-cause mortality, and 
risk of the composite kidney outcome of eGFR decline >50%, end-stage kidney 
disease, or all-cause mortality. In the first 6 months of therapy, compared with 
other antihyperglycemics, excess rates of eGFR dip >10% and eGFR dip >30% were 
9.86 (95% CI: 8.83-11.00) and 1.15 (0.70-1.62) per 100 SGLT2i users, 
respectively. In mediation analyses that accounted for eGFR dipping, SGLT2i use 
was associated with reduced risk of cardiovascular and kidney outcomes (hazard 
ratio, 0.92 [0.84-0.99] and 0.78 [0.71-0.87], respectively); the magnitude of 
the association reduced by eGFR dipping was small for both outcomes. SGLT2i was 
associated with reduced risk of both outcomes in those with higher than average 
probability of eGFR dip >10% or 30%. Compared with discontinuation, continued 
use of SGLT2i at 6 months was associated with reduced risk of cardiovascular and 
kidney outcomes in those with no eGFR dip or eGFR dip ≤10%, in those with eGFR 
dip >10%, and in those with eGFR dip >30%. Conclusions The salutary association 
of SGLT2i with cardiovascular and kidney outcomes was maintained regardless of 
eGFR dipping; concerns about eGFR dipping should not preclude use, and 
occurrence of eGFR dip after SGLT2i initiation may not warrant discontinuation.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.120.020237
PMCID: PMC8483543
PMID: 34013739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.