---
reference_id: "PMID:19529952"
title: Novel mutations in the P2RY5 gene in one Turkish and two Indian patients presenting with hypotrichosis and woolly hair.
authors:
- Pasternack SM
- Murugusundram S
- Eigelshoven S
- Müller M
- Kruse R
- Lehmann P
- Betz RC
journal: Arch Dermatol Res
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1007/s00403-009-0971-5
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- Child
- Female
- Hair/pathology
- Humans
- Hypotrichosis/genetics
- India
- Lipase/genetics
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- "Receptors, Purinergic P2/genetics"
- Turkey
- "Receptors, Lysophosphatidic Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel mutations in the P2RY5 gene in one Turkish and two Indian patients presenting with hypotrichosis and woolly hair.
**Authors:** Pasternack SM, Murugusundram S, Eigelshoven S, Müller M, Kruse R, Lehmann P, Betz RC
**Journal:** Arch Dermatol Res (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00403-009-0971-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00403-009-0971-5)

## Content

1. Arch Dermatol Res. 2009 Sep;301(8):621-4. doi: 10.1007/s00403-009-0971-5. Epub
 2009 Jun 16.

Novel mutations in the P2RY5 gene in one Turkish and two Indian patients 
presenting with hypotrichosis and woolly hair.

Pasternack SM(1), Murugusundram S, Eigelshoven S, Müller M, Kruse R, Lehmann P, 
Betz RC.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, 53111 Bonn, Germany.

Hypotrichosis simplex comprises a group of non-syndromic human alopecias. 
Diffuse loss of hair typically starts in early childhood and progresses 
throughout adolescence. We and others have previously reported mutations in the 
P2RY5 gene and the LIPH gene as being causal factors of autosomal recessive 
hypotrichosis simplex with or without woolly hair. In the present study, we 
analyzed one Turkish family and two non-related girls of Indian ethnicity 
affected with hypotrichosis and woolly hair for mutations in these genes. We 
identified as yet unreported mutations in the P2RY5 gene: a 1-base pair deletion 
(c.472delC) and a 4-base pair duplication (c.64_67dupTGCA), both of which lead 
to frameshifts resulting in truncated proteins. Our study increases the spectrum 
of known P2RY5 mutations and highlights the importance of this receptor in human 
hair growth and texture.

DOI: 10.1007/s00403-009-0971-5
PMID: 19529952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]