---
reference_id: "PMID:33598805"
title: "EDA-ID: a Severe Clinical Presentation Associated with a New IKBKG Mutation."
authors:
- Bret Puvilland C
- Boisson B
- Fusaro M
- Bustamante J
- Bertrand Y
- Ceraulo A
- Ouachée-Chardin M
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-021-00992-x
keywords:
- Candidiasis/genetics
- Cytomegalovirus Infections/genetics
- Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics"
- Humans
- I-kappa B Kinase/genetics
- Infant
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Phenotype
- "Pneumonia, Pneumocystis/genetics"
- Primary Immunodeficiency Diseases/genetics
- Recurrence
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# EDA-ID: a Severe Clinical Presentation Associated with a New IKBKG Mutation.
**Authors:** Bret Puvilland C, Boisson B, Fusaro M, Bustamante J, Bertrand Y, Ceraulo A, Ouachée-Chardin M
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-021-00992-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-021-00992-x)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2021 Jul;41(5):1099-1102. doi: 10.1007/s10875-021-00992-x.
Epub  2021 Feb 17.

EDA-ID: a Severe Clinical Presentation Associated with a New IKBKG Mutation.

Bret Puvilland C(1), Boisson B(2)(3)(4), Fusaro M(2)(5), Bustamante 
J(2)(3)(4)(5), Bertrand Y(6), Ceraulo A(#)(6), Ouachée-Chardin M(#)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Institute of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology 
(IHOPe), and University Claude Bernard, 1 place du Pr Joseph Renault - 69008, 
Lyon, France. coline.puvilland@free.fr.
(2)Imagine Institute, Paris University, Paris, France.
(3)Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, Inserm 
U1163, Necker Hospital for Sick Children, Paris, France.
(4)St Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller 
Branch, Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.
(5)Study Center for Immunodeficiencies, Necker Hospital for Sick Children, 
Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, EU, France.
(6)Department of Hematology, Institute of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology 
(IHOPe), and University Claude Bernard, 1 place du Pr Joseph Renault - 69008, 
Lyon, France.
(#)Contributed equally

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-021-00992-x
PMCID: PMC8254782
PMID: 33598805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.

X-linked recessive (XR) ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency (EDA-ID) is a rare primary immunodeficiency (PID) with various clinical phenotypes, including anomalies of the ectodermic tissues (nails, hairs, teeth, and hair), osteopetrosis, lymphedema, colitis and susceptibility to severe infections [1]. XR-EDA-ID results from hypomorphic hemizygous mutations in IKBKG (Xq28), encoding NEMO (NF-κB Essential Modulator), critical in immune and inflammatory responses, oncogenesis and the regulation of apoptosis [1]. A total loss of NEMO activity leads to a severe form of Incontinentia Pigmenti (IP), lethal in male individuals [2]. Immunological phenotypes are diverse, affecting Toll-like receptor pathways, NK cells or T lymphocytes [2].

We report the observation of a boy diagnosed with EDA-ID. He was born healthy but with harmonious intrauterine growth restriction. At 3 months, he presented with an acute respiratory distress syndrome with circulatory failure following a Staphylococcus aureus septicemia and pulmonary pneumocystosis. He improved after 8 days of invasive ventilation and IV antibiotics. Pneumocystosis was diagnosed by nasopharyngeal PCR and typical CT scans and was treated with corticosteroids and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. Moreover, he had cytomegalovirus (CMV) viremia which was not controlled with Valganciclovir and Ganciclovir was introduced (with initially 50,000 UI/mL copies of CMV), allowing a slow regression until clearance after 2 months of treatment (Online Resource 1). During each severe infectious episode, the fever never exceeded 38.5°C and the C-reactive protein was mildly elevated (maximum 55.2 mg/L). He also had symptoms of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD): diarrhea, failure to thrive, and feeding intolerance with the need for parenteral nutrition. However, the colitis was probably aggravated by the persistent CMV infection. He had also recurrent muco-cutaneous Candidiasis. He did not present with osteopetrosis nor lymphedema. Biological analysis showed the presence of increased lymphocytes (patient’s immunological characteristics at diagnosis are presented in Online Resource 2), increased IgM levels at 4.6 g/L (0.26 −1), normal B cells differentiation and a slightly decreased of CD40L expression level.

The boy had a severe clinical presentation suggestive of NEMO deficiency: severe and recurrences CMV infection and, pneumocystosis, recurrent muco-cutaneous candidiasis and pyogenic infections, but with a moderate EDA characterized by sparse hair, some skin areas that were dry and darker in color, ichthyosis with pilling of the abdomen, eczematous dermatosis and hypohidrosis (Fig. 1a). The mother also had dyschromic spots producing linear pigmentation in splash and blaschkoïde on the trunk consistent with IP (Fig. 1b). The mother is Cameroonian and the father Caucasian. She had cervical cancer at the age of 19 years that relapsed at age 21. The mother's half-brother died at 3 months of anemia and hemorrhage of unknown etiology and the child's maternal grandmother died at age 36 years from breast cancer (Fig. 1c).

The karyotype was 46, XY. 22q11.2 FISH analysis was negative and CGH array was normal. Targeted next generation sequencing identified a hemizygous missense mutation in the coiled coil domain 1 (CC1) of IKBKG consistent with the diagnosis of XR-EDA-ID. This mutation was confirmed by Sanger method, with a long PCR using primers specific for IKBKG and excluding IKBKGP pseudogene [3]. This mutation (c.490A>C, p.Thr164Pro (NM_001099587.2) in exon 4) has never been reported [3]. It is located in in the CC1 domain, a domain for which several IKBKG mutations had been reported and associated to this disease (Fig. 1d) [2]. The mother was heterozygous and therefore carrier for the same mutation. In silico prediction scores suggested this variant was functionally deleterious and be pathogenic (Sift: tolerated, Polyphen2: possibly damaging, CADD: deleterious (22.31)). By overexpression system, using a SV-40 NEMO-deficient fibroblastic cell lines (NEMOΔ4-10/WT), the variant had protein expression similar to wild-type IKBKG plasmid (Fig. 1e) but associated with an absence of activity in terms of IL-6 production upon IL-1β stimulation (Fig. 1f). In addition, whole blood activation with TFN-α showed an absence of IL-6 production, similar to other patients with XR-EDA-ID (Online Resource 3).

The patient benefited from a hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) at 8 months with a cord blood unit (HLA 6/8 identical, with 8.6 x 107 total nucleated cells/kg, 2.54 x 105 CD34+ cells/kg) after receiving a reduced-toxicity myeloablative conditioning regimen with Fludarabine (40 mg/m2/day from D10 to D7), Busulfan (from D-6 to D2, AUC 4.4 mg.h/L) and rabbit anti-thymocyte globulins (Thymoglobulines®, 10 mg/kg total dose over 3 days). The prevention of graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) was based on cyclosporin and mycophenolate mofetil. He presented with a stage 2 cutaneous acute GVHD ten days after transplant and responded favorably to topic and systemic corticosteroids. He recovered from aplasia at day 17. The following post-transplant period was affected by numerous CMV recurrences, without organ damage, which required multiple dual therapy with Foscarnet and Ganciclovir as well as 2 injections of anti-CMV cytotoxic T lymphocytes [4] (Online Resource 1). He required IV immunoglobulin replacement after transplant.

Patient had a 100% donor whole blood chimerism at 1, 3 and 6 month post-transplantation. Quantitative immune recovery occurred after 1 month for NK cells, 5 months for B lymphocytes and for T CD8+ lymphocytes and 6 months for T CD4+ lymphocytes. However, qualitative immune recovery was inadequate given that CD4+ T lymphocyte were lower than CD8+ and the number of naive T lymphocytes remained very low. Unfortunately, he died 7 months after HSCT, from a refractory septic shock to multi-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae.

EDA-ID is a rare cause of PID. This patient presented with a severe and very particular form of the disease, associated with a new mutation, and a mother fulfilling the classic criteria for IP diagnosis in adults, without neurological involvement. The clinical and biological descriptions of the proband and his mother clearly demonstrate the relationship between IP and EDA-ID. This has already been described in patients before [5]. Our proband had features of very mild EDA (sparse hair associated with a dry and non-sweating skin, hyperpigmentation, and eczema) with severe immunodeficiency instead. In this case, fever was absent or delayed in the course of several infections, suggesting an impaired response to proinflammatory cytokines and/or microbial products, which may be a distinctive feature of XR-EDA-ID. Both syndromes are allelic and are associated with mutations in IKBKG, with a genotype-phenotype correlation in hemizygous males. In contrast, loss-of-function mutations and hypomorphic mutations cause IP in females [5]. His mother and maternal grandmother had at a young age a severe form of cervical and breast cancer respectively. Sixteen cases of cancer have been reported in IP and these cases provide evidence suggesting a predisposition to cancer among women with IP [6]. NF-κB signaling promotes NF-κB target gene transcription including IL-6 and activation of IL-6/STAT3 signaling, subsequently leading to the expression of tumor suppressive protein, PML. Inactivation or downregulation of PML has been found in many cancers and in a model of breast cancer, the loss of NEMO resulted in a loss of estrogen plus progesterone (E+P) protection against breast cancer [7].

Our patient carried a new mutation in CC1 domain, and had a phenotype similar to other patients carrying mutation in this domain: EDA, colitis, pyogenic infection, mycobacterial infection, TNF alpha response deficiency, hyper-IgM phenotype but he didn't have lymphoedema nor mycobacterial infection (but was not BCG vaccinated) [8]. Mortality is also higher in patients with CC1 domain mutations. In the cohort of Miot et al. [2], among the 5 patients with a mutation in CC1, 4 had a CMV viremia, 3 had a pneumocystosis, and 4 had an EDA. This incidence is more frequent than that of the entire cohort. In fact, out of 29 children, 6 had a CMV infection, 6 had a pneumocystosis and 13 had an EDA. In the overall cohort of Hanson et al., the incidence of viral DNA infections was 21 % and 8 % for pneumocystosis [8]. It would therefore appear that CC1 mutations are associated with EDA and severe and early viral or opportunistic infections.

Severe XR-EDA-ID is potentially curable with HSCT: the recent study by Miot et al. reviewed 29 cases of transplanted children with EDA-ID and the overall survival rate was 74% at 57 month-post-transplantation. They identified two main unfavorable factors for HSCT were colitis or a pre-existing mycobacterial infection. According to Miot et al., the integrity of the intestinal epithelium is altered in NEMO deficiency-related colitis, potentially favoring bacterial translocation and increasing the risk for life-threatening systemic infections, and not accessible to cure with HSCT [2]. This may explain the septic shock with a gram-negative bacillus in our patient, who was a digestive carrier for a multi-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae.

In conclusion, we report a new missense mutation in the CC1 domain in IKBKG responsible for one of the most severe clinical presentations of XR-EDA-ID. This case extends the spectrum of IKBKG mutation associated phenotypes, the main difference being the very discreet signs of EDA features associated with severe immunological presentation.

ESM 1 Evolution of the CMV plasmatic viral load (Artus kit CMV QS-RGS, Qiagen®) and treatments

ESM 2 Immunological characteristics of the patient

ESM 3 Methods of functional characterization of the variant