---
reference_id: "PMID:21666692"
title: Genome-wide association study reveals three susceptibility loci for common migraine in the general population.
authors:
- Chasman DI
- Schürks M
- Anttila V
- de Vries B
- Schminke U
- Launer LJ
- Terwindt GM
- van den Maagdenberg AM
- Fendrich K
- Völzke H
- Ernst F
- Griffiths LR
- Buring JE
- Kallela M
- Freilinger T
- Kubisch C
- Ridker PM
- Palotie A
- Ferrari MD
- Hoffmann W
- Zee RY
- Kurth T
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1038/ng.856
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome-wide association study reveals three susceptibility loci for common migraine in the general population.
**Authors:** Chasman DI, Schürks M, Anttila V, de Vries B, Schminke U, Launer LJ, Terwindt GM, van den Maagdenberg AM, Fendrich K, Völzke H, Ernst F, Griffiths LR, Buring JE, Kallela M, Freilinger T, Kubisch C, Ridker PM, Palotie A, Ferrari MD, Hoffmann W, Zee RY, Kurth T
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.856](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.856)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2011 Jun 12;43(7):695-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.856.

Genome-wide association study reveals three susceptibility loci for common 
migraine in the general population.

Chasman DI(1), Schürks M, Anttila V, de Vries B, Schminke U, Launer LJ, Terwindt 
GM, van den Maagdenberg AM, Fendrich K, Völzke H, Ernst F, Griffiths LR, Buring 
JE, Kallela M, Freilinger T, Kubisch C, Ridker PM, Palotie A, Ferrari MD, 
Hoffmann W, Zee RY, Kurth T.

Author information:
(1)Division of Preventive Medicine, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Migraine is a common, heterogeneous and heritable neurological disorder. Its 
pathophysiology is incompletely understood, and its genetic influences at the 
population level are unknown. In a population-based genome-wide analysis 
including 5,122 migraineurs and 18,108 non-migraineurs, rs2651899 (1p36.32, 
PRDM16), rs10166942 (2q37.1, TRPM8) and rs11172113 (12q13.3, LRP1) were among 
the top seven associations (P < 5 × 10(-6)) with migraine. These SNPs were 
significant in a meta-analysis among three replication cohorts and met 
genome-wide significance in a meta-analysis combining the discovery and 
replication cohorts (rs2651899, odds ratio (OR) = 1.11, P = 3.8 × 10(-9); 
rs10166942, OR = 0.85, P = 5.5 × 10(-12); and rs11172113, OR = 0.90, P = 4.3 × 
10(-9)). The associations at rs2651899 and rs10166942 were specific for migraine 
compared with non-migraine headache. None of the three SNP associations was 
preferential for migraine with aura or without aura, nor were any associations 
specific for migraine features. TRPM8 has been the focus of neuropathic pain 
models, whereas LRP1 modulates neuronal glutamate signaling, plausibly linking 
both genes to migraine pathophysiology.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.856
PMCID: PMC3125402
PMID: 21666692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Financial Interests None of the 
authors has a competing financial interest with regard to this manuscript.