---
reference_id: "PMID:35177655"
title: Genotype-phenotype correlations for COL4A3-COL4A5 variants resulting in Gly substitutions in Alport syndrome.
authors:
- Gibson JT
- Huang M
- Shenelli Croos Dabrera M
- Shukla K
- Rothe H
- Hilbert P
- Deltas C
- Storey H
- Lipska-Ziętkiewicz BS
- Chan MMY
- Sadeghi-Alavijeh O
- Gale DP
- Genomics England Research Consortium
- Cerkauskaite A
- Savige J
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-06525-9
keywords:
- Adult
- Amino Acid Substitution/genetics
- Autoantigens/genetics
- Collagen Type IV/genetics
- "Databases, Genetic"
- "Deafness/complications, genetics"
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Variation
- Glycine/genetics
- "Hematuria/complications, genetics"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Logistic Models
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/complications, epidemiology, genetics"
- Prevalence
- Proportional Hazards Models
- "Renal Insufficiency/complications, genetics"
- Risk Factors
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotype-phenotype correlations for COL4A3-COL4A5 variants resulting in Gly substitutions in Alport syndrome.
**Authors:** Gibson JT, Huang M, Shenelli Croos Dabrera M, Shukla K, Rothe H, Hilbert P, Deltas C, Storey H, Lipska-Ziętkiewicz BS, Chan MMY, Sadeghi-Alavijeh O, Gale DP, Genomics England Research Consortium, Cerkauskaite A, Savige J
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-022-06525-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-06525-9)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2022 Feb 17;12(1):2722. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-06525-9.

Genotype-phenotype correlations for COL4A3-COL4A5 variants resulting in Gly
substitutions in Alport syndrome.

Gibson JT(1), Huang M(1), Shenelli Croos Dabrera M(1), Shukla K(1), Rothe H(2),
Hilbert P(3), Deltas C(4), Storey H(5), Lipska-Ziętkiewicz BS(6), Chan MMY(7),
Sadeghi-Alavijeh O(7), Gale DP(7); Genomics England Research Consortium;
Cerkauskaite A(8), Savige J(9).

Collaborators: Ambrose JC, Arumugam P, Baple EL, Bleda M, Boardman-Pretty F,
Boissiere JM, Boustred CR, Brittain H, Caulfield MJ, Chan GC, Craig CEH,
Daugherty LC, de Burca A, Devereau A, Elgar G, Foulger RE, Fowler T, Furió-Tarí
P, Giess A, Hackett JM, Halai D, Hamblin A, Henderson S, Holman JE, Hubbard TJP,
Ibáñez K, Jackson R, Jones LJ, Kasperaviciute D, Kayikci M, Kousathanas A,
Lahnstein L, Lawson K, Leigh SEA, Leong IUS, Lopez FJ, Maleady-Crowe F, Mason J,
McDonagh EM, Moutsianas L, Mueller M, Murugaesu N, Need AC, Odhams CA, Orioli A,
Patch C, Perez-Gil D, Pereira MB, Polychronopoulos D, Pullinger J, Rahim T,
Rendon A, Riesgo-Ferreiro P, Rogers T, Ryten M, Savage K, Sawant K, Scott RH,
Siddiq A, Sieghart A, Smedley D, Smith KR, Smith SC, Sosinsky A, Spooner W,
Stevens HE, Stuckey A, Sultana R, Tanguy M, Thomas ERA, Thompson SR, Tregidgo C,
Tucci A, Walsh E, Watters SA, Welland MJ, Williams E, Witkowska K, Wood SM,
Zarowiecki M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (Melbourne Health and Northern Health), Royal
Melbourne Hospital, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, 3050,
Australia.
(2)Centre for Nephrology and Metabolic Disorders, 02943, Weisswasser, Germany.
(3)Departement de Biologie Moleculaire, Institute de Pathologie et de Genetique
ASBL, Gosselies, Belgium.
(4)Center of Excellence in Biobanking and Biomedical Research, University of
Cyprus Medical School, Nicosia, Cyprus.
(5)Molecular Genetics, Viapath Laboratories, 5th Floor Tower Wing, Guy's
Hospital, London, SE1 9RT, UK.
(6)Centre for Rare Diseases, and Clinical Genetics Unit, Medical University of
Gdańsk, Gdańsk, Poland.
(7)Department of Renal Medicine, University College London, London, UK.
(8)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University,
Vilnius, Lithuania.
(9)Department of Medicine (Melbourne Health and Northern Health), Royal
Melbourne Hospital, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, 3050,
Australia. jasavige@unimelb.edu.au.

Alport syndrome is the commonest inherited kidney disease and nearly half the
pathogenic variants in the COL4A3-COL4A5 genes that cause Alport syndrome result
in Gly substitutions. This study examined the molecular characteristics of Gly
substitutions that determine the severity of clinical features. Pathogenic
COL4A5 variants affecting Gly in the Leiden Open Variation Database in males
with X-linked Alport syndrome were correlated with age at kidney failure
(n = 157) and hearing loss diagnosis (n = 80). Heterozygous pathogenic COL4A3
and COL4A4 variants affecting Gly (n = 304) in autosomal dominant Alport
syndrome were correlated with the risk of haematuria in the UK 100,000 Genomes
Project. Gly substitutions were stratified by exon location (1 to 20 or 21 to
carboxyl terminus), being adjacent to a non-collagenous region (interruption or
terminus), and the degree of instability caused by the replacement residue.
Pathogenic COL4A5 variants that resulted in a Gly substitution with a highly
destabilising residue reduced the median age at kidney failure by 7 years
(p = 0.002), and age at hearing loss diagnosis by 21 years (p = 0.004).
Substitutions adjacent to a non-collagenous region delayed kidney failure by
19 years (p = 0.014). Heterozygous pathogenic COL4A3 and COL4A4 variants that
resulted in a Gly substitution with a highly destabilising residue (Arg, Val,
Glu, Asp, Trp) were associated with an increased risk of haematuria (p = 0.018),
and those adjacent to a non-collagenous region were associated with a reduced
risk (p = 0.046). Exon location had no effect. In addition, COL4A5 variants
adjacent to non-collagenous regions were over-represented in the normal
population in gnomAD (p < 0.001). The nature of the substitution and of nearby
residues determine the risk of haematuria, early onset kidney failure and
hearing loss for Gly substitutions in X-linked and autosomal dominant Alport
syndrome.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-06525-9
PMCID: PMC8854626
PMID: 35177655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
