---
reference_id: "PMID:30970351"
title: Management of Iron Deficiency Anaemia in Inflammatory Bowel Disease.
authors:
- Jimenez KM
- Gasche C
journal: Acta Haematol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1159/000496728
keywords:
- "Anemia, Iron-Deficiency/complications, drug therapy, pathology"
- Humans
- "Inflammatory Bowel Diseases/complications, pathology"
- "Iron/administration & dosage"
- "Lymphocytes/cytology, metabolism"
- Quality of Life
- Severity of Illness Index
- "Thrombocytosis/complications, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of Iron Deficiency Anaemia in Inflammatory Bowel Disease.
**Authors:** Jimenez KM, Gasche C
**Journal:** Acta Haematol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000496728](https://doi.org/10.1159/000496728)

## Content

1. Acta Haematol. 2019;142(1):30-36. doi: 10.1159/000496728. Epub 2019 Apr 10.

Management of Iron Deficiency Anaemia in Inflammatory Bowel Disease.

Jimenez KM(1), Gasche C(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine 
III, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine 
III, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 
christoph.gasche@meduniwien.ac.at.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a group of chronic relapsing inflammatory 
disorders affecting the large and small intestine, with a rising worldwide 
incidence and prevalence. Anaemia is the most common extraintestinal 
manifestation of IBD, correlating with disease activity, and tending to relapse 
even after successful therapy. Iron deficiency is the most common cause; 
however, it often manifests in combination with anaemia of inflammation. As 
such, multiple parameters are used for the diagnosis of iron deficiency anaemia 
in IBD. Timely recognition and selection of appropriate therapy leads to an 
improvement in the quality of life and prevention of potential sequelae. Oral 
iron can be effective under specific circumstances; however, as luminal iron 
changes microbiota and bacterial metabolism, oral administration should be 
avoided. Intravenous iron is preferred as it bypasses the sites of inflammation. 
Nevertheless, the optimization of IBD treatment should occur simultaneously, as 
this improves both patient condition and response to iron therapy. Herein, we 
discuss the screening, diagnosis, selection of therapy, and follow-up for iron 
deficiency anaemia in IBD.

© 2019 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000496728
PMID: 30970351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]