---
reference_id: "PMID:24763535"
title: The effects of lupus and antiphospholipid antibody syndrome on foetal outcomes.
authors:
- Nalli C
- Iodice A
- Andreoli L
- Lojacono A
- Motta M
- Fazzi E
- Tincani A
journal: Lupus
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1177/0961203313501402
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The effects of lupus and antiphospholipid antibody syndrome on foetal outcomes.
**Authors:** Nalli C, Iodice A, Andreoli L, Lojacono A, Motta M, Fazzi E, Tincani A
**Journal:** Lupus (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0961203313501402](https://doi.org/10.1177/0961203313501402)

## Content

1. Lupus. 2014 May;23(6):507-17. doi: 10.1177/0961203313501402.

The effects of lupus and antiphospholipid antibody syndrome on foetal outcomes.

Nalli C(1), Iodice A, Andreoli L, Lojacono A, Motta M, Fazzi E, Tincani A.

Author information:
(1)1Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Department of Clinical and 
Experimental Sciences, Spedali Civili and University of Brescia, Italy.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a multi-organ autoimmune disease that 
primarily affects women of childbearing-age. Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is 
a systemic autoimmune disorder defined by the occurrence of venous and arterial 
thrombosis, often multiple, and pregnancy morbidity in the presence of 
antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL). Recently, the long-term outcome of children 
born to patients with lupus and APS has become a major topic of interest both to 
patients and physicians. One of the major problems related to maternal disease 
is preterm delivery with all the consequences that this condition may bring. 
Prematurity may also be due to the presence of aPL; however, aPL do not 
generally display any thrombotic potential on neonates. Another complication may 
be neonatal lupus (NL), mediated by the presence of maternal antibodies 
(anti-Ro/SSA and anti-La/SSB). In addition, behaviour and neuropsychological 
outcomes have also been a matter of interest, but there are currently few data 
available. Beyond the biological influence of both maternal disease and 
autoimmune background, it is important to focus on the possible influence of 
maternal chronic illness on the neuropsychological development of her children. 
Whether aPL exposure could have a direct effect on brain development is still 
being debated. In children of mothers with APS, language delays have been noted 
and learning disabilities were described with a higher rate than the general 
age-school population. Several studies were performed on children born to lupus 
mothers: even if maternal lupus does not seem to impair intelligence levels, it 
may increase the occurrence of learning disabilities and particularly dyslexia 
in male children. To the best of our knowledge, no studies are available on the 
long-term outcome of children born to mothers with lupus or APS and particularly 
regarding the development of autoimmune diseases. Nevertheless, common 
experience of experts in the field is that these children do not show a 
significantly increased risk of displaying the same autoimmune disease as their 
mothers. The purpose of this paper is to answer the frequently asked questions 
of patients with lupus and APS who desire to become mothers, based on the little 
information available.

DOI: 10.1177/0961203313501402
PMID: 24763535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]