---
reference_id: "PMID:38294885"
title: Biologics, small molecule therapies and surgery in small bowel Crohn's disease.
authors:
- Steinberg JM
- Chowdhury R
- Sharma S
- Charabaty A
journal: Curr Opin Gastroenterol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/MOG.0000000000001006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biologics, small molecule therapies and surgery in small bowel Crohn's disease.
**Authors:** Steinberg JM, Chowdhury R, Sharma S, Charabaty A
**Journal:** Curr Opin Gastroenterol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MOG.0000000000001006](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOG.0000000000001006)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2024 May 1;40(3):203-208. doi: 
10.1097/MOG.0000000000001006. Epub 2024 Mar 15.

Biologics, small molecule therapies and surgery in small bowel Crohn's disease.

Steinberg JM(1), Chowdhury R(2), Sharma S(2), Charabaty A(3).

Author information:
(1)Gastroenterology of the Rockies; University of Colorado School of Medicine; 
Denver, CO.
(2)Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(3)Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Washington, District of Columbia, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The terminal ileum and small bowel (SB) are involved in 
30-45% of patients with Crohn's disease, while 20% have both small and large 
bowel involvement. Ileal Crohn's is associated with higher risk of progression 
to stricturing and penetrating disease 1 , hence it's imperative to utilize 
effective therapies to induce and maintain clinical and endoscopic remission and 
prevent intestinal complications. We review the available data of biologics and 
upadacitinib in small bowel disease, and the emerging data on the role of 
surgery as first line therapy for isolated Crohn's ileitis.
RECENT FINDINGS: Most trials assessing drug efficacy do not report efficacy by 
disease location, and robust data on efficacy of therapies in isolated small 
bowel Crohn's is sparse. Several studies indicate that small bowel disease is 
generally less responsive to biologics, and could require higher drug trough 
levels to achieve endoscopic healing.
SUMMARY: Current therapies for induction and maintenance of remission in 
moderate to severe Crohn's disease include several classes of monoclonal 
antibodies and a Janus Kinase inhibitor, upadacitinib. While small bowel Crohn's 
disease is generally less responsive to treatment, anti-TNFs are still preferred 
as first line therapy, and the option of early ileocecal resection in early 
limited ileal disease is gaining interest.

Copyright © 2024 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MOG.0000000000001006
PMID: 38294885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]