---
reference_id: "PMID:39949598"
title: Complete response to anti-PD1 therapy and chemotherapy in a patient with ALK-rearranged non-small cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Hu H
- Min M
- Dai H
- Tang Y
- He J
journal: Int J Clin Exp Pathol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.62347/XWHW6190
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Complete response to anti-PD1 therapy and chemotherapy in a patient with ALK-rearranged non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Hu H, Min M, Dai H, Tang Y, He J
**Journal:** Int J Clin Exp Pathol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.62347/XWHW6190](https://doi.org/10.62347/XWHW6190)

## Content

1. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2025 Jan 15;18(1):37-41. doi: 10.62347/XWHW6190.
eCollection 2025.

Complete response to anti-PD1 therapy and chemotherapy in a patient with
ALK-rearranged non-small cell lung cancer.

Hu H(1), Min M(2), Dai H(3), Tang Y(4), He J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Sichuan Cancer Hospital and Institute,
Sichuan Cancer Center, Medicine School of University of Electronic Science and
Technology Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, The Third Hospital of Mianyang (Sichuan Mental
Health Center) Mianyang, Sichuan, China.
(3)Department of Oncology, The Third Hospital of Mianyang (Sichuan Mental Health
Center) Mianyang, Sichuan, China.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, Zhongjiang People's Hospital Deyang, Sichuan,
China.

Targeted therapies are effective in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients
with driver gene mutations. Chemotherapy combined with immunotherapy is also a
common treatment strategy in lung cancer. However, in previous studies, patients
with ALK (Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase) rearranged had a low response to immune
checkpoint inhibitor (ICI) and the role of immunotherapy in ALK-positive NSCLC
patients is unclear. Here, we report a case of a young man with ALK rearranged
who demonstrated a complete response to anti-PD1 combination with chemotherapy,
which suggests some ALK-rearranged patients with high expression of PD-L1 may
permanently benefit from immunotherapy.

IJCEP Copyright © 2025.

DOI: 10.62347/XWHW6190
PMCID: PMC11815393
PMID: 39949598

Conflict of interest statement: None.
