---
reference_id: "PMID:30631001"
title: Cerebral Venous Sinus Thrombosis in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus.
authors:
- Darmawan G
- Hamijoyo L
- Oehadian A
- Bandiara R
- Amalia L
journal: Acta Med Indones
year: '2018'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebral Venous Sinus Thrombosis in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus.
**Authors:** Darmawan G, Hamijoyo L, Oehadian A, Bandiara R, Amalia L
**Journal:** Acta Med Indones (2018)

## Content

1. Acta Med Indones. 2018 Oct;50(4):343-345.

Cerebral Venous Sinus Thrombosis in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus.

Darmawan G(1), Hamijoyo L, Oehadian A, Bandiara R, Amalia L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Padjadjaran University, 
Bandung, Indonesia. guntur_d@yahoo.com.

A 38-year-old woman presented with general weakness and vaginal bleeding. One 
month prior, she had been diagnosed with Evans syndrome (haemolytic anemia with 
positive Coombs test and thrombocytopenia) and was given oral steroid as 
maintenance therapy. Her serology examination was negative for hepatitis B, 
hepatitis C, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Her obstetrical history was 
marked by miscarriage in second pregnancy and preeclampsia in third pregnancy. 
She used hormonal contraceptives until 5 months prior to admission. On physical 
examination, she had anemic conjunctiva and no organomegaly. Blood tests were 
significant for anemia (3.4 g/dl) and thrombocytopenia (28,000/µl). Her vaginal 
bleeding had ceased, however her platelet continued decreasing to 12,000/µl 
during first several days of hospitalization despite receiving platelet 
transfusion. On the tenth hospital day, she suddenly complained of severe 
headache and blurred vision. She had bilateral edema and erythema of palpebral, 
chemosis, decreased in visual acuity, and reduced ocular motility. Ear and nose 
examination were normal. Peripheral blood smear showed no blast. Prothrombine 
time (PT), INR, APTT tests were normal and D Dimer was slightly increased (3.3 
mg/l; NV ≤0.5 mg/l). Urine examination revealed proteinuria with 24 hour urine 
protein was 1,863 mg (NV <150 mg/day). We assessed her as cavernous sinus 
thrombosis and treated her empirically with intravenous broad-spectrum 
antibiotics, morphine drip. Either digital subtraction angiography or 
anticoagulant was deferred due to low platelet. Further examination revealed 
positive for ANA, anti-SSA, and diagnosis of SLE was established. 
Anticardiolipin antibodies of IgG and IgM and anti-beta2 glycoprotein antibodies 
of IgM and IgG tests were non reactive. Methylprednisolone pulse therapy 
(1g/day) was given for 3 consecutive days, and then tapered to oral 
methylprednisolone. She additionally received azathioprine 50 mg tab BID. 
Meanwhile her clinical symptoms alleviated and platelet count was increased, 
brain MRI and MR venography finally performed suggesting cerebral venous sinus 
thrombosis. She got additional oral anticoagulant rivaroxaban 15 mg tab BID and 
eventually discharged. Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis may be the presenting 
symptoms or occur concomitantly within the onset of SLE. Our patient had SLE, 
meeting 4 of the Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinic 
classification criteria (hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, renal involvement, 
and positive for ANA test). Vasculitis due to endothelial cell injury mediated 
by immune-complex deposition is proposed to be the pathogenesis of CVST in SLE. 
Hypercoagulable state could be other etiology factor. Antiphospholipid 
antibodies were absent in our case as reported in some cases, emphasizing 
vasculitis as the underlying mechanism. Treatment of CVST in SLE consisting of 
anticoagulant, steroid, and immunosuppressant. This case elicits intriguing 
problem: CVST and thrombocytopenia. Anticoagulant treatment is proposed as the 
cornerstone treatment for CVST, however it was deferred due to risk of bleeding 
in thrombocytopenia. Steroid plays role in treatment of CVST in SLE, owing to 
its anti-inflammatory property. As shown in previous cases, the patient had 
remarkable response to high dose steroid treatment and eventually got 
anticoagulant after her platelet had increased. In summary, prompt diagnosis and 
treatment of CVST are important for a favorable prognosis.

PMID: 30631001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]