---
reference_id: "PMID:36506307"
title: Clinical heterogeneity of hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria syndrome in thirteen palestinian patients and report of a novel variant in the SLC25A15 gene.
authors:
- Dweikat I
- Khalaf-Nazzal R
journal: Front Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.1004598
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical heterogeneity of hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria syndrome in thirteen palestinian patients and report of a novel variant in the SLC25A15 gene.
**Authors:** Dweikat I, Khalaf-Nazzal R
**Journal:** Front Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2022.1004598](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2022.1004598)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2022 Nov 24;13:1004598. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.1004598.
eCollection 2022.

Clinical heterogeneity of hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria
syndrome in thirteen palestinian patients and report of a novel variant in the
SLC25A15 gene.

Dweikat I(1), Khalaf-Nazzal R(2).

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Department, Faculty of Medicine, Arab American University of
Palestine, Jenin, Palestine.
(2)Department of Physiology and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Arab
American University of Palestine, Jenin, Palestine.

Background: Hyperornithinemia-Hyperammonemia-Homocitrullinuria (HHH) syndrome,
is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by impaired ornithine
transport across the inner mitochondrial membrane. HHH is caused by biallelic
disease-causing variants in the SLC25A15 gene. The clinical presentation of HHH
is highly variable ranging from severe neonatal encephalopathy and hepatic
failure to a milder form with corresponding learning difficulties. Methods: In
this study, data from thirteen patients with HHH syndrome, diagnosed between the
age of 1 week-29 years at two tertiary care centers in Palestine, is presented.
The clinical, biochemical, and molecular data are reviewed. Results: Analysis of
the SLC25A15 gene sequence revealed a novel homozygous frameshift deletion in
exon 5, NM_014252.4:c.552-555delTTTC; p (Phe185SerfsTer8) in nine patients. The
remaining four patients had a recurrent homozygous frameshift variant;
NM_014252.4:c.446delG, (p.Ser149ThrfsTer45). The major acute clinical
presentation found was encephalopathy and liver dysfunction. Nervous system
involvement was common, progressive, and presented with signs of upper motor
neuron disease as well as variable degrees of cognitive impairment. One patient
had an initial presentation in adulthood with acute encephalopathy that
responded well to treatment. There was no clear genotype-phenotype correlation.
Conclusion: Our results confirm the marked clinical heterogeneity of HHH
including severe neonatal presentation, hepatic failure, and progressive
pyramidal tract dysfunction in all age groups. The disease progression was
variable, even in patients with the same genetic variant, and in patients with
severe neonatal-onset hepatic encephalopathy. We report a novel pathogenic
variant in the SLC25A15 gene, further expanding the molecular spectrum of the
disease.

Copyright © 2022 Dweikat and Khalaf-Nazzal.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.1004598
PMCID: PMC9730883
PMID: 36506307

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
