---
reference_id: "PMID:35585196"
title: Unexplained post-acute infection syndromes.
authors:
- Choutka J
- Jansari V
- Hornig M
- Iwasaki A
journal: Nat Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41591-022-01810-6
keywords:
- COVID-19/complications
- Disease Progression
- "Fatigue Syndrome, Chronic/diagnosis, etiology"
- Humans
- SARS-CoV-2
- Post-Acute COVID-19 Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unexplained post-acute infection syndromes.
**Authors:** Choutka J, Jansari V, Hornig M, Iwasaki A
**Journal:** Nat Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41591-022-01810-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-022-01810-6)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2022 May;28(5):911-923. doi: 10.1038/s41591-022-01810-6. Epub 2022
May  18.

Unexplained post-acute infection syndromes.

Choutka J(1), Jansari V(2), Hornig M(3), Iwasaki A(4)(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry of Natural Compounds, University of Chemistry and
Technology, Prague, Czech Republic. choutka.jan@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
CT, USA.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Columbia University Mailman School of Public
Health, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
CT, USA. akiko.iwasaki@yale.edu.
(5)Department of Epidemiology of Microbial Diseases, Yale School of Public
Health, New Haven, CT, USA. akiko.iwasaki@yale.edu.
(6)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
New Haven, CT, USA. akiko.iwasaki@yale.edu.
(7)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD, USA.
akiko.iwasaki@yale.edu.

Erratum in
    Nat Med. 2022 Aug;28(8):1723. doi: 10.1038/s41591-022-01952-7.

SARS-CoV-2 is not unique in its ability to cause post-acute sequelae; certain
acute infections have long been associated with an unexplained chronic
disability in a minority of patients. These post-acute infection syndromes
(PAISs) represent a substantial healthcare burden, but there is a lack of
understanding of the underlying mechanisms, representing a significant blind
spot in the field of medicine. The relatively similar symptom profiles of
individual PAISs, irrespective of the infectious agent, as well as the overlap
of clinical features with myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome
(ME/CFS), suggest the potential involvement of a common etiopathogenesis. In
this Review, we summarize what is known about unexplained PAISs, provide context
for post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection (PASC), and delineate the need
for basic biomedical research into the underlying mechanisms behind this group
of enigmatic chronic illnesses.

© 2022. Springer Nature America, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s41591-022-01810-6
PMID: 35585196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
