---
reference_id: "PMID:28816422"
title: "Dolichol kinase deficiency (DOLK-CDG): Two new cases and expansion of phenotype."
authors:
- Rush ET
- Baker CV
- Rizzo WB
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38287
keywords:
- "Cardiomyopathy, Dilated/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/genetics, physiopathology"
- Female
- Humans
- "Ichthyosis/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Lipid Metabolism/genetics
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Phosphotransferases (Alcohol Group Acceptor)/deficiency, genetics"
- Siblings
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dolichol kinase deficiency (DOLK-CDG): Two new cases and expansion of phenotype.
**Authors:** Rush ET, Baker CV, Rizzo WB
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.38287](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.38287)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2017 Sep;173(9):2428-2434. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38287.

Dolichol kinase deficiency (DOLK-CDG): Two new cases and expansion of phenotype.

Rush ET(1)(2)(3), Baker CV(4), Rizzo WB(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, 
Nebraska.
(2)Munroe-Meyer Institute for Genetics and Rehabilitation, University of 
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska.
(3)Children's Hospital & Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska.
(4)Department of Pediatrics-Division of Medical Genetics, UTHealth McGovern 
Medical School, Houston, Texas.

Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDGs) are a group of genetic diseases 
caused by mutations in genes that are necessary for the addition of 
oligosaccharides to acceptor proteins or lipids. An early step in this process 
requires dolichol kinase (DK) to catalyze the formation of dolichyl phosphate, 
which acts as a membrane anchor for initial attachment of sugar residues that 
are subsequently built up to oligosaccharides and transferred to acceptor 
proteins and lipids for further processing. Biallelic mutations in DOLK, the 
gene for DK, result in human in a CDG with variable symptoms, ranging from 
nonsyndromic dilated cardiomypopathy to severe multiorgan involvement. We report 
two female siblings with novel compound heterozygous mutations in DOLK: c.951C>A 
(p.Tyr317Ter) and c.1558A>G (p.Thr520Ala). Both patients presented in the 
neonatal period with severe ichthyosis, unusual distal digital constrictions and 
dilated cardiomyopathy which resulted in death. Histology of the skin showed 
lipid droplet accumulation in the stratum corneum and keratinocytes, which 
suggests defective epidermal lipid metabolism. These patients represent an 
earlier and more severe form of DOLK-CDG (CDG-1m) with a striking presentation 
at birth that expands the known phenotypic spectrum.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38287
PMID: 28816422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]