---
reference_id: "PMID:17262855"
title: Paraneoplastic anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor encephalitis associated with ovarian teratoma.
authors:
- Dalmau J
- Tüzün E
- Wu HY
- Masjuan J
- Rossi JE
- Voloschin A
- Baehring JM
- Shimazaki H
- Koide R
- King D
- Mason W
- Sansing LH
- Dichter MA
- Rosenfeld MR
- Lynch DR
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1002/ana.21050
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Animals
- "Antibodies/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, pharmacology"
- Dissection/methods
- "Encephalitis/etiology, immunology, metabolism, therapy"
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry/methods
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- Neurons/drug effects
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/complications, immunology, metabolism, therapy"
- Protein Subunits/immunology
- Rats
- "Rats, Wistar"
- "Receptors, N-Methyl-D-Aspartate/immunology, metabolism"
- "Teratoma/complications, immunology, metabolism, therapy"
- Transfection/methods
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Paraneoplastic anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor encephalitis associated with ovarian teratoma.
**Authors:** Dalmau J, Tüzün E, Wu HY, Masjuan J, Rossi JE, Voloschin A, Baehring JM, Shimazaki H, Koide R, King D, Mason W, Sansing LH, Dichter MA, Rosenfeld MR, Lynch DR
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.21050](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.21050)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2007 Jan;61(1):25-36. doi: 10.1002/ana.21050.

Paraneoplastic anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor encephalitis associated with 
ovarian teratoma.

Dalmau J(1), Tüzün E, Wu HY, Masjuan J, Rossi JE, Voloschin A, Baehring JM, 
Shimazaki H, Koide R, King D, Mason W, Sansing LH, Dichter MA, Rosenfeld MR, 
Lynch DR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Division of Neuro-oncology, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. josep.dalmau@uphs.upenn.edu

Comment in
    Ann Neurol. 2007 Jan;61(1):3-4. doi: 10.1002/ana.21074.
    Ann Neurol. 2008 Jul;64(1):110-1; author reply 111-2. doi: 
10.1002/ana.21362.
    Lancet Psychiatry. 2018 Jan;5(1):9-10. doi: 10.1016/S2215-0366(17)30482-0.

OBJECTIVE: To report the autoantigens of a new category of treatment-responsive 
paraneoplastic encephalitis.
METHODS: Analysis of clinical features, neuropathological findings, tumors, and 
serum/cerebrospinal fluid antibodies using rat tissue, neuronal cultures, and 
HEK293 cells expressing subunits of the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR).
RESULTS: Twelve women (14-44 years) developed prominent psychiatric symptoms, 
amnesia, seizures, frequent dyskinesias, autonomic dysfunction, and decreased 
level of consciousness often requiring ventilatory support. All had 
serum/cerebrospinal fluid antibodies that predominantly immunolabeled the 
neuropil of hippocampus/forebrain, in particular the cell surface of hippocampal 
neurons, and reacted with NR2B (and to a lesser extent NR2A) subunits of the 
NMDAR. NR2B binds glutamate and forms heteromers (NR1/NR2B or NR1/NR2A/NR2B) 
that are preferentially expressed in the adult hippocampus/forebrain. Expression 
of functional heteromers (not single subunits) was required for antibody 
binding. Eleven patients had teratoma of the ovary (six mature) and one a mature 
teratoma in the mediastinum; five of five tumors examined contained nervous 
tissue that strongly expressed NR2 subunits and reacted with patients' 
antibodies. Tumor resection and immunotherapy resulted in improvement or full 
recovery of eight of nine patients (paralleled by decreased antibody titers); 
two of three patients without tumor resection died of neurological 
deterioration. Autopsies showed extensive microgliosis, rare T-cell infiltrates, 
and neuronal degeneration predominantly involving, but not restricted to, the 
hippocampus.
INTERPRETATION: Antibodies to NR2B- and NR2A-containing heteromers of the NMDAR 
associate with a severe but treatment-responsive encephalitis. Our findings 
provide a diagnostic test and suggest a model of autoimmune NMDAR-related 
encephalitis with broad implications for other immune-mediated disorders of 
memory, behavior, and cognition.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.21050
PMCID: PMC2430743
PMID: 17262855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]