---
reference_id: "PMID:33420383"
title: "Voltage-independent GluN2A-type NMDA receptor Ca(2+) signaling promotes audiogenic seizures, attentional and cognitive deficits in mice."
authors:
- Bertocchi I
- Eltokhi A
- Rozov A
- Chi VN
- Jensen V
- Bus T
- Pawlak V
- Serafino M
- Sonntag H
- Yang B
- Burnashev N
- Li SB
- Obenhaus HA
- Both M
- Niewoehner B
- Single FN
- Briese M
- Boerner T
- Gass P
- Rawlins JNP
- Köhr G
- Bannerman DM
- Sprengel R
journal: Commun Biol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s42003-020-01538-4
keywords:
- Animals
- Association Learning
- Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/genetics
- Calcium Signaling
- Cognitive Dysfunction/genetics
- "Epilepsy, Reflex/genetics"
- Hippocampus/metabolism
- Mice
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-fos/metabolism
- "Receptors, N-Methyl-D-Aspartate/physiology"
- Spatial Memory
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Voltage-independent GluN2A-type NMDA receptor Ca(2+) signaling promotes audiogenic seizures, attentional and cognitive deficits in mice.
**Authors:** Bertocchi I, Eltokhi A, Rozov A, Chi VN, Jensen V, Bus T, Pawlak V, Serafino M, Sonntag H, Yang B, Burnashev N, Li SB, Obenhaus HA, Both M, Niewoehner B, Single FN, Briese M, Boerner T, Gass P, Rawlins JNP, Köhr G, Bannerman DM, Sprengel R
**Journal:** Commun Biol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s42003-020-01538-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-020-01538-4)

## Content

1. Commun Biol. 2021 Jan 8;4(1):59. doi: 10.1038/s42003-020-01538-4.

Voltage-independent GluN2A-type NMDA receptor Ca(2+) signaling promotes 
audiogenic seizures, attentional and cognitive deficits in mice.

Bertocchi I(1)(2)(3)(4), Eltokhi A(2)(5), Rozov A(#)(1)(6)(7)(8), Chi VN(#)(6), 
Jensen V(#)(9), Bus T(1)(2), Pawlak V(1)(10), Serafino M(1)(11), Sonntag 
H(1)(2), Yang B(1)(12), Burnashev N(1)(13), Li SB(1)(14)(15), Obenhaus 
HA(1)(2)(16), Both M(6), Niewoehner B(17), Single FN(1)(18), Briese M(17)(19), 
Boerner T(17), Gass P(20), Rawlins JNP(17), Köhr G(1)(21), Bannerman DM(22), 
Sprengel R(23)(24).

Author information:
(1)Departments Molecular Neurobiology and Physiology at the Max Planck Institute 
for Medical Research, Jahnstr. 29, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Research Group of the Max Planck Institute for Medical Research at the 
Institute for Anatomy and Cell Biology of the Heidelberg University, Im 
Neuenheimer Feld 307, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Department of Neuroscience Rita Levi Montalcini, University of Turin, Via 
Cherasco 15, 10126, Torino, Italy.
(4)Neuroscience Institute-Cavalieri-Ottolenghi Foundation (NICO), Laboratory of 
Neuropsychopharmacology, Regionale Gonzole 10, 10043 Orbassano, Torino, Italy.
(5)Department of Neurology and Epileptology, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain 
Research, Eberhard Karls University Tübingen, Otfried-Müller Str. 27, 72076, 
Tübingen, Germany.
(6)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Heidelberg University, Im 
Neuenheimer Feld 326, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
(7)OpenLab of Neurobiology, Kazan Federal University, 8 Kremlyovskaya Street, 
Kazan, 420008, Russian Federation.
(8)Federal Center of Brain Research and Neurotechnologies, Ostrovityanova Str 
1/10, Moscow, 117997, Russia.
(9)Department of Molecular Medicine, Division of Physiology, Institute of Basic 
Medical Sciences, University of Oslo, Sognsvannsveien 9, 0372, Oslo, Norway.
(10)Department of Behavior and Brain Organization, Research Center Caesar, 
Ludwig-Erhard-Allee 2, 53175, Bonn, Germany.
(11)FARMA-DERMA s.r.l. Via dell'Artigiano 6-8, 40010, Sala Bolognese, Italy.
(12)Department of Geriatrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, 1095 JieFang Road, Wuhan, Hubei, 430030, 
China.
(13)INSERM UMR 1249 Mediterranean Institute of Neurobiology (INMED), 
Aix-Marseille University, Parc Scientifique de Luminy, 163 avenue de Luminy 
BP13, 13273, Marseille Cedex 09, France.
(14)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, 1201 Welch Road, Stanford, CA, 94305, USA.
(15)Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute, Stanford University, Stanford Way, Rm E152, 
Stanford, CA, 94305, USA.
(16)Kavli Institute for Systems Neuroscience, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, NTNU, Postboks 8905, NO-7491, Trondheim, Norway.
(17)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Radcliffe 
Observatory, Anna Watts Building, Woodstock Rd, Oxford, OX2 6GG, UK.
(18)Miltenyi Biotec B.V. & Co. KG, Bergisch Gladbach, Friedrich-Ebert-Str. 68, 
51429, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany.
(19)Institute of Clinical Neurobiology, University Hospital Wuerzburg, 
Versbacherstraße 5, 97080, Wuerzburg, Germany.
(20)RG Animal Models in Psychiatry, Animal Models Psychatry, Central Institute 
of Mental Health (CIMH), Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University, J5, 68159, 
Mannheim, Germany.
(21)Department of Neurophysiology, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg 
University, Ludolf-Krehl-Str. 13-17, 68167, Mannheim, Germany.
(22)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Radcliffe 
Observatory, Anna Watts Building, Woodstock Rd, Oxford, OX2 6GG, UK. 
Rolf.Sprengel@mpimf-heidelberg.mpg.de.
(23)Departments Molecular Neurobiology and Physiology at the Max Planck 
Institute for Medical Research, Jahnstr. 29, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany. 
David.Bannerman@psy.ox.ac.uk.
(24)Research Group of the Max Planck Institute for Medical Research at the 
Institute for Anatomy and Cell Biology of the Heidelberg University, Im 
Neuenheimer Feld 307, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany. David.Bannerman@psy.ox.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Commun Biol. 2021 Feb 9;4(1):187. doi: 10.1038/s42003-021-01717-x.

The NMDA receptor-mediated Ca2+ signaling during simultaneous pre- and 
postsynaptic activity is critically involved in synaptic plasticity and thus has 
a key role in the nervous system. In GRIN2-variant patients alterations of this 
coincidence detection provoked complex clinical phenotypes, ranging from reduced 
muscle strength to epileptic seizures and intellectual disability. By using our 
gene-targeted mouse line (Grin2aN615S), we show that voltage-independent 
glutamate-gated signaling of GluN2A-containing NMDA receptors is associated with 
NMDAR-dependent audiogenic seizures due to hyperexcitable midbrain circuits. In 
contrast, the NMDAR antagonist MK-801-induced c-Fos expression is reduced in the 
hippocampus. Likewise, the synchronization of theta- and gamma oscillatory 
activity is lowered during exploration, demonstrating reduced hippocampal 
activity. This is associated with exploratory hyperactivity and aberrantly 
increased and dysregulated levels of attention that can interfere with 
associative learning, in particular when relevant cues and reward outcomes are 
disconnected in space and time. Together, our findings provide (i) experimental 
evidence that the inherent voltage-dependent Ca2+ signaling of NMDA receptors is 
essential for maintaining appropriate responses to sensory stimuli and (ii) a 
mechanistic explanation for the neurological manifestations seen in the 
NMDAR-related human disorders with GRIN2 variant-meidiated intellectual 
disability and focal epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1038/s42003-020-01538-4
PMCID: PMC7794508
PMID: 33420383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.