---
reference_id: "PMID:32109194"
title: Randomized Phase II Study of First-Line Cladribine With Concurrent or Delayed Rituximab in Patients With Hairy Cell Leukemia.
authors:
- Chihara D
- Arons E
- Stetler-Stevenson M
- Yuan CM
- Wang HW
- Zhou H
- Raffeld M
- Xi L
- Steinberg SM
- Feurtado J
- James L
- Wilson W
- Braylan RC
- Calvo KR
- Maric I
- Dulau-Florea A
- Kreitman RJ
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.19.02250
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Cladribine/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Female
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Hairy Cell/drug therapy"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Rituximab/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Randomized Phase II Study of First-Line Cladribine With Concurrent or Delayed Rituximab in Patients With Hairy Cell Leukemia.
**Authors:** Chihara D, Arons E, Stetler-Stevenson M, Yuan CM, Wang HW, Zhou H, Raffeld M, Xi L, Steinberg SM, Feurtado J, James L, Wilson W, Braylan RC, Calvo KR, Maric I, Dulau-Florea A, Kreitman RJ
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.19.02250](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.19.02250)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2020 May 10;38(14):1527-1538. doi: 10.1200/JCO.19.02250. Epub
2020  Feb 28.

Randomized Phase II Study of First-Line Cladribine With Concurrent or Delayed
Rituximab in Patients With Hairy Cell Leukemia.

Chihara D(1), Arons E(2), Stetler-Stevenson M(3), Yuan CM(3), Wang HW(3), Zhou
H(2), Raffeld M(3), Xi L(3), Steinberg SM(4), Feurtado J(5), James L(2), Wilson
W(6), Braylan RC(7), Calvo KR(7), Maric I(7), Dulau-Florea A(7), Kreitman
RJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Medical Oncology Service, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.
(3)Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD.
(4)Biostatistics and Data Management Section, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.
(5)Office of Research Nursing, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD.
(6)Lymphoid Malignancies Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, MD.
(7)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Clinical Center, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD.

PURPOSE: Single-agent purine analog, usually cladribine, has been the standard
first-line therapy of hairy cell leukemia (HCL) for 30 years. High complete
remission (CR) rates often include minimal residual disease (MRD), leading to
relapse and repeated treatments. Rituximab can clear MRD, but long-term results
are unknown and optimal timing of rituximab undefined.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients were randomly assigned to first-line cladribine
0.15 mg/kg intravenously days 1-5 with 8 weekly doses of rituximab 375 mg/m2
begun either day 1 (concurrent, CDAR) or ≥ 6 months later (delayed) after
detection of MRD in blood. MRD tests included blood and bone marrow (BM) flow
cytometry, and BM immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Sixty-eight patients with purine analog-naïve classic HCL were randomly
assigned 1:1 to concurrent versus delayed arms. At 6 months after CDAR versus
cladribine monotherapy, CR rates were 100% versus 88% (P = .11), MRD-free CR
rates 97% versus 24% (P < .0001, primary end point), and blood MRD-free rates
100% versus 50% (P < .0001), respectively. At 96 months median follow-up, 94%
versus 12% remained MRD free. Compared with CDAR, delayed rituximab after
cladribine achieved lower rate (67% of 21 evaluable patients; P = .0034) and
durability (P = .0081, hazard radio favoring CDAR, 0.094) of MRD-free CR.
Nevertheless, 12 patients in the delayed arm remained MRD free when restaged
6-104 (median, 78) months after last delayed rituximab treatment. Compared with
cladribine monotherapy, CDAR led to brief grade 3/4 thrombocytopenia (59% v 9%;
P < .0001) and platelet transfusions without bleeding (35% v 0%; P = .0002), but
higher neutrophil (P = .017) and platelet (P = .0015) counts at 4 weeks.
CONCLUSION: Achieving MRD-free CR of HCL after first-line cladribine is greatly
enhanced by concurrent rituximab and less so by delayed rituximab. Longer
follow-up will determine if MRD-free survival leads to less need for additional
therapy or cure of HCL.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.19.02250
PMCID: PMC7213585
PMID: 32109194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
