---
reference_id: "PMID:40481143"
title: Dysregulation of cell migration by matrix metalloproteinases in geleophysic dysplasia.
authors:
- Morales AA
- Camarena V
- Peart L
- Smithson S
- Shaw L
- Webber L
- Negron JM
- Sola JE
- Brady AC
- Walz K
- Wang G
- Tekin M
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-04666-1
keywords:
- Humans
- Cell Movement
- Animals
- "Fibroblasts/metabolism, pathology"
- "ADAMTS Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Fibrillin-1/genetics, metabolism"
- "Matrix Metalloproteinase 1/metabolism, genetics"
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/genetics, pathology, metabolism"
- "Matrix Metalloproteinase 14/metabolism, genetics"
- Male
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Female
- Extracellular Matrix/metabolism
- Adipokines
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dysregulation of cell migration by matrix metalloproteinases in geleophysic dysplasia.
**Authors:** Morales AA, Camarena V, Peart L, Smithson S, Shaw L, Webber L, Negron JM, Sola JE, Brady AC, Walz K, Wang G, Tekin M
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-025-04666-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-04666-1)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2025 Jun 6;15(1):19970. doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-04666-1.

Dysregulation of cell migration by matrix metalloproteinases in geleophysic
dysplasia.

Morales AA(1), Camarena V(1), Peart L(1), Smithson S(2), Shaw L(2), Webber L(2),
Negron JM(3), Sola JE(4), Brady AC(4), Walz K(1)(5)(6), Wang G(1)(6)(7), Tekin
M(8)(9)(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Dr. John T. Macdonald Foundation, University of
Miami Leonard M. Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.
(2)Departments of Clinical Genetics and Dermatology, University Hospitals
Bristol NHS Foundation Trust, Bristol, UK.
(3)Providence Medical Group, Gateway Family Medicine, Portland, OR, USA.
(4)Division of Pediatric Surgery, University of Miami Leonard M. Miller School
of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.
(5)IQUIBICEN - CONICET, Faculty of Exact and Natural Sciences, University of
Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(6)John P. Hussmann Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami Leonard M.
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.
(7)Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami Leonard M. Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.
(8)Department of Human Genetics, Dr. John T. Macdonald Foundation, University of
Miami Leonard M. Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.
mtekin@med.miami.edu.
(9)John P. Hussmann Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami Leonard M.
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA. mtekin@med.miami.edu.
(10)Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami Leonard M. Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA. mtekin@med.miami.edu.
(11)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Miami Leonard M. Miller School
of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA. mtekin@med.miami.edu.
(12)Department of Human Genetics, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine,
1501 NW 10th Avenue, BRB-610 (M-860), Miami, FL, 33136, USA.
mtekin@med.miami.edu.

Geleophysic dysplasia (GD) is characterized by short stature, brachydactyly,
joint limitations, a distinctive facial appearance, as well as cardiac and
respiratory dysfunction that can be life-threatening. GD is caused by pathogenic
variants in the ADAMTSL2, FBN1, or LTBP3 genes. While dermal fibroblasts derived
from affected individuals have shown poor organization of the extracellular
matrix (ECM), it remains elusive how the disorganized ECM contributes to GD
pathogenesis. To understand the molecular mechanisms in GD, we isolated and
characterized primary human dermal fibroblasts from affected individuals with
ADAMTSL2 and FBN1 variants. We found that the secretion of ECM proteins
including ADAMTSL2, FBN1, and Fibronectin were impaired in GD fibroblasts.
Increased cell migration was observed in GD fibroblasts carrying ADAMTSL2 or
FBN1 variants, which was associated with up-regulation of MMP-1 and MMP-14, two
proteases related to cell mobility. The enhanced cell migration and
up-regulation of MMP-1 and MMP-14 were corroborated in mouse primary dermal
fibroblasts carrying pathogenic variants in Adamtsl2 and in lung and heart
tissues from Adamtsl2-knockout mice. A pan MMP inhibitor, GM6001, inhibited the
migration of GD fibroblasts. Overall, our results suggest that MMP-1/-14
up-regulation play a role in the development of GD and may be utilized as a
treatment target.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-025-04666-1
PMCID: PMC12144124
PMID: 40481143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors
declare no competing interests.
