---
reference_id: "PMID:37034091"
title: Differentiating neurosarcoidosis from multiple sclerosis using combined analysis of basic CSF parameters and MRZ reaction.
authors:
- Vlad B
- Neidhart S
- Hilty M
- Ziegler M
- Jelcic I
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1135392
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differentiating neurosarcoidosis from multiple sclerosis using combined analysis of basic CSF parameters and MRZ reaction.
**Authors:** Vlad B, Neidhart S, Hilty M, Ziegler M, Jelcic I
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2023.1135392](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2023.1135392)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2023 Mar 24;14:1135392. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1135392.
eCollection 2023.

Differentiating neurosarcoidosis from multiple sclerosis using combined analysis
of basic CSF parameters and MRZ reaction.

Vlad B(1)(2), Neidhart S(1)(2), Hilty M(1)(2), Ziegler M(1)(2), Jelcic I(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Zurich and University of Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Neuroimmunology and Multiple Sclerosis Research Section, Department of
Neurology, University Hospital Zurich and University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Neurosarcodosis is one of the most frequent differential diagnoses
of multiple sclerosis (MS) and requires central nervous system (CNS) biopsy to
establish definite diagnosis according to the latest consensus diagnostic
criteria. We here analyzed diagnostic values of basic cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
parameters to distinguish neurosarcoidosis from MS without CNS biopsy.
METHODS: We retrospectively assessed clinical, radiological and laboratory data
of 27 patients with neurosarcoidosis treated at our center and compared
following CSF parameters with those of 138 patients with relapsing-remitting MS:
CSF white cell count (WCC), CSF/serum albumin quotient (Qalb), intrathecal
production of immunoglobulins including oligoclonal bands (OCB), MRZ reaction,
defined as a polyspecific intrathecal production of IgG reactive against ≥2 of 3
the viruses measles (M), rubella (R), and zoster (Z) virus, and CSF lactate
levels. Additional inflammatory biomarkers in serum and/or CSF such as
neopterin, soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R) and C-reactive protein (CRP)
were assessed.
RESULTS: There was no significant difference in the frequency of CSF
pleocytosis, but a CSF WCC > 30/μl was more frequent in patients with
neurosarcoidosis. Compared to MS, patients with neurosarcoidosis showed more
frequently an increased Qalb and CSF lactate levels as well as increased serum
and CSF levels of sIL-2R, but a lower frequency of intrathecal IgG synthesis and
positive MRZ reaction. Positive likelihood ratio (PLR) of single CSF parameters
indicating neurosarcoidosis was highest, if (a) CSF WCC was >30/μl (PLR 7.2),
(b) Qalb was >10 × 10-3 (PLR 66.4), (c) CSF-specific OCB were absent (PLR 11.5),
(d) CSF lactate was elevated (PLR 23.0) or (e) sIL-2R was elevated (PLR>8.0).
The combination of (a) one of three following basic CSF parameters, i.e., (a.1.)
CSF WCC >30/ul, or (a.2.) QAlb >10 × 10-3, or (a.3.) absence of CSF-specific
OCB, and (b) absence of positive MRZ reaction showed the best diagnostic
accuracy (sensitivity and specificity each >92%; PLR 12.8 and NLR 0.08).
CONCLUSION: Combined evaluation of basic CSF parameters and MRZ reaction is
powerful in differentiating neurosarcoidosis from MS, with moderate to severe
pleocytosis and QAlb elevation and absence of intrathecal IgG synthesis as
useful rule-in parameters and positive MRZ reaction as a rule-out parameter for
neurosarcoidosis.

Copyright © 2023 Vlad, Neidhart, Hilty, Ziegler and Jelcic.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1135392
PMCID: PMC10080049
PMID: 37034091

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
