---
reference_id: "PMID:41309336"
title: Pathologic Response to Immunotherapy Is Associated with Survival in Patients Undergoing Delayed Nephrectomy for Metastatic Renal Cell Carcinoma.
authors:
- Khandwala YS
- Reese SW
- Ucpinar BA
- Knezevic A
- Eismann L
- Wu CY
- Mittal R
- Doshi S
- Barbakoff D
- Sanmiguel AL
- Coleman J
- Dawidek M
- Motzer RJ
- Russo P
- Akin O
- Kotecha RR
- Chen YB
- Voss MH
- Ari Hakimi A
journal: Eur Urol Oncol
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1016/j.euo.2025.11.003
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Renal Cell/mortality, pathology, therapy, secondary, surgery, drug therapy"
- Nephrectomy/methods
- "Kidney Neoplasms/pathology, mortality, therapy, surgery, drug therapy"
- Male
- Female
- Retrospective Studies
- Middle Aged
- Immunotherapy/methods
- Aged
- Survival Rate
- Treatment Outcome
- Neoplasm Metastasis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathologic Response to Immunotherapy Is Associated with Survival in Patients Undergoing Delayed Nephrectomy for Metastatic Renal Cell Carcinoma.
**Authors:** Khandwala YS, Reese SW, Ucpinar BA, Knezevic A, Eismann L, Wu CY, Mittal R, Doshi S, Barbakoff D, Sanmiguel AL, Coleman J, Dawidek M, Motzer RJ, Russo P, Akin O, Kotecha RR, Chen YB, Voss MH, Ari Hakimi A
**Journal:** Eur Urol Oncol (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.euo.2025.11.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euo.2025.11.003)

## Content

1. Eur Urol Oncol. 2026 Feb;9(1):101-110. doi: 10.1016/j.euo.2025.11.003. Epub
2025  Nov 26.

Pathologic Response to Immunotherapy Is Associated with Survival in Patients 
Undergoing Delayed Nephrectomy for Metastatic Renal Cell Carcinoma.

Khandwala YS(1), Reese SW(2), Ucpinar BA(3), Knezevic A(4), Eismann L(1), Wu 
CY(5), Mittal R(5), Doshi S(6), Barbakoff D(1), Sanmiguel AL(1), Coleman J(1), 
Dawidek M(1), Motzer RJ(6), Russo P(1), Akin O(3), Kotecha RR(6), Chen YB(5), 
Voss MH(6), Ari Hakimi A(7).

Author information:
(1)Urology Service, Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Urology Service, Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, NY, USA; Department of Urology, Montefiore Medical Center, 
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Radiology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY, USA.
(4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, NY, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering 
Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
(6)Genitourinary Medical Oncology Service, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, NY, USA.
(7)Urology Service, Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, NY, USA. Electronic address: hakimia@mskcc.org.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2025 Apr 25:2025.04.24.25326353. doi: 10.1101/2025.04.24.25326353.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The role of consolidative nephrectomy (CN) in 
metastatic renal cell carcinoma (mRCC) patients treated with immune checkpoint 
inhibitors remains unknown. As patients derive variable benefit from 
immunotherapy (IO), an understanding of how treatment response is associated 
with long-term outcomes could inform patient surgical selection. We thus 
conducted a retrospective study to evaluate whether radiographic and pathologic 
tumor responses after IO are associated with survival in patients undergoing CN 
at a high-volume academic center.
METHODS: We identified mRCC patients treated with at least one IO-containing 
regimen followed by CN between 2015 and 2024. A radiographic response was 
assessed using the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors. A pathologic 
response was measured using the percentage of residual viable tumor (RVT), with 
a major pathologic response (MPR) defined as RVT <10%. Outcomes included 
progression-free (PFS) and overall (OS) survival, analyzed using Cox 
proportional hazards models.
KEY FINDINGS AND LIMITATIONS: Sixty patients underwent CN after IO. The median 
time to nephrectomy was 9 mo (interquartile range: 7, 14), and the 2-yr OS rate 
was 75% (95% confidence interval [CI]: 60-85%). Fifteen patients (26%) had an 
MPR and 21 patients (35%) had a radiographic response of the primary tumor. The 
radiographic response was protective but not significantly associated with PFS 
or OS. The MPR was significantly associated with PFS (hazard ratio [HR]: 0.05, 
95% CI: 0.01-0.41; p = 0.005) and OS (HR: 0.07, 95% CI: 0.01-0.88; p = 0.039).
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: Patients with an MPR at nephrectomy had 
longer PFS and OS. A pathologic response helps guide postnephrectomy treatment 
timing and sequencing, although future efforts should further validate the 
utility of post-IO pathologic endpoints.

Copyright © 2025 European Association of Urology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.euo.2025.11.003
PMCID: PMC12716383
PMID: 41309336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]