---
reference_id: "PMID:15118073"
title: Activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor underlying responsiveness of non-small-cell lung cancer to gefitinib.
authors:
- Lynch TJ
- Bell DW
- Sordella R
- Gurubhagavatula S
- Okimoto RA
- Brannigan BW
- Harris PL
- Haserlat SM
- Supko JG
- Haluska FG
- Louis DN
- Christiani DC
- Settleman J
- Haber DA
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa040938
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor underlying responsiveness of non-small-cell lung cancer to gefitinib.
**Authors:** Lynch TJ, Bell DW, Sordella R, Gurubhagavatula S, Okimoto RA, Brannigan BW, Harris PL, Haserlat SM, Supko JG, Haluska FG, Louis DN, Christiani DC, Settleman J, Haber DA
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa040938](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa040938)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2004 May 20;350(21):2129-39. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa040938. Epub
2004  Apr 29.

Activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor underlying 
responsiveness of non-small-cell lung cancer to gefitinib.

Lynch TJ(1), Bell DW, Sordella R, Gurubhagavatula S, Okimoto RA, Brannigan BW, 
Harris PL, Haserlat SM, Supko JG, Haluska FG, Louis DN, Christiani DC, Settleman 
J, Haber DA.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Center, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 
Boston 02129, USA.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2004 May 20;350(21):2191-3. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe048101.
    N Engl J Med. 2004 Sep 16;351(12):1260-1; author reply 1260-1. doi: 
10.1056/NEJM200409163511221.
    N Engl J Med. 2004 Sep 16;351(12):1260-1; author reply 1260-1.
    N Engl J Med. 2004 Sep 16;351(12):1260-1; author reply 1260-1.
    Adv Anat Pathol. 2005 Mar;12(2):47-52. doi: 
10.1097/01.pap.0000155052.68496.e4.
    N Engl J Med. 2005 Jul 14;353(2):209-10. doi: 10.1056/NEJM200507143530219.

BACKGROUND: Most patients with non-small-cell lung cancer have no response to 
the tyrosine kinase inhibitor gefitinib, which targets the epidermal growth 
factor receptor (EGFR). However, about 10 percent of patients have a rapid and 
often dramatic clinical response. The molecular mechanisms underlying 
sensitivity to gefitinib are unknown.
METHODS: We searched for mutations in the EGFR gene in primary tumors from 
patients with non-small-cell lung cancer who had a response to gefitinib, those 
who did not have a response, and those who had not been exposed to gefitinib. 
The functional consequences of identified mutations were evaluated after the 
mutant proteins were expressed in cultured cells.
RESULTS: Somatic mutations were identified in the tyrosine kinase domain of the 
EGFR gene in eight of nine patients with gefitinib-responsive lung cancer, as 
compared with none of the seven patients with no response (P<0.001). Mutations 
were either small, in-frame deletions or amino acid substitutions clustered 
around the ATP-binding pocket of the tyrosine kinase domain. Similar mutations 
were detected in tumors from 2 of 25 patients with primary non-small-cell lung 
cancer who had not been exposed to gefitinib (8 percent). All mutations were 
heterozygous, and identical mutations were observed in multiple patients, 
suggesting an additive specific gain of function. In vitro, EGFR mutants 
demonstrated enhanced tyrosine kinase activity in response to epidermal growth 
factor and increased sensitivity to inhibition by gefitinib.
CONCLUSIONS: A subgroup of patients with non-small-cell lung cancer have 
specific mutations in the EGFR gene, which correlate with clinical 
responsiveness to the tyrosine kinase inhibitor gefitinib. These mutations lead 
to increased growth factor signaling and confer susceptibility to the inhibitor. 
Screening for such mutations in lung cancers may identify patients who will have 
a response to gefitinib.

Copyright 2004 Massachusetts Medical Society

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa040938
PMID: 15118073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]