---
reference_id: "PMID:8423875"
title: Central basis of muscle fatigue in chronic fatigue syndrome.
authors:
- Kent-Braun JA
- Sharma KR
- Weiner MW
- Massie B
- Miller RG
journal: Neurology
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1212/wnl.43.1_part_1.125
keywords:
- Adult
- Electromyography
- Exercise/physiology
- "Fatigue Syndrome, Chronic/etiology, physiopathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Isometric Contraction/physiology
- Lactates/blood
- Male
- Muscle Contraction/physiology
- Muscles/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Central basis of muscle fatigue in chronic fatigue syndrome.
**Authors:** Kent-Braun JA, Sharma KR, Weiner MW, Massie B, Miller RG
**Journal:** Neurology (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1212/wnl.43.1_part_1.125](https://doi.org/10.1212/wnl.43.1_part_1.125)

## Content

1. Neurology. 1993 Jan;43(1):125-31. doi: 10.1212/wnl.43.1_part_1.125.

Central basis of muscle fatigue in chronic fatigue syndrome.

Kent-Braun JA(1), Sharma KR, Weiner MW, Massie B, Miller RG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco.

Comment in
    Neurology. 1993 Sep;43(9):1866-7. doi: 10.1212/wnl.43.9.1866-c.

We studied whether muscle fatigue, metabolism, or activation are abnormal in the
chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS). Subjects performed both an intermittent
submaximal and a sustained maximal voluntary isometric exercise protocol of the
tibialis anterior muscle. The extent of fatigue, metabolic response, and changes
in both M-wave amplitude and twitch tension during exercise were similar in
patients and controls. The response to systemic exercise was also normal in the
patients. However, voluntary activation of the tibialis was significantly lower
in the patients during maximal sustained exercise. The results indicate that
patients with CFS have (1) normal fatigability and metabolism at both the
intracellular and systemic levels, (2) normal muscle membrane function and
excitation-contraction coupling, and (3) an inability to fully activate skeletal
muscle during intense, sustained exercise. This failure of activation was well
in excess of that found in controls, suggesting an important central component
of muscle fatigue in CFS.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.43.1_part_1.125
PMID: 8423875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
