---
reference_id: "PMID:34626839"
title: Deep RNA Sequencing Revealed Fusion Junctional Heterogeneity May Predict Crizotinib Treatment Efficacy in ALK-Rearranged NSCLC.
authors:
- Song Z
- Lian S
- Mak S
- Chow MZ
- Xu C
- Wang W
- Keung HY
- Lu C
- Kebede FT
- Gao Y
- Cheuk W
- Cho WCS
- Yang M
- Zheng Z
journal: J Thorac Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jtho.2021.09.016
keywords:
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics"
- Crizotinib/therapeutic use
- Gene Fusion
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics, metabolism"
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- RNA
- Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- "Sequence Analysis, RNA"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deep RNA Sequencing Revealed Fusion Junctional Heterogeneity May Predict Crizotinib Treatment Efficacy in ALK-Rearranged NSCLC.
**Authors:** Song Z, Lian S, Mak S, Chow MZ, Xu C, Wang W, Keung HY, Lu C, Kebede FT, Gao Y, Cheuk W, Cho WCS, Yang M, Zheng Z
**Journal:** J Thorac Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jtho.2021.09.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtho.2021.09.016)

## Content

1. J Thorac Oncol. 2022 Feb;17(2):264-276. doi: 10.1016/j.jtho.2021.09.016. Epub
2021 Oct 6.

Deep RNA Sequencing Revealed Fusion Junctional Heterogeneity May Predict
Crizotinib Treatment Efficacy in ALK-Rearranged NSCLC.

Song Z(1), Lian S(2), Mak S(3), Chow MZ(3), Xu C(4), Wang W(1), Keung HY(5), Lu
C(6), Kebede FT(7), Gao Y(8), Cheuk W(9), Cho WCS(10), Yang M(6), Zheng Z(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Trial, The Cancer Hospital of the University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences (Zhejiang Cancer Hospital), Hangzhou, Zhejiang,
People's Republic of China; Institute of Basic Medicine and Cancer, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, People's Republic of China.
(2)Unit of Integrative Epidemiology, Institute of Environmental Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Ming Wai Lau Centre for Reparative Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Sha Tin,
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing University
School of Medicine, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.
(5)Institute of Basic Medicine and Cancer, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, People's Republic of China.
(6)Department of Biomedical Sciences, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon,
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China;
Biotechnology and Health Centre, City University of Hong Kong Shenzhen Research
Institute, Shenzhen, People's Republic of China.
(7)Department of Biomedical Sciences, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon,
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China.
(8)Helitec Limited, Shenzhen, People's Republic of China.
(9)Department of Pathology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Kowloon, Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China.
(10)Department of Clinical Oncology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Kowloon, Hong
Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China.
(11)Ming Wai Lau Centre for Reparative Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Sha Tin,
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China;
Department of Biomedical Sciences, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong
Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China;
Biotechnology and Health Centre, City University of Hong Kong Shenzhen Research
Institute, Shenzhen, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
zongli.zheng@cityu.edu.hk.

Comment in
    J Thorac Oncol. 2022 Feb;17(2):182-185. doi: 10.1016/j.jtho.2021.11.010.

INTRODUCTION: Gene fusion variants in ALK-rearranged NSCLC may predict patient
outcomes, but previous results have been inconclusive. Fusion isoforms
coexisting in the same tumor may affect the efficacy of targeted therapy, but
they have not been investigated.
METHODS: Patients with ALK-rearranged NSCLC who received crizotinib treatments
were recruited. Precrizotinib tumor tissues were analyzed by the anchored
multiplex polymerase chain reaction for targeted RNA sequencing. Kaplan-Meier
and Cox regression were used to compare overall and progression-free survivals.
RESULTS: Of the 51 studied subjects, EML4-ALK variant types v1, v2, v3, and
others were detected in 23 (45.1%), five (9.8%), 19 (37.3%), and four patients
(7.8%), respectively. Multiple EML4-ALK RNA isoforms were detected in 24 tumors
(47.1%), and single isoform in 27 (52.9%). Most of the v3 tumors (16 of 19)
harbored both v3a and v3b RNA isoforms. Multiple isoforms were also detected in
eight non-v3 tumors (33.3% of all 24 multiple isoforms; five v1, two v5', and
one v2). Compared with patients with single isoform, those with multiple
isoforms had worse progression-free (hazard ratio and 95% confidence interval:
2.45 [1.06-5.69]) and overall (hazard ratio [95% confidence interval]: 3.74
[1.26-11.13]) survivals after adjusting for potential confounders including
variant type. Using the patient-derived H2228 cells known to express v3a and
v3b, our single-cell polymerase chain reaction detected either v3a or v3b in
most single cells. Treatment of H2228 cells by three ALK inhibitors revealed
increased ratios of v3a-to-v3b expression over time.
CONCLUSIONS: Intratumoral EML4-ALK isoforms may predict the efficacy of targeted
therapy in ALK-rearranged NSCLC. Temporal changes of intratumoral fusion
isoforms may result from differential selection pressures that a drug might have
on one isoform over another. Larger studies on fusion heterogeneity using RNA
sequencing are warranted.

Copyright © 2021 International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtho.2021.09.016
PMID: 34626839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
