---
reference_id: "PMID:35679365"
title: Large and Small Animal Models of Heart Failure With Reduced Ejection Fraction.
authors:
- Pilz PM
- Ward JE
- Chang WT
- Kiss A
- Bateh E
- Jha A
- Fisch S
- Podesser BK
- Liao R
journal: Circ Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.122.320246
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Large and Small Animal Models of Heart Failure With Reduced Ejection Fraction.
**Authors:** Pilz PM, Ward JE, Chang WT, Kiss A, Bateh E, Jha A, Fisch S, Podesser BK, Liao R
**Journal:** Circ Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.122.320246](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.122.320246)

## Content

1. Circ Res. 2022 Jun 10;130(12):1888-1905. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.122.320246. 
Epub 2022 Jun 9.

Large and Small Animal Models of Heart Failure With Reduced Ejection Fraction.

Pilz PM(1)(2), Ward JE(3), Chang WT(4)(5), Kiss A(2), Bateh E(1), Jha A(1), 
Fisch S(3), Podesser BK(2), Liao R(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, CA 
(P.M.P., E.B., R.L.).
(2)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute at the Center for Biomedical Research, Medical 
University of Vienna, Austria (P.M.P., A.K., B.K.P.).
(3)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
MA (J.E.W., S.F., R.L.).
(4)Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University, Taiwan (W.-T.C.).
(5)Department of Cardiology, Chi-Mei Medical Center, Taiwan (W.-T.C.).

Heart failure (HF) describes a heterogenous complex spectrum of pathological 
conditions that results in structural and functional remodeling leading to 
subsequent impairment of cardiac function, including either systolic 
dysfunction, diastolic dysfunction, or both. Several factors chronically lead to 
HF, including cardiac volume and pressure overload that may result from 
hypertension, valvular lesions, acute, or chronic ischemic injuries. Major forms 
of HF include hypertrophic, dilated, and restrictive cardiomyopathy. The 
severity of cardiomyopathy can be impacted by other comorbidities such as 
diabetes or obesity and external stress factors. Age is another major 
contributor, and the number of patients with HF is rising worldwide in part due 
to an increase in the aged population. HF can occur with reduced ejection 
fraction (HF with reduced ejection fraction), that is, the overall cardiac 
function is compromised, and typically the left ventricular ejection fraction is 
lower than 40%. In some cases of HF, the ejection fraction is preserved (HF with 
preserved ejection fraction). Animal models play a critical role in facilitating 
the understanding of molecular mechanisms of how hearts fail. This review aims 
to summarize and describe the strengths, limitations, and outcomes of both small 
and large animal models of HF with reduced ejection fraction that are currently 
used in basic and translational research. The driving defect is a failure of the 
heart to adequately supply the tissues with blood due to impaired filling or 
pumping. An accurate model of HF with reduced ejection fraction would encompass 
the symptoms (fatigue, dyspnea, exercise intolerance, and edema) along with the 
pathology (collagen fibrosis, ventricular hypertrophy) and ultimately exhibit a 
decrease in cardiac output. Although countless experimental studies have been 
published, no model completely recapitulates the full human disease. Therefore, 
it is critical to evaluate the strength and weakness of each animal model to 
allow better selection of what animal models to use to address the scientific 
question proposed.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.122.320246
PMID: 35679365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]