---
reference_id: "PMID:28077691"
title: Establishment and baseline characteristics of a nationwide Danish cohort of patients with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
authors:
- Kulas Søborg ML
- Leganger J
- Quitzau Mortensen L
- Rosenberg J
- Burcharth J
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/kew478
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Establishment and baseline characteristics of a nationwide Danish cohort of patients with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
**Authors:** Kulas Søborg ML, Leganger J, Quitzau Mortensen L, Rosenberg J, Burcharth J
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/kew478](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/kew478)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2017 May 1;56(5):763-767. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/kew478.

Establishment and baseline characteristics of a nationwide Danish cohort of 
patients with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.

Kulas Søborg ML(1), Leganger J(1), Quitzau Mortensen L(1), Rosenberg J(1), 
Burcharth J(2).

Author information:
(1)Gastro Unit, Department of Surgery, Herlev Hospital, Center for Perioperative 
Optimization, Herlev.
(2)Department of Surgery, Zealand University Hospital, Køge, Denmark.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to investigate national prevalence, 
general demographic characteristics and survival of Danish patients with 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS).
METHOD: A population-based cohort study was conducted using a database 
consisting of the entire Danish population alive at any given time between 1 
January 2000 and 31 December 2012, based upon longitudinal Danish national 
registers. All patients with EDS were identified, and the cohort was described 
by disease prevalence, basic demographic characteristics, mean age at death and 
mortality for the observational period of 13 years.
RESULTS: The cohort held 1427 unique persons with EDS, giving a national 
prevalence of 0.02%. The EDS population had a mean ( s . d .) age of 34.9 (18.6) 
years and comprised 73.9% females and 26.1% males. Of the cohort, 95.9% 
originated from Denmark and 57% were unmarried. We found that 31.6% of the 
cohort received state-granted subsidies, of which 77% were in the form of early 
retirement pension. Regarding educational status, 28.1% of the EDS cohort had 
completed primary education (⩽10th grade) as their highest educational level, 
while 71.9% had completed a higher level. During the observation period, 42 
patients died, with a mean ( s . d .) age at death of 53.6 (21.7) years.
CONCLUSION: This study confirmed a small national prevalence of patients 
diagnosed with EDS and showed that the majority of patients diagnosed are 
female. The EDS cohort had a lower educational level, mean age and life 
expectancy compared with the background population and showed a predisposition 
for receiving state-granted subsidies.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/kew478
PMID: 28077691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]