---
reference_id: "PMID:37041599"
title: Insights into the impact of hepatitis B virus on hepatic stellate cell activation.
authors:
- You H
- Wang X
- Ma L
- Zhang F
- Zhang H
- Wang Y
- Pan X
- Zheng K
- Kong F
- Tang R
journal: Cell Commun Signal
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12964-023-01091-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Insights into the impact of hepatitis B virus on hepatic stellate cell activation.
**Authors:** You H, Wang X, Ma L, Zhang F, Zhang H, Wang Y, Pan X, Zheng K, Kong F, Tang R
**Journal:** Cell Commun Signal (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12964-023-01091-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12964-023-01091-7)

## Content

1. Cell Commun Signal. 2023 Apr 11;21(1):70. doi: 10.1186/s12964-023-01091-7.

Insights into the impact of hepatitis B virus on hepatic stellate cell 
activation.

You H(#)(1), Wang X(#)(1), Ma L(1), Zhang F(2), Zhang H(1), Wang Y(1), Pan X(3), 
Zheng K(1)(4), Kong F(5), Tang R(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Immunity and Metabolism, Jiangsu International 
Laboratory of Immunity and Metabolism, Department of Pathogenic Biology and 
Immunology, Xuzhou Medical University, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Imaging Department, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Shandong First Medical 
University, Taian, China.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, The Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical 
University, Xuzhou, China.
(4)National Demonstration Center for Experimental Basic Medical Sciences 
Education, Xuzhou Medical University, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, China.
(5)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Immunity and Metabolism, Jiangsu International 
Laboratory of Immunity and Metabolism, Department of Pathogenic Biology and 
Immunology, Xuzhou Medical University, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, China. 
kong.fanyun@163.com.
(6)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Immunity and Metabolism, Jiangsu International 
Laboratory of Immunity and Metabolism, Department of Pathogenic Biology and 
Immunology, Xuzhou Medical University, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, China. 
tangrenxian-t@163.com.
(7)National Demonstration Center for Experimental Basic Medical Sciences 
Education, Xuzhou Medical University, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, China. 
tangrenxian-t@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

During chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection, hepatic fibrosis is a serious 
pathological condition caused by virus-induced liver damage. The activation of 
hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) is a central event in the occurrence and 
progression of liver fibrosis. Although accumulating evidence has shown that HBV 
directly stimulates HSC activation, whether the virus infects and replicates in 
HSCs remains controversial. Inflammation is one of the obvious characteristics 
of chronic HBV infection, and it has been demonstrated that persistent 
inflammation has a predominant role in triggering and maintaining liver 
fibrosis. In particular, the regulation of HSC activation by HBV-related 
hepatocytes via various inflammatory modulators, including TGF-β and CTGF, in a 
paracrine manner has been reported. In addition to these inflammation-related 
molecules, several inflammatory cells are essential for the progression of 
HBV-associated liver fibrosis. Monocytes, macrophages, Th17 cells, NK cells, as 
well as NKT cells, participate in the modulation of HBV-related liver fibrosis 
by interacting with HSCs. This review summarizes current findings on the effects 
of HBV and the relevant molecular mechanisms involved in HSC activation. Because 
HSC activation is essential for liver fibrosis, targeting HSCs is an attractive 
therapeutic strategy to prevent and reverse hepatic fibrosis induced by HBV 
infection. Video abstract.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12964-023-01091-7
PMCID: PMC10088164
PMID: 37041599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that we have no competing 
interests.