---
reference_id: "PMID:36482623"
title: "Severe lower gastrointestinal bleeding caused by rectal Dieulafoy's lesion: Case reports and literature review."
authors:
- Han P
- Lei Y
- Hou W
- Chen N
- Liu J
- Tian D
- Guo Q
- Yan W
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000032031
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Severe lower gastrointestinal bleeding caused by rectal Dieulafoy's lesion: Case reports and literature review.
**Authors:** Han P, Lei Y, Hou W, Chen N, Liu J, Tian D, Guo Q, Yan W
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000032031](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000032031)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2022 Dec 2;101(48):e32031. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000032031.

Severe lower gastrointestinal bleeding caused by rectal Dieulafoy's lesion: Case 
reports and literature review.

Han P(1), Lei Y, Hou W, Chen N, Liu J, Tian D, Guo Q, Yan W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.

RATIONALE: Dieulafoy's lesion are relatively rare and can cause severe 
gastrointestinal bleeding. A Dieulafoy's lesion is defined as an artery that 
erodes the overlying epithelium without the presence of an ulcer. Bleeding in 
Dieulafoy's lesion predominantly involves the proximal stomach and upper 
gastrointestinal tract and is rarely observed in the lower gastrointestinal 
tract.
PATIENT CONCERNS: Case 1 was a 58-year-old woman complaining of sudden headache 
and vomiting who was diagnosed with subarachnoid hemorrhage. She underwent 
transcatheter embolization for intracranial aneurysm treatment but had an acute 
profuse hematochezia on the 11th day of admission. Case 2 was a 63-year-old man 
admitted to the respiratory intensive care unit because of fever with altered 
consciousness level for a week. He was diagnosed with advanced lung cancer that 
had metastasized to multiple organs one month prior. On the third day of 
admission, he had an attack of profuse hematochezia, and quickly developed shock 
and apathy.
DIAGNOSIS: Both patients were diagnosed with actively bleeding rectal 
Dieulafoy's lesion by bedside emergency colonoscopy.
INTERVENTIONS: Endoscopic hemostatic clipping was performed in 2 patients.
OUTCOMES: Hemostasis was successfully achieved in these 2 patients, and there 
was no recurrence of symptoms during follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: We propose that hemostatic clipping is one of the options in the 
treatment of rectal Dieulafoy's lesions.

Copyright © 2022 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000032031
PMCID: PMC9726342
PMID: 36482623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.