---
reference_id: "PMID:40161896"
title: "Development and Validation of a Nomogram Prediction Model for Key Symptoms of Post-Intensive Care Syndrome-Family in Family Members of Critically-Ill Patients: Focusing on Sleep Disturbance, Fatigue, Anxiety, and Depression."
authors:
- Dong H
- Liu L
- Ma S
- Han H
- Zhang J
- Salvador JT
- Liu X
journal: Risk Manag Healthc Policy
year: '2025'
doi: 10.2147/RMHP.S490487
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Development and Validation of a Nomogram Prediction Model for Key Symptoms of Post-Intensive Care Syndrome-Family in Family Members of Critically-Ill Patients: Focusing on Sleep Disturbance, Fatigue, Anxiety, and Depression.
**Authors:** Dong H, Liu L, Ma S, Han H, Zhang J, Salvador JT, Liu X
**Journal:** Risk Manag Healthc Policy (2025)
**DOI:** [10.2147/RMHP.S490487](https://doi.org/10.2147/RMHP.S490487)

## Content

1. Risk Manag Healthc Policy. 2025 Mar 26;18:1031-1043. doi:
10.2147/RMHP.S490487.  eCollection 2025.

Development and Validation of a Nomogram Prediction Model for Key Symptoms of 
Post-Intensive Care Syndrome-Family in Family Members of Critically-Ill 
Patients: Focusing on Sleep Disturbance, Fatigue, Anxiety, and Depression.

Dong H(1)(2), Liu L(1), Ma S(3), Han H(4), Zhang J(5), Salvador JT(6), Liu X(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nursing, Binzhou Medical University Hospital, Binzhou, Shandong 
Province, People's Republic of China.
(2)School of Nursing, Binzhou Medical University, Binzhou, Shandong Province, 
People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Binzhou Medical University Hospital, Binzhou, 
Shandong Province, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Emergency Intensive Care Unit, Binzhou Medical University 
Hospital, Binzhou, Shandong Province, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Intensive Care Unit, Binzhou Medical University Hospital, 
Binzhou, Shandong Province, People's Republic of China.
(6)Department of Nursing Education, College of Nursing, Imam Abdulrahman Bin 
Faisal University, Dammam, Saudi Arabia.

PURPOSE: To construct and validate a nomogram model predicting the risk of 
post-intensive care syndrome-family (PICS-F) in family members of critically ill 
patients.
METHODS: This study was conducted on family members (parents, spouses, or 
children) of critically ill patients in the three intensive care units of 
Binzhou Medical University Hospital from December 2023 to June 2024, responsible 
for medical decisions and primary care. The sleep disturbances, fatigue, 
anxiety, and depression were assessed using the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, 
the Subscale of Fatigue Assessment Instrument, and the Hospital Anxiety and 
Depression Scale, respectively. Predictive factors were identified through 
univariate and multivariate logistic regression, and a nomogram was constructed 
using R4.2.3. Internal validation used the Bootstrap sampling method, and 
external validation employed the time-period method.
RESULTS: The study involved 567 participants divided into a modeling group (n = 
432; median age = 46 years; 209 males, 223 females) and an external validation 
group (n = 135; median age = 45 years; 70 males, 65 females). The model included 
five predictive factors: family age, patient age, APACHE II score, average 
monthly income per family member, and PSSS score. The AUC of the modeling group 
was 0.894 (0.864 ~ 0.924), with a specificity of 85.4%, a sensitivity of 78.0%, 
and a maximum Youden index of 0.634. The H-L test revealed a good fit (X 2 value 
= 9.528, P = 0.300). The internal validation results of the Bootstrap sampling 
method showed that the calibration curve of the model was close to the ideal 
curve, and the DCA curve results indicated high clinical practicality. Moreover, 
the external validation results showed that AUC was 0.847 (0.782 ~ 0.912), with 
sensitivity and specificity of 74.5% and 86.3%, respectively. The H-L test 
results indicated a good fit (X 2 value = 9.625, P = 0.292).
CONCLUSION: The nomogram demonstrated strong predictive performance for PICS-F 
risk in ICU patients' families, offering a valuable tool for clinical 
assessment.

© 2025 Dong et al.

DOI: 10.2147/RMHP.S490487
PMCID: PMC11955170
PMID: 40161896

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest in this work.