---
reference_id: "PMID:37934770"
title: Dominant negative variants in KIF5B cause osteogenesis imperfecta via down regulation of mTOR signaling.
authors:
- Marom R
- Zhang B
- Washington ME
- Song IW
- Burrage LC
- Rossi VC
- Berrier AS
- Lindsey A
- Lesinski J
- Nonet ML
- Chen J
- Baldridge D
- Silverman GA
- Sutton VR
- Rosenfeld JA
- Tran AA
- Hicks MJ
- Murdock DR
- Dai H
- Weis M
- Jhangiani SN
- Muzny DM
- Gibbs RA
- Caswell R
- Pottinger C
- Cilliers D
- Stals K
- Undiagnosed Diseases Network
- Eyre D
- Krakow D
- Schedl T
- Pak SC
- Lee BH
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1011005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dominant negative variants in KIF5B cause osteogenesis imperfecta via down regulation of mTOR signaling.
**Authors:** Marom R, Zhang B, Washington ME, Song IW, Burrage LC, Rossi VC, Berrier AS, Lindsey A, Lesinski J, Nonet ML, Chen J, Baldridge D, Silverman GA, Sutton VR, Rosenfeld JA, Tran AA, Hicks MJ, Murdock DR, Dai H, Weis M, Jhangiani SN, Muzny DM, Gibbs RA, Caswell R, Pottinger C, Cilliers D, Stals K, Undiagnosed Diseases Network, Eyre D, Krakow D, Schedl T, Pak SC, Lee BH
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1011005](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1011005)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2023 Nov 7;19(11):e1011005. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1011005. 
eCollection 2023 Nov.

Dominant negative variants in KIF5B cause osteogenesis imperfecta via down 
regulation of mTOR signaling.

Marom R(1)(2), Zhang B(3), Washington ME(1), Song IW(1), Burrage LC(1)(2), Rossi 
VC(1)(2), Berrier AS(1), Lindsey A(3), Lesinski J(3), Nonet ML(4), Chen J(5), 
Baldridge D(3), Silverman GA(3), Sutton VR(1)(2), Rosenfeld JA(1), Tran AA(1), 
Hicks MJ(2)(6), Murdock DR(1), Dai H(1), Weis M(7), Jhangiani SN(1), Muzny 
DM(1), Gibbs RA(1), Caswell R(8), Pottinger C(9), Cilliers D(10), Stals K(8); 
Undiagnosed Diseases Network; Eyre D(7), Krakow D(11), Schedl T(5), Pak SC(3), 
Lee BH(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, United States of America.
(2)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas, United States of America.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
Missouri, United States of America.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Washington University School of Medicine, St 
Louis, Missouri, United States of America.
(5)Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
Missouri, United States of America.
(6)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
Texas, United States of America.
(7)Department of Orthopaedics and Sports Medicine, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington, United States of America.
(8)Exeter Genomics Laboratory, Royal Devon University Healthcare NHS Foundation 
Trust, Exeter, United Kingdom.
(9)All Wales Medical Genomics Service, Wrexham Maelor Hospital, Wrexham, UK.
(10)Oxford Centre for Genomic Medicine, Oxford University Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(11)Human Genetics, Obstetrics & Gynecology, Orthopedic Surgery, University of 
California, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Kinesin motor proteins transport intracellular cargo, including 
mRNA, proteins, and organelles. Pathogenic variants in kinesin-related genes 
have been implicated in neurodevelopmental disorders and skeletal dysplasias. We 
identified de novo, heterozygous variants in KIF5B, encoding a kinesin-1 
subunit, in four individuals with osteogenesis imperfecta. The variants cluster 
within the highly conserved kinesin motor domain and are predicted to interfere 
with nucleotide binding, although the mechanistic consequences on cell signaling 
and function are unknown.
METHODS: To understand the in vivo genetic mechanism of KIF5B variants, we 
modeled the p.Thr87Ile variant that was found in two patients in the C. elegans 
ortholog, unc-116, at the corresponding position (Thr90Ile) by CRISPR/Cas9 
editing and performed functional analysis. Next, we studied the cellular and 
molecular consequences of the recurrent p.Thr87Ile variant by microscopy, RNA 
and protein analysis in NIH3T3 cells, primary human fibroblasts and bone biopsy.
RESULTS: C. elegans heterozygous for the unc-116 Thr90Ile variant displayed 
abnormal body length and motility phenotypes that were suppressed by additional 
copies of the wild type allele, consistent with a dominant negative mechanism. 
Time-lapse imaging of GFP-tagged mitochondria showed defective mitochondria 
transport in unc-116 Thr90Ile neurons providing strong evidence for disrupted 
kinesin motor function. Microscopy studies in human cells showed dilated 
endoplasmic reticulum, multiple intracellular vacuoles, and abnormal 
distribution of the Golgi complex, supporting an intracellular trafficking 
defect. RNA sequencing, proteomic analysis, and bone immunohistochemistry 
demonstrated down regulation of the mTOR signaling pathway that was partially 
rescued with leucine supplementation in patient cells.
CONCLUSION: We report dominant negative variants in the KIF5B kinesin motor 
domain in individuals with osteogenesis imperfecta. This study expands the 
spectrum of kinesin-related disorders and identifies dysregulated signaling 
targets for KIF5B in skeletal development.

Copyright: © 2023 Marom et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1011005
PMCID: PMC10656020
PMID: 37934770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.