---
reference_id: "PMID:28730073"
title: "A Chinese family with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome: report of the clinical and genetic findings."
authors:
- Sun DP
- Dai YH
- Pan XJ
- Shan T
- Wang DQ
- Chen P
journal: Int J Ophthalmol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.18240/ijo.2017.06.04
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Chinese family with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome: report of the clinical and genetic findings.
**Authors:** Sun DP, Dai YH, Pan XJ, Shan T, Wang DQ, Chen P
**Journal:** Int J Ophthalmol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.18240/ijo.2017.06.04](https://doi.org/10.18240/ijo.2017.06.04)

## Content

1. Int J Ophthalmol. 2017 Jun 18;10(6):847-853. doi: 10.18240/ijo.2017.06.04. 
eCollection 2017.

A Chinese family with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome: report of the clinical and 
genetic findings.

Sun DP(1), Dai YH(1), Pan XJ(1), Shan T(2), Wang DQ(1), Chen P(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory Cultivation Base, Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of 
Ophthalmology, Shandong Eye Institute, Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, 
Qingdao 266071, Shandong Province, China.
(2)Qingdao University, Qingdao 266071, Shandong Province, China.

AIM: To describe a Chinese family affected by a severe form of Axenfeld-Rieger 
syndrome (ARS) and characterize the molecular defect in PITX2 in the family.
METHODS: Patients presented with typical ARS from a Chinese family were 
investigated. We performed genome-wide linkage scan and exome sequencing to 
identify the pathogenic mutations. Candidate mutations were verified for 
co-segregation in the whole pedigree using Sanger sequencing. Real-time 
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Western blotting were performed to verify 
the expression of the pathogenic gene.
RESULTS: Genome-wide linkage and exome sequencing analyses showed PITX2 as the 
disease candidate gene. A>G substitution at position -11 of 3'ss of exon 5 
(IVS5-11A>G) that co-segregated with the disease phenotype was discovered in the 
family. The PITX2 messenger ribonucleic acid and protein levels were about 50% 
lower in patients with ARS than in unaffected family members in the family.
CONCLUSION: Our findings implicate the first intronic mutation of the PITX2 gene 
in the pathogenesis of a severe form of ARS in a Chinese family. This study 
highlights the importance of a systematic search for intronic mutation in ARS 
cases for which no mutations in the exons of PITX2 have been found.

DOI: 10.18240/ijo.2017.06.04
PMCID: PMC5515146
PMID: 28730073