---
reference_id: "PMID:34833497"
title: "Parvovirus B19 in Croatia: A Large-Scale Seroprevalence Study."
authors:
- Vilibic-Cavlek T
- Tabain I
- Kolaric B
- Mihulja K
- Blazevic L
- Bogdanic M
- Navolan D
- Beader N
- Mrzljak A
journal: Medicina (Kaunas)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/medicina57111279
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Parvovirus B19 in Croatia: A Large-Scale Seroprevalence Study.
**Authors:** Vilibic-Cavlek T, Tabain I, Kolaric B, Mihulja K, Blazevic L, Bogdanic M, Navolan D, Beader N, Mrzljak A
**Journal:** Medicina (Kaunas) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/medicina57111279](https://doi.org/10.3390/medicina57111279)

## Content

1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021 Nov 21;57(11):1279. doi: 10.3390/medicina57111279.

Parvovirus B19 in Croatia: A Large-Scale Seroprevalence Study.

Vilibic-Cavlek T(1)(2), Tabain I(1), Kolaric B(3)(4), Mihulja K(5), Blazevic 
L(6), Bogdanic M(1), Navolan D(7), Beader N(2)(8), Mrzljak A(2)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology, Croatian Institute of Public Health, 10000 Zagreb, 
Croatia.
(2)School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia.
(3)Department of Public Health Gerontology, Andrija Stampar Teaching Institute 
of Public Health, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Rijeka, 51000 
Rijeka, Croatia.
(5)Zagreb County Family Medicine Division, 10380 Sveti Ivan Zelina, Croatia.
(6)Department of Epidemiology, Croatian Institute of Public Health, 10000 
Zagreb, Croatia.
(7)Department of Obstetrics-Gynecology, "Victor Babes" University of Medicine 
and Pharmacy, 300041 Timisoara, Romania.
(8)Department of Clinical and Molecular Microbiology, University Hospital 
Center, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia.
(9)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital Centre 
Zagreb, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia.

Background and Objectives: Seroepidemiological studies indicate that parvovirus 
B19 circulates in all areas of the world, although with some differences. The 
aim of this study is to analyze the seroprevalence of parvovirus B19 in the 
Croatian population. Materials and Methods: From 2010 to 2021, 1538 serum 
samples from different populations were tested for the presence of parvovirus 
B19 IgM/IgG antibodies. Serological tests were performed using a commercial 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Results: IgG antibodies were detected in 
986/64.1% of participants with differences (p < 0.001) among the following 
population groups: 42.4% of children and adolescents, 67.1% of the adult general 
population, 66.7% of hemodialysis patients, and 65.6% of liver transplant 
recipients. Seroprevalence increased with age, from 30.0% in the 6 months-9 
years age group to 69.0% in the 40-49 years age group, and remained stable 
thereafter (68.8-73.3%). There was no difference in the seropositivity among 
males (66.1%) and females (63.1%), as well as the place of residence 
(suburban/rural 63.9%, urban 64.1%). IgM antibodies (current/recent infection) 
were found in 61/4.0% of participants with the highest seropositivity in the 
youngest age group (11.1%). In pregnant women, seroprevalence was higher in 
women with an unfavorable obstetric history compared with a normal pregnancy 
(IgG 71.0% vs. 62.6%; IgM 6.5% vs. 2.4%), but these differences were not 
significant. Logistic regression showed that the adult population had almost 
three times higher risk of IgG seropositivity compared to children/adolescents 
(general population OR = 2.777, 95% CI = 2.023-3.812; hemodialysis patients OR = 
2.586, 95% CI = 1.531-4.367; and transplant patients OR = 2.717, 95% CI = 
1.604-4.603). A one-year increase in age increased the risk of IgG 
seroprevalence (OR = 1.017; 95% CI = 1.011-1.022). Conclusions: Older age was 
the main risk factor for IgG seropositivity. Hemodialysis and organ 
transplantation seem unrelated to the increased parvovirus B19 seroprevalence. 
The role of parvovirus B19 in the etiology of TORCH infections needs to be 
studied further.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina57111279
PMCID: PMC8617724
PMID: 34833497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.