---
reference_id: "PMID:40370031"
title: Abnormal Brain Iron Metabolism is Linked to Altered Neural Function in Isolated Laryngeal Dystonia.
authors:
- Battistella G
- Xavier LL
- Vortmeyer AO
- Simonyan K
journal: Mov Disord
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/mds.30217
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Iron/metabolism
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- Positron-Emission Tomography
- "Brain/metabolism, diagnostic imaging"
- "Dystonic Disorders/metabolism, diagnostic imaging"
- Aged
- "Laryngeal Diseases/metabolism, diagnostic imaging"
- Brain Mapping
- "Receptors, GABA-A/metabolism"
- "Nerve Net/metabolism, diagnostic imaging"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abnormal Brain Iron Metabolism is Linked to Altered Neural Function in Isolated Laryngeal Dystonia.
**Authors:** Battistella G, Xavier LL, Vortmeyer AO, Simonyan K
**Journal:** Mov Disord (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.30217](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.30217)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 2025 Aug;40(8):1680-1691. doi: 10.1002/mds.30217. Epub 2025 May
15.

Abnormal Brain Iron Metabolism is Linked to Altered Neural Function in Isolated 
Laryngeal Dystonia.

Battistella G(1), Xavier LL(1), Vortmeyer AO(2), Simonyan K(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Massachusetts Eye and Ear 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Indiana, 
Indianapolis, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.

BACKGROUND: Laryngeal dystonia (LD) is an isolated focal dystonia causing 
involuntary spasms in the laryngeal muscles that selectively impair speech 
production. LD is characterized as a functional and structural neural network 
disorder; however, the mechanistic aspects of network dysfunction in dystonia 
remain unknown.
OBJECTIVE: We hypothesized that iron-induced abnormal metabolic processes may 
underlie microstructural neuronal damage, contributing to altered neural 
activity within the dystonic network and, subsequently, the development of the 
dystonic state.
METHODS: We used 7 Tesla magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at ultra-high field 
resolution for quantitative susceptibility mapping (QSM) of iron content, 
multi-echo multi-band resting-state functional MRI (fMRI) of brain activity and 
functional connectivity, positron emission tomography with [11C]flumazenil 
radioligand of GABAA neuroreceptor availability, and immunohistochemistry of 
postmortem brain tissue to investigate iron metabolism in LD patients and 
healthy controls.
RESULTS: The QSM analysis found increased iron content in primary sensorimotor 
and premotor cortices, inferior frontal, middle frontal, and middle temporal 
gyri, middle cingulate cortex, superior and inferior parietal lobules, insula, 
putamen, and cerebellum. Histopathology substantiated the neuroimaging findings 
by showing focal clusters of iron precipitates in these regions. Increased iron 
content in the supplementary motor area and middle cingulate cortex was 
associated with altered neural activity, while increased iron in the middle 
cingulate cortex, premotor cortex, and putamen had associations with GABAA 
receptor availability in LD patients.
CONCLUSION: Abnormal iron accumulations are likely to contribute to the 
imbalance of excitatory and inhibitory signaling within the dystonic neural 
network, leading to altered network dynamics that ultimately contribute to LD 
development. © 2025 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

© 2025 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.30217
PMCID: PMC12697069
PMID: 40370031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None relevant to this study for all authors. 
L.L.X., and A.O.V. have nothing to disclose. G.B. receives fundings from the 
Eleanor and Miles Shore Faculty Development Award, the Seth Robbins Mass General 
Neuroscienc Transformative Scholar in Tinnitus Award, and the American Academy 
of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck surgery Percy during speaking. While the exact 
pathophysiology of the disorder is unclear, advanced neuroimaging studies have 
defined a complex, large-scale brain network disorganization in patients with 
LD, where alterations in the basal ganglia, thalamic, cerebellar, and cortical 
sensorimotor and parietal regions represent key changes of Memorial Research 
Award, K.S. receives funding from the National Institutes of Health 
(R01NS088160, R01NS124228, R01DC011805, R01DC012545, R01DC019353, R01DE030464, 
P50DC01990), the Department of Defense, and serves on the Scientific Advisory 
Board of the Tourette Association of America and the Voice Foundation.