---
reference_id: "PMID:36341017"
title: "A 46,XX Karyotype in Men with Infertility: Two New Cases and Review of the Literature."
authors:
- Kouvidi E
- Tsimela H
- Lazaros L
- Manola KN
- Zachaki S
- Dobrescu R
- Sfakianoudis K
- Tsoni T
- Katsidi C
- Tsarouha H
- Kanavakis E
- Mavrou A
journal: J Hum Reprod Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.4103/jhrs.jhrs_100_22
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A 46,XX Karyotype in Men with Infertility: Two New Cases and Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Kouvidi E, Tsimela H, Lazaros L, Manola KN, Zachaki S, Dobrescu R, Sfakianoudis K, Tsoni T, Katsidi C, Tsarouha H, Kanavakis E, Mavrou A
**Journal:** J Hum Reprod Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.4103/jhrs.jhrs_100_22](https://doi.org/10.4103/jhrs.jhrs_100_22)

## Content

1. J Hum Reprod Sci. 2022 Jul-Sep;15(3):307-317. doi: 10.4103/jhrs.jhrs_100_22. 
Epub 2022 Sep 30.

A 46,XX Karyotype in Men with Infertility: Two New Cases and Review of the 
Literature.

Kouvidi E(1), Tsimela H(1), Lazaros L(1), Manola KN(2), Zachaki S(1), Dobrescu 
R(3), Sfakianoudis K(4), Tsoni T(1), Katsidi C(1), Tsarouha H(1), Kanavakis 
E(1), Mavrou A(1).

Author information:
(1)Genesis Genoma Lab, Genetic Diagnosis, Clinical Genetics & Research, Athens, 
Greece.
(2)Laboratory of Health Physics, Radiobiology & Cytogenetics, NCSR "Demokritos", 
Athens, Greece.
(3)Medsana Medical Center SRL, Bucharest, Romania.
(4)Genesis Athens Clinic, Athens, Greece.

46,XX male sex reversal syndrome is a rare genetic cause of male infertility. We 
report on two new cases of this syndrome in men presenting with hypogonadism and 
infertility. Cytogenetic and molecular analysis was performed in both patients. 
An extensive review of the literature for 46,XX male sex reversal syndrome cases 
related to infertility was also performed to fully characterise this syndrome. 
Genetic analyses showed translocation of the SRY on Xp chromosome and complete 
absence of all Azoospermia factor (AZF) genetic regions. All patients included 
in the review presented hypergonadotropic hypogonadism. Small testes were the 
most common clinical characteristic present in 90.2% of the patients, followed 
by small penis (31.8%), gynecomastia (26.8%) and poor hair distribution (15.4%). 
The presence of the SRY was identified in 130/154 (84.4%) patients: in 98.5% of 
cases, it was translocated on the Xp chromosome and in 1.5% on an autosome. All 
patients were azoospermic, due to the lack of AZF genetic regions. Males with 
normal phenotype and primary hypogonadism should be properly evaluated by the 
physicians and must be referred for cytogenetic and molecular analysis to 
exclude or confirm 46,XX male sex reversal syndrome. More cases of this syndrome 
with SRY translocated on an autosome are needed to identify if these patients 
have different characteristics than those with SRY translocated on Xp 
chromosome. Whole genome analysis of these patients is required to elucidate the 
genetic differences which are responsible for the phenotypic variability of the 
syndrome.

Copyright: © 2022 Journal of Human Reproductive Sciences.

DOI: 10.4103/jhrs.jhrs_100_22
PMCID: PMC9635368
PMID: 36341017

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.