---
reference_id: "PMID:37373384"
title: "Delayed Biotin Therapy in a Child with Atypical Profound Biotinidase Deficiency: Late Arrival of the Truth and a Lesson Worth Thinking."
authors:
- Liu S
- Zhang Y
- Deng Z
- He H
- Zheng X
- Hong Q
- Luo X
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms241210239
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Delayed Biotin Therapy in a Child with Atypical Profound Biotinidase Deficiency: Late Arrival of the Truth and a Lesson Worth Thinking.
**Authors:** Liu S, Zhang Y, Deng Z, He H, Zheng X, Hong Q, Luo X
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms241210239](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms241210239)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Jun 16;24(12):10239. doi: 10.3390/ijms241210239.

Delayed Biotin Therapy in a Child with Atypical Profound Biotinidase Deficiency: 
Late Arrival of the Truth and a Lesson Worth Thinking.

Liu S(1), Zhang Y(1), Deng Z(1), He H(1), Zheng X(2), Hong Q(3), Luo X(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Endocrinology and Inherited Metabolic Department, Guangdong Women 
and Children Hospital, Guangzhou 511442, China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Guangdong Women and Children Hospital, 
Guangzhou 511442, China.
(3)Department of Radiology, Guangdong Women and Children Hospital, Guangzhou 
511442, China.

Biotinidase (BTD) deficiency (OMIM 253260) is an autosomal recessively inherited 
metabolic disorder resulting from deficient activity of the BTD enzyme, which 
can cleave and release biotin from a variety of biotin-dependent carboxylases, 
and is therefore recognized as a tool to recycle biotin. Being a condition 
caused by variations on BTD gene with a consequence of free biotin shortage, BTD 
deficiency may impair the activity of biotin-dependent carboxylases, and thus 
bring about a buildup of potentially toxic compounds in the body, primarily 
3-hydroxyisovaleryl-carnitine in plasma as well as 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid in 
urine. The phenotype of BTD deficiency may vary dramatically, from asymptomatic 
adults to severe neurological anomalies, even death in infancy. In the present 
study, we reported on a 5-month-old boy, whose parents sought for medical 
consultation in our clinic for their son due to his loss of consciousness, 
repeated tetany, and motor retardation. Detailed clinical features included 
severe psychomotor retardation, hypotonia, as well as failure to thrive. The 
brain MRI at 12 months showed cerebellar hypoplasia and multiple foci of 
leukodystrophy. The result of antiepileptic therapy was not satisfying. During 
hospitalization, BTD deficiency was suggested by elevated concentration of 
3-hydroxyisovaleryl-carnitine in the blood spots and 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid in 
the urine. The child was then diagnosed with profound BTD deficiency based on 
the above findings and low BTD enzyme activity. Subsequent mutational analysis 
revealed a novel homozygous variant, c.637_637delC (p.H213Tfs*51) in exon 4 of 
BTD gene in the proband, which was recognized as a further support to the 
diagnosis. Therefore, biotin treatment was started immediately, eventually with 
satisfactory outcomes achieved in terms of prevention of epileptic seizure, 
performance in deep tendon reflexes, and improvement of muscular hypotonia, but 
unfortunately, the therapy failed to show any evident effects on poor feeding 
and intellectual disability. This painful lesson suggests that newborn screening 
for inherited metabolic diseases is essential for early identification and 
treatment, which should have been performed in this case to avoid this tragedy.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241210239
PMCID: PMC10299609
PMID: 37373384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.