---
reference_id: "PMID:32905071"
title: Chondroitin sulfate disaccharide is a specific and sensitive biomarker for mucopolysaccharidosis type IVA.
authors:
- Chin SJ
- Saville JT
- McDermott BK
- Zankl A
- Fletcher JM
- Fuller M
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/jmd2.12132
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chondroitin sulfate disaccharide is a specific and sensitive biomarker for mucopolysaccharidosis type IVA.
**Authors:** Chin SJ, Saville JT, McDermott BK, Zankl A, Fletcher JM, Fuller M
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmd2.12132](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmd2.12132)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2020 Jun 30;55(1):68-74. doi: 10.1002/jmd2.12132. eCollection 2020 
Sep.

Chondroitin sulfate disaccharide is a specific and sensitive biomarker for 
mucopolysaccharidosis type IVA.

Chin SJ(1), Saville JT(1), McDermott BK(1), Zankl A(2), Fletcher JM(1)(3), 
Fuller M(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Molecular Pathology SA Pathology [at Women's and Children's 
Hospital] Adelaide South Australia Australia.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, The Children's Hospital at Westmead and 
Sydney Medical School The University of Sydney Sydney New South Wales Australia.
(3)School of Medicine University of Adelaide Adelaide South Australia Australia.

Mucopolysaccharidosis type IVA (MPS IVA) is an inborn error of glycosaminoglycan 
(GAG) catabolism characterized by a deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme, 
N-acetylgalactosamine 6-sulphatase (GALNS). Consequently, partially degraded 
GAG, chondroitin 6-sulfate (CS) and keratan sulfate (KS), accumulate in the 
lysosomes of affected cells, primarily in cartilage resulting in skeletal 
disease. Excessive urinary excretion of these GAG is often used as the initial 
biochemical parameter to inform a laboratory diagnosis. Here we present the 
utility of a CS-disaccharide with a non-reducing 6-sulfated 
N-acetylgalactosamine residue (HNAc-UA (1S))-the enzyme's substrate-for the 
diagnosis and biochemical monitoring of MPS IVA patients. Following 
implementation of this method into the diagnostic laboratory, we identified one 
MPS IVA patient over 3 years of MPS urine screening, with no false positive 
results from 2050 urines tested. Uniquely, urinary concentrations of HNAc-UA 
(1S) are independent of age meaning that age-related reference ranges are not 
required. Urinary HNAc-UA (1S) was also able to identify two MPS IVA siblings 
who remained misdiagnosed with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia for 5 years because 
of normal urinary GAG. HNAc-UA (1S) could also be used as a biomarker for 
monitoring response to enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) as there was a drop in 
urinary concentration following the administration of ERT in all 12 patients and 
concentrations correlated with urinary KS (R 2 = 0.92). In conclusion, HNAc-UA 
(1S) is a reliable, sensitive and specific biomarker for the diagnosis of MPS 
IVA and can be used to biochemically monitor the response to ERT.

© 2020 The Authors. Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jmd2.12132
PMCID: PMC7463049
PMID: 32905071

Conflict of interest statement: Jennifer Saville, Sharon Chin, Belinda 
McDermott, and Andreas Zankl declare they have no conflict of interest. Janice 
Fletcher and Maria Fuller have received travel support for attendance at 
conferences and educational meetings from BioMarin.