---
reference_id: "PMID:39091670"
title: "Safety and efficacy of deoxycytidine/deoxythymidine combination therapy in POLG-related disorders: 6-month interim results of an open-label, single arm, phase 2 trial."
authors:
- Pekeles H
- Berrahmoune S
- Dassi C
- Cheung ACT
- Gagnon T
- Waters PJ
- Eberhard R
- Buhas D
- Myers KA
journal: EClinicalMedicine
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102740
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Safety and efficacy of deoxycytidine/deoxythymidine combination therapy in POLG-related disorders: 6-month interim results of an open-label, single arm, phase 2 trial.
**Authors:** Pekeles H, Berrahmoune S, Dassi C, Cheung ACT, Gagnon T, Waters PJ, Eberhard R, Buhas D, Myers KA
**Journal:** EClinicalMedicine (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102740](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102740)

## Content

1. EClinicalMedicine. 2024 Jul 18;74:102740. doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102740. 
eCollection 2024 Aug.

Safety and efficacy of deoxycytidine/deoxythymidine combination therapy in 
POLG-related disorders: 6-month interim results of an open-label, single arm, 
phase 2 trial.

Pekeles H(1), Berrahmoune S(2), Dassi C(2), Cheung ACT(3), Gagnon T(4), Waters 
PJ(4)(5), Eberhard R(1), Buhas D(3)(6), Myers KA(1)(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Montreal Children's 
Hospital, McGill University Health Centre, 1001 Décarie Boulevard, Montreal, 
Quebec, H4A 3J1, Canada.
(2)Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, 2155 Guy Street, 
Suite 500, Montreal, Quebec, H3H 2R9, Canada.
(3)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Specialized Medicine, McGill 
University Health Centre, 1001 Décarie Boulevard, Montreal, Quebec, H4A 3J1, 
Canada.
(4)Medical Genetics Service, Department of Laboratory Medicine, CHUS and 
Department of Pediatrics, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec, J1K 2R1, 
Canada.
(5)Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Sherbrooke 
(CRCHUS), 12e Avenue N Porte 6, Sherbrooke, Quebec, J1H 5N4, Canada.
(6)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(7)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Montreal Children's Hospital, 
McGill University Health Centre, 1001 Décarie Boulevard, Montreal, Quebec, H4A 
3J1, Canada.

BACKGROUND: DNA polymerase gamma (POLG)-related disorders are a group of rare 
neurodegenerative mitochondrial diseases caused by pathogenic variants in POLG, 
the gene encoding POLG. Patients may experience a range of signs and symptoms, 
including seizures, vision loss, myopathy, neuropathy, developmental impairment 
or regression, and liver failure. The diseases follow a progressive, 
degenerative course, with most affected individuals dying within 3 months-12 
years of diagnosis. At present, there are no effective treatments for 
POLG-related disorders.
METHODS: In this study we report the interim 6-month data from a long term 
open-label, single arm phase 2 trial, in which we assessed the safety and 
efficacy of combination therapy with deoxycytidine and deoxythymidine (dC/dT) in 
children with POLG-related disorders. dC/dT was given enterally in powder form, 
dissolved in water. The primary outcome measures included Newcastle 
Mitochondrial Disease Scale (NMDS) score, serum growth differentiation factor 15 
(GDF-15; a biomarker of mitochondrial dysfunction), electroencephalography 
(EEG), seizure diary, and blood and urine tests to assess end organ and 
mitochondrial function. Secondary outcome measures included recording of all 
adverse events to evaluate the safety of the intervention. The trial is 
registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT04802707 
(https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04802707). Data were collected from 14 
October, 2021 to 13 December, 2023.
FINDINGS: We present 6-month interim data from the first ten people with 
POLG-related disorders enrolled in the trial, six with Alpers-Huttenlocher 
syndrome, two with ataxia-neuropathy spectrum, and two who do not fit into a 
classical POLG-related phenotype. During the 6 months of treatment, NMDS score 
improved from a mean of 27.3 at baseline to 20.7 at 6 months (estimated 
difference 6.0; 95% CI 2.5-∞). GDF-15 values remained stable or decreased in all 
patients; the mean decreased from 1031 pg/ml to 729 pg/ml (estimated difference 
200; 95% CI 12-∞). 8/10 patients had abnormal baseline EEG; improvement in EEG 
was seen in 5 of these 8. There were no significant changes in other blood and 
urine testing. Regarding adverse events, two patients experienced diarrhea that 
spontaneously resolved.
INTERPRETATION: dC/dT is a promising treatment option for people with 
POLG-related disorders. Further research is needed to assess the long-term 
safety and efficacy in POLG-related disorders, as well as safety and efficacy in 
other mitochondrial DNA depletion disorders.
FUNDING: This study was primarily funded by the Liam Foundation, with additional 
funding from the Savoy Foundation, Grand Défi Pierre Lavoie Foundation, and 
Fonds de Recherche du Québec - Santé.

© 2024 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102740
PMCID: PMC11293517
PMID: 39091670

Conflict of interest statement: KAM reports a consulting or advisory role with 
Jazz Pharmaceuticals and research grants paid to institution from Liam 
Foundation, Savoy Foundation, Fonds de Recherche du Québec—Santé, Grand Défi 
Pierre Lavoie Foundation, Pediatric Research Foundation, Epilepsy Canada, 
Ultragenyx and LivaNova. PJW reports a leadership role with the Garrod 
Association. HP, SB, CD, ACTC, TG, RE, DB report no competing interests.