---
reference_id: "PMID:22008915"
title: Liver production of sulfamidase reverses peripheral and ameliorates CNS pathology in mucopolysaccharidosis IIIA mice.
authors:
- Ruzo A
- Garcia M
- Ribera A
- Villacampa P
- Haurigot V
- Marcó S
- Ayuso E
- Anguela XM
- Roca C
- Agudo J
- Ramos D
- Ruberte J
- Bosch F
journal: Mol Ther
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1038/mt.2011.220
keywords:
- Animals
- Central Nervous System/pathology
- Cerebellum/ultrastructure
- Dependovirus/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Gene Order
- Gene Transfer Techniques
- Genetic Therapy
- "Genetic Vectors/administration & dosage, genetics, pharmacokinetics"
- "Hydrolases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Injections, Intramuscular"
- "Injections, Intravenous"
- "Liver/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- Lysosomes/pathology
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mucopolysaccharidosis III/genetics, mortality, therapy"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism"
- Survival Analysis
- "Transduction, Genetic"
- "Visual Cortex/pathology, ultrastructure"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liver production of sulfamidase reverses peripheral and ameliorates CNS pathology in mucopolysaccharidosis IIIA mice.
**Authors:** Ruzo A, Garcia M, Ribera A, Villacampa P, Haurigot V, Marcó S, Ayuso E, Anguela XM, Roca C, Agudo J, Ramos D, Ruberte J, Bosch F
**Journal:** Mol Ther (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/mt.2011.220](https://doi.org/10.1038/mt.2011.220)

## Content

1. Mol Ther. 2012 Feb;20(2):254-66. doi: 10.1038/mt.2011.220. Epub 2011 Oct 18.

Liver production of sulfamidase reverses peripheral and ameliorates CNS
pathology in mucopolysaccharidosis IIIA mice.

Ruzo A(1), Garcia M, Ribera A, Villacampa P, Haurigot V, Marcó S, Ayuso E,
Anguela XM, Roca C, Agudo J, Ramos D, Ruberte J, Bosch F.

Author information:
(1)Center of Animal Biotechnology and Gene Therapy, School of Veterinary
Medicine, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain.

Mucopolysaccharidosis type IIIA (MPSIIIA) is an inherited lysosomal storage
disease caused by deficiency of sulfamidase, resulting in accumulation of the
glycosaminoglycan (GAG) heparan sulfate. It is characterized by severe
progressive neurodegeneration, together with somatic alterations, which lead to
death during adolescence. Here, we tested the ability of adeno-associated virus
(AAV) vector-mediated genetic modification of either skeletal muscle or liver to
revert the already established disease phenotype of 2-month-old MPSIIIA males
and females. Intramuscular administration of AAV-Sulfamidase failed to achieve
significant therapeutic benefit in either gender. In contrast, AAV8-mediated
liver-directed gene transfer achieved high and sustained levels of circulating
active sulfamidase, which reached normal levels in females and was fourfold
higher in males, and completely corrected lysosomal GAG accumulation in most
somatic tissues. Remarkably, a 50% reduction of GAG accumulation was achieved
throughout the entire brain of males, which correlated with a partial
improvement of the pathology of cerebellum and cortex. Liver-directed gene
transfer expanded the lifespan of MPSIIIA males, underscoring the importance of
reaching supraphysiological plasma levels of enzyme for maximal therapeutic
benefit. These results show how liver-directed gene transfer can reverse somatic
and ameliorate neurological pathology in MPSIIIA.

DOI: 10.1038/mt.2011.220
PMCID: PMC3278559
PMID: 22008915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
