---
reference_id: "PMID:31816062"
title: Genomic analyses of flow-sorted Hodgkin Reed-Sternberg cells reveal complementary mechanisms of immune evasion.
authors:
- Wienand K
- Chapuy B
- Stewart C
- Dunford AJ
- Wu D
- Kim J
- Kamburov A
- Wood TR
- Cader FZ
- Ducar MD
- Thorner AR
- Nag A
- Heubeck AT
- Buonopane MJ
- Redd RA
- Bojarczuk K
- Lawton LN
- Armand P
- Rodig SJ
- Fromm JR
- Getz G
- Shipp MA
journal: Blood Adv
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2019001012
keywords:
- Adult
- Genomics/methods
- Humans
- Immune Evasion
- Reed-Sternberg Cells/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genomic analyses of flow-sorted Hodgkin Reed-Sternberg cells reveal complementary mechanisms of immune evasion.
**Authors:** Wienand K, Chapuy B, Stewart C, Dunford AJ, Wu D, Kim J, Kamburov A, Wood TR, Cader FZ, Ducar MD, Thorner AR, Nag A, Heubeck AT, Buonopane MJ, Redd RA, Bojarczuk K, Lawton LN, Armand P, Rodig SJ, Fromm JR, Getz G, Shipp MA
**Journal:** Blood Adv (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1182/bloodadvances.2019001012](https://doi.org/10.1182/bloodadvances.2019001012)

## Content

1. Blood Adv. 2019 Dec 10;3(23):4065-4080. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2019001012.

Genomic analyses of flow-sorted Hodgkin Reed-Sternberg cells reveal
complementary mechanisms of immune evasion.

Wienand K(1)(2), Chapuy B(1)(2)(3), Stewart C(4), Dunford AJ(4), Wu D(5), Kim
J(4), Kamburov A(4), Wood TR(4), Cader FZ(1)(2), Ducar MD(6)(7), Thorner
AR(1)(7), Nag A(1)(7), Heubeck AT(8), Buonopane MJ(8), Redd RA(9), Bojarczuk
K(1)(2), Lawton LN(1), Armand P(1)(2), Rodig SJ(10), Fromm JR(5), Getz
G(2)(4)(11)(12), Shipp MA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA.
(2)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(3)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University Medical Center Göttingen,
Göttingen, Germany.
(4)Broad Institute of Harvard and Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.
(6)Department of Data Science, Knowledge Systems Group, Boston, MA.
(7)Center for Cancer Genome Discovery, Boston, MA.
(8)Hematologic Neoplasia Flow Cytometry Core and.
(9)Department of Data Sciences, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA.
(10)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA; and.
(11)Department of Pathology and.
(12)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA.

Classical Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL) is composed of rare malignant Hodgkin
Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cells within an extensive, but ineffective,
inflammatory/immune cell infiltrate. HRS cells exhibit near-universal somatic
copy gains of chromosome 9p/9p24.1, which increase expression of the programmed
cell death protein 1 (PD-1) ligands. To define genetic mechanisms of response
and resistance to PD-1 blockade and identify complementary treatment targets, we
performed whole-exome sequencing of flow cytometry-sorted HRS cells from 23
excisional biopsies of newly diagnosed cHLs, including 8 Epstein-Barr
virus-positive (EBV+) tumors. We identified significantly mutated cancer
candidate genes (CCGs) as well as somatic copy number alterations and structural
variations and characterized their contribution to disease-defining immune
evasion mechanisms and nuclear factor κB (NF-κB), JAK/STAT, and PI3K signaling
pathways. EBV- cHLs had a higher prevalence of genetic alterations in the NF-κB
and major histocompatibility complex class I antigen presentation pathways. In
this young cHL cohort (median age, 26 years), we identified a predominant
mutational signature of spontaneous deamination of cytosine- phosphate-guanines
("Aging"), in addition to apolipoprotein B mRNA editing catalytic
polypeptide-like, activation-induced cytidine deaminase, and microsatellite
instability (MSI)-associated hypermutation. In particular, the mutational burden
in EBV- cHLs was among the highest reported, similar to that of
carcinogen-induced tumors. Together, the overall high mutational burden,
MSI-associated hypermutation, and newly identified genetic alterations represent
additional potential bases for the efficacy of PD-1 blockade in cHL. Of note,
recurrent cHL alterations, including B2M, TNFAIP3, STAT6, GNA13, and XPO1
mutations and 2p/2p15, 6p21.32, 6q23.3, and 9p/9p24.1 copy number alterations,
were also identified in >20% of primary mediastinal B-cell lymphomas,
highlighting shared pathogenetic mechanisms in these diseases.

© 2019 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2019001012
PMCID: PMC6963251
PMID: 31816062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: S.J.R. received
research funding from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Meyer, KITE/Gilead, and Affimed.
P.A. received research funding from Merck, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Adaptive,
Roche, Tensha, Otsuka, Sigma-Tau Pharmaceuticals, and Genentech, served as a
consultant for Merck, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Pfizer, Affimed, Adaptive, Infinity,
and ADC Therapeutics, and has received honoraria from Merck and Bristol-Myers
Squibb. G.G. received research funding from IBM and Pharmacylics and is an
inventor on patent applications related to MuTect, ABSOLUTE, and MutSig. M.A.S.
received research funding from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Bayer, and Merck, served on
advisory boards for Bayer and Bristol-Myers Squibb, and received honoraria from
Bristol-Myers Squibb and Bayer. The remaining authors declare no competing
financial interests.
