---
reference_id: "PMID:36874927"
title: Rapid Dantrolene Administration with Body Temperature Monitoring Is Associated with Decreased Mortality in Japanese Malignant Hyperthermia Events.
authors:
- Toyota Y
- Kondo T
- Shorin D
- Sumii A
- Kido K
- Watanabe T
- Otsuki S
- Kanzaki R
- Miyoshi H
- Yasuda T
- Horikawa YT
- Mukaida K
- Tsutsumi YM
journal: Biomed Res Int
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1155/2023/8340209
keywords:
- Humans
- Dantrolene
- Malignant Hyperthermia
- Retrospective Studies
- Body Temperature
- East Asian People
- Rare Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rapid Dantrolene Administration with Body Temperature Monitoring Is Associated with Decreased Mortality in Japanese Malignant Hyperthermia Events.
**Authors:** Toyota Y, Kondo T, Shorin D, Sumii A, Kido K, Watanabe T, Otsuki S, Kanzaki R, Miyoshi H, Yasuda T, Horikawa YT, Mukaida K, Tsutsumi YM
**Journal:** Biomed Res Int (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2023/8340209](https://doi.org/10.1155/2023/8340209)

## Content

1. Biomed Res Int. 2023 Feb 22;2023:8340209. doi: 10.1155/2023/8340209.
eCollection  2023.

Rapid Dantrolene Administration with Body Temperature Monitoring Is Associated 
with Decreased Mortality in Japanese Malignant Hyperthermia Events.

Toyota Y(1), Kondo T(1), Shorin D(1), Sumii A(1), Kido K(1), Watanabe T(1), 
Otsuki S(1), Kanzaki R(1), Miyoshi H(1), Yasuda T(2), Horikawa YT(1)(3), Mukaida 
K(1), Tsutsumi YM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care, Hiroshima University 
Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Hiroshima Prefectural Rehabilitation Center, 
Higashi, Hiroshima, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Sharp Rees-Stealy Medical Group, San Diego, CA, 
USA.

PURPOSE: Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a rare genetic disorder but one of the 
most severe complications of general anesthesia. The mortality rate of MH has 
dropped from 70% in the 1960s to 15% because of dantrolene, the only currently 
accepted specific treatment for MH. In this study, we retrospectively identified 
the optimal dantrolene administration conditions to reduce MH mortality further.
METHODS: Our database performed a retrospective analysis of patients with MH 
clinical grading scale (CGS) grade 5 (very likely) or 6 (almost certain) between 
1995 and 2020. We examined whether dantrolene administration affected mortality 
and compared the clinical variables associated with improved prognosis. 
Furthermore, a multivariable logistic regression analysis was used to identify 
specific variables associated with improved prognosis.
RESULTS: 128 patients met the inclusion criteria. 115 patients were administered 
dantrolene; 104 survived, and 11 died. The mortality rate of patients who were 
not administered dantrolene was 30.8%, which was significantly higher than those 
of patients who were administered dantrolene (P = 0.047). Among patients 
administered dantrolene, the interval from the first sign of MH to the start of 
dantrolene administration was significantly longer in the deceased than in the 
survivors (100 min vs. 45.0 min, P < 0.001), and the temperature at the start of 
dantrolene administration was also significantly higher in the deceased (41.6°C 
vs. 39.1°C, P < 0.001). There was no significant difference in the rate of 
increase in temperature between the two, but there was a substantial difference 
in the maximum temperature (P < 0.001). The multivariable analysis also showed 
that the patient's temperature at dantrolene administration and interval from 
the first MH sign to dantrolene administration was significantly associated with 
improved prognosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Dantrolene should be given as rapidly as possible once MH has been 
diagnosed. Beginning treatment at a more normal body temperature can prevent 
critical elevations associated with a worse prognosis.

Copyright © 2023 Yukari Toyota et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2023/8340209
PMCID: PMC9977521
PMID: 36874927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.