---
reference_id: "PMID:22322005"
title: Direct interaction between HLA-B and carbamazepine activates T cells in patients with Stevens-Johnson syndrome.
authors:
- Wei CY
- Chung WH
- Huang HW
- Chen YT
- Hung SI
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2011.12.990
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Antigen Presentation/immunology
- "Carbamazepine/adverse effects, chemistry, immunology"
- Cell Line
- Child
- "Drug Hypersensitivity/genetics, immunology"
- Female
- "HLA-B15 Antigen/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Lymphocyte Activation/immunology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Models, Molecular"
- Peptides/immunology
- Protein Binding/immunology
- "Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/chemically induced, genetics, immunology"
- T-Lymphocytes/immunology
- "T-Lymphocytes, Cytotoxic/immunology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Direct interaction between HLA-B and carbamazepine activates T cells in patients with Stevens-Johnson syndrome.
**Authors:** Wei CY, Chung WH, Huang HW, Chen YT, Hung SI
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2011.12.990](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2011.12.990)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2012 Jun;129(6):1562-9.e5. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2011.12.990. Epub 2012 Feb 8.

Direct interaction between HLA-B and carbamazepine activates T cells in patients 
with Stevens-Johnson syndrome.

Wei CY(1), Chung WH, Huang HW, Chen YT, Hung SI.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Medicine Program, Taiwan International Graduate Program, Taipei, 
Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Increasing studies have revealed that HLA alleles are the major 
genetic determinants of drug hypersensitivity; however, the underlying molecular 
mechanism remains unclear.
OBJECTIVE: We adopted the HLA-B∗1502 genetic predisposition to carbamazepine 
(CBZ)-induced Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS)/toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) as 
a model to study the pathologic role of HLA in delayed-type drug 
hypersensitivity.
METHODS: We in vitro expanded CBZ-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) from 
patients with CBZ-induced SJS/TEN and analyzed the interaction between HLA-B and 
CBZ analogs based on CTL response, surface plasmon resonance, peptide-binding 
assay, site-directed mutagenesis, and computer modeling.
RESULTS: The endogenous peptide-loaded HLA-B∗1502 molecule presented CBZ to CTLs 
without the involvement of intracellular drug metabolism or antigen processing. 
The HLA-B∗1502/peptide/β(2)-microglobulin protein complex showed binding 
affinity toward chemicals sharing 5-carboxamide on the tricyclic ring, as with 
CBZ. However, modifications of the ring structure of CBZ altered HLA-B∗1502 
binding and CTL response. In addition to HLA-B∗1502, other HLA-B75 family 
members could also present CBZ to activate CTLs, whereas members of the HLA-B62 
and HLA-B72 families could not. Three residues (Asn63, Ile95, and Leu156) in the 
peptide-binding groove of HLA-B∗1502 were involved in CBZ presentation and CTL 
activation. In particular, Asn63 shared by members of the B75 family was the key 
residue. Computer simulations revealed a preferred molecular conformation of the 
5-carboxamide group of CBZ and the side chain of Arg62 on the B pocket of 
HLA-B∗1502.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates a direct interaction of HLA with drugs, 
provides a detailed molecular mechanism of HLA-associated drug hypersensitivity, 
and has clinical correlations for CBZ-related drug-induced SJS/TEN.

Copyright © 2012 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2011.12.990
PMID: 22322005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]