---
reference_id: "PMID:34623732"
title: "INTU-related oral-facial-digital syndrome XVII: Clinical spectrum of a rare disorder."
authors:
- Yakar O
- Tatar A
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62527
keywords:
- Face/abnormalities
- Humans
- "Orofaciodigital Syndromes/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- Polycystic Kidney Diseases
- Polydactyly/complications
- Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# INTU-related oral-facial-digital syndrome XVII: Clinical spectrum of a rare disorder.
**Authors:** Yakar O, Tatar A
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.62527](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.62527)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2022 Feb;188(2):590-594. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62527. Epub
2021  Oct 8.

INTU-related oral-facial-digital syndrome XVII: Clinical spectrum of a rare 
disorder.

Yakar O(1), Tatar A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Ataturk University, 
Erzurum, Turkey.

Oral-facial-digital syndromes (OFDSs) as a subgroup of ciliopathies are rare 
genetic disorders characterized by the association of abnormalities of the face, 
oral cavity, and extremities. OFDS XVII is a recently described subtype of OFDS 
that presents with developmental delay, facial dysmorphism, high palate, tongue 
nodules, brain malformations, cardiac anomaly, polydactyly, renal malformation, 
and various other findings. OFDS XVII is caused by biallelic variants in INTU 
gene and is inherited autosomal recessively. Intu is part of the CPLANE protein 
module that has an essential role in the ciliary transport system and function. 
INTU pathogenic variants have been reported in two patients with OFDS XVII, in 
two patients with short-rib thoracic dysplasia-20 with polydactyly (SRTD20), and 
one with nephronophthisis so far. We report the third family in the literature 
with OFDS XVII, with urogenital malformations as an additional finding.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62527
PMID: 34623732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]