---
reference_id: "PMID:20181974"
title: Graves' ophthalmopathy.
authors:
- Bahn RS
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMra0905750
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Graves' ophthalmopathy.
**Authors:** Bahn RS
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMra0905750](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra0905750)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2010 Feb 25;362(8):726-38. doi: 10.1056/NEJMra0905750.

Graves' ophthalmopathy.

Bahn RS(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, Metabolism, and Nutrition, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN 55905, USA. bahn.rebecca@mayo.edu

Graves’ ophthalmopathy, also called Graves’ orbitopathy, is a potentially 
sight-threatening ocular disease that has puzzled physicians and scientists for 
nearly two centuries.– Generally occurring in patients with hyperthyroidism or a 
history of hyperthyroidism due to Graves’ disease, Graves’ ophthalmopathy is 
also known as thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy or thyroid eye disease, because 
it sometimes occurs in patients with euthyroid or hypothyroid chronic autoimmune 
thyroiditis. The condition has an annual adjusted incidence rate of 16 women and 
3 men per 100,000 population. This review explores the perplexing relationship 
between Graves’ ophthalmopathy, hyperthyroidism, and thyroid dermopathy, the 
associated skin condition. I examine clinical features, histologic findings, and 
laboratory studies, with an emphasis on mechanisms that could be targeted in the 
development of new treatments for this debilitating disease.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMra0905750
PMCID: PMC3902010
PMID: 20181974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest relevant to 
this article was reported.