---
reference_id: "PMID:38036954"
title: Changes of gut microbiota and short chain fatty acids in patients with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.
authors:
- Zhou A
- Tang B
- Xie Y
- Li S
- Xiao X
- Wu L
- Tu D
- Wang S
- Feng Y
- Feng X
- Lai Y
- Ning S
- Yang S
journal: BMC Microbiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12866-023-03132-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Changes of gut microbiota and short chain fatty acids in patients with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.
**Authors:** Zhou A, Tang B, Xie Y, Li S, Xiao X, Wu L, Tu D, Wang S, Feng Y, Feng X, Lai Y, Ning S, Yang S
**Journal:** BMC Microbiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12866-023-03132-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12866-023-03132-0)

## Content

1. BMC Microbiol. 2023 Nov 30;23(1):373. doi: 10.1186/s12866-023-03132-0.

Changes of gut microbiota and short chain fatty acids in patients with 
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.

Zhou A(#)(1), Tang B(#)(1), Xie Y(#)(2), Li S(1), Xiao X(1), Wu L(1), Tu D(1), 
Wang S(1), Feng Y(1), Feng X(1), Lai Y(1), Ning S(3), Yang S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Second Affiliated Hospital, Army Medical 
University, Chongqing, 400037, China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Air Force Medical Center, Beijing, 100142, 
China.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Air Force Medical Center, Beijing, 100142, 
China. shoubinning@126.com.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, Second Affiliated Hospital, Army Medical 
University, Chongqing, 400037, China. 13228686589@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Peutz-Jeghers Syndromeis a rare autosomal dominant genetic disease characterized 
by gastrointestinal hamartomatous polyps and skin and mucous membrane 
pigmentation. The pathogenesis of PJS remains unclear; however, it may be 
associated with mutations in the STK11 gene, and there is currently no effective 
treatment available. The gut microbiota plays an important role in maintaining 
intestinal homeostasis in the human body, and an increasing number of studies 
have reported a relationship between gut microbiota and human health and 
disease. However, relatively few studies have been conducted on the gut 
microbiota characteristics of patients with PJS. In this study, we analyzed the 
characteristics of the gut microbiota of 79 patients with PJS using 16 S 
sequencing and measured the levels of short-chain fatty acids in the intestines. 
The results showed dysbiosis in the gut microbiota of patients with PJS, and 
decreased synthesis of short-chain fatty acids. Bacteroides was positively 
correlated with maximum polyp length, while Agathobacter was negatively 
correlated with age of onset. In addition, acetic acid, propionic acid, and 
butyric acid were positively correlated with the age of onset but negatively 
correlated with the number of polyps. Furthermore, the butyric acid level was 
negatively correlated with the frequency of endoscopic surgeries. In contrast, 
we compared the gut microbiota of STK11-positive and STK11-negative patients 
with PJS for the first time, but 16 S sequencing analysis revealed no 
significant differences. Finally, we established a random forest prediction 
model based on the gut microbiota characteristics of patients to provide a basis 
for the targeted diagnosis and treatment of PJS in the future.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-023-03132-0
PMCID: PMC10688050
PMID: 38036954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflicts of interest were 
disclosed.