---
reference_id: "PMID:25719194"
title: TBC1D24-Related Disorders.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Balestrini S
- Campeau PM
- Mei D
- Guerrini R
- Sisodiya S
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TBC1D24-Related Disorders.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Balestrini S, Campeau PM, Mei D, Guerrini R, Sisodiya S

## Content

1. TBC1D24-Related Disorders.

Balestrini S(1)(2)(3), Campeau PM(4), Mei D(1), Guerrini R(1), Sisodiya S(2)(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2015 Feb 26 [updated 2024 Oct 24].

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience and Human Genetics Department, Children's Hospital Meyer IRCSS - 
University of Florence, Florence, Italy
(2)Department of Clinical and Experimental Epilepsy, UCL Queen Square Institute 
of Neurology, London, United Kingdom
(3)National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery and Chalfont Centre for 
Epilepsy, University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, London, 
United Kingdome
(4)Department of Pediatrics, CHU Sainte-Justine, Montréal, Québec, Canada

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: TBC1D24-related disorders comprise a continuum of 
features that were originally described as distinct, recognized phenotypes: 
DOORS syndrome (deafness, onychodystrophy, osteodystrophy, mental retardation, 
and seizures), with profound sensorineural hearing loss, onychodystrophy, 
osteodystrophy, intellectual disability / developmental delay, and seizures; 
familial infantile myoclonic epilepsy (FIME), with early-onset myoclonic 
seizures, focal epilepsy, dysarthria, and mild-to-moderate intellectual 
disability; progressive myoclonus epilepsy (PME), with action myoclonus, 
tonic-clonic seizures, ataxia, and progressive neurologic decline; rolandic 
epilepsy with paroxysmal exercise-induced dystonia and writer's cramp (EPRPDC); 
developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (DEE), including epilepsy of infancy 
with migrating focal seizures (EIMFS); autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing 
loss (DFNB); and autosomal dominant nonsyndromic hearing loss (DFNA).
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of a TBC1D24-related disorder is established in 
an individual with suggestive findings biallelic TBC1D24 pathogenic variants 
when the mode of inheritance is autosomal recessive (i.e., DOORS syndrome, FIME, 
PME, EPRPDC, DEE, and DFNB), and in an individual with suggestive findings and a 
heterozygous TBC1D24 pathogenic variant when the mode of inheritance is 
autosomal dominant (DFNA).
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Hearing aids or cochlear implants as 
needed for hearing loss; early educational intervention and physical, 
occupational, and speech therapy for developmental delay; symptomatic 
pharmacologic management for seizures; standard treatment for tremors, dystonic 
attacks, or other neurologic manifestations; routine management of visual 
impairment and renal, cardiac, dental, orthopedic, and endocrine issues. 
Surveillance: Neurologic evaluations with EEGs depending on seizure frequency 
and/or progression; annual audiologic evaluations to assess for possible 
progression of hearing loss and/or the efficacy of hearing aids; annual dental 
evaluations; annual endocrine evaluations. Agents/circumstances to avoid: 
Excessive ambient noise, which may exacerbate hearing loss in individuals with a 
heterozygous TBC1D24 pathogenic variant that causes autosomal dominant hearing 
loss (DFNA). Evaluation of relatives at risk: Molecular genetic testing for the 
familial TBC1D24 pathogenic variant(s) in older and younger sibs of a proband is 
appropriate in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit 
from early treatment of seizures and/or hearing loss.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Most TBC1D24-related disorders are inherited in an autosomal 
recessive manner (DOORS syndrome, FIME, PME, EPRPDC, and DEE [including EIMFS]). 
TBC1D24-related nonsyndromic hearing loss can be inherited in an autosomal 
recessive (DFNB) or autosomal dominant (DFNA) manner. Autosomal recessive 
inheritance: If both parents are known to be heterozygous for a TBC1D24 
pathogenic variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% 
chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being heterozygous, and a 25% chance 
of inheriting neither of the familial TBC1D24 pathogenic variants. Heterozygotes 
(carriers) are typically asymptomatic. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives 
requires prior identification of the TBC1D24 pathogenic variants in the family. 
Once the TBC1D24 pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in an affected 
family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 25719194