---
reference_id: "PMID:32354749"
title: "Distinguishing neurosarcoidosis from multiple sclerosis based on CSF analysis: A retrospective study."
authors:
- Arun T
- Pattison L
- Palace J
journal: Neurology
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000009491
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Central Nervous System Diseases/cerebrospinal fluid, diagnosis"
- Cerebrospinal Fluid Proteins/analysis
- Cohort Studies
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin G/cerebrospinal fluid
- Leukocyte Count
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Multiple Sclerosis/cerebrospinal fluid, diagnosis"
- Oligoclonal Bands/cerebrospinal fluid
- "Peptidyl-Dipeptidase A/blood, cerebrospinal fluid"
- Positron-Emission Tomography
- "Sarcoidosis/cerebrospinal fluid, diagnosis"
- Spinal Cord/diagnostic imaging
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distinguishing neurosarcoidosis from multiple sclerosis based on CSF analysis: A retrospective study.
**Authors:** Arun T, Pattison L, Palace J
**Journal:** Neurology (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000009491](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000009491)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2020 Jun 16;94(24):e2545-e2554. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000009491.
Epub 2020 Apr 30.

Distinguishing neurosarcoidosis from multiple sclerosis based on CSF analysis: A
retrospective study.

Arun T(1), Pattison L(2), Palace J(2).

Author information:
(1)From the University Hospitals of Coventry and Warwickshire (T.A., L.P.); and
Oxford University Hospitals (J.P.), Oxford, UK. tarunya.arun@uhcw.nhs.uk.
(2)From the University Hospitals of Coventry and Warwickshire (T.A., L.P.); and
Oxford University Hospitals (J.P.), Oxford, UK.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize a cohort of patients with neurosarcoidosis with
particular focus on CSF analysis and to investigate whether CSF values could
help in distinguishing it from multiple sclerosis (MS).
METHODS: This retrospective cohort study enrolled 85 patients with a diagnosis
of neurosarcoidosis (possible, probable, or definite). CSF total protein, white
cell count, and angiotensin-converting enzyme levels were measured. CSF and
serum oligoclonal immunoglobulin G (IgG) patterns were analyzed with the use of
odds ratios and binary logistic regression.
RESULTS: Eighty patients had a probable (nonneural positive histology) or
definite (neural positive histology) diagnosis of neurosarcoidosis. Most
frequent findings on MRI were leptomeningeal enhancement (35%) and white matter
and spinal cord involvement (30% and 23%). PET scan showed avid areas in 74% of
cases. CSF analysis frequently showed lymphocytosis (63%) and elevated protein
(62%), but CSF-selective oligoclonal bands were rare (3%). Serum ACE levels were
elevated in 51% of patients but in only 14% of those with isolated
neurosarcoidosis. Elevated CSF ACE was not found in any patient.
CONCLUSIONS: Large elevations in total protein, white cell count, and serum ACE
occur in neurosarcoidosis but are rare in MS. The diagnostic use of these tests
is, however, limited because minimal changes may occur in both. MS clinical
mimics in neurosarcoidosis are not common, and intrathecal synthesis of
oligoclonal IgG is a powerful discriminator because it is rare in
neurosarcoidosis but occurs in 95% to 98% cases of MS. We suggest caution in
making a diagnosis of neurosarcoidosis when intrathecal oligoclonal IgG
synthesis is found.

© 2020 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000009491
PMID: 32354749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
