---
reference_id: "PMID:32280032"
title: "Cardiopulmonary exercise testing in patients with asthma: What is its clinical value?"
authors:
- Boutou AK
- Daniil Z
- Pitsiou G
- Papakosta D
- Kioumis I
- Stanopoulos I
journal: Respir Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2020.105953
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiopulmonary exercise testing in patients with asthma: What is its clinical value?
**Authors:** Boutou AK, Daniil Z, Pitsiou G, Papakosta D, Kioumis I, Stanopoulos I
**Journal:** Respir Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rmed.2020.105953](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rmed.2020.105953)

## Content

1. Respir Med. 2020 Jun;167:105953. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2020.105953. Epub 2020
Apr  2.

Cardiopulmonary exercise testing in patients with asthma: What is its clinical 
value?

Boutou AK(1), Daniil Z(2), Pitsiou G(3), Papakosta D(4), Kioumis I(3), 
Stanopoulos I(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, "G. Papanikolaou" Hospital, Thessaloniki, 
Greece. Electronic address: afboutou@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Thessaly, Larissa, Greece.
(3)Department of Respiratory Failure, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 
Thessaloniki, Greece.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 
Thessaloniki, Greece.

Asthma is one of the most common respiratory disorders, characterized by fully 
or largely reversible airflow limitation. Asthma symptoms can be triggered or 
magnified during exertion, while physical activity limitation is often present 
among asthmatic patients. Cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET) is a dynamic, 
non-invasive technique which provides a thorough assessment of exercise 
physiology, involving the integrative assessment of cardiopulmonary, 
neuromuscular and metabolic responses during exercise. This review summarizes 
current evidence regarding the utility of CPET in the diagnostic work-up, 
functional evaluation and therapeutic intervention among patients with asthma, 
highlighting its potential role for thorough patient assessment and physician 
clinical desicion-making.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2020.105953
PMID: 32280032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.