---
reference_id: "PMID:38869222"
title: TBC1D24 is likely to regulate vesicle trafficking in glia-like non-sensory epithelial cells of the cochlea.
authors:
- Defourny J
journal: Int J Dev Biol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1387/ijdb.240060jd
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- Cochlea/metabolism
- Neuroglia/metabolism
- "GTPase-Activating Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- Epithelial Cells/metabolism
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- "Hair Cells, Auditory/metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TBC1D24 is likely to regulate vesicle trafficking in glia-like non-sensory epithelial cells of the cochlea.
**Authors:** Defourny J
**Journal:** Int J Dev Biol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1387/ijdb.240060jd](https://doi.org/10.1387/ijdb.240060jd)

## Content

1. Int J Dev Biol. 2024 Jun 11;68(2):79-83. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.240060jd.

TBC1D24 is likely to regulate vesicle trafficking in glia-like non-sensory 
epithelial cells of the cochlea.

Defourny J(1).

Author information:
(1)GIGA-Neurosciences, Research Unit in Cell and Tissue Biology, University of 
Liege, Liege, Belgium.

Mutations in the gene encoding Tre2/Bub2/Cdc16 (TBC)1 domain family member 24 
(TBC1D24) protein are associated with a variety of neurological disorders, 
ranging from non-syndromic hearing loss to drug-resistant lethal epileptic 
encephalopathy and DOORS syndrome [Deafness, Onychodystrophy, Osteodystrophy, 
intellectual disability (formerly referred to as mental Retardation), and 
Seizures]. TBC1D24 is a vesicle-associated protein involved in neural crest cell 
and neuronal migration, maturation, and neurotransmission. In the cochlea, 
TBC1D24 has been detected in auditory neurons, but few reliable and convergent 
data exist about the sensory epithelium. Here, the expression of TBC1D24 has 
been characterized via immunolabelling throughout the postnatal maturation of 
the mouse cochlear sensory epithelium. TBC1D24 was detected in glia-like 
non-sensory epithelial cells during early developmental stages. In contrast, 
TBC1D24 was virtually absent in adjacent sensory hair cells. This expression 
distinguishing non-sensory from sensory epithelial cells almost disappears 
around the onset of hearing. Until now, TBC1D24 was mainly described as a 
neuronal protein either in the brain or in the cochlea. The present observations 
suggest that TBC1D24 could also regulate vesicle trafficking in cochlear 
glia-like non-sensory epithelial cells. For a long time, research about epilepsy 
has been mainly neurocentric. However, there is now evidence proving that glial 
cell dysregulation contribute to pathogenesis of epilepsy and neurodevelopmental 
disorders. As a consequence, exploring the possibility that TBC1D24 could also 
have a role in glial cells of the central nervous system could help to gain 
insight into TBC1D24-related neurological pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1387/ijdb.240060jd
PMID: 38869222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]