---
reference_id: "PMID:31389106"
title: Dominant-negative SOX9 mutations in campomelic dysplasia.
authors:
- Csukasi F
- Duran I
- Zhang W
- Martin JH
- Barad M
- Bamshad M
- Weis MA
- Eyre D
- Krakow D
- Cohn DH
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/humu.23888
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dominant-negative SOX9 mutations in campomelic dysplasia.
**Authors:** Csukasi F, Duran I, Zhang W, Martin JH, Barad M, Bamshad M, Weis MA, Eyre D, Krakow D, Cohn DH
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.23888](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.23888)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2019 Dec;40(12):2344-2352. doi: 10.1002/humu.23888. Epub 2019 Aug
26.

Dominant-negative SOX9 mutations in campomelic dysplasia.

Csukasi F(1), Duran I(1), Zhang W(1)(2)(3), Martin JH(1), Barad M(1), Bamshad 
M(4)(5)(6), Weis MA(7), Eyre D(7), Krakow D(1)(3)(8)(9), Cohn DH(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of California Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, California.
(2)Department of Molecular Cell and Developmental Biology, University of 
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California.
(3)Orthopaedic Institute for Children, University of California Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, California.
(4)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(6)University of Washington Center for Mendelian Genomics, Seattle, Washington.
(7)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington.
(8)Department of Human Genetics, University of California Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, California.
(9)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of California Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, California.

Campomelic dysplasia (CD) is an autosomal dominant, perinatal lethal skeletal 
dysplasia characterized by a small chest and short long bones with bowing of the 
lower extremities. CD is the result of heterozygosity for mutations in the gene 
encoding the chondrogenesis master regulator, SOX9. Loss-of-function mutations 
have been identified in most CD cases so it has been assumed that the disease 
results from haploinsufficiency for SOX9. Here, we identified distal truncating 
SOX9 mutations in four unrelated CD cases. The mutations all leave the 
dimerization and DNA-binding domains intact and cultured chondrocytes from three 
of the four cases synthesized truncated SOX9. Relative to CD resulting from 
haploinsufficiency, there was decreased transactivation activity toward a major 
transcriptional target, COL2A1, consistent with the mutations exerting a 
dominant-negative effect. For one of the cases, the phenotypic consequence was a 
very severe form of CD, with a pronounced effect on vertebral and limb 
development. The data identify a novel molecular mechanism of disease in CD in 
which the truncated protein leads to a distinct and more significant effect on 
SOX9 function.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.23888
PMCID: PMC7608528
PMID: 31389106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]