---
reference_id: "PMID:7130397"
title: Tangier disease. High density lipoprotein deficiency due to defective metabolism of an abnormal apolipoprotein A-i (ApoA-ITangier).
authors:
- Schaefer EJ
- Kay LL
- Zech LA
- Brewer HB Jr
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1982'
doi: 10.1172/jci110705
keywords:
- Adult
- Apolipoprotein A-I
- Apolipoproteins/genetics
- Apolipoproteins A
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Hypolipoproteinemias/blood
- Iodine Radioisotopes
- Lipids/blood
- Lipoproteins/blood
- "Lipoproteins, HDL/deficiency, genetics"
- Male
- "Tangier Disease/blood, diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tangier disease. High density lipoprotein deficiency due to defective metabolism of an abnormal apolipoprotein A-i (ApoA-ITangier).
**Authors:** Schaefer EJ, Kay LL, Zech LA, Brewer HB Jr
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1982)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci110705](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci110705)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 1982 Nov;70(5):934-45. doi: 10.1172/jci110705.

Tangier disease. High density lipoprotein deficiency due to defective metabolism
of an abnormal apolipoprotein A-i (ApoA-ITangier).

Schaefer EJ, Kay LL, Zech LA, Brewer HB Jr.

Tangier disease is a rare familial disorder characterized by enlarged orange
tonsils, transient peripheral neuropathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and
lymphadenopathy, as well as striking reductions in plasma high density
lipoproteins (HDL) and their major protein constituents, apolipoproteins
(apo)A-I and A-II. In order to test the hypothesis that Tangier patients have
abnormal apoA-I or apoA-II, the in vitro lipoprotein binding and in vivo
metabolic characteristics of these proteins isolated from normal and Tangier
plasma, were studied in normal subjects and patients with Tangier disease. After
incubation with normal plasma, significantly greater percentages of radiolabeled
Tangier apoA-I were associated with the 1.063-g/ml supernate (6%) and the 1.21
g/ml infranate (19%), and a lower percentage with HDL (75%), than those observed
for normal apoA-I (2, 8, and 90%, respectively). In contrast, the lipoprotein
binding properties of normal and Tangier apoA-II were very similar. Following
the injection of radiolabeled normal and Tangier apoA-I into normal subjects (n
= 4), the mean residence times of the specific activity for apoA-I(Tangier) were
significantly lower, both in plasma (1.29 d) and in HDL (1.34 d), than those
observed for normal apoA-I (3.80 and 4.06 d). In Tangier homozygotes the decay
rates of these tracers were very rapid and were similar. No significant
differences between the kinetics of normal and Tangier apoA-II were observed in
normal subjects (n = 2). Tangier homozygotes (n = 3) had mean plasma HDL
cholesterol, apoA-I, and apoA-II concentrations that were 4, 2, and 11% of
normal (n = 24), respectively, whereas for heterozygotes (n = 3) these values
were 46, 62, and 68% of normal. In homozygotes, in contrast to normals or
heterozygotes, a significant fraction of both apoA-I and apoA-II were found in
the 1.063-g/ml supernate instead of in HDL. Homozygotes had apoA-I(Tangier)
synthesis rates and residence times that were 41 and 5% of values observed for
normal apoA-I in normal subjects, and for apoA-II in homozygotes, these
parameters were 63 and 18% of normal. Heterozygotes had apoA-I synthesis rates
and residence times that were 92 and 66% of normal, and for apoA-II these values
were 101 and 64% of normal. These data are consistent with the concept that
apoA-I(Tangier) is functionally and metabolically distinct from normal apoA-I,
and is the cause of the striking hypercatabolism of apoA-I and apoA-II, and the
lipoprotein abnormalities observed in Tangier disease.

DOI: 10.1172/jci110705
PMCID: PMC370306
PMID: 7130397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
