---
reference_id: "PMID:39354418"
title: "Weekly carboplatin plus paclitaxel chemotherapy in advanced melanoma patients resistant to anti-PD-1 inhibitors: a retrospective, monocentric experience."
authors:
- Di Pietro FR
- Marinelli D
- Verkhovskaia S
- Poti G
- Falcone R
- Carbone ML
- Morelli MF
- Zappalà AR
- Di Rocco ZC
- Morese R
- Piesco G
- Chesi P
- Marchetti P
- Failla CM
- De Galitiis F
journal: BMC Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12885-024-12961-9
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- "Melanoma/drug therapy, pathology, mortality"
- "Carboplatin/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Paclitaxel/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- Retrospective Studies
- Middle Aged
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- Aged
- Adult
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm"
- Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Programmed Cell Death 1 Receptor/antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology, mortality"
- "Aged, 80 and over"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Weekly carboplatin plus paclitaxel chemotherapy in advanced melanoma patients resistant to anti-PD-1 inhibitors: a retrospective, monocentric experience.
**Authors:** Di Pietro FR, Marinelli D, Verkhovskaia S, Poti G, Falcone R, Carbone ML, Morelli MF, Zappalà AR, Di Rocco ZC, Morese R, Piesco G, Chesi P, Marchetti P, Failla CM, De Galitiis F
**Journal:** BMC Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12885-024-12961-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12885-024-12961-9)

## Content

1. BMC Cancer. 2024 Oct 1;24(1):1220. doi: 10.1186/s12885-024-12961-9.

Weekly carboplatin plus paclitaxel chemotherapy in advanced melanoma patients
resistant to anti-PD-1 inhibitors: a retrospective, monocentric experience.

Di Pietro FR(#)(1), Marinelli D(#)(2), Verkhovskaia S(1), Poti G(1), Falcone
R(1), Carbone ML(3), Morelli MF(1), Zappalà AR(1), Di Rocco ZC(1), Morese R(1),
Piesco G(1), Chesi P(1), Marchetti P(1), Failla CM(#)(4), De Galitiis F(#)(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology and Dermatological Oncology, IDI-IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.
(3)Clinical Trial Center, IDI-IRCCS, Rome, Italy. marialuigia.carbone@idi.it.
(4)Experimental Immunology Laboratory, IDI-IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(#)Contributed equally

Immunotherapy with anti-PD-1 antibodies significantly improved the prognosis in
advanced melanoma patients, but most of them develop primary or secondary
resistance to the treatment. In this study, we evaluated efficacy and safety of
a chemotherapy regimen with weekly carboplatin plus paclitaxel (wCP) in patients
previously treated with anti-PD-1 antibodies. We retrospectively identified 30
patients with advanced melanoma treated at our Institute over the last eight
years with wCP. The co-primary endpoints of the study were overall survival (OS)
and progression-free survival (PFS). In addition, we evaluated treatment
tolerability. For this patient cohort, median PFS and OS were 3.25 and 7.69
months, respectively. All included patients had previously received anti-PD-1
immunotherapy, most of them had ECOG PS 0-1, and only 5 patients had a BRAF V600
mutation. In univariable analysis, we observed shorter OS in patients with > 2
involved metastatic sites, superficial spreading histology, and serum lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) values above the median. Liver metastases were associated
with worse outcomes, while radiotherapy treatment of brain metastases was
associated with improved OS. However, in a multivariable Cox regression model,
only LDH above the median, superficial spreading histology, and female sex were
significantly associated with worse OS. We reported grade 3 and 4
treatment-related toxicities in 4 and 0 patients, respectively. In conclusion,
chemotherapy with wCP is a valid palliative treatment in advanced melanoma who
progressed with anti-PD-1 antibodies.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-024-12961-9
PMCID: PMC11446135
PMID: 39354418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests. FdG
has been a speaker at BMS, and Novartis conference. PM had a consultant/advisory
role for BMS, ROCHE Genentech, MSD, Novartis, AMGEN, Merck Serono, Pierre Fabre,
INCYTE. The two authors declare that this research was conducted in the absence
of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest. All other authors declare no conflict of
interest.
