---
reference_id: "PMID:31069670"
title: Embryonic Midfacial Palatal Organ Culture Methods in Developmental Toxicology.
authors:
- Abbott BD
journal: Methods Mol Biol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-9182-2_7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Embryonic Midfacial Palatal Organ Culture Methods in Developmental Toxicology.
**Authors:** Abbott BD
**Journal:** Methods Mol Biol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-1-4939-9182-2_7](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-9182-2_7)

## Content

1. Methods Mol Biol. 2019;1965:93-105. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-9182-2_7.

Embryonic Midfacial Palatal Organ Culture Methods in Developmental Toxicology.

Abbott BD(1).

Author information:
(1)Toxicity Assessment Division, (B105-04), National Health and Environmental 
Effects Research Laboratory, Office of Research and Development, US 
Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA. 
lau.christopher@epa.gov.

The morphogenesis of the secondary palate provides an interesting model for many 
of the processes involved in embryonic development. A number of in vitro models 
have been used to study craniofacial development, including whole embryo 
culture, palatal mesenchymal and micromass cell cultures, and Trowell-like 
palatal cultures in which dissected palates are cultured individually or as 
pairs in contact on a support above medium. This chapter presents a detailed 
protocol for the culture of maxillary midfacial tissues, including the palatal 
shelves, in suspension culture. This method involves isolation of the midfacial 
tissues (maxillary arch and palatal shelves) and suspension of the tissues in 
medium in flasks. On a rocker in an incubator, the palatal shelves elevate, 
grow, make contact, and fuse in a time span analogous to that occurring in the 
intact embryo in utero.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-9182-2_7
PMID: 31069670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]