---
reference_id: "PMID:37169264"
title: Prolactin and pain of endometriosis.
authors:
- Lee GJ
- Porreca F
- Navratilova E
journal: Pharmacol Ther
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2023.108435
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- "Endometriosis/complications, metabolism"
- Prolactin
- "Receptors, Prolactin"
- Pelvic Pain/complications
- Chronic Pain
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prolactin and pain of endometriosis.
**Authors:** Lee GJ, Porreca F, Navratilova E
**Journal:** Pharmacol Ther (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pharmthera.2023.108435](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pharmthera.2023.108435)

## Content

1. Pharmacol Ther. 2023 Jul;247:108435. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2023.108435.
Epub  2023 May 9.

Prolactin and pain of endometriosis.

Lee GJ(1), Porreca F(1), Navratilova E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, University of Arizona,
Tucson, AZ, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, University of Arizona,
Tucson, AZ, USA. Electronic address: edita@arizona.edu.

Women experience chronic pain more often than men with some pain conditions
being specific to women while others are more prevalent in women. Prolactin, a
neuropeptide hormone with higher serum levels in women, has recently been
demonstrated in preclinical studies to sensitize nociceptive sensory neurons in
a sexually dimorphic manner. Dysregulation of prolactin and prolactin receptors
may be responsible for increased pain especially in female predominant
conditions such as migraine, fibromyalgia, and pelvic pain. In this review, we
focus on the role of prolactin in endometriosis, a condition characterized by
pelvic pain and infertility that affects a large proportion of women during
their reproductive age. We discuss the symptoms and pathology of endometriosis
and discuss how different sources of prolactin secretion may contribute to this
disease. We highlight our current understanding of prolactin-mediated mechanisms
of nociceptor sensitization in females and how this mechanism may apply to
endometriosis. Lastly, we report the results of a systematic review of clinical
studies conducted by searching the PubMed and EMBASE databases to identify
association between endometriosis and blood levels of prolactin. The results of
this search strongly indicate that serum prolactin levels are increased in
patients with endometriosis and support the possibility that high levels of
prolactin may promote pelvic pain in these patients and increase vulnerability
to other comorbid pain conditions likely by dysregulating prolactin receptor
expression. Targeting of prolactin and prolactin receptors may improve
management of pain associated with endometriosis.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2023.108435
PMCID: PMC12181984
PMID: 37169264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare no conflict of interest.
