---
reference_id: "PMID:12584185"
title: Carcinogenicity of dimethylarsinic acid in p53 heterozygous knockout and wild-type C57BL/6J mice.
authors:
- Salim EI
- Wanibuchi H
- Morimura K
- Wei M
- Mitsuhashi M
- Yoshida K
- Endo G
- Fukushima S
journal: Carcinogenesis
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1093/carcin/24.2.335
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Cacodylic Acid/toxicity
- Carcinogens/toxicity
- DNA Primers
- "Genes, p53"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Neoplasms, Experimental/chemically induced, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Carcinogenicity of dimethylarsinic acid in p53 heterozygous knockout and wild-type C57BL/6J mice.
**Authors:** Salim EI, Wanibuchi H, Morimura K, Wei M, Mitsuhashi M, Yoshida K, Endo G, Fukushima S
**Journal:** Carcinogenesis (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1093/carcin/24.2.335](https://doi.org/10.1093/carcin/24.2.335)

## Content

1. Carcinogenesis. 2003 Feb;24(2):335-42. doi: 10.1093/carcin/24.2.335.

Carcinogenicity of dimethylarsinic acid in p53 heterozygous knockout and
wild-type C57BL/6J mice.

Salim EI(1), Wanibuchi H, Morimura K, Wei M, Mitsuhashi M, Yoshida K, Endo G,
Fukushima S.

Author information:
(1)First Department of Pathology, Osaka City University Medical School,
1-4-3-Asahi-machi, Abeno-Ku, Osaka 545-8585, Japan.

There is abundant epidemiological evidence that arsenic is an environmental
carcinogen related to human cancers of the skin, lung, liver and urinary
bladder, in particular. Dimethylarsinic acid (DMA) has also been reported to act
as a carcinogen/or a promoter in rat models. To elucidate molecular mechanisms,
we conducted an 18 month carcinogenicity study of DMA in p53 heterozygous (+/-)
knockout mice, which are susceptible to early spontaneous development of various
types of tumors, and wild-type (+/+) C57BL/6J mice. Totals of 88-90 males, 7-8
weeks of age, were divided into three groups each administered 0, 50 or 200
p.p.m. DMA in their drinking water for 18 months. Mice that were found moribund
or died before the end of the study were autopsied to evaluate the tumor
induction levels, as well as those killed at the end. Both p53(+/-) knockout and
wild-type mice demonstrated spontaneous tumor development, but lesions were more
prevalent in the knockout case. Carcinogenic effect of DMA was evident by
significant early induction of tumors in both treated p53(+/-) knockout and
wild-type mice, significant increase of the tumor multiplicity in 200
p.p.m.-treated p53(+/-) knockout mice, and by significant increase in the
incidence and multiplicity of tumors (malignant lymphomas) in the treated
wild-type mice. By the end of 80 weeks, tumor induction, particularly malignant
lymphomas and sarcomas, were similar in treated and control p53(+/-) knockout
mice. No evidence for organ-tumor specificity of DMA was obtained. Molecular
analysis using PCR-SSCP techniques revealed no p53 mutations in lymphomas from
either p53(+/-) knockout or wild-type mice. In conclusion, DMA primarily exerted
its carcinogenic effect on spontaneous development of tumors with both of the
animal genotypes investigated here.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/24.2.335
PMID: 12584185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
