---
reference_id: "PMID:24678015"
title: Future developments in XLHED treatment approaches.
authors:
- Huttner K
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36499
keywords:
- Animals
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics, therapy"
- Ectodysplasins/genetics
- Humans
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Future developments in XLHED treatment approaches.
**Authors:** Huttner K
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.36499](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.36499)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Oct;164A(10):2433-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36499. Epub
2014  Mar 26.

Future developments in XLHED treatment approaches.

Huttner K(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Development, Edimer Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (XLHED) is the most common genetic 
disorder of ectoderm development, presenting with abnormalities of skin, teeth, 
hair, and secretory glands. In the first years of life, XLHED-affected patients 
are at risk for life-threatening hyperthermia and pulmonary infection. Survival 
into childhood and beyond is associated with severe dental abnormalities as well 
as chronic growth, respiratory, skin, eye, and psychosocial disorders. Currently 
there are no approved therapies to restore function in disorders of development 
like XLHED. Over the last two decades, molecular research has provided 
convincing evidence that alterations in the ectodysplasin (EDA) gene that 
disrupt the encoded protein EDA-A1 are causative for XLHED. In mouse and dog 
XLHED models, administration of a single course of an EDA-A1 replacement protein 
(EDI200) resulted in permanent correction of the key phenotypic features, 
providing the first hope for an effective, targeted therapy. Animal models for 
genetic disorders have their strengths and limitations that must be considered 
when modeling clinical studies in human patients. Of greatest significance in 
the case of a developmental disorder may be the relative timeline for normal 
development and the maturation level at birth. With FDA clearance to start 
EDI200 studies in XLHED patients, we are on the verge of converting a decade of 
animal studies into the first test of a novel paradigm for rescue and permanent 
correction of a human developmental disorder.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36499
PMID: 24678015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]