---
reference_id: "PMID:35399956"
title: Loss of Function of WFS1 Causes ER Stress-Mediated Inflammation in Pancreatic Beta-Cells.
authors:
- Morikawa S
- Blacher L
- Onwumere C
- Urano F
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2022.849204
keywords:
- Animals
- Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress
- Endoribonucleases/metabolism
- Inflammation/metabolism
- Insulin-Secreting Cells/metabolism
- Loss of Function Mutation
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mice
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases
- "Wolfram Syndrome/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of Function of WFS1 Causes ER Stress-Mediated Inflammation in Pancreatic Beta-Cells.
**Authors:** Morikawa S, Blacher L, Onwumere C, Urano F
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2022.849204](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2022.849204)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2022 Mar 25;13:849204. doi:
10.3389/fendo.2022.849204. eCollection 2022.

Loss of Function of WFS1 Causes ER Stress-Mediated Inflammation in Pancreatic
Beta-Cells.

Morikawa S(1)(2), Blacher L(1), Onwumere C(1), Urano F(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Lipid
Research, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United
States.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, Hokkaido University,
Sapporo, Japan.
(3)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United States.

Wolfram syndrome is a rare genetic disorder characterized by juvenile-onset
diabetes mellitus, optic nerve atrophy, hearing loss, diabetes insipidus, and
progressive neurodegeneration. Pathogenic variants in the WFS1 gene are the main
causes of Wolfram syndrome. WFS1 encodes a transmembrane protein localized to
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and regulates the unfolded protein response
(UPR). Loss of function of WFS1 leads to dysregulation of insulin production and
secretion, ER calcium depletion, and cytosolic calpains activation, resulting in
activation of apoptotic cascades. Although the terminal UPR has been shown to
induce inflammation that accelerates pancreatic β-cell dysfunction and death in
diabetes, the contribution of pancreatic β-cell inflammation to the development
of diabetes in Wolfram syndrome has not been fully understood. Here we show that
WFS1-deficiency enhances the gene expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines and
chemokines, leading to cytokine-induced ER-stress and cell death in pancreatic
β-cells. PERK and IRE1α pathways mediate high glucose-induced inflammation in a
β-cell model of Wolfram syndrome. M1-macrophage infiltration and
hypervascularization are seen in the pancreatic islets of Wfs1 whole-body
knockout mice, demonstrating that WFS1 regulates anti-inflammatory responses in
pancreatic β-cells. Our results indicate that inflammation plays an essential
role in the progression of β-cell death and diabetes in Wolfram syndrome. The
pathways involved in ER stress-mediated inflammation provide potential
therapeutic targets for the treatment of Wolfram syndrome.

Copyright © 2022 Morikawa, Blacher, Onwumere and Urano.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2022.849204
PMCID: PMC8990750
PMID: 35399956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Author FU is a Founder and President of
CURE4WOLFRAM, INC and employed by it. The remaining authors declare that the
research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. FU is
an inventor of three patents related to the treatment of Wolfram syndrome,
SOLUBLE MANF IN PANCREATIC BETA CELL DISORDERS (US 9,891,231) and TREATMENT FOR
WOLFRAM SYNDROME AND OTHER ER STRESS DISORDERS (US 10,441,574 and US
10,695,324).
