---
reference_id: "PMID:18684041"
title: Choroid plexus carcinoma.
authors:
- Gopal P
- Parker JR
- Debski R
- Parker JC Jr
journal: Arch Pathol Lab Med
year: '2008'
doi: 10.5858/2008-132-1350-CPC
keywords:
- "Carcinoma/pathology, physiopathology, surgery"
- "Carcinoma, Papillary/pathology"
- Cerebral Ventricle Neoplasms/pathology
- "Chemotherapy, Adjuvant"
- Choroid Plexus/pathology
- "Choroid Plexus Neoplasms/pathology, physiopathology, surgery"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Epithelial Cells/pathology
- Humans
- Necrosis
- Neoplasm Invasiveness
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Choroid plexus carcinoma.
**Authors:** Gopal P, Parker JR, Debski R, Parker JC Jr
**Journal:** Arch Pathol Lab Med (2008)
**DOI:** [10.5858/2008-132-1350-CPC](https://doi.org/10.5858/2008-132-1350-CPC)

## Content

1. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2008 Aug;132(8):1350-4. doi: 10.5858/2008-132-1350-CPC.

Choroid plexus carcinoma.

Gopal P(1), Parker JR, Debski R, Parker JC Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Louisville, 
Louisville, KY, USA.

Comment in
    Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2009 May;133(5):680. doi: 10.5858/133.5.680.

Choroid plexus carcinoma is an uncommon neoplasm of the central nervous system 
most commonly found in the pediatric population. It is associated with a dismal 
prognosis, especially if incompletely resected. Accurate histopathologic 
diagnosis is imperative, and this neoplasm should always be included in the 
differential diagnosis of a papillary intraventricular tumor. Histopathologic 
features include blurring of papillary architecture, layers of neoplastic 
choroid plexus epithelial cells with pleomorphic nuclei, increased 
nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratio, increased mitotic activity, areas of necrosis, and 
brain invasion. Current accepted treatment is gross total surgical resection of 
the tumor as the goal. Use of adjuvant chemotherapy is controversial at this 
time; however, it is considered in some cases.

DOI: 10.5858/2008-132-1350-CPC
PMID: 18684041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]