---
reference_id: "PMID:24344243"
title: "Synergy against PML-RARa: targeting transcription, proteolysis, differentiation, and self-renewal in acute promyelocytic leukemia."
authors:
- Dos Santos GA
- Kats L
- Pandolfi PP
journal: J Exp Med
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1084/jem.20131121
keywords:
- Animals
- Arsenic Trioxide
- Arsenicals/chemistry
- Cell Differentiation
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/genetics, metabolism"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Leukemic"
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/genetics, metabolism, therapy"
- Mice
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics, metabolism"
- Oxides/chemistry
- Remission Induction
- Signal Transduction
- Transcriptional Activation
- Tretinoin/chemistry
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Synergy against PML-RARa: targeting transcription, proteolysis, differentiation, and self-renewal in acute promyelocytic leukemia.
**Authors:** Dos Santos GA, Kats L, Pandolfi PP
**Journal:** J Exp Med (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1084/jem.20131121](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20131121)

## Content

1. J Exp Med. 2013 Dec 16;210(13):2793-802. doi: 10.1084/jem.20131121.

Synergy against PML-RARa: targeting transcription, proteolysis, differentiation,
and self-renewal in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Dos Santos GA(1), Kats L, Pandolfi PP.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Genetics Program, Beth Israel Deaconess Cancer Center; and 2
Department of Medicine and 3 Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a hematological malignancy driven by a
chimeric oncoprotein containing the C terminus of the retinoic acid receptor-a
(RARa) fused to an N-terminal partner, most commonly promyelocytic leukemia
protein (PML). Mechanistically, PML-RARa acts as a transcriptional repressor of
RARa and non-RARa target genes and antagonizes the formation and function of PML
nuclear bodies that regulate numerous signaling pathways. The empirical
discoveries that PML-RARa-associated APL is sensitive to both all-trans-retinoic
acid (ATRA) and arsenic trioxide (ATO), and the subsequent understanding of the
mechanisms of action of these drugs, have led to efforts to understand the
contribution of molecular events to APL cell differentiation,
leukemia-initiating cell (LIC) clearance, and disease eradication in vitro and
in vivo. Critically, the mechanistic insights gleaned from these studies have
resulted not only in a better understanding of APL itself, but also carry
valuable lessons for other malignancies.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20131121
PMCID: PMC3865469
PMID: 24344243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
