---
reference_id: "PMID:38672719"
title: "Retinal Structural and Vascular Changes in Patients with Coronary Artery Disease: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Rusu AC
- Horvath KU
- Tinica G
- Chistol RO
- Bulgaru-Iliescu AI
- Todosia ET
- Brînzaniuc K
journal: Life (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/life14040448
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retinal Structural and Vascular Changes in Patients with Coronary Artery Disease: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Rusu AC, Horvath KU, Tinica G, Chistol RO, Bulgaru-Iliescu AI, Todosia ET, Brînzaniuc K
**Journal:** Life (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/life14040448](https://doi.org/10.3390/life14040448)

## Content

1. Life (Basel). 2024 Mar 28;14(4):448. doi: 10.3390/life14040448.

Retinal Structural and Vascular Changes in Patients with Coronary Artery 
Disease: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Rusu AC(1)(2), Horvath KU(2)(3), Tinica G(4)(5), Chistol RO(4)(5), 
Bulgaru-Iliescu AI(4), Todosia ET(4), Brînzaniuc K(3).

Author information:
(1)Doctoral School of Medicine and Pharmacy, George Emil Palade University of 
Medicine, Pharmacy, Science, and Technology of Targu Mures, 540142 Targu Mures, 
Romania.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Emergency County Hospital Targu Mures, 540136 
Targu Mures, Romania.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, George Emil Palade University of Medicine, Pharmacy, 
Science, and Technology of Targu Mures, 540142 Targu Mures, Romania.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, Grigore T. Popa University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
700115 Iasi, Romania.
(5)Prof. Dr. George I.M. Georgescu Cardiovascular Diseases Institute, 700503 
Iasi, Romania.

BACKGROUND: Retinal microvascular anomalies have been identified in patients 
with cardiovascular conditions such as arterial hypertension, diabetes mellitus, 
and carotid artery disease. We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis 
(PROSPERO registration number CRD42024506589) to explore the potential of 
retinal vasculature as a biomarker for diagnosis and monitoring of patients with 
coronary artery disease (CAD) through optical coherence tomography (OCT) and 
optical coherence tomography angiography (OCTA).
METHODS: We systematically examined original articles in the Pubmed, Embase, and 
Web of Science databases from their inception up to November 2023, comparing 
retinal microvascular features between patients with CAD and control groups. 
Studies were included if they reported sample mean with standard deviation or 
median with range and/or interquartile range (which were computed into mean and 
standard deviation). Review Manager 5.4 (The Cochrane Collaboration, 2020) 
software was used to calculate the pooled effect size with weighted mean 
difference and 95% confidence intervals (CI) by random-effects inverse variance 
method.
RESULTS: Eleven studies meeting the inclusion criteria were incorporated into 
the meta-analysis. The findings indicated a significant decrease in the retinal 
nerve fiber layer (WMD -3.11 [-6.06, -0.16]), subfoveal choroid (WMD -58.79 
[-64.65, -52.93]), and overall retinal thickness (WMD -4.61 [-7.05, -2.17]) 
among patients with CAD compared to controls (p < 0.05). Furthermore, vascular 
macular density was notably lower in CAD patients, particularly in the 
superficial capillary plexus (foveal vessel density WMD -2.19 [-3.02, -1.135], p 
< 0.0001). Additionally, the foveal avascular zone area was statistically larger 
in CAD patients compared to the control group (WMD 52.73 [8.79, 96.67], p = 
0.02). Heterogeneity was significant (I2 > 50%) for most features except for 
subfoveal choroid thickness, retina thickness, and superficial foveal vessel 
density.
CONCLUSION: The current meta-analysis suggests that retinal vascularization 
could function as a noninvasive biomarker, providing additional insights beyond 
standard routine examinations for assessing dysfunction in coronary arteries.

DOI: 10.3390/life14040448
PMCID: PMC11051177
PMID: 38672719

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.