---
reference_id: "PMID:40138888"
title: "Prevalence, genetic variations and clinical outcomes of BRAF-V600 mutated advanced NSCLC in China: a retrospective real-world multi-centre study."
authors:
- Jia B
- Wang S
- Zhang F
- Wang Z
- An T
- Wang Y
- Zhuo M
- Li J
- Yang X
- Chen H
- Chi Y
- Wang J
- Zhai X
- Nuersulitan R
- Wang X
- Tai Y
- Liu Y
- Guan G
- Zhao Y
- Wang Y
- Zhang M
- Liu X
- Lu L
- Li H
- Wang Y
- Shen F
- Liu Z
- Wang Z
- Man L
- Zhang J
- Shi M
- Li Y
- Jiang C
- Yan J
- Jin X
- Jin B
- Zhao J
journal: EBioMedicine
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2025.105652
keywords:
- Aged
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- China/epidemiology
- Genetic Variation
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Imidazoles/therapeutic use
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Staging
- Oximes/therapeutic use
- Prevalence
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Pyridones/therapeutic use
- Retrospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
- Pyrimidinones
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence, genetic variations and clinical outcomes of BRAF-V600 mutated advanced NSCLC in China: a retrospective real-world multi-centre study.
**Authors:** Jia B, Wang S, Zhang F, Wang Z, An T, Wang Y, Zhuo M, Li J, Yang X, Chen H, Chi Y, Wang J, Zhai X, Nuersulitan R, Wang X, Tai Y, Liu Y, Guan G, Zhao Y, Wang Y, Zhang M, Liu X, Lu L, Li H, Wang Y, Shen F, Liu Z, Wang Z, Man L, Zhang J, Shi M, Li Y, Jiang C, Yan J, Jin X, Jin B, Zhao J
**Journal:** EBioMedicine (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ebiom.2025.105652](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2025.105652)

## Content

1. EBioMedicine. 2025 Apr;114:105652. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2025.105652. Epub 2025
 Mar 25.

Prevalence, genetic variations and clinical outcomes of BRAF-V600 mutated
advanced NSCLC in China: a retrospective real-world multi-centre study.

Jia B(1), Wang S(2), Zhang F(2), Wang Z(3), An T(3), Wang Y(3), Zhuo M(3), Li
J(3), Yang X(3), Chen H(3), Chi Y(3), Wang J(3), Zhai X(3), Nuersulitan R(3),
Wang X(3), Tai Y(3), Liu Y(3), Guan G(3), Zhao Y(4), Wang Y(5), Zhang M(6), Liu
X(7), Lu L(8), Li H(9), Wang Y(10), Shen F(11), Liu Z(12), Wang Z(13), Man
L(14), Zhang J(15), Shi M(16), Li Y(17), Jiang C(18), Yan J(19), Jin X(20), Jin
B(21), Zhao J(22).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Department of Thoracic Medical Oncology, Peking University Cancer
Hospital & Institute, Beijing, 100142, China; Department of Thoracic Medical
Oncology, Peking University Cancer Hospital (Inner Mongolia Campus)/Affiliated
Cancer Hospital of Inner Mongolia Medical University, Inner Mongolia Cancer
Center, Hohhot, 010020, China.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, The First Hospital of China Medical
University, Shenyang, 110001, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Department of Thoracic Medical Oncology, Peking University Cancer
Hospital & Institute, Beijing, 100142, China.
(4)Department of Thoracic Medical Oncology, Harbin Medical University Cancer
Hospital, Harbin, 150040, China.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology, The Fourth Hospital of Hebei Medical
University, Shijiazhuang, 050011, China.
(6)Respiratory Department, Dezhou Linyi People's Hospital, Dezhou, 251500,
China.
(7)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Shandong
First Medical University, Jinan, 250117, China.
(8)Department of Oncology, Chaoyang Central Hospital, Chaoyang, 122000, China.
(9)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The Second Hospital of
Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, 050000, China.
(10)Department of Oncology, Affiliated Hospital of Chifeng University, Chifeng,
024000, China.
(11)Department of Oncology, Kaifeng Central Hospital, Kaifeng, 475000, China.
(12)Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, TangShan Central Hospital, Tangshan,
063008, China.
(13)Department of Hematology and Oncology, 988th Hospital of the PLA Joint
Logistic Support Force, Jiaozuo, 454003, China.
(14)Department of Oncology, Anshan Cancer Hospital, Anshan, 114036, China.
(15)Oncology Department, Dezhou Municipal Hospital, Dezhou, 253012, China.
(16)Oncology Department II, Jincheng Second People's Hospital, Jincheng, 048000,
China.
(17)Hematology and Oncology Department, Huanghua People's Hospital, Huanghua,
061100, China.
(18)Department of Medical Oncology, Ordos Central Hospital, Ordos, 017000,
China.
(19)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Hebei Petrochina
Central Hospital, Langfang, 065000, China.
(20)Department of Oncology and Hematology, The Second Hospital of Jilin
University, Changchun, 130041, China.
(21)Department of Medical Oncology, The First Hospital of China Medical
University, Shenyang, 110001, China. Electronic address: jb_cmu@126.com.
(22)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Department of Thoracic Medical Oncology, Peking University Cancer
Hospital & Institute, Beijing, 100142, China. Electronic address:
ohjerry@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Due to the low incidence of BRAF mutations, limited data is
available about their prevalence and clinical characteristics. Moreover,
comparative real-world efficacy of dabrafenib combined with trametinib versus
other treatment regimens, especially in Chinese patients, is also lacking.
METHODS: Patients who had BRAF genetic testing from the Lung Cancer Big Data
Precise Treatment Collaboration Group (LANDSCAPE) database were included as
Cohort I. The LANDSCAPE database comprises next-generation sequencing (NGS) data
of 175,336 patients with lung cancer, originating from 6 Chinese genetic testing
institutions. Cohort II included patients with unresectable locally advanced or
metastatic NSCLC with a primary BRAF mutation from 19 centres in China from
December 2015 to September 2022.
FINDINGS: In Cohort I, of patients with NSCLC, 6249 (3.56%, 95% CI: 3.48%-3.65%)
were confirmed to harbour a BRAF mutation. BRAF V600E accounted for 24.6%
(1539/6249) of all patients with BRAF-mutated NSCLC. In Cohort II, a total of
129 patients with locally advanced or metastatic BRAF-mutated NSCLC were
included. Of 112 patients who received NGS testing, 80 (71.4%) patients had
concomitant mutations. The median first-line real-world progression-free
survival (rwPFS) of dabrafenib plus trametinib for patients with BRAF V600
mutations was 25.0 months (N = 37), which was numerically longer than first-line
immunotherapy-based therapy (N = 12, 15.7 months), and chemotherapy (N = 17, 9.2
months).
INTERPRETATION: This study indicates that dabrafenib plus trametinib could be
considered as the optimal treatment option for Chinese patients with NSCLC
harbouring BRAF V600 mutations.
FUNDING: National Natural Science Foundation of China (82072583); Beijing
Municipal Administration of Hospitals Incubating Program (PX2020044); Beijing
Hospitals Authority Youth Programme (QML20231113); Science Foundation of Peking
University Cancer Hospital (2022-17); Peking University Cancer Hospital Inner
Mongolia Hospital Public Hospital Reform and High-Quality Development
Demonstration Project (Gastrointestinal Cancer + Thoracic Cancer) Research Fund
(2024YNYB006).

Copyright © 2025. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2025.105652
PMCID: PMC11986240
PMID: 40138888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare
that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
