---
reference_id: "PMID:36777632"
title: "Methylmalonic acidemia: Neurodevelopment and neuroimaging."
authors:
- Chen T
- Gao Y
- Zhang S
- Wang Y
- Sui C
- Yang L
journal: Front Neurosci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2023.1110942
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Methylmalonic acidemia: Neurodevelopment and neuroimaging.
**Authors:** Chen T, Gao Y, Zhang S, Wang Y, Sui C, Yang L
**Journal:** Front Neurosci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnins.2023.1110942](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2023.1110942)

## Content

1. Front Neurosci. 2023 Jan 26;17:1110942. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2023.1110942.
eCollection 2023.

Methylmalonic acidemia: Neurodevelopment and neuroimaging.

Chen T(1), Gao Y(2), Zhang S(3), Wang Y(4), Sui C(2), Yang L(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Jinan Maternity and Child Care Hospital
Affiliated to Shandong First Medical University, Jinan, Shandong, China.
(2)Department of Radiology, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong
First Medical University, Jinan, Shandong, China.
(3)Department of Radiology, Shandong Yinan People's Hospital, Linyi, Shandong,
China.
(4)Department of Radiology, Binzhou Medical University, Yantai, Shandong, China.
(5)Department of Radiology, Jinan Maternity and Child Care Hospital Affiliated
to Shandong First Medical University, Jinan, Shandong, China.

Methylmalonic acidemia (MMA) is a genetic disease of abnormal organic acid
metabolism, which is one of the important factors affecting the survival rate
and quality of life of newborns or infants. Early detection and diagnosis are
particularly important. The diagnosis of MMA mainly depends on clinical
symptoms, newborn screening, biochemical detection, gene sequencing and
neuroimaging diagnosis. The accumulation of methylmalonic acid and other
metabolites in the body of patients causes brain tissue damage, which can
manifest as various degrees of intellectual disability and severe neurological
dysfunction. Neuroimaging examination has important clinical significance in the
diagnosis and prognosis of MMA. This review mainly reviews the etiology,
pathogenesis, and nervous system development, especially the neuroimaging
features of MMA.

Copyright © 2023 Chen, Gao, Zhang, Wang, Sui and Yang.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2023.1110942
PMCID: PMC9909197
PMID: 36777632

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
