---
reference_id: "PMID:31072004"
title: Sonic Hedgehog Signaling Is Required for Cyp26 Expression during Embryonic Development.
authors:
- El Shahawy M
- Reibring CG
- Hallberg K
- Neben CL
- Marangoni P
- Harfe BD
- Klein OD
- Linde A
- Gritli-Linde A
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3390/ijms20092275
keywords:
- Animals
- Apoptosis/genetics
- Cell Differentiation/genetics
- Cytochrome P450 Family 26/genetics
- "Embryo, Mammalian"
- Embryonic Development/genetics
- Epithelial Cells/metabolism
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental/genetics"
- Hedgehog Proteins/genetics
- Mice
- Organogenesis/genetics
- Retinoic Acid 4-Hydroxylase/genetics
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- "Tooth/growth & development, metabolism"
- Tretinoin/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sonic Hedgehog Signaling Is Required for Cyp26 Expression during Embryonic Development.
**Authors:** El Shahawy M, Reibring CG, Hallberg K, Neben CL, Marangoni P, Harfe BD, Klein OD, Linde A, Gritli-Linde A
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms20092275](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms20092275)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 May 8;20(9):2275. doi: 10.3390/ijms20092275.

Sonic Hedgehog Signaling Is Required for Cyp26 Expression during Embryonic
Development.

El Shahawy M(1)(2), Reibring CG(3), Hallberg K(4), Neben CL(5), Marangoni P(6),
Harfe BD(7), Klein OD(8)(9), Linde A(10), Gritli-Linde A(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Biochemistry, Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of
Gothenburg, SE-40530 Göteborg, Sweden. maha.el.shahawy@odontologi.gu.se.
(2)Department of Oral Biology, Minia University, Minia 51161, Egypt.
maha.el.shahawy@odontologi.gu.se.
(3)Department of Oral Biochemistry, Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of
Gothenburg, SE-40530 Göteborg, Sweden. claes-goran.reibring@gu.se.
(4)Department of Oral Biochemistry, Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of
Gothenburg, SE-40530 Göteborg, Sweden. kristina.hallberg@odontologi.gu.se.
(5)Program in Craniofacial Biology and Department of Orofacial Sciences,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
cynthianeben@gmail.com.
(6)Program in Craniofacial Biology and Department of Orofacial Sciences,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
Pauline.Marangoni@ucsf.edu.
(7)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. bharfe@UFL.EDU.
(8)Program in Craniofacial Biology and Department of Orofacial Sciences,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
Ophir.Klein@ucsf.edu.
(9)Department of Pediatrics and Institute for Human Genetics, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. Ophir.Klein@ucsf.edu.
(10)Department of Oral Biochemistry, Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of
Gothenburg, SE-40530 Göteborg, Sweden. linde@odontologi.gu.se.
(11)Department of Oral Biochemistry, Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of
Gothenburg, SE-40530 Göteborg, Sweden. amel@odontologi.gu.se.

Deciphering how signaling pathways interact during development is necessary for
understanding the etiopathogenesis of congenital malformations and disease. In
several embryonic structures, components of the Hedgehog and retinoic acid
pathways, two potent players in development and disease are expressed and
operate in the same or adjacent tissues and cells. Yet whether and, if so, how
these pathways interact during organogenesis is, to a large extent, unclear.
Using genetic and experimental approaches in the mouse, we show that during
development of ontogenetically different organs, including the tail, genital
tubercle, and secondary palate, Sonic hedgehog (SHH) loss-of-function causes
anomalies phenocopying those induced by enhanced retinoic acid signaling and
that SHH is required to prevent supraphysiological activation of retinoic
signaling through maintenance and reinforcement of expression of the Cyp26
genes. Furthermore, in other tissues and organs, disruptions of the Hedgehog or
the retinoic acid pathways during development generate similar phenotypes. These
findings reveal that rigidly calibrated Hedgehog and retinoic acid activities
are required for normal organogenesis and tissue patterning.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20092275
PMCID: PMC6540044
PMID: 31072004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
