---
reference_id: "PMID:34814144"
title: "Kawasaki Disease and Atopic Diseases: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Observational Studies."
authors:
- Wang Z
- Zhang J
- Yan H
- Dong L
journal: Int Arch Allergy Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1159/000520045
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kawasaki Disease and Atopic Diseases: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Observational Studies.
**Authors:** Wang Z, Zhang J, Yan H, Dong L
**Journal:** Int Arch Allergy Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000520045](https://doi.org/10.1159/000520045)

## Content

1. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2022;183(4):389-397. doi: 10.1159/000520045. Epub
2021  Nov 23.

Kawasaki Disease and Atopic Diseases: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of 
Observational Studies.

Wang Z(1)(2), Zhang J(3)(4), Yan H(5), Dong L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory, Shandong Qianfoshan Hospital, Cheeloo College of 
Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory, Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, Shandong 
University, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shandong First Medical University, 
Shandong Institute of Respiratory Diseases, Jinan, China.
(3)Department of Respiratory, Shandong Qianfoshan Hospital, Cheeloo College of 
Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, China, zjt9607@126.com.
(4)Department of Respiratory, Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, Shandong 
University, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shandong First Medical University, 
Shandong Institute of Respiratory Diseases, Jinan, China, zjt9607@126.com.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, 
Shandong First Medical University, Jinan, China.

INTRODUCTION: The etiology of Kawasaki disease (KD), an inflammatory and 
cardiovascular disorder, remains largely unexplained after more than 50 years of 
intensive research. In recent years, the association between KD and atopic 
diseases had been explored by some observational studies. We systematically 
reviewed and summarized the literature on the relationship between KD and atopic 
diseases.
METHODS: MEDLINE and EMBASE were searched to identify observational studies on 
the association between KD and atopic diseases from inception to May 2021. Odds 
ratio (OR) was pooled using random-effects models. Heterogeneity was assessed 
using the I2 and Cochran Q statistics. Primary outcomes were to compare the 
prevalence of KD among individuals with atopic diseases to nonatopic disease 
controls and the prevalence of atopic diseases among individuals with KD to 
non-KD controls.
RESULTS: Thirteen studies, including 12,651 cases and 170,708 controls, were 
included in this meta-analysis. In cross-sectional studies, KD was associated 
with allergic rhinitis (n = 6; OR, 1.69; 95% CI, 1.52-1.87), asthma (n = 3; OR, 
1.72; 95% CI, 1.38-2.14), allergic conjunctivitis (n = 2; OR, 1.95; 95% CI, 
1.68-2.27), and atopic dermatitis (n = 3; OR, 1.35; 95% CI, 1.22-1.49). In 
case-control and cohort studies, KD was associated with allergic rhinitis (n = 
3; OR, 1.35; 95% CI, 1.28-1.43), asthma (n = 8; OR, 1.40; 95% CI, 1.19-1.65), 
allergic conjunctivitis (n = 1; OR, 1.74; 95% CI, 1.45-2.09), and atopic 
dermatitis (n = 3; OR, 1.39; 95% CI, 1.26-1.53).
CONCLUSION: KD diagnosed was associated with four common atopic diseases. Among 
the four allergic diseases, allergic conjunctivitis and asthma have the highest 
correlation with KD, which may provide a direction for exploring the etiology of 
KD.

© 2021 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000520045
PMID: 34814144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]