---
reference_id: "PMID:30627963"
title: Non-infectious Granulomatous Lesions of the Orofacial Region.
authors:
- Müller S
journal: Head Neck Pathol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s12105-018-00997-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Non-infectious Granulomatous Lesions of the Orofacial Region.
**Authors:** Müller S
**Journal:** Head Neck Pathol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12105-018-00997-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12105-018-00997-w)

## Content

1. Head Neck Pathol. 2019 Sep;13(3):449-456. doi: 10.1007/s12105-018-00997-w.
Epub  2019 Jan 9.

Non-infectious Granulomatous Lesions of the Orofacial Region.

Müller S(1).

Author information:
(1)Atlanta Oral Pathology, Emory Decatur Hospital, Emory University School of 
Medicine, 2701 N. Decatur Road, Decatur, GA, 30033, USA. smullerdmd@gmail.com.

Granulomatous lesions of the orofacial region are a heterogeneous group of 
disorders characterized by a granulomatous reaction to a variety of stimuli. 
Infectious agents, foreign material, systemic inflammation and metabolic 
disorders can all be associated with granulomatous inflammation. In the 
orofacial region primary causes of granulomatosis include foreign body reaction, 
delayed hypersensitivity to topical agents and idiopathic orofacial 
granulomatosis. Secondary causes of granulomas include infectious agents, 
sarcoid, and Crohn disease. For this review, infectious causes of orofacial 
granulomatosis (OFG) including bacteria, parasites and fungi will not be 
discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/s12105-018-00997-w
PMCID: PMC6684712
PMID: 30627963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares they have no conflicts of 
interest.