---
reference_id: "PMID:30064169"
title: "Host-vector interaction in dengue: a simple mathematical model."
authors:
- Tennakone K
- De Silva L A
journal: Ceylon Med J
year: '2018'
doi: 10.4038/cmj.v63i2.8670
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Host-vector interaction in dengue: a simple mathematical model.
**Authors:** Tennakone K, De Silva L A
**Journal:** Ceylon Med J (2018)
**DOI:** [10.4038/cmj.v63i2.8670](https://doi.org/10.4038/cmj.v63i2.8670)

## Content

1. Ceylon Med J. 2018 Jun 30;63(2):58-64. doi: 10.4038/cmj.v63i2.8670.

Host-vector interaction in dengue: a simple mathematical model.

Tennakone K(1), De Silva L A.

Author information:
(1)55 Amberville Rd, North Andover, MA 01845, United State. ktenna@yahoo.co.uk

INTRODUCTION: Dengue is a mosquito-borne viral infection endemic in tropical and 
subtropical regions, now spreading at epidemic proportions causing a major 
health issue in Sri Lanka and elsewhere. No effective vaccine or a curative 
antiviral drug is available to prevent or treat the disease. The only way of 
mitigating dengue at present, is through mosquito eradication and educating the 
public on preventive measures which can minimizing the cycle of transfer.
OBJECTIVES: A theoretical model of dengue with simple mathematics is presented 
to gain a quantitative understanding of the pattern of dengue outbreaks in Sri 
Lanka and suggest control measures.
METHODS: The statistics on incidence of the disease reported by the Epidemiology 
Unit is analyzed using the model. Despite simplicity, the model possesses 
explanatory and predictive capacity, enabling determination of crucial 
parameters. The model shows that the “infectives” increase exponentially in an 
outbreak, provided the number of vectors per human exceeds a threshold, 
illustrating not only vector eradication but measures which minimize their 
biting frequency and preventing prolonged survival are effective safeguards.
RESULTS: In a population consisting of 75% who are susceptible, the threshold is 
estimated to be 20 mosquitos per person.
CONCLUSIONS: The model showed that the endemic equilibrium of the system can 
occur at any level. As demographic changes escalate mosquito breeding, they 
infect more and more susceptible people. The consequent increase in virus 
replication induces new strains broadening the genetic diversity of the virus 
and helping it to overcome the human immune response. The increasing endemicity 
of dengue due to this is demonstrated by the model.

DOI: 10.4038/cmj.v63i2.8670
PMID: 30064169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]