---
reference_id: "PMID:29097342"
title: Variable signaling activity by FOP ACVR1 mutations.
authors:
- Haupt J
- Xu M
- Shore EM
journal: Bone
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2017.10.027
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variable signaling activity by FOP ACVR1 mutations.
**Authors:** Haupt J, Xu M, Shore EM
**Journal:** Bone (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bone.2017.10.027](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2017.10.027)

## Content

1. Bone. 2018 Apr;109:232-240. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2017.10.027. Epub 2017 Oct 31.

Variable signaling activity by FOP ACVR1 mutations.

Haupt J(1), Xu M(2), Shore EM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Center for Research in FOP and 
Related Disorders, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic address: juhaupt@mail.med.upenn.edu.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Center for Research in FOP and 
Related Disorders, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Department of Genetics, Perelman 
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; 
Center for Research in FOP and Related Disorders, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic address: 
shore@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.

Most patients with fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP), a rare genetic 
disorder of heterotopic ossification, have the same causative mutation in ACVR1, 
R206H. However, additional mutations within the ACVR1 BMP type I receptor have 
been identified in a small number of FOP cases, often in patients with disease 
of lesser or greater severity than occurs with R206H mutations. 
Genotype-phenotype correlations have been suggested in patients, resulting in 
classification of FOP mutations based on location within different receptor 
domains and structural modeling. However while each of the mutations induces 
increased signaling through the BMP-pSmad1/5/8 pathway, the molecular mechanisms 
underlying functional differences of these FOP variant receptors remained 
undetermined. We now demonstrate that FOP mutations within the ACVR1 receptor 
kinase domain are more sensitive to low levels of BMP than mutations in the 
ACVR1 GS domain. Our data additionally confirm responsiveness of cells with FOP 
ACVR1 mutations to both BMP and Activin A ligands. We also have determined that 
constructs with FOP ACVR1 mutations that are engineered without the 
ligand-binding domain retain increased BMP-pSmad1/5/8 pathway activation 
relative to wild-type ACVR1, supporting that the mutant receptors can function 
through ligand-independent mechanisms either directly through mutant ACVR1 or 
through indirect mechanisms.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2017.10.027
PMCID: PMC5866189
PMID: 29097342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interest All authors declare no 
conflicts of interests.