---
reference_id: "PMID:39187475"
title: Intracellular Trafficking Defects in Congenital Intestinal and Hepatic Diseases.
authors:
- Szabó L
- Pollio AR
- Vogel GF
journal: Traffic
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/tra.12954
keywords:
- Humans
- "Liver Diseases/metabolism, genetics"
- Animals
- Protein Transport
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
- "Mucolipidoses/metabolism, genetics"
- trans-Golgi Network/metabolism
- Malabsorption Syndromes
- Microvilli/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intracellular Trafficking Defects in Congenital Intestinal and Hepatic Diseases.
**Authors:** Szabó L, Pollio AR, Vogel GF
**Journal:** Traffic (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/tra.12954](https://doi.org/10.1111/tra.12954)

## Content

1. Traffic. 2024 Aug;25(8):e12954. doi: 10.1111/tra.12954.

Intracellular Trafficking Defects in Congenital Intestinal and Hepatic Diseases.

Szabó L(1), Pollio AR(1), Vogel GF(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, 
Austria.
(2)Department of Paediatrics I, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, 
Austria.

Enterocytes and liver cells fulfill important metabolic and barrier functions 
and are responsible for crucial vectorial secretive and absorptive processes. To 
date, genetic diseases affecting metabolic enzymes or transmembrane transporters 
in the intestine and the liver are better comprehended than mutations affecting 
intracellular trafficking. In this review, we explore the emerging knowledge on 
intracellular trafficking defects and their clinical manifestations in both the 
intestine and the liver. We provide a detailed overview including more 
investigated diseases such as the canonical, variant and associated forms of 
microvillus inclusion disease, as well as recently described pathologies, 
highlighting the complexity and disease relevance of several trafficking 
pathways. We give examples of how intracellular trafficking hubs, such as the 
apical recycling endosome system, the trans-Golgi network, lysosomes, or the 
Golgi-to-endoplasmic reticulum transport are involved in the pathomechanism and 
lead to disease. Ultimately, understanding these processes could spark novel 
therapeutic approaches, which would greatly improve the quality of life of the 
affected patients.

© 2024 The Author(s). Traffic published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tra.12954
PMID: 39187475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]