---
reference_id: "PMID:37033248"
title: "What endocrinologists can do to prevent cardiovascular complications in adults with Prader-Willi syndrome: Lessons from a case series."
authors:
- Pellikaan K
- van Weijen PMH
- Rosenberg AGW
- Hoekstra FME
- Vermaak M
- Oomen PHN
- van der Lely AJ
- Cuypers JAAE
- de Graaff LCG
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1145066
keywords:
- Humans
- Prader-Willi Syndrome/complications
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/complications"
- Retrospective Studies
- Endocrinologists
- "Obesity/complications, epidemiology"
- Heart Failure/complications
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/prevention & control, complications"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# What endocrinologists can do to prevent cardiovascular complications in adults with Prader-Willi syndrome: Lessons from a case series.
**Authors:** Pellikaan K, van Weijen PMH, Rosenberg AGW, Hoekstra FME, Vermaak M, Oomen PHN, van der Lely AJ, Cuypers JAAE, de Graaff LCG
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2023.1145066](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2023.1145066)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2023 Mar 24;14:1145066. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2023.1145066. eCollection 2023.

What endocrinologists can do to prevent cardiovascular complications in adults 
with Prader-Willi syndrome: Lessons from a case series.

Pellikaan K(1)(2)(3)(4), van Weijen PMH(1), Rosenberg AGW(1)(2)(3)(4), Hoekstra 
FME(5), Vermaak M(6), Oomen PHN(7), van der Lely AJ(1), Cuypers JAAE(8), de 
Graaff LCG(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Erasmus MC, 
University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(2)Center for Adults with Rare Genetic Syndromes, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center 
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(3)Dutch Center of Reference for Prader-Willi Syndrome, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(4)Academic Centre for Growth Disorders, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center 
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Reinier de Graaf Hospital, Delft, 
Netherlands.
(6)Novicare, Best, Netherlands.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Medical Center Leeuwarden, Leeuwarden, 
Netherlands.
(8)Department of Cardiology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, 
Rotterdam, Netherlands.

CONTEXT: Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a complex rare genetic syndrome. 
Mortality in patients with PWS is 3% per year. In nearly half of the patients, 
the cause of death is of cardiopulmonary origin. Prevention, diagnosis and 
treatment of cardiovascular (CV) disease in PWS adults is complicated by the 
behavioral phenotype, reduced ability to express physical complaints, high pain 
threshold and obesity.
OBJECTIVE: To describe the challenges in prevention, diagnosis and treatment of 
CV disease in PWS adults, in order to increase awareness and improve medical 
care.
METHODS: Retrospective study of medical records of adults visiting the Dutch PWS 
reference center.
RESULTS: We describe the challenges encountered during diagnosis and treatment 
of four PWS adults with heart failure. All had pre-existent peripheral edema. CV 
risk factors in these patients were obesity (n=4), type 2 diabetes mellitus 
(n=2), hypertension (n=2), hypogonadism (n=3) and sleep apnea (n=2). Remarkably, 
all patients were younger than 40 years during their first cardiac 
decompensation. All patients presented with progressive shortness of breath 
and/or orthopnea and progressive pitting edema. In 117 controls with PWS without 
CV problems, 31% had leg edema.
CONCLUSION: Diagnosing CV problems in PWS adults is challenging. Peripheral 
edema is common in PWS adults without CV morbidity, which makes edema in general 
a poor marker for heart failure. However, when edema is of the pitting kind and 
progressive, this is a strong predictor of cardiac decompensation. We provide 
practical recommendations for diagnosing and treating CV problems in this 
vulnerable patient population.

Copyright © 2023 Pellikaan, van Weijen, Rosenberg, Hoekstra, Vermaak, Oomen, van 
der Lely, Cuypers and de Graaff.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1145066
PMCID: PMC10080071
PMID: 37033248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.