---
reference_id: "PMID:23624251"
title: "Hepatic cholesteryl ester accumulation in lysosomal acid lipase deficiency: non-invasive identification and treatment monitoring by magnetic resonance."
authors:
- Thelwall PE
- Smith FE
- Leavitt MC
- Canty D
- Hu W
- Hollingsworth KG
- Thoma C
- Trenell MI
- Taylor R
- Rutkowski JV
- Blamire AM
- Quinn AG
journal: J Hepatol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2013.04.016
keywords:
- Animals
- Cholesterol Esters/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Fatty Acids/metabolism
- Fatty Liver/metabolism
- Humans
- Liver/metabolism
- Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
- Male
- Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease
- Prospective Studies
- Rats
- "Rats, Sprague-Dawley"
- "Rats, Transgenic"
- Recombinant Proteins/therapeutic use
- "Sterol Esterase/deficiency, genetics, therapeutic use"
- Triglycerides/metabolism
- "Wolman Disease/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatic cholesteryl ester accumulation in lysosomal acid lipase deficiency: non-invasive identification and treatment monitoring by magnetic resonance.
**Authors:** Thelwall PE, Smith FE, Leavitt MC, Canty D, Hu W, Hollingsworth KG, Thoma C, Trenell MI, Taylor R, Rutkowski JV, Blamire AM, Quinn AG
**Journal:** J Hepatol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jhep.2013.04.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2013.04.016)

## Content

1. J Hepatol. 2013 Sep;59(3):543-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2013.04.016. Epub 2013
Apr  25.

Hepatic cholesteryl ester accumulation in lysosomal acid lipase deficiency:
non-invasive identification and treatment monitoring by magnetic resonance.

Thelwall PE(1), Smith FE, Leavitt MC, Canty D, Hu W, Hollingsworth KG, Thoma C,
Trenell MI, Taylor R, Rutkowski JV, Blamire AM, Quinn AG.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne,
UK. pete.thelwall@newcastle.ac.uk

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Lysosomal Acid Lipase (LAL) deficiency is a rare metabolic
storage disease, caused by a marked reduction in activity of LAL, which leads to
accumulation of cholesteryl esters (CE) and triglycerides (TG) in lysosomes in
many tissues. We used (1)H magnetic resonance (MR) spectroscopy to characterize
the abnormalities in hepatic lipid content and composition in patients with LAL
deficiency, and in ex vivo liver tissue from a LAL deficiency rat model.
Secondly, we used MR spectroscopy to monitor the effects of an enzyme
replacement therapy (ERT), sebelipase alfa (a recombinant human lysosomal acid
lipase), on hepatic TG and CE content in the preclinical model.
METHODS: Human studies employed cohorts of LAL-deficient patients and NAFLD
subjects. Rat experimental groups comprised ex vivo liver samples of wild type,
NAFLD, LAL-deficient, and LAL-deficient rats receiving 4weeks of sebelipase alfa
treatment. Hepatic (1)H MR spectroscopy was performed using 3T (human) and 7T
(preclinical) MRI scanners to quantify hepatic cholesterol and triglyceride
content.
RESULTS: CE accumulation was identified in LAL deficiency in both human and
preclinical studies. A significant decrease in hepatic CE was observed in
LAL-deficient rats following treatment with sebelipase alfa.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate an entirely non-invasive method to identify and
quantify the hepatic lipid signature associated with a rare genetic cause of
fatty liver. The approach provides a more favorable alternative to repeated
biopsy sampling for diagnosis and disease progression / treatment monitoring of
patients with LAL deficiency and other disorders characterised by increased free
cholesterol and/or cholesteryl esters.

Copyright © 2013 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2013.04.016
PMCID: PMC3749380
PMID: 23624251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
