---
reference_id: "PMID:24528855"
title: "X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, Arts syndrome, and prelingual non-syndromic deafness form a disease continuum: evidence from a family with a novel PRPS1 mutation."
authors:
- Synofzik M
- Müller vom Hagen J
- Haack TB
- Wilhelm C
- Lindig T
- Beck-Wödl S
- Nabuurs SB
- van Kuilenburg AB
- de Brouwer AP
- Schöls L
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-9-24
keywords:
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Ataxia/genetics
- Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease/genetics
- Deaf-Blind Disorders/genetics
- Female
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics"
- Hearing Loss/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Ribose-Phosphate Pyrophosphokinase/chemistry, genetics"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, Arts syndrome, and prelingual non-syndromic deafness form a disease continuum: evidence from a family with a novel PRPS1 mutation.
**Authors:** Synofzik M, Müller vom Hagen J, Haack TB, Wilhelm C, Lindig T, Beck-Wödl S, Nabuurs SB, van Kuilenburg AB, de Brouwer AP, Schöls L
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-9-24](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-9-24)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2014 Feb 14;9:24. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-9-24.

X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, Arts syndrome, and prelingual
non-syndromic deafness form a disease continuum: evidence from a family with a
novel PRPS1 mutation.

Synofzik M(1), Müller vom Hagen J, Haack TB, Wilhelm C, Lindig T, Beck-Wödl S,
Nabuurs SB, van Kuilenburg AB, de Brouwer AP, Schöls L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Hertie-Institute for Clinical Brain
Research, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
matthis.synofzik@uni-tuebingen.de.

BACKGROUND: X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 5 (CMTX5), Arts syndrome,
and non-syndromic sensorineural deafness (DFN2) are allelic syndromes, caused by
reduced activity of phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase 1 (PRS-I) due to
loss-of-function mutations in PRPS1. As only few families have been described,
knowledge about the relation between these syndromes, the phenotypic spectrum in
patients and female carriers, and the relation to underlying PRS-I activity is
limited.
METHODS: We investigated a family with a novel PRPS1 mutation (c.830A > C,
p.Gln277Pro) by extensive phenotyping, MRI, and genetic and enzymatic tests.
RESULTS: The male index subject presented with an overlap of CMTX5 and Arts
syndrome features, whereas his sister presented with prelingual DFN2. Both
showed mild parietal and cerebellar atrophy on MRI. Enzymatically, PRS-I
activity was undetectable in the index subject, reduced in his less affected
sister, and normal in his unaffected mother.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that CMTX5, Arts syndrome and DFN2 are
phenotypic clusters on an intrafamilial continuum, including overlapping
phenotypes even within individuals. The respective phenotypic presentation seems
to be determined by the exact PRPS1 mutation and the residual enzyme activity,
the latter being largely influenced by the degree of skewed X-inactivation.
Finally, our findings show that brain atrophy might be more common in
PRPS1-disorders than previously thought.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-9-24
PMCID: PMC3931488
PMID: 24528855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
