---
reference_id: "PMID:30610452"
title: Morphometric analysis of thoracic aorta in Slc39a13/Zip13-KO mice.
authors:
- Hirose T
- Shimazaki T
- Takahashi N
- Fukada T
- Watanabe T
- Tangkawattana P
- Takehana K
journal: Cell Tissue Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s00441-018-2977-9
keywords:
- Animals
- "Aorta, Thoracic/abnormalities, pathology"
- Cation Transport Proteins/genetics
- Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome/pathology
- Elasticity
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Muscle, Smooth, Vascular/abnormalities, ultrastructure"
- Osteochondrodysplasias/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Morphometric analysis of thoracic aorta in Slc39a13/Zip13-KO mice.
**Authors:** Hirose T, Shimazaki T, Takahashi N, Fukada T, Watanabe T, Tangkawattana P, Takehana K
**Journal:** Cell Tissue Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00441-018-2977-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00441-018-2977-9)

## Content

1. Cell Tissue Res. 2019 Apr;376(1):137-141. doi: 10.1007/s00441-018-2977-9. Epub
 2019 Jan 4.

Morphometric analysis of thoracic aorta in Slc39a13/Zip13-KO mice.

Hirose T(1), Shimazaki T(1), Takahashi N(1), Fukada T(2), Watanabe T(1)(3), 
Tangkawattana P(4)(5), Takehana K(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Anatomy, School of Veterinary Medicine, Rakuno Gakuen 
University, Ebetsu, Hokkaido, 069-8501, Japan.
(2)Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Tokushima Bunri University, Tokushima, 770-8055, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Animal Functional Anatomy, Faculty of Agriculture, Shinshu 
University, Minami-minowa, Kami-ina, Nagano, 399-4598, Japan.
(4)Laboratory of Anatomy, School of Veterinary Medicine, Rakuno Gakuen 
University, Ebetsu, Hokkaido, 069-8501, Japan. prasarn@kku.ac.th.
(5)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, 40002, 
Thailand. prasarn@kku.ac.th.

Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a collection of inheritable diseases involving 
the musculoskeletal, integumentary and visual systems. Spondylodysplastic 
EDS-ZIP13 (spEDS-ZIP13: OMIM 612350) was recently defined as a new form of EDS. 
Although vasculitis has been found in many spEDS-ZIP13 patients, vascular 
pathology has not been included as a pathognomonic lesion of this type of EDS. 
We investigate the morphometry of the thoracic aorta in wild-type and 
Zip13-knockout (Zip13-KO) mice. Our assessment found abnormalities in the number 
and morphology of elastic and cellular components in the aortic wall, especially 
the tunica media, of Zip13-KO mice, indicating aortic fragility. Accordingly, 
our major findings (vascular smooth muscle cells with small nuclei, small 
percentage of elastic membrane area per tunica media, many large elastic flaps) 
should be considered vulnerable characteristics indicating fragility of the 
aorta in patients with spEDS-ZIP13.

DOI: 10.1007/s00441-018-2977-9
PMID: 30610452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]