---
reference_id: "PMID:37464041"
title: "Depression pathophysiology, risk prediction of recurrence and comorbid psychiatric disorders using genome-wide analyses."
authors:
- Als TD
- Kurki MI
- Grove J
- Voloudakis G
- Therrien K
- Tasanko E
- Nielsen TT
- Naamanka J
- Veerapen K
- Levey DF
- Bendl J
- Bybjerg-Grauholm J
- Zeng B
- Demontis D
- Rosengren A
- Athanasiadis G
- Bækved-Hansen M
- Qvist P
- Bragi Walters G
- Thorgeirsson T
- Stefánsson H
- Musliner KL
- Rajagopal VM
- Farajzadeh L
- Thirstrup J
- Vilhjálmsson BJ
- McGrath JJ
- Mattheisen M
- Meier S
- Agerbo E
- Stefánsson K
- Nordentoft M
- Werge T
- Hougaard DM
- Mortensen PB
- Stein MB
- Gelernter J
- Hovatta I
- Roussos P
- Daly MJ
- Mors O
- Palotie A
- Børglum AD
journal: Nat Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41591-023-02352-1
keywords:
- Male
- Female
- Humans
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Depression
- "Bipolar Disorder/epidemiology, genetics"
- "Schizophrenia/epidemiology, genetics"
- "Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/epidemiology, genetics"
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide/genetics"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Depression pathophysiology, risk prediction of recurrence and comorbid psychiatric disorders using genome-wide analyses.
**Authors:** Als TD, Kurki MI, Grove J, Voloudakis G, Therrien K, Tasanko E, Nielsen TT, Naamanka J, Veerapen K, Levey DF, Bendl J, Bybjerg-Grauholm J, Zeng B, Demontis D, Rosengren A, Athanasiadis G, Bækved-Hansen M, Qvist P, Bragi Walters G, Thorgeirsson T, Stefánsson H, Musliner KL, Rajagopal VM, Farajzadeh L, Thirstrup J, Vilhjálmsson BJ, McGrath JJ, Mattheisen M, Meier S, Agerbo E, Stefánsson K, Nordentoft M, Werge T, Hougaard DM, Mortensen PB, Stein MB, Gelernter J, Hovatta I, Roussos P, Daly MJ, Mors O, Palotie A, Børglum AD
**Journal:** Nat Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41591-023-02352-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-023-02352-1)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2023 Jul;29(7):1832-1844. doi: 10.1038/s41591-023-02352-1. Epub 2023
Jul 18.

Depression pathophysiology, risk prediction of recurrence and comorbid
psychiatric disorders using genome-wide analyses.

Als TD(1)(2)(3), Kurki MI(4)(5)(6), Grove J(7)(8)(9)(10), Voloudakis
G(11)(12)(13)(14)(15)(16), Therrien K(11)(12)(13)(14)(15)(16)(17), Tasanko
E(18), Nielsen TT(7)(8)(9), Naamanka J(18), Veerapen K(5)(6)(19), Levey
DF(20)(21), Bendl J(11)(12)(13)(14)(15), Bybjerg-Grauholm J(8)(22), Zeng
B(11)(12)(13)(14)(15), Demontis D(7)(8)(9), Rosengren A(8)(23), Athanasiadis
G(8)(23)(24), Bækved-Hansen M(8)(22), Qvist P(7)(8)(9), Bragi Walters G(25),
Thorgeirsson T(25), Stefánsson H(25), Musliner KL(8)(26)(27)(28), Rajagopal
VM(7)(8)(9), Farajzadeh L(7)(8)(9), Thirstrup J(7)(8)(9), Vilhjálmsson
BJ(8)(10)(29), McGrath JJ(29)(30)(31), Mattheisen M(8)(32)(33)(34), Meier
S(8)(33)(34)(35), Agerbo E(8)(26)(36), Stefánsson K(25), Nordentoft M(8)(37),
Werge T(8)(23)(38), Hougaard DM(8)(22), Mortensen PB(8)(26)(36), Stein
MB(39)(40), Gelernter J(20)(21), Hovatta I(18), Roussos
P(11)(12)(13)(14)(15)(16)(41), Daly MJ(4)(5)(6)(19), Mors O(8)(42), Palotie
A(4), Børglum AD(43)(44)(45).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
tda@biomed.au.dk.
(2)The Lundbeck Foundation Initiative for Integrative Psychiatric Research,
iPSYCH, Aarhus, Denmark. tda@biomed.au.dk.
(3)Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine, Aarhus, Denmark.
tda@biomed.au.dk.
(4)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland.
(5)Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Department of Medicine,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(7)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(8)The Lundbeck Foundation Initiative for Integrative Psychiatric Research,
iPSYCH, Aarhus, Denmark.
(9)Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine, Aarhus, Denmark.
(10)Bioinformatics Research Centre, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(11)Center for Disease Neurogenomics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
New York, NY, USA.
(12)Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
NY, USA.
(13)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(14)Icahn Institute for Data Science and Genomic Technology, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(15)Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
NY, USA.
(16)Mental Illness Research, Education, and Clinical Center (VISN 2 South),
James J Peters VA Medical Center, Bronx, NY, USA.
(17)Nash Family Department of Neuroscience, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(18)Department of Psychology and Logopedics, SleepWell Research Program,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(19)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(20)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School
of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(21)Department of Psychiatry, Veterans Affairs Connecticut Healthcare Center,
West Haven, CT, USA.
(22)Center for Neonatal Screening, Department for Congenital Disorders, Statens
Serum Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(23)Mental Health Centre Sct. Hans, Capital Region of Denmark, Institute of
Biological Psychiatry, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(24)Department of Evolutionary Biology, Ecology and Environmental Sciences,
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(25)deCODE Genetics/Amgen, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(26)National Centre for Register-Based Research (NCRR), Business and Social
Sciences, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(27)Department of Affective Disorders, Aarhus University Hospital-Psychiatry,
Aarhus, Denmark.
(28)The Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(29)National Centre for Register-Based Research, Aarhus University, Aarhus,
Denmark.
(30)Queensland Centre for Mental Health Research, The Park Centre for Mental
Health, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(31)Queensland Brain Institute, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland,
Australia.
(32)Institute of Psychiatric Phenomics and Genomics (IPPG), University Hospital,
LMU Munich, Munich, Germany.
(33)Department of Community Health and Epidemiology, Dalhousie University,
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(34)Faculty of Computer Science, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia,
Canada.
(35)Department of Psychiatry, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia,
Canada.
(36)Centre for Integrated Register-based Research, CIRRAU, Aarhus University,
Aarhus, Denmark.
(37)Mental Health Centre Copenhagen, Capital Region of Denmark, Copenhagen
University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(38)Institute of Clinical Sciences and GLOBE Institute, LF Center for
GeoGenetics, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(39)Psychiatry Service, VA San Diego Healthcare System, San Diego, CA, USA.
(40)Departments of Psychiatry and Herbert Wertheim School of Public Health,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(41)Center for Dementia Research, Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric
Research, Orangeburg, NY, USA.
(42)Psychosis Research Unit, Aarhus University Hospital-Psychiatry, Aarhus,
Denmark.
(43)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
anders@biomed.au.dk.
(44)The Lundbeck Foundation Initiative for Integrative Psychiatric Research,
iPSYCH, Aarhus, Denmark. anders@biomed.au.dk.
(45)Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine, Aarhus, Denmark.
anders@biomed.au.dk.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2023 Aug;55(8):1253. doi: 10.1038/s41588-023-01482-z.

Depression is a common psychiatric disorder and a leading cause of disability
worldwide. Here we conducted a genome-wide association study meta-analysis of
six datasets, including >1.3 million individuals (371,184 with depression) and
identified 243 risk loci. Overall, 64 loci were new, including genes encoding
glutamate and GABA receptors, which are targets for antidepressant drugs.
Intersection with functional genomics data prioritized likely causal genes and
revealed new enrichment of prenatal GABAergic neurons, astrocytes and
oligodendrocyte lineages. We found depression to be highly polygenic, with
~11,700 variants explaining 90% of the single-nucleotide polymorphism
heritability, estimating that >95% of risk variants for other psychiatric
disorders (anxiety, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder) were influencing depression risk when both concordant
and discordant variants were considered, and nearly all depression risk variants
influenced educational attainment. Additionally, depression genetic risk was
associated with impaired complex cognition domains. We dissected the genetic and
clinical heterogeneity, revealing distinct polygenic architectures across
subgroups of depression and demonstrating significantly increased absolute risks
for recurrence and psychiatric comorbidity among cases of depression with the
highest polygenic burden, with considerable sex differences. The risks were up
to 5- and 32-fold higher than cases with the lowest polygenic burden and the
background population, respectively. These results deepen the understanding of
the biology underlying depression, its disease progression and inform precision
medicine approaches to treatment.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature America, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s41591-023-02352-1
PMCID: PMC10839245
PMID: 37464041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: B.J.V. is a member of the advisory board for
Allelica. D.D. has received a speaker fee from Takeda. B.W., T.T., H.S. and K.S.
are employed at deCODE/Amgen. M.J.D. is a founder of Maze Therapeutics and on
the Scientific Advisory Board of RBNC Therapeutics. The other authors declare no
competing interests.
