---
reference_id: "PMID:11432814"
title: "Whipple's disease and \"Tropheryma whippelii\"."
authors:
- Dutly F
- Altwegg M
journal: Clin Microbiol Rev
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1128/CMR.14.3.561-583.2001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whipple's disease and "Tropheryma whippelii".
**Authors:** Dutly F, Altwegg M
**Journal:** Clin Microbiol Rev (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1128/CMR.14.3.561-583.2001](https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.14.3.561-583.2001)

## Content

1. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2001 Jul;14(3):561-83. doi: 10.1128/CMR.14.3.561-583.2001.

Whipple's disease and "Tropheryma whippelii".

Dutly F(1), Altwegg M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Zürich, CH-8028 Zürich, 
Switzerland. dutly.imd@bluewin.ch

Whipple's disease is a rare bacterial infection that may involve any organ 
system in the body. It occurs primarily in Caucasian males older than 40 years. 
The gastrointestinal tract is the most frequently involved organ, with 
manifestations such as abdominal pain, malabsorption syndrome with diarrhea, and 
weight loss. Other signs include low-grade fever, lymphadenopathy, skin 
hyperpigmentation, endocarditis, pleuritis, seronegative arthritis, uveitis, 
spondylodiscitis, and neurological manifestations, and these signs may occur in 
the absence of gastrointestinal manifestations. Due to the wide variability of 
manifestations, clinical diagnosis is very difficult and is often made only 
years or even decades after the initial symptoms have appeared. 
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole for at least 1 year is usually considered adequate 
to eradicate the infection. The microbiological diagnosis of this insidious 
disease is rendered difficult by the virtual lack of culture and serodiagnostic 
methods. It is usually based on the demonstration of periodic 
acid-Schiff-positive particles in infected tissues and/or the presence of 
bacteria with an unusual trilaminar cell wall ultrastructure by electron 
microscopy. Recently, the Whipple bacteria have been characterized at the 
molecular level by amplification of their 16S rRNA gene(s). Phylogenetic 
analysis of these sequences revealed a new bacterial species related to the 
actinomycete branch which was named "Tropheryma whippelli." Based on its unique 
16S ribosomal DNA (rDNA) sequence, species-specific primers were selected for 
the detection of the organism in clinical specimens by PCR. This technique is 
currently used as one of the standard methods for establishing the diagnosis of 
Whipple's disease. Specific and broad-spectrum PCR amplifications mainly but not 
exclusively from extraintestinal specimens have significantly improved 
diagnosis, being more sensitive than histopathologic analysis. However, "T. 
whippelii" DNA has also been found in persons without clinical and histological 
evidence of Whipple's disease. It is unclear whether these patients are true 
asymptomatic carriers or whether differences in virulence exist among strains of 
"T. whippelii" that might account for the variable clinical manifestations. So 
far, six different "T. whippelii" subtypes have been found by analysis of their 
16S-23S rDNA spacer region. Further studies of the pathogen "T. whippelii" as 
well as the host immune response are needed to fully understand this fascinating 
disease. The recent cultivation of the organisms is a promising major step in 
this direction.

DOI: 10.1128/CMR.14.3.561-583.2001
PMCID: PMC88990
PMID: 11432814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]