---
reference_id: "PMID:36448839"
title: Redistribution of the Novel Clostridioides difficile Spore Adherence Receptor E-Cadherin by TcdA and TcdB Increases Spore Binding to Adherens Junctions.
authors:
- Castro-Córdova P
- Otto-Medina M
- Montes-Bravo N
- Brito-Silva C
- Lacy DB
- Paredes-Sabja D
journal: Infect Immun
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1128/iai.00476-22
keywords:
- Humans
- Adherens Junctions
- Bacterial Proteins/metabolism
- Bacterial Toxins/metabolism
- Clostridioides
- Clostridioides difficile
- "Spores, Bacterial"
- Cadherins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Redistribution of the Novel Clostridioides difficile Spore Adherence Receptor E-Cadherin by TcdA and TcdB Increases Spore Binding to Adherens Junctions.
**Authors:** Castro-Córdova P, Otto-Medina M, Montes-Bravo N, Brito-Silva C, Lacy DB, Paredes-Sabja D
**Journal:** Infect Immun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1128/iai.00476-22](https://doi.org/10.1128/iai.00476-22)

## Content

1. Infect Immun. 2023 Jan 24;91(1):e0047622. doi: 10.1128/iai.00476-22. Epub 2022
 Nov 30.

Redistribution of the Novel Clostridioides difficile Spore Adherence Receptor 
E-Cadherin by TcdA and TcdB Increases Spore Binding to Adherens Junctions.

Castro-Córdova P(#)(1), Otto-Medina M(#)(2), Montes-Bravo N(#)(1), Brito-Silva 
C(1), Lacy DB(3), Paredes-Sabja D(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)ANID-Millennium Science Initiative Program-Millennium Nucleus in the Biology 
of the Intestinal Microbiota, Santiago, Chile.
(2)Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias de la Vida, 
Universidad Andrés Bello, Santiago, Chile.
(3)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University 
School of Medicinegrid.471397.f, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(4)Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Clostridioides difficile causes antibiotic-associated diseases in humans, 
ranging from mild diarrhea to severe pseudomembranous colitis and death. A major 
clinical challenge is the prevention of disease recurrence, which affects nearly 
~20 to 30% of the patients with a primary C. difficile infection (CDI). During 
CDI, C. difficile forms metabolically dormant spores that are essential for 
recurrence of CDI (R-CDI). In prior studies, we have shown that C. difficile 
spores interact with intestinal epithelial cells (IECs), which contribute to 
R-CDI. However, this interaction remains poorly understood. Here, we provide 
evidence that C. difficile spores interact with E-cadherin, contributing to 
spore adherence and internalization into IECs. C. difficile toxins TcdA and TcdB 
lead to adherens junctions opening and increase spore adherence to IECs. 
Confocal micrographs demonstrate that C. difficile spores associate with 
accessible E-cadherin; spore-E-cadherin association increases upon TcdA and TcdB 
intoxication. The presence of anti-E-cadherin antibodies decreased spore 
adherence and entry into IECs. By enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), 
immunofluorescence, and immunogold labeling, we observed that E-cadherin binds 
to C. difficile spores, specifically to the hairlike projections of the spore, 
reducing spore adherence to IECs. Overall, these results expand our knowledge of 
how C. difficile spores bind to IECs by providing evidence that E-cadherin acts 
as a spore adherence receptor to IECs and by revealing how toxin-mediated damage 
affects spore interactions with IECs.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.00476-22
PMCID: PMC9872679
PMID: 36448839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.