---
reference_id: "PMID:26921540"
title: "Multicenter Evaluation of a Novel Automated Rapid Detection System of BRAF Status in Formalin-Fixed, Paraffin-Embedded Tissues."
authors:
- Schiefer AI
- Parlow L
- Gabler L
- Mesteri I
- Koperek O
- von Deimling A
- Streubel B
- Preusser M
- Lehmann A
- Kellner U
- Pauwels P
- Lambin S
- Dietel M
- Hummel M
- Klauschen F
- Birner P
- Möbs M
journal: J Mol Diagn
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2015.12.005
keywords:
- "DNA Mutational Analysis/methods, standards"
- "Genetic Testing/methods, standards"
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- "Melanoma/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Molecular Diagnostic Techniques/methods, standards"
- Mutation
- Paraffin Embedding
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Reproducibility of Results
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- Tissue Fixation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multicenter Evaluation of a Novel Automated Rapid Detection System of BRAF Status in Formalin-Fixed, Paraffin-Embedded Tissues.
**Authors:** Schiefer AI, Parlow L, Gabler L, Mesteri I, Koperek O, von Deimling A, Streubel B, Preusser M, Lehmann A, Kellner U, Pauwels P, Lambin S, Dietel M, Hummel M, Klauschen F, Birner P, Möbs M
**Journal:** J Mol Diagn (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmoldx.2015.12.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmoldx.2015.12.005)

## Content

1. J Mol Diagn. 2016 May;18(3):370-377. doi: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2015.12.005. Epub
2016 Feb 24.

Multicenter Evaluation of a Novel Automated Rapid Detection System of BRAF
Status in Formalin-Fixed, Paraffin-Embedded Tissues.

Schiefer AI(1), Parlow L(2), Gabler L(1), Mesteri I(3), Koperek O(1), von
Deimling A(4), Streubel B(5), Preusser M(6), Lehmann A(2), Kellner U(7), Pauwels
P(8), Lambin S(8), Dietel M(2), Hummel M(9), Klauschen F(2), Birner P(10), Möbs
M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Institute of Pathology, Charité-Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Institute of Pathology, Überlingen, Germany.
(4)Department of Neuropathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Heidelberg, and Clinical Cooperation Unit Neuropathology, DKFZ and DKTK,
Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria.
(6)Division of Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine I, Comprehensive Cancer
Center Vienna, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(7)Department of Pathology, Johannes Wesling Klinikum Minden, Minden, Germany.
(8)Department of Pathology, Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium.
(9)Institute of Pathology, Charité-Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
Electronic address: michael.hummel@charite.de.
(10)Department of Pathology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
Electronic address: peter.birner@meduniwien.ac.at.

The mutated BRAF oncogene represents a therapeutic target in malignant melanoma.
Because BRAF mutations are also involved in the pathogenesis of other human
malignancies, the use of specific BRAF inhibitors might also be extended to
other diseases in the future. A prerequisite for the clinical application of
BRAF inhibitors is the reliable detection of activating BRAF mutations in
routine histopathological samples. In a multicenter approach, we evaluated a
novel and fully automated PCR-based system (Idylla) capable of detecting BRAF
V600 mutations in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue within 90 minutes
with high sensitivity. We analyzed a total of 436 samples with the Idylla
system. Valid results were obtained in 421 cases (96.56%). Its performance was
compared with conventional methods (pyrosequencing or Sanger sequencing).
Concordant results were obtained in 406 cases (96.90%). Reanalysis of eight
discordant samples by next-generation sequencing and/or pyrosequencing with
newly extracted DNA and the BRAF RGQ Kit confirmed the Idylla result in seven
cases, resulting in an overall agreement of 98.57%. In conclusion, the Idylla
system is a highly reliable and sensitive platform for detection of BRAF V600
mutations in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded material, providing an efficient
alternative to conventional diagnostic methods, particularly for routine
diagnostics laboratories with limited experience in molecular pathology.

Copyright © 2016 American Society for Investigative Pathology and the
Association for Molecular Pathology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2015.12.005
PMID: 26921540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
