---
reference_id: "PMID:29631795"
title: Autoimmune Addison's disease - An update on pathogenesis.
authors:
- Hellesen A
- Bratland E
- Husebye ES
journal: Ann Endocrinol (Paris)
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.ando.2018.03.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmune Addison's disease - An update on pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Hellesen A, Bratland E, Husebye ES
**Journal:** Ann Endocrinol (Paris) (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ando.2018.03.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ando.2018.03.008)

## Content

1. Ann Endocrinol (Paris). 2018 Jun;79(3):157-163. doi:
10.1016/j.ando.2018.03.008.  Epub 2018 Apr 7.

Autoimmune Addison's disease - An update on pathogenesis.

Hellesen A(1), Bratland E(1), Husebye ES(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, 5021 Bergen, Norway; 
K.G. Jebsen Senter for Autoimmune Sykdommer, University of Bergen, 5021 Bergen, 
Norway.
(2)Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, 5021 Bergen, Norway; 
K.G. Jebsen Senter for Autoimmune Sykdommer, University of Bergen, 5021 Bergen, 
Norway; Department of Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, 5021 Bergen, 
Norway; Department of Medicine (Solna), Karolinska Institutet, 17176 Stockholm, 
Sweden. Electronic address: Eystein.Husebye@uib.no.

Autoimmunity against the adrenal cortex is the leading cause of Addison's 
disease in industrialized countries, with prevalence estimates ranging from 
93-220 per million in Europe. The immune-mediated attack on adrenocortical cells 
cripples their ability to synthesize vital steroid hormones and necessitates 
life-long hormone replacement therapy. The autoimmune disease etiology is 
multifactorial involving variants in immune genes and environmental factors. 
Recently, we have come to appreciate that the adrenocortical cell itself is an 
active player in the autoimmune process. Here we summarize the complex interplay 
between the immune system and the adrenal cortex and highlight unanswered 
questions and gaps in our current understanding of the disease.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ando.2018.03.008
PMID: 29631795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]