---
reference_id: "PMID:11078593"
title: "Liquid chromatographic assay for a glucose tetrasaccharide, a putative biomarker for the diagnosis of Pompe disease."
authors:
- An Y
- Young SP
- Hillman SL
- Van Hove JL
- Chen YT
- Millington DS
journal: Anal Biochem
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1006/abio.2000.4838
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Biomarkers/analysis
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid/methods"
- "Chromatography, Liquid/methods"
- Female
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type II/diagnosis, metabolism"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Oligosaccharides/analysis
- Sensitivity and Specificity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liquid chromatographic assay for a glucose tetrasaccharide, a putative biomarker for the diagnosis of Pompe disease.
**Authors:** An Y, Young SP, Hillman SL, Van Hove JL, Chen YT, Millington DS
**Journal:** Anal Biochem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1006/abio.2000.4838](https://doi.org/10.1006/abio.2000.4838)

## Content

1. Anal Biochem. 2000 Dec 1;287(1):136-43. doi: 10.1006/abio.2000.4838.

Liquid chromatographic assay for a glucose tetrasaccharide, a putative biomarker
for the diagnosis of Pompe disease.

An Y(1), Young SP, Hillman SL, Van Hove JL, Chen YT, Millington DS.

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University
Medical Center, 99 TW Alexander Drive, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina
27709, USA.

A HPLC method associated with butyl-p-aminobenzoate derivatization has been
developed for the analysis of a tetraglucose oligomer,
Glcalpha1-6Glcalpha1-4Glcalpha1-4Glc, designated Glc(4), in biological fluids.
This tetraglucose, normally excreted in the urine, has previously been shown to
be elevated in a number of pathological conditions including Pompe disease
(glycogen storage disease type II), which is caused by a deficiency of the
lysosomal enzyme acid alpha-glucosidase. Concentrations of Glc(4) in both urine
and plasma were established for the age ranges of <1, 1-5, 6-10, 11-20, and >20
years, both in normal individuals and in a cohort of 21 patients with
enzymatically confirmed Pompe disease. The Glc(4) concentration decreased with
age in both groups, but all the patients had elevated Glc(4) levels compared
with age-matched controls. Electrospray tandem mass spectrometry was employed to
establish the homogeneity of the HPLC peak for Glc(4) and to investigate the
identity of other unusual oligosaccharides excreted in patient urine. Our
results demonstrate that this method is suitable for application in clinical
laboratories to help establish the diagnosis of Pompe disease.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/abio.2000.4838
PMID: 11078593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
