---
reference_id: "PMID:15629767"
title: Evidence of multiple recombination events between two RNA sequence variants within a Citrus tristeza virus isolate.
authors:
- Vives MC
- Rubio L
- Sambade A
- Mirkov TE
- Moreno P
- Guerri J
journal: Virology
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2004.10.037
keywords:
- Citrus/virology
- Genetic Variation
- "Genome, Viral"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational"
- "RNA, Double-Stranded/genetics"
- "RNA, Viral/analysis, genetics"
- "Recombination, Genetic"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evidence of multiple recombination events between two RNA sequence variants within a Citrus tristeza virus isolate.
**Authors:** Vives MC, Rubio L, Sambade A, Mirkov TE, Moreno P, Guerri J
**Journal:** Virology (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.virol.2004.10.037](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.virol.2004.10.037)

## Content

1. Virology. 2005 Jan 20;331(2):232-7. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2004.10.037.

Evidence of multiple recombination events between two RNA sequence variants 
within a Citrus tristeza virus isolate.

Vives MC(1), Rubio L, Sambade A, Mirkov TE, Moreno P, Guerri J.

Author information:
(1)Instituto Valenciano de Investigaciones Agrarias, Ctra. Moncada-Náquera Km. 
4.5, 46113 Moncada, Valencia, Spain.

Analysis of sequence variants of a natural Citrus tristeza virus (CTV) isolate 
(SY568) revealed that its population was composed of three sequence types: (I) 
the most frequent type had > or =97.9% nucleotide identity with the sequence 
predominant in severe CTV isolates from different origins; (II) a second 
variant, genetically close to the major component of several mild isolates, had 
< or =85% identity with the first; and (III) several variants (less than 4%) 
resulted from homologous recombination at one or more sites between sequences I 
and II. Recombination sites had an AU-rich stretch of 8-89 nucleotides shared by 
both parental sequences, flanked by GC- and AU-rich regions upstream and 
downstream, respectively. This context has been suggested as a hot-spot for 
homologous recombination in other RNA viruses.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2004.10.037
PMID: 15629767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]