---
reference_id: "PMID:26911542"
title: "Cronkhite-Canada syndrome: a rare case report and literature review."
authors:
- Zhao R
- Huang M
- Banafea O
- Zhao J
- Cheng L
- Zou K
- Zhu L
journal: BMC Gastroenterol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s12876-016-0436-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cronkhite-Canada syndrome: a rare case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Zhao R, Huang M, Banafea O, Zhao J, Cheng L, Zou K, Zhu L
**Journal:** BMC Gastroenterol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12876-016-0436-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12876-016-0436-1)

## Content

1. BMC Gastroenterol. 2016 Feb 25;16:23. doi: 10.1186/s12876-016-0436-1.

Cronkhite-Canada syndrome: a rare case report and literature review.

Zhao R(1), Huang M(2), Banafea O(3), Zhao J(4), Cheng L(5), Zou K(6), Zhu L(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430022, P. R. China. 
Zhaoruifeng08@sina.com.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430022, P. R. China. 
ppvictory@yahoo.com.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430022, P. R. China. 
banafaomar@yahoo.com.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430022, P. R. China. 
zhaojinfang13@163.com.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430022, P. R. China. 
lingcheng1991@126.com.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430022, P. R. China. 
zoukaifang06@sina.com.
(7)Department of Gastroenterology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430022, P. R. China. 
zhuliangru05@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Cronkhite-Canada Syndrome (CCS) is a rare non-inherited disease 
characterized by gastrointestinal polyposis and ectodermal abnormalities, the 
estimated incidence is about one per million. Recognizing and curing the 
disorder face great challenge.
CASE PRESENTATION: This report refers to a Chinese 52 year old man with 
gastrointestinal symptoms and ectodermal abnormalities. Gastrointestinal 
symptoms occurred without obvious cause, followed by ectodermal abnormalities 
after two months. In several hospitals, endoscopy examinations found numerous 
polypoid lesions in various sizes spreading over the stomach and the entire 
colon and rectum, histopathological examinations showed inflammatory and 
adenomatous polyp. In our hospital, both endoscopy and the contrast-enhanced 
computed tomography (CT) of small intestine showed gastrointestinal polyposis. 
Gastric antrum and the colon biopsy samples suggested hyperplastic and 
inflammatory polyp respectively. Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) suggested 
gastric wall thickening. Fujinnon intelligent color enhancement (FICE) revealed 
that the size of gastric glands pit varied, and vessels were visible. Confocal 
endoscope showed increased glandular epithelium layers. Magnifying narrow-band 
imaging endoscopy (ME-NBI) detected that pit pattern in the mucous of the polyp 
were regular and type III-IV of microvessels were seen. Biochemical 
investigations showed anemia, hypoalbuminemia and electrolyte disturbance. IgG, 
IgA and C3 decreased. Anti-ribosomal phosphoprotein is weak positive. The 
patient was given nutritional support treatment. Gstrointestinal symptoms and 
hyperpigmentation improved gradually.
CONCLUSION: The patient was ever hospitalized in four hospitals and was 
diagnosed with CCS after 8 months of gastrointestinal symptoms. So when 
encountering the patient with gastrointestinal polyposis and ectodermal 
abnormalities, try to take CCS into consideration. Due to its low incidence, no 
standard therapy regimen has been established so far. However, nutritional 
support treatment is of great significance.

DOI: 10.1186/s12876-016-0436-1
PMCID: PMC4766628
PMID: 26911542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]