---
reference_id: "PMID:36635328"
title: "Clinical characteristics of Campylobacter bacteremia: a multicenter retrospective study."
authors:
- Otsuka Y
- Hagiya H
- Takahashi M
- Fukushima S
- Maeda R
- Sunada N
- Yamada H
- Kishida M
- Fujita K
- Otsuka F
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-27330-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical characteristics of Campylobacter bacteremia: a multicenter retrospective study.
**Authors:** Otsuka Y, Hagiya H, Takahashi M, Fukushima S, Maeda R, Sunada N, Yamada H, Kishida M, Fujita K, Otsuka F
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-022-27330-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-27330-4)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2023 Jan 12;13(1):647. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-27330-4.

Clinical characteristics of Campylobacter bacteremia: a multicenter 
retrospective study.

Otsuka Y(1)(2), Hagiya H(3), Takahashi M(1), Fukushima S(1)(4), Maeda R(1)(2), 
Sunada N(1), Yamada H(5), Kishida M(2), Fujita K(4), Otsuka F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Medicine, Okayama University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata-Cho, Kita-Ku, 
Okayama, 700-8558, Japan.
(2)Department of General Internal Medicine, Okayama City Hospital, Okayama, 
Japan.
(3)Department of General Medicine, Okayama University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata-Cho, Kita-Ku, 
Okayama, 700-8558, Japan. hagiya@okayama-u.ac.jp.
(4)Department of General Medicine and Infectious Disease, Tsuyama Chuo Hospital, 
Tsuyama, Japan.
(5)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Okayama City Hospital, Okayama, Japan.

Campylobacter species are the pathogens of the intestinal tract, which 
infrequently cause bacteremia. To reveal the clinical characteristics of 
Campylobacter bacteremia, we performed a retrospective, multicenter study. 
Patients diagnosed with Campylobacter bacteremia in three general hospitals in 
western Japan between 2011 and 2021 were included in the study. Clinical, 
microbiological, and prognostic data of the patients were obtained from medical 
records. We stratified the cases into the gastroenteritis (GE) and fever 
predominant (FP) types by focusing on the presence of gastrointestinal symptoms. 
Thirty-nine patients (24 men and 15 women) were included, with a median age of 
57 years and bimodal distribution between those in their 20 s and the elderly. 
The proportion of GE and FP types were 21 (53.8%) and 18 (46.2%), respectively. 
Comparing these two groups, there was no significant difference in patient 
backgrounds in terms of sex, age, and underlying diseases. Campylobacter jejuni 
was exclusively identified in the GE type (19 cases, 90.5%), although other 
species such as Campylobacter fetus and Campylobacter coli were isolated in the 
FP type as well. Patients with the FP type underwent intravenous antibiotic 
therapy more frequently (47.6% vs. 88.9%), and their treatment (median: 5 days 
vs. 13 days) and hospitalization (median: 7 days vs. 21 days) periods were 
significantly longer. None of the patients died during the hospitalization. In 
summary, we found that nearly half of the patients with Campylobacter bacteremia 
presented with fever as a predominant manifestation without gastroenteritis 
symptoms.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-27330-4
PMCID: PMC9837072
PMID: 36635328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.