---
reference_id: "PMID:33060816"
title: "Malignant peritoneal mesothelioma: prognostic significance of clinical and pathologic parameters and validation of a nuclear-grading system in a multi-institutional series of 225 cases."
authors:
- Chapel DB
- Schulte JJ
- Absenger G
- Attanoos R
- Brcic L
- Butnor KJ
- Chirieac L
- Churg A
- Galateau-Sallé F
- Hiroshima K
- Hung YP
- Kindler H
- Krausz T
- Marchevsky A
- Mino-Kenudson M
- Mueller J
- Nabeshima K
- Turaga K
- Walts AE
- Husain AN
journal: Mod Pathol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41379-020-00688-4
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis"
- Cell Nucleus/pathology
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Mesothelioma, Malignant/pathology"
- Middle Aged
- Mitotic Index
- Neoplasm Grading/methods
- Peritoneal Neoplasms/pathology
- Prognosis
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Malignant peritoneal mesothelioma: prognostic significance of clinical and pathologic parameters and validation of a nuclear-grading system in a multi-institutional series of 225 cases.
**Authors:** Chapel DB, Schulte JJ, Absenger G, Attanoos R, Brcic L, Butnor KJ, Chirieac L, Churg A, Galateau-Sallé F, Hiroshima K, Hung YP, Kindler H, Krausz T, Marchevsky A, Mino-Kenudson M, Mueller J, Nabeshima K, Turaga K, Walts AE, Husain AN
**Journal:** Mod Pathol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41379-020-00688-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41379-020-00688-4)

## Content

1. Mod Pathol. 2021 Feb;34(2):380-395. doi: 10.1038/s41379-020-00688-4. Epub 2020
 Oct 15.

Malignant peritoneal mesothelioma: prognostic significance of clinical and
pathologic parameters and validation of a nuclear-grading system in a
multi-institutional series of 225 cases.

Chapel DB(1)(2), Schulte JJ(3)(4), Absenger G(5), Attanoos R(6), Brcic L(7),
Butnor KJ(8), Chirieac L(9), Churg A(10), Galateau-Sallé F(11), Hiroshima K(12),
Hung YP(13), Kindler H(14), Krausz T(3), Marchevsky A(15), Mino-Kenudson M(13),
Mueller J(3), Nabeshima K(16), Turaga K(17), Walts AE(15), Husain AN(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
dchapel@bwh.harvard.edu.
(2)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA. dchapel@bwh.harvard.edu.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.
(5)Division of Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Medical University of
Graz, Auenbruggerplatz 15, 8036, Graz, Austria.
(6)Department of Cellular Pathology, University Hospital of Wales and School of
Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, Wales, UK.
(7)Diagnostic and Research Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz,
Neue Stiftingtalstrasse 6, 8010, Graz, Austria.
(8)Department of Pathology, University of Vermont Medical Center, Burlington,
VT, USA.
(9)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(10)Department of Pathology, Vancouver General Hospital and University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(11)Centre National Référent MESOPATH, Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France.
(12)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, Chiba University Graduate School of
Medicine, Chiba, Japan.
(13)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(14)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(15)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(16)Department of Pathology, Fukuoka University School of Medicine and Hospital,
Jonan-ku, Fukuoka, Japan.
(17)Department of Surgery, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

Malignant peritoneal mesothelioma historically carried a grim prognosis, but
outcomes have improved substantially in recent decades. The prognostic
significance of clinical, morphologic, and immunophenotypic features remains
ill-defined. This multi-institutional cohort comprises 225 malignant peritoneal
mesotheliomas, which were assessed for 21 clinical, morphologic, and
immunohistochemical parameters. For epithelioid mesotheliomas, combining nuclear
pleomorphism and mitotic index yielded a composite nuclear grade, using a
previously standardized grading system. Correlation of clinical, morphologic,
and immunohistochemical parameters with overall and disease-free survival was
examined by univariate and multivariate analyses. On univariate analysis, longer
overall survival was significantly associated with diagnosis after 2000
(P = 0.0001), age <60 years (P = 0.0001), ECOG performance status 0 or 1
(P = 0.01), absence of radiographic lymph-node metastasis (P = 0.04),
cytoreduction surgery (P < 0.0001), hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy
(P = 0.0001), peritoneal carcinomatosis index <27 (P = 0.01), absence of
necrosis (P = 0.007), and epithelioid histotype (P < 0.0001). Among epithelioid
malignant mesotheliomas only, longer overall survival was further associated
with female sex (P = 0.03), tubulopapillary architecture (P = 0.005), low
nuclear pleomorphism (P < 0.0001), low mitotic index (P = 0.0007), and low
composite nuclear grade (P < 0.0001). On multivariate analyses, the low
composite nuclear grade was independently associated with longer overall and
disease-free survival (P < 0.0001). Our data further clarify the interactions of
clinical and pathologic features in peritoneal mesothelioma prognosis and
validate the prognostic significance of a standardized nuclear-grading system in
epithelioid malignant mesothelioma of the peritoneum.

DOI: 10.1038/s41379-020-00688-4
PMID: 33060816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
