---
reference_id: "PMID:36246085"
title: Modelling polycystic liver disease progression using age-adjusted liver volumes and targeted mutational analysis.
authors:
- Sierks D
- Schönauer R
- Friedrich A
- Hantmann E
- de Fallois J
- Linder N
- Fischer J
- Herber A
- Bergmann C
- Berg T
- Halbritter J
journal: JHEP Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jhepr.2022.100579
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modelling polycystic liver disease progression using age-adjusted liver volumes and targeted mutational analysis.
**Authors:** Sierks D, Schönauer R, Friedrich A, Hantmann E, de Fallois J, Linder N, Fischer J, Herber A, Bergmann C, Berg T, Halbritter J
**Journal:** JHEP Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jhepr.2022.100579](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhepr.2022.100579)

## Content

1. JHEP Rep. 2022 Sep 8;4(11):100579. doi: 10.1016/j.jhepr.2022.100579.
eCollection  2022 Nov.

Modelling polycystic liver disease progression using age-adjusted liver volumes
and targeted mutational analysis.

Sierks D(1), Schönauer R(2)(1), Friedrich A(3), Hantmann E(2), de Fallois J(1),
Linder N(4), Fischer J(5), Herber A(5), Bergmann C(3), Berg T(5), Halbritter
J(2)(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Leipzig University
Medical Center, Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Division of Nephrology and Internal Intensive Care Medicine, Charité -
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin and
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Medizinische Genetik Mainz, Limbach Genetics, Mainz, Germany.
(4)Department of Radiology, Leipzig University Medical Center, Germany.
(5)Division of Hepatology, Department of Medicine II, Leipzig University Medical
Center, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Polycystic liver disease (PLD) manifests as numerous
fluid-filled cysts scattered throughout the liver parenchyma. PLD most commonly
develops in females, either as an extra-renal manifestation of
autosomal-dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) or as isolated
autosomal-dominant polycystic liver disease (ADPLD). Despite known genetic
causes, clinical variability challenges patient counselling and timely risk
prediction is hampered by a lack of genotype-phenotype correlations and
prognostic imaging classifications.
METHODS: We performed targeted next-generation sequencing and multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification to identify the underlying genetic defect
in a cohort of 80 deeply characterized patients with PLD. Identified genotypes
were correlated with total liver and kidney volume (assessed by CT or MRI),
organ function, co-morbidities, and clinical endpoints.
RESULTS: Monoallelic diagnostic variants were identified in 60 (75%) patients,
38 (48%) of which pertained to ADPKD-gene variants (PKD1, PKD2, GANAB) and 22
(27%) to ADPLD-gene variants (PRKCSH, SEC63). Disease severity defined by age at
waitlisting for liver transplantation and first PLD-related hospitalization was
significantly more pronounced in mutation carriers compared to patients without
genetic diagnoses. While current imaging classifications proved unable to
differentiate between severe and moderate courses, grouping by estimated
age-adjusted total liver volume progression yielded significant risk
discrimination.
CONCLUSION: This study underlines the predictive value of providing a molecular
diagnosis for patients with PLD. In addition, we propose a novel
risk-classification model based on age- and height-adjusted total liver volume
that could improve individual prognostication and personalized clinical
management.
LAY SUMMARY: Polycystic liver disease (PLD) is a highly variable condition that
can be asymptomatic or severe. However, it is currently difficult to predict
clinical outcomes such as hospitalization, symptom burden, and need for
transplantation in individual patients. In the current study, we aimed to
investigate the clinical value of genetic confirmation and an age-adjusted total
liver volume classification for individual disease prediction. While genetic
confirmation generally pointed to more severe disease, estimated age-adjusted
increases in liver volume could be useful for predicting clinical outcomes.

© 2022 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhepr.2022.100579
PMCID: PMC9563211
PMID: 36246085

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare not conflict of interest
concerning the content of this manuscript. Please refer to the accompanying
ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.
