---
reference_id: "PMID:36936380"
title: "Development of a Cystic Fibrosis Primary Palliative Care Intervention: Qualitative Analysis of Patient and Family Caregiver Preferences."
authors:
- Basile MJ
- Dhingra L
- DiFiglia S
- Polo J
- Portenoy R
- Wang J
- Walker P
- Middour-Oxler B
- Linnemann RW
- Kier C
- Friedman D
- Berdella M
- Abdullah R
- Yonker LM
- Markovitz M
- Hadjiliadis D
- Shiffman M
- Fischer F
- Pollinger S
- Hardcastle M
- Chaudhary N
- Georgiopoulos AM
journal: J Patient Exp
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1177/23743735231161486
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Development of a Cystic Fibrosis Primary Palliative Care Intervention: Qualitative Analysis of Patient and Family Caregiver Preferences.
**Authors:** Basile MJ, Dhingra L, DiFiglia S, Polo J, Portenoy R, Wang J, Walker P, Middour-Oxler B, Linnemann RW, Kier C, Friedman D, Berdella M, Abdullah R, Yonker LM, Markovitz M, Hadjiliadis D, Shiffman M, Fischer F, Pollinger S, Hardcastle M, Chaudhary N, Georgiopoulos AM
**Journal:** J Patient Exp (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1177/23743735231161486](https://doi.org/10.1177/23743735231161486)

## Content

1. J Patient Exp. 2023 Mar 15;10:23743735231161486. doi:
10.1177/23743735231161486.  eCollection 2023.

Development of a Cystic Fibrosis Primary Palliative Care Intervention: 
Qualitative Analysis of Patient and Family Caregiver Preferences.

Basile MJ(1), Dhingra L(2)(3), DiFiglia S(2), Polo J(1), Portenoy R(2)(4), Wang 
J(5), Walker P(6), Middour-Oxler B(7)(8), Linnemann RW(7)(8), Kier C(9), 
Friedman D(10)(11), Berdella M(6), Abdullah R(9), Yonker LM(10)(12), Markovitz 
M(13), Hadjiliadis D(14), Shiffman M(15), Fischer F(15), Pollinger S(16), 
Hardcastle M(16), Chaudhary N(16), Georgiopoulos AM(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Feinstein Institutes for Medical Research, Northwell Health, New York, NY, 
USA.
(2)MJHS Institute for Innovation in Palliative Care, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Family and Social Medicine, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Family and Social Medicine, Department of Neurology, Albert 
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.
(5)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Donald and Barbara 
Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell, New Hyde Park, NY, USA.
(6)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York, NY, USA.
(7)Division of Pulmonary, Asthma, Cystic Fibrosis and Sleep, Department of 
Pediatrics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Stony Brook University Medical Center, Stony Brook, 
NY, USA.
(10)Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(11)Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(12)Pulmonary Division, Massachusetts General Hospital for Children, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(13)Keck Medicine of University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, 
USA (retired).
(14)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(15)Community Stakeholder, New York, NY, USA.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

To prevent or mitigate chronic illness burden, people with cystic fibrosis 
(pwCF) and their family caregivers need primary (generalist-level) palliative 
care from the time of diagnosis forward. We used qualitative methods to explore 
their preferences about a screening-and-triage model ("Improving Life with CF") 
developed to standardize this care. We purposively sampled and interviewed 14 
pwCF and caregivers from 5 Improving Life with CF study sites. Thematic analysis 
was guided by a priori codes using the National Consensus Project's Guidelines 
for Quality Palliative Care. Participants included 7 adults and 2 adolescents 
with CF (3 with advanced disease), 4 parents, 1 partner (7 women; 5 people of 
color). Few were familiar with palliative care. Illness burden was described in 
multiple domains, including physical (e.g., dyspnea, pain), psychological (e.g., 
anxiety), and social (e.g., family well-being; impact on work/school). Most 
preferred survey-based screening with care coordination by the CF team. 
Preferences for screening approaches varied. PwCF and caregivers experience 
illness burden and are receptive to a CF-team delivered primary palliative care 
screening-and-triage model with flexible processes.

© The Author(s) 2023.

DOI: 10.1177/23743735231161486
PMCID: PMC10021085
PMID: 36936380

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared the following potential 
conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or 
publication of this article: MJB receives research support from the Cystic 
Fibrosis Foundation in addition to the submitted work, and a grant from a 
federal source (AHRQ 1R03HS026970-01A1), outside the submitted work. LD receives 
research support from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation [GEORGI19QI0]. RP receives 
research support from NIH grants. JW reports grants from the Cystic Fibrosis 
Foundation (CFF); consultation fees from the Data Safety Monitoring Board of 
CFF, irrelevant to the submitted work. PW reports grants support from Cystic 
Fibrosis Foundation (CFF); consultation fees from Cystic Fibrosis Foundation 
(CFF); grant support from Vertex Pharmaceuticals, irrelevant to the submitted 
work. BMO reports grants from Cystic Fibrosis Foundation; consulting and travel 
reimbursement from CFF. RWL reports grants from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation 
and Vertex Pharmaceuticals; consulting fees and serving on advisory boards for 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals, outside of the submitted work. DF reports grants from 
the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (CFF), Dutch Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, and 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals, and travel reimbursement from the CFF. MB receives 
research support from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation [GEORGI19QI0]. DH reports 
grants from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (CFF), NIH; consulting fees from ADAM 
Medical review; personnel fees from global CF conference, Metropolitan Jewish 
Health System and Astra Zeneca advisory board. AMG reports personal fees and 
travel reimbursement from Cystic Fibrosis Australia; grants, personal fees, and 
travel reimbursement from Cystic Fibrosis Foundation; grants from the Dutch 
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation; travel reimbursement from the European Cystic 
Fibrosis Society; personal fees from Johns Hopkins University/DKBmed; personal 
fees from Saudi Pediatric Pulmonology Association; grants and personal fees from 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals. The authors (SD, JP, CK, RA, LY, MM, MS, FF, SP, MH, NC) 
do not have any personal, professional, or financial conflicts of interest to 
disclose for this work. The authors did not work with or were otherwise 
influenced by any external sponsors for this work.