---
reference_id: "PMID:24036948"
title: A de novo gain-of-function mutation in SCN11A causes loss of pain perception.
authors:
- Leipold E
- Liebmann L
- Korenke GC
- Heinrich T
- Giesselmann S
- Baets J
- Ebbinghaus M
- Goral RO
- Stödberg T
- Hennings JC
- Bergmann M
- Altmüller J
- Thiele H
- Wetzel A
- Nürnberg P
- Timmerman V
- De Jonghe P
- Blum R
- Schaible HG
- Weis J
- Heinemann SH
- Hübner CA
- Kurth I
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1038/ng.2767
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A de novo gain-of-function mutation in SCN11A causes loss of pain perception.
**Authors:** Leipold E, Liebmann L, Korenke GC, Heinrich T, Giesselmann S, Baets J, Ebbinghaus M, Goral RO, Stödberg T, Hennings JC, Bergmann M, Altmüller J, Thiele H, Wetzel A, Nürnberg P, Timmerman V, De Jonghe P, Blum R, Schaible HG, Weis J, Heinemann SH, Hübner CA, Kurth I
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.2767](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2767)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2013 Nov;45(11):1399-404. doi: 10.1038/ng.2767. Epub 2013 Sep 15.

A de novo gain-of-function mutation in SCN11A causes loss of pain perception.

Leipold E(1), Liebmann L, Korenke GC, Heinrich T, Giesselmann S, Baets J, 
Ebbinghaus M, Goral RO, Stödberg T, Hennings JC, Bergmann M, Altmüller J, Thiele 
H, Wetzel A, Nürnberg P, Timmerman V, De Jonghe P, Blum R, Schaible HG, Weis J, 
Heinemann SH, Hübner CA, Kurth I.

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Biomedicine, Department of Biophysics, Friedrich 
Schiller University Jena and Jena University Hospital, Jena, Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2013 Nov;45(11):1271-2. doi: 10.1038/ng.2810.

The sensation of pain protects the body from serious injury. Using exome 
sequencing, we identified a specific de novo missense mutation in SCN11A in 
individuals with the congenital inability to experience pain who suffer from 
recurrent tissue damage and severe mutilations. Heterozygous knock-in mice 
carrying the orthologous mutation showed reduced sensitivity to pain and 
self-inflicted tissue lesions, recapitulating aspects of the human phenotype. 
SCN11A encodes Nav1.9, a voltage-gated sodium ion channel that is primarily 
expressed in nociceptors, which function as key relay stations for the 
electrical transmission of pain signals from the periphery to the central 
nervous system. Mutant Nav1.9 channels displayed excessive activity at resting 
voltages, causing sustained depolarization of nociceptors, impaired generation 
of action potentials and aberrant synaptic transmission. The gain-of-function 
mechanism that underlies this channelopathy suggests an alternative way to 
modulate pain perception.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.2767
PMID: 24036948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]