---
reference_id: "PMID:33176113"
title: "Hippocampal volume, function, and related molecular activity in anorexia nervosa: A scoping review."
authors:
- Keeler J
- Patsalos O
- Thuret S
- Ehrlich S
- Tchanturia K
- Himmerich H
- Treasure J
journal: Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1080/17512433.2020.1850256
keywords:
- Animals
- "Anorexia Nervosa/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- "Hippocampus/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Malnutrition/physiopathology
- Neuroimaging
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hippocampal volume, function, and related molecular activity in anorexia nervosa: A scoping review.
**Authors:** Keeler J, Patsalos O, Thuret S, Ehrlich S, Tchanturia K, Himmerich H, Treasure J
**Journal:** Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1080/17512433.2020.1850256](https://doi.org/10.1080/17512433.2020.1850256)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2020 Dec;13(12):1367-1387. doi:
10.1080/17512433.2020.1850256. Epub 2020 Nov 25.

Hippocampal volume, function, and related molecular activity in anorexia
nervosa: A scoping review.

Keeler J(1), Patsalos O(1), Thuret S(2), Ehrlich S(3), Tchanturia K(1),
Himmerich H(1), Treasure J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Medicine, King's College London, Institute of
Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience ,UK.
(2)Department of Basic and Clinical Neuroscience, King's College London,
Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience , UK.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Technische Universitat Dresden, Division of
Psychological and Social Medicine and Developmental Neurosciences , Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Anorexia nervosa (AN) is a serious and persistent eating disorder,
characterized by severe dietary restriction and weight loss, with a third of
patients developing a  severe-enduring form. The factors contributing to this
progression are poorly understood, although there is evidence for impairments in
neural structures such as the hippocampus, an area particularly affected by
malnutrition and chronic stress.
AREAS COVERED: This study aimed to map the evidence for alterations in
hippocampal volume, function, and related molecular activity in anorexia
nervosa. PubMed, PsycINFO, and Web of Science were searched for studies related
to hippocampal function and integrity using a range of methodologies, such as
neuropsychological paradigms, structural and functional magnetic resonance
imaging, and analysis of blood components.
EXPERT OPINION: Thirty-nine studies were included in this review. The majority
were neuroimaging studies, which found hippocampus-specific volumetric and
functional impairments. Neuropsychological studies showed evidence for a
specific memory and learning impairments. There was some evidence for molecular
abnormalities (e.g. cortisol), although these were few studies. Taken together,
our review suggests that the hippocampus might be a particular region of
interest when considering neurobiological approaches to understanding AN. These
findings warrant further investigation and may lead to novel treatment
approaches.

DOI: 10.1080/17512433.2020.1850256
PMID: 33176113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
