---
reference_id: "PMID:30258024"
title: "Area postrema syndrome: Frequency, criteria, and severity in AQP4-IgG-positive NMOSD."
authors:
- Shosha E
- Dubey D
- Palace J
- Nakashima I
- Jacob A
- Fujihara K
- Takahashi T
- Whittam D
- Leite MI
- Misu T
- Yoshiki T
- Messina S
- Elsone L
- Majed M
- Flanagan E
- Gadoth A
- Huebert C
- Sagen J
- Greenberg BM
- Levy M
- Banerjee A
- Weinshenker B
- Pittock SJ
journal: Neurology
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000006392
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Aquaporin 4/immunology
- "Area Postrema/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin G/blood
- Immunotherapy
- International Cooperation
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Nausea/etiology
- "Neuromyelitis Optica/blood, diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- Vomiting/etiology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Area postrema syndrome: Frequency, criteria, and severity in AQP4-IgG-positive NMOSD.
**Authors:** Shosha E, Dubey D, Palace J, Nakashima I, Jacob A, Fujihara K, Takahashi T, Whittam D, Leite MI, Misu T, Yoshiki T, Messina S, Elsone L, Majed M, Flanagan E, Gadoth A, Huebert C, Sagen J, Greenberg BM, Levy M, Banerjee A, Weinshenker B, Pittock SJ
**Journal:** Neurology (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000006392](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000006392)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2018 Oct 23;91(17):e1642-e1651. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000006392. 
Epub 2018 Sep 26.

Area postrema syndrome: Frequency, criteria, and severity in AQP4-IgG-positive 
NMOSD.

Shosha E(1), Dubey D(1), Palace J(1), Nakashima I(1), Jacob A(1), Fujihara K(1), 
Takahashi T(1), Whittam D(1), Leite MI(1), Misu T(1), Yoshiki T(1), Messina 
S(1), Elsone L(1), Majed M(1), Flanagan E(1), Gadoth A(1), Huebert C(1), Sagen 
J(1), Greenberg BM(1), Levy M(1), Banerjee A(1), Weinshenker B(1), Pittock 
SJ(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Neurology (E.S., D.D., M.M., E.F., A.G., B.W., 
S.J.P.), Laboratory Medicine and Pathology (M.M., E.F., A.G., S.J.P.), and 
Clinical Research Unit (C.H., J.S.), Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, 
MN; Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences (J.P., M.I.L., S.M.), Oxford; 
The Walton Centre (A.J., D.W., L.E.), NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool, UK; 
Department of Neurology (I.N., K.F., T.T., T.M., Y.T.), Tohoku University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai; Department of Multiple Sclerosis 
Therapeutics (K.F.), Fukushima Medical University School of Medicine and 
Multiple Sclerosis and Neuromyelitis Optica Center, Southern Tohoku Research 
Institute for NeuroScience, Koriyama, Japan; Department of Neurology (M.L., 
A.B.), Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD; Departments of Neurology and 
Neurotherapeutics (B.M.G.), UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX; 
Department of Neurology (T.T.), Yonezawa National Hospital; and Department of 
Neurology (I.N.), Tohoku Medical and Pharmaceutical University, Sendai, Japan.
(2)From the Departments of Neurology (E.S., D.D., M.M., E.F., A.G., B.W., 
S.J.P.), Laboratory Medicine and Pathology (M.M., E.F., A.G., S.J.P.), and 
Clinical Research Unit (C.H., J.S.), Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, 
MN; Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences (J.P., M.I.L., S.M.), Oxford; 
The Walton Centre (A.J., D.W., L.E.), NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool, UK; 
Department of Neurology (I.N., K.F., T.T., T.M., Y.T.), Tohoku University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai; Department of Multiple Sclerosis 
Therapeutics (K.F.), Fukushima Medical University School of Medicine and 
Multiple Sclerosis and Neuromyelitis Optica Center, Southern Tohoku Research 
Institute for NeuroScience, Koriyama, Japan; Department of Neurology (M.L., 
A.B.), Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD; Departments of Neurology and 
Neurotherapeutics (B.M.G.), UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX; 
Department of Neurology (T.T.), Yonezawa National Hospital; and Department of 
Neurology (I.N.), Tohoku Medical and Pharmaceutical University, Sendai, Japan. 
pittock.sean@mayo.edu.

OBJECTIVE: To define the frequency, duration, and severity of intractable 
nausea, vomiting, or hiccups in aquaporin-4-immunoglobulin G (AQP4-IgG)-positive 
neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD) and propose diagnostic criteria 
and a severity scale for area postrema syndrome (APS).
METHODS: An International NMOSD database was interrogated for frequency of APS. 
Patients with AQP4-IgG-positive NMOSD completed an APS symptom questionnaire. 
Nausea and vomiting severity was derived from the Pregnancy-Unique 
Quantification of Emesis and Nausea (PUQE) score. The diagnostic criteria, 
severity scale, and immunotherapy response was applied to a prospective 
validation cohort of patients from multiple centers.
RESULTS: Analysis of an international database for AQP4-IgG-seropositive NMOSD 
(n = 430) revealed a high prevalence of isolated APS attacks (onset 7.1%-10.3%; 
subsequent 9.4%-14.5%) across continents. For 100 patients with 157 episodes of 
APS, nausea (n = 127, 81%) lasted for a median of 14 days (range 2-365), 
vomiting (113, 72%) with a median of 5 episodes/d (2-40) lasted 1-20 minutes, 
and hiccups (102, 65%) lasted a median of 14 days (2-365). Symptoms consistently 
and completely resolved following immunotherapy. Data were used to propose APS 
diagnostic criteria and repurpose PUQE score (hiccups severity grade based on 
symptom duration). The clinical utility was demonstrated in a prospective 
validation cohort.
CONCLUSION: Isolated APS attacks are frequently encountered both at onset and 
during the NMOSD course. The diagnostic criteria proposed here will assist 
clinicians in recognizing APS. Diagnosis of an APS attack earlier than 48 hours 
is possible if a dorsal medulla lesion is detected. Accurate diagnosis and 
evaluation of APS attack severity will assist in outcome measurement in NMOSD 
clinical trials.

Copyright © 2018 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000006392
PMCID: PMC6205685
PMID: 30258024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]