---
reference_id: "PMID:37685787"
title: "Acute-Onset Retinal Conditions Mimicking Acute Optic Neuritis: Overview and Differential Diagnosis."
authors:
- Interlandi E
- Pellegrini F
- Giuffrè C
- Cirone D
- Brocca D
- Lee AG
- Casalino G
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/jcm12175720
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute-Onset Retinal Conditions Mimicking Acute Optic Neuritis: Overview and Differential Diagnosis.
**Authors:** Interlandi E, Pellegrini F, Giuffrè C, Cirone D, Brocca D, Lee AG, Casalino G
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm12175720](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm12175720)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2023 Sep 1;12(17):5720. doi: 10.3390/jcm12175720.

Acute-Onset Retinal Conditions Mimicking Acute Optic Neuritis: Overview and 
Differential Diagnosis.

Interlandi E(1), Pellegrini F(2), Giuffrè C(3)(4), Cirone D(5), Brocca D(6), Lee 
AG(7)(8)(9)(10)(11)(12), Casalino G(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, "Ospedale del Mare", ASL Napoli 1-Centro, 80147 
Naples, Italy.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, "Santo Spirito" Hospital, 65122 Pescara, Italy.
(3)Centro Europeo di Oftalmologia, 90141 Palermo, Italy.
(4)Ophthalmology Department, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, University 
Vita-Salute, 20132 Milan, Italy.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, "Villa Anna" Hospital, 63074 San Benedetto del 
Tronto, Italy.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, "De Gironcoli" Hospital, AULSS2 Marca 
Trevigiana, 31015 Conegliano, Italy.
(7)Department of Ophthalmology, Blanton Eye Institute, Houston Methodist 
Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(8)Departments of Ophthalmology, Neurology and Neurosurgery, Weill Cornell 
Medicine, New York, NY 10021, USA.
(9)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, 
TX 77555, USA.
(10)University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(11)Texas A and M College of Medicine, Bryan, TX 77807, USA.
(12)Department of Ophthalmology, The University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, 
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
(13)Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, University of 
Milan, 20122 Milan, Italy.

Acute optic neuritis (AON) is a common cause of sudden visual loss in young 
patients. Because of the risk of demyelinating disease, patients affected by 
unilateral or bilateral optic neuritis should be evaluated and treated 
accordingly. Despite advancements in imaging of the brain and retina, 
misdiagnosis of AON is not uncommon. Indeed, some acute disorders of the retina 
have the potential to mimic AON and their prompt diagnosis may avoid unnecessary 
neurologic investigation, psychological stress to the patient, and delays in 
treatment. This review describes uncommon retinal disorders presenting with 
sudden-onset visual loss and absent or subtle funduscopic manifestation that can 
mimic AON. Multimodal retinal imaging is essential in detecting these conditions 
and in their differential diagnosis. It behooves neurologists and general 
ophthalmologists to be aware of these entities and be familiar with multimodal 
imaging of the retina.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm12175720
PMCID: PMC10488521
PMID: 37685787

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.