---
reference_id: "PMID:38184594"
title: Varicella zoster virus glycoprotein E facilitates PINK1/Parkin-mediated mitophagy to evade STING and MAVS-mediated antiviral innate immunity.
authors:
- Oh SJ
- Yu JW
- Ahn JH
- Choi ST
- Park H
- Yun J
- Shin OS
journal: Cell Death Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41419-023-06400-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Varicella zoster virus glycoprotein E facilitates PINK1/Parkin-mediated mitophagy to evade STING and MAVS-mediated antiviral innate immunity.
**Authors:** Oh SJ, Yu JW, Ahn JH, Choi ST, Park H, Yun J, Shin OS
**Journal:** Cell Death Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41419-023-06400-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41419-023-06400-z)

## Content

1. Cell Death Dis. 2024 Jan 6;15(1):16. doi: 10.1038/s41419-023-06400-z.

Varicella zoster virus glycoprotein E facilitates PINK1/Parkin-mediated 
mitophagy to evade STING and MAVS-mediated antiviral innate immunity.

Oh SJ(1), Yu JW(2), Ahn JH(3), Choi ST(4), Park H(4), Yun J(5), Shin OS(6).

Author information:
(1)BK21 Graduate Program, Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of 
Medicine, Korea University Guro Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute for Immunology and 
Immunological Diseases, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 
Suwon, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, Yeungnam University, Daegu, 
Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Translational Biomedical Sciences, Graduate School of Dong-A 
University, Busan, Republic of Korea. yunj@dau.ac.kr.
(6)BK21 Graduate Program, Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of 
Medicine, Korea University Guro Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea. 
oshin@korea.ac.kr.

Viruses have evolved to control mitochondrial quality and content to facilitate 
viral replication. Mitophagy is a selective autophagy, in which the damaged or 
unnecessary mitochondria are removed, and thus considered an essential mechanism 
for mitochondrial quality control. Although mitophagy manipulation by several 
RNA viruses has recently been reported, the effect of mitophagy regulation by 
varicella zoster virus (VZV) remains to be fully determined. In this study, we 
showed that dynamin-related protein-1 (DRP1)-mediated mitochondrial fission and 
subsequent PINK1/Parkin-dependent mitophagy were triggered during VZV infection, 
facilitating VZV replication. In addition, VZV glycoprotein E (gE) promoted 
PINK1/Parkin-mediated mitophagy by interacting with LC3 and upregulating 
mitochondrial reactive oxygen species. Importantly, VZV gE inhibited MAVS 
oligomerization and STING translocation to disrupt MAVS- and STING-mediated 
interferon (IFN) responses, and PINK1/Parkin-mediated mitophagy was required for 
VZV gE-mediated inhibition of IFN production. Similarly, carbonyl cyanide 
m-chlorophenyl hydrazone (CCCP)-mediated mitophagy induction led to increased 
VZV replication but attenuated IFN production in a three-dimensional human skin 
organ culture model. Our results provide new insights into the immune evasion 
mechanism of VZV gE via PINK1/Parkin-dependent mitophagy.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-023-06400-z
PMCID: PMC10771418
PMID: 38184594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that this study was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as potential conflicts of interest.