---
reference_id: "PMID:21868491"
title: Comparison between universal molecular screening for Lynch syndrome and revised Bethesda guidelines in a large population-based cohort of patients with colorectal cancer.
authors:
- Pérez-Carbonell L
- Ruiz-Ponte C
- Guarinos C
- Alenda C
- Payá A
- Brea A
- Egoavil CM
- Castillejo A
- Barberá VM
- Bessa X
- Xicola RM
- Rodríguez-Soler M
- Sánchez-Fortún C
- Acame N
- Castellví-Bel S
- Piñol V
- Balaguer F
- Bujanda L
- De-Castro ML
- Llor X
- Andreu M
- Carracedo A
- Soto JL
- Castells A
- Jover R
journal: Gut
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-300041
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparison between universal molecular screening for Lynch syndrome and revised Bethesda guidelines in a large population-based cohort of patients with colorectal cancer.
**Authors:** Pérez-Carbonell L, Ruiz-Ponte C, Guarinos C, Alenda C, Payá A, Brea A, Egoavil CM, Castillejo A, Barberá VM, Bessa X, Xicola RM, Rodríguez-Soler M, Sánchez-Fortún C, Acame N, Castellví-Bel S, Piñol V, Balaguer F, Bujanda L, De-Castro ML, Llor X, Andreu M, Carracedo A, Soto JL, Castells A, Jover R
**Journal:** Gut (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1136/gutjnl-2011-300041](https://doi.org/10.1136/gutjnl-2011-300041)

## Content

1. Gut. 2012 Jun;61(6):865-72. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-300041. Epub 2011 Aug 25.

Comparison between universal molecular screening for Lynch syndrome and revised 
Bethesda guidelines in a large population-based cohort of patients with 
colorectal cancer.

Pérez-Carbonell L(1), Ruiz-Ponte C, Guarinos C, Alenda C, Payá A, Brea A, 
Egoavil CM, Castillejo A, Barberá VM, Bessa X, Xicola RM, Rodríguez-Soler M, 
Sánchez-Fortún C, Acame N, Castellví-Bel S, Piñol V, Balaguer F, Bujanda L, 
De-Castro ML, Llor X, Andreu M, Carracedo A, Soto JL, Castells A, Jover R.

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Investigación, Hospital General Universitario, Alicante, Spain.

BACKGROUND: The selection of patients for genetic testing to rule out Lynch 
syndrome is currently based on fulfilment of at least one of the revised 
Bethesda criteria followed by mismatch repair (MMR) status analysis. A study was 
undertaken to compare the present approach with universal MMR study-based 
strategies to detect Lynch syndrome in a large series of patients with 
colorectal cancer (CRC).
METHODS: 2093 patients with CRC from the EPICOLON I and II cohorts were 
included. Immunohistochemistry for MMR proteins and/or microsatellite 
instability (MSI) analysis was performed in tumour tissue. Germline MLH1 and 
MSH2 mutation analysis was performed in patients whose tumours showed loss of 
MLH1 or MSH2 staining, respectively. MSH6 genetic testing was done in patients 
whose tumours showed lack of MSH6 expression or a combined lack of MSH2 and MSH6 
expression but did not have MSH2 mutations. PMS2 genetic testing was performed 
in patients showing isolated loss of PMS2 expression. In patients with MSI 
tumours and normal or not available MMR protein expression, all four MMR genes 
were studied.
RESULTS: A total of 180 patients (8.6%) showed loss of expression of some of the 
MMR proteins and/or MSI. Four hundred and eighty-six patients (23.2%) met some 
of the revised Bethesda criteria. Of the 14 (0.7%) patients who had a MMR gene 
mutation, 12 fulfilled at least one of the revised Bethesda criteria and two 
(14.3%) did not.
CONCLUSIONS: Routine molecular screening of patients with CRC for Lynch syndrome 
using immunohistochemistry or MSI has better sensitivity for detecting mutation 
carriers than the Bethesda guidelines.

DOI: 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-300041
PMID: 21868491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]