---
reference_id: "PMID:30514738"
title: "Kabuki syndrome: international consensus diagnostic criteria."
authors:
- Adam MP
- Banka S
- Bjornsson HT
- Bodamer O
- Chudley AE
- Harris J
- Kawame H
- Lanpher BC
- Lindsley AW
- Merla G
- Miyake N
- Okamoto N
- Stumpel CT
- Niikawa N
- Kabuki Syndrome Medical Advisory Board
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2018-105625
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, etiology, genetics"
- Consensus
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- "Face/abnormalities, abnormalities"
- "Hematologic Diseases/diagnosis, etiology, genetics"
- Histone Demethylases/genetics
- Intellectual Disability/etiology
- Muscle Hypotonia/etiology
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Proteins/genetics
- "Vestibular Diseases/diagnosis, etiology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kabuki syndrome: international consensus diagnostic criteria.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Banka S, Bjornsson HT, Bodamer O, Chudley AE, Harris J, Kawame H, Lanpher BC, Lindsley AW, Merla G, Miyake N, Okamoto N, Stumpel CT, Niikawa N, Kabuki Syndrome Medical Advisory Board
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2018-105625](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2018-105625)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2019 Feb;56(2):89-95. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2018-105625. Epub
2018  Dec 4.

Kabuki syndrome: international consensus diagnostic criteria.

Adam MP(1), Banka S(2)(3), Bjornsson HT(4)(5)(6)(7), Bodamer O(8)(9), Chudley 
AE(10)(11), Harris J(12), Kawame H(13), Lanpher BC(14)(15), Lindsley AW(16)(17), 
Merla G(18), Miyake N(19), Okamoto N(20), Stumpel CT(21), Niikawa N(22); Kabuki 
Syndrome Medical Advisory Board.

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(2)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Division of Evolution and Genomic 
Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and 
Health, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(3)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, St Mary's Hospital, Manchester 
University NHS Foundation Trust, Health Innovation Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(4)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(7)Department of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Landspitali University 
Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(8)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Department of Medicine, Boston Children's 
Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(9)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard 
University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(10)Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Max Rady College of Medicine, 
Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 
Canada.
(11)Department of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, Max Rady College of 
Medicine, Rady Faculty Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, 
Manitoba, Canada.
(12)Departments of Neurology and Pediatrics, Kennedy Krieger Institute, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(13)Department of Education and Training, Tohoku University School of Medicine, 
Sendai, Japan.
(14)Center for Individualized Medicine, Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(15)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(16)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(17)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(18)Division of Medical Genetics, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, 
San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.
(19)Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.
(20)Department of Medical Genetics, Osaka Women's and Children's Hospital, 
Izumi, Japan.
(21)Department of Clinical Genetics and GROW-School for Oncology and 
Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, The 
Netherlands.
(22)President, the Research Institute of Personalized Health Sciences, Health 
Sciences University of Hokkaido, Hokkaido, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a clinically recognisable syndrome in which 
70% of patients have a pathogenic variant in KMT2D or KDM6A. Understanding the 
function of these genes opens the door to targeted therapies. The purpose of 
this report is to propose diagnostic criteria for KS, particularly when 
molecular genetic testing is equivocal.
METHODS: An international group of experts created consensus diagnostic criteria 
for KS. Systematic PubMed searches returned 70 peer-reviewed publications in 
which at least one individual with molecularly confirmed KS was reported. The 
clinical features of individuals with known mutations were reviewed.
RESULTS: The authors propose that a definitive diagnosis can be made in an 
individual of any age with a history of infantile hypotonia, developmental delay 
and/or intellectual disability, and one or both of the following major criteria: 
(1) a pathogenic or likely pathogenic variant in KMT2D or KDM6A; and (2) typical 
dysmorphic features (defined below) at some point of life. Typical dysmorphic 
features include long palpebral fissures with eversion of the lateral third of 
the lower eyelid and two or more of the following: (1) arched and broad eyebrows 
with the lateral third displaying notching or sparseness; (2) short columella 
with depressed nasal tip; (3) large, prominent or cupped ears; and (4) 
persistent fingertip pads. Further criteria for a probable and possible 
diagnosis, including a table of suggestive clinical features, are presented.
CONCLUSION: As targeted therapies for KS are being developed, it is important to 
be able to make the correct diagnosis, either with or without molecular genetic 
confirmation.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2018-105625
PMID: 30514738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The clinical and molecular 
genetic experts on Kabuki syndrome who collaborated on this manuscript were all 
participants of the Kabuki Syndrome Medical Advisory Board organised and 
sponsored by Takeda in January 2018. Although the meeting was facilitated and 
organised by Takeda, Takeda did not have any influence on the content of this 
report.