---
reference_id: "PMID:3158692"
title: Cardiomyopathies and their role in sudden death.
authors:
- Brandenburg RO
journal: J Am Coll Cardiol
year: '1985'
doi: 10.1016/s0735-1097(85)80553-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiomyopathies and their role in sudden death.
**Authors:** Brandenburg RO
**Journal:** J Am Coll Cardiol (1985)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0735-1097(85)80553-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0735-1097(85)80553-2)

## Content

1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1985 Jun;5(6 Suppl):185B-189B. doi: 
10.1016/s0735-1097(85)80553-2.

Cardiomyopathies and their role in sudden death.

Brandenburg RO.

Frequent ventricular premature complexes, complex ventricular ectopic activity 
and asymptomatic ventricular tachycardia are common to both hypertrophic and 
dilated cardiomyopathy; in both conditions, sudden death is a common occurrence. 
Asymptomatic young patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy who have a family 
history and a high incidence of ventricular arrhythmias have a particularly high 
incidence of sudden death. In patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, efforts 
to attribute sudden death to the cardiac index, left ventricular end-diastolic 
pressure, left ventricular outflow obstruction, ejection fraction, age, 
symptomatic state and septal thickness have been unrewarding. Myocardial 
hypertrophy and disordered myocardial cell arrangement are the likely substrates 
for the development of ventricular arrhythmias in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. 
Ventricular fibrillation preceded by ventricular tachycardia appears to be the 
terminal event in most patients who die suddenly. In some patients, cardiac 
asystole is the terminal event. Additional factors playing a role in the 
development of the substrate for sudden death in patients with hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy vary in importance on an individual basis. These factors include 
narrowing of septal arteries and the artery to the atrioventricular node, 
preservation of fetal anatomy with dispersion in the atrioventricular node and 
His bundle, fibrosis of the sinus node, clefts in the septum, multiple 
atrioventricular pathways and massive myocardial infarction. Patients with 
dilated cardiomyopathy appear to have the highest incidence of ventricular 
arrhythmias of any disease yet studied. The substrate for the development of 
ventricular arrhythmias in these patients appears to be myocardial hypertrophy 
and myocardial fibrosis.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1016/s0735-1097(85)80553-2
PMID: 3158692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]