---
reference_id: "PMID:37164315"
title: Anterior Spinal Artery Syndrome Due to Fibrocartilaginous Embolism-Case Report and Treatment Options.
authors:
- Menke C
- Wieland I
- Bueltmann E
- Illsinger S
- Hartmann H
journal: Neuropediatrics
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1055/a-2090-5865
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Embolism/complications, diagnostic imaging"
- Child
- "Cartilage Diseases/complications, diagnostic imaging"
- "Anterior Spinal Artery Syndrome/etiology, diagnostic imaging, complications, physiopathology"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Enoxaparin/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anterior Spinal Artery Syndrome Due to Fibrocartilaginous Embolism-Case Report and Treatment Options.
**Authors:** Menke C, Wieland I, Bueltmann E, Illsinger S, Hartmann H
**Journal:** Neuropediatrics (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1055/a-2090-5865](https://doi.org/10.1055/a-2090-5865)

## Content

1. Neuropediatrics. 2024 Jun;55(3):196-199. doi: 10.1055/a-2090-5865. Epub 2023
May  10.

Anterior Spinal Artery Syndrome Due to Fibrocartilaginous Embolism-Case Report
and Treatment Options.

Menke C(1), Wieland I(2), Bueltmann E(3), Illsinger S(1), Hartmann H(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinic for Pediatric Kidney, Liver and Metabolic Diseases, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany.
(2)Clinic for Pediatric Oncology and Hematology, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, Germany.
(3)Institute of Diagnostic and Interventional Neuroradiology, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany.

Acute occlusion of the anterior spinal artery and subsequent spinal ischemic
infarction leads to anterior spinal artery syndrome characterized by back pain
and bilateral flaccid paresis with loss of protopathic sensibility. As a rare
cause fibrocartilaginous embolism has been described and is associated with
sports or unusual strain.Following gymnastic exercise the day before
symptom-onset, a 11 years old girl presented with neck pain, paresis of arms and
legs, and impaired deep tendon reflexes. She was unable to lift her arms, grasp,
stand, walk and had urinary incontinence. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a
longitudinal T2 hyperintense signal in the anterior spinal cord from C3 to C6
with accompanying bilateral diffusion restriction involving gray matter
bilaterally at the level of C4 and C5 and unilaterally at the level of C3/4. The
adjacent annulus fibrosus of the intervertebral disc showed a fissure without
disc protrusion. Treatment with prednisolone and enoxaparin was started within
12 hours of symptom-onset and continued over 6 days and 8 weeks, respectively.
After 2 months, her motor function gradually improved, spinal imaging showed
persistent T2 signal hyperintense defects at the level of C4/5. After 5 months,
there was only slight impairment affecting elevation and abduction of the right
arm.Following physical exercise, the patient suffered from acute anterior spinal
cord ischemia with imaging findings in line with a presumed fibrocartilaginous
embolism. Unlike most cases, our patient showed almost complete recovery
following treatment with prednisolone and enoxaparin. We speculate that the
positive outcome is related to rapid treatment initiation.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/a-2090-5865
PMID: 37164315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.
