---
reference_id: "PMID:15537727"
title: "An uncommon presentation: chronic meningococcaemia associated with cholestatic hepatitis in a Turkish child."
authors:
- Totan M
- Yildiz G
- Kalayci AG
journal: J Trop Pediatr
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1093/tropej/50.6.372
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An uncommon presentation: chronic meningococcaemia associated with cholestatic hepatitis in a Turkish child.
**Authors:** Totan M, Yildiz G, Kalayci AG
**Journal:** J Trop Pediatr (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1093/tropej/50.6.372](https://doi.org/10.1093/tropej/50.6.372)

## Content

1. J Trop Pediatr. 2004 Dec;50(6):372-4. doi: 10.1093/tropej/50.6.372.

An uncommon presentation: chronic meningococcaemia associated with cholestatic 
hepatitis in a Turkish child.

Totan M(1), Yildiz G, Kalayci AG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Ondokuz Mayis University Faculty of Medicine, 
Samsun,Turkey. mtotan@omu.edu.tr

Chronic meningococcaemia is a very rare clinical manifestation of invasive 
infection by Neisseria meningitidis. A 9-year-old girl was admitted to our 
clinic with complaints of fever, headache, arthralgia, and maculopapular rash. 
The diagnosis was made by the growth of Neisseria meningitidis in the blood 
cultures. Four days after admission, liver function tests were increased and 
were compatible with cholestatic hepatitis. Thereafter, the patient was 
successfully treated and symptoms were completely resolved. To our knowledge, 
there have been no previous reports of Neisseria meningitidis causing 
cholestatic hepatitis. Herein, we present an unusual child patient with chronic 
meningococcaemia associated with cholestatic hepatitis.

DOI: 10.1093/tropej/50.6.372
PMID: 15537727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]