---
reference_id: "PMID:21625931"
title: "Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain in adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency: a report of seven cases and a review of the literature."
authors:
- Jurecka A
- Jurkiewicz E
- Tylki-Szymanska A
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1007/s00431-011-1503-9
keywords:
- Adenylosuccinate Lyase/deficiency
- Autistic Disorder
- Brain/pathology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Microcephaly/etiology
- "Purine-Pyrimidine Metabolism, Inborn Errors/complications, pathology"
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain in adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency: a report of seven cases and a review of the literature.
**Authors:** Jurecka A, Jurkiewicz E, Tylki-Szymanska A
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00431-011-1503-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00431-011-1503-9)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 2012 Jan;171(1):131-8. doi: 10.1007/s00431-011-1503-9. Epub
2011  May 31.

Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain in adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency: a
report of seven cases and a review of the literature.

Jurecka A(1), Jurkiewicz E, Tylki-Szymanska A.

Author information:
(1)The Children's Memorial Health Institute, Al. Dzieci Polskich 20, Warsaw,
Poland. ajurecka@gmail.com

Adenylosuccinate lyase (ADSL) deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive disorder
of purine metabolism. Patients may present with a wide range of neurological
symptoms. Head imaging abnormalities have been reported only rarely in the
scientific literature and include atrophy of the cerebral cortex, corpus
callosum, cerebellar vermis, lack of myelination, delayed myelination, anomalies
of the white matter, and lissencephaly. The pathogenesis of abnormalities
remains unknown. To further the understanding of the spectrum of brain
abnormalities associated with ADSL deficiency, we examined the magnetic
resonance findings in seven Polish patients with different clinical phenotypes
and genotypes. Head MRI showed impaired white matter myelination with various
degrees of global supra- and infratentorial white matter loss including widening
of the lateral ventricles, enlargement of the subarachnoid spaces, atrophy of
the cerebrum, hypoplasia of the cerebellar hemispheres and enlargement of the
cisterna magna, and white matter abnormal hyperintense signal on T(2)-weighted
sequences. We recommend performing a detailed analysis of urine and plasma
purine metabolites in patients who have neurological findings, including
developmental delay, microcephaly, autistic features, neonatal encephalopathy,
and seizures especially if MRI findings such as delayed or lack of myelination,
white matter abnormal signal, and atrophy of the cerebrum and/or cerebellum are
also present. Greater awareness of adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency among
general pediatricians, neonatologists, pediatric neurologists, and also
radiologists is the key to identifying the disorder at an early stage.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-011-1503-9
PMID: 21625931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
