---
reference_id: "PMID:35530863"
title: Intussusception Caused by Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome.
authors:
- Sreemantula HS
- Joseph CA
- Jamal F
- Agrawal S
- Thirumaran R
journal: Cureus
year: '2022'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.23792
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intussusception Caused by Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome.
**Authors:** Sreemantula HS, Joseph CA, Jamal F, Agrawal S, Thirumaran R
**Journal:** Cureus (2022)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.23792](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.23792)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2022 Apr 3;14(4):e23792. doi: 10.7759/cureus.23792. eCollection 2022 
Apr.

Intussusception Caused by Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome.

Sreemantula HS(1), Joseph CA(2), Jamal F(3), Agrawal S(1), Thirumaran R(4).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Mercy Catholic Medical Center, Darby, USA.
(2)Hematology/Oncology, Drexel University College of Medicine, Darby, USA.
(3)Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Mercy Catholic Medical Center, Darby, 
USA.
(4)Hematology/Oncology, Mercy Catholic Medical Center, Darby, USA.

A 20-year-old female patient with a family history significant 
for Peutz-Jeghers syndrome presented to the hospital multiple times with 
complaints of abdominal pain. On the initial visit to the hospital, the patient 
underwent small bowel resection for small bowel obstruction secondary to 
intussusception, following which she visited the hospital again one 
year later for similar complaints and underwent reduction of multiple points of 
intussusception of the small bowel without any resection of the same. 
Eventually, the patient underwent resection of the small bowel for the second 
time, along with tumor resections. The importance of follow-up in patients 
with Peutz-Jeghers is particularly essential, in part, because it is vital to 
monitor the tumors, their size, and number to prevent surgical intestinal 
complications, anemia, and also to eventually monitor for carcinomatous changes.

Copyright © 2022, Sreemantula et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.23792
PMCID: PMC9067348
PMID: 35530863

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.