---
reference_id: "PMID:18350553"
title: "Alterations of the IKBKG locus and diseases: an update and a report of 13 novel mutations."
authors:
- Fusco F
- Pescatore A
- Bal E
- Ghoul A
- Paciolla M
- Lioi MB
- "D'Urso M"
- Rabia SH
- Bodemer C
- Bonnefont JP
- Munnich A
- Miano MG
- Smahi A
- Ursini MV
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1002/humu.20739
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- "Chromosomes, Human, X"
- DNA
- Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- "I-kappa B Kinase/chemistry, genetics"
- Incontinentia Pigmenti/genetics
- Male
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mosaicism
- Mutation
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alterations of the IKBKG locus and diseases: an update and a report of 13 novel mutations.
**Authors:** Fusco F, Pescatore A, Bal E, Ghoul A, Paciolla M, Lioi MB, D'Urso M, Rabia SH, Bodemer C, Bonnefont JP, Munnich A, Miano MG, Smahi A, Ursini MV
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.20739](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.20739)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2008 May;29(5):595-604. doi: 10.1002/humu.20739.

Alterations of the IKBKG locus and diseases: an update and a report of 13 novel 
mutations.

Fusco F(1), Pescatore A, Bal E, Ghoul A, Paciolla M, Lioi MB, D'Urso M, Rabia 
SH, Bodemer C, Bonnefont JP, Munnich A, Miano MG, Smahi A, Ursini MV.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics Adriano Buzzati-Traverso (IGB-CNR), 
Naples, Italy.

Mutations in the inhibitor of kappa light polypeptide gene enhancer in B-cells, 
kinase gamma (IKBKG), also called nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kB) essential 
modulator (NEMO), gene are the most common single cause of incontinentia 
pigmenti (IP) in females and anhydrotic ectodermal dysplasia with 
immunodeficiency (EDA-ID) in males. The IKBKG gene, located in the Xq28 
chromosomal region, encodes for the regulatory subunit of the inhibitor of 
kappaB (IkB) kinase (IKK) complex required for the activation of the NF-kB 
pathway. Therefore, the remarkably heterogeneous and often severe clinical 
presentation reported in IP is due to the pleiotropic role of this signaling 
transcription pathway. A recurrent exon 4_10 genomic rearrangement in the IKBKG 
gene accounts for 60 to 80% of IP-causing mutations. Besides the IKBKG 
rearrangement found in IP females (which is lethal in males), a total of 69 
different small mutations (missense, frameshift, nonsense, and splice-site 
mutations) have been reported, including 13 novel ones in this work. The updated 
distribution of all the IP- and EDA-ID-causing mutations along the IKBKG gene 
highlights a secondary hotspot mutation in exon 10, which contains only 11% of 
the protein. Furthermore, familial inheritance analysis revealed an unexpectedly 
high incidence of sporadic cases (>65%). The sum of the observations can aid 
both in determining the molecular basis of IP and EDA-ID allelic diseases, and 
in genetic counseling in affected families.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20739
PMID: 18350553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]