---
reference_id: "PMID:35931755"
title: "Primary CNS vasculitis (PCNSV): a cohort study."
authors:
- Agarwal A
- Sharma J
- Srivastava MVP
- Sharma MC
- Bhatia R
- Dash D
- Goyal V
- Srivastava AK
- Tripathi M
- Suri V
- Singh MB
- Agarwal S
- Sarkar C
- Joseph L
- Singh M
- Suri A
- Singh RK
- Vibha D
- Pandit AK
- Rajan R
- Gupta A
- Elavarasi A
- Radhakrishnan DM
- Das A
- Gaikwad S
- Tandon V
- Doddamani R
- Upadhyay A
- Garg A
- Vishnu VY
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-17869-7
keywords:
- Cerebral Angiography
- Cohort Studies
- Delayed Diagnosis
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- Seizures/complications
- "Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary CNS vasculitis (PCNSV): a cohort study.
**Authors:** Agarwal A, Sharma J, Srivastava MVP, Sharma MC, Bhatia R, Dash D, Goyal V, Srivastava AK, Tripathi M, Suri V, Singh MB, Agarwal S, Sarkar C, Joseph L, Singh M, Suri A, Singh RK, Vibha D, Pandit AK, Rajan R, Gupta A, Elavarasi A, Radhakrishnan DM, Das A, Gaikwad S, Tandon V, Doddamani R, Upadhyay A, Garg A, Vishnu VY
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-022-17869-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-17869-7)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2022 Aug 5;12(1):13494. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-17869-7.

Primary CNS vasculitis (PCNSV): a cohort study.

Agarwal A(1), Sharma J(1), Srivastava MVP(1), Sharma MC(2), Bhatia R(1), Dash 
D(1), Goyal V(1), Srivastava AK(1), Tripathi M(1), Suri V(2), Singh MB(1), 
Agarwal S(3), Sarkar C(2), Joseph L(3), Singh M(4), Suri A(4), Singh RK(1), 
Vibha D(1), Pandit AK(1), Rajan R(1), Gupta A(1), Elavarasi A(1), Radhakrishnan 
DM(1), Das A(1), Gaikwad S(3), Tandon V(4), Doddamani R(4), Upadhyay A(5), Garg 
A(6), Vishnu VY(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 
India.
(2)Department of Neuropathology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi, India.
(3)Department of Neuroradiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi, India.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi, India.
(5)Department of Biostatistics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi, India.
(6)Department of Neuroradiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi, India. drajaygarg@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Neurology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 
India. Vishnuvy16@yahoo.com.

Primary CNS Vasculitis (PCNSV) is a rare inflammatory disorder affecting the 
blood vessels of the central nervous system. Patients present with a combination 
of headaches, seizures, and focal neurological deficits. There is usually a 
diagnostic delay. Treatment is based on observational studies and expert 
opinion. Our objective was to identify clinical, laboratory, neuroimaging, 
pathologic or management-related associations with 2 year outcome in patients 
with primary CNS vasculitis. We conducted a cohort study at a single tertiary 
care referral centre of prospectively (2018-2019) and retrospectively 
(2010-2018) identified individuals with primary CNS vasculitis (diagnosis was 
proven by either brain biopsy or cerebral digital subtraction angiography). 
Clinical, imaging and histopathologic findings, treatment, and functional 
outcomes were recorded. Univariate and stepwise multiple logistic regression 
were applied. P-value<0.05 was considered statistically significant. The main 
outcome measures were documentation of clinical improvement or worsening 
(defined by mRS scores) and identification of independent predictors of good 
functional outcome (mRS 0-2) at 2 years. We enrolled eighty-two biopsy and/or 
angiographically proven PCNSV cases. The median age at presentation was 34 years 
with a male predilection and a median diagnostic delay of 23 months. Most 
patients presented with seizures (70.7%). All patients had haemorrhages on MRI. 
Histologically lymphocytic subtype was the commonest. Corticosteroids with 
cyclophosphamide was the commonest medication used. The median mRS at follow-up 
of 2 years was 2 (0-3), and 65.2% of patients achieved a good functional 
outcome. Myelitis and longer duration of illness before diagnosis were 
associated with poorer outcomes. The presence of hemorrhages on SWI sequence of 
MRI might be a sensitive imaging marker. Treatment with steroids and another 
immunosuppressant probably reduced relapse rates in our cohort. We have 
described the third largest PCNSV cohort and multi-centre randomised controlled 
trials are required to study the relative efficacy of various 
immunosuppressants.Study registration: CTRI/2018/03/012721.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-17869-7
PMCID: PMC9355950
PMID: 35931755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.