---
reference_id: "PMID:37867541"
title: Simultaneous Echinococcal superinfection in a patient with polycystic liver disease.
authors:
- Cicerone O
- Lissandrin R
- Brunetti E
- Maestri M
journal: Clin Case Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ccr3.8083
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Simultaneous Echinococcal superinfection in a patient with polycystic liver disease.
**Authors:** Cicerone O, Lissandrin R, Brunetti E, Maestri M
**Journal:** Clin Case Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ccr3.8083](https://doi.org/10.1002/ccr3.8083)

## Content

1. Clin Case Rep. 2023 Oct 19;11(10):e8083. doi: 10.1002/ccr3.8083. eCollection 
2023 Oct.

Simultaneous Echinococcal superinfection in a patient with polycystic liver 
disease.

Cicerone O(1)(2), Lissandrin R(3), Brunetti E(1)(3), Maestri M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Clinico-Chirurgiche, Diagnostiche e Pediatriche 
Università di Pavia Pavia Italy.
(2)Chirurgia Generale I Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo Pavia Italy.
(3)Malattie Infettive e Tropicali Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo Pavia 
Italy.

KEY CLINICAL MESSAGE: Concurrent polycystic liver disease and echinococcus 
infection can hinder diagnosis. Surgery may be needed for accurate diagnosis and 
treatment. Multidisciplinary collaboration is crucial.
ABSTRACT: Cystic echinococcosis, caused by Echinococcus granulosus eggs, is a 
parasitic zoonosis that typically affects humans through accidental ingestion. 
Polycystic liver disease is a condition characterized by the presence of 
multiple liver cysts and is often associated with polycystic kidney disease. 
Here, we present a case of a man in his 70s with a pre-existing diagnosis of 
polycystic liver disease. Radiological findings of a suspicious cyst in the S4 
segment initially lacked serological evidence of echinococcosis; however, 
intraoperative confirmation revealed the presence of an echinococcal cyst. This 
article aims to explore both clinical conditions and highlight the therapeutic 
considerations for their management. Moreover, we discuss the significance of 
this unique case, emphasizing the possibility of the coexistence of these two 
pathologies.

© 2023 The Authors. Clinical Case Reports published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/ccr3.8083
PMCID: PMC10587650
PMID: 37867541

Conflict of interest statement: The authors do not have any conflict of interest 
to declare.