---
reference_id: "PMID:37321578"
title: "X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets: from diagnosis to management."
authors:
- Park E
- Kang HG
journal: Clin Exp Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3345/cep.2022.01459
content_type: abstract_only
---

# X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets: from diagnosis to management.
**Authors:** Park E, Kang HG
**Journal:** Clin Exp Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3345/cep.2022.01459](https://doi.org/10.3345/cep.2022.01459)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Pediatr. 2024 Jan;67(1):17-25. doi: 10.3345/cep.2022.01459. Epub 2023
 Jun 14.

X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets: from diagnosis to management.

Park E(1), Kang HG(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Korea University Guro Hospital, Korea University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.
(3)Departments of Pediatrics, Seoul National University Children's Hospital, 
Seoul, Korea.
(4)Kidney Research Institute, Medical Research Center, Seoul National University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(5)Wide River Institute of Immunology, Seoul National University, Hongcheon, 
Korea.

X-linked hypophosphatemia (XLH), the most common cause of hypophosphatemic 
rickets, affects one in every 20,000 people. Although conventional therapy for 
XLH was introduced approximately 4 decades ago, the temporary replacement of 
oral phosphate salts and activated vitamin D cannot completely control chronic 
hypophosphatemia, leaving patients with incomplete healing and residual skeletal 
deformity as well as at risk of endocrine abnormalities and adverse drug 
reactions. However, understanding the pathophysiology has led to the development 
of a targeted therapy, burosumab, a fibroblast growth factor-23 inhibitor that 
was recently approved in Korea for the treatment of XLH. This review provides 
insight into the diagnosis, evaluation, treatment, and recommended follow-up for 
a typical case of XLH and reviews its pathophysiology.

DOI: 10.3345/cep.2022.01459
PMCID: PMC10764665
PMID: 37321578

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest No potential conflict of 
interest relevant to this article was reported.