---
reference_id: "PMID:30066494"
title: "Hepatopulmonary Syndrome in Children: A 20-Year Review of Presenting Symptoms, Clinical Progression, and Transplant Outcome."
authors:
- Warner S
- McKiernan PJ
- Hartley J
- Ong E
- van Mourik ID
- Gupte G
- Abdel-Hady M
- Muiesan P
- Perera T
- Mirza D
- Sharif K
- Kelly DA
- Beath SV
journal: Liver Transpl
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/lt.25296
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Age Factors
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Databases, Factual"
- Disease Progression
- Early Diagnosis
- Female
- "Hepatopulmonary Syndrome/diagnosis, etiology, surgery"
- Humans
- Infant
- Length of Stay
- "Liver Cirrhosis/complications, diagnosis, surgery"
- Liver Transplantation/adverse effects
- Male
- Oxygen Inhalation Therapy
- "Postoperative Complications/etiology, therapy"
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Recovery of Function
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
- Waiting Lists
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatopulmonary Syndrome in Children: A 20-Year Review of Presenting Symptoms, Clinical Progression, and Transplant Outcome.
**Authors:** Warner S, McKiernan PJ, Hartley J, Ong E, van Mourik ID, Gupte G, Abdel-Hady M, Muiesan P, Perera T, Mirza D, Sharif K, Kelly DA, Beath SV
**Journal:** Liver Transpl (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/lt.25296](https://doi.org/10.1002/lt.25296)

## Content

1. Liver Transpl. 2018 Sep;24(9):1271-1279. doi: 10.1002/lt.25296.

Hepatopulmonary Syndrome in Children: A 20-Year Review of Presenting Symptoms,
Clinical Progression, and Transplant Outcome.

Warner S(1)(2), McKiernan PJ(1), Hartley J(1), Ong E(1), van Mourik ID(1), Gupte
G(1), Abdel-Hady M(1), Muiesan P(3), Perera T(3), Mirza D(3), Sharif K(1), Kelly
DA(1), Beath SV(1).

Author information:
(1)The Liver Unit, Birmingham Women's and Children's Hospitals National Health
Service Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(2)Centre for Liver Research and National Institute for Health Research
Biomedical Research Unit in Liver Disease, Institute of Immunology and
Immunotherapy, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(3)University Hospitals Birmingham National Health Service Foundation Trust,
Birmingham, United Kingdom.

Hepatopulmonary syndrome (HPS) in stable patients with cirrhosis can easily be
overlooked. We report on the presenting symptoms, disease progression, and
outcomes after liver transplantation (LT) in children with HPS. Twenty patients
were diagnosed with HPS between 1996 and 2016. The etiologies were as follows:
biliary atresia (n = 9); alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency (n = 2); cryptogenic
liver disease (n = 3); and others (n = 6). HPS presentations were as follows;
dyspnea (n = 17) and pneumonia (n = 3). For diagnostic confirmation, the
following techniques were used: technetium-99m-labeled macroaggregated albumin
lung perfusion scan (n = 13) or contrast echocardiogram (n = 7). There were 16
patients listed for LT, with a median age at HPS diagnosis of 10 years and an
average wait from listing to LT of 9 weeks. A marked rise in hemoglobin (Hb;
median, 125-143.5 g/L) and modest decrease in oxygen saturation (SpO2 ; median
91% to 88% room air) were evident over this time. Patients' need for assisted
ventilation (1 day), pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) stay (3 days), and
total hospital stay (20 days) were similar to our general LT recipients-the key
difference in the postoperative period was the duration of supplementary O2
requirement. Hb of ≥130 g/L on the day of LT correlated with a longer PICU stay
(P value = 0.02), duration of supplementary O2 (P value = 0.005), and the need
for the latter beyond 7 days after LT (P value = 0.01). Fifteen patients had
resolution of their HPS after LT. The 5-, 10-, and 20-year survival rates were
unchanged at 87.5%. None had a recurrence of HPS. In conclusion, HPS is a
life-threatening complication of cirrhosis which usually develops insidiously.
This combined with the often-stable nature of the liver disease leads to delays
in diagnosis and listing for LT. Progressive polycythemia extends the need for
supplementary O2 and PICU stay. We advocate screening for HPS with a combination
of SpO2 and Hb monitoring to facilitate earlier recognition, timely LT, and
shortened recovery periods.

© 2018 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/lt.25296
PMID: 30066494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
