---
reference_id: "PMID:8404969"
title: Differential diagnosis of hyperphenylalaninaemia by a combined phenylalanine-tetrahydrobiopterin loading test.
authors:
- Ponzone A
- Guardamagna O
- Spada M
- Ferraris S
- Ponzone R
- Kierat L
- Blau N
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1007/BF01955242
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differential diagnosis of hyperphenylalaninaemia by a combined phenylalanine-tetrahydrobiopterin loading test.
**Authors:** Ponzone A, Guardamagna O, Spada M, Ferraris S, Ponzone R, Kierat L, Blau N
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF01955242](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01955242)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 1993 Aug;152(8):655-61. doi: 10.1007/BF01955242.

Differential diagnosis of hyperphenylalaninaemia by a combined 
phenylalanine-tetrahydrobiopterin loading test.

Ponzone A(1), Guardamagna O, Spada M, Ferraris S, Ponzone R, Kierat L, Blau N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University of Sassari, Italy.

We describe a new fully reliable method for the differential diagnosis of 
tetrahydrobiopterin-dependent hyperphenylalaninaemia (HPA). The method comprises 
the combined phenylalanine (Phe) plus tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) oral loading 
test and enables the selective screening of BH4 deficiency when pterin analysis 
is not available or when a clear diagnosis has not been previously made. It 
should be performed together with the measurement of dihydropteridine reductase 
(DHPR) activity in blood. The new combined loading test was performed in nine 
patients with primary HPA, three with classical phenylketonuria (PKU), three 
with DHPR deficiency, and three with 6-pyruvoyl tetrahydropterin synthase (PTPS) 
deficiency. Three hours after oral Phe loading (100 mg/kg body weight), 
synthetic BH4 was administered orally at doses of either 7.5 or 20 mg/kg body 
weight. Amino acid (Phe and tyrosine) and pterin (neopterin and biopterin) 
metabolism and kinetics were analysed. By exploiting the decrease in serum Phe 4 
and 8 h after administration, a clear response was obtained with the higher BH4 
dose (20 mg/kg body weight), allowing detection of all cases of BH4 deficiency, 
as well as differentiation of BH4 synthesis from regeneration defects. Since 
DHPR deficient patients who were previously shown to be non-responsive to the 
simple BH4 loading test gave a positive response, the combined Phe plus BH4 
loading test can be used as a more reliable tool for the differential diagnosis 
of HPA in these patients. Moreover, it takes advantage of being performed while 
patients are on a Phe-restricted diet.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01955242
PMID: 8404969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]