---
reference_id: "PMID:37539177"
title: "Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome: A systematic review examining genetic, neurological, and neurovascular associations to inform screening."
authors:
- Muzyka L
- Winterhalter E
- LoPresti MA
- Scoville J
- Bohnsack BL
- Lam SK
journal: Heliyon
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e18225
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome: A systematic review examining genetic, neurological, and neurovascular associations to inform screening.
**Authors:** Muzyka L, Winterhalter E, LoPresti MA, Scoville J, Bohnsack BL, Lam SK
**Journal:** Heliyon (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e18225](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e18225)

## Content

1. Heliyon. 2023 Jul 13;9(7):e18225. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e18225. 
eCollection 2023 Jul.

Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome: A systematic review examining genetic, neurological, 
and neurovascular associations to inform screening.

Muzyka L(1), Winterhalter E(2), LoPresti MA(2)(3), Scoville J(4), Bohnsack 
BL(5)(6)(7), Lam SK(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Dell Medical School at the University of Texas at Austin, Department of 
Neurosurgery, Austin, TX, United States.
(2)Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Department of 
Neurosurgery, Chicago, IL, United States.
(3)Ann and Robert H Lurie Children's Hospital, Division of Pediatric 
Neurosurgery, Chicago, IL, United States.
(4)University of Utah School of Medicine, Department of Neurosurgery, Salt Lake 
City, UT, United States.
(5)Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Department of 
Ophthalmology, Chicago, IL, United States.
(6)Ann and Robert H Lurie Children's Hospital, Division of Ophthalmology, 
Chicago, IL, United States.
(7)University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Department of 
Neurosurgery, Rochester, NY, United States.

Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome (ARS) is comprised of a group of autosomal dominant 
disorders that are each characterized by anterior segment abnormalities of the 
eye. Mutations in the transcription factors FOXC1 or PITX2 are the most 
well-studied genetic manifestations of this syndrome. Due to the rarity this 
syndrome, ARS-associated neurological manifestations have not been well 
characterized. The purpose of this systematic review is to characterize and 
describe ARS neurologic manifestations that affect the cerebral vasculature and 
their early and late sequelae. PRISMA guidelines were followed; studies meeting 
inclusion criteria were analyzed for study design, evidence level, number of 
patients, patient age, whether the patients were related, genotype, ocular 
findings, and nervous system findings, specifically neurostructural and 
neurovascular manifestations. 63 studies met inclusion criteria, 60 (95%) were 
case studies or case series. The FOXC1 gene was most commonly found, followed by 
COL4A1, then PITX2. The most commonly described structural neurological findings 
were white matter abnormalities in 26 (41.3%) of studies, followed by 
Dandy-Walker Complex 12 (19%), and agenesis of the corpus callosum 11 (17%). 
Neurovascular findings were examined in 6 (9%) of studies, identifying stroke, 
cerebral small vessel disease (CSVD), tortuosity/dolichoectasia of arteries, 
among others, with no mention of moyamoya. This is the first systematic review 
investigating the genetic, neurological, and neurovascular associations with 
ARS. Structural neurological manifestations were common, yet often benign, 
perhaps limiting the utility of MRI screening. Neurovascular abnormalities, 
specifically stroke and CSVD, were identified in this population. Stroke risk 
was present in the presence and absence of cardiac comorbidities. These findings 
suggest a relationship between ARS and neurovascular findings; however, larger 
scale studies are necessary inform therapeutic decisions.

© 2023 Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e18225
PMCID: PMC10395477
PMID: 37539177

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.