---
reference_id: "PMID:17853480"
title: WT1 mutations in Meacham syndrome suggest a coelomic mesothelial origin of the cardiac and diaphragmatic malformations.
authors:
- Suri M
- Kelehan P
- "O'neill D"
- Vadeyar S
- Grant J
- Ahmed SF
- Tolmie J
- McCann E
- Lam W
- Smith S
- Fitzpatrick D
- Hastie ND
- Reardon W
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31924
keywords:
- Diaphragm/abnormalities
- Epithelium/pathology
- "Genes, Wilms Tumor"
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/genetics"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Mutation
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# WT1 mutations in Meacham syndrome suggest a coelomic mesothelial origin of the cardiac and diaphragmatic malformations.
**Authors:** Suri M, Kelehan P, O'neill D, Vadeyar S, Grant J, Ahmed SF, Tolmie J, McCann E, Lam W, Smith S, Fitzpatrick D, Hastie ND, Reardon W
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.31924](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.31924)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Oct 1;143A(19):2312-20. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31924.

WT1 mutations in Meacham syndrome suggest a coelomic mesothelial origin of the 
cardiac and diaphragmatic malformations.

Suri M(1), Kelehan P, O'neill D, Vadeyar S, Grant J, Ahmed SF, Tolmie J, McCann 
E, Lam W, Smith S, Fitzpatrick D, Hastie ND, Reardon W.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Genetics Service, City Hospital, Nottingham, UK.

Meacham syndrome is a rare sporadically occurring multiple malformation syndrome 
characterized by male pseudohermaphroditism with abnormal internal female 
genitalia comprising a uterus and double or septate vagina, complex congenital 
heart defect and diaphragmatic abnormalities. We report on eight new cases of 
this condition, two of whom were shown to have heterozygous missense mutations 
in the C-terminal zinc finger domains of WT1: Arg366Cys and Arg394Trp. These 
data represent clinical and molecular evidence that the WT1 gene plays a central 
role in normal development of the diaphragm and the proepicardially derived 
tissues. Identification of WT1 expression in the region of coelomic mesothelium 
which will form the proepicardium and diaphragm provides a plausible unifying 
patterning defect in these cases. Interestingly, the Arg366Cys mutation has been 
previously reported in Denys-Drash syndrome and Arg394Trp mutation has been 
previously reported in both isolated Wilms tumor and Denys-Drash syndrome. This 
phenotypic diversity with a single mutation suggests there are other factors 
modulating all aspects of WT1 function during human development. If genetic 
modifiers of WT1 can be identified in animal models these become good candidate 
genes for the cases with Meacham syndrome we report on here where WT1 mutations 
cannot be identified.

2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31924
PMID: 17853480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]