---
reference_id: "PMID:33882206"
title: Sacituzumab Govitecan in Metastatic Triple-Negative Breast Cancer.
authors:
- Bardia A
- Hurvitz SA
- Tolaney SM
- Loirat D
- Punie K
- Oliveira M
- Brufsky A
- Sardesai SD
- Kalinsky K
- Zelnak AB
- Weaver R
- Traina T
- Dalenc F
- Aftimos P
- Lynce F
- Diab S
- Cortés J
- "O'Shaughnessy J"
- Diéras V
- Ferrario C
- Schmid P
- Carey LA
- Gianni L
- Piccart MJ
- Loibl S
- Goldenberg DM
- Hong Q
- Olivo MS
- Itri LM
- Rugo HS
- ASCENT Clinical Trial Investigators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2028485
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sacituzumab Govitecan in Metastatic Triple-Negative Breast Cancer.
**Authors:** Bardia A, Hurvitz SA, Tolaney SM, Loirat D, Punie K, Oliveira M, Brufsky A, Sardesai SD, Kalinsky K, Zelnak AB, Weaver R, Traina T, Dalenc F, Aftimos P, Lynce F, Diab S, Cortés J, O'Shaughnessy J, Diéras V, Ferrario C, Schmid P, Carey LA, Gianni L, Piccart MJ, Loibl S, Goldenberg DM, Hong Q, Olivo MS, Itri LM, Rugo HS, ASCENT Clinical Trial Investigators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2028485](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2028485)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2021 Apr 22;384(16):1529-1541. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2028485.

Sacituzumab Govitecan in Metastatic Triple-Negative Breast Cancer.

Bardia A(1), Hurvitz SA(1), Tolaney SM(1), Loirat D(1), Punie K(1), Oliveira 
M(1), Brufsky A(1), Sardesai SD(1), Kalinsky K(1), Zelnak AB(1), Weaver R(1), 
Traina T(1), Dalenc F(1), Aftimos P(1), Lynce F(1), Diab S(1), Cortés J(1), 
O'Shaughnessy J(1), Diéras V(1), Ferrario C(1), Schmid P(1), Carey LA(1), Gianni 
L(1), Piccart MJ(1), Loibl S(1), Goldenberg DM(1), Hong Q(1), Olivo MS(1), Itri 
LM(1), Rugo HS(1); ASCENT Clinical Trial Investigators.

Collaborators: Ademuyiwa F, Aftimos P, Armstrong A, Bardia A, Bigot F, Brufsky 
A, Calvo Martînez L, Carey LA, Ciruelos Gil E, Conlin A, Cortés J, Dalenc F, 
Daniel B, Danso M, Darcourt J, Diab S, Diamond J, Diéras V, Favret A, Fernaández 
Abad M, Ferrario C, Firmin N, Fontaine C, Frenel JS, Gianni L, Graff S, Hamilton 
E, Harris E, Hart L, Hegewisch- S, Becker B, Henry S, Hilton C, Hurvitz SA, Jain 
S, Kalinsky K, Kechagioglou P, Klein L, Leon-Ferre R, Lerebours F, Loibl S, 
Loirat D, López R, Lynce F, Malik Z, Mansi L, Martínez García M, Mayer I, Meshad 
M, Meza-Junco J, Moroose R, Nanda R, Nikolinakos P, O'Shaughnessy J, Oliveira M, 
Omene C, Paterson F, Perez A, Perez Garcia JM, Piccart M, Punie K, Rayson D, 
Recalde S, Richards D, Richards P, Rugo H, Ruiz-Borrego M, Saghatchian M, 
Sardesai SR, Schmid P, Schnipper L, Schwartzberg L, Sharma P, Sheri A, Spensley 
S, Stokoe C, Sun J, Tedesco K, Tolaney SM, Traina T, Tredan O, Tsai M, Vahdat L, 
Wahl T, Wang G, Weaver R, Weide R, Young R, Zelnak A.

Author information:
(1)From the Division of Medical Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer 
Center (A. Bardia), and the Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer 
Institute (S.M.T.) - both in Boston; the University of California, Los Angeles, 
Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, Los Angeles (S.A.H.); the Medical Oncology 
Department and the Department of Drug Development and Innovation, Institut 
Curie, Paris (D.L.), Institut Claudius Regaud, Institut Universitaire du Cancer 
de Toulouse Oncopole, Toulouse (F.D.), and the Department of Medical Oncology, 
Centre Eugène Marquis, Rennes (V.D.) - all in France; the Department of General 
Medical Oncology and Multidisciplinary Breast Center, Leuven Cancer Institute, 
University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven (K.P.), and the Clinical Trials Conduct Unit 
(P.A.), Institut Jules Bordet-Université Libre de Bruxelles (M.J.P.), Brussels - 
all in Belgium; the Medical Oncology Department and Breast Cancer Group, Vall 
d'Hebron University Hospital and Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology (M.O.), and 
the International Breast Cancer Center, Quiron Group (J.C.) - all in Barcelona; 
Magee-Womens Hospital and the Hillman Cancer Center, University of Pittsburgh 
Medical Center, Pittsburgh (A. Brufsky); Ohio State University Wexner Medical 
Center, Columbus (S.D.S.); Columbia University Irving Medical Center (K.K.) and 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center (T.T.) - both in New York; Northside 
Hospital, Atlanta (A.B.Z.); Florida Cancer Specialists, Tampa (R.W.); Georgetown 
Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Washington, DC (F.L.); Rocky Mountain 
Cancer Centers, Greenwood Village, CO (S.D.); Baylor University Medical Center 
and Texas Oncology, Dallas (J.O.); Segal Cancer Centre, Jewish General Hospital, 
Montreal (C.F.); Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London 
(P.S.); University of North Carolina Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
Chapel Hill (L.A.C.); Gianni Bonadonna Foundation, Milan (L.G.); the Department 
of Medicine and Research, Hämatologisch-Onkologische Gemeinschaftspraxis am 
Bethanien-Krankenhaus, Frankfurt, Germany (S.L.); Immunomedics, Morris Plains, 
NJ (D.M.G., Q.H., M.S.O., L.M.I.); and the University of California, San 
Francisco, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, San Francisco 
(H.S.R.).

Comment in
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2021 Jun;18(6):322. doi: 10.1038/s41571-021-00516-x.
    N Engl J Med. 2021 Jul 15;385(3):e12. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2108478.
    Ann Transl Med. 2021 Jul;9(14):1113. doi: 10.21037/atm-21-1103.
    Future Oncol. 2021 Oct 1;17(30):3911-3924. doi: 10.2217/fon-2021-0868.
    Ann Transl Med. 2022 Apr;10(7):389. doi: 10.21037/atm-21-6999.
    Ann Transl Med. 2022 Apr;10(7):390. doi: 10.21037/atm-22-484.
    Ann Transl Med. 2022 Jun;10(11):647. doi: 10.21037/atm-22-813.
    Ann Transl Med. 2022 May;10(9):501. doi: 10.21037/atm-22-621.
    Ann Transl Med. 2022 Sep;10(18):1031. doi: 10.21037/atm-22-1892.
    Ann Transl Med. 2022 Nov;10(21):1184. doi: 10.21037/atm-22-4581.

BACKGROUND: Patients with metastatic triple-negative breast cancer have a poor 
prognosis. Sacituzumab govitecan is an antibody-drug conjugate composed of an 
antibody targeting the human trophoblast cell-surface antigen 2 (Trop-2), which 
is expressed in the majority of breast cancers, coupled to SN-38 (topoisomerase 
I inhibitor) through a proprietary hydrolyzable linker.
METHODS: In this randomized, phase 3 trial, we evaluated sacituzumab govitecan 
as compared with single-agent chemotherapy of the physician's choice (eribulin, 
vinorelbine, capecitabine, or gemcitabine) in patients with relapsed or 
refractory metastatic triple-negative breast cancer. The primary end point was 
progression-free survival (as determined by blinded independent central review) 
among patients without brain metastases.
RESULTS: A total of 468 patients without brain metastases were randomly assigned 
to receive sacituzumab govitecan (235 patients) or chemotherapy (233 patients). 
The median age was 54 years; all the patients had previous use of taxanes. The 
median progression-free survival was 5.6 months (95% confidence interval [CI], 
4.3 to 6.3; 166 events) with sacituzumab govitecan and 1.7 months (95% CI, 1.5 
to 2.6; 150 events) with chemotherapy (hazard ratio for disease progression or 
death, 0.41; 95% CI, 0.32 to 0.52; P<0.001). The median overall survival was 
12.1 months (95% CI, 10.7 to 14.0) with sacituzumab govitecan and 6.7 months 
(95% CI, 5.8 to 7.7) with chemotherapy (hazard ratio for death, 0.48; 95% CI, 
0.38 to 0.59; P<0.001). The percentage of patients with an objective response 
was 35% with sacituzumab govitecan and 5% with chemotherapy. The incidences of 
key treatment-related adverse events of grade 3 or higher were neutropenia (51% 
with sacituzumab govitecan and 33% with chemotherapy), leukopenia (10% and 5%), 
diarrhea (10% and <1%), anemia (8% and 5%), and febrile neutropenia (6% and 2%). 
There were three deaths owing to adverse events in each group; no deaths were 
considered to be related to sacituzumab govitecan treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Progression-free and overall survival were significantly longer 
with sacituzumab govitecan than with single-agent chemotherapy among patients 
with metastatic triple-negative breast cancer. Myelosuppression and diarrhea 
were more frequent with sacituzumab govitecan. (Funded by Immunomedics; ASCENT 
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02574455; EudraCT number, 2017-003019-21.).

Copyright © 2021 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2028485
PMID: 33882206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]