---
reference_id: "PMID:25592632"
title: "Sunitinib in patients with chemotherapy-refractory thymoma and thymic carcinoma: an open-label phase 2 trial."
authors:
- Thomas A
- Rajan A
- Berman A
- Tomita Y
- Brzezniak C
- Lee MJ
- Lee S
- Ling A
- Spittler AJ
- Carter CA
- Guha U
- Wang Y
- Szabo E
- Meltzer P
- Steinberg SM
- Trepel JB
- Loehrer PJ
- Giaccone G
journal: Lancet Oncol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(14)71181-7
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/drug effects"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Indoles/therapeutic use
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/drug therapy, mortality, pathology"
- Neoplasm Staging
- "Neuroendocrine Tumors/drug therapy, mortality, pathology"
- Prognosis
- Pyrroles/therapeutic use
- Sunitinib
- Survival Rate
- "Thymoma/drug therapy, mortality, pathology"
- "Thymus Neoplasms/drug therapy, mortality, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sunitinib in patients with chemotherapy-refractory thymoma and thymic carcinoma: an open-label phase 2 trial.
**Authors:** Thomas A, Rajan A, Berman A, Tomita Y, Brzezniak C, Lee MJ, Lee S, Ling A, Spittler AJ, Carter CA, Guha U, Wang Y, Szabo E, Meltzer P, Steinberg SM, Trepel JB, Loehrer PJ, Giaccone G
**Journal:** Lancet Oncol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1470-2045(14)71181-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(14)71181-7)

## Content

1. Lancet Oncol. 2015 Feb;16(2):177-86. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(14)71181-7. Epub 
2015 Jan 13.

Sunitinib in patients with chemotherapy-refractory thymoma and thymic carcinoma: 
an open-label phase 2 trial.

Thomas A(1), Rajan A(1), Berman A(1), Tomita Y(2), Brzezniak C(3), Lee MJ(2), 
Lee S(2), Ling A(4), Spittler AJ(5), Carter CA(3), Guha U(1), Wang Y(6), Szabo 
E(7), Meltzer P(8), Steinberg SM(9), Trepel JB(2), Loehrer PJ(5), Giaccone 
G(10).

Author information:
(1)Thoracic and GI Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Developmental Therapeutics Branch, National Cancer Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Walter Reed National Military Medical 
Center, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Warren Grant Magnuson Clinical Center, 
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(5)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Indiana University Medical Center, 
Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(6)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Lombardi Cancer Center, Georgetown 
University, Washington, DC, USA.
(7)Division of Cancer Prevention, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(8)Genetics Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(9)Biostatistics and Data Management Section, Center for Cancer Research, 
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(10)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Lombardi Cancer Center, Georgetown 
University, Washington, DC, USA. Electronic address: gg496@georgetown.edu.

Erratum in
    Lancet Oncol. 2015 Mar;16(3):e105. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(15)70095-1.

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2015 Feb;16(2):124-5. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(15)70010-0.

BACKGROUND: No standard treatments are available for advanced thymic epithelial 
tumours after failure of platinum-based chemotherapy. We investigated the 
activity of sunitinib, an orally administered tyrosine kinase inhibitor.
METHODS: Between May 15, 2012, and Oct 2, 2013, we did an open-label phase 2 
trial in patients with histologically confirmed chemotherapy-refractory thymic 
epithelial tumours. Patients were eligible if they had disease progression after 
at least one previous regimen of platinum-containing chemotherapy, an Eastern 
Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of two or lower, measurable 
disease, and adequate organ function. Patients received 50 mg of sunitinib 
orally once a day, in 6-week cycles (ie, 4 weeks of treatment followed by 2 
weeks without treatment), until tumour progression or unacceptable toxic effects 
arose. The primary endpoint was investigator-assessed best tumour response at 
any point, which we analysed separately in thymoma and thymic carcinoma cohorts. 
Patients who had received at least one cycle of treatment and had their disease 
reassessed were included in the analyses of response. The trial was registered 
with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01621568.
FINDINGS: 41 patients were enrolled, 25 with thymic carcinoma and 16 with 
thymoma. One patient with thymic carcinoma was deemed ineligible after enrolment 
and did not receive protocol treatment. Of patients who received treatment, one 
individual with thymic carcinoma was not assessable because she died. Median 
follow-up on trial was 17 months (IQR 14.0-18.4). Of 23 assessable patients with 
thymic carcinoma, six (26%, 90% CI 12.1-45.3, 95% CI 10.2-48.4) had partial 
responses, 15 (65%, 95% CI 42.7-83.6) achieved stable disease, and two (9%, 
1.1-28.0) had progressive disease. Of 16 patients with thymoma, one (6%, 95% CI 
0.2-30.2) had a partial response, 12 (75%, 47.6-92.7) had stable disease, and 
three (19%, 4.1-45.7) had progressive disease. The most common grade 3 and 4 
treatment-related adverse events were lymphocytopenia (eight [20%] of 40 
patients), fatigue (eight [20%]), and oral mucositis (eight [20%]). Five (13%) 
patients had decreases in left-ventricular ejection fraction, of which three 
(8%) were grade 3 events. Three (8%) patients died during treatment, including 
one individual who died of cardiac arrest that was possibly treatment-related.
INTERPRETATION: Sunitinib is active in previously treated patients with thymic 
carcinoma. Further studies are needed to identify potential biomarkers of 
activity.
FUNDING: National Cancer Institute (Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program).

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(14)71181-7
PMCID: PMC4401497
PMID: 25592632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]