---
reference_id: "PMID:28158428"
title: "The clinical and genetic spectrum of catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia: findings from an international multicentre registry."
authors:
- Roston TM
- Yuchi Z
- Kannankeril PJ
- Hathaway J
- Vinocur JM
- Etheridge SP
- Potts JE
- Maginot KR
- Salerno JC
- Cohen MI
- Hamilton RM
- Pflaumer A
- Mohammed S
- Kimlicka L
- Kanter RJ
- LaPage MJ
- Collins KK
- Gebauer RA
- Temple JD
- Batra AS
- Erickson C
- Miszczak-Knecht M
- Kubuš P
- Bar-Cohen Y
- Kantoch M
- Thomas VC
- Hessling G
- Anderson C
- Young ML
- Choi SHJ
- Cabrera Ortega M
- Lau YR
- Johnsrude CL
- Fournier A
- Van Petegem F
- Sanatani S
journal: Europace
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/europace/euw389
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Calsequestrin/genetics
- Child
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac/epidemiology"
- Female
- Genetic Markers
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Heredity
- Humans
- Male
- "Models, Molecular"
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Prognosis
- Protein Conformation
- Registries
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- "Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Structure-Activity Relationship
- "Tachycardia, Ventricular/diagnosis, genetics, mortality, physiopathology"
- Polymorphic Catecholaminergic Ventricular Tachycardia
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The clinical and genetic spectrum of catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia: findings from an international multicentre registry.
**Authors:** Roston TM, Yuchi Z, Kannankeril PJ, Hathaway J, Vinocur JM, Etheridge SP, Potts JE, Maginot KR, Salerno JC, Cohen MI, Hamilton RM, Pflaumer A, Mohammed S, Kimlicka L, Kanter RJ, LaPage MJ, Collins KK, Gebauer RA, Temple JD, Batra AS, Erickson C, Miszczak-Knecht M, Kubuš P, Bar-Cohen Y, Kantoch M, Thomas VC, Hessling G, Anderson C, Young ML, Choi SHJ, Cabrera Ortega M, Lau YR, Johnsrude CL, Fournier A, Van Petegem F, Sanatani S
**Journal:** Europace (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/europace/euw389](https://doi.org/10.1093/europace/euw389)

## Content

1. Europace. 2018 Mar 1;20(3):541-547. doi: 10.1093/europace/euw389.

The clinical and genetic spectrum of catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular
tachycardia: findings from an international multicentre registry.

Roston TM(1), Yuchi Z(1), Kannankeril PJ(2), Hathaway J(3), Vinocur JM(4),
Etheridge SP(5), Potts JE(1), Maginot KR(6), Salerno JC(7), Cohen MI(8),
Hamilton RM(9), Pflaumer A(10), Mohammed S(1), Kimlicka L(1), Kanter RJ(11),
LaPage MJ(12), Collins KK(13), Gebauer RA(14), Temple JD(15), Batra AS(16),
Erickson C(17), Miszczak-Knecht M(18), Kubuš P(19), Bar-Cohen Y(20), Kantoch
M(21), Thomas VC(17), Hessling G(22), Anderson C(23), Young ML(24), Choi SHJ(1),
Cabrera Ortega M(25), Lau YR(26), Johnsrude CL(27), Fournier A(28), Van Petegem
F(1), Sanatani S(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pediatrics/Medicine/Biochemistry & Molecular Biology,
University of British Columbia, 4480 Oak Street, Room 1F3, Vancouver, BC, V6H
3V4, Canada.
(2)Department of Pediatrics and the Vanderbilt Center for Arrhythmia Research
and Therapeutics (VanCART) Vanderbilt University Medical Center and the Monroe
Carell Jr. Children's Hospital at Vanderbilt, 2200 Children's Way, Suite 5230,
Nashville, TN 37232-9119, USA.
(3)BC Inherited Arrhythmia Program, 211-1033 Davie St, Vancouver, BC V6E 1M7,
Canada.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Rochester, 601 Elmwood Ave, Box 631,
Rochester, NY 14642, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah, 81 N Mario Capecchi Drive Salt
Lake City, UT 84113, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, 1675 Highland Ave, Madison, WI 53792, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, 4800 Sand Point Way NE,
Seattle, WA 98105, USA.
(8)Division of Cardiology Phoenix Children's Hospital, 1919 E. Thomas Road, 2nd
Floor, Heart Center, Phoenix, AZ 85016, USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, University of Toronto, Hospital for Sick Children,
555 University Avenue Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.
(10)Royal Children's Hospital MCRI and University of Melbourne, 50 Flemington
Road Parkville, Melbourne 3052, Australia.
(11)Nicklaus Children's Hospital, 3100 SW 62 Ave, Cardiology ACB - 2nd Floor
Miami, FL 33155, USA.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan, 1500 E Medical Center
Drive, #6303, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado, 13123 East 16th Avenue,
Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(14)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Heart Center, University of Leipzig,
Strümpellstrasse 39, Leipzig, Germany.
(15)Department of Pediatrics, A. I. DuPont Hospital For Children, 1600 Rockland
Rd, Wilmington, DE 19803, USA.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, University of California at Irvine Medical Center,
1140 W. La Veta Ave., Suite 750, Orange, CA 92868, USA.
(17)Division of Cardiology, UNMC/CUMC/Children's Hospital and Medical Center,
8200 Dodge Street, Omaha, NE 68114, USA.
(18)Department of Cardiology, Children's Memorial Health Institute, Dzieci
Polskich 20, 04 -730 Warsaw, Poland.
(19)Children's Heart Centre, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in
Prague and Motol University Hospital, Vúvalu 84, 15006, Prague, Czech Republic.
(20)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, 4650 Sunset Blvd
#34, Los Angeles, CA 90027, USA.
(21)Stollery Children's Hospital, University of Alberta, Clinical Sciences
Building, 8440 112 St NW, Edmonton, AB T6G 2B7, Canada.
(22)Department of Electrophysiology, German Heart Center Munich, Technical
University, Lazarettstr. 3680636 Munich, Germany.
(23)Providence Sacred Heart Children's Hospital, 101 W. 8th Ave. Suite 4300E,
Spokane, WA 99204, USA.
(24)Department of Pediatrics, Joe DiMaggio Children's Hospital, 1150 North 35th
Avenue Suite 575, Hollywood, FL 33021, USA.
(25)Department of Arrhythmia and Cardiac Pacing, Cardiocentro Pediatrico William
Soler, 100 y perla, Boyeros. 10800, Havana, Cuba.
(26)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1700
6th Ave S, Birmingham, AL 35233, USA.
(27)Department of Pediatrics, University of Louisville, 601 S Floyd St #602,
Louisville, KY 40208, USA.
(28)Département de Pédiatrie, CHU Ste Justine, 3175, chemin Côte
Sainte-Catherine, Montréal, QC H3T 1C5 Canada.

AIMS: Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) is an ion
channelopathy characterized by ventricular arrhythmia during exertion or stress.
Mutations in RYR2-coded Ryanodine Receptor-2 (RyR2) and CASQ2-coded
Calsequestrin-2 (CASQ2) genes underlie CPVT1 and CPVT2, respectively. However,
prognostic markers are scarce. We sought to better characterize the phenotypic
and genotypic spectrum of CPVT, and utilize molecular modelling to help account
for clinical phenotypes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: This is a Pediatric and Congenital Electrophysiology
Society multicentre, retrospective cohort study of CPVT patients diagnosed
at <19 years of age and their first-degree relatives. Genetic testing was
undertaken in 194 of 236 subjects (82%) during 3.5 (1.4-5.3) years of follow-up.
The majority (60%) had RyR2-associated CPVT1. Variant locations were predicted
based on a 3D structural model of RyR2. Specific residues appear to have key
structural importance, supported by an association between cardiac arrest and
mutations in the intersubunit interface of the N-terminus, and the S4-S5 linker
and helices S5 and S6 of the RyR2 C-terminus. In approximately one quarter of
symptomatic patients, cardiac events were precipitated by only normal wakeful
activities.
CONCLUSION: This large, multicentre study identifies contemporary challenges
related to the diagnosis and prognostication of CPVT patients. Structural
modelling of RyR2 can improve our understanding severe CPVT phenotypes. Wakeful
rest, rather than exertion, often precipitated life-threatening cardiac events.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved.
© The Author 2017. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/europace/euw389
PMCID: PMC6059141
PMID: 28158428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
