---
reference_id: "PMID:39062116"
title: "Fibromyalgia: A Review of the Pathophysiological Mechanisms and Multidisciplinary Treatment Strategies."
authors:
- Jurado-Priego LN
- Cueto-Ureña C
- Ramírez-Expósito MJ
- Martínez-Martos JM
journal: Biomedicines
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/biomedicines12071543
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fibromyalgia: A Review of the Pathophysiological Mechanisms and Multidisciplinary Treatment Strategies.
**Authors:** Jurado-Priego LN, Cueto-Ureña C, Ramírez-Expósito MJ, Martínez-Martos JM
**Journal:** Biomedicines (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biomedicines12071543](https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines12071543)

## Content

1. Biomedicines. 2024 Jul 11;12(7):1543. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines12071543.

Fibromyalgia: A Review of the Pathophysiological Mechanisms and 
Multidisciplinary Treatment Strategies.

Jurado-Priego LN(1), Cueto-Ureña C(1), Ramírez-Expósito MJ(1), Martínez-Martos 
JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Experimental and Clinical Physiopathology Research Group CTS-1039, Department 
of Health Sciences, School of Experimental and Health Sciences, University of 
Jaén, E-23071 Jaén, Spain.

Fibromyalgia is a syndrome characterized by chronic widespread musculoskeletal 
pain, which may or may not be associated with muscle or joint stiffness, 
accompanied by other symptoms such as fatigue, sleep disturbances, anxiety, and 
depression. It is a highly prevalent condition globally, being considered the 
third most common musculoskeletal disorder, following lower back pain and 
osteoarthritis. It is more prevalent in women than in men, and although it can 
occur at any age, it is more common between the ages of thirty and thirty-five. 
Although the pathophysiology and etiopathogenesis remain largely unknown, three 
underlying processes in fibromyalgia have been investigated. These include 
central sensitization, associated with an increase in the release of both 
excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitters; peripheral sensitization, involving 
alterations in peripheral nociceptor signaling; and inflammatory and immune 
mechanisms that develop concurrently with the aforementioned processes. 
Furthermore, it has been determined that genetic, endocrine, psychological, and 
sleep disorders may influence the development of this pathology. The accurate 
diagnosis of fibromyalgia remains challenging as it lacks specific diagnostic 
biomarkers, which are still under investigation. Nonetheless, diagnostic 
approaches to the condition have evolved based on the use of scales and 
questionnaires for pain identification. The complexity associated with this 
pathology makes it difficult to establish a single effective treatment. 
Therefore, treatment is multidisciplinary, involving both pharmacological and 
non-pharmacological interventions aimed at alleviating symptoms. The 
non-pharmacological treatments outlined in this review are primarily related to 
physiotherapy interventions. The effectiveness of physical exercise, both on 
land and in water, as well as the application of electrotherapy combined with 
transcranial therapy and manual therapy has been highlighted. All of these 
interventions aim to improve the quality of life of patients highly affected by 
fibromyalgia.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines12071543
PMCID: PMC11275111
PMID: 39062116

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.