---
reference_id: "PMID:18772345"
title: A novel stem loop control element-dependent UGA read-through system without translational selenocysteine incorporation in Drosophila.
authors:
- Hirosawa-Takamori M
- Ossipov D
- Novoselov SV
- Turanov AA
- Zhang Y
- Gladyshev VN
- Krol A
- Vorbrüggen G
- Jäckle H
journal: FASEB J
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1096/fj.08-116640
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel stem loop control element-dependent UGA read-through system without translational selenocysteine incorporation in Drosophila.
**Authors:** Hirosawa-Takamori M, Ossipov D, Novoselov SV, Turanov AA, Zhang Y, Gladyshev VN, Krol A, Vorbrüggen G, Jäckle H
**Journal:** FASEB J (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.08-116640](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.08-116640)

## Content

1. FASEB J. 2009 Jan;23(1):107-13. doi: 10.1096/fj.08-116640. Epub 2008 Sep 4.

A novel stem loop control element-dependent UGA read-through system without 
translational selenocysteine incorporation in Drosophila.

Hirosawa-Takamori M(1), Ossipov D, Novoselov SV, Turanov AA, Zhang Y, Gladyshev 
VN, Krol A, Vorbrüggen G, Jäckle H.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für biophysikalische Chemie, Abteilung Molekulare 
Entwicklungsbiologie, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.

Translational read-through of the UGA stop codon is an evolutionarily conserved 
feature that most prominently represents the basis of selenoprotein 
biosynthesis. It requires a specific cis-acting stem loop control element, 
termed SECIS, which is located in the 3'-untranslated region of eukaryotic 
selenoprotein mRNAs. In a search for novel factors underlying the SECIS-directed 
UGA read-through process, we identified an evolutionary conserved 
GTPase-activating protein, termed GAPsec. We show that the activity of the 
Drosophila GAPsec (dGAPsec) is necessary to support SECIS-dependent UGA 
read-through activity in flies and the mouse homolog mGAPsec in mice tissue 
culture cells. However, selenoprotein biosynthesis is not impaired in flies that 
lack dGAPsec activity. The results indicate that GAPsec is part of a novel 
SECIS-dependent translational read-through system that does not involve 
selenocysteine incorporation.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.08-116640
PMCID: PMC2626620
PMID: 18772345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]