---
reference_id: "PMID:32046998"
title: "Pathologic Complete Response after Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy and Impact on Breast Cancer Recurrence and Survival: A Comprehensive Meta-analysis."
authors:
- Spring LM
- Fell G
- Arfe A
- Sharma C
- Greenup R
- Reynolds KL
- Smith BL
- Alexander B
- Moy B
- Isakoff SJ
- Parmigiani G
- Trippa L
- Bardia A
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-19-3492
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathologic Complete Response after Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy and Impact on Breast Cancer Recurrence and Survival: A Comprehensive Meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Spring LM, Fell G, Arfe A, Sharma C, Greenup R, Reynolds KL, Smith BL, Alexander B, Moy B, Isakoff SJ, Parmigiani G, Trippa L, Bardia A
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-19-3492](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-19-3492)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2020 Jun 15;26(12):2838-2848. doi: 
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-19-3492. Epub 2020 Feb 11.

Pathologic Complete Response after Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy and Impact on Breast 
Cancer Recurrence and Survival: A Comprehensive Meta-analysis.

Spring LM(#)(1)(2), Fell G(#)(3), Arfe A(#)(4), Sharma C(1), Greenup R(5), 
Reynolds KL(1)(2), Smith BL(1)(2), Alexander B(2)(3), Moy B(1)(2), Isakoff 
SJ(1)(2), Parmigiani G(3)(6), Trippa L(#)(3)(6), Bardia A(#)(7)(2).

Author information:
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Bocconi University, Milan, Italy.
(5)Duke University, Durham, North Carolina.
(6)Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts.
(7)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Boston, Massachusetts. 
Bardia.Aditya@mgh.harvard.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2020 Jun 15;26(12):2771-2773. doi: 
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-20-0604.

Comment on
    Clin Cancer Res. 2020 Jun 15;26(12):2771-2773. doi: 
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-20-0604.

PURPOSE: While various studies have highlighted the prognostic significance of 
pathologic complete response (pCR) after neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAT), the 
impact of additional adjuvant therapy after pCR is not known.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: PubMed was searched for studies with NAT for breast cancer 
and individual patient-level data was extracted for analysis using plot 
digitizer software. HRs, with 95% probability intervals (PI), measuring the 
association between pCR and overall survival (OS) or event-free survival (EFS), 
were estimated using Bayesian piece-wise exponential proportional hazards 
hierarchical models including pCR as predictor.
RESULTS: Overall, 52 of 3,209 publications met inclusion criteria, totaling 
27,895 patients. Patients with a pCR after NAT had significantly better EFS (HR 
= 0.31; 95% PI, 0.24-0.39), particularly for triple-negative (HR = 0.18; 95% PI, 
0.10-0.31) and HER2+ (HR = 0.32; 95% PI, 0.21-0.47) disease. Similarly, pCR 
after NAT was also associated with improved survival (HR = 0.22; 95% PI, 
0.15-0.30). The association of pCR with improved EFS was similar among patients 
who received subsequent adjuvant chemotherapy (HR = 0.36; 95% PI, 0.19-0.67) and 
those without adjuvant chemotherapy (HR = 0.36; 95% PI, 0.27-0.54), with no 
significant difference between the two groups (P = 0.60).
CONCLUSIONS: Achieving pCR following NAT is associated with significantly better 
EFS and OS, particularly for triple-negative and HER2+ breast cancer. The 
similar outcomes with or without adjuvant chemotherapy in patients who attain 
pCR likely reflects tumor biology and systemic clearance of micrometastatic 
disease, highlighting the potential of escalation/deescalation strategies in the 
adjuvant setting based on neoadjuvant response.See related commentary by 
Esserman, p. 2771.

©2020 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-19-3492
PMCID: PMC7299787
PMID: 32046998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No other authors have any relevant conflicts of 
interest.