---
reference_id: "PMID:34050715"
title: "Whole genome sequencing identifies a cryptic SOX9 regulatory element duplication underlying a case of 46,XX ovotesticular difference of sexual development."
authors:
- Qian Z
- Grand K
- Freedman A
- Nieto MC
- Behlmann A
- Schweiger BM
- Sanchez-Lara PA
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62373
keywords:
- "46, XX Disorders of Sex Development/genetics, pathology"
- Gene Duplication
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Ovotesticular Disorders of Sex Development/genetics, pathology"
- Prognosis
- SOX9 Transcription Factor/genetics
- Whole Genome Sequencing/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whole genome sequencing identifies a cryptic SOX9 regulatory element duplication underlying a case of 46,XX ovotesticular difference of sexual development.
**Authors:** Qian Z, Grand K, Freedman A, Nieto MC, Behlmann A, Schweiger BM, Sanchez-Lara PA
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.62373](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.62373)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2021 Sep;185(9):2782-2788. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62373. Epub 
2021 May 29.

Whole genome sequencing identifies a cryptic SOX9 regulatory element duplication 
underlying a case of 46,XX ovotesticular difference of sexual development.

Qian Z(1), Grand K(2), Freedman A(3), Nieto MC(4), Behlmann A(5), Schweiger 
BM(1)(2), Sanchez-Lara PA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los 
Angeles, California, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, 
California, USA.
(3)Department of Surgery, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, 
USA.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, California State University, Hayward, 
California, USA.
(5)PerkinElmer Genomics, Duluth, Georgia, USA.

Ovotesticular differences of sexual development (OT-DSD) are rare genetic 
variances defined by the coexistence of both testicular and ovarian tissues. 
Various molecular etiologies including SRY translocation or SOX9 pathogenic 
variants with different modes of inheritance have been associated with 46,XX 
OT-DSD. Here we describe a child diagnosed with SRY-negative 46,XX OT-DSD after 
completing a series of complex clinical genetic analyses, including chromosomal 
microarray, DSD gene panel (sequencing and deletion/duplication analysis), whole 
exome sequencing, and whole genome sequencing. Of these, only whole genome 
sequencing reported a pathogenic duplication in a non-coding region that 
contains the RevSex regulatory element, which modifies SOX9 expression and is 
associated with 46,XX OT-DSD and complete sex reversal. This is the first 
clinical RevSex duplication detected by clinical whole genome sequencing. We 
highlight the utility of whole genome sequencing in shortening the diagnostic 
odyssey and the importance of optimal counseling through a team-based 
multi-specialty approach for patients with DSDs.

© 2021 The Authors. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62373
PMCID: PMC8453973
PMID: 34050715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Andrea Behlmann is a clinical laboratory 
director employed by PerkinElmer Genomics. The authors have no conflicts of 
interest to disclose.