---
reference_id: "PMID:36184373"
title: "The effectiveness and side effects of pyridostigmine in the treatment of myasthenia gravis: a cross-sectional study."
authors:
- Remijn-Nelissen L
- Verschuuren JJGM
- Tannemaat MR
journal: Neuromuscul Disord
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2022.09.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The effectiveness and side effects of pyridostigmine in the treatment of myasthenia gravis: a cross-sectional study.
**Authors:** Remijn-Nelissen L, Verschuuren JJGM, Tannemaat MR
**Journal:** Neuromuscul Disord (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nmd.2022.09.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nmd.2022.09.002)

## Content

1. Neuromuscul Disord. 2022 Oct;32(10):790-799. doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2022.09.002. 
Epub 2022 Sep 7.

The effectiveness and side effects of pyridostigmine in the treatment of 
myasthenia gravis: a cross-sectional study.

Remijn-Nelissen L(1), Verschuuren JJGM(1), Tannemaat MR(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Leiden University Medical Center, Albinusdreef 2, 
2333 ZA, Leiden, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Neurology, Leiden University Medical Center, Albinusdreef 2, 
2333 ZA, Leiden, the Netherlands. Electronic address: m.r.tannemaat@lumc.nl.

Pyridostigmine is the most commonly used drug in the symptomatic treatment of 
myasthenia gravis (MG); however, research into its effectiveness and side 
effects is scarce. The aim of this study was to assess the effectiveness, 
prevalence of side effects and net benefit of pyridostigmine. All MG patients 
participating in the Dutch-Belgian myasthenia patient registry were included. A 
dynamic online questionnaire was developed to assess the effectiveness, side 
effects and net benefit of pyridostigmine. Out of 642 invited patients, 410 
patients (64%) fully completed the questionnaire; 61% reported that they 
currently used pyridostigmine, 36% had discontinued pyridostigmine and 2% 
reported to never have used pyridostigmine. Patients reported a median 
effectiveness of 60, IQR 28-78 and net benefit of 65, IQR 45-84. Of all patients 
currently using pyridostigmine, 91% reported side effects (vs. 55% in the 
control group). Most frequently reported side effects were flatulence, urinary 
urgency, muscle cramps, blurred vision and hyperhidrosis. In the group of 
patients who discontinued pyridostigmine, side effects were the reason for 
discontinuation in 26%. Diarrhea, abdominal cramps and muscle twitching were the 
most frequently cited reasons to discontinue pyridostigmine. These results can 
be used to guide shared decision making prior to starting symptomatic treatment 
for MG.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nmd.2022.09.002
PMID: 36184373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest L. 
Remijn-Nelissen reports no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. J.J.G.M. 
Verschuuren has been involved in MG research sponsored by the Princes Beatrix 
Fonds, NIH, FP7 European grant (#602420), consultancies for Argen-X, Alexion and 
Rapharma, and patents on the use of MuSK monoclonal antibodies. The LUMC 
receives royalties for MuSK antibody assays. M.R. Tannemaat reports trial 
support from ArgenX and Alexion, consultancies for ArgenX and UCB Pharma and 
research funding from NMD Pharma, with all reimbursements received by Leiden 
University Medical Center. He is co-inventor on a patent describing a deep 
learning application to diagnose and monitor myasthenia gravis based on facial 
video data. The authors are members of the European Reference Network for Rare 
Neuromuscular Diseases (ERN EURO-NMD).