---
reference_id: "PMID:40243727"
title: Clinical Features of Families with a Novel Pathogenic Mutation in Sepiapterin Reductase.
authors:
- Mohamed FE
- Alzyoud L
- Ghattas MA
- Tabouni M
- Fienemann A
- Trinh J
- Baydoun I
- Kizhakkedath P
- Alblooshi H
- Shaukat Q
- Amouri R
- Farrer MJ
- Sassi SB
- Al-Jasmi F
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/ijms26073056
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Pedigree
- Female
- "Alcohol Oxidoreductases/genetics, deficiency, chemistry"
- Mutation
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Biopterins/cerebrospinal fluid
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Features of Families with a Novel Pathogenic Mutation in Sepiapterin Reductase.
**Authors:** Mohamed FE, Alzyoud L, Ghattas MA, Tabouni M, Fienemann A, Trinh J, Baydoun I, Kizhakkedath P, Alblooshi H, Shaukat Q, Amouri R, Farrer MJ, Sassi SB, Al-Jasmi F
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms26073056](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms26073056)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2025 Mar 27;26(7):3056. doi: 10.3390/ijms26073056.

Clinical Features of Families with a Novel Pathogenic Mutation in Sepiapterin 
Reductase.

Mohamed FE(1)(2), Alzyoud L(3)(4), Ghattas MA(3)(4), Tabouni M(1)(2), Fienemann 
A(5), Trinh J(5), Baydoun I(1), Kizhakkedath P(1), Alblooshi H(1), Shaukat Q(6), 
Amouri R(7), Farrer MJ(8), Sassi SB(7), Al-Jasmi F(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Genomics, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain 15551, United Arab Emirates.
(2)ASPIRE Precision Medicine Research Institute Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates 
University, Abu Dhabi 15551, United Arab Emirates.
(3)College of Pharmacy, Al Ain University, Abu Dhabi 64141, United Arab 
Emirates.
(4)AAU Health and Biomedical Research Center, Al Ain University, Abu Dhabi 
64141, United Arab Emirates.
(5)Institute of Neurogenetics, University of Lübeck, 23538 Lübeck, Germany.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Tawam Hospital, Al Ain 15258, United Arab Emirates.
(7)Neurology's Department, Mongi Ben Hmida National Institute of Neurology, 
Tunis 1007, Tunisia.
(8)Department of Neurology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA.

Sepiapterin Reductase Deficiency (SRD) is a rare inherited neurometabolic 
disorder caused by variants in the SPR gene, which may lead to developmental 
delays, psychomotor retardation, and cognitive impairments. Two consanguineous 
North African and Middle Eastern families are reported with multiple affected 
individuals presenting with developmental delay, ataxia, hypotonia, fatigue, and 
ptosis, or parkinsonism and cognitive impairment. Exome sequencing revealed a 
novel homozygous SPR c.560A>G (p.Glu187Gly) mutation that segregates with 
disease. According to molecular dynamics analysis, the substitution is predicted 
to compromise structural integrity, likely affecting ligand binding and 
catalytic activity. Elevated cerebrospinal fluid sepiapterin and biopterin 
levels, along with low neurotransmitter levels, were concordant with a genetic 
diagnosis of SRD and the reclassification of this variant as pathogenic. SRD 
patients manifest a broad constellation of symptoms, albeit well-managed using 
low-dose L-dopa/carbidopa. This study highlights the value of genetic testing in 
expediting early diagnosis and intervention to mitigate the onset of this 
disorder.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms26073056
PMCID: PMC11988716
PMID: 40243727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 
The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analysis, 
or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision 
to publish the results.