---
reference_id: "PMID:31373985"
title: Orbital Bone Decompression for Non-Thyroid Eye Disease Proptosis.
authors:
- Limongi RM
- Feijó ED
- Rodrigues Lopes E Silva M
- Akaishi P
- Velasco E Cruz AA
- Christian Pieroni-Gonçalves A
- Pereira F
- Devoto M
- Bernardini F
- Marques V
- Tao JP
journal: Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1097/IOP.0000000000001435
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Orbital Bone Decompression for Non-Thyroid Eye Disease Proptosis.
**Authors:** Limongi RM, Feijó ED, Rodrigues Lopes E Silva M, Akaishi P, Velasco E Cruz AA, Christian Pieroni-Gonçalves A, Pereira F, Devoto M, Bernardini F, Marques V, Tao JP
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1097/IOP.0000000000001435](https://doi.org/10.1097/IOP.0000000000001435)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg. 2020 Jan/Feb;36(1):13-16. doi: 
10.1097/IOP.0000000000001435.

Orbital Bone Decompression for Non-Thyroid Eye Disease Proptosis.

Limongi RM(1), Feijó ED(1), Rodrigues Lopes E Silva M(1), Akaishi P(2), Velasco 
E Cruz AA(2), Christian Pieroni-Gonçalves A(3), Pereira F(4), Devoto M(5), 
Bernardini F(6), Marques V(7), Tao JP(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Federal University of Goiás, Goiânia, Brazil.
(2)Department of Opthalmology, University of São Paulo - Ribeirão Preto, Brazil.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology of University of São Paulo - São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Clínica Catarinense de Pálpebras e Olhos, 
Florianópolis, Brazil.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Facultad de Medicina del Salvador, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Genova, Genova, Italy.
(7)Department of Ophthalmology, Santa Casa de Belo Horizonte, Belo Horizonte, 
Brazil.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology, University of California, Irvine, California, 
U.S.A.

PURPOSE: To report a multicenter large case series of orbital decompression for 
non-thyroid eye disease proptosis.
METHODS: Retrospective chart review of cases of orbital decompression performed 
by 9 experienced orbital surgeons from different countries from 2014 to 2017 for 
non-thyroid eye disease proptosis. Patients were divided into 3 groups: 1) 
negative vector (high axial length or shallow orbit), 2) inflammatory, and 3) 
tumor. Types of orbital decompression and Hertel exophthalmometry (preoperative 
and minimum 6 months postoperative) were recorded. Charts were also assessed for 
serious complications. The amount of exophthalmometry improvement was recorded 
according to the above groups.
RESULTS: The analysis included 41 orbits of 29 patients (14 women and 15 men) 
with a mean age of 38.9 years (ranging from 9 to 74; standard deviation (SD) 
15.66). There were 17 orbits of 11 patients in the negative vector group, 16 
orbits of 10 patients in the inflammatory group, and 8 orbits of 8 patients in 
the tumor group. The mean reduction of proptosis was 2.95 mm in the negative 
vector group, 2.54 mm in the inflammatory group, and 5.75 mm in the tumor group. 
There were no serious complications.
CONCLUSIONS: Orbital decompression was safe and effective in reducing proptosis 
for non-thyroid eye disease indications in this series. The amount of 
exophthalmometry improvement was less in the inflammatory orbitopathy group 
compared with other proptosis etiology groups.Orbital decompression may have a 
role in improving proptosis in non-thyroid eye disease entities.

DOI: 10.1097/IOP.0000000000001435
PMID: 31373985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]