---
reference_id: "PMID:20364556"
title: Clinical presentation and echocardiographic findings of Thai patients with Marfan syndrome.
authors:
- Pithukpakorn M
- Chaowalit N
journal: J Med Assoc Thai
year: '2010'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical presentation and echocardiographic findings of Thai patients with Marfan syndrome.
**Authors:** Pithukpakorn M, Chaowalit N
**Journal:** J Med Assoc Thai (2010)

## Content

1. J Med Assoc Thai. 2010 Jan;93 Suppl 1:S43-7.

Clinical presentation and echocardiographic findings of Thai patients with 
Marfan syndrome.

Pithukpakorn M(1), Chaowalit N.

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

OBJECTIVE: Marfan syndrome is an inherited disorder with systemic connective 
tissue involvement. The condition is clinically diverse and extremely 
pleiotropic. Though several articles had been published, no data from Thai 
individuals has ever been reported. Here we presented clinical manifestations 
and echocardiographic findings of Thai patients with Marfan syndrome.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: Clinical and echocardiographic data were collected from 
series of Thai index cases with diagnosis of Marfan syndrome at Siriraj Hospital 
between 1995 and 2009. Demographic data, clinical presentations, and 
echocardiographic data were reviewed and analyzed.
RESULTS: Fifty individuals and thirty echocardiograms were identified. Thirty 
eight individuals (76%) fulfilled clinical criteria for definite Marfan syndrome 
and twelve individuals (24%) were incomplete Marfan syndrome. The majority of 
those individuals had significant organ involvement including dilatation of 
ascending aorta (78%), ectopia lentis (54%), and skeletal involvement (96%).
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, this is the first report of clinical manifestation and 
echocardiographic findings of Thai patients with Marfan syndrome.

PMID: 20364556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]