---
reference_id: "PMID:36253518"
title: Engineering of tetanus toxoid-loaded polymeric microneedle patches.
authors:
- Arshad MS
- Gulfam S
- Zafar S
- Jalil NA
- Ahmad N
- Qutachi O
- Chang MW
- Singh N
- Ahmad Z
journal: Drug Deliv Transl Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s13346-022-01249-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Engineering of tetanus toxoid-loaded polymeric microneedle patches.
**Authors:** Arshad MS, Gulfam S, Zafar S, Jalil NA, Ahmad N, Qutachi O, Chang MW, Singh N, Ahmad Z
**Journal:** Drug Deliv Transl Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13346-022-01249-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13346-022-01249-9)

## Content

1. Drug Deliv Transl Res. 2023 Mar;13(3):852-861. doi:
10.1007/s13346-022-01249-9.  Epub 2022 Oct 17.

Engineering of tetanus toxoid-loaded polymeric microneedle patches.

Arshad MS(1), Gulfam S(1), Zafar S(1), Jalil NA(2), Ahmad N(2), Qutachi O(2), 
Chang MW(3), Singh N(4), Ahmad Z(5).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan, Pakistan.
(2)Leicester School of Pharmacy, De Montfort University, Leicester, UK.
(3)Nanotechnology and Integrated Bioengineering Centre, University of Ulster, 
Newtownabbey, Northern Ireland, UK.
(4)Leicester School of Allied Health Sciences, De Montfort University, 
Leicester, UK.
(5)Leicester School of Pharmacy, De Montfort University, Leicester, UK. 
zahmad@dmu.ac.uk.

This study is aimed to fabricate tetanus toxoid laden microneedle patches by 
using a polymeric blend comprising of polyvinyl pyrrolidone and sodium 
carboxymethyl cellulose as base materials and sorbitol as a plasticizer. The 
tetanus toxoid was mixed with polymeric blend and patches were prepared by using 
vacuum micromolding technique. Microneedle patches were evaluated for physical 
attributes such as uniformity of thickness, folding endurance, and swelling 
profile. Morphological features were assessed by optical and scanning electron 
microscopy. In vitro performance of fabricated patches was studied by using 
bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA). Insertion ability of microstructures was studied 
in vitro on model skin parafilm and in vivo in albino rat. In vivo immunogenic 
activity of the formulation was assessed by recording immunoglobulin G (IgG) 
levels, interferon gamma (IFN-γ) levels, and T-cell (CD4+ and CD8+) count 
following the application of dosage forms. Prepared patches, displaying 
sharp-tipped and smooth-surfaced microstructures, remained intact after 350 ± 36 
foldings. Optimized microneedle patch formulation showed ~ 74% swelling 
and ~ 85.6% vaccine release within an hour. The microneedles successfully 
pierced parafilm. Histological examination of microneedle-treated rat skin 
confirmed disruption of epidermis without damaging the underneath vasculature. A 
significant increase in IgG levels (~ 21%), IFN-γ levels (~ 30%), CD4+ 
(~ 41.5%), and CD8+ (~ 48.5%) cell count was observed in tetanus vaccine-loaded 
microneedle patches treated albino rats with respect to control (untreated) 
group at 42nd day of immunization. In conclusion, tetanus toxoid-loaded 
microneedle patches can be considered as an efficient choice for transdermal 
delivery of vaccine without inducing pain commonly experienced with hypodermic 
needles.

© 2022. Controlled Release Society.

DOI: 10.1007/s13346-022-01249-9
PMCID: PMC9576317
PMID: 36253518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests. 