---
reference_id: "PMID:30206957"
title: "Spotting Zika spots: descriptive features of the rash used in 66 published cases."
authors:
- Dobson JS
- Levell NJ
journal: Clin Exp Dermatol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/ced.13733
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spotting Zika spots: descriptive features of the rash used in 66 published cases.
**Authors:** Dobson JS, Levell NJ
**Journal:** Clin Exp Dermatol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ced.13733](https://doi.org/10.1111/ced.13733)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2019 Jan;44(1):4-12. doi: 10.1111/ced.13733. Epub 2018 Sep 
11.

Spotting Zika spots: descriptive features of the rash used in 66 published 
cases.

Dobson JS(1), Levell NJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Norfolk and Norwich University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Norwich, UK.

Zika virus (ZV) is an important emerging infection. Rash is a key feature, but 
the summative literature lacks description of the rash beyond 'maculopapular'. 
Our aim was to identify the cutaneous features described in the published 
literature. A literature search using defined terms for ZV cases reports and 
series was performed on the OVID, Clinical Key and University of Dundee's 
e-library journals databases in December 2016; a later case report was included 
while the paper was under review. Diagnosis in all cases was via PCR. Exclusion 
criteria were Zika cases without rash or omitting any description of the rash. 
Ocular features (conjunctivitis) were not included. In total, 42 publications 
with 66 cases met the criteria. The most frequent descriptive features included 
maculopapular (59%), lower limb petechial purpura (11%) and erythematous/red 
(9%). Pruritus was described in 44% and tenderness in 3%. Lesions were located 
on the trunk (29%), limbs (5% arms, 11% both arms and legs), face (17%) and 
extremities (14%) or were diffuse/generalized (12%). There was facial sparing in 
3%. Other features were centrifugal spread (6%), palmar and/or plantar 
involvement (6%), palmoplantar desquamation (2%) and malar erythema with oedema 
(2%). Mucosal features included gingival bleeding (11%), oral haemorrhagic 
blisters (8%) and painful blisters/vesicles (4%). Oedema/swelling was described 
in the upper limbs (5%), lower limbs (5%) and both (3%). Mean rash duration was 
6 days (range 3-11 days). The ZV exanthema is most frequently maculopapular, 
pruritic, sometimes with centrifugal spread from the trunk to extremities. This 
may include lower limb petechial purpura, palmoplantar lesions, oedema of limb 
extremities, and gingival bleeding or painful oral bullae. As ZV becomes more 
prevalent, recognition of the clinical features will enable earlier diagnosis 
and appropriate testing.

© 2018 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/ced.13733
PMID: 30206957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]