---
reference_id: "PMID:40943780"
title: Pilot Evaluation of Intestinal Current Measurement in Cystic Fibrosis and CRMS/CFSPID Patients in Poland.
authors:
- Postek M
- Zybert K
- Wozniacki L
- Woynarowski M
- Sands D
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/jcm14176020
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pilot Evaluation of Intestinal Current Measurement in Cystic Fibrosis and CRMS/CFSPID Patients in Poland.
**Authors:** Postek M, Zybert K, Wozniacki L, Woynarowski M, Sands D
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm14176020](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm14176020)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2025 Aug 26;14(17):6020. doi: 10.3390/jcm14176020.

Pilot Evaluation of Intestinal Current Measurement in Cystic Fibrosis and 
CRMS/CFSPID Patients in Poland.

Postek M(1)(2), Zybert K(1)(2), Wozniacki L(1)(2), Woynarowski M(2)(3), Sands 
D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Cystic Fibrosis Department, Institute of Mother and Child, 01-211 Warsaw, 
Poland.
(2)Cystic Fibrosis Centre, Pediatric Hospital, 05-092 Dziekanow Lesny, Poland.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, Collegium Medicum, Jan Kochanowski University, 
25-317 Kielce, Poland.

Background/Objectives: The term 'cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance 
regulator-related metabolic syndrome/cystic fibrosis screen positive, 
inconclusive diagnosis (CRMS/CFSPID)' refers to patients with positive screening 
tests but without a final diagnosis of Cystic Fibrosis (CF). Intestinal Current 
Measurement (ICM) is a novel diagnostic technique that may document the abnormal 
function of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator. Our study 
aims to compare the cumulative chloride secretory response in the ICM study in 
the Polish population of CF patients, CRMS/CFSPID, and in a control group. 
Methods: Forceps rectal biopsies were taken from 40 patients (CF; n = 17 mean 
age 9.10 ± 4.18 (0.7-17.20); CRMS/CFSPID: n = 16, mean age 6.66 ± 4.83 
(0.6-18.0); healthy controls (HC): n = 7, mean age 23.7 ± 9.5 (7.8-34.6). ICM 
tests were performed in the Ussing Chamber according to standard protocol 
version 2.7 of the European Cystic Fibrosis Society Diagnostic Network Working 
Group. Delta short circuit-current (ΔIsc) was measured after carbachol 
(ΔIsccarbachol), 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine with forskolin 
(ΔIscIBMX/forskolin), and histamine (Δischistamine) stimulation. Cumulative 
secretion was calculated for each study group. Results: We obtained 
statistically significant differences in cumulative chloride secretory response 
between CF and CRMS/CFSPID (CF ΔIsccarbachol+IBMX/forskolin+histamine 15.32 ± 
15.47 µA/cm2 vs. CRMS/CFSPID ΔIsccarbachol+IBMX/forskolin+histamine 86.84 ± 
37.84 µA/cm2; p < 0.001), and between CF and healthy controls (CF 
ΔIsccarbachol+IBMX/forskolin+histamine 15.32 ± 15.47 µA/cm2 vs. HC 
ΔIsccarbachol+IBMX/forskolin+histamine 80.16 ± 48.54 µA/cm2; p = 0.005). No 
differences in cumulative chloride secretion were observed between the 
CRMS/CFSPID and HC groups. Conclusions: The conducted study suggests that ICM 
may offer diagnostic value, especially in cases where sweat test results are 
equivocal.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm14176020
PMCID: PMC12429021
PMID: 40943780

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.