---
reference_id: "PMID:28596197"
title: First evidence of genotype-phenotype correlations in Gorlin syndrome.
authors:
- Evans DG
- Oudit D
- Smith MJ
- Rutkowski D
- Allan E
- Newman WG
- Lear JT
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2017-104669
content_type: abstract_only
---

# First evidence of genotype-phenotype correlations in Gorlin syndrome.
**Authors:** Evans DG, Oudit D, Smith MJ, Rutkowski D, Allan E, Newman WG, Lear JT
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2017-104669](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2017-104669)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2017 Aug;54(8):530-536. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2017-104669. Epub 
2017 Jun 8.

First evidence of genotype-phenotype correlations in Gorlin syndrome.

Evans DG(1)(2), Oudit D(3), Smith MJ(1)(2), Rutkowski D(1)(4), Allan E(3), 
Newman WG(1)(2)(4), Lear JT(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Evolution and Genomic Science, School of Biological Sciences, 
Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester 
Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, UK.
(2)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, St Mary's Hospital, Central 
Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health 
Science Centre, Manchester, UK.
(3)Department of Plastic Surgery, Oncology Christie Hospital, Manchester, UK.
(4)Department of Dermatology, MAHSC, Salford Royal Foundation Trust, Salford, 
UK.

BACKGROUND: Gorlin syndrome (GS) is an autosomal dominant syndrome characterised 
by multiple basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) and an increased risk of jaw cysts and 
early childhood medulloblastoma. Heterozygous germline variants in PTCH1 and 
SUFU encoding components of the Sonic hedgehog pathway explain the majority of 
cases. Here, we aimed to delineate genotype-phenotype correlations in GS.
METHODS: We assessed genetic and phenotypic data for 182 individuals meeting the 
diagnostic criteria for GS (median age: 47.1; IQR: 31.1-61.1). A total of 126 
patients had a heterozygous pathogenic variant, 9 had SUFU pathogenic variants 
and 46 had no identified mutation.
RESULTS: Patients with variants were more likely to be diagnosed earlier 
(p=0.02), have jaw cysts (p=0.002) and have bifid ribs (p=0.003) or any skeletal 
abnormality (p=0.003) than patients with no identified mutation. Patients with a 
missense variant in PTCH1 were diagnosed later (p=0.03) and were less likely to 
develop at least 10 BCCs and jaw cysts than those with other pathogenic PTCH1 
variants (p=0.03). Patients with SUFU pathogenic variants were significantly 
more likely than those with PTCH1 pathogenic variants to develop a 
medulloblastoma (p=0.009), a meningioma (p=0.02) or an ovarian fibroma 
(p=0.015), but were less likely to develop a jaw cyst (p=0.0004).
CONCLUSION: We propose that the clinical heterogeneity of GS can in part be 
explained by the underlying or SUFU variant.

© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of 
the article) 2017. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless 
otherwise expressly granted.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2017-104669
PMID: 28596197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.