---
reference_id: "PMID:8968222"
title: "Cerebrovascular disease with antiphospholipid antibodies: immune mechanisms, significance, and therapeutic options."
authors:
- Feldmann E
- Levine SR
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1002/ana.410370712
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebrovascular disease with antiphospholipid antibodies: immune mechanisms, significance, and therapeutic options.
**Authors:** Feldmann E, Levine SR
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.410370712](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.410370712)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 1995 May;37 Suppl 1:S114-30. doi: 10.1002/ana.410370712.

Cerebrovascular disease with antiphospholipid antibodies: immune mechanisms, 
significance, and therapeutic options.

Feldmann E(1), Levine SR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Brown University School of Medicine, 
Providence, RI, USA.

There has been a recent, dramatic surge in interest in antiphospholipid 
antibodies and associated clinical disorders, especially focal ischemic 
cerebrovascular disease. Antiphospholipid antibodies are a heterogeneous group 
of antibodies with varying specificities. Coagulation assays will detect lupus 
anticoagulants while enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays detect anticardiolipin 
antibodies. There are numerous potential links between antiphospholipid 
antibodies and coagulation disorders, including interaction of antiphospholipid 
antibodies and a cofactor, beta 2-glycoprotein I, which itself is involved in 
coagulation mechanisms. While the specific mechanism of antiphospholipid 
antibody-related coagulopathy is unknown, it is clear that antiphospholipid 
antibodies are associated with an immune-mediated prothrombotic state. Patients 
with the highest titers of IgG antiphospholipid antibodies have a relatively 
high risk of recurrent thrombotic events, especially stroke, deep venous 
thrombosis, and spontaneous abortion. Because of limited controlled, prospective 
data, current therapy remains empiric and directed at coagulation mechanisms, 
immune mechanisms, or both.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410370712
PMID: 8968222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]