---
reference_id: "PMID:37212067"
title: "Presynaptic Congenital Myasthenic Syndromes: Understanding Clinical Phenotypes through In vivo Models."
authors:
- Pugliese A
- Holland SH
- Rodolico C
- Lochmüller H
- Spendiff S
journal: J Neuromuscul Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3233/JND-221646
keywords:
- Animals
- "Myasthenic Syndromes, Congenital"
- Neuromuscular Junction/metabolism
- Muscle Weakness
- Phenotype
- Arthrogryposis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Presynaptic Congenital Myasthenic Syndromes: Understanding Clinical Phenotypes through In vivo Models.
**Authors:** Pugliese A, Holland SH, Rodolico C, Lochmüller H, Spendiff S
**Journal:** J Neuromuscul Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JND-221646](https://doi.org/10.3233/JND-221646)

## Content

1. J Neuromuscul Dis. 2023;10(5):731-759. doi: 10.3233/JND-221646.

Presynaptic Congenital Myasthenic Syndromes: Understanding Clinical Phenotypes 
through In vivo Models.

Pugliese A(1)(2), Holland SH(1)(3), Rodolico C(2), Lochmüller H(1)(4)(5)(6)(7), 
Spendiff S(1).

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, 
Canada.
(2)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Messina, 
Messina, Italy.
(3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of Neurology, The Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa, 
ON, Canada.
(5)Brain and Mind Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(6)Department of Neuropediatrics and Muscle Disorders, Medical Center - 
University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany.
(7)Centro Nacional de Análisis Genómico (CNAG-CRG), Center for Genomic 
Regulation, Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), Barcelona, 
Catalonia, Spain.

Presynaptic congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS) are a group of genetic 
disorders affecting the presynaptic side of the neuromuscular junctions (NMJ). 
They can result from a dysfunction in acetylcholine (ACh) synthesis or 
recycling, in its packaging into synaptic vesicles, or its subsequent release 
into the synaptic cleft. Other proteins involved in presynaptic endplate 
development and maintenance can also be impaired.Presynaptic CMS usually 
presents during the prenatal or neonatal period, with a severe phenotype 
including congenital arthrogryposis, developmental delay, and apnoeic crisis. 
However, milder phenotypes with proximal muscle weakness and good response to 
treatment have been described. Finally, many presynaptic genes are expressed in 
the brain, justifying the presence of additional central nervous system 
symptoms.Several animal models have been developed to study CMS, providing the 
opportunity to identify disease mechanisms and test treatment options. In this 
review, we describe presynaptic CMS phenotypes with a focus on in vivo models, 
to better understand CMS pathophysiology and define new causative genes.

DOI: 10.3233/JND-221646
PMCID: PMC10578258
PMID: 37212067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]