---
reference_id: "PMID:39695809"
title: Role of carglumic acid in the long-term management of propionic and methylmalonic acidurias.
authors:
- Yap S
- Gasperini S
- Matsumoto S
- Feillet F
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03468-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of carglumic acid in the long-term management of propionic and methylmalonic acidurias.
**Authors:** Yap S, Gasperini S, Matsumoto S, Feillet F
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-024-03468-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-024-03468-4)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 Dec 18;19(1):464. doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03468-4.

Role of carglumic acid in the long-term management of propionic and 
methylmalonic acidurias.

Yap S(1), Gasperini S(2), Matsumoto S(3), Feillet F(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Sheffield Children's Hospital, 
Sheffield Children's NHS Foundation Trust, Western Bank, Sheffield, S10 2TH, UK. 
sufin.yap@nhs.net.
(2)Metabolic Rare Disease Unit "Fondazione Mariani", Pediatric Department, 
Fondazione IRCCS San Gerardo dei Tintori, Monza, Italy.
(3)Department of Neonatology, Kumamoto University, Honjo 1-1-1, Chu-oh-ku, 
Kumamoto, Japan.
(4)Pediatric Unit, Reference Center for Inborn Errors of Metabolism, University 
Hospital of Nancy, INSERM UMR_S 1256, Nutrition, Genetics, and Environmental 
Risk Exposure (NGERE), Faculty of Medicine of Nancy, University of Lorraine, 
Nancy, France.

Propionic aciduria (PA) and methylmalonic aciduria (MMA) are rare inherited 
disorders caused by defects in the propionate metabolic pathway. PA due to 
propionyl coenzyme A carboxylase deficiency results in accumulation of propionic 
acid, while in MMA, deficiency in methylmalonyl coenzyme A mutase leads to 
accumulation of methylmalonic acid. Hyperammonemia is related to a secondary 
deficiency of N-acetylglutamate (NAG), the activator of carbamoyl phosphate 
synthetase 1, which is an irreversible rate-limiting enzyme in the urea cycle. 
Carglumic acid (CGA) is a synthetic structural analog of human NAG and is 
approved for the treatment of patients with hyperammonemia due to PA or MMA. CGA 
is well tolerated and its use in normalizing ammonia levels during acute 
hyperammonemic episodes in patients with PA and MMA is well established. This 
expert opinion analyzed clinical evidence for CGA and discussed its place, along 
with other management strategies, in the long-term management of PA or MMA. A 
literature search of PubMed was undertaken to identify publications related to 
the chronic use of CGA, transplantation, dietary management, ammonia scavengers, 
and gene therapy for treatment of patients with PA or MMA. The authors selected 
the most relevant studies for inclusion. Four clinical studies, one single 
center case series, and three case reports show that CGA is safe and effective 
in the chronic treatment of PA and MMA. In particular, the addition of CGA is 
associated with a reduction in hyperammonemic decompensation episodes and 
admission to hospital, compared with conventional dietary treatment alone. 
Current treatment guidelines and recommendations include the use of CGA mainly 
in acute decompensation, however, lag in considering the benefits of long-term 
CGA treatment on clinical and biochemical outcomes in patients with PA or MMA. 
CGA is safe and effective in the chronic treatment of PA and MMA and may help to 
resolve some of the issues associated with other strategies used to treat these 
disorders. Thus, CGA appears to have potential for the chronic management of 
patients with PA and MMA and should be recommended for inclusion in the chronic 
treatment of these disorders.

© 2024. Crown.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-024-03468-4
PMCID: PMC11654332
PMID: 39695809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: Not applicable. Consent for publication: Not applicable. Competing 
interests: SY has received honoraria from Recordati Rare Diseases, Moderna, and 
Travere Therapeutics, and has acted as clinical advisor to the National 
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE), UK. SG has received honoraria 
for participation at conferences and consultation fees from Recordati Rare 
Diseases, Sanofi, Immedica, Amicus, and Chiesi. FF has received honoraria from 
BioMarin, Sanofi, Merck Serono, Nutricia International/Danone, Vitaflo, Alexion, 
Immedica, Travere Therapeutics, and Recordati Rare Diseases. SM was supported by 
the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) Grants-in-Aid for 
Scientific Research (KAKENHI) grant numbers JP23K07335, JP22K07948, 
JP17bk0104008h0005, and JP17bk0104015h0005.