---
reference_id: "PMID:32345314"
title: "2-methylacetoacetyl-coenzyme A thiolase (beta-ketothiolase) deficiency: one disease - two pathways."
authors:
- Grünert SC
- Sass JO
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-020-01357-0
keywords:
- Acetyl-CoA C-Acetyltransferase/genetics
- Acetyl-CoA C-Acyltransferase/genetics
- Acyl Coenzyme A
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 2-methylacetoacetyl-coenzyme A thiolase (beta-ketothiolase) deficiency: one disease - two pathways.
**Authors:** Grünert SC, Sass JO
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-020-01357-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-020-01357-0)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2020 Apr 28;15(1):106. doi: 10.1186/s13023-020-01357-0.

2-methylacetoacetyl-coenzyme A thiolase (beta-ketothiolase) deficiency: one
disease - two pathways.

Grünert SC(1), Sass JO(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Pediatrics, Adolescent Medicine and Neonatology,
Medical Center - University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Mathildenstr. 1,
79106, Freiburg, Germany. sarah.gruenert@uniklinik-freiburg.de.
(2)Research Group Inborn Errors of Metabolism, Department of Natural Sciences &
Institute for Functional Gene Analytics (IFGA), Bonn-Rhein-Sieg University of
Applied Sciences, von-Liebig-Str. 20, 53359, Rheinbach, Germany.
joern.oliver.sass@h-brs.de.

BACKGROUND: 2-methylacetoacetyl-coenzyme A thiolase deficiency (MATD; deficiency
of mitochondrial acetoacetyl-coenzyme A thiolase T2/ "beta-ketothiolase") is an
autosomal recessive disorder of ketone body utilization and isoleucine
degradation due to mutations in ACAT1.
METHODS: We performed a systematic literature search for all available clinical
descriptions of patients with MATD. Two hundred forty-four patients were
identified and included in this analysis. Clinical course and biochemical data
are presented and discussed.
RESULTS: For 89.6% of patients at least one acute metabolic decompensation was
reported. Age at first symptoms ranged from 2 days to 8 years (median
12 months). More than 82% of patients presented in the first 2 years of life,
while manifestation in the neonatal period was the exception (3.4%). 77.0% (157
of 204 patients) of patients showed normal psychomotor development without
neurologic abnormalities.
CONCLUSION: This comprehensive data analysis provides a systematic overview on
all cases with MATD identified in the literature. It demonstrates that MATD is a
rather benign disorder with often favourable outcome, when compared with many
other organic acidurias.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-020-01357-0
PMCID: PMC7187484
PMID: 32345314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SCG declares that she does not have competing
interests. JOS serves as consultant of a medical diagnostic laboratory in ketone
body metabolism and he and his institution have received honoraria/a
reimbursement by the company SoBi.
