---
reference_id: "PMID:19363998"
title: "[Anti-NAE autoantibodies and clinical spectrum in Hashimoto's encephalopathy]."
authors:
- Matsunaga A
- Yoneda M
journal: Rinsho Byori
year: '2009'
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Autoantibodies/blood
- "Biomarkers/blood, cerebrospinal fluid"
- "Brain Diseases/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Female
- "Hashimoto Disease/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin G/cerebrospinal fluid
- "Immunosuppressive Agents/administration & dosage"
- Male
- "Methylprednisolone/administration & dosage"
- Middle Aged
- Phosphopyruvate Hydratase/immunology
- Plasma Exchange
- "Pulse Therapy, Drug"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Anti-NAE autoantibodies and clinical spectrum in Hashimoto's encephalopathy].
**Authors:** Matsunaga A, Yoneda M
**Journal:** Rinsho Byori (2009)

## Content

1. Rinsho Byori. 2009 Mar;57(3):271-8.

[Anti-NAE autoantibodies and clinical spectrum in Hashimoto's encephalopathy].

[Article in Japanese]

Matsunaga A(1), Yoneda M.

Author information:
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine (Neurology), Faculty of Medical 
Sciences, University of Fukui, Yoshida-gun, Fukui-pref. 910-1193, Japan.

Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT) is the most common disorder affecting the thyroid 
gland. Encephalopathy associated with abnormal thyroid functions, such as 
myxedema encephalopathy, is treatable. Hashimoto's encephalopathy (HE) was 
recognized as a new clinical disease based on an autoimmune mechanism associated 
with HT, and steroid treatment has been successfully administrated. Recently, we 
discovered serum autoantibodies against the NH2-terminal of a-enolase (NAE) as a 
specific diagnostic marker for HE. We analyzed these serum anti-NAE 
autoantibodies and the clinical features in 84 cases of HE. The 84 patients 
consisted of 26 men and 58 women, from many institutions throughout Japan and 
other countries. A total of 37 patients carried anti-NAE antibodies (44%). The 
age was widely distributed between 19 and 87 years old, with two peaks (around 
20-30 and 50-70 years old). Most patients were in euthyroid states, and all 
patients had anti-thyroid (TG) and/or anti-thyroid peroxidase (TPO) antibodies, 
and anti-TSH receptor (TSHR) antibodies in some cases. Only 20% of patients had 
past histories of HT. The acute encephalopathy form was the most common clinical 
feature, and subacute or chronic psychiatric forms and other forms such as pure 
ataxia, limbic encephalopathy, and Creutzfeldt Jakob-like forms followed. The 
patients with anti NAE antibodies tended to exhibit acute encephalopathy. The 
most common neuropsychiatric features were consciousness disturbance, 
psychiatric symptoms, and seizures. Involuntary movements (tremor, myoclonus, or 
choreoathetosis) or ataxia occasionally occurred. Abnormalities, especially the 
slowing of background activities, on EEG and elevated levels of protein/IgG in 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) were common and useful laboratory findings for the 
diagnosis, while abnormalities on brain MRI were rare and non-specific in HE. 
Immunotherapies such as glucocorticoid, immunosuppressants, immunoglobulin, and 
plasma exchange, were recommended and effective for HE treatment. HE belongs to 
a part of a clinical spectrum consisting of individuals with anti-thyroid 
antibodies, overlapping the clinical spectrum of HT. Anti-NAE autoantibodies 
were positive in 44% of patients with HE. Considering the overall findings, we 
should be aware of the possibility of autoimmune encephalopathy associated with 
thyroid disorders (HE) in patients with an unknown etiology of neuronpsychiatric 
symptoms with/without a past history of HT.

PMID: 19363998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]