---
reference_id: "PMID:38003734"
title: Molecular Characteristics of Cisplatin-Induced Ototoxicity and Therapeutic Interventions.
authors:
- Tan WJT
- Vlajkovic SM
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms242216545
keywords:
- Humans
- Child
- Cisplatin/adverse effects
- Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects
- "Ototoxicity/etiology, drug therapy"
- Hearing Loss/drug therapy
- Osteosarcoma/drug therapy
- Deafness
- Bone Neoplasms/drug therapy
- Inflammation/drug therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Characteristics of Cisplatin-Induced Ototoxicity and Therapeutic Interventions.
**Authors:** Tan WJT, Vlajkovic SM
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms242216545](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms242216545)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Nov 20;24(22):16545. doi: 10.3390/ijms242216545.

Molecular Characteristics of Cisplatin-Induced Ototoxicity and Therapeutic 
Interventions.

Tan WJT(1)(2), Vlajkovic SM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, The 
University of Auckland, Auckland 1023, New Zealand.
(2)Eisdell Moore Centre, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, The University 
of Auckland, Auckland 1023, New Zealand.

Cisplatin is a commonly used chemotherapeutic agent with proven efficacy in 
treating various malignancies, including testicular, ovarian, cervical, breast, 
bladder, head and neck, and lung cancer. Cisplatin is also used to treat tumors 
in children, such as neuroblastoma, osteosarcoma, and hepatoblastoma. However, 
its clinical use is limited by severe side effects, including ototoxicity, 
nephrotoxicity, neurotoxicity, hepatotoxicity, gastrointestinal toxicity, and 
retinal toxicity. Cisplatin-induced ototoxicity manifests as irreversible, 
bilateral, high-frequency sensorineural hearing loss in 40-60% of adults and in 
up to 60% of children. Hearing loss can lead to social isolation, depression, 
and cognitive decline in adults, and speech and language developmental delays in 
children. Cisplatin causes hair cell death by forming DNA adducts, mitochondrial 
dysfunction, oxidative stress, and inflammation, culminating in programmed cell 
death by apoptosis, necroptosis, pyroptosis, or ferroptosis. Contemporary 
medical interventions for cisplatin ototoxicity are limited to prosthetic 
devices, such as hearing aids, but these have significant limitations because 
the cochlea remains damaged. Recently, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) approved the first therapy, sodium thiosulfate, to prevent 
cisplatin-induced hearing loss in pediatric patients with localized, 
non-metastatic solid tumors. Other pharmacological treatments for cisplatin 
ototoxicity are in various stages of preclinical and clinical development. This 
narrative review aims to highlight the molecular mechanisms involved in 
cisplatin-induced ototoxicity, focusing on cochlear inflammation, and shed light 
on potential antioxidant and anti-inflammatory therapeutic interventions to 
prevent or mitigate the ototoxic effects of cisplatin. We conducted a 
comprehensive literature search (Google Scholar, PubMed) focusing on 
publications in the last five years.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms242216545
PMCID: PMC10671929
PMID: 38003734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.