---
reference_id: "PMID:35249719"
title: "Dermoscopy as an Auxiliary Tool in the Assessment of Malassezia Folliculitis: An Observational Study."
authors:
- Jakhar D
- Bhatia V
- Gupta RK
- Kaur I
journal: Actas Dermosifiliogr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ad.2020.05.012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dermoscopy as an Auxiliary Tool in the Assessment of Malassezia Folliculitis: An Observational Study.
**Authors:** Jakhar D, Bhatia V, Gupta RK, Kaur I
**Journal:** Actas Dermosifiliogr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ad.2020.05.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ad.2020.05.012)

## Content

1. Actas Dermosifiliogr. 2022 Jan;113(1):T78-T81. doi: 10.1016/j.ad.2020.05.012. 
Epub 2021 Jun 29.

Dermoscopy as an Auxiliary Tool in the Assessment of Malassezia Folliculitis: An 
Observational Study.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Jakhar D(1), Bhatia V(2), Gupta RK(3), Kaur I(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, NDMC Medical College & Hindu Rao Hospital, New 
Delhi, India. Electronic address: dr.deepakjakhar@yahoo.in.
(2)Department of Microbiology, NDMC Medical College & Hindu Rao Hospital, New 
Delhi, India.
(3)Department of Dermatology, NDMC Medical College & Hindu Rao Hospital, New 
Delhi, India.

Malassezia folliculitis is an under-recognized entity commonly affecting the 
face and upper trunk. Clinical picture mimics acne vulgaris and diagnosis is 
challenging at times. Ten percent potassium hydroxide examination is usually 
performed to confirm the diagnosis. This study sought to describe the 
dermoscopic features in Malassezia folliculitis. Patients diagnosed clinically 
with Malassezia folliculitis and confirmed by 10% potassium hydroxide 
preparation were included in the study. Dermoscopy was performed with a 
videodermatoscope (Dino-Lite AM413ZT; Polarizer) from the most representative 
lesion. A total of 45 patients (M:F=1:0.8) were recruited. All patients had 
monomorphic papulo-pustular lesions. Itching was present in 64.4% patients. 
Dermoscopy reveled folliculocentricity (100%), perilesional background erythema 
(100%), dotted/linear/tortous vessels (88.9%), dirty white scaling (77.8%), 
hypopigmentation of hair follicle (64.4%), coiled/looped hairs (57.8%) and 
broken hairs (13.3%). In conclusion, dermoscopy shows typical features in 
Malassezia folliculitis and can serve as a office-based tool for identification 
of this entity.

Copyright © 2021 AEDV. Publicado por Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ad.2020.05.012
PMID: 35249719