---
reference_id: "PMID:36897017"
title: Repurposing of the antibiotic nitroxoline for the treatment of mpox.
authors:
- Bojkova D
- Zöller N
- Tietgen M
- Steinhorst K
- Bechtel M
- Rothenburger T
- Kandler JD
- Schneider J
- Corman VM
- Ciesek S
- Rabenau HF
- Wass MN
- Kippenberger S
- Göttig S
- Michaelis M
- Cinatl J Jr
journal: J Med Virol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/jmv.28652
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Repurposing of the antibiotic nitroxoline for the treatment of mpox.
**Authors:** Bojkova D, Zöller N, Tietgen M, Steinhorst K, Bechtel M, Rothenburger T, Kandler JD, Schneider J, Corman VM, Ciesek S, Rabenau HF, Wass MN, Kippenberger S, Göttig S, Michaelis M, Cinatl J Jr
**Journal:** J Med Virol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmv.28652](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.28652)

## Content

1. J Med Virol. 2023 Mar;95(3):e28652. doi: 10.1002/jmv.28652.

Repurposing of the antibiotic nitroxoline for the treatment of mpox.

Bojkova D(1), Zöller N(2), Tietgen M(3), Steinhorst K(2), Bechtel M(1), 
Rothenburger T(1), Kandler JD(1), Schneider J(4)(5), Corman VM(4)(5), Ciesek 
S(1)(6)(7), Rabenau HF(1), Wass MN(8), Kippenberger S(2), Göttig S(3), Michaelis 
M(8), Cinatl J Jr(1)(9).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Virology, University Hospital, Goethe University, 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, University Hospital, 
Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(3)Institute for Medical Microbiology and Infection Control, University 
Hospital, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(4)Institute of Virology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(5)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Berlin, Germany.
(6)German Center for Infection Research, DZIF, External partner site, Frankfurt 
am Main, Germany.
(7)Fraunhofer Institute for Translational Medicine and Pharmacology ITMP, 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(8)School of Biosciences, University of Kent, Canterbury, UK.
(9)Dr. Petra Joh-Forschungshaus, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

The antiviral drugs tecovirimat, brincidofovir, and cidofovir are considered for 
mpox (monkeypox) treatment despite a lack of clinical evidence. Moreover, their 
use is affected by toxic side-effects (brincidofovir, cidofovir), limited 
availability (tecovirimat), and potentially by resistance formation. Hence, 
additional, readily available drugs are needed. Here, therapeutic concentrations 
of nitroxoline, a hydroxyquinoline antibiotic with a favourable safety profile 
in humans, inhibited the replication of 12 mpox virus isolates from the current 
outbreak in primary cultures of human keratinocytes and fibroblasts and a skin 
explant model by interference with host cell signalling. Tecovirimat, but not 
nitroxoline, treatment resulted in rapid resistance development. Nitroxoline 
remained effective against the tecovirimat-resistant strain and increased the 
anti-mpox virus activity of tecovirimat and brincidofovir. Moreover, nitroxoline 
inhibited bacterial and viral pathogens that are often co-transmitted with mpox. 
In conclusion, nitroxoline is a repurposing candidate for the treatment of mpox 
due to both antiviral and antimicrobial activity.

© 2023 The Authors. Journal of Medical Virology published by Wiley Periodicals 
LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.28652
PMID: 36897017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]