---
reference_id: "PMID:21827905"
title: Machado-Joseph disease/spinocerebellar ataxia type 3.
authors:
- Paulson H
journal: Handb Clin Neurol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-51892-7.00027-9
keywords:
- Ataxin-3
- Humans
- "Machado-Joseph Disease/etiology, genetics, pathology"
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Proteostasis Deficiencies/complications
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Machado-Joseph disease/spinocerebellar ataxia type 3.
**Authors:** Paulson H
**Journal:** Handb Clin Neurol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/B978-0-444-51892-7.00027-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-51892-7.00027-9)

## Content

1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2012;103:437-49. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-51892-7.00027-9.

Machado-Joseph disease/spinocerebellar ataxia type 3.

Paulson H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, 
USA. henryp@umich.edu

Machado-Joseph disease (MJD), also known as spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 
(SCA3), may be the most common dominantly inherited ataxia in the world. Here I 
will review historical, clinical, neuropathological, genetic, and pathogenic 
features of MJD, and finish with a brief discussion of present, and possible 
future, treatment for this currently incurable disorder. Like many other 
dominantly inherited ataxias, MJD/SCA3 shows remarkable clinical heterogeneity, 
reflecting the underlying genetic defect: an unstable CAG trinucleotide repeat 
that varies in size among affected persons. This pathogenic repeat in MJD/SCA3 
encodes an expanded tract of the amino acid glutamine in the disease protein, 
which is known as ataxin-3. MJD/SCA3 is one of nine identified polyglutamine 
neurodegenerative diseases which share features of pathogenesis centered on 
protein misfolding and accumulation. The specific properties of MJD/SCA3 and its 
disease protein are discussed in light of what is known about the entire class 
of polyglutamine diseases.

2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-444-51892-7.00027-9
PMCID: PMC3568768
PMID: 21827905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]