---
reference_id: "PMID:19449182"
title: "Intracranial intermediate-grade meningeal melanocytoma with increased cellular proliferative index: an illustrative case associated with a nevus of Ota."
authors:
- Navas M
- Pascual JM
- Fraga J
- Pedrosa M
- Shakur S
- Carrasco R
- Martínez P
- Manzanares R
- de Sola RG
journal: J Neurooncol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1007/s11060-009-9907-3
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Male
- "Melanoma/diagnostic imaging, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Meningeal Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging, pathology, physiopathology"
- Nevus of Ota/pathology
- "Nevus, Pigmented/surgery"
- Radiography
- "Tomography Scanners, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intracranial intermediate-grade meningeal melanocytoma with increased cellular proliferative index: an illustrative case associated with a nevus of Ota.
**Authors:** Navas M, Pascual JM, Fraga J, Pedrosa M, Shakur S, Carrasco R, Martínez P, Manzanares R, de Sola RG
**Journal:** J Neurooncol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11060-009-9907-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11060-009-9907-3)

## Content

1. J Neurooncol. 2009 Oct;95(1):105-115. doi: 10.1007/s11060-009-9907-3. Epub
2009  May 18.

Intracranial intermediate-grade meningeal melanocytoma with increased cellular 
proliferative index: an illustrative case associated with a nevus of Ota.

Navas M(1), Pascual JM(2), Fraga J(3), Pedrosa M(2), Shakur S(4), Carrasco R(2), 
Martínez P(2), Manzanares R(5), de Sola RG(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, La Princesa University Hospital, C/Diego de León 
62, 28006, Madrid, Spain. m_navas_garcia@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, La Princesa University Hospital, C/Diego de León 
62, 28006, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Pathology, La Princesa University Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(5)Department of Neuroradiology, La Princesa University Hospital, Madrid, Spain.

Solitary primary melanocytic tumors of the central nervous system (CNS) 
represent a spectrum of lesions ranging from well-differentiated melanocytoma to 
melanoma. The association of a meningeal melanocytoma with an ipsilateral nevus 
of Ota is extremely rare, with only six cases reported in the literature to 
date. Only a minority of melanocytic tumors correspond to lesions of 
intermediate-grade malignancy, whose biological behavior and outcome remain 
undetermined. We report a new case of a 25-year-old man with a giant 
fronto-temporal intracranial meningeal melanocytoma associated with a congenital 
nevus of Ota, who suffered an acute neurological deterioration requiring an 
emergent surgical procedure. Despite total removal of the lesion, the patient 
did not recover from the operation due to a malignant infarct of the right 
hemisphere. The lesion showed no histological criteria of malignancy but did 
exhibit an elevated (8%) MIB-1/Ki-67 cell proliferative index, which suggested 
an intermediate-grade melanocytoma. In addition, its metabolic profile, 
determined by in vivo proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS), was similar 
to that observed in most high-grade gliomas. To our knowledge, this is the first 
case of a meningeal melanocytoma of intermediate grade associated with a nevus 
of Ota reported in the literature. Only two additional intermediate-grade 
melanocytomas showing an elevated MIB-1/Ki-67 labeling index have been 
previously reported. The MIB-1/Ki-67 labeling index may have potential 
prognostic value in helping the clinician to predict an aggressive clinical 
behavior and/or malignant progression for primary melanocytic neoplasms of the 
CNS.

DOI: 10.1007/s11060-009-9907-3
PMID: 19449182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]