---
reference_id: "PMID:38450850"
title: "Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia: 2024 update on diagnosis, risk stratification and management."
authors:
- Patnaik MM
- Tefferi A
journal: Am J Hematol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/ajh.27271
keywords:
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Myelomonocytic, Chronic/therapy, genetics, diagnosis"
- Risk Assessment
- Mutation
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia: 2024 update on diagnosis, risk stratification and management.
**Authors:** Patnaik MM, Tefferi A
**Journal:** Am J Hematol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajh.27271](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajh.27271)

## Content

1. Am J Hematol. 2024 Jun;99(6):1142-1165. doi: 10.1002/ajh.27271. Epub 2024 Mar
7.

Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia: 2024 update on diagnosis, risk stratification
and management.

Patnaik MM(1), Tefferi A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota, USA.

DISEASE OVERVIEW: Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) is a clonal
hematopoietic stem cell disorder with overlapping features of myelodysplastic
syndromes and myeloproliferative neoplasms, characterized by prominent
monocytosis and an inherent risk for leukemic transformation (~15%-20% over
3-5 years).
DIAGNOSIS: Newly revised diagnostic criteria include sustained (>3 months)
peripheral blood (PB) monocytosis (≥0.5 × 109/L; monocytes ≥10% of leukocyte
count), consistent bone marrow (BM) morphology, <20% BM or PB blasts (including
promonocytes), and cytogenetic or molecular evidence of clonality. Cytogenetic
abnormalities occur in ~30% of patients, while >95% harbor somatic mutations:
TET2 (~60%), SRSF2 (~50%), ASXL1 (~40%), RAS pathway (~30%), and others. The
presence of ASXL1 and DNMT3A mutations and absence of TET2 mutations negatively
impact overall survival (ASXL1WT/TET2MT genotype being favorable).
RISK STRATIFICATION: Several risk models serve similar purposes in identifying
high-risk patients that are considered for allogeneic stem cell transplant
(ASCT) earlier than later. Risk factors in the Mayo Molecular Model (MMM)
include presence of truncating ASXL1 mutations, absolute monocyte count
>10 × 109/L, hemoglobin <10 g/dL, platelet count <100 × 109/L, and the presence
of circulating immature myeloid cells; the resulting 4-tiered risk
categorization includes high (≥3 risk factors), intermediate-2 (2 risk factors),
intermediate-1 (1 risk factor), and low (no risk factors); the corresponding
median survivals were 16, 31, 59, and 97 months. CMML is also classified as
being "myeloproliferative (MP-CMML)" or "myelodysplastic (MD-CMML)," based on
the presence or absence of leukocyte count of ≥13 × 109/L.
TREATMENT: ASCT is the only treatment modality that secures cure or long-term
survival and is appropriate for MMM high/intermediate-2 risk disease. Drug
therapy is currently not disease-modifying and includes hydroxyurea and
hypomethylating agents; a recent phase-3 study (DACOTA) comparing hydroxyurea
and decitabine, in high-risk MP-CMML, showed similar overall survival at 23.1
versus 18.4 months, respectively, despite response rates being higher for
decitabine (56% vs. 31%).
UNIQUE DISEASE ASSOCIATIONS: These include systemic inflammatory autoimmune
diseases, leukemia cutis and lysozyme-induced nephropathy; the latter requires
close monitoring of renal function during leukocytosis and is a potential
indication for cytoreductive therapy.

© 2024 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.27271
PMCID: PMC11096042
PMID: 38450850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: Mrinal Patnaik
has received research funding from Kura Oncology, Stem Line Therapeutics,
Epigenetix, Polaris and Solutherapeutics. He has served on the advisory board
for CTI pharmaceuticals. Ayalew Tefferi has no conflicts of interest or
disclosures.
