---
reference_id: "PMID:26692951"
title: Targeted next-generation sequencing of cancer genes identified frequent TP53 and ATRX mutations in leiomyosarcoma.
authors:
- Yang CY
- Liau JY
- Huang WJ
- Chang YT
- Chang MC
- Lee JC
- Tsai JH
- Su YN
- Hung CC
- Jeng YM
journal: Am J Transl Res
year: '2015'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeted next-generation sequencing of cancer genes identified frequent TP53 and ATRX mutations in leiomyosarcoma.
**Authors:** Yang CY, Liau JY, Huang WJ, Chang YT, Chang MC, Lee JC, Tsai JH, Su YN, Hung CC, Jeng YM
**Journal:** Am J Transl Res (2015)

## Content

1. Am J Transl Res. 2015 Oct 15;7(10):2072-81. eCollection 2015.

Targeted next-generation sequencing of cancer genes identified frequent TP53 and
ATRX mutations in leiomyosarcoma.

Yang CY(1), Liau JY(2), Huang WJ(3), Chang YT(4), Chang MC(4), Lee JC(2), Tsai
JH(2), Su YN(5), Hung CC(5), Jeng YM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, National Taiwan University Hospital, and National
Taiwan University College of Medicine, National Taiwan University Taipei,
Taiwan.
(2)Department of Pathology, National Taiwan University Hospital, and Graduate
Institute of Pathology, National Taiwan University College of Medicine, National
Taiwan University Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Pathology, National Taiwan University Hospital, and Graduate
Institute of Pathology, National Taiwan University College of Medicine, National
Taiwan University Taipei, Taiwan ; Department of Nursing, Hsin-Sheng College of
Medical Care and Management Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, and
National Taiwan University College of Medicine, National Taiwan University
Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Sofiva Genomics, Inc. Taipei, Taiwan.

Leiomyosarcoma is an aggressive soft tissue sarcoma with poor patient survival.
The genetic changes of leiomyosarcoma remain to be discovered. In this study, we
analyzed the genetic changes of 44 cancer-related genes by using next-generation
sequencing in 54 leiomyosarcomas. We identified TP53 mutations in 19 of the 54
tumors (35%) and ATRX mutations in 9 of the 54 tumors (17%). The TP53-mutated
leiomyosarcomas were limited to female patients (P = 0.006). All but 2 of the
TP53-mutated leiomyosarcomas were located in the uterus (n = 11) or
retroperitoneum (n = 6). The ATRX mutations were associated with poorly
differentiated leiomyosarcomas (P = 0.028) and the presence of tumor necrosis (P
= 0.015). Kaplan-Meier survival analysis showed that patients with ATRX-mutated
leiomyosarcomas had worse overall survival than did patients with ATRX-wild-type
leiomyosarcomas. All of the ATRX-mutated leiomyosarcomas showed the alternative
lengthening of telomere phenotype. The ATRX mutations did not correlate with
ATRX protein expression, as detected using immunohistochemistry. In conclusion,
we identified loss of function of the p53 and ATRX pathways being the main
mechanisms for leiomyosarcomas. The molecular mechanisms may provide new
opportunities to treat these aggressive neoplasms.

PMCID: PMC4656784
PMID: 26692951
