---
reference_id: "PMID:37685915"
title: Hormonal Imbalances in Prader-Willi and Schaaf-Yang Syndromes Imply the Evolution of Specific Regulation of Hypothalamic Neuroendocrine Function in Mammals.
authors:
- Hoyos Sanchez MC
- Bayat T
- Gee RRF
- Fon Tacer K
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms241713109
keywords:
- Animals
- Syndrome
- Anxiety
- Hypothalamus
- Mammals/genetics
- Neurosecretory Systems
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hormonal Imbalances in Prader-Willi and Schaaf-Yang Syndromes Imply the Evolution of Specific Regulation of Hypothalamic Neuroendocrine Function in Mammals.
**Authors:** Hoyos Sanchez MC, Bayat T, Gee RRF, Fon Tacer K
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms241713109](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms241713109)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Aug 23;24(17):13109. doi: 10.3390/ijms241713109.

Hormonal Imbalances in Prader-Willi and Schaaf-Yang Syndromes Imply the 
Evolution of Specific Regulation of Hypothalamic Neuroendocrine Function in 
Mammals.

Hoyos Sanchez MC(1)(2), Bayat T(1)(2), Gee RRF(1)(2), Fon Tacer K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Veterinary Medicine, Texas Tech University, 7671 Evans Dr., 
Amarillo, TX 79106, USA.
(2)Texas Center for Comparative Cancer Research (TC3R), Amarillo, TX 79106, USA.

The hypothalamus regulates fundamental aspects of physiological homeostasis and 
behavior, including stress response, reproduction, growth, sleep, and feeding, 
several of which are affected in patients with Prader-Willi (PWS) and 
Schaaf-Yang syndrome (SYS). PWS is caused by paternal deletion, maternal 
uniparental disomy, or imprinting defects that lead to loss of expression of a 
maternally imprinted region of chromosome 15 encompassing non-coding RNAs and 
five protein-coding genes; SYS patients have a mutation in one of them, MAGEL2. 
Throughout life, PWS and SYS patients suffer from musculoskeletal deficiencies, 
intellectual disabilities, and hormonal abnormalities, which lead to compulsive 
behaviors like hyperphagia and temper outbursts. Management of PWS and SYS is 
mostly symptomatic and cures for these debilitating disorders do not exist, 
highlighting a clear, unmet medical need. Research over several decades into the 
molecular and cellular roles of PWS genes has uncovered that several impinge on 
the neuroendocrine system. In this review, we will discuss the expression and 
molecular functions of PWS genes, connecting them with hormonal imbalances in 
patients and animal models. Besides the observed hormonal imbalances, we will 
describe the recent findings about how the loss of individual genes, 
particularly MAGEL2, affects the molecular mechanisms of hormone secretion. 
These results suggest that MAGEL2 evolved as a mammalian-specific regulator of 
hypothalamic neuroendocrine function.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241713109
PMCID: PMC10487939
PMID: 37685915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.