---
reference_id: "PMID:25110390"
title: Skeletal Deformity Associated with SHOX Deficiency.
authors:
- Seki A
- Jinno T
- Suzuki E
- Takayama S
- Ogata T
- Fukami M
journal: Clin Pediatr Endocrinol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1297/cpe.23.65
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Skeletal Deformity Associated with SHOX Deficiency.
**Authors:** Seki A, Jinno T, Suzuki E, Takayama S, Ogata T, Fukami M
**Journal:** Clin Pediatr Endocrinol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1297/cpe.23.65](https://doi.org/10.1297/cpe.23.65)

## Content

1. Clin Pediatr Endocrinol. 2014 Jul;23(3):65-72. doi: 10.1297/cpe.23.65. Epub
2014  Aug 6.

Skeletal Deformity Associated with SHOX Deficiency.

Seki A(1), Jinno T(2), Suzuki E(2), Takayama S(1), Ogata T(3), Fukami M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, National Center for Child Health and 
Development, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, National Research Institute for Child 
Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, 
Japan.

SHOX haploinsufficiency due to mutations in the coding exons or microdeletions 
involving the coding exons and/or the enhancer regions accounts for 
approximately 80% and 2-16% of genetic causes of Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis 
and idiopathic short stature, respectively. The most characteristic feature in 
patients with SHOX deficiency is Madelung deformity, a cluster of anatomical 
changes in the wrist that can be attributed to premature epiphyseal fusion of 
the distal radius. Computed tomography of SHOX-deficient patients revealed a 
thin bone cortex and an enlarged total bone area at the diaphysis of the radius, 
while histopathological analyses showed a disrupted columnar arrangement of 
chondrocytes and an expanded hypertrophic layer of the growth plate. Recent 
studies have suggested that perturbed programmed cell death of hypertrophic 
chondrocytes may underlie the skeletal changes related to SHOX deficiency. 
Furthermore, the formation of an aberrant ligament tethering the lunate and 
radius has been implicated in the development of Madelung deformity. Blood 
estrogen levels and mutation types have been proposed as phenotypic determinants 
of SHOX deficiency, although other unknown factors may also affect clinical 
severity of this entity.

DOI: 10.1297/cpe.23.65
PMCID: PMC4125598
PMID: 25110390

SHOX (NM_000451.3) encodes a transcription factor exclusively expressed in
the developing limb and pharyngeal arch in the human embryo (1). Heterozygous mutations of SHOX lead to Leri-Weill
dyschondrosteosis characterized by wrist deformity and mesomelic short stature (LWD; OMIM
#249700), as well as idiopathic short stature without apparent skeletal malformations (ISS;
OMIM # 300582) (2,3,4). Less specific skeletal changes such as
high arched palate, short metacarpals, scoliosis, and micrognathia have also been described
in patients with SHOX deficiency (5).
Previous studies have shown that SHOX deficiency accounts for approximately
80% and 2–16% of genetic causes of LWD and ISS, respectively (5,6,7,8). Furthermore, haploinsufficiency of
SHOX represents the major cause of growth failure in patients with Turner
syndrome (9). Thus, SHOX deficiency
is a clinically important condition, particularly in the field of pediatric endocrinology
and orthopedics. This review article introduces our current understanding of the causative
mechanisms and phenotypic characteristics of SHOX-associated skeletal malformations.

SHOX resides in the short arm pseudoautosomal region of the X and Y
chromosomes (PAR1) and escapes X inactivation (2).
Thus, although SHOX is located on the sex chromosomes, molecular defects of
SHOX are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. To date, several
point mutations in the SHOX-coding exons and submicroscopic deletions
encompassing the coding region and/or the upstream or downstream enhancer regions have been
identified in more than 200 patients with LWD or ISS (5,6,7,8,9). Previously reported SHOX mutations are listed in the SHOX
Mutation Database (http://hyg-serv-01.hyg.uni-heidelberg.de/lovd/index.php?select_db=SHOX)
(10). The precise position of the
SHOX enhancers remains to be determined, although the upstream and
downstream enhancers have been mapped to a ~300 kb region ~95 kb upstream and an ~30 kb
region ~250 kb downstream from the start codon, respectively (11,12,13). Deletions involving the coding and/or downstream enhancer regions
account for about 60% of Japanese LWD patients (14),
and those affecting the downstream enhancer regions are the major genetic causes in Spanish
patients (15). High recombination frequency and the
abundant presence of repeat sequences in PAR1 likely play a role in the development of
submicroscopic genomic rearrangements involving SHOX (14).

The most characteristic feature in patients with SHOX deficiency is
Madelung deformity, a cluster of anatomical changes in the forearm including bowing and
shortening of the radius, prominence of the ulnar head and palmar and ulnar deviation
(“pyramidal configuration”) of the carpal bones (Fig.
1Fig. 1.Madelung deformity in a female patient with SHOX deficiency. Upper
panel: appearance of the forearm. Prominence of the distal ulna is shown. Lower panel:
radiographic findings. Shortening and bowing of the radius and dorsal subluxation of
the ulnar head are shown. and Fig. 2Fig. 2.Forearm three-dimensional computed tomography of a female patient with
SHOX deficiency. Significant findings include shortening of the
radius, pyramidal configuration of the carpal bones and dorsal subluxation of the ulna
in addition to severely disturbed structural organization of the elbow joint.) (16). Clinical manifestations induced by
Madelung deformity include wrist pain, deformation and limited joint motion (16, 17).
Radiological findings of Madelung deformity include the absence or narrowing of the ulnar
portion of the distal radial physis, anterior bowing of the radial shaft and dorsal
subluxation of the ulnar head (17, 18). Several additional skeletal changes such as
triangularization of the distal radial epiphysis have been associated with Madelung
deformity (19). In patients with severe Madelung
deformity, the structural organization of the elbow joint is also disrupted (Fig. 2).

Madelung deformity in a female patient with SHOX deficiency. Upper
panel: appearance of the forearm. Prominence of the distal ulna is shown. Lower panel:
radiographic findings. Shortening and bowing of the radius and dorsal subluxation of
the ulnar head are shown.

Forearm three-dimensional computed tomography of a female patient with
SHOX deficiency. Significant findings include shortening of the
radius, pyramidal configuration of the carpal bones and dorsal subluxation of the ulna
in addition to severely disturbed structural organization of the elbow joint.

Previous studies have suggested that the primary lesion of Madelung deformity is the
premature epiphyseal fusion at the volar-ulnar portion of the radial growth plate (20). Impaired growth of the radius due to the early
epiphyseal fusion, in combination with relatively preserved growth of the ulna, appears to
underlie the characteristic deformity (18, 21). The appearance of the wrist varies among patients
and probably depends on the fusion position along the anterior-posterior axis of the radial
epiphysis (22).

Although Madelung deformity usually occurs as a result of SHOX deficiency,
it can also take place as a component of other congenital disorders such as multiple
exostoses syndrome, multiple epiphyseal dysplasia and dysostosis multiplex of
mucopolysaccharidosis (23). Madelung-like deformity
has also been observed in patients with pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1b (24). In addition, Madelung deformity can occur as a
change secondary to injury and infection (19). When
Madelung deformity is accompanied by short stature and mesomelic shorting of the limbs, it
is referred to as LWD. The mesomelic short stature of LWD can be explained as a result of
impaired linear growth of the radius, ulna, tibia and fibula. A decreased extremity/trunk
ratio with a fairly preserved sitting height and head circumference is a characteristic
auxological finding of patients with LWD (5, 25). Rappold et al. developed a phenotype scoring system
for screening of individuals with possible SHOX deficiency from patients
with short stature (8). They suggested the following
eight clinical features as indicators for SHOX deficiency: arm span/height
ratio, sitting height/height ratio, body mass index, cubitus valgus, short forearm, bowing
of the forearm, muscular hypertrophy and dislocation of the ulna. Although
SHOX deficiency is the only condition that has been implicated in LWD,
SHOX abnormalities have been detected only in 50–90% of patients with LWD
(5). It remains currently unknown whether LWD
patients with apparently normal SHOX alleles have mutations in the
regulatory regions of SHOX or in a hitherto unidentified gene involved in
skeletal development.

Using peripheral quantitative computed tomography of the forearm, Soucek et
al. investigated bone mineral density and bone geometry in 10 prepubertal
patients with SHOX deficiency and 22 patients with Turner syndrome (26). They found that patients of both groups had a thin
bone cortex and an enlarged total bone area at the diaphysis of the radius compared with
control individuals. On the other hand, these patients had a normal trabecular bone mineral
density and bone strength index. Soucek et al. proposed that the skeletal
changes observed in patients with SHOX deficiency are attributable to an
adjustment of the long bones with a disrupted cortex to the mechanical loading that aims to
increase bone strength.

Munns et al. investigated histopathological findings of the
surgically-excised growth plate of the distal radius obtained from two patients with
molecularly confirmed SHOX deficiency (22). They found disrupted columnar arrangement of chondrocytes; the normal tandem
stacking of mature chondrocytes within columns was replaced by a side-by-side arrangement.
Furthermore, the presence of hypertrophic osteoid with micro-enchondromata in the metaphysis
suggested aberrant endochondral ossification. Significant expansion of the hypertrophic
layer and reduction of the proliferative layer were observed in the growth plate. These data
imply that the SHOX protein is required for ordered zonal development of chondrocytes. In
this regard, SHOX is strongly expressed in terminally differentiated
hypertrophic chondrocytes and less obviously in proliferating and reserve chondrocytes
(27). In vitro assays with
osteosarcoma cells indicated that SHOX induces oxidative stress and activates the intrinsic
apoptotic pathway (27). Thus, it is possible that
SHOX plays a critical role in chondrocyte development by regulating the cell cycle and
apoptosis of hypertrophic chondrocytes. Indeed, premature epiphyseal fusion in patients with
SHOX deficiency may reflect a perturbed cell death process in the growth
plate. To date, however, the precise mechanism by which SHOX exerts its effect on
chondrocyte development remains unknown. Although in vivo and in
vitro assays have indicated that several proteins such as BNP, FGFR3, SOX5, and
SOX6 can interact with SHOX (28, 29), the function of SHOX in human tissues has yet to be
elucidated.

Vickers and Nielsen identified an abnormal ligament in patients with Madelung deformity
(30). The “Vickers ligament” tethers the lunate to
the distal portion of the radius and can have a diameter as large as 8 mm (Fig. 3Fig. 3.Schematic representation of the Vickers ligament that tethers the lunate to the
distal portion of the radius. This ligament seems to consist of hypertrophied
connective tissues that form under the mechanical force that arises from asymmetrical
growth of the radius and ulna.) (22). Histological analysis demonstrated that
the Vickers ligament is a morphologically normal ligament consisting of collagen and elastin
fibers (22). This ligament is predicted to promote
pyramidal configuration of the carpal bones by disturbing the physiological migration of
these bones during growth (22). Furthermore, this
ligament may exert an inhibitory effect on linear growth of the radius by compressing its
distal epiphysis (18). Therefore, it is possible that
the Vickers ligament constitutes an essential factor in the development of Madelung
deformity. Although the process by which the Vickers ligament forms has yet to be clarified,
this ligament is regarded as a secondary change of the forearm deformity (30, 31). Actually,
the ligament seems to consist of hypertrophied connective tissues that form under a
mechanical force that arises from asymmetrical growth of the radius and ulna.

Schematic representation of the Vickers ligament that tethers the lunate to the
distal portion of the radius. This ligament seems to consist of hypertrophied
connective tissues that form under the mechanical force that arises from asymmetrical
growth of the radius and ulna.

Recent advancements in high-resolution magnetic resonance imaging have enabled early
detection of the Vickers ligament (31). Previous
studies have indicated that surgical removal of the Vickers ligament in combination with
dome osteotomy is beneficial to patients with Madelung deformity; Harley et
al. reported that these surgical interventions effectively improved the clinical
features of adolescent patients with Madelung deformity (21), while Steinman et al. showed that these interventions can
provide long-term correction of the wrist deformity (16). However, since the number of treated patients was small, further studies are
necessary to validate these findings.

Skeletal changes of SHOX deficiency tend to be more severe in adult
females than in children or adult males (5). Obvious
Madelung deformity is rare in prepubertal patients, although decreased extremity/trunk
ratios and subtle skeletal changes are observed in the majority of children with
SHOX deficiency (5, 32, 33). These
data can be explained by assuming that estrogens exert a deleterious effect on skeletal
formation in patients with SHOX abnormalities. Since estrogens induce
physiological skeletal maturation in both sexes (34),
they may also enhance premature epiphyseal fusion in patients with SHOX
deficiency. Consistent with this, severe Madelung deformity is rarely seen in Turner females
in whom ovarian function is frequently impaired (35).
Furthermore, a longitudinal study of a female patient with SHOX deficiency
and normal ovarian function showed age-appropriate skeletal maturation before puberty and
rapidly advanced bone age during puberty (36). On the
other hand, since Soucek et al. revealed a significant difference in bone geometry between
prepubertal patients with the 46,XX karyotype and prepubertal Turner females, it is likely
that some factors other than estrogens may also underlie relatively mild skeletal features
in Turner females (26). Soucek et al. suggested
karyotype mosaicism as one of the possible candidates for such factors (26). It is known that the karyotype of Turner females is
heterogeneous and includes 45,X/46,XX. Since two normal SHOX alleles are
present in a certain percentage of cells in females with the 45,X/46,XX karyotype, this may
lead to relatively well preserved skeletal structures in such patients.

Mutation types may affect the phenotypic severity of SHOX deficiency. It
has been proposed that molecular defects involving only the enhancer regions are associated
with broader phenotypic variation than deletions/mutations affecting the coding exons; Chen
et al. have described more severe skeletal changes in patients with enhancer deletions than
in those with mutations/deletions affecting the coding exons (37), while Rosilio et al. reported relatively mild phenotypes in patients
with enhancer deletions (7). On the other hand, no
apparent genotype-phenotype correlation has been reported for SHOX
intragenic mutations/deletions (8).

Recent studies have indicated that SHOX deficiency leads to premature
epiphyseal fusion at the distal radius, possibly by disturbing programmed cell death of
hypertrophic chondrocytes. In addition, the formation of an aberrant ligament tethering the
lunate and radius appears to play a role in the development of Madelung deformity. Blood
estrogen levels and mutation types have been proposed as phenotypic determinants of
SHOX deficiency, although other unknown factors may also modify the
clinical severity of this condition.