---
reference_id: "PMID:11095431"
title: "Polycystic ovarian syndrome: evidence that flutamide restores sensitivity of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone pulse generator to inhibition by estradiol and progesterone."
authors:
- Eagleson CA
- Gingrich MB
- Pastor CL
- Arora TK
- Burt CM
- Evans WS
- Marshall JC
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1210/jcem.85.11.6992
keywords:
- 17-alpha-Hydroxyprogesterone/blood
- Activity Cycles
- Adult
- "Androgen Antagonists/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Body Mass Index
- Dehydroepiandrosterone Sulfate/blood
- Estradiol/blood
- Female
- "Flutamide/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Follicle Stimulating Hormone/blood, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Luteinizing Hormone/blood, metabolism"
- "Polycystic Ovary Syndrome/blood, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Reference Values
- Thyroxine/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Polycystic ovarian syndrome: evidence that flutamide restores sensitivity of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone pulse generator to inhibition by estradiol and progesterone.
**Authors:** Eagleson CA, Gingrich MB, Pastor CL, Arora TK, Burt CM, Evans WS, Marshall JC
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jcem.85.11.6992](https://doi.org/10.1210/jcem.85.11.6992)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Nov;85(11):4047-52. doi:
10.1210/jcem.85.11.6992.

Polycystic ovarian syndrome: evidence that flutamide restores sensitivity of the
gonadotropin-releasing hormone pulse generator to inhibition by estradiol and
progesterone.

Eagleson CA(1), Gingrich MB, Pastor CL, Arora TK, Burt CM, Evans WS, Marshall
JC.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology and the Center for Research in Reproduction,
University of Virginia, Charlottesville 22908, USA.

Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) is a complex disorder with multiple
abnormalities, including hyperandrogenism, ovulatory dysfunction, and altered
gonadotropin secretion. The majority of patients have elevated LH levels in
plasma and a persistent rapid frequency of LH (GnRH) pulse secretion, the
mechanisms of which are unclear. Earlier work has suggested that the sensitivity
of the GnRH pulse generator to inhibition by ovarian steroids is impaired. We
performed a study to determine whether antiandrogen therapy with flutamide could
enhance feedback inhibition by estradiol (E2) and progesterone (P) in women with
PCOS. Ten anovulatory women with PCOS and nine normal controls (days 8-10 of the
cycle) were studied on three occasions. During each admission, LH and FSH were
determined every 10 min and E2, P, and testosterone (T) every 2 h for 13 h.
After 12 h, GnRH (25 ng/kg) was given iv. After the first admission, patients
were started on flutamide (250 mg twice daily), which was continued for the
entire study. The second admission occurred on days 8-10 of the next menstrual
cycle for normal controls and on study day 28 for PCOS patients. Subjects were
then given E2 transdermally (mean plasma E2, 106+/-18 pg/mL) and P by vaginal
suppository to obtain varied plasma concentrations of P (mean P, 4.4+/-0.5
ng/mL; range, 0.6-9.0 ng/mL), and a third study was performed 7 days later. At
baseline women with PCOS had higher LH pulse amplitude, response to GnRH, T,
androstenedione, and insulin and lower sex hormone-binding globulin
concentrations (P < 0.05). Most hormonal parameters were not altered by 4 weeks
of flutamide, except T in controls and E2 and FSH in PCOS patients, which were
lower. Of note, flutamide alone had no effect on LH pulse frequency or
amplitude, mean plasma LH, or LH responsiveness to exogenous GnRH. After the
addition of E2 and P for 7 days, both PCOS patients and normal controls had
similar reductions in LH pulse frequency (4.0+/-0.7 and 5.8+/-0.7 pulses/12 h,
respectively). This contrasts with our earlier results in the absence of
flutamide, where a plasma P level of less than 10 ng/mL had minimal effects on
LH pulse frequency in women with PCOS, but was effective in controls. These
results suggest that although the elevated LH pulse frequency in PCOS may in
part reflect impaired sensitivity to E2 and P, continuing actions of
hyperandrogenemia are important for sustaining the abnormal hypothalamic
sensitivity to feedback inhibition by ovarian steroids.

DOI: 10.1210/jcem.85.11.6992
PMID: 11095431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
