---
reference_id: "PMID:25257953"
title: "Two years' experience with denosumab for children with osteogenesis imperfecta type VI."
authors:
- Hoyer-Kuhn H
- Netzer C
- Koerber F
- Schoenau E
- Semler O
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-014-0145-1
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Bone Density/drug effects, physiology"
- Child
- Denosumab
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy"
- "RANK Ligand/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Radiography
- Time Factors
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two years' experience with denosumab for children with osteogenesis imperfecta type VI.
**Authors:** Hoyer-Kuhn H, Netzer C, Koerber F, Schoenau E, Semler O
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-014-0145-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-014-0145-1)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2014 Sep 26;9:145. doi: 10.1186/s13023-014-0145-1.

Two years' experience with denosumab for children with osteogenesis imperfecta 
type VI.

Hoyer-Kuhn H, Netzer C, Koerber F, Schoenau E, Semler O.

BACKGROUND: Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a hereditary disease causing reduced 
bone mass, increased fracture rate, long bone deformities and vertebral 
compressions. Additional non skeletal findings are caused by impaired collagen 
function and include hyperlaxity of joints and blue sclera. Most OI cases are 
caused by dominant mutations in COL1A1/2 affecting bone formation. During the 
last years, recessive forms of OI have been identified, mostly affecting 
posttranslational modification of collagen. In 2011, mutations in SERPINF1 were 
identified as the molecular cause of OI type VI, and thereby a novel 
pathophysiology of the disease was elucidated. The subgroup of patients with OI 
type VI are affected by an increased bone resorption, leading to the same 
symptoms as observed in patients with an impaired bone formation. Severely 
affected children are currently treated with intravenous bisphosphonates 
regardless of the underlying mutation and pathophysiology. Patients with OI type 
VI are known to have a poor response to such a bisphosphonate treatment.
METHOD: Deciphering the genetic cause of OI type VI in our 4 patients (three 
children and one adolescent) led to an immediate translational approach in the 
form of a treatment with the monoclonal RANKL antibody Denosumab (1 mg/kg body 
weight every 12 weeks).
RESULTS: Short-term biochemical response to this treatment was reported 
previously. We now present the results after 2 years of treatment and 
demonstrate a long term benefit as well as an increase of bone mineral density, 
a normalization of vertebral shape, an increase of mobility, and a reduced 
fracture rate.
CONCLUSION: This report presents the first two-year data of denosumab treatment 
in patients with Osteogenesis imperfecta type VI and in Osteogenesis imperfecta 
in general as an effective and apparently safe treatment option.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-014-0145-1
PMCID: PMC4180531
PMID: 25257953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]