---
reference_id: "PMID:28077719"
title: Suppressing N-Acetyl-l-Aspartate Synthesis Prevents Loss of Neurons in a Murine Model of Canavan Leukodystrophy.
authors:
- Sohn J
- Bannerman P
- Guo F
- Burns T
- Miers L
- Croteau C
- Singhal NK
- McDonough JA
- Pleasure D
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2013-16.2016
keywords:
- Animals
- "Aspartic Acid/analogs & derivatives, biosynthesis, deficiency, genetics"
- "Canavan Disease/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Suppressing N-Acetyl-l-Aspartate Synthesis Prevents Loss of Neurons in a Murine Model of Canavan Leukodystrophy.
**Authors:** Sohn J, Bannerman P, Guo F, Burns T, Miers L, Croteau C, Singhal NK, McDonough JA, Pleasure D
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2013-16.2016](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2013-16.2016)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2017 Jan 11;37(2):413-421. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2013-16.2016.

Suppressing N-Acetyl-l-Aspartate Synthesis Prevents Loss of Neurons in a Murine
Model of Canavan Leukodystrophy.

Sohn J(1), Bannerman P(1), Guo F(1), Burns T(1), Miers L(1), Croteau C(1),
Singhal NK(2), McDonough JA(2), Pleasure D(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Pediatric Regenerative Medicine, University of California,
Davis, Sacramento, California 95817, and.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences and School of Biomedical Sciences, Kent
State University, Kent, Ohio 44242.
(3)Institute for Pediatric Regenerative Medicine, University of California,
Davis, Sacramento, California 95817, and depleasure@ucdavis.edu.

Canavan disease is a leukodystrophy caused by aspartoacylase (ASPA) deficiency.
The lack of functional ASPA, an enzyme enriched in oligodendroglia that cleaves
N-acetyl-l-aspartate (NAA) to acetate and l-aspartic acid, elevates brain NAA
and causes "spongiform" vacuolation of superficial brain white matter and
neighboring gray matter. In children with Canavan disease, neuroimaging shows
early-onset dysmyelination and progressive brain atrophy. Neuron loss has been
documented at autopsy in some cases. Prior studies have shown that mice
homozygous for the Aspa nonsense mutation Nur7 also develop brain vacuolation.
We now report that numbers of cerebral cortical and cerebellar neurons are
decreased and that cerebral cortex progressively thins in AspaNur7/Nur7 mice.
This neuronal pathology is prevented by constitutive disruption of Nat8l, which
encodes the neuronal NAA-synthetic enzyme N-acetyltransferase-8-like.
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: This is the first demonstration of cortical and
cerebellar neuron depletion and progressive cerebral cortical thinning in an
animal model of Canavan disease. Genetic suppression of N-acetyl-l-aspartate
(NAA) synthesis, previously shown to block brain vacuolation in
aspartoacylase-deficient mice, also prevents neuron loss and cerebral cortical
atrophy in these mice. These results suggest that lowering the concentration of
NAA in the brains of children with Canavan disease would prevent or slow
progression of neurological deficits.

Copyright © 2017 the authors 0270-6474/17/370413-09$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2013-16.2016
PMCID: PMC5242397
PMID: 28077719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
