---
reference_id: "PMID:39935752"
title: "Treatment outcomes of patients with BRAF(V600E)-mutated metastatic colorectal cancer: a Polish retrospective cohort study."
authors:
- Żok J
- Bieńkowski M
- Radecka B
- Kuchar A
- Borowiec S
- Streb J
- Jurczyk M
- Jakieła-Drąg A
- Gełej M
- Zając P
- Ploch-Glapińska M
- Duchnowska R
journal: Contemp Oncol (Pozn)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.5114/wo.2024.146953
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment outcomes of patients with BRAF(V600E)-mutated metastatic colorectal cancer: a Polish retrospective cohort study.
**Authors:** Żok J, Bieńkowski M, Radecka B, Kuchar A, Borowiec S, Streb J, Jurczyk M, Jakieła-Drąg A, Gełej M, Zając P, Ploch-Glapińska M, Duchnowska R
**Journal:** Contemp Oncol (Pozn) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.5114/wo.2024.146953](https://doi.org/10.5114/wo.2024.146953)

## Content

1. Contemp Oncol (Pozn). 2024;28(4):297-303. doi: 10.5114/wo.2024.146953. Epub
2025  Jan 15.

Treatment outcomes of patients with BRAF(V600E)-mutated metastatic colorectal
cancer: a Polish retrospective cohort study.

Żok J(1), Bieńkowski M(2), Radecka B(3), Kuchar A(1), Borowiec S(1), Streb
J(4)(5), Jurczyk M(5)(6), Jakieła-Drąg A(7), Gełej M(3), Zając P(3),
Ploch-Glapińska M(7), Duchnowska R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Military Institute of Medicine, National Research
Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Department of Pathomorphology, Medical University of Gdańsk, Gdańsk, Poland.
(3)Department of Oncology, Institute of Medical Science, University of Opole,
Opole, Poland.
(4)Department of Oncology, Jagiellonian University Medical College, University
Hospital, Kraków, Poland.
(5)Department of Oncology, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Kraków,
Poland.
(6)Department of Pathophysiology, Jagiellonian University Medical College,
Kraków, Poland.
(7)Department of Oncology, 4th Military Clinical Hospital with Polyclinic,
Wrocław, Poland.

INTRODUCTION: The BRAFV600E mutation is found in 6-11% of metastatic colo-rectal
cancer (mCRC) patients. According to international guidelines for
BRAFV600E-mutated mCRC, the triplet chemotherapy FOLFOXIRI (folinic acid,
5-fluorouracil, oxaliplatin, irinotecan) or double chemotherapy with or without
bevacizumab, and encorafenib plus cetuximab should be considered in the first-
and second-line settings. We aimed to evaluate clinical practices in
BRAFV600E-mutated mCRC patients treated at five Polish oncology centers.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed the data of BRAFV600E- mutated
mCRC patients treated between 2011 and 2023. Before starting the first-line
treatment, all patients were tested for BRAF and RAS mutations.
RESULTS: One hundred twenty-six patients (median age: 68 years; 55% female, 45%
male) from five oncology centers were included. The majority of patients (69,
55%) had a right-sided primary tumor. The first line of chemotherapy was
received by 100 patients (79.4%). The majority received doublet chemotherapy:
FOLFOX (folinic acid, 5-fluorouracil, oxaliplatin), FOLFIRI (folinic acid,
5-fluorouracil, irinotecan), XELOX (capecitabine, oxaliplatin), and FOLFIRI with
bevacizumab: 30 (30%), 47 (47%), 5 (5%), and 3 (3%). Only three patients
received FOLFOXIRI; one patient received bevacizumab. The median duration of
first-line treatment was 5.26 months (95% CI: 0.03-18.9). Subsequently, 40%,
16%, 5%, and 1% of patients received second, third, fourth, and fifth-line
therapy, retrospectively. During the median follow-up of 38.5 months, 96 (79.3%)
patients died. The median overall survival from the time of mCRC diagnosis was
13.7 months (95% CI: 11.3-17.6).
CONCLUSIONS: This study highlights the unmet need for effective treatment
strategies for patients with BRAFV600E-mutated mCRC in Poland.

Copyright © 2024 Termedia.

DOI: 10.5114/wo.2024.146953
PMCID: PMC11809569
PMID: 39935752

Conflict of interest statement: None.
