---
reference_id: "PMID:36894991"
title: "Associations of genetic markers of diabetes mellitus with carotid atherosclerosis: a community-based case-control study."
authors:
- Wu TW
- Chou CL
- Cheng CF
- Lu SX
- Wu YJ
- Wang LY
journal: Cardiovasc Diabetol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12933-023-01787-7
keywords:
- Humans
- Genetic Markers
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Case-Control Studies
- Risk Factors
- "Carotid Artery Diseases/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, genetics"
- "Plaque, Atherosclerotic"
- Atherosclerosis
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Diabetes Mellitus
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Associations of genetic markers of diabetes mellitus with carotid atherosclerosis: a community-based case-control study.
**Authors:** Wu TW, Chou CL, Cheng CF, Lu SX, Wu YJ, Wang LY
**Journal:** Cardiovasc Diabetol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12933-023-01787-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12933-023-01787-7)

## Content

1. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2023 Mar 9;22(1):51. doi: 10.1186/s12933-023-01787-7.

Associations of genetic markers of diabetes mellitus with carotid 
atherosclerosis: a community-based case-control study.

Wu TW(1), Chou CL(1)(2), Cheng CF(3), Lu SX(2), Wu YJ(4)(5)(6)(7), Wang LY(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, MacKay Medical College, No. 46, Sec. 3, Zhongzheng 
Road, Sanzhi District, New Taipei City, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Neurology, MacKay Memorial Hospital, New Taipei City, Taiwan.
(3)Tamsui Health Station, Department of Health, New Taipei City Government, New 
Taipei City, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Medicine, MacKay Medical College, No. 46, Sec. 3, Zhongzheng 
Road, Sanzhi District, New Taipei City, Taiwan. jacobyjwu@gmail.com.
(5)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, MacKay Medical College, New Taipei City, 
Taiwan. jacobyjwu@gmail.com.
(6)Cardiovascular Center, Department of Internal Medicine, MacKay Memorial 
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. jacobyjwu@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Medical Research, MacKay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. 
jacobyjwu@gmail.com.
(8)Department of Medicine, MacKay Medical College, No. 46, Sec. 3, Zhongzheng 
Road, Sanzhi District, New Taipei City, Taiwan. yannbo@mmc.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND: Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a well-established determinant of 
atherosclerosis and cardiovascular diseases (CVD). Recently, genome-wide 
association studies (GWAS) identified several single nucleotide polymorphism 
(SNP) significantly correlated with DM. The study aimed to explore the 
relationships of the top significant DM SNPs with carotid atherosclerosis (CA).
METHODS: We used a case-control design and randomly selected 309 cases and 439 
controls with and without, respectively, carotid plaque (CP) from a 
community-based cohort. Eight recent GWAS on DM in East Asians reported hundreds 
of SNPs with genome-wide significance. The study used the top significant DM 
SNPs, with a p-value < 10-16, as the candidate genetic markers of CA. The 
independent effects of these DM SNPs on CA were assessed by multivariable 
logistic regression analyses to control the effects of conventional 
cardio-metabolic risk factors.
RESULTS: Multivariable analyses showed that, 9 SNPs, including rs4712524, 
rs1150777, rs10842993, rs2858980, rs9583907, rs1077476, rs7180016, rs4383154, 
and rs9937354, showed promising associations with the presence of carotid plaque 
(CP). Among them, rs9937354, rs10842993, rs7180016, and rs4383154 showed 
significantly independent effects. The means (SD) of the 9-locus genetic risk 
score (9-GRS) of CP-positive and -negative subjects were 9.19 (1.53) and 8.62 
(1.63), respectively (p < 0.001). The corresponding values of 4-locus GRS 
(4-GRS) were 4.02 (0.81) and. 3.78 (0.92), respectively (p < 0.001). The 
multivariable-adjusted odds ratio of having CP for per 1.0 increase in 9-GRS and 
4-GRS were 1.30 (95% CI 1.18-1.44; p = 4.7 × 10-7) and 1.47 (95% CI 1.74-9.40; 
p = 6.1 × 10-5), respectively. The means of multi-locus GRSs of DM patients were 
similar to those of CP-positive subjects and higher than those of CP-negative or 
DM-negative subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified 9 DM SNPs showing promising associations with CP. The 
multi-locus GRSs may be used as biomarkers for the identification and prediction 
of high-risks subjects for atherosclerosis and atherosclerotic diseases. Future 
studies on these specific SNPs and their associated genes may provide valuable 
information for the preventions of DM and atherosclerosis.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12933-023-01787-7
PMCID: PMC9999522
PMID: 36894991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.