---
reference_id: "PMID:37839908"
title: "Relapsing polychondritis: Best Practice & Clinical Rheumatology."
authors:
- Mertz P
- Sparks J
- Kobrin D
- Ogbonnaya SA
- Sevim E
- Michet C
- Arnaud L
- Ferrada M
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.berh.2023.101867
keywords:
- Humans
- "Polychondritis, Relapsing/diagnosis, therapy, complications"
- Rheumatology
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relapsing polychondritis: Best Practice & Clinical Rheumatology.
**Authors:** Mertz P, Sparks J, Kobrin D, Ogbonnaya SA, Sevim E, Michet C, Arnaud L, Ferrada M
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.berh.2023.101867](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.berh.2023.101867)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 2023 Mar;37(1):101867. doi: 
10.1016/j.berh.2023.101867. Epub 2023 Oct 14.

Relapsing polychondritis: Best Practice & Clinical Rheumatology.

Mertz P(1), Sparks J(2), Kobrin D(3), Ogbonnaya SA(3), Sevim E(3), Michet C(4), 
Arnaud L(1), Ferrada M(5).

Author information:
(1)Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Centre National de Référence 
RESO-Lupus, 67000 Strasbourg, France.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, USA.
(3)National Institutes of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)Mayo Clinic School of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, USA.
(5)National Institutes of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, 
Bethesda, MD, USA. Electronic address: marcela.ferrada@nih.gov.

Relapsing polychondritis (RP) is an uncommon inflammatory disorder that 
predominantly targets cartilaginous structures. The disease frequently affects 
the nose, ears, airways, and joints, but it can also impact organs that aren't 
primarily cartilage-based, such as blood vessels, skin, inner ear, and eyes. 
Given its infrequent occurrence and recurrent symptoms, patients often 
experience delays in proper diagnosis. Lately, based on the organs involved, the 
disease's diverse manifestations have been categorized into specific clinical 
groups, based on the most likely organ involvement including auricular, nasal, 
pulmonary, and musculoskeletal. More recently the discovery of a new disease, 
called (Vacuoles, E1 enzyme, X-linked, Autoinflammatory, Somatic) VEXAS 
syndrome, due to mutations in UBA1 gene, identified the cause of 8 % of the 
patients with a clinical diagnosis of RP. VEXAS is likely the cause of a 
previously described "hematologic subgroup" in RP. This discovery is proof of 
concept that RP is likely more than one disease (Beck et al., Dec 31 2020; 
Ferrada et al., 2021). People diagnosed with RP face numerous hurdles, with the 
quality of their lives and overall prognosis being affected. Diagnosing the 
condition is particularly challenging due to its fluctuating symptoms, the 
absence of specific markers, and the lack of universally recognized 
classification criteria. For a correct diagnosis, it's imperative for healthcare 
professionals to identify its unique clinical patterns. Moreover, there are no 
approved metrics to gauge the disease's severity, complicating patient 
management. This review seeks to equip clinicians with pertinent insights to 
better diagnose and attend to these complex patients.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.berh.2023.101867
PMID: 37839908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]