---
reference_id: "PMID:28927525"
title: "Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency: Genetic variations, clinical manifestations and therapeutic interventions."
authors:
- Hazari YM
- Bashir A
- Habib M
- Bashir S
- Habib H
- Qasim MA
- Shah NN
- Haq E
- Teckman J
- Fazili KM
journal: Mutat Res Rev Mutat Res
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.mrrev.2017.03.001
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- "Liver/metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Liver Diseases/diagnosis, etiology, genetics"
- "Lung/metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Protein Conformation
- "Pulmonary Disease, Chronic Obstructive/diagnosis, etiology, genetics"
- "Pulmonary Emphysema/diagnosis, etiology, genetics"
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin/genetics, metabolism"
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/complications, diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency: Genetic variations, clinical manifestations and therapeutic interventions.
**Authors:** Hazari YM, Bashir A, Habib M, Bashir S, Habib H, Qasim MA, Shah NN, Haq E, Teckman J, Fazili KM
**Journal:** Mutat Res Rev Mutat Res (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mrrev.2017.03.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mrrev.2017.03.001)

## Content

1. Mutat Res Rev Mutat Res. 2017 Jul;773:14-25. doi: 10.1016/j.mrrev.2017.03.001.
 Epub 2017 Mar 18.

Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency: Genetic variations, clinical manifestations and
therapeutic interventions.

Hazari YM(1), Bashir A(1), Habib M(1), Bashir S(1), Habib H(2), Qasim MA(3),
Shah NN(4), Haq E(1), Teckman J(5), Fazili KM(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University of Kashmir, Srinagar, Jammu and
Kashmir, India.
(2)The Islamia College of Science & Commerce, Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir,
India.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Indiana University Purdue University Fort Wayne, IN,
USA.
(4)Department of Chest Medicine, Government Medical College, Srinagar, Jammu and
Kashmir, India.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Saint Louis University, St Louis, MO, USA.
(6)Department of Biotechnology, University of Kashmir, Srinagar, Jammu and
Kashmir, India. Electronic address: fazili@kashmiruniversity.ac.in.

Alpha-1-antitrypsin (AAT) is an acute phase secretory glycoprotein that inhibits
neutrophil proteases like elastase and is considered as the archetype of a
family of structurally related serine-protease inhibitors termed serpins. Serum
AAT predominantly originates from liver and increases three to five fold during
host response to tissue injury and inflammation. The AAT deficiency is unique
among the protein-misfolding diseases in that it causes target organ injury by
both loss-of-function and gain-of-toxic function mechanisms. Lack of its
antiprotease activity is associated with premature development of pulmonary
emphysema and loss-of-function due to accumulation of resultant aggregates in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This' in turn' markedly reduces
the amount of AAT that is available to protect lungs against proteolytic attack
by the enzyme neutrophil elastase. The coalescence of AAT deficiency, its
reduced efficacy, and cigarette smoking or poor ventilation conditions have
devastating effect on lung function. On the other hand, the accumulation of
retained mutant proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum of hepatocytes in a
polymerized form rather than secreted into the blood in its monomeric form is
associated with chronic liver disease and predisposition to hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) by gain- of- toxic function. Liver injury resulting from this
gain-of-toxic function mechanism in which mutant AAT retained in the ER
initiates a series of pathologic events, eventually culminating at liver
cirrhosis and HCC. Here in this review, we underline the structural, genetic,
polymorphic, biochemical and pathological advances made in the field of AAT
deficiency and further comprehensively emphasize on the therapeutic
interventions available for the patient.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrrev.2017.03.001
PMID: 28927525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
