---
reference_id: "PMID:31894937"
title: "Lymphoma: Diagnosis and Treatment."
authors:
- Lewis WD
- Lilly S
- Jones KL
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '2020'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lymphoma: Diagnosis and Treatment.
**Authors:** Lewis WD, Lilly S, Jones KL
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (2020)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 2020 Jan 1;101(1):34-41.

Lymphoma: Diagnosis and Treatment.

Lewis WD(1), Lilly S(1), Jones KL(1).

Author information:
(1)West Virginia University Eastern Division, Harpers Ferry, WV, USA.

Lymphoma is a group of malignant neoplasms of lymphocytes with more than 90 
subtypes. It is traditionally classified broadly as non-Hodgkin or Hodgkin 
lymphoma. Approximately 82,000 new U.S. patients are diagnosed with lymphoma 
annually. Any tobacco use and obesity are major modifiable risk factors, with 
genetic, infectious, and inflammatory etiologies also contributing. Lymphoma 
typically presents as painless adenopathy, with systemic symptoms of fever, 
unexplained weight loss, and night sweats occurring in more advanced stages of 
the disease. An open lymph node biopsy is preferred for diagnosis. The Lugano 
classification system incorporates symptoms and the extent of the disease as 
shown on positron emission tomography/computed tomography to stage lymphoma, 
which is then used to determine treatment. Chemotherapy treatment plans differ 
between the main subtypes of lymphoma. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma is treated with CHOP 
(cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone) with or without 
rituximab (R-CHOP), bendamustine, and lenalidomide. Hodgkin lymphoma is treated 
with combined chemotherapy with ABVD (doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and 
dacarbazine), Stanford V (a chemotherapy regimen consisting of mechlorethamine, 
doxorubicin, vinblastine, vincristine, bleomycin, etoposide, and prednisone), or 
BEACOPP (bleomycin, etoposide, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, 
procarbazine, and prednisone) with radiotherapy. Subsequent chemotherapy 
toxicities include neuropathy, cardiotoxicity, and secondary cancers such as 
lung and breast, and should be considered in the shared decision-making process 
to select a treatment regimen. Once remission is achieved, patients need routine 
surveillance to monitor for complications and relapse, in addition to 
age-appropriate screenings recommended by the U.S. Preventive Services Task 
Force. Patients should receive a 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine 
followed by a 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine at least eight weeks 
later with additional age-appropriate vaccinations because lymphoma is an 
immunosuppressive condition. Household contacts should also be current with 
their immunizations.

PMID: 31894937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]