---
reference_id: "PMID:11185536"
title: Epidemiology of hepatocellular carcinoma.
authors:
- Yu MC
- Yuan JM
- Govindarajan S
- Ross RK
journal: Can J Gastroenterol
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1155/2000/371801
keywords:
- Africa South of the Sahara/epidemiology
- "Asia, Southeastern/epidemiology"
- Canada/epidemiology
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/epidemiology"
- Europe/epidemiology
- Female
- Hepatitis B/epidemiology
- "Hepatitis C, Chronic/epidemiology"
- Humans
- Incidence
- Liver Neoplasms/epidemiology
- Male
- Prevalence
- Risk Factors
- United States/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of hepatocellular carcinoma.
**Authors:** Yu MC, Yuan JM, Govindarajan S, Ross RK
**Journal:** Can J Gastroenterol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2000/371801](https://doi.org/10.1155/2000/371801)

## Content

1. Can J Gastroenterol. 2000 Sep;14(8):703-9. doi: 10.1155/2000/371801.

Epidemiology of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Yu MC(1), Yuan JM, Govindarajan S, Ross RK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, University of Southern California/Norris
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles 90089-9176,
USA. mimiyu@hsc.usc.edu

Although rare in Canada and the United States, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
ranks as the eighth most common cancer in the world. High-risk regions are East
and Southeast Asia, and sub-Saharan Africa. Independent of race and geography,
rates in men are at least two to three times those in women; this sex ratio is
more pronounced in high-risk regions. Rates of HCC in the United States have
increased by 70% over the past two decades. Registry data in Canada and Western
Europe show similar trends. In contrast, the incidence of HCC in Singapore and
Shanghai, China, both high-risk regions, has declined steadily over the past two
decades. Among white and black Americans, there is an inverse relationship
between social class status and HCC incidence. Chronic infection by the
hepatitis B virus (HBV) is by far the most important risk factor for HCC in
humans. It is estimated that 80% of HCC worldwide is etiologically associated
with HBV. In the United States, although the infection rate in the general
population is low, HBV is estimated to account for one in four cases of HCC
among non-Asians. Chronic infection by the hepatitis C virus is another
important risk factor for HCC in the United States; however, this virus is
believed to play a relatively minor role in the development of HCC in Africa and
Asia. Dietary aflatoxin exposure is an important codeterminant of HCC risk in
Africa and parts of Asia. In Canada and the United States, excessive alcohol
intake, cigarette smoking and oral contraceptive use in women also are risk
factors for HCC.

DOI: 10.1155/2000/371801
PMID: 11185536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
