---
reference_id: "PMID:35066614"
title: RNF43 as a predictor of malignant transformation of pancreatic mucinous cystic neoplasm.
authors:
- Sakihama K
- Koga Y
- Yamamoto T
- Shimada Y
- Yamada Y
- Kawata J
- Shindo K
- Nakamura M
- Oda Y
journal: Virchows Arch
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00428-022-03277-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# RNF43 as a predictor of malignant transformation of pancreatic mucinous cystic neoplasm.
**Authors:** Sakihama K, Koga Y, Yamamoto T, Shimada Y, Yamada Y, Kawata J, Shindo K, Nakamura M, Oda Y
**Journal:** Virchows Arch (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00428-022-03277-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00428-022-03277-9)

## Content

1. Virchows Arch. 2022 Jun;480(6):1189-1199. doi: 10.1007/s00428-022-03277-9.
Epub  2022 Jan 23.

RNF43 as a predictor of malignant transformation of pancreatic mucinous cystic 
neoplasm.

Sakihama K(1)(2), Koga Y(3), Yamamoto T(1)(2), Shimada Y(1)(2), Yamada Y(1)(2), 
Kawata J(1)(2), Shindo K(2), Nakamura M(2), Oda Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashiku, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan.
(2)Department of Surgery and Oncology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(3)Department of Pathology, National Hospital Organization Kyushu Cancer Center, 
Fukuoka, Japan.
(4)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashiku, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan. 
oda.yoshinao.389@m.kyushu-u.ac.jp.

Mucinous cystic neoplasm (MCN) of the pancreas rarely progresses to invasive 
carcinoma, but few studies have analyzed genomic alterations involved in its 
malignant transformation. The relationships of ring finger protein 43 (RNF43) 
mutations with cytological atypia, RNF43 protein expression, and Wnt signaling 
proteins in MCN remain unclear. This study included 106 MCN cases, classified 
into 89 low-grade dysplasia (LG), 9 high-grade dysplasia (HG), and 8 invasive 
carcinoma (INV). We analyzed HG/INV and LG lesions of 9 HG/INV cases and LG 
lesions of 9 LG cases using targeted sequencing and confirmed the protein 
expression of RNF43 and β-catenin. The frequency of RNF43 mutations was 
significantly higher in HG/INV cases than in LG cases. Furthermore, HG/INV 
lesions (56%) and LG lesions (33%) of HG/INV cases possessed RNF43 mutation, 
whereas no such mutation was detected in any LG cases. The expression of RNF43 
was reduced in 71% of HG/INV cases and significantly correlated with 
histological grade and aberrant expression of β-catenin. In 3 of 5 RNF43-mutated 
cases, the expression of RNF43 was reduced, but there was no significant 
correlation between RNF43 mutation and protein expression. MCNs frequently 
harbored KRAS mutations, at rates of 100% in HG/INV lesions and 50% in LG 
lesions of HG/INV and LG cases. There was no significant difference in mutation 
frequency in LG lesions between HG/INV and LG cases. These results suggest that 
RNF43 mutations may be involved in and predictive of malignant transformation 
from an early stage of MCN.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00428-022-03277-9
PMID: 35066614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]