---
reference_id: "PMID:21559395"
title: Modeling initiation of Ewing sarcoma in human neural crest cells.
authors:
- von Levetzow C
- Jiang X
- Gwye Y
- von Levetzow G
- Hung L
- Cooper A
- Hsu JH
- Lawlor ER
journal: PLoS One
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019305
keywords:
- "Blotting, Western"
- Cell Differentiation
- Cellular Senescence
- Embryonic Stem Cells/cytology
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Flow Cytometry
- Gene Expression Profiling
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Gene Silencing
- Humans
- Lentivirus/metabolism
- "Models, Genetic"
- Neural Crest/cytology
- Neural Stem Cells/cytology
- Oncogenes
- "Sarcoma, Ewing/diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modeling initiation of Ewing sarcoma in human neural crest cells.
**Authors:** von Levetzow C, Jiang X, Gwye Y, von Levetzow G, Hung L, Cooper A, Hsu JH, Lawlor ER
**Journal:** PLoS One (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0019305](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0019305)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 29;6(4):e19305. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019305.

Modeling initiation of Ewing sarcoma in human neural crest cells.

von Levetzow C(1), Jiang X, Gwye Y, von Levetzow G, Hung L, Cooper A, Hsu JH,
Lawlor ER.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United
States of America.

Ewing sarcoma family tumors (ESFT) are aggressive bone and soft tissue tumors
that express EWS-ETS fusion genes as driver mutations. Although the histogenesis
of ESFT is controversial, mesenchymal (MSC) and/or neural crest (NCSC) stem
cells have been implicated as cells of origin. For the current study we
evaluated the consequences of EWS-FLI1 expression in human embryonic stem
cell-derived NCSC (hNCSC). Ectopic expression of EWS-FLI1 in undifferentiated
hNCSC and their neuro-mesenchymal stem cell (hNC-MSC) progeny was readily
tolerated and led to altered expression of both well established as well as
novel EWS-FLI1 target genes. Importantly, whole genome expression profiling
studies revealed that the molecular signature of established ESFT is more
similar to hNCSC than any other normal tissue, including MSC, indicating that
maintenance or reactivation of the NCSC program is a feature of ESFT
pathogenesis. Consistent with this hypothesis, EWS-FLI1 induced hNCSC genes as
well as the polycomb proteins BMI-1 and EZH2 in hNC-MSC. In addition,
up-regulation of BMI-1 was associated with avoidance of cellular senescence and
reversible silencing of p16. Together these studies confirm that, unlike
terminally differentiated cells but consistent with bone marrow-derived MSC,
NCSC tolerate expression of EWS-FLI1 and ectopic expression of the oncogene
initiates transition to an ESFT-like state. In addition, to our knowledge this
is the first demonstration that EWS-FLI1-mediated induction of BMI-1 and
epigenetic silencing of p16 might be critical early initiating events in ESFT
tumorigenesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019305
PMCID: PMC3084816
PMID: 21559395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.
