---
reference_id: "PMID:16407889"
title: Gout-associated uric acid crystals activate the NALP3 inflammasome.
authors:
- Martinon F
- Pétrilli V
- Mayor A
- Tardivel A
- Tschopp J
journal: Nature
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1038/nature04516
keywords:
- Animals
- "Calcium Pyrophosphate/metabolism, pharmacology"
- Carrier Proteins/metabolism
- Caspase 1/metabolism
- Cell Line
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Chondrocalcinosis/chemically induced, metabolism, pathology"
- Colchicine/pharmacology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Gout/chemically induced, metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- "Inflammation/chemically induced, metabolism, pathology"
- Interleukin-1/metabolism
- "Macrophages/drug effects, enzymology, metabolism"
- Mice
- "NLR Family, Pyrin Domain-Containing 3 Protein"
- "Neutrophils/immunology, metabolism, pathology"
- "Peritonitis/chemically induced, metabolism, pathology"
- "Receptors, Interleukin-1/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Uric Acid/chemistry, metabolism, pharmacology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gout-associated uric acid crystals activate the NALP3 inflammasome.
**Authors:** Martinon F, Pétrilli V, Mayor A, Tardivel A, Tschopp J
**Journal:** Nature (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature04516](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature04516)

## Content

1. Nature. 2006 Mar 9;440(7081):237-41. doi: 10.1038/nature04516. Epub 2006 Jan
11.

Gout-associated uric acid crystals activate the NALP3 inflammasome.

Martinon F(1), Pétrilli V, Mayor A, Tardivel A, Tschopp J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Lausanne, Chemin des Boveresses 
155, 1066 Epalinges, Switzerland.

Development of the acute and chronic inflammatory responses known as gout and 
pseudogout are associated with the deposition of monosodium urate (MSU) or 
calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate (CPPD) crystals, respectively, in joints and 
periarticular tissues. Although MSU crystals were first identified as the 
aetiological agent of gout in the eighteenth century and more recently as a 
'danger signal' released from dying cells, little is known about the molecular 
mechanisms underlying MSU- or CPPD-induced inflammation. Here we show that MSU 
and CPPD engage the caspase-1-activating NALP3 (also called cryopyrin) 
inflammasome, resulting in the production of active interleukin (IL)-1beta and 
IL-18. Macrophages from mice deficient in various components of the inflammasome 
such as caspase-1, ASC and NALP3 are defective in crystal-induced IL-1beta 
activation. Moreover, an impaired neutrophil influx is found in an in vivo model 
of crystal-induced peritonitis in inflammasome-deficient mice or mice deficient 
in the IL-1beta receptor (IL-1R). These findings provide insight into the 
molecular processes underlying the inflammatory conditions of gout and 
pseudogout, and further support a pivotal role of the inflammasome in several 
autoinflammatory diseases.

DOI: 10.1038/nature04516
PMID: 16407889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]