---
reference_id: "PMID:30833370"
title: Risk Factors for Kidney Disease in Type 1 Diabetes.
authors:
- Perkins BA
- Bebu I
- de Boer IH
- Molitch M
- Tamborlane W
- Lorenzi G
- Herman W
- White NH
- Pop-Busui R
- Paterson AD
- Orchard T
- Cowie C
- Lachin JM
- Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT)/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and Complications (EDIC) Research Group
journal: Diabetes Care
year: '2019'
doi: 10.2337/dc18-2062
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk Factors for Kidney Disease in Type 1 Diabetes.
**Authors:** Perkins BA, Bebu I, de Boer IH, Molitch M, Tamborlane W, Lorenzi G, Herman W, White NH, Pop-Busui R, Paterson AD, Orchard T, Cowie C, Lachin JM, Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT)/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and Complications (EDIC) Research Group
**Journal:** Diabetes Care (2019)
**DOI:** [10.2337/dc18-2062](https://doi.org/10.2337/dc18-2062)

## Content

1. Diabetes Care. 2019 May;42(5):883-890. doi: 10.2337/dc18-2062. Epub 2019 Mar
4.

Risk Factors for Kidney Disease in Type 1 Diabetes.

Perkins BA(1), Bebu I(2), de Boer IH(3), Molitch M(4), Tamborlane W(5), Lorenzi 
G(6), Herman W(7), White NH(8), Pop-Busui R(7), Paterson AD(9), Orchard T(10), 
Cowie C(11), Lachin JM(12); Diabetes Control and Complications Trial 
(DCCT)/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and Complications (EDIC) Research 
Group.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Canada.
(2)Biostatistics Center, The George Washington University, Rockville, MD.
(3)Division of Nephrology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.
(4)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Molecular Medicine, Northwestern 
University, Chicago, IL.
(5)Pediatrics and Endocrinology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT.
(6)University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA.
(7)Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Diabetes, Department of Internal 
Medicine, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, MI.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO.
(9)Genetics and Genome Biology, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada.
(10)Department of Epidemiology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
(11)National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.
(12)Biostatistics Center, The George Washington University, Rockville, MD 
jml@bsc.gwu.edu.

OBJECTIVE: In type 1 diabetes (T1D), the course of microalbuminuria is 
unpredictable and timing of glomerular filtration rate (GFR) loss is uncertain. 
Thus, there is a need to identify the risk factors associated with the 
development of more advanced stages of kidney disease through large, long-term 
systematic analysis.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Multivariable Cox proportional hazards models 
assessed the association of baseline and time-dependent glycemic and nonglycemic 
risk factors for incident macroalbuminuria and reduced estimated GFR (eGFR; 
defined as <60 mL/min/1.73 m2) over a mean of 27 years in the Diabetes Control 
and Complications Trial (DCCT) cohort.
RESULTS: Higher mean HbA1c (hazard ratio [HR] 1.969 per 1% higher level [95% CI 
1.671-2.319]) and male sex (HR 2.767 [95% CI 1.951-3.923]) were the most 
significant factors independently associated with incident macroalbuminuria, 
whereas higher mean triglycerides, higher pulse, higher systolic blood pressure 
(BP), longer diabetes duration, higher current HbA1c, and lower mean weight had 
lower magnitude associations. For incident reduced eGFR, higher mean HbA1c (HR 
1.952 per 1% higher level [95% CI 1.714-2.223]) followed by higher mean 
triglycerides, older age, and higher systolic BP were the most significant 
factors.
CONCLUSIONS: Although several risk factors associated with macroalbuminuria and 
reduced eGFR were identified, higher mean glycemic exposure was the strongest 
determinant of kidney disease among the modifiable risk factors. These findings 
may inform targeted clinical strategies for the frequency of screening, 
prevention, and treatment of kidney disease in T1D.

© 2019 by the American Diabetes Association.

DOI: 10.2337/dc18-2062
PMCID: PMC6489116
PMID: 30833370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]