---
reference_id: "PMID:24011925"
title: Prevalence and determinants of elevated high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Jenab Y
- Pourjafari M
- Darabi F
- Boroumand MA
- Zoroufian A
- Jalali A
journal: J Cardiol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.jjcc.2013.07.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence and determinants of elevated high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Jenab Y, Pourjafari M, Darabi F, Boroumand MA, Zoroufian A, Jalali A
**Journal:** J Cardiol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jjcc.2013.07.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jjcc.2013.07.008)

## Content

1. J Cardiol. 2014 Feb;63(2):140-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jjcc.2013.07.008. Epub 2013
Sep  4.

Prevalence and determinants of elevated high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T in 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Jenab Y(1), Pourjafari M(2), Darabi F(2), Boroumand MA(2), Zoroufian A(2), 
Jalali A(2).

Author information:
(1)Tehran Heart Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. 
Electronic address: jenab@razi.tums.ac.ir.
(2)Tehran Heart Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: This study was designed to evaluate the prevalence and determinants 
of increased high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T (hs-cTnT) as a marker of 
cardiac injury in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM).
METHODS: A total of 98 consecutive patients with HCM (71.4% males; mean age 
51.18 ± 15.47 years) between 2012 and 2013 were evaluated by measuring the level 
of serum hs-cTnT along with other clinical assessments.
RESULTS: There were 42 (42.9%) patients with a minimum serum hs-cTnT level of 14 
ng/L. The mean hs-cTnT level was 12.37 ng/L (6.94-24.26 ng/L). There were 
significant differences in chest pain New York Heart Association functional 
class, left ventricular hypertrophy in the surface electrocardiogram, 
non-sustained ventricular tachycardia in 24-h electrocardiogram-Holter 
monitoring, left atrial (LA) area index, ratio of peak early (E) transmitral 
filling velocity to peak early diastolic annular velocity (Ea septal) at the 
level of the septal mitral annulus (E/Ea septal), maximum left ventricular (LV) 
wall thickness ≥ 30 mm, and peak LV outflow gradient ≥ 30 mmHg in 
echocardiography between the patients with hs-cTnT<14 ng/L and those with 
hs-cTnT ≥ 14 ng/L. However, after multivariate analysis, age, maximum LV wall 
thickness, LA area index, and E/Ea septal remained as the independent 
determinants of elevated hs-cTnT in HCM.
CONCLUSIONS: The results demonstrated that hs-cTnT was elevated in a significant 
number of our HCM patients; therefore, hs-cTnT can be introduced as a valuable 
marker of myocardial injury in HCM patients.

Copyright © 2013 Japanese College of Cardiology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jjcc.2013.07.008
PMID: 24011925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]