---
reference_id: "PMID:37660911"
title: Transcription factor UBF depletion in mouse cells results in downregulation of both downstream and upstream elements of the rRNA transcription network.
authors:
- Theophanous A
- Christodoulou A
- Mattheou C
- Sibai DS
- Moss T
- Santama N
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105203
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcription factor UBF depletion in mouse cells results in downregulation of both downstream and upstream elements of the rRNA transcription network.
**Authors:** Theophanous A, Christodoulou A, Mattheou C, Sibai DS, Moss T, Santama N
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105203](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105203)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2023 Oct;299(10):105203. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105203. Epub
2023  Sep 1.

Transcription factor UBF depletion in mouse cells results in downregulation of 
both downstream and upstream elements of the rRNA transcription network.

Theophanous A(1), Christodoulou A(1), Mattheou C(1), Sibai DS(2), Moss T(2), 
Santama N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus.
(2)Laboratory of Growth and Development, St-Patrick Research Group in Basic 
Oncology, Cancer Division of the Quebec University Hospital Research Centre, 
Quebec, Canada; Department of Molecular Biology, Medical Biochemistry and 
Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Laval University, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus. 
Electronic address: santama@ucy.ac.cy.

Transcription/processing of the ribosomal RNA (rRNA) precursor, as part of 
ribosome biosynthesis, is intensively studied and characterized in eukaryotic 
cells. Here, we constructed shRNA-based mouse cell lines partially silenced for 
the Upstream Binding Factor UBF, the master regulator of rRNA transcription and 
organizer of open rDNA chromatin. Full Ubf silencing in vivo is not viable, and 
these new tools allow further characterization of rRNA transcription and its 
coordination with cellular signaling. shUBF cells display cell cycle G1 delay 
and reduced 47S rRNA precursor and 28S rRNA at baseline and serum-challenged 
conditions. Growth-related mTOR signaling is downregulated with the fractions of 
active phospho-S6 Kinase and pEIF4E translation initiation factor reduced, 
similar to phosphorylated cell cycle regulator retinoblastoma, pRB, positive 
regulator of UBF availability/rRNA transcription. Additionally, we find 
transcription-competent pUBF (Ser484) severely restricted and its interacting 
initiation factor RRN3 reduced and responsive to extracellular cues. 
Furthermore, fractional UBF occupancy on the rDNA unit is decreased in shUBF, 
and expression of major factors involved in different aspects of rRNA 
transcription is severely downregulated by UBF depletion. Finally, we observe 
reduced RNA Pol1 occupancy over rDNA promoter sequences and identified 
unexpected regulation of RNA Pol1 expression, relative to serum availability and 
under UBF silencing, suggesting that regulation of rRNA transcription may not be 
restricted to modulation of Pol1 promoter binding/elongation rate. Overall, this 
work reveals that UBF depletion has a critical downstream and upstream impact on 
the whole network orchestrating rRNA transcription in mammalian cells.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105203
PMCID: PMC10558777
PMID: 37660911

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that 
could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.