---
reference_id: "PMID:37665033"
title: Novobiocin blocks nucleic acid binding to Polθ and inhibits stimulation of its ATPase activity.
authors:
- Syed A
- Filandr F
- Patterson-Fortin J
- Bacolla A
- Ravindranathan R
- Zhou J
- McDonald DT
- Albuhluli ME
- Verway-Cohen A
- Newman JA
- Tsai MS
- Jones DE
- Schriemer DC
- "D'Andrea AD"
- Tainer JA
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkad727
keywords:
- Humans
- Adenosine Triphosphatases/metabolism
- DNA Polymerase theta
- DNA Replication
- "DNA, Single-Stranded"
- DNA-Directed DNA Polymerase/metabolism
- "Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- Novobiocin/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novobiocin blocks nucleic acid binding to Polθ and inhibits stimulation of its ATPase activity.
**Authors:** Syed A, Filandr F, Patterson-Fortin J, Bacolla A, Ravindranathan R, Zhou J, McDonald DT, Albuhluli ME, Verway-Cohen A, Newman JA, Tsai MS, Jones DE, Schriemer DC, D'Andrea AD, Tainer JA
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkad727](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkad727)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2023 Oct 13;51(18):9920-9937. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkad727.

Novobiocin blocks nucleic acid binding to Polθ and inhibits stimulation of its
ATPase activity.

Syed A(1), Filandr F(2), Patterson-Fortin J(1), Bacolla A(3), Ravindranathan
R(1), Zhou J(1), McDonald DT(4), Albuhluli ME(5), Verway-Cohen A(4), Newman
JA(6), Tsai MS(4), Jones DE(5), Schriemer DC(2), D'Andrea AD(1)(7), Tainer
JA(3)(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Radiation and Genome Instability, Department of Radiation
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA 02215, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary,
Calgary, AB T2N 4N1, Canada.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Department of Cancer Biology,
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(4)Biological and System Engineering Division, Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
(5)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA.
(6)Center for Medicines Discovery, University of Oxford, OX1 3QU, UK.
(7)Center for DNA Damage and Repair, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
MA 02215, USA.
(8)Molecular Biophysics and Integrated Bioimaging, Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

Polymerase theta (Polθ) acts in DNA replication and repair, and its inhibition
is synthetic lethal in BRCA1 and BRCA2-deficient tumor cells. Novobiocin (NVB)
is a first-in-class inhibitor of the Polθ ATPase activity, and it is currently
being tested in clinical trials as an anti-cancer drug. Here, we investigated
the molecular mechanism of NVB-mediated Polθ inhibition. Using hydrogen
deuterium exchange-mass spectrometry (HX-MS), biophysical, biochemical,
computational and cellular assays, we found NVB is a non-competitive inhibitor
of ATP hydrolysis. NVB sugar group deletion resulted in decreased potency and
reduced HX-MS interactions, supporting a specific NVB binding orientation.
Collective results revealed that NVB binds to an allosteric site to block DNA
binding, both in vitro and in cells. Comparisons of The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) tumors and matched controls implied that POLQ upregulation in tumors
stems from its role in replication stress responses to increased cell
proliferation: this can now be tested in fifteen tumor types by NVB blocking
ssDNA-stimulation of ATPase activity, required for Polθ function at replication
forks and DNA damage sites. Structural and functional insights provided in
this study suggest a path for developing NVB derivatives with improved potency
for Polθ inhibition by targeting ssDNA binding with entropically constrained
small molecules.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkad727
PMCID: PMC10570058
PMID: 37665033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
