---
reference_id: "PMID:31761101"
title: Natural history and management outcomes of segmental arterial mediolysis.
authors:
- Peng KX
- Davila VJ
- Stone WM
- Shamoun FE
- Naidu SG
- McBane RD
- Money SR
journal: J Vasc Surg
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2019.02.068
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Aortic Dissection/diagnosis, therapy"
- Celiac Artery
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Mesenteric Arteries
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
- Tunica Media
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural history and management outcomes of segmental arterial mediolysis.
**Authors:** Peng KX, Davila VJ, Stone WM, Shamoun FE, Naidu SG, McBane RD, Money SR
**Journal:** J Vasc Surg (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jvs.2019.02.068](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvs.2019.02.068)

## Content

1. J Vasc Surg. 2019 Dec;70(6):1877-1886. doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2019.02.068.

Natural history and management outcomes of segmental arterial mediolysis.

Peng KX(1), Davila VJ(2), Stone WM(2), Shamoun FE(3), Naidu SG(2), McBane RD(4), 
Money SR(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Vascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, Mayo Clinic Arizona, 
Phoenix, Ariz. Electronic address: kpengx@gmail.com.
(2)Division of Vascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, Mayo Clinic Arizona, 
Phoenix, Ariz.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Mayo Clinic Arizona, Phoenix, Minn.
(4)Department of Vascular Medicine, Mayo Clinic Rochester, Rochester, Minn.

Comment in
    J Vasc Surg. 2019 Dec;70(6):1885-1886. doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2019.02.070.
    J Vasc Surg. 2019 Dec;70(6):1887-1888. doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2019.03.076.

BACKGROUND: Segmental arterial mediolysis (SAM) is a poorly understood, 
nonatherosclerotic, noninflammatory disease resulting from arterial medial 
degeneration. Patients may present with aneurysm, dissection, stenosis, or 
bleeding from visceral or renal arteries. Treatment algorithms are poorly 
characterized.
METHODS: A retrospective review of all patients diagnosed with SAM was performed 
at our institution. Patients were identified by established criteria that 
include clinical presentation in combination with radiographic and serologic 
findings. Demographics, presenting symptoms, diagnostic evaluation, management, 
and outcomes were reviewed.
RESULTS: There were 117 patients diagnosed with SAM between 2000 and 2016; 67.5% 
(n = 79) were male. Mean age was 52.7 years (range, 23.4-90 years); 69.2% (n = 
81) presented with acute abdominal pain, 22.2% (n = 26) with flank pain, and 
19.7% (n = 23) with back pain; 15.4% (n = 18) had abdominal pain longer than 
30 days; 13.7% (n = 16) had acute hypertension, and 5.1% (n = 6) were 
hypotensive; 10.3% (n = 12) were asymptomatic. There were 93 (79.5%) dissections 
and 61 (52.1%) aneurysms. Hemorrhage was seen in 10 (8.5%). The celiac axis was 
affected in 54.7% (n = 64), renal arteries in 49.6% (n = 5 8), superior 
mesenteric artery in 43.6% (n = 51), and inferior mesenteric artery in 2.6% (n = 
3). After diagnosis of SAM, aspirin was prescribed in 60.7% (n = 71). Statins 
were prescribed in 29.9% (n = 35). Antihypertensive medications were prescribed 
in 65% (n = 76), including beta blockers in 42.7% (n = 50); 40.2% (n = 47) of 
patients were prescribed anticoagulation. Interventions were performed in 26 
(22%) patients; 13 had endovascular intervention only, 9 open surgery only, and 
4 open and endovascular interventions. Of the 17 patients undergoing 
endovascular intervention, 19 procedures were performed, most commonly 
embolization (78.9% [n = 15]), followed by stenting (10.5% [n = 2]). Of the 13 
patients undergoing open surgery, 14 procedures were performed, including 
arterial bypass (50% [n = 7]) and splenectomy with aneurysm ligation (15.4% [n = 
2]). Other surgery involved thrombectomy (21.4% [n = 3]) and angioplasty (14.3% 
[n = 2]). Only 11.5% (n = 3) experienced a perioperative complication, including 
one hematoma, one abscess, and one death secondary to ongoing hemorrhage. 
Follow-up imaging was performed in 96.6% (n = 112). Mean follow-up was 1258 days 
(range, 2-5017 days). Of these, 27.7% (n = 31) had regression, 43.8% (n = 49) 
stability, and 28.6% (n = 32) progression. Average time between initial 
diagnosis and progression was 666 days.
CONCLUSIONS: SAM is an uncommon disease that may require intervention; it is 
therefore important that the vascular surgery community be aware of this 
disease. Follow-up imaging is required to monitor for disease progression.

Copyright © 2019 Society for Vascular Surgery. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2019.02.068
PMID: 31761101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]