---
reference_id: "PMID:39116879"
title: SMAD4 mutations causing Myhre syndrome are under positive selection in the male germline.
authors:
- Wood KA
- Tong RS
- Motta M
- Cordeddu V
- Scimone ER
- Bush SJ
- Maxwell DW
- Giannoulatou E
- Caputo V
- Traversa A
- Mancini C
- Ferrero GB
- Benedicenti F
- Grammatico P
- Melis D
- Steindl K
- Brunetti-Pierri N
- Trevisson E
- Wilkie AO
- Lin AE
- Cormier-Daire V
- Twigg SR
- Tartaglia M
- Goriely A
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2024.07.006
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Smad4 Protein/genetics
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Contracture/genetics
- Adult
- Facies
- "Spermatozoa/metabolism, pathology"
- Cryptorchidism/genetics
- Growth Disorders/genetics
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- "Selection, Genetic"
- Alleles
- Paternal Age
- "Testis/pathology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SMAD4 mutations causing Myhre syndrome are under positive selection in the male germline.
**Authors:** Wood KA, Tong RS, Motta M, Cordeddu V, Scimone ER, Bush SJ, Maxwell DW, Giannoulatou E, Caputo V, Traversa A, Mancini C, Ferrero GB, Benedicenti F, Grammatico P, Melis D, Steindl K, Brunetti-Pierri N, Trevisson E, Wilkie AO, Lin AE, Cormier-Daire V, Twigg SR, Tartaglia M, Goriely A
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2024.07.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2024.07.006)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2024 Sep 5;111(9):1953-1969. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2024.07.006. 
Epub 2024 Aug 7.

SMAD4 mutations causing Myhre syndrome are under positive selection in the male 
germline.

Wood KA(1), Tong RS(1), Motta M(2), Cordeddu V(3), Scimone ER(4), Bush SJ(1), 
Maxwell DW(1), Giannoulatou E(5), Caputo V(6), Traversa A(6), Mancini C(2), 
Ferrero GB(7), Benedicenti F(8), Grammatico P(9), Melis D(10), Steindl K(11), 
Brunetti-Pierri N(12), Trevisson E(13), Wilkie AO(1), Lin AE(4), Cormier-Daire 
V(14), Twigg SR(1), Tartaglia M(15), Goriely A(16).

Author information:
(1)MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford OX39DS, UK; Nuffield 
Division of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, 
University of Oxford, Oxford OX39DS, UK; NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, 
Oxford OX39DU, UK.
(2)Molecular Genetics and Functional Genomics, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, 
IRCCS, 00146 Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 
00161 Rome, Italy.
(4)Medical Genetics, Mass General Brigham, Harvard Medical School, Harvard 
University, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(5)Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, Darlinghurst, Sydney, NSW 2010, 
Australia; School of Clinical Medicine, St Vincent's Healthcare Clinical Campus, 
Faculty of Medicine and Health, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia.
(6)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University, 00161 Rome, Italy.
(7)Department of Clinical and Biological Science, University of Torino, 10126 
Turin, Italy.
(8)Genetic Counseling Service, Regional Hospital of Bolzano, 39100 Bolzano, 
Italy.
(9)Department of Experimental Medicine, San Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, Sapienza 
University, 00152 Rome, Italy.
(10)Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry, University of Salerno, 84081 
Salerno, Italy.
(11)Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, 8952 Schlieren-Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(12)Department of Translational Medicine, Federico II University, 80131 Naples, 
Italy; Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, Italy; Scuola 
Superiore Meridionale (SSM, School of Advanced Studies), Genomics and 
Experimental Medicine Program, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy.
(13)Department of Women's and Children's Health, University of Padova, 35128 
Padua, Italy.
(14)Université Paris Cité, Service de Médecine Génomique des Maladies Rares, 
INSERM UMR 1163, Institut Imagine, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, 75015 Paris, 
France.
(15)Molecular Genetics and Functional Genomics, Bambino Gesù Children's 
Hospital, IRCCS, 00146 Rome, Italy. Electronic address: 
marco.tartaglia@opbg.net.
(16)MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford OX39DS, UK; Nuffield 
Division of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, 
University of Oxford, Oxford OX39DS, UK; NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, 
Oxford OX39DU, UK. Electronic address: anne.goriely@imm.ox.ac.uk.

While it is widely thought that de novo mutations (DNMs) occur randomly, we 
previously showed that some DNMs are enriched because they are positively 
selected in the testes of aging men. These "selfish" mutations cause disorders 
with a shared presentation of features, including exclusive paternal origin, 
significant increase of the father's age, and high apparent germline mutation 
rate. To date, all known selfish mutations cluster within the components of the 
RTK-RAS-MAPK signaling pathway, a critical modulator of testicular homeostasis. 
Here, we demonstrate the selfish nature of the SMAD4 DNMs causing Myhre syndrome 
(MYHRS). By analyzing 16 informative trios, we show that MYHRS-causing DNMs 
originated on the paternally derived allele in all cases. We document a 
statistically significant epidemiological paternal age effect of 6.3 years 
excess for fathers of MYHRS probands. We developed an ultra-sensitive assay to 
quantify spontaneous MYHRS-causing SMAD4 variants in sperm and show that 
pathogenic variants at codon 500 are found at elevated level in sperm of most 
men and exhibit a strong positive correlation with donor's age, indicative of a 
high apparent germline mutation rate. Finally, we performed in vitro assays to 
validate the peculiar functional behavior of the clonally selected DNMs and 
explored the basis of the pathophysiology of the different SMAD4 sperm-enriched 
variants. Taken together, these data provide compelling evidence that SMAD4, a 
gene operating outside the canonical RAS-MAPK signaling pathway, is associated 
with selfish spermatogonial selection and raises the possibility that other 
genes/pathways are under positive selection in the aging human testis.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2024.07.006
PMCID: PMC11444041
PMID: 39116879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.