---
reference_id: "PMID:21240839"
title: "Buruli ulcer: a review of in vitro tests to screen natural products for activity against Mycobacterium ulcerans."
authors:
- Yemoa A
- Gbenou J
- Affolabi D
- Moudachirou M
- Bigot A
- Anagonou S
- Portaels F
- Quetin-Leclercq J
- Martin A
journal: Planta Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1055/s-0030-1250642
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Buruli ulcer: a review of in vitro tests to screen natural products for activity against Mycobacterium ulcerans.
**Authors:** Yemoa A, Gbenou J, Affolabi D, Moudachirou M, Bigot A, Anagonou S, Portaels F, Quetin-Leclercq J, Martin A
**Journal:** Planta Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0030-1250642](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0030-1250642)

## Content

1. Planta Med. 2011 Apr;77(6):641-6. doi: 10.1055/s-0030-1250642. Epub 2011 Jan
14.

Buruli ulcer: a review of in vitro tests to screen natural products for activity 
against Mycobacterium ulcerans.

Yemoa A(1), Gbenou J, Affolabi D, Moudachirou M, Bigot A, Anagonou S, Portaels 
F, Quetin-Leclercq J, Martin A.

Author information:
(1)UFR Pharmacie, Faculté des Sciences de Santé Université d'Abomey Calavi 
(UAC), Cotonou, Bénin. ayemoa@yahoo.fr

Buruli ulcer (BU), caused by Mycobacterium ulcerans, has recently been 
recognized by the World Health Organization (WHO) as an important emerging 
disease. It is largely a problem of the poor in remote rural areas and has 
emerged as an important cause of human suffering. While antimycobacterial 
therapy is often effective for the earliest nodular or ulcerative lesions, for 
advanced ulcerated lesions, surgery is sometimes necessary. Antimycobacterial 
drugs may also prevent relapses or disseminated infections. Efficient 
alternatives different from surgery are presently explored because this 
treatment deals with huge restrictive factors such as the necessity of prolonged 
hospitalization, its high cost, and the scars after surgery. Traditional 
treatment remains the first option for poor populations of remote areas who may 
have problems of accessibility to synthetic products because of their high cost. 
The search for efficient natural products active on M. ulcerans should then be 
encouraged because they are part of the natural heritage of these populations; 
they are affordable financially and can be used at the earliest stage. This 
review provides a number of tests that will help to evaluate the 
antimycobacterial activity of natural products against M. ulcerans, which are 
adapted to its slow growing rate, and lists active extracts published up to now 
in Medline.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0030-1250642
PMID: 21240839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]