---
reference_id: "PMID:32896257"
title: "Prevalence and outcome of thrombocytopenia in systemic lupus erythematous: single-centre cohort analysis."
authors:
- Costa Pires T
- Caparrós-Ruiz R
- Gaspar P
- Isenberg DA
journal: Clin Exp Rheumatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.55563/clinexprheumatol/bz64na
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence and outcome of thrombocytopenia in systemic lupus erythematous: single-centre cohort analysis.
**Authors:** Costa Pires T, Caparrós-Ruiz R, Gaspar P, Isenberg DA
**Journal:** Clin Exp Rheumatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.55563/clinexprheumatol/bz64na](https://doi.org/10.55563/clinexprheumatol/bz64na)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2021 May-Jun;39(3):601-605. doi: 
10.55563/clinexprheumatol/bz64na. Epub 2020 Aug 31.

Prevalence and outcome of thrombocytopenia in systemic lupus erythematous: 
single-centre cohort analysis.

Costa Pires T(1), Caparrós-Ruiz R(2), Gaspar P(3), Isenberg DA(4).

Author information:
(1)Serviço de Medicina 1, Hospital de Santo André, Centro Hospitalar de Leiria, 
Portugal.
(2)UGC de Reumatologia, Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Málaga, Hospital 
Regional Universitario de Málaga, Spain.
(3)Serviço de Medicina 2, Hospital Santa Maria, Centro Hospitalar Universitario 
Lisboa Norte, Lisbon, Portugal.
(4)Centre for Rheumatology, Divsion of Medicine, University College London, UK. 
d.isenberg@ucl.ac.uk.

OBJECTIVES: We aimed to characterise the frequency of thrombocytopenia in 
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and determine its time of onset during the 
course of the disease, and its severity and impact on mortality.
METHODS: This was a single-centre cohort analysis of 707 patients with SLE 
followed for up to 40 years. We reviewed the patients' clinical notes 
identifying the presence of thrombocytopenia, its time of onset and ascertained 
other clinical and serological features of the disease. Thrombocytopenia was 
classified as mild (100-149x109/L), moderate (31-99x109/L) or severe (≤30x109/L 
platelets). It was also classified as asymptomatic, with minor bleeding or with 
major bleeding.
RESULTS: 22.9% of patients (n=162) had thrombocytopenia prior to or during the 
course of SLE. Twenty-three patients (14.2%) had isolated immune 
thrombocytopenia (ITP) before the diagnosis of SLE. Median follow-up time was 19 
years (IQR=13). Most patients (n=67, 41.4%) had mild thrombocytopenia. More than 
half the patients (n=98, 60.5%) developed asymptomatic thrombocytopenia and only 
6 patients (3.7%) had major bleeding events in the context of thrombocytopenia. 
The development of severe thrombocytopenia any time during the course of SLE was 
associated with an increased risk of death (HR=3.57, p=0.025). Anti-phospholipid 
syndrome was over twice as common in patients with thrombocytopenia in the 
cohort. There is an increased risk of death for male patients (HR=3.41, p=0.036) 
who develop thrombocytopenia and for those who present with concomitant 
haemolytic anaemia (HR=3.07, p=0.027).
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of severe thrombocytopenia (platelets ≤30x109) in 
patients with SLE is associated with an increased risk of death, regardless of 
bleeding events. Male patients with SLE and thrombocytopenia have an increased 
mortality risk, as have those who develop concomitant thrombocytopenia and 
haemolytic anaemia.

DOI: 10.55563/clinexprheumatol/bz64na
PMID: 32896257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]