---
reference_id: "PMID:30922915"
title: Green one-step synthesis of ZnO/cellulose nanocrystal hybrids with modulated morphologies and superfast absorption of cationic dyes.
authors:
- Guan Y
- Yu HY
- Abdalkarim SYH
- Wang C
- Tang F
- Marek J
- Chen WL
- Militky J
- Yao JM
journal: Int J Biol Macromol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.03.104
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Green one-step synthesis of ZnO/cellulose nanocrystal hybrids with modulated morphologies and superfast absorption of cationic dyes.
**Authors:** Guan Y, Yu HY, Abdalkarim SYH, Wang C, Tang F, Marek J, Chen WL, Militky J, Yao JM
**Journal:** Int J Biol Macromol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.03.104](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.03.104)

## Content

1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2019 Jul 1;132:51-62. doi:
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.03.104.  Epub 2019 Mar 25.

Green one-step synthesis of ZnO/cellulose nanocrystal hybrids with modulated 
morphologies and superfast absorption of cationic dyes.

Guan Y(1), Yu HY(2), Abdalkarim SYH(3), Wang C(3), Tang F(3), Marek J(4), Chen 
WL(3), Militky J(4), Yao JM(5).

Author information:
(1)The Key Laboratory of Advanced Textile Materials and Manufacturing Technology 
of Ministry of Education, College of Materials and Textile, Zhejiang Sci-Tech 
University, Hangzhou 310018, China; Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of 
Chemical Utilization of Forestry Biomass, Zhejiang A&F University, Hangzhou 
311300, China.
(2)The Key Laboratory of Advanced Textile Materials and Manufacturing Technology 
of Ministry of Education, College of Materials and Textile, Zhejiang Sci-Tech 
University, Hangzhou 310018, China; State Key Laboratory for Modification of 
Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials, College of Materials Science and 
Engineering, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, China. Electronic address: 
phdyu@zstu.edu.cn.
(3)The Key Laboratory of Advanced Textile Materials and Manufacturing Technology 
of Ministry of Education, College of Materials and Textile, Zhejiang Sci-Tech 
University, Hangzhou 310018, China.
(4)Institute for Nanomaterials, Advanced Technologies And Innovations, 
Studentska 1402/2, Liberec, Czech Republic.
(5)The Key Laboratory of Advanced Textile Materials and Manufacturing Technology 
of Ministry of Education, College of Materials and Textile, Zhejiang Sci-Tech 
University, Hangzhou 310018, China. Electronic address: yaoj@zstu.edu.cn.

Zinc oxide/cellulose nanocrystal (ZnO/CNC) hybrids with modulated morphologies 
were prepared by using bamboo CNC as templates via green one-step technique. The 
effect of pH values on the morphology, microstructure, thermal stability, 
antibacterial efficiency and dye absorption kinetics of hybrids were 
investigated. A possible mechanism for various hybrid morphologies at different 
pH values was provided. All the samples exhibited high antibacterial ratios of 
91.4%-99.8% against both Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus. ZnO/CNC8.5 
gave quick removal efficiency with high dye removal ratios in methylene blue 
(MB, 93.55%) and malachite green (MG, 99.02%), especially >91.47% and 97.85% 
within 5 min. The absorption capacity could reach up to 46.77 mg/g for MB and 
49.51 mg/g for MG. Besides, absorption kinetics showed that the absorption 
behavior followed the pseudo-second-order kinetic model (R2 > 0.99996). Such 
ZnO/CNC hybrids show outstanding and low-cost adsorbent for efficient absorption 
of cationic dyes in wastewater treatment field.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.03.104
PMID: 30922915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]