---
reference_id: "PMID:20130826"
title: "Involvement of SOX10 in the pathogenesis of Hirschsprung disease: report of a truncating mutation in an isolated patient."
authors:
- Sánchez-Mejías A
- Watanabe Y
- M Fernández R
- López-Alonso M
- Antiñolo G
- Bondurand N
- Borrego S
journal: J Mol Med (Berl)
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1007/s00109-010-0592-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Involvement of SOX10 in the pathogenesis of Hirschsprung disease: report of a truncating mutation in an isolated patient.
**Authors:** Sánchez-Mejías A, Watanabe Y, M Fernández R, López-Alonso M, Antiñolo G, Bondurand N, Borrego S
**Journal:** J Mol Med (Berl) (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00109-010-0592-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00109-010-0592-7)

## Content

1. J Mol Med (Berl). 2010 May;88(5):507-14. doi: 10.1007/s00109-010-0592-7. Epub 
2010 Feb 4.

Involvement of SOX10 in the pathogenesis of Hirschsprung disease: report of a 
truncating mutation in an isolated patient.

Sánchez-Mejías A(1), Watanabe Y, M Fernández R, López-Alonso M, Antiñolo G, 
Bondurand N, Borrego S.

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Gestión Clínica de Genética, Reproducción y Medicina Fetal, 
Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Avda. Manuel Siurot s/n, 41013, 
Seville, Spain.

SOX10 protein is a key transcription factor during neural crest development. 
Mutations in SOX10 are associated with several neurocristopathies such as 
Waardenburg syndrome type IV (WS4), a congenital disorder characterized by the 
association of hearing loss, pigmentary abnormalities, and absence of ganglion 
cells in the myenteric and submucosal plexus of the gastrointestinal tract, also 
known as aganglionic megacolon or Hirschsprung disease (HSCR). Several mutations 
at this locus are known to cause a high percentage of WS4 cases, but no SOX10 
mutations had been ever reported associated to isolated HSCR patient. Therefore, 
nonsyndromic HSCR was initially thought not to be associated to mutations at 
this particular locus. In the present study, we describe the evaluation of the 
SOX10 gene in a series of 196 isolated HSCR cases, the largest patient series 
evaluated so far, and report a truncating c.153-155del mutation. This is the 
first time that a SOX10 mutation is detected in an isolated HSCR patient, which 
completely changes the scenario for the implications of SOX10 mutations in human 
disease, giving us a new tool for genetic counseling.

DOI: 10.1007/s00109-010-0592-7
PMCID: PMC3235085
PMID: 20130826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]