---
reference_id: "PMID:28766551"
title: "Mutation in the COX4I1 gene is associated with short stature, poor weight gain and increased chromosomal breaks, simulating Fanconi anemia."
authors:
- Abu-Libdeh B
- Douiev L
- Amro S
- Shahrour M
- Ta-Shma A
- Miller C
- Elpeleg O
- Saada A
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2017.112
keywords:
- Adenosine Triphosphate/metabolism
- Body Height
- Body Weight
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Child
- Chromosome Breakage
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Electron Transport Complex IV/genetics, metabolism"
- "Fanconi Anemia/diagnosis, genetics"
- Female
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Humans
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Reactive Oxygen Species/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation in the COX4I1 gene is associated with short stature, poor weight gain and increased chromosomal breaks, simulating Fanconi anemia.
**Authors:** Abu-Libdeh B, Douiev L, Amro S, Shahrour M, Ta-Shma A, Miller C, Elpeleg O, Saada A
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2017.112](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2017.112)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2017 Oct;25(10):1142-1146. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2017.112. Epub 
2017 Aug 2.

Mutation in the COX4I1 gene is associated with short stature, poor weight gain 
and increased chromosomal breaks, simulating Fanconi anemia.

Abu-Libdeh B(1), Douiev L(2)(3), Amro S(1), Shahrour M(1), Ta-Shma A(2), Miller 
C(2)(3), Elpeleg O(2), Saada A(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Makassed Hospital and Al-Quds University, 
Jerusalem, Palestinian Authority.
(2)Monique and Jacques Roboh Department of Genetic Research, Hadassah, Hebrew 
University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(3)Department of Genetic and Metabolic Diseases, Hadassah, Hebrew University 
Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.

Comment in
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2018 Apr;26(4):475-476. doi: 10.1038/s41431-017-0046-6.

We describe a novel autosomal recessive form of mitochondrial disease in a child 
with short stature, poor weight gain, and mild dysmorphic features with highly 
suspected Fanconi anemia due to a mutation in COX4I1 gene. Whole Exome 
Sequencing was performed then followed by Sanger confirmation, identified a 
K101N mutation in COX4I1, segregating with the disease. This nuclear gene 
encodes the common isoform of cytochrome c oxidase (COX) subunit 4 (COX 4-1), an 
integral regulatory part of COX (respiratory chain complex IV) the terminal 
electron acceptor of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. The patient's 
fibroblasts disclosed decreased COX activity, impaired ATP production, elevated 
ROS production, decreased expression of COX4I1 mRNA and undetectable (COX4) 
protein. COX activity and ATP production were restored by lentiviral 
transfection with the wild-type gene. Our results demonstrate the first human 
mutation in the COX4I1 gene linked to diseases and confirm its role in the 
pathogenesis. Thus COX4I1 mutations should be considered in any patient with 
features suggestive of this diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2017.112
PMCID: PMC5602013
PMID: 28766551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.