---
reference_id: "PMID:31868578"
title: Aberrant calcium channel splicing drives defects in cortical differentiation in Timothy syndrome.
authors:
- Panagiotakos G
- Haveles C
- Arjun A
- Petrova R
- Rana A
- Portmann T
- Paşca SP
- Palmer TD
- Dolmetsch RE
journal: Elife
year: '2019'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.51037
keywords:
- Alternative Splicing/physiology
- Animals
- "Autism Spectrum Disorder/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Autistic Disorder
- "Brain/embryology, growth & development"
- Calcium
- "Calcium Channels/genetics, metabolism"
- "Calcium Channels, L-Type/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Differentiation/physiology
- "Cerebral Cortex/embryology, metabolism"
- Exons
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism
- Long QT Syndrome
- Matrix Attachment Region Binding Proteins/metabolism
- Mice
- "Models, Animal"
- Mutation
- Neurogenesis
- "Neurons/cytology, metabolism"
- RNA Splicing
- "Repressor Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Syndactyly
- Transcription Factors/metabolism
- "Tumor Suppressor Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aberrant calcium channel splicing drives defects in cortical differentiation in Timothy syndrome.
**Authors:** Panagiotakos G, Haveles C, Arjun A, Petrova R, Rana A, Portmann T, Paşca SP, Palmer TD, Dolmetsch RE
**Journal:** Elife (2019)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.51037](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.51037)

## Content

1. Elife. 2019 Dec 23;8:e51037. doi: 10.7554/eLife.51037.

Aberrant calcium channel splicing drives defects in cortical differentiation in
Timothy syndrome.

Panagiotakos G(1)(2)(3), Haveles C(2)(3), Arjun A(2)(3)(4), Petrova R(2)(3),
Rana A(5), Portmann T(1), Paşca SP(1)(6), Palmer TD(7), Dolmetsch RE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
United States.
(2)Eli & Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, United States.
(3)Kavli Institute for Fundamental Neuroscience, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, United States.
(4)Graduate Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, United States.
(5)Graduate Program in Biochemistry, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, United States.
(6)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University School
of Medicine, Stanford, United States.
(7)Department of Neurosurgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
United States.

The syndromic autism spectrum disorder (ASD) Timothy syndrome (TS) is caused by
a point mutation in the alternatively spliced exon 8A of the calcium channel
Cav1.2. Using mouse brain and human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), we
provide evidence that the TS mutation prevents a normal developmental switch in
Cav1.2 exon utilization, resulting in persistent expression of gain-of-function
mutant channels during neuronal differentiation. In iPSC models, the TS mutation
reduces the abundance of SATB2-expressing cortical projection neurons, leading
to excess CTIP2+ neurons. We show that expression of TS-Cav1.2 channels in the
embryonic mouse cortex recapitulates these differentiation defects in a
calcium-dependent manner and that in utero Cav1.2 gain-and-loss of function
reciprocally regulates the abundance of these neuronal populations. Our findings
support the idea that disruption of developmentally regulated calcium channel
splicing patterns instructively alters differentiation in the developing cortex,
providing important in vivo insights into the pathophysiology of a syndromic
ASD.

© 2019, Panagiotakos et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.51037
PMCID: PMC6964969
PMID: 31868578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: GP, CH, AA, RP, AR, SP, TP No competing
interests declared, TP is currently an employee of Neucyte, Inc, RD is currently
an employee of Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research
