---
reference_id: "PMID:18667698"
title: "DNA polymorphisms at the BCL11A, HBS1L-MYB, and beta-globin loci associate with fetal hemoglobin levels and pain crises in sickle cell disease."
authors:
- Lettre G
- Sankaran VG
- Bezerra MA
- Araújo AS
- Uda M
- Sanna S
- Cao A
- Schlessinger D
- Costa FF
- Hirschhorn JN
- Orkin SH
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0804799105
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DNA polymorphisms at the BCL11A, HBS1L-MYB, and beta-globin loci associate with fetal hemoglobin levels and pain crises in sickle cell disease.
**Authors:** Lettre G, Sankaran VG, Bezerra MA, Araújo AS, Uda M, Sanna S, Cao A, Schlessinger D, Costa FF, Hirschhorn JN, Orkin SH
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0804799105](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0804799105)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Aug 19;105(33):11869-74. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0804799105. Epub 2008 Jul 30.

DNA polymorphisms at the BCL11A, HBS1L-MYB, and beta-globin loci associate with 
fetal hemoglobin levels and pain crises in sickle cell disease.

Lettre G(1), Sankaran VG, Bezerra MA, Araújo AS, Uda M, Sanna S, Cao A, 
Schlessinger D, Costa FF, Hirschhorn JN, Orkin SH.

Author information:
(1)Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and 
Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. lettre@broad.mit.edu

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Aug 19;105(33):11595-6. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0806633105.

Sickle cell disease (SCD) is a debilitating monogenic blood disorder with a 
highly variable phenotype characterized by severe pain crises, acute clinical 
events, and early mortality. Interindividual variation in fetal hemoglobin (HbF) 
expression is a known and potentially heritable modifier of SCD severity. High 
HbF levels are correlated with reduced morbidity and mortality. Common single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at the BCL11A and HBS1L-MYB loci have been 
implicated previously in HbF level variation in nonanemic European populations. 
We recently demonstrated an association between a BCL11A SNP and HbF levels in 
one SCD cohort [Uda M, et al. (2008) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105:1620-1625]. 
Here, we genotyped additional BCL11A SNPs, HBS1L-MYB SNPs, and an SNP upstream 
of (G)gamma-globin (HBG2; the XmnI polymorphism), in two independent SCD 
cohorts: the African American Cooperative Study of Sickle Cell Disease (CSSCD) 
and an SCD cohort from Brazil. We studied the effect of these SNPs on HbF levels 
and on a measure of SCD-related morbidity (pain crisis rate). We strongly 
replicated the association between these SNPs and HbF level variation (in the 
CSSCD, P values range from 0.04 to 2 x 10(-42)). Together, common SNPs at the 
BCL11A, HBS1L-MYB, and beta-globin (HBB) loci account for >20% of the variation 
in HbF levels in SCD patients. We also have shown that HbF-associated SNPs 
associate with pain crisis rate in SCD patients. These results provide a clear 
example of inherited common sequence variants modifying the severity of a 
monogenic disease.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0804799105
PMCID: PMC2491485
PMID: 18667698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.