---
reference_id: "PMID:35787602"
title: "Diagnostic Challenge of Congenital Chloride Diarrhea and Ulcerative Colitis Overlap in an Adult Misdiagnosed with Bartter Syndrome: Case Report and Literature Review."
authors:
- Sadagah LF
- Makeen AZ
- Kotbi ET
journal: Am J Case Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.12659/AJCR.936715
keywords:
- Adult
- "Alkalosis/complications, etiology"
- "Bartter Syndrome/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Colitis, Ulcerative/complications, diagnosis"
- Diagnostic Errors
- "Diarrhea/congenital, diagnosis"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic Challenge of Congenital Chloride Diarrhea and Ulcerative Colitis Overlap in an Adult Misdiagnosed with Bartter Syndrome: Case Report and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Sadagah LF, Makeen AZ, Kotbi ET
**Journal:** Am J Case Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.12659/AJCR.936715](https://doi.org/10.12659/AJCR.936715)

## Content

1. Am J Case Rep. 2022 Jul 5;23:e936715. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.936715.

Diagnostic Challenge of Congenital Chloride Diarrhea and Ulcerative Colitis
Overlap in an Adult Misdiagnosed with Bartter Syndrome: Case Report and
Literature Review.

Sadagah LF(1)(2)(3), Makeen AZ(1)(2), Kotbi ET(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, King Abdulaziz Medical City, Ministry of National
Guard Health Affairs, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(2)King Abdullah International Research Center, Ministry of National Guard
Health Affairs, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(3)King Saudi bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, Jeddah, Saudi
Arabia.

BACKGROUND Congenital chloride diarrhea (CCD) is an autosomal recessive disease
that is usually diagnosed in early childhood. Mutations in the SLC26A3 gene have
been attributed to the primary etiology of disease development. Patients with
CCD usually present with electrolyte disturbances, metabolic alkalosis, and
chronic diarrhea. Early diagnosis is essential to prevent long-term
complications that often require genetic testing. Bartter syndrome is another
congenital disorder that has clinical features similar to CCD, which might cause
a delay in diagnosis in a few patients. CASE REPORT We describe the case of a
28-year-old man who was misdiagnosed as having Bartter syndrome when he was 5
months old based on the clinical features of hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis,
and a family history of Bartter syndrome. He had multiple admissions with
diarrhea and was diagnosed with ulcerative colitis. Unfortunately, the course
was complicated by renal failure, and the patient underwent a kidney transplant.
Persistent metabolic alkalosis with diarrhea after transplantation was unusual
in Bartter syndrome. Therefore, his primary diagnosis was challenged and
suspicion of CCD was raised, which was confirmed by genetic testing. CONCLUSIONS
CCD is a rare congenital disorder that requires high clinical suspicion and
often a genetic test to confirm diagnosis. Here, we report a patient who was
misdiagnosed as having Bartter syndrome until early adulthood owing to several
misleading factors. We hope by reporting this case it will raise awareness about
CCD in high-prevalence areas and the importance of early diagnosis to prevent
serious complications.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.936715
PMCID: PMC9272577
PMID: 35787602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None declared
