---
reference_id: "PMID:17044471"
title: "Alleviation of renal and pulmonary injury by immunomodulation in leptospirosis: hamster model."
authors:
- Praditpornsilpa K
- Sangjun N
- Kittikowit W
- Phulsuksombati D
- Avihingsanon Y
- Kansanabuch T
- Tungsanga K
- Eiam-Ong S
journal: J Med Assoc Thai
year: '2006'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alleviation of renal and pulmonary injury by immunomodulation in leptospirosis: hamster model.
**Authors:** Praditpornsilpa K, Sangjun N, Kittikowit W, Phulsuksombati D, Avihingsanon Y, Kansanabuch T, Tungsanga K, Eiam-Ong S
**Journal:** J Med Assoc Thai (2006)

## Content

1. J Med Assoc Thai. 2006 Aug;89 Suppl 2:S178-87.

Alleviation of renal and pulmonary injury by immunomodulation in leptospirosis: 
hamster model.

Praditpornsilpa K(1), Sangjun N, Kittikowit W, Phulsuksombati D, Avihingsanon Y, 
Kansanabuch T, Tungsanga K, Eiam-Ong S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
Chulalongkorn University Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand. kearkiat@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: Severe leptospirosis manifestations include acute renal failure, 
caused by acute interstitial nephritis and pulmonary hemorrohage. Spirochete 
invasion and toxicity of outer membrane cause robust inflammatory host 
responses. These responses lead to the generation of cytokines, chemokines, and 
inflammatory cell infiltrations which result in severe organ dysfunctions. The 
immunomodulation by the modulation of host immune response may alleviate the 
renal and pulmonary injury. The authors determined whether the current 
immunosuppressive agents could alleviate the inflammation and minimize the organ 
injury in hamster model.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: The animal experiments were conducted with the approval of 
The Ethical Research Committee of Chulalongkorn University Hospital. The 
leptospira interrogan serovar pyrogenese was isolated from a wild rat. The 
spirochete was grown in Fletcher's semisolid media and after subcultures were 
transferred to the Fletcher's liquid media. An amount of 0.5 ml of the 
spirochete culture media containing 1 x 10(8) leptospires/ml was 
intraperitoneally injected to golden Syrian hamsters (Mesocrietus auratus), age 
4-6 weeks, weighing 60-80 grams. The hamsters were randomed into 5 groups (n = 4 
in each group) namely, 1) Normal group (Control group), 2) Leptospira group, 3) 
CsA group (leptospira with cyclosporine feeding, 100 mg/kg/ day), 4) Rapa group 
(leptospira with rapamicin feeding, 0.6 mg/kg/day), and 5) Irra group 
(leptospira with irradiation). Cyclosporine and rapamicin were started at day 0 
after the spirochete injection. Gamma ray dose 200 cGy was irradiated to the 
hamster 3 days before the spirochete inoculation. The animals were autopsied or 
euthanized if expired or at day 5 post inoculation. The blood samples for BUN, 
and creatinine were drawn before the inoculation and at autopsy or euthanasia.
RESULTS: The inoculation of L Interrogan 0.5 ml (1 x 10(8) leptospires/ml) 
without immunomodulation cause mortality of all animals at day 4 or day 5 post 
inoculation. The blood chemistry showed acute severe azotemia. The autopsy 
findings revealed severe interstitial nephritis and severe pulmonary hemorrhage. 
The hamsters in the Rapa group had only minimal pulmonary hemorrhage and minimal 
focal interstitial inflammation of kidney. There were cytoadherance of 
inflammatory cells to the endothelial cells in lungs and kidneys without the 
intrusion into the interstitium. The blood chemistry in Rapa group showed mild 
elevation of BUN and Cr. The immunomodulation by cyclosporine and irradiation 
did not alleviate the disease. On the contrary, cyclosporine and irradiation 
caused more severe histopathology.
CONCLUSION: The immunomodulation by rapamicin in leptospirosis in hamsters could 
alleviate the kidney and pulmonary injuries. The up-regulation of IL-2 in 
peripheral blood lymphocytes did not result in the kidney and pulmonary 
injuries.

PMID: 17044471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]