---
reference_id: "PMID:36378562"
title: BEST1 novel mutation causes Bestrophinopathies in six families with distinct phenotypic diversity.
authors:
- Yang S
- Li Z
- Cheng W
- Ma M
- Qi R
- Rui X
- Ren Y
- Sheng X
- Rong W
journal: Mol Genet Genomic Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.2095
keywords:
- Humans
- Bestrophins/genetics
- "Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Chloride Channels/genetics
- Eye Proteins/genetics
- Angiotensin Receptor Antagonists
- Pedigree
- Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors
- Phenotype
- "Mutation, Missense"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BEST1 novel mutation causes Bestrophinopathies in six families with distinct phenotypic diversity.
**Authors:** Yang S, Li Z, Cheng W, Ma M, Qi R, Rui X, Ren Y, Sheng X, Rong W
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomic Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mgg3.2095](https://doi.org/10.1002/mgg3.2095)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2023 Jan;11(1):e2095. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.2095. Epub 2022
 Nov 15.

BEST1 novel mutation causes Bestrophinopathies in six families with distinct
phenotypic diversity.

Yang S(1), Li Z(2), Cheng W(1), Ma M(3), Qi R(4), Rui X(3), Ren Y(2), Sheng
X(3), Rong W(2).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Medical College, Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan, China.
(2)Ningxia Eye Hospital, People's Hospital of Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region,
Third Clinical Medical College of Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan, China.
(3)Gansu Aier Ophthalmiology and Optometry Hospital, Lanzhou City, China.
(4)Aier Eye Hospital Group, Hubin Aier Eye Hospital, Binzhou City, China.

PURPOSE: To report novel BEST1 variants in six Chinese families with
bestrophinopathies of two different inheritance modes and analyze the
intrafamilial phenotypic diversity.
METHOD: A total of 25 participants including 13 patients and 12 healthy family
members from 6 Chinese families with bestrophinopathies were available for
genetic and clinical analysis. All of the patients were subjected to
comprehensive ophthalmic evaluations and exome sequencing was performed on the
probands to detect the causative variants. The pathogenicity of gene variants
was predicted using silico analysis and evaluated according to ACMG guidelines.
All (likely) pathogenic variants were determined by Sanger sequencing and
co-segregation analyses were performed on available family members. The relevant
original literature previously reported was retrieved to explore the
relationship between BEST1-related gene variants and clinical features.
RESULTS: In the 6 families, 3 families (10 patients) were assigned as autosomal
dominant bestrophinopathies (VMD) and 3 families (3 patients) were assigned as
Autosomal recessive Bestrophinopathies (ARB). A total of 9 variants on the BEST1
gene were identified, containing 7 missense variants, 1 nonsense variant, and 1
frameshift variant, respectively, of which 3 variants c.88A > G (p.Lys30Glu),
c.764G > A (p.Arg255Gln) and c.233dupT (p.Ser79Phefs*153) were novel variants.
Three families with ARB were detected with heterozygous variants on the BEST1
gene.2 families (8 patients) with BVMD showed markedly irregular dominant
inheritance, and the severity of macular lesions varies greatly among
individuals of the same family. Among them, the probands showed typical
vitelliform lesions in the macula, while the other six patients had no visible
signs of the disease by fundus photography (ophthalmoscopy) and minor lesions
could be detected on OCT in two patients, the continuity of the ellipsoidal band
was interrupted with the chimeric band. The phenotypes of the patients in the
three ARB families ranged from typical/atypical vitelliform lesions to extensive
extramacular deposits (peripheral spots).
CONCLUSION: This study provided evidence that the phenotype of BVMD manifested
irregular dominant inheritance, with patients carrying a pathogenic heterozygous
variant of BEST1 to develop obvious intrafamilial phenotypic diversity, and the
patients who harbor two pathogenic alleles showed recessive inheritance
bestrophinopathies with distinct phenotypic diversity. Our study also emphasized
the importance of comprehensive genetic analysis in patients with
bestrophinopathies, and in such challenging families with distinct intrafamilial
phenotypic diversity, it shall provide novel insights into phenotypic
assessments of bestrophinopathies, and contribute to better diagnosis,
prognosis, and treatment for these patients.

© 2022 The Authors. Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.2095
PMCID: PMC9834154
PMID: 36378562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
