---
reference_id: "PMID:39000209"
title: "Difficulties in the Diagnostics and Treatment of Hashimoto's Encephalopathy-A Systematic and Critical Review."
authors:
- Pempera N
- Miedziaszczyk M
- Lacka K
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25137101
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hashimoto Disease/diagnosis, therapy, drug therapy"
- "Encephalitis/diagnosis, drug therapy, therapy"
- "Autoantibodies/immunology, blood"
- Biomarkers
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Glucocorticoids/therapeutic use
- "Brain Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy, therapy"
- Iodide Peroxidase/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Difficulties in the Diagnostics and Treatment of Hashimoto's Encephalopathy-A Systematic and Critical Review.
**Authors:** Pempera N, Miedziaszczyk M, Lacka K
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25137101](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25137101)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Jun 28;25(13):7101. doi: 10.3390/ijms25137101.

Difficulties in the Diagnostics and Treatment of Hashimoto's Encephalopathy-A 
Systematic and Critical Review.

Pempera N(1), Miedziaszczyk M(2)(3), Lacka K(4).

Author information:
(1)Students' Scientific Society, Endocrinology Section at Department of 
Endocrinology, Metabolism and Internal Medicine, Poznan University of Medical 
Sciences, 60-355 Poznan, Poland.
(2)Department of General and Transplant Surgery, Poznan University of Medical 
Sciences, 60-355 Poznan, Poland.
(3)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Biopharmacy, Poznan University of Medical 
Sciences, 60-806 Poznan, Poland.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Internal Medicine, Poznan 
University of Medical Sciences, 60-355 Poznan, Poland.

Hashimoto's encephalopathy (HE) has been a poorly understood disease. It has 
been described in all age group, yet, there is no specific HE marker. 
Additionally, the treatment data in the available studies are frequently 
divergent and contradictory. Therefore, the aim of our systematic and critical 
review is to evaluate the diagnosis and treatment of HE in view of the latest 
findings. The databases browsed comprised PubMed, Scopus, and Google Scholar as 
well as Cochrane Library, and the search strategy included controlled vocabulary 
and keywords. A total of 2443 manuscripts were found, published since the 
beginning of HE research until February 2024. In order to determine validity of 
the data collected from studies, bias assessment was performed using RoB 2 tool. 
Ultimately, six studies were included in our study. HE should be considered in 
the differential diagnosis in patients with psychiatric and neurological 
symptoms. According to our findings, negative thyroid peroxidase antibodies 
(anti-TPOs) may represent a valuable parameter in ruling out HE. Nonetheless, 
this result cannot be used to confirm HE. Furthermore, the proposed anti 
NH2-terminal-α-enolase (anti-NAE) is non-specific for HE. The effectiveness of 
glucocorticoid therapy is 60.94%, although relapse occurs in 31.67% of patients 
following the treatment. Our review emphasizes the significance of conducting 
further large-scale research and the need to take into account the potential 
genetic factor.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25137101
PMCID: PMC11241003
PMID: 39000209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.