---
reference_id: "PMID:39304240"
title: "Mexiletine versus lamotrigine in non-dystrophic myotonias: a randomised, double-blind, head-to-head, crossover, non-inferiority, phase 3 trial."
authors:
- Vivekanandam V
- Skorupinska I
- Jayaseelan DL
- Matthews E
- Barohn RJ
- McDermott MP
- Hanna MG
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(24)00320-X
keywords:
- Humans
- Lamotrigine/therapeutic use
- Double-Blind Method
- Male
- Female
- "Mexiletine/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Cross-Over Studies
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Myotonia/drug therapy
- "Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel Blockers/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mexiletine versus lamotrigine in non-dystrophic myotonias: a randomised, double-blind, head-to-head, crossover, non-inferiority, phase 3 trial.
**Authors:** Vivekanandam V, Skorupinska I, Jayaseelan DL, Matthews E, Barohn RJ, McDermott MP, Hanna MG
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(24)00320-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(24)00320-X)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2024 Oct;23(10):1004-1012. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(24)00320-X.

Mexiletine versus lamotrigine in non-dystrophic myotonias: a randomised,
double-blind, head-to-head, crossover, non-inferiority, phase 3 trial.

Vivekanandam V(1), Skorupinska I(2), Jayaseelan DL(2), Matthews E(3), Barohn
RJ(4), McDermott MP(5), Hanna MG(6).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Neuromuscular Disorders, The National Hospital for Neurology and
Neurosurgery, London, UK; Queen Square Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases, UCL
Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London, UK. Electronic address:
v.vivekanandam@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Centre for Neuromuscular Disorders, The National Hospital for Neurology and
Neurosurgery, London, UK.
(3)Neurosciences and Cell Biology Research Institute, St George's University of
London, London, UK.
(4)University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA.
(5)University of Rochester Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.
(6)Centre for Neuromuscular Disorders, The National Hospital for Neurology and
Neurosurgery, London, UK; Queen Square Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases, UCL
Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Non-dystrophic myotonias are skeletal muscle channelopathies caused
by ion channel dysfunction. Symptom onset is frequently in the first decade of
life, causing disability in a young cohort. Although there is no cure,
symptomatic treatments exist. Previous trials provide evidence of the efficacy
of mexiletine. More recently, lamotrigine has been shown to be effective. Both
treatments have different profiles, including pharmacokinetics and adverse
events. This trial aimed to investigate whether lamotrigine is non-inferior to
mexiletine to directly inform clinical practice.
METHODS: We did a randomised, double-blind, crossover, non-inferiority, phase 3
trial at the National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery (London, UK).
Participants (aged ≥18 years) who had genetically confirmed symptomatic
non-dystrophic myotonia were randomly assigned (1:1), by means of a block
randomisation schedule created by a computer program, to receive either
mexiletine for 8 weeks followed by lamotrigine for 8 weeks, or lamotrigine
followed by mexiletine, with a 7-day washout period in between. Investigators
and participants were masked to treatment allocation. The primary outcome
measure was the mean interactive voice response (IVR) diary stiffness score (0-9
scale) over the participant's final 2 weeks of diary reporting in each treatment
period. Non-inferiority was assessed using a mixed-effects model with a
predefined margin of 0·5 and included all randomly assigned participants who
contributed at least 7 days of IVR-diary data in either treatment period. The
trial is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT05017155, and EudraCT,
2020-003375-17.
FINDINGS: Between Aug 1, 2021, and Dec 12, 2022, of 60 participants were
screened (24 females and 36 males) and randomly assigned between Aug 1, 2021 and
Dec 12, 2022, to either the mexiletine-lamotrigine sequence (n=30) or the
lamotrigine-mexiletine sequence (n=30). 53 participants contributed data to the
primary analysis. The mean IVR stiffness score after treatment with mexiletine
was 2·54 (95% CI 1·98 to 3·10) versus 2·77 (2·21 to 3·32) with lamotrigine (mean
mexiletine-lamotrigine difference -0·23 [95% CI -0·63 to 0·17]). The most common
adverse event with both treatments was indigestion-reflux (eight participants,
208 participant-days receiving mexiletine; seven participants, 130
participant-days receiving lamotrigine). No serious adverse events were
reported.
INTERPRETATION: We were unable to conclude that lamotrigine is non-inferior to
mexiletine; however, improvements in all outcome measures from baseline were
similar between lamotrigine and mexiletine. Lamotrigine is an important
treatment consideration in non-dystrophic myotonias alongside mexiletine; we
propose a treatment algorithm to guide clinical practice.
FUNDING: Neuromuscular Study Group, Jon Moulton Charity Trust, UCLH BRC Fast
Track Grant.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open
Access article under the CC BY-NC 4.0 license. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(24)00320-X
PMID: 39304240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests We declare no competing
interests.
