---
reference_id: "PMID:16538613"
title: "Brachyury, a crucial regulator of notochordal development, is a novel biomarker for chordomas."
authors:
- Vujovic S
- Henderson S
- Presneau N
- Odell E
- Jacques TS
- Tirabosco R
- Boshoff C
- Flanagan AM
journal: J Pathol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1002/path.1969
keywords:
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis, genetics"
- "Cartilage Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Chondrosarcoma/diagnosis, embryology, genetics"
- "Chordoma/diagnosis, embryology, genetics"
- "Fetal Proteins/analysis, genetics"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic/genetics"
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry/methods
- "Keratins/analysis, genetics"
- "Notochord/chemistry, embryology"
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction/methods
- "Spinal Neoplasms/diagnosis, embryology, genetics"
- "T-Box Domain Proteins/analysis, genetics"
- Tissue Distribution
- Brachyury Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brachyury, a crucial regulator of notochordal development, is a novel biomarker for chordomas.
**Authors:** Vujovic S, Henderson S, Presneau N, Odell E, Jacques TS, Tirabosco R, Boshoff C, Flanagan AM
**Journal:** J Pathol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1002/path.1969](https://doi.org/10.1002/path.1969)

## Content

1. J Pathol. 2006 Jun;209(2):157-65. doi: 10.1002/path.1969.

Brachyury, a crucial regulator of notochordal development, is a novel biomarker 
for chordomas.

Vujovic S(1), Henderson S, Presneau N, Odell E, Jacques TS, Tirabosco R, Boshoff 
C, Flanagan AM.

Author information:
(1)Wolfson Institute for Biomedical Research, University College London, and 
Department of Oral Pathology, King's College London Dental Institute at Guy's 
Hospital, WC1E 6BT, UK.

Chordomas are malignant tumours that occur along the spine and are thought to 
derive from notochordal remnants. There is significant morphological variability 
between and within chordomas, with some showing prominent areas of chondroid 
differentiation. Our microarray data from a broad range of connective tissue 
neoplasms indicate that, at the transcriptional level, chordomas resemble 
cartilaginous neoplasms. Here we show that chordomas express many genes known to 
be involved in cartilage development, but they also uniquely express genes 
distinguishing them from chondroid neoplasms. The brachyury transcription 
factor, known to be involved in notochordal development, is only expressed by 
chordomas. Using a polyclonal antibody, we show that brachyury is expressed in 
the embryonic notochord and in all 53 chordomas analysed, labelling both 
chondroid and chordoid areas of these tumours. In contrast, the protein was not 
detected in over 300 neoplasms, including 163 chondroid tumours. Brachyury was 
not detected in the nucleus pulposus, arguing against the hypothesis that this 
tissue derives directly from the notochord. These data provide compelling 
evidence that chordomas derive from notochord and demonstrate that brachyury is 
a specific marker for the notochord and notochord-derived tumours.

Copyright (c) 2006 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

DOI: 10.1002/path.1969
PMID: 16538613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]