---
reference_id: "PMID:34335185"
title: Otoferlin Is Required for Proper Synapse Maturation and for Maintenance of Inner and Outer Hair Cells in Mouse Models for DFNB9.
authors:
- Stalmann U
- Franke AJ
- Al-Moyed H
- Strenzke N
- Reisinger E
journal: Front Cell Neurosci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fncel.2021.677543
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Otoferlin Is Required for Proper Synapse Maturation and for Maintenance of Inner and Outer Hair Cells in Mouse Models for DFNB9.
**Authors:** Stalmann U, Franke AJ, Al-Moyed H, Strenzke N, Reisinger E
**Journal:** Front Cell Neurosci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fncel.2021.677543](https://doi.org/10.3389/fncel.2021.677543)

## Content

1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2021 Jul 14;15:677543. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2021.677543. 
eCollection 2021.

Otoferlin Is Required for Proper Synapse Maturation and for Maintenance of Inner 
and Outer Hair Cells in Mouse Models for DFNB9.

Stalmann U(1), Franke AJ(1), Al-Moyed H(2), Strenzke N(1), Reisinger E(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Auditory Systems Physiology Group, Department of Otolaryngology and Institute 
for Auditory Neuroscience, SFB 889 project A06, University Medical Center 
Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(2)Molecular Biology of Cochlear Neurotransmission Group, Department of 
Otolaryngology, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(3)Gene Therapy for Hearing Impairment Group, Department of Otolaryngology, Head 
and Neck Surgery, University of Tübingen Medical Center, Tübingen, Germany.

Deficiency of otoferlin causes profound prelingual deafness in humans and animal 
models. Here, we closely analyzed developmental deficits and degenerative 
mechanisms in Otof knock-out (Otof -/-) mice over the course of 48 weeks. We 
found otoferlin to be required for proper synapse development in the immature 
rodent cochlea: In absence of otoferlin, synaptic pruning was delayed, and 
postsynaptic boutons appeared enlarged at 2 weeks of age. At postnatal day 14 
(P14), we found on average ∼15 synapses per inner hair cell (IHC) in Otof -/- 
cochleae as well as in wild-type controls. Further on, the number of synapses in 
Otof -/- IHCs was reduced to ∼7 at 8 weeks of age and to ∼6 at 48 weeks of age. 
In the same period, the number of spiral ganglion neurons (SGNs) declined in 
Otof -/- animals. Importantly, we found an age-progressive loss of IHCs to an 
overall number of 75% of wildtype IHCs. The IHC loss more prominently but not 
exclusively affected the basal aspects of the cochlea. For outer hair cells 
(OHCs), we observed slightly accelerated age-dependent degeneration from base to 
apex. This was associated with a progressive decay in DPOAE amplitudes for high 
frequency stimuli, which could first be observed at the age of 24 weeks in Otof 
-/- mice. Our data will help to plan and predict the outcome of a gene therapy 
applied at various ages of DFNB9 patients.

Copyright © 2021 Stalmann, Franke, Al-Moyed, Strenzke and Reisinger.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2021.677543
PMCID: PMC8316924
PMID: 34335185

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.