---
reference_id: "PMID:26060190"
title: Reversibility of neuropathology and motor deficits in an inducible mouse model for FXTAS.
authors:
- Hukema RK
- Buijsen RA
- Schonewille M
- Raske C
- Severijnen LA
- Nieuwenhuizen-Bakker I
- Verhagen RF
- van Dessel L
- Maas A
- Charlet-Berguerand N
- De Zeeuw CI
- Hagerman PJ
- Berman RF
- Willemsen R
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv216
keywords:
- Animals
- "Ataxia/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Eye Movements/genetics
- "Fragile X Syndrome/genetics, physiopathology"
- Gene Expression
- "Genes, Reporter"
- Humans
- Intranuclear Inclusion Bodies/pathology
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Peptides/metabolism
- Protein Binding
- Protein Transport
- "Tremor/genetics, physiopathology"
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion
- Ubiquitin/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reversibility of neuropathology and motor deficits in an inducible mouse model for FXTAS.
**Authors:** Hukema RK, Buijsen RA, Schonewille M, Raske C, Severijnen LA, Nieuwenhuizen-Bakker I, Verhagen RF, van Dessel L, Maas A, Charlet-Berguerand N, De Zeeuw CI, Hagerman PJ, Berman RF, Willemsen R
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddv216](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddv216)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Sep 1;24(17):4948-57. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv216. Epub 2015
Jun  9.

Reversibility of neuropathology and motor deficits in an inducible mouse model 
for FXTAS.

Hukema RK(1), Buijsen RA(2), Schonewille M(3), Raske C(4), Severijnen LA(2), 
Nieuwenhuizen-Bakker I(2), Verhagen RF(2), van Dessel L(2), Maas A(5), 
Charlet-Berguerand N(6), De Zeeuw CI(7), Hagerman PJ(4), Berman RF(8), Willemsen 
R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, r.hukema@erasmusmc.nl.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics.
(3)Department of Neuroscience.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine and.
(5)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, 3000 CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(6)IGBMC, 67404 Illkirch, France and.
(7)Department of Neuroscience The Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, 
Amsterdam 1105 BA, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Neurological Surgery, School of Medicine, University of 
California Davis, CA 95618, USA.

Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) is a late-onset 
neurodegenerative disorder affecting carriers of the fragile X-premutation, who 
have an expanded CGG repeat in the 5'-UTR of the FMR1 gene. FXTAS is 
characterized by progressive development of intention tremor, ataxia, 
parkinsonism and neuropsychological problems. The disease is thought to be 
caused by a toxic RNA gain-of-function mechanism, and the major hallmark of the 
disease is ubiquitin-positive intranuclear inclusions in neurons and astrocytes. 
We have developed a new transgenic mouse model in which we can induce expression 
of an expanded repeat in the brain upon doxycycline (dox) exposure (i.e. Tet-On 
mice). This Tet-On model makes use of the PrP-rtTA driver and allows us to study 
disease progression and possibilities of reversibility. In these mice, 8 weeks 
of dox exposure was sufficient to induce the formation of ubiquitin-positive 
intranuclear inclusions, which also stain positive for the RAN translation 
product FMRpolyG. Formation of these inclusions is reversible after stopping 
expression of the expanded CGG RNA at an early developmental stage. Furthermore, 
we observed a deficit in the compensatory eye movements of mice with inclusions, 
a functional phenotype that could be reduced by stopping expression of the 
expanded CGG RNA early in the disease development. Taken together, this study 
shows, for the first time, the potential of disease reversibility and suggests 
that early intervention might be beneficial for FXTAS patients.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddv216
PMCID: PMC4527492
PMID: 26060190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]