---
reference_id: "PMID:25480730"
title: Characterization of 28 novel patients expands the mutational and phenotypic spectrum of Lowe syndrome.
authors:
- Recker F
- Zaniew M
- Böckenhauer D
- Miglietti N
- Bökenkamp A
- Moczulska A
- Rogowska-Kalisz A
- Laube G
- Said-Conti V
- Kasap-Demir B
- Niemirska A
- Litwin M
- Siteń G
- Chrzanowska KH
- Krajewska-Walasek M
- Sethi SK
- Tasic V
- Anglani F
- Addis M
- Wasilewska A
- Szczepańska M
- Pawlaczyk K
- Sikora P
- Ludwig M
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s00467-014-3013-2
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Cataract/diagnosis, genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Breakpoints
- CpG Islands
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Disease Progression
- Europe/epidemiology
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Heredity
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Hyperacusis/diagnosis, genetics"
- India/epidemiology
- Infant
- Male
- Mutation
- "Oculocerebrorenal Syndrome/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases/genetics
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Prevalence
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Thrombocytopenia/diagnosis, genetics"
- Time Factors
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of 28 novel patients expands the mutational and phenotypic spectrum of Lowe syndrome.
**Authors:** Recker F, Zaniew M, Böckenhauer D, Miglietti N, Bökenkamp A, Moczulska A, Rogowska-Kalisz A, Laube G, Said-Conti V, Kasap-Demir B, Niemirska A, Litwin M, Siteń G, Chrzanowska KH, Krajewska-Walasek M, Sethi SK, Tasic V, Anglani F, Addis M, Wasilewska A, Szczepańska M, Pawlaczyk K, Sikora P, Ludwig M
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00467-014-3013-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00467-014-3013-2)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2015 Jun;30(6):931-43. doi: 10.1007/s00467-014-3013-2. Epub
2014 Dec 6.

Characterization of 28 novel patients expands the mutational and phenotypic
spectrum of Lowe syndrome.

Recker F(1), Zaniew M, Böckenhauer D, Miglietti N, Bökenkamp A, Moczulska A,
Rogowska-Kalisz A, Laube G, Said-Conti V, Kasap-Demir B, Niemirska A, Litwin M,
Siteń G, Chrzanowska KH, Krajewska-Walasek M, Sethi SK, Tasic V, Anglani F,
Addis M, Wasilewska A, Szczepańska M, Pawlaczyk K, Sikora P, Ludwig M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, University of
Bonn, Sigmund-Freud-Str. 25, 53127, Bonn, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The oculocerebrorenal syndrome of Lowe (OCRL) is a rare X-linked
multi-systemic disorder, almost always characterized by the triad of congenital
cataract, cognitive and behavioral impairment and a proximal tubulopathy.
METHODS: Twenty-eight novel patients with suspected Lowe syndrome were studied.
RESULTS: All patients carried OCRL gene defects with mutational hot spots at CpG
dinucleotides. Mutations previously unknown in Lowe syndrome were observed in
ten of the 28 patients, and carriership was identified in 30.4 % of the mothers
investigated. Mapping the exact breakpoints of a complete OCRL gene deletion
revealed involvement of several flanking repeat elements. We noted a similar
pattern of documented clinically relevant symptoms, and even though the patient
cohort comprised relatively young patients, 32 % of these patients already
showed advanced chronic kidney disease. Thrombocytopenia was seen in several
patients, and hyperosmia and/or hyperacusis were reported recurrently. A
p.Asp523Asn mutation in a Polish patient, associated with the typical
cerebrorenal spectrum but with late cataract (10 year), was also evident in two
milder affected Italian brothers with ocular involvement of similar progression.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified clinical features in 28 patients with suspected
Lowe syndrome that had not been recognized in Lowe syndrome prior to our study.
We also provide further evidence that OCRL mutations cause a phenotypic
continuum with selective and/or time-dependent organ involvement. At least some
of these mutants might exhibit a genotype-phenotype correlation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-014-3013-2
PMID: 25480730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
