---
reference_id: "PMID:26788835"
title: Symptom-trigger factors other than allergens in asthma and allergy.
authors:
- Claeson AS
- Palmquist E
- Lind N
- Nordin S
journal: Int J Environ Health Res
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1080/09603123.2015.1135314
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Symptom-trigger factors other than allergens in asthma and allergy.
**Authors:** Claeson AS, Palmquist E, Lind N, Nordin S
**Journal:** Int J Environ Health Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1080/09603123.2015.1135314](https://doi.org/10.1080/09603123.2015.1135314)

## Content

1. Int J Environ Health Res. 2016 Aug;26(4):448-57. doi: 
10.1080/09603123.2015.1135314. Epub 2016 Jan 20.

Symptom-trigger factors other than allergens in asthma and allergy.

Claeson AS(1), Palmquist E(1), Lind N(1), Nordin S(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Psychology , Umeå University , Umeå , Sweden.

Several environmental exposures of particular relevance for indoor air quality, 
such as exposure to odorants, may be associated with asthma and allergy. The aim 
of this study was to investigate attribution of symptoms and behavioral 
disruptions to various chemical and physical environmental sources in persons 
with self-reported asthma and allergy. Data from a population-based study, the 
Västerbotten Environmental Health Study, were used to compare persons with 
asthma, allergic rhinitis, allergic dermatitis, multiple diagnoses of 
asthma/allergy and no asthma or allergy. Persons with asthma and multiple 
diagnoses reported odorous/pungent and building-related environmental factors to 
trigger symptoms to a larger extent than did the reference group, mainly due to 
perfume and odors from flowers. They also reported behavioral disruptions and 
affective reactions to odorous/pungent environments. These findings increase the 
understanding of the role of odorants in symptom development and thereby the 
prevention of health problems in asthma and allergy in indoor air.

DOI: 10.1080/09603123.2015.1135314
PMID: 26788835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]