---
reference_id: "PMID:32600288"
title: A novel POLR3A genotype leads to leukodystrophy type-7 in two siblings with unusually late age of onset.
authors:
- Campopiano R
- Ferese R
- Zampatti S
- Giardina E
- Biagioni F
- Colonnese C
- Centonze D
- Storto M
- Buttari F
- Fraviga E
- Broccoli V
- Fanelli M
- Fornai F
- Gambardella S
journal: BMC Neurol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1186/s12883-020-01835-9
keywords:
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Brain/pathology
- Female
- Genotype
- "Hereditary Central Nervous System Demyelinating Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Mutation
- RNA Polymerase III/genetics
- Siblings
- White Matter/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel POLR3A genotype leads to leukodystrophy type-7 in two siblings with unusually late age of onset.
**Authors:** Campopiano R, Ferese R, Zampatti S, Giardina E, Biagioni F, Colonnese C, Centonze D, Storto M, Buttari F, Fraviga E, Broccoli V, Fanelli M, Fornai F, Gambardella S
**Journal:** BMC Neurol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12883-020-01835-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12883-020-01835-9)

## Content

1. BMC Neurol. 2020 Jun 29;20(1):258. doi: 10.1186/s12883-020-01835-9.

A novel POLR3A genotype leads to leukodystrophy type-7 in two siblings with 
unusually late age of onset.

Campopiano R(1), Ferese R(1), Zampatti S(2), Giardina E(2)(3), Biagioni F(1), 
Colonnese C(1), Centonze D(1)(4), Storto M(1), Buttari F(1), Fraviga E(5), 
Broccoli V(5)(6), Fanelli M(7), Fornai F(1)(8), Gambardella S(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)I.R.C.C.S. I.N.M. Neuromed, via Atinense 18, 86077, Pozzilli, Italy.
(2)Molecular Genetics Laboratory UILDM, Santa Lucia Foundation IRCCS, Rome, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, University of Rome "Tor Vergata", 
Rome, Italy.
(4)Dipartimento di Medicina dei Sistemi, Università di Roma Tor Vergata, Rome, 
Italy.
(5)Stem Cell and Neurogenesis Unit, Division of Neuroscience, San Raffaele 
Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
(6)CNR Institute of Neuroscience, Milan, Italy.
(7)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, University of Urbino "Carlo Bo", Urbino, 
Italy.
(8)Department of Translational Research and New Technologies in Medicine and 
Surgery, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(9)I.R.C.C.S. I.N.M. Neuromed, via Atinense 18, 86077, Pozzilli, Italy. 
stefano.gambardella@uniurb.it.
(10)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, University of Urbino "Carlo Bo", 
Urbino, Italy. stefano.gambardella@uniurb.it.

BACKGROUND: Leukodystrophies are familial heterogeneous disorders primarily 
affecting the white matter, which are defined as hypomyelinating or 
demyelinating based on disease severity as assessed at MRI. Recently, a group of 
clinically overlapping hypomyelinating leukodystrophies (HL) has been associated 
with mutations in RNA polymerase III enzymes (Pol III) subunits.
CASE PRESENTATION: In this manuscript, we describe two Italian siblings carrying 
a novel POLR3A genotype. MRI imaging, genetic analysis, and clinical data led to 
diagnosing HL type 7. The female sibling, at the age of 34, is tetra-paretic and 
suffers from severe cognitive regression. She had a disease onset at the age of 
19, characterized by slow and progressive cognitive impairment associated with 
gait disturbances and amenorrhea. The male sibling was diagnosed during an MRI 
carried out for cephalalgia at the age of 41. After 5 years, he developed mild 
cognitive impairment, dystonia with 4-limb hypotonia, and moderate dysmetria 
with balance and gait impairment.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study provides the first evidence of unusually late age 
of onset in HL, describing two siblings with a novel POLR3A genotype which 
showed the first symptoms at the age of 41 and 19, respectively. This provides a 
powerful insight into clinical heterogeneity and genotype-phenotype correlation 
in POLR3A related HL.

DOI: 10.1186/s12883-020-01835-9
PMCID: PMC7322863
PMID: 32600288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.