---
reference_id: "PMID:38109745"
title: "A case of subarachnoid haemorrhage associated with MPO-ANCA-positive eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis, successfully treated with glucocorticoid, cyclophosphamide, and mepolizumab."
authors:
- Satake Y
- Sakai S
- Takao T
- Saeki T
journal: Mod Rheumatol Case Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/mrcr/rxad071
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cyclophosphamide/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- "Subarachnoid Hemorrhage/etiology, diagnosis, complications, drug therapy"
- "Glucocorticoids/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- "Antibodies, Antineutrophil Cytoplasmic/immunology"
- Treatment Outcome
- "Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- "Churg-Strauss Syndrome/diagnosis, complications, drug therapy"
- Peroxidase/immunology
- "Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis/drug therapy, diagnosis, complications"
- Male
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Middle Aged
- Female
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case of subarachnoid haemorrhage associated with MPO-ANCA-positive eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis, successfully treated with glucocorticoid, cyclophosphamide, and mepolizumab.
**Authors:** Satake Y, Sakai S, Takao T, Saeki T
**Journal:** Mod Rheumatol Case Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/mrcr/rxad071](https://doi.org/10.1093/mrcr/rxad071)

## Content

1. Mod Rheumatol Case Rep. 2024 Jul 8;8(2):310-313. doi: 10.1093/mrcr/rxad071.

A case of subarachnoid haemorrhage associated with MPO-ANCA-positive 
eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis, successfully treated with 
glucocorticoid, cyclophosphamide, and mepolizumab.

Satake Y(1), Sakai S(1), Takao T(2), Saeki T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Nagaoka Red Cross Hospital, Niigata, Japan.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Nagaoka Red Cross Hospital, Niigata, Japan.

Subarachnoid haemorrhage (SAH) is a quite rare but serious central nervous 
system complication of eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA). We 
report a case of myeloperoxidase antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody-positive 
EGPA in which SAH developed during glucocorticoid induction pulse therapy for 
skin purpura, peripheral neuropathy, and rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis. 
In addition to high-dose glucocorticoid and intravenous cyclophosphamide, we 
administered mepolizumab, a humanised anti-interleukin-5 monoclonal antibody, 
and this resulted in remission of the SAH. Although the pathogenesis of SAH in 
EGPA is not fully understood, both necrotising vasculitis and eosinophilic 
inflammation are thought to be involved. In addition to prompt intensive 
immunosuppressive therapy, mepolizumab should be considered for SAH associated 
with EGPA.

© Japan College of Rheumatology 2023. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/mrcr/rxad071
PMID: 38109745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]