---
reference_id: "PMID:26542286"
title: Creatine biosynthesis and transport in health and disease.
authors:
- Joncquel-Chevalier Curt M
- Voicu PM
- Fontaine M
- Dessein AF
- Porchet N
- Mention-Mulliez K
- Dobbelaere D
- Soto-Ares G
- Cheillan D
- Vamecq J
journal: Biochimie
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2015.10.022
keywords:
- AMP-Activated Protein Kinases/metabolism
- "Amidinotransferases/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- "Amino Acid Transport Systems, Basic/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Biological Transport, Active"
- "Brain Diseases, Metabolic, Inborn/diagnosis, enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- "Creatine/biosynthesis, deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Developmental Disabilities/diagnosis, enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- Energy Metabolism
- "Guanidinoacetate N-Methyltransferase/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Gyrate Atrophy/diagnosis, enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Hyperammonemia/diagnosis, enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- "Language Development Disorders/diagnosis, enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- "X-Linked Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- Methylation
- Mitochondrial Membrane Transport Proteins
- "Movement Disorders/congenital, diagnosis, enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Ornithine/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Plasma Membrane Neurotransmitter Transport Proteins/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- S-Adenosylmethionine/metabolism
- "Speech Disorders/diagnosis, enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- "Urea Cycle Disorders, Inborn/diagnosis, enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Creatine biosynthesis and transport in health and disease.
**Authors:** Joncquel-Chevalier Curt M, Voicu PM, Fontaine M, Dessein AF, Porchet N, Mention-Mulliez K, Dobbelaere D, Soto-Ares G, Cheillan D, Vamecq J
**Journal:** Biochimie (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biochi.2015.10.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biochi.2015.10.022)

## Content

1. Biochimie. 2015 Dec;119:146-65. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2015.10.022. Epub 2015
Nov  2.

Creatine biosynthesis and transport in health and disease.

Joncquel-Chevalier Curt M(1), Voicu PM(2), Fontaine M(1), Dessein AF(3), Porchet
N(4), Mention-Mulliez K(5), Dobbelaere D(5), Soto-Ares G(6), Cheillan D(7),
Vamecq J(8).

Author information:
(1)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Hormonology-Metabolism-Nutrition &
Oncology (HMNO), Center of Biology & Pathology (CBP) Pierre-Marie Degand, CHRU
Lille, 59037 Lille, France; RADEME Research Team for Rare Metabolic and
Developmental Diseases, EA 7364, Université Lille 2, Lille, France.
(2)Clinical Chemistry Laboratory, Dr Schaffner Hospital of Lens, 62307 Lens,
France.
(3)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Hormonology-Metabolism-Nutrition &
Oncology (HMNO), Center of Biology & Pathology (CBP) Pierre-Marie Degand, CHRU
Lille, 59037 Lille, France.
(4)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Hormonology-Metabolism-Nutrition &
Oncology (HMNO), Center of Biology & Pathology (CBP) Pierre-Marie Degand, CHRU
Lille, 59037 Lille, France; Inserm, Lille, France.
(5)RADEME Research Team for Rare Metabolic and Developmental Diseases, EA 7364,
Université Lille 2, Lille, France; Medical Reference Center for Inherited
Metabolic Diseases, Jeanne de Flandres Hospital, CHRU Lille, 59037 Lille,
France.
(6)Department of Neuroradiology, Roger Salengro Hospital, CHRU Lille, 59037
Lille, France.
(7)Hospices Civils de Lyon, Service Maladies Héréditaires du Métabolisme et
Dépistage Néonatal, Groupement Hospitalier Est, 69677 Bron, France; Lyon
University, INSERM U1060, CarMeN Laboratory, University Lyon-1, INSA-Lyon,
F-69600 Oullins, France.
(8)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Hormonology-Metabolism-Nutrition &
Oncology (HMNO), Center of Biology & Pathology (CBP) Pierre-Marie Degand, CHRU
Lille, 59037 Lille, France; RADEME Research Team for Rare Metabolic and
Developmental Diseases, EA 7364, Université Lille 2, Lille, France; Inserm,
Lille, France. Electronic address: joseph.vamecq@inserm.fr.

Creatine is physiologically provided equally by diet and by endogenous synthesis
from arginine and glycine with successive involvements of arginine glycine
amidinotransferase [AGAT] and guanidinoacetate methyl transferase [GAMT]. A
specific plasma membrane transporter, creatine transporter [CRTR] (SLC6A8),
further enables cells to incorporate creatine and through uptake of its
precursor, guanidinoacetate, also directly contributes to creatine biosynthesis.
Breakthrough in the role of creatine has arisen from studies on creatine
deficiency disorders. Primary creatine disorders are inherited as autosomal
recessive (mutations affecting GATM [for glycine-amidinotransferase,
mitochondrial]) and GAMT genes) or X-linked (SLC6A8 gene) traits. They have
highlighted the role of creatine in brain functions altered in patients (global
developmental delay, intellectual disability, behavioral disorders). Creatine
modulates GABAergic and glutamatergic cerebral pathways, presynaptic CRTR
(SLC6A8) ensuring re-uptake of synaptic creatine. Secondary creatine disorders,
addressing other genes, have stressed the extraordinary imbrication of creatine
metabolism with many other cellular pathways. This high dependence on multiple
pathways supports creatine as a cellular sensor, to cell methylation and energy
status. Creatine biosynthesis consumes 40% of methyl groups produced as
S-adenosylmethionine, and creatine uptake is controlled by AMP activated protein
kinase, a ubiquitous sensor of energy depletion. Today, creatine is considered
as a potential sensor of cell methylation and energy status, a neurotransmitter
influencing key (GABAergic and glutamatergic) CNS neurotransmission, therapeutic
agent with anaplerotic properties (towards creatine kinases [creatine-creatine
phosphate cycle] and creatine neurotransmission), energetic and antioxidant
compound (benefits in degenerative diseases through protection against energy
depletion and oxidant species) with osmolyte behavior (retention of water by
muscle). This review encompasses all these aspects by providing an illustrated
metabolic account for brain and body creatine in health and disease, an
algorithm to diagnose metabolic and gene bases of primary and secondary creatine
deficiencies, and a metabolic exploration by (1)H-MRS assessment of cerebral
creatine levels and response to therapeutic measures.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. and Société Française de Biochimie et Biologie
Moléculaire (SFBBM). All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biochi.2015.10.022
PMID: 26542286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
