---
reference_id: "PMID:38885336"
title: The IFITM5 mutation in osteogenesis imperfecta type V is associated with an ERK/SOX9-dependent osteoprogenitor differentiation defect.
authors:
- Marom R
- Song IW
- Busse EC
- Washington ME
- Berrier AS
- Rossi VC
- Ortinau L
- Jeong Y
- Jiang MM
- Dawson BC
- Adeyeye M
- Leynes C
- Lietman CD
- Stroup BM
- Batkovskyte D
- Jain M
- Chen Y
- Cela R
- Castellon A
- Tran AA
- Lorenzo I
- Meyers DN
- Huang S
- Turner A
- Shenava V
- Wallace M
- Orwoll E
- Park D
- Ambrose CG
- Nagamani SC
- Heaney JD
- Lee BH
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1172/JCI170369
keywords:
- Animals
- Female
- Male
- Mice
- Cell Differentiation
- MAP Kinase Signaling System
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Mutation
- "Osteoblasts/metabolism, pathology"
- Osteogenesis/genetics
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/genetics, pathology, metabolism"
- "SOX9 Transcription Factor/genetics, metabolism"
- "Stem Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Extracellular Signal-Regulated MAP Kinases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The IFITM5 mutation in osteogenesis imperfecta type V is associated with an ERK/SOX9-dependent osteoprogenitor differentiation defect.
**Authors:** Marom R, Song IW, Busse EC, Washington ME, Berrier AS, Rossi VC, Ortinau L, Jeong Y, Jiang MM, Dawson BC, Adeyeye M, Leynes C, Lietman CD, Stroup BM, Batkovskyte D, Jain M, Chen Y, Cela R, Castellon A, Tran AA, Lorenzo I, Meyers DN, Huang S, Turner A, Shenava V, Wallace M, Orwoll E, Park D, Ambrose CG, Nagamani SC, Heaney JD, Lee BH
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI170369](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI170369)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2024 Jun 17;134(15):e170369. doi: 10.1172/JCI170369.

The IFITM5 mutation in osteogenesis imperfecta type V is associated with an
ERK/SOX9-dependent osteoprogenitor differentiation defect.

Marom R(1)(2), Song IW(1), Busse EC(1)(3), Washington ME(1), Berrier AS(1),
Rossi VC(1)(2), Ortinau L(1), Jeong Y(1), Jiang MM(1), Dawson BC(1), Adeyeye
M(1)(4), Leynes C(1), Lietman CD(1), Stroup BM(1), Batkovskyte D(1), Jain M(1),
Chen Y(1), Cela R(1), Castellon A(1), Tran AA(1), Lorenzo I(1), Meyers DN(5),
Huang S(6), Turner A(1)(2), Shenava V(7), Wallace M(8), Orwoll E(9), Park D(1),
Ambrose CG(5), Nagamani SC(1)(2), Heaney JD(1), Lee BH(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA.
(3)Medical Scientist Training Program, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas, USA.
(4)Medical Scientist Training Program, UT Health Houston MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(5)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, McGovern Medical School at UT Health,
Houston, Texas, USA.
(6)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, and Huffington Department of
Education, Innovation, and Technology, Advanced Technology Cores, and.
(7)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas,
USA.
(8)Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Children's
Hospital and Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.
(9)Department of Medicine, Bone and Mineral Unit, Oregon Health and Science
University, Portland, Oregon, USA.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) type V is the second most common form of OI,
distinguished by hyperplastic callus formation and calcification of the
interosseous membranes, in addition to the bone fragility. It is caused by a
recurrent, dominant pathogenic variant (c.-14C>T) in interferon-induced
transmembrane protein 5 (IFITM5). Here, we generated a conditional
Rosa26-knockin mouse model to study the mechanistic consequences of the
recurrent mutation. Expression of the mutant Ifitm5 in osteo-chondroprogenitor
or chondrogenic cells resulted in low bone mass and growth retardation. Mutant
limbs showed impaired endochondral ossification, cartilage overgrowth, and
abnormal growth plate architecture. The cartilage phenotype correlates with the
pathology reported in patients with OI type V. Surprisingly, expression of
mutant Ifitm5 in mature osteoblasts caused no obvious skeletal abnormalities. In
contrast, earlier expression in osteo-chondroprogenitors was associated with an
increase in the skeletal progenitor cell population within the periosteum.
Lineage tracing showed that chondrogenic cells expressing the mutant Ifitm5 had
decreased differentiation into osteoblastic cells in diaphyseal bone. Moreover,
mutant IFITM5 disrupted early skeletal homeostasis in part by activating ERK
signaling and downstream SOX9 protein, and inhibition of these pathways
partially rescued the phenotype in mutant animals. These data identify the
contribution of a signaling defect altering osteo-chondroprogenitor
differentiation as a driver in the pathogenesis of OI type V.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI170369
PMCID: PMC11290974
PMID: 38885336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared
that no conflict of interest exists.
