---
reference_id: "PMID:9718341"
title: "Comprehensive human genetic maps: individual and sex-specific variation in recombination."
authors:
- Broman KW
- Murray JC
- Sheffield VC
- White RL
- Weber JL
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1086/302011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comprehensive human genetic maps: individual and sex-specific variation in recombination.
**Authors:** Broman KW, Murray JC, Sheffield VC, White RL, Weber JL
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1086/302011](https://doi.org/10.1086/302011)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1998 Sep;63(3):861-9. doi: 10.1086/302011.

Comprehensive human genetic maps: individual and sex-specific variation in 
recombination.

Broman KW(1), Murray JC, Sheffield VC, White RL, Weber JL.

Author information:
(1)Marshfield Medical Research Foundation, Marshfield, WI 54449, USA. 
BromanK@cmg.mfldclin.edu

Comprehensive human genetic maps were constructed on the basis of nearly 1 
million genotypes from eight CEPH families; they incorporated >8,000 short 
tandem-repeat polymorphisms (STRPs), primarily from Généthon, the Cooperative 
Human Linkage Center, the Utah Marker Development Group, and the Marshfield 
Medical Research Foundation. As part of the map building process, 0.08% of the 
genotypes that resulted in tight double recombinants and that largely, if not 
entirely, represent genotyping errors, mutations, or gene-conversion events were 
removed. The total female, male, and sex-averaged lengths of the final maps were 
44, 27, and 35 morgans, respectively. Numerous (267) sets of STRPs were 
identified that represented the exact same loci yet were developed independently 
and had different primer pairs. The distributions of the total number of 
recombination events per gamete, among the eight mothers of the CEPH families, 
were significantly different, and this variation was not due to maternal age. 
The female:male ratio of genetic distance varied across individual chromosomes 
in a remarkably consistent fashion, with peaks at the centromeres of all 
metacentric chromosomes. The new linkage maps plus much additional information, 
including a query system for use in the construction of reliably ordered maps 
for selected subsets of markers, are available from the Marshfield Website.

DOI: 10.1086/302011
PMCID: PMC1377399
PMID: 9718341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]