---
reference_id: "PMID:12293697"
title: "[Plasmodium falciparum malaria: epidemiology and clinical features at Tarapoto Hospital]."
authors:
- Calderon J
- Rodriguez J
- Romero D
journal: Rev Med IPSS
year: '1997'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Plasmodium falciparum malaria: epidemiology and clinical features at Tarapoto Hospital].
**Authors:** Calderon J, Rodriguez J, Romero D
**Journal:** Rev Med IPSS (1997)

## Content

1. Rev Med IPSS. 1997 Jan-Jun;6(1-2):65-8.

[Plasmodium falciparum malaria: epidemiology and clinical features at Tarapoto 
Hospital].

[Article in Spanish]

Calderon J, Rodriguez J, Romero D.

PIP: A retrospective study was conducted of the clinical records of 41 patients 
discharged from a hospital in Tarapoto, Peru, between August 1992 and June 1996 
following treatment for Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Patients ranged in age 
from 18 to 65 years; 25 were male. The cases were uniformly distributed 
throughout the year. The duration of illness averaged 11 days. At admission, 40 
patients had fever, 36 had shaking chills, 29 had headache, 21 had nausea and 
vomiting, 21 had hyporexia, 15 had pallor, and 13 had splenomegaly. 3 of the 16 
women were pregnant. 7 patients reported a history of malaria. The admission 
diagnosis was malaria in 33 cases. 31 patients were treated with chloroquine; 18 
were subsequently treated with pyrimethamine-sulfadoxin and 1 received 
doxycycline. No cases of grave illness or death occurred. The increasing 
presence of Plasmodium falciparum malaria in the Peruvian lowlands should 
promote review of the adequacy of control programs.

PMID: 12293697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]