---
reference_id: "PMID:31729208"
title: "How does diabetes type 1 affects immune response to hepatitis B virus vaccine in pediatric population? Evaluation of a booster dose in unresponsive subjects with type 1 diabetes."
authors:
- Silvestri F
- Tromba V
- Mazzotta I
- Costantino F
journal: Minerva Pediatr (Torino)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.23736/S2724-5276.19.05678-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# How does diabetes type 1 affects immune response to hepatitis B virus vaccine in pediatric population? Evaluation of a booster dose in unresponsive subjects with type 1 diabetes.
**Authors:** Silvestri F, Tromba V, Mazzotta I, Costantino F
**Journal:** Minerva Pediatr (Torino) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.23736/S2724-5276.19.05678-0](https://doi.org/10.23736/S2724-5276.19.05678-0)

## Content

1. Minerva Pediatr (Torino). 2023 Dec;75(6):822-827. doi: 
10.23736/S2724-5276.19.05678-0. Epub 2019 Nov 11.

How does diabetes type 1 affects immune response to hepatitis B virus vaccine in 
pediatric population? Evaluation of a booster dose in unresponsive subjects with 
type 1 diabetes.

Silvestri F(1), Tromba V(2), Mazzotta I(2), Costantino F(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy - 
francesca.silvestri89@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Hepatitis B virus (HBV) vaccine reduced the incidence of Hepatitis B 
worldwide. Genetic variability, by the presence of specific haplotypes of HLA 
system (HLA-DR3, HLA-DR4), influences the response to the vaccination. Subjects 
affected by type 1 diabetes (T1D), contrary to non-diabetics, have a high 
prevalence of Hepatitis B.
METHODS: The objective of the study was to evaluate anti-HBs antigen 
(anti-HBsAg) antibody (Ab) in a group of 201 children (age range: 2-18 years), 
regularly vaccinated against HBV according to the national vaccination schedule. 
Patients with anti-HBs Ab≥10 mIU/mL have been defined "responders" and those 
with anti-HBs Ab<10mIU/mL have been defined "non-responders." The possible 
association between the T1D and a low immune response to the vaccine has been 
subsequently valued. Besides the presence of T1D, other possible influential 
variables have been studied: sex, age, presence of celiac disease and 
Hashimoto's thyroiditis, intervening years from the diagnosis of diabetes and 
presence/absence of diabetic ketoacidosis at time of diagnosis.
RESULTS: Among the 201 subjects with T1D, 90 (44.8%) were responders, while 111 
(55.2%) were non-responders; among the 145 subjects without T1D, 86 (59.3%) were 
responders and 59 (40.7%) non-responders. We invited "Subjects with T1D 
non-responders" to undergo a booster dose of the same vaccine. Of these, 21 
refused the booster, reducing the sample to 90 patients. After 4 weeks from the 
booster dose 81 patients showed seroconversion ("false non-responders"), and 9 
did not ("true non-responders").
CONCLUSIONS: After the booster dose, immune response in our cross-section has 
been similar to general population. Given the high frequency of "false 
non-responders" anti-HBsAg Ab should be tested in T1D patients and a booster 
dose should be administrated in non-responders.

DOI: 10.23736/S2724-5276.19.05678-0
PMID: 31729208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]