---
reference_id: "PMID:3967850"
title: Hepatitis B virus DNA in serum from patients with acute hepatitis B.
authors:
- Krogsgaard K
- Kryger P
- Aldershvile J
- Andersson P
- Brechot C
journal: Hepatology
year: '1985'
doi: 10.1002/hep.1840050104
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis B virus DNA in serum from patients with acute hepatitis B.
**Authors:** Krogsgaard K, Kryger P, Aldershvile J, Andersson P, Brechot C
**Journal:** Hepatology (1985)
**DOI:** [10.1002/hep.1840050104](https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.1840050104)

## Content

1. Hepatology. 1985 Jan-Feb;5(1):10-3. doi: 10.1002/hep.1840050104.

Hepatitis B virus DNA in serum from patients with acute hepatitis B.

Krogsgaard K, Kryger P, Aldershvile J, Andersson P, Brechot C.

Sera from 77 consecutive patients with acute type B hepatitis were examined for 
hepatitis B virus DNA (HBV DNA) by a spot hybridization method. The median 
follow-up time was 8 months (range, 1 week to 3 years). HBV DNA was detected in 
26 (34%) patients on admission to the hospital. A significant positive 
correlation was found between short duration of symptoms and the presence of HBV 
DNA (p less than 0.025). Twenty-four (46%) of 52 HBeAg-positive patients were 
HBV DNA positive compared to 2 HBV DNA-positive patients of 25 HBeAg-negative 
patients (8%) (p less than 0.001). Four HBeAg-negative patients had serum HBV 
DNA initially or during follow-up; three had anti-HBe. Six of 77 patients with 
acute type B hepatitis (8%) became chronic HBsAg carriers, and HBV DNA was 
detectable from 5 months to more than 3 years after onset of symptoms. The 
presence of serum HBV DNA for more than 8 weeks after initial symptoms may 
predict development of a chronic HBsAg carrier state. In none of the chronic 
carriers was serum HBV DNA present after clearing of HBeAg.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.1840050104
PMID: 3967850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]