---
reference_id: "PMID:20605796"
title: Wild-type and brachyolmia-causing mutant TRPV4 channels respond directly to stretch force.
authors:
- Loukin S
- Zhou X
- Su Z
- Saimi Y
- Kung C
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.143370
keywords:
- Animals
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/genetics, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Genetic Diseases, Inborn/genetics, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Oocytes
- "Phospholipases A2/genetics, metabolism"
- Rats
- "TRPV Cation Channels/genetics, metabolism"
- Weight-Bearing
- Xenopus
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wild-type and brachyolmia-causing mutant TRPV4 channels respond directly to stretch force.
**Authors:** Loukin S, Zhou X, Su Z, Saimi Y, Kung C
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.143370](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.143370)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Aug 27;285(35):27176-27181. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.143370.
Epub  2010 Jul 6.

Wild-type and brachyolmia-causing mutant TRPV4 channels respond directly to 
stretch force.

Loukin S(1), Zhou X(2), Su Z(2), Saimi Y(2), Kung C(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 
53706. Electronic address: shloukin@wisc.edu.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 
53706.
(3)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 
53706; Department of Genetics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 
53706.

Whether animal ion channels functioning as mechanosensors are directly activated 
by stretch force or indirectly by ligands produced by the stretch is a crucial 
question. TRPV4, a key molecular model, can be activated by hypotonicity, but 
the mechanism of activation is unclear. One model has this channel being 
activated by a downstream product of phospholipase A(2), relegating 
mechanosensitivity to the enzymes or their regulators. We expressed rat TRPV4 in 
Xenopus oocytes and repeatedly examined >200 excised patches bathed in a simple 
buffer. We found that TRPV4 can be activated by tens of mm Hg pipette suctions 
with open probability rising with suction even in the presence of relevant 
enzyme inhibitors. Mechanosensitivity of TRPV4 provides the simplest explanation 
of its various force-related physiological roles, one of which is in the sensing 
of weight load during bone development. Gain-of-function mutants cause heritable 
skeletal dysplasias in human. We therefore examined the brachyolmia-causing 
R616Q gain-of-function channel and found increased whole-cell current densities 
compared with wild-type channels. Single-channel analysis revealed that R616Q 
channels maintain mechanosensitivity but have greater constitutive activity and 
no change in unitary conductance or rectification.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.143370
PMCID: PMC2930716
PMID: 20605796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]