---
reference_id: "PMID:17304052"
title: Development of a newborn screening follow-up algorithm for the diagnosis of isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency.
authors:
- Oglesbee D
- He M
- Majumder N
- Vockley J
- Ahmad A
- Angle B
- Burton B
- Charrow J
- Ensenauer R
- Ficicioglu CH
- Keppen LD
- Marsden D
- Tortorelli S
- Hahn SH
- Matern D
journal: Genet Med
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1097/gim.0b013e31802f78d6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Development of a newborn screening follow-up algorithm for the diagnosis of isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency.
**Authors:** Oglesbee D, He M, Majumder N, Vockley J, Ahmad A, Angle B, Burton B, Charrow J, Ensenauer R, Ficicioglu CH, Keppen LD, Marsden D, Tortorelli S, Hahn SH, Matern D
**Journal:** Genet Med (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1097/gim.0b013e31802f78d6](https://doi.org/10.1097/gim.0b013e31802f78d6)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2007 Feb;9(2):108-16. doi: 10.1097/gim.0b013e31802f78d6.

Development of a newborn screening follow-up algorithm for the diagnosis of 
isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency.

Oglesbee D(1), He M, Majumder N, Vockley J, Ahmad A, Angle B, Burton B, Charrow 
J, Ensenauer R, Ficicioglu CH, Keppen LD, Marsden D, Tortorelli S, Hahn SH, 
Matern D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic College of 
Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

PURPOSE: Isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency is a defect in valine 
metabolism and was first reported in a child with cardiomyopathy, anemia, and 
secondary carnitine deficiency. We identified 13 isobutyryl-CoA 
dehydrogenase-deficient patients through newborn screening due to an elevation 
of C4-acylcarnitine in dried blood spots. Because C4-acylcarnitine represents 
both isobutyryl- and butyrylcarnitine, elevations are not specific for 
isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency but are also observed in short-chain 
acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency. To delineate the correct diagnosis, we have 
developed a follow-up algorithm for abnormal C4-acylcarnitine newborn screening 
results based on the comparison of biomarkers for both conditions.
METHODS: Fibroblast cultures were established from infants with C4-acylcarnitine 
elevations, and the analysis of in vitro acylcarnitine profiles provided 
confirmation of either isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase or short-chain acyl-CoA 
dehydrogenase deficiency. Isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency was further 
confirmed by molecular genetic analysis of the gene encoding isobutyryl-CoA 
dehydrogenase (ACAD8). Plasma acylcarnitines, urine acylglycines, organic acids, 
and urine acylcarnitine results were compared between isobutyryl-CoA 
dehydrogenase- and short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase-deficient patients.
RESULTS: Quantification of C4-acylcarnitine in plasma and urine as well as 
ethylmalonic acid in urine allows the differentiation of isobutyryl-CoA 
dehydrogenase-deficient from short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase-deficient cases. 
In nine unrelated patients with isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, 10 
missense mutations were identified in ACAD8. To date, 10 of the 13 
isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase-deficient patients remain asymptomatic, two were 
lost to follow-up, and one patient required frequent hospitalizations due to 
emesis and dehydration but is developing normally at 5 years of age.
CONCLUSION: Although the natural history of isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase 
deficiency must be further defined, we have developed an algorithm for rapid 
laboratory evaluation of neonates with an isolated elevation of C4-acylcarnitine 
identified through newborn screening.

DOI: 10.1097/gim.0b013e31802f78d6
PMID: 17304052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]