---
reference_id: "PMID:32584970"
title: "Genomic and epigenomic insights into the origin, pathogenesis, and clinical behavior of mantle cell lymphoma subtypes."
authors:
- Nadeu F
- Martin-Garcia D
- Clot G
- Díaz-Navarro A
- Duran-Ferrer M
- Navarro A
- Vilarrasa-Blasi R
- Kulis M
- Royo R
- Gutiérrez-Abril J
- Valdés-Mas R
- López C
- Chapaprieta V
- Puiggros M
- Castellano G
- Costa D
- Aymerich M
- Jares P
- Espinet B
- Muntañola A
- Ribera-Cortada I
- Siebert R
- Colomer D
- Torrents D
- Gine E
- López-Guillermo A
- Küppers R
- Martin-Subero JI
- Puente XS
- Beà S
- Campo E
journal: Blood
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1182/blood.2020005289
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Cell Proliferation
- Cyclin D1/genetics
- DNA Methylation
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Gene Rearrangement
- Genomics
- Humans
- Immunoglobulins/genetics
- "Lymphoma, Mantle-Cell/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genomic and epigenomic insights into the origin, pathogenesis, and clinical behavior of mantle cell lymphoma subtypes.
**Authors:** Nadeu F, Martin-Garcia D, Clot G, Díaz-Navarro A, Duran-Ferrer M, Navarro A, Vilarrasa-Blasi R, Kulis M, Royo R, Gutiérrez-Abril J, Valdés-Mas R, López C, Chapaprieta V, Puiggros M, Castellano G, Costa D, Aymerich M, Jares P, Espinet B, Muntañola A, Ribera-Cortada I, Siebert R, Colomer D, Torrents D, Gine E, López-Guillermo A, Küppers R, Martin-Subero JI, Puente XS, Beà S, Campo E
**Journal:** Blood (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood.2020005289](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.2020005289)

## Content

1. Blood. 2020 Sep 17;136(12):1419-1432. doi: 10.1182/blood.2020005289.

Genomic and epigenomic insights into the origin, pathogenesis, and clinical 
behavior of mantle cell lymphoma subtypes.

Nadeu F(1)(2), Martin-Garcia D(1)(2), Clot G(1)(2), Díaz-Navarro A(2)(3), 
Duran-Ferrer M(1), Navarro A(1)(2), Vilarrasa-Blasi R(1), Kulis M(1), Royo R(4), 
Gutiérrez-Abril J(3), Valdés-Mas R(3), López C(1)(5), Chapaprieta V(1), Puiggros 
M(4), Castellano G(6), Costa D(7), Aymerich M(1)(2)(7), Jares P(1)(7)(8), 
Espinet B(9), Muntañola A(10), Ribera-Cortada I(7)(11), Siebert R(5), Colomer 
D(1)(2)(7)(8), Torrents D(4), Gine E(2)(7), López-Guillermo A(1)(2)(7)(8), 
Küppers R(12)(13), Martin-Subero JI(1)(2)(8)(14), Puente XS(2)(3), Beà 
S(1)(2)(7)(8), Campo E(1)(2)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 
Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Cáncer, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Instituto Universitario de 
Oncología, Universidad de Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain.
(4)Barcelona Supercomputing Center, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Institute of Human Genetics, Ulm University and Ulm University Medical 
Center, Ulm, Germany.
(6)Unitat de Genòmica, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Hospital Clínic of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Departament de Fonaments Clinics, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(9)Laboratori de Citogenètica Molecular, Servei de Patologia, Hospital del Mar, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(10)Servei d'Hematologia, Hospital Mútua de Terrassa, Terrassa, Spain.
(11)Hospital Nostra Senyora de Meritxell, Escaldes-Engordany, Andorra la Vella, 
Andorra.
(12)Institute of Cell Biology (Cancer Research), University of Duisburg-Essen, 
Essen, Germany.
(13)German Consortium for Cancer Research, Heidelberg, Germany; and.
(14)Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats, Barcelona, Spain.

Comment in
    Blood. 2020 Sep 17;136(12):1378-1379. doi: 10.1182/blood.2020006581.

Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is a mature B-cell neoplasm initially driven by CCND1 
rearrangement with 2 molecular subtypes, conventional MCL (cMCL) and leukemic 
non-nodal MCL (nnMCL), that differ in their clinicobiological behavior. To 
identify the genetic and epigenetic alterations determining this diversity, we 
used whole-genome (n = 61) and exome (n = 21) sequencing (74% cMCL, 26% nnMCL) 
combined with transcriptome and DNA methylation profiles in the context of 5 MCL 
reference epigenomes. We identified that open and active chromatin at the major 
translocation cluster locus might facilitate the t(11;14)(q13;32), which 
modifies the 3-dimensional structure of the involved regions. This translocation 
is mainly acquired in precursor B cells mediated by recombination-activating 
genes in both MCL subtypes, whereas in 8% of cases the translocation occurs in 
mature B cells mediated by activation-induced cytidine deaminase. We identified 
novel recurrent MCL drivers, including CDKN1B, SAMHD1, BCOR, SYNE1, HNRNPH1, 
SMARCB1, and DAZAP1. Complex structural alterations emerge as a relevant early 
oncogenic mechanism in MCL, targeting key driver genes. Breakage-fusion-bridge 
cycles and translocations activated oncogenes (BMI1, MIR17HG, TERT, MYC, and 
MYCN), generating gene amplifications and remodeling regulatory regions. cMCL 
carried significant higher numbers of structural variants, copy number 
alterations, and driver changes than nnMCL, with exclusive alterations of ATM in 
cMCL, whereas TP53 and TERT alterations were slightly enriched in nnMCL. Several 
drivers had prognostic impact, but only TP53 and MYC aberrations added value 
independently of genomic complexity. An increasing genomic complexity, together 
with the presence of breakage-fusion-bridge cycles and high DNA methylation 
changes related to the proliferative cell history, defines patients with 
different clinical evolution.

© 2020 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.2020005289
PMCID: PMC7498364
PMID: 32584970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: E.C. is named 
inventor on 2 patents filed by the National Institutes of Health, National 
Cancer Institute: “Methods for selecting and treating lymphoma types,” licensed 
to NanoString Technologies, and “Evaluation of mantle cell lymphoma and methods 
related thereof.” X.S.P. has ownership interest in DREAMgenics. The remaining 
authors declare no competing financial interests.