---
reference_id: "PMID:23332916"
title: Loss of function of glucocerebrosidase GBA2 is responsible for motor neuron defects in hereditary spastic paraplegia.
authors:
- Martin E
- Schüle R
- Smets K
- Rastetter A
- Boukhris A
- Loureiro JL
- Gonzalez MA
- Mundwiller E
- Deconinck T
- Wessner M
- Jornea L
- Oteyza AC
- Durr A
- Martin JJ
- Schöls L
- Mhiri C
- Lamari F
- Züchner S
- De Jonghe P
- Kabashi E
- Brice A
- Stevanin G
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.11.021
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Animals
- Brain/pathology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Family
- Female
- Glucosylceramidase
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Motor Neurons/pathology
- Mutation/genetics
- Neuroimaging
- Pedigree
- "Spastic Paraplegia, Hereditary/enzymology, genetics"
- Young Adult
- Zebrafish
- Zebrafish Proteins/genetics
- beta-Glucosidase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of function of glucocerebrosidase GBA2 is responsible for motor neuron defects in hereditary spastic paraplegia.
**Authors:** Martin E, Schüle R, Smets K, Rastetter A, Boukhris A, Loureiro JL, Gonzalez MA, Mundwiller E, Deconinck T, Wessner M, Jornea L, Oteyza AC, Durr A, Martin JJ, Schöls L, Mhiri C, Lamari F, Züchner S, De Jonghe P, Kabashi E, Brice A, Stevanin G
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.11.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.11.021)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Feb 7;92(2):238-44. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.11.021. Epub
 2013 Jan 17.

Loss of function of glucocerebrosidase GBA2 is responsible for motor neuron 
defects in hereditary spastic paraplegia.

Martin E(1), Schüle R, Smets K, Rastetter A, Boukhris A, Loureiro JL, Gonzalez 
MA, Mundwiller E, Deconinck T, Wessner M, Jornea L, Oteyza AC, Durr A, Martin 
JJ, Schöls L, Mhiri C, Lamari F, Züchner S, De Jonghe P, Kabashi E, Brice A, 
Stevanin G.

Author information:
(1)Unité Mixte de Recherche S975, Centre de Recherche de l'Institut du Cerveau 
et de la Moelle Epinière, Pitie-Salpêtrière Hospital, Université Pierre et Marie 
Curie (Paris 6), Paris, France.

Spastic paraplegia 46 refers to a locus mapped to chromosome 9 that accounts for 
a complicated autosomal-recessive form of hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP). 
With next-generation sequencing in three independent families, we identified 
four different mutations in GBA2 (three truncating variants and one missense 
variant), which were found to cosegregate with the disease and were absent in 
controls. GBA2 encodes a microsomal nonlysosomal glucosylceramidase that 
catalyzes the conversion of glucosylceramide to free glucose and ceramide and 
the hydrolysis of bile acid 3-O-glucosides. The missense variant was also found 
at the homozygous state in a simplex subject in whom no residual 
glucocerebrosidase activity of GBA2 could be evidenced in blood cells, opening 
the way to a possible measurement of this enzyme activity in clinical practice. 
The overall phenotype was a complex HSP with mental impairment, cataract, and 
hypogonadism in males associated with various degrees of corpus callosum and 
cerebellar atrophy on brain imaging. Antisense morpholino oligonucleotides 
targeting the zebrafish GBA2 orthologous gene led to abnormal motor behavior and 
axonal shortening/branching of motoneurons that were rescued by the human 
wild-type mRNA but not by applying the same mRNA containing the missense 
mutation. This study highlights the role of ceramide metabolism in HSP 
pathology.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.11.021
PMCID: PMC3567271
PMID: 23332916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]