---
reference_id: "PMID:38791244"
title: Peripheral Blood Gene Expression Profiling Reveals Molecular Pathways Associated with Cervical Artery Dissection.
authors:
- Shlapakova PS
- Dobrynina LA
- Kalashnikova LA
- Gubanova MV
- Danilova MS
- Gnedovskaya EV
- Grigorenko AP
- Gusev FE
- Manakhov AD
- Rogaev EI
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25105205
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Gene Expression Profiling/methods
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Transcriptome/genetics
- Vertebral Artery Dissection/genetics
- Case-Control Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peripheral Blood Gene Expression Profiling Reveals Molecular Pathways Associated with Cervical Artery Dissection.
**Authors:** Shlapakova PS, Dobrynina LA, Kalashnikova LA, Gubanova MV, Danilova MS, Gnedovskaya EV, Grigorenko AP, Gusev FE, Manakhov AD, Rogaev EI
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25105205](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25105205)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 May 10;25(10):5205. doi: 10.3390/ijms25105205.

Peripheral Blood Gene Expression Profiling Reveals Molecular Pathways Associated 
with Cervical Artery Dissection.

Shlapakova PS(1), Dobrynina LA(1), Kalashnikova LA(1), Gubanova MV(1), Danilova 
MS(1), Gnedovskaya EV(1), Grigorenko AP(2), Gusev FE(2)(3), Manakhov AD(3)(4), 
Rogaev EI(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Third Neurological Department, Research Center of Neurology, Moscow 125367, 
Russia.
(2)Department of Genomics and Human Genetics, Laboratory of Evolutionary 
Genomics, Vavilov Institute of General Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Moscow 119333, Russia.
(3)Department of Genetics, Center for Genetics and Life Science, Sirius 
University of Science and Technology, Sochi 354340, Russia.
(4)Center for Genetics and Genetic Technologies, Faculty of Biology, Lomonosov 
Moscow State University, Moscow 119192, Russia.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, UMass Chan Medical School, 222 Maple Ave, 
Reed-Rose-Gordon Building, Shrewsbury, MA 01545, USA.

Cervical artery dissection (CeAD) is the primary cause of ischemic stroke in 
young adults. Monogenic heritable connective tissue diseases account for fewer 
than 5% of cases of CeAD. The remaining sporadic cases have known risk factors. 
The clinical, radiological, and histological characteristics of systemic 
vasculopathy and undifferentiated connective tissue dysplasia are present in up 
to 70% of individuals with sporadic CeAD. Genome-wide association studies 
identified CeAD-associated genetic variants in the non-coding genomic regions 
that may impact the gene transcription and RNA processing. However, global gene 
expression profile analysis has not yet been carried out for CeAD patients. We 
conducted bulk RNA sequencing and differential gene expression analysis to 
investigate the expression profile of protein-coding genes in the peripheral 
blood of 19 CeAD patients and 18 healthy volunteers. This was followed by 
functional annotation, heatmap clustering, reports on gene-disease associations 
and protein-protein interactions, as well as gene set enrichment analysis. We 
found potential correlations between CeAD and the dysregulation of genes linked 
to nucleolar stress, senescence-associated secretory phenotype, mitochondrial 
malfunction, and epithelial-mesenchymal plasticity.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25105205
PMCID: PMC11121660
PMID: 38791244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.