---
reference_id: "PMID:11723115"
title: Expression of the osteoblast differentiation factor RUNX2 (Cbfa1/AML3/Pebp2alpha A) is inhibited by tumor necrosis factor-alpha.
authors:
- Gilbert L
- He X
- Farmer P
- Rubin J
- Drissi H
- van Wijnen AJ
- Lian JB
- Stein GS
- Nanes MS
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M106339200
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expression of the osteoblast differentiation factor RUNX2 (Cbfa1/AML3/Pebp2alpha A) is inhibited by tumor necrosis factor-alpha.
**Authors:** Gilbert L, He X, Farmer P, Rubin J, Drissi H, van Wijnen AJ, Lian JB, Stein GS, Nanes MS
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M106339200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M106339200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jan 25;277(4):2695-701. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M106339200. Epub
2001  Nov 26.

Expression of the osteoblast differentiation factor RUNX2 (Cbfa1/AML3/Pebp2alpha 
A) is inhibited by tumor necrosis factor-alpha.

Gilbert L(1), He X, Farmer P, Rubin J, Drissi H, van Wijnen AJ, Lian JB, Stein 
GS, Nanes MS.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Emory University School of Medicine 
and Atlanta Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Atlanta, Georgia 30033, USA.

The transcription factor RUNX2 (Cbfa1/AML3/Pebp2alphaA) is a critical regulator 
of osteoblast differentiation. We investigated the effect of the inflammatory 
cytokine tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF) on the expression of RUNX2 because 
TNF is known to inhibit differentiation of osteoblasts from pluripotent 
progenitor cells. TNF treatment of fetal calvaria precursor cells or MC3T3-E1 
clonal pre-osteoblastic cells caused a dose-dependent suppression of RUNX2 
steady state mRNA as measured by reverse transcription-PCR. The IC(50) for TNF 
inhibition was 0.6 ng/ml. TNF suppression of RUNX2 mRNA was confirmed using 
Northern analysis. The effect of TNF was studied using isoform-specific primers 
that flanked unique regions of two major RUNX2 isoforms. TNF suppressed 
expression of the mRNA coding for the shorter MRIPV isoform by >90% while 
inhibiting expression of the mRNA for the longer MASNS isoform by 50%. RUNX2 
nuclear content was evaluated by electrophoretic mobility shift assay using a 
rat osteocalcin promoter binding sequence as probe and by Western analysis. TNF 
reduced nuclear RUNX2 protein. Inhibition of new protein synthesis with 
cycloheximide failed to prevent TNF inhibition of RUNX2 mRNA, suggesting that a 
newly translated protein did not mediate the TNF effect. RUNX2 mRNA half-life 
was 1.8 h and reduced to 0.9 h by TNF. The effect of TNF on RUNX2 gene 
transcription was evaluated using a 0.6-kb RUNX2 promoter-luciferase reporter in 
MC3T3-E1 cells. TNF caused a dose-dependent inhibition of transcription to 50% 
of control values. The inhibitory effect of TNF was preserved with deletions to 
nucleotide -108 upstream of the translational start site; however, localization 
downstream of nucleotide -108 was obscured by loss of basal activity. Our 
results indicate that TNF regulates RUNX2 expression at multiple levels 
including destabilization of mRNA and suppression of transcription. The 
disproportionate inhibition of RUNX2 nuclear protein suggests that additional 
post-transcriptional mechanisms may be occurring. Suppression of RUNX2 by TNF 
may decrease osteoblast differentiation and inhibit bone formation in TNF excess 
states.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M106339200
PMID: 11723115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]