---
reference_id: PMID:8317261
title: "The widespread but silent cerebral mineralization: a case report."
authors:
- Kuchna I
- Laure-Kamionowska M
- Walkiewicz W
journal: Acta Neurobiol Exp (Wars)
year: '1993'
keywords:
- Brain/pathology
- Brain Diseases/pathology
- Calcinosis/pathology
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The widespread but silent cerebral mineralization: a case report.
**Authors:** Kuchna I, Laure-Kamionowska M, Walkiewicz W
**Journal:** Acta Neurobiol Exp (Wars) (1993)

## Content

1. Acta Neurobiol Exp (Wars). 1993;53(1):285-8.

The widespread but silent cerebral mineralization: a case report.

Kuchna I(1), Laure-Kamionowska M, Walkiewicz W.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Neuropathology, Medical Research Centre, Polish 
Academy of Sciences, Warsaw.

We present a sporadic infantile case of primary cerebral mineralization with 
unexpected asymptomatic clinical course. An 11 months old boy with negative 
familial and gestational data developed normally. He died after two days of 
fever and rapid course of cardiorespiratory failure due to pneumonia. 
Parathyroid dysfunction and somatic abnormalities were not evident clinically. 
Neuropathological examination revealed bilateral, diffuse or pericapillary 
calcifications in the striatum, cerebral and cerebellar cortex, dentate nucleus 
and brain stem. The mineralizations were less prominent in the cerebral 
hemispheres than in cerebellum. A diffuse demyelination was seen in the 
cerebellum where calcifications were numerous. We suggest that the intracerebral 
calcifications progressed gradually through a disease course and probably 
started in the cerebellum. We discuss the lack of clinico-pathological 
correlations and the nosologic position of the observed syndrome.

PMID: 8317261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]