---
reference_id: "PMID:35906690"
title: The efficacy and safety of allogeneic stem cell transplantation in Mevalonate Kinase Deficiency.
authors:
- Jeyaratnam J
- Faraci M
- Gennery AR
- Drabko K
- Algeri M
- Morimoto A
- Sirait T
- Lankester AC
- Albert M
- Neven B
- Frenkel J
- EBMT Inborn Errors Working Party
journal: Pediatr Rheumatol Online J
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s12969-022-00716-4
keywords:
- Graft vs Host Disease/etiology
- "Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation/adverse effects, methods"
- Humans
- Male
- Mevalonate Kinase Deficiency/therapy
- Retrospective Studies
- "Transplantation Conditioning/adverse effects, methods"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The efficacy and safety of allogeneic stem cell transplantation in Mevalonate Kinase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Jeyaratnam J, Faraci M, Gennery AR, Drabko K, Algeri M, Morimoto A, Sirait T, Lankester AC, Albert M, Neven B, Frenkel J, EBMT Inborn Errors Working Party
**Journal:** Pediatr Rheumatol Online J (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12969-022-00716-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12969-022-00716-4)

## Content

1. Pediatr Rheumatol Online J. 2022 Jul 29;20(1):56. doi: 
10.1186/s12969-022-00716-4.

The efficacy and safety of allogeneic stem cell transplantation in Mevalonate 
Kinase Deficiency.

Jeyaratnam J(1), Faraci M(2), Gennery AR(3), Drabko K(4), Algeri M(5), Morimoto 
A(6), Sirait T(7), Lankester AC(8), Albert M(9), Neven B(10), Frenkel J(11); 
EBMT Inborn Errors Working Party.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University Medical Center Utrecht, 3584, EA, 
Utrecht, the Netherlands. J.Jeyaratnam@umcutrecht.nl.
(2)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Stem Cell Transplantation, IRCCS Istituto 
G. Gaslini, Genoa, Italy.
(3)Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Newcastle University, and 
Paediatric Haematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant Unit, Great North Children's 
Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(4)Department of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, 
Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland.
(5)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology and Cell and Gene Therapy, 
IRCCS, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Jichi Medical University, Shimotsuke, Japan.
(7)EBMT Data Office, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Immuno-Hematology and Stem Cell 
Transplantation, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Dr. von Hauner Children's Hospital, University 
Hospital, LMU, Munich, Germany.
(10)Unité d'Immuno-hematologie et Rhumatologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital 
Necker-Enfants Malades, assistance publique hopitaux de paris, Paris, France; 
Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, University Medical Center Utrecht, 3584, EA, 
Utrecht, the Netherlands.

OBJECTIVES: Mevalonate kinase deficiency (MKD) is a rare autoinflammatory 
syndrome. Several reports have described allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation in severely affected patients, sometimes with promising results. 
In view of the scarcity of data, this study aims to analyse the efficacy and 
safety of allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) to give a 
more complete overview of this treatment.
METHODS: This multicentre retrospective study on behalf of the European Society 
for Blood and Marrow Transplantation aimed to include all MKD patients who had 
undergone allogeneic HSCT. All centres related to EMBT and centres that have 
reported cases of allogeneic HSCT in the literature were contacted via the EBMT 
data office.
RESULTS: We analyzed 9 patients (5 male). Treosulfan based conditioning was the 
most frequently used conditioning regimen. Engraftment occurred in all but one 
patient. Source of stem cells was cord blood (n = 2), peripheral blood stem 
cells (n = 4) and bone marrow (n = 5). Two patients needed a second 
transplantation due to an incomplete response or primary graft failure. Seven 
patients went into complete remission after stem cell transplantation. At final 
follow-up these patients reported no symptoms of MKD. Four patients suffered 
from grade II-IV acute graft-versus-host disease (GvHD). During follow-up two 
patients died due to transplantation related complications.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, allogeneic stem cell transplantation represents an 
effective treatment for the most severely affected MKD patients. However, 
treatment-related morbidity and mortality are significant. Transplantation may 
be justified in patients with a severe disease course on conservative therapy.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12969-022-00716-4
PMCID: PMC9338460
PMID: 35906690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no conflict of interest.