---
reference_id: "PMID:40911901"
title: "Advancing Preclinical Biology for Ewing Sarcoma: An International Effort."
authors:
- Dela Cruz FS
- Stewart EA
- Surdez D
- Daley JD
- Soragni A
- Tomazou EM
- Alvarez-Perez J
- Feinberg TY
- Amatruda JF
- Ganapathi SS
- Ohm JE
- Heske CM
- Cohen-Gogo S
- Pesic D
- Nash JO
- Shlien A
- Roundhill EA
- Burchill SA
- Crompton BD
- Lawlor ER
- Loeb DM
- Delattre O
- Mora J
- Scotlandi K
- Reed DR
- Grohar PJ
- Grünewald TGP
- Kovar H
- Bailey KM
journal: Mol Cancer Ther
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-25-0428
keywords:
- "Sarcoma, Ewing/pathology"
- Humans
- Animals
- Bone Neoplasms/pathology
- Mice
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Advancing Preclinical Biology for Ewing Sarcoma: An International Effort.
**Authors:** Dela Cruz FS, Stewart EA, Surdez D, Daley JD, Soragni A, Tomazou EM, Alvarez-Perez J, Feinberg TY, Amatruda JF, Ganapathi SS, Ohm JE, Heske CM, Cohen-Gogo S, Pesic D, Nash JO, Shlien A, Roundhill EA, Burchill SA, Crompton BD, Lawlor ER, Loeb DM, Delattre O, Mora J, Scotlandi K, Reed DR, Grohar PJ, Grünewald TGP, Kovar H, Bailey KM
**Journal:** Mol Cancer Ther (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-25-0428](https://doi.org/10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-25-0428)

## Content

1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2026 Jan 2;25(1):48-70. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-25-0428.

Advancing Preclinical Biology for Ewing Sarcoma: An International Effort.

Dela Cruz FS(1), Stewart EA(2)(3), Surdez D(4), Daley JD(5), Soragni A(6),
Tomazou EM(7)(8), Alvarez-Perez J(1), Feinberg TY(1), Amatruda JF(9)(10),
Ganapathi SS(11)(12), Ohm JE(13), Heske CM(14), Cohen-Gogo S(15)(16), Pesic
D(16), Nash JO(16), Shlien A(16), Roundhill EA(17), Burchill SA(17), Crompton
BD(18), Lawlor ER(11)(12), Loeb DM(19)(20), Delattre O(21), Mora J(22),
Scotlandi K(23), Reed DR(1), Grohar PJ(24), Grünewald TGP(25)(26)(27)(28), Kovar
H(7)(29), Bailey KM(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
New York.
(2)Department of Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee.
(3)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee.
(4)Balgrist University Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, University of Zurich
(UZH), Zurich, Switzerland.
(5)University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(6)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine,
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California.
(7)St. Anna Children's Cancer Research Institute, Vienna, Austria.
(8)Medical University of Vienna, Center for Cancer Research, Vienna, Austria.
(9)Cancer and Blood Disease Institute, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, California.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California.
(11)Ben Towne Center for Childhood Cancer and Blood Disorders Research, Seattle
Children's Research Institute, Seattle, Washington.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Seattle Children's Hospital, Fred Hutch Cancer
Center, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(13)Department of Cancer Genetics and Genomics, Roswell Park Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Buffalo, New York.
(14)Pediatric Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland.
(15)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, The Hospital for
Sick Children, Toronto, Canada.
(16)Genetics and Genome Biology Program, The Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, Canada.
(17)Children's Cancer Research Group, Leeds Institute of Medical Research,
University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom.
(18)Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Boston,
Massachusetts.
(19)Department of Pediatrics, Cancer Dormancy Institute, Albert Einstein College
of Medicine, Bronx, New York.
(20)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Cancer Dormancy
Institute, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York.
(21)INSERM U830, Diversity and Plasticity of Childhood Tumors Lab, PSL Research
University, SIREDO Oncology Center, Institut Curie Research Center, Paris,
France.
(22)Pediatric Cancer Center Barcelona (PCCB), Hospital Sant Joan de Déu,
Barcelona, Spain.
(23)Experimental Oncology Laboratory, IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli,
Bologna, Italy.
(24)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Michigan Medical School, Rogel Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(25)Division of Translational Pediatric Sarcoma Research, German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ), German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany.
(26)Hopp Children's Cancer Center (KiTZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(27)National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), NCT Heidelberg, a partnership
between DKFZ and Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(28)Institute of Pathology, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(29)Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Ewing sarcoma is an aggressive bone and soft-tissue cancer affecting adolescents
and young adults. In vitro and in vivo models of Ewing sarcoma have been
instrumental in advancing our understanding of Ewing sarcoma biology and
essential in evaluating potential therapies, particularly for metastatic or
relapsed disease for which effective treatment options remain limited. Through
an international collaborative effort between the Children's Oncology Group Bone
Tumor Committee and the Euro Ewing Consortium, we review the current landscape
of preclinical modeling used in Ewing sarcoma research encompassing both in
vitro (cell lines and tumor organoids) and in vivo (mouse and nonmammalian
xenografts) model systems. We discuss factors that can influence experimental
results, provide testing considerations for both in vitro and in vivo studies,
and descriptions of existing preclinical data repositories. We highlight current
needs in Ewing sarcoma modeling and the importance of enhanced international
cooperative research and patient advocacy efforts which will be critical in
expanding our resources of biologically relevant Ewing sarcoma models to enable
translation of preclinical findings into effective therapeutic strategies for
patients with Ewing sarcoma.

©2025 The Authors; Published by the American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-25-0428
PMCID: PMC12757721
PMID: 40911901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A. Soragni reports grants from NCI during the
conduct of the study, as well as a patent for WO/2022/125585 pending and a
patent for WO/2022/125580 pending. A. Shlien reports other support from NewCode
Oncology outside the submitted work, as well as a patent for An RNA-Based Tumor
Classifier pending to NewCode Oncology. E.R. Lawlor reports grants from NCI,
Cure Childhood Cancer Foundation, and Sam Day Foundation outside the submitted
work. D.R. Reed reports personal fees from Springworks, Eisai, and Recordati
outside the submitted work. P.J. Grohar reports other support from OrphAI
therapeutics outside the submitted work. K.M. Bailey reports other support from
Merck outside the submitted work. No disclosures were reported by the other
authors.
