---
reference_id: "PMID:19257829"
title: Moderate ingestion of alcohol is associated with acute ethanol-induced suppression of circulating CTX in a PTH-independent fashion.
authors:
- Sripanyakorn S
- Jugdaohsingh R
- Mander A
- Davidson SL
- Thompson RP
- Powell JJ
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1359/jbmr.090222
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Moderate ingestion of alcohol is associated with acute ethanol-induced suppression of circulating CTX in a PTH-independent fashion.
**Authors:** Sripanyakorn S, Jugdaohsingh R, Mander A, Davidson SL, Thompson RP, Powell JJ
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1359/jbmr.090222](https://doi.org/10.1359/jbmr.090222)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2009 Aug;24(8):1380-8. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.090222.

Moderate ingestion of alcohol is associated with acute ethanol-induced 
suppression of circulating CTX in a PTH-independent fashion.

Sripanyakorn S(1), Jugdaohsingh R, Mander A, Davidson SL, Thompson RP, Powell 
JJ.

Author information:
(1)Gastrointestinal Laboratory, The Rayne Institute (King's College London), St. 
Thomas' Hospital, London, United Kingdom.

The "J shape" curve linking the risk of poor bone health to alcohol intake is 
now well recognized from epidemiological studies. Ethanol and nonethanol 
components of alcoholic beverages could influence bone remodeling. However, in 
the absence of a solid underlying mechanism, the positive association between 
moderate alcoholic intake and BMD remains questionable because of confounding 
associated social factors. The objective of this work was to characterize the 
short-term effects of moderate alcohol consumption on circulating bone markers, 
especially those involved in bone resorption. Two sequential blood-sampling 
studies were undertaken in fasted healthy volunteers (age, 20-47 yr) over a 6-h 
period using beer of different alcohol levels (<0.05-4.6%), solutions of ethanol 
or orthosilicic acid (two major components of beer), and water +/- calcium 
chloride (positive and negative controls, respectively). Study 1 (24 subjects) 
assessed the effects of the different solutions, whereas study 2 (26 subjects) 
focused on ethanol/beer dose. Using all data in a "mixed effect model," we 
identified the contributions of the individual components of beer, namely 
ethanol, energy, low-dose calcium, and high-dose orthosilicic acid, on acute 
bone resorption. Markers of bone formation were unchanged throughout the study 
for all solutions investigated. In contrast, the bone resorption marker, serum 
carboxy terminal telopeptide of type I collagen (CTX), was significantly reduced 
after ingestion of a 0.6 liters of ethanol solution (>2% ethanol; p <or= 0.01, 
RM-ANOVA), 0.6 liters of beer (<0.05-4.6% ethanol; p < 0.02), or a solution of 
calcium (180 mg calcium; p < 0.001), but only after calcium ingestion was the 
reduction in CTX preceded by a significant fall in serum PTH (p < 0.001). 
Orthosilicic acid had no acute effect. Similar reductions in CTX, from baseline, 
were measured in urine after ingestion of the test solutions; however, the 
biological variability in urine CTX was greater compared with serum CTX. 
Modeling indicated that the major, acute suppressive effects of moderate beer 
ingestion (0.6 liters) on CTX were caused by energy intake in the early phase 
(approximately 0-3 h) and a "nonenergy" ethanol component in the later phase 
(approximately 3 to >6 h). The early effect on bone resorption is well described 
after the intake of energy, mediated by glucagon-like peptide-2, but the late 
effect of moderate alcohol ingestion is novel, seems to be ethanol specific, and 
is mediated in a non-calcitonin- and a non-PTH-dependent fashion, thus providing 
a mechanism for the positive association between moderate alcohol ingestion and 
BMD.

DOI: 10.1359/jbmr.090222
PMCID: PMC2718797
PMID: 19257829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]