---
reference_id: "PMID:24552757"
title: BRAF-mutations in non-small cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Brustugun OT
- Khattak AM
- Trømborg AK
- Beigi M
- Beiske K
- Lund-Iversen M
- Helland Å
journal: Lung Cancer
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.01.023
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/genetics, mortality, pathology"
- ErbB Receptors/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, mortality, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Staging
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- Risk Factors
- "Translocation, Genetic"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BRAF-mutations in non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Brustugun OT, Khattak AM, Trømborg AK, Beigi M, Beiske K, Lund-Iversen M, Helland Å
**Journal:** Lung Cancer (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.01.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.01.023)

## Content

1. Lung Cancer. 2014 Apr;84(1):36-8. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.01.023. Epub
2014  Feb 3.

BRAF-mutations in non-small cell lung cancer.

Brustugun OT(1), Khattak AM(2), Trømborg AK(2), Beigi M(2), Beiske K(2),
Lund-Iversen M(2), Helland Å(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Oslo University Hospital, The Norwegian Radium
Hospital, Oslo, Norway; Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo,
Oslo, Norway. Electronic address: otr@ous-hf.no.
(2)Department of Pathology, Oslo University Hospital, The Norwegian Radium
Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Oncology, Oslo University Hospital, The Norwegian Radium
Hospital, Oslo, Norway; Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo,
Oslo, Norway.

OBJECTIVES: Targeted therapies in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) now also
include inhibitors against mutated BRAF. We present clinicopathological
characteristics of nearly one thousand unselected NSCLC patients tested for the
targetable V600E/K BRAF-mutation.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: NSCLC routinely tested for EGFR-mutations at Oslo
University Hospital in the period February 2011-July 2013 were tested for
V600E/K BRAF-mutations using a PCR-based method.
RESULTS: We found a BRAF-mutation frequency of 1.7% in the total cohort of 979
patients, and 2.3% among 646 adenocarcinomas. One of the BRAF-positive samples
was also KRAS-mutated, and one had an ALK-translocation. None of 231 squamous
cell carcinomas were BRAF-mutated. The proportion of never-smokers among
BRAF-positives was high (29%).
CONCLUSION: BRAF-mutation analysis should be part of the subtyping of
non-squamous NSCLC.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.01.023
PMID: 24552757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
