---
reference_id: "PMID:23532242"
title: "Effect of long-term, low-dose erythromycin on pulmonary exacerbations among patients with non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis: the BLESS randomized controlled trial."
authors:
- Serisier DJ
- Martin ML
- McGuckin MA
- Lourie R
- Chen AC
- Brain B
- Biga S
- Schlebusch S
- Dash P
- Bowler SD
journal: JAMA
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1001/jama.2013.2290
keywords:
- Aged
- "Anti-Bacterial Agents/administration & dosage, pharmacology"
- Bronchiectasis/complications
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Double-Blind Method
- Drug Administration Schedule
- "Drug Resistance, Bacterial"
- "Erythromycin/administration & dosage, pharmacology"
- Female
- Humans
- Lung/physiopathology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Pseudomonas Infections/etiology, prevention & control"
- "Pseudomonas aeruginosa/isolation & purification"
- "Respiratory Tract Infections/etiology, prevention & control"
- Sputum/microbiology
- "Streptococcus/isolation & purification"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of long-term, low-dose erythromycin on pulmonary exacerbations among patients with non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis: the BLESS randomized controlled trial.
**Authors:** Serisier DJ, Martin ML, McGuckin MA, Lourie R, Chen AC, Brain B, Biga S, Schlebusch S, Dash P, Bowler SD
**Journal:** JAMA (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.2013.2290](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2013.2290)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2013 Mar 27;309(12):1260-7. doi: 10.1001/jama.2013.2290.

Effect of long-term, low-dose erythromycin on pulmonary exacerbations among 
patients with non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis: the BLESS randomized 
controlled trial.

Serisier DJ(1), Martin ML, McGuckin MA, Lourie R, Chen AC, Brain B, Biga S, 
Schlebusch S, Dash P, Bowler SD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Level 9, Mater Adult Hospital, Raymond 
Terr, South Brisbane, Queensland 4101, Australia. david.serisier@mater.org.au

Comment in
    JAMA. 2013 Mar 27;309(12):1295-6. doi: 10.1001/jama.2013.2780.

IMPORTANCE: Macrolide antibiotics such as erythromycin may improve clinical 
outcomes in non-cystic fibrosis (CF) bronchiectasis, although associated risks 
of macrolide resistance are poorly defined.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the clinical efficacy and antimicrobial resistance cost 
of low-dose erythromycin given for 12 months to patients with non-CF 
bronchiectasis with a history of frequent pulmonary exacerbations.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Twelve-month, randomized (1:1), double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial of erythromycin in currently nonsmoking, adult patients 
with non-CF bronchiectasis with a history of 2 or more infective exacerbations 
in the preceding year. This Australian study was undertaken between October 2008 
and December 2011 in a university teaching hospital, with participants also 
recruited via respiratory physicians at other centers and from public radio 
advertisements.
INTERVENTIONS: Twice-daily erythromycin ethylsuccinate (400 mg) or matching 
placebo.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The primary outcome was the annualized mean rate of 
protocol-defined pulmonary exacerbations (PDPEs) per patient. Secondary outcomes 
included macrolide resistance in commensal oropharyngeal streptococci and lung 
function.
RESULTS: Six-hundred seventy-nine patients were screened, 117 were randomized 
(58 placebo, 59 erythromycin), and 107 (91.5%) completed the study. Erythromycin 
significantly reduced PDPEs both overall (mean, 1.29 [95% CI, 0.93-1.65] vs 1.97 
[95% CI, 1.45-2.48] per patient per year; incidence rate ratio [IRR], 0.57 [95% 
CI, 0.42-0.77]; P = .003), and in the prespecified subgroup with baseline 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa airway infection (mean difference, 1.32 [95% CI, 
0.19-2.46]; P = .02). Erythromycin reduced 24-hour sputum production (median 
difference, 4.3 g [interquartile range [IQR], 1 to 7.8], P = .01) and attenuated 
lung function decline (mean absolute difference for change in postbronchodilator 
forced expiratory volume in the first second of expiration, 2.2 percent 
predicted [95% CI, 0.1% to 4.3%]; P = .04) compared with placebo. Erythromycin 
increased the proportion of macrolide-resistant oropharyngeal streptococci 
(median change, 27.7% [IQR, 0.04% to 41.1%] vs 0.04% [IQR, -1.6% to 1.5%]; 
difference, 25.5% [IQR,15.0% to 33.7%]; P < .001).
CONCLUSION AND RELEVANCE: Among patients with non-CF bronchiectasis, the 
12-month use of erythromycin compared with placebo resulted in a modest decrease 
in the rate of pulmonary exacerbations and an increased rate of macrolide 
resistance.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: anzctr.org.au Identifier: ACTRN12609000578202.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2013.2290
PMID: 23532242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]