---
reference_id: "PMID:36451280"
title: Predictors of weight loss during the intensive phase of tuberculosis treatment in patients with drug-susceptible pulmonary tuberculosis in South India.
authors:
- Kalva J
- Babu SP
- Narasimhan PB
- Raghupathy K
- Ezhumalai K
- Knudsen S
- Horsburgh CR
- Hochberg N
- Salgame P
- Roy G
- Ellner J
- Sarkar S
journal: J Public Health (Oxf)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/pubmed/fdac141
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predictors of weight loss during the intensive phase of tuberculosis treatment in patients with drug-susceptible pulmonary tuberculosis in South India.
**Authors:** Kalva J, Babu SP, Narasimhan PB, Raghupathy K, Ezhumalai K, Knudsen S, Horsburgh CR, Hochberg N, Salgame P, Roy G, Ellner J, Sarkar S
**Journal:** J Public Health (Oxf) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/pubmed/fdac141](https://doi.org/10.1093/pubmed/fdac141)

## Content

1. J Public Health (Oxf). 2023 Aug 28;45(3):545-552. doi: 10.1093/pubmed/fdac141.

Predictors of weight loss during the intensive phase of tuberculosis treatment 
in patients with drug-susceptible pulmonary tuberculosis in South India.

Kalva J(1), Babu SP(1), Narasimhan PB(1), Raghupathy K(1), Ezhumalai K(1), 
Knudsen S(2), Horsburgh CR(3), Hochberg N(2), Salgame P(4), Roy G(1), Ellner 
J(4), Sarkar S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Preventive and Social Medicine, JIPMER, Puducherry 605006, 
India.
(2)Section of Infectious Diseases, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, 
MA 02118, USA.
(3)School of Public Health, Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Boston University, 
Boston, MA 02118, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ 07102, USA.

BACKGROUND: Tuberculosis (TB) is well-known for causing wasting. Patients on 
treatment gain weight and weight loss is associated with unfavorable treatment 
outcomes. There is limited description of weight loss and its predictors during 
intensive treatment phase. The objective of this study was to assess the 
predictors of weight loss during intensive phase and to see if there is any 
association exists with sputum conversion at the end of intensive phase of 
treatment.
METHODS: Data collected as a part of the prospective TB cohort (Regional 
Prospective Observational Research for TB India Phase 1) conducted in 
Pondicherry, Cuddalore and Viluppuram districts of Tamil Nadu were used for this 
study. Sputum smear and body weight comparison were made in the baseline and at 
the end of second month of treatment.
RESULTS: In all, 726 participants had weight measurements at the two time points 
and 18.7% had weight loss; mean weight lost being 2.3 kg (SD 3.05). Mean weight 
loss was more among males (2.4 kg, SD 3.2), diabetics (2.8 kg, SD 3.9) and 
alcoholics (2.1 kg, SD 2.4). Alcohol consumption was the only predictor of 
weight loss after adjusting for age, diabetes, marital status and BMI (aRR 1.52, 
P 0.02). Weight loss was not associated with sputum conversion at the end of 
second month.
CONCLUSIONS: Alcohol use emerged as the major predictor for weight loss during 
intensive phase.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Faculty 
of Public Health. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/pubmed/fdac141
PMCID: PMC10470329
PMID: 36451280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.