---
reference_id: "PMID:25894502"
title: COPA mutations impair ER-Golgi transport and cause hereditary autoimmune-mediated lung disease and arthritis.
authors:
- Watkin LB
- Jessen B
- Wiszniewski W
- Vece TJ
- Jan M
- Sha Y
- Thamsen M
- Santos-Cortez RL
- Lee K
- Gambin T
- Forbes LR
- Law CS
- Stray-Pedersen A
- Cheng MH
- Mace EM
- Anderson MS
- Liu D
- Tang LF
- Nicholas SK
- Nahmod K
- Makedonas G
- Canter DL
- Kwok PY
- Hicks J
- Jones KD
- Penney S
- Jhangiani SN
- Rosenblum MD
- Dell SD
- Waterfield MR
- Papa FR
- Muzny DM
- Zaitlen N
- Leal SM
- Gonzaga-Jauregui C
- Baylor-Hopkins Center for Mendelian Genomics
- Boerwinkle E
- Eissa NT
- Gibbs RA
- Lupski JR
- Orange JS
- Shum AK
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/ng.3279
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Arthritis/genetics
- Autoimmune Diseases/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- Coatomer Protein/genetics
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
- Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Golgi Apparatus/metabolism
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Infant
- Lod Score
- "Lung Diseases, Interstitial/genetics"
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Pedigree
- Protein Transport
content_type: abstract_only
---

# COPA mutations impair ER-Golgi transport and cause hereditary autoimmune-mediated lung disease and arthritis.
**Authors:** Watkin LB, Jessen B, Wiszniewski W, Vece TJ, Jan M, Sha Y, Thamsen M, Santos-Cortez RL, Lee K, Gambin T, Forbes LR, Law CS, Stray-Pedersen A, Cheng MH, Mace EM, Anderson MS, Liu D, Tang LF, Nicholas SK, Nahmod K, Makedonas G, Canter DL, Kwok PY, Hicks J, Jones KD, Penney S, Jhangiani SN, Rosenblum MD, Dell SD, Waterfield MR, Papa FR, Muzny DM, Zaitlen N, Leal SM, Gonzaga-Jauregui C, Baylor-Hopkins Center for Mendelian Genomics, Boerwinkle E, Eissa NT, Gibbs RA, Lupski JR, Orange JS, Shum AK
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.3279](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.3279)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2015 Jun;47(6):654-60. doi: 10.1038/ng.3279. Epub 2015 Apr 20.

COPA mutations impair ER-Golgi transport and cause hereditary
autoimmune-mediated lung disease and arthritis.

Watkin LB(1), Jessen B(2), Wiszniewski W(3), Vece TJ(4), Jan M(2), Sha Y(5),
Thamsen M(2), Santos-Cortez RL(6), Lee K(6), Gambin T(3), Forbes LR(1), Law
CS(2), Stray-Pedersen A(7), Cheng MH(2), Mace EM(1), Anderson MS(2), Liu D(1),
Tang LF(8), Nicholas SK(1), Nahmod K(1), Makedonas G(1), Canter DL(1), Kwok
PY(9), Hicks J(10), Jones KD(11), Penney S(3), Jhangiani SN(12), Rosenblum
MD(13), Dell SD(14), Waterfield MR(15), Papa FR(2), Muzny DM(12), Zaitlen N(2),
Leal SM(6), Gonzaga-Jauregui C(3); Baylor-Hopkins Center for Mendelian Genomics;
Boerwinkle E(16), Eissa NT(5), Gibbs RA(17), Lupski JR(18), Orange JS(1), Shum
AK(19).

Author information:
(1)1] Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
[2] Texas Children's Hospital Center for Human Immuno-Biology, Houston, Texas,
USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, California, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(6)Center for Statistical Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas,
USA.
(7)1] Texas Children's Hospital Center for Human Immuno-Biology, Houston, Texas,
USA. [2] Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA.
(8)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco,
San Francisco, California, USA.
(9)1] Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA. [2] Department of Dermatology,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.
(10)Department of Pathology, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA.
(11)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, California, USA.
(12)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas,
USA.
(13)Department of Dermatology, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, California, USA.
(14)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.
(15)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, California, USA.
(16)1] Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas, USA. [2] Human Genetics Center and Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Texas-Houston Health Science Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(17)1] Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA. [2] Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(18)1] Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas,
USA. [2] Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA. [3] Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(19)1] Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, California, USA. [2] Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.

Unbiased genetic studies have uncovered surprising molecular mechanisms in human
cellular immunity and autoimmunity. We performed whole-exome sequencing and
targeted sequencing in five families with an apparent mendelian syndrome of
autoimmunity characterized by high-titer autoantibodies, inflammatory arthritis
and interstitial lung disease. We identified four unique deleterious variants in
the COPA gene (encoding coatomer subunit α) affecting the same functional
domain. Hypothesizing that mutant COPA leads to defective intracellular
transport via coat protein complex I (COPI), we show that COPA variants impair
binding to proteins targeted for retrograde Golgi-to-ER transport. Additionally,
expression of mutant COPA results in ER stress and the upregulation of cytokines
priming for a T helper type 17 (TH17) response. Patient-derived CD4(+) T cells
also demonstrate significant skewing toward a TH17 phenotype that is implicated
in autoimmunity. Our findings uncover an unexpected molecular link between a
vesicular transport protein and a syndrome of autoimmunity manifested by lung
and joint disease.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.3279
PMCID: PMC4513663
PMID: 25894502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
