---
reference_id: "PMID:36692560"
title: Estimated Prevalence and Clinical Manifestations of UBA1 Variants Associated With VEXAS Syndrome in a Clinical Population.
authors:
- Beck DB
- Bodian DL
- Shah V
- Mirshahi UL
- Kim J
- Ding Y
- Magaziner SJ
- Strande NT
- Cantor A
- Haley JS
- Cook A
- Hill W
- Schwartz AL
- Grayson PC
- Ferrada MA
- Kastner DL
- Carey DJ
- Stewart DR
journal: JAMA
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1001/jama.2022.24836
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Biopsy
- Electronic Health Records
- Prevalence
- "Myelodysplastic Syndromes/complications, diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Ubiquitin-Activating Enzymes/genetics
- Mutation
- Retrospective Studies
- Exome
- Middle Aged
- "Skin Diseases, Genetic/complications, diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- United States/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Estimated Prevalence and Clinical Manifestations of UBA1 Variants Associated With VEXAS Syndrome in a Clinical Population.
**Authors:** Beck DB, Bodian DL, Shah V, Mirshahi UL, Kim J, Ding Y, Magaziner SJ, Strande NT, Cantor A, Haley JS, Cook A, Hill W, Schwartz AL, Grayson PC, Ferrada MA, Kastner DL, Carey DJ, Stewart DR
**Journal:** JAMA (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.2022.24836](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2022.24836)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2023 Jan 24;329(4):318-324. doi: 10.1001/jama.2022.24836.

Estimated Prevalence and Clinical Manifestations of UBA1 Variants Associated 
With VEXAS Syndrome in a Clinical Population.

Beck DB(1)(2)(3), Bodian DL(4), Shah V(5), Mirshahi UL(5), Kim J(6), Ding Y(7), 
Magaziner SJ(2), Strande NT(5), Cantor A(2)(3), Haley JS(5), Cook A(5), Hill 
W(5), Schwartz AL(8), Grayson PC(9), Ferrada MA(9), Kastner DL(1), Carey DJ(5), 
Stewart DR(6).

Author information:
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland.
(2)Center for Human Genetics and Genomics, New York University School of 
Medicine.
(3)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, New York University School 
of Medicine.
(4)Geisinger Research, North Bethesda, Maryland.
(5)Department of Molecular and Functional Genomics, Geisinger, Danville, 
Pennsylvania.
(6)Clinical Genetics Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, 
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland.
(7)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Geisinger, Danville, Pennsylvania.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University in St Louis, Missouri.
(9)National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2023 Apr;19(4):193. doi: 10.1038/s41584-023-00931-7.

IMPORTANCE: VEXAS (vacuoles, E1-ubiquitin-activating enzyme, X-linked, 
autoinflammatory, somatic) syndrome is a disease with rheumatologic and 
hematologic features caused by somatic variants in UBA1. Pathogenic variants are 
associated with a broad spectrum of clinical manifestations. Knowledge of 
prevalence, penetrance, and clinical characteristics of this disease have been 
limited by ascertainment biases based on known phenotypes.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the prevalence of pathogenic variants in UBA1 and 
associated clinical manifestations in an unselected population using a genomic 
ascertainment approach.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This retrospective observational study 
evaluated UBA1 variants in exome data from 163 096 participants within the 
Geisinger MyCode Community Health Initiative. Clinical phenotypes were 
determined from Geisinger electronic health record data from January 1, 1996, to 
January 1, 2022.
EXPOSURES: Exome sequencing was performed.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Outcome measures included prevalence of somatic UBA1 
variation; presence of rheumatologic, hematologic, pulmonary, dermatologic, and 
other findings in individuals with somatic UBA1 variation on review of the 
electronic health record; review of laboratory data; bone marrow biopsy 
pathology analysis; and in vitro enzymatic assays.
RESULTS: In 163 096 participants (mean age, 52.8 years; 94% White; 61% women), 
11 individuals harbored likely somatic variants at known pathogenic UBA1 
positions, with 11 of 11 (100%) having clinical manifestations consistent with 
VEXAS syndrome (9 male, 2 female). A total of 5 of 11 individuals (45%) did not 
meet criteria for rheumatologic and/or hematologic diagnoses previously 
associated with VEXAS syndrome; however, all individuals had anemia (hemoglobin: 
mean, 7.8 g/dL; median, 7.5 g/dL), which was mostly macrocytic (10/11 [91%]) 
with concomitant thrombocytopenia (10/11 [91%]). Among the 11 patients 
identified, there was a pathogenic variant in 1 male participant prior to onset 
of VEXAS-related signs or symptoms and 2 female participants had disease with 
heterozygous variants. A previously unreported UBA1 variant (c.1861A>T; 
p.Ser621Cys) was found in a symptomatic patient, with in vitro data supporting a 
catalytic defect and pathogenicity. Together, disease-causing UBA1 variants were 
found in 1 in 13 591 unrelated individuals (95% CI, 1:7775-1:23 758), 1 in 4269 
men older than 50 years (95% CI, 1:2319-1:7859), and 1 in 26 238 women older 
than 50 years (95% CI, 1:7196-1:147 669).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This study provides an estimate of the prevalence and 
a description of the clinical manifestations of UBA1 variants associated with 
VEXAS syndrome within a single regional health system in the US. Additional 
studies are needed in unselected and genetically diverse populations to better 
define general population prevalence and phenotypic spectrum.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2022.24836
PMCID: PMC10408261
PMID: 36692560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.