---
reference_id: "PMID:34160123"
title: Nonlethal presentations of CYP26B1-related skeletal anomalies and multiple synostoses syndrome.
authors:
- Grand K
- Skraban CM
- Cohen JL
- Dowsett L
- Mazzola S
- Tarpinian J
- Bedoukian E
- Nesbitt A
- Denenberg B
- Lulis L
- Santani A
- Zackai EH
- Deardorff MA
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62387
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- Child
- Family
- Female
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Phenotype
- "Radius/abnormalities, pathology"
- Retinoic Acid 4-Hydroxylase/genetics
- "Synostosis/genetics, pathology"
- "Ulna/abnormalities, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nonlethal presentations of CYP26B1-related skeletal anomalies and multiple synostoses syndrome.
**Authors:** Grand K, Skraban CM, Cohen JL, Dowsett L, Mazzola S, Tarpinian J, Bedoukian E, Nesbitt A, Denenberg B, Lulis L, Santani A, Zackai EH, Deardorff MA
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.62387](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.62387)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2021 Sep;185(9):2766-2775. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62387. Epub 
2021 Jun 23.

Nonlethal presentations of CYP26B1-related skeletal anomalies and multiple 
synostoses syndrome.

Grand K(1), Skraban CM(2)(3), Cohen JL(4), Dowsett L(5)(6), Mazzola S(7), 
Tarpinian J(8), Bedoukian E(2), Nesbitt A(9), Denenberg B(9), Lulis L(9), 
Santani A(10), Zackai EH(2)(3), Deardorff MA(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, 
California, USA.
(2)Division of Human Genetics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University 
School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(5)Kapi'olani Medical Center, Honolulu, Hawai'i, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of Hawai'i John A. Burns School of 
Medicine, Honolulu, Hawai'i, USA.
(7)Division of Pediatric Genetics, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(8)Variantyx Inc., Framingham, Massachusetts, USA.
(9)Division of Genomic Diagnostics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(10)Veritas Genetics, Danvers, Massachusetts, USA.
(11)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital Los 
Angeles, Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, California, USA.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Keck School of 
Medicine of the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA.

Retinoic acid exposures as well as defects in the retinoic acid-degrading enzyme 
CYP26B1 have teratogenic effects on both limb and craniofacial skeleton. An 
initial report of four individuals described a syndrome of fetal and infantile 
lethality with craniosynostosis and skeletal anomalies caused by homozygous 
pathogenic missense variants in CYP26B1. In contrast, a 22-year-old female was 
reported with a homozygous missense pathogenic variant in CYP26B1 with complex 
multisuture craniosynostosis and intellectual disability, suggesting that in 
some cases, biallelic pathogenic variants of CYP26B1 may be compatible with 
life. Here we describe four additional living individuals from two families with 
compound heterozygous pathogenic missense variants in CYP26B1. Structural 
assessment of these additional missense variants places them further from the 
catalytic site and supports a model consistent with milder nonlethal disease. In 
addition to previously reported findings of multisuture craniosynostosis, 
conductive hearing loss, joint contractures, long slender fingers, camptodactly, 
broad fingertips, and developmental delay/intellectual disability, skeletal 
imaging in our cases also revealed gracile long bones, gracile ribs, radioulnar 
synostosis, and carpal and/or tarsal fusions. These individuals broaden the 
phenotypic range of biallelic pathogenic variants in CYPB26B1 and most 
significantly clarify that mortality can range from perinatal lethality to 
survival into adulthood.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62387
PMID: 34160123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]