---
reference_id: "PMID:41195223"
title: A novel frameshift variant in the MED13 gene causing intellectual developmental disorder-61 in a Chinese family.
authors:
- Yang Q
- Zhang Q
- Yi S
- Huang G
- Zhou X
- Yi S
- Luo J
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2025.1699544
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel frameshift variant in the MED13 gene causing intellectual developmental disorder-61 in a Chinese family.
**Authors:** Yang Q, Zhang Q, Yi S, Huang G, Zhou X, Yi S, Luo J
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2025.1699544](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2025.1699544)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2025 Oct 21;13:1699544. doi: 10.3389/fped.2025.1699544. 
eCollection 2025.

A novel frameshift variant in the MED13 gene causing intellectual developmental 
disorder-61 in a Chinese family.

Yang Q(#)(1)(2)(3), Zhang Q(#)(1)(2)(3), Yi S(1)(2)(3), Huang G(4), Zhou 
X(1)(2)(3), Yi S(1)(2)(3), Luo J(1)(2)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Guangxi Key Laboratory of Birth Defects Research and Prevention, Guangxi Key 
Laboratory of Reproductive Health and Birth Defects Prevention, Maternal and 
Child Health Hospital, Nanning, China.
(2)Department of Genetic and Metabolic Central Laboratory, Maternal and Child 
Health Hospital, Nanning, China.
(3)Guangxi Clinical Research Center for Birth Defects, Maternal and Child Health 
Hospital, Nanning, China.
(4)Neonatal Surgery, Maternal and Child Health Hospital, Nanning, China.
(5)Guangxi Clinical Research Center for Pediatric Diseases, Maternal and Child 
Health Hospital, Nanning, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Intellectual developmental disorder type 61 (MRD61) is an extremely rare 
autosomal dominant disorder caused by variants in the MED13 gene. This gene 
encodes a subunit of the mediator complex, which is also known as TRAP, SMCC, 
DRIP or ARC. This complex functions as a transcriptional coactivator and is 
essential for the expression of almost all genes. To date, only 26 cases of 
MRD61 have been reported worldwide. The main symptoms are intellectual 
disability (ID) of varying degrees, developmental delay (DD), hypotonia during 
infancy, facial dysmorphism, language impairment, restricted growth, skeletal 
and limb abnormalities, and behavioral abnormalities. In this study, we 
recruited a Chinese family in which two individuals were diagnosed with MRD61. 
Whole-exome sequencing of the proband revealed a novel heterozygous frameshift 
variant in the MED13 gene (NM_005121.3): c.5641delinsTC (p.R1882Sfs*9). This 
variant was inherited from the affected mother and was subsequently confirmed in 
both the proband and her other family members using Sanger sequencing. The 
dysmorphology profile of both patients described here is similar to that 
associated with MRD61. Compared with previously reported cases of MRD61, the 
proband presented with congenital megacolon, a previously unreported 
complication. Additionally, skeletal and limb deformities, eye or vision 
abnormalities, behavioral issues and brain abnormalities were absent in our 
patients. This is the first report of MED13-associated intellectual 
developmental disorder-61 in China. This molecular diagnosis expands the known 
genetic spectrum of MRD61. Furthermore, the specific manifestations observed in 
these patients with this condition provide valuable additional clinical insight 
into the syndrome.

© 2025 Yang, Zhang, Yi, Huang, Zhou, Yi and Luo.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2025.1699544
PMCID: PMC12583948
PMID: 41195223

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.