---
reference_id: "PMID:35478727"
title: Outcomes of Interventions for Angiosarcoma.
authors:
- Yan Q
- Fernandez RA
- Elmi M
- Gelfond J
- Davies MG
journal: Front Surg
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fsurg.2022.819099
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcomes of Interventions for Angiosarcoma.
**Authors:** Yan Q, Fernandez RA, Elmi M, Gelfond J, Davies MG
**Journal:** Front Surg (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fsurg.2022.819099](https://doi.org/10.3389/fsurg.2022.819099)

## Content

1. Front Surg. 2022 Apr 11;9:819099. doi: 10.3389/fsurg.2022.819099. eCollection
2022.

Outcomes of Interventions for Angiosarcoma.

Yan Q(1), Fernandez RA(2), Elmi M(1)(3), Gelfond J(2), Davies MG(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Long School of Medicine University of Texas Health at
San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, United States.
(2)Department of Population Health Sciences, Long School of Medicine University
of Texas Health at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, United States.
(3)MD Anderson Cancer Center, Long School of Medicine University of Texas Health
at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, United States.
(4)Division of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Long School of Medicine
University of Texas Health at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, United States.
(5)South Texas Center for Vascular Care, South Texas Medical Center, San
Antonio, TX, United States.

OBJECTIVE: Angiosarcoma is a rare malignant vascular tumor, and the management
and outcome of this disease are not well-described. The aim of this study was to
report the incidence, patient demographics, and outcomes of angiosarcoma based
on national data.
METHODS: Data on patients with angiosarcoma were obtained from the Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database. Inverse probability treatment
weights (IPTW) were used to assess the survival benefit of operation with
additional chemo or radiation therapy compared to operation alone. These
variables were further compared against patients who did not receive an
operation despite being initially offered one. Cox regression was used to assess
survival. Statistical analyses were performed on RStudio.
RESULTS: For this study, 5,135 patients (46% men; median age 69, range 0-102)
with angiosarcoma were identified in the SEER database between 1975 and 2016.
The age-adjusted incidence rate was 1-4%. Patients were mostly non-Hispanic
Caucasian (75.4%). The average tumor size was 4.7 cm, range (.1-98.9). Tumor
grades were high at presentation (Grade III 17.2, Grade IV 19, and unknown
50.6%), but half were considered localized tumors. Most patients underwent an
operation (66.1%). In 5.6% of patients, the operation was recommended but not
performed. The overall 5-year survival was 26.7% (95% CI 25.4-28.1%). IPTW with
adjusted Cox proportional hazard model demonstrated worse survival, showing that
operation compared to no operation and operation with chemo/radiation compared
to operation alone had worse survival between months 0 and 25 but had improved
survival after month 25.
CONCLUSIONS: The incidence of angiosarcoma is low and long-term survival is
poor. Multimodal therapy in the form of neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemo/radiation
therapy offers significant long-term survival benefits over operation alone.

Copyright © 2022 Yan, Fernandez, Elmi, Gelfond and Davies.

DOI: 10.3389/fsurg.2022.819099
PMCID: PMC9035688
PMID: 35478727

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
