---
reference_id: "PMID:38248039"
title: Challenges in the Diagnosis of Cutaneous Mastocytosis.
authors:
- Brockow K
- Bent RK
- Schneider S
- Spies S
- Kranen K
- Hindelang B
- Kurgyis Z
- Broesby-Olsen S
- Biedermann T
- Grattan CE
journal: Diagnostics (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/diagnostics14020161
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Challenges in the Diagnosis of Cutaneous Mastocytosis.
**Authors:** Brockow K, Bent RK, Schneider S, Spies S, Kranen K, Hindelang B, Kurgyis Z, Broesby-Olsen S, Biedermann T, Grattan CE
**Journal:** Diagnostics (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/diagnostics14020161](https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics14020161)

## Content

1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2024 Jan 11;14(2):161. doi: 10.3390/diagnostics14020161.

Challenges in the Diagnosis of Cutaneous Mastocytosis.

Brockow K(1)(2), Bent RK(1), Schneider S(1), Spies S(1), Kranen K(1), Hindelang 
B(1), Kurgyis Z(1), Broesby-Olsen S(2), Biedermann T(1), Grattan CE(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Allergy Biederstein, School of Medicine and 
Health, Technical University of Munich, 80802 Munich, Germany.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Allergy Centre, Odense University Hospital, 
5000 Odense, Denmark.
(3)St John's Institute of Dermatology, Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK.

BACKGROUND: Mastocytosis is characterized by an accumulation of clonal mast 
cells (MCs) in tissues such as the skin. Skin lesions in mastocytosis may be 
clinically subtle or heterogeneous, and giving the correct diagnosis can be 
difficult.
METHODS: This study compiles personal experiences together with relevant 
literature, discussing possible obstacles encountered in diagnosing skin 
involvement in mastocytosis and cutaneous mastocytosis (CM).
RESULTS: The nomenclature of the term "CM" is ambiguous. The WHO classification 
defines CM as mastocytosis solely present in the skin. However, the term is also 
used as a morphological description, e.g., in maculopapular cutaneous 
mastocytosis (MPCM). This is often seen in systemic, as well as cutaneous, 
mastocytosis. Typical CM manifestations (MPCM), including mastocytoma or diffuse 
cutaneous mastocytosis (DCM), all share a positive Darier's sign, and can thus 
be clinically recognized. Nevertheless, distinguishing monomorphic versus 
polymorphic MPCM may be challenging, even for experienced dermatologists. Less 
typical clinical presentations, such as MPCM with telangiectatic erythemas 
(formerly called telangiectasia macularis eruptiva perstans), confluent, nodular 
or xanthelasmoid variants may require a skin biopsy for histopathological 
confirmation. Because MC numbers in CM have a large overlap to those in healthy 
and inflamed skin, detailed histopathological criteria to diagnose mastocytosis 
in MPCM are needed and have been proposed. D816V KIT mutational analysis in 
tissue is helpful for confirming the diagnosis. Biomarkers allow the prediction 
of the course of CM into regression or evolution of the disease. Further 
diagnostic measures should screen for concomitant diseases, such as malignant 
melanoma, and for systemic involvement.
CONCLUSIONS: Whereas in typical cases the diagnosis of CM may be uncomplicated, 
less typical manifestations may require specific investigations for making the 
diagnosis and predicting its course.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics14020161
PMCID: PMC10814739
PMID: 38248039

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest 
regarding the content of the paper. All authors have endorsed the final 
manuscript.