---
reference_id: "PMID:18381349"
title: Genetic interaction between Bardet-Biedl syndrome genes and implications for limb patterning.
authors:
- Tayeh MK
- Yen HJ
- Beck JS
- Searby CC
- Westfall TA
- Griesbach H
- Sheffield VC
- Slusarski DC
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn093
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic interaction between Bardet-Biedl syndrome genes and implications for limb patterning.
**Authors:** Tayeh MK, Yen HJ, Beck JS, Searby CC, Westfall TA, Griesbach H, Sheffield VC, Slusarski DC
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddn093](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddn093)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Jul 1;17(13):1956-67. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn093. Epub 2008
Apr  1.

Genetic interaction between Bardet-Biedl syndrome genes and implications for 
limb patterning.

Tayeh MK(1), Yen HJ, Beck JS, Searby CC, Westfall TA, Griesbach H, Sheffield VC, 
Slusarski DC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of 
Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a pleiotropic, genetically heterogeneous disorder 
characterized by obesity, retinopathy, polydactyly, cognitive impairment, renal 
and cardiac anomalies, as well as hypertension and diabetes. Multiple genes are 
known to independently cause BBS. These genes do not appear to code for the same 
functional category of proteins; yet, mutation of each results in a similar 
phenotype. Gene knockdown of different BBS genes in zebrafish shows strikingly 
overlapping phenotypes including defective melanosome transport and disruption 
of the ciliated Kupffer's vesicle. Here, we demonstrate that individual 
knockdown of bbs1 and bbs3 results in the same prototypical phenotypes as 
reported previously for other BBS genes. We utilize the zebrafish system to 
comprehensively determine whether simultaneous pair-wise knockdown of BBS genes 
reveals genetic interactions between BBS genes. Using this approach, we 
demonstrate eight genetic interactions between a subset of BBS genes. The 
synergistic relationships between distinct combinations are not due to 
functional redundancy but indicate specific interactions within a multi-subunit 
BBS complex. In addition, we utilize the zebrafish model system to investigate 
limb development. Human polydactyly is a cardinal feature of BBS not reproduced 
in BBS-mouse models. We evaluated zebrafish fin bud patterning and observed 
altered Sonic hedgehog (shh) expression and subsequent changes to fin skeletal 
elements. The SHH fin bud phenotype was also used to confirm specific genetic 
interactions between BBS genes. This study reveals an in vivo requirement for 
BBS function in limb bud patterning. Our results provide important new insights 
into the mechanism and biological significance of BBS.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddn093
PMCID: PMC2900902
PMID: 18381349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]