---
reference_id: "PMID:31470005"
title: Efficacy and Safety of Vedolizumab Subcutaneous Formulation in a Randomized Trial of Patients With Ulcerative Colitis.
authors:
- Sandborn WJ
- Baert F
- Danese S
- Krznarić Ž
- Kobayashi T
- Yao X
- Chen J
- Rosario M
- Bhatia S
- Kisfalvi K
- "D'Haens G"
- Vermeire S
journal: Gastroenterology
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2019.08.027
keywords:
- "Administration, Intravenous"
- Adult
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/blood, immunology, pharmacokinetics, therapeutic use"
- "Colitis, Ulcerative/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy"
- Colonoscopy
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- "Gastrointestinal Agents/blood, immunology, pharmacokinetics, therapeutic use"
- Humans
- Infections/chemically induced
- Injection Site Reaction/etiology
- "Injections, Subcutaneous"
- Maintenance Chemotherapy
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Remission Induction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and Safety of Vedolizumab Subcutaneous Formulation in a Randomized Trial of Patients With Ulcerative Colitis.
**Authors:** Sandborn WJ, Baert F, Danese S, Krznarić Ž, Kobayashi T, Yao X, Chen J, Rosario M, Bhatia S, Kisfalvi K, D'Haens G, Vermeire S
**Journal:** Gastroenterology (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.gastro.2019.08.027](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2019.08.027)

## Content

1. Gastroenterology. 2020 Feb;158(3):562-572.e12. doi: 
10.1053/j.gastro.2019.08.027. Epub 2019 Aug 28.

Efficacy and Safety of Vedolizumab Subcutaneous Formulation in a Randomized 
Trial of Patients With Ulcerative Colitis.

Sandborn WJ(1), Baert F(2), Danese S(3), Krznarić Ž(4), Kobayashi T(5), Yao 
X(6), Chen J(6), Rosario M(6), Bhatia S(7), Kisfalvi K(6), D'Haens G(8), 
Vermeire S(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, University of California-San Diego, La Jolla, 
California. Electronic address: wsandborn@ucsd.edu.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, AZ Delta, Roeselare, Belgium.
(3)Gastrointestinal Immunopathology, Humanitas University, Italy.
(4)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital Centre 
Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
(5)Center for Advanced IBD Research and Treatment, Kitasato University Kitasato 
Institute Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Takeda Development Center Americas Inc, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(7)Takeda International, London, UK.
(8)Department of Gastroenterology, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(9)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University Hospitals 
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Erratum in
    Gastroenterology. 2025 Aug;169(2):390. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2025.05.019.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Maintenance treatment with vedolizumab, a monoclonal antibody 
that inhibits the gut-selective α4β7 integrin, is administered intravenously. 
Some patients might prefer a subcutaneous formulation of vedolizumab for 
maintenance treatment. Subcutaneous vedolizumab was investigated as maintenance 
treatment in patients with moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis.
METHODS: We performed a phase 3, double-blind, double-dummy trial at 141 sites 
in 29 countries from December 18, 2015 through August 21, 2018. Patients with 
moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis received open-label treatment 
with intravenous vedolizumab 300 mg at weeks 0 and 2. At week 6, patients with 
clinical response were randomly assigned maintenance treatment with subcutaneous 
vedolizumab 108 mg every 2 weeks, intravenous vedolizumab 300 mg every 8 weeks, 
or placebo. The primary end point was clinical remission at week 52, which was 
defined as a total Mayo score of ≤2 and no subscore >1.
RESULTS: Among the randomized 216 patients, clinical remission at week 52 was 
achieved by 46.2%, 42.6%, and 14.3% of patients in the subcutaneous vedolizumab, 
intravenous vedolizumab, and placebo groups, respectively (subcutaneous 
vedolizumab vs placebo: Δ32.3%; 95% confidence interval, 19.7%-45.0%; P < .001). 
The subcutaneous vedolizumab group also had greater endoscopic improvement and 
durable clinical response at week 52 compared with placebo (both P < .001). The 
incidence of injection-site reactions was more frequent in patients given 
subcutaneous vedolizumab (10.4%) than intravenous vedolizumab (1.9%) or placebo 
(0%); these were not treatment limiting, most were mild, and none resulted in 
discontinuation. Subcutaneous and intravenous vedolizumab safety profiles were 
otherwise similar.
CONCLUSIONS: Subcutaneous vedolizumab is effective as maintenance therapy in 
patients with moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis who had a 
clinical response to intravenous vedolizumab induction therapy. It has a 
favorable safety and tolerability profile. ClinicalTrials.gov ID: NCT02611830; 
EudraCT 2015-000480-14.

Copyright © 2020 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2019.08.027
PMID: 31470005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]