---
reference_id: "PMID:30226355"
title: "Corticosteroid therapy in borderline tuberculoid leprosy patients co-infected with HIV undergoing reversal reaction: a clinical study."
authors:
- Secchin-De-Andrade PJ
- De Andrea Vilas-Boas Hacker M
- Sales AM
- Dalvi-Garcia F
- Da Costa Nery JA
- Menezes VM
- Sarno EN
journal: Lepr Rev
year: '2016'
keywords:
- "Adrenal Cortex Hormones/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Adult
- "Coinfection/drug therapy, microbiology, virology"
- Female
- "HIV Infections/complications, virology"
- Humans
- "Leprosy, Borderline/drug therapy, microbiology"
- "Leprosy, Tuberculoid/drug therapy, microbiology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mycobacterium leprae/drug effects, physiology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Corticosteroid therapy in borderline tuberculoid leprosy patients co-infected with HIV undergoing reversal reaction: a clinical study.
**Authors:** Secchin-De-Andrade PJ, De Andrea Vilas-Boas Hacker M, Sales AM, Dalvi-Garcia F, Da Costa Nery JA, Menezes VM, Sarno EN
**Journal:** Lepr Rev (2016)

## Content

1. Lepr Rev. 2016 Dec;87(4):516-25.

Corticosteroid therapy in borderline tuberculoid leprosy patients co-infected 
with HIV undergoing reversal reaction: a clinical study.

Secchin-De-Andrade PJ, De Andrea Vilas-Boas Hacker M, Sales AM, Dalvi-Garcia F, 
Da Costa Nery JA, Menezes VM, Sarno EN.

BACKGROUND: Mycobacterium leprae and HIV cause infectious diseases of great 
concern for the public health care sector worldwide. Both are especially 
worrisome diseases when patients become co-infected and exhibit the expected 
clinical exuberance. The objective of this study was to evaluate episodes of 
reversal reaction (RR) and the effect of the use of corticosteroids on the 
treatment of borderline tuberculoid leprosy patients co-infected with the human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
METHODS: This is a retrospective cohort study in which the clinical 
manifestations of the patients and their responses to corticosteroid therapy 
were observed. Variables were analysed during and after multidrug therapy 
between the first and last days of prednisone, which occurred up to a maximum of 
6 months after initiating corticosteroid therapy.
RESULTS: A total of 22 HIV-positive and 28 HIV-negative cases were included. 
Loss of sensitivity and neural thickening were statistically significant while 
clinically ulcerated lesions were only observed in the co-infected group. Most 
patients were diagnosed with leprosy in the presence of RR and six patients 
manifested RR as an immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome. On average, 
both groups received similar doses of corticosteroids (difference of 0·1 
mg/kg/day).

PMID: 30226355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]