---
reference_id: "PMID:21092740"
title: "Estrogen dependence of the renal vasodilatory effect of nicotine in rats: role of α7 nicotinic cholinergic receptor/eNOS signaling."
authors:
- el-Mas MM
- el-Gowilly SM
- Gohar EY
- Ghazal AR
- Abdel-Rahman AA
journal: Life Sci
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2010.11.009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Estrogen dependence of the renal vasodilatory effect of nicotine in rats: role of α7 nicotinic cholinergic receptor/eNOS signaling.
**Authors:** el-Mas MM, el-Gowilly SM, Gohar EY, Ghazal AR, Abdel-Rahman AA
**Journal:** Life Sci (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lfs.2010.11.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lfs.2010.11.009)

## Content

1. Life Sci. 2011 Jan 17;88(3-4):187-93. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2010.11.009. Epub
2010  Nov 16.

Estrogen dependence of the renal vasodilatory effect of nicotine in rats: role 
of α7 nicotinic cholinergic receptor/eNOS signaling.

el-Mas MM(1), el-Gowilly SM, Gohar EY, Ghazal AR, Abdel-Rahman AA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Alexandria 
University, Alexandria, Egypt. mahelm@hotmail.com

AIMS: We recently reported that acute exposure to nicotine vasodilates the renal 
vasculature of male rats via facilitation of endothelial nitric oxide synthase 
(eNOS). In this study, we investigated whether this effect of nicotine is 
sexually dimorphic and the role of estrogen in modulating the nicotine effect.
MAIN METHODS: Nicotine-evoked vasodilation was evaluated in 
phenylephrine-preconstricted perfused kidneys obtained from male, proestrus 
female, ovariectomized (OVX) and estrogen-replaced OVX (OVXE(2)) rats.
KEY FINDINGS: Nicotine infusion (5×10(-5), 1×10(-4), and 5×10(-4) M) produced 
greater concentration-dependent reductions in the renal perfusion pressure (RPP) 
in an isolated kidney from proestrus females than from males. Inhibition of NOS 
by N(G)-nitro-L-arginine abolished the nicotine-evoked reduction in RPP and 
abolished the gender difference in the nicotine effect. Nicotine vasodilation 
was also attenuated in kidneys isolated from OVX and diestrus rats, models 
characterized by reduced estrogen levels. Further, estrogen or L-arginine 
supplementation in OVX rats largely restored the renal vasodilatory response to 
nicotine. Estrogen receptor blockade by tamoxifen abrogated the enhanced 
nicotine-evoked vasodilation elicited by E(2) in OVX rats. The nitrite/nitrate 
levels and protein expressions of eNOS and α(7) nicotinic cholinergic receptor 
(α(7) nAChRs) were significantly higher in renal tissues of OVXE(2) compared 
with OVX rats, suggesting a facilitatory effect for E(2) on α(7) nAChRs/eNOS 
signaling.
SIGNIFICANCE: Estrogen-dependent facilitation of NOS signaling mediates the 
enhanced vasodilator capacity of nicotine in the renal vasculature of female 
rats. Preliminary evidence also suggests a potential role for α(7) nAChRs in 
this estrogen-dependent phenomenon.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lfs.2010.11.009
PMCID: PMC3777393
PMID: 21092740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement The authors 
declare that there are no conflicts of interest.