---
reference_id: "PMID:32054785"
title: Incubation periods impact the spatial predictability of cholera and Ebola outbreaks in Sierra Leone.
authors:
- Kahn R
- Peak CM
- Fernández-Gracia J
- Hill A
- Jambai A
- Ganda L
- Castro MC
- Buckee CO
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1913052117
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incubation periods impact the spatial predictability of cholera and Ebola outbreaks in Sierra Leone.
**Authors:** Kahn R, Peak CM, Fernández-Gracia J, Hill A, Jambai A, Ganda L, Castro MC, Buckee CO
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1913052117](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1913052117)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2020 Mar 3;117(9):5067-5073. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1913052117. Epub 2020 Feb 13.

Incubation periods impact the spatial predictability of cholera and Ebola 
outbreaks in Sierra Leone.

Kahn R(1), Peak CM(1), Fernández-Gracia J(1)(2), Hill A(3), Jambai A(4), Ganda 
L(5), Castro MC(6), Buckee CO(7).

Author information:
(1)Center for Communicable Disease Dynamics, Department of Epidemiology, Harvard 
T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115.
(2)Institute for Cross-Disciplinary Physics and Complex Systems, Universitat de 
les Illes Balears - Consell Superior d'Investigacions Científiques, E-07122 
Palma de Mallorca, Spain.
(3)Disease Control in Humanitarian Emergencies, World Health Organization, 
CH-1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland.
(4)Disease Control and Prevention, Sierra Leone Ministry of Health and 
Sanitation, Freetown, Sierra Leone FPGG+89.
(5)Country Office, World Health Organization, Freetown, Sierra Leone FPGG+89.
(6)Department of Global Health and Population, Harvard T.H. Chan School of 
Public Health, Boston, MA 02115.
(7)Center for Communicable Disease Dynamics, Department of Epidemiology, Harvard 
T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115; cbuckee@hsph.harvard.edu.

Forecasting the spatiotemporal spread of infectious diseases during an outbreak 
is an important component of epidemic response. However, it remains challenging 
both methodologically and with respect to data requirements, as disease spread 
is influenced by numerous factors, including the pathogen's underlying 
transmission parameters and epidemiological dynamics, social networks and 
population connectivity, and environmental conditions. Here, using data from 
Sierra Leone, we analyze the spatiotemporal dynamics of recent cholera and Ebola 
outbreaks and compare and contrast the spread of these two pathogens in the same 
population. We develop a simulation model of the spatial spread of an epidemic 
in order to examine the impact of a pathogen's incubation period on the dynamics 
of spread and the predictability of outbreaks. We find that differences in the 
incubation period alone can determine the limits of predictability for diseases 
with different natural history, both empirically and in our simulations. Our 
results show that diseases with longer incubation periods, such as Ebola, where 
infected individuals can travel farther before becoming infectious, result in 
more long-distance sparking events and less predictable disease trajectories, as 
compared to the more predictable wave-like spread of diseases with shorter 
incubation periods, such as cholera.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1913052117
PMCID: PMC7060667
PMID: 32054785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.