---
reference_id: "PMID:30260057"
title: Ten-year reinvestigation of ocular manifestations in Marfan syndrome.
authors:
- Sandvik GF
- Vanem TT
- Rand-Hendriksen S
- Cholidis S
- Saethre M
- Drolsum L
journal: Clin Exp Ophthalmol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/ceo.13408
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ten-year reinvestigation of ocular manifestations in Marfan syndrome.
**Authors:** Sandvik GF, Vanem TT, Rand-Hendriksen S, Cholidis S, Saethre M, Drolsum L
**Journal:** Clin Exp Ophthalmol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ceo.13408](https://doi.org/10.1111/ceo.13408)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2019 Mar;47(2):212-218. doi: 10.1111/ceo.13408. Epub 2018
 Nov 11.

Ten-year reinvestigation of ocular manifestations in Marfan syndrome.

Sandvik GF(1)(2), Vanem TT(2), Rand-Hendriksen S(2)(3), Cholidis S(1), Saethre 
M(1), Drolsum L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of TRS National Resource Centre for Rare Disorders, Sunnaas 
Rehabilitation Hospital, Nesodden, Norway.

IMPORTANCE: Long-term follow-up of Marfan syndrome (MFS) patients.
BACKGROUND: Investigate changes in ocular features in MFS patients fulfilling 
the Ghent-2 criteria following a period of 10 years.
DESIGN: Repeated cross-sectional study with two observations.
PARTICIPANTS: Eighty-four MFS patients were investigated in 2003-2004 
(baseline). Forty-four of these patients (52%) were examined after 10 years.
METHODS: A comprehensive ocular examination performed at baseline and follow-up.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Development or progression of ectopia lentis (EL).
RESULTS: At follow-up, mean age was 50.1 ± 11.9 years (range: 30-80 years), 74% 
were female and 70% of the patients were diagnosed with EL compared to 66% at 
baseline. Two patients (3 eyes) had developed EL over the decade, representing a 
13% risk. Furthermore, one eye had progressed from a subtle tilt of the lens to 
dislocation. We found no significant change in the axial length (P = 0.96), the 
corneal curvature (P = 0.64) or the spherical equivalent (P = 0.23). Best 
corrected visual acuity was improved at follow-up (P = 0.02). There were 7% and 
33% risks for development of retinal detachment and cataract between baseline 
and follow-up, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Our study indicates that even though EL typically 
occurs at an early stage in most MFS patients, there is still a risk of 
developing EL in adulthood. The risk of developing vision-threatening 
complications such as retinal detachment and cataract was much higher than in 
the normal population, but even so, the visual potential of the MFS patients was 
relatively good.

© 2018 Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Ophthalmologists.

DOI: 10.1111/ceo.13408
PMID: 30260057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]