---
reference_id: "PMID:41044867"
title: "Perforated Meckel Diverticulum Caused by Vegetal Food Entrapment: A Rare Case Report and Literature Review."
authors:
- Sorg O
- Papazarkadas X
- Racine M
- Toso C
- Mönig S
journal: Am J Case Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.12659/AJCR.948592
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Perforated Meckel Diverticulum Caused by Vegetal Food Entrapment: A Rare Case Report and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Sorg O, Papazarkadas X, Racine M, Toso C, Mönig S
**Journal:** Am J Case Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.12659/AJCR.948592](https://doi.org/10.12659/AJCR.948592)

## Content

1. Am J Case Rep. 2025 Oct 4;26:e948592. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.948592.

Perforated Meckel Diverticulum Caused by Vegetal Food Entrapment: A Rare Case 
Report and Literature Review.

Sorg O(1), Papazarkadas X(1), Racine M(1), Toso C(1), Mönig S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Genève, Geneva, 
Switzerland.

BACKGROUND Meckel diverticulum is the most common congenital anomaly of the 
gastrointestinal tract. It results from incomplete obliteration of the vitelline 
duct, leading to the formation of a true diverticulum of the small intestine, 
and is often clinically silent. However, complications can occur, including 
gastrointestinal bleeding, bowel obstruction, Meckel's diverticulitis, or 
perforation. CASE REPORT We present the case of a 62-year-old male patient in 
good health, with no prior history of surgery, who presented with abdominal pain 
in the right iliac fossa and elevated C-reactive protein levels. An abdominal 
ultrasound showed signs of acute appendicitis. During surgical laparoscopic 
exploration, which was converted to a median laparotomy, an inflamed perforated 
Meckel diverticulum caused by a foreign body was discovered. Due to the 
inflammation, a segmental small bowel resection with an ileo-ileal 
latero-lateral anastomosis was performed. CONCLUSIONS The surgical management of 
Meckel diverticulum depends on several factors, including the presence of 
inflammation, perforation, infection, and the size of the diverticulum. 
Diverticulectomy, which can be easily performed laparoscopically, typically has 
a lower complication rate. Nevertheless, in cases of bleeding or severe 
inflammation, a small bowel resection may be needed to ensure that all 
heterotopic mucosa is removed. This report highlights a rare case of perforation 
caused by a foreign body of vegetal origin.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.948592
PMCID: PMC12506557
PMID: 41044867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None declared