---
reference_id: "PMID:39896956"
title: A Rare Case of Thyrotoxic Periodic Paralysis in a Patient With Concomitant Methimazole-Induced Agranulocytosis.
authors:
- Wei KS
- Lim AN
- Cannon SM
journal: AACE Clin Case Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.aace.2024.11.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Rare Case of Thyrotoxic Periodic Paralysis in a Patient With Concomitant Methimazole-Induced Agranulocytosis.
**Authors:** Wei KS, Lim AN, Cannon SM
**Journal:** AACE Clin Case Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.aace.2024.11.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aace.2024.11.002)

## Content

1. AACE Clin Case Rep. 2024 Nov 6;11(1):66-69. doi: 10.1016/j.aace.2024.11.002. 
eCollection 2025 Jan-Feb.

A Rare Case of Thyrotoxic Periodic Paralysis in a Patient With Concomitant 
Methimazole-Induced Agranulocytosis.

Wei KS(1), Lim AN(1), Cannon SM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Keck School of Medicine at USC, Los Angeles, 
California.
(2)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, UCLA Health, Los Angeles, 
California.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVE: Thyrotoxic periodic paralysis (TPP) is a rare condition 
causing weakness of the lower extremities associated with significant 
hypokalemia. Likewise, agranulocytosis due to methimazole use is a rare 
occurrence. We present the first documented case of concomitant TPP and 
agranulocytosis from methimazole use.
CASE REPORT: A 48-year-old woman presented with sore throat, fevers, 
odynophagia, and sudden-onset bilateral leg weakness. Methimazole had been 
started 10 weeks prior for a new diagnosis of Graves' disease. On admission, the 
patient was febrile, tachycardic, thyrotoxic, and neutropenic. She also 
experienced near-paralysis of the lower extremities. She was diagnosed with TPP 
and treated with beta blockade. She was admitted to the intensive care unit and 
started on broad-spectrum antibiotics, lithium, and propranolol for treatment of 
septic shock and hyperthyroidism, respectively. Given persistent hypokalemia 
despite 2 days of therapy, she was also diagnosed with refeeding syndrome.
DISCUSSION: TPP is a rare entity, though it should be considered on the 
differential for any thyrotoxic patient presenting with sudden weakness. If the 
associated hypokalemia does not begin to normalize within 48 h of beta blockade, 
other etiologies should be investigated. Lastly, alternative treatments such as 
lithium may be used to control hyperthyroidism in patients with 
methimazole-induced agranulocytosis.
CONCLUSION: While methimazole-induced agranulocytosis and thyrotoxic periodic 
paralysis are independently rare diagnoses, the combination of the 2 is 
exceedingly rare, and our case represents the first documented case in the 
literature reflecting a patient suffering from both syndromes.

© 2024 AACE. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aace.2024.11.002
PMCID: PMC11784620
PMID: 39896956

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.