---
reference_id: "PMID:37755363"
title: Molecular Pathogenic Mechanisms of Hypomyelinating Leukodystrophies (HLDs).
authors:
- Torii T
- Yamauchi J
journal: Neurol Int
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/neurolint15030072
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Pathogenic Mechanisms of Hypomyelinating Leukodystrophies (HLDs).
**Authors:** Torii T, Yamauchi J
**Journal:** Neurol Int (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/neurolint15030072](https://doi.org/10.3390/neurolint15030072)

## Content

1. Neurol Int. 2023 Sep 11;15(3):1155-1173. doi: 10.3390/neurolint15030072.

Molecular Pathogenic Mechanisms of Hypomyelinating Leukodystrophies (HLDs).

Torii T(1)(2)(3), Yamauchi J(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neurology, Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life 
Sciences, Hachioji 192-0392, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Ion Channel Pathophysiology, Graduate School of Brain Science, 
Doshisha University, Kyotanabe-shi 610-0394, Japan.
(3)Center for Research in Neurodegenerative Disease, Doshisha University, 
Kyotanabe-shi 610-0394, Japan.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, National Research Institute for Child Health and 
Development, Setagaya-ku 157-8535, Japan.

Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies (HLDs) represent a group of congenital rare 
diseases for which the responsible genes have been identified in recent studies. 
In this review, we briefly describe the genetic/molecular mechanisms underlying 
the pathogenesis of HLD and the normal cellular functions of the related genes 
and proteins. An increasing number of studies have reported genetic mutations 
that cause protein misfolding, protein dysfunction, and/or mislocalization 
associated with HLD. Insight into the mechanisms of these pathways can provide 
new findings for the clinical treatments of HLD.

DOI: 10.3390/neurolint15030072
PMCID: PMC10538087
PMID: 37755363

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.