---
reference_id: "PMID:36706773"
title: "Diagnosis of myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody-associated disease: International MOGAD Panel proposed criteria."
authors:
- Banwell B
- Bennett JL
- Marignier R
- Kim HJ
- Brilot F
- Flanagan EP
- Ramanathan S
- Waters P
- Tenembaum S
- Graves JS
- Chitnis T
- Brandt AU
- Hemingway C
- Neuteboom R
- Pandit L
- Reindl M
- Saiz A
- Sato DK
- Rostasy K
- Paul F
- Pittock SJ
- Fujihara K
- Palace J
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(22)00431-8
keywords:
- Humans
- Myelin-Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein
- Neuromyelitis Optica
- Optic Neuritis
- Aquaporin 4
- Multiple Sclerosis/diagnosis
- Immunoglobulin G
- Autoantibodies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis of myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody-associated disease: International MOGAD Panel proposed criteria.
**Authors:** Banwell B, Bennett JL, Marignier R, Kim HJ, Brilot F, Flanagan EP, Ramanathan S, Waters P, Tenembaum S, Graves JS, Chitnis T, Brandt AU, Hemingway C, Neuteboom R, Pandit L, Reindl M, Saiz A, Sato DK, Rostasy K, Paul F, Pittock SJ, Fujihara K, Palace J
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(22)00431-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(22)00431-8)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2023 Mar;22(3):268-282. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(22)00431-8.
Epub  2023 Jan 24.

Diagnosis of myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody-associated disease:
International MOGAD Panel proposed criteria.

Banwell B(1), Bennett JL(2), Marignier R(3), Kim HJ(4), Brilot F(5), Flanagan
EP(6), Ramanathan S(7), Waters P(8), Tenembaum S(9), Graves JS(10), Chitnis
T(11), Brandt AU(12), Hemingway C(13), Neuteboom R(14), Pandit L(15), Reindl
M(16), Saiz A(17), Sato DK(18), Rostasy K(19), Paul F(20), Pittock SJ(21),
Fujihara K(22), Palace J(23).

Author information:
(1)Division of Child Neurology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Department
of Neurology and Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, PA, USA. Electronic address: banwellb@chop.edu.
(2)Departments of Neurology and Ophthalmology, Programs in Neuroscience and
Immunology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Anschutz Medical Campus,
Aurora, CO, USA.
(3)Service de neurologie, sclérose en plaques, pathologies de la myéline et
neuro-inflammation, and Centre de Référence des Maladies Inflammatoires Rares du
Cerveau et de la Moelle, Hôpital Neurologique Pierre Wertheimer, Hospices Civils
de Lyon, France; Centre de Recherche en Neurosciences de Lyon, Lyon, France;
Université Claude Bernard Lyon, Lyon, France.
(4)Department of Neurology, Research Institute and Hospital of National Cancer
Center, Goyang, South Korea.
(5)Brain Autoimmunity Group, Kids Neuroscience Centre, Kids Research at the
Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia; School of Medical Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine and Health and Brain and Mind Centre, University of Sydney,
Sydney, Australia.
(6)Departments of Neurology, Laboratory Medicine and Pathology and Center MS and
Autoimmune Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(7)Department of Neurology, Concord Hospital, Translational Neuroimmunology
Group, Kids Neuroscience Centre, Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney,
Australia; Brain and Mind Centre and Sydney Medical School, Faculty of Medicine
and Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(8)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford,
UK.
(9)Paediatric Neuroimmunology Clinic, Department of Neurology, National
Paediatric Hospital Dr J P Garrahan, Ciudad de Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(10)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.
(11)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(12)Department of Neurology, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA.
(13)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London,
UK; Institute of Neurology, UCL, London, UK.
(14)Department of Neurology, MS Center ErasMS, Sophia Children's Hospital,
Erasmus MC University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(15)Center for Advanced Neurological Research, Nitte University Mangalore,
Mangalore, India.
(16)Clinical Department of Neurology, Medical University of Innsbruck,
Innsbruck, Austria.
(17)Neuroimmunology and Multiple Sclerosis Unit, Service of Neurology, Hospital
Clinic, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Barcelona,
Spain; Facultat de Medicina i Ciencies de la Salut, Universitat de Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain.
(18)School of Medicine and Institute for Geriatrics and Gerontology, Pontifical
Catholic University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(19)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Children'sHospital Datteln, University
Witten and Herdecke, Datteln, Germany.
(20)Experimental and Clinical Research Center, Max Delbrueck Center for
Molecular Medicine and Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of
Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute
of Health, Berlin, Germany.
(21)Departments of Neurology, Laboratory Medicine, and Pathology and Center MS
and Autoimmune Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(22)Department of Multiple Sclerosis Therapeutics, Fukushima Medical University
School of Medicine, Fukushima, Japan; Multiple Sclerosis and Neuromyelitis
Optica Center, Southern TOHOKU Research Institute for Neuroscience, Koriyama,
Japan.
(23)Department of Neurology John Radcliffe Hospital Oxford and Nuffield
Department of Clinical Neurosciences Oxford University, Oxford, UK.

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2023 Mar;22(3):193-194. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(22)00520-8.

Serum antibodies directed against myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) are
found in patients with acquired CNS demyelinating syndromes that are distinct
from multiple sclerosis and aquaporin-4-seropositive neuromyelitis optica
spectrum disorder. Based on an extensive literature review and a structured
consensus process, we propose diagnostic criteria for MOG antibody-associated
disease (MOGAD) in which the presence of MOG-IgG is a core criterion. According
to our proposed criteria, MOGAD is typically associated with acute disseminated
encephalomyelitis, optic neuritis, or transverse myelitis, and is less commonly
associated with cerebral cortical encephalitis, brainstem presentations, or
cerebellar presentations. MOGAD can present as either a monophasic or relapsing
disease course, and MOG-IgG cell-based assays are important for diagnostic
accuracy. Diagnoses such as multiple sclerosis need to be excluded, but not all
patients with multiple sclerosis should undergo screening for MOG-IgG. These
proposed diagnostic criteria require validation but have the potential to
improve identification of individuals with MOGAD, which is essential to define
long-term clinical outcomes, refine inclusion criteria for clinical trials, and
identify predictors of a relapsing versus a monophasic disease course.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(22)00431-8
PMID: 36706773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests BB has or will
potentially receive financial compensation for consultancy effort for Novartis,
Roche, UCB, Horizon Therapeutics, Biogen, and Immunic Therapeutics for advice on
clinical trial design. BB is funded by the National Multiple Sclerosis Society,
National Institute of Health, and has been previously funded by the Canadian
Multiple Sclerosis Society. JLB has received research grants from Novartis,
Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals, Alexion, and the National Institutes of Health,
license fees from a US patent (2014/0170140); consulting fees from Horizon
Therapeutics, Alexion, BeiGene Chugai Pharmaceutical, Genentech, Genzyme,
Mitsubishi-Tanabe Pharma, Reistone Biopharma, Roche, and AbbVie; and serves on
Data Safety Monitoring Boards for Roche, Genentech, and Clene Nanomedicine. RM
reports personal fees from Horizon Therapeutics, Alexion, Roche, and UCB and
non-financial support from Horizon Therapeutics, Merck, Biogen, and Roche,
outside the submitted work. HJK received a grant from the National Research
Foundation of Korea and research support from Aprilbio and Eisai; received
consultancy and speaker fees from Alexion, Aprilbio, Altos Biologics, Biogen,
Celltrion, Daewoong, Eisai, GC Pharma, HanAll BioPharma, Handok, Horizon
Therapeutics (formerly Viela Bio), Kolon Life Science, Mdimune, Merck Serono,
Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma, Novartis, Roche, Sanofi Genzyme, Teva-Handok, and UCB;
and is a co-editor for the Multiple Sclerosis Journal and an associated editor
for the Journal of Clinical Neurology. FB has received research funding from the
National Health and Medical Research Council (Australia), Multiple Sclerosis
Research Australia, New South Wales Health, Novartis, and the University of
Sydney (Sydney, NSW, Australia). She has received speaker honoraria from
Novartis, Biogen, Merck, and Limbic Neurology, and has been on advisory boards
for Merck and Novartis. She works at the University of Sydney and at the
Children's Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, New South Wales, Australia, which
offers MOG-IgG testing. EPF has served on advisory boards for Alexion,
Genentech, and Horizon Therapeutics. He has received speaker honoraria from
Pharmacy Times and royalties from UpToDate for a topic on MOGAD. He was a site
primary investigator in a randomised clinical trial on inebilizumab in
neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder run by Horizon Therapeutics. He is
principal investigator on an RO1 on MOG-IgG disease. He works at Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, MN, USA, which offers commercial MOG-IgG testing but he receives no
royalties from such testing. SR has received research funding from the National
Health and Medical Research Council (Australia), the Brain Foundation
(Australia), the Royal Australasian College of Physicians, and the University of
Sydney. She was supported by an National Health and Medicine Research Council
Neil Hamilton Fairley Early Career Fellowship (APP1141169) and is currently
supported by an NHMRC Emerging Leadership (EL2) Investigator Grant (APP2008339).
She serves as a consultant on an advisory board for UCB and Limbic Neurology,
and has been an invited speaker for Biogen, Limbic Neurology, and Excemed. PW
has received research grants from Euroimmun AG, Commonwealth Serum Laboratories
Behring and patent royalties for antibody testing (W02010046716A1). He is the
co-director of the Oxford Autoimmune Neurology Diagnostic Laboratory (Oxford
University, Oxford, UK) where MOG-IgG1 autoantibodies are tested and both he and
the University of Oxford receive royalties (for antibody tests for LGI1 and
CASPR2, W02010046716A1). He has received honoraria or consulting fees from
Biogen Idec, F Hoffmann La-Roche, Mereo BioPharma, Retrogenix, UBC, Euroimmun
AG, University of British Columbia, and Alexion; and travel grants from the
Guthy-Jackson Charitable Foundation. Work in the Oxford Autoimmune Neurology
Diagnostic Laboratory is supported by the UK National Health Service
Commissioning service for NMOSD. ST has received speaker and consulting fees
from Biogen-Idec Argentina, Merck SA, Genzyme-Sanofi, Roche, Novartis Argentina,
and Novartis Pharma. She serves as a consultant on an advisory board for
Genentech-Roche. and Alexion Pharmaceuticals. JSG has grant or contract research
support from the National Multiple Sclerosis Society, Biogen, and Octave
Biosciences for work unrelated to the present project. She serves on a steering
committee for a trial supported by Novartis. She has received speaker fees from
Alexion and Bristol Myers Sqiuibb, and served on an advisory board for
Genentech. TC has received compensation for consulting from Biogen, Novartis
Pharmaceuticals, Roche, Genentech, and Sanofi Genzyme. She has received research
support from the National Institutes of Health, National Multiple Sclerosis
Society, US Department of Defense, EMD Serono, Guthy-Jackson Charitable
Foundation, I-Mab Biopharma, Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals, Novartis, Octave
Bioscience, Roche Genentech, The Sumaira Foundation, and Tiziana Life Sciences.
AUB has received grant support from Moore Foundation, Clinical and Trnaslational
Awards Program, German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF). He has
been named as inventor on several patents and patent applications describing
multiple sclerosis serological biomarkers, drug targets for remyelination
therapy, marker-less motor function analysis, and retinal image analysis
methods. He serves on the Observational Study Monitoring Board for CAVS-MS. He
is cofounder, board member, and currently serving as secretary treasurer of
IMSVISUAL. He is cofounder and holds stocks of technology startups Motognosis
GmbH and Nocturne GmbH. Motognosis GmbH develops and sells systems for assessing
motor dysfunction in patients with neurological disorders. Nocturne GmbH offers
analysis services for retinal optical coherence tomography. Both companies'
products and services are relevant for neurology in general, but not specific to
MOGAD. CH reports grant support from the Medical Research Council, Multiple
Sclerosis Society, and Vasculitis UK. She serves as a consultant to Novartis,
Biogen, Roche, UCB, Viela Bio, and Sanofi. She participated on an independent
data safety monitoring board for the Wellcome Trust. RN reports grant support
from Multiple Sclerosis Research Foundation (Netherlands). He has participated
on a data safety monitoring board or advisory board for EXCEL study
(neurofibromatosis). He is board member of the Dutch Pediatric Neurology
Society. LP has received speaker honoraria and travel grants from Biogen, and
has consulted for Biogen, Novartis, and Sanofi. Her university holds a patent
for her invention: Live cell based assay for detection of autoantibodies for
NMOSD and related disorders (Indian patent number 202141055841). MR is supported
by research grants from the Austrian Science Fund (FWF project P32699), the
Austrian Research Promotion Agency, Euroimmun, and Roche, and consulting fees
and advisory board from Roche (to institution). MR works at the Clinical
Department of the Medical University of Innsbruck (Innsbruck, Austria), which
offers diagnostic testing for MOG-IgG and other autoantibodies. AS received
personal compensation for consulting, serving on a scientific advisory board,
speaking activities with Merck, Sanofi, Biogen, Roche, TEVA Pharmaceuticals,
Novartis, Alexion, and Janssen. DKS has received research support from National
council for Scientific and Technological Development CNPq Brazil (425331/2016-4
and 308636/2019-8), Fundacao de Amparo Pesquisa do Estado do Rio Grande do Sul
(17/2551-0001391-3 and 21/2551-0000077-5), TEVA Pharmaceuticals, Merck, Biogen,
and Euroimmun AG; speaker honoraria from Biogen, Novartis, Genzyme, TEVA
Pharmaceuticals, Merck, Roche, and Bayer; and participates in advisory boards
for Biogen, Roche, and Merck. KR has been an invited speaker for Merck and
serves as a consultant for an advisory board for Roche. FP has received
honoraria and research support from Alexion, Bayer, Biogen, Chugai, MerckSerono,
Novartis, Genyzme, MedImmune, Shire, and Teva Pharmaceuticals, and serves on
scientific advisory boards for Alexion, MedImmune, Novartis, and UCB. He has
received funding from Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG Exc 257),
Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (Competence Network Multiple
Sclerosis), Guthy-Jackson Charitable Foundation, EU Framework Program 7, and
National Multiple Sclerosis Society of the USA. He serves on the steering
committee of the N-Momentum study with inebilizumab (Horizon Therapeutics) and
the OCTiMS Study (Novartis). He is an associatee editor with Neurology,
Neuroimmunology, and Neuroinflammation and academic editor with PloS One. SJP
reports grants, personal fees, and non-financial support from Alexion
Pharmaceuticals; grants, personal fees, and non-financial support from MedImmune
/Viela Bio; and personal fees for consulting from Genentech, Roche, UCB, and
Astellas. He has two patents issued (8889102; application 12-678350;
Neuromyelitis Optica Autoantibodies as a Marker for Neoplasia; and 9891219B2;
application 12-573942; Methods for Treating Neuromyelitis Optica [NMO] by
Administration of Eculizumab to an individual that is Aquaporin-4 [AQP4]-IgG
Autoantibody positive). SJP also has patents pending for IgGs to the following
proteins as biomarkers of autoimmune neurological disorders: septin-5,
kelch-like protein 11, GFAP, PDE10A, and MAP1B. He works at Mayo Clinic, which
offers commercial MOG-IgG testing. He receives no royalties from the sale of
tests done at the neuroimmunology Laboratory at Mayo Clinic. KF serves as an
advisor or on scientific advisory boards for Biogen, Mitsubishi Tanabe,
Novartis, Chugai, Roche, Alexion, VielaBio/Horizon Therapeutics, UCB, Merck
Biopharma, Japan Tobacco and Abbvie; has received funding for travel and speaker
honoraria from Biogen, Eisai, Mitsubishi Tanabe, Novartis, Chugai, Roche,
Alexion, VielaBio, Teijin, Asahi Kasei Medical, Merck, and Takeda; and has
received the Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of
Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan and the
Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Health, Welfare and
Labor of Japan. JP has received consulting fees from Merck, Novartis, Roche,
Mitsubishi Tnabe Pharma, UCB, Alexion, Vitaccess, and Argenx, and MRI support
from Medimmune, Merck, and Roche. She has received payment or honoraria for
lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing, or educational
events from Merck, VielaBio, Roche and Alexion. She has participated on a data
safety monitoring board or advisory board for Novartis, Roche, Argenx, UCB,
Alexion, and Sanofi. She is member of the Charcot Foundation Board, Magnetic
Resonance in Multiple Sclerosis steering committee, and National Health Service
England Intravenous Immune Globulin Committee. She holds stock for AstraZeneca
for a product that is not related to MOG-antibody associated disease. She has a
patent for Diagnosing Multiple Sclerosis (application no PCT/GB2013/050285,
final patent number 13704627.2–1408; client reference 4440; MS reference
P37347WO; patent published Sept 13, 2021).
