---
reference_id: "PMID:19847161"
title: Dissociable control of impulsivity in rats by dopamine d2/3 receptors in the core and shell subregions of the nucleus accumbens.
authors:
- Besson M
- Belin D
- McNamara R
- Theobald DE
- Castel A
- Beckett VL
- Crittenden BM
- Newman AH
- Everitt BJ
- Robbins TW
- Dalley JW
journal: Neuropsychopharmacology
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1038/npp.2009.162
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dissociable control of impulsivity in rats by dopamine d2/3 receptors in the core and shell subregions of the nucleus accumbens.
**Authors:** Besson M, Belin D, McNamara R, Theobald DE, Castel A, Beckett VL, Crittenden BM, Newman AH, Everitt BJ, Robbins TW, Dalley JW
**Journal:** Neuropsychopharmacology (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/npp.2009.162](https://doi.org/10.1038/npp.2009.162)

## Content

1. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010 Jan;35(2):560-9. doi: 10.1038/npp.2009.162.

Dissociable control of impulsivity in rats by dopamine d2/3 receptors in the 
core and shell subregions of the nucleus accumbens.

Besson M(1), Belin D, McNamara R, Theobald DE, Castel A, Beckett VL, Crittenden 
BM, Newman AH, Everitt BJ, Robbins TW, Dalley JW.

Author information:
(1)Behavioral and Clinical Neuroscience Institute and Department of Experimental 
Psychology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Previous research has identified the nucleus accumbens (NAcb) as an important 
brain region underlying inter-individual variation in impulsive behavior. Such 
variation has been linked to decreased dopamine (DA) D2/3 receptor availability 
in the ventral striatum of rats exhibiting spontaneously high levels of 
impulsivity on a 5-choice serial reaction time (5-CSRT) test of sustained visual 
attention. This study investigated the involvement of DA D2/3 receptors in the 
NAcb core (NAcbC) and the NAcb shell (NAcbS) in impulsivity. We investigated the 
effects of a DA D2/3 receptor antagonist (nafadotride) and a DA D2/3 partial 
agonist (aripiprazole) infused directly into either the NAcbC or NAcbS of rats 
selected for high (HI) and low (LI) impulsivity on the 5-CSRT task. Nafadotride 
increased significantly the level of impulsivity when infused into the NAcbS, 
but decreased impulsivity when infused into the NAcbC of HI rats. By contrast, 
intra-NAcb microinfusions of aripiprazole did not affect impulsivity. Systemic 
administration of nafadotride had no effect on impulsive behavior but increased 
the number of omissions and correct response latencies, whereas systemic 
injections of aripiprazole decreased impulsive and perseverative behavior, and 
increased the number of omissions and correct response latencies. These findings 
indicate an opponent modulation of impulsive behavior by DA D2/3 receptors in 
the NAcbS and NAcbC. Such divergent roles may have relevance for the etiology 
and treatment of clinical disorders of behavioral control, including 
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and drug addiction.

DOI: 10.1038/npp.2009.162
PMCID: PMC3055378
PMID: 19847161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]