---
reference_id: "PMID:35526155"
title: Biallelic HFM1 variants cause non-obstructive azoospermia with meiotic arrest in humans by impairing crossover formation to varying degrees.
authors:
- Xie X
- Murtaza G
- Li Y
- Zhou J
- Ye J
- Khan R
- Jiang L
- Khan I
- Zubair M
- Yin H
- Jiang H
- Liu W
- Shi B
- Hou X
- Gong C
- Fan S
- Wang Y
- Jiang X
- Zhang Y
- Zhang H
- Ma H
- Shi Q
journal: Hum Reprod
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/humrep/deac092
keywords:
- Animals
- Azoospermia/pathology
- "DNA Helicases/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Humans
- "Infertility, Male/diagnosis"
- Male
- Mice
- Spermatogenesis/genetics
- Spermatozoa/metabolism
- Testis/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biallelic HFM1 variants cause non-obstructive azoospermia with meiotic arrest in humans by impairing crossover formation to varying degrees.
**Authors:** Xie X, Murtaza G, Li Y, Zhou J, Ye J, Khan R, Jiang L, Khan I, Zubair M, Yin H, Jiang H, Liu W, Shi B, Hou X, Gong C, Fan S, Wang Y, Jiang X, Zhang Y, Zhang H, Ma H, Shi Q
**Journal:** Hum Reprod (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/humrep/deac092](https://doi.org/10.1093/humrep/deac092)

## Content

1. Hum Reprod. 2022 Jun 30;37(7):1664-1677. doi: 10.1093/humrep/deac092.

Biallelic HFM1 variants cause non-obstructive azoospermia with meiotic arrest in 
humans by impairing crossover formation to varying degrees.

Xie X(1), Murtaza G(1), Li Y(1), Zhou J(1), Ye J(1), Khan R(1), Jiang L(1), Khan 
I(1), Zubair M(1), Yin H(1), Jiang H(1), Liu W(1), Shi B(1), Hou X(1), Gong 
C(1), Fan S(1), Wang Y(1), Jiang X(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhang H(1), Ma H(1), Shi 
Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Reproduction and Genetics, First Affiliated Hospital of USTC, The 
CAS Key Laboratory of Innate Immunity and Chronic Disease, School of Basic 
Medical Sciences, Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, Biomedical Sciences 
and Health Laboratory of Anhui Province, University of Science and Technology of 
China, Hefei, China.

STUDY QUESTION: Do variants in helicase for meiosis 1 (HFM1) account for male 
infertility in humans?
SUMMARY ANSWER: Biallelic variants in HFM1 cause human male infertility owing to 
non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA) with impaired crossover formation and meiotic 
metaphase I (MMI) arrest.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: HFM1 encodes an evolutionarily conserved DNA helicase 
that is essential for crossover formation and completion of meiosis. The null 
mutants of Hfm1 or its ortholog in multiple organisms displayed spermatogenic 
arrest at the MMI owing to deficiencies in synapsis and severe defects in 
crossover formation. Although HFM1 variants were found in infertile men with 
azoospermia or oligozoospermia, the causal relationship has not yet been 
established with functional evidence.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: A Pakistani family, having two infertile brothers 
born to consanguineous parents, and three unrelated Chinese men diagnosed with 
NOA were recruited for pathogenic variants screening.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: All the patients were diagnosed with 
idiopathic NOA and, for the Chinese patients, meiotic defects were confirmed by 
histological analyses and/or immunofluorescence staining on testicular sections. 
Exome sequencing and subsequent bioinformatic analyses were performed to screen 
for candidate pathogenic variants. The pathogenicity of identified variants was 
assessed and studied in vivo in mice carrying the equivalent mutations.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: Six variants (homozygous or compound 
heterozygous) in HFM1 were identified in the three Chinese patients with NOA and 
two brothers with NOA from the Pakistani family. Testicular histological 
analysis revealed that spermatogenesis is arrested at MMI in patients carrying 
the variants. Mice modeling the HFM1 variants identified in patients 
recapitulated the meiotic defects of patients, confirming the pathogenicity of 
the identified variants. These Hfm1 variants led to various reductions of HFM1 
foci on chromosome axes and resulted in varying degrees of synapsis and 
crossover formation defects in the mutant male mice. In addition, Hfm1 mutant 
female mice displayed infertility or subfertility with oogenesis variously 
affected.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: A limitation of the current study is the small 
sample size. Owing to the unavailability of fresh testicular samples, the 
defects of synapsis and crossover formation could not be detected in 
spermatocytes of patients. Owing to the unavailability of antibodies, we could 
not quantify the impact of these variants on HFM1 protein levels.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: Our findings provide direct clinical and in 
vivo functional evidence that HFM1 variants cause male infertility in humans and 
also suggest that HFM1 may regulate meiotic crossover formation in a 
dose-dependent manner. Noticeably, our findings from mouse models showed that 
HFM1 variants could impair spermatogenesis and oogenesis with a varying degree 
of severity and might also be compatible with the production of a few 
spermatozoa in men and subfertility in women, extending the phenotypic spectrum 
of patients with HFM1 variants.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTEREST(S): This work was supported by the National 
Natural Science Foundation of China (31890780, 32070850, 32061143006, 32000587 
and 31900398) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities 
(YD2070002007 and YD2070002012). The authors declare no potential conflicts of 
interest.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: N/A.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of European 
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/humrep/deac092
PMID: 35526155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]