---
reference_id: "PMID:9525867"
title: "Blk, a BH3-containing mouse protein that interacts with Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL, is a potent death agonist."
authors:
- Hegde R
- Srinivasula SM
- Ahmad M
- Fernandes-Alnemri T
- Alnemri ES
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.14.7783
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Blk, a BH3-containing mouse protein that interacts with Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL, is a potent death agonist.
**Authors:** Hegde R, Srinivasula SM, Ahmad M, Fernandes-Alnemri T, Alnemri ES
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.14.7783](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.14.7783)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Apr 3;273(14):7783-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.14.7783.

Blk, a BH3-containing mouse protein that interacts with Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL, is a 
potent death agonist.

Hegde R(1), Srinivasula SM, Ahmad M, Fernandes-Alnemri T, Alnemri ES.

Author information:
(1)Center for Apoptosis Research and the Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Institute, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

We identified and cloned a novel murine member of the pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 
family. This protein, designated Blk, is structurally and functionally related 
to human Bik and localized to the mitochondrial membrane. Blk contains a 
conserved BH3 domain and can interact with the anti-apoptotic proteins Bcl-2 and 
Bcl-xL. Ectopic expression of Blk in mammalian cells induces apoptosis, which 
can be inhibited by mutations in the BH3 domain and by overexpression of Bcl-2 
or Bcl-xL but not by CrmA. The apoptotic activity of Blk is also inhibited by a 
dominant negative caspase-9, suggesting that Blk induces apoptosis through 
activation of the cytochrome c-Apaf-1-caspase-9 pathway.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.14.7783
PMID: 9525867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]