---
reference_id: "PMID:28889260"
title: Developmental Neurotoxicity of Lead.
authors:
- Caito S
- Aschner M
journal: Adv Neurobiol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-60189-2_1
keywords:
- Alzheimer Disease/epidemiology
- Antisocial Personality Disorder/epidemiology
- Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/epidemiology
- Drinking Water
- Environmental Exposure
- Female
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/epidemiology
- "Juvenile Delinquency/statistics & numerical data"
- "Lead Poisoning, Nervous System/epidemiology"
- Paint
- Pregnancy
- Prenatal Exposure Delayed Effects/epidemiology
- Problem Behavior
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Developmental Neurotoxicity of Lead.
**Authors:** Caito S, Aschner M
**Journal:** Adv Neurobiol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-319-60189-2_1](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-60189-2_1)

## Content

1. Adv Neurobiol. 2017;18:3-12. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-60189-2_1.

Developmental Neurotoxicity of Lead.

Caito S(1), Aschner M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 
1300 Morris Park Ave, Forchheimer Rm 209, Bronx, NY, 10461, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 
1300 Morris Park Ave, Forchheimer Rm 209, Bronx, NY, 10461, USA. 
michael.aschner@einstein.yu.edu.

Lead exposure is a major concern for the developing nervous system. 
Environmental exposures to lead, predominantly from contaminated water or lead 
paint chips, account for the majority of exposures to children. In utero and 
early life exposures to lead have been associated with lower IQ, antisocial and 
delinquent behaviors, and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. In this 
review, we will discuss sources of developmental lead exposure and mechanisms of 
lead neurotoxicity. We will highlight both human epidemiological studies showing 
associations between lead exposure and behavioral abnormalities as well as 
experimental data from animal studies. Finally, we will discuss the effects of 
lead on neurological endpoint past childhood, namely, development of Alzheimer's 
disease in old age.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-60189-2_1
PMID: 28889260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]