---
reference_id: "PMID:28089942"
title: "Targeting EGFR T790M mutation in NSCLC: From biology to evaluation and treatment."
authors:
- Passaro A
- Guerini-Rocco E
- Pochesci A
- Vacirca D
- Spitaleri G
- Catania CM
- Rappa A
- Barberis M
- de Marinis F
journal: Pharmacol Res
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2017.01.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeting EGFR T790M mutation in NSCLC: From biology to evaluation and treatment.
**Authors:** Passaro A, Guerini-Rocco E, Pochesci A, Vacirca D, Spitaleri G, Catania CM, Rappa A, Barberis M, de Marinis F
**Journal:** Pharmacol Res (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.phrs.2017.01.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phrs.2017.01.003)

## Content

1. Pharmacol Res. 2017 Mar;117:406-415. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2017.01.003. Epub
2017  Jan 12.

Targeting EGFR T790M mutation in NSCLC: From biology to evaluation and 
treatment.

Passaro A(1), Guerini-Rocco E(2), Pochesci A(3), Vacirca D(2), Spitaleri G(3), 
Catania CM(3), Rappa A(2), Barberis M(2), de Marinis F(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Thoracic Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy. 
Electronic address: antonio.passaro@ieo.it.
(2)Clinic Unit of Histopathology and Molecular Diagnostics, Division of 
Pathology, European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy.
(3)Division of Thoracic Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy.

The identification of EGFR mutations and their respectively tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors (TKIs), changed dramatically treatment and survival of patients with 
EGFR-positive lung cancer. Nowadays, different EGFR TKIs as afatinib, erlotinib 
and gefitinib are approved worldwide for the treatment of NSCLC harbouring EGFR 
mutations, in particular exon 19 deletions or exon 21 (Leu858Arg) substitution 
EGFR mutations. In first-line setting, when comparing with platinum-based 
chemotherapy, these target drugs improves progression-free survival, response 
rate and quality of life. Unfortunately, the development of different mechanism 
of resistance, limits the long term efficacy of these agents. The most clear 
mechanism of resistance is the development of EGFR Thr790Met mutation. Against 
this new target, different third-generation EGFR-mutant-selective TKIs, such as 
osimertinib, rociletinib and olmutinib, showed a great activity. In this review, 
we summarize the scientific evidences about biology, evaluation and treatment on 
NSCLC with EGFR T790M mutation.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2017.01.003
PMID: 28089942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]