---
reference_id: "PMID:36877098"
title: Phase 3 Trial of Sotatercept for Treatment of Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension.
authors:
- Hoeper MM
- Badesch DB
- Ghofrani HA
- Gibbs JSR
- Gomberg-Maitland M
- McLaughlin VV
- Preston IR
- Souza R
- Waxman AB
- Grünig E
- Kopeć G
- Meyer G
- Olsson KM
- Rosenkranz S
- Xu Y
- Miller B
- Fowler M
- Butler J
- Koglin J
- de Oliveira Pena J
- Humbert M
- STELLAR Trial Investigators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2213558
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Double-Blind Method
- "Hypertension, Pulmonary/drug therapy"
- "Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- "Recombinant Fusion Proteins/administration & dosage, adverse effects, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Treatment Outcome
- Vascular Resistance/drug effects
- "Injections, Subcutaneous"
- Walk Test
- Exercise Tolerance/drug effects
- "Cardiovascular Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Respiratory System Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phase 3 Trial of Sotatercept for Treatment of Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension.
**Authors:** Hoeper MM, Badesch DB, Ghofrani HA, Gibbs JSR, Gomberg-Maitland M, McLaughlin VV, Preston IR, Souza R, Waxman AB, Grünig E, Kopeć G, Meyer G, Olsson KM, Rosenkranz S, Xu Y, Miller B, Fowler M, Butler J, Koglin J, de Oliveira Pena J, Humbert M, STELLAR Trial Investigators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2213558](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2213558)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2023 Apr 20;388(16):1478-1490. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2213558. Epub 
2023 Mar 6.

Phase 3 Trial of Sotatercept for Treatment of Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension.

Hoeper MM(1), Badesch DB(1), Ghofrani HA(1), Gibbs JSR(1), Gomberg-Maitland 
M(1), McLaughlin VV(1), Preston IR(1), Souza R(1), Waxman AB(1), Grünig E(1), 
Kopeć G(1), Meyer G(1), Olsson KM(1), Rosenkranz S(1), Xu Y(1), Miller B(1), 
Fowler M(1), Butler J(1), Koglin J(1), de Oliveira Pena J(1), Humbert M(1); 
STELLAR Trial Investigators.

Collaborators: Hoeper MM, Humbert M, Badesch DB, Ghofrani HA, Gibbs JSR, 
Gomberg-Maitland M, McLaughlin VV, Preston IR, Souza R, Waxman A, Adir Y, 
Al-Hiti H, Adrade Lima M, Argula R, Baratz D, Berastegui C, Bertoletti L, 
Bjorklund E, Blanco I, Botta C, Bourdin A, Burger C, Chakinala M, Chung WJ, 
Cifrian Martinez JM, Coghlan JG, De Salvo M, Degano B, DeGroote P, Del Cerro 
Marin MJ, Delcroix M, Eisenmann S, Elwing J, Engel P, Escribano Subias P, Farber 
H, Feenstra J, Feldman J, Fisher M, Fortin T, Franco V, Gagnadoux F, Gallagher 
H, Aguilar HG, Grünig E, Halank M, Hjalmarsson C, Horeau-Langlard D, Horn E, 
Howard L, Huston J, Jansa P, Keogh A, Klinger J, Kopeć G, Kramer M, Lange T, 
Langleben D, Lau E, Leary P, Leuchte H, McConnell J, Michelakis E, Moceri P, 
Moles V, Montani D, Nair A, Nikolic A, Opitz C, Oudiz R, Picard F, Poch D, 
Ramirez A, Reeves G, Restrepo-Jaramillo R, Riou M, Rowan C, Safdar Z, Segel M, 
Shitrit D, Sood N, Spikes L, Swisher J, Thenappan T, Torbicki A, Ulrich S, 
Vachiery JL, van Paassen P, Vizza C, Vonk Noordegraaf A, Whyte K, Wichman T, 
Wort J, Brundage BH, Ford I, McGoon MD, Neufeld EJ.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Respiratory Medicine and Infectious Diseases, Hannover 
Medical School, Member of the German Center for Lung Research, Biomedical 
Research in End-Stage and Obstructive Lung Disease Hannover, Hannover (M.M.H., 
K.M.O.), the Department of Internal Medicine, Universities of Giessen and 
Marburg Lung Center, Institute for Lung Health, Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, 
Member of the German Center for Lung Research, Giessen (H.A.G.), 
Thoraxklinik-Heidelberg and the German Center for Lung Research, Heidelberg 
(E.G.), and the Department of Cardiology, Heart Center, University Hospital 
Cologne, Cologne (S.R.) - all in Germany; the University of Colorado, Anschutz 
Medical Campus, Aurora (D.B.B.); the National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial 
College London, London (J.S.R.G.); George Washington University, Washington, DC 
(M.G.-M.); the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor (V.V.M.); Tufts Medical Center 
(I.R.P.) and Brigham and Women's Hospital (A.B.W.) - both in Boston; Instituto 
do Coração, Hospital das Clínicas da Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de 
São Paulo, São Paulo (R.S.), and Irmandade da Santa Casa de Misericórdia de 
Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre (G.M.) - both in Brazil; the Pulmonary Circulation 
Center, Department of Cardiac and Vascular Diseases, Jagiellonian University 
Medical College, John Paul II Hospital in Krakow, Krakow, Poland (G.K.); Merck 
(Y.X., J.K.) and Acceleron Pharma (B.M., M.F., J.B., J.O.P.) - both in Rahway, 
NJ; and Université Paris-Saclay, INSERM Unité Mixte de Recherche en Santé 999, 
Hôpital Bicêtre (Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris), Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, 
France (M.H.).

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cardiol. 2023 May;20(5):285. doi: 10.1038/s41569-023-00868-0.
    Ann Intern Med. 2023 Jun;176(6):JC69. doi: 10.7326/J23-0034.

BACKGROUND: Pulmonary arterial hypertension is a progressive disease involving 
proliferative remodeling of the pulmonary vessels. Despite therapeutic advances, 
the disease-associated morbidity and mortality remain high. Sotatercept is a 
fusion protein that traps activins and growth differentiation factors involved 
in pulmonary arterial hypertension.
METHODS: We conducted a multicenter, double-blind, phase 3 trial in which adults 
with pulmonary arterial hypertension (World Health Organization [WHO] functional 
class II or III) who were receiving stable background therapy were randomly 
assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive subcutaneous sotatercept (starting dose, 0.3 
mg per kilogram of body weight; target dose, 0.7 mg per kilogram) or placebo 
every 3 weeks. The primary end point was the change from baseline at week 24 in 
the 6-minute walk distance. Nine secondary end points, tested hierarchically in 
the following order, were multicomponent improvement, change in pulmonary 
vascular resistance, change in N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide level, 
improvement in WHO functional class, time to death or clinical worsening, French 
risk score, and changes in the Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension-Symptoms and 
Impact (PAH-SYMPACT) Physical Impacts, Cardiopulmonary Symptoms, and 
Cognitive/Emotional Impacts domain scores; all were assessed at week 24 except 
time to death or clinical worsening, which was assessed when the last patient 
completed the week 24 visit.
RESULTS: A total of 163 patients were assigned to receive sotatercept and 160 to 
receive placebo. The median change from baseline at week 24 in the 6-minute walk 
distance was 34.4 m (95% confidence interval [CI], 33.0 to 35.5) in the 
sotatercept group and 1.0 m (95% CI, -0.3 to 3.5) in the placebo group. The 
Hodges-Lehmann estimate of the difference between the sotatercept and placebo 
groups in the change from baseline at week 24 in the 6-minute walk distance was 
40.8 m (95% CI, 27.5 to 54.1; P<0.001). The first eight secondary end points 
were significantly improved with sotatercept as compared with placebo, whereas 
the PAH-SYMPACT Cognitive/Emotional Impacts domain score was not. Adverse events 
that occurred more frequently with sotatercept than with placebo included 
epistaxis, dizziness, telangiectasia, increased hemoglobin levels, 
thrombocytopenia, and increased blood pressure.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension who were receiving 
stable background therapy, sotatercept resulted in a greater improvement in 
exercise capacity (as assessed by the 6-minute walk test) than placebo. (Funded 
by Acceleron Pharma, a subsidiary of MSD; STELLAR ClinicalTrials.gov number, 
NCT04576988.).

Copyright © 2023 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2213558
PMID: 36877098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]