---
reference_id: "PMID:21253789"
title: "Thinking about the role (largely ignored) of heavy metals in cancer prevention: hexavalent chromium and melanoma as a case in point."
authors:
- Meyskens FL
- Yang S
journal: Recent Results Cancer Res
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-10858-7_5
keywords:
- "Arthroplasty, Replacement, Hip/adverse effects"
- Chromium/toxicity
- Humans
- Melanoma/etiology
- Skin Neoplasms/etiology
- Ultraviolet Rays
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thinking about the role (largely ignored) of heavy metals in cancer prevention: hexavalent chromium and melanoma as a case in point.
**Authors:** Meyskens FL, Yang S
**Journal:** Recent Results Cancer Res (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-642-10858-7_5](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-10858-7_5)

## Content

1. Recent Results Cancer Res. 2011;188:65-74. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-10858-7_5.

Thinking about the role (largely ignored) of heavy metals in cancer prevention:
hexavalent chromium and melanoma as a case in point.

Meyskens FL(1), Yang S.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Medicine, University of California, Irvine, USA.
flmeyske@uci.edu

Ultraviolet (UV) light exposure accounts for only 40-50% of the attributable
risk for cutaneous melanoma (CM); also classical UV-induced lesions are rare in
melanomas (especially among CM with NRAS or BRAF mutations). It is therefore
likely that an additional environmental factor exists as familial and genetic
factors play a role in less than 5%. A large amount of (largely forgotten)
epidemiologic data indicates that heavy metal exposure is strongly associated
with the development of CM. Also, epidemiologic studies of patients with joint
replacement indicate a marked subsequent time-related increase in melanoma in
patients with metal-on-metal hip arthroplasties. In these patients chromium and
cobalt levels rise to 10x normal and stay elevated at levels two- to threefold
normal for at least 10 years. Chromium is widely used in industry for its
anticorrosive and steel-strengthening properties and is widespread in everyday
materials. Our hypothesis is therefore that chromium, alone or in conjunction
with UV, plays a major role in the pathogenesis of CM. We have incubated human
neonatal melanocytes for more than 10 weeks in the presence of a wide range and
concentrations of metals without effect except by hexavalent chromium Cr(VI)and
to a lesser degree Co²(+). After prolonged culture, chromium-incubated cells
produced foci and when replated secondary colonies formed. We have just begun to
study this phenomenon in more detail and studies without and with different
wavelengths of UV will be explored. Of interest is that aneuploidy (a universal
chromosomal change in cutaneous melanoma) in lymphocytes in patients with
hip-on-hip metal prostheses has been demonstrated by others.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-10858-7_5
PMID: 21253789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
