---
reference_id: "PMID:36368253"
title: "Real-world first-line treatment of patients with BRAF(V600E)-mutant metastatic colorectal cancer: the CAPSTAN CRC study."
authors:
- Martinelli E
- Cremolini C
- Mazard T
- Vidal J
- Virchow I
- Tougeron D
- Cuyle PJ
- Chibaudel B
- Kim S
- Ghanem I
- Asselain B
- Castagné C
- Zkik A
- Khan S
- Arnold D
journal: ESMO Open
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2022.100603
keywords:
- Aged
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Bevacizumab/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- Colonic Neoplasms/drug therapy
- "Colorectal Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Irinotecan/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Retrospective Studies
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Real-world first-line treatment of patients with BRAF(V600E)-mutant metastatic colorectal cancer: the CAPSTAN CRC study.
**Authors:** Martinelli E, Cremolini C, Mazard T, Vidal J, Virchow I, Tougeron D, Cuyle PJ, Chibaudel B, Kim S, Ghanem I, Asselain B, Castagné C, Zkik A, Khan S, Arnold D
**Journal:** ESMO Open (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.esmoop.2022.100603](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2022.100603)

## Content

1. ESMO Open. 2022 Dec;7(6):100603. doi: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2022.100603. Epub 2022
Nov 8.

Real-world first-line treatment of patients with BRAF(V600E)-mutant metastatic
colorectal cancer: the CAPSTAN CRC study.

Martinelli E(1), Cremolini C(2), Mazard T(3), Vidal J(4), Virchow I(5), Tougeron
D(6), Cuyle PJ(7), Chibaudel B(8), Kim S(9), Ghanem I(10), Asselain B(11),
Castagné C(12), Zkik A(12), Khan S(12), Arnold D(13).

Author information:
(1)Medical Oncology, Department of Precision Medicine, Università Degli Studi
Della Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Naples, Italy. Electronic address:
erika.martinelli@unicampania.it.
(2)Oncologia Medica, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(3)Institut de Recherche en Cancerologie de Montpellier, INSERM, Montpellier
University, Institut du Cancer de Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Hospital del Mar - IMIM, CIBERONC, Barcelona,
Spain.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology, West German Cancer Center, University
Hospital Essen, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(6)Department of Hepato-gastroenterology, Poitiers University Hospital and
University of Poitiers, Poitiers, France.
(7)Gastroenterology and Digestive Oncology Department, Imelda General Hospital,
Bonheiden, Belgium.
(8)Department of Medical Oncology, Hôpital Franco-Britannique - Fondation
Cognacq-Jay, Levallois-Perret, France.
(9)Department of Medical Oncology, Centre Hospitalier Régional et Universitaire
de Besançon, Besançon, France.
(10)Department of Medical Oncology, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid,
Spain.
(11)GINECO, Paris, France.
(12)Pierre Fabre, Boulogne-Billancourt, France.
(13)Asklepios Tumorzentrum Hamburg AK Altona, Hamburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: BRAFV600E mutations occur in 8%-12% of metastatic colorectal cancer
(mCRC) cases and are associated with poor survival. European guidelines
recommend combination (doublet or triplet) chemotherapy plus bevacizumab in
first line. However, an unmet need remains for more effective treatments for
these patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: CAPSTAN CRC is a European, retrospective, multicenter,
observational study evaluating real-world treatment practices for patients with
BRAFV600E-mutant mCRC treated between 1 January 2016 and 31 January 2020. The
primary objective was to describe first-line treatment patterns. Secondary
objectives included describing baseline demographics, mutational testing
procedures, treatment effectiveness, and safety.
RESULTS: In total, 255 patients (median age 66.0 years; 58.4% female) with
BRAFV600E-mutant unresectable mCRC from seven countries were included. Most had
right-sided tumors (52.5%) and presented with synchronous disease at diagnosis
(66.4%). Chemotherapy plus targeted therapy (68.7%) was preferred at first line
over chemotherapy alone (31.3%). The main first-line treatments were FOLFOX plus
bevacizumab (27.1%) and FOLFOXIRI (folinic acid, 5-fluorouracil, oxaliplatin,
irinotecan) with/without bevacizumab (27.1%/19.2%). Median duration of
first-line treatment was 4.9 months. Overall, 52.5% received second-line
treatment. Across all first-line regimens, progression-free survival (PFS) and
overall survival were 6.0 [95% confidence interval (CI) 5.3-6.7] months and 12.9
(95% CI 11.6-14.1) months, respectively. Triplet plus targeted therapy was
associated with more adverse events (75.0%) compared with triplet chemotherapy
alone (50.0%) and doublet chemotherapy alone (36.1%). Multivariate analysis
identified low body mass index and presence of three or more metastatic sites as
significant prognostic factors for PFS.
CONCLUSIONS: This study is, to date, the largest real-world analysis of patients
with BRAFV600E-mutant mCRC, providing valuable insights into routine first-line
treatment practices for these patients. The data highlight the intrinsic
aggressiveness of this disease subgroup, confirming results from previous
real-world studies and clinical trials, and stressing the urgent need for more
effective treatment options in this setting.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2022.100603
PMCID: PMC9832736
PMID: 36368253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure EM has Personal fees from
AstraZeneca, Amgen, Bayer, Merck Serono, Roche, Servier, and Pierre Fabre. CCr
reports receiving personal fees from Amgen, Bayer, F. Hoffman–La Roche, and
Sirtex. TM reports receiving personal fees from Servier and Pierre Fabre; and
honoraria from Sandoz, Pierre Fabre, Sanofi, AAA, Merck Serono, and Servier. JV
reports receiving honoraria from Amgen, Hoffman La-Roche, Merck-Serono, Sanofi,
and Sysmex Inostics. IV reports receiving honoraria from Bristol Myers Squibb.
DT reports financial interests in Merk Serono, Novartis, and BMS; and receiving
honoraria from Amgen, BMS, Servier, Roche, Ipsen, Sanofi, Astra Zeneca,
Novartis, and Merk Serono. PJC has a consulting/advisory role with Lilly,
Novartis, Amgen, Roche, MSD, and Pierre Fabre; and reports receiving fees for
travel expenses from Novartis, Ipsen, Roche, and Lilly. BC reports receiving
personal fees from Roche, Sanofi, and Amgen; and honoraria from Sanofi. SKi
reports receiving honoraria from Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Ipsen, MSD,
Sanofi, and Servier; and research funding from Boehringer Ingelheim, Pfizer,
Roche, and Sanofi. IG reports receiving honoraria from Amgen, Merck Serono,
Pierre Fabre, Roche, and Servier; and research funding from Roche. BA reports
receiving personal fees from AstraZeneca, Bristol Myers Squibb, Pierre Fabre,
Roche, and Servier. CCa, AZ, and SKh are all employees of Pierre Fabre. DA
reports financial and personal interests in Bayer, Bristol Myers Squibb, Lilly,
Merck (EMD), Mologen, Sanofi, Servier, Sirtex, Symphogen, Terumo, and Roche. IV
has declared no conflicts of interest.
