---
reference_id: "PMID:14679583"
title: "Brittle cornea syndrome and its delineation from the kyphoscoliotic type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS VI): report on 23 patients and review of the literature."
authors:
- Al-Hussain H
- Zeisberger SM
- Huber PR
- Giunta C
- Steinmann B
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.20326
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brittle cornea syndrome and its delineation from the kyphoscoliotic type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS VI): report on 23 patients and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Al-Hussain H, Zeisberger SM, Huber PR, Giunta C, Steinmann B
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.20326](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.20326)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Jan 1;124A(1):28-34. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.20326.

Brittle cornea syndrome and its delineation from the kyphoscoliotic type of 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS VI): report on 23 patients and review of the 
literature.

Al-Hussain H(1), Zeisberger SM, Huber PR, Giunta C, Steinmann B.

Author information:
(1)King Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

The brittle cornea syndrome (BCS) is a generalized connective tissue disorder 
characterized by corneal rupture following only minor trauma, keratoconus or 
keratoglobus, blue sclerae, hyperelasticity of the skin without excessive 
fragility, and hypermobility of the joints. It is inherited as an autosomal 
recessive trait but the underlying genetic defect remains undetermined. We 
present 23 patients (11 male) from 13 nuclear families followed at the King 
Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, aged 3-28 years at last 
follow-up. A total of 28 events of corneal rupture were noted in 17 patients 
(eight male), among whom nine had had bilateral ruptures, and eight had had 
unilateral ruptures (four of the right cornea), while two had experienced 
re-rupture 2 and 4 years, respectively, after surgery; six patients (aged 3-21 
years) had had no ruptures. We describe the natural history of our cases and 
discuss them together with those others reported in the literature. Because of 
similarities between the BCS and the kyphoscoliotic type of the Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome (EDS VI), both disorders tend to have been confounded. Here, we show 
that all of our BCS patients tested in this regard had biochemical findings 
reflective of normal activity of lysyl hydroxylase, characteristically deficient 
in EDS VI, such as normal urinary total pyridinoline ratios and/or normal 
electrophoretic migration of collagen chains produced by dermal fibroblasts. The 
BCS is, therefore, an entity distinct from the kyphoscoliotic type of EDS, which 
has a much poorer prognosis.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.20326
PMID: 14679583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]