---
reference_id: "PMID:31737996"
title: The NuRD complex and macrocephaly associated neurodevelopmental disorders.
authors:
- Pierson TM
- Otero MG
- Grand K
- Choi A
- Graham JM Jr
- Young JI
- Mackay JP
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31752
keywords:
- DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- Humans
- Megalencephaly/genetics
- "Mi-2 Nucleosome Remodeling and Deacetylase Complex/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
- Neurodevelopmental Disorders/genetics
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The NuRD complex and macrocephaly associated neurodevelopmental disorders.
**Authors:** Pierson TM, Otero MG, Grand K, Choi A, Graham JM Jr, Young JI, Mackay JP
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.31752](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.31752)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2019 Dec;181(4):548-556. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.c.31752. Epub 2019 Nov 18.

The NuRD complex and macrocephaly associated neurodevelopmental disorders.

Pierson TM(1)(2)(3), Otero MG(3), Grand K(4), Choi A(3), Graham JM Jr(4), Young
JI(5), Mackay JP(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles,
California.
(2)Department of Neurology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles,
California.
(3)Board of Governors Regenerative Medicine Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center, Los Angeles, California.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Medical Genetics, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los
Angeles, California.
(5)John P. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, Florida.
(6)School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Sydney, Sydney, New
South Wales, Australia.

The nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase (NuRD) complex is a major regulator of
gene expression involved in pluripotency, lineage commitment, and
corticogenesis. This important complex is composed of seven different proteins,
with mutations in CHD3, CHD4, and GATAD2B being associated with
neurodevelopmental disorders presenting with macrocephaly and intellectual
disability similar to other overgrowth and intellectual disability (OGID)
syndromes. Pathogenic variants in CHD3 and CHD4 primarily involve disruption of
enzymatic function. GATAD2B variants include loss-of-function mutations that
alter protein dosage and missense variants that involve either of two conserved
domains (CR1 and CR2) known to interact with other NuRD proteins. In addition to
macrocephaly and intellectual disability, CHD3 variants are associated with
inguinal hernias and apraxia of speech; whereas CHD4 variants are associated
with skeletal anomalies, deafness, and cardiac defects. GATAD2B-associated
neurodevelopmental disorder (GAND) has phenotypic overlap with both of these
disorders. Of note, structural models of NuRD indicate that CHD3 and CHD4
require direct contact with the GATAD2B-CR2 domain to interact with the rest of
the complex. Therefore, the phenotypic overlaps of CHD3- and CHD4-related
disorders with GAND are consistent with a loss in the ability of GATAD2B to
recruit CHD3 or CHD4 to the complex. The shared features of these
neurodevelopmental disorders may represent a new class of OGID syndrome: the
NuRDopathies.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31752
PMID: 31737996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
