---
reference_id: "PMID:28638553"
title: A review of 640 Oral squamous cell carcinoma cases in Nigeria.
authors:
- Lawal AO
- Adisa AO
- Effiom OA
journal: J Clin Exp Dent
year: '2017'
doi: 10.4317/jced.53680
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A review of 640 Oral squamous cell carcinoma cases in Nigeria.
**Authors:** Lawal AO, Adisa AO, Effiom OA
**Journal:** J Clin Exp Dent (2017)
**DOI:** [10.4317/jced.53680](https://doi.org/10.4317/jced.53680)

## Content

1. J Clin Exp Dent. 2017 Jun 1;9(6):e767-e771. doi: 10.4317/jced.53680.
eCollection  2017 Jun.

A review of 640 Oral squamous cell carcinoma cases in Nigeria.

Lawal AO(1), Adisa AO(1), Effiom OA(2).

Author information:
(1)FMCDS. Senior Lecturer/Consultant, Department of Oral Pathology, College of 
Medicine, University of Ibadan, Nigeria.
(2)FMCDS. Senior Lecturer/Consultant, Department of Oral and Maxillofacial 
Pathology & Biology, College of Medicine, University of Lagos, Nigeria.

BACKGROUND: Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is the most prevalent malignant 
neoplasm in the oral cavity and accounts for 70% to 90% of all oral malignant 
neoplasms. The aim of this study was to examine the demographic distribution of 
OSCC in five Tertiary Health centres in Nigeria.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: All cases diagnosed as OSCC during the period from 1970 
-2014 were retrieved from the records of five teaching hospitals in Nigeria. 
Hematoxylin and eosin stained histological slides of all cases that had a 
diagnosis of OSCC were reviewed for confirmation and inclusion. Data from all 
the centers was collated at the University College Hospital, Ibadan by 2 
researchers. The data was entered into and analyzed with the SPSS for Windows 
(version 20.0; SPSS Inc. Chicago, IL). Simple descriptive and comparative 
analyses were done, with the test of statistical significance set at p ≤ 0.05.
RESULTS: A total of 640 cases of OSCC were seen out of 1560 oral malignant 
neoplasms representing 41% of all the oral malignancies seen. The mean age of 
occurence of OSCC was 55.5 (±17.0) years and a peak age incidence in the sixth 
and seventh decades of life. OSCC occurred more in males (60.9%) than females 
(39.1%) with a male: female ratio of 1.6:1. The well differentiated OSCC with 
309 (48.3%) cases, was the most common grade, while the moderately 
differentiated and poorly differentiated OSCC accounted for 232 (36.2%) and 92 
(14.4%) cases respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: This study showed that OSCC is more common in males, most commonly 
seen in the 60-69 age group and the commonest site of occurrence was the 
mandibular mucosa. The well differentiated OSCC was the most common histology 
sub-type. Key words:Oral squamous cell carcinoma, tongue, palate, mandible.

DOI: 10.4317/jced.53680
PMCID: PMC5474332
PMID: 28638553

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement:The Authors 
declare no conflict of Interest as study was entirely self-funded.