---
reference_id: "PMID:15668867"
title: Microbiologic evaluation of patients from Missouri with erythema migrans.
authors:
- Wormser GP
- Masters E
- Liveris D
- Nowakowski J
- Nadelman RB
- Holmgren D
- Bittker S
- Cooper D
- Wang G
- Schwartz I
journal: Clin Infect Dis
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1086/427289
keywords:
- "Borrelia/classification, isolation & purification"
- "Borrelia Infections/epidemiology, microbiology"
- "Erythema Chronicum Migrans/epidemiology, microbiology"
- Humans
- Missouri/epidemiology
- Phylogeny
- Skin/microbiology
- "Tick-Borne Diseases/epidemiology, microbiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Microbiologic evaluation of patients from Missouri with erythema migrans.
**Authors:** Wormser GP, Masters E, Liveris D, Nowakowski J, Nadelman RB, Holmgren D, Bittker S, Cooper D, Wang G, Schwartz I
**Journal:** Clin Infect Dis (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1086/427289](https://doi.org/10.1086/427289)

## Content

1. Clin Infect Dis. 2005 Feb 1;40(3):423-8. doi: 10.1086/427289. Epub 2005 Jan
10.

Microbiologic evaluation of patients from Missouri with erythema migrans.

Wormser GP(1), Masters E, Liveris D, Nowakowski J, Nadelman RB, Holmgren D, 
Bittker S, Cooper D, Wang G, Schwartz I.

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York Medical 
College, Valhalla, NY 10595, USA. gary_wormser@nymc.edu

BACKGROUND: Borrelia lonestari infects Amblyomma americanum, the tick species 
that is the most common cause of tick bites in southeast and south-central 
United States, and this spirochete has been detected in an erythema migrans 
(EM)-like skin rash in 1 patient. Therefore, B. lonestari is considered to be a 
leading candidate for the etiologic agent of EM in this region.
METHODS: Skin biopsy specimens obtained from patients from the Cape Girardeau 
area of Missouri who had EM-like lesions were cultured in Barbour-Stoenner-Kelly 
medium and evaluated by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) targeting multiple 
genes. Serum specimens were tested by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for 
antibodies against sonicated whole-cell Borrelia burgdorferi. Results were 
compared with those obtained over the same period for patients from New York 
State who had EM.
RESULTS: B. lonestari was not detected by PCR in any of 31 skin biopsy specimens 
collected from 30 Missouri patients. None of 19 cultures of Missouri skin 
samples that were suitable for evaluation were positive for B. burgdorferi, 
compared with 89 (63%) of 142 cultures of samples collected from New York State 
patients (P<.001). None of the 25 evaluable Missouri patients were seropositive 
for antibodies against B. burgdorferi, compared with 107 (75%) of 143 New York 
State patients (P<.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Neither B. lonestari nor B. burgdorferi is likely to be the cause 
of EM-like skin lesions in patients from the Cape Girardeau area of Missouri. 
The etiology of this condition remains unknown.

DOI: 10.1086/427289
PMCID: PMC2773674
PMID: 15668867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential conflicts of interest. All authors: no 
conflicts.