---
reference_id: "PMID:38150484"
title: Normalization by orientation-tuned surround in human V1-V3.
authors:
- Fang Z
- Bloem IM
- Olsson C
- Ma WJ
- Winawer J
journal: PLoS Comput Biol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011704
keywords:
- Humans
- Orientation/physiology
- "Visual Cortex/diagnostic imaging, physiology"
- Neurons/physiology
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Photic Stimulation/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Normalization by orientation-tuned surround in human V1-V3.
**Authors:** Fang Z, Bloem IM, Olsson C, Ma WJ, Winawer J
**Journal:** PLoS Comput Biol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011704](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011704)

## Content

1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2023 Dec 27;19(12):e1011704. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011704. eCollection 2023 Dec.

Normalization by orientation-tuned surround in human V1-V3.

Fang Z(1)(2), Bloem IM(1), Olsson C(1), Ma WJ(1), Winawer J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Center for Neural Science, New York University, 
New York City, New York, United States of America.
(2)Department of Cognitive Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New 
York, United States of America.

An influential account of neuronal responses in primary visual cortex is the 
normalized energy model. This model is often implemented as a multi-stage 
computation. The first stage is linear filtering. The second stage is the 
extraction of contrast energy, whereby a complex cell computes the squared and 
summed outputs of a pair of the linear filters in quadrature phase. The third 
stage is normalization, in which a local population of complex cells mutually 
inhibit one another. Because the population includes cells tuned to a range of 
orientations and spatial frequencies, the result is that the responses are 
effectively normalized by the local stimulus contrast. Here, using evidence from 
human functional MRI, we show that the classical model fails to account for the 
relative responses to two classes of stimuli: straight, parallel, band-passed 
contours (gratings), and curved, band-passed contours (snakes). The snakes 
elicit fMRI responses that are about twice as large as the gratings, yet a 
traditional divisive normalization model predicts responses that are about the 
same. Motivated by these observations and others from the literature, we 
implement a divisive normalization model in which cells matched in orientation 
tuning ("tuned normalization") preferentially inhibit each other. We first show 
that this model accounts for differential responses to these two classes of 
stimuli. We then show that the model successfully generalizes to other band-pass 
textures, both in V1 and in extrastriate cortex (V2 and V3). We conclude that 
even in primary visual cortex, complex features of images such as the degree of 
heterogeneity, can have large effects on neural responses.

Copyright: © 2023 Fang et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011704
PMCID: PMC10793941
PMID: 38150484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.