---
reference_id: "PMID:34573386"
title: "Glaucoma Syndromes: Insights into Glaucoma Genetics and Pathogenesis from Monogenic Syndromic Disorders."
authors:
- Balikov DA
- Jacobson A
- Prasov L
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/genes12091403
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glaucoma Syndromes: Insights into Glaucoma Genetics and Pathogenesis from Monogenic Syndromic Disorders.
**Authors:** Balikov DA, Jacobson A, Prasov L
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes12091403](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes12091403)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Sep 11;12(9):1403. doi: 10.3390/genes12091403.

Glaucoma Syndromes: Insights into Glaucoma Genetics and Pathogenesis from 
Monogenic Syndromic Disorders.

Balikov DA(1), Jacobson A(1), Prasov L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI 48105, USA.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, 
USA.

Monogenic syndromic disorders frequently feature ocular manifestations, one of 
which is glaucoma. In many cases, glaucoma in children may go undetected, 
especially in those that have other severe systemic conditions that affect other 
parts of the eye and the body. Similarly, glaucoma may be the first presenting 
sign of a systemic syndrome. Awareness of syndromes associated with glaucoma is 
thus critical both for medical geneticists and ophthalmologists. In this review, 
we highlight six categories of disorders that feature glaucoma and other ocular 
or systemic manifestations: anterior segment dysgenesis syndromes, aniridia, 
metabolic disorders, collagen/vascular disorders, immunogenetic disorders, and 
nanophthalmos. The genetics, ocular and systemic features, and current and 
future treatment strategies are discussed. Findings from rare diseases also 
uncover important genes and pathways that may be involved in more common forms 
of glaucoma, and potential novel therapeutic strategies to target these 
pathways.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12091403
PMCID: PMC8471311
PMID: 34573386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no relevant conflict of 
interests.