---
reference_id: "PMID:34660315"
title: "Choroid Plexus Carcinomas With TP53 Germline Mutations: Management and Outcome."
authors:
- Li Y
- Liu H
- Li T
- Feng J
- He Y
- Chen L
- Li C
- Qiu X
journal: Front Oncol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.751784
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Choroid Plexus Carcinomas With TP53 Germline Mutations: Management and Outcome.
**Authors:** Li Y, Liu H, Li T, Feng J, He Y, Chen L, Li C, Qiu X
**Journal:** Front Oncol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fonc.2021.751784](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2021.751784)

## Content

1. Front Oncol. 2021 Sep 30;11:751784. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.751784. eCollection
 2021.

Choroid Plexus Carcinomas With TP53 Germline Mutations: Management and Outcome.

Li Y(1), Liu H(1), Li T(2), Feng J(1), He Y(3), Chen L(1), Li C(4), Qiu X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China.
(2)Departments of Pharmacy, New York Presbyterian Lower Manhattan Hospital, New 
York, NY, United States.
(3)Department of Pathology, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Choroid plexus carcinomas (CPCs) are rare pediatric tumors commonly 
associated with Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), which involves a germline mutation 
of the tumor suppressor gene TP53.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed the corresponding information 
of 12 cases, including the effects of surgery and radiotherapy and TP53 germline 
mutations, to analyse the management strategies. Kaplan-Meier curves and the 
log-rank test were used to evaluate the progression-free survival (PFS).
RESULTS: Twelve CPC patients were included, of which TP53 germline mutations 
were found in eight cases. All patients underwent surgical resection, and six 
patients received radiotherapy following with operation after initial diagnosis, 
one patient received radiotherapy following relapse. It was significantly 
different (P=0.012 and 0.028) that patients with TP53 germline mutation 
receiving the gross total resection (GTR) without radiotherapy showed survival 
advantages. Without TP53 germline mutations also showed survival advantages, but 
there is no statistical significance (P=0.063).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings provide evidence for the therapeutic strategy that 
radiotherapy should not be considered for patients with TP53 germline mutations.

Copyright © 2021 Li, Liu, Li, Feng, He, Chen, Li and Qiu.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.751784
PMCID: PMC8514937
PMID: 34660315

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.