---
reference_id: "PMID:29460029"
title: Outcome of adult patients with X-linked hypophosphatemia caused by PHEX gene mutations.
authors:
- Chesher D
- Oddy M
- Darbar U
- Sayal P
- Casey A
- Ryan A
- Sechi A
- Simister C
- Waters A
- Wedatilake Y
- Lachmann RH
- Murphy E
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-018-0147-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcome of adult patients with X-linked hypophosphatemia caused by PHEX gene mutations.
**Authors:** Chesher D, Oddy M, Darbar U, Sayal P, Casey A, Ryan A, Sechi A, Simister C, Waters A, Wedatilake Y, Lachmann RH, Murphy E
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-018-0147-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-018-0147-6)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2018 Sep;41(5):865-876. doi: 10.1007/s10545-018-0147-6. 
Epub 2018 Feb 19.

Outcome of adult patients with X-linked hypophosphatemia caused by PHEX gene 
mutations.

Chesher D(1)(2), Oddy M(3), Darbar U(4), Sayal P(5), Casey A(5), Ryan A(1)(6), 
Sechi A(1)(7), Simister C(1), Waters A(8), Wedatilake Y(1)(9), Lachmann RH(1), 
Murphy E(10).

Author information:
(1)Charles Dent Metabolic Unit, National Hospital for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, Queen Square, London, WC1N 3BG, UK.
(2)New South Wales Health Pathology, Royal North Shore Hospital, St Leonards, 
NSW, Australia.
(3)Department of Trauma and Orthopaedics, University College London Hospitals 
NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(4)Department of Periodontology, Eastman Dental Hospital, London, UK.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, 
Queen Square, London, UK.
(6)Chemical Pathology and Metabolic Medicine, University Hospital Southampton 
NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton, UK.
(7)Centre for Rare Disease, Academic Hospital of Udine, Udine, Italy.
(8)Institute of Child Health, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(9)Imperial College London NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(10)Charles Dent Metabolic Unit, National Hospital for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, Queen Square, London, WC1N 3BG, UK. elaine.murphy8@nhs.net.

X-linked hypophosphatemia (XLH) is the most common monogenic disorder causing 
hypophosphatemia. This case-note review documents the clinical features and the 
complications of treatment in 59 adults (19 male, 40 female) with XLH. XLH is 
associated with a large number of private mutations; 37 different mutations in 
the PHEX gene were identified in this cohort, 14 of which have not been 
previously reported. Orthopaedic involvement requiring surgical intervention 
(osteotomy) was frequent. Joint replacement and decompressive laminectomy were 
observed in those older than 40 years. Dental disease (63%), nephrocalcinosis 
(42%), and hearing impairment (14%) were also common. The rarity of the disease 
and the large number of variants make it difficult to discern specific 
genotype-phenotype relationships. A new treatment, an anti-FGF23 antibody, that 
may affect the natural history of the disease is currently being investigated in 
clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-018-0147-6
PMCID: PMC6133187
PMID: 29460029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Robin Lachmann is a principal investigator for a 
Study of KRN23 in Adults With X-linked Hypophosphatemia (XLH) (Ultragenyx 
Pharmaceutical Inc). Elaine Murphy is an investigator for a Study of KRN23 in 
Adults With X-linked Hypophosphatemia (XLH) (Ultragenyx Pharmaceutical Inc). D. 
Chesher, M. Oddy, U. Darbar, P. Sayal, A. Casey, A. Ryan, A. Sechi, C. Simister, 
A. Waters and Y. Wedatilake declare that they have no conflict of interest.