---
reference_id: "PMID:29381155"
title: "Effectiveness of Video-Assisted Debriefing in Health Education: An Integrative Review."
authors:
- Ali AA
- Miller ET
journal: J Nurs Educ
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3928/01484834-20180102-04
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effectiveness of Video-Assisted Debriefing in Health Education: An Integrative Review.
**Authors:** Ali AA, Miller ET
**Journal:** J Nurs Educ (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3928/01484834-20180102-04](https://doi.org/10.3928/01484834-20180102-04)

## Content

1. J Nurs Educ. 2018 Jan 1;57(1):14-20. doi: 10.3928/01484834-20180102-04.

Effectiveness of Video-Assisted Debriefing in Health Education: An Integrative 
Review.

Ali AA, Miller ET.

BACKGROUND: Debriefing is an integral component of the high-fidelity simulation 
experience in health education. Video-assisted debriefing (VAD) is used to 
structure debriefing following simulation. This review synthesizes the best 
available evidence about VAD compared with verbal debriefing; moreover, it 
reviews the effectiveness of VAD on students' learning outcomes and learners' 
perceptions of using VAD postsimulation sessions.
METHOD: Databases included Med-line, Scopus, CINAHL, and EMBASE, and articles 
published between 2000 and 2016 were reviewed if they used the keywords 
video-assisted debriefing, HFS, debriefing and learning outcomes, and 
video-playback debriefing. Fourteen studies met the inclusion criteria.
RESULTS: Three themes emerged: VAD Effectiveness Compared to Verbal (Oral) 
Debriefing, VAD Effectiveness on Learning Outcomes, and Learners' Perceptions of 
VAD Experience.
CONCLUSION: VAD following simulation experiences compared with other debriefing 
modalities resulted in mixed findings related to learning outcomes in health 
education. More research on debriefing practices is needed that describes all 
key debriefing components. [J Nurs Educ. 2018;57(1):14-20.].

Copyright 2018, SLACK Incorporated.

DOI: 10.3928/01484834-20180102-04
PMID: 29381155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]