---
reference_id: "PMID:37119756"
title: "Type II pleuropulmonary blastoma mistaken for rhabdomyosarcoma: A case report."
authors:
- Karray A
- Boussetta A
- Sassi F
- Cherifi W
- Haouet S
- Gargah T
journal: Int J Surg Case Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2023.108261
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type II pleuropulmonary blastoma mistaken for rhabdomyosarcoma: A case report.
**Authors:** Karray A, Boussetta A, Sassi F, Cherifi W, Haouet S, Gargah T
**Journal:** Int J Surg Case Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijscr.2023.108261](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijscr.2023.108261)

## Content

1. Int J Surg Case Rep. 2023 May;106:108261. doi: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2023.108261.
Epub  2023 Apr 26.

Type II pleuropulmonary blastoma mistaken for rhabdomyosarcoma: A case report.

Karray A(1), Boussetta A(2), Sassi F(3), Cherifi W(4), Haouet S(3), Gargah T(5).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Department, Charles Nicolle Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia; University of
Tunis El Manar-Faculty of Medicine of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia. Electronic address:
karrayamina04@gmail.com.
(2)Pediatric Department, Charles Nicolle Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia; University of
Tunis El Manar-Faculty of Medicine of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia.
(3)Department of Pathology, Rabta Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia; University of Tunis
El Manar-Faculty of Medicine of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia.
(4)University of Tunis El Manar-Faculty of Medicine of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia.
(5)Pediatric Department, Charles Nicolle Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia; University of
Tunis El Manar-Faculty of Medicine of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia. Electronic address:
tahar.gargah@rns.tn.

INTRODUCTION: Pleuropulmonary blastoma (PPB) is rare, representing 0.3 % of all
pediatric cancers. PPB is classified into three subtypes and may progress from
type I to types II and III, with a worse prognosis. Given its rarity, the
diagnosis is frequently challenging.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report an occurrence of PPB in a 3-year-old girl, who
presented recurrent pneumopathy. Imaging investigations revealed a large solid
lesion in the left hemithorax. Biopsy followed by histological analysis
suggested rhabdomyosarcoma. The patient received neoadjuvant chemotherapy before
proceeding to complete tumor excision. Surgical exploration revealed that the
tumor was primitively related to parietal pleura and lower lobe of left lung.
Histopathology of the tumor retained a definitive diagnosis of PPB type II.
Postoperative course was uneventful, and a cerebral MRI ruled out brain
metastasis. Adjuvant chemotherapy was administered.
DISCUSSION: Clinical expression of PPB is nonspecific and variable. It ranges
from a dry cough to respiratory distress. Standard radiography is the first
examination to perform and CT is the gold standard for characterization thoracic
masses. Surgery and chemotherapy are the pillars of treatment. Indications
depend on the tumor type, its extent and its resectability.
CONCLUSION: PPB is an aggressive tumor that occurs only in children. Due to the
rarity of PPB, evidence on optimal treatment is still insufficient. Careful
follow-up is necessary searching for local recurrence or metastasis.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2023.108261
PMCID: PMC10163632
PMID: 37119756

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that there are no conflicts of interest regarding the publication of
this article.
