---
reference_id: "PMID:15163106"
title: Epidemiology of extra-articular manifestations in rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Turesson C
- Jacobsson LT
journal: Scand J Rheumatol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1080/03009740310004621
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of extra-articular manifestations in rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Turesson C, Jacobsson LT
**Journal:** Scand J Rheumatol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1080/03009740310004621](https://doi.org/10.1080/03009740310004621)

## Content

1. Scand J Rheumatol. 2004;33(2):65-72. doi: 10.1080/03009740310004621.

Epidemiology of extra-articular manifestations in rheumatoid arthritis.

Turesson C(1), Jacobsson LT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Malmö University Hospital, Lund University, 
Sweden. Carl.Turesson@telia.com

Extra-articular RA (ExRA) includes a wide variety of disease manifestations. 
Although rheumatologists in general are aware that such events are clinically 
important, the heterogeneity of available data, including discrepancies in case 
definitions, has complicated constructive discussions on this aspect of the RA 
disease phenotype. In recent years, there has been a growing recognition of the 
importance of co-morbidity in patients with RA. ExRA manifestations are not 
uncommon, explain excess mortality in RA and are predicted by smoking and 
autoantibodies. Further studies of the mechanisms underlying these associations 
are likely to be important in improving our understanding of the systemic nature 
of RA. This article discusses the methodological issues involved in the study of 
ExRA manifestations, presents suggested criteria that have been used in clinical 
studies, and reviews important surveys of the epidemiology of extra-articular 
RA.

DOI: 10.1080/03009740310004621
PMID: 15163106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]