---
reference_id: "PMID:30292786"
title: "Loss of Tbx3 in murine neural crest reduces enteric glia and causes cleft palate, but does not influence heart development or bowel transit."
authors:
- López SH
- Avetisyan M
- Wright CM
- Mesbah K
- Kelly RG
- Moon AM
- Heuckeroth RO
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2018.09.017
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Movement
- "Cleft Palate/embryology, genetics"
- Enteric Nervous System/embryology
- Heart/embryology
- Intestines/embryology
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Neural Crest/embryology, metabolism, physiology"
- Neurogenesis
- Neuroglia/physiology
- Neurons
- "T-Box Domain Proteins/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Wnt1 Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of Tbx3 in murine neural crest reduces enteric glia and causes cleft palate, but does not influence heart development or bowel transit.
**Authors:** López SH, Avetisyan M, Wright CM, Mesbah K, Kelly RG, Moon AM, Heuckeroth RO
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ydbio.2018.09.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2018.09.017)

## Content

1. Dev Biol. 2018 Dec 1;444 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):S337-S351. doi: 
10.1016/j.ydbio.2018.09.017. Epub 2018 Oct 5.

Loss of Tbx3 in murine neural crest reduces enteric glia and causes cleft 
palate, but does not influence heart development or bowel transit.

López SH(1), Avetisyan M(2), Wright CM(3), Mesbah K(4), Kelly RG(4), Moon AM(5), 
Heuckeroth RO(6).

Author information:
(1)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Research Institute, 3615 Civic Center 
Blvd, Abramson Research Center - Suite # 1116I, Philadelphia, PA 19104-4318, 
United States.
(2)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Research Institute, 3615 Civic Center 
Blvd, Abramson Research Center - Suite # 1116I, Philadelphia, PA 19104-4318, 
United States; Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of 
Medicine in St. Louis, 660 South Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, United 
States.
(3)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Research Institute, 3615 Civic Center 
Blvd, Abramson Research Center - Suite # 1116I, Philadelphia, PA 19104-4318, 
United States; Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104-4318, United States.
(4)Aix-Marseille Univ, CNRS, IBDM, Marseille, France.
(5)Weis Center for Research, Geisinger Clinic, Danville, PA, United States; 
Departments of Pediatrics and Human Genetics, University of Utah, Salt Lake 
City, United States.
(6)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Research Institute, 3615 Civic Center 
Blvd, Abramson Research Center - Suite # 1116I, Philadelphia, PA 19104-4318, 
United States; Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104-4318, United States. 
Electronic address: HeuckerothR@email.chop.edu.

Transcription factors that coordinate migration, differentiation or 
proliferation of enteric nervous system (ENS) precursors are not well defined. 
To identify novel transcriptional regulators of ENS development, we performed 
microarray analysis at embryonic day (E) 17.5 and identified many genes that 
were enriched in the ENS compared to other bowel cells. We decided to 
investigate the T-box transcription factor Tbx3, which is prominently expressed 
in developing and mature ENS. Haploinsufficiency for TBX3 causes ulnar-mammary 
syndrome (UMS) in humans, a multi-organ system disorder. TBX3 also regulates 
several genes known to be important for ENS development. To test the hypothesis 
that Tbx3 is important for ENS development or function, we inactivated Tbx3 in 
all neural crest derivatives, including ENS progenitors using Wnt1-Cre and a 
floxed Tbx3 allele. Tbx3 fl/fl; Wnt1-Cre conditional mutant mice die shortly 
after birth with cleft palate and difficulty feeding. The ENS of mutants was 
well-organized with a normal density of enteric neurons and nerve fiber bundles, 
but small bowel glial cell density was reduced. Despite this, bowel motility 
appeared normal. Furthermore, although Tbx3 is expressed in cardiac neural 
crest, Tbx3 fl/fl; Wnt1-Cre mice had structurally normal hearts. Thus, loss of 
Tbx3 within neural crest has selective effects on Tbx3-expressing neural crest 
derivatives.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2018.09.017
PMCID: PMC6431575
PMID: 30292786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]