---
reference_id: "PMID:9839173"
title: Perforin and Fas pathways of cytotoxic T-cells in histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis.
authors:
- Ohshima K
- Shimazaki K
- Kume T
- Suzumiya J
- Kanda M
- Kikuchi M
journal: Histopathology
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2559.1998.00532.x
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Antigens, CD/analysis"
- Apoptosis
- Child
- Fas Ligand Protein
- Female
- Flow Cytometry
- Histiocytic Necrotizing Lymphadenitis/immunology
- Humans
- Immunoenzyme Techniques
- In Situ Hybridization
- Male
- Membrane Glycoproteins/analysis
- Perforin
- Pore Forming Cytotoxic Proteins
- "T-Lymphocytes, Cytotoxic/chemistry, cytology"
- fas Receptor/analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Perforin and Fas pathways of cytotoxic T-cells in histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis.
**Authors:** Ohshima K, Shimazaki K, Kume T, Suzumiya J, Kanda M, Kikuchi M
**Journal:** Histopathology (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-2559.1998.00532.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2559.1998.00532.x)

## Content

1. Histopathology. 1998 Nov;33(5):471-8. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2559.1998.00532.x.

Perforin and Fas pathways of cytotoxic T-cells in histiocytic necrotizing 
lymphadenitis.

Ohshima K(1), Shimazaki K, Kume T, Suzumiya J, Kanda M, Kikuchi M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Fukuoka University, Japan.

AIMS: Cell death can be divided into necrosis and apoptosis. In histiocytic 
necrotizing lymphadenitis (HNL), apoptosis is the main form of cell death. Two 
molecular mechanisms of T-cell-mediated cytotoxicity, one perforin-based and the 
other Fas-based, have been demonstrated, and both systems induce apoptosis of 
the target cells. This study was designed to investigate the Fas and perforin 
pathways in HNL.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Twelve cases of HNL were analysed using immunohistochemical 
staining. The Fas and/or FasL-positive cells, including lymphocytes and 
histiocytes, were frequently encountered in the necrotizing lesions, however, 
they were rare in the nonpathological regions. The perforin and/or 
granzyme-positive cells were also confined in the necrotizing lesions. In double 
staining, CD8-positive lymphocytes occasionally expressed Fas and/or FasL, and 
histiocytes also expressed FasL and/or Fas. However, CD4-positive lymphocytes 
rarely expressed FasL and/or Fas. In a flow cytometric analysis, most of the 
cytotoxic T-cells, which were recognized by cytolytic granules of TIA-1 and 
considered to be CD8-positive lymphocytes, expressed FasL and Fas. The 
perforin-positive lymphocytes also expressed FasL and Fas.
CONCLUSION: In our previous study, the apoptotic cells were T-cells, especially 
CD8-positive cells rather than CD4-positive cells. Based on these findings, in 
Fas and perforin pathways, the CD8-positive cells were considered to be effector 
and target cells, while histiocytes could possibly be enhancers. As a result, 
both pathways seemed to induce an abundance of apoptosis and thus induce 
necrotizing lesions.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2559.1998.00532.x
PMID: 9839173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]