---
reference_id: "PMID:30628751"
title: Predicting progression to type 1 diabetes from ages 3 to 6 in islet autoantibody positive TEDDY children.
authors:
- Jacobsen LM
- Larsson HE
- Tamura RN
- Vehik K
- Clasen J
- Sosenko J
- Hagopian WA
- She JX
- Steck AK
- Rewers M
- Simell O
- Toppari J
- Veijola R
- Ziegler AG
- Krischer JP
- Akolkar B
- Haller MJ
- TEDDY Study Group
journal: Pediatr Diabetes
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/pedi.12812
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predicting progression to type 1 diabetes from ages 3 to 6 in islet autoantibody positive TEDDY children.
**Authors:** Jacobsen LM, Larsson HE, Tamura RN, Vehik K, Clasen J, Sosenko J, Hagopian WA, She JX, Steck AK, Rewers M, Simell O, Toppari J, Veijola R, Ziegler AG, Krischer JP, Akolkar B, Haller MJ, TEDDY Study Group
**Journal:** Pediatr Diabetes (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pedi.12812](https://doi.org/10.1111/pedi.12812)

## Content

1. Pediatr Diabetes. 2019 May;20(3):263-270. doi: 10.1111/pedi.12812. Epub 2019
Jan  29.

Predicting progression to type 1 diabetes from ages 3 to 6 in islet autoantibody 
positive TEDDY children.

Jacobsen LM(1), Larsson HE(2), Tamura RN(3), Vehik K(3), Clasen J(3), Sosenko 
J(4), Hagopian WA(5), She JX(6), Steck AK(7), Rewers M(7), Simell O(8), Toppari 
J(8)(9), Veijola R(10), Ziegler AG(11), Krischer JP(3), Akolkar B(12), Haller 
MJ(1); TEDDY Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida.
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences Malmö, Lund University, Skåne University 
Hospital SUS, Malmö, Sweden.
(3)Health Informatics Institute, Morsani College of Medicine, University of 
South Florida, Tampa, Florida.
(4)Division of Endocrinology, University of Miami, Miami, Florida.
(5)Pacific Northwest Diabetes Research Institute, Seattle, Washington.
(6)Center for Biotechnology and Genomic Medicine, Medical College of Georgia, 
Augusta University, Augusta, Georgia.
(7)Barbara Davis Center for Childhood Diabetes, University of Colorado, Denver, 
Colorado.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland.
(9)Department of Physiology, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku, 
Turku, Finland.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Medical Research Center, PEDEGO Research Unit, 
Oulu University Hospital and University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(11)Institute of Diabetes Research, Helmholtz Zentrum München and Forschergruppe 
Diabetes e.V. Neuherberg, Neuherberg, Germany.
(12)Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, National Institute of 
Diabetes, Digestive, and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland.

OBJECTIVE: The capacity to precisely predict progression to type 1 diabetes 
(T1D) in young children over a short time span is an unmet need. We sought to 
develop a risk algorithm to predict progression in children with high-risk human 
leukocyte antigen (HLA) genes followed in The Environmental Determinants of 
Diabetes in the Young (TEDDY) study.
METHODS: Logistic regression and 4-fold cross-validation examined 38 candidate 
predictors of risk from clinical, immunologic, metabolic, and genetic data. 
TEDDY subjects with at least one persistent, confirmed autoantibody at age 3 
were analyzed with progression to T1D by age 6 serving as the primary endpoint. 
The logistic regression prediction model was compared to two non-statistical 
predictors, multiple autoantibody status, and presence of 
insulinoma-associated-2 autoantibodies (IA-2A).
RESULTS: A total of 363 subjects had at least one autoantibody at age 3. 
Twenty-one percent of subjects developed T1D by age 6. Logistic regression 
modeling identified 5 significant predictors - IA-2A status, hemoglobin A1c, 
body mass index Z-score, single-nucleotide polymorphism rs12708716_G, and a 
combination marker of autoantibody number plus fasting insulin level. The 
logistic model yielded a receiver operating characteristic area under the curve 
(AUC) of 0.80, higher than the two other predictors; however, the differences in 
AUC, sensitivity, and specificity were small across models.
CONCLUSIONS: This study highlights the application of precision medicine 
techniques to predict progression to diabetes over a 3-year window in TEDDY 
subjects. This multifaceted model provides preliminary improvement in prediction 
over simpler prediction tools. Additional tools are needed to maximize the 
predictive value of these approaches.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pedi.12812
PMCID: PMC6456374
PMID: 30628751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no relevant conflicts of 
interest to disclose.