---
reference_id: "PMID:28863310"
title: Altered patterns of resting-state functional connectivity between the caudate and other brain regions in medication-naïve children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
authors:
- Yang Z
- Li H
- Tu W
- Wang S
- Ren Y
- Yi Y
- Wu T
- Jiang K
- Shen H
- Wu J
- Dong X
journal: Clin Imaging
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.clinimag.2017.07.009
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/pathology
- Basal Ganglia/pathology
- Brain/pathology
- Brain Mapping
- Cerebellum/pathology
- Cerebral Cortex/pathology
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Altered patterns of resting-state functional connectivity between the caudate and other brain regions in medication-naïve children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
**Authors:** Yang Z, Li H, Tu W, Wang S, Ren Y, Yi Y, Wu T, Jiang K, Shen H, Wu J, Dong X
**Journal:** Clin Imaging (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clinimag.2017.07.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinimag.2017.07.009)

## Content

1. Clin Imaging. 2018 Jan-Feb;47:47-51. doi: 10.1016/j.clinimag.2017.07.009. Epub
 2017 Jul 28.

Altered patterns of resting-state functional connectivity between the caudate
and other brain regions in medication-naïve children with attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder.

Yang Z(1), Li H(2), Tu W(2), Wang S(3), Ren Y(3), Yi Y(2), Wu T(2), Jiang K(2),
Shen H(2), Wu J(1), Dong X(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Changzhou 213003, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Institute of Children Health, Children's Hospital of Changzhou, Changzhou
213003, Jiangsu, China.
(3)Institute of Brain Research, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, Changzhou 213003, Jiangsu, China.
(4)Institute of Children Health, Children's Hospital of Changzhou, Changzhou
213003, Jiangsu, China. Electronic address: czdongxuan@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Structural and functional alterations occur in the caudate of
patients with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Here we aimed to
investigate the functional connectivity between the dorsal caudate and other
brain regions in ADHD children.
METHODS: Resting-state functional connectivity from 30 ADHD and 33 age- and
gender-matched "normal" children were measured by functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging.
RESULTS: Positive connectivity with dorsal caudate was observed in the
prefrontal areas, cingulate cortex and temporal lobe. Negative functional
connectivity was observed in the precuneus, occipital cortices and cerebellum.
The connectivity of left dorsal caudate to left inferior frontal gyrus was
correlated with severity of ADHD.
CONCLUSIONS: Connectivity of dorsal caudate with several brain regions was
identified in ADHD children.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinimag.2017.07.009
PMID: 28863310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
