---
reference_id: "PMID:10519361"
title: "DNA typing of HLA class II genes (HLA-DR, -DQ and -DP) in Japanese patients with histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis (Kikuchi's disease)."
authors:
- Tanaka T
- Ohmori M
- Yasunaga S
- Ohshima K
- Kikuchi M
- Sasazuki T
journal: Tissue Antigens
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1034/j.1399-0039.1999.540305.x
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Alleles
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "DNA Probes, HLA"
- "DNA, Complementary"
- Female
- HLA Antigens/genetics
- HLA-DP Antigens/genetics
- HLA-DP alpha-Chains
- HLA-DP beta-Chains
- HLA-DQ Antigens/genetics
- HLA-DQ alpha-Chains
- HLA-DQ beta-Chains
- HLA-DR Antigens/genetics
- HLA-DRB1 Chains
- Haplotypes
- Histiocytic Necrotizing Lymphadenitis/genetics
- Histocompatibility Antigens Class II/genetics
- Humans
- Japan
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DNA typing of HLA class II genes (HLA-DR, -DQ and -DP) in Japanese patients with histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis (Kikuchi's disease).
**Authors:** Tanaka T, Ohmori M, Yasunaga S, Ohshima K, Kikuchi M, Sasazuki T
**Journal:** Tissue Antigens (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1034/j.1399-0039.1999.540305.x](https://doi.org/10.1034/j.1399-0039.1999.540305.x)

## Content

1. Tissue Antigens. 1999 Sep;54(3):246-53. doi:
10.1034/j.1399-0039.1999.540305.x.

DNA typing of HLA class II genes (HLA-DR, -DQ and -DP) in Japanese patients with 
histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis (Kikuchi's disease).

Tanaka T(1), Ohmori M, Yasunaga S, Ohshima K, Kikuchi M, Sasazuki T.

Author information:
(1)First Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Fukuoka University, Japan.

The pathogenesis of histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis (HNL), which was 
reported first by Kikuchi et al. and Fujimoto et al. in 1972, is as yet unknown. 
HNL is frequently reported in Asian countries including Japan, however it is 
rare in Europe and North America. To elucidate whether the human leukocyte 
antigen (HLA) alleles and haplotypes are associated with HNL, we performed DNA 
typing of HLA class II genes (HLA-DR, -DQ, and -DP) in 86 patients with HNL and 
525 unrelated healthy Japanese controls with polymerase chain reaction using 
sequence-specific oligonucleotide probes (PCR-SSOP). In this study, we found 
DPA1*01 and DPB1*0202 allele frequencies in HLA class II genes are significantly 
higher in HNL patients than in normal controls. It is known that the frequency 
of DPB1*0202 alleles is extremely low or absent in Caucasians (e.g., French 
0.4%, Italian 0.8%) and Negroid (e.g., South African 0%, Hottentot 0%), but 
relatively frequent in Asians (e.g., Korean 9.9%, Japanese 4.5%). Previous 
reports have said the incidence of HNL is frequent in Asians but rare in other 
races. In light of this background, HLA class II genes of HNL and the incidence 
of HNL in Asian countries, including Japan, might have a positive relationship 
to DPA1*01 and DPB1*0202 allele.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1399-0039.1999.540305.x
PMID: 10519361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]