---
reference_id: "PMID:28976817"
title: Hematopoietic Stem-Cell Gene Therapy for Cerebral Adrenoleukodystrophy.
authors:
- Eichler F
- Duncan C
- Musolino PL
- Orchard PJ
- De Oliveira S
- Thrasher AJ
- Armant M
- Dansereau C
- Lund TC
- Miller WP
- Raymond GV
- Sankar R
- Shah AJ
- Sevin C
- Gaspar HB
- Gissen P
- Amartino H
- Bratkovic D
- Smith NJC
- Paker AM
- Shamir E
- "O'Meara T"
- Davidson D
- Aubourg P
- Williams DA
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1700554
keywords:
- "ATP Binding Cassette Transporter, Subfamily D, Member 1"
- "ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics, therapeutic use"
- Adolescent
- "Adrenoleukodystrophy/genetics, therapy"
- "Antigens, CD34/blood"
- Biomarkers/blood
- Child
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Genetic Therapy
- Genetic Vectors/blood
- Granulocyte Colony-Stimulating Factor/therapeutic use
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Hematopoietic Stem Cells/immunology
- Humans
- Lentivirus
- Male
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Transplantation, Autologous"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hematopoietic Stem-Cell Gene Therapy for Cerebral Adrenoleukodystrophy.
**Authors:** Eichler F, Duncan C, Musolino PL, Orchard PJ, De Oliveira S, Thrasher AJ, Armant M, Dansereau C, Lund TC, Miller WP, Raymond GV, Sankar R, Shah AJ, Sevin C, Gaspar HB, Gissen P, Amartino H, Bratkovic D, Smith NJC, Paker AM, Shamir E, O'Meara T, Davidson D, Aubourg P, Williams DA
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1700554](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1700554)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2017 Oct 26;377(17):1630-1638. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1700554. Epub
2017 Oct 4.

Hematopoietic Stem-Cell Gene Therapy for Cerebral Adrenoleukodystrophy.

Eichler F(1), Duncan C(1), Musolino PL(1), Orchard PJ(1), De Oliveira S(1),
Thrasher AJ(1), Armant M(1), Dansereau C(1), Lund TC(1), Miller WP(1), Raymond
GV(1), Sankar R(1), Shah AJ(1), Sevin C(1), Gaspar HB(1), Gissen P(1), Amartino
H(1), Bratkovic D(1), Smith NJC(1), Paker AM(1), Shamir E(1), O'Meara T(1),
Davidson D(1), Aubourg P(1), Williams DA(1).

Author information:
(1)From Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School (F.E.,
P.L.M.), Dana-Farber and Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders Center (C.
Duncan, M.A., C. Dansereau, D.A.W.), and Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, and Harvard Stem-Cell Institute (D.A.W.), Boston, and Bluebird
Bio, Cambridge (A.M.P., E.S., T.O., D.D.) - all in Massachusetts; University of
Minnesota Children's Hospital, Minneapolis (P.J.O., T.C.L., W.P.M., G.V.R.);
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles (S.D.O., R.S., A.J.S.);
University College London Great Ormond Street Hospital Institute of Child Health
and Great Ormond Street Hospital NHS Trust, London (A.J.T., H.B.G., P.G.);
Pediatric Neurology Department, Hôpital Bicêtre-Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris
Sud, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France (C.S., P.A.); Fundacion Investigar, Buenos Aires
(H.A.); and Women's and Children's Hospital, North Adelaide, SA, Australia
(D.B., N.J.C.S.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2017 Oct 26;377(17):1682-1684. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1709253.
    Nature. 2017 Oct 12;550(7676):314. doi: 10.1038/nature.2017.22819.
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2017 Dec;13(12):706-707. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2017.152.
    N Engl J Med. 2018 Feb 01;378(5):490. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1715427.

BACKGROUND: In X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy, mutations in ABCD1 lead to loss of
function of the ALD protein. Cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy is characterized by
demyelination and neurodegeneration. Disease progression, which leads to loss of
neurologic function and death, can be halted only with allogeneic hematopoietic
stem-cell transplantation.
METHODS: We enrolled boys with cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy in a single-group,
open-label, phase 2-3 safety and efficacy study. Patients were required to have
early-stage disease and gadolinium enhancement on magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) at screening. The investigational therapy involved infusion of autologous
CD34+ cells transduced with the elivaldogene tavalentivec (Lenti-D) lentiviral
vector. In this interim analysis, patients were assessed for the occurrence of
graft-versus-host disease, death, and major functional disabilities, as well as
changes in neurologic function and in the extent of lesions on MRI. The primary
end point was being alive and having no major functional disability at 24 months
after infusion.
RESULTS: A total of 17 boys received Lenti-D gene therapy. At the time of the
interim analysis, the median follow-up was 29.4 months (range, 21.6 to 42.0).
All the patients had gene-marked cells after engraftment, with no evidence of
preferential integration near known oncogenes or clonal outgrowth. Measurable
ALD protein was observed in all the patients. No treatment-related death or
graft-versus-host disease had been reported; 15 of the 17 patients (88%) were
alive and free of major functional disability, with minimal clinical symptoms.
One patient, who had had rapid neurologic deterioration, had died from disease
progression. Another patient, who had had evidence of disease progression on
MRI, had withdrawn from the study to undergo allogeneic stem-cell
transplantation and later died from transplantation-related complications.
CONCLUSIONS: Early results of this study suggest that Lenti-D gene therapy may
be a safe and effective alternative to allogeneic stem-cell transplantation in
boys with early-stage cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy. Additional follow-up is
needed to fully assess the duration of response and long-term safety. (Funded by
Bluebird Bio and others; STARBEAM ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01896102 ;
ClinicalTrialsRegister.eu number, 2011-001953-10 .).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1700554
PMCID: PMC5708849
PMID: 28976817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
