---
reference_id: "PMID:21047408"
title: "Antiphospholipid syndrome; its implication in cardiovascular diseases: a review."
authors:
- Koniari I
- Siminelakis SN
- Baikoussis NG
- Papadopoulos G
- Goudevenos J
- Apostolakis E
journal: J Cardiothorac Surg
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1186/1749-8090-5-101
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antiphospholipid syndrome; its implication in cardiovascular diseases: a review.
**Authors:** Koniari I, Siminelakis SN, Baikoussis NG, Papadopoulos G, Goudevenos J, Apostolakis E
**Journal:** J Cardiothorac Surg (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1749-8090-5-101](https://doi.org/10.1186/1749-8090-5-101)

## Content

1. J Cardiothorac Surg. 2010 Nov 3;5:101. doi: 10.1186/1749-8090-5-101.

Antiphospholipid syndrome; its implication in cardiovascular diseases: a review.

Koniari I(1), Siminelakis SN, Baikoussis NG, Papadopoulos G, Goudevenos J, 
Apostolakis E.

Author information:
(1)Cardiothoracic Surgery Department, University of Patras, School of Medicine, 
Patras, Greece. iokoniari@yahoo.gr

Antiphospholipid syndrome (APLS) is a rare syndrome mainly characterized by 
several hyper-coagulable complications and therefore, implicated in the operated 
cardiac surgery patient. APLS comprises clinical features such as arterial or 
venous thromboses, valve disease, coronary artery disease, intracardiac thrombus 
formation, pulmonary hypertension and dilated cardiomyopathy. The most commonly 
affected valve is the mitral, followed by the aortic and tricuspid valve. For 
APLS diagnosis essential is the detection of so-called antiphospholipid 
antibodies (aPL) as anticardiolipin antibodies (aCL) or lupus anticoagulant 
(LA). Minor alterations in the anticoagulation, infection, and surgical stress 
may trigger widespread thrombosis. The incidence of thrombosis is highest during 
the following perioperative periods: preoperatively during the withdrawal of 
warfarin, postoperatively during the period of hypercoagulability despite 
warfarin or heparin therapy, or postoperatively before adequate anticoagulation 
achievement. Cardiac valvular pathology includes irregular thickening of the 
valve leaflets due to deposition of immune complexes that may lead to 
vegetations and valve dysfunction; a significant risk factor for stroke. 
Patients with APLS are at increased risk for thrombosis and adequate 
anticoagulation is of vital importance during cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB). A 
successful outcome requires multidisciplinary management in order to prevent 
thrombotic or bleeding complications and to manage perioperative 
anticoagulation. More work and reporting on anticoagulation management and 
adjuvant therapy in patients with APLS during extracorporeal circulation are 
necessary.

DOI: 10.1186/1749-8090-5-101
PMCID: PMC2987921
PMID: 21047408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]