---
reference_id: "PMID:18281854"
title: Vasculitis mimics.
authors:
- Molloy ES
- Langford CA
journal: Curr Opin Rheumatol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e3282f1dcf2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vasculitis mimics.
**Authors:** Molloy ES, Langford CA
**Journal:** Curr Opin Rheumatol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BOR.0b013e3282f1dcf2](https://doi.org/10.1097/BOR.0b013e3282f1dcf2)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2008 Jan;20(1):29-34. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e3282f1dcf2.

Vasculitis mimics.

Molloy ES(1), Langford CA.

Author information:
(1)Center for Vasculitis Care and Research, Department of Rheumatic and 
Immunologic Diseases, Cleveland Clinic, Ohio 44195, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: There are many disorders that may closely resemble the 
clinical, radiologic and/or pathologic features of the primary vasculitides. In 
this review, we focus on recently described and under-recognized syndromes that 
may mimic vasculitis.
RECENT FINDINGS: Hereditary causes of large-artery aneurysms such as Marfan's 
syndrome have long been recognized; recent years have seen a greater 
understanding of the genetics of Marfan's and other such disorders, including 
Loeys-Dietz syndrome and Ehler-Danlos syndrome type IV. Under-recognized mimics 
of medium-vessel vasculitis include segmental arterial mediolysis and Grange 
syndrome. A large number of entities can mimic small-vessel vasculitis. Recent 
descriptions of antibodies to human neutrophil elastase have provided insight 
into the occurrence of antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies in cocaine-induced 
midline destructive lesions. The differential diagnosis of cerebral vasculitis 
can be particularly difficult. Reversible cerebral vasoconstriction syndromes 
represent an important class of entities that can readily mimic cerebral 
vasculitis but have a very different management approach and outcome.
SUMMARY: The diagnosis of vasculitis requires careful assessment of all 
available clinical, laboratory, radiologic and pathologic information, and 
consideration of many competing differential diagnoses. Awareness of 
noninflammatory mimics of vasculitis is essential to avoid unnecessary and 
potentially harmful treatment with immunosuppressive agents.

DOI: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e3282f1dcf2
PMID: 18281854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]