---
reference_id: "PMID:23114485"
title: "Screening for blunt cardiac injury: an Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma practice management guideline."
authors:
- Clancy K
- Velopulos C
- Bilaniuk JW
- Collier B
- Crowley W
- Kurek S
- Lui F
- Nayduch D
- Sangosanya A
- Tucker B
- Haut ER
- Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma
journal: J Trauma Acute Care Surg
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1097/TA.0b013e318270193a
keywords:
- Electrocardiography
- "Heart Injuries/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- Troponin I/blood
- "Wounds, Nonpenetrating/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Screening for blunt cardiac injury: an Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma practice management guideline.
**Authors:** Clancy K, Velopulos C, Bilaniuk JW, Collier B, Crowley W, Kurek S, Lui F, Nayduch D, Sangosanya A, Tucker B, Haut ER, Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma
**Journal:** J Trauma Acute Care Surg (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1097/TA.0b013e318270193a](https://doi.org/10.1097/TA.0b013e318270193a)

## Content

1. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012 Nov;73(5 Suppl 4):S301-6. doi:
10.1097/TA.0b013e318270193a.

Screening for blunt cardiac injury: an Eastern Association for the Surgery of
Trauma practice management guideline.

Clancy K(1), Velopulos C, Bilaniuk JW, Collier B, Crowley W, Kurek S, Lui F,
Nayduch D, Sangosanya A, Tucker B, Haut ER; Eastern Association for the Surgery
of Trauma.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, York Hospital Trauma Program, York, Pennsylvania
17405, USA. kdclancy@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Diagnosing blunt cardiac injury (BCI) can be difficult. Many
patients with mechanism for BCI are admitted to the critical care setting based
on associated injuries; however, debate surrounds those patients who are
hemodynamically stable and do not otherwise require a higher level of care. To
allow safe discharge home or admission to a nonmonitored setting, BCI should be
definitively ruled out in those at risk.
METHODS: This Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma (EAST) practice
management guideline (PMG) updates the original from 1998. English-language
citations were queried for BCI from March 1997 through December 2011, using the
PubMed Entrez interface. Of 599 articles identified, prospective or
retrospective studies examining BCI were selected. Each article was reviewed by
two members of the EAST BCI PMG workgroup. Data were collated, and a consensus
was obtained for the recommendations.
RESULTS: We identified 35 institutional studies evaluating the diagnosis of
adult patients with suspected BCI. This PMG has 10 total recommendations,
including two Level 2 updates, two upgrades from Level 3 to Level 2, and three
new recommendations.
CONCLUSION: Electrocardiogram (ECG) alone is not sufficient to rule out BCI.
Based on four studies showing that the addition of troponin I to ECG improved
the negative predictive value to 100%, we recommend obtaining an admission ECG
and troponin I from all patients in whom BCI is suspected. BCI can be ruled out
only if both ECG result and troponin I level are normal, a significant change
from the previous guideline. Patients with new ECG changes and/or elevated
troponin I should be admitted for monitoring. Echocardiogram is not beneficial
as a screening tool for BCI and should be reserved for patients with hypotension
and/or arrhythmias. The presence of a sternal fracture alone does not predict
BCI. Cardiac computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging can be used to
differentiate acute myocardial infarction from BCI in trauma patients.

DOI: 10.1097/TA.0b013e318270193a
PMID: 23114485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
