---
reference_id: "PMID:37675914"
title: "CHARGE syndrome and congenital heart diseases: systematic review of literature."
authors:
- Polito MV
- Ferraioli M
- Nocilla A
- Coppola G
- "D'Auria F"
- Marzano A
- Barnabei L
- Malinconico M
- Bossone E
- Ferrara F
journal: Monaldi Arch Chest Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.4081/monaldi.2023.2661
keywords:
- Humans
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/epidemiology, complications"
- "CHARGE Syndrome/epidemiology, complications, diagnosis"
- Prevalence
- Hospital Mortality/trends
- Cardiac Surgical Procedures/methods
- "Infant, Newborn"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CHARGE syndrome and congenital heart diseases: systematic review of literature.
**Authors:** Polito MV, Ferraioli M, Nocilla A, Coppola G, D'Auria F, Marzano A, Barnabei L, Malinconico M, Bossone E, Ferrara F
**Journal:** Monaldi Arch Chest Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.4081/monaldi.2023.2661](https://doi.org/10.4081/monaldi.2023.2661)

## Content

1. Monaldi Arch Chest Dis. 2023 Sep 6;94(3). doi: 10.4081/monaldi.2023.2661.

CHARGE syndrome and congenital heart diseases: systematic review of literature.

Polito MV(1), Ferraioli M(2), Nocilla A(2), Coppola G(1), D'Auria F(1), Marzano 
A(1), Barnabei L(1), Malinconico M(1), Bossone E(3), Ferrara F(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Heart Department, "Cava de' Tirreni and Amalfi Coast" 
Hospital, University Hospital of Salerno.
(2)Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry, University of Salerno, 
Baronissi (SA).
(3)Department of Public Health, Federico II University of Naples.

CHARGE syndrome (CS) is a rare genetic disease that affects many areas of the 
body. The aim of the present systematic review was to evaluate the prevalence 
and types of congenital heart diseases (CHDs) in CS and their impact on clinical 
outcome. A systematic review from 1981 to September 2022 was conducted. Clinical 
studies that reported the association between CS and CHDs were identified, 
including a case report of a rare congenital anomaly of the aortic arch (AA) 
with persistent fifth AA (PFAA). Demographic, clinical and outcome data were 
extracted and analyzed. A total of 68 studies (44 case reports and 24 case 
series; n=943 CS patients) were included. The prevalence of CHDs was 76.6%, 
patent ductus arteriosus 26%, ventricular 21%, atrial septal defects 18%, 
tetralogy of Fallot 11%, and aortic abnormalities 24%. PFAA has not been 
previously reported in CS. Cardiac surgery was performed in more than half of CS 
patients (150/242, 62%). The in-hospital mortality rate was about 9.5% 
(n=86/900) in case series studies and 12% (n=5/43) in case reports, including 
cardiovascular (CV) and non-CV causes. CHDs and feeding disorders associated 
with CS may have a substantial impact on prognosis. CHDs were usually associated 
with CS and represent important causes of morbidity and mortality. PFAA, 
although rare, may also be present. The prognosis is highly dependent on the 
presence of cardiac and non-cardiac developmental abnormalities. Further studies 
are needed to better identify the main causes of the long-term outcome of CS 
patients.

DOI: 10.4081/monaldi.2023.2661
PMID: 37675914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]