---
reference_id: "PMID:20015486"
title: A meta-analysis of cytokines in major depression.
authors:
- Dowlati Y
- Herrmann N
- Swardfager W
- Liu H
- Sham L
- Reim EK
- Lanctôt KL
journal: Biol Psychiatry
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.09.033
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A meta-analysis of cytokines in major depression.
**Authors:** Dowlati Y, Herrmann N, Swardfager W, Liu H, Sham L, Reim EK, Lanctôt KL
**Journal:** Biol Psychiatry (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.09.033](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.09.033)

## Content

1. Biol Psychiatry. 2010 Mar 1;67(5):446-57. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.09.033.
 Epub 2009 Dec 16.

A meta-analysis of cytokines in major depression.

Dowlati Y(1), Herrmann N, Swardfager W, Liu H, Sham L, Reim EK, Lanctôt KL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Major depression occurs in 4.4% to 20% of the general population. 
Studies suggest that major depression is accompanied by immune dysregulation and 
activation of the inflammatory response system (IRS). Our objective was to 
quantitatively summarize the data on concentrations of specific cytokines in 
patients diagnosed with a major depressive episode and controls.
METHODS: We performed a meta-analysis of studies measuring cytokine 
concentration in patients with major depression, with a database search of the 
English literature (to August 2009) and a manual search of references.
RESULTS: Twenty-four studies involving unstimulated measurements of cytokines in 
patients meeting DSM criteria for major depression were included in the 
meta-analysis; 13 for tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, 9 for interleukin 
(IL)-1beta, 16 for IL-6, 5 for IL-4, 5 for IL-2, 4 for IL-8, 6 for IL-10, and 4 
for interferon (IFN)-gamma. There were significantly higher concentrations of 
TNF-alpha (p < .00001), weighted mean difference (WMD) (95% confidence interval) 
3.97 pg/mL (2.24 to 5.71), in depressed subjects compared with control subjects 
(438 depressed/350 nondepressed). Also, IL-6 concentrations were significantly 
higher (p < .00001) in depressed subjects compared with control subjects (492 
depressed/400 nondepressed) with an overall WMD of 1.78 pg/mL (1.23 to 2.33). 
There were no significant differences among depressed and nondepressed subjects 
for the other cytokines studied.
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis reports significantly higher concentrations of 
the proinflammatory cytokines TNF-alpha and IL-6 in depressed subjects compared 
with control subjects. While both positive and negative results have been 
reported in individual studies, this meta-analytic result strengthens evidence 
that depression is accompanied by activation of the IRS.

Copyright 2010 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.09.033
PMID: 20015486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]