---
reference_id: "PMID:39896197"
title: Brugada syndrome update.
authors:
- Xu T
- Wang S
- Wang J
- Xing J
journal: Front Physiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2024.1520008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brugada syndrome update.
**Authors:** Xu T, Wang S, Wang J, Xing J
**Journal:** Front Physiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fphys.2024.1520008](https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2024.1520008)

## Content

1. Front Physiol. 2025 Jan 17;15:1520008. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2024.1520008. 
eCollection 2024.

Brugada syndrome update.

Xu T(1), Wang S(1), Wang J(2), Xing J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, The First Hospital of Jilin University, 
Changchun, Jilin, China.
(2)Department of Nuclear Medicine, The First Hospital of Jilin University, 
Changchun, Jilin, China.

Brugada syndrome (BrS), a genetic disorder affecting cardiac ion channels, 
predominantly manifests due to mutations that impair the function of the Nav1.5 
sodium channel's α-subunit. This condition, identified by Josep and Pedro 
Brugada, is often marked by symptoms such as syncope and episodes of polymorphic 
ventricular tachycardia (PVT) or ventricular fibrillation (VF). These 
arrhythmias, if not managed promptly, can escalate to sudden cardiac death 
(SCD), notably in patients whose cardiac structure appears normal. Given this, 
the prompt recognition and stratification of individuals at elevated risk are 
critical. This review elaborates on the current insights into BrS, focusing on 
recent diagnostic techniques, risk assessment strategies, and therapeutic 
advancements. It also critically examines ongoing controversies in the field.

Copyright © 2025 Xu, Wang, Wang and Xing.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2024.1520008
PMCID: PMC11782167
PMID: 39896197

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.