---
reference_id: "PMID:16989002"
title: Survival outcome and predictors of gefitinib antitumor activity in East Asian chemonaive patients with advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Yang CH
- Shih JY
- Chen KC
- Yu CJ
- Yang TY
- Lin CP
- Su WP
- Gow CH
- Hsu C
- Chang GC
- Yang PC
journal: Cancer
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1002/cncr.22220
keywords:
- Adenocarcinoma/drug therapy
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Asian People
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics, mortality"
- Disease-Free Survival
- ErbB Receptors/genetics
- Female
- Gefitinib
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, mortality"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Multivariate Analysis
- Mutation
- "Neoplasms, Squamous Cell/drug therapy"
- Prognosis
- Quinazolines/therapeutic use
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Smoking/adverse effects
- Survival Analysis
- Survival Rate
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Survival outcome and predictors of gefitinib antitumor activity in East Asian chemonaive patients with advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Yang CH, Shih JY, Chen KC, Yu CJ, Yang TY, Lin CP, Su WP, Gow CH, Hsu C, Chang GC, Yang PC
**Journal:** Cancer (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cncr.22220](https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.22220)

## Content

1. Cancer. 2006 Oct 15;107(8):1873-82. doi: 10.1002/cncr.22220.

Survival outcome and predictors of gefitinib antitumor activity in East Asian
chemonaive patients with advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer.

Yang CH(1), Shih JY, Chen KC, Yu CJ, Yang TY, Lin CP, Su WP, Gow CH, Hsu C,
Chang GC, Yang PC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, National Taiwan University Hospital, College of
Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Chemonaive patients had higher response rates than
chemotherapy-treated patients in previous analyses of East Asian patients with
advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer. The survival outcome and the predictors for
antitumor activity in chemonaive patients who received gefitinib as first-line
treatment are unclear.
METHODS: Clinicopathologic predictive factors, objective tumor responses, and
the survival of consecutive patients with advanced, chemonaive nonsmall cell
lung cancer who received gefitinib as first-line treatment were collected and
analyzed. Multivariate analysis was conducted to determine independent
predictive factors for gefitinib antitumor efficacy.
RESULTS: One hundred ninety-six patients (112 males and 84 females) were
analyzed. Ninety-six patients (49%) were never smokers. One hundred forty-four
patients (73%) had adenocarcinoma or bronchioloalveolar carcinoma histology. One
hundred twenty patients had an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance
status 0 to 2. Eighty-three patients (42%; 95% confidence interval, 36-49%) had
an objective tumor response. An additional 35 patients had stable disease
(disease control rate, 61%). The tumor response rate was 52% in patients who had
a good performance status. Female gender, nonsmoking status, and adenocarcinoma
histology all were independent predictors of response or disease control in
multivariate analysis. The median survival was 11.1 months, and the 1-year
survival rate of patients who had a good performance status was 47.5%.
CONCLUSIONS: The response rate to gefitinib was high in East Asian chemonaive
patients with advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer. Female gender, adenocarcinoma
histology, and nonsmoking status all were independent predictors of gefitinib
response. The survival outcome of these patients was similar to that of patients
who initially received chemotherapy.

2006 American Cancer Society

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.22220
PMID: 16989002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
