---
reference_id: "PMID:36730963"
title: Prolonged Elevations of Factor VIII and von Willebrand Factor Antigen After Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children.
authors:
- Boucher AA
- Knutson S
- Young L
- Evans MD
- Braunlin E
- Zantek ND
- Sharon B
- Binstadt BA
- Ryan M
- Greene R
- Mahmud S
- Marmet J
- Fischer G
- Steiner ME
journal: J Pediatr Hematol Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/MPH.0000000000002583
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prolonged Elevations of Factor VIII and von Willebrand Factor Antigen After Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children.
**Authors:** Boucher AA, Knutson S, Young L, Evans MD, Braunlin E, Zantek ND, Sharon B, Binstadt BA, Ryan M, Greene R, Mahmud S, Marmet J, Fischer G, Steiner ME
**Journal:** J Pediatr Hematol Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MPH.0000000000002583](https://doi.org/10.1097/MPH.0000000000002583)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2023 May 1;45(4):e427-e432. doi: 
10.1097/MPH.0000000000002583. Epub 2022 Oct 24.

Prolonged Elevations of Factor VIII and von Willebrand Factor Antigen After 
Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children.

Boucher AA(1), Knutson S(2), Young L(3), Evans MD(4), Braunlin E(2), Zantek 
ND(5), Sharon B(6)(7), Binstadt BA(8), Ryan M(8), Greene R(2), Mahmud S(8), 
Marmet J(7), Fischer G(9), Steiner ME(1)(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology.
(2)Division of Pediatric Cardiology.
(3)College of Biological Sciences, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.
(4)Biostatistical Design and Analysis Center, Clinical and Translational Science 
Institute.
(5)Division of Transfusion Medicine, Department of Laboratory Medicine and 
Pathology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.
(6)Division of Pediatric Infectious Disease.
(7)Division of Pediatric Hospital Medicine.
(8)Division of Pediatric Rheumatology, Allergy, and Immunology.
(9)Division of Pediatric Intensive Care, Department of Pediatrics.

Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children (MIS-C) is a late systemic 
inflammatory response to a recent mild or asymptomatic coronavirus disease of 
2019 infection. The pathophysiology is incompletely understood but it often 
features significant coagulopathy along with cardiac and endothelial 
dysfunction. Endothelial inflammation has been primarily described in acute 
coronavirus disease of 2019 infection, with less characterization in MIS-C. Here 
we describe novel findings of nearly universal severe and prolonged factor VIII 
(FVIII) and von Willebrand factor antigen elevations in an institutional cohort 
of patients with MIS-C ages younger than or 21 years old (N=31). All patients 
had elevated acute phase reactants and D-dimer at presentation and met published 
criteria for MIS-C. FVIII was high at presentation in 97% of patients but 
continued to rise during the ensuing weeks of treatment to a mean 429%, peaking 
on median day 17 of illness as an outpatient. FVIII levels were >600% in 
multiple patients. von Willebrand factor antigen was measured less frequently 
but showed similar trends. These escalations occurred amidst resolving cardiac 
dysfunction and acute phase reactant normalization and despite patients 
receiving multimodal anti-inflammatory treatments and aspirin and enoxaparin 
thromboprophylaxis. No thrombotic events occurred. Endothelial dysfunction 
represented by very elevated FVIII levels may persist longer than other acute 
phase reactants may reflect.

Copyright © 2022 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MPH.0000000000002583
PMCID: PMC10121725
PMID: 36730963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.