---
reference_id: "PMID:15096952"
title: "TBX5 mutations and congenital heart disease: Holt-Oram syndrome revealed."
authors:
- Mori AD
- Bruneau BG
journal: Curr Opin Cardiol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1097/00001573-200405000-00004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TBX5 mutations and congenital heart disease: Holt-Oram syndrome revealed.
**Authors:** Mori AD, Bruneau BG
**Journal:** Curr Opin Cardiol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00001573-200405000-00004](https://doi.org/10.1097/00001573-200405000-00004)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2004 May;19(3):211-5. doi:
10.1097/00001573-200405000-00004.

TBX5 mutations and congenital heart disease: Holt-Oram syndrome revealed.

Mori AD(1), Bruneau BG.

Author information:
(1)Program in Cardiovascular Research, Hospital for Sick Children, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Mutations in the T-box transcription factor TBX5 cause 
Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS), an autosomal-dominant condition characterized by a 
familial history of congenital heart defects and preaxial radial ray upper limb 
defects. This review summarizes recent developments in the study of TBX5 as it 
relates to congenital heart disease and the pathology of HOS.
RECENT FINDINGS: Currently, 37 mutations in TBX5 have been found in patients 
with HOS. Most of these mutations cause premature truncation of the primary TBX5 
transcript, thereby presumably causing haploinsufficiency. Conversely, missense 
mutations diminish the interaction of TBX5 with other transcription factors and 
reduce nuclear localization of mutant protein. Although mutations are found 
throughout the TBX5 gene, no evidence exists to suggest that genotype affects 
the location of heart and limb defects or the severity of HOS manifestation. 
However, genetic background, and to a lesser extent, environmental and 
stochastic modifiers are believed to influence greatly the severity of HOS 
manifestation and may account for the large variation seen in the severity of 
defects, even among members of the same kindred. Careful clinical examination of 
patients who seek treatment with heart and limb malformations is necessary to 
avoid misdiagnosis of similar congenital conditions. With the proper 
examination, TBX5 mutations can be identified in more than 70% of patients with 
a clinical diagnosis of HOS.
SUMMARY: Genetic analysis of patient populations and the biochemical 
characterization of the mutated proteins have provided considerable insight into 
the function of TBX5 in cardiac development and disease pathology. Novel 
discoveries await as these two paradigms merge.

DOI: 10.1097/00001573-200405000-00004
PMID: 15096952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]