---
reference_id: "PMID:37206830"
title: "Hyaluronic Acid in Rhinology: Its Uses, Advantages and Drawbacks-A Review."
authors:
- Abi Zeid Daou C
- Korban Z
journal: Indian J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s12070-022-03255-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hyaluronic Acid in Rhinology: Its Uses, Advantages and Drawbacks-A Review.
**Authors:** Abi Zeid Daou C, Korban Z
**Journal:** Indian J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12070-022-03255-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12070-022-03255-2)

## Content

1. Indian J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2023 Apr;75(Suppl 1):696-704. doi: 
10.1007/s12070-022-03255-2. Epub 2022 Nov 6.

Hyaluronic Acid in Rhinology: Its Uses, Advantages and Drawbacks-A Review.

Abi Zeid Daou C(1), Korban Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, American University of 
Beirut Medical Center, P.O. Box 11-0236, Beirut, Lebanon.

Hyaluronic acid has been increasingly involved in recent research due to its 
many chemical and physical properties. This is a review of the literature for 
studies involving the use of hyaluronic acid in rhinology. Hyaluronic acid 
washes and irrigation have been increasingly used in chronic sinusitis medical 
therapy and post-operatively with mixed results. It has also been shown to play 
a role in the treatment of nasal polyposis, allergic rhinitis, acute 
rhinosinusitis and empty nose syndrome. Its effect on biofilm in many disease 
entities has also been studied. HA is being recently used as ancillary treatment 
for several rhinologic conditions such as post-operative endoscopy care and 
chronic sinonasal infections. The properties of HA have intrigued researchers 
over the past years particularly in biofilm management, healing and 
inflammation.

© Association of Otolaryngologists of India 2022, Springer Nature or its 
licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this 
article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other 
rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of 
this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and 
applicable law.

DOI: 10.1007/s12070-022-03255-2
PMCID: PMC10188805
PMID: 37206830

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors have no 
competing interests to declare that are relevant to the content of this article.