---
reference_id: "PMID:37104696"
title: "Clear cell carcinoma of the ovary and venous thromboembolism: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Didar H
- Farzaneh F
- Najafiarab H
- Namakin K
- Gohari K
- Sheidaei A
- Ramezani S
journal: Curr Med Res Opin
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1080/03007995.2023.2208488
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Venous Thromboembolism/epidemiology, etiology"
- Ovary
- Risk Factors
- Venous Thrombosis
- Carcinoma
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clear cell carcinoma of the ovary and venous thromboembolism: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Didar H, Farzaneh F, Najafiarab H, Namakin K, Gohari K, Sheidaei A, Ramezani S
**Journal:** Curr Med Res Opin (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1080/03007995.2023.2208488](https://doi.org/10.1080/03007995.2023.2208488)

## Content

1. Curr Med Res Opin. 2023 Jun;39(6):901-910. doi: 10.1080/03007995.2023.2208488.
 Epub 2023 May 7.

Clear cell carcinoma of the ovary and venous thromboembolism: a systematic
review and meta-analysis.

Didar H(1), Farzaneh F(1), Najafiarab H(1), Namakin K(2), Gohari K(3), Sheidaei
A(4), Ramezani S(5).

Author information:
(1)Preventative Gynecology Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Student Research Committee, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares
University, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(5)School of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Babol University of Medical
Sciences, Babol, Iran.

OBJECTIVES: As the second most common subtype of Epithelial ovarian cancers
(EOCs), ovarian clear cell carcinoma (OCCC) is associated with a high rate of
cancer-associated thrombosis. Previous studies revealed the wide range
prevalence (6-42%) of venous thromboembolism (VTE) among OCCC patients. This
study aimed to determine the prevalence of VTE among OCCC patients as well as
factors affecting it.
METHODS: PubMed, Scopus, Embase, and Cochrane Library databases were searched up
to December 12th, 2022. Studies reporting venous thromboembolic events in women
with clear cell carcinoma of the ovary were included. Demographic data,
clinical, and paraclinical features of the patients were independently extracted
by two reviewers.
RESULTS: Out of the 2254 records, 43 studies were processed for final review.
The qualified studies involved 573 VTE cases among 2965 patients with OCCC. The
pooled prevalence of VTE among OCCC patients was 21.32% (95%CI=(17.38-25.87)).
Most VTE events were reported in Japanese women (26.15%), followed by Americans
(24.41%) and UK (21.57%), and Chinese (13.61%) women. VTE was more common in
patients with advanced stages (37.79%) compared to those with early stages of
the disease (16.54%).
CONCLUSIONS: Ovarian clear cell carcinoma is associated with a high rate of
cancer-associated thrombosis. VTE events in OCCC patients were higher in
advanced stages and Japanese women.

DOI: 10.1080/03007995.2023.2208488
PMID: 37104696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
