---
reference_id: "PMID:37053307"
title: The relative importance of key meteorological factors affecting numbers of mosquito vectors of dengue fever.
authors:
- Liu Y
- Wang X
- Tang S
- Cheke RA
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0011247
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The relative importance of key meteorological factors affecting numbers of mosquito vectors of dengue fever.
**Authors:** Liu Y, Wang X, Tang S, Cheke RA
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0011247](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0011247)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2023 Apr 13;17(4):e0011247. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0011247. eCollection 2023 Apr.

The relative importance of key meteorological factors affecting numbers of 
mosquito vectors of dengue fever.

Liu Y(1), Wang X(1), Tang S(1), Cheke RA(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Mathematics and Statistics, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an, 
Shaanxi, China.
(2)Natural Resources Institute, University of Greenwich at Medway, Chatham 
Maritime, Chatham, United Kingdom.

Although single factors such as rainfall are known to affect the population 
dynamics of Aedes albopictus, the main vector of dengue fever in Eurasia, the 
synergistic effects of different meteorological factors are not fully 
understood. To address this topic, we used meteorological data and 
mosquito-vector association data including Breteau and ovitrap indices in key 
areas of dengue outbreaks in Guangdong Province, China, to formulate a 
five-stage mathematical model for Aedes albopictus population dynamics by 
integrating multiple meteorological factors. Unknown parameters were estimated 
using a genetic algorithm, and the results were analyzed by k-Shape clustering, 
random forest and grey correlation analysis. In addition, the population density 
of mosquitoes in 2022 was predicted and used for evaluating the effectiveness of 
the model. We found that there is spatiotemporal heterogeneity in the effects of 
temperature and rainfall and their distribution characteristics on the diapause 
period, the numbers of peaks in mosquito densities in summer and the annual 
total numbers of adult mosquitoes. Moreover, we identified the key 
meteorological indicators of the mosquito quantity at each stage and that 
rainfall (seasonal rainfall and annual total rainfall) was more important than 
the temperature distribution (seasonal average temperature and temperature 
index) and the uniformity of rainfall annual distribution (coefficient of 
variation) for most of the areas studied. The peak rainfall during the summer is 
the best indicator of mosquito population development. The results provide 
important theoretical support for the future design of mosquito vector control 
strategies and early warnings of mosquito-borne diseases.

Copyright: © 2023 Liu et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0011247
PMCID: PMC10128945
PMID: 37053307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.