---
reference_id: "PMID:25704303"
title: PI3K/Akt signaling in osteosarcoma.
authors:
- Zhang J
- Yu XH
- Yan YG
- Wang C
- Wang WJ
journal: Clin Chim Acta
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2014.12.041
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PI3K/Akt signaling in osteosarcoma.
**Authors:** Zhang J, Yu XH, Yan YG, Wang C, Wang WJ
**Journal:** Clin Chim Acta (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cca.2014.12.041](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cca.2014.12.041)

## Content

1. Clin Chim Acta. 2015 Apr 15;444:182-92. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2014.12.041. Epub 
2015 Feb 19.

PI3K/Akt signaling in osteosarcoma.

Zhang J(1), Yu XH(2), Yan YG(1), Wang C(1), Wang WJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Spine Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, University of 
South China, Hengyang, Hunan 421001, China.
(2)Life Science Research Center, University of South China, Hengyang, Hunan 
421001, China.
(3)Department of Spine Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, University of 
South China, Hengyang, Hunan 421001, China. Electronic address: 
wwwwjj167@qq.com.

Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common nonhematologic bone malignancy in children 
and adolescents. Despite the advances of adjuvant chemotherapy and significant 
improvement of survival, the prognosis remains generally poor. As such, the 
search for more effective anti-OS agents is urgent. The phosphatidylinositol 
3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt pathway is thought to be one of the most important oncogenic 
pathways in human cancer. An increasing body of evidence has shown that this 
pathway is frequently hyperactivated in OS and contributes to disease initiation 
and development, including tumorigenesis, proliferation, invasion, cell cycle 
progression, inhibition of apoptosis, angiogenesis, metastasis and 
chemoresistance. Inhibition of this pathway through small molecule compounds 
represents an attractive potential therapeutic approach for OS. The aim of this 
review is to summarize the roles of the PI3K/Akt pathway in the development and 
progression of OS, and to highlight the therapeutic potential of targeting this 
signaling pathway. Knowledge obtained from the application of these compounds 
will help in further understanding the pathogenesis of OS and designing 
subsequent treatment strategies.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2014.12.041
PMID: 25704303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]