---
reference_id: "PMID:6933561"
title: Helper virus is not required for in vitro erythroid transformation of hematopoietic cells by Friend virus.
authors:
- Hankins WD
- Krantz SB
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1980'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.77.9.5287
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Helper virus is not required for in vitro erythroid transformation of hematopoietic cells by Friend virus.
**Authors:** Hankins WD, Krantz SB
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1980)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.77.9.5287](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.77.9.5287)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1980 Sep;77(9):5287-91. doi: 10.1073/pnas.77.9.5287.

Helper virus is not required for in vitro erythroid transformation of 
hematopoietic cells by Friend virus.

Hankins WD, Krantz SB.

The Friend polycythemia virus complex (FVP), consisting of the 
replication-defective spleen focus-forming virus (SFFV) and a helper Friend 
murine leukemia virus (MuLV-F), produces erythroleukemia within 2-3 weeks in 
vivo. We have recently reported in vitro transformation of bone marrow cells by 
FVP, producing clusters of erythroid colonies (erythroid bursts) 4-6 days after 
infection. In contrast to uninfected bone marrow cells, FVP-treated cells 
proliferated and differentiated (synthesized hemoglobin) in the absence of added 
erythropoietin, the physiologic regulator of erythropoiesis. The relative roles 
of helper murine leukemia virus (MuLV) and SFFV in the in vitro erythroid 
transformation have now been examined. Pseudotype studies and the finding that 
cloned MuLV-F (free of SFFV) did not induce burst formation indicated that SFFV 
was essential for this in vitro effect of FVP. Because SFFV could not be 
obtained free of helper MuLV, we assessed the requirement of MuLV in the 
transformation by kinetic analyses of helper-deficient and helper-excess FVP 
preparations. Whereas helper-excess FVP gave single-hit kinetics both in vivo 
and in vitro, the helper-deficient FVP followed multiple-hit kinetics when 
titrated for spleen focus formation in vivo. Addition of MuLV-F to 
helper-deficient FVP prior to injection resulted in a marked enhancement of 
spleen focus formation and a conversion from multiple-hit to single-hit 
kinetics. In contrast, titration of this same preparation for erythroid burst 
transformation in vitro yielded single-hit kinetics, and the addition of helper 
MuLV-F had no effect. The time course of burst development was similar with or 
without added MuLV-F. Unlike burst transformation, SFFV production by these 
infected cultures followed multiple-hit kinetics. Addition of MuLV-F at the time 
of infection led to an enhancement of SFFV production and conversion of the 
titration curve from multiple-hit to single-hit. These data are consistent with 
the idea that SFFV is competent for erythroid transformation in vitro, but 
requires helper MuLV for its replication.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.77.9.5287
PMCID: PMC350043
PMID: 6933561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]