---
reference_id: "PMID:33673160"
title: "Fabry Disease: Molecular Basis, Pathophysiology, Diagnostics and Potential Therapeutic Directions."
authors:
- Kok K
- Zwiers KC
- Boot RG
- Overkleeft HS
- Aerts JMFG
- Artola M
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/biom11020271
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fabry Disease: Molecular Basis, Pathophysiology, Diagnostics and Potential Therapeutic Directions.
**Authors:** Kok K, Zwiers KC, Boot RG, Overkleeft HS, Aerts JMFG, Artola M
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom11020271](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom11020271)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2021 Feb 12;11(2):271. doi: 10.3390/biom11020271.

Fabry Disease: Molecular Basis, Pathophysiology, Diagnostics and Potential 
Therapeutic Directions.

Kok K(1), Zwiers KC(1), Boot RG(1), Overkleeft HS(2), Aerts JMFG(1), Artola 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden 
University, P.O. Box 9502, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Bio-organic Synthesis, Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden 
University, P.O. Box 9502, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands.

Fabry disease (FD) is a lysosomal storage disorder (LSD) characterized by the 
deficiency of α-galactosidase A (α-GalA) and the consequent accumulation of 
toxic metabolites such as globotriaosylceramide (Gb3) and 
globotriaosylsphingosine (lysoGb3). Early diagnosis and appropriate timely 
treatment of FD patients are crucial to prevent tissue damage and organ failure 
which no treatment can reverse. LSDs might profit from four main therapeutic 
strategies, but hitherto there is no cure. Among the therapeutic possibilities 
are intravenous administered enzyme replacement therapy (ERT), oral 
pharmacological chaperone therapy (PCT) or enzyme stabilizers, substrate 
reduction therapy (SRT) and the more recent gene/RNA therapy. Unfortunately, FD 
patients can only benefit from ERT and, since 2016, PCT, both always combined 
with supportive adjunctive and preventive therapies to clinically manage 
FD-related chronic renal, cardiac and neurological complications. Gene therapy 
for FD is currently studied and further strategies such as substrate reduction 
therapy (SRT) and novel PCTs are under investigation. In this review, we discuss 
the molecular basis of FD, the pathophysiology and diagnostic procedures, 
together with the current treatments and potential therapeutic avenues that FD 
patients could benefit from in the future.

DOI: 10.3390/biom11020271
PMCID: PMC7918333
PMID: 33673160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.