---
reference_id: "PMID:38324273"
title: "Speech, Language, Hearing, and Otopathology Results From the International Smith-Magenis Syndrome Patient Registry."
authors:
- Brennan C
- Smith ML
- Baiduc RR
- "O'Connor L"
journal: J Speech Lang Hear Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1044/2023_JSLHR-23-00179
keywords:
- Humans
- "Child, Preschool"
- Child
- Speech
- Smith-Magenis Syndrome/complications
- Hearing
- Hearing Loss/etiology
- Deafness/complications
- Otitis Media/complications
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Speech, Language, Hearing, and Otopathology Results From the International Smith-Magenis Syndrome Patient Registry.
**Authors:** Brennan C, Smith ML, Baiduc RR, O'Connor L
**Journal:** J Speech Lang Hear Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1044/2023_JSLHR-23-00179](https://doi.org/10.1044/2023_JSLHR-23-00179)

## Content

1. J Speech Lang Hear Res. 2024 Mar 11;67(3):917-938. doi: 
10.1044/2023_JSLHR-23-00179. Epub 2024 Feb 7.

Speech, Language, Hearing, and Otopathology Results From the International 
Smith-Magenis Syndrome Patient Registry.

Brennan C(1), Smith ML(1), Baiduc RR(1), O'Connor L(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Colorado Boulder.
(2)Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.

PURPOSE: Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS), a rare, genetically linked complex 
developmental disorder caused by a deletion or mutation within chromosome 
17p11.2, is associated with delays in speech-language development, otopathology, 
and hearing loss, yet previous studies lack comprehensive descriptions of 
hearing and communication profiles. Here, analyses of patient registry data 
expand what is known about speech, language, hearing, and otopathology in SMS.
METHOD: International speech-language and hearing registry survey data for 82 
individuals with SMS were analyzed using descriptive and inferential statistics. 
Hearing loss, history of otitis media and pressure equalization (PE) tubes, 
communication mode, expressive/receptive language, and vocal quality were 
analyzed for all subjects and subjects grouped by age. Statistical methods 
included descriptive statistics and Pearson's chi-square tests of independence 
to test for differences between age groups for each variable of interest. 
Association analyses included Pearson's correlations.
RESULTS: Hearing and otological analyses revealed that 35% of subjects had 
hearing loss, 66% had a history of otitis media, and 62% had received PE tubes. 
Speech-language analyses revealed that 60% of subjects communicated using 
speech, 79% began speaking words at/after 24 months of age, 92% combined words 
at/after 36 months, and 41% used sign language before speech. There was a 
significant association between the age that first words were spoken and the age 
that PE tubes were first placed. Communication strengths noted in more than 40% 
of subjects included social interest, humor, and memory for people, past events, 
and/or facts.
CONCLUSIONS: Significant delays and impairment in speech-language were common, 
but the majority of those with SMS communicated using speech by age 6 years. Age 
was a significant factor for some aspects of hearing loss and communication. 
Neither hearing loss nor otitis media exacerbated language impairment. These 
results confirm and extend previous findings about the nature of speech, 
language, hearing, and otopathology in those with SMS.

DOI: 10.1044/2023_JSLHR-23-00179
PMID: 38324273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]