---
reference_id: "PMID:3799920"
title: A Golgi study of the polymicrogyric cortex in Aicardi syndrome.
authors:
- Ferrer I
- Cusí MV
- Liarte A
- Campistol J
journal: Brain Dev
year: '1986'
doi: 10.1016/s0387-7604(86)80097-3
keywords:
- Agenesis of Corpus Callosum
- Cerebral Cortex/abnormalities
- Eye Diseases/pathology
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Pigmentation Disorders/pathology
- "Spasms, Infantile/pathology"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Golgi study of the polymicrogyric cortex in Aicardi syndrome.
**Authors:** Ferrer I, Cusí MV, Liarte A, Campistol J
**Journal:** Brain Dev (1986)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0387-7604(86)80097-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0387-7604(86)80097-3)

## Content

1. Brain Dev. 1986;8(5):518-25. doi: 10.1016/s0387-7604(86)80097-3.

A Golgi study of the polymicrogyric cortex in Aicardi syndrome.

Ferrer I, Cusí MV, Liarte A, Campistol J.

The neuropathological examination of the brain of a 4-month-old girl with 
Aicardi syndrome (infantile spasms, chorioretinal lacunae, psychomotor 
retardation, agenesis of the corpus callosum and vertebral anomalies) showed 
agenesis of the corpus callosum, agenesis of the anterior commissure and 
abnormal orientation of the hippocampal formation, in addition to 
periventricular cerebral nodules and extensive non-laminated cortical 
polymicrogyria of the fronto-parietal regions and gyrus cinguli of both 
hemispheres. A non-communicating medial supracollicular cyst, racemose cysts of 
the choroid plexus, underdevelopment of the inferior cerebellar vermis tonsils 
were also observed. The study of the polymicrogyric cortex with the Golgi method 
revealed an abnormal orientation of neurons; but the different varieties of 
cells were located at the depth corresponding to that were they are normally 
found. The Golgy study of the periventricular nodules disclosed the presence of 
different types of cortex-like neurons. On the basis of these data it may be 
suggested that polymicrogyria is not a migratory disturbance, but rather the 
result of a partial necrosis of the cortical mantle occurring before the 5th 
month of foetal life.

DOI: 10.1016/s0387-7604(86)80097-3
PMID: 3799920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]