---
reference_id: "PMID:36580474"
title: Loss of Slc12a2 specifically in pancreatic β-cells drives metabolic syndrome in mice.
authors:
- Abdelgawad R
- Rathod YD
- Alshammari M
- Kelly L
- Hübner CA
- Aguilar-Bryan L
- Di Fulvio M
journal: PLoS One
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0279560
keywords:
- Mice
- Animals
- Metabolic Syndrome/metabolism
- Insulin-Secreting Cells/metabolism
- Insulin/metabolism
- Insulin Resistance
- Hyperinsulinism/metabolism
- Hyperglycemia/metabolism
- Diuretics
- Hypertension/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of Slc12a2 specifically in pancreatic β-cells drives metabolic syndrome in mice.
**Authors:** Abdelgawad R, Rathod YD, Alshammari M, Kelly L, Hübner CA, Aguilar-Bryan L, Di Fulvio M
**Journal:** PLoS One (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0279560](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0279560)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2022 Dec 29;17(12):e0279560. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0279560. 
eCollection 2022.

Loss of Slc12a2 specifically in pancreatic β-cells drives metabolic syndrome in 
mice.

Abdelgawad R(1), Rathod YD(1), Alshammari M(1), Kelly L(1), Hübner CA(2), 
Aguilar-Bryan L(3), Di Fulvio M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Wright State University, School of 
Medicine Dayton, Fairborn, Ohio, United States of America.
(2)Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Jena, Jena, Germany.
(3)Pacific Northwest Diabetes Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, United 
States of America.

The risk of type-2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease is higher in subjects 
with metabolic syndrome, a cluster of clinical conditions characterized by 
obesity, impaired glucose metabolism, hyperinsulinemia, hyperlipidemia and 
hypertension. Diuretics are frequently used to treat hypertension in these 
patients, however, their use has long been associated with poor metabolic 
outcomes which cannot be fully explained by their diuretic effects. Here, we 
show that mice lacking the diuretic-sensitive Na+K+2Cl-cotransporter-1 Nkcc1 
(Slc12a2) in insulin-secreting β-cells of the pancreatic islet (Nkcc1βKO) have 
reduced in vitro insulin responses to glucose. This is associated with islet 
hypoplasia at the expense of fewer and smaller β-cells. Remarkably, Nkcc1βKO 
mice excessively gain weight and progressive metabolic syndrome when fed a 
standard chow diet ad libitum. This is characterized by impaired hepatic insulin 
receptor activation and altered lipid metabolism. Indeed, overweight Nkcc1βKO 
but not lean mice had fasting and fed hyperglycemia, hypertriglyceridemia and 
non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. Notably, fasting hyperinsulinemia was detected 
earlier than hyperglycemia, insulin resistance, glucose intolerance and 
increased hepatic de novo gluconeogenesis. Therefore, our data provide evidence 
supporting the novel hypothesis that primary β-cell defects related to 
Nkcc1-regulated intracellular Cl-homeostasis and β-cell growth can result in the 
development of metabolic syndrome shedding light into additional potential 
mechanisms whereby chronic diuretic use may have adverse effects on metabolic 
homeostasis in susceptible individuals.

Copyright: © 2022 Abdelgawad et al. This is an open access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0279560
PMCID: PMC9799326
PMID: 36580474 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.