---
reference_id: "PMID:29921609"
title: Effects of multiple sclerosis disease-modifying therapies on employment measures using patient-reported data.
authors:
- Chen J
- Taylor BV
- Blizzard L
- Simpson S Jr
- Palmer AJ
- van der Mei IAF
journal: J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1136/jnnp-2018-318228
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of multiple sclerosis disease-modifying therapies on employment measures using patient-reported data.
**Authors:** Chen J, Taylor BV, Blizzard L, Simpson S Jr, Palmer AJ, van der Mei IAF
**Journal:** J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jnnp-2018-318228](https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp-2018-318228)

## Content

1. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2018 Nov;89(11):1200-1207. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2018-318228. Epub 2018 Jun 19.

Effects of multiple sclerosis disease-modifying therapies on employment measures 
using patient-reported data.

Chen J(1), Taylor BV(1), Blizzard L(1), Simpson S Jr(1)(2), Palmer AJ(1), van 
der Mei IAF(3).

Author information:
(1)Menzies Institute for Medical Research, University of Tasmania, Hobart, TAS, 
Australia.
(2)Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(3)Menzies Institute for Medical Research, University of Tasmania, Hobart, TAS, 
Australia ingrid.vandermei@utas.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: The direct comparative evidence on treatment effects of available 
multiple sclerosis (MS) disease-modifying therapies (DMTs) is limited, and few 
studies have examined the benefits of DMTs on employment outcomes. We compared 
the effects of DMTs used in the previous 5 years on improving the work 
attendance, amount of work and work productivity of people with MS.
METHODS: The Australian MS Longitudinal Study collected data from participants 
on DMTs usage from 2010 to 2015 and whether DMTs contributed to changes in 
employment outcomes. We classified 11 DMTs into three categories based on their 
clinical efficacy (β-interferons and glatiramer acetate as category 1; 
teriflunomide and dimethyl fumarate as category 2; fingolimod, natalizumab, 
alemtuzumab and mitoxantrone as category 3). Each DMT used by a participant was 
treated as one observation and analysed by log-multinomial regression.
RESULTS: Of the 874 participants included, 1384 observations were generated. 
Those who used category 3 (higher efficacy) DMTs were 2-3 times more likely to 
report improvements in amount of work, work attendance and work productivity 
compared with those who used category 1 (classical injectable) DMTs. Natalizumab 
was associated with superior beneficial effects on patient-reported employment 
outcomes than fingolimod (RR=1.76, 95% CI 1.02 to 3.03 for increased work 
attendance and RR=1.46, 95% CI 1.02 to 2.10 for increased work productivity).
CONCLUSIONS: Those using the higher efficacy (category 3) DMTs, particularly 
fingolimod and natalizumab, reported significant increases in amount of work, 
work attendance and work productivity, suggesting they have important beneficial 
effects on work life in people with MS.

© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of 
the article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless 
otherwise expressly granted.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2018-318228
PMID: 29921609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.