---
reference_id: "PMID:12081585"
title: Role of cyclooxygenase-2 in hyperprostaglandin E syndrome/antenatal Bartter syndrome.
authors:
- Reinalter SC
- Jeck N
- Brochhausen C
- Watzer B
- Nüsing RM
- Seyberth HW
- Kömhoff M
journal: Kidney Int
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1046/j.1523-1755.2002.00435.x
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Bartter Syndrome/drug therapy, etiology, metabolism"
- Child
- Cyclooxygenase 2
- Cyclooxygenase 2 Inhibitors
- Cyclooxygenase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Female
- Humans
- "Isoenzymes/antagonists & inhibitors, physiology"
- Lactones/therapeutic use
- Male
- Membrane Proteins
- Prostaglandin-Endoperoxide Synthases/physiology
- Prostaglandins E/biosynthesis
- Renin/blood
- Sulfones
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of cyclooxygenase-2 in hyperprostaglandin E syndrome/antenatal Bartter syndrome.
**Authors:** Reinalter SC, Jeck N, Brochhausen C, Watzer B, Nüsing RM, Seyberth HW, Kömhoff M
**Journal:** Kidney Int (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1523-1755.2002.00435.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1523-1755.2002.00435.x)

## Content

1. Kidney Int. 2002 Jul;62(1):253-60. doi: 10.1046/j.1523-1755.2002.00435.x.

Role of cyclooxygenase-2 in hyperprostaglandin E syndrome/antenatal Bartter
syndrome.

Reinalter SC(1), Jeck N, Brochhausen C, Watzer B, Nüsing RM, Seyberth HW,
Kömhoff M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Philipps-University Marburg, Deutschhausstrasse 12,
D-35053 Marburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Hyperprostaglandin E syndrome/antenatal Bartter syndrome (HPS/aBS)
is a congenital salt-losing tubulopathy with an induced expression of
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) in the macula densa probably leading to hyperreninemia.
Inhibition of stimulated prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) formation with indomethacin
results in a significant improvement of clinical symptoms and is therefore
standard therapy. Using the COX-2 selective inhibitor rofecoxib, we investigated
the role of COX-2 in the pathophysiology of HPS/aBS.
METHODS: Six clinically well-characterized patients with HPS/aBS (3 girls) were
enrolled into the study. Four patients had mutations in the renal potassium
channel ROMK, one patient in the furosemide-sensitive cotransporter NKCC2,
whereas in one patient no molecular abnormality could be detected. Median age
was 15.8 years (range: 9.1 to 19.0 years). Patients were evaluated on
indomethacin treatment, 3 days after indomethacin withdrawal, and after 4 days
of treatment with rofecoxib. Therapeutic drug monitoring was performed.
RESULTS: COX-2-selectivity of rofecoxib was confirmed in vivo and ex vivo. Both
indomethacin and rofecoxib ameliorated clinical symptoms, the typical laboratory
findings, and significantly suppressed PGE2 and PGE-M excretion to normal values
while it was elevated under withdrawal conditions. Rofecoxib suppressed
hyperreninemia to a similar extent as indomethacin.
CONCLUSION: In patients with HPS/aBS, excessive PGE2 synthesis and
hyperreninemia is dependent on COX-2 activity. This observation proves the
stimulatory role of COX-2 on renin-secretion in salt-depletion in humans.
Clinical long-term efficacy and potential side effects of rofecoxib need to be
evaluated in a larger cohort of HPS/aBS-patients.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1523-1755.2002.00435.x
PMID: 12081585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
