---
reference_id: "PMID:8640103"
title: Identification of malnutrition-related diabetes mellitus among hospitalized patients in Taiwan.
authors:
- Chen KW
- Lee CJ
- Huang HS
- Lin JD
- Huang BY
- Huang MJ
journal: J Formos Med Assoc
year: '1996'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of malnutrition-related diabetes mellitus among hospitalized patients in Taiwan.
**Authors:** Chen KW, Lee CJ, Huang HS, Lin JD, Huang BY, Huang MJ
**Journal:** J Formos Med Assoc (1996)

## Content

1. J Formos Med Assoc. 1996 Jan;95(1):76-8.

Identification of malnutrition-related diabetes mellitus among hospitalized 
patients in Taiwan.

Chen KW(1), Lee CJ, Huang HS, Lin JD, Huang BY, Huang MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Chang Gung Medical College and Memorial 
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.

A retrospective review of 1,089 diabetes mellitus admitted to the metabolic ward 
of Chang Gung Memorial Hospital was performed to screen for malnutrition-related 
diabetes mellitus (MRDM). None of the patients fulfilled the MRDM criteria, 
although 20 patients with a body mass index < or = 15 kg/m2 were further 
analyzed. These patients presented with poor glycemic control and most had 
associated chronic diseases. C-peptide levels were < 0.8 ng/mL in 17 patients 
and undetectable in six patients. Two patients experienced diabetic ketoacidosis 
(DKA). Insulin treatment was required by 18 patients with a mean (+/- SD) dosage 
of 30 +/- 9 U/day. During follow-up of 14 of the patients for 9.8 +/- 4.3 
months, HbA1c decreased significantly. Their mean body weight and body mass 
index increased significantly from 36.6 +/- 4.6 kg to 47.2 +/- 6.2 kg and 13.9 
+/- 0.9 to 18.0 +/- 1.9 kg/m2, respectively. Careful attention should be paid to 
diabetic control and associated chronic illness in patients with severe 
undernutrition.

PMID: 8640103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]