---
reference_id: "PMID:40754307"
title: Ectopic laminin α2 accumulation in the glomerular basement membrane exacerbates podocyte injury in Alport syndrome.
authors:
- Uchio-Yamada K
- Yasuda K
- Suzuki O
- Oh-Hashi K
- Ohta T
- Manabe N
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2025.168008
keywords:
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/pathology, metabolism, genetics"
- "Podocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- Animals
- "Laminin/metabolism, genetics"
- "Glomerular Basement Membrane/metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- "Collagen Type IV/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Mice, Inbred DBA"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ectopic laminin α2 accumulation in the glomerular basement membrane exacerbates podocyte injury in Alport syndrome.
**Authors:** Uchio-Yamada K, Yasuda K, Suzuki O, Oh-Hashi K, Ohta T, Manabe N
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbadis.2025.168008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbadis.2025.168008)

## Content

1. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis. 2025 Nov;1871(8):168008. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2025.168008. Epub 2025 Aug 5.

Ectopic laminin α2 accumulation in the glomerular basement membrane exacerbates
podocyte injury in Alport syndrome.

Uchio-Yamada K(1), Yasuda K(2), Suzuki O(3), Oh-Hashi K(4), Ohta T(5), Manabe
N(6).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Animal Models for Human Diseases, National Institutes of
Biomedical Innovation, Health and Nutrition, Ibaraki, Osaka, Japan. Electronic
address: kozue-mt@nibn.go.jp.
(2)Department of Immunology, Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Nagoya, Japan; Department of Medical Chemistry, Graduate School of
Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Animal Models for Human Diseases, National Institutes of
Biomedical Innovation, Health and Nutrition, Ibaraki, Osaka, Japan.
(4)Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Science, Faculty of Engineering,
Gifu University, Gifu 501-1193, Japan; United Graduate School of Drug Discovery
and Medical Information Sciences, Gifu University, Gifu, Japan; Center for One
Medicine Innovative Translational Research (COMIT), Gifu University, Gifu,
Japan.
(5)Laboratory of Animal Physiology and Functional Anatomy, Graduate School of
Agriculture, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(6)Department of Human Sciences, Osaka International University, Moriguchi,
Osaka, Japan.

Alport syndrome is a hereditary disease caused by mutations in Col4a3, Col4a4,
and Col4a5, which encode the type IV collagen α3, α4, and α5 chains,
respectively. Alport glomerular basement membrane (GBM), which predominantly
consists of collagen α1α2α1 (IV) heterotrimers, provides less biomechanical
strength than normal GBM with collagen α3α4α5 (IV) heterotrimers. In addition to
type IV collagen abnormalities, laminin dysregulation is observed in Alport GBM.
In this study, we aimed to investigate the mechanisms underlying laminin
dysregulation in Alport GBM and their roles in disease progression using primary
podocytes and Col4a4-deficient mice on DBA/2 background. Histological analysis
of Col4a4-deficient mice revealed that ectopic laminin α2 deposition in GBM
during postnatal nephrogenesis, followed by re-expression of laminin α1 and
decreased expression of nephrin. The analysis of primary podocytes indicated
that podocytes on low substrate stiffness overexpressed laminin α2. Moreover,
podocytes cultured on laminin-α2β1γ1 exhibited higher laminin α1 levels and
lower nephrin levels than those cultured on laminin-α5β2γ1. Cell adhesion assays
showed that ectopic laminin α2 deposition in GBM may cause defective
podocyte-GBM adhesion, leading to podocyte depletion. Overall, these findings
suggest that insufficient GBM strength increases the mechanical stress on
podocytes via daily transcapillary filtration pressures, resulting in ectopic
laminin α2 deposition in GBM, which contributes to defective podocyte-GBM
adhesion, GBM abnormalities, and podocyte injury in Alport syndrome.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2025.168008
PMID: 40754307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
