---
reference_id: "PMID:36786112"
title: "Prevalence and incidence of psychotic disorders in 22q11.2 deletion syndrome: a meta-analysis."
authors:
- Provenzani U
- Damiani S
- Bersano I
- Singh S
- Moschillo A
- Accinni T
- Brondino N
- Oliver D
- Fusar-Poli P
journal: Int Rev Psychiatry
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/09540261.2022.2123273
keywords:
- Humans
- "DiGeorge Syndrome/epidemiology, complications, genetics"
- Incidence
- Prevalence
- "Psychotic Disorders/epidemiology, etiology"
- "Schizophrenia/epidemiology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence and incidence of psychotic disorders in 22q11.2 deletion syndrome: a meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Provenzani U, Damiani S, Bersano I, Singh S, Moschillo A, Accinni T, Brondino N, Oliver D, Fusar-Poli P
**Journal:** Int Rev Psychiatry (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/09540261.2022.2123273](https://doi.org/10.1080/09540261.2022.2123273)

## Content

1. Int Rev Psychiatry. 2022 Nov-Dec;34(7-8):676-688. doi:
10.1080/09540261.2022.2123273. Epub 2022 Sep 14.

Prevalence and incidence of psychotic disorders in 22q11.2 deletion syndrome: a
meta-analysis.

Provenzani U(1)(2), Damiani S(1), Bersano I(1), Singh S(1), Moschillo A(3),
Accinni T(3), Brondino N(1), Oliver D(2), Fusar-Poli P(1)(2)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, University of Pavia, Pavia,
Italy.
(2)Early Psychosis: Interventions and Clinical-detection (EPIC) Lab, Department
of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's
College London, London, UK.
(3)Department of Human Neurosciences, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(4)OASIS service, South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(5)National Institute for Health Research, Maudsley Biomedical Research Centre,
South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.

22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q.11.2DS) might be one of the strongest genetic
risk factors for psychosis, but robust estimates of prevalence and incidence of
psychotic disorders in this condition are not available. To address this gap, we
performed a multistep systematic PRISMA/MOOSE-compliant literature search of
articles reporting prevalence (primary outcome) or incidence (secondary outcome)
of psychotic disorders in 22q11.2DS samples (protocol: https://osf.io/w6hpg)
using random-effects meta-analysis, subgroup analyses and meta-regressions. The
pooled prevalence of psychotic disorders was 11.50% (95%CI:9.40-14.00%), largely
schizophrenia (9.70%, 95%CI:6.50-14.20). Prevalence was significantly higher in
samples with a mean age over 18 years, with both psychiatric and non-psychiatric
comorbidities and recruited from healthcare services (compared to the
community). Mean age was also significantly positively associated with
prevalence in meta-regressions (p < 0.01). The pooled incidence of psychotic
disorders was 10.60% (95%CI:6.60%-16.70%) at a mean follow-up time of
59.27 ± 40.55 months; meta-regressions were not significant. To our knowledge,
this is the first comprehensive systematic review and meta-analysis of the
prevalence and incidence of psychotic disorders in 22q11.2DS individuals. It
demonstrates that around one in ten individuals with 22q11.2DS displays comorbid
psychotic disorders, and around one in ten will develop psychosis in the
following five years, indicating that preventive approaches should be
implemented systematically in 22q11.2DS.

DOI: 10.1080/09540261.2022.2123273
PMID: 36786112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
