---
reference_id: "PMID:34071064"
title: "Immunopathology of Chronic Hepatitis B Infection: Role of Innate and Adaptive Immune Response in Disease Progression."
authors:
- Khanam A
- Chua JV
- Kottilil S
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/ijms22115497
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunopathology of Chronic Hepatitis B Infection: Role of Innate and Adaptive Immune Response in Disease Progression.
**Authors:** Khanam A, Chua JV, Kottilil S
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms22115497](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22115497)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 May 23;22(11):5497. doi: 10.3390/ijms22115497.

Immunopathology of Chronic Hepatitis B Infection: Role of Innate and Adaptive 
Immune Response in Disease Progression.

Khanam A(1), Chua JV(1), Kottilil S(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Care and Research, Institute of Human Virology, 
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

More than 250 million people are living with chronic hepatitis B despite the 
availability of highly effective vaccines and oral antivirals. Although innate 
and adaptive immune cells play crucial roles in controlling hepatitis B virus 
(HBV) infection, they are also accountable for inflammation and subsequently 
cause liver pathologies. During the initial phase of HBV infection, innate 
immunity is triggered leading to antiviral cytokines production, followed by 
activation and intrahepatic recruitment of the adaptive immune system resulting 
in successful virus elimination. In chronic HBV infection, significant 
alterations in both innate and adaptive immunity including expansion of 
regulatory cells, overexpression of co-inhibitory receptors, presence of 
abundant inflammatory mediators, and modifications in immune cell derived 
exosome release and function occurs, which overpower antiviral response leading 
to persistent viral infection and subsequent immune pathologies associated with 
disease progression towards fibrosis, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma. 
In this review, we discuss the current knowledge of innate and adaptive immune 
cells transformations that are associated with immunopathogenesis and disease 
outcome in CHB patients.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22115497
PMCID: PMC8197097
PMID: 34071064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.