---
reference_id: "PMID:28857979"
title: "Coccidioidomycosis Involving Lungs and Skin: A Mimicker of Metastatic Disease."
authors:
- Saenz-Ibarra B
- Prieto VG
- Torres-Cabala CA
- Huen A
- Nagarajan P
- Tetzlaff MT
- Curry JL
- Ivan D
- Aung PP
journal: Am J Dermatopathol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000000986
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Coccidioidomycosis Involving Lungs and Skin: A Mimicker of Metastatic Disease.
**Authors:** Saenz-Ibarra B, Prieto VG, Torres-Cabala CA, Huen A, Nagarajan P, Tetzlaff MT, Curry JL, Ivan D, Aung PP
**Journal:** Am J Dermatopathol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1097/DAD.0000000000000986](https://doi.org/10.1097/DAD.0000000000000986)

## Content

1. Am J Dermatopathol. 2018 Mar;40(3):e41-e43. doi: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000000986.

Coccidioidomycosis Involving Lungs and Skin: A Mimicker of Metastatic Disease.

Saenz-Ibarra B(1), Prieto VG(2)(3), Torres-Cabala CA(2)(3), Huen A(3), Nagarajan 
P(2), Tetzlaff MT(2), Curry JL(2)(3), Ivan D(2)(3), Aung PP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University Hospital "Jose Eleuterio Gonzalez," 
Monterrey, Mexico.
(2)Departments of Pathology, and.
(3)Dermatology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX.

Coccidioidomycosis is the major systemic mycoses, considered to be 1 of the most 
infectious fungal diseases. In symptomatic patients, the most common 
manifestation is pulmonary disease, but many other organs can be affected. 
Disseminated disease occurs in 1%-5% of all patients affected by 
coccidioidomycosis and can affect any organ, with the skin, central nervous 
system, and musculoskeletal system being reported as the most prevalent. Here, 
we report a 42-year-old male farmer from the west Texas who presented with an 
approximately 2-month history of progressive shortness of breath and dyspnea on 
exertion, weight loss, and night sweats. He was treated with various antibiotics 
for possible upper respiratory tract infection without symptomatic improvement. 
Computed tomography of the chest revealed numerous subcentimeter noncalcified 
pulmonary nodules scattered throughout both lungs with extensive mediastinal and 
bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy. The patient was referred to our hospital for 
further evaluation of suspected metastatic lung disease. Physical examination 
revealed an erythematous 1.2 cm nodule on his left medial eyebrow. Skin biopsy 
of the lesion revealed prominent squamous epithelial hyperplasia with basal 
keratinocytic atypia and associated mixed inflammatory infiltrate and scattered 
large thick-walled spherules containing variable-sized endospores, predominantly 
within the multinucleated giant cells. Special stain Periodic acid-Schiff tissue 
culture studies confirmed these to be Coccidioides immitis. After appropriate 
treatment with antifungal therapy for 5.5 months, his symptoms have improved 
with complete disappearance of lung nodules and a partially cavitated (1.1 × 1.1 
cm) lesion in the left upper lung confirmed by follow-up chest computed 
tomography. With this report, the authors highlight disseminated 
coccidioidomycosis, a great mimicker of metastatic lung disease, which was 
diagnosed by skin biopsy, to ensure its prompt recognition and appropriate 
antifungal therapy.

DOI: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000000986
PMID: 28857979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]