---
reference_id: "PMID:16101538"
title: Bronchial epithelial cells in allergic reactions.
authors:
- Takizawa H
journal: Curr Drug Targets Inflamm Allergy
year: '2005'
doi: 10.2174/1568010054022123
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bronchial epithelial cells in allergic reactions.
**Authors:** Takizawa H
**Journal:** Curr Drug Targets Inflamm Allergy (2005)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1568010054022123](https://doi.org/10.2174/1568010054022123)

## Content

1. Curr Drug Targets Inflamm Allergy. 2005 Jun;4(3):305-11. doi: 
10.2174/1568010054022123.

Bronchial epithelial cells in allergic reactions.

Takizawa H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University of Tokyo Graduate School of 
Medicine, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. 
TAKIZAWA-PHY@h.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Bronchial epithelial cells (BEC) are known to play an integral role in the 
airway defense mechanism via mucociliary system as well as mechanical barriers. 
Recent studies further indicate that BEC produce and release biologically active 
compounds including lipid mediators, growth factors, endothelin and a variety of 
cytokines/chemokines important in the pathogenesis of airway disorders. 
Cytokines and chemokines produced by BEC include IL-6, IL-8, G-CSF, GM-CSF, 
RANTES, eotaxin and TARC. Pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1 and TNF-alpha, 
generally upregulate expression and release these cytokines/chemokines. BEC from 
patients with bronchial asthma showed increased levels of mRNA for these potent 
inflammatory peptides. BEC also interact with immune and inflammatory cells by 
direct adhesion as well as by humoral factors including cytokines. For example, 
eosinophil adhesion to BEC may be an important signal for the activation and 
degranulation of eosinophils. BEC is also believed to take part in the airway 
mucosal immunity via Toll-like receptors. Finally, BEC may play a crucial role 
in the processes of airway remodeling by cross-talk with mesenchymal cells. 
These findings strongly suggest that BEC are actively involved as regulators of 
allergic inflammatory responses, and become a target for therapeutic 
intervention.

DOI: 10.2174/1568010054022123
PMID: 16101538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]