---
reference_id: "PMID:37950147"
title: "Diagnostic Yield of NGS Tests for Hereditary Ataxia: a Systematic Review."
authors:
- Tenorio RB
- Camargo CHF
- Donis KC
- Almeida CCB
- Teive HAG
journal: Cerebellum
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s12311-023-01629-y
keywords:
- Humans
- "Ataxia/genetics, diagnosis"
- "Genetic Testing/methods, statistics & numerical data"
- "High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing/methods, statistics & numerical data"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic Yield of NGS Tests for Hereditary Ataxia: a Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Tenorio RB, Camargo CHF, Donis KC, Almeida CCB, Teive HAG
**Journal:** Cerebellum (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12311-023-01629-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12311-023-01629-y)

## Content

1. Cerebellum. 2024 Aug;23(4):1552-1565. doi: 10.1007/s12311-023-01629-y. Epub
2023  Nov 11.

Diagnostic Yield of NGS Tests for Hereditary Ataxia: a Systematic Review.

Tenorio RB(1), Camargo CHF(2)(3), Donis KC(4), Almeida CCB(5), Teive HAG(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Postgraduate Program in Internal Medicine, Internal Medicine Department,
Hospital de Clínicas, Federal University of Paraná, Curitiba, Paraná, Brazil.
genetica.curitiba@gmail.com.
(2)Postgraduate Program in Internal Medicine, Internal Medicine Department,
Hospital de Clínicas, Federal University of Paraná, Curitiba, Paraná, Brazil.
(3)Movement Disorders Sector, Neurology Service, Internal Medicine Department,
Hospital de Clínicas, Federal University of Paraná, Curitiba, Paraná, Brazil.
(4)Medical Genetics Service, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto
Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.
(5)Department of Nutrition, Federal University of Paraná, Curitiba, Paraná,
Brazil.

Next-generation sequencing (NGS), comprising targeted panels (TP), exome
sequencing (ES), and genome sequencing (GS) became robust clinical tools for
diagnosing hereditary ataxia (HA). Determining their diagnostic yield (DY) is
crucial for optimal clinical decision-making. We conducted a comprehensive
systematic literature review on the DY of NGS tests for HA. We searched PubMed
and Embase databases for relevant studies between 2016 and 2022 and manually
examined reference lists of relevant reviews. Eligible studies described the DY
of NGS tests in patients with ataxia as a significant feature. Data from 33
eligible studies showed a median DY of 43% (IQR = 9.5-100%). The median DY for
TP and ES was 46% and 41.9%, respectively. Higher DY was associated with
specific phenotype selection, such as episodic ataxia at 68.35% and early and
late onset of ataxia at 46.4% and 54.4%. Parental consanguinity had a DY of
52.4% (p = 0.009), and the presumed autosomal recessive (AR) inheritance pattern
showed 62.5%. There was a difference between the median DY of studies that
performed targeted sequencing (tandem repeat expansion, TRE) screening and those
that did not (p = 0.047). A weak inverse correlation was found between DY and
the extent of previous genetic investigation (rho = - 0.323; p = 0.065). The
most common genes were CACNA1A and SACS. DY was higher for presumed AR
inheritance pattern, positive family history, and parental consanguinity. ES
appears more advantageous due to the inclusion of rare genes that might be
excluded in TP.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12311-023-01629-y
PMID: 37950147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
