---
reference_id: "PMID:36858772"
title: "Arsenic and cancer: Evidence and mechanisms."
authors:
- Speer RM
- Zhou X
- Volk LB
- Liu KJ
- Hudson LG
journal: Adv Pharmacol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/bs.apha.2022.08.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arsenic and cancer: Evidence and mechanisms.
**Authors:** Speer RM, Zhou X, Volk LB, Liu KJ, Hudson LG
**Journal:** Adv Pharmacol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/bs.apha.2022.08.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.apha.2022.08.001)

## Content

1. Adv Pharmacol. 2023;96:151-202. doi: 10.1016/bs.apha.2022.08.001. Epub 2022
Sep  27.

Arsenic and cancer: Evidence and mechanisms.

Speer RM(1), Zhou X(1), Volk LB(1), Liu KJ(2), Hudson LG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of New 
Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, United States.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of New 
Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, United States; Stony Brook Cancer Center, Renaissance 
School of Medicine, State University of New York Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY, 
United States. Electronic address: kliu@salud.unm.edu.

Arsenic is a potent carcinogen and poses a significant health concern worldwide. 
Exposure occurs through ingestion of drinking water and contaminated foods and 
through inhalation due to pollution. Epidemiological evidence shows arsenic 
induces cancers of the skin, lung, liver, and bladder among other tissues. While 
studies in animal and cell culture models support arsenic as a carcinogen, the 
mechanisms of arsenic carcinogenesis are not fully understood. Arsenic 
carcinogenesis is a complex process due its ability to be metabolized and 
because of the many cellular pathways it targets in the cell. Arsenic metabolism 
and the multiple forms of arsenic play distinct roles in its toxicity and 
contribute differently to carcinogenic endpoints, and thus must be considered. 
Arsenic generates reactive oxygen species increasing oxidative stress and 
damaging DNA and other macromolecules. Concurrently, arsenic inhibits DNA 
repair, modifies epigenetic regulation of gene expression, and targets protein 
function due its ability to replace zinc in select proteins. While these 
mechanisms contribute to arsenic carcinogenesis, there remain significant gaps 
in understanding the complex nature of arsenic cancers. In the future improving 
models available for arsenic cancer research and the use of arsenic induced 
human tumors will bridge some of these gaps in understanding arsenic driven 
cancers.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.apha.2022.08.001
PMCID: PMC10860672
PMID: 36858772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.