---
reference_id: "PMID:29959505"
title: Polysomnography as an indicator for cervicomedullary decompression to treat foramen magnum stenosis in achondroplasia.
authors:
- Sano M
- Takahashi N
- Nagasaki K
- Oishi M
- Yoshimura J
- Fujii Y
journal: Childs Nerv Syst
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s00381-018-3880-0
keywords:
- Achondroplasia/complications
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Constriction, Pathologic/etiology, surgery"
- "Decompression, Surgical/methods"
- Female
- "Foramen Magnum/pathology, surgery"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Polysomnography
- Retrospective Studies
- "Sleep Apnea Syndromes/diagnosis, etiology"
- "Spinal Cord Compression/etiology, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Polysomnography as an indicator for cervicomedullary decompression to treat foramen magnum stenosis in achondroplasia.
**Authors:** Sano M, Takahashi N, Nagasaki K, Oishi M, Yoshimura J, Fujii Y
**Journal:** Childs Nerv Syst (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00381-018-3880-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00381-018-3880-0)

## Content

1. Childs Nerv Syst. 2018 Nov;34(11):2275-2281. doi: 10.1007/s00381-018-3880-0. 
Epub 2018 Jun 29.

Polysomnography as an indicator for cervicomedullary decompression to treat 
foramen magnum stenosis in achondroplasia.

Sano M(1), Takahashi N(2), Nagasaki K(3), Oishi M(4), Yoshimura J(4), Fujii 
Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Brain Research Institute, University of Niigata, 
1-757, Asahimachi-dori, Chuo-ku,, Niigata City, Niigata, 951-8585, Japan. 
masa2188@k5.dion.ne.jp.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck surgery, Niigata University 
Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata, Japan.
(3)Division of Pediatrics, Department of Homeostatic Regulation and Development, 
Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, Brain Research Institute, University of Niigata, 
1-757, Asahimachi-dori, Chuo-ku,, Niigata City, Niigata, 951-8585, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Management of cervicomedullary compression due to foramen magnum 
stenosis in achondroplasia remains controversial, especially for patients with 
no symptoms or mild symptoms. We examined the effectiveness of polysomnography 
(PSG) as an indicator for cervicomedullary decompression treatment.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed nine achondroplasia cases (mean age 1 year 
and 9 months) treated from 2008 to 2015. All patients were examined by PSG, 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and otolaryngeal fibroscopy. We analyzed 
demographic data, clinical presentation, degree and type of respiratory 
impairment, severity of foramen magnum stenosis and concomitant cervicomedullary 
compression, treatment (conservative or surgical), and clinical outcome.
RESULTS: Eight of nine patients presented with no severe symptoms in the 
daytime. However, MRI revealed four severe, four moderate, and one mild case of 
cervicomedullary compression, and PSG demonstrated severe sleep apnea in four 
cases and moderate sleep apnea in five cases. All sleep apnea cases were 
obstructive or obstructive-dominant. Fibroscopy revealed no upper airway 
stenosis in six cases and mild stenosis in three cases. Four patients who had 
severe sleep-related respiratory disturbance on PSG and severe or moderate 
cervicomedullary compression were treated by cervicomedullary decompression. 
Three of these patients demonstrated improved sleep respiration soon after 
surgery, while one required temporary tracheostomy due to bilateral vocal cord 
paralysis caused by compression during intratracheal intubation.
CONCLUSION: Polysomnography can be a useful indicator for cervicomedullary 
decompression surgery, especially in cases of seemingly asymptomatic 
achondroplasia with severe foramen magnum stenosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00381-018-3880-0
PMID: 29959505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]