---
reference_id: "PMID:15160902"
title: Development of lymphoma in Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative Syndrome (ALPS) and its relationship to Fas gene mutations.
authors:
- Poppema S
- Maggio E
- van den Berg A
journal: Leuk Lymphoma
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1080/10428190310001593166
keywords:
- Apoptosis/genetics
- "Autoimmune Diseases/complications, genetics"
- Caspases/genetics
- Family Health
- Humans
- "Lymphoma/etiology, genetics"
- "Lymphoproliferative Disorders/complications, genetics"
- T-Lymphocytes/immunology
- fas Receptor/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Development of lymphoma in Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative Syndrome (ALPS) and its relationship to Fas gene mutations.
**Authors:** Poppema S, Maggio E, van den Berg A
**Journal:** Leuk Lymphoma (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1080/10428190310001593166](https://doi.org/10.1080/10428190310001593166)

## Content

1. Leuk Lymphoma. 2004 Mar;45(3):423-31. doi: 10.1080/10428190310001593166.

Development of lymphoma in Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative Syndrome (ALPS) and
its relationship to Fas gene mutations.

Poppema S(1), Maggio E, van den Berg A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, University Medical Center
Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, 9700RB Groningen, The Netherlands. s.poppema@med.rug.nl

Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative Syndrome (ALPS) is generally the result of a
mutation in genes associated with apoptosis, like Fas, Fas ligand, Casp 8 and
Casp 10. As a result, the normal homeostasis of T- and B-lymphocytes is
disturbed and a proliferation of polyclonal T lymphocytes occurs. This leads to
hepatosplenomegaly and lymphadenopathy and in most patients also to autoimmune
phenomena like anemia and thrombocytopenia. The proliferating T cells are
TCRalphabeta and/or TCRgammadelta positive but lack both CD4 and CD8. Hence they
are termed double negative (DN) T cells. In addition, there is an increase of
CD5 positive B cells. Individuals with germline mutations in the Fas gene have a
high risk to develop non Hodgkin lymphomas (x 14) as well as Hodgkin lymphomas
(x 51), in particular NLP Hodgkin lymphoma. Somatic mutations of Fas are
frequently acquired during the normal germinal center reaction. Non Hodgkin
lymphomas carry somatic mutations of the Fas gene in 11% and of the Casp 10 gene
in 14.5% of the patients. In Hodgkin lymphomas, Fas mutations can be
demonstrated in Reed-Sternberg cells in 10-20% of the patients. These data
implicate a role for Fas-mediated apoptosis in preventing lymphomas. Inherited
defects in receptor-mediated lymphocyte apoptosis represent a risk factor for
lymphomas and somatic mutations of these genes may also play a role in the
development and/or progression of lymphomas.

DOI: 10.1080/10428190310001593166
PMID: 15160902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
