---
reference_id: "PMID:39912025"
title: "Unveiling the Silent Sinus Syndrome: A Familial Case Series Exploring Chronic Maxillary Atelectasis."
authors:
- Perez GE
- Bures A
- Melero-Pardo AL
- Garraton F
- Hernández-Herrera GA
- Portela-Arraiza JC
journal: Cureus
year: '2025'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.77001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unveiling the Silent Sinus Syndrome: A Familial Case Series Exploring Chronic Maxillary Atelectasis.
**Authors:** Perez GE, Bures A, Melero-Pardo AL, Garraton F, Hernández-Herrera GA, Portela-Arraiza JC
**Journal:** Cureus (2025)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.77001](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.77001)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2025 Jan 6;17(1):e77001. doi: 10.7759/cureus.77001. eCollection 2025 
Jan.

Unveiling the Silent Sinus Syndrome: A Familial Case Series Exploring Chronic 
Maxillary Atelectasis.

Perez GE(1), Bures A(2), Melero-Pardo AL(3), Garraton F(1), Hernández-Herrera 
GA(4), Portela-Arraiza JC(1).

Author information:
(1)Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, University of Puerto Rico, Medical 
Sciences Campus, San Juan, PRI.
(2)Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, University of Puerto Rico School of 
Medicine, San Juan, PRI.
(3)Medicine, Universidad Central del Caribe, Bayamón, PRI.
(4)School of Medicine, University of Puerto Rico, Medical Sciences Campus, San 
Juan, PRI.

Chronic maxillary atelectasis (CMA) is characterized by a persistent reduction 
in maxillary sinus volume, resulting from inward bowing of its antral walls. 
Silent sinus syndrome (SSS), a rare manifestation of CMA, typically presents 
with significant bony structural changes but without the usual nasal symptoms. 
The primary clinical presentation of SSS often includes enophthalmos, which may 
lead to referrals to ophthalmology due to perceived ocular asymmetry. This case 
series presents the familial occurrence of CMA and SSS in three male family 
members, each exhibiting different degrees of nasal symptoms and imaging 
findings consistent with maxillary sinus opacification and collapse. The 
familial clustering of these cases suggests a possible genetic or hereditary 
component to the development of CMA and SSS, an aspect not commonly explored in 
the existing literature.

Copyright © 2025, Perez et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.77001
PMCID: PMC11796483
PMID: 39912025

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent for treatment and open 
access publication was obtained or waived by all participants in this study. 
Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all 
authors declare the following: Payment/services info: All authors have declared 
that no financial support was received from any organization for the submitted 
work. Financial relationships: All authors have declared that they have no 
financial relationships at present or within the previous three years with any 
organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work. Other 
relationships: All authors have declared that there are no other relationships 
or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.