---
reference_id: "PMID:36849339"
title: Seroprotection against tetanus in southern Vietnam.
authors:
- Thwaites CL
- Thanh TT
- Ny NTH
- Nguyet LA
- Nhat NTD
- Thuy CT
- Thanh NTL
- Dung NT
- OUCRU Sero-surveillance Network
- Campbell J
- Thai PQ
- Tan LV
- Choisy M
- Boni MF
journal: Vaccine
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2023.02.036
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Seroprotection against tetanus in southern Vietnam.
**Authors:** Thwaites CL, Thanh TT, Ny NTH, Nguyet LA, Nhat NTD, Thuy CT, Thanh NTL, Dung NT, OUCRU Sero-surveillance Network, Campbell J, Thai PQ, Tan LV, Choisy M, Boni MF
**Journal:** Vaccine (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.vaccine.2023.02.036](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2023.02.036)

## Content

1. Vaccine. 2023 Mar 24;41(13):2208-2213. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2023.02.036.
Epub  2023 Feb 26.

Seroprotection against tetanus in southern Vietnam.

Thwaites CL(1), Thanh TT(2), Ny NTH(2), Nguyet LA(2), Nhat NTD(2), Thuy CT(2), 
Thanh NTL(2), Dung NT(3); OUCRU Sero-surveillance Network; Campbell J(4), Thai 
PQ(5), Tan LV(2), Choisy M(1), Boni MF(6).

Author information:
(1)Oxford University Clinical Research Unit, Ho Chi Minh City, Viet Nam; Centre 
for Global Health and Tropical Medicine, University of Oxford, UK.
(2)Oxford University Clinical Research Unit, Ho Chi Minh City, Viet Nam.
(3)Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Ho Chi Minh City, Viet Nam.
(4)Oxford University Clinical Research Unit, Ho Chi Minh City, Viet Nam; Centre 
for Global Health and Tropical Medicine, University of Oxford, UK. Electronic 
address: jcampbell@1152gmail.com.
(5)National Institute of Hygiene and Epidemiology, Hanoi, Viet Nam; School of 
Preventive Medicine and Public Health, Hanoi Medical University, Hanoi, Viet 
Nam.
(6)Oxford University Clinical Research Unit, Ho Chi Minh City, Viet Nam; Centre 
for Global Health and Tropical Medicine, University of Oxford, UK; Center for 
Infectious Disease Dynamics, Department of Biology, Pennsylvania State 
University, University Park, PA 16802, United States.

BACKGROUND: Ongoing tetanus cases and sporadic outbreaks of vaccine-preventable 
diseases associated with routine vaccination programmes remain problems in many 
low and middle-income countries, including Vietnam. With no human-to-human 
transmission or natural immunity, tetanus antibody levels indicate both 
individual risk of tetanus and gaps in vaccination programmes.
METHODS: To investigate gaps in immunity to tetanus in Vietnam, a country with a 
historically high level of tetanus vaccination coverage, tetanus antibodies were 
measure by ELISA from samples selected from a long-term serum bank, established 
for the purposes of general-population seroepidemiological investigations in 
southern Vietnam. Samples were selected from 10 provinces, focussing on 
age-groups targeted by national vaccination programmes for infants and pregnant 
women (Expanded Programme on Immunization, EPI, and Maternal and Neonatal 
Tetanus, MNT).
RESULTS: Antibodies were measured from a total of 3864 samples. Highest tetanus 
antibody concentrations occurred in children under 4 years old, over 90 % of 
whom had protective levels. Approximately 70 % of children aged 7-12 years had 
protective antibody concentrations although there was variation among provinces. 
For infants and children, there were no significant differences in tetanus 
protection between males and females, but for adults aged 20-35 years, in five 
of the ten provinces surveyed, protection against tetanus was higher in females 
(p < 0.05) who are eligible for booster doses under the MNT programme. In seven 
of ten provinces, antibody concentrations were inversely related to age 
(p < 0.01) and protection of older individuals was generally low.
CONCLUSION: Widespread immunity to tetanus toxoid is seen in infants and young 
children consistent with the high coverage rates reported for diptheria tetanus 
toxoid and pertussis (DTP) in Vietnam. However, the lower antibody 
concentrations seen in older children and men suggest reduced immunity to 
tetanus in populations not targeted by EPI and MNT programmes.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2023.02.036
PMCID: PMC10580288
PMID: 36849339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: Louise Thwaites reports financial 
support was provided by Wellcome Trust. OUCRU affiliated authors reports 
financial support was provided by Wellcome Trust.