---
reference_id: "PMID:37414777"
title: Early maturation and hyperexcitability is a shared phenotype of cortical neurons derived from different ASD-associated mutations.
authors:
- Hussein Y
- Tripathi U
- Choudhary A
- Nayak R
- Peles D
- Rosh I
- Rabinski T
- Djamus J
- Vatine GD
- Spiegel R
- Garin-Shkolnik T
- Stern S
journal: Transl Psychiatry
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41398-023-02535-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early maturation and hyperexcitability is a shared phenotype of cortical neurons derived from different ASD-associated mutations.
**Authors:** Hussein Y, Tripathi U, Choudhary A, Nayak R, Peles D, Rosh I, Rabinski T, Djamus J, Vatine GD, Spiegel R, Garin-Shkolnik T, Stern S
**Journal:** Transl Psychiatry (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41398-023-02535-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41398-023-02535-x)

## Content

1. Transl Psychiatry. 2023 Jul 6;13(1):246. doi: 10.1038/s41398-023-02535-x.

Early maturation and hyperexcitability is a shared phenotype of cortical neurons 
derived from different ASD-associated mutations.

Hussein Y(#)(1), Tripathi U(#)(1), Choudhary A(1), Nayak R(1), Peles D(1), Rosh 
I(1), Rabinski T(2)(3), Djamus J(1), Vatine GD(2)(3), Spiegel R(4), 
Garin-Shkolnik T(4), Stern S(5).

Author information:
(1)Sagol Department of Neurobiology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, University of 
Haifa, Haifa, Israel.
(2)The Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences and 
the Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell (RMSC) Research Center, Ben-Gurion 
University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.
(3)The Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell (RMSC) Research Center, Ben-Gurion 
University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.
(4)Center for Rare Diseases, Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel.
(5)Sagol Department of Neurobiology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, University of 
Haifa, Haifa, Israel. sstern@univ.haifa.ac.il.
(#)Contributed equally

Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is characterized mainly by social and 
sensory-motor abnormal and repetitive behavior patterns. Over hundreds of genes 
and thousands of genetic variants were reported to be highly penetrant and 
causative of ASD. Many of these mutations cause comorbidities such as epilepsy 
and intellectual disabilities (ID). In this study, we measured cortical neurons 
derived from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) of patients with four 
mutations in the genes GRIN2B, SHANK3, UBTF, as well as chromosomal duplication 
in the 7q11.23 region and compared them to neurons derived from a first-degree 
relative without the mutation. Using a whole-cell patch-clamp, we observed that 
the mutant cortical neurons demonstrated hyperexcitability and early maturation 
compared to control lines. These changes were characterized by increased sodium 
currents, increased amplitude and rate of excitatory postsynaptic currents 
(EPSCs), and more evoked action potentials in response to current stimulation in 
early-stage cell development (3-5 weeks post differentiation). These changes 
that appeared in all the different mutant lines, together with previously 
reported data, indicate that an early maturation and hyperexcitability may be a 
convergent phenotype of ASD cortical neurons.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41398-023-02535-x
PMCID: PMC10326262
PMID: 37414777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.