---
reference_id: "PMID:23894476"
title: Proline dehydrogenase regulates redox state and respiratory metabolism in Trypanosoma cruzi.
authors:
- Paes LS
- Suárez Mantilla B
- Zimbres FM
- Pral EM
- Diogo de Melo P
- Tahara EB
- Kowaltowski AJ
- Elias MC
- Silber AM
journal: PLoS One
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069419
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Down-Regulation
- Electron Transport
- Flavin-Adenine Dinucleotide/metabolism
- Intracellular Space/metabolism
- Life Cycle Stages
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Oxidative Stress
- Proline/metabolism
- "Proline Oxidase/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Protein Transport
- "Trypanosoma cruzi/cytology, enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Proline dehydrogenase regulates redox state and respiratory metabolism in Trypanosoma cruzi.
**Authors:** Paes LS, Suárez Mantilla B, Zimbres FM, Pral EM, Diogo de Melo P, Tahara EB, Kowaltowski AJ, Elias MC, Silber AM
**Journal:** PLoS One (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0069419](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0069419)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 22;8(7):e69419. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069419. Print
2013.

Proline dehydrogenase regulates redox state and respiratory metabolism in
Trypanosoma cruzi.

Paes LS(1), Suárez Mantilla B, Zimbres FM, Pral EM, Diogo de Melo P, Tahara EB,
Kowaltowski AJ, Elias MC, Silber AM.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Parasitologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade
de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

Over the past three decades, L-proline has become recognized as an important
metabolite for trypanosomatids. It is involved in a number of key processes,
including energy metabolism, resistance to oxidative and nutritional stress and
osmoregulation. In addition, this amino acid supports critical parasite life
cycle processes by acting as an energy source, thus enabling host-cell invasion
by the parasite and subsequent parasite differentiation. In this paper, we
demonstrate that L-proline is oxidized to Δ(1)-pyrroline-5-carboxylate (P5C) by
the enzyme proline dehydrogenase (TcPRODH, E.C. 1.5.99.8) localized in
Trypanosoma cruzi mitochondria. When expressed in its active form in Escherichia
coli, TcPRODH exhibits a Km of 16.58±1.69 µM and a Vmax of 66±2 nmol/min mg.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that TcPRODH is a FAD-dependent dimeric state
protein. TcPRODH mRNA and protein expression are strongly upregulated in the
intracellular epimastigote, a stage which requires an external supply of
proline. In addition, when Saccharomyces cerevisiae null mutants for this gene
(PUT1) were complemented with the TcPRODH gene, diminished free intracellular
proline levels and an enhanced sensitivity to oxidative stress in comparison to
the null mutant were observed, supporting the hypothesis that free proline
accumulation constitutes a defense against oxidative imbalance. Finally, we show
that proline oxidation increases cytochrome c oxidase activity in mitochondrial
vesicles. Overall, these results demonstrate that TcPRODH is involved in
proline-dependant cytoprotection during periods of oxidative imbalance and also
shed light on the participation of proline in energy metabolism, which drives
critical processes of the T. cruzi life cycle.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069419
PMCID: PMC3718742
PMID: 23894476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.
