---
reference_id: "PMID:37806042"
title: "Characterizing Common Phenotypes Across the Childhood Dementia Disorders: A Cross-sectional Study From Two Australian Centers."
authors:
- Djafar JV
- Smith NJ
- Johnson AM
- Bhattacharya K
- Ardern-Holmes SL
- Ellaway C
- Dale RC
- "D'Silva AM"
- Kariyawasam DS
- Grattan S
- Kandula T
- Lewis K
- Mohammed SS
- Farrar MA
journal: Pediatr Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2023.09.006
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Australia
- Pain
- Dementia/diagnosis
- "Sleep Wake Disorders/epidemiology, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterizing Common Phenotypes Across the Childhood Dementia Disorders: A Cross-sectional Study From Two Australian Centers.
**Authors:** Djafar JV, Smith NJ, Johnson AM, Bhattacharya K, Ardern-Holmes SL, Ellaway C, Dale RC, D'Silva AM, Kariyawasam DS, Grattan S, Kandula T, Lewis K, Mohammed SS, Farrar MA
**Journal:** Pediatr Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2023.09.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2023.09.006)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neurol. 2023 Dec;149:75-83. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2023.09.006. 
Epub 2023 Sep 21.

Characterizing Common Phenotypes Across the Childhood Dementia Disorders: A 
Cross-sectional Study From Two Australian Centers.

Djafar JV(1), Smith NJ(2), Johnson AM(3), Bhattacharya K(4), Ardern-Holmes 
SL(5), Ellaway C(4), Dale RC(5), D'Silva AM(1), Kariyawasam DS(3), Grattan S(1), 
Kandula T(5), Lewis K(5), Mohammed SS(5), Farrar MA(6).

Author information:
(1)Discipline of Paediatrics and Child Health, School of Clinical Medicine, UNSW 
Medicine and Health, Sydney, Australia.
(2)Department of Neurology and Clinical Neurophysiology, Women's and Children's 
Health Network, Adelaide, Australia; Discipline of Paediatrics, School of 
Medicine, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia.
(3)Discipline of Paediatrics and Child Health, School of Clinical Medicine, UNSW 
Medicine and Health, Sydney, Australia; Department of Neurology, Sydney 
Children's Hospital Network, Sydney, Australia.
(4)Genetic Metabolic Disorders Service, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, 
Sydney, Australia.
(5)Department of Neurology, Sydney Children's Hospital Network, Sydney, 
Australia.
(6)Discipline of Paediatrics and Child Health, School of Clinical Medicine, UNSW 
Medicine and Health, Sydney, Australia; Department of Neurology, Sydney 
Children's Hospital Network, Sydney, Australia. Electronic address: 
m.farrar@unsw.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Childhood dementias are a group of rare pediatric conditions 
characterized by progressive neurocognitive decline. Quantifying and 
characterising phenotypes to identify similarities between specific conditions 
is critical to inform opportunities to optimize care and advance research.
METHODS: This cross-sectional study recruited primary caregivers of children 
(<18 years) living with a dementia syndrome from neurology and metabolic clinics 
in Sydney and Adelaide, Australia. Sociodemographic and clinical data were 
collated. Behavior, eating, sleep, pain, and neurological disability were 
assessed using validated tools, including Strengths and Difficulties, Child 
Eating Behaviour, and Children's Sleep Habits questionnaires and visual analog 
of pain and modified Rankin scales. Data were analyzed with descriptive 
statistics.
RESULTS: Among 45 children with 23 different dementia syndromes, the modified 
Rankin Scale demonstrated at least moderate neurological disability and 
functional dependence in 82% (37/45). Families reported delays in receiving an 
accurate diagnosis following initial symptoms (mean: 1.6 ± 1.4 years, range: 0-5 
years). The most prevalent phenotypes included communication, comprehension, or 
recall difficulties (87%, 39/45); disturbances in sleep (80%, 36/45); appetite 
changes (74%, 29/39); mobility issues (53%, 24/45); and hyperactive behavior 
(53%, 21/40). Behavioral problems had a "high" or "very high" impact on everyday 
family life in 73% (24/33).
CONCLUSIONS: Childhood dementia disorders share substantial behavioral, motor, 
sensory, and socioemotional symptoms, resulting in high care needs, despite 
their vast heterogeneity in age of onset and progression. Considering their 
unifying characteristics under one collective term is an opportunity to improve 
treatment, provide quality care, and accelerate research.

Crown Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2023.09.006
PMID: 37806042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Michelle 
Farrar and Nicholas Smith are nonpecuniary members of the Scientific and Medical 
Advisory Board for the Childhood Dementia Initiative. Alexandra Johnson has 
acted as a consultant/speaker for BioMarin and PTC Pharmaceuticals. The other 
authors have no relevant conflicts of interest to disclose.