---
reference_id: "PMID:25852447"
title: A novel mutation in the endothelin B receptor gene in a moroccan family with shah-waardenburg syndrome.
authors:
- Doubaj Y
- Pingault V
- Elalaoui SC
- Ratbi I
- Azouz M
- Zerhouni H
- Ettayebi F
- Sefiani A
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1159/000371590
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel mutation in the endothelin B receptor gene in a moroccan family with shah-waardenburg syndrome.
**Authors:** Doubaj Y, Pingault V, Elalaoui SC, Ratbi I, Azouz M, Zerhouni H, Ettayebi F, Sefiani A
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000371590](https://doi.org/10.1159/000371590)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2015 Feb;6(1):44-9. doi: 10.1159/000371590. Epub 2015 Jan 28.

A novel mutation in the endothelin B receptor gene in a moroccan family with
shah-waardenburg syndrome.

Doubaj Y(1), Pingault V(2), Elalaoui SC(1), Ratbi I(3), Azouz M(4), Zerhouni
H(4), Ettayebi F(4), Sefiani A(1).

Author information:
(1)Département de Génétique Médicale, Institut National d'Hygiène, France ;
Centre de Génomique Humaine, Faculté de Médecine et de Pharmacie, Université
Mohammed V Souissi, France.
(2)Département de Génétique, AP-HP, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France.
(3)Centre de Génomique Humaine, Faculté de Médecine et de Pharmacie, Université
Mohammed V Souissi, France.
(4)Service des Urgences Chirurgicales Pédiatriques, Hôpital d'Enfants, Rabat,
Morocco, France.

Waardenburg syndrome (WS) is a neurocristopathy disorder combining sensorineural
deafness and pigmentary abnormalities. The presence of additional signs defines
the 4 subtypes. WS type IV, also called Shah-Waardenburg syndrome (SWS), is
characterized by the association with congenital aganglionic megacolon
(Hirschsprung disease). To date, 3 causative genes have been related to this
congenital disorder. Mutations in the EDNRB and EDN3 genes are responsible for
the autosomal recessive form of SWS, whereas SOX10 mutations are inherited in an
autosomal dominant manner. We report here the case of a 3-month-old Morrocan
girl with WS type IV, born to consanguineous parents. The patient had 3 cousins
who died in infancy with the same symptoms. Molecular analysis by Sanger
sequencing revealed the presence of a novel homozygous missense mutation
c.1133A>G (p.Asn378Ser) in the EDNRB gene. The proband's parents as well as the
parents of the deceased cousins are heterozygous carriers of this likely
pathogenic mutation. This molecular diagnosis allows us to provide genetic
counseling to the family and eventually propose prenatal diagnosis to prevent
recurrence of the disease in subsequent pregnancies.

DOI: 10.1159/000371590
PMCID: PMC4369116
PMID: 25852447
