---
reference_id: "PMID:14647276"
title: Mutations in ARFGEF2 implicate vesicle trafficking in neural progenitor proliferation and migration in the human cerebral cortex.
authors:
- Sheen VL
- Ganesh VS
- Topcu M
- Sebire G
- Bodell A
- Hill RS
- Grant PE
- Shugart YY
- Imitola J
- Khoury SJ
- Guerrini R
- Walsh CA
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1038/ng1276
keywords:
- ADP-Ribosylation Factors/genetics
- Adolescent
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Cell Division
- Cell Movement
- Cerebral Cortex/physiology
- "Guanine Nucleotide Exchange Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Neurons/physiology
- Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in ARFGEF2 implicate vesicle trafficking in neural progenitor proliferation and migration in the human cerebral cortex.
**Authors:** Sheen VL, Ganesh VS, Topcu M, Sebire G, Bodell A, Hill RS, Grant PE, Shugart YY, Imitola J, Khoury SJ, Guerrini R, Walsh CA
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1276](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1276)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2004 Jan;36(1):69-76. doi: 10.1038/ng1276. Epub 2003 Nov 30.

Mutations in ARFGEF2 implicate vesicle trafficking in neural progenitor
proliferation and migration in the human cerebral cortex.

Sheen VL(1), Ganesh VS, Topcu M, Sebire G, Bodell A, Hill RS, Grant PE, Shugart
YY, Imitola J, Khoury SJ, Guerrini R, Walsh CA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurogenetics and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of
Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Disruption of human neural precursor proliferation can give rise to a small
brain (microcephaly), and failure of neurons to migrate properly can lead to an
abnormal arrest of cerebral cortical neurons in proliferative zones near the
lateral ventricles (periventricular heterotopia). Here we show that an autosomal
recessive condition characterized by microcephaly and periventricular
heterotopia maps to chromosome 20 and is caused by mutations in the gene
ADP-ribosylation factor guanine nucleotide-exchange factor-2 (ARFGEF2). By
northern-blot analysis, we found that mouse Arfgef2 mRNA levels are highest
during embryonic periods of ongoing neuronal proliferation and migration, and by
in situ hybridization, we found that the mRNA is widely distributed throughout
the embryonic central nervous system (CNS). ARFGEF2 encodes the large (>200 kDa)
brefeldin A (BFA)-inhibited GEF2 protein (BIG2), which is required for vesicle
and membrane trafficking from the trans-Golgi network (TGN). Inhibition of BIG2
by BFA, or by a dominant negative ARFGEF2 cDNA, decreases cell proliferation in
vitro, suggesting a cell-autonomous regulation of neural expansion. Inhibition
of BIG2 also disturbed the intracellular localization of such molecules as
E-cadherin and beta-catenin by preventing their transport from the Golgi
apparatus to the cell surface. Our findings show that vesicle trafficking is an
important regulator of proliferation and migration during human cerebral
cortical development.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1276
PMID: 14647276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
