---
reference_id: "PMID:8019556"
title: Mutations in PAX3 associated with Waardenburg syndrome type I.
authors:
- Baldwin CT
- Lipsky NR
- Hoth CF
- Cohen T
- Mamuya W
- Milunsky A
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1002/humu.1380030306
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- DNA/genetics
- DNA Primers
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Exons
- Female
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Humans
- Introns
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- PAX3 Transcription Factor
- Paired Box Transcription Factors
- Pedigree
- Point Mutation
- Transcription Factors
- Waardenburg Syndrome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in PAX3 associated with Waardenburg syndrome type I.
**Authors:** Baldwin CT, Lipsky NR, Hoth CF, Cohen T, Mamuya W, Milunsky A
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.1380030306](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.1380030306)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 1994;3(3):205-11. doi: 10.1002/humu.1380030306.

Mutations in PAX3 associated with Waardenburg syndrome type I.

Baldwin CT(1), Lipsky NR, Hoth CF, Cohen T, Mamuya W, Milunsky A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Boston University School of Medicine, Massachusetts
02118.

Waardenburg syndrome (WS) types I, II, and III (McKusick #14882, #19351, and
#19350) are related autosomal dominant disorders characterized by sensorineural
hearing loss, dystopia canthorum, pigmentary disturbances, and other
developmental defects. Disease causing PAX3 mutations have been identified in a
few families from each of the three disease subtypes, WS-I, WS-II, and WS-III.
In others, although the mutations have not been pinpointed, linkage with the
PAX3 locus on chromosome 2q35 has been demonstrated. The PAX3 protein is a
transcription factor that contains both a paired-domain and a homeodomain DNA
binding motif and appears to play a key role during embryogenesis. In this
report, we describe two mutations in the human PAX3 gene that cause WS type I.
One mutation is a deletion/frameshift in the paired-domain of PAX3 and results
in a protein without functional DNA binding domains. The second mutation is a
single-base substitution and results in a premature termination codon in the
homeodomain of PAX3. This is the first demonstration of a mutation in the
homeodomain DNA binding motif in this protein resulting in WS and one of the few
examples of a mutation in a homeodomain of any protein that results in human
disease.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.1380030306
PMID: 8019556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
