---
reference_id: "PMID:38137468"
title: "Butyrylcarnitine Elevation in Newborn Screening: Reducing False Positives and Distinguishing between Two Rare Diseases through the Evaluation of New Ratios."
authors:
- Messina M
- Arena A
- Iacobacci R
- La Spina L
- Meli C
- Raudino F
- Ruggieri M
journal: Biomedicines
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/biomedicines11123247
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Butyrylcarnitine Elevation in Newborn Screening: Reducing False Positives and Distinguishing between Two Rare Diseases through the Evaluation of New Ratios.
**Authors:** Messina M, Arena A, Iacobacci R, La Spina L, Meli C, Raudino F, Ruggieri M
**Journal:** Biomedicines (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biomedicines11123247](https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines11123247)

## Content

1. Biomedicines. 2023 Dec 7;11(12):3247. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines11123247.

Butyrylcarnitine Elevation in Newborn Screening: Reducing False Positives and 
Distinguishing between Two Rare Diseases through the Evaluation of New Ratios.

Messina M(1), Arena A(1), Iacobacci R(1), La Spina L(1), Meli C(1), Raudino 
F(1), Ruggieri M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Expanded Newborn Screening Laboratory, Newborn Screening and Metabolic 
Diseases Unit, University-Polyclinic "G. Rodolico-San Marco", 95123 Catania, 
Italy.
(2)Unit of Clinical Pediatrics, Department of Clinical and Experimental 
Medicine, University of Catania, 95123 Catania, Italy.

One of the main challenges of newborn screening programs, which screen for 
inherited metabolic disorders, is cutting down on false positives (FPs) in order 
to avoid family stresses, additional analyses, and unnecessary costs. False 
positives are partly caused by an insubstantial number of robust biomarkers in 
evaluations. Another challenge is how to distinguish between diseases which 
share the same primary marker and for which secondary biomarkers are just as 
highly desirable. Focusing on pathologies that involve butyrylcarnitine (C4) 
elevation, such as short-chain acylCoA dehydrogenase deficiency (SCADD) and 
isobutyrylCoA dehydrogenase deficiency (IBDD), we investigated the acylcarnitine 
profile of 121 newborns with a C4 increase to discover secondary markers to 
achieve two goals: reduce the FP rate and discriminate between the two rare 
diseases. Analyses were carried out using tandem mass spectrometry with whole 
blood samples spotted on filter paper. Seven new biomarkers (C4/C0, C4/C5, 
C4/C5DC\C6OH, C4/C6, C4/C8, C4/C14:1, C4/C16:1) were identified using a 
non-parametric ANOVA analysis. Then, the corresponding cut-off values were found 
and applied to the screening program. The seven new ratios were shown to be 
robust (p < 0.001 and p < 0.01, 0.0937 < ε2 < 0.231) in discriminating between 
FP and IBDD patients, FP and SCADD patients, or SCADD and IBDD patients. Our 
results suggest that the new ratios are optimal indicators for identifying true 
positives, distinguishing between two rare diseases that share the same primary 
biomarker, improving the predictive positive value (PPV) and reducing the false 
positive rate (FPR).

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines11123247
PMCID: PMC10741594
PMID: 38137468

Conflict of interest statement: According to the law 167/16, Italian newborn 
screening program costs are financed by the Government. The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.