---
reference_id: "PMID:41171118"
title: Comprehensive care of the patient with Refeeding Syndrome.
authors:
- Kwiatkowska M
- Krupnik D
- Wesołek F
- Jonczyk A
- Krzych Ł
journal: Pol Przegl Chir
year: '2025'
doi: 10.5604/01.3001.0055.1957
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comprehensive care of the patient with Refeeding Syndrome.
**Authors:** Kwiatkowska M, Krupnik D, Wesołek F, Jonczyk A, Krzych Ł
**Journal:** Pol Przegl Chir (2025)
**DOI:** [10.5604/01.3001.0055.1957](https://doi.org/10.5604/01.3001.0055.1957)

## Content

1. Pol Przegl Chir. 2025 Jul 2;97(5):64-71. doi: 10.5604/01.3001.0055.1957.

Comprehensive care of the patient with Refeeding Syndrome.

Kwiatkowska M(1), Krupnik D(1), Wesołek F(1), Jonczyk A(1), Krzych Ł(2).

Author information:
(1)Students' Scientific Society "#Intensywna_Po_Godzinach", Department of Acute 
Medicine, Medical University of Silesia, Zabrze, Poland.
(2)Department of Acute Medicine, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Medical University 
of Silesia, Zabrze, Poland, Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Therapy, 
Silesian Center for Heart Diseases, Zabrze, Poland.

&lt;b&gt;Introduction:&lt;/b&gt; Refeeding syndrome (RS) is a serious 
complication of nutritional therapy in critically ill patients, to which 
patients on surgical wards are particularly vulnerable. It is a potentially 
life-threatening, complex metabolic disorder that occurs in response to the 
implementation of overly aggressive, inadequate adaptive patient nutritional 
therapy, often exacerbated by malnutrition. Moreover, if an appropriate 
diagnostic and therapeutic process is not undertaken, RS itself becomes the 
cause of subsequent systemic complications such as respiratory failure, 
neurological disorders, circulatory failure or seizures. Identified risk factors 
for RS are mostly modifiable.&lt;b&gt;Aim:&lt;/b&gt; The article reviews the 
literature on the current knowledge and recommendations regarding RS and 
provides practical recommendations to assist surgeons in effectively diagnosing 
and managing the syndrome during the perioperative 
period.&lt;b&gt;Methods:&lt;/b&gt; A database query was conducted to identify 
the most recent information related to the topic of this 
study.&lt;b&gt;Results:&lt;/b&gt; Treatment of RS in critically ill patients 
undergoing surgery is challenging due to overlapping symptoms of the underlying 
disease and coexisting severe metabolic disorders. Current guidelines recommend 
a gradual increase in energy intake and regular monitoring of a patient&apos;s 
metabolic status (especially phosphorus, potassium, and magnesium levels) during 
nutritional treatment.&lt;b&gt;Conclusions:&lt;/b&gt; It is necessary to 
regularly follow the recommendations of scientific societies, which will take 
into account the specificity of the treatment of patients in the perioperative 
period with Refeeding Syndrome in the context of coexisting diseases to improve 
the quality and safety of care of these patients.

DOI: 10.5604/01.3001.0055.1957
PMID: 41171118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]