---
reference_id: "PMID:22197486"
title: "Deletion of KDM6A, a histone demethylase interacting with MLL2, in three patients with Kabuki syndrome."
authors:
- Lederer D
- Grisart B
- Digilio MC
- Benoit V
- Crespin M
- Ghariani SC
- Maystadt I
- Dallapiccola B
- Verellen-Dumoulin C
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.021
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, metabolism"
- Adolescent
- Base Sequence
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromosomes, Human, X/genetics"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- Developmental Disabilities/genetics
- Face/abnormalities
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- "Hematologic Diseases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Histone Demethylases/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Infant
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Neoplasm Proteins/metabolism
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Vestibular Diseases/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deletion of KDM6A, a histone demethylase interacting with MLL2, in three patients with Kabuki syndrome.
**Authors:** Lederer D, Grisart B, Digilio MC, Benoit V, Crespin M, Ghariani SC, Maystadt I, Dallapiccola B, Verellen-Dumoulin C
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.021)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Jan 13;90(1):119-24. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.021.
Epub  2011 Dec 22.

Deletion of KDM6A, a histone demethylase interacting with MLL2, in three 
patients with Kabuki syndrome.

Lederer D(1), Grisart B, Digilio MC, Benoit V, Crespin M, Ghariani SC, Maystadt 
I, Dallapiccola B, Verellen-Dumoulin C.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Génétique Humaine, Institut de Pathologie et Génétique, Charleroi, 
Belgium. damien.lederer@ipg.be

Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a rare genetic disease that causes developmental delay 
and congenital anomalies. Since the identification of MLL2 mutations as the 
primary cause of KS, such mutations have been identified in 56%-76% of affected 
individuals, suggesting that there may be additional genes associated with KS. 
Here, we describe three KS individuals with de novo partial or complete 
deletions of an X chromosome gene, KDM6A, that encodes a histone demethylase 
that interacts with MLL2. Although KDM6A escapes X inactivation, we found a 
skewed X inactivation pattern, in which the deleted X chromosome was inactivated 
in the majority of the cells. This study identifies KDM6A mutations as another 
cause of KS and highlights the growing role of histone methylases and histone 
demethylases in multiple-congenital-anomaly and intellectual-disability 
syndromes.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.021
PMCID: PMC3257878
PMID: 22197486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]