---
reference_id: "PMID:36833331"
title: Delineating the Spectrum of Genetic Variants Associated with Bardet-Biedl Syndrome in Consanguineous Pakistani Pedigrees.
authors:
- Rao AR
- Nazir A
- Imtiaz S
- Paracha SA
- Waryah YM
- Ujjan ID
- Anwar I
- Iqbal A
- Santoni FA
- Shah I
- Gul K
- Baig HMA
- Waryah AM
- Antonarakis SE
- Ansar M
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/genes14020404
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Delineating the Spectrum of Genetic Variants Associated with Bardet-Biedl Syndrome in Consanguineous Pakistani Pedigrees.
**Authors:** Rao AR, Nazir A, Imtiaz S, Paracha SA, Waryah YM, Ujjan ID, Anwar I, Iqbal A, Santoni FA, Shah I, Gul K, Baig HMA, Waryah AM, Antonarakis SE, Ansar M
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes14020404](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes14020404)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Feb 3;14(2):404. doi: 10.3390/genes14020404.

Delineating the Spectrum of Genetic Variants Associated with Bardet-Biedl 
Syndrome in Consanguineous Pakistani Pedigrees.

Rao AR(1), Nazir A(2), Imtiaz S(3), Paracha SA(2), Waryah YM(4), Ujjan ID(5), 
Anwar I(6), Iqbal A(7), Santoni FA(8)(9), Shah I(2), Gul K(3)(10), Baig 
HMA(6)(11), Waryah AM(1), Antonarakis SE(8)(12), Ansar M(6)(8)(13).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology and Genetics Department, Medical Research Center, Liaquat 
University of Medical and Health Sciences, Jamshoro 76090, Pakistan.
(2)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Khyber Medical University, Peshawar 
25100, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Genetics, University of Karachi, Karachi 75270, Pakistan.
(4)Scientific and Ophthalmic Research Laboratory, Sindh Institute of 
Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Hyderabad 71000, Pakistan.
(5)Department of Pathology, Liaquat University of Medical and Health Sciences, 
Jamshoro 76090, Pakistan.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Lausanne, Jules Gonin Eye 
Hospital, Fondation Asile Des Aveugles, 1004 Lausanne, Switzerland.
(7)Department of Zoology, Lahore College for Women University, Lahore 54810, 
Pakistan.
(8)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva, 1211 
Geneva, Switzerland.
(9)Department of Endocrinology Diabetes and Metabolism, University Hospital of 
Lausanne, 1011 Lausanne, Switzerland.
(10)Department of BioSciences, Faculty of Life Science, Mohammad Ali Jinnah 
University, Karachi 75400, Pakistan.
(11)Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Biochemistry, Biotechnology and 
Bioinformatics, The Islamia University of Bahawalpur, Bahawalpur 63080, 
Pakistan.
(12)iGE3 Institute of Genetics and Genomics of Geneva, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland.
(13)Advanced Molecular Genetics and Genomics Disease Research and Treatment 
Centre, Dow University of Health Sciences, Karachi 74200, Pakistan.

This study aimed to find the molecular basis of Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) in 
Pakistani consanguineous families. A total of 12 affected families were 
enrolled. Clinical investigations were performed to access the BBS-associated 
phenotypes. Whole exome sequencing was conducted on one affected individual from 
each family. The computational functional analysis predicted the variants' 
pathogenic effects and modeled the mutated proteins. Whole-exome sequencing 
revealed 9 pathogenic variants in six genes associated with BBS in 12 families. 
The BBS6/MKS was the most common BBS causative gene identified in five families 
(5/12, 41.6%), with one novel (c.1226G>A, p.Gly409Glu) and two reported 
variants. c.774G>A, Thr259LeuTer21 was the most frequent BBS6/MMKS allele in 
three families 3/5 (60%). Two variants, c.223C>T, p.Arg75Ter and a novel, c. 
252delA, p.Lys85STer39 were detected in the BBS9 gene. A novel 8bp deletion 
c.387_394delAAATAAAA, p. Asn130GlyfsTer3 was found in BBS3 gene. Three known 
variants were detected in the BBS1, BBS2, and BBS7 genes. Identification of 
novel likely pathogenic variants in three genes reaffirms the allelic and 
genetic heterogeneity of BBS in Pakistani patients. The clinical differences 
among patients carrying the same pathogenic variant may be due to other factors 
influencing the phenotype, including variants in other modifier genes.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14020404
PMCID: PMC9956862
PMID: 36833331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.