---
reference_id: "PMID:38461768"
title: "Uncommon de novo EGFR(T790M)-Mutant NSCLC characterized with unique genetic Features: Clinical response and acquired resistance to the third-generation EGFR-TKIs treatment."
authors:
- Pang LL
- Zhuang WT
- Huang YH
- Liao J
- Li MZ
- Lv Y
- Zhang L
- Fang WF
journal: Lung Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2024.107528
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- "ErbB Receptors/genetics, metabolism"
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Mutation
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Uncommon de novo EGFR(T790M)-Mutant NSCLC characterized with unique genetic Features: Clinical response and acquired resistance to the third-generation EGFR-TKIs treatment.
**Authors:** Pang LL, Zhuang WT, Huang YH, Liao J, Li MZ, Lv Y, Zhang L, Fang WF
**Journal:** Lung Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lungcan.2024.107528](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lungcan.2024.107528)

## Content

1. Lung Cancer. 2024 Apr;190:107528. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2024.107528. Epub
2024  Mar 2.

Uncommon de novo EGFR(T790M)-Mutant NSCLC characterized with unique genetic
Features: Clinical response and acquired resistance to the third-generation
EGFR-TKIs treatment.

Pang LL(1), Zhuang WT(1), Huang YH(1), Liao J(1), Li MZ(2), Lv Y(3), Zhang L(1),
Fang WF(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South
China, Guangdong Provincial Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Sun Yat-sen
University Cancer Center, Guangzhou 510060, People's Republic of China.
(2)Mygene Diagnostics Co., Ltd., China.
(3)Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University, 74 Zhongshan II Road,
Guangzhou 510080, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South
China, Guangdong Provincial Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Sun Yat-sen
University Cancer Center, Guangzhou 510060, People's Republic of China.
Electronic address: fangwf@sysucc.org.cn.

INTRODUCTION: The literature on de novo EGFRT790M-mutant patients diagnosed with
lung cancer is limited, and there is currently no consensus concerning the most
effective treatment protocols. This study aimed to investigate the genomic
characteristics of de novoEGFRT790M-mutant non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
and provide insights into its clinical response and resistance mechanism to
third-generation EGFR-TKIs.
METHODS: Next-generation sequencing was utilized to screen a substantial cohort
of 4,228 treatment-naïve patients from the Mygene genomic database to
identifythe de novo EGFR-T790M mutation. Meanwhile, we recruited 83 individuals
diagnosed with lung cancer who harbored de novo EGFRT790M mutation in the real
world. In addition, 166 patients who acquired EGFR-T790M mutation after becoming
resistant to first- or second-generation EGFR-TKIs were included as a comparison
cohort.
RESULTS: De novo EGFRT790M mutation identified by next-generation sequencing is
rare (∼1.3 %) in Chinese lung cancer patients. The relative variant allele
frequency (VAF) of de novo EGFRT790M mutation was either comparable to or
significantly lower than those of EGFR-activating mutations. Patients with de
novo-T790M mutations exhibited less favorable clinical outcomes when
administered third-generation EGFR-TKIs as first-line therapy thanthose with
19del mutationsdue to a high overlap rate in EGFR p.L858R mutation. In patients
with a de novo EGFRT790M mutation, no correlation was observed between T790M
clonality and treatment outcomes with third-generation EGFR-TKIs. In contrast,
the sub-clonality of the T790M mutation detrimentally affected the
third-generation EGFR-TKI treatment efficacy in patients with acquired T790M
mutation. Potential resistance mechanisms of third-generation EGFR TKIs in NSCLC
patients with de novo or acquired EGFRT790M mutations included EGFR p.C797S in
cis or EGFR p.E709X mutation, as well as activation of bypass pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study characterized the uncommon but unique de novo
EGFRT790M-mutant NSCLC and laid a foundation for designing future clinical
trials in the setting of uncommon EGFR mutation.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2024.107528
PMID: 38461768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
