---
reference_id: "PMID:28549150"
title: Primary congenital and developmental glaucomas.
authors:
- Lewis CJ
- Hedberg-Buenz A
- DeLuca AP
- Stone EM
- Alward WLM
- Fingert JH
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddx205
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary congenital and developmental glaucomas.
**Authors:** Lewis CJ, Hedberg-Buenz A, DeLuca AP, Stone EM, Alward WLM, Fingert JH
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddx205](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddx205)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2017 Aug 1;26(R1):R28-R36. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddx205.

Primary congenital and developmental glaucomas.

Lewis CJ(1)(2)(3), Hedberg-Buenz A(1)(2)(3), DeLuca AP(2)(3), Stone EM(2)(3), 
Alward WLM(2)(3), Fingert JH(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Carver College of 
Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Carver College of Medicine, 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
(3)Stephen A. Wynn Institute for Vision Research, 3111B Medical Education and 
Research Facility, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Glaucoma is the leading cause of irreversible blindness worldwide. Although most 
glaucoma patients are elderly, congenital glaucoma and glaucomas of childhood 
are also important causes of visual disability. Primary congenital glaucoma 
(PCG) is isolated, non-syndromic glaucoma that occurs in the first three years 
of life and is a major cause of childhood blindness. Other early-onset glaucomas 
may arise secondary to developmental abnormalities, such as glaucomas that occur 
with aniridia or as part of Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome. Congenital and childhood 
glaucomas have strong genetic bases and disease-causing mutations have been 
discovered in several genes. Mutations in three genes (CYP1B1, LTBP2, TEK) have 
been reported in PCG patients. Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome is caused by mutations 
in PITX2 or FOXC1 and aniridia is caused by PAX6 mutations. This review 
discusses the roles of these genes in primary congenital glaucoma and glaucomas 
of childhood.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddx205
PMCID: PMC5886473
PMID: 28549150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]