---
reference_id: "PMID:35028714"
title: Disease-specific complications and multidisciplinary interventions in achondroplasia.
authors:
- Kitoh H
- Matsushita M
- Mishima K
- Kamiya Y
- Sawamura K
journal: J Bone Miner Metab
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00774-021-01298-z
keywords:
- "Achondroplasia/complications, genetics, therapy"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Animals
- Child
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Mutation
- Quality of Life
- "Sleep Apnea, Obstructive"
- Spinal Stenosis/complications
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disease-specific complications and multidisciplinary interventions in achondroplasia.
**Authors:** Kitoh H, Matsushita M, Mishima K, Kamiya Y, Sawamura K
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Metab (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00774-021-01298-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00774-021-01298-z)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Metab. 2022 Mar;40(2):189-195. doi: 10.1007/s00774-021-01298-z. 
Epub 2022 Jan 14.

Disease-specific complications and multidisciplinary interventions in 
achondroplasia.

Kitoh H(1)(2), Matsushita M(3), Mishima K(3), Kamiya Y(3), Sawamura K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Aichi Children's Health and Medical 
Center, 7-426 Morioka, Obu, Aichi, 474-8710, Japan. hkitoh420@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Comprehensive Pediatric Medicine, Nagoya University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan. hkitoh420@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Nagoya University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Nagoya, Aichi, 466-8550, Japan.

Achondroplasia (ACH) is the most common skeletal dysplasia and characterized by 
a disproportionate short stature, macrocephaly with frontal bossing, exaggerated 
lumbar lordosis, and trident hands. It is induced by activated mutations in the 
fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) gene. In addition to short stature, 
patients with ACH have a high prevalence of medical complications, including 
upper airway obstructive apnea, increased mortality, foramen magnum stenosis, 
hydrocephalus, developmental delay, recurrent ear infections, genu varum, 
obesity, and spinal canal stenosis, throughout their whole life. Several 
investigational drugs that modulate abnormal FGFR3 signaling have recently 
emerged, vosoritide being the most developed. This review presents the different 
disease-specific complications of ACH occurring in neonates, infants, childhood, 
adolescent, and adults and reports the current multidisciplinary interventions 
for these various complications. Moreover, we propose treatment strategies for 
children with ACH from the perspective of quality of life in adulthood.

© 2021. The Japanese Society Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1007/s00774-021-01298-z
PMID: 35028714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]