---
reference_id: "PMID:31520578"
title: A novel de novo PDE4D gene mutation identified in a Chinese patient with acrodysostosis.
authors:
- Zhan Y
- Chen W
- Feng Z
- Tan C
- Li M
- Song Y
- Zhao Z
- Sheng W
- Huang G
journal: Genesis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/dvg.23336
keywords:
- Asian People/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- China
- "Cyclic Nucleotide Phosphodiesterases, Type 4/genetics, metabolism"
- "Dysostoses/genetics, metabolism"
- HEK293 Cells
- HeLa Cells
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Mutation
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics, metabolism"
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel de novo PDE4D gene mutation identified in a Chinese patient with acrodysostosis.
**Authors:** Zhan Y, Chen W, Feng Z, Tan C, Li M, Song Y, Zhao Z, Sheng W, Huang G
**Journal:** Genesis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/dvg.23336](https://doi.org/10.1002/dvg.23336)

## Content

1. Genesis. 2019 Nov;57(11-12):e23336. doi: 10.1002/dvg.23336. Epub 2019 Sep 14.

A novel de novo PDE4D gene mutation identified in a Chinese patient with 
acrodysostosis.

Zhan Y(1), Chen W(1), Feng Z(1), Tan C(1), Li M(1), Song Y(1), Zhao Z(1), Sheng 
W(1)(2), Huang G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Center, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.
(2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Birth Defects, Shanghai, China.

Acrodysostosis is an extremely rare disorder at birth, that is, characterized by 
skeletal dysplasia with short stature and midfacial hypoplasia, which has been 
reported to be caused by PDE4D and PRKAR1A gene mutations. Here, a Chinese boy 
with acrodysostosis, ventricular septal defect, and pulmonary hypertension was 
recruited for our study, and his clinical and biochemical characteristics were 
analyzed. A novel de novo heterozygous missense mutation (NM_001104631: 
c.2030A>C, p.Tyr677Ser) of the PDE4D gene was detected by whole exome sequencing 
and confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The c.2030A>C (p.Tyr677Ser) variant was 
located in exon 15 of the PDE4D gene, predicted to be damaging by a functional 
prediction program and shown to be highly conserved among many species. Further 
functional analysis showed that the p.Tyr677Ser substitution changes the 
function of the PDE4D protein, affects its subcellular localization in 
transfected cells, increases PDE4 activity in the regulation of cAMP signaling 
and affects cell proliferation. Our study identified a novel de novo PDE4D 
mutation in acrodysostosis of Chinese origin that not only contributes a deeper 
appreciation of the phenotypic characteristics of patients with PDE4D mutations 
but also expands the spectrum of PDE4D mutations.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/dvg.23336
PMID: 31520578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]