---
reference_id: "PMID:34295687"
title: "Immune checkpoint inhibitors in oncogene-addicted non-small cell lung cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Guaitoli G
- Tiseo M
- Di Maio M
- Friboulet L
- Facchinetti F
journal: Transl Lung Cancer Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.21037/tlcr-20-941
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immune checkpoint inhibitors in oncogene-addicted non-small cell lung cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Guaitoli G, Tiseo M, Di Maio M, Friboulet L, Facchinetti F
**Journal:** Transl Lung Cancer Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.21037/tlcr-20-941](https://doi.org/10.21037/tlcr-20-941)

## Content

1. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2021 Jun;10(6):2890-2916. doi: 10.21037/tlcr-20-941.

Immune checkpoint inhibitors in oncogene-addicted non-small cell lung cancer: a
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Guaitoli G(1)(2), Tiseo M(3)(4), Di Maio M(5), Friboulet L(2), Facchinetti F(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, University Hospital of Modena, Modena, Italy.
(2)Université Paris-Saclay, Institut Gustave Roussy, Inserm, Biomarqueurs
Prédictifs et Nouvelles Stratégies Thérapeutiques en Oncologie, Villejuif,
France.
(3)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(4)Medical Oncology Unit, University Hospital of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(5)Department of Oncology, University of Turin at Ordine Mauriziano Hospital,
Torino, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Treatment of oncogene-addicted non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
has been changed by the advent of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). Albeit
great benefits are achieved with target therapies, resistance invariably occurs
and recourse to alternative treatments is unavoidable. Immune checkpoint
inhibitors (ICIs) role and the best setting of immunotherapy administration in
oncogene-driven NSCLC are matter of debate.
METHODS: We performed a systematic literature review through PubMed, in order to
gather all the available information regarding ICI activity and efficacy in
oncogene-addicted NSCLC, from both prospective trials and retrospective series.
A meta-analysis of objective response rate in different molecular subgroups was
provided. Combinatorial strategies including ICIs and related toxicities were
also recorded.
RESULTS: Eighty-seven studies were included in the qualitative analysis. EGFR
mutation may be a biomarker of poor response to single-agent ICIs (7% of
EGFR-mutant NSCLC patients achieved disease response in prospective trials),
while encouraging results have been shown with combination strategies.
KRAS-mutated disease (response rate, RR, 22%) has different clinical and
pathological characteristics, and the co-existence of additional mutations
(e.g., STK11 or TP53) influence tumor microenvironment and response to
immunotherapy. Other molecular alterations have been marginally considered
prospectively, and data from clinical practice are variegated, given poor
effectiveness of ICIs in ALK-rearranged disease (RR 9.5%, pooling the data of
retrospective studies) or some encouraging results in BRAF-(RR 25%,
retrospective data) or MET-driven one (with estimations conditioned by the
presence of both exon 14 skipping mutations and gene amplification in reported
series).
CONCLUSIONS: In oncogene-addicted NSCLC (with the exception of KRAS-mutated),
ICIs are usually administered at the failure of other treatment options, but
administering single-agent immunotherapy in later disease phases may limit its
efficacy. With the progressive administration of TKIs and ICIs in early-stage
disease, molecular characterization will become fundamental in this setting.

2021 Translational Lung Cancer Research. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tlcr-20-941
PMCID: PMC8264334
PMID: 34295687

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at
http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/tlcr-20-941). The series “Immunotherapy in other
thoracic malignancies and uncommon populations” was commissioned by the
editorial office without any funding or sponsorship. M Tiseo serves as an unpaid
editorial board member of Translational Lung Cancer Research from Dec 2014 to
Nov 2021. M Tiseo reports grants and personal fees from Astra-Zeneca, grants and
personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, grants from Pfizer, personal fees from
Eli-Lilly, personal fees from BMS, grants and personal fees from Novartis,
grants and personal fees from Roche, grants and personal fees from MSD, grants
from Otsuka, grants from Pierre Fabre, outside the submitted work. M Di Maio
reports personal fees from Astra-Zeneca, personal fees from Pfizer, personal
fees from BMS, personal fees from MSD, personal fees from Eisai, personal fees
from Janssen, personal fees from Astellas, personal fees from Takeda, grants
from Tesaro-GSK, outside the submitted work. F Facchinetti reports personal fees
from BMS, personal fees from Roche, outside the submitted work. The authors have
no other conflicts of interest to declare.
