---
reference_id: "PMID:37275982"
title: Delayed sleep-wake phase disorder and its related sleep behaviors in the young generation.
authors:
- Futenma K
- Takaesu Y
- Komada Y
- Shimura A
- Okajima I
- Matsui K
- Tanioka K
- Inoue Y
journal: Front Psychiatry
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1174719
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Delayed sleep-wake phase disorder and its related sleep behaviors in the young generation.
**Authors:** Futenma K, Takaesu Y, Komada Y, Shimura A, Okajima I, Matsui K, Tanioka K, Inoue Y
**Journal:** Front Psychiatry (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1174719](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1174719)

## Content

1. Front Psychiatry. 2023 May 19;14:1174719. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1174719. 
eCollection 2023.

Delayed sleep-wake phase disorder and its related sleep behaviors in the young 
generation.

Futenma K(1)(2), Takaesu Y(1)(2), Komada Y(3), Shimura A(2)(4), Okajima I(5), 
Matsui K(2)(6)(7), Tanioka K(2)(8), Inoue Y(2)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Graduate School of Medicine, University of the 
Ryukyus, Okinawa, Japan.
(2)Japan Somnology Center, Neuropsychiatric Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Institute for Liberal Arts, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Psychological Counseling, Faculty of Humanities, Tokyo Kasei 
University, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Clinical Laboratory, National Center Hospital, National Center 
of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Department of Sleep-Wake Disorders, National Institute of Mental Health, 
National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Department of Somnology, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.

Delayed sleep-wake phase disorder (DSWPD) is a sleep disorder in which the 
habitual sleep-wake timing is delayed, resulting in difficulty in falling asleep 
and waking up at the desired time. Patients with DSWPD frequently experience 
fatigue, impaired concentration, sleep deprivation during weekdays, and problems 
of absenteeism, which may be further complicated by depressive symptoms. DSWPD 
is typically prevalent during adolescence and young adulthood. Although there 
are no studies comparing internationally, the prevalence of DSWPD is estimated 
to be approximately 3% with little racial differences between Caucasians and 
Asians. The presence of this disorder is associated with various physiological, 
genetic and psychological as well as behavioral factors. Furthermore, social 
factors are also involved in the mechanism of DSWPD. Recently, delayed sleep 
phase and prolonged sleep duration in the young generation have been reported 
during the period of COVID-19 pandemic-related behavioral restrictions. This 
phenomenon raises a concern about the risk of a mismatch between their 
sleep-wake phase and social life that may lead to the development of DSWPD after 
the removal of these restrictions. Although the typical feature of DSWPD is a 
delay in circadian rhythms, individuals with DSWPD without having misalignment 
of objectively measured circadian rhythm markers account for approximately 40% 
of the cases, wherein the psychological and behavioral characteristics of young 
people, such as truancy and academic or social troubles, are largely involved in 
the mechanism of this disorder. Recent studies have shown that DSWPD is 
frequently comorbid with psychiatric disorders, particularly mood and 
neurodevelopmental disorders, both of which have a bidirectional association 
with the pathophysiology of DSWPD. Additionally, patients with DSWPD have a 
strong tendency toward neuroticism and anxiety, which may result in the 
aggravation of insomnia symptoms. Therefore, future studies should address the 
effectiveness of cognitive-behavioral approaches in addition to chronobiological 
approaches in the treatment of DSWPD.

Copyright © 2023 Futenma, Takaesu, Komada, Shimura, Okajima, Matsui, Tanioka and 
Inoue.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1174719
PMCID: PMC10235460
PMID: 37275982

Conflict of interest statement: KF reported personal fees from Eisai., Ltd. and 
MSD outside the submitted work. YT reported lecture fees from Takeda 
Pharmaceutical, Sumitomo Pharma, Otsuka Pharmaceutical, Meiji Seika Pharma, 
Kyowa Pharmaceutical, Eisai, MSD, and Yoshitomi Pharmaceutical outside the 
submitted work. KM reported personal fees from Eisai, Meiji Seika Pharma, MSD, 
Otsuka Pharmaceutical, Takeda Pharmaceutical, and Yoshitomi Pharmaceutical 
outside the submitted work. AS reported personal fees from Eisai and Sumitomo 
Pharma outside the submitted work. IO reported grants from NEC Solution 
Innovators Co., Ltd. and Infocom Co.; personal fees from Otsuka Pharmaceutical 
MSD, and Eisai.; and consultation fees from NEC Solution Innovators Co., Ltd. 
and Suntory Wellness Ltd. outside the submitted work. YK reported lecture fees 
from Eisai outside the submitted work. YI reported personal fees from Eisai, 
Otsuka Pharmaceutical, Takeda Pharmaceutical, Astellas Pharma Inc., and MED K.K. 
and grants from Philips Japan Co., Ltd., Koike Medical Co., Ltd., and Teijin 
Pharma Ltd. outside the submitted work. The remaining author declares that the 
research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.