---
reference_id: "PMID:23380221"
title: "Decoding asthma: translating genetic variation in IL33 and IL1RL1 into disease pathophysiology."
authors:
- Grotenboer NS
- Ketelaar ME
- Koppelman GH
- Nawijn MC
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2012.11.028
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Decoding asthma: translating genetic variation in IL33 and IL1RL1 into disease pathophysiology.
**Authors:** Grotenboer NS, Ketelaar ME, Koppelman GH, Nawijn MC
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2012.11.028](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2012.11.028)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013 Mar;131(3):856-65. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2012.11.028.  Epub 2013 Feb 4.

Decoding asthma: translating genetic variation in IL33 and IL1RL1 into disease 
pathophysiology.

Grotenboer NS(1), Ketelaar ME, Koppelman GH, Nawijn MC.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Allergology and Pulmonary Diseases, Department of Pathology and 
Medical Biology, Beatrix Children's Hospital, University of Groningen, 
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Asthma is a complex disease that results from the interaction between genetic 
predisposition and environmental factors. Recently, genome-wide association 
studies have identified a number of genes that significantly contribute to 
asthma. Two of these genes, IL33 and IL-1 receptor-like 1 (IL1RL1), act in one 
signal transduction pathway. IL33 encodes a cytokine released on damage of 
cells, whereas IL1RL1 encodes part of the IL-33 receptor complex. Recent 
progress made in functional studies in human subjects and mouse models of 
allergic airway disease indicate a central role of IL-33 signaling in driving 
TH2 inflammation, which is central to eosinophilic allergic asthma. Here, IL-33 
acts on cells of both the adaptive and innate immune systems. Very recently, a 
novel population of IL-33-responsive innate immune cells, the type 2 innate 
lymphoid cells, was found to produce hallmark TH2 cytokines, such as IL-5 and 
IL-13. The relevance of these cells for asthma is underscored by the 
identification of retinoic acid-related orphan receptor α(RORA), the gene 
encoding the transcription factor critical for their differentiation, as another 
asthma gene in genome-wide association studies. This review describes the 
mechanisms through which genetic variation at the IL33 and IL1RL1 loci 
translates into increased susceptibility for asthma. We propose that genetic 
variation associated with asthma at the IL33 and IL1RL1 loci can be dissected 
into independent signals with distinct functional consequences for this pathway 
that is central to asthma pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2012.11.028
PMID: 23380221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]