---
reference_id: "PMID:28821675"
title: "Synergistic Toxicity of Polyglutamine-Expanded TATA-Binding Protein in Glia and Neuronal Cells: Therapeutic Implications for Spinocerebellar Ataxia 17."
authors:
- Yang Y
- Yang S
- Guo J
- Cui Y
- Tang B
- Li XJ
- Li S
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0111-17.2017
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Survival/immunology
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Female
- Gene Knock-In Techniques
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Neuroglia/immunology, pathology"
- "Neurons/immunology, pathology"
- Peptides/immunology
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/immunology, pathology, therapy"
- TATA-Box Binding Protein/immunology
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Synergistic Toxicity of Polyglutamine-Expanded TATA-Binding Protein in Glia and Neuronal Cells: Therapeutic Implications for Spinocerebellar Ataxia 17.
**Authors:** Yang Y, Yang S, Guo J, Cui Y, Tang B, Li XJ, Li S
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0111-17.2017](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0111-17.2017)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2017 Sep 20;37(38):9101-9115. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0111-17.2017.
 Epub 2017 Aug 18.

Synergistic Toxicity of Polyglutamine-Expanded TATA-Binding Protein in Glia and
Neuronal Cells: Therapeutic Implications for Spinocerebellar Ataxia 17.

Yang Y(1)(2), Yang S(2), Guo J(1)(2), Cui Y(1)(2), Tang B(1), Li XJ(3)(4), Li
S(5)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan 410008, China.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia 30322, and.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia 30322, and xli2@emory.edu sli@emory.edu.
(4)GHM Institute of CNS Regeneration, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China.
(5)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan 410008, China, xli2@emory.edu sli@emory.edu.

Spinocerebellar ataxia 17 (SCA17) is caused by polyglutamine (polyQ) repeat
expansion in the TATA-binding protein (TBP) and is among a family of
neurodegenerative diseases in which polyQ expansion leads to preferential
neuronal loss in the brain. Although previous studies have demonstrated that
expression of polyQ-expanded proteins in glial cells can cause neuronal injury
via noncell-autonomous mechanisms, these studies investigated animal models that
overexpress transgenic mutant proteins. Since glial cells are particularly
reactive to overexpressed mutant proteins, it is important to investigate the in
vivo role of glial dysfunction in neurodegeneration when mutant polyQ proteins
are endogenously expressed. In the current study, we generated two conditional
TBP-105Q knock-in mouse models that specifically express mutant TBP at the
endogenous level in neurons or in astrocytes. We found that mutant TBP
expression in neuronal cells or astrocytes alone only caused mild
neurodegeneration, whereas severe neuronal toxicity requires the expression of
mutant TBP in both neuronal and glial cells. Coculture of neurons and astrocytes
further validated that mutant TBP in astrocytes promoted neuronal injury. We
identified activated inflammatory signaling pathways in mutant TBP-expressing
astrocytes, and blocking nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) signaling in astrocytes
ameliorated neurodegeneration. Our results indicate that the synergistic
toxicity of mutant TBP in neuronal and glial cells plays a critical role in
SCA17 pathogenesis and that targeting glial inflammation could be a potential
therapeutic approach for SCA17 treatment.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Mutant TBP with
polyglutamine expansion preferentially affects neuronal viability in SCA17
patients. Whether glia, the cells that support and protect neurons, contribute
to neurodegeneration in SCA17 remains mostly unexplored. In this study, we
provide both in vivo and in vitro evidence arguing that endogenous expression of
mutant TBP in neurons and glia synergistically impacts neuronal survival.
Hyperactivated inflammatory signaling pathways, particularly the NF-κB pathway,
underlie glia-mediated neurotoxicity. Moreover, blocking NF-κB activity with
small chemical inhibitors alleviated such neurotoxicity. Our study establishes
glial dysfunction as an important component of SCA17 pathogenesis and suggests
targeting glial inflammation as a potential therapeutic approach for SCA17
treatment.

Copyright © 2017 the authors 0270-6474/17/379101-15$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0111-17.2017
PMCID: PMC5607462
PMID: 28821675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
