---
reference_id: "PMID:10867794"
title: Ubiquitinated filamentous inclusions in cerebellar dentate nucleus neurons in dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy contain expanded polyglutamine stretches.
authors:
- Yamada M
- Piao YS
- Toyoshima Y
- Tsuji S
- Takahashi H
journal: Acta Neuropathol
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1007/s004010051171
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Cerebellar Nuclei/metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- Female
- Humans
- "Inclusion Bodies/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Myoclonic Epilepsies, Progressive/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Neurofilament Proteins/metabolism
- "Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
- "Peptides/genetics, metabolism"
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion/physiology
- Ubiquitins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ubiquitinated filamentous inclusions in cerebellar dentate nucleus neurons in dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy contain expanded polyglutamine stretches.
**Authors:** Yamada M, Piao YS, Toyoshima Y, Tsuji S, Takahashi H
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s004010051171](https://doi.org/10.1007/s004010051171)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol. 2000 Jun;99(6):615-8. doi: 10.1007/s004010051171.

Ubiquitinated filamentous inclusions in cerebellar dentate nucleus neurons in
dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy contain expanded polyglutamine stretches.

Yamada M(1), Piao YS, Toyoshima Y, Tsuji S, Takahashi H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Niigata University, Japan. nori@bri.niigata-u.ac.jp

We have recently reported that, in addition to the widespread occurrence of
ubiquitinated neuronal intranuclear inclusions (NIIs), the restricted occurrence
of ubiquitinated intracytoplasmic filamentous inclusions in the neurons of the
cerebellar dentate nucleus (CDN) is a characteristic feature of
dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA). Interestingly, these neuronal
intracytoplasmic filamentous inclusions (NIFIs) were morphologically
indistinguishable from the skein-like inclusions (SLIs) described previously in
the spinal anterior horn cells in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). In the
present study, we examined immunohistochemically the CDN in ten patients with
clinicopathologically and genetically confirmed DRPLA and the spinal anterior
horns in five patients with sporadic ALS, using a monoclonal antibody (1C2)
directed against long polyglutamine stretches. In all of the patients with
DRPLA, both the NIFIs and the NIIs were visualized clearly with 1C2. Conversely,
in the patients with ALS all structures, including the SLIs, were completely
negative. These findings indicate that in DRPLA, the NIFIs in the CDN are an
alteration that is directly related to the causative gene abnormality (an
expanded CAG repeat encoding polyglutamine) and that, from the molecular point
of view, they are distinct from the SLIs in ALS.

DOI: 10.1007/s004010051171
PMID: 10867794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
