---
reference_id: "PMID:36696026"
title: Prevalence and impact of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in patients with papillary thyroid carcinoma.
authors:
- Xiao R
- Ni C
- Cai Y
- Zhou Y
- Gong X
- Xie K
- You J
journal: Endocrine
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s12020-023-03312-y
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- "Thyroid Cancer, Papillary/epidemiology, pathology"
- "Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease/complications, epidemiology"
- Lymphatic Metastasis
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Prevalence
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/complications, epidemiology, genetics"
- Mutation
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence and impact of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in patients with papillary thyroid carcinoma.
**Authors:** Xiao R, Ni C, Cai Y, Zhou Y, Gong X, Xie K, You J
**Journal:** Endocrine (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12020-023-03312-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12020-023-03312-y)

## Content

1. Endocrine. 2023 Jun;80(3):619-629. doi: 10.1007/s12020-023-03312-y. Epub 2023
Jan 25.

Prevalence and impact of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in patients with
papillary thyroid carcinoma.

Xiao R(#)(1), Ni C(#)(2), Cai Y(1), Zhou Y(1), Gong X(3), Xie K(4), You J(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thyroid Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang Province, China.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang Province, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang Province, China.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Research Center, The Affiliated
Hospital of Jiaxing University, Jiaxing, China. ballbe@163.com.
(5)Department of Thyroid Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang Province, China. youjie@wmu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) is the most common thyroid cancer.
Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD) was possibly among the risk factors
for thyroid carcinoma. It is uncertain whether NAFLD is associated with the
aggressiveness of PTC.
METHODS: We obtained data on patients with PTC who had undergone surgery at the
First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University between January 2020 and
February 2022. Pre-and post-operative data were obtained from electronic medical
records and analyzed. Patients were split into two groups based on the NAFLD
diagnostic criteria and compared using univariate and multivariate analysis
through a logistic regression model.
RESULTS: In all, 3468 patients with PTC were included in this study, of which
594 (17.1%) were diagnosed with NAFLD. NAFLD was found to be an independent risk
factor for lymph node metastasis (OR = 1.285 95% CI: 1.052-1.570), incidence of
BRAF V600E mutation (OR = 1.504, 95% CI: 1.148-1.972) and later tumor stage at
diagnosis (OR = 2.310, 95% CI: 1.700-3.139) in PTC. The association mentioned
above remained significant in subgroups of patients with Hashimoto's thyroiditis
(HT), hypertension, diabetes (DM), high triglyceride (TG) levels, low levels of
high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol (HDL-C), and high body mass index (BMI). In
subgroup of female rather than male, NAFLD was an independent risk factor for
lymph node metastasis (OR = 1.638 95% CI: 1.264-2.123), incidence of BRAF V600E
mutation (OR = 1.973, 95% CI: 1.368-2.846) as well as later tumor stage
(OR = 2.825, 95% CI: 1.964-4.063) in PTC. However, NAFLD was not a risk factor
for the larger tumor size (>1 cm), extra-thyroidal extension (ETE), or
multifocality in PTC.
CONCLUSION: Our cross-sectional study indicated that there is a strong
association of NAFLD with higher incidence of lymph node metastasis, higher
incidence of BRAF V600E mutation and later TNM stage than non-NAFLD in females
with PTC.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12020-023-03312-y
PMCID: PMC9875189
PMID: 36696026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
