---
reference_id: "PMID:30206659"
title: Bisphosphonate therapy in an infant with generalized arterial calcification with an ABCC6 mutation.
authors:
- Akhtar Ali S
- Ng C
- Votava-Smith JK
- Randolph LM
- Pitukcheewanont P
journal: Osteoporos Int
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s00198-018-4639-x
keywords:
- Bone Density Conservation Agents/therapeutic use
- Diphosphonates/therapeutic use
- "Diseases in Twins/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy, genetics"
- Echocardiography
- Female
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "ATP-Binding Cassette, Sub-Family C Proteins/genetics"
- Mutation
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- "Vascular Calcification/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bisphosphonate therapy in an infant with generalized arterial calcification with an ABCC6 mutation.
**Authors:** Akhtar Ali S, Ng C, Votava-Smith JK, Randolph LM, Pitukcheewanont P
**Journal:** Osteoporos Int (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00198-018-4639-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00198-018-4639-x)

## Content

1. Osteoporos Int. 2018 Nov;29(11):2575-2579. doi: 10.1007/s00198-018-4639-x.
Epub  2018 Sep 11.

Bisphosphonate therapy in an infant with generalized arterial calcification with
an ABCC6 mutation.

Akhtar Ali S(1), Ng C(2), Votava-Smith JK(3), Randolph LM(4), Pitukcheewanont
P(5).

Author information:
(1)Center For Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Children's Hospital Los
Angeles and Keck School of Medicine of University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Huntington Health Physicians,
Huntington, CA, USA.
(3)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Children's Hospital Los Angeles and Keck
School of Medicine of University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Division of Medical Genetics, Children's Hospital Los Angeles and Keck School
of Medicine of University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(5)Center For Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Children's Hospital Los
Angeles and Keck School of Medicine of University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA, USA. dpisit@chla.usc.edu.

Generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI) is a rare genetic disorder
with high infantile mortality, described to be due to ENPP1, and less commonly
ABCC6 mutations. Bisphosphonate treatment has been described to improve survival
in ENPP1-positive GACI patients, but few studies have described bisphosphonate
treatment in ABCC6-positive patients. Without therapy, patients will die before
6 months of age. Our patient is now 3 years old, former recipient twin of
twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS). Initial fetal echocardiogram at
19 weeks showed calcifications of the ascending aorta and pulmonary artery (PA).
She underwent utero laser therapy, and despite resolution of the TTTS, her
follow-up scans showed progressive calcification of the aorta and PA. Postnatal
echocardiogram showed calcification and supravalvar stenosis of the aorta and
PA. CT on day of life 6 showed calcifications in the PAs, aortic arch, and
descending aorta. Quantification of valvular calcification can be difficult; in
our patient, increasing outflow tract gradient on echocardiogram was used to
monitor disease progression. Molecular testing revealed an ABCC6 gene mutation.
She was started on weekly IV pamidronate (0.1-0.3 mg/kg/week) on day 8 of life
then transitioned to oral etidronate (15-20 mg/kg/day). Given progressive
supravalvar aortic and pulmonary stenosis, she underwent surgical repair with
patch augmentation of the PA and ascending aorta at 4 months old. She has done
well post-operatively, continuing on enteral bisphosphonate therapy with no side
effects to date. Her identical twin was confirmed to have the same mutation and
remains asymptomatic with no calcifications. Aggressive bisphosphonate therapy
should be started as soon as possible in patients with infantile arterial
calcinosis due to ABCC6 or ENPP1 mutations. Echocardiographic evaluation can be
used to monitor disease progression by arterial gradients. Molecular testing is
also essential to evaluate for possible co-morbidities in these patients and
pregnancy management for the future.

DOI: 10.1007/s00198-018-4639-x
PMID: 30206659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
