---
reference_id: "PMID:24494608"
title: "An overview of pain management: the clinical efficacy and value of treatment."
authors:
- Nalamachu S
journal: Am J Manag Care
year: '2013'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An overview of pain management: the clinical efficacy and value of treatment.
**Authors:** Nalamachu S
**Journal:** Am J Manag Care (2013)

## Content

1. Am J Manag Care. 2013 Nov;19(14 Suppl):s261-6.

An overview of pain management: the clinical efficacy and value of treatment.

Nalamachu S(1).

Author information:
(1)Nalamachu@gmail.com.

Appropriate treatment of pain requires an understanding of the characteristics 
of pain, including the severity and the nature of the pain-for example, acute 
versus chronic pain or nociceptive versus neuropathic pain. Appropriate 
treatment requires an understanding of the efficacies of the available agents in 
different pain models, and their adverse events, to best match them to the type 
of pain. While numerous classes of drugs are used to treat pain, 3 categories in 
particular-acetaminophen, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and 
opioids-are most often used for the treatment of pain, along with adjuvants (eg, 
muscle relaxants, anticonvulsants). Each of these drugs is associated with 
different adverse events and with varying degrees of efficacy. In general, 
acetaminophen is the least potent, while NSAIDs and opioids offer stronger 
analgesic effects. At the same time, acetaminophen use can cause acute liver 
failure, and NSAIDs are associated with serious complications impacting the 
gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, and renal systems. Opioids can cause cognitive 
deficiency, motor impairment, and respiratory depression, among other problems; 
they also represent a significant addiction risk in certain groups of patients. 
This article reviews the safety and efficacy of NSAIDs relative to other 
therapeutic agents in the treatment of 4 common types of pain, summarizes 
clinical treatment guidelines in these types of pain, and compares the relative 
roles of NSAIDs, acetaminophen, and opioids in treating pain.

PMID: 24494608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]