---
reference_id: "PMID:35379979"
title: "Intravitreal antisense oligonucleotide sepofarsen in Leber congenital amaurosis type 10: a phase 1b/2 trial."
authors:
- Russell SR
- Drack AV
- Cideciyan AV
- Jacobson SG
- Leroy BP
- Van Cauwenbergh C
- Ho AC
- Dumitrescu AV
- Han IC
- Martin M
- Pfeifer WL
- Sohn EH
- Walshire J
- Garafalo AV
- Krishnan AK
- Powers CA
- Sumaroka A
- Roman AJ
- Vanhonsebrouck E
- Jones E
- Nerinckx F
- De Zaeytijd J
- Collin RWJ
- Hoyng C
- Adamson P
- Cheetham ME
- Schwartz MR
- den Hollander W
- Asmus F
- Platenburg G
- Rodman D
- Girach A
journal: Nat Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41591-022-01755-w
keywords:
- Adult
- "Antigens, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Blindness/genetics
- Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics
- Child
- Cytoskeletal Proteins/metabolism
- Humans
- "Leber Congenital Amaurosis/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Oligonucleotides, Antisense/adverse effects"
- "Vision, Ocular"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intravitreal antisense oligonucleotide sepofarsen in Leber congenital amaurosis type 10: a phase 1b/2 trial.
**Authors:** Russell SR, Drack AV, Cideciyan AV, Jacobson SG, Leroy BP, Van Cauwenbergh C, Ho AC, Dumitrescu AV, Han IC, Martin M, Pfeifer WL, Sohn EH, Walshire J, Garafalo AV, Krishnan AK, Powers CA, Sumaroka A, Roman AJ, Vanhonsebrouck E, Jones E, Nerinckx F, De Zaeytijd J, Collin RWJ, Hoyng C, Adamson P, Cheetham ME, Schwartz MR, den Hollander W, Asmus F, Platenburg G, Rodman D, Girach A
**Journal:** Nat Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41591-022-01755-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-022-01755-w)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2022 May;28(5):1014-1021. doi: 10.1038/s41591-022-01755-w. Epub 2022 
Apr 4.

Intravitreal antisense oligonucleotide sepofarsen in Leber congenital amaurosis 
type 10: a phase 1b/2 trial.

Russell SR(1), Drack AV(2), Cideciyan AV(3), Jacobson SG(3), Leroy BP(4)(5)(6), 
Van Cauwenbergh C(5), Ho AC(7), Dumitrescu AV(2), Han IC(2), Martin M(2), 
Pfeifer WL(2), Sohn EH(2), Walshire J(2), Garafalo AV(3), Krishnan AK(3), Powers 
CA(3), Sumaroka A(3), Roman AJ(3), Vanhonsebrouck E(5), Jones E(5), Nerinckx 
F(5), De Zaeytijd J(5), Collin RWJ(8), Hoyng C(9), Adamson P(10), Cheetham 
ME(10), Schwartz MR(11), den Hollander W(12), Asmus F(13), Platenburg G(11), 
Rodman D(14), Girach A(11).

Author information:
(1)University of Iowa Institute for Vision Research, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA, USA. steve-russell@uiowa.edu.
(2)University of Iowa Institute for Vision Research, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA, USA.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Scheie Eye Institute, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital, 
Ghent, Belgium.
(6)Division of Ophthalmology and Center for Cellular & Molecular Therapeutics, 
The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(7)Wills Eye Hospital/Mid Atlantic Retina, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(8)Department of Human Genetics and Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(9)Department of Ophthalmology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(10)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, UK.
(11)ProQR Therapeutics, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(12)3D-PharmXchange, Tilburg, The Netherlands.
(13)Oxular Limited, Magdalen Centre, Oxford, UK.
(14)Mineralys Therapeutics, Radnor, PA, USA.

CEP290-associated Leber congenital amaurosis type 10 (LCA10) is a retinal 
disease resulting in childhood blindness. Sepofarsen is an RNA antisense 
oligonucleotide targeting the c.2991+1655A>G variant in the CEP290 gene to treat 
LCA10. In this open-label, phase 1b/2 ( NCT03140969 ), 12-month, multicenter, 
multiple-dose, dose-escalation trial, six adult patients and five pediatric 
patients received ≤4 doses of intravitreal sepofarsen into the worse-seeing eye. 
The primary objective was to evaluate sepofarsen safety and tolerability via the 
frequency and severity of ocular adverse events (AEs); secondary objectives were 
to evaluate pharmacokinetics and efficacy via changes in functional outcomes. 
Six patients received sepofarsen 160 µg/80 µg, and five patients received 
sepofarsen 320 µg/160 µg. Ten of 11 (90.9%) patients developed ocular AEs in the 
treated eye (5/6 with 160 µg/80 µg; 5/5 with 320 µg/160 µg) versus one of 11 
(9.1%) in the untreated eye; most were mild in severity and dose dependent. 
Eight patients developed cataracts, of which six (75.0%) were categorized as 
serious (2/3 with 160 µg/80 µg; 4/5 with 320 µg/160 µg), as lens replacement was 
required. As the 160-µg/80-µg group showed a better benefit-risk profile, higher 
doses were discontinued or not initiated. Statistically significant improvements 
in visual acuity and retinal sensitivity were reported (post hoc analysis). The 
manageable safety profile and improvements reported in this trial support the 
continuation of sepofarsen development.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41591-022-01755-w
PMCID: PMC9117145
PMID: 35379979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S.R.R. and A.V.C. report grant funding from 
ProQR Therapeutics during the conduct of the study. A.V.D. reports grants and 
other from ProQR Therapeutics during the conduct of the study; personal fees 
from Medscape and Novartis; grants from Spark Therapeutics and the National 
Institutes of Health; a patent held by Novartis with royalties paid to Spark 
Therapeutics and a patent held by the University of Iowa issued to Spark 
Therapeutics, outside the submitted work. B.P.L. reports grants and 
non-financial support from ProQR Therapeutics; grants from the Fund for Research 
Flanders during the conduct of the study; grants from GenSight Therapeutics, 
IVERIC Bio and Vedere Bio; and grants and non-financial support from Novartis, 
Spark Therapeutics and RegenXBio, outside the submitted work. C.V.C. reports 
grants and non-financial support from ProQR Therapeutics, during the conduct of 
the study, and grants from GenSight Therapeutics, outside the submitted work. 
A.C.H. reports grants from ProQR Therapeutics both during the conduct of the 
study and outside the submitted work. E.J. reports grants and non-financial 
support from ProQR Therapeutics during the conduct of the study and grants from 
GenSight Therapeutics outside the submitted work. J.D.Z. reports grants from 
ProQR Therapeutics, during the conduct of the study, and grants from GenSight 
Therapeutics, outside the submitted work. R.W.J.C. reports other from ProQR 
Therapeutics, outside the submitted work, and a patent (antisense 
oligonucleotides) for the treatment of Leber congenital amaurosis licensed to 
ProQR Therapeutics. P.A. reports share holdings in ProQR Therapeutics. M.E.C. 
reports grants and personal fees from ProQR Therapeutics, during the conduct of 
the study, and grants and/or personal fees from Editas Medicine, BridgeBio, PYC 
and Alia Therapeutics, outside the submitted work. M.R.S., G.P. and A.G. are 
employees of ProQR Therapeutics. W.D.H., F.A. and D.R. are former employees of 
ProQR Therapeutics. S.G.J., A.V.D., I.H., M.M., W.P., E.H.S., J.W., A.V.G., 
A.K.K., C.A.P., A.S., A.J.R., E.V., F.N. and C.H. have nothing to disclose.