---
reference_id: "PMID:39455012"
title: "Oxytocin in neurodevelopmental disorders: Autism spectrum disorder and Prader-Willi syndrome."
authors:
- Josselsohn A
- Zhao Y
- Espinoza D
- Hollander E
journal: Pharmacol Ther
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2024.108734
keywords:
- "Oxytocin/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Humans
- "Prader-Willi Syndrome/drug therapy, physiopathology"
- "Autism Spectrum Disorder/drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Animals
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oxytocin in neurodevelopmental disorders: Autism spectrum disorder and Prader-Willi syndrome.
**Authors:** Josselsohn A, Zhao Y, Espinoza D, Hollander E
**Journal:** Pharmacol Ther (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pharmthera.2024.108734](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pharmthera.2024.108734)

## Content

1. Pharmacol Ther. 2024 Dec;264:108734. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2024.108734.
Epub  2024 Oct 23.

Oxytocin in neurodevelopmental disorders: Autism spectrum disorder and 
Prader-Willi syndrome.

Josselsohn A(1), Zhao Y(2), Espinoza D(3), Hollander E(4).

Author information:
(1)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center, 1225 Morris 
Park Avenue Bronx, NY 10461, USA; Temple University, College of Education and 
Human Development, 1301 Cecil B. Moore Ave, Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA.
(2)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center, 1225 Morris 
Park Avenue Bronx, NY 10461, USA.
(3)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center, 1225 Morris 
Park Avenue Bronx, NY 10461, USA; SUNY Upstate Medical University, 750 E Adams 
St, Syracuse, NY 13210, USA.
(4)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center, 1225 Morris 
Park Avenue Bronx, NY 10461, USA. Electronic address: eholland@montefiore.org.

This manuscript reviews recent work on oxytocin and its use in 
neurodevelopmental disorders including spectrum disorder (ASD) and Prader-Willi 
syndrome (PWS). Oxytocin is involved in social recognition, bonding, maternal 
behaviors, anxiety, food motivation, and hyperphagia. While the pathophysiology 
of ASD and PWS involve abnormalities in the oxytocin system, clinical trials 
have shown discrepant results in the effectiveness of oxytocin as a treatment 
for core symptoms associated with these disorders. In this review, we outline 
oxytocin's clinical pharmacology, safety considerations, and results in recent 
clinical trials. We propose that oxytocin may be most beneficial in these 
populations if dosed in a dynamic regimen (PRN) and paired with social 
interventions.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2024.108734
PMCID: PMC12329755
PMID: 39455012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Dr. Hollander 
reported being the recipient of research grants from the U.S. Department of 
Defense, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, GW Pharma, F. Hoffmann-La Roche 
Ltd.; editorial stipends from Elsevier; and serving on scientific advisory 
boards for GW Pharma and F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd.