---
reference_id: "PMID:29908063"
title: Oligonucleotide therapy mitigates disease in spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 mice.
authors:
- McLoughlin HS
- Moore LR
- Chopra R
- Komlo R
- McKenzie M
- Blumenstein KG
- Zhao H
- Kordasiewicz HB
- Shakkottai VG
- Paulson HL
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/ana.25264
keywords:
- "Action Potentials/drug effects, genetics"
- Age Factors
- Animals
- "Apoptosis/drug effects, genetics"
- "Ataxin-3/chemistry, genetics"
- "Brain/drug effects, metabolism"
- Calcium-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Exploratory Behavior/drug effects
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation/drug effects, genetics"
- "Gliosis/drug therapy, etiology"
- "Machado-Joseph Disease/drug therapy, genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Microfilament Proteins/metabolism
- "Motor Activity/drug effects, genetics"
- Mutation/genetics
- "Oligonucleotides, Antisense/therapeutic use"
- "Purkinje Cells/drug effects, pathology"
- RNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oligonucleotide therapy mitigates disease in spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 mice.
**Authors:** McLoughlin HS, Moore LR, Chopra R, Komlo R, McKenzie M, Blumenstein KG, Zhao H, Kordasiewicz HB, Shakkottai VG, Paulson HL
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.25264](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.25264)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2018 Jul;84(1):64-77. doi: 10.1002/ana.25264. Epub 2018 Aug 6.

Oligonucleotide therapy mitigates disease in spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 mice.

McLoughlin HS(1), Moore LR(1), Chopra R(1), Komlo R(1), McKenzie M(1), 
Blumenstein KG(1), Zhao H(2), Kordasiewicz HB(2), Shakkottai VG(1), Paulson 
HL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
(2)Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Carlsbad, CA.

OBJECTIVE: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (SCA3), also known as Machado-Joseph 
disease, is the most common dominantly inherited ataxia. Despite advances in 
understanding this CAG repeat/polyglutamine expansion disease, there are still 
no therapies to alter its progressive fatal course. Here, we investigate whether 
an antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) targeting the SCA3 disease gene, ATXN3, can 
prevent molecular, neuropathological, electrophysiological, and behavioral 
features of the disease in a mouse model of SCA3.
METHODS: The top ATXN3-targeting ASO from an in vivo screen was injected 
intracerebroventricularly into early symptomatic transgenic SCA3 mice that 
express the full human disease gene and recapitulate key disease features. 
Following a single ASO treatment at 8 weeks of age, mice were evaluated 
longitudinally for ATXN3 suppression and rescue of disease-associated 
pathological changes. Mice receiving an additional repeat injection at 21 weeks 
were evaluated longitudinally up to 29 weeks for motor performance.
RESULTS: The ATXN3-targeting ASO achieved sustained reduction of 
polyglutamine-expanded ATXN3 up to 8 weeks after treatment and prevented 
oligomeric and nuclear accumulation of ATXN3 up to at least 14 weeks after 
treatment. Longitudinal ASO therapy rescued motor impairment in SCA3 mice, and 
this rescue was associated with a recovery of defects in Purkinje neuron firing 
frequency and afterhyperpolarization.
INTERPRETATION: This preclinical study established efficacy of ATXN3-targeted 
ASOs as a disease-modifying therapeutic strategy for SCA3. These results support 
further efforts to develop ASOs for human clinical trials in this polyglutamine 
disease as well as in other dominantly inherited disorders caused by toxic gain 
of function. Ann Neurol 2018;83:64-77.

© 2018 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.25264
PMCID: PMC6119475
PMID: 29908063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential Conflicts of Interest: Ionis 
Pharmaceuticals solely owns Intellectual Property directed to SCA3 ASOs. H.Z. 
and H.B.K. are employees of Ionis Pharmaceuticals. This work was supported in 
part by Ionis Pharmaceuticals.