---
reference_id: "PMID:16263173"
title: Localization of the third heparin-binding site in the human complement regulator factor H1.
authors:
- Ormsby RJ
- Jokiranta TS
- Duthy TG
- Griggs KM
- Sadlon TA
- Giannakis E
- Gordon DL
journal: Mol Immunol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2005.09.012
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Binding Sites/genetics
- "Complement Factor H/chemistry, genetics"
- Consensus Sequence
- Endothelial Cells/chemistry
- Heparin/chemistry
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- "Recombinant Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- "Repetitive Sequences, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Localization of the third heparin-binding site in the human complement regulator factor H1.
**Authors:** Ormsby RJ, Jokiranta TS, Duthy TG, Griggs KM, Sadlon TA, Giannakis E, Gordon DL
**Journal:** Mol Immunol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molimm.2005.09.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molimm.2005.09.012)

## Content

1. Mol Immunol. 2006 Apr;43(10):1624-32. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2005.09.012. Epub
2005 Nov 2.

Localization of the third heparin-binding site in the human complement regulator
factor H1.

Ormsby RJ(1), Jokiranta TS, Duthy TG, Griggs KM, Sadlon TA, Giannakis E, Gordon
DL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Flinders Medical Centre,
University of South Australia, Bedford Park, Adelaide, Australia.
rebecca.ormsby@flinders.edu.au

Complement factor H (fH) plays a pivotal role in regulating the alternative
pathway, allowing complement activation to proceed on foreign surfaces, whilst
protecting surrounding host cell surfaces from complement-mediated damage. Host
cell recognition is mediated by polyanions such as sialic acid and
glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), which promote a high affinity interaction between fH
and C3b deposited on host cell surfaces. Factor H is composed of 20 short
consensus repeats (SCRs); two heparin-binding sites have been identified within
SCR 7 and SCR 20 and a third site is thought to exist within or near SCR 13.
Using an extensive series of recombinant fH fragments and heparin affinity
chromatography, we have localized the third heparin-binding domain to SCR 9. A
recombinant fH fragment containing both SCR 7 and SCR 9 exhibited higher
affinity for heparin than SCR 7 alone, suggesting that the individual
heparin-binding sites interact simultaneously with heparin to create a higher
avidity interaction. Recombinant fragments containing SCR 9 bound to endothelial
cells, indicating that this domain is capable of interacting with polyanions
within a physiologically relevant environment. In addition, the three
heparin-binding sites exhibited differences in their specificity for certain
GAGs, suggesting that the individual binding domains may possess separate GAG
recognition functions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2005.09.012
PMID: 16263173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
