---
reference_id: "PMID:38472515"
title: Pneumococcal Meningitis Induces Hearing Loss and Cochlear Ossification Modulated by Chemokine Receptors CX3CR1 and CCR2.
authors:
- Hirose K
- Li SZ
- Gill R
- Hartsock J
journal: J Assoc Res Otolaryngol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s10162-024-00935-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pneumococcal Meningitis Induces Hearing Loss and Cochlear Ossification Modulated by Chemokine Receptors CX3CR1 and CCR2.
**Authors:** Hirose K, Li SZ, Gill R, Hartsock J
**Journal:** J Assoc Res Otolaryngol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10162-024-00935-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10162-024-00935-4)

## Content

1. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol. 2024 Apr;25(2):179-199. doi: 
10.1007/s10162-024-00935-4. Epub 2024 Mar 12.

Pneumococcal Meningitis Induces Hearing Loss and Cochlear Ossification Modulated 
by Chemokine Receptors CX3CR1 and CCR2.

Hirose K(1), Li SZ(2), Gill R(2)(3), Hartsock J(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Washington University 
School of Medicine, 660 S. Euclid Avenue, Campus Box 8115, St. Louis, MO, 63110, 
USA. hirosek@wustl.edu.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Washington University 
School of Medicine, 660 S. Euclid Avenue, Campus Box 8115, St. Louis, MO, 63110, 
USA.
(3)Department of Obstetric and Gynecology, Washington University, St. Louis, MO, 
USA.
(4)Turner Scientific, Jacksonville, IL, USA.

PURPOSE: Pneumococcal meningitis is a major cause of hearing loss and permanent 
neurological impairment despite widely available antimicrobial therapies to 
control infection. Methods to improve hearing outcomes for those who survive 
bacterial meningitis remains elusive. We used a mouse model of pneumococcal 
meningitis to evaluate the impact of mononuclear phagocytes on hearing outcomes 
and cochlear ossification by altering the expression of CX3CR1 and CCR2 in these 
infected mice.
METHODS: We induced pneumococcal meningitis in approximately 500 C57Bl6 adult 
mice using live Streptococcus pneumoniae (serotype 3, 1 × 105 colony forming 
units (cfu) in 10 µl) injected directly into the cisterna magna of anesthetized 
mice and treated these mice with ceftriaxone daily until recovered. We evaluated 
hearing thresholds over time, characterized the cochlear inflammatory response, 
and quantified the amount of new bone formation during meningitis recovery. We 
used microcomputed tomography (microCT) scans to quantify cochlear volume loss 
caused by neo-ossification. We also performed perilymph sampling in live mice to 
assess the integrity of the blood-perilymph barrier during various time 
intervals after meningitis. We then evaluated the effect of CX3CR1 or CCR2 
deletion in meningitis symptoms, hearing loss, macrophage/monocyte recruitment, 
neo-ossification, and blood labyrinth barrier function.
RESULTS: Sixty percent of mice with pneumococcal meningitis developed hearing 
loss. Cochlear fibrosis could be detected within 4 days of infection, and 
neo-ossification by 14 days. Loss of spiral ganglion neurons was common, and 
inner ear anatomy was distorted by scarring caused by new soft tissue and bone 
deposited within the scalae. The blood-perilymph barrier was disrupted at 3 days 
post infection (DPI) and was restored by seven DPI. Both CCR2 and CX3CR1 
monocytes and macrophages were present in the cochlea in large numbers after 
infection. Neither chemokine receptor was necessary for the induction of hearing 
loss, cochlear fibrosis, ossification, or disruption of the blood-perilymph 
barrier. CCR2 knockout (KO) mice suffered the most severe hearing loss. CX3CR1 
KO mice demonstrated an intermediate phenotype with greater susceptibility to 
hearing loss compared to control mice. Elimination of CX3CR1 mononuclear 
phagocytes during the first 2 weeks after meningitis in CX3CR1-DTR transgenic 
mice did not protect mice from any of the systemic or hearing sequelae of 
pneumococcal meningitis.
CONCLUSIONS: Pneumococcal meningitis can have devastating effects on cochlear 
structure and function, although not all mice experienced hearing loss or 
cochlear damage. Meningitis can result in rapid progression of hearing loss with 
fibrosis starting at four DPI and ossification within 2 weeks of infection 
detectable by light microscopy. The inflammatory response to bacterial 
meningitis is robust and can affect all three scalae. Our results suggest that 
CCR2 may assist in controlling infection and maintaining cochlear patency, as 
CCR2 knockout mice experienced more severe disease, more rapid hearing loss, and 
more advanced cochlear ossification after pneumococcal meningitis. CX3CR1 also 
may play an important role in the maintenance of cochlear patency.

© 2024. The Author(s) under exclusive licence to Association for Research in 
Otolaryngology.

DOI: 10.1007/s10162-024-00935-4
PMCID: PMC11018586
PMID: 38472515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.