---
reference_id: PMID:2342578
title: Telomeres shorten during ageing of human fibroblasts.
authors:
- Harley CB
- Futcher AB
- Greider CW
journal: Nature
year: '1990'
doi: 10.1038/345458a0
keywords:
- Aging
- Cell Survival
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Chromosomes/ultrastructure
- Fibroblasts
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Telomeres shorten during ageing of human fibroblasts.
**Authors:** Harley CB, Futcher AB, Greider CW
**Journal:** Nature (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1038/345458a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/345458a0)

## Content

1. Nature. 1990 May 31;345(6274):458-60. doi: 10.1038/345458a0.

Telomeres shorten during ageing of human fibroblasts.

Harley CB(1), Futcher AB, Greider CW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

The terminus of a DNA helix has been called its Achilles' heel. Thus to prevent 
possible incomplete replication and instability of the termini of linear DNA, 
eukaryotic chromosomes end in characteristic repetitive DNA sequences within 
specialized structures called telomeres. In immortal cells, loss of telomeric 
DNA due to degradation or incomplete replication is apparently balanced by 
telomere elongation, which may involve de novo synthesis of additional repeats 
by novel DNA polymerase called telomerase. Such a polymerase has been recently 
detected in HeLa cells. It has been proposed that the finite doubling capacity 
of normal mammalian cells is due to a loss of telomeric DNA and eventual 
deletion of essential sequences. In yeast, the est1 mutation causes gradual loss 
of telomeric DNA and eventual cell death mimicking senescence in higher 
eukaryotic cells. Here, we show that the amount and length of telomeric DNA in 
human fibroblasts does in fact decrease as a function of serial passage during 
ageing in vitro and possibly in vivo. It is not known whether this loss of DNA 
has a causal role in senescence.

DOI: 10.1038/345458a0
PMID: 2342578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]