---
reference_id: "PMID:28215594"
title: Adult-onset Satoyoshi syndrome in a young male.
authors:
- Montanaro VV
- Hora TF
- Couto CM
- Ribas FD
journal: Neuromuscul Disord
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2017.01.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adult-onset Satoyoshi syndrome in a young male.
**Authors:** Montanaro VV, Hora TF, Couto CM, Ribas FD
**Journal:** Neuromuscul Disord (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nmd.2017.01.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nmd.2017.01.007)

## Content

1. Neuromuscul Disord. 2017 Apr;27(4):382-384. doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2017.01.007.
Epub  2017 Jan 20.

Adult-onset Satoyoshi syndrome in a young male.

Montanaro VV(1), Hora TF(2), Couto CM(2), Ribas FD(3).

Author information:
(1)SARAH Network of Rehabilitation Hospitals, Brasilia, Brazil. Electronic 
address: vinicius_montanaro@yahoo.com.br.
(2)SARAH Network of Rehabilitation Hospitals, Brasilia, Brazil.
(3)Ene Neuroclínica Hospital Dona Helena, Joinville, Brazil.

Satoyoshi syndrome is a rare condition of presumed autoimmune etiology that is 
characterized by intermittent painful spasms, diarrhea, hair loss, and bone 
abnormalities. We report the first case of adult onset Satoyoshi syndrome in 
South America. A 32-year-old Caucasian male presented with sudden involuntary 
muscle contractions and painful cramps that had started at the age of 21. He 
also presented with trismus and complete loss of body hair. 
Electroneuromyography showed abnormal spontaneous activity. Diagnosis of 
Satoyoshi syndrome was made after extensive investigation; improvement was 
achieved with corticosteroids and azathioprine. It is a rare disease; few cases 
have been described worldwide, most of them in Asian children and almost all 
sporadic. There are several atypical presentations described in the literature. 
Immunosuppression is the basis of treatment. Professionals dealing with 
neuromuscular diseases should be aware of this condition and its atypical 
presentations, given the possible response to immunosuppressive treatment.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nmd.2017.01.007
PMID: 28215594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]