---
reference_id: "PMID:16530712"
title: "Novel TBX3 mutation data in families with ulnar-mammary syndrome indicate a genotype-phenotype relationship: mutations that do not disrupt the T-domain are associated with less severe limb defects."
authors:
- Meneghini V
- Odent S
- Platonova N
- Egeo A
- Merlo GR
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2005.04.021
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel TBX3 mutation data in families with ulnar-mammary syndrome indicate a genotype-phenotype relationship: mutations that do not disrupt the T-domain are associated with less severe limb defects.
**Authors:** Meneghini V, Odent S, Platonova N, Egeo A, Merlo GR
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2005.04.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2005.04.021)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2006 Mar-Apr;49(2):151-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2005.04.021.
Epub  2005 Jun 22.

Novel TBX3 mutation data in families with ulnar-mammary syndrome indicate a 
genotype-phenotype relationship: mutations that do not disrupt the T-domain are 
associated with less severe limb defects.

Meneghini V(1), Odent S, Platonova N, Egeo A, Merlo GR.

Author information:
(1)Dulbecco Telethon Institute CNR-ITB, Via Fratelli Cervi 93, 20090 Segrate, 
Milano, Italy.

We describe a family affected by Ulnar-Mammary syndrome (UMS) in which typical 
UMS traits (hypoplasia of the breast and axillary hair, upper limbs and genital 
defects) are present together with cardiac malformations and pulmonary stenosis. 
Sequence analysis of TBX3 shows a new heterozygous mutation that causes a 
frame-shift (Nt.1586-1587-insC) in exon 6, resulting in a truncated ORF. 
Recently the expression of Tbx3 has been described also in the septal region of 
the embryonic murine heart. This observation may establish a link between the 
congenital heart defects and the TBX3 mutation in this family. Combining the 
TBX3 mutation data in the literature with this novel mutation we find an 
association between mutations that disrupt the DNA-binding domain and a higher 
frequency of severe upper limb malformations and teeth defects. A possible 
explanation is that mutant TBX3 proteins that retain the T-domain, if 
translated, might be minimally active in promoting/repressing transcription of 
target genes in the limbs and in other embryonic tissues.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2005.04.021
PMID: 16530712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]