---
reference_id: "PMID:38440537"
title: "Post-traumatic Sinus Syndrome, Proposal for a New Clinical Entity (CDR Syndrome) as Variant of the Silent Sinus Syndrome: Systematic Review and Case Series."
authors:
- Catalfamo L
- Siniscalchi EN
- De Ponte FS
- De Rinaldis D
journal: Indian J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s12070-023-04112-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Post-traumatic Sinus Syndrome, Proposal for a New Clinical Entity (CDR Syndrome) as Variant of the Silent Sinus Syndrome: Systematic Review and Case Series.
**Authors:** Catalfamo L, Siniscalchi EN, De Ponte FS, De Rinaldis D
**Journal:** Indian J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12070-023-04112-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12070-023-04112-6)

## Content

1. Indian J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2024 Feb;76(1):1378-1388. doi: 
10.1007/s12070-023-04112-6. Epub 2023 Aug 4.

Post-traumatic Sinus Syndrome, Proposal for a New Clinical Entity (CDR Syndrome) 
as Variant of the Silent Sinus Syndrome: Systematic Review and Case Series.

Catalfamo L(1), Siniscalchi EN(1), De Ponte FS(1), De Rinaldis D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical and Dental Sciences and Morphofunctional Imaging, 
University Hospital G. Martino, University of Messina, Via Consolare Valeria 1, 
98124 Messina, Italy.

The diagnostic criteria for silent sinus syndrome (SSS) are still controversial, 
especially for the post-traumatic/surgery cases that are, nowadays, excluded 
from the diagnosis of SSS because lacking of spontaneously. We present a 
systematic review of the last 10 years and our case series of SSS associated to 
previous trauma/surgery, proposing a new interpretation of SSS. In this work, 
following the PRISMA guide lines for systematic reviews, we collected 86 
articles published on PubMed, Cochrane Library and Medline Plus since 2013 to 
2023 about SSS. We divided them in six groups forming the structure of the 
review: (1) epidemiology, (2) clinical presentation, (3) imaging, (4) 
etiopathogenesis, (5) sss and craniofacial trauma and (6) treatment. We reported 
two explicative clinical cases: two men of 34 and 37 years old, involved in 
motorcycle accident in 2020 and 2014, respectively, and underwent surgery. They 
came back in 2023 referring diplopia documented by Hess-Lancaster test. CT-scan 
reported two clear cases of SSS. Basing on what is reported in literature, and 
basing on our experience, the post-traumatic/surgery SSS are more frequent than 
the idiopathic ones. Our proposal is to considered them as two individual 
entities. We propose to adopt the name of Post-traumatic sinus syndrome, or CDR 
syndrome (Catalfamo-De Rinaldis), for all cases that respect four specific 
diagnostic criteria reported into the text.

© Association of Otolaryngologists of India 2023. Springer Nature or its 
licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this 
article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other 
rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of 
this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and 
applicable law.

DOI: 10.1007/s12070-023-04112-6
PMCID: PMC10908886
PMID: 38440537

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare no 
conflict of interest.