---
reference_id: "PMID:26850060"
title: School district wellness policy quality and weight-related outcomes among high school students in Minnesota.
authors:
- Hoffman PK
- Davey CS
- Larson N
- Grannon KY
- Hanson C
- Nanney MS
journal: Health Educ Res
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1093/her/cyv101
content_type: abstract_only
---

# School district wellness policy quality and weight-related outcomes among high school students in Minnesota.
**Authors:** Hoffman PK, Davey CS, Larson N, Grannon KY, Hanson C, Nanney MS
**Journal:** Health Educ Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1093/her/cyv101](https://doi.org/10.1093/her/cyv101)

## Content

1. Health Educ Res. 2016 Apr;31(2):234-46. doi: 10.1093/her/cyv101. Epub 2016 Feb
 5.

School district wellness policy quality and weight-related outcomes among high 
school students in Minnesota.

Hoffman PK(1), Davey CS(2), Larson N(3), Grannon KY(4), Hanson C(5), Nanney 
MS(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Medicine and Community Health, Program in Health 
Disparities Research, pamkhoffman@gmail.com.
(2)Biostatistical Design and Center, Clinical and Translational Science 
Institute.
(3)School of Public Health, Division of Epidemiology & Community Health, 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA and.
(4)Department of Family Medicine and Community Health, Program in Health 
Disparities Research.
(5)College of Public Health, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Weight-related outcomes were examined among high school students in Minnesota 
public school districts according to the quality of district wellness policies. 
Wellness policy strength and comprehensiveness were scored using the Wellness 
School Assessment Tool (WellSAT) for 325 Minnesota public school districts in 
2013. The associations between WellSAT scores and district-level means of high 
school student responses to a statewide survey of health behaviors were examined 
in this ecologic study. WellSAT Total Strength and Total Comprehensiveness 
scores were positively associated with both student mean Body Mass Index (BMI) 
percentile (Strength: P = 0.018, Comprehensiveness: P = 0.031) and mean percent 
overweight or obese (Strength: P = 0.008, Comprehensiveness: P = 0.026), but 
only in districts with > 50% of students eligible for Free or Reduced-Price 
Lunches (FRPLs), or 'high FRPL districts'. WellSAT Physical Education and 
Physical Activity subscale scores were also positively associated with the mean 
days per week students engaged in physical activity for ≥ 60 min in high FRPL 
districts (Strength: P = 0.008, Comprehensiveness: P = 0.003) and in low FRPL 
districts (< 35% eligible) for Strength score: (P = 0.027). In medium FRPL 
districts (35-50% eligible), Nutrition Education and Wellness Promotion Strength 
and Comprehensiveness subscale scores were positively associated with, 
respectively, daily servings of vegetables (P = 0.037) and fruit (P = 0.027); 
and WellSAT Total scores were positively associated with daily vegetable 
servings (Strength: P = 0.037, Comprehensiveness: P = 0.012). Administrators of 
economically disadvantaged school districts with a higher percentage of 
overweight students may be recognizing the need for stronger wellness policies 
and the specific importance of implementing policies pertaining to physical 
activity as a means to improve student health.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/her/cyv101
PMCID: PMC4980870
PMID: 26850060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]