---
reference_id: "PMID:9228031"
title: Mice deficient in lysosomal acid phosphatase develop lysosomal storage in the kidney and central nervous system.
authors:
- Saftig P
- Hartmann D
- Lüllmann-Rauch R
- Wolff J
- Evers M
- Köster A
- Hetman M
- von Figura K
- Peters C
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.30.18628
keywords:
- "Acid Phosphatase/deficiency, genetics"
- Animals
- "Antigens, CD/metabolism"
- Bone and Bones/abnormalities
- Cathepsin D/metabolism
- "Central Nervous System Diseases/enzymology, pathology"
- Fibroblasts/enzymology
- "Kidney Diseases/enzymology, pathology"
- Lysosomal Storage Diseases/enzymology
- Lysosomal Membrane Proteins
- Lysosomes/enzymology
- Membrane Glycoproteins/metabolism
- Mice
- "Microglia/enzymology, pathology"
- Phenotype
- Seizures/enzymology
- Tartrates/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mice deficient in lysosomal acid phosphatase develop lysosomal storage in the kidney and central nervous system.
**Authors:** Saftig P, Hartmann D, Lüllmann-Rauch R, Wolff J, Evers M, Köster A, Hetman M, von Figura K, Peters C
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.272.30.18628](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.272.30.18628)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jul 25;272(30):18628-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.30.18628.

Mice deficient in lysosomal acid phosphatase develop lysosomal storage in the 
kidney and central nervous system.

Saftig P(1), Hartmann D, Lüllmann-Rauch R, Wolff J, Evers M, Köster A, Hetman M, 
von Figura K, Peters C.

Author information:
(1)Zentrum Biochemie und Molekulare Zellbiologie, Abteilung Biochemie II, 
Universität Göttingen, Gosslerstrasse 12D, 37073 Göttingen, Federal Republic of 
Germany. saftig@uni-bc2.gwd.de

Lysosomal acid phosphatase (LAP) is a tartrate-sensitive enzyme with ubiquitous 
expression. Neither the physiological substrates nor the functional significance 
is known. Mice with a deficiency of LAP generated by targeted disruption of the 
LAP gene are fertile and develop normally. Microscopic examination of various 
peripheral organs revealed progredient lysosomal storage in podocytes and 
tubular epithelial cells of the kidney, with regionally different 
ultrastructural appearance of the stored material. Within the central nervous 
system, lysosomal storage was detected to a regionally different extent in 
microglia, ependymal cells, and astroglia concomitant with the development of a 
progressive astrogliosis and microglial activation. Whereas behavioral and 
neuromotor analyses were unable to distinguish between control and deficient 
mice, approximately 7% of the deficient animals developed generalized seizures. 
From the age of 6 months onward, conspicuous alterations of bone structure 
became apparent, resulting in a kyphoscoliotic malformation of the lower 
thoracic vertebral column. We conclude from these findings that LAP has a unique 
function in only a subset of cells, where its deficiency causes the storage of a 
heterogeneously appearing material in lysosomes. The causal relationship of the 
enzyme defect to the clinical manifestations remains to be determined.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.272.30.18628
PMID: 9228031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]