---
reference_id: "PMID:38778342"
title: A case report of classic galactosemia with a GALT gene variant and a literature review.
authors:
- Wang YC
- Lan LC
- Yang X
- Xiao J
- Liu HX
- Shan QW
journal: BMC Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12887-024-04769-0
keywords:
- Humans
- "Galactosemias/genetics, diagnosis"
- UTP-Hexose-1-Phosphate Uridylyltransferase/genetics
- Male
- Female
- Mutation
- Infant
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case report of classic galactosemia with a GALT gene variant and a literature review.
**Authors:** Wang YC, Lan LC, Yang X, Xiao J, Liu HX, Shan QW
**Journal:** BMC Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12887-024-04769-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12887-024-04769-0)

## Content

1. BMC Pediatr. 2024 May 22;24(1):352. doi: 10.1186/s12887-024-04769-0.

A case report of classic galactosemia with a GALT gene variant and a literature 
review.

Wang YC(1)(2), Lan LC(1), Yang X(1), Xiao J(1), Liu HX(1), Shan QW(3).

Author information:
(1)Difficult and Critical Illness Center, Pediatric Clinical Medical Research 
Center of Guangxi, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University, 
No. 6 Shuangyong Road, Nanning, 530021, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, China.
(2)Dazhou Central Hosptial, No. 56 Nanyuemiao Street, Tongchuan District, 
Dazhou, 635000, Sichuan Province, China.
(3)Difficult and Critical Illness Center, Pediatric Clinical Medical Research 
Center of Guangxi, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University, 
No. 6 Shuangyong Road, Nanning, 530021, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, China. 
shanqw333@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Galactosemia is an autosomal recessive disorder resulting from an 
enzyme defect in the galactose metabolic pathway. The most severe manifestation 
of classic galactosemia is caused by galactose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase 
(GALT) deficiency, and this condition can be fatal during infancy if left 
untreated. It also may result in long-term complications in affected 
individuals.
CASE PRESENTATION: This report describes a patient whose initial clinical 
symptoms were jaundice and liver dysfunction. The patient's liver and 
coagulation functions did not improve after multiple admissions and treatment 
with antibiotics, hepatoprotective and choleretic agents and blood transfusion. 
Genetic analysis revealed the presence of two variants in the GALT gene in the 
compound heterozygous state: c.377 + 2dup and c.368G > C (p.Arg123Pro). 
Currently, the variant locus (c.377 + 2dup) in the GALT gene has not been 
reported in the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD), while c.368G > C 
(p.Arg123Pro) has not been reported in the Genome Aggregation Database (GnomAD) 
nor the HGMD in East Asian population. We postulated that the two variants may 
contribute to the development of classical galactosemia.
CONCLUSIONS: Applications of whole-exome sequencing to detect the two variants 
can improve the detection and early diagnosis of classical galactosemia and, 
more specifically, may identify individuals who are compound heterozygous with 
variants in the GALT gene. Variants in the GALT gene have a potential 
therapeutic significance for classical galactosemia.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12887-024-04769-0
PMCID: PMC11110268
PMID: 38778342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.