---
reference_id: "PMID:28722966"
title: Whipple Disease.
authors:
- Antunes C
- Singhal M
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whipple Disease.
**Authors:** Antunes C, Singhal M

## Content

1. Whipple Disease.

Antunes C(1), Singhal M(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 
Jan–.
2023 Jul 4.

Author information:
(1)Yale University
(2)Cape Fear Valley, Methodist University

Whipple disease is caused by a gram-positive bacteria, Tropheryma 
whippelii. This is a systemic disorder that not only involves malabsorption from 
the gastrointestinal tract but also affects other systems like the 
cardiovascular, central nervous system, joints, and vascular system. Dr. George 
Hoyt Whipple initially described this condition in 1907. He was the first 
American Nobel Prize laureate in Physiology. Dr. Whipple described a case of a 
36-year-old male who presented with malabsorption associated with mesenteric 
lymphadenopathy, arthralgias, and skin pigmentation. The condition named by him 
"Intestinal Lipodystrophy," and his article was published in the Bulletin of 
Johns Hopkins Hospital. He hypothesized that an infectious agent was 
responsible, but the bacteria was only fully identified in 1992. Whipple disease 
is rare, and only case reports exist in the literature.

Copyright © 2025, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 28722966

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Catiele Antunes declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Mayank Singhal 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.