---
reference_id: "PMID:20301547"
title: SALL4-Related Disorders.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Kohlhase J
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SALL4-Related Disorders.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Kohlhase J

## Content

1. SALL4-Related Disorders.

Kohlhase J(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2004 Aug 16 [updated 2022 Mar 17].

Author information:
(1)SYNLAB Center for Human Genetics Freiburg, Germany

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: SALL4-related disorders include Duane-radial ray
syndrome (DRRS, Okihiro syndrome), acro-renal-ocular syndrome (AROS), and
SALL4-related Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) – three phenotypes previously thought to
be distinct entities. DRRS is characterized by uni- or bilateral Duane anomaly
and radial ray malformation that can include thenar hypoplasia and/or hypoplasia
or aplasia of the thumbs, hypoplasia or aplasia of the radii, shortening and
radial deviation of the forearms, triphalangeal thumbs, and duplication of the
thumb (preaxial polydactyly). AROS is characterized by radial ray malformations,
renal abnormalities (mild malrotation, ectopia, horseshoe kidney, renal
hypoplasia, vesicoureteral reflux, bladder diverticula), ocular coloboma, and
Duane anomaly. Rarely, pathogenic variants in SALL4 may cause clinically typical
HOS (i.e., radial ray malformations and cardiac malformations without additional
features).
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of a SALL4-related disorder is established in a
proband with suggestive findings and a heterozygous pathogenic variant in SALL4
identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Surgery as needed for strabismus from
Duane anomaly, malformations of the forearms, and congenital heart defects;
management of renal anomalies per nephrologist and/or urologist; antiarrhythmic
medications or pacemaker for those with conduction defects or heart block;
cardiologist can assist in determining the need for anticoagulants and
antibiotic prophylaxis for bacterial endocarditis; hearing aids as needed;
consideration of growth hormone therapy for children with growth deficiency;
treatment of pituitary hypoplasia per endocrinologist. Surveillance:
Ophthalmologic exam with frequency as recommended by ophthalmologist; monitor
renal function in those with renal anomalies, even if renal function is normal
initially; periodic renal ultrasound evaluation if renal position anomalies
could cause obstruction; periodic echocardiographic surveillance may be
recommended for individuals with certain congenital heart defects; in those at
risk for conduction defects, EKG at least annually with consideration of annual
Holter monitor in those with known conduction defects; at least annual blood
counts in those with a history of thrombocytopenia and leukocytosis; audiologic
evaluation as needed; assessment of growth and for signs and symptoms of
pituitary hypoplasia at each visit. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Drugs
affecting the kidney if renal function is impaired, or the inner ear if hearing
is impaired; certain medications may be contraindicated in those with
arrhythmias.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SALL4-related disorders are inherited in an autosomal
dominant manner. The proportion of cases caused by a de novo pathogenic variant
is approximately 40%-50%. Each child of an individual with a SALL4-related
disorder has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant. Prenatal testing
for a pregnancy at increased risk is possible if the pathogenic variant has been
identified in an affected family member.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301547
