---
reference_id: "PMID:8709175"
title: Cytokeratin fragment 19 (CYFRA 21-1) as a tumor marker in non-small cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Huang MS
- Jong SB
- Lin MS
- Chong IW
- Tsai MS
- Lin HC
- Hwang JJ
journal: Kaohsiung J Med Sci
year: '1996'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cytokeratin fragment 19 (CYFRA 21-1) as a tumor marker in non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Huang MS, Jong SB, Lin MS, Chong IW, Tsai MS, Lin HC, Hwang JJ
**Journal:** Kaohsiung J Med Sci (1996)

## Content

1. Kaohsiung J Med Sci. 1996 Feb;12(2):62-8.

Cytokeratin fragment 19 (CYFRA 21-1) as a tumor marker in non-small cell lung 
cancer.

Huang MS(1), Jong SB, Lin MS, Chong IW, Tsai MS, Lin HC, Hwang JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical College, Taiwan, Republic 
of China.

To evaluate the diagnostic value of the serum cytokeratin 19 fragment (CYFRA 
21-1) in bronchogenic carcinoma, we investigated the sera of 138 patients (58 
with benign pulmonary disease and 80 with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)) 
using immunoradiometric assay. The mean (SD) value of serum CYFRA 21-1 in NSCLC 
(13.26 (16.54)) was significantly higher than in benign lung diseases (1.74 
(1.55)) (p < 0.0001). Sensitivity for CYFRA 21-1 (using 3.5 ng/ml, a cut-off 
value corresponding to a 95% specificity for benign pulmonary disease) in NSCL 
was 62%. Positive CYFRA 21-1 levels were significantly higher in 75% of patients 
with squamous cell carcinoma (n = 36) than in 53% with other NSCLC (n = 44) (p < 
0.05). CYFRA 21-1 levels were significantly different between squamous cell 
carcinoma (17.28 (19.94)) and the other NSCLC (9.96 (12.44)) (P < 0.05). 
Elevated CYFRA 21-1 levels in patients with stage III and IV disease (n = 64, 
18.19 (26.51)) were significantly higher than in stage I and II (n = 16, 4.41 
(5.76)) (p < 0.02). The positive rate of CYFRA 21-1 in tumor stage I and II was 
only 37%. Our results indicate that CYFRA 21-1 may be a useful tumor marker in 
NSCLC, especially in squamous cell carcinoma. However, CYFRA 21-1 cannot be used 
for the diagnosis of early stage disease of NSCLC. CYFRA 21-1 may also 
contribute to the monitoring of NSCLC.

PMID: 8709175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]