---
reference_id: "PMID:11423618"
title: Clinical resistance to STI-571 cancer therapy caused by BCR-ABL gene mutation or amplification.
authors:
- Gorre ME
- Mohammed M
- Ellwood K
- Hsu N
- Paquette R
- Rao PN
- Sawyers CL
journal: Science
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1126/science.1062538
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical resistance to STI-571 cancer therapy caused by BCR-ABL gene mutation or amplification.
**Authors:** Gorre ME, Mohammed M, Ellwood K, Hsu N, Paquette R, Rao PN, Sawyers CL
**Journal:** Science (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1062538](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1062538)

## Content

1. Science. 2001 Aug 3;293(5531):876-80. doi: 10.1126/science.1062538. Epub 2001 
Jun 21.

Clinical resistance to STI-571 cancer therapy caused by BCR-ABL gene mutation or 
amplification.

Gorre ME(1), Mohammed M, Ellwood K, Hsu N, Paquette R, Rao PN, Sawyers CL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Molecular Biology Institute, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Comment on
    Science. 2001 Sep 21;293(5538):2163. doi: 10.1126/science.293.5538.2163a.
    Science. 2001 Sep 21;293(5538):2163.

Clinical studies with the Abl tyrosine kinase inhibitor STI-571 in chronic 
myeloid leukemia demonstrate that many patients with advanced stage disease 
respond initially but then relapse. Through biochemical and molecular analysis 
of clinical material, we find that drug resistance is associated with the 
reactivation of BCR-ABL signal transduction in all cases examined. In six of 
nine patients, resistance was associated with a single amino acid substitution 
in a threonine residue of the Abl kinase domain known to form a critical 
hydrogen bond with the drug. This substitution of threonine with isoleucine was 
sufficient to confer STI-571 resistance in a reconstitution experiment. In three 
patients, resistance was associated with progressive BCR-ABL gene amplification. 
These studies provide evidence that genetically complex cancers retain 
dependence on an initial oncogenic event and suggest a strategy for identifying 
inhibitors of STI-571 resistance.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1062538
PMID: 11423618 [Indexed for MEDLINE]