---
reference_id: "PMID:19762710"
title: Loss-of-function FERMT1 mutations in kindler syndrome implicate a role for fermitin family homolog-1 in integrin activation.
authors:
- Lai-Cheong JE
- Parsons M
- Tanaka A
- Ussar S
- South AP
- Gomathy S
- Mee JB
- Barbaroux JB
- Techanukul T
- Almaani N
- Clements SE
- Hart IR
- McGrath JA
journal: Am J Pathol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2009.081154
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Basement Membrane/metabolism, pathology"
- Cell Adhesion
- Cell Membrane/metabolism
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Epidermis/metabolism, pathology"
- Extracellular Matrix/metabolism
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Humans
- Integrins/metabolism
- "Keratin-15/genetics, metabolism"
- Keratinocytes/pathology
- Male
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Microscopy, Fluorescence"
- Middle Aged
- Mutation/genetics
- "Neoplasm Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Phenotype
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss-of-function FERMT1 mutations in kindler syndrome implicate a role for fermitin family homolog-1 in integrin activation.
**Authors:** Lai-Cheong JE, Parsons M, Tanaka A, Ussar S, South AP, Gomathy S, Mee JB, Barbaroux JB, Techanukul T, Almaani N, Clements SE, Hart IR, McGrath JA
**Journal:** Am J Pathol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.2353/ajpath.2009.081154](https://doi.org/10.2353/ajpath.2009.081154)

## Content

1. Am J Pathol. 2009 Oct;175(4):1431-41. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2009.081154. Epub
2009  Sep 17.

Loss-of-function FERMT1 mutations in kindler syndrome implicate a role for 
fermitin family homolog-1 in integrin activation.

Lai-Cheong JE(1), Parsons M, Tanaka A, Ussar S, South AP, Gomathy S, Mee JB, 
Barbaroux JB, Techanukul T, Almaani N, Clements SE, Hart IR, McGrath JA.

Author information:
(1)St John's Institute of Dermatology, King's College London, London, United 
Kingdom.

Kindler syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by skin 
atrophy and blistering. It results from loss-of-function mutations in the FERMT1 
gene encoding the focal adhesion protein, fermitin family homolog-1. How and why 
deficiency of fermitin family homolog-1 results in skin atrophy and blistering 
are unclear. In this study, we investigated the epidermal basement membrane and 
keratinocyte biology abnormalities in Kindler syndrome. We identified altered 
distribution of several basement membrane proteins, including types IV, VII, and 
XVII collagens and laminin-332 in Kindler syndrome skin. In addition, reduced 
immunolabeling intensity of epidermal cell markers such as beta1 and alpha6 
integrins and cytokeratin 15 was noted. At the cellular level, there was loss of 
beta4 integrin immunolocalization and random distribution of laminin-332 in 
Kindler syndrome keratinocytes. Of note, active beta1 integrin was reduced but 
overexpression of fermitin family homolog-1 restored integrin activation and 
partially rescued the Kindler syndrome cellular phenotype. This study provides 
evidence that fermitin family homolog-1 is implicated in integrin activation and 
demonstrates that lack of this protein leads to pathological changes beyond 
focal adhesions, with disruption of several hemidesmosomal components and 
reduced expression of keratinocyte stem cell markers. These findings 
collectively provide novel data on the role of fermitin family homolog-1 in skin 
and further insight into the pathophysiology of Kindler syndrome.

DOI: 10.2353/ajpath.2009.081154
PMCID: PMC2751540
PMID: 19762710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]