---
reference_id: "PMID:39135054"
title: Insights into the ANKRD11 variants and short-stature phenotype through literature review and ClinVar database search.
authors:
- He D
- Zhang M
- Li Y
- Liu F
- Ban B
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03301-y
keywords:
- Humans
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- "Tooth Abnormalities/genetics, pathology"
- "Craniosynostoses/genetics, pathology"
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental"
- Facies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Insights into the ANKRD11 variants and short-stature phenotype through literature review and ClinVar database search.
**Authors:** He D, Zhang M, Li Y, Liu F, Ban B
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-024-03301-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-024-03301-y)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 Aug 12;19(1):292. doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03301-y.

Insights into the ANKRD11 variants and short-stature phenotype through 
literature review and ClinVar database search.

He D(1)(2), Zhang M(3)(4), Li Y(3)(4), Liu F(3)(5), Ban B(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Genetics and Metabolism, Affiliated Hospital of 
Jining Medical University, Jining, Shandong, 272029, China. 
hehe0917@mail.jnmc.edu.cn.
(2)Medical Research Center, Affiliated Hospital of Jining Medical University, 
Jining, China. hehe0917@mail.jnmc.edu.cn.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Genetics and Metabolism, Affiliated Hospital of 
Jining Medical University, Jining, Shandong, 272029, China.
(4)Chinese Research Center for Behavior Medicine in Growth and Development, 
Jining, China.
(5)Medical Research Center, Affiliated Hospital of Jining Medical University, 
Jining, China.
(6)Department of Endocrinology, Genetics and Metabolism, Affiliated Hospital of 
Jining Medical University, Jining, Shandong, 272029, China. banbo2011@163.com.
(7)Medical Research Center, Affiliated Hospital of Jining Medical University, 
Jining, China. banbo2011@163.com.
(8)Chinese Research Center for Behavior Medicine in Growth and Development, 
Jining, China. banbo2011@163.com.

Ankyrin repeat domain containing-protein 11 (ANKRD11), a transcriptional factor 
predominantly localized in the cell nucleus, plays a crucial role in the 
expression regulation of key genes by recruiting chromatin remodelers and 
interacting with specific transcriptional repressors or activators during 
numerous biological processes. Its pathogenic variants are strongly linked to 
the pathogenesis and progression of multisystem disorder known as KBG syndrome. 
With the widespread application of high-throughput DNA sequencing technologies 
in clinical medicine, numerous pathogenic variants in the ANKRD11 gene have been 
reported. Patients with KBG syndrome usually exhibit a broad phenotypic spectrum 
with a variable degree of severity, even if having identical variants. In 
addition to distinctive dental, craniofacial and neurodevelopmental 
abnormalities, patients often present with skeletal anomalies, particularly 
postnatal short stature. The relationship between ANKRD11 variants and short 
stature is not well-understood, with limited knowledge regarding its occurrence 
rate or underlying biological mechanism involved. This review aims to provide an 
updated analysis of the molecular spectrum associated with ANKRD11 variants, 
investigate the prevalence of the short stature among patients harboring these 
variants, evaluate the efficacy of recombinant human growth hormone in treating 
children with short stature and ANKRD11 variants, and explore the biological 
mechanisms underlying short stature from both scientific and clinical 
perspectives. Our investigation indicated that frameshift and nonsense were the 
most frequent types in 583 pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants identified 
in the ANKRD11 gene. Among the 245 KBGS patients with height data, approximately 
50% displayed short stature. Most patients showed a positive response to rhGH 
therapy, although the number of patients receiving treatment was limited. 
ANKRD11 deficiency potentially disrupts longitudinal bone growth by affecting 
the orderly differentiation of growth plate chondrocytes. Our review offers 
crucial insights into the association between ANKRD11 variants and short stature 
and provides valuable guidance for precise clinical diagnosis and treatment of 
patients with KBG syndrome.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-024-03301-y
PMCID: PMC11318275
PMID: 39135054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The autors declare that they have no competing 
interests.