---
reference_id: "PMID:38474289"
title: Single Nucleotide Polymorphism in Cell Adhesion Molecule L1 Affects Learning and Memory in a Mouse Model of Traumatic Brain Injury.
authors:
- Jiang H
- Giarratana AO
- Theis T
- Nagaraj V
- Zhou X
- Thakker-Varia S
- Schachner M
- Alder J
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25053043
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Animals
- Mice
- Neural Cell Adhesion Molecule L1/genetics
- Neurodegenerative Diseases
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Hydrocephalus/genetics
- "Brain Injuries, Traumatic"
- Intellectual Disability
- "Spastic Paraplegia, Hereditary"
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single Nucleotide Polymorphism in Cell Adhesion Molecule L1 Affects Learning and Memory in a Mouse Model of Traumatic Brain Injury.
**Authors:** Jiang H, Giarratana AO, Theis T, Nagaraj V, Zhou X, Thakker-Varia S, Schachner M, Alder J
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25053043](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25053043)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Mar 6;25(5):3043. doi: 10.3390/ijms25053043.

Single Nucleotide Polymorphism in Cell Adhesion Molecule L1 Affects Learning and 
Memory in a Mouse Model of Traumatic Brain Injury.

Jiang H(1), Giarratana AO(1), Theis T(2), Nagaraj V(2), Zhou X(1), Thakker-Varia 
S(1), Schachner M(2), Alder J(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience and Cell Biology, Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, 
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.
(2)Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Rutgers School of Arts and Sciences, 
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

The L1 cell adhesion molecule (L1) has demonstrated a range of beneficial 
effects in animal models of spinal cord injury, neurodegenerative disease, and 
ischemia; however, the role of L1 in TBI has not been fully examined. Mutations 
in the L1 gene affecting the extracellular domain of this type 1 transmembrane 
glycoprotein have been identified in patients with L1 syndrome. These patients 
suffer from hydrocephalus, MASA (mental retardation, adducted thumbs, shuffling 
gait, aphasia) symptoms, and corpus callosum agenesis. Clinicians have observed 
that recovery post-traumatic brain injury (TBI) varies among the population. 
This variability may be explained by the genetic differences present in the 
general population. In this study, we utilized a novel mouse model of L1 
syndrome with a mutation at aspartic acid position 201 in the extracellular 
domain of L1 (L1-201). We assessed the impact of this specific single nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) localized to the X-chromosome L1 gene on recovery outcomes 
following TBI by comparing the L1-201 mouse mutants with their wild-type 
littermates. We demonstrate that male L1-201 mice exhibit significantly worse 
learning and memory outcomes in the Morris water maze after lateral fluid 
percussion (LFP) injury compared to male wild-type mice and a trend to worse 
motor function on the rotarod. However, no significant changes were observed in 
markers for inflammatory responses or apoptosis after TBI.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25053043
PMCID: PMC10932301
PMID: 38474289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.