---
reference_id: "PMID:33106940"
title: "Immunotherapy in prostate cancer: new horizon of hurdles and hopes."
authors:
- Tsaur I
- Brandt MP
- Juengel E
- Manceau C
- Ploussard G
journal: World J Urol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00345-020-03497-1
keywords:
- Humans
- Immunotherapy
- Male
- Prostatic Neoplasms/therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunotherapy in prostate cancer: new horizon of hurdles and hopes.
**Authors:** Tsaur I, Brandt MP, Juengel E, Manceau C, Ploussard G
**Journal:** World J Urol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00345-020-03497-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00345-020-03497-1)

## Content

1. World J Urol. 2021 May;39(5):1387-1403. doi: 10.1007/s00345-020-03497-1. Epub
2020 Oct 26.

Immunotherapy in prostate cancer: new horizon of hurdles and hopes.

Tsaur I(#)(1), Brandt MP(#)(2), Juengel E(2), Manceau C(3), Ploussard G(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology and Pediatric Urology, University Medical Center,
Johannes Gutenberg University, Langenbeckstr. 1, 55131, Mainz, Germany.
igor.tsaur@unimedizin-mainz.de.
(2)Department of Urology and Pediatric Urology, University Medical Center,
Johannes Gutenberg University, Langenbeckstr. 1, 55131, Mainz, Germany.
(3)Department of Urology, CHU-Institut Universitaire du Cancer
Toulouse-Oncopole, Toulouse, France.
(4)Department of Urology, La Croix du Sud Hospital, Toulouse, France.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    World J Urol. 2022 Apr;40(4):1089. doi: 10.1007/s00345-021-03849-5.

PURPOSE: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most common malignancy in men and the
cause for the second most common cancer-related death in the western world.
Despite ongoing development of novel approaches such as second generation
androgen receptor targeted therapies, metastatic disease is still fatal. In PCa,
immunotherapy (IT) has not reached a therapeutic breakthrough as compared to
several other solid tumors yet. We aimed at highlighting the underlying cellular
mechanisms crucial for IT in PCa and giving an update of the most essential past
and ongoing clinical trials in the field.
METHODS: We searched for relevant publications on molecular and cellular
mechanisms involved in the PCa tumor microenvironment and response to IT as well
as completed and ongoing IT studies and screened appropriate abstracts of
international congresses.
RESULTS: Tumor progression and patient outcomes depend on complex cellular and
molecular interactions of the tumor with the host immune system, driven rather
dormant in case of PCa. Sipuleucel-T and pembrolizumab are the only registered
immune-oncology drugs to treat this malignancy. A plethora of studies assess
combination of immunotherapy with other agents or treatment modalities like
radiation therapy which might increase its antineoplastic activity. No robust
and clinically relevant prognostic or predictive biomarkers have been
established yet.
CONCLUSION: Despite immunosuppressive functional status of PCa microenvironment,
current evidence, based on cellular and molecular conditions, encourages further
research in this field.

DOI: 10.1007/s00345-020-03497-1
PMCID: PMC8514362
PMID: 33106940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts
of interest.
