---
reference_id: "PMID:32674932"
title: "[BRAF V600E-mutant colorectal cancers: Where are we?]."
authors:
- Lièvre A
- de la Fouchardière C
- Samalin E
- Benoist S
- Phelip JM
- André T
- Lledo G
journal: Bull Cancer
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.bulcan.2020.04.017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [BRAF V600E-mutant colorectal cancers: Where are we?].
**Authors:** Lièvre A, de la Fouchardière C, Samalin E, Benoist S, Phelip JM, André T, Lledo G
**Journal:** Bull Cancer (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bulcan.2020.04.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bulcan.2020.04.017)

## Content

1. Bull Cancer. 2020 Sep;107(9):881-895. doi: 10.1016/j.bulcan.2020.04.017. Epub 
2020 Jul 14.

[BRAF V600E-mutant colorectal cancers: Where are we?].

[Article in French]

Lièvre A(1), de la Fouchardière C(2), Samalin E(3), Benoist S(4), Phelip JM(5), 
André T(6), Lledo G(7).

Author information:
(1)Service des maladies de l'appareil digestif, CHU Pontchaillou, université 
Rennes 1, Rennes, France. Electronic address: astrid.lievre@chu-rennes.fr.
(2)Département d'oncologie, centre Léon-Bérard, Lyon, France.
(3)Département d'oncologie, institut du cancer de Montpellier (ICM), University 
Montpellier, Montpellier et institut de génomique fonctionnelle, CNRS, inserm, 
university Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(4)service de chirurgie digestive et oncologique, CHU Bicêtre, AP-HP, université 
Paris-Saclay, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France.
(5)Service de gastroentérologie, CHU Saint-Étienne, Saint-Etienne, France.
(6)Département d'oncologie médicale, Sorbonne université, hôpital Saint-Antoine, 
AP-HP, 7512 Paris, France.
(7)Centre hospitalier Lyon Sud, Lyon, France.

The BRAFV600E mutation, observed in 8 % of colorectal cancers (CRC), introduces 
a particular phenotype and a poor prognosis at the localized or metastatic 
stage. BRAF mutant CRCs are more often localized in the right colon, poorly 
differentiated and mucinous. They affect an older population (more often female) 
and are associated with a more frequent metastatic lymph node and peritoneal 
evolution. The BRAFV600E mutation is associated with a sporadic microsatellite 
instability (MSI) status in 20 to 40% of cases. In localized colon cancer, it 
does not imply any modification of the adjuvant treatment. In metastatic CRC, 
the first action must be the systematic search for an MSI phenotype, given its 
frequent association with the presence of a BRAF mutation, in order to propose 
immunotherapy that has been demonstrated to be very effective in MSI metastatic 
CRC. In non-MSI CRC, a first-line trichimiotherapy associated with bevacizumab 
is an option to be favored in patients in good general condition but the 
association with an anti-EGFR can be discussed, especially when the objective is 
tumor response. At the same time, surgical resection must be systematically 
discussed in the case of resectable hepatic metastases since the presence of a 
BRAFV600E mutation is not a risk factor for recurrence and that prolonged 
survival may be observed after surgery. In the second or third line, the triplet 
encorafenib, binimetinib and cetuximab, as well as the doublet encorafenib and 
cetuximab are superior to the association of irinotecan plus cetuximab in terms 
of response and survival (phase III study BEACON) and represent a new 
therapeutic standard. Their use on the front line is under study.

Copyright © 2020 Société Française du Cancer. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bulcan.2020.04.017
PMID: 32674932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]