---
reference_id: PMID:18603627
title: "Trichothiodystrophy: a systematic review of 112 published cases characterises a wide spectrum of clinical manifestations."
authors:
- Faghri S
- Tamura D
- Kraemer KH
- Digiovanna JJ
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2008.058743
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Birth Weight
- Body Height
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Repair/physiology
- Developmental Disabilities/epidemiology
- "Eye Diseases/epidemiology, microbiology"
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Gonadal Dysgenesis/epidemiology
- "Hair/abnormalities, chemistry"
- Humans
- Ichthyosis/epidemiology
- Infant
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Photosensitivity Disorders/epidemiology
- Prevalence
- "Trichothiodystrophy Syndromes/genetics, microbiology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Trichothiodystrophy: a systematic review of 112 published cases characterises a wide spectrum of clinical manifestations.
**Authors:** Faghri S, Tamura D, Kraemer KH, Digiovanna JJ
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2008.058743](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2008.058743)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2008 Oct;45(10):609-21. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2008.058743. Epub 2008
Jun  25.

Trichothiodystrophy: a systematic review of 112 published cases characterises a 
wide spectrum of clinical manifestations.

Faghri S(1), Tamura D, Kraemer KH, Digiovanna JJ.

Author information:
(1)DNA Repair Section, Basic Research Laboratory, Center for Clinical Research, 
Building 37, Room 4002, MSC 4258, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, 
USA.

Trichothiodystrophy (TTD) is a rare, autosomal recessive disease, characterised 
by brittle, sulfur deficient hair and multisystem abnormalities. A systematic 
literature review identified 112 patients ranging from 12 weeks to 47 years of 
age (median 6 years). In addition to hair abnormalities, common features 
reported were developmental delay/intellectual impairment (86%), short stature 
(73%), ichthyosis (65%), abnormal characteristics at birth (55%), ocular 
abnormalities (51%), infections (46%), photosensitivity (42%), maternal 
pregnancy complications (28%) and defective DNA repair (37%). There was high 
mortality, with 19 deaths under the age of 10 years (13 infection related), 
which is 20-fold higher compared to the US population. The spectrum of clinical 
features varied from mild disease with only hair involvement to severe disease 
with profound developmental defects, recurrent infections and a high mortality 
at a young age. Abnormal characteristics at birth and pregnancy complications, 
unrecognised but common features of TTD, suggest a role for DNA repair genes in 
normal fetal development.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2008.058743
PMCID: PMC3459585
PMID: 18603627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]