---
reference_id: "PMID:33960688"
title: Genetics of non-syndromic and syndromic oculocutaneous albinism in human and mouse.
authors:
- Fernández A
- Hayashi M
- Garrido G
- Montero A
- Guardia A
- Suzuki T
- Montoliu L
journal: Pigment Cell Melanoma Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/pcmr.12982
keywords:
- "Albinism, Oculocutaneous/genetics"
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Melanins/metabolism
- Mice
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics of non-syndromic and syndromic oculocutaneous albinism in human and mouse.
**Authors:** Fernández A, Hayashi M, Garrido G, Montero A, Guardia A, Suzuki T, Montoliu L
**Journal:** Pigment Cell Melanoma Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pcmr.12982](https://doi.org/10.1111/pcmr.12982)

## Content

1. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2021 Jul;34(4):786-799. doi: 10.1111/pcmr.12982.
Epub  2021 May 8.

Genetics of non-syndromic and syndromic oculocutaneous albinism in human and 
mouse.

Fernández A(1)(2), Hayashi M(3), Garrido G(1)(2), Montero A(1)(2), Guardia 
A(1)(2), Suzuki T(3), Montoliu L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Centre for 
Biotechnology (CNB-CSIC), Madrid, Spain.
(2)CIBERER-ISCIII, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Yamagata University Faculty of Medicine, Yamagata, 
Japan.

Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is the most frequent presentation of albinism, a 
heterogeneous rare genetic condition generally associated with variable 
alterations in pigmentation and with a profound visual impairment. There are 
non-syndromic and syndromic types of OCA, depending on whether the gene product 
affected impairs essentially the function of melanosomes or, in addition, that 
of other lysosome-related organelles (LROs), respectively. Syndromic OCA can be 
more severe and associated with additional systemic consequences, beyond 
pigmentation and vision alterations. In addition to OCA, albinism can also be 
presented without obvious skin and hair pigmentation alterations, in ocular 
albinism (OA), and a related genetic condition known as foveal hypoplasia, optic 
nerve decussation defects, and anterior segment dysgenesis (FHONDA). In this 
review, we will focus only in the genetics of skin pigmentation in OCA, both in 
human and mouse, updating our current knowledge on this subject.

© 2021 The Authors. Pigment Cell & Melanoma Research published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pcmr.12982
PMID: 33960688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]