---
reference_id: "PMID:38611057"
title: "Advancing GCT Management: A Review of miR-371a-3p and Other miRNAs in Comparison to Traditional Serum Tumor Markers."
authors:
- Seales CL
- Puri D
- Yodkhunnatham N
- Pandit K
- Yuen K
- Murray S
- Smitham J
- Lafin JT
- Bagrodia A
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cancers16071379
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Advancing GCT Management: A Review of miR-371a-3p and Other miRNAs in Comparison to Traditional Serum Tumor Markers.
**Authors:** Seales CL, Puri D, Yodkhunnatham N, Pandit K, Yuen K, Murray S, Smitham J, Lafin JT, Bagrodia A
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers16071379](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers16071379)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2024 Mar 31;16(7):1379. doi: 10.3390/cancers16071379.

Advancing GCT Management: A Review of miR-371a-3p and Other miRNAs in Comparison 
to Traditional Serum Tumor Markers.

Seales CL(1)(2), Puri D(2), Yodkhunnatham N(2), Pandit K(2), Yuen K(2), Murray 
S(3), Smitham J(2), Lafin JT(4), Bagrodia A(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30310, USA.
(2)Department of Urology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 
92093, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 
92093, USA.
(4)Department of Urology, University Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, 
TX 75390, USA.

MicroRNAs, short non-protein coding RNAs, are overexpressed in GCTs. Circulating 
levels of germ cell tumor (GCT)-associated miRNAs, such as miR-371a-3p, can be 
utilized as efficient and cost-effective alternatives in diagnosing and managing 
patients presenting with GCTs. This quality of miRNAs has demonstrated favorable 
performance characteristics as a reliable blood-based biomarker with high 
diagnostic accuracy compared to current serum tumor markers (STMs), including 
α-fetoprotein (AFP), beta human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG), and lactate 
dehydrogenase (LDH). The conventional STMs exhibit limited specificity and 
sensitivity. Potential clinical implications of miRNAs include impact on 
de-escalating or intensifying treatment, detecting recurrence at earlier stages, 
and lessening the necessity of cross-sectional imaging or invasive tissue biopsy 
for non-teratomatous GCTs. Here, we also highlight the outstanding issues that 
must be addressed prior to clinical implementation. Standards for measuring 
circulating miRNAs and determining ideal cutoff values are essential for 
integration into current clinical guidelines.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers16071379
PMCID: PMC11010994
PMID: 38611057

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.