---
reference_id: "PMID:10517506"
title: Tau-positive glial inclusions in progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration and Pick's disease.
authors:
- Komori T
journal: Brain Pathol
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.1999.tb00549.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tau-positive glial inclusions in progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration and Pick's disease.
**Authors:** Komori T
**Journal:** Brain Pathol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1750-3639.1999.tb00549.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1750-3639.1999.tb00549.x)

## Content

1. Brain Pathol. 1999 Oct;9(4):663-79. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.1999.tb00549.x.

Tau-positive glial inclusions in progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal 
degeneration and Pick's disease.

Komori T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neuropathology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute for 
Neuroscience, Fuchu, Japan. komori@tmin.ac.jp

The presence of tau-positive glial inclusions has been recently found a 
consistent feature in the brains of patients with progressive supranuclear palsy 
(PSP), corticobasal degeneration (CBD) and Pick's disease (PiD). These 
inclusions are classified based on cellular origin as tau-positive astrocytes, 
presumably either fibrillary or protoplasmic, coiled bodies and glial threads. 
Immunohistochemically, their major structural component is abnormal tau 
proteins, similar to those found in Alzheimer's disease. Nevertheless, their 
morphology, including ultrastructural profile, has been suggested to be 
distinctive for each disease. The profile and extent of particular glial 
inclusions correlate well with disease phenotype. Highly characteristic 
correlations include tufts of abnormal fibers in PSP, astrocytic plaques and 
dense glial threads in CBD and ramified astrocytes and small Pick body-like 
inclusions in PiD. The significance of the inclusions in disease pathogenesis 
and their biochemical characteristics remain to be clarified. Nevertheless, 
these distinctive glial lesions most likely reflect fundamental alterations in 
isoform composition of tau as well as its specific cellular and regional 
expression in sporadic tauopathies.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.1999.tb00549.x
PMCID: PMC8098509
PMID: 10517506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]