---
reference_id: "PMID:41131279"
title: Connectome-based symptom mapping and in silico related gene expression in children with autism and/or attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
authors:
- Segura P
- Pagani M
- Bishop SL
- Thomson P
- Colcombe S
- Xu T
- Factor ZZ
- Hector EC
- Kim SH
- Lombardo MV
- Gozzi A
- Castellanos XF
- Lord C
- Milham MP
- Di Martino A
journal: Mol Psychiatry
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1038/s41380-025-03205-8
keywords:
- Humans
- "Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/genetics, physiopathology, metabolism"
- Child
- Male
- Female
- Connectome/methods
- "Brain/metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Autistic Disorder/genetics, physiopathology, metabolism"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Gene Expression/genetics
- Computer Simulation
- Brain Mapping/methods
- Gyrus Cinguli
- Neural Pathways
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Connectome-based symptom mapping and in silico related gene expression in children with autism and/or attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
**Authors:** Segura P, Pagani M, Bishop SL, Thomson P, Colcombe S, Xu T, Factor ZZ, Hector EC, Kim SH, Lombardo MV, Gozzi A, Castellanos XF, Lord C, Milham MP, Di Martino A
**Journal:** Mol Psychiatry (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41380-025-03205-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-025-03205-8)

## Content

1. Mol Psychiatry. 2026 Jan;31(1):282-295. doi: 10.1038/s41380-025-03205-8. Epub
2025 Oct 23.

Connectome-based symptom mapping and in silico related gene expression in
children with autism and/or attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.

Segura P(1)(2), Pagani M(1)(3)(4), Bishop SL(5), Thomson P(1), Colcombe S(1)(6),
Xu T(1), Factor ZZ(1), Hector EC(7), Kim SH(8), Lombardo MV(9), Gozzi A(3),
Castellanos XF(6)(10), Lord C(11), Milham MP(1)(6), Di Martino A(12).

Author information:
(1)Child Mind Institute, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Medical Physiology and Biophysics, University of Seville,
Seville, Spain.
(3)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, Center for Neuroscience and Cognitive
systems, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Rovereto, Italy.
(4)Istituzioni Mercati Tecnologie School for Advanced Studies, Lucca, Italy.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences and Weill Institute for
Neurosciences, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(6)Nathan S. Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg, NY, USA.
(7)Department of Statistics, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA.
(8)School of Psychology, Korea University, Seoul, South Korea.
(9)Laboratory for Autism and Neurodevelopmental Disorders Center for
Neuroscience and Cognitive Systems, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Rovereto,
38068, Italy.
(10)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, NYU Grossman School of
Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(11)Semel Institute of Neuroscience and Human Behavior, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(12)Child Mind Institute, New York, NY, USA. adriana.dimartino@childmind.org.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2024 Dec 11:2024.12.09.24318621. doi: 10.1101/2024.12.09.24318621.

Clinical, neuroimaging and genomics evidence have increasingly underscored a
degree of overlap between autism and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD). This study explores the specific contribution of their core symptoms to
shared biology in N = 166 verbal children (6-12 years) with
rigorously-established primary diagnoses of either autism or ADHD (without
autism). We investigated the associations between inter-individual differences
in low motion whole-brain intrinsic functional connectivity (iFC) and
dimensional measures of autism and ADHD symptoms indexed by clinician-based
observation and parent interview, respectively. Additionally, we explored their
linked gene expression patterns in silico. Whole-brain multivariate distance
matrix regression revealed a transdiagnostic association between autism severity
and iFC of two nodes primarily on the left hemisphere: the middle frontal gyrus
of the frontoparietal network and the posterior cingulate cortex of the default
mode network. Across children, the greater the iFC between these nodes, the more
severe the autism symptoms, even after controlling for ADHD ratings. Results
from secondary segregation analyses were consistent with primary findings,
underscoring the significance of internetwork iFC for autism symptom severity
across diagnoses. No statistically significant brain-behavior relationships were
observed for ADHD symptoms. Genetic enrichment analyses of the iFC maps
associated with autism symptoms implicated genes known to: (i) have greater rate
of variance in autism and ADHD, and (ii) be involved in neuron projections,
suggesting shared genetic mechanisms for this specific brain-clinical phenotype.
These findings underscore the relevance of transdiagnostic dimensional
approaches in linking clinically-defined and observation-based phenomena to
shared presentations at the macroscale circuit- and genomic-levels across
diagnoses.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41380-025-03205-8
PMCID: PMC12700815
PMID: 41131279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: Drs. Lord and Bishop
receive royalties for the sale of diagnostic instruments they have co-authored
(ADOS-2 and/or SCQ); profits generated from any of their own research or
clinical activities are donated to charity. Dr. Di Martino is coauthor of the
Italian version of the Social Responsiveness Scale — child version distributed
in Italy by Organizzazioni Speciali, Italy. All other co-authors report no
financial interests or potential conflicts of interest. Ethics approval and
consent to participate: The study was conducted in accordance with the
Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the Institutional Review Board at New
York University (i15-01450) and by Advarra Inc. at the Child Mind Institute
(Pro00030108). Written informed consent was obtained from parents/legal
guardians of all participating children. Verbal assent was obtained from all
child participants, and written assent was also obtained from children aged
seven years or older.
