---
reference_id: "PMID:40852926"
title: Seclidemstat (SP-2577) Induces Transcriptomic Reprogramming and Cytotoxicity in Multiple Fusion-Positive Sarcomas.
authors:
- Rask GC
- Taslim C
- Bayanjargal A
- Dreher RD
- Cannon MV
- Selich-Anderson J
- Crow JC
- Duncan A
- Theisen ER
journal: Cancer Res Commun
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1158/2767-9764.CRC-24-0296
keywords:
- Humans
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- "Sarcoma/genetics, drug therapy, pathology"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- RNA-Binding Protein EWS/genetics
- Transcriptome/drug effects
- RNA-Binding Protein FUS/genetics
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic/drug effects"
- Proto-Oncogene Protein c-fli-1/genetics
- Benzamides
- Piperazines
- TATA-Binding Protein Associated Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Seclidemstat (SP-2577) Induces Transcriptomic Reprogramming and Cytotoxicity in Multiple Fusion-Positive Sarcomas.
**Authors:** Rask GC, Taslim C, Bayanjargal A, Dreher RD, Cannon MV, Selich-Anderson J, Crow JC, Duncan A, Theisen ER
**Journal:** Cancer Res Commun (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1158/2767-9764.CRC-24-0296](https://doi.org/10.1158/2767-9764.CRC-24-0296)

## Content

1. Cancer Res Commun. 2025 Sep 1;5(9):1584-1598. doi:
10.1158/2767-9764.CRC-24-0296.

Seclidemstat (SP-2577) Induces Transcriptomic Reprogramming and Cytotoxicity in
Multiple Fusion-Positive Sarcomas.

Rask GC(1), Taslim C(1), Bayanjargal A(1)(2), Dreher RD(1)(2), Cannon MV(1),
Selich-Anderson J(1), Crow JC(1), Duncan A(3), Theisen ER(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Childhood Cancer Research, Abigail Wexner Research Institute at
Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio.
(2)Medical Scientist Training Program, College of Medicine, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio.
(3)Salarius Pharmaceuticals, Houston, Texas.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio.

Genes encoding the RNA-binding proteins FUS, EWSR1, and TAF15 (FET proteins) are
involved in chromosomal translocations in rare sarcomas. The encoded fusion
oncoproteins typically include a DNA-binding domain and function as oncogenic
transcription factors. FET-rearranged sarcomas are often aggressive malignancies
affecting patients of all ages. Oncogenic fusion transcription factors are
challenging to target directly, and new therapies are needed. Treatment with the
small molecule SP-2509 results in reversal of the transcriptional activity of
the FET fusion that causes Ewing sarcoma, EWSR1::FLI1. A similar molecule,
seclidemstat (SP-2577), is currently in clinical trials for FET-rearranged
sarcomas (NCT03600649), but its pharmacologic activity in FET fusion-positive
sarcomas has not been demonstrated. We found potent seclidemstat cytotoxicity
against both FET-rearranged and other fusion-positive sarcoma cell lines in
vitro, including Ewing sarcoma, desmoplastic small round cell tumor, clear cell
sarcoma, myxoid liposarcoma, and fusion-positive rhabdomyosarcoma. We also
define transcriptomic effects of seclidemstat with bulk RNA sequencing.
Seclidemstat recapitulated much of SP-2509 transcriptional activity in Ewing
sarcoma. Widespread transcriptional changes were seen in all tested cell lines
after seclidemstat treatment, regardless of the fusion protein expressed. This
included reversal of FET fusion transcriptional signatures for EWSR1::WT1,
EWSR1::ATF1, and EWSR1::ERG. Though novel inhibitors are unlikely to display
single-agent efficacy in the clinic, these data suggest that seclidemstat
remains a promising new treatment strategy for patients with FET-rearranged and
other fusion-positive sarcomas.
SIGNIFICANCE: In this study, we show seclidemstat has in vitro activity in
multiple rare and aggressive sarcomas caused by FET fusion proteins. With 13 RNA
sequencing experiments, including multiple FET-rearranged sarcoma cell lines,
this dataset is a rich resource for those studying FET-rearranged sarcomas.

©2025 The Authors; Published by the American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2767-9764.CRC-24-0296
PMCID: PMC12421227
PMID: 40852926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A. Duncan reports grants from the Cancer
Prevention and Research Institute of Texas during the conduct of the study. E.R.
Theisen reports grants from Salarius Pharmaceuticals during the conduct of the
study. No disclosures were reported by the other authors.
