---
reference_id: "PMID:40953932"
title: The Overlapping Clinicopathological Presentations of Pityriasis Lichenoides and Mycosis Fungoides.
authors:
- Pierog O
- Estill M
- Jedrych J
- Rozati S
- Marchalik R
journal: J Cutan Pathol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/cup.14856
keywords:
- Humans
- "Mycosis Fungoides/pathology, immunology, metabolism"
- "Pityriasis Lichenoides/pathology, immunology, metabolism"
- "Skin Neoplasms/pathology, immunology, metabolism"
- "T-Lymphocytes/pathology, immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Overlapping Clinicopathological Presentations of Pityriasis Lichenoides and Mycosis Fungoides.
**Authors:** Pierog O, Estill M, Jedrych J, Rozati S, Marchalik R
**Journal:** J Cutan Pathol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cup.14856](https://doi.org/10.1111/cup.14856)

## Content

1. J Cutan Pathol. 2025 Dec;52(12):785-794. doi: 10.1111/cup.14856. Epub 2025 Sep
 15.

The Overlapping Clinicopathological Presentations of Pityriasis Lichenoides and
Mycosis Fungoides.

Pierog O(1), Estill M(2), Jedrych J(3), Rozati S(1), Marchalik R(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Georgetown University School of Medicine,
Washington, DC, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, New York, USA.

Pityriasis lichenoides (PL) has traditionally been considered a benign cutaneous
disorder with a diverse clinical presentation. This comprehensive literature
review challenges that notion by exploring its histopathologic,
immunopathologic, and molecular overlap with mycosis fungoides (MF). Through
examination of lymphocyte populations, T-lymphocyte clonality, and aberrant
immunohistochemical phenotypes, our findings indicate that a subset of PL cases,
particularly those exhibiting a loss of pan-T-cell markers (CD2, CD5, CD7), or
T-cell clonality, may have a closer association with MF. These findings
highlight the need for heightened clinical awareness and surveillance in select
PL cases, as early identification of MF may improve patient outcomes.

© 2025 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cup.14856
PMID: 40953932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
