---
reference_id: "PMID:33002135"
title: An induced pluripotent stem cell model of Fanconi anemia reveals mechanisms of p53-driven progenitor cell differentiation.
authors:
- Marion W
- Boettcher S
- Ruiz-Torres S
- Lummertz da Rocha E
- Lundin V
- Morris V
- Chou S
- Zhao AM
- Kubaczka C
- Aumais O
- Zhang Y
- Shimamura A
- Schlaeger TM
- North TE
- Ebert BL
- Wells SI
- Daley GQ
- Rowe RG
journal: Blood Adv
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2020001593
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An induced pluripotent stem cell model of Fanconi anemia reveals mechanisms of p53-driven progenitor cell differentiation.
**Authors:** Marion W, Boettcher S, Ruiz-Torres S, Lummertz da Rocha E, Lundin V, Morris V, Chou S, Zhao AM, Kubaczka C, Aumais O, Zhang Y, Shimamura A, Schlaeger TM, North TE, Ebert BL, Wells SI, Daley GQ, Rowe RG
**Journal:** Blood Adv (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1182/bloodadvances.2020001593](https://doi.org/10.1182/bloodadvances.2020001593)

## Content

1. Blood Adv. 2020 Oct 13;4(19):4679-4692. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2020001593.

An induced pluripotent stem cell model of Fanconi anemia reveals mechanisms of 
p53-driven progenitor cell differentiation.

Marion W(1), Boettcher S(2), Ruiz-Torres S(3), Lummertz da Rocha E(1), Lundin 
V(1), Morris V(1), Chou S(1), Zhao AM(1), Kubaczka C(1), Aumais O(1), Zhang 
Y(1), Shimamura A(1)(4)(5), Schlaeger TM(1)(4), North TE(1)(4), Ebert BL(2)(4), 
Wells SI(3), Daley GQ(1)(4), Rowe RG(1)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Stem Cell Program, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA.
(2)Division of Hematology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA.
(3)Division of Oncology, Cancer and Blood Diseases Institute, Cincinnati 
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH.
(4)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA; and.
(5)Department of Hematology and.
(6)Stem Cell Transplantation Program, Dana Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and 
Blood Disorders Center, Boston, MA.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a disorder of DNA repair that manifests as bone marrow 
(BM) failure. The lack of accurate murine models of FA has refocused efforts 
toward differentiation of patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells (IPSCs) 
to hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs). However, an intact FA DNA repair 
pathway is required for efficient IPSC derivation, hindering these efforts. To 
overcome this barrier, we used inducible complementation of FANCA-deficient 
IPSCs, which permitted robust maintenance of IPSCs. Modulation of FANCA during 
directed differentiation to HPCs enabled the production of FANCA-deficient human 
HPCs that recapitulated FA genotoxicity and hematopoietic phenotypes relative to 
isogenic FANCA-expressing HPCs. FANCA-deficient human HPCs underwent accelerated 
terminal differentiation driven by activation of p53/p21. We identified growth 
arrest specific 6 (GAS6) as a novel target of activated p53 in FANCA-deficient 
HPCs and modulate GAS6 signaling to rescue hematopoiesis in FANCA-deficient 
cells. This study validates our strategy to derive a sustainable, highly 
faithful human model of FA, uncovers a mechanism of HPC exhaustion in FA, and 
advances toward future cell therapy in FA.

© 2020 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2020001593
PMCID: PMC7556119
PMID: 33002135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: During the 
conduct of this study, G.Q.D. held equity or received consulting fees from the 
following: Epizyme, 28/7 Therapeutics, and MPM Capital, LLC. The remaining 
authors declare no competing financial interests.