---
reference_id: "PMID:37206505"
title: A Case of Solitary Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome Leading to Chronic Small Bowel Obstruction Due to Intussusception From a Large Hamartomatous Polyp.
authors:
- Edmondson E
- Mihalopulos G
- Kwok PE
- Dellert A
- Olsen L
- Zhang ZJ
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.37679
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Case of Solitary Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome Leading to Chronic Small Bowel Obstruction Due to Intussusception From a Large Hamartomatous Polyp.
**Authors:** Edmondson E, Mihalopulos G, Kwok PE, Dellert A, Olsen L, Zhang ZJ
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.37679](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.37679)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Apr 17;15(4):e37679. doi: 10.7759/cureus.37679. eCollection 2023 
Apr.

A Case of Solitary Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome Leading to Chronic Small Bowel 
Obstruction Due to Intussusception From a Large Hamartomatous Polyp.

Edmondson E(1), Mihalopulos G(1), Kwok PE(1), Dellert A(2), Olsen L(3), Zhang 
ZJ(4).

Author information:
(1)General Surgery, Waterbury Hospital, Waterbury, USA.
(2)Surgery, University of Connecticut School of Medicine, Farmington, USA.
(3)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Waterbury Hospital, Waterbury, USA.
(4)Colorectal Surgery, Waterbury Hosptial, Waterbury, USA.

We report a case of a 33-year-old male who presented to the emergency department 
with a three-day history of severe diffuse abdominal pain associated with 
anorexia, nausea, and vomiting. Computed tomography (CT) imaging of the abdomen 
and pelvis revealed a long segment of intussusception in the proximal jejunum 
and a round lesion along the intussusception with punctate hyperdensities. The 
patient underwent a diagnostic laparoscopy converted to open small bowel 
resection and end-to-end anastomosis that demonstrated a pedunculated jejunal 
mass. The mass was removed, and the pathology revealed a hamartomatous polyp 
with features of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS). The patient did not have a family 
history, previous endoscopic findings, or physical exam findings such as 
mucocutaneous pigmentation that could be attributed to PJS.  Definitive 
diagnosis of solitary PJS-type hamartomatous polyps depends on histopathological 
findings. Genetic analysis for mutations of the PJS susceptible gene, STK11/LB1 
located at 19p13.3, as well as loss of heterozygosity at that locus, have been 
used for the diagnosis of PJS. In patients with large pedunculated hamartomatous 
polyps, chronic intussusception can occur. If pathology reveals features of 
Peutz-Jeghers, but the patient lacks the characteristic mucocutaneous 
pigmentation, family history of PJS, or additional polyps within the GI tract, 
then solitary PJS may be suspected.

Copyright © 2023, Edmondson et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.37679
PMCID: PMC10189826
PMID: 37206505

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.