---
reference_id: "PMID:12975285"
title: Total tau and phosphorylated tau 181 levels in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with frontotemporal dementia due to P301L and G272V tau mutations.
authors:
- Rosso SM
- van Herpen E
- Pijnenburg YA
- Schoonenboom NS
- Scheltens P
- Heutink P
- van Swieten JC
journal: Arch Neurol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1001/archneur.60.9.1209
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Total tau and phosphorylated tau 181 levels in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with frontotemporal dementia due to P301L and G272V tau mutations.
**Authors:** Rosso SM, van Herpen E, Pijnenburg YA, Schoonenboom NS, Scheltens P, Heutink P, van Swieten JC
**Journal:** Arch Neurol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1001/archneur.60.9.1209](https://doi.org/10.1001/archneur.60.9.1209)

## Content

1. Arch Neurol. 2003 Sep;60(9):1209-13. doi: 10.1001/archneur.60.9.1209.

Total tau and phosphorylated tau 181 levels in the cerebrospinal fluid of 
patients with frontotemporal dementia due to P301L and G272V tau mutations.

Rosso SM(1), van Herpen E, Pijnenburg YA, Schoonenboom NS, Scheltens P, Heutink 
P, van Swieten JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. 
s.rosso@erasmusmc.nl

BACKGROUND: Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is a pathologically heterogeneous 
group of presenile neurodegenerative disorders, with or without the deposition 
of hyperphosphorylated tau protein in affected brain regions. Mutations in the 
tau gene have been found in the familial form of FTD, linked to chromosome 
17q21-22, showing a spectrum of tauopathy.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate levels of total tau, phosphorylated tau 181 (Ptau-181), 
and amyloid-beta1-42 in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of patients with FTD, with 
special emphasis on FTD due to tau mutations.
DESIGN: Case-control study.
SETTING: Outpatient neurology clinics at 2 university medical centers, in 
Rotterdam and Amsterdam (the Netherlands).
PATIENTS: Twenty-six patients with FTD (9 with tau mutations 7 P301L and 2 
G272V), 18 patients with Alzheimer disease (AD), and 13 nondemented controls.
METHODS: Total tau, Ptau-181, and amyloid-beta1-42 levels in CSF, obtained by 
lumbar puncture, were determined by sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. 
Patients were diagnosed after clinical examination, neuropsychologic evaluation, 
and neuroimaging. Differences between patient groups were statistically 
evaluated using nonparametric tests.
RESULTS: Although CSF levels of total tau were mildly increased in FTD patients 
compared with nondemented controls (P =.05), median CSF total tau levels were 
low in the subgroup with tau mutations compared with AD patients. Furthermore, 
CSF levels of Ptau-181 and amyloid-beta1-42 were not different in FTD patients, 
including the patients with tau mutations, compared with nondemented controls.
CONCLUSIONS: The tauopathy in P301L and G272V does not appear to be associated 
with an evident increase in CSF levels of Ptau-181 in FTD patients with these 
tau mutations, in contrast with findings in patients with AD.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.60.9.1209
PMID: 12975285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]