---
reference_id: "PMID:8681317"
title: Ventricular remodeling.
authors:
- Maisch B
journal: Cardiology
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1159/000177160
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ventricular remodeling.
**Authors:** Maisch B
**Journal:** Cardiology (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000177160](https://doi.org/10.1159/000177160)

## Content

1. Cardiology. 1996;87 Suppl 1:2-10. doi: 10.1159/000177160.

Ventricular remodeling.

Maisch B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Cardiology. Marburg, Germany.

Ventricular remodeling is a repair process. It can follow myocardial infarction, 
mechanical overload (for example, in hypertension or valvular heart disease), 
and also occurs in inflammation and dilated cardiomyopathy. Remodeling can be an 
(early) adaptive process followed by a maladaptive (late) phase and involves all 
cells that are present in the myocardium - the myocyte, the interstitial cells, 
the vascular endothelium, and the immune cells. Despite the varying 
etiopathology that these different aspects of heart disease share, a similar 
sequence of molecular, biochemical and mechanical events that can lead to heart 
failure, myocyte hypertrophy, extensive extracellular matrix production and 
fibrosis, even in patients who were previously unaffected by the original 
disease process (for example, inflammation or infarction). Heart failure can be 
influenced by treatment of the underlying disease and by modification of the 
remodeling process, for example, by ACE inhibitors (cardioreparation). In 
experimental animals it has been clearly demonstrated that ACE inhibitors may 
even prevent a genetically predetermined left ventricular hypertrophy 
(cardioprevention).

DOI: 10.1159/000177160
PMID: 8681317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]