---
reference_id: "PMID:35597096"
title: "Cell function and identity revealed by comparative scRNA-seq analysis in human nasal, bronchial and epididymis epithelia."
authors:
- Paranjapye A
- Leir SH
- Huang F
- Kerschner JL
- Harris A
journal: Eur J Cell Biol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2022.151231
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cell function and identity revealed by comparative scRNA-seq analysis in human nasal, bronchial and epididymis epithelia.
**Authors:** Paranjapye A, Leir SH, Huang F, Kerschner JL, Harris A
**Journal:** Eur J Cell Biol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejcb.2022.151231](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejcb.2022.151231)

## Content

1. Eur J Cell Biol. 2022 Jun-Aug;101(3):151231. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2022.151231. 
Epub 2022 May 18.

Cell function and identity revealed by comparative scRNA-seq analysis in human 
nasal, bronchial and epididymis epithelia.

Paranjapye A(1), Leir SH(1), Huang F(1), Kerschner JL(1), Harris A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, and Case Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, 
USA.
(2)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, and Case Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, 
USA. Electronic address: ann.harris@case.edu.

The evolutionary relationship of cells within tissues having a similar function 
but located in different anatomical sites is of considerable biological 
interest. The development of single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) protocols 
has greatly enhanced opportunities to address this topic. Here we focus on cells 
in the epithelium which lines two regions of the human respiratory tract and the 
male genital ducts to delineate the shared, differentiated functions of the 
different cell populations. Transcriptomic data were used to assess the gene 
expression profiles of human bronchial, nasal, and epididymal epithelium (HBE, 
HNE, and HEE). Bulk RNA-seq showed many shared genes expressed in cells from the 
nasal and bronchial epithelium and highlighted their divergence from the 
epididymal epithelium. ScRNA-seq in HBE and HNE cells demonstrated overlapping 
gene expression patterns within basal and secretory cell populations. Moreover, 
the distribution of cell types was altered in HNE cells derived from donors with 
cystic fibrosis (CF) when compared to cells from healthy donors. Next, the HBE 
and HNE datasets were merged and confirmed intersection of cell type gene 
expression profiles from the two sites. However, secretory and ciliated cells 
were the most abundant types in the HBE samples, while more basal cells were 
seen in the HNE populations. We then merged single-cell data from the epididymis 
to determine if overlapping functions of these cells corresponded to those in 
the airway. Of note, only the pulmonary ionocytes/epididymis clear cells showed 
a strongly conserved identity, which was confirmed by imputation in bulk RNA-seq 
datasets from the same cells.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier GmbH.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2022.151231
PMCID: PMC9357053
PMID: 35597096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the study, in the 
collection, analyses, or interpretation of the data, in the writing of the 
manuscript, or in the decision to publish the results.