---
reference_id: "PMID:29374517"
title: Association analysis of norepinephrine transporter polymorphisms and methylphenidate response in ADHD patients.
authors:
- Angyal N
- Horvath EZ
- Tarnok Z
- Richman MJ
- Bognar E
- Lakatos K
- Sasvari-Szekely M
- Nemoda Z
journal: Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2018.01.013
keywords:
- Attention
- "Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/drug therapy, genetics"
- Case-Control Studies
- Central Nervous System Stimulants/therapeutic use
- Child
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Introns
- Linkage Disequilibrium
- Male
- Methylphenidate/therapeutic use
- Norepinephrine Plasma Membrane Transport Proteins/genetics
- Pharmacogenomic Variants
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association analysis of norepinephrine transporter polymorphisms and methylphenidate response in ADHD patients.
**Authors:** Angyal N, Horvath EZ, Tarnok Z, Richman MJ, Bognar E, Lakatos K, Sasvari-Szekely M, Nemoda Z
**Journal:** Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pnpbp.2018.01.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2018.01.013)

## Content

1. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2018 Jun 8;84(Pt A):122-128. doi:
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2018.01.013. Epub 2018 Feb 20.

Association analysis of norepinephrine transporter polymorphisms and
methylphenidate response in ADHD patients.

Angyal N(1), Horvath EZ(1), Tarnok Z(2), Richman MJ(3), Bognar E(2), Lakatos
K(4), Sasvari-Szekely M(1), Nemoda Z(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Chemistry, Molecular Biology and Pathobiochemistry,
Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Vadaskert Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Hospital, Budapest, Hungary.
(3)Department of Clinical Psychology and Addiction, Eötvös Loránd University,
Budapest, Hungary.
(4)Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience and Psychology, Research Centre for
Natural Sciences, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary.
(5)Institute of Medical Chemistry, Molecular Biology and Pathobiochemistry,
Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. Electronic address:
nemoda.zsofia@med.semmelweis-univ.hu.

AIMS: Methylphenidate (MPH) is the most frequently prescribed drug in Attention
Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). Hitherto mostly the dopamine transporter
gene has been studied in MPH-response and only a few studies analyzed the
norepinephrine transporter (NET, SLC6A2) gene, although MPH is a potent
inhibitor of both dopamine and norepinephrine transporters. We aimed to analyze
this monoamine transporter gene in relation to ADHD per se and MPH-response in
particular to gain further knowledge in ADHD pharmacogenetics using a Caucasian
sample.
METHODS: Six single nucleotide polymorphisms (rs28386840, rs2242446, rs3785143,
rs3785157, rs5569, rs7194256 SNP) were studied across the NET gene in 163 ADHD
children (age: 9.3±2.6; 86.5% male) using ADHD-RS hyperactivity-impulsivity and
inattention scales. For case-control analysis 486 control subjects were also
genotyped. At the MPH-response analysis responders had minimum 25% decrease of
ADHD-RS total score after 2months of treatment, and chi-square test compared 90
responders and 32 non-responders, whereas ANOVA was used to assess symptom
improvement after the first month among the 122 ADHD patients.
RESULTS: The classical case-control analysis did not yield any association with
ADHD diagnosis, which was supported by meta-analysis conducted on the available
genetic data (combining previously published and the present studies). On the
other hand, the intronic rs3785143 showed nominal association with inattention
symptoms (p=0.01). The haplotype analysis supported this association, and
indicated the importance of the first haploblock encompassing the intronic and 2
promoter SNPs. With MPH-response only the promoter rs28386840 showed nominal
association: Those with at least one T-allele were overrepresented in the
responder group (42% vs 19%, p=0.08), and they had better improvement on the
hyperactivity-impulsivity scale compared to the AA genotype (p=0.04).
CONCLUSION: Although none of our single SNP findings remained significant after
correcting for multiple testing, our results from the MPH-response analysis
indicate the potential importance of promoter variants in the NET gene.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2018.01.013
PMID: 29374517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
