---
reference_id: "PMID:33734376"
title: Genetic analysis of Pycr1 and Pycr2 in mice.
authors:
- Stum MG
- Tadenev ALD
- Seburn KL
- Miers KE
- Poon PP
- McMaster CR
- Robinson C
- Kane C
- Silva KA
- Cliften PF
- Sundberg JP
- Reinholdt LG
- John SWM
- Burgess RW
journal: Genetics
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/genetics/iyab048
keywords:
- Animals
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Proline/biosynthesis, chemistry, genetics"
- "Pyrroline Carboxylate Reductases/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic analysis of Pycr1 and Pycr2 in mice.
**Authors:** Stum MG, Tadenev ALD, Seburn KL, Miers KE, Poon PP, McMaster CR, Robinson C, Kane C, Silva KA, Cliften PF, Sundberg JP, Reinholdt LG, John SWM, Burgess RW
**Journal:** Genetics (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/genetics/iyab048](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyab048)

## Content

1. Genetics. 2021 May 17;218(1):iyab048. doi: 10.1093/genetics/iyab048.

Genetic analysis of Pycr1 and Pycr2 in mice.

Stum MG(1), Tadenev ALD(1), Seburn KL(1), Miers KE(1), Poon PP(2), McMaster
CR(2), Robinson C(3), Kane C(1), Silva KA(1), Cliften PF(4), Sundberg JP(1),
Reinholdt LG(1), John SWM(1)(5)(6), Burgess RW(1).

Author information:
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME 04609, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS B3H 4R2,
Canada.
(3)Department of Pathology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS B3H 4R2, Canada.
(4)Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis,
MO 63110, USA.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York, NY
10032, USA.
(6)Zuckerman Mind Brain Behavior Institute, Columbia University, New York, NY
10032, USA.

The final step in proline biosynthesis is catalyzed by three
pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductases, PYCR1, PYCR2, and PYCR3, which convert
pyrroline-5-carboxylate (P5C) to proline. Mutations in human PYCR1 and ALDH18A1
(P5C Synthetase) cause Cutis Laxa (CL), whereas mutations in PYCR2 cause
hypomyelinating leukodystrophy 10 (HLD10). Here, we investigated the genetics of
Pycr1 and Pycr2 in mice. A null allele of Pycr1 did not show integument or
CL-related phenotypes. We also studied a novel chemically-induced mutation in
Pycr2. Mice with recessive loss-of-function mutations in Pycr2 showed phenotypes
consistent with neurological and neuromuscular disorders, including weight loss,
kyphosis, and hind-limb clasping. The peripheral nervous system was largely
unaffected, with only mild axonal atrophy in peripheral nerves. A severe loss of
subcutaneous fat in Pycr2 mutant mice is reminiscent of a CL-like phenotype, but
primary features such as elastin abnormalities were not observed. Aged Pycr2
mutant mice had reduced white blood cell counts and altered lipid metabolism,
suggesting a generalized metabolic disorder. PYCR1 and -2 have similar enzymatic
and cellular activities, and consistent with previous studies, both were
localized in the mitochondria in fibroblasts. Both PYCR1 and -2 were able to
complement the loss of Pro3, the yeast enzyme that converts P5C to proline,
confirming their activity as P5C reductases. In mice, Pycr1; Pycr2 double
mutants were sub-viable and unhealthy compared to either single mutant,
indicating the genes are largely functionally redundant. Proline levels were not
reduced, and precursors were not increased in serum from Pycr2 mutant mice or in
lysates from skin fibroblast cultures, but placing Pycr2 mutant mice on a
proline-free diet worsened the phenotype. Thus, Pycr1 and -2 have redundant
functions in proline biosynthesis, and their loss makes proline a semi-essential
amino acid. These findings have implications for understanding the genetics of
CL and HLD10, and for modeling these disorders in mice.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Genetics
Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/genetics/iyab048
PMCID: PMC8128379
PMID: 33734376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
