---
reference_id: PMID:16324149
title: Nrf2-deficient mice are highly susceptible to cigarette smoke-induced emphysema.
authors:
- Iizuka T
- Ishii Y
- Itoh K
- Kiwamoto T
- Kimura T
- Matsuno Y
- Morishima Y
- Hegab AE
- Homma S
- Nomura A
- Sakamoto T
- Shimura M
- Yoshida A
- Yamamoto M
- Sekizawa K
journal: Genes Cells
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2005.00905.x
keywords:
- Animals
- Antioxidants/metabolism
- Bronchoalveolar Lavage Fluid/chemistry
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Leukocyte Elastase/metabolism
- "Lung/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
- Macrophages/metabolism
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "NF-E2-Related Factor 2/genetics, physiology"
- Neutrophils/metabolism
- Phagocytosis
- "Pneumonia/metabolism, pathology"
- "Proteinase Inhibitory Proteins, Secretory"
- "Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Pulmonary Emphysema/chemically induced, genetics, metabolism"
- Secretory Leukocyte Peptidase Inhibitor
- Tobacco Smoke Pollution/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nrf2-deficient mice are highly susceptible to cigarette smoke-induced emphysema.
**Authors:** Iizuka T, Ishii Y, Itoh K, Kiwamoto T, Kimura T, Matsuno Y, Morishima Y, Hegab AE, Homma S, Nomura A, Sakamoto T, Shimura M, Yoshida A, Yamamoto M, Sekizawa K
**Journal:** Genes Cells (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2443.2005.00905.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2443.2005.00905.x)

## Content

1. Genes Cells. 2005 Dec;10(12):1113-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2005.00905.x.

Nrf2-deficient mice are highly susceptible to cigarette smoke-induced emphysema.

Iizuka T(1), Ishii Y, Itoh K, Kiwamoto T, Kimura T, Matsuno Y, Morishima Y, 
Hegab AE, Homma S, Nomura A, Sakamoto T, Shimura M, Yoshida A, Yamamoto M, 
Sekizawa K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Japan.

Inflammation, protease/anti-protease imbalance and oxidative stress play 
important roles in the pathogenesis of emphysema. Nrf2 counteracts oxidative 
tissue damage and inflammation through transcriptional activation via the 
anti-oxidant responsive element (ARE). To clarify the protective role of Nrf2 in 
the development of emphysema, the susceptibility of Nrf2-knockout mice to 
cigarette smoke (CS)-induced emphysema was examined. In Nrf2-knockout mice, 
emphysema was first observed at 8 weeks and exacerbated by 16 weeks following 
CS-exposure, whereas no pathological abnormalities were observed in wild-type 
mice. Neutrophilic lung inflammation and permeability lung damage were 
significantly enhanced in Nrf2-knockout mice 8 weeks after CS-exposure. 
Importantly, neutrophil elastase activity in bronchoalveolar lavage fluids was 
markedly higher in Nrf2-knockout mice preceding the pronounced neutrophil 
accumulation. The expression of secretory leukoprotease inhibitor, a potent 
inhibitor of neutrophil elastase, was inducible in wild-type, but not in 
Nrf2-knockout mice. This protease/anti-protease imbalance, together with the 
lack of inducible expression of ARE-regulated anti-oxidant/anti-inflammatory 
genes, may explain the predisposition of Nrf2-knockout mice to neutrophilic 
inflammation. Indeed, specific activators of Nrf2 induced the expression of the 
SLPI gene in macrophages. These results indicate that Nrf2 protects against the 
development of emphysema by regulating not only the oxidant/anti-oxidant 
balance, but also inflammation and the protease/anti-protease balance.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2005.00905.x
PMID: 16324149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]