---
reference_id: "PMID:30578370"
title: A score that predicts 1-year functional status in patients with anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis.
authors:
- Balu R
- McCracken L
- Lancaster E
- Graus F
- Dalmau J
- Titulaer MJ
journal: Neurology
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000006783
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Anti-N-Methyl-D-Aspartate Receptor Encephalitis/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Electroencephalography
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Infant
- Logistic Models
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Movement Disorders/etiology
- Neurologic Examination
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Retrospective Studies
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A score that predicts 1-year functional status in patients with anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis.
**Authors:** Balu R, McCracken L, Lancaster E, Graus F, Dalmau J, Titulaer MJ
**Journal:** Neurology (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000006783](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000006783)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2019 Jan 15;92(3):e244-e252. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000006783.
Epub  2018 Dec 21.

A score that predicts 1-year functional status in patients with anti-NMDA 
receptor encephalitis.

Balu R(1), McCracken L(1), Lancaster E(1), Graus F(1), Dalmau J(2), Titulaer 
MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neurology (R.B., L.M., E.L., J.D.) and Division of 
Neurocritical Care (R.B.), Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia; Department of Neurology (F.G., J.D.), Hospital 
Clinic, University of Barcelona/Institut d'Investigacions Biomediques August Pi 
i Sunyer; Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA) (J.D.), 
Barcelona, Spain; and Department of Neurology (M.J.T.), Erasmus University 
Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)From the Department of Neurology (R.B., L.M., E.L., J.D.) and Division of 
Neurocritical Care (R.B.), Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia; Department of Neurology (F.G., J.D.), Hospital 
Clinic, University of Barcelona/Institut d'Investigacions Biomediques August Pi 
i Sunyer; Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA) (J.D.), 
Barcelona, Spain; and Department of Neurology (M.J.T.), Erasmus University 
Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands. josep.dalmau@uphs.upenn.edu.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2019 Jan 15;92(3):119-120. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000006766.
    J Neurol. 2019 May;266(5):1287-1289. doi: 10.1007/s00415-019-09273-5.

OBJECTIVE: To construct a grading score that predicts neurologic function 1 year 
after diagnosis of anti-NMDA receptor (NMDAR) encephalitis.
METHODS: Three hundred eighty-two patients with detailed information and 
functional status at 1 year were studied. Factors associated with poor status 
(defined as modified Rankin Scale score ≥3) were identified and incorporated 
into a multivariate logistic regression model. This model was used to develop a 
5-point prediction score, termed the anti-NMDAR Encephalitis One-Year Functional 
Status (NEOS) score.
RESULTS: Intensive care unit admission (p < 0.001), treatment delay >4 weeks (p 
= 0.012), lack of clinical improvement within 4 weeks (p < 0.001), movement 
disorder (p = 0.001), central hypoventilation (p < 0.001), elevated CSF white 
blood cell count (p < 0.001), elevated CSF protein level (p = 0.027), and 
abnormal MRI (p = 0.002) were associated with 1-year functional status in 
univariate analysis. Intensive care unit admission, treatment delay >4 weeks, 
lack of clinical improvement within 4 weeks, abnormal MRI, and CSF white blood 
cell count >20 cells/μL were independent predictors for outcome in multivariate 
regression modeling. These 5 variables were assigned 1 point each to create the 
NEOS score. NEOS score strongly associated with the probability of poor 
functional status at 1 year (3% for 0 or 1 point to 69% for 4 or 5 points, p < 
0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The NEOS score accurately predicts 1-year functional status in 
patients with anti-NMDAR encephalitis. This score could help estimate the 
clinical course following diagnosis and may aid in identifying patients who 
could benefit from novel therapies.

Copyright © 2018 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000006783
PMCID: PMC6340387
PMID: 30578370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]