---
reference_id: "PMID:33722101"
title: Medical Malpractice Allegations in Nasal Turbinate Surgery.
authors:
- Coppess SM
- Weymuller SG
- Davis GE
journal: Am J Rhinol Allergy
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1177/19458924211004052
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Medical Malpractice Allegations in Nasal Turbinate Surgery.
**Authors:** Coppess SM, Weymuller SG, Davis GE
**Journal:** Am J Rhinol Allergy (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1177/19458924211004052](https://doi.org/10.1177/19458924211004052)

## Content

1. Am J Rhinol Allergy. 2021 Nov;35(6):840-845. doi: 10.1177/19458924211004052. 
Epub 2021 Mar 15.

Medical Malpractice Allegations in Nasal Turbinate Surgery.

Coppess SM(1), Weymuller SG(2), Davis GE(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Washington Department of Emergency Medicine, Seattle, 
Washington.
(2)Schroeter Goldmark & Bender Law Firm, Seattle, Washington.
(3)Proliance Surgeons, Seattle, Washington.

BACKGROUND: Despite studies showing most patients significantly improve their 
nasal congestion with surgical management of nasal turbinates, not all achieve 
acceptable results. Rarely, patients report substantial worsening of symptoms 
leading to litigation risk.
OBJECTIVE: Document the United States medicolegal environment for nasal 
turbinate surgery.
METHODS: We searched the Westlaw database for turbinate related terms for 1987- 
July 2019, recording demographics, claims, legal arguments, and outcomes in 
legal cases related to nasal turbinate surgery. We assessed prevalence and 
correlations with case outcomes.
RESULTS: Of the 39 cases identified, the most common complaint was nose/facial 
pain (53.8% of cases). Surgeons prevailed in 87.2% of cases, with total 
liabilities of $3,224,606 [mean $97,715.3, ±$283,900.8]. Surgeons had 
statistically significant favorable outcomes when patients claimed dryness, 
headache, congestion, crusting, breathing problems, and disfigurement (all 
p < 0.05). Revision surgery was indicated in 23.1% of cases and was claimed in 
40.0% of patient awards. Surgical negligence was claimed in 40.0% of patient 
awards versus 67.9% of surgeon awards (p = 0.333). Lack of informed consent was 
claimed in 20.0% of patient awards versus 32.1% of surgeon awards (p = 0.601).
CONCLUSIONS: There are inherent litigation risks for surgeons when performing 
nasal turbinate surgery. Most claims against surgeons, are resolved in favor of 
the surgeon. Understanding the types of claims and legal arguments that are made 
by patients could help assessing the risks of a proposed litigation. Documenting 
clear indications for surgery and written informed consent may reduce 
litigations against surgeons.

DOI: 10.1177/19458924211004052
PMID: 33722101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]