---
reference_id: "PMID:36008429"
title: Multiple system atrophy.
authors:
- Poewe W
- Stankovic I
- Halliday G
- Meissner WG
- Wenning GK
- Pellecchia MT
- Seppi K
- Palma JA
- Kaufmann H
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-022-00382-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiple system atrophy.
**Authors:** Poewe W, Stankovic I, Halliday G, Meissner WG, Wenning GK, Pellecchia MT, Seppi K, Palma JA, Kaufmann H
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-022-00382-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-022-00382-6)

## Content

Multiple system atrophy (MSA) is a rare neurodegenerative disease that is characterized by neuronal loss and gliosis in multiple areas of the central nervous system including striatonigral, olivopontocerebellar and central autonomic structures. Oligodendroglial cytoplasmic inclusions containing misfolded and aggregated α-synuclein are the histopathological hallmark of MSA. A firm clinical diagnosis requires the presence of autonomic dysfunction in combination with parkinsonism that responds poorly to levodopa and/or cerebellar ataxia. Clinical diagnostic accuracy is suboptimal in early disease because of phenotypic overlaps with Parkinson disease or other types of degenerative parkinsonism as well as with other cerebellar disorders. The symptomatic management of MSA requires a complex multimodal approach to compensate for autonomic failure, alleviate parkinsonism and cerebellar ataxia and associated disabilities. None of the available treatments significantly slows the aggressive course of MSA. Despite several failed trials in the past, a robust pipeline of putative disease-modifying agents, along with progress towards early diagnosis and the development of sensitive diagnostic and progression biomarkers for MSA, offer new hope for patients.

PMID: 36008429
