---
reference_id: "PMID:34165432"
title: "[Use of the multiparametric panel CD3/CD4/CD8/CD7/CD26/CD158k in the detection and use of flow cytometry of Sezary cells]."
authors:
- Callet J
- Latger-Cannard V
- Gérard D
- Salignac S
- Granel-Brocard F
- Campidelli A
- Bursztejn AC
- Broséus J
- Vial JP
- Lesesve JF
journal: Ann Biol Clin (Paris)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1684/abc.2021.1651
keywords:
- "Antigens, CD"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor"
- CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes
- Dipeptidyl Peptidase 4
- Flow Cytometry
- Humans
- Retrospective Studies
- Skin Neoplasms/diagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Use of the multiparametric panel CD3/CD4/CD8/CD7/CD26/CD158k in the detection and use of flow cytometry of Sezary cells].
**Authors:** Callet J, Latger-Cannard V, Gérard D, Salignac S, Granel-Brocard F, Campidelli A, Bursztejn AC, Broséus J, Vial JP, Lesesve JF
**Journal:** Ann Biol Clin (Paris) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1684/abc.2021.1651](https://doi.org/10.1684/abc.2021.1651)

## Content

1. Ann Biol Clin (Paris). 2021 Jun 1;79(3):233-240. doi: 10.1684/abc.2021.1651.

[Use of the multiparametric panel CD3/CD4/CD8/CD7/CD26/CD158k in the detection
and use of flow cytometry of Sezary cells].

[Article in French]

Callet J(1), Latger-Cannard V(1), Gérard D(1), Salignac S(1), Granel-Brocard
F(2), Campidelli A(3), Bursztejn AC(2), Broséus J(1), Vial JP(4), Lesesve JF(1).

Author information:
(1)Service d'hématologie biologique, CHRU de Nancy, Plateforme de cytométrie en
flux, CHRU Nancy.
(2)Service de dermatologie, CHRU Nancy.
(3)Service d'hématologie clinique, CHRU de Nancy.
(4)Laboratoire hématologie, CHU Bordeaux.

The Sezary syndrome has been defined by a triad combining erythrodermia,
generalized lymphadenopathy, and the presence of circulating Sezary cells > 1
× 109/L characterized by a CD4+/CD8- phenotype with loss of one or more
T antigens (mainly CD7 and/or CD26). We retrospectively reviewed the
immunophenotypic profiles of 10 SS patients followed in our institution
(University Hospital at Nancy, France). The application of the WHO criteria
resulted in a diagnostic confirmation for 9 out of 10 cases. Since 2008, new
diagnostic and staging criteria have been proposed, including the CD158k/KIR3DL2
receptor detection. The application of these new criteria to our cohort led us
to notice a phenotypic heterogeneity of our cases but allowed to achieve a
relevant diagnosis of Sezary syndrome in all cases, especially for patients with
lymphopenia. The use of such a panel of monoclonal antibodies also optimized the
follow-up of the patients.

DOI: 10.1684/abc.2021.1651
PMID: 34165432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
