---
reference_id: "PMID:31474191"
title: Anti-IFNAR treatment does not reverse neuropsychiatric disease in MRL/lpr lupus mice.
authors:
- Huang MW
- Stock AD
- Mike EV
- Herlitz L
- Kolbeck R
- Putterman C
journal: Lupus
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1177/0961203319872265
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antibodies/administration & dosage, immunology"
- "Behavior, Animal"
- "Cognitive Dysfunction/etiology, therapy"
- "Depression/etiology, therapy"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Interferon Type I/immunology
- Interferon-alpha/immunology
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/immunology, physiopathology, therapy"
- "Lupus Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/immunology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred MRL lpr"
- "Receptor, Interferon alpha-beta/immunology"
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Anti-IFNAR treatment does not reverse neuropsychiatric disease in MRL/lpr lupus mice.
**Authors:** Huang MW, Stock AD, Mike EV, Herlitz L, Kolbeck R, Putterman C
**Journal:** Lupus (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0961203319872265](https://doi.org/10.1177/0961203319872265)

## Content

1. Lupus. 2019 Nov;28(13):1510-1523. doi: 10.1177/0961203319872265. Epub 2019 Aug
 31.

Anti-IFNAR treatment does not reverse neuropsychiatric disease in MRL/lpr lupus 
mice.

Huang MW(1), Stock AD(1), Mike EV(1), Herlitz L(2), Kolbeck R(3), Putterman 
C(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(3)Research and Early Development, Respiratory, Inflammation and Autoimmune, 
Biopharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.
(4)Division of Rheumatology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, 
USA.

Erratum in
    Lupus. 2019 Nov;28(13):1615. doi: 10.1177/0961203319883488.

OBJECTIVE: Many systemic lupus erythematosus patients display a type I 
interferon (IFN) signature, and IFNα levels positively correlate with disease 
severity. Previous studies blocking the type I IFN pathway systemically in lupus 
models showed some beneficial effects. However, its effects on neuropsychiatric 
manifestations have yet to be carefully assessed, even though IFNα has been 
associated with induction of depression. Our aim was to investigate whether 
disrupting the type I IFN pathway would attenuate the development of murine 
neuropsychiatric lupus.
METHODS: Female MRL/lpr mice were administered an antitype I IFN receptor 
(IFNAR) antibody or a control antibody intraperitoneally three times weekly for 
12 weeks starting at age 4-5 weeks. Behavior was assessed during and at the end 
of the treatment schedule.
RESULTS: No significant differences were seen between the anti-IFNAR- and 
control-treated mice when assessing for depression-like behavior or cognitive 
dysfunction, although anti-IFNAR antibody-treated mice displayed significant 
decreases in levels of IFN-stimulated genes. Anti-IFNAR treatment also did not 
significantly improve brain histology, cellular infiltration, or blood-brain 
barrier integrity.
CONCLUSIONS: Surprisingly, our results showed no improvement in neuropsychiatric 
disease and suggest that the role of IFNAR signaling in the pathogenesis of 
neuropsychiatric lupus continues to need to be carefully assessed.

DOI: 10.1177/0961203319872265
PMCID: PMC7541038
PMID: 31474191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests The authors 
declared the following potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: RK is a full-time 
employee of AstraZeneca. The other authors declared no potential conflicts of 
interested with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic autoimmune disease characterized by autoantibodies that target nuclear components and immune complex deposition. Patients are affected by various end-organ pathologies, including involvement of the kidneys and brain.1,2 Neuropsychiatric SLE (NPSLE) is the term used for manifestations of SLE in the central nervous system (CNS), which appear in up to 20% to 40% of SLE patients.1,3 Common signs and symptoms of NPSLE include depression, seizures, cognitive dysfunction, anxiety, and psychosis, which all greatly affect quality of life.4 Current therapies for treating NPSLE often target mostly the systemic disease rather than specifically the neuropsychiatric manifestations. Certain drugs, such as glucocorticoids, are often prescribed to treat NPSLE but are accompanied by many side effects, such as increased susceptibility to infection.5,6 One major obstacle in drug development is that the pathogenesis of NPSLE is still not fully understood, preventing the development of more targeted treatments.

Classically produced in response to viral infections, type I interferons (IFNs) are mainly released by plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs), which have been shown to be actively recruited to and accumulate at areas of inflammation in SLE.7 Type I IFNs signal through the type I IFN receptor (IFNAR), which is present on most tissue types.8 Gene expression studies have demonstrated activation of IFN pathways in SLE patients (known as the IFN signature) as well as positive correlations between levels of type I IFNs and disease activity and severity.9 This evidence strongly suggests type I IFN involvement in the context of SLE.

Though type I IFNs have been closely associated with progression of SLE, and inhibiting components of its pathway has been effective in attenuating systemic as well as renal disease,10–13 the potential of this approach in treating neuropsychiatric manifestations has yet to be fully explored. This is particularly important at the present time, when anti-IFN antibodies are in phase 2–3 trials in human lupus.14,15 IFNα can precipitate depression when administered as a therapy, a common treatment used in the past for hepatitis C;16,17 interestingly, depression is one of the most common symptoms in NPSLE patients.1,18 Furthermore, transgenic mice overproducing IFNα intrathecally showed severe behavioral alterations, including seizures and impairment in spatial discrimination learning (in a nonlupus context),19 suggesting that type I IFNs may also mediate, or majorly contribute to, the neuropsychiatric manifestations of lupus.

The MRL/MpJ-Faslpr (MRL/lpr) mouse model is a spontaneous mouse model commonly used for studying SLE. The lpr mutation is in the FAS gene, resulting in ineffective Fas-mediated apoptosis that leads to nuclear autoantibody production, hypergammaglobulinemia, and ultimately end-organ damage.20,21 Organs affected in MRL/lpr mice include the kidneys and, more important for this study, the brain. The MRL/lpr strain is one of the better-characterized mouse lupus models that recapitulates certain neuropsychiatric phenotypes of the human disease, including cognitive deficits and depression-like behavior.3,20 For this study, we investigated the role of type I IFNs in the pathogenesis of the neuropsychiatric symptoms seen in MRL/lpr mice. We treated MRL/lpr mice with an anti-IFNAR antibody and assessed behavioral defects and leukocyte infiltration in the brain to determine whether blocking IFNAR may prove valuable for the treatment for NPSLE.

Female MRL/lpr mice were bred from mice purchased from Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME) and housed at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine animal facility (Bronx, NY) for the duration of the study. Three independent studies were performed. In two experiments (analyzed as Cohort 1), mice received 250 μg per injection during the treatment period of 12 weeks (Cohort 1A, used for behavioral studies, serology, histology, and immunohistochemistry; Cohort 1B, used for behavioral studies, serology, and gene expression studies), whereas in one experiment mice received 350 μg per injection (Cohort 2) (Figure 1). At age 4–5 weeks, mice were injected intraperitoneally with a single initial 3 mg dose of an anti-IFNAR antibody (MAR1-5A3, immunoglobulin G (IgG)1; AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD) or an IgG isotype control antibody (MAR1-1A7), followed by their respective cohort dosage of antibody three times per week for 12 weeks. Antibodies (MAR1-5A3 and MAR1-1A7) were gifts from AstraZeneca (formerly MedImmune). Dosing was determined based on previous studies with this antibody.10,22 Cohort 2 received a higher dose than Cohort 1 to determine whether this would improve efficacy. Cohorts 1 and 2 also differed in time of testing, as further described below, to ensure that any therapeutic benefit was detected. Cohort 1 included 16 mice in each group, whereas Cohort 2 had 8 in each group. All mice were sacrificed at age 16–17 weeks. Serum was collected from all mice before sacrificing. All animal protocols were approved by the Albert Einstein College of Medicine Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.

Cohort 1 mice were anesthetized and perfused with phosphate-buffered saline at age 16–17 weeks. Brains and kidneys from Cohort 1A mice (n = 7) were fixed in 2.5% paraformaldehyde for 24 hours at 4°C and then diluted down to 1% until paraffin embedding. Paraffin embedding, sectioning, and staining for hematoxylin and eosin (H&E; brains and kidneys) and periodic acid-Schiff (PAS; kidneys only) were performed at the Histopathology and Comparative Pathology Core at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine. Choroid plexus, brain cortex, and spleen from Cohort 1B mice (n = 9) were flash frozen with liquid nitrogen immediately after perfusion for downstream RNA analysis.

Total IgG and anti-dsDNA serum levels were assessed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, as previously described.23,24

Kidney sections stained with H&E and PAS were scored by a blinded nephropathologist, using a range from 0 to 4, as previously described.23

Proteinuria levels were assessed semiquantitatively using Uristix test strips (Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics, Tarrytown, NY). Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) levels were measured by the DIUR 500 kit purchased from BioAssay Systems (Hayward, CA), following the manufacturer’s instructions.

All mice were assessed for depression-like behavior and cognitive dysfunction through a series of behavioral tests, including the Porsolt swim test, and object placement (OP) and object recognition (OR) tasks.

Mice were placed in a clear tank of water at a temperature of 27°C for 10 minutes, leaving the first minute for the mice to adjust and scoring the next 9 minutes in 3-minute time bins manually with stopwatches. Each test was also digitally recorded with Viewer III software. Percent time spent immobile was calculated by ([total floating time (in seconds)]/[total time scored (in seconds)]) × 100. Cohort 1 was tested at age 8 weeks, whereas Cohort 2 was tested at age 11 weeks. Cohort 2 was tested at a later age to see whether a longer treatment course would be more effective (Figure 1).

Each test requires two trials, a training trial and a testing trial, in which the mice are placed into an arena and exposed to two objects. The setup for the testing trial varies from that of the training trial in that one object is either moved (OP) or replaced with another object (OR). The two trials are separated by a timed retention interval, testing the animals’ memory. Cohort 1 was tested at age 16 weeks (before sacrifice), whereas Cohort 2 was tested at age 11 weeks (with the Porsolt swim test) (Figure 1).

For the OP task, Cohort 1 was trained for 5 minutes, retained for 16 minutes, and then tested for 3 minutes. Cohort 2 was also trained and tested for 5 and 3 minutes, respectively, but were retained for 20 minutes between trials. For the OR task, Cohort 1 and 2 both were trained and tested for 3 minutes during each trial, with a 90-minute retention interval separating the trials.

Exploration, as defined by physical contract with the object, was timed manually with stopwatches. Preference scores (%) were calculated by ([exploration time of the novel object (seconds)]/ [exploration time of both objects (seconds)]) × 100. A preference score at or above 55% was considered a passing preference, as previously determined.25

H&E-stained sections were scored, using a range from 0 to 4, based on stromal expansion and cellular infiltration in the choroid plexus of the third ventricle, as described.26

Coronal sections of the paraffin-embedded brain tissue were cut for immunofluorescent staining. All sections were blocked initially with 20% normal horse serum. Sections were incubated with a primary goat antimouse albumin antibody (1:300; Bethyl, Montgomery, TX), followed by a secondary Cy5-conjugated donkey antigoat antibody (1:500; Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA), for albumin staining. IgG deposition in the brain was assessed by staining with a directly Cy5-conjugated donkey antimouse IgG (1:100; Jackson ImmunoResearch). Leukocyte infiltration was also assessed by staining for CD3 and B220, using primary antibodies of rabbit antimouse (1:100; Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and rat antimouse (1:100; BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) and secondary antibodies of Cy5-conjugated donkey antirabbit and AF488-conjugated donkey antirat (1:100; Jackson ImmunoResearch), respectively. The secondary antibody applied alone served as a negative control.

Fluorescence-stained slides were imaged under an Invitrogen microscope (Invitrogen EVOS FL Auto 2 Cell Imaging System). Images were analyzed and processed using ImageJ (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD).

RNA was extracted using the TRIzol reagent and isolated using the Zymo Research Direct-zol MiniPrep Plus Kit (Irvine, CA). Complementary DNA was prepared using Invitrogen SuperScript IV VILO Master Mix with ezDNase Enzyme. RT–quantitative PCR was performed in triplicate, and values were normalized to GAPDH as described previously.27

Terminal serum samples from Cohort 1B were separately pooled for each treatment group and analyzed using the RayBiotech Mouse Inflammation Ab array C1 (Peachtree Corners, GA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Relative signal intensities were measured using ImageJ.

Data were analyzed using GraphPad Prism 7 software (La Jolla, CA) and JMP14 (SAS, Cary, NC). Differences between two groups of normally distributed data were compared using an unpaired t test, whereas two groups of non-normally distributed data were compared using a Mann-Whitney test, with significance considered as p < .05. All graphs are displayed as mean ± SEM.

Following an initial loading dose, female MRL/lpr mice received intraperitoneal (IP) injections of an anti-IFNAR antibody three times per week after an initial load dose for 12 weeks, starting at age 4–5 weeks (Figure 1). Systemic disease in MRL/lpr mice is characterized by hypergammaglobulinemia and high titers of antinuclear antibodies.20 The systemic effect of the anti-IFNAR antibody treatment was evaluated by comparing antibodies and autoantibodies present in the terminal serum taken at age 16–17 weeks. Cohort 1 showed no significant difference in levels for total IgG (36.02 ± 23.17mg/ml (treated) vs 38.09 ± 30.73 mg/ml (control); p = .67) (Figure 2(a)) or anti-dsDNA IgG (216.0 ± 56.61 units (treated) vs 217.9 ± 85.36 units (control); p = .95) (Figure 2(b)) between anti-IFNAR and control antibody–treated mice. The lack of effect on antibody levels was recapitulated in Cohort 2 (p = .56 for total IgG levels and p = .57 for anti-dsDNA IgG levels between groups; data not shown). On measuring levels of antibodies for each IgG isotype individually, no differences were seen between either group or cohort for any isotype (data not shown). The only exception was the IgG3 levels between groups in Cohort 2; the treatment group had significantly decreased levels of total IgG3 (p = .03) (data not shown). Overall, blocking IFNAR with a neutralizing antibody has no significant effect on serum antibody levels in MRL/lpr mice.

Assessment of renal damage and function was performed as another important indicator of systemic disease. We found that anti-IFNAR treatment did not improve renal histopathology in MRL/lpr mice compared with the control treatment. Specifically, interstitial inflammation and endocapillary proliferation scores were similar between the groups (p = .16 and p = .07, respectively) (Figure 3(a)).

As for renal function, terminal serum from either cohort showed no significant differences in BUN levels between the anti-IFNAR– and control-treated groups (p = .17 (Cohort 1, Figure 3(b)) and p = .90 (Cohort 2, data not shown)). Protein levels in the urine also did not normalize with treatment (p = .33 (Cohort 1, Figure 3(c)) and p = .07 (Cohort 2, data not shown)). These functional studies, together with the renal histopathology data, indicate that neutralizing IFNAR in MRL/lpr mice did not significantly alter the extent of kidney damage that is a feature of lupus in this strain.

Cognitive dysfunction is a common symptom seen among NPSLE patients and is mirrored in MRL/lpr mice.3 The OR task assesses recognition memory, whereas the OP task measures visuospatial memory impairment. Because rodents tend to prefer novel objects and placements, memory is measured by a preference for the novel object/ placement respectively during the test trials for the assessment of both tasks.

For the OR task, the treated mice in Cohort 1 showed 6 of 14 mice (43%) with a passing preference, as compared with 7 of 16 mice (44%) in the control group. No significant difference was seen between these two groups (p = .96), indicating that the treatment had no meaningful effect on improving recognition memory in lupus mice (Figure 4(a)). Similarly, Cohort 2 did not exhibit a significant improvement in the treatment group (p = .28; data not shown). The OP task also did not suggest any improvement in visuospatial memory among the mice; both cohorts showed no significant difference between treatment or control groups. In Cohort 1, only 5 of the 16 anti-IFNAR antibody-treated mice (31%) passed the OP task, as compared with 7 of 16 mice (44%) in the isotype control-treated group (p = .46) (Figure 4(b)). A lack of improvement in OP (spatial memory) with anti-IFNAR treatment was confirmed in Cohort 2 (p = .26; data not shown).

MRL/lpr mice robustly exhibit depression-like behavior, mimicking the depression phenotype in NPSLE patients.3 Using the Porsolt swim test, MRL/lpr mice demonstrate despair-like behavior as early as age 5–6 weeks. The Porsolt swim test measures depression by quantitating the percent time spent immobile in the water, as an indicator of behavioral despair. Cohort 1 had average immobility percentages of 64.33 ± 7.65% (treated) and 67.07 ± 7.97% (control) (p = .32; Figure 4(c)), whereas normal mice display immobility of about 25% (data not shown). Cohort 2 showed similar results to Cohort 1 (p = .30; data not shown).

Mouse NPSLE is characterized by brain barrier abnormalities and lymphocytic infiltration.28,29 We next determined whether anti-IFNAR treatment had an effect on the permeability of the blood-brain barrier (BBB), brain histology, and leukocyte infiltration in the CNS.

Using immunofluorescent staining, we first assessed brain barrier permeability. Brain barrier disruption is usually implicated as the entry point of peripherally produced autoantibodies into the brain in NPSLE. Neither albumin nor IgG staining, indicators of barrier permeability, showed significant differences between the groups (p = .72 and p = .16, respectively; Figure 5).

Lymphocytic infiltration of the choroid plexus is a common feature of NPSLE in the MRL/lpr strain.28,29 MRL/lpr mice in this study showed notable cellular infiltration in the third and lateral ventricles of the brain, with no observable difference between the anti-IFNAR antibody–treated and control groups (Figure 6(a)). This finding was confirmed with scoring of the H&E-stained sections for stromal expansion and degree of infiltration (p = .53; Figure 6(b)). We also stained the brain sections for T cells (CD3) and B cells (B220) to determine whether, despite similar quantities of infiltration overall, there was any variation between the groups in the composition of the leukocyte infiltration associated with the neurological phenotype in MRL/lpr mice. Differences between treated and control mice were not observed in lymphocytic infiltration (Figure 6(a) and (c)) or in cell distribution (p = .92 for CD3+ cells, p = .53 for B220+ cells; Figure 6(d)). These findings collectively indicate that the blockade of IFNAR did not normalize barrier function or alter cellular infiltration, which is consistent with the lack of changes in the behavioral phenotype between the treated and control mice.

Type I IFN activates several cellular signaling pathways that promote downstream immune responses.30 Successful IFNAR blockade would therefore result in downregulation of these ISGs, since triggering via the receptor is inhibited. We isolated total RNA from the spleen, brain cortex, and choroid plexus from Cohort 1B mice and tested for ISG expression levels to determine whether the treatment had the expected effect. In the treatment group, IP10 was significantly decreased in the spleen (p = .023) and choroid plexus (p = .0088) when compared with the control group (Figure 7(a)). Treated mice also demonstrated a significant decrease in macrophage colony-stimulating factor (CSF1) expression levels in the spleen (p = .031) (data not shown), whereas the brain cortex exhibited significantly decreased IFN-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 1 (IFIT1) levels (p = .012) (Figure 7(b)).

Next, serum from Cohort 1B was tested by protein array to similarly assess the effect of antibody treatment on circulating ISG-encoded proteins and/or cytokines important in brain and systemic inflammation. We found that several ISG-encoded chemokines and cytokines were decreased in the serum of the anti-IFNAR–treated mice when compared with that of the IgG control–treated mice, including interleukin-12, CSF1, CXCL5, CCL9, TNFRI, and TNFRII (Figure 7(c), and data not shown). Interestingly, CXCL5 and TNFR1, along with macrophage colony-stimulating factor, are important in proinflammatory responses in the brain.31–35 Taken together, the RNA expression and serum chemokine/cytokine levels indicate that there were differences in production of mediators downstream of type I IFN pathway activation as a result of blocking IFNAR, and highlight the presence of an altered systemic and brain inflammatory milieu attributable to treatment despite the lack of observable differences in behavioral phenotype.

SLE can result in multiple end-organ pathologies, with brain involvement as one of the more common disease manifestations.2 Brain involvement often manifests as depression, anxiety, and cognitive dysfunction.1 Though NPSLE is not the leading cause of death in SLE patients, the symptoms in affected patients greatly affect quality of life, and neuropsychiatric involvement is prognostically significant. Current treatments are only partially effective and frequently not designed or tested specifically for the CNS manifestations.4,6 Improved understanding of disease pathology in NPSLE is expected to translate into better treatments.

The type I IFN signature is characteristic of most SLE patients.7 Increased levels of this cytokine are believed to arise as a consequence of the release of nuclear components from improperly cleared apoptotic material.36 Immune complexes containing DNA and anti-DNA antibodies can induce IFNα production mediated through the Fc gamma receptor IIa (FcγRIIa) on pDCs, the main producer of IFNα.37 Receptor-mediated endocytosis by FcγRIIa results in the internalization of these DNA-containing immune complexes, which trigger the endosomal toll-like receptors (TLRs) in the pDCs. Cells then “mistakenly” interpret this signal as a viral invasion, producing excess IFNα.38,39 Furthermore, type I IFNs are known to induce additional production of IFNs, creating a positive feedback loop and continuously stimulating the immune response.7

The relationship of type I IFNs with systemic disease in lupus is well documented. Many studies have shown IFNα to be elevated in patient serum and levels to be correlated with disease activity and severity.9 There have also been case studies reporting a lupus-like syndrome appearing in patients after treatment with IFNα, with more than 20% developing antinuclear antibodies, a common antibody seen in SLE patients.7,40 These findings make it logical to pursue the type I IFN pathway as a potential therapeutic target.

Previous studies have looked at the effect of blocking components of the type I IFN pathway in the context of systemic disease. TLR7 and TLR9 antagonist treatment both resulted in reduced glomerulonephritis in MRL/lpr mice.11,41 A study conducted in NZB/W F1 mice showed that inducing production of transient neutralizing antibodies with IFNα kinoid, an adjuvanted IFNα immunogen, significantly delayed proteinuria and renal lesions.13 This has potential clinical relevance because some SLE patients display endogenous antibodies against IFNα that correlate with lower disease activity.8,37,42 However, preliminary results of IFNα kinoid in human lupus do not mirror these results and instead showed no significant difference in disease activity between active- and control-treated patients.8 Rontalizumab and sifalimumab both are anti-IFNα antibody drugs that in clinical trials have shown reduced disease activity and flares in lupus patients compared with placebo or standard of care alone.15,43

As for blocking IFNAR, NZB, B6/lpr, and NZM 2328 mice deficient in IFNAR all showed reduced disease, as evidenced by reduced glomerulonephritis and IgG deposits in the kidney.12,44,45 Male BXSB mice treated early with anti-IFNAR also showed decreased glomerulonephritis scores and kidney deposits.10 Interestingly, a study by Hron and Peng demonstrated worse disease in MRL/lpr mice when IFNAR was knocked out.46 However, this result was not recapitulated with an anti-IFNAR treatment, as seen in the study by Baccala et al.10 or in the current study, suggesting a potential difference in IFNAR’s role in the disease depending on degree of inhibition.

In human lupus, the anti-IFNAR monoclonal antibody anifrolumab decreases the type I IFN signature in SLE patients without activation of Fcmediated effector functions in B cells in vitro.47 Additionally, in a phase 2 trial, anifrolumab significantly decreased disease activity, mostly in the skin and joints, in patients with moderate-to-severe SLE despite incomplete responses to standard therapy previously.48 The study, however, excluded patients with NPSLE.

Though inhibiting IFN signaling in lupus seems promising for renal and other disease manifestations, the role of IFNα and the effect of IFNAR blockade has yet to be thoroughly explored in the context of NPSLE. Two studies, one in humans and one in mice, did however examine certain neurological aspects. Shiozawa and colleagues reported increased levels of IFNα present in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of patients with lupus psychosis.49 A decrease of CSF IFNα levels was seen after resolution of the psychosis, suggesting that IFNα plays a role in this particular disease manifestation. Experimentally, Bialas et al. looked at the effect of blocking IFNAR in 564Igi mice, a lupus-prone mouse strain transgenic for an antinuclear antibody that displays IFNAR-dependent autoimmunity.50 Treatment with an anti-IFNAR antibody prevented certain behavioral phenotypes, such as anxiety and impaired spatial memory. Bialas and colleagues, however, used a mouse strain not yet in common use to model NPSLE. MRL/lpr were not treated in this study; though anti-IFNAR antibody treatment reduced the IFN signature and microglia activation in the NZB/W F1 lupus-prone strain, no effect on the neurobehavioral profile was reported. Differences in therapeutic responses between lupus animal models are not uncommon, and it is possible that the brain IFN signature in the MRL/lpr strain is more resistant, and/or that brain access is more limited, than in the 564Igi model.

In our study, we used MRL/lpr mice, which demonstrate behavioral phenotypes commonly seen in human lupus, including depression-like behavior and memory deficits.3,20 Although the genetic abnormality underlying the development of lupus in MRL/lpr mice, defective Fas signaling, is not a common contributor to human lupus, nevertheless several clinical manifestations are highly analogous to those present in human disease, including antinuclear autoimmunity, cutaneous, joint, and renal disease, and neuropsychiatric deficits, making MRL/lpr mice the most common strain used in exploring the latter phenotype. This particular strain allowed us to explore the key manifestation of depression not seen in other murine studies, for a more comprehensive look at the role of type I IFN in NPSLE. Indeed, investigating the role of IFNAR in lupus-associated depression is especially important because IFNα and depression have been so strongly correlated outside the context of lupus.

By RNA sequencing, we previously found that MRL/lpr mice show significantly increased brain expression of ISGs.51 Together with the beneficial effect of IFNAR blockade seen in early disease,10 this strongly suggests this particular mouse model is appropriate for assessing the effects of therapeutic targeting of type I IFN on neurobehavioral deficits in lupus, though the strain does not consistently demonstrate the systemic IFN signature seen in human lupus patients.36,52,53 Moreover, it has been previously demonstrated that NPSLE may present before any clinical indications of systemic disease.3 Because this disparate timeline may indicate that the mechanisms of systemic and neurologic disease may diverge, it might be possible to observe a dissociation between brain and extracranial responses to anti-IFNAR treatment. Furthermore, it is interesting to note that though Baccala et al.10 did find that blocking IFNAR improved certain disease parameters in younger MRL/lpr mice (age 12 weeks), these differences disappeared as the mice aged (age 16 weeks) and survival was similar to that of control mice. Because in our study the neurobehavioral assessments were carried out at age 16–17 weeks, our results are not inconsistent with this study.

Our findings indicate that type I IFNs may not be as important in the neuropsychiatric manifestations of SLE as previously thought. This particular antibody is active, as seen by its effect in mice immunized by in vivo hydrodynamic transfection.22 Moreover, there were significant differences both in RNA expression and serum cytokine levels of known IFN-stimulated mediators, some of known importance in brain inflammation, between anti-IFNAR antibody and isotype control–treated mice. However, neither recognition nor visuospatial memory improved in the treated mice. The more surprising result is that we also did not see any significant attenuation of the depression-like behavior with anti-IFNAR treatment, despite ample evidence supporting IFNα’s ability to induce depression. This difference was not a result of the age at which we tested the mice, since MRL/lpr mice robustly demonstrate a depressive phenotype by age 8 weeks.3 Moreover, the behavioral assessments used here have been repeatedly validated in this strain, so we do not attribute the negative results to experimental design. As another potential caveat, in general the predictive value of preclinical neuropsychiatric models can be low. For example, many antidepressants that have failed in human studies have shown promise in preclinical models. The same observation is applicable to cognition as well, which is a much more difficult area to treat. Nevertheless, the MRL/lpr strain is currently the best available animal model for human neuropsychiatric lupus. Moreover, at least cyclophosphamide is effective for neuropsychiatric manifestations both in MRL/lpr mice54 and in human lupus. Structural brain changes as an explanation for resistance to anti-IFNAR antibody therapy is also not likely, since as compared with other lupus strains these are not commonly seen in MRL/lpr mice.55

From a molecular standpoint, the BBB was previously believed to be the entryway for circulating systemic antibodies to enter the CNS and cause the behavioral manifestations. However, it has been recently shown that the barrier’s permeability remains the same despite being challenged with external stressors28; our findings also saw no difference in permeability. Additionally, it has been suggested that the blood-cerebrospinal fluid barrier, represented by the choroid plexus, may act as a major barrier responsible for entry of infiltrating cells and pathogenic antibodies.29 This is consistent with the leukocytic infiltration we have seen at the choroid plexus in MRL/lpr mice. Still, the type I IFN pathway appears not to play a role in infiltration of these cells into the CNS in the context of lupus, as neither the amount nor composition of the infiltration changed with the blockade of IFNAR.

Our results suggest that blocking IFNAR systemically does not attenuate neuropsychiatric disease, and the cytokine may not be a universal target for the treatment of NPSLE, despite the brain IFN signature present in the MRL/lpr strain and significant decreases in ISG expression associated with IFNAR blockade in treated mice. Employing a positive control arm (e.g. a drug of known efficacy such as cyclophosphamide) was unfortunately not part of the experimental design. Although no changes were seen in anti-DNA antibodies or renal parameters, our previous studies demonstrating the persistence of neurobehavioral deficits even after normalization of systemic disease by bone marrow transplantation in MRL/lpr mice suggests there are brain-specific molecular pathways that may be modulated even if an effect on systemic disease is not evident.56 For future studies in mice lupus models, it may be beneficial to explore different dosages or frequency of delivery, as a more optimum combination of the two factors may exist. It is possible that a more prolonged therapeutic course may have been more effective in demonstrating an effect on depression and cognition. Furthermore, because the brain barriers separate the CNS from the rest of the body, an antibody given systemically may not block IFN activity intrathecally; delivery via intracerebroventricular injection might be more beneficial. Additionally, it will be important to determine the effect of an anti-IFNAR treatment in other validated mouse models of NPSLE to confirm the current study’s findings. As antibodies against components of the type I IFN pathway are currently in clinical trials, dedicated human studies for NPSLE and its manifestations are still important to conduct. Especially since drugs blocking the IFN pathway have shown significant improvement of other disease indices, the role of blocking IFN signaling in NPSLE deserves to be thoroughly studied.