---
reference_id: "PMID:18216294"
title: CD27-CD70 interactions in the pathogenesis of Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia.
authors:
- Ho AW
- Hatjiharissi E
- Ciccarelli BT
- Branagan AR
- Hunter ZR
- Leleu X
- Tournilhac O
- Xu L
- "O'Connor K"
- Manning RJ
- Santos DD
- Chemaly M
- Patterson CJ
- Soumerai JD
- Munshi NC
- McEarchern JA
- Law CL
- Grewal IS
- Treon SP
journal: Blood
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-04-084525
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/metabolism"
- "CD27 Ligand/immunology, metabolism, physiology"
- Case-Control Studies
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Humans
- "Mast Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, SCID"
- "Plasma Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Protein Binding
- Tumor Burden
- "Tumor Necrosis Factor Receptor Superfamily, Member 7/metabolism, physiology"
- "Waldenstrom Macroglobulinemia/etiology, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CD27-CD70 interactions in the pathogenesis of Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia.
**Authors:** Ho AW, Hatjiharissi E, Ciccarelli BT, Branagan AR, Hunter ZR, Leleu X, Tournilhac O, Xu L, O'Connor K, Manning RJ, Santos DD, Chemaly M, Patterson CJ, Soumerai JD, Munshi NC, McEarchern JA, Law CL, Grewal IS, Treon SP
**Journal:** Blood (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2007-04-084525](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2007-04-084525)

## Content

1. Blood. 2008 Dec 1;112(12):4683-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-04-084525. Epub 2008
 Jan 23.

CD27-CD70 interactions in the pathogenesis of Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia.

Ho AW(1), Hatjiharissi E, Ciccarelli BT, Branagan AR, Hunter ZR, Leleu X,
Tournilhac O, Xu L, O'Connor K, Manning RJ, Santos DD, Chemaly M, Patterson CJ,
Soumerai JD, Munshi NC, McEarchern JA, Law CL, Grewal IS, Treon SP.

Author information:
(1)Bing Center for Waldenström's Macroglobulinemia, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Waldenström macroglobulinemia (WM) is a B-cell malignancy characterized by an
IgM monoclonal gammopathy and bone marrow (BM) infiltration with
lymphoplasmacytic cells (LPCs). Excess mast cells (MCs) are commonly present in
WM, and provide growth and survival signals to LPCs through several TNF family
ligands (CD40L, a proliferation-inducing ligand [APRIL], and B-lymphocyte
stimulator factor [BLYS]). As part of these studies, we demonstrated that WM
LPCs secrete soluble CD27 (sCD27), which is elevated in patients with WM (P <
.001 vs healthy donors), and serves as a faithful marker of disease.
Importantly, sCD27 stimulated expression of CD40L on 10 of 10 BM MC samples and
APRIL on 4 of 10 BM MC samples obtained from patients with WM as well as on LAD2
MCs. Moreover, the SGN-70 humanized monoclonal antibody, which binds to CD70
(the receptor-ligand partner of CD27), abrogated sCD27 mediated up-regulation of
CD40L and APRIL on WM MCs. Last, treatment of severe combined
immunodeficiency-human (SCID-hu) mice with established WM using the SGN-70
antibody blocked disease progression in 12 of 12 mice, whereas disease
progressed in all 5 untreated mice. The results of these studies demonstrate a
functional role for sCD27 in WM pathogenesis, along with its utility as a
surrogate marker of disease and a target in the treatment of WM.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2007-04-084525
PMCID: PMC2597134
PMID: 18216294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
