---
reference_id: "PMID:718271"
title: The arthritis of mixed connective tissue disease.
authors:
- Bennett RM
- "O'Connell DJ"
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '1978'
doi: 10.1136/ard.37.5.397
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The arthritis of mixed connective tissue disease.
**Authors:** Bennett RM, O'Connell DJ
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (1978)
**DOI:** [10.1136/ard.37.5.397](https://doi.org/10.1136/ard.37.5.397)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 1978 Oct;37(5):397-403. doi: 10.1136/ard.37.5.397.

The arthritis of mixed connective tissue disease.

Bennett RM, O'Connell DJ.

Twenty patients with mixed connective tissue disease were followed for 5 years. 
Arthritis occurred in all 20 patients, being the presenting complaint in 11 
patients. The joints most frequently involved were the proximal interphalangeal 
(PIP), metacarpophalangeal (MCP), wrists, metatarsophalangeal (MTP), and knee; 
the distribution tended to be symmetrical, mimicking early rheumatoid arthritis. 
Joint deformities occurred in 6 patients, but apart from 1 patient with 
arthritis mutilans, significant functional impairment was not encountered. 
Radiologically small punched out bone erosions, asymmetrically distributed, were 
the most characteristic finding; other notable changes were aseptic necrosis, 
tuft erosions, and periarticular calcification. Joint effusions were 
non-inflammatory, the cellular content was predominantly lymphocytic and the C3 
level was normal. Most cases were controlled with non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory agents and invariably responded to prednisone less than or 
equal to 7.5 mg/day.

DOI: 10.1136/ard.37.5.397
PMCID: PMC1000265
PMID: 718271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]