---
reference_id: "PMID:36722221"
title: "Arginase deficiency in Bulgaria: first cases and potential endemic region for the disorder."
authors:
- Atemin S
- Todorov T
- Tourtourikov I
- Ivanova MB
- Chamova T
- Avdjieva-Tzavella D
- Kathom H
- Georgieva B
- Guergueltcheva V
- Savov IBA
- Tournev I
- Mitev V
- Todorova A
journal: J Genet
year: '2023'
keywords:
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Humans
- "Hyperargininemia/epidemiology, genetics"
- Bulgaria/epidemiology
- Ataxia
- Consanguinity
- Ethnicity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arginase deficiency in Bulgaria: first cases and potential endemic region for the disorder.
**Authors:** Atemin S, Todorov T, Tourtourikov I, Ivanova MB, Chamova T, Avdjieva-Tzavella D, Kathom H, Georgieva B, Guergueltcheva V, Savov IBA, Tournev I, Mitev V, Todorova A
**Journal:** J Genet (2023)

## Content

1. J Genet. 2023;102:2.

Arginase deficiency in Bulgaria: first cases and potential endemic region for
the disorder.

Atemin S(1), Todorov T, Tourtourikov I, Ivanova MB, Chamova T, Avdjieva-Tzavella
D, Kathom H, Georgieva B, Guergueltcheva V, Savov IBA, Tournev I, Mitev V,
Todorova A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University Sofia,
1431 Sofia, Bulgaria. slavena_tsaneva@abv.bg.

Arginase deficiency is an autosomal recessive urea cycle disorder caused by
pathogenic variants in the ARG1 gene. The clinical features of the disease
include spasticity, tremour, ataxia, hypotonia, microcephaly and seizures.
Growth delay can also be observed in the affected individuals. Here we describe
the results from molecular-genetic analysis of two patients with arginase
deficiency. In the first case, we reported a novel homozygous missense variant
c.775G>A p.(Gly259Ser) in a patient with Bulgarian ethnic origin. In the second
case, a novel homozygous splice site variant c.329+1G>A was detected in a
patient from a consanguineous family of Roma ethnic origin. A hundred samples of
newborns of Roma origin were screened for variant c.329+1G>A and one individual
was found to be a heterozygous carrier of variant c.329+1G> A. The results from
this study indicated the necessity for screening of the Roma population with
respect to the disease arginase deficiency in Bulgaria.

PMID: 36722221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
