---
reference_id: "PMID:39428391"
title: Treatment and survival of non-metastatic small cell carcinoma of the bladder from multiple centers in China.
authors:
- Lu J
- Zhou J
- Liu Y
- Li Y
- Tang Y
- Li N
- Wang S
- Song Y
- Zhang W
- Xiang X
- Jin J
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-75512-z
keywords:
- Humans
- "Urinary Bladder Neoplasms/mortality, pathology, therapy"
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- "Carcinoma, Small Cell/therapy, mortality, pathology"
- China/epidemiology
- Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Cystectomy
- Adult
- Treatment Outcome
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Combined Modality Therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment and survival of non-metastatic small cell carcinoma of the bladder from multiple centers in China.
**Authors:** Lu J, Zhou J, Liu Y, Li Y, Tang Y, Li N, Wang S, Song Y, Zhang W, Xiang X, Jin J
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-024-75512-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-75512-z)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Oct 20;14(1):24652. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-75512-z.

Treatment and survival of non-metastatic small cell carcinoma of the bladder 
from multiple centers in China.

Lu J(1), Zhou J(1), Liu Y(2), Li Y(2), Tang Y(2), Li N(2), Wang S(2), Song Y(2), 
Zhang W(1), Xiang X(1), Jin J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, National Cancer Center, National Clinical 
Research Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital & Shenzhen Hospital, Chinese Academy 
of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 113 Baohe Avenue, Longgang 
District, Shenzhen, 518172, Guangdong, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Department of Radiation Oncology, 
National Clinical Research Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital, National Cancer 
Center, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 
Beijing, 100021, China.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, National Cancer Center, National Clinical 
Research Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital & Shenzhen Hospital, Chinese Academy 
of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 113 Baohe Avenue, Longgang 
District, Shenzhen, 518172, Guangdong, China. jinjing@csco.org.cn.

Small cell carcinoma of the bladder (SCCB) is a rare, highly malignant 
neuroendocrine tumor. This study attempted to analyze tumor characteristics, 
treatments and clinical outcomes in China. We conducted a retrospective analysis 
of patients diagnosed with non-metastatic SCCB at multi-institutions between 
January 2007 and January 2022. The Kaplan-Meier method was used to calculate 
survival. A total of 20 patients were included. 10 had localized disease 
(T1-2N0), and 10 had locally advanced disease (≥ T3 or N+). 13 received local 
treatment (partial cystectomy or transurethral resection of the bladder tumor) 
and 7 received radical treatment (radical cystectomy or radiotherapy). A total 
of 18 patients (90%) received chemotherapy (CT), either neoadjuvant CT (n = 5) 
or adjuvant CT (n = 13). The median OS for the receiving local treatment was 
65.3 months (95% CI 0 to 138 months) and the corresponding 1-year, 2-year, and 
3-year OS was 77%, 54%, and 54%, respectively. The median OS for the receiving 
radical treatment was not reached and the corresponding 1-year, 2-year, and 
3-year OS was 100%, 100%, and 75%, respectively. The median PFS for receiving 
local treatment was 13.8 months (95% CI 9.3 to 18.3 months) and the 
corresponding 1-year, 2-year, and 3-year PFS was 46%, 31%, and 31%, 
respectively. The median PFS for the receiving radical treatment was not reached 
and the corresponding 1-year, 2-year, and 3-year PFS was 83%, 56%, and 56%, 
respectively. This study reported the largest cohort of non-metastatic SCCB 
among Chinese population. Given its metastatic potential, CT remained an 
essential part of the treatment. The survival outcomes of radical cystectomy and 
RT in non-metastatic SCCB were encouraging.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-75512-z
PMCID: PMC11491447
PMID: 39428391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.