---
reference_id: "PMID:39080518"
title: Unraveling the interplay of neuroinflammatory signaling between parenchymal and meningeal cells in migraine headache.
authors:
- Dalkara T
- Kaya Z
- Erdener ŞE
journal: J Headache Pain
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s10194-024-01827-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unraveling the interplay of neuroinflammatory signaling between parenchymal and meningeal cells in migraine headache.
**Authors:** Dalkara T, Kaya Z, Erdener ŞE
**Journal:** J Headache Pain (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s10194-024-01827-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s10194-024-01827-x)

## Content

1. J Headache Pain. 2024 Jul 31;25(1):124. doi: 10.1186/s10194-024-01827-x.

Unraveling the interplay of neuroinflammatory signaling between parenchymal and 
meningeal cells in migraine headache.

Dalkara T(1), Kaya Z(2), Erdener ŞE(3).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Neuroscience and, Molecular Biology and Genetics, Faculty of 
Science, Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey. t.dalkara@bilkent.edu.tr.
(2)Department of Neurology, Başkent University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(3)Institute of Neurological Sciences and Psychiatry, Hacettepe University, 
Ankara, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: The initiation of migraine headaches and the involvement of 
neuroinflammatory signaling between parenchymal and meningeal cells remain 
unclear. Experimental evidence suggests that a cascade of inflammatory signaling 
originating from neurons may extend to the meninges, thereby inducing neurogenic 
inflammation and headache. This review explores the role of parenchymal 
inflammatory signaling in migraine headaches, drawing upon recent advancements. 
BODY: Studies in rodents have demonstrated that sterile meningeal inflammation 
can stimulate and sensitize meningeal nociceptors, culminating in headaches. The 
efficacy of relatively blood-brain barrier-impermeable anti-calcitonin 
gene-related peptide antibodies and triptans in treating migraine attacks, both 
with and without aura, supports the concept of migraine pain originating in 
meninges. Additionally, PET studies utilizing inflammation markers have revealed 
meningeal inflammatory activity in patients experiencing migraine with aura, 
particularly over the occipital cortex generating visual auras. The parenchymal 
neuroinflammatory signaling involving neurons, astrocytes, and microglia, which 
eventually extends to the meninges, can link non-homeostatic perturbations in 
the insensate brain to pain-sensitive meninges. Recent experimental research has 
brought deeper insight into parenchymal signaling mechanisms: Neuronal 
pannexin-1 channels act as stress sensors, initiating the inflammatory signaling 
by inflammasome formation and high-mobility group box-1 release in response to 
transient perturbations such as cortical spreading depolarization (CSD) or 
synaptic metabolic insufficiency caused by transcriptional changes induced by 
migraine triggers like sleep deprivation and stress. After a single CSD, 
astrocytes respond by upregulating the transcription of proinflammatory enzymes 
and mediators, while microglia are involved in restoring neuronal structural 
integrity; however, repeated CSDs may prompt microglia to adopt a 
pro-inflammatory state. Transcriptional changes from pro- to anti-inflammatory 
within 24 h may serve to dampen the inflammatory signaling. The extensive 
coverage of brain surface and perivascular areas by astrocyte endfeet suggests 
their role as an interface for transporting inflammatory mediators to the 
cerebrospinal fluid to contribute to meningeal nociception.
CONCLUSION: We propose that neuronal stress induced by CSD or synaptic 
activity-energy mismatch may initiate a parenchymal inflammatory signaling 
cascade, transmitted to the meninges, thereby triggering lasting headaches 
characteristic of migraine, with or without aura. This neuroinflammatory 
interplay between parenchymal and meningeal cells points to the potential for 
novel targets for migraine treatment and prophylaxis.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s10194-024-01827-x
PMCID: PMC11290240
PMID: 39080518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.