---
reference_id: PMID:37064029
title: A review of cytokine-based pathophysiology of Long COVID symptoms.
authors:
- Low RN
- Low RJ
- Akrami A
journal: Front Med (Lausanne)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1011936
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A review of cytokine-based pathophysiology of Long COVID symptoms.
**Authors:** Low RN, Low RJ, Akrami A
**Journal:** Front Med (Lausanne) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmed.2023.1011936](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2023.1011936)

## Content

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2023 Mar 31;10:1011936. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1011936. 
eCollection 2023.

A review of cytokine-based pathophysiology of Long COVID symptoms.

Low RN(1), Low RJ(2)(3), Akrami A(3).

Author information:
(1)Retired, La Jolla, CA, United States.
(2)Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, University College London, London, 
United Kingdom.
(3)Sainsbury Wellcome Centre, University College London, London, United Kingdom.

The Long COVID/Post Acute Sequelae of COVID-19 (PASC) group includes patients 
with initial mild-to-moderate symptoms during the acute phase of the illness, in 
whom recovery is prolonged, or new symptoms are developed over months. Here, we 
propose a description of the pathophysiology of the Long COVID presentation 
based on inflammatory cytokine cascades and the p38 MAP kinase signaling 
pathways that regulate cytokine production. In this model, the SARS-CoV-2 viral 
infection is hypothesized to trigger a dysregulated peripheral immune system 
activation with subsequent cytokine release. Chronic low-grade inflammation 
leads to dysregulated brain microglia with an exaggerated release of central 
cytokines, producing neuroinflammation. Immunothrombosis linked to chronic 
inflammation with microclot formation leads to decreased tissue perfusion and 
ischemia. Intermittent fatigue, Post Exertional Malaise (PEM), CNS symptoms with 
"brain fog," arthralgias, paresthesias, dysautonomia, and GI and ophthalmic 
problems can consequently arise as result of the elevated peripheral and central 
cytokines. There are abundant similarities between symptoms in Long COVID and 
myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). DNA polymorphisms 
and viral-induced epigenetic changes to cytokine gene expression may lead to 
chronic inflammation in Long COVID patients, predisposing some to develop 
autoimmunity, which may be the gateway to ME/CFS.

Copyright © 2023 Low, Low and Akrami.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1011936
PMCID: PMC10103649
PMID: 37064029

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.