---
reference_id: "PMID:32846061"
title: Efficacy of Selpercatinib in RET-Altered Thyroid Cancers.
authors:
- Wirth LJ
- Sherman E
- Robinson B
- Solomon B
- Kang H
- Lorch J
- Worden F
- Brose M
- Patel J
- Leboulleux S
- Godbert Y
- Barlesi F
- Morris JC
- Owonikoko TK
- Tan DSW
- Gautschi O
- Weiss J
- de la Fouchardière C
- Burkard ME
- Laskin J
- Taylor MH
- Kroiss M
- Medioni J
- Goldman JW
- Bauer TM
- Levy B
- Zhu VW
- Lakhani N
- Moreno V
- Ebata K
- Nguyen M
- Heirich D
- Zhu EY
- Huang X
- Yang L
- Kherani J
- Rothenberg SM
- Drilon A
- Subbiah V
- Shah MH
- Cabanillas ME
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2005651
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of Selpercatinib in RET-Altered Thyroid Cancers.
**Authors:** Wirth LJ, Sherman E, Robinson B, Solomon B, Kang H, Lorch J, Worden F, Brose M, Patel J, Leboulleux S, Godbert Y, Barlesi F, Morris JC, Owonikoko TK, Tan DSW, Gautschi O, Weiss J, de la Fouchardière C, Burkard ME, Laskin J, Taylor MH, Kroiss M, Medioni J, Goldman JW, Bauer TM, Levy B, Zhu VW, Lakhani N, Moreno V, Ebata K, Nguyen M, Heirich D, Zhu EY, Huang X, Yang L, Kherani J, Rothenberg SM, Drilon A, Subbiah V, Shah MH, Cabanillas ME
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2005651](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2005651)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2020 Aug 27;383(9):825-835. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2005651.

Efficacy of Selpercatinib in RET-Altered Thyroid Cancers.

Wirth LJ(1), Sherman E(1), Robinson B(1), Solomon B(1), Kang H(1), Lorch J(1), 
Worden F(1), Brose M(1), Patel J(1), Leboulleux S(1), Godbert Y(1), Barlesi 
F(1), Morris JC(1), Owonikoko TK(1), Tan DSW(1), Gautschi O(1), Weiss J(1), de 
la Fouchardière C(1), Burkard ME(1), Laskin J(1), Taylor MH(1), Kroiss M(1), 
Medioni J(1), Goldman JW(1), Bauer TM(1), Levy B(1), Zhu VW(1), Lakhani N(1), 
Moreno V(1), Ebata K(1), Nguyen M(1), Heirich D(1), Zhu EY(1), Huang X(1), Yang 
L(1), Kherani J(1), Rothenberg SM(1), Drilon A(1), Subbiah V(1), Shah MH(1), 
Cabanillas ME(1).

Author information:
(1)From Massachusetts General Hospital (L.J.W.) and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute 
(J. Lorch), Boston; Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York (E.S., 
A.D.); Royal North Shore Hospital, St. Leonards, NSW (B.R.), and Peter MacCallum 
Cancer Institute, Melbourne, VIC (B.S.) - both in Australia; University of 
California, San Francisco-Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, San 
Francisco (H.K.), David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles (J.W.G.), 
and Chao Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California Irvine, 
Orange (V.W.Z.) - all in California; University of Michigan, Ann Arbor (F.W.), 
and START Midwest, Grand Rapids (N.L.) - both in Michigan; University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia (M.B.); University of Chicago, Chicago (J.P.); 
Gustave Roussy, Villejuif (S.L.), Institut Bergonié, Bordeaux (Y.G.), Aix 
Marseille University, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, INSERM, 
Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux 
de Marseille, Early Phase Cancer Trial Center CLIP2, Hospital La Timone, 
Marseille (F.B.), Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon (C.D.L.F.), and Hôpital Européen 
Georges-Pompidou, Faculté de Médecine Paris-Descartes, Paris (J.M.) - all in 
France; Mayo Clinic-Rochester, Rochester, MN (J.C.M.); Winship Cancer Institute 
of Emory University, Atlanta (T.K.O.); National Cancer Center Singapore, 
Singapore (D.S.W.T.); University of Bern, Bern, and Cantonal Hospital of 
Lucerne, Lucerne - both in Switzerland (O.G.); University of North 
Carolina-Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill (J.W.); University of Wisconsin-Carbone Cancer 
Center, Madison (M.E.B.); British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, Canada (J. 
Laskin); Oregon Health and Science University, Portland (M.H.T.); 
Universitätsklinikum Würzburg, Department of Internal Medicine I, Division of 
Endocrinology and Diabetology, Würzburg, Germany (M.K.); Sarah Cannon Research 
Institute-Tennessee Oncology, Nashville (T.M.B.); Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer 
Center, Washington, DC (B.L.); Fundación Jimenez Diaz, START-Madrid, Madrid 
(V.M.); Loxo Oncology, Stamford, CT (K.E., M.N., D.H., E.Y.Z., X.H., L.Y., J.K., 
S.M.R.); University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston (V.S., 
M.E.C.); and Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus 
(M.H.S.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2020 Aug 27;383(9):868-869. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe2024831.

BACKGROUND: RET mutations occur in 70% of medullary thyroid cancers, and RET 
fusions occur rarely in other thyroid cancers. In patients with RET-altered 
thyroid cancers, the efficacy and safety of selective RET inhibition are 
unknown.
METHODS: We enrolled patients with RET-mutant medullary thyroid cancer with or 
without previous vandetanib or cabozantinib treatment, as well as those with 
previously treated RET fusion-positive thyroid cancer, in a phase 1-2 trial of 
selpercatinib. The primary end point was an objective response (a complete or 
partial response), as determined by an independent review committee. Secondary 
end points included the duration of response, progression-free survival, and 
safety.
RESULTS: In the first 55 consecutively enrolled patients with RET-mutant 
medullary thyroid cancer who had previously received vandetanib, cabozantinib, 
or both, the percentage who had a response was 69% (95% confidence interval 
[CI], 55 to 81), and 1-year progression-free survival was 82% (95% CI, 69 to 
90). In 88 patients with RET-mutant medullary thyroid cancer who had not 
previously received vandetanib or cabozantinib, the percentage who had a 
response was 73% (95% CI, 62 to 82), and 1-year progression-free survival was 
92% (95% CI, 82 to 97). In 19 patients with previously treated RET 
fusion-positive thyroid cancer, the percentage who had a response was 79% (95% 
CI, 54 to 94), and 1-year progression-free survival was 64% (95% CI, 37 to 82). 
The most common adverse events of grade 3 or higher were hypertension (in 21% of 
the patients), increased alanine aminotransferase level (in 11%), increased 
aspartate aminotransferase level (in 9%), hyponatremia (in 8%), and diarrhea (in 
6%). Of all 531 patients treated, 12 (2%) discontinued selpercatinib owing to 
drug-related adverse events.
CONCLUSIONS: In this phase 1-2 trial, selpercatinib showed durable efficacy with 
mainly low-grade toxic effects in patients with medullary thyroid cancer with 
and without previous vandetanib or cabozantinib treatment. (Funded by Loxo 
Oncology and others; LIBRETTO-001 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03157128.).

Copyright © 2020 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2005651
PMCID: PMC10777663
PMID: 32846061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]