---
reference_id: "PMID:24938411"
title: "Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy: clinicopathological features, natural history and pathomechanism(s)."
authors:
- Yonekawa T
- Nishino I
journal: J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1136/jnnp-2013-307052
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Collagen Type VI/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Disease Progression
- "Genes, Dominant/genetics"
- "Genes, Recessive/genetics"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Mobility Limitation
- "Muscle, Skeletal/pathology"
- "Muscular Dystrophies/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Neurologic Examination
- Phenotype
- "Sclerosis/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy: clinicopathological features, natural history and pathomechanism(s).
**Authors:** Yonekawa T, Nishino I
**Journal:** J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jnnp-2013-307052](https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp-2013-307052)

## Content

1. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2015 Mar;86(3):280-7. doi:
10.1136/jnnp-2013-307052. Epub 2014 Jun 17.

Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy: clinicopathological features, natural
history and pathomechanism(s).

Yonekawa T(1), Nishino I(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuromuscular Research, National Institute of Neuroscience,
National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry (NCNP), Kodaira, Tokyo, Japan
Department of Child Neurology, National Center Hospital, NCNP, Kodaira, Tokyo,
Japan.
(2)Department of Neuromuscular Research, National Institute of Neuroscience,
National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry (NCNP), Kodaira, Tokyo, Japan
Department of Clinical Development, Translational Medical Center, NCNP.

Collagen VI is widely distributed throughout extracellular matrices (ECMs) in
various tissues. In skeletal muscle, collagen VI is particularly concentrated in
and adjacent to basement membranes of myofibers. Ullrich congenital muscular
dystrophy (UCMD) is caused by mutations in either COL6A1, COL6A2 or COL6A3 gene,
thereby leading to collagen VI deficiency in the ECM. It is known to occur
through either recessive or dominant genetic mechanism, the latter most
typically by de novo mutations. UCMD is well defined by the clinicopathological
hallmarks including distal hyperlaxity, proximal joint contractures, protruding
calcanei, scoliosis and respiratory insufficiency. Recent reports have depicted
the robust natural history of UCMD; that is, loss of ambulation by early teenage
years, rapid decline in respiratory function by 10 years of age and early-onset,
rapidly progressive scoliosis. Muscle pathology is characterised by prominent
interstitial fibrosis disproportionate to the relative paucity of necrotic and
regenerating fibres. To date, treatment for patients is supportive for symptoms
such as joint contractures, respiratory failure and scoliosis. There have been
clinical trials based on the theory of mitochondrion-mediated myofiber apoptosis
or impaired autophagy. Furthermore, the fact that collagen VI producing cells in
skeletal muscle are interstitial mesenchymal cells can support proof of concept
for stem cell-based therapy.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2013-307052
PMID: 24938411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
