---
reference_id: "PMID:25298073"
title: "Endarteritis obliterans in the pathogenesis of Buerger's disease from the pathological and immunohistochemical points of view."
authors:
- Kobayashi M
- Sugimoto M
- Komori K
journal: Circ J
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1253/circj.cj-14-0656
keywords:
- "Arteries/immunology, pathology"
- Disease Progression
- "Endarteritis/complications, pathology, physiopathology"
- Extracellular Matrix/pathology
- Humans
- Immunoglobulins/analysis
- Lymphocyte Subsets/immunology
- Macrophages/immunology
- Matrix Metalloproteinase 3/physiology
- Neutrophil Infiltration
- "Receptors, Notch/physiology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Signal Transduction/physiology
- "Smoking/adverse effects, physiopathology"
- "Thromboangiitis Obliterans/etiology, immunology, pathology"
- "Tunica Intima/immunology, pathology"
- Urokinase-Type Plasminogen Activator/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endarteritis obliterans in the pathogenesis of Buerger's disease from the pathological and immunohistochemical points of view.
**Authors:** Kobayashi M, Sugimoto M, Komori K
**Journal:** Circ J (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1253/circj.cj-14-0656](https://doi.org/10.1253/circj.cj-14-0656)

## Content

1. Circ J. 2014;78(12):2819-26. doi: 10.1253/circj.cj-14-0656. Epub 2014 Oct 8.

Endarteritis obliterans in the pathogenesis of Buerger's disease from the 
pathological and immunohistochemical points of view.

Kobayashi M(1), Sugimoto M, Komori K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Vascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Nagoya University.

Buerger's disease (thromboangiitis obliterans) is considered to be a 
nonatherosclerotic, inflammatory, and vaso-occlusive disease, although the 
details of the mechanisms of pathogenesis remain unknown. The occurrence of the 
disease is strongly related to tobacco abuse and its progression is closely 
linked to continued smoking. The purpose of this review article is to 
demonstrate the pathological characteristics of arteries affected with Buerger's 
disease from a possible immunoreactive point of view. In addition, we present 
the mechanisms for preserving the architecture of the arterial wall in affected 
vasculatures. Thereafter, we discuss the possibility that the pathogenesis of 
Buerger's disease is a type of endarteritis obliterans, deeply connected to the 
Notch pathway, distinct from arteriosclerosis obliterans and other vasculitides.

DOI: 10.1253/circj.cj-14-0656
PMID: 25298073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]