---
reference_id: "PMID:9856478"
title: "Identification and characterization of a novel cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase gene (PDE9A) that maps to 21q22.3: alternative splicing of mRNA transcripts, genomic structure and sequence."
authors:
- Guipponi M
- Scott HS
- Kudoh J
- Kawasaki K
- Shibuya K
- Shintani A
- Asakawa S
- Chen H
- Lalioti MD
- Rossier C
- Minoshima S
- Shimizu N
- Antonarakis SE
journal: Hum Genet
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1007/s004390050838
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification and characterization of a novel cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase gene (PDE9A) that maps to 21q22.3: alternative splicing of mRNA transcripts, genomic structure and sequence.
**Authors:** Guipponi M, Scott HS, Kudoh J, Kawasaki K, Shibuya K, Shintani A, Asakawa S, Chen H, Lalioti MD, Rossier C, Minoshima S, Shimizu N, Antonarakis SE
**Journal:** Hum Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s004390050838](https://doi.org/10.1007/s004390050838)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 1998 Oct;103(4):386-92. doi: 10.1007/s004390050838.

Identification and characterization of a novel cyclic nucleotide 
phosphodiesterase gene (PDE9A) that maps to 21q22.3: alternative splicing of 
mRNA transcripts, genomic structure and sequence.

Guipponi M(1), Scott HS, Kudoh J, Kawasaki K, Shibuya K, Shintani A, Asakawa S, 
Chen H, Lalioti MD, Rossier C, Minoshima S, Shimizu N, Antonarakis SE.

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, University of Geneva Medical School and 
Cantonal Hospital of Geneva, Switzerland.

Cyclic nucleotide-specific phosphodiesterases (PDEs) play an essential role in 
signal transduction by regulating the intracellular concentration of second 
messengers (cAMP and cGMP). We have identified and made an initial 
characterization of a full-length cDNA encoding a novel human cyclic nucleotide 
phosphodiesterase, PDE9A. At least four different mRNA transcripts (PDE9A1, A2, 
A3, A4) are produced as a result of alternative splicing of 5' exons, 
potentially changing the N-terminal amino acid sequences of the encoded 
proteins. All these predicted proteins would contain a 3',5'-cyclic nucleotide 
phosphodiesterase signature motif (Prosite no. PDOC00116). Northern blot 
analysis revealed several mRNA species of approximately 2.4 kb with varying 
expression patterns and intensities in most tissues examined, except blood. We 
have also isolated the mouse homolog of the human PDE9A2 mRNA transcript, 
pde9A2. The human and mouse isoforms have 93 and 83% sequence identity at the 
amino acid and nucleotide levels, respectively. PDE9A was mapped to 21q22.3, 
between TFF1 and D21S360. Comparison of the PDE9A1 cDNA with the genomic 
sequence from the region revealed that the gene is split into 20 exons that 
extend over 122 kb. Comparison of the physical map of the region and the genomic 
sequence further refines the mapping, with D21S113 being derived from intron 15. 
Several genetic disorders map to 21q22.3, including one form of bipolar 
affective disorder. Since functional disturbances in intraneuronal signal 
transmission via second messengers play an important role in the pathophysiology 
of affective disorders, PDE9A is a strong candidate for such a role by position 
and function.

DOI: 10.1007/s004390050838
PMID: 9856478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]