---
reference_id: "PMID:34588557"
title: "The biochemical subtype is a predictor for cognitive function in glutaric aciduria type 1: a national prospective follow-up study."
authors:
- Märtner EMC
- Thimm E
- Guder P
- Schiergens KA
- Rutsch F
- Roloff S
- Marquardt I
- Das AM
- Freisinger P
- Grünert SC
- Krämer J
- Baumgartner MR
- Beblo S
- Haase C
- Dieckmann A
- Lindner M
- Näke A
- Hoffmann GF
- Mühlhausen C
- Walter M
- Garbade SF
- Maier EM
- Kölker S
- Boy N
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-98809-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The biochemical subtype is a predictor for cognitive function in glutaric aciduria type 1: a national prospective follow-up study.
**Authors:** Märtner EMC, Thimm E, Guder P, Schiergens KA, Rutsch F, Roloff S, Marquardt I, Das AM, Freisinger P, Grünert SC, Krämer J, Baumgartner MR, Beblo S, Haase C, Dieckmann A, Lindner M, Näke A, Hoffmann GF, Mühlhausen C, Walter M, Garbade SF, Maier EM, Kölker S, Boy N
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-021-98809-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-98809-9)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2021 Sep 29;11(1):19300. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-98809-9.

The biochemical subtype is a predictor for cognitive function in glutaric 
aciduria type 1: a national prospective follow-up study.

Märtner EMC(1), Thimm E(2), Guder P(3), Schiergens KA(4), Rutsch F(5), Roloff 
S(6), Marquardt I(7), Das AM(8), Freisinger P(9), Grünert SC(10), Krämer J(11), 
Baumgartner MR(12), Beblo S(13), Haase C(14), Dieckmann A(15), Lindner M(16), 
Näke A(17), Hoffmann GF(1), Mühlhausen C(18), Walter M(1), Garbade SF(1), Maier 
EM(4), Kölker S(1), Boy N(19).

Author information:
(1)Division of Child Neurology and Metabolic Medicine, Centre for Child and 
Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Division of Experimental Paediatrics and Metabolism, Department of General 
Paediatrics, Neonatology and Paediatric Cardiology, University Children's 
Hospital, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(3)Children's Hospital, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, 
Germany.
(4)Dr. Von Hauner Children's Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, 
Germany.
(5)Department of General Paediatrics, Metabolic Diseases, University Children's 
Hospital Muenster, Muenster, Germany.
(6)Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität 
Berlin, Humboldt-Universität Zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Center 
for Chronically Sick Children, Berlin, Germany.
(7)Department of Child Neurology, Children's Hospital Oldenburg, Oldenburg, 
Germany.
(8)Department of Paediatrics, Paediatric Metabolic Medicine, Hannover Medical 
School, Hannover, Germany.
(9)Children's Hospital Reutlingen, Reutlingen, Germany.
(10)Department of General Paediatrics, Adolescent Medicine and Neonatology, 
Medical Centre, University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany.
(11)Department of Pediatric Neurology and Inborn Errors of Metabolism, 
Children's Hospital, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
(12)Division of Metabolism and Children's Research Centre, University Children's 
Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(13)Department of Women and Child Health, Hospital for Children and Adolescents, 
Centre for Paediatric Research Leipzig (CPL), University Hospitals, University 
of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, Helios Klinikum, Erfurt, Germany.
(15)Centre for Inborn Metabolic Disorders, Department of Neuropediatrics, Jena 
University Hospital, Jena, Germany.
(16)Division of Paediatric Neurology, University Children's Hospital Frankfurt, 
Frankfurt, Germany.
(17)Children's Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technical University, Dresden, 
Germany.
(18)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Medical Center, 
Göttingen, Germany.
(19)Division of Child Neurology and Metabolic Medicine, Centre for Child and 
Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. 
nikolas.boy@med.uni-heidelberg.de.

Erratum in
    Sci Rep. 2021 Oct 12;11(1):20618. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00137-5.

The aim of the study was a systematic evaluation of cognitive development in 
individuals with glutaric aciduria type 1 (GA1), a rare neurometabolic disorder, 
identified by newborn screening in Germany. This national, prospective, 
observational, multi-centre study includes 107 individuals with confirmed GA1 
identified by newborn screening between 1999 and 2020 in Germany. Clinical 
status, development, and IQ were assessed using standardized tests. Impact of 
interventional and non-interventional parameters on cognitive outcome was 
evaluated. The majority of tested individuals (n = 72) showed stable IQ values 
with age (n = 56 with IQ test; median test age 11 years) but a significantly 
lower performance (median [IQR] IQ 87 [78-98]) than in general population, 
particularly in individuals with a biochemical high excreter phenotype (84 
[75-96]) compared to the low excreter group (98 [92-105]; p = 0.0164). For all 
patients, IQ results were homogenous on subscale levels. Sex, clinical motor 
phenotype and quality of metabolic treatment had no impact on cognitive 
functions. Long-term neurologic outcome in GA1 involves both motor and cognitive 
functions. The biochemical high excreter phenotype is the major risk factor for 
cognitive impairment while cognitive functions do not appear to be impacted by 
current therapy and striatal damage. These findings implicate the necessity of 
new treatment concepts.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-98809-9
PMCID: PMC8481501
PMID: 34588557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: E. M. C. Märtner, E. Thimm, P. Guder, K. A. 
Schiergens, F. Rutsch, S. Roloff, I. Marquardt, A. M. Das, P. Freisinger, S. C. 
Grünert, J. Krämer, M. R. Baumgartner, S. Beblo, C. Haase, A. Dieckmann, M. 
Lindner, A. Näke, G. F. Hoffmann, C. Mühlhausen, M. Walter, S. F. Garbade, E. M. 
Maier, S. Kölker, and N. Boy declare no disclosures relevant to the manuscript.