---
reference_id: "PMID:1975174"
title: The American College of Rheumatology 1990 criteria for the classification of polyarteritis nodosa.
authors:
- Lightfoot RW Jr
- Michel BA
- Bloch DA
- Hunder GG
- Zvaifler NJ
- McShane DJ
- Arend WP
- Calabrese LH
- Leavitt RY
- Lie JT
journal: Arthritis Rheum
year: '1990'
doi: 10.1002/art.1780330805
keywords:
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Diagnostic Errors
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Polyarteritis Nodosa/classification, diagnosis"
- "Rheumatology/methods, trends"
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- "Societies, Medical"
- Vasculitis/diagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The American College of Rheumatology 1990 criteria for the classification of polyarteritis nodosa.
**Authors:** Lightfoot RW Jr, Michel BA, Bloch DA, Hunder GG, Zvaifler NJ, McShane DJ, Arend WP, Calabrese LH, Leavitt RY, Lie JT
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheum (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1002/art.1780330805](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.1780330805)

## Content

1. Arthritis Rheum. 1990 Aug;33(8):1088-93. doi: 10.1002/art.1780330805.

The American College of Rheumatology 1990 criteria for the classification of 
polyarteritis nodosa.

Lightfoot RW Jr(1), Michel BA, Bloch DA, Hunder GG, Zvaifler NJ, McShane DJ, 
Arend WP, Calabrese LH, Leavitt RY, Lie JT, et al.

Author information:
(1)University of Kentucky, Lexington.

Criteria for the classification of polyarteritis nodosa were developed by 
comparing 118 patients who had this disease with 689 control patients who had 
other forms of vasculitis. For the traditional format classification, 10 
criteria were selected: weight loss greater than or equal to 4 kg, livedo 
reticularis, testicular pain or tenderness, myalgias, mononeuropathy or 
polyneuropathy, diastolic blood pressure greater than 90 mm Hg, elevated blood 
urea nitrogen or serum creatinine levels, presence of hepatitis B reactants in 
serum, arteriographic abnormality, and presence of granulocyte or mixed 
leukocyte infiltrate in an arterial wall on biopsy. The presence of 3 or more of 
these 10 criteria was associated with a sensitivity of 82.2% and specificity of 
86.6%. A classification tree was also constructed, with 6 criteria being 
selected. Three of these, angiographic abnormality, biopsy-proven granulocyte or 
mixed leukocyte infiltrate in arterial wall, and neuropathy, were criteria used 
in the traditional format. The other 3 criteria used in the tree format included 
the patient's sex, weight loss greater than 6.5 kg, and elevated serum aspartate 
aminotransferase or alanine aminotransferase levels above the range of normal. 
The classification tree yielded a sensitivity of 87.3% and a specificity of 
89.3%.

DOI: 10.1002/art.1780330805
PMID: 1975174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]