---
reference_id: "PMID:1442028"
title: "Atelosteogenesis type 3: the first patient in Japan and a survivor for more than 1 year."
authors:
- Kuwashima S
- Nishimura G
- Kikushima H
- Tanaka G
- Furukawa T
- Fujioka M
journal: Acta Paediatr Jpn
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1111/j.1442-200x.1992.tb01004.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atelosteogenesis type 3: the first patient in Japan and a survivor for more than 1 year.
**Authors:** Kuwashima S, Nishimura G, Kikushima H, Tanaka G, Furukawa T, Fujioka M
**Journal:** Acta Paediatr Jpn (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1442-200x.1992.tb01004.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1442-200x.1992.tb01004.x)

## Content

1. Acta Paediatr Jpn. 1992 Oct;34(5):543-6. doi: 
10.1111/j.1442-200x.1992.tb01004.x.

Atelosteogenesis type 3: the first patient in Japan and a survivor for more than 
1 year.

Kuwashima S(1), Nishimura G, Kikushima H, Tanaka G, Furukawa T, Fujioka M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Dokkyo University School of Medicine, Tochigi, 
Japan.

We report the first patient of atelosteogenesis type 3 (AO3) in Japan. The 
patient had multiple craniofacial abnormalities at birth, including ocular 
hypertelorism, a flat nasal bridge, micrognathia and a cleft palate. There was 
rhizomelic shortness of the limbs and a club-foot. The infant had short broad 
thumbs in the hands similar to those observed in the feet. There were no 
chromosomal abnormalities. Radiological examination demonstrated striking 
hypoplasia of the humerus with proximal rounding and distal tapering giving a 
'drumstick' appearance, 'S'-shape configuration of the cervical spine, scoliosis 
and coronal cleft in the thoracolumbar vertebral bodies. The infant experienced 
recurrent apnea and persistent severe tracheomalacia, which necessitated 
tracheostomy at 5 months of age. Despite his multiple skeletal deformities and 
respiratory problems, this patient survived more than 1 year with motoneuronal 
developmental delay.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1442-200x.1992.tb01004.x
PMID: 1442028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]