---
reference_id: "PMID:40875177"
title: "Prademagene Zamikeracel: First Approval."
authors:
- Lee A
journal: Mol Diagn Ther
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s40291-025-00804-7
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- Humans
- Collagen Type VII/genetics
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa Dystrophica/therapy, genetics"
- Genetic Therapy/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prademagene Zamikeracel: First Approval.
**Authors:** Lee A
**Journal:** Mol Diagn Ther (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40291-025-00804-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40291-025-00804-7)

## Content

1. Mol Diagn Ther. 2025 Sep;29(5):701-704. doi: 10.1007/s40291-025-00804-7. Epub 
2025 Aug 28.

Prademagene Zamikeracel: First Approval.

Lee A(1).

Author information:
(1)Springer Nature, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay, Auckland, 0754, New 
Zealand. mdt@adis.com.

Prademagene zamikeracel (ZEVASKYN™) is an autologous cell sheet-based gene 
therapy developed by Abeona Therapeutics Inc. for the treatment of wounds in 
patients with recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa. Prademagene 
zamikeracel contains the patient's own genetically modified cells with 
functional copies of the COL7A1 gene, as patients lacking functional copies of 
this gene may develop chronic open wounds caused by the separation of dermal 
layers. This article summarizes the milestones in the development of prademagene 
zamikeracel leading to this first approval for treatment of wounds in adult and 
paediatric patients with recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40291-025-00804-7
PMID: 40875177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Funding: The preparation of this 
review was not supported by any external funding. Authorship and Conflict of 
interest: During the peer review process the manufacturer of the agent under 
review was offered an opportunity to comment on the article. Changes resulting 
from any comments received were made by the authors on the basis of scientific 
completeness and accuracy. Arnold Lee is a contracted employee of Adis 
International Ltd/Springer Nature, and declares no relevant conflicts of 
interest. All authors contributed to this article and are responsible for its 
content. Ethics approval, Consent to participate, Consent to publish, 
Availability of data and material, Code availability: Not applicable.