---
reference_id: "PMID:30104523"
title: Nutritional and Environmental Factors in Thyroid Carcinogenesis.
authors:
- Nettore IC
- Colao A
- Macchia PE
journal: Int J Environ Res Public Health
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3390/ijerph15081735
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma, Follicular/epidemiology"
- Carcinogens/analysis
- Environmental Exposure
- Environmental Pollutants/analysis
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Nutritional Status
- Risk Factors
- Thyroid Neoplasms/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nutritional and Environmental Factors in Thyroid Carcinogenesis.
**Authors:** Nettore IC, Colao A, Macchia PE
**Journal:** Int J Environ Res Public Health (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijerph15081735](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15081735)

## Content

1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2018 Aug 13;15(8):1735. doi:
10.3390/ijerph15081735.

Nutritional and Environmental Factors in Thyroid Carcinogenesis.

Nettore IC(1), Colao A(2), Macchia PE(3).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Chirurgia, Università di Napoli Federico
II, 80138 Napoli NA, Italy. immanettore85@libero.it.
(2)Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Chirurgia, Università di Napoli Federico
II, 80138 Napoli NA, Italy. colao@unina.it.
(3)Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Chirurgia, Università di Napoli Federico
II, 80138 Napoli NA, Italy. pmacchia@unina.it.

Several epidemiological studies suggest an increased incidence of thyroid
carcinoma (TC) in recent years, especially for the papillary histotype (PTC),
suggesting that specific carcinogens might promote molecular abnormalities that
are typical of PTC. The increased incidence is probably attributed to more
intensive and sensitive diagnostic procedures, even if recent data suggest that
various toxic elements could explain the phenomenon. Ionizing radiation exposure
represents the most accepted risk factor for differentiated thyroid cancer that
includes both the follicular and papillary histotypes. In this review, we
examined the other environmental carcinogens that play a role in TC, such as
eating habits, living in volcanic areas, and xenobiotic elements. Among eating
habits, iodine intake represents one of the more discussed elements, because its
deficiency is associated with follicular thyroid carcinomas (FTCs), while its
progressive increment seems to be responsible for PTC. The gas, ash, and lava
emissions of volcanoes are composed of various toxic compounds that pollute
ground water, vegetables, and animals, contaminating humans via the food chain.
Finally, the risk of developing PTC has also been associated with exposure of
the population to xenobiotics in the environment or in the home. Their
carcinogenic effects are probably caused by their accumulation, but additional
studies are necessary to better understand the mechanisms of action.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph15081735
PMCID: PMC6121258
PMID: 30104523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
