---
reference_id: "PMID:17162264"
title: Pathophysiology of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy determines its medical treatment.
authors:
- Musat D
- Sherrid MV
journal: Anadolu Kardiyol Derg
year: '2006'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy determines its medical treatment.
**Authors:** Musat D, Sherrid MV
**Journal:** Anadolu Kardiyol Derg (2006)

## Content

1. Anadolu Kardiyol Derg. 2006 Dec;6 Suppl 2:9-17.

Pathophysiology of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy determines its medical treatment.

Musat D(1), Sherrid MV.

Author information:
(1)Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Program, Division of Cardiology, St. 
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York City, NY, USA. msherrid@chpnet.org.

Physicians treating hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) are faced with unique 
management challenges. Understanding pathophysiology and overall good prognosis 
forms the basis for medical treatment. Treatment is tailored by the presence or 
absence of outflow tract gradient and individual symptoms. In all patients, 
formal stratification for sudden death risk is necessary, with consideration of 
defibrillator implantation in patients deemed to be at high risk. In patients 
with no or only mild symptoms the approach of watchful waiting is often 
appropriate. For symptomatic patients with non-obstructed disease medical 
treatment with calcium channel blockers and beta-blockers is aimed to improve 
heart failure symptoms, and ischemia. Verapamil is the most often used, with 
likely benefit of relieving ischemia. Obstruction, most commonly due to systolic 
anterior motion of the mitral valve (SAM) and mitral-septal contact, occurs in 
>/=50% of all HCM patients, worsening symptoms and increasing mortality. 
Successful medical treatment of obstruction with negative inotropes slows 
acceleration of left ventricular ejection with delay in SAM, ultimately yielding 
a lower pressure gradient. Beta -blockers are the first line treatment in 
obstructive HCM predominantly by mitigating provocable gradients. The magnitude 
of symptom relief with verapamil is similar to the effect of beta -blockade. 
Disopyramide combined with beta -blockade is thought by some to be the most 
effective medical treatment of obstruction, and has been shown to be safe and 
not pro-arrhythmic. Most symptomatic HCM patients with significant obstruction 
at rest or provocation can be successfully managed with long-term medication 
alone.

PMID: 17162264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]