---
reference_id: "PMID:14676148"
title: Sudden death associated with short-QT syndrome linked to mutations in HERG.
authors:
- Brugada R
- Hong K
- Dumaine R
- Cordeiro J
- Gaita F
- Borggrefe M
- Menendez TM
- Brugada J
- Pollevick GD
- Wolpert C
- Burashnikov E
- Matsuo K
- Wu YS
- Guerchicoff A
- Bianchi F
- Giustetto C
- Schimpf R
- Brugada P
- Antzelevitch C
journal: Circulation
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000109482.92774.3A
keywords:
- Adult
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac/genetics, mortality"
- Cell Line
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac"
- ERG1 Potassium Channel
- Electrocardiography
- Ether-A-Go-Go Potassium Channels
- Female
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Humans
- Infant
- Ion Channels/genetics
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Potassium Channels, Voltage-Gated/genetics"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sudden death associated with short-QT syndrome linked to mutations in HERG.
**Authors:** Brugada R, Hong K, Dumaine R, Cordeiro J, Gaita F, Borggrefe M, Menendez TM, Brugada J, Pollevick GD, Wolpert C, Burashnikov E, Matsuo K, Wu YS, Guerchicoff A, Bianchi F, Giustetto C, Schimpf R, Brugada P, Antzelevitch C
**Journal:** Circulation (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.CIR.0000109482.92774.3A](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.CIR.0000109482.92774.3A)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2004 Jan 6;109(1):30-5. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000109482.92774.3A.
Epub 2003 Dec 15.

Sudden death associated with short-QT syndrome linked to mutations in HERG.

Brugada R(1), Hong K, Dumaine R, Cordeiro J, Gaita F, Borggrefe M, Menendez TM,
Brugada J, Pollevick GD, Wolpert C, Burashnikov E, Matsuo K, Wu YS, Guerchicoff
A, Bianchi F, Giustetto C, Schimpf R, Brugada P, Antzelevitch C.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Genetics Program, Masonic Medical Research Laboratory, 2150
Bleecker St, Utica, NY 13501, USA. brugada@mmrl.edu

BACKGROUND: Sudden cardiac death takes the lives of more than 300 000 Americans
annually. Malignant ventricular arrhythmias occurring in individuals with
structurally normal hearts account for a subgroup of these sudden deaths. The
present study describes the genetic basis for a new clinical entity
characterized by sudden death and short-QT intervals in the ECG.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Three families with hereditary short-QT syndrome and a high
incidence of ventricular arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death were studied. In 2
of them, we identified 2 different missense mutations resulting in the same
amino acid change (N588K) in the S5-P loop region of the cardiac IKr channel
HERG (KCNH2). The mutations dramatically increase IKr, leading to heterogeneous
abbreviation of action potential duration and refractoriness, and reduce the
affinity of the channels to IKr blockers.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate a novel genetic and biophysical mechanism
responsible for sudden death in infants, children, and young adults caused by
mutations in KCNH2. The occurrence of sudden cardiac death in the first 12
months of life in 2 patients suggests the possibility of a link between KCNH2
gain of function mutations and sudden infant death syndrome. KCNH2 is the
binding target for a wide spectrum of cardiac and noncardiac pharmacological
compounds. Our findings may provide better understanding of drug interaction
with KCNH2 and have implications for diagnosis and therapy of this and other
arrhythmogenic diseases.

DOI: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000109482.92774.3A
PMID: 14676148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
