---
reference_id: "PMID:34854502"
title: Dysfunction of cerebellar microglia in Ataxia-telangiectasia.
authors:
- Levi H
- Bar E
- Cohen-Adiv S
- Sweitat S
- Kanner S
- Galron R
- Mitiagin Y
- Barzilai A
journal: Glia
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/glia.24122
keywords:
- Animals
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/genetics, metabolism"
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Cerebellum/metabolism
- Female
- Male
- Mice
- Microglia/metabolism
- Neurons/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dysfunction of cerebellar microglia in Ataxia-telangiectasia.
**Authors:** Levi H, Bar E, Cohen-Adiv S, Sweitat S, Kanner S, Galron R, Mitiagin Y, Barzilai A
**Journal:** Glia (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/glia.24122](https://doi.org/10.1002/glia.24122)

## Content

1. Glia. 2022 Mar;70(3):536-557. doi: 10.1002/glia.24122. Epub 2021 Dec 2.

Dysfunction of cerebellar microglia in Ataxia-telangiectasia.

Levi H(1), Bar E(1), Cohen-Adiv S(1), Sweitat S(1), Kanner S(1), Galron R(1), 
Mitiagin Y(1), Barzilai A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, George S. Wise, Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel 
Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a multisystem autosomal recessive disease caused 
by mutations in the ATM gene and characterized by cerebellar atrophy, 
progressive ataxia, immunodeficiency, male and female sterility, 
radiosensitivity, cancer predisposition, growth retardation, insulin-resistant 
diabetes, and premature aging. ATM phosphorylates more than 1500 target 
proteins, which are involved in cell cycle control, DNA repair, apoptosis, 
modulation of chromatin structure, and other cytoplasmic as well as 
mitochondrial processes. In our quest to better understand the mechanisms by 
which ATM deficiency causes cerebellar degeneration, we hypothesized that 
specific vulnerabilities of cerebellar microglia underlie the etiology of A-T. 
Our hypothesis is based on the recent finding that dysfunction of glial cells 
affect a variety of process leading to impaired neuronal functionality (Song et 
al., 2019). Whereas astrocytes and neurons descend from the neural tube, 
microglia originate from the hematopoietic system, invade the brain at early 
embryonic stage, and become the innate immune cells of the central nervous 
system and important participants in development of synaptic plasticity. Here we 
demonstrate that microglia derived from Atm-/- mouse cerebellum display 
accelerated cell migration and are severely impaired in phagocytosis, secretion 
of neurotrophic factors, and mitochondrial activity, suggestive of apoptotic 
processes. Interestingly, no microglial impairment was detected in Atm-deficient 
cerebral cortex, and Atm deficiency had less impact on astroglia than microglia. 
Collectively, our findings validate the roles of glial cells in cerebellar 
attrition in A-T.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/glia.24122
PMID: 34854502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]