---
reference_id: PMID:33531368
title: Early Developmental EEG and Seizure Phenotypes in a Full Gene Deletion of Ubiquitin Protein Ligase E3A Rat Model of Angelman Syndrome.
authors:
- Born HA
- Martinez LA
- Levine AT
- Harris SE
- Mehra S
- Lee WL
- Dindot SV
- Nash KR
- Silverman JL
- Segal DJ
- Weeber EJ
- Anderson AE
journal: eNeuro
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1523/ENEURO.0345-20.2020
keywords:
- Angelman Syndrome/genetics
- Animals
- Electroencephalography
- Gene Deletion
- Mice
- Phenotype
- Rats
- Seizures/genetics
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early Developmental EEG and Seizure Phenotypes in a Full Gene Deletion of Ubiquitin Protein Ligase E3A Rat Model of Angelman Syndrome.
**Authors:** Born HA, Martinez LA, Levine AT, Harris SE, Mehra S, Lee WL, Dindot SV, Nash KR, Silverman JL, Segal DJ, Weeber EJ, Anderson AE
**Journal:** eNeuro (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1523/ENEURO.0345-20.2020](https://doi.org/10.1523/ENEURO.0345-20.2020)

## Content

1. eNeuro. 2021 Mar 24;8(2):ENEURO.0345-20.2020. doi:
10.1523/ENEURO.0345-20.2020.  Print 2021 Mar-Apr.

Early Developmental EEG and Seizure Phenotypes in a Full Gene Deletion of 
Ubiquitin Protein Ligase E3A Rat Model of Angelman Syndrome.

Born HA(1)(2), Martinez LA(1)(2), Levine AT(1)(2), Harris SE(1)(2), Mehra 
S(1)(2)(3), Lee WL(1)(2), Dindot SV(4), Nash KR(5), Silverman JL(6), Segal 
DJ(6), Weeber EJ(5), Anderson AE(7)(2)(8).

Author information:
(1)Cain Foundation Laboratories, Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research 
Institute at Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX 77030.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030.
(3)Rice University, Houston, TX 77005.
(4)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine and 
Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843.
(5)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology, University of South 
Florida, Tampa, FL 33612.
(6)MIND Institute and Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, 
University of California Davis School of Medicine, Sacramento, CA 95817.
(7)Cain Foundation Laboratories, Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research 
Institute at Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX 77030 annea@bcm.edu.
(8)Departments of Neuroscience and Neurology, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030.

Angelman syndrome (AS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder with unique behavioral 
phenotypes, seizures, and distinctive electroencephalographic (EEG) patterns. 
Recent studies identified motor, social communication, and learning and memory 
deficits in a CRISPR engineered rat model with a complete maternal deletion of 
the Ube3a gene. It is unknown whether this model recapitulates other aspects of 
the clinical disorder. We report here the effect of Ube3a maternal deletion in 
the rat on epileptiform activity, seizure threshold, and quantitative EEG. Using 
video-synchronized EEG (vEEG) monitoring, we assessed spectral power and 
epileptiform activity early postnatally through adulthood. While EEG power was 
similar to wild-type (WT) at 1.5 weeks postnatally, at all other ages analyzed, 
our findings were similar to the AS phenotype in mice and humans with 
significantly increased δ power. Analysis of epileptiform activity in juvenile 
and adult rats showed increased time spent in epileptiform activity in AS 
compared with WT rats. We evaluated seizure threshold using pentylenetetrazol 
(PTZ), audiogenic stimulus, and hyperthermia to provoke febrile seizures (FSs). 
Behavioral seizure scoring following PTZ induction revealed no difference in 
seizure threshold in AS rats, however behavioral recovery from the PTZ-induced 
seizure was longer in the adult group with significantly increased hippocampal 
epileptiform activity during this phase. When exposed to hyperthermia, AS rat 
pups showed a significantly lower temperature threshold to first seizure than 
WT. Our findings highlight an age-dependence for the EEG and epileptiform 
phenotypes in a preclinical model of AS, and support the use of quantitative EEG 
and increased δ power as a potential biomarker of AS.

Copyright © 2021 Born et al.

DOI: 10.1523/ENEURO.0345-20.2020
PMCID: PMC8114899
PMID: 33531368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]