---
reference_id: "PMID:34125001"
title: "Effect of Lee Silverman Voice Treatment (LSVT)® BIG on motor symptoms in a patient with severe Parkinson's disease: a case report."
authors:
- Hirakawa Y
- Takeda K
- Koyama S
- Naoi Y
- Matsushita T
- Nagai T
- Motoya I
- Sakurai H
- Kanada Y
- Kawamura N
- Kawamura M
- Tanabe S
journal: Physiother Theory Pract
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/09593985.2021.1938304
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Aged
- Parkinson Disease/therapy
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of Lee Silverman Voice Treatment (LSVT)® BIG on motor symptoms in a patient with severe Parkinson's disease: a case report.
**Authors:** Hirakawa Y, Takeda K, Koyama S, Naoi Y, Matsushita T, Nagai T, Motoya I, Sakurai H, Kanada Y, Kawamura N, Kawamura M, Tanabe S
**Journal:** Physiother Theory Pract (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/09593985.2021.1938304](https://doi.org/10.1080/09593985.2021.1938304)

## Content

1. Physiother Theory Pract. 2022 Nov;38(13):3159-3168. doi:
10.1080/09593985.2021.1938304. Epub 2021 Jun 14.

Effect of Lee Silverman Voice Treatment (LSVT)® BIG on motor symptoms in a
patient with severe Parkinson's disease: a case report.

Hirakawa Y(1)(2), Takeda K(1), Koyama S(3), Naoi Y(1), Matsushita T(1), Nagai
T(1), Motoya I(1), Sakurai H(3), Kanada Y(3), Kawamura N(4), Kawamura M(4),
Tanabe S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rehabilitation, Kawamura Hospital, Gifu, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Health Sciences, Fujita Health University, Toyoake, Japan.
(3)Faculty of Rehabilitation, School of Health Sciences, Fujita Health
University, Toyoake, Japan.
(4)Department of Neurology, Kawamura Hospital, Gifu, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Lee Silverman Voice Treatment® BIG (LSVT® BIG) is widely used to
improve motor symptoms in patients with mild-to-moderate Parkinson's disease
(PD).
OBJECTIVE: To describe the effect of LSVT® BIG on the motor symptoms of a
patient with severe PD.
CASE DESCRIPTION: A 77-year-old woman who was diagnosed with PD received a
4-week LSVT® BIG program under the supervision of certified LSVT® BIG physical
therapists. Her disease severity was classified as Hoehn and Yahr stage 4. The
unified Parkinson's disease rating scale (UPDRS) part 3, 10-m walk test (10MWT),
timed up-and-go test (TUG), Berg balance scale (BBS), and 30-s chair stand test
(30-s CST) were used for assessment before and after intervention.
OUTCOMES: The UPDRS part 3, 10MWT, TUG, BBS, and 30-s CST improved after
intervention (33 to 26, 0.51 to 0.69 m/s, 38.1 to 23.2 seconds, 11 to 34, and 3
to 9 times, respectively). All improvements exceeded the Minimal Clinically
Important Difference or Minimal Detectable Change values (2.5, 0.16 m/s,
3.5 seconds, 5, and 3 times, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicated that LSVT® BIG appears to have improved
motor symptoms in a patient with severe PD. Further studies, ideally randomized
controlled trials, are needed to confirm these findings.

DOI: 10.1080/09593985.2021.1938304
PMID: 34125001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]