---
reference_id: "PMID:12577056"
title: Homozygous loss of ICOS is associated with adult-onset common variable immunodeficiency.
authors:
- Grimbacher B
- Hutloff A
- Schlesier M
- Glocker E
- Warnatz K
- Dräger R
- Eibel H
- Fischer B
- Schäffer AA
- Mages HW
- Kroczek RA
- Peter HH
journal: Nat Immunol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1038/ni902
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homozygous loss of ICOS is associated with adult-onset common variable immunodeficiency.
**Authors:** Grimbacher B, Hutloff A, Schlesier M, Glocker E, Warnatz K, Dräger R, Eibel H, Fischer B, Schäffer AA, Mages HW, Kroczek RA, Peter HH
**Journal:** Nat Immunol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ni902](https://doi.org/10.1038/ni902)

## Content

1. Nat Immunol. 2003 Mar;4(3):261-8. doi: 10.1038/ni902. Epub 2003 Feb 10.

Homozygous loss of ICOS is associated with adult-onset common variable 
immunodeficiency.

Grimbacher B(1), Hutloff A, Schlesier M, Glocker E, Warnatz K, Dräger R, Eibel 
H, Fischer B, Schäffer AA, Mages HW, Kroczek RA, Peter HH.

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Medical School, University 
of Freiburg, Hugstetterstr. 55, 79106 Freiburg, Germany.

No genetic defect is known to cause common variable immunodeficiency (CVID), a 
heterogeneous human disorder leading to adult-onset panhypogammaglobulinemia. In 
a search for CVID candidate proteins, we found four of 32 patients to lack ICOS, 
the "inducible costimulator" on activated T cells, due to an inherited 
homozygous deletion in the ICOS gene. T cells from these individuals were normal 
with regard to subset distribution, activation, cytokine production and 
proliferation. In contrast, naive, switched and memory B cells were reduced. The 
phenotype of human ICOS deficiency, which differs in key aspects from that of 
the ICOS-/- mouse, suggests a critical involvement of ICOS in T cell help for 
late B cell differentiation, class-switching and memory B cell generation.

DOI: 10.1038/ni902
PMID: 12577056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]