---
reference_id: "PMID:14711067"
title: Obesity and endocrine disease.
authors:
- Kokkoris P
- Pi-Sunyer FX
journal: Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/s0889-8529(03)00078-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Obesity and endocrine disease.
**Authors:** Kokkoris P, Pi-Sunyer FX
**Journal:** Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0889-8529(03)00078-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0889-8529(03)00078-1)

## Content

1. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 2003 Dec;32(4):895-914. doi: 
10.1016/s0889-8529(03)00078-1.

Obesity and endocrine disease.

Kokkoris P(1), Pi-Sunyer FX.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Hellenic Air Force 
General Hospital, 3 P. Kanelopoulou Street, Athens 11525, Greece. 
pakokkoris@hotmail.com

Several endocrine abnormalities are reported in obesity. Some of these 
abnormalities are considered as causative factors for the development of 
obesity, whereas others are considered to be secondary effects of obesity and 
usually are restored after weight loss. Thyroid hormones usually are normal in 
obesity, with the exception of T3 which is elevated. Prolactin is normal but 
prolactin response to different stimuli is blunted. GH is low and GH response to 
stimuli is blunted. IGF-I levels are normal or elevated. Cortisol, ACTH, and 
urine free cortisol levels are usually normal; however, a hyperresponsiveness of 
the HPA axis with increased cortisol and ACTH response to stimulatory tests is 
observed in centrally obese individuals. Total testosterone and SHBG levels are 
low, but free testosterone levels are usually normal in obese men. LH and FSH 
levels usually are normal and estrogens are elevated. Norepinephrine levels are 
elevated, whereas epinephrine levels are low or normal. Aldosterone levels are 
elevated but renin activity is usually normal. Parathyroid hormone levels are 
elevated with normal serum calcium levels and increased urine calcium levels. 
Monogenic mutations that result in severe obesity have been described in several 
individuals. Also, several endocrine diseases have obesity as one their clinical 
manifestations. Hypothyroidism, Cushing's syndrome, GH and testosterone 
deficiency, polycystic ovarian syndrome, insulinoma, hypothalamic lesions, and 
genetic syndromes often present with obesity. In most of these conditions, 
appropriate treatment of the primary disease results in weight loss. In 
addition, the fat cell has been found to be an endocrine organ that produces 
several peptides that are bioactive and participate in the regulation of 
adipocyte function.

DOI: 10.1016/s0889-8529(03)00078-1
PMID: 14711067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]