---
reference_id: "PMID:20301745"
title: Creatine Deficiency Disorders.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Mercimek-Andrews S
- Salomons GS
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Creatine Deficiency Disorders.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Mercimek-Andrews S, Salomons GS

## Content

1. Creatine Deficiency Disorders.

Mercimek-Andrews S(1), Salomons GS(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2009 Jan 15 [updated 2025 Aug 7].

Author information:
(1)Associate Professor, Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and
Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
(2)Professor, Department of Clinical Chemistry, Laboratory Genetic Metabolic
Diseases, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Amsterdam, the Netherlands

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: The creatine deficiency disorders (CDDs), inborn
errors of creatine metabolism and transport, comprise three disorders: the
creatine biosynthesis disorders guanidinoacetate methyltransferase (GAMT)
deficiency and L-arginine:glycine amidinotransferase (AGAT) deficiency; and
creatine transporter (CRTR) deficiency. Developmental delay and cognitive
dysfunction or intellectual disability and speech-language disorder are common
to all three CDDs. Onset of clinical manifestations of GAMT deficiency (reported
in ~130 individuals) is between ages three months and two years; in addition to
developmental delays, the majority of individuals have epilepsy and develop a
behavior disorder (e.g., hyperactivity, autism, or self-injurious behavior), and
about 30% have movement disorder. AGAT deficiency has been reported in 16
individuals; none have had epilepsy or movement disorders. Clinical findings of
CRTR deficiency in affected males (reported in ~130 individuals) in addition to
developmental delays include epilepsy (variable seizure types and may be
intractable) and behavior disorders (e.g., attention deficit and/or
hyperactivity, autistic features, impulsivity, social anxiety), hypotonia, and
(less commonly) a movement disorder. Poor weight gain with constipation and
prolonged QTc on EKG have been reported. While mild-to-moderate intellectual
disability is commonly observed up to age four years, the majority of adult
males with CRTR deficiency have been reported to have severe intellectual
disability. Females heterozygous for CRTR deficiency are typically either
asymptomatic or have mild intellectual disability, although a more severe
phenotype resembling the male phenotype has been reported.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of a CDD is established in a proband with
suggestive findings and biallelic pathogenic variants in GAMT or GATM or a
hemizygous or heterozygous pathogenic variant in SLC6A8 identified by molecular
genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: GAMT deficiency and AGAT deficiency are
treated with oral creatine monohydrate to replenish cerebral creatine levels.
Treatment of GAMT deficiency requires supplementation of ornithine and dietary
restriction of arginine or protein. CRTR deficiency is treated with oral
creatine monohydrate and arginine and glycine supplementation. The developmental
delay, intellectual disability, and behavior problems are managed with an
individualized education and therapy program; epilepsy and movement disorder are
treated by the appropriate specialist in a standard manner. Surveillance: In
those treated with creatine monohydrate, periodic determination of cerebral
creatine level by in vivo 1H-MRS and annual measurement of kidney function to
detect possible creatine-associated nephropathy is warranted. Developmental and
neurologic assessments are recommended at each clinic visit. Evaluation of
relatives at risk: Early diagnosis of neonates at risk for a CDD by biochemical
or molecular genetic testing allows for early diagnosis and treatment.
GENETIC COUNSELING: GAMT deficiency (caused by pathogenic variants in GAMT) and
AGAT deficiency (caused by pathogenic variants in GATM) are inherited in an
autosomal recessive manner. CRTR deficiency (caused by pathogenic variants in
SLC6A8) is inherited in an X-linked manner. Autosomal recessive inheritance: If
both parents are known to be heterozygous for a GAMT or GATM pathogenic variant,
each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being
affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of
being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the GAMT or GATM pathogenic variants
have been identified in an affected family member, molecular genetic carrier
testing and prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible. X-linked
inheritance: Mothers who are heterozygous for an SLC6A8 pathogenic variant have
a 50% chance of transmitting the pathogenic variant in each pregnancy; sons who
inherit the pathogenic variant will be affected; daughters who inherit the
pathogenic variant will be heterozygotes and may develop clinical findings
related to the disorder. Once the SLC6A8 pathogenic variant has been identified
in an affected family member, molecular genetic testing to identify female
heterozygotes and prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301745
