---
reference_id: "PMID:39255538"
title: "Efficacy and safety of the combination of encorafenib/cetuximab with or without binimetinib in patients with BRAF V600E-mutated metastatic colorectal cancer: an AGEO real-world multicenter study."
authors:
- Gallois C
- Bergen ES
- Auclin É
- Pernot S
- Higué J
- Trouilloud I
- Touchefeu Y
- Turpin A
- Mazard T
- Sartore-Bianchi A
- Prenen H
- Alberti A
- Pilla L
- Cuissy S
- Wookey V
- Perret A
- Melchior C
- Artru P
- Dubreuil O
- Drouillard A
- Doat S
- Lavolé J
- Basile D
- Perkins G
- Jary M
- Stintzing S
- Ros J
- Tougeron D
- Taieb J
journal: ESMO Open
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2024.103696
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carbamates/therapeutic use, adverse effects, administration & dosage"
- Female
- "Colorectal Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Retrospective Studies
- "Cetuximab/therapeutic use, administration & dosage, pharmacology, adverse effects"
- "Sulfonamides/therapeutic use, administration & dosage, adverse effects, pharmacology"
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- "Benzimidazoles/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- Aged
- Mutation
- Adult
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Neoplasm Metastasis
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of the combination of encorafenib/cetuximab with or without binimetinib in patients with BRAF V600E-mutated metastatic colorectal cancer: an AGEO real-world multicenter study.
**Authors:** Gallois C, Bergen ES, Auclin É, Pernot S, Higué J, Trouilloud I, Touchefeu Y, Turpin A, Mazard T, Sartore-Bianchi A, Prenen H, Alberti A, Pilla L, Cuissy S, Wookey V, Perret A, Melchior C, Artru P, Dubreuil O, Drouillard A, Doat S, Lavolé J, Basile D, Perkins G, Jary M, Stintzing S, Ros J, Tougeron D, Taieb J
**Journal:** ESMO Open (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.esmoop.2024.103696](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2024.103696)

## Content

1. ESMO Open. 2024 Sep;9(9):103696. doi: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2024.103696. Epub 2024
Sep 9.

Efficacy and safety of the combination of encorafenib/cetuximab with or without
binimetinib in patients with BRAF V600E-mutated metastatic colorectal cancer: an
AGEO real-world multicenter study.

Gallois C(1), Bergen ES(2), Auclin É(3), Pernot S(4), Higué J(5), Trouilloud
I(6), Touchefeu Y(7), Turpin A(8), Mazard T(9), Sartore-Bianchi A(10), Prenen
H(11), Alberti A(12), Pilla L(1), Cuissy S(13), Wookey V(14), Perret A(15),
Melchior C(16), Artru P(17), Dubreuil O(18), Drouillard A(19), Doat S(20),
Lavolé J(21), Basile D(22), Perkins G(23), Jary M(24), Stintzing S(25), Ros
J(26), Tougeron D(27), Taieb J(28).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Digestive Oncology, Paris-Cité University,
Georges Pompidou European Hospital, SIRIC CARPEM, Paris, France.
(2)Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine I, Medical University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria.
(3)Medical and Thoracic Oncology Department, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou,
AP-HP, Paris, France.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Institut Bergonié, Bordeaux, France.
(5)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
(6)Department of Medical Oncology, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, AP-HP, Paris, France.
(7)Digestive Oncology, Institut Des Maladies De l'Appareil Digestif, Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire De Nantes, Nantes, France.
(8)Department of Medical Oncology, University Lille, Lille, France; UMR9020
CNRS, UMR-S1277 Inserm, Canther - Cancer Heterogeneity, Plasticity and
Resistance to Therapies, CHU Lille, Lille, France.
(9)Department of Medical Oncology, Montpellier Cancer Institute (ICM),
Montpellier, France; Institut de Recherche en Cancérologie de Montpellier
(IRCM), INSERM U1194, University of Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(10)Department of Oncology and Hemato-Oncology, Università degli Studi di Milano
and Niguarda Cancer Center, Grande Ospedale Metropolitano Niguarda, Milan,
Italy.
(11)University Hospital Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium.
(12)Medical Oncology, University of Brescia, ASST-Spedali Civili, Brescia,
Italy.
(13)Department of Hepatogastroenterology, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen,
France.
(14)Department of Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, USA.
(15)Department of Medical Oncology, Gustave Roussy Cancer Centre, Villejuif,
France.
(16)Department of Medical Oncology, Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France.
(17)Hepatogastroenterology Department, Hôpital Jean-Mermoz, Lyon, France.
(18)Department of Digestive Oncology, Groupe hospitalier Diaconesses Croix Saint
Simon, Paris, France.
(19)Department of Hepato-Gastroenterology, Dijon Hospital, Dijon, France.
(20)Department of Hepato-Gastroenterology, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris,
France.
(21)Department of Hepato-Gastroenterology, Begin Teaching Military Hospital,
Saint-Mandé, France.
(22)Department of Medical Oncology, San Giovanni di Dio Hospital, Crotone,
Italy.
(23)Department of Gastroenterology, CHRU Pontchaillou, Rennes, France.
(24)Department of Surgical and Medical Oncology, University Hospital of
Clermont-Ferrand, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(25)Department of Hematology, Oncology, and Cancer Immunology (CCM),
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(26)Department of Medical Oncology, Vall d'Hebron University Hospital,
Barcelona, Spain.
(27)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Poitiers University Hospital,
Poitiers, France.
(28)Department of Gastroenterology and Digestive Oncology, Paris-Cité
University, Georges Pompidou European Hospital, SIRIC CARPEM, Paris, France.
Electronic address: jtaieb75@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The combination of encorafenib with cetuximab has become the
standard of care in patients with BRAF V600E-mutated metastatic colorectal
cancer (mCRC) after a prior systemic therapy. This study aims to describe the
efficacy and safety of encorafenib/cetuximab +/- binimetinib in patients with
BRAF V600E-mutated mCRC in a real-world setting.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This retrospective study included patients with BRAF
V600E-mutated mCRC who received this combination from January 2020 to June 2022
in 30 centers.
RESULTS: A total of 201 patients were included, with 55% of women, a median age
of 62 years, and an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status
(ECOG-PS) >1 in 20% of cases. The main tumor characteristics were 60% of
right-sided primary tumor, 11% of microsatellite instability/mismatch repair
deficient phenotype, and liver and peritoneum being the two main metastatic
sites (57% and 51%). Encorafenib/cetuximab +/- binimetinib was prescribed in the
first, second, third, and beyond third line in 4%, 56%, 29%, and 11%,
respectively, of cases, with the encorafenib/cetuximab/binimetinib combination
for 21 patients (10%). With encorafenib/cetuximab treatment, 21% of patients
experienced grade ≥3 adverse events (AEs), with each type of grade ≥3 AE
observed in <5% of patients. The objective response rate was 32.2% and the
disease control rate (DCR) was 71.2%. The median progression-free survival (PFS)
was 4.5 months [95% confidence interval (CI) 3.9-5.4 months] and the median
overall survival (OS) was 9.2 months (95% CI 7.8-10.8 months). In multivariable
analysis, factors associated with a shorter PFS were synchronous metastases
[hazard ratio (HR) 1.66, P = 0.04] and ECOG-PS >1 (HR 1.88, P = 0.007), and
those associated with a shorter OS were the same factors (HR 1.71, P = 0.03 and
HR 2.36, P < 0.001, respectively) in addition to treatment beyond the second
line (HR 1.74, P = 0.003) and high carcinoembryonic antigen level (HR 1.72, P =
0.003).
CONCLUSION: This real-world study showed that in patients with BRAF
V600E-mutated mCRC treated with encorafenib/cetuximab +/- binimetinib, efficacy
and safety data confirm those reported in the BEACON registration trial. The
main poor prognostic factors for this treatment are synchronous metastases and
ECOG-PS >1.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2024.103696
PMCID: PMC11415680
PMID: 39255538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
