---
reference_id: "PMID:25088196"
title: Tks5 activation in mesothelial cells creates invasion front of peritoneal carcinomatosis.
authors:
- Satoyoshi R
- Aiba N
- Yanagihara K
- Yashiro M
- Tanaka M
journal: Oncogene
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.246
keywords:
- Animals
- "Carcinoma/metabolism, pathology"
- Cell Movement
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Enzyme Activation
- "Epithelium/metabolism, pathology"
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
- "Mice, Nude"
- Neoplasm Invasiveness
- "Peritoneal Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology"
- "Peritoneum/metabolism, pathology"
- Phosphate-Binding Proteins
- Phosphoproteins/metabolism
- Rats
- "Rats, Wistar"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tks5 activation in mesothelial cells creates invasion front of peritoneal carcinomatosis.
**Authors:** Satoyoshi R, Aiba N, Yanagihara K, Yashiro M, Tanaka M
**Journal:** Oncogene (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/onc.2014.246](https://doi.org/10.1038/onc.2014.246)

## Content

1. Oncogene. 2015 Jun 11;34(24):3176-87. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.246. Epub 2014 Aug
 4.

Tks5 activation in mesothelial cells creates invasion front of peritoneal
carcinomatosis.

Satoyoshi R(1), Aiba N(1), Yanagihara K(2), Yashiro M(3), Tanaka M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Biochemistry, Akita University Graduate
School of Medicine, Akita, Japan.
(2)Division of Translational Research, Exploratory Oncology and Clinical Trial
Center, National Cancer Center, Chiba, Japan.
(3)Department of Surgical Oncology, Osaka City University Graduate School of
Medicine, Osaka, Japan.

Scirrhous gastric cancer is frequently associated with peritoneal dissemination,
and the interaction of cancer cells with peritoneal mesothelial cells (PMCs) is
crucial for the establishment of the metastasis in the peritoneum. Although
cells derived from PMCs are detected within tumors of peritoneal carcinomatosis,
how PMCs are incorporated into tumor architecture is not understood. The present
study shows that PMCs create the invasion front of peritoneal carcinomatosis,
which depends on activation of Tks5 in PMCs. In peritoneal tumor implants, PMCs
represent majority of cells located at the invasive edge of the cancer tissue.
Exogenously implanted PMCs and host PMCs aggressively invade into abdominal wall
upon the peritoneal inoculation of cancer cells, and PMCs locate ahead of cancer
cells in the direction of invasion. Tks5, a substrate of Src kinase, is
predominantly expressed in the PMCs of cancer tissue, and promotes the invasion
of PMCs and cancer cells. Expression and activation of Tks5 was induced in PMCs
following their exposure to gastric cancer cells, and increased Tks5 expression
was detected in PMCs located at the invasion front. Reduced Tks5 expression in
PMCs blocked PMC invasion, which in turn prevents cancer cell invasion both in
vitro and in vivo. The peritoneal dissemination of gastric cancer was
significantly increased by mixing cancer cells and PMCs, and was suppressed by
knockdown of Tks5 in PMCs. These results suggest that cancer-activated PMCs
create invasion front by guiding cancer cells. Signaling leading to Tks5
activation in PMCs may be a suitable therapeutic target for prevention of
peritoneal carcinomatosis.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2014.246
PMID: 25088196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
