---
reference_id: "PMID:16084319"
title: "Raynaud's phenomenon in mixed connective tissue disease."
authors:
- Grader-Beck T
- Wigley FM
journal: Rheum Dis Clin North Am
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/j.rdc.2005.04.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Raynaud's phenomenon in mixed connective tissue disease.
**Authors:** Grader-Beck T, Wigley FM
**Journal:** Rheum Dis Clin North Am (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rdc.2005.04.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rdc.2005.04.006)

## Content

1. Rheum Dis Clin North Am. 2005 Aug;31(3):465-81, vi. doi: 
10.1016/j.rdc.2005.04.006.

Raynaud's phenomenon in mixed connective tissue disease.

Grader-Beck T(1), Wigley FM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 5200 Eastern 
Avenue, Suite 4100, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

Raynaud's phenomenon affects most patients who have mixed connective tissue 
disease (MCTD) and frequently represents the initial manifestation of the 
disease. It is the cutaneous symptom of a systemic vasculopathy that is 
characterized by intimal fibrosis and blood vessel obliteration that frequently 
leads to visceral involvement, particularly pulmonary hypertension. An 
association between Raynaud's phenomenon and the characteristic autoantibody in 
MCTD, anti-U1-RNP (ribonucleoprotein), is found across the spectrum of rheumatic 
diseases, including undifferentiated connective tissue disease, scleroderma, and 
systemic lupus erythematosus. Capillary nailfold examination represents a 
valuable tool to identify patients who are at risk for MCTD. The goal in the 
therapy of Raynaud's phenomenon in MCTD is to decrease the frequency of attacks, 
to prevent digital ulceration, and to limit progressive vascular damage. 
Therapeutic regimens include the traditional use of calcium channel blockers and 
novel vascular therapies.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rdc.2005.04.006
PMID: 16084319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]