---
reference_id: "PMID:14986813"
title: Synergistic interaction between aflatoxin B1 and hepatitis B virus in hepatocarcinogenesis.
authors:
- Kew MC
journal: Liver Int
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2003.00869.x
keywords:
- Aflatoxin B1/toxicity
- Animals
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/etiology, physiopathology"
- Cocarcinogenesis
- Food Contamination
- Fungi
- Hepatitis B virus/physiology
- "Hepatitis B, Chronic/complications, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Liver Neoplasms/etiology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Synergistic interaction between aflatoxin B1 and hepatitis B virus in hepatocarcinogenesis.
**Authors:** Kew MC
**Journal:** Liver Int (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1478-3231.2003.00869.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1478-3231.2003.00869.x)

## Content

1. Liver Int. 2003 Dec;23(6):405-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2003.00869.x.

Synergistic interaction between aflatoxin B1 and hepatitis B virus in 
hepatocarcinogenesis.

Kew MC(1).

Author information:
(1)MRC/CANSA/University Molecular Hepatology Research Unit, Department of 
Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, 
Johannesburg, South Africa. kewmc@medicine.wits.ac.za

Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection and dietary exposure to aflatoxin B1 
(AFB1), two of the major risk factors in the multifactorial aetiology of 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), co-exist in those countries with the highest 
incidences of and the youngest patients with this tumour, raising the 
possibility of a synergistic carcinogenic interaction between the two agents. 
Experimental studies in HBV-transgenic mice and woodchucks infected with 
woodchuck hepatitis virus were the first to show a synergistic 
hepatocarcinogenic effect between hepadnaviral infection and AFB1 exposure. With 
the availability of urinary and serum biomarkers that more accurately reflect 
dietary exposure to AFB1 than did the initially used food sampling and dietary 
questionnaires, cohort studies of patients with HCC in China and Taiwan have 
provided compelling evidence for a multiplicative or sub-multiplicative 
interaction between HBV and AFB1 in the genesis of human HCC. A number of 
possible mechanisms for the interaction have been suggested. Chronic HBV 
infection may induce the cytochrome P450s that metabolise inactive AFB1 to the 
mutagenic AFB1-8,9-epoxide. Hepatocyte necrosis and regeneration and the 
generation of oxygen and nitrogen reactive species resulting from chronic HBV 
infection increase the likelihood of the AFB1-induced p53 249ser and other 
mutations and the subsequent clonal expansion of cells containing these 
mutations. Nuclear excision repair, which is normally responsible for removing 
AFB1-DNA adducts, is inhibited by HBV x protein, favouring the persistence of 
existing mutations. This protein also increases the overall frequency of DNA 
mutations, including the p53 249ser mutation, and may contribute to uncontrolled 
cell cycling when p53 is non-functional.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2003.00869.x
PMID: 14986813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]