---
reference_id: "PMID:36804444"
title: Bilateral Wilms Tumor in CLOVES Syndrome.
authors:
- Kim JK
- Hansen A
- Peard L
- Newsome M
- Saltzman AF
journal: Urology
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.urology.2023.01.034
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bilateral Wilms Tumor in CLOVES Syndrome.
**Authors:** Kim JK, Hansen A, Peard L, Newsome M, Saltzman AF
**Journal:** Urology (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.urology.2023.01.034](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.urology.2023.01.034)

## Content

1. Urology. 2023 Jul;177:178-180. doi: 10.1016/j.urology.2023.01.034. Epub 2023
Feb  16.

Bilateral Wilms Tumor in CLOVES Syndrome.

Kim JK(1), Hansen A(2), Peard L(1), Newsome M(1), Saltzman AF(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY.
(2)College of Medicine, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY.
(3)Department of Urology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY. Electronic 
address: afsaltzman@gmail.com.

Wilms tumor is the most common pediatric renal mass and occurs in up to 10% of 
predisposition syndromes. One such syndrome is CLOVES syndrome, an extremely 
rare disorder within the umbrella of PIK3CA-related overgrowth spectrum 
disorders. This case presents the management of a bilateral Wilms tumor in a 
patient with CLOVES syndrome and highlights the many intricacies in caring for 
complex oncology patients. Particularly highlighted in this case is the delicate 
line in balancing the risks of treatment-related morbidity against the risks of 
recurrence in predisposed patients, while still abiding by established treatment 
guidelines.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.urology.2023.01.034
PMID: 36804444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST None of the authors of this 
manuscript have any financial or personal relationships to disclose that could 
inappropriately influence or bias our work.