---
reference_id: "PMID:37184208"
title: Progression of liver disease and portal hypertension in dyskeratosis congenita and related telomere biology disorders.
authors:
- Vittal A
- Niewisch MR
- Bhala S
- Kudaravalli P
- Rahman F
- Hercun J
- Kleiner DE
- Savage SA
- Koh C
- Heller T
- Giri N
journal: Hepatology
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/HEP.0000000000000461
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- "Dyskeratosis Congenita/complications, genetics"
- Digestive System Diseases
- Telomere/metabolism
- "Hypertension, Portal/genetics, complications"
- Vascular Diseases/complications
- Disease Progression
- Biology
- Mutation
- "Telomerase/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Progression of liver disease and portal hypertension in dyskeratosis congenita and related telomere biology disorders.
**Authors:** Vittal A, Niewisch MR, Bhala S, Kudaravalli P, Rahman F, Hercun J, Kleiner DE, Savage SA, Koh C, Heller T, Giri N
**Journal:** Hepatology (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/HEP.0000000000000461](https://doi.org/10.1097/HEP.0000000000000461)

## Content

1. Hepatology. 2023 Dec 1;78(6):1777-1787. doi: 10.1097/HEP.0000000000000461.
Epub  2023 May 16.

Progression of liver disease and portal hypertension in dyskeratosis congenita 
and related telomere biology disorders.

Vittal A(1), Niewisch MR(2), Bhala S(2), Kudaravalli P(3), Rahman F(1), Hercun 
J(1), Kleiner DE(4), Savage SA(2), Koh C(1), Heller T(1), Giri N(2).

Author information:
(1)Liver Diseases Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)Clinical Genetics Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, 
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, 
USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, 
New York, USA.
(4)Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Dyskeratosis congenita (DC) and related telomere biology 
disorders (TBD) are characterized by very short telomeres and multisystem organ 
involvement including liver disease. Our study aimed to characterize baseline 
hepatic abnormalities in patients with DC/TBD and determine risk factors 
associated with liver disease progression.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: A retrospective review was performed on a cohort of 58 
patients (39 males) with DC/TBD who were prospectively evaluated at a single 
institute from 2002 to 2019. The median age at initial assessment was 18 
(1.4-67.6) years, and median follow-up duration was 6 (1.4-8.2) years. Patients 
with autosomal or X-linked recessive inheritance and those with heterozygous 
TINF2 DC were significantly younger, predominantly male, and more likely to have 
DC-associated mucocutaneous triad features and severe bone marrow failure 
compared with autosomal dominant-non- TINF2 DC/TBD patients. Liver abnormality 
(defined at baseline assessment by laboratory and/or radiological findings) was 
present in 72.4% of patients with predominantly cholestatic pattern of liver 
enzyme elevation. Clinically significant liver disease and portal hypertension 
developed in 17.2% of patients during the 6-year follow-up; this progression was 
mainly seen in patients with recessive or TINF2 -associated DC. Significant risk 
factors associated with progression included the presence of pulmonary or 
vascular disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Our experience shows a high prevalence of cholestatic pattern of 
liver abnormality with progression to portal hypertension in patients with 
DC/TBD. Presence of pulmonary and/or vascular disease in patients with recessive 
or TINF2 DC was an important predictor of liver disease progression, suggesting 
the need for increased vigilance and monitoring for complications in these 
patients.

Copyright © 2023 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1097/HEP.0000000000000461
PMCID: PMC10733788
PMID: 37184208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors have no 
conflicts to report.