---
reference_id: "PMID:39440439"
title: Natural history of valve disease in patients with mucopolysaccharidosis II and the impact of enzyme replacement therapy.
authors:
- Kampmann C
- Lampe C
- Wiethoff CM
- Arash-Kaps L
- Mengel E
- Reinke J
- Beck M
- Hennermann JB
- Abu-Tair T
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12808
keywords:
- Humans
- Mucopolysaccharidosis II/drug therapy
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy/methods
- Male
- Iduronate Sulfatase/therapeutic use
- Adolescent
- Child
- Adult
- "Child, Preschool"
- Young Adult
- Glycosaminoglycans/urine
- Heart Valve Diseases/drug therapy
- Infant
- Follow-Up Studies
- Echocardiography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural history of valve disease in patients with mucopolysaccharidosis II and the impact of enzyme replacement therapy.
**Authors:** Kampmann C, Lampe C, Wiethoff CM, Arash-Kaps L, Mengel E, Reinke J, Beck M, Hennermann JB, Abu-Tair T
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12808](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12808)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2025 Jan;48(1):e12808. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12808. Epub 2024
 Oct 23.

Natural history of valve disease in patients with mucopolysaccharidosis II and
the impact of enzyme replacement therapy.

Kampmann C(1), Lampe C(2), Wiethoff CM(1), Arash-Kaps L(3), Mengel E(3), Reinke
J(4), Beck M(3), Hennermann JB(5), Abu-Tair T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology and Structural Heart Diseases, Center for
Diseases in Childhood and Adolescence, University Medicine Mainz, Mainz,
Germany.
(2)Department of Child Neurology, Epileptology and Social Medicine, University
Hospital Giessen, Giessen, Germany.
(3)SphinCS, Institute of Clinical Science in LSD, Hochheim, Germany.
(4)Medical center for adults with disabilities, Kreuznacher Diakonie, Bad
Kreuznach, Germany.
(5)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Villa Metabolica, Center for Diseases in
Childhood and Adolescence, University Medicine Mainz, Mainz, Germany.

Mucopolysaccharidosis II (MPS II, Hunter syndrome) is a rare, X-linked lysosomal
storage disease caused by reduced activity of iduronate-2-sulfatase (I2S), with
subsequent cellular accumulation of the glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), heparan
sulfate, and dermatan sulfate (DS). DS is a major component of the extracellular
matrix of heart valves, which can be affected in MPS II. We investigated the
natural history of valve disease in MPS II and the impact of long-term
intravenous enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with recombinant I2S (idursulfase).
In total, 604 cardiac examinations were assessed from serial follow-up of 80
male patients (49 neuronopathic). Valve disease was classified according to
standard practice from hemodynamic features evident from echocardiography. The
natural history group comprised 48 patients (up to 14.8 years of follow-up;
median, 2.6 years; 24 patients started ERT during the study); 56 patients were
treated (up to 14.2 years of follow-up; median, 6.2 years). Lifetime GAG burden
(calculated from urinary GAG measurements) correlated significantly with the
degree of valve disease. Onset of moderate-to-severe valve disease was
significantly delayed in treated (median age at onset, 29.1 ± 2 [95% CI:
25.2-32.9] years; Kaplan-Meier estimation) versus untreated patients (17.6 ± 1
[95% Cl: 15.8-19.4] years; p < 0.0001). Cox regression modeling found that
long-term ERT reduced the probability of developing severe valve disease (χ2,
32.736; significant after 5 years of ERT). Overall, this study found that valve
disease severity in MPS II correlates with GAG burden and that progression is
delayed by long-term ERT.

© 2024 The Author(s). Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12808
PMCID: PMC11670151
PMID: 39440439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Christoph Kampmann, Christiane M. Wiethoff,
Laila Arash‐Kaps, Joerg Reinke, and Tariq Abu‐Tair declare that they have no
conflict of interest. Michael Beck has sadly now passed away, but had no
conflict of interest to declare at the time of manuscript development. Christina
Lampe has received travel support, speaker fees/honoraria for participating in
advisory boards, research funds and consulting fees from Amicus, Alexion,
Chiesi, BioMarin, Sanofi Genzyme, Takeda, Regenxbio, and Ultragenyx. Eugen
Mengel has received research grants and consultation fees from Takeda, Sanofi
Genzyme, Amicus, Alexion, and Orphazyme. Julia B. Hennermann has received
consulting fees from Chiesi, Amicus, and Genzyme/Sanofi.
