---
reference_id: "PMID:14556253"
title: Craniofacial-deafness-hand syndrome revisited.
authors:
- Sommer A
- Bartholomew DW
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.20501
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Deafness/genetics
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Hand Deformities/genetics
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- PAX3 Transcription Factor
- Paired Box Transcription Factors
- Syndrome
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Craniofacial-deafness-hand syndrome revisited.
**Authors:** Sommer A, Bartholomew DW
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.20501](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.20501)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Nov 15;123A(1):91-4. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.20501.

Craniofacial-deafness-hand syndrome revisited.

Sommer A(1), Bartholomew DW.

Author information:
(1)Human and Molecular Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, The Ohio State
University and Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio 43205-2696, USA.
asommer@chi.osu.edu

In 1983 Sommer described a new syndrome in a mother and her infant daughter
which was subsequently called the syndrome of craniofacial, hand anomalies and
sensorineural deafness. The syndrome consisted of a normal calvarium with a flat
facial profile, hypertelorism and small palpebral fissures with an antimongoloid
slant, a depressed nasal bridge with a button tip and slitlike nares and a small
"pursed" mouth. Profound sensorineural hearing loss and ulnar deviation of the
hands with flexion contractures of digits three, four and five was evident. The
family had another child, a son, two years after the birth of the index case
that had the exact manifestations as his mother and sister. Because of three
affected family members in two generations and a phenotype of midfacial
anomalies and dystopia canthorum resembling Waardenburg syndrome, a search for
mutations in the PAX3 gene was undertaken. A missense mutation in the paired
domain of PAX3 (Asn47Lys) was detected. We have provided a 20-year follow-up of
a syndrome characterized by craniofacial anomalies, hearing loss and hand
deformities and which is caused by a PAX3 missense mutation.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.20501
PMID: 14556253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
