---
reference_id: "PMID:38036713"
title: Weight loss from diagnosis of Crohn's disease to one year post-diagnosis results in earlier surgery.
authors:
- Kim M
- Cho M
- Hong S
- Song JH
- Kim ER
- Hong SN
- Chang DK
- Kim YH
- Kim JE
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-48474-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Weight loss from diagnosis of Crohn's disease to one year post-diagnosis results in earlier surgery.
**Authors:** Kim M, Cho M, Hong S, Song JH, Kim ER, Hong SN, Chang DK, Kim YH, Kim JE
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-023-48474-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-48474-x)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2023 Nov 30;13(1):21101. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-48474-x.

Weight loss from diagnosis of Crohn's disease to one year post-diagnosis results 
in earlier surgery.

Kim M(#)(1), Cho M(#)(1), Hong S(2), Song JH(3), Kim ER(1), Hong SN(1), Chang 
DK(1), Kim YH(1), Kim JE(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, 81 Irwon-ro, Gangnam-gu, Seoul, 06351, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Digital Health, Samsung Advanced Institute for Health Sciences 
and Technology, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Medicine, Konkuk University Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.
(4)Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, 81 Irwon-ro, Gangnam-gu, Seoul, 06351, Republic of Korea. 
happyjinny0706@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Malnutrition might play a key role in the prognosis of patients with Crohn's 
disease (CD). The aim of this study was to explore the impact of weight loss 
from diagnosis of CD to one-year post-diagnosis on disease prognosis in terms of 
surgery. Patients who were diagnosed with CD at Samsung Medical Center between 
1995 to 2020 were included in this study. The study defined the "group with 
weight loss" as patients with weight loss in one year after diagnosis and the 
"group without body weight loss" as patients without weight loss in one year 
after diagnosis. Their data such as demographics, laboratory findings, and 
medical interventions were collected retrospectively. The primary outcome was 
confirmation of the difference in the incidence of surgery associated with CD 
between the group with weight loss and the group without body weight loss. We 
further analyzed factors associated with surgery outcomes. A total of 165 
patients were analyzed in this study. Forty-one patients (24.8%) had body weight 
loss whereas 124 patients (75.2%) had no body weight loss. Body change at one 
year showed no significant association with direct surgical incidence. However, 
the patients with weight loss tended to undergo surgery earlier than patients 
without body weight loss. Among factors associated with outcomes of Crohn's 
surgery, the albumin was the only significant factor. Patients with weight loss 
had no statistically significant increase in the risk of surgery than patients 
without weight loss, although they tended to undergo surgery earlier than 
patients without body weight loss. A prospective study is needed to determine 
serial body weight changes during follow-up for patients with CD.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-48474-x
PMCID: PMC10689484
PMID: 38036713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.