---
reference_id: "PMID:28665177"
title: "Epigenetics and ADHD: Toward an Integrative Approach of the Disorder Pathogenesis."
authors:
- Hamza M
- Halayem S
- Bourgou S
- Daoud M
- Charfi F
- Belhadj A
journal: J Atten Disord
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1177/1087054717696769
keywords:
- Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/genetics
- Child
- CpG Islands/genetics
- DNA Methylation
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Gene-Environment Interaction
- Humans
- "Receptors, Dopamine D4/genetics"
- "Receptors, Vasoactive Intestinal Peptide, Type II/genetics"
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epigenetics and ADHD: Toward an Integrative Approach of the Disorder Pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Hamza M, Halayem S, Bourgou S, Daoud M, Charfi F, Belhadj A
**Journal:** J Atten Disord (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1087054717696769](https://doi.org/10.1177/1087054717696769)

## Content

1. J Atten Disord. 2019 May;23(7):655-664. doi: 10.1177/1087054717696769. Epub
2017  Mar 9.

Epigenetics and ADHD: Toward an Integrative Approach of the Disorder
Pathogenesis.

Hamza M(1)(2), Halayem S(1)(3), Bourgou S(1)(2), Daoud M(1)(2), Charfi F(1)(2),
Belhadj A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)1 University of Tunis El Manar, Tunis, Tunisia.
(2)2 Mongi Slim Hospital, Sidi Daoud, Tunisia.
(3)3 Razi Hospital, Manouba, Tunisia.

OBJECTIVE: Epigenetic hypothesis is one of the research pathways used to explain
the complex etiology of neurodevelopmental disorders. This review highlights the
findings of recent studies in the field of epigenetics in ADHD.
METHODS: An electronic literature search using Medline.
RESULTS: In the Gene × Environment interaction model, several clinical, genetic
and molecular arguments support the epigenetic hypothesis in ADHD etiology.
Environmental ADHD risk factors including toxic, nutritional factors and
stressful life events lead to changes in DNA methylation and in histone
modification levels. One critical CpG site located in the promoter of the DRD4
gene exhibited a specific pattern in ADHD children. A methylome wide exploration
of DNA showed decreased methylation in vasoactive intestinal peptide receptor 2
gene, which was not replicated by further research.
CONCLUSION: Current data require consolidation and could lead to the
identification of biomarkers and the introduction of new modalities of
treatment.

DOI: 10.1177/1087054717696769
PMID: 28665177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
