---
reference_id: "PMID:29947174"
title: "Genome-Wide Association Studies of Autoimmune Thyroid Diseases, Thyroid Function, and Thyroid Cancer."
authors:
- Hwangbo Y
- Park YJ
journal: Endocrinol Metab (Seoul)
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3803/EnM.2018.33.2.175
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome-Wide Association Studies of Autoimmune Thyroid Diseases, Thyroid Function, and Thyroid Cancer.
**Authors:** Hwangbo Y, Park YJ
**Journal:** Endocrinol Metab (Seoul) (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3803/EnM.2018.33.2.175](https://doi.org/10.3803/EnM.2018.33.2.175)

## Content

1. Endocrinol Metab (Seoul). 2018 Jun;33(2):175-184. doi: 
10.3803/EnM.2018.33.2.175.

Genome-Wide Association Studies of Autoimmune Thyroid Diseases, Thyroid 
Function, and Thyroid Cancer.

Hwangbo Y(1), Park YJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Thyroid Cancer, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. yjparkmd@snu.ac.kr.

Thyroid diseases, including autoimmune thyroid diseases and thyroid cancer, are 
known to have high heritability. Family and twin studies have indicated that 
genetics plays a major role in the development of thyroid diseases. Thyroid 
function, represented by thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) and free thyroxine 
(T4), is also known to be partly genetically determined. Before the era of 
genome-wide association studies (GWAS), the ability to identify genes 
responsible for susceptibility to thyroid disease was limited. Over the past 
decade, GWAS have been used to identify genes involved in many complex diseases, 
including various phenotypes of the thyroid gland. In GWAS of autoimmune thyroid 
diseases, many susceptibility loci associated with autoimmunity (human leukocyte 
antigen [HLA], protein tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor type 22 [PTPN22], 
cytotoxic T-lymphocyte associated protein 4 [CTLA4], and interleukin 2 receptor 
subunit alpha [IL2RA]) or thyroid-specific genes (thyroid stimulating hormone 
receptor [TSHR] and forkhead box E1 [FOXE1]) have been identified. Regarding 
thyroid function, many susceptibility loci for levels of TSH and free T4 have 
been identified through genome-wide analyses. In GWAS of differentiated thyroid 
cancer, associations at FOXE1, MAP3K12 binding inhibitory protein 1 (MBIP)-NK2 
homeobox 1 (NKX2-1), disrupted in renal carcinoma 3 (DIRC3), neuregulin 1 
(NRG1), and pecanex-like 2 (PCNXL2) have been commonly identified in people of 
European and Korean ancestry, and many other susceptibility loci have been found 
in specific populations. Through GWAS of various thyroid-related phenotypes, 
many susceptibility loci have been found, providing insights into the 
pathogenesis of thyroid diseases and disease co-clustering within families and 
individuals.

Copyright © 2018 Korean Endocrine Society.

DOI: 10.3803/EnM.2018.33.2.175
PMCID: PMC6021314
PMID: 29947174

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest relevant to 
this article was reported.