---
reference_id: "PMID:39156428"
title: Holt-Oram Syndrome With Atrial Septal Defect.
authors:
- C S SL
- Sharma K
- Manaswini M
- Thakur K
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.64772
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Holt-Oram Syndrome With Atrial Septal Defect.
**Authors:** C S SL, Sharma K, Manaswini M, Thakur K
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.64772](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.64772)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Jul 17;16(7):e64772. doi: 10.7759/cureus.64772. eCollection 2024 
Jul.

Holt-Oram Syndrome With Atrial Septal Defect.

C S SL(1), Sharma K(1), Manaswini M(1), Thakur K(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatrics, Sree Balaji Medical College and Hospital, Chennai, IND.

Holt-Oram syndrome is an autosomal dominant condition marked by heart and upper 
limb defects. Holt and Oram were the first to narrate this in 1960. Holt-Oram 
syndrome is the prototype of heart-hand syndromes and has recently been mapped 
to the long arm of chromosome 12 (12q2). This syndrome was described in 1960 by 
Dr Mary Holt and Dr Samuel Oram. It is an autosomal dominant condition resulting 
from a mutation in TBX5 located on chromosome 12q24.1, which regulates cardiac 
and limb morphogenesis. It must be differentiated from heart-hand syndrome type 
II (Tobatznik's syndrome) and heart-hand syndrome type III (MIM No. 140450), 
which are phenotypically similar. The latter do not map to 12q2, and atrial 
septal defects do not occur in these conditions. This syndrome is distinguished 
by heart problems as well as thumb aplasia or hypoplasia. It is sometimes 
referred to as atriodigital syndrome, upper limb-cardiovascular syndrome, 
heart-hand syndrome, cardiomelic syndrome, or cardiac limb syndrome. Other 
upper-limb anomalies include aplasia or hypoplasia of the radius, arm length 
variation, atypical forearm pronation and supination, uncommon thumb resistance, 
sloping shoulders, and restricted shoulder movement. All those who are affected 
have an aberrant carpal bone, which might be the only sign of the illness. 
Seventy-five percent of those with Holt-Oram syndrome have a congenital cardiac 
defect, which most frequently affects the septum. In this case, we report a girl 
who is 4 years and 6 months old and is a known case of Holt-Oram syndrome with 
an atrial septal defect. She underwent device closure and had come to the 
pediatric op with fever and cough.

Copyright © 2024, C.S et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.64772
PMCID: PMC11329708
PMID: 39156428

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent was obtained or waived 
by all participants in this study. Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the 
ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: 
Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no financial support was 
received from any organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships: 
All authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present 
or within the previous three years with any organizations that might have an 
interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All authors have declared 
that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have 
influenced the submitted work.