---
reference_id: "PMID:26739693"
title: Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation.
authors:
- Schneider SA
journal: Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s11910-015-0608-3
keywords:
- Brain/metabolism
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- Iron/metabolism
- Lipid Metabolism
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- "Neurodegenerative Diseases/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation.
**Authors:** Schneider SA
**Journal:** Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11910-015-0608-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11910-015-0608-3)

## Content

1. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2016 Jan;16(1):9. doi: 10.1007/s11910-015-0608-3.

Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation.

Schneider SA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, University of 
Munich, Marchioninistraße 15, 81377, München, Germany. 
s.schneider@neurologie.uni-kiel.de.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany. 
s.schneider@neurologie.uni-kiel.de.

Syndromes with neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) are a group 
of neurodegenerative disorders characterized by abnormalities in brain iron 
metabolism with excess iron accumulation in the globus pallidus and to a lesser 
degree in the substantia nigra and sometimes adjacent areas. They clinically 
present as neurodegenerative diseases with progressive hypo- and/or hyperkinetic 
movement disorders and a variable degree of pyramidal, cerebellar, peripheral 
nerve, autonomic, cognitive and psychiatric involvement, and visual dysfunction. 
Several causative genes underlying NBIA have been identified which explain about 
65% of cases. Pathophysiologically, many of the NBIA syndromes map into related 
biochemical pathways and gene networks including mitochondrial pathways, lipid 
metabolism, and autophagy. Treatment for NBIA disorders remains symptomatic but 
a placebo-controlled double-blind study is underway. Rapid developments prompted 
the review of this interesting field.

DOI: 10.1007/s11910-015-0608-3
PMID: 26739693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]