---
reference_id: "PMID:36998347"
title: "Endoscopic resection for a solitary Peutz-Jeghers type polyp in the duodenum: A case report with literature review."
authors:
- Hamada Y
- Katsurahara M
- Umeda Y
- Ikenoyama Y
- Shigefuku A
- Fujiwara Y
- Beppu T
- Tsuboi J
- Yamada R
- Nakamura M
- Tanaka K
- Horiki N
- Nakagawa H
journal: DEN Open
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/deo2.226
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endoscopic resection for a solitary Peutz-Jeghers type polyp in the duodenum: A case report with literature review.
**Authors:** Hamada Y, Katsurahara M, Umeda Y, Ikenoyama Y, Shigefuku A, Fujiwara Y, Beppu T, Tsuboi J, Yamada R, Nakamura M, Tanaka K, Horiki N, Nakagawa H
**Journal:** DEN Open (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/deo2.226](https://doi.org/10.1002/deo2.226)

## Content

1. DEN Open. 2023 Mar 27;3(1):e226. doi: 10.1002/deo2.226. eCollection 2023 Apr.

Endoscopic resection for a solitary Peutz-Jeghers type polyp in the duodenum: A 
case report with literature review.

Hamada Y(1), Katsurahara M(1), Umeda Y(1), Ikenoyama Y(1), Shigefuku A(1), 
Fujiwara Y(1), Beppu T(1), Tsuboi J(1), Yamada R(1), Nakamura M(1), Tanaka K(1), 
Horiki N(1), Nakagawa H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Mie University Hospital Tsu Mie 
Japan.

A 68-year-old female patient was referred to our hospital with a 30-mm polyp in 
the second portion of the duodenum found via esophagogastroduodenoscopy. The 
polyp had an irregular, lobular surface and a thick stalk. In addition, white 
dots were detected on the surface. Magnifying endoscopy with narrow-band imaging 
showed a white material deep in the loop-shaped microvessels on the white dots. 
Endoscopic ultrasonography showed a hypoechoic elevated lesion from the mucosal 
layer, and a feeding vessel traversing the stalk to supply the head of the 
polyp. Endoscopic biopsy did not provide a definitive diagnosis. Endoscopic 
resection was conducted for a definitive diagnosis and treatment. The resected 
specimen showed a branching bundle of smooth muscle fibers covered by 
hyperplastic mucosa, consistent with a hamartomatous polyp. The patient had no 
mucocutaneous pigmentation or familial history of the hamartomatous polyp. The 
polyp was finally diagnosed as a solitary Peutz-Jeghers-type polyp. No 
recurrence has been observed for seven years postoperatively.

© 2023 The Authors. DEN Open published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on 
behalf of Japan Gastroenterological Endoscopy Society.

DOI: 10.1002/deo2.226
PMCID: PMC10043356
PMID: 36998347

Conflict of interest statement: None.