---
reference_id: "PMID:26238017"
title: "Venous thromboembolism, interleukin-6 and survival outcomes in patients with advanced ovarian clear cell carcinoma."
authors:
- Matsuo K
- Hasegawa K
- Yoshino K
- Murakami R
- Hisamatsu T
- Stone RL
- Previs RA
- Hansen JM
- Ikeda Y
- Miyara A
- Hiramatsu K
- Enomoto T
- Fujiwara K
- Matsumura N
- Konishi I
- Roman LD
- Gabra H
- Fotopoulou C
- Sood AK
journal: Eur J Cancer
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2015.07.012
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/blood"
- "Carcinoma/blood, complications, mortality, pathology"
- Disease Progression
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- Interleukin-6/blood
- Japan
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Middle Aged
- Multivariate Analysis
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local"
- Neoplasm Staging
- "Neoplasms, Cystic, Mucinous, and Serous/blood, complications, mortality, pathology"
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/blood, complications, mortality, pathology"
- Proportional Hazards Models
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Time Factors
- United States
- Up-Regulation
- "Venous Thromboembolism/diagnosis, etiology, mortality"
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Venous thromboembolism, interleukin-6 and survival outcomes in patients with advanced ovarian clear cell carcinoma.
**Authors:** Matsuo K, Hasegawa K, Yoshino K, Murakami R, Hisamatsu T, Stone RL, Previs RA, Hansen JM, Ikeda Y, Miyara A, Hiramatsu K, Enomoto T, Fujiwara K, Matsumura N, Konishi I, Roman LD, Gabra H, Fotopoulou C, Sood AK
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejca.2015.07.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2015.07.012)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer. 2015 Sep;51(14):1978-88. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2015.07.012. Epub
2015 Jul 31.

Venous thromboembolism, interleukin-6 and survival outcomes in patients with
advanced ovarian clear cell carcinoma.

Matsuo K(1), Hasegawa K(2), Yoshino K(3), Murakami R(4), Hisamatsu T(5), Stone
RL(6), Previs RA(7), Hansen JM(7), Ikeda Y(8), Miyara A(2), Hiramatsu K(3),
Enomoto T(9), Fujiwara K(2), Matsumura N(4), Konishi I(4), Roman LD(10), Gabra
H(11), Fotopoulou C(11), Sood AK(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA, USA; Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Electronic address: koji.matsuo@med.usc.edu.
(2)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, Saitama Medical University International
Medical Center, Saitama, Japan.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, Osaka, Japan.
(4)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Kyoto University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, Osaka, Japan; Department of Gynecologic Oncology, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(7)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(8)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, Saitama Medical University International
Medical Center, Saitama, Japan; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The
University of Tokyo Faculty of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(9)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Niigata University Graduate School
of Medicine, Niigata, Japan.
(10)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA, USA; Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(11)Ovarian Cancer Action Research Centre, Department of Surgery and Cancer,
Imperial College London, London, UK.
(12)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA; Department of Cancer Biology, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA; Center for RNA Interference
and Non-Coding RNAs, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
TX, USA.

BACKGROUND: We compared survival outcomes and risk of venous thromboembolism
(VTE) among patients with advanced and early-stage ovarian clear cell carcinoma
(OCCC) and serous ovarian carcinoma (SOC), as well as potential links with
interleukin-6 (IL-6) levels.
METHODS: A multicenter case-control study was conducted in 370 patients with
OCCC and 938 with SOC. In a subset of 200 cases, pretreatment plasma IL-6 levels
were examined.
FINDINGS: Patients with advanced OCCC had the highest 2-year cumulative VTE
rates (advanced OCCC 43.1%, advanced SOC 16.2%, early-stage OCCC 11.9% and
early-stage SOC 6.4%, P<0.0001) and the highest median levels of IL-6 (advanced
OCCC 17.8 pg/mL, advanced SOC 9.0 pg/mL, early-stage OCCC 4.2 pg/mL and
early-stage SOC 5.0 pg/mL, P=0.006). Advanced OCCC (hazard ratio [HR] 3.38,
P<0.0001), thrombocytosis (HR 1.42, P=0.032) and elevated IL-6 (HR 8.90,
P=0.046) were independent predictors of VTE. In multivariate analysis, patients
with advanced OCCC had significantly poorer 5-year progression-free and overall
survival rates than those with advanced SOC (P<0.01), and thrombocytosis was an
independent predictor of decreased survival outcomes (P<0.01). Elevated IL-6
levels led to poorer 2-year progression-free survival rates in patients with
OCCC (50% versus 87.5%, HR 4.89, P=0.016) than in those with SOC (24.9% versus
40.8%, HR 1.40, P=0.07).
INTERPRETATION: Advanced OCCC is associated with an increased incidence of VTE
and decreased survival outcomes, which has major implications for clinical
management of OCCC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2015.07.012
PMCID: PMC7304744
PMID: 26238017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement None declared.

Epithelial ovarian cancer comprises various histologic subtypes, including ovarian clear cell carcinoma (OCCC), which represents the second most common histologic subtype [1,2]. Accumulating evidence suggests that OCCC has distinct clinical and molecular characteristics compared with other histologic subtypes of epithelial ovarian cancer [3,4]. Clinically, patients with advanced-stage OCCC have poorer survival outcomes than those with advanced-stage serous ovarian carcinoma (SOC), whereas patients with early-stage OCCC and SOC have similar survival outcomes [5,6]. However, the reasons for this discrepancy and the mechanisms leading to poor survival outcomes in patients with advanced-stage OCCC have yet to be completely elucidated.

Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is a relatively common complication in ovarian cancer and is associated with decreased survival outcomes [7,8]. Epidemiologic studies have shown that patients with OCCC have an increased risk of VTE compared with patients with other histologic subtypes of epithelial ovarian cancer, and VTE adversely affects survival outcomes in patients with OCCC [9–11]. One possible biomarker linking OCCC with the increased risk of VTE is the proinflammatory cytokine interleukin 6 (IL-6). OCCC is known to be associated with higher IL-6 expression than in other subtypes of epithelial ovarian cancer [12], and IL-6 is a pivotal marker of paraneoplastic thrombocytosis, which is a prognostic factor for decreased survival of ovarian cancer [13, 14]. IL-6 could directly increase the risk of VTE by inducing procoagulant factors or indirectly increase the risk by inducing thrombocytosis [15, 16]. However, it is unclear whether VTE events and IL-6 levels differ by stage of disease. The aim of our study was to compare the survival outcomes and risk of VTE among patients with early- and advanced-stage OCCC and SOC, as well as to examine the relationship of these outcomes to IL-6 levels.

A large-scale multicenter international case-control study was conducted in 10 academic institutions, including five from the United States, four from Japan and one from England. Institutional Review Board approval was obtained at each participating institution. Consecutive patients diagnosed with OCCC and SOC between January 1, 2000 and December 31, 2012 were identified from institutional databases. The STROBE guidelines for case-control studies were followed [17]. All patients had primary OCCC or SOC that was histologically confirmed from surgical specimens obtained in cytoreductive surgery. Those with a mixed histologic type were excluded from our analysis. A fraction of this study population was used in our previous study [13]. Medical records were retrospectively reviewed to obtain the following data: age, tumour markers, cytoreductive status, VTE characteristics, tumour characteristics and survival outcomes.

Tumour markers included CA-125 levels and the presence of thrombocytosis (based on platelet counts) at the time of diagnosis. The cutoff for thrombocytosis (platelet count ≥ 400 × 109 /L) was determined on the basis of prior work [18]. Among those with recurrent or progressive disease, CA-125 levels and platelet counts were also collected at the time of first recurrence or progression. Residual tumour size at the end of cytoreductive surgery was grouped as > 1 cm versus ≤ 1 cm. VTE characteristics included type of VTE (deep vein thrombosis [DVT], pulmonary embolism [PE] and others) and date of VTE diagnosis. Information for VTE was searched in both medical records and radiology reports for Doppler study, computed tomography scan and lung scan. Tumour characteristics included histologic subtype (OCCC or SOC) and cancer stage (early or advanced) based on International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) criteria. Early-stage disease was defined as FIGO stage I–II disease and advanced-stage disease was defined as FIGO stage III–IV disease [19].

For survival outcomes, we determined progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS). PFS was defined as the time interval between the date of ovarian cancer diagnosis and the date of the first recurrence or progression of disease or last follow-up if there was no recurrence or progression. OS was defined as the time interval between the date of ovarian cancer diagnosis and the date of death or last follow-up if the patient was still alive. OS after first recurrence or progression was also examined in the subset of patients who experienced recurrence or progression.

Pretreatment plasma samples were available for consecutive patients in two institutions. Blood samples were obtained prior to surgery and centrifuged at 3000 rotations per minute for 10 min. Plasma was collected and stored in I-mL aliquots in a ‒80 °c freezer until it was processed. Plasma levels of IL-6 were examined using a Human IL-6 Quantikine enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) Kit (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The ELISA plates were read using Multiskan JX (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). All tests were done in triplicate. Written informed consent was obtained from each subject prior to the blood sampling.

The primary outcome of interest was the impact of stage-specific histologic subtype (advanced-OCCC, advanced-SOC, early-OCCC or early-SOC) on cumulative risk of VTE and survival outcomes. The secondary outcomes of interest were the correlation between IL-6 levels and VTE incidence and between IL-6 levels and survival outcomes, by stage-specific histologic subtype. Continuous variables were assessed for normality distribution using Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, and results were expressed using mean (±standard deviation) or median (range) as appropriate. Statistical significance of continuous variables was determined using Student t-test or Mann–Whitney U-test, depending on normality. Median values across the four groups were examined using Kruskal–Wallis test. For categorical variables, chi-square test or Fisher exact test was used as appropriate.

VTE is a time-dependent event after ovarian cancer diagnosis. Therefore, the statistical significance of cumulative risk of VTE was determined using log-rank test in univariate analysis. Cox proportional hazards regression modelling in multivariate analysis was also performed to identify independent predictors of VTE. For survival analysis, log-rank test in univariate analysis and Cox proportional hazards regression modelling in multivariate analysis were used, and results were expressed as hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI). In multivariate analysis, variables used in the final model were based on clinical relevance and impact in ovarian cancer; these included age ( ≥ 60 or <60 years), CA-125 levels (>35 or ≤ 35 IU/L), thrombocytosis (yes or no), residual tumour size (≤ 1 cm or > 1 cm), VTE (yes or no) and stage-specific histologic subtype (advanced-OCCC, advanced-SOC, early-OCCC, or early-SOC). Kaplan–Meier method was used to construct survival curves. P < 0.05 was considered statistical significant (two-tailed test). Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS, Inc., version 12.0, Chicago, IL) was used for all statistical analyses.

We evaluated the records of 1,308 patients with ovarian cancer in the current study. Although most of the 938 patients with SOC had advanced disease (n = 836, 89.1%), most of the 370 patients with OCCC had early-stage disease (n = 264, 71.4%; Table Sl).

Stage-specific characteristics are shown in Table 1. The mean age of the entire cohort was 58.5 years. Both the advanced-OCCC and advanced-SOC groups had a high proportion of patients with elevated CA-125 levels at the initial cancer diagnosis (advanced-OCCC 96.2%, and advanced-soc 87.0%). The advanced-SOC group had the highest proportion of patients with thrombocytosis at initial diagnosis (41.6%), followed by the advanced-OCCC group (32.1%). The advanced-SOC group had the highest proportion of patients with residual tumour size > 1 cm at cytoreductive surgery (37.6%), followed by advanced-OCCC (26.4%). The median follow-up time of the entire cohort was 31.3 months, and there were 787 cases of recurrent or progressive disease (60.2%) and 487 deaths (37.2%) reported in the records.

There were 215 VTEs reported in the entire cohort (16.4%). DVT alone (n = 102, 47.4%) was the most common type of VTE, followed by PE alone (n = 56, 26.0%) and DVT + PE (n = 51, 23.7%). The advanced-OCCC group had the highest incidence of any VTE (36.8%) among the 4 groups, as well as the highest incidence of DVT + PE (11.3%, P < 0.0001, Table 1).

The cumulative prevalence of VTE was examined by stage-specific histologic subtype (Table 2). In univariate analysis, advanced-OCCC was associated with the highest cumulative risk of VTE among the four groups (2-year cumulative VTE rates, advanced-OCCC 43.1%, advanced-soc 16.2%, early-OCCC 11.9% and early-soc 6.4%, P < 0.0001, Fig. 1A). In addition, age ≥ 60 years (19.3% versus 14.1%, P = 0.009), elevated CA-125 levels (17.0% versus 5.8%, P = 0.003) and thrombocytosis (22.3% versus 13.8%, P = 0.0001) were associated with increased risk of VTE. Residual tumour size ≤ 1 cm at cytoreductive surgery showed a protective effect against VTE (13.6% versus 20.2%, P = 0.028).

To identify independent risk factors for VTE, we performed multivariate analysis (Table 2). After controlling for age, CA-125 levels, thrombocytosis, cytoreductive status and stage-specific histologic subtype, we found that advanced-OCCC remained an independent risk factor for VTE compared with advanced-SOC (HR 3.38, 95%CI 2.28–5.01, P < 0.0001). Thrombocytosis also remained an independent risk factor for VTE (HR 1.42, 95%CI 1.03–1.96, P = 0.032).

In the univariate analysis for 5-year PFS rates, age years (24.6% versus 38.4%), CA-125 > 35 IU/L (27.4% versus 81.3%), thrombocytosis (15.3% versus 40.7%) and VTE (15.7% versus 35.3%) were associated with decreased PFS (P < 0.0001; Table 3). Five-year PFS rates were 13.3% for advanced-OCCC, 19.7% for advanced-SOC, 84.7% for early-OCCC and 66.9% for early-soc (P < 0.0001).

In the multivariate analysis controlling for age, CA-125, thrombocytosis, cytoreductive status, VTE and stage-specific histologic subtype, patients with advanced-OCCC had poorer 5-year PFS rates than those with advanced-soc (HR 1.45, 95%CI 1.12–1.86, P = 0.004; Table 3). Thrombocytosis (HR 1.39, 95%CI 1.18–1.64, P < 0.0001) and VTE (HR 1.28, 95%CI 1.04–1.58, P = 0.02) also remained independent prognostic factors for decreased 5-year PFS rates.

For 5-year OS rates, in the univariate analysis, age years (44.7% versus 58.0%), CA-125 > 35 IU/L (49.1% versus 90.7%), thrombocytosis (35.8% versus 60.7%) and VTE (33.0% versus 55.8%) were associated with decreased 5-year OS rates (P < 0.0001; Table S2). Five-year OS rates were 28.2% for advanced-OCCC, 39.8% for advanced-SOC, 89.5% for early-OCCC and 82.1% for early-soc (Fig 1B, P < 0.0001).

In the multivariate analysis controlling for age, CA-125, thrombocytosis, cytoreductive status, VTE and stage-specific histologic subtype, those with advanced-OCCC had poorer 5-year OS rates than those with advanced-soc (HR 2.15, 95%CI 1.60–2.88, P < 0.0001; Table S2). In addition, thrombocytosis (HR 1.45, 95%CI 1.18–1.79, P = 0.001) remained an independent prognostic factor for decreased 5-year OS rates. In a post hoc multivariate analysis, 5-year OS rates did not differ between those with early-OCCC and those with early-soc (HR 0.62, 95%CI 0.27–1.39, P = 0.24).

In our cohort, 787 patients experienced recurrence or progression. Among these patients, prognostic factors for OS after the first recurrence or progression of the tumour were examined (Table 4). Patterns of CA-125 and thrombocytosis at recurrence or progression were distinctively different from those at the initial ovarian cancer diagnosis. Specifically, CA-125 levels were similar across the 4 stage-specific histologic subtype groups (P = 0.38; Table 1). Although thrombocytosis was more common in those with advanced-SOC (41.6%) than in those with advanced-OCCC (32.1%) at the time of the initial cancer diagnosis, at the time of the first recurrence or progression, thrombocytosis was more common in those with advanced-OCCC (27.0%) than in those with advanced-SOC (13.6%, P = 0.028). Splenectomy at the time of cytoreductive surgery (n = 15, 1.1%) was not associated with thrombocytosis at the time of the first recurrence or progression of disease (9.1% versus 15.1%, P = 1.0).

The median OS duration after the first recurrence or progression was 13.0 months. In the multivariate analysis controlling for age, CA-125, thrombocytosis, VTE and stage-specific histologic subtype, thrombocytosis at the first recurrence or progression remained an independent prognostic factor for decreased 2-year OS rates after the first recurrence or progression (28.7% versus 46.3%; HR 1.67, 95%CI 1.21–2.30, 0.002). In addition, advanced-OCCC (17.0% versus 46.3%; HR 2.68, 95%CI 1.90–3.79, P < 0.0001) and early-OCCC (29.5% versus 46.3%; HR 2.12, 95%CI 1.30–3.44, P = 0.002) remained independent prognostic factors for decreased 2-year OS rates after the first recurrence or progression compared to advanced-SOC (Table 4 and Fig. 1C).

Plasma samples were available for 200 patients in the cohort (OCCC n = 38, and SOC n = 162). The median plasma IL-6 level among these 200 patients was 7.6 pg/mL, and 85 of the patients (42.5%) had IL-6 levels ≥ 10 pg/mL. Thrombocytosis was associated with IL-6 levels ≥ 10 pg/mL (66.7% versus 27.0%; HR 5.39, 95%CI 2.91–10.0, 0.0001). Patients with VTE had significantly higher IL-6 levels than those without VTE (median IL-6 levels: 14.4 versus 7.1 pg/mL, P = 0.003).

In a multivariate analysis controlling for age, CA-125 levels, thrombocytosis, cytoreductive status and stage-specific histologic subtype, high pretreatment IL-6 levels remained an independent predictor of VTE compared with lower IL-6 levels (2-year cumulative VTE rates, 5–19.9 versus <5 pg/mL, 14.0% versus 1.4%; HR 7.98, 95%CI 0.99–64.0, P = 0.051; and ≥ 20 versus pg/mL, 17.1% versus 1.4%; HR 8.90, 95%CI 1.04–76.0, P = 0.046; Table 5).

Across the four stage-specific histologic subtype groups, the advanced-OCCC group had the highest proportion of IL-6 levels ≥ 10 pg/mL (advanced-OCCC 83.3%, advanced-soc 47.7%, early-OCCC 15.6% and early-soc 27.3%, P = 0.001, Fig. 1D). Similarly, the advanced-OCCC group had the highest median IL-6 levels among the four groups (advanced-OCCC 17.8 pg/mL, advanced-SOC 9.0 pg/mL, early-OCCC 4.2 pg/mL and early-SOC 5.0 pg/mL, P = 0.006). Similar to the results from the entire cohort, advanced-OCCC was associated with the highest risk of VTE across the 4 groups (2-year cumulative VTE risk: advanced-OCCC 40%, advanced-SOC 13.4%, early-OCCC 17.5% and early-soc 0%, P = 0.039).

Among the 200 patients in whom IL-6 levels were examined, IL-6 levels ≥ 10 pg/mL were associated with decreased 2-year PFS rates (27.4% versus 47.6%; HR 1.58, 95%CI 1.11–2.26, P = 0.013). However, when the patients were stratified by histologic subtype, the magnitude of the difference was larger in those with OCCC (2-year PFS rates, IL-6 ≥ 10 versus<10 pg/mL, 50% versus 87.5%, HR 4.89, 95%CI 1.17–20.5, P = 0.016, Fig. 1E) than in those with SOC (24.9% versus 40.8%, HR 1.40, 95%CI 0.97–2.03, P = 0.07, Fig. 1F).

In the current study, advanced-OCCC, but not early-OCCC, was associated with a substantially increased risk of VTE compared with advanced-SOC. Patients with advanced-OCCC also had the highest frequency of elevated IL-6 levels, and those with advanced-OCCC had poorer survival outcomes than those with advanced-SOC. These findings suggest that the IL-6 pathway plays a pivotal role in the progression of OCCC. A proposed schema of the role of IL-6 in OCCC, based on our results, is shown in Fig. SI.

A recent study showed that paraneoplastic thrombo cytosis contributed to poor outcomes in ovarian cancer. The authors showed that IL-6 stimulates hepatocytes to induce thrombopoietin, which further induces megakaryocytes in bone marrow to produce platelets [13]. These IL-6–induced platelets promote tumour progression by providing platelet-related cancer cell protection from the host immune system, providing growth factors and promoting tumour angiogenesis. In our study, survival analyses showed that both advanced-OCCC and thrombocytosis were the common prognostic factors for decreased survival outcomes (Tables 3 and 4). In addition, elevated IL-6 levels were associated with thrombocytosis and advanced disease. These findings provide evidence for the existence of IL-6–mediated paraneoplastic thrombocytosis in advanced-OCCC.

Although IL-6–mediated paraneoplastic thrombocytosis is a proposed mechanism for tumour progression in advanced-OCCC, our study showed that thrombocytosis was less common in patients with advanced-OCCC than in those with advanced-SOC (32.1% versus 41.6%, Table 1). This implies that the IL-6–mediated paraneoplastic thrombocytosis is more prominent in SOC, and there may be an alternative IL-6–related pathway that contributes to tumour progression in OCCC, such as a direct autocrine pathway. Recently, the tumour microenvironment was reported to be a source of IL-6 in certain types of malignancy [20,21]. Some researchers have even speculated that the tumour microenvironment may supply IL-6 in SOC [22]. Therefore, hypothetically, there are 2 possible pathways for IL-6 interaction in ovarian cancer: (i) direct pathway via autocrine IL-6 signalling and (ii) IL-6–mediated indirect pathway via paraneoplastic thrombocytosis [13,221. In the IL-6 autocrine pathway in OCCC, downstream signalling of the IL-6 receptor is activated via the HIFlA-STAT3 cascade and ultimately induces VEGF, a key mediator for tumour angiogenesis [12,23,24]. Indeed, VEGF expression in OCCC is significantly higher than in other histologic types of epithelial ovarian cancer [25]. Collectively, our findings suggest that both direct and indirect IL-6 pathways may lead to tumour progression in OCCC, and the direct pathway may be more active in OCCC.

VTE is a common issue in OCCC [10]. Quality of life in cancer patients can be compromised as a result of the VTE itself and from drug injections, treatment costs and decreased survival outcomes. In our study, those with VTE had significantly higher levels of IL-6 than those who did not have VTE, and this association has not been well studied in cancer patients [26]. In addition, VTE was associated with thrombocytosis (Table 2), which has recently been recognised in the oncology field [27]. Our findings also showed that elevated IL-6 is associated with thrombocytosis, and those with advanced-OCCC had the highest frequency of multiple-site VTE (DVE + PE; 11.3%) compared with the other groups. Taken together, our findings indicate that VTE in OCCC is a clinical manifestation and surrogate marker of the aggressiveness of IL-6–driven tumour progression, and the decreased survival outcomes in those who develop VTE among OCCC patients is more likely from the aggressive tumour behaviour than from cardiovascular collapse.

Although overexpression of IL-6 in OCCC has been reported by various investigators, the exact mechanism driving IL-6 overexpression in OCCC has yet to be determined [28]. Although a fraction of IL-6 may come from the tumour microenvironment, a substantial fraction of IL-6 is speculated to come from tumour cells in OCCC given its high IL-6 expression. To date, ARIDIA mutation (loss of function) and PIK3CA mutation (gain of function) have been identified as common occurrences in OCCC (40–60%) [2,29]. Available evidence suggests a possible link between the PIK3CA mutation and IL-6 overexpression. Specifically, the PIK3CA mutation upregulates NF-KB, which leads to IL-6-dependent STAT3 activation [30]. Moreover, a recent pre-clinical study has shown that additional loss of ARIDIA function in the setting of PIK3CA overexpression is a key step in pathogenesis of OCCC [31]. Interestingly, IL-6 transcription in this OCCC model of ARIDIA and PIK3CA mutation is found to be elevated. Therefore, it is paramount to see if this correlation seen in pre-clinical study also exists in human samples of OCCC by sequencing ARIDIA and PIK3CA correlating with plasma IL-6 levels.

The unique characteristics of recurrent or progressive OCCC deserve further discussion. Generally, recurrent OCCC is resistant to therapy, with a response rate of < 10% [32]. This was also true in our study, and those with advanced-OCCC had poorer 2-year OS rates after recurrence or progression than those with advanced-SOC (Table 5). The advanced-OCCC group had a higher proportion of patients with thrombocytosis at the first recurrence or progression than the other groups, and this may represent a role for paraneoplastic thrombocytosis in the setting of advanced-OCCC. Interestingly, 2-year OS rates after recurrence or progression were also shorter in those with early-OCCC than in those with advanced-SOC. This implies that recurrent or progressive OCCC is quite chemoresistant regardless of original disease status. Our study did not have information for chemotherapy treatment after the first recurrence or progression and therefore we were unable to address this question.

A potential limitation of our study is that this is a retrospective study that may have some confounding factors. For example, we did not use the standard case record form to capture VTE events; however, all the participating institutions are tertiary care cancer centres and patient follow-up is quite consistent. In addition, central pathology review to confirm OCCC was not performed for the study. A potential weakness of our study is that central histopathologic slide review was not available for grading serous tumours [33,34]. Nevertheless, in post hoc analysis, high-grade SOC cases (n = 768) were compared to CCC cases (Tables S3–6). The results were consistent in that advanced-OCCC was significantly associated with increased risk of VTE (HR 3.34, 95%CI 2.23–4.99, P < 0.0001), decreased PFS (HR 1.55, 95%CI 1.20–2.01, P = 0.001), decreased OS (HR 2.19, 95%CI 1.62–2.97, P < 0.0001) and decreased OS after the first recurrence or progression of disease (HR 2.73, 95%CI 1.89–3.96, P < 0.0001) compared to advanced high-grade SOC in multivariate analysis. Lastly, a relatively small sample size for IL-6 assessment may limit generalisability.

In summary, our results indicate that advanced-OCCC is thrombogenic and may be a surrogate marker of tumour that is biologically more aggressive disease. Treatment involving both anti-thrombotic agents and blocking of IL-6 signalling may be an attractive approach in advanced-OCCC. A phase Il study examining the efficacy of the combination of a monoclonal antibody against IL-6 with siltuximab for platinum-resistant ovarian cancer showed that the combination had some therapeutic activity; however, this study was not solely for patients with OCCC [35]. Statin therapy is also suggested to reduce IL-6 activity and VTE risk by inhibiting inflammatory cytokines, resulting in reduced cancer-related mortality [36,37]. Currently (as of April 8, 2015), no ongoing clinical trial of a treatment targeting IL-6 for OCCC has been registered at clinicaltrials.gov. Further preclinical and clinical studies are warranted.
