---
reference_id: "PMID:32342453"
title: Exercise and Type 1 Diabetes.
authors:
- Lu X
- Zhao C
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/978-981-15-1792-1_7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exercise and Type 1 Diabetes.
**Authors:** Lu X, Zhao C
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-981-15-1792-1_7](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-1792-1_7)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2020;1228:107-121. doi: 10.1007/978-981-15-1792-1_7.

Exercise and Type 1 Diabetes.

Lu X(1), Zhao C(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Digestive Disease Institute, 
Shanghai Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School 
of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Diabetes mellitus (DM) is the most common endocrine and metabolic disease caused 
by absolute or insufficient insulin secretion. Under the context of an aging 
population worldwide, the number of diabetic patients is increasing year by 
year. Most patients with diabetes have multiple complications that severely 
threaten their survival and living quality. DM is mainly divided into type 1 
diabetes mellitus (T1DM) and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). T1DM is caused by 
absolute lack of insulin secretion, so the current treatment for T1DM patients 
is exogenous insulin replacement therapy. At present, exercise therapy has been 
widely recognized in the prevention and treatment of diabetes, and regular 
aerobic exercise has become an important part of T1DM treatment. At the same 
time, exercise therapy is also used in conjunction with other treatments in the 
prevention and treatment of diabetic complications. However, for patients with 
T1DM, exercise still has the risk of hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia. T1DM 
Patients and specialist physician need to fully understand the effects of 
exercise on metabolism and implement individualized exercise programs. This 
chapter reviews the related content of exercise and T1DM.

DOI: 10.1007/978-981-15-1792-1_7
PMID: 32342453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]