---
reference_id: "PMID:39745195"
title: "Deciphering the role of APOE in cerebral amyloid angiopathy: from genetic insights to therapeutic horizons."
authors:
- Hu H
- Wan S
- Hu Y
- Wang Q
- Li H
- Zhang N
journal: Ann Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1080/07853890.2024.2445194
keywords:
- Humans
- Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy/genetics
- Apolipoproteins E/genetics
- "Amyloid beta-Peptides/metabolism, genetics"
- Alleles
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Protein Isoforms/genetics, metabolism"
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deciphering the role of APOE in cerebral amyloid angiopathy: from genetic insights to therapeutic horizons.
**Authors:** Hu H, Wan S, Hu Y, Wang Q, Li H, Zhang N
**Journal:** Ann Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1080/07853890.2024.2445194](https://doi.org/10.1080/07853890.2024.2445194)

## Content

1. Ann Med. 2025 Dec;57(1):2445194. doi: 10.1080/07853890.2024.2445194. Epub 2025
 Jan 2.

Deciphering the role of APOE in cerebral amyloid angiopathy: from genetic 
insights to therapeutic horizons.

Hu H(1), Wan S(1), Hu Y(1), Wang Q(1), Li H(1), Zhang N(2).

Author information:
(1)Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Tianjin Neurological Institute, Tianjin Medical 
University General Hospital, Tianjin, China.

Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA), characterized by the deposition of amyloid-β 
(Aβ) peptides in the walls of medium and small vessels of the brain and 
leptomeninges, is a major cause of lobar hemorrhage in elderly individuals. 
Among the genetic risk factors for CAA that continue to be recognized, the 
apolipoprotein E (APOE) gene is the most significant and prevalent, as its 
variants have been implicated in more than half of all patients with CAA. While 
the presence of the APOE ε4 allele markedly increases the risk of CAA, the ε2 
allele confers a protective effect relative to the common ε3 allele. These 
allelic variants encode three APOE isoforms that differ at two amino acid 
positions. The primary physiological role of APOE is to mediate lipid transport 
in the brain and periphery; however, it has also been shown to be involved in a 
wide array of biological functions, particularly those involving Aβ, in which it 
plays a known role in processing, production, aggregation, and clearance. The 
challenges posed by the reliance on postmortem histological analyses and the 
current absence of an effective intervention underscore the urgency for 
innovative APOE-targeted strategies for diagnosing CAA. This review not only 
deepens our understanding of the impact of APOE on the pathogenesis of CAA but 
can also help guide the exploration of targeted therapies, inspiring further 
research into the therapeutic potential of APOE.

DOI: 10.1080/07853890.2024.2445194
PMCID: PMC11703089
PMID: 39745195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).