---
reference_id: "PMID:28850801"
title: "Spasmodic Dysphonia: A Review. Part 1: Pathogenic Factors."
authors:
- Hintze JM
- Ludlow CL
- Bansberg SF
- Adler CH
- Lott DG
journal: Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1177/0194599817728521
keywords:
- "Dysphonia/diagnosis, etiology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Laryngeal Muscles/physiopathology
- Speech/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spasmodic Dysphonia: A Review. Part 1: Pathogenic Factors.
**Authors:** Hintze JM, Ludlow CL, Bansberg SF, Adler CH, Lott DG
**Journal:** Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0194599817728521](https://doi.org/10.1177/0194599817728521)

## Content

1. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2017 Oct;157(4):551-557. doi: 
10.1177/0194599817728521. Epub 2017 Aug 29.

Spasmodic Dysphonia: A Review. Part 1: Pathogenic Factors.

Hintze JM(1), Ludlow CL(2), Bansberg SF(3), Adler CH(4), Lott DG(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)1 Head and Neck Regeneration Program, Center for Regenerative Medicine, Mayo 
Clinic Arizona, Phoenix, Arizona, USA.
(2)2 Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, James Madison 
University, Virginia, USA.
(3)3 Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Mayo Clinic Arizona, Phoenix, Arizona, 
USA.
(4)4 Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic Arizona, Phoenix, Arizona, USA.

Objective The purpose of this review is to describe the recent advances in 
identifying possible factors involved in the pathogenesis of spasmodic 
dysphonia. Spasmodic dysphonia is a task-specific focal laryngeal dystonia 
characterized by irregular and uncontrolled voice breaks. Pathogenesis of the 
disorder is poorly understood. Data Sources PubMed, Google Scholar, and Cochrane 
Library. Review Methods The data sources were searched using the following 
search terms: ( spasmodic dysphonia or laryngeal dystonia) and ( etiology, 
aetiology, diagnosis, pathogenesis, or pathophysiology). Conclusions Several 
potential etiological factors have been proposed by epidemiological, genetic, 
and neuropathological studies. Spasmodic dysphonia is a rare disorder primarily 
affecting females beginning in their 40s. Vocal tremor co-occurs in 30% to 60%. 
Large cohort studies identified risk factors such as a family history of 
neurological disorders including dystonia and tremor, recent viral illness, and 
heavy voice use. As none are rare events, a complex interactive process may 
contribute to pathogenesis in a small proportion of those at risk. Consequences 
to pathogenesis are neurological processes found in spasmodic dysphonia: loss of 
cortical inhibition, sensory processing disturbances, and neuroanatomical and 
physiological differences in the laryngeal motor control system. Implications 
for Practice Diagnosis of spasmodic dysphonia usually includes speech and 
laryngoscopic assessment. However, as diagnosis is sometimes problematic, 
measurement of neurophysiological abnormalities may contribute useful adjuncts 
for the diagnosis of spasmodic dysphonia in the future.

DOI: 10.1177/0194599817728521
PMID: 28850801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]