---
reference_id: "PMID:20577006"
title: Novel and recurrent TRPV4 mutations and their association with distinct phenotypes within the TRPV4 dysplasia family.
authors:
- Dai J
- Kim OH
- Cho TJ
- Schmidt-Rimpler M
- Tonoki H
- Takikawa K
- Haga N
- Miyoshi K
- Kitoh H
- Yoo WJ
- Choi IH
- Song HR
- Jin DK
- Kim HT
- Kamasaki H
- Bianchi P
- Grigelioniene G
- Nampoothiri S
- Minagawa M
- Miyagawa SI
- Fukao T
- Marcelis C
- Jansweijer MC
- Hennekam RC
- Bedeschi F
- Mustonen A
- Jiang Q
- Ohashi H
- Furuichi T
- Unger S
- Zabel B
- Lausch E
- Superti-Furga A
- Nishimura G
- Ikegawa S
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2009.075358
keywords:
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Dwarfism/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- Genotype
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- Phenotype
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Radiography
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- TRPV Cation Channels/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel and recurrent TRPV4 mutations and their association with distinct phenotypes within the TRPV4 dysplasia family.
**Authors:** Dai J, Kim OH, Cho TJ, Schmidt-Rimpler M, Tonoki H, Takikawa K, Haga N, Miyoshi K, Kitoh H, Yoo WJ, Choi IH, Song HR, Jin DK, Kim HT, Kamasaki H, Bianchi P, Grigelioniene G, Nampoothiri S, Minagawa M, Miyagawa SI, Fukao T, Marcelis C, Jansweijer MC, Hennekam RC, Bedeschi F, Mustonen A, Jiang Q, Ohashi H, Furuichi T, Unger S, Zabel B, Lausch E, Superti-Furga A, Nishimura G, Ikegawa S
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2009.075358](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2009.075358)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2010 Oct;47(10):704-9. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2009.075358. Epub 2010
Jun  24.

Novel and recurrent TRPV4 mutations and their association with distinct 
phenotypes within the TRPV4 dysplasia family.

Dai J(1), Kim OH, Cho TJ, Schmidt-Rimpler M, Tonoki H, Takikawa K, Haga N, 
Miyoshi K, Kitoh H, Yoo WJ, Choi IH, Song HR, Jin DK, Kim HT, Kamasaki H, 
Bianchi P, Grigelioniene G, Nampoothiri S, Minagawa M, Miyagawa SI, Fukao T, 
Marcelis C, Jansweijer MC, Hennekam RC, Bedeschi F, Mustonen A, Jiang Q, Ohashi 
H, Furuichi T, Unger S, Zabel B, Lausch E, Superti-Furga A, Nishimura G, Ikegawa 
S.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Bone and Joint Diseases, Center for Genomic Medicine, 4-6-1 
Shirokane-dai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in TRPV4, a gene that encodes a Ca(2+) permeable 
non-selective cation channel, have recently been found in a spectrum of skeletal 
dysplasias that includes brachyolmia, spondylometaphyseal dysplasia, Kozlowski 
type (SMDK) and metatropic dysplasia (MD). Only a total of seven missense 
mutations were detected, however. The full spectrum of TRPV4 mutations and their 
phenotypes remained unclear.
OBJECTIVES AND METHODS: To examine TRPV4 mutation spectrum and 
phenotype-genotype association, we searched for TRPV4 mutations by PCR-direct 
sequencing from genomic DNA in 22 MD and 20 SMDK probands.
RESULTS: TRPV4 mutations were found in all but one MD subject. In total, 19 
different heterozygous mutations were identified in 41 subjects; two were 
recurrent and 17 were novel. In MD, a recurrent P799L mutation was identified in 
nine subjects, as well as 10 novel mutations including F471del, the first 
deletion mutation of TRPV4. In SMDK, a recurrent R594H mutation was identified 
in 12 subjects and seven novel mutations. An association between the position of 
mutations and the disease phenotype was also observed. Thus, P799 in exon 15 is 
a hot codon for MD mutations, as four different amino acid substitutions have 
been observed at this codon; while R594 in exon 11 is a hotspot for SMDK 
mutations.
CONCLUSION: The TRPV4 mutation spectrum in MD and SMDK, which showed 
genotype-phenotype correlation and potential functional significance of 
mutations that are non-randomly distributed over the gene, was presented in this 
study. The results would help diagnostic laboratories establish efficient 
screening strategies for genetic diagnosis of the TRPV4 dysplasia family 
diseases.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2009.075358
PMID: 20577006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]