---
reference_id: "PMID:23972547"
title: Drugs induced pulmonary arterial hypertension.
authors:
- Seferian A
- Chaumais MC
- Savale L
- Günther S
- Tubert-Bitter P
- Humbert M
- Montani D
journal: Presse Med
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2013.07.005
keywords:
- Amphetamine/adverse effects
- Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects
- Appetite Depressants/adverse effects
- Disease Susceptibility
- Familial Primary Pulmonary Hypertension
- Heart Failure/chemically induced
- Humans
- "Hypertension, Pulmonary/chemically induced"
- Lung/blood supply
- "Muscle, Smooth, Vascular/drug effects, pathology"
- Risk Factors
- Vascular Resistance/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Drugs induced pulmonary arterial hypertension.
**Authors:** Seferian A, Chaumais MC, Savale L, Günther S, Tubert-Bitter P, Humbert M, Montani D
**Journal:** Presse Med (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lpm.2013.07.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lpm.2013.07.005)

## Content

1. Presse Med. 2013 Sep;42(9 Pt 2):e303-10. doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2013.07.005. Epub
2013 Aug 22.

Drugs induced pulmonary arterial hypertension.

Seferian A(1), Chaumais MC, Savale L, Günther S, Tubert-Bitter P, Humbert M,
Montani D.

Author information:
(1)Université Paris-Sud, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France; Hôpital Bicêtre, AP-HP,
service de pneumologie, DHU Thorax Innovation, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France;
Inserm U999, LabEx Lermit, centre chirurgical Marie-Lannelongue, Le
Plessis-Robinson, France.

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a rare disorder characterized by
progressive obliteration of the pulmonary microvasculature, resulting in
elevated pulmonary vascular resistance and premature death. According to the
current classification, PAH can be associated with exposure to certain drugs or
toxins, particularly appetite suppressant drugs, such as aminorex, fenfluramine
derivatives and benfluorex. These drugs have been confirmed to be risk factors
for PAH and were withdrawn from the market. The supposed mechanism is an
increase in serotonin levels, which was demonstrated to act as a growth factor
for the pulmonary arterial smooth muscle cells. Amphetamines, phentermine and
mazindol were less frequently used but are also considered as possible risk
factors for PAH. Dasatinib, a dual Src/Abl kinase inhibitor, used in the
treatment of chronic myelogenous leukaemia was associated with cases of severe
PAH, in part reversible after its withdrawal. Recently several studies raised
the potential endothelial dysfunction that could be induced by interferon, and
few cases of PAH have been reported with interferon therapy. Other possible risk
factors for PAH include: nasal decongestants, like phenylpropanolamine, dietary
supplement - L-Tryptophan, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, pergolide
and other drugs that could act on 5HT2B receptors. Interestingly, PAH remains a
rare complication of these drugs, suggesting possible individual susceptibility
and further studies are needed to identify patients at risk of drugs induced
PAH.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lpm.2013.07.005
PMID: 23972547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
