---
reference_id: "PMID:30264176"
title: An update on the diagnosis and management of the polyneuropathy of POEMS syndrome.
authors:
- Cerri F
- Falzone YM
- Riva N
- Quattrini A
journal: J Neurol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-018-9068-4
keywords:
- Humans
- "POEMS Syndrome/diagnosis, pathology, physiopathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An update on the diagnosis and management of the polyneuropathy of POEMS syndrome.
**Authors:** Cerri F, Falzone YM, Riva N, Quattrini A
**Journal:** J Neurol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-018-9068-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-018-9068-4)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2019 Jan;266(1):258-267. doi: 10.1007/s00415-018-9068-4. Epub 2018
Sep  27.

An update on the diagnosis and management of the polyneuropathy of POEMS 
syndrome.

Cerri F(1), Falzone YM(1), Riva N(2), Quattrini A(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuropathology Unit, Division of Neuroscience and Department of Neurology, 
Institute of Experimental Neurology, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Via 
Olgettina 48, 20132, Milan, Italy.
(2)Neuropathology Unit, Division of Neuroscience and Department of Neurology, 
Institute of Experimental Neurology, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Via 
Olgettina 48, 20132, Milan, Italy. riva.nilo@hsr.it.

POEMS syndrome is a rare, chronic, disabling paraneoplastic disorder 
characterized by peripheral neuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, monoclonal 
plasma cells disorder and skin changes. Diagnosis relies on the fulfillment of a 
set of clinical criteria of which polyneuropathy and a monoclonal plasma cell 
dyscrasia are early and essential features. Treatment may be either local or 
systemic and is aimed at the monoclonal plasma cell disorder. Our knowledge of 
the pathogenesis underlying the POEMS syndrome has advanced greatly over the 
past years, favoring an important progression in the recognition and management 
of this disorder. Here, we discuss the recent literature that has advanced our 
knowledge of the pathogenesis and clinical management of the polyneuropathy in 
POEMS syndrome.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-018-9068-4
PMCID: PMC6343023
PMID: 30264176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.