---
reference_id: "PMID:2672903"
title: "Anti-HIV antibody testing: procedures and precautions."
authors:
- Gauthier DK
- Turner JG
journal: Am J Infect Control
year: '1989'
doi: 10.1016/0196-6553(89)90131-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anti-HIV antibody testing: procedures and precautions.
**Authors:** Gauthier DK, Turner JG
**Journal:** Am J Infect Control (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0196-6553(89)90131-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/0196-6553(89)90131-4)

## Content

1. Am J Infect Control. 1989 Aug;17(4):213-25. doi: 10.1016/0196-6553(89)90131-4.

Anti-HIV antibody testing: procedures and precautions.

Gauthier DK(1), Turner JG.

Author information:
(1)University of Alabama School of Nursing, Birmingham 35294.

Prudent use of screening tests for infection with human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV) and interpretation of test results require an understanding of the body's 
immune response to HIV infection, the serologic assays currently available, and 
the problems associated with false-positive and false-negative test results. The 
methodologies of the enzyme immunoassay (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
[ELISA]) and the Western blot assay are presented, and efficacies of these tests 
are evaluated. Tests for the detection of anti-HIV antibodies that are, at this 
time, primarily restricted to research use but that show promise for adaptation 
to screening (such as the ELISA with recombinant antigen) also are discussed, as 
is the alternative of testing for HIV antigens or HIV-specific DNA. From a 
personal perspective, any test for HIV infection is accompanied by certain 
benefits and risks. These can be discussed with the patient in the framework of 
pretest and posttest counseling.

DOI: 10.1016/0196-6553(89)90131-4
PMID: 2672903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]