---
reference_id: "PMID:36469203"
title: Circulating Levels of Hypoxia-regulating MicroRNAs in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Patients with Hemolytic Anemia.
authors:
- Gamal-Eldeen AM
- Fahmy CA
- Raafat BM
- Althobaiti F
- Bassyouni IH
- Talaat RM
journal: Curr Med Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s11596-022-2644-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Circulating Levels of Hypoxia-regulating MicroRNAs in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Patients with Hemolytic Anemia.
**Authors:** Gamal-Eldeen AM, Fahmy CA, Raafat BM, Althobaiti F, Bassyouni IH, Talaat RM
**Journal:** Curr Med Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11596-022-2644-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11596-022-2644-y)

## Content

1. Curr Med Sci. 2022 Dec;42(6):1231-1239. doi: 10.1007/s11596-022-2644-y. Epub 
2022 Dec 3.

Circulating Levels of Hypoxia-regulating MicroRNAs in Systemic Lupus 
Erythematosus Patients with Hemolytic Anemia.

Gamal-Eldeen AM(1)(2), Fahmy CA(3)(4), Raafat BM(5), Althobaiti F(6)(7), 
Bassyouni IH(8), Talaat RM(9).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Laboratory Sciences Department, College of Applied Medical Sciences, 
Taif University, Taif, 21944, Saudi Arabia. amabdulaziz@tu.edu.sa.
(2)High Altitude Research Center, Prince Sultan Medical Complex, Al-Hawiyah, 
Taif University, Taif, 21944, Saudi Arabia. amabdulaziz@tu.edu.sa.
(3)Cancer Biology and Genetics Laboratory, Centre of Excellence for Advanced 
Sciences, National Research Centre, Cairo, 12622, Egypt.
(4)Biochemistry Department, National Research Centre, Cairo, 12622, Egypt.
(5)Radiological Sciences Department, College of Applied Medical Sciences, Taif 
University, Taif, 21944, Saudi Arabia.
(6)High Altitude Research Center, Prince Sultan Medical Complex, Al-Hawiyah, 
Taif University, Taif, 21944, Saudi Arabia.
(7)Biotechnology Department, Faculty of Science, Taif University, Taif, 21944, 
Saudi Arabia.
(8)Department of Rheumatology and Rehabilitation, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo 
University, El-Kasr El-Aini Hospital, Cairo, 12613, Egypt.
(9)Molecular Biology Department, Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology Research 
Institute (GEBRI), Sadat City University, Sadat City, 32897, Egypt.

OBJECTIVE: MicroRNAs are fine regulators for gene expression during the 
post-transcriptional stage in many autoimmune diseases. HypoxamiRs (miR-210 and 
miR-21) play an important role in hypoxia and in inflammation-associated 
hypoxia. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic systemic autoimmune 
disease that would potentiate many pathological complications, including 
hemolytic anemia. This study aimed to investigate the role of hypoxamiRs in 
SLE/hemolytic anemia patients.
METHODS: This work was designed to analyze the circulating levels of↱ the 
miR-210 and miR-21 expressions and hypoxia-inducible factor-1α (HIF-α) in 
SLE/hemolytic anemia patients. SLE activity was evaluated for all patients by 
SLE Disease Activity Index (SLEDAI). Clinical manifestations/complications and 
serological/hematological investigations were reported. HIF-α concentration was 
assayed by ELISA and expression of miR-21 and miR-210 was analyzed by qRT-PCR.
RESULTS: The results indicated that the fold change of the miR-210/miR-21 
expressions in plasma was significantly elevated in SLE/hemolytic anemia 
patients. A strong positive correlation between the miR-210 and miR-21 
expression levels was also recorded. Among the associated-disease complications, 
hypertension, arthritis, oral ulcers, and serositis were associated with a high 
circulating miR-210 expression, while the occurrence of renal disorders was 
associated with the increased miR-21 expression. Furthermore, the HIF-α level 
was remarkably elevated in SLE/hemolytic anemia patients. A high positive 
correlation was recorded between the HIF-α concentration and miR-210/miR-21 
expression levels. The occurrence of oral ulcers, arthritis, and hypertension 
was associated with the increased HIF-α concentration. On the other hand, SLEDAI 
and white blood cell count were positively correlated with miR-21/ miR-210. The 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate was positively correlated with miR-21.
CONCLUSION: The dysregulation of the circulating miR-210/miR-210/HIF-1α levels 
in SLE/hemolytic anemia patients advocated that the hypoxia pathway might have 
an essential role in the pathogenesis and complications of these diseases.

© 2022. Huazhong University of Science and Technology.

DOI: 10.1007/s11596-022-2644-y
PMID: 36469203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]