---
reference_id: "PMID:3275856"
title: "Primary angiitis of the central nervous system. Report of 8 new cases, review of the literature, and proposal for diagnostic criteria."
authors:
- Calabrese LH
- Mallek JA
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '1988'
doi: 10.1097/00005792-198801000-00002
keywords:
- Aged
- "Arteritis/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, therapy"
- Cerebral Angiography
- Cerebral Arteries
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Pregnancy
- "Pregnancy Complications, Cardiovascular/diagnosis, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary angiitis of the central nervous system. Report of 8 new cases, review of the literature, and proposal for diagnostic criteria.
**Authors:** Calabrese LH, Mallek JA
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00005792-198801000-00002](https://doi.org/10.1097/00005792-198801000-00002)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 1988 Jan;67(1):20-39. doi: 
10.1097/00005792-198801000-00002.

Primary angiitis of the central nervous system. Report of 8 new cases, review of 
the literature, and proposal for diagnostic criteria.

Calabrese LH(1), Mallek JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatic and Immunologic Disease, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, 
Ohio 44106.

Primary angiitis of the central nervous system (PACNS) is a rare form of 
angiitis limited to the central nervous system. The diagnosis and classification 
of this disorder has been problematic, owing to the lack of uniform diagnostic 
criteria and the difficulty in obtaining pathologic material for diagnosis. This 
study proposes to establish diagnostic criteria for PACNS which would include 1) 
the presence of an unexplained neurologic deficit after thorough clinical and 
laboratory evaluation; 2) documentation by cerebral angiography and/or tissue 
examination of an arteritic process within the central nervous system; and 3) no 
evidence of a systemic vasculitide or any other condition to which the 
angiographic or pathologic features could be secondary. Utilizing these 
criteria, 8 new cases are reported and are combined with 40 previously diagnosed 
cases from the literature. The clinical findings of the combined series revealed 
that headache was the most common symptom (58%) with a combination of focal and 
diffuse neurologic deficits described in 79% of the group. The diagnostic 
approach to PACNS should include a variety of laboratory tests and examination 
of the cerebral spinal fluid primarily to rule out mimicking conditions. Special 
procedures including electroencephalography, computed axial tomography, and 
magnetic resonance imaging appear only marginally helpful in securing the 
diagnosis, but are extremely important in ruling out other conditions. 
Angiography appears to be the first invasive diagnostic procedure of choice and 
it has a high predictive value when properly interpreted. Leptomeningeal and 
cortical biopsy can be accomplished with acceptable mortality and should be 
performed along with a normal or non-diagnostic angiogram when the diagnostic 
likelihood is high. Therapy of PACNS with a combination of cytotoxic drugs and 
high-dose corticosteroids has greatly improved the prognosis for this condition.

DOI: 10.1097/00005792-198801000-00002
PMID: 3275856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]