---
reference_id: "PMID:11591834"
title: "Generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus: further heterogeneity in a large family."
authors:
- Lerche H
- Weber YG
- Baier H
- Jurkat-Rott K
- Kraus de Camargo O
- Ludolph AC
- Bode H
- Lehmann-Horn F
journal: Neurology
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1212/wnl.57.7.1191
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Electroencephalography
- "Epilepsy, Generalized/diagnosis, genetics"
- Family Health
- Female
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Genetic Linkage
- Germany
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Pedigree
- Penetrance
- "Seizures, Febrile/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus: further heterogeneity in a large family.
**Authors:** Lerche H, Weber YG, Baier H, Jurkat-Rott K, Kraus de Camargo O, Ludolph AC, Bode H, Lehmann-Horn F
**Journal:** Neurology (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1212/wnl.57.7.1191](https://doi.org/10.1212/wnl.57.7.1191)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2001 Oct 9;57(7):1191-8. doi: 10.1212/wnl.57.7.1191.

Generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus: further heterogeneity in a 
large family.

Lerche H(1), Weber YG, Baier H, Jurkat-Rott K, Kraus de Camargo O, Ludolph AC, 
Bode H, Lehmann-Horn F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Ulm, Germany. 
holger.lerche@medizin.uni-ulm.de

BACKGROUND: Generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS(+)) is a 
recently described benign childhood-onset epileptic syndrome with autosomal 
dominant inheritance. The most common phenotypes are febrile seizures (FS) often 
with accessory afebrile generalized tonic-clonic seizures (GTCS, FS(+)). In 
about one third, additional seizure types occur, such as absences, myoclonic, or 
atonic seizures. So far, three mutations within genes encoding subunits of 
neuronal voltage-gated Na(+) channels have been found in GEFS(+) families, one 
in SCN1B (beta(1)-subunit) and two in SCN1A (alpha-subunit).
METHODS: The authors examined the phenotypic variability of GEFS(+) in a 
five-generation German family with 18 affected individuals. Genetic linkage 
analysis was performed to exclude candidate loci.
RESULTS: Inheritance was autosomal dominant with a penetrance of about 80%. A 
variety of epilepsy phenotypes occurred predominantly during childhood. Only 
four individuals showed the FS or FS(+) phenotype. The others presented with 
different combinations of GTCS, tonic seizures, atonic seizures, and absences, 
only in part associated with fever. The age at onset was 2.8 +/- 1.3 years. 
Interictal EEG recordings showed rare, 1- to 2-second-long generalized, 
irregular spike-and-wave discharges of 2.5 to 5 Hz in eight cases and additional 
focal parietal discharges in one case. Linkage analysis excluded the previously 
described loci on chromosomes 2q21-33 and 19q13. All other chromosomal regions 
containing known genes encoding neuronal Na(+) channel subunits on chromosomes 
3p21-24, 11q23, and 12q13 and described loci for febrile convulsions on 
chromosomes 5q14-15, 8q13-21, and 19p13.3 were also excluded.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate further clinical and genetic heterogeneity in 
GEFS(+).

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.57.7.1191
PMID: 11591834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]