---
reference_id: "PMID:39827853"
title: "A Rare Case of Dichorionic Twins Concordant for Arterial Tortuosity Syndrome: Case Report and Review of the Literature."
authors:
- Ponziani I
- Checcucci C
- Masini G
- Pasquini L
journal: Fetal Diagn Ther
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1159/000543596
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Pregnancy
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
- "Arteries/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- Vascular Malformations/diagnostic imaging
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Skin Diseases, Genetic/diagnostic imaging"
- Adult
- "Twins, Dizygotic"
- Joint Instability/diagnostic imaging
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Rare Case of Dichorionic Twins Concordant for Arterial Tortuosity Syndrome: Case Report and Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Ponziani I, Checcucci C, Masini G, Pasquini L
**Journal:** Fetal Diagn Ther (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000543596](https://doi.org/10.1159/000543596)

## Content

1. Fetal Diagn Ther. 2025;52(4):371-376. doi: 10.1159/000543596. Epub 2025 Jan
17.

A Rare Case of Dichorionic Twins Concordant for Arterial Tortuosity Syndrome:
Case Report and Review of the Literature.

Ponziani I(1), Checcucci C(2), Masini G(2), Pasquini L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, S. Jacopo Hospital, Pistoia, Italy.
(2)Fetal Medicine Unit, Department for Women and Child Health, Careggi
University Hospital, Florence, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Arterial tortuosity syndrome (ATS) is a rare congenital disorder
characterized by elongation and tortuosity of the aorta and mid-sized arteries.
Additional features typical of connective tissue disorders are usually present,
but the clinical presentation of the syndrome can extensively change. The
cardiovascular implications are the major source of morbidity and mortality and
can be present even during the neonatal period; therefore, a correct neonatal
management is extremely important. However, only few cases of ATS have been
suspected or diagnosed prenatally.
CASE PRESENTATION: In our study, we present a rare case of dichorionic twins
both affected by ATS, in which the syndrome was suspected antenatally. Moreover,
we performed a review of the literature and summarized the main findings
identified at prenatal ultrasounds and postnatal examination, in order to help
clinicians with the management of this rare diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: The most suspicious ultrasound prenatal finding of ATS is the
elongation and tortuosity of great arteries. When ATS is suspected prenatally,
the newborn should be referred immediately after birth to a high specialized
center for proper neonatal care. In case of confirmed ATS, parents should be
counseled regarding the recurrence risk in other pregnancies.

© 2025 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000543596
PMID: 39827853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
