---
reference_id: "PMID:38413593"
title: MVA-based vaccines are protective against lethal eastern equine encephalitis virus aerosol challenge in cynomolgus macaques.
authors:
- Beddingfield BJ
- Plante KS
- Plante JA
- Weaver SC
- Bose S
- Krzykwa C
- Chirichella N
- Redmann RK
- Seiler SZ
- Dufour J
- Blair RV
- Endt K
- Volkmann A
- Maness NJ
- Roy CJ
journal: NPJ Vaccines
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41541-024-00842-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MVA-based vaccines are protective against lethal eastern equine encephalitis virus aerosol challenge in cynomolgus macaques.
**Authors:** Beddingfield BJ, Plante KS, Plante JA, Weaver SC, Bose S, Krzykwa C, Chirichella N, Redmann RK, Seiler SZ, Dufour J, Blair RV, Endt K, Volkmann A, Maness NJ, Roy CJ
**Journal:** NPJ Vaccines (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41541-024-00842-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41541-024-00842-y)

## Content

1. NPJ Vaccines. 2024 Feb 27;9(1):47. doi: 10.1038/s41541-024-00842-y.

MVA-based vaccines are protective against lethal eastern equine encephalitis
virus aerosol challenge in cynomolgus macaques.

Beddingfield BJ(1), Plante KS(2)(3), Plante JA(2)(3), Weaver SC(2)(3), Bose
S(1), Krzykwa C(1), Chirichella N(1), Redmann RK(1), Seiler SZ(1), Dufour J(4),
Blair RV(5), Endt K(6), Volkmann A(6), Maness NJ(1)(7), Roy CJ(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Microbiology, Tulane National Primate Research Center, Covington,
LA, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical
Branch, Galveston, TX, USA.
(3)World Reference Center for Emerging Viruses and Arboviruses, Institute for
Human Infections and Immunity, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston,
TX, USA.
(4)Division of Veterinary Medicine, Tulane National Primate Research Center,
Covington, LA, USA.
(5)Division of Comparative Pathology, Tulane National Primate Research Center,
Covington, LA, USA.
(6)Bavarian Nordic GmbH, Fraunhofer Strasse 13, 82152, Martinsried, Germany.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tulane School of Medicine, New
Orleans, LA, USA.
(8)Division of Microbiology, Tulane National Primate Research Center, Covington,
LA, USA. croy@tulane.edu.
(9)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tulane School of Medicine, New
Orleans, LA, USA. croy@tulane.edu.

MVA-based monovalent eastern equine encephalitis virus (MVA-BN-EEEV) and
multivalent western, eastern, and Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus
(MVA-BN-WEV) vaccines were evaluated in the cynomolgus macaque aerosol model of
EEEV infection. Macaques vaccinated with two doses of 5 × 108 infectious units
of the MVA-BN-EEEV or MVA-BN-WEV vaccine by the intramuscular route rapidly
developed robust levels of neutralizing antibodies to EEEV that persisted at
high levels until challenge at day 84 via small particle aerosol delivery with a
target inhaled dose of 107 PFU of EEEV FL93-939. Robust protection was observed,
with 7/8 animals receiving MVA-BN-EEEV and 100% (8/8) animals receiving
MVA-BN-WEV surviving while only 2/8 mock vaccinated controls survived lethal
challenge. Complete protection from viremia was afforded by both vaccines, with
near complete protection from vRNA loads in tissues and any pathologic evidence
of central nervous system damage. Overall, the results indicate both vaccines
are effective in eliciting an immune response that is consistent with protection
from aerosolized EEEV-induced disease.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41541-024-00842-y
PMCID: PMC10899228
PMID: 38413593

Conflict of interest statement: Kathrin Endt and Ariane Volkmann are employees
of Bavarian Nordic GmbH.
