---
reference_id: "PMID:34630863"
title: Empty nose syndrome pathogenesis and cell-based biotechnology products as a new option for treatment.
authors:
- Gordiienko IM
- Gubar OS
- Sulik R
- Kunakh T
- Zlatskiy I
- Zlatska A
journal: World J Stem Cells
year: '2021'
doi: 10.4252/wjsc.v13.i9.1293
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Empty nose syndrome pathogenesis and cell-based biotechnology products as a new option for treatment.
**Authors:** Gordiienko IM, Gubar OS, Sulik R, Kunakh T, Zlatskiy I, Zlatska A
**Journal:** World J Stem Cells (2021)
**DOI:** [10.4252/wjsc.v13.i9.1293](https://doi.org/10.4252/wjsc.v13.i9.1293)

## Content

1. World J Stem Cells. 2021 Sep 26;13(9):1293-1306. doi:
10.4252/wjsc.v13.i9.1293.

Empty nose syndrome pathogenesis and cell-based biotechnology products as a new 
option for treatment.

Gordiienko IM(1), Gubar OS(2), Sulik R(1), Kunakh T(1), Zlatskiy I(3), Zlatska 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Biotechnology Laboratory, Medical Company "Good Cells", Kyiv 03115, Ukraine.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics NAS of Ukraine, Kyiv 03143, 
Ukraine.
(3)State Institute of Genetic and Regenerative Medicine, National Academy of 
Medical Sciences of Ukraine, Kyiv 04114, Ukraine. zlatskiy@ukr.net.

Empty nose syndrome (ENS) is a rare complication that develops after partial or 
complete turbinectomy. The main feature of ENS is paradoxical nasal obstruction 
feeling despite objectively wide nasal airway. ENS pathogenesis is 
multifactorial and includes changes in laminar physiological airflow, disruption 
of mucosa functions and deficient neural sensation. This leads to the 
development of ENS symptomatology such as dyspnea, nasal dryness, nasal burning, 
nasal obstruction, feeling of suffocation and even comorbid psychiatric 
disorders that significantly impairs life quality. Specific effective treatment 
of ENS does not exist up to date. In this review we outline existing biomaterial 
for surgical reconstitution of nasal anatomy and discuss the perspective of stem 
cell-based technologies in ENS management. The main focus is directed to 
justification of rationality application of adult mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) 
from different tissues origin and neural crest-derived stem cells (NCSCs) based 
on their intrinsic biological properties. MSCs transplantation may stimulate 
mucosa tissue regeneration via trophic factors secretion, direct 
transdifferentiation into epithelial cells and pronounced immunosuppressive 
effect. From the other hand, NCSCs based on their high neuroprotective 
properties may reconstitute nerve structure and functioning leading to normal 
sensation in ENS patients. We postulate that application of cell-based and 
tissue-engineered products can help to significantly improve ENS symptomatology 
only as complex approach aimed at reconstitution of nasal anatomy, recovery the 
nasal mucosa functionality and neural tissue sensation.

©The Author(s) 2021. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.4252/wjsc.v13.i9.1293
PMCID: PMC8474723
PMID: 34630863

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: Authors declare 
no conflict of interests for this article.