---
reference_id: "PMID:26344814"
title: The hyperkinetic movement disorder of FOXG1-related epileptic-dyskinetic encephalopathy.
authors:
- Cellini E
- Vignoli A
- Pisano T
- Falchi M
- Molinaro A
- Accorsi P
- Bontacchio A
- Pinelli L
- Giordano L
- Guerrini R
- FOXG1 Syndrome Study Group
journal: Dev Med Child Neurol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1111/dmcn.12894
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Epilepsy/genetics
- Female
- Forkhead Transcription Factors/genetics
- Humans
- Hyperkinesis/genetics
- Male
- Movement Disorders/genetics
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The hyperkinetic movement disorder of FOXG1-related epileptic-dyskinetic encephalopathy.
**Authors:** Cellini E, Vignoli A, Pisano T, Falchi M, Molinaro A, Accorsi P, Bontacchio A, Pinelli L, Giordano L, Guerrini R, FOXG1 Syndrome Study Group
**Journal:** Dev Med Child Neurol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/dmcn.12894](https://doi.org/10.1111/dmcn.12894)

## Content

1. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2016 Jan;58(1):93-7. doi: 10.1111/dmcn.12894. Epub 2015
Sep 6.

The hyperkinetic movement disorder of FOXG1-related epileptic-dyskinetic
encephalopathy.

Cellini E(1), Vignoli A(2), Pisano T(1), Falchi M(1), Molinaro A(3), Accorsi
P(4), Bontacchio A(4), Pinelli L(5), Giordano L(4), Guerrini R(1); FOXG1
Syndrome Study Group.

Collaborators: Fusco C, Bertani G.

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Neurology Unit, Children's Hospital A Meyer -University of
Florence, Florence, Italy.
(2)Department of Health Sciences, Epilepsy Center, San Paolo Hospital,
University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(3)School in Reproductive and Developmental Science, University of Trieste and
University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(4)Child Neurology and Psychiatry Unit, Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy.
(5)Neuroradiology Unit, Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy.

Comment in
    Dev Med Child Neurol. 2016 Jan;58(1):15. doi: 10.1111/dmcn.12928.

AIM: Forkhead Box G1 (FOXG1) syndrome is a developmental encephalopathy
characterized by postnatal microcephaly, structural brain abnormalities, facial
dysmorphisms, severe delay with absent language, defective social interactions,
and epilepsy. Abnormal movements in FOXG1 syndrome have often been mentioned but
not characterized.
METHOD: We clinically assessed and analysed video recordings of eight patients
with different mutations or copy number variations affecting the FOXG1 gene and
describe the peculiar pattern of the associated movement disorder.
RESULTS: The age of the patients in the study ranged from 2 to 17 years old (six
females, two males). They had severe epilepsy and exhibited a complex motor
disorder including various combinations of dyskinetic and hyperkinetic movements
featuring dystonia, chorea, and athetosis. The onset of the movement disorder
was apparent within the first year of life, reached its maximum expression
within months, and then remained stable.
INTERPRETATION: A hyperkinetic-dyskinetic movement disorder emerges as a
distinctive feature of the FOXG1-related phenotype. FOXG1 syndrome is as an
epileptic-dyskinetic encephalopathy whose clinical presentation bears
similarities with ARX- and STXBP1-gene related encephalopathies.

© 2015 Mac Keith Press.

DOI: 10.1111/dmcn.12894
PMID: 26344814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
