---
reference_id: "PMID:36539129"
title: EVALUATION OF SERUM LEVELS OF INTERLEUKIN-6, FETUIN-A, LIPOCALIN-2, AND C-REACTIVE PROTEIN IN RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS PATIENTS.
authors:
- Ibrahim S
- Sarhat E
journal: Georgian Med News
year: '2022'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EVALUATION OF SERUM LEVELS OF INTERLEUKIN-6, FETUIN-A, LIPOCALIN-2, AND C-REACTIVE PROTEIN IN RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS PATIENTS.
**Authors:** Ibrahim S, Sarhat E
**Journal:** Georgian Med News (2022)

## Content

1. Georgian Med News. 2022 Oct;(331):42-45.

EVALUATION OF SERUM LEVELS OF INTERLEUKIN-6, FETUIN-A, LIPOCALIN-2, AND 
C-REACTIVE PROTEIN IN RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS PATIENTS.

Ibrahim S(1), Sarhat E(2).

Author information:
(1)1Department of Basic Science, Dentistry College, University of Mosul, 
Nineveh, Iraq.
(2)2Department of Basic Medical Science, Dentistry College, University of 
Tikrit, Tikrit, Iraq.

Several biochemical factors have increasingly been reported as diagnostic tools 
associated with certain diseases. C-reactive protein (CRP) has been widely 
accepted as a systemic inflammatory marker, nonetheless, non-specificity remains 
innocent for diagnosis. Hence looking for alternative supportive more specific 
diagnostic markers was subjective for continuous research. Aim - Identifying 
whether Interleukin-6, Fetuin-A, and Lipocalin-2 (LCN-2) could have a potential 
contribution to rheumatoid arthritis (RA) prognosis and diagnosis. RA patients 
were recruited, and equally matched control healthy individuals were assigned 
for comparison. Blood was withdrawn and serum was separated and stored at -80 
for future analysis. Target parameters were measured including Interleukin-6, 
Fetuin-A, LCN-2, and CRP. The outcome has revealed potentially significant 
differences between measured parameters in RA patients compared to the control 
group, Fetuin, LCN-2, and CRP were significantly (P<0.0) elevated. The measured 
parameters could be considered as additional parameters for the diagnosis and 
prognosis of a patient with rheumatoid arthritis.

PMID: 36539129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]