---
reference_id: "PMID:30194892"
title: "A novel mutation in CDH11, encoding cadherin-11, cause Branchioskeletogenital (Elsahy-Waters) syndrome."
authors:
- Castori M
- Ott CE
- Bisceglia L
- Leone MP
- Mazza T
- Castellana S
- Tomassi J
- Lanciotti S
- Mundlos S
- Hennekam RC
- Kornak U
- Brancati F
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.40379
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, genetics"
- Alleles
- Cadherins/genetics
- Child
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Testing
- Genotype
- Humans
- Loss of Function Mutation
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Syndrome
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel mutation in CDH11, encoding cadherin-11, cause Branchioskeletogenital (Elsahy-Waters) syndrome.
**Authors:** Castori M, Ott CE, Bisceglia L, Leone MP, Mazza T, Castellana S, Tomassi J, Lanciotti S, Mundlos S, Hennekam RC, Kornak U, Brancati F
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.40379](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.40379)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2018 Sep;176(9):2028-2033. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.40379. Epub 
2018 Sep 8.

A novel mutation in CDH11, encoding cadherin-11, cause Branchioskeletogenital 
(Elsahy-Waters) syndrome.

Castori M(1), Ott CE(2), Bisceglia L(1), Leone MP(1), Mazza T(3), Castellana 
S(3), Tomassi J(4), Lanciotti S(5), Mundlos S(2)(6), Hennekam RC(7), Kornak 
U(2)(6)(8), Brancati F(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San 
Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.
(2)Institute of Medical and Human Genetics, Charité - Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Bioinformatics Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni 
Rotondo, Italy.
(4)Neurological Rehabilitation Unit, San Raffaele Hospital, Cassino, Italy.
(5)Medical Genetics Residency Programme, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy.
(6)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Development and Disease Group, 
Berlin, Germany.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(8)Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies, Charité - 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany.
(9)Department of Life, Health and Environmental Sciences, University of 
L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy.
(10)Laboratory of Molecular and Cell Biology, Istituto Dermopatico 
dell'Immacolata (IDI) IRCCS, Rome, Italy.

Cadherins are cell-adhesion molecules that control morphogenesis, cell 
migration, and cell shape changes during multiple developmental processes. Until 
now four distinct cadherins have been implicated in human Mendelian disorders, 
mainly featuring skin, retinal and hearing manifestations. 
Branchio-skeleto-genital (or Elsahy-Waters) syndrome (BSGS) is an ultra-rare 
condition featuring a characteristic face, premature loss of teeth, vertebral 
and genital anomalies, and intellectual disability. We have studied two sibs 
with BSGS originally described by Castori et al. in 2010. Exome sequencing led 
to the identification of a novel homozygous nonsense variant in the first exon 
of the cadherin-11 gene (CDH11), which results in a prematurely truncated form 
of the protein. Recessive variants in CDH11 have been recently demonstrated in 
two other sporadic patients and a pair of sisters affected by BSGS. Although the 
function of this cadherin (also termed Osteoblast-Cadherin) is not completely 
understood, its prevalent expression in osteoblastic cell lines and 
up-regulation during differentiation suggest a specific function in bone 
formation and development. This study identifies a novel loss-of-function 
variant in CDH11 as a cause of BSGS and supports the role of cadherin-11 as a 
key player in axial and craniofacial malformations.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.40379
PMID: 30194892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]