---
reference_id: PMID:1944469
title: Activating mutations of the stimulatory G protein in the McCune-Albright syndrome.
authors:
- Weinstein LS
- Shenker A
- Gejman PV
- Merino MJ
- Friedman E
- Spiegel AM
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '1991'
doi: 10.1056/NEJM199112123252403
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Base Sequence
- "Child, Preschool"
- Exons
- Female
- "Fibrous Dysplasia, Polyostotic/genetics"
- GTP-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Gene Amplification
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Activating mutations of the stimulatory G protein in the McCune-Albright syndrome.
**Authors:** Weinstein LS, Shenker A, Gejman PV, Merino MJ, Friedman E, Spiegel AM
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJM199112123252403](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJM199112123252403)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 1991 Dec 12;325(24):1688-95. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199112123252403.

Activating mutations of the stimulatory G protein in the McCune-Albright 
syndrome.

Weinstein LS(1), Shenker A, Gejman PV, Merino MJ, Friedman E, Spiegel AM.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Pathophysiology Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and 
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 1991 Dec 12;325(24):1738-40. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199112123252410.

BACKGROUND: The McCune-Albright syndrome is a sporadic disease characterized by 
polyostotic fibrous dysplasia, café au lait spots, sexual precocity, and 
hyperfunction of multiple endocrine glands. These manifestations may be 
explained by a somatic mutation in affected tissues that results in activation 
of the signal-transduction pathway generating cyclic AMP (cAMP). We analyzed DNA 
from tissues of patients with the McCune-Albright syndrome for the presence of 
activating mutations of the gene for the alpha subunit of the G protein (Gs 
alpha) that stimulates cAMP formation.
METHODS: Genomic DNA fragments encompassing regions (exons 8 and 9) previously 
found to contain activating missense mutations of the Gs alpha gene (gsp 
mutations) in sporadically occurring pituitary tumors were amplified in tissues 
from four patients with the McCune-Albright syndrome by the polymerase chain 
reaction. The amplified DNA was analyzed for mutations by denaturing gradient 
gel electrophoresis and allele-specific oligonucleotide hybridization.
RESULTS: We detected one of two activating mutations within exon 8 of the Gs 
alpha gene in tissues from all four patients, including affected endocrine 
organs (gonads, adrenal glands, thyroid, and pituitary) and tissues not 
classically involved in the McCune-Albright syndrome. In two of the patients, 
histidine was substituted for arginine at position 201 of Gs alpha, and in the 
other two patients cysteine was substituted for the same arginine residue. In 
each patient the proportion of cells affected varied from tissue to tissue. In 
two endocrine organs, the highest proportion of mutant alleles was found in 
regions of abnormal cell proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations within exon 8 of the Gs alpha gene that result in 
increased activity of the Gs protein and increased cAMP formation are present in 
various tissues of patients with the McCune-Albright syndrome. Somatic mutation 
of this gene early in embryogenesis could result in the mosaic population of 
normal and mutant-bearing tissues that may underlie the clinical manifestations 
of this disease.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJM199112123252403
PMID: 1944469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]