---
reference_id: "PMID:33417210"
title: "Potential Involvement of Peroxisome in Multiple Sclerosis and Alzheimer's Disease : Peroxisome and Neurodegeneration."
authors:
- Zarrouk A
- Nury T
- El Hajj HI
- Gondcaille C
- Andreoletti P
- Moreau T
- Cherkaoui-Malki M
- Berger J
- Hammami M
- Lizard G
- Vejux A
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-60204-8_8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Potential Involvement of Peroxisome in Multiple Sclerosis and Alzheimer's Disease : Peroxisome and Neurodegeneration.
**Authors:** Zarrouk A, Nury T, El Hajj HI, Gondcaille C, Andreoletti P, Moreau T, Cherkaoui-Malki M, Berger J, Hammami M, Lizard G, Vejux A
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-030-60204-8_8](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-60204-8_8)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2020;1299:91-104. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-60204-8_8.

Potential Involvement of Peroxisome in Multiple Sclerosis and Alzheimer's 
Disease : Peroxisome and Neurodegeneration.

Zarrouk A(1)(2), Nury T(3), El Hajj HI(4), Gondcaille C(3), Andreoletti P(3), 
Moreau T(3)(5), Cherkaoui-Malki M(3), Berger J(6), Hammami M(7), Lizard G(8), 
Vejux A(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Laboratory 'Nutrition, Functional Food and Vascular 
Health', UR12ES05, University of Monastir, Monastir, Tunisia. 
zarroukamira@gmail.com.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Sousse, Laboratory of Biochemistry, 
Sousse, Tunisia. zarroukamira@gmail.com.
(3)Team 'Biochemistry of the Peroxisome, Inflammation and Lipid Metabolism' EA 
7270/University of Bourgogne Franche-Comté/Inserm, Dijon, France.
(4)Laboratory 'Neurosciences Experimentale et Clinique (LNEC)'-Inserm U1084, 
University of Poitiers, Poitiers, France.
(5)Department of Neurology, University Hospital of Dijon, Dijon, France.
(6)Department of Pathobiology of the Nervous System, Center for Brain Research, 
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(7)Faculty of Medicine, Laboratory 'Nutrition, Functional Food and Vascular 
Health', UR12ES05, University of Monastir, Monastir, Tunisia.
(8)Team 'Biochemistry of the Peroxisome, Inflammation and Lipid Metabolism' EA 
7270/University of Bourgogne Franche-Comté/Inserm, Dijon, France. 
gerard.lizard@ubourgogne.fr.

Peroxisomopathies are rare diseases due to dysfunctions of the peroxisome in 
which this organelle is either absent or with impaired activities. These 
diseases, at the exception of type I hyperoxaluria and acatalasaemia, affect the 
central and peripheral nervous system. Due to the significant impact of 
peroxisomal abnormalities on the functioning of nerve cells, this has led to an 
interest in peroxisome in common neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's 
disease and multiple sclerosis. In these diseases, a role of the peroxisome is 
suspected on the basis of the fatty acid and phospholipid profile in the 
biological fluids and the brains of patients. It is also speculated that 
peroxisomal dysfunctions could contribute to oxidative stress and mitochondrial 
alterations which are recognized as major players in the development of 
neurodegenerative diseases. Based on clinical and in vitro studies, the data 
obtained support a potential role of peroxisome in Alzheimer's disease and 
multiple sclerosis.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-60204-8_8
PMID: 33417210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]