---
reference_id: "PMID:34696397"
title: "Dengue Virus Infection: A Tale of Viral Exploitations and Host Responses."
authors:
- Nanaware N
- Banerjee A
- Mullick Bagchi S
- Bagchi P
- Mukherjee A
journal: Viruses
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/v13101967
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue Virus Infection: A Tale of Viral Exploitations and Host Responses.
**Authors:** Nanaware N, Banerjee A, Mullick Bagchi S, Bagchi P, Mukherjee A
**Journal:** Viruses (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/v13101967](https://doi.org/10.3390/v13101967)

## Content

1. Viruses. 2021 Sep 30;13(10):1967. doi: 10.3390/v13101967.

Dengue Virus Infection: A Tale of Viral Exploitations and Host Responses.

Nanaware N(1), Banerjee A(1), Mullick Bagchi S(2), Bagchi P(3), Mukherjee A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Virology, ICMR-National AIDS Research Institute, Pune 411026, MH, 
India.
(2)Life Sciences Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical 
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Dengue is a mosquito-borne viral disease (arboviral) caused by the Dengue virus. 
It is one of the prominent public health problems in tropical and subtropical 
regions with no effective vaccines. Every year around 400 million people get 
infected by the Dengue virus, with a mortality rate of about 20% among the 
patients with severe dengue. The Dengue virus belongs to the Flaviviridae 
family, and it is an enveloped virus with positive-sense single-stranded RNA as 
the genetic material. Studies of the infection cycle of this virus revealed 
potential host targets important for the virus replication cycle. Here in this 
review article, we will be discussing different stages of the Dengue virus 
infection cycle inside mammalian host cells and how host proteins are exploited 
by the virus in the course of infection as well as how the host counteracts the 
virus by eliciting different antiviral responses.

DOI: 10.3390/v13101967
PMCID: PMC8541669
PMID: 34696397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.