---
reference_id: "PMID:27664421"
title: Upregulation of neurovascular communication through filamin abrogation promotes ectopic periventricular neurogenesis.
authors:
- Houlihan SL
- Lanctot AA
- Guo Y
- Feng Y
journal: Elife
year: '2016'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.17823
keywords:
- Animals
- "Filamins/deficiency, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Neovascularization, Physiologic"
- Neurogenesis
- Neuroglia/physiology
- Stem Cells/physiology
- Up-Regulation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Upregulation of neurovascular communication through filamin abrogation promotes ectopic periventricular neurogenesis.
**Authors:** Houlihan SL, Lanctot AA, Guo Y, Feng Y
**Journal:** Elife (2016)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.17823](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.17823)

## Content

1. Elife. 2016 Sep 24;5:e17823. doi: 10.7554/eLife.17823.

Upregulation of neurovascular communication through filamin abrogation promotes
ectopic periventricular neurogenesis.

Houlihan SL(1)(2)(3), Lanctot AA(1)(2)(3), Guo Y(1)(2), Feng Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, United States.
(2)Center for Genetic Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, United States.
(3)Driskill Graduate Program, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, United States.

Neuronal fate-restricted intermediate progenitors (IPs) are derived from the
multipotent radial glia (RGs) and serve as the direct precursors for cerebral
cortical neurons, but factors that control their neurogenic plasticity remain
elusive. Here we report that IPs' neuron production is enhanced by abrogating
filamin function, leading to the generation of periventricular neurons
independent of normal neocortical neurogenesis and neuronal migration. Loss of
Flna in neural progenitor cells (NPCs) led RGs to undergo changes resembling
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) along with exuberant angiogenesis that
together changed the microenvironment and increased neurogenesis of IPs. We show
that by collaborating with β-arrestin, Flna maintains the homeostatic signaling
between the vasculature and NPCs, and loss of this function results in escalated
Vegfa and Igf2 signaling, which exacerbates both EMT and angiogenesis to further
potentiate IPs' neurogenesis. These results suggest that the neurogenic
potential of IPs may be boosted in vivo by manipulating Flna-mediated
neurovascular communication.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.17823
PMCID: PMC5050022
PMID: 27664421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that no competing interests
exist.
