---
reference_id: "PMID:39669623"
title: "Clinical study of ferredoxin-reductase-related mitochondriopathy: Genotype-phenotype correlation and proposal of ancestry-based carrier screening in the Mexican population."
authors:
- Campbell T
- Slone J
- Metzger H
- Liu W
- Sacharow S
- Yang A
- Moosajee M
- La Morgia C
- Carelli V
- Palombo F
- Lines MA
- Innes AM
- Levy RJ
- Neilson D
- Longo N
- Huang T
journal: Genet Med Open
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.gimo.2023.100841
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical study of ferredoxin-reductase-related mitochondriopathy: Genotype-phenotype correlation and proposal of ancestry-based carrier screening in the Mexican population.
**Authors:** Campbell T, Slone J, Metzger H, Liu W, Sacharow S, Yang A, Moosajee M, La Morgia C, Carelli V, Palombo F, Lines MA, Innes AM, Levy RJ, Neilson D, Longo N, Huang T
**Journal:** Genet Med Open (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gimo.2023.100841](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gimo.2023.100841)

## Content

1. Genet Med Open. 2023 Nov 11;2:100841. doi: 10.1016/j.gimo.2023.100841. 
eCollection 2024.

Clinical study of ferredoxin-reductase-related mitochondriopathy: 
Genotype-phenotype correlation and proposal of ancestry-based carrier screening 
in the Mexican population.

Campbell T(1), Slone J(1), Metzger H(1), Liu W(1), Sacharow S(2)(3), Yang A(4), 
Moosajee M(5)(6), La Morgia C(7)(8), Carelli V(7)(8), Palombo F(7), Lines MA(9), 
Innes AM(9), Levy RJ(10), Neilson D(11), Longo N(12), Huang T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Jacobs School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, 
University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY.
(2)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA.
(3)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(4)Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR.
(5)Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(6)The Francis Crick Institute, London, United Kingdom.
(7)IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna, Programma di 
Neurogenetica, Bologna, BO, Italy.
(8)Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna, BO, 
Italy.
(9)Department of Medical Genetics and Alberta Children's Hospital Research 
Institute, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, 
Canada.
(10)Department of Neurology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
(11)Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Child Health, The 
University of Arizona College of Medicine, Phoenix, AZ.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT.

PURPOSE: Ferredoxin reductase (FDXR) is a flavoprotein that functions in both 
iron sulfur cluster biogenesis and steroid biosynthesis pathways in the 
mitochondria. Not surprisingly, loss of FDXR function causes severe 
mitochondrial diseases in humans. Although several FDXR-related 
mitochondriopathy (FRM) cohorts have been reported in the literature, further 
characterization of the natural history of FRM is warranted.
METHODS: To better understand the spectrum of FRM, a natural history study of 
FRM was performed. New cases were added to previously reported FRM cases for 
analysis (n = 62 cases).
RESULTS: Optic atrophy, movement disorder, and developmental delay were frequent 
findings. Mortality is high, with 18% of patients, often infants, passing from 
complications. Notably, 25% of cases were homozygous or compound heterozygous 
for the previously reported p.Arg386Trp "hotspot" variant. Of the obtained 
ancestry, all but 1 individual heterozygous for the p.Arg386Trp variant was 
Hispanic, with many reporting Mexican heritage. Utilizing recent large-scale 
genome sequencing surveys, the carrier frequency of the p.Arg386Trp variant was 
estimated as 1 of 185 in the Mexican population.
CONCLUSION: Given the high mortality of FRM and carrier frequency of the common 
variant, consideration of a new approach for population carrier screening and 
development of therapeutics for affected individuals is needed.

© 2023 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gimo.2023.100841
PMCID: PMC11613914
PMID: 39669623

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest