---
reference_id: "PMID:33641388"
title: "Spontaneous Cervical Artery Dissection in Vascular Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome: A Cohort Study."
authors:
- Adham S
- Billon C
- Legrand A
- Domigo V
- Denarié N
- Charpentier E
- Jeunemaitre X
- Frank M
journal: Stroke
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.120.032106
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spontaneous Cervical Artery Dissection in Vascular Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome: A Cohort Study.
**Authors:** Adham S, Billon C, Legrand A, Domigo V, Denarié N, Charpentier E, Jeunemaitre X, Frank M
**Journal:** Stroke (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1161/STROKEAHA.120.032106](https://doi.org/10.1161/STROKEAHA.120.032106)

## Content

1. Stroke. 2021 May;52(5):1628-1635. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.120.032106. Epub 2021
 Mar 1.

Spontaneous Cervical Artery Dissection in Vascular Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome: A 
Cohort Study.

Adham S(1)(2), Billon C(1)(2), Legrand A(1)(2), Domigo V(3)(4), Denarié N(1), 
Charpentier E(5), Jeunemaitre X(1)(2), Frank M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)AP-HP, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Département de Génétique, Centre de 
Référence des Maladies Vasculaires Rares, Paris, France (S.A., C.B., A.L., N.D., 
X.J., M.F.).
(2)Université de Paris, INSERM, U970 PARCC, Paris, France (S.A., C.B., A.L., 
X.J., M.F.).
(3)GH Sainte-Anne, Service d'imagerie morphologique et fonctionnelle, Paris, 
France (V.D.).
(4)INSERM, U894, IMA-BRAIN, DHU NeuroVasc, Paris, France (V.D.).
(5)AP-HP, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Service de Radiologie, Paris, 
France (E.C.).

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is a rare inherited 
connective tissue disorder because of pathogenic variants in the COL3A1 gene. 
Arterial complications can affect all anatomic areas and about 25% involve 
supra-aortic trunks (SATs) but no systematic assessment of cervical artery 
lesions has been made. The primary objective was to determine an accurate 
prevalence of spontaneous SAT lesions in a large series of patients with 
vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome at diagnosis and during follow-up. Secondary 
objectives were to study their neurological consequences (transient ischemic 
attack or stroke) and the possible relationships with sex, genotype, 
ascertainment status.
METHODS: A retrospective review of a monocentric cohort of patients with 
molecularly proven vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome followed in a tertiary 
referral center from 2000 to 2017.
RESULTS: One hundred forty-four patients were analyzed, 56.9% (n=82) had SAT 
lesions: 64.6% females, 74.4% index-case patients. Most lesions were identified 
in early arterial assessment (48% at first work-up, mean age of 35.7±13.0 
years). Cumulative incidence of a first identification of a SAT lesion was 41.7% 
at 40 years old. On the complete period of survey, 183 SAT lesions (with 132 
dissections and 33 aneurysms) were identified, mainly in internal carotid 
arteries (56.3%) and vertebral arteries (28.9%), more rarely in patients with 
COL3A1 null mutations (P=0.008). Transient ischemic attack or stroke were 
reported in n=16 (19.5%) of the 82 patients with SAT lesions without relation 
with age, sex, treatment, or hypertension.
CONCLUSIONS: Cervical artery lesions are frequent and mostly asymptomatic in 
patients with vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Local dissections and aneurysms 
are the most frequent type of lesions, but transient ischemic attack or stroke 
seem rare.

DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.120.032106
PMID: 33641388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]