---
reference_id: "PMID:7993663"
title: "Anabolic effect of human growth hormone: management of inherited disorders of catabolic pathways."
authors:
- Marsden D
- Barshop BA
- Capistrano-Estrada S
- Rice M
- Prodanos C
- Sartoris D
- Wolff J
- Jones KL
- Spector S
- Nyhan WL
journal: Biochem Med Metab Biol
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1006/bmmb.1994.1047
keywords:
- 3-Hydroxybutyric Acid
- Adolescent
- Age Determination by Skeleton
- Bone Density
- Child
- "Dietary Proteins/administration & dosage"
- Growth/drug effects
- Growth Hormone/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Hydroxybutyrates/urine
- Insulin-Like Growth Factor I/analysis
- Isoleucine/metabolism
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/drug therapy"
- Nitrogen/metabolism
- Propionates/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anabolic effect of human growth hormone: management of inherited disorders of catabolic pathways.
**Authors:** Marsden D, Barshop BA, Capistrano-Estrada S, Rice M, Prodanos C, Sartoris D, Wolff J, Jones KL, Spector S, Nyhan WL
**Journal:** Biochem Med Metab Biol (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1006/bmmb.1994.1047](https://doi.org/10.1006/bmmb.1994.1047)

## Content

1. Biochem Med Metab Biol. 1994 Aug;52(2):145-54. doi: 10.1006/bmmb.1994.1047.

Anabolic effect of human growth hormone: management of inherited disorders of
catabolic pathways.

Marsden D(1), Barshop BA, Capistrano-Estrada S, Rice M, Prodanos C, Sartoris D,
Wolff J, Jones KL, Spector S, Nyhan WL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Diego, La Jolla 92093.

The effects of growth hormone treatment and dietary alanine supplementation,
individually and in combination, were studied in five patients with organic
acidemias. Three patients had propionic acidemia, one had 3-hydroxyisobutyric
acidemia, and one had a defect in isoleucine metabolism. Two patients with
propionic acidemia had decreased growth hormone secretion in response to
provocative stimuli (intravenous L-arginine and oral levodopa or clonidine); the
remaining subjects had sufficient growth hormone secretion. Three of four
subjects in whom IGF1 was measured showed subnormal concentrations at baseline
(including two with normal growth hormone secretory responses). All patients
showed an increase in linear growth with growth hormone. In the four patients
studied, all had a significant increase in nitrogen retention over baseline with
alanine or growth hormone alone, or with the combination of growth hormone and
alanine, with a much greater effect of growth hormone. Lean body mass and body
fat composition tended to become normal with treatment. Protein tolerance
increased, and when the patients' dietary protein intakes were increased between
20 and 60% they maintained positive nitrogen balance, without a significant
increase in metabolite excretion. One patient with propionic acidemia expired
during the time of the study, following a course of recurrent pancreatitis and
an episode of acute basal ganglia infarction. All of the other subjects showed
clinical improvement (decreased incidence of ketoacidotic episodes and decreased
frequency of hospital admission and school absence) during treatment, and even
the patient who expired remained metabolically stable up to and through the
terminal event. We conclude that growth hormone may be of value in the
management of patients with organic acidemia.

DOI: 10.1006/bmmb.1994.1047
PMID: 7993663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
