---
reference_id: "PMID:11224597"
title: "Sarcomatoid differentiation in renal cell carcinoma: a study of 101 cases."
authors:
- de Peralta-Venturina M
- Moch H
- Amin M
- Tamboli P
- Hailemariam S
- Mihatsch M
- Javidan J
- Stricker H
- Ro JY
- Amin MB
journal: Am J Surg Pathol
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1097/00000478-200103000-00001
keywords:
- Adenocarcinoma/pathology
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Carcinoma, Papillary/pathology"
- "Carcinoma, Renal Cell/classification, mortality, pathology, therapy"
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- Humans
- "Kidney Neoplasms/classification, mortality, pathology, therapy"
- "Kidney Tubules, Collecting/pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Staging
- Sarcoma/pathology
- Survival Rate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sarcomatoid differentiation in renal cell carcinoma: a study of 101 cases.
**Authors:** de Peralta-Venturina M, Moch H, Amin M, Tamboli P, Hailemariam S, Mihatsch M, Javidan J, Stricker H, Ro JY, Amin MB
**Journal:** Am J Surg Pathol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00000478-200103000-00001](https://doi.org/10.1097/00000478-200103000-00001)

## Content

1. Am J Surg Pathol. 2001 Mar;25(3):275-84. doi:
10.1097/00000478-200103000-00001.

Sarcomatoid differentiation in renal cell carcinoma: a study of 101 cases.

de Peralta-Venturina M(1), Moch H, Amin M, Tamboli P, Hailemariam S, Mihatsch M, 
Javidan J, Stricker H, Ro JY, Amin MB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, Michigan, USA.

Sarcomatoid renal cell carcinoma is not a distinct histologic entity and 
represents high-grade transformation in different subtypes of renal cell 
carcinoma. It is not known whether any particular histologic type has a 
predilection for sarcomatoid change or whether the primary histologic type of 
renal carcinoma undergoing sarcomatoid change affects prognosis. Of 952 
consecutively histologically subtyped renal cell carcinomas, the incidence of 
sarcomatoid differentiation was 8% in conventional (clear cell) renal carcinoma, 
3% in papillary renal carcinoma, 9% in chromophobe renal carcinoma, 29% in 
collecting duct carcinoma, and 11% in unclassified renal cell carcinoma. One 
hundred one renal cell carcinomas with sarcomatoid change were studied, and 
clinicopathologic parameters were correlated with outcome. The mean age of 
patients was 60 years (range, 33-80 years), and the male-to-female ratio was 
1.6:1. The median tumor size was 9.2 cm (range, 3-25 cm). The primary histologic 
subtype of the carcinoma component was conventional (clear cell) renal carcinoma 
in 80 cases, papillary renal carcinoma in eight, chromophobe renal carcinoma in 
seven, collecting duct carcinoma in two, and unclassified renal cell carcinoma 
in four. The sarcomatoid component resembled fibrosarcoma in 54 cases, malignant 
fibrous histiocytoma in 44, undifferentiated sarcoma (not otherwise specified) 
in three with focal rhabdomyosarcomatous component in two of them. The spindled 
elements accounted for 1% to 99% of the sampled tumor (median, 40%; mean 45%). 
The histologic grade of the spindled elements was intermediate to high in 92 
cases and low in nine cases. Most cases were TNM stages III and IV (seven stage 
I, six stage II, 63 stage III, and 25 stage IV). Follow-up was available in 88 
patients; 61 (69%) patients died of disease and had a median survival time of 19 
months. Distant metastases, most frequently to the lungs, were documented in 51 
(66%) of 77 patients who had available clinical information regarding distant 
metastasis. The disease-specific survival rate was 22% and 13% after 5 and 10 
years, respectively, compared with a cohort of renal cell carcinomas without 
sarcomatoid change with a 5-and 10-year disease-specific survival of 79% and 
76%, respectively. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis showed that tumors with high 
TNM stage (p = 0.0027), at least 50% sarcomatoid component (p = 0.0453), and 
angiolymphatic invasion (p = 0.0282) were associated with decreased survival 
rates. The primary histologic subtype of the carcinoma component and the type 
and grade of the sarcomatoid component did not affect survival. In a Cox 
proportional hazard regression model, TNM stage appeared to be the only 
significant variable in predicting outcome among renal cell carcinomas with 
sarcomatoid change (p = 0.018; risk ratio, 6.984 and 8.439). Compared with a 
cohort of renal cell carcinomas without sarcomatoid change, sarcomatoid tumors 
tended to present at a more advanced stage (p = 0.0001). Also, when adjusted for 
stage, necrosis, and tumor size, patients with tumors with sarcomatoid 
differentiation had a worse prognosis than did patients with tumors without 
sarcomatoid change (p = 0.0001). In conclusion, sarcomatoid change in renal cell 
carcinoma portends a worse prognosis. Because tumors with even a small component 
of sarcomatoid change may have an adverse outcome, this finding, when present, 
should be noted in the surgical pathology report.

DOI: 10.1097/00000478-200103000-00001
PMID: 11224597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]