---
reference_id: "PMID:23273567"
title: Whole-genome analysis reveals that mutations in inositol polyphosphate phosphatase-like 1 cause opsismodysplasia.
authors:
- Below JE
- Earl DL
- Shively KM
- McMillin MJ
- Smith JD
- Turner EH
- Stephan MJ
- Al-Gazali LI
- Hertecant JL
- Chitayat D
- Unger S
- Cohn DH
- Krakow D
- Swanson JM
- Faustman EM
- Shendure J
- Nickerson DA
- Bamshad MJ
- University of Washington Center for Mendelian Genomics
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.11.011
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Genome, Human"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mutation
- Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics
- "Phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-Trisphosphate 5-Phosphatases"
- Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whole-genome analysis reveals that mutations in inositol polyphosphate phosphatase-like 1 cause opsismodysplasia.
**Authors:** Below JE, Earl DL, Shively KM, McMillin MJ, Smith JD, Turner EH, Stephan MJ, Al-Gazali LI, Hertecant JL, Chitayat D, Unger S, Cohn DH, Krakow D, Swanson JM, Faustman EM, Shendure J, Nickerson DA, Bamshad MJ, University of Washington Center for Mendelian Genomics
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.11.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.11.011)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Jan 10;92(1):137-43. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.11.011.
Epub  2012 Dec 27.

Whole-genome analysis reveals that mutations in inositol polyphosphate 
phosphatase-like 1 cause opsismodysplasia.

Below JE(1), Earl DL, Shively KM, McMillin MJ, Smith JD, Turner EH, Stephan MJ, 
Al-Gazali LI, Hertecant JL, Chitayat D, Unger S, Cohn DH, Krakow D, Swanson JM, 
Faustman EM, Shendure J, Nickerson DA, Bamshad MJ; University of Washington 
Center for Mendelian Genomics.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, 
USA.

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2013 Jun;83(6):527-9. doi: 10.1111/cge.12136.

Opsismodysplasia is a rare, autosomal-recessive skeletal dysplasia characterized 
by short stature, characteristic facial features, and in some cases severe renal 
phosphate wasting. We used linkage analysis and whole-genome sequencing of a 
consanguineous trio to discover that mutations in inositol polyphosphate 
phosphatase-like 1 (INPPL1) cause opsismodysplasia with or without renal 
phosphate wasting. Evaluation of 12 families with opsismodysplasia revealed that 
INPPL1 mutations explain ~60% of cases overall, including both of the families 
in our cohort with more than one affected child and 50% of the simplex cases.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.11.011
PMCID: PMC3542462
PMID: 23273567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]