---
reference_id: "PMID:37569906"
title: Interaction of L1CAM with LC3 Is Required for L1-Dependent Neurite Outgrowth and Neuronal Survival.
authors:
- Loers G
- Kleene R
- Granato V
- Bork U
- Schachner M
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms241512531
keywords:
- "Neural Cell Adhesion Molecule L1/metabolism, genetics, chemistry"
- Animals
- Microtubule-Associated Proteins/metabolism
- Neuronal Outgrowth
- Mice
- Cell Survival
- "Neurons/metabolism, cytology"
- Protein Binding
- Humans
- Neurites/metabolism
- Protein Interaction Domains and Motifs
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interaction of L1CAM with LC3 Is Required for L1-Dependent Neurite Outgrowth and Neuronal Survival.
**Authors:** Loers G, Kleene R, Granato V, Bork U, Schachner M
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms241512531](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms241512531)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Aug 7;24(15):12531. doi: 10.3390/ijms241512531.

Interaction of L1CAM with LC3 Is Required for L1-Dependent Neurite Outgrowth and 
Neuronal Survival.

Loers G(1), Kleene R(1), Granato V(1), Bork U(1), Schachner M(2).

Author information:
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Neurobiologie, Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Martinistr. 52, 20246 Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Keck Center for Collaborative 
Neuroscience, Rutgers University, 604 Allison Road, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

The neural cell adhesion molecule L1 (also called L1CAM or CD171) functions not 
only in cell migration, but also in cell survival, differentiation, myelination, 
neurite outgrowth, and signaling during nervous system development and in 
adults. The proteolytic cleavage of L1 in its extracellular domain generates 
soluble fragments which are shed into the extracellular space and transmembrane 
fragments that are internalized into the cell and transported to various 
organelles to regulate cellular functions. To identify novel intracellular 
interaction partners of L1, we searched for protein-protein interaction motifs 
and found two potential microtubule-associated protein 1 light-chain 3 
(LC3)-interacting region (LIR) motifs within L1, one in its extracellular domain 
and one in its intracellular domain. By ELISA, immunoprecipitation, and 
proximity ligation assay using L1 mutant mice lacking the 70 kDa L1 fragment 
(L1-70), we showed that L1-70 interacts with LC3 via the extracellular LIR motif 
in the fourth fibronectin type III domain, but not by the motif in the 
intracellular domain. The disruption of the L1-LC3 interaction reduces 
L1-mediated neurite outgrowth and neuronal survival.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241512531
PMCID: PMC10419456
PMID: 37569906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.