---
reference_id: "PMID:25683118"
title: "Loss-of-function mutations in CAST cause peeling skin, leukonychia, acral punctate keratoses, cheilitis, and knuckle pads."
authors:
- Lin Z
- Zhao J
- Nitoiu D
- Scott CA
- Plagnol V
- Smith FJ
- Wilson NJ
- Cole C
- Schwartz ME
- McLean WH
- Wang H
- Feng C
- Duo L
- Zhou EY
- Ren Y
- Dai L
- Chen Y
- Zhang J
- Xu X
- "O'Toole EA"
- Kelsell DP
- Yang Y
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.12.026
keywords:
- Adult
- Apoptosis/genetics
- "Calcium-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Adhesion/genetics
- Cheilitis/genetics
- Epidermis/metabolism
- Female
- Homozygote
- Humans
- In Situ Nick-End Labeling
- Keratinocytes
- Keratosis/genetics
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Nail Diseases/genetics
- Pedigree
- "RNA, Small Interfering/genetics, metabolism"
- Skin/pathology
- Skin Diseases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss-of-function mutations in CAST cause peeling skin, leukonychia, acral punctate keratoses, cheilitis, and knuckle pads.
**Authors:** Lin Z, Zhao J, Nitoiu D, Scott CA, Plagnol V, Smith FJ, Wilson NJ, Cole C, Schwartz ME, McLean WH, Wang H, Feng C, Duo L, Zhou EY, Ren Y, Dai L, Chen Y, Zhang J, Xu X, O'Toole EA, Kelsell DP, Yang Y
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.12.026](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.12.026)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2015 Mar 5;96(3):440-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.12.026. Epub 
2015 Feb 12.

Loss-of-function mutations in CAST cause peeling skin, leukonychia, acral 
punctate keratoses, cheilitis, and knuckle pads.

Lin Z(1), Zhao J(1), Nitoiu D(2), Scott CA(2), Plagnol V(3), Smith FJ(4), Wilson 
NJ(4), Cole C(5), Schwartz ME(6), McLean WH(4), Wang H(7), Feng C(1), Duo L(7), 
Zhou EY(1), Ren Y(8), Dai L(9), Chen Y(9), Zhang J(9), Xu X(9), O'Toole EA(2), 
Kelsell DP(10), Yang Y(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 100034, 
China; Beijing Key Laboratory of Molecular Diagnosis on Dermatoses, Beijing 
100034, China.
(2)Centre for Cutaneous Research, The Blizard Institute, Barts and The London 
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London E1 
2AT, UK.
(3)Department of Genetics, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK.
(4)Centre for Dermatology and Genetic Medicine, Colleges of Life Sciences and 
Medicine, Dentistry & Nursing, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK.
(5)Centre for Dermatology and Genetic Medicine, Colleges of Life Sciences and 
Medicine, Dentistry & Nursing, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK; 
Division of Computational Biology, College of Life Sciences, University of 
Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK.
(6)PC Project, Salt Lake City, UT 84109, USA.
(7)Department of Dermatology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 100034, 
China; Beijing Key Laboratory of Molecular Diagnosis on Dermatoses, Beijing 
100034, China; Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Beijing 100871, China.
(8)Laboratory of Electron Microscopy, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 
100034, China.
(9)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China.
(10)Centre for Cutaneous Research, The Blizard Institute, Barts and The London 
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London E1 
2AT, UK. Electronic address: d.p.kelsell@qmul.ac.uk.
(11)Department of Dermatology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 100034, 
China; Beijing Key Laboratory of Molecular Diagnosis on Dermatoses, Beijing 
100034, China; Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Beijing 100871, China. 
Electronic address: dryongyang@bjmu.edu.cn.

Calpastatin is an endogenous specific inhibitor of calpain, a calcium-dependent 
cysteine protease. Here we show that loss-of-function mutations in calpastatin 
(CAST) are the genetic causes of an autosomal-recessive condition characterized 
by generalized peeling skin, leukonychia, acral punctate keratoses, cheilitis, 
and knuckle pads, which we propose to be given the acronym PLACK syndrome. In 
affected individuals with PLACK syndrome from three families of different 
ethnicities, we identified homozygous mutations (c.607dup, c.424A>T, and 
c.1750delG) in CAST, all of which were predicted to encode truncated proteins 
(p.Ile203Asnfs∗8, p.Lys142∗, and p.Val584Trpfs∗37). Immunohistochemistry shows 
that staining of calpastatin is reduced in skin from affected individuals. 
Transmission electron microscopy revealed widening of intercellular spaces with 
chromatin condensation and margination in the upper stratum spinosum in lesional 
skin, suggesting impaired intercellular adhesion as well as keratinocyte 
apoptosis. A significant increase of apoptotic keratinocytes was also observed 
in TUNEL assays. In vitro studies utilizing siRNA-mediated CAST knockdown 
revealed a role for calpastatin in keratinocyte adhesion. In summary, we 
describe PLACK syndrome, as a clinical entity of defective epidermal adhesion, 
caused by loss-of-function mutations in CAST.

Copyright © 2015 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.12.026
PMCID: PMC4375526
PMID: 25683118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]