---
reference_id: "PMID:38255832"
title: Pathophysiology of Atrial Fibrillation and Approach to Therapy in Subjects Less than 60 Years Old.
authors:
- Curcio A
- Scalise R
- Indolfi C
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25020758
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology of Atrial Fibrillation and Approach to Therapy in Subjects Less than 60 Years Old.
**Authors:** Curcio A, Scalise R, Indolfi C
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25020758](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25020758)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Jan 7;25(2):758. doi: 10.3390/ijms25020758.

Pathophysiology of Atrial Fibrillation and Approach to Therapy in Subjects Less 
than 60 Years Old.

Curcio A(1), Scalise R(1), Indolfi C(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Magna 
Graecia University, 88100 Catanzaro, Italy.

Atrial fibrillation (AF) is an arrhythmia that affects the left atrium, cardiac 
function, and the patients' survival rate. Due to empowered diagnostics, it has 
become increasingly recognized among young individuals as well, in whom it is 
influenced by a complex interplay of autoimmune, inflammatory, and 
electrophysiological mechanisms. Deepening our understanding of these mechanisms 
could contribute to improving AF management and treatment. Inflammation is a 
complexly regulated process, with interactions among various immune cell types, 
signaling molecules, and complement components. Addressing circulating 
antibodies and designing specific autoantibodies are promising therapeutic 
options. In cardiomyopathies or channelopathies, the first manifestation could 
be paroxysmal AF; persistent forms tend not to respond to antiarrhythmic drugs 
in these conditions. Further research, both in vitro and in vivo, on the use of 
genomic biotechnology could lead to new therapeutic approaches. Additional 
triggers that can be encountered in AF patients below 60 years of age are 
systemic hypertension, overweight, diabetes, and alcohol abuse. The aims of this 
review are to briefly report evidence from basic science and results of clinical 
studies that might explain the juvenile burden of the most encountered sustained 
supraventricular tachyarrhythmias in the general population.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25020758
PMCID: PMC10815447
PMID: 38255832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.