---
reference_id: "PMID:33675874"
title: Alcohol-induced Hsp90 acetylation is a novel driver of liver sinusoidal endothelial dysfunction and alcohol-related liver disease.
authors:
- Yang Y
- Sangwung P
- Kondo R
- Jung Y
- McConnell MJ
- Jeong J
- Utsumi T
- Sessa WC
- Iwakiri Y
journal: J Hepatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2021.02.028
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Alcohol-induced Hsp90 acetylation is a novel driver of liver sinusoidal endothelial dysfunction and alcohol-related liver disease.
**Authors:** Yang Y, Sangwung P, Kondo R, Jung Y, McConnell MJ, Jeong J, Utsumi T, Sessa WC, Iwakiri Y
**Journal:** J Hepatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jhep.2021.02.028](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2021.02.028)

## Content

1. J Hepatol. 2021 Aug;75(2):377-386. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2021.02.028. Epub 2021 
Mar 3.

Alcohol-induced Hsp90 acetylation is a novel driver of liver sinusoidal 
endothelial dysfunction and alcohol-related liver disease.

Yang Y(1), Sangwung P(1), Kondo R(2), Jung Y(1), McConnell MJ(1), Jeong J(1), 
Utsumi T(1), Sessa WC(3), Iwakiri Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Digestive Diseases, Yale School 
of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Digestive Diseases, Yale School 
of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA; Department of Pathology, Kurume University 
School of Medicine, Kurume, Japan.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Digestive Diseases, Yale School 
of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. Electronic address: yasuko.iwakiri@yale.edu.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Liver sinusoidal endothelial cell (LSEC) dysfunction has been 
reported in alcohol-related liver disease, yet it is not known whether LSECs 
metabolize alcohol. Thus, we investigated this, as well as the mechanisms of 
alcohol-induced LSEC dysfunction and a potential therapeutic approach for 
alcohol-induced liver injury.
METHODS: Primary human, rat and mouse LSECs were used. Histone deacetylase 6 
(HDAC6) was overexpressed specifically in liver ECs via adeno-associated virus 
(AAV)-mediated gene delivery to decrease heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) 
acetylation in ethanol-fed mice.
RESULTS: LSECs expressed CYP2E1 and alcohol dehydrogenase 1 (ADH1) and 
metabolized alcohol. Ethanol induced CYP2E1 in LSECs, but not ADH1. Alcohol 
metabolism by CYP2E1 increased Hsp90 acetylation and decreased its interaction 
with endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) leading to a decrease in nitric 
oxide (NO) production. A non-acetylation mutant of Hsp90 increased its 
interaction with eNOS and NO production, whereas a hyperacetylation mutant 
decreased NO production. These results indicate that Hsp90 acetylation is 
responsible for decreases in its interaction with eNOS and eNOS-derived NO 
production. AAV8-driven HDAC6 overexpression specifically in liver ECs 
deacetylated Hsp90, restored Hsp90's interaction with eNOS and ameliorated 
alcohol-induced liver injury in mice.
CONCLUSION: Restoring LSEC function is important for ameliorating 
alcohol-induced liver injury. To this end, blocking acetylation of Hsp90 
specifically in LSECs via AAV-mediated gene delivery has the potential to be a 
new therapeutic strategy.
LAY SUMMARY: Alcohol metabolism in liver sinusoidal endothelial cells (LSECs) 
and the mechanism of alcohol-induced LSEC dysfunction are largely unknown. 
Herein, we demonstrate that LSECs can metabolize alcohol. We also uncover a 
mechanism by which alcohol induces LSEC dysfunction and liver injury, and we 
identify a potential therapeutic strategy to prevent this.

Copyright © 2021 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2021.02.028
PMCID: PMC8292196
PMID: 33675874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest that pertain to this work. Please refer to the 
accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.

Liver sinusoidal endothelial cells (LSECs) are indispensable for liver homeostasis[1]. LSEC dysfunction has been reported in various liver diseases, including alcohol-related liver disease (ALD)[2, 3]. However, it is not known whether LSECs metabolize alcohol and, if so, how it is related to alcohol-induced liver injury.

Alcohol is metabolized in the liver by several pathways[4]. The most common of these involves two enzymes, alcohol dehydrogenase 1 (ADH1) and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH). In this pathway, alcohol is metabolized first by ADH1 to acetaldehyde, a highly toxic metabolite and a known carcinogen[5]. Then, ALDH catabolizes acetaldehyde to acetate, a less active product, which can be converted to acetyl-CoA by acetyl-CoA synthetase (ACS)[5].

Cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1) is another enzyme that metabolizes alcohol to acetaldehyde[6], especially in pathological conditions. Ethanol increases the rate of CYP2E1 gene transcription and also stabilizes CYP2E1 by preventing it from degradation[7]. CYP2E1 is mainly expressed in the liver with its highest expression in hepatocytes. Accordingly, the study of CYP2E1 in the liver has been concentrated on hepatocytes, although Kupffer cells[8] and LSECs[9] are also reported to express it to some degree. The relative expression of CYP2E1 in LSECs versus hepatocytes and the function of CYP2E1 in LSECs remain unknown.

In this study, we have explored the presence of CYP2E1 and ADH1 as well as alcohol metabolism by these enzymes in LSECs. We have also examined the mechanism of LSEC dysfunction represented by decreased nitric oxide (NO) production and liver injury caused by CYP2E1-mediated alcohol metabolism as well as a therapeutic strategy of blocking this mechanism via adeno-associated virus (AAV)-mediated gene delivery.

Heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) is a chaperone protein that promotes protein homeostasis by assisting other proteins to function[10]. It was reported that Hsp90 mRNA levels were elevated in mouse liver macrophages and hepatocytes in response to ethanol feeding and that inhibition of Hsp90 activity by 17-DMAG (17-Dimethylamino-ethylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin) decreased alcohol-induced hepatic steatosis, macrophage activation and liver injury in mice[11]. However, the role of Hsp90 in LSECs in ALD remains unknown. In endothelial cells (ECs), Hsp90 increases endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) activity by directly binding to eNOS[12] and thereby promotes NO production. It has been reported that phosphorylation of Hsp90 increases its association with eNOS[13], while acetylation of Hsp90 reduces the formation of complexes between Hsp90 and its client proteins and has a negative impact on their function[14]. Given that acetyl-CoA, a final product of alcohol metabolism, serves as a substrate for protein acetylation[15], we thus hypothesized that alcohol metabolism by CYP2E1 could cause excessive Hsp90 acetylation and decrease its interaction with eNOS, leading to decreased NO production in LSECs and contributing to alcohol-induced liver injury. We also hypothesized that overexpression of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) in LSECs, which deacetylates Hsp90, could restore eNOS activity and NO production, thereby ameliorating liver injury.

To examine the effect of HDAC6 overexpression in liver ECs on ALD, we used Cdh5-CreERT2 mice and the NIAAA model for generation of ALD with a slight modification (3.75 g/kg body weight ethanol gavage instead of 5 g/kg in the NIAAA model)[16]. Cdh5-CreERT2 mice were administrated with an adeno-associated virus 8 (AAV8)-EF1a-DIO-mKate2 (Vector Biolabs, Malvern, PA)(control, n=25) or AAV8-EFS-DIO-mHDAC6 vector (Vector Biolabs)(n=26) retro-orbitally at a dose of 2 × 1012 GC/100 μL per mouse. Three weeks later, mice(16 Kate2 vs. 16 HDAC6) started to be fed with a 5% ethanol-liquid diet(F1258SP, Bio-Serv, Flemington, NJ) for 10 days. On the morning of Day 11, they received an oral gavage of ethanol and were sacrificed 9 hours later to collect blood and liver tissues. For a control group, Cdh5-CreERT2 mice(9 Kate2 vs. 10 HDAC6) were fed with a control liquid diet(F1259SP, Bio-Serv) for 10 days and were sacrificed for sample collection. All mice were approximately 4 months old at the time of sacrifice. We received liver specimens of ethanol-fed Sprague Dawley rats (the NIAAA model) from Dr. Varman Samuel(Yale University).

All animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Veterans Affairs Connecticut Healthcare System(#YI0001) and performed in adherence with the National Institutes of Health Guidelines for the Use of Laboratory Animals.

Primary mouse LSECs and hepatocytes were isolated from Cdh5-CreERT2 mice at the Yale Liver Center Core Facility as previously described[17, 18]. Refer to the Supplemental Materials for details.

We obtained primary human LSECs from ScienCell Research Laboratories(#5000, Carlsbad, CA), primary human hepatocytes through the Liver Tissue Cell Distribution System(Pittsburgh, PA, NIH Contract #N01-DK-7-0004/HHSN267200700004C), monkey kidney fibroblast-like cells(COS-7) from ATCC(Manassas, VA) and bovine aortic endothelial cells(BAECs) from Clonetics(San Diego, CA). Refer to the Supplemental Materials for culture conditions.

Hsp90α acetylation mutants tagged with FLAG were gifts from Dr. Len Neckers (National Cancer Institute). A mutation of the lysine 294 residue to glutamine (Q) represents a hyper-acetylated state of Hsp90, while an arginine (R) mutant cannot be acetylated[14]. An empty pcDNA3 vector was used as a control, because it was used for the backbone of Hsp90α and eNOS constructs[19].

Refer to the Supplemental Materials.

Refer to the Supplemental Materials.

Refer to the Supplemental Materials.

Refer to the Supplemental Materials.

Refer to the Supplemental Materials.

Refer to the Supplemental Materials.

Refer to the Supplemental Materials.

Refer to the Supplemental Materials.

Refer to the Supplemental Materials.

Refer to the Supplemental Materials.

Refer to the Supplemental Materials.

Refer to the Supplemental Materials.

Refer to the Supplemental Materials.

Data were expressed as mean ± standard error of mean(SEM), and statistical analyses were performed using Graph-Pad Prism version 8.0(GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA). Statistical significance was determined by performing unpaired t-test for the comparisons of two groups or one-way analysis of variance(ANOVA) followed by Tukey’s test for the comparisons of multiple groups. A p-value <0.05 was considered statistically significant.

We observed that CYP2E1 was expressed in mouse (Figs. 1A&B) and rat (Supplementary Figs. 1A, B&C) LSECs. Hepatocytes, the major CYP2E1-expressing cells in the liver, exhibited approximately 3-fold(p<0.001) and 3.3-fold higher protein levels(p<0.01) than LSECs in mice (Fig. 1A) and rats (Supplementary Fig. 1A), respectively. Further, ethanol increased CYP2E1 protein levels in mouse(1.5-fold, p<0.001) and rat LSECs(1.4-fold, p<0.05)(Fig. 1C & Supplementary Fig. 1D) in agreement with immunofluorescence images (Fig. 1D & Supplementary Fig. 1E). Increased CYP2E1 protein levels were also observed in LSECs in rat livers with an ethanol diet (Supplementary Fig. 1F). To increase implications of these findings in translational or clinical research, we also used human primary LSECs and found an increase in CYP2E1 levels by ethanol treatment(2.2-fold, p<0.01)(Figs. 1E&F). Immunofluorescence staining of livers of endothelial-GFP reporter mice also showed that GFP-positive cells (liver ECs with LSECs occupying the major portion) were positive for CYP2E1, confirming CYP2E1 expression in LSECs in mouse livers (Fig. 1G). A previous study reported Wnt-dependent CYP2E1 zonal expression in hepatocytes[20]. We found that suppression of Wntless (WLS) decreased CYP2E1 expression induced by ethanol without changing CYP2E1 expression in a basal condition (Supplementary Fig. 2A), suggesting that CYP2E1 induction in LSECs may also be Wnt-dependent.

We next examined whether LSECs could express other ethanol metabolizing enzymes, such as ADH1, ALDH1/2, ACS1 and ACS2 (Fig. 2A). Although expression levels appear to be different, these enzymes were expressed in primary LSECs and hepatocytes from human, mouse and rat origins (Fig. 2B & Supplementary Fig. 2B). Unlike CYP2E1, however, ethanol did not change expression levels of these enzymes in human LSECs (Fig. 2B), but did increase intracellular levels of acetate(1.7-fold, p<0.02) and acetyl-CoA (4-fold, p<0.01)(Figs. 2C&D). While acetyl-CoA could be generated by pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) or ATP citrate lyase (ACLY) through metabolic processes, ethanol did not change their levels (Fig. 2B). To understand the relative roles of CYP2E1 and ADH1 in ethanol metabolism in LSECs, we suppressed CYP2E1 or ADH1 in human LSECs by siRNA and treated them with ethanol. CYP2E1 and ADH1 suppression both decreased acetyl-CoA levels, compared to a control group[62% (p<0.005) and 40% (p<0.05), respectively](Fig. 2E). Given a larger decrease in acetyl-CoA production by CYP2E1 silencing and induction of CYP2E1, but not ADH, by ethanol, these observations may suggest that CYP2E1 is more responsible for ethanol metabolism in LSECs than endogenous ADH1 under excessive alcohol intake that can lead to liver injury.

Decreased production of eNOS-derived NO is a characteristic of LSEC dysfunction[21]. Ethanol significantly decreased NO production in human LSECs(39%, p<0.01)(Fig. 3A) without changing eNOS protein levels (Fig. 3B). A similar result was observed in BAECs, frequently used ECs for the study of eNOS (Supplementary Figs. 3A&B). These observations indicate that the decreased production of NO by ethanol is due to compromised eNOS activity.

To understand the role of CYP2E1 in LSEC dysfunction in response to ethanol, we suppressed CYP2E1 in human LSECs by siRNA and treated them with ethanol. Suppression of CYP2E1 did not change eNOS protein levels (Fig. 3C) but recovered NO production (Fig. 3D). CYP2E1 metabolizes ethanol and leads to the production of acetyl-CoA, a substrate for protein acetylation. As shown in Fig. 3E, ethanol significantly increased Hsp90 acetylation (4-fold, p<0.01) in human LSECs, which was reversed by CYP2E1 suppression. Similarly, ethanol significantly increased Hsp90 acetylation(1.54-fold, p<0.05) in BAECs(Supplementary Fig. 3C). We also observed that ethanol-driven Hsp90 acetylation could be reversed by ALDH1/2 double knockdown in human LSECs (Supplementary Fig. 3D). Similar to ethanol, acetate increased Hsp90 acetylation (2.9-fold, p<0.01)(Fig. 3F) and reduced NO production in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 3G). Collectively, these results indicate that ethanol decreases NO production and increases Hsp90 acetylation in the presence of CYP2E1.

Whether Hsp90 acetylation influences eNOS activity is not known. As shown in Fig. 4B, ethanol decreased Hsp90’s interaction with eNOS in human LSECs(25%, p<0.02), but this interaction was restored by CYP2E1 suppression, indicating that decreased interaction of Hsp90 with eNOS by ethanol is CYP2E1-dependent. A similar pattern was observed in BAECs with both ethanol and acetaldehyde decreasing Hsp90’s interaction with eNOS and reducing NO production(Supplementary Figs. 4A&B).

We further confirmed the role of Hsp90 acetylation in its interaction with eNOS and NO production by mutating its specific lysine residue for acetylation. A mutation to glutamine (Q) represents a hyper-acetylated state of Hsp90, while an arginine (R) mutant cannot be acetylated. We assessed Hsp90’s interaction with eNOS and NO production in COS-7 cells, which express Hsp90, but not eNOS[12, 22], allowing us to restrict the source of NO only to transfected eNOS constructs. Thus, eNOS was transfected along with the Hsp90 mutants. As shown in Fig. 4C, the non-acetylation mutant of Hsp90α(K294R) increased its interaction with eNOS compared with WT, or even greater compared with the hyper-acetylation mutant(K294Q). Further, the non-acetylation mutant(K294R) produced NO more than any other type, whereas the hyper-acetylation mutant(K294Q) did not increase NO production(Fig. 4D). These observations strongly support our hypothesis that the state of Hsp90 acetylation influences its interaction with eNOS and NO production(Fig. 4A).

HDAC6 decreases Hsp90 acetylation levels by removing an acetyl group[23]. HDAC6 inhibition by BRD9757, an HDAC6-specific inhibitor, increased Hsp90 acetylation(2.0-fold, p<0.02)(Figs. 5A&B), decreased Hsp90’s interaction with eNOS(45%, p<0.001)(Fig. 5C) and NO production(55%, p<0.001)(Fig. 5D) in BAECs. Since BRD9757 did not change eNOS protein levels (Fig. 5E), the decreased production of NO may be attributable to the change in the interaction between Hsp90 and eNOS that influences eNOS activity. Similar results were observed in BAECs treated with another HDAC inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA) (Supplementary Fig. 5). Collectively, Hsp90 acetylation promoted by HDAC6 inhibition decreases Hsp90’s interaction with eNOS and inhibits NO production.

To test whether inhibiting Hsp90 acetylation by overexpressing HDAC6 in liver ECs could restore EC function in ALD(Fig. 6A), we generated AAV8-HDAC6, which allows HDAC6 expression only in the presence of Cre-recombinase. AAV-HDAC6 or AAV-control (Ctrl) was injected to tamoxifen-induced Cdh5-CreERT2 mice (EC-specific Cre mice) 3 weeks before feeding an ethanol or a control diet for 10 days Fig. 6B). Because AAV8 has a significantly greater liver targeting ability[24], this approach permits liver EC-specific HDAC6 overexpression without influencing ECs in other organs. We confirmed HDAC6 overexpression in liver ECs, particularly LSECs, as indicated by co-localization of HDAC6 expression with PECAM-1, an EC marker, in mice administered AAV-HDAC6, compared to mice given AAV-control(Fig. 6C). Similarly, HDAC6 mRNA and protein levels were both elevated in liver tissue lysates from AAV-HDAC6-injected mice(Supplementary Figs. 6A&B). We observed no increases in HDAC6 expression in the lung by AAV-HDAC6(Supplementary Fig. 6C).

LSEC-specific overexpression of HDAC6 was confirmed by LSECs and hepatocytes isolated from these mice, showing that both HDAC6 mRNA and protein levels were elevated in LSECs from mice given AAV-HDAC6 with unaltered HDAC6 mRNA and protein levels in hepatocytes compared to mice given AAV-control(Figs. 6D&E & Supplementary Fig. 6D). HDAC6 overexpression by AAV-HDAC6 significantly decreased Hsp90 acetylation in LSECs from ethanol-fed mice(Fig. 6F), increased Hsp90’s interaction with eNOS(Fig. 6G) and restored their NO production(Fig. 6H). Similar results were observed in liver tissue lysates(Supplementary Figs. 6E&F).

We also investigated the effect of HDAC6 overexpression in liver ECs on alcohol-induced liver injury. Plasma ALT levels(Fig. 7A) and myeloperoxidase (MPO) levels(Figs. 7B&C) were significantly elevated by ethanol feeding but decreased by HDAC6 overexpression. Histologically, hepatic inflammation was increased by ethanol feeding but alleviated by HDAC6 overexpression(Fig. 7D & Supplementary Fig. 7). Immunolabeling of CK8 also showed reduced hepatic injury by HDAC6 overexpression(Fig. 7E). Further, the levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines including tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, interleukin (IL)-1β and IL-6 were significantly lower in AAV-HDAC6 mice than AAV-control mice(Fig. 7F, Supplementary Fig. 8). All these results indicate that HDAC6 overexpression in liver ECs protects mice from alcohol-induced liver injury.

Our results indicate that LSEC capillarization, assessed by downregulation of Lyve-1 and Stabilin2 and upregulation of CD31 and CD34[18, 25], is unlikely to have occurred in the animal model of ALD used in this study(Supplementary Figs. 9A&B). Likewise, HSC activation was not observed(Supplementary Fig. 9C), consistent with a previous study showing no obvious liver fibrosis in the NIAAA model[26]. However, we found HDAC6 overexpression in LSECs reduced ET-1, HIF1α and CXCL1 mRNA levels induced by ethanol, but not hepatocyte CXCL1 mRNA levels(Supplementary Figs. 10A–C).

Alcohol metabolism has not been described in LSECs. In this study, we have shown CYP2E1 and ADH1, key enzymes in alcohol metabolism, are constitutively expressed in LSECs, and that ethanol increases CYP2E1 levels (but not ADH1 levels) as well as intracellular levels of acetyl-CoA, a final product of alcohol metabolism, in LSECs. Further, we have determined ethanol-driven Hsp90 acetylation and the resultant decrease of its interaction with eNOS as the underlying mechanism of LSEC dysfunction and liver injury under excessive alcohol consumption. In normal conditions, ADH1 enzyme, by metabolizing alcohol, may also facilitate Hsp90 acetylation to some degree without causing LSEC dysfunction. Under excess alcohol intake, since ADH1 is not induced by ethanol in LSECs, significantly upregulated CYP2E1 increases Hsp90 acetylation and impairs eNOS-derived NO production in LSECs.

EC dysfunction is known to precede liver pathogenesis. Decreased production of eNOS-derived NO, a major regulator of intrahepatic vascular tone and homeostasis, is a characteristic of LSEC dysfunction[21]. eNOS-derived NO also protects the liver from inflammation by inhibiting Kupffer cell activation[27]. Further, eNOS-derived NO can block endotheliopathy, a type of endothelial dysfunction characterized by an inflammatory and procoagulant state, by inhibiting the release of Weibel-Palade bodies, which contain P-selectin that mediates recruitment of leukocytes and thus initiates vascular inflammation[28]. Furthermore, NO can block platelet adhesion and aggregation to ECs, reducing the occurrence of microvascular thrombosis[29]. Our study suggests that restoration of eNOS-derived NO production by increasing Hsp90-eNOS interaction could ameliorate LSEC dysfunction and thereby hepatic inflammation.

The role of HDAC6 in LSECs and in response to ethanol remains to be elucidated[30]. In WIF-B cells, ethanol treatment slightly decreased HDAC6 protein levels[30]. In a recent study, however, binge drinking did not change gene expression levels of HDAC6 in rat livers[31]. We did not observe any changes in either HDAC6 protein or gene expression levels in ethanol-fed mouse livers.

It was reported that ethanol could increase expression of endothelin-1 (ET-1) and its B receptor (ET-BR) in both isolated rat LSECs and human ECs through activation of HIF1α[32]. Similarly, we found that ET-1 and HIF1α mRNA levels were increased in LSECs isolated from ethanol-fed mice. Interestingly, we also found HDAC6 overexpression in LSECs reduced ET-1 and HIF1α mRNA levels induced by ethanol. This observation may be consistent with a previous report that HDAC6 could act as a regulator of HIF-1 activity and overexpression of HDAC6 in the nucleus pulposus cells could decrease HIF activity in hypoxic conditions[33].

Endothelial cells can express chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 1 (CXCL1) and attract neutrophils. It was reported that HFD+ethanol feeding elevated the production of CXCL1 in ECs besides hepatocytes and hepatic stellate cells[34]. A recent study also revealed increased expression of CXCL1 in LSECs through Notch signaling induced by mechanical stretch[35]. Our result also showed an increase in LSEC-derived CXCL1 in response to ethanol feeding. Further, HDAC6 overexpression reversed ethanol-induced CXCL1 expression in LSECs. Although the mechanism by which HDAC6 overexpression in LSECs led to decreased CXCL1 in LSECs is beyond the scope of the current study, we speculate that deacetylation activities by HDAC6 may mediate this diminished CXCL1 expression in LSECs and it will be interesting to explore in the future.

Studies have shown that HDAC6 is a tumor suppressor for HCC[36, 37]. It is reported that low expression of HDAC6 in liver cancer specimens is highly associated with poor prognosis of HCC patients[36]. Sustained HDAC6 overexpression is shown to trigger autophagic death of cancer cells and reduce the in vivo tumor growth rate in a mouse xenograft model. Another study[37] has demonstrated that HDAC6 is a tumor suppressor for HCC by inhibiting canonical Wnt/β-catenin signaling, which is known to be involved in hepatocarcinogenesis and metastasis. Our study has shown that liver EC-specific HDAC6 overexpression is beneficial for alcohol-induced liver injury.

Protein acetylation has been described in relation to ethanol exposure. It is reported that ethanol exposure induces global protein hyperacetylation, contributing to alcohol-induced hepatotoxicity[30]. Chronic ethanol exposure promotes α-tubulin acetylation, which enhances microtubule stability, impairs lipid droplet motility and thus causes functional defects of hepatocytes[38]. Histone acetylation has also been observed in isolated hepatocytes and rat livers in response to both acute and chronic ethanol exposure, which could lead to epigenetic alterations in hepatocytes[39, 40]. Therefore, besides deacetylation of Hsp90, it is possible that HDAC6 might have deacetylated other proteins in liver ECs and helped to ameliorate alcohol-induced liver injury. With acetyl-CoA as a product of alcohol metabolism, protein acetylation in ALD may be an interesting area of investigation, which would advance our understanding of molecular mechanisms leading to liver injury.

Several studies have addressed eNOS acetylation with inconsistent results regarding its effect. For example, aspirin and acetylating analogs were reported to activate eNOS by directly acetylating eNOS[41]. Sirtuin1 (SIRT1) enhanced eNOS activity by directly deacetylating eNOS at lysines 496 and 506[41–43], while HDAC3 deacetylated eNOS and decreased NO production by reducing an association of eNOS with calmodulin, a positive regulator of eNOS activity[44]. In our study, ethanol did not change eNOS acetylation (data not shown), reinforcing that diminished eNOS activity is attributable to Hsp90 acetylation by CYP2E1-mediated alcohol metabolism.

Of note, it is reported that production of extracellular vesicles (EVs) is significantly increased in patients with alcoholism and rats with ethanol exposure and that these EVs are highly enriched with CYP2E1[45]. Therefore, deletion of the CYP2E1 gene in LSECs may not be a useful measure for LSEC protection against ethanol exposure. Rather, targeting downstream effectors of CYP2E1, such as Hsp90 acetylation, would be a more plausible therapeutic approach.

In conclusion, alcohol metabolism by CYP2E1 in LSECs contributes to liver injury. Restoration of LSEC function, particularly maintaining NO levels in LSECs, may be important for ameliorating alcohol-induced liver injury. In this regard, HDAC6 overexpression specifically in LSECs with AAV8-mediated gene delivery may represent a new therapeutic strategy.