---
reference_id: "PMID:17298101"
title: Acquired palmoplantar keratoderma.
authors:
- Patel S
- Zirwas M
- English JC 3rd
journal: Am J Clin Dermatol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.2165/00128071-200708010-00001
keywords:
- Climacteric/physiology
- "Communicable Diseases/complications, diagnosis"
- Drug-Related Side Effects and Adverse Reactions
- Humans
- "Keratoderma, Palmoplantar/chemically induced, diagnosis, etiology"
- "Malnutrition/complications, diagnosis"
- "Neoplasms/complications, diagnosis"
- "Skin Diseases/complications, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acquired palmoplantar keratoderma.
**Authors:** Patel S, Zirwas M, English JC 3rd
**Journal:** Am J Clin Dermatol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.2165/00128071-200708010-00001](https://doi.org/10.2165/00128071-200708010-00001)

## Content

1. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2007;8(1):1-11. doi: 10.2165/00128071-200708010-00001.

Acquired palmoplantar keratoderma.

Patel S(1), Zirwas M, English JC 3rd.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, 
USA.

Palmoplantar keratodermas (PPKs) are a diverse entity of disorders that are 
characterized by abnormal thickening of the skin on the palms and soles. 
Traditionally they have been classified as either hereditary or acquired and are 
distinguished from each other on the basis of mode of inheritance, presence of 
transgrediens (defined as contiguous extension of hyperkeratosis beyond the 
palmar and/or plantar skin), co-morbidities with other symptoms, and extent of 
epidermal involvement, namely diffuse, focal, and punctate. As the terms 
hyperkeratosis and keratoderma have been used interchangeably throughout the 
literature, we define acquired keratoderma as a non-hereditary, non-frictional 
hyperkeratosis of the palms and/or soles that involves >/=50% of the surface of 
involved acral areas and that may or may not be associated with clinical and 
histologic inflammation. Given the numerous possible underlying causes for 
acquired PPKs, evaluation of patients presenting with acquired PPK can be a 
perplexing task. To facilitate such evaluations, this review categorizes the 
acquired PPKs as: keratoderma climactericum, drug related, malnutrition 
associated, chemically induced, systemic disease related, malignancy associated, 
dermatoses related, infectious, and idiopathic. In order to avoid the 
possibility of overlooking an underlying etiology and to eliminate excessive 
testing, we present an algorithm for assessing patients presenting with acquired 
PPK. The first step should include a comprehensive history and a physical 
examination, including a complete skin examination. If findings are consistent 
with a hereditary keratoderma, then a genetics consultation should be 
considered. Any findings suggestive of underlying conditions should be 
aggressively evaluated and treated. If no pertinent findings are identified 
after a history and a physical examination, laboratory and radiology studies 
should be undertaken in a systematic, logical fashion. In terms of treatment, 
the most successful results occur when the underlying etiology is diagnosed and 
treated. If no such etiology is evident, then conservative treatment options 
include topical keratolytics (urea, salicylic acid, lactic acid), repeated 
physical debridement, topical retinoids, topical psoralen plus UVA, and topical 
corticosteroids. Etretinate and acitretin have also shown some success as 
alternative treatments in recalcitrant cases.

DOI: 10.2165/00128071-200708010-00001
PMID: 17298101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]