---
reference_id: "PMID:36837507"
title: "Morphopathogenesis of Adult Acquired Cholesteatoma."
journal: Medicina (Kaunas)
year: "2023"
doi: 10.3390/medicina59020306
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Morphopathogenesis of Adult Acquired Cholesteatoma.

## Content

Background and Objectives. The aim of this study was to compare the distribution
of proliferation markers (Ki-67, NF-κβ), tissue-remodeling factors (MMP-2,
MMP-9, TIMP-2, TIMP-4), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
interleukins (IL-1 and IL-10), human beta defensins (HβD-2 and HβD-4) and
Sonic hedgehog gene protein in cholesteatoma and control skin.

Methods. Nineteen patient cholesteatoma tissues and seven control skin materials
from cadavers were included in the study and stained immunohistochemically.

Results. Statistically discernible differences were found between the following:
the Ki-67 in the matrix and the Ki-67 in the skin epithelium (p = 0.000); the
Ki-67 in the perimatrix and the Ki-67 in the connective tissue (p = 0.010); the
NF-κβ in the cholesteatoma matrix and the NF-κβ in the epithelium (p = 0.001);
the MMP-9 in the matrix and the MMP-9 in the epithelium (p = 0.008); the HβD-2
in the perimatrix and the HβD-2 in the connective tissue (p = 0.004); and the
Shh in the cholesteatoma's perimatrix and the Shh in the skin's connective tissue
(p = 0.000).

Conclusion. The elevation of Ki-67 and NF-κβ suggests the induction of cellular
proliferation in the cholesteatoma. Intercorrelations between VEGF, NF-κβ and
TIMP-2 induce neo-angiogenesis in adult cholesteatoma. The similarity in the
expression of IL-1 and IL-10 suggests the dysregulation of the local immune
status in cholesteatoma. The overexpression of the Sonic hedgehog gene protein
in the cholesteatoma proves the selective local stimulation of perimatrix
development.
