---
reference_id: "PMID:22946728"
title: "Provoked and reflex seizures: surprising or common?"
authors:
- Kasteleijn-Nolst Trenité DG
journal: Epilepsia
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2012.03620.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Provoked and reflex seizures: surprising or common?
**Authors:** Kasteleijn-Nolst Trenité DG
**Journal:** Epilepsia (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1528-1167.2012.03620.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1528-1167.2012.03620.x)

## Content

1. Epilepsia. 2012 Sep;53 Suppl 4:105-13. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2012.03620.x.

Provoked and reflex seizures: surprising or common?

Kasteleijn-Nolst Trenité DG(1).

Author information:
(1)University Hospital Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. dkasteleijn@planet.nl

Most patients with epilepsy report that seizures are sometimes, or exclusively, 
provoked by general internal precipitants (such as stress, fatigue, fever, 
sleep, and menstrual cycle) and by external precipitants (such as excess 
alcohol, heat, bathing, eating, reading, and flashing lights). Some patients 
describe very exotic and precise triggers, like tooth brushing or listening to a 
particular melody. Nevertheless, the most commonly noticed seizure increasers by 
far are stress, lack of sleep, and fatigue. Recognized reflex seizure triggers 
are usually sensory and visual, such as television, discotheques, and video 
games. Visually evoked seizures comprise 5% of the total of 6% reflex seizures. 
The distinction between provocative and reflex factors and seizures seems 
artificial, and in many patients, maybe all, there is a combination of these. It 
seems plausible that all of the above-mentioned factors can misbalance the 
actual brain network; at times, accumulation of factors leads then to primary 
generalized, partial, or secondarily generalized seizures. If the provoking 
factors are too exotic, patients may be sent to the psychiatrist. Conversely, if 
the seizure-provoking fluctuating mechanisms include common habits and 
environmental factors, these may hardly be considered as provocative factors. 
Awareness of precipitating factors and its possible interactions might help us 
to unravel the pathophysiology of epilepsy and to change the notion that seizure 
occurrence is unpredictable. This article provides an overview of the 
epidemiology, classification, diagnosis, treatment, and especially similarities 
in the variety of provocative and reflex factors with resulting general 
hypotheses.

Wiley Periodicals, Inc. © 2012 International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2012.03620.x
PMID: 22946728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]