---
reference_id: "PMID:28905944"
title: Snakebite envenoming.
authors:
- Gutiérrez JM
- Calvete JJ
- Habib AG
- Harrison RA
- Williams DJ
- Warrell DA
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2017.63
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Snakebite envenoming.
**Authors:** Gutiérrez JM, Calvete JJ, Habib AG, Harrison RA, Williams DJ, Warrell DA
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrdp.2017.63](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrdp.2017.63)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2017 Sep 14;3:17063. doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2017.63.

Snakebite envenoming.

Gutiérrez JM(1), Calvete JJ(2), Habib AG(3), Harrison RA(4), Williams DJ(5)(6), 
Warrell DA(7).

Author information:
(1)Instituto Clodomiro Picado, Facultad de Microbiología, Universidad de Costa 
Rica, PO Box 11501-2060, San José, Costa Rica.
(2)Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones 
Científicas (CSIC), Valencia, Spain.
(3)College of Health Sciences, Bayero University, Kano, Nigeria.
(4)Alistair Reid Venom Research Unit, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, 
Liverpool, UK.
(5)Charles Campbell Toxinology Centre, School of Medicine &Health Sciences, 
University of Papua New Guinea, Boroko, National Capital District, Papua New 
Guinea.
(6)Australian Venom Research Unit, Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(7)Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, University 
of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Erratum in
    Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2017 Oct 05;3:17079. doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2017.79.

Snakebite envenoming is a neglected tropical disease that kills >100,000 people 
and maims >400,000 people every year. Impoverished populations living in the 
rural tropics are particularly vulnerable; snakebite envenoming perpetuates the 
cycle of poverty. Snake venoms are complex mixtures of proteins that exert a 
wide range of toxic actions. The high variability in snake venom composition is 
responsible for the various clinical manifestations in envenomings, ranging from 
local tissue damage to potentially life-threatening systemic effects. 
Intravenous administration of antivenom is the only specific treatment to 
counteract envenoming. Analgesics, ventilator support, fluid therapy, 
haemodialysis and antibiotic therapy are also used. Novel therapeutic 
alternatives based on recombinant antibody technologies and new toxin inhibitors 
are being explored. Confronting snakebite envenoming at a global level demands 
the implementation of an integrated intervention strategy involving the WHO, the 
research community, antivenom manufacturers, regulatory agencies, national and 
regional health authorities, professional health organizations, international 
funding agencies, advocacy groups and civil society institutions.

DOI: 10.1038/nrdp.2017.63
PMID: 28905944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]