---
reference_id: "PMID:35604130"
title: Performance Evaluation of a Dengue IgG Rapid Diagnostic Test Designed to Determine Dengue Serostatus as Part of Prevaccination Screening.
authors:
- Liberal V
- Forrat R
- Zhang C
- Pan C
- Bonaparte M
- Yin W
- Zheng L
- Viscardi V
- Wu Y
- Ataman-Önal Y
- Savarino S
- Chen C
journal: Microbiol Spectr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1128/spectrum.00711-21
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Performance Evaluation of a Dengue IgG Rapid Diagnostic Test Designed to Determine Dengue Serostatus as Part of Prevaccination Screening.
**Authors:** Liberal V, Forrat R, Zhang C, Pan C, Bonaparte M, Yin W, Zheng L, Viscardi V, Wu Y, Ataman-Önal Y, Savarino S, Chen C
**Journal:** Microbiol Spectr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1128/spectrum.00711-21](https://doi.org/10.1128/spectrum.00711-21)

## Content

1. Microbiol Spectr. 2022 Jun 29;10(3):e0071121. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.00711-21. 
Epub 2022 May 23.

Performance Evaluation of a Dengue IgG Rapid Diagnostic Test Designed to 
Determine Dengue Serostatus as Part of Prevaccination Screening.

Liberal V(1), Forrat R(2), Zhang C(3), Pan C(1)(3), Bonaparte M(4), Yin W(1), 
Zheng L(4), Viscardi V(1), Wu Y(4), Ataman-Önal Y(2), Savarino S(4), Chen C(1).

Author information:
(1)CTK Biotech, Poway, California, USA.
(2)Sanofi, Marcy l'Etoile, France.
(3)Beijing Genesee Biotech, Beijing, China.
(4)Sanofi, Swiftwater, Pennsylvania, USA.

The World Health Organization has recommended prevaccination screening for prior 
dengue infection as the preferred approach prior to vaccination with the dengue 
vaccine CYD-TDV. These screening tests need to be highly specific and sensitive, 
and deliverable at the point-of-care. We evaluate here the sensitivity and 
specificity of the newly developed OnSite Dengue IgG rapid diagnostic test 
(RDT). A retrospective double-blind study of the sensitivity and specificity of 
the OnSite Dengue IgG RDT was performed using a sample panel consisting of 
archived serum specimens collected during CYD-TDV clinical trials in Latin 
American and Asia, with the reference serostatus for each sample determined by 
an algorithm using measured dengue PRNT90, PRNT50, and NS1 IgG ELISA. An 
additional panel of dengue seronegative samples positive for other flaviviruses 
and infections was used to assess cross-reactivity. Samples were included from 
579 participants; 346 in the specificity panel and 233 in the sensitivity panel. 
The OnSite dengue IgG RDT exhibited a specificity of 98.0% (95% CI = 95.9 to 
99.2) and sensitivity of 95.3% (95% CI = 91.7 to 97.6). The sensitivity for 
samples exhibiting a multitypic immune profile (PRNT90-positive to >1 dengue 
serotype) was 98.8% while for monotypic immune samples (PRNT90-positive to a 
single dengue serotype) it was 88.1%. The OnSite dengue IgG RDT showed minimal 
to no cross-reactivity to related flaviviruses. These findings support the use 
of the OnSite dengue IgG RDT to determine dengue serostatus in CYD-TDV 
prevaccination screening. IMPORTANCE Dengue remains a significant public health 
issue, with over 5.2 million cases reported to the World Health Organization 
(WHO) in 2019. The tetravalent dengue vaccine (CYD-TDV) is currently licensed 
for use in those aged ≥9 years; however, vaccinees with no previous exposure to 
dengue experience an increased risk of hospitalized and severe dengue upon 
subsequent heterotypic infection. Consequently, WHO recommends screening for 
prior dengue infection before vaccination. Screening tests for previous 
infection need to be highly specific and sensitive, and deliverable at the 
point-of-care. High sensitivity ensures that the largest number of individuals 
with previous infection can be identified and vaccinated, while high specificity 
prevents the inadvertent vaccination of those without previous infection. This 
study of the OnSite Dengue IgG Rapid Test, which was explicitly developed to 
meet this need, found that it had both high specificity (98.0% [95% CI = 95.9 to 
99.2]) and sensitivity (95.3% [95% CI = 91.7 to 97.6]).

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.00711-21
PMCID: PMC9241662
PMID: 35604130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare a conflict of interest. 
V.L., C.P., V.V., W.Y., and C.C. are employees of CTK Biotech. R.F., M.B., L.Z., 
Y.W., Y.A.-O., and S.S. are employees of Sanofi and may hold shares and/or stock 
options in the company. C.Z. and C.P. are employees of Beijing Genesee Biotech.