---
reference_id: "PMID:15695517"
title: "Misfolding of collagen X chains harboring Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia mutations results in aberrant disulfide bond formation, intracellular retention, and activation of the unfolded protein response."
authors:
- Wilson R
- Freddi S
- Chan D
- Cheah KS
- Bateman JF
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M410758200
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Misfolding of collagen X chains harboring Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia mutations results in aberrant disulfide bond formation, intracellular retention, and activation of the unfolded protein response.
**Authors:** Wilson R, Freddi S, Chan D, Cheah KS, Bateman JF
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M410758200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M410758200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 22;280(16):15544-52. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M410758200. Epub 
2005 Feb 4.

Misfolding of collagen X chains harboring Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia 
mutations results in aberrant disulfide bond formation, intracellular retention, 
and activation of the unfolded protein response.

Wilson R(1), Freddi S, Chan D, Cheah KS, Bateman JF.

Author information:
(1)Cell and Matrix Biology Research Unit, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, 
University of Melbourne, Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria 3052, 
Australia.

Collagen X is a short chain collagen expressed specifically by the hypertrophic 
chondrocytes of the cartilage growth plate during endochondral bone formation. 
Accordingly, COL10A1 mutations disrupt growth plate function and cause Schmid 
metaphyseal chondrodysplasia (SMCD). SMCD mutations are almost exclusively 
located in the NC1 domain, which is crucial for both trimer formation and 
extracellular assembly. Several mutations are expected to reduce the level of 
functional collagen X due to NC1 domain misfolding or exclusion from stable 
trimer formation. However, other mutations may be tolerated within the structure 
of the assembled NC1 trimer, allowing mutant chains to exert a dominant-negative 
impact within the extracellular matrix. To address this, we engineered SMCD 
mutations that are predicted either to prohibit subunit folding and assembly 
(NC1del10 and Y598D, respectively) or to allow trimerization (N617K and G618V) 
and transfected these constructs into 293-EBNA and SaOS-2 cells. Although 
expected to form stable trimers, G618V and N617K chains (like Y598D and NC1del10 
chains) were secreted very poorly compared with wild-type collagen X. 
Interestingly, all mutations resulted in formation of an unusual SDS-stable 
dimer, which dissociated upon reduction. As the NC1 domain sulfhydryl group is 
not solvent-exposed in the correctly folded NC1 monomer, disulfide bond 
formation would result only from a dramatic conformational change. In cells 
expressing mutant collagen X, we detected significantly increased amounts of the 
spliced form of X-box DNA-binding protein mRNA and up-regulation of BiP, two key 
markers for the unfolded protein response. Our data provide the first clear 
evidence for misfolding of SMCD collagen X mutants, and we propose that solvent 
exposure of the NC1 thiol may trigger the recognition and degradation of mutant 
collagen X chains.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M410758200
PMID: 15695517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]