---
reference_id: "PMID:19862852"
title: Association study of DTNBP1 with schizophrenia in a US sample.
authors:
- Zuo L
- Luo X
- Kranzler HR
- Lu L
- Rosenheck RA
- Cramer J
- van Kammen DP
- Erdos J
- Charney DS
- Krystal J
- Gelernter J
journal: Psychiatr Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1097/ypg.0b013e32832a50bc
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association study of DTNBP1 with schizophrenia in a US sample.
**Authors:** Zuo L, Luo X, Kranzler HR, Lu L, Rosenheck RA, Cramer J, van Kammen DP, Erdos J, Charney DS, Krystal J, Gelernter J
**Journal:** Psychiatr Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1097/ypg.0b013e32832a50bc](https://doi.org/10.1097/ypg.0b013e32832a50bc)

## Content

1. Psychiatr Genet. 2009 Dec;19(6):292-304. doi: 10.1097/ypg.0b013e32832a50bc.

Association study of DTNBP1 with schizophrenia in a US sample.

Zuo L(1), Luo X, Kranzler HR, Lu L, Rosenheck RA, Cramer J, van Kammen DP, Erdos 
J, Charney DS, Krystal J, Gelernter J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06516, USA.

BACKGROUND: Straub et al. (2002b) located a susceptibility region for 
schizophrenia at the DTNBP1 locus. At least 40 studies (including one study in 
US populations) attempted to replicate this original finding, but the reported 
findings are highly diverse and at least five pathways by which dysbindin 
protein might be involved in schizophrenia have been proposed. This study aimed 
to test the association in two common US populations by using powerful analytic 
methods.
METHODS: Six markers at DTNBP1 were genotyped by mass spectroscopy ('MassARRAY' 
technique) in a sample of 663 individuals, including 346 healthy individuals 
European-Americans (EAs) and 48 African-Americans (AAs), and 317 individuals 
with schizophrenia (235 EAs and 82 AAs). Thirty-eight ancestry-informative 
markers were genotyped in this sample to infer the ancestry proportions. 
Diplotype, haplotype, genotype, and allele frequency distributions were compared 
between the cases and controls, controlling for possible population 
stratification, admixture, and sex-specific effects, and taking interaction 
effects into account, using a logistic regression analysis (an extended 
structured association method).
RESULTS: Conventional case-control comparisons showed that genotypes of the 
markers P1578 (rs1018381) and P1583 (rs909706) were nominally associated with 
schizophrenia in EAs and in AAs, respectively. These associations became less or 
nonsignificant after controlling for population stratification and admixture 
effects (using structured association or regression analysis), and became 
nonsignificant after correction for multiple testing. However, regression 
analysis showed that the common diplotypes (ACCCTT/GCCGCC or GCCGCC/GCCGCC) and 
the interaction effects of haplotypes GCCGCC/GCCGCC significantly affected risk 
for schizophrenia in EAs, effects that were modified by sex. Fine-mapping using 
d or J statistics located the specific markers (d: P1328; J: P1333) closest to 
the putative risk sites in EAs.
CONCLUSION: This study shows that DTNBP1 is a risk gene for schizophrenia in 
EAs. Variation at DTNBP1 may modify risk for schizophrenia in this population.

DOI: 10.1097/ypg.0b013e32832a50bc
PMCID: PMC2771321
PMID: 19862852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]