---
reference_id: "PMID:26250845"
title: A review of 18p deletions.
authors:
- Hasi-Zogaj M
- Sebold C
- Heard P
- Carter E
- Soileau B
- Hill A
- Rupert D
- Perry B
- Atkinson S
- "O'Donnell L"
- Gelfond J
- Lancaster J
- Fox PT
- Hale DE
- Cody JD
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31445
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- Animals
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 18/genetics"
- Genotype
- Humans
- Mice
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A review of 18p deletions.
**Authors:** Hasi-Zogaj M, Sebold C, Heard P, Carter E, Soileau B, Hill A, Rupert D, Perry B, Atkinson S, O'Donnell L, Gelfond J, Lancaster J, Fox PT, Hale DE, Cody JD
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.31445](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.31445)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2015 Sep;169(3):251-64. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.c.31445. Epub 2015 Aug 6.

A review of 18p deletions.

Hasi-Zogaj M, Sebold C, Heard P, Carter E, Soileau B, Hill A, Rupert D, Perry B, 
Atkinson S, O'Donnell L, Gelfond J, Lancaster J, Fox PT, Hale DE, Cody JD.

Since 18p- was first described in 1963, much progress has been made in our 
understanding of this classic deletion condition. We have been able to establish 
a fairly complete picture of the phenotype when the deletion breakpoint occurs 
at the centromere, and we are working to establish the phenotypic effects when 
each gene on 18p is hemizygous. Our aim is to provide genotype-specific 
anticipatory guidance and recommendations to families with an 18p- diagnosis. In 
addition, establishing the molecular underpinnings of the condition will 
potentially suggest targets for molecular treatments. Thus, the next step is to 
establish the precise effects of specific gene deletions. As we look forward to 
deepening our understanding of 18p-, our focus will continue to be on the 
establishment of robust genotype-phenotype correlations and the penetrance of 
these phenotypes. We will continue to follow our 18p- cohort closely as they age 
to determine the presence or absence of some of these diagnoses, including 
spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA), facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD), and 
dystonia. We will also continue to refine the critical regions for other 
phenotypes as we enroll additional (hopefully informative) participants into the 
research study and as the mechanisms of the genes in these regions are 
elucidated. Mouse models will also be developed to further our understanding of 
the effects of hemizygosity as well as to serve as models for treatment 
development.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31445
PMID: 26250845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]