---
reference_id: "PMID:23569304"
title: Pharmacodynamic effects and mechanisms of resistance to vemurafenib in patients with metastatic melanoma.
authors:
- Trunzer K
- Pavlick AC
- Schuchter L
- Gonzalez R
- McArthur GA
- Hutson TE
- Moschos SJ
- Flaherty KT
- Kim KB
- Weber JS
- Hersey P
- Long GV
- Lawrence D
- Ott PA
- Amaravadi RK
- Lewis KD
- Puzanov I
- Lo RS
- Koehler A
- Kockx M
- Spleiss O
- Schell-Steven A
- Gilbert HN
- Cockey L
- Bollag G
- Lee RJ
- Joe AK
- Sosman JA
- Ribas A
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2012.44.7888
keywords:
- "Administration, Oral"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Antineoplastic Agents/administration & dosage, pharmacology"
- Apoptosis/drug effects
- Cell Cycle/drug effects
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- Disease Progression
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm"
- Female
- GTP Phosphohydrolases/genetics
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- "Indoles/administration & dosage, pharmacology"
- MAP Kinase Kinase 1/genetics
- MAP Kinase Signaling System/drug effects
- Male
- "Melanoma/drug therapy, secondary"
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Middle Aged
- Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase Kinases/metabolism
- Point Mutation
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics, metabolism"
- "Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology"
- "Sulfonamides/administration & dosage, pharmacology"
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured"
- Vemurafenib
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pharmacodynamic effects and mechanisms of resistance to vemurafenib in patients with metastatic melanoma.
**Authors:** Trunzer K, Pavlick AC, Schuchter L, Gonzalez R, McArthur GA, Hutson TE, Moschos SJ, Flaherty KT, Kim KB, Weber JS, Hersey P, Long GV, Lawrence D, Ott PA, Amaravadi RK, Lewis KD, Puzanov I, Lo RS, Koehler A, Kockx M, Spleiss O, Schell-Steven A, Gilbert HN, Cockey L, Bollag G, Lee RJ, Joe AK, Sosman JA, Ribas A
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2012.44.7888](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2012.44.7888)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2013 May 10;31(14):1767-74. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2012.44.7888. Epub
2013 Apr 8.

Pharmacodynamic effects and mechanisms of resistance to vemurafenib in patients
with metastatic melanoma.

Trunzer K(1), Pavlick AC, Schuchter L, Gonzalez R, McArthur GA, Hutson TE,
Moschos SJ, Flaherty KT, Kim KB, Weber JS, Hersey P, Long GV, Lawrence D, Ott
PA, Amaravadi RK, Lewis KD, Puzanov I, Lo RS, Koehler A, Kockx M, Spleiss O,
Schell-Steven A, Gilbert HN, Cockey L, Bollag G, Lee RJ, Joe AK, Sosman JA,
Ribas A.

Author information:
(1)Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, 777 Preston Research Building, Nashville, TN
37232-6307, USA. jeff.sosman@vanderbilt.edu

PURPOSE To assess pharmacodynamic effects and intrinsic and acquired resistance
mechanisms of the BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib in BRAF(V600)-mutant melanoma,
leading to an understanding of the mechanism of action of vemurafenib and
ultimately to optimization of metastatic melanoma therapy. METHODS In the phase
II clinical study NP22657 (BRIM-2), patients received oral doses of vemurafenib
(960 mg twice per day). Serial biopsies were collected to study changes in
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling, cell-cycle progression, and
factors causing intrinsic or acquired resistance by immunohistochemistry, DNA
sequencing, or somatic mutation profiling. Results Vemurafenib inhibited MAPK
signaling and cell-cycle progression. An association between the decrease in
extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK) phosphorylation and objective response
was observed in paired biopsies (n = 22; P = .013). Low expression of
phosphatase and tensin homolog showed a modest association with lower response.
Baseline mutations in MEK1(P124) coexisting with BRAF(V600) were noted in seven
of 92 samples; their presence did not preclude objective tumor responses.
Acquired resistance to vemurafenib associated with reactivation of MAPK
signaling as observed by elevated ERK1/2 phosphorylation levels in progressive
lesions and the appearance of secondary NRAS(Q61) mutations or MEK1(Q56P) or
MEK1(E203K) mutations. These two activating MEK1 mutations had not previously
been observed in vivo in biopsies of progressive melanoma tumors. CONCLUSION
Vemurafenib inhibits tumor proliferation and oncogenic BRAF signaling through
the MAPK pathway. Acquired resistance results primarily from MAPK reactivation
driven by the appearance of secondary mutations in NRAS and MEK1 in subsets of
patients. The data suggest that inhibition downstream of BRAF should help to
overcome acquired resistance.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2012.44.7888
PMID: 23569304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
