---
reference_id: "PMID:39150594"
title: Glutamatergic Modulators for Major Depression from Theory to Clinical Use.
authors:
- McIntyre RS
- Jain R
journal: CNS Drugs
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s40263-024-01114-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glutamatergic Modulators for Major Depression from Theory to Clinical Use.
**Authors:** McIntyre RS, Jain R
**Journal:** CNS Drugs (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40263-024-01114-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40263-024-01114-y)

## Content

1. CNS Drugs. 2024 Nov;38(11):869-890. doi: 10.1007/s40263-024-01114-y. Epub 2024
 Aug 16.

Glutamatergic Modulators for Major Depression from Theory to Clinical Use.

McIntyre RS(1)(2)(3), Jain R(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Texas Tech University School of Medicine-Permian 
Basin, Midland, TX, USA. jaintexas@gmail.com.
(5)Texas Tech University School of Medicine-Permian Basin, 2500 W William Cannon 
Drive, Suite 505, Austin, Texas, 78745, USA. jaintexas@gmail.com.

Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a chronic, burdensome, highly prevalent 
disease that is characterized by depressed mood and anhedonia. MDD is especially 
burdensome as approved monoamine antidepressant treatments have weeks-long 
delays before clinical benefit and low remission rates. In the past 2 decades, a 
promising target emerged to improve patient outcomes in depression treatment: 
glutamatergic signaling. This narrative review provides a high-level overview of 
glutamate signaling in synaptogenesis and neural plasticity and the implications 
of glutamate dysregulation in depression. Based on this preclinical evidence 
implicating glutamate in depression and the rapid improvement of depression with 
ketamine treatment in a proof-of-concept trial, a range of N-methyl-D-aspartate 
(NMDA)-targeted therapies have been investigated. While an array of treatments 
has been investigated in registered phase 2 or 3 clinical trials, the 
development of most of these agents has been discontinued. Multiple 
glutamate-targeted antidepressants are actively in development, and two are 
approved. Nasal administration of esketamine (Spravato®) was approved by the US 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2019 to treat adults with 
treatment-resistant depression and in 2020 for adults with MDD with acute 
suicidal ideation or behavior. Oral combination dextromethorphan-bupropion 
(AXS-05, Auvelity® extended-release tablet) was FDA approved in 2022 for the 
treatment of MDD in adults. These approvals bolster the importance of glutamate 
in depression and represent an exciting breakthrough in contemporary psychiatry, 
providing new avenues of treatment for patients as first-line therapy or with 
either poor response or unacceptable side effects to monoaminergic 
antidepressants.

Plain Language Summary: Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a common disease 
defined by sadness and a loss of interest or pleasure in activities. Depression 
treatments include therapy and antidepressant medication. Most available 
antidepressants affect the same types of chemicals that communicate in the brain 
(neurotransmitters) called monoamines. Unfortunately, these medicines can take 
weeks to work for some people and many still have depression symptoms with 
treatment. To provide more treatment options, new medicines have been studied 
that impact a different neurotransmitter in the brain, that is, glutamate. 
Glutamate, the most abundant neurotransmitter, is important for the growth of 
new brain cell connections, and there are changes in glutamate in people with 
depression versus people without depression. In 2000, the first small study in 
people showed that ketamine, a medicine targeting glutamate, quickly improved 
depression symptoms. Safety risks, including dissociation and sedation, require 
supervised administration and management guidance. Since 2000, about 20 
glutamate-targeted medicines have been tested in human clinical trials. Two of 
these are approved as antidepressants. The medicine esketamine, which is inhaled 
up the nose at a clinic under medical supervision, is approved for the 
adjunctive treatment of people with MDD whose symptoms do not improve with other 
treatments or who have suicidal thoughts or actions (brand name Spravato®). The 
combination medicine dextromethorphan–bupropion is a swallowed tablet taken 
twice daily that is an approved monotherapy to treat adults with MDD (brand name 
Auvelity®). The approval of these drugs helps show the importance of glutamate 
in depression and provides more options for people with depression.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s40263-024-01114-y
PMCID: PMC11486832
PMID: 39150594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: R. Jain received speakers’ fees from Alkermes, 
Corium, Intra-Cellular Therapies, Ironshore Pharmaceuticals, Lilly, Lundbeck, 
Merck, Neos Therapeutics, Otsuka, Pamlab, Pfizer, Shire, Sunovion, Takeda, and 
Tris Pharmaceuticals; consultant fees from AbbVie, Acadia, Adamas, Alfasigma, 
Cingulate Therapeutics, Eisai, Evidera, Impel, Janssen, Lilly, Lundbeck, Merck, 
Neos Therapeutics, Neurocrine Biosciences, Osmotica, Otsuka, Pamlab, Pfizer, 
Shire, Sunovion, Supernus, Takeda, and Teva; is an advisory board member for 
Adamas, Alkermes, Janssen, Lilly, Lundbeck, Merck, Neos Therapeutics, Neurocrine 
Biosciences, Otsuka, Pamlab, Pfizer, Shire, Sunovion, Supernus, Takeda, and 
Teva; and received research support from AbbVie, Lilly, Lundbeck, Otsuka, 
Pfizer, Shire, and Takeda. R. S. McIntyre has received research grant support 
from CIHR/GACD/National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC); and 
speaker/consultation fees from Lundbeck, Janssen, Alkermes, Neumora 
Therapeutics, Boehringer Ingelheim, Sage, Biogen, Mitsubishi Tanabe, Purdue, 
Pfizer, Otsuka, Takeda, Neurocrine, Sunovion, Bausch Health, Axsome, Novo 
Nordisk, Kris, Sanofi, Eisai, Intra-Cellular Therapies, Inc., NewBridge 
Pharmaceuticals, AbbVie, and Atai Life Sciences. He is CEO of Braxia Scientific 
Corp (a company focused on ketamine treatment and psychedelic medicine for 
advanced mental health treatments).