---
reference_id: PMID:29127110
title: Pathways of cellular proteostasis in aging and disease.
authors:
- Klaips CL
- Jayaraj GG
- Hartl FU
journal: J Cell Biol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1083/jcb.201709072
keywords:
- Aging/physiology
- Humans
- Neurodegenerative Diseases/pathology
- "Protein Aggregation, Pathological/pathology"
- Protein Biosynthesis/physiology
- Protein Folding
- Proteostasis/physiology
- Proteostasis Deficiencies/pathology
- "Stress, Physiological/physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Pathways of cellular proteostasis in aging and disease.
**Authors:** Klaips CL, Jayaraj GG, Hartl FU
**Journal:** J Cell Biol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1083/jcb.201709072](https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201709072)

## Content

1. J Cell Biol. 2018 Jan 2;217(1):51-63. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201709072. Epub 2017
Nov  10.

Pathways of cellular proteostasis in aging and disease.

Klaips CL(1), Jayaraj GG(2), Hartl FU(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, 
Martinsried, Germany klaips@biochem.mpg.de.
(2)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, 
Martinsried, Germany.
(3)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, 
Martinsried, Germany uhartl@biochem.mpg.de.

Ensuring cellular protein homeostasis, or proteostasis, requires precise control 
of protein synthesis, folding, conformational maintenance, and degradation. A 
complex and adaptive proteostasis network coordinates these processes with 
molecular chaperones of different classes and their regulators functioning as 
major players. This network serves to ensure that cells have the proteins they 
need while minimizing misfolding or aggregation events that are hallmarks of 
age-associated proteinopathies, including neurodegenerative disorders such as 
Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases. It is now clear that the capacity of cells 
to maintain proteostasis undergoes a decline during aging, rendering the 
organism susceptible to these pathologies. Here we discuss the major 
proteostasis pathways in light of recent research suggesting that their 
age-dependent failure can both contribute to and result from disease. We 
consider different strategies to modulate proteostasis capacity, which may help 
develop urgently needed therapies for neurodegeneration and other age-dependent 
pathologies.

© 2018 Klaips et al.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201709072
PMCID: PMC5748993
PMID: 29127110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]