---
reference_id: "PMID:24916641"
title: Missense variant in CCDC22 causes X-linked recessive intellectual disability with features of Ritscher-Schinzel/3C syndrome.
authors:
- Kolanczyk M
- Krawitz P
- Hecht J
- Hupalowska A
- Miaczynska M
- Marschner K
- Schlack C
- Emmerich D
- Kobus K
- Kornak U
- Robinson PN
- Plecko B
- Grangl G
- Uhrig S
- Mundlos S
- Horn D
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.109
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, genetics"
- Adolescent
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Cell Line
- Child
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- "Craniofacial Abnormalities/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Dandy-Walker Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- Exome
- Gene Expression
- "Genes, X-Linked"
- Genetic Association Studies
- "Heart Septal Defects, Atrial/diagnosis, genetics"
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- Sequence Alignment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Missense variant in CCDC22 causes X-linked recessive intellectual disability with features of Ritscher-Schinzel/3C syndrome.
**Authors:** Kolanczyk M, Krawitz P, Hecht J, Hupalowska A, Miaczynska M, Marschner K, Schlack C, Emmerich D, Kobus K, Kornak U, Robinson PN, Plecko B, Grangl G, Uhrig S, Mundlos S, Horn D
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2014.109](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2014.109)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 May;23(5):633-8. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.109. Epub 2014
Jun  11.

Missense variant in CCDC22 causes X-linked recessive intellectual disability 
with features of Ritscher-Schinzel/3C syndrome.

Kolanczyk M(1), Krawitz P(2), Hecht J(2), Hupalowska A(3), Miaczynska M(3), 
Marschner K(4), Schlack C(4), Emmerich D(1), Kobus K(4), Kornak U(4), Robinson 
PN(4), Plecko B(5), Grangl G(6), Uhrig S(7), Mundlos S(8), Horn D(4).

Author information:
(1)1] Institute for Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, 
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany [2] Max Planck Institute for 
Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), 
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Laboratory of Cell Biology, International Institute of Molecular and Cell 
Biology, Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Institute for Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, 
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Division of Child Neurology, University Children's Hospital Zurich, Zürich, 
Switzerland.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Medical University Graz, Graz, Austria.
(7)Institute of Human Genetics, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
(8)1] Institute for Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, 
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany [2] Max Planck Institute for 
Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany [3] Berlin-Brandenburg Center for 
Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, 
Germany.

Erratum in
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 May;23(5):720. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.278.

Ritscher-Schinzel syndrome (RSS)/3C (cranio-cerebro-cardiac) syndrome 
(OMIM#220210) is a rare and clinically heterogeneous developmental disorder 
characterized by intellectual disability, cerebellar brain malformations, 
congenital heart defects, and craniofacial abnormalities. A recent study of a 
Canadian cohort identified homozygous sequence variants in the KIAA0196 gene, 
which encodes the WASH complex subunit strumpellin, as a cause for a form of 
RSS/3C syndrome. We have searched for genetic causes of a phenotype similar to 
RSS/3C syndrome in an Austrian family with two affected sons. To search for 
disease-causing variants, whole-exome sequencing (WES) was performed on samples 
from two affected male children and their parents. Before WES, CGH array 
comparative genomic hybridization was applied. Validation of WES and segregation 
studies was done using routine Sanger sequencing. Exome sequencing detected a 
missense variant (c.1670A>G; p.(Tyr557Cys)) in exon 15 of the CCDC22 gene, which 
maps to chromosome Xp11.23. Western blots of immortalized lymphoblastoid cell 
lines (LCLs) from the affected individual showed decreased expression of CCDC22 
and an increased expression of WASH1 but a normal expression of strumpellin and 
FAM21 in the patients cells. We identified a variant in CCDC22 gene as the cause 
of an X-linked phenotype similar to RSS/3C syndrome in the family described 
here. A hypomorphic variant in CCDC22 was previously reported in association 
with a familial case of syndromic X-linked intellectual disability, which shows 
phenotypic overlap with RSS/3C syndrome. Thus, different inactivating variants 
affecting CCDC22 are associated with a phenotype similar to RSS/3C syndrome.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.109
PMCID: PMC4402616
PMID: 24916641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]