---
reference_id: "PMID:38987029"
title: "Investigation of setmelanotide, an MC4R agonist, for obesity in individuals with Smith-Magenis syndrome."
authors:
- Lazareva J
- Sisley SR
- Brady SM
- Smith ACM
- Elsea SH
- Pomeroy JJ
- Roth CL
- Sprague JE
- Wabitsch M
- Garrison J
- Yanovski JA
journal: Obes Res Clin Pract
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.orcp.2024.07.001
keywords:
- Humans
- "Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4/agonists"
- "alpha-MSH/analogs & derivatives, pharmacology"
- Male
- Adult
- Female
- Adolescent
- Obesity/drug therapy
- Young Adult
- Child
- Treatment Outcome
- Hunger/drug effects
- Waist Circumference/drug effects
- Weight Loss/drug effects
- Body Composition/drug effects
- Body Weight/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Investigation of setmelanotide, an MC4R agonist, for obesity in individuals with Smith-Magenis syndrome.
**Authors:** Lazareva J, Sisley SR, Brady SM, Smith ACM, Elsea SH, Pomeroy JJ, Roth CL, Sprague JE, Wabitsch M, Garrison J, Yanovski JA
**Journal:** Obes Res Clin Pract (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.orcp.2024.07.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orcp.2024.07.001)

## Content

1. Obes Res Clin Pract. 2024 Jul-Aug;18(4):301-307. doi: 
10.1016/j.orcp.2024.07.001. Epub 2024 Jul 10.

Investigation of setmelanotide, an MC4R agonist, for obesity in individuals with 
Smith-Magenis syndrome.

Lazareva J(1), Sisley SR(2), Brady SM(3), Smith ACM(4), Elsea SH(5), Pomeroy 
JJ(6), Roth CL(7), Sprague JE(8), Wabitsch M(9), Garrison J(10), Yanovski 
JA(11).

Author information:
(1)Section on Growth and Obesity, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institutes of 
Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health Bethesda, 
20892 MD, United States. Electronic address: julazar7@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 77030 TX, 
United States. Electronic address: stephanie.sisley@bcm.edu.
(3)Section on Growth and Obesity, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institutes of 
Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health Bethesda, 
20892 MD, United States. Electronic address: bradys@mail.nih.gov.
(4)Office of the Clinical Director, National Human Genome Research Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 20892 MD, United States. Electronic 
address: acmsmith@mail.nih.gov.
(5)Department of Molecular & Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, 77030 TX, United States. Electronic address: sarah.elsea@bcm.edu.
(6)Marshfield Clinic Research Institute, Marshfield, WI 54449, United States. 
Electronic address: pomeroy.jeremy@marshfieldresearch.org.
(7)Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, WA 98145, United States. 
Electronic address: christian.roth@seattlechildrens.org.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University of St. Louis, St. Louis, 
MO 63110, United States. Electronic address: spraguej@wustl.edu.
(9)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, University Medical 
Centre, 89075 Ulm, Germany. Electronic address: 
Martin.Wabitsch@uniklinik-ulm.de.
(10)Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Boston, MA 02116, United States. Electronic address: 
jgarrison@rhythmtx.com.
(11)Section on Growth and Obesity, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institutes of 
Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health Bethesda, 
20892 MD, United States. Electronic address: yanovskj@mail.nih.gov.

BACKGROUND: Smith Magenis Syndrome (SMS) is a rare genetic disorder caused by 
RAI1 haploinsufficiency. Obesity in people with SMS is believed partially due to 
dysfunction of the proximal melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) pathway. We therefore 
studied effects of treatment with the MC4R agonist setmelanotide on obesity and 
hunger, as well as metabolic, cardiac and safety, in individuals with SMS.
METHODS: People with SMS received once-daily setmelanotide injections, with the 
dose titrated bi-weekly to a maximum of 3 mg over ∼1 month; and a full-dose 
treatment duration of 3mo. The primary outcome was percent change in body 
weight. Secondary outcomes included hunger, waist circumference, body 
composition, and safety.
RESULTS: 12 individuals, ages 11-39 y, enrolled and 10 completed the full-dose 
treatment phase. Mean percent change in body weight at end-treatment was 
- 0.28 % [(95 % CI, -2.1 % to 1.5 %; n = 12; P = 0.66]. Participants experienced 
a significant decrease in total cholesterol associated with a significant 
decrease in HDL-cholesterol and a trend for lower LDL-cholesterol. Self-reported 
hunger was reduced at end-treatment (p = 0.011). All participants reported 
adverse events (AEs), most commonly injection-site reactions and skin 
hyperpigmentation. No AEs led to withdrawal or death.
CONCLUSIONS: In this trial, setmelanotide did not significantly reduce body 
weight in participants with SMS. Participants reported significant differences 
in hunger, but such self-reports are difficult to interpret without a 
placebo-treated group. The changes in lipid profiles require further 
investigation. Results of this study do not suggest that dysfunction of the 
proximal MC4R pathway is the main etiology for obesity in people with SMS.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.orcp.2024.07.001
PMCID: PMC11427144
PMID: 38987029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest This research 
was sponsored by Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Inc., which supplied setmelanotide, 
wrote the original protocol, organized data collection, and gave grant support 
to each Investigator’s Institution for this study. The Sponsor also had the 
opportunity to suggest edits to the manuscript and approved submission of the 
article for publication. JAY also reports grants given to his Institution to 
support unrelated clinical research from Soleno Therapeutics Inc., medication 
for an unrelated clinical trial from Hikma Pharmaceuticals, and support for 
murine studies from Versanis Bio. SRS reports receiving speaking fees from 
Rhythm Pharmaceuticals. SRS and JES also report grants to their institutions to 
support unrelated clinical research from Eli Lilly and Co. Jill Garrison is an 
employee of Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Inc.