---
reference_id: "PMID:36566461"
title: Conventional and emerging treatments of astrocytomas and oligodendrogliomas.
authors:
- Kessler T
- Ito J
- Wick W
- Wick A
journal: J Neurooncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s11060-022-04216-z
keywords:
- Humans
- "Oligodendroglioma/genetics, therapy, metabolism"
- "Astrocytoma/genetics, therapy, metabolism"
- Glioma/pathology
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Conventional and emerging treatments of astrocytomas and oligodendrogliomas.
**Authors:** Kessler T, Ito J, Wick W, Wick A
**Journal:** J Neurooncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11060-022-04216-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11060-022-04216-z)

## Content

1. J Neurooncol. 2023 May;162(3):471-478. doi: 10.1007/s11060-022-04216-z. Epub 
2022 Dec 25.

Conventional and emerging treatments of astrocytomas and oligodendrogliomas.

Kessler T(1)(2)(3), Ito J(4), Wick W(4)(5), Wick A(5).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Cooperation Unit Neurooncology, German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), 
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. 
tobias.kessler@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(2)Department of Neurology and Neurooncology Program, National Center for Tumor 
Diseases, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany. 
tobias.kessler@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(3)Neurology Clinic and Neurooncology Program, National Center for Tumor 
Diseases & DKTK, DKFZ, Im Neuenheimer Feld 400, D-69120, Heidelberg, Germany. 
tobias.kessler@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(4)Clinical Cooperation Unit Neurooncology, German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), 
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)Department of Neurology and Neurooncology Program, National Center for Tumor 
Diseases, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.

PURPOSE: Astrocytomas and oligodendrogliomas are mainly diffuse primary brain 
tumors harboring a diagnostic and prognostically favorable isocitrate 
dehydrogenase mutation. They are still incurable besides growing molecular 
knowledge and therapy options. Circumscribed astrocytomas are also discussed 
here, although they represent a separate entity despite similarities in the 
nomenclature.
METHODS: We reviewed clinical trials, preclinical approaches as well as 
guideline recommendations form the major scientific Neuro-Oncology organizations 
for astrocytomas and oligodendrogliomas according to PRISMA guidelines.
RESULTS: After histopathological diagnosis and eventually a maximal safe 
resection, patients with good prognostic factors may be followed by magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI). If further treatment is necessary, either after 
diagnosis or at progression, diffuse astrocytomas and oligodendrogliomas are 
mainly treated with combined radiochemotherapy or maximal safe resection 
followed by combined radiochemotherapy according to current guidelines based on 
randomized trials. Circumscribed gliomas like pilocytic astrocytomas, CNS WHO 
grade 1, or pleomorphic xanthoastrocytomas, CNS WHO grade 2, are often treated 
with surgery alone. Current approaches for therapy optimization include decision 
of the best chemotherapy regimen. The IDH mutation presents a rational target 
for small molecule inhibition and immune therapy in diffuse astrocytomas and 
oligodendrogliomas, while the BRAF pathway is frequently mutated and treatable 
in circumscribed gliomas.
CONCLUSION: Despite establishment of standard treatment approaches for gliomas 
that include resection, radio- and chemotherapy, there is a lack of effective 
treatments for progressive disease. Immune- and targeted therapies are currently 
investigated.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11060-022-04216-z
PMCID: PMC10226903
PMID: 36566461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Wolfgang Wick is one of the inventors and 
patent-holders on ‘Peptides for use in treating or diagnosing IDH1R132H positive 
cancers’ (EP2800580B1). All other authors have no relevant financial or 
non-financial interests to disclose.