---
reference_id: "PMID:32013812"
title: "Exhaustive Review on Lung Cancers: Novel Technologies."
authors:
- Khan S
- Ali S
- Muhammad
journal: Curr Med Imaging Rev
year: '2019'
doi: 10.2174/1573405615666181128124528
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exhaustive Review on Lung Cancers: Novel Technologies.
**Authors:** Khan S, Ali S, Muhammad
**Journal:** Curr Med Imaging Rev (2019)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1573405615666181128124528](https://doi.org/10.2174/1573405615666181128124528)

## Content

1. Curr Med Imaging Rev. 2019;15(9):873-883. doi: 
10.2174/1573405615666181128124528.

Exhaustive Review on Lung Cancers: Novel Technologies.

Khan S(1), Ali S(2), Muhammad(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Biotechnology and Microbiology, University of Swat, Swat, 
Pakistan.
(2)Centre for Biotechnology and Microbiology, University of Swat, Swat, 
Pakistan.
(3)Department of Microbiology, University of Swabi, Swabi, KP, Pakistan.

BACKGROUND: Lung cancers or (Bronchogenic-Carcinomas) are the disease in certain 
parts of the lungs in which irresistible multiplication of abnormal cells leads 
to the inception of a tumor. Lung cancers consisting of two substantial forms 
based on the microscopic appearance of tumor cells are: 
Non-Small-Cell-Lung-Cancer (NSCLC) (80 to 85%) and Small-Cell-Lung-Cancer (SCLC) 
(15 to 20%).
DISCUSSION: Lung cancers are existing luxuriantly across the globe and the most 
prominent cause of death in advanced countries (USA & UK). There are many causes 
of lung cancers in which the utmost imperative aspect is the cigarette smoking. 
During the early stage, there is no perspicuous sign/symptoms but later many 
symptoms emerge in the infected individual such as insomnia, headache, pain, 
loss of appetite, fatigue, coughing etc. Lung cancers can be diagnosed in many 
ways, such as history, physical examination, chest X-rays and biopsy. However, 
after the diagnosis and confirmation of lung carcinoma, various treatment 
approaches are existing for curing of cancer in different stages such as 
surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and immune therapy. Currently, novel 
techniques merged that revealed advancements in detection and curing of lung 
cancer in which mainly includes: microarray analysis, gene expression profiling.
CONCLUSION: Consequently, the purpose of the current analysis is to specify and 
epitomize the novel literature pertaining to the development of cancerous cells 
in different parts of the lung, various preeminent approaches of prevention, 
efficient diagnostic procedure, and treatments along with novel technologies for 
inhibition of cancerous cell growth in advance stages.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1573405615666181128124528
PMID: 32013812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]