---
reference_id: "PMID:36778180"
title: "Sarcoidosis in Johannesburg, South Africa: A retrospective study."
authors:
- Morar R
- Feldman C
journal: Afr J Thorac Crit Care Med
year: "2022"
doi: 10.7196/AJTCCM.2022.v28i4.205
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sarcoidosis in Johannesburg, South Africa: A retrospective study.
**Authors:** Morar R, Feldman C
**Journal:** Afr J Thorac Crit Care Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.7196/AJTCCM.2022.v28i4.205](https://doi.org/10.7196/AJTCCM.2022.v28i4.205)

## Content

1. Afr J Thorac Crit Care Med. 2022 Dec 19;28(4):10.7196/AJTCCM.2022.v28i4.205.
doi: 10.7196/AJTCCM.2022.v28i4.205.

Sarcoidosis in Johannesburg, South Africa: A retrospective study.

Morar R(1), Feldman C(2).

BACKGROUND: Sarcoidosis is a multisystem granulomatous condition of uncertain
aetiology that most frequently affects the lungs. Because of clinical and
radiological similarities with tuberculosis (TB), particularly in
high-prevalence regions, sarcoidosis is frequently misdiagnosed as TB.
OBJECTIVES: To review the clinical features of sarcoidosis patients in a South
African (SA) population, adding clinical information to the relatively few
studies that have been conducted in SA patients with sarcoidosis.
METHODS: This was a retrospective study of 102 sarcoidosis patients conducted
between 2002 and 2006 at the Charlotte Maxeke Johannesburg Academic Hospital.
RESULTS: Of 102 sarcoidosis patients, there were 69 (67.6%) females and 33
(32.4%) males. The majority (85.3%) were non-smokers. The mean age of the group
was 44.6 years. One-third of patients had chronic comorbid diseases. Almost 17%
had been treated initially for TB, prior to being diagnosed as having
sarcoidosis. Two patients developed active TB while receiving corticosteroid
treatment for sarcoidosis. The salient clinical manifestations were dry cough
(the most common presenting symptom in 82.4%), dyspnoea in 53.9%, cutaneous
lesions other than erythema nodosum in 33.3%, and on lung examination crackles
were noted in 37.3% of patients. Raised angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
levels were found in 56.8% of patients. The majority (48%) of patients had
stage II chest radiographic changes. Cutaneous (28.4%), mediastinal lymph node
(25.5%) and transbronchial lung (25.5%) biopsies were the most frequent sites
confirming granulomatous inflammation. Overall, 21.2% of patients had
obstructive airway disease. Systemic corticosteroids were indicated in 87.3% of
patients and the relapse rate was 60.7%.

DOI: 10.7196/AJTCCM.2022.v28i4.205
PMCID: PMC9904283
PMID: 36778180
