---
reference_id: "PMID:39830765"
title: "Efficacy, safety, and quality of life of dabrafenib plus trametinib treatment in Chinese patients with BRAF (V600E) mutation-positive metastatic non-small cell lung cancer."
authors:
- Fan Y
- Zhou J
- Zhao Y
- Yu Y
- Yang N
- Li J
- Wang J
- Zhao J
- Wang Z
- Chen J
- Zhu T
- Li H
- Passos VQ
- Bury-Maynard D
- Zhang L
journal: Transl Lung Cancer Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.21037/tlcr-24-494
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy, safety, and quality of life of dabrafenib plus trametinib treatment in Chinese patients with BRAF (V600E) mutation-positive metastatic non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Fan Y, Zhou J, Zhao Y, Yu Y, Yang N, Li J, Wang J, Zhao J, Wang Z, Chen J, Zhu T, Li H, Passos VQ, Bury-Maynard D, Zhang L
**Journal:** Transl Lung Cancer Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.21037/tlcr-24-494](https://doi.org/10.21037/tlcr-24-494)

## Content

1. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2024 Dec 31;13(12):3382-3391. doi:
10.21037/tlcr-24-494.  Epub 2024 Dec 27.

Efficacy, safety, and quality of life of dabrafenib plus trametinib treatment in
Chinese patients with BRAF (V600E) mutation-positive metastatic non-small cell
lung cancer.

Fan Y(1), Zhou J(2), Zhao Y(3), Yu Y(4), Yang N(5), Li J(6), Wang J(7), Zhao
J(8), Wang Z(9), Chen J(10), Zhu T(11), Li H(12), Passos VQ(13), Bury-Maynard
D(14), Zhang L(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Medical Oncology, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou
Institute of Medicine (HIM), Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State
Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Guangdong Provincial Clinical
Research Center for Cancer, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Harbin Medical University Cancer Hospital,
Harbin, China.
(5)Department of Pulmonary Gastroenterology, Hunan Cancer Hospital, Changsha,
China.
(6)Department of Medical Oncology, Sichuan Cancer Hospital & Institute, Chengdu,
China.
(7)Department of Thoracic Medical Oncology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer
Center, Shanghai, China.
(8)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education/Beijing), Department I of Thoracic Oncology, Peking University Cancer
Hospital & Institute, Beijing, China.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine-Oncology, Shandong Cancer Hospital, Jinan,
China.
(10)Department of Lung Cancer Surgery, Lung Cancer Institute, Tianjin Medical
University General Hospital, Tianjin, China.
(11)Analytics-Oncology Solid tumor, Novartis Development, Shanghai, China.
(12)Solid Tumor Clinical Development, Novartis Development, Beijing, China.
(13)Oncology Clinical Development, Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East
Hanover, NJ, USA.
(14)Patient Centered Outcomes, International Value and Access, PCO and HEOR,
Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, Cambridge, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Dabrafenib plus trametinib (Dab + Tram) is an approved targeted
therapy in patients with BRAF V600+ mutated metastatic non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). Here, we report the efficacy, safety, and quality of life (QoL)
results of Dab + Tram treatment in Chinese patients with BRAF V600E
mutation-positive metastatic NSCLC.
METHODS: This is a single-arm, open-label, multicentre, phase II study
(NCT04452877). Patients received dabrafenib 150 mg twice daily plus trametinib 2
mg once daily. The primary endpoint was overall response rate (ORR) by central
independent review per Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumours (RECIST)
1.1 criteria. Secondary endpoints included ORR by investigator assessment,
progression-free survival (PFS), duration of response (DOR), overall survival
(OS), safety, tolerability, and QoL.
RESULTS: At the data cut-off (March 11, 2021), 18 of 20 enrolled patients were
still receiving treatment. The median age was 64 years; majority were female
(55%), non-smokers (55%), and had ≥3 metastatic sites (70%). Nine patients
received prior anticancer therapy in a therapeutic or metastatic setting. The
median duration of follow-up was 5 months. The ORR by both central and
investigator assessment was 75% [95% confidence interval (CI): 50.9-91.3%]. The
median DOR, PFS, and OS were not reached/estimable at the cut-off date. The most
common treatment-related adverse events (AEs) (all grades, in ≥30% of patients)
were pyrexia, increased aspartate aminotransferase (AST), decreased neutrophil
count, and decreased white blood cell (WBC) count. The self-reported QoL was
improved or maintained during the treatment period.
CONCLUSIONS: Dab + Tram treatment is safe, effective, and can preserve or
improve QoL in majority of Chinese patients with BRAF V600E mutation-positive
metastatic NSCLC. The results are consistent with the global phase II study.

2024 AME Publishing Company. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tlcr-24-494
PMCID: PMC11736603
PMID: 39830765

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at
https://tlcr.amegroups.com/article/view/10.21037/tlcr-24-494/coif). J.Z.
received speaker honorarium from Roche, Lily, MSD, AstraZeneca, Hengrui, Pfizer,
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Novartis, Innovent Biologics, BeiGene; and served on data
safety monitoring board for BeiGene. T.Z., H.L. and D.B.M. are employed by
Novartis. V.Q.P. is employed by Novartis and also owns stocks in Novartis. L.Z.
received speaker honorarium from AstraZeneca, BeiGene, HengRui Pharm., Innovent
Biologics, Roche; and served as consulting or advisory board of AstraZeneca,
Innovent Biologics. He also received research funding from AstraZeneca, Akeso
Biopharma, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Chia Tai Tianqing Pharmaceutical Group, Junshi
Pharmaceuticals, QiLu Pharmaceutical and Pfizer. The other authors have no
conflicts of interest to declare.
