---
reference_id: "PMID:1925080"
title: Long-term oxygen therapy for cor pulmonale in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
authors:
- Solèr M
- Michel F
- Perruchoud AP
journal: Respiration
year: '1991'
doi: 10.1159/000195972
keywords:
- Humans
- "Lung Diseases, Obstructive/complications, mortality, therapy"
- Oxygen Inhalation Therapy
- Pulmonary Heart Disease/complications
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term oxygen therapy for cor pulmonale in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
**Authors:** Solèr M, Michel F, Perruchoud AP
**Journal:** Respiration (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000195972](https://doi.org/10.1159/000195972)

## Content

1. Respiration. 1991;58 Suppl 1:52-6. doi: 10.1159/000195972.

Long-term oxygen therapy for cor pulmonale in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Solèr M(1), Michel F, Perruchoud AP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital, Basel, Switzerland.

Besides smoking cessation, antiobstructive therapy, and the treatment of
intercurrent infections, long-term oxygen therapy has had the most impressive
impact on survival in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). COPD leads to a functional and anatomical obstruction of the pulmonary
vascular bed, with the development of pulmonary arterial hypertension and cor
pulmonale. In these patients, survival benefit from long-term oxygen therapy
(LTOT) stems mainly from improved hemodynamics. However, this improvement is
limited: hypoxemic COPD patients treated by LTOT have the same life expectancy
as nonhypoxemic COPD patients. Practical aspects concerning the prescription and
application of LTOT are discussed, with special emphasis on ambulatory oxygen
and oxygen-saving techniques.

DOI: 10.1159/000195972
PMID: 1925080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]