---
reference_id: "PMID:21535335"
title: Two SCID cases with Cernunnos-XLF deficiency successfully treated by hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
authors:
- Çağdaş D
- Özgür TT
- Asal GT
- Revy P
- De Villartay JP
- van der Burg M
- Sanal Ö
- Tezcan I
journal: Pediatr Transplant
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1111/j.1399-3046.2011.01491.x
keywords:
- Bone Marrow Transplantation
- "DNA Repair Enzymes/deficiency, genetics"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/deficiency, genetics"
- Female
- Genetic Markers
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Humans
- Infant
- "Severe Combined Immunodeficiency/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two SCID cases with Cernunnos-XLF deficiency successfully treated by hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
**Authors:** Çağdaş D, Özgür TT, Asal GT, Revy P, De Villartay JP, van der Burg M, Sanal Ö, Tezcan I
**Journal:** Pediatr Transplant (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1399-3046.2011.01491.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-3046.2011.01491.x)

## Content

1. Pediatr Transplant. 2012 Aug;16(5):E167-71. doi: 
10.1111/j.1399-3046.2011.01491.x. Epub 2011 Apr 27.

Two SCID cases with Cernunnos-XLF deficiency successfully treated by 
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.

Çağdaş D(1), Özgür TT, Asal GT, Revy P, De Villartay JP, van der Burg M, Sanal 
Ö, Tezcan I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Pediatric Immunology, Hacettepe 
University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.

SCID affects T and B cell differentiation and functions, presenting with severe 
opportunistic infections in the early postnatal period. It is fatal unless stem 
cell transplantation is performed. RS SCID forms are caused by defects in the 
NHEJ pathway, the enzymatic process required for the repair of DNA double-strand 
breaks. Cernunnos-XLF defect is one of the defects in this pathway. Here, we 
present two patients with Cernunnos-XLF defect, both having microcephaly, 
prominent growth retardation, and T-B-NK+SCID, one of whom had AHA. These 
patients received hematopoietic stem cells from HLA identical related donor 
without conditioning regimen and recovered without any complication. Now, both 
of the patients are well and alive seven and one yr after transplantation, 
respectively. A remarkable observation was the severe diarrhea that occurred in 
both patients soon after transplantation.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-3046.2011.01491.x
PMID: 21535335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]