---
reference_id: "PMID:7913883"
title: "Mutations in the transmembrane domain of FGFR3 cause the most common genetic form of dwarfism, achondroplasia."
authors:
- Shiang R
- Thompson LM
- Zhu YZ
- Church DM
- Fielder TJ
- Bocian M
- Winokur ST
- Wasmuth JJ
journal: Cell
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(94)90302-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the transmembrane domain of FGFR3 cause the most common genetic form of dwarfism, achondroplasia.
**Authors:** Shiang R, Thompson LM, Zhu YZ, Church DM, Fielder TJ, Bocian M, Winokur ST, Wasmuth JJ
**Journal:** Cell (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0092-8674(94)90302-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(94)90302-6)

## Content

1. Cell. 1994 Jul 29;78(2):335-42. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(94)90302-6.

Mutations in the transmembrane domain of FGFR3 cause the most common genetic 
form of dwarfism, achondroplasia.

Shiang R(1), Thompson LM, Zhu YZ, Church DM, Fielder TJ, Bocian M, Winokur ST, 
Wasmuth JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, College of Medicine, University of 
California, Irvine 92717.

Achondroplasia (ACH) is the most common genetic form of dwarfism. This disorder 
is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait, although the majority of cases are 
sporadic. A gene for ACH was recently localized to 4p16.3 by linkage analyses. 
The ACH candidate region includes the gene encoding fibroblast growth factor 
receptor 3 (FGFR3), which was originally considered as a candidate for the 
Huntington's disease gene. DNA studies revealed point mutations in the FGFR3 
gene in ACH heterozygotes and homozygotes. The mutation on 15 of the 16 
ACH-affected chromosomes was the same, a G-->A transition, at nucleotide 1138 of 
the cDNA. The mutation on the only ACH-affected chromosome 4 without the G-->A 
transition at nucleotide 1138 had a G-->C transversion at this same position. 
Both mutations result in the substitution of an arginine residue for a glycine 
at position 380 of the mature protein, which is in the transmembrane domain of 
FGFR3.

DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(94)90302-6
PMID: 7913883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]