---
reference_id: "PMID:10507962"
title: "The stiff-person syndrome: an autoimmune disorder affecting neurotransmission of gamma-aminobutyric acid."
authors:
- Levy LM
- Dalakas MC
- Floeter MK
journal: Ann Intern Med
year: '1999'
doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-131-7-199910050-00008
keywords:
- "Adjuvants, Immunologic/therapeutic use"
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- Brain/metabolism
- Diazepam/therapeutic use
- Electromyography
- GABA Modulators/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
- "Stiff-Person Syndrome/drug therapy, immunology, physiopathology"
- Synaptic Transmission
- "gamma-Aminobutyric Acid/immunology, metabolism, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The stiff-person syndrome: an autoimmune disorder affecting neurotransmission of gamma-aminobutyric acid.
**Authors:** Levy LM, Dalakas MC, Floeter MK
**Journal:** Ann Intern Med (1999)
**DOI:** [10.7326/0003-4819-131-7-199910050-00008](https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-131-7-199910050-00008)

## Content

1. Ann Intern Med. 1999 Oct 5;131(7):522-30. doi:
10.7326/0003-4819-131-7-199910050-00008.

The stiff-person syndrome: an autoimmune disorder affecting neurotransmission of
gamma-aminobutyric acid.

Levy LM(1), Dalakas MC, Floeter MK.

Author information:
(1)Neuroimaging Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. levy@codon.nih.gov

The stiff-person syndrome, a rare and disabling disorder, is characterized by
muscle rigidity and episodic spasms that involve axial and limb musculature.
Continuous contraction of agonist and antagonist muscles caused by involuntary
motor-unit firing at rest are the hallmark clinical and electrophysiologic signs
of the disease. Except for global muscle stiffness, results of neurologic
examination are usually normal. Results of conventional computed tomography and
magnetic resonance imaging of the brain are also normal. The cause of the
stiff-person syndrome is unknown; however, an autoimmune pathogenesis is
suspected because of 1) the presence of antibodies against glutamic acid
decarboxylase (GAD), the rate-limiting enzyme for the synthesis of the
inhibitory neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA); 2) the association
of the disease with other autoimmune conditions; 3) the presence of various
autoantibodies; and 4) a strong immunogenetic association. Anti-GAD antibodies,
which are found in high titers in most patients, seem to be directed against
conformational forms of GAD. New evidence suggests that these antibodies may be
pathogenic because they interfere with the synthesis of GABA. In addition, a
reduction in brain levels of GABA, which is prominent in the motor cortex, has
been demonstrated with magnetic resonance spectroscopy in patients with the
stiff-person syndrome. The stiff-person syndrome is clinically elusive but
potentially treatable and should be considered in patients with unexplained
stiffness and spasms. Drugs that enhance GABA neurotransmission, such as
diazepam, vigabatrin, and baclofen, provide mild to modest relief of clinical
symptoms. Immunomodulatory agents, such as steroids, plasmapheresis, and
intravenous immunoglobulin, seem to offer substantial improvement. Results of an
ongoing controlled trial will elucidate the role of these agents in the
treatment of the disease.

DOI: 10.7326/0003-4819-131-7-199910050-00008
PMID: 10507962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
