---
reference_id: "PMID:34828368"
title: Nephronophthisis-Pathobiology and Molecular Pathogenesis of a Rare Kidney Genetic Disease.
authors:
- Gupta S
- Ozimek-Kulik JE
- Phillips JK
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/genes12111762
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nephronophthisis-Pathobiology and Molecular Pathogenesis of a Rare Kidney Genetic Disease.
**Authors:** Gupta S, Ozimek-Kulik JE, Phillips JK
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes12111762](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes12111762)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Nov 5;12(11):1762. doi: 10.3390/genes12111762.

Nephronophthisis-Pathobiology and Molecular Pathogenesis of a Rare Kidney 
Genetic Disease.

Gupta S(1), Ozimek-Kulik JE(1)(2)(3), Phillips JK(1).

Author information:
(1)Macquarie Medical School, Faculty of Medicine, Health and Human Sciences, 
Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia.
(2)School of Women's and Children's Health, University of New South Wales, 
Sydney, NSW 2031, Australia.
(3)Department of Paediatric Nephrology, Sydney Children's Hospital Network, 
Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, NSW 2145, Australia.

The exponential rise in our understanding of the aetiology and pathophysiology 
of genetic cystic kidney diseases can be attributed to the identification of 
cystogenic genes over the last three decades. The foundation of this was laid by 
positional cloning strategies which gradually shifted towards next-generation 
sequencing (NGS) based screenings. This shift has enabled the discovery of novel 
cystogenic genes at an accelerated pace unlike ever before and, most notably, 
the past decade has seen the largest increase in identification of the genes 
which cause nephronophthisis (NPHP). NPHP is a monogenic autosomal recessive 
cystic kidney disease caused by mutations in a diverse clade of over 26 
identified genes and is the most common genetic cause of renal failure in 
children. NPHP gene types present with some common pathophysiological features 
alongside a diverse range of extra-renal phenotypes associated with specific 
syndromic presentations. This review provides a timely update on our knowledge 
of this disease, including epidemiology, pathophysiology, anatomical and 
molecular features. We delve into the diversity of the NPHP causing genes and 
discuss known molecular mechanisms and biochemical pathways that may have 
possible points of intersection with polycystic kidney disease (the most studied 
renal cystic pathology). We delineate the pathologies arising from extra-renal 
complications and co-morbidities and their impact on quality of life. Finally, 
we discuss the current diagnostic and therapeutic modalities available for 
disease management, outlining possible avenues of research to improve the 
prognosis for NPHP patients.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12111762
PMCID: PMC8623546
PMID: 34828368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.