---
reference_id: "PMID:10923226"
title: Hearing loss in children with osteogenesis imperfecta.
authors:
- Kuurila K
- Grénman R
- Johansson R
- Kaitila I
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1007/s004310051322
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Audiometry, Pure-Tone"
- Auditory Threshold
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Deafness/diagnosis, genetics"
- Female
- Finland
- "Hearing Loss, Conductive/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/classification, diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hearing loss in children with osteogenesis imperfecta.
**Authors:** Kuurila K, Grénman R, Johansson R, Kaitila I
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s004310051322](https://doi.org/10.1007/s004310051322)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 2000 Jul;159(7):515-9. doi: 10.1007/s004310051322.

Hearing loss in children with osteogenesis imperfecta.

Kuurila K(1), Grénman R, Johansson R, Kaitila I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Turku University
Central Hospital, Finland. kaija.kuurila@vshp.vaasa.fi

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a genetic disorder of connective tissue.
Progressive hearing loss is one of the principal symptoms of OI, affecting about
50% of adult patients. Hearing loss may also occur in childhood and results in
additional disability in education and psychosocial adaptation and aggravates
the physical handicap. This can be avoided by appropriate otological and
audiological treatment. In a nationwide search, 254 Finnish patients with OI
were identified indicating a prevalence of 4.9/100,000. Of the 60 children, 45
aged between 4 and 16 years accepting to participate the study on hearing, were
evaluated by a questionnaire and clinical audiometry. Hearing loss was defined
as pure tone average (PTA0.5-2 kHz) more than 20 dB hearing level (HL). A
clinical geneticist determined the type of OI among the 45 patients. Two
sporadic OI cases with conductive hearing loss were ascertained (4.4%): An
11-year-old girl with type IV OI with a PTA0.5-2 kHz of 35/40 dB HL and a
15-year-old boy with type IV OI with a PTA0.5-2 kHz of 27/18 dB HL. In addition,
a 6-year-old girl with familial OI type I had either a congenital sensorineural
deafness or early progressive deafness with PTA0.5-2 kHz of 97/103 dB HL,
probably of unrelated aetiology.
CONCLUSION: Hearing loss in children with osteogenesis imperfecta is less
frequent than generally suspected. Nevertheless, it is recommended that
audiometry is performed in children with osteogenesis imperfecta even without
symptoms of hearing loss at the age of 10 years, and repeated every 3 years
thereafter.

DOI: 10.1007/s004310051322
PMID: 10923226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
