---
reference_id: "PMID:12654658"
title: "Flucytosine-fluconazole cross-resistance in purine-cytosine permease-deficient Candida lusitaniae clinical isolates: indirect evidence of a fluconazole uptake transporter."
authors:
- Noël T
- François F
- Paumard P
- Chastin C
- Brèthes D
- Villard J
journal: Antimicrob Agents Chemother
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1128/AAC.47.4.1275-1284.2003
keywords:
- Antifungal Agents/pharmacology
- Biological Transport
- Candida/drug effects
- "Drug Resistance, Fungal"
- "Fluconazole/pharmacokinetics, pharmacology"
- Flucytosine/pharmacology
- Humans
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Flucytosine-fluconazole cross-resistance in purine-cytosine permease-deficient Candida lusitaniae clinical isolates: indirect evidence of a fluconazole uptake transporter.
**Authors:** Noël T, François F, Paumard P, Chastin C, Brèthes D, Villard J
**Journal:** Antimicrob Agents Chemother (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1128/AAC.47.4.1275-1284.2003](https://doi.org/10.1128/AAC.47.4.1275-1284.2003)

## Content

1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2003 Apr;47(4):1275-84. doi: 
10.1128/AAC.47.4.1275-1284.2003.

Flucytosine-fluconazole cross-resistance in purine-cytosine permease-deficient 
Candida lusitaniae clinical isolates: indirect evidence of a fluconazole uptake 
transporter.

Noël T(1), François F, Paumard P, Chastin C, Brèthes D, Villard J.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire des Sciences Végétales, Faculté de Pharmacie, Université René 
Descartes-Paris 5, Paris 75006, USA. noel@pharmacie.univ-paris5.fr

Erratum in
    Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2003 Jun;47(6):2062.

An unusual interaction between flucytosine and fluconazole was observed when a 
collection of 60 Candida lusitaniae clinical isolates was screened for 
cross-resistance. Among eight isolates resistant to flucytosine (MIC >/= 128 
micro g/ml) and susceptible to fluconazole (0.5 < MIC < 2 micro g/ml), four 
became flucytosine-fluconazole cross resistant when both antifungals were used 
simultaneously. Fluconazole resistance occurred only in the presence of high 
flucytosine concentrations, and the higher the fluconazole concentration used, 
the greater the flucytosine concentration necessary to trigger the 
cross-resistance. When the flucytosine- and fluconazole-resistant cells were 
grown in the presence of fluconazole alone, the cells reversed to fluconazole 
susceptibility. Genetic analyses of the progeny from crosses between resistant 
and sensitive isolates showed that resistance to flucytosine was derived from a 
recessive mutation in a single gene, whereas cross-resistance to fluconazole 
seemed to vary like a quantitative trait. We further demonstrated that the four 
clinical isolates were susceptible to 5-fluorouracil and that cytosine deaminase 
activity was unaffected. Kinetic transport studies with [(14)C]flucytosine 
showed that flucytosine resistance was due to a defect in the purine-cytosine 
permease. Our hypothesis was that extracellular flucytosine would subsequently 
behave as a competitive inhibitor of fluconazole uptake transport. Finally, in 
vitro selection of spontaneous and induced mutants indicated that such a 
cross-resistance mechanism could also affect other Candida species, including C. 
albicans, C. tropicalis, and C. glabrata. This is the first report of a putative 
fluconazole uptake transporter in Candida species and of a possible resistance 
mechanism associated with a deficiency in the uptake of this drug.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.47.4.1275-1284.2003
PMCID: PMC152504
PMID: 12654658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]