---
reference_id: "PMID:38631765"
title: "MAPT H2 haplotype and risk of Pick's disease in the Pick's disease International Consortium: a genetic association study."
authors:
- Valentino RR
- Scotton WJ
- Roemer SF
- Lashley T
- Heckman MG
- Shoai M
- Martinez-Carrasco A
- Tamvaka N
- Walton RL
- Baker MC
- Macpherson HL
- Real R
- Soto-Beasley AI
- Mok K
- Revesz T
- Christopher EA
- DeTure M
- Seeley WW
- Lee EB
- Frosch MP
- Molina-Porcel L
- Gefen T
- Redding-Ochoa J
- Ghetti B
- Robinson AC
- Kobylecki C
- Rowe JB
- Beach TG
- Teich AF
- Keith JL
- Bodi I
- Halliday GM
- Gearing M
- Arzberger T
- Morris CM
- White CL 3rd
- Mechawar N
- Boluda S
- MacKenzie IR
- McLean C
- Cykowski MD
- Wang SJ
- Graff C
- Nagra RM
- Kovacs GG
- Giaccone G
- Neumann M
- Ang LC
- Carvalho A
- Morris HR
- Rademakers R
- Hardy JA
- Dickson DW
- Rohrer JD
- Ross OA
- Pick's disease International Consortium
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(24)00083-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MAPT H2 haplotype and risk of Pick's disease in the Pick's disease International Consortium: a genetic association study.
**Authors:** Valentino RR, Scotton WJ, Roemer SF, Lashley T, Heckman MG, Shoai M, Martinez-Carrasco A, Tamvaka N, Walton RL, Baker MC, Macpherson HL, Real R, Soto-Beasley AI, Mok K, Revesz T, Christopher EA, DeTure M, Seeley WW, Lee EB, Frosch MP, Molina-Porcel L, Gefen T, Redding-Ochoa J, Ghetti B, Robinson AC, Kobylecki C, Rowe JB, Beach TG, Teich AF, Keith JL, Bodi I, Halliday GM, Gearing M, Arzberger T, Morris CM, White CL 3rd, Mechawar N, Boluda S, MacKenzie IR, McLean C, Cykowski MD, Wang SJ, Graff C, Nagra RM, Kovacs GG, Giaccone G, Neumann M, Ang LC, Carvalho A, Morris HR, Rademakers R, Hardy JA, Dickson DW, Rohrer JD, Ross OA, Pick's disease International Consortium
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(24)00083-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(24)00083-8)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2024 May;23(5):487-499. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(24)00083-8.

MAPT H2 haplotype and risk of Pick's disease in the Pick's disease International 
Consortium: a genetic association study.

Valentino RR(1), Scotton WJ(2), Roemer SF(1), Lashley T(3), Heckman MG(4), Shoai 
M(5), Martinez-Carrasco A(6), Tamvaka N(1), Walton RL(1), Baker MC(1), 
Macpherson HL(5), Real R(6), Soto-Beasley AI(1), Mok K(7), Revesz T(3), 
Christopher EA(1), DeTure M(1), Seeley WW(8), Lee EB(9), Frosch MP(10), 
Molina-Porcel L(11), Gefen T(12), Redding-Ochoa J(13), Ghetti B(14), Robinson 
AC(15), Kobylecki C(16), Rowe JB(17), Beach TG(18), Teich AF(19), Keith JL(20), 
Bodi I(21), Halliday GM(22), Gearing M(23), Arzberger T(24), Morris CM(25), 
White CL 3rd(26), Mechawar N(27), Boluda S(28), MacKenzie IR(29), McLean C(30), 
Cykowski MD(31), Wang SJ(32), Graff C(33), Nagra RM(34), Kovacs GG(35), Giaccone 
G(36), Neumann M(37), Ang LC(38), Carvalho A(39), Morris HR(6), Rademakers 
R(40), Hardy JA(41), Dickson DW(1), Rohrer JD(42), Ross OA(43); Pick's disease 
International Consortium.

Collaborators: Warner TT, Jaunmuktane Z, Boeve BF, Duara R, Graff-Radford NR, 
Josephs KA, Knopman DS, Koga S, Murray ME, Lyons KE, Pahwa R, Petersen RC, 
Whitwell JL, Grinberg LT, Miller B, Schlereth A, Spina S, Grossman M, Irwin DJ, 
Suh E, Trojanowski JQ, Van Deerlin VM, Wolk DA, Connors TR, Dooley PM, Oakley 
DH, Aldecoa I, Balasa M, Gelpi E, Borrego-Écija S, Gascon-Bayarri J, 
Sánchez-Valle R, Sanz-Cartagena P, Piñol-Ripoll G, Bigio EH, Flanagan ME, 
Rogalski EJ, Weintraub S, Schneider JA, Peng L, Zhu X, Chang K, Troncoso JC, 
Prokop S, Newell KL, Jones M, Richardson A, Roncaroli F, Snowden J, Allinson K, 
Singh P, Serrano GE, Flowers XE, Goldman JE, Heaps AC, Leskinen SP, Black SE, 
Masellis M, King A, Al-Sarraj S, Troakes C, Hodges JR, Kril JJ, Kwok JB, Piguet 
O, Roeber S, Attems J, Thomas AJ, Evers BM, Bieniek KF, Sieben AA, Cras PP, De 
Vil BB, Bird T, Castellani RJ, Chaffee A, Franklin E, Haroutunian V, Jacobsen M, 
Keene D, Latimer CS, Metcalf J, Perrin RJ, Purohit DP, Rissman RA, Schantz A, 
Walker J, De Deyn PP, Duyckaerts C, Le Ber I, Seilhean D, Turbant-Leclere S, 
Ervin JF, Nennesmo I, Riehl J, Nacmias B, Finger EC, Blauwendraat C, Nalls MA, 
Singleton AB, Vitale D, Cunha C, Wszolek ZK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(2)Dementia Research Centre, Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, University 
College London, Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London, UK. Electronic 
address: w.scotton@ucl.ac.uk.
(3)Queen Square Brain Bank for Neurological Disorders, University College 
London, Queen Square Institute of Neurology London, UK; Department of 
Neurodegenerative Disease, University College London, Queen Square Institute of 
Neurology London, UK.
(4)Division of Clinical Trials and Biostatistics, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, 
USA.
(5)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, University College London, Queen 
Square Institute of Neurology London, UK.
(6)Department of Clinical and Movement Neurosciences, University College London, 
Queen Square Institute of Neurology London, UK.
(7)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, University College London, Queen 
Square Institute of Neurology London, UK; UK Dementia Research Institute at UCL, 
London, UK; Division of Life Science, State Key Laboratory of Molecular 
Neuroscience, Molecular Neuroscience Center, The Hong Kong University of Science 
and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China; Hong Kong Center for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, Hong Kong Science Park, Hong Kong, China.
(8)Department of Neurology, Memory and Aging Center, University of California 
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(9)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine 
at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(10)Neuropathology Service, C S Kubik Laboratory for Neuropathology, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(11)Neurological Tissue Bank, Biobanc-Hospital Clínic-Fundació de Recerca Clínic 
Barcelona-Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Barcelona, 
Spain; Alzheimer's Disease and other Cognitive Disorders Unit, Neurology 
Department, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain; Barcelona Clinical Research 
Foundation-August Pi i Sunyer Biomedical Research Institute, Barcelona, Spain.
(12)Mesulam Center for Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer's Disease, Northwestern 
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA; Department of 
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
(13)Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(14)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(15)Division of Neuroscience, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, School of 
Biological Sciences, The University of Manchester, Salford Royal Hospital, 
Salford, UK; Geoffrey Jefferson Brain Research Centre, Manchester Academic 
Health Science Centre, Manchester, UK.
(16)Department of Neurology, Manchester Centre for Clinical Neurosciences, 
Northern Care Alliance NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health Science 
Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK; Division of Neuroscience, 
School of Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(17)Cambridge University Department of Clinical Neurosciences and Cambridge 
University Hospitals NHS Trust, Cambridge, UK; Medical Research Council 
Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK.
(18)Civin Laboratory of Neuropathology, Banner Sun Health Research Institute, 
Sun City, AZ, USA.
(19)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, NY, 
USA; Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, 
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(20)Laboratory Medicine and Molecular Diagnostics, Sunnybrook Health Sciences 
Centre, and Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada.
(21)Clinical Neuropathology Department, King's College Hospital NHS Foundation 
Trust, London, UK; London Neurodegenerative Diseases Brain Bank, Department of 
Basic and Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and 
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK.
(22)University of Sydney Brain and Mind Centre and Faculty of Medicine and 
Health School of Medical Sciences, Camperdown, NSW, Australia.
(23)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA; Department of Neurology, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA; Goizueta Alzheimer's Disease Center Brain Bank, 
Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(24)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Hospital, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany.
(25)Newcastle Brain Tissue Resource, Translational and Clinical Research 
Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(26)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(27)Douglas Hospital Research Centre, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(28)Laboratoire de Neuropathologie Escourolle, Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, 
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France; Alzheimer Prion Team, 
L'Institut du Cerveau, Paris, France.
(29)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(30)Department of Anatomical Pathology Alfred Heath, Melbourne, VIC, Australia; 
Victorian Brain Bank, The Florey Institute of Neuroscience of Mental Health, 
Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(31)Department of Pathology and Genomic Medicine, Houston Methodist Research 
Institute and Weill Cornell Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(32)Department of Neurology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(33)Division for Neurogeriatrics, Centre for Alzheimer Research, Department of 
Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden; Unit for Hereditary Dementias, Karolinska University Hospital Solna, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(34)Human Brain and Spinal Fluid Resource Center, Brentwood Biomedical Research 
Institute, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(35)Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Disease, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; Department of Laboratory Medicine and 
Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; Laboratory Medicine 
Program and Krembil Brain Institute, University Health Network, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(36)Fondazione Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico, Istituto 
Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy.
(37)Molecular Neuropathology of Neurodegenerative Diseases, German Center for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, Tübingen, Germany; Department of Neuropathology, 
University Hospital of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(38)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, London Health Sciences 
Centre, London, ON, Canada; Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, Western 
University, London, ON, Canada.
(39)Life and Health Sciences Research Institute, School of Medicine, University 
of Minho, Braga, Portugal; ICVS/3B's-PT Government Associate Laboratory, 
Braga/Guimarães, Portugal.
(40)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA; Vlaams 
Instituut voor Biotechnologie-Universiteit Antwerpen, Center for Molecular 
Neurology, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(41)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, University College London, Queen 
Square Institute of Neurology London, UK; Reta Lila Weston Institute, University 
College London, Queen Square Institute of Neurology London, UK; UK Dementia 
Research Institute at UCL, London, UK; Institute for Advanced Study, The Hong 
Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China.
(42)Dementia Research Centre, Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, 
University College London, Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London, UK.
(43)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA; Department 
of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA. Electronic address: 
ross.owen@mayo.edu.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2023 Apr 24:2023.04.17.23288471. doi: 10.1101/2023.04.17.23288471.

BACKGROUND: Pick's disease is a rare and predominantly sporadic form of 
frontotemporal dementia that is classified as a primary tauopathy. Pick's 
disease is pathologically defined by the presence in the frontal and temporal 
lobes of Pick bodies, composed of hyperphosphorylated, three-repeat tau protein, 
encoded by the MAPT gene. MAPT has two distinct haplotypes, H1 and H2; the MAPT 
H1 haplotype is the major genetic risk factor for four-repeat tauopathies (eg, 
progressive supranuclear palsy and corticobasal degeneration), and the MAPT H2 
haplotype is protective for these disorders. The primary aim of this study was 
to evaluate the association of MAPT H2 with Pick's disease risk, age at onset, 
and disease duration.
METHODS: In this genetic association study, we used data from the Pick's disease 
International Consortium, which we established to enable collection of data from 
individuals with pathologically confirmed Pick's disease worldwide. For this 
analysis, we collected brain samples from individuals with pathologically 
confirmed Pick's disease from 35 sites (brainbanks and hospitals) in North 
America, Europe, and Australia between Jan 1, 2020, and Jan 31, 2023. 
Neurologically healthy controls were recruited from the Mayo Clinic (FL, USA, or 
MN, USA between March 1, 1998, and Sept 1, 2019). For the primary analysis, 
individuals were directly genotyped for the MAPT H1-H2 haplotype-defining 
variant rs8070723. In a secondary analysis, we genotyped and constructed the 
six-variant-defined (rs1467967-rs242557-rs3785883-rs2471738-rs8070723-rs7521) 
MAPT H1 subhaplotypes. Associations of MAPT variants and MAPT haplotypes with 
Pick's disease risk, age at onset, and disease duration were examined using 
logistic and linear regression models; odds ratios (ORs) and β coefficients were 
estimated and correspond to each additional minor allele or each additional copy 
of the given haplotype.
FINDINGS: We obtained brain samples from 338 people with pathologically 
confirmed Pick's disease (205 [61%] male and 133 [39%] female; 338 [100%] White) 
and 1312 neurologically healthy controls (611 [47%] male and 701 [53%] female; 
1312 [100%] White). The MAPT H2 haplotype was associated with increased risk of 
Pick's disease compared with the H1 haplotype (OR 1·35 [95% CI 1·12 to 1·64], 
p=0·0021). MAPT H2 was not associated with age at onset (β -0·54 [95% CI -1·94 
to 0·87], p=0·45) or disease duration (β 0·05 [-0·06 to 0·16], p=0·35). Although 
not significant after correcting for multiple testing, associations were 
observed at p less than 0·05: with risk of Pick's disease for the H1f 
subhaplotype (OR 0·11 [0·01 to 0·99], p=0·049); with age at onset for H1b (β 
2·66 [0·63 to 4·70], p=0·011), H1i (β -3·66 [-6·83 to -0·48], p=0·025), and H1u 
(β -5·25 [-10·42 to -0·07], p=0·048); and with disease duration for H1x (β -0·57 
[-1·07 to -0·07], p=0·026).
INTERPRETATION: The Pick's disease International Consortium provides an 
opportunity to do large studies to enhance our understanding of the pathobiology 
of Pick's disease. This study shows that, in contrast to the decreased risk of 
four-repeat tauopathies, the MAPT H2 haplotype is associated with an increased 
risk of Pick's disease in people of European ancestry. This finding could inform 
development of isoform-related therapeutics for tauopathies.
FUNDING: Wellcome Trust, Rotha Abraham Trust, Brain Research UK, the Dolby Fund, 
Dementia Research Institute (Medical Research Council), US National Institutes 
of Health, and the Mayo Clinic Foundation.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open 
Access article under the CC BY 4.0 license. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(24)00083-8
PMCID: PMC11877577
PMID: 38631765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of interest WJS declares funding 
from a Wellcome Trust Clinical PhD Fellowship (220582/Z/20/Z) and from the Rotha 
Abraham Trust; and has received conference travel funding from the Guarantors of 
Brain. NT declares funding from the 2023 Diana Jacobs Kalman-American Federation 
for Aging Research Scholarship for Pre-Doctoral Research on the biology of 
aging. KM declares funding from the Michael J Fox Foundation, Innovation and 
Technology Commission, Hong Kong Government, and the Chow Tai Fook Charity 
Foundation; affiliations with the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 
and University College London; employment with the Hong Kong Center for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases; and support for speaker and educational activity 
from the National Taiwan University, Yonsei University, and the Movement 
Disorder Society. WWS declares funding from the National Institutes of Health 
(NIH), Tau Consortium, Bluefield Project to Cure Frontotemporal Dementia, and 
the Chan-Zuckerberg Initiative. EBL declares funding from the NIH and personal 
honorarium from University of Toronto, Mayo Clinic, St Louis University, 
Haverford, University of Oslo, NIH, and the Association of Frontotemporal 
Dementia. LM-P declares personal honorarium from the Galician Society of 
Neurology and the Spanish Society of Neurology. JBR declares funding from the 
NIH Research Biomedical Research Centre, the Medical Research Council, Wellcome 
Trust, Cambridge Centre for Parkinson-plus, PSP association, and Alzheimer's UK; 
and has received consulting fees from Asceneuron, Astronautx, Astex, Curasen, 
CumulusNeuro, Wave, Prevail, and SVHealth. TGB declares funding from the NIH, 
Michael J Fox Foundation, and Life Molecular Imaging; personal consulting fees 
from Aprinoia Therapeutics; and stock options in Vivid Genomics. S-HJW declares 
funding from NIH and personal honorarium from the American Society of Clinical 
Pathology. CG declares funding from the Swedish Frontotemporal Dementia 
Inititative-Schörling Foundation, EU Joint Programme-Neurodegenerative Disease 
Research-Prefrontals, EU Joint Programme-Neurodegenerative Disease 
Research-Genetic Frontotemporal Dementia Initiative-Proximity, the Alzheimer 
Foundation, Brain Foundation, Dementia Foundation, Region Karolinska 
Institutet-StratNeuro Strategiska forskningsområden, Centre for Innovative 
Medicine, and Karolinska Institutet-Region Stockholm Core facility; personal 
honoraria from Demensdagarna Örebro, Diakonia Ersta sjukhus, and 
Göteborgsregionen. GGK declares funding from Edmond J Safra Philanthropic 
Foundation, Michael J Fox Foundation, Parkinson Canada, Canada, Canada 
Foundation for Innovation, MSA Coalition, and the NIH; and royalties from a 
patent for 5G4 synuclein antibody (DE102011008153B4); and personal honoraria 
from the Movement Disorders Society. MN declares funding from Deutsche 
Forschungsgemeinschaft and Alzheimer Forschungsinitiative. HRM declares funding 
from the PSP Association, CBD Solutions, the Drake Foundation, the Cure 
Parkinson's Trust, the Michael J Fox Foundation, and Parkinson's UK; consulting 
fees from Roche, Amylyx, and Aprinoia; personal honoraria from Kyowa-Kirin, BMJ, 
and the Movement Disorders Society; travel support from the Michael J Fox 
Foundation; is a co-applicant on a patent application related to C9ORF72 method 
for diagnosing a neurodegenerative disease (PCT/GB2012/052140); and serves on 
the Cure PSP Association Advisory Board, the Association of British Neurologists 
Movement Disorders Special Interest Group, and the Association of British 
Neurologists Neurogenetics Advisory Group. RRa declares consulting fees from 
Arkuda Therapeutics and is on the advisory board for the Kissick Family 
Foundation. JAH declares funding from the Dolby Charities, and consulting fees 
from Eli Lilly and Eisai. JDR declares funding from the Bluefied project and the 
Alzheimer's Associaton; and consulting fees from Novartis, Wave Life Sciences, 
Prevail, Alector, Aviado Bio, Takeda, Arkuda Therapeutics, and Denali 
Therapeutics. OAR declares internal funding from the Mayo Clinic Foundation. All 
other authors declare no competing interests.