---
reference_id: "PMID:21290185"
title: Advances and challenges in the treatment of branched-chain amino/keto acid metabolic defects.
authors:
- Knerr I
- Weinhold N
- Vockley J
- Gibson KM
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-010-9269-1
keywords:
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/therapy"
- "Amino Acids, Branched-Chain/metabolism"
- Animals
- Creatinine/metabolism
- Humans
- Maple Syrup Urine Disease/diagnosis
- Mass Spectrometry/methods
- Metabolomics/methods
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Ornithine/analogs & derivatives, metabolism"
- Phenotype
- Risk
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Advances and challenges in the treatment of branched-chain amino/keto acid metabolic defects.
**Authors:** Knerr I, Weinhold N, Vockley J, Gibson KM
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-010-9269-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-010-9269-1)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2012 Jan;35(1):29-40. doi: 10.1007/s10545-010-9269-1.
Epub  2011 Feb 3.

Advances and challenges in the treatment of branched-chain amino/keto acid
metabolic defects.

Knerr I(1), Weinhold N, Vockley J, Gibson KM.

Author information:
(1)Children's and Adolescents' Hospital, Otto-Heubner Centrum, Pediatric
Metabolic Unit, Charité - Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany.
ina.knerr@charite.de

Disorders of branched-chain amino/keto acid metabolism encompass diverse
entities, including maple syrup urine disease (MSUD), the 'classical' organic
acidurias isovaleric acidemia (IVA), propionic acidemia (PA), methylmalonic
acidemia (MMA) and, among others, rarely described disorders such as
2-methylbutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (MBDD) or isobutyryl-CoA
dehydrogenase deficiency (IBDD). Our focus in this review is to highlight the
biochemical basis underlying recent advances and ongoing challenges of long-term
conservative therapy including precursor/protein restriction, replenishment of
deficient substrates, and the use of antioxidants and anaplerotic agents which
refill the Krebs cycle. Ongoing clinical assessments of affected individuals in
conjunction with monitoring of disease-specific biochemical parameters remain
essential. It is likely that mass spectrometry-based 'metabolomics' may be a
helpful tool in the future for studying complete biochemical profiles and
diverse metabolic phenotypes. Prospective studies are needed to test the
effectiveness of adjunct therapies such as antioxidants,
ornithine-alpha-ketoglutarate (OKG) or creatine in addition to specialized diets
and to optimize current therapeutic strategies in affected individuals. With the
individual life-time risk and degree of severity being unknown in asymptomatic
individuals with MBDD or IBDD, instructions regarding risks for metabolic stress
and fasting avoidance along with clinical monitoring are reasonable
interventions at the current time. Overall, it is apparent that carefully
designed prospective clinical investigations and multicenter cohort-controlled
trials are needed in order to leverage that knowledge into significant
breakthroughs in treatment strategies and appropriate approaches.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-010-9269-1
PMCID: PMC4136412
PMID: 21290185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interest: None declared
