---
reference_id: "PMID:36323958"
title: "Meckel diverticulum scintigraphy: technique, findings and diagnostic pitfalls."
authors:
- Aboughalia HA
- Cheeney SHE
- Elojeimy S
- Blacklock LC
- Parisi MT
journal: Pediatr Radiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00247-022-05527-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Meckel diverticulum scintigraphy: technique, findings and diagnostic pitfalls.
**Authors:** Aboughalia HA, Cheeney SHE, Elojeimy S, Blacklock LC, Parisi MT
**Journal:** Pediatr Radiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00247-022-05527-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00247-022-05527-z)

## Content

1. Pediatr Radiol. 2023 Mar;53(3):493-508. doi: 10.1007/s00247-022-05527-z. Epub 
2022 Nov 3.

Meckel diverticulum scintigraphy: technique, findings and diagnostic pitfalls.

Aboughalia HA(1), Cheeney SHE(2)(3), Elojeimy S(4), Blacklock LC(5), Parisi 
MT(2)(3)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Washington School of Medicine, 1959 NE 
Pacific Street, Seattle, WA, 98195, USA. ha_aboughalia@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Radiology, University of Washington School of Medicine, 1959 NE 
Pacific Street, Seattle, WA, 98195, USA.
(3)Department of Radiology, Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA, USA.
(4)Department of Radiology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, 
SC, USA.
(5)Department of Radiology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA, USA.

Meckel diverticulum, the most common congenital anomaly of the gastrointestinal 
tract, results from the aberrant involution of the omphalomesenteric duct and 
accounts for more than 50% of unexplained lower gastrointestinal bleeding in the 
pediatric population. The most accurate imaging tool to identify a Meckel 
diverticulum containing ectopic gastric mucosa is the Technetium-99m 
pertechnetate Meckel scan, a scintigraphic study with a reported accuracy of 90% 
in the pediatric population. In addition to depicting a Meckel diverticulum with 
ectopic gastric mucosa, careful attention to the normal biodistribution of the 
radiotracer can lead to the identification of unexpected pathology with 
implications for patient management. This article serves to review the 
embryological origin and anatomical features of Meckel diverticulum, highlight 
the role of scintigraphy in evaluating Meckel diverticulum, and discuss the 
proper imaging technique when performing this test. We will focus on pitfalls 
that can lead to an erroneous diagnosis as well as incidental findings that can 
affect patient management.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00247-022-05527-z
PMID: 36323958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]