---
reference_id: "PMID:32499606"
title: "SMAD6 variants in craniosynostosis: genotype and phenotype evaluation."
authors:
- Calpena E
- Cuellar A
- Bala K
- Swagemakers SMA
- Koelling N
- McGowan SJ
- Phipps JM
- Balasubramanian M
- Cunningham ML
- Douzgou S
- Lattanzi W
- Morton JEV
- Shears D
- Weber A
- Wilson LC
- Lord H
- Lester T
- Johnson D
- Wall SA
- Twigg SRF
- Mathijssen IMJ
- Boardman-Pretty F
- Genomics England Research Consortium
- Boyadjiev SA
- Wilkie AOM
journal: Genet Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41436-020-0817-2
keywords:
- Craniosynostoses/genetics
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Penetrance
- Phenotype
- Smad6 Protein/genetics
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# SMAD6 variants in craniosynostosis: genotype and phenotype evaluation.
**Authors:** Calpena E, Cuellar A, Bala K, Swagemakers SMA, Koelling N, McGowan SJ, Phipps JM, Balasubramanian M, Cunningham ML, Douzgou S, Lattanzi W, Morton JEV, Shears D, Weber A, Wilson LC, Lord H, Lester T, Johnson D, Wall SA, Twigg SRF, Mathijssen IMJ, Boardman-Pretty F, Genomics England Research Consortium, Boyadjiev SA, Wilkie AOM
**Journal:** Genet Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41436-020-0817-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41436-020-0817-2)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2020 Sep;22(9):1498-1506. doi: 10.1038/s41436-020-0817-2. Epub 2020
 Jun 5.

SMAD6 variants in craniosynostosis: genotype and phenotype evaluation.

Calpena E(1), Cuellar A(2), Bala K(2), Swagemakers SMA(3), Koelling N(1),
McGowan SJ(1), Phipps JM(1), Balasubramanian M(4), Cunningham ML(5), Douzgou
S(6)(7), Lattanzi W(8)(9), Morton JEV(10), Shears D(11)(12), Weber A(13), Wilson
LC(14), Lord H(15), Lester T(15), Johnson D(12), Wall SA(12), Twigg SRF(1),
Mathijssen IMJ(16), Boardman-Pretty F(17)(18); Genomics England Research
Consortium; Boyadjiev SA(2), Wilkie AOM(19)(20)(21).

Collaborators: Boardman-Pretty F.

Author information:
(1)MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of California-Davis, Sacramento, CA,
USA.
(3)Departments of Pathology and Bioinformatics, Erasmus MC, University Medical
Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Sheffield Clinical Genetics Service, Sheffield Children's NHS Foundation
Trust, Sheffield, UK.
(5)Division of Craniofacial Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(6)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Central Manchester University
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Saint Mary's Hospital, Manchester, UK.
(7)Division of Evolution and Genomic Sciences, School of Biological Sciences,
Faculty of Biology, Medicines and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester,
UK.
(8)Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(9)Department of Life Science and Public Health, Università Cattolica del Sacro
Cuore, Rome, Italy.
(10)West Midlands Regional Clinical Genetics Service and Birmingham Health
Partners, Birmingham Women's and Children's Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
Birmingham, UK.
(11)Oxford Centre for Genomic Medicine, Oxford University Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Oxford, UK.
(12)Craniofacial Unit, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, John Radcliffe
Hospital, Oxford, UK.
(13)Department of Clinical Genetics, Liverpool Women's NHS Foundation Trust,
Liverpool, UK.
(14)Clinical Genetics Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS
Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(15)Oxford Genetics Laboratories, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation
Trust, The Churchill Hospital, Oxford, UK.
(16)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery and Hand Surgery, Erasmus
MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(17)Genomics England, London, UK.
(18)William Harvey Research Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London,
UK.
(19)MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK. andrew.wilkie@imm.ox.ac.uk.
(20)Oxford Centre for Genomic Medicine, Oxford University Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Oxford, UK. andrew.wilkie@imm.ox.ac.uk.
(21)Craniofacial Unit, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, John Radcliffe
Hospital, Oxford, UK. andrew.wilkie@imm.ox.ac.uk.

Erratum in
    Genet Med. 2020 Sep;22(9):1567. doi: 10.1038/s41436-020-0886-2.

PURPOSE: Enrichment of heterozygous missense and truncating SMAD6 variants was
previously reported in nonsyndromic sagittal and metopic synostosis, and
interaction of SMAD6 variants with a common polymorphism nearBMP2 (rs1884302)
was proposed to contribute to inconsistent penetrance. We determined the
occurrence of SMAD6 variants in all types of craniosynostosis, evaluated the
impact of different missense variants on SMAD6 function, and tested
independently whether rs1884302 genotype significantly modifies the phenotype.
METHODS: We performed resequencing of SMAD6 in 795 unsolved patients with any
type of craniosynostosis and genotyped rs1884302 in SMAD6-positive individuals
and relatives. We examined the inhibitory activity and stability of SMAD6
missense variants.
RESULTS: We found 18 (2.3%) different rare damaging SMAD6 variants, with the
highest prevalence in metopic synostosis (5.8%) and an 18.3-fold enrichment of
loss-of-function variants comparedwith gnomAD data (P < 10-7). Combined with
eight additional variants, ≥20/26 were transmitted from an unaffected parent but
rs1884302 genotype did not predict phenotype.
CONCLUSION: Pathogenic SMAD6 variants substantially increase the risk of both
nonsyndromic and syndromic presentations of craniosynostosis, especially metopic
synostosis. Functional analysis is important to evaluate missense variants.
Genotyping of rs1884302 is not clinically useful. Mechanisms to explain the
remarkable diversity of phenotypes associated with SMAD6 variants remain
obscure.

DOI: 10.1038/s41436-020-0817-2
PMCID: PMC7462747
PMID: 32499606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.O.M.W. provides nonremunerated consultancy to
Orion Corporation. The other authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Craniosynostosis (CRS), the premature fusion of the cranial sutures, is
a heterogeneous disorder with a prevalence of ∼1 in 2000. Environmental factors,
polygenic inheritance and single-gene or chromosomal abnormalities all contribute to
its complex manifestations. Variants in >60 genes have been identified as
recurrently associated with CRS, with an underlying genetic cause being found in
∼24% of patients overall.1–3 The proportion in whom a cause can be
determined varies widely depending on clinical diagnosis: from 88% for bicoronal
synostosis down to 8% for sagittal synostosis (SS).2 Until recently, success in
identifying a genetic diagnosis has been particularly low in nonsyndromic midline
CRS, under 1% for both sagittal and metopic suture fusions.2

In 2016, Timberlake et al.4 performed exome sequencing of 132
parent–offspring trios and 59 additional probands presenting with clinically
nonsyndromic SS, metopic (MS), or combined metopic/sagittal synostosis, seeking
evidence for major monogenic contributions to these disorders. Based on enrichment
of de novo variants and inherited damaging variants, this study identified a single
significant gene, SMAD6, located at
15q22.3.4

SMAD6, originally identified in
mammals by homology-based cloning,5,6
encodes one of two (with SMAD7) inhibitory members of the SMAD family required for
regulated intracellular signal transduction by members of the transforming growth
factor β/bone morphogenetic protein (TGFβ/BMP) superfamily.7–9 Intriguingly, enrichment of
rare SMAD6 variants has also been reported in
association with several other distinct phenotypes, namely congenital heart
disease,10–12 bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) and ascending
thoracic aortic aneurysm (TAA),13–15 intellectual
disability,16 and radioulnar
synostosis.17

In a follow-up study, Timberlake et al. increased the sample size of
probands with midline CRS and no other genetic diagnosis to 379 (45 pedigrees
included ≥1 additional affected family member).18 They found damaging
SMAD6 variants in 4/234 (1.7%) SS, 11/135
(8.1%) MS, and 2/10 (20%) combined metopic/sagittal synostosis probands. Although de
novo variants (DNMs) were identified in four families, in the remainder, the
SMAD6 variant was transmitted by an
apparently unaffected (i.e., nonpenetrant) parent. Similar observations of
nonpenetrance of SMAD6 variants were made for
several of the other described disease associations.13,14,17 To seek an explanation for the unpredictable
penetrance, Timberlake et al.4,18 genotyped a single-nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP), rs1884302, previously reported in a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of
nonsyndromic SS to be the most significant associated SNP, which may differentially
regulate the most proximal gene BMP2.19,20 The risk-conferring C allele (prevalence in
non-Finnish Europeans of 32.7%, gnomAD),21 was found to be present in 15/21 individuals
with CRS but only 1/20 unaffected relatives heterozygous for the SMAD6 variant but without CRS, suggesting a two-locus
mechanism to account for variable manifestation of CRS.18

Although the studies described above4,18 represent an important advance in
delineating the contribution of single-gene variants to nonsyndromic midline CRS,
they raise several questions. First, what is the contribution of SMAD6 variants in all presentations of CRS (including
syndromic diagnoses and fusion of coronal or lambdoid sutures)? Second, can it be
assumed that all rare SMAD6 missense variants affect protein function? Third, can
the two-locus (SMAD6/rs1884302) model be
confirmed in an independent cohort? Here, we address these questions. We confirm the
primary finding that SMAD6 variants are enriched
in CRS, especially metopic synostosis, but find a more diverse pattern of clinical
presentation; in addition, we illustrate the importance of combining functional
studies with frequency-based evaluation of variants to refine likelihood of
pathogenicity. Finally, we report that the two-locus model does not account for
inconsistencies of penetrance of damaging SMAD6
variants in our data set.

The clinical studies were approved by respective Institutional
Review Boards (IRB): Oxfordshire Research Ethics Committee (REC) B (C02.143),
London–Riverside REC (09/H0706/20), East of England–Cambridge South REC
(14/EE/1112 for 100,000 Genomes Project [100kGP]), the Medical Ethical Committee
of the Erasmus University Medical Center Rotterdam (MEC-2012–140), and the IRB
of the University of California–Davis (International Craniosynostosis Consortium
[ICC]; protocol 215635–23). Written informed consent to obtain samples for
genetics research was given by each child’s parent or guardian. Written
authorization for publication of clinical photographs was obtained from every
individual and/or their parent/guardian. The clinical diagnosis of CRS was
confirmed by three-dimensional computed tomography scanning of the skull;
routine genetic investigations are described in Supplementary Information. Patients were considered to have a
syndromic diagnosis if (1) additional dysmorphic features or congenital
anomalies were present and/or (2) there was significant developmental delay or
intellectual disability on neuropsychological assessment; in addition (3)
families including affected first degree relatives were classified as syndromic,
although affected individuals in those families may have presented with
nonsyndromic clinical features.

Variant screening was performed by next-generation sequencing
(NGS)-based resequencing of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products
encompassing the coding regions and intron/exon boundaries of the four exons of
SMAD6 (NC_000015.10
[chr15:66702110–66782849, hg38]; NM_005585, ENST00000288840.9). Primer sequences
are given in Table S1 and detailed
methods are provided in Supplementary Information. Variant calls and coverage information were
obtained using the bioinformatic tool amplimap.22

Validation and segregation analysis of variants was undertaken by
dideoxy-sequencing of PCR products from genomic DNA. The rs1884302 BMP2 polymorphism was genotyped in all the
SMAD6-positive individuals by PCR
(Table S1) followed by EcoRI
digest and/or dideoxy-sequencing.

Analysis of SMAD6 dosage using
multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) is described in the
Supplementary Information.

Using the frequency-based filtering framework provided by Whiffin
et al.,23 we estimated the maximum credible population
allele frequency (AF) for any causative variant in CRS to be 0.000045, assuming
a penetrance of 0.2 (Supplementary Information). For each identified variant we assigned
AFmax, the greater of (1) the maximum observed AF in
any population in gnomAD21 (except Other; gnomAD v2.1.1), where
this was based on the presence of ≥2 mutant alleles in that population, or (2)
the overall AF. We classified rare alleles as those for which
AFmax was <0.000045.

To measure the deleteriousness of the identified variants, the
deleterious score (DS, range 0–6) was calculated based on exceeding a defined
threshold for six separate scores generated by Annovar24 (Supplementary
Information).25 For comparison, the CADD score was
additionally calculated for missense variants.26

For all SMAD6 variants listed in
previous publications4,10–18 and implied to be pathogenic,
nomenclature was verified using Mutalyzer27 and their presence and
AF checked in gnomAD. We calculated the DS and CADD score for all missense
variants.

Source plasmids and methods used to evaluate the 5′ untranslated
region (UTR), splice-site, and missense variants are provided in the
Supplementary Information. Luciferase
measurements and immunoblot quantifications were performed from at least three
independent experiments. Statistical analysis is described in the Supplementary
Information.

To investigate the contribution of SMAD6 variants in CRS, we performed NGS-based resequencing of
SMAD6 in 795 unsolved patients with any
type of CRS. After applying the joint criteria that variants should be both rare
(AFmax < 0.000045) and damaging (predicted
loss-of-function [LoF] and/or DS ≥ 4/6), we identified 18 probands (and 2
additional affected siblings) with heterozygous rare damaging SMAD6 variants (Table 1, Fig. 1,
Fig. S1, Table S2). These SMAD6-positive individuals accounted for 2.3% of the cohort
(3.4% and 2.0% of those classified as syndromic and nonsyndromic, respectively).
Nine probands had LoF variants, representing a ~18.3-fold enrichment compared
with gnomAD genome sequencing data (9 LoF in minimum 29,066 alleles; P < 10−7, Fisher’s
exact test). The highest prevalence of novel/rare damaging SMAD6 variants occurred in MS (12/207; 5.8%). Such
SMAD6 variants were much less frequent in
isolated SS (3/316; 0.95%) or other types of suture fusion, but we noted
three probands with coronal suture involvement (one each sagittal + bicoronal,
sagittal + unicoronal, and unicoronal synostosis). The varied craniofacial
presentation of individuals with CRS heterozygous for SMAD6 variants is illustrated in Fig. 2a–c.Table 1Subjects with CRS analyzed for rare, deleterious
SMAD6 variants by
NGS-based resequencing.NonsyndromicSyndromicCombinedTotalSMAD6
positiveTotalSMAD6
positiveTotalSMAD6
positiveMetopic1679403b20712 (5.80%)Sagittal2792a371b3163 (0.95%)Unilateral coronal15011601661 (0.60%)Bilateral coronal110110220Uni- or bilateral lambdoid7030100Multisuture351291642 (3.13%)Sutures not specified00100100Combined64913146579518 (2.26%)CRS craniosynostosis,
NGS next-generation
sequencing.aIn one patient, additional
bicoronal suture fusion was noted at the time of
surgery.bIncludes proband classified as
syndromic because a sibling had sagittal synostosis.Fig. 1Human SMAD6 gene and
protein showing variants identified in craniosynostosis
(CRS).Top, SMAD6 comprises
four exons; positions of variants affecting translation
initiation or splicing are indicated. Middle, cartoon of encoded
protein showing conserved domains (MH1 and MH2, including highly
conserved L3 region) and PY and PLDLS
motifs.9 Colored shading indicates
the position of the MH1 (transparent purple) and MH2
(transparent orange) domains according to Uniprot, Pfam, and CDD
resources, with darker shading denoting overlapping domain
assignments. Novel or rare
(AFmax < 0.000045) variants identified
in CRS patients that are also predicted damaging
(loss-of-function [LoF], plus missense variants with
DS25 ≥ 4) are indicated above the
cartoon, whereas below in gray are additional missense variants
predicted to have lower pathogenicity (DS ≤ 3 and/or
AFmax > 0.000045); negative and
positive controls10 used in the functional
assays are colored green and blue, respectively. Frameshifts and
stop-gain variants are shown with filled and empty arrowheads,
respectively; § = de novo variants; * = novel/rare damaging
variants found in addition to the CRS cohort screen; # =
AFmax ≥ 0.000045 in gnomAD. Bottom,
conservation profiles40 of inhibitory SMADs
SMAD6 (black), SMAD7 (gray), and all SMAD members (SMAD1–8)
combined (purple line). AF
allele frequency, DS
deleterious score.Fig. 2Preoperative clinical presentations of craniosynostosis
(CRS) in association with pathogenic heterozygous SMAD6 variants.(a) Subject 8260 aged 4
months with metopic synostosis, the most frequently associated
CRS phenotype, showing hypotelorism (front view) and
trigonocephaly (top view). Newly described clinical
presentations include sagittal and bicoronal synostosis
(b, subject 3711 aged 11
months, note narrow, saddle-shaped skull with frontal bossing)
and right unicoronal synostosis (c, subject 4370 aged 10 months, note facial
asymmetry and recessed brow on right).

Subjects with CRS analyzed for rare, deleterious
SMAD6 variants by
NGS-based resequencing.

CRS craniosynostosis,
NGS next-generation
sequencing.

aIn one patient, additional
bicoronal suture fusion was noted at the time of
surgery.

bIncludes proband classified as
syndromic because a sibling had sagittal synostosis.

Top, SMAD6 comprises
four exons; positions of variants affecting translation
initiation or splicing are indicated. Middle, cartoon of encoded
protein showing conserved domains (MH1 and MH2, including highly
conserved L3 region) and PY and PLDLS
motifs.9 Colored shading indicates
the position of the MH1 (transparent purple) and MH2
(transparent orange) domains according to Uniprot, Pfam, and CDD
resources, with darker shading denoting overlapping domain
assignments. Novel or rare
(AFmax < 0.000045) variants identified
in CRS patients that are also predicted damaging
(loss-of-function [LoF], plus missense variants with
DS25 ≥ 4) are indicated above the
cartoon, whereas below in gray are additional missense variants
predicted to have lower pathogenicity (DS ≤ 3 and/or
AFmax > 0.000045); negative and
positive controls10 used in the functional
assays are colored green and blue, respectively. Frameshifts and
stop-gain variants are shown with filled and empty arrowheads,
respectively; § = de novo variants; * = novel/rare damaging
variants found in addition to the CRS cohort screen; # =
AFmax ≥ 0.000045 in gnomAD. Bottom,
conservation profiles40 of inhibitory SMADs
SMAD6 (black), SMAD7 (gray), and all SMAD members (SMAD1–8)
combined (purple line). AF
allele frequency, DS
deleterious score.

(a) Subject 8260 aged 4
months with metopic synostosis, the most frequently associated
CRS phenotype, showing hypotelorism (front view) and
trigonocephaly (top view). Newly described clinical
presentations include sagittal and bicoronal synostosis
(b, subject 3711 aged 11
months, note narrow, saddle-shaped skull with frontal bossing)
and right unicoronal synostosis (c, subject 4370 aged 10 months, note facial
asymmetry and recessed brow on right).

Together, these observations confirm the enrichment of rare,
damaging SMAD6 variants in CRS, as reported
in nonsyndromic midline synostosis.4,18 However, this work extends the previous
findings to include syndromic as well as nonsyndromic patients, and synostosis
of coronal sutures. Among the pure midline synostoses, MS was 6.1-fold more
frequent than SS (P = 0.002, two-tailed
Fisher’s exact test).

Combining these unbiased findings with eight additional
independently identified (see Supplementary Information) SMAD6-positive CRS patients (three MS, three SS, one
sagittal + bicoronal and one unicoronal synostosis; Fig. S2), in total we identified 25 different
damaging variants in SMAD6 (Fig. 1, Table S2) in 28 affected individuals from 26 unrelated families
with CRS.

The phenotypes identified in each of the 28 SMAD6-positive individuals are summarized in Table S3. Of 8 patients considered to have a
syndromic clinical presentation, 1 (subject 5944) was excluded from further
consideration owing to confounding by two additional DNMs likely to contribute
to the phenotype, which had been separately identified by exome
sequencing.28 Of the remaining seven syndromic subjects,
five had congenital heart defects (comprising atrioventricular septal defect,
atrial septal defect [ASD] with patent foramen ovale, two ASD with ventricular
septal defect, and bicuspid aortic valve with right bundle branch block; only
the first of these required corrective surgery), three had brain anomalies
(comprising ventriculomegaly and absent corpus callosum, macrocephaly, and mild
microcephaly), and one had duodenal atresia. Seven children had delayed
developmental/intellectual or educational attainment, classified as
mild–moderate in one case and mild in the remainder. Both congenital heart
defects10–12 and neurodevelopmental
disability16 were previously described as significantly
associated with SMAD6 variants.

Although the craniofacial surgical course for most patients with
CRS was good, four individuals (plus the child with additional confounding DNMs)
were documented to have raised intracranial pressure (ICP). Of those four, one
with syndromic SS developed additional bilateral coronal suture fusion and was
found to have primary raised ICP and the other three (two SS, one MS) had raised
ICP following reconstructive craniofacial surgery, necessitating a second major
surgical procedure. Secondarily raised ICP represents an infrequent complication
of simple synostosis of midline sutures, for example only 2 of 128 patients with
SS,29 and 6 of 202 patients with
MS30 who underwent major calvarial remodeling
procedures developed secondarily raised ICP. The difference from background is
significant (P = 0.042, Fisher’s exact test),
suggesting that this is a complication that should be monitored for in SMAD6-positive CRS.

The human SMAD6 protein comprises 496 amino acids and includes two
highly conserved domains (MH1 and MH2), with MH2 being necessary and sufficient
for its inhibitory activity on TGFβ/BMP signaling.31,32 The 25 different rare damaging variants
in SMAD6 include 12 LoF (seven frameshift,
three stop-gain, two splice-site), one within the 5′ UTR (creating an
out-of-frame upstream ATG), an in-frame duplication (within the MH1 domain) and
11 missense variants (Fig. 1). Ten of
the 11 identified missense variants are clustered in the MH1/MH2 domains and the
remaining substitution is a de novo p.W14R located near the N-terminus and
affecting a highly conserved region of the inhibitory SMADs (SMAD6/SMAD7;
Fig. 1). We performed in vitro
studies of the SMAD6 variants (excluding the
frameshifts and stop-gains) to gather additional evidence for
pathogenicity.

The two splice-site variants (c.817G>C and c.817+2T>A) are
predicted to affect recognition of the intron 1 splice donor; in both cases,
analysis of messenger RNA (mRNA) extracted from patient cells showed abnormal
splice product(s), absent in the control (Fig. S3). Dideoxy-sequencing demonstrated activation of cryptic
donor splice sites within intron 1, resulting in partial intron retention and
generating a frameshift and premature stop codon (Fig. S3).

The 5′ UTR variant (c.-9G>T), present in both affected
individuals of family M130 and assumed to have been inherited from their father
(Fig. S1), creates an out-of-frame
upstream ATG codon with potential initiation activity. Using a dual-luciferase
reporter construct in C2C12 cells, the translation efficiency of the main open
reading frame (ORF) was reduced, an effect not observed when the c.-9G>A SNP
(rs559095945; AF[total]=0.0001706), affecting the same nucleotide but not
generating an ATG codon, was tested (Fig. S4).

The inhibitory activity of the SMAD6 missense variants on BMP
signaling was evaluated using a BRE-luc transcriptional reporter containing a
BMP-responsive element.10,33,34 In addition to the 11 damaging and rare
missense variants summarized in Table S2, we included 10 other missense variants that were either
previously reported as positive (p.C484F) or negative (p.A325T)
controls,10 or that we had encountered during
resequencing (Table S2) but were
classed as being of uncertain pathogenicity because they failed one or both
criteria of being damaging and rare (Supplementary Information). SMAD6 missense variants located outside the MH2
domain maintained potent inhibitory activity, similar to the wild type (WT) and
the p.A325T negative control (Fig. 3a).
For SMAD6 variants located within the MH2 domain, the rare damaging variants
associated with CRS (p.G365C, p.G390R, p.G473R, and p.E489K) showed reduced
inhibitory capacity (statistically significant except for p.G365C), whereas more
frequent and/or less damaging variants (p.S333T, p.K395R) did not. We found a
stronger defect in variants within, or near to, the L3 loop motif, indispensable
for the receptor association (Figs. 1
and 3a);9,35 the strongest defect was present for the
p.G433fs construct, used as an additional control.Fig. 3Functional analysis of SMAD6 variants.(a) Luciferase assay.
The cartoon at top shows a simplified representation of the BMP
signaling pathway, indicating in red the components transfected
into C2C12 cells to perform the assay. Firefly luciferase
activity of the BRE-luc transcriptional reporter induced by
constitutively active BMPR1A (BMPR1A c.a.) was used to monitor
the inhibitory effects of SMAD6 variants on BMP signaling,
similar to previously described.10 Below,
graphs represent means ± SEM from three independent experiments.
Data were normalized (using Renilla levels), relativized to the wild type
(WT) and analyzed by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with
Dunnett’s multiple-comparisons test;
∗P ≤ 0.05, ∗∗P ≤ 0.01, and
∗∗∗P ≤ 0.001. Color-coding of SMAD6 variants
follows the same scheme as in Fig. 1. (b)
Analysis of SMAD6 protein stability. Above are representative
examples of western blots (using aliquots of protein extracts
from the luciferase assays), showing SMAD6 protein levels
(detected with anti-FLAG) compared with anti-GAPDH loading
control. Control missense variants (negative, green bar,
p.A325T; positive, blue bar, p.C484F) were selected as
previously described.10 Data were normalized
(using GAPDH) and relativized to the WT. The bars represent
means ± SEM from three independent experiments, analyzed and
visualized as in (a).
(c) SMAD6 average protein
levels of 21 different missense variants (from b) plotted against respective
deleterious score (DS).

(a) Luciferase assay.
The cartoon at top shows a simplified representation of the BMP
signaling pathway, indicating in red the components transfected
into C2C12 cells to perform the assay. Firefly luciferase
activity of the BRE-luc transcriptional reporter induced by
constitutively active BMPR1A (BMPR1A c.a.) was used to monitor
the inhibitory effects of SMAD6 variants on BMP signaling,
similar to previously described.10 Below,
graphs represent means ± SEM from three independent experiments.
Data were normalized (using Renilla levels), relativized to the wild type
(WT) and analyzed by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with
Dunnett’s multiple-comparisons test;
∗P ≤ 0.05, ∗∗P ≤ 0.01, and
∗∗∗P ≤ 0.001. Color-coding of SMAD6 variants
follows the same scheme as in Fig. 1. (b)
Analysis of SMAD6 protein stability. Above are representative
examples of western blots (using aliquots of protein extracts
from the luciferase assays), showing SMAD6 protein levels
(detected with anti-FLAG) compared with anti-GAPDH loading
control. Control missense variants (negative, green bar,
p.A325T; positive, blue bar, p.C484F) were selected as
previously described.10 Data were normalized
(using GAPDH) and relativized to the WT. The bars represent
means ± SEM from three independent experiments, analyzed and
visualized as in (a).
(c) SMAD6 average protein
levels of 21 different missense variants (from b) plotted against respective
deleterious score (DS).

To test the stability of mutant SMAD6 proteins, we performed
western blot analysis of the protein lysates generated for the BRE-luc reporter
assay. Strikingly, all 11 CRS-associated rare damaging missense variants (and,
in addition, a 5–amino acid in-frame duplication affecting the MH1 domain, and
the C-terminal frameshift p.G433fs) exhibited significantly reduced SMAD6
protein levels, suggesting that the substitutions caused protein instability
(Fig. 3b, red and pink bars). With
the exception of p.E171K, average protein levels were <60% of WT. Conversely,
no major instability was observed for eight other novel/rare variants predicted
to have lower pathogenicity, or in more frequent
(AFmax ≥ 0.000045) variants (Fig. 3b, gray bars). As an additional control we
generated WT revertants of plasmids encoding three of the missense substitutions
classified as pathogenic, and found that the revertant proteins were stable
(Fig. S5).

Collectively, aside from the ten frameshifts/stop-gains (likely LoF
alleles), we provide compelling functional evidence to support the pathogenicity
of all 15 other CRS-associated rare and predicted damaging variants. The
damaging missense variants mainly cluster in the MH1/MH2 domains of SMAD6 and
significantly affect its activity and/or stability. We observed a strong
negative correlation between the predicted deleteriousness of each missense
variant and observed protein stability, with the DS (Spearman r = −0.67) (Fig. 3c) and CADD (Spearman r = −0.66) scores performing similarly (Fig. S6).

An enrichment of SMAD6 variants
considered to be pathogenic has been reported in several pathologies distinct
from CRS.10–17 Using our variant categorization (based on
AF and DS), we evaluated all SMAD6 variants
that were previously reported as pathogenic. Systematic review identified 74
different SMAD6 variants, including 30
missense (Table S4, Fig. S7). Four of the 74 variants (including 3
missense) have an AFmax ≥ 0.000045; the in-frame deletion
c.79_84del (p.S27_G28del, AFmax = 0.0007) is particularly
frequent. This variant was identified in our initial resequencing
(Table S2) but was excluded based
on frequency and occurrence in a poorly conserved region outside the functional
domains. Approximately one third of the previously reported SMAD6 missense
variants are predicted to have a low (≤3) DS (Table S4, Fig. S8),
affecting residues with low evolutionary conservation (Fig. S9).

Although 3 of the CRS-associated SMAD6 variants arose de novo, in 20 cases, the variant was
transmitted from a clinically unaffected parent (11 mothers, 9 fathers); in 3
further cases, 1 or both parents were not available. The SMAD6-transmitting parents had a total of 23 children unaffected
by CRS; taking account of the two affected sib pairs in the cohort, this
indicates a sib recurrence risk of 2/25 = 8%, equivalent to an estimated
penetrance for CRS of SMAD6 variants of ~16%
assuming a 50% transmission rate of the parental SMAD6 variant (unaffected offspring were not genotyped).

To compare our results with the previous work of Timberlake et
al.,4,18 which proposed that the rs1884302 SNP
influenced the phenotype associated with SMAD6 variants, we genotyped rs1884302 in all SMAD6-positive individuals. However, we did not
observe any association in our data between presence of the BMP2 risk allele (rs1884302C) and manifestation
with CRS, whether the data were analyzed in a 2×2 association
(Table 2) or by transmission
disequilibrium test (in the 20 families with a SMAD6 carrier parent, parents heterozygous for the rs1884302 SNP
transmitted 12 C and 7 T alleles to their affected offspring; P = 0.25, χ2 test).
Merger of our 2×2 association data with the previous results of Timberlake et
al.18 did however show a significant association
(P = 0.002, Fisher’s exact test),
although this was much weaker than observed in the original publication
(Table 2).Table 2Risk of craniosynostosis in SMAD6 variant carriers in the presence/absence
of the BMP2 risk allele
(C).SMAD6 /
BMP2
genotypesCRS (+)CRS (-)Fisher’s exact P value (one-tailed)This workSMAD6 (+) /
BMP2 risk allele
(+)1712SMAD6 (+) /
BMP2 risk allele
(-)1180.60Timberlake et al.4,18SMAD6 (+) /
BMP2 risk allele
(+)151SMAD6 (+) /
BMP2 risk allele
(-)6190.000011CombinedSMAD6 (+) /
BMP2 risk allele
(+)3213SMAD6 (+) /
BMP2 risk allele
(-)17270.0019CRS
craniosynostosis.

Risk of craniosynostosis in SMAD6 variant carriers in the presence/absence
of the BMP2 risk allele
(C).

CRS
craniosynostosis.

This study builds upon the observations of Timberlake et
al.4,18 to obtain a more
comprehensive picture of the significance and impact of SMAD6 variants in CRS. We identified 28 affected individuals from 26
different families, adding to the 22 affected individuals from 18 families
previously reported.18 By surveying all types of CRS without a genetic
diagnosis, we gained a broader picture of the range of CRS phenotypes with which
SMAD6 variants may be associated. We find
that MS is most highly represented; 5.8% of patients with this diagnosis (Fig.
2a) had a rare, damaging SMAD6 variant, by far the largest monogenic
contribution to MS yet identified.2
SMAD6 variants were less commonly associated with
other types of suture fusion, in particular variants were significantly less
frequent in SS (0.95% of cases overall) than in MS. We observed four SMAD6-positive patients in whom fusion of one or both
coronal sutures accompanied the SS, as well as two patients with isolated unicoronal
synostosis (Fig. 2b, c). Although based on
small numbers, the observation that three subjects developed raised ICP following
their primary surgical procedure suggests that long-term postoperative follow-up of
these patients is important for optimal management. Given the inhibitory action of
SMAD6 on TGFβ/BMP signaling, this work adds further evidence that overactivity of
these pathway(s) predispose to craniosynostosis.1

Overall, we believe that the data presented here support adoption of
SMAD6 genetic testing to inform genetic
diagnosis of CRS: in the 13-year Oxford birth cohort study,2 10 of 677 (1.5%) individuals
harbor rare, damaging SMAD6 variants, making
SMAD6 the fifth most common gene for which
variants are found in CRS within this cohort. The pattern of variants identified in
patients with CRS (enrichment for heterozygous LoF, plus damaging missense),
supports a haploinsufficiency mechanism of pathogenesis, predicting that partial or
complete heterozygous deletions of SMAD6 would
also be pathogenic. We screened for such lesions both experimentally (MLPA in 127
individuals with MS) and bioinformatically (113 individuals from 98 families with
CRS), but did not detect any deletions in these samples or data sets (Supplementary
Information).

The additional observation by Timberlake et al. that the genotype at
the rs1884302 SNP appeared strongly related to manifestation of CRS in SMAD6-positive individuals4,18 has attracted attention as a potential
example of digenic or two-locus inheritance.36 However, our own data do
not support any major modifying role for this SNP (Table 2). Although upon merger with the previous data the overall
effect remains significant (Table 2), we
note that, given the frequency of the risk allele (C) of ~0.33 (gnomAD, European
non-Finnish), the signal in these previous data4,18 was largely driven by strong
underrepresentation of the C allele in nonpenetrant individuals, with only weak
overrepresentation of C in penetrant individuals. This pattern runs counter to
population genetic expectations, given the very low penetrance of CRS in individuals
heterozygous for pathogenic SMAD6 variants
(formally estimated as 0.16 from the number of additional affected and unaffected
offspring born to carrier parents). Furthermore we note that the rs1884302 SNP was
originally investigated because it showed the strongest relationship with
nonsyndromic SS in a GWAS,19 but more recent data for MS reveal no
equivalent association for this SNP.37 Given that the majority of individuals with
deleterious SMAD6 variants have MS, it is perhaps
unsurprising that we did not find an overall interaction between SMAD6 variants and rs1884302 genotype. Whether such a
relationship might exist for the SMAD6-positive
SS, and whether this interaction could be synergistic or simply represent an
additive effect of the GWAS signal, will require a much larger sample size to
answer. In conclusion, we caution that the modifying effect of rs1884302 on CRS
phenotype in SMAD6 heterozygotes is unlikely to
have useful predictive clinical application.

Despite the compelling statistical relationship between rare, damaging
SMAD6 variation and CRS, many aspects of
SMAD6 disease pathogenesis remain mysterious,
a situation that poses substantial challenges for genetic counseling. Notably,
although the spectrum of associated pathogenic variants shows the classical pattern
of haploinsufficiency, the gnomAD pLI (probability of loss-of-function intolerance)
value for SMAD6 is zero, as the number of LoF
variants observed (23) exceeds expectation (11.7).21 Our own data support that
many individuals carrying SMAD6 pathogenic
variants remain asymptomatic, yet a minority are associated with significant
morbidity. Besides the CRS by which these patients were ascertained, in eight cases
syndromes were diagnosed based on concurrent congenital cardiac and/or significant
neurodevelopmental disorders, features that have been shown to be associated with
SMAD6 variants in independent
studies.10–12,16

Substantial further work will be required to delineate the overall
contribution of SMAD6 variants to multisystem
pathogenesis, and to understand the causal mechanisms underlying the extreme
variability in expressivity and the unpredictable penetrance. In this regard, for
optimum practice it will be essential carefully to evaluate the pathogenic
contribution of every SMAD6 variant encountered,
because it is evident that there are many SMAD6
variants of intermediate rarity that may be found in mutational screens and assumed
to be pathogenic, when this conclusion could be incorrect. Here, we show that in our
CRS cohort, by applying joint thresholds for high predicted deleteriousness (DS ≥ 4)
and low allele frequency (AFmax < 0.000045), we could
successfully discriminate missense variants that demonstrated objective evidence of
abnormal protein function in assays, based on overall stability (Fig. 3b, c) and (for those located in the MH2 domain),
failure to suppress BMP-mediated signaling (Fig. 3a). In our analysis of previously reported missense variants
implied to be pathogenic, 10/29 did not meet these joint criteria
(Table S4). Such SMAD6 variants should be prioritized for further
functional analysis to enable their clinical significance to be determined robustly,
using logic similar to that recently described for CFTR variants.38

In determining the clinical utility of SMAD6 genetic testing, prior reports that subjects with BAV and
ascending TAA are enriched for SMAD6 variation
are particularly important, because these are occult cardiovascular disorders
associated with severe age-related complications, potentially amenable to targeted
echocardiographic screening and intervention. At present, however, the absolute and
age-related risks of these disorders when association with SMAD6 variants are unknown. For families within the UK, we have
started to offer echocardiographic screening to asymptomatic SMAD6-positive parents of children with CRS. Of the seven parents
screened to date, none has shown evidence of either BAV or TAA, but unexpectedly,
one had severe primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH). While this is not a described
association of SMAD6
variants,39 two of the major known monogenic predispositions
to PPH (variants in BMPR2 and SMAD9) also involve components of the BMP signaling
pathway, so a pathogenic link to SMAD6 is
plausible. These observations should motivate further efforts to disentangle the
complex role of SMAD6 variation in multiple
diseases.

Supplementary Information

Supplementary Table S1

Supplementary Table S2

Supplementary Table S3

Supplementary Table S4

Genomics England Research Consortium
