---
reference_id: "PMID:16754644"
title: "Hepatitis B virus infection: epidemiology and vaccination."
authors:
- Shepard CW
- Simard EP
- Finelli L
- Fiore AE
- Bell BP
journal: Epidemiol Rev
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1093/epirev/mxj009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis B virus infection: epidemiology and vaccination.
**Authors:** Shepard CW, Simard EP, Finelli L, Fiore AE, Bell BP
**Journal:** Epidemiol Rev (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1093/epirev/mxj009](https://doi.org/10.1093/epirev/mxj009)

## Content

1. Epidemiol Rev. 2006;28:112-25. doi: 10.1093/epirev/mxj009. Epub 2006 Jun 5.

Hepatitis B virus infection: epidemiology and vaccination.

Shepard CW(1), Simard EP, Finelli L, Fiore AE, Bell BP.

Author information:
(1)Epidemiology Branch, Division of Viral Hepatitis, National Center for 
Infectious Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA 
30333, USA.

Worldwide, two billion people have been infected with hepatitis B virus (HBV), 
360 million have chronic infection, and 600,000 die each year from HBV-related 
liver disease or hepatocellular carcinoma. This comprehensive review of 
hepatitis B epidemiology and vaccines focuses on definitive and influential 
studies and highlights current trends, policies, and directions. HBV can be 
transmitted vertically, through sexual or household contact, or by unsafe 
injections, but chronic infections acquired during infancy or childhood account 
for a disproportionately large share of worldwide morbidity and mortality. 
Vaccination against HBV infection can be started at birth and provides long-term 
protection against infection in more than 90% of healthy people. In the 1990s, 
many industrialized countries and a few less-developed countries implemented 
universal hepatitis B immunization and experienced measurable reductions in 
HBV-related disease. For example, in Taiwan, the prevalence of chronic infection 
in children declined by more than 90%. Many resource-poor nations have recently 
initiated universal hepatitis B immunization programs with assistance from the 
Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization. Further progress towards the 
elimination of HBV transmission will require sustainable vaccination programs 
with improved vaccination coverage, practical methods of measuring the impact of 
vaccination programs, and targeted vaccination efforts for communities at high 
risk of infection.

DOI: 10.1093/epirev/mxj009
PMID: 16754644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]