---
reference_id: "PMID:34623748"
title: D-bifunctional protein deficiency caused by splicing variants in a neonate with severe peroxisomal dysfunction and persistent hypoglycemia.
authors:
- Werner KM
- Cox AJ
- Qian E
- Jain P
- Ji W
- Tikhonova I
- Castaldi C
- Bilguvar K
- Knight J
- Ferdinandusse S
- Fawaz R
- Jiang YH
- Gallagher PG
- Bizzarro M
- Gruen JR
- Bale A
- Zhang H
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62520
keywords:
- Exons
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/genetics"
- Humans
- Hypoglycemia/genetics
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Peroxisomal Multifunctional Protein-2/genetics
- Protein Deficiency/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# D-bifunctional protein deficiency caused by splicing variants in a neonate with severe peroxisomal dysfunction and persistent hypoglycemia.
**Authors:** Werner KM, Cox AJ, Qian E, Jain P, Ji W, Tikhonova I, Castaldi C, Bilguvar K, Knight J, Ferdinandusse S, Fawaz R, Jiang YH, Gallagher PG, Bizzarro M, Gruen JR, Bale A, Zhang H
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.62520](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.62520)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2022 Jan;188(1):357-363. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62520. Epub
2021  Oct 8.

D-bifunctional protein deficiency caused by splicing variants in a neonate with 
severe peroxisomal dysfunction and persistent hypoglycemia.

Werner KM(1), Cox AJ(2)(3), Qian E(2), Jain P(2)(4), Ji W(1), Tikhonova I(2), 
Castaldi C(2), Bilguvar K(2), Knight J(2), Ferdinandusse S(5), Fawaz R(1), Jiang 
YH(2), Gallagher PG(1)(2)(6), Bizzarro M(1), Gruen JR(1)(2), Bale A(2), Zhang 
H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut, USA.
(3)PreventionGenetics LLC, Marshfield, Wisconsin, USA.
(4)Sema4, Stanford, CT, USA.
(5)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Amsterdam UMC Locatie AMC, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands.
(6)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut, USA.

D-bifunctional protein (DBP) deficiency is a rare, autosomal recessive 
peroxisomal enzyme deficiency resulting in a high burden of morbidity and early 
mortality. Patients with DBP deficiency resemble those with a severe Zellweger 
phenotype, with neonatal hypotonia, seizures, craniofacial dysmorphisms, 
psychomotor delay, deafness, blindness, and death typically within the first 
2 years of life, although patients with residual enzyme function can survive 
longer. The clinical severity of the disease depends on the degree of enzyme 
deficiency. Loss-of-function variants typically result in no residual enzyme 
activity; however, splice variants may result in protein with residual function. 
We describe a full-term newborn presenting with hypotonia, seizures, and 
unexplained hypoglycemia, who was later found to have rickets at follow up. 
Rapid whole genome sequencing identified two HSD17B4 variants in trans; one 
likely pathogenic variant and one variant of uncertain significance (VUS) 
located in the polypyrimidine tract of intron 13. To determine the functional 
consequence of the VUS, we analyzed RNA from the patient's father with RNA-seq 
which showed skipping of Exon 14, resulting in a frameshift mutation three amino 
acids from the new reading frame. This RNA-seq analysis was correlated with 
virtually absent enzyme activity, elevated very-long-chain fatty acids in 
fibroblasts, and a clinically severe phenotype. Both variants are reclassified 
as pathogenic. Due to the clinical spectrum of DBP deficiency, this provides 
important prognostic information, including early mortality. Furthermore, we add 
persistent hypoglycemia to the clinical spectrum of the disease, and advocate 
for the early management of fat-soluble vitamin deficiencies to reduce 
complications.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62520
PMCID: PMC8678290
PMID: 34623748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors have no 
conflicts to declare.