---
reference_id: "PMID:18266205"
title: Hematological abnormalities in patients with distal renal tubular acidosis and hemoglobinopathies.
authors:
- Khositseth S
- Sirikanaerat A
- Khoprasert S
- Opastirakul S
- Kingwatanakul P
- Thongnoppakhun W
- Yenchitsomanus PT
journal: Am J Hematol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1002/ajh.21151
keywords:
- "Acidosis, Renal Tubular/blood, genetics"
- Adolescent
- "Anion Exchange Protein 1, Erythrocyte/genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Elliptocytosis, Hereditary"
- "Erythrocytes, Abnormal/pathology"
- Female
- Genotype
- "Hematologic Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- "Hemoglobinopathies/genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Reticulocytosis
- Thailand
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hematological abnormalities in patients with distal renal tubular acidosis and hemoglobinopathies.
**Authors:** Khositseth S, Sirikanaerat A, Khoprasert S, Opastirakul S, Kingwatanakul P, Thongnoppakhun W, Yenchitsomanus PT
**Journal:** Am J Hematol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajh.21151](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajh.21151)

## Content

1. Am J Hematol. 2008 Jun;83(6):465-71. doi: 10.1002/ajh.21151.

Hematological abnormalities in patients with distal renal tubular acidosis and 
hemoglobinopathies.

Khositseth S(1), Sirikanaerat A, Khoprasert S, Opastirakul S, Kingwatanakul P, 
Thongnoppakhun W, Yenchitsomanus PT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Thammasat University, 
Thailand.

Mutations of the human SLC4A1 gene encoding erythroid and kidney isoforms of 
anion exchanger 1 (AE1, band 3) result in erythrocyte abnormalities or distal 
renal tubular acidosis (dRTA) and such mutations are observed in Southeast Asia, 
where hemoglobinopathies are prevalent. Genetic and hematological studies in 18 
Thai patients with dRTA have shown that 12 of them (67%) carried SLC4A1 
mutations (7 G701D/G701D, 3 SAO/G701D, and 2 G701D/A858D). Of these 12 patients, 
three had homozygous G701D/G701D and heterozygous Hb E; one compound 
heterozygous SAO/G701D and heterozygous alpha(+)-thalassemia; and one compound 
heterozygous G701D/A858D and heterozygous Hb E. Of 6 patients without SLC4A1 
mutation, two each carried heterozygous or homozygous Hb E and one of the latter 
also had Hb H disease (--(SEA)/-alpha(4.2)). The blood smears of patients with 
homozygous G701D/G701D showed approximately 25% ovalocytes. Strikingly, the 
patients with coexistence of homozygous G701D/G701D and heterozygous Hb E had 
58% ovalocytes. Similarly, the patients who had compound heterozygous SAO/G701D 
showed 49% ovalocytes, but the patient with coexistence of compound heterozygous 
SAO/G701D and heterozygous alpha(+)-thalassemia had 70% ovalocytes. Our previous 
study has shown that under metabolic acidosis, the patients with homozygous 
G701D/G701D or compound heterozygous SAO/G701D had reticulocytosis, indicating 
compensated hemolysis. A patient with compound heterozygous SAO/G701D and 
heterozygous alpha(+)-thalassemia presented with hemolytic anemia and 
hepatosplenomegaly which was alleviated by alkaline therapy. Taken together, the 
coexistence of both homozygous or compound heterozygous SLC4A1 mutations and 
hemoglobinopathy has a combined effect on red cell morphology and degree of 
hemolytic anemia, which is aggravated by acidosis.

Copyright 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.21151
PMID: 18266205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]