---
reference_id: "PMID:37621856"
title: Retrograde Cricopharyngeus Dysfunction effectively treated with low dose botulinum toxin. A case report from Italy.
authors:
- Pavesi L
- Balzano C
- Mauramati S
- Giudice C
- Fresia M
- Todisco M
- Alfonsi E
- Cosentino G
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1238304
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retrograde Cricopharyngeus Dysfunction effectively treated with low dose botulinum toxin. A case report from Italy.
**Authors:** Pavesi L, Balzano C, Mauramati S, Giudice C, Fresia M, Todisco M, Alfonsi E, Cosentino G
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2023.1238304](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2023.1238304)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2023 Aug 9;14:1238304. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1238304. 
eCollection 2023.

Retrograde Cricopharyngeus Dysfunction effectively treated with low dose 
botulinum toxin. A case report from Italy.

Pavesi L(1), Balzano C(1), Mauramati S(2), Giudice C(3)(4), Fresia M(4), Todisco 
M(4), Alfonsi E(4), Cosentino G(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Independent Researcher in Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Technology and in 
Nutritional Sciences, Novara, Italy.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, 
Pavia, Italy.
(3)Department of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, University of Pavia, Pavia, 
Italy.
(4)IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy.

A large constellation of hitherto unexplained symptoms including inability to 
burp, gurgling noises from the chest and lower neck, abdominal bloating, 
flatulence, painful hiccups and emetophobia was defined as Retrograde 
Cricopharyngeus Dysfunction (R-CPD) in 2019. First choice treatment of R-CPD 
involves injection of botulinum toxin into the cricopharyngeus muscle under 
local or general anesthesia. This treatment has been found to be effective in 
the vast majority of subjects, with limited adverse events and prolonged 
therapeutic effects. Notwithstanding, R-CPD is still a poorly understood and 
underestimated disease, and a specific therapeutic dosage range of botulinum 
toxin (BT) has not been yet established. In this report, we describe the first 
case of R-CPD diagnosed in Italy, successfully treated with unilateral, 
anesthesia-free injection of 10 units of onabotulinum toxin into the 
cricopharyngeus muscle, representing the lowest dose reported to date.

Copyright © 2023 Pavesi, Balzano, Mauramati, Giudice, Fresia, Todisco, Alfonsi 
and Cosentino.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1238304
PMCID: PMC10444988
PMID: 37621856

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research were 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.