---
reference_id: "PMID:31956018"
title: "Synovial fibroblasts and articular tissue remodelling: Role and mechanisms."
authors:
- Pap T
- Dankbar B
- Wehmeyer C
- Korb-Pap A
- Sherwood J
journal: Semin Cell Dev Biol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2019.12.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Synovial fibroblasts and articular tissue remodelling: Role and mechanisms.
**Authors:** Pap T, Dankbar B, Wehmeyer C, Korb-Pap A, Sherwood J
**Journal:** Semin Cell Dev Biol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semcdb.2019.12.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semcdb.2019.12.006)

## Content

1. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2020 May;101:140-145. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2019.12.006. 
Epub 2020 Jan 16.

Synovial fibroblasts and articular tissue remodelling: Role and mechanisms.

Pap T(1), Dankbar B(2), Wehmeyer C(2), Korb-Pap A(2), Sherwood J(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Musculoskeletal Medicine (IMM), Westfalian Wilhelms-University 
Münster, Germany. Electronic address: thomas.pap@uni-muenster.de.
(2)Institute of Musculoskeletal Medicine (IMM), Westfalian Wilhelms-University 
Münster, Germany.

Synovial joints are unique functional elements of the body and provide the 
ability for locomotion and for physical interaction with the environment. They 
are composed of different connective tissue structures, of which the synovial 
membrane is one central component. It shows a number of peculiarities that makes 
it different from other membranes in our body, while several lines of evidence 
suggest that synovial fibroblasts, also termed fibroblast-like synoviocytes 
(FLS) critically contribute to these peculiarities. This becomes evident 
particularly under disease conditions such as in rheumatoid arthritis and 
osteoarthritis, where the synovium is a key pathophysiological component. 
Therefore, an in-depth knowledge of FLS biology is not only important for 
understanding key features of articular function but also provides explanations 
for important characteristics of both degenerative and inflammatory joint 
diseases. This article reviews the structure, biochemical composition and 
functions of the synovial membrane and by focusing on the role of synovial 
fibroblasts explains key features of articular tissue remodelling particularly 
under disease conditions.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2019.12.006
PMID: 31956018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]