---
reference_id: "PMID:24821639"
title: "Alternating hemiplegia of childhood: new diagnostic options."
authors:
- Gergont A
- Kaciński M
journal: Neurol Neurochir Pol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.pjnns.2013.05.003
keywords:
- Child
- "Hemiplegia/epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Sodium-Potassium-Exchanging ATPase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alternating hemiplegia of childhood: new diagnostic options.
**Authors:** Gergont A, Kaciński M
**Journal:** Neurol Neurochir Pol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pjnns.2013.05.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pjnns.2013.05.003)

## Content

1. Neurol Neurochir Pol. 2014;48(2):130-5. doi: 10.1016/j.pjnns.2013.05.003. Epub
 2014 Feb 15.

Alternating hemiplegia of childhood: new diagnostic options.

Gergont A(1), Kaciński M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology of Children and Youth, Jagiellonian University, 
Collegium Medicum, Krakow, Poland. Electronic address: agergon@cm-uj.krakow.pl.
(2)Department of Neurology of Children and Youth, Jagiellonian University, 
Collegium Medicum, Krakow, Poland.

A syndrome of alternating hemiplegia of childhood (AHC) is a rare disorder first 
presented in 1971. AHC is characterized by transient episodes of hemiplegia 
affecting either one or both sides of the body. Age of onset is before 18 months 
and the common earliest manifestations are dystonic or tonic attacks and 
nystagmus. Hemiplegic episodes last minutes to days and the frequency and 
duration tend to decrease with time. Motor and intellectual development is 
affected, deficits may also develop later. Epileptic seizures occur in some 
patients. Neuroimaging of the brain usually reveals no abnormalities. The 
variability of individual clinical presentations and evolution of symptoms have 
made diagnosis difficult. Therefore the problems of misdiagnosis could account 
for the low prevalence of this syndrome. This paper hopes to present actual data 
on AHC, especially of the results of genetic research and new diagnostic tools.

Copyright © 2014 Polish Neurological Society. Published by Elsevier Urban & 
Partner Sp. z o.o. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pjnns.2013.05.003
PMID: 24821639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]