---
reference_id: "PMID:15365990"
title: Stability related bias in residues replacing glycines within the collagen triple helix (Gly-Xaa-Yaa) in inherited connective tissue disorders.
authors:
- Persikov AV
- Pillitteri RJ
- Amin P
- Schwarze U
- Byers PH
- Brodsky B
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1002/humu.20091
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stability related bias in residues replacing glycines within the collagen triple helix (Gly-Xaa-Yaa) in inherited connective tissue disorders.
**Authors:** Persikov AV, Pillitteri RJ, Amin P, Schwarze U, Byers PH, Brodsky B
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.20091](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.20091)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2004 Oct;24(4):330-7. doi: 10.1002/humu.20091.

Stability related bias in residues replacing glycines within the collagen triple 
helix (Gly-Xaa-Yaa) in inherited connective tissue disorders.

Persikov AV(1), Pillitteri RJ, Amin P, Schwarze U, Byers PH, Brodsky B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, University of 
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

A missense mutation leading to the replacement of one Gly in the (Gly-Xaa-Yaa)n 
repeat of the collagen triple helix can cause a range of heritable connective 
tissue disorders that depend on the gene in which the mutation occurs. 
Osteogenesis imperfecta results from mutations in type I collagen, Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome type IV from mutations in type III collagen, Alport syndrome from 
mutations in type IV collagen, and dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa from 
mutations in type VII collagen. The predicted rates of substitutions by 
different amino acids for glycine in the alpha1(I), alpha2(I), alpha1(III), 
alpha5(IV), and alpha1(VII) chains (encoded by COL1A1, COL1A2, COL3A1, COL4A5, 
and COL7A1, respectively) were compared with missense mutations in those chains 
that have been observed to cause disease. The spectrum of amino acids replacing 
Gly was not significantly different from that expected for the alpha1(VII) 
chains, suggesting that any Gly replacement will cause disease. The distribution 
of residues replacing Gly was significantly different from that expected for all 
other collagen chains studied, with a particularly strong bias seen for 
alpha1(I) and alpha1(III) collagen chains. The bias did not correlate with the 
degree of chemical dissimilarity between Gly and the replacement residues, but 
in some cases a relationship was observed with the predicted extent of 
destabilization of the triple helix. For alpha1(III) collagen chains, the more 
destabilizing mutations were identified more often than expected. For alpha1(I), 
the most destabilizing residues, Val, Glu, and Asp, and the least destabilizing 
residue, Ala, were underrepresented. This bias supports the hypothesis that the 
level of triple-helix destabilization determines clinical outcome.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20091
PMID: 15365990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]