---
reference_id: "PMID:33878780"
title: Impaired Fibrinolysis in the Antiphospholipid Syndrome.
authors:
- Antovic A
- Bruzelius M
journal: Semin Thromb Hemost
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1725098
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impaired Fibrinolysis in the Antiphospholipid Syndrome.
**Authors:** Antovic A, Bruzelius M
**Journal:** Semin Thromb Hemost (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0041-1725098](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0041-1725098)

## Content

1. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2021 Jul;47(5):506-511. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1725098. Epub
 2021 Apr 20.

Impaired Fibrinolysis in the Antiphospholipid Syndrome.

Antovic A(1)(2), Bruzelius M(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Hematology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

The pathogenesis of the antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is complex and involves 
the persistent presence of antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL) in the bloodstream 
causing a prothrombotic condition. aPL induce excessive activation of the 
endothelium, monocytes, and platelets in consort with aberrations in 
hemostasis/clotting, fibrinolytic system, and complement activation. Impaired 
fibrinolysis has been found in APS patients with thrombotic as well as obstetric 
manifestations. Increased levels of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 and 
thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor, together with the presence of aPL 
against annexin-2, tissue-type plasminogen activator, and plasminogen contribute 
to the compromised fibrinolytic activity in these patients. Furthermore, 
unfavorably altered fibrin morphology, less amenable to fibrinolysis, has been 
proposed as a novel prothrombotic mechanism in APS. This review aims to 
summarize the present knowledge of the mechanisms involved in impaired 
fibrinolysis in APS patients. We also present a case from clinical practice as 
an illustration of fibrinolysis impairment in APS patients from a real-life 
setting.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0041-1725098
PMID: 33878780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.