---
reference_id: "PMID:31269850"
title: Optic neuropathy in classical methylmalonic acidemia.
authors:
- AlOwain M
- Khalifa OA
- Al Sahlawi Z
- Hussein MH
- Sulaiman RA
- Al-Sayed M
- Rahbeeni Z
- Al-Hassnan Z
- Al-Zaidan H
- Nezzar H
- Al Homoud I
- Eldali A
- Altonen B
- Handoom BS
- Mbekeani JN
journal: Ophthalmic Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1080/13816810.2019.1634740
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/complications"
- Child
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Male
- "Optic Nerve Diseases/etiology, pathology"
- Prognosis
- Visual Acuity
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Optic neuropathy in classical methylmalonic acidemia.
**Authors:** AlOwain M, Khalifa OA, Al Sahlawi Z, Hussein MH, Sulaiman RA, Al-Sayed M, Rahbeeni Z, Al-Hassnan Z, Al-Zaidan H, Nezzar H, Al Homoud I, Eldali A, Altonen B, Handoom BS, Mbekeani JN
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1080/13816810.2019.1634740](https://doi.org/10.1080/13816810.2019.1634740)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Genet. 2019 Aug;40(4):313-322. doi: 10.1080/13816810.2019.1634740.
Epub 2019 Jul 4.

Optic neuropathy in classical methylmalonic acidemia.

AlOwain M(1)(2), Khalifa OA(3), Al Sahlawi Z(4), Hussein MH(5), Sulaiman
RA(1)(2), Al-Sayed M(1)(2), Rahbeeni Z(1)(2), Al-Hassnan Z(1)(2), Al-Zaidan
H(1)(2), Nezzar H(6)(7), Al Homoud I(8), Eldali A(9), Altonen B(10), Handoom
BS(11), Mbekeani JN(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research
Centre , Riyadh , Saudi Arabia.
(2)College of Medicine, Alfaisal University , Riyadh , Saudi Arabia.
(3)Genetics Unit, Pediatrics Department, Ain Shams University , Cairo , Egypt.
(4)Department of Pediatrics and Metabolic/Genetic Diseases, Salmaniya Medical
Complex , Manama , Kingdom of Bahrain.
(5)Department of Medicine, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center ,
Riyadh , Saudi Arabia.
(6)Image-Guided Clinical Neurosciences and Connectomics (IGCNC), Université
d'Auvergne , Clermont-Ferrand , France.
(7)Department of Ophthalmology, Dubai Hospital , Dubai , United Arab Emirates.
(8)Department of Neurosciences, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research
Centre , Riyadh , Saudi Arabia.
(9)Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Scientific Computing, King
Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre , Riyadh , Saudi Arabia.
(10)Department of Biostatistics, Research Administration, Health & Hospitals
Corporation , New York , NY , USA.
(11)Department of Nutrition Services, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and
Research Centre , Riyadh , Saudi Arabia.
(12)Department of Surgery (Ophthalmology), Jacobi Medical Centre , Bronx , NY ,
USA.
(13)Department of Ophthalmology & Visual Sciences, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine , Bronx , NY , USA.

Background: Classical MMA, caused by methylmalonyl-CoA mutase deficiency, may
result in late-onset dysfunction in several organ systems. To date, 10 cases of
optic neuropathy have been reported. The prevalence of optic neuropathy in
visually asymptomatic patients has not been determined. This study sought to
identify overt and subclinical optic neuropathy in a cohort with classical MMA.
Methods and Materials: Neuroophthalmic examinations were performed on 21
patients identified with classical MMA, older than 10years. Diagnosis of optic
neuropathy was determined by a combination of visual acuity, optic nerve
appearance and electrodiagnostic tests. Tabulated data were analyzed for
association of variables using SAS software. Significance was set at p < .05.
Results: Two-thirds were Saudi nationals and one third, Syrian. Age range was
11-29years. Eleven (52.4%) patients had optic neuropathy. Nine (81.8%) of these
were bilateral, seven (57.9% to 63.6%) reported decreased vision and four (33.1%
to 36.4%) were asymptomatic. Two patients had catastrophic vision loss,
following acute metabolic crises. Sixteen patients had chronic renal impairment
while three had renal hypertension. Seventeen patients had short stature and
eight, chronic pancreatitis. Methylmalonic acid levels ranged from 82 to
3,324µmol/L (Normal<1µmol/L). There was a significant association between optic
neuropathy and female gender (p = .011) and none with age, nationality, renal
impairment, pancreatitis or specific genotype. Conclusion: Optic neuropathy was
a frequent finding in classical MMA. It was often bilateral and some cases were
sub-clinical, lacking visual symptoms. These findings have important management
implications. Full ophthalmic evaluations should be performed early and
regularly in patients with MMA, even when patients are asymptomatic.

DOI: 10.1080/13816810.2019.1634740
PMID: 31269850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
