---
reference_id: "PMID:21221869"
title: Papillary thyroid carcinoma variants.
authors:
- Lloyd RV
- Buehler D
- Khanafshar E
journal: Head Neck Pathol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s12105-010-0236-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Papillary thyroid carcinoma variants.
**Authors:** Lloyd RV, Buehler D, Khanafshar E
**Journal:** Head Neck Pathol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12105-010-0236-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12105-010-0236-9)

## Content

1. Head Neck Pathol. 2011 Mar;5(1):51-6. doi: 10.1007/s12105-010-0236-9. Epub
2011  Jan 8.

Papillary thyroid carcinoma variants.

Lloyd RV(1), Buehler D, Khanafshar E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Wisconsin 
School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53792, USA. rvlloyd@wisc.edu

Papillary thyroid carcinomas are the most common thyroid cancers and constitute 
more than 70% of thyroid malignancies. The most common etiologic factor is 
radiation, but genetic susceptibility and other factors also contribute to the 
development of papillary thyroid carcinoma. The most common variants include 
conventional, follicular variant and tall cell variant. However, many other 
uncommon variants have been described including oncocytic, columnar cell, 
diffuse sclerosing and solid forms. Immunohistochemical staining with TTF-1 and 
thyroglobulin is very useful in confirming the diagnosis of papillary thyroid 
carcinoma especially in metastatic sites. Markers such as HBME-1 and CITED1 can 
assist in separating some difficult cases of follicular variants of papillary 
thyroid carcinomas from follicular adenomas. Molecular studies have shown that 
the BRAF V600E mutation is found mainly in papillary and anaplastic thyroid 
carcinomas. Other molecular markers such as HMGA2 and insulin-like growth factor 
II mRNA binding protein 3 have been used recently as molecular tests to separate 
papillary thyroid carcinoma and its variants from follicular adenomas and other 
benign thyroid nodules.

DOI: 10.1007/s12105-010-0236-9
PMCID: PMC3037461
PMID: 21221869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]