---
reference_id: "PMID:20482692"
title: "Isotretinoin: state of the art treatment for acne vulgaris."
authors:
- Ganceviciene R
- Zouboulis CC
journal: J Dtsch Dermatol Ges
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1111/j.1610-0387.2009.07238.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Isotretinoin: state of the art treatment for acne vulgaris.
**Authors:** Ganceviciene R, Zouboulis CC
**Journal:** J Dtsch Dermatol Ges (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1610-0387.2009.07238.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1610-0387.2009.07238.x)

## Content

1. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2010 Mar;8 Suppl 1:S47-59. doi: 
10.1111/j.1610-0387.2009.07238.x.

Isotretinoin: state of the art treatment for acne vulgaris.

Ganceviciene R(1), Zouboulis CC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Dessau Medical Center, Dessau, Germany.

Summary Isotretinoin (13-cis retinoic acid) is the most potent known inhibitor 
of sebum production. The multiple modes of action for isotretinoin, including 
suppression of sebaceous gland activity, normalization of the pattern of 
keratinization within the sebaceous gland follicle, inhibition of inflammation, 
reduction of growth of Propionibacterium acnes in a secondary manner and, as 
currently shown, normalization of the expression of matrix tissue 
metalloproteinases and their inhibitors make this compound the single most 
effective in the treatment of severe recalcitrant nodulocystic acne, and in the 
prevention of acne scarring. Several generic formulations for oral use have 
recently been introduced, in addition to the brand formulations Roaccutane and 
Accutane (Roche). This development, considering the high risk of teratogenicity 
associated with oral isotretinoin use, has led the European Commission and the 
European Medicines Agency (EMEA) to release a directive towards the 
harmonization of the Summary of Product Characteristics (SPC). This has 
similarities to US FDA regulations, a matter that caused the reaction of the 
Forum for the Improvement of Clinical Trials in Acne. Physician's experience, 
coupled with proper patient selection, dose adjustment or discontinuation of 
treatment, and routine monitoring for potential toxicity, has allowed the 
successful prevention and management of most adverse effects associated with 
isotretinoin.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1610-0387.2009.07238.x
PMID: 20482692