---
reference_id: "PMID:22127393"
title: "HSD10 disease: clinical consequences of mutations in the HSD17B10 gene."
authors:
- Zschocke J
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-011-9415-4
keywords:
- 3-Hydroxyacyl CoA Dehydrogenases/genetics
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diet therapy, genetics"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Family Health
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Isoleucine/genetics
- Male
- "Models, Genetic"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HSD10 disease: clinical consequences of mutations in the HSD17B10 gene.
**Authors:** Zschocke J
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-011-9415-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-011-9415-4)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2012 Jan;35(1):81-9. doi: 10.1007/s10545-011-9415-4. Epub
 2011 Nov 30.

HSD10 disease: clinical consequences of mutations in the HSD17B10 gene.

Zschocke J(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Medical University Innsbruck, Schöpfstr 41, 6020 
Innsbruck, Austria. johannes.zschocke@i-med.ac.at

The HSD17B10 gene is located on chromosome Xp11.2 and codes for a 
multifunctional protein called 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 10 (HSD10). 
This protein catalyzes the 2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenation (MHBD) 
reaction in isoleucine metabolism and is an essential component of mitochondrial 
RNase P required for the processing of mtDNA transcripts. HSD10 is required for 
normal mitochondrial maintenance, and complete loss of HSD10 is incompatible 
with life. Mutations in the HSD17B10 gene have been reported in 19 families. The 
classical infantile form of what is best named HSD10 disease is characterized by 
a period of more or less normal development in the first 6-18 months of life. 
Some patients showed transient metabolic derangement in the neonatal period, 
with good clinical recovery but often persistent lactate elevation. Usually from 
age 6-18 months affected boys show a progressive neurodegenerative disease 
course in conjunction with retinopathy and cardiomyopathy leading to death at 
age 2-4 years or later. A more severe presentation in the neonatal period with 
little neurological development, severe progressive cardiomyopathy, and early 
death, is denoted neonatal form. Juvenile and atypical/asymptomatic forms of 
HSD10 disease have been recognized. Heterozygous females often show 
non-progressive developmental delay and intellectual disability but may also be 
clinically normal. The pathogenesis is poorly understood but is unrelated to 
MHBD function. Diagnosis is based on typical abnormalities in urinary organic 
acid analysis and molecular studies. The same de novo mutation p.R130C was found 
in over half of patient families; it is associated with the infantile disease 
form. There is no effective treatment.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-011-9415-4
PMID: 22127393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]