---
reference_id: "PMID:39126118"
title: CRKL Enhances YAP Signaling through Binding and JNK/JUN Pathway Activation in Liver Cancer.
authors:
- Wesener MC
- Weiler SME
- Bissinger M
- Klessinger TF
- Rose F
- Merker S
- Luzarowski M
- Ruppert T
- Helm B
- Klingmüller U
- Schirmacher P
- Breuhahn K
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25158549
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CRKL Enhances YAP Signaling through Binding and JNK/JUN Pathway Activation in Liver Cancer.
**Authors:** Wesener MC, Weiler SME, Bissinger M, Klessinger TF, Rose F, Merker S, Luzarowski M, Ruppert T, Helm B, Klingmüller U, Schirmacher P, Breuhahn K
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25158549](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25158549)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Aug 5;25(15):8549. doi: 10.3390/ijms25158549.

CRKL Enhances YAP Signaling through Binding and JNK/JUN Pathway Activation in 
Liver Cancer.

Wesener MC(1), Weiler SME(1), Bissinger M(1), Klessinger TF(1), Rose F(1), 
Merker S(2), Luzarowski M(2), Ruppert T(2), Helm B(3), Klingmüller U(3), 
Schirmacher P(1), Breuhahn K(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, 
Germany.
(2)CFMP, Core Facility for Mass Spectrometry & Proteomics at the Center for 
Molecular Biology (ZMBH), Heidelberg University, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)DKFZ, German Cancer Research Center Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

The Hippo pathway transducers yes-associated protein (YAP) and WW-domain 
containing transcription regulator 1 (WWTR1/TAZ) are key regulators of liver 
tumorigenesis, promoting tumor formation and progression. Although the first 
inhibitors are in clinical trials, targeting the relevant upstream regulators of 
YAP/TAZ activity could prove equally beneficial. To identify regulators of 
YAP/TAZ activity in hepatocarcinoma (HCC) cells, we carried out a proximity 
labelling approach (BioID) coupled with mass spectrometry. We verified CRK-like 
proto-oncogene adaptor protein (CRKL) as a new YAP-exclusive interaction 
partner. CRKL is highly expressed in HCC patients, and its expression is 
associated with YAP activity as well as poor survival prognosis. In vitro 
experiments demonstrated CRKL-dependent cell survival and the loss of YAP 
binding induced through actin disruption. Moreover, we delineated the activation 
of the JNK/JUN pathway by CRKL, which promoted YAP transcription. Our data 
illustrate that CRKL not only promoted YAP activity through its binding but also 
through the induction of YAP transcription by JNK/JUN activation. This 
emphasizes the potential use of targeting the JNK/JUN pathway to suppress YAP 
expression in HCC patients.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25158549
PMCID: PMC11312940
PMID: 39126118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.