---
reference_id: "PMID:34572129"
title: Muscle-Related Plectinopathies.
authors:
- Zrelski MM
- Kustermann M
- Winter L
journal: Cells
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/cells10092480
keywords:
- Animals
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex/metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism, pathology"
- "Muscular Dystrophies/metabolism, pathology"
- Plectin/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Muscle-Related Plectinopathies.
**Authors:** Zrelski MM, Kustermann M, Winter L
**Journal:** Cells (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells10092480](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells10092480)

## Content

1. Cells. 2021 Sep 19;10(9):2480. doi: 10.3390/cells10092480.

Muscle-Related Plectinopathies.

Zrelski MM(1), Kustermann M(1), Winter L(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Neuromuscular Research Department, 
Medical University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria.

Plectin is a giant cytoskeletal crosslinker and intermediate filament 
stabilizing protein. Mutations in the human plectin gene (PLEC) cause several 
rare diseases that are grouped under the term plectinopathies. The most common 
disorder is autosomal recessive disease epidermolysis bullosa simplex with 
muscular dystrophy (EBS-MD), which is characterized by skin blistering and 
progressive muscle weakness. Besides EBS-MD, PLEC mutations lead to EBS with 
nail dystrophy, EBS-MD with a myasthenic syndrome, EBS with pyloric atresia, 
limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type R17, or EBS-Ogna. In this review, we focus 
on the clinical and pathological manifestations caused by PLEC mutations on 
skeletal and cardiac muscle. Skeletal muscle biopsies from EBS-MD patients and 
plectin-deficient mice revealed severe dystrophic features with variation in 
fiber size, degenerative myofibrillar changes, mitochondrial alterations, and 
pathological desmin-positive protein aggregates. Ultrastructurally, PLEC 
mutations lead to a disorganization of myofibrils and sarcomeres, Z- and I-band 
alterations, autophagic vacuoles and cytoplasmic bodies, and misplaced and 
degenerating mitochondria. We also summarize a variety of genetically 
manipulated mouse and cell models, which are either plectin-deficient or that 
specifically lack a skeletal muscle-expressed plectin isoform. These models are 
powerful tools to study functional and molecular consequences of PLEC defects 
and their downstream effects on the skeletal muscle organization.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10092480
PMCID: PMC8466646
PMID: 34572129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.