---
reference_id: "PMID:31994716"
title: "Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics of the Small Interfering Ribonucleic Acid, Givosiran, in Patients With Acute Hepatic Porphyria."
authors:
- Agarwal S
- Simon AR
- Goel V
- Habtemariam BA
- Clausen VA
- Kim JB
- Robbie GJ
journal: Clin Pharmacol Ther
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/cpt.1802
keywords:
- "Acetylgalactosamine/administration & dosage, analogs & derivatives, pharmacokinetics, pharmacology"
- Adult
- Aminolevulinic Acid/urine
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Drug Administration Schedule
- Female
- Half-Life
- Humans
- "Injections, Subcutaneous"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Porphobilinogen/urine
- "Porphyria, Acute Intermittent/drug therapy"
- "Pyrrolidines/administration & dosage, pharmacokinetics, pharmacology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics of the Small Interfering Ribonucleic Acid, Givosiran, in Patients With Acute Hepatic Porphyria.
**Authors:** Agarwal S, Simon AR, Goel V, Habtemariam BA, Clausen VA, Kim JB, Robbie GJ
**Journal:** Clin Pharmacol Ther (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cpt.1802](https://doi.org/10.1002/cpt.1802)

## Content

1. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2020 Jul;108(1):63-72. doi: 10.1002/cpt.1802. Epub 2020
Mar  7.

Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics of the Small Interfering Ribonucleic Acid,
Givosiran, in Patients With Acute Hepatic Porphyria.

Agarwal S(1), Simon AR(1), Goel V(1), Habtemariam BA(1), Clausen VA(1), Kim
JB(1), Robbie GJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Givosiran is a small interfering ribonucleic acid agent that was recently
approved in the United States for the treatment of acute hepatic porphyria
(AHP). This phase I study evaluated the safety, pharmacokinetic, and
pharmacodynamic profile of subcutaneously (SC) administered givosiran in
patients with acute intermittent porphyria, the most common AHP type. Givosiran
was rapidly absorbed from the SC injection site with peak plasma concentrations
achieved within 0.5-5 hours followed by elimination with a short half-life of
4-10 hours. Plasma exposures of AS(N-1)3' givosiran, an active metabolite with
equal potency as givosiran, was 35%-75%. Givosiran treatment resulted in a rapid
and dose-dependent reduction in urinary aminolevulinic acid (ALA) and
porphobilinogen (PBG) towards the upper limit of normal (ULN) in AHP patients.
Greater and more sustained reductions in ALA and PBG were achieved with once
monthly dosing compared with once quarterly dosing. After monthly dosing, trough
ALA levels were reduced to below the ULN, approximately 95% reduction from
baseline, at both the 2.5 and 5.0 mg/kg doses.

© 2020 Alnylam Pharmaceuticals Inc. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics © 2020
American Society for Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1002/cpt.1802
PMID: 31994716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
