---
reference_id: "PMID:38163269"
title: Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction-Based Detection and Quantification of Hepatitis B Virus DNA.
authors:
- Bag S
- Ghosh S
- Lalwani R
- Vishnoi P
- Gupta S
- Dubey D
journal: J Vis Exp
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3791/66249
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction-Based Detection and Quantification of Hepatitis B Virus DNA.
**Authors:** Bag S, Ghosh S, Lalwani R, Vishnoi P, Gupta S, Dubey D
**Journal:** J Vis Exp (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3791/66249](https://doi.org/10.3791/66249)

## Content

1. J Vis Exp. 2023 Dec 15;(202). doi: 10.3791/66249.

Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction-Based Detection and Quantification of 
Hepatitis B Virus DNA.

Bag S(1), Ghosh S(2), Lalwani R(2), Vishnoi P(2), Gupta S(2), Dubey D(3).

Author information:
(1)3B BlackBio Biotech India Limited; satya@3bblackbio.com.
(2)3B BlackBio Biotech India Limited.
(3)3B BlackBio Biotech India Limited; d.dubey@3bblackbio.com.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a significant cause of liver disease worldwide. It 
can lead to acute or chronic infections, making individuals highly susceptible 
to fatal cirrhosis and liver cancer. Accurate detection and quantification of 
HBV DNA in the blood are essential for diagnosing and monitoring HBV infection. 
The most common method for detecting HBV DNA is real-time PCR, which can be used 
to detect the virus and assess the viral load to monitor the response to 
antiviral therapy. Here, we describe a detailed protocol for the detection and 
quantification of HBV DNA in human serum or plasma using an IVD-marked real-time 
PCR-based kit. The kit uses primers and probes that target the highly conserved 
core region of the HBV genome and can accurately quantify all HBV genotypes (A, 
B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, and J). The kit also includes an endogenous internal 
control to monitor possible PCR inhibition. This assay runs for 40 cycles, and 
its cutoff is 38 Ct. For the quantification of HBV DNA in clinical samples, a 
set of 5 quantification standards is provided with the kit. The standards 
contain known concentrations of HBV-specific DNA that are calibrated against the 
4th WHO International Standard for HBV DNA for the nucleic acid test (NIBSC code 
10/266). The standards are used to validate the functionality of the 
HBV-specific DNA amplification and to generate a standard curve, allowing the 
quantification of HBV DNA in a sample. HBV DNA as low as 2.5 IU/mL was detected 
using the PCR kit. The high sensitivity and reproducibility of the kit make it a 
powerful tool in clinical laboratories, aiding healthcare professionals in 
effectively diagnosing and managing HBV infections.

DOI: 10.3791/66249
PMID: 38163269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]