---
reference_id: "PMID:29263051"
title: Microduplications of 10q24 Detected in Two Chinese Patients with Split-hand/foot Malformation Type 3.
authors:
- Xiang R
- Du R
- Guo S
- Jin JY
- Fan LL
- Tang JY
- Zhou ZB
journal: Ann Clin Lab Sci
year: '2017'
keywords:
- Asian People/genetics
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 10/genetics"
- Female
- Gene Duplication
- Humans
- Infant
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Male
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Microduplications of 10q24 Detected in Two Chinese Patients with Split-hand/foot Malformation Type 3.
**Authors:** Xiang R, Du R, Guo S, Jin JY, Fan LL, Tang JY, Zhou ZB
**Journal:** Ann Clin Lab Sci (2017)

## Content

1. Ann Clin Lab Sci. 2017 Nov;47(6):754-757.

Microduplications of 10q24 Detected in Two Chinese Patients with Split-hand/foot 
Malformation Type 3.

Xiang R(1), Du R(1), Guo S(1), Jin JY(1), Fan LL(1), Tang JY(2), Zhou ZB(3).

Author information:
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics & School of Life Sciences, 
Central South University, Changsha, China.
(2)Department of Orthopaedics, Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, 
Changsha, China.
(3)Department of Orthopaedics, Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, 
Changsha, China xy_zhouzhengbing@126.com.

Split hand/foot malformation (SHFM) is a congenital heterogeneous disorder with 
prominent limb deficiency. Seven loci have been identified to associate with 
SHFM, including SHFM1 to SHFM6 and SHFM/SHFLD. SHFM3 is an autosomal dominant 
disease, of which the pathogenesis is closely related to the genomic 
rearrangements at 10q24.We described two Chinese patients with the SHFM3 
phenotype by high-resolution SNP array technology. We detected a 534kb 
microduplication at 10q24 encompassing TLX1, LBX1, BTRC and POLL, and a 600kb 
duplication with TLX1, LBX1, BTRC, POLL, and FBXW4 located. Sequencing analysis 
did not find any pathogenic mutations in genes within the region detected by SNP 
Array Analysis. Our findings may offer more evidence for the further mechanism 
research of limb-specific congenital disease and will give more precise 
diagnosis to SHFM3 patients.

© 2017 by the Association of Clinical Scientists, Inc.

PMID: 29263051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]