---
reference_id: "PMID:8683283"
title: "Central nervous system atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors of infancy and childhood: definition of an entity."
authors:
- Rorke LB
- Packer RJ
- Biegel JA
journal: J Neurosurg
year: '1996'
doi: 10.3171/jns.1996.85.1.0056
keywords:
- Antibodies/immunology
- Central Nervous System Neoplasms/diagnosis
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Infant
- Male
- "Microscopy, Electron"
- Prognosis
- "Rhabdoid Tumor/diagnosis, ultrastructure"
- "Teratoma/diagnosis, ultrastructure"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Central nervous system atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors of infancy and childhood: definition of an entity.
**Authors:** Rorke LB, Packer RJ, Biegel JA
**Journal:** J Neurosurg (1996)
**DOI:** [10.3171/jns.1996.85.1.0056](https://doi.org/10.3171/jns.1996.85.1.0056)

## Content

1. J Neurosurg. 1996 Jul;85(1):56-65. doi: 10.3171/jns.1996.85.1.0056.

Central nervous system atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors of infancy and
childhood: definition of an entity.

Rorke LB(1), Packer RJ, Biegel JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathological Anatomy, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA.

Clinical and pathological features of 52 infants and children with atypical
teratoid/rhabdoid tumor (ATT/RhT) of the central nervous system are defined.
This tumor is typically misdiagnosed as a primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET)
primarily because 70% of ATT/RhTs contain fields indistinguishable from classic
PNETs. Separation of these two tumor types is crucial because the prognosis for
ATT/RhT is given even when treatment includes surgery with or without radio
and/or chemotherapy. These tumors are most common in infants less than 2 years
of age. The cases described in this study arose in intracranially in all but one
instance, although one-third had already spread throughout the subarachnoid
space at presentation. Clinical signs and symptoms and radiological features do
not distinguish ATT/RhTs from PNETs. The tumors are composed entirely (13%) or
partly (77%) or rhabdoid cells. Seventy percent contains fields of typical PNET
alone or in combinations with mesenchymal and/r epithelial elements. The
immunohistochemical profile is unique: epithelial membrane antigen, vimentin,
and smooth-muscle actin are positive in the majority of tumors and markers for
germ-cell tumors are consistently negative. Abnormalities of chromosome 22
distinguish ATT/RhTs from PNETs, which typically display an i(17q) abnormality.

DOI: 10.3171/jns.1996.85.1.0056
PMID: 8683283 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
