---
reference_id: "PMID:39622313"
title: "Corticosteroid-responsive narcolepsy type II after COVID-19: A relevant differential diagnosis of post-COVID syndrome (a case report)."
authors:
- Künstler ECS
- Menrad S
- Utech I
- Finke K
- Rupprecht S
journal: J Sleep Res
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/jsr.14406
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Corticosteroid-responsive narcolepsy type II after COVID-19: A relevant differential diagnosis of post-COVID syndrome (a case report).
**Authors:** Künstler ECS, Menrad S, Utech I, Finke K, Rupprecht S
**Journal:** J Sleep Res (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jsr.14406](https://doi.org/10.1111/jsr.14406)

## Content

1. J Sleep Res. 2025 Aug;34(4):e14406. doi: 10.1111/jsr.14406. Epub 2024 Dec 2.

Corticosteroid-responsive narcolepsy type II after COVID-19: A relevant 
differential diagnosis of post-COVID syndrome (a case report).

Künstler ECS(1)(2), Menrad S(1)(2), Utech I(1), Finke K(1), Rupprecht S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Jena University Hospital, Jena, Germany.
(2)Interdisciplinary Centre for Sleep and Ventilatory Medicine, Jena University 
Hospital, Jena, Germany.

Excessive daytime sleepiness is a possible symptom of post-COVID syndrome and is 
also the cardinal symptom of narcolepsy, a rare life-long sleep disorder with a 
possible autoimmune background. Recent reports indicate that COVID-19 infection 
may trigger narcolepsy. However, it remains unclear how best to identify and 
treat such cases. A 25-year-old male developed daytime sleepiness after COVID-19 
infection. A diagnosis of narcolepsy type II was made based on pathologically 
shortened sleep latencies in polysomnography and multiple sleep latency tests 
(MSLT) together with several sleep-onset REM-sleep periods (SOREMs). 
Pupillography and neuropsychological testing revealed reduced alertness levels. 
Hypocretin levels in the cerebrospinal fluid were borderline. Based on the 
postulated autoimmune background of narcolepsy, we performed an intravenous 
high-dose corticosteroid pulse therapy with methylprednisolone. Narcoleptic 
symptoms immediately and consistently remitted after the corticosteroid pulse. 
Follow-up after 4 months revealed normalisation of sleep latencies, no further 
SOREMs in the MSLT, and increased alertness in pupillography and neurocognitive 
testing. No further wakefulness promoting drug therapy was required. Narcolepsy 
should be considered in the differential diagnosis of post-COVID syndrome with 
leading symptoms of daytime sleepiness. Furthermore, immunosuppressive therapy 
may offer a treatment option in managing an otherwise lifelong disorder in 
select cases.

© 2024 The Author(s). Journal of Sleep Research published by John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd on behalf of European Sleep Research Society.

DOI: 10.1111/jsr.14406
PMCID: PMC12215223
PMID: 39622313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors report no conflict of interest.