---
reference_id: "PMID:18626615"
title: "[Cutaneous larva migrans]."
authors:
- Hoff NP
- Mota R
- Groffik A
- Hengge UR
journal: Hautarzt
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1007/s00105-008-1514-2
keywords:
- Ancylostoma
- "Ancylostomiasis/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Animals
- "Anthelmintics/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- "Ivermectin/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Larva Migrans/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Pruritus/etiology
- Travel
- Tropical Climate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Cutaneous larva migrans].
**Authors:** Hoff NP, Mota R, Groffik A, Hengge UR
**Journal:** Hautarzt (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00105-008-1514-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00105-008-1514-2)

## Content

1. Hautarzt. 2008 Aug;59(8):622-6. doi: 10.1007/s00105-008-1514-2.

[Cutaneous larva migrans].

[Article in German]

Hoff NP(1), Mota R, Groffik A, Hengge UR.

Author information:
(1)Hautklinik der Heinrich-Heine-Universität, Moorenstrasse 5, 40225 Düsseldorf.

As a result of the rise of mass tourism with increasingly cheap and exotic 
destinations, tropical diseases are becoming an increasingly important part of 
dermatology. Infection with cutaneous larva migrans is one of the most common 
"souvenirs" from the tropics. The disease is caused by the nematode infection 
with dog or cat hookworm parasites (Ancylostoma braziliense or A. caninum). The 
characteristic manifestation is a gyrated, serpiginous and in some cases 
vesicular erythema, which appears after penetration of the epidermis by the 
parasite and the subsequent intraepidermal migration of the larva. This is often 
accompanied by intense pruritus in the affected skin. The infection is usually 
found in those areas of the foot, calf or buttocks exposed by walking or sitting 
on sand. Although subjectively very unpleasant, the disease is self-limiting and 
resolves after several weeks; it is treated locally in most cases (e.g. using 
cryotherapy). The prognosis of the disease is excellent, but a prolonged course 
or complications have been observed, e.g. due to superinfection.

DOI: 10.1007/s00105-008-1514-2
PMID: 18626615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]