---
reference_id: "PMID:8644955"
title: Emergency department presentation and misdiagnosis of imported falciparum malaria.
authors:
- Kyriacou DN
- Spira AM
- Talan DA
- Mabey DC
journal: Ann Emerg Med
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1016/s0196-0644(96)70186-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Emergency department presentation and misdiagnosis of imported falciparum malaria.
**Authors:** Kyriacou DN, Spira AM, Talan DA, Mabey DC
**Journal:** Ann Emerg Med (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0196-0644(96)70186-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0196-0644(96)70186-5)

## Content

1. Ann Emerg Med. 1996 Jun;27(6):696-9. doi: 10.1016/s0196-0644(96)70186-5.

Emergency department presentation and misdiagnosis of imported falciparum 
malaria.

Kyriacou DN(1), Spira AM, Talan DA, Mabey DC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Olive View-UCLA Medical Center, Sylmar, 
USA.

STUDY OBJECTIVE: To review the travel history, clinical presentation, laboratory 
findings, diagnostic accuracy, management, and outcome of the largest reported 
series of emergency department patients with imported falciparum malaria in the 
United States.
METHODS: This is a retrospective case series at large, inner-city medical center 
in Los Angeles. Twenty cases of falciparum malaria with initial medical 
evaluation in the ED were identified from the period 1979 through 1993.
RESULTS: Fifteen male and 5 female patients were identified, with an age range 
of 5 to 55 years. All had a recent history (within 2 months) of international 
travel in regions endemic for malaria. Most (85%) were recent immigrants or 
expatriates returning from a recent visit to their native country. The most 
common documented symptoms were fever (100%), chills (65%), vomiting (60%), 
anorexia (45%), and headache (45%). Tachycardia (85%) and hyperpyrexia (> 39 
degrees C) (65%) were the most common presenting signs. Malaria was considered 
in the ED diagnoses in only 12 cases (60%). The specification of falciparum 
(malignant) malaria was established in only 2 cases (10%). Hepatitis and 
gastroenteritis were the most common misdiagnoses. Only four patients received 
antimalarial medication in the ED. There were no deaths, and complications were 
limited to thrombocytopenia and anemia. Two patients required transfusion.
CONCLUSION: Imported falciparum malaria presenting to EDs in the United States 
is frequently misdiagnosed. Emergency physicians improve their ability to 
diagnose falciparum malaria by obtaining a thorough travel history on all 
patients with clinical features suggesting an infectious origin and considering 
this diagnosis in any patient with a history of travel to or migration from 
malaria-endemic areas.

DOI: 10.1016/s0196-0644(96)70186-5
PMID: 8644955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]