---
reference_id: PMID:21402586
title: "The ageing lens and cataract: a model of normal and pathological ageing."
authors:
- Michael R
- Bron AJ
journal: Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2010.0300
keywords:
- Aging/physiology
- "Cataract/pathology, physiopathology"
- "Crystallins/genetics, metabolism"
- Free Radical Scavengers/metabolism
- Humans
- "Lens, Crystalline/growth & development, pathology, physiology"
- "Models, Biological"
- Optical Phenomena
- Oxidative Stress/physiology
- Presbyopia/physiopathology
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The ageing lens and cataract: a model of normal and pathological ageing.
**Authors:** Michael R, Bron AJ
**Journal:** Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1098/rstb.2010.0300](https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2010.0300)

## Content

1. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2011 Apr 27;366(1568):1278-92. doi: 
10.1098/rstb.2010.0300.

The ageing lens and cataract: a model of normal and pathological ageing.

Michael R(1), Bron AJ.

Author information:
(1)Institut Universitari Barraquer, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Laforja 
88, 08021 Barcelona, Spain. ralphm@barraquer.com

Cataract is a visible opacity in the lens substance, which, when located on the 
visual axis, leads to visual loss. Age-related cataract is a cause of blindness 
on a global scale involving genetic and environmental influences. With ageing, 
lens proteins undergo non-enzymatic, post-translational modification and the 
accumulation of fluorescent chromophores, increasing susceptibility to oxidation 
and cross-linking and increased light-scatter. Because the human lens grows 
throughout life, the lens core is exposed for a longer period to such influences 
and the risk of oxidative damage increases in the fourth decade when a barrier 
to the transport of glutathione forms around the lens nucleus. Consequently, as 
the lens ages, its transparency falls and the nucleus becomes more rigid, 
resisting the change in shape necessary for accommodation. This is the basis of 
presbyopia. In some individuals, the steady accumulation of chromophores and 
complex, insoluble crystallin aggregates in the lens nucleus leads to the 
formation of a brown nuclear cataract. The process is homogeneous and the 
affected lens fibres retain their gross morphology. Cortical opacities are due 
to changes in membrane permeability and enzyme function and shear-stress damage 
to lens fibres with continued accommodative effort. Unlike nuclear cataract, 
progression is intermittent, stepwise and non-uniform.

DOI: 10.1098/rstb.2010.0300
PMCID: PMC3061107
PMID: 21402586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]