---
reference_id: "PMID:39273498"
title: "Identifying microRNAs Possibly Implicated in Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome and Fibromyalgia: A Review."
authors:
- Tsamou M
- Kremers FAC
- Samaritakis KA
- Roggen EL
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25179551
keywords:
- "Fatigue Syndrome, Chronic/genetics, diagnosis"
- Humans
- Fibromyalgia/genetics
- MicroRNAs/genetics
- Biomarkers
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Oxidative Stress/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identifying microRNAs Possibly Implicated in Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome and Fibromyalgia: A Review.
**Authors:** Tsamou M, Kremers FAC, Samaritakis KA, Roggen EL
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25179551](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25179551)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Sep 3;25(17):9551. doi: 10.3390/ijms25179551.

Identifying microRNAs Possibly Implicated in Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic 
Fatigue Syndrome and Fibromyalgia: A Review.

Tsamou M(1), Kremers FAC(1), Samaritakis KA(1), Roggen EL(1).

Author information:
(1)ToxGenSolutions (TGS), 6229 EV Maastricht, The Netherlands.

Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) and fibromyalgia 
(FM) are chronic syndromes of unknown etiology, accompanied by numerous symptoms 
affecting neurological and physical conditions. Despite frequent revisions of 
the diagnostic criteria, clinical practice guidelines are often outdated, 
leading to underdiagnosis and ineffective treatment. Our aim was to identify 
microRNA (miRNA) biomarkers implicated in pathological mechanisms underlying 
these diseases. A comprehensive literature review using publicly accessible 
databases was conducted. Interesting miRNAs were extracted from relevant 
publications on ME/CFS and/or FM, and were then linked to pathophysiological 
processes possibly manifesting these chronic diseases. Dysregulated miRNAs in 
ME/CFS and FM may serve as promising biomarkers for these diseases. Key 
identified miRNAs, such as miR-29c, miR-99b, miR-128, miR-374b, and miR-766, 
were frequently mentioned for their roles in immune response, mitochondrial 
dysfunction, oxidative stress, and central sensitization, while miR-23a, 
miR-103, miR-152, and miR-320 were implicated in multiple crucial pathological 
processes for FM and/or ME/CFS. In summary, both ME/CFS and FM seem to share 
many dysregulated biological or molecular processes, which may contribute to 
their commonly shared symptoms. This miRNA-based approach offers new angles for 
discovering molecular markers urgently needed for early diagnosis or 
therapeutics to tackle the pathology of these medically unexplained chronic 
diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25179551
PMCID: PMC11395538
PMID: 39273498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors were employed by the company 
ToxGenSolutions. The authors declare that the research was conducted in the 
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as 
a potential conflict of interest.