---
reference_id: "PMID:27784853"
title: Phenotypic Variability of ANK2 Mutations in Patients With Inherited Primary Arrhythmia Syndromes.
authors:
- Ichikawa M
- Aiba T
- Ohno S
- Shigemizu D
- Ozawa J
- Sonoda K
- Fukuyama M
- Itoh H
- Miyamoto Y
- Tsunoda T
- Makiyama T
- Tanaka T
- Shimizu W
- Horie M
journal: Circ J
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1253/circj.CJ-16-0486
keywords:
- Adult
- Ankyrins/genetics
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac/epidemiology, genetics"
- Asian People
- Child
- Exons
- Female
- "Genetic Diseases, Inborn/epidemiology, genetics"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Japan/epidemiology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Prevalence
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypic Variability of ANK2 Mutations in Patients With Inherited Primary Arrhythmia Syndromes.
**Authors:** Ichikawa M, Aiba T, Ohno S, Shigemizu D, Ozawa J, Sonoda K, Fukuyama M, Itoh H, Miyamoto Y, Tsunoda T, Makiyama T, Tanaka T, Shimizu W, Horie M
**Journal:** Circ J (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1253/circj.CJ-16-0486](https://doi.org/10.1253/circj.CJ-16-0486)

## Content

1. Circ J. 2016 Nov 25;80(12):2435-2442. doi: 10.1253/circj.CJ-16-0486. Epub 2016
 Oct 25.

Phenotypic Variability of ANK2 Mutations in Patients With Inherited Primary
Arrhythmia Syndromes.

Ichikawa M(1), Aiba T, Ohno S, Shigemizu D, Ozawa J, Sonoda K, Fukuyama M, Itoh
H, Miyamoto Y, Tsunoda T, Makiyama T, Tanaka T, Shimizu W, Horie M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular and Respiratory Medicine, Shiga University of
Medical Science.

BACKGROUND: Mutations inANK2have been reported to cause various arrhythmia
phenotypes. The prevalence ofANK2mutation carriers in inherited primary
arrhythmia syndrome (IPAS), however, remains unknown in Japanese. Using a
next-generation sequencer, we aimed to identifyANK2mutations in our cohort of
IPAS patients, in whom conventional Sanger sequencing failed to identify
pathogenic mutations in major causative genes, and to assess the clinical
characteristics ofANK2mutation carriers.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We screened 535 probands with IPAS and analyzed 46 genes
including wholeANK2exons using a bench-top NGS (MiSeq, Illumina) or performed
whole-exome-sequencing using HiSeq2000 (Illumina). As a result, 12 of 535
probands (2.2%, aged 0-61 years, 5 males) were found to carry 7 different
heterozygousANK2mutations.ANK2-W1535R was identified in 5 LQTS patients and 1
symptomatic BrS and was predicted as damaging by multiple prediction software.
In total, as to phenotype, there were 8 LQTS, 2 BrS, 1 IVF, and 1 SSS/AF.
Surprisingly, 4/8 LQTS patients had the acquired type of LQTS (aLQTS) and
suffered torsades de pointes. A total of 7 of 12 patients had documented
malignant ventricular tachyarrhythmias.
CONCLUSIONS: VariousANK2mutations are associated with a wide range of
phenotypes, including aLQTS, especially with ventricular fibrillation,
representing "ankyrin-B" syndrome. (Circ J 2016; 80: 2435-2442).

DOI: 10.1253/circj.CJ-16-0486
PMID: 27784853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
