---
reference_id: "PMID:35958604"
title: "Synovial Macrophages: Past Life, Current Situation, and Application in Inflammatory Arthritis."
authors:
- Bai LK
- Su YZ
- Wang XX
- Bai B
- Zhang CQ
- Zhang LY
- Zhang GL
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.905356
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Synovial Macrophages: Past Life, Current Situation, and Application in Inflammatory Arthritis.
**Authors:** Bai LK, Su YZ, Wang XX, Bai B, Zhang CQ, Zhang LY, Zhang GL
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2022.905356](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.905356)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2022 Jul 26;13:905356. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.905356. 
eCollection 2022.

Synovial Macrophages: Past Life, Current Situation, and Application in 
Inflammatory Arthritis.

Bai LK(1), Su YZ(1), Wang XX(1), Bai B(2), Zhang CQ(3), Zhang LY(1), Zhang 
GL(3).

Author information:
(1)Third Hospital of Shanxi Medical University, Shanxi Bethune Hospital, Shanxi 
Academy of Medical Sciences, Tongji Shanxi Hospital, Taiyuan, Shanxi, China.
(2)First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical University, Dalian Medical 
University, Dalian, China.
(3)Fifth Hospital of Shanxi Medical University, Shanxi Provincial People's 
Hospital, Taiyuan, Shanxi, China.

Inflammatory arthritis is an inflammatory disease that involves the joints and 
surrounding tissues. Synovial hyperplasia often presents when joints become 
inflamed due to immune cell infiltration. Synovial membrane is an important as 
well as a highly specific component of the joint, and its lesions can lead to 
degeneration of the joint surface, causing pain and joint disability or 
affecting the patients' quality of life in severe cases. Synovial macrophages 
(SMs) are one of the cellular components of the synovial membrane, which not 
only retain the function of macrophages to engulf foreign bodies in the joint 
cavity, but also interact with synovial fibroblasts (SFs), T cells, B cells, and 
other inflammatory cells to promote the production of a variety of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, such as TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-8, and IL-6, 
which are involved in the pathogenic process of inflammatory arthritis. SMs from 
different tissue sources have differently differentiated potentials and 
functional expressions. This article provides a summary on studies pertaining to 
SMs in inflammatory arthritis, and explores their role in its treatment, in 
order to highlight novel treatment modalities for the disease.

Copyright © 2022 Bai, Su, Wang, Bai, Zhang, Zhang and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.905356
PMCID: PMC9361854
PMID: 35958604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.