---
reference_id: "PMID:38869283"
title: VP1 is the primary determinant of neuropathogenesis in a mouse model of enterovirus D68 acute flaccid myelitis.
authors:
- Leser JS
- Frost JL
- Wilson CJ
- Rudy MJ
- Clarke P
- Tyler KL
journal: J Virol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1128/jvi.00397-24
keywords:
- Animals
- "Enterovirus D, Human/pathogenicity, genetics, physiology"
- Myelitis/virology
- Mice
- "Enterovirus Infections/virology, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/virology, pathology"
- "Capsid Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Central Nervous System Viral Diseases/virology, pathology"
- Humans
- "Spinal Cord/virology, pathology"
- "Motor Neurons/virology, pathology"
- "Animals, Newborn"
- Virulence
- Paralysis/virology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# VP1 is the primary determinant of neuropathogenesis in a mouse model of enterovirus D68 acute flaccid myelitis.
**Authors:** Leser JS, Frost JL, Wilson CJ, Rudy MJ, Clarke P, Tyler KL
**Journal:** J Virol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jvi.00397-24](https://doi.org/10.1128/jvi.00397-24)

## Content

1. J Virol. 2024 Jul 23;98(7):e0039724. doi: 10.1128/jvi.00397-24. Epub 2024 Jun
13.

VP1 is the primary determinant of neuropathogenesis in a mouse model of
enterovirus D68 acute flaccid myelitis.

Leser JS(1), Frost JL(2), Wilson CJ(1), Rudy MJ(1), Clarke P(1), Tyler
KL(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
Colorado, USA.
(2)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(3)Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, University of
Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(4)Neurology Service, Rocky Mountain VA Medical Center, Aurora, Colorado, USA.

Enterovirus D68 (EV-D68) is an emerging pathogen that can cause severe
respiratory and neurologic disease [acute flaccid myelitis (AFM)]. Intramuscular
(IM) injection of neonatal Swiss Webster (SW) mice with US/IL/14-18952 (IL52), a
clinical isolate from the 2014 EV-D68 epidemic, results in many of the
pathogenic features of human AFM, including viral infection of the spinal cord,
death of motor neurons, and resultant progressive paralysis. In distinction,
CA/14-4231 (CA4231), another clinical isolate from the 2014 EV-D68 outbreak,
does not cause paralysis in mice, does not grow in the spinal cord, and does not
cause motor neuron loss following IM injection. A panel of chimeric viruses
containing sequences from IL52 and CA4231 was used to demonstrate that VP1 is
the main determinant of EV-D68 neurovirulence following IM injection of neonatal
SW mice. VP1 contains four amino acid differences between IL52 and CA4231.
Mutations resulting in substituting these four amino acids (CA4231 residues into
the IL52 polyprotein) completely abolished neurovirulence. Conversely, mutations
resulting in substituting VP1 IL52 amino acid residues into the CA4231
polyprotein created a virus that induced paralysis to the same degree as IL52.
Neurovirulence following infection of neonatal SW mice with parental and
chimeric viruses was associated with viral growth in the spinal cord.
IMPORTANCE: Emerging viruses allow us to investigate mutations leading to
increased disease severity. Enterovirus D68 (EV-D68), once the cause of rare
cases of respiratory illness, recently acquired the ability to cause severe
respiratory and neurologic disease. Chimeric viruses were used to demonstrate
that viral structural protein VP1 determines growth in the spinal cord, motor
neuron loss, and paralysis following intramuscular (IM) injection of neonatal
Swiss Webster (SW) mice with EV-D68. These results have relevance for predicting
the clinical outcome of future EV-D68 epidemics as well as targeting retrograde
transport as a potential strategy for treating virus-induced neurologic disease.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.00397-24
PMCID: PMC11264684
PMID: 38869283 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
