---
reference_id: "PMID:40605075"
title: "Life in stop motion: a review of akinetopsia."
authors:
- Mowafi S
- Khashana R
- Bakr M
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-03781-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Life in stop motion: a review of akinetopsia.
**Authors:** Mowafi S, Khashana R, Bakr M
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-025-03781-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-025-03781-6)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2025 Jul 2;20(1):334. doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-03781-6.

Life in stop motion: a review of akinetopsia.

Mowafi S(1)(2), Khashana R(1), Bakr M(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Global Health & Human Ecology, School of Sciences & Engineering, 
The American University in Cairo, Cairo, Egypt.
(2)Department of Psychology, School of Humanities & Social Sciences, The 
American University in Cairo, Cairo, Egypt.
(3)Institute of Global Health & Human Ecology, School of Sciences & Engineering, 
The American University in Cairo, Cairo, Egypt. may.bakr@aucegypt.edu.

Akinetopsia is a rare visual cortical disorder in which patients lose the 
ability to perceive motion. Visual cortical disorders are often misdiagnosed by 
most clinicians because they misinterpret the cause of visual dysfunction. Since 
akinetopsia was first described in 1911, only a handful of cases have been 
studied. Recent cases have demonstrated that it is not necessarily attributed 
only to vascular causes and neurodegenerative diseases but can also be induced 
through transcranial magnetic stimulation, and certain medications. This paper 
aims to review the etiology of akinetopsia in recent studies and provide a more 
holistic understanding of the disorder and its impact on patients' lives.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-025-03781-6
PMCID: PMC12225072
PMID: 40605075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: This research did not involve any studies involving animal or human 
participants, nor did it take place in private or protected areas. No specific 
permissions were needed. Consent for publication: Not applicable. Competing 
interests: The authors declare that the research was conducted without any 
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as potential 
conflicts of interest.