---
reference_id: "PMID:37927483"
title: "S-adenosylmethionine and nicotinamide riboside therapy in Arts syndrome: A case report and literature review."
authors:
- Lee A
- Knox R
- Reynolds M
- McRoy E
- Nguyen H
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/jmd2.12395
content_type: abstract_only
---

# S-adenosylmethionine and nicotinamide riboside therapy in Arts syndrome: A case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Lee A, Knox R, Reynolds M, McRoy E, Nguyen H
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmd2.12395](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmd2.12395)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2023 Sep 1;64(6):417-423. doi: 10.1002/jmd2.12395. eCollection 2023
Nov.

S-adenosylmethionine and nicotinamide riboside therapy in Arts syndrome: A case
report and literature review.

Lee A(1), Knox R(2), Reynolds M(3), McRoy E(1), Nguyen H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine
Washington University Saint Louis Missouri USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics and Neurology Washington University Saint Louis
Missouri USA.
(3)Departments of Pediatrics, Division of Ophthalmology Washington University
Saint Louis Missouri USA.

Phospho-ribosyl-pyrophosphate synthetase 1 (PRPS1) deficiency is secondary to
loss of function variants in PRPS1. This enzyme generates
phospho-ribosyl-pyrophosphate (PRPP), which is utilized in the synthesis of
purines, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), and NAD phosphate (NADP),
among other metabolic pathways. Arts syndrome, or severe PRPS1 deficiency, is an
X-linked condition characterized by congenital sensorineural hearing loss, optic
atrophy, developmental delays, ataxia, hypotonia, and recurrent infections that
can cause progressive clinical decline, often resulting in death before 5 years
of age. Supplementation of the purine and NAD pathways outside of PRPP-dependent
reactions is a logical approach and has been reported in a handful of patients,
two with S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe) and one with SAMe and nicotinamide riboside
(NR). We present the clinical course of a fourth Arts syndrome patient who was
started on therapy and review previously reported patients. All patients had
stability or improvement of symptoms, suggesting that SAMe and NR can be a
treatment option in Arts syndrome, though further studies are warranted.

© 2023 The Authors. JIMD Reports published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of
SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jmd2.12395
PMCID: PMC10623096
PMID: 37927483

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
