---
reference_id: "PMID:16964288"
title: Characterizing a rat Brca2 knockout model.
authors:
- Cotroneo MS
- Haag JD
- Zan Y
- Lopez CC
- Thuwajit P
- Petukhova GV
- Camerini-Otero RD
- Gendron-Fitzpatrick A
- Griep AE
- Murphy CJ
- Dubielzig RR
- Gould MN
journal: Oncogene
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1209960
keywords:
- Animals
- "Animals, Genetically Modified"
- Base Sequence
- DNA Primers
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- "Genes, BRCA2"
- Male
- "Mammary Neoplasms, Experimental/genetics"
- Rats
- "Rats, Sprague-Dawley"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterizing a rat Brca2 knockout model.
**Authors:** Cotroneo MS, Haag JD, Zan Y, Lopez CC, Thuwajit P, Petukhova GV, Camerini-Otero RD, Gendron-Fitzpatrick A, Griep AE, Murphy CJ, Dubielzig RR, Gould MN
**Journal:** Oncogene (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1209960](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1209960)

## Content

1. Oncogene. 2007 Mar 8;26(11):1626-35. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1209960. Epub 2006
Sep  11.

Characterizing a rat Brca2 knockout model.

Cotroneo MS(1), Haag JD, Zan Y, Lopez CC, Thuwajit P, Petukhova GV,
Camerini-Otero RD, Gendron-Fitzpatrick A, Griep AE, Murphy CJ, Dubielzig RR,
Gould MN.

Author information:
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Evidence exists that BRCA2 carriers may have an elevated risk of breast,
ovarian, colon, prostate, and pancreatic cancer. In general, carriers are
defined as individuals with protein truncating mutations within the BRCA2 gene.
Many Brca2 knockout lines have been produced and characterized in the mouse. We
previously produced a rat Brca2 knockout strain in which there is a nonsense
mutation in exon 11 between BRC repeats 2 and 3, and a truncated protein is
produced. Interestingly, while such a mutation in homozygous mice would lead to
limited survival of approximately 3 months, the Brca2-/- rats are 100% viable
and the vast majority live to over 1 year of age. Brca2-/- rats show a phenotype
of growth inhibition and sterility in both sexes. Aspermatogenesis in the
Brca2-/- rats is due to a failure of homologous chromosome synapsis. Long-term
phenotypes include underdeveloped mammary glands, cataract formation and
lifespan shortening due to the development of tumors and cancers in multiple
organs. The establishment of the rat Brca2 knockout model provides a means to
study the role of Brca2 in increasing cancer susceptibility and inducing a novel
ocular phenotype not previously associated with this gene.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1209960
PMID: 16964288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
