---
reference_id: "PMID:25031270"
title: An annexin A1-FPR1 interaction contributes to necroptosis of keratinocytes in severe cutaneous adverse drug reactions.
authors:
- Saito N
- Qiao H
- Yanagi T
- Shinkuma S
- Nishimura K
- Suto A
- Fujita Y
- Suzuki S
- Nomura T
- Nakamura H
- Nagao K
- Obuse C
- Shimizu H
- Abe R
journal: Sci Transl Med
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3008227
keywords:
- Animals
- Annexin A1/metabolism
- Apoptosis
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins/metabolism
- CD18 Antigens/metabolism
- CD8 Antigens/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- "Keratinocytes/metabolism, pathology, ultrastructure"
- "Leukocytes, Mononuclear/metabolism"
- Mice
- Necrosis
- Protein Binding
- Skin/pathology
- "Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/pathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An annexin A1-FPR1 interaction contributes to necroptosis of keratinocytes in severe cutaneous adverse drug reactions.
**Authors:** Saito N, Qiao H, Yanagi T, Shinkuma S, Nishimura K, Suto A, Fujita Y, Suzuki S, Nomura T, Nakamura H, Nagao K, Obuse C, Shimizu H, Abe R
**Journal:** Sci Transl Med (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scitranslmed.3008227](https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.3008227)

## Content

1. Sci Transl Med. 2014 Jul 16;6(245):245ra95. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3008227.

An annexin A1-FPR1 interaction contributes to necroptosis of keratinocytes in 
severe cutaneous adverse drug reactions.

Saito N(1), Qiao H(1), Yanagi T(1), Shinkuma S(1), Nishimura K(1), Suto A(1), 
Fujita Y(1), Suzuki S(1), Nomura T(1), Nakamura H(1), Nagao K(2), Obuse C(2), 
Shimizu H(3), Abe R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Sapporo 060-8638, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Life Science, Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0810, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Sapporo 060-8638, Japan. aberi@med.hokudai.ac.jp shimizu@med.hokudai.ac.jp.

Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) are 
life-threatening, cutaneous adverse drug reactions that are accompanied by 
keratinocyte cell death. Dead keratinocytes from SJS/TEN lesions exhibited 
necrosis, by morphological criteria. Supernatant from peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) that had been exposed to the causative drug from 
patients with SJS/TEN induced the death of SJS/TEN keratinocytes, whereas 
supernatant from PBMCs of patients with ordinary drug skin reactions (ODSRs) 
exposed to the same drug did not. Keratinocytes from ODSR patients or from 
healthy controls were unaffected by supernatant from SJS/TEN or ODSR PBMCs. Mass 
spectrometric analysis identified annexin A1 as a key mediator of keratinocyte 
death; depletion of annexin A1 by a specific antibody diminished supernatant 
cytotoxicity. The necroptosis-mediating complex of RIP1 and RIP3 was 
indispensable for SJS/TEN supernatant-induced keratinocyte death, and SJS/TEN 
keratinocytes expressed abundant formyl peptide receptor 1 (FPR1), the receptor 
for annexin A1, whereas control keratinocytes did not. Inhibition of necroptosis 
completely prevented SJS/TEN-like responses in a mouse model of SJS/TEN. Our 
results demonstrate that a necroptosis pathway, likely mediated by annexin 1 
acting through the FPR1 receptor, contributes to SJS/TEN.

Copyright © 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3008227
PMID: 25031270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]