---
reference_id: "PMID:27298202"
title: Common human ANK2 variant confers in vivo arrhythmia phenotypes.
authors:
- Musa H
- Murphy NP
- Curran J
- Higgins JD
- Webb TR
- Makara MA
- Wright P
- Lancione PJ
- Lubbers ER
- Healy JA
- Smith SA
- Bennett V
- Hund TJ
- Kline CF
- Mohler PJ
journal: Heart Rhythm
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2016.06.012
keywords:
- Action Potentials/genetics
- Animals
- Ankyrins/genetics
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac/ethnology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Black People/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Gene-Environment Interaction
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/ethnology
- Genetic Variation
- Humans
- Loss of Function Mutation
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Phenotype
- Risk Assessment/ethnology
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Common human ANK2 variant confers in vivo arrhythmia phenotypes.
**Authors:** Musa H, Murphy NP, Curran J, Higgins JD, Webb TR, Makara MA, Wright P, Lancione PJ, Lubbers ER, Healy JA, Smith SA, Bennett V, Hund TJ, Kline CF, Mohler PJ
**Journal:** Heart Rhythm (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hrthm.2016.06.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hrthm.2016.06.012)

## Content

1. Heart Rhythm. 2016 Sep;13(9):1932-40. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2016.06.012. Epub
2016 Jun 11.

Common human ANK2 variant confers in vivo arrhythmia phenotypes.

Musa H(1), Murphy NP(1), Curran J(1), Higgins JD(1), Webb TR(1), Makara MA(1),
Wright P(2), Lancione PJ(1), Lubbers ER(1), Healy JA(3), Smith SA(4), Bennett
V(3), Hund TJ(5), Kline CF(1), Mohler PJ(6).

Author information:
(1)Dorothy M. Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, College of Medicine, The
Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH; Department of
Physiology & Cell Biology College of Medicine, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH.
(2)Dorothy M. Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, College of Medicine, The
Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC.
(4)Dorothy M. Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, College of Medicine, The
Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH; Department of
Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine.
(5)Dorothy M. Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, College of Medicine, The
Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH; Department of
Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine,; Department of
Biomedical Engineering, College of Engineering, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH.
(6)Dorothy M. Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, College of Medicine, The
Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH; Department of
Physiology & Cell Biology College of Medicine, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH; Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular
Medicine,. Electronic address: peter.mohler@osumc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Human ANK2 (ankyrin-B) loss-of-function variants are directly linked
with arrhythmia phenotypes. However, in atypical non-ion channel arrhythmia
genes such as ANK2 that lack the same degree of robust structure/function and
clinical data, it may be more difficult to assign variant disease risk based
simply on variant location, minor allele frequency, and/or predictive structural
algorithms. The human ankyrin-B p.L1622I variant found in arrhythmia probands
displays significant diversity in minor allele frequency across populations.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to directly test the in vivo impact
of ankyrin-B p.L1622I on cardiac electrical phenotypes and arrhythmia risk using
a new animal model.
METHODS: We tested arrhythmia phenotypes in a new "knock-in" animal model
harboring the human ankyrin-B p.L1622I variant.
RESULTS: Ankyrin-B p.L1622I displays reduced posttranslational expression in
vivo, resulting in reduced cardiac ankyrin-B expression and reduced association
with binding-partner Na/Ca exchanger. Ankyrin-B(L1622I/L1622I) mice display
changes in heart rate, atrioventricular and intraventricular conduction, and
alterations in repolarization. Furthermore, ankyrin-B(L1622I/L1622I) mice
display catecholamine-dependent arrhythmias. At the cellular level,
ankyrin-B(L1622I/L1622I) myocytes display increased action potential duration
and severe arrhythmogenic afterdepolarizations that provide a mechanistic
rationale for the arrhythmias.
CONCLUSION: Our findings support in vivo arrhythmogenic phenotypes of an ANK2
variant with unusual frequency in select populations. On the basis of our
findings and current clinical data, we support classification of p.L1622I as a
"mild" loss-of-function variant that may confer arrhythmia susceptibility in the
context of secondary risk factors including environment, medication, and/or
additional genetic variation.

Copyright © 2016 Heart Rhythm Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2016.06.012
PMID: 27298202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
