---
reference_id: "PMID:33586216"
title: Early and late diagnoses of 17β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type-3 deficiency in two unrelated patients.
authors:
- Manyas H
- Eroğlu Filibeli B
- Ayrancı İ
- Güvenç MS
- Dündar BN
- Çatlı G
journal: Andrologia
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/and.14017
keywords:
- 17-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenases/genetics
- Adolescent
- Delayed Diagnosis
- Female
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early and late diagnoses of 17β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type-3 deficiency in two unrelated patients.
**Authors:** Manyas H, Eroğlu Filibeli B, Ayrancı İ, Güvenç MS, Dündar BN, Çatlı G
**Journal:** Andrologia (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/and.14017](https://doi.org/10.1111/and.14017)

## Content

1. Andrologia. 2021 Jul;53(6):e14017. doi: 10.1111/and.14017. Epub 2021 Feb 14.

Early and late diagnoses of 17β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type-3 deficiency
in two unrelated patients.

Manyas H(1), Eroğlu Filibeli B(1), Ayrancı İ(1), Güvenç MS(2), Dündar BN(3),
Çatlı G(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Tepecik Training and Research
Hospital, University of Medical Science, Izmir, Turkey.
(2)Genetic Diseases Diagnostic Center, Tepecik Training and Research Hospital,
University of Medical Science, Izmir, Turkey.
(3)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Izmir Katip Celebi University, Izmir,
Turkey.

17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 3 deficiency is a rare cause of 46 XY
disorders of sexual development. Mutations in the HSD17B3 gene result in reduced
activity of the 17β-HSD3 enzyme, decreasing the conversion of androstenedione to
testosterone. In this report, two cases, admitted with different clinical
findings in the neonatal and adolescent periods and were decided to be raised in
different genders are presented. The first case who had complete female external
genitalia presented on the third postnatal day with the complaint of swelling in
the groin. He was decided to be raised as a male and was treated successfully
with parenteral testosterone in order to increase phallus size before surgical
correction of the external genitalia. The second case was an adolescent girl who
presented due to pubertal virilisation and primary amenorrhoea and chose female
gender. Molecular genetic analyses of the HSD17B3 gene revealed two different
previously reported homozygous variants. We emphasise that patients with
17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 3 deficiency can present with
heterogeneous clinical findings in different age groups. Early diagnosis is
important to prevent future gender confusion and related problems.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/and.14017
PMID: 33586216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
