---
reference_id: "PMID:30614812"
title: "PTEN-opathies: from biological insights to evidence-based precision medicine."
authors:
- Yehia L
- Ngeow J
- Eng C
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1172/JCI121277
keywords:
- Animals
- "Autism Spectrum Disorder/genetics, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- Evidence-Based Medicine
- Germ-Line Mutation
- "Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple/genetics, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- Humans
- "Neoplasms, Experimental/genetics, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- "PTEN Phosphohydrolase/genetics, metabolism"
- "Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- Precision Medicine
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- "TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PTEN-opathies: from biological insights to evidence-based precision medicine.
**Authors:** Yehia L, Ngeow J, Eng C
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI121277](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI121277)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2019 Feb 1;129(2):452-464. doi: 10.1172/JCI121277. Epub 2019
Jan  7.

PTEN-opathies: from biological insights to evidence-based precision medicine.

Yehia L(1), Ngeow J(1)(2)(3)(4), Eng C(1)(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Genomic Medicine Institute, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(2)Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University, 
Singapore.
(3)Cancer Genetics Service, Division of Medical Oncology, National Cancer 
Centre, Singapore.
(4)Oncology Academic Program, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore.
(5)Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(6)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, Case Western Reserve University 
School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(7)Germline High Risk Cancer Focus Group, Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case 
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

The tumor suppressor phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) classically 
counteracts the PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling cascade. Germline pathogenic PTEN 
mutations cause PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS), featuring various benign 
and malignant tumors, as well as neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism 
spectrum disorder. Germline and somatic mosaic mutations in genes encoding 
components of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway downstream of PTEN predispose to 
syndromes with partially overlapping clinical features, termed the 
"PTEN-opathies." Experimental models of PTEN pathway disruption uncover the 
molecular and cellular processes influencing clinical phenotypic manifestations. 
Such insights not only teach us about biological mechanisms in states of health 
and disease, but also enable more accurate gene-informed cancer risk assessment, 
medical management, and targeted therapeutics. Hence, the PTEN-opathies serve as 
a prototype for bedside to bench, and back to the bedside, practice of 
evidence-based precision medicine.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI121277
PMCID: PMC6355220
PMID: 30614812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.