---
reference_id: "PMID:36308677"
title: How Has Molecular Biology Enhanced Our Undertaking of axSpA and Its Management.
authors:
- Fatica M
- "D'Antonio A"
- Novelli L
- Triggianese P
- Conigliaro P
- Greco E
- Bergamini A
- Perricone C
- Chimenti MS
journal: Curr Rheumatol Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s11926-022-01092-4
keywords:
- Humans
- Spondylarthritis
- Axial Spondyloarthritis
- "Osteoporosis/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Bone Diseases, Metabolic"
- Molecular Biology
- Aminopeptidases
- Minor Histocompatibility Antigens
content_type: abstract_only
---

# How Has Molecular Biology Enhanced Our Undertaking of axSpA and Its Management.
**Authors:** Fatica M, D'Antonio A, Novelli L, Triggianese P, Conigliaro P, Greco E, Bergamini A, Perricone C, Chimenti MS
**Journal:** Curr Rheumatol Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11926-022-01092-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11926-022-01092-4)

## Content

1. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2023 Jan;25(1):12-33. doi: 10.1007/s11926-022-01092-4.
Epub  2022 Oct 29.

How Has Molecular Biology Enhanced Our Undertaking of axSpA and Its Management.

Fatica M(1), D'Antonio A(1), Novelli L(2), Triggianese P(1), Conigliaro P(1), 
Greco E(1), Bergamini A(1), Perricone C(3), Chimenti MS(4).

Author information:
(1)Rheumatology, Allergology and Clinical Immunology, Department of Systems 
Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(2)UniCamillus, Saint Camillus International University of Health Sciences, 
Rome, Italy.
(3)Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(4)Rheumatology, Allergology and Clinical Immunology, Department of Systems 
Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy. 
msolechimenti@hotmail.com.

PURPOSE: This review aims at investigating pathophysiological mechanisms in 
spondyloarthritis (SpA). Analysis of genetic factors, immunological pathways, 
and abnormalities of bone metabolism lay the foundations for a better 
understanding of development of the axial clinical manifestations in patients, 
allowing physician to choose the most appropriate therapeutic strategy in a more 
targeted manner.
RECENT FINDINGS: In addition to the contribution of MHC system, findings emerged 
about the role of non-HLA genes (as ERAP1 and 2, whose inhibition could 
represent a new therapeutic approach) and of epigenetic mechanisms that regulate 
the expression of genes involved in SpA pathogenesis. Increasing evidence of 
bone metabolism abnormalities secondary to the activation of immunological 
pathways suggests the development of various bone anomalies that are present in 
axSpA patients. SpA are a group of inflammatory diseases with a multifactorial 
origin, whose pathogenesis is linked to the genetic predisposition, the action 
of environmental risk factors, and the activation of immune response. It is now 
well known how bone metabolism leads to long-term structural damage via 
increased bone turnover, bone loss and osteoporosis, osteitis, erosions, 
osteosclerosis, and osteoproliferation. These effects can exist in the same 
patient over time or even simultaneously. Evidence suggests a cross relationship 
among innate immunity, autoimmunity, and bone remodeling in SpA, making 
treatment approach a challenge for rheumatologists. Specifically, treatment 
targets are consistently increasing as new drugs are upcoming. Both biological 
and targeted synthetic drugs are promising in terms of their efficacy and safety 
profile in patients affected by SpA.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11926-022-01092-4
PMCID: PMC9825525
PMID: 36308677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.