---
reference_id: "PMID:12381896"
title: Four novel mutations in the PITX2 gene in patients with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.
authors:
- Phillips JC
journal: Ophthalmic Res
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1159/000065602
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Four novel mutations in the PITX2 gene in patients with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.
**Authors:** Phillips JC
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Res (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000065602](https://doi.org/10.1159/000065602)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Res. 2002 Sep-Oct;34(5):324-6. doi: 10.1159/000065602.

Four novel mutations in the PITX2 gene in patients with Axenfeld-Rieger 
syndrome.

Phillips JC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Tufts University School of Veterinary 
Medicine, N. Grafton, Mass., USA.

Mutational screening and sequence analysis of the PITX2 gene was performed in 
four families previously diagnosed with Rieger syndrome. The results of this 
analysis identified four novel mutations within the coding sequence of PITX2. 
These mutations were not identified in the sequence of 50 control individuals. 
Two mutations were found in the homeobox and would be expected to result in 
nonconservative amino acid changes within the second and third helixes. The 
remaining two mutations were found in the region downstream of the homeobox and 
are also predicted to result in missense mutations. In conclusion, mutations 
within the homeobox sequence and the adjacent coding sequence of PITX2 lead to 
various Rieger syndrome phenotypes characterized by a high incidence of 
glaucoma.

Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000065602
PMID: 12381896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]