---
reference_id: "PMID:26605913"
title: "Primary Prevention of Celiac Disease: Environmental Factors with a Focus on Early Nutrition."
authors:
- Chmielewska A
- Pieścik-Lech M
- Szajewska H
- Shamir R
journal: Ann Nutr Metab
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1159/000440992
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary Prevention of Celiac Disease: Environmental Factors with a Focus on Early Nutrition.
**Authors:** Chmielewska A, Pieścik-Lech M, Szajewska H, Shamir R
**Journal:** Ann Nutr Metab (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000440992](https://doi.org/10.1159/000440992)

## Content

1. Ann Nutr Metab. 2015;67 Suppl 2:43-50. doi: 10.1159/000440992. Epub 2015 Nov
26.

Primary Prevention of Celiac Disease: Environmental Factors with a Focus on 
Early Nutrition.

Chmielewska A(1), Pieścik-Lech M, Szajewska H, Shamir R.

Author information:
(1)Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.

Celiac disease (CD) is a common autoimmune disorder caused by ingestion of 
gluten. When diagnosed, it should be treated with a lifelong, strict gluten-free 
diet. Early infant feeding practices have been suggested as a means of 
preventing CD. In the last few decades, observational data have suggested that 
breastfeeding, especially at the time of introducing gluten into the infant's 
diet, as well as the time and mode of gluten first being given to a child could 
prevent or delay the occurrence of CD. As a result, recommendations advised that 
it is prudent to avoid both early (<4 months) and late (>7 months) introduction 
of gluten, and to introduce gluten gradually while the infant is still being 
breastfed, as this may reduce the risk of celiac disease, type 1 diabetes 
mellitus, and wheat allergy. Recently, the results of two large randomized 
trials have shown that breastfeeding in general, breastfeeding during gluten 
introduction, and early or delayed gluten introduction do not influence the 
total risk of CD in genetically predisposed individuals. Introducing gluten at 4 
versus 6 months in very small amounts, or at 6 versus 12 months, resulted in 
similar rates of CD in these children. Thus, early feeding practices seem to 
have no impact on the risk of developing CD during childhood. In children 
without the genetic predisposition, the age and mode of gluten introduction do 
not influence the risk anyway.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000440992
PMID: 26605913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]