---
reference_id: "PMID:11566936"
title: Cardioreparation in hypertensive heart disease.
authors:
- Weber KT
journal: Hypertension
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1161/01.hyp.38.3.588
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardioreparation in hypertensive heart disease.
**Authors:** Weber KT
**Journal:** Hypertension (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.hyp.38.3.588](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.hyp.38.3.588)

## Content

1. Hypertension. 2001 Sep;38(3 Pt 2):588-91. doi: 10.1161/01.hyp.38.3.588.

Cardioreparation in hypertensive heart disease.

Weber KT(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of 
Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, USA. KTWeber@utmem.edu

The normal myocardium is composed of a variety of cells. Cardiac myocytes, 
tethered within an extracellular matrix of fibrillar collagen, represent one 
third of all cells; noncardiomyocytes account for the remaining two thirds. 
Ventricular hypertrophy involves myocyte growth. Hypertensive heart disease 
(HHD) includes myocyte and nonmyocyte growth that leads to an adverse structural 
remodeling of the intramural coronary vasculature and matrix. In HHD, it is not 
the quantity of myocardium but rather its quality that accounts for increased 
risk of adverse cardiovascular events. Structural homogeneity of cardiac tissue 
is governed by a balanced equilibrium existing between stimulator and inhibitor 
signals that regulate cell growth, apoptosis, phenotype, and matrix turnover. 
Stimulators (eg, angiotensin II, aldosterone, and endothelins) are normally 
counterbalanced by inhibitors (eg, bradykinin, NO, and prostaglandins) in a 
paradigm of reciprocal regulation. To reduce the risk of heart failure and 
sudden cardiac death that accompanies HHD, its adverse structural remodeling 
must be targeted for pharmacologic intervention. Cardioprotective agents 
counteract the imbalance between stimulators and inhibitors. They include ACE 
and endopeptidase inhibitors and respective receptor antagonists. 
Cardioreparative agents reverse the growth-promoting state and regress existing 
abnormalities in coronary vascular and matrix structure. ACE inhibition has 
achieved this outcome with favorable impact on vasomotor reactivity and tissue 
stiffness. Today's management of hypertension should not simply focus on a 
reduction in blood pressure, it must also target the adverse structural 
remodeling that begets HHD.

DOI: 10.1161/01.hyp.38.3.588
PMID: 11566936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]