---
reference_id: "PMID:1355950"
title: Liver biochemical tests and dengue fever.
authors:
- Kuo CH
- Tai DI
- Chang-Chien CS
- Lan CK
- Chiou SS
- Liaw YF
journal: Am J Trop Med Hyg
year: '1992'
doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.1992.47.265
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liver biochemical tests and dengue fever.
**Authors:** Kuo CH, Tai DI, Chang-Chien CS, Lan CK, Chiou SS, Liaw YF
**Journal:** Am J Trop Med Hyg (1992)
**DOI:** [10.4269/ajtmh.1992.47.265](https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.1992.47.265)

## Content

1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 1992 Sep;47(3):265-70. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.1992.47.265.

Liver biochemical tests and dengue fever.

Kuo CH(1), Tai DI, Chang-Chien CS, Lan CK, Chiou SS, Liaw YF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan.

The impact of dengue on liver function was studied by biochemical tests on 125 
male and 145 female patients diagnosed with this disease during an outbreak that 
extended from November 1987 to December 1988. Abnormal levels of aspartate 
aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), bilirubin, alkaline 
phosphatase, and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (G-GT) were observed in 93.3%, 
82.2%, 7.2%, 16.3% and 83.0% of the patients, respectively. The elevation of 
transaminases was mild to moderate in most cases, but was 10-fold greater than 
the normal upper limit for AST and ALT in 11.1% and 7.4% of the patients, 
respectively. Initially, the level of AST was greater than that of ALT, 
increasing to maximum levels nine days after the onset of symptoms, then 
decreasing to normal levels within two weeks. Results of the biochemical tests 
did not differ significantly between the cases with and without hepatitis B or 
hepatitis C virus infection, but significantly higher elevations of AST, ALT, 
and G-GT were observed in patients with episodes of bleeding. Liver biopsies of 
two patients showed features of lobular hepatitis. Of the five fatal cases, 
three died of hepatic failure. It is concluded that dengue fever may cause 
hepatic injury and transaminase elevation similar to that in patients with 
conventional viral hepatitis. In epidemic or endemic areas, dengue fever 
infection should be considered in the differential diagnosis of hepatitis.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.1992.47.265
PMID: 1355950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]