---
reference_id: "PMID:37712757"
title: Biomarkers for systemic lupus erythematosus - a focus on organ damage.
authors:
- Ding H
- Shen Y
- Hong SM
- Xiang C
- Shen N
journal: Expert Rev Clin Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/1744666X.2023.2260098
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biomarkers for systemic lupus erythematosus - a focus on organ damage.
**Authors:** Ding H, Shen Y, Hong SM, Xiang C, Shen N
**Journal:** Expert Rev Clin Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/1744666X.2023.2260098](https://doi.org/10.1080/1744666X.2023.2260098)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2024 Jan-Jun;20(1):39-58. doi: 
10.1080/1744666X.2023.2260098. Epub 2023 Sep 15.

Biomarkers for systemic lupus erythematosus - a focus on organ damage.

Ding H(1)(2), Shen Y(1)(2), Hong SM(1)(2), Xiang C(1)(2), Shen 
N(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 
School of Medicine (SJTUSM), Shanghai, China.
(2)Shanghai Institute of Rheumatology, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine (SJTUSM), Shanghai, China.
(3)China-Australia Centre for Personalized Immunology, Renji Hospital, School of 
Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer 
Institute, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine 
(SJTUSM), Shanghai, China.
(5)Department of Rheumatology, Shenzhen Futian Hospital for Rheumatic Diseases, 
Shenzhen, China.
(6)Center for Autoimmune Genomics and Etiology (CAGE), Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(8)Collaborative Innovation Centre for Translational Medicine, Shanghai Jiao 
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

INTRODUCTION: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is complex autoimmune disease 
with heterogenous manifestations, unpredictable disease course and response to 
treatment. One of the critical needs in SLE management is the identification of 
reliable biomarkers that can aid in early diagnosis, accurate monitoring of 
disease activity, and assessment of treatment response.
AREAS COVERED: In the current review, we focus on the commonly affected organs 
(skin, kidney, and nervous system) in SLE to summarize the emerging biomarkers 
that show promise in disease diagnosis, monitoring and treatment response 
assessment. The subtitles within each organ domain were determined based on the 
most relevant and promising biomarkers for that specific organ damage.
EXPERT OPINION: Biomarkers have the potential to significantly benefit the 
management of SLE by aiding in diagnosis, disease activity monitoring, 
prognosis, and treatment response assessment. However, despite decades of 
research, none has been validated and implemented for routine clinical use. 
Novel biomarkers could lead to the development of precision medicine for SLE, 
guide personalized treatment, and improve patient outcomes. Challenges in 
biomarker research in SLE include defining clear and clinically relevant 
questions, accounting for the heterogeneity of SLE, and confirming initial 
findings in larger, multi-center, multi-ethnic, independent cohorts that reflect 
real-world clinical scenarios.

DOI: 10.1080/1744666X.2023.2260098
PMID: 37712757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]