---
reference_id: "PMID:39599853"
title: "Acute Hepatitis C: Current Status and Future Perspectives."
authors:
- Fasano M
- Ieva F
- Ciarallo M
- Caccianotti B
- Santantonio TA
journal: Viruses
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/v16111739
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hepatitis C/drug therapy, epidemiology, virology"
- Antiviral Agents/therapeutic use
- "Hepacivirus/drug effects, physiology, genetics"
- Risk Factors
- Acute Disease
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute Hepatitis C: Current Status and Future Perspectives.
**Authors:** Fasano M, Ieva F, Ciarallo M, Caccianotti B, Santantonio TA
**Journal:** Viruses (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/v16111739](https://doi.org/10.3390/v16111739)

## Content

1. Viruses. 2024 Nov 6;16(11):1739. doi: 10.3390/v16111739.

Acute Hepatitis C: Current Status and Future Perspectives.

Fasano M(1), Ieva F(2), Ciarallo M(2), Caccianotti B(2), Santantonio TA(2).

Author information:
(1)Infectious Diseases Unit, PO Della Murgia "F. Perinei", 70022 Altamura, 
Italy.
(2)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Section of Infectious Diseases, 
University of Foggia, 71122 Foggia, Italy.

The hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection continues to represent a significant 
public health threat and is a leading cause of liver cirrhosis, liver cancer, 
and liver-related mortality. The World Health Organization (WHO) has set a goal 
for 2030: to eliminate HCV infection as a public health threat by reducing new 
HCV infections by 90% and mortality by 65%. The early phase of HCV infection 
represents a pivotal point in the evolution of hepatitis C. Despite a favourable 
course in the majority of patients, approximately 50-70% of individuals with 
recently acquired hepatitis C will develop a chronic infection, defined as the 
persistence of viremia for a period exceeding six months. The diagnosis and 
treatment of a recent HCV infection should facilitate engagement in 
multidisciplinary care, prevent the development and complications of chronic 
liver disease, and reduce ongoing transmission in key populations. Therefore, 
early treatment in the early phase of infection compared with deferring 
treatment until the chronic infection remains a valid approach in the era of 
direct antiviral agents (DAAs). This approach is supported by a 
cost-effectiveness analysis. The aim of this review is to synthesise the 
existing knowledge on the early phase of hepatitis C virus infection, with a 
particular focus on the current risk factors, natural history, therapeutic 
management, and future perspectives.

DOI: 10.3390/v16111739
PMCID: PMC11599108
PMID: 39599853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.