---
reference_id: "PMID:37985634"
title: A chorea-acanthocytosis patient with novel mutations in the VPS13A gene without acanthocyte.
authors:
- Jin S
- Sun Z
- Fang X
- Chen H
- Yang W
- Wang S
- Fan J
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s10072-023-07174-0
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- "Acanthocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- Movement Disorders/pathology
- Mutation/genetics
- "Neuroacanthocytosis/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Vesicular Transport Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A chorea-acanthocytosis patient with novel mutations in the VPS13A gene without acanthocyte.
**Authors:** Jin S, Sun Z, Fang X, Chen H, Yang W, Wang S, Fan J
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10072-023-07174-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-023-07174-0)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2024 May;45(5):2057-2061. doi: 10.1007/s10072-023-07174-0. Epub
2023  Nov 21.

A chorea-acanthocytosis patient with novel mutations in the VPS13A gene without 
acanthocyte.

Jin S(#)(1), Sun Z(#)(2), Fang X(3), Chen H(1), Yang W(1)(4), Wang S(2), Fan 
J(2).

Author information:
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui University of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Shushan District, No.117, Meishan Road, Hefei, 230000, Anhui, China.
(2)Anhui University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Hefei, Anhui, China.
(3)The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui University of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Shushan District, No.117, Meishan Road, Hefei, 230000, Anhui, China. 
fxdxx@ahtcm.edu.cn.
(4)Key Laboratory of Xin'an Medicine Ministry of Education, Hefei, Anhui, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Chorea-acanthocytosis (ChAc) is a rare clinical genetic disorder of the nervous 
system, which is characterized by choreiform movement disorder, cognitive 
decline, and psychiatric disorders. ChAc is mostly diagnosed based on its 
typical clinical manifestations and the increased number of acanthocytes in 
peripheral blood smears. Here, we report a patient, who has the characteristic 
clinical manifestations of ChAc with limb choreiform movements, involuntary lip 
and tongue bites, seizures, and emotional instability. However, her blood smear 
was negative for acanthocytes with scanning electron microscopy. We later 
identified two novel pathogenic mutations in the patient's vacuolar protein 
sorting homolog 13 A (VPS13A) on chromosome 9q21 by targeted gene sequencing, 
and she was definitively diagnosed with "ChAc." After treatment with 
carbamazepine, haloperidol, the patient's symptoms gradually improved. We 
consider that an acanthocyte negative blood smear cannot rule out ChAC 
diagnosis, and genetic testing is the "gold standard" for the diagnosis. Through 
a review of previous research, it is rare for a patient to have a clear 
diagnosis of ChAc by genetic testing, but whose blood smear is negative for 
acanthocytes with electron microscopy. In addition, in this report, we 
discovered two novel pathogenic mutations, which have not been reported 
previously, and extended the genetic characteristics of ChAc.

© 2023. Fondazione Società Italiana di Neurologia.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-023-07174-0
PMID: 37985634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]