---
reference_id: "PMID:40548073"
title: New variants and genotype-phenotype correlation of PPP3CA-related developmental and epileptic encephalopathy.
authors:
- Wang T
- Ouyang S
- Niu X
- Cheng M
- Yang Y
- Yang Y
- Tan Q
- Liu W
- Yang X
- Zhang Y
journal: Front Neurosci
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2025.1570997
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New variants and genotype-phenotype correlation of PPP3CA-related developmental and epileptic encephalopathy.
**Authors:** Wang T, Ouyang S, Niu X, Cheng M, Yang Y, Yang Y, Tan Q, Liu W, Yang X, Zhang Y
**Journal:** Front Neurosci (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnins.2025.1570997](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2025.1570997)

## Content

1. Front Neurosci. 2025 Jun 6;19:1570997. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2025.1570997. 
eCollection 2025.

New variants and genotype-phenotype correlation of PPP3CA-related developmental 
and epileptic encephalopathy.

Wang T(1), Ouyang S(1), Niu X(2), Cheng M(1), Yang Y(1), Yang Y(3), Tan Q(1), 
Liu W(1), Yang X(1), Zhang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Children's Medical Center of Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, 
China.
(2)Department of Respiratory, Beijing Children's Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, the First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong 
University, Xi'an, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the genotypic spectrum and refine the genotype-phenotype 
correlation of PPP3CA-related developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (DEE).
METHODS: whole-exome sequencing or whole-genome sequencing was performed to all 
patients. Clinical data of 15 epilepsy patients in current study and 21 epilepsy 
patients from published studies were collected and analyzed.
RESULTS: In this study, 15 patients were identified with 13 de novo PPP3CA 
variants. Among these, seven frameshift variants and one gene inversion between 
intron 11 and intron 13 (including exons 12 and 13) were novel. 80% of patients 
experiencing seizure onset before the age of one. The seizure types observed 
included epileptic spasms (93.3%), tonic seizures (46.7%), myoclonic seizures 
(46.7%), focal seizures (40.0%), atypical absence seizures (13.3%), generalized 
tonic-clonic seizures (6.7%) and myoclonic atonic seizures (6.7%). All patients 
exhibited global developmental delay. MRI abnormalities were noticed in 9 
patients, including widened subarachnoid space, bilateral ventricular width, 
poor myelination of white matter, and dysplasia of the corpus callosum. 80% 
specifically diagnosed with infantile epileptic spasms syndrome (IESS). When 
combining data from this study and published studies, 66.7% of patients 
experienced seizure onset before the age of one, and 77.8% were diagnosed with 
IESS. In patients with variants located in the catalytic domain (CD), 45.4% 
patients exhibited multiple seizure types, while 45.4% patients presented only 
with epileptic spasms. In contrast, among patients with variants in regulatory 
domain (RD), 87% had multiple seizure types and only 8.7% had epileptic spasms 
alone. Additionally, 45.5% of patients with CD variants had comorbid autism 
spectrum disorders, compared to 13% patients with RD variants. Recurrent 
variants included p.His92Arg, p.Asp234Glu, p.Glu282Lys, and p.Ser419Asnfs*31.
CONCLUSION: This study is the first to report a gene inversion in PPP3CA-related 
DEE. Patients with only epileptic spasms were more prevalent in those with CD 
variants, compared to those with RD variants. Conversely, patients with multiple 
seizure types were more common among those with RD variants. The most frequently 
diagnosed epileptic syndrome was IESS. Additionally, comorbid ASD were more 
commonly observed in patients with CD variants than in those with RD variants.

Copyright © 2025 Wang, Ouyang, Niu, Cheng, Yang, Yang, Tan, Liu, Yang and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2025.1570997
PMCID: PMC12179222
PMID: 40548073

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.