---
reference_id: "PMID:17456915"
title: A clinical and histopathological study of pityriasis lichenoides.
authors:
- Nair PS
journal: Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.4103/0378-6323.31894
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Distribution
- Blood Vessels/pathology
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- India/epidemiology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Pityriasis Lichenoides/epidemiology, pathology"
- Prospective Studies
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A clinical and histopathological study of pityriasis lichenoides.
**Authors:** Nair PS
**Journal:** Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.4103/0378-6323.31894](https://doi.org/10.4103/0378-6323.31894)

## Content

1. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol. 2007 Mar-Apr;73(2):100-2. doi:
10.4103/0378-6323.31894.

A clinical and histopathological study of pityriasis lichenoides.

Nair PS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Medical College Hospital,
Trivandrum, Kerala, India. brainwaveind@yahoo.co.in

Comment in
    Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol. 2008 Mar-Apr;74(2):156-7; author reply
157. doi: 10.4103/0378-6323.39706.

BACKGROUND: Pityriasis lichenoides is a papulosquamous disorder of unknown
etiology with remissions and exacerbations. Histopathology helps greatly in the
diagnosis of this condition.
AIM: We studied clinical and histopathological features of pityriasis
lichenoides in our patients.
METHODS: This is a 3-year retrospective and prospective, descriptive study of
all patients clinically diagnosed as pityriasis lichenoides and confirmed by
histopathology. All patients were studied clinically and histopathologically.
RESULTS: There were 51 (30 males and 21 females) cases of pityriasis lichenoides
in the study period. The maximum number of cases, 14 (27.45%) were in their
second decade of life. Pityriasis lichenoides chronica was diagnosed in 39 cases
(76.47%) and pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta (PLEVA) in 12 cases
(23.53%). Histopathologically, basal cell vacuolation and perivascular
infiltrate were seen in all the cases. Exocytosis was seen in 45.1% of the
cases. All the cases of PLEVA showed lymphocytic vasculitis albeit without
fibrinoid deposition in the vessel walls.
CONCLUSION: Pityriasis lichenoides is not a rare disorder, and is not a true
lymphocytic vasculitis as blood vessel damage and fibrinoid deposition in the
blood vessel walls were not seen in this study.

DOI: 10.4103/0378-6323.31894
PMID: 17456915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
