---
reference_id: "PMID:37372760"
title: "Neurological and Neurocognitive Impairments in Adults with a History of Prenatal Methylmercury Poisoning: Minamata Disease."
authors:
- Yorifuji T
- Kadowaki T
- Yasuda M
- Kado Y
journal: Int J Environ Res Public Health
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijerph20126173
keywords:
- Animals
- Foodborne Diseases
- Japan
- "Mercury Poisoning, Nervous System/complications"
- Methylmercury Compounds/poisoning
- Neurologic Examination
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurological and Neurocognitive Impairments in Adults with a History of Prenatal Methylmercury Poisoning: Minamata Disease.
**Authors:** Yorifuji T, Kadowaki T, Yasuda M, Kado Y
**Journal:** Int J Environ Res Public Health (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijerph20126173](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph20126173)

## Content

1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2023 Jun 19;20(12):6173. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph20126173.

Neurological and Neurocognitive Impairments in Adults with a History of Prenatal 
Methylmercury Poisoning: Minamata Disease.

Yorifuji T(1), Kadowaki T(1), Yasuda M(2), Kado Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama University, 2-5-1 Shikata, Okayama 700-8558, 
Japan.
(2)Center for Clinical Psychology, Kawasaki Medical School Hospital, 577 
Matsushima, Okayama 701-0192, Japan.
(3)Department of Psychology, Faculty of Letters, Kansai University, 3-3-35, 
Yamate-cho, Osaka 564-8680, Japan.

Minamata disease, which happened during the 1950s and 1960s in Minamata, Japan, 
is a well-known case of food poisoning caused by methylmercury-contaminated 
fish. Although many children were born, in the affected areas, with severe 
neurological signs after birth (known as congenital Minamata disease (CMD)), few 
studies have explored the possible effects of low-to-moderate methylmercury 
exposure in utero, probably at lower levels than in CMD patients, in Minamata. 
We, therefore, recruited 52 participants in 2020: 10 patients with known CMD; 15 
moderately exposed residents; and 27 non-exposed controls. The average umbilical 
cord methylmercury concentrations were 1.67 parts per million (ppm) for CMD 
patients and 0.77 ppm for moderately exposed participants. After conducting four 
neuropsychological tests, we compared the functions among the groups. Compared 
with the non-exposed controls, both the CMD patients and moderately exposed 
residents had worse scores in the neuropsychological tests, although the score 
decline was more severe in the CMD patients. For example, even after adjusting 
for age and sex, the CMD patients and moderately exposed residents had 16.77 
(95% CI: 13.46 to 20.08) and 4.11 (95% CI: 1.43 to 6.78) lower scores in the 
Montreal Cognitive Assessment, respectively, than the non-exposed controls. The 
present study indicates that residents of Minamata who experienced 
low-to-moderate prenatal methylmercury exposure also have neurological or 
neurocognitive impairments.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph20126173
PMCID: PMC10297889
PMID: 37372760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The funders had no role in the design of the 
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of 
the manuscript; or in the decision to publish the results.