---
reference_id: "PMID:31757238"
title: Allergic Contact Dermatitis.
authors:
- Nassau S
- Fonacier L
journal: Med Clin North Am
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.mcna.2019.08.012
keywords:
- "Administration, Topical"
- "Adrenal Cortex Hormones/administration & dosage"
- Allergens/analysis
- "Dermatitis, Allergic Contact/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Humans
- Patch Tests/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Allergic Contact Dermatitis.
**Authors:** Nassau S, Fonacier L
**Journal:** Med Clin North Am (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mcna.2019.08.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcna.2019.08.012)

## Content

1. Med Clin North Am. 2020 Jan;104(1):61-76. doi: 10.1016/j.mcna.2019.08.012.
Epub  2019 Oct 28.

Allergic Contact Dermatitis.

Nassau S(1), Fonacier L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Allergy and Immunology, NYU 
Winthrop University Hospital, 120 Mineola Boulevard, Suite 410, Mineola, NY 
11501, USA. Electronic address: Stacy.Nassau@nyulangone.org.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Allergy and Immunology, NYU 
Winthrop University Hospital, 120 Mineola Boulevard, Suite 410, Mineola, NY 
11501, USA.

Allergic contact dermatitis is common, resulting in considerable morbidity. 
Diagnosis is based on a thorough history, physical examination, and patch 
testing. Several commercially available panels of patch testing are currently 
used. Allergens are found in a wide variety of daily products, occupational 
exposures, and foods. The mainstay of treatment is avoidance of the allergen, 
and databases like Contact Allergen Management Program and Contact Allergen 
Replacement Database help patients to select products that do not contain 
allergens to which they are sensitized. Topical corticosteroids can be used to 
treat exacerbations, but should be avoided in long-term treatment.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcna.2019.08.012
PMID: 31757238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]