---
reference_id: "PMID:32522722"
title: Giant serous adenofibroma of the fallopian tube.
authors:
- Tavares MA
- Silva RC
- Lourenço M
- Ambrósio A
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2020-234267
keywords:
- "Adenofibroma/pathology, physiopathology, surgery"
- Adolescent
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Fallopian Tube Neoplasms/pathology, physiopathology, surgery"
- "Fallopian Tubes/pathology, surgery"
- Female
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Paracentesis/methods
- Preoperative Care/methods
- Salpingectomy/methods
- Treatment Outcome
- Tumor Burden
- Ultrasonography/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Giant serous adenofibroma of the fallopian tube.
**Authors:** Tavares MA, Silva RC, Lourenço M, Ambrósio A
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2020-234267](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2020-234267)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2020 Jun 9;13(6):e234267. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2020-234267.

Giant serous adenofibroma of the fallopian tube.

Tavares MA(1), Silva RC(2), Lourenço M(2), Ambrósio A(2).

Author information:
(1)Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Hospital of Vila Franca de Xira, Lisboa, Portugal 
madalena_a_tavares@hotmail.com.
(2)Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Hospital of Vila Franca de Xira, Lisboa, 
Portugal.

Serous adenofibroma of the fallopian tube is a rare, benign tumour of the female 
genital tract. They are usually small, asymptomatic and incidentally diagnosed 
during a surgery for another gynaecological condition. This report presents an 
atypical case of a 17-year-old girl with a tubal serous adenofibroma that 
presented with a palpable mass occupying the entire abdomen accompanied by 
urinary symptoms. She underwent a laparoscopic surgery with drainage of 1800 mL 
of yellow, citrine liquid from the cyst and left salpingectomy with no 
complications.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2020. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2020-234267
PMCID: PMC7287497
PMID: 32522722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.