---
reference_id: "PMID:37360345"
title: "Long-term effects of the gait treatment using a wearable cyborg hybrid assistive limb in a patient with spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy: a case report with 5 years of follow-up."
authors:
- Iijima K
- Watanabe H
- Nakashiro Y
- Iida Y
- Nonaka M
- Moriwaka F
- Hamada S
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1143820
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term effects of the gait treatment using a wearable cyborg hybrid assistive limb in a patient with spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy: a case report with 5 years of follow-up.
**Authors:** Iijima K, Watanabe H, Nakashiro Y, Iida Y, Nonaka M, Moriwaka F, Hamada S
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2023.1143820](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2023.1143820)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2023 Jun 8;14:1143820. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1143820. 
eCollection 2023.

Long-term effects of the gait treatment using a wearable cyborg hybrid assistive 
limb in a patient with spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy: a case report with 5 
years of follow-up.

Iijima K(1), Watanabe H(2), Nakashiro Y(1), Iida Y(3), Nonaka M(3), Moriwaka 
F(3), Hamada S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rehabilitation, Hokuyukai Neurological Hospital, Sapporo, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Institute of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 
Tsukuba, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology, Hokuyukai Neurological Hospital, Sapporo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA) is a progressive 
neuromuscular degenerative disease characterized by the degeneration of lower 
motor neurons in the spinal cord and brainstem and neurogenic atrophy of the 
skeletal muscle. Although the short-term effectiveness of gait treatment using a 
wearable cyborg hybrid assistive limb (HAL) has been demonstrated for the 
rehabilitation of patients with SBMA, the long-term effects of this treatment 
are unclear. Thus, this study aimed to investigate the long-term effects of the 
continued gait treatment with HAL in a patient with SBMA.
RESULTS: A 68-year-old man with SBMA had lower limb muscle weakness and atrophy, 
gait asymmetry, and decreased walking endurance. The patient performed nine 
courses of HAL gait treatment (as one course three times per week for 3 weeks, 
totaling nine times) for ~5 years. The patient performed HAL gait treatment to 
improve gait symmetry and endurance. A physical therapist adjusted HAL based on 
the gait analysis and physical function of the patient. Outcome measurements, 
such as 2-min walking distance (2MWD), 10-meter walking test (maximal walking 
speed, step length, cadence, and gait symmetry), muscle strength, Revised 
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Functional Assessment Scale (ALSFRS-R), and 
patient-reported outcomes, were evaluated immediately before and after gait 
treatment with HAL for each course. 2MWD improved from 94 m to 101.8 m, and the 
ALSFRS-R gait items remained unchanged (score 3) for approximately 5 years. The 
patient could maintain walking ability in terms of gait symmetry, walking 
endurance, and independence walking despite disease progression during HAL 
treatment.
CONCLUSION: The long-term gait treatment with HAL in a patient with SBMA may 
contribute to the maintenance and improvement of the gait endurance and ability 
to perform activities of daily living. The cybernics treatment using HAL may 
enable patients to relearn correct gait movements. The gait analysis and 
physical function assessment by a physical therapist might be important to 
maximize the benefits of HAL treatment.

Copyright © 2023 Iijima, Watanabe, Nakashiro, Iida, Nonaka, Moriwaka and Hamada.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1143820
PMCID: PMC10285061
PMID: 37360345

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.