---
reference_id: "PMID:33844744"
title: Observed Frequency and Characteristics of Hearing Loss in Osteogenesis Imperfecta.
authors:
- Waissbluth S
- Lira K
- Aracena K
- Oyarzun J
- Willson M
- Seiltgens C
journal: Rev Med Chil
year: '2020'
doi: 10.4067/S0034-98872020001201781
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Observed Frequency and Characteristics of Hearing Loss in Osteogenesis Imperfecta.
**Authors:** Waissbluth S, Lira K, Aracena K, Oyarzun J, Willson M, Seiltgens C
**Journal:** Rev Med Chil (2020)
**DOI:** [10.4067/S0034-98872020001201781](https://doi.org/10.4067/S0034-98872020001201781)

## Content

1. Rev Med Chil. 2020 Dec;148(12):1781-1786. doi:
10.4067/S0034-98872020001201781.

Observed Frequency and Characteristics of Hearing Loss in Osteogenesis 
Imperfecta.

Waissbluth S(1), Lira K(1), Aracena K(1), Oyarzun J(1), Willson M(1), Seiltgens 
C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, UC Christus Health Center, Pontificia 
Universidad Católica de Chile, Chile.
(2)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, UC Christus Health Center, Pontificia 
Universidad Católica de Chile, Chile.

BACKGROUND: Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a rare group of genetic disorders 
affecting connective tissue, with consequent bone fragility, frequent fractures 
and skeletal deformity. Depending on the type, patients can have blue sclera, 
dentinogenesis imperfecta, and hearing loss.
AIM: To determine the frequency, type and audiometric characteristics of hearing 
loss in a group of patients with OI.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A prospective cohort study was completed. A clinical and 
diagnostic hearing evaluation with tympanometry, acoustic stapedial reflex, 
pure-tone and speech audiometry were performed.
RESULTS: Thirty patients completed the study; mean age of 22 years (range 6-63 
years). Sixty seven percent had a type I OI. Overall, nine (30%) patients had 
hearing loss (15/60 ears). Of these, six had bilateral hearing loss. Of the 15 
affected ears, six showed conductive hearing loss, five sensorineural hearing 
loss, and four mixed hearing loss. Patients with hearing loss were older than 
patients with normal hearing. Only one pediatric patient developed hearing loss. 
Of the ears without hearing loss, 13% did not have an acoustic stapedial reflex.
CONCLUSIONS: In this group of patients with OI, 30% had hearing loss and among 
those ears with normal hearing, 13% did not have an acoustic stapedial reflex. 
Patients with OI should be monitored for hearing loss.

DOI: 10.4067/S0034-98872020001201781
PMID: 33844744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]