---
reference_id: "PMID:35111754"
title: "Autosomal Recessive Primary Microcephaly: Not Just a Small Brain."
authors:
- Zaqout S
- Kaindl AM
journal: Front Cell Dev Biol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.784700
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal Recessive Primary Microcephaly: Not Just a Small Brain.
**Authors:** Zaqout S, Kaindl AM
**Journal:** Front Cell Dev Biol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcell.2021.784700](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcell.2021.784700)

## Content

1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2022 Jan 17;9:784700. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.784700. 
eCollection 2021.

Autosomal Recessive Primary Microcephaly: Not Just a Small Brain.

Zaqout S(1)(2), Kaindl AM(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, QU Health, Qatar 
University, Doha, Qatar.
(2)Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Research Unit, QU Health, Qatar University, 
Doha, Qatar.
(3)Institute of Cell and Neurobiology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany.
(4)Center for Chronically Sick Children (Sozialpädiatrisches Zentrum, SPZ), 
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany.

Microcephaly or reduced head circumference results from a multitude of abnormal 
developmental processes affecting brain growth and/or leading to brain atrophy. 
Autosomal recessive primary microcephaly (MCPH) is the prototype of isolated 
primary (congenital) microcephaly, affecting predominantly the cerebral cortex. 
For MCPH, an accelerating number of mutated genes emerge annually, and they are 
involved in crucial steps of neurogenesis. In this review article, we provide a 
deeper look into the microcephalic MCPH brain. We explore cytoarchitecture 
focusing on the cerebral cortex and discuss diverse processes occurring at the 
level of neural progenitors, early generated and mature neurons, and glial 
cells. We aim to thereby give an overview of current knowledge in MCPH phenotype 
and normal brain growth.

Copyright © 2022 Zaqout and Kaindl.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.784700
PMCID: PMC8802810
PMID: 35111754

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.