---
reference_id: "PMID:15979919"
title: "Mutation analysis of the PLOD1 gene: an efficient multistep approach to the molecular diagnosis of the kyphoscoliotic type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS VIA)."
authors:
- Giunta C
- Randolph A
- Steinmann B
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2005.04.014
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation analysis of the PLOD1 gene: an efficient multistep approach to the molecular diagnosis of the kyphoscoliotic type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS VIA).
**Authors:** Giunta C, Randolph A, Steinmann B
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2005.04.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2005.04.014)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2005 Sep-Oct;86(1-2):269-76. doi:
10.1016/j.ymgme.2005.04.014.  Epub 2005 Jun 24.

Mutation analysis of the PLOD1 gene: an efficient multistep approach to the 
molecular diagnosis of the kyphoscoliotic type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS 
VIA).

Giunta C(1), Randolph A, Steinmann B.

Author information:
(1)Division of Metabolism and Molecular Pediatrics, University Children's 
Hospital, CH-8032 Zurich, Switzerland. cecilia.giunta@kispi.unizh.ch

The kyphoscoliotic type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS VIA) is an inheritable 
connective tissue disorder characterized by a deficiency of lysyl hydroxylase 
due to mutations in PLOD1. We describe a mutation analysis strategy for the 
PLOD1 gene using either cDNA or gDNA or a combination thereof, which allows for 
reliable, time-effective and efficient mutation detection in patients with EDS 
VIA. We report the results obtained in 9 index patients from 12 unrelated 
families: three patients were homozygous for three novel mutations 
(p.Ile454IlefsX2, p.Ala667Thr, and p.His706Arg), four patients were homozygous 
for the common duplication of exons 10-16, one patient was compound heterozygous 
for the common duplication and p.Ile454IlefsX2, and one patient was homozygous 
for p.Arg319X.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2005.04.014
PMID: 15979919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]