---
reference_id: "PMID:29191819"
title: "Efficacy and safety of tocilizumab in patients with refractory Takayasu arteritis: results from a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial in Japan (the TAKT study)."
authors:
- Nakaoka Y
- Isobe M
- Takei S
- Tanaka Y
- Ishii T
- Yokota S
- Nomura A
- Yoshida S
- Nishimoto N
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2017-211878
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of tocilizumab in patients with refractory Takayasu arteritis: results from a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial in Japan (the TAKT study).
**Authors:** Nakaoka Y, Isobe M, Takei S, Tanaka Y, Ishii T, Yokota S, Nomura A, Yoshida S, Nishimoto N
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1136/annrheumdis-2017-211878](https://doi.org/10.1136/annrheumdis-2017-211878)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2018 Mar;77(3):348-354. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2017-211878. 
Epub 2017 Nov 30.

Efficacy and safety of tocilizumab in patients with refractory Takayasu 
arteritis: results from a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 
trial in Japan (the TAKT study).

Nakaoka Y(1), Isobe M(2), Takei S(3), Tanaka Y(4), Ishii T(5), Yokota S(6), 
Nomura A(7), Yoshida S(7), Nishimoto N(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Vascular Physiology, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular 
Center Research Institute, Osaka, Japan.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, School of Health Sciences, Kagoshima University, 
Kagoshima, Japan.
(4)First Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, University of 
Occupational and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, Japan.
(5)Clinical Research, Innovation and Education Center, Tohoku University 
Hospital, Sendai, Japan.
(6)Laboratory of Pediatric Research, Institute of Tokyo Medical School, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(7)Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Department of Molecular Regulation for Intractable Disease, Institute of 
Medical Science, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    Ann Rheum Dis. 2019 Jan;78(1):e9. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2017-212838.
    Ann Rheum Dis. 2019 Jan;78(1):e10. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2017-212871.
    Ann Rheum Dis. 2019 Oct;78(10):e116. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2018-214191.
    Ann Rheum Dis. 2019 Oct;78(10):e117. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2018-214239.
    Ann Rheum Dis. 2020 Feb;79(2):e21. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2018-214642.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the efficacy and safety of the interleukin-6 receptor 
antibody tocilizumab in patients with Takayasu arteritis (TAK).
METHODS: Patients with TAK who had relapsed within the previous 12 weeks were 
induced into remission with oral glucocorticoid therapy. In this double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial, patients were randomly assigned 1:1 to receive weekly 
tocilizumab 162 mg or placebo subcutaneously, and oral glucocorticoids were 
tapered 10 %/week from week 4 to a minimum of 0.1 mg/kg/day until 19 patients 
relapsed. The primary endpoint was time to relapse of TAK, defined as ≥2 of the 
following: objective systemic symptoms, subjective systemic symptoms, elevated 
inflammation markers, vascular signs and symptoms or ischaemic symptoms.
RESULTS: The intent-to-treat and safety populations included 18 
tocilizumab-treated and 18 placebo-treated patients. The per-protocol set (PPS) 
included 16 tocilizumab-treated and 17 placebo-treated patients. HRs for time to 
relapse of TAK were 0.41 (95.41% CI 0.15 to 1.10; p=0.0596) in the 
intent-to-treat population (primary endpoint) based on relapse in eight 
tocilizumab-treated and 11 placebo-treated patients and 0.34 (95.41% CI 0.11 to 
1.00; p=0.0345) in the PPS. The secondary endpoints, time to relapse assessed by 
Kerr's definition and clinical symptoms only, were consistent with the primary 
endpoint. Serious adverse events were reported in one tocilizumab-treated and 
two placebo-treated patients. There were no serious infections and no deaths.
CONCLUSION: Although the primary endpoint was not met, the results suggest 
favour for tocilizumab over placebo for time to relapse of TAK without new 
safety concerns. Further investigation is warranted to confirm the efficacy of 
tocilizumab in patients with refractory TAK.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: JapicCTI-142616.

© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of 
the article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless 
otherwise expressly granted.

DOI: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2017-211878
PMCID: PMC5867398
PMID: 29191819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: YN reports personal fees 
from Chugai as a consultant of the sponsor-initiated clinical trial (Chugai 
Pharmaceutical Co.) using tocilizumab for Takayasu arteritis; grants and 
personal fees from Chugai; grants and personal fees from Astellas, Pfizer, and 
MSD outside the submitted work; grants from Takeda, Otsuka, Bayer outside the 
submitted work; and personal fees from Daiichi Sankyo and Kowa Pharmaceutical 
Co. outside the submitted work. MI reports personal fees from Chugai during the 
conduct of the study; personal fees from Chugai; and grants and personal fees 
from Ono, Mitsubishi Tanabe, Daiichi Sankyo, Otsuka and Teijin Pharma outside 
the submitted work. ST reports grants and personal fees from Chugai during the 
conduct of the study; grants and personal fees from Eisai, Takeda, Bristol-Myers 
Squibb and Tanabe-Mitsubishi; and personal fees from Pfizer, Ayumi, Asahi Kasei 
Pharma, AbbVie, Santen, Nihon Pharmaceutical, Japan Blood Products Organization, 
Teijin and UCB Japan outside the submitted work. YT reports grants and personal 
fees from Chugai during the conduct of the study; grants and personal fees from 
Daiichi Sankyo, Astellas, Pfizer, Mitsubishi-Tanabe and Bristol-Myers Squibb 
outside the submitted work; grants from MSD, Takeda, AbbVie, Kyowa-Kirin, Eisai 
and Ono outside the submitted work; and personal fees from YL Biologics, Eli 
Lilly, Sanofi, Janssen and UCB outside the submitted work. TI reports personal 
fees from Chugai during the conduct of the study and personal fees from Chugai, 
Ono, Pfizer, Mitsubishi-Tanabe and Astellas outside the submitted work. SY 
reports personal fees from Chugai during the conduct of the study and personal 
fees from Chugai outside the submitted work. AN reports personal fees from 
Chugai during the conduct of the study. SY reports personal fees from Chugai 
during the conduct of the study. NN reports personal fees from Chugai during the 
conduct of the study and grants and personal fees from Chugai outside the 
submitted work and has a patent for tocilizumab with royalties paid by Chugai. S 
Ooka reports personal fees from Chugai during the conduct of the study and a 
grant from Chugai outside the submitted work. H Yamada reports personal fees 
from Chugai during the conduct of the study and personal fees from Chugai, 
Teijin, Asahi Kasei, Astellas, Ono, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Pfizer, Eisai, 
Mitsubishi Tanabe, Janssen, AbbVie, Actelion, Nippon Shinyaku, GlaxoSmithKline 
and Bayer outside the submitted work. H Niiro reports personal fees from Chugai 
during the conduct of the study; grants and personal fees from Chugai, 
Mitsubishi Tanabe, Astellas, Bristol-Myers Squibb and Takeda outside the 
submitted work; and personal fees from Pfizer and Eisai outside the submitted 
work. H. Tsukamoto reports personal fees from Chugai during the conduct of the 
study and personal fees from Chugai, Astellas, Takeda, Pfizer, AbbVie, Eisai, 
Mitsubishi-Tanabe, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Ayumi, Mylan, Asahi Kasei Pharma, 
Actelion, Daiichi Sankyo, Nippon Kayaku, Thermo Fisher Diagnostics, Kissei and 
Eli Lilly outside the submitted work. S Banno reports personal fees from Chugai 
during the conduct of the study; personal fees from Kissei outside the submitted 
work; and grants from Chugai, Teijin, Kissei, Mitsubishi Tanabe, Takeda, Pfizer, 
Eisai, AbbVie, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Ono, Astellas, Janssen and UCB outside the 
submitted work. N Tamura reports personal fees from Chugai during the conduct of 
the study; grants and personal fees from Janssen, Astellas, Eisai, AbbVie, 
Pfizer and Daiichi Sankyo outside the submitted work; and personal fees from 
UCB, Bristol-Myers Squibb and Novartis outside the submitted work. Y Takasaki 
reports personal fees from Chugai during the conduct of the study and grants and 
personal fees from Santen, Daiichi Sankyo, Mitsubishi Tanabe, Bristol-Myers 
Squibb, AstraZeneca, Astellas, MSD, Chugai, Asahi Kasei, Eisai and Janssen 
outside the submitted work. H Yoshifuji reports personal fees from Chugai during 
the conduct of the study. A Kawakami reports personal fees from Chugai during 
the conduct of the study; grants and personal fees from Ono, Mitsubishi Tanabe, 
Takeda, Astellas, AbbVie, MSD, AstraZeneca, Actelion, Eisai, Kissei, Santen, 
Daiichi Sankyo, Pfizer, Sanofi, Asahi Kasei, Taisho Toyama, Teijin, Sumitomo 
Dainippon, Eli Lilly, Bristol-Myers Squibb and Janssen outside the submitted 
work; grants from Mochida, Boehringer Ingelheim, Otsuka and Kowa outside the 
submitted work; and personal fees from Novartis outside the submitted work. S 
Furuta reports personal fees from Chugai during the conduct of the study. T 
Atsumi reports personal fees from Chugai, Eli Lilly, GlaxoSmithKline, Pfizer and 
UCB Japan during the conduct of the study; grants and personal fees from 
Astellas, Takeda, Mitsubishi Tanabe, Chugai, Pfizer, Daiichi Sankyo, Eisai and 
AbbVie outside the submitted work; grants from Otsuka outside the submitted 
work; personal fees from Bristol-Myers Squibb outside the submitted work. K 
Suzuki reports personal fees from Chugai during the conduct of the study; grants 
and personal fees from Eisai, Bristol-Myers Squibb and Kissei outside the 
submitted work; grants from Daiichi Sankyo outside the submitted work; personal 
fees from AbbVie, Astellas, Chugai, Fuji Film, Janssen, Mitsubishi Tanabe, 
Pfizer, Shionogi, Takeda and UCB Japan outside the submitted work. R Hara 
reports personal fees from Chugai during the conduct of the study and personal 
fees from Chugai, Eisai and Toshiba Medical outside the submitted work.