---
reference_id: "PMID:20301751"
title: Chediak-Higashi Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Toro C
- Morimoto M
- Malicdan MC
- Adams DR
- Introne WJ
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chediak-Higashi Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Toro C, Morimoto M, Malicdan MC, Adams DR, Introne WJ

## Content

1. Chediak-Higashi Syndrome.

Toro C(1), Morimoto M(2), Malicdan MC(3), Adams DR(4), Introne WJ(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2009 Mar 3 [updated 2023 Dec 21].

Author information:
(1)Staff Clinician, National Human Genome Research Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
(2)Scientist I (contractor), National Human Genome Research Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
(3)Staff Scientist, National Human Genome Research Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
(4)Senior Clinician, National Human Genome Research Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Chediak-Higashi syndrome (CHS) is characterized by 
partial oculocutaneous albinism (OCA), immunodeficiency, a mild bleeding 
tendency, and late adolescent- to adult-onset neurologic manifestations (e.g., 
learning difficulties, peripheral neuropathy, ataxia, and parkinsonism). While 
present in nearly all individuals with CHS, these clinical findings vary in 
severity. Of note, all individuals with CHS are at risk of developing neurologic 
manifestations and hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH). Individuals with 
severe childhood-onset presentations are considered to have "classic" CHS, 
whereas individuals with milder adolescent- to adult-onset presentations are 
considered to have "atypical" CHS. Because of the considerable overlap between 
classic CHS and atypical CHS, the disorder is best understood as a continuum of 
severe to milder phenotypes, with the universal feature being the pathognomonic 
giant granules within leukocytes observed on peripheral blood smear.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The clinical diagnosis of CHS is established in a proband 
with suggestive clinical findings by identification of the pathognomonic giant 
granules within leukocytes on peripheral blood smear and/or biallelic pathogenic 
variants in LYST on molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapy: The only targeted therapy currently available is 
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). HSCT can correct the hematologic 
and immunologic manifestations of CHS but does not appear to protect against the 
development of neurologic manifestations. Supportive care: Multidisciplinary 
care is recommended, including specialists in ophthalmology and low vision 
services, infectious disease for management and prevention, hematology (to 
manage the bleeding disorder, HSCT, and treatment of HLH), neurology and 
physiatry, physical therapy, occupational therapy, and (for children) 
neuropsychology or developmental pediatrics to address educational and emotional 
needs or (for adults) neuropsychology. Surveillance: To monitor existing 
manifestations, the individual's response to supportive care, and the emergence 
of new manifestations, routinely scheduled follow-up evaluations by the 
multidisciplinary specialists are recommended. Agents/circumstances to avoid: 
Live vaccines given the risk of infection due to immunodeficiency; all 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (e.g., aspirin, ibuprofen) given 
the risk of exacerbating the bleeding tendency. Evaluation of relatives at risk: 
It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband as early 
as possible. Early diagnosis may provide the opportunity to perform HSCT prior 
to the development of HLH. Pregnancy management: Although data are limited, to 
date females with CHS report uneventful pregnancy, labor, and delivery. However, 
because of concerns about bleeding during delivery and the postpartum period, 
developing a plan prior to delivery to address this issue is recommended.
GENETIC COUNSELING: CHS is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If both 
parents are known to be heterozygous for a LYST pathogenic variant, each sib of 
an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% 
chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected 
and not a carrier. Once the LYST pathogenic variants have been identified in an 
affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk relatives and 
prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301751