---
reference_id: "PMID:34543069"
title: Coronary Artery Anomalies.
authors:
- Gentile F
- Castiglione V
- De Caterina R
journal: Circulation
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.121.055347
keywords:
- "Coronary Artery Disease/diagnostic imaging, etiology, physiopathology"
- "Coronary Vessel Anomalies/complications, diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- "Coronary Vessels/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- Echocardiography/methods
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Coronary Artery Anomalies.
**Authors:** Gentile F, Castiglione V, De Caterina R
**Journal:** Circulation (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.121.055347](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.121.055347)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2021 Sep 21;144(12):983-996. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.121.055347. Epub 2021 Sep 20.

Coronary Artery Anomalies.

Gentile F(1), Castiglione V(1), De Caterina R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Cardiology Division, Pisa University Hospital, Italy (F.G., V.C., R.D.C.).
(2)Fondazione Villa Serena per la Ricerca, Città Sant'Angelo, Pescara, Italy 
(R.D.C.).

Coronary artery anomalies (CAAs) are a group of congenital conditions 
characterized by abnormal origin or course of any of the 3 main epicardial 
coronary arteries. Although CAAs have been identified as a common underlying 
condition in young athletes with sudden cardiac death, the widespread use of 
invasive and noninvasive coronary imaging has led to increased recognition of 
CAAs among adults. CAAS are often discovered as an incidental finding during the 
diagnostic workup for ischemic heart disease. The clinical correlates and 
prognostic implication of CAAs remain poorly understood in this context, and 
guideline-recommended therapeutic choices are supported by a low level of 
scientific evidence. Several studies have examined whether assessment of 
CAA-related myocardial ischemia can improve risk stratification in these 
patients, suggesting that multimodality imaging and functional tests may be key 
in the management of CAAs. The aim of this review is to outline definitions, 
classification, and epidemiology of the most relevant CAAs, highlighting recent 
advances and the potential impact of multimodality evaluation, and to discuss 
current therapeutic opportunities.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.121.055347
PMID: 34543069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]