---
reference_id: "PMID:37985839"
title: STAG2 Regulates Homologous Recombination Repair and Sensitivity to ATM Inhibition.
authors:
- Zhou J
- Nie RC
- He ZP
- Cai XX
- Chen JW
- Lin WP
- Yin YX
- Xiang ZC
- Zhu TC
- Xie JJ
- Zhang YC
- Wang X
- Lin P
- Xie D
- "D'Andrea AD"
- Cai MY
journal: Adv Sci (Weinh)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/advs.202302494
keywords:
- Humans
- Recombinational DNA Repair/genetics
- "Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- DNA Repair/genetics
- Neoplasms/drug therapy
- Cohesins
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# STAG2 Regulates Homologous Recombination Repair and Sensitivity to ATM Inhibition.
**Authors:** Zhou J, Nie RC, He ZP, Cai XX, Chen JW, Lin WP, Yin YX, Xiang ZC, Zhu TC, Xie JJ, Zhang YC, Wang X, Lin P, Xie D, D'Andrea AD, Cai MY
**Journal:** Adv Sci (Weinh) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/advs.202302494](https://doi.org/10.1002/advs.202302494)

## Content

1. Adv Sci (Weinh). 2023 Dec;10(36):e2302494. doi: 10.1002/advs.202302494. Epub
2023 Nov 20.

STAG2 Regulates Homologous Recombination Repair and Sensitivity to ATM
Inhibition.

Zhou J(1)(2), Nie RC(3), He ZP(4), Cai XX(1), Chen JW(4), Lin WP(1), Yin YX(1),
Xiang ZC(4), Zhu TC(4), Xie JJ(1), Zhang YC(4), Wang X(1), Lin P(5), Xie
D(1)(4), D'Andrea AD(6)(7), Cai MY(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Guangdong Provincial
Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center,
Guangzhou, 510060, China.
(2)Guangxi International Travel Healthcare Centre (Port Clinic of Nanning
Customs District), Nanning, Guangxi, 530021, China.
(3)Department of Gastric Surgery, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South
China, Guangdong Provincial Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Sun Yat-sen
University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, 510060, China.
(4)Department of Pathology, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China,
Guangdong Provincial Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Sun Yat-sen University
Cancer Center, Guangzhou, 510060, China.
(5)Department of Thoracic Surgery, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South
China, Guangdong Provincial Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Sun Yat-sen
University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, 510060, China.
(6)Department of Radiation Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
02215, USA.
(7)Center for DNA Damage and Repair, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
02215, USA.

Stromal antigen 2 (STAG2), a subunit of the cohesin complex, is recurrently
mutated in various tumors. However, the role of STAG2 in DNA repair and its
therapeutic implications are largely unknown. Here it is reported that knockout
of STAG2 results in increased double-stranded breaks (DSBs) and chromosomal
aberrations by reducing homologous recombination (HR) repair, and confers
hypersensitivity to inhibitors of ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATMi), Poly ADP
Ribose Polymerase (PARPi), or the combination of both. Of note, the impaired HR
by STAG2-deficiency is mainly attributed to the restored expression of KMT5A,
which in turn methylates H4K20 (H4K20me0) to H4K20me1 and thereby decreases the
recruitment of BRCA1-BARD1 to chromatin. Importantly, STAG2 expression
correlates with poor prognosis of cancer patients. STAG2 is identified as an
important regulator of HR and a potential therapeutic strategy for STAG2-mutant
tumors is elucidated.

© 2023 The Authors. Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/advs.202302494
PMCID: PMC10754142
PMID: 37985839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
