---
reference_id: "PMID:10398680"
title: Proper metaphase spindle length is determined by centromere proteins Mis12 and Mis6 required for faithful chromosome segregation.
authors:
- Goshima G
- Saitoh S
- Yanagida M
journal: Genes Dev
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1101/gad.13.13.1664
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Proper metaphase spindle length is determined by centromere proteins Mis12 and Mis6 required for faithful chromosome segregation.
**Authors:** Goshima G, Saitoh S, Yanagida M
**Journal:** Genes Dev (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.13.13.1664](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.13.13.1664)

## Content

1. Genes Dev. 1999 Jul 1;13(13):1664-77. doi: 10.1101/gad.13.13.1664.

Proper metaphase spindle length is determined by centromere proteins Mis12 and 
Mis6 required for faithful chromosome segregation.

Goshima G(1), Saitoh S, Yanagida M.

Author information:
(1)Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST) Research 
Project, Department of Biophysics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, 
Kitashirakawa-Oiwakecho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502 Japan.

High-fidelity chromosome transmission is fundamental in controlling the quality 
of the cell division cycle. The spindle pole-to-pole distance remains constant 
from metaphase to anaphase A. We show that fission yeast sister 
centromere-connecting proteins, Mis6 and Mis12, are required for correct spindle 
morphogenesis, determining metaphase spindle length. Thirty-five to sixty 
percent extension of metaphase spindle length takes place in mis6 and mis12 
mutants. This may be due to incorrect spindle morphogenesis containing impaired 
sister centromeres or force unbalance between pulling by the linked sister 
kinetochores and kinetochore-independent pushing. The mutant spindle fully 
extends in anaphase, although it is accompanied by drastic missegregation by 
aberrant sister centromere separation. Hence, metaphase spindle length may be 
crucial for segregation fidelity. Suppressors of mis12 partly restore normal 
metaphase spindle length. In mis4 that is defective in sister chromatid 
cohesion, metaphase spindle length is also long, but anaphase spindle extension 
is blocked, probably due to the activated spindle checkpoint. Extensive 
missegregation is caused in mis12 only when Mis12 is inactivated from the 
previous M through to the following M, an effective way to avoid missegregation 
in the cell cycle. Mis12 has conserved homologs in budding yeast and filamentous 
fungi.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.13.13.1664
PMCID: PMC316848
PMID: 10398680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]