---
reference_id: "PMID:28749637"
title: SLC6A3-Related Dopamine Transporter Deficiency Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Spaull RVV
- Kurian MA
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SLC6A3-Related Dopamine Transporter Deficiency Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Spaull RVV, Kurian MA

## Content

1. SLC6A3-Related Dopamine Transporter Deficiency Syndrome.

Spaull RVV(1), Kurian MA(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2017 Jul 27 [updated 2023 Sep 28].

Author information:
(1)Developmental Neurosciences, Zayed Centre for Research into Rare Disease in 
Children, UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, United 
Kingdom

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: SLC6A3-related dopamine transporter deficiency 
syndrome (DTDS) is a complex movement disorder with a continuum that ranges from 
classic early-onset DTDS (by age 6 months) to atypical later-onset DTDS (in 
childhood, adolescence, or adulthood). Classic early-onset DTDS: Infants 
typically manifest nonspecific findings (irritability, feeding difficulties, 
axial hypotonia, and/or delayed motor development) followed by a hyperkinetic 
movement disorder (with features of chorea, dystonia, ballismus, orolingual 
dyskinesia). Over time, affected individuals develop parkinsonism-dystonia 
characterized by bradykinesia (progressing to akinesia), dystonic posturing, 
distal tremor, rigidity, and reduced facial expression. Limitation of voluntary 
movements leads to severe motor delay. Episodic status dystonicus, exacerbations 
of dystonia, and secondary orthopedic, gastrointestinal, and respiratory 
complications are common. Many affected individuals appear to show relative 
preservation of intellect with good cognitive development. Atypical later-onset 
DTDS: Normal psychomotor development in infancy and early childhood. 
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is reported in childhood 
followed by later-onset manifestations of parkinsonism-dystonia with tremor, 
progressive bradykinesia, variable tone, and dystonic posturing. The long-term 
prognosis of this form of DTDS is currently unknown.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SLC6A3-related DTDS is established in a 
proband with characteristic clinical, laboratory, and imaging findings and 
either biallelic loss-of-function pathogenic variants in SLC6A3 or, rarely, a 
heterozygous dominant-negative pathogenic variant in SLC6A3 identified by 
molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment to control chorea and 
dyskinesia in early stages of the disease includes tetrabenazine and 
benzodiazepines. Dystonia is more difficult to control, and treatment often 
includes the dopamine agonists pramipexole and ropinirole as first-line agents; 
adjuncts such as trihexyphenidyl, baclofen, gabapentin, and clonidine for severe 
dystonia; and chloral hydrate and benzodiazepines for exacerbations of dystonia 
or status dystonicus. Movement disorders can be exacerbated by pain or 
discomfort, so diagnosis and treatment of all sources of pain and discomfort 
(e.g., dental caries, hip dislocation, scoliosis, pressure sores) is essential. 
Supportive management and developmental support includes: nutrition management 
and feeding support for oral feeding issues; alternative and augmentative 
communication devices when needed; medical management of tone issues and regular 
physical therapy to reduce the risk of contractures and fractures; focal 
botulinum toxin for contractures; standard treatments for pulmonary infections; 
influenza vaccine, prophylactic antibiotics, and chest physiotherapy to prevent 
pulmonary infections; chloral hydrate, melatonin, and other sedatives as needed 
for sleep issues; anti-serotoninergic agents for vomiting; standard treatments 
for gastroesophageal reflux, constipation, and ADHD. Surveillance: Every six to 
12 months: neurologic assessment; nutrition, swallowing, and speech-language 
assessment; physiotherapy evaluation for postural and tone issues; evaluation 
for hip dislocation and spinal deformity; physical and occupational therapy 
evaluation to assess mobility, activities of daily living, and need for adaptive 
devices; assessment of the frequency of respiratory infections and presence of 
sleep issues; assessment for vomiting, gastrointestinal reflux, and 
constipation; assessment for manifestations of ADHD. Annually: ophthalmology 
examination for eye movement disorders and refractive errors. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Although the dopamine agonists bromocriptine and 
pergolide could be considered, the associated increased risk of pulmonary, 
retroperitoneal, and pericardial fibrosis makes them less desirable than the 
newer dopamine agonists. Drugs with anti-dopaminergic side effects (e.g., some 
antihistamines, sedatives, and dimenhydrinate) may exacerbate movement 
disorders. The antiemetics metoclopramide, prochlorperazine, and other medicines 
with anti-dopaminergic effects may exacerbate movement disorders.
GENETIC COUNSELING: In most individuals reported to date, SLC6A3-related DTDS is 
caused by biallelic loss-of-function pathogenic variants and inherited in an 
autosomal recessive manner. Autosomal dominant SLC6A3-related DTDS caused by a 
heterozygous dominant-negative SLC6A3 pathogenic variant has been reported in 
one individual to date. Autosomal recessive inheritance: If both parents are 
known to be heterozygous for an SLC6A3 loss-of-function pathogenic variant, each 
sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, 
a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being 
unaffected and not a carrier. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives requires 
prior identification of the SLC6A3 pathogenic variants in the family. Autosomal 
dominant inheritance: Each child of an individual with SLC6A3-related DTDS has a 
50% chance of inheriting the dominant-negative SLC6A3 pathogenic variant. Once 
the SLC6A3 pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in an affected family 
member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 28749637