---
reference_id: "PMID:31387748"
title: "TRPV4 expresses in bone cell lineages and TRPV4-R616Q mutant causing Brachyolmia in human reveals \"loss-of-interaction\" with cholesterol."
authors:
- Das R
- Goswami C
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.07.042
keywords:
- Amino Acid Motifs
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Bone and Bones/pathology
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Lineage
- Cell Movement
- Cholesterol/metabolism
- Conserved Sequence
- Humans
- Membrane Microdomains/metabolism
- Mesenchymal Stem Cells/metabolism
- Mutant Proteins/metabolism
- Mutation/genetics
- Neurons/metabolism
- Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics
- "Structural Homology, Protein"
- "TRPV Cation Channels/chemistry, genetics"
- Temperature
- Xenopus
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TRPV4 expresses in bone cell lineages and TRPV4-R616Q mutant causing Brachyolmia in human reveals "loss-of-interaction" with cholesterol.
**Authors:** Das R, Goswami C
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.07.042](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.07.042)

## Content

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2019 Oct 1;517(4):566-574. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.07.042. Epub 2019 Aug 3.

TRPV4 expresses in bone cell lineages and TRPV4-R616Q mutant causing Brachyolmia 
in human reveals "loss-of-interaction" with cholesterol.

Das R(1), Goswami C(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, National Institute of Science Education and 
Research, HBNI, Khordha, Jatni, Odisha, 752050, India; Homi Bhabha National 
Institute, Training School Complex, Anushakti Nagar, Mumbai, 400094, India.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, National Institute of Science Education and 
Research, HBNI, Khordha, Jatni, Odisha, 752050, India; Homi Bhabha National 
Institute, Training School Complex, Anushakti Nagar, Mumbai, 400094, India. 
Electronic address: chandan@niser.ac.in.

Transient receptor potential Vanilloid ion channel sub type 4 (TRPV4) is 
involved in complex Ca2+-signaling. At least one copy of TRPV4 is present in all 
vertebrates and is involved in several physiological processes including sensory 
process and point mutations in TRPV4 leads to development of different 
pathophysiological disorders in human. R616Q mutant of TRPV4 has been referred 
as "gain-of-function" mutant causing abnormality in bone cells and develop 
pathophysiological condition known as "Brachyolmia". In this work, we 
demonstrated that R616Q mutation is located in a very critical position of TRPV4 
containing a cholesterol-binding motif sequence which is highly conserved in all 
vertebrates. Accordingly, TRPV4-Wt but not the TRPV4-R616Q localizes preferably 
in cholesterol-enriched lipid rafts in osteogenic cell line Saos2 and in 
DRG-neuron derived F11 cell line. Further, FRAP experiment suggest TRPV4-Wt but 
not the TRPV4-R616Q mutant is more mobile especially in cholesterol-reduced 
lipid membrane. GST-tagged TM4-Loop-TM5 fragment containing TRPV4-Wt but not 
R616Q sequence interacts with cholesterol, forms high-molecular weight complex 
and also show band shift in SDS-PAGE. TRPV4 is expressed in Mesenchymal stem 
cells and the localization of TRPV4 in lipid raft is dependent on temperature 
and cholesterol. Our data suggests that TRPV4-R616Q mutant behaves as a 
"loss-of-interaction" with cholesterol.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.07.042
PMID: 31387748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]