---
reference_id: "PMID:33560519"
title: A greater awareness of children with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency is imperative in western countries.
authors:
- Kristensen L
- Lai AB
- Ebbesen F
- Donneborg ML
journal: Acta Paediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/apa.15803
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A greater awareness of children with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency is imperative in western countries.
**Authors:** Kristensen L, Lai AB, Ebbesen F, Donneborg ML
**Journal:** Acta Paediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/apa.15803](https://doi.org/10.1111/apa.15803)

## Content

1. Acta Paediatr. 2021 Jun;110(6):1935-1941. doi: 10.1111/apa.15803. Epub 2021
Feb  15.

A greater awareness of children with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
deficiency is imperative in western countries.

Kristensen L(1), Lai AB(2), Ebbesen F(3)(4), Donneborg ML(5)(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)Regional Hospital Central Jutland, Denmark.
(2)Region Hospital Horsens, Horsens, Denmark.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark.
(4)Department of Clinical Medicine, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, The North Denmark Region Hospital, Hjørring, 
Denmark.
(6)Centre for Clinical Research, The North Denmark Regional Hospital, Hjørring, 
Denmark.

AIM: This national retrospective Danish study described the characteristics of 
children diagnosed with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, an 
inherited X-linked recessive disorder that often affects children of Middle 
Eastern descent.
METHODS: We studied children born between 1 January 2000 and 31 December 2017 
and diagnosed with G6PD deficiency. They were identified from the Danish 
National Hospital Discharge Register and the Danish Database of Extreme Neonatal 
Hyperbilirubinaemia.
RESULTS: There were 113 children diagnosed with G6PD deficiency, 67% were of 
Middle Eastern descent and they were frequently diagnosed before the onset of 
symptoms, based on known heredity. Of the 67 infants born in Denmark, 10% had 
extreme neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia and one developed kernicterus spectrum 
disorder, as did one child born in the Middle East. Most (61%) of the 33 
children with jaundice received phototherapy, 12% had exchange transfusions and 
18% received whole blood transfusions. After the neonatal period, 23% of the 
cohort had blood transfusions and 4% needed intensive care for acute haemolytic 
anaemia. The incidence of G6PD deficiency appeared to be severely 
underestimated.
CONCLUSION: Many families from countries where G6PD deficiency is endemic move 
to Denmark and other Western countries. Greater awareness is essential to avoid 
chronic and potentially lethal, consequences.

©2021 Foundation Acta Paediatrica. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/apa.15803
PMID: 33560519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]