---
reference_id: "PMID:11791665"
title: "Mycobacterium leprae and leprosy: a compendium."
authors:
- Sasaki S
- Takeshita F
- Okuda K
- Ishii N
journal: Microbiol Immunol
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1111/j.1348-0421.2001.tb01308.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mycobacterium leprae and leprosy: a compendium.
**Authors:** Sasaki S, Takeshita F, Okuda K, Ishii N
**Journal:** Microbiol Immunol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1348-0421.2001.tb01308.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1348-0421.2001.tb01308.x)

## Content

1. Microbiol Immunol. 2001;45(11):729-36. doi:
10.1111/j.1348-0421.2001.tb01308.x.

Mycobacterium leprae and leprosy: a compendium.

Sasaki S(1), Takeshita F, Okuda K, Ishii N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioregulation, Leprosy Research Center, National Institute of 
Infectious Diseases, Higashimurayama, Tokyo, Japan. ssasaki@nih.go.jp

Leprosy is a chronic infectious disease caused by Mycobacterium leprae, which 
was discovered by G.H.A. Hansen in 1873. M. leprae is an exceptional bacterium 
because of its long generation time and no growth in artificial media. Entire 
sequencing of the bacterial genome revealed numerous pseudogenes (inactive 
reading frames with functional counterparts in M. tuberculosis) which might be 
responsible for the very limited metabolic activity of M. leprae. The clinical 
demonstration of the disease is determined by the quality of host immune 
response. Th1-type immune response helps to kill the bacteria, but hosts are 
encroached upon when Th2-type response is predominant. The bacteria have 
affinity to the peripheral nerves and are likely to cause neuropathy. M. 
leprae/laminin-alpha2 complexes bind to alpha/beta dystroglycan complexes 
expressed on the Schwann cell surface. WHO recommends a chemotherapy protocol 
[multidrug therapy (MDT)] which effectively controls the disease and contributes 
to the global elimination program. Leprosy has been stigmatized throughout 
history, and recent topics regarding the disease in Japan are also discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1348-0421.2001.tb01308.x
PMID: 11791665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]