---
reference_id: "PMID:34297046"
title: Response to upfront azacitidine in juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia in the AZA-JMML-001 trial.
authors:
- Niemeyer CM
- Flotho C
- Lipka DB
- Starý J
- Rössig C
- Baruchel A
- Klingebiel T
- Micalizzi C
- Michel G
- Nysom K
- Rives S
- Schmugge Liner M
- Zecca M
- Schönung M
- Baumann I
- Nöllke P
- Benettaib B
- Biserna N
- Poon J
- Simcock M
- Patturajan M
- Menezes D
- Gaudy A
- van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM
- Locatelli F
journal: Blood Adv
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2020004144
keywords:
- Adult
- Azacitidine/adverse effects
- Child
- DNA Methylation
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Myelomonocytic, Juvenile/drug therapy, genetics"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Response to upfront azacitidine in juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia in the AZA-JMML-001 trial.
**Authors:** Niemeyer CM, Flotho C, Lipka DB, Starý J, Rössig C, Baruchel A, Klingebiel T, Micalizzi C, Michel G, Nysom K, Rives S, Schmugge Liner M, Zecca M, Schönung M, Baumann I, Nöllke P, Benettaib B, Biserna N, Poon J, Simcock M, Patturajan M, Menezes D, Gaudy A, van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM, Locatelli F
**Journal:** Blood Adv (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1182/bloodadvances.2020004144](https://doi.org/10.1182/bloodadvances.2020004144)

## Content

1. Blood Adv. 2021 Jul 27;5(14):2901-2908. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2020004144.

Response to upfront azacitidine in juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia in the
AZA-JMML-001 trial.

Niemeyer CM(1)(2), Flotho C(1)(2), Lipka DB(3), Starý J(4), Rössig C(5),
Baruchel A(6), Klingebiel T(2)(7)(8), Micalizzi C(9), Michel G(10), Nysom K(11),
Rives S(12), Schmugge Liner M(13), Zecca M(14), Schönung M(3)(15), Baumann
I(16), Nöllke P(1), Benettaib B(17), Biserna N(17), Poon J(18), Simcock M(19),
Patturajan M(18), Menezes D(20), Gaudy A(18), van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM(21),
Locatelli F(22)(23).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatrics and
Adolescent Medicine, Medical Center, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(2)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Translational Cancer Epigenomics Section, Division of Translational Medical
Oncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) and National Center for Tumor
Diseases (NCT), Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Department of Paediatric Hematology and Oncology, Charles University and
University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.
(5)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Münster University
Children's Hospital, Münster, Germany.
(6)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Immunology, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire (CHU) Paris-Hôpital Universitaire Robert-Debré (Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris [AP-HP]), Paris, France.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Universitätsklinikum Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany.
(8)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Site Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany.
(9)Department of Pediatric Sciences, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Istituto di
Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS), Genoa, Italy.
(10)Pediatrics and Pediatric Oncology, Hôpital de la Timone, Marseilles, France.
(11)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Rigshospitalet,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(12)Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Institut de Recerca, Hospital Sant Joan
de Deu de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(13)Division of Haematology, Kinderspital Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(14)Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo,
Pavia, Italy.
(15)Faculty of Biosciences, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany.
(16)Department of Pathology, Böblingen Hospital, Sindelfingen, Germany.
(17)Formerly Bristol Myers Squibb, Princeton, NJ.
(18)Bristol Myers Squibb, Princeton, NJ.
(19)Celgene Corporation, a Bristol Myers Squibb company, Uxbridge, United
Kingdom.
(20)Bristol Myers Squibb, San Francisco, CA.
(21)Hematology-Oncology, Prinses Máxima Center for Pediatric
Oncology/Hematology, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(22)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, IRCCS Ospedale Pediatrico
Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy; and.
(23)Department of Pediatrics, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is the only curative
therapy for most children with juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML). Novel
therapies controlling the disorder prior to HSCT are needed. We conducted a
phase 2, multicenter, open-label study to evaluate the safety and antileukemic
activity of azacitidine monotherapy prior to HSCT in newly diagnosed JMML
patients. Eighteen patients enrolled from September 2015 to November 2017 were
treated with azacitidine (75 mg/m2) administered IV once daily on days 1 to 7 of
a 28-day cycle. The primary end point was the number of patients with clinical
complete remission (cCR) or clinical partial remission (cPR) after 3 cycles of
therapy. Pharmacokinetics, genome-wide DNA-methylation levels, and variant
allele frequencies of leukemia-specific index mutations were also analyzed.
Sixteen patients completed 3 cycles and 5 patients completed 6 cycles. After 3
cycles, 11 patients (61%) were in cPR and 7 (39%) had progressive disease. Six
of 16 patients (38%) who needed platelet transfusions were transfusion-free
after 3 cycles. All 7 patients with intermediate- or low-methylation signatures
in genome-wide DNA-methylation studies achieved cPR. Seventeen patients received
HSCT; 14 (82%) were leukemia-free at a median follow-up of 23.8 months (range,
7.0-39.3 months) after HSCT. Azacitidine was well tolerated and plasma
concentration--time profiles were similar to observed profiles in adults. In
conclusion, azacitidine monotherapy is a suitable option for children with newly
diagnosed JMML. Although long-term safety and efficacy remain to be fully
elucidated in this population, these data demonstrate that azacitidine provides
valuable clinical benefit to JMML patients prior to HSCT. This trial was
registered at www.clinicaltrials.gov as #NCT02447666.

© 2021 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2020004144
PMCID: PMC8341358
PMID: 34297046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
