---
reference_id: "PMID:32119081"
title: "Radiation Treatment, ATM, BRCA1/2, and CHEK2*1100delC Pathogenic Variants and Risk of Contralateral Breast Cancer."
authors:
- Reiner AS
- Robson ME
- Mellemkjær L
- Tischkowitz M
- John EM
- Lynch CF
- Brooks JD
- Boice JD
- Knight JA
- Teraoka SN
- Liang X
- Woods M
- Shen R
- Shore RE
- Stram DO
- Thomas DC
- Malone KE
- Bernstein L
- Riaz N
- Woodward W
- Powell S
- Goldgar D
- Concannon P
- WECARE Study Collaborative Group
- Bernstein JL
journal: J Natl Cancer Inst
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/jnci/djaa031
keywords:
- Adult
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins/genetics
- BRCA1 Protein/genetics
- BRCA2 Protein/genetics
- "Breast Neoplasms/genetics, pathology, radiotherapy"
- Case-Control Studies
- Checkpoint Kinase 2/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/etiology, genetics, pathology"
- "Neoplasms, Radiation-Induced/etiology, genetics"
- "Neoplasms, Second Primary/etiology, genetics"
- Penetrance
- Radiotherapy/adverse effects
- Sequence Deletion
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Radiation Treatment, ATM, BRCA1/2, and CHEK2*1100delC Pathogenic Variants and Risk of Contralateral Breast Cancer.
**Authors:** Reiner AS, Robson ME, Mellemkjær L, Tischkowitz M, John EM, Lynch CF, Brooks JD, Boice JD, Knight JA, Teraoka SN, Liang X, Woods M, Shen R, Shore RE, Stram DO, Thomas DC, Malone KE, Bernstein L, Riaz N, Woodward W, Powell S, Goldgar D, Concannon P, WECARE Study Collaborative Group, Bernstein JL
**Journal:** J Natl Cancer Inst (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jnci/djaa031](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djaa031)

## Content

1. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2020 Dec 14;112(12):1275-1279. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djaa031.

Radiation Treatment, ATM, BRCA1/2, and CHEK2*1100delC Pathogenic Variants and
Risk of Contralateral Breast Cancer.

Reiner AS(1), Robson ME(1)(2), Mellemkjær L(3), Tischkowitz M(4), John EM(5),
Lynch CF(6), Brooks JD(7), Boice JD(8), Knight JA(7)(9), Teraoka SN(10), Liang
X(1), Woods M(1), Shen R(1), Shore RE(11), Stram DO(12), Thomas DC(12), Malone
KE(13), Bernstein L(14), Riaz N(1), Woodward W(15), Powell S(1), Goldgar D(16),
Concannon P(10); WECARE Study Collaborative Group; Bernstein JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Weill Cornell Medical College, Cornell University, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Danish Cancer Society Research Center, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(5)Stanford University, School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(6)University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(7)University of Toronto, Dalla Lana School of Public Health Science, Toronto,
ON, Canada.
(8)Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center,
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(9)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Sinai Health System, Toronto, ON,
Canada.
(10)Genetics Institute and Department of Pathology, Immunology and Laboratory
Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(11)NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(12)University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(13)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA.
(14)Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte,
CA, USA.
(15)MD Anderson Cancer Center, The University of Texas, Houston, TX, USA.
(16)University of Utah, School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

Whether radiation therapy (RT) affects contralateral breast cancer (CBC) risk in
women with pathogenic germline variants in moderate- to high-penetrance breast
cancer-associated genes is unknown. In a population-based case-control study, we
examined the association between RT; variants in ATM, BRCA1/2, or
CHEK2*1100delC; and CBC risk. We analyzed 708 cases of women with CBC and 1399
controls with unilateral breast cancer, all diagnosed with first invasive breast
cancer between 1985 and 2000 and aged younger than 55 years at diagnosis and
screened for variants in breast cancer-associated genes. Rate ratios (RR) and
95% confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated using multivariable conditional
logistic regression. RT did not modify the association between known pathogenic
variants and CBC risk (eg, BRCA1/2 pathogenic variant carriers without RT: RR =
3.52, 95% CI = 1.76 to 7.01; BRCA1/2 pathogenic variant carriers with RT: RR =
4.46, 95% CI = 2.96 to 6.71), suggesting that modifying RT plans for young women
with breast cancer is unwarranted. Rare ATM missense variants, not currently
identified as pathogenic, were associated with increased risk of RT-associated
CBC (carriers of ATM rare missense variants of uncertain significance without
RT: RR = 0.38, 95% CI = 0.09 to 1.55; carriers of ATM rare missense variants of
uncertain significance with RT: RR = 2.98, 95% CI = 1.31 to 6.80). Further
mechanistic studies will aid clinical decision-making related to RT.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jnci/djaa031
PMCID: PMC7735763
PMID: 32119081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
