---
reference_id: "PMID:36804485"
title: Amplified therapeutic targets in high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma - a review of the literature with quantitative appraisal.
authors:
- Talbot T
- Lu H
- Aboagye EO
journal: Cancer Gene Ther
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41417-023-00589-z
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- Mutation
- Oncogenes/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Amplified therapeutic targets in high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma - a review of the literature with quantitative appraisal.
**Authors:** Talbot T, Lu H, Aboagye EO
**Journal:** Cancer Gene Ther (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41417-023-00589-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41417-023-00589-z)

## Content

1. Cancer Gene Ther. 2023 Jul;30(7):955-963. doi: 10.1038/s41417-023-00589-z.
Epub  2023 Feb 20.

Amplified therapeutic targets in high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma - a review 
of the literature with quantitative appraisal.

Talbot T(#)(1), Lu H(#)(1), Aboagye EO(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery & Cancer, Imperial College London, Hammersmith 
Hospital, Du Cane Road, W120NN, London, UK.
(2)Department of Surgery & Cancer, Imperial College London, Hammersmith 
Hospital, Du Cane Road, W120NN, London, UK. eric.aboagye@imperial.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

High-grade serous ovarian carcinoma is a unique cancer characterised by 
universal TP53 mutations and widespread copy number alterations. These copy 
number alterations include deletion of tumour suppressors and amplification of 
driver oncogenes. Given their key oncogenic roles, amplified driver genes are 
often proposed as therapeutic targets. For example, development of anti-HER2 
agents has been clinically successful in treatment of ERBB2-amplified tumours. A 
wide scope of preclinical work has since investigated numerous amplified genes 
as potential therapeutic targets in high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma. 
However, variable experimental procedures (e.g., choice of cell lines), 
ambiguous phenotypes or lack of validation hinders further clinical translation 
of many targets. In this review, we collate the genes proposed to be amplified 
therapeutic targets in high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma, and quantitatively 
appraise the evidence in support of each candidate gene. Forty-four genes are 
found to have evidence as amplified therapeutic targets; the five highest 
scoring genes are CCNE1, PAX8, URI1, PRKCI and FAL1. This review generates an 
up-to-date list of amplified therapeutic target candidates for further 
development and proposes comprehensive criteria to assist amplified therapeutic 
target discovery in the future.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41417-023-00589-z
PMCID: PMC9940086
PMID: 36804485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors acknowledge funding from the Medical 
Research Council Grant (MR/M015858/1), Imperial College NIHR Biomedical Research 
Centre award (WSCC_P62585), Imperial College Experimental Cancer Medicines award 
(C1312/A25149) and National Cancer Imaging Translational Accelerator 
(C2536/A28680).