---
reference_id: "PMID:21730772"
title: "Community of practice: a nurse practitioner collaborative model."
authors:
- Burgess J
- Sawchenko L
journal: Nurs Leadersh (Tor Ont)
year: '2011'
doi: 10.12927/cjnl.2011.22468
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Community of practice: a nurse practitioner collaborative model.
**Authors:** Burgess J, Sawchenko L
**Journal:** Nurs Leadersh (Tor Ont) (2011)
**DOI:** [10.12927/cjnl.2011.22468](https://doi.org/10.12927/cjnl.2011.22468)

## Content

1. Nurs Leadersh (Tor Ont). 2011 Jun;24(2):99-112. doi: 10.12927/cjnl.2011.22468.

Community of practice: a nurse practitioner collaborative model.

Burgess J(1), Sawchenko L.

Author information:
(1)Health Services, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada. 
jburgess@uvic.ca

A study was undertaken with nurse practitioners (NPs) in 2008-2009 to examine 
post-legislation role development in British Columbia. The authors used a 
participatory action research approach to engage NPs in social investigation, 
education and action, and to explore, from the participants' perspective, how 
collaboration advances NP role integration in primary healthcare. A particular 
discovery of the study was the Interior Health Authority Community of Practice 
(CoP) established in collaboration with health leaders and NPs. The purpose of 
this paper is to report on the CoP and the five characteristics describing this 
collaborative CoP model, including sanctioned social structure, knowledge 
exchange network, practice discovery and innovation, generating meaning and 
value, and power sharing for strategic improvement. The CoP helped NPs to build 
collegial and collaborative relationships, enhance practice learning and 
competence, extend and apply new knowledge, enrich professional identities, and 
shape health organizational policy and politics. Because healthcare research 
about CoPs is limited, principles of a collaborative CoP model are offered for 
broader healthcare use. The authors conclude that a collaborative CoP model 
addresses the internal interests and needs of participating members while 
attending to the external concerns of the organization, and thus contributes to 
healthcare improvement.

DOI: 10.12927/cjnl.2011.22468
PMID: 21730772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]