---
reference_id: "PMID:38452171"
title: Schinzel-Giedion Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Duis J
- van Bon BWM
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Schinzel-Giedion Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Duis J, van Bon BWM

## Content

1. Schinzel-Giedion Syndrome.

Duis J(1), van Bon BWM(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2024 Mar 7.

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital Colorado;, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical 
Campus, Aurora, Colorado
(2)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
the Netherlands

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Classic Schinzel-Giedion syndrome (SGS), an ultra-rare 
multisystem disorder caused by gain-of-function pathogenic variants in a SETBP1 
mutational hot spot, is characterized by global neurodevelopmental impairment 
leading to moderate-to-profound intellectual disability, epilepsy (often 
refractory to treatment), hypotonia, spasticity, dysautonomia, hearing loss, and 
cerebral visual impairment. Other findings can include poor weight gain often 
associated with gastroesophageal reflux disease, chronic vomiting, constipation, 
gastroparesis, and/or feeding intolerance. Structural malformations can involve 
the heart, skeleton, kidney and urinary tract, genitalia, and brain. Anomalies 
of the liver, spleen, and/or pancreas are less common. Other features may 
include neuroepithelial neoplasia, severely disrupted sleep, choanal stenosis, 
inguinal hernia, sensitive skin, and increased risk of infection. To date, more 
than 50 individuals have been reported with molecularly confirmed classic SGS. 
Atypical SGS, reported in five individuals to date, is caused by pathogenic 
SETBP1 variants in proximity to – but not within – the mutational hot spot. The 
broad spectrum of clinical features of variable severity partially overlaps with 
classic SGS; however, this spectrum does not include risk for neuroepithelial 
neoplasia to date.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of classic SGS can be established in a proband 
based on published clinical diagnostic criteria, or the molecular diagnosis can 
be established in a proband with suggestive findings and a heterozygous SETBP1 
pathogenic gain-of-function variant within the mutational hot spot (i.e., a 
12-base-pair region in exon 4 encoding a canonical degron). The diagnosis of 
atypical SGS syndrome is established in a proband with suggestive findings and a 
heterozygous SETBP1 pathogenic variant adjacent to – but not within – the 
mutational hot spot.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: There is no cure for classic or 
atypical SGS. Supportive treatment to improve quality of life, maximize 
function, and reduce complications can include multidisciplinary care by 
specialists in pediatrics, neurology, physiatry, occupational and physical 
therapy, speech-language pathology, psychiatry, ophthalmology, ENT, surgery, 
pulmonology, oncology, urology, nephrology, audiology, gastroenterology, 
orthopedics, cardiology, and medical genetics. Surveillance: At each visit, 
evaluate for feeding issues (including nutritional status and safety of oral 
intake), gastrointestinal issues, respiratory issues, neurologic manifestations 
(including seizures, changes in tone, movement disorders, mood, irritability, 
and alertness), kidney and urinary tract manifestations, and musculoskeletal 
manifestations. In individuals with classic SGS, age-related surveillance for 
occurrence of neoplasia includes liver ultrasound and serum alpha-fetoprotein 
levels, renal ultrasound examination, pelvic MRI for sacrococcygeal teratoma, 
and monitoring for clinical signs of leukemia. Agents/circumstances to avoid: 
Nephrotoxic drugs such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and vancomycin 
should be used with caution due to high frequency of chronic renal impairment 
from recurrent pyelonephritis and structural renal anomalies.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Classic and atypical SGS are autosomal dominant disorders 
typically caused by a de novo SETBP1 pathogenic variant. Rarely, individuals 
diagnosed with SGS have the disorder as the result of a pathogenic variant 
inherited from a parent. Sib recurrence of clinically defined classic SGS, 
presumed to be due to parental germline mosaicism, has been reported in two 
families. Transmission of a SETBP1 pathogenic missense variant from an 
unaffected parent to a child with atypical SGS has been reported in one family 
(of note, the possibility of mosaicism in the unaffected parent was not 
excluded). Once the SETBP1 pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected 
family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 38452171