---
reference_id: "PMID:37870973"
title: First-Line Selpercatinib or Chemotherapy and Pembrolizumab in RET Fusion-Positive NSCLC.
authors:
- Zhou C
- Solomon B
- Loong HH
- Park K
- Pérol M
- Arriola E
- Novello S
- Han B
- Zhou J
- Ardizzoni A
- Mak MP
- Santini FC
- Elamin YY
- Drilon A
- Wolf J
- Payakachat N
- Uh MK
- Rajakumar D
- Han H
- Puri T
- Soldatenkova V
- Lin AB
- Lin BK
- Goto K
- LIBRETTO-431 Trial Investigators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2309457
keywords:
- Humans
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Pyrazoles
- Pyridines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# First-Line Selpercatinib or Chemotherapy and Pembrolizumab in RET Fusion-Positive NSCLC.
**Authors:** Zhou C, Solomon B, Loong HH, Park K, Pérol M, Arriola E, Novello S, Han B, Zhou J, Ardizzoni A, Mak MP, Santini FC, Elamin YY, Drilon A, Wolf J, Payakachat N, Uh MK, Rajakumar D, Han H, Puri T, Soldatenkova V, Lin AB, Lin BK, Goto K, LIBRETTO-431 Trial Investigators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2309457](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2309457)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2023 Nov 16;389(20):1839-1850. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2309457. Epub
2023 Oct 21.

First-Line Selpercatinib or Chemotherapy and Pembrolizumab in RET
Fusion-Positive NSCLC.

Zhou C(1), Solomon B(1), Loong HH(1), Park K(1), Pérol M(1), Arriola E(1),
Novello S(1), Han B(1), Zhou J(1), Ardizzoni A(1), Mak MP(1), Santini FC(1),
Elamin YY(1), Drilon A(1), Wolf J(1), Payakachat N(1), Uh MK(1), Rajakumar D(1),
Han H(1), Puri T(1), Soldatenkova V(1), Lin AB(1), Lin BK(1), Goto K(1);
LIBRETTO-431 Trial Investigators.

Collaborators: Kowalyszyn R, Lerzo G, Paz G, Martin C, Solomon B, Boyer M, Ganju
V, Mallesara G, Alamgeer M, Wong M, Lambrechts M, Dooms C, Surmont V, Deschepper
K, Goeminne JC, Demedts I, Lima L, de Castro Junior G, Mak M, Liutti V, Pinto
GD, Padoan M, Ferreira C, Soares A, Reis T, Leighl N, Chu Q, Han B, Zhou J, Yang
N, Zhang W, Zhang Y, Zhou C, Wang Z, Yang M, Yu Y, Cheng Y, Fan Y, Dong X, Zhou
C, Tang K, Opalka P, Melichar B, Roubec J, Perol M, Moro-Sibilot D, Quantin X,
Wislez M, Rieke DT, Wolf J, Bischoff H, Reck M, Reinmuth N, Hoffknecht P,
Schumann C, Mavroudis D, Syrigos K, Baka S, Kontakiotis T, Loong H, Li YC,
Nechushtan H, Dudnik J, Bar J, Zer A, Peled N, Siena S, Bria E, D'Arcangelo M,
Cortinovis D, De Carlo E, Migliorino MR, Morabito A, Novello S, Toschi L,
Ardizzoni A, Cappuzzo F, Kenmotsu H, Kato T, Sakamoto T, Sakakibara J, Kumagai
T, Hayashi H, Yanagitani N, Goto K, Ohashi K, Takeuchi S, Ohe Y, de la Mora
Jimenez E, Alatorre Alexander J, Dingemans AMC, Hashemi S, Biesma B,
Dziadziuszko R, Mazilu L, Alexandru A, Ciuleanu T, Tiut C, Levchenko E,
Moiseenko F, Rozhkova I, Solovyeva E, Makarycheva Y, Kazantseva M, Ling CP,
Paz-Ares Rodriguez L, Bernabe R, Fernández de Sanmamed M, Garrido-Lopez P, Majem
M, Nadal E, Aguado de la Rosa C, Arriola Aperribay E, Moran Bueno MT, Martinez
Bueno A, Rodriguez Abreu D, Coves Sarto J, Martinez Aguillo M, Vicente D,
Massuti B, Insa Molla A, Ortega Granados AL, Han JY, Kim YJ, Lee DH, Lee SH, Kim
JS, Kim DW, Yang TY, Yang JC, Lin SH, Lin CC, Huang WT, Wang CC, Chen YM, Lee
KY, Ho CL, Wei YF, Lai CL, Yang CT, Chang GC, Cicin I, Goksel T, Harputluoglu H,
Gumus M, Arslan C, Kaplan MA, Ozyilkan O, Demir A, Oksuzoglu B, Kadzhoian A,
Kobziev O, Ponomarova O, Vynnychenko O, Bondarenko I, Matsishevska I, Berzoy O,
Ivashchuk O, Sinielnikov I, Viguro M.

Author information:
(1)From Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine
(C.Z.), and the Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Shanghai
Chest Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University (B.H.),
Shanghai, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong (H.H.L.), and the First
Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou (J.Z.) -
all in China; Peter MacCallum Cancer Institute, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
(B.S.); Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine,
Seoul, South Korea (K.P.); Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France (M.P.); Hospital del
Mar, Barcelona (E.A.); the Department of Oncology, Azienda
Ospedaliero-Universitaria San Luigi-Orbassano, University of Turin, Turin
(S.N.), and IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, Bologna (A.A.) -
both in Italy; Instituto do Câncer do Estado de São Paulo, University of São
Paulo Medical School and Instituto D'Or de Ensino e Pesquisa (M.P.M.), and the
Oncology Center, Hospital Śırio Libanês (F.C.S.) - both in São Paulo; the
University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston (Y.Y.E.); Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and Weill Cornell Medical College, New York
(A.D.); the Center for Integrated Oncology, University Hospital of Cologne,
Cologne, Germany (J.W.); Loxo@Lilly (H.H.) and Eli Lilly (N.P., M.K.U., D.R.,
T.P., V.S., A.B.L., B.K.L.) - both in Indianapolis; and National Cancer Center
Hospital East, Kashiwa, Japan (K.G.).

Comment in
    Cancer Discov. 2023 Dec 12;13(12):OF8. doi:
10.1158/2159-8290.CD-ND2023-0011.
    N Engl J Med. 2024 Jan 25;390(4):381. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2314327.
    N Engl J Med. 2024 Jan 25;390(4):381-382. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2314327.

BACKGROUND: Selpercatinib, a highly selective potent and brain-penetrant RET
inhibitor, was shown to have efficacy in patients with advanced RET
fusion-positive non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in a nonrandomized phase 1-2
study.
METHODS: In a randomized phase 3 trial, we evaluated the efficacy and safety of
first-line selpercatinib as compared with control treatment that consisted of
platinum-based chemotherapy with or without pembrolizumab at the investigator's
discretion. The primary end point was progression-free survival assessed by
blinded independent central review in both the intention-to-treat-pembrolizumab
population (i.e., patients whose physicians had planned to treat them with
pembrolizumab in the event that they were assigned to the control group) and the
overall intention-to-treat population. Crossover from the control group to the
selpercatinib group was allowed if disease progression as assessed by blinded
independent central review occurred during receipt of control treatment.
RESULTS: In total, 212 patients underwent randomization in the
intention-to-treat-pembrolizumab population. At the time of the preplanned
interim efficacy analysis, median progression-free survival was 24.8 months (95%
confidence interval [CI], 16.9 to not estimable) with selpercatinib and 11.2
months (95% CI, 8.8 to 16.8) with control treatment (hazard ratio for
progression or death, 0.46; 95% CI, 0.31 to 0.70; P<0.001). The percentage of
patients with an objective response was 84% (95% CI, 76 to 90) with
selpercatinib and 65% (95% CI, 54 to 75) with control treatment. The
cause-specific hazard ratio for the time to progression affecting the central
nervous system was 0.28 (95% CI, 0.12 to 0.68). Efficacy results in the overall
intention-to-treat population (261 patients) were similar to those in the
intention-to-treat-pembrolizumab population. The adverse events that occurred
with selpercatinib and control treatment were consistent with those previously
reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with selpercatinib led to significantly longer
progression-free survival than platinum-based chemotherapy with or without
pembrolizumab among patients with advanced RET fusion-positive NSCLC. (Funded by
Eli Lilly and others; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT04194944.).

Copyright © 2023 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2309457
PMCID: PMC10698285
PMID: 37870973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
