---
reference_id: "PMID:16536303"
title: "[Study on the detoxication gene gstM1-gstT1-null and susceptibility to aflatoxin B1 related hepatocellular carcinoma in Guangxi]."
authors:
- Long XD
- Ma Y
- Wei YP
- Deng ZL
journal: Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi
year: '2005'
keywords:
- Adult
- Aflatoxin B1/toxicity
- Aged
- Alleles
- Asian People/genetics
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/complications, etiology, genetics"
- Case-Control Studies
- China
- Environmental Exposure/adverse effects
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genotype
- Glutathione Transferase/genetics
- Hepatitis B/complications
- Humans
- "Liver Neoplasms/complications, etiology, genetics"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Study on the detoxication gene gstM1-gstT1-null and susceptibility to aflatoxin B1 related hepatocellular carcinoma in Guangxi].
**Authors:** Long XD, Ma Y, Wei YP, Deng ZL
**Journal:** Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi (2005)

## Content

1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Oct;26(10):777-81.

[Study on the detoxication gene gstM1-gstT1-null and susceptibility to aflatoxin
B1 related hepatocellular carcinoma in Guangxi].

[Article in Chinese]

Long XD(1), Ma Y, Wei YP, Deng ZL.

Author information:
(1)Pathology Department, Guangxi Medical University, Naning 530021, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the association between susceptibility to aflatoxin B1
(AFB1)-related hepatocellular carcinoma(HCC) and the null genotypes of
detoxication gene gstM1 and gstT1.
METHODS: Peripheral blood white blood cells DNA samples were obtained from all
the subjects including 140 HCC cases and 536 controls from AFB1 high risk area
Guangxi. gstM1 and gstT1 polymorphisms were detected by polymerase chain
reaction technique.
RESULTS: (1) gstM1- and gstT1-present were associated with decreasing risk of
HCC. gstM1- and gstT1-null were associated with the increasing risk of HCC
[adjusted OR (95 % CI) = 2.07 (1.20-3.57) and 1.44 (0.85-2.45), respectively];
(2) The appearance of both gstM1- and gstT1-null genotypes were more susceptible
to HCC than either one of them(adjusted OR and 95% CI are 2.43 and (1.19-4.97);
(3) From low/median to high level of AFB1 exposure, both gstM1- and gstTl-null
genotypes were associated with significantly conspicuous increasing risk of HCC
[adjusted OR(95% CI) = 12.76(5.38-30.24) and 7.82(3.61-16.90) respectively].
CONCLUSION: It was suggested that: genetic polymorphisms of gstM1 and gstT1 were
susceptible to HCC; individuals who were gstM1- or gstT1-null would have an
increasing risk of developing HCC while individuals with both nulls were more
susceptible. There was evidence of interaction between gstM1- and gstT1-null and
the level of AFB1 exposure which was associated with the increasing risk of HCC.

PMID: 16536303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
