---
reference_id: "PMID:24366610"
title: Treatment of Huntington's disease.
authors:
- Frank S
journal: Neurotherapeutics
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s13311-013-0244-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of Huntington's disease.
**Authors:** Frank S
**Journal:** Neurotherapeutics (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13311-013-0244-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13311-013-0244-z)

## Content

1. Neurotherapeutics. 2014 Jan;11(1):153-60. doi: 10.1007/s13311-013-0244-z.

Treatment of Huntington's disease.

Frank S(1).

Author information:
(1)Boston University School of Medicine, 72 East Concord St, C3, Boston, MA, 
02118, USA, samfrank@bu.edu.

Huntington's disease (HD) is a dominantly inherited progressive neurological 
disease characterized by chorea, an involuntary brief movement that tends to 
flow between body regions. HD is typically diagnosed based on clinical findings 
in the setting of a family history and may be confirmed with genetic testing. 
Predictive testing is available to family members at risk, but only experienced 
clinicians should perform the counseling and testing. Multiple areas of the 
brain degenerate, mainly involving the neurotransmitters dopamine, glutamate, 
and γ-aminobutyric acid. Although pharmacotherapies theoretically target these 
neurotransmitters, few well-conducted trials for symptomatic interventions have 
yielded positive results and current treatments have focused on the motor 
aspects of HD. Tetrabenazine is a dopamine-depleting agent that may be one of 
the more effective agents for reducing chorea, although it has a risk of 
potentially serious adverse effects. Some newer neuroleptic agents, such as 
olanzapine and aripiprazole, may have adequate efficacy with a more favorable 
adverse effect profile than older neuroleptic agents for treating chorea and 
psychosis. There are no current treatments to change the course of HD, but 
education and symptomatic therapies can be effective tools for clinicians to use 
with patients and families affected by HD.

DOI: 10.1007/s13311-013-0244-z
PMCID: PMC3899480
PMID: 24366610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]