---
reference_id: "PMID:34549549"
title: "Incidence, Prevalence, and Mortality of Dermatomyositis: A Population-Based Cohort Study."
authors:
- Kronzer VL
- Kimbrough BA
- Crowson CS
- Davis JM 3rd
- Holmqvist M
- Ernste FC
journal: Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/acr.24786
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Male
- "Dermatomyositis/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Cohort Studies
- Incidence
- Prevalence
- Polymyositis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence, Prevalence, and Mortality of Dermatomyositis: A Population-Based Cohort Study.
**Authors:** Kronzer VL, Kimbrough BA, Crowson CS, Davis JM 3rd, Holmqvist M, Ernste FC
**Journal:** Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/acr.24786](https://doi.org/10.1002/acr.24786)

## Content

1. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2023 Feb;75(2):348-355. doi: 10.1002/acr.24786. 
Epub 2022 Oct 6.

Incidence, Prevalence, and Mortality of Dermatomyositis: A Population-Based 
Cohort Study.

Kronzer VL(1), Kimbrough BA(1), Crowson CS(1), Davis JM 3rd(1), Holmqvist M(2), 
Ernste FC(1).

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(2)Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: We aimed to determine the population-based incidence, prevalence, and 
mortality of dermatomyositis (DM) using European Alliance of Associations for 
Rheumatology (EULAR)/American College of Rheumatology (ACR) criteria.
METHODS: This population-based cohort study included incident DM from January 1, 
1995 to December 31, 2019. We manually reviewed all individuals with at least 1 
code for DM or polymyositis to determine if they met EULAR/ACR criteria, 
subspecialty physician diagnosis, and/or Bohan and Peter criteria. We age- and 
sex-adjusted incidence and prevalence estimates to the US non-Hispanic White 
year 2000 population and estimated prevalence on January 1, 2015. Standardized 
mortality ratios (SMRs) with 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs) compared 
observed to expected mortality adjusting for age, sex, and year.
RESULTS: We identified 40 cases of verified DM, with 29 cases incident in 
Olmsted County from 1995 to 2019. The mean age was 57 years, 26 (90%) were 
female, and 12 (41%) had clinically amyopathic DM (CADM). The median follow-up 
time was 8.2 years. The overall adjusted incidence of DM was 1.1 (95% CI 
0.7-1.5) per 100,000 person-years, and prevalence was 13 (95% CI 6-19) per 
100,000. The SMR was significantly elevated among the myopathic DM cases (3.1 
[95% CI 1.1-6.8]) but not CADM cases (1.1 [95% CI 0.2-3.3]). The positive 
predictive value of ≥2 DM codes was only 40 of 82 (49%).
CONCLUSION: This population-based study found that DM incidence and prevalence 
were higher than previously reported. Mortality was significantly elevated for 
myopathic DM but not for CADM.

© 2021 American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/acr.24786
PMCID: PMC8934743
PMID: 34549549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]