---
reference_id: "PMID:31668817"
title: Case management of cholera.
authors:
- Pietroni MAC
journal: Vaccine
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.09.098
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case management of cholera.
**Authors:** Pietroni MAC
**Journal:** Vaccine (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.09.098](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.09.098)

## Content

1. Vaccine. 2020 Feb 29;38 Suppl 1:A105-A109. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.09.098.
 Epub 2019 Oct 24.

Case management of cholera.

Pietroni MAC(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Director, Gloucetsershire Royal Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, 
Gloucester, UK; University of Bristol, Faculty of Health Sciences, Bristol, UK. 
Electronic address: mark.pietroni@nhs.net.

Cholera still affects about three million people a year and kills approximately 
100,000. Cholera can be effectively managed in the majority of cases with oral 
rehydration solution alone. Up to one third of patients present with severe 
dehydration, which can be diagnosed clinically, and will require rapid 
intravenous rehydration with Ringers Lactate or other appropriate fluid before 
being managed with oral rehydration solution. Antibiotics reduce the duration of 
illness and should be used in patients with severe dehydration. Resistance is 
common and local sensitivities should guide the choice of antibiotic. All 
children between six months and five years should receive zinc supplements. 
Effective case management with strict attention to detail including infection 
control and the use of protocolized approaches can reduce the mortality to 
around 1% even in resource poor settings.

Copyright © 2019 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.09.098
PMID: 31668817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.