---
reference_id: "PMID:21880975"
title: Characterization of Vibrio cholerae O1 El Tor biotype variant clinical isolates from Bangladesh and Haiti, including a molecular genetic analysis of virulence genes.
authors:
- Son MS
- Megli CJ
- Kovacikova G
- Qadri F
- Taylor RK
journal: J Clin Microbiol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1128/JCM.01286-11
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of Vibrio cholerae O1 El Tor biotype variant clinical isolates from Bangladesh and Haiti, including a molecular genetic analysis of virulence genes.
**Authors:** Son MS, Megli CJ, Kovacikova G, Qadri F, Taylor RK
**Journal:** J Clin Microbiol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JCM.01286-11](https://doi.org/10.1128/JCM.01286-11)

## Content

1. J Clin Microbiol. 2011 Nov;49(11):3739-49. doi: 10.1128/JCM.01286-11. Epub
2011  Aug 31.

Characterization of Vibrio cholerae O1 El Tor biotype variant clinical isolates 
from Bangladesh and Haiti, including a molecular genetic analysis of virulence 
genes.

Son MS(1), Megli CJ, Kovacikova G, Qadri F, Taylor RK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dartmouth Medical School, Vail 
Building HB7550, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.

Vibrio cholerae serogroup O1, the causative agent of the diarrheal disease 
cholera, is divided into two biotypes: classical and El Tor. Both biotypes 
produce the major virulence factors toxin-coregulated pilus (TCP) and cholera 
toxin (CT). Although possessing genotypic and phenotypic differences, El Tor 
biotype strains displaying classical biotype traits have been reported and 
subsequently were dubbed El Tor variants. Of particular interest are reports of 
El Tor variants that produce various levels of CT, including levels typical of 
classical biotype strains. Here, we report the characterization of 10 clinical 
isolates from the International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, 
Bangladesh, and a representative strain from the 2010 Haiti cholera outbreak. We 
observed that all 11 strains produced increased CT (2- to 10-fold) compared to 
that of wild-type El Tor strains under in vitro inducing conditions, but they 
possessed various TcpA and ToxT expression profiles. Particularly, El Tor 
variant MQ1795, which produced the highest level of CT and very high levels of 
TcpA and ToxT, demonstrated hypervirulence compared to the virulence of El Tor 
wild-type strains in the infant mouse cholera model. Additional genotypic and 
phenotypic tests were conducted to characterize the variants, including an 
assessment of biotype-distinguishing characteristics. Notably, the sequencing of 
ctxB in some El Tor variants revealed two copies of classical ctxB, one per 
chromosome, contrary to previous reports that located ctxAB only on the large 
chromosome of El Tor biotype strains.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.01286-11
PMCID: PMC3209127
PMID: 21880975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]