---
reference_id: "PMID:9847087"
title: 3-Methylcrotonyl-coenzyme A carboxylase is a component of the mitochondrial leucine catabolic pathway in plants.
authors:
- Anderson MD
- Che P
- Song J
- Nikolau BJ
- Wurtele ES
journal: Plant Physiol
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1104/pp.118.4.1127
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 3-Methylcrotonyl-coenzyme A carboxylase is a component of the mitochondrial leucine catabolic pathway in plants.
**Authors:** Anderson MD, Che P, Song J, Nikolau BJ, Wurtele ES
**Journal:** Plant Physiol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1104/pp.118.4.1127](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.118.4.1127)

## Content

1. Plant Physiol. 1998 Dec;118(4):1127-38. doi: 10.1104/pp.118.4.1127.

3-Methylcrotonyl-coenzyme A carboxylase is a component of the mitochondrial
leucine catabolic pathway in plants.

Anderson MD(1), Che P, Song J, Nikolau BJ, Wurtele ES.

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany (M.D.A., E.S.W.).

3-Methylcrotonyl-coenzyme A carboxylase (MCCase) is a mitochondrial
biotin-containing enzyme whose metabolic function is not well understood in
plants. In soybean (Glycine max) seedlings the organ-specific and
developmentally induced changes in MCCase expression are regulated by mechanisms
that control the accumulation of MCCase mRNA and the activity of the enzyme.
During soybean cotyledon development, when seed-storage proteins are degraded,
leucine (Leu) accumulation peaks transiently at 8 d after planting. The
coincidence between peak MCCase expression and the decline in Leu content
provides correlative evidence that MCCase is involved in the mitochondrial
catabolism of Leu. Direct evidence for this conclusion was obtained from
radiotracer metabolic studies using extracts from isolated mitochondria. These
experiments traced the metabolic fate of [U-14C]Leu and NaH14CO3, the latter of
which was incorporated into methylglutaconyl-coenzyme A (CoA) via MCCase. These
studies directly demonstrate that plant mitochondria can catabolize Leu via the
following scheme: Leu --> alpha-ketoisocaproate --> isovaleryl-CoA -->
3-methylcrotonyl-CoA --> 3-methylglutaconyl-CoA -->
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA --> acetoacetate + acetyl-CoA. These findings
demonstrate for the first time, to our knowledge, that the enzymes responsible
for Leu catabolism are present in plant mitochondria. We conclude that a primary
metabolic role of MCCase in plants is the catabolism of Leu.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.118.4.1127
PMCID: PMC34729
PMID: 9847087
