---
reference_id: "PMID:36435678"
title: Mitochondrial copper in human genetic disorders.
authors:
- Garza NM
- Swaminathan AB
- Maremanda KP
- Zulkifli M
- Gohil VM
journal: Trends Endocrinol Metab
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.tem.2022.11.001
keywords:
- Humans
- Copper/metabolism
- "Mitochondria/genetics, metabolism"
- Biological Transport
- Homeostasis
- "Molecular Chaperones/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial copper in human genetic disorders.
**Authors:** Garza NM, Swaminathan AB, Maremanda KP, Zulkifli M, Gohil VM
**Journal:** Trends Endocrinol Metab (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tem.2022.11.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tem.2022.11.001)

## Content

1. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2023 Jan;34(1):21-33. doi: 10.1016/j.tem.2022.11.001.
 Epub 2022 Nov 23.

Mitochondrial copper in human genetic disorders.

Garza NM(1), Swaminathan AB(1), Maremanda KP(1), Zulkifli M(1), Gohil VM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, MS 3474, Texas A&M University, 
College Station, TX 77843, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, MS 3474, Texas A&M University, 
College Station, TX 77843, USA. Electronic address: vgohil@tamu.edu.

Copper is an essential micronutrient that serves as a cofactor for enzymes 
involved in diverse physiological processes, including mitochondrial energy 
generation. Copper enters cells through a dedicated copper transporter and is 
distributed to intracellular cuproenzymes by copper chaperones. Mitochondria are 
critical copper-utilizing organelles that harbor an essential cuproenzyme 
cytochrome c oxidase, which powers energy production. Mutations in copper 
transporters and chaperones that perturb mitochondrial copper homeostasis result 
in fatal genetic disorders. Recent studies have uncovered the therapeutic 
potential of elesclomol, a copper ionophore, for the treatment of copper 
deficiency disorders such as Menkes disease. Here we review the role of copper 
in mitochondrial energy metabolism in the context of human diseases and 
highlight the recent developments in copper therapeutics.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tem.2022.11.001
PMCID: PMC9780195
PMID: 36435678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors’ university 
(Texas A&M) has entered into a licensing agreement with Engrail Therapeutics for 
the development of elesclomol:copper as a therapeutic agent for the disorders of 
copper metabolism. Engrail therapeutics also sponsors certain aspects of 
elesclomol research in the author’s laboratory.