---
reference_id: "PMID:12594264"
title: The 19-kDa Mycobacterium tuberculosis protein induces macrophage apoptosis through Toll-like receptor-2.
authors:
- López M
- Sly LM
- Luu Y
- Young D
- Cooper H
- Reiner NE
journal: J Immunol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.170.5.2409
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The 19-kDa Mycobacterium tuberculosis protein induces macrophage apoptosis through Toll-like receptor-2.
**Authors:** López M, Sly LM, Luu Y, Young D, Cooper H, Reiner NE
**Journal:** J Immunol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.170.5.2409](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.170.5.2409)

## Content

1. J Immunol. 2003 Mar 1;170(5):2409-16. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.170.5.2409.

The 19-kDa Mycobacterium tuberculosis protein induces macrophage apoptosis 
through Toll-like receptor-2.

López M(1), Sly LM, Luu Y, Young D, Cooper H, Reiner NE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, University of 
British Columbia, Faculty of Medicine and Science, The Research Institute of the 
Vancouver Hospital and Health Sciences Center, Vancouver, British Columbia, 
Canada.

Macrophages infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis undergo increased rates of 
apoptosis. Important objectives are to define the microbial factors that cause 
apoptosis, the mechanisms involved and the impact on infection. The 19-kDa M. 
tuberculosis glycolipoprotein (p19) is both cell wall-associated and secreted 
and is a candidate virulence factor. We investigated the potential of 
recombinant, His-tagged p19 lacking the secretion/acylation signal to induce 
macrophage apoptosis. The TUNEL assay and annexin V binding to membrane 
phosphatidylserine were used to measure apoptosis. The results show that p19 
does act to induce apoptosis in differentiated THP-1 cells and monocyte-derived 
macrophages and that this effect is both dose- and time-dependent. Furthermore, 
this effect of p19 is Toll-like receptor (TLR)-2-mediated because preincubation 
of either THP-1 cells or TLR-2-expressing CHO cells with anti-TLR-2 mAb 
inhibited apoptosis induced by p19. Apoptosis of macrophages in response to p19 
was found to be caspase-8 dependent and caspase-9 independent consistent with a 
transmembrane pathway signaling cell death through TLR-2. The viability of M. 
tuberculosis in cells undergoing apoptosis induced by p19 was significantly 
reduced suggesting the possibility that this may favor containment of infection. 
Although native p19 is a mycobacterial glycolipoprotein, based upon the use of 
recombinant p19 where the acylation signal had been removed, we conclude that it 
is the polypeptide component of p19 that is responsible for signaling through 
TLR-2 and that the lipid moiety is not required.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.170.5.2409
PMID: 12594264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]