---
reference_id: "PMID:24445571"
title: "Host and viral determinants of the outcome of exposure to HCV infection genotype 4: a large longitudinal study."
authors:
- Kamal SM
- Kassim SK
- Ahmed AI
- Mahmoud S
- Bahnasy KA
- Hafez TA
- Aziz IA
- Fathelbab IF
- Mansour HM
journal: Am J Gastroenterol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1038/ajg.2013.427
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Adult
- Age Distribution
- Antiviral Agents/therapeutic use
- Case-Control Studies
- Confidence Intervals
- Disease Progression
- Egypt/epidemiology
- Female
- "GB virus C/genetics, isolation & purification"
- Genotype
- "Hepacivirus/drug effects, genetics"
- "Hepatitis C/drug therapy, epidemiology, genetics"
- Humans
- Incidence
- Interferons
- Interleukins/genetics
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Prognosis
- Prospective Studies
- "RNA, Viral/analysis, genetics"
- Ribavirin/therapeutic use
- Sex Distribution
- "Statistics, Nonparametric"
- Treatment Outcome
- Viral Load/genetics
- "Viremia/epidemiology, genetics"
- Interferon Lambda
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Host and viral determinants of the outcome of exposure to HCV infection genotype 4: a large longitudinal study.
**Authors:** Kamal SM, Kassim SK, Ahmed AI, Mahmoud S, Bahnasy KA, Hafez TA, Aziz IA, Fathelbab IF, Mansour HM
**Journal:** Am J Gastroenterol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ajg.2013.427](https://doi.org/10.1038/ajg.2013.427)

## Content

1. Am J Gastroenterol. 2014 Feb;109(2):199-211. doi: 10.1038/ajg.2013.427. Epub
2014 Jan 21.

Host and viral determinants of the outcome of exposure to HCV infection genotype
4: a large longitudinal study.

Kamal SM(1), Kassim SK(2), Ahmed AI(1), Mahmoud S(1), Bahnasy KA(3), Hafez
TA(4), Aziz IA(5), Fathelbab IF(6), Mansour HM(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Gastroenterology and Tropical Medicine,
Ain Shams Faculty of Medicine, Cairo, Egypt.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Ain Shams Faculty of
Medicine, Cairo, Egypt.
(3)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Ain Shams University, Cairo,
Egypt.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, The American University in
Cairo, Egypt.
(5)Department of Tropical Medicine, Al Azhar Faculty of Medicine, Cairo, Egypt.
(6)Department of Immunology, Vacsera, Cairo, Egypt.

OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study was to characterize the factors that
influence the outcome of exposure to hepatitis C virus (HCV) genotype 4 (HCV-G4)
and the course of recent infection.
METHODS: In this longitudinal study, we prospectively assessed the clinical,
genetic, virological, and immunological parameters and retrospectively
determined single-nucleotide polymorphisms at interleukin-28B (IL-28B)
rs12979860 in a well-characterized large cohort recently exposed to HCV-G4.
RESULTS: A total of 136 subjects with acute HCV (new viremia, seroconversion,
and HCV-specific T-cell responses) were identified. Forty-eight subjects (35%)
had spontaneous viral clearance and 88 subjects developed chronic HCV of which
42 subjects were treated with pegylated interferon monotherapy, with a sustained
virologic response (SVR) rate of 88%. Twenty-six subjects developed HCV-specific
T-cell immune responses without detectable viremia or seroconversion. IL-28B-CC
(odds ratio (OR) 14.22; P<0.0001), multispecific T-cell responses (OR=11.66;
P<0.0001), >300 IU/l alanine aminotransferase (ALT) decline within 4 weeks
(OR=6.83; P<0.0001), jaundice (OR=3.54; P=0.001), female gender (OR=2.39;
P=0.007), and >2.5 log10 HCV-RNA drop within 8 weeks (OR=2.48; P=0.016) were
independently associated with spontaneous clearance. ALT normalization and
undetectable HCV-RNA predicted SVR. Exposed apparently uninfected participants
had a higher frequency of IL-28B-CC than patients with unresolved acute HCV
(P<0.001). IL-28B-CC was associated with multispecific T-cell response
(r(2)=0.0.835; P<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: IL-28B-CC genotype, multispecific HCV T-cell responses, rapid
decline in ALT, and viral load predict spontaneous clearance and response to
acute HCV-G 4 therapy. IL-28B-CC genotype correlates with developing early
multispecific T-cell responses. These findings have important implications for
predicting the outcome of HCV exposure and acute infection and identifying
patients likely to benefit from therapy.

DOI: 10.1038/ajg.2013.427
PMID: 24445571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
