---
reference_id: "PMID:20598277"
title: Terminal osseous dysplasia is caused by a single recurrent mutation in the FLNA gene.
authors:
- Sun Y
- Almomani R
- Aten E
- Celli J
- van der Heijden J
- Venselaar H
- Robertson SP
- Baroncini A
- Franco B
- Basel-Vanagaite L
- Horii E
- Drut R
- Ariyurek Y
- den Dunnen JT
- Breuning MH
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.06.008
keywords:
- Adult
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/complications, genetics"
- "Bone Neoplasms/complications, genetics"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Contractile Proteins/genetics
- Female
- "Fibroma/complications, genetics"
- Filamins
- Genetic Association Studies
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Microfilament Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local"
- Pedigree
- "Pigmentation Disorders/complications, genetics"
- Skin Pigmentation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Terminal osseous dysplasia is caused by a single recurrent mutation in the FLNA gene.
**Authors:** Sun Y, Almomani R, Aten E, Celli J, van der Heijden J, Venselaar H, Robertson SP, Baroncini A, Franco B, Basel-Vanagaite L, Horii E, Drut R, Ariyurek Y, den Dunnen JT, Breuning MH
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.06.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.06.008)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Jul 9;87(1):146-53. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.06.008.

Terminal osseous dysplasia is caused by a single recurrent mutation in the FLNA 
gene.

Sun Y(1), Almomani R, Aten E, Celli J, van der Heijden J, Venselaar H, Robertson 
SP, Baroncini A, Franco B, Basel-Vanagaite L, Horii E, Drut R, Ariyurek Y, den 
Dunnen JT, Breuning MH.

Author information:
(1)Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, 
2300RC Leiden, The Netherlands.

Terminal osseous dysplasia (TOD) is an X-linked dominant male-lethal disease 
characterized by skeletal dysplasia of the limbs, pigmentary defects of the 
skin, and recurrent digital fibroma with onset in female infancy. After 
performing X-exome capture and sequencing, we identified a mutation at the last 
nucleotide of exon 31 of the FLNA gene as the most likely cause of the disease. 
The variant c.5217G>A was found in six unrelated cases (three families and three 
sporadic cases) and was not found in 400 control X chromosomes, pilot data from 
the 1000 Genomes Project, or the FLNA gene variant database. In the families, 
the variant segregated with the disease, and it was transmitted four times from 
a mildly affected mother to a more seriously affected daughter. We show that, 
because of nonrandom X chromosome inactivation, the mutant allele was not 
expressed in patient fibroblasts. RNA expression of the mutant allele was 
detected only in cultured fibroma cells obtained from 15-year-old surgically 
removed material. The variant activates a cryptic splice site, removing the last 
48 nucleotides from exon 31. At the protein level, this results in a loss of 16 
amino acids (p.Val1724_Thr1739del), predicted to remove a sequence at the 
surface of filamin repeat 15. Our data show that TOD is caused by this single 
recurrent mutation in the FLNA gene.

Copyright 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.06.008
PMCID: PMC2896768
PMID: 20598277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]