---
reference_id: "PMID:36871881"
title: Endocrine-disrupting chemical exposure augments neutrophilic inflammation in severe asthma through the autophagy pathway.
authors:
- Quoc QL
- Cao TBT
- Kim SH
- Choi Y
- Ryu MS
- Choi Y
- Park HS
- Shin YS
journal: Food Chem Toxicol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2023.113699
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endocrine-disrupting chemical exposure augments neutrophilic inflammation in severe asthma through the autophagy pathway.
**Authors:** Quoc QL, Cao TBT, Kim SH, Choi Y, Ryu MS, Choi Y, Park HS, Shin YS
**Journal:** Food Chem Toxicol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.fct.2023.113699](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fct.2023.113699)

## Content

1. Food Chem Toxicol. 2023 May;175:113699. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2023.113699. Epub 
2023 Mar 5.

Endocrine-disrupting chemical exposure augments neutrophilic inflammation in 
severe asthma through the autophagy pathway.

Quoc QL(1), Cao TBT(1), Kim SH(1), Choi Y(1), Ryu MS(2), Choi Y(2), Park HS(1), 
Shin YS(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Ajou University School of 
Medicine, Suwon, South Korea; Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ajou University 
School of Medicine, Suwon, South Korea.
(2)Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Ajou University School of 
Medicine, Suwon, South Korea.
(3)Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Ajou University School of 
Medicine, Suwon, South Korea. Electronic address: drsys93@naver.com.

Corticosteroid resistance, progressive lung function decline, and frequent 
asthma exacerbations are the hallmarks of neutrophilic asthma (NA). However, the 
potential contributors and their mechanisms of NA aggravation have not yet been 
fully clarified. This study was conducted to assess the precise mechanism and 
inflammatory effects of endocrine-disrupting chemicals using mono-n-butyl 
phthalate (MnBP) on an NA model. BALB/c mice from normal control and 
LPS/OVA-induced NA groups were treated with or without MnBP. The effects of MnBP 
on the airway epithelial cells (AECs), macrophages (Mφ), and neutrophils were 
investigated in vitro and in vivo. NA mice exposed to MnBP had significantly 
increased airway hyperresponsiveness, total and neutrophil cell counts in the 
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, and the percentage of M1Mφ in the lung tissues 
compared to those non-exposed to MnBP. In in vitro study, MnBP induced the human 
neutrophil activation to release neutrophil DNA extracellular traps, Mφ 
polarizing toward M1Mφ, and AEC damage. Treatment with hydroxychloroquine (an 
autophagy inhibitor) reduced the effects of MnBP in vivo and in vitro. The 
results of our study suggest that MnBP exposure may increase the risk of 
neutrophilic inflammation in severe asthma and autophagy pathway-targeted 
therapeutics can help control MnBP-induced harmful effects in asthma.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fct.2023.113699
PMID: 36871881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.