---
reference_id: "PMID:33057169"
title: Genome-wide association study reveals new insights into the heritability and genetic correlates of developmental dyslexia.
authors:
- Gialluisi A
- Andlauer TFM
- Mirza-Schreiber N
- Moll K
- Becker J
- Hoffmann P
- Ludwig KU
- Czamara D
- Pourcain BS
- Honbolygó F
- Tóth D
- Csépe V
- Huguet G
- Chaix Y
- Iannuzzi S
- Demonet JF
- Morris AP
- Hulslander J
- Willcutt EG
- DeFries JC
- Olson RK
- Smith SD
- Pennington BF
- Vaessen A
- Maurer U
- Lyytinen H
- Peyrard-Janvid M
- Leppänen PHT
- Brandeis D
- Bonte M
- Stein JF
- Talcott JB
- Fauchereau F
- Wilcke A
- Kirsten H
- Müller B
- Francks C
- Bourgeron T
- Monaco AP
- Ramus F
- Landerl K
- Kere J
- Scerri TS
- Paracchini S
- Fisher SE
- Schumacher J
- Nöthen MM
- Müller-Myhsok B
- Schulte-Körne G
journal: Mol Psychiatry
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41380-020-00898-x
keywords:
- Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/genetics
- Dyslexia/genetics
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Humans
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics
- Multifactorial Inheritance
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome-wide association study reveals new insights into the heritability and genetic correlates of developmental dyslexia.
**Authors:** Gialluisi A, Andlauer TFM, Mirza-Schreiber N, Moll K, Becker J, Hoffmann P, Ludwig KU, Czamara D, Pourcain BS, Honbolygó F, Tóth D, Csépe V, Huguet G, Chaix Y, Iannuzzi S, Demonet JF, Morris AP, Hulslander J, Willcutt EG, DeFries JC, Olson RK, Smith SD, Pennington BF, Vaessen A, Maurer U, Lyytinen H, Peyrard-Janvid M, Leppänen PHT, Brandeis D, Bonte M, Stein JF, Talcott JB, Fauchereau F, Wilcke A, Kirsten H, Müller B, Francks C, Bourgeron T, Monaco AP, Ramus F, Landerl K, Kere J, Scerri TS, Paracchini S, Fisher SE, Schumacher J, Nöthen MM, Müller-Myhsok B, Schulte-Körne G
**Journal:** Mol Psychiatry (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41380-020-00898-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-020-00898-x)

## Content

1. Mol Psychiatry. 2021 Jul;26(7):3004-3017. doi: 10.1038/s41380-020-00898-x.
Epub  2020 Oct 14.

Genome-wide association study reveals new insights into the heritability and 
genetic correlates of developmental dyslexia.

Gialluisi A(1)(2)(3), Andlauer TFM(#)(1)(2)(4), Mirza-Schreiber N(#)(1)(5), Moll 
K(#)(6), Becker J(7), Hoffmann P(7), Ludwig KU(7), Czamara D(1), Pourcain 
BS(8)(9), Honbolygó F(10), Tóth D(10), Csépe V(10), Huguet G(11), Chaix 
Y(12)(13), Iannuzzi S(13), Demonet JF(14), Morris AP(15)(16)(17), Hulslander 
J(18), Willcutt EG(18), DeFries JC(18), Olson RK(18), Smith SD(19), Pennington 
BF(20), Vaessen A(21), Maurer U(22), Lyytinen H(23), Peyrard-Janvid M(24), 
Leppänen PHT(23), Brandeis D(25)(26)(27)(28), Bonte M(21), Stein JF(29), Talcott 
JB(30), Fauchereau F(11), Wilcke A(31), Kirsten H(31)(32), Müller B(31), Francks 
C(8), Bourgeron T(11), Monaco AP(17)(33), Ramus F(34), Landerl K(35), Kere 
J(24)(36), Scerri TS(17)(37), Paracchini S(38), Fisher SE(8), Schumacher 
J(#)(7), Nöthen MM(#)(7), Müller-Myhsok B(#)(39)(40)(41), Schulte-Körne 
G(#)(42).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Research in Psychiatry, Max Planck Institute of 
Psychiatry, Munich, Germany.
(2)Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Munich, Germany.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Prevention, IRCCS Istituto Neurologico 
Mediterraneo Neuromed, Pozzilli, Italy.
(4)Department of Neurology, Klinikum rechts der Isar, School of Medicine, 
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(5)Institute of Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany.
(6)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatic, and 
Psychotherapy, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Munich, Germany.
(7)Department of Genomics, Life and Brain Center, Institute of Human Genetics, 
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(8)Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics 
and Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(9)MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.
(10)Brain Imaging Centre, Research Centre of Natural Sciences of the Hungarian 
Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary.
(11)Human Genetics and Cognitive Functions Unit, Institut Pasteur and University 
Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(12)ToNIC, Toulouse NeuroImaging Center, Université de Toulouse, Inserm, UPS, 
Toulouse, France.
(13)Children's Hospital, Purpan University Hospital, Toulouse, France.
(14)Leenaards Memory Centre, Department of Clinical Neurosciences Lausanne 
University Hospital (CHUV), University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(15)Department of Biostatistics, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
(16)Centre for Genetics and Genomics Versus Arthritis, Centre for 
Musculoskeletal Research, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(17)Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(18)Institute for Behavioral Genetics and Department of Psychology and 
Neuroscience, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA.
(19)Department of Neurological Sciences, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 
Omaha, NE, USA.
(20)Developmental Neuropsychology Lab and Clinic, Department of Psychology, 
University of Denver, Denver, CO, USA.
(21)Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Faculty of Psychology and Neuroscience 
and Maastricht Brain Imaging Center (M-BIC), Maastricht University, Maastricht, 
The Netherlands.
(22)Department of Psychology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., 
Hong Kong.
(23)Centre for Research on Learning and Teaching, Department of Psychology, 
University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland.
(24)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, 
Sweden.
(25)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Psychiatric 
Hospital, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(26)Zurich Center for Integrative Human Physiology (ZIHP), University of Zurich 
and ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(27)Neuroscience Center Zurich, University of Zurich and ETH Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(28)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Central 
Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University, 
Mannheim, Germany.
(29)Department of Physiology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(30)School of Life and Health Sciences, Aston University, Birmingham, UK.
(31)Cognitive Genetics Unit, Fraunhofer Institute for Cell Therapy and 
Immunology, Leipzig, Germany.
(32)Institute for Medical Informatics, Statistics and Epidemiology and 
LIFE-Leipzig Research Center for Civilization Diseases, University of Leipzig, 
Leipzig, Germany.
(33)Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA.
(34)Laboratoire de Sciences Cognitives et Psycholinguistique, Ecole Normale 
Supérieure, CNRS, EHESS, PSL University, Paris, France.
(35)Institute of Psychology, University of Graz and BioTechMed, Graz, Austria.
(36)Stem Cells and Metabolism Research Program, Biomedicum, Folkhälsan Institute 
of Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(37)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne 
University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(38)School of Medicine, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, UK.
(39)Department of Translational Research in Psychiatry, Max Planck Institute of 
Psychiatry, Munich, Germany. bmm@psych.mpg.de.
(40)Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Munich, Germany. 
bmm@psych.mpg.de.
(41)Institute of Translational Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK. 
bmm@psych.mpg.de.
(42)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatic, and 
Psychotherapy, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Munich, Germany. 
Gerd.Schulte-Koerne@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(#)Contributed equally

Developmental dyslexia (DD) is a learning disorder affecting the ability to 
read, with a heritability of 40-60%. A notable part of this heritability remains 
unexplained, and large genetic studies are warranted to identify new 
susceptibility genes and clarify the genetic bases of dyslexia. We carried out a 
genome-wide association study (GWAS) on 2274 dyslexia cases and 6272 controls, 
testing associations at the single variant, gene, and pathway level, and 
estimating heritability using single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data. We also 
calculated polygenic scores (PGSs) based on large-scale GWAS data for different 
neuropsychiatric disorders and cortical brain measures, educational attainment, 
and fluid intelligence, testing them for association with dyslexia status in our 
sample. We observed statistically significant (p  < 2.8 × 10-6) enrichment of 
associations at the gene level, for LOC388780 (20p13; uncharacterized gene), and 
for VEPH1 (3q25), a gene implicated in brain development. We estimated an 
SNP-based heritability of 20-25% for DD, and observed significant associations 
of dyslexia risk with PGSs for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (at 
pT = 0.05 in the training GWAS: OR = 1.23[1.16; 1.30] per standard deviation 
increase; p  = 8 × 10-13), bipolar disorder (1.53[1.44; 1.63]; p = 1 × 10-43), 
schizophrenia (1.36[1.28; 1.45]; p = 4 × 10-22), psychiatric cross-disorder 
susceptibility (1.23[1.16; 1.30]; p = 3 × 10-12), cortical thickness of the 
transverse temporal gyrus (0.90[0.86; 0.96]; p = 5 × 10-4), educational 
attainment (0.86[0.82; 0.91]; p = 2 × 10-7), and intelligence (0.72[0.68; 0.76]; 
p = 9 × 10-29). This study suggests an important contribution of common genetic 
variants to dyslexia risk, and novel genomic overlaps with psychiatric 
conditions like bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and cross-disorder 
susceptibility. Moreover, it revealed the presence of shared genetic foundations 
with a neural correlate previously implicated in dyslexia by neuroimaging 
evidence.

© 2020. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41380-020-00898-x
PMCID: PMC8505236
PMID: 33057169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.