---
reference_id: "PMID:31615618"
title: A continuum of stomatal responses to water deficits among 17 wine grape cultivars (Vitis vinifera).
authors:
- Levin AD
- Williams LE
- Matthews MA
journal: Funct Plant Biol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1071/FP19073
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A continuum of stomatal responses to water deficits among 17 wine grape cultivars (Vitis vinifera).
**Authors:** Levin AD, Williams LE, Matthews MA
**Journal:** Funct Plant Biol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1071/FP19073](https://doi.org/10.1071/FP19073)

## Content

1. Funct Plant Biol. 2019 Jan;47(1):11-25. doi: 10.1071/FP19073.

A continuum of stomatal responses to water deficits among 17 wine grape 
cultivars (Vitis vinifera).

Levin AD(1), Williams LE(2), Matthews MA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Horticulture, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, 
USA; and Southern Oregon Research and Extension Center, 569 Hanley Road., 
Central Point, OR 97502, USA; and Corresponding author. Email: 
alexander.levin@oregonstate.edu.
(2)Department of Viticulture and Enology, University of California, Davis, CA 
95616, USA; and Kearney Agricultural Research and Extension Center, 9240 S. 
Riverbend Avenue., Parlier, CA 93648, USA.
(3)Department of Viticulture and Enology, University of California, Davis, CA 
95616, USA.

Vitis vinifera L. cultivars have been previously classified as isohydric, 
near-isohydric, anisohydric or isohydrodynamic, depending on the study. To test 
the hypothesis that V. vinifera cultivars' stomatal behaviour can be separated 
into distinct classes, 17 cultivars grown in a replicated field trial were 
subjected to three irrigation treatments to manipulate vine water status across 
multiple years. Predawn (ΨPD) and midday (Ψl) leaf water potential and midday 
stomatal conductance (gs) were measured regularly throughout several seasons. 
The relationship of gs to Ψl was best modelled as a sigmoidal function and 
maximum stomatal conductance (gmax), water status at the onset of stomatal 
closure (Ψl95), sensitivity of closure (gsensitivity) and water status at the 
end of closure (Ψl25) were compared. There were no significant differences in 
gmax among cultivars. Cultivar-specific responses of gs to Ψl were broadly 
distributed along a continuum based on the relationship between Ψl95 and 
gsensitivity. Season-long cultivar mean Ψl values were positively related to 
Ψl25. In general, cultivars responded similarly to one another at high and low 
water status, but their stomatal behaviour differed at moderate water deficits. 
The results show that V. vinifera cultivars possess both iso- and anisohydric 
stomatal behaviours that depend on the intensity of water deficits, and call 
into question previous classifications assuming a single behaviour.

DOI: 10.1071/FP19073
PMID: 31615618 [Indexed for MEDLINE]