---
reference_id: "PMID:40282378"
title: "Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy PKP2-Related: Clinical and Functional Characterization of a Pathogenic Variant Detected in Two Italian Families."
authors:
- Marchionni E
- Lomuscio S
- Latini A
- Murdocca M
- Romeo F
- Crescenzi C
- Calò L
- Novelli G
- Mango R
- Sangiuolo F
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/genes16040419
keywords:
- Humans
- "Plakophilins/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Female
- Italy
- Pedigree
- Adult
- "Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Dysplasia/genetics, pathology"
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Heterozygote
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy PKP2-Related: Clinical and Functional Characterization of a Pathogenic Variant Detected in Two Italian Families.
**Authors:** Marchionni E, Lomuscio S, Latini A, Murdocca M, Romeo F, Crescenzi C, Calò L, Novelli G, Mango R, Sangiuolo F
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes16040419](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes16040419)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2025 Mar 31;16(4):419. doi: 10.3390/genes16040419.

Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy PKP2-Related: Clinical and Functional
Characterization of a Pathogenic Variant Detected in Two Italian Families.

Marchionni E(1), Lomuscio S(1), Latini A(2)(3), Murdocca M(2), Romeo F(4),
Crescenzi C(4), Calò L(4), Novelli G(1)(2), Mango R(5), Sangiuolo F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Unit, Tor Vergata University Hospital, 00133 Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, University of Rome Tor Vergata,
00133 Rome, Italy.
(3)UniCamillus, Saint Camillus International University of Health Sciences,
00131 Rome, Italy.
(4)Division of Cardiology, Policlinico Casilino, 00169 Rome, Italy.
(5)Cardiology Unit, Department of Emergency and Critical Care, Policlinico Tor
Vergata, 00131 Rome, Italy.

Background/Objectives:PKP2 (MIM *602861) is the most commonly gene associated
with Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy (ACM), an inherited cardiac muscle disorder.
The aim of this study was to characterize the phenotypical effect of a
heterozygous pathogenic c.2443_2448delAACACCinsGAAA variant in PKP2 gene
(NM_004572), detected in two Italian families. Methods: Next Generation
Sequencing (NGS) analysis was carried out on two probands, testing a multigenic
targeted panel. Segregation analysis through Sanger sequencing detected other
three and six positive members, in Family 1 and 2, respectively. Thus, eleven
positive patients were identified overall. A deep clinical evaluation was
performed according to age groups and clinical parameters (symptoms,
electrocardiogram, imaging, and devices). To investigate the molecular effect of
the identified variant on PKP2 expression level, total RNA was isolated from
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and quantitative RT-polymerase chain
reaction was performed. PKP2 expression at the protein level was analyzed on
PBMCs by Western blot analysis. Results: PKP2 transcriptional levels resulted to
be reduced by 48% in cells carrying c.2443_2448delAACACCinsGAAA variant compared
to WT cells (p = 0.00015). Importantly, Western blot confirmed the reduced level
of PKP2 protein in two heterozygous carriers of the variant, confirming the
haploinsufficiency effect. Conclusions: The clinical onset of ACM can be Sudden
Cardiac Death, and hence, it is recommended to perform a segregation test on
first-degree relatives of pathogenic variant carriers, even if they are
asymptomatic, with the purpose of promptly detecting those at risk.

DOI: 10.3390/genes16040419
PMCID: PMC12027432
PMID: 40282378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
