---
reference_id: "PMID:18318771"
title: "Recessive congenital methaemoglobinaemia: cytochrome b(5) reductase deficiency."
authors:
- Percy MJ
- Lappin TR
journal: Br J Haematol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07017.x
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Cytochrome-B(5) Reductase/deficiency, genetics"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- "Methemoglobinemia/congenital, diagnosis, enzymology, genetics"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recessive congenital methaemoglobinaemia: cytochrome b(5) reductase deficiency.
**Authors:** Percy MJ, Lappin TR
**Journal:** Br J Haematol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07017.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07017.x)

## Content

1. Br J Haematol. 2008 May;141(3):298-308. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07017.x.
 Epub 2008 Mar 3.

Recessive congenital methaemoglobinaemia: cytochrome b(5) reductase deficiency.

Percy MJ(1), Lappin TR.

Author information:
(1)Haematology, Belfast City Hospital, Belfast, UK.
melanie.percy@belfasttrust.hscni.net

Some 60 years ago, Quentin Gibson reported the first hereditary disorder
involving an enzyme when he deduced that familial methaemoglobinaemia was caused
by an enzymatic lesion associated with the glycolysis pathway in red blood
cells. This disorder, now known as recessive congenital methaemoglobinaemia
(RCM), is caused by NADH-cytochrome b5 reductase (cb(5)r) deficiency. Two
distinct clinical forms, types I and II, have been recognized, both
characterized by cyanosis from birth. In type II, the cyanosis is accompanied by
neurological impairment and reduced life expectancy. Cytochrome b(5) reductase
is composed of one FAD and one NADH binding domain linked by a hinge region. It
is encoded by the CYB5R3 (previously known as DIA1) gene and more than 40
mutations have been described, some of which are common to both types of RCM.
Mutations associated with type II tend to cause incorrect splicing, disruption
of the active site or truncation of the protein. At present the description of
the sequence variants of cb(5)r in the literature is confusing, due to the use
of two conventions which differ by one codon position. Herein we propose a new
system for nomenclature of cb(5)r based on recommendations of the Human Genome
Variation Society. The development of a heterologous expression system has
allowed the impact of naturally occurring variants of cb(5)r to be assessed and
has provided insight into the function of cb(5)r.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07017.x
PMID: 18318771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
