---
reference_id: "PMID:6290045"
title: Distribution of myoepithelial cells and basement membrane proteins in the normal breast and in benign and malignant breast diseases.
authors:
- Gusterson BA
- Warburton MJ
- Mitchell D
- Ellison M
- Neville AM
- Rudland PS
journal: Cancer Res
year: '1982'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distribution of myoepithelial cells and basement membrane proteins in the normal breast and in benign and malignant breast diseases.
**Authors:** Gusterson BA, Warburton MJ, Mitchell D, Ellison M, Neville AM, Rudland PS
**Journal:** Cancer Res (1982)

## Content

1. Cancer Res. 1982 Nov;42(11):4763-70.

Distribution of myoepithelial cells and basement membrane proteins in the normal 
breast and in benign and malignant breast diseases.

Gusterson BA, Warburton MJ, Mitchell D, Ellison M, Neville AM, Rudland PS.

An immunocytochemical method for fixed and paraffin-embedded human breast 
biopsies is reported for the detection of myoepithelial and epithelial cells 
using antibodies to myosin and keratin, respectively, and of basement membranes 
using antibodies to laminin and type IV collagen. Using these markers, 
myoepithelial cells can be clearly distinguished in the normal breast and in the 
benign breast diseases sclerosing adenosis, epitheliosis, and fibroadenoma. In 
sclerosing adenosis, myoepithelial cells form a major cellular component. A 
stromally derived spindle cell is identified which stains with myosin but not 
with keratin antibodies (myofibroblast). These cells are seen in one-fifth of 
the fibroadenomas. Although cells staining with myosin antibodies are seen in 
the infiltrating component of all 18 carcinomas examined, elongated cells 
staining with both myosin and keratin antibodies (myoepithelial-like) are seen 
in only one infiltrating carcinoma where they are interposed at the 
stromal-epithelial junction of the infiltrating tumor cells. In contrast to the 
situation in benign breast diseases, mature myoepithelial cells form a very 
minor component of the majority of infiltrating ductal carcinomas. Basement 
membrane proteins, laminin, and type IV collagen are present in normal breast, 
benign breast disease, and grade I infiltrating ductal carcinomas but are absent 
in carcinomas of grades II and III.

PMID: 6290045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]