---
reference_id: "PMID:21347587"
title: Cross-sectional analysis of speech and cognitive performance in 32 patients with classic galactosemia.
authors:
- Hoffmann B
- Wendel U
- Schweitzer-Krantz S
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-011-9297-5
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Cognition Disorders/complications, diagnosis"
- Cohort Studies
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Female
- "Galactosemias/complications, diagnosis"
- Germany
- Humans
- Intelligence Tests
- Male
- Phonetics
- Reproducibility of Results
- Speech
- "Speech Disorders/complications, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cross-sectional analysis of speech and cognitive performance in 32 patients with classic galactosemia.
**Authors:** Hoffmann B, Wendel U, Schweitzer-Krantz S
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-011-9297-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-011-9297-5)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2011 Apr;34(2):421-7. doi: 10.1007/s10545-011-9297-5.
Epub  2011 Feb 24.

Cross-sectional analysis of speech and cognitive performance in 32 patients with 
classic galactosemia.

Hoffmann B(1), Wendel U, Schweitzer-Krantz S.

Author information:
(1)Department of General Pediatrics, University Children's Hospital, 
Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, Siegen, Germany. 
mail@kinderarzt-hoffmann.de

BACKGROUND: Long-term outcome in classic galactosemia is disappointing with 
impaired IQ, reduced bone mineral density, and fertility problems. Moreover, 
speech impairment is common with conflicting reports regarding frequency, 
pattern, and relation to IQ.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate speech and cognitive performance in patients with 
galactosemia.
METHODS: Speech performance was evaluated by means of the Hierarchische 
Wortlisten, a German word-repetition test for the diagnosis of apraxia of 
speech, using real words and pseudo-words. Cognitive performance was evaluated 
by use of age-appropriate German versions of the Wechsler Scales.
RESULTS: In a cohort of 32 patients (12 females, 20 males; mean age 21.2 ± 7.2 
years) with classic galactosemia, the mean IQ was 76.2 ± 14.8. Eighty-four 
percent of the patients passed the speech test with errors. Speech errors were 
much more related to pseudo-words than real words and were predominantly 
observed in words with three and four syllables. The performance in producing 
words was correlated to the IQ scores.
CONCLUSION: Impairment of speech affects a significant number of patients with 
galactosemia, appears in early childhood, and persists into adulthood. The 
pattern of speech impairment may allow labeling as apraxia of speech. In many 
cases impaired speech is related to decreased IQ.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-011-9297-5
PMID: 21347587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]