---
reference_id: "PMID:35367465"
title: "Rodent models of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: An updated framework for model validation and therapeutic drug discovery."
authors:
- Kantak KM
journal: Pharmacol Biochem Behav
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2022.173378
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Animals
- "Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Drug Discovery
- Female
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Nicotine/pharmacology
- Pregnancy
- Prenatal Exposure Delayed Effects
- Rats
- "Rats, Inbred SHR"
- "Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled"
- "Receptors, Peptide"
- Rodentia
- Substance-Related Disorders/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rodent models of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: An updated framework for model validation and therapeutic drug discovery.
**Authors:** Kantak KM
**Journal:** Pharmacol Biochem Behav (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pbb.2022.173378](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbb.2022.173378)

## Content

1. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2022 May;216:173378. doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2022.173378.
Epub 2022 Mar 31.

Rodent models of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: An updated framework
for model validation and therapeutic drug discovery.

Kantak KM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Boston University, Boston,
MA, USA. Electronic address: kkantak@bu.edu.

There are over twenty rodent models of Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
(ADHD), with most reflecting a recognized ADHD subtype. Of these, only five rat
models (Neonatal 6-Hydroxydopamine, Spontaneously Hypertensive Rat, Prenatal
Alcohol Exposure, Prenatal Nicotine Exposure, and Lphn3 Knockout) and three
mouse models (Dopamine Transporter Knockout, Neurokinin-1 Receptor Knockout, and
Prenatal Nicotine Exposure) have a sufficient number of publications to explore
their suitability for modelling ADHD with respect to core features, executive
dysfunction, and medication effects. An updated view is advanced specifying that
an informative model encompasses elevated drug use risk as a means to assess
ADHD/Substance Use Disorder (SUD) comorbidity, a common co-occurrence among
patients. Based on the full range of symptoms and medication effects, it is
concluded that the Spontaneously Hypertensive Rat (specifically the Charles
River Laboratories substrain) has the most translational support at this stage
to model ADHD/SUD comorbidity. The Lphn3 knockout rat model and the prenatal
nicotine exposure mouse model are strong contenders if additional validation
work is performed, as they have a high degree of construct validity pertaining
to genetic and environmental etiologies of ADHD. Research using validated rodent
models of ADHD is warranted because their study can provide insights for drug
discovery geared toward the development of safer ADHD therapeutics, particularly
for adolescent patients.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pbb.2022.173378
PMID: 35367465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
