---
reference_id: "PMID:9537424"
title: Mutations in the early growth response 2 (EGR2) gene are associated with hereditary myelinopathies.
authors:
- Warner LE
- Mancias P
- Butler IJ
- McDonald CM
- Keppen L
- Koob KG
- Lupski JR
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1038/ng0498-382
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease/genetics
- "DNA/analysis, genetics, isolation & purification"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Demyelinating Diseases/genetics
- Early Growth Response Protein 2
- Family Health
- Female
- Genes/genetics
- Humans
- Immediate-Early Proteins/genetics
- Male
- Pedigree
- "Point Mutation/genetics, physiology"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Zinc Fingers/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the early growth response 2 (EGR2) gene are associated with hereditary myelinopathies.
**Authors:** Warner LE, Mancias P, Butler IJ, McDonald CM, Keppen L, Koob KG, Lupski JR
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0498-382](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0498-382)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1998 Apr;18(4):382-4. doi: 10.1038/ng0498-382.

Mutations in the early growth response 2 (EGR2) gene are associated with 
hereditary myelinopathies.

Warner LE(1), Mancias P, Butler IJ, McDonald CM, Keppen L, Koob KG, Lupski JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The early growth response 2 gene (EGR2) is part of a multigene family encoding 
Cys2His2 type zinc-finger proteins and may play a role in the regulation of 
cellular proliferation. Egr2, (also known as Krox20) is the mouse orthologue of 
human EGR2 and was first identified as an immediate-early response gene, 
encoding a protein that binds DNA in a sequence-specific manner and acts as a 
transcription factor. Stable expression of Egr2 is specifically associated with 
the onset of myelination in the peripheral nervous system (PNS). Egr2(-/-) mice 
display disrupted hindbrain segmentation and development, and a block of 
Schwann-cell differentiation at an early stage. We hypothesized that Egr2 may be 
a transcription factor affecting late myelin genes and that human myelinopathies 
of the PNS may result from mutations in EGR2. In support of this hypothesis, we 
have identified one recessive and two dominant missense mutations in EGR2 
(within regions encoding conserved functional domains) in patients with 
congenital hypomyelinating neuropathy (CHN) and a family with 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 1 (CMT1).

DOI: 10.1038/ng0498-382
PMID: 9537424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]