---
reference_id: "PMID:38933181"
title: "A perfectly imperfect engine: Utilizing the digital twin paradigm in pulmonary hypertension."
authors:
- Walker M
- Moore H
- Ataya A
- Pham A
- Corris PA
- Laubenbacher R
- Bryant AJ
journal: Pulm Circ
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/pul2.12392
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A perfectly imperfect engine: Utilizing the digital twin paradigm in pulmonary hypertension.
**Authors:** Walker M, Moore H, Ataya A, Pham A, Corris PA, Laubenbacher R, Bryant AJ
**Journal:** Pulm Circ (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pul2.12392](https://doi.org/10.1002/pul2.12392)

## Content

1. Pulm Circ. 2024 Jun 25;14(2):e12392. doi: 10.1002/pul2.12392. eCollection 2024
 Apr.

A perfectly imperfect engine: Utilizing the digital twin paradigm in pulmonary 
hypertension.

Walker M(1), Moore H(1), Ataya A(1), Pham A(1), Corris PA(2), Laubenbacher R(1), 
Bryant AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Florida College of Medicine Gainesville Florida USA.
(2)The Faculty of Medical Sciences Newcastle University Newcastle upon Tyne UK.

Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is a severe medical condition with a number of 
treatment options, the majority of which are introduced without consideration of 
the underlying mechanisms driving it within an individual and thus a lack of 
tailored approach to treatment. The one exception is a patient presenting with 
apparent pulmonary arterial hypertension and shown to have vaso-responsive 
disease, whose clinical course and prognosis is significantly improved by high 
dose calcium channel blockers. PH is however characterized by a relative 
abundance of available data from patient cohorts, ranging from molecular data 
characterizing gene and protein expression in different tissues to physiological 
data at the organ level and clinical information. Integrating available data 
with mechanistic information at the different scales into computational models 
suggests an approach to a more personalized treatment of the disease using 
model-based optimization of interventions for individual patients. That is, 
constructing digital twins of the disease, customized to a patient, promises to 
be a key technology for personalized medicine, with the aim of optimizing use of 
existing treatments and developing novel interventions, such as new drugs. This 
article presents a perspective on this approach in the context of a review of 
existing computational models for different aspects of the disease, and it lays 
out a roadmap for a path to realizing it.

© 2024 The Author(s). Pulmonary Circulation published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 
on behalf of Pulmonary Vascular Research Institute.

DOI: 10.1002/pul2.12392
PMCID: PMC11199193
PMID: 38933181

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.