---
reference_id: "PMID:39976384"
title: "Trichothiodystrophy due to ERCC2 Variants: Uncommon Contributor to Progressive Hypomyelinating Leukodystrophy."
authors:
- Tavasoli AR
- Kaki A
- Ganji M
- Kahani SM
- Radmehr F
- Mohammadi P
- Heidari M
- Ashrafi MR
- Lewis KS
journal: Mol Genet Genomic Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.70067
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- Humans
- Male
- "Hereditary Central Nervous System Demyelinating Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Trichothiodystrophy Syndromes/genetics, pathology"
- Xeroderma Pigmentosum Group D Protein/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Trichothiodystrophy due to ERCC2 Variants: Uncommon Contributor to Progressive Hypomyelinating Leukodystrophy.
**Authors:** Tavasoli AR, Kaki A, Ganji M, Kahani SM, Radmehr F, Mohammadi P, Heidari M, Ashrafi MR, Lewis KS
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomic Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mgg3.70067](https://doi.org/10.1002/mgg3.70067)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2025 Feb;13(2):e70067. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.70067.

Trichothiodystrophy due to ERCC2 Variants: Uncommon Contributor to Progressive 
Hypomyelinating Leukodystrophy.

Tavasoli AR(1)(2), Kaki A(3)(4), Ganji M(5), Kahani SM(6), Radmehr F(7), 
Mohammadi P(2)(6), Heidari M(2), Ashrafi MR(2), Lewis KS(1).

Author information:
(1)Neurology Division, Barrow Neurological Institute, Phoenix Children's, 
Phoenix, Arizona, USA.
(2)Myelin Disorders Clinic, Children's Medical Center, Pediatric Center of 
Excellence, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Hamadan University of 
Medical Sciences, Hamadan, Iran.
(4)Research Center for Molecular Medicine, Institute of Cancer, Avicenna Health 
Research Institute, Hamadan University of Medical Sciences, Hamadan, Iran.
(5)DeNA Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Department of Medical Genetics, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran.
(7)Department of Molecular Medicine, National Institute of Genetic Engineering 
and Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Trichothiodystrophy (TTD) is caused by homozygous or compound 
heterozygous variants in genes associated with DNA repair. The ERCC2 gene 
encoded a protein, XPD, that is a subunit of the general transcription factor 
TFIIH and important in both DNA repair and transcription. Disease-causing 
variants in ERCC2 can partially inactivate these activities, giving rise to 
symptoms seen in TTD, Cockayne syndrome (CS) and xeroderma pigmentosa (XP). 
Although generalized cerebral white matter abnormalities is reported in TTD, 
myelination disorders specifically linked to ERCC2 gene variants are 
exceptionally uncommon. Here, we introduce a thorough investigation of a patient 
exhibiting classic TTD symptoms alongside progressive cerebral hypomyelination 
with ERCC2 variants.
METHODS: In a non-consanguineous family, we conducted Autism/ID gene Panel on a 
5-year-old affected child who presented with microcephaly, failure to thrive, 
developmental delay, and progressive hypomyelination on three serial brain 
imaging over 5-years follow-up. Our investigation aimed to elucidate the genetic 
underpinnings of the observed phenotype. We also conducted a comprehensive 
review of the genetic profiles of all documented ERCC2-related patients 
exhibiting myelination disorders.
RESULTS: Autism/ID gene Panel identified a compound heterozygous variant in 
ERCC2 gene causing TTD. Clinical and paraclinical findings enabled 
differentiation of TTD from Cockayne syndrome and XP. Segregation analysis 
revealed that, the variation in the paternal allele was a splice junction loss 
(c.2190 + 1delG), and the other alteration in the maternal allele was a 
pathogenic variant (c.1479 + 2dupT). It has been noted that these variants were 
reported in previous studies in homozygous or compound heterozygous form in 
patients with TTD, but none of them exhibited hypomyelinating leukodystrophy.
CONCLUSION: The identification of hypomyelination in TTD due to ERCC2 sheds a 
light on the molecular diagnosis and contributing to the limited literature on 
ERCC2 variants and associated hypomyelinating leukodystrophy in patients with 
TTD.

© 2025 The Author(s). Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.70067
PMCID: PMC11840839
PMID: 39976384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.