---
reference_id: "PMID:24674232"
title: Expanding the phenotypic spectrum of ARID1B-mediated disorders and identification of altered cell-cycle dynamics due to ARID1B haploinsufficiency.
authors:
- Sim JC
- White SM
- Fitzpatrick E
- Wilson GR
- Gillies G
- Pope K
- Mountford HS
- Torring PM
- McKee S
- Vulto-van Silfhout AT
- Jhangiani SN
- Muzny DM
- Leventer RJ
- Delatycki MB
- Amor DJ
- Lockhart PJ
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-9-43
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Cell Cycle/genetics
- Chromatin Assembly and Disassembly
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Face/abnormalities
- Female
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Haploinsufficiency/genetics
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Male
- Micrognathism/genetics
- Neck/abnormalities
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanding the phenotypic spectrum of ARID1B-mediated disorders and identification of altered cell-cycle dynamics due to ARID1B haploinsufficiency.
**Authors:** Sim JC, White SM, Fitzpatrick E, Wilson GR, Gillies G, Pope K, Mountford HS, Torring PM, McKee S, Vulto-van Silfhout AT, Jhangiani SN, Muzny DM, Leventer RJ, Delatycki MB, Amor DJ, Lockhart PJ
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-9-43](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-9-43)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2014 Mar 27;9:43. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-9-43.

Expanding the phenotypic spectrum of ARID1B-mediated disorders and 
identification of altered cell-cycle dynamics due to ARID1B haploinsufficiency.

Sim JC, White SM, Fitzpatrick E, Wilson GR, Gillies G, Pope K, Mountford HS, 
Torring PM, McKee S, Vulto-van Silfhout AT, Jhangiani SN, Muzny DM, Leventer RJ, 
Delatycki MB, Amor DJ, Lockhart PJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Bruce Lefroy Centre for Genetic Health Research, Murdoch Childrens Research 
Institute, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia. paul.lockhart@mcri.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in genes encoding components of the Brahma-associated 
factor (BAF) chromatin remodeling complex have recently been shown to contribute 
to multiple syndromes characterised by developmental delay and intellectual 
disability. ARID1B mutations have been identified as the predominant cause of 
Coffin-Siris syndrome and have also been shown to be a frequent cause of 
nonsyndromic intellectual disability. Here, we investigate the molecular basis 
of a patient with an overlapping but distinctive phenotype of intellectual 
disability, plantar fat pads and facial dysmorphism.
METHODS/RESULTS: High density microarray analysis of the patient demonstrated a 
heterozygous deletion at 6q25.3, which resulted in the loss of four genes 
including AT Rich Interactive Domain 1B (ARID1B). Subsequent quantitative 
real-time PCR analysis revealed ARID1B haploinsufficiency in the patient. 
Analysis of both patient-derived and ARID1B knockdown fibroblasts after serum 
starvation demonstrated delayed cell cycle re-entry associated with reduced cell 
number in the S1 phase. Based on the patient's distinctive phenotype, we 
ascertained four additional patients and identified heterozygous de novo ARID1B 
frameshift or nonsense mutations in all of them.
CONCLUSIONS: This study broadens the spectrum of ARID1B associated phenotypes by 
describing a distinctive phenotype including plantar fat pads but lacking the 
hypertrichosis or fifth nail hypoplasia associated with Coffin-Siris syndrome. 
We present the first direct evidence in patient-derived cells that alterations 
in cell cycle contribute to the underlying pathogenesis of syndromes associated 
with ARID1B haploinsufficiency.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-9-43
PMCID: PMC4022252
PMID: 24674232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]