---
reference_id: "PMID:40951761"
title: Molecular treatment options for patients carrying KIAA0586/TALPID3 variants.
authors:
- Taudien JE
- Swirski S
- Möller M
- Jüschke C
- Owczarek-Lipska M
- Korenke GC
- Neidhardt J
journal: Mol Ther Nucleic Acids
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.omtn.2025.102688
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular treatment options for patients carrying KIAA0586/TALPID3 variants.
**Authors:** Taudien JE, Swirski S, Möller M, Jüschke C, Owczarek-Lipska M, Korenke GC, Neidhardt J
**Journal:** Mol Ther Nucleic Acids (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.omtn.2025.102688](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omtn.2025.102688)

## Content

1. Mol Ther Nucleic Acids. 2025 Aug 14;36(3):102688. doi: 
10.1016/j.omtn.2025.102688. eCollection 2025 Sep 9.

Molecular treatment options for patients carrying KIAA0586/TALPID3 variants.

Taudien JE(1), Swirski S(1), Möller M(1), Jüschke C(1), Owczarek-Lipska M(1)(2), 
Korenke GC(3), Neidhardt J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Human Genetics, School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Carl von Ossietzky 
Universität Oldenburg, 26129 Oldenburg, Germany.
(2)Research Center Neurosensory Science, University of Oldenburg, 26129 
Oldenburg, Germany.
(3)University Children's Hospital Oldenburg, Department of Neuropaediatric and 
Metabolic Diseases, 26133 Oldenburg, Germany.

Variants in KIAA0586/TALPID3 are associated with the ciliopathy Joubert syndrome 
(JS), which is a genetically heterogeneous disorder. Mutations in more than 40 
different genes were associated with JS, genes that are relevant to ciliary 
assembly, maintenance, or cellular signaling pathways during the development. 
Genetic variability suggests that gene- and/or mutation-independent treatment 
strategies could be beneficial to patients. Currently, targeted therapeutic 
options are not available. In this study, we present molecular treatment options 
for pathogenic KIAA0586/TALPID3 sequence alterations. We compared therapeutic 
efficacy and side effects using patient-derived fibroblasts from two siblings 
affected by JS. The patients harbored two compound heterozygous sequence 
alterations, a non-sense mutation (KIAA0586/TALPID3: c.2353C>T) in exon 18 and a 
deep-intronic mutation in intron 28 (KIAA0586/TALPID3: c.3990 + 3186G>A). The 
deep-intronic sequence alteration activates a cryptic exon that causes a 
frameshift and splicing defect. Both variants are predicted to potentially 
result in the premature termination of translation. The patient-derived 
fibroblasts exhibited reduced primary cilia length and altered distribution of 
PCM1. These cellular defects were responsive to treatments with RNA-based 
therapeutics and/or readthrough agents (RTAs). Our results highlight the 
potential of addressing mutations and molecular defects associated with 
KIAA0586/TALPID3 sequence alterations as future perspectives toward treatments 
of patients.

© 2025 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtn.2025.102688
PMCID: PMC12423346
PMID: 40951761

Conflict of interest statement: A patent on the AONs and associated treatment 
approaches has been issued to J.N.