---
reference_id: "PMID:27313125"
title: Estimation of dengue infection for travelers in Thailand.
authors:
- Polwiang S
journal: Travel Med Infect Dis
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.tmaid.2016.06.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Estimation of dengue infection for travelers in Thailand.
**Authors:** Polwiang S
**Journal:** Travel Med Infect Dis (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tmaid.2016.06.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tmaid.2016.06.002)

## Content

1. Travel Med Infect Dis. 2016 Jul-Aug;14(4):398-406. doi: 
10.1016/j.tmaid.2016.06.002. Epub 2016 Jun 14.

Estimation of dengue infection for travelers in Thailand.

Polwiang S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Science, Silpakorn University, 
Thailand; The Center of Excellence in Mathematics, CHE, Bangkok 10400, Thailand. 
Electronic address: polwiang_s@su.ac.th.

BACKGROUND: Dengue infection among travelers has become one of the most public 
health concerns in present days. The importation of dengue virus can initiate an 
outbreak in non-endemic regions. Thailand is one of the countries topping the 
list of highest dengue infections in travelers.
METHOD: This study estimates the risk of dengue infection among travelers during 
their visit in Thailand by using a mathematical model with seasonal variations.
RESULTS: The risk of dengue infection in high dengue season is 2.50-4.07 times 
that on low dengue season depending on the locations. The average daily risk of 
dengue infections of Thailand per 100,000 travelers is 2.14 and 7.03 for low and 
high dengue season, respectively. The highest rate of infection is Rayong and 
the lowest rate is Sing Buri. Several popular tourist provinces are high dengue 
endemic areas.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides useful information on dengue infection among 
travelers. The main factors are the time of arrival in the year, the duration of 
stay of the travelers and the locations where the travelers spend most of their 
time.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tmaid.2016.06.002
PMID: 27313125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]