---
reference_id: "PMID:19039991"
title: "[Case of a Japanese female presenting severe achondroplasia with developmental delay and acanthosis nigricans (SADDAN) syndrome with a K650M mutation in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 gene]."
authors:
- Adachi M
journal: No To Hattatsu
year: '2008'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Case of a Japanese female presenting severe achondroplasia with developmental delay and acanthosis nigricans (SADDAN) syndrome with a K650M mutation in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 gene].
**Authors:** Adachi M
**Journal:** No To Hattatsu (2008)

## Content

1. No To Hattatsu. 2008 Nov;40(6):478-82.

[Case of a Japanese female presenting severe achondroplasia with developmental 
delay and acanthosis nigricans (SADDAN) syndrome with a K650M mutation in the 
fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 gene].

[Article in Japanese]

Adachi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kakogawa Municipal Hospital, Kakogawa, Hyogo. 
ama-p@rc4.so-net.ne.jp

We diagnosed a Japanese female as having severe achondroplasia with 
developmental delay and acanthosis nigricans (SADDAN) syndrome. Genetic analysis 
revealed a K650M point mutation in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 
(FGFR3) gene, described in only six other individuals in the world. The medical 
history of the present case includes severe skeletal dysplasia at birth, 
progressive acanthosis nigricans in infancy, and severe central nervous system 
structural abnormalities, consisting of the absence of right cerebral hemisphere 
(hydranencephaly), ventricular dilatation, both indicating congenital brain 
malformation, and porencephaly indicating destructive brain damages. The patient 
is severely retarded and has suffered from intractable seizures. This is the 
first report of a Japanese patient and the seventh case of SADDAN syndrome 
confirmed genetically.

PMID: 19039991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]