---
reference_id: "PMID:1396037"
title: "AIDS: Part I."
authors:
- Kessler HA
- Bick JA
- Pottage JC Jr
- Benson CA
journal: Dis Mon
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1016/0011-5029(92)90029-o
content_type: abstract_only
---

# AIDS: Part I.
**Authors:** Kessler HA, Bick JA, Pottage JC Jr, Benson CA
**Journal:** Dis Mon (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0011-5029(92)90029-o](https://doi.org/10.1016/0011-5029(92)90029-o)

## Content

1. Dis Mon. 1992 Sep;38(9):633-90. doi: 10.1016/0011-5029(92)90029-o.

AIDS: Part I.

Kessler HA(1), Bick JA, Pottage JC Jr, Benson CA.

Author information:
(1)Section of Infectious Disease, Rush Medical College, Chicago, Illinois.

Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) is caused by infection with a 
pathogenic human retrovirus known as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). 
Approximately 1 million people are currently infected with HIV in the United 
States, with 8 to 10 million infected individuals worldwide. The virus is 
transmitted predominantly through genital sexual contact, although orogenital 
spread has been rarely reported. Heterosexual transmission has been most common 
in the Third World, whereas male homosexual transmission has predominated in the 
United States and western Europe. Transmission through homosexual contact has 
been steadily declining over the past 5 years as transmission through illicit 
intravenous drug use and promiscuous unprotected heterosexual activity has 
increased. Sexually transmitted diseases that cause inflammatory or ulcerative 
lesions of the genital tract act as important cofactors in increasing the risk 
of transmission through sexual contact. Perinatal transmission of HIV occurs in 
approximately 30% of infants born to infected mothers. Transmission to infants 
through breast-feeding has also been documented. Health care workers have been 
infected with HIV through accidental high-risk percutaneous or mucous membrane 
exposures, albeit at a low transmission rate of 0.3%. Infection of patients by 
infected health care professionals is a rare event, having been reported only 
once in 10 years of the epidemic. Infection with HIV results in a chronic 
lifelong infection. The major targets for HIV are CD4+ T-helper lymphocytes and 
cells of monocyte/macrophage lineage. Infection of the T-helper lymphocyte 
ultimately results in the death of the cell. Over time (measured in years), a 
progressive destruction of the T-helper lymphocyte population occurs, which 
results in profound immune suppression. Infection of monocytes/macrophages is 
not cidal, but these cells do have functional alterations as a result of the 
infection, which may contribute to the immune deficiency. In addition, 
chronically infected tissue macrophages may act as an important reservoir for 
HIV, particularly in the central nervous system. Infection of the T-helper 
lymphocytes and monocytes/macrophages is mediated through attachment of HIV 
through a specific binding interaction between CD4 expressed in the plasma 
membrane of these cells and a surface glycoprotein on the virus, gp120. Once the 
virus nucleocapsid (core particle) enters the cytoplasm of the target cell, the 
viral RNA genome is reverse transcribed by a reverse transcriptase enzyme into 
proviral DNA. This proviral DNA migrates into the nucleus where it integrates 
into the host cellular genome, which results in a chronically infected 
cell.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1016/0011-5029(92)90029-o
PMID: 1396037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]