---
reference_id: "PMID:25755580"
title: Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome (hepatic veno-occlusive disease).
authors:
- Fan CQ
- Crawford JM
journal: J Clin Exp Hepatol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.jceh.2014.10.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome (hepatic veno-occlusive disease).
**Authors:** Fan CQ, Crawford JM
**Journal:** J Clin Exp Hepatol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jceh.2014.10.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jceh.2014.10.002)

## Content

1. J Clin Exp Hepatol. 2014 Dec;4(4):332-46. doi: 10.1016/j.jceh.2014.10.002.
Epub  2014 Oct 30.

Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome (hepatic veno-occlusive disease).

Fan CQ(1), Crawford JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Medicine, North Shore-LIJ Health System, 
Manhasset, NY, USA.

Hepatic sinusoidal obstruction syndrome (SOS) is an obliterative venulitis of 
the terminal hepatic venules, which in its more severe forms imparts a high risk 
of mortality. SOS, also known as veno-occlusive disease (VOD), occurs as a 
result of cytoreductive therapy prior to hematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
(HSCT), following oxaliplatin-containing adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemotherapy 
for colorectal carcinoma metastatic to the liver and treated by partial 
hepatectomy, in patients taking pyrrolizidine alkaloid-containing herbal 
remedies, and in other particular settings such as the autosomal recessive 
condition of veno-occlusive disease with immunodeficiency (VODI). A central 
pathogenic event is toxic destruction of hepatic sinusoidal endothelial cells 
(SEC), with sloughing and downstream occlusion of terminal hepatic venules. 
Contributing factors are SEC glutathione depletion, nitric oxide depletion, 
increased intrahepatic expression of matrix metalloproteinases and vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and activation of clotting factors. The 
clinical presentation of SOS includes jaundice, development of right 
upper-quadrant pain and tender hepatomegaly, ascites, and unexplained weight 
gain. Owing to the potentially critical condition of these patients, 
transjugular biopsy may be the preferred route for liver biopsy to exclude other 
potential causes of liver dysfunction and to establish a diagnosis of SOS. 
Treatment includes rigorous fluid management so as to avoid excessive fluid 
overload while avoiding too rapid diuresis or pericentesis, potential use of 
pharmaceutics such as defibrotide, coagulolytic agents, or methylprednisolone, 
and liver transplantation. Proposed strategies for prevention and prophylaxis 
include reduced-intensity conditioning radiation for HSCT, treatment with 
ursodeoxycholic acid, and inclusion of bevacizumab with oxaliplatin-based 
chemotherapeutic regimes. While significant progress has been made in 
understanding the pathogenesis of SOS and in mitigating against its adverse 
outcomes, this condition remains a serious complication of a selective group of 
medical treatments.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jceh.2014.10.002
PMCID: PMC4298625
PMID: 25755580