---
reference_id: "PMID:38848133"
title: "Alcoholic cardiomyopathy: an update."
authors:
- Domínguez F
- Adler E
- García-Pavía P
journal: Eur Heart J
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehae362
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alcoholic cardiomyopathy: an update.
**Authors:** Domínguez F, Adler E, García-Pavía P
**Journal:** Eur Heart J (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/eurheartj/ehae362](https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehae362)

## Content

1. Eur Heart J. 2024 Jul 9;45(26):2294-2305. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehae362.

Alcoholic cardiomyopathy: an update.

Domínguez F(1)(2), Adler E(3), García-Pavía P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Heart Failure and Inherited Cardiac Diseases Unit, 
Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro Majadahonda, IDIPHISA, CIBERCV, Manuel 
de Falla, 2, Majadahonda, Madrid 28222, Spain.
(2)Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares Carlos III, Calle de 
Melchor Fernández Almagro, 3, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Section Head of Heart Failure, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.

Alcohol-induced cardiomyopathy (AC) is an acquired form of dilated 
cardiomyopathy (DCM) caused by prolonged and heavy alcohol intake in the absence 
of other causes. The amount of alcohol required to produce AC is generally 
considered as >80 g/day over 5 years, but there is still some controversy 
regarding this definition. This review on AC focuses on pathogenesis, which 
involves different mechanisms. Firstly, the direct toxic effect of ethanol 
promotes oxidative stress in the myocardium and activation of the 
renin-angiotensin system. Moreover, acetaldehyde, the best-studied metabolite of 
alcohol, can contribute to myocardial damage impairing actin-myosin interaction 
and producing mitochondrial dysfunction. Genetic factors are also involved in 
the pathogenesis of AC, with DCM-causing genetic variants in patients with AC, 
especially titin-truncating variants. These findings support a double-hit 
hypothesis in AC, combining genetics and environmental factors. The synergistic 
effect of alcohol with concomitant conditions such as hypertension or liver 
cirrhosis can be another contributing factor leading to AC. There are no 
specific cardiac signs and symptoms in AC as compared with other forms of DCM. 
However, natural history of AC differs from DCM and relies directly on alcohol 
withdrawal, as left ventricular ejection fraction recovery in abstainers is 
associated with an excellent prognosis. Thus, abstinence from alcohol is the 
most crucial step in treating AC, and specific therapies are available for this 
purpose. Otherwise, AC should be treated according to current guidelines of 
heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. Targeted therapies based on AC 
pathogenesis are currently being developed and could potentially improve AC 
treatment in the future.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
European Society of Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehae362
PMCID: PMC11231944
PMID: 38848133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]