---
reference_id: "PMID:39825918"
title: Comparison of the natural course of clinical and radiologic features in 13 patients with TRPV4-related skeletal dysplasias.
authors:
- Güneş N
- Alkaya DU
- Kurugoğlu S
- Özyalvaç N
- Bursalı A
- Elçioğlu NH
- Tüysüz B
journal: Pediatr Radiol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s00247-024-06145-7
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Child
- TRPV Cation Channels/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- Adolescent
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Mutation
- Infant
- Adult
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Radiography
- Young Adult
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparison of the natural course of clinical and radiologic features in 13 patients with TRPV4-related skeletal dysplasias.
**Authors:** Güneş N, Alkaya DU, Kurugoğlu S, Özyalvaç N, Bursalı A, Elçioğlu NH, Tüysüz B
**Journal:** Pediatr Radiol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00247-024-06145-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00247-024-06145-7)

## Content

1. Pediatr Radiol. 2025 Mar;55(3):505-519. doi: 10.1007/s00247-024-06145-7. Epub 
2025 Jan 18.

Comparison of the natural course of clinical and radiologic features in 13 
patients with TRPV4-related skeletal dysplasias.

Güneş N(1), Alkaya DU(1), Kurugoğlu S(2), Özyalvaç N(3), Bursalı A(3), Elçioğlu 
NH(4), Tüysüz B(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Istanbul University-Cerrahpaşa, Cerrahpasa 
Medical Faculty, 34098, Cerrahpasa, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Pediatric Radiology, Istanbul University-Cerrahpaşa, Cerrahpaşa 
Medical Faculty, Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, University of Health Sciences, 
Turkey, Baltalimani Bone Diseases Training and Research Center, Istanbul, 
Turkey.
(4)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Marmara University School of Medicine, 
Istanbul, Turkey.
(5)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Istanbul University-Cerrahpaşa, Cerrahpasa 
Medical Faculty, 34098, Cerrahpasa, Istanbul, Turkey. beyhan@istanbul.edu.tr.

BACKGROUND: Heterozygous TRPV4 mutations cause a group of skeletal dysplasias 
characterized by short stature, short trunk, and skeletal deformities.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to compare the natural history of clinical 
and radiologic features of patients with different TRPV4-related skeletal 
dysplasias.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirteen patients with a mutation in TRPV4 were included 
in the study, and 11 were followed for a median of 6.5 years. The clinical 
phenotype of five patients was compatible with spondylometaphyseal dysplasia 
Kozlowski type, three each with metatropic dysplasia and brachyolmia type 3, and 
one each with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia Maroteaux type and congenital distal 
spinal muscular atrophy.
RESULTS: Short stature and bone pain when running, walking, and climbing stairs 
occurred in patients with spondylometaphyseal dysplasia Kozlowski type and 
metatropic dysplasia from the age of 5 years and worsened with increasing age. 
Kyphosis was more pronounced with increasing age in these two groups of 
patients, while severe scoliosis occurred in brachyolmia type 3. In the 
radiographs of patients with spondylometaphyseal dysplasia Kozlowski type and 
metatropic dysplasia, severe platyspondyly persisted into adulthood or puberty. 
The patients with spondylometaphyseal dysplasia Kozlowski type exhibited 
irregular proximal femora leading to destruction of the femoral head towards the 
end of puberty, whereas metatropic dysplasia showed marked irregularity and 
widening of the femoral neck. We also observed that metaphyseal dysplasia in 
long bones other than the proximal femur was so inconspicuous that it could be 
ignored in patients with spondylometaphyseal dysplasia Kozlowski type.
CONCLUSION: Comparison of radiologic features that change with age in five 
different TRPV4-related skeletal dysplasias will be of great benefit in the 
management of this patient group.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00247-024-06145-7
PMID: 39825918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethical approval: This study was 
approved by the Istanbul University Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty Ethics Committee 
(12020/158705). Informed consent: Informed written consent for genetic testing 
and publication of the clinical information, including clinical photographs, was 
obtained from the families according to the Declaration of Helsinki. Competing 
interests: The authors declare no competing interests.