---
reference_id: "PMID:12362029"
title: Genotype-phenotype relationships in Berardinelli-Seip congenital lipodystrophy.
authors:
- Van Maldergem L
- Magré J
- Khallouf TE
- Gedde-Dahl T Jr
- Delépine M
- Trygstad O
- Seemanova E
- Stephenson T
- Albott CS
- Bonnici F
- Panz VR
- Medina JL
- Bogalho P
- Huet F
- Savasta S
- Verloes A
- Robert JJ
- Loret H
- De Kerdanet M
- Tubiana-Rufi N
- Mégarbané A
- Maassen J
- Polak M
- Lacombe D
- Kahn CR
- Silveira EL
- "D'Abronzo FH"
- Grigorescu F
- Lathrop M
- Capeau J
- "O'Rahilly S"
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.39.10.722
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Alleles
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- GTP-Binding Protein gamma Subunits
- Genotype
- Heterotrimeric GTP-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Hyperlipidemias/genetics
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Lipodystrophy/congenital, genetics, metabolism, mortality"
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Protein Isoforms/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotype-phenotype relationships in Berardinelli-Seip congenital lipodystrophy.
**Authors:** Van Maldergem L, Magré J, Khallouf TE, Gedde-Dahl T Jr, Delépine M, Trygstad O, Seemanova E, Stephenson T, Albott CS, Bonnici F, Panz VR, Medina JL, Bogalho P, Huet F, Savasta S, Verloes A, Robert JJ, Loret H, De Kerdanet M, Tubiana-Rufi N, Mégarbané A, Maassen J, Polak M, Lacombe D, Kahn CR, Silveira EL, D'Abronzo FH, Grigorescu F, Lathrop M, Capeau J, O'Rahilly S
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.39.10.722](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.39.10.722)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2002 Oct;39(10):722-33. doi: 10.1136/jmg.39.10.722.

Genotype-phenotype relationships in Berardinelli-Seip congenital lipodystrophy.

Van Maldergem L(1), Magré J, Khallouf TE, Gedde-Dahl T Jr, Delépine M, Trygstad 
O, Seemanova E, Stephenson T, Albott CS, Bonnici F, Panz VR, Medina JL, Bogalho 
P, Huet F, Savasta S, Verloes A, Robert JJ, Loret H, De Kerdanet M, Tubiana-Rufi 
N, Mégarbané A, Maassen J, Polak M, Lacombe D, Kahn CR, Silveira EL, D'Abronzo 
FH, Grigorescu F, Lathrop M, Capeau J, O'Rahilly S.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Génétique Humaine, Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique, 
Loverval, Belgium. vmald@skypro.be

Erratum in
    J Med Genet. 2003 Feb;40(2):150.

Generalised lipodystrophy of the Berardinelli-Seip type (BSCL) is a rare 
autosomal recessive human disorder with severe adverse metabolic consequences. A 
gene on chromosome 9 (BSCL1) has recently been identified, predominantly in 
African-American families. More recently, mutations in a previously undescribed 
gene of unknown function (BSCL2) on chromosome 11, termed seipin, have been 
found to be responsible for this disorder in a number of European and Middle 
Eastern families. We have studied the genotype/phenotype relationships in 70 
affected subjects from 44 apparently unrelated pedigrees of diverse ethnic 
origin. In all subjects, hepatic dysfunction, hyperlipidaemia, diabetes 
mellitus, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy were significant contributors to 
morbidity with no clear differences in their prevalence between subjects with 
BSCL1 or BSCL2 and those with evidence against cosegregation with either 
chromosome 9 or 11 (designated BSCLX). BSCL2 appears to be a more severe 
disorder than BSCL1 with a higher incidence of premature death and a lower 
prevalence of partial and/or delayed onset of lipodystrophy. Notably, subjects 
with BSCL2 had a significantly higher prevalence of intellectual impairment than 
those with BSCL1 or BSCLX (p<0.0001, OR 17.0, CI 3.6 to 79.0). The higher 
prevalence of intellectual impairment and the increased risk of premature death 
in BSCL2 compared to BSCL1 emphasise the importance of molecular diagnosis of 
this syndrome and have clear implications for genetic counselling.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.39.10.722
PMCID: PMC1734991
PMID: 12362029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]