---
reference_id: "PMID:38179406"
title: Update on current diagnosis and management of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma.
authors:
- Pavlidis ET
- Galanis IN
- Pavlidis TE
journal: World J Clin Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.5306/wjco.v14.i12.570
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update on current diagnosis and management of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma.
**Authors:** Pavlidis ET, Galanis IN, Pavlidis TE
**Journal:** World J Clin Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.5306/wjco.v14.i12.570](https://doi.org/10.5306/wjco.v14.i12.570)

## Content

1. World J Clin Oncol. 2023 Dec 24;14(12):570-583. doi: 10.5306/wjco.v14.i12.570.

Update on current diagnosis and management of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma.

Pavlidis ET(1), Galanis IN(1), Pavlidis TE(2).

Author information:
(1)2nd Propedeutic Department of Surgery, Hippokration General Hospital, School 
of Medicine, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki 54642, Greece.
(2)2nd Propedeutic Department of Surgery, Hippokration General Hospital, School 
of Medicine, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki 54642, Greece. 
pavlidth@auth.gr.

Well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma has a favorable prognosis with a 5-year 
survival rate of over 95%. However, the undifferentiated or anaplastic type 
accounting for < 0.2%, usually in elderly individuals, exhibits a dismal 
prognosis with rapid growth and disappointing outcomes. It is the most 
aggressive form of thyroid carcinoma, with a median survival of 5 mo and poor 
quality of life (airway obstruction, dysphagia, hoarseness, persistent pain). 
Early diagnosis and staging are crucial. Diagnostic tools include biopsy (fine 
needle aspiration, core needle, open surgery), high-resolution ultrasound, 
computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, [(18)F]fluoro-D-glucose 
positron emission tomo-graphy/computed tomography, liquid biopsy and microRNAs. 
The BRAF gene (BRAF-V600E and BRAF wild type) is the most often found molecular 
factor. Others include the genes RET, KRAS, HRAS, and NRAS. Recent management 
policy is based on surgery, even debulking, chemotherapy (cisplatin or 
doxorubicin), radiotherapy (adjuvant or definitive), targeted biological agents 
and immunotherapy. The last two options constitute novel hopeful management 
modalities improving the overall survival in these otherwise condemned patients. 
Anti-programmed death-ligand 1 antibody immunotherapy, stem cell targeted 
therapies, nanotechnology achievements and artificial intelligence 
imple-mentation provide novel promising alternatives. Genetic mutations 
determine molecular pathways, thus indicating novel treatment strategies such as 
anti-BRAF, anti-vascular endothelial growth factor-A, and anti-epidermal growth 
factor receptor. Treatment with the combination of the BRAF inhibitor dabrafenib 
and the MEK inhibitor trametinib has been approved by the Food and Drug 
Administration in cases with BRAF-V600E gene mutations and is currently the 
standard care. This neoadjuvant treatment followed by surgery ensures a two-year 
overall survival of 80%. Prognostic factors for improved outcomes have been 
found to be younger age, earlier tumor stage and radiation therapy. A 
multidisciplinary approach is necessary, and the therapeutic plan should be 
individualized based on surveillance and epidemiology end results.

©The Author(s) 2023. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.5306/wjco.v14.i12.570
PMCID: PMC10762533
PMID: 38179406

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All the authors 
report no relevant conflicts of interest for this article.