---
reference_id: "PMID:29477613"
title: Hallmarks of Cellular Senescence.
authors:
- Hernandez-Segura A
- Nehme J
- Demaria M
journal: Trends Cell Biol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.tcb.2018.02.001
keywords:
- "Aging/genetics, metabolism"
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- Cellular Senescence/genetics
- DNA Damage
- Genetic Markers
- Humans
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hallmarks of Cellular Senescence.
**Authors:** Hernandez-Segura A, Nehme J, Demaria M
**Journal:** Trends Cell Biol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tcb.2018.02.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcb.2018.02.001)

## Content

1. Trends Cell Biol. 2018 Jun;28(6):436-453. doi: 10.1016/j.tcb.2018.02.001. Epub
 2018 Feb 21.

Hallmarks of Cellular Senescence.

Hernandez-Segura A(1), Nehme J(1), Demaria M(2).

Author information:
(1)European Research Institute for the Biology of Ageing (ERIBA), University 
Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)European Research Institute for the Biology of Ageing (ERIBA), University 
Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. 
Electronic address: m.demaria@umcg.nl.

Cellular senescence is a permanent state of cell cycle arrest that promotes 
tissue remodeling during development and after injury, but can also contribute 
to the decline of the regenerative potential and function of tissues, to 
inflammation, and to tumorigenesis in aged organisms. Therefore, the 
identification, characterization, and pharmacological elimination of senescent 
cells have gained attention in the field of aging research. However, the 
nonspecificity of current senescence markers and the existence of different 
senescence programs strongly limit these tasks. Here, we describe the molecular 
regulators of senescence phenotypes and how they are used for identifying 
senescent cells in vitro and in vivo. We also highlight the importance that 
these levels of regulations have in the development of therapeutic targets.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tcb.2018.02.001
PMID: 29477613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]