---
reference_id: "PMID:3442386"
title: delta-Aminolevulinic acid dehydratase isozymes and lead toxicity.
authors:
- Astrin KH
- Bishop DF
- Wetmur JG
- Kaul B
- Davidow B
- Desnick RJ
journal: Ann N Y Acad Sci
year: '1987'
doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1987.tb48757.x
keywords:
- Alleles
- Disease Susceptibility
- Humans
- Isoenzymes/metabolism
- "Lead Poisoning/enzymology, genetics"
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- Porphobilinogen Synthase/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# delta-Aminolevulinic acid dehydratase isozymes and lead toxicity.
**Authors:** Astrin KH, Bishop DF, Wetmur JG, Kaul B, Davidow B, Desnick RJ
**Journal:** Ann N Y Acad Sci (1987)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1749-6632.1987.tb48757.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.1987.tb48757.x)

## Content

1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1987;514:23-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1987.tb48757.x.

delta-Aminolevulinic acid dehydratase isozymes and lead toxicity.

Astrin KH(1), Bishop DF, Wetmur JG, Kaul B, Davidow B, Desnick RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York 
10029.

ALAD is a zinc metalloenzyme whose inhibition by lead is the first and most 
sensitive indicator of lead exposure and whose decreased activity has been 
implicated in the pathogenesis of lead poisoning. This heme biosynthetic enzyme 
is encoded by a gene located at chromosome 9q34, which has two codominant 
alleles, ALAD1 and ALAD2. The occurrence of two frequent alleles for ALAD 
stimulated an investigation into the possible pharmacogenetic role of the enzyme 
polymorphism in lead poisoning. In a New York City population at high risk for 
lead exposure, individuals heterozygous or homozygous for the less common 
allele, ALAD2, had blood lead levels greater than or equal to 30 micrograms/dl 
more frequently than expected. These findings suggest a potential genetic 
susceptibility to lead poisoning in individuals with the ALAD 1-2 and 2-2 
phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1987.tb48757.x
PMID: 3442386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]