---
reference_id: "PMID:35299616"
title: "Sleep Disorders in Rett Syndrome and Rett-Related Disorders: A Narrative Review."
authors:
- Tascini G
- "Dell'Isola GB"
- Mencaroni E
- Di Cara G
- Striano P
- Verrotti A
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.817195
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sleep Disorders in Rett Syndrome and Rett-Related Disorders: A Narrative Review.
**Authors:** Tascini G, Dell'Isola GB, Mencaroni E, Di Cara G, Striano P, Verrotti A
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2022.817195](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2022.817195)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2022 Mar 1;13:817195. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.817195.
eCollection  2022.

Sleep Disorders in Rett Syndrome and Rett-Related Disorders: A Narrative Review.

Tascini G(1), Dell'Isola GB(1), Mencaroni E(1), Di Cara G(1), Striano P(2)(3),
Verrotti A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(2)Pediatric Neurology and Muscular Diseases Unit, IRCCS "G. Gaslini" Institute,
Genoa, Italy.
(3)Department of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics,
Maternal and Child Health, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy.

Rett Syndrome (RTT) is a rare and severe X-linked developmental brain disorder
that occurs primarily in females, with a ratio of 1:10.000. De novo mutations in
the Methyl-CpG Binding protein 2 (MECP2) gene on the long arm of X chromosome
are responsible for more than 95% cases of classical Rett. In the remaining
cases (atypical Rett), other genes are involved such as the cyclin-dependent
kinase-like 5 (CDKL5) and the forkhead box G1 (FOXG1). Duplications of the MECP2
locus cause MECP2 duplication syndrome (MDS) which concerns about 1% of male
patients with intellectual disability. Sleep disorders are common in individuals
with intellectual disability, while the prevalence in children is between 16 and
42%. Over 80% of individuals affected by RTT show sleep problems, with a higher
prevalence in the first 7 years of life and some degree of variability in
correlation to age and genotype. Abnormalities in circadian rhythm and loss of
glutamate homeostasis play a key role in the development of these disorders.
Sleep disorders, epilepsy, gastrointestinal problems characterize CDKL5
Deficiency Disorder (CDD). Sleep impairment is an area of overlap between RTT
and MECP2 duplication syndrome along with epilepsy, regression and others. Sleep
dysfunction and epilepsy are deeply linked. Sleep deprivation could be an
aggravating factor of epilepsy and anti-comitial therapy could interfere in
sleep structure. Epilepsy prevalence in atypical Rett syndrome with severe
clinical phenotype is higher than in classical Rett syndrome. However, RTT
present a significant lifetime risk of epilepsy too. Sleep disturbances impact
on child's development and patients' families and the evidence for its
management is still limited. The aim of this review is to analyze
pathophysiology, clinical features, the impact on other comorbidities and the
management of sleep disorders in Rett syndrome and Rett-related syndrome.

Copyright © 2022 Tascini, Dell'Isola, Mencaroni, Di Cara, Striano and Verrotti.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2022.817195
PMCID: PMC8923297
PMID: 35299616

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
