---
reference_id: PMID:38878211
title: Azole resistance in Aspergillus fumigatus- comprehensive review.
authors:
- Dladla M
- Gyzenhout M
- Marias G
- Ghosh S
journal: Arch Microbiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00203-024-04026-z
keywords:
- "Aspergillus fumigatus/drug effects, genetics"
- Azoles/pharmacology
- "Drug Resistance, Fungal/genetics"
- Antifungal Agents/pharmacology
- Humans
- "Fungal Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Aspergillosis/microbiology, drug therapy"
- Microbial Sensitivity Tests
- "Cytochrome P-450 Enzyme System/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Azole resistance in Aspergillus fumigatus- comprehensive review.
**Authors:** Dladla M, Gyzenhout M, Marias G, Ghosh S
**Journal:** Arch Microbiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00203-024-04026-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00203-024-04026-z)

## Content

1. Arch Microbiol. 2024 Jun 15;206(7):305. doi: 10.1007/s00203-024-04026-z.

Azole resistance in Aspergillus fumigatus- comprehensive review.

Dladla M(1), Gyzenhout M(2), Marias G(3), Ghosh S(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Faculty of Natural and Agricultural Sciences, 
University of the Free State, Bloemfontein, 9301, South Africa.
(2)Department of Genetics, Faculty of Natural and Agricultural Sciences, 
University of the Free State, Bloemfontein, 9301, South Africa. 
Gryzenhoutm@ufs.ac.za.
(3)Department of Plant Sciences, Division of Plant Pathology, Faculty of Natural 
and Agricultural Sciences, University of the Free State, Bloemfontein, South 
Africa.
(4)Department of Genetics, Faculty of Natural and Agricultural Sciences, 
University of the Free State, Bloemfontein, 9301, South Africa. 
soumyaghosh@yahoo.com.
(5)Natural and Medical Sciences Research Center, University of Nizwa, Nizwa 616, 
Birkat Al Mawz, Oman. soumyaghosh@yahoo.com.

Aspergillus fumigatus is a ubiquitous filamentous fungus commonly found in the 
environment. It is also an opportunistic human pathogen known to cause a range 
of respiratory infections, such as invasive aspergillosis, particularly in 
immunocompromised individuals. Azole antifungal agents are widely used for the 
treatment and prophylaxis of Aspergillus infections due to their efficacy and 
tolerability. However, the emergence of azole resistance in A. fumigatus has 
become a major concern in recent years due to their association with increased 
treatment failures and mortality rates. The development of azole resistance in 
A. fumigatus can occur through both acquired and intrinsic mechanisms. Acquired 
resistance typically arises from mutations in the target enzyme, lanosterol 
14-α-demethylase (Cyp51A), reduces the affinity of azole antifungal agents for 
the enzyme, rendering them less effective, while intrinsic resistance refers to 
a natural resistance of certain A. fumigatus isolates to azole antifungals due 
to inherent genetic characteristics. The current review aims to provide a 
comprehensive overview of azole antifungal resistance in A. fumigatus, discusses 
underlying resistance mechanisms, including alterations in the target enzyme, 
Cyp51A, and the involvement of efflux pumps in drug efflux. Impact of azole 
fungicide uses in the environment and the spread of resistant strains is also 
explored.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00203-024-04026-z
PMID: 38878211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]