---
reference_id: "PMID:39939790"
title: "MorPhiC Consortium: towards functional characterization of all human genes."
authors:
- Adli M
- Przybyla L
- Burdett T
- Burridge PW
- Cacheiro P
- Chang HY
- Engreitz JM
- Gilbert LA
- Greenleaf WJ
- Hsu L
- Huangfu D
- Hung LH
- Kundaje A
- Li S
- Parkinson H
- Qiu X
- Robson P
- Schürer SC
- Shojaie A
- Skarnes WC
- Smedley D
- Studer L
- Sun W
- Vidović D
- Vierbuchen T
- White BS
- Yeung KY
- Yue F
- Zhou T
- MorPhiC Consortium
journal: Nature
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-08243-w
keywords:
- Humans
- Alleles
- "Genome, Human/genetics"
- Genomics
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MorPhiC Consortium: towards functional characterization of all human genes.
**Authors:** Adli M, Przybyla L, Burdett T, Burridge PW, Cacheiro P, Chang HY, Engreitz JM, Gilbert LA, Greenleaf WJ, Hsu L, Huangfu D, Hung LH, Kundaje A, Li S, Parkinson H, Qiu X, Robson P, Schürer SC, Shojaie A, Skarnes WC, Smedley D, Studer L, Sun W, Vidović D, Vierbuchen T, White BS, Yeung KY, Yue F, Zhou T, MorPhiC Consortium
**Journal:** Nature (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-024-08243-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-08243-w)

## Content

1. Nature. 2025 Feb;638(8050):351-359. doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-08243-w. Epub 2025
 Feb 12.

MorPhiC Consortium: towards functional characterization of all human genes.

Adli M(#)(1), Przybyla L(#)(2), Burdett T(3), Burridge PW(4), Cacheiro P(5),
Chang HY(6), Engreitz JM(7)(8), Gilbert LA(9), Greenleaf WJ(7), Hsu L(10),
Huangfu D(11), Hung LH(12), Kundaje A(13), Li S(14), Parkinson H(15), Qiu
X(8)(13), Robson P(14), Schürer SC(16), Shojaie A(17), Skarnes WC(14), Smedley
D(5), Studer L(11), Sun W(10), Vidović D(16), Vierbuchen T(11), White BS(14),
Yeung KY(12), Yue F(18), Zhou T(11); MorPhiC Consortium.

Collaborators: Abbaszadeh N, Diniz JA, Amiri A, Avireddy RNVSRK, Bai T, Baker
DS, Baroch JJ, Chan C, Chen S, Chen X, Cho HS, Choudhary A, Chung CE, Dahlstrom
TJ, Doty A, Eraslan B, Felsenfeld AL, Fleming PJ, Fletcher CF, Flores J, Flynn
WF, Fu Y, Fukuda BN, Garofalo JL, Glenn RA, Goyal J, Griffiths AM, Guo T, Gupta
R, Gupta D, Hu N, Huang YH, Huebner AJ, Hutter C, Kendra A, Kirsammer G, Koci
OA, Kraft K, Li Z, Li S, Liu S, Liu Z, Liu D, Liu N, Luo R, Leite DL, Mao Y,
Marengo G, McDonough JA, Melo-Carrillo A, Meng C, Metzl-Raz E, Mitchell JM,
Mittal V, Nasam N, Neyisci O, Ning G, Parker D, Pilarczyk M, Pillai A, Poirion
OB, Pongpamorn P, Rana A, Rivera-Diaz J, Ross NC, Ventura ES, Seker F, Sengupta
K, Shivalikanjli A, Tang W, Torre D, Wang P, Wang X, Xing D, Yang D, Yordanova
GN, Yu B, Zeng T, Zhang S, Zhang Z, Zhang N, Zhao H, Zheng S, Zhong A,
Žurauskienė J.

Author information:
(1)Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL,
USA. adli@northwestern.edu.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San
Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Omics Section, European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), European
Molecular Biology Laboratory, Hinxton, UK.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Center for Pharmacogenomics, Northwestern
University, Feinberg School of Medicine, Evanston, IL, USA.
(5)William Harvey Research Institute, Clinical Pharmacology and Precision
Medicine, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(8)Basic Science and Engineering (BASE) Initiative, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, USA.
(9)Department of Urology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(10)Department of Biostatistics, Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Center, Seattle, WA, USA.
(11)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, New York, NY, USA.
(12)School of Engineering and Technology, University of Washington Tacoma,
Tacoma, WA, USA.
(13)Departments of Genetics and Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford,
CA, USA.
(14)The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT, USA.
(15)Knowledge Management Section, European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI),
European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Hinxton, UK.
(16)Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology; Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USA.
(17)Department of Biostatistics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(18)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Robert H. Lurie
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Recent advances in functional genomics and human cellular models have
substantially enhanced our understanding of the structure and regulation of the
human genome. However, our grasp of the molecular functions of human genes
remains incomplete and biased towards specific gene classes. The Molecular
Phenotypes of Null Alleles in Cells (MorPhiC) Consortium aims to address this
gap by creating a comprehensive catalogue of the molecular and cellular
phenotypes associated with null alleles of all human genes using in vitro
multicellular systems. In this Perspective, we present the strategic vision of
the MorPhiC Consortium and discuss various strategies for generating null
alleles, as well as the challenges involved. We describe the cellular models and
scalable phenotypic readouts that will be used in the consortium's initial
phase, focusing on 1,000 protein-coding genes. The resulting molecular and
cellular data will be compiled into a catalogue of null-allele phenotypes. The
methodologies developed in this phase will establish best practices for
extending these approaches to all human protein-coding genes. The resources
generated-including engineered cell lines, plasmids, phenotypic data, genomic
information and computational tools-will be made available to the broader
research community to facilitate deeper insights into human gene functions.

© 2025. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-024-08243-w
PMCID: PMC12088665
PMID: 39939790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no
competing interests.
