---
reference_id: "PMID:11754051"
title: Acampomelic campomelic syndrome.
authors:
- Moog U
- Jansen NJ
- Scherer G
- Schrander-Stumpel CT
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '2001'
keywords:
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/genetics, pathology"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Follow-Up Studies
- High Mobility Group Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mutation
- "Mutation, Missense"
- SOX9 Transcription Factor
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acampomelic campomelic syndrome.
**Authors:** Moog U, Jansen NJ, Scherer G, Schrander-Stumpel CT
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (2001)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 2001 Dec 1;104(3):239-45.

Acampomelic campomelic syndrome.

Moog U(1), Jansen NJ, Scherer G, Schrander-Stumpel CT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University of Maastricht, PO Box 1475, 6201 
BL Maastricht, The Netherlands. ute.moog@gen.unimaas.nl

Campomelic syndrome (or campomelic dysostosis, CD; MIM *114290) is an autosomal 
dominant skeletal malformation syndrome characterized by shortness and bowing of 
long bones, especially of the lower limbs. Additional radiological and clinical 
findings are 11 pairs of ribs and a bell-shaped thorax, hypoplastic scapulae, 
narrow iliac wings, non-mineralized thoracic pedicles, clubbed feet, Robin 
sequence, typical facial anomalies and tracheomalacia. The disorder is 
frequently lethal due to respiratory distress. Sex reversal occurs in most 
patients with an XY karyotype. CD is caused by heterozygous mutations in the 
SOX9 gene, an SRY-related gene at 17q24.3-q25.1 with pleiotropic effects on the 
skeletal and genital systems. In addition, cases with chromosomal rearrangements 
involving 17q have been described that are most likely caused by disturbing one 
or more cis-regulatory elements from an extended control region. Campomelia 
(bowed limbs) is seen in most but not all patients, defining a so-called 
acampomelic campomelic dysostosis (ACD). Half of the CD cases with 17q 
rearrangements have no or mild campomelia. Furthermore, campomelia is absent or 
only mildly present in a small subgroup of cases with a normal karyotype. We 
present a chromosomally normal boy with ACD and his clinical follow-up up to the 
age of 2 years, in whom a heterozygous SOX9 missense mutation (H165Y) was 
identified. A SOX9 missense mutation was published in two other patients with 
ACD. Although up to now a general genotype-phenotype correlation could not be 
established for CD, a correlation emerges for the ACD variant that needs further 
confirmation.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11754051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]