---
reference_id: "PMID:32853045"
title: "Dengue virus 4: the 'black sheep' of the family?"
authors:
- Lazo L
journal: Expert Rev Vaccines
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1080/14760584.2020.1813578
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue virus 4: the 'black sheep' of the family?
**Authors:** Lazo L
**Journal:** Expert Rev Vaccines (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14760584.2020.1813578](https://doi.org/10.1080/14760584.2020.1813578)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Vaccines. 2020 Sep;19(9):807-815. doi:
10.1080/14760584.2020.1813578.  Epub 2020 Oct 12.

Dengue virus 4: the 'black sheep' of the family?

Lazo L(1).

Author information:
(1)Vaccine Department, Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology Havana , 
Havana, Cuba.

INTRODUCTION: The induction of a functional immune response against the four 
viral serotypes is one of the premises for an effective vaccine against Dengue 
virus. This is challenging since the immunization with four antigens leads to 
immunologic phenomena such as antigen interference, immuno-dominance, and 
tolerance. Moreover, the four serotypes have intrinsic features that impact the 
outcome after the immunization with a tetravalent formulation.
AREAS COVERED: This work reviews the main studies evidencing the differences 
between Dengue virus 4 and the rest of the serotypes. We address some 
peculiarities of this virus and discuss which factors could explain the 
heterogeneous response achieved after the immune evaluation of tetravalent 
formulations.
EXPERT OPINION: The low immunogenicity associated with serotype 4 could slow 
down the development of a vaccine against Dengue virus. Achieving similar levels 
of neutralizing antibodies against the four serotypes has been the goal of many 
vaccine developers. However, this does not need to be seen as a mandatory dogma. 
High levels of efficacy against Dengue virus 4 could be reached even if it shows 
the lowest neutralizing antibody titers among the viral complex. Studies on the 
efficacy of vaccines, currently in phase III clinical trials, should shed light 
on this concern in the near future.

DOI: 10.1080/14760584.2020.1813578
PMID: 32853045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]