---
reference_id: "PMID:12736280"
title: High-dose chemotherapy with hematopoietic stem-cell rescue for multiple myeloma.
authors:
- Child JA
- Morgan GJ
- Davies FE
- Owen RG
- Bell SE
- Hawkins K
- Brown J
- Drayson MT
- Selby PJ
- Medical Research Council Adult Leukaemia Working Party
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa022340
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High-dose chemotherapy with hematopoietic stem-cell rescue for multiple myeloma.
**Authors:** Child JA, Morgan GJ, Davies FE, Owen RG, Bell SE, Hawkins K, Brown J, Drayson MT, Selby PJ, Medical Research Council Adult Leukaemia Working Party
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa022340](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa022340)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2003 May 8;348(19):1875-83. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa022340.

High-dose chemotherapy with hematopoietic stem-cell rescue for multiple myeloma.

Child JA(1), Morgan GJ, Davies FE, Owen RG, Bell SE, Hawkins K, Brown J, Drayson 
MT, Selby PJ; Medical Research Council Adult Leukaemia Working Party.

Author information:
(1)Academic Unit of Haematology and Oncology, Cancer Research United Kingdom 
Clinical Centre, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom. 
tony.child@leedsth.nhs.uk

Comment in
    Curr Hematol Rep. 2004 Jan;3(1):65-6.

BACKGROUND: High-dose therapy with supporting autologous stem-cell 
transplantation remains a controversial treatment for cancer. In multiple 
myeloma, first-line regimens incorporating high-dose therapy yield higher 
remission rates than do conventional-dose treatments, but evidence that this 
translates into improved survival is limited.
METHODS: In this multicenter study, the Medical Research Council Myeloma VII 
Trial, we randomly assigned 407 patients with previously untreated multiple 
myeloma who were younger than 65 years of age to receive either standard 
conventional-dose combination chemotherapy or high-dose therapy and an 
autologous stem-cell transplant.
RESULTS: Among the 401 patients who could be evaluated, the rates of complete 
response were higher in the intensive-therapy group than in the standard-therapy 
group (44 percent vs. 8 percent, P<0.001). The rates of partial response were 
similar (42 percent and 40 percent, respectively; P=0.72), and the rates of 
minimal response were lower in the intensive-therapy group than in the 
standard-therapy group (3 percent vs. 18 percent, P<0.001). Intention-to-treat 
analysis showed a higher rate of overall survival (P=0.04 by the log-rank test) 
and progression-free survival (P<0.001) in the intensive-therapy group than in 
the standard-therapy group. As compared with standard therapy, intensive 
treatment increased median survival by almost 1 year (54.1 months [95 percent 
confidence interval, 44.9 to 65.2] vs. 42.3 months [95 percent confidence 
interval, 33.1 to 51.6]). There was a trend toward a greater survival benefit in 
the group of patients with a poor prognosis, as defined by a high 
beta2-microglobulin level (more than 8 mg per liter).
CONCLUSIONS: High-dose therapy with autologous stem-cell rescue is an effective 
first-line treatment for patients with multiple myeloma who are younger than 65 
years of age.

Copyright 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa022340
PMID: 12736280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]