---
reference_id: "PMID:25667374"
title: Genetic forms of adrenal insufficiency.
authors:
- Brett EM
- Auchus RJ
journal: Endocr Pract
year: '2015'
doi: 10.4158/EP14503.RA
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic forms of adrenal insufficiency.
**Authors:** Brett EM, Auchus RJ
**Journal:** Endocr Pract (2015)
**DOI:** [10.4158/EP14503.RA](https://doi.org/10.4158/EP14503.RA)

## Content

1. Endocr Pract. 2015 Apr;21(4):395-9. doi: 10.4158/EP14503.RA. Epub 2015 Feb 9.

Genetic forms of adrenal insufficiency.

Brett EM, Auchus RJ.

OBJECTIVE: The American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists Adrenal 
Scientific Committee has developed a series of articles to update members on the 
genetics of adrenal diseases.
METHODS: Case presentation, discussion of literature, table, and bullet point 
conclusions.
RESULTS: The genetic mutations associated with several familial causes of 
adrenal insufficiency have now been identified. The most common ones that will 
be discussed here include Allgrove syndrome, adrenoleukodystrophy, adrenal 
hypoplasia congenita, autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1, congenital 
adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), lipoid CAH, and familial glucocorticoid deficiency. 
Although these diseases most commonly present in childhood, some rarely present 
in adulthood, and thus all endocrinologists must be familiar with these 
syndromes. Some patients only develop glucocorticoid deficiency, and others have 
both glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid deficiency. These diseases may be 
associated with other conditions, especially neurologic disease, hypogonadism, 
or dermatologic problems. Diagnosis is suspected based on clinical presentation 
and laboratory findings. Gene testing may be necessary for confirmation of a 
diagnosis and/or screening of family members.
CONCLUSION: This article briefly reviews the various familial adrenal 
insufficiency syndromes and the specific associated gene defects.

DOI: 10.4158/EP14503.RA
PMID: 25667374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]