---
reference_id: "PMID:12925722"
title: A glycine to aspartic acid substitution of COL2A1 in a family with the Strudwick variant of spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia.
authors:
- Tysoe C
- Saunders J
- White L
- Hills N
- Nicol M
- Evans G
- Cole T
- Chapman S
- Pope FM
journal: QJM
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1093/qjmed/hcg112
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A glycine to aspartic acid substitution of COL2A1 in a family with the Strudwick variant of spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia.
**Authors:** Tysoe C, Saunders J, White L, Hills N, Nicol M, Evans G, Cole T, Chapman S, Pope FM
**Journal:** QJM (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1093/qjmed/hcg112](https://doi.org/10.1093/qjmed/hcg112)

## Content

1. QJM. 2003 Sep;96(9):663-71. doi: 10.1093/qjmed/hcg112.

A glycine to aspartic acid substitution of COL2A1 in a family with the Strudwick 
variant of spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia.

Tysoe C(1), Saunders J, White L, Hills N, Nicol M, Evans G, Cole T, Chapman S, 
Pope FM.

Author information:
(1)Connective Tissue Genetics Group, Institute of Medical Genetics, University 
of Wales College of Medicine, Cardiff, UK.

BACKGROUND: Spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia (SEMD) is one of a clinically 
heterogeneous group of skeletal disorders, characterized by defective growth and 
modelling of the spine and long bones. Common clinical features include 
disproportionate short stature, malformed vertebrae and abnormal epiphyses or 
metaphyses. Some cases have been associated with mutations in the COL2A1 gene.
AIM: To determine whether the autosomal dominant Strudwick-type SEMD in a 
three-generation family, showing specific phenotypical features such as chest 
deformity, limb shortening, myopia and early-onset degenerative osteoarthrosis, 
might be caused by a novel COL2A1 mutation.
DESIGN: Genetic testing and clinical examination of family members.
METHODS: Direct sequencing of PCR-amplified genomic DNA from the COL2A1 gene.
RESULTS: A point mutation within exon 20 of the COL2A1 gene was identified that 
substituted a glycine for an aspartic acid residue at codon 262.
DISCUSSION: All previously reported autosomal dominant mutations causing SEMD 
have substituted an obligate glycine within the triple helix, in particular at 
codons 292, 304 and 709 in the three reported Strudwick-type patients. 
Additionally, a recurrent glycine substitution at codon 154 has been identified 
in two unrelated Finnish cases with radiological features consistent with the 
Strudwick subtype. Our sixth helical glycine substitution extends the mutational 
spectrum and genotype/phenotype correlations of Strudwick-type SEMD.

DOI: 10.1093/qjmed/hcg112
PMID: 12925722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]