---
reference_id: "PMID:33108355"
title: Humanized neurofibroma model from induced pluripotent stem cells delineates tumor pathogenesis and developmental origins.
authors:
- Mo J
- Anastasaki C
- Chen Z
- Shipman T
- Papke J
- Yin K
- Gutmann DH
- Le LQ
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1172/JCI139807
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Line
- Humans
- "Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Nude"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Mutation
- "Neoplasms, Experimental/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Neurofibroma/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Neurofibromin 1/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Humanized neurofibroma model from induced pluripotent stem cells delineates tumor pathogenesis and developmental origins.
**Authors:** Mo J, Anastasaki C, Chen Z, Shipman T, Papke J, Yin K, Gutmann DH, Le LQ
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI139807](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI139807)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2021 Jan 4;131(1):e139807. doi: 10.1172/JCI139807.

Humanized neurofibroma model from induced pluripotent stem cells delineates 
tumor pathogenesis and developmental origins.

Mo J(1), Anastasaki C(2), Chen Z(1), Shipman T(1), Papke J(2), Yin K(1), Gutmann 
DH(2), Le LQ(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, 
USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine in St. 
Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(3)Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center and.
(4)Hamon Center for Regenerative Science and Medicine, UT Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.

Erratum in
    J Clin Invest. 2025 Oct 15;135(20):e199700. doi: 10.1172/JCI199700.

Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a common tumor predisposition syndrome caused 
by NF1 gene mutation, in which affected patients develop Schwann cell lineage 
peripheral nerve sheath tumors (neurofibromas). To investigate human 
neurofibroma pathogenesis, we differentiated a series of isogenic, 
patient-specific NF1-mutant human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) into 
Schwannian lineage cells (SLCs). We found that, although WT and heterozygous 
NF1-mutant hiPSCs-SLCs did not form tumors following mouse sciatic nerve 
implantation, NF1-null SLCs formed bona fide neurofibromas with high levels of 
SOX10 expression. To confirm that SOX10+ SLCs contained the cells of origin for 
neurofibromas, both Nf1 alleles were inactivated in mouse Sox10+ cells, leading 
to classic nodular cutaneous and plexiform neurofibroma formation that 
completely recapitulated their human counterparts. Moreover, we discovered that 
NF1 loss impaired Schwann cell differentiation by inducing a persistent 
stem-like state to expand the pool of progenitors required to initiate tumor 
formation, indicating that, in addition to regulating MAPK-mediated cell growth, 
NF1 loss also altered Schwann cell differentiation to promote neurofibroma 
development. Taken together, we established a complementary humanized 
neurofibroma explant and, to our knowledge, first-in-kind genetically engineered 
nodular cutaneous neurofibroma mouse models that delineate neurofibroma 
pathogenesis amenable to future therapeutic target discovery and evaluation.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI139807
PMCID: PMC7773354
PMID: 33108355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.