---
reference_id: "PMID:8507680"
title: Ether lipid synthesis and its deficiency in peroxisomal disorders.
authors:
- van den Bosch H
- Schrakamp G
- Hardeman D
- Zomer AW
- Wanders RJ
- Schutgens RB
journal: Biochimie
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1016/0300-9084(93)90076-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ether lipid synthesis and its deficiency in peroxisomal disorders.
**Authors:** van den Bosch H, Schrakamp G, Hardeman D, Zomer AW, Wanders RJ, Schutgens RB
**Journal:** Biochimie (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0300-9084(93)90076-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/0300-9084(93)90076-5)

## Content

1. Biochimie. 1993;75(3-4):183-9. doi: 10.1016/0300-9084(93)90076-5.

Ether lipid synthesis and its deficiency in peroxisomal disorders.

van den Bosch H(1), Schrakamp G, Hardeman D, Zomer AW, Wanders RJ, Schutgens RB.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Biomembranes and Lipid Enzymology, Utrecht, Netherlands.

This paper deals with the discovery of plasmalogen deficiency in the 
cerebro-hepato-renal (Zellweger) syndrome and discusses how this has led to the 
development of postnatal and prenatal diagnostic procedures for this and a 
number of related peroxisomal disorders in man that show a general impairment in 
the biosynthesis of ether glycerophospholipids. The results have clearly shown 
an indispensable role for peroxisomes in the total process of ether lipid 
synthesis as evidenced by a description of the cellular topography of this 
process. Platelet-activating factor is a bioactive phospholipid in which the 
glycero-ether linkage is essential for its biological activities. The deficient 
formation of this lipid mediator can be correlated to the residual amounts of 
ether phospholipids found in patients with impaired ether lipid production. 
Evidence is provided to demonstrate that the extent to which cells upon 
stimulation produce platelet-activating factor and its 1-acyl counterpart is not 
caused by enzyme selectivities for ether-linked versus ester-linked phospholipid 
species. Rather, the relative production of these compounds appears to be mainly 
governed by the relative abundance of ether-linked and ester-linked precursor 
molecules and the activity of cellular enzymes, such as lysophospholipases, that 
catabolize the acyl analog of platelet-activating factor through deacylation.

DOI: 10.1016/0300-9084(93)90076-5
PMID: 8507680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]