---
reference_id: "PMID:36396635"
title: CHD7 regulates otic lineage specification and hair cell differentiation in human inner ear organoids.
authors:
- Nie J
- Ueda Y
- Solivais AJ
- Hashino E
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-34759-8
keywords:
- Humans
- Organoids/metabolism
- "Ear, Inner"
- Neurogenesis
- CHARGE Syndrome/genetics
- Hair/metabolism
- "DNA Helicases/genetics, metabolism"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CHD7 regulates otic lineage specification and hair cell differentiation in human inner ear organoids.
**Authors:** Nie J, Ueda Y, Solivais AJ, Hashino E
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-022-34759-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34759-8)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2022 Nov 17;13(1):7053. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-34759-8.

CHD7 regulates otic lineage specification and hair cell differentiation in human 
inner ear organoids.

Nie J(1), Ueda Y(1), Solivais AJ(1), Hashino E(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, 46202, USA.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, 46202, USA. ehashino@iu.edu.
(3)Stark Neurosciences Research Institute, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, 46202, USA. ehashino@iu.edu.

Mutations in CHD7 cause CHARGE syndrome, affecting multiple organs including the 
inner ear in humans. We investigate how CHD7 mutations affect inner ear 
development using human pluripotent stem cell-derived organoids as a model 
system. We find that loss of CHD7 or its chromatin remodeling activity leads to 
complete absence of hair cells and supporting cells, which can be explained by 
dysregulation of key otic development-associated genes in mutant otic 
progenitors. Further analysis of the mutant otic progenitors suggests that CHD7 
can regulate otic genes through a chromatin remodeling-independent mechanism. 
Results from transcriptome profiling of hair cells reveal disruption of deafness 
gene expression as a potential underlying mechanism of CHARGE-associated 
sensorineural hearing loss. Notably, co-differentiating CHD7 knockout and 
wild-type cells in chimeric organoids partially rescues mutant phenotypes by 
restoring otherwise severely dysregulated otic genes. Taken together, our 
results suggest that CHD7 plays a critical role in regulating human otic lineage 
specification and hair cell differentiation.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-022-34759-8
PMCID: PMC9672366
PMID: 36396635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.