---
reference_id: "PMID:20179406"
title: Similarities and differences between excessive exercising anorexia nervosa patients compared with DSM-IV defined anorexia nervosa subtypes.
authors:
- Kiezebrink K
- Campbell D
- Mann E
- Blundell J
journal: Eat Weight Disord
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1007/BF03325117
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Anorexia Nervosa/psychology
- Body Image
- Body Mass Index
- Body Weight
- Caloric Restriction
- Case-Control Studies
- Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
- Exercise
- "Extraversion, Psychological"
- Feeding Behavior
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Personality Inventory
- Phenotype
- Psychometrics
- Self Concept
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Similarities and differences between excessive exercising anorexia nervosa patients compared with DSM-IV defined anorexia nervosa subtypes.
**Authors:** Kiezebrink K, Campbell D, Mann E, Blundell J
**Journal:** Eat Weight Disord (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF03325117](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03325117)

## Content

1. Eat Weight Disord. 2009 Dec;14(4):e199-204. doi: 10.1007/BF03325117.

Similarities and differences between excessive exercising anorexia nervosa
patients compared with DSM-IV defined anorexia nervosa subtypes.

Kiezebrink K(1), Campbell D, Mann E, Blundell J.

Author information:
(1)University of Abertary Dundee, School of Contemporary Sciences, Dundee DD1
1HG, UK. k.kiezebrink@abertay.ac.uk

This study describes anorexia nervosa (AN) patients who use excessive exercise
for weight management and how this behaviour relates to the classical Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders - Fourth Edition (DSM-IV)
sub-grouping of AN. The study compared 428 clinical AN patients with 119 age and
gender-matched controls. The AN cases were initially dichotomised according to
DSM-IV subtype criteria into restricting (RAN; N=198) and binge-purge (BPAN;
N=230) anorexia. The psychometric instruments were chosen to reflect key
features concerning the diagnosis of eating disorders and characteristics of
eating and food behaviour and included the 26-item Eating Attitude Test
(EAT-26), Three Factor Eating Questionnaire (TFEQ), Dutch Eating Behaviour
Questionnaire (DEBQ), Eysenck Personality Inventory (EPI) and Rosenberg
Self-Esteem scale (RSE). Structured clinical interviews (1) were carried out in
order to identify the subgroup of patients who use excessive exercise in order
to facilitate weight control (EAN). The three groups (RAN, BPAN, EAN) did not
differ in measures of current age, current body mass index, age of onset of AN
and measures of restrained eating. However, significant differences were
observed on EAT-26, DEBQ emotional and external factors, TFEQ disinhibition and
hunger factors, EPI extraversion and neuroticism, and self-esteem. The EAN were
similar to the RAN on the majority of variables but showed significant
differences on extraversion, neuroticism, self-esteem and disease pathology
(EAT-26). Compared with BPAN, EAN had lower disease pathology (EAT-26 scores),
scored higher on the EPI extraversion scale, lower on the neuroticism scale and
had greater self-esteem. The EAN also displayed significantly lower emotional
and external eating (DEBQ) than BPAN and significantly lower disinhibition and
hunger scores (TFEQ). These data suggest that EAN group display a mixed profile
of characteristics resembling both BPAN and RAN. When EAN are defined as a
separate group they appear to be phenotypically more similar to RAN than BPAN on
this particular profile of variables. However when DSM-IV criteria are applied
they are almost exclusively classified as BPAN. This outcome suggests that EAN
do constitute an identifiable group that can be distinguished from RAN and BPAN.
Consequently it is likely that the behaviour of excessive exercising should be
considered as clinically relevant on the outcome of treatment.

DOI: 10.1007/BF03325117
PMID: 20179406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
