---
reference_id: "PMID:20393176"
title: "A randomized study of alglucosidase alfa in late-onset Pompe's disease."
authors:
- van der Ploeg AT
- Clemens PR
- Corzo D
- Escolar DM
- Florence J
- Groeneveld GJ
- Herson S
- Kishnani PS
- Laforet P
- Lake SL
- Lange DJ
- Leshner RT
- Mayhew JE
- Morgan C
- Nozaki K
- Park DJ
- Pestronk A
- Rosenbloom B
- Skrinar A
- van Capelle CI
- van der Beek NA
- Wasserstein M
- Zivkovic SA
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0909859
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- Analysis of Variance
- Child
- Drug Hypersensitivity/etiology
- Female
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type II/drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin G/blood
- "Infusions, Intravenous"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Vital Capacity/drug effects
- Walking
- Young Adult
- "alpha-Glucosidases/adverse effects, immunology, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A randomized study of alglucosidase alfa in late-onset Pompe's disease.
**Authors:** van der Ploeg AT, Clemens PR, Corzo D, Escolar DM, Florence J, Groeneveld GJ, Herson S, Kishnani PS, Laforet P, Lake SL, Lange DJ, Leshner RT, Mayhew JE, Morgan C, Nozaki K, Park DJ, Pestronk A, Rosenbloom B, Skrinar A, van Capelle CI, van der Beek NA, Wasserstein M, Zivkovic SA
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa0909859](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa0909859)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2010 Apr 15;362(15):1396-406. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0909859.

A randomized study of alglucosidase alfa in late-onset Pompe's disease.

van der Ploeg AT(1), Clemens PR, Corzo D, Escolar DM, Florence J, Groeneveld GJ,
Herson S, Kishnani PS, Laforet P, Lake SL, Lange DJ, Leshner RT, Mayhew JE,
Morgan C, Nozaki K, Park DJ, Pestronk A, Rosenbloom B, Skrinar A, van Capelle
CI, van der Beek NA, Wasserstein M, Zivkovic SA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Lysosomal and Metabolic Diseases,
Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
a.vanderploeg@erasmusmc.nl

BACKGROUND: Pompe's disease is a metabolic myopathy caused by a deficiency of
acid alpha glucosidase (GAA), an enzyme that degrades lysosomal glycogen.
Late-onset Pompe's disease is characterized by progressive muscle weakness and
loss of respiratory function, leading to early death. We conducted a randomized,
placebo-controlled trial of alglucosidase alfa, a recombinant human GAA, for the
treatment of late-onset Pompe's disease.
METHODS: Ninety patients who were 8 years of age or older, ambulatory, and free
of invasive ventilation were randomly assigned to receive biweekly intravenous
alglucosidase alfa (20 mg per kilogram of body weight) or placebo for 78 weeks
at eight centers in the United States and Europe. The two primary end points
were distance walked during a 6-minute walk test and percentage of predicted
forced vital capacity (FVC).
RESULTS: At 78 weeks, the estimated mean changes from baseline in the primary
end points favored alglucosidase alfa (an increase of 28.1+/-13.1 m on the
6-minute walk test and an absolute increase of 3.4+/-1.2 percentage points in
FVC; P=0.03 and P=0.006, respectively). Similar proportions of patients in the
two groups had adverse events, serious adverse events, and infusion-associated
reactions; events that occurred only in patients who received the active study
drug included anaphylactic reactions and infusion-associated reactions of
urticaria, flushing, hyperhidrosis, chest discomfort, vomiting, and increased
blood pressure (each of which occurred in 5 to 8% of the patients).
CONCLUSIONS: In this study population, treatment with alglucosidase alfa was
associated with improved walking distance and stabilization of pulmonary
function over an 18-month period. (ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00158600.)

Massachusetts Medical Society

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa0909859
PMID: 20393176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
