---
reference_id: "PMID:10414380"
title: Faecal excretion of Vibrio cholerae during convalescence of cholera patients in Calabar, Nigeria.
authors:
- Utsalo SJ
- Eko FO
- Umoh F
- Asindi AA
journal: Eur J Epidemiol
year: '1999'
doi: "10.1023/a:1007541317104"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Faecal excretion of Vibrio cholerae during convalescence of cholera patients in Calabar, Nigeria.
**Authors:** Utsalo SJ, Eko FO, Umoh F, Asindi AA
**Journal:** Eur J Epidemiol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1023/a:1007541317104](https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1007541317104)

## Content

1. Eur J Epidemiol. 1999 Apr;15(4):379-81. doi: 10.1023/a:1007541317104.

Faecal excretion of Vibrio cholerae during convalescence of cholera patients in 
Calabar, Nigeria.

Utsalo SJ(1), Eko FO, Umoh F, Asindi AA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology & Parasitology, College of Medical 
Sciences, University of Calabar, Nigeria. sjutsalo@unical.anpa.net.ng

The pattern of faecal excretion of Vibrio cholerae was studied over a duration 
of eight months among 13 cholera convalescents by two-weekly surveillance 
cultures. Stools and rectal swabs were cultured on Thiosulphate citrate bile 
salts sucrose (TCBS) agar for the recovery of vibrio pathogens. Clinical phase 
and convalescent phase V. cholerae strains were compared for antibiogram 
profiles. The population of vibrios recovered from faecal inocula was usually 
scanty (<10(3) vibrios/g). All clinical isolates except three were concordant 
with convalescent phase strains. Sensitivity to tetracycline was uniform for 
concordant V. cholerae strains, with minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) 
ranging from 0.54-4.0 microg/ml. Nine (69.2%) of the convalescents had positive 
faecal cultures for periods ranging from two weeks to more than seven months. 
Two adults whose excretions lasted several months also tested positive for human 
immuno-deficiency virus (HIV) infections. The significance of stool surveillance 
cultures for identifying asymptomatic infections among convalescents who may 
need chemotherapy to abolish excretion is emphasised. However, it could not be 
established with certainty if vibrios excreted during convalescence were from 
enteric colonization by the causative strains, or re-infections with the common 
strains in circulation.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1007541317104
PMID: 10414380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]