---
reference_id: "PMID:39946654"
title: Efficacy of the Rho-Kinase Inhibitor for Corneal Endothelial Protection in Fuchs Endothelial Corneal Dystrophy After Phacoemulsification.
authors:
- Keeratidamkerngsakul B
- Puangsricharern V
- Chokesuwattanaskul S
- Pongpirul K
- Kittipibul T
journal: Cornea
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1097/ICO.0000000000003827
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Cell Count
- "Corneal Endothelial Cell Loss/prevention & control"
- Double-Blind Method
- "Endothelium, Corneal/pathology, drug effects"
- "Fuchs' Endothelial Dystrophy/drug therapy, etiology"
- "Isoquinolines/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- Ophthalmic Solutions
- Phacoemulsification/adverse effects
- Prospective Studies
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "rho-Associated Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Sulfonamides/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- Visual Acuity/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of the Rho-Kinase Inhibitor for Corneal Endothelial Protection in Fuchs Endothelial Corneal Dystrophy After Phacoemulsification.
**Authors:** Keeratidamkerngsakul B, Puangsricharern V, Chokesuwattanaskul S, Pongpirul K, Kittipibul T
**Journal:** Cornea (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1097/ICO.0000000000003827](https://doi.org/10.1097/ICO.0000000000003827)

## Content

1. Cornea. 2025 Feb 12;44(7):896-904. doi: 10.1097/ICO.0000000000003827.

Efficacy of the Rho-Kinase Inhibitor for Corneal Endothelial Protection in Fuchs
Endothelial Corneal Dystrophy After Phacoemulsification.

Keeratidamkerngsakul B(1), Puangsricharern V(1)(2)(3), Chokesuwattanaskul S(1),
Pongpirul K(4), Kittipibul T(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University,
King Chulalongkorn Memorial Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Center of Excellence for Cornea and Stem Cell Transplantation, Department of
Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Excellence Center for Cornea and Limbal Stem Cell Transplantation, Department
of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine, King Chulalongkorn Memorial Hospital,
Thai Red Cross Society, Bangkok, Thailand ; and.
(4)Department of Preventive and Social Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand .

PURPOSE: To evaluate the efficacy of Rho-kinase (ROCK) inhibitors in corneal
endothelial protection in Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) after
phacoemulsification.
METHODS: Forty-eight eyes from 31 patients with FECD and cataracts were randomly
assigned to receive either the topical ROCK inhibitor (or ripasudil) or placebo
4 times a day, in addition to the standard antibiotic and antiinflammatory eye
drops, for 1 month after phacoemulsification. Endothelial cell density (ECD),
central corneal thickness (CCT), and corneal densitometry were measured. The
primary outcome was the central ECD (C-ECD) loss percentage 3 months after
phacoemulsification. Secondary outcomes included C-ECD loss and paracentral ECD
loss percentages and the CCT change ratio at different time points after
phacoemulsification. Adverse events were evaluated.
RESULTS: There was significantly less cell loss among those eyes treated with
ripasudil. C-ECD significantly increased from a baseline of 2361 cells/mm 2 (95%
confidence interval, 2151-2571) to 2506 cells/mm 2 (95% confidence interval,
2296-2716) 3 months after phacoemulsification. The paracentral ECD loss was 0.4%
in the ripasudil group versus 7.3% in the control group. Corneal densitometry
remained relatively unchanged in the ripasudil group but increased significantly
over time in the control group. The mean CCT increased slightly in both groups
from baseline to the final follow-up at 3 months, albeit without significant
differences between the groups. In the ripasudil group, transient conjunctival
erythema was the most common adverse event.
CONCLUSIONS: The topical ROCK inhibitor, or ripasudil, demonstrated beneficial
effects on preventing endothelial cell loss and improving endothelial function
in patients with FECD undergoing phacoemulsification. Corneal densitometry
showed reduced corneal light scattering in the ripasudil group after
phacoemulsification, suggesting improved corneal endothelial function.

Copyright © 2025 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/ICO.0000000000003827
PMID: 39946654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.
