---
reference_id: PMID:22530004
title: Role of the CCAAT-binding protein NFY in SCA17 pathogenesis.
authors:
- Lee LC
- Chen CM
- Wang HC
- Hsieh HH
- Chiu IS
- Su MT
- Hsieh-Li HM
- Wu CH
- Lee GC
- Lee-Chen GJ
- Lin JY
journal: PLoS One
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035302
keywords:
- CCAAT-Binding Factor/metabolism
- Endoplasmic Reticulum Chaperone BiP
- Gene Expression
- HEK293 Cells
- Heat-Shock Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Mutant Proteins/metabolism
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- Protein Binding
- Protein Transport
- Spinocerebellar Ataxias/etiology
- TATA-Box Binding Protein/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of the CCAAT-binding protein NFY in SCA17 pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Lee LC, Chen CM, Wang HC, Hsieh HH, Chiu IS, Su MT, Hsieh-Li HM, Wu CH, Lee GC, Lee-Chen GJ, Lin JY
**Journal:** PLoS One (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0035302](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0035302)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35302. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035302. Epub 2012 Apr
17.

Role of the CCAAT-binding protein NFY in SCA17 pathogenesis.

Lee LC(1), Chen CM, Wang HC, Hsieh HH, Chiu IS, Su MT, Hsieh-Li HM, Wu CH, Lee 
GC, Lee-Chen GJ, Lin JY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science, National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.

Spinocerebellar ataxia 17 (SCA17) is caused by expansion of the polyglutamine 
(polyQ) tract in human TATA-box binding protein (TBP) that is ubiquitously 
expressed in both central nervous system and peripheral tissues. The spectrum of 
SCA17 clinical presentation is broad. The precise pathogenic mechanism in SCA17 
remains unclear. Previously proteomics study using a cellular model of SCA17 has 
revealed reduced expression of heat shock 70 kDa protein 5 (HSPA5) and heat 
shock 70 kDa protein 8 (HSPA8), suggesting that impaired protein folding may 
contribute to the cell dysfunction of SCA17 (Lee et al., 2009). In 
lymphoblastoid cells, HSPA5 and HSPA8 expression levels in cells with mutant TBP 
were also significantly lower than that of the control cells (Chen et al., 
2010). As nuclear transcription factor Y (NFY) has been reported to regulate 
HSPA5 transcription, we focused on if NFY activity and HSPA5 expression in SCA17 
cells are altered. Here, we show that TBP interacts with NFY subunit A (NFYA) in 
HEK-293 cells and NFYA incorporated into mutant TBP aggregates. In both HEK-293 
and SH-SY5Y cells expressing TBP/Q(61~79), the level of soluble NFYA was 
significantly reduced. In vitro binding assay revealed that the interaction 
between TBP and NFYA is direct. HSPA5 luciferase reporter assay and endogenous 
HSPA5 expression analysis in NFYA cDNA and siRNA transfection cells further 
clarified the important role of NFYA in regulating HSPA5 transcription. In SCA17 
cells, HSPA5 promoter activity was activated as a compensatory response before 
aggregate formation. NFYA dysfunction was indicated in SCA17 cells as HSPA5 
promoter activity reduced along with TBP aggregate formation. Because essential 
roles of HSPA5 in protection from neuronal apoptosis have been shown in a mouse 
model, NFYA could be a target of mutant TBP in SCA17.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035302
PMCID: PMC3328435
PMID: 22530004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.