---
reference_id: "PMID:12351998"
title: Myotonic syndromes.
authors:
- Mankodi A
- Thornton CA
journal: Curr Opin Neurol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1097/00019052-200210000-00005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myotonic syndromes.
**Authors:** Mankodi A, Thornton CA
**Journal:** Curr Opin Neurol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00019052-200210000-00005](https://doi.org/10.1097/00019052-200210000-00005)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Neurol. 2002 Oct;15(5):545-52. doi:
10.1097/00019052-200210000-00005.

Myotonic syndromes.

Mankodi A(1), Thornton CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Rochester School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To highlight recent advances in understanding the clinical 
manifestations and molecular genetics of myotonic syndromes, with particular 
emphasis on the myotonic dystrophies.
RECENT FINDINGS: Myotonic syndromes include the non-dystrophic myotonias, caused 
by mutations in genes encoding the chloride or sodium channels that are specific 
to skeletal muscle, and the myotonic dystrophies. Previous studies have shown 
that myotonic dystrophy type 1 is caused by the expansion of a CTG repeat in the 
gene. Recently, it was discovered that myotonic dystrophy type 2 (proximal 
myotonic myopathy) is also caused by a DNA expansion mutation. In both types of 
myotonic dystrophy the expanded repeat is transcribed and the RNA produced from 
the mutant allele is retained in nuclear inclusions. Recent studies suggest that 
the mutant RNA has a toxic effect on muscle fibers by interfering with the 
essential functions of the myonucleus, such as RNA processing.
SUMMARY: It now appears likely that myotonic dystrophy is the first instance of 
a genetic disease in which the harmful effect of a mutation involves the 
production of a pathogenic RNA. However, the exact mechanism is not understood, 
and it is unclear whether this RNA-mediated disease process is also responsible 
for the manifestations of myotonic dystrophy in non-muscle tissues.

DOI: 10.1097/00019052-200210000-00005
PMID: 12351998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]