---
reference_id: "PMID:31919734"
title: Clinical and Molecular Characteristics of Two Chinese Children with Infantile Sandhoff Disease and Review of the Literature.
authors:
- Liu M
- Huang D
- Wang H
- Zhao L
- Wang Q
- Chen X
journal: J Mol Neurosci
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s12031-019-01409-6
keywords:
- Brain/diagnostic imaging
- Female
- Fundus Oculi
- Humans
- Infant
- Mutation
- Protein Domains
- "Sandhoff Disease/genetics, pathology"
- "beta-Hexosaminidase beta Chain/chemistry, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and Molecular Characteristics of Two Chinese Children with Infantile Sandhoff Disease and Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Liu M, Huang D, Wang H, Zhao L, Wang Q, Chen X
**Journal:** J Mol Neurosci (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12031-019-01409-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12031-019-01409-6)

## Content

1. J Mol Neurosci. 2020 Apr;70(4):481-487. doi: 10.1007/s12031-019-01409-6. Epub
2020 Jan 9.

Clinical and Molecular Characteristics of Two Chinese Children with Infantile
Sandhoff Disease and Review of the Literature.

Liu M(1), Huang D(1), Wang H(2), Zhao L(3), Wang Q(4), Chen X(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Soochow University, No. 92
Zhongnan Street, Industrial Park, Suzhou, 215003, Jiangsu Province, People's
Republic of China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Children's Hospital of Soochow University,
No. 92 Zhongnan Street, Industrial Park, Suzhou, 215003, Jiangsu Province,
People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Children's Hospital of Soochow University, No.
92 Zhongnan Street, Industrial Park, Suzhou, 215003, Jiangsu Province, People's
Republic of China.
(4)Department of Radiology, Children's Hospital of Soochow University, No. 92
Zhongnan Street, Industrial Park, Suzhou, 215003, Jiangsu Province, People's
Republic of China.
(5)Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Soochow University, No. 92
Zhongnan Street, Industrial Park, Suzhou, 215003, Jiangsu Province, People's
Republic of China. xuqinlili@163.com.

Infantile Sandhoff disease is an autosomal recessive inherited disease primarily
characterized by cherry red spots in the retina, muscle weakness, seizure,
truncal hypotonia, hyperacusis, developmental delay and regression. The
pathogenic genetic defects of the HEXB gene, which encodes the β subunit of the
hexosaminidase A (ɑβ) and hexosaminidase B (ββ) enzymes, cause deficiency of
both the Hex A and Hex B enzymes, resulting in the deposition of GM2 ganglion
glycerides in the lysosomes of the central nervous system and somatic cells. The
aim of this study was to discover disease-causing variants of the HEXB gene in
two Chinese families through the use of exome sequencing. By characterizing
three novel variants by molecular genetics, bioinformatics analysis, and
three-dimensional structure modeling, we showed that all these novel variants
influenced the protein structure. The results broaden the variant spectrum of
HEXB in different ethnic groups. Furthermore, not all patients diagnosed with
infantile Sandhoff disease had characteristic cranial imaging findings, which
can only be used as supplementary information for diagnosis. The results of this
study may contribute to clinical management, genetic counseling, and
gene-targeted treatments for Sandhoff disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s12031-019-01409-6
PMID: 31919734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
