---
reference_id: "PMID:27206232"
title: "Seizure treatment in Angelman syndrome: A case series from the Angelman Syndrome Clinic at Massachusetts General Hospital."
authors:
- Shaaya EA
- Grocott OR
- Laing O
- Thibert RL
journal: Epilepsy Behav
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2016.04.030
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Seizure treatment in Angelman syndrome: A case series from the Angelman Syndrome Clinic at Massachusetts General Hospital.
**Authors:** Shaaya EA, Grocott OR, Laing O, Thibert RL
**Journal:** Epilepsy Behav (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yebeh.2016.04.030](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yebeh.2016.04.030)

## Content

1. Epilepsy Behav. 2016 Jul;60:138-141. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2016.04.030. Epub
2016  May 18.

Seizure treatment in Angelman syndrome: A case series from the Angelman Syndrome 
Clinic at Massachusetts General Hospital.

Shaaya EA(1), Grocott OR(1), Laing O(1), Thibert RL(2).

Author information:
(1)Angelman Syndrome Clinic, Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, MA, United States.
(2)Angelman Syndrome Clinic, Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, MA, United States. Electronic address: 
rthibert@mgh.harvard.edu.

Epilepsy is a common feature of Angelman syndrome (~80-90%), with the most 
common seizure types including myoclonic, atonic, atypical absence, focal, and 
generalized tonic-clonic. Seizure types are similar among the various genetic 
subtypes, but epilepsy in those with maternal deletions is more frequent and 
more refractory to medication. Treatment with older antiepileptic drugs such as 
valproic acid and clonazepam is effective, but these medications tend to have 
less favorable side effect profiles in Angelman syndrome compared with those in 
newer medications. This study aimed to assess the use of newer antiepileptic 
drug therapies in individuals with Angelman syndrome followed at the Angelman 
Syndrome Clinic at the Massachusetts General Hospital. Many of the subjects in 
this study were on valproic acid therapy prior to their initial evaluation and 
exhibited increased tremor, decreased balance, and/or regression of motor 
skills, which resolved after tapering off of this medication. Newer 
antiepileptic drugs such as levetiracetam, lamotrigine, and clobazam, and to a 
lesser extent topiramate, appeared to be as effective - if not more so - as 
valproic acid and clonazepam while offering more favorable side effect profiles. 
The low glycemic index treatment also provided effective seizure control with 
minimal side effects. The majority of subjects remained on combination therapy 
with levetiracetam, lamotrigine, and clobazam being the most commonly used 
medications, indicating a changing trend when compared with prior studies.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2016.04.030
PMID: 27206232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]