---
reference_id: "PMID:20301464"
title: Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Introne WJ
- Huizing M
- Malicdan MCV
- "O'Brien KJ"
- Gahl WA
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Introne WJ, Huizing M, Malicdan MCV, O'Brien KJ, Gahl WA

## Content

1. Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome.

Introne WJ(1), Huizing M(2), Malicdan MCV(2), O'Brien KJ(3), Gahl WA(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2000 Jul 24 [updated 2023 May 25].

Author information:
(1)Staff Clinician, National Human Genome Research Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
(2)Staff Scientist, National Human Genome Research Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
(3)Research Nurse, National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
(4)Clinical Director, National Human Genome Research Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome (HPS) is characterized by 
oculocutaneous albinism, a bleeding diathesis, and, in some individuals, 
pulmonary fibrosis, granulomatous colitis, and/or immunodeficiency. Ocular 
findings include nystagmus, reduced iris pigment, reduced retinal pigment, 
foveal hypoplasia with significant reduction in visual acuity (usually in the 
range of 20/50 to 20/400), and strabismus in many individuals. Hair color ranges 
from white to brown; skin color ranges from white to olive and is usually at 
least a shade lighter than that of other family members. The bleeding diathesis 
can result in variable degrees of bruising, epistaxis, gingival bleeding, 
postpartum hemorrhage, colonic bleeding, and prolonged bleeding with menses or 
after tooth extraction, circumcision, and/or other surgeries. Pulmonary 
fibrosis, colitis, and/or neutropenia have been reported in individuals with 
pathogenic variants in some HPS-related genes. Pulmonary fibrosis, a restrictive 
lung disease, typically causes symptoms in the early 30s and can progress to 
death within a decade. Granulomatous colitis is severe in about 15% of affected 
individuals. Neutropenia and/or immune defects occur primarily in individuals 
with pathogenic variants in AP3B1 and AP3D1.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The clinical diagnosis of HPS can be established in a proband 
with hypopigmentation of the skin and hair, characteristic eye findings, and 
demonstration of absence of platelet delta granules (dense bodies) on electron 
microscopy. Identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in AP3B1, AP3D1, 
BLOC1S3, BLOC1S5, BLOC1S6, DTNBP1, HPS1, HPS3, HPS4, HPS5, or HPS6 confirms the 
diagnosis if clinical features are inconclusive.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Correction of refractive errors and use 
of low vision aids; preferential seating in school; low-vision consultant as 
needed; UV-blocking sunglasses; surgery for strabismus as needed; protection 
from sun exposure with protective clothing and sunscreen; standard treatment for 
skin cancer; thrombin-soaked Gelfoam® for skin wounds with prolonged bleeding; 
medical alert bracelet and bleeding management plan; humidifier to reduce 
frequency of epistaxis; oral contraceptives and IUD for menorrhagia; DDAVP® 
(desmopressin acetate) for wisdom tooth extraction and invasive procedures; 
platelet or red blood cell transfusions for surgery or protracted bleeding; 
HLA-matched single-donor platelets as needed; maximize pulmonary function with 
prompt treatment of asthma and pulmonary infections; influenza, pneumococcal, 
and COVID-19 vaccines; regular moderate exercise; supplemental oxygen for 
advanced-stage pulmonary fibrosis; lung transplantation for end-stage pulmonary 
disease; steroids, other anti-inflammatory agents, and/or Remicade® for 
granulomatous colitis. Immunodeficiency, when present, is lifelong and 
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor responsive, and affected individuals 
benefit from an infection prevention plan. Surveillance: Annual ophthalmologic 
examination including assessment for refractive errors; annual skin examination 
for evidence of sun-induced skin damage (e.g., solar keratoses [premalignant 
lesions], basal cell carcinoma, and squamous cell carcinoma); annual pulmonary 
function testing in those older than age 20 years; colonoscopy in those with 
symptoms of colitis (e.g., cramping, mucoid stools, hematochezia, melena); 
assessment for clinical and laboratory manifestations of immunodeficiency. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Over-the-counter nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
products, aspirin-containing products, and other anticoagulants unless medically 
indicated; activities that increase the risk of bleeding; all tobacco and vaping 
products and inhalation of chemical and physical substances injurious to the 
lungs; unprotected and direct sun exposure. Evaluation of relatives at risk: In 
families with HPS3-, HPS5-, or HPS6-related HPS (milder types of HPS in which 
hypopigmentation and nystagmus may not be clinically evident), it is appropriate 
to clarify the status of apparently asymptomatic at-risk sibs in order to 
identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of 
treatment and preventive measures.
GENETIC COUNSELING: HPS is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If both 
parents are known to be heterozygous for an HPS-causing pathogenic variant, each 
sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, 
a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being 
unaffected and not a carrier. Once the HPS-causing pathogenic variants are 
identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk family 
members, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk, and preimplantation 
genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301464