---
reference_id: "PMID:21680529"
title: Parvovirus B19 infection of human primary erythroid progenitor cells triggers ATR-Chk1 signaling, which promotes B19 virus replication.
authors:
- Luo Y
- Lou S
- Deng X
- Liu Z
- Li Y
- Kleiboeker S
- Qiu J
journal: J Virol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1128/JVI.00831-11
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Parvovirus B19 infection of human primary erythroid progenitor cells triggers ATR-Chk1 signaling, which promotes B19 virus replication.
**Authors:** Luo Y, Lou S, Deng X, Liu Z, Li Y, Kleiboeker S, Qiu J
**Journal:** J Virol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.00831-11](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.00831-11)

## Content

1. J Virol. 2011 Aug;85(16):8046-55. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00831-11. Epub 2011 Jun 15.

Parvovirus B19 infection of human primary erythroid progenitor cells triggers 
ATR-Chk1 signaling, which promotes B19 virus replication.

Luo Y(1), Lou S, Deng X, Liu Z, Li Y, Kleiboeker S, Qiu J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Molecular Genetics and Immunology, University of 
Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA. jqiu@kumc.edu

Human parvovirus B19 (B19V) infection is restricted to erythroid progenitor 
cells of the human bone marrow. Although the mechanism by which the B19V genome 
replicates in these cells has not been studied in great detail, accumulating 
evidence has implicated involvement of the cellular DNA damage machinery in this 
process. Here, we report that, in ex vivo-expanded human erythroid progenitor 
cells, B19V infection induces a broad range of DNA damage responses by 
triggering phosphorylation of all the upstream kinases of each of three repair 
pathways: ATM (ataxia-telangiectasi mutated), ATR (ATM and Rad3 related), and 
DNA-PKcs (DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit). We found that 
phosphorylated ATM, ATR, and DNA-PKcs, and also their downstream substrates and 
components (Chk2, Chk1, and Ku70/Ku80 complex, respectively), localized within 
the B19V replication center. Notably, inhibition of kinase phosphorylation 
(through treatment with either kinase-specific inhibitors or kinase-specific 
shRNAs) revealed requirements for signaling of ATR and DNA-PKcs, but not ATM, in 
virus replication. Inhibition of the ATR substrate Chk1 led to similar levels of 
decreased virus replication, indicating that signaling via the ATR-Chk1 pathway 
is critical to B19V replication. Notably, the cell cycle arrest characteristic 
of B19V infection was not rescued by interference with the activity of any of 
the three repair pathway kinases.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00831-11
PMCID: PMC3147961
PMID: 21680529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]