---
reference_id: "PMID:37073640"
title: "Clinical characteristics, brain magnetic resonance imaging findings and diagnostic approach of the primary central nervous system vasculitis according to angiographic classification."
authors:
- Shimoyama T
- Uchino K
- Calabrese LH
- Hajj-Ali RA
journal: Clin Exp Rheumatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.55563/clinexprheumatol/a9886f
keywords:
- Humans
- Case-Control Studies
- Cerebral Angiography
- Prospective Studies
- Retrospective Studies
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Brain/diagnostic imaging
- "Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/diagnostic imaging"
- Magnetic Resonance Angiography/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical characteristics, brain magnetic resonance imaging findings and diagnostic approach of the primary central nervous system vasculitis according to angiographic classification.
**Authors:** Shimoyama T, Uchino K, Calabrese LH, Hajj-Ali RA
**Journal:** Clin Exp Rheumatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.55563/clinexprheumatol/a9886f](https://doi.org/10.55563/clinexprheumatol/a9886f)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2023 Apr;41(4):800-811. doi: 
10.55563/clinexprheumatol/a9886f. Epub 2023 Apr 5.

Clinical characteristics, brain magnetic resonance imaging findings and 
diagnostic approach of the primary central nervous system vasculitis according 
to angiographic classification.

Shimoyama T(1), Uchino K(1), Calabrese LH(2), Hajj-Ali RA(3).

Author information:
(1)Cerebrovascular Centre, Neurological Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, 
OH, USA.
(2)Department of Rheumatic and Immunologic Disease, Orthopaedic and Rheumatology 
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(3)Department of Rheumatic and Immunologic Disease, Orthopaedic and Rheumatology 
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA. hajjalr@ccf.org.

OBJECTIVES: To determine the diagnostic accuracy for high-resolution vessel wall 
image (HR-VWI) and brain biopsy according to angiographical classification in 
patients with primary central nervous system vasculitis (PCNSV).
METHODS: We extracted the patients with PCNSV who underwent the complete brain 
MRI protocol and cerebral vascular image from Cleveland Clinic prospective CNS 
vasculopathy Bioregistry. The large-medium vessel variant (LMVV) was defined as 
patients with cerebral vasculature indicating vasculitis in proximal or middle 
arterial segments, whereas vessel involvements in smaller distal branches or 
normal angiography were considered as the small vessel variant (SVV). We 
compared clinical demographics, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings, and 
diagnostic approaches between two variants.
RESULTS: In this case-control study that included 34 PCNSV patients, the LMVV 
group comprised a total of 11 patients (32.4%), and 23 patients (67.6%) were 
classified as the SVV group. The LMVV had more strong/concentric vessel wall 
enhancement on HR-VWI (LMVV: 90% (9/10) vs. SVV: 7.1% (1/14), p<0.001). By 
contrast, meningeal/parenchymal contrast enhancement lesion was more frequently 
observed in the SVV group (p=0.006). The majority of SVV was diagnosed by brain 
biopsy (SVV: 78.3% vs. LMVV: 30.8%, p=0.022). The diagnostic accuracy of the 
brain biopsy was 100% (18/18) in SVV and 57.1% (4/7) in LMVV, respectively 
(p=0.015).
CONCLUSIONS: Diagnostic approach for PCNSV differs concerning the affected 
vessel size. HR-VWI is a useful imaging modality for the diagnosis of LMVV. 
Brain biopsy remains the gold standard for proving PCNSV with SVV but is still 
positive in almost one-third of LMVV.

DOI: 10.55563/clinexprheumatol/a9886f
PMID: 37073640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]