---
reference_id: "PMID:18514052"
title: "[Amyloidosis AA]."
authors:
- Stankovic K
- Grateau G
journal: Nephrol Ther
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.nephro.2008.02.002
keywords:
- "Amyloidosis/epidemiology, pathology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Autopsy
- Humans
- Inflammation
- Serum Amyloid A Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Amyloidosis AA].
**Authors:** Stankovic K, Grateau G
**Journal:** Nephrol Ther (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nephro.2008.02.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nephro.2008.02.002)

## Content

1. Nephrol Ther. 2008 Jul;4(4):281-7. doi: 10.1016/j.nephro.2008.02.002. Epub
2008  Jun 2.

[Amyloidosis AA].

[Article in French]

Stankovic K(1), Grateau G.

Author information:
(1)Service de Médecine Interne, Hôpital Tenon, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de 
Paris (AP-HP), Paris Cedex 20, France.

Amyloidosis remains one of the three major types of multisystemic amyloidosis, 
with immunoglobulinic (AL) and hereditary varieties. Recently, however, its 
incidence has been decreasing in Western countries. Inflammatory disorders are 
currently the major causes of amyloid-associated (AA) amyloidosis; first of all 
it is rheumatoid arthritis, then ankylosing spondylarthropathy and 
auto-inflammatory syndromes. Some tumours may lead to amyloidosis, including 
Castleman's disease. Complete surgery can result in regression of amyloid. It is 
not exactly known why some patients develop a progressive amyloidosis, whereas 
others do not. A permanent acute phase response, ideally evaluated with serial 
measurement of serum protein SAA, the precursor of the AA protein deposited in 
tissues, seems to be a prerequisite to the development of inflammatory (AA) 
amyloidosis. Genetic factors have however been recently emphasized. Nephropathy 
is the main clinical manifestation of amyloidosis. Serial search for proteinuria 
and serum creatinine measurement remain quite useful for detecting the first 
sign of renal impairment during chronic inflammatory disorders. A thorough 
diagnosis of AA amyloidosis deserves to gather whole clinical and pathological 
data, including immunohistochemistry. Some pitfalls exist and another type of 
amyloidosis should not be misdiagnosed as the AA variety. Ultimate renal failure 
and gut involvement with denutrition account for the persistent poor prognosis 
of AA amyloidosis. Current treatment aim at decreasing the inflammatory 
response; drugs targeting other steps of amyloid deposition are currently 
developed.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nephro.2008.02.002
PMID: 18514052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]