---
reference_id: "PMID:39519337"
title: "Neuroinflammatory Proteins in Huntington's Disease: Insights into Mechanisms, Diagnosis, and Therapeutic Implications."
authors:
- Li X
- Tong H
- Xu S
- Zhou G
- Yang T
- Yin S
- Yang S
- Li X
- Li S
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms252111787
keywords:
- "Huntington Disease/metabolism, diagnosis, therapy, genetics, pathology, immunology"
- Humans
- Animals
- Neuroinflammatory Diseases/metabolism
- Biomarkers
- Microglia/metabolism
- Inflammation/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Astrocytes/metabolism
- "Huntingtin Protein/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuroinflammatory Proteins in Huntington's Disease: Insights into Mechanisms, Diagnosis, and Therapeutic Implications.
**Authors:** Li X, Tong H, Xu S, Zhou G, Yang T, Yin S, Yang S, Li X, Li S
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms252111787](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms252111787)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Nov 2;25(21):11787. doi: 10.3390/ijms252111787.

Neuroinflammatory Proteins in Huntington's Disease: Insights into Mechanisms, 
Diagnosis, and Therapeutic Implications.

Li X(1), Tong H(1)(2), Xu S(1), Zhou G(1), Yang T(1), Yin S(1), Yang S(1), Li 
X(1), Li S(1).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Key Laboratory of Non-Human Primate Research, Key Laboratory of CNS 
Regeneration (Ministry of Education), Guangdong-Hongkong-Macau Institute of CNS 
Regeneration, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan 
University, Guangzhou 510630, China.

Huntington's disease (HD) is a hereditary neurodegenerative disorder caused by a 
CAG tract expansion in the huntingtin gene (HTT). HD is characterized by 
involuntary movements, cognitive decline, and behavioral changes. 
Pathologically, patients with HD show selective striatal neuronal vulnerability 
at the early disease stage, although the mutant protein is ubiquitously 
expressed. Activation of the immune system and glial cell-mediated 
neuroinflammatory responses are early pathological features and have been found 
in all neurodegenerative diseases (NDDs), including HD. However, the role of 
inflammation in HD, as well as its therapeutic significance, has been less 
extensively studied compared to other NDDs. This review highlights the 
significantly elevated levels of inflammatory proteins and cellular markers 
observed in various HD animal models and HD patient tissues, emphasizing the 
critical roles of microglia, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes in mediating 
neuroinflammation in HD. Moreover, it expands on recent discoveries related to 
the peripheral immune system's involvement in HD. Although current 
immunomodulatory treatments and inflammatory biomarkers for adjunctive diagnosis 
in HD are limited, targeting inflammation in combination with other therapies, 
along with comprehensive personalized treatment approaches, shows promising 
therapeutic potential.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms252111787
PMCID: PMC11546928
PMID: 39519337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.