---
reference_id: "PMID:29979900"
title: "Pharmacological resources, diagnostic approach and coordination of care in joint hypermobility-related disorders."
authors:
- Baban A
- Castori M
journal: Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1080/17512433.2018.1497973
keywords:
- Animals
- Cooperative Behavior
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- "Joint Instability/diagnosis, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Pain/etiology
- Pain Management/methods
- Precision Medicine/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pharmacological resources, diagnostic approach and coordination of care in joint hypermobility-related disorders.
**Authors:** Baban A, Castori M
**Journal:** Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1080/17512433.2018.1497973](https://doi.org/10.1080/17512433.2018.1497973)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2018 Jul;11(7):689-703. doi:
10.1080/17512433.2018.1497973. Epub 2018 Jul 19.

Pharmacological resources, diagnostic approach and coordination of care in joint
hypermobility-related disorders.

Baban A(1), Castori M(2).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Pediatric Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery , IRCCS-Ospedale
Pediatrico Bambino Gesù , Rome , Italy.
(2)b Division of Medical Genetics , IRCCS-Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza , San
Giovanni Rotondo , FG , Italy.

Joint hypermobility (JH) is the hallmark of many hereditary soft connective
tissue disorders, including Ehlers-Danlos syndromes and related disorders,
disorders of the TGFβ-pathway, lateral meningocele syndrome, arterial tortuosity
syndrome, and cutis laxa syndromes. Contemporary practice separates individuals
with isolated, non-syndromic JH from patients with Mendelian syndromes and those
with hypermobility spectrum disorders. The latter is a new nosologic entity
grouping together individuals with JH and related musculoskeletal
manifestations, but lacking inclusion criteria for well-defined and/or
single-gene disorders. Area covered: Nomenclature of JH and JH-related disorders
are summarized on a practically oriented perspective. Critical areas of clinical
management comprise pain; cardiovascular and respiratory issues; fatigue and
dysautonomia; bone fragility; and capillary, skin and soft tissue fragility.
Medical management stands on low-evidence data. Ongoing preclinical and clinical
studies are aimed to reach a more personalized pharmacological approach to the
management of the cardiovascular risk, musculoskeletal pain, and reduced bone
mass. Expert commentary: Correct classification of patients with JH-related
disorders needs a systematic approach, in which a wide array of molecular tests
should be intermingled with strong clinical competences in highly specialized
settings. A multispecialty, hierarchical approach should be encouraged for
optimal coordination of care in systemic phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1080/17512433.2018.1497973
PMID: 29979900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
