---
reference_id: "PMID:38232988"
title: "Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease: illustrative cases and literature review."
authors:
- Lechartier B
- Boucly A
- Solinas S
- Gopalan D
- Dorfmüller P
- Radonic T
- Sitbon O
- Montani D
journal: Eur Respir Rev
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1183/16000617.0156-2023
keywords:
- Humans
- "Pulmonary Veno-Occlusive Disease/etiology, genetics"
- Lung/diagnostic imaging
- Familial Primary Pulmonary Hypertension
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed/methods"
- Lung Transplantation/adverse effects
- Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease: illustrative cases and literature review.
**Authors:** Lechartier B, Boucly A, Solinas S, Gopalan D, Dorfmüller P, Radonic T, Sitbon O, Montani D
**Journal:** Eur Respir Rev (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1183/16000617.0156-2023](https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0156-2023)

## Content

1. Eur Respir Rev. 2024 Jan 17;33(171):230156. doi: 10.1183/16000617.0156-2023. 
Print 2024 Jan 31.

Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease: illustrative cases and literature review.

Lechartier B(1)(2)(3)(4), Boucly A(1)(2)(3), Solinas S(1)(2)(3), Gopalan D(5), 
Dorfmüller P(6)(7), Radonic T(8), Sitbon O(1)(2)(3), Montani D(9)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Department of Respiratory 
and Intensive Care Medicine, Pulmonary Hypertension National Referral Center, 
DMU 5 Thorinno, Hôpital Bicêtre, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(2)Université Paris-Saclay, School of Medicine, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(3)INSERM UMR_S 999 "Pulmonary Hypertension: Pathophysiology and Novel 
Therapies", Hôpital Marie Lannelongue, Le Plessis-Robinson, France.
(4)Respiratory Division, Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV), Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(5)Department of Radiology, Imperial College Hospital NHS Trust, London, UK.
(6)Institut für Pathologie, Universitätsklinikum Giessen/Marburg, Giessen, 
Germany.
(7)Deutsches Zentrum für Lungenforschung (DZL), Giessen, Germany.
(8)Amsterdam UMC location Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Department of Pathology, 
Boelelaan Amsterdam, The Netherlands Cancer Centre Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(9)Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Department of Respiratory 
and Intensive Care Medicine, Pulmonary Hypertension National Referral Center, 
DMU 5 Thorinno, Hôpital Bicêtre, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France 
david.montani@aphp.fr.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1183/16000617.0237-2023.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1183/16000617.0138-2023.
    doi: 10.1183/16000617.0119-2023.
    doi: 10.1183/16000617.0149-2023.

Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease (PVOD), also known as "pulmonary arterial 
hypertension (PAH) with overt features of venous/capillary involvement", is a 
rare cause of PAH characterised by substantial small pulmonary vein and 
capillary involvement, leading to increased pulmonary vascular resistance and 
right ventricular failure. Environmental risk factors have been associated with 
the development of PVOD, such as occupational exposure to organic solvents and 
chemotherapy, notably mitomycin. PVOD may also be associated with a mutation in 
the EIF2AK4 gene in heritable forms of disease. Distinguishing PVOD from PAH is 
critical for guiding appropriate management. Chest computed tomography typically 
displays interlobular septal thickening, ground-glass opacities and mediastinal 
lymphadenopathy. Life-threatening pulmonary oedema is a complication of 
pulmonary vasodilator therapy that can occur with any class of PAH drugs in 
PVOD. Early referral to a lung transplant centre is essential due to the poor 
response to therapy when compared with other forms of PAH. Histopathological 
analysis of lung explants reveals microvascular remodelling with typical fibrous 
veno-occlusive lesions. This review covers the main features distinguishing PVOD 
from PAH and two clinical cases that illustrate the challenges of PVOD 
management.

Copyright ©The authors 2024.

DOI: 10.1183/16000617.0156-2023
PMCID: PMC10792437
PMID: 38232988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: B. Lechartier reports 
travel support from Janssen and advisory board participation with MSD, outside 
the submitted work. A. Boucly reports grants from Acceleron, Janssen and MSD; 
lecture honoraria from Janssen, MSD, AOP Orphan and Ferrer; and travel support 
from Janssen, MSD and Ferrer, outside the submitted work. D. Montani reports 
grants from Acceleron, Janssen and MSD; consulting fees from Acceleron, Merck 
MSD, Janssen and Ferrer; and lecture honoraria from Bayer, Janssen, Boehringer, 
Chiesi, GSK, Ferrer and Merck MSD, outside the submitted work. All other authors 
have nothing to disclose.