---
reference_id: "PMID:35411967"
title: Heterozygous PNPT1 Variants Cause Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 25.
authors:
- Barbier M
- Bahlo M
- Pennisi A
- Jacoupy M
- Tankard RM
- Ewenczyk C
- Davies KC
- Lino-Coulon P
- Colace C
- Rafehi H
- Auger N
- Ansell BRE
- van der Stelt I
- Howell KB
- Coutelier M
- Amor DJ
- Mundwiller E
- Guillot-Noël L
- Storey E
- Gardner RJM
- Wallis MJ
- Brusco A
- Corti O
- Rötig A
- Leventer RJ
- Brice A
- Delatycki MB
- Stevanin G
- Lockhart PJ
- Durr A
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/ana.26366
keywords:
- Ataxia
- Australia
- Cerebellar Ataxia
- Exoribonucleases
- France
- Humans
- Interferon Type I/genetics
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, pathology"
- Mitochondrial Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heterozygous PNPT1 Variants Cause Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 25.
**Authors:** Barbier M, Bahlo M, Pennisi A, Jacoupy M, Tankard RM, Ewenczyk C, Davies KC, Lino-Coulon P, Colace C, Rafehi H, Auger N, Ansell BRE, van der Stelt I, Howell KB, Coutelier M, Amor DJ, Mundwiller E, Guillot-Noël L, Storey E, Gardner RJM, Wallis MJ, Brusco A, Corti O, Rötig A, Leventer RJ, Brice A, Delatycki MB, Stevanin G, Lockhart PJ, Durr A
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.26366](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.26366)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2022 Jul;92(1):122-137. doi: 10.1002/ana.26366. Epub 2022 May 7.

Heterozygous PNPT1 Variants Cause Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 25.

Barbier M(#)(1), Bahlo M(#)(2)(3), Pennisi A(4)(5), Jacoupy M(1), Tankard 
RM(2)(3), Ewenczyk C(1), Davies KC(6)(7), Lino-Coulon P(1), Colace C(1), Rafehi 
H(2)(3), Auger N(1)(8), Ansell BRE(2)(3), van der Stelt I(2)(3)(9), Howell 
KB(7)(10)(11), Coutelier M(1)(8), Amor DJ(7)(11), Mundwiller E(1), Guillot-Noël 
L(1)(8), Storey E(12), Gardner RJM(13), Wallis MJ(14)(15), Brusco A(16), Corti 
O(1), Rötig A(4)(5), Leventer RJ(7)(10)(11), Brice A(1), Delatycki MB(6)(7)(17), 
Stevanin G(1)(8), Lockhart PJ(6)(7), Durr A(1).

Author information:
(1)Sorbonne Université, Institut du Cerveau-Paris Brain Institute-ICM, Inserm, 
CNRS, APHP, Hôpital de la Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(2)Population Health and Immunity Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute 
of Medical Research, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(3)Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia.
(4)Necker Hospital, APHP, Reference Center for Mitochondrial Diseases, Genetics 
Department, Institut Imagine, University of Paris, Paris, France.
(5)Inserm UMR_S1163, Institut Imagine, Paris, France.
(6)Bruce Lefroy Centre, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia.
(7)Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia.
(8)Paris Sciences Lettres Research University, EPHE, Paris, France.
(9)Donders Centre for Neuroscience, Faculty of Science, Radboud University, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(10)Department of Neurology, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia.
(11)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(12)School of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, Monash University, 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(13)Clinical Genetics Group, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(14)Clinical Genetics Service, Austin Health, Melbourne, Australia; Department 
of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Austin Health, Melbourne, Australia.
(15)School of Medicine and Menzies Institute for Medical Research, University of 
Tasmania, Hobart, Tasmania, Australia.
(16)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Torino, Torino, Italy.
(17)Victorian Clinical Genetics Service, Melbourne, Australia.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVE: Dominant spinocerebellar ataxias (SCA) are characterized by genetic 
heterogeneity. Some mapped and named loci remain without a causal gene 
identified. Here we applied next generation sequencing (NGS) to uncover the 
genetic etiology of the SCA25 locus.
METHODS: Whole-exome and whole-genome sequencing were performed in families 
linked to SCA25, including the French family in which the SCA25 locus was 
originally mapped. Whole exome sequence data were interrogated in a cohort of 
796 ataxia patients of unknown etiology.
RESULTS: The SCA25 phenotype spans a slowly evolving sensory and cerebellar 
ataxia, in most cases attributed to ganglionopathy. A pathogenic variant causing 
exon skipping was identified in the gene encoding Polyribonucleotide 
Nucleotidyltransferase PNPase 1 (PNPT1) located in the SCA25 linkage interval. A 
second splice variant in PNPT1 was detected in a large Australian family with a 
dominant ataxia also mapping to SCA25. An additional nonsense variant was 
detected in an unrelated individual with ataxia. Both nonsense and splice 
heterozygous variants result in premature stop codons, all located in the 
S1-domain of PNPase. In addition, an elevated type I interferon response was 
observed in blood from all affected heterozygous carriers tested. PNPase notably 
prevents the abnormal accumulation of double-stranded mtRNAs in the mitochondria 
and leakage into the cytoplasm, associated with triggering a type I interferon 
response.
INTERPRETATION: This study identifies PNPT1 as a new SCA gene, responsible for 
SCA25, and highlights biological links between alterations of mtRNA trafficking, 
interferonopathies and ataxia. ANN NEUROL 2022;92:122-137.

© 2022 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.26366
PMID: 35411967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]