---
reference_id: "PMID:6641761"
title: Hypochondrogenesis.
authors:
- Maroteaux P
- Stanescu V
- Stanescu R
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '1983'
doi: 10.1007/BF00445662
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypochondrogenesis.
**Authors:** Maroteaux P, Stanescu V, Stanescu R
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (1983)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF00445662](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00445662)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 1983 Oct;141(1):14-22. doi: 10.1007/BF00445662.

Hypochondrogenesis.

Maroteaux P, Stanescu V, Stanescu R.

Three clinicopathological observations of a mild form of type II achondrogenesis 
are presented. The cases were selected from a group of 21 similar cases to 
illustrate the various degrees of clinical and roentgenological signs that can 
be found. The cases had various survival periods after birth but not exceeding 
several months. The roentgenological signs were less severe than those of type 
II achondrogenesis. Some cases similar to case no. 3 have roentgenological signs 
very close to spondylo-epiphyseal dysplasia congenita and probably were confused 
previously with the latter. The name of hypochondrogenesis was proposed for 
these cases because the lesions of the growth plate are similar although less 
marked to those found in type II achondrogenesis: high cellularity with poor 
matrix development; irregular columnization and vascular penetration; large 
chondrocytes and even more enlarged lacunae; large sclerotic cartilage canals. 
The clinical and roentgenological diagnosis of hypochondrogenesis could be 
difficult especially in the less severe forms. The delay in vertebral 
ossification, the absence of all the epiphyseal nuclei and of the tarsal bones 
might suggest the diagnosis of hypochondrogenesis, rather than that of 
spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia. The evolution which seems to be always lethal in a 
period of several weeks or months would make the diagnosis still more likely and 
it could be confirmed by histopathological examination. Cases of 
spondylo-epiphyseal dysplasia congenita might have at birth, roentgenological 
signs indistinguishable from those of hypochondrogenesis, as was illustrated by 
case no. 4.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1007/BF00445662
PMID: 6641761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]