---
reference_id: "PMID:34215651"
title: "Whole-exome sequencing reveals a monogenic cause in 56% of individuals with laterality disorders and associated congenital heart defects."
authors:
- Bolkier Y
- Barel O
- Marek-Yagel D
- Atias-Varon D
- Kagan M
- Vardi A
- Mishali D
- Katz U
- Salem Y
- Tirosh-Wagner T
- Jacobson JM
- Raas-Rothschild A
- Chorin O
- Eliyahu A
- Sarouf Y
- Shlomovitz O
- Veber A
- Shalva N
- Javasky E
- Ben Moshe Y
- Staretz-Chacham O
- Rechavi G
- Mane S
- Anikster Y
- Vivante A
- Pode-Shakked B
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-107775
keywords:
- Cohort Studies
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/genetics"
- Heterotaxy Syndrome/genetics
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whole-exome sequencing reveals a monogenic cause in 56% of individuals with laterality disorders and associated congenital heart defects.
**Authors:** Bolkier Y, Barel O, Marek-Yagel D, Atias-Varon D, Kagan M, Vardi A, Mishali D, Katz U, Salem Y, Tirosh-Wagner T, Jacobson JM, Raas-Rothschild A, Chorin O, Eliyahu A, Sarouf Y, Shlomovitz O, Veber A, Shalva N, Javasky E, Ben Moshe Y, Staretz-Chacham O, Rechavi G, Mane S, Anikster Y, Vivante A, Pode-Shakked B
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-107775](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-107775)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2022 Jul;59(7):691-696. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-107775. Epub
2021 Jul 2.

Whole-exome sequencing reveals a monogenic cause in 56% of individuals with
laterality disorders and associated congenital heart defects.

Bolkier Y(#)(1)(2)(3), Barel O(#)(4)(5), Marek-Yagel D(#)(2)(3), Atias-Varon
D(6), Kagan M(2)(6), Vardi A(2)(7), Mishali D(2)(8), Katz U(1)(2), Salem
Y(1)(2), Tirosh-Wagner T(1)(2), Jacobson JM(2)(9), Raas-Rothschild A(2)(10),
Chorin O(2)(10), Eliyahu A(2)(11), Sarouf Y(2)(12), Shlomovitz O(2)(12), Veber
A(3), Shalva N(3), Javasky E(4), Ben Moshe Y(2)(12), Staretz-Chacham O(13),
Rechavi G(2)(5)(14), Mane S(15), Anikster Y(2)(3)(5), Vivante A(2)(12)(16),
Pode-Shakked B(17)(3)(12)(16).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Heart Institute, Edmond and Lily Safra Children's Hospital, Sheba
Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel.
(2)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)Metabolic Disease Unit, Edmond and Lily Safra Children's Hospital, Sheba
Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel.
(4)Genomic Unit, Sheba Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel
Hashomer, Israel.
(5)The Wohl Institute for Translational Medicine, Sheba Medical Center, Tel
Hashomer, Israel.
(6)Pediatric Nephrology Unit, Edmond and Lily Safra Children's Hospital, Sheba
Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel.
(7)Department of Pediatric Cardiac Intensive Care, Edmond and Lily Safra
Children's Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel.
(8)Department of Pediatric Cardiac Intensive Care, Edmond Safra International
Congenital Heart Center, Edmond and Lily Safra Children's Hospital, Sheba
Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel.
(9)Pediatric Imaging Unit, Edmond and Lily Safra Children's Hospital, Sheba
Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel.
(10)The Institute of Rare Diseases, Edmond and Lily Safra Children's Hospital,
Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel.
(11)The Danek Gertner Institute of Human Genetics, Sheba Medical Center, Tel
Hashomer, Israel.
(12)Department of Pediatrics B, Edmond and Lily Safra Children's Hospital, Sheba
Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel.
(13)Metabolic Clinic, Division of Pediatrics, Soroka Medical Center, Ben-Gurion
University, Beer Sheva, Israel.
(14)Sheba Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel.
(15)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA.
(16)Talpiot Medical Leadership Program, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer,
Israel.
(17)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel
ben_pode@hotmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The molecular basis of heterotaxy and congenital heart malformations
associated with disruption of left-right asymmetry is broad and heterogenous,
with over 25 genes implicated in its pathogenesis thus far.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to elucidate the molecular basis of laterality disorders
and associated congenital heart defects in a cohort of 30 unrelated probands of
Arab-Muslim descent, using next-generation sequencing techniques.
METHODS: Detailed clinical phenotyping followed by whole-exome sequencing (WES)
was pursued for each of the probands and their parents (when available). Sanger
sequencing was used for segregation analysis of disease-causing mutations in the
families.
RESULTS: Using WES, we reached a molecular diagnosis for 17 of the 30 probands
(56.7%). Genes known to be associated with heterotaxy and/or primary ciliary
dyskinesia, in which homozygous pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants were
detected, included CFAP53 (CCDC11), CFAP298 (C21orf59), CFAP300, LRRC6, GDF1,
DNAAF1, DNAH5, CCDC39, CCDC40, PKD1L1 and TTC25. Additionally, we detected a
homozygous disease causing mutation in DAND5, as a novel recessive monogenic
cause for heterotaxy in humans. Three additional probands were found to harbour
variants of uncertain significance. These included variants in DNAH6, HYDIN,
CELSR1 and CFAP46.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings contribute to the current knowledge regarding
monogenic causes of heterotaxy and its associated congenital heart defects and
underscore the role of next-generation sequencing techniques in the diagnostic
workup of such patients, and especially among consanguineous families.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2022. No commercial re-use. See rights and
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-107775
PMID: 34215651 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.
