---
reference_id: "PMID:22503633"
title: Mainzer-Saldino syndrome is a ciliopathy caused by IFT140 mutations.
authors:
- Perrault I
- Saunier S
- Hanein S
- Filhol E
- Bizet AA
- Collins F
- Salih MA
- Gerber S
- Delphin N
- Bigot K
- Orssaud C
- Silva E
- Baudouin V
- Oud MM
- Shannon N
- Le Merrer M
- Roche O
- Pietrement C
- Goumid J
- Baumann C
- Bole-Feysot C
- Nitschke P
- Zahrate M
- Beales P
- Arts HH
- Munnich A
- Kaplan J
- Antignac C
- Cormier-Daire V
- Rozet JM
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.03.006
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Alleles
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Cerebellar Ataxia/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Fibroblasts/cytology, metabolism"
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Protein Transport/genetics
- Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mainzer-Saldino syndrome is a ciliopathy caused by IFT140 mutations.
**Authors:** Perrault I, Saunier S, Hanein S, Filhol E, Bizet AA, Collins F, Salih MA, Gerber S, Delphin N, Bigot K, Orssaud C, Silva E, Baudouin V, Oud MM, Shannon N, Le Merrer M, Roche O, Pietrement C, Goumid J, Baumann C, Bole-Feysot C, Nitschke P, Zahrate M, Beales P, Arts HH, Munnich A, Kaplan J, Antignac C, Cormier-Daire V, Rozet JM
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.03.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.03.006)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 May 4;90(5):864-70. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.03.006. Epub
 2012 Apr 12.

Mainzer-Saldino syndrome is a ciliopathy caused by IFT140 mutations.

Perrault I(1), Saunier S, Hanein S, Filhol E, Bizet AA, Collins F, Salih MA, 
Gerber S, Delphin N, Bigot K, Orssaud C, Silva E, Baudouin V, Oud MM, Shannon N, 
Le Merrer M, Roche O, Pietrement C, Goumid J, Baumann C, Bole-Feysot C, Nitschke 
P, Zahrate M, Beales P, Arts HH, Munnich A, Kaplan J, Antignac C, Cormier-Daire 
V, Rozet JM.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U781 & Department of Genetics, Paris Descartes University, Paris, 
France.

Mainzer-Saldino syndrome (MSS) is a rare disorder characterized by phalangeal 
cone-shaped epiphyses, chronic renal failure, and early-onset, severe retinal 
dystrophy. Through a combination of ciliome resequencing and Sanger sequencing, 
we identified IFT140 mutations in six MSS families and in a family with the 
clinically overlapping Jeune syndrome. IFT140 is one of the six currently known 
components of the intraflagellar transport complex A (IFT-A) that regulates 
retrograde protein transport in ciliated cells. Ciliary abundance and 
localization of anterograde IFTs were altered in fibroblasts of affected 
individuals, a result that supports the pivotal role of IFT140 in proper 
development and function of ciliated cells.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.03.006
PMCID: PMC3376548
PMID: 22503633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]