---
reference_id: "PMID:7485151"
title: "Mutations in SOX9, the gene responsible for Campomelic dysplasia and autosomal sex reversal."
authors:
- Kwok C
- Weller PA
- Guioli S
- Foster JW
- Mansour S
- Zuffardi O
- Punnett HH
- Dominguez-Steglich MA
- Brook JD
- Young ID
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1995'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in SOX9, the gene responsible for Campomelic dysplasia and autosomal sex reversal.
**Authors:** Kwok C, Weller PA, Guioli S, Foster JW, Mansour S, Zuffardi O, Punnett HH, Dominguez-Steglich MA, Brook JD, Young ID
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1995)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1995 Nov;57(5):1028-36.

Mutations in SOX9, the gene responsible for Campomelic dysplasia and autosomal 
sex reversal.

Kwok C(1), Weller PA, Guioli S, Foster JW, Mansour S, Zuffardi O, Punnett HH, 
Dominguez-Steglich MA, Brook JD, Young ID, et al.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Am J Hum Genet. 1995 Nov;57(5):998-1001.

Campomelic dysplasia (CD) is a skeletal malformation syndrome frequently 
accompanied by 46,XY sex reversal. A mutation-screening strategy using SSCP was 
employed to identify mutations in SOX9, the chromosome 17q24 gene responsible 
for CD and autosomal sex reversal in man. We have screened seven CD patients 
with no cytologically detectable chromosomal aberrations and two CD patients 
with chromosome 17 rearrangements for mutations in the entire open reading frame 
of SOX9. Five different mutations have been identified in six CD patients: two 
missense mutations in the SOX9 putative DNA binding domain (high mobility group, 
or HMG, box); three frameshift mutations and a splice-acceptor mutation. An 
identical frameshift mutation is found in two unrelated 46,XY patients, one 
exhibiting a male phenotype and the other displaying a female phenotype (XY sex 
reversal). All mutations found affect a single allele, which is consistent with 
a dominant mode of inheritance. No mutations were found in the SOX9 open reading 
frame of two patients with chromosome 17q rearrangements, suggesting that the 
translocations affect SOX9 expression. These findings are consistent with the 
hypothesis that CD results from haploinsufficiency of SOX9.

PMCID: PMC1801368
PMID: 7485151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]