---
reference_id: "PMID:32178602"
title: "Acute flaccid myelitis - has it gone unrecognised in Australian children?"
authors:
- Bao J
- Thorley B
- Elliott EJ
- McIntyre P
- Britton PN
journal: Commun Dis Intell (2018)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.33321/cdi.2020.44.22
keywords:
- Australia/epidemiology
- "Central Nervous System Viral Diseases/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Child
- Disease Outbreaks
- "Enterovirus D, Human"
- "Enterovirus Infections/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Myelitis/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/diagnosis, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute flaccid myelitis - has it gone unrecognised in Australian children?
**Authors:** Bao J, Thorley B, Elliott EJ, McIntyre P, Britton PN
**Journal:** Commun Dis Intell (2018) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.33321/cdi.2020.44.22](https://doi.org/10.33321/cdi.2020.44.22)

## Content

1. Commun Dis Intell (2018). 2020 Mar 16;44. doi: 10.33321/cdi.2020.44.22.

Acute flaccid myelitis - has it gone unrecognised in Australian children?

Bao J(1), Thorley B(2), Elliott EJ(3), McIntyre P(4), Britton PN(1).

Author information:
(1)Discipline of Child and Adolescent Health, University of Sydney, NSW; The
Children's Hospital at Westmead, NSW.
(2)National Enterovirus Reference Laboratory, the Peter Doherty Institute for
Infection and Immunity, Victoria.
(3)Discipline of Child and Adolescent Health, University of Sydney, NSW; The
Children's Hospital at Westmead, NSW; University of Sydney Faculty of Medicine
and Health and Discipline of Child and Adolescent Health and Australian
Paediatric Surveillance Unit, Kid's Research, Westmead, NSW.
(4)The Children's Hospital at Westmead, NSW; National Centre for Immunisation
Research and Surveillance, Kid's Research, Westmead, NSW; Department of Women's
and Children's Health, University of Otago, Dunedin New Zealand.

We have identified a previously unrecognised cluster of a newly recognised
condition - acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) - among acute flaccid paralysis (AFP)
cases identified by the Australian Paediatric Active Enhanced Disease
Surveillance Network (PAEDS) 2007-2017. In the 12 months before and after
detection of enterovirus D68 (EV-D68) from a single AFP case in April 2016, 24
of 97 notified cases of AFP were found to be clinically compatible with AFM; of
these 24 cases, ten, clustered in early 2016, met magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) criteria for AFM. Detection of emerging enteroviruses requires collection
of respiratory, cerebrospinal fluid and stool specimens, and should be routine
practice for all AFP cases.

© Commonwealth of Australia CC BY-NC-ND.

DOI: 10.33321/cdi.2020.44.22
PMID: 32178602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
