---
reference_id: "PMID:25677883"
title: "Comparison of Solomon technique with selective laser ablation for twin-twin transfusion syndrome: a systematic review."
authors:
- Dhillon RK
- Hillman SC
- Pounds R
- Morris RK
- Kilby MD
journal: Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/uog.14813
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparison of Solomon technique with selective laser ablation for twin-twin transfusion syndrome: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Dhillon RK, Hillman SC, Pounds R, Morris RK, Kilby MD
**Journal:** Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/uog.14813](https://doi.org/10.1002/uog.14813)

## Content

1. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 2015 Nov;46(5):526-33. doi: 10.1002/uog.14813.

Comparison of Solomon technique with selective laser ablation for twin-twin 
transfusion syndrome: a systematic review.

Dhillon RK(1), Hillman SC(1), Pounds R(2), Morris RK(1)(3), Kilby MD(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Women's & Children's Health, School of Clinical and Experimental 
Medicine, College of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, UK.
(2)Russells Hall Hospital, The Dudley Group NHS Foundation Trust, Dudley, UK.
(3)Fetal Medicine Centre, Birmingham Women's NHS Foundation Trust, Edgbaston, 
Birmingham, UK.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the Solomon and selective techniques for fetoscopic laser 
ablation (FLA) for the treatment of twin-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS) in 
monochorionic-diamniotic twin pregnancies.
METHODS: This was a systematic review conducted in accordance with the PRISMA 
statement. Electronic searches were performed for relevant citations published 
from inception to September 2014. Selected studies included pregnancies 
undergoing FLA for TTTS that reported on recurrence of TTTS, occurrence of twin 
anemia-polycythemia sequence (TAPS) or survival.
RESULTS: From 270 possible citations, three studies were included, two cohort 
studies and one randomized controlled trial (RCT), which directly compared the 
Solomon and selective techniques for FLA. The odds ratios (OR) of recurrent TTTS 
when using the Solomon vs the selective technique in the two cohort studies (n = 
249) were 0.30 (95% CI, 0.00-4.46) and 0.45 (95% CI, 0.07-2.20). The RCT (n = 
274) demonstrated a statistically significant reduction in risk of recurrent 
TTTS with the Solomon technique (OR, 0.21 (95% CI, 0.04-0.98); P = 0.03). The 
ORs for the development of TAPS following the Solomon and the selective 
techniques were 0.20 (95% CI, 0.00-2.46) and 0.61 (95% CI, 0.05-5.53) in the 
cohort studies and 0.16 (95% CI, 0.05-0.49) in the RCT, with statistically 
significant differences for the RCT only (P < 0.001). Observational evidence 
suggested overall better survival with the Solomon technique, which was 
statistically significant for survival of at least one twin. The RCT did not 
demonstrate a significant difference in survival between the two techniques, 
most probably owing to the small sample size and lack of power.
CONCLUSION: This systematic review of observational, comparative cohort and RCT 
data suggests a trend towards a reduction in TAPS and recurrent TTTS and an 
increase in twin survival, with no increase in the occurrence of complications 
or adverse events, when using the Solomon compared to the selective technique 
for the treatment of TTTS. These findings need to be confirmed by an 
appropriately-powered RCT with long-term neurological follow-up.

Copyright © 2015 ISUOG. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/uog.14813
PMID: 25677883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]