---
reference_id: "PMID:20731544"
title: "Molecular contortionism - on the physical limits of serpin 'loop-sheet' polymers."
authors:
- Huntington JA
- Whisstock JC
journal: Biol Chem
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1515/BC.2010.085
keywords:
- Computer Simulation
- "Databases, Protein"
- Humans
- "Models, Molecular"
- Protein Folding
- Protein Interaction Domains and Motifs
- Protein Multimerization
- "Protein Structure, Quaternary"
- Serine Proteinase Inhibitors/chemistry
- Serpins/chemistry
- alpha 1-Antitrypsin/chemistry
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular contortionism - on the physical limits of serpin 'loop-sheet' polymers.
**Authors:** Huntington JA, Whisstock JC
**Journal:** Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1515/BC.2010.085](https://doi.org/10.1515/BC.2010.085)

## Content

1. Biol Chem. 2010 Aug;391(8):973-82. doi: 10.1515/BC.2010.085.

Molecular contortionism - on the physical limits of serpin 'loop-sheet'
polymers.

Huntington JA(1), Whisstock JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research, Cambridge, UK. jah52@cam.ac.uk

Members of the serpin (serine protease inhibitor) superfamily fold into a
metastable conformation that is crucial for proper function. As a consequence,
serpins are susceptible to mutations that cause misfolding and the intracellular
accumulation of pathogenic polymers. The mechanism of serpin polymerisation
remains to be resolved, however, over the past two decades the 'loop-sheet'
hypothesis has gained wide acceptance. In this mechanism the reactive centre
loop of one serpin monomer inserts into the beta-sheet A of another (in trans),
in a manner similar to what is seen for reactive centre loop-cleaved and latent
conformations (in cis). The hypothesis has been refined in response to certain
experimental data, but it has proved difficult to assess the various
propositions without creating molecular models. Here we evaluate the loop-sheet
mechanism by creating models of pentamers of the archetypal serpin
alpha(1)-antitrypsin. We conclude that an inescapable consequence of the
loop-sheet mechanism is polymer compaction and rigidity, properties that are
inconsistent with the 'beads-on-a-string' morphology of polymers obtained from
human tissue. The recent crystal structure of a domain-swapped serpin dimer
suggests an alternative mechanism that is consistent with known polymer
properties, including the requirement of partial unfolding to induce polymer
formation in vitro, and polymerisation from a folding intermediate in vivo.

DOI: 10.1515/BC.2010.085
PMID: 20731544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
