---
reference_id: "PMID:39081229"
title: "Genomic technologies and the diagnosis of 46, XY differences of sex development."
authors:
- Idris F
- Sinclair AH
- Ayers KL
journal: Andrology
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/andr.13708
keywords:
- "Disorder of Sex Development, 46,XY/diagnosis, genetics"
- Genomics/methods
- Humans
- Family Planning Services
- Genetic Testing
- Male
- Female
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genomic technologies and the diagnosis of 46, XY differences of sex development.
**Authors:** Idris F, Sinclair AH, Ayers KL
**Journal:** Andrology (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/andr.13708](https://doi.org/10.1111/andr.13708)

## Content

1. Andrology. 2025 Jul;13(5):1025-1043. doi: 10.1111/andr.13708. Epub 2024 Jul
31.

Genomic technologies and the diagnosis of 46, XY differences of sex development.

Idris F(1)(2), Sinclair AH(1)(2), Ayers KL(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)The Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia.
(2)The Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.

Differences/disorders of sex development can be caused by disruptions to the 
molecular and cellular mechanisms that control development and sex determination 
of the reproductive organs with 1:100 live births affected. Multiple genes are 
associated with 46, XY differences/disorders of sex development that can cause 
varying clinical phenotypes. An accurate genetic diagnosis is essential to guide 
clinical care for individuals with 46, XY differences/disorders of sex 
development and can contribute to family planning. The use of genomics in 
differences/disorders of sex development has grown, with several advances 
employed in genetic diagnosis; however, diagnostic rates have stagnated at less 
than 50% for these conditions. This review will discuss 46, XY 
differences/disorders of sex development, its molecular causes, and the genomic 
technologies currently utilized for diagnosis with focus on reports from the 
last 5 years. We also touch on the challenges in diagnosing 46, XY 
differences/disorders of sex development and discuss new and future technologies 
that promise to improved diagnostic rates for these difficult conditions.

© 2024 The Author(s). Andrology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of 
American Society of Andrology and European Academy of Andrology.

DOI: 10.1111/andr.13708
PMCID: PMC12183017
PMID: 39081229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]