---
reference_id: "PMID:33516773"
title: Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency-associated panniculitis.
authors:
- Franciosi AN
- Ralph J
- "O'Farrell NJ"
- Buckley C
- Gulmann C
- "O'Kane M"
- Carroll TP
- McElvaney NG
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2021.01.074
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency-associated panniculitis.
**Authors:** Franciosi AN, Ralph J, O'Farrell NJ, Buckley C, Gulmann C, O'Kane M, Carroll TP, McElvaney NG
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaad.2021.01.074](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2021.01.074)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2022 Oct;87(4):825-832. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2021.01.074. 
Epub 2021 Jan 29.

Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency-associated panniculitis.

Franciosi AN(1), Ralph J(2), O'Farrell NJ(3), Buckley C(3), Gulmann C(3), O'Kane 
M(2), Carroll TP(4), McElvaney NG(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland; Irish Centre for 
Genetic Lung Disease, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland. 
Electronic address: alessandrofranciosi@rcsi.com.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(3)Department of Histopathology, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(4)Irish Centre for Genetic Lung Disease, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, 
Dublin, Ireland; Alpha-1 Foundation Ireland, Royal College of Surgeons in 
Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.
(5)Department of Medicine, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland; Irish Centre for 
Genetic Lung Disease, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.

Comment in
    J Am Acad Dermatol. 2022 Feb;86(2):e67-e68. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2021.06.897.

BACKGROUND: Panniculitis represents a rare and potentially lethal manifestation 
of alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD). Evidence regarding management is 
limited to case reports and small case series. We sought to clarify typical 
features and investigation of AATD-associated panniculitis and assess the 
evidence regarding therapeutic options.
SEARCH METHODOLOGY: Articles and abstracts published between 1970 and 2020 were 
identified by searches of MEDLINE, PubMed, and secondary searches of references 
from relevant articles using the search terms "panniculitis," "alpha-1," 
"antitrypsin," "deficiency," and "Weber-Christian."
FINDINGS: We identified 117 cases of AATD-associated panniculitis. In 1 series, 
AATD was present in 15% of all cases of biopsy-proven panniculitis. Failure to 
achieve clinical response was seen in all instances of systemic steroid use. 
Dapsone, although effective and accessible, is frequently associated with 
failure to achieve remission. In these instances, intravenous AAT augmentation 
therapy generally resulted in response.
CONCLUSIONS: AATD may be more prevalent among patients presenting with 
panniculitis than previously thought. Patients presenting with panniculitis and 
systemic illness show high mortality risk. Although most cases are associated 
with the severe ZZ-genotype, moderate genotypes may also predispose to 
panniculitis. Dapsone remains the most cost-effective therapeutic option, 
whereas intravenous AAT augmentation remains the most efficacious. Finally, 
glucocorticoids appear ineffective in this setting.

Copyright © 2021 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2021.01.074
PMID: 33516773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest None disclosed.