---
reference_id: "PMID:12534775"
title: "The role of aflatoxins and hepatitis viruses in the etiopathogenesis of hepatocellular carcinoma: A basis for primary prevention in Guinea-Conakry, West Africa."
authors:
- Turner PC
- Sylla A
- Diallo MS
- Castegnaro JJ
- Hall AJ
- Wild CP
journal: J Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1046/j.1440-1746.17.s4.7.x
keywords:
- Aflatoxins/adverse effects
- Animals
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/epidemiology, etiology, prevention & control"
- Female
- Guinea/epidemiology
- Hepatitis Viruses/pathogenicity
- "Liver Neoplasms/epidemiology, etiology, prevention & control"
- Male
- Mice
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of aflatoxins and hepatitis viruses in the etiopathogenesis of hepatocellular carcinoma: A basis for primary prevention in Guinea-Conakry, West Africa.
**Authors:** Turner PC, Sylla A, Diallo MS, Castegnaro JJ, Hall AJ, Wild CP
**Journal:** J Gastroenterol Hepatol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1440-1746.17.s4.7.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1440-1746.17.s4.7.x)

## Content

1. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2002 Dec;17 Suppl:S441-8. doi:
10.1046/j.1440-1746.17.s4.7.x.

The role of aflatoxins and hepatitis viruses in the etiopathogenesis of
hepatocellular carcinoma: A basis for primary prevention in Guinea-Conakry, West
Africa.

Turner PC(1), Sylla A, Diallo MS, Castegnaro JJ, Hall AJ, Wild CP.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Epidemiology Unit, Epidemiology and Health Services Research,
Algernon Firth Building, School of Medicine, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.

Aflatoxins and hepatitis B virus (HBV) are major risk factors for hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) in South-east Asia and Africa, parts of the world where this
cancer is most prevalent. Exposure to both factors is endemic, occurring from
early in life. There is evidence from both epidemiological studies and animal
models that the two factors can act synergistically to increase the risk of HCC,
but the underlying cellular and molecular mechanisms of interaction are as yet
undefined. One possibility suggested by studies in HBV transgenic mice is that
chronic liver injury alters the expression of carcinogen metabolizing enzymes,
thus modulating the level of binding of aflatoxin to DNA. Primary prevention of
HCC in high incidence areas of the world should primarily be focused on
provision of the safe, effective vaccine against HBV. However, measures to
reduce the high levels of aflatoxin exposure, where chronic HBV infection is
currently epidemic, would also significantly contribute to reducing HCC
incidence. In Guinea-Conakry, West Africa, surveys of HBV infection and
aflatoxin exposure have established baseline data for the implementation of a
community-based intervention study. This study will evaluate the effectiveness
of improving the post-harvest processing and storage of the groundnut crop, a
major source of aflatoxins, using aflatoxin-albumin adducts as the outcome
measurement.

Copyright 2002 Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd

DOI: 10.1046/j.1440-1746.17.s4.7.x
PMID: 12534775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
