---
reference_id: "PMID:10353778"
title: Clinical and Molecular genetics of Stickler syndrome.
authors:
- Snead MP
- Yates JR
journal: J Med Genet
year: '1999'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and Molecular genetics of Stickler syndrome.
**Authors:** Snead MP, Yates JR
**Journal:** J Med Genet (1999)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 1999 May;36(5):353-9.

Clinical and Molecular genetics of Stickler syndrome.

Snead MP(1), Yates JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK.

Stickler syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder with characteristic 
ophthalmological and orofacial features, deafness, and arthritis. Abnormalities 
of vitreous gel architecture are a pathognomonic feature, usually associated 
with high myopia which is congenital and non-progressive. There is a substantial 
risk of retinal detachment. Less common ophthalmological features include 
paravascular pigmented lattice degeneration and cataracts. Non-ocular features 
show great variation in expression. Children with Stickler syndrome typically 
have a flat midface with depressed nasal bridge, short nose, anteverted nares, 
and micrognathia. These features can become less pronounced with age. Midline 
clefting, if present, ranges in severity from a cleft of the soft palate to 
Pierre-Robin sequence. There is joint hypermobility which declines with age. 
Osteoarthritis develops typically in the third or fourth decade. Mild 
spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia is often apparent radiologically. Sensorineural 
deafness with high tone loss may be asymptomatic or mild. Occasional findings 
include slender extremities and long fingers. Stature and intellect are usually 
normal. Mitral valve prolapse was reported to be a common finding in one series 
but not in our experience. The majority of families with Stickler syndrome have 
mutations in the COL2A1 gene and show the characteristic type 1 vitreous 
phenotype. The remainder with the type 2 vitreous phenotype have mutations in 
COL11A1 or other loci yet to be identified. Mutations in COL111A2 can give rise 
to a syndrome with the systemic features of Stickler syndrome but no 
ophthalmological abnormality.

PMCID: PMC1734362
PMID: 10353778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]