---
reference_id: "PMID:15347561"
title: "A case control etiologic study of sarcoidosis: environmental and occupational risk factors."
authors:
- Newman LS
- Rose CS
- Bresnitz EA
- Rossman MD
- Barnard J
- Frederick M
- Terrin ML
- Weinberger SE
- Moller DR
- McLennan G
- Hunninghake G
- DePalo L
- Baughman RP
- Iannuzzi MC
- Judson MA
- Knatterud GL
- Thompson BW
- Teirstein AS
- Yeager H Jr
- Johns CJ
- Rabin DL
- Rybicki BA
- Cherniack R
- ACCESS Research Group
journal: Am J Respir Crit Care Med
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1164/rccm.200402-249OC
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Case-Control Studies
- Environmental Exposure/adverse effects
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Multivariate Analysis
- Occupational Exposure/adverse effects
- Risk Factors
- Sarcoidosis/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case control etiologic study of sarcoidosis: environmental and occupational risk factors.
**Authors:** Newman LS, Rose CS, Bresnitz EA, Rossman MD, Barnard J, Frederick M, Terrin ML, Weinberger SE, Moller DR, McLennan G, Hunninghake G, DePalo L, Baughman RP, Iannuzzi MC, Judson MA, Knatterud GL, Thompson BW, Teirstein AS, Yeager H Jr, Johns CJ, Rabin DL, Rybicki BA, Cherniack R, ACCESS Research Group
**Journal:** Am J Respir Crit Care Med (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1164/rccm.200402-249OC](https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.200402-249OC)

## Content

1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2004 Dec 15;170(12):1324-30. doi:
10.1164/rccm.200402-249OC. Epub 2004 Sep 3.

A case control etiologic study of sarcoidosis: environmental and occupational
risk factors.

Newman LS(1), Rose CS, Bresnitz EA, Rossman MD, Barnard J, Frederick M, Terrin
ML, Weinberger SE, Moller DR, McLennan G, Hunninghake G, DePalo L, Baughman RP,
Iannuzzi MC, Judson MA, Knatterud GL, Thompson BW, Teirstein AS, Yeager H Jr,
Johns CJ, Rabin DL, Rybicki BA, Cherniack R; ACCESS Research Group.

Author information:
(1)National Jewish Medical and Research Center and Univresity of Colorado Health
Scienes Center, Denver, CO 80206, USA. newmanL@njc.org

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2004 Dec 15;170(12):1268-9. doi:
10.1164/rccm.2409006.

Past research suggests that environmental factors may be associated with
sarcoidosis risk. We conducted a case control study to test a priori hypotheses
that environmental and occupational exposures are associated with sarcoidosis.
Ten centers recruited 706 newly diagnosed patients with sarcoidosis and an equal
number of age-, race-, and sex-matched control subjects. Interviewers
administered questionnaires containing questions regarding occupational and
nonoccupational exposures that we assessed in univariable and multivariable
analyses. We observed positive associations between sarcoidosis and specific
occupations (e.g., agricultural employment, odds ratio [OR] 1.46, confidence
interval [CI] 1.13-1.89), exposures (e.g., insecticides at work, OR 1.52, CI
1.14-2.04, and work environments with mold/mildew exposures [environments with
possible exposures to microbial bioaerosols], OR 1.61, CI 1.13-2.31). A history
of ever smoking cigarettes was less frequent among cases than control subjects
(OR 0.62, CI 0.50-0.77). In multivariable modeling, we observed elevated ORs for
work in areas with musty odors (OR 1.62, CI 1.24-2.11) and with occupational
exposure to insecticides (OR 1.61, CI 1.13-2.28), and a decreased OR related to
ever smoking cigarettes (OR 0.65, CI 0.51-0.82). The study did not identify a
single, predominant cause of sarcoidosis. We identified several exposures
associated with sarcoidosis risk, including insecticides, agricultural
employment, and microbial bioaerosols.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200402-249OC
PMID: 15347561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
