---
reference_id: "PMID:22878961"
title: Targeted deletion of Klotho in kidney distal tubule disrupts mineral metabolism.
authors:
- Olauson H
- Lindberg K
- Amin R
- Jia T
- Wernerson A
- Andersson G
- Larsson TE
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2012010048
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeted deletion of Klotho in kidney distal tubule disrupts mineral metabolism.
**Authors:** Olauson H, Lindberg K, Amin R, Jia T, Wernerson A, Andersson G, Larsson TE
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2012010048](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2012010048)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012 Oct;23(10):1641-51. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2012010048. Epub 
2012 Aug 9.

Targeted deletion of Klotho in kidney distal tubule disrupts mineral metabolism.

Olauson H(1), Lindberg K, Amin R, Jia T, Wernerson A, Andersson G, Larsson TE.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Center, Sixth Floor, Novumhuset, Karolinska University 
Hospital in Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Nephrol. 2012 Oct;8(10):553. doi: 10.1038/nrneph.2012.174.
    J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012 Oct;23(10):1599-601. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2012080848.

Renal Klotho controls mineral metabolism by directly modulating tubular 
reabsorption of phosphate and calcium and by acting as a co-receptor for the 
phosphaturic and vitamin D-regulating hormone fibroblast growth factor-23 
(FGF23). Klotho null mice have a markedly abnormal phenotype. We sought to 
determine effects of renal-specific and partial deletion of Klotho to facilitate 
investigation of its roles in health and disease. We generated a mouse model 
with partial deletion of Klotho in distal tubular segments (Ksp-KL(-/-)). In 
contrast to Klotho null mice, Ksp-KL(-/-) mice were fertile, had a normal gross 
phenotype, and did not have vascular or tubular calcification on renal 
histology. However, Ksp-KL(-/-) mice were hyperphosphatemic with elevated FGF23 
levels and abundant expression of the sodium-phosphate cotransporter Npt2a at 
the brush border membrane. Serum calcium and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) levels 
were normal but parathyroid hormone levels were decreased. TRPV5 protein was 
reduced with a parallel mild increase in urinary calcium excretion. Renal 
expression of vitamin D regulatory enzymes and vitamin D receptor was higher in 
Ksp-KL(-/-) mice than controls, suggesting increased turnover of vitamin D 
metabolites and a functional increase in vitamin D signaling. There was a 
threshold effect of residual renal Klotho expression on FGF23: deletion of >70% 
of Klotho resulted in FGF23 levels 30-250 times higher than in wild-type mice. A 
subgroup of Ksp-KL(-/-) mice with normal phosphate levels had elevated FGF23, 
suggesting a Klotho-derived renal-bone feedback loop. Taken together, renal 
FGF23-Klotho signaling, which is disrupted in CKD, is essential for homeostatic 
control of mineral metabolism.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2012010048
PMCID: PMC3458458
PMID: 22878961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]