---
reference_id: "PMID:30950647"
title: Psychological Sequelae in Family Caregivers of Critically III Intensive Care Unit Patients. A Systematic Review.
authors:
- Johnson CC
- Suchyta MR
- Darowski ES
- Collar EM
- Kiehl AL
- Van J
- Jackson JC
- Hopkins RO
journal: Ann Am Thorac Soc
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201808-540SR
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Psychological Sequelae in Family Caregivers of Critically III Intensive Care Unit Patients. A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Johnson CC, Suchyta MR, Darowski ES, Collar EM, Kiehl AL, Van J, Jackson JC, Hopkins RO
**Journal:** Ann Am Thorac Soc (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1513/AnnalsATS.201808-540SR](https://doi.org/10.1513/AnnalsATS.201808-540SR)

## Content

1. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2019 Jul;16(7):894-909. doi:
10.1513/AnnalsATS.201808-540SR.

Psychological Sequelae in Family Caregivers of Critically III Intensive Care 
Unit Patients. A Systematic Review.

Johnson CC(1)(2), Suchyta MR(3), Darowski ES(4), Collar EM(2)(5), Kiehl 
AL(2)(5), Van J(2)(5), Jackson JC(2)(5)(6)(7), Hopkins RO(8)(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)1 C.W. Bill Young Veterans' Affairs Medical Center, Bay Pines VA Healthcare 
System, Bay Pines, Florida.
(2)2 Center for Critical Illness, Brain Dysfunction, and Survivorship.
(3)3 Instacare, Intermountain Health Care, Salt Lake City, Utah.
(4)4 Harold B. Lee Library.
(5)5 Division of Allergy, Pulmonary, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, and.
(6)6 Department of Psychiatry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 
Nashville, Tennessee.
(7)7 Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, VA Tennessee Valley 
Healthcare System, Nashville, Tennessee.
(8)8 Psychology Department, and.
(9)9 Neuroscience Center, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
(10)10 Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Intermountain Medical Center, Murray, Utah; and.
(11)11 Center for Humanizing Critical Care, Intermountain Health Care, Murray, 
Utah.

Rationale: Family members of critically ill patients hospitalized in the 
intensive care unit (ICU) often become caregivers, and they are at risk to 
develop adverse psychological outcomes. There is a need to understand the 
psychological impact of critical illness on family caregivers. Objectives: The 
aim of this systematic review is to document the prevalence of depression, 
anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in family caregivers of 
critically ill patients and identify potential risk factors for psychological 
outcomes to inform clinical and future research recommendations. Methods: A 
literature search for psychological outcomes for family caregivers of critically 
ill patients was conducted. A total of 1,148 studies from PsycINFO, CINAHL, Web 
of Science, SCOPUS, and Medline were identified. Results: Forty studies met 
inclusion criteria and were included in the review. The prevalence of 
psychological outcomes in family caregivers ranged from 4% to 94% for 
depression, 2% to 80% for anxiety, and 3% to 62% for PTSD. Caregiver depression, 
anxiety, and PTSD decreased in most studies that assessed longitudinal outcomes. 
Common risk factors identified for adverse psychological outcomes included 
younger caregiver age, caregiver relationship to the patient, lower 
socioeconomic status, and female sex. Conclusions: The prevalence of depression, 
anxiety, and PTSD varies greatly across studies of family caregivers of 
critically ill patients. This finding highlights the need for more systematic 
investigations of psychological outcomes and the implementation of clinical 
interventions to prevent or reduce depression, anxiety, and PTSD in family 
caregivers of critically ill patients.

DOI: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201808-540SR
PMID: 30950647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]