---
reference_id: "PMID:11902552"
title: "Lymph-node metastases in patients with melanoma: what is the optimum management?"
authors:
- Fife K
- Thompson JF
journal: Lancet Oncol
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(01)00519-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lymph-node metastases in patients with melanoma: what is the optimum management?
**Authors:** Fife K, Thompson JF
**Journal:** Lancet Oncol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1470-2045(01)00519-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(01)00519-8)

## Content

1. Lancet Oncol. 2001 Oct;2(10):614-21. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(01)00519-8.

Lymph-node metastases in patients with melanoma: what is the optimum management?

Fife K(1), Thompson JF.

Author information:
(1)Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK.

Lymph-node metastasis is an indicator of poor prognosis for patients with 
melanoma. The management of regional nodes is controversial, with continuing 
debate about whether surgery or radiotherapy of positive lymph nodes improves 
long-term survival or whether nodal involvement is merely a marker of aggressive 
disease. However, there is general agreement that systemic chemotherapy is 
rarely an effective form of management. This review therefore considers surgical 
and radiotherapeutic aspects of lymph-node management in patients with melanoma. 
We discuss regional control and survival after lymph-node surgery in 
retrospective series, randomised trials of elective lymph-node dissection, the 
role of 'sentinel' lymph-node biopsy, radiobiology and radiotherapy 
fractionation issues in melanoma treatment, retrospective studies of adjuvant 
nodal radiotherapy, and finally, randomised trials of adjuvant radiotherapy 
after lymph-node dissection.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(01)00519-8
PMID: 11902552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]