---
reference_id: "PMID:21681015"
title: Genome-wide association studies of asthma.
authors:
- Tamari M
- Tomita K
- Hirota T
journal: Allergol Int
year: '2011'
doi: 10.2332/allergolint.11-RAI-0320
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome-wide association studies of asthma.
**Authors:** Tamari M, Tomita K, Hirota T
**Journal:** Allergol Int (2011)
**DOI:** [10.2332/allergolint.11-RAI-0320](https://doi.org/10.2332/allergolint.11-RAI-0320)

## Content

1. Allergol Int. 2011 Sep;60(3):247-52. doi: 10.2332/allergolint.11-RAI-0320.

Genome-wide association studies of asthma.

Tamari M(1), Tomita K, Hirota T.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Respiratory Diseases, Center for Genomic Medicine, The 
Institute of Physical and Chemical Research, Kanagawa, Japan. 
tamari@src.riken.jp

Bronchial asthma is a common inflammatory disease caused by a combination of 
genetic and environmental factors. To discover the genes and cellular pathways 
underlying asthma, a large number of genetic studies have been conducted. 
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS), which comprehensively assess genes 
related to multifactorial diseases and drug reactivity, have enhanced 
understanding of human diseases. From 2007, GWAS of susceptibility to asthma in 
Caucasian, Mexican, and African-ancestry populations have been conducted and 
several susceptible loci were identified. Recently, much larger consortium-based 
GWAS analyses of collaborative samples with adequate statistical power were 
performed, and the implicated genes suggested a role for communication of 
epithelial damage to the adaptive immune system and activation of airway 
inflammation. Furthermore, GWAS identified candidate loci associated with 
natural variations in lung function, blood eosinophilia and eosinophilic 
esophagitis, which is inflammation of the esophagus with abnormal infiltration 
of eosinophils in an allergic reaction. Comparing GWAS in asthma and these 
clinical phenotypes might help to clarify the mechanisms underlying asthma. 
Pharmacogenomics analyses using GWAS regarding genetic factors related to the 
effectiveness of inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) therapy and inhaled beta(2)- 
adrenergic agonists are ongoing now. Although a more complete collection of 
associated genes and pathways is needed, biologic insights revealed by GWAS 
provide valuable insights into the pathophysiology of asthma and contribute to 
the development of better treatment and preventive strategies.

DOI: 10.2332/allergolint.11-RAI-0320
PMID: 21681015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]