---
reference_id: "PMID:16182595"
title: "Pneumocystis: immune recognition and evasion."
authors:
- Pop SM
- Kolls JK
- Steele C
journal: Int J Biochem Cell Biol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2005.08.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pneumocystis: immune recognition and evasion.
**Authors:** Pop SM, Kolls JK, Steele C
**Journal:** Int J Biochem Cell Biol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biocel.2005.08.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocel.2005.08.010)

## Content

1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2006 Jan;38(1):17-22. doi: 
10.1016/j.biocel.2005.08.010. Epub 2005 Sep 12.

Pneumocystis: immune recognition and evasion.

Pop SM(1), Kolls JK, Steele C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pulmonology, Children's Hospital of 
Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, 
USA.

Pulmonary infection caused by the opportunistic fungal organism Pneumocystis 
continues to be a leading AIDS defining illness. The initiation of highly active 
antiretroviral therapy (HAART) in the HIV-infected population has led to a 
significant reduction in the incidence of Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP), although 
recent trends suggest the incidence has plateaued rather than decreased. Host 
defense against Pneumocystis involves a delicate, concerted balance between the 
inflammatory response and immune-mediated clearance. Innate cellular immunity is 
a cornerstone in this response as it provides the initial recognition event that 
precipitates an immune response, ultimately leading to clearance of the organism 
from the host. This review will focus on carbohydrate moieties found in the 
Pneumocystis cell wall and the immune events that occur following their 
recognition.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biocel.2005.08.010
PMID: 16182595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]