---
reference_id: "PMID:38260573"
title: Mutation of a highly conserved isoleucine residue in loop 2 of several β-coronavirus macrodomains indicates that enhanced ADP-ribose binding is detrimental to infection.
authors:
- Kerr CM
- Pfannenstiel JJ
- Alhammad YM
- "O'Connor JJ"
- Ghimire R
- Shrestha R
- Khattabi R
- Saenjamsai P
- Parthasarathy S
- McDonald PR
- Gao P
- Johnson DK
- More S
- Roy A
- Channappanavar R
- Fehr AR
journal: bioRxiv
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1101/2024.01.03.574082
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation of a highly conserved isoleucine residue in loop 2 of several β-coronavirus macrodomains indicates that enhanced ADP-ribose binding is detrimental to infection.
**Authors:** Kerr CM, Pfannenstiel JJ, Alhammad YM, O'Connor JJ, Ghimire R, Shrestha R, Khattabi R, Saenjamsai P, Parthasarathy S, McDonald PR, Gao P, Johnson DK, More S, Roy A, Channappanavar R, Fehr AR
**Journal:** bioRxiv (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1101/2024.01.03.574082](https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.03.574082)

## Content

1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Jul 12:2024.01.03.574082. doi:
10.1101/2024.01.03.574082.

Mutation of a highly conserved isoleucine residue in loop 2 of several
β-coronavirus macrodomains indicates that enhanced ADP-ribose binding is
detrimental to infection.

Kerr CM(1), Pfannenstiel JJ(1), Alhammad YM(1), O'Connor JJ(1), Ghimire R(2),
Shrestha R(2), Khattabi R(1), Saenjamsai P(1), Parthasarathy S(1), McDonald
PR(3), Gao P(4), Johnson DK(5), More S(3)(6), Roy A(3), Channappanavar R(2)(6),
Fehr AR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas
66045, USA.
(2)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater,
Oklahoma 74078, USA.
(3)High Throughput Screening Laboratory, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas
66047, USA.
(4)Protein Production Group, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas 66047, USA.
(5)Molecular Graphics and Modeling Laboratory and the Computational Chemical
Biology Core, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas 66047, USA.
(6)Oklahoma Center for Respiratory and Infectious Diseases, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Stillwater, Oklahoma 74078, USA.

Update in
    J Virol. 2024 Nov 19;98(11):e0131324. doi: 10.1128/jvi.01313-24.

All coronaviruses (CoVs) encode for a conserved macrodomain (Mac1) located in
nonstructural protein 3 (nsp3). Mac1 is an ADP-ribosylhydrolase that binds and
hydrolyzes mono-ADP-ribose from target proteins. Previous work has shown that
Mac1 is important for virus replication and pathogenesis. Within Mac1, there are
several regions that are highly conserved across CoVs, including the GIF
(glycine-isoleucine-phenylalanine) motif. To determine how the biochemical
activities of these residues impact CoV replication, the isoleucine and the
phenylalanine residues were mutated to alanine (I-A/F-A) in both recombinant
Mac1 proteins and recombinant CoVs, including murine hepatitis virus (MHV),
Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), and severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). The F-A mutant proteins had
ADP-ribose binding and/or hydrolysis defects that led to attenuated replication
and pathogenesis in cell culture and mice. In contrast, the I-A mutations had
normal enzyme activity and enhanced ADP-ribose binding. Despite increased
ADP-ribose binding, I-A mutant MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 were highly attenuated in
both cell culture and mice, indicating that this isoleucine residue acts as a
gate that controls ADP-ribose binding for efficient virus replication. These
results highlight the function of this highly conserved residue and provide
unique insight into how macrodomains control ADP-ribose binding and hydrolysis
to promote viral replication.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.01.03.574082
PMCID: PMC10802294
PMID: 38260573

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no competing interests.
