---
reference_id: "PMID:36332787"
title: "Anemia in myelofibrosis: Current and emerging treatment options."
authors:
- Passamonti F
- Harrison CN
- Mesa RA
- Kiladjian JJ
- Vannucchi AM
- Verstovsek S
journal: Crit Rev Oncol Hematol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2022.103862
keywords:
- Humans
- "Primary Myelofibrosis/complications, therapy"
- Janus Kinase 2
- Quality of Life
- Nitriles/therapeutic use
- "Anemia/therapy, drug therapy"
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anemia in myelofibrosis: Current and emerging treatment options.
**Authors:** Passamonti F, Harrison CN, Mesa RA, Kiladjian JJ, Vannucchi AM, Verstovsek S
**Journal:** Crit Rev Oncol Hematol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.critrevonc.2022.103862](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.critrevonc.2022.103862)

## Content

1. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2022 Dec;180:103862. doi: 
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2022.103862. Epub 2022 Nov 1.

Anemia in myelofibrosis: Current and emerging treatment options.

Passamonti F(1), Harrison CN(2), Mesa RA(3), Kiladjian JJ(4), Vannucchi AM(5), 
Verstovsek S(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Insubria, Varese, Italy. 
Electronic address: francesco.passamonti@unisubria.it.
(2)Guy's and St. Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(3)Mays Cancer Center, UT Health San Antonio Cancer Center, San Antonio, TX, 
USA.
(4)Université Paris Cité, AP-HP, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Centre d'Investigations 
Cliniques, INSERM, CIC1427, Paris, France.
(5)Center of Research and Innovation of Myeloproliferative Neoplasms (CRIMM), 
University of Florence, AOU Careggi, Florence, Italy.
(6)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX, USA.

Myelofibrosis (MF) is a clonal hematologic malignancy with progressive bone 
marrow fibrosis. Clinical manifestations of MF include splenomegaly, 
constitutional symptoms, and anemia, whose pathogenesis is multifactorial and 
largely due to ineffective erythropoiesis and is clinically associated with poor 
quality of life and reduced overall survival. The only curative treatment for MF 
is allogenic stem cell transplantation; however, few patients are eligible. 
Disease management strategies for MF-related anemia have limited effectiveness, 
and Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors may induce or worsen related anemia. Thus, 
there is a significant unmet need for the treatment of patients with MF-related 
anemia. This review summarizes current and emerging treatments for anemia in MF, 
including luspatercept and KER-050 (transforming growth factor-β ligand traps), 
momelotinib and pacritinib (JAK inhibitors), pelabresib (a bromodomain 
extra-terminal domain inhibitor), PRM-151 (an antifibrotic agent), imetelstat (a 
telomerase inhibitor), and navitoclax (a BCL-2/BCL-xL inhibitor). Therapeutic 
combinations with ruxolitinib may offer another treatment approach.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2022.103862
PMID: 36332787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest Francesco 
Passamonti has been a member of a speakers’ bureau for AbbVie, BMS, Celgene, 
Janssen, and Novartis; has consulted for AbbVie, AOP Orphan, BMS, Celgene, 
Janssen, Karyopharma, Kyowa Kirin, MEI Pharma, Novartis, and Roche; and has 
received research grants from BMS. Claire N. Harrison has received honoraria 
from AbbVie, AOP Orphan, BMS, Constellation Pharmaceuticals, CTI BioPharma Corp, 
Janssen, Novartis, and Sierra Oncology; has consulted for AbbVie, AOP Orphan, 
CTI BioPharma Corp, Galecto, Geron, and Sierra Oncology; has received support 
for travel from BMS and Novartis; has been a member of an advisory board for 
Galecto; and has received research grants from BMS, Constellation 
Pharmaceuticals, and Novartis. Ruben A. Mesa has consulted for Constellation 
Pharmaceuticals, La Jolla Pharmaceutical, Novartis, Pharma, and Sierra Oncology; 
and has received research grants from AbbVie, Celgene, Constellation 
Pharmaceuticals, CTI BioPharma Corp, Genotech, Incyte, Mays Cancer Center P30 
Cancer Center Support Grant from the National Cancer Institute (CA054174), 
Promedior, and Samus. Jean-Jacques Kiladjian received honoraria from Novartis; 
and has been a member of an advisory board for AbbVie, AOP Orphan, BMS, Incyte, 
and Novartis. Alessandro M. Vannucchi has been a member of an advisory board for 
AbbVie, AOP Orphan, Blueprint Medicines, Celgene, Incyte, and Novartis; and has 
received lecture fees from AbbVie, AOP Orphan, Blueprint Medicines, BMS, GSK, 
Incyte, and Novartis. Srdan Verstovsek has received research support for the 
conduct of clinical studies from BMS.