---
reference_id: "PMID:19177532"
title: Mutations in MFSD8/CLN7 are a frequent cause of variant-late infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis.
authors:
- Aiello C
- Terracciano A
- Simonati A
- Discepoli G
- Cannelli N
- Claps D
- Crow YJ
- Bianchi M
- Kitzmuller C
- Longo D
- Tavoni A
- Franzoni E
- Tessa A
- Veneselli E
- Boldrini R
- Filocamo M
- Williams RE
- Bertini ES
- Biancheri R
- Carrozzo R
- Mole SE
- Santorelli FM
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1002/humu.20975
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Gene Frequency
- Humans
- Italy
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Membrane Transport Proteins/genetics
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- "Neuronal Ceroid-Lipofuscinoses/genetics, pathology"
- Pedigree
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in MFSD8/CLN7 are a frequent cause of variant-late infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis.
**Authors:** Aiello C, Terracciano A, Simonati A, Discepoli G, Cannelli N, Claps D, Crow YJ, Bianchi M, Kitzmuller C, Longo D, Tavoni A, Franzoni E, Tessa A, Veneselli E, Boldrini R, Filocamo M, Williams RE, Bertini ES, Biancheri R, Carrozzo R, Mole SE, Santorelli FM
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.20975](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.20975)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2009 Mar;30(3):E530-40. doi: 10.1002/humu.20975.

Mutations in MFSD8/CLN7 are a frequent cause of variant-late infantile neuronal
ceroid lipofuscinosis.

Aiello C(1), Terracciano A, Simonati A, Discepoli G, Cannelli N, Claps D, Crow
YJ, Bianchi M, Kitzmuller C, Longo D, Tavoni A, Franzoni E, Tessa A, Veneselli
E, Boldrini R, Filocamo M, Williams RE, Bertini ES, Biancheri R, Carrozzo R,
Mole SE, Santorelli FM.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Medicine, Neurology, Radiology, and Pathology, IRCCS-Bambino Gesù
Hospital, Rome, Italy.

The neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCL) are a group of genetically
heterogeneous neurodegenerative disorders. The recent identification of the
MFSD8/CLN7 gene in a variant-late infantile form of NCL (v-LINCL) in affected
children from Turkey prompted us to examine the relative frequency of variants
in this gene in Italian patients with v-LINCL. We identified nine children
harboring 11 different mutations in MFSD8/CLN7. Ten mutations were novel and
included three nonsense (p.Arg35Stop, p.Glu381Stop, p.Arg482Stop), four missense
(p.Met1Thr, p.Gly52Arg, p.Thr294Lys, p.Pro447Leu), two splice site mutations
(c.863+3_4insT, c.863+1G>C), and a 17-bp deletion predicting a frameshift and
premature protein truncation (c.627_643del17/p.Met209IlefsX3). The clinical
phenotype, which was similar to that of the Turkish v-LINCL cases, was not
influenced by type and location of the mutation nor the length of the predicted
residual gene product. As well as identifying novel variants in MFSD8/CLN7, this
study contributes to a better molecular characterization of Italian NCL cases,
and will facilitate medical genetic counseling in such families. The existence
of a subset of v-LINCL cases without mutations in any of the known NCL genes
suggests further genetic heterogeneity.

2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20975
PMID: 19177532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]