---
reference_id: "PMID:20301495"
title: Maple Syrup Urine Disease.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Strauss KA
- Puffenberger EG
- Carson VJ
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Maple Syrup Urine Disease.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Strauss KA, Puffenberger EG, Carson VJ

## Content

1. Maple Syrup Urine Disease.

Strauss KA(1), Puffenberger EG(1), Carson VJ(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2006 Jan 30 [updated 2020 Apr 23].

Author information:
(1)Clinic for Special Children, Strasburg, Pennsylvania

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) is categorized as
classic (severe), intermediate, or intermittent. Neonates with classic MSUD are
born asymptomatic but without treatment follow a predictable course: 12–24
hours. Elevated concentrations of branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs; leucine,
isoleucine, and valine) and alloisoleucine, as well as a generalized disturbance
of amino acid concentration ratios, are present in blood and the maple syrup
odor can be detected in cerumen; Two to three days. Early and nonspecific signs
of metabolic intoxication (i.e., irritability, hypersomnolence, anorexia) are
accompanied by the presence of branched-chain alpha-ketoacids, acetoacetate, and
beta-hydroxybutyrate in urine; Four to six days. Worsening encephalopathy
manifests as lethargy, apnea, opisthotonos, and reflexive "fencing" or
"bicycling" movements as the sweet maple syrup odor becomes apparent in urine;
Seven to ten days. Severe intoxication culminates in critical cerebral edema,
coma, and central respiratory failure. Individuals with intermediate MSUD have
partial branched-chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase deficiency that manifests
only intermittently or responds to dietary thiamine therapy; these individuals
can experience severe metabolic intoxication and encephalopathy in the face of
sufficient catabolic stress. In the era of newborn screening (NBS), the prompt
initiation of treatment of asymptomatic infants detected by NBS means that most
individuals who would have developed neonatal manifestations of MSUD remain
asymptomatic with continued treatment adherence.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: Suggestive biochemical findings on NBS include whole-blood
concentration ratios of (leucine + isoleucine) to alanine and phenylalanine that
are above the cutoff values for the particular screening lab. Follow-up plasma
amino acid analysis typically demonstrates elevated concentrations of BCAAs and
alloisoleucine. The diagnosis of MSUD is confirmed by identification of
biallelic pathogenic variants in BCKDHA, BCKDHB, or DBT.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment consists of dietary leucine
restriction, BCAA-free medical foods, judicious supplementation with isoleucine
and valine, and frequent clinical and biochemical monitoring. A BCAA-restricted
diet fortified with prescription medical foods can maintain average plasma BCAA
concentrations within standard reference intervals and preserves the ratios
among them. Use of a "sick-day" formula recipe (devoid of leucine and enriched
with calories, isoleucine, valine, and BCAA-free amino acids) combined with
rapid and frequent amino acid monitoring allows many catabolic illnesses to be
managed in the outpatient setting. Acute metabolic decompensation is corrected
by treating the precipitating stress while delivering sufficient calories,
insulin, free amino acids, isoleucine, and valine to achieve sustained net
protein synthesis in tissues. Some centers use hemodialysis/hemofiltration to
remove BCAAs from the extracellular compartment, but this intervention does not
alone establish net protein accretion. Brain edema is a common complication of
metabolic encephalopathy and requires careful management in an intensive care
setting. Adolescents and adults with MSUD are at increased risk for
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, depression, and anxiety disorders and
can be treated successfully with standard psychostimulant and antidepressant
medications. Prevention of primary manifestations: Transplantation of allogeneic
liver tissue affords affected individuals an unrestricted diet and protects them
from metabolic crises, but does not reverse preexisting psychomotor disability
or mental illness. In those who have not undergone liver transplantation, strict
and consistent metabolic control can decrease the risk of developing
neuropsychiatric morbidities. Consider a trial of enteral thiamine to determine
if an affected individual may have thiamine-responsive disease. Prevention of
secondary complications: Any trauma care or surgical procedures should be
approached in consultation with a metabolic specialist. Surveillance: Weekly or
twice-weekly assessment of amino acid profile for rapidly growing infants;
weekly amino acid profile assessment in children, adolescents, and adults;
routine monitoring of calcium, magnesium, zinc, folate, selenium, and omega-3
essential fatty acid levels; at least monthly visit with a metabolic specialist
in infancy; assessment of developmental milestones at each visit or as needed.
Evaluation of relatives at risk: It can be determined if newborn sibs of an
affected individual (who have not been tested prenatally) are affected (1) by
plasma amino acid analysis at approximately 24 hours of life; or (2) by
molecular genetic testing of umbilical cord blood if the family-specific
pathogenic variants have been identified. Early diagnosis may allow management
of asymptomatic infants out of hospital by experienced providers. Before
confirmatory molecular testing is complete, at-risk neonates can be managed with
an MSUD prescription diet if serial plasma amino acid profiles provide evidence
of MSUD. Pregnancy management: For women with MSUD, metabolic control should be
rigorously maintained before and throughout pregnancy by frequent monitoring of
plasma amino acid concentrations and dietary adjustments to avoid the likely
teratogenic effects of elevated maternal leucine plasma concentration. Fetal
growth should be monitored to detect any signs of essential amino acid
deficiency. The catabolic stress of labor, involutional changes of the uterus,
and internal sequestration of blood are potential sources of metabolic
decompensation of the affected mother. Appropriate monitoring of the affected
mother at a metabolic referral center at the time of delivery and in the
postpartum period are recommended.
GENETIC COUNSELING: MSUD is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. At
conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being
affected, a 50% chance of being unaffected and a carrier, and a 25% chance of
being unaffected and not a carrier. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives and
prenatal diagnosis for pregnancies at increased risk are possible if the
pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected family member.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 20301495
