---
reference_id: "PMID:11447189"
title: Vacuolating cytotoxin of Helicobacter pylori induces apoptosis in the human gastric epithelial cell line AGS.
authors:
- Kuck D
- Kolmerer B
- Iking-Konert C
- Krammer PH
- Stremmel W
- Rudi J
journal: Infect Immun
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1128/IAI.69.8.5080-5087.2001
keywords:
- Apoptosis
- "Bacterial Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- "Bacterial Toxins/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Line
- "Cytotoxins/genetics, physiology"
- Epithelial Cells/cytology
- Gastric Mucosa/cytology
- Helicobacter pylori/pathogenicity
- Humans
- Precipitin Tests
- Vacuoles
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vacuolating cytotoxin of Helicobacter pylori induces apoptosis in the human gastric epithelial cell line AGS.
**Authors:** Kuck D, Kolmerer B, Iking-Konert C, Krammer PH, Stremmel W, Rudi J
**Journal:** Infect Immun (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1128/IAI.69.8.5080-5087.2001](https://doi.org/10.1128/IAI.69.8.5080-5087.2001)

## Content

1. Infect Immun. 2001 Aug;69(8):5080-7. doi: 10.1128/IAI.69.8.5080-5087.2001.

Vacuolating cytotoxin of Helicobacter pylori induces apoptosis in the human
gastric epithelial cell line AGS.

Kuck D(1), Kolmerer B, Iking-Konert C, Krammer PH, Stremmel W, Rudi J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Heidelberg, 69115 Heidelberg, Germany.

Helicobacter pylori induces cell death by apoptosis. However, the
apoptosis-inducing factor is still unknown. The virulence factor vacuolating
cytotoxin A (VacA) is a potential candidate, and thus its role in apoptosis
induction was investigated in the human gastric epithelial cell line AGS. The
supernatant from the vacA wild-type strain P12 was able to induce apoptotic cell
death, whereas the supernatant from its isogenic mutant strain P14 could not.
That VacA was indeed the apoptosis-inducing factor was demonstrated further by
substantial reduction of apoptosis upon treatment of AGS cells with a
supernatant specifically depleted of native VacA. Furthermore, a recombinant
VacA produced in Escherichia coli was also able to induce apoptosis in AGS cells
but failed to induce cellular vacuolation. These findings demonstrate that the
vacuolating cytototoxin of H. pylori is a bacterial factor capable of inducing
apoptosis in gastric epithelial cells.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.69.8.5080-5087.2001
PMCID: PMC98603
PMID: 11447189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
