---
reference_id: "PMID:36055438"
title: "Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome (POTS): An Update for Clinical Practice."
authors:
- Sebastian SA
- Co EL
- Panthangi V
- Jain E
- Ishak A
- Shah Y
- Vasavada A
- Padda I
journal: Curr Probl Cardiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.cpcardiol.2022.101384
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome (POTS): An Update for Clinical Practice.
**Authors:** Sebastian SA, Co EL, Panthangi V, Jain E, Ishak A, Shah Y, Vasavada A, Padda I
**Journal:** Curr Probl Cardiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cpcardiol.2022.101384](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpcardiol.2022.101384)

## Content

1. Curr Probl Cardiol. 2022 Dec;47(12):101384. doi: 
10.1016/j.cpcardiol.2022.101384. Epub 2022 Aug 31.

Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome (POTS): An Update for Clinical 
Practice.

Sebastian SA(1), Co EL(2), Panthangi V(3), Jain E(4), Ishak A(5), Shah Y(6), 
Vasavada A(7), Padda I(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Azeezia Medical College, Kollam, Kerala, 
India. Electronic address: snehaann1991@gmail.com.
(2)University of Santo Tomas Faculty of Medicine and Surgery, Manila, 
Philippines.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Osmania Medical College, Hyderabad, India.
(4)Department of Family Medicine, Cooper University Hospital, Camden, NJ, USA.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, European University Cyprus - School of 
Medicine, Nicosia Cyprus.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Trinity Health Oakland, Michigan, USA.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, MP Shah Medical College, Jamnagar, India.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine, Richmond University Medical Center, Staten 
Island, NY, USA.

Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome (POTS) is a variant of autonomic 
cardiovascular disorder characterized by an excessive increase in heart rate 
upon standing associated with light-headedness, headaches, chest pain, shortness 
of breath, and brain fog. The etiology of POTS is largely unknown and often 
debilitating. The 3 major hypotheses about the pathophysiology of POTS are 
autoimmunity, abnormally increased sympathetic activity, and sympathetic 
denervation leading to central hypovolemia and reflex tachycardia. Given its 
heterogeneous nature, it is crucial to understand each component of POTS with 
more emphasis on incorporating a multidisciplinary approach to control the 
symptoms. Future works should focus on better understanding the POTS 
pathophysiology and designing randomized controlled trials for implementing 
effective therapy. In this review, we outline the extent of the problem, studies 
and resources needed to address the issue, and the diagnostic and therapeutic 
updates on POTS.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cpcardiol.2022.101384
PMID: 36055438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]