---
reference_id: "PMID:38595698"
title: "Ophthalmic Symptoms of Long-Chain 3-Hydroxyacyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency: A Report of Three Cases."
authors:
- Lange N
- Bodetko AM
- Mozrzymas R
- Kowal-Lange A
journal: Case Rep Ophthalmol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1159/000537895
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ophthalmic Symptoms of Long-Chain 3-Hydroxyacyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency: A Report of Three Cases.
**Authors:** Lange N, Bodetko AM, Mozrzymas R, Kowal-Lange A
**Journal:** Case Rep Ophthalmol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000537895](https://doi.org/10.1159/000537895)

## Content

1. Case Rep Ophthalmol. 2024 Apr 9;15(1):310-319. doi: 10.1159/000537895. 
eCollection 2024 Jan-Dec.

Ophthalmic Symptoms of Long-Chain 3-Hydroxyacyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency: A 
Report of Three Cases.

Lange N(1), Bodetko AM(2), Mozrzymas R(3), Kowal-Lange A(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Postgraduate Internship, Marciniak Lower Silesian Specialist Hospital, 
Wroclaw, Poland.
(2)Postgraduate Internship, Research and Development Center, Provincial 
Specialist Hospital, Wroclaw, Poland.
(3)Department and Clinic of Pediatrics, Gastroenterology, and Nutrition, 
Research and Development Center, Provincial Specialist Hospital, Wroclaw, 
Poland.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Research and Development Center, Provincial 
Specialist Hospital, Wroclaw, Poland.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, Wroclaw University of Science and Technology, Wroclaw, 
Poland.

INTRODUCTION: Long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCHAD) deficiency, 
typically inherited as a recessive trait, is a genetic condition predominantly 
observed in Central and Eastern Europe, with birth prevalence in Poland 
amounting to 1/118,336. In most European countries, e.g., in Poland since 2014, 
this disorder is included in newborn screening.
CASE PRESENTATION: This paper presents the ophthalmic symptoms of long-chain 
3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCHAD) deficiency in three pediatric patients. 
Visual acuity testing, fundus photography, and optical coherence tomography 
(OCT) were performed and data were collected over several years (2017-2022). In 
case 1, a female born in 2010, exhibited abnormalities in the central part of 
the posterior pole, mainly in the macula, and included choriocapillaris atrophy 
and severe disruption of the outer retinal layer. Case 2, a female born in 2012, 
presented with progressive shortsightedness and choroid atrophy documented with 
angio-OCT. Case 3, a male born in 2013, experienced recurrent hospitalizations 
due to metabolic decompensations and presented with mild myopia, thinning of the 
choroid layer, and slight pigment dispersion with macular sparing.
CONCLUSION: The main ophthalmic symptoms of LCHAD deficiency were choroidal 
atrophy, disorganization of the outer retinal layer, and myopia. Choroidal 
atrophy and pigment dispersion were consistently the earliest signs of 
LCHAD-associated chorioretinopathy. Although the progression of 
chorioretinopathy in each case resulted from metabolic decompensation, one 
documented case revealed that not every metabolic crisis results in 
ophthalmological changes. Nonetheless, strict adherence to a low-fat, 
high-carbohydrate diet remains crucial to prevent gradual deterioration and 
vision loss.

© 2024 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000537895
PMCID: PMC11003731
PMID: 38595698

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.