---
reference_id: "PMID:22634452"
title: "Cholera vaccine: new preventive tool for endemic countries."
authors:
- Verma R
- Khanna P
- Chawla S
journal: Hum Vaccin Immunother
year: '2012'
doi: 10.4161/hv.19083
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cholera vaccine: new preventive tool for endemic countries.
**Authors:** Verma R, Khanna P, Chawla S
**Journal:** Hum Vaccin Immunother (2012)
**DOI:** [10.4161/hv.19083](https://doi.org/10.4161/hv.19083)

## Content

1. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2012 May;8(5):682-4. doi: 10.4161/hv.19083. Epub 2012
May  1.

Cholera vaccine: new preventive tool for endemic countries.

Verma R(1), Khanna P, Chawla S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Community Medicine, Pt. B.D. Sharma PGIMS, Rohtak, India. 
dr.rameshverma@yahoo.co.in

Cholera is a major global public health problem and remains an important threat 
in almost every developing country, especially in areas where population 
overcrowding and poor sanitation are common, such as slums and refugee camps. 
Cholera is one of the most dreaded diseases in the world, in some cases leading 
to death within 24 h if left untreated. Without treatment, severe infection has 
a mortality rate of 30-50%. In 2007, WHO recorded 177,963 cholera cases and 
4,031 deaths worldwide. However, the estimated actual burden of cholera is in 
the vicinity of 3 to 5 million cases and 100,000 to 130,000 deaths per year. The 
disease is endemic to parts of Africa, Asia, the Middle East and South America. 
Large outbreaks are common after natural disasters or in populations displaced 
by war, where there is inadequate sewage disposal and contaminated water. In 
India, during the 10-y period (1997-2006) studied, the states having the highest 
number of reported outbreaks were West Bengal, Orissa, Maharashtra and Kerala, 
which together accounted for 60% of all reported outbreaks. A review of cholera 
cases in India reported to WHO from 2003-2007 showed that the numbers were in 
the few thousands with a case fatality rate of < 1%. However, it is believed 
that the number of cholera cases and deaths occurring annually in India is much 
greater than the number reported. A literature review covering a four-year 
period from 2003 to 2006 found reported cholera outbreaks in 18 of the 35 States 
and Union Territories of India. Of these, 11 had cholera outbreaks reported for 
multiple years. Vietnam has produced a cheaper variant of killed whole-cell 
vaccine devoid of the B subunit. This vaccine contains both Vibrio cholerae O1 
and O139, and provides 50 per cent protection for at least three years after 
vaccination. For endemic cholera, population-level immunity is relatively high, 
making control possible with relatively low vaccine coverage levels. This 
vaccine should be used in areas where cholera is endemic, particularly in those 
at risk of outbreaks, in conjunction with other prevention and control 
strategies.

DOI: 10.4161/hv.19083
PMID: 22634452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]