---
reference_id: "PMID:37573494"
title: "Evaluation of nutrient assimilative capacity in waterfowl impoundments: The role of environmental stressors."
authors:
- Wood RL
- Stark JM
- Aanderud ZT
- Baker MA
journal: J Environ Qual
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/jeq2.20507
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of nutrient assimilative capacity in waterfowl impoundments: The role of environmental stressors.
**Authors:** Wood RL, Stark JM, Aanderud ZT, Baker MA
**Journal:** J Environ Qual (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jeq2.20507](https://doi.org/10.1002/jeq2.20507)

## Content

1. J Environ Qual. 2023 Nov-Dec;52(6):1127-1138. doi: 10.1002/jeq2.20507. Epub
2023  Aug 23.

Evaluation of nutrient assimilative capacity in waterfowl impoundments: The role 
of environmental stressors.

Wood RL(1)(2), Stark JM(1), Aanderud ZT(3), Baker MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Utah State University, Logan, Utah, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, USA.
(3)Department of Plant and Wildlife Sciences, Brigham Young University, Provo, 
Utah, USA.

The effectiveness of wetlands in sequestering nutrients and improving water 
quality relies on a suite of abiotic and biotic conditions. To more fully 
understand the restraints on nutrient removal, especially salinity and plant 
cover, we created field-scale mesocosms and monitored nutrient sequestration 
with nutrient additions and isotopic pool dilutions over 2 years in two wetlands 
near the Great Salt Lake in Utah. Surprisingly, we found no differences in 
nutrient removal with plant removal, increased salinity, and altered ambient 
nutrient concentrations, suggesting functional redundancy in associated primary 
producers. When submerged aquatic vegetation was removed, chlorophyll α 
concentration (0.1-9.0 μg/L) increased while nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) 
assimilation remained the same as phytoplankton occupied the open niche space. 
We did find ammonium concentrations to be inversely related to nitrate 
assimilation-as the ammonium concentration increased, nitrate assimilation 
decreased, suggesting preferential uptake of ammonium. Last, in our high N and P 
treatment mesocosms, the nitrate dramatically declined from 43.9 mg/L to 
background levels (<0.1 mg/L) within 1 week, showing a high potential for N 
remediation in these wetlands.

© 2023 The Authors. Journal of Environmental Quality published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Society of Agronomy, Crop Science Society 
of America, and Soil Science Society of America.

DOI: 10.1002/jeq2.20507
PMID: 37573494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]