---
reference_id: "PMID:36709280"
title: "Coronary artery disease in a patient with Addison's disease: a case report and literature review."
authors:
- Zhao R
- Luo S
- Wang S
- Wen Y
- Xiong F
journal: BMC Cardiovasc Disord
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12872-023-03079-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Coronary artery disease in a patient with Addison's disease: a case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Zhao R, Luo S, Wang S, Wen Y, Xiong F
**Journal:** BMC Cardiovasc Disord (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12872-023-03079-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12872-023-03079-0)

## Content

1. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2023 Jan 29;23(1):54. doi: 10.1186/s12872-023-03079-0.

Coronary artery disease in a patient with Addison's disease: a case report and 
literature review.

Zhao R(#)(1), Luo S(#)(2), Wang S(1), Wen Y(3), Xiong F(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Cardiovascular Institute of Chengdu Third People's 
Hospital/The Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, 
610031, China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, 400016, China.
(3)Health Management Centre, University-Town Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, 401331, China.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Cardiovascular Institute of Chengdu Third People's 
Hospital/The Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, 
610031, China. xiongfengcd3yy@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Addison's disease which is due to dysfunction of the adrenal gland, 
with abnormal secretion of glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids, is rare. By 
inducing inflammation and disorders of water and electrolyte metabolism, 
Addison's disease may accelerate progression of co-existed cardiovascular 
diseases. Addison's disease combined with cardiovascular disease is infrequent, 
only 10 cases in the literature.
CASE PRESENTATION: We reported a 51-year-old male patient with unstable angina 
pectoris and hypotension. Changes on coronary angiography within 2 years 
suggested rapid progression of coronary artery disease in a patient with low 
cardiovascular risk. An additional clue of skin hyperpigmentation, fatigue and 
further examination confirmed the diagnosis of Addison's disease caused by 
adrenal tuberculosis. After hormone replacement treatment, the frequency and 
severity of the angina pectoris were alleviated significantly, as were 
hypotension, hyperpigmentation and fatigue.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of Addison's disease and coronary artery disease in 
one patient is rare. Addison's disease can induce inflammation and disorders of 
water and electrolyte metabolism, which may further accelerate the course of 
coronary artery disease. Meanwhile, the hypotension in Addison's disease may 
affect the coronary blood flow, which may result in an increased susceptibility 
to unstable angina in the presence of coronary stenosis. So, we should analyze 
comprehensively if the coronary artery disease progress rapidly.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12872-023-03079-0
PMCID: PMC9884407
PMID: 36709280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author’s decalared that they have no 
competing interests.