---
reference_id: "PMID:39725884"
title: "Uncertain significance and molecular insights of CPLANE1 variants in prenatal diagnosis of Joubert syndrome: a case report."
authors:
- Li SX
- Chen L
- Deng C
- Tang D
- Zhang J
- Hu WG
- Hu Y
- Lai H
- Yang X
journal: BMC Pregnancy Childbirth
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12884-024-07052-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Uncertain significance and molecular insights of CPLANE1 variants in prenatal diagnosis of Joubert syndrome: a case report.
**Authors:** Li SX, Chen L, Deng C, Tang D, Zhang J, Hu WG, Hu Y, Lai H, Yang X
**Journal:** BMC Pregnancy Childbirth (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12884-024-07052-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12884-024-07052-3)

## Content

1. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2024 Dec 26;24(1):865. doi: 
10.1186/s12884-024-07052-3.

Uncertain significance and molecular insights of CPLANE1 variants in prenatal 
diagnosis of Joubert syndrome: a case report.

Li SX(1)(2), Chen L(2), Deng C(3), Tang D(4), Zhang J(1), Hu WG(1), Hu Y(5), Lai 
H(6), Yang X(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology, School of Medicine, Chengdu Women's and 
Children's Central Hospital, University of Electronic Science and Technology of 
China, Chengdu, China.
(2)Institute of Electronic and Information Engineering of UESTC in Guangdong, 
Dongguan, Guangdong, China.
(3)Department of Radiology, Chengdu Women's and Children's Central Hospital, 
School of Medicine, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 
Chengdu, China.
(4)Department of Obstetrics, School of Medicine, Chengdu Women's and Children's 
Central Hospital, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 
Chengdu, China.
(5)Department of Prenatal Diagnosis, Chengdu Women's and Children's Central 
Hospital, School of Medicine, University of Electronic Science and Technology of 
China, Chengdu, China.
(6)Department of Radiology, Chengdu Women's and Children's Central Hospital, 
School of Medicine, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 
Chengdu, China. 449535176@qq.com.
(7)Department of Obstetrics, School of Medicine, Chengdu Women's and Children's 
Central Hospital, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 
Chengdu, China. yczar@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Prenatal whole exome sequencing (WES) is becoming an increasingly 
used diagnostic tool for fetuses with structural anomalies. However, the 
identification of variants of uncertain significance (VUS) in clinically 
relevant genes can significantly complicate prenatal diagnosis and genetic 
counseling.
CASE PRESENTATION: A fetus conceived through in vitro fertilization at the third 
attempt presented with polydactyly and molar tooth sign at 24 + 6 weeks of 
gestation. Trio-based WES was performed on both parents and the affected fetus, 
revealing a pair of compound heterozygous CPLANE1 variants 
(c.4646 A > T/p.Glu1549Val and c.1233 C > A/p.Tyr411*) potentially associated 
with Joubert syndrome. According to the ACMG guidelines, one of the biallelic 
variants was classified as VUS, and the other as pathogenic. However, these 
variants had no allele frequencies in the general population. The p.Tyr411* 
variant was classified as deleterious, while the p.Glu1549Val variant was 
located in highly conserved residues, was predicted to be damaging by in silico 
tools, and altered hydrogen bonding. Furthermore, CPLANE1 expression was highest 
in the brain during the embryonic and fetal stages. These findings provide 
additional support for the association between CPLANE1 variants in this fetus 
and Joubert syndrome. Thus, the most likely diagnosis was Joubert syndrome, and 
after careful consideration, the couple decided to terminate the pregnancy.
CONCLUSION: The expression patterns of CPLANE1 and the molecular effects of the 
variants may provide further evidence supporting the potential for prenatal 
diagnosis of Joubert syndrome in the case of biallelic VUS and pathogenic 
variant. This study suggests that molecular insights may play a role in 
interpreting VUS in clinically relevant prenatal genes for prenatal diagnosis.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12884-024-07052-3
PMCID: PMC11674561
PMID: 39725884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: This study was approved by the ethics committee of the Chengdu 
Women’s and Children’s Central Hospital, approval ethics number 2024(3). Consent 
for publication: Written informed consent was obtained from the family regarding 
the publication of the case. Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests.