---
reference_id: "PMID:34058057"
title: "Liver Transplantation in Children with Urea Cycle Disorders: The Importance of Minimizing Waiting Time."
authors:
- Ziogas IA
- Wu WK
- Matsuoka LK
- Pai AK
- Hafberg ET
- Gillis LA
- Morgan TM
- Alexopoulos SP
journal: Liver Transpl
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/lt.26186
keywords:
- Child
- Graft Survival
- Humans
- Liver Transplantation/adverse effects
- Male
- Risk Factors
- "Urea Cycle Disorders, Inborn/complications, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Waiting Lists
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liver Transplantation in Children with Urea Cycle Disorders: The Importance of Minimizing Waiting Time.
**Authors:** Ziogas IA, Wu WK, Matsuoka LK, Pai AK, Hafberg ET, Gillis LA, Morgan TM, Alexopoulos SP
**Journal:** Liver Transpl (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/lt.26186](https://doi.org/10.1002/lt.26186)

## Content

1. Liver Transpl. 2021 Dec;27(12):1799-1810. doi: 10.1002/lt.26186. Epub 2021 Aug
 1.

Liver Transplantation in Children with Urea Cycle Disorders: The Importance of
Minimizing Waiting Time.

Ziogas IA(1), Wu WK(1), Matsuoka LK(1), Pai AK(2), Hafberg ET(2), Gillis LA(2),
Morgan TM(3), Alexopoulos SP(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hepatobiliary Surgery and Liver TransplantationDepartment of
SurgeryVanderbilt University Medical CenterNashvilleTN.
(2)D. Brent Polk Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and
NutritionDepartment of PediatricsVanderbilt University Medical
CenterNashvilleTN.
(3)Division of Medical GeneticsDepartment of PediatricsVanderbilt University
Medical CenterNashvilleTN.

Liver transplantation (LT) for children with urea cycle disorders (UCDs) is
capable of correcting the enzymatic defect and preventing progressive neurologic
injury. We describe the characteristics and outcomes of pediatric LT recipients
with UCDs. We identified all pediatric (<18 years) LT candidates with UCDs in
the United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) database (February 2002 to September
2020). Multivariable Cox and logistic regression were used to determine risk
factors for graft loss and cognitive delay, respectively. Of 424 patients, 1.9%
(8/424) experienced waitlist mortality and 95.0% underwent LT (403/424). The
most frequently encountered UCDs in our cohort were ornithine transcarbamylase
deficiency (46.2%), citrullinemia (20.3%), and argininosuccinic aciduria (ASA;
12.9%). The 1-, 3-, and 5-year graft survival rates were 90.4%, 86.3%, and
85.2%, respectively. Multivariable analysis showed a decreased risk of graft
loss with increasing weight at LT (adjusted hazard ratio [aHR], 0.96; 95%
confidence interval [CI], 0.94-0.99; P = 0.02), male sex (aHR, 0.49; 95% CI,
0.28-0.85; P = 0.01), and ASA diagnosis (aHR, 0.29; 95% CI, 0.09-0.98;
P = 0.047), when adjusting for location (intensive care/hospital/home) and graft
type (both P ≥ 0.65). In multivariable logistic regression, waitlist time
(adjusted odds ratio [aOR], 1.10; 95% CI, 1.02-1.17; P = 0.009) and male sex
(aOR, 1.71; 95% CI, 1.02-2.88; P = 0.04) were associated with increased odds of
long-term cognitive delay. Waitlist duration is associated with a long-term risk
of cognitive delay. Given excellent long-term outcomes, early LT evaluation
should be considered in all children with UCDs to prevent progressive neurologic
injury and optimize cognitive outcomes.

© 2021 The Authors. Liver Transplantation published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on
behalf of American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/lt.26186
PMCID: PMC9291867
PMID: 34058057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
