---
reference_id: "PMID:40021438"
title: Aortic disease in giant cell arteritis.
authors:
- Warrington KJ
journal: Semin Arthritis Rheum
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2025.152677
keywords:
- Humans
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/complications, diagnostic imaging"
- Aortitis/diagnostic imaging
- "Aortic Diseases/etiology, diagnostic imaging"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aortic disease in giant cell arteritis.
**Authors:** Warrington KJ
**Journal:** Semin Arthritis Rheum (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semarthrit.2025.152677](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semarthrit.2025.152677)

## Content

1. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2025 Jun;72S:152677. doi:
10.1016/j.semarthrit.2025.152677. Epub 2025 Feb 23.

Aortic disease in giant cell arteritis.

Warrington KJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA. Electronic
address: warrington.kenneth@mayo.edu.

The increasing use of non-invasive vascular imaging has allowed for improved
detection of aortic disease in patients with vasculitis. Indeed, up to 70 % of
patients have radiographic evidence of aortitis at GCA onset and aortic
dilatation is already identified in about 15 %. Aortic inflammation is generally
diagnosed by imaging studies such as CT angiography, MR angiography or FDG-PET,
and occasionally by histopathology following resection of the aorta for aneurysm
repair. Aortic inflammation may be clinically silent but is a risk factor for
progressive aortic dilatation and aneurysm formation in GCA. By comparison,
aortitis in Takayasu arteritis may lead to aortic dilatation or stenosis,
particularly in the descending thoracic and abdominal aorta. The risk of
thoracic aortic aneurysm in patients with GCA has been estimated to be up to
17-fold higher than that of the general population, with up to 1/3 of patients
developing aortic aneurysm at 10 years of follow-up. Moreover, chronic
smoldering aortitis may be refractory to current therapy, lasts for several
years and contributes to progressive aortic dilatation. A rare but
life-threatening complication of GCA-associated aortic disease is dissection or
rupture. Observational studies are informing outcomes and management of
inflammatory aortic aneurysms, while transcriptomic and molecular studies on
aortic tissue are yielding important information regarding disease pathogenesis.
These endeavors are critical to reducing the excess mortality related to aortic
disease in GCA. Also, improved understanding of the pathophysiology of the
disease is allowing the development of non-glucocorticoid targeted therapies.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2025.152677
PMID: 40021438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be
considered as potential competing interests: Dr. Warrington receives clinical
trial support from BMS, and has received consulting fees from Sanofi and Amgen.
