---
reference_id: "PMID:12713737"
title: SOX9 exerts a bifunctional effect on type II collagen gene (COL2A1) expression in chondrocytes depending on the differentiation state.
authors:
- Kypriotou M
- Fossard-Demoor M
- Chadjichristos C
- Ghayor C
- de Crombrugghe B
- Pujol JP
- Galéra P
journal: DNA Cell Biol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1089/104454903321515922
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SOX9 exerts a bifunctional effect on type II collagen gene (COL2A1) expression in chondrocytes depending on the differentiation state.
**Authors:** Kypriotou M, Fossard-Demoor M, Chadjichristos C, Ghayor C, de Crombrugghe B, Pujol JP, Galéra P
**Journal:** DNA Cell Biol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1089/104454903321515922](https://doi.org/10.1089/104454903321515922)

## Content

1. DNA Cell Biol. 2003 Feb;22(2):119-29. doi: 10.1089/104454903321515922.

SOX9 exerts a bifunctional effect on type II collagen gene (COL2A1) expression 
in chondrocytes depending on the differentiation state.

Kypriotou M(1), Fossard-Demoor M, Chadjichristos C, Ghayor C, de Crombrugghe B, 
Pujol JP, Galéra P.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie du Tissu Conjonctif, Faculté de Médecine, Caen 
Cedex, France.

As a key transcription factor in cartilage formation, SOX9 is a potent activator 
of type II collagen expression, a phenotypic marker of articular chondrocytes. 
This study was designed to determine the potential role of SOX9 on COL2A1 gene 
transcription during chondrocyte dedifferentiation, a characteristic feature of 
osteoarthritic cartilage that can be partially mimicked in vitro by subculturing 
primary chondrocytes. Constructs containing different regions from the promoter 
and the first intron of human COL2A1 gene were transfected in differentiated 
(primary) and dedifferentiated (passaged) rabbit articular chondrocytes (RAC), 
together with an expression vector containing or not the SOX9 cDNA. As expected, 
low levels of SOX9 overexpression were capable of enhancing COL2A1 gene 
transcription in both fully differentiated and slightly phenotypically altered 
chondrocytes, through the specific intronic enhancer. In contrast, when 
overexpressed at high levels, SOX9 induced an inhibition of COL2A1 gene 
expression, mediated by the -266 bp promoter region, whatever the 
differentiation state of chondrocytes. However, in the advanced stages of 
dedifferentiation, SOX9, independently of its expression level, depressed COL2A1 
transcriptional activity through the -63 bp short promoter. Although SOX9 has a 
crucial role in chondrocyte differentiation, our findings indicate that this 
factor cannot restore the phenotype of osteoarthritic chondrocytes by itself.

DOI: 10.1089/104454903321515922
PMID: 12713737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]