---
reference_id: "PMID:39107446"
title: Mechanisms of autophagy-lysosome dysfunction in neurodegenerative diseases.
authors:
- Nixon RA
- Rubinsztein DC
journal: Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41580-024-00757-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms of autophagy-lysosome dysfunction in neurodegenerative diseases.
**Authors:** Nixon RA, Rubinsztein DC
**Journal:** Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41580-024-00757-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41580-024-00757-5)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2024 Nov;25(11):926-946. doi:
10.1038/s41580-024-00757-5.  Epub 2024 Aug 6.

Mechanisms of autophagy-lysosome dysfunction in neurodegenerative diseases.

Nixon RA(1)(2)(3)(4), Rubinsztein DC(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Center for Dementia Research, Nathan Kline Institute, Orangeburg, New York, 
NY, USA. Ralph.Nixon@nki.rfmh.org.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, New York University Grossman School of Medicine, 
New York, NY, USA. Ralph.Nixon@nki.rfmh.org.
(3)Department of Cell Biology, New York University Grossman School of Medicine, 
New York, NY, USA. Ralph.Nixon@nki.rfmh.org.
(4)Neuroscience Institute, New York University Grossman School of Medicine, New 
York, NY, USA. Ralph.Nixon@nki.rfmh.org.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, 
Cambridge, UK.
(6)UK Dementia Research Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge Institute 
for Medical Research, Cambridge, UK.

Autophagy is a lysosome-based degradative process used to recycle obsolete 
cellular constituents and eliminate damaged organelles and aggregate-prone 
proteins. Their postmitotic nature and extremely polarized morphologies make 
neurons particularly vulnerable to disruptions caused by autophagy-lysosomal 
defects, especially as the brain ages. Consequently, mutations in genes 
regulating autophagy and lysosomal functions cause a wide range of 
neurodegenerative diseases. Here, we review the role of autophagy and lysosomes 
in neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease and 
frontotemporal dementia. We also consider the strong impact of cellular ageing 
on lysosomes and autophagy as a tipping point for the late-age emergence of 
related neurodegenerative disorders. Many of these diseases have primary defects 
in autophagy, for example affecting autophagosome formation, and in lysosomal 
functions, especially pH regulation and calcium homeostasis. We have aimed to 
provide an integrative framework for understanding the central importance of 
autophagic-lysosomal function in neuronal health and disease.

© 2024. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41580-024-00757-5
PMCID: PMC12239022
PMID: 39107446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]