---
reference_id: "PMID:27188817"
title: Huntington disease.
authors:
- Bates GP
- Dorsey R
- Gusella JF
- Hayden MR
- Kay C
- Leavitt BR
- Nance M
- Ross CA
- Scahill RI
- Wetzel R
- Wild EJ
- Tabrizi SJ
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2015.5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Huntington disease.
**Authors:** Bates GP, Dorsey R, Gusella JF, Hayden MR, Kay C, Leavitt BR, Nance M, Ross CA, Scahill RI, Wetzel R, Wild EJ, Tabrizi SJ
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrdp.2015.5](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrdp.2015.5)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2015 Apr 23;1:15005. doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2015.5.

Huntington disease.

Bates GP(1), Dorsey R(2), Gusella JF(3), Hayden MR(4), Kay C(4), Leavitt BR(4), 
Nance M(5), Ross CA(6), Scahill RI(7), Wetzel R(8), Wild EJ(7), Tabrizi SJ(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, King's College London, London, 
UK.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, 
New York, USA.
(3)Molecular Neurogenetics Unit, Center for Human Genetic Research, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, and Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Centre for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics, Department of Medical 
Genetics, Child and Family Research Institute, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(5)Struthers Parkinson's Center, Golden Valley, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA; and 
Hennepin County Medical Center, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(6)Division of Neurobiology, Department of Psychiatry and Departments of 
Neurology, Pharmacology and Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(7)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, University College London Institute 
of Neurology, Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK.
(8)Department of Structural Biology and Pittsburgh Institute for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

Huntington disease is devastating to patients and their families - with 
autosomal dominant inheritance, onset typically in the prime of adult life, 
progressive course, and a combination of motor, cognitive and behavioural 
features. The disease is caused by an expanded CAG trinucleotide repeat (of 
variable length) in HTT, the gene that encodes the protein huntingtin. In 
mutation carriers, huntingtin is produced with abnormally long polyglutamine 
sequences that confer toxic gains of function and predispose the protein to 
fragmentation, resulting in neuronal dysfunction and death. In this Primer, we 
review the epidemiology of Huntington disease, noting that prevalence is higher 
than previously thought, geographically variable and increasing. We describe the 
relationship between CAG repeat length and clinical phenotype, as well as the 
concept of genetic modifiers of the disease. We discuss normal huntingtin 
protein function, evidence for differential toxicity of mutant huntingtin 
variants, theories of huntingtin aggregation and the many different mechanisms 
of Huntington disease pathogenesis. We describe the genetic and clinical 
diagnosis of the condition, its clinical assessment and the multidisciplinary 
management of symptoms, given the absence of effective disease-modifying 
therapies. We review past and present clinical trials and therapeutic strategies 
under investigation, including impending trials of targeted huntingtin-lowering 
drugs and the progress in development of biomarkers that will support the next 
generation of trials. For an illustrated summary of this Primer, visit: 
http://go.nature.com/hPMENh.

DOI: 10.1038/nrdp.2015.5
PMID: 27188817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]