---
reference_id: "PMID:10821497"
title: The cutaneous manifestations of human parvovirus B19 infection.
authors:
- Magro CM
- Dawood MR
- Crowson AN
journal: Hum Pathol
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1053/hp.2000.6714
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The cutaneous manifestations of human parvovirus B19 infection.
**Authors:** Magro CM, Dawood MR, Crowson AN
**Journal:** Hum Pathol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1053/hp.2000.6714](https://doi.org/10.1053/hp.2000.6714)

## Content

1. Hum Pathol. 2000 Apr;31(4):488-97. doi: 10.1053/hp.2000.6714.

The cutaneous manifestations of human parvovirus B19 infection.

Magro CM(1), Dawood MR, Crowson AN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Thomas Jefferson University Hospitals, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA.

The prototypical cutaneous manifestations of human parvovirus B19 (B19) 
infection include a petechial eruption in a glove and stocking distribution, 
reticular truncal erythema, and the "slapped cheek" sign. An association with 
connective tissue disease (CTD) stigmata has recently been made. The clinical 
and dermatopathologic findings in 14 patients whose skin lesions were 
accompanied by serological evidence of B19 infection or documentation of B19 
genome in lesional skin are presented. The authors encountered skin biopsy 
specimens from 14 patients who presented with skin eruptions accompanied by 
clinical signs or serology suggestive of antecedent B19 infection. Clinical 
findings were correlated to the light microscopic appearance of the lesions and 
the presence of B19 genome in lesional skin. The study group comprised 9 women, 
3 men, and 2 boys. Eruptions characteristic of fifth disease, including the 
slapped cheek sign, reticulated truncal erythema, and acral petechiae, were 
present in 3 patients, 1 of whom later developed granuloma annulare. The other 
patients had atypical clinical presentations comprising an asymptomatic papular 
eruption (2), an eruption clinically resembling Sweet's syndrome (3), myopathic 
dermatomyositis (DM) (2), lupus erythematosus (LE)-like syndromes (2), and 
lower-extremity palpable purpura (2). Skin biopsy specimens in 12 cases showed 
interstitial histiocytic infiltrates with piecemeal fragmentation of collagen 
and a mononuclear cell-predominant vascular injury pattern. Other features 
included an interface dermatitis, eczematous alterations, and papillary dermal 
edema. Lesions with features of DM or LE also showed mesenchymal mucinosis, 
whereas a biopsied lesion of palpable purpura showed leukocytoclastic vasculitis 
(LCV). Immunofluorescent testing showed a positive lupus band test (LBT) with 
epidermal IgG and C5b-9 decoration in 1 patient with a systemic LE-like illness, 
whereas the DM patients had negative LBTs and vascular C5b-9 deposition typical 
for DM. Skin biopsy specimens from 11 patients, including those whose 
presentations resembled LE and DM, were positive for B19 genome. The 
dermatopathology of B19 infection suggests tissue injury mediated by 
delayed-type hypersensitivity, by antibody-dependent cellular immunity directed 
at microbial antigenic targets in the epidermis and endothelium, and by 
circulating immune complexes in the setting of LCV. These mechanisms appear to 
generate a clinical and histopathological picture that recapitulates that of 
CTD.

DOI: 10.1053/hp.2000.6714
PMID: 10821497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]