---
reference_id: "PMID:36575989"
title: Diagnostic and therapeutic algorithms for monogenic autoinflammatory diseases presenting with recurrent fevers among adults.
authors:
- Delplanque M
- Fayand A
- Boursier G
- Grateau G
- Savey L
- Georgin-Lavialle S
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/keac712
keywords:
- Pyrin
- Humans
- Aged
- Myelodysplastic Syndromes
- "Hereditary Autoinflammatory Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- Adult
- "Skin Diseases, Genetic"
- "Fever/etiology, genetics"
- Male
- "Cryopyrin-Associated Periodic Syndromes/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- "Familial Mediterranean Fever/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- "Mevalonate Kinase Deficiency/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic and therapeutic algorithms for monogenic autoinflammatory diseases presenting with recurrent fevers among adults.
**Authors:** Delplanque M, Fayand A, Boursier G, Grateau G, Savey L, Georgin-Lavialle S
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/keac712](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/keac712)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2023 Aug 1;62(8):2665-2672. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/keac712.

Diagnostic and therapeutic algorithms for monogenic autoinflammatory diseases 
presenting with recurrent fevers among adults.

Delplanque M(1)(2), Fayand A(1)(2), Boursier G(2)(3), Grateau G(1)(2), Savey 
L(1)(2), Georgin-Lavialle S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Sorbonne University, Internal Medicine Department, AP-HP, Tenon Hospital, 
Paris, France.
(2)French National Reference Center for Autoinflammatory Diseases and AA 
Amyloidosis (CEREMAIA) France.
(3)Department of Molecular Genetics and Cytogenomics, Rare and Auto Inflammatory 
Diseases Unit, CHU Montpellier, University of Montpellier, Montpellier, France.

Autoinflammatory diseases (AIDs) are defined as disorders of innate immunity. 
They were initially defined in contrast to autoimmune diseases because of the 
lack of involvement of the adaptive immune system and circulating 
autoantibodies. The four monogenic AIDs first described are called the 
'historical' AIDs and include FMF (associated with MEFV mutations), 
cryopyrinopathies (associated with NLRP3 mutations), TNF receptor-associated 
periodic syndrome (associated with TNFRSF1A mutations) and mevalonate kinase 
deficiency (MKD; associated with MVK mutations). In the last 10 years, >50 new 
monogenic AIDs have been discovered due to genetic advances. The most important 
discovery for adult patients is VEXAS syndrome associated with somatic UBA1 
mutations leading to an AID affecting mostly elderly men. Diagnosis of monogenic 
AIDs is based on personal and family history and detailed analysis of symptoms 
associated with febrile attacks in the context of elevated peripheral 
inflammatory markers. This review proposes a practical approach for the 
diagnosis of the main monogenic AIDs among adult patients.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
British Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/keac712
PMID: 36575989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]