---
reference_id: "PMID:36050663"
title: "Cognitive Enhancement Therapy vs social skills training in schizophrenia: a cluster randomized comparative effectiveness evaluation."
authors:
- Schutt RK
- Xie H
- Mueser KT
- Killam MA
- Delman J
- Eack SM
- Mesholam-Gately R
- Pratt SI
- Sandoval L
- Santos MM
- Golden LR
- Keshavan MS
journal: BMC Psychiatry
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s12888-022-04149-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cognitive Enhancement Therapy vs social skills training in schizophrenia: a cluster randomized comparative effectiveness evaluation.
**Authors:** Schutt RK, Xie H, Mueser KT, Killam MA, Delman J, Eack SM, Mesholam-Gately R, Pratt SI, Sandoval L, Santos MM, Golden LR, Keshavan MS
**Journal:** BMC Psychiatry (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12888-022-04149-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-022-04149-x)

## Content

1. BMC Psychiatry. 2022 Sep 1;22(1):583. doi: 10.1186/s12888-022-04149-x.

Cognitive Enhancement Therapy vs social skills training in schizophrenia: a 
cluster randomized comparative effectiveness evaluation.

Schutt RK(1)(2), Xie H(3), Mueser KT(4), Killam MA(5), Delman J(6), Eack SM(7), 
Mesholam-Gately R(5), Pratt SI(8), Sandoval L(5), Santos MM(8), Golden LR(5)(9), 
Keshavan MS(5).

Author information:
(1)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA. 
rschutt@bidmc.harvard.edu.
(2)University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, USA. rschutt@bidmc.harvard.edu.
(3)Dartmouth College, Hanover, USA.
(4)Boston University, Boston, USA.
(5)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA.
(6)University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, USA.
(7)University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA.
(8)Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, USA.
(9)University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, USA.

Erratum in
    BMC Psychiatry. 2022 Sep 16;22(1):613. doi: 10.1186/s12888-022-04250-1.

BACKGROUND: Schizophrenia and related disorders are highly disabling and create 
substantial burdens for families, communities, and health care systems. Although 
pharmacological treatments can often lessen the psychotic symptoms that are a 
hallmark of schizophrenia, they do not lessen the social and cognitive deficits 
that create the greatest impediments to community engagement and functional 
recovery. This study builds on prior research on psychosocial rehabilitation by 
comparing the effectiveness of two treatments demonstrated as efficacious in 
improving social and community functioning, Cognitive Enhancement Therapy (CET) 
and a version of Social Skills Training (HOPES/SST).
METHODS: The study uses a randomized cluster design in which a pair of 
clinicians at community- and hospital-based mental service centers deliver 
either CET or HOPES to at least one group of 6-8 eligible clients for 12 months. 
Clinicians are trained and then supervised weekly, with ongoing process 
measurement of treatment fidelity, attendance, satisfaction, and retention, and 
use of other services. Measures administered at baseline and at 6 and 12 months 
while in treatment, and then at 18 and 24 months after treatment include social 
adjustment, quality of life, social skills, positive and negative symptoms, and 
neuro- and social cognition. We hypothesize that CET will be associated with 
greater improvements than SST in both the primary outcome of community 
functioning and the secondary outcomes of neuro- and social cognition and social 
skills. Secondarily, we hypothesize that more cognitive impairment at baseline 
and younger age will predict more benefit from CET compared to HOPES.
DISCUSSION: Resource shortages endemic in mental health services and exacerbated 
by the pandemic highlight the importance of identifying the most effective 
approach to improving social and community functioning. We aim to improve 
understanding of the impact of two efficacious psychosocial treatments and to 
improve clinicians' ability to refer to both treatments the individuals who are 
most likely to benefit from them. We expect the result to be programmatic 
improvements that improve the magnitude and durability of gains in community 
functioning.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrial.gov NCT04321759 , registered March 25, 2020.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12888-022-04149-x
PMCID: PMC9434502
PMID: 36050663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests. No professional writers will be used to write any manuscripts that 
arise from this study.