---
reference_id: "PMID:35793467"
title: Translation of cytoplasmic UBA1 contributes to VEXAS syndrome pathogenesis.
authors:
- Ferrada MA
- Savic S
- Cardona DO
- Collins JC
- Alessi H
- Gutierrez-Rodrigues F
- Kumar DBU
- Wilson L
- Goodspeed W
- Topilow JS
- Paik JJ
- Poulter JA
- Kermani TA
- Koster MJ
- Warrington KJ
- Cargo C
- Tattersall RS
- Duncan CJA
- Cantor A
- Hoffmann P
- Payne EM
- Bonnekoh H
- Krause K
- Cowen EW
- Calvo KR
- Patel BA
- Ombrello AK
- Kastner DL
- Young NS
- Werner A
- Grayson PC
- Beck DB
journal: Blood
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1182/blood.2022016985
keywords:
- "Codon, Initiator"
- Humans
- Mutation
- Nucleotides
- Ubiquitin-Activating Enzymes/genetics
- Ubiquitination
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Translation of cytoplasmic UBA1 contributes to VEXAS syndrome pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Ferrada MA, Savic S, Cardona DO, Collins JC, Alessi H, Gutierrez-Rodrigues F, Kumar DBU, Wilson L, Goodspeed W, Topilow JS, Paik JJ, Poulter JA, Kermani TA, Koster MJ, Warrington KJ, Cargo C, Tattersall RS, Duncan CJA, Cantor A, Hoffmann P, Payne EM, Bonnekoh H, Krause K, Cowen EW, Calvo KR, Patel BA, Ombrello AK, Kastner DL, Young NS, Werner A, Grayson PC, Beck DB
**Journal:** Blood (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood.2022016985](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.2022016985)

## Content

1. Blood. 2022 Sep 29;140(13):1496-1506. doi: 10.1182/blood.2022016985.

Translation of cytoplasmic UBA1 contributes to VEXAS syndrome pathogenesis.

Ferrada MA(1), Savic S(2)(3), Cardona DO(4)(5), Collins JC(6), Alessi H(1), 
Gutierrez-Rodrigues F(7), Kumar DBU(5), Wilson L(4), Goodspeed W(1), Topilow 
JS(8), Paik JJ(8), Poulter JA(2), Kermani TA(9), Koster MJ(10), Warrington 
KJ(10), Cargo C(11), Tattersall RS(12), Duncan CJA(13), Cantor A(5), Hoffmann 
P(4), Payne EM(14)(15), Bonnekoh H(16)(17)(18), Krause K(16)(17)(18), Cowen 
EW(1), Calvo KR(19), Patel BA(7), Ombrello AK(4), Kastner DL(4), Young NS(7), 
Werner A(6), Grayson PC(1), Beck DB(4)(5)(20).

Author information:
(1)National Institutes of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, 
National Institutes of Health (NHS), Bethesda, MD.
(2)Leeds Institute of Rheumatic and Musculoskeletal Medicine, University of 
Leeds, United Kingdom.
(3)National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR)-Leeds Biomedical 
Research Centre, United Kingdom.
(4)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD.
(5)Center for Human Genetics and Genomics, New York University Grossman School 
of Medicine, NY, NY.
(6)National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research and.
(7)National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD.
(8)Division of Rheumatology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD.
(9)Division of Rheumatology, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
CA.
(10)Division of Rheumatology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science, 
Rochester, MN.
(11)Haematological Malignancy Diagnostic Service, Leeds Cancer Centre, St 
James's University Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom.
(12)Sheffield Teaching Hospitals National Institutes of Health (NHS) Foundation, 
Sheffield, United Kingdom.
(13)Immunity and Inflammation Theme, Translational and Clinical Research 
Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
(14)Research Department of Hematology, Cancer Institute, University College 
London, London, United Kingdom.
(15)National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR)/University College 
London Hospitals (UCLH) Clinical Research Facility, University College London 
Hospitals National Institutes of Health (NHS) Foundation Trust, London, United 
Kingdom.
(16)Institute of Allergology, Charite - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate 
member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin 
Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany.
(17)Fraunhofer Institute for Translational Medicine and Pharmacology (ITMP), 
Allergology and Immunology, Berlin, Germany.
(18)Autoinflammation Reference Center Charite (ARC2), Charite - 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany.
(19)Department of Laboratory Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
MD; and.
(20)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, New York University 
Grossman School of Medicine, NY, NY.

Comment in
    Blood. 2022 Sep 29;140(13):1455-1457. doi: 10.1182/blood.2022017560.

Somatic mutations in UBA1 cause vacuoles, E1 ubiquitin-activating enzyme, 
X-linked, autoinflammatory somatic (VEXAS) syndrome, an adult-onset inflammatory 
disease with an overlap of hematologic manifestations. VEXAS syndrome is 
characterized by a high mortality rate and significant clinical heterogeneity. 
We sought to determine independent predictors of survival in VEXAS and to 
understand the mechanistic basis for these factors. We analyzed 83 patients with 
somatic pathogenic variants in UBA1 at p.Met41 (p.Met41Leu/Thr/Val), the start 
codon for translation of the cytoplasmic isoform of UBA1 (UBA1b). Patients with 
the p.Met41Val genotype were most likely to have an undifferentiated 
inflammatory syndrome. Multivariate analysis showed ear chondritis was 
associated with increased survival, whereas transfusion dependence and the 
p.Met41Val variant were independently associated with decreased survival. Using 
in vitro models and patient-derived cells, we demonstrate that p.Met41Val 
variant supports less UBA1b translation than either p.Met41Leu or p.Met41Thr, 
providing a molecular rationale for decreased survival. In addition, we show 
that these 3 canonical VEXAS variants produce more UBA1b than any of the 6 other 
possible single-nucleotide variants within this codon. Finally, we report a 
patient, clinically diagnosed with VEXAS syndrome, with 2 novel mutations in 
UBA1 occurring in cis on the same allele. One mutation (c.121 A>T; p.Met41Leu) 
caused severely reduced translation of UBA1b in a reporter assay, but 
coexpression with the second mutation (c.119 G>C; p.Gly40Ala) rescued UBA1b 
levels to those of canonical mutations. We conclude that regulation of residual 
UBA1b translation is fundamental to the pathogenesis of VEXAS syndrome and 
contributes to disease prognosis.

© 2022 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.2022016985
PMCID: PMC9523373
PMID: 35793467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]