---
reference_id: "PMID:29461867"
title: "Associations Between Three CTLA-4 Polymorphisms and Hashimoto's Thyroiditis Risk: An Updated Meta-Analysis with Trial Sequential Analysis."
authors:
- Hu Y
- Xu K
- Jiang L
- Zhang L
- Shi H
- Cui D
journal: Genet Test Mol Biomarkers
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2017.0243
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Associations Between Three CTLA-4 Polymorphisms and Hashimoto's Thyroiditis Risk: An Updated Meta-Analysis with Trial Sequential Analysis.
**Authors:** Hu Y, Xu K, Jiang L, Zhang L, Shi H, Cui D
**Journal:** Genet Test Mol Biomarkers (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1089/gtmb.2017.0243](https://doi.org/10.1089/gtmb.2017.0243)

## Content

1. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2018 Apr;22(4):224-236. doi:
10.1089/gtmb.2017.0243.  Epub 2018 Feb 20.

Associations Between Three CTLA-4 Polymorphisms and Hashimoto's Thyroiditis 
Risk: An Updated Meta-Analysis with Trial Sequential Analysis.

Hu Y(1), Xu K(1), Jiang L(1), Zhang L(1), Shi H(1), Cui D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University , Nanjing, China .

AIMS: In this article, we conducted an updated meta-analysis with trial 
sequential analysis (TSA) to refine the associations between three common single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the CTLA-4 gene (+49A/G, CT60, and -318C/T) 
and Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT).
METHODS: Statistical association analyses were performed using four genetic 
models, including the allelic, codominant, dominant, and recessive models with 
the Revman 5.3, Stata 14.0, and TSA 0.9 software. For quality evaluation, the 
Newcastle-Ottawa Scale was used.
RESULTS: Our meta-analysis included 29 independent studies with low risk of bias 
that involved 3614 cases and 8839 controls. The pooled results indicated a 
significant association between the +49A/G polymorphism and an increased risk of 
HT in all four genetic models. Furthermore, the TSA demonstrated that the 
evidence of this association was robust and credible. Subgroup analysis revealed 
a significantly higher risk of HT in Asians compared with Caucasians associated 
with the +49A/G polymorphism. Surprisingly, in contrast to the results with 
adults, we did not find any significant association when analyzing the pediatric 
subgroup. For the CT60 polymorphism, a significant association with risk of HT 
was detected overall, and subgroup analysis revealed that this association was 
significant in the Asian subgroup, but not in the Caucasian subgroup. No 
statistically significant associations were detected in any of the investigated 
genetic models for the -318C/T polymorphism. However, the results of the TSA 
suggested that the sample sizes used for the CTLA-4 CT60 and -318C/T SNPs were 
insufficient.
CONCLUSION: Our meta-analysis showed significant associations between the risk 
of HT and both the +49A/G and CT60 polymorphisms, but not the -318C/T 
polymorphism. In addition, the TSA results indicated that CTLA-4 +49A/G should 
be considered as a biomarker for HT, whereas both the CT60 and -318C/T SNPs 
warrant confirmation by further studies.

DOI: 10.1089/gtmb.2017.0243
PMID: 29461867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]