---
reference_id: "PMID:38904987"
title: "The Alk receptor tyrosine kinase regulates Sparkly, a novel activity regulating neuropeptide precursor in the Drosophila central nervous system."
authors:
- Sukumar SK
- Antonydhason V
- Molander L
- Sandakly J
- Kleit M
- Umapathy G
- Mendoza-Garcia P
- Masudi T
- Schlosser A
- Nässel DR
- Wegener C
- Shirinian M
- Palmer RH
journal: Elife
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.88985
keywords:
- Animals
- Central Nervous System/metabolism
- "Drosophila Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- "Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/metabolism, genetics"
- "Larva/metabolism, genetics, growth & development"
- "Neuropeptides/metabolism, genetics"
- Signal Transduction
- "Drosophila melanogaster/genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/metabolism, genetics"
- "Drosophila/genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Gene Expression Regulation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Alk receptor tyrosine kinase regulates Sparkly, a novel activity regulating neuropeptide precursor in the Drosophila central nervous system.
**Authors:** Sukumar SK, Antonydhason V, Molander L, Sandakly J, Kleit M, Umapathy G, Mendoza-Garcia P, Masudi T, Schlosser A, Nässel DR, Wegener C, Shirinian M, Palmer RH
**Journal:** Elife (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.88985](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.88985)

## Content

1. Elife. 2024 Jun 21;12:RP88985. doi: 10.7554/eLife.88985.

The Alk receptor tyrosine kinase regulates Sparkly, a novel activity regulating
neuropeptide precursor in the Drosophila central nervous system.

Sukumar SK(1), Antonydhason V(1), Molander L(1), Sandakly J(2), Kleit M(2),
Umapathy G(1), Mendoza-Garcia P(1), Masudi T(1), Schlosser A(3), Nässel DR(4),
Wegener C(5), Shirinian M(2), Palmer RH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Institute of
Biomedicine, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Experimental Pathology, Immunology and Microbiology, Faculty of
Medicine, American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon.
(3)Julius-Maximilians-Universität Würzburg, Rudolf-Virchow-Center, Center for
Integrative and Translational Bioimaging, Würzburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Zoology, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Julius-Maximilians-Universität Würzburg, Biocenter, Theodor-Boveri-Institute,
Neurobiology and Genetics, Würzburg, Germany.

Update of
    doi: 10.1101/2023.06.02.543395.
    doi: 10.7554/eLife.88985.1.
    doi: 10.7554/eLife.88985.2.
    doi: 10.7554/eLife.88985.3.
    doi: 10.7554/eLife.88985.4.

Numerous roles for the Alk receptor tyrosine kinase have been described in
Drosophila, including functions in the central nervous system (CNS), however the
molecular details are poorly understood. To gain mechanistic insight, we
employed Targeted DamID (TaDa) transcriptional profiling to identify targets of
Alk signaling in the larval CNS. TaDa was employed in larval CNS tissues, while
genetically manipulating Alk signaling output. The resulting TaDa data were
analyzed together with larval CNS scRNA-seq datasets performed under similar
conditions, identifying a role for Alk in the transcriptional regulation of
neuroendocrine gene expression. Further integration with bulk and scRNA-seq
datasets from larval brains in which Alk signaling was manipulated identified a
previously uncharacterized Drosophila neuropeptide precursor encoded by CG4577
as an Alk signaling transcriptional target. CG4577, which we named Sparkly
(Spar), is expressed in a subset of Alk-positive neuroendocrine cells in the
developing larval CNS, including circadian clock neurons. In agreement with our
TaDa analysis, overexpression of the Drosophila Alk ligand Jeb resulted in
increased levels of Spar protein in the larval CNS. We show that Spar protein is
expressed in circadian (clock) neurons, and flies lacking Spar exhibit defects
in sleep and circadian activity control. In summary, we report a novel activity
regulating neuropeptide precursor gene that is regulated by Alk signaling in the
Drosophila CNS.

© 2023, Sukumar et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.88985
PMCID: PMC11196111
PMID: 38904987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SS, VA, LM, JS, MK, GU, PM, TM, AS, DN, CW, MS,
RP No competing interests declared
