---
reference_id: "PMID:30737480"
title: "Homogentisate 1,2-dioxygenase (HGD) gene variants, their analysis and genotype-phenotype correlations in the largest cohort of patients with AKU."
authors:
- Ascher DB
- Spiga O
- Sekelska M
- Pires DEV
- Bernini A
- Tiezzi M
- Kralovicova J
- Borovska I
- Soltysova A
- Olsson B
- Galderisi S
- Cicaloni V
- Ranganath L
- Santucci A
- Zatkova A
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41431-019-0354-0
keywords:
- "Alkaptonuria/enzymology, genetics"
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Genetic Variation
- Genotype
- "Homogentisate 1,2-Dioxygenase/genetics"
- Humans
- Ligase Chain Reaction
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homogentisate 1,2-dioxygenase (HGD) gene variants, their analysis and genotype-phenotype correlations in the largest cohort of patients with AKU.
**Authors:** Ascher DB, Spiga O, Sekelska M, Pires DEV, Bernini A, Tiezzi M, Kralovicova J, Borovska I, Soltysova A, Olsson B, Galderisi S, Cicaloni V, Ranganath L, Santucci A, Zatkova A
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41431-019-0354-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-019-0354-0)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2019 Jun;27(6):888-902. doi: 10.1038/s41431-019-0354-0. Epub
2019 Feb 8.

Homogentisate 1,2-dioxygenase (HGD) gene variants, their analysis and
genotype-phenotype correlations in the largest cohort of patients with AKU.

Ascher DB(1)(2)(3), Spiga O(4), Sekelska M(5), Pires DEV(2)(3), Bernini A(4),
Tiezzi M(4), Kralovicova J(6), Borovska I(6), Soltysova A(5)(7), Olsson B(8),
Galderisi S(4), Cicaloni V(4)(9), Ranganath L(10), Santucci A(4)(11), Zatkova
A(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Institute Molecular
Science & Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC,
Australia.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Cambridge University, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Instituto René Rachou, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais,
Brazil.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, Chemistry and Pharmacy, Department of Excellence
2018-22, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.
(5)Biomedical Research Center, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia.
(6)Center of Biosciences, Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Slovak
Academy of Science, Bratislava, Slovakia.
(7)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius
University, Bratislava, Slovakia.
(8)Clinical Development, Swedish Orphan Biovitrum AB, Stockholm, Sweden.
(9)Toscana life Sciences (TLS), Siena, Italy.
(10)Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Metabolism, Royal Liverpool
University Hospital, Liverpool, UK.
(11)Centro Interdipartimentale per lo Studio Biochimico delle Patologie
Osteoarticolari, Università di Siena, Siena, Italy.
(12)Biomedical Research Center, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava,
Slovakia. andrea.zatkova@savba.sk.

Alkaptonuria (AKU) is a rare metabolic disorder caused by a deficient enzyme in
the tyrosine degradation pathway, homogentisate 1,2-dioxygenase (HGD). In 172
AKU patients from 39 countries, we identified 28 novel variants of the HGD gene,
which include three larger genomic deletions within this gene discovered via
self-designed multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) probes. In
addition, using a reporter minigene assay, we provide evidence that three of
eight tested variants potentially affecting splicing cause exon skipping or
cryptic splice-site activation. Extensive bioinformatics analysis of novel
missense variants, and of the entire HGD monomer, confirmed mCSM as an effective
computational tool for evaluating possible enzyme inactivation mechanisms. For
the first time for AKU, a genotype-phenotype correlation study was performed for
the three most frequent HGD variants identified in the Suitability Of Nitisinone
in Alkaptonuria 2 (SONIA2) study. We found a small but statistically significant
difference in urinary homogentisic acid (HGA) excretion, corrected for dietary
protein intake, between variants leading to 1% or >30% residual HGD activity.
There was, interestingly, no difference in serum levels or absolute urinary
excretion of HGA, or clinical symptoms, indicating that protein intake is more
important than differences in HGD variants for the amounts of HGA that
accumulate in the body of AKU patients.

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-019-0354-0
PMCID: PMC6777518
PMID: 30737480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest.
