---
reference_id: "PMID:37287975"
title: Lack of strong innate immune reactivity renders macrophages alone unable to control productive Varicella-Zoster Virus infection in an isogenic human iPSC-derived neuronal co-culture model.
authors:
- Van Breedam E
- Buyle-Huybrecht T
- Govaerts J
- Meysman P
- Bours A
- Boeren M
- Di Stefano J
- Caers T
- De Reu H
- Dirkx L
- Schippers J
- Bartholomeus E
- Lebrun M
- Sadzot-Delvaux C
- Rybakowska P
- Alarcón-Riquelme ME
- Marañón C
- Laukens K
- Delputte P
- Ogunjimi B
- Ponsaerts P
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1177245
keywords:
- Humans
- "Herpesvirus 3, Human"
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells
- Coculture Techniques
- Virus Replication/physiology
- Chickenpox
- Herpes Zoster
- Varicella Zoster Virus Infection
- Neurons
- Macrophages
- Interferons
- Antiviral Agents
- "Immunity, Innate"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lack of strong innate immune reactivity renders macrophages alone unable to control productive Varicella-Zoster Virus infection in an isogenic human iPSC-derived neuronal co-culture model.
**Authors:** Van Breedam E, Buyle-Huybrecht T, Govaerts J, Meysman P, Bours A, Boeren M, Di Stefano J, Caers T, De Reu H, Dirkx L, Schippers J, Bartholomeus E, Lebrun M, Sadzot-Delvaux C, Rybakowska P, Alarcón-Riquelme ME, Marañón C, Laukens K, Delputte P, Ogunjimi B, Ponsaerts P
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2023.1177245](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1177245)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2023 May 23;14:1177245. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1177245.
eCollection 2023.

Lack of strong innate immune reactivity renders macrophages alone unable to
control productive Varicella-Zoster Virus infection in an isogenic human
iPSC-derived neuronal co-culture model.

Van Breedam E(1), Buyle-Huybrecht T(1)(2)(3), Govaerts J(1)(2)(3), Meysman
P(4)(5)(6), Bours A(6), Boeren M(1)(2)(3), Di Stefano J(1), Caers T(1)(3), De
Reu H(1)(7), Dirkx L(3), Schippers J(2), Bartholomeus E(2), Lebrun M(8),
Sadzot-Delvaux C(8), Rybakowska P(9), Alarcón-Riquelme ME(9), Marañón C(9),
Laukens K(4)(5)(6), Delputte P(6)(10), Ogunjimi B(2)(4)(11)(12), Ponsaerts
P(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Hematology (LEH), Vaccine and Infectious Disease
Institute (VAXINFECTIO), University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(2)Antwerp Center for Translational Immunology and Virology (ACTIV), Vaccine and
Infectious Disease Institute (VAXINFECTIO), University of Antwerp, Antwerp,
Belgium.
(3)Laboratory of Microbiology, Parasitology and Hygiene (LMPH), University of
Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(4)Antwerp Unit for Data Analysis and Computation in Immunology and Sequencing
(AUDACIS), University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(5)Adrem Data Lab, Department of Computer Science, University of Antwerp,
Antwerp, Belgium.
(6)Biomedical Informatics Research Network Antwerp (Biomina), University of
Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(7)Flow Cytometry and Cell Sorting Core Facility (FACSUA), Laboratory of
Experimental Hematology (LEH), Vaccine and Infectious Disease Institute
(VAXINFECTIO), University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(8)Laboratory of Virology and Immunology, Interdisciplinary Research Institute
in the Biomedical Sciences GIGA-Infection, Inflammation and Immunity, University
of Liège, Liège, Belgium.
(9)Department of Genomic Medicine, Centre for Genomics and Oncological Research
(GENYO), Pfizer-University of Granada-Junta de Andalucía, Parque Tecnológico de
la Salud (PTS), Granada, Spain.
(10)Infla-Med, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(11)Centre for Health Economics Research & Modelling Infectious Diseases
(CHERMID), Vaccine & Infectious Disease Institute (VAXINFECTIO), University of
Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(12)Department of Paediatrics, Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium.

With Varicella-Zoster Virus (VZV) being an exclusive human pathogen, human
induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived neural cell culture models are an
emerging tool to investigate VZV neuro-immune interactions. Using a
compartmentalized hiPSC-derived neuronal model allowing axonal VZV infection, we
previously demonstrated that paracrine interferon (IFN)-α2 signalling is
required to activate a broad spectrum of interferon-stimulated genes able to
counteract a productive VZV infection in hiPSC-neurons. In this new study, we
now investigated whether innate immune signalling by VZV-challenged macrophages
was able to orchestrate an antiviral immune response in VZV-infected
hiPSC-neurons. In order to establish an isogenic hiPSC-neuron/hiPSC-macrophage
co-culture model, hiPSC-macrophages were generated and characterised for
phenotype, gene expression, cytokine production and phagocytic capacity. Even
though immunological competence of hiPSC-macrophages was shown following
stimulation with the poly(dA:dT) or treatment with IFN-α2, hiPSC-macrophages in
co-culture with VZV-infected hiPSC-neurons were unable to mount an antiviral
immune response capable of suppressing a productive neuronal VZV infection.
Subsequently, a comprehensive RNA-Seq analysis confirmed the lack of strong
immune responsiveness by hiPSC-neurons and hiPSC-macrophages upon, respectively,
VZV infection or challenge. This may suggest the need of other cell types, like
T-cells or other innate immune cells, to (co-)orchestrate an efficient antiviral
immune response against VZV-infected neurons.

Copyright © 2023 Van Breedam, Buyle-Huybrecht, Govaerts, Meysman, Bours, Boeren,
Di Stefano, Caers, De Reu, Dirkx, Schippers, Bartholomeus, Lebrun,
Sadzot-Delvaux, Rybakowska, Alarcón-Riquelme, Marañón, Laukens, Delputte,
Ogunjimi and Ponsaerts.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1177245
PMCID: PMC10241998
PMID: 37287975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CM, PR and MA-R are affiliated with the Centre
for Genomics and Oncological Research (GENYO), Pfizer-University of
Granada-Junta de Andalucía, whereby Pfizer is solely the owner of the build-ing
and provides funding for maintenance of the building. The remaining authors
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of
interest.
