---
reference_id: "PMID:35348938"
title: The wide spectrum of cryoglobulinemic vasculitis and an overview of therapeutic advancements.
authors:
- Dammacco F
- Lauletta G
- Vacca A
journal: Clin Exp Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10238-022-00808-1
keywords:
- Humans
- Antiviral Agents/therapeutic use
- "Cryoglobulinemia/complications, drug therapy"
- "Hepatitis C, Chronic/complications"
- Cryoglobulins
- "Vasculitis/complications, drug therapy"
- Hepatitis C/complications
- Hepacivirus
- Rituximab/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The wide spectrum of cryoglobulinemic vasculitis and an overview of therapeutic advancements.
**Authors:** Dammacco F, Lauletta G, Vacca A
**Journal:** Clin Exp Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10238-022-00808-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10238-022-00808-1)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Med. 2023 Jun;23(2):255-272. doi: 10.1007/s10238-022-00808-1. Epub
2022  Mar 28.

The wide spectrum of cryoglobulinemic vasculitis and an overview of therapeutic 
advancements.

Dammacco F(1), Lauletta G(2), Vacca A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Human Oncology, University of Bari 
"Aldo Moro" Medical School, Polyclinic, Piazza Giulio Cesare, 11, 70124, Bari, 
Italy. francesco.dammacco@uniba.it.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Human Oncology, University of Bari 
"Aldo Moro" Medical School, Polyclinic, Piazza Giulio Cesare, 11, 70124, Bari, 
Italy.

Immunoglobulins that reversibly precipitate at temperatures below 37 °C are 
called cryoglobulins (CGs). Cryoglobulinemia often manifests as cryoglobulinemic 
vasculitis (CV), whose symptoms range in severity from purpuric eruptions to 
life-threatening features. The majority of CV patients are infected with 
hepatitis C virus (HCV), whereas lymphoproliferative disorders or connective 
tissue diseases (CTD) are commonly diagnosed among patients with CV of 
non-infectious origin. In the absence of detectable associated disease, 
cryoglobulinemia is classified as "essential" (EMC). All HCV-positive CV 
patients should be given direct-acting antiviral agents (DAAs) that are 
consistently able to induce a sustained virologic response (SVR). 
Glucocorticoids (GCs) can mitigate CV-associated vasculitis, but they have no 
role as maintenance therapy. Cyclophosphamide restrains the hyperactive phase(s) 
of the disease and the post-apheresis rebound of newly synthesized CGs. Its use 
has been largely replaced by rituximab (RTX) in patients unresponsive to DAAs, 
patients progressing to B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (B-NHL) and patients in whom 
CV persists or reappears after clearance of HCV. Therapeutic apheresis is an 
emergency treatment for CV patients with hyperviscosity syndrome. HCV-positive 
CV patients are at an increased risk of developing NHL, but the achievement of 
SVR can effectively prevent HCV-related NHL or induce the remission of an 
already established lymphoma, even without chemotherapy. The treatment of 
patients with IgM or IgG monoclonal cryoglobulins and an underlying 
immunoproliferative disorder is based on the regimens adopted for patients with 
the same B-cell malignancies but without circulating CGs. For patients with CTD, 
GCs plus alkylating agents or RTX are similarly effective as first-line therapy 
and in the relapse/refractory setting. In patients with EMC, treatment should 
consist of GCs plus RTX, with the dose of GCs tapered as soon as possible to 
reduce the risk of infectious complications.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s10238-022-00808-1
PMCID: PMC8960698
PMID: 35348938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no relevant financial or 
non-financial interests to disclose.