---
reference_id: "PMID:36899857"
title: Role of Astrocytes in the Pathophysiology of Lafora Disease and Other Glycogen Storage Disorders.
authors:
- Duran J
journal: Cells
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cells12050722
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Aged
- "Lafora Disease/genetics, pathology"
- Astrocytes/pathology
- Glycogen
- Neurons/pathology
- Glycogen Storage Disease/pathology
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of Astrocytes in the Pathophysiology of Lafora Disease and Other Glycogen Storage Disorders.
**Authors:** Duran J
**Journal:** Cells (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells12050722](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells12050722)

## Content

1. Cells. 2023 Feb 24;12(5):722. doi: 10.3390/cells12050722.

Role of Astrocytes in the Pathophysiology of Lafora Disease and Other Glycogen
Storage Disorders.

Duran J(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institut Químic de Sarrià (IQS), Universitat Ramon Llull (URL), 08017
Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia (IBEC), The Barcelona Institute of
Science and Technology, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona
Institute of Science and Technology, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.

Lafora disease is a rare disorder caused by loss of function mutations in either
the EPM2A or NHLRC1 gene. The initial symptoms of this condition are most
commonly epileptic seizures, but the disease progresses rapidly with dementia,
neuropsychiatric symptoms, and cognitive deterioration and has a fatal outcome
within 5-10 years after onset. The hallmark of the disease is the accumulation
of poorly branched glycogen in the form of aggregates known as Lafora bodies in
the brain and other tissues. Several reports have demonstrated that the
accumulation of this abnormal glycogen underlies all the pathologic traits of
the disease. For decades, Lafora bodies were thought to accumulate exclusively
in neurons. However, it was recently identified that most of these glycogen
aggregates are present in astrocytes. Importantly, astrocytic Lafora bodies have
been shown to contribute to pathology in Lafora disease. These results identify
a primary role of astrocytes in the pathophysiology of Lafora disease and have
important implications for other conditions in which glycogen abnormally
accumulates in astrocytes, such as Adult Polyglucosan Body disease and the
buildup of Corpora amylacea in aged brains.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12050722
PMCID: PMC10000527
PMID: 36899857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest.
