---
reference_id: "PMID:25453094"
title: "Recessive cardiac phenotypes in induced pluripotent stem cell models of Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome: disease mechanisms and pharmacological rescue."
authors:
- Zhang M
- "D'Aniello C"
- Verkerk AO
- Wrobel E
- Frank S
- Ward-van Oostwaard D
- Piccini I
- Freund C
- Rao J
- Seebohm G
- Atsma DE
- Schulze-Bahr E
- Mummery CL
- Greber B
- Bellin M
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1419553111
keywords:
- Action Potentials/physiology
- Analysis of Variance
- Base Sequence
- Cell Line
- "Genes, Recessive/genetics"
- Genetic Engineering
- Humans
- In Vitro Techniques
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/physiology
- "Jervell-Lange Nielsen Syndrome/drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- "KCNQ1 Potassium Channel/chemistry, genetics"
- "Models, Biological"
- "Models, Molecular"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/physiology"
- Phenotype
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recessive cardiac phenotypes in induced pluripotent stem cell models of Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome: disease mechanisms and pharmacological rescue.
**Authors:** Zhang M, D'Aniello C, Verkerk AO, Wrobel E, Frank S, Ward-van Oostwaard D, Piccini I, Freund C, Rao J, Seebohm G, Atsma DE, Schulze-Bahr E, Mummery CL, Greber B, Bellin M
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1419553111](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1419553111)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Dec 16;111(50):E5383-92. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1419553111. Epub 2014 Dec 1.

Recessive cardiac phenotypes in induced pluripotent stem cell models of Jervell
and Lange-Nielsen syndrome: disease mechanisms and pharmacological rescue.

Zhang M(1), D'Aniello C(2), Verkerk AO(3), Wrobel E(4), Frank S(1), Ward-van
Oostwaard D(2), Piccini I(4), Freund C(2), Rao J(1), Seebohm G(4), Atsma DE(5),
Schulze-Bahr E(4), Mummery CL(2), Greber B(6), Bellin M(7).

Author information:
(1)Human Stem Cell Pluripotency Group, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Biomedicine, D-48149 Münster, Germany; Chemical Genomics Centre of the Max
Planck Society, 44227 Dortmund, Germany; Departments of.
(2)Anatomy and Embryology and.
(3)Department of Anatomy, Embryology and Physiology, Heart Failure Research
Center, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, 1105 AZ, The Netherlands; and.
(4)Institute for Genetics of Heart Diseases, Department of Cardiovascular
Medicine, University Hospital Münster, D-48149 Münster, Germany.
(5)Cardiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 2300 RC, The
Netherlands;
(6)Human Stem Cell Pluripotency Group, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Biomedicine, D-48149 Münster, Germany; Chemical Genomics Centre of the Max
Planck Society, 44227 Dortmund, Germany; Departments of
boris.greber@mpi-muenster.mpg.de m.bellin@lumc.nl.
(7)Anatomy and Embryology and boris.greber@mpi-muenster.mpg.de m.bellin@lumc.nl.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Apr 21;112(16):E1969. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1503762112.
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Apr 21;112(16):E1968. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1503347112.

Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome (JLNS) is one of the most severe
life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias. Patients display delayed cardiac
repolarization, associated high risk of sudden death due to ventricular
tachycardia, and congenital bilateral deafness. In contrast to the autosomal
dominant forms of long QT syndrome, JLNS is a recessive trait, resulting from
homozygous (or compound heterozygous) mutations in KCNQ1 or KCNE1. These genes
encode the α and β subunits, respectively, of the ion channel conducting the
slow component of the delayed rectifier K(+) current, IKs. We used complementary
approaches, reprogramming patient cells and genetic engineering, to generate
human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC) models of JLNS, covering splice site
(c.478-2A>T) and missense (c.1781G>A) mutations, the two major classes of
JLNS-causing defects in KCNQ1. Electrophysiological comparison of hiPSC-derived
cardiomyocytes (CMs) from homozygous JLNS, heterozygous, and wild-type lines
recapitulated the typical and severe features of JLNS, including pronounced
action and field potential prolongation and severe reduction or absence of IKs.
We show that this phenotype had distinct underlying molecular mechanisms in the
two sets of cell lines: the previously unidentified c.478-2A>T mutation was
amorphic and gave rise to a strictly recessive phenotype in JLNS-CMs, whereas
the missense c.1781G>A lesion caused a gene dosage-dependent channel reduction
at the cell membrane. Moreover, adrenergic stimulation caused action potential
prolongation specifically in JLNS-CMs. Furthermore, sensitivity to proarrhythmic
drugs was strongly enhanced in JLNS-CMs but could be pharmacologically
corrected. Our data provide mechanistic insight into distinct classes of
JLNS-causing mutations and demonstrate the potential of hiPSC-CMs in drug
evaluation.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1419553111
PMCID: PMC4273331
PMID: 25453094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: C.L.M. is
cofounder and advisor of Pluriomics.
