---
reference_id: "PMID:41184854"
title: "Achondroplasia and hypochondroplasia in France: a nationwide epidemiological analysis."
authors:
- Baujat G
- Hamandjian MA
- Jannot AS
- Karam P
- Cormier-Daire V
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-04069-5
keywords:
- Humans
- "Achondroplasia/epidemiology, genetics"
- "Dwarfism/epidemiology, genetics"
- Female
- "Lordosis/epidemiology, genetics"
- France/epidemiology
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/epidemiology, genetics"
- Male
- Child
- Adolescent
- Retrospective Studies
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3/genetics"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Infant
- Bone and Bones/abnormalities
- Prevalence
- Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Achondroplasia and hypochondroplasia in France: a nationwide epidemiological analysis.
**Authors:** Baujat G, Hamandjian MA, Jannot AS, Karam P, Cormier-Daire V
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-025-04069-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-025-04069-5)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2025 Nov 3;20(1):555. doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-04069-5.

Achondroplasia and hypochondroplasia in France: a nationwide epidemiological 
analysis.

Baujat G(1), Hamandjian MA(2), Jannot AS(3), Karam P(4), Cormier-Daire V(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genomic Medicine for Rare Diseases, Reference Center for 
Skeletal Dysplasia, Necker- Enfants Malades Hospital, Imagine Institute, Paris 
Cité University, INSERM UMR 1163, Paris, France.
(2)Medical Department, BioMarin, Paris, France.
(3)Banque Nationale de Données Maladies Rares, DSN-I&D, APHP, Paris, France.
(4)PKCS, Ecully, France.
(5)Department of Genomic Medicine for Rare Diseases, Reference Center for 
Skeletal Dysplasia, Necker- Enfants Malades Hospital, Imagine Institute, Paris 
Cité University, INSERM UMR 1163, Paris, France. valerie.cormier-daire@aphp.fr.

BACKGROUND: Achondroplasia (ACH) and hypochondroplasia (HCH) are among the most 
common forms of skeletal dysplasia, caused by gain-of-function variants in the 
FGFR3 gene, leading to disproportionate short stature. The birth prevalence of 
HCH remains poorly defined. In addition, the reported birth prevalence of ACH in 
Europe and globally may not be applicable to France, given its relatively high 
rate of pregnancy terminations for medical reasons. This retrospective study 
provides the first birth prevalence estimates for ACH and HCH in France, using 
the French National Registry of Rare Diseases (Banque Nationale de Données 
Maladies Rares, BNDMR).
RESULTS: As of January 2024, 766 patients with ACH (ORPHA:15) and 408 with HCH 
(ORPHA:429) were identified. Most patients were diagnosed and cared for within 
the network of constitutional bone diseases centers (ACH: 71.3%; HCH: 63.4%). 
Overall, 85.5% of ACH cases and 57.2% of HCH cases were related to de novo 
genetic variants (p < 0.0001). ACH was diagnosed prenatally in 40.8% and at 
birth in 40.6% of patients, whereas HCH was diagnosed postnatally in 65.7% of 
cases (p < 0.0001). To estimate live birth prevalence, we focused on pediatric 
patients (0-15 years) born between 2008 and 2023. The mean (range) live birth 
prevalence was 3.27 per 100,000 for ACH (1.90-4.03) and 1.31 per 100,000 for HCH 
(0.54-2.08).
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides the first nationwide birth prevalence estimates 
for ACH and HCH in France, leveraging data from BNDMR. ACH is often identified 
prenatally, whereas HCH is predominantly diagnosed postnatally. The prevalence 
of HCH may be underestimated due to under-recognition of milder forms. With the 
emergence of specific therapies for ACH, and for HCH in the near future, 
strengthening specialized care pathways is critical to ensure equitable access 
to timely diagnosis and interventions.
CLINICAL TRIAL NUMBER: Not applicable.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-025-04069-5
PMCID: PMC12581505
PMID: 41184854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: This non-interventional study was approved by the BNDMR scientific 
committee (BPD-2018-DIAG-008/-002) and registered with the French Data 
Protection Authority (CNIL: MR004) and the AP-HP local registry 
(#20230314171333). In accordance with French law, patients were informed about 
the inclusion of their data in BNDMR and had the opportunity to object to its 
use for research. Only those who did not object were included in our study. 
Consent for publication: All authors agree with the content of the manuscript. 
All authors have agreed to the submission and publication of this manuscript. 
Competing interests: GB declares competing interests for advisory consultancy 
and expert report production for BioMarin, Inozyme, Ipsen, Sanofi, and Alexion; 
participation in scientific work for Incyte, Ipsen, QED, Ascendis, BioMarin, 
Alexion, Clementia, and Therachon Pfizer; and writing articles and interventions 
for Elsevier, BioMarin, Ipsen, and Alexion. MAH is a BioMarin employee and has 
stock options. ASJ and PK have no conflicts of interest to declare. VCD declares 
competing interests related to advisory consultancy or interventions for 
BioMarin and QED.