---
reference_id: "PMID:19782302"
title: The histopathology of gastrointestinal motility disorders in children.
authors:
- Feichter S
- Meier-Ruge WA
- Bruder E
journal: Semin Pediatr Surg
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2009.07.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The histopathology of gastrointestinal motility disorders in children.
**Authors:** Feichter S, Meier-Ruge WA, Bruder E
**Journal:** Semin Pediatr Surg (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2009.07.002](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2009.07.002)

## Content

1. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2009 Nov;18(4):206-11. doi: 
10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2009.07.002.

The histopathology of gastrointestinal motility disorders in children.

Feichter S(1), Meier-Ruge WA, Bruder E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hospital Lucerne, Lucerne, Switzerland.

Gastrointestinal motility disorders and chronic constipation are common 
pediatric problems. Symptoms of abdominal discomfort are frequently encountered 
in the daily practice of pediatricians and pediatric surgeons. Normal 
peristalsis depends on the interaction between muscles, nerve cells, and 
tendinous connective tissue of muscularis propria. Malfunction of any of these 
components results in a motility disorder. Aganglionosis, typically of the left 
distal colon, is the cause of Hirschsprung disease. Hypoganglionosis constitutes 
another gastrointestinal motility disorder. In hypoplastic hypoganglionosis, the 
number of nerve cells and the size of ganglia of the enteric nervous system are 
reduced, resulting in symptoms similar to aganglionosis. In intestinal neuronal 
dysplasia type B, submucous plexus development is disturbed. Immaturity of the 
enteric nervous system, but also ganglioneuromatosis, can be the underlying 
cause of chronic constipation. Chronic constipation may be caused by a myopathy. 
Aplasia or atrophy of the tendinous connective tissue of muscularis propria may 
cause desmosis, which may result in an aperistaltic syndrome. In severe chronic 
constipation, a histopathological diagnosis of the underlying cause is useful. 
In the diagnostic approach for most of these causes of chronic constipation, 
enzyme histochemistry is an efficient tool to complement conventional 
immunohistochemical and selected molecular technologies. An interdisciplinary 
approach of a gastrointestinal working group is beneficial in the management of 
these difficult patients.

DOI: 10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2009.07.002
PMID: 19782302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]