---
reference_id: "PMID:38007664"
title: Amyloid and Tau PET Positivity in Progressive Agrammatic Aphasia and Apraxia of Speech.
authors:
- Tetzloff KA
- Duffy JR
- Clark HM
- Pham NTT
- Machulda MM
- Botha H
- Jack CR
- Dickson DW
- Lowe VJ
- Josephs KA
- Whitwell JL
- Utianski RL
journal: J Alzheimers Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3233/JAD-230912
keywords:
- Humans
- "Alzheimer Disease/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Amyloid/metabolism
- Amyloid beta-Peptides/metabolism
- Aphasia
- Apraxias
- Biomarkers
- Brain/pathology
- Positron-Emission Tomography/methods
- Speech
- tau Proteins/metabolism
- Amyloid beta-Protein Precursor
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Amyloid and Tau PET Positivity in Progressive Agrammatic Aphasia and Apraxia of Speech.
**Authors:** Tetzloff KA, Duffy JR, Clark HM, Pham NTT, Machulda MM, Botha H, Jack CR, Dickson DW, Lowe VJ, Josephs KA, Whitwell JL, Utianski RL
**Journal:** J Alzheimers Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JAD-230912](https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-230912)

## Content

1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2023;96(4):1759-1765. doi: 10.3233/JAD-230912.

Amyloid and Tau PET Positivity in Progressive Agrammatic Aphasia and Apraxia of 
Speech.

Tetzloff KA(1), Duffy JR(1), Clark HM(1), Pham NTT(2), Machulda MM(3), Botha 
H(1), Jack CR(2), Dickson DW(2), Lowe VJ(2), Josephs KA(1), Whitwell JL(2), 
Utianski RL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(2)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.

BACKGROUND: The agrammatic variant of primary progressive aphasia (PAA), primary 
progressive apraxia of speech (PPAOS), or a combination of both (AOS-PAA) are 
neurodegenerative disorders characterized by speech-language impairments and 
together compose the AOS-PAA spectrum disorders. These patients typically have 
an underlying 4-repeat tauopathy, although they sometimes show evidence of 
amyloid-β and tau deposition on PET, suggesting Alzheimer's disease (AD). Given 
the growing number of pharmacologic treatment options for AD, it is important to 
better understand the incidence of AD pathology in these patients.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to evaluate the frequency of amyloid-β and tau 
positivity in AOS-PAA spectrum disorders. Sixty-five patients with AOS-PAA 
underwent a clinical speech-language battery and PiB PET and flortaucipir PET 
imaging.
METHODS: Global PiB PET standardized uptake value ratios (SUVRs) and 
flortaucipir PET SUVRs from the temporal meta region of interest were compared 
between patient groups. For 19 patients who had died and undergone autopsy, 
their PET and pathology findings were also compared.
RESULTS: The results showed that although roughly half of the patients are 
positive for at least one biomarker, their clinical symptoms and biomarker 
status were not related, suggesting that AD is not the primary cause of their 
neurodegeneration. All but one patient in the autopsy subset had a Braak stage 
of IV or less, despite four being positive on tau PET imaging.
CONCLUSIONS: Inclusion criteria for clinical trials should specify clinical 
presentation or adjust the evaluation of such treatments to be specific to 
disease diagnosis beyond the presence of certain imaging biomarkers.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-230912
PMCID: PMC10804396
PMID: 38007664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: Dr. Jennifer L. Whitwell 
is a Board Member of this journal but was not involved in the peer-review 
process nor had access to any information regarding its peer-review.