---
reference_id: "PMID:27988895"
title: "Radiopharmaceuticals for metastatic bone pain palliation: available options in the clinical domain and their comparisons."
authors:
- Das T
- Banerjee S
journal: Clin Exp Metastasis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s10585-016-9831-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Radiopharmaceuticals for metastatic bone pain palliation: available options in the clinical domain and their comparisons.
**Authors:** Das T, Banerjee S
**Journal:** Clin Exp Metastasis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10585-016-9831-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10585-016-9831-9)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2017 Jan;34(1):1-10. doi: 10.1007/s10585-016-9831-9. Epub
 2016 Dec 17.

Radiopharmaceuticals for metastatic bone pain palliation: available options in 
the clinical domain and their comparisons.

Das T(1)(2), Banerjee S(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Radiopharmaceuticals Chemistry Section, Radiochemistry and Isotope Group, 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay, Mumbai, 400085, India. tdas@barc.gov.in.
(2)Homi Bhabha National Institute, Anushaktinagar, Mumbai, 400094, India. 
tdas@barc.gov.in.
(3)Radiopharmaceuticals Chemistry Section, Radiochemistry and Isotope Group, 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay, Mumbai, 400085, India.
(4)Homi Bhabha National Institute, Anushaktinagar, Mumbai, 400094, India.

Bone pain arising due to skeletal metastases is one of the common complications 
experienced by the majority of patients suffering from prostate, breast and lung 
cancer at the advanced stage of the disease. These patients are subjected to 
palliative care in order to improve the quality of their remaining life. With 
the gradually increasing number of cancer cases, palliation of metastatic bone 
pain is gaining importance. Bone-seeking radiopharmaceuticals play a pivotal 
role in the management of cancer pain, particularly in patients with multiple 
metastases, as these agents are proven to be effective in controlling the bone 
pain with minimum side effects. Although a plethora of such radiopharmaceuticals 
have been developed and evaluated in animal models, only a few are regularly 
used in clinics while some of these agents are at different stages of clinical 
evaluations. The present article describes only those bone-seeking 
radiopharmaceuticals, which have been reported to be clinically administered 
till date, along with their relative merits and drawbacks.

DOI: 10.1007/s10585-016-9831-9
PMID: 27988895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]