---
reference_id: "PMID:39090514"
title: "Treatment of Epidermolysis Bullosa and Future Directions: A Review."
authors:
- Danescu S
- Negrutiu M
- Has C
journal: Dermatol Ther (Heidelb)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s13555-024-01227-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of Epidermolysis Bullosa and Future Directions: A Review.
**Authors:** Danescu S, Negrutiu M, Has C
**Journal:** Dermatol Ther (Heidelb) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13555-024-01227-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13555-024-01227-8)

## Content

1. Dermatol Ther (Heidelb). 2024 Aug;14(8):2059-2075. doi: 
10.1007/s13555-024-01227-8. Epub 2024 Aug 2.

Treatment of Epidermolysis Bullosa and Future Directions: A Review.

Danescu S(1), Negrutiu M(1), Has C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Medicine Iuliu Hatieganu 
Cluj-Napoca, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Medical Center University of Freiburg, Freiburg im 
Breisgau, Germany. cristina.has@uniklinik-freiburg.de.

Epidermolysis bullosa (EB) comprises rare genetic disorders characterized by 
skin and mucosal membrane blistering induced by mechanical trauma. Molecularly, 
pathogenic variants affect genes encoding proteins crucial for epidermal-dermal 
adhesion and stability. Management of severe EB is multidisciplinary, focusing 
on wound healing support, ensuring that patients thrive, and complication 
treatment. Despite extensive research over 30 years, novel therapeutic 
approaches face challenges. Gene therapy and protein therapy struggle with 
efficacy, while regenerative cell-based therapies show limited effects. Drug 
repurposing to target various pathogenic mechanisms has gained attention, as has 
in vivo gene therapy with drugs for dystrophic and junctional EB that were 
recently approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and European 
Medicines Agency (EMA). However, their high cost limits global accessibility. 
This review examines therapeutic advancements made over the past 5 years, 
exploiting a systematic literature review and clinical trial data.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s13555-024-01227-8
PMCID: PMC11333680
PMID: 39090514

Conflict of interest statement: Cristina Has has served as an advisor for Amryt 
Pharma and Krystal Biotech. Sorina Danescu and Mircea Negrutiu have nothing to 
disclose.