---
reference_id: "PMID:36948138"
title: "Objective sleep measures in chronic fatigue syndrome patients: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Mohamed AZ
- Andersen T
- Radovic S
- Del Fante P
- Kwiatek R
- Calhoun V
- Bhuta S
- Hermens DF
- Lagopoulos J
- Shan ZY
journal: Sleep Med Rev
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.smrv.2023.101771
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Objective sleep measures in chronic fatigue syndrome patients: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Mohamed AZ, Andersen T, Radovic S, Del Fante P, Kwiatek R, Calhoun V, Bhuta S, Hermens DF, Lagopoulos J, Shan ZY
**Journal:** Sleep Med Rev (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.smrv.2023.101771](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.smrv.2023.101771)

## Content

1. Sleep Med Rev. 2023 Jun;69:101771. doi: 10.1016/j.smrv.2023.101771. Epub 2023 
Mar 9.

Objective sleep measures in chronic fatigue syndrome patients: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis.

Mohamed AZ(1), Andersen T(2), Radovic S(2), Del Fante P(2), Kwiatek R(2), 
Calhoun V(3), Bhuta S(4), Hermens DF(2), Lagopoulos J(2), Shan ZY(2).

Author information:
(1)Thompson Institute, University of the Sunshine Coast, 12 Innovation Parkway, 
Birtinya, QLD, 4575, Australia. Electronic address: amohamed@usc.edu.au.
(2)Thompson Institute, University of the Sunshine Coast, 12 Innovation Parkway, 
Birtinya, QLD, 4575, Australia.
(3)Tri-institutional Center for Translational Research in Neuroimaging and Data 
Science (TReNDS), Georgia State University, Georgia Institute of Technology, 
Emory University, 55 Park Pl NE, 18th Floor, Atlanta, GA, 30303, USA.
(4)Medical Imaging Department, Gold Coast University Hospital, Parklands, QLD, 
4215, Australia.

Comment in
    Sleep Med Rev. 2023 Aug;70:101813. doi: 10.1016/j.smrv.2023.101813.

Patients with myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) often 
report disrupted and unrefreshing sleep in association with worsened fatigue 
symptoms. However, the nature and magnitude of sleep architecture alteration in 
ME/CFS is not known, with studies using objective sleep measures in ME/CFS 
generating contradictory results. The current manuscript aimed to review and 
meta-analyse of case-control studies with objective sleep measures in ME/CSF. A 
search was conducted in PubMed, Scopus, Medline, Google Scholar, and Psychoinfo 
databases. After review, 24 studies were included in the meta-analysis, 
including 20 studies with 801 adults (ME/CFS = 426; controls = 375), and 4 
studies with 477 adolescents (ME/CFS = 242; controls = 235), who underwent 
objective measurement of sleep. Adult ME/CFS patients spend longer time in bed, 
longer sleep onset latency, longer awake time after sleep onset, reduced sleep 
efficiency, decreased stage 2 sleep, more Stage 3, and longer rapid eye movement 
sleep latency. However, adolescent ME/CFS patients had longer time in bed, 
longer total sleep time, longer sleep onset latency, and reduced sleep 
efficiency. The meta-analysis results demonstrate that sleep is altered in 
ME/CFS, with changes seeming to differ between adolescent and adults, and 
suggesting sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system alterations in ME/CFS.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.smrv.2023.101771
PMCID: PMC10281648
PMID: 36948138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
report no competing interests.