---
reference_id: "PMID:20579626"
title: Identification of a frameshift mutation in Osterix in a patient with recessive osteogenesis imperfecta.
authors:
- Lapunzina P
- Aglan M
- Temtamy S
- Caparrós-Martín JA
- Valencia M
- Letón R
- Martínez-Glez V
- Elhossini R
- Amr K
- Vilaboa N
- Ruiz-Perez VL
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.05.016
keywords:
- Child
- Consanguinity
- Frameshift Mutation
- Genetic Association Studies
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Osteogenesis Imperfecta/genetics
- Pedigree
- Sp7 Transcription Factor
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of a frameshift mutation in Osterix in a patient with recessive osteogenesis imperfecta.
**Authors:** Lapunzina P, Aglan M, Temtamy S, Caparrós-Martín JA, Valencia M, Letón R, Martínez-Glez V, Elhossini R, Amr K, Vilaboa N, Ruiz-Perez VL
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.05.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.05.016)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Jul 9;87(1):110-4. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.05.016. Epub 
2010 Jun 24.

Identification of a frameshift mutation in Osterix in a patient with recessive 
osteogenesis imperfecta.

Lapunzina P(1), Aglan M, Temtamy S, Caparrós-Martín JA, Valencia M, Letón R, 
Martínez-Glez V, Elhossini R, Amr K, Vilaboa N, Ruiz-Perez VL.

Author information:
(1)CIBER de enfermedades Raras, 28046 Madrid, Spain.

Osteogenesis imperfecta, or "brittle bone disease," is a type I collagen-related 
condition associated with osteoporosis and increased risk of bone fractures. 
Using a combination of homozygosity mapping and candidate gene approach, we have 
identified a homozygous single base pair deletion (c.1052delA) in SP7/Osterix 
(OSX) in an Egyptian child with recessive osteogenesis imperfecta. The clinical 
findings from this patient include recurrent fractures, mild bone deformities, 
delayed tooth eruption, normal hearing, and white sclera. OSX encodes a 
transcription factor containing three Cys2-His2 zinc-finger DNA-binding domains 
at its C terminus, which, in mice, has been shown to be essential for bone 
formation. The frameshift caused by the c.1052delA deletion removes the last 81 
amino acids of the protein, including the third zinc-finger motif. This finding 
adds another locus to the spectrum of genes associated with osteogenesis 
imperfecta and reveals that SP7/OSX also plays a key role in human bone 
development.

Copyright 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.05.016
PMCID: PMC2896769
PMID: 20579626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]