---
reference_id: "PMID:12072018"
title: A recurrent mutation in the loricrin gene underlies the ichthyotic variant of Vohwinkel syndrome.
authors:
- "O'Driscoll J"
- Muston GC
- McGrath JA
- Lam HM
- Ashworth J
- Christiano AM
journal: Clin Exp Dermatol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2230.2002.01031.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A recurrent mutation in the loricrin gene underlies the ichthyotic variant of Vohwinkel syndrome.
**Authors:** O'Driscoll J, Muston GC, McGrath JA, Lam HM, Ashworth J, Christiano AM
**Journal:** Clin Exp Dermatol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-2230.2002.01031.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2230.2002.01031.x)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2002 May;27(3):243-6. doi:
10.1046/j.1365-2230.2002.01031.x.

A recurrent mutation in the loricrin gene underlies the ichthyotic variant of 
Vohwinkel syndrome.

O'Driscoll J(1), Muston GC, McGrath JA, Lam HM, Ashworth J, Christiano AM.

Author information:
(1)Stepping Hill Hospital, Stockport NHS Trust, UK.

Vohwinkel syndrome (VS) is a family of genodermatoses which exhibits extensive 
clinical and genetic heterogeneity. Here, we studied a pedigree originating from 
the UK with typical features of the ichthyotic variant of VS and identified a 
recurrent insertion mutation in the loricrin gene resulting in a mutant 
polypeptide with an unusual C terminus. Functional studies in transgenic mice 
have shown that the accumulation of mutant loricrin in the nucleus appears to 
interfere with the later stages of epidermal differentiation, thereby explaining 
the clinical manifestations of ichthyosis, keratoderma and pseudoainhum. Our 
findings extend the body of evidence implicating mutations in the loricrin gene 
as the underlying cause of VS.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2230.2002.01031.x
PMID: 12072018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]