---
reference_id: "PMID:21029860"
title: ATR-X syndrome protein targets tandem repeats and influences allele-specific expression in a size-dependent manner.
authors:
- Law MJ
- Lower KM
- Voon HP
- Hughes JR
- Garrick D
- Viprakasit V
- Mitson M
- De Gobbi M
- Marra M
- Morris A
- Abbott A
- Wilder SP
- Taylor S
- Santos GM
- Cross J
- Ayyub H
- Jones S
- Ragoussis J
- Rhodes D
- Dunham I
- Higgs DR
- Gibbons RJ
journal: Cell
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.09.023
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Chromatin Immunoprecipitation
- "Chromosomes, Mammalian/metabolism"
- CpG Islands
- "DNA Helicases/genetics, metabolism"
- "DNA, Ribosomal/metabolism"
- G-Quadruplexes
- Gene Expression
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Histones/metabolism
- Humans
- Mice
- Minisatellite Repeats
- Mutation
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Telomere/metabolism
- X-linked Nuclear Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ATR-X syndrome protein targets tandem repeats and influences allele-specific expression in a size-dependent manner.
**Authors:** Law MJ, Lower KM, Voon HP, Hughes JR, Garrick D, Viprakasit V, Mitson M, De Gobbi M, Marra M, Morris A, Abbott A, Wilder SP, Taylor S, Santos GM, Cross J, Ayyub H, Jones S, Ragoussis J, Rhodes D, Dunham I, Higgs DR, Gibbons RJ
**Journal:** Cell (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2010.09.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2010.09.023)

## Content

1. Cell. 2010 Oct 29;143(3):367-78. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.09.023.

ATR-X syndrome protein targets tandem repeats and influences allele-specific 
expression in a size-dependent manner.

Law MJ(1), Lower KM, Voon HP, Hughes JR, Garrick D, Viprakasit V, Mitson M, De 
Gobbi M, Marra M, Morris A, Abbott A, Wilder SP, Taylor S, Santos GM, Cross J, 
Ayyub H, Jones S, Ragoussis J, Rhodes D, Dunham I, Higgs DR, Gibbons RJ.

Author information:
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, 
Headington, Oxford, UK.

Comment in
    Cell. 2010 Oct 29;143(3):335-6. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.10.021.
    Nat Rev Genet. 2010 Dec;11(12):815. doi: 10.1038/nrg2908.

ATRX is an X-linked gene of the SWI/SNF family, mutations in which cause 
syndromal mental retardation and downregulation of α-globin expression. Here we 
show that ATRX binds to tandem repeat (TR) sequences in both telomeres and 
euchromatin. Genes associated with these TRs can be dysregulated when ATRX is 
mutated, and the change in expression is determined by the size of the TR, 
producing skewed allelic expression. This reveals the characteristics of the 
affected genes, explains the variable phenotypes seen with identical ATRX 
mutations, and illustrates a new mechanism underlying variable penetrance. Many 
of the TRs are G rich and predicted to form non-B DNA structures (including 
G-quadruplex) in vivo. We show that ATRX binds G-quadruplex structures in vitro, 
suggesting a mechanism by which ATRX may play a role in various nuclear 
processes and how this is perturbed when ATRX is mutated.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.09.023
PMID: 21029860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]