---
reference_id: "PMID:30882291"
title: How dyspepsia led to the diagnosis of Morbus Crohn.
authors:
- Maertens A
- Persyn D
- Van Moerkercke W
journal: Acta Clin Belg
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1080/17843286.2019.1590497
content_type: abstract_only
---

# How dyspepsia led to the diagnosis of Morbus Crohn.
**Authors:** Maertens A, Persyn D, Van Moerkercke W
**Journal:** Acta Clin Belg (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1080/17843286.2019.1590497](https://doi.org/10.1080/17843286.2019.1590497)

## Content

1. Acta Clin Belg. 2020 Aug;75(4):293-295. doi: 10.1080/17843286.2019.1590497.
Epub  2019 Mar 18.

How dyspepsia led to the diagnosis of Morbus Crohn.

Maertens A(1), Persyn D(2), Van Moerkercke W(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)University School of Medicine, UZ Gasthuisberg , Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, University hospital Gasthuisberg , Leuven, 
Belgium.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, AZ Groeninge , Kortrijk, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: It is well known that Crohn's disease can involve the stomach. 
However, most often this upper gastrointestinal tract involvement is 
asymptomatic. Typically, there is involvement of the small intestine with the 
typical associated symptoms of Crohn's disease: abdominal cramps, diarrhoea and 
weight loss.
METHODS: We report a case of a young woman with complaints of dyspepsia since 
2 months.
RESULTS: Gastroscopy revealed severe aphthous pangastritis with biopsies showing 
a focal active and chronic gastritis with presence of granulomas. We therefore 
performed a coloscopy showing an aphthous terminal ileum. The pathologic report 
indicated granulomatous reaction concordant with a slightly active, mildly 
chronic terminal ileitis typical for Crohn's disease.
CONCLUSION: The incidence of upper gastrointestinal tract involvement of Crohn's 
disease is still underestimated, partially due to the asymptomatic nature in two 
thirds of patients. IBD gastritis should always be included in the differential 
diagnosis of gastritis, considering the increased risk of a more severe disease 
course and complications.

DOI: 10.1080/17843286.2019.1590497
PMID: 30882291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]