---
reference_id: "PMID:39350134"
title: "Epidemiological changes of scarlet fever before, during and after the COVID-19 pandemic in Chongqing, China: a 19-year surveillance and prediction study."
authors:
- Wu R
- Xiong Y
- Wang J
- Li B
- Yang L
- Zhao H
- Yang J
- Yin T
- Sun J
- Qi L
- Long J
- Li Q
- Zhong X
- Tang W
- Chen Y
- Su K
journal: BMC Public Health
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12889-024-20116-5
keywords:
- Humans
- China/epidemiology
- Scarlet Fever/epidemiology
- COVID-19/epidemiology
- Child
- Male
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Incidence
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Infant
- Young Adult
- Pandemics
- Forecasting
- Middle Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiological changes of scarlet fever before, during and after the COVID-19 pandemic in Chongqing, China: a 19-year surveillance and prediction study.
**Authors:** Wu R, Xiong Y, Wang J, Li B, Yang L, Zhao H, Yang J, Yin T, Sun J, Qi L, Long J, Li Q, Zhong X, Tang W, Chen Y, Su K
**Journal:** BMC Public Health (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12889-024-20116-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-024-20116-5)

## Content

1. BMC Public Health. 2024 Sep 30;24(1):2674. doi: 10.1186/s12889-024-20116-5.

Epidemiological changes of scarlet fever before, during and after the COVID-19 
pandemic in Chongqing, China: a 19-year surveillance and prediction study.

Wu R(#)(1), Xiong Y(#)(1), Wang J(1), Li B(1), Yang L(1), Zhao H(1), Yang J(1), 
Yin T(1), Sun J(1), Qi L(1), Long J(1), Li Q(1), Zhong X(2), Tang W(3), Chen 
Y(4), Su K(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Chongqing Center for Disease Control and Prevention, No. 187 Tongxing North 
Road, Beibei district, Chongqing Municipality, China.
(2)School of Public Health and Management, Chongqing Medical University, No. 1 
Yixueyuan Road, Yuzhong district, Chongqing Municipality, China.
(3)Chongqing Center for Disease Control and Prevention, No. 187 Tongxing North 
Road, Beibei district, Chongqing Municipality, China. wengetangcq@163.com.
(4)Chongqing Public Health Medical Center, No. 109 Baoyu Road, Shapingba 
district, Chongqing Municipality, China. yaokaichen@hotmail.com.
(5)Chongqing Center for Disease Control and Prevention, No. 187 Tongxing North 
Road, Beibei district, Chongqing Municipality, China. sukun325@163.com.
(6)Chongqing Public Health Medical Center, No. 109 Baoyu Road, Shapingba 
district, Chongqing Municipality, China. sukun325@163.com.
(7)School of Public Health and Management, Chongqing Medical University, No. 1 
Yixueyuan Road, Yuzhong district, Chongqing Municipality, China. 
sukun325@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: This study aimed to investigate the epidemiological changes in 
scarlet fever before, during and after the COVID-19 pandemic (2005-2023) and 
predict the incidence of the disease in 2024 and 2025 in Chongqing Municipality, 
Southwest China.
METHODS: Descriptive analysis was used to summarize the characteristics of the 
scarlet fever epidemic. Spatial autocorrelation analysis was utilized to explore 
the distribution pattern of the disease, and the seasonal autoregressive 
integrated moving average (SARIMA) model was constructed to predict its 
incidence in 2024 and 2025.
RESULTS: Between 2005 and 2023, 9,593 scarlet fever cases were reported in 
Chongqing, which resulted in an annual average incidence of 1.6694 per 100,000 
people. Children aged 3-7 were the primary victims of this disease, with the 
highest average incidence found among children aged 6 (5.0002 per 100,000 
people). Kindergarten children were the dominant infected population, accounting 
for as much as 54.32% of cases, followed by students (34.09%). The incidence for 
the male was 1.51 times greater than that for the female. The monthly 
distribution of the incidence showed a bimodal pattern, with one peak occurring 
between April and June and another in November or December. The spatial 
autocorrelation analysis revealed that scarlet fever cases were markedly 
clustered; the areas with higher incidence were mainly concentrated in 
Chongqing's urban areas and its adjacent districts, and gradually spreading to 
remote areas after 2020. The incidence of scarlet fever increased by 106.54% and 
39.33% in the post-upsurge period (2015-2019) and the dynamic zero-COVID period 
(2020-2022), respectively, compared to the pre-upsurge period (2005-2014) 
(P < 0.001). During the dynamic zero-COVID period, the incidence of scarlet 
fever decreased by 68.61%, 25.66%, and 10.59% (P < 0.001) in 2020, 2021, and 
2022, respectively, compared to the predicted incidence. In 2023, after the 
dynamic zero-COVID period, the reported cases decreased to 1.5168 per 100,000 
people unexpectedly instead of increasing. The cases of scarlet fever are 
predicted to increase in 2024 (675 cases) and 2025 (705 cases).
CONCLUSIONS: Children aged 3-7 years are the most affected population, 
particularly males, and kindergartens and primary schools serving as 
transmission hotspots. It is predicted that the high incidence of scarlet fever 
in Chongqing will persist in 2024 and 2025, and the outer districts (counties) 
beyond urban zone would bear the brunt of the impact. Therefore, imminent public 
health planning and resource allocation should be focused within those areas.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12889-024-20116-5
PMCID: PMC11443759
PMID: 39350134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.