---
reference_id: "PMID:18480157"
title: Ganglioside depletion and EGF responses of human GM3 synthase-deficient fibroblasts.
authors:
- Liu Y
- Su Y
- Wiznitzer M
- Epifano O
- Ladisch S
journal: Glycobiology
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwn039
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Movement/drug effects
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Enzyme Activation
- Epidermal Growth Factor/pharmacology
- ErbB Receptors/metabolism
- Fibroblasts
- "Gangliosides/deficiency, metabolism"
- Genotype
- Humans
- Mice
- Mutation/genetics
- "Sialyltransferases/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- rac1 GTP-Binding Protein/metabolism
- rho GTP-Binding Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ganglioside depletion and EGF responses of human GM3 synthase-deficient fibroblasts.
**Authors:** Liu Y, Su Y, Wiznitzer M, Epifano O, Ladisch S
**Journal:** Glycobiology (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1093/glycob/cwn039](https://doi.org/10.1093/glycob/cwn039)

## Content

1. Glycobiology. 2008 Aug;18(8):593-601. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwn039. Epub 2008
May  14.

Ganglioside depletion and EGF responses of human GM3 synthase-deficient
fibroblasts.

Liu Y(1), Su Y, Wiznitzer M, Epifano O, Ladisch S.

Author information:
(1)Center for Cancer and Immunology Research, Children's Research Institute, 111
Michigan Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20010, USA.

Recognition of important roles of gangliosides in normal and abnormal cell
function has motivated pharmacological modification of cellular ganglioside
content. However, constitutive depletion of gangliosides in untransformed human
cells has not been reported. In this context, the recent identification of a
kindred carrying a point mutation in the GM3 synthase [ST3Gal5, Siat9] gene
(Simpson MA, Cross H, Proukakis C, Priestman DA, Neville DC, Reinkensmeier G,
Wang H, Wiznitzer M, Gurtz K, Verganelaki A, Pryde A, Patton MA, Dwek RA,
Butters TD, Platt FM, Crosby AH. 2004. Infantile-onset symptomatic epilepsy
syndrome caused by a homozygous loss-of-function mutation of GM3 synthase. Nat
Genet. 36:1225-1229) provided an opportunity to explore this possibility. We
established primary cultures of skin fibroblasts of three patients homozygous
for this autosomal recessive defect. They exhibited a 93% reduction in
ganglioside content (0.8 +/- 0.2 nmol lipid-bound sialic acid per 10(7) cells
versus 12.7 +/- 1.3 nmol per 10(7) normal fibroblasts). Importantly, this marked
reduction was not compensated by the activation of an alternate pathway of
ganglioside synthesis, as occurs in murine GM3 synthase knockout fibroblasts.
Cell morphology appeared unaffected, but under stringent conditions EGF-induced
proliferation and migration of the mutant fibroblasts were reduced by 80% and
60%, respectively. Probing potential explanations, we found that EGF binding
(effective membrane EGF receptor (EGFR) number) was reduced by 52% (to 6.2 +/-
1.9 from 12.8 +/- 2.0 pmol/10(8) normal fibroblasts, P < 0.01), despite normal
total EGFR protein. EGFR activation was likewise reduced as was EGF-induced
Rho/Rac1 phosphorylation, which is associated with cell migration. We conclude
that this GM3 synthase point mutation almost completely depletes human
fibroblast cellular gangliosides, dampens membrane EGFR activation, and
modulates related critical cell functions such as proliferation and migration.
These cells offer a valuable model for the study of ganglioside modulation of
cell function.

DOI: 10.1093/glycob/cwn039
PMID: 18480157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
