---
reference_id: "PMID:23315542"
title: Heterogeneity of mutational mechanisms and modes of inheritance in auriculocondylar syndrome.
authors:
- Gordon CT
- Vuillot A
- Marlin S
- Gerkes E
- Henderson A
- AlKindy A
- Holder-Espinasse M
- Park SS
- Omarjee A
- Sanchis-Borja M
- Bdira EB
- Oufadem M
- Sikkema-Raddatz B
- Stewart A
- Palmer R
- McGowan R
- Petit F
- Delobel B
- Speicher MR
- Aurora P
- Kilner D
- Pellerin P
- Simon M
- Bonnefont JP
- Tobias ES
- García-Miñaúr S
- Bitner-Glindzicz M
- Lindholm P
- Meijer BA
- Abadie V
- Denoyelle F
- Vazquez MP
- Rotky-Fast C
- Couloigner V
- Pierrot S
- Manach Y
- Breton S
- Hendriks YM
- Munnich A
- Jakobsen L
- Kroisel P
- Lin A
- Kaban LB
- Basel-Vanagaite L
- Wilson L
- Cunningham ML
- Lyonnet S
- Amiel J
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101331
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Ear/abnormalities, pathology"
- "Ear Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Female
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits, Gi-Go/genetics"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phospholipase C beta/genetics
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heterogeneity of mutational mechanisms and modes of inheritance in auriculocondylar syndrome.
**Authors:** Gordon CT, Vuillot A, Marlin S, Gerkes E, Henderson A, AlKindy A, Holder-Espinasse M, Park SS, Omarjee A, Sanchis-Borja M, Bdira EB, Oufadem M, Sikkema-Raddatz B, Stewart A, Palmer R, McGowan R, Petit F, Delobel B, Speicher MR, Aurora P, Kilner D, Pellerin P, Simon M, Bonnefont JP, Tobias ES, García-Miñaúr S, Bitner-Glindzicz M, Lindholm P, Meijer BA, Abadie V, Denoyelle F, Vazquez MP, Rotky-Fast C, Couloigner V, Pierrot S, Manach Y, Breton S, Hendriks YM, Munnich A, Jakobsen L, Kroisel P, Lin A, Kaban LB, Basel-Vanagaite L, Wilson L, Cunningham ML, Lyonnet S, Amiel J
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101331](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101331)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2013 Mar;50(3):174-86. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101331. Epub 
2013 Jan 12.

Heterogeneity of mutational mechanisms and modes of inheritance in 
auriculocondylar syndrome.

Gordon CT(1), Vuillot A, Marlin S, Gerkes E, Henderson A, AlKindy A, 
Holder-Espinasse M, Park SS, Omarjee A, Sanchis-Borja M, Bdira EB, Oufadem M, 
Sikkema-Raddatz B, Stewart A, Palmer R, McGowan R, Petit F, Delobel B, Speicher 
MR, Aurora P, Kilner D, Pellerin P, Simon M, Bonnefont JP, Tobias ES, 
García-Miñaúr S, Bitner-Glindzicz M, Lindholm P, Meijer BA, Abadie V, Denoyelle 
F, Vazquez MP, Rotky-Fast C, Couloigner V, Pierrot S, Manach Y, Breton S, 
Hendriks YM, Munnich A, Jakobsen L, Kroisel P, Lin A, Kaban LB, Basel-Vanagaite 
L, Wilson L, Cunningham ML, Lyonnet S, Amiel J.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U781, Tour Lavoisier 2ème étage, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, 149 
rue de Sèvres, Paris 75015, France. chris.gordon@inserm.fr

BACKGROUND: Auriculocondylar syndrome (ACS) is a rare craniofacial disorder 
consisting of micrognathia, mandibular condyle hypoplasia and a specific 
malformation of the ear at the junction between the lobe and helix. Missense 
heterozygous mutations in the phospholipase C, β 4 (PLCB4) and guanine 
nucleotide binding protein (G protein), α inhibiting activity polypeptide 3 
(GNAI3) genes have recently been identified in ACS patients by exome sequencing. 
These genes are predicted to function within the G protein-coupled endothelin 
receptor pathway during craniofacial development.
RESULTS: We report eight additional cases ascribed to PLCB4 or GNAI3 gene 
lesions, comprising six heterozygous PLCB4 missense mutations, one heterozygous 
GNAI3 missense mutation and one homozygous PLCB4 intragenic deletion. Certain 
residues represent mutational hotspots; of the total of 11 ACS PLCB4 missense 
mutations now described, five disrupt Arg621 and two disrupt Asp360. The narrow 
distribution of mutations within protein space suggests that the mutations may 
result in dominantly interfering proteins, rather than haploinsufficiency. The 
consanguineous parents of the patient with a homozygous PLCB4 deletion each 
harboured the heterozygous deletion, but did not present the ACS phenotype, 
further suggesting that ACS is not caused by PLCB4 haploinsufficiency. In 
addition to ACS, the patient harbouring a homozygous deletion presented with 
central apnoea, a phenotype that has not been previously reported in ACS 
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that ACS is not only genetically 
heterogeneous but also an autosomal dominant or recessive condition according to 
the nature of the PLCB4 gene lesion.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101331
PMID: 23315542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]