---
reference_id: "PMID:30478444"
title: Discovery of the first genome-wide significant risk loci for attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
authors:
- Demontis D
- Walters RK
- Martin J
- Mattheisen M
- Als TD
- Agerbo E
- Baldursson G
- Belliveau R
- Bybjerg-Grauholm J
- Bækvad-Hansen M
- Cerrato F
- Chambert K
- Churchhouse C
- Dumont A
- Eriksson N
- Gandal M
- Goldstein JI
- Grasby KL
- Grove J
- Gudmundsson OO
- Hansen CS
- Hauberg ME
- Hollegaard MV
- Howrigan DP
- Huang H
- Maller JB
- Martin AR
- Martin NG
- Moran J
- Pallesen J
- Palmer DS
- Pedersen CB
- Pedersen MG
- Poterba T
- Poulsen JB
- Ripke S
- Robinson EB
- Satterstrom FK
- Stefansson H
- Stevens C
- Turley P
- Walters GB
- Won H
- Wright MJ
- ADHD Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium (PGC)
- "Early Lifecourse & Genetic Epidemiology (EAGLE) Consortium"
- 23andMe Research Team
- Andreassen OA
- Asherson P
- Burton CL
- Boomsma DI
- Cormand B
- Dalsgaard S
- Franke B
- Gelernter J
- Geschwind D
- Hakonarson H
- Haavik J
- Kranzler HR
- Kuntsi J
- Langley K
- Lesch KP
- Middeldorp C
- Reif A
- Rohde LA
- Roussos P
- Schachar R
- Sklar P
- Sonuga-Barke EJS
- Sullivan PF
- Thapar A
- Tung JY
- Waldman ID
- Medland SE
- Stefansson K
- Nordentoft M
- Hougaard DM
- Werge T
- Mors O
- Mortensen PB
- Daly MJ
- Faraone SV
- Børglum AD
- Neale BM
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41588-018-0269-7
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/genetics
- Brain/physiology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Gene Expression Regulation/genetics
- Genetic Loci/genetics
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Genome-Wide Association Study/methods
- Humans
- Male
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide/genetics"
- Risk
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Discovery of the first genome-wide significant risk loci for attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
**Authors:** Demontis D, Walters RK, Martin J, Mattheisen M, Als TD, Agerbo E, Baldursson G, Belliveau R, Bybjerg-Grauholm J, Bækvad-Hansen M, Cerrato F, Chambert K, Churchhouse C, Dumont A, Eriksson N, Gandal M, Goldstein JI, Grasby KL, Grove J, Gudmundsson OO, Hansen CS, Hauberg ME, Hollegaard MV, Howrigan DP, Huang H, Maller JB, Martin AR, Martin NG, Moran J, Pallesen J, Palmer DS, Pedersen CB, Pedersen MG, Poterba T, Poulsen JB, Ripke S, Robinson EB, Satterstrom FK, Stefansson H, Stevens C, Turley P, Walters GB, Won H, Wright MJ, ADHD Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium (PGC), Early Lifecourse & Genetic Epidemiology (EAGLE) Consortium, 23andMe Research Team, Andreassen OA, Asherson P, Burton CL, Boomsma DI, Cormand B, Dalsgaard S, Franke B, Gelernter J, Geschwind D, Hakonarson H, Haavik J, Kranzler HR, Kuntsi J, Langley K, Lesch KP, Middeldorp C, Reif A, Rohde LA, Roussos P, Schachar R, Sklar P, Sonuga-Barke EJS, Sullivan PF, Thapar A, Tung JY, Waldman ID, Medland SE, Stefansson K, Nordentoft M, Hougaard DM, Werge T, Mors O, Mortensen PB, Daly MJ, Faraone SV, Børglum AD, Neale BM
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41588-018-0269-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-018-0269-7)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2019 Jan;51(1):63-75. doi: 10.1038/s41588-018-0269-7. Epub 2018 Nov
 26.

Discovery of the first genome-wide significant risk loci for attention 
deficit/hyperactivity disorder.

Demontis D(#)(1)(2)(3), Walters RK(#)(4)(5), Martin J(5)(6)(7), Mattheisen 
M(1)(2)(3)(8)(9)(10), Als TD(1)(2)(3), Agerbo E(1)(11)(12), Baldursson G(13), 
Belliveau R(5), Bybjerg-Grauholm J(1)(14), Bækvad-Hansen M(1)(14), Cerrato F(5), 
Chambert K(5), Churchhouse C(4)(5)(15), Dumont A(5), Eriksson N(16), Gandal 
M(17)(18)(19)(20), Goldstein JI(4)(5)(15), Grasby KL(21), Grove J(1)(2)(3)(22), 
Gudmundsson OO(13)(23)(24), Hansen CS(1)(14)(25), Hauberg ME(1)(2)(3), 
Hollegaard MV(1)(14), Howrigan DP(4)(5), Huang H(4)(5), Maller JB(5)(26), Martin 
AR(4)(5)(15), Martin NG(21), Moran J(5), Pallesen J(1)(2)(3), Palmer DS(4)(5), 
Pedersen CB(1)(11)(12), Pedersen MG(1)(11)(12), Poterba T(4)(5)(15), Poulsen 
JB(1)(14), Ripke S(4)(5)(27), Robinson EB(4)(28), Satterstrom FK(4)(5)(15), 
Stefansson H(23), Stevens C(5), Turley P(4)(5), Walters GB(23)(24), Won 
H(17)(18), Wright MJ(29); ADHD Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics 
Consortium (PGC); Early Lifecourse & Genetic Epidemiology (EAGLE) Consortium; 
23andMe Research Team; Andreassen OA(30), Asherson P(31), Burton CL(32), Boomsma 
DI(33)(34), Cormand B(35)(36)(37)(38), Dalsgaard S(11), Franke B(39), Gelernter 
J(40)(41), Geschwind D(17)(18)(19), Hakonarson H(42), Haavik J(43)(44), Kranzler 
HR(45)(46), Kuntsi J(31), Langley K(7)(47), Lesch KP(48)(49)(50), Middeldorp 
C(33)(51)(52), Reif A(53), Rohde LA(54)(55), Roussos P(56)(57)(58)(59), Schachar 
R(32), Sklar P(56)(57)(58), Sonuga-Barke EJS(60), Sullivan PF(6)(61), Thapar 
A(7), Tung JY(16), Waldman ID(62), Medland SE(21), Stefansson K(23)(24), 
Nordentoft M(1)(63), Hougaard DM(1)(14), Werge T(1)(25)(64), Mors O(1)(65), 
Mortensen PB(1)(2)(11)(12), Daly MJ(4)(5)(15)(66), Faraone SV(67), Børglum 
AD(68)(69)(70), Neale BM(71)(72)(73).

Collaborators: Albayrak Ö, Anney RJL, Arranz MJ, Banaschewski TJ, Bau C, 
Biederman J, Buitelaar JK, Casas M, Charach A, Crosbie J, Dempfle A, Doyle AE, 
Ebstein RP, Elia J, Freitag C, Föcker M, Gill M, Grevet E, Hawi Z, Hebebrand J, 
Herpertz-Dahlmann B, Hervas A, Hinney A, Hohmann S, Holmans P, Hutz M, Ickowitz 
A, Johansson S, Kent L, Kittel-Schneider S, Lambregts-Rommelse N, Lehmkuhl G, 
Loo SK, McGough JJ, Meyer J, Mick E, Middletion F, Miranda A, Mota NR, Mulas F, 
Mulligan A, Nelson F, Nguyen TT, Oades RD, O'Donovan MC, Owen MJ, Palmason H, 
Ramos-Quiroga JA, Renner TJ, Ribasés M, Rietschel M, Rivero O, Romanos J, 
Romanos M, Rothenberger A, Royers H, Sánchez-Mora C, Scherag A, Schimmelmann BG, 
Schäfer H, Sergeant J, Sinzig J, Smalley SL, Steinhausen HC, Thompson M, Todorov 
A, Vasquez AA, Walitza S, Wang Y, Warnke A, Williams N, Witt SH, Yang L, Zayats 
T, Zhang-James Y, Smith GD, Davies GE, Ehli EA, Evans DM, Fedko IO, Greven CU, 
Groen-Blokhuis MM, Guxens M, Hammerschlag AR, Hartman CA, Heinrich J, Jan 
Hottenga J, Hudziak J, Jugessur A, Kemp JP, Krapohl E, Murcia M, Myhre R, Nolte 
IM, Nyholt DR, Ormel J, Ouwens KG, Pappa I, Pennell CE, Plomin R, Ring S, Standl 
M, Stergiakouli E, Pourcain BS, Stoltenberg C, Sunyer J, Thiering E, Tiemeier H, 
Tiesler CMT, Timpson NJ, Trzaskowski M, van der Most PJ, Vilor-Tejedor N, Wang 
CA, Whitehouse AJO, Zhao H, Agee M, Alipanahi B, Auton A, Bell RK, Bryc K, Elson 
SL, Fontanillas P, Furlotte NA, Hinds DA, Hromatka BS, Huber KE, Kleinman A, 
Litterman NK, McIntyre MH, Mountain JL, Northover CAM, Pitts SJ, 
Sathirapongsasuti JF, Sazonova OV, Shelton JF, Shringarpure S, Tian C, Vacic V, 
Wilson CH.

Author information:
(1)The Lundbeck Foundation Initiative for Integrative Psychiatric Research, 
iPSYCH, Aarhus, Denmark.
(2)Centre for Integrative Sequencing, iSEQ, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(3)Department of Biomedicine - Human Genetics, Aarhus University, Aarhus, 
Denmark.
(4)Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Department of Medicine, 
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(6)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics & Genomics, School of Medicine, 
Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.
(8)Centre for Psychiatry Research, Department of Clinical Neuroscience, 
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(9)Stockholm Health Care Services, Stockholm County Council, Stockholm, Sweden.
(10)Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, University of 
Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany.
(11)National Centre for Register-Based Research, Aarhus University, Aarhus, 
Denmark.
(12)Centre for Integrated Register-based Research, Aarhus University, Aarhus, 
Denmark.
(13)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, National University Hospital, 
Reykjavik, Iceland.
(14)Center for Neonatal Screening, Department for Congenital Disorders, Statens 
Serum Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(15)Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and 
Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(16)23andMe, Inc, Mountain View, CA, USA.
(17)Program in Neurogenetics, Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(18)Center for Autism Research and Treatment and Center for Neurobehavioral 
Genetics, Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human Behavior, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(19)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(20)Department of Psychiatry, Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human 
Behavior, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(21)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, Australia.
(22)Bioinformatics Research Centre, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(23)deCODE genetics/Amgen, Reykjavík, Iceland.
(24)Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavík, Iceland.
(25)Institute of Biological Psychiatry, MHC Sct. Hans, Mental Health Services 
Copenhagen, Roskilde, Denmark.
(26)Genomics plc, Oxford, UK.
(27)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Charité - Universitätsmedizin, 
Berlin, Germany.
(28)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard Chan School of Public Health, Boston, 
MA, USA.
(29)Queensland Brain Institute, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
(30)NORMENT KG Jebsen Centre for Psychosis Research, Division of Mental Health 
and Addiction, University of Oslo and Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(31)Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of 
Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK.
(32)Psychiatry, Neurosciences and Mental Health, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(33)Department of Biological Psychology, Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, VU 
University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(34)EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(35)Departament de Genètica, Microbiologia i Estadística, Facultat de Biologia, 
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(36)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), 
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(37)Institut de Biomedicina de la Universitat de Barcelona (IBUB), Barcelona, 
Catalonia, Spain.
(38)Institut de Recerca Sant Joan de Déu (IRSJD), Esplugues de Llobregat, 
Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(39)Departments of Human Genetics (855) and Psychiatry, Donders Institute for 
Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.
(40)Department of Psychiatry, Genetics, and Neuroscience, Yale University School 
of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(41)Veterans Affairs Connecticut Healthcare Center, West Haven, CT, USA.
(42)The Center for Applied Genomics, The Children´s Hospital of Philadelphia, 
The Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA.
(43)K.G. Jebsen Centre for Neuropsychiatric Disorders, Department of 
Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(44)Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(45)Department of Psychiatry, The Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(46)Veterans Integrated Service Network (VISN4) Mental Illness Research, 
Education, and Clinical Center (MIRECC), Crescenz VA Medical Center, 
Philadephia, PA, USA.
(47)School of Psychology, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.
(48)Division of Molecular Psychiatry, Center of Mental Health, University of 
Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany.
(49)Department of Neuroscience, School for Mental Health and Neuroscience 
(MHENS), Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(50)Laboratory of Psychiatric Neurobiology, Institute of Molecular Medicine, 
I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russia.
(51)Child Health Research Centre, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
(52)Child and Youth Mental Health Service, Children's Health Queensland Hospital 
and Health Service, Brisbane, Australia.
(53)Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, 
University Hospital Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(54)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, Universidade Federal do Rio 
Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(55)ADHD Outpatient Clinic, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, 
Brazil.
(56)Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, USA.
(57)Institute for Genomics and Multiscale Biology, Department of Genetics and 
Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(58)Friedman Brain Institute, Department of Neuroscience, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(59)Mental Illness Research Education and Clinical Center (MIRECC), James J. 
Peters VA Medical Center, Bronx, New York, USA.
(60)Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, Kings College, London, 
UK.
(61)Departments of Genetics and Psychiatry, University of North Carolina, Chapel 
Hill, NC, USA.
(62)Department of Psychology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(63)Mental Health Services in the Capital Region of Denmark, Mental Health 
Center Copenhagen, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(64)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(65)Psychosis Research Unit, Aarhus University Hospital, Risskov, Denmark.
(66)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), Helsinki, Finland.
(67)Departments of Psychiatry and Neuroscience and Physiology, SUNY Upstate 
Medical University, Syracuse, NY, USA. sfaraone@childpsychresearch.org.
(68)The Lundbeck Foundation Initiative for Integrative Psychiatric Research, 
iPSYCH, Aarhus, Denmark. anders@biomed.au.dk.
(69)Centre for Integrative Sequencing, iSEQ, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark. 
anders@biomed.au.dk.
(70)Department of Biomedicine - Human Genetics, Aarhus University, Aarhus, 
Denmark. anders@biomed.au.dk.
(71)Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Department of Medicine, 
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
bneale@broadinstitute.org.
(72)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 
Cambridge, MA, USA. bneale@broadinstitute.org.
(73)Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and 
Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA. bneale@broadinstitute.org.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2019 Jan;15(1):4. doi: 10.1038/s41582-018-0117-5.
    Nat Rev Genet. 2019 Feb;20(2):69. doi: 10.1038/s41576-018-0084-0.

Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a highly heritable childhood 
behavioral disorder affecting 5% of children and 2.5% of adults. Common genetic 
variants contribute substantially to ADHD susceptibility, but no variants have 
been robustly associated with ADHD. We report a genome-wide association 
meta-analysis of 20,183 individuals diagnosed with ADHD and 35,191 controls that 
identifies variants surpassing genome-wide significance in 12 independent loci, 
finding important new information about the underlying biology of ADHD. 
Associations are enriched in evolutionarily constrained genomic regions and 
loss-of-function intolerant genes and around brain-expressed regulatory marks. 
Analyses of three replication studies: a cohort of individuals diagnosed with 
ADHD, a self-reported ADHD sample and a meta-analysis of quantitative measures 
of ADHD symptoms in the population, support these findings while highlighting 
study-specific differences on genetic overlap with educational attainment. 
Strong concordance with GWAS of quantitative population measures of ADHD 
symptoms supports that clinical diagnosis of ADHD is an extreme expression of 
continuous heritable traits.

DOI: 10.1038/s41588-018-0269-7
PMCID: PMC6481311
PMID: 30478444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests In the past year, Dr. 
Faraone received income, potential income, travel expenses continuing education 
support and/or research support from Lundbeck, Rhodes, Arbor, KenPharm, 
Ironshore, Shire, Akili Interactive Labs, CogCubed, Alcobra, VAYA, Sunovion, 
Genomind and Neurolifesciences. With his institution, he has US patent 
US20130217707 A1 for the use of sodium-hydrogen exchange inhibitors in the 
treatment of ADHD. In previous years, he received support from: Shire, 
Neurovance, Alcobra, Otsuka, McNeil, Janssen, Novartis, Pfizer and Eli Lilly. 
Dr. Faraone receives royalties from books published by Guilford Press: Straight 
Talk about Your Child’s Mental Health, Oxford University Press: Schizophrenia: 
The Facts and Elsevier: ADHD: Non-Pharmacologic Interventions. He is principal 
investigator of www.adhdinadults.com. Dr. Neale is a member of Deep Genomics 
Scientific Advisory Board and has received travel expenses from Illumina. He 
also serves as a consultant for Avanir and Trigeminal solutions. Olafur O. 
Gudmundsson, G. Bragi Walters, Hreinn Stefansson and Kari Stefansson are 
employees of deCODE genetics/Amgen. Nicholas Eriksson, Joyce Y Tung, and the 
23andMe Research Team are employees of 23andMe, Inc., and hold stock or stock 
options in 23andMe. Dr. Rohde has received honoraria, has been on the speakers' 
bureau/advisory board and/or has acted as a consultant for Eli-Lilly, 
Janssen-Cilag, Novartis, Medice and Shire in the last three years. He receives 
authorship royalties from Oxford Press and ArtMed. He also received travel award 
for taking part of 2015 WFADHD meeting from Shire. The ADHD and Juvenile Bipolar 
Disorder Outpatient Programs chaired by him received unrestricted educational 
and research support from the following pharmaceutical companies in the last 
three years: Eli-Lilly, Janssen-Cilag, Novartis, and Shire. Over the last three 
years Dr. Sonuga-Barke has received speaker fees, consultancy, research funding 
and conference support from Shire Pharma and speaker fees from Janssen Cilag. He 
has received consultancy fees from Neurotech solutions, Aarhus University, 
Copenhagen University and Berhanderling, Skolerne, Copenhagen, KU Leuven. Book 
royalties from OUP and Jessica Kingsley. He is the editor-in-chief of the 
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry for which his University receives 
financial support. Dr. Franke has received educational speaking fees from Merz 
and Shire. Dr. Schachar’s disclosures: ehave equity and advisory board, 
Ironshore Pharmaceuticals Advisory Board. Dr. Reif has received a research grant 
from Medice, and speaker’s honorarium from Medice and Servier. Dr. Haavik has 
received speaker fees from Shire, Lilly and Novartis. Dr. Kranzler has been an 
advisory board member, consultant, or CME speaker for Alkermes, Indivior, and 
Lundbeck. He is also a member of the American Society of Clinical 
Psychopharmacology’s Alcohol Clinical Trials Initiative, which was supported in 
the last three years by AbbVie, Alkermes, Ethypharm, Indivior, Lilly, Lundbeck, 
Otsuka, Pfizer, Arbor, and Amygdala Neurosciences. Drs. Kranzler and Gelernter 
are named as inventors on PCT patent application #15/878,640 entitled: 
"Genotype-guided dosing of opioid agonists," filed January 24, 2018. Dr Asherson 
received honoraria paid to King's College London by Shire, Flynn Pharma, Lilly, 
Janssen, Novartis and Lunbeck for research, speaker fees, education events, 
advisory board membership or consultancy. Dr. Andreassen has received speaker 
fees from Lundbeck and Sunovion. Dr Kuntsi has received speaker’s honorarium 
from Medice; all funds are received by King’s College London and used for 
studies of ADHD. Thomas Werge has acted as lecturer and scientific advisor to H. 
Lundbeck A/S