---
reference_id: "PMID:40366862"
title: "Metagenomic analysis reveals distinct patterns of gut microbiota features with diversified functions in C. difficile infection (CDI), asymptomatic carriage and non-CDI diarrhea."
authors:
- Wang L
- Chen X
- Pollock NR
- Villafuerte Gálvez JA
- Alonso CD
- Wang D
- Daugherty K
- Xu H
- Yao J
- Chen Y
- Kelly CP
- Cao Y
journal: Gut Microbes
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1080/19490976.2025.2505269
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Metagenomic analysis reveals distinct patterns of gut microbiota features with diversified functions in C. difficile infection (CDI), asymptomatic carriage and non-CDI diarrhea.
**Authors:** Wang L, Chen X, Pollock NR, Villafuerte Gálvez JA, Alonso CD, Wang D, Daugherty K, Xu H, Yao J, Chen Y, Kelly CP, Cao Y
**Journal:** Gut Microbes (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1080/19490976.2025.2505269](https://doi.org/10.1080/19490976.2025.2505269)

## Content

1. Gut Microbes. 2025 Dec;17(1):2505269. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2025.2505269. Epub
 2025 May 14.

Metagenomic analysis reveals distinct patterns of gut microbiota features with 
diversified functions in C. difficile infection (CDI), asymptomatic carriage and 
non-CDI diarrhea.

Wang L(1)(2), Chen X(2), Pollock NR(3)(4), Villafuerte Gálvez JA(2), Alonso 
CD(3), Wang D(1), Daugherty K(2), Xu H(2), Yao J(1), Chen Y(1), Kelly CP(2), Cao 
Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
Shaanxi, China.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI) has been recognized as a leading cause 
of healthcare-associated infections and a considerable threat to public health 
globally. Increasing evidence suggests that the gut microbiota plays a key role 
in the pathogenesis of CDI. The taxonomic composition and functional capacity of 
the gut microbiota associated with CDI have not been studied systematically. 
Here, we performed a comprehensive shotgun metagenomic sequencing in a 
well-characterized human cohort to reveal distinct patterns of gut microbiota 
and potential functional features associated with CDI. Fecal samples were 
collected from 104 inpatients, including : (1) patients with clinically 
significant diarrhea and positive nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT) and 
received CDI treatment (CDI, n = 47); (2) patients with positive stool NAAT but 
without diarrhea (Carrier, n = 17); (3) patients with negative stool NAAT but 
with diarrhea (Diarrhea, n = 14); and (4) patients with negative stool NAAT and 
without diarrhea (Control, n = 26). Downstream statistical analyses (including 
alpha and beta diversity analysis, differential abundance analysis, correlation 
network analysis, and potential functional analysis) were then performed. The 
gut microbiota in the Control group showed higher Chao1 index (p < 0.05), while 
Shannon index at KEGG module level was higher in CDI than in Carrier and Control 
(p < 0.05). Beta diversity for species composition differed significantly 
between CDI vs Carrier/Control cohorts (p < 0.05). Microbial Linear discriminant 
analysis Effect Size and ANCOM analysis both identified 8 species 
(unclassified_f_Enterobacteriaceae, Veillonella_parvula, 
unclassified_g_Klebsiella and etc.) were enriched in CDI, Enterobacter_aerogenes 
was enriched in Diarrhea, Collinsella_aerofaciens, Collinsella_sp_4_8_47FAA, 
Collinsella_tanakaei and Collinsella_sp_CAG_166 were enriched in Control (LDA 
>3.0, adjusted p < 0.05). Correlation network complexity was higher in CDI with 
more negative correlations than in other three cohorts. Modules involved in iron 
complex transport system (M00240) was enriched in CDI, ABC-2 type transport 
system (M00254), aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis (M00359), histidine biosynthesis 
(M00026) and inosine monophosphate biosynthesis (M00048) were enriched in 
Carrier, ribosome (M00178 and M00179) was enriched in Diarrhea, fluoroquinolone 
resistance (M00729) and aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis (M00360) were enriched in 
Control (LDA > 2.5, adjusted p < 0.05). Resistance functions of acriflavine and 
glycylcycline were enriched in CDI, while resistance function of bacitracin was 
enriched in Carrier (LDA > 3.0, adjusted p < 0.05), and the contributions of 
phylum and species to resistance functions differed among the four groups. Our 
results reveal alterations of gut microbiota composition and potential functions 
among four groups of differential colonization/infection status of 
Clostridioides difficile. These findings support the potential roles of gut 
microbiota and their potential functions in the pathogenesis of CDI.

DOI: 10.1080/19490976.2025.2505269
PMCID: PMC12080279
PMID: 40366862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CPK has acted as a paid consultant to Facile 
Therapeutics, Ferring Pharma, Finch, Janssen (J&J), Milky Way Life Sciences, 
Pfizer, Seres, Summit Therapeutics, RVAC Medicines, and Vedanta; has been a 
Scientific Advisory Board Member, study investigator and received grant support 
from Milky Way Life Sciences and was a Data Monitoring Board member for Finch 
Therapeutics.