---
reference_id: "PMID:20979576"
title: Identification of binding partners interacting with the α1-N-propeptide of type V collagen.
authors:
- Symoens S
- Renard M
- Bonod-Bidaud C
- Syx D
- Vaganay E
- Malfait F
- Ricard-Blum S
- Kessler E
- Van Laer L
- Coucke P
- Ruggiero F
- De Paepe A
journal: Biochem J
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1042/BJ20101061
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of binding partners interacting with the α1-N-propeptide of type V collagen.
**Authors:** Symoens S, Renard M, Bonod-Bidaud C, Syx D, Vaganay E, Malfait F, Ricard-Blum S, Kessler E, Van Laer L, Coucke P, Ruggiero F, De Paepe A
**Journal:** Biochem J (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20101061](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20101061)

## Content

1. Biochem J. 2011 Jan 15;433(2):371-81. doi: 10.1042/BJ20101061.

Identification of binding partners interacting with the α1-N-propeptide of type 
V collagen.

Symoens S(1), Renard M, Bonod-Bidaud C, Syx D, Vaganay E, Malfait F, Ricard-Blum 
S, Kessler E, Van Laer L, Coucke P, Ruggiero F, De Paepe A.

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Belgium.

The predominant form of type V collagen is the [α1(V)]₂α2(V) heterotrimer. 
Mutations in COL5A1 or COL5A2, encoding respectively the α1(V)- and 
α2(V)-collagen chain, cause classic EDS (Ehlers-Danlos syndrome), a heritable 
connective tissue disorder, characterized by fragile hyperextensible skin and 
joint hypermobility. Approximately half of the classic EDS cases remain 
unexplained. Type V collagen controls collagen fibrillogenesis through its 
conserved α1(V)-N-propeptide domain. To gain an insight into the role of this 
domain, a yeast two-hybrid screen among proteins expressed in human dermal 
fibroblasts was performed utilizing the N-propeptide as a bait. We identified 12 
interacting proteins, including extracellular matrix proteins and proteins 
involved in collagen biosynthesis. Eleven interactions were confirmed by surface 
plasmon resonance and/or co-immunoprecipitation: α1(I)- and α2(I)-collagen 
chains, α1(VI)-, α2(VI)- and α3(VI)-collagen chains, tenascin-C, fibronectin, 
PCPE-1 (procollagen C-proteinase enhancer-1), TIMP-1 (tissue inhibitor of 
metalloproteinases-1), MMP-2 (matrix metalloproteinase 2) and TGF-β1 
(transforming growth factor β1). Solid-phase binding assays confirmed the 
involvement of the α1(V)-N-propeptide in the interaction between native type V 
collagen and type VI collagen, suggesting a bridging function of this protein 
complex in the cell-matrix environment. Enzymatic studies showed that processing 
of the α1(V)-N-propeptide by BMP-1 (bone morphogenetic protein 1)/procollagen 
C-proteinase is enhanced by PCPE-1. These interactions are likely to be involved 
in extracellular matrix homoeostasis and their disruption could explain the 
pathogenetic mechanism in unresolved classic EDS cases.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20101061
PMID: 20979576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]