---
reference_id: "PMID:38646510"
title: "Navigating cholestasis: identifying inborn errors of bile acid metabolism for precision diagnosis."
authors:
- Nittono H
- Suzuki M
- Suzuki H
- Sugimoto S
- Mori J
- Sakamoto R
- Takaki Y
- Hayashi H
- Takei H
- Kimura A
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2024.1385970
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Navigating cholestasis: identifying inborn errors of bile acid metabolism for precision diagnosis.
**Authors:** Nittono H, Suzuki M, Suzuki H, Sugimoto S, Mori J, Sakamoto R, Takaki Y, Hayashi H, Takei H, Kimura A
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2024.1385970](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2024.1385970)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2024 Apr 5;12:1385970. doi: 10.3389/fped.2024.1385970. 
eCollection 2024.

Navigating cholestasis: identifying inborn errors of bile acid metabolism for 
precision diagnosis.

Nittono H(1), Suzuki M(2), Suzuki H(1)(3), Sugimoto S(4), Mori J(5), Sakamoto 
R(6), Takaki Y(7), Hayashi H(8), Takei H(1), Kimura A(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Analysis Technology, Junshin Clinic Bile Acid Institute, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Juntendo University Faculty of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Legal Medicine, Showa University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto 
Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(5)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, Children's Medical 
Center, Osaka City General Hospital, Osaka, Japan.
(6)Department of Pediatrics and Pediatric Surgery, Juzen Hospital, Kumamoto, 
Japan.
(7)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Japanese Red Cross 
Kumamoto Hospital, Kumamoto, Japan.
(8)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacokinetics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical 
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Kumamoto-Ashikita Medical Center for the Severity 
Disabled, Kumamoto, Japan.

Inborn errors of bile acid metabolism (IEBAM) cause cholestasis during the 
neonatal period, and 8 types of IEBAM have been reported to date. IEBAM accounts 
for approximately 2% of cases of cholestasis of unknown cause. As only 10 
patients have been identified in Japan, IEBAM presents diagnostic challenges due 
to the similarity of clinical symptoms with biliary atresia, thus necessitating 
precise differentiation to avoid unnecessary invasive procedures. Laboratory 
tests in IEBAM are characterized by normal γ-glutamyltransferase (GGT) and serum 
total bile acid (STBA) levels despite the presence of cholestasis; therefore, 
measuring STBA and GGT is essential to distinguishing biliary atresia from 
IEBAM. With suspected IEBAM, liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC/MS) 
analysis of urinary bile acids is needed to optimize diagnostic and therapeutic 
efficacy and avoid open cholangiography and initiate treatment for primary bile 
acids such as cholic acid or chenodeoxycholic acid. This prospective report aims 
to increase awareness of IEBAM by highlighting the characteristics of general 
blood test and bile acid profiles from LC/MS analyses of blood, urine, and stool 
samples.

© 2024 Nittono, Suzuki, Suzuki, Sugimoto, Mori, Sakamoto, Takaki, Hayashi, Takei 
and Kimura.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2024.1385970
PMCID: PMC11026588
PMID: 38646510

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.