---
reference_id: "PMID:28753427"
title: A Genetic Variant Associated with Five Vascular Diseases Is a Distal Regulator of Endothelin-1 Gene Expression.
authors:
- Gupta RM
- Hadaya J
- Trehan A
- Zekavat SM
- Roselli C
- Klarin D
- Emdin CA
- Hilvering CRE
- Bianchi V
- Mueller C
- Khera AV
- Ryan RJH
- Engreitz JM
- Issner R
- Shoresh N
- Epstein CB
- de Laat W
- Brown JD
- Schnabel RB
- Bernstein BE
- Kathiresan S
journal: Cell
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2017.06.049
keywords:
- Acetylation
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Chromatin/metabolism
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 6"
- Coronary Artery Disease/genetics
- Endothelial Cells/cytology
- "Endothelin-1/blood, genetics"
- Epigenomics
- Gene Editing
- Gene Expression
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Histones/metabolism
- Humans
- "Muscle, Smooth, Vascular/cytology"
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Vascular Diseases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Genetic Variant Associated with Five Vascular Diseases Is a Distal Regulator of Endothelin-1 Gene Expression.
**Authors:** Gupta RM, Hadaya J, Trehan A, Zekavat SM, Roselli C, Klarin D, Emdin CA, Hilvering CRE, Bianchi V, Mueller C, Khera AV, Ryan RJH, Engreitz JM, Issner R, Shoresh N, Epstein CB, de Laat W, Brown JD, Schnabel RB, Bernstein BE, Kathiresan S
**Journal:** Cell (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2017.06.049](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.06.049)

## Content

1. Cell. 2017 Jul 27;170(3):522-533.e15. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2017.06.049.

A Genetic Variant Associated with Five Vascular Diseases Is a Distal Regulator
of Endothelin-1 Gene Expression.

Gupta RM(1), Hadaya J(2), Trehan A(2), Zekavat SM(2), Roselli C(2), Klarin D(2),
Emdin CA(2), Hilvering CRE(3), Bianchi V(3), Mueller C(4), Khera AV(5), Ryan
RJH(6), Engreitz JM(2), Issner R(2), Shoresh N(2), Epstein CB(2), de Laat W(3),
Brown JD(7), Schnabel RB(4), Bernstein BE(6), Kathiresan S(8).

Author information:
(1)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA; Cardiology
Division, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA USA; Center for Genomic Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA,
USA. Electronic address: rgupta@broadinstitute.org.
(2)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)Hubrecht Institute, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the
Netherlands.
(4)Department of General and Interventional Cardiology, University Heart Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(5)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA; Cardiology
Division, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA USA; Center for Genomic Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA,
USA.
(6)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA; Department
of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA, USA.
(7)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, TN, USA.
(8)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA; Cardiology
Division, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA USA; Center for Genomic Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA,
USA. Electronic address: skathiresan1@mgh.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2017 Sep;18(9):514-515. doi: 10.1038/nrg.2017.66.

Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) implicate the PHACTR1 locus (6p24) in
risk for five vascular diseases, including coronary artery disease, migraine
headache, cervical artery dissection, fibromuscular dysplasia, and hypertension.
Through genetic fine mapping, we prioritized rs9349379, a common SNP in the
third intron of the PHACTR1 gene, as the putative causal variant. Epigenomic
data from human tissue revealed an enhancer signature at rs9349379 exclusively
in aorta, suggesting a regulatory function for this SNP in the vasculature.
CRISPR-edited stem cell-derived endothelial cells demonstrate rs9349379
regulates expression of endothelin 1 (EDN1), a gene located 600 kb upstream of
PHACTR1. The known physiologic effects of EDN1 on the vasculature may explain
the pattern of risk for the five associated diseases. Overall, these data
illustrate the integration of genetic, phenotypic, and epigenetic analysis to
identify the biologic mechanism by which a common, non-coding variant can
distally regulate a gene and contribute to the pathogenesis of multiple vascular
diseases.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2017.06.049
PMCID: PMC5785707
PMID: 28753427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
