---
reference_id: "PMID:16950638"
title: "Inborn errors of isoleucine degradation: a review."
authors:
- Korman SH
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2006.07.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inborn errors of isoleucine degradation: a review.
**Authors:** Korman SH
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2006.07.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2006.07.010)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2006 Dec;89(4):289-99. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2006.07.010. Epub
 2006 Sep 6.

Inborn errors of isoleucine degradation: a review.

Korman SH(1).

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Diseases Unit, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem 
91120, Israel. korman@hadassah.org.il

Comment in
    Mol Genet Metab. 2007 May;91(1):115. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2007.01.001.

Three inborn errors have been identified in the pathway of isoleucine 
degradation. Deficiency of beta-ketothiolase (beta-KT, also known as T2, 
mitochondrial acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase and acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase 1) is a 
well-described disorder which presents with acute episodic ketoacidosis. In 
contrast, short/branched-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (SBCAD) and 
2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase (MHBD) deficiencies are recently 
described and relatively rare defects which present with predominantly 
neurological manifestations, although acute metabolic decompensation may occur 
in the early newborn period. Careful examination of urine organic acids is 
required for identification and differential diagnosis of these disorders, with 
awareness that the abnormalities may be subtle and variable. Tandem MS analysis 
of acylcarnitines may reveal elevated C5 (SBCAD) or C5:1 and/or OH-C5 species 
(MHBD and beta-KT deficiencies) but the abnormalities are non-diagnostic and may 
be intermittent or absent. Confirmation of diagnosis is therefore advisable by 
specific enzyme assay and/or mutation analysis of the ACAT1 (beta-KT), ACADSB 
(SBCAD) or HADH2 (MHBD) genes. The latter is located on the X chromosome, 
accounting for the milder clinical phenotype in females. If beta-KT deficiency 
is diagnosed early and treated by fasting avoidance and modest protein 
restriction, ketoacidosis episodes can be prevented and the prognosis is 
excellent. The role of treatment in SBCAD deficiency remains unclear pending 
further delineation of its clinical phenotype and pathogenicity, particularly 
regarding asymptomatic individuals detected by expanded newborn screening. The 
ineffectiveness of isoleucine restriction in MHBD deficiency is consistent with 
the additional roles of this multifunctional enzyme in sex steroid and 
neurosteroid metabolism and its interaction with amyloid-beta peptide.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2006.07.010
PMID: 16950638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]