---
reference_id: "PMID:39128102"
title: "Congenital Sucrase-Isomaltase Deficiency: Same Mutation with Different Clinical Presentations."
authors:
- İryancı Fİ
- Güven B
- Çakır M
journal: Turk J Gastroenterol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.5152/tjg.2024.23250
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- "Sucrase-Isomaltase Complex/deficiency, genetics"
- "Carbohydrate Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics, diagnosis"
- Adult
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Infant
- Mutation
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Middle Aged
- Pedigree
- Aged
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital Sucrase-Isomaltase Deficiency: Same Mutation with Different Clinical Presentations.
**Authors:** İryancı Fİ, Güven B, Çakır M
**Journal:** Turk J Gastroenterol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.5152/tjg.2024.23250](https://doi.org/10.5152/tjg.2024.23250)

## Content

1. Turk J Gastroenterol. 2024 Apr;35(4):343-349. doi: 10.5152/tjg.2024.23250.

Congenital Sucrase-Isomaltase Deficiency: Same Mutation with Different Clinical 
Presentations.

İryancı Fİ(1), Güven B(1), Çakır M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Karadeniz Technical University 
Faculty of Medicine, Trabzon, Turkey.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency is an autosomal 
recessive inherited disaccharidase deficiency characterized by chronic osmotic 
diarrhea. In this study, the genotype-phenotype relationships of close relatives 
of an index case with congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency were 
investigated.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A 23-month-old female patient with a sucrase-isomaltase 
gene c.317G>A (p.C106Y) homozygous mutation was diagnosed as an index case and 
her pedigree analysis was performed subsequently. The family members with and 
without sucrase- isomaltase gene mutations were compared in terms of clinical 
symptoms.
RESULTS: The study included 109 cases [mean age ± SD: 22.6 ± 17.2 years (0.1-75 
years), 61 males (56%)] of 130 family members of the index case. 
Sucrase-isomaltase gene c.317G>A (p.C106Y) heterozygous mutation was detected in 
27 cases (24.7%); 14 (51.9%) were male and had a mean age of 23.2 ± 18.3 years. 
The most common complaints of 12 (44.4%) symptomatic patients with mutations 
were abdominal pain (37%), gas irritability (33.3%), bloating (22.2%), and 
foul-smelling stools (18.5%). Compared with the cases without mutation, a 
statistically significant difference was observed in the incidence of gas 
irritability, foul-smelling stool, ≥2 gastrointestinal symptoms, postprandial 
complaints, and food allergy (P = .005, P = .047, P = .049, P = .017, P = .021, 
respectively). Sacrosidase enzyme replacement was applied to 7 patients whose 
symptoms did not improve with dietary elimination. Clinical response was 
obtained after enzyme treatment.
CONCLUSION: Despite its autosomal recessive inheritance, congenital 
sucrase-isomaltase deficiency can also be symptomatic in heterozygous 
individuals. Further studies are required to clarify the genotype-phenotype 
relationship and management of the disease.

DOI: 10.5152/tjg.2024.23250
PMCID: PMC11114242
PMID: 39128102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests: The authors have no 
conflict of interest to declare.