---
reference_id: "PMID:10721805"
title: Mucinous cystic neoplasms of the pancreas.
authors:
- Wilentz RE
- Albores-Saavedra J
- Hruban RH
journal: Semin Diagn Pathol
year: '2000'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mucinous cystic neoplasms of the pancreas.
**Authors:** Wilentz RE, Albores-Saavedra J, Hruban RH
**Journal:** Semin Diagn Pathol (2000)

## Content

1. Semin Diagn Pathol. 2000 Feb;17(1):31-42.

Mucinous cystic neoplasms of the pancreas.

Wilentz RE(1), Albores-Saavedra J, Hruban RH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, 
MD 21287, USA.

Since their initial description, mucinous cystic neoplasms have been difficult 
to classify. This article attempts to clarify histological, clinical, and 
genetic criteria so that the pathologist can categorize each mucinous cystic 
neoplasm into 1 of 4 possible categories. Mucinous cystadenomas contain a single 
layer of mucin-producing, columnar epithelium lacking significant atypia. 
Borderline mucinous cystic neoplasms contain cells with moderate atypia. 
Mucinous cystic neoplasms with in situ carcinoma show significant architectural 
and cytological atypia. When invasive carcinoma is present in association with a 
mucinous cystic neoplasm, then the diagnosis of invasive mucinous 
cystadenocarcinoma should be made. The categorization of mucinous cystic 
neoplasms into these groups is essential because it accurately predicts outcome, 
provided that the tumor has been sampled and examined thoroughly. Completely 
removed mucinous cystadenomas, borderline mucinous cystic neoplasms, and 
mucinous cystic neoplasms with in situ carcinoma follow benign courses. Partial 
resection should be avoided as evidence suggests that mucinous cystic neoplasms 
can progress from adenomas to borderline lesions to carcinomas in situ to 
invasive carcinomas over time; partial resection should be avoided if possible. 
Modern molecular genetic techniques are helping to unravel the origins of rare 
variants of mucinous cystic tumors, such as the mucinous cystic tumor with an 
associated osteoclast-like giant cell tumor and the mucinous cystic tumor with 
sarcomatous stroma.

PMID: 10721805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]