---
reference_id: "PMID:38861148"
title: "Schnitzler's Syndrome-Diagnostic Experience, Approaches to Therapy, and Patient Management according to a Multicenter Russian Cohort."
authors:
- Salugina SO
- Torgashina AV
- Borzova EY
- Rameev VV
- Gorodetsky VR
- Fedorov ES
- Muravyova NV
journal: Dokl Biochem Biophys
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1134/S1607672924700923
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- "Schnitzler Syndrome/drug therapy, diagnosis"
- Aged
- Russia/epidemiology
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Retrospective Studies
- Cohort Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Schnitzler's Syndrome-Diagnostic Experience, Approaches to Therapy, and Patient Management according to a Multicenter Russian Cohort.
**Authors:** Salugina SO, Torgashina AV, Borzova EY, Rameev VV, Gorodetsky VR, Fedorov ES, Muravyova NV
**Journal:** Dokl Biochem Biophys (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1134/S1607672924700923](https://doi.org/10.1134/S1607672924700923)

## Content

1. Dokl Biochem Biophys. 2024 Aug;517(1):214-227. doi: 10.1134/S1607672924700923.
 Epub 2024 Jun 10.

Schnitzler's Syndrome-Diagnostic Experience, Approaches to Therapy, and Patient 
Management according to a Multicenter Russian Cohort.

Salugina SO(1), Torgashina AV(2), Borzova EY(3)(4), Rameev VV(3), Gorodetsky 
VR(2), Fedorov ES(2), Muravyova NV(2).

Author information:
(1)Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, Moscow, Russia. 
pafon1@yandex.ru.
(2)Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, Moscow, Russia.
(3)Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Ministry of Health of the 
Russian Federation (Sechenov University), Moscow, Russia.
(4)Niigata University, 8050 Ikarashi 2-no-cho, 950-2181, Nishi-ku, Niigata, 
Japan.

The objectives of the study were to present the experience of diagnosis, 
management, and therapy with IL-1 inhibitors in patients with Schnitzler's 
syndrome (SchS) according to a multicenter Russian cohort. An observational 
retrospective study for a 10-year period (2012-2022) involved 17 patients with 
SchS who were admitted to the hospital or were observed on an outpatient basis 
(eight women and nine men). The diagnosis of all of them corresponded to the 
Strasbourg diagnostic criteria. The age of patients ranged from 25 to 81 years 
(Me 53[46; 56]). The age at the time of the onset of the disease ranged from 20 
to 72 years (Me 46[39; 54]), the duration of the disease before diagnosis ranged 
from 1 to 35 years (Me 6.5[3; 6]), in three patients it exceeded 10 years, in 
the rest it ranged from 1 to 8 years. Infectious and lymphoproliferative 
diseases, monogenic AIDs (CAPS, TRAPS, and HIDS) were excluded from all patients 
at the prehospital stage. The referral diagnosis for all of them was Still 's 
disease in adults. Clinical manifestations of the disease in all patients 
included fatigue, lethargy, fatigue, rash, and fever. In all patients, skin 
elements were urticular and were accompanied by itching in 6 (37.5%) patients. 
Bone pain was observed in 12 (70.6%) patients; arthralgias, in 16 (94.1%); 
arthritis, in 9 (52.9%); myalgia, in 7 (41.2%); and weight loss, in 4 (23.5%). 
Lymphadenopathy was detected in 6 (35.3%) patients; enlarged liver, in 6 
(35.3%); pericarditis, in 4 (23.5%); angioedema, in 6 (35.3); redness and 
dryness in the eyes, in 3 (17.6%); sore throat, in 2 (11.8%); abdominal pain, in 
1 (5.9%), distal polyneuropathy, in 2 (11.8%); paraesthesia, in 1 (5.9%); and 
chondritis of the auricles, in 1 (5.9%). Monoclonal gammopathy was detected in 
all patients with a secretion level of 2.9-15.1 g/L: IgMk (n = 10, 64.7%), less 
often IgMλ (n = 2), IgGk (n = 2), IgGλ (n = 1), and IgAλ (n = 1). Ben-Jones 
protein was not detected in any of them. All patients had an increased level of 
ESR and CRP. Before inclusion in the study, 16 patients received GCs (94.1%) 
with a temporary effect that disappeared with dose reduction or cancellation. 
Seven patients received cDMARDs, including methotrexate (5), hydroxychloroquine 
(2), and cyclophosphamide (1). All patients received NSAIDs and antihistamines, 
as well as biologics, including the anti-B-cell drug rituximab (1), monoclonal 
ABs to IgE omalizumab (2, 1 without effect and 1 with partial effect), IL-1i 
canakinumab (n = 10, 58.8%) subcutaneously once every 8 weeks, and anakinra (n = 
4, 23.5%) subcutaneously daily. The duration of taking anakinra, which was 
prescribed in the test mode, ranged from 1 week to 2.5 months with a further 
switch to canakinumab in 3 patients. The duration of taking canakinumab at the 
time of analysis ranged from 7 months to 8 years. Against the background of 
treatment with IL-1i, 10 out of 11 (90.9%) patients received a complete response 
in terms of the clinical manifestations of the disease and a decrease in the 
level of ESR and CRP within a few days. In one patient, a partial response to 
the administration of anakinra was detected; however, after switching to 
canakinumab, the effect of treatment was finally lost. One patient received 
IL-6i for 8 months with an incomplete effect and a positive dynamics after 
switching to anakinra. Thus, anakinra was initially prescribed to four patients 
and changed to canakinumab in two of them; canakinumab was started as the first 
drug in seven patients. Treatment with anakinra was continued in two patients; 
with canakinumab, in nine patients. In one patient, due to the persistent 
absence of relapses, the interval between canakinumab injections was increased 
to 5 months without signs of reactivation; however, subsequently, against the 
background of stress and relapses of the disease, the intervals were reduced to 
4 months. A healthy child was born by the same patient on the background of 
treatment. The tolerability of therapy was satisfactory in all patients, no SAEs 
were noted. SchS is a rare multifactorial/non-monogenic AID that should be 
differentiated from a number of rheumatic diseases and other AIDs. The onset in 
adulthood, the presence of recurrent urticarial rashes in combination with fever 
and other manifestations of a systemic inflammatory response are indications for 
examination for monoclonal secretion. The use of short- or long-acting IL-1i is 
a highly effective and safe option in the treatment of such patients.

© 2024. Pleiades Publishing, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1134/S1607672924700923
PMID: 38861148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]