---
reference_id: "PMID:38518792"
title: Staphylococcus aureus colonisation and strategies for decolonisation.
authors:
- Piewngam P
- Otto M
journal: Lancet Microbe
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/S2666-5247(24)00040-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Staphylococcus aureus colonisation and strategies for decolonisation.
**Authors:** Piewngam P, Otto M
**Journal:** Lancet Microbe (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2666-5247(24)00040-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2666-5247(24)00040-5)

## Content

1. Lancet Microbe. 2024 Jun;5(6):e606-e618. doi: 10.1016/S2666-5247(24)00040-5. 
Epub 2024 Mar 19.

Staphylococcus aureus colonisation and strategies for decolonisation.

Piewngam P(1), Otto M(2).

Author information:
(1)Pathogen Molecular Genetics Section, Laboratory of Bacteriology, National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, US National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Pathogen Molecular Genetics Section, Laboratory of Bacteriology, National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, US National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA. Electronic address: motto@niaid.nih.gov.

Staphylococcus aureus is a leading cause of death by infectious diseases 
worldwide. Treatment of S aureus infections is difficult due to widespread 
antibiotic resistance, necessitating alternative approaches and measures for 
prevention of infection. Because S aureus infections commonly arise from 
asymptomatic colonisation, decolonisation is considered a key approach for their 
prevention. Current decolonisation procedures include antibiotic-based and 
antiseptic-based eradication of S aureus from the nose and skin. However, 
despite the widespread implementation and partial success of such measures, S 
aureus infection rates remain worrisome, and resistance to decolonisation agents 
is on the rise. In this Review we outline the epidemiology and mechanisms of S 
aureus colonisation, describe how colonisation underlies infection, and discuss 
current and novel approaches for S aureus decolonisation, with a focus on the 
latest findings on probiotic strategies and the intestinal S aureus colonisation 
site.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/S2666-5247(24)00040-5
PMCID: PMC11162333
PMID: 38518792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests We declare no competing 
interests.