---
reference_id: "PMID:28763601"
title: "Leprosy - an overview of clinical features, diagnosis, and treatment."
authors:
- Fischer M
journal: J Dtsch Dermatol Ges
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/ddg.13301
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Leprosy - an overview of clinical features, diagnosis, and treatment.
**Authors:** Fischer M
**Journal:** J Dtsch Dermatol Ges (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ddg.13301](https://doi.org/10.1111/ddg.13301)

## Content

1. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2017 Aug;15(8):801-827. doi: 10.1111/ddg.13301.

Leprosy - an overview of clinical features, diagnosis, and treatment.

Fischer M(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Tropical Dermatology, Department of Dermatology, Venereology, and 
Allergology, Federal Army Hospital, Hamburg, Germany.

Leprosy is a chronic infectious disease caused by Mycobacterium (M.) leprae. 
Worldwide, 210,758 new cases were diagnosed in 2015. The highest incidence is 
found in India, Brazil, and Indonesia. While the exact route of transmission 
remains unknown, nasal droplet infection is thought to be most likely. The 
pathogen primarily affects the skin and peripheral nervous system. The disease 
course is determined by individual host immunity. Clinically, multibacillary 
lepromatous variants are distinguished from paucibacillary tuberculoid forms. 
Apart from the various characteristic skin lesions, the condition is marked by 
damage to the peripheral nervous system. Advanced disease is characterized by 
disfiguring mutilations. Current treatment options are based on WHO 
recommendations. Early treatment frequently results in complete remission 
without sequelae. While paucibacillary forms are treated with rifampicin and 
dapsone for at least six months, multibacillary leprosy is treated for at least 
twelve months, additionally requiring clofazimine. Leprosy reactions during 
therapy may considerably aggravate the disease course. Besides individual 
treatment, WHO-supported preventive measures and strategies play a key role in 
endemic areas.

© 2017 Deutsche Dermatologische Gesellschaft (DDG). Published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ddg.13301
PMID: 28763601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]