---
reference_id: "PMID:38000801"
title: "Bad Liver and a Broken Heart: Hepatitis B in the Newborn."
authors:
- McPherson C
journal: Neonatal Netw
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1891/NN-2023-0035
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bad Liver and a Broken Heart: Hepatitis B in the Newborn.
**Authors:** McPherson C
**Journal:** Neonatal Netw (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1891/NN-2023-0035](https://doi.org/10.1891/NN-2023-0035)

## Content

1. Neonatal Netw. 2023 Nov 1;42(6):348-355. doi: 10.1891/NN-2023-0035.

Bad Liver and a Broken Heart: Hepatitis B in the Newborn.

McPherson C.

Hepatitis B viral infection is a significant source of morbidity and mortality 
worldwide. The United States has experienced a precipitous drop in acute 
hepatitis B infection after the introduction and widespread adoption of 
recombinant vaccines. Neonates experience significant risk from both vertical 
and horizontal hepatitis B exposure during a period of immaturity of the innate 
and adaptive immune systems. Acquisition of hepatitis B virus at or near birth 
confers the highest lifetime risk of chronic infection and subsequent 
complications including liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Pregnant 
women should be screened for the presence of hepatitis B surface antigen, 
indicating acute or chronic infection, and, if positive, hepatitis B viral 
deoxyribonucleic acid, allowing for quantification of viral load. The 
development of highly effective and safe recombinant vaccines allows partial 
protection of late preterm and term neonates immediately after birth. 
Additionally, administration of hepatitis B immune globulin in the setting of 
suspected or confirmed exposure supplements the immune response and decreases 
the risk of chronic infection. The optimal timing of vaccination is later in 
low-birth-weight neonates due to the aforementioned immune system immaturity. 
Health care providers serving neonates must familiarize themselves with national 
guidelines regarding hepatitis B vaccination and hepatitis B immune globulin 
therapy. Understanding the risks of infection and the evidence basis supporting 
vaccination and immunotherapy will allow providers to educate families and 
support decision-making, with the potential to eradicate this 
vaccine-preventable illness in our lifetime.

© Copyright 2023 Springer Publishing Company, LLC.

DOI: 10.1891/NN-2023-0035
PMID: 38000801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]