---
reference_id: "PMID:34820282"
title: A retrospective longitudinal study and comprehensive review of adult patients with glycogen storage disease type III.
authors:
- Hijazi G
- Paschall A
- Young SP
- Smith B
- Case LE
- Boggs T
- Amarasekara S
- Austin SL
- Pendyal S
- El-Gharbawy A
- Deak KL
- Muir AJ
- Kishnani PS
journal: Mol Genet Metab Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2021.100821
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A retrospective longitudinal study and comprehensive review of adult patients with glycogen storage disease type III.
**Authors:** Hijazi G, Paschall A, Young SP, Smith B, Case LE, Boggs T, Amarasekara S, Austin SL, Pendyal S, El-Gharbawy A, Deak KL, Muir AJ, Kishnani PS
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgmr.2021.100821](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgmr.2021.100821)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2021 Nov 11;29:100821. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2021.100821.
eCollection 2021 Dec.

A retrospective longitudinal study and comprehensive review of adult patients
with glycogen storage disease type III.

Hijazi G(1), Paschall A(1), Young SP(1), Smith B(2), Case LE(3), Boggs T(4),
Amarasekara S(5), Austin SL(1), Pendyal S(1), El-Gharbawy A(1), Deak KL(6), Muir
AJ(7), Kishnani PS(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(2)Division of Neonatal-Perinatal Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(3)Doctor of Physical Therapy Division, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Duke
University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, USA.
(4)Duke University Health System, Department of Physical Therapy and
Occupational Therapy, USA.
(5)Duke University School of Nursing, Durham, NC, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(7)Division of Gastroenterology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC,
USA.

INTRODUCTION: A deficiency of glycogen debrancher enzyme in patients with
glycogen storage disease type III (GSD III) manifests with hepatic, cardiac, and
muscle involvement in the most common subtype (type a), or with only hepatic
involvement in patients with GSD IIIb.
OBJECTIVE AND METHODS: To describe longitudinal biochemical, radiological,
muscle strength and ambulation, liver histopathological findings, and clinical
outcomes in adults (≥18 years) with glycogen storage disease type III, by a
retrospective review of medical records.
RESULTS: Twenty-one adults with GSD IIIa (14 F & 7 M) and four with GSD IIIb
(1 F & 3 M) were included in this natural history study. At the most recent
visit, the median (range) age and follow-up time were 36 (19-68) and 16 years
(0-41), respectively. For the entire cohort: 40% had documented hypoglycemic
episodes in adulthood; hepatomegaly and cirrhosis were the most common
radiological findings; and 28% developed decompensated liver disease and portal
hypertension, the latter being more prevalent in older patients. In the GSD IIIa
group, muscle weakness was a major feature, noted in 89% of the GSD IIIa cohort,
a third of whom depended on a wheelchair or an assistive walking device. Older
individuals tended to show more severe muscle weakness and mobility limitations,
compared with younger adults. Asymptomatic left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH)
was the most common cardiac manifestation, present in 43%. Symptomatic
cardiomyopathy and reduced ejection fraction was evident in 10%. Finally, a
urinary biomarker of glycogen storage (Glc4) was significantly associated with
AST, ALT and CK.
CONCLUSION: GSD III is a multisystem disorder in which a multidisciplinary
approach with regular clinical, biochemical, radiological and functional
(physical therapy assessment) follow-up is required. Despite dietary
modification, hepatic and myopathic disease progression is evident in adults,
with muscle weakness as the major cause of morbidity. Consequently, definitive
therapies that address the underlying cause of the disease to correct both liver
and muscle are needed.

© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2021.100821
PMCID: PMC8600151
PMID: 34820282
