---
reference_id: "PMID:37921817"
title: Cutaneous larva migrans in the northeastern US.
authors:
- Johanis M
- Cheema KS
- Young PA
- Narala S
- Saleem A
- Novoa RA
- Bae GH
journal: Dermatol Online J
year: '2023'
doi: 10.5070/D329461906
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Middle Aged
- "Larva Migrans/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Ivermectin/therapeutic use
- Skin/pathology
- Epidermis
- Exanthema/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cutaneous larva migrans in the northeastern US.
**Authors:** Johanis M, Cheema KS, Young PA, Narala S, Saleem A, Novoa RA, Bae GH
**Journal:** Dermatol Online J (2023)
**DOI:** [10.5070/D329461906](https://doi.org/10.5070/D329461906)

## Content

1. Dermatol Online J. 2023 Aug 15;29(4). doi: 10.5070/D329461906.

Cutaneous larva migrans in the northeastern US.

Johanis M, Cheema KS, Young PA, Narala S, Saleem A, Novoa RA, Bae GH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Redwood 
City, California, USA. GBae@Stanford.edu.

Cutaneous larva migrans (CLM) is a dermo-epidermal parasitic infection with a 
disproportionate incidence in developing countries, particularly in, and near 
tropical areas. It is characterized by erythematous, twisting, and linear 
plaques that can migrate to adjacent skin. Herein, we present an otherwise 
healthy 45-year-old woman who acquired a pruritic, erythematous, and serpiginous 
rash localized to her right medial ankle during a trip to New England. Oral 
ivermectin, the preferred first-line treatment for cutaneous larva migrans, was 
administered in combination with triamcinolone. This was followed by removal of 
the papular area via punch biopsy; treatment was successful with a one-week 
recovery. Although cutaneous larva migrans has traditionally been considered a 
tropical disease, clinicians should be cognizant of its expanding geographic 
spread.

DOI: 10.5070/D329461906
PMID: 37921817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]