---
reference_id: PMID:27449972
title: "Topoisomerase Inhibitors: Fluoroquinolone Mechanisms of Action and Resistance."
authors:
- Hooper DC
- Jacoby GA
journal: Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a025320
keywords:
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/pharmacology
- DNA Gyrase/genetics
- DNA Topoisomerase IV/genetics
- "DNA, Bacterial/genetics"
- "Drug Resistance, Bacterial/genetics"
- "Escherichia coli/drug effects, genetics"
- Fluoroquinolones/pharmacology
- Humans
- Mutation
- Plasmids/drug effects
- Topoisomerase Inhibitors/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Topoisomerase Inhibitors: Fluoroquinolone Mechanisms of Action and Resistance.
**Authors:** Hooper DC, Jacoby GA
**Journal:** Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1101/cshperspect.a025320](https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a025320)

## Content

1. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2016 Sep 1;6(9):a025320. doi: 
10.1101/cshperspect.a025320.

Topoisomerase Inhibitors: Fluoroquinolone Mechanisms of Action and Resistance.

Hooper DC(1), Jacoby GA(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02114.
(2)Lahey Hospital and Medical Center, Burlington, Massachusetts 01805.

Quinolone antimicrobials are widely used in clinical medicine and are the only 
current class of agents that directly inhibit bacterial DNA synthesis. 
Quinolones dually target DNA gyrase and topoisomerase IV binding to specific 
domains and conformations so as to block DNA strand passage catalysis and 
stabilize DNA-enzyme complexes that block the DNA replication apparatus and 
generate double breaks in DNA that underlie their bactericidal activity. 
Resistance has emerged with clinical use of these agents and is common in some 
bacterial pathogens. Mechanisms of resistance include mutational alterations in 
drug target affinity and efflux pump expression and acquisition of 
resistance-conferring genes. Resistance mutations in one or both of the two drug 
target enzymes are commonly in a localized domain of the GyrA and ParC subunits 
of gyrase and topoisomerase IV, respectively, and reduce drug binding to the 
enzyme-DNA complex. Other resistance mutations occur in regulatory genes that 
control the expression of native efflux pumps localized in the bacterial 
membrane(s). These pumps have broad substrate profiles that include other 
antimicrobials as well as quinolones. Mutations of both types can accumulate 
with selection pressure and produce highly resistant strains. Resistance genes 
acquired on plasmids confer low-level resistance that promotes the selection of 
mutational high-level resistance. Plasmid-encoded resistance is because of Qnr 
proteins that protect the target enzymes from quinolone action, a mutant 
aminoglycoside-modifying enzyme that also modifies certain quinolones, and 
mobile efflux pumps. Plasmids with these mechanisms often encode additional 
antimicrobial resistances and can transfer multidrug resistance that includes 
quinolones.

Copyright © 2016 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1101/cshperspect.a025320
PMCID: PMC5008060
PMID: 27449972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]