---
reference_id: "PMID:34565156"
title: Scavenger receptor class B type I is more conducive for genotype 1b hepatitis C virus internalization than low-density lipoprotein receptor.
authors:
- Cao X
- Kang Q
- Deng J
- Xiao J
- Zhang Y
- Ma P
- Yang X
- Lv L
journal: Acta Virol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.4149/av_2021_307
keywords:
- Animals
- Genotype
- Hepacivirus/genetics
- Hepatitis C/genetics
- "Lipoproteins, LDL"
- Mice
- "Scavenger Receptors, Class B/genetics"
- Tetraspanin 28/genetics
- Virus Internalization
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Scavenger receptor class B type I is more conducive for genotype 1b hepatitis C virus internalization than low-density lipoprotein receptor.
**Authors:** Cao X, Kang Q, Deng J, Xiao J, Zhang Y, Ma P, Yang X, Lv L
**Journal:** Acta Virol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.4149/av_2021_307](https://doi.org/10.4149/av_2021_307)

## Content

1. Acta Virol. 2021;65(3):279-287. doi: 10.4149/av_2021_307.

Scavenger receptor class B type I is more conducive for genotype 1b hepatitis C
virus internalization than low-density lipoprotein receptor.

Cao X, Kang Q, Deng J, Xiao J, Zhang Y, Ma P, Yang X, Lv L.

The current limited understanding of HCV entry mechanisms hinders the
development of specific antiviral drug screening techniques and vaccine
assessment. HCV subtypes and cellular surface proteins both can affect virus
tropism. Human factors such as low-density lipoprotein receptor (hLDLR), CD81
(hCD81), scavenger receptor class B type I (hSR-BI), claudin 1 (hCLDN1), and
occludin (hOCLN) assist HCV entry into hepatocytes. Here, we studied the
importance of five human proteins in the process of cell culture-derived (HCVcc)
and serum-derived (HCV-sd) HCV entry using constructed humanized mouse
hepatocytes and mouse models. We determined that unlike hLDLR, hSR-BI was an
indispensable factor for 1b genotype HCV adsorption. Furthermore, this
attachment can be completely prevented by treatment with a monoclonal antibody
targeting hSR-BI. Our data support the idea that SR-BI is an essential factor in
HCV infection, particularly during the initial HCV particle-binding step. This
novel finding will facilitate the development of antiviral drugs and vaccines.
Keywords: hepatitis C virus; virus internalization; model construction; hSR-BI.

DOI: 10.4149/av_2021_307
PMID: 34565156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
