---
reference_id: "PMID:34427740"
title: A novel tandem duplication of PRDM13 in a Chinese family with North Carolina macular dystrophy.
authors:
- Wu S
- Yuan Z
- Sun Z
- Zhu T
- Wei X
- Zou X
- Sui R
journal: Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00417-021-05376-w
keywords:
- China/epidemiology
- "Corneal Dystrophies, Hereditary"
- Electroretinography
- Humans
- Pedigree
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel tandem duplication of PRDM13 in a Chinese family with North Carolina macular dystrophy.
**Authors:** Wu S, Yuan Z, Sun Z, Zhu T, Wei X, Zou X, Sui R
**Journal:** Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00417-021-05376-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00417-021-05376-w)

## Content

1. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2022 Feb;260(2):645-653. doi: 
10.1007/s00417-021-05376-w. Epub 2021 Aug 24.

A novel tandem duplication of PRDM13 in a Chinese family with North Carolina 
macular dystrophy.

Wu S(1), Yuan Z(1), Sun Z(1), Zhu T(1), Wei X(1), Zou X(1), Sui R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare 
Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100730, China.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare 
Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100730, China. 
hrfsui@163.com.

Comment in
    Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2023 Jul;261(7):2093-2095. doi: 
10.1007/s00417-023-06006-3.

PURPOSES: North Carolina macular dystrophy (NCMD) is a rare autosomal dominant 
inherited disorder characterized by macular impairment with a variety of 
phenotypic manifestations. The aims of this study were to assess the clinical 
features of a Chinese family with NCMD and to identify the underlying genetic 
cause of the disease.
METHODS: Three patients from a Chinese family were included in this study. 
Detailed ophthalmological examinations were performed, including best corrected 
visual acuity (BCVA), slit lamp, dilated indirect ophthalmoscopy, fundus 
photography, optical coherence tomography (OCT), fundus autofluorescence, 
full-field electroretinography (ERG), and electrooculography (EOG). Genomic DNA 
was extracted from peripheral blood samples. Whole-genome sequencing and 
long-read genome sequencing were applied to detect the pathogenic variants. 
Sanger sequencing was performed to confirm the breakpoints.
RESULTS: All three patients had macular involvement ranging from patchy 
yellowish-white lesions to big-area thinning, which are typical for NCMD. The 
BCVA ranged from 20/50 to 20/20. OCT revealed varying degrees of macular 
structure disorganization. The ERG responses were normal, and the Arden ration 
of the EOG was reduced. A novel 134.6 kb (g.99932464-100067110dup) tandem 
duplication on chromosome 6 (NC_000006.11) encompassing the entire CCNC and 
PRDM13 genes and a DNase 1 hypersensitivity site in the MCDR1 locus was 
identified.
CONCLUSION: A novel large tandem duplication in MCDR1 locus was confirmed in a 
Chinese family with NCMD with a variety of macular phenotypes.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00417-021-05376-w
PMID: 34427740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]