---
reference_id: "PMID:20054783"
title: "Severe encephalopathy with brain atrophy and hypomyelination due to adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency--MRI, clinical, biochemical and neuropathological findings of Polish patients."
authors:
- Mierzewska H
- Schmidt-Sidor B
- Jurkiewicz E
- Bogdańska A
- Kuśmierska K
- Stepień T
journal: Folia Neuropathol
year: '2009'
keywords:
- "Adenylosuccinate Lyase/deficiency, genetics"
- Atrophy/pathology
- Brain/pathology
- Brain Mapping
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Demyelinating Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- "Encephalitis/genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Muscle Hypotonia/etiology, genetics, pathology"
- "Muscle Spasticity/etiology, genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- Neurons/pathology
- Poland
- "Purine-Pyrimidine Metabolism, Inborn Errors/complications, genetics, pathology"
- "Seizures/etiology, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Severe encephalopathy with brain atrophy and hypomyelination due to adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency--MRI, clinical, biochemical and neuropathological findings of Polish patients.
**Authors:** Mierzewska H, Schmidt-Sidor B, Jurkiewicz E, Bogdańska A, Kuśmierska K, Stepień T
**Journal:** Folia Neuropathol (2009)

## Content

1. Folia Neuropathol. 2009;47(4):314-20.

Severe encephalopathy with brain atrophy and hypomyelination due to
adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency--MRI, clinical, biochemical and
neuropathological findings of Polish patients.

Mierzewska H(1), Schmidt-Sidor B, Jurkiewicz E, Bogdańska A, Kuśmierska K,
Stepień T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Child and Adolescent Neurology Institute of Mother and Child,
The Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. h.mierzewska@gmail.com

Adenylosuccinate lyase (ADSL) deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder
caused by mutation in the ADSL gene. The disease was identified in 1984 by
Jaeken and van der Berghe as the first inborn defect of purine biosynthesis.
Affected children revealed encephalopathy with epilepsy and marked psychomotor
retardation. A neurological examination showed hypotonia, followed sometimes
after years by spasticity. The diagnosis is based on detection in the urine and
CSF succinyladenosine (S-Ado) and succinylaminoimidazole carboxamide ribotide
(SAICAr). We present brain MR examinations of seven patients with ADSL
deficiency in the correlation with their clinical findings. In all cases lack of
myelination or of delayed myelination of cerebral white matter was seen.
Additionally cerebral and cerebellar atrophy was observed. Neuropathological
findings revealed damage of all cellular elements of brain tissue and are cause
of observed MR changes. Hypo/dysmyelination seemed to be secondary to damage of
oligodendroglia and axons of damaged neuronal cells.

PMID: 20054783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
