---
reference_id: "PMID:12686396"
title: "Madras motor neuron disease variant, clinical features of seven patients."
authors:
- Gourie-Devi M
- Nalini A
journal: J Neurol Sci
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/s0022-510x(02)00458-6
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- "Bulbar Palsy, Progressive/etiology"
- Cerebellar Diseases/etiology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Consanguinity
- Disease Progression
- Fatal Outcome
- Female
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/etiology"
- Humans
- India
- Male
- "Motor Neuron Disease/complications, diagnosis"
- Muscle Weakness/etiology
- Optic Atrophy/etiology
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Madras motor neuron disease variant, clinical features of seven patients.
**Authors:** Gourie-Devi M, Nalini A
**Journal:** J Neurol Sci (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0022-510x(02)00458-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022-510x(02)00458-6)

## Content

1. J Neurol Sci. 2003 May 15;209(1-2):13-7. doi: 10.1016/s0022-510x(02)00458-6.

Madras motor neuron disease variant, clinical features of seven patients.

Gourie-Devi M(1), Nalini A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, National Institute of Mental Health and 
Neurosciences, 506 029, Bangalore, India. mgd@nimhans.kar.nic.in

Madras motor neuron disease (MMND) has the characteristic features of onset in 
the young, atrophy and weakness of the limbs, multiple cranial nerve palsies 
particularly the seventh, ninth to twelfth and sensorineural hearing loss with 
unique geographic distribution to southern part of India. During a period of 28 
years (1974-2001), 7 (13%) among 54 patients of MMND seen at a tertiary referral 
center at Bangalore, India, had the additional features of optic atrophy in all 
and cerebellar involvement in three of them. There were three males and four 
females, the mean age at onset was 11.7 years, with a mean duration of illness 
of 6.4 years. All except one patient were ambulant and independent in the 
activities of daily living. Family history of MMND was present in more than a 
quarter (28.6%) of patients. Compared to MMND, these patients had onset of 
illness at a younger age and family history was more frequently observed, 
however, these differences were not statistically significant. Bulbar palsy was 
an invariable feature, being present in all patients compared to 38.3% of MMND 
and the difference was statistically significant (p=0.003). This clinical 
profile may be considered to be a variant of Madras motor neuron disease 
(MMNDV).

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-510x(02)00458-6
PMID: 12686396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]