---
reference_id: "PMID:11769739"
title: Late onset white matter disease in peroxisome biogenesis disorder.
authors:
- Barth PG
- Gootjes J
- Bode H
- Vreken P
- Majoie CB
- Wanders RJ
journal: Neurology
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1212/wnl.57.11.1949
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Late onset white matter disease in peroxisome biogenesis disorder.
**Authors:** Barth PG, Gootjes J, Bode H, Vreken P, Majoie CB, Wanders RJ
**Journal:** Neurology (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1212/wnl.57.11.1949](https://doi.org/10.1212/wnl.57.11.1949)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2001 Dec 11;57(11):1949-55. doi: 10.1212/wnl.57.11.1949.

Late onset white matter disease in peroxisome biogenesis disorder.

Barth PG(1), Gootjes J, Bode H, Vreken P, Majoie CB, Wanders RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Emma Children's Hospital/AMC, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. p.g.barth@amc.uva.nl

OBJECTIVE: To report late onset cerebral white matter disease as a distinctive 
phenotype in peroxisome biogenesis disorder (PBD).
BACKGROUND: There is phenotypic and genetic overlap among the PBD known as 
Zellweger syndrome (ZS), infantile Refsum disease (IRD), and neonatal 
adrenoleukodystrophy (NALD). Distinctive external features are variable among 
these three disorders, and neurologic deficit has its onset at birth or in 
infancy. In a structured follow-up cohort of 25 patients with PBD, not including 
ZS, three patients had an unusual pattern of cerebral white matter disease with 
onset past the age of 1, not conforming to any of the classic PBD phenotypes.
METHODS: Clinical phenotyping and follow-up, peroxisomal biochemical 
determinations in body fluids and fibroblasts, identification of affected PEX 
gene by genetic complementation in fibroblasts, and MRI studies.
RESULTS: Two unrelated patients with PBD without distinctive external features 
had normal neurodevelopmental milestones during their first year, followed by 
rapid deterioration including severe hypotonic pareses, seizures, retinopathy, 
and deafness. A third patient initially diagnosed with IRD developed cerebral 
white matter degeneration in the third year of life, complicating the original 
diagnosis. MRI in all three patients showed cerebral demyelination with sparing 
of subcortical fibers and pronounced central cerebellar demyelination.
CONCLUSIONS: Late-onset cerebral white matter disease may occur in PBD, either 
following IRD or following normal early development and in the absence of 
distinctive external features. Peroxisome biogenesis disorder should be included 
in the differential diagnosis of post-infantile onset of cerebral white matter 
disease

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.57.11.1949
PMID: 11769739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]