---
reference_id: "PMID:21722602"
title: "Saliva urea dipstick test: application in chronic kidney disease."
authors:
- Raimann JG
- Kirisits W
- Gebetsroither E
- Carter M
- Callegari J
- Rosales L
- Levin NW
- Kotanko P
journal: Clin Nephrol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.5414/cn106826
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Saliva urea dipstick test: application in chronic kidney disease.
**Authors:** Raimann JG, Kirisits W, Gebetsroither E, Carter M, Callegari J, Rosales L, Levin NW, Kotanko P
**Journal:** Clin Nephrol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.5414/cn106826](https://doi.org/10.5414/cn106826)

## Content

1. Clin Nephrol. 2011 Jul;76(1):23-8. doi: 10.5414/cn106826.

Saliva urea dipstick test: application in chronic kidney disease.

Raimann JG(1), Kirisits W, Gebetsroither E, Carter M, Callegari J, Rosales L, 
Levin NW, Kotanko P.

Author information:
(1)Renal Research Institute, New York City, NY 10128, USA. j-raimann@gmx.net

BACKGROUND: A noninvasive test for determining elevated levels of blood urea 
nitrogen (BUN) may be useful under circumstances in which there is limited 
access to laboratories. Because saliva urea nitrogen (SUN) parallels BUN, we 
investigated the diagnostic performance of a semiquantitative SUN dipstick to 
test for elevated BUN levels in patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Patients with CKD Stages 1 to 5D were studied. 50 µl of 
saliva were transferred onto the SUN test strip (Integrated Biomedical 
Technology, Elkhart, Indiana, IN, USA). SUN was determined after 1 minute by 
visual comparison of the color of the moistened test pad with 6 calibrated color 
blocks. Interobserver reproducibility was evaluated by independent observers, 
masked to urea concentrations of 6 calibrated urea solutions. Correlation 
between SUN and BUN was quantified by Spearman's rank correlation coefficient 
(RS), Kappa Statistic was employed to evaluate within-sample reproducibility of 
duplicates. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis was used to assess 
the diagnostic performance of SUN.
RESULTS: 68 patients (31 females, 60 ± 14 years; 34 hemodialysis patients, 34 
patients CKD Stages 1 - 4) were studied. Interobserver coefficient of variation 
was 4.9% at SUN levels > 50 mg/dl; within-sample reproducibility was 90%. SUN 
and BUN were correlated significantly (RS = 0.63; p < 0.01). Elevated BUN was 
diagnosed with high accuracy by SUN determination (area under the ROC curve: 
0.90 (95% CI 0.85 - 0.95)).
CONCLUSION: Semiquantitative dipstick measurements of SUN can reliably identify 
CKD patients with elevated BUN levels.

DOI: 10.5414/cn106826
PMID: 21722602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]