---
reference_id: "PMID:38232699"
title: Single-cell transcriptomics of the immune system in ME/CFS at baseline and following symptom provocation.
authors:
- Vu LT
- Ahmed F
- Zhu H
- Iu DSH
- Fogarty EA
- Kwak Y
- Chen W
- Franconi CJ
- Munn PR
- Tate AE
- Levine SM
- Stevens J
- Mao X
- Shungu DC
- Moore GE
- Keller BA
- Hanson MR
- Grenier JK
- Grimson A
journal: Cell Rep Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2023.101373
keywords:
- Humans
- "Fatigue Syndrome, Chronic/genetics, diagnosis"
- Exercise/physiology
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Transcriptome
- Monocytes
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single-cell transcriptomics of the immune system in ME/CFS at baseline and following symptom provocation.
**Authors:** Vu LT, Ahmed F, Zhu H, Iu DSH, Fogarty EA, Kwak Y, Chen W, Franconi CJ, Munn PR, Tate AE, Levine SM, Stevens J, Mao X, Shungu DC, Moore GE, Keller BA, Hanson MR, Grenier JK, Grimson A
**Journal:** Cell Rep Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.xcrm.2023.101373](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2023.101373)

## Content

1. Cell Rep Med. 2024 Jan 16;5(1):101373. doi: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2023.101373.

Single-cell transcriptomics of the immune system in ME/CFS at baseline and
following symptom provocation.

Vu LT(1), Ahmed F(2), Zhu H(1), Iu DSH(1), Fogarty EA(1), Kwak Y(1), Chen W(1),
Franconi CJ(1), Munn PR(2), Tate AE(2), Levine SM(3), Stevens J(4), Mao X(5),
Shungu DC(5), Moore GE(6), Keller BA(6), Hanson MR(1), Grenier JK(7), Grimson
A(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
14853, USA.
(2)Genomics Innovation Hub and TREx Facility, Institute of Biotechnology,
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.
(3)Levine Clinic, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Workwell Foundation, Ripon, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Radiology, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(6)Department of Exercise Science and Athletic Training, Ithaca College, Ithaca,
NY, USA.
(7)Genomics Innovation Hub and TREx Facility, Institute of Biotechnology,
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. Electronic address:
jgrenier@cornell.edu.
(8)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
14853, USA. Electronic address: agrimson@cornell.edu.

Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) is a serious and
poorly understood disease. To understand immune dysregulation in ME/CFS, we use
single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) to examine immune cells in patient and
control cohorts. Postexertional malaise (PEM), an exacerbation of symptoms
following strenuous exercise, is a characteristic symptom of ME/CFS. To detect
changes coincident with PEM, we applied scRNA-seq on the same cohorts following
exercise. At baseline, ME/CFS patients display classical monocyte dysregulation
suggestive of inappropriate differentiation and migration to tissue. We identify
both diseased and more normal monocytes within patients, and the fraction of
diseased cells correlates with disease severity. Comparing the transcriptome at
baseline and postexercise challenge, we discover patterns indicative of improper
platelet activation in patients, with minimal changes elsewhere in the immune
system. Taken together, these data identify immunological defects present at
baseline in patients and an additional layer of dysregulation in platelets.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2023.101373
PMCID: PMC10829790
PMID: 38232699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no
competing interests.
