---
reference_id: "PMID:34929863"
title: Climate factors and dengue fever occurrence in Makassar during period of 2011-2017.
authors:
- Susilawaty A
- Ekasari R
- Widiastuty L
- Wijaya DR
- Arranury Z
- Basri S
journal: Gac Sanit
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2021.10.063
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Climate factors and dengue fever occurrence in Makassar during period of 2011-2017.
**Authors:** Susilawaty A, Ekasari R, Widiastuty L, Wijaya DR, Arranury Z, Basri S
**Journal:** Gac Sanit (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gaceta.2021.10.063](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gaceta.2021.10.063)

## Content

1. Gac Sanit. 2021;35 Suppl 2:S408-S412. doi: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2021.10.063.

Climate factors and dengue fever occurrence in Makassar during period of 
2011-2017.

Susilawaty A(1), Ekasari R(1), Widiastuty L(1), Wijaya DR(1), Arranury Z(1), 
Basri S(2).

Author information:
(1)Universitas Islam Negeri Alauddin, Makassar 90221, Indonesia.
(2)Universitas Islam Negeri Alauddin, Makassar 90221, Indonesia. Electronic 
address: syahrul.basri@uin-alauddin.ac.id.

OBJECTIVE: Dengue fever is a global burden because of high cases number. Climate 
factors became determinant of the mosquito's growth. This study aimed to analyze 
the relationship between climate factors (humidity, temperature, wind speed, 
rainfall) and dengue cases in Makassar during 2011-2017.
METHODS: It was quantitative study located in Makassar. Data were analyzed by 
General Estimating Equation (GEE). Gee was used to showing the model of 
variables. This study used secondary data from Health District Office of 
Makassar to get Dengue Cases Data and Meteorological, Climatological, and 
Geophysical Agency of Makassar for monthly climate data.
RESULTS: The result showed significant correlation between climate variables 
that have been researched which were temperature, humidity, rainfall, and wind 
speed to dengue fever cases.
CONCLUSIONS: As conclusion, the humidity had strongest correlation to dengue 
fever cases. It also showed positive correlation, while others showed negative 
correlation.

Copyright © 2021 SESPAS. Publicado por Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2021.10.063
PMID: 34929863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]