---
reference_id: "PMID:29503890"
title: Retinitis pigmentosa associated with a mutation in BEST1.
authors:
- Dalvin LA
- Abou Chehade JE
- Chiang J
- Fuchs J
- Iezzi R
- Marmorstein AD
journal: Am J Ophthalmol Case Rep
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajoc.2016.03.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retinitis pigmentosa associated with a mutation in BEST1.
**Authors:** Dalvin LA, Abou Chehade JE, Chiang J, Fuchs J, Iezzi R, Marmorstein AD
**Journal:** Am J Ophthalmol Case Rep (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajoc.2016.03.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajoc.2016.03.005)

## Content

1. Am J Ophthalmol Case Rep. 2016 Mar 30;2:11-17. doi:
10.1016/j.ajoc.2016.03.005.  eCollection 2016 Jul.

Retinitis pigmentosa associated with a mutation in BEST1.

Dalvin LA(1), Abou Chehade JE(1), Chiang J(2), Fuchs J(3), Iezzi R(1),
Marmorstein AD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN,
55905, United States.
(2)CEI Diagnostic Laboratory, Casey Eye Institute, 3375 SW Terwilliger Blvd,
Portland, OR, 97239, United States.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Rigshospitalet, Blegdamsvej 9, 2100, København
Ø, Denmark.

PURPOSE: There is only one prior report associating mutations in BEST1 with a
diagnosis of retinitis pigmentosa (RP). The imaging studies presented in that
report were more atypical of RP and shared features of autosomal recessive
bestrophinopathy and autosomal dominant vitreoretinochoroidopathy. Here, we
present a patient with a clinical phenotype consistent with classic features of
RP.
OBSERVATIONS: The patient in this report was diagnosed with simplex RP based on
clinically-evident bone spicules with characteristic ERG and EOG findings. The
patient had associated massive cystoid macular edema which resolved following a
short course of oral acetazolamide. Genetic testing revealed that the patient
carries a novel heterozygous deletion mutation in BEST1 which is not carried by
either parent. While this suggests BEST1 is causative, the patient also
inherited heterozygous copies of several mutations in other genes known to cause
recessive retinal degenerative disease.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPORTANCE: How some mutations in BEST1 associate with
peripheral retinal degeneration phenotypes, while others manifest as macular
degeneration phenotypes is currently unknown. We speculate that RP due to BEST1
mutation requires mutations in other modifier genes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajoc.2016.03.005
PMCID: PMC5757359
PMID: 29503890
