---
reference_id: "PMID:9037349"
title: Molecular genetics of hereditary elliptocytosis and hereditary spherocytosis.
authors:
- Delaunay J
- Alloisio N
- Morle L
- Baklouti F
- Dalla Venezia N
- Maillet P
- Wilmotte R
journal: Ann Genet
year: '1996'
keywords:
- "Anemia, Hemolytic/genetics"
- Blood Proteins/genetics
- "Elliptocytosis, Hereditary/genetics"
- Erythrocytes/metabolism
- Humans
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- "Spherocytosis, Hereditary/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular genetics of hereditary elliptocytosis and hereditary spherocytosis.
**Authors:** Delaunay J, Alloisio N, Morle L, Baklouti F, Dalla Venezia N, Maillet P, Wilmotte R
**Journal:** Ann Genet (1996)

## Content

1. Ann Genet. 1996;39(4):209-21.

Molecular genetics of hereditary elliptocytosis and hereditary spherocytosis.

Delaunay J(1), Alloisio N, Morle L, Baklouti F, Dalla Venezia N, Maillet P,
Wilmotte R.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine, CNRS URA 1171, Institut Pasteur
de Lyon, France.

Red cells ow their mechanical properties, that is, their resistance and their
elastic deformability, to a protein network that laminates the lipid bilayer and
to proteins spanning the latter. All proteins are interconnected. Their
structure, as well as the structure of the corresponding genes, will be
outlined. Numerous mutations have allowed to reclassify hereditary
elliptocytosis (HE) and poikilocytosis (HP), and, more recently, hereditary
spherocytosis (HS) into well defined subsets of hereditary hemolytic anemias. HE
stems from changes in the SPTA1, SPTB, EL1 and (exceptionally) GPYC genes that
encode spectrin alpha- and beta- chains, protein 4.1 and glycophorin C/D,
respectively. HS derives from altercations in the ANK1, EPB3 and ELB42 genes,
encoding ankyrin, band 3 and protein 4.2, respectively, and also in the SPTA1
and SPTB genes. We will present a repertory of the known mutations. Innumerable
polymorphisms will not be considered here, except for a few remarkable ones.
Some general points must be stressed on. (a) Clinically conspicuous disorders
are often the result of two alleles interacting in trans to one another. Whereas
one allele causes moderate symptoms by itself, the other one is usually silent
in the simple heterozygous (and exceptionally in the homozygous) state. As a
result, the number of potentially pathogenic alleles is much more important than
had been initially suspected. (b) The reduction or the loss of a protein within
multiprotein assemblies are frequently encountered in red cell membrane genetic
diseases; it leads to the disruption of the complexes with the possible
disappearance of the other proteins than the mutated protein. (c) The above
genes being also expressed in nonerythroid tissues, one starts finding
multisyndromic conditions adding non-hematological manifestations to hemolysis.
It is puzzling, though, that such situations are not more frequent. (d) In
practice, the molecular diagnosis of HE and HS has reached a semi-routine stage
that helps very much the paediatricians and haematologists.

PMID: 9037349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
