---
reference_id: "PMID:24163243"
title: Mosaic synaptopathy and functional defects in Cav1.4 heterozygous mice and human carriers of CSNB2.
authors:
- Michalakis S
- Shaltiel L
- Sothilingam V
- Koch S
- Schludi V
- Krause S
- Zeitz C
- Audo I
- Lancelot ME
- Hamel C
- Meunier I
- Preising MN
- Friedburg C
- Lorenz B
- Zabouri N
- Haverkamp S
- Garcia Garrido M
- Tanimoto N
- Seeliger MW
- Biel M
- Wahl-Schott CA
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt541
keywords:
- Animals
- "Calcium Channels/genetics, metabolism"
- "Calcium Channels, L-Type/genetics, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Electroretinography
- "Eye Diseases, Hereditary/genetics, pathology"
- Female
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics, pathology"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Myopia/genetics, pathology"
- "Night Blindness/genetics, pathology"
- Phenotype
- "Retina/metabolism, pathology"
- "Retinal Cone Photoreceptor Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- X Chromosome
- X Chromosome Inactivation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mosaic synaptopathy and functional defects in Cav1.4 heterozygous mice and human carriers of CSNB2.
**Authors:** Michalakis S, Shaltiel L, Sothilingam V, Koch S, Schludi V, Krause S, Zeitz C, Audo I, Lancelot ME, Hamel C, Meunier I, Preising MN, Friedburg C, Lorenz B, Zabouri N, Haverkamp S, Garcia Garrido M, Tanimoto N, Seeliger MW, Biel M, Wahl-Schott CA
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddt541](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddt541)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Mar 15;23(6):1538-50. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt541. Epub 2013
Oct  26.

Mosaic synaptopathy and functional defects in Cav1.4 heterozygous mice and human
carriers of CSNB2.

Michalakis S(1), Shaltiel L, Sothilingam V, Koch S, Schludi V, Krause S, Zeitz
C, Audo I, Lancelot ME, Hamel C, Meunier I, Preising MN, Friedburg C, Lorenz B,
Zabouri N, Haverkamp S, Garcia Garrido M, Tanimoto N, Seeliger MW, Biel M,
Wahl-Schott CA.

Author information:
(1)Center for Integrated Protein Science Munich (CIPSM) and Department of
Pharmacy-Center for Drug Research, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, 81377
Munich, Germany.

Erratum in
    Hum Mol Genet. 2017 Jan 15;26(2):466. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddw424.

Mutations in CACNA1F encoding the α1-subunit of the retinal Cav1.4 L-type
calcium channel have been linked to Cav1.4 channelopathies including incomplete
congenital stationary night blindness type 2A (CSNB2), Åland Island eye disease
(AIED) and cone-rod dystrophy type 3 (CORDX3). Since CACNA1F is located on the X
chromosome, Cav1.4 channelopathies are typically affecting male patients via
X-chromosomal recessive inheritance. Occasionally, clinical symptoms have been
observed in female carriers, too. It is currently unknown how these mutations
lead to symptoms in carriers and how the retinal network in these females is
affected. To investigate these clinically important issues, we compared retinal
phenotypes in Cav1.4-deficient and Cav1.4 heterozygous mice and in human female
carrier patients. Heterozygous Cacna1f carrier mice have a retinal mosaic
consistent with differential X-chromosomal inactivation, characterized by
adjacent vertical columns of affected and non-affected wild-type-like retinal
network. Vertical columns in heterozygous mice are well comparable to either the
wild-type retinal network of normal mice or to the retina of homozygous mice.
Affected retinal columns display pronounced rod and cone photoreceptor
synaptopathy and cone degeneration. These changes lead to vastly impaired
vision-guided navigation under dark and normal light conditions and reduced
retinal electroretinography (ERG) responses in Cacna1f carrier mice. Similar
abnormal ERG responses were found in five human CACNA1F carriers, four of which
had novel mutations. In conclusion, our data on Cav1.4 deficient mice and human
female carriers of mutations in CACNA1F are consistent with a phenotype of
mosaic CSNB2.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddt541
PMCID: PMC3929091
PMID: 24163243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
