---
reference_id: "PMID:22837795"
title: Mitochondrial dysfunction and the pathophysiology of Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS).
authors:
- Booth NE
- Myhill S
- McLaren-Howard J
journal: Int J Clin Exp Med
year: '2012'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial dysfunction and the pathophysiology of Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS).
**Authors:** Booth NE, Myhill S, McLaren-Howard J
**Journal:** Int J Clin Exp Med (2012)

## Content

1. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2012;5(3):208-20. Epub 2012 Jun 15.

Mitochondrial dysfunction and the pathophysiology of Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS).

Booth NE, Myhill S, McLaren-Howard J.

The objectives of this study are to test the hypothesis that the fatigue and 
accompanying symptoms of Chronic Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Fatigue Syndrome are 
in part due to defects in energy provision at the cellular level, and to 
understand the pathophysiology of the defects so that effective medical 
intervention can be implemented. We performed an audit of 138 patients (ages 
18-65) diagnosed with ME/CFS and attending a private practice. The patients and 
53 normal, healthy controls had the ATP Profile test carried out on neutrophils 
from a 3-ml venous blood sample. This test yields 6 numerical factors that 
describe the availability of ATP and the efficiency of oxidative phosphorylation 
in mitochondria. Other biomedical measurements, including the concentration of 
cell-free DNA in plasma, were made. The results of the audit are compared with 
the controls and a previous cohort of 61 patients. We find that all patients 
tested have measureable mitochondrial dysfunction which correlates with the 
severity of the illness. The patients divide into two main groups differentiated 
by how cellular metabolism attempts to compensate for the dysfunction. 
Comparisons with exercise studies suggest that the dysfunction in neutrophils 
also occurs in other cells. This is confirmed by the cell-free DNA measurements 
which indicate levels of tissue damage up to 3.5 times the normal reference 
range. The major immediate causes of the dysfunction are lack of essential 
substrates and partial blocking of the translocator protein sites in 
mitochondria. The ATP Profile is a valuable diagnostic tool for the clinical 
management of ME/CFS.

PMCID: PMC3403556
PMID: 22837795