---
reference_id: "PMID:20301723"
title: Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 11.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Chen Z
- Puzriakova A
- Houlden H
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 11.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Chen Z, Puzriakova A, Houlden H

## Content

1. Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 11.

Chen Z(1), Puzriakova A(2), Houlden H(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2008 Jul 22 [updated 2019 Oct 31].

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease UCL Queen Square Institute of 
Neurology and National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery London, United 
Kingdom
(2)Department of Neuromuscular Disease UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology 
and National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery London, United Kingdom

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 11 (SCA11) is 
characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia and abnormal eye signs (jerky 
pursuit, horizontal and vertical nystagmus). Pyramidal features are seen on 
occasion. Peripheral neuropathy and dystonia are rare. Six families have been 
reported to date, one each from the UK, Pakistan, France, Germany, Denmark, and 
China. Age of onset ranged from early childhood to the mid-40s. Life span is 
thought to be normal.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of spinocerebellar ataxia type 11 (SCA11) is 
established in a proband with a heterozygous pathogenic variant in TTBK2 
identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Management is supportive; there are no 
known disease-modifying treatments to date. Physiotherapy and assessment for 
assistive devices for ambulation; occupational therapy, including home 
adaptations; speech and language therapy for dysarthria and dysphagia; 
ankle-foot orthotics if required and good foot care for those with neuropathy; 
treatment per ophthalmologist for vision issues; prism glasses may be helpful 
for diplopia. Surveillance: Annual neurologic evaluation; evaluations with 
physiotherapist, occupational therapist, speech and language therapist, and 
ophthalmologist as indicated.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SCA11 is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. The 
proportion of SCA11 caused by de novo mutation is unknown. Each child of an 
individual with SCA11 has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant. 
Prenatal testing for an at-risk pregnancy is possible if the diagnosis has been 
established by molecular genetic testing in an affected family member.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301723