---
reference_id: "PMID:31050392"
title: "WNT10B variants in split hand/foot malformation: Report of three novel families and review of the literature."
authors:
- Brunelle P
- Jourdain AS
- Escande F
- Martinovic J
- Dupont J
- Busa T
- Moncla A
- Frénois F
- Stichelbout M
- Manouvrier-Hanu S
- Petit F
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61177
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Male
- Pedigree
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics
- Wnt Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# WNT10B variants in split hand/foot malformation: Report of three novel families and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Brunelle P, Jourdain AS, Escande F, Martinovic J, Dupont J, Busa T, Moncla A, Frénois F, Stichelbout M, Manouvrier-Hanu S, Petit F
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.61177](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.61177)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2019 Jul;179(7):1351-1356. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61177. Epub 
2019 May 3.

WNT10B variants in split hand/foot malformation: Report of three novel families 
and review of the literature.

Brunelle P(1), Jourdain AS(2)(3), Escande F(2)(3), Martinovic J(4)(5), Dupont 
J(6), Busa T(7), Moncla A(7), Frénois F(3), Stichelbout M(3), Manouvrier-Hanu 
S(1)(3), Petit F(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Clinique de Génétique Guy Fontaine, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHU Lille, 
Lille, France.
(2)Laboratoire de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, Centre de Biologie 
Pathologie, CHU Lille, Lille, France.
(3)EA7364-RADEME, Université de Lille, Lille, France.
(4)Unité de Foetopathologie, AP-HP, Hôpital Antoine Béclère, Clamart, France.
(5)INSERM U1169, Kremlin Bicêtre, France.
(6)Serviço de Genética Departamento da Criança e da Família, Hospital de Santa 
Maria, Lisbon, Portugal.
(7)Service de Génétique Clinique, Département de Génétique, AP-HM CHU Timone 
Enfants, Marseille, France.

Split-hand/foot malformation (SHFM) is a genetically heterogeneous congenital 
limb malformation typically limited to a defect of the central rays of the 
autopod, presenting as a median cleft of hands and feet. It can be associated 
with long bone deficiency or included in more complex syndromes. Among the 
numerous genetic causes, WNT10B homozygous variants have been recently 
identified in consanguineous families, but remain still rarely described (SHFM6; 
MIM225300). We report on three novel SHFM families harboring WNT10B variants and 
review the literature, allowing us to highlight some clinical findings. The feet 
are more severely affected than the hands and there is a frequent asymmetry 
without obvious side-bias. Syndactyly of third-fourth fingers was a frequent 
finding (62%). Polydactyly, which was classically described in SHFM6, was only 
present in 27% of patients. No genotype-phenotype correlation is delineated but 
heterozygous individuals might have mild features of SHFM, suggesting a 
dose-effect of the WNT10B loss-of-function.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61177
PMID: 31050392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]