---
reference_id: "PMID:37074537"
title: Inborn Error of STAT2-Dependent IFN-I Immunity in a Patient Presented with Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis and Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children.
authors:
- López-Nevado M
- Sevilla J
- Almendro-Vázquez P
- Gil-Etayo FJ
- Garcinuño S
- Serrano-Hernández A
- Paz-Artal E
- González-Granado LI
- Allende LM
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-023-01488-6
keywords:
- STAT2 Transcription Factor/genetics
- Infant
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- "Lymphohistiocytosis, Hemophagocytic/diagnosis"
- COVID-19/complications
- Antibodies
- SARS-CoV-2
- Interferon Type I/metabolism
- Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inborn Error of STAT2-Dependent IFN-I Immunity in a Patient Presented with Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis and Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children.
**Authors:** López-Nevado M, Sevilla J, Almendro-Vázquez P, Gil-Etayo FJ, Garcinuño S, Serrano-Hernández A, Paz-Artal E, González-Granado LI, Allende LM
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-023-01488-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-023-01488-6)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2023 Aug;43(6):1278-1288. doi: 10.1007/s10875-023-01488-6.
Epub  2023 Apr 19.

Inborn Error of STAT2-Dependent IFN-I Immunity in a Patient Presented with 
Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis and Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in 
Children.

López-Nevado M(1)(2), Sevilla J(3), Almendro-Vázquez P(4)(5), Gil-Etayo 
FJ(4)(5), Garcinuño S(4)(5), Serrano-Hernández A(4)(5), Paz-Artal E(4)(5)(6)(7), 
González-Granado LI(5)(6)(8), Allende LM(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Immunology Department, University Hospital, 12 de Octubre, Av de Córdoba S/N 
28041, Madrid, Spain. martalopezne@gmail.com.
(2)Research Institute Hospital, 12 Octubre (imas12), Madrid, Spain. 
martalopezne@gmail.com.
(3)Hematology and Hemotherapy Unit, University Children's Hospital Niño Jesus, 
Madrid, Spain.
(4)Immunology Department, University Hospital, 12 de Octubre, Av de Córdoba S/N 
28041, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Research Institute Hospital, 12 Octubre (imas12), Madrid, Spain.
(6)School of Medicine, Complutense University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(7)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Infecciosas 
(CIBERINFEC), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Immunodeficiency Unit, University Hospital, 12 de 
Octubre, Madrid, Spain.
(9)Immunology Department, University Hospital, 12 de Octubre, Av de Córdoba S/N 
28041, Madrid, Spain. luis.allende@salud.madrid.org.
(10)Research Institute Hospital, 12 Octubre (imas12), Madrid, Spain. 
luis.allende@salud.madrid.org.
(11)School of Medicine, Complutense University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain. 
luis.allende@salud.madrid.org.

Human inborn errors of immunity (IEI) affecting the type I interferon (IFN-I) 
induction pathway have been associated with predisposition to severe viral 
infections. Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is a life-threatening 
systemic hyperinflammatory syndrome that has been increasingly associated with 
inborn errors of IFN-I-mediated innate immunity. Here is reported a novel case 
of complete deficiency of STAT2 in a 3-year-old child that presented with 
typical features of HLH after mumps, measles, and rubella vaccination at the age 
of 12 months. Due to the life-threatening risk of viral infection, she received 
SARS-CoV-2 mRNA vaccination. Unfortunately, she developed multisystem 
inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) after SARS-CoV-2 infection, 4 months 
after the last dose. Functional studies showed an impaired IFN-I-induced 
response and a defective IFNα expression at later stages of STAT2 pathway 
induction. These results suggest a possible more complex mechanism for 
hyperinflammatory reactions in this type of patients involving a possible defect 
in the IFN-I production. Understanding the cellular and molecular links between 
IFN-I-induced signaling and hyperinflammatory syndromes can be critical for the 
diagnosis and tailored management of these patients with predisposition to 
severe viral infection.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-023-01488-6
PMCID: PMC10113994
PMID: 37074537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.