---
reference_id: "PMID:40556259"
title: Unilateral maculopathy associated with autosomal dominant bestrophinopathy.
authors:
- Cruz-Pimentel M
- Wright T
- Eng KT
- Ballios BG
journal: Ophthalmic Genet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1080/13816810.2025.2521657
keywords:
- Humans
- Bestrophins/genetics
- Electrooculography
- Electroretinography
- "Eye Diseases, Hereditary/genetics, diagnosis"
- Fluorescein Angiography
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Mutation
- "Retinal Diseases/genetics, diagnosis"
- Retinal Pigment Epithelium/pathology
- Retrospective Studies
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Visual Acuity
- "Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy/genetics, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unilateral maculopathy associated with autosomal dominant bestrophinopathy.
**Authors:** Cruz-Pimentel M, Wright T, Eng KT, Ballios BG
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Genet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1080/13816810.2025.2521657](https://doi.org/10.1080/13816810.2025.2521657)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Genet. 2025 Dec;46(6):665-670. doi: 10.1080/13816810.2025.2521657.
Epub 2025 Jun 24.

Unilateral maculopathy associated with autosomal dominant bestrophinopathy.

Cruz-Pimentel M(1), Wright T(1)(2), Eng KT(1)(3), Ballios BG(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Kensington Vision and Research Center, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)John and Liz Tory Eye Centre, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Toronto,
Canada.
(4)Donald K. Johnson Eye Institute, University Health Network, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

PURPOSE: To describe the presentation of Best Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy
(BVMD) as a unilateral maculopathy with bilateral retinal pigment epithelium
(RPE) reduced function secondary to molecular changes or variants in BEST1 gene.
METHODS: Retrospective case series.
RESULTS: Both patients exhibited unilateral anatomical changes during fundus
examination caused by pathogenic variants in BEST1. These changes were also
evident in fundus autofluorescence (FAF) and optical coherence tomography (OCT)
images. However, both patients displayed evidence of global RPE dysfunction,
which was confirmed by a reduced light peak-to-dark trough amplitude ratio (LP:
DT ratio) on the electrooculogram (EOG).
CONCLUSION: Autosomal dominant variants in the BEST1 gene can manifest as
unilateral disease. In such cases, it is important to conduct genetic testing
promptly to confirm the presence of bestrophinopathy. When counseling the
patient, it is essential to discuss the potential for future anatomical
involvement in the unaffected eye.

DOI: 10.1080/13816810.2025.2521657
PMID: 40556259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
