---
reference_id: "PMID:34054692"
title: Identification of TH Variants in Chinese Dopa-Responsive Dystonia Patients and Long-Term Outcomes.
authors:
- Li XY
- Yang YM
- Li LB
- Zhang MY
- Huang YY
- Wang J
- Wang L
- Wan XH
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2021.644910
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of TH Variants in Chinese Dopa-Responsive Dystonia Patients and Long-Term Outcomes.
**Authors:** Li XY, Yang YM, Li LB, Zhang MY, Huang YY, Wang J, Wang L, Wan XH
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2021.644910](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2021.644910)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2021 May 12;12:644910. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2021.644910.
eCollection  2021.

Identification of TH Variants in Chinese Dopa-Responsive Dystonia Patients and
Long-Term Outcomes.

Li XY(1), Yang YM(1), Li LB(1), Zhang MY(1), Huang YY(1), Wang J(1), Wang L(1),
Wan XH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.

Background: Dopa-responsive dystonia (DRD) is a movement disorder that is highly
clinically and genetically heterogeneous. Our study summarizes clinical
characteristics and long-term outcomes in patients with dopa-responsive dystonia
with the aim of obtaining further knowledge on this disorder. Methods: Patients
who met DRD genetic diagnostic criteria through whole-exome sequencing and took
levodopa for over 3 years were included in our study. Detailed information was
collected on these patients, including family history, age at onset, age and
dosage at starting levodopa, current medication and dosage, levodopa duration,
diurnal fluctuation, and other clinical features. The Burke-Fahn-Marsden
Dystonia Rating Scale-Motor (BFMDRS-M) score was used to evaluate patients'
dystonia and variation after levodopa. According to the long-term outcomes,
patients were further graded as good (dystonia improved by more than 50% after
levodopa, and no further motor symptoms appeared) and poor (dystonia improved by
<50% after levodopa, or new motor symptoms appeared). Results: A total of 20 DRD
patients were included (11 with GCH1 variants, 9 with TH variants). During
long-term levodopa treatment, three patients with TH variants (3/20, 15%)
developed motor symptoms, including body jerks and paroxysmal symptoms, and
responded well to increasing levodopa doses. The patient with homozygous
mutation c.1481C>T/p. Thr494Met harbored more serious symptoms and poor response
to levodopa and showed decreased cardiac uptake in MIBG. Conclusions: Most DRD
patients showed satisfactory treatment outcomes after long-term levodopa,
whereas few patients with TH variants presented motor symptoms, which is
considered to be related to dopamine insufficiency. For patients with motor
symptoms after long-term levodopa, increasing the dose slowly might be helpful
to relieve symptoms.

Copyright © 2021 Li, Yang, Li, Zhang, Huang, Wang, Wang and Wan.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2021.644910
PMCID: PMC8149779
PMID: 34054692

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
