---
reference_id: "PMID:37270806"
title: Analysis of GPR126 polymorphisms and their relationship with scoliosis in Marfan syndrome and Marfan-like syndrome in Mexican patients.
authors:
- Soto ME
- Fuentevilla-Alvarez G
- Koretzky SG
- Vargas-Alarcón G
- Torres-Paz YE
- Meza-Toledo SE
- Pérez-Torres I
- Huesca-Gómez C
- Gamboa R
journal: Biomol Biomed
year: '2023'
doi: 10.17305/bb.2023.9268
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of GPR126 polymorphisms and their relationship with scoliosis in Marfan syndrome and Marfan-like syndrome in Mexican patients.
**Authors:** Soto ME, Fuentevilla-Alvarez G, Koretzky SG, Vargas-Alarcón G, Torres-Paz YE, Meza-Toledo SE, Pérez-Torres I, Huesca-Gómez C, Gamboa R
**Journal:** Biomol Biomed (2023)
**DOI:** [10.17305/bb.2023.9268](https://doi.org/10.17305/bb.2023.9268)

## Content

1. Biomol Biomed. 2023 Nov 3;23(6):976-983. doi: 10.17305/bb.2023.9268.

Analysis of GPR126 polymorphisms and their relationship with scoliosis in Marfan 
syndrome and Marfan-like syndrome in Mexican patients.

Soto ME(1), Fuentevilla-Alvarez G(2), Koretzky SG(3), Vargas-Alarcón G(4), 
Torres-Paz YE(5), Meza-Toledo SE(6), Pérez-Torres I(7), Huesca-Gómez C(5), 
Gamboa R(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología "Ignacio Chávez", 
México City, México; Cardiovascular Line Department in American British Cowdray 
(ABC) Medical Center, México City, México.
(2)Department of Physiology, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología "Ignacio Chávez", 
México City, México; Department of Biochemistry, Escuela Nacional de Ciencias 
Biológicas, Instituto Politécnico Nacional (IPN), México City, México.
(3)Editorial Department, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología "Ignacio Chávez", 
México City, México.
(4)Research Direction, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología "Ignacio Chávez", 
México City, México.
(5)Department of Physiology, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología "Ignacio Chávez", 
México City, México.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, Escuela Nacional de Ciencias Biológicas, 
Instituto Politécnico Nacional (IPN), México City, México.
(7)Department of Cardiovascular Biomedicine, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología 
"Ignacio Chávez", México City, México.

Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an inherited connective tissue disorder. As the spinal 
growth depends on delicate balance of forces, conditions that affect 
musculoskeletal matrix often lead to spinal deformities. A large cross-sectional 
study revealed a 63% prevalence of scoliosis among patients with MFS. 
Multi-ethnic genome-wide association studies and analyses of human genetic 
mutations showed that variations and mutations of G protein-coupled receptor 126 
(GPR126)locus are associated with multiple skeletal defects, including shorter 
stature and adolescent idiopathic scoliosis. The study included 54 patients with 
MFS and 196 control patients. The DNA was extracted from peripheral blood using 
the saline expulsion method and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) 
determination was carried out using TaqMan probes. Allelic discrimination was 
performed by RT-qPCR. Significant differences in genotype frequencies were found 
for SNP rs6570507 in relation to MFS and sex (recessive model, OR 2.46, 95% CI 
1.03 -5.87; P = 0.03) and rs7755109 (overdominant model, OR 0.39, 95% CI 
0.16-0.91; P = 0.03). The most significant association was found in SNP 
rs7755109, where the frequency of genotype AG was significantly different 
between MFS patients with scoliosis and those without (OR 5.68, 95% CI 
1.09-29.48; P=0.04). This study, for the first time, examined the genetic 
association of SNP GPR126 with the risk of scoliosis in patients with connective 
tissue diseases. The study revealed that SNP rs7755109 is associated with the 
presence of scoliosis in Mexican patients with MFS.

DOI: 10.17305/bb.2023.9268
PMCID: PMC10655884
PMID: 37270806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: Authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.