---
reference_id: "PMID:31272211"
title: "The Degree of Stress in Patients With Empty Nose Syndrome, Compared With Chronic Rhinosinusitis and Allergic Rhinitis."
authors:
- Kim CH
- Kim J
- Song JA
- Choi GS
- Kwon JH
journal: Ear Nose Throat J
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1177/0145561319858912
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Degree of Stress in Patients With Empty Nose Syndrome, Compared With Chronic Rhinosinusitis and Allergic Rhinitis.
**Authors:** Kim CH, Kim J, Song JA, Choi GS, Kwon JH
**Journal:** Ear Nose Throat J (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0145561319858912](https://doi.org/10.1177/0145561319858912)

## Content

1. Ear Nose Throat J. 2021 Feb;100(2):NP87-NP92. doi: 10.1177/0145561319858912. 
Epub 2019 Jul 4.

The Degree of Stress in Patients With Empty Nose Syndrome, Compared With Chronic 
Rhinosinusitis and Allergic Rhinitis.

Kim CH(1), Kim J(1), Song JA(1), Choi GS(2), Kwon JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, 65366Kosin University 
College of Medicine, Busan, Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Allergic Division, 65366Kosin University 
College of Medicine, Busan, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Depression is a mental health disease of growing public health 
concern because depressive mood affects the sufferer's daily life and is also 
associated with productivity decline. Depression that is caused by other 
diseases or substances is referred to as secondary depression, which is an 
important distinction because curing the underlying cause could subsequently 
regulate depressive mood. Empty nose syndrome (ENS), also known as "paradoxical 
obstruction of the nose," is a condition in which the major symptom is 
difficulty breathing, despite having sufficient breathing space in the nose. 
Empty nose syndrome has been increasing in prevalence in Korea. We found that 
patients with this ENS have a tendency toward depressive mood, which can 
escalate so far as to lead to suicide attempts. Thus, herein, we aimed to 
investigate the psychological burden on patients with ENS.
METHODS: We divided patients into 4 groups: ENS (group A), chronic 
rhinosinusitis with polyp (CRS c polyp, group B), chronic rhinosinusitis without 
polyp (CRS s polyp, group C), and allergic rhinitis (AR, group D). We estimated 
and compared Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) scores among the 4 groups, and we 
investigated the relationship between depression index and nasal cavity area in 
patients with ENS.
RESULTS: The ENS group (A) had depression prevalence of 71% with varying 
severity, which was much higher than group B (19%), group C (15%), and group D 
(27%). The correlation between nasal cavity volume and BDI score for the ENS 
group was not statistically significant.
CONCLUSION: The degree and severity of depression in patients with ENS was 
higher than in patients with CRS or AR. Furthermore, there was no relationship 
between depression severity and nasal cavity volume in the patients with ENS. 
Thus, physicians should be careful not to dismiss the accompanying mental health 
problems of patients with ENS.

DOI: 10.1177/0145561319858912
PMID: 31272211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]