---
reference_id: "PMID:39709083"
title: "Epidermal spongiotic Langerhans cell collections, but not eosinophils, are a clue to the diagnosis of allergic contact dermatitis: A series of 170 clinically- and patch test-confirmed cases."
authors:
- Wu PA
- Wu J
- Liu R
- Sullivan S
- Keller O
- Caro-Chang L
- Pemba Y
- Fung MA
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2024.11.062
keywords:
- Humans
- "Dermatitis, Allergic Contact/pathology, diagnosis"
- Langerhans Cells/pathology
- Female
- Male
- Eosinophils/pathology
- Patch Tests
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Case-Control Studies
- Prospective Studies
- Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Epidermis/pathology
- Biopsy
- Child
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidermal spongiotic Langerhans cell collections, but not eosinophils, are a clue to the diagnosis of allergic contact dermatitis: A series of 170 clinically- and patch test-confirmed cases.
**Authors:** Wu PA, Wu J, Liu R, Sullivan S, Keller O, Caro-Chang L, Pemba Y, Fung MA
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaad.2024.11.062](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2024.11.062)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2025 Apr;92(4):853-860. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2024.11.062. 
Epub 2024 Dec 19.

Epidermal spongiotic Langerhans cell collections, but not eosinophils, are a 
clue to the diagnosis of allergic contact dermatitis: A series of 170 
clinically- and patch test-confirmed cases.

Wu PA(1), Wu J(2), Liu R(3), Sullivan S(4), Keller O(5), Caro-Chang L(1), Pemba 
Y(2), Fung MA(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of California Davis School of Medicine, 
Sacramento, California.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California 
Davis School of Medicine, Sacramento, California.
(3)Department of Dermatology, University of Rochester School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, Rochester, New York.
(4)School of Nursing, DePaul University, Chicago, Illinois.
(5)School of Medicine and Health Sciences, George Washington University, 
Washington, District of Columbia.
(6)Department of Dermatology, University of California Davis School of Medicine, 
Sacramento, California; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 
University of California Davis School of Medicine, Sacramento, California. 
Electronic address: maxfung@ucdavis.edu.

BACKGROUND: Allergic contact dermatitis cannot be reliably differentiated from 
other forms of spongiotic/eczematous dermatitis by histology alone. Textbooks 
and recent studies have variably supported the specificity of dermal 
eosinophils, eosinophilic spongiosis, and Langerhans cell collections, among 
other features.
OBJECTIVE: To assess which histopathologic features favor a diagnosis of 
allergic contact dermatitis.
METHODS: In this case control study with prospective validation, patients were 
evaluated by patch testing and skin biopsy. Lesional histopathologic features 
were independently assessed.
RESULTS: One hundred seventy cases fulfilled inclusion criteria. Langerhans cell 
collections were more likely to be found in allergic contact dermatitis (29/111, 
26%) (P = .03). Heavy dermal eosinophilic infiltration was associated with 
diagnoses other than allergic contact dermatitis. No significant differences 
were found for any other predictor variables.
LIMITATIONS: Mostly retrospective study with small validation sample.
CONCLUSION: This largest study to date is the first to independently confirm 
Langerhans cell collections as the single histopathologic feature most closely 
associated with allergic contact dermatitis.

Copyright © 2024 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2024.11.062
PMID: 39709083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest None disclosed.