---
reference_id: "PMID:31633303"
title: Grange syndrome due to homozygous YY1AP1 missense rare variants.
authors:
- Ciuffetelli Alamo IV
- Kwartler CS
- Regalado ER
- Afifi RO
- Parkash S
- Rideout A
- Guo DC
- Milewicz DM
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61379
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Grange syndrome due to homozygous YY1AP1 missense rare variants.
**Authors:** Ciuffetelli Alamo IV, Kwartler CS, Regalado ER, Afifi RO, Parkash S, Rideout A, Guo DC, Milewicz DM
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.61379](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.61379)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2019 Dec;179(12):2500-2505. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61379. Epub 
2019 Oct 21.

Grange syndrome due to homozygous YY1AP1 missense rare variants.

Ciuffetelli Alamo IV(1), Kwartler CS(1), Regalado ER(1), Afifi RO(2), Parkash 
S(3)(4), Rideout A(3), Guo DC(1), Milewicz DM(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Internal Medicine, McGovern 
Medical School, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houstan, 
Texas.
(2)Cardiothoracic and Vascular Surgery Department, McGovern Medical School at 
the University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houstan, Texas.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(4)Maritime Medical Genetic Service, IWK Health Service, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 
Canada.

Grange syndrome (OMIM 602531) is an autosomal recessive condition characterized 
by severe early onset vascular occlusive disease and variable penetrance of 
brachydactyly, syndactyly, bone fragility, and learning disabilities. Grange 
syndrome is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous loss-of-function 
variants in the YYA1P1 gene. We report on the case of a 53-year old female with 
novel homozygous missense variants in YYA1P1 (c.1079C>T, p.Pro360Leu), 
presenting with a history of brachysyndactyly, hypertension, and ischemic 
stroke. Imaging studies revealed stenosis of the bilateral internal carotid with 
extensive collateralization of cerebral vessels in a moyamoya-like pattern, 
along with stenosis in the splenic, common hepatic, celiac, left renal, and 
superior mesenteric arteries. Functional studies conducted with the patient's 
dermal fibroblasts suggest that the p.Pro360Leu variant decreases the stability 
of the YY1AP1 protein. This is the first report of a missense variant associated 
with Grange syndrome characterized by later onset of vascular disease and a lack 
of developmental delay and bone fragility.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61379
PMID: 31633303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]