---
reference_id: "PMID:40350497"
title: Long-term prognosis of 47 pediatric patients with Blau syndrome in China.
authors:
- Shi X
- Deng J
- Zhang J
- Zhao X
- Zhao Y
- Li L
- Gao F
- Kuang W
- Wang J
- Tan X
- Li C
- Li S
- Li C
journal: BMC Pediatr
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s12887-025-05584-x
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- "Uveitis/genetics, drug therapy, diagnosis"
- Female
- "Arthritis/genetics, drug therapy, diagnosis"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Infant
- Nod2 Signaling Adaptor Protein/genetics
- Retrospective Studies
- "Synovitis/genetics, drug therapy, diagnosis"
- China
- Prognosis
- Mutation
- "Dermatitis/genetics, drug therapy, diagnosis"
- "Sarcoidosis/genetics, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Child
- Phenotype
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Hereditary Autoinflammatory Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term prognosis of 47 pediatric patients with Blau syndrome in China.
**Authors:** Shi X, Deng J, Zhang J, Zhao X, Zhao Y, Li L, Gao F, Kuang W, Wang J, Tan X, Li C, Li S, Li C
**Journal:** BMC Pediatr (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12887-025-05584-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12887-025-05584-x)

## Content

1. BMC Pediatr. 2025 May 11;25(1):374. doi: 10.1186/s12887-025-05584-x.

Long-term prognosis of 47 pediatric patients with Blau syndrome in China.

Shi X(#)(1), Deng J(#)(1), Zhang J(1), Zhao X(1), Zhao Y(1), Li L(1), Gao F(1), 
Kuang W(1), Wang J(1), Tan X(1), Li C(1), Li S(1), Li C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Beijing Children's Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, National Center for Children's Health, Beijing, 100045, China.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, Beijing Children's Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, National Center for Children's Health, Beijing, 100045, China. 
caifeng_li@yeah.net.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVES: Blau syndrome (BS) is a rare autoinflammatory disease characterized 
by a clinical triad of uveitis, dermatitis and arthritis. The aim of our study 
was to summarize organ involvement, predict disease prognosis and evaluate 
treatment response.
METHODS: Clinical data of 47 Chinese children who were diagnosed with Blau 
syndrome in Beijing Children's hospital, Capital Medical University was 
retrospectively analyzed. Direct sequencing of NOD2 gene was performed by sanger 
sequencing. Data were analyzed through SPSS 21.0. A Bayesian network was 
constructed to integrate prediction algorithms of genetic mutations and clinical 
manifestations, exploring the complex relationship between genotype and 
phenotype through R (Version 4.4.1, R Core Development Team). P value < 0.05 was 
significant.
RESULTS: The 47 patients included 26 males and 21 females. Median age of disease 
onset was 13.64 months, ranging from 1 to 51 months. At baseline, incidence of 
fever, arthritis, rash, dermatitis and uveitis were 34%, 93.6%, 72.3% and 31.9%. 
Nearly 30% patients (14 patients) presented with characteristic triad. Incidence 
of vasculitis and interstitial lung disease were 27.7% and 17.0%, respectively. 
Inflammatory indices (e.g., erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C reactive 
protein) were above normal range. Twelve different NOD2 mutations were 
identified. R334Q was associated with arthritis, rash, uveitis and fever, 
whereas R334W was associated with arthritis, rash and fever. Approximately 95.7% 
patients (45 patients) were treated with combination of prednisolone and 
methotrexate and 42.6% patients (20 patients) were treated with tumor necrosis 
factor inhibitors. At the most recent follow-up visit, 34 patients (72.3%) 
achieved disease control. Patients treated with TNF-α inhibitors had a higher 
remission rate.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinical manifestations of Blau syndrome in this study were 
various. TNF-α inhibitors were effective in inducing remission rate of Blau 
syndrome.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12887-025-05584-x
PMCID: PMC12066035
PMID: 40350497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: This work was approved by Institutional Review Board of School of 
Public health, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China ([2022]-E-134-R). 
Written informed consent was obtained from participant and/or their parents. 
Consent for publication: Not applicable. Competing interests: The authors 
declare no competing interests.