---
reference_id: "PMID:32178491"
title: Clostridium difficile Infection After Ileostomy Reversal.
authors:
- Kim HS
- Kang JH
- Kim HG
- Kim YH
- Bae H
- Kim NK
journal: Ann Coloproctol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3393/ac.2019.09.24
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clostridium difficile Infection After Ileostomy Reversal.
**Authors:** Kim HS, Kang JH, Kim HG, Kim YH, Bae H, Kim NK
**Journal:** Ann Coloproctol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3393/ac.2019.09.24](https://doi.org/10.3393/ac.2019.09.24)

## Content

1. Ann Coloproctol. 2021 Jul;37(Suppl 1):S4-S6. doi: 10.3393/ac.2019.09.24. Epub 
2020 Mar 16.

Clostridium difficile Infection After Ileostomy Reversal.

Kim HS(1), Kang JH(1), Kim HG(1), Kim YH(1), Bae H(1), Kim NK(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Colorectal Surgery, Department of Surgery, Severance Hospital, 
Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) after ileostomy reversal is rare, with few 
reports available in the available literature describing this condition. The 
diagnosis of CDI after ileostomy reversal is challenging because symptoms such 
as diarrhea observed in these patients can occur frequently after surgery. 
However, CDI can be fatal, so early diagnosis and prompt treatment are 
important. We discuss 2 patients with positive C. difficile toxin assay results 
on stool cultures performed after ileostomy reversal. Clinical progression 
differed between these patients: one patient who presented with severe CDI and 
shock was successfully treated following a prolonged intensive care unit stay 
for the management of vital signs and underwent hemodialysis, while another 
patient showed symptoms of mild colitis but we could not confirm whether 
diarrhea was associated with CDI or with the usual postoperative state. To our 
knowledge, these represent 2 of just a few cases reported in the literature 
describing CDI after ileostomy reversal.

DOI: 10.3393/ac.2019.09.24
PMCID: PMC8359696
PMID: 32178491

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest relevant to 
this article was reported.