---
reference_id: "PMID:36284392"
title: "Hand, Foot, and Mouth Disease: A Narrative Review."
authors:
- Leung AKC
- Lam JM
- Barankin B
- Leong KF
- Hon KL
journal: Recent Adv Inflamm Allergy Drug Discov
year: '2022'
doi: 10.2174/1570180820666221024095837
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- "Hand, Foot and Mouth Disease/complications"
- Enterovirus
- Enterovirus Infections/diagnosis
- Exanthema/epidemiology
- Mouth Diseases
- Benzopyrans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hand, Foot, and Mouth Disease: A Narrative Review.
**Authors:** Leung AKC, Lam JM, Barankin B, Leong KF, Hon KL
**Journal:** Recent Adv Inflamm Allergy Drug Discov (2022)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1570180820666221024095837](https://doi.org/10.2174/1570180820666221024095837)

## Content

1. Recent Adv Inflamm Allergy Drug Discov. 2022;16(2):77-95. doi: 
10.2174/1570180820666221024095837.

Hand, Foot, and Mouth Disease: A Narrative Review.

Leung AKC(1), Lam JM(2), Barankin B(3), Leong KF(4), Hon KL(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, The University of Calgary, Alberta Children's 
Hospital, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Department of Pediatrics and Department of Dermatology and Skin Sciences, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(3)Toronto Dermatology Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Pediatric Institute, Kuala Lumpur General Hospital, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, Hong Kong Institute of Integrative Medicine, and 
the Jockey Club School of Public Health and Primary Care, The Chinese University 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

BACKGROUND: Hand, foot, and mouth disease is a common viral disease in 
childhood. Because the disease has the potential to reach epidemic levels and 
mortality is high in some countries, early recognition of this disease is of 
paramount importance.
OBJECTIVE: This purpose of this article is to familiarize pediatricians with the 
clinical manifestations and management of hand, foot, and mouth disease.
METHODS: A search was conducted in February 2022 in PubMed Clinical Queries 
using the key term "hand, foot, and mouth disease". The search strategy included 
all clinical trials, observational studies, and reviews published within the 
past 10 years. Only papers published in English were included in this review.
RESULTS: Hand, foot, and mouth disease is characterized by a painful oral 
enanthem and asymptomatic exanthem on the palms and soles. Children younger than 
5 years are most commonly affected. Hand, foot, and mouth disease caused by 
enterovirus A71 is more severe and has a higher rate of complications than that 
attributed to other viruses such as coxsackievirus A16. Circulatory failure 
secondary to myocardial impairment and neurogenic pulmonary edema secondary to 
brainstem damage are the main causes of death. Fortunately, the disease is 
usually benign and resolves in 7 to10 days without sequelae. Given the 
self-limited nature of most cases, treatment is mainly symptomatic and 
supportive. Intravenous immunoglobulin should be considered for the treatment of 
severe/complicated hand, foot, and mouth disease and has been recommended by 
several national and international guideline committees. Currently, there are no 
specific antiviral agents approved for the treatment of the disease. Drugs such 
as ribavirin, suramin, mulberroside C, aminothiazole analogs, and sertraline 
have emerged as potential candidates for the treatment of hand, foot, and mouth 
disease. Vaccination of susceptible individuals in high-risk areas and good 
personal hygiene are important preventative measures to combat the disease.
CONCLUSION: Familiarity of the disease including its atypical manifestations is 
crucial so that a correct diagnosis can be made, and appropriate treatment 
initiated. A timely diagnosis can help avoid contact with the affected 
individual and decrease the risk of an outbreak.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1570180820666221024095837
PMID: 36284392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]