---
reference_id: "PMID:38486361"
title: "Anderson-Fabry disease management: role of the cardiologist."
authors:
- Pieroni M
- Namdar M
- Olivotto I
- Desnick RJ
journal: Eur Heart J
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehae148
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anderson-Fabry disease management: role of the cardiologist.
**Authors:** Pieroni M, Namdar M, Olivotto I, Desnick RJ
**Journal:** Eur Heart J (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/eurheartj/ehae148](https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehae148)

## Content

1. Eur Heart J. 2024 Apr 21;45(16):1395-1409. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehae148.

Anderson-Fabry disease management: role of the cardiologist.

Pieroni M(1), Namdar M(2), Olivotto I(3)(4), Desnick RJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Department, San Donato Hospital, Via Pietro Nenni 22, 52100 
Arezzo, Italy.
(2)Cardiology Division, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Genève, Geneva, Switzerland.
(3)Cardiomyopathy Unit, Careggi Hospital and Meyer Children's Hospital IRCCS, 
Florence, Italy.
(4)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence, 
Florence, Italy.
(5)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.

Anderson-Fabry disease (AFD) is a lysosomal storage disorder characterized by 
glycolipid accumulation in cardiac cells, associated with a peculiar form of 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). Up to 1% of patients with a diagnosis of HCM 
indeed have AFD. With the availability of targeted therapies for sarcomeric HCM 
and its genocopies, a timely differential diagnosis is essential. Specifically, 
the therapeutic landscape for AFD is rapidly evolving and offers increasingly 
effective, disease-modifying treatment options. However, diagnosing AFD may be 
difficult, particularly in the non-classic phenotype with prominent or isolated 
cardiac involvement and no systemic red flags. For many AFD patients, the 
clinical journey from initial clinical manifestations to diagnosis and 
appropriate treatment remains challenging, due to late recognition or utter 
neglect. Consequently, late initiation of treatment results in an exacerbation 
of cardiac involvement, representing the main cause of morbidity and mortality, 
irrespective of gender. Optimal management of AFD patients requires a dedicated 
multidisciplinary team, in which the cardiologist plays a decisive role, ranging 
from the differential diagnosis to the prevention of complications and the 
evaluation of timing for disease-specific therapies. The present review aims to 
redefine the role of cardiologists across the main decision nodes in 
contemporary AFD clinical care and drug discovery.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. For commercial re-use, 
please contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for 
reprints. All other permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service 
via the Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information 
please contact journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehae148
PMID: 38486361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]