---
reference_id: "PMID:35240329"
title: Baseline Hepatitis B Virus Surface Antigen Titers in Childhood Predict the Risk of Advanced Liver Fibrosis in Adulthood.
authors:
- Wu JF
- Tai CS
- Chang KC
- Chen HL
- Ni YH
- Hsu HY
- Chang MH
journal: Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.cgh.2022.02.046
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Baseline Hepatitis B Virus Surface Antigen Titers in Childhood Predict the Risk of Advanced Liver Fibrosis in Adulthood.
**Authors:** Wu JF, Tai CS, Chang KC, Chen HL, Ni YH, Hsu HY, Chang MH
**Journal:** Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cgh.2022.02.046](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cgh.2022.02.046)

## Content

1. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2023 Mar;21(3):663-669.e1. doi: 
10.1016/j.cgh.2022.02.046. Epub 2022 Feb 28.

Baseline Hepatitis B Virus Surface Antigen Titers in Childhood Predict the Risk 
of Advanced Liver Fibrosis in Adulthood.

Wu JF(1), Tai CS(1), Chang KC(1), Chen HL(2), Ni YH(2), Hsu HY(1), Chang MH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan; Hepatitis Research Center, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan; Hepatitis Research Center, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan. Electronic address: changmh@ntu.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Hepatitis B virus (HBV) surface antigen (HBsAg) is a marker 
of both HBV covalently closed circular DNA and integrated HBV genome, whereas 
the HBV core-related antigen (HBcrAg) indicates the transcriptional activity of 
covalently closed circular DNA. This study examined the relationship between 
HBsAg and HBcrAg titers in childhood and advanced fibrosis in adulthood.
METHODS: We recruited 214 initially hepatitis B e antigen-positive chronic 
HBV-infected patients who were followed for a total of 6371 person-years. None 
of the patients were co-infected with hepatitis C or D virus. Serum HBsAg and 
HBcrAg titers were assessed at 10 and 15 years of age. Transient elastography 
was performed at a mean final age of 38.21 years to identify advanced fibrosis.
RESULTS: Patients with advanced fibrosis in adulthood had a higher rate of 
genotype C HBV infection and a higher HBsAg titer at 10 and 15 years of age (P = 
.003, P = .03, and P = .005, respectively). The HBcrAg titer was not correlated 
with advanced fibrosis (P > .05). Receiver operating characteristic curve 
analysis showed that HBsAg cutoffs of >4.23 and >4.44 log10 IU/mL at 10 and 15 
years of age, respectively, best predicted advanced fibrosis in the fourth 
decade of life (P = .001 and P < .001, respectively). In a multivariate 
analysis, both an HBsAg titer >4.44 log10 IU/mL at 15 years of age and HBV 
genotype C were predictors of advanced fibrosis (odds ratios, 15.43 and 4.77; 
P = .01 and P = .02, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: HBsAg titers in childhood predict the progression to liver fibrosis 
in adulthood.

Copyright © 2023 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cgh.2022.02.046
PMID: 35240329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]