---
reference_id: "PMID:20301696"
title: 22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- McDonald-McGinn DM
- Hain HS
- Emanuel BS
- Zackai EH
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, McDonald-McGinn DM, Hain HS, Emanuel BS, Zackai EH

## Content

1. 22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome.

McDonald-McGinn DM(1), Hain HS(1), Emanuel BS(2), Zackai EH(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
1999 Sep 23 [updated 2025 May 8].

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
(2)Division of Human Genetics and Molecular Biology, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Individuals with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS) 
can present with a wide range of features that are highly variable, even within 
families. The major clinical manifestations of 22q11.2DS include congenital 
heart disease, particularly conotruncal malformations (ventricular septal 
defect, tetralogy of Fallot, interrupted aortic arch, and truncus arteriosus), 
palatal abnormalities (velopharyngeal incompetence, submucosal cleft palate, 
bifid uvula, and cleft palate), immune deficiency, characteristic facial 
features, and learning difficulties. Hearing loss can be sensorineural and/or 
conductive. Laryngotracheoesophageal, gastrointestinal, ophthalmologic, central 
nervous system, skeletal, and genitourinary anomalies also occur. Psychiatric 
illness and autoimmune disorders are more common in individuals with 22q11.2DS.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of 22q11.2DS is established by identification 
of a heterozygous deletion at chromosome 22q11.2 on chromosomal microarray 
analysis or other genomic analyses.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Cardiac anomalies are treated as 
recommended by cardiologist; surgical repair for palate anomalies as recommended 
by otolaryngologist; feeding issues are treated with modification of spoon 
placement; standard treatment for gastroesophageal reflux and gastrointestinal 
dysmotility; immune deficiency requires aggressive treatment of infections; 
rarely, prophylactic antibiotics, IVIG therapy, or thymus tissue implantation 
are required; irradiated blood products are recommended until normalization of 
the immune system can be confirmed; treatment of autoimmune disease as per 
immunologist; calcium supplementation and referral to an endocrinologist and 
nephrologist because of increased risk of renal calculi if long-term 
supplementation is required; standard treatment for growth hormone deficiency; 
standard treatment for ocular anomalies; hearing aids may be helpful for hearing 
loss; occupational, physical, and speech therapy with introduction of sign 
language by age one year, educational and behavioral therapy; support and 
treatment for psychiatric disease as indicated; activity restriction as 
recommended by an orthopedist for cervical spine anomalies; surgery and 
treatment as recommended by a nephrologist for renal anomalies; routine dental 
treatment with consideration of sealants. Surveillance: Evaluation for nasal 
speech quality after language emergence; antibody studies to assess 
seroconversion; reevaluate immune status in childhood before administration of 
live vaccines; annual complete blood count and differential; serum ionized 
calcium every three to six months in infancy, every five years through 
childhood, every one to two years thereafter, preoperatively and 
postoperatively, and regularly during pregnancy; TSH and free T4 annually; 
ophthalmologic evaluation between age one and three years or as indicated; 
audiology evaluation in infancy, at preschool age, and in school age children; 
developmental assessments annually; annual clinical surveillance for scoliosis; 
dental examination every six months. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Infants with 
lymphocyte abnormalities should not be immunized with live vaccines (e.g., oral 
polio, MMR). Carbonated drinks and alcohol consumption may exacerbate 
hypocalcemia. Caffeine intake may contribute to or worsen anxiety.
GENETIC COUNSELING: 22q11.2DS is an autosomal dominant contiguous gene deletion 
syndrome. In 22q11.2DS caused by a 3.0 (2.54)-Mb deletion, the deletion is de 
novo in more than 90% of individuals and inherited from a heterozygous parent in 
about 10% of individuals. Sixty percent of individuals with 22q11.2DS caused by 
a nested 22q11.2 deletion inherited the deletion from an affected parent. 
Offspring of affected individuals have a 50% chance of inheriting the 22q11.2 
deletion. Once the 22q11.2 deletion has been identified in an affected family 
member, prenatal testing using FISH, MLPA, or array studies for a pregnancy at 
increased risk and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301696