---
reference_id: "PMID:26951252"
title: What Causes Lupus Flares?
authors:
- Fernandez D
- Kirou KA
journal: Curr Rheumatol Rep
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s11926-016-0562-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# What Causes Lupus Flares?
**Authors:** Fernandez D, Kirou KA
**Journal:** Curr Rheumatol Rep (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11926-016-0562-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11926-016-0562-3)

## Content

1. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2016 Mar;18(3):14. doi: 10.1007/s11926-016-0562-3.

What Causes Lupus Flares?

Fernandez D(1), Kirou KA(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Hospital for Special Surgery and Weill Medical 
College of Cornell University, 535 East 70th Street, New York, NY, 10021, USA.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, Hospital for Special Surgery and Weill Medical 
College of Cornell University, 535 East 70th Street, New York, NY, 10021, USA. 
kirouk@hss.edu.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), the prototypic systemic autoimmune disease, 
follows a chronic disease course, punctuated by flares. Disease flares often 
occur without apparent cause, perhaps from progressive inherent buildup of 
autoimmunity. However, there is evidence that certain environmental factors may 
trigger the disease. These include exposure to UV light, infections, certain 
hormones, and drugs which may activate the innate and adaptive immune system, 
resulting in inflammation, cytotoxic effects, and clinical symptoms. 
Uncontrolled disease flares, as well as their treatment, especially with 
glucocorticoids, can cause significant organ damage. Tight surveillance and 
timely control of lupus flares with judicial use of effective treatments to 
adequately suppress the excessive immune system activation are required to bring 
about long term remission of the disease. We hope that new clinical trials will 
soon offer additional effective and target-specific biologic treatments for SLE.

DOI: 10.1007/s11926-016-0562-3
PMID: 26951252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]