---
reference_id: "PMID:30836973"
title: Urine proteome changes associated with autonomic regulation of heart rate in cosmonauts.
authors:
- Pastushkova LH
- Rusanov VB
- Goncharova AG
- Brzhozovskiy AG
- Kononikhin AS
- Chernikova AG
- Kashirina DN
- Nosovsky AM
- Baevsky RM
- Nikolaev EN
- Larina IM
journal: BMC Syst Biol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s12918-019-0688-9
keywords:
- "Adaptation, Physiological/physiology"
- Astronauts
- Autonomic Nervous System/physiology
- Heart Rate
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Proteome
- Urinalysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Urine proteome changes associated with autonomic regulation of heart rate in cosmonauts.
**Authors:** Pastushkova LH, Rusanov VB, Goncharova AG, Brzhozovskiy AG, Kononikhin AS, Chernikova AG, Kashirina DN, Nosovsky AM, Baevsky RM, Nikolaev EN, Larina IM
**Journal:** BMC Syst Biol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12918-019-0688-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12918-019-0688-9)

## Content

1. BMC Syst Biol. 2019 Mar 5;13(Suppl 1):17. doi: 10.1186/s12918-019-0688-9.

Urine proteome changes associated with autonomic regulation of heart rate in 
cosmonauts.

Pastushkova LH(1), Rusanov VB(1), Goncharova AG(1), Brzhozovskiy AG(1), 
Kononikhin AS(1)(2)(3), Chernikova AG(1), Kashirina DN(1), Nosovsky AM(1), 
Baevsky RM(1), Nikolaev EN(4)(5)(6), Larina IM(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Biomedical Problems - Russian Federation State Scientific 
Research Center Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia.
(2)V.L. Talrose Institute for Energy Problems of Chemical Physics, Russian 
Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia.
(3)Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Moscow region, 
Russia.
(4)V.L. Talrose Institute for Energy Problems of Chemical Physics, Russian 
Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia. ennikolaev@gmail.com.
(5)Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Moscow region, 
Russia. ennikolaev@gmail.com.
(6)Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Skolkovo, Moscow region, 
Russia. ennikolaev@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The strategy of adaptation of the human body in microgravity is 
largely associated with the plasticity of cardiovascular system regulatory 
mechanisms. During long-term space flights the changes in the stroke volume of 
the heart are observed, the heart rate decreases, the phase structure of cardiac 
cycle is readjusted The purpose of this work was to clarify urine proteome 
changes associated with the initial condition of the heart rate autonomic 
regulation mechanisms in cosmonauts who have participated in long space 
missions. Urine proteome of each cosmonaut was analyzed before and after space 
flight, depending on the initial parameters characterizing the regulatory 
mechanisms of the cardiovascular system.
RESULTS: The proteins cadherin-13, mucin-1, alpha-1 of collagen subunit type VI 
(COL6A1), hemisentin-1, semenogelin-2, SH3 domain-binding protein, transthyretin 
and serine proteases inhibitors realize a homeostatic role in individuals with 
different initial type of the cardiovascular system regulation. The role of 
significantly changed urine proteins in the cardiovascular homeostasis 
maintenance is associated with complex processes of atherogenesis, 
neoangiogenesis, activation of calcium channels, changes in cell adhesion and 
transmembrane properties, changes in extracellular matrix, participation in 
protection from oxidative stress and leveling the effects of hypoxia. Therefore, 
the concentrations of these proteins significantly differ between groups with 
dominant parasympathetic and sympathetic influences.
CONCLUSION: The space flight induced urine proteome changes are significantly 
different in the groups identified by heart rate autonomic regulation 
peculiarities before space flight. All these proteins regulate the associated 
biological processes which affect the stiffness of the vascular wall, blood 
pressure level, the severity of atherosclerotic changes, the rate and degree of 
age-related involution of elastin and fibulin, age-related increase in collagen 
stiffness, genetically determined features of elastin fibers. The increased 
vascular rigidity (including the aorta) and of myocardium may be regarded as a 
universal response to various extreme factors. Significant differences in the 
semi-quantitative analysis of signal proteins between groups with different 
types of autonomic regulation are explained by a common goal: to ensure optimal 
adaptation regardless of age and of the genetically determined type of responses 
to the extreme environmental factors effects.

DOI: 10.1186/s12918-019-0688-9
PMCID: PMC6399814
PMID: 30836973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: All 
members of the main and backup crews provided written informed consent to 
participate in the experiment “Proteome” in advance of their missions on the 
ISS. The experiment “Proteome” was approved by Biomedicine Ethics Committee of 
IBMP RAS/Physiology Section of the Russian Bioethics Committee Russian 
Federation National Commission for UNESCO and Human Research Multilateral Review 
Board, NASA, Houston, Tx, USA. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. The 
manuscript does not contain data from any individual person. COMPETING 
INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.