---
reference_id: "PMID:37644541"
title: "Congenital disorders of glycosylation: narration of a story through its patents."
authors:
- Monticelli M
- "D'Onofrio T"
- Jaeken J
- Morava E
- Andreotti G
- Cubellis MV
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02852-w
keywords:
- Humans
- Glycosylation
- Narration
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Databases, Factual"
- Exome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital disorders of glycosylation: narration of a story through its patents.
**Authors:** Monticelli M, D'Onofrio T, Jaeken J, Morava E, Andreotti G, Cubellis MV
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-02852-w](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-02852-w)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 Aug 29;18(1):247. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02852-w.

Congenital disorders of glycosylation: narration of a story through its patents.

Monticelli M(1)(2), D'Onofrio T(1)(2), Jaeken J(3), Morava E(4), Andreotti G(5), 
Cubellis MV(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Napoli "Federico II", Complesso 
Universitario Monte Sant'Angelo, Via Cinthia, Napoli, 80126, Italy.
(2)Institute of Biomolecular Chemistry ICB, CNR, Via Campi Flegrei 34, Pozzuoli, 
80078, Italy.
(3)Center of Metabolic Diseases, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(4)Department of Clinical Genomics and Laboratory of Medical Pathology, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(5)Institute of Biomolecular Chemistry ICB, CNR, Via Campi Flegrei 34, Pozzuoli, 
80078, Italy. gandreotti@icb.cnr.it.
(6)Stazione Zoologica "Anton Dohrn", Villa Comunale, Naples, Italy.

Congenital disorders of glycosylation are a group of more than 160 rare genetic 
defects in protein and lipid glycosylation. Since the first clinical report in 
1980 of PMM2-CDG, the most common CDG worldwide, research made great strides, 
but nearly all of them are still missing a cure. CDG diagnosis has been at a 
rapid pace since the introduction of whole-exome/whole-genome sequencing as a 
diagnostic tool. Here, we retrace the history of CDG by analyzing all the 
patents associated with the topic. To this end, we explored the Espacenet 
database, extracted a list of patents, and then divided them into three major 
groups: (1) Drugs/therapeutic approaches for CDG, (2) Drug delivery tools for 
CDG, (3) Diagnostic tools for CDG. Despite the enormous scientific progress 
experienced in the last 30 years, diagnostic tools, drugs, and biomarkers are 
still urgently needed.

© 2023. Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-02852-w
PMCID: PMC10466741
PMID: 37644541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.