---
reference_id: "PMID:9845520"
title: A missense mutation in gamma-glutamyl carboxylase gene causes combined deficiency of all vitamin K-dependent blood coagulation factors.
authors:
- Brenner B
- Sánchez-Vega B
- Wu SM
- Lanir N
- Stafford DW
- Solera J
journal: Blood
year: '1998'
keywords:
- Animals
- "Carbon-Carbon Ligases/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Line
- Coagulation Protein Disorders/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Drosophila/cytology
- Female
- Gene Expression
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Pedigree
- Point Mutation
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Vitamin K/metabolism, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A missense mutation in gamma-glutamyl carboxylase gene causes combined deficiency of all vitamin K-dependent blood coagulation factors.
**Authors:** Brenner B, Sánchez-Vega B, Wu SM, Lanir N, Stafford DW, Solera J
**Journal:** Blood (1998)

## Content

1. Blood. 1998 Dec 15;92(12):4554-9.

A missense mutation in gamma-glutamyl carboxylase gene causes combined 
deficiency of all vitamin K-dependent blood coagulation factors.

Brenner B(1), Sánchez-Vega B, Wu SM, Lanir N, Stafford DW, Solera J.

Author information:
(1)Thrombosis and Hemostasis Unit, Institute of Hematology, Rambam Medical 
Center, and Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel.

To identify potential mutations in the gamma-glutamyl carboxylase gene, the 
sequence of all exons and intron/exon borders was determined in 4 patients from 
a consanguineous kindred with combined deficiency of all vitamin K-dependent 
procoagulants and anticoagulants and results were compared with normal genomic 
sequence. All 4 patients were homozygous for a point mutation in exon 9 that 
resulted in the conversion of an arginine codon (CTG) to leucine codon (CGG) at 
residue 394. Screening of this mutation based on introduction of Alu I site in 
amplified fragment from normal allele but not from the mutated allele showed 
that 13 asymptomatic members of the kindred were heterozygous for the mutation. 
The mutation was not found in 340 unrelated normal chromosomes. The segregation 
pattern of the mutation which is the first reported in the gamma-glutamyl 
carboxylase gene fits perfectly with phenotype of the disorder and confirms the 
suggested autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance of combined deficiency of 
all vitamin K-dependent procoagulants and anticoagulants in this kindred. The 
mutated carboxylase protein expressed in Drosophila cells was stable but 
demonstrated threefold reduced activity compared with WT carboxylase, confirming 
that the L394R mutation results in a defective carboxylase.

PMID: 9845520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]