---
reference_id: "PMID:15293620"
title: Idiopathic pulmonary haemosiderosis revisited.
authors:
- Ioachimescu OC
- Sieber S
- Kotch A
journal: Eur Respir J
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1183/09031936.04.00116302
keywords:
- Adult
- "Biopsy, Needle"
- Blood Chemical Analysis
- Female
- "Hemosiderosis/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Incidence
- Lung/pathology
- "Lung Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Male
- Prognosis
- "Radiography, Thoracic"
- Respiratory Function Tests
- Risk Assessment
- Severity of Illness Index
- Survival Rate
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Idiopathic pulmonary haemosiderosis revisited.
**Authors:** Ioachimescu OC, Sieber S, Kotch A
**Journal:** Eur Respir J (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1183/09031936.04.00116302](https://doi.org/10.1183/09031936.04.00116302)

## Content

1. Eur Respir J. 2004 Jul;24(1):162-70. doi: 10.1183/09031936.04.00116302.

Idiopathic pulmonary haemosiderosis revisited.

Ioachimescu OC(1), Sieber S, Kotch A.

Author information:
(1)Dept of Pulmonary Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Cleveland, OH, USA. oioac@yahoo.com

Idiopathic pulmonary haemosiderosis is a rare cause of diffuse alveolar
haemorrhage of unknown aetiology. It occurs most frequently in children, has a
variable natural history with repetitive episodes of diffuse alveolar
haemorrhage, and has been reported to have a high mortality. Many patients
develop iron deficiency anaemia secondary to deposition of haemosiderin iron in
the alveoli. Examination of sputum and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid can disclose
haemosiderin-laden alveolar macrophages (siderophages), and the lung biopsy
shows numerous siderophages in the alveoli, without any evidence of pulmonary
vasculitis, nonspecific/granulomatous inflammation, or deposition of
immunoglobulins. Contrary to earlier reports, corticosteroids alone or in
combination with other immunosuppressive agents may be effective for either
exacerbations or maintenance therapy of idiopathic pulmonary haemosiderosis.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.04.00116302
PMID: 15293620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
