---
reference_id: "PMID:32353617"
title: Acute vestibular syndrome and hearing loss mimicking labyrinthitis as initial presentation of multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Valente P
- Pinto I
- Aguiar C
- Castro E
- Condé A
- Larangeiro J
journal: Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2020.110048
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute vestibular syndrome and hearing loss mimicking labyrinthitis as initial presentation of multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Valente P, Pinto I, Aguiar C, Castro E, Condé A, Larangeiro J
**Journal:** Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijporl.2020.110048](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijporl.2020.110048)

## Content

1. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2020 Jul;134:110048. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijporl.2020.110048. Epub 2020 Apr 21.

Acute vestibular syndrome and hearing loss mimicking labyrinthitis as initial 
presentation of multiple sclerosis.

Valente P(1), Pinto I(2), Aguiar C(2), Castro E(2), Condé A(2), Larangeiro J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Centro Hospitalar de Vila Nova de 
Gaia/Espinho, Rua Conceição Fernandes, S/n, 4434-502, Vila Nova de Gaia, Porto, 
Portugal. Electronic address: pedrofmvalente@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Centro Hospitalar de Vila Nova de 
Gaia/Espinho, Rua Conceição Fernandes, S/n, 4434-502, Vila Nova de Gaia, Porto, 
Portugal.

Acute vestibular syndrome is most often caused by vestibular neuritis or stroke, 
although demyelinating diseases may be responsible for 4% of all AVS episodes. 
The authors present the case of a previously healthy 17-year-old female patient 
complaining of spontaneous vertigo and right-sided hearing loss. Otoneurological 
examination suggested a peripheral vestibular cause and video head impulse test 
revealed a reduced vestibulo-ocular reflex gain. The presence of sensorineural 
hearing loss raised the suspicion of a central cause and prompted imaging 
evaluation. A brain MRI evidenced demyelinating lesions in the right middle 
cerebellar peduncle and the patient was ultimately diagnosed with Multiple 
Sclerosis.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2020.110048
PMID: 32353617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no competing interest.