---
reference_id: "PMID:24045899"
title: "Synergistic mutations in SLC3A1 and SLC7A9 leading to heterogeneous cystinuria phenotypes: pitfalls in the diagnostic workup."
authors:
- Kummer S
- Venghaus A
- Schlune A
- Leube B
- Eggermann T
- Spiekerkoetter U
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s00467-013-2617-2
keywords:
- "Amino Acid Transport Systems, Basic/genetics"
- "Amino Acid Transport Systems, Neutral/genetics"
- Base Sequence
- Cystinuria/genetics
- Female
- Genotype
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Synergistic mutations in SLC3A1 and SLC7A9 leading to heterogeneous cystinuria phenotypes: pitfalls in the diagnostic workup.
**Authors:** Kummer S, Venghaus A, Schlune A, Leube B, Eggermann T, Spiekerkoetter U
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00467-013-2617-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00467-013-2617-2)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2014 Jan;29(1):155-9. doi: 10.1007/s00467-013-2617-2. Epub
2013  Sep 19.

Synergistic mutations in SLC3A1 and SLC7A9 leading to heterogeneous cystinuria
phenotypes: pitfalls in the diagnostic workup.

Kummer S(1), Venghaus A, Schlune A, Leube B, Eggermann T, Spiekerkoetter U.

Author information:
(1)Department of General Pediatrics, Neonatology and Pediatric Cardiology,
University Children's Hospital, Moorenstr. 5, 40225, Dusseldorf, Germany,
Sebastian.kummer@med.uni-duesseldorf.de.

BACKGROUND: Cystinuria is an inherited disorder of a renal tubular amino acid
transporter and leads to increased cystine excretion with the risk of urinary
stone formation. Phenotypical classification is based on urinary amino acid
concentration as type I (silent), type non-I (hyper-excretors), mixed or
untyped. Genotypic classification is based on mutations in SLC3A1 (type A) or
SLC7A9 (type B).
CASE-DIAGNOSIS/TREATMENT: We present six family members with a complex
phenotypic profile based on mutations in both genes. The index patient presents
a known homozygous mutation (p.T189M) in SLC3A1 and a homozygous mutation
(c.225C > T) in SLC7A9. Based on a bioinformatics analysis and published
findings, we considered p.T189M to be pathogenic and initially classified
c.225C > T as a silent variant. However, segregation analysis detected
homozygosity for p.T189M also in non-affected individuals, whereas homozygous
c.225C > T segregated with the phenotype. RNA studies confirmed c.225C > T to
cause aberrant splicing.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on our findings, we conclude that c.225C > T in SLC7A9
determines the clinical phenotype in this family, whereas additional SLC3A1
mutations aggravate the phenotype in heterozygotes for c.225C > T in SLC7A9
without resulting in cystinuria in the homozygous state. Our results underline
the need for careful biochemical characterization of family members of an index
case of cystinuria. Genetic analysis of both cystinuria genes may be necessary
due to the synergistic effects of mutations in two genes.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-013-2617-2
PMID: 24045899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
