---
reference_id: "PMID:28789479"
title: Heart and Nervous System Pathology in Compound Heterozygous Friedreich Ataxia.
authors:
- Becker AB
- Qian J
- Gelman BB
- Yang M
- Bauer P
- Koeppen AH
journal: J Neuropathol Exp Neurol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/jnen/nlx047
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
- "Friedreich Ataxia/genetics, pathology"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Iron-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Myocardium/pathology
- "Nervous System/metabolism, pathology"
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion/genetics
- Frataxin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heart and Nervous System Pathology in Compound Heterozygous Friedreich Ataxia.
**Authors:** Becker AB, Qian J, Gelman BB, Yang M, Bauer P, Koeppen AH
**Journal:** J Neuropathol Exp Neurol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jnen/nlx047](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnen/nlx047)

## Content

1. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2017 Aug 1;76(8):665-675. doi: 10.1093/jnen/nlx047.

Heart and Nervous System Pathology in Compound Heterozygous Friedreich Ataxia.

Becker AB(1), Qian J(1), Gelman BB(1), Yang M(1), Bauer P(1), Koeppen AH(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Service, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Albany, New York (ABB,
AHK); Department of Pathology, Albany Medical Center, Albany, New York (JQ,
AHK); Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Texas
Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas (BBG); Department of Pediatrics and Neurology,
University of Colorado, Aurora, Colorado (MY); and Centogene, Rostock, Germany
(PB).

In a small percentage of patients with Friedreich ataxia (FA), the pathogenic
mutation is compound heterozygous, consisting of a guanine-adenine-adenine (GAA)
trinucleotide repeat expansion in one allele, and a deletion, point mutation, or
insertion in the other. In 2 cases of compound heterozygous FA, the GAA
expansion was inherited from the mother, and deletions from the father. Compound
heterozygous FA patient 1, an 11-year-old boy (GAA, 896/c.11_12TCdel), had
ataxia, chorea, cardiomyopathy, and diabetes mellitus. Compound heterozygous FA
patient 2, a 28-year-old man (GAA, 744/exon 5 del), had ataxia, cardiomyopathy,
and diabetes mellitus. Microscopy showed cardiomyocyte hypertrophy,
iron-positive inclusions, and disrupted intercalated discs. The cardiac lesions
were similar to those in age-matched homozygous FA patients with cardiomyopathy
and diabetes mellitus (boy, 10, GAA 1016/1016; woman, 25, GAA 800/1100). The
neuropathology was also similar and included hypoplasia of spinal cord and
dorsal root ganglia, loss of large axons in dorsal roots, and atrophy of the
dentate nucleus (DN). Frataxin levels in heart and DN of all 4 FA cases were at
or below the detection limits of the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (≤10 ng/g
wet weight) (normal DN: 126 ± 43 ng/g; normal heart: 266 ± 92 ng/g). The
pathologic phenotype in homozygous and compound heterozygous FA is determined by
residual frataxin levels rather than unique mutations.

2017 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc. This work is written by US
Government employees and is in the public domain in the US.

DOI: 10.1093/jnen/nlx047
PMCID: PMC5901083
PMID: 28789479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
