---
reference_id: "PMID:11331325"
title: "Bexarotene is effective and safe for treatment of refractory advanced-stage cutaneous T-cell lymphoma: multinational phase II-III trial results."
authors:
- Duvic M
- Hymes K
- Heald P
- Breneman D
- Martin AG
- Myskowski P
- Crowley C
- Yocum RC
- Bexarotene Worldwide Study Group
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2001.19.9.2456
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Anticarcinogenic Agents/therapeutic use
- Bexarotene
- Female
- Humans
- "Lymphoma, T-Cell, Cutaneous/drug therapy, mortality"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Quality of Life
- "Tetrahydronaphthalenes/adverse effects, pharmacokinetics, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bexarotene is effective and safe for treatment of refractory advanced-stage cutaneous T-cell lymphoma: multinational phase II-III trial results.
**Authors:** Duvic M, Hymes K, Heald P, Breneman D, Martin AG, Myskowski P, Crowley C, Yocum RC, Bexarotene Worldwide Study Group
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2001.19.9.2456](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2001.19.9.2456)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2001 May 1;19(9):2456-71. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2001.19.9.2456.

Bexarotene is effective and safe for treatment of refractory advanced-stage
cutaneous T-cell lymphoma: multinational phase II-III trial results.

Duvic M(1), Hymes K, Heald P, Breneman D, Martin AG, Myskowski P, Crowley C,
Yocum RC; Bexarotene Worldwide Study Group.

Author information:
(1)M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX.

PURPOSE: Cutaneous T-cell lymphomas (CTCL) are malignancies of T cells appearing
as skin lesions and are responsive to retinoid therapy. Safety and efficacy of a
novel RXR-selective retinoid (rexinoid) bexarotene (Targretin, LGD1069; Ligand
Pharmaceuticals Inc, San Diego, CA) was evaluated as a single-agent oral therapy
administered once daily in an open-label study in patients with refractory
advanced-stage CTCL.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Ninety-four patients with biopsy-confirmed CTCL in
advanced stages (IIB-IVB) were enrolled at 26 centers. Fifty-six patients
received an initial dose of 300 mg/m2/d oral bexarotene and 38 started at more
than 300 mg/m2/d.
RESULTS: Clinical complete and partial responses were reported by Primary End
point Classification for the study in 45% (25 of 56) of patients enrolled at 300
mg/m2/d dosing. At more than 300 mg/m2/d, 55% (21 of 38) of patients responded,
including 13% (five of 38) clinical complete. For the 300 mg/m2/d initial dose
group, the rate of relapse after response was 36% and the projected median
duration of response was 299 days. Improvements were also seen in overall
body-surface area involvement, median index lesion surface area, adenopathy,
cutaneous tumors, pruritus, and CTCL-specific quality of life. The most frequent
drug-related adverse events included hypertriglyceridemia (associated rarely
with pancreatitis), hypercholesterolemia, hypothyroidism, and headache.
CONCLUSION: Bexarotene is the first in a novel class of pharmacologic agents,
the RXR-selective retinoids, or rexinoids. Bexarotene is orally administered,
safe, and generally well tolerated with reversible side effects, and is
effective for the treatment of advanced, refractory CTCL.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2001.19.9.2456
PMID: 11331325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
