---
reference_id: "PMID:10092316"
title: A recombinant bovine gallbladder mucin polypeptide binds biliary lipids and accelerates cholesterol crystal appearance time.
authors:
- Nunes DP
- Afdhal NH
- Offner GD
journal: Gastroenterology
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1016/s0016-5085(99)70077-6
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Bile/metabolism
- Cattle
- Cholelithiasis/etiology
- Cholesterol/chemistry
- Crystallization
- Gallbladder/chemistry
- Lipid Metabolism
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mucins/metabolism
- Peptides/metabolism
- Recombinant Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A recombinant bovine gallbladder mucin polypeptide binds biliary lipids and accelerates cholesterol crystal appearance time.
**Authors:** Nunes DP, Afdhal NH, Offner GD
**Journal:** Gastroenterology (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0016-5085(99)70077-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0016-5085(99)70077-6)

## Content

1. Gastroenterology. 1999 Apr;116(4):936-42. doi: 10.1016/s0016-5085(99)70077-6.

A recombinant bovine gallbladder mucin polypeptide binds biliary lipids and 
accelerates cholesterol crystal appearance time.

Nunes DP(1), Afdhal NH, Offner GD.

Author information:
(1)Section of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Boston University School 
of Medicine and Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Mucin has a central role in the pathogenesis of cholesterol 
gallstones, in part because of its ability to bind biliary lipids and accelerate 
cholesterol crystal appearance time. Previous studies have localized these 
properties to nonglycosylated mucin domains, and we have recently shown that 
these domains contain a series of 127-amino acid, cysteine-rich repeats. The aim 
of this study was to express a recombinant mucin polypeptide containing these 
repeats and investigate its lipid-binding and pronucleating properties.
METHODS: A recombinant mucin polypeptide was expressed as a glutathione 
S-transferase fusion protein in Escherichia coli, purified by affinity 
chromatography, and compared with native bovine gallbladder mucin in 
lipid-binding and cholesterol crystal appearance time assays.
RESULTS: The recombinant mucin polypeptide bound a hydrophobic fluorescent probe 
and cholesterol in a concentration-dependent manner. It accelerated the 
appearance of cholesterol crystals from lithogenic model bile, an effect that 
was both time and concentration dependent.
CONCLUSIONS: The cysteine-rich repeats in the recombinant mucin polypeptide 
correspond to the protease-sensitive hydrophobic domains identified in earlier 
biochemical studies. Further delineation of the lipid-binding site(s) in these 
repeats will provide new insights into the mechanism of cholesterol crystal 
nucleation and stone growth.

DOI: 10.1016/s0016-5085(99)70077-6
PMID: 10092316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]