---
reference_id: "PMID:38571311"
title: DNA methylation episignature and comparative epigenomic profiling for Pitt-Hopkins syndrome caused by TCF4 variants.
authors:
- van der Laan L
- Lauffer P
- Rooney K
- Silva A
- Haghshenas S
- Relator R
- Levy MA
- Trajkova S
- Huisman SA
- Bijlsma EK
- Kleefstra T
- van Bon BW
- Baysal Ö
- Zweier C
- Palomares-Bralo M
- Fischer J
- Szakszon K
- Faivre L
- Piton A
- Mesman S
- Hochstenbach R
- Elting MW
- van Hagen JM
- Plomp AS
- Mannens MMAM
- Alders M
- van Haelst MM
- Ferrero GB
- Brusco A
- Henneman P
- Sweetser DA
- Sadikovic B
- Vitobello A
- Menke LA
journal: HGG Adv
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2024.100289
keywords:
- Humans
- Transcription Factor 4/genetics
- "Hyperventilation/genetics, diagnosis"
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, diagnosis"
- Female
- DNA Methylation
- Male
- Child
- Facies
- Adolescent
- Epigenomics/methods
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Hyperkinesis/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- Adult
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DNA methylation episignature and comparative epigenomic profiling for Pitt-Hopkins syndrome caused by TCF4 variants.
**Authors:** van der Laan L, Lauffer P, Rooney K, Silva A, Haghshenas S, Relator R, Levy MA, Trajkova S, Huisman SA, Bijlsma EK, Kleefstra T, van Bon BW, Baysal Ö, Zweier C, Palomares-Bralo M, Fischer J, Szakszon K, Faivre L, Piton A, Mesman S, Hochstenbach R, Elting MW, van Hagen JM, Plomp AS, Mannens MMAM, Alders M, van Haelst MM, Ferrero GB, Brusco A, Henneman P, Sweetser DA, Sadikovic B, Vitobello A, Menke LA
**Journal:** HGG Adv (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.xhgg.2024.100289](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xhgg.2024.100289)

## Content

1. HGG Adv. 2024 Jul 18;5(3):100289. doi: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2024.100289. Epub 2024
Apr  2.

DNA methylation episignature and comparative epigenomic profiling for 
Pitt-Hopkins syndrome caused by TCF4 variants.

van der Laan L(1), Lauffer P(1), Rooney K(2), Silva A(3), Haghshenas S(4), 
Relator R(4), Levy MA(4), Trajkova S(5), Huisman SA(6), Bijlsma EK(7), Kleefstra 
T(8), van Bon BW(9), Baysal Ö(9), Zweier C(10), Palomares-Bralo M(11), Fischer 
J(12), Szakszon K(13), Faivre L(14), Piton A(15), Mesman S(16), Hochstenbach 
R(1), Elting MW(1), van Hagen JM(1), Plomp AS(1), Mannens MMAM(1), Alders M(1), 
van Haelst MM(1), Ferrero GB(17), Brusco A(18), Henneman P(1), Sweetser DA(19), 
Sadikovic B(20), Vitobello A(21), Menke LA(22).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, 
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Amsterdam Reproduction & 
Development, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)Verspeeten Clinical Genome Centre, London Health Science Centre, London, ON, 
Canada; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Western University, 
London, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Western University, London, 
ON, Canada.
(4)Verspeeten Clinical Genome Centre, London Health Science Centre, London, ON, 
Canada.
(5)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Torino, Torino, Italy.
(6)Amsterdam UMC location University of Amsterdam, Emma Children's Hospital, 
Department of Pediatrics, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Zodiak, Prinsenstichting, 
Purmerend, the Netherlands.
(7)Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
the Netherlands.
(8)Department of Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(9)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
the Netherlands.
(10)Department of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität 
Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany; Department of Human Genetics, 
University of Bern, Inselspital Universitätsspital Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(11)Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), La Paz University 
Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
(12)Institute for Clinical Genetics, University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus at 
the Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(13)Institute of Paediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, 
Debrecen, Hungary.
(14)UFR Des Sciences de Santé, INSERM-Université de Bourgogne UMR1231 GAD 
«Génétique des Anomalies du Développement», FHUTRANSLAD, Dijon, France; CHU 
Dijon Bourgogne, Centre de Génétique, Centre de Référence Maladies Rares 
«Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs», FHU-TRANSLDAD, Dijon, 
France.
(15)Genetic Diagnosis Laboratories, Strasbourg University Hospital, Strasbourg 
67000, France.
(16)Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, FNWI, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(17)Department of Public Health and Pediatrics, University of Torino, Turin, 
Italy.
(18)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Torino, Turin, Italy.
(19)Division of Medical Genetics and Metabolism and Center for Genomic Medicine, 
Massachusetts General for Children, Boston, MA, USA.
(20)Department of Human Genetics, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, 
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Amsterdam Reproduction & 
Development, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Verspeeten Clinical Genome Centre, 
London Health Science Centre, London, ON, Canada; Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, Western University, London, ON, Canada.
(21)Unité Fonctionnelle Innovation en Diagnostic Génomique des Maladies Rares, 
FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France.
(22)Amsterdam Reproduction & Development, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Amsterdam 
UMC location University of Amsterdam, Emma Children's Hospital, Department of 
Pediatrics, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Amsterdam Neuroscience - Cellular & 
Molecular Mechanisms, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
l.a.menke@amsterdamumc.nl.

Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder caused by 
pathogenic variants in TCF4, leading to intellectual disability, specific 
morphological features, and autonomic nervous system dysfunction. Epigenetic 
dysregulation has been implicated in PTHS, prompting the investigation of a DNA 
methylation (DNAm) "episignature" specific to PTHS for diagnostic purposes and 
variant reclassification and functional insights into the molecular 
pathophysiology of this disorder. A cohort of 67 individuals with genetically 
confirmed PTHS and three individuals with intellectual disability and a variant 
of uncertain significance (VUS) in TCF4 were studied. The DNAm episignature was 
developed with an Infinium Methylation EPIC BeadChip array analysis using 
peripheral blood cells. Support vector machine (SVM) modeling and clustering 
methods were employed to generate a DNAm classifier for PTHS. Validation was 
extended to an additional cohort of 11 individuals with PTHS. The episignature 
was assessed in relation to other neurodevelopmental disorders and its 
specificity was examined. A specific DNAm episignature for PTHS was established. 
The classifier exhibited high sensitivity for TCF4 haploinsufficiency and 
missense variants in the basic-helix-loop-helix domain. Notably, seven 
individuals with TCF4 variants exhibited negative episignatures, suggesting 
complexities related to mosaicism, genetic factors, and environmental 
influences. The episignature displayed degrees of overlap with other related 
disorders and biological pathways. This study defines a DNAm episignature for 
TCF4-related PTHS, enabling improved diagnostic accuracy and VUS 
reclassification. The finding that some cases scored negatively underscores the 
potential for multiple or nested episignatures and emphasizes the need for 
continued investigation to enhance specificity and coverage across PTHS-related 
variants.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2024.100289
PMCID: PMC11087720
PMID: 38571311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests B.S. is an employee and 
shareholder of EpiSign, Inc., a biotech firm involved in commercial application 
of EpiSign technology.