---
reference_id: "PMID:39571737"
title: A near-complete genome reveals the population evolution of the cotton-melon aphid Aphis gossypii.
authors:
- Jing T
- Yang J
- Pan J
- Liu X
- Yang X
- Farhan M
- Su H
- Ma X
- Zhang S
journal: Insect Biochem Mol Biol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2024.104215
keywords:
- Animals
- Aphids/genetics
- "Genome, Insect"
- Male
- Female
- Telomere/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A near-complete genome reveals the population evolution of the cotton-melon aphid Aphis gossypii.
**Authors:** Jing T, Yang J, Pan J, Liu X, Yang X, Farhan M, Su H, Ma X, Zhang S
**Journal:** Insect Biochem Mol Biol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ibmb.2024.104215](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ibmb.2024.104215)

## Content

1. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2025 Jan;176:104215. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2024.104215.
 Epub 2024 Nov 19.

A near-complete genome reveals the population evolution of the cotton-melon 
aphid Aphis gossypii.

Jing T(1), Yang J(1), Pan J(1), Liu X(1), Yang X(1), Farhan M(1), Su H(1), Ma 
X(2), Zhang S(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Plant Protection, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, 225009, Jiangsu, 
China.
(2)National Key Laboratory of Cotton Bio-breeding and Integrated Utilization, 
Institute of Cotton Research, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Anyang, 
Henan, 455000, China.
(3)College of Plant Protection, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, 225009, Jiangsu, 
China. Electronic address: shuaizhang@yzu.edu.cn.

The cotton-melon aphid Aphis gossypii Glover is a severe pest worldwide. 
Interhaplotype genomic variation can be used as a starting point to analyze the 
adaptability of Ap. gossypii. In this study, we utilized long-read PacBio HiFi 
sequencing and HiC scaffolding techniques to assemble a near 
telomere-to-telomere gap-free genome assembly of Hap4. The assembly had two gaps 
totaling 321.24 Mb. We characterized five telomeric repetitive regions (GGTTA)n, 
including the four found at the 3' end of the chromosomes, and obtained new 
structural information about the telomeres. Due to the improved sequencing 
technology, we also identified more than 55.03 Mb of repetitive DNA in the 
genome assembly of Hap4, which contributed significantly to the increase in 
genome size compared to that of Hap1 and Hap3. Most of the additional repetitive 
DNA content was located on the X chromosome, and the tandem repeat sequence 
occupied 16.8% of the X chromosome length. The Hap4 assembly showed that the X 
chromosome exhibited a greater abundance of AT-rich satDNA arrays (11 satDNA 
arrays longer than 100 kb) than that observed in the autosomes (A1 and A2 
harboured 3 and 1 satDNA arrays). We detected presence-absence variations, 
insertions, and deletions events between Hap1, Hap3, and Hap4 Ap. gossypii, 
which had significant effects on gene expression. Additionally, we identified a 
male-specific glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase of fungal origin in all 
strains of Ap. gossypii. This comprehensive genome assembly provides valuable 
insights into the structural characteristics of highly repetitive regions and 
allows comparative genomic analyses that facilitate our understanding of Ap. 
gossypii's adaptation and diversification.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2024.104215
PMID: 39571737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
wish to declare no competing interests.