---
reference_id: "PMID:16928994"
title: Aneurysm syndromes caused by mutations in the TGF-beta receptor.
authors:
- Loeys BL
- Schwarze U
- Holm T
- Callewaert BL
- Thomas GH
- Pannu H
- De Backer JF
- Oswald GL
- Symoens S
- Manouvrier S
- Roberts AE
- Faravelli F
- Greco MA
- Pyeritz RE
- Milewicz DM
- Coucke PJ
- Cameron DE
- Braverman AC
- Byers PH
- De Paepe AM
- Dietz HC
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa055695
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aneurysm syndromes caused by mutations in the TGF-beta receptor.
**Authors:** Loeys BL, Schwarze U, Holm T, Callewaert BL, Thomas GH, Pannu H, De Backer JF, Oswald GL, Symoens S, Manouvrier S, Roberts AE, Faravelli F, Greco MA, Pyeritz RE, Milewicz DM, Coucke PJ, Cameron DE, Braverman AC, Byers PH, De Paepe AM, Dietz HC
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa055695](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa055695)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2006 Aug 24;355(8):788-98. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa055695.

Aneurysm syndromes caused by mutations in the TGF-beta receptor.

Loeys BL(1), Schwarze U, Holm T, Callewaert BL, Thomas GH, Pannu H, De Backer 
JF, Oswald GL, Symoens S, Manouvrier S, Roberts AE, Faravelli F, Greco MA, 
Pyeritz RE, Milewicz DM, Coucke PJ, Cameron DE, Braverman AC, Byers PH, De Paepe 
AM, Dietz HC.

Author information:
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute for Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, and the Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, USA. 
bart.loeys@ugent.be

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2006 Aug 24;355(8):841-4. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe068122.
    N Engl J Med. 2006 Nov 16;355(20):2155; author reply 2156. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMc062573.

BACKGROUND: The Loeys-Dietz syndrome is a recently described autosomal dominant 
aortic-aneurysm syndrome with widespread systemic involvement. The disease is 
characterized by the triad of arterial tortuosity and aneurysms, hypertelorism, 
and bifid uvula or cleft palate and is caused by heterozygous mutations in the 
genes encoding transforming growth factor beta receptors 1 and 2 (TGFBR1 and 
TGFBR2, respectively).
METHODS: We undertook the clinical and molecular characterization of 52 affected 
families. Forty probands presented with typical manifestations of the 
Loeys-Dietz syndrome. In view of the phenotypic overlap between this syndrome 
and vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, we screened an additional cohort of 40 
patients who had vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome without the characteristic type 
III collagen abnormalities or the craniofacial features of the Loeys-Dietz 
syndrome.
RESULTS: We found a mutation in TGFBR1 or TGFBR2 in all probands with typical 
Loeys-Dietz syndrome (type I) and in 12 probands presenting with vascular 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (Loeys-Dietz syndrome type II). The natural history of 
both types was characterized by aggressive arterial aneurysms (mean age at 
death, 26.0 years) and a high incidence of pregnancy-related complications (in 6 
of 12 women). Patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome type I, as compared with those 
with type II, underwent cardiovascular surgery earlier (mean age, 16.9 years vs. 
26.9 years) and died earlier (22.6 years vs. 31.8 years). There were 59 vascular 
surgeries in the cohort, with one death during the procedure. This low rate of 
intraoperative mortality distinguishes the Loeys-Dietz syndrome from vascular 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in either TGFBR1 or TGFBR2 predispose patients to 
aggressive and widespread vascular disease. The severity of the clinical 
presentation is predictive of the outcome. Genotyping of patients presenting 
with symptoms like those of vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome may be used to guide 
therapy, including the use and timing of prophylactic vascular surgery.

Copyright 2006 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa055695
PMID: 16928994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]