---
reference_id: "PMID:30237433"
title: Expanding the concept of peroxisomal diseases and efficient diagnostic system in Japan.
authors:
- Takashima S
- Saitsu H
- Shimozawa N
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s10038-018-0512-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanding the concept of peroxisomal diseases and efficient diagnostic system in Japan.
**Authors:** Takashima S, Saitsu H, Shimozawa N
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s10038-018-0512-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s10038-018-0512-1)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2019 Feb;64(2):145-152. doi: 10.1038/s10038-018-0512-1. Epub 2018
 Sep 20.

Expanding the concept of peroxisomal diseases and efficient diagnostic system in 
Japan.

Takashima S(1), Saitsu H(2), Shimozawa N(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genomics Research, Life Science Research Center, Gifu University, 
Gifu, Japan.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 
Hamamatsu, Japan.
(3)Division of Genomics Research, Life Science Research Center, Gifu University, 
Gifu, Japan. nshim@gifu-u.ac.jp.

The concept of peroxisomal diseases is expanding because of improvements in 
diagnostic technology based on advanced biochemical analysis and development of 
next-generation sequencing. For quicker and more accurate diagnosis of as many 
patients as possible, we developed a new diagnostic system combining the 
conventional diagnostic system and comprehensive mutational analysis by 
whole-exome sequencing in Japan. Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) is the most common 
peroxisomal disease. In the cerebral type of ALD, hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation is the only treatment in the early stage, and thus prompt 
diagnosis will improve the prognosis of affected patients. Furthermore, it is 
also important to identify pre-symptomatic patients by family analysis of 
probands by providing appropriate disease information and genetic counseling, 
which will also lead to early intervention. Here, we summarize current 
information related to peroxisomal diseases and ALD and introduce our efficient 
diagnostic system for use in Japan, which resulted in the diagnosis of 73 
Japanese patients with peroxisome biogenesis disorders, 16 with impaired 
β-oxidation of fatty acids, three with impaired etherphospholipid biosynthesis, 
and 191 Japanese families with ALD so far.

DOI: 10.1038/s10038-018-0512-1
PMID: 30237433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]