---
reference_id: "PMID:39649707"
title: "Dysphagia due to Lyme Disease: A Case Report."
authors:
- Kim P
- Lim SH
- Lee JI
- Namgung HG
- Kim D
- Lee EJ
journal: Brain Neurorehabil
year: '2024'
doi: 10.12786/bn.2024.17.e25
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dysphagia due to Lyme Disease: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Kim P, Lim SH, Lee JI, Namgung HG, Kim D, Lee EJ
**Journal:** Brain Neurorehabil (2024)
**DOI:** [10.12786/bn.2024.17.e25](https://doi.org/10.12786/bn.2024.17.e25)

## Content

1. Brain Neurorehabil. 2024 Nov 28;17(3):e25. doi: 10.12786/bn.2024.17.e25. 
eCollection 2024 Nov.

Dysphagia due to Lyme Disease: A Case Report.

Kim P(1), Lim SH(1)(2), Lee JI(1), Namgung HG(1), Kim D(1), Lee EJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, College of 
Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Institute for Basic Medical Science, Catholic Medical Center, The Catholic 
University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Yeouido St. Mary's Hospital, The 
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.

Lyme disease is a multisystem infection that can affect the joints, heart, and 
nervous system when untreated. While it can present with cranial nerve palsy, 
dysphagia is rarely reported. This case highlights a rare instance of dysphagia 
in Lyme disease, typically known for neurological symptoms like facial nerve 
palsy. Despite the absence of erythema migrans or a documented tick bite, the 
patient's facial palsy, hearing loss, vocal cord paralysis, and dysphagia were 
attributed to Lyme disease. With the rising prevalence of Lyme disease, similar 
cases may increase, particularly in endemic regions of North America, Europe, 
and parts of Asia, emphasizing the need for early diagnosis and treatment in 
patients with unexplained dysphagia.

Copyright © 2024. Korean Society for Neurorehabilitation.

DOI: 10.12786/bn.2024.17.e25
PMCID: PMC11621671
PMID: 39649707

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors have no 
potential conflicts of interest to disclose.