---
reference_id: "PMID:8957959"
title: "Intravenous immunoglobulin, splenectomy, and antibiotic prophylaxis in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome."
authors:
- Litzman J
- Jones A
- Hann I
- Chapel H
- Strobel S
- Morgan G
journal: Arch Dis Child
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1136/adc.75.5.436
keywords:
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- Blood Platelets/pathology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Immunoglobulins/blood
- "Immunoglobulins, Intravenous/therapeutic use"
- Infant
- Male
- Platelet Count
- Retrospective Studies
- Splenectomy
- "Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome/blood, immunology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intravenous immunoglobulin, splenectomy, and antibiotic prophylaxis in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome.
**Authors:** Litzman J, Jones A, Hann I, Chapel H, Strobel S, Morgan G
**Journal:** Arch Dis Child (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1136/adc.75.5.436](https://doi.org/10.1136/adc.75.5.436)

## Content

1. Arch Dis Child. 1996 Nov;75(5):436-9. doi: 10.1136/adc.75.5.436.

Intravenous immunoglobulin, splenectomy, and antibiotic prophylaxis in
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome.

Litzman J(1), Jones A, Hann I, Chapel H, Strobel S, Morgan G.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Immunology Unit, University of London.

AIM: To assess the results of supportive treatment with intravenous
immunoglobulin (IVIG) and antibiotic prophylaxis in combination with splenectomy
in patients with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective review of case records of 21 patients from March
1984 to February 1996.
RESULTS: Thrombocytopenia was cured in 14 of 15 patients who had splenectomy,
but it recurred intermittently in three. Mean platelet volume (MPV) was normal
transiently in some patients, but all MPV values were subnormal 8-23 months
after splenectomy. Antibiotic and IVIG prophylaxis may have contributed to the
lack of a detectable increase in the number of severe acute bacterial infections
in the 451 months after splenectomy. Four patients died in 2205 months of
observation before and after splenectomy (median 82, range 16-248): two of
cerebral B cell lymphoma, one of progressive multifocal leucoencephalopathy, and
one with severe chronic chest disease of pneumonia.
CONCLUSION: Adequate supportive treatment with IVIG and antibiotic prophylaxis
together with splenectomy enables good survival and quality of life in the short
and medium term in patients with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Persistence of
infection, bleeding, and vasculitic and allergic symptoms in a significant
minority and the risk of development of lymphoma, however, suggest that bone
marrow transplantation may be indicated if an HLA identical donor is available.

DOI: 10.1136/adc.75.5.436
PMCID: PMC1511781
PMID: 8957959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
