---
reference_id: "PMID:36356723"
title: Odd- and even-numbered medium-chained fatty acids protect against glutathione depletion in very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency.
authors:
- Lund M
- Heaton R
- Hargreaves IP
- Gregersen N
- Olsen RKJ
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Cell Biol Lipids
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2022.159248
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Odd- and even-numbered medium-chained fatty acids protect against glutathione depletion in very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency.
**Authors:** Lund M, Heaton R, Hargreaves IP, Gregersen N, Olsen RKJ
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Cell Biol Lipids (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbalip.2022.159248](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbalip.2022.159248)

## Content

1. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Cell Biol Lipids. 2023 Feb;1868(2):159248. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbalip.2022.159248. Epub 2022 Nov 7.

Odd- and even-numbered medium-chained fatty acids protect against glutathione 
depletion in very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency.

Lund M(1), Heaton R(2), Hargreaves IP(2), Gregersen N(3), Olsen RKJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Research Unit for Molecular Medicine, Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus 
University and Aarhus University Hospital, Palle Juel-Jensens Boulevard 99, 8200 
Aarhus, Denmark. Electronic address: martin.lund@post.au.dk.
(2)School of Pharmacy, Liverpool John Moore University, Byrom Street, Liverpool 
L3 3AF, United Kingdom.
(3)Research Unit for Molecular Medicine, Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus 
University and Aarhus University Hospital, Palle Juel-Jensens Boulevard 99, 8200 
Aarhus, Denmark.
(4)Research Unit for Molecular Medicine, Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus 
University and Aarhus University Hospital, Palle Juel-Jensens Boulevard 99, 8200 
Aarhus, Denmark. Electronic address: rikke.olsen@clin.au.dk.

Recent trials have reported the ability of triheptanoin to improve clinical 
outcomes for the severe symptoms associated with long-chain fatty acid oxidation 
disorders, including very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (VLCAD) deficiency. 
However, the milder myopathic symptoms are still challenging to treat 
satisfactorily. Myopathic pathogenesis is multifactorial, but oxidative stress 
is an important component. We have previously shown that metabolic stress 
increases the oxidative burden in VLCAD-deficient cell lines and can deplete the 
antioxidant glutathione (GSH). We investigated whether medium-chain fatty acids 
provide protection against GSH depletion during metabolic stress in 
VLCAD-deficient fibroblasts. To investigate the effect of differences in 
anaplerotic capacity, we included both even-(octanoate) and odd-numbered 
(heptanoate) medium-chain fatty acids. Overall, we show that modulation of the 
concentration of medium-chain fatty acids in culture media affects levels of GSH 
retained during metabolic stress in VLCAD-deficient cell lines but not in 
controls. Lowered glutamine concentration in the culture media during metabolic 
stress led to GSH depletion and decreased viability in VLCAD deficient cells, 
which could be rescued by both heptanoate and octanoate in a dose-dependent 
manner. Unlike GSH levels, the levels of total thiols increased after metabolic 
stress exposure, the size of this increase was not affected by differences in 
cell culture medium concentrations of glutamine, heptanoate or octanoate. 
Addition of a PPAR agonist further exacerbated stress-related GSH-depletion and 
viability loss, requiring higher concentrations of fatty acids to restore GSH 
levels and cell viability. Both odd- and even-numbered medium-chain fatty acids 
efficiently protect VLCADdeficient cells against metabolic stress-induced 
antioxidant depletion.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2022.159248
PMID: 36356723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: The study was partially funded by 
Ultragenyx Pharmaceutical Inc., CA, USA without influence on project design and 
interpretation of data.