---
reference_id: "PMID:35197628"
title: TDP-43 loss and ALS-risk SNPs drive mis-splicing and depletion of UNC13A.
authors:
- Brown AL
- Wilkins OG
- Keuss MJ
- Kargbo-Hill SE
- Zanovello M
- Lee WC
- Bampton A
- Lee FCY
- Masino L
- Qi YA
- Bryce-Smith S
- Gatt A
- Hallegger M
- Fagegaltier D
- Phatnani H
- NYGC ALS Consortium
- Newcombe J
- Gustavsson EK
- Seddighi S
- Reyes JF
- Coon SL
- Ramos D
- Schiavo G
- Fisher EMC
- Raj T
- Secrier M
- Lashley T
- Ule J
- Buratti E
- Humphrey J
- Ward ME
- Fratta P
journal: Nature
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-04436-3
keywords:
- Alternative Splicing
- "Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/genetics, metabolism"
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Frontotemporal Dementia/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Nerve Tissue Proteins
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide/genetics"
- TDP-43 Proteinopathies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TDP-43 loss and ALS-risk SNPs drive mis-splicing and depletion of UNC13A.
**Authors:** Brown AL, Wilkins OG, Keuss MJ, Kargbo-Hill SE, Zanovello M, Lee WC, Bampton A, Lee FCY, Masino L, Qi YA, Bryce-Smith S, Gatt A, Hallegger M, Fagegaltier D, Phatnani H, NYGC ALS Consortium, Newcombe J, Gustavsson EK, Seddighi S, Reyes JF, Coon SL, Ramos D, Schiavo G, Fisher EMC, Raj T, Secrier M, Lashley T, Ule J, Buratti E, Humphrey J, Ward ME, Fratta P
**Journal:** Nature (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-022-04436-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-04436-3)

## Content

1. Nature. 2022 Mar;603(7899):131-137. doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-04436-3. Epub 2022
 Feb 23.

TDP-43 loss and ALS-risk SNPs drive mis-splicing and depletion of UNC13A.

Brown AL(#)(1), Wilkins OG(#)(1)(2), Keuss MJ(#)(1), Kargbo-Hill SE(#)(3),
Zanovello M(1), Lee WC(1), Bampton A(4)(5), Lee FCY(1)(2), Masino L(2), Qi
YA(6), Bryce-Smith S(1), Gatt A(4)(5), Hallegger M(1)(2), Fagegaltier D(7),
Phatnani H(7); NYGC ALS Consortium; Newcombe J(8), Gustavsson EK(4)(9), Seddighi
S(3)(10), Reyes JF(3), Coon SL(11), Ramos D(3)(6), Schiavo G(1)(12), Fisher
EMC(1), Raj T(13)(14)(15)(16), Secrier M(17), Lashley T(4)(5), Ule J(1)(2)(18),
Buratti E(19), Humphrey J(13)(14)(15)(16), Ward ME(20), Fratta P(21).

Collaborators: Phatnani H, Kwan J, Sareen D, Broach JR, Simmons Z,
Arcila-Londono X, Lee EB, Van Deerlin VM, Shneider NA, Fraenkel E, Ostrow LW,
Baas F, Zaitlen N, Berry JD, Malaspina A, Fratta P, Cox GA, Thompson LM,
Finkbeiner S, Dardiotis E, Miller TM, Chandran S, Pal S, Hornstein E, MacGowan
DJ, Heiman-Patterson T, Hammell MG, Patsopoulos NA, Butovsky O, Dubnau J, Nath
A, Bowser R, Harms M, Aronica E, Poss M, Phillips-Cremins J, Crary J, Atassi N,
Lange DJ, Adams DJ, Stefanis L, Gotkine M, Baloh RH, Babu S, Raj T, Paganoni S,
Shalem O, Smith C, Zhang B, Harris B, Broce I, Drory V, Ravits J, McMillan C,
Menon V, Wu L, Altschuler S, Lerner Y, Sattler R, Van Keuren-Jensen K,
Rozenblatt-Rosen O, Lindblad-Toh K, Nicholson K, Gregersen P, Lee JH, Koks S,
Muljo S.

Author information:
(1)UCL Queen Square Motor Neuron Disease Centre, Department of Neuromuscular
Diseases, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, UCL, London, UK.
(2)The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK.
(3)National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, NIH, Bethesda, MD,
USA.
(4)Queen Square Brain Bank, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, University
College London, London, UK.
(5)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Queen Square Institute of
Neurology, University College London, London, UK.
(6)Center for Alzheimer's and Related Dementias, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(7)Center for Genomics of Neurodegenerative Disease, New York Genome Center
(NYGC), New York, NY, USA.
(8)NeuroResource, Department of Neuroinflammation, UCL Queen Square Institute of
Neurology, London, UK.
(9)Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, Genetics and Genomic Medicine,
University College London, London, UK.
(10)Medical Scientist Training Program, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(11)Molecular Genomics Core, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(12)UK Dementia Research Institute, University College London, London, UK.
(13)Nash Family Department of Neuroscience and Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(14)Ronald M. Loeb Center for Alzheimer's Disease, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(15)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences and Icahn Institute for Data
Science and Genomic Technology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New
York, NY, USA.
(16)Estelle and Daniel Maggin Department of Neurology, Icahn School of Medicine
at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(17)Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, UCL Genetics Institute,
University College London, London, UK.
(18)Department of Molecular Biology and Nanobiotechnology, National Institute of
Chemistry, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(19)Molecular Pathology Lab, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology (ICGEB), Trieste, Italy.
(20)National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, NIH, Bethesda, MD,
USA. wardme@nih.gov.
(21)UCL Queen Square Motor Neuron Disease Centre, Department of Neuromuscular
Diseases, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, UCL, London, UK.
p.fratta@ucl.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Nature. 2024 Jul;631(8020):E7. doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-07577-9.

Comment in
    Nature. 2022 Mar;603(7899):33-34. doi: 10.1038/d41586-022-00383-1.
    Med. 2022 Apr 8;3(4):226-227. doi: 10.1016/j.medj.2022.03.008.
    Trends Genet. 2022 Sep;38(9):889-891. doi: 10.1016/j.tig.2022.06.004.

Variants of UNC13A, a critical gene for synapse function, increase the risk of
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia1-3, two related
neurodegenerative diseases defined by mislocalization of the RNA-binding protein
TDP-434,5. Here we show that TDP-43 depletion induces robust inclusion of a
cryptic exon in UNC13A, resulting in nonsense-mediated decay and loss of UNC13A
protein. Two common intronic UNC13A polymorphisms strongly associated with
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia risk overlap with
TDP-43 binding sites. These polymorphisms potentiate cryptic exon
inclusion, both in cultured cells and in brains and spinal cords from patients
with these conditions. Our findings, which demonstrate a genetic link between
loss of nuclear TDP-43 function and disease, reveal the mechanism by which
UNC13A variants exacerbate the effects of decreased TDP-43 function. They
further provide a promising therapeutic target for TDP-43 proteinopathies.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-022-04436-3
PMCID: PMC8891020
PMID: 35197628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A patent application related to this work has
been filed. The technology described in this work has been protected in the
patent PCT/EP2021/084908 and UK patent 2117758.9 (patent applicant, UCL Business
Ltd and NIH; status pending), in which A.-L.B., O.G.W., M.J.K., S.E.K.-H.,
M.E.W. and P.F. are named as inventors. The other authors declare no competing
interests.
