---
reference_id: "PMID:23125460"
title: Novel KIF7 mutations extend the phenotypic spectrum of acrocallosal syndrome.
authors:
- Putoux A
- Nampoothiri S
- Laurent N
- Cormier-Daire V
- Beales PL
- Schinzel A
- Bartholdi D
- Alby C
- Thomas S
- Elkhartoufi N
- Ichkou A
- Litzler J
- Munnich A
- Encha-Razavi F
- Kannan R
- Faivre L
- Boddaert N
- Rauch A
- Vekemans M
- Attié-Bitach T
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101016
keywords:
- "Acrocallosal Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Agenesis of Corpus Callosum/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Fetus
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Kinesins/genetics
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Polydactyly/diagnosis, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel KIF7 mutations extend the phenotypic spectrum of acrocallosal syndrome.
**Authors:** Putoux A, Nampoothiri S, Laurent N, Cormier-Daire V, Beales PL, Schinzel A, Bartholdi D, Alby C, Thomas S, Elkhartoufi N, Ichkou A, Litzler J, Munnich A, Encha-Razavi F, Kannan R, Faivre L, Boddaert N, Rauch A, Vekemans M, Attié-Bitach T
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101016](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101016)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2012 Nov;49(11):713-20. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101016.

Novel KIF7 mutations extend the phenotypic spectrum of acrocallosal syndrome.

Putoux A(1), Nampoothiri S, Laurent N, Cormier-Daire V, Beales PL, Schinzel A, 
Bartholdi D, Alby C, Thomas S, Elkhartoufi N, Ichkou A, Litzler J, Munnich A, 
Encha-Razavi F, Kannan R, Faivre L, Boddaert N, Rauch A, Vekemans M, 
Attié-Bitach T.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U-781, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Acrocallosal syndrome (ACLS) is a rare recessive disorder 
characterised by corpus callosum agenesis or hypoplasia, craniofacial 
dysmorphism, duplication of the hallux, postaxial polydactyly, and severe mental 
retardation. Recently, we identified mutations in KIF7, a key component of the 
Sonic hedgehog pathway, as being responsible for this syndrome.
METHODS: We sequenced KIF7 in five suspected ACLS cases, one fetus and four 
patients, based on facial dysmorphism and brain anomalies.
RESULTS: Seven mutations were identified at the KIF7 locus in these five cases, 
six of which are novel. We describe the first four compound heterozygous cases. 
In all patients, the diagnosis was suspected based on the craniofacial features, 
despite the absence of corpus callosum anomaly in one and of polydactyly in 
another. Hallux duplication was absent in 4/5 cases.
CONCLUSIONS: These results show that ACLS has a variable expressivity and can be 
diagnosed even in the absence of the two major features, namely polydactyly or 
agenesis or hypoplasia of the corpus callosum. Facial dysmorphism with 
hypertelorism and prominent forehead in all the cases, as well as vermis 
dysgenesis with brainstem anomalies (molar tooth sign), strongly indicated the 
diagnosis. KIF7 should be tested in less typical patients in whom craniofacial 
features are suggestive of ACLS.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101016
PMID: 23125460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]