---
reference_id: "PMID:26691894"
title: A relatively mild skeletal ciliopathy phenotype consistent with cranioectodermal dysplasia is associated with a homozygous nonsynonymous mutation in WDR35.
authors:
- Smith C
- Lamont RE
- Wade A
- Bernier FP
- Parboosingh JS
- Innes AM
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37514
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Bone and Bones/abnormalities
- "Craniosynostoses/diagnosis, genetics"
- Cytoskeletal Proteins
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Ellis-Van Creveld Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- Hedgehog Proteins
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Male
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Proteins/genetics
- "Skeleton/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A relatively mild skeletal ciliopathy phenotype consistent with cranioectodermal dysplasia is associated with a homozygous nonsynonymous mutation in WDR35.
**Authors:** Smith C, Lamont RE, Wade A, Bernier FP, Parboosingh JS, Innes AM
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.37514](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.37514)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2016 Mar;170(3):760-5. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37514. Epub 2015 
Dec 22.

A relatively mild skeletal ciliopathy phenotype consistent with cranioectodermal 
dysplasia is associated with a homozygous nonsynonymous mutation in WDR35.

Smith C(1), Lamont RE(1)(2), Wade A(3), Bernier FP(1)(2), Parboosingh JS(1)(2), 
Innes AM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Cumming School of Medicine, University of 
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Alberta Children's Hospital Research Institute, Calgary, Albeta, Canada.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

Ciliopathies are a class of clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorders 
characterized by deficits of the primary cilium, an important organelle for 
cellular signaling and development. Here we report on a patient from a 
consanguineous family presenting with renal cysts, short stature, distinctive 
facial features, missing teeth, brachydactyly, narrow chest, and abnormal ribs. 
His phenotype resembled a skeletal ciliopathy and the initial clinical 
differential diagnosis included Jeune thoracic dystrophy and cranioectodermal 
dysplasia. Due to the presence of parental consanguinity, a homozygous recessive 
mutation was the suspected cause and homozygosity mapping was used to direct 
candidate gene sequencing. WDR35, an intraflagellar transport protein previously 
associated with cranioectodermal dysplasia, the more severe short rib 
polydactyly syndrome type V and recently Ellis van Creveld syndrome, is present 
within a region of homozygosity and sequencing of all coding exons identified a 
novel homozygous nonsynonymous variant, p.Trp1153Cys. This variant affects a 
highly conserved tryptophan residue, is predicted to be deleterious, and is the 
most distal mutation yet reported in WDR35. This case expands the spectrum of 
phenotypes caused by WDR35 mutations, which we review herein.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37514
PMID: 26691894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]