---
reference_id: "PMID:22907560"
title: "Preserved fertility in a patient with a 46,XY disorder of sex development due to a new heterozygous mutation in the NR5A1/SF-1 gene: evidence of 46,XY and 46,XX gonadal dysgenesis phenotype variability in multiple members of an affected kindred."
authors:
- Ciaccio M
- Costanzo M
- Guercio G
- De Dona V
- Marino R
- Ramirez PC
- Galeano J
- Warman DM
- Berensztein E
- Saraco N
- Baquedano MS
- Chaler E
- Maceiras M
- Lazzatti JM
- Rivarola MA
- Belgorosky A
journal: Horm Res Paediatr
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1159/000338346
keywords:
- Adult
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Disorder of Sex Development, 46,XY/genetics"
- Female
- Fertility
- "Gonadal Dysgenesis, 46,XX/genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Steroidogenic Factor 1/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Preserved fertility in a patient with a 46,XY disorder of sex development due to a new heterozygous mutation in the NR5A1/SF-1 gene: evidence of 46,XY and 46,XX gonadal dysgenesis phenotype variability in multiple members of an affected kindred.
**Authors:** Ciaccio M, Costanzo M, Guercio G, De Dona V, Marino R, Ramirez PC, Galeano J, Warman DM, Berensztein E, Saraco N, Baquedano MS, Chaler E, Maceiras M, Lazzatti JM, Rivarola MA, Belgorosky A
**Journal:** Horm Res Paediatr (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000338346](https://doi.org/10.1159/000338346)

## Content

1. Horm Res Paediatr. 2012;78(2):119-26. doi: 10.1159/000338346. Epub 2012 Aug
14.

Preserved fertility in a patient with a 46,XY disorder of sex development due to
a new heterozygous mutation in the NR5A1/SF-1 gene: evidence of 46,XY and 46,XX
gonadal dysgenesis phenotype variability in multiple members of an affected
kindred.

Ciaccio M(1), Costanzo M, Guercio G, De Dona V, Marino R, Ramirez PC, Galeano J,
Warman DM, Berensztein E, Saraco N, Baquedano MS, Chaler E, Maceiras M, Lazzatti
JM, Rivarola MA, Belgorosky A.

Author information:
(1)Endocrinology Service, Hospital de Pediatría Garrahan, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

In humans, steroidogenic factor 1 (NR5A1/SF-1) mutations have been reported to
cause gonadal dysgenesis, with or without adrenal failure, in both 46,XY and
46,XX individuals. We have previously reported extreme within-family variability
in affected 46,XY patients. Even though low ovarian reserve with preserved
fertility has been reported in females harboring NR5A1 gene mutations, fertility
has only been observed in one reported case in affected 46,XY individuals. A
kindred with multiple affected members presenting gonadal dysgenesis was
studied. Four 46,XY individuals presented severe hypospadias at birth, one of
them associated with micropenis and cryptorchidism. The other 3 developed
spontaneous male puberty, and 1 has fathered 5 children. Four 46,XX patients
presented premature ovarian failure (one of them was not available for the
study) or high follicle-stimulating hormone levels. Mutational analysis of the
NR5A1 gene revealed a novel heterozygous mutation, c.938G→A, predicted to cause
a p.Arg313Hys amino acid change. A highly conserved amino acid of the
ligand-binding domain of the mature protein is affected, predicting abnormal
protein function. We confirm that preserved fertility can be observed in
patients with a 46,XY disorder of sex development due to heterozygous mutations
in the NR5A1 gene.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000338346
PMID: 22907560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
