---
reference_id: "PMID:21566415"
title: Diagnosis and management of urothelial carcinoma of the bladder.
authors:
- Tanaka MF
- Sonpavde G
journal: Postgrad Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.3810/pgm.2011.05.2283
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and management of urothelial carcinoma of the bladder.
**Authors:** Tanaka MF, Sonpavde G
**Journal:** Postgrad Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.3810/pgm.2011.05.2283](https://doi.org/10.3810/pgm.2011.05.2283)

## Content

1. Postgrad Med. 2011 May;123(3):43-55. doi: 10.3810/pgm.2011.05.2283.

Diagnosis and management of urothelial carcinoma of the bladder.

Tanaka MF(1), Sonpavde G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Medical Oncology, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

Bladder carcinoma is the fourth most common cancer in men and the ninth most 
common cancer in women in the United States. In 2010, approximately 70,000 new 
cases of bladder carcinoma (52,000 in men and 18000 in women) and approximately 
14000 deaths were expected in the United States. More than 90% of bladder 
carcinomas are classified as urothelial carcinoma (UC), which arise from the 
urothelium. This epithelium, also known as transitional cell epithelium, lines 
the urinary tract, which extends from the renal pelvis through the ureters, 
bladder, and urethra. Urothelial carcinoma of the bladder may present as a 
non-muscle-invasive, muscle-invasive, or metastatic malignancy. In noninvasive 
tumors, treatment by cystoscopic resection and intravesical therapy is directed 
at reducing recurrences and preventing progression to a more advanced stage. The 
goal in invasive tumors is a combination of radical cystectomy and perioperative 
cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy to enhance outcomes by reducing the 
high risk of distant recurrences. Outcomes in metastatic UC are dismal with 
current cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy, and progressive disease after 
frontline chemotherapy is characterized by a short survival. Therefore, clinical 
trials should be the focus for metastatic UC. It is important for primary care 
physicians to recognize the early signs and symptoms of bladder carcinoma, 
initiate the proper work-up, and refer promptly to a urologist to evaluate 
suspicious signs and symptoms.

DOI: 10.3810/pgm.2011.05.2283
PMID: 21566415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]