---
reference_id: "PMID:15044383"
title: "Aprataxin, a novel protein that protects against genotoxic stress."
authors:
- Gueven N
- Becherel OJ
- Kijas AW
- Chen P
- Howe O
- Rudolph JH
- Gatti R
- Date H
- Onodera O
- Taucher-Scholz G
- Lavin MF
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddh122
keywords:
- Apraxias/genetics
- Ataxia/genetics
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Culture Techniques
- Chromatin/metabolism
- DNA Damage
- DNA Repair
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/analysis, genetics, metabolism, physiology"
- Fibroblasts/ultrastructure
- Humans
- Hydrogen Peroxide/pharmacology
- Mesylates/pharmacology
- Mitomycin/pharmacology
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Nuclear Localization Signals/genetics
- "Nuclear Proteins/analysis, genetics, physiology"
- Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerases/metabolism
- Protein Binding
- Protein Interaction Mapping
- "Radiation, Ionizing"
- Syndrome
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/metabolism
- X-ray Repair Cross Complementing Protein 1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aprataxin, a novel protein that protects against genotoxic stress.
**Authors:** Gueven N, Becherel OJ, Kijas AW, Chen P, Howe O, Rudolph JH, Gatti R, Date H, Onodera O, Taucher-Scholz G, Lavin MF
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddh122](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddh122)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2004 May 15;13(10):1081-93. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddh122. Epub 2004 
Mar 25.

Aprataxin, a novel protein that protects against genotoxic stress.

Gueven N(1), Becherel OJ, Kijas AW, Chen P, Howe O, Rudolph JH, Gatti R, Date H, 
Onodera O, Taucher-Scholz G, Lavin MF.

Author information:
(1)Radiation Biology and Oncology, The Queensland Institute of Medical Research, 
Herston, Australia. nurig@qimr.edu.au

Ataxia-oculomotor apraxia (AOA1) is a neurological disorder with symptoms that 
overlap those of ataxia-telangiectasia, a syndrome characterized by abnormal 
responses to double-strand DNA breaks and genome instability. The gene mutated 
in AOA1, APTX, is predicted to code for a protein called aprataxin that contains 
domains of homology with proteins involved in DNA damage signalling and repair. 
We demonstrate that aprataxin is a nuclear protein, present in both the 
nucleoplasm and the nucleolus. Mutations in the APTX gene destabilize the 
aprataxin protein, and fusion constructs of enhanced green fluorescent protein 
and aprataxin, representing deletions of putative functional domains, generate 
highly unstable products. Cells from AOA1 patients are characterized by enhanced 
sensitivity to agents that cause single-strand breaks in DNA but there is no 
evidence for a gross defect in single-strand break repair. Sensitivity to 
hydrogen peroxide and the resulting genome instability are corrected by 
transfection with full-length aprataxin cDNA. We also demonstrate that aprataxin 
interacts with the repair proteins XRCC1, PARP-1 and p53 and that it 
co-localizes with XRCC1 along charged particle tracks on chromatin. These 
results demonstrate that aprataxin influences the cellular response to genotoxic 
stress very likely by its capacity to interact with a number of proteins 
involved in DNA repair.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddh122
PMID: 15044383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]