---
reference_id: "PMID:27076762"
title: Multi-locus genetic risk score predicts risk for Crohn's disease in Slovenian population.
authors:
- Zupančič K
- Skok K
- Repnik K
- Weersma RK
- Potočnik U
- Skok P
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v22.i14.3777
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multi-locus genetic risk score predicts risk for Crohn's disease in Slovenian population.
**Authors:** Zupančič K, Skok K, Repnik K, Weersma RK, Potočnik U, Skok P
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.v22.i14.3777](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v22.i14.3777)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2016 Apr 14;22(14):3777-84. doi: 
10.3748/wjg.v22.i14.3777.

Multi-locus genetic risk score predicts risk for Crohn's disease in Slovenian 
population.

Zupančič K(1), Skok K(1), Repnik K(1), Weersma RK(1), Potočnik U(1), Skok P(1).

Author information:
(1)Katarina Zupančič, Kristijan Skok, Katja Repnik, Uroš Potočnik, Center for 
Human Genetics and Pharmacogenomics, Medical Faculty of Maribor, University of 
Maribor, 2000 Maribor, Slovenia.

AIM: To develop a risk model for Crohn's disease (CD) based on homogeneous 
population.
METHODS: In our study were included 160 CD patients and 209 healthy individuals 
from Slovenia. The association study was performed for 112 single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs). We generated genetic risk scores (GRS) based on the number 
of risk alleles using weighted additive model. Discriminatory accuracy was 
measured by area under ROC curve (AUC). For risk evaluation, we divided 
individuals according to positive and negative likelihood ratios (LR) of a test, 
with LR > 5 for high risk group and LR < 0.20 for low risk group.
RESULTS: The highest accuracy, AUC of 0.78 was achieved with GRS combining 33 
SNPs with optimal sensitivity and specificity of 75.0% and 72.7%, respectively. 
Individuals with the highest risk (GRS > 5.54) showed significantly increased 
odds of developing CD (OR = 26.65, 95%CI: 11.25-63.15) compared to the 
individuals with the lowest risk (GRS < 4.57) which is a considerably greater 
risk captured than in one SNP with the highest effect size (OR = 3.24). When 
more than 33 SNPs were included in GRS, discriminatory ability was not improved 
significantly; AUC of all 74 SNPs was 0.76.
CONCLUSION: The authors proved the possibility of building accurate genetic risk 
score based on 33 risk variants on Slovenian CD patients which may serve as a 
screening tool in the targeted population.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v22.i14.3777
PMCID: PMC4814740
PMID: 27076762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]