---
reference_id: "PMID:39353037"
title: A human DCC variant causing mirror movement disorder reveals that the WAVE regulatory complex mediates axon guidance by netrin-1-DCC.
authors:
- Chaudhari K
- Zhang K
- Yam PT
- Zang Y
- Kramer DA
- Gagnon S
- Schlienger S
- Calabretta S
- Michaud JF
- Collins M
- Wang J
- Srour M
- Chen B
- Charron F
- Bashaw GJ
journal: Sci Signal
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1126/scisignal.adk2345
keywords:
- "Netrin-1/metabolism, genetics"
- "DCC Receptor/metabolism, genetics"
- Animals
- Humans
- Axon Guidance/genetics
- "Drosophila Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- Rats
- "Tumor Suppressor Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- "Axons/metabolism, physiology"
- "Receptors, Cell Surface/metabolism, genetics"
- Signal Transduction
- "Drosophila melanogaster/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- Neurons/metabolism
- HEK293 Cells
- Netrin Receptors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A human DCC variant causing mirror movement disorder reveals that the WAVE regulatory complex mediates axon guidance by netrin-1-DCC.
**Authors:** Chaudhari K, Zhang K, Yam PT, Zang Y, Kramer DA, Gagnon S, Schlienger S, Calabretta S, Michaud JF, Collins M, Wang J, Srour M, Chen B, Charron F, Bashaw GJ
**Journal:** Sci Signal (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scisignal.adk2345](https://doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.adk2345)

## Content

1. Sci Signal. 2024 Oct;17(856):eadk2345. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.adk2345. Epub
2024  Oct 1.

A human DCC variant causing mirror movement disorder reveals that the WAVE 
regulatory complex mediates axon guidance by netrin-1-DCC.

Chaudhari K(1), Zhang K(2)(3), Yam PT(2), Zang Y(1), Kramer DA(4), Gagnon S(1), 
Schlienger S(2)(5), Calabretta S(2), Michaud JF(2), Collins M(6), Wang J(7), 
Srour M(6)(8)(9), Chen B(4), Charron F(2)(3)(5)(10), Bashaw GJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(2)Montreal Clinical Research Institute (IRCM), Montreal, QC H2W 1R7, Canada.
(3)Integrated Program in Neuroscience, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 2B4, 
Canada.
(4)Roy J. Carver Department of Biochemistry, Biophysics, and Molecular Biology, 
Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.
(5)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Division of Experimental Medicine, 
McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 0G4, Canada.
(6)McGill University Health Center Research Institute, Montreal, QC H4A 3J1, 
Canada.
(7)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, 
PA 15261, USA.
(8)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 
2B4, Canada.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Neurology, McGill University, 
Montreal, QC H4A 3J1, Canada.
(10)Department of Medicine, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC H3T 1J4, 
Canada.

The axon guidance cue netrin-1 signals through its receptor DCC (deleted in 
colorectal cancer) to attract commissural axons to the midline. Variants in DCC 
are frequently associated with congenital mirror movements (CMMs). A 
CMM-associated variant in the cytoplasmic tail of DCC is located in a conserved 
motif predicted to bind to a regulator of actin dynamics called the WAVE 
(Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein-family verprolin homologous protein) 
regulatory complex (WRC). Here, we explored how this variant affects DCC 
function and may contribute to CMM. We found that a conserved WRC-interacting 
receptor sequence (WIRS) motif in the cytoplasmic tail of DCC mediated the 
interaction between DCC and the WRC. This interaction was required for 
netrin-1-mediated axon guidance in cultured rodent commissural neurons. 
Furthermore, the WIRS motif of Fra, the Drosophila DCC ortholog, was required 
for attractive signaling in vivo at the Drosophila midline. The CMM-associated 
R1343H variant of DCC, which altered the WIRS motif, prevented the DCC-WRC 
interaction and impaired axon guidance in cultured commissural neurons and in 
Drosophila. The findings reveal the WRC as a pivotal component of netrin-1-DCC 
signaling and uncover a molecular mechanism explaining how a human genetic 
variant in the cytoplasmic tail of DCC may lead to CMM.

DOI: 10.1126/scisignal.adk2345
PMCID: PMC11568466
PMID: 39353037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]