---
reference_id: "PMID:34995917"
title: Subunit-specific autoantibodies in autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy.
authors:
- Urriola N
- Blazek K
- Adelstein S
journal: J Neuroimmunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2021.577805
keywords:
- "Autoantibodies/analysis, immunology"
- Autoantigens/immunology
- "Autoimmune Diseases of the Nervous System/diagnosis, immunology"
- "Autonomic Nervous System Diseases/diagnosis, immunology"
- Humans
- Immunoassay/methods
- "Receptors, Cholinergic/immunology"
- Sensitivity and Specificity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Subunit-specific autoantibodies in autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy.
**Authors:** Urriola N, Blazek K, Adelstein S
**Journal:** J Neuroimmunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jneuroim.2021.577805](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroim.2021.577805)

## Content

1. J Neuroimmunol. 2022 Feb 15;363:577805. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2021.577805. 
Epub 2022 Jan 2.

Subunit-specific autoantibodies in autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy.

Urriola N(1), Blazek K(2), Adelstein S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology and Allergy, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, 
Sydney, Australia; Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, 
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. Electronic address: 
nicolas.urriola@health.nsw.gov.au.
(2)School of Population Health, UNSW, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(3)Department of Clinical Immunology and Allergy, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, 
Sydney, Australia; Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, 
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; Central Sydney Immunopathology Laboratory, 
Pathology East, NSW Health Pathology, Australia.

Autoimmune Autonomic Ganglionopathy (AAG) is a disorder that causes autonomic 
failure and is associated with alpha3-ganglionic acetylcholine-receptor (gnACHR) 
antibodies. Assays that detect antibodies to whole gnACHR or subunits are 
available. We compared in-house subunit-specific immunoassays using 
bacterially-expressed alpha3 and beta4 subunits against an immunomodulation 
assay to detect antibodies in patients with AAG or control groups in a novel 
2-step clinical-characteristic unblinding protocol. Only 1/8 patients with 
seropositive-AAG had subunit-specific antibodies, with sensitivity, specificity, 
false-negative and positive rates of 12.5, 85.2, 78.6 and 13.4% respectively. 
Subunit-specific antibody-derived false-positive results can lead to 
misdiagnosis, as autonomic failure is not specific to AAG.

Crown Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2021.577805
PMID: 34995917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]