---
reference_id: "PMID:15599928"
title: Post-poliomyelitis syndrome.
authors:
- Trojan DA
- Cashman NR
journal: Muscle Nerve
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1002/mus.20259
keywords:
- Humans
- "Muscle Weakness/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
- "Postpoliomyelitis Syndrome/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Post-poliomyelitis syndrome.
**Authors:** Trojan DA, Cashman NR
**Journal:** Muscle Nerve (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mus.20259](https://doi.org/10.1002/mus.20259)

## Content

1. Muscle Nerve. 2005 Jan;31(1):6-19. doi: 10.1002/mus.20259.

Post-poliomyelitis syndrome.

Trojan DA(1), Cashman NR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Montreal Neurological Institute, 
McGill University, 3801 rue Université, Montréal, Québec H3A 2B4, Canada. 
daria.trojan@mcgill.ca <daria.trojan@mcgill.ca>

Post-poliomyelitis syndrome (PPS) is a common neurological disorder that occurs 
in a large proportion of individuals who have recovered from paralytic 
poliomyelitis. The main clinical features are new weakness, muscular 
fatigability, general fatigue, and pain. The primary criteria necessary for the 
diagnosis of PPS are a history of paralytic poliomyelitis, partial or complete 
recovery of neurological function followed by a period of stability (usually 
several decades), persistent new muscle weakness or abnormal muscle 
fatigability, and the exclusion of other causes of new symptoms. The cause of 
PPS remains unclear, but is likely due to a distal degeneration of enlarged 
post-poliomyelitis motor units. Contributing factors to PPS may be aging (with 
motor neuron loss), overuse, and disuse. PPS is usually a slowly progressive 
neuromuscular disease. Although there is no specific treatment for PPS, an 
interdisciplinary management program can be useful in controlling symptoms.

(c) 2005 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mus.20259
PMID: 15599928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]