---
reference_id: "PMID:27577098"
title: "Current and experimental treatments of Parkinson disease: A guide for neuroscientists."
authors:
- Oertel W
- Schulz JB
journal: J Neurochem
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1111/jnc.13750
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current and experimental treatments of Parkinson disease: A guide for neuroscientists.
**Authors:** Oertel W, Schulz JB
**Journal:** J Neurochem (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jnc.13750](https://doi.org/10.1111/jnc.13750)

## Content

1. J Neurochem. 2016 Oct;139 Suppl 1:325-337. doi: 10.1111/jnc.13750. Epub 2016
Aug  30.

Current and experimental treatments of Parkinson disease: A guide for 
neuroscientists.

Oertel W(1)(2), Schulz JB(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hertie-Senior Research Professorship, Philipps 
University Marburg, Baldingerstrasse, Marburg, Germany. 
oertelw@med.uni-marburg.de.
(2)Institute for Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Institute for Health and Environment, 
München, Germany. oertelw@med.uni-marburg.de.
(3)Department of Neurology, University Hospital, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, 
Germany.
(4)JARA-BRAIN Institute Molecular Neuroscience and Neuroimaging, 
Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH and RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.

Over a period of more than 50 years, the symptomatic treatment of the motor 
symptoms of Parkinson disease (PD) has been optimized using pharmacotherapy, 
deep brain stimulation, and physiotherapy. The arsenal of pharmacotherapies 
includes L-Dopa, several dopamine agonists, inhibitors of monoamine oxidase 
(MAO)-B and catechol-o-methyltransferase (COMT), and amantadine. In the later 
course of the disease, motor complications occur, at which stage different oral 
formulations of L-Dopa or dopamine agonists with long half-life, a transdermal 
application or parenteral pumps for continuous drug supply can be subscribed. 
Alternatively, the patient is offered deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic 
nucleus (STN) or the internal part of the globus pallidus (GPi). For a more 
efficacious treatment of motor complications, new formulations of L-Dopa, 
dopamine agonists, and amantadine as well as new MAO-B and COMT inhibitors are 
currently tested in clinical trials, and some of them already yielding positive 
results in phase 3 trials. In addition, non-dopaminergic agents have been tested 
in the early clinical phase for the treatment of motor fluctuations and 
dyskinesia, including adenosine A2A antagonists (istradefylline, preladenant, 
and tozadenant) and modulators of the metabolic glutamate receptor 5 (mGluR5 - 
mavoglurant) and serotonin (eltoprazine) receptors. Recent clinical trials 
testing coenzyme Q10, the dopamine agonist pramipexole, creatine monohydrate, 
pioglitazone, or AAV-mediated gene therapy aimed at increasing expression of 
neurturin, did not prove efficacious. Treatment with nicotine, caffeine, inosine 
(a precursor of urate), and isradipine (a dihydropyridine calcium channel 
blocker), as well as active and passive immunization against α-synuclein and 
inhibitors or modulators of α-synuclein-aggregation are currently studied in 
clinical trials. However, to date, no disease-modifying treatment is available. 
We here review the current status of treatment options for motor and non-motor 
symptoms, and discuss current investigative strategies for disease modification. 
This review provides basic insights, mainly addressing basic scientists and 
non-specialists. It stresses the need to intensify therapeutic PD research and 
points out reasons why the translation of basic research to disease-modifying 
therapies has been unsuccessful so far. The symptomatic treatment of the motor 
symptoms of Parkinson disease (PD) has been constantly optimized using 
pharmacotherapy (L-Dopa, several dopamine agonists, inhibitors of monoamine 
oxidase (MAO)-B and catechol-o-methyltransferase (COMT), and amantadine), deep 
brain stimulation, and physiotherapy. For a more efficacious treatment of motor 
complications, new formulations of L-Dopa, dopamine agonists, and amantadine as 
well as new MAO-B and COMT inhibitors are currently tested in clinical trials. 
Non-dopaminergic agents have been tested in the early clinical phase for the 
treatment of motor fluctuations and dyskinesia. Recent clinical trials testing 
coenzyme Q10, the dopamine agonist pramipexole, creatine monohydrate, 
pioglitazone, or AAV-mediated gene therapy aimed at increasing expression of 
neurturin, did not prove efficacious. Treatment with nicotine, caffeine, and 
isradipine - a dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker - as well as active and 
passive immunization against α-synuclein and inhibitors of 
α-synuclein-aggregation are currently studied in clinical trials. However, to 
date, no disease-modifying treatment is available for PD. We here review the 
current status of treatment options and investigative strategies for both motor 
and non-motor symptoms. This review stresses the need to intensify therapeutic 
PD research and points out reasons why the translation of basic research to 
disease-modifying therapies has been unsuccessful so far. This article is part 
of a special issue on Parkinson disease.

© 2016 International Society for Neurochemistry.

DOI: 10.1111/jnc.13750
PMID: 27577098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]