---
reference_id: "PMID:26586198"
title: Overview of current surgical strategies for aortic disease in patients with Marfan syndrome.
authors:
- Miyahara S
- Okita Y
journal: Surg Today
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s00595-015-1278-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Overview of current surgical strategies for aortic disease in patients with Marfan syndrome.
**Authors:** Miyahara S, Okita Y
**Journal:** Surg Today (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00595-015-1278-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00595-015-1278-0)

## Content

1. Surg Today. 2016 Sep;46(9):1006-18. doi: 10.1007/s00595-015-1278-0. Epub 2015 
Nov 19.

Overview of current surgical strategies for aortic disease in patients with 
Marfan syndrome.

Miyahara S(1), Okita Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Surgery, Department Surgery, Kobe University 
Graduate School of Medicine, 7-5-1 Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe, 650-0017, Japan.
(2)Division of Cardiovascular Surgery, Department Surgery, Kobe University 
Graduate School of Medicine, 7-5-1 Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe, 650-0017, Japan. 
yokita@med.kobe-u.ac.jp.

Marfan syndrome is a heritable, systemic disorder of the connective tissue with 
a high penetrance, named after Dr. Antoine Marfan. The most clinically important 
manifestations of this syndrome are cardiovascular pathologies which cause 
life-threatening events, such as acute aortic dissections, aortic rupture and 
regurgitation of the aortic valve or other artrioventricular valves leading to 
heart failure. These events play important roles in the life expectancy of 
patients with this disorder, especially prior to the development of effective 
surgical approaches for proximal ascending aortic disease. To prevent such 
catastrophic aortic events, a lower threshold has been recommended for 
prophylactic interventions on the aortic root. After prophylactic root 
replacement, disease in the aorta beyond the root and distal to the arch remains 
a cause for concern. Multiple surgeries are required throughout a patient's 
lifetime that can be problematic due to distal lesions complicated by 
dissection. Many controversies in surgical strategies remain, such as 
endovascular repair, to manage such complex cases. This review examines the 
trends in surgical strategies for the treatment of cardiovascular disease in 
patients with Marfan syndrome, and current perspectives in this field.

DOI: 10.1007/s00595-015-1278-0
PMID: 26586198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]