---
reference_id: "PMID:26185088"
title: "The Roles of Inflammation, Nutrient Availability and the Commensal Microbiota in Enteric Pathogen Infection."
authors:
- Stecher B
journal: Microbiol Spectr
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1128/microbiolspec.MBP-0008-2014
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Roles of Inflammation, Nutrient Availability and the Commensal Microbiota in Enteric Pathogen Infection.
**Authors:** Stecher B
**Journal:** Microbiol Spectr (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1128/microbiolspec.MBP-0008-2014](https://doi.org/10.1128/microbiolspec.MBP-0008-2014)

## Content

1. Microbiol Spectr. 2015 Jun;3(3). doi: 10.1128/microbiolspec.MBP-0008-2014.

The Roles of Inflammation, Nutrient Availability and the Commensal Microbiota in 
Enteric Pathogen Infection.

Stecher B(1).

Author information:
(1)Max von Pettenkofer Institute, LMU Munich, Pettenkoferstr. 9a, 80336 Munich, 
Germany.

The healthy human intestine is colonized by as many as 1014 bacteria belonging 
to more than 500 different species forming a microbial ecosystem of unsurpassed 
diversity, termed the microbiota. The microbiota's various bacterial members 
engage in a physiological network of cooperation and competition within several 
layers of complexity. Within the last 10 years, technological progress in the 
field of next-generation sequencing technologies has tremendously advanced our 
understanding of the wide variety of physiological and pathological processes 
that are influenced by the commensal microbiota (1, 2). An increasing number of 
human disease conditions, such as inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD), type 2 
diabetes, obesity, allergies and colorectal cancer are linked with altered 
microbiota composition (3). Moreover, a clearer picture is emerging of the 
composition of the human microbiota in healthy individuals, its variability over 
time and between different persons and how the microbiota is shaped by 
environmental factors (i.e., diet) and the host's genetic background (4). A 
general feature of a normal, healthy gut microbiota can generate conditions in 
the gut that disfavor colonization of enteric pathogens. This is termed 
colonization-resistance (CR). Upon disturbance of the microbiota, CR can be 
transiently disrupted, and pathogens can gain the opportunity to grow to high 
levels. This disruption can be caused by exposure to antibiotics (5, 6), changes 
in diet (7, 8), application of probiotics and drugs (9), and a variety of 
diseases (3). Breakdown of CR can boost colonization by intrinsic pathogens or 
increase susceptibility to infections (10). One consequence of pathogen 
expansion is the triggering of inflammatory host responses and pathogen-mediated 
disease. Interestingly, human enteric pathogens are part of a small group of 
bacterial families that belong to the Proteobacteria: the Enterobacteriaceae (E. 
coli, Yersinia spp., Salmonella spp., Shigella spp.), the Vibrionaceae (Vibrio 
cholerae) and the Campylobacteriaceae (Campylobacter spp.). In general, members 
of these families (be it commensals or pathogens) only constitute a minority of 
the intestinal microbiota. However, proteobacterial "blooms" are a 
characteristic trait of an abnormal microbiota such as in the course of 
antibiotic therapy, dietary changes or inflammation (11). It has become clear 
that the gut microbiota not only plays a major role in priming and regulating 
mucosal and systemic immunity, but that the immune system also contributes to 
host control over microbiota composition. These two ways of mutual communication 
between the microbiota and the immune system were coined as "outside-in" and 
"inside-out," respectively (12). The significance of those interactions for 
human health is particularly evident in Crohn's disease (CD) and Ulcerative 
Colitis (UC). The symptoms of these recurrent, chronic types of gut inflammation 
are caused by an excessive immune response against one's own commensal 
microbiota (13). It is assumed that deregulated immune responses can be caused 
by a genetic predisposition, leading to, for example, the impairment of 
intestinal barrier function or disruption of mucosal T-cell homeostasis. In CD 
or UC patients, an abnormally composed microbiota, referred to as "dysbiosis," 
is commonly observed (discussed later). This is often characterized by an 
increased relative abundance of facultative anaerobic bacteria (e.g., 
Enterobacteriaeceae, Bacilli) and, at the same time, depletion of obligate 
anaerobic bacteria of the classes Bacteroidia and Clostridia. So far, it is 
unclear whether dysbiosis is a cause or a consequence of inflammatory bowel 
disease (IBD). In fact, both scenarios are equally conceivable. Recent work 
suggests that inflammatory immune responses in the gut (both IBD and 
pathogen-induced) can alter the gut luminal milieu in a way that favors 
dysbiosis (14). In this chapter, I present a survey on our current state of 
understanding of the characteristics and mechanisms underlying gut 
inflammation-associated dysbiosis. The role of dysbiosis in enteric infections 
and human IBD is discussed. In addition, I will focus on competition of enteric 
pathogens and the gut microbiota in the inflamed gut and the role of dysbiotic 
microbiota alterations (e.g., "Enterobacterial blooms" (11)) for the evolution 
of pathogenicity.

DOI: 10.1128/microbiolspec.MBP-0008-2014
PMID: 26185088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]