---
reference_id: "PMID:31034465"
title: "Mutations in PIK3C2A cause syndromic short stature, skeletal abnormalities, and cataracts associated with ciliary dysfunction."
authors:
- Tiosano D
- Baris HN
- Chen A
- Hitzert MM
- Schueler M
- Gulluni F
- Wiesener A
- Bergua A
- Mory A
- Copeland B
- Gleeson JG
- Rump P
- van Meer H
- Sival DA
- Haucke V
- Kriwinsky J
- Knaup KX
- Reis A
- Hauer NN
- Hirsch E
- Roepman R
- Pfundt R
- Thiel CT
- Wiesener MS
- Aslanyan MG
- Buchner DA
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008088
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/genetics"
- Cataract/genetics
- Child
- Ciliary Motility Disorders/genetics
- Consanguinity
- Dwarfism/genetics
- Female
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in PIK3C2A cause syndromic short stature, skeletal abnormalities, and cataracts associated with ciliary dysfunction.
**Authors:** Tiosano D, Baris HN, Chen A, Hitzert MM, Schueler M, Gulluni F, Wiesener A, Bergua A, Mory A, Copeland B, Gleeson JG, Rump P, van Meer H, Sival DA, Haucke V, Kriwinsky J, Knaup KX, Reis A, Hauer NN, Hirsch E, Roepman R, Pfundt R, Thiel CT, Wiesener MS, Aslanyan MG, Buchner DA
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1008088](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1008088)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2019 Apr 29;15(4):e1008088. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008088. 
eCollection 2019 Apr.

Mutations in PIK3C2A cause syndromic short stature, skeletal abnormalities, and 
cataracts associated with ciliary dysfunction.

Tiosano D(1)(2), Baris HN(2)(3), Chen A(4), Hitzert MM(5), Schueler M(6), 
Gulluni F(7), Wiesener A(8), Bergua A(9), Mory A(3), Copeland B(10), Gleeson 
JG(10)(11), Rump P(5), van Meer H(12), Sival DA(12), Haucke V(13), Kriwinsky 
J(14), Knaup KX(6), Reis A(8), Hauer NN(8), Hirsch E(7), Roepman R(15), Pfundt 
R(15), Thiel CT(8), Wiesener MS(6), Aslanyan MG(15), Buchner DA(4)(14)(16).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Ruth Children's Hospital, Rambam Medical 
Center, Haifa, Israel.
(2)Rappaport Family Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of 
Technology, Haifa, Israel.
(3)The Genetics Institute, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, 
United States of America.
(5)Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, Friedrich-Alexander University 
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(7)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, Molecular 
Biotechnology Center, University of Turin, Torino, Italy.
(8)Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander University 
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(9)Department of Ophthalmology, Friedrich-Alexander University 
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(10)Laboratory of Pediatric Brain Diseases, Rockefeller University, New York, 
New York, United States of America.
(11)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
California, United States of America.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Beatrix Children's Hospital, University of 
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(13)Leibniz-Institut für Molekulare Pharmakologie, Berlin Faculty of Biology, 
Chemistry, and Pharmacy, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(14)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.
(15)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, 
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(16)Research Institute for Children's Health, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.

PIK3C2A is a class II member of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) family that 
catalyzes the phosphorylation of phosphatidylinositol (PI) into PI(3)P and the 
phosphorylation of PI(4)P into PI(3,4)P2. At the cellular level, PIK3C2A is 
critical for the formation of cilia and for receptor mediated endocytosis, among 
other biological functions. We identified homozygous loss-of-function mutations 
in PIK3C2A in children from three independent consanguineous families with short 
stature, coarse facial features, cataracts with secondary glaucoma, multiple 
skeletal abnormalities, neurological manifestations, among other findings. 
Cellular studies of patient-derived fibroblasts found that they lacked PIK3C2A 
protein, had impaired cilia formation and function, and demonstrated reduced 
proliferative capacity. Collectively, the genetic and molecular data implicate 
mutations in PIK3C2A in a new Mendelian disorder of PI metabolism, thereby 
shedding light on the critical role of a class II PI3K in growth, vision, 
skeletal formation and neurological development. In particular, the considerable 
phenotypic overlap, yet distinct features, between this syndrome and Lowe's 
syndrome, which is caused by mutations in the PI-5-phosphatase OCRL, highlight 
the key role of PI metabolizing enzymes in specific developmental processes and 
demonstrate the unique non-redundant functions of each enzyme. This discovery 
expands what is known about disorders of PI metabolism and helps unravel the 
role of PIK3C2A and class II PI3Ks in health and disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008088
PMCID: PMC6508738
PMID: 31034465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.