---
reference_id: "PMID:22771754"
title: "Hierarchical cluster and survival analyses of antisynthetase syndrome: phenotype and outcome are correlated with anti-tRNA synthetase antibody specificity."
authors:
- Hervier B
- Devilliers H
- Stanciu R
- Meyer A
- Uzunhan Y
- Masseau A
- Dubucquoi S
- Hatron PY
- Musset L
- Wallaert B
- Nunes H
- Maisonobe T
- Olsson NO
- Adoue D
- Arlet P
- Sibilia J
- Guiguet M
- Lauque D
- Amoura Z
- Hachulla E
- Hamidou M
- Benveniste O
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2012.06.006
keywords:
- Adult
- Amino Acyl-tRNA Synthetases/immunology
- Antibody Specificity
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- Cluster Analysis
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Myositis/immunology, mortality"
- Phenotype
- Retrospective Studies
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hierarchical cluster and survival analyses of antisynthetase syndrome: phenotype and outcome are correlated with anti-tRNA synthetase antibody specificity.
**Authors:** Hervier B, Devilliers H, Stanciu R, Meyer A, Uzunhan Y, Masseau A, Dubucquoi S, Hatron PY, Musset L, Wallaert B, Nunes H, Maisonobe T, Olsson NO, Adoue D, Arlet P, Sibilia J, Guiguet M, Lauque D, Amoura Z, Hachulla E, Hamidou M, Benveniste O
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2012.06.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2012.06.006)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2012 Dec;12(2):210-7. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2012.06.006. Epub 
2012 Jul 5.

Hierarchical cluster and survival analyses of antisynthetase syndrome: phenotype 
and outcome are correlated with anti-tRNA synthetase antibody specificity.

Hervier B(1), Devilliers H, Stanciu R, Meyer A, Uzunhan Y, Masseau A, Dubucquoi 
S, Hatron PY, Musset L, Wallaert B, Nunes H, Maisonobe T, Olsson NO, Adoue D, 
Arlet P, Sibilia J, Guiguet M, Lauque D, Amoura Z, Hachulla E, Hamidou M, 
Benveniste O.

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine Department 2, French Reference Centre for Lupus, Hôpital 
Pitié-Salpêtrière, APHP, Paris, France. bhervier@yahoo.fr

The clinical phenotype and evolution of antisynthetase syndrome (ASS) are 
heterogeneous. This study was therefore undertaken to identify subgroups of ASS 
patients with similar clinico-biological features and outcomes. This 
retrospective multicentric study included 233 consecutive patients with three 
different anti-aminoacyl-tRNA-synthetase antibodies (anti-ARS): anti-Jo1 
(n=160), anti-PL7 (n=25) and anti-PL12 (n=48). To characterise ASS patients, 
bivariate, multiple correspondence (MCA), cluster and survival analyses were 
performed. Interstitial lung disease (ILD) and myositis were the most common ASS 
manifestations. However, their respective frequencies were correlated to 
anti-ARS specificity: ILD was more frequent (80% and 88% vs 67%, p=0.014) 
whereas myositis was less common (44% and 47% vs 74%, p<0.001) in patients with 
anti-PL7 and anti-PL12 compared to anti-Jo1. The MCA suggested that anti-PL7 and 
anti-PL12 phenotypes were close to one another and distinct from anti-Jo1. The 
clustering analysis confirmed these data, identifying subgroups strongly defined 
by the anti-ARS specificity and other clinical features. Cluster 1 (n=175, 86% 
of anti-Jo1) defined patients with the most diffuse phenotype, whereas patients 
from cluster 2 (n=48, 96% of anti-PL12 and anti-PL7) exhibited a disease more 
restricted to the lung. Patient survival was also conditioned by the anti-ARS 
specificity, and was significantly lower in patients with anti-PL7/12 rather 
than anti-Jo1 (p=0.012). Other factors associated with poor survival were mostly 
related to pulmonary involvement, including severe dyspnea (p=0.003) and 
isolated ILD (p=0.009) at diagnosis. In patients with ASS, the phenotype and the 
survival were correlated with the anti-ARS specificity.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2012.06.006
PMID: 22771754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]