---
reference_id: "PMID:37658439"
title: "Prognostic value of pathogenic variants in Lafora Disease: systematic review and meta-analysis of patient-level data."
authors:
- Pondrelli F
- Minardi R
- Muccioli L
- Zenesini C
- Vignatelli L
- Licchetta L
- Mostacci B
- Tinuper P
- Vander Kooi CW
- Gentry MS
- Bisulli F
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02880-6
keywords:
- Humans
- Lafora Disease/genetics
- Prognosis
- Tandem Mass Spectrometry
- "Myoclonic Epilepsies, Progressive"
- Disease Progression
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prognostic value of pathogenic variants in Lafora Disease: systematic review and meta-analysis of patient-level data.
**Authors:** Pondrelli F, Minardi R, Muccioli L, Zenesini C, Vignatelli L, Licchetta L, Mostacci B, Tinuper P, Vander Kooi CW, Gentry MS, Bisulli F
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-02880-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-02880-6)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 Sep 2;18(1):263. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02880-6.

Prognostic value of pathogenic variants in Lafora Disease: systematic review and
meta-analysis of patient-level data.

Pondrelli F(1), Minardi R(2), Muccioli L(3), Zenesini C(2), Vignatelli L(2),
Licchetta L(2), Mostacci B(2), Tinuper P(1), Vander Kooi CW(4), Gentry MS(4),
Bisulli F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna,
Bologna, Italy.
(2)IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna, Full Member of the
European Reference Network for Rare and Complex Epilepsies (EpiCARE), Bologna,
Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna,
Bologna, Italy. lorenzo.muccioli@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Florida,
Gainesville, USA.

BACKGROUND: Lafora disease (LD) is a fatal form of progressive myoclonic
epilepsy caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in EPM2A or NHLRC1. With a few
exceptions, the influence of genetic factors on disease progression has yet to
be confirmed. We present a systematic review and meta-analysis of the known
pathogenic variants to identify genotype-phenotype correlations.
METHODS: We collected all reported cases with genetically-confirmed LD
containing data on disease history. Pathogenic variants were classified into
missense (MS) and protein-truncating (PT). Three genotype classes were defined
according to the combination of the variants: MS/MS, MS/PT, and PT/PT.
Time-to-event analysis was performed to evaluate survival and loss of autonomy.
RESULTS: 250 cases described in 70 articles were included. The mutated gene was
NHLRC1 in 56% and EPM2A in 44% of cases. 114 pathogenic variants (67 EPM2A; 47
NHLRC1) were identified. The NHLRC1 genotype PT/PT was associated with shorter
survival [HR 2.88; 95% CI 1.23-6.78] and a trend of higher probability of loss
of autonomy [HR 2.03, 95% CI 0.75-5.56] at the multivariable Cox regression
analysis. The population carrying the homozygous p.Asp146Asn variant of NHLRC1
genotype was confirmed to have a more favourable prognosis in terms of disease
duration.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates the existence of prognostic genetic factors
in LD, namely the genotype defined according to the functional impact of the
pathogenic variants. Although the reasons why NHLRC1 genotype PT/PT is
associated with a poorer prognosis have yet to be fully elucidated, it may be
speculated that malin plays a pivotal role in LD pathogenesis.

© 2023. Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-02880-6
PMCID: PMC10474773
PMID: 37658439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
