---
reference_id: "PMID:40677575"
title: "Refractory chronic diarrhea complicated with optic neuritis in a young woman: A case report."
authors:
- Chen CN
- Fan XY
- Yang CM
- Zhang XH
- Liu J
journal: World J Gastrointest Endosc
year: '2025'
doi: 10.4253/wjge.v17.i7.106208
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Refractory chronic diarrhea complicated with optic neuritis in a young woman: A case report.
**Authors:** Chen CN, Fan XY, Yang CM, Zhang XH, Liu J
**Journal:** World J Gastrointest Endosc (2025)
**DOI:** [10.4253/wjge.v17.i7.106208](https://doi.org/10.4253/wjge.v17.i7.106208)

## Content

1. World J Gastrointest Endosc. 2025 Jul 16;17(7):106208. doi: 
10.4253/wjge.v17.i7.106208.

Refractory chronic diarrhea complicated with optic neuritis in a young woman: A 
case report.

Chen CN(1), Fan XY(1), Yang CM(1), Zhang XH(1), Liu J(2).

Author information:
(1)Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong First Medical University, 
Jinan 250021, Shandong Province, China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to 
Shandong First Medical University, Jinan 250000, Shandong Province, China. 
miracle713@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Collagenous sprue is a serious intestinal malabsorption disorder 
characterized by dull and flattened intestinal villi with subepithelial collagen 
deposition. At present, fewer than 100 cases have been reported in the 
literature. Owing to the rarity of this disease, clinicians and pathologists 
have insufficient understanding of it.
CASE SUMMARY: The authors present a case of a 34-year-old female patient who 
presented with severe watery diarrhea with significant weight loss. She also 
experienced blurred binocular vision. The intestinal lesions were located mainly 
in the small intestine, which presented flat and dull intestinal villi with 
subepithelial collagen deposition. Masson staining was positive. Glucocorticoids 
were effective for this patient, but there seemed to be glucocorticoid 
dependence.
CONCLUSION: Collagenous stomatitis diarrhea is a rare intestinal malabsorption 
disease that needs to be diagnosed in combination with special clinical 
manifestations and unique histological features.

©The Author(s) 2025. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.4253/wjge.v17.i7.106208
PMCID: PMC12264809
PMID: 40677575

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All the authors 
report no relevant conflicts of interest for this article.