---
reference_id: "PMID:20547426"
title: HLA-DQ2+ individuals are susceptible to Hu-Ab associated paraneoplastic neurological syndromes.
authors:
- de Graaf MT
- de Beukelaar JW
- Haasnoot GW
- Levering WH
- Rogemond V
- Didelot A
- Honnorat J
- Gratama JW
- Smitt PA
journal: J Neuroimmunol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2010.05.035
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Antibodies/metabolism
- CD4 Antigens/metabolism
- Confidence Intervals
- ELAV Proteins/immunology
- Female
- HLA-DQ Antigens/metabolism
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Odds Ratio
- "Paraneoplastic Syndromes, Nervous System/immunology, pathology"
- "Small Cell Lung Carcinoma/immunology, metabolism"
- "T-Lymphocytes/immunology, metabolism"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HLA-DQ2+ individuals are susceptible to Hu-Ab associated paraneoplastic neurological syndromes.
**Authors:** de Graaf MT, de Beukelaar JW, Haasnoot GW, Levering WH, Rogemond V, Didelot A, Honnorat J, Gratama JW, Smitt PA
**Journal:** J Neuroimmunol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jneuroim.2010.05.035](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroim.2010.05.035)

## Content

1. J Neuroimmunol. 2010 Sep 14;226(1-2):147-9. doi:
10.1016/j.jneuroim.2010.05.035.  Epub 2010 Jun 12.

HLA-DQ2+ individuals are susceptible to Hu-Ab associated paraneoplastic 
neurological syndromes.

de Graaf MT(1), de Beukelaar JW, Haasnoot GW, Levering WH, Rogemond V, Didelot 
A, Honnorat J, Gratama JW, Smitt PA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Hypothetically, T cells are involved in the pathogenesis of 
paraneoplastic neurological syndromes associated with Hu-antibodies (Hu-PNS).
OBJECTIVE: To identify genetic risk factors for Hu-PNS and investigate the role 
of T cells.
METHODS: HLA-A, B, DRB1 and DQB1 alleles were compared in 53 Hu-PNS patients 
with 24 small-cell lung-cancer (SCLC) patients and 2440 healthy controls (HC).
RESULTS: The frequency of both HLA-DQ2 and HLA-DR3 was significantly higher in 
Hu-PNS patients than in HC.
CONCLUSIONS: This study indicates an association between Hu-PNS and presence of 
HLA-DQ2 and HLA-DR3, which supports a role for CD4(+) T cells in the 
pathogenesis of Hu-PNS.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2010.05.035
PMID: 20547426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]