---
reference_id: "PMID:34771672"
title: Targeted Deep Sequencing of Mycosis Fungoides Reveals Intracellular Signaling Pathways Associated with Aggressiveness and Large Cell Transformation.
authors:
- Wobser M
- Roth S
- Appenzeller S
- Houben R
- Schrama D
- Goebeler M
- Geissinger E
- Rosenwald A
- Maurus K
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/cancers13215512
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeted Deep Sequencing of Mycosis Fungoides Reveals Intracellular Signaling Pathways Associated with Aggressiveness and Large Cell Transformation.
**Authors:** Wobser M, Roth S, Appenzeller S, Houben R, Schrama D, Goebeler M, Geissinger E, Rosenwald A, Maurus K
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers13215512](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers13215512)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Nov 2;13(21):5512. doi: 10.3390/cancers13215512.

Targeted Deep Sequencing of Mycosis Fungoides Reveals Intracellular Signaling
Pathways Associated with Aggressiveness and Large Cell Transformation.

Wobser M(1), Roth S(2)(3), Appenzeller S(3), Houben R(1), Schrama D(1), Goebeler
M(1), Geissinger E(3)(4), Rosenwald A(2)(3), Maurus K(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Venereology and Allergology and Skin Cancer Center, Department of
Dermatology, University Hospital Würzburg, 97080 Würzburg, Germany.
(2)Comprehensive Cancer Center Mainfranken, University Hospital of Würzburg,
97080 Würzburg, Germany.
(3)Institute of Pathology, University of Würzburg, 97080 Würzburg, Germany.
(4)Pathology Practice, 85049 Ingolstadt, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Large-cell transformation (LCT) of mycosis fungoides (MF) has been
associated with a higher risk of relapse and progression and, consequently,
restricted prognosis. Its molecular pathogenesis has not been elucidated yet.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In order to address molecular mechanisms of LCT, we
performed hybrid capture panel-based sequencing of skin biopsies from 10
patients suffering from MF with LCT versus 17 patients without LCT including
follow-up biopsies during clinical course, respectively (51 samples in total).
The analyzed patients were attributed to three different groups based on the
presence of LCT and clinical behavior.
RESULTS: While indolent MF cases without LCT did not show pathogenic driver
mutations, a high rate of oncogenic alterations was detected in patients with
LCT and aggressive clinical courses. Various genes of different oncogenic
signaling pathways, including the MAPK and JAK-STAT signaling pathways, as well
as epigenetic modifiers were affected. A high inter-individual and distinctive
intra-individual mutation diversity was observed. Oncogenic RAS mutations were
exclusively detected in patients with LCT.
CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrate that LCT transition of MF is associated with
increased frequency of somatic mutations in cancer-associated genes. In
particular, the activation of RAS signaling-together with epigenetic
dysregulation-may crucially contribute to the molecular pathogenesis of the LCT
phenotype, thus conveying its adverse clinical behavior.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13215512
PMCID: PMC8582785
PMID: 34771672

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial
interests.
