---
reference_id: "PMID:33417918"
title: Predicting Adverse Outcomes for Shiga Toxin-Producing Escherichia coli Infections in Emergency Departments.
authors:
- Lin CY
- Xie J
- Freedman SB
- McKee RS
- Schnadower D
- Tarr PI
- Finkelstein Y
- Desai NM
- Lane RD
- Bergmann KR
- Kaplan RL
- Hariharan S
- Cruz AT
- Cohen DM
- Dixon A
- Ramgopal S
- Powell EC
- Kilgar J
- Michelson KA
- Bitzan M
- Yen K
- Meckler GD
- Plint AC
- Balamuth F
- Bradin S
- Gouin S
- Kam AJ
- Meltzer JA
- Hunley TE
- Avva U
- Porter R
- Fein DM
- Louie JP
- Tarr GAM
- Pediatric Emergency Research Canada (PERC) and Pediatric Emergency Medicine Collaborative Research Committee (PEMCRC) STEC Study Group
journal: J Pediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2020.12.077
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predicting Adverse Outcomes for Shiga Toxin-Producing Escherichia coli Infections in Emergency Departments.
**Authors:** Lin CY, Xie J, Freedman SB, McKee RS, Schnadower D, Tarr PI, Finkelstein Y, Desai NM, Lane RD, Bergmann KR, Kaplan RL, Hariharan S, Cruz AT, Cohen DM, Dixon A, Ramgopal S, Powell EC, Kilgar J, Michelson KA, Bitzan M, Yen K, Meckler GD, Plint AC, Balamuth F, Bradin S, Gouin S, Kam AJ, Meltzer JA, Hunley TE, Avva U, Porter R, Fein DM, Louie JP, Tarr GAM, Pediatric Emergency Research Canada (PERC) and Pediatric Emergency Medicine Collaborative Research Committee (PEMCRC) STEC Study Group
**Journal:** J Pediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpeds.2020.12.077](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2020.12.077)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 2021 May;232:200-206.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2020.12.077. Epub
2021  Jan 5.

Predicting Adverse Outcomes for Shiga Toxin-Producing Escherichia coli 
Infections in Emergency Departments.

Lin CY(1), Xie J(2), Freedman SB(3), McKee RS(4), Schnadower D(5), Tarr PI(6), 
Finkelstein Y(7), Desai NM(8), Lane RD(9), Bergmann KR(10), Kaplan RL(11), 
Hariharan S(5), Cruz AT(12), Cohen DM(13), Dixon A(14), Ramgopal S(15), Powell 
EC(15), Kilgar J(16), Michelson KA(17), Bitzan M(18), Yen K(19), Meckler GD(20), 
Plint AC(21), Balamuth F(22), Bradin S(23), Gouin S(24), Kam AJ(25), Meltzer 
JA(26), Hunley TE(27), Avva U(28), Porter R(29), Fein DM(30), Louie JP(31), Tarr 
GAM(32); Pediatric Emergency Research Canada (PERC) and Pediatric Emergency 
Medicine Collaborative Research Committee (PEMCRC) STEC Study Group.

Collaborators: Rominger A, Beer D, Pruitt CM, Abramo TJ, Schuh A, Kanegaye JT, 
Jones NE.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, 
Canada.
(2)Section of Pediatric Emergency Medicine, Department of Pediatric, Alberta 
Children's Hospital, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, 
Alberta, Canada.
(3)Section of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Department of Pediatrics, Alberta 
Children's Hospital and Alberta Children's Hospital Research Institute, Cumming 
School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(4)Section of Pediatric Emergency Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University 
of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK.
(5)Division of Emergency Medicine, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center, and Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of 
Medicine, Cincinnati, OH.
(6)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, & Nutrition, Department of 
Pediatrics, Washington University in St Louis, School of Medicine, St Louis, MO.
(7)Divisions of Emergency Medicine and Clinical Pharmacology & Toxicology, 
Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(8)Division of Pediatric Emergency Medicine, British Columbia Children's 
Hospital, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(9)Division of Pediatric Emergency Medicine, University of Utah School of 
Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT.
(10)Department of Emergency Medicine, Children's Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Emergency Medicine, University of 
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA.
(12)Pediatric Emergency Medicine and Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Baylor 
College of Medicine, Houston, TX.
(13)Nationwide Children's Hospital & The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH.
(14)University of Alberta, Stollery Children's Hospital, Women's and Children's 
Health Research Institute, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(15)Division of Emergency Medicine, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of 
Chicago, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, 
Ontario, Canada.
(17)Division of Emergency Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA.
(18)Division of Nephrology, Montreal Children's Hospital, McGill University 
Health Centre, Montreal, Canada; Al Jalila Children's Hospital, Kidney Centre of 
Excellence, Dubai, United Arab Emirates.
(19)Pediatric Emergency Medicine, Children's Medical Center, UT Southwestern, 
Dallas, TX.
(20)Pediatrics and Emergency Medicine, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(21)Departments of Pediatrics and Emergency Medicine, University of Ottawa and 
the Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(22)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Division of Emergency Medicine, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA.
(23)Children's Emergency Services, Department of Emergency Medicine, University 
of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI.
(24)Departments of Pediatric Emergency Medicine & Pediatrics, CHU 
Sainte-Justine, Universite de Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(25)Department of Pediatrics, McMaster Children's Hospital, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(26)Division of Emergency Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Jacobi Medical 
Center, Bronx, NY.
(27)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Monroe Carell Jr Children's Hospital at 
Vanderbilt, Nashville, TN.
(28)Department of Pediatrics, Joseph M. Sanzari Women and Children's Hospital, 
Hackensack University Medical Center, Hackensack, NJ.
(29)Discipline of Pediatrics, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St John's, 
Newfoundland, Canada.
(30)Division of Pediatric Emergency Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, 
Children's Hospital at Montefiore, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, 
NY.
(31)Division of Emergency Medicine, University of Minnesota, Masonic Children's 
Hospital, Minneapolis, MN.
(32)Division of Environmental Health Sciences, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, MN. Electronic address: gtarr@umn.edu.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the performance of a hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) 
severity score among children with Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli (STEC) 
infections and HUS by stratifying them according to their risk of adverse 
events. The score has not been previously evaluated in a North American acute 
care setting.
STUDY DESIGN: We reviewed medical records of children <18 years old infected 
with STEC and treated in 1 of 38 participating emergency departments in North 
America between 2011 and 2015. The HUS severity score (hemoglobin [g/dL] plus 
2-times serum creatinine [mg/dL]) was calculated using first available 
laboratory results. Children with scores >13 were designated as high-risk. We 
assessed score performance to predict severe adverse events (ie, dialysis, 
neurologic complication, respiratory failure, and death) using discrimination 
and net benefit (ie, threshold probability), with subgroup analyses by age and 
day-of-illness.
RESULTS: A total of 167 children had HUS, of whom 92.8% (155/167) had relevant 
data to calculate the score; 60.6% (94/155) experienced a severe adverse event. 
Discrimination was acceptable overall (area under the curve 0.71, 95% CI 
0.63-0.79) and better among children <5 years old (area under the curve 0.77, 
95% CI 0.68-0.87). For children <5 years, greatest net benefit was achieved for 
a threshold probability >26%.
CONCLUSIONS: The HUS severity score was able to discriminate between high- and 
low-risk children <5 years old with STEC-associated HUS at a statistically 
acceptable level; however, it did not appear to provide clinical benefit at a 
meaningful risk threshold.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2020.12.077
PMCID: PMC8084908
PMID: 33417918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]