---
reference_id: "PMID:20675664"
title: "Current state of knowledge on aetiology, diagnosis, management, and therapy of peripartum cardiomyopathy: a position statement from the Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology Working Group on peripartum cardiomyopathy."
authors:
- Sliwa K
- Hilfiker-Kleiner D
- Petrie MC
- Mebazaa A
- Pieske B
- Buchmann E
- Regitz-Zagrosek V
- Schaufelberger M
- Tavazzi L
- van Veldhuisen DJ
- Watkins H
- Shah AJ
- Seferovic PM
- Elkayam U
- Pankuweit S
- Papp Z
- Mouquet F
- McMurray JJ
- Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology Working Group on Peripartum Cardiomyopathy
journal: Eur J Heart Fail
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1093/eurjhf/hfq120
keywords:
- Antihypertensive Agents/therapeutic use
- Cardiology/trends
- "Cardiomyopathies/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology"
- Cathepsin D
- Europe
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- Inflammation
- "Natriuretic Peptide, Brain"
- Oxidative Stress
- Postpartum Period
- Pregnancy
- "Pregnancy Complications/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology"
- Prognosis
- "Prolactin/antagonists & inhibitors, drug effects"
- Risk Factors
- "Societies, Medical/trends"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current state of knowledge on aetiology, diagnosis, management, and therapy of peripartum cardiomyopathy: a position statement from the Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology Working Group on peripartum cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Sliwa K, Hilfiker-Kleiner D, Petrie MC, Mebazaa A, Pieske B, Buchmann E, Regitz-Zagrosek V, Schaufelberger M, Tavazzi L, van Veldhuisen DJ, Watkins H, Shah AJ, Seferovic PM, Elkayam U, Pankuweit S, Papp Z, Mouquet F, McMurray JJ, Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology Working Group on Peripartum Cardiomyopathy
**Journal:** Eur J Heart Fail (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/eurjhf/hfq120](https://doi.org/10.1093/eurjhf/hfq120)

## Content

1. Eur J Heart Fail. 2010 Aug;12(8):767-78. doi: 10.1093/eurjhf/hfq120.

Current state of knowledge on aetiology, diagnosis, management, and therapy of 
peripartum cardiomyopathy: a position statement from the Heart Failure 
Association of the European Society of Cardiology Working Group on peripartum 
cardiomyopathy.

Sliwa K(1), Hilfiker-Kleiner D, Petrie MC, Mebazaa A, Pieske B, Buchmann E, 
Regitz-Zagrosek V, Schaufelberger M, Tavazzi L, van Veldhuisen DJ, Watkins H, 
Shah AJ, Seferovic PM, Elkayam U, Pankuweit S, Papp Z, Mouquet F, McMurray JJ; 
Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology Working Group on 
Peripartum Cardiomyopathy.

Author information:
(1)Hatter Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, 
South Africa. sliwa-hahnlek@mdh-africa.org

Peripartum cardiomyopathy (PPCM) is a cause of pregnancy-associated heart 
failure. It typically develops during the last month of, and up to 6 months 
after, pregnancy in women without known cardiovascular disease. The present 
position statement offers a state-of-the-art summary of what is known about risk 
factors for potential pathophysiological mechanisms, clinical presentation of, 
and diagnosis and management of PPCM. A high index of suspicion is required for 
the diagnosis, as shortness of breath and ankle swelling are common in the 
peripartum period. Peripartum cardiomyopathy is a distinct form of 
cardiomyopathy, associated with a high morbidity and mortality, but also with 
the possibility of full recovery. Oxidative stress and the generation of a 
cardiotoxic subfragment of prolactin may play key roles in the pathophysiology 
of PPCM. In this regard, pharmacological blockade of prolactin offers the 
possibility of a disease-specific therapy.

DOI: 10.1093/eurjhf/hfq120
PMID: 20675664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]