---
reference_id: "PMID:20032806"
title: Heart and skeletal muscle are targets of dengue virus infection.
authors:
- Salgado DM
- Eltit JM
- Mansfield K
- Panqueba C
- Castro D
- Vega MR
- Xhaja K
- Schmidt D
- Martin KJ
- Allen PD
- Rodriguez JA
- Dinsmore JH
- López JR
- Bosch I
journal: Pediatr Infect Dis J
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1097/INF.0b013e3181bc3c5b
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heart and skeletal muscle are targets of dengue virus infection.
**Authors:** Salgado DM, Eltit JM, Mansfield K, Panqueba C, Castro D, Vega MR, Xhaja K, Schmidt D, Martin KJ, Allen PD, Rodriguez JA, Dinsmore JH, López JR, Bosch I
**Journal:** Pediatr Infect Dis J (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1097/INF.0b013e3181bc3c5b](https://doi.org/10.1097/INF.0b013e3181bc3c5b)

## Content

1. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2010 Mar;29(3):238-42. doi:
10.1097/INF.0b013e3181bc3c5b.

Heart and skeletal muscle are targets of dengue virus infection.

Salgado DM(1), Eltit JM, Mansfield K, Panqueba C, Castro D, Vega MR, Xhaja K, 
Schmidt D, Martin KJ, Allen PD, Rodriguez JA, Dinsmore JH, López JR, Bosch I.

Author information:
(1)Universidad Surcolombiana and Pediatric Unit, Hospital Universitario de 
Neiva, Neiva, Colombia.

BACKGROUND: Dengue fever is one of the most significant re-emerging tropical 
diseases, despite our expanding knowledge of the disease, viral tropism is still 
not known to target heart tissues or muscle.
METHODS: A prospective pediatric clinical cohort of 102 dengue hemorrhagic fever 
patients from Colombia, South America, was followed for 1 year. Clinical 
diagnosis of myocarditis was routinely performed. Electrocardiograph and 
echocardiograph analysis were performed to confirm those cases. 
Immunohistochemistry for detection of dengue virus and inflammatory markers was 
performed on autopsied heart tissue. In vitro studies of human striated skeletal 
fibers (myotubes) infected with dengue virus were used as a model for myocyte 
infection. Measurements of intracellular Ca2+ concentration as well as 
immunodetection of dengue virus and inflammation markers in infected myotubes 
were performed.
RESULTS: Eleven children with dengue hemorrhagic fever presented with symptoms 
of myocarditis. Widespread viral infection of the heart, myocardial endothelium, 
and cardiomyocytes, accompanied by inflammation was observed in 1 fatal case. 
Immunofluorescence confocal microscopy showed that myotubes were infected by 
dengue virus and had increased expression of the inflammatory genes and protein 
IP-10. The infected myotubes also had increases in intracellular Ca2+ 
concentration.
CONCLUSIONS: Vigorous infection of heart tissues in vivo and striated skeletal 
cells in vitro are demonstrated. Derangements of Ca2+ storage in the infected 
cells may directly contribute to the presentation of myocarditis in pediatric 
patients.

DOI: 10.1097/INF.0b013e3181bc3c5b
PMCID: PMC2833338
PMID: 20032806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]