---
reference_id: "PMID:36703211"
title: Molecular signatures of inherited and acquired sporadic late onset nemaline myopathies.
authors:
- Nicolau S
- Dasgupta A
- Dasari S
- Charlesworth MC
- Johnson KL
- Pandey A
- Doles JD
- Milone M
journal: Acta Neuropathol Commun
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s40478-023-01518-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular signatures of inherited and acquired sporadic late onset nemaline myopathies.
**Authors:** Nicolau S, Dasgupta A, Dasari S, Charlesworth MC, Johnson KL, Pandey A, Doles JD, Milone M
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol Commun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40478-023-01518-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40478-023-01518-9)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2023 Jan 26;11(1):20. doi:
10.1186/s40478-023-01518-9.

Molecular signatures of inherited and acquired sporadic late onset nemaline 
myopathies.

Nicolau S(#)(1)(2), Dasgupta A(#)(3)(4)(5), Dasari S(6), Charlesworth MC(7), 
Johnson KL(7), Pandey A(8)(9), Doles JD(3)(4)(5), Milone M(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW, Rochester, MN, 55905, 
USA.
(2)Center for Gene Therapy, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, 43205, 
USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
55905, USA.
(4)Department of Anatomy, Cell Biology and Physiology, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, 46202, USA.
(5)Indiana Center for Musculoskeletal Health, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, 46202, USA.
(6)Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
55905, USA.
(7)Proteomics Core, Medical Genomics Facility, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
55905, USA.
(8)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
55905, USA.
(9)Manipal Academy of Higher Education (MAHE), Manipal, Karnataka, 576104, 
India.
(10)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW, Rochester, MN, 
55905, USA. Milone.Margherita@mayo.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Acquired sporadic late onset nemaline myopathy (SLONM) and inherited nemaline 
myopathy (iNM) both feature accumulation of nemaline rods in muscle fibers. 
Unlike iNM, SLONM is amenable to therapy. The distinction between these 
disorders is therefore crucial when the diagnosis remains ambiguous after 
initial investigations. We sought to identify biomarkers facilitating this 
distinction and to investigate the pathophysiology of nemaline rod formation in 
these different disorders. Twenty-two muscle samples from patients affected by 
SLONM or iNM underwent quantitative histological analysis, laser capture 
microdissection for proteomic analysis of nemaline rod areas and rod-free areas, 
and transcriptomic analysis. In all iNM samples, nemaline rods were found in 
subsarcolemmal or central aggregates, whereas they were diffusely distributed 
within muscle fibers in most SLONM samples. In SLONM, muscle fibers harboring 
nemaline rods were smaller than those without rods. Necrotic fibers, increased 
endomysial connective tissue, and atrophic fibers filled with nemaline rods were 
more common in SLONM. Proteomic analysis detected differentially expressed 
proteins between nemaline rod areas and rod-free areas, as well as between SLONM 
and iNM. These differentially expressed proteins implicated immune, structural, 
metabolic, and cellular processes in disease pathophysiology. Notably, 
immunoglobulin overexpression with accumulation in nemaline rod areas was 
detected in SLONM. Transcriptomic analysis corroborated proteomic findings and 
further revealed substantial gene expression differences between SLONM and iNM. 
Overall, we identified unique pathological and molecular signatures associated 
with SLONM and iNM, suggesting distinct underlying pathophysiological 
mechanisms. These findings represent a step towards enhanced diagnostic tools 
and towards development of treatments for SLONM.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-023-01518-9
PMCID: PMC9878979
PMID: 36703211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MM has received honoraria as associate editor of 
Neurology: Genetics, and compensation for serving in the Argenx advisory 
board for a topic unrelated to this project. The remaining authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.