---
reference_id: PMID:24016541
title: Perturbations of mechanotransduction and aneurysm formation in heritable aortopathies.
authors:
- Jeremy RW
- Robertson E
- Lu Y
- Hambly BD
journal: Int J Cardiol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2013.08.056
keywords:
- "Aortic Dissection/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Animals
- "Aortic Aneurysm, Thoracic/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Mechanotransduction, Cellular/physiology"
- Mutation/genetics
- Transforming Growth Factor beta/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Perturbations of mechanotransduction and aneurysm formation in heritable aortopathies.
**Authors:** Jeremy RW, Robertson E, Lu Y, Hambly BD
**Journal:** Int J Cardiol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijcard.2013.08.056](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcard.2013.08.056)

## Content

1. Int J Cardiol. 2013 Oct 25;169(1):7-16. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2013.08.056.
Epub  2013 Aug 27.

Perturbations of mechanotransduction and aneurysm formation in heritable 
aortopathies.

Jeremy RW(1), Robertson E, Lu Y, Hambly BD.

Author information:
(1)Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, NSW, Australia. Electronic 
address: richmond.jeremy@sydney.edu.au.

Thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection in young and middle aged patients is 
increasingly recognised as due to genetic aortopathy. Mutations in multiple 
genes affecting proteins in the extracellular matrix, microfibrillar structure, 
the endothelium and cell signalling pathways have been associated with thoracic 
aortic disease. The TGFß signalling pathway appears to play a key role in 
mediating abnormal aortic growth and aneurysm formation. A challenge remains in 
understanding how the many different gene mutations can result in deranged TGFß 
signalling. This review examines the functional relationships between key 
structural and signalling proteins, with reference to the need for maintenance 
of homeostasis in mechanotransduction within the aortic wall. A mechanism, 
through which perturbations in mechanotransduction, arising from different gene 
mutations, results in altered TGFß signalling is described.

© 2013. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2013.08.056
PMID: 24016541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]