---
reference_id: "PMID:36911732"
title: "The effects of microglia-associated neuroinflammation on Alzheimer's disease."
authors:
- Wang C
- Zong S
- Cui X
- Wang X
- Wu S
- Wang L
- Liu Y
- Lu Z
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1117172
keywords:
- Humans
- Alzheimer Disease/pathology
- Microglia/pathology
- Neuroinflammatory Diseases
- Amyloid beta-Peptides
- Amyloidogenic Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The effects of microglia-associated neuroinflammation on Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Wang C, Zong S, Cui X, Wang X, Wu S, Wang L, Liu Y, Lu Z
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2023.1117172](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1117172)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2023 Feb 22;14:1117172. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1117172.
eCollection 2023.

The effects of microglia-associated neuroinflammation on Alzheimer's disease.

Wang C(1), Zong S(1), Cui X(2), Wang X(1), Wu S(2), Wang L(1), Liu Y(1), Lu
Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Shandong Provincial Hospital
Affiliated to Shandong First Medical University, Jinan, Shandong, China.
(2)School of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is defined as a severe chronic degenerative
neurological disease in human. The pathogenic mechanism of AD has been
convincingly elucidated by the "amyloid cascade hypothesis" with the main focus
of the pathological accretion of β-amyloid (Aβ) peptides outside the cell.
However, increasing evidence suggests that this hypothesis is weak in explaining
the pathogenesis of AD. Neuroinflammation is crucial in the development of AD,
which is proven by the elevated levels of inflammatory markers and the
identification of AD risk genes relevant to the innate immune function. Here, we
summarize the effects of microglia-mediated neuroinflammation on AD, focusing on
the temporal and spatial changes in microglial phenotype, the interactions among
microglia, Aβ, tau, and neurons, and the prospects and recent advances in
neuroinflammation as a diagnostic and therapeutic target of AD.

Copyright © 2023 Wang, Zong, Cui, Wang, Wu, Wang, Liu and Lu.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1117172
PMCID: PMC9992739
PMID: 36911732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
