---
reference_id: "PMID:31806422"
title: "Ebola virus disease: An emerging and re-emerging viral threat."
authors:
- Rojas M
- Monsalve DM
- Pacheco Y
- Acosta-Ampudia Y
- Ramírez-Santana C
- Ansari AA
- Gershwin ME
- Anaya JM
journal: J Autoimmun
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2019.102375
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ebola virus disease: An emerging and re-emerging viral threat.
**Authors:** Rojas M, Monsalve DM, Pacheco Y, Acosta-Ampudia Y, Ramírez-Santana C, Ansari AA, Gershwin ME, Anaya JM
**Journal:** J Autoimmun (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaut.2019.102375](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaut.2019.102375)

## Content

1. J Autoimmun. 2020 Jan;106:102375. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2019.102375. Epub 2019
Dec  3.

Ebola virus disease: An emerging and re-emerging viral threat.

Rojas M(1), Monsalve DM(2), Pacheco Y(2), Acosta-Ampudia Y(2), Ramírez-Santana 
C(2), Ansari AA(3), Gershwin ME(4), Anaya JM(5).

Author information:
(1)Center for Autoimmune Diseases Research (CREA), School of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Universidad del Rosario, Bogota, Colombia; Doctoral Program in 
Biomedical Sciences, Universidad del Rosario, Bogota, Colombia.
(2)Center for Autoimmune Diseases Research (CREA), School of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Universidad del Rosario, Bogota, Colombia.
(3)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of 
California Davis, School of Medicine, Davis, CA, USA.
(4)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of 
California Davis, School of Medicine, Davis, CA, USA. Electronic address: 
megershwin@ucdavis.edu.
(5)Center for Autoimmune Diseases Research (CREA), School of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Universidad del Rosario, Bogota, Colombia. Electronic address: 
juan.anaya@urosario.edu.co.

The genus Ebolavirus from the family Filoviridae is composed of five species 
including Sudan ebolavirus, Reston ebolavirus, Bundibugyo ebolavirus, Taï Forest 
ebolavirus, and Ebola virus (previously known as Zaire ebolavirus). These 
viruses have a large non-segmented, negative-strand RNA of approximately 19 kb 
that encodes for glycoproteins (i.e., GP, sGP, ssGP), nucleoproteins, virion 
proteins (i.e., VP 24, 30,40) and an RNA dependent RNA polymerase. These viruses 
have become a global health concern because of mortality, their rapid 
dissemination, new outbreaks in West-Africa, and the emergence of a new 
condition known as "Post-Ebola virus disease syndrome" that resembles 
inflammatory and autoimmune conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis, systemic 
lupus erythematosus and spondyloarthritis with uveitis. However, there are many 
gaps in the understanding of the mechanisms that may induce the development of 
such autoimmune-like syndromes. Some of these mechanisms may include a high 
formation of neutrophil extracellular traps, an uncontrolled "cytokine storm", 
and the possible formation of auto-antibodies. The likely appearance of 
autoimmune phenomena in Ebola survivors suppose a new challenge in the 
management and control of this disease and opens a new field of research in a 
special subgroup of patients. Herein, the molecular biology, pathogenesis, 
clinical manifestations, and treatment of Ebola virus disease are reviewed and 
some strategies for control of disease are discussed.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaut.2019.102375
PMID: 31806422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]