---
reference_id: "PMID:24128684"
title: Is schizophrenia a dopamine supersensitivity psychotic reaction?
authors:
- Seeman MV
- Seeman P
journal: Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2013.10.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Is schizophrenia a dopamine supersensitivity psychotic reaction?
**Authors:** Seeman MV, Seeman P
**Journal:** Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pnpbp.2013.10.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2013.10.003)

## Content

1. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2014 Jan 3;48:155-60. doi: 
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2013.10.003. Epub 2013 Oct 12.

Is schizophrenia a dopamine supersensitivity psychotic reaction?

Seeman MV(1), Seeman P.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, 260 Heath St. West, Suite 
605, Toronto, Ontario M5P 3L6, Canada.

Adolf Meyer (1866-1950) did not see schizophrenia as a discrete disorder with a 
specific etiology but, rather, as a reaction to a wide variety of 
biopsychosocial factors. He may have been right. Today, we have evidence that 
gene mutations, brain injury, drug use (cocaine, amphetamine, marijuana, 
phencyclidine, and steroids), prenatal infection and malnutrition, social 
isolation and marginalization, can all result in the signs and symptoms of 
schizophrenia. This clinical picture is generally associated with 
supersensitivity to dopamine, and activates dopamine neurotransmission that is 
usually alleviated or blocked by drugs that block dopamine D2 receptors. While 
the dopamine neural pathway may be a final common route to many of the clinical 
symptoms, the components of this pathway, such as dopamine release and number of 
D2 receptors, are approximately normal in schizophrenia patients who are in 
remission. Postmortem findings, however, reveal more dimers of D1D2 and D2D2 
receptors in both human schizophrenia brains and in animal models of 
schizophrenia. Another finding in animal models is an elevation of high-affinity 
state D2High receptors, but no radioactive ligand is yet available to 
selectively label D2High receptors in humans. It is suggested that synaptic 
dopamine supersensitivity in schizophrenia is an attempt at compensation for the 
original damage by heightening dopamine neurotransmission pathways (preparing 
the organism for fight or flight). The dopamine overactivity is experienced 
subjectively as overstimulation, which accounts for some of the clinical 
symptoms, with attempts at dampening down the stimulation leading to still other 
symptoms. Reaction and counter-reaction may explain the symptoms of 
schizophrenia.

© 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2013.10.003
PMCID: PMC3858317
PMID: 24128684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]