---
reference_id: "PMID:29717526"
title: "Nephronophthisis: A review of genotype-phenotype correlation."
authors:
- Luo F
- Tao YH
journal: Nephrology (Carlton)
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/nep.13393
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Nephronophthisis: A review of genotype-phenotype correlation.
**Authors:** Luo F, Tao YH
**Journal:** Nephrology (Carlton) (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/nep.13393](https://doi.org/10.1111/nep.13393)

## Content

1. Nephrology (Carlton). 2018 Oct;23(10):904-911. doi: 10.1111/nep.13393. Epub
2018  Jun 21.

Nephronophthisis: A review of genotype-phenotype correlation.

Luo F(1)(2), Tao YH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan 
University, Sichuan, Chengdu, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Obstetric & Gynecologic and Pediatric Diseases and Birth 
Defects of Ministry Education, West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan 
University, Sichuan, Chengdu, China.

Nephronophthisis is an autosomal recessive cystic kidney disease and one of the 
most common genetic disorders causing end-stage renal disease in children. 
Nephronophthisis is a genetically heterogenous disorder with more than 25 
identified genes. In 10%-20% of cases, there are additional features of a 
ciliopathy syndrome, such as retinal defects, liver fibrosis, skeletal 
abnormalities, and brain developmental disorders. This review provides an update 
of the recent advances in the clinical features and related gene mutations of 
nephronophthisis, and novel approaches for therapy in nephronophthisis patients 
may be needed.

© 2018 The Authors Nephrology published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on 
behalf of Asian Pacific Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1111/nep.13393
PMCID: PMC6175366
PMID: 29717526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Nephronophthisis (NPHP), the most common monogenic cause of end‐stage renal disease (ESRD) during the first three decades of life, is responsible for 2.4%–15% of ESRD in this population. The estimated incidence varies from 1:50 000 live births in Finland to 1:1 000 000 in the United States.1 It is caused by mutations in many genes that encode nephrocystin protein, which is involved in the function of primary cilia, basal bodies, and centrosomes. These mutations result in renal disease and extra‐renal manifestations.2 This review provides an update about the recent advances in the field of NPHP.

Nephronophthisis is characterized by reduced ability of the kidneys to concentrate solutes, chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis, cystic renal disease, and progression to ESRD before age 30. The typical clinical symptoms of NPHP include polyuria, polydipsia with regular fluid intake at night, secondary enuresis, anaemia, and growth retardation. Patients with NPHP typically have a “bland” urinalysis without evidence of proteinuria, hematuria, or cellular elements until the late stage, when proteinuria may develop into secondary glomerulosclerosis.

Clinically, three clinical subtypes of NPHP have been recognized based on the median age of onset of ESRD: infantile, juvenile, and adolescent/adult.3 The main characteristics of these three subtypes of NPHP are summarized in Table 1. However, there have been several case reports of patients with NPHP who progressed to ESRD between the ages of 27 and 56 years.4, 5, 6 These cases of NPHP extend the age of ESRD from birth to the sixth decade of life.

Main features of three clinical subtypes of nephronophthisis (NPHP)

Extra‐renal manifestations occur in approximately 10%–20% of patients, including retinitis pigmentosa,7 skeletal defects,8 hepatic fibrosis,9 neurologic abnormalities,10 and cardiac defects.11 NPHP is also a major clinical finding in several syndromes, including Senior‐Loken, Joubert, Meckel‐Gruber, Cogan, and Sensenbrenner syndromes, and asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy (ATD, also known as Jeune syndrome). A summary of the main extra‐renal manifestations associated with NPHP is described in Table 2.

Extra‐renal manifestations associated with nephronophthisis (NPHP)

To date, more than 25 different genes have been found to be associated with NPHP (Table 3).2, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51 Mutations in the NPHP1 gene are the most common, being reported in approximately 20% of cases. Each of the remaining NPHP genes probably account for 1% or fewer of all cases of NPHP, and around two‐thirds of cases remain genetically unknown.41


Genes mutated in isolated nephronophthisis (NPHP)‐ and NPHP‐associated syndromes

ALMS1, Alstrom Syndrome 1; APC2, anaphase‐promoting complex 2; ATF4, activating transcription factor 4; ATRIP, ATR interacting protein; BBS, Bardet‐Biedl syndrome; BCAR1, breast cancer anti‐estrogen resistance 1; BICC1, Bicaudal‐C1; CAD, cranioectodermal dysplasia; CCDC92, coiled‐coil domain containing 92; CC2D2A, coiled‐coil and C2 domain containing 2A; CEP290, centrosomal protein 290; CHD, congenital heart disease; COACH, cerebellar vermis hypo/aplasia, oligophrenia, congenital ataxia, ocular coloboma and hepatic fibrosis; DVL3, dishevelled 3; HIF1AN, hypoxia inducible factor 1 alpha subunit inhibitor; IFT, intraflagellar transport; JATD, Jeune asphyxiating thoracic dysplasia; JBTS, Joubert syndrome; JS, Jeune syndrome; LCA, Leber congenital amaurosis; LRRC50, leucine‐rich repeat containing protein 50; MKS, Meckel‐Gruber syndrome; MZSDS, Mainzer‐Saldino syndrome; OFD1, oral‐facial‐digital protein1; OMA, oculomotor apraxia; PTK2B, protein tyrosine kinase 2B; RP, retinitis pigmentosa; RPGR, retinitis pigmentosa GTPase regulator; SBS, Sensenbrenner syndrome; SLSN, Senior‐Loken syndrome; TMEM67,transmembrane protein 67; TTBK2, Tau‐tubulin kinase 2.

Most nephrocystins are located in the transition zone, inversin compartment, or subunits of intraflagellar transport (IFT) complexes.6 However, genome‐wide homozygosity mapping identified pathogenic mutations in NPHP1L and NPHP2L of which the protein product localizes to mitochondria.52 Currently, at least four distinct nephrocystin modules have been found: the NPHP1‐4‐8 module, NPHP2‐3‐9‐ANKS6 module, NPHP5‐6 module, and MKS module (Fig. 1). These nephrocystin modules are related to different signalling pathways, including the Wnt pathway, Hedgehog pathway, DNA damage response (DDR) pathway, Hippo pathway, intracellular calcium signalling pathway, cAMP signalling pathway, and mTOR pathway.

Subcellular localization of different nephrocystin module.

NPHP shows genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity. Mutations in single ciliary genes are often associated with multiple phenotypes (Table 1 and Table 3). Single locus allelism is insufficient to explain the variability in phenotypic heterogeneity in NPHP. Digenic and triallelic inheritance may provide an explanation. Triallelic inheritance was first demonstrated for BBS.53To date, oligogenic inheritance has been noted in some patients with mutations in NPHP1, NPHP5, NPHP6, NPHP8, NPHP9, NPHP11, and TTC21B genes.12, 54, 55, 56


The diagnosis of NPHP is suggested by clinical features and confirmed by a positive genetic test (Fig. 2). The role of renal biopsy in diagnosis is controversial. Renal biopsy should be limited to cases in which tissue diagnosis can be used to distinguish it from other differential diagnoses. Molecular genetic analysis is currently the only method available to diagnose NPHP and thus provide patients and families with an unequivocal diagnosis. Due to an increasing number of potentially causative monogenic genes and to advances in next‐generation sequencing, whole‐exome sequencing has mostly replaced targeted‐sequencing panels in the diagnosis of NPHP.57 Using this method, a causative single‐gene mutation can be detected in up to 60% of cases depending on the composition of the cohort. However, the absence of mutation is not sufficient to exclude the diagnosis of NPHP. Most importantly, genetic testing should always be combined with thorough phenotyping and genetic counseling.

Approach to clinical diagnosis of nephronophthisis (NPHP).

Early onset autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease and autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease are often in the main differential diagnosis for patients with NPHP. Renal imaging may be useful in differential diagnosis. But genetic testing is required to make a definite diagnosis.

There is no specific therapy for NPHP. Management is supportive, focusing on slowing the progression of CKD, controlling complications, and maintaining the promotion of growth. This disease does not recur after transplantation, so renal transplantation is the preferred renal replacement therapy.

Some potential therapeutic interventions have arisen from several lines of investigation into the pathogenesis of NPHP. Various personalized drugs include isosorbide dinitrate and tolvaptan (vasopressin V2 receptor antagonist),58 dimethyl fumarate,59 rapamycin (mTOR inhibitor),60 roscovitine and its analog S‐CR8 (cyclin‐dependent kinases inhibitor),61 purmorphamine (Shh signalling pathway agonist),62 paclitaxel,63 regulation of transcription factor Glis2/NPHP7 by SUMOylation,64 and FR167653 (p38 MAPK pathway inhibitor).65 Despite the many promising interventions that have arisen from preclinical studies, no clinical trials have yet been conducted in NPHP patients. Furthermore, large numbers of compounds which may be potential therapies are being screened in the zebrafish models of NPHP.66


The lack of a clear‐cut genotype–phenotype correlation remains a major challenge for physicians treating children with NPHP, even though the development of a single comprehensive histopathology and the discovery of specific disease genes and molecular mechanisms have significantly improved our understanding of NPHP. Only about 30% of NPHP patients have clear genetic mutations, suggesting that more NPHP genes have yet to be discovered. Novel genes will enable us to better understand the pathogenesis and relationship between cilia and cystic diseases. It is necessary to find new therapeutic strategies and develop alternative treatments other than conservative approaches and renal replacement therapy.

There authors declare that they have no potential or actual competing interests.