---
reference_id: "PMID:21529752"
title: The essential role of centrosomal NDE1 in human cerebral cortex neurogenesis.
authors:
- Bakircioglu M
- Carvalho OP
- Khurshid M
- Cox JJ
- Tuysuz B
- Barak T
- Yilmaz S
- Caglayan O
- Dincer A
- Nicholas AK
- Quarrell O
- Springell K
- Karbani G
- Malik S
- Gannon C
- Sheridan E
- Crosier M
- Lisgo SN
- Lindsay S
- Bilguvar K
- Gergely F
- Gunel M
- Woods CG
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.03.019
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics
- Centrosome/metabolism
- "Cerebral Cortex/embryology, growth & development"
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Epithelial Cells/metabolism
- Exons
- Female
- Genetic Linkage
- HeLa Cells
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mice
- Microcephaly/genetics
- Microtubule-Associated Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- Neural Stem Cells/metabolism
- Neurogenesis
- Neurons
- Phenotype
- Pregnancy
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, metabolism"
- Transfection
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The essential role of centrosomal NDE1 in human cerebral cortex neurogenesis.
**Authors:** Bakircioglu M, Carvalho OP, Khurshid M, Cox JJ, Tuysuz B, Barak T, Yilmaz S, Caglayan O, Dincer A, Nicholas AK, Quarrell O, Springell K, Karbani G, Malik S, Gannon C, Sheridan E, Crosier M, Lisgo SN, Lindsay S, Bilguvar K, Gergely F, Gunel M, Woods CG
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.03.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.03.019)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 May 13;88(5):523-35. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.03.019.
Epub  2011 Apr 28.

The essential role of centrosomal NDE1 in human cerebral cortex neurogenesis.

Bakircioglu M(1), Carvalho OP, Khurshid M, Cox JJ, Tuysuz B, Barak T, Yilmaz S,
Caglayan O, Dincer A, Nicholas AK, Quarrell O, Springell K, Karbani G, Malik S,
Gannon C, Sheridan E, Crosier M, Lisgo SN, Lindsay S, Bilguvar K, Gergely F,
Gunel M, Woods CG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Center for Human Genetics and Genomics, and
Program on Neurogenetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2011 Sep;80(3):241-2. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01753.x.

We investigated three families whose offspring had extreme microcephaly at birth
and profound mental retardation. Brain scans and postmortem data showed that
affected individuals had brains less than 10% of expected size (≤10 standard
deviation) and that in addition to a massive reduction in neuron production they
displayed partially deficient cortical lamination (microlissencephaly).
Other body systems were apparently unaffected and overall growth was normal. We
found two distinct homozygous mutations of NDE1, c.83+1G>T (p.Ala29GlnfsX114) in
a Turkish family and c.684_685del (p.Pro229TrpfsX85) in two families of
Pakistani origin. Using patient cells, we found that c.83+1G>T led to the use of
a novel splice site and to a frameshift after NDE1 exon 2. Transfection of
tagged NDE1 constructs showed that the c.684_685del mutation resulted in a NDE1
that was unable to localize to the centrosome. By staining a patient-derived
cell line that carried the c.83+1G>T mutation, we found that this endogeneously
expressed mutated protein equally failed to localize to the centrosome. By
examining human and mouse embryonic brains, we determined that NDE1 is highly
expressed in neuroepithelial cells of the developing cerebral cortex,
particularly at the centrosome. We show that NDE1 accumulates on the mitotic
spindle of apical neural precursors in early neurogenesis. Thus, NDE1 deficiency
causes both a severe failure of neurogenesis and a deficiency in cortical
lamination. Our data further highlight the importance of the centrosome in
multiple aspects of neurodevelopment.

Copyright © 2011 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.03.019
PMCID: PMC3146716
PMID: 21529752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
