---
reference_id: "PMID:19893893"
title: Early molecular markers predictive of dengue hemorrhagic fever.
authors:
- Calzavara-Silva CE
- Gomes AL
- Maia RC
- Acioli-Santos B
- Gil LH
- Marques ET Jr
journal: An Acad Bras Cienc
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1590/s0001-37652009000400006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early molecular markers predictive of dengue hemorrhagic fever.
**Authors:** Calzavara-Silva CE, Gomes AL, Maia RC, Acioli-Santos B, Gil LH, Marques ET Jr
**Journal:** An Acad Bras Cienc (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1590/s0001-37652009000400006](https://doi.org/10.1590/s0001-37652009000400006)

## Content

1. An Acad Bras Cienc. 2009 Dec;81(4):671-7. doi:
10.1590/s0001-37652009000400006.

Early molecular markers predictive of dengue hemorrhagic fever.

Calzavara-Silva CE(1), Gomes AL, Maia RC, Acioli-Santos B, Gil LH, Marques ET 
Jr.

Author information:
(1)Laboratório de Virologia e Terapia Experimental, Centro de Pesquisa Aggeu 
Magalhães, CPqAM/FIOCRUZ, Recife, PE, Brasil. calzavara@cpqam.fiocruz.br

The management of acute dengue patients during outbreaks is a challenging 
problem. Most of the dengue fever cases are benign, but some cases develop into 
a severe and possibly lethal vasculopathy, known as dengue hemorrhagic fever. 
Early symptoms of dengue and hemorrhagic fever are very similar. An early 
differential diagnosis is needed to predict which of these two clinical 
presentations is crucial to proper patient care and public health management. 
This study evaluates the predictive potential of specific mRNA expression 
markers of dengue hemorrhagic fever using quantitative real-time PCR assays. Six 
candidate 'dengue hemorrhagic fever specific signature genes' were evaluated and 
all showed good correlation among their transcription levels at early days of 
infection and the later development of severe vasculopathy. The markers selected 
were able to indicate, at early stages of infection, the evolution of a 
dengue-infected patient to the severe form of the illness. Despite the fact that 
these results grant further validation studies, the panel of candidate 
prognostic markers obtained demonstrated the potential to be useful for clinical 
use in the form of a fast assay based in blood samples.

DOI: 10.1590/s0001-37652009000400006
PMID: 19893893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]