---
reference_id: "PMID:15272267"
title: Protein aggregation and neurodegenerative disease.
authors:
- Ross CA
- Poirier MA
journal: Nat Med
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1038/nm1066
keywords:
- "Amyloid beta-Peptides/chemistry, metabolism"
- Animals
- Humans
- Huntingtin Protein
- "Inclusion Bodies/metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- "Models, Biological"
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/metabolism
- "Neurodegenerative Diseases/etiology, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- Nuclear Proteins/metabolism
- Peptides/metabolism
- Protein Folding
- "Protein Structure, Secondary"
- Ubiquitin/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Protein aggregation and neurodegenerative disease.
**Authors:** Ross CA, Poirier MA
**Journal:** Nat Med (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nm1066](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm1066)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2004 Jul;10 Suppl:S10-7. doi: 10.1038/nm1066.

Protein aggregation and neurodegenerative disease.

Ross CA(1), Poirier MA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurobiology, Department of Psychiatry, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Ross Research Building, Room 618, 720 Rutland Avenue, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA. caross@jhu.edu

Neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease 
(PD), Huntington's disease (HD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and prion 
diseases are increasingly being realized to have common cellular and molecular 
mechanisms including protein aggregation and inclusion body formation. The 
aggregates usually consist of fibers containing misfolded protein with a 
beta-sheet conformation, termed amyloid. There is partial but not perfect 
overlap among the cells in which abnormal proteins are deposited and the cells 
that degenerate. The most likely explanation is that inclusions and other 
visible protein aggregates represent an end stage of a molecular cascade of 
several steps, and that earlier steps in the cascade may be more directly tied 
to pathogenesis than the inclusions themselves. For several diseases, genetic 
variants assist in explaining the pathogenesis of the more common sporadic forms 
and developing mouse and other models. There is now increased understanding of 
the pathways involved in protein aggregation, and some recent clues have emerged 
as to the molecular mechanisms of cellular toxicity. These are leading to 
approaches toward rational therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1038/nm1066
PMID: 15272267 [Indexed for MEDLINE]