---
reference_id: "PMID:22467625"
title: Unchanged distribution density of anionic sites on the glomerular wall in rats with streptozotocin-induced diabetic nephropathy.
authors:
- Shimoi A
- Hatakeyama H
- Koizumi H
- Satoh H
- Watanabe M
journal: Toxicol Pathol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1177/0192623312441411
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unchanged distribution density of anionic sites on the glomerular wall in rats with streptozotocin-induced diabetic nephropathy.
**Authors:** Shimoi A, Hatakeyama H, Koizumi H, Satoh H, Watanabe M
**Journal:** Toxicol Pathol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0192623312441411](https://doi.org/10.1177/0192623312441411)

## Content

1. Toxicol Pathol. 2012 Jul;40(5):789-96. doi: 10.1177/0192623312441411. Epub
2012  Mar 30.

Unchanged distribution density of anionic sites on the glomerular wall in rats 
with streptozotocin-induced diabetic nephropathy.

Shimoi A(1), Hatakeyama H, Koizumi H, Satoh H, Watanabe M.

Author information:
(1)Ina Research Inc., Ina, Nagano, Japan. a-shimoi@inaresearch.co.jp

As a cause of proteinuria in diabetic nephropathy, a decrease in anionic charge 
on the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) is considered to be related to protein 
leakage. However, the constancy of the anionic charge has been reported in 
several types of nephropathy. To elucidate the relation between glomerular 
protein leakage and anionic charge, we examined the distribution of anionic 
sites on the GBM and podocytes in diabetic rats induced by a single intravenous 
injection of 60 mg/kg of streptozotocin (STZ). Five months after the treatment 
with STZ, urinalysis for glucose and protein levels was conducted, and the 
kidneys were examined using electron microscopic cytochemistry for the 
assessment of anionic charge with two cationic probes. The distributions of 
anionic sites on the GBM demonstrated by two kinds of cationic markers in the 
diabetic rats were similar in density to those seen in the control animals. The 
distributions of anionic sites on the foot processes and cell membrane of 
podocytes were regular and also similar in density to that of the control group. 
From these results, we consider that the charge barrier of the GBM and podocytes 
is irrelevant to the protein leakage in diabetic rats.

DOI: 10.1177/0192623312441411
PMID: 22467625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]