---
reference_id: "PMID:31357902"
title: Brain endothelial specific gene therapy improves experimental Sandhoff disease.
authors:
- Dogbevia G
- Grasshoff H
- Othman A
- Penno A
- Schwaninger M
journal: J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1177/0271678X19865917
keywords:
- Animals
- Brain
- Dependovirus
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Endothelial Cells
- Genetic Therapy/methods
- Genetic Vectors
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Sandhoff Disease
- "Transduction, Genetic"
- "beta-Hexosaminidase alpha Chain/administration & dosage, genetics"
- "beta-Hexosaminidase beta Chain/administration & dosage, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brain endothelial specific gene therapy improves experimental Sandhoff disease.
**Authors:** Dogbevia G, Grasshoff H, Othman A, Penno A, Schwaninger M
**Journal:** J Cereb Blood Flow Metab (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0271678X19865917](https://doi.org/10.1177/0271678X19865917)

## Content

1. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2020 Jun;40(6):1338-1350. doi:
10.1177/0271678X19865917. Epub 2019 Jul 29.

Brain endothelial specific gene therapy improves experimental Sandhoff disease.

Dogbevia G(1)(2), Grasshoff H(1), Othman A(1), Penno A(3), Schwaninger M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology,
University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(2)Division of Cardiac Surgery, University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ottawa,
Canada.
(3)Department of Cell Biology of Lipids, LIMES Institute, University of Bonn,
Bonn, Germany.

In Tay-Sachs and Sandhoff disease, a deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme
β-hexosaminidase causes GM2 and other gangliosides to accumulate in neurons and
triggers neurodegeneration. Although the pathology centers on neurons,
β-hexosaminidase is mainly expressed outside of neurons, suggesting that gene
therapy of these diseases should target non-neuronal cells to reconstitute
physiological conditions. Here, we tested in Hexb-/- mice, a model of Sandhoff
disease, to determine whether endothelial expression of the genes for human
β-hexosaminidase subunit A and B (HEXA, HEXB) is able to reduce disease symptoms
and prolong survival of the affected mice. The brain endothelial selective
vectors AAV-BR1-CAG-HEXA and AAV-BR1-CAG-HEXB transduced brain endothelial
cells, which subsequently released β-hexosaminidase enzyme. In vivo intravenous
administration of the gene vectors to adult and neonatal mice prolonged
survival. They improved neurological function and reduced accumulation of the
ganglioside GM2 and the glycolipid GA2 as well as astrocytic activation.
Overall, the data demonstrate that endothelial cells are a suitable target for
intravenous gene therapy of GM2 gangliosidoses and possibly other lysosomal
storage disorders.

DOI: 10.1177/0271678X19865917
PMCID: PMC7238384
PMID: 31357902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
