---
reference_id: "PMID:17395137"
title: Episodic ataxia type 2.
authors:
- Strupp M
- Zwergal A
- Brandt T
journal: Neurotherapeutics
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.nurt.2007.01.014
keywords:
- 4-Aminopyridine/therapeutic use
- Acetazolamide/therapeutic use
- Animals
- "Calcium Channels/genetics, metabolism"
- Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Cerebellar Ataxia/genetics, physiopathology, therapy"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- Mutation
- Potassium Channel Blockers/therapeutic use
- "Calcium Channels, N-Type"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Episodic ataxia type 2.
**Authors:** Strupp M, Zwergal A, Brandt T
**Journal:** Neurotherapeutics (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nurt.2007.01.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nurt.2007.01.014)

## Content

1. Neurotherapeutics. 2007 Apr;4(2):267-73. doi: 10.1016/j.nurt.2007.01.014.

Episodic ataxia type 2.

Strupp M(1), Zwergal A, Brandt T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Munich, Munich, Germany. 
Michael.Strupp@med.uni-muenchen.de

Episodic ataxia type 2 (EA 2) is a rare neurological disorder of autosomal 
dominant inheritance resulting from dysfunction of a voltage-gated calcium 
channel. It manifests with recurrent disabling attacks of imbalance, vertigo, 
and ataxia, and can be provoked by physical exertion or emotional stress. In the 
spell-free interval, patients present with central ocular motor dysfunction, 
mainly downbeat nystagmus. A slow progression of cerebellar signs accompanied by 
a slight atrophy of midline cerebellar structures is commonly observed during 
the course of the disease. EA 2 is caused most often by the loss of function 
mutations of the calcium channel gene CACNA1A, which encodes the Ca(v)2.1 
subunit of the P/Q-type calcium channel and is primarily expressed in Purkinje 
cells. To date, more than 30 mutations have been described. Two effective 
treatment options have been established for EA 2: acetazolamide (ACTZ), which 
probably changes the intracellular pH and thereby the transmembraneous 
potential, and 4-aminopyridine (4-AP), a potassium channel blocker. 
Approximately 70% of all patients respond to treatment with ACTZ, but the effect 
is often only transient. In an open trial, 4-AP prevented attacks in five of six 
patients with EA 2, most likely by increasing the resting activity and 
excitability of the Purkinje cells. These findings were confirmed by experiments 
in animal models of EA 2. Many aspects of the pathophysiology (e.g., induction 
of the attacks) and treatment of EA 2 (e.g., mode of action of ACTZ and 4-AP) 
still remain unclear and need to be addressed in further animal and clinical 
studies.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nurt.2007.01.014
PMID: 17395137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]