---
reference_id: "PMID:11845220"
title: "Genetic linkage and association studies of Type I diabetes: challenges and rewards."
authors:
- Field LL
journal: Diabetologia
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1007/s125-002-8241-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic linkage and association studies of Type I diabetes: challenges and rewards.
**Authors:** Field LL
**Journal:** Diabetologia (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s125-002-8241-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s125-002-8241-7)

## Content

1. Diabetologia. 2002 Jan;45(1):21-35. doi: 10.1007/s125-002-8241-7.

Genetic linkage and association studies of Type I diabetes: challenges and 
rewards.

Field LL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, BC Research Institute for Children's and 
Women's Health, University of British Columbia, 950 West 28 Ave., Vancouver, BC, 
V5Z 4H4, Canada. llfield@interchange.ubc.ca

Family and twin studies have shown clearly that Type I (insulin-dependent) 
diabetes mellitus has a genetic basis. However, only within the past decade has 
it been possible to systematically attempt to identify the genes that increase 
susceptibility to this disorder using linkage and association analysis of 
genetic markers distributed across the genome. More than 20 putative 
diabetes-predisposing genes have been localised in addition to HLA region 
susceptibility genes detected more than 25 years ago. Unfortunately, the effects 
of most diabetes-predisposing genes are weak, with the exception of HLA region 
susceptibility genes (which contribute about half of the genetic risk). The 
overall effects of diabetes-predisposing genes could be weak because the 
susceptibility gene occurs in only a small proportion of diabetic patients or 
the susceptibility gene (although it might be common) produces only a modest 
increase in risk, probably by acting in concert with other such genes to cause 
disease. The weak effects of these genes have made them difficult to locate, 
difficult to confirm in independent studies and difficult to isolate by genetic 
procedures. This paper summarizes the major challenges that have faced 
geneticists in mapping Type I diabetes genes, and reviews the progress achieved 
to date. The rewards of the genetic studies will be twofold: increased 
understanding of the causes of Type I diabetes, facilitating creation of 
preventative therapies, and enabling clinicians in the future to use genetic 
information to predict which children are predisposed to diabetes in order to 
target them for preventative therapies.

DOI: 10.1007/s125-002-8241-7
PMID: 11845220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]