---
reference_id: "PMID:34878152"
title: Analysis of a family with mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiency caused by HADHA gene mutations.
authors:
- Yang J
- Yuan D
- Tan X
- Zeng Y
- Tang N
- Chen D
- Tan J
- Cai R
- Huang J
- Yan T
journal: Mol Med Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3892/mmr.2021.12563
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of a family with mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiency caused by HADHA gene mutations.
**Authors:** Yang J, Yuan D, Tan X, Zeng Y, Tang N, Chen D, Tan J, Cai R, Huang J, Yan T
**Journal:** Mol Med Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3892/mmr.2021.12563](https://doi.org/10.3892/mmr.2021.12563)

## Content

1. Mol Med Rep. 2022 Feb;25(2):47. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2021.12563. Epub 2021 Dec 8.

Analysis of a family with mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiency caused 
by HADHA gene mutations.

Yang J(1), Yuan D(1), Tan X(2), Zeng Y(3), Tang N(1), Chen D(1), Tan J(1), Cai 
R(1), Huang J(1), Yan T(1).

Author information:
(1)Newborn Screening Center, Department of Medical Genetics, Key Laboratory of 
Prevention and Control of Birth Defects, Liuzhou Maternity and Child Health Care 
Hospital, Affiliated Maternity Hospital and Affiliated Children's Hospital of 
Guangxi University of Science and Technology, Liuzhou, Guangxi 545000, 
P.R. China.
(2)School of Forensic Medicine, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, 
Guangdong 510515, P.R. China.
(3)Newborn Screening Center, Huizhou Second Maternity and Child Health Care 
Hospital, Huizhou, Guangdong 516001, P.R. China.

Mitochondrial trifunctional protein (MTP) deficiency (MTPD; MIM 609015) is a 
metabolic disease of fatty acid oxidation. MTPD is an autosomal recessive 
disorder caused by mutations in the HADHA gene, encoding the α‑subunit of a 
trifunctional protease, or in the HADHB gene, encoding the β‑subunit of a 
trifunctional protease. To the best of our knowledge, only two cases of families 
with MTPD due to HADHB gene mutations have been reported in China, and the HADHA 
gene mutation has not been reported in a Chinese family with MTPD. The present 
study reported the clinical characteristics and compound heterozygous HADHA gene 
mutations of two patients with MTPD in the Chinese population. The medical 
history, routine examination data, blood acyl‑carnitine analysis results, 
results of pathological examination after autopsy and family pedigree map were 
collected for patients with MTPD. The HADHA gene was analyzed by Sanger 
sequencing or high‑throughput sequencing, the pathogenicity of the newly 
discovered variant was interpreted by bioinformatics analysis, and the function 
of the mutated protein was modeled and analyzed according to 3D structure. The 
two patients with MTPD experienced metabolic crises and died following an 
infectious disease. Lactate dehydrogenase, creatine kinase (CK), CK‑MB and liver 
enzyme abnormalities were observed in routine examinations. Tandem mass 
spectrometry revealed that long‑chain acyl‑carnitine was markedly elevated in 
blood samples from the patients with MTPD. The autopsy results for one child 
revealed fat accumulation in the liver and heart. Next‑generation sequencing 
detected compound heterozygous c.703C>T (p.R235W) and c.2107G>A (p.G703R) 
mutations in the HADHA gene. The mother did not have acute fatty liver during 
pregnancy with the two patients. Using amniotic fluid prenatal diagnostic 
testing, the unborn child was confirmed to carry only c.2107G>A (p.G703R). 
Molecular mechanistic analysis indicated that the two variants affected the 
conformation of the α‑subunit of the MTP enzyme complex, and consequently 
affected the stability and function of the enzyme complex. The present study 
comprehensively analyzed the cases, including exome sequencing and protein 
structure analysis and, to the best of our knowledge, describes the first 
observation of compound heterozygous mutations in the HADHA gene underlying this 
disorder in China. The clinical phenotypes of the two heterozygous variants of 
the HADHA gene are non‑lethal. The present study may improve understanding of 
the HADHA gene mutation spectrum and clinical phenotype in the Chinese 
population.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2021.12563
PMCID: PMC8674702
PMID: 34878152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.