---
reference_id: "PMID:35769964"
title: "A Truncating Variant of CHRNG as a Cause of Escobar Syndrome: A Multiple Pterygium Syndrome Subtype."
authors:
- Sandweiss AJ
- Patel S
- Bader MY
- Kylat RI
journal: J Pediatr Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1055/s-0040-1715640
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Truncating Variant of CHRNG as a Cause of Escobar Syndrome: A Multiple Pterygium Syndrome Subtype.
**Authors:** Sandweiss AJ, Patel S, Bader MY, Kylat RI
**Journal:** J Pediatr Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0040-1715640](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0040-1715640)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Genet. 2020 Aug 26;11(2):144-146. doi: 10.1055/s-0040-1715640. 
eCollection 2022 Jun.

A Truncating Variant of CHRNG as a Cause of Escobar Syndrome: A Multiple 
Pterygium Syndrome Subtype.

Sandweiss AJ(1)(2), Patel S(1), Bader MY(1), Kylat RI(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Arizona College of Medicine, Tucson, 
Arizona, United States.
(2)Section of Neurology and Developmental Neurosciences, Department of 
Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States.

Escobar syndrome is a milder variant of multiple pterygium syndrome 
characterized by pterygia, scoliosis, and multiple congenital contractures. It 
is most frequently due to a genetic variant in CHRNG , which encodes the 
γ-subunit of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor. Though the subunit is 
considered a "fetal" form and transitions to the "adult" ε-subunit by 33 weeks' 
gestation, the pathogenic musculoskeletal effects during fetal development 
render children with this condition permanently affected. We report a neonate 
with homozygous CHRNG c.117dupC and discuss some of the downstream clinical 
effects we observed with this variant.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0040-1715640
PMCID: PMC9236754
PMID: 35769964

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None declared.