---
reference_id: "PMID:31495596"
title: Surveillance of invasive meningococcal disease in the Tel Aviv District, Israel, 2007-2017.
authors:
- Salama M
- Kopel E
- Jaffe J
- Amitai Z
- Sheffer R
- Rahmani S
- Yuabov I
- Dardik L
- Valinsky L
journal: Vaccine
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.08.055
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surveillance of invasive meningococcal disease in the Tel Aviv District, Israel, 2007-2017.
**Authors:** Salama M, Kopel E, Jaffe J, Amitai Z, Sheffer R, Rahmani S, Yuabov I, Dardik L, Valinsky L
**Journal:** Vaccine (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.08.055](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.08.055)

## Content

1. Vaccine. 2019 Sep 30;37(42):6186-6191. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.08.055.
Epub  2019 Sep 5.

Surveillance of invasive meningococcal disease in the Tel Aviv District, Israel, 
2007-2017.

Salama M(1), Kopel E(2), Jaffe J(3), Amitai Z(4), Sheffer R(5), Rahmani S(4), 
Yuabov I(4), Dardik L(4), Valinsky L(3).

Author information:
(1)Tel Aviv District Health Office, Ministry of Health, Tel Aviv, Israel. 
Electronic address: Matanelle.salama@gmail.com.
(2)School of Public Health, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, 
Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)Central Laboratories, Israel Ministry of Health, Jerusalem, Israel.
(4)Tel Aviv District Health Office, Ministry of Health, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(5)Public Health Services, Israel Ministry of Health, Jerusalem, Israel.

Invasive meningococcal disease (IMD) is one of the leading causes of bacterial 
meningitis and septicemia in Israel. The purpose of the study was to describe 
the IMD in the Tel Aviv District and to identify specific populations who could 
benefit from vaccine introduction. In the Tel Aviv District, the incidence rates 
ranged from 0.4 to 1.4 cases per 100,000 population per year during 2007-2017. 
During the study period, seventy-nine patients (65%) occurred among children 
younger than four years of age. Eight deaths occurred (7%), most of them among 
children under the age of 1 year (5 deaths; 15%). A serogroup was identified in 
82 isolates. Most of the isolates (69 cases - 84%) belonged to serogroup B 
(NmB). IMD clustered geographically in the city of Bnei Brak, with a 
predominantly Ultra-Orthodox Jewish population. It is the youngest and most 
densely populated city in the district. The overall incidence rates of IMD among 
children in Bnei Brak were more than seven times higher in children up to nine 
years, compared to the rest of the district. Specifically for NmB, disease rates 
were 9.08 times higher in children up to the age of four, and 7.74 times higher 
in children from five to nine years old in Bnei Brak, compared to the rest of 
the district. Our findings describe the burden of a vaccine-preventable disease 
and reinforce the need for routine 4CmenB introduction, especially in groups 
where the disease clusters.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.08.055
PMID: 31495596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]