---
reference_id: "PMID:40566003"
title: Clinical Management of Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy.
authors:
- Theodorou A
- Fanouraki S
- Bakola E
- Papagiannopoulou G
- Palaiodimou L
- Chondrogianni M
- Stefanou MI
- Stavrinou L
- Athanasaki A
- Psychogios K
- Kargiotis O
- Safouris A
- Velonakis G
- Paraskevas GP
- Tsivgoulis G
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/jcm14124259
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Management of Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy.
**Authors:** Theodorou A, Fanouraki S, Bakola E, Papagiannopoulou G, Palaiodimou L, Chondrogianni M, Stefanou MI, Stavrinou L, Athanasaki A, Psychogios K, Kargiotis O, Safouris A, Velonakis G, Paraskevas GP, Tsivgoulis G
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm14124259](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm14124259)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2025 Jun 15;14(12):4259. doi: 10.3390/jcm14124259.

Clinical Management of Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy.

Theodorou A(1), Fanouraki S(1), Bakola E(1), Papagiannopoulou G(1), Palaiodimou 
L(1), Chondrogianni M(1), Stefanou MI(1)(2)(3), Stavrinou L(4), Athanasaki A(1), 
Psychogios K(5), Kargiotis O(5), Safouris A(1)(5), Velonakis G(6), Paraskevas 
GP(1), Tsivgoulis G(1).

Author information:
(1)Second Department of Neurology, "Attikon" University Hospital, School of 
Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Rimini 1, Chaidari, 
12462 Athens, Greece.
(2)Department of Neurology & Stroke, Eberhard-Karls University of Tübingen, 
72074 Tübingen, Germany.
(3)Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, Eberhard-Karls University of 
Tübingen, 72074 Tübingen, Germany.
(4)Second Department of Neurosurgery, "Attikon" University Hospital, School of 
Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 12462 Athens, Greece.
(5)Stroke Unit, Metropolitan Hospital, 18547 Piraeus, Greece.
(6)Second Department of Radiology, "Attikon" University Hospital, School of 
Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 12462 Athens, Greece.

Background: Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) represents a progressive 
cerebrovascular disorder, characterized by aberrant accumulation of beta-amyloid 
isoforms in cortical and leptomeningeal vessel walls of cerebrum and cerebellum. 
Methods: We sought to investigate the clinical manifestations, current different 
diagnostic tools, various therapeutic strategies and most uncommon subtypes of 
the disease. Results: The vast majority of CAA remains sporadic, with increasing 
prevalence with age and very frequent coexistence with Alzheimer's disease. 
Clinically, CAA can present with spontaneous lobar intracerebral hemorrhage, 
transient focal neurologic episodes attributed to convexity subarachnoid 
hemorrhage or cortical superficial siderosis, and progressive cognitive decline 
leading to dementia. Inflammatory CAA subtype should be recognized early and 
treated promptly so that better functional outcomes may be achieved. Moreover, 
genetic and iatrogenic CAA forms are rare, yet increasingly recognized during 
the last years. Therapeutic management remains challenging for clinicians, 
especially when markers indicative of higher bleeding risk are present. A 
targeted therapy does not currently exist. However, various clinical trials are 
in progress, focusing on offering new promising insights into the disease 
treatment. Conclusions: This review aims to deepen our understanding of CAA 
diagnosis and therapeutic approach but also summarizes current evidence on the 
most uncommon subtypes of this cerebral small-vessel disease.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm14124259
PMCID: PMC12194787
PMID: 40566003

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.