---
reference_id: "PMID:37611023"
title: Monkeypox genome mutation analysis using a timeseries model based on long short-term memory.
authors:
- Pathan RK
- Uddin MA
- Paul AM
- Uddin MI
- Hamd ZY
- Aljuaid H
- Khandaker MU
journal: PLoS One
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0290045
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monkeypox genome mutation analysis using a timeseries model based on long short-term memory.
**Authors:** Pathan RK, Uddin MA, Paul AM, Uddin MI, Hamd ZY, Aljuaid H, Khandaker MU
**Journal:** PLoS One (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0290045](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0290045)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2023 Aug 23;18(8):e0290045. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0290045. 
eCollection 2023.

Monkeypox genome mutation analysis using a timeseries model based on long 
short-term memory.

Pathan RK(1), Uddin MA(2), Paul AM(3), Uddin MI(4), Hamd ZY(5), Aljuaid H(6), 
Khandaker MU(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computing and Information Systems, School of Engineering and 
Technology, Sunway University, Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Chittagong University of 
Engineering & Technology, Chittagong, Bangladesh.
(3)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, BGC Trust University 
Bangladesh, Chittagong, Bangladesh.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, State University of Bangladesh, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(5)Department of Radiological Sciences, College of Health and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(6)Computer Sciences Department, College of Computer and Information Sciences, 
Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University (PNU), Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(7)Centre for Applied Physics and Radiation Technologies, School of Engineering 
and Technology, Sunway University, Selangor, Malaysia.
(8)Department of General Educational Development, Faculty of Science and 
Information Technology, Daffodil International University, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

Monkeypox is a double-stranded DNA virus with an envelope and is a member of the 
Poxviridae family's Orthopoxvirus genus. This virus can transmit from human to 
human through direct contact with respiratory secretions, infected animals and 
humans, or contaminated objects and causing mutations in the human body. In May 
2022, several monkeypox affected cases were found in many countries. Because of 
its transmitting characteristics, on July 23, 2022, a nationwide public health 
emergency was proclaimed by WHO due to the monkeypox virus. This study analyzed 
the gene mutation rate that is collected from the most recent NCBI monkeypox 
dataset. The collected data is prepared to independently identify the nucleotide 
and codon mutation. Additionally, depending on the size and availability of the 
gene dataset, the computed mutation rate is split into three categories: Canada, 
Germany, and the rest of the world. In this study, the genome mutation rate of 
the monkeypox virus is predicted using a deep learning-based Long Short-Term 
Memory (LSTM) model and compared with Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) model. The LSTM 
model shows "Root Mean Square Error" (RMSE) values of 0.09 and 0.08 for testing 
and training, respectively. Using this time series analysis method, the 
prospective mutation rate of the 50th patient has been predicted. Note that this 
is a new report on the monkeypox gene mutation. It is found that the nucleotide 
mutation rates are decreasing, and the balance between bi-directional rates are 
maintained.

Copyright: © 2023 Pathan et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0290045
PMCID: PMC10446231
PMID: 37611023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.