---
reference_id: "PMID:24925629"
title: "Aortopathy in Marfan syndrome: an update."
authors:
- Romaniello F
- Mazzaglia D
- Pellegrino A
- Grego S
- Fiorito R
- Ferlosio A
- Chiariello L
- Orlandi A
journal: Cardiovasc Pathol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.carpath.2014.04.007
keywords:
- "Aortic Diseases/etiology, pathology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Marfan Syndrome/complications
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aortopathy in Marfan syndrome: an update.
**Authors:** Romaniello F, Mazzaglia D, Pellegrino A, Grego S, Fiorito R, Ferlosio A, Chiariello L, Orlandi A
**Journal:** Cardiovasc Pathol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.carpath.2014.04.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carpath.2014.04.007)

## Content

1. Cardiovasc Pathol. 2014 Sep-Oct;23(5):261-6. doi:
10.1016/j.carpath.2014.04.007.  Epub 2014 May 6.

Aortopathy in Marfan syndrome: an update.

Romaniello F(1), Mazzaglia D(1), Pellegrino A(2), Grego S(2), Fiorito R(3), 
Ferlosio A(1), Chiariello L(2), Orlandi A(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Anatomic Pathology, Dept. of Biomedicine and Prevention, Tor 
Vergata University of Rome, Via Montpellier, 00133 Rome, Italy.
(2)Cardiac Surgery, Dept. of Experimental Medicine and Surgery, Tor Vergata 
University of Rome, Via Montpellier, 00133 Rome, Italy.
(3)General Surgery, Dept. of Biomedicine and Prevention, Tor Vergata University 
of Rome, Via Montpellier, 00133 Rome, Italy.
(4)Institute of Anatomic Pathology, Dept. of Biomedicine and Prevention, Tor 
Vergata University of Rome, Via Montpellier, 00133 Rome, Italy. Electronic 
address: orlandi@uniroma2.it.

Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an inherited autosomal dominant multisystem disease 
caused by mutations in the FBN1 gene encoding fibrillin-1, an extracellular 
matrix glycoprotein widely distributed in mesenchymal-derived tissues that 
provide a scaffold for elastin deposition. MFS is characterized by variable 
clinical manifestations, including skeletal, ocular, and cardiovascular 
abnormalities; ascending aortic aneurysm with ensuing dissection and rupture is 
the main life-threatening cardiovascular manifestation of MFS. Histological 
aspects of MFS aortopathy include a medial degeneration from disarray and 
fragmentation of elastic fibers and accumulation of basophilic ground substance 
areas depleted of smooth muscle cells (SMCs). Transmission electron microscopy 
well evidences the high number of interruptions and the thick appearance of the 
elastic lamellae and the accumulation of abundant extracellular 
glycosaminoglycan-rich material, sometimes SMCs showing a prevalent synthetic 
phenotype. The aberrant signaling of transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) as the 
consequence of the altered structure of fibrillin-1 induces activation and the 
overexpression of Smad-dependent profibrotic signaling pathway and 
ERK1/2-mediated increased synthesis of matrix metalloproteinases. In addition, 
MFS is accompanied by an impaired aortic contractile function and aortic 
endothelial-dependent relaxation, which is caused by an enhancement of the 
oxidative stress and increased reactive oxygen species during the progression of 
the disease. Many studies are currently evaluating the contribution of 
TGF-β-mediated biomolecular pathways to the progression of MFS aortopathy and 
aneurysm development, in order to discover new targets for pharmacological 
strategies aimed to counteract aortic dilation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.carpath.2014.04.007
PMID: 24925629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]