---
reference_id: "PMID:39816672"
title: Anomalous Aortic Origin of a Coronary Artery in Pediatric Patients.
authors:
- Doan TT
- Puelz C
- Rusin C
- Molossi S
journal: Curr Pediatr Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s40124-024-00317-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anomalous Aortic Origin of a Coronary Artery in Pediatric Patients.
**Authors:** Doan TT, Puelz C, Rusin C, Molossi S
**Journal:** Curr Pediatr Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40124-024-00317-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40124-024-00317-7)

## Content

1. Curr Pediatr Rep. 2024;12(3):69-80. doi: 10.1007/s40124-024-00317-7. Epub 2024
 May 24.

Anomalous Aortic Origin of a Coronary Artery in Pediatric Patients.

Doan TT(1)(2), Puelz C(2), Rusin C(2), Molossi S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Coronary Artery Anomalies Program, Division of Cardiology, Texas Children's 
Hospital, 6651 Main Street MC-E1920, Houston, TX 77030 USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030 USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: We present a contemporary approach to risk assessment and 
management of patients with anomalous aortic origin of a coronary artery 
(AAOCA).
RECENT FINDINGS: Anomalous left coronary artery from the right aortic sinus 
(L-AAOCA) with interarterial course carries a high risk of sudden cardiac death 
(SCD); therefore, current guidelines recommend exercise restriction and surgical 
intervention. Recent data in intraseptal and juxtacommissural L-AAOCA showed 
inducible perfusion abnormalities, leading to consideration of surgical 
intervention. Anomalous right coronary artery from the left aortic sinus 
(R-AAOCA) carries a much lower risk and stress perfusion imaging is helpful in 
identifying patients with inducible ischemia. Perfusion abnormalities resolve 
following successful surgical intervention of AAOCA. Computational modeling 
techniques identifying risk features shows promise in the evaluation of AAOCA.
SUMMARY: Stress perfusion imaging is helpful in assessing AAOCA upon 
presentation and following surgical intervention. Computational modeling has 
potential in bridging knowledge gaps in AAOCA.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The online version contains supplementary material 
available at 10.1007/s40124-024-00317-7.

© The Author(s) 2024.

DOI: 10.1007/s40124-024-00317-7
PMCID: PMC11729077
PMID: 39816672

Conflict of interest statement: Competing InterestsThe authors declare that they 
have no competing interests.