---
reference_id: "PMID:30730842"
title: "Clinical, biochemical, and molecular spectrum of short/branched-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency: two new cases and review of literature."
authors:
- Porta F
- Chiesa N
- Martinelli D
- Spada M
journal: J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1515/jpem-2018-0311
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical, biochemical, and molecular spectrum of short/branched-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency: two new cases and review of literature.
**Authors:** Porta F, Chiesa N, Martinelli D, Spada M
**Journal:** J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1515/jpem-2018-0311](https://doi.org/10.1515/jpem-2018-0311)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2019 Feb 25;32(2):101-108. doi: 
10.1515/jpem-2018-0311.

Clinical, biochemical, and molecular spectrum of short/branched-chain acyl-CoA 
dehydrogenase deficiency: two new cases and review of literature.

Porta F(1), Chiesa N(1), Martinelli D(2), Spada M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Torino, Torino, Italy.
(2)Division of Metabolism, IRCCS Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy.

Background Short/branched-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (SBCAD) deficiency is a 
rare inborn error of metabolism with uncertain clinical significance. As it 
leads to C5-carnitine (i.e. isovalerylcarnitine, 2methylbutyrilcarnitine, or 
pivaloylcarnitine) elevation, SBCAD deficiency is detectable at newborn 
screening, requiring differential diagnosis from isovaleric acidemia and pivalic 
acid administration. Increased urinary excretion of 2-methylbutyrylglycine 
(2MBG) is the hallmark of SBCAD deficiency. Methods We report two cases of SBCAD 
deficiency and provide a review of the available literature on this condition. 
Results Two siblings newly diagnosed with SBCAD deficiency are reported. Newborn 
screening allowed the early diagnosis in the second-born (C5=0.5 μmol/L, normal 
0.05-0.3 μmol/L) and addressed selective screening in the 5-year asymptomatic 
brother (C5=1.9 μmol/L). Both patients showed increased urinary excretion of 
2MBG and two mutations in the ACADSB gene (c.443C>T/c.1145C>T). Currently, both 
the patients are asymptomatic. Longitudinal biochemical monitoring of the two 
patients while on treatment with carnitine (100 mg/kg/day) was provided. Based 
on our experience and the literature review (162 patients), SBCAD deficiency is 
symptomatic in about 10% of reported patients. Clinical onset occurs in newborns 
or later in life with seizures, developmental delay, hypotonia, and failure to 
thrive. On longitudinal follow-up, epilepsy, developmental delay, microcephaly, 
and autism can develop. Acute metabolic decompensation due to catabolic 
stressors can occur, as observed in one newly reported patient. Fifteen 
mutations in the ACADSB gene are known, including the newly identified variant 
c.1145C>T (p.Thr382Met), variably associated to the phenotype. In the Hmong 
population, SBCAD deficiency is highly prevalent, mostly due to the founder 
mutation c.1165A>G, and is largely asymptomatic. Conclusions Although mostly 
asymptomatic, considering SBCAD deficiency as a non-disease in non-Hmong 
subjects appears unsafe. Catabolic situations can precipitate acute metabolic 
decompensation. Carnitine supplementation and valproate avoidance appear to be 
indicated. Providing an emergency protocol for the management of acute catabolic 
episodes seems reasonable in asymptomatic patients with SBCAD deficiency. 
Longitudinal follow-up is recommended.

DOI: 10.1515/jpem-2018-0311
PMID: 30730842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]