---
reference_id: "PMID:12838516"
title: Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy with agenesis of the corpus callosum.
authors:
- Dupré N
- Howard HC
- Mathieu J
- Karpati G
- Vanasse M
- Bouchard JP
- Carpenter S
- Rouleau GA
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1002/ana.77777
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Agenesis of Corpus Callosum
- Atrophy/pathology
- Brachial Plexus Neuritis/epidemiology
- Brain/pathology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cognition Disorders/epidemiology
- Comorbidity
- Electromyography
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Genotype
- "Hereditary Sensory and Motor Neuropathy/epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Median Nerve/physiopathology
- Muscle Hypotonia/epidemiology
- Neural Conduction/physiology
- Point Mutation/genetics
- Quebec/epidemiology
- "Reflex, Abnormal/physiology"
- Symporters/genetics
- K Cl- Cotransporters
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy with agenesis of the corpus callosum.
**Authors:** Dupré N, Howard HC, Mathieu J, Karpati G, Vanasse M, Bouchard JP, Carpenter S, Rouleau GA
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.77777](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.77777)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2003 Jul;54(1):9-18. doi: 10.1002/ana.77777.

Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy with agenesis of the corpus callosum.

Dupré N(1), Howard HC, Mathieu J, Karpati G, Vanasse M, Bouchard JP, Carpenter
S, Rouleau GA.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Research in Neurosciences and the Department of Neurology and
Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montreal.

Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy associated with agenesis of the corpus
callosum (OMIM 218000) is an autosomal recessive disease of early onset
characterized by a delay in developmental milestones, a severe sensory-motor
polyneuropathy with areflexia, a variable degree of agenesis of the corpus
callosum, amyotrophy, hypotonia, and cognitive impairment. Although this
disorder has rarely been reported worldwide, it has a high prevalence in the
Saguenay-Lac-St-Jean region of the province of Quebec (Canada) predominantly
because of a founder effect. The gene defect responsible for this disorder
recently has been identified, and it is a protein-truncating mutation in the
SLC12A6 gene, which codes for a cotransporter protein known as KCC3. Herein, we
provide the first extensive review of this disorder, covering epidemiological,
clinical, and molecular genetic studies.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.77777
PMID: 12838516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
