---
reference_id: "PMID:19797919"
title: "Prevention of amyloidosis in familial Mediterranean fever with colchicine: a case-control study in Armenia."
authors:
- Sevoyan MK
- Sarkisian TF
- Beglaryan AA
- Shahsuvaryan GR
- Armenian HK
journal: Med Princ Pract
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1159/000235892
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevention of amyloidosis in familial Mediterranean fever with colchicine: a case-control study in Armenia.
**Authors:** Sevoyan MK, Sarkisian TF, Beglaryan AA, Shahsuvaryan GR, Armenian HK
**Journal:** Med Princ Pract (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000235892](https://doi.org/10.1159/000235892)

## Content

1. Med Princ Pract. 2009;18(6):441-6. doi: 10.1159/000235892. Epub 2009 Sep 30.

Prevention of amyloidosis in familial Mediterranean fever with colchicine: a 
case-control study in Armenia.

Sevoyan MK(1), Sarkisian TF, Beglaryan AA, Shahsuvaryan GR, Armenian HK.

Author information:
(1)American University of Armenia, Yerevan, Republic of Armenia. 
maria_sevoyan@yahoo.co.uk

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether or not the use of colchicine decreases the risk 
of amyloidosis among Armenian patients with familial Mediterranean fever (FMF).
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: The study included 99 Armenian patients from the Center of 
Medical Genetics database with genetically ascertained FMF; 33 had renal 
amyloidosis and 66 were randomly selected control patients without renal 
amyloidosis. Self- reported colchicine use was assessed by interviewer-based 
questionnaire.
RESULTS: The patients with incident amyloidosis were more likely to be older 
men, but younger at the time of disease onset, and more likely to have had a 
family history of amyloidosis and M694F mutation in the MEFV gene compared to 
patients without amyloidosis. The risk of amyloidosis decreased with adequate 
colchicine use rather than nonadequate use (adjusted odds ratio, OR, 0.48, 95% 
confidence interval, CI, 0.16-1.43), continuous colchicine use rather than 
interrupted use (adjusted OR 0.15, 95% CI 0.04-0.53), earlier rather than later 
initiation age of colchicine treatment (adjusted OR 0.95, 95% CI 0.90-1.01), 
current colchicine rather than ever/never colchicine use (adjusted OR 0.20, 95% 
CI 0.05-0.89).
CONCLUSION: The study demonstrated that colchicine treatment is effective in 
preventing amyloidosis among Armenian patients with FMF and that earlier 
initiation and continuous therapy at an adequate dose of 1.2-1.8 mg/day may be 
associated with a decreased amyloidosis risk among Armenian patients with FMF.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000235892
PMID: 19797919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]