---
reference_id: "PMID:25437284"
title: "Detecting the earliest signs of rheumatoid arthritis: symptoms and examination."
authors:
- Kung TN
- Bykerk VP
journal: Rheum Dis Clin North Am
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.rdc.2014.07.009
keywords:
- "Arthralgia/etiology, physiopathology"
- "Arthritis, Rheumatoid/complications, diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Early Diagnosis
- Humans
- Joints/physiopathology
- Physical Examination
- "Range of Motion, Articular"
- Surveys and Questionnaires
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Detecting the earliest signs of rheumatoid arthritis: symptoms and examination.
**Authors:** Kung TN, Bykerk VP
**Journal:** Rheum Dis Clin North Am (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rdc.2014.07.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rdc.2014.07.009)

## Content

1. Rheum Dis Clin North Am. 2014 Nov;40(4):669-83. doi:
10.1016/j.rdc.2014.07.009.  Epub 2014 Oct 14.

Detecting the earliest signs of rheumatoid arthritis: symptoms and examination.

Kung TN(1), Bykerk VP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario M5T3L9, Canada.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, Hospital for Special Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical 
College, New York, NY 10021, USA. Electronic address: bykerkv@hss.edu.

Signs and symptoms often occur well in advance of a formal diagnosis of 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). However, these do not necessarily represent symptoms 
that are included in classification criteria. Their intensity, frequency, and 
persistence over time seem to be important in the spectrum from preclinical 
autoimmunity to classifiable RA. Prospective study of signs and symptoms in 
individuals at risk for RA will help to determine their onset and relationship 
with epitope spreading, cytokine evolution, sensitive imaging, and their 
usefulness in discriminating between individuals patients who will develop 
incident inflammatory arthritis versus normal controls.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rdc.2014.07.009
PMID: 25437284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]