---
reference_id: "PMID:37456462"
title: Incomplete Anterior Spinal Artery Syndrome Responsive to Intrathecal Baclofen.
authors:
- Waack A
- Fliegner M
- Menkes DL
- Staudt MD
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.40391
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incomplete Anterior Spinal Artery Syndrome Responsive to Intrathecal Baclofen.
**Authors:** Waack A, Fliegner M, Menkes DL, Staudt MD
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.40391](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.40391)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Jun 13;15(6):e40391. doi: 10.7759/cureus.40391. eCollection 2023 
Jun.

Incomplete Anterior Spinal Artery Syndrome Responsive to Intrathecal Baclofen.

Waack A(1), Fliegner M(2), Menkes DL(3)(4), Staudt MD(5)(2).

Author information:
(1)Neurosurgery, The University of Toledo, Toledo, USA.
(2)Neurosurgery, Oakland University William Beaumont School of Medicine, 
Rochester, USA.
(3)Neurology, Beaumont Health, Royal Oak, USA.
(4)Neurology, Oakland University William Beaumont School of Medicine, Rochester, 
USA.
(5)Neurosurgery, Beaumont Health, Royal Oak, USA.

Anterior cord syndrome (ACS) occurs as a result of ischemia in the territory of 
the anterior spinal artery (ASA). Although spinal cord strokes are rare, the ASA 
is the most commonly affected vessel in the spinal cord. The typical 
presentation of an ASA stroke is paraparesis or paraplegia, bilateral loss of 
pain and temperature sensation, and fecal or urinary incontinence; the 
underlying neural structures responsible for these symptoms include the 
corticospinal tracts and anterior horns, anterolateral spinothalamic tracts, and 
lateral horns, respectively. ACS is a feared complication of aortic procedures 
and has been well-documented to occur during or after endovascular abdominal 
aortic aneurysm revascularization (EVAR). We report a case of incomplete or 
partial ACS presenting with delayed-onset spasticity and instability several 
months following EVAR, who was subsequently treated with intrathecal baclofen. 
We hypothesize that this patient's ischemia selectively damaged descending white 
matter tracts responsible for modulating the stretch receptor reflex, including 
damage to the corticospinal tract, which likely also impaired positional 
stability.

Copyright © 2023, Waack et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.40391
PMCID: PMC10345232
PMID: 37456462

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.