---
reference_id: "PMID:7713480"
title: "Mantle cell lymphoma: a clinicopathological study of 55 cases."
authors:
- Pittaluga S
- Wlodarska I
- Stul MS
- Thomas J
- Verhoef G
- Cassiman JJ
- Van den Berghe H
- de Wolf-Peeters C
journal: Histopathology
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.1995.tb00615.x
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Antigens, CD/analysis"
- Cyclin D1
- Cyclins/genetics
- Female
- "Gene Rearrangement, B-Lymphocyte/genetics"
- Humans
- Immunoglobulins/analysis
- Immunophenotyping/methods
- "Lymphoma, Non-Hodgkin/genetics, immunology, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Oncogene Proteins/genetics
- "Translocation, Genetic/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mantle cell lymphoma: a clinicopathological study of 55 cases.
**Authors:** Pittaluga S, Wlodarska I, Stul MS, Thomas J, Verhoef G, Cassiman JJ, Van den Berghe H, de Wolf-Peeters C
**Journal:** Histopathology (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2559.1995.tb00615.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2559.1995.tb00615.x)

## Content

1. Histopathology. 1995 Jan;26(1):17-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.1995.tb00615.x.

Mantle cell lymphoma: a clinicopathological study of 55 cases.

Pittaluga S(1), Wlodarska I, Stul MS, Thomas J, Verhoef G, Cassiman JJ, Van den 
Berghe H, de Wolf-Peeters C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Leuven, Belgium.

A recently described unifying proposal for mantle cell lymphoma has led to the 
formulation of strict diagnostic criteria based on morphology, immunology and 
molecular data to define this specific entity. Previous studies were often based 
on broader definitions such as centrocytic lymphoma, intermediately 
differentiated lymphoma or mantle zone lymphoma and, therefore, included a 
variety of entities with some, but not all, features ascribed to the mantle cell 
lymphoma. Since the publication of the unifying proposal no comprehensive 
studies have been published to confirm and support it. We selected 55 cases of 
mantle cell lymphoma collected in our institution in order to evaluate the 
validity of the proposal and, by using strict criteria, we analysed the 
morphological features, their variations and the changes occurring in the course 
of the disease as well as its clinical behaviour. The analysis of this material 
demonstrates that mantle cell lymphoma affects predominantly elderly males 
presenting with an advanced stage of disease. Twenty-four out of 55 patients 
died with, or of, the disease with a median survival of 32 months, even though 
most of them received aggressive chemotherapy. In all cases the histological 
features were strikingly uniform and most cases had a diffuse growth pattern. 
The neoplastic cells corresponded to small cleaved cells with a minimal 
variation in shape and size from one case to the other. The phenotype of the 
neoplastic cells was remarkably constant with expression of several pan-B cell 
markers, IgM, IgD and CD5, and lack of CD10 and CD23.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 
WORDS)

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.1995.tb00615.x
PMID: 7713480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]