---
reference_id: "PMID:16606836"
title: Mutations in fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 cause both Kallmann syndrome and normosmic idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.
authors:
- Pitteloud N
- Acierno JS Jr
- Meysing A
- Eliseenkova AV
- Ma J
- Ibrahimi OA
- Metzger DL
- Hayes FJ
- Dwyer AA
- Hughes VA
- Yialamas M
- Hall JE
- Grant E
- Mohammadi M
- Crowley WF Jr
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0600962103
keywords:
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Female
- Genotype
- "Gonadotropins/deficiency, genetics"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Hypogonadism/genetics
- Kallmann Syndrome/genetics
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Protein Conformation
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 1/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 cause both Kallmann syndrome and normosmic idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.
**Authors:** Pitteloud N, Acierno JS Jr, Meysing A, Eliseenkova AV, Ma J, Ibrahimi OA, Metzger DL, Hayes FJ, Dwyer AA, Hughes VA, Yialamas M, Hall JE, Grant E, Mohammadi M, Crowley WF Jr
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0600962103](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0600962103)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Apr 18;103(16):6281-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0600962103. Epub 2006 Apr 10.

Mutations in fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 cause both Kallmann syndrome
and normosmic idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.

Pitteloud N(1), Acierno JS Jr, Meysing A, Eliseenkova AV, Ma J, Ibrahimi OA,
Metzger DL, Hayes FJ, Dwyer AA, Hughes VA, Yialamas M, Hall JE, Grant E,
Mohammadi M, Crowley WF Jr.

Author information:
(1)Reproductive Endocrine Unit of the Department of Medicine and Harvard
Reproductive Endocrine Science Centers, Massachusetts General Hospital, 55 Fruit
Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA. npitteloud@partners.org

Mutations in KAL1 and FGFR1 cause Kallmann syndrome (KS), whereas mutations in
the GNRHR and GPR54 genes cause idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism with
normal olfaction (nIHH). Mixed pedigrees containing both KS and nIHH have also
been described; however, the genetic cause of these rare cases is unknown. We
examined the FGFR1 gene in seven nIHH subjects who either belonged to a mixed
pedigree (n = 5) or who had associated midline defects (n = 2). Heterozygous
FGFR1 mutations were found in three of seven unrelated nIHH probands with normal
MRI of the olfactory system: (i) G237S in an nIHH female and a KS brother; (ii)
(P722H and N724K) in an nIHH male missing two teeth and his mother with isolated
hyposmia; and (iii) Q680X in a nIHH male with cleft lip/palate and missing
teeth, his brother with nIHH, and his father with delayed puberty. We show that
these mutations lead to receptor loss-of-function. The Q680X leads to an
inactive FGFR1, which lacks a major portion of the tyrosine kinase domain (TKD).
The G237S mutation inhibits proper folding of D2 of the FGFR1 and likely leads
to the loss of cell-surface expression of FGFR1. In contrast, the (P722H and
N724K) double mutation causes structural perturbations in TKD, reducing the
catalytic activity of TKD. We conclude that loss-of-function mutations in FGFR1
cause nIHH with normal MRI of the olfactory system. These mutations also account
for some of the mixed pedigrees, thus challenging the current idea that KS and
nIHH are distinct entities.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0600962103
PMCID: PMC1458869
PMID: 16606836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts
declared.
