---
reference_id: "PMID:23316006"
title: A deletion mutation in TMEM38B associated with autosomal recessive osteogenesis imperfecta.
authors:
- Volodarsky M
- Markus B
- Cohen I
- Staretz-Chacham O
- Flusser H
- Landau D
- Shelef I
- Langer Y
- Birk OS
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1002/humu.22274
keywords:
- Adult
- Base Sequence
- "Child, Preschool"
- Consanguinity
- Gene Order
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- Infant
- Ion Channels/genetics
- Israel
- Male
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/diagnosis, genetics"
- Pedigree
- Sequence Deletion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A deletion mutation in TMEM38B associated with autosomal recessive osteogenesis imperfecta.
**Authors:** Volodarsky M, Markus B, Cohen I, Staretz-Chacham O, Flusser H, Landau D, Shelef I, Langer Y, Birk OS
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.22274](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.22274)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2013 Apr;34(4):582-6. doi: 10.1002/humu.22274.

A deletion mutation in TMEM38B associated with autosomal recessive osteogenesis 
imperfecta.

Volodarsky M(1), Markus B, Cohen I, Staretz-Chacham O, Flusser H, Landau D, 
Shelef I, Langer Y, Birk OS.

Author information:
(1)The Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics at the National Institute for 
Biotechnology in the Negev (NIBN) and Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben Gurion 
University, Beer-Sheva, Israel.

Autosomal recessive osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) was diagnosed in three 
unrelated Israeli Bedouin consanguineous families. Fractures were evident in all 
cases in infancy. Genome-wide linkage analysis ruled out association with any of 
the known OI genes, and identified a single homozygosity locus of approximately 
2 Mb on chromosome 9 common to all affected individuals (maximum multipoint lod 
score 6.5). Whole exome sequencing identified only a single mutation within this 
locus that was shared by all affected individuals: a homozygous deletion 
mutation of exon 4 of TMEM38B, leading to an early stop codon and a truncated 
protein, as well as low TMEM38B mRNA levels. TMEM38B encodes TRIC-B, a 
ubiquitous component of TRIC, a monovalent cation-specific channel involved in 
Ca(2+) release from intracellular stores that has been shown to act in cell 
differentiation. Molecular mechanisms through which a TMEM38B mutation might 
lead to an OI phenotype are yet to be explored.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22274
PMID: 23316006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]