---
reference_id: "PMID:33712743"
title: "Location is important: differentiation between ileal and colonic Crohn's disease."
authors:
- Atreya R
- Siegmund B
journal: Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41575-021-00424-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Location is important: differentiation between ileal and colonic Crohn's disease.
**Authors:** Atreya R, Siegmund B
**Journal:** Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41575-021-00424-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41575-021-00424-6)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2021 Aug;18(8):544-558. doi: 
10.1038/s41575-021-00424-6. Epub 2021 Mar 12.

Location is important: differentiation between ileal and colonic Crohn's 
disease.

Atreya R(1), Siegmund B(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine 1, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, 
Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Infectious Diseases and Rheumatology, Charité 
- Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. britta.siegmund@charite.de.

Crohn's disease can affect any part of the gastrointestinal tract; however, 
current European and national guidelines worldwide do not differentiate between 
small-intestinal and colonic Crohn's disease for medical treatment. Data from 
the past decade provide evidence that ileal Crohn's disease is distinct from 
colonic Crohn's disease in several intestinal layers. Remarkably, colonic 
Crohn's disease shows an overlap with regard to disease behaviour with 
ulcerative colitis, underlining the fact that there is more to inflammatory 
bowel disease than just Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis, and that 
subtypes, possibly defined by location and shared pathophysiology, are also 
important. This Review provides a structured overview of the differentiation 
between ileal and colonic Crohn's disease using data in the context of 
epidemiology, genetics, macroscopic differences such as creeping fat and 
histological findings, as well as differences in regard to the intestinal 
barrier including gut microbiota, mucus layer, epithelial cells and infiltrating 
immune cell populations. We also discuss the translation of these basic findings 
to the clinic, emphasizing the important role of treatment decisions. Thus, this 
Review provides a conceptual outlook on a new mechanism-driven classification of 
Crohn's disease.

© 2021. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41575-021-00424-6
PMID: 33712743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]