---
reference_id: "PMID:17519110"
title: Arsenic and lead induced free radical generation and their reversibility following chelation.
authors:
- Flora SJ
- Flora G
- Saxena G
- Mishra M
journal: Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand)
year: '2007'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arsenic and lead induced free radical generation and their reversibility following chelation.
**Authors:** Flora SJ, Flora G, Saxena G, Mishra M
**Journal:** Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand) (2007)

## Content

1. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 2007 Apr 15;53(1):26-47.

Arsenic and lead induced free radical generation and their reversibility 
following chelation.

Flora SJ(1), Flora G, Saxena G, Mishra M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Defence Research and Development 
Establishment, Gwalior, India. sjsflora@hotmail.com

Health hazards caused by heavy metals have become a great concern to the 
population. Lead and arsenic are one of the most important current global 
environmental toxicants. Their toxic manifestations are being considered caused 
primarily due to the imbalance between pro-oxidant and antioxidant homeostasis 
and also due to a high affinity of these metals for thiol groups on functional 
proteins. They also interfere with a number of other body functions and are 
known to affect central nervous system (CNS), hematopoietic system, liver and 
kidneys and produce serious disorders. They produce both acute and chronic 
poisoning, of which chronic poisoning is more dangerous as its very difficult to 
revert back to normal condition after chronic exposure to these insidious metals 
present in our life. Despite many years of research, we are still far from an 
effective treatment of chronic plumbism and arsenicosis. Current approved 
treatment lies in the administration of chelating agents that forms an insoluble 
complex with the metal and removes it. They have been used clinically as 
antidotes for treating acute and chronic poisoning. The most widely used 
chelating agents are calcium disodium ethylenediamine tetra acetic acid 
(CaNa2EDTA), D-penicillamine and British anti-lewisite (BAL). Meso 2,3 
dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA), an analogue of BAL, has been tried successfully 
in animals as well as in humans. But it is unable to remove the metal from 
intracellular sites. Effective chelation therapy for intoxication by heavy 
metals depends on whether the chelating agents are able to reach the 
intracellular site where the heavy metal is firmly bound. One of the important 
approaches has been the use of combination therapy. This includes use of 
structurally different chelators or a combination of an adjuvant/ antioxidant/ 
herbal extracts and a chelator to provide better clinical/ biochemical recovery. 
A number of other strategies have been suggested to minimize the numerous 
problems. This article presents the recent development made in this area with 
possible directions for future research.

PMID: 17519110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]