---
reference_id: "PMID:30587386"
title: "Clinical epidemiology of familial sarcoidosis: A systematic literature review."
authors:
- Terwiel M
- van Moorsel CHM
journal: Respir Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2018.11.022
keywords:
- Black or African American/genetics
- Clinical Decision-Making/methods
- Ethnicity/genetics
- Family
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/ethnology
- Humans
- Ireland/ethnology
- Male
- Netherlands/ethnology
- Prevalence
- Risk Factors
- "Sarcoidosis/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- White People/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical epidemiology of familial sarcoidosis: A systematic literature review.
**Authors:** Terwiel M, van Moorsel CHM
**Journal:** Respir Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rmed.2018.11.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rmed.2018.11.022)

## Content

1. Respir Med. 2019 Mar;149:36-41. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2018.11.022. Epub 2018 Dec
 13.

Clinical epidemiology of familial sarcoidosis: A systematic literature review.

Terwiel M(1), van Moorsel CHM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonology, St Antonius ILD Center of Excellence, St Antonius
Hospital, Nieuwegein, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Pulmonology, St Antonius ILD Center of Excellence, St Antonius
Hospital, Nieuwegein, the Netherlands; Division of Heart and Lung, University
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands. Electronic address:
c.van.moorsel@antoniusziekenhuis.nl.

Comment in
    Respir Med. 2019 Nov - Dec;160:105696. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.05.003.
    Respir Med. 2019 Nov - Dec;160:105717. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.06.002.
    Respir Med. 2019 Nov - Dec;160:105753. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2019.07.012.

INTRODUCTION: Although the presence of familial sarcoidosis has been confirmed,
clinical and epidemiological data on its characteristics are scattered and
sometimes paradoxical. The objective of this review is to assess what is known
on the clinical epidemiology of familial sarcoidosis, by combining data from
early case reports with recent population based data; aiming to support in
clinical decision making and providing information to patients.
METHOD: A systematic review of the literature in PubMed was done and 27 studies
with clinical or epidemiological data on familial sarcoidosis, published between
1947 and 2017, were included.
RESULTS: The pooled prevalence proportion of familial sarcoidosis, based on
twelve study populations, was 9.5% (CI 4.6-16.1), highest in French, African
American, Dutch and Irish patients. A heritability of 60-70% was estimated in
diverse studies. Relative types and relationships most often reported in
familial sarcoidosis were siblings and mother-child relationships. Familial risk
is heterogeneous. In African Americans specific environmental factors have been
associated with familial sarcoidosis (OR between 1.5 and 3.2). European American
and African American subjects had different relative risks for first degree
familial relationships (OR of 16.6 vs 3.1) and relative risk differed between
relative types. Clinical findings in familial sarcoidosis are still obscure.
CONCLUSIONS: Prevalence of familial sarcoidosis is high in specific study
populations from countries worldwide. The estimated heritability of 60-70%,
suggests a shared determinant, and the heterogeneous familial risk, associated
with both genetic and environmental factors. Familial relative risks and
clinical phenotypes may differ between ethnic groups and relative types, but
require further study.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2018.11.022
PMID: 30587386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
