---
reference_id: "PMID:3897267"
title: Detection of Treponema pallidum in lesion exudate with a pathogen-specific monoclonal antibody.
authors:
- Hook EW 3rd
- Roddy RE
- Lukehart SA
- Hom J
- Holmes KK
- Tam MR
journal: J Clin Microbiol
year: '1985'
doi: 10.1128/jcm.22.2.241-244.1985
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Bacterial/immunology"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/immunology"
- Diagnostic Errors
- Evaluation Studies as Topic
- Humans
- Microscopy/methods
- Syphilis/diagnosis
- Syphilis Serodiagnosis
- "Treponema pallidum/immunology, isolation & purification"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Detection of Treponema pallidum in lesion exudate with a pathogen-specific monoclonal antibody.
**Authors:** Hook EW 3rd, Roddy RE, Lukehart SA, Hom J, Holmes KK, Tam MR
**Journal:** J Clin Microbiol (1985)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jcm.22.2.241-244.1985](https://doi.org/10.1128/jcm.22.2.241-244.1985)

## Content

1. J Clin Microbiol. 1985 Aug;22(2):241-4. doi: 10.1128/jcm.22.2.241-244.1985.

Detection of Treponema pallidum in lesion exudate with a pathogen-specific
monoclonal antibody.

Hook EW 3rd, Roddy RE, Lukehart SA, Hom J, Holmes KK, Tam MR.

The diagnosis of early syphilis currently requires dark-field microscopic or
serologic demonstration of Treponema pallidum infection. Dark-field microscopy
is not widely available and is complicated by the numerous saprophytic
spirochetes which are present at oral and rectal mucosal surfaces. Serologic
tests are positive in only 70 to 90% of patients with primary syphilis, and
several days may be required for results to become available. We used a
pathogen-specific, fluorescein-conjugated monoclonal antibody to examine lesion
exudates from 61 patients for the presence of T. pallidum and compared the data
with results of dark-field microscopy and serologic testing. The direct
fluorescent-antibody technique revealed the presence of T. pallidum in 30 of 30
patients with early syphilis, and dark-field microscopy was positive for 29.
Serologic tests were reactive for 27 of 30 patients with syphilis; in the 3
patients with nonreactive serologic tests, chancres had been present for 4, 6,
and 21 days. Although 7 of 31 patients without syphilis had spiral organisms
seen on dark-field microscopy, the direct fluorescent-antibody test was negative
for all 31. The presence of nonpathogenic spirochetes was subsequently verified
in 5 of 7 patients by using a second monoclonal antibody which reacts with
nonpathogenic, as well as pathogenic, treponemes and related spirochetes. The
demonstration of T. pallidum by using fluorescein-conjugated monoclonal
antibodies is intrinsically specific and is as sensitive as dark-field
microscopy for the diagnosis of early syphilis. This method provides a
convenient, accurate means for the diagnosis of syphilis by health care
providers, many of whom lack access to dark-field microscopy.

DOI: 10.1128/jcm.22.2.241-244.1985
PMCID: PMC268367
PMID: 3897267 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
