---
reference_id: "PMID:12638897"
title: "Antiphospholipid antibodies: are they pro-atherogenic or an epiphenomenon of atherosclerosis?"
authors:
- Sherer Y
- Shoenfeld Y
journal: Immunobiology
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1078/0171-2985-00212
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antiphospholipid antibodies: are they pro-atherogenic or an epiphenomenon of atherosclerosis?
**Authors:** Sherer Y, Shoenfeld Y
**Journal:** Immunobiology (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1078/0171-2985-00212](https://doi.org/10.1078/0171-2985-00212)

## Content

1. Immunobiology. 2003;207(1):13-6. doi: 10.1078/0171-2985-00212.

Antiphospholipid antibodies: are they pro-atherogenic or an epiphenomenon of 
atherosclerosis?

Sherer Y(1), Shoenfeld Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine 'B' and Center of Autoimmune Diseases, Sheba Medical 
Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel.

Antiphospholipid antibodies are the hallmark of the antiphospholipid syndrome 
which is characterized by thrombosis. There are currently data supporting an 
association between these autoantibodies and atherosclerosis as well. Human 
studies suggest that anti-cardiolipin and anti-beta2-glycoprotein-I antibodies 
are elevated in patients having coronary artery disease compared with controls. 
Anti-cardiolipin antibodies are also associated with typical chest pain, 
significant coronary artery stenosis on angiography and prediction of myocardial 
infarction. Laboratory studies and murine models support the pro-atherogenic 
role of these autoantibodies, as they are involved in uptake of oxidized LDL 
into macrophages, and immunization of mice with them results in enhanced 
atherosclerosis. There is some evidence that high anti-beta2-glycoprotein-I 
antibodies can present a risk factor for atherosclerosis, but more 
epidemiological data are required in order to confirm whether the 
pro-atherogenic properties of anti-phospholipid antibodies signifies an 
independent risk factor for atherosclerosis and its complications.

DOI: 10.1078/0171-2985-00212
PMID: 12638897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]