---
reference_id: "PMID:6338584"
title: The contagiosity of tuberculosis.
authors:
- Riley RL
journal: Schweiz Med Wochenschr
year: '1983'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The contagiosity of tuberculosis.
**Authors:** Riley RL
**Journal:** Schweiz Med Wochenschr (1983)

## Content

1. Schweiz Med Wochenschr. 1983 Jan 22;113(3):75-9.

The contagiosity of tuberculosis.

Riley RL.

Although a few advanced thinkers understood the contagious nature of 
tuberculosis in the middle of the last century, more precise concepts of 
transmission awaited Pasteurs's demonstration in 1862 that organisms exist in 
the air and Koch's identification of the tubercle bacillus in 1882. At the end 
of the last century Cornet presented evidence that tuberculosis was dust-borne, 
and Flügge presented equally convincing evidence that tuberculosis was 
droplet-borne. Chapin, in 1910, summarized evidence against the prevaling belief 
in airborne transmission of many common infections but made an exception of 
tuberculosis. Chapin emphasized transmission by direct contact (touching). In 
the 1930's William F. Wells introduced the droplet nucleus hypothesis. In the 
1950's droplet nuclei were shown to be the carriers of infection from 
tuberculosis patients to guinea pigs breathing air vented from the patients' 
ward. Subsequent evidence has indicated that direct contact is unimportant, 
although close proximity facilitates airborne transmission. Attempts to control 
the spread of tuberculosis by air disinfection or by immunization have been 
disappointing. Specific antituberculosis drugs, widely used since the 1950's, 
cause patients to become noninfectious for others very rapidly, even before 
organisms in the sputum disappear. Chemotherapy is now recognized as the corner 
stone of contagion control.

PMID: 6338584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]