---
reference_id: "PMID:38454854"
title: Current understanding of acute zonal occult outer retinopathy (AZOOR).
authors:
- Roy R
- Dutta Majumder P
journal: Indian J Ophthalmol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.4103/IJO.IJO_3228_23
keywords:
- Humans
- White Dot Syndromes/diagnosis
- "Scotoma/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence/methods"
- Fluorescein Angiography/methods
- Fundus Oculi
- Visual Acuity
- Visual Fields/physiology
- Electroretinography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current understanding of acute zonal occult outer retinopathy (AZOOR).
**Authors:** Roy R, Dutta Majumder P
**Journal:** Indian J Ophthalmol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.4103/IJO.IJO_3228_23](https://doi.org/10.4103/IJO.IJO_3228_23)

## Content

1. Indian J Ophthalmol. 2024 Jul 1;72(7):935-937. doi: 10.4103/IJO.IJO_3228_23.
Epub 2024 Mar 8.

Current understanding of acute zonal occult outer retinopathy (AZOOR).

Roy R(1), Dutta Majumder P(2).

Author information:
(1)Vitreoretinal Services, Aditya Birla Sankara Nethralaya, 147/1, Mukundapur,
E.M. Bypass, Kolkata, West Bengal, India.
(2)Medical and Vision Research Foundations, Sankara Nethralaya, 18, College
Road, Sankara Nethralaya, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.

Acute Zonal Occult Outer Retinopathy (AZOOR) is characterized by sudden visual
impairment, often presenting with scotoma and photopsia in young to middle-aged
adults, showing a female predominance. This condition, distinct from genetic
disorders like retinitis pigmentosa, lacks a hereditary basis and exhibits
unique fundus changes and imaging features indicative of outer retinal
dysfunction. Recent advancements have broadened our understanding, identifying
variants like Acute Annular Outer Retinopathy (AAOR) and Multizonal outer
retinopathy and retinal pigment epitheliopathy (MORR), each with specific
clinical presentations and imaging characteristics. The diagnosis of AZOOR and
its variants primarily relies on excluding other conditions through
comprehensive evaluation, including imaging and serological testing. Treatment
approaches, including the use of corticosteroids and immunosuppressives, remain
debated, with some evidence suggesting benefits in the early stages. The
prognosis of AZOOR varies, with most patients experiencing stabilization,
although complications like choroidal neovascularization may occur, requiring
targeted therapy. This manuscript elucidates the complexity of AZOOR,
emphasizing the necessity of high clinical suspicion and the role of advanced
imaging in diagnosis and management.

Copyright © 2024 Copyright: © 2024 Indian Journal of Ophthalmology.

DOI: 10.4103/IJO.IJO_3228_23
PMCID: PMC11329826
PMID: 38454854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.
