---
reference_id: "PMID:35658005"
title: Adagrasib in Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer Harboring a KRAS(G12C) Mutation.
authors:
- Jänne PA
- Riely GJ
- Gadgeel SM
- Heist RS
- Ou SI
- Pacheco JM
- Johnson ML
- Sabari JK
- Leventakos K
- Yau E
- Bazhenova L
- Negrao MV
- Pennell NA
- Zhang J
- Anderes K
- Der-Torossian H
- Kheoh T
- Velastegui K
- Yan X
- Christensen JG
- Chao RC
- Spira AI
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2204619
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adagrasib in Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer Harboring a KRAS(G12C) Mutation.
**Authors:** Jänne PA, Riely GJ, Gadgeel SM, Heist RS, Ou SI, Pacheco JM, Johnson ML, Sabari JK, Leventakos K, Yau E, Bazhenova L, Negrao MV, Pennell NA, Zhang J, Anderes K, Der-Torossian H, Kheoh T, Velastegui K, Yan X, Christensen JG, Chao RC, Spira AI
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2204619](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2204619)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2022 Jul 14;387(2):120-131. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2204619. Epub
2022  Jun 3.

Adagrasib in Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer Harboring a KRAS(G12C) Mutation.

Jänne PA(1), Riely GJ(1), Gadgeel SM(1), Heist RS(1), Ou SI(1), Pacheco JM(1), 
Johnson ML(1), Sabari JK(1), Leventakos K(1), Yau E(1), Bazhenova L(1), Negrao 
MV(1), Pennell NA(1), Zhang J(1), Anderes K(1), Der-Torossian H(1), Kheoh T(1), 
Velastegui K(1), Yan X(1), Christensen JG(1), Chao RC(1), Spira AI(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Lowe Center for Thoracic Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute 
(P.A.J.), and Massachusetts General Hospital (R.S.H.) - both in Boston; the 
Thoracic Oncology Service, Division of Solid Tumor Oncology, Department of 
Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, and Weill Cornell Medical 
College (G.J.R.), and Perlmutter Cancer Center, New York University Langone 
Health (J.K.S.), New York, and the Department of Medicine, Roswell Park 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Buffalo (E.Y.) - all in New York; the Henry Ford 
Cancer Institute, Detroit (S.M.G.); the University of California Irvine School 
of Medicine, Chao Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, Orange (S.-H.I.O.),  the 
University of California San Diego Moores Cancer Center, La Jolla (L.B.), and 
Mirati Therapeutics, San Diego (K.A., H.D.-T., T.K., K.V., X.Y., J.G.C., R.C.C.) 
- all in California; the Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, 
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora (J.M.P.); Sarah Cannon 
Research Institute at Tennessee Oncology, Nashville (M.L.J.); the Department of 
Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN (K.L.); the University of Texas M.D. 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston (M.V.N.) and US Oncology Research, The Woodlands 
(A.I.S.) - both in Texas; Cleveland Clinic Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland 
(N.A.P.); the Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, and 
the Department of Cancer Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas 
City (J.Z.); and Virginia Cancer Specialists and NEXT Oncology Virginia - both 
in Fairfax (A.I.S.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2022 Jul 14;387(2):180-183. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe2207902.
    N Engl J Med. 2022 Jul 14;387(2):184-186. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe2206831.
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2022 Nov;19(11):677-678. doi: 
10.1038/s41571-022-00676-4.
    N Engl J Med. 2022 Sep 29;387(13):1238-1239. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2210539.

BACKGROUND: Adagrasib, a KRASG12C inhibitor, irreversibly and selectively binds 
KRASG12C, locking it in its inactive state. Adagrasib showed clinical activity 
and had an acceptable adverse-event profile in the phase 1-1b part of the 
KRYSTAL-1 phase 1-2 study.
METHODS: In a registrational phase 2 cohort, we evaluated adagrasib (600 mg 
orally twice daily) in patients with KRASG12C -mutated non-small-cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC) previously treated with platinum-based chemotherapy and 
anti-programmed death 1 or programmed death ligand 1 therapy. The primary end 
point was objective response assessed by blinded independent central review. 
Secondary end points included the duration of response, progression-free 
survival, overall survival, and safety.
RESULTS: As of October 15, 2021, a total of 116 patients with KRASG12C -mutated 
NSCLC had been treated (median follow-up, 12.9 months); 98.3% had previously 
received both chemotherapy and immunotherapy. Of 112 patients with measurable 
disease at baseline, 48 (42.9%) had a confirmed objective response. The median 
duration of response was 8.5 months (95% confidence interval [CI], 6.2 to 13.8), 
and the median progression-free survival was 6.5 months (95% CI, 4.7 to 8.4). As 
of January 15, 2022 (median follow-up, 15.6 months), the median overall survival 
was 12.6 months (95% CI, 9.2 to 19.2). Among 33 patients with previously 
treated, stable central nervous system metastases, the intracranial confirmed 
objective response rate was 33.3% (95% CI, 18.0 to 51.8). Treatment-related 
adverse events occurred in 97.4% of the patients - grade 1 or 2 in 52.6% and 
grade 3 or higher in 44.8% (including two grade 5 events) - and resulted in drug 
discontinuation in 6.9% of patients.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with previously treated KRASG12C -mutated NSCLC, 
adagrasib showed clinical efficacy without new safety signals. (Funded by Mirati 
Therapeutics; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03785249.).

Copyright © 2022 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2204619
PMID: 35658005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]