---
reference_id: "PMID:10431236"
title: Mutations in ABC1 in Tangier disease and familial high-density lipoprotein deficiency.
authors:
- Brooks-Wilson A
- Marcil M
- Clee SM
- Zhang LH
- Roomp K
- van Dam M
- Yu L
- Brewer C
- Collins JA
- Molhuizen HO
- Loubser O
- Ouelette BF
- Fichter K
- Ashbourne-Excoffon KJ
- Sensen CW
- Scherer S
- Mott S
- Denis M
- Martindale D
- Frohlich J
- Morgan K
- Koop B
- Pimstone S
- Kastelein JJ
- Genest J Jr
- Hayden MR
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1038/11905
keywords:
- ATP Binding Cassette Transporter 1
- "ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics, metabolism"
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- "Cholesterol, HDL/deficiency"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 9"
- Female
- Genetic Linkage
- Genetic Markers
- "Glycoproteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Male
- "Models, Genetic"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Physical Chromosome Mapping
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Tangier Disease/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in ABC1 in Tangier disease and familial high-density lipoprotein deficiency.
**Authors:** Brooks-Wilson A, Marcil M, Clee SM, Zhang LH, Roomp K, van Dam M, Yu L, Brewer C, Collins JA, Molhuizen HO, Loubser O, Ouelette BF, Fichter K, Ashbourne-Excoffon KJ, Sensen CW, Scherer S, Mott S, Denis M, Martindale D, Frohlich J, Morgan K, Koop B, Pimstone S, Kastelein JJ, Genest J Jr, Hayden MR
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1038/11905](https://doi.org/10.1038/11905)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1999 Aug;22(4):336-45. doi: 10.1038/11905.

Mutations in ABC1 in Tangier disease and familial high-density lipoprotein
deficiency.

Brooks-Wilson A(1), Marcil M, Clee SM, Zhang LH, Roomp K, van Dam M, Yu L,
Brewer C, Collins JA, Molhuizen HO, Loubser O, Ouelette BF, Fichter K,
Ashbourne-Excoffon KJ, Sensen CW, Scherer S, Mott S, Denis M, Martindale D,
Frohlich J, Morgan K, Koop B, Pimstone S, Kastelein JJ, Genest J Jr, Hayden MR.

Author information:
(1)Xenon Bioresearch Inc., NRC Innovation Centre, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1999 Aug;22(4):316-8. doi: 10.1038/11878.

Genes have a major role in the control of high-density lipoprotein (HDL)
cholesterol (HDL-C) levels. Here we have identified two Tangier disease (TD)
families, confirmed 9q31 linkage and refined the disease locus to a limited
genomic region containing the gene encoding the ATP-binding cassette transporter
(ABC1). Familial HDL deficiency (FHA) is a more frequent cause of low HDL
levels. On the basis of independent linkage and meiotic recombinants, we
localized the FHA locus to the same genomic region as the TD locus. Mutations in
ABC1 were detected in both TD and FHA, indicating that TD and FHA are allelic.
This indicates that the protein encoded by ABC1 is a key gatekeeper influencing
intracellular cholesterol transport, hence we have named it cholesterol efflux
regulatory protein (CERP).

DOI: 10.1038/11905
PMID: 10431236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
