---
reference_id: "PMID:25889074"
title: Clinical profile of Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax infections in low and unstable malaria transmission settings of Colombia.
authors:
- Arévalo-Herrera M
- Lopez-Perez M
- Medina L
- Moreno A
- Gutierrez JB
- Herrera S
journal: Malar J
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1186/s12936-015-0678-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical profile of Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax infections in low and unstable malaria transmission settings of Colombia.
**Authors:** Arévalo-Herrera M, Lopez-Perez M, Medina L, Moreno A, Gutierrez JB, Herrera S
**Journal:** Malar J (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12936-015-0678-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12936-015-0678-3)

## Content

1. Malar J. 2015 Apr 11;14:154. doi: 10.1186/s12936-015-0678-3.

Clinical profile of Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax infections in low 
and unstable malaria transmission settings of Colombia.

Arévalo-Herrera M(1)(2), Lopez-Perez M(3), Medina L(4), Moreno A(5)(6), 
Gutierrez JB(7), Herrera S(8).

Author information:
(1)Caucaseco Scientific Research Center, Cali, Colombia. marevalo@inmuno.org.
(2)Faculty of Health, Universidad del Valle, Cali, Colombia. 
marevalo@inmuno.org.
(3)Caucaseco Scientific Research Center, Cali, Colombia. marlopez@inmuno.org.
(4)Asoclinic Inmunología Ltda, Cali, Colombia. lmedina@inmuno.org.
(5)Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA. camoren@emory.edu.
(6)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Emory University, 
Atlanta, GA, USA. camoren@emory.edu.
(7)University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA. jgutierr@uga.edu.
(8)Caucaseco Scientific Research Center, Cali, Colombia. sherrera@inmuno.org.

BACKGROUND: Malaria transmission in Latin America is generally hypoendemic and 
unstable, with Plasmodium vivax as the most prevalent species. However, only a 
few studies have been carried out in areas with low and unstable transmission, 
whereas the clinical profile of malaria has been broadly described in 
hyperendemic areas. The pattern of clinical manifestations and laboratory 
findings in low to moderate endemic areas of Colombia is reported here.
METHODS: A passive surveillance study was conducted between 2011 and 2013 
involving 1,328 patients with Plasmodium falciparum, P. vivax or mixed malaria 
infections attending malaria points-of-care of four malaria endemic-areas with 
distinct transmission intensities and parasite distribution. Trained physicians 
recorded clinical symptoms and signs as well as socio-demographic 
characteristics of study participants. Haematological, biochemical and urine 
tests were performed at the time of diagnosis.
RESULTS: Out of 1,328 cases, 673 (50.7%) were caused by P. vivax; 650 (48.9%) 
were due to P. falciparum; and five (0.4%) patients had mixed infections (P. 
falciparum/P. vivax). Most patients (92.5%) presented with uncomplicated malaria 
characterized by fever, chills, headache, sweating, myalgia/arthralgia and 
parasitaemia ≤ 20,000 parasites/μL. Fever, tachycardia, pallor and abdominal 
pain on palpation were more frequent in P. falciparum patients, whereas mild 
hepatomegaly and splenomegaly were mostly observed with P. vivax. Non-severe 
anaemia (Hb 7.0-10.9 g/dL) was observed in 20% of the subjects, whereas severe 
anaemia (Hb < 7.0 g/dL) was present in four patients. Half of the patients 
presented thrombocytopaenia regardless of parasite species. Leukopaenia, 
neutrophilia and monocytosis were frequently observed in patients infected with 
P. falciparum. Mild-to-moderate biochemical alterations were present in ~25% of 
the patients, particularly abnormal bilirubin in those with P. falciparum and 
abnormal transaminases in P. vivax malaria patients. Proteinuria was present in 
~50% of the patients regardless of parasite species, whereas haemoglobinuria was 
more common in P. vivax infections. Only 7.5% of the cases were classified as 
clinically severe malaria, caused by both P. vivax and P. falciparum.
CONCLUSIONS: The high prevalence of uncomplicated malaria associated with 
moderate parasitaemia suggests the importance of timely diagnosis and effective 
treatment and encourages new activities to further decrease complicated malaria 
cases and mortality.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-015-0678-3
PMCID: PMC4397685
PMID: 25889074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]