---
reference_id: "PMID:22231430"
title: "Autosomal recessive osteopetrosis: report of 41 novel mutations in the TCIRG1 gene and diagnostic implications."
authors:
- Pangrazio A
- Caldana ME
- Lo Iacono N
- Mantero S
- Vezzoni P
- Villa A
- Sobacchi C
journal: Osteoporos Int
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1007/s00198-011-1878-5
keywords:
- DNA Mutational Analysis/methods
- Gene Deletion
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Osteopetrosis/diagnosis, enzymology, genetics"
- "Vacuolar Proton-Translocating ATPases/deficiency, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal recessive osteopetrosis: report of 41 novel mutations in the TCIRG1 gene and diagnostic implications.
**Authors:** Pangrazio A, Caldana ME, Lo Iacono N, Mantero S, Vezzoni P, Villa A, Sobacchi C
**Journal:** Osteoporos Int (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00198-011-1878-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00198-011-1878-5)

## Content

1. Osteoporos Int. 2012 Nov;23(11):2713-8. doi: 10.1007/s00198-011-1878-5. Epub 
2012 Jan 10.

Autosomal recessive osteopetrosis: report of 41 novel mutations in the TCIRG1 
gene and diagnostic implications.

Pangrazio A(1), Caldana ME, Lo Iacono N, Mantero S, Vezzoni P, Villa A, Sobacchi 
C.

Author information:
(1)Milan Unit, Institute of Genetic and Biomedical Research (IRGB), National 
Research Council, 20138, Milan, Italy.

Erratum in
    Osteoporos Int. 2012 Nov;23(11):2719. Iacono, N L [corrected to Lo Iacono, 
N].

Here we report 41 novel mutations in the TCIRG1 gene that is responsible for the 
disease in more than 50% of ARO patients. The characterisation of mutations in 
this gene might be useful in the process of drug design for osteoporosis 
treatment.
INTRODUCTION: Autosomal recessive osteopetrosis (ARO) is a genetically 
heterogeneous disorder due to reduced bone resorption by osteoclasts. In this 
process, a crucial role is played by the proton pump V-ATPase. Biallelic 
mutations in the TCIRG1 gene, encoding for the a3 subunit of this pump, are 
responsible for more than one half of ARO patients.
METHODS: Patients with a clinical diagnosis of ARO have been collected for 7 
years and mutation analysis of the TCIRG1 gene was performed using direct DNA 
sequencing of PCR-amplified exons according to both a standard protocol and a 
modified one.
RESULTS: We report here 41 novel mutations identified in 67 unpublished 
patients, all with biallelic mutations. In particular, we describe two novel 
large genomic deletions and two splice site mutations in the 5' UTR of the 
TCIRG1 gene, in patients previously classified as mono-allelic.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data highlights the importance of two large genomic deletions 
and mutations in the 5' UTR with respect to patient management and, more 
critically, to prenatal diagnosis. With the present work, we strongly contribute 
to the molecular dissection of TCIRG1-deficient ARO and identify several protein 
residues which are fundamental for proton pump function and could thus be the 
target of future drugs designed to inhibit osteoclast resorptive activity.

DOI: 10.1007/s00198-011-1878-5
PMID: 22231430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]