---
reference_id: "PMID:28387980"
title: "Immune balance in Hepatitis B Infection: Present and Future Therapies."
authors:
- Vyas AK
- Jindal A
- Hissar S
- Ramakrishna G
- Trehanpati N
journal: Scand J Immunol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/sji.12553
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immune balance in Hepatitis B Infection: Present and Future Therapies.
**Authors:** Vyas AK, Jindal A, Hissar S, Ramakrishna G, Trehanpati N
**Journal:** Scand J Immunol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/sji.12553](https://doi.org/10.1111/sji.12553)

## Content

1. Scand J Immunol. 2017 Jul;86(1):4-14. doi: 10.1111/sji.12553.

Immune balance in Hepatitis B Infection: Present and Future Therapies.

Vyas AK(1), Jindal A(2), Hissar S(1), Ramakrishna G(1), Trehanpati N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Medicine, Institute of Liver & Biliary 
Sciences, New Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Hepatology, Institute of Liver & Biliary Sciences, New Delhi, 
India.

Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection affects millions of people worldwide 
and about half a million people die every year. India represents the second 
largest pool of chronic HBV infections with an estimated 40 million chronically 
infected patients. Persistence or clearance of HBV infection mainly depends upon 
host immune responses. Chronically infected individuals remain in immune 
tolerant phase unless HBV flares and leads to the development of chronic active 
hepatitis or acute-on-chronic liver failure. Strategies based on inhibition of 
viral replication (nucleoside analogues) or immune modulation (interferons) as 
monotherapy, or in combination in sequential therapies, are currently being used 
globally for reducing HBV viral load and mediating HBsAg clearance. However, the 
immune status and current therapies for promoting sustained virological 
responses in HBV-infected patients remain suboptimal. Elimination of cccDNA is 
major challenge for future therapies, and new molecules such as NTCP, Toll-like 
receptor (TLR)7 agonist (GS9620) and cyclophilin have emerged as potential 
targets for preventing HBV entry and replication. Other than these, HBV cccDNA 
elimination is the major target for future therapies.

© 2017 The Foundation for the Scandinavian Journal of Immunology.

DOI: 10.1111/sji.12553
PMID: 28387980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]