---
reference_id: "PMID:39567422"
title: "Potential role of ARG1 c.57G > A variant in Argininemia."
authors:
- Li Y
- Tian R
- Wang D
- Zhang H
- Zhou Y
- Ma C
- Zhang H
- Zhang K
- Liu S
journal: Genes Genomics
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s13258-024-01595-7
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Arginase/genetics
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Homozygote
- Hyperargininemia/genetics
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Infant, Newborn"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Potential role of ARG1 c.57G > A variant in Argininemia.
**Authors:** Li Y, Tian R, Wang D, Zhang H, Zhou Y, Ma C, Zhang H, Zhang K, Liu S
**Journal:** Genes Genomics (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13258-024-01595-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13258-024-01595-7)

## Content

1. Genes Genomics. 2025 Feb;47(2):197-205. doi: 10.1007/s13258-024-01595-7. Epub
2024 Nov 20.

Potential role of ARG1 c.57G > A variant in Argininemia.

Li Y(#)(1)(2)(3), Tian R(#)(1), Wang D(1), Zhang H(1), Zhou Y(4), Ma C(5), Zhang
H(6), Zhang K(7), Liu S(8).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Research Institute, Children's Hospital Affiliated to Shandong
University, Jinan, 250022, Shandong, China.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Shandong Provincial Hospital, Cheeloo College of
Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, 250001, Shandong, China.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Qilu Hospital, Cheeloo College of Medicine,
Shandong University, Jinan, 250012, Shandong, China.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical
University, Xuzhou, 221002, Jiangsu, China.
(5)Shandong Academy of Medical Science, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated
to Shandong First Medical University, Jinan, 250021, Shandong, China.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, Shandong Provincial Hospital, Cheeloo College of
Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, 250001, Shandong, China.
zhanghan0696@139.com.
(7)Pediatric Research Institute, Children's Hospital Affiliated to Shandong
University, Jinan, 250022, Shandong, China. khz83@163.com.
(8)Pediatric Endocrinology and Inherited Metabolic Department, Guangdong Women
and Children Hospital, Guangzhou, 511442, Guangdong, China. shmicy@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Argininemia (OMIM: 207800), as well as arginase
deficiency, a disorder of the urea cycle caused by deficiency of arginase 1
(ARG1, NP_000036.2), is a scarce autosomal recessive genetic disease. The
patients who suffered with argininemia often showed spastic paraplegia,
epileptic seizures, severe mental retardation, and even the hyperammonemia. In
neonatal screening, we found a healthy baby with mild elevated arginine levels.
We have demonstrated the genetic etiology of the patient.
METHODS: The patient's clinical characteristic and family history were
collected. The technologies including Next Generation Sequencing (NGS), Sanger
sequencing, Bioinformatics Analysis, RNA extraction, cDNA obtained, Sanger
sequencing, Minigene splicing assay, Real-time PCR, Single-molecule real-time
(SMRT) sequencing were applied.
RESULTS: One homozygous variant, c.57G > A (p.Q19=), was identified in the
proband, which was inherited from the parents. Through different detection
methods, we found that the c.57G > A variant causes three different
transcriptional versions: normal mRNA (mRNA from blood), mRNA with the exon2
deletion (73bp, mRNA from blood and minigene assay), and mRNA sequence from the
SMRT sequencing (parts of exons and introns were detected, including exon 1-4,
intron 1 and 4, and part of intron 2, 3, and 5). The expression of ARG1 mRNA and
protein also decreased in the blood. The related genes of NMD (Nonsense-mediated
mRNA decay), SMG1, UPF1, and UPF3b, were expressed higher than the controls in
the blood, which hints the NMD could play a role in the mRNA decay regarding the
cDNA with 73bp deletion by c.57G > A variant.
CONCLUSIONS: The study is the first study considering a synonymous variant of
the ARG1 gene influencing alternative splicing(AS). Otherwise, the variant
c.57G > A is relatively frequent in the general population( MAF = 0.0146). Our
discovery revealed the variant possesses partial pathogenic potential, which
would contribute to the deeper understanding and gold model for the intricate
relationship between genetic mutations, arginine metabolism, and physical
function.

© 2024. The Author(s) under exclusive licence to The Genetics Society of Korea.

DOI: 10.1007/s13258-024-01595-7
PMID: 39567422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: The authors
have no conflicts of interest to declare. Ethics approval: The Ethics Committee
of Children’s Hospital affiliated to Shandong University granted approval for
this work (Ethics Approval No. ETYY-2014012). All procedures conducted in the
study adhered to the Declaration of Helsinki. Consent to participate: Not
applicable. Consent for publication: Not applicable.
