---
reference_id: "PMID:22932130"
title: Targeted therapy for lung cancer.
authors:
- Petrosyan F
- Daw H
- Haddad A
- Spiro T
journal: Anticancer Drugs
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1097/CAD.0b013e3283585149
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeted therapy for lung cancer.
**Authors:** Petrosyan F, Daw H, Haddad A, Spiro T
**Journal:** Anticancer Drugs (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1097/CAD.0b013e3283585149](https://doi.org/10.1097/CAD.0b013e3283585149)

## Content

1. Anticancer Drugs. 2012 Nov;23(10):1016-21. doi: 10.1097/CAD.0b013e3283585149.

Targeted therapy for lung cancer.

Petrosyan F(1), Daw H, Haddad A, Spiro T.

Author information:
(1)Fairview Hospital, A Cleveland Clinic Hospital, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

Lung cancer is considered the number one killer among all cancers. Recent 
observations have altered the treatment paradigm for non-small-cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC). The discovery of activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor 
receptor and anaplastic lymphoma kinase positivity has made personalized 
treatment for NSCLC more feasible. Both erlotinib and crizotinib have been shown 
to be effective and safe for subgroup populations, and now personalized 
treatment for nonsquamous NSCLC has progressed even further. New tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors are being tested, resistant mutations are being studied, and new 
detection systems are being incorporated; all these developments will make the 
detection and treatment of the deadliest cancer more affordable, practical, and 
effective. The National Comprehensive Cancer Network has already incorporated 
these new developments into their guidelines for advanced nonsquamous NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1097/CAD.0b013e3283585149
PMID: 22932130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]