---
reference_id: "PMID:29422768"
title: Retinal phenotypic characterization of patients with ABCA4 retinopathydue to the homozygous p.Ala1773Val mutation.
authors:
- López-Rubio S
- Chacon-Camacho OF
- Matsui R
- Guadarrama-Vallejo D
- Astiazarán MC
- Zenteno JC
journal: Mol Vis
year: '2018'
keywords:
- "ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/deficiency, genetics"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Cohort Studies
- "Cone-Rod Dystrophies/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Electroretinography
- Female
- Gene Expression
- Genetic Association Studies
- Heterozygote
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Macular Degeneration/congenital, diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Mutation
- "Night Blindness/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Photophobia/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Retina/metabolism, pathology"
- Stargardt Disease
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retinal phenotypic characterization of patients with ABCA4 retinopathydue to the homozygous p.Ala1773Val mutation.
**Authors:** López-Rubio S, Chacon-Camacho OF, Matsui R, Guadarrama-Vallejo D, Astiazarán MC, Zenteno JC
**Journal:** Mol Vis (2018)

## Content

1. Mol Vis. 2018 Feb 1;24:105-114. eCollection 2018.

Retinal phenotypic characterization of patients with ABCA4 retinopathydue to the 
homozygous p.Ala1773Val mutation.

López-Rubio S(1), Chacon-Camacho OF(2), Matsui R(1), Guadarrama-Vallejo D(1), 
Astiazarán MC(2), Zenteno JC(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Retina, Institute of Ophthalmology "Conde de Valenciana," 
Mexico City, Mexico.
(2)Department of Genetics-Research Unit, Institute of Ophthalmology "Conde de 
Valenciana," Mexico City, Mexico.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, UNAM, Mexico City, Mexico.

PURPOSE: To describe the retinal clinical features of a group of Mexican 
patients with Stargardt disease carrying the uncommon p.Ala1773Val founder 
mutation in ABCA4.
METHODS: Ten patients carrying the p.Ala1773Val mutation, nine of them 
homozygously, were included. Visual function studies included best-corrected 
visual acuity, electroretinography, Goldmann kinetic visual fields, and 
full-field electroretinography (ERG). In addition, imaging studies, such as 
optical coherence tomography (OCT), short-wave autofluorescence imaging, and 
quantitative analyses of hypofluorescence, were performed in each patient.
RESULTS: Best-corrected visual acuities ranged from 20/200 to 4/200. The median 
age of the patients at diagnosis was 23.3 years. The majority of the patients 
had photophobia and nyctalopia, and were classified as Fishman stage 4 
(widespread choriocapillaris atrophy, resorption of flecks, and greatly reduced 
ERG amplitudes). An atypical retinal pigmentation pattern was observed in the 
patients, and the majority showed cone-rod dystrophy on full-field ERG. In vivo 
retinal microstructure assessment with OCT demonstrated central retinal 
thinning, variable loss of photoreceptors, and three different patterns of 
structural retinal degeneration. Two dissimilar patterns of abnormal 
autofluorescence were observed. No apparent age-related differences in the 
pattern of retinal degeneration were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that this particular mutation in ABCA4 is 
associated with a severe retinal phenotype and thus, could be classified as 
null. Careful phenotyping of patients carrying specific mutations in ABCA4 is 
essential to enhance our understanding of disease expression linked to 
particular mutations and the resulting genotype-phenotype correlations.

PMCID: PMC5800431
PMID: 29422768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]