---
reference_id: "PMID:28085522"
title: Elderly onset vitreous opacities as the initial manifestation in hereditary transthyretin (ATTR Val30Met) carries.
authors:
- Ishida K
- Nishida T
- Niimi Y
- Suemori S
- Mochizuki K
- Kawakami H
- Kimura A
- Hirayama T
journal: Ophthalmic Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1080/13816810.2016.1232413
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Elderly onset vitreous opacities as the initial manifestation in hereditary transthyretin (ATTR Val30Met) carries.
**Authors:** Ishida K, Nishida T, Niimi Y, Suemori S, Mochizuki K, Kawakami H, Kimura A, Hirayama T
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1080/13816810.2016.1232413](https://doi.org/10.1080/13816810.2016.1232413)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Genet. 2017 Jul-Aug;38(4):387-391. doi: 
10.1080/13816810.2016.1232413. Epub 2017 Jan 13.

Elderly onset vitreous opacities as the initial manifestation in hereditary 
transthyretin (ATTR Val30Met) carries.

Ishida K(1)(2), Nishida T(1), Niimi Y(1)(3), Suemori S(1), Mochizuki K(1), 
Kawakami H(4), Kimura A(5), Hirayama T(6).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Ophthalmology , Gifu University Graduate School of Medicine , 
Gifu , Japan.
(2)b Department of Ophthalmology , Toho University Ohashi Medical Center , Tokyo 
, Japan.
(3)c Department of Ophthalmology , Ogaki Municipal Hospital , Gifu , Japan.
(4)d Department of Ophthalmology , Gifu Municipal Hospital , Gifu , Japan.
(5)e Department of Neurology and Geriatrics , Gifu University Graduate School of 
Medicine , Gifu , Japan.
(6)f Department of Neurology , Ogaki Municipal Hospital , Gifu , Japan.

Familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP) is a systemic disorder transmitted as an 
autosomal dominant trait and is characterized by deposits of protein fibrils in 
various organs leading to physiologic dysfunction. In cases with FAP in Japanese 
endemic foci, their signs and symptoms often develop before the age of 40 years. 
We report on two elderly patients (an 80-year-old woman and an 83-year-old man) 
with progressive vitreous opacities (VOs) as the initial manifestation of 
hereditary transthyretin (ATTR Val30Met) carries, who had no evidence of 
systemic involvement or family history of amyloidosis and lived in non-endemic 
areas. Therapeutic vitrectomy with extensive vitreous removal combined with 
cataract surgery was performed. Clinicians should consider the possibility of 
hereditary transthyretin carries in cases presenting with VOs of undetermined 
etiology to avoid misdiagnosis.

DOI: 10.1080/13816810.2016.1232413
PMID: 28085522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]