---
reference_id: "PMID:39827848"
title: "Worldwide Prevalence of Hereditary Angioedema: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Fisch SA
- Rundle AG
- Neugut AI
- Freedberg DE
journal: Int Arch Allergy Immunol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1159/000543321
keywords:
- Humans
- "Angioedemas, Hereditary/epidemiology"
- Prevalence
- Global Health
- Female
- Male
- Complement C1 Inhibitor Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Worldwide Prevalence of Hereditary Angioedema: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Fisch SA, Rundle AG, Neugut AI, Freedberg DE
**Journal:** Int Arch Allergy Immunol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000543321](https://doi.org/10.1159/000543321)

## Content

1. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2025;186(8):802-810. doi: 10.1159/000543321. Epub
2025  Jan 17.

Worldwide Prevalence of Hereditary Angioedema: A Systematic Review and
Meta-Analysis.

Fisch SA(1), Rundle AG(2), Neugut AI(2)(3), Freedberg DE(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Mailman School of Public Health, New York, New
York, USA, saf2217@cumc.columbia.edu.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Mailman School of Public Health, New York, New
York, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, New York, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is a rare disease caused by
dysfunction or lack of the C1 esterase inhibitor (C1-INH) protein. The true
prevalence of HAE and whether this prevalence differs across regions is
uncertain.
METHODS: To estimate the prevalence of HAE worldwide, a systematic review and
meta-analysis were performed. The pooled prevalence of HAE was calculated using
a random-effects model, and heterogeneity across studies was assessed.
RESULTS: Twenty-four studies from 2000 to 2024 were included in the analysis,
describing 11,245 cases of HAE. The pooled prevalence of HAE was 1.22 cases per
100,000 people (95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.91, 1.53), with lower
prevalences reported in Asia and Africa compared to Europe and North America.
HAE type 1 made up most of the cases, with a slight female predominance.
CONCLUSION: HAE is a rare condition which affects 1-2 individuals per 100,000
people worldwide. A true estimate of the prevalence of HAE will inform care for
the condition, especially as new treatment options become available.

© 2025 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000543321
PMID: 39827848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
