---
reference_id: "PMID:35289012"
title: "Pathological changes within the cerebral vasculature in Alzheimer's disease: New perspectives."
authors:
- Fisher RA
- Miners JS
- Love S
journal: Brain Pathol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/bpa.13061
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathological changes within the cerebral vasculature in Alzheimer's disease: New perspectives.
**Authors:** Fisher RA, Miners JS, Love S
**Journal:** Brain Pathol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bpa.13061](https://doi.org/10.1111/bpa.13061)

## Content

1. Brain Pathol. 2022 Nov;32(6):e13061. doi: 10.1111/bpa.13061. Epub 2022 Mar 14.

Pathological changes within the cerebral vasculature in Alzheimer's disease: New 
perspectives.

Fisher RA(1), Miners JS(1), Love S(1).

Author information:
(1)Dementia Research Group, University of Bristol Medical School, Bristol, UK.

Cerebrovascular disease underpins vascular dementia (VaD), but structural and 
functional changes to the cerebral vasculature contribute to disease pathology 
and cognitive decline in Alzheimer's disease (AD). In this review, we discuss 
the contribution of cerebral amyloid angiopathy and non-amyloid small vessel 
disease in AD, and the accompanying changes to the density, maintenance and 
remodelling of vessels (including alterations to the composition and function of 
the cerebrovascular basement membrane). We consider how abnormalities of the 
constituent cells of the neurovascular unit - particularly of endothelial cells 
and pericytes - and impairment of the blood-brain barrier (BBB) impact on the 
pathogenesis of AD. We also discuss how changes to the cerebral vasculature are 
likely to impair Aβ clearance - both intra-periarteriolar drainage (IPAD) and 
transport of Aβ peptides across the BBB, and how impaired neurovascular coupling 
and reduced blood flow in relation to metabolic demand increase amyloidogenic 
processing of APP and the production of Aβ. We review the vasoactive properties 
of Aβ peptides themselves, and the probable bi-directional relationship between 
vascular dysfunction and Aβ accumulation in AD. Lastly, we discuss recent 
methodological advances in transcriptomics and imaging that have provided novel 
insights into vascular changes in AD, and recent advances in assessment of the 
retina that allow in vivo detection of vascular changes in the early stages of 
AD.

© 2022 The Authors. Brain Pathology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf 
of International Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/bpa.13061
PMCID: PMC9616094
PMID: 35289012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We have no conflicts of interest to declare.