---
reference_id: "PMID:29749584"
title: Droplet digital PCR detects high rate of TP53 R249S mutants in cell-free DNA of middle African patients with hepatocellular carcinoma.
authors:
- Marchio A
- Amougou Atsama M
- Béré A
- Komas NP
- Noah Noah D
- Atangana PJA
- Camengo-Police SM
- Njouom R
- Bekondi C
- Pineau P
journal: Clin Exp Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s10238-018-0502-9
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aflatoxin B1/toxicity
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Cameroon
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/chemically induced, diagnosis, genetics, virology"
- Case-Control Studies
- "Cell-Free Nucleic Acids/blood, genetics"
- Central African Republic
- "DNA, Viral/genetics"
- Female
- Gene Expression
- "Hepatitis B Surface Antigens/blood, genetics"
- "Hepatitis B virus/genetics, isolation & purification"
- "Hepatitis B, Chronic/diagnosis, genetics, pathology, virology"
- Humans
- "Liver Neoplasms/chemically induced, diagnosis, genetics, virology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation Rate
- Polymerase Chain Reaction/methods
- "Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/blood, genetics"
- Viral Load
- "alpha-Fetoproteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Droplet digital PCR detects high rate of TP53 R249S mutants in cell-free DNA of middle African patients with hepatocellular carcinoma.
**Authors:** Marchio A, Amougou Atsama M, Béré A, Komas NP, Noah Noah D, Atangana PJA, Camengo-Police SM, Njouom R, Bekondi C, Pineau P
**Journal:** Clin Exp Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10238-018-0502-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10238-018-0502-9)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Med. 2018 Aug;18(3):421-431. doi: 10.1007/s10238-018-0502-9. Epub
2018  May 10.

Droplet digital PCR detects high rate of TP53 R249S mutants in cell-free DNA of
middle African patients with hepatocellular carcinoma.

Marchio A(1), Amougou Atsama M(2), Béré A(3), Komas NP(4), Noah Noah D(5),
Atangana PJA(6), Camengo-Police SM(7), Njouom R(2), Bekondi C(3), Pineau P(8).

Author information:
(1)Unité "Organisation Nucléaire et Oncogenèse," INSERM U993, Institut Pasteur,
28, rue du Docteur Roux, 752724, Paris Cedex 15, France.
(2)Service de Virologie, Centre Pasteur du Cameroun, Yaoundé, Cameroun.
(3)Unité de Rétrovirologie et Virus Oncogènes, Institut Pasteur de Bangui,
Bangui, Central African Republic.
(4)Laboratoire des Hépatites Virales, Institut Pasteur de Bangui, Bangui,
Central African Republic.
(5)Service de Gastro-Entérologie, Hôpital Central, Yaoundé, Cameroun.
(6)Laboratoire d'Anatomo-Pathologie, Centre Pasteur du Cameroun, Yaoundé,
Cameroun.
(7)Service de Gastro-Entérologie, Hôpital de l'Amitié, Bangui, Central African
Republic.
(8)Unité "Organisation Nucléaire et Oncogenèse," INSERM U993, Institut Pasteur,
28, rue du Docteur Roux, 752724, Paris Cedex 15, France.
pascal.pineau@pasteur.fr.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is still a major killing malignancy in
sub-Saharan Africa. Lifelong intoxication with aflatoxin B1 is considered as one
of the primary causes of this situation. The role of aflatoxin in HCC from a
given population is commonly estimated through the prevalence of R249S mutation
of TP53, a hallmark for previous exposure to the mycotoxin. However, the role of
AFB1 is barely known in large part of Africa. We conducted a survey on
circulating cell-free DNA from 149 patients with HCC and 213 control subjects
with and without liver diseases from Cameroon and Central African Republic using
droplet digital PCR technique. We observed a mutation prevalence of 24.8%
(n = 37/149) in patients with tumor and 5.6% (n = 12/213) in controls
(P = 2.2E-07). Patients with mutations usually displayed significantly increased
circulating alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) values, high hepatitis B virus (HBV) DNA
loads as well as worsened values of blood cells count. Interestingly, the
fraction of droplets positive for R249S was significantly larger in patients
with liver cancer (15.3 ± 3.7%) than in controls (0.5 ± 0.3%, P = 7.1E-04). Our
survey indicates that AFB1 is instrumental for HCC development in Middle Africa
and that droplet digital PCR might be used in the region both to diagnose HCC
and to conduct public health surveys on populations at risk of chronic aflatoxin
intoxication.

DOI: 10.1007/s10238-018-0502-9
PMID: 29749584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
