---
reference_id: "PMID:39800093"
title: "Epicardial substrate ablation in patients with symptomatic Brugada syndrome: An updated systematic review and single-arm meta-analysis."
authors:
- Karlinski Vizentin V
- Ferreira Felix I
- Pivato da Fonseca R
- Bozko Collini M
- Pinheiro Braga MA
- Serafim Dagostin C
- Vidal Armaganijan L
- Ackerman MJ
- Dantas Brígido AR
- Dagostin de Carvalho G
journal: Heart Rhythm
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2025.01.006
keywords:
- Humans
- "Brugada Syndrome/surgery, physiopathology, diagnosis"
- Catheter Ablation/methods
- Electrocardiography
- Pericardium/surgery
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epicardial substrate ablation in patients with symptomatic Brugada syndrome: An updated systematic review and single-arm meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Karlinski Vizentin V, Ferreira Felix I, Pivato da Fonseca R, Bozko Collini M, Pinheiro Braga MA, Serafim Dagostin C, Vidal Armaganijan L, Ackerman MJ, Dantas Brígido AR, Dagostin de Carvalho G
**Journal:** Heart Rhythm (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hrthm.2025.01.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hrthm.2025.01.006)

## Content

1. Heart Rhythm. 2025 Dec;22(12):3314-3322. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2025.01.006.
Epub  2025 Jan 10.

Epicardial substrate ablation in patients with symptomatic Brugada syndrome: An
updated systematic review and single-arm meta-analysis.

Karlinski Vizentin V(1), Ferreira Felix I(2), Pivato da Fonseca R(3), Bozko
Collini M(4), Pinheiro Braga MA(5), Serafim Dagostin C(6), Vidal Armaganijan
L(7), Ackerman MJ(8), Dantas Brígido AR(9), Dagostin de Carvalho G(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Diseases, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota;
Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic,
Windland Smith Rice Sudden Death Genomics Laboratory, Rochester, Minnesota.
Electronic address: karlinskivizentin.vanessa@mayo.edu.
(2)Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(3)Department of Medicine, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto
Alegre, Brazil.
(4)Department of Medicine, Federal University of Parana, Curitiba, Brazil.
(5)Department of Medicine, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil.
(6)Department of Medicine, University of the Extreme South of Santa Catarina,
Criciuma, Santa Catarina, Brazil.
(7)Department of Electrophysiology, Dante Pazzanese Institute of Cardiology, São
Paulo, Brazil.
(8)Department of Cardiovascular Diseases, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota;
Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic,
Windland Smith Rice Sudden Death Genomics Laboratory, Rochester, Minnesota.
(9)Department of Electrophysiology, University of Sao Paulo Medical School, São
Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Brugada syndrome (BrS) is a genetic heart disease that predisposes
individuals to ventricular arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death. Although
implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs) and quinidine are primary
treatments, recurrent BrS-triggered ventricular arrhythmias can persist. In this
setting, epicardial substrate ablation has emerged as a promising alternative
for symptomatic patients.
OBJECTIVE: Evaluate the effectiveness and safety of epicardial substrate
ablation in patients with BrS.
METHODS: In this single-arm meta-analysis, we systematically searched PubMed,
Embase, and Cochrane databases following PRISMA guidelines for studies including
BrS patients with epicardial substrate ablation. Data were extracted, and
statistical analysis was performed using random-effects modeling for
proportional meta-analysis.
RESULTS: Thirteen cohort studies comprising 555 BrS patients were included. The
mean age at enrollment was 42.6 ± 12.3 years; 82.7% were male patients, and 50%
exhibited spontaneous type 1 Brugada electrocardiographic (ECG) pattern. Pooled
analysis demonstrated resolution of the type 1 pattern in 91% of the cases (95%
confidence interval [CI] 80-98%; I2 = 86%) and elimination of abnormal
electrograms in 91% (95% CI 78-99%; I2 = 74%). Rates of recurrent VT/VF and
appropriate ICD therapies during postablation follow-up were 12% (95% CI 4-21%;
I2 = 86%) and 8% (95% CI 2-18%; I2 = 87%), respectively.
CONCLUSION: Epicardial substrate ablation shows promise for patients with BrS
experiencing BrS-triggered ventricular arrhythmias, offering therapeutic
efficacy with an acceptable safety profile. High heterogeneity among studies
highlights the need for further research and standardized protocols.

Copyright © 2025 Heart Rhythm Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2025.01.006
PMID: 39800093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures Dr Ackerman is consultant for Abbot,
Boston Scientific, Bristol Myers Squibb, Illumina, Invitae, Medtronic, Tenaya
Therapeutics, and UpToDate. Dr Ackerman and Mayo Clinic have an
equity/IP/royalty relationship with AliveCor, Anumana, ARMGO Pharma, Prolaio,
and Solid Biosciences. However, none of these entities were involved in this
study in any manner. The other authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.
