---
reference_id: "PMID:32143947"
title: "Acute parvovirus B19 infection: analysis of 46 patients."
authors:
- Tomás-Velázquez A
- Escribano Á
- Rodríguez-Garijo N
- Estenaga Pérez de Álbeniz Á
- Reina G
- España A
journal: Med Clin (Barc)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.medcli.2019.12.014
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute parvovirus B19 infection: analysis of 46 patients.
**Authors:** Tomás-Velázquez A, Escribano Á, Rodríguez-Garijo N, Estenaga Pérez de Álbeniz Á, Reina G, España A
**Journal:** Med Clin (Barc) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.medcli.2019.12.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.medcli.2019.12.014)

## Content

1. Med Clin (Barc). 2020 Jul 10;155(1):26-29. doi: 10.1016/j.medcli.2019.12.014. 
Epub 2020 Mar 3.

Acute parvovirus B19 infection: analysis of 46 patients.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Tomás-Velázquez A(1), Escribano Á(2), Rodríguez-Garijo N(1), Estenaga Pérez de 
Álbeniz Á(1), Reina G(3), España A(4).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Dermatología, Clínica Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, 
España.
(2)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, España.
(3)Departamento de Microbiología, Clínica Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, 
España.
(4)Departamento de Dermatología, Clínica Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, 
España. Electronic address: aespana@unav.es.

INTRODUCTION: Parvovirus B19 (PVB19) infection has a high incidence and 
worldwide distribution. It has a broad clinical spectrum, with skin, joint and 
haematological manifestations being the most common. The objective of this study 
was to determine the epidemiology and clinical-analytical manifestations of 
acute PVB19 infection.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A retrospective study of patients with a positive IgM 
serology for PVB19 (10 years). Forty-six patients were included and their 
demographic, clinical and analytical characteristics were analyzed.
RESULTS: Primary infection was most prevalent in women (ratio 2.2:1) aged 41 
(mean age). Joint involvement was the most common manifestation (65%). Skin 
abnormalities were observed in more than half of patients (24 cases): rash 
(28%), megalerythema (9%), "gloves and socks" involvement (6.5%), periflexural 
rash (4%) and oedema (4%). Anaemia was the main haematological alteration (35%). 
The symptoms were self-limiting and resolved in 1-2 weeks in most patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Although there is a variable clinical spectrum, polyarthralgias and 
generalized maculopapular rash with fever and anaemia are the typical and most 
frequent manifestations of primary infection by PVB19 and are usually 
self-limiting.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.medcli.2019.12.014
PMID: 32143947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]