---
reference_id: "PMID:25037980"
title: "Mitochondrial myopathy, lactic acidosis, and sideroblastic anemia (MLASA) plus associated with a novel de novo mutation (m.8969G>A) in the mitochondrial encoded ATP6 gene."
authors:
- Burrage LC
- Tang S
- Wang J
- Donti TR
- Walkiewicz M
- Luchak JM
- Chen LC
- Schmitt ES
- Niu Z
- Erana R
- Hunter JV
- Graham BH
- Wong LJ
- Scaglia F
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.06.004
keywords:
- "Acidosis, Lactic/diagnosis, genetics"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Anemia, Sideroblastic/diagnosis, genetics"
- Cell Respiration
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Child
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/genetics"
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- Male
- "Mitochondrial Myopathies/diagnosis, genetics"
- Mitochondrial Proton-Translocating ATPases/genetics
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Point Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial myopathy, lactic acidosis, and sideroblastic anemia (MLASA) plus associated with a novel de novo mutation (m.8969G>A) in the mitochondrial encoded ATP6 gene.
**Authors:** Burrage LC, Tang S, Wang J, Donti TR, Walkiewicz M, Luchak JM, Chen LC, Schmitt ES, Niu Z, Erana R, Hunter JV, Graham BH, Wong LJ, Scaglia F
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.06.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.06.004)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2014 Nov;113(3):207-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.06.004.
Epub  2014 Jun 30.

Mitochondrial myopathy, lactic acidosis, and sideroblastic anemia (MLASA) plus
associated with a novel de novo mutation (m.8969G>A) in the mitochondrial
encoded ATP6 gene.

Burrage LC(1), Tang S(2), Wang J(3), Donti TR(4), Walkiewicz M(5), Luchak JM(6),
Chen LC(7), Schmitt ES(8), Niu Z(9), Erana R(10), Hunter JV(11), Graham BH(12),
Wong LJ(13), Scaglia F(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA. Electronic address: burrage@bcm.edu.
(2)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA. Electronic address: stang@ambrygen.com.
(3)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA. Electronic address: jwang7@bcm.edu.
(4)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA. Electronic address: donti@bcm.edu.
(5)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA. Electronic address: Magdalena.Walkiewicz@bcm.edu.
(6)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA. Electronic address: jluchak@bcm.edu.
(7)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA. Electronic address: ziv28@hotmail.com.
(8)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA. Electronic address: eschmitt@bcm.edu.
(9)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA. Electronic address: zniu@bcm.edu.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Hematology and Oncology, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. Electronic address: rxerana@txch.org.
(11)Department of Radiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
Electronic address: jvhunter@texaschildrens.org.
(12)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA. Electronic address: bgraham@bcm.edu.
(13)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA. Electronic address: ljwong@bcm.edu.
(14)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA. Electronic address: fscaglia@bcm.edu.

Mitochondrial myopathy, lactic acidosis and sideroblastic anemia (MLASA) is a
rare mitochondrial disorder that has previously been associated with mutations
in PUS1 and YARS2. In the present report, we describe a 6-year old male with an
MLASA plus phenotype. This patient had features of MLASA in the setting of
developmental delay, sensorineural hearing loss, epilepsy, agenesis of the
corpus callosum, failure to thrive, and stroke-like episodes. Sequencing of the
mitochondrial genome identified a novel de novo, heteroplasmic mutation in the
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) encoded ATP6 gene (m.8969G>A, p.S148N). Whole exome
sequencing did not identify mutations or variants in PUS1 or YARS2 or any known
nuclear genes that could affect mitochondrial function and explain this
phenotype. Studies of fibroblasts derived from the patient revealed a decrease
in oligomycin-sensitive respiration, a finding which is consistent with a
complex V defect. Thus, this mutation in MT-ATP6 may represent the first mtDNA
point mutation associated with the MLASA phenotype.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.06.004
PMCID: PMC4253070
PMID: 25037980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
