---
reference_id: "PMID:31089417"
title: "Exercise in Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency: Harmful or Harmless? A Narrative Review."
authors:
- Georgakouli K
- Fatouros IG
- Draganidis D
- Papanikolaou K
- Tsimeas P
- Deli CK
- Jamurtas AZ
journal: Oxid Med Cell Longev
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1155/2019/8060193
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exercise in Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency: Harmful or Harmless? A Narrative Review.
**Authors:** Georgakouli K, Fatouros IG, Draganidis D, Papanikolaou K, Tsimeas P, Deli CK, Jamurtas AZ
**Journal:** Oxid Med Cell Longev (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2019/8060193](https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/8060193)

## Content

1. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2019 Apr 4;2019:8060193. doi: 10.1155/2019/8060193. 
eCollection 2019.

Exercise in Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency: Harmful or Harmless? A 
Narrative Review.

Georgakouli K(1), Fatouros IG(1), Draganidis D(1), Papanikolaou K(1), Tsimeas 
P(1), Deli CK(1), Jamurtas AZ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Education and Sport Science, University of Thessaly, 
Karies, Trikala 42100, Greece.
(2)Institute of Human Performance and Rehabilitation, Centre for Research and 
Technology Thessaly, Karies, Trikala 42100, Greece.

OBJECTIVES: Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, theoretically, 
renders red blood cells (RBC) susceptible to oxidative stress. G6PD deficiency 
has also been found in other types of cells than RBC, such as leukocytes and 
myocytes, where an inefficient protection against oxidative stress may occur 
too. Glutathione (GSH), a significant antioxidant molecule, levels are lower in 
G6PD individuals, and theoretically, the probability of oxidative stress and 
haemolysis due to exercise in individuals with G6PD deficiency is increased, 
whereas dietary supplementation with antioxidants may have beneficial effects on 
various aspects of this enzymopathy.
METHODS: A search of the available literature was conducted using the keywords 
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD), deficiency, disease, exercise, muscle, 
antioxidant, vitamin, supplement, and supplementation. The search was limited to 
publications in English, conducted on humans, and published until August 2018. 
After screening, only relevant articles were included.
RESULTS: There is little evidence indicating that G6PD deficiency can cause 
perturbations in redox status, haemolysis, and clinical symptoms such as 
fatigability and myoglobinuria, especially after intense exercise, compared to 
individuals with normal enzyme levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Exercise could be used by G6PD-deficient individuals as a tool to 
improve their quality of life. However, there is a lack of training studies, and 
assessment of the effects of regular and systematic exercise in G6PD-deficient 
individuals is warranted. Finally, since GSH levels are lower in G6PD 
deficiency, it would be interesting to examine the effects of antioxidant or 
cysteine donor supplements on redox status after exercise in these individuals.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/8060193
PMCID: PMC6476018
PMID: 31089417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]