---
reference_id: "PMID:35179219"
title: A de novo mutation of SALL4 in a Chinese family with Okihiro syndrome.
authors:
- Ma X
- Huang R
- Li G
- Zhang T
- Ma J
journal: Mol Med Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3892/mmr.2022.12647
keywords:
- China
- "Duane Retraction Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A de novo mutation of SALL4 in a Chinese family with Okihiro syndrome.
**Authors:** Ma X, Huang R, Li G, Zhang T, Ma J
**Journal:** Mol Med Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3892/mmr.2022.12647](https://doi.org/10.3892/mmr.2022.12647)

## Content

1. Mol Med Rep. 2022 Apr;25(4):131. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2022.12647. Epub 2022 Feb
18.

A de novo mutation of SALL4 in a Chinese family with Okihiro syndrome.

Ma X(#)(1), Huang R(#)(2), Li G(2), Zhang T(2), Ma J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Kunming Children's
Hospital, Kunming, Yunnan 650228, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Kunming Children's
Hospital, Kunming, Yunnan 650228, P.R. China.
(#)Contributed equally

Okihiro syndrome is an autosomal dominant condition characterized by Duane
anomaly and radial ray defects. The present study aimed to analyze the clinical
manifestations of a patient with Okihiro syndrome and perform genetic testing on
the proband and his family to determine the biological pathogenesis. Clinical
data were collected from the proband and his family and genomic DNA was
extracted from peripheral blood. Whole exome sequencing was performed by
high‑throughput sequencing and mutation sites of the proband and his parents
were validated by Sanger sequencing. The proband was diagnosed with Okihiro
syndrome, which is characterized by bone abnormality in the arms and hands
(radial ray malformation, absence of thumbs) and sensorineural hearing loss. A
pathogenic heterozygous c.3060delG variant was identified in exon 4 of
spalt‑like transcription factor 4 (SALL4) gene in the proband. This is a
frameshift mutation that changes increases the length of SALL4 protein from
1,053 to 1,076 amino acids. The variant was classed as a de novo mutation
because the parents of the proband showed no variation at this site. This
variant is not included in the ClinVar database and, to the best of our
knowledge, has not previously been reported. The de novo heterozygous c.3060delG
variant was the molecular pathological cause of Okihiro syndrome in the present
study and expanded the database of known SALL4 variants.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2022.12647
PMCID: PMC8867470
PMID: 35179219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
