---
reference_id: "PMID:38450938"
title: "Acquired hypothalamic obesity: A clinical overview and update."
authors:
- Roth CL
- McCormack SE
journal: Diabetes Obes Metab
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/dom.15530
keywords:
- Humans
- Leptin/metabolism
- "Hypothalamic Diseases/complications, therapy, metabolism"
- "Obesity/complications, therapy, genetics"
- Hypothalamus/metabolism
- "Craniopharyngioma/complications, therapy, metabolism"
- Hyperphagia
- "Pituitary Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology"
- Melanocortins/metabolism
- Energy Metabolism/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acquired hypothalamic obesity: A clinical overview and update.
**Authors:** Roth CL, McCormack SE
**Journal:** Diabetes Obes Metab (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/dom.15530](https://doi.org/10.1111/dom.15530)

## Content

1. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2024 Apr;26 Suppl 2:34-45. doi: 10.1111/dom.15530. Epub
2024 Mar 7.

Acquired hypothalamic obesity: A clinical overview and update.

Roth CL(1)(2), McCormack SE(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute,
Seattle, Washington, DC, USA.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, University of Washington, School of Medicine,
Seattle, Washington, DC, USA.
(3)Neuroendocrine Centre, Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Department of Paediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Hypothalamic obesity (HO) is a rare and complex disorder that confers
substantial morbidity and excess mortality. HO is a unique subtype of obesity
characterized by impairment in the key brain pathways that regulate energy
intake and expenditure, autonomic nervous system function, and peripheral
hormonal signalling. HO often occurs in the context of hypothalamic syndrome, a
constellation of symptoms that follow from disruption of hypothalamic functions,
for example, temperature regulation, sleep-wake circadian control, and energy
balance. Genetic forms of HO, including the monogenic obesity syndromes, often
impact central leptin-melanocortin pathways. Acquired forms of HO occur as a
result of tumours impacting the hypothalamus, such as craniopharyngioma, surgery
or radiation to treat those tumours, or other forms of hypothalamic damage, such
as brain injury impacting the region. Risk for severe obesity following
hypothalamic injury is increased with larger extent of hypothalamic damage or
lesions that contain the medial and posterior hypothalamic nuclei that support
melanocortin signalling pathways. Structural damage in these hypothalamic nuclei
often leads to hyperphagia, central insulin and leptin resistance, decreased
sympathetic activity, low energy expenditure, and increased energy storage in
adipose tissue, the collective effect of which is rapid weight gain. Individuals
with hyperphagia are perpetually hungry. They do not experience fullness at the
end of a meal, nor do they feel satiated after meals, leading them to consume
larger and more frequent meals. To date, most efforts to treat HO have been
disappointing and met with limited, if any, long-term success. However, new
treatments based on the distinct pathophysiology of disturbed energy homeostasis
in acquired HO may hold promise for the future.

© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/dom.15530
PMID: 38450938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
