---
reference_id: "PMID:26238698"
title: "Malignant hyperthermia: a review."
authors:
- Rosenberg H
- Pollock N
- Schiemann A
- Bulger T
- Stowell K
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-015-0310-1
keywords:
- Genetic Counseling
- Humans
- "Malignant Hyperthermia/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Malignant hyperthermia: a review.
**Authors:** Rosenberg H, Pollock N, Schiemann A, Bulger T, Stowell K
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-015-0310-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-015-0310-1)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2015 Aug 4;10:93. doi: 10.1186/s13023-015-0310-1.

Malignant hyperthermia: a review.

Rosenberg H(1), Pollock N(2), Schiemann A(3), Bulger T(4), Stowell K(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Education and Clinical Research, Saint Barnabas Medical 
Center, Livingston, NJ, 07039, USA. HRosenberg@barnabashealth.org.
(2)Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care, Palmerston North Hospital, 
Palmerston North, New Zealand. Neil.Pollock@midcentraldhb.govt.nz.
(3)Institute of Fundamental Sciences, Massey University, Palmerston North, New 
Zealand. A.H.Schiemann@massey.ac.nz.
(4)Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care, Palmerston North Hospital, 
Palmerston North, New Zealand. Terasa.Bulger@midcentraldhb.govt.nz.
(5)Institute of Fundamental Sciences, Massey University, Palmerston North, New 
Zealand. k.m.stowell@massey.ac.nz.

Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a pharmacogenetic disorder of skeletal muscle 
that presents as a hypermetabolic response to potent volatile anesthetic gases 
such as halothane, sevoflurane, desflurane, isoflurane and the depolarizing 
muscle relaxant succinylcholine, and rarely, in humans, to stressors such as 
vigorous exercise and heat. The incidence of MH reactions ranges from 1:10,000 
to 1: 250,000 anesthetics. However, the prevalence of the genetic abnormalities 
may be as great as one in 400 individuals. MH affects humans, certain pig 
breeds, dogs and horses. The classic signs of MH include hyperthermia, 
tachycardia, tachypnea, increased carbon dioxide production, increased oxygen 
consumption, acidosis, hyperkalaemia, muscle rigidity, and rhabdomyolysis, all 
related to a hypermetabolic response. The syndrome is likely to be fatal if 
untreated. An increase in end-tidal carbon dioxide despite increased minute 
ventilation provides an early diagnostic clue. In humans the syndrome is 
inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, while in pigs it is autosomal 
recessive. Uncontrolled rise of myoplasmic calcium, which activates biochemical 
processes related to muscle activation leads to the pathophysiologic changes. In 
most cases, the syndrome is caused by a defect in the ryanodine receptor. Over 
400 variants have been identified in the RYR1 gene located on chromosome 
19q13.1, and at least 34 are causal for MH. Less than 1 % of variants have been 
found in CACNA1S but not all of these are causal. Diagnostic testing involves 
the in vitro contracture response of biopsied muscle to halothane, caffeine, and 
in some centres ryanodine and 4-chloro-m-cresol. Elucidation of the genetic 
changes has led to the introduction of DNA testing for susceptibility to MH. 
Dantrolene sodium is a specific antagonist and should be available wherever 
general anesthesia is administered. Increased understanding of the clinical 
manifestation and pathophysiology of the syndrome, has lead to the mortality 
decreasing from 80 % thirty years ago to <5 % in 2006.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-015-0310-1
PMCID: PMC4524368
PMID: 26238698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]