---
reference_id: "PMID:25240504"
title: "Treatment algorithm in 2014 for advanced non-small cell lung cancer: therapy selection by tumour histology and molecular biology."
authors:
- Manegold C
journal: Adv Med Sci
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.advms.2014.08.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment algorithm in 2014 for advanced non-small cell lung cancer: therapy selection by tumour histology and molecular biology.
**Authors:** Manegold C
**Journal:** Adv Med Sci (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.advms.2014.08.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.advms.2014.08.008)

## Content

1. Adv Med Sci. 2014 Sep;59(2):308-13. doi: 10.1016/j.advms.2014.08.008. Epub
2014  Aug 29.

Treatment algorithm in 2014 for advanced non-small cell lung cancer: therapy 
selection by tumour histology and molecular biology.

Manegold C(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany; 
Visiting Professor Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland. 
Electronic address: prof.manegold@t-online.de.

The availability of antineoplastic monoclonal antibodies, small molecules and 
newer cytotoxics such as pemetrexed, the EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors 
erlotinib, gefitinib, afatinib as well as the anti-angiogenic bevacizumab and 
the ALK-inhibitor crizotinib has recently changes the treatment algorithm of 
advanced non-small cell lung cancer. Decision making in 2014 is characterized by 
customizing therapy, by selecting a specific therapeutic regimen based on the 
histotype and the genotype of the tumour. This refers to first-line induction 
therapy and maintenance therapy as well, but also to subsequent lines of therapy 
since anti-neoplastic drugs and regimens used upfront clinically influence the 
selection of agents/regimes considered for second-/third-line treatment. 
Consequently, therapy customization through tumour histology and molecular 
markers has significantly influenced the work of pathologists around the globe 
and the process of obtaining an extended therapeutically relevant tumour 
diagnosis. Not only histological sub-typing became standard but molecular 
information is also considered of increasing importance for treatment selection. 
Routine molecular testing in certified laboratories must be established, and the 
diagnostic process should ideally be performed under the guidance of evidence 
based recommendation. The process of investigating and implementing medical 
targeting in lung cancer therefore, requires advanced diagnostic techniques and 
expertise and because of its large dimension is costly and influenced by the 
limitation of financial and clinical resources.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Urban & Partner Sp. z o.o.

DOI: 10.1016/j.advms.2014.08.008
PMID: 25240504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]