---
reference_id: "PMID:31891582"
title: Analysis of gut microbiota of obese individuals with type 2 diabetes and healthy individuals.
authors:
- Ahmad A
- Yang W
- Chen G
- Shafiq M
- Javed S
- Ali Zaidi SS
- Shahid R
- Liu C
- Bokhari H
journal: PLoS One
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0226372
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of gut microbiota of obese individuals with type 2 diabetes and healthy individuals.
**Authors:** Ahmad A, Yang W, Chen G, Shafiq M, Javed S, Ali Zaidi SS, Shahid R, Liu C, Bokhari H
**Journal:** PLoS One (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0226372](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0226372)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2019 Dec 31;14(12):e0226372. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0226372. 
eCollection 2019.

Analysis of gut microbiota of obese individuals with type 2 diabetes and healthy 
individuals.

Ahmad A(1), Yang W(2), Chen G(2), Shafiq M(1), Javed S(1), Ali Zaidi SS(1), 
Shahid R(1), Liu C(2), Bokhari H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, COMSATS University, Chak Shahzad, Islamabad, 
Pakistan.
(2)Endocrine and Diabetes Center, Affiliated Hospital of Integrated Traditional 
Chinese and Western Medicine, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, Jiangsu 
Province Academy of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, China.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) accounts for 90% of diabetes cases worldwide. 
The majority of T2DM patients are obese. Dysbiosis in the gut microflora is 
strongly associated with the pathogenesis of obesity and T2DM; however, the 
microbiome of obese-T2DM individuals in the Pakistani population remains 
unexplored. The gut microbiota signature of 60 Pakistani adults was studied 
using 16S rRNA sequencing targeting V3-V4 hypervariable regions. The sequence 
analysis revealed that bacteria from Firmicutes were predominant along with 
those from Clostridia and Negativicutes, whereas bacteria from Verrucomicrobia, 
Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria, and Elusimicrobia were less abundant among the 
obese T2DM patients. These data distinctively vary from those in reports on the 
Indian population. The difference in gut microbiota could presumably be related 
to the distinct lifestyle and eastern dietary habits (high carbohydrate and fat 
intake, low fiber intake) and unregulated antibiotic consumption. This is the 
first study carried out to understand the gut microbiome and its correlation 
with individual life style of obese T2DM patients in the Pakistani population.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0226372
PMCID: PMC6938335
PMID: 31891582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.