---
reference_id: "PMID:32158599"
title: "Current Status and Future Direction of Immunotherapy in Hepatocellular Carcinoma: What Do the Data Suggest?"
authors:
- Lee HW
- Cho KJ
- Park JY
journal: Immune Netw
year: '2020'
doi: 10.4110/in.2020.20.e11
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current Status and Future Direction of Immunotherapy in Hepatocellular Carcinoma: What Do the Data Suggest?
**Authors:** Lee HW, Cho KJ, Park JY
**Journal:** Immune Netw (2020)
**DOI:** [10.4110/in.2020.20.e11](https://doi.org/10.4110/in.2020.20.e11)

## Content

1. Immune Netw. 2020 Feb 17;20(1):e11. doi: 10.4110/in.2020.20.e11. eCollection
2020 Feb.

Current Status and Future Direction of Immunotherapy in Hepatocellular
Carcinoma: What Do the Data Suggest?

Lee HW(1)(2)(3), Cho KJ(3)(4), Park JY(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul
03722, Korea.
(2)Institue of Gastroenterology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul
03722, Korea.
(3)Yonsei Liver Center, Severance Hospital, Seoul 03722, Korea.
(4)BK21 Plus Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine,
Seoul 03722, Korea.

Most patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) are diagnosed at an advanced
stage of disease. Until recently, systemic treatment options that showed
survival benefits in HCC have been limited to tyrosine kinase inhibitors,
antibodies targeting oncogenic signaling pathways or VEGF receptors. The HCC
tumor microenvironment is characterized by a dysfunction of the immune system
through multiple mechanisms, including accumulation of various immunosuppressive
factors, recruitment of regulatory T cells and myeloid-derived suppressor cells,
and induction of T cell exhaustion accompanied with the interaction between
immune checkpoint ligands and receptors. Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs)
have been interfered this interaction and have altered therapeutic landscape of
multiple cancer types including HCC. In this review, we discuss the use of
anti-PD-1, anti-PD-L1, and anti-CTLA-4 antibodies in the treatment of advanced
HCC. However, ICIs as a single agent do not benefit a significant portion of
patients. Therefore, various clinical trials are exploring possible synergistic
effects of combinations of different ICIs (anti-PD-1/PD-L1 and anti-CTLA-4
antibodies) or ICIs and target agents. Combinations of ICIs with locoregional
therapies may also improve therapeutic responses.

Copyright © 2020. The Korean Association of Immunologists.

DOI: 10.4110/in.2020.20.e11
PMCID: PMC7049588
PMID: 32158599

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interests: The authors declare no
potential conflicts of interest.
