---
reference_id: "PMID:37452370"
title: Comparison of two different intravitreal treatment regimens combined with systemic antiviral therapy for cytomegalovirus retinitis in patients with AIDS.
authors:
- Liang X
- An H
- He H
- Shen B
- Ou Z
- Li L
journal: AIDS Res Ther
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12981-023-00543-x
keywords:
- Humans
- Antiviral Agents/therapeutic use
- "Cytomegalovirus Retinitis/complications, drug therapy"
- "Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome/complications, drug therapy"
- Prospective Studies
- Retrospective Studies
- HIV Infections/drug therapy
- "Ganciclovir/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparison of two different intravitreal treatment regimens combined with systemic antiviral therapy for cytomegalovirus retinitis in patients with AIDS.
**Authors:** Liang X, An H, He H, Shen B, Ou Z, Li L
**Journal:** AIDS Res Ther (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12981-023-00543-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12981-023-00543-x)

## Content

1. AIDS Res Ther. 2023 Jul 14;20(1):46. doi: 10.1186/s12981-023-00543-x.

Comparison of two different intravitreal treatment regimens combined with 
systemic antiviral therapy for cytomegalovirus retinitis in patients with AIDS.

Liang X(1), An H(1), He H(2), Shen B(1), Ou Z(1), Li L(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Fundus Disease, Nanning Aier Eye Hospital, Nanning City, China.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, The Fourth Hospital of Nanning, Nanning 
City, China.
(3)Department of Fundus Disease, Nanning Aier Eye Hospital, Nanning City, China. 
lxmyanke@163.com.

PURPOSE: To compare the efficacy and injection frequency of intravitreal 
low-dose vs. intermediate-dose ganciclovir therapy in acquired immune deficiency 
syndrome (AIDS) patients exhibiting cytomegalovirus retinitis (CMVR).
METHODS: A prospective, single-centre, double-blinded, randomized controlled 
interventional study was conducted. Fifty patients with a total of 67 included 
eyes were randomly divided into low-dose (0.4 mg ganciclovir per week) and 
intermediate-dose (1.0 mg ganciclovir per week) groups. The primary clinical 
outcomes were the changes in best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) from baseline 
to the end of treatment and the 12-month follow-up visit as well as the number 
of intravitreal injections.
RESULTS: In both groups, the median BCVA, expressed as the logarithm of the 
minimum angle of resolution (logMAR), improved significantly from baseline to 
the end of treatment (both p < 0.001), while vision loss from CMVR continued to 
occur at the 12-month visit. The mean number of injections was 5.8 in the 
low-dose group and 5.4 in the intermediate-dose group. No significant 
differences were detected between the two groups (p > 0.05). Regarding the 
location of CMVR, we found that Zone I lesions led to a worse visual outcome, 
more injections and a higher occurrence rate of complications than lesions in 
other zones (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The efficacy and frequency of injections to treat CMVR in AIDS 
patients were not significantly different between low and intermediate doses. 
Zone I lesions were associated with a worse visual outcome, more injections and 
a higher occurrence rate of CMVR-related complications than lesions in other 
zones.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12981-023-00543-x
PMCID: PMC10347846
PMID: 37452370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.