---
reference_id: "PMID:10617161"
title: "Type II autosomal dominant osteopetrosis (Albers-Schönberg disease): clinical and radiological manifestations in 42 patients."
authors:
- Bénichou OD
- Laredo JD
- de Vernejoul MC
journal: Bone
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1016/s8756-3282(99)00244-6
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Arthroplasty, Replacement, Hip"
- Child
- Female
- "Genes, Dominant"
- "Genetic Diseases, Inborn/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Osteopetrosis/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- Pedigree
- Radiography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type II autosomal dominant osteopetrosis (Albers-Schönberg disease): clinical and radiological manifestations in 42 patients.
**Authors:** Bénichou OD, Laredo JD, de Vernejoul MC
**Journal:** Bone (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s8756-3282(99)00244-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s8756-3282(99)00244-6)

## Content

1. Bone. 2000 Jan;26(1):87-93. doi: 10.1016/s8756-3282(99)00244-6.

Type II autosomal dominant osteopetrosis (Albers-Schönberg disease): clinical
and radiological manifestations in 42 patients.

Bénichou OD(1), Laredo JD, de Vernejoul MC.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U 349, Hôpital Lariboisière, Paris, France.
olivier.benichou@inserm.lrb.ap-hop-paris.fr

Type II autosomal dominant osteopetrosis (ADO II, Albers-Schonberg disease) is a
genetic condition characterized by generalized osteosclerosis predominating in
some skeletal sites such as the spine and pelvis. ADO II is rare, and most
available clinical descriptions are based on small numbers of patients. We
report the clinical and radiological manifestations in 42 ADO II patients. To
our knowledge, this is the largest series reported so far. Our inclusion
criterion was presence on radiographs of the spine of vertebral endplate
thickening, producing the classic sandwich vertebra appearance. We found various
patterns of sandwich vertebra, of which we provide a description to assist
physicians in diagnosing ADO II. The classic bone-within-bone appearance was
present in most but not all skeletal sites. The radiological penetrance of the
disease was high (90%) and increased after 20 years of age. As many as 81% of
our patients experienced clinical manifestations. Fractures were common (78% of
patients) and healed slowly. Hip osteoarthritis developed in 27% of patients and
required arthroplasty in 9 of the 16 affected hips. Nonmandibular osteomyelitis
occurred in 4 cases (11%). Twenty-four percent of patients had thoracic or
lumbar scoliosis. Orthopedic surgery was performed in 52.8% of patients, of whom
half had at least three surgical procedures for internal fracture fixation,
arthroplasty, limb deformity correction, or treatment of surgical complications.
There was a high rate of surgical complications including nonunion, infection,
prosthesis loosening, and intraoperative fractures. Nearly two-thirds of
patients (64%) had stomatologic manifestations, including mandibular
osteomyelitis in 4 patients (11%). Cranial nerve involvement responsible for
hearing loss, bilateral optic atrophy, and/or facial palsy was present in 14
patients but was clearly attributable to ADO II in only 6 cases (16%). This
large series sheds new light on several aspects of ADO II, most notably the
possibility of severe clinical complications. Although other forms of
osteopetrosis are considerably more severe, the name "benign osteopetrosis"
previously used for ADO II is probably a misnomer.

DOI: 10.1016/s8756-3282(99)00244-6
PMID: 10617161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
