---
reference_id: "PMID:23763801"
title: Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Naz S
- Mushtaq A
- Rehman S
- Bari A
- Maqsud A
- Khan MZ
- Ahmad TM
journal: J Coll Physicians Surg Pak
year: '2013'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Naz S, Mushtaq A, Rehman S, Bari A, Maqsud A, Khan MZ, Ahmad TM
**Journal:** J Coll Physicians Surg Pak (2013)

## Content

1. J Coll Physicians Surg Pak. 2013 Jun;23(6):409-12.

Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis.

Naz S(1), Mushtaq A, Rehman S, Bari A, Maqsud A, Khan MZ, Ahmad TM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Medicine , The Children's Hospital and The Institute 
of Child Health, Lahore. naz_arfi@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To determine the spectrum of clinical presentation, laboratory 
parameters and drug therapy in patients with Juvenile Rheumatoid Arthritis 
(JRA).
STUDY DESIGN: Case series.
PLACE AND DURATION OF STUDY: The Children's Hospital and The Institute of Child 
Health, Lahore, from October 2008 to October 2011.
METHODOLOGY: All patients who fulfilled the American College of Rheumatology 
criteria for JRA were enrolled. Their clinical features, investigations done and 
treatment received for JRA were noted. Statistical analysis of data was done on 
SPSS version 16.0 for obtaining descriptive statistics.
RESULTS: Out of 185 patients, 50.3% (n = 93) were females; 54% (n = 100) were 
between 10 - 15 years of age. Polyarthritis was found in 71.9% (n = 133) 
followed by oligoarthritis (22.7%, n = 42) and systemic onset disease (5.4%, n = 
10). Morning stiffness (78%) and fever (68%) were the most common clinical 
presentations. All patients with systemic onset disease had fever (n = 10) 
followed by skin rash, hepatosplenomegaly and lymphadenopathy. Uveitis was found 
in 2 patients, and both belonged to the oligoarticular group. Rheumatoid factor 
was found in 10.27% (n = 19) of all patients. All patients were given 
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Disease modifying agents 
(methotrexate) were given to 43.8% (n = 81). Steroids were used in 61% (n = 113) 
of patients either with NSAIDs alone or NSAIDs plus methotrexate.
CONCLUSION: Disease profile of JRA at the study centre showed that polyarthritis 
is the commonest type. Recognition of subtypes will help in planning the 
management of these patients.

PMID: 23763801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]