---
reference_id: "PMID:33705444"
title: Spatial distribution and natural environment mechanism of the cholera epidemic in ancient Jiangnan area, China.
authors:
- Wang X
- Yang M
journal: PLoS One
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0248048
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spatial distribution and natural environment mechanism of the cholera epidemic in ancient Jiangnan area, China.
**Authors:** Wang X, Yang M
**Journal:** PLoS One (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0248048](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0248048)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2021 Mar 11;16(3):e0248048. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0248048. 
eCollection 2021.

Spatial distribution and natural environment mechanism of the cholera epidemic 
in ancient Jiangnan area, China.

Wang X(1), Yang M(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Tourism, Shandong Women's University, Jinan, China.
(2)Key Lab of Guangdong for Utilization of Remote Sensing and Geographical 
Information System, Guangdong Open Laboratory of Geospatial Information 
Technology and Application, Guangzhou Institute of Geography, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Centre for Human Geography and Urban Development, Guangdong Provincial Center 
for Urban and Migration Studies, School of Geographical Sciences, Guangzhou 
University, Guangzhou, China.

Cholera, as an acute, high-risk and widespread infectious disease, has been 
studied by many scholars. Based on the data from <Annals of Epidemics in China 
over the Past 3000 Years>, this research investigated the spatial distribution 
of the cholera epidemic and natural environment mechanism of the cholera 
epidemic in the Jiangnan area, from the year 1820 to 1821. We applied a set of 
spatial statistical analyses to investigate the spatial heterogeneity and the 
factors that influence the cholera epidemic in the Jiangnan area. Results show 
that: 1) Spatial distribution of cholera epidemic lied at different geographical 
scales. The cholera epidemic was highly concentrated in Shanghai, Nanjing and 
Hangzhou; There was a north-south difference of cholera epidemic distribution at 
the regional scale. The cholera epidemic was more concentrated in the north part 
than in the south part of the Jiangnan area; Meanwhile, there was an east-west 
difference in cholera epidemic distribution where the intensity of the cholera 
epidemic decreased from east to northwest and southwest. 2) A land-sea 
distribution of cholera can be also found. The Chang-Hang line and the Hu-Jia 
line were the two boundaries of the cholera epidemic in the Jiangnan area. 3) 
There was a close relationship between the distribution of the cholera epidemic 
and natural environment in the Jiangnan area. The influence intensity of natural 
factors on epidemic disasters followed the order of temperature (0.760) > 
precipitation (0.663) > river distance (0.413) > river density (0.398) > 
elevation (0.395). The present investigation is conductive to establish a 
prevention system for public health emergencies, which contributes to the 
sustainable development of society and human health.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0248048
PMCID: PMC7951932
PMID: 33705444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.