---
reference_id: "PMID:28536811"
title: Listeriosis during pregnancy.
authors:
- Madjunkov M
- Chaudhry S
- Ito S
journal: Arch Gynecol Obstet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s00404-017-4401-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Listeriosis during pregnancy.
**Authors:** Madjunkov M, Chaudhry S, Ito S
**Journal:** Arch Gynecol Obstet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00404-017-4401-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00404-017-4401-1)

## Content

1. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2017 Aug;296(2):143-152. doi: 10.1007/s00404-017-4401-1. 
Epub 2017 May 23.

Listeriosis during pregnancy.

Madjunkov M(1), Chaudhry S(1), Ito S(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, 555 University Avenue, Toronto, ON, M5G 1X8, Canada.
(2)Division of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, 555 University Avenue, Toronto, ON, M5G 1X8, Canada. 
shinya.ito@sickkids.ca.

PURPOSE: Listeriosis is a rare foodborne illness caused by Listeria 
monocytogenes. It can be transmitted by consuming contaminated ready-to-eat 
food, long shelf-life products, deli meats, and soft cheeses. Listeria has a 
predilection to affect immunocompromised patients, elderly people, pregnant 
women and neonates. In particular, pregnant women are at ~18 times greater risk 
of infection than general population due to specific pregnancy-related 
suppressed cell-mediated immunity and placental tropism of L. monocytogenes. The 
purpose of this review is to summarize the current knowledge regarding 
listeriosis during pregnancy.
METHODS: A literature search on Medline and Embase was done for articles about 
listeriosis during pregnancy. A detailed review of published data on 
epidemiology, pathogenesis, diagnosis, treatment and prevention of listeriosis 
during pregnancy was performed.
RESULTS: Listeriosis during pregnancy encompasses maternal, fetal and neonatal 
disease. Maternal listeriosis during pregnancy usually presents as a mild 
febrile illness. Fetal listeriosis has a high mortality rate of 25-35%, 
depending on the gestational age at the time of infection. Neonatal listeriosis 
may present as sepsis or meningitis with severe sequels and high case fatality 
rate of 20%. Adequate treatment of maternal listeriosis prevents and treats 
fetal disease and it is of imminence importance in the treatment of the 
neonates. Amoxicillin or ampicillin are the first line of treatment alone or in 
combination with gentamicin, followed by trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole.
CONCLUSIONS: Pregnancy-associated listeriosis should be considered as a cause of 
fever during pregnancy and appropriate treatment should be initiated 
preemptively. Prevention remains the best way to control listeriosis and should 
be reinforced among patients, health care professionals, and regulatory 
agencies.

DOI: 10.1007/s00404-017-4401-1
PMID: 28536811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]