---
reference_id: "PMID:23621114"
title: Identification of the SV2 protein receptor-binding site of botulinum neurotoxin type E.
authors:
- Mahrhold S
- Strotmeier J
- Garcia-Rodriguez C
- Lou J
- Marks JD
- Rummel A
- Binz T
journal: Biochem J
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1042/BJ20130391
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of the SV2 protein receptor-binding site of botulinum neurotoxin type E.
**Authors:** Mahrhold S, Strotmeier J, Garcia-Rodriguez C, Lou J, Marks JD, Rummel A, Binz T
**Journal:** Biochem J (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20130391](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20130391)

## Content

1. Biochem J. 2013 Jul 1;453(1):37-47. doi: 10.1042/BJ20130391.

Identification of the SV2 protein receptor-binding site of botulinum neurotoxin 
type E.

Mahrhold S(1), Strotmeier J, Garcia-Rodriguez C, Lou J, Marks JD, Rummel A, Binz 
T.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 
1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

The highly specific binding and uptake of BoNTs (botulinum neurotoxins; A-G) 
into peripheral cholinergic motoneurons turns them into the most poisonous 
substances known. Interaction with gangliosides accumulates the neurotoxins on 
the plasma membrane and binding to a synaptic vesicle membrane protein leads to 
neurotoxin endocytosis. SV2 (synaptic vesicle glycoprotein 2) mediates the 
uptake of BoNT/A and /E, whereas Syt (synaptotagmin) is responsible for the 
endocytosis of BoNT/B and /G. The Syt-binding site of the former was identified 
by co-crystallization and mutational analyses. In the present study we report 
the identification of the SV2-binding interface of BoNT/E. Mutations interfering 
with SV2 binding were located at a site that corresponds to the Syt-binding site 
of BoNT/B and at an extended surface area located on the back of the conserved 
ganglioside-binding site, comprising the N- and C-terminal half of the 
BoNT/E-binding domain. Mutations impairing the affinity also reduced the 
neurotoxicity of full-length BoNT/E at mouse phrenic nerve hemidiaphragm 
preparations demonstrating the crucial role of the identified binding interface. 
Furthermore, we show that a monoclonal antibody neutralizes BoNT/E activity 
because it directly interferes with the BoNT/E-SV2 interaction. The results of 
the present study suggest a novel mode of binding for BoNTs that exploit SV2 as 
a cell surface receptor.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20130391
PMID: 23621114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]