---
reference_id: "PMID:23108300"
title: Promotion of hepatocellular carcinoma by hepatitis C virus.
authors:
- Bühler S
- Bartenschlager R
journal: Dig Dis
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1159/000341688
keywords:
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/metabolism, virology"
- Cell Survival
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/metabolism"
- "Fatty Liver/metabolism, physiopathology, virology"
- Female
- Hepacivirus
- "Hepatitis C, Chronic/metabolism, physiopathology, virology"
- Humans
- "Liver Cirrhosis/metabolism, physiopathology, virology"
- "Liver Neoplasms/metabolism, virology"
- Male
- "Stress, Physiological"
- Virus Replication
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Promotion of hepatocellular carcinoma by hepatitis C virus.
**Authors:** Bühler S, Bartenschlager R
**Journal:** Dig Dis (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000341688](https://doi.org/10.1159/000341688)

## Content

1. Dig Dis. 2012;30(5):445-52. doi: 10.1159/000341688. Epub 2012 Oct 24.

Promotion of hepatocellular carcinoma by hepatitis C virus.

Bühler S(1), Bartenschlager R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Molecular Virology, Heidelberg University,
Germany.

Persistent infection with the hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a major global health
problem. Around 2-3% of the world's population are chronically infected, and
infected individuals are at high risk of developing steatosis, fibrosis, and
liver cirrhosis. The latter is a major predisposing factor for the development
of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). It is generally accepted that an inflammatory
response triggered by persistent HCV infection leads to increased cell
proliferation and fibrogenesis that in turn promotes cirrhosis and ultimately
HCC development. This indirect mechanism of tumor induction would explain the
long incubation period from primary HCV infection to HCC and the requirement for
additional cofactors such as toxins or drugs (most notably alcohol), metabolic
liver diseases, steatosis, nonalcoholic liver disease, or diabetes. With the
advent of adequate cell culture systems for HCV it is, however, becoming
increasingly clear that the virus also contributes directly to HCC formation.
Examples are the continuous induction of stress response or the massive
accumulation of intracellular lipids. Moreover, viral proteins can bind to and
sequester cell cycle control factors such as the retinoblastoma protein or the
tumor suppressor DDX3. Thus, HCV-associated liver cancer is most likely promoted
by the combined action of long-term chronic inflammation and targeted
perturbations of cellular key pathways involved in metabolic homeostasis as well
as cell cycle control.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000341688
PMID: 23108300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
