---
reference_id: "PMID:31428203"
title: Effect of insulin-glucose metabolism compared with obesity on adipose omentin gene expression in different models of diabetic C57BL/6 mice.
authors:
- Goodarzi G
- Shirgir A
- Alavi S
- Khoshi A
journal: Diabetol Metab Syndr
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13098-019-0460-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of insulin-glucose metabolism compared with obesity on adipose omentin gene expression in different models of diabetic C57BL/6 mice.
**Authors:** Goodarzi G, Shirgir A, Alavi S, Khoshi A
**Journal:** Diabetol Metab Syndr (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13098-019-0460-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13098-019-0460-8)

## Content

1. Diabetol Metab Syndr. 2019 Aug 14;11:65. doi: 10.1186/s13098-019-0460-8. 
eCollection 2019.

Effect of insulin-glucose metabolism compared with obesity on adipose omentin 
gene expression in different models of diabetic C57BL/6 mice.

Goodarzi G(1), Shirgir A(2), Alavi S(2), Khoshi A(1).

Author information:
(1)1Department of Clinical Biochemistry, School of Medicine, North Khorasan 
University of Medical Sciences, Bojnurd, Iran.
(2)2Student Research Committee, School of Medicine, North Khorasan University of 
Medical Sciences, Bojnurd, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Omentin, releasing by adipose-tissue may be related to glucose 
metabolism. The omentin circulating levels and the related mRNA expression in 
visceral adipose-tissue are different in types of diabetes and the exact 
function of this molecule is still unknown. The aim of this study was to examine 
omentin gene expression in adipose-tissues of type-1 and type-2 diabetic mice 
for the investigation of the effects of fat-mass and insulin-glucose metabolism.
METHODS: In this study, 36 C57BL/6 mice were divided into four experimental 
groups, including control, type-1 diabetes (inducted by streptozotocin), type-2 
diabetes with obesity (high-fat diet + low-dose-streptozotocin [HFD + STZ]), and 
type-2 with normal weight (normal-pellet diet + low-dose-streptozotocin 
[NPD + STZ]). The present study involved the measurements of 
oral-glucose-tolerance-test and the levels of biochemical parameters, including 
blood glucose, omentin, insulin, lipid-profile, as well as aminotransferases. In 
addition, the omentin mRNA expression was evaluated by real-time 
polymerase-chain-reaction.
RESULTS: The results of omentin gene expression analysis showed a significant 
difference between mRNA expressions in the experimental groups. The plasma 
omentin levels were significantly higher in type-1 diabetes group and lower in 
type-2 diabetes with NPD + STZ; however, the plasma omentin levels were not 
changed in the HFD + STZ group. In addition, the findings of serum-biochemical 
analysis revealed significant differences, compared to the control-group.
CONCLUSIONS: The omentin expression may be affected by insulin and glucose 
levels in different types of diabetes more than fat-mass, and due to the local 
activity, the serum omentin may not comply with its gene expression.

DOI: 10.1186/s13098-019-0460-8
PMCID: PMC6694498
PMID: 31428203

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare that they 
have no competing interests.