---
reference_id: "PMID:34543610"
title: Liver cirrhosis.
authors:
- Ginès P
- Krag A
- Abraldes JG
- Solà E
- Fabrellas N
- Kamath PS
journal: Lancet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)01374-X
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liver cirrhosis.
**Authors:** Ginès P, Krag A, Abraldes JG, Solà E, Fabrellas N, Kamath PS
**Journal:** Lancet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(21)01374-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(21)01374-X)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2021 Oct 9;398(10308):1359-1376. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)01374-X. 
Epub 2021 Sep 17.

Liver cirrhosis.

Ginès P(1), Krag A(2), Abraldes JG(3), Solà E(4), Fabrellas N(5), Kamath PS(6).

Author information:
(1)Liver Unit, Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Faculty of 
Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; 
Institute of Biomedical Investigation August Pi I Sunyer, Barcelona, Spain; 
Hepatic and Digestive Diseases Biomedical Investigation Center, Madrid, Spain. 
Electronic address: pgines@clinic.cat.
(2)Centre for Liver Research, Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 
Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark; Institute of Clinical Research, 
University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
(3)Liver Unit, Division of Gastroenterology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, 
AB, Canada.
(4)Liver Unit, Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Faculty of 
Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; 
Institute for Immunity, Transplantation and Infection, Stanford University, 
Stanford, CA, USA.
(5)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, 
Spain; Institute of Biomedical Investigation August Pi I Sunyer, Barcelona, 
Spain; Hepatic and Digestive Diseases Biomedical Investigation Center, Madrid, 
Spain.
(6)Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science, Rochester, MN, USA.

Cirrhosis is widely prevalent worldwide and can be a consequence of different 
causes, such as obesity, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, high alcohol 
consumption, hepatitis B or C infection, autoimmune diseases, cholestatic 
diseases, and iron or copper overload. Cirrhosis develops after a long period of 
inflammation that results in replacement of the healthy liver parenchyma with 
fibrotic tissue and regenerative nodules, leading to portal hypertension. The 
disease evolves from an asymptomatic phase (compensated cirrhosis) to a 
symptomatic phase (decompensated cirrhosis), the complications of which often 
result in hospitalisation, impaired quality of life, and high mortality. 
Progressive portal hypertension, systemic inflammation, and liver failure drive 
disease outcomes. The management of liver cirrhosis is centred on the treatment 
of the causes and complications, and liver transplantation can be required in 
some cases. In this Seminar, we discuss the disease burden, pathophysiology, and 
recommendations for the diagnosis and management of cirrhosis and its 
complications. Future challenges include better screening for early fibrosis or 
cirrhosis, early identification and reversal of causative factors, and 
prevention of complications.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)01374-X
PMID: 34543610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests PG reports research 
funding from Gilead Sciences, Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals, and Grifols; and 
participation in advisory boards for Gilead Sciences, Grifols, Mallinckrodt, 
Novartis, Martin Pharmaceuticals, and Ferring. AK is a speaker and advisory 
board member for Norgine and Siemens. JGA is a consultant for Gilead Sciences, 
Intercept, Genfit, Lupin, Inventiva, and Boehringer Ingelheim; and reports grant 
support from Gilead Sciences and speaker fees from Lupin. NF participated in 
advisory boards for Intercept. PSK is an advisory board member of Sequana. ES 
declares no competing interests.