---
reference_id: "PMID:24452334"
title: Glycogen accumulation underlies neurodegeneration and autophagy impairment in Lafora disease.
authors:
- Duran J
- Gruart A
- García-Rocha M
- Delgado-García JM
- Guinovart JJ
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu024
keywords:
- Animals
- Autophagy
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Dual-Specificity Phosphatases/metabolism
- Electrical Synapses/metabolism
- "Epilepsy/chemically induced, pathology"
- Glycogen/metabolism
- "Glycogen Synthase/genetics, metabolism"
- Hippocampus/physiology
- Humans
- "Inclusion Bodies/genetics, metabolism"
- Kainic Acid/pharmacology
- "Lafora Disease/metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation
- "Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases, Non-Receptor"
- "Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glycogen accumulation underlies neurodegeneration and autophagy impairment in Lafora disease.
**Authors:** Duran J, Gruart A, García-Rocha M, Delgado-García JM, Guinovart JJ
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddu024](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddu024)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Jun 15;23(12):3147-56. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu024. Epub 2014 
Jan 22.

Glycogen accumulation underlies neurodegeneration and autophagy impairment in 
Lafora disease.

Duran J(1), Gruart A(2), García-Rocha M(3), Delgado-García JM(2), Guinovart 
JJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), Barcelona 08028, Spain 
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Diabetes y Enfermedades Metabólicas 
Asociadas (CIBERDEM), Barcelona 08017, Spain.
(2)Division of Neurosciences, Pablo de Olavide University, Seville 41013, Spain.
(3)Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), Barcelona 08028, 
Spain.
(4)Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), Barcelona 08028, Spain 
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Diabetes y Enfermedades Metabólicas 
Asociadas (CIBERDEM), Barcelona 08017, Spain Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, University of Barcelona, Barcelona 08028, Spain 
guinovart@irbbarcelona.org.

Lafora disease is a fatal neurodegenerative condition characterized by the 
accumulation of abnormal glycogen inclusions known as Lafora bodies. It is an 
autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in either the laforin or malin 
gene. To study whether glycogen is primarily responsible for the 
neurodegeneration in Lafora disease, we generated malin knockout mice with 
impaired (totally or partially) glycogen synthesis. These animals did not show 
the increase in markers of neurodegeneration, the impairments in 
electrophysiological properties of hippocampal synapses, nor the susceptibility 
to kainate-induced epilepsy seen in the malin knockout model. Interestingly, the 
autophagy impairment that has been described in malin knockout animals was also 
rescued in this double knockout model. Conversely, two other mouse models in 
which glycogen is over-accumulated in the brain independently of the lack of 
malin showed impairment in autophagy. Our findings reveal that glycogen 
accumulation accounts for the neurodegeneration and functional consequences seen 
in the malin knockout model, as well as the impaired autophagy. These results 
identify the regulation of glycogen synthesis as a key target for the treatment 
of Lafora disease.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddu024
PMID: 24452334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]