---
reference_id: "PMID:37428955"
title: Finerenone Added to RAS/SGLT2 Blockade for CKD in Alport Syndrome. Results of a Randomized Controlled Trial with Col4a3-/- Mice.
authors:
- Zhu Z
- Rosenkranz KAT
- Kusunoki Y
- Li C
- Klaus M
- Gross O
- Angelotti ML
- Antonelli G
- Cirillo L
- Romagnani P
- Bouteldja N
- Sadr AV
- Bülow RD
- Boor P
- Anders HJ
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.0000000000000186
keywords:
- Animals
- Female
- Male
- Mice
- Antihypertensive Agents/therapeutic use
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/drug therapy"
- Fibrosis
- "Glucose Transport Proteins, Facilitative/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Ramipril/therapeutic use
- "Receptors, Mineralocorticoid"
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/drug therapy"
- Renin-Angiotensin System
- Sodium
- "Sodium-Glucose Transporter 2/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Benzhydryl Compounds
- Glucosides
- Naphthyridines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Finerenone Added to RAS/SGLT2 Blockade for CKD in Alport Syndrome. Results of a Randomized Controlled Trial with Col4a3-/- Mice.
**Authors:** Zhu Z, Rosenkranz KAT, Kusunoki Y, Li C, Klaus M, Gross O, Angelotti ML, Antonelli G, Cirillo L, Romagnani P, Bouteldja N, Sadr AV, Bülow RD, Boor P, Anders HJ
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.0000000000000186](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.0000000000000186)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2023 Sep 1;34(9):1513-1520. doi:
10.1681/ASN.0000000000000186.  Epub 2023 Jul 10.

Finerenone Added to RAS/SGLT2 Blockade for CKD in Alport Syndrome. Results of a
Randomized Controlled Trial with Col4a3-/- Mice.

Zhu Z(1)(2), Rosenkranz KAT(1), Kusunoki Y(1), Li C(1), Klaus M(1), Gross O(3),
Angelotti ML(4), Antonelli G(4), Cirillo L(4)(5), Romagnani P(4)(5), Bouteldja
N(6), Sadr AV(6), Bülow RD(6), Boor P(6), Anders HJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine IV, Hospital of the
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany.
(2)Center of Structural Heart Disease, Beijing Anzhen Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China.
(3)Clinic of Nephrology and Rheumatology, University Medical Centre Goettingen,
Goettingen, Germany.
(4)Department of Biomedical Experimental and Clinical Sciences "Mario Serio,"
University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(5)Nephrology and Dialysis Unit, Meyer Children's Hospital IRCCS, Florence,
Italy.
(6)Institute of Pathology, RWTH University Hospital Aachen, Aachen, Germany;
Division of Nephrology and Immunology, RWTH University Hospital Aachen, Aachen,
Germany.

SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: We hypothesized that triple therapy with inhibitors of
the renin-angiotensin system (RAS), sodium-glucose transporter (SGLT)-2, and the
mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) would be superior to dual RAS/SGLT2 blockade in
attenuating CKD progression in Col4a3 -deficient mice, a model of Alport
syndrome. Late-onset ramipril monotherapy or dual ramipril/empagliflozin therapy
attenuated CKD and prolonged overall survival by 2 weeks. Adding the
nonsteroidal MR antagonist finerenone extended survival by 4 weeks. Pathomics
and RNA sequencing revealed significant protective effects on the
tubulointerstitium when adding finerenone to RAS/SGLT2 inhibition. Thus, triple
RAS/SGLT2/MR blockade has synergistic effects and might attenuate CKD
progression in patients with Alport syndrome and possibly other progressive
chronic kidney disorders.
BACKGROUND: Dual inhibition of the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) plus
sodium-glucose transporter (SGLT)-2 or the mineralocorticoid receptor (MR)
demonstrated additive renoprotective effects in large clinical trials. We
hypothesized that triple therapy with RAS/SGLT2/MR inhibitors would be superior
to dual RAS/SGLT2 blockade in attenuating CKD progression.
METHODS: We performed a preclinical randomized controlled trial (PCTE0000266) in
Col4a3 -deficient mice with established Alport nephropathy. Treatment was
initiated late (age 6 weeks) in mice with elevated serum creatinine and
albuminuria and with glomerulosclerosis, interstitial fibrosis, and tubular
atrophy. We block-randomized 40 male and 40 female mice to either nil (vehicle)
or late-onset food admixes of ramipril monotherapy (10 mg/kg), ramipril plus
empagliflozin (30 mg/kg), or ramipril plus empagliflozin plus finerenone (10
mg/kg). Primary end point was mean survival.
RESULTS: Mean survival was 63.7±10.0 days (vehicle), 77.3±5.3 days (ramipril),
80.3±11.0 days (dual), and 103.1±20.3 days (triple). Sex did not affect outcome.
Histopathology, pathomics, and RNA sequencing revealed that finerenone mainly
suppressed the residual interstitial inflammation and fibrosis despite dual
RAS/SGLT2 inhibition.
CONCLUSION: Experiments in mice suggest that triple RAS/SGLT2/MR blockade may
substantially improve renal outcomes in Alport syndrome and possibly other
progressive CKDs because of synergistic effects on the glomerular and
tubulointerstitial compartments.

Copyright © 2023 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.0000000000000186
PMCID: PMC10482061
PMID: 37428955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: H.-J. Anders received consultancy fees from
Aptarion, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer-Ingelheim, GSK, Janssen, Kezar, Lilly,
Novartis, Sanofi, and Vifor; research funding: Boehringer-Ingelheim; and
advisory or leadership role: JASN, NDT. N. Bouteldja reports employer: Ocumeda
GmbH. O. Gross received consultancy fees from AstraZeneca, Bayer,
Boehringer-Ingelheim, Novartis, and Sanofi. O. Gross also reports consultancy:
Codon-X Therapeutics Inc., Galapagos, Genzyme/Regulus Therapeutics,
ONO-Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., Reata Pharmaceuticals, Roche; research funding:
Bayer AG; and advisory or leadership role: advisory committees for AstraZeneca,
Boehringer-Ingelheim, Reata Pharmaceuticals, Roche, and Sanofi US Services
Inc./Genzyme/Regulus Therapeutics. P. Romagnani reports research funding:
AstraZeneca. All remaining authors have nothing to disclose.
