---
reference_id: "PMID:22032582"
title: Core-binding factor acute myeloid leukemia.
authors:
- Sangle NA
- Perkins SL
journal: Arch Pathol Lab Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.5858/arpa.2010-0482-RS
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Core-binding factor acute myeloid leukemia.
**Authors:** Sangle NA, Perkins SL
**Journal:** Arch Pathol Lab Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.5858/arpa.2010-0482-RS](https://doi.org/10.5858/arpa.2010-0482-RS)

## Content

1. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2011 Nov;135(11):1504-9. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2010-0482-RS.

Core-binding factor acute myeloid leukemia.

Sangle NA(1), Perkins SL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Utah Health Sciences Center, 50 N 
Medical Dr, Salt Lake City, Utah 84132, USA. nikhil_sangle@yahoo.com

Core-binding factor acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is cytogenetically defined by 
the presence of t(8;21)(q22;q22) or inv(16)(p13q22)/t(16;16)(p13;q22), commonly 
abbreviated as t(8;21) and inv(16), respectively. In both subtypes, the 
cytogenetic rearrangements disrupt genes that encode subunits of core-binding 
factor, a transcription factor that functions as an essential regulator of 
normal hematopoiesis. The rearrangements t(8;21) and inv(16) involve the 
RUNX1/RUNX1T1 ( AML1-ETO ) and CBFB/MYH11 genes, respectively. These 2 subtypes 
are categorized as AML with recurrent genetic abnormalities, and hence the 
cytogenetic fusion transcripts are considered diagnostic of acute leukemia even 
when the marrow blast count is less than 20%. The t(8;21) and inv(16) subtypes 
of AML have been usually grouped and reported together in clinical studies; 
however, recent studies have demonstrated genetic, clinical, and prognostic 
differences, supporting the notion that they represent 2 distinct biologic and 
clinical entities. This review summarizes the spectrum of this subset of AMLs, 
with particular emphasis on molecular genetics and pathologic findings.

DOI: 10.5858/arpa.2010-0482-RS
PMID: 22032582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]