---
reference_id: PMID:25972376
title: "Kabuki syndrome genes KMT2D and KDM6A: functional analyses demonstrate critical roles in craniofacial, heart and brain development."
authors:
- Van Laarhoven PM
- Neitzel LR
- Quintana AM
- Geiger EA
- Zackai EH
- Clouthier DE
- Artinger KB
- Ming JE
- Shaikh TH
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv180
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, physiopathology"
- Animals
- "Brain/abnormalities, growth & development, physiopathology"
- "Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics, physiopathology"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- "Face/abnormalities, physiopathology"
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Hematologic Diseases/genetics, physiopathology"
- Histone Demethylases/genetics
- Humans
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Proteins/genetics
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- "Vestibular Diseases/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Zebrafish/genetics, growth & development"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kabuki syndrome genes KMT2D and KDM6A: functional analyses demonstrate critical roles in craniofacial, heart and brain development.
**Authors:** Van Laarhoven PM, Neitzel LR, Quintana AM, Geiger EA, Zackai EH, Clouthier DE, Artinger KB, Ming JE, Shaikh TH
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddv180](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddv180)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Aug 1;24(15):4443-53. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv180. Epub 2015
May  13.

Kabuki syndrome genes KMT2D and KDM6A: functional analyses demonstrate critical 
roles in craniofacial, heart and brain development.

Van Laarhoven PM(1), Neitzel LR(1), Quintana AM(1), Geiger EA(1), Zackai EH(2), 
Clouthier DE(3), Artinger KB(4), Ming JE(2), Shaikh TH(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Clinical Genetics and Metabolism and.
(2)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital 
of Philadelphia, the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA and.
(3)Department of Craniofacial Biology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical 
Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.
(4)Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities Research Center, University of 
Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA, Department of Craniofacial 
Biology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Clinical Genetics and Metabolism and, 
Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities Research Center, University of 
Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA, tamim.shaikh@ucdenver.edu.

Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a rare multiple congenital anomaly syndrome 
characterized by distinctive facial features, global developmental delay, 
intellectual disability and cardiovascular and musculoskeletal abnormalities. 
While mutations in KMT2D have been identified in a majority of KS patients, a 
few patients have mutations in KDM6A. We analyzed 40 individuals clinically 
diagnosed with KS for mutations in KMT2D and KDM6A. Mutations were detected in 
KMT2D in 12 and KDM6A in 4 cases, respectively. Observed mutations included 
single-nucleotide variations and indels leading to frame shifts, nonsense, 
missense or splice-site alterations. In two cases, we discovered overlapping 
chromosome X microdeletions containing KDM6A. To further elucidate the 
functional roles of KMT2D and KDM6A, we knocked down the expression of their 
orthologs in zebrafish. Following knockdown of kmt2d and the two zebrafish 
paralogs kdm6a and kdm6al, we analyzed morphants for developmental abnormalities 
in tissues that are affected in individuals with KS, including craniofacial 
structures, heart and brain. The kmt2d morphants exhibited severe abnormalities 
in all tissues examined. Although the kdm6a and kdm6al morphants had similar 
brain abnormalities, kdm6a morphants exhibited craniofacial phenotypes, whereas 
kdm6al morphants had prominent defects in heart development. Our results provide 
further support for the similar roles of KMT2D and KDM6A in the etiology of KS 
by using a vertebrate model organism to provide direct evidence of their roles 
in the development of organs and tissues affected in KS patients.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddv180
PMCID: PMC4492403
PMID: 25972376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]