---
reference_id: "PMID:37813974"
title: Recanalization of chronic long-segment occlusion of the internal carotid artery with endovascular and hybrid surgery.
authors:
- Ren W
- Xue J
- Zhao T
- Xu G
- Yang B
- Li T
- Gao B
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-44406-x
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carotid Artery, Internal/surgery"
- Retrospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
- Carotid Artery Diseases
- Arterial Occlusive Diseases
- Thrombosis
- Endovascular Procedures/methods
- Carotid Stenosis/surgery
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recanalization of chronic long-segment occlusion of the internal carotid artery with endovascular and hybrid surgery.
**Authors:** Ren W, Xue J, Zhao T, Xu G, Yang B, Li T, Gao B
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-023-44406-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-44406-x)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2023 Oct 9;13(1):17026. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-44406-x.

Recanalization of chronic long-segment occlusion of the internal carotid artery 
with endovascular and hybrid surgery.

Ren W(1), Xue J(1), Zhao T(1), Xu G(1), Yang B(1), Li T(2), Gao B(3).

Author information:
(1)Stroke Center, Henan Provincial People's Hospital, Zhengzhou University, 7 
Weiwu Road, Zhengzhou, 450000, Henan, China.
(2)Stroke Center, Henan Provincial People's Hospital, Zhengzhou University, 7 
Weiwu Road, Zhengzhou, 450000, Henan, China. litianxiaod@163.com.
(3)Stroke Center, Henan Provincial People's Hospital, Zhengzhou University, 7 
Weiwu Road, Zhengzhou, 450000, Henan, China. browngao@163.com.

To investigate the effect of endovascular and/or hybrid surgical recanalization 
on chronic long-segment occlusion of the internal carotid artery (ICA) and the 
effect of occlusion location on the recanalization rate and prognosis, 87 
patients with chronic ICA occlusion treated with endovascular approach only or 
hybrid surgery were retrospectively enrolled. The duration of ICA occlusion 
ranged from 21 to 360 days (median 30). Type I occlusion (from the neck to below 
the cavernous segment) consisted of 46 (52.8%) patients while type II (from the 
neck to above the clinoid segment) of 41 (47.1%). Hybrid surgery was performed 
in 44 (50.6%) patients while endovascular recanalization only was conducted in 
the other 43 (49.4%). In all patients, the success rate of recanalization was 
93.0% (40/43) for the endovascular approach and 95.5% for the hybrid surgical 
approach. In patients with type I occlusion, endovascular recanalization only 
was performed in 22 (47.8%) patients and hybrid surgery in 24 (52.2%), resulting 
in successful recanalization in all patients (100%). In patients with type II 
occlusion, the success rate of recanalization was 85.7% (18/21) for the 
endovascular approach only but 90% (18/20) for the hybrid surgery. The total 
success rate of recanalization was 94.3% (82/87) for all patients, 100% for type 
I occlusion, and 87.8% for type II occlusion. No significant (P = 0.12) 
differences existed in the recanalization rate between groups I and II. Clinical 
follow-up was performed in 82 (94.3%) patients 6-39 months (mean 16) after the 
surgery. Re-occlusion occurred in 0 in group I but in four (9.8%) in group II. 
The mRS was good with 0-2 in 38 (82.6%) patients in group I and in 27 (75%) 
patients in group II, with no significant (P = 0.78) difference. In conclusion, 
chronic long-segment ICA occlusion can be safely and efficiently recanalized 
with the endovascular and hybrid surgery. The location of ICA occlusion may have 
a critical role in determining the recanalization rate, and careful evaluation 
of the occlusion location may be helpful in increasing the prognosis of 
recanalization.

© 2023. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-44406-x
PMCID: PMC10562445
PMID: 37813974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.