---
reference_id: "PMID:17541055"
title: "The worldwide prevalence of ADHD: a systematic review and metaregression analysis."
authors:
- Polanczyk G
- de Lima MS
- Horta BL
- Biederman J
- Rohde LA
journal: Am J Psychiatry
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1176/ajp.2007.164.6.942
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Africa/epidemiology
- Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/epidemiology
- Child
- Cross-Cultural Comparison
- Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
- Europe/epidemiology
- Female
- Global Health
- Health Surveys
- Humans
- International Classification of Diseases
- Male
- Middle East/epidemiology
- North America/epidemiology
- Prevalence
- Regression Analysis
- Research Design
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The worldwide prevalence of ADHD: a systematic review and metaregression analysis.
**Authors:** Polanczyk G, de Lima MS, Horta BL, Biederman J, Rohde LA
**Journal:** Am J Psychiatry (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1176/ajp.2007.164.6.942](https://doi.org/10.1176/ajp.2007.164.6.942)

## Content

1. Am J Psychiatry. 2007 Jun;164(6):942-8. doi: 10.1176/ajp.2007.164.6.942.

The worldwide prevalence of ADHD: a systematic review and metaregression
analysis.

Polanczyk G(1), de Lima MS, Horta BL, Biederman J, Rohde LA.

Author information:
(1)ADHD Outpatient Program, Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Division, Hospital
de Clinicas de Porto Alegre, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Rua Ramiro
Barcelos, 2350, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil 90035-003. gvp.ez@terra.com.br

Comment in
    Am J Psychiatry. 2007 Jun;164(6):856-8. doi: 10.1176/ajp.2007.164.6.856.
    Am J Psychiatry. 2007 Oct;164(10):1612; author reply 1612-3. doi:
10.1176/appi.ajp.2007.07060942.

OBJECTIVE: The worldwide prevalence estimates of attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD)/hyperkinetic disorder (HD) are highly heterogeneous. Presently,
the reasons for this discrepancy remain poorly understood. The purpose of this
study was to determine the possible causes of the varied worldwide estimates of
the disorder and to compute its worldwide-pooled prevalence.
METHOD: The authors searched MEDLINE and PsycINFO databases from January 1978 to
December 2005 and reviewed textbooks and reference lists of the studies
selected. Authors of relevant articles from North America, South America,
Europe, Africa, Asia, Oceania, and the Middle East and ADHD/HD experts were
contacted. Surveys were included if they reported point prevalence of ADHD/HD
for subjects 18 years of age or younger from the general population or schools
according to DSM or ICD criteria.
RESULTS: The literature search generated 9,105 records, and 303 full-text
articles were reviewed. One hundred and two studies comprising 171,756 subjects
from all world regions were included. The ADHD/HD worldwide-pooled prevalence
was 5.29%. This estimate was associated with significant variability. In the
multivariate metaregression model, diagnostic criteria, source of information,
requirement of impairment for diagnosis, and geographic origin of the studies
were significantly associated with ADHD/HD prevalence rates. Geographic location
was associated with significant variability only between estimates from North
America and both Africa and the Middle East. No significant differences were
found between Europe and North America.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that geographic location plays a limited role
in the reasons for the large variability of ADHD/HD prevalence estimates
worldwide. Instead, this variability seems to be explained primarily by the
methodological characteristics of studies.

DOI: 10.1176/ajp.2007.164.6.942
PMID: 17541055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
