---
reference_id: "PMID:40220947"
title: "Craniosynostosis among children with X-linked hypophosphatemia: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Fisch SA
- Tudor A
- Benchekroun EM
- Landsberg W
- Feldstein N
- Lamb M
- Carpenter TO
- Rundle AG
- Jacobson JS
- Neugut AI
- Freedberg DE
journal: Bone
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2025.117488
keywords:
- Humans
- "Craniosynostoses/epidemiology, complications"
- "Familial Hypophosphatemic Rickets/complications, epidemiology"
- Fibroblast Growth Factor-23
- Child
- Prevalence
- Female
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Craniosynostosis among children with X-linked hypophosphatemia: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Fisch SA, Tudor A, Benchekroun EM, Landsberg W, Feldstein N, Lamb M, Carpenter TO, Rundle AG, Jacobson JS, Neugut AI, Freedberg DE
**Journal:** Bone (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bone.2025.117488](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2025.117488)

## Content

1. Bone. 2025 Jul;196:117488. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2025.117488. Epub 2025 Apr 10.

Craniosynostosis among children with X-linked hypophosphatemia: A systematic
review and meta-analysis.

Fisch SA(1), Tudor A(2), Benchekroun EM(2), Landsberg W(2), Feldstein N(3), Lamb
M(3), Carpenter TO(4), Rundle AG(1), Jacobson JS(1), Neugut AI(5), Freedberg
DE(6).

Author information:
(1)Columbia University, Mailman School of Public Health, New York, NY, United
States of America.
(2)Kyowa Kirin International plc. Marlow, UK.
(3)Columbia University, Vagelos College of Physicians & Surgeons, Neurological
Surgery, New York, NY, United States of America.
(4)Yale University School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics and Department
of Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation, New Haven, CT, United States of America.
(5)Columbia University, Mailman School of Public Health, New York, NY, United
States of America; Columbia University, Vagelos College of Physicians &
Surgeons, Departments of Medicine, New York, NY, United States of America.
(6)Columbia University, Mailman School of Public Health, New York, NY, United
States of America; Columbia University, Vagelos College of Physicians &
Surgeons, Departments of Medicine, New York, NY, United States of America.
Electronic address: def2004@cumc.columbia.edu.

BACKGROUND: X-linked hypophosphatemia (XLH) is a rare genetic disorder caused by
PHEX gene variants, leading to elevated FGF23 levels and impaired phosphate
reabsorption, resulting in abnormal bone growth. Skull abnormalities, including
craniosynostosis, are often reported in children with XLH, but the true
prevalence of craniosynostosis among children with XLH is unknown.
METHODS: We performed a systematic review and meta-analysis to estimate
craniosynostosis prevalence in children with XLH. We searched PubMed, Embase,
and Web of Science for cohort studies or large case series published before June
2024. Eligible studies included at least ten children with XLH and reported
craniosynostosis prevalence without selection based on skull abnormalities.
Pooled prevalence was calculated using a random-effects model, with
heterogeneity assessed.
RESULTS: Of 517 studies initially identified, ten studies with 461 patients met
the criteria for inclusion. The pooled prevalence of craniosynostosis among
children with XLH was 22 % (95 % confidence interval (CI) 9.0 % to 44 %) with
significant heterogeneity across studies (I2 = 88.5 %, p < 0.01). This
prevalence is far greater than the prevalence of craniosynostosis in the general
pediatric population, which is estimated to be one in 2100-2500 births. We
confirmed an expected female predominance among children with XLH (median 65.9 %
female, interquartile range [IQR] 53.7 % to 68.4 %) but not among children with
XLH and craniosynostosis (median 42 % female, range 21 % to 48 %).
CONCLUSION: Craniosynostosis is more common among children with XLH compared to
the general pediatric population and may be disproportionately common among
males. Increased vigilance for craniosynostosis is warranted for children with
XLH.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2025.117488
PMID: 40220947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Drs.
Freedberg, Jacobson, Neugut, and Samuel A. Fisch receive research funding from
Kyowa Kirin; Drs. Tudor, Benchekroun, and Landsberg are employees of Kyowa Kirin
International plc. Marlow, UK; Dr. Carpenter has served on advisory boards and
received consulting fees from Ultragenyx and Kyowa Kirin, unrelated to this
project. Dr. Neugut has consulted for Otsuka, Organon, United Biosource Corp,
Merck, and Value Analytics. Drs. Neugut, Freedberg, and Jacobson receive
research support from Otsuka. The other authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.
