---
reference_id: "PMID:35987766"
title: "Triple negative breast cancer: Pitfalls and progress."
authors:
- Zagami P
- Carey LA
journal: NPJ Breast Cancer
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41523-022-00468-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Triple negative breast cancer: Pitfalls and progress.
**Authors:** Zagami P, Carey LA
**Journal:** NPJ Breast Cancer (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41523-022-00468-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41523-022-00468-0)

## Content

1. NPJ Breast Cancer. 2022 Aug 20;8(1):95. doi: 10.1038/s41523-022-00468-0.

Triple negative breast cancer: Pitfalls and progress.

Zagami P(1)(2), Carey LA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology and Hematology, University of Milano, Milan, Italy.
(2)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(3)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. lisa_carey@med.unc.edu.

Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is characterized by the lack of estrogen 
and progesterone receptor expression and lacks HER2 overexpression or gene 
amplification. It accounts for 10-15% of incident breast cancers and carries the 
worst prognosis. TNBC is overrepresented among Black and pre-menopausal women 
and is associated with significant psychological and treatment-related burdens, 
including financial toxicity. Like other breast cancers, TNBC is biologically 
heterogeneous, leading to diverse clinical and epidemiological behaviors, 
however, unlike the other clinical subtypes, in TNBC we still lack 
tumor-specific targeted therapy. Early TNBC outcomes have improved due to the 
intensification of therapies, including improvements in polychemotherapy and the 
addition of immunotherapy. Future efforts are needed to identify targetable 
aberrations for specific drug therapy, prevent immune evasion, and increase 
social-economic support. Given that the name TNBC illustrates its lack of 
specifically targeted and effective therapy, we look forward to being able to 
retire the name in favor of a group of targetable entities within what is now 
called "TNBC".

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41523-022-00468-0
PMCID: PMC9392735
PMID: 35987766

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.