---
reference_id: "PMID:23285490"
title: Glycogen Storage Disease Type IV.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Magoulas PL
- El-Hattab AW
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glycogen Storage Disease Type IV.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Magoulas PL, El-Hattab AW

## Content

1. Glycogen Storage Disease Type IV.

Magoulas PL(1), El-Hattab AW(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2013 Jan 3 [updated 2019 Aug 1].

Author information:
(1)Baylor College of Medicine, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas
(2)Associate Professor, Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Medicine,
University of Sharjah, Sharjah, United Arab Emirates

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: The clinical manifestations of glycogen storage
disease type IV (GSD IV) discussed in this entry span a continuum of different
subtypes with variable ages of onset, severity, and clinical features. Clinical
findings vary extensively both within and between families. The fatal perinatal
neuromuscular subtype presents in utero with fetal akinesia deformation
sequence, including decreased fetal movements, polyhydramnios, and fetal
hydrops. Death usually occurs in the neonatal period. The congenital
neuromuscular subtype presents in the newborn period with profound hypotonia,
respiratory distress, and dilated cardiomyopathy. Death usually occurs in early
infancy. Infants with the classic (progressive) hepatic subtype may appear
normal at birth, but rapidly develop failure to thrive; hepatomegaly, liver
dysfunction, and progressive liver cirrhosis; hypotonia; and cardiomyopathy.
Without liver transplantation, death from liver failure usually occurs by age
five years. Children with the non-progressive hepatic subtype tend to present
with hepatomegaly, liver dysfunction, myopathy, and hypotonia; however, they are
likely to survive without progression of the liver disease and may not show
cardiac, skeletal muscle, or neurologic involvement. The childhood neuromuscular
subtype is rare and the course is variable, ranging from onset in the second
decade with a mild disease course to a more severe, progressive course resulting
in death in the third decade.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis is established in a proband by the
demonstration of glycogen branching enzyme (GBE) deficiency in liver, muscle, or
skin fibroblasts or the identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in GBE1
on molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Management should involve a
multidisciplinary team including specialists in hepatology, neurology,
nutrition, medical or biochemical genetics, and child development. Liver
transplantation is the only treatment option for individuals with the
progressive hepatic subtype of GSD IV who develop liver failure; however, the
risk for morbidity and mortality is high, in part because of the extrahepatic
manifestations of GSD type IV, especially cardiomyopathy. Children with skeletal
myopathy and/or hypotonia warrant developmental evaluation and physical therapy
as needed. Those with cardiomyopathy warrant care by a cardiologist. Heart
transplant may be an option in individuals with severe cardiac involvement.
Prevention of secondary complications: Prevent nutritional deficiencies (e.g.,
of fat-soluble vitamins) by ensuring adequate dietary intake; prevent
perioperative bleeding by assessment of a coagulation profile and use of fresh
frozen plasma as needed. Surveillance: No clinical guidelines for surveillance
are available. The following evaluations are suggested (with frequency varying
according to disease severity): liver function tests including liver
transaminases, albumin, and coagulation profile (PT and PTT); abdominal
ultrasound examination; echocardiogram; neurologic assessment; nutritional
assessment. If cardiomyopathy was not observed on baseline screening
echocardiogram at the time of initial diagnosis, repeat echocardiograms every
three months during infancy, every six months during early childhood, and
annually thereafter. Evaluation of relatives at risk: If the GBE1 pathogenic
variants have been identified in an affected family member, test at-risk
relatives to allow for early diagnosis and management of disease manifestations.
GENETIC COUNSELING: GSD IV is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Each
sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance
of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a
carrier. Although affected sibs are expected to manifest the same subtype of GSD
IV, the age of onset and presentation may differ. Carrier testing for at-risk
family members and prenatal testing for pregnancies at increased risk are
possible based on molecular testing if the pathogenic variants in the family
have been identified. If the pathogenic variants have not been identified, GBE
testing on cultured amniocytes can be performed for prenatal diagnosis.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 23285490
