---
reference_id: "PMID:24714244"
title: "Hypercalcemic crisis due to adult T cell leukemia: a rare cause of paralytic ileus."
authors:
- Kunnathuparambil SG
- Payangappadom PK
- Yerol PK
- Madhavan M
- Sreesh S
- Narayanan P
- Devdas K
- Ramakrishanan Kattoor V
journal: Ann Gastroenterol
year: '2012'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypercalcemic crisis due to adult T cell leukemia: a rare cause of paralytic ileus.
**Authors:** Kunnathuparambil SG, Payangappadom PK, Yerol PK, Madhavan M, Sreesh S, Narayanan P, Devdas K, Ramakrishanan Kattoor V
**Journal:** Ann Gastroenterol (2012)

## Content

1. Ann Gastroenterol. 2012;25(2):170-172.

Hypercalcemic crisis due to adult T cell leukemia: a rare cause of paralytic 
ileus.

Kunnathuparambil SG(1), Payangappadom PK(1), Yerol PK(1), Madhavan M(1), Sreesh 
S(1), Narayanan P(1), Devdas K(1), Ramakrishanan Kattoor V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Gastroenterology, Government Medical College, 
Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India.

Adult T cell leukemia- lymphoma is a rare aggressive malignancy of the 
peripheral T lymphocytes, caused by human T cell lymphotropic virus -1 (HTLV-1) 
infection. Hypercalcemia occurs in about 70% of patients with acute adult T cell 
leukemia. However, there are very few case reports of adult T cell leukemia 
presenting as a hypercalcemic crisis. We report a case of a 54-year-old male who 
presented with abdominal pain, constipation and altered sensorium. On 
examination he had generalized lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly and paralytic 
ileus. Investigation revealed hypercalcemic crisis with low parathormone (PTH) 
levels. Peripheral smear and bone marrow aspirate were consistent with adult T 
cell leukemia. HTLV-1 serology was positive. Despite the corrective measures for 
hypercalcemia and chemotherapy, he succumbed to the illness in a week.

PMCID: PMC3959384
PMID: 24714244

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None