---
reference_id: "PMID:33880338"
title: Visceral myopathy diagnosed by a de novo ACTG2 mutation in a patient with chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction-a case report.
authors:
- Xiong X
- Li J
- Liu C
- Xu F
journal: Transl Pediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.21037/tp-20-316
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Visceral myopathy diagnosed by a de novo ACTG2 mutation in a patient with chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction-a case report.
**Authors:** Xiong X, Li J, Liu C, Xu F
**Journal:** Transl Pediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.21037/tp-20-316](https://doi.org/10.21037/tp-20-316)

## Content

1. Transl Pediatr. 2021 Mar;10(3):679-685. doi: 10.21037/tp-20-316.

Visceral myopathy diagnosed by a de novo ACTG2 mutation in a patient with 
chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction-a case report.

Xiong X(1), Li J(1), Liu C(1), Xu F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Chongqing Medical University 
Affiliated Children's Hospital; National Clinical Research Center for Child 
Health and Disorders, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development 
and Disorders, China International Science and Technology Cooperation Base of 
Child Development and Critical Disorders; Chongqing Key Laboratory of 
Pediatrics, Chongqing, China.

Visceral myopathy is a rare genetic disorder that commonly affects the digestive 
and renal systems. Manifestations include a clinical spectrum covering chronic 
intestinal pseudo-obstruction (CIPO) and megacystis-microcolon-intestinal 
hypoperistalsis syndrome (MMIHS). The smooth muscle actin γ-2 gene (ACTG2) is 
one of the most common disease-causing genes. Here, we present a case of 
pediatric intestinal pseudo-obstruction associated with a novel missense ACTG2 
mutation, c.588G>C/p.E196D. His parents had no this mutation, which suggested 
the possibility of spontaneous mutation. Amino acid conservation analysis of γ-2 
actin showed replacement of glutamate at position 196 by aspartate. The patient 
suffered from recurrent episodes of abdominal bloating, undergone repeated 
gastrointestinal surgery, had feeding difficulties, and required long-term 
parenteral nutrition support. The patient had no other specific symptoms or 
underlying diseases. X-ray of the abdomen showed dilation of the intestine as 
well as an air-fluid pattern. The manifestations of biopsy were various. All 
biochemical tests were normal, and the possibility of secondary intestinal 
pseudo-obstruction was excluded. The mutation site of ACTG2 in the present study 
has not been previously described in patients with visceral myopathy, and thus, 
our study reveals a novel mutation of ACTG2-associated visceral myopathy in a 
patient with CIPO. This report can serve as a reference for future research and 
further expands the map of genetic variation for visceral myopathy.

2021 Translational Pediatrics. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tp-20-316
PMCID: PMC8041608
PMID: 33880338

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/tp-20-316). The authors have no conflicts of interest 
to declare.