---
reference_id: "PMID:34486665"
title: "Tubular microdomains of Rab7-positive endosomes retrieve TrkA, a mechanism disrupted in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease 2B."
authors:
- Markworth R
- Dambeck V
- Steinbeck LM
- Koufali A
- Bues B
- Dankovich TM
- Wichmann C
- Burk K
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1242/jcs.258559
keywords:
- Axons/metabolism
- Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease/genetics
- Endosomes/metabolism
- Humans
- Signal Transduction
- "rab GTP-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tubular microdomains of Rab7-positive endosomes retrieve TrkA, a mechanism disrupted in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease 2B.
**Authors:** Markworth R, Dambeck V, Steinbeck LM, Koufali A, Bues B, Dankovich TM, Wichmann C, Burk K
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.258559](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.258559)

## Content

1. J Cell Sci. 2021 Oct 15;134(20):jcs258559. doi: 10.1242/jcs.258559. Epub 2021 
Oct 28.

Tubular microdomains of Rab7-positive endosomes retrieve TrkA, a mechanism 
disrupted in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease 2B.

Markworth R(1)(2)(3), Dambeck V(1)(3), Steinbeck LM(1)(3), Koufali A(1)(3), Bues 
B(1)(3), Dankovich TM(4), Wichmann C(3)(5)(6), Burk K(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Göttingen, Robert Koch 
Straße 40, 37075 Göttingen, Germany.
(2)European Neuroscience Institute, Grisebachstraße 5, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.
(3)Center for Biostructural Imaging of Neurodegeneration, University Medical 
Center Göttingen, Von-Siebold Straße 3A, 37075 Göttingen, Germany.
(4)Institute for Neuro- and Sensory Physiology, Humboldtallee 23, 37073 
Göttingen, Germany.
(5)Molecular Architecture of Synapses Group, Institute for Auditory Neuroscience 
and InnerEarLab, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(6)Collaborative Research Centers 889 'Cellular Mechanisms of Sensory 
Processing' and 1286 'Quantitative Synaptology', 37099 Göttingen, Germany.

Axonal survival and growth requires signalling from tropomyosin receptor kinases 
(Trks). To transmit their signals, receptor-ligand complexes are endocytosed and 
undergo retrograde trafficking to the soma, where downstream signalling occurs. 
Vesicles transporting neurotrophic receptors to the soma are reported to be 
Rab7-positive late endosomes and/or multivesicular bodies (MVBs), where 
receptors localize within so-called intraluminal vesicles (herein Rab7 
corresponds to Rab7A unless specified otherwise). Therefore, one challenging 
question is how downstream signalling is possible given the insulating 
properties of intraluminal vesicles. In this study, we report that Rab7-positive 
endosomes and MVBs retrieve TrkA (also known as NTRK1) through tubular 
microdomains. Interestingly, this phenotype is absent for the EGF receptor. 
Furthermore, we found that endophilinA1, endophilinA2 and endophilinA3, together 
with WASH1 (also known as WASHC1), are involved in the tubulation process. In 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease 2B (CMT2B), a neuropathy of the peripheral nervous 
system, this tubulating mechanism is disrupted. In addition, the ability to 
tubulate correlates with the phosphorylation levels of TrkA as well as with 
neurite length in neuronal cultures from dorsal root ganglia. In all, we report 
a new retrieval mechanism of late Rab7-positive endosomes, which enables TrkA 
signalling and sheds new light onto how neurotrophic signalling is disrupted in 
CMT2B. This article has an associated First Person interview with the first 
author of the paper.

© 2021. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.258559
PMID: 34486665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.