---
reference_id: "PMID:33872085"
title: "Multiple sclerosis: prevalence of the 'central vein' sign in white matter lesions on gadolinium-enhanced susceptibility-weighted images."
authors:
- Sparacia G
- Agnello F
- Iaia A
- Banco A
- Galia M
- Midiri M
journal: Neuroradiol J
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1177/19714009211008750
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiple sclerosis: prevalence of the 'central vein' sign in white matter lesions on gadolinium-enhanced susceptibility-weighted images.
**Authors:** Sparacia G, Agnello F, Iaia A, Banco A, Galia M, Midiri M
**Journal:** Neuroradiol J (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1177/19714009211008750](https://doi.org/10.1177/19714009211008750)

## Content

1. Neuroradiol J. 2021 Oct;34(5):470-475. doi: 10.1177/19714009211008750. Epub
2021  Apr 19.

Multiple sclerosis: prevalence of the 'central vein' sign in white matter 
lesions on gadolinium-enhanced susceptibility-weighted images.

Sparacia G(1), Agnello F(1), Iaia A(2), Banco A(1), Galia M(1), Midiri M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Palermo, Italy.
(2)Department of Neuroradiology, Christiana Care Health System, USA.

AIMS: To evaluate prospectively whether an intravenous gadolinium injection 
could improve the detection of the central vein sign on susceptibility-weighted 
imaging sequences obtained with a 1.5 T magnetic resonance scanner in patients 
with multiple sclerosis compared to unenhanced susceptibility-weighted images.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This prospective, institution review board-approved study 
included 19 patients affected by multiple sclerosis (six men; 13 women; mean age 
40.8 years, range 20-74 years). Patients had the relapsing-remitting clinical 
subtype in 95% of cases, and only one (5%) patient had the primary progressive 
clinical subtype of multiple sclerosis. T2-weighted images, fluid-attenuated 
inversion recovery images, unenhanced and contrast-enhanced 
susceptibility-weighted images were evaluated in consensus by two 
neuroradiologists for the presence of the central vein sign. The readers were 
blinded to magnetic resonance imaging reports, clinical information, the 
presence and the localisation of focal hyperintense white matter lesions. Any 
discordance between readers was resolved through a joint review of the recorded 
images with an additional neuroradiologist.
RESULTS: A total of 317 multiple sclerosis lesions were analysed. The central 
vein sign had a higher prevalence detection rate on gadolinium-enhanced 
susceptibility-weighted images (272 of 317 lesions, 86%) compared to unenhanced 
susceptibility-weighted images (172 of 317 lesions, 54%).
CONCLUSION: Gadolinium-enhanced susceptibility-weighted imaging improves the 
detection rate of the central vein sign in multiple sclerosis lesions.

DOI: 10.1177/19714009211008750
PMCID: PMC8559019
PMID: 33872085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]