---
reference_id: "PMID:9493273"
title: Keratoconus.
authors:
- Rabinowitz YS
journal: Surv Ophthalmol
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1016/s0039-6257(97)00119-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Keratoconus.
**Authors:** Rabinowitz YS
**Journal:** Surv Ophthalmol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0039-6257(97)00119-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0039-6257(97)00119-7)

## Content

1. Surv Ophthalmol. 1998 Jan-Feb;42(4):297-319. doi:
10.1016/s0039-6257(97)00119-7.

Keratoconus.

Rabinowitz YS(1).

Author information:
(1)Cornea-Genetic Eye Medical Clinic, Burns and Allen Research Institute, 
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los-Angeles, California, USA. rabinowitzy@csmc.edu

Keratoconus is a bilateral noninflammatory corneal ectasia with an incidence of 
approximately 1 per 2,000 in the general population. It has well-described 
clinical signs, but early forms of the disease may go undetected unless the 
anterior corneal topography is studied. Early disease is now best detected with 
videokeratography. Classic histopathologic features include stromal thinning, 
iron deposition in the epithelial basement membrane, and breaks in Bowman's 
layer. Keratoconus is most commonly an isolated disorder, although several 
reports describe an association with Down syndrome, Leber's congenital 
amaurosis, and mitral valve prolapse. The differential diagnosis of keratoconus 
includes keratoglobus, pellucid marginal degeneration and Terrien's marginal 
degeneration. Contact lenses are the most common treatment modality. When 
contact lenses fail, corneal transplant is the best and most successful surgical 
option. Despite intensive clinical and laboratory investigation, the etiology of 
keratoconus remains unclear. Clinical studies provide strong indications of a 
major role for genes in its etiology. Videokeratography is playing an increasing 
role in defining the genetics of keratoconus, since early forms of the disease 
can be more accurately detected and potentially quantified in a reproducible 
manner. Laboratory studies suggest a role for degradative enzymes and proteinase 
inhibitors and a possible role for the interleukin-1 system in its pathogenesis, 
but these roles need to be more clearly defined. Genes suggested by these 
studies, as well as collagen genes and their regulatory products, could 
potentially be used as candidate genes to study patients with familial 
keratoconus. Such studies may provide the clues needed to enable us to better 
understand the underlying mechanisms that cause the corneal thinning in this 
disorder.

DOI: 10.1016/s0039-6257(97)00119-7
PMID: 9493273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]