---
reference_id: "PMID:3067866"
title: Rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Grennan DM
- Sanders PA
journal: Baillieres Clin Rheumatol
year: '1988'
doi: 10.1016/s0950-3579(88)80030-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Grennan DM, Sanders PA
**Journal:** Baillieres Clin Rheumatol (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0950-3579(88)80030-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0950-3579(88)80030-x)

## Content

1. Baillieres Clin Rheumatol. 1988 Dec;2(3):585-601. doi: 
10.1016/s0950-3579(88)80030-x.

Rheumatoid arthritis.

Grennan DM, Sanders PA.

The results of family and twin studies suggest that RA may result from an 
interaction between an oligogenic susceptibility and unknown environmental 
factors. Part of this genetic predisposition is accounted for by genes within 
the MHC where there is a well-documented association with HLA-DR4. Studies of DR 
and other MHC variants have shown different associations with particular 
subgroups. One subgroup is Felty's syndrome where there is a strong association 
with DR4, as well as associations with DQ-beta and C4B null variants when 
DR4-matched Felty's and RA subjects are analysed. These DQ-beta and C4B null 
variants may characterize a single haplotype which is associated with 
extra-articular disease. A further rheumatoid subgroup characterized by 
circulating antibodies to native type II collagen, shows an association with 
HLA-DR3 and 7. Genes on chromosome 14 may also influence susceptibility to RA, 
probably by interaction with MHC genes and there are different Gm associations 
for DR4-positive and collagen-antibody-positive rheumatoid subgroups. HLA and Gm 
markers so far identified only account for a small part of the total genetic 
predisposition to RA and a third or further loci may also be involved. Possible 
candidates include T-cell alpha- and beta-chain genes and immunoglobulin light 
chain genes. One present concept of the genetic predisposition to RA is of 
several independent immunogenetic pathways each including interactions at two or 
more loci.

DOI: 10.1016/s0950-3579(88)80030-x
PMID: 3067866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]