---
reference_id: "PMID:8532389"
title: "Progression from Goodpasture's disease to membranous glomerulonephritis."
authors:
- Elder G
- Perl S
- Yong JL
- Fletcher J
- Mackie J
journal: Pathology
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1080/00313029500169043
keywords:
- Adult
- "Anti-Glomerular Basement Membrane Disease/complications, drug therapy, pathology"
- Disease Progression
- "Glomerular Mesangium/immunology, pathology"
- "Glomerulonephritis, Membranous/etiology, pathology"
- Humans
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Progression from Goodpasture's disease to membranous glomerulonephritis.
**Authors:** Elder G, Perl S, Yong JL, Fletcher J, Mackie J
**Journal:** Pathology (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00313029500169043](https://doi.org/10.1080/00313029500169043)

## Content

1. Pathology. 1995 Jul;27(3):233-6. doi: 10.1080/00313029500169043.

Progression from Goodpasture's disease to membranous glomerulonephritis.

Elder G(1), Perl S, Yong JL, Fletcher J, Mackie J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Renal Medicine, Concord Hospital, Sydney, Australia.

An unusual case of a patient with Goodpasture's disease presenting with 
hemoptysis, severe iron deficiency anemia and microscopic hematuria and 
proteinuria is described. Both circulating and tissue anti-glomerular basement 
membrane (GBM) antibodies were present, and renal function remained normal 
throughout. Immunosuppressive therapy was given for subclinical pulmonary 
hemorrhage with successful resolution of anemia and disappearance of the 
circulating anti-GBM antibody. Nine months after presentation he developed 
nephrotic range proteinuria and a repeat renal biopsy revealed membranous 
glomerulonephritis with no evidence of his original disease. Both the 
Goodpasture's associated HLA-DR2 and the membranous associated HLA-DR3 class II 
antigens were present. The association of antibody mediated and immune complex 
glomerulonephritis is discussed. The simultaneous presence of HLA-DR2 and 
HLA-DR3 may predispose to this association.

DOI: 10.1080/00313029500169043
PMID: 8532389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]