---
reference_id: "PMID:26638120"
title: Retinoid regulation of antiviral innate immunity in hepatocytes.
authors:
- Cho NE
- Bang BR
- Gurung P
- Li M
- Clemens DL
- Underhill TM
- James LP
- Chase JR
- Saito T
journal: Hepatology
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/hep.28380
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Line
- "Ethanol/adverse effects, metabolism"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- "Hepatitis C, Chronic/complications"
- "Hepatocytes/immunology, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Immunity, Innate"
- "Liver Diseases, Alcoholic/complications"
- Liver Failure/etiology
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Vitamin A/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retinoid regulation of antiviral innate immunity in hepatocytes.
**Authors:** Cho NE, Bang BR, Gurung P, Li M, Clemens DL, Underhill TM, James LP, Chase JR, Saito T
**Journal:** Hepatology (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/hep.28380](https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.28380)

## Content

1. Hepatology. 2016 Jun;63(6):1783-95. doi: 10.1002/hep.28380. Epub 2016 Jan 21.

Retinoid regulation of antiviral innate immunity in hepatocytes.

Cho NE(1), Bang BR(1), Gurung P(1), Li M(2), Clemens DL(3), Underhill TM(4),
James LP(5), Chase JR(6), Saito T(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, USC Research Center for Liver Diseases, Division of
Gastrointestinal and Liver Diseases, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA.
(2)Bioinformatics Service, Norris Medical Library, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA.
(3)Veterans Administration Medical Center and Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE.
(4)Department of Cellular and Physiological Sciences, Biomedical Research
Center, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, and
Arkansas Children's Hospital Research Institute, Little Rock, AR.
(6)Department of Biology, Northwest Nazarene University, Nampa, ID.
(7)Southern California Research Center for ALPD and Cirrhosis, Los Angeles, CA.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2016 Jun;63(6):1759-61. doi: 10.1002/hep.28540.

Persistent infection of hepatitis C virus (HCV) is one of the leading causes of
end-stage liver disease (ESLD), such as decompensated cirrhosis and liver
cancer. Of particular note, nearly half of HCV-infected people in the United
States are reported to be heavy drinkers. This particular group of patients is
known to rapidly progress to the ESLD. Although accelerated disease progression
among alcohol abusers infected with HCV is clinically well recognized, the
molecular pathophysiology behind this manifestation has not been well
elucidated. Hepatocytes metabolize ethanol (EtOH) primarily through two steps of
oxidative catabolism in which alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) and aldehyde
dehydrogenase (ALDH) play central roles. The ADH-ALDH pathway also governs the
metabolism of retinol (vitamin A) to its transcriptionally active metabolite,
retinoic acid (RA). In this study, we defined that the ADH-ALDH pathway serves
as a potent antiviral host factor in hepatocytes, which regulates the expression
of interferon (IFN)-stimulated genes (ISGs) by biogenesis of RA. ISGs constitute
over 300 antiviral effectors, which cooperatively govern intracellular antiviral
innate immunity. Our study revealed that intracellular RA levels greatly
influence ISG expression under basal conditions. Moreover, RA augments ISG
induction in response to viral infection or exposure to IFN in a gene-specific
manner. Lastly, our results demonstrated that EtOH attenuates the antiviral
function of the ADH-ALDH pathway, which suggests the possibility that
EtOH-retinol metabolic competition is one of the molecular mechanisms for the
synergism between HCV and alcohol abuse in liver disease progression.
CONCLUSIONS: RA plays a critical role in the regulation of intracellular
antiviral innate immunity in hepatocytes. (Hepatology 2016;63:1783-1795).

© 2015 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.28380
PMCID: PMC4874888
PMID: 26638120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
