---
reference_id: "PMID:11740218"
title: Screening for mutations of Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome caused by FOXC1 gene in Japanese patients.
authors:
- Kawase C
- Kawase K
- Taniguchi T
- Sugiyama K
- Yamamoto T
- Kitazawa Y
- Alward WL
- Stone EM
- Nishimura DY
- Sheffield VC
journal: J Glaucoma
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1097/00061198-200112000-00007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Screening for mutations of Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome caused by FOXC1 gene in Japanese patients.
**Authors:** Kawase C, Kawase K, Taniguchi T, Sugiyama K, Yamamoto T, Kitazawa Y, Alward WL, Stone EM, Nishimura DY, Sheffield VC
**Journal:** J Glaucoma (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00061198-200112000-00007](https://doi.org/10.1097/00061198-200112000-00007)

## Content

1. J Glaucoma. 2001 Dec;10(6):477-82. doi: 10.1097/00061198-200112000-00007.

Screening for mutations of Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome caused by FOXC1 gene in 
Japanese patients.

Kawase C(1), Kawase K, Taniguchi T, Sugiyama K, Yamamoto T, Kitazawa Y, Alward 
WL, Stone EM, Nishimura DY, Sheffield VC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Gifu University School of Medicine, Gifu, Japan.

PURPOSE: Mutations in the forkhead transcription factor gene (FOXC1) have been 
recently shown to cause some cases of juvenile glaucoma associated with a 
variety of anterior-segment anomalies. The purpose of this study was to 
investigate the clinical features of Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome caused by FOXC1 
mutations in Japanese patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: After informed consent was obtained, genomic DNA was 
isolated from peripheral blood. The DNA-sequence changes were analyzed using 
single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis and automated sequencing in six 
Japanese probands with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.
RESULTS: The authors identified four mutations: pedigree 1 (26-47ins22), 2 
(Ile91Ser), 3 (286ins1), and 4 (Arg127His). Two pedigrees showed new mutations 
in FOXC1. In pedigrees 1,2, and 4, younger generations had iris hypoplasia with 
severe early-onset glaucoma, whereas their parents had posterior embryotoxon 
without glaucoma. Pedigree 3 had a single affected person with iris hypoplasia 
and posterior embryotoxon with a mild increase of intraocular pressure.
CONCLUSION: Four different FOXC1 mutations were found in four of six Japanese 
pedigrees with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome. This was a new mutation in two 
pedigrees that was not found in earlier generations. This study confirms that 
mutations in this gene cause maldevelopment of the anterior segment of the eye.

DOI: 10.1097/00061198-200112000-00007
PMID: 11740218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]