---
reference_id: "PMID:20005004"
title: "[CINCA syndrome: a rare cause of papilledema. The case of homozygous twins]."
authors:
- Carzoli A
- Maalouf T
- Henckes O
- Lemelle I
- George JL
- Angioi K
journal: J Fr Ophtalmol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.jfo.2009.11.003
keywords:
- Child
- Cryopyrin-Associated Periodic Syndromes/complications
- Diseases in Twins/complications
- Humans
- Male
- Papilledema/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [CINCA syndrome: a rare cause of papilledema. The case of homozygous twins].
**Authors:** Carzoli A, Maalouf T, Henckes O, Lemelle I, George JL, Angioi K
**Journal:** J Fr Ophtalmol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jfo.2009.11.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfo.2009.11.003)

## Content

1. J Fr Ophtalmol. 2010 Jan;33(1):36-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jfo.2009.11.003. Epub 2009
 Dec 10.

[CINCA syndrome: a rare cause of papilledema. The case of homozygous twins].

[Article in French]

Carzoli A(1), Maalouf T, Henckes O, Lemelle I, George JL, Angioi K.

Author information:
(1)Service d'Ophtalmologie B, CHU Nancy Allée du Morvan 54511 
Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy Cedex.

CINCA syndrome is an autoinflammatory disease in childhood characterized by 
multisystemic manifestations: cutaneous, articular, and neurological including 
sensory organs. We report the case of homozygous twins affected by CINCA 
syndrome. The diagnosis was evoked on the basis of multiple systemic symptoms 
(multiple episodes of fever of unknown origin, mental retardation, short 
stature, meningitis, hearing loss, bilateral papilledema) and confirmed by the 
presence of a CIAS1 mutation on genetic analysis. After few months of treatment 
by anakinra (an interleukin-1 receptor antagonist) the children began to grow 
again and we noted regression of the biological inflammatory syndrome.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jfo.2009.11.003
PMID: 20005004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]