---
reference_id: "PMID:30762375"
title: Cognitive outcomes of childhood primary CNS vasculitis.
authors:
- Deschamps K
- Yeates KO
- Fay-McClymont TB
- Twilt M
- Westmacott R
- Dropol A
- Brooks BL
- Kirton A
- Gowdie P
- Sheikh S
- Benseler SM
journal: Neuropsychology
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1037/neu0000513
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cognition/physiology
- Female
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/etiology, psychology"
- Intelligence/physiology
- Male
- "Memory, Short-Term/physiology"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/complications, psychology"
- Wechsler Scales
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cognitive outcomes of childhood primary CNS vasculitis.
**Authors:** Deschamps K, Yeates KO, Fay-McClymont TB, Twilt M, Westmacott R, Dropol A, Brooks BL, Kirton A, Gowdie P, Sheikh S, Benseler SM
**Journal:** Neuropsychology (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1037/neu0000513](https://doi.org/10.1037/neu0000513)

## Content

1. Neuropsychology. 2019 May;33(4):462-469. doi: 10.1037/neu0000513. Epub 2019
Feb  14.

Cognitive outcomes of childhood primary CNS vasculitis.

Deschamps K(1), Yeates KO(2), Fay-McClymont TB(3), Twilt M(4), Westmacott R(5), 
Dropol A(6), Brooks BL(7), Kirton A(8), Gowdie P(9), Sheikh S(10), Benseler 
SM(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Calgary.
(2)Department of Psychology, Alberta Children's Hospital Research Institute, 
University of Calgary.
(3)Neurosciences Program, Alberta Children's Hospital.
(4)Section of Rheumatology, Department of Pediatrics, Alberta Children's 
Hospital.
(5)Psychology Department, The Hospital for Sick Children.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary.
(7)Alberta Children's Hospital Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics.
(8)Departments of Pediatrics and Clinical Neurosciences, Alberta Children's 
Hospital Research Institute, University of Calgary.
(9)Rheumatology Service, Department of General Medicine, Royal Children's 
Hospital.
(10)Information Services, The Hospital for Sick Children.
(11)Alberta Children's Hospital Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, 
Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize the clinical cognitive phenotypes and severity of 
cognitive burden according to disease subtype in children with primary central 
nervous system vasculitis (cPACNS).
METHOD: This retrospective multicenter inflammatory brain disease database study 
examined the neuropsychological outcomes of 80 children (44 male; mean age = 
7.89 years, SD = 4.17) consecutively diagnosed with primary CNS vasculitis 
between 1992 and 2016. Twenty-one children had small-vessel disease (AN_cPACNS), 
and 59 had large-vessel disease (including 49 nonprogressive [APNP_cPACNS] and 
10 progressive [APP_cPACNS]). Neuroimaging revealed MRI abnormalities in 100% 
and 90% of children with large- and small-vessel vasculitis, respectively. The 
primary outcomes were Full Scale IQ (FSIQ) and the index scores from the 
Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-III (WISC-III, WISC-IV, and WISC-V). 
Analyses explored the effect of disease subtype.
RESULTS: Intellectual functioning was assessed on average 2.82 years after 
symptom onset. Children with small-vessel CNS vasculitis had significantly lower 
FSIQ scores than did those with large-vessel CNS vasculitis (Ms = 81.90 vs. 
94.82; p = .04). Intellectual disability (FSIQ < 70) was more frequent in 
children with small-vessel disease (24% vs. 5%). All groups displayed lower 
Working Memory and Processing Speed index scores relative to Verbal 
Comprehension and Perceptual Reasoning index scores. Group differences in FSIQ 
remained significant after controlling for the presence of seizures.
CONCLUSION: Children with small-vessel CNS vasculitis are more likely to 
demonstrate deficits in intellectual functioning than are those with 
large-vessel disease, and children with both types of CNS vasculitis demonstrate 
relatively poor working memory and processing speed. (PsycINFO Database Record 
(c) 2019 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/neu0000513
PMID: 30762375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]