---
reference_id: "PMID:34708697"
title: "Lane-Hamilton syndrome - Is it really a needle in a haystack?"
authors:
- Mondkar SA
- Tullu MS
- Sathe P
- Agrawal M
journal: J Postgrad Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.4103/jpgm.JPGM_1163_20
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lane-Hamilton syndrome - Is it really a needle in a haystack?
**Authors:** Mondkar SA, Tullu MS, Sathe P, Agrawal M
**Journal:** J Postgrad Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.4103/jpgm.JPGM_1163_20](https://doi.org/10.4103/jpgm.JPGM_1163_20)

## Content

1. J Postgrad Med. 2022 Jul-Sep;68(3):162-167. doi: 10.4103/jpgm.JPGM_1163_20.

Lane-Hamilton syndrome - Is it really a needle in a haystack?

Mondkar SA(1), Tullu MS(1), Sathe P(2), Agrawal M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Seth G.S. Medical College and KEM Hospital, Parel, 
Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.
(2)Department of Pathology, Seth G.S. Medical College and KEM Hospital, Parel, 
Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.

INTRODUCTION: The association of pulmonary hemosiderosis with celiac disease 
(Lane-Hamilton syndrome) is extremely rare.
CASE DETAILS: A five-year-old female child presented with fever, cough, 
breathlessness, and pallor for 20 days, without any previous history of 
recurrent lower respiratory tract infections, tuberculosis, or cardiac disease. 
There was no history of pica, chronic diarrhea, bleeding, or personal or family 
history of repeated blood transfusions. She had tachycardia, tachypnea, severe 
pallor, stunting, rickets, and bilateral fine lung crepitations. Peripheral 
smear and blood indices revealed dimorphic anemia. Anti-tissue transglutaminase 
IgA antibody levels were high (>200 U/mL) and the upper gastrointestinal 
endoscopy with duodenal biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of celiac disease. The 
child was discharged on a gluten-free diet (GFD) and oral hematinic, but her 
dietary compliance was poor. Interestingly, the child had persistent bilateral 
pulmonary infiltrates, which was initially attributed to congestive cardiac 
failure (CCF), which persisted even despite treatment. HRCT chest revealed 
interstitial thickening and bilateral alveolar shadows and bronchoalveolar 
lavage showed a few inflammatory cells. The child was readmitted four times with 
similar complaints and was given packed red cell transfusions. In the fourth 
admission, a lung biopsy was done, which revealed extensive pulmonary 
hemosiderosis. The patient was given a course of oral steroids for 6 weeks, with 
a gluten-free diet, following which both the anemia and the pulmonary 
infiltrates resolved.
CONCLUSION: Pulmonary hemosiderosis is an important cause of anemia in cases of 
celiac disease and may be misdiagnosed as CCF due to severe anemia. A strict 
GFD, with or without corticosteroids, can reverse the clinical and radiological 
picture.

DOI: 10.4103/jpgm.JPGM_1163_20
PMCID: PMC9733521
PMID: 34708697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None