---
reference_id: "PMID:38316654"
title: "KLK7, KLK10, and KLK11 in Papillary Thyroid Cancer: Bioinformatic Analysis and Experimental Validation."
authors:
- Ni T
- Zhao RH
- Wu JF
- Li CY
- Xue G
- Lin X
journal: Biochem Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s10528-024-10679-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# KLK7, KLK10, and KLK11 in Papillary Thyroid Cancer: Bioinformatic Analysis and Experimental Validation.
**Authors:** Ni T, Zhao RH, Wu JF, Li CY, Xue G, Lin X
**Journal:** Biochem Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10528-024-10679-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10528-024-10679-8)

## Content

1. Biochem Genet. 2024 Dec;62(6):4446-4471. doi: 10.1007/s10528-024-10679-8. Epub
 2024 Feb 5.

KLK7, KLK10, and KLK11 in Papillary Thyroid Cancer: Bioinformatic Analysis and 
Experimental Validation.

Ni T(#)(1), Zhao RH(#)(2), Wu JF(2), Li CY(1), Xue G(3), Lin X(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Hebei North University, Zhangjiakou, 075000, China.
(2)Department of Morphology Laboratory, Hebei North University, Zhangjiakou, 
075000, China.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Hebei North University, Zhangjiakou, 075000, China. xgwjf@163.com.
(4)Department of Morphology Laboratory, Hebei North University, Zhangjiakou, 
075000, China. 305461101@qq.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Despite many studies on papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) in the past few 
decades, some critical and significant genes remain undiscovered. To explore 
genes that may play crucial roles in PTC, a detailed analysis of the expression 
levels, mutations, and clinical significance of Kallikrein-related peptidases 
(KLKs) family genes in PTC was undertaken to provide new targets for the precise 
treatment of the disease. A comprehensive analysis of KLK family genes was 
performed using various online tools, such as GEPIA, Kaplan-Meier Plotter, 
LinkedOmics, GSCA, TIMER, and Cluego. KLK7, KLK10, and KLK11 were critical 
factors of KLK family genes. Then, functional assays were carried out on 
KLK7/10/11 to determine their proliferation, migration, and invasion 
capabilities in PTC. The mRNA expression levels of KLK7, KLK10, KLK11, and KLK13 
were significantly elevated in thyroid carcinoma, while KLK1, KLK2, KLK3 and 
KLK4 mRNA levels were decreased compared to normal tissues. Correlations between 
KLK2/7-12/15 expression levels and tumor stage were also observed in thyroid 
carcinoma. Survival analysis demonstrated that KLK4/5/7/9-12/14 was associated 
with overall survival in patients with thyroid cancer. Not only were KLK genes 
strongly associated with cancer-related pathways, but also KLK7/10/11 was 
associated with immune-cell infiltration. Finally, silencing KLK7/10/11 impaired 
human papillary thyroid carcinoma cells' growth, migration ability, and 
invasiveness. The increased expression of KLK7, KLK10, and KLK11 may serve as 
molecular markers to identify PTC patients. KLK7, KLK10, and KLK11 could be 
potential prognostic indicators and targets for precision therapy against PTC.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10528-024-10679-8
PMID: 38316654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interest: The authors 
declare no competing interests. Ethical Approval: This experiment was approved 
by the Ethical Committee of the First Affiliated Hospital of Hebei North 
University.