---
reference_id: "PMID:17460091"
title: "Inactivation of Arx, the murine ortholog of the X-linked lissencephaly with ambiguous genitalia gene, leads to severe disorganization of the ventral telencephalon with impaired neuronal migration and differentiation."
authors:
- Colombo E
- Collombat P
- Colasante G
- Bianchi M
- Long J
- Mansouri A
- Rubenstein JL
- Broccoli V
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0417-07.2007
keywords:
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- "Basal Ganglia/abnormalities, pathology"
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Movement
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Cerebral Cortex/abnormalities, pathology"
- Doublecortin Protein
- Female
- Genitalia/abnormalities
- "Globus Pallidus/abnormalities, pathology"
- "Homeodomain Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Interneurons/pathology
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- Organ Culture Techniques
- Pregnancy
- "Septal Nuclei/abnormalities, pathology"
- "Substantia Nigra/abnormalities, pathology"
- "Thalamus/abnormalities, pathology"
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- X Chromosome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inactivation of Arx, the murine ortholog of the X-linked lissencephaly with ambiguous genitalia gene, leads to severe disorganization of the ventral telencephalon with impaired neuronal migration and differentiation.
**Authors:** Colombo E, Collombat P, Colasante G, Bianchi M, Long J, Mansouri A, Rubenstein JL, Broccoli V
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0417-07.2007](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0417-07.2007)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2007 Apr 25;27(17):4786-98. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0417-07.2007.

Inactivation of Arx, the murine ortholog of the X-linked lissencephaly with
ambiguous genitalia gene, leads to severe disorganization of the ventral
telencephalon with impaired neuronal migration and differentiation.

Colombo E(1), Collombat P, Colasante G, Bianchi M, Long J, Mansouri A,
Rubenstein JL, Broccoli V.

Author information:
(1)Stem Cell Research Department, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20132
Milan, Italy.

ARX loss-of-function mutations cause X-linked lissencephaly with ambiguous
genitalia (XLAG), a severe neurological condition that results in profound brain
malformations, including microcephaly, absence of corpus callosum, and
impairment of the basal ganglia. Despite such dramatic defects, their nature and
origin remain largely unknown. Here, we used Arx mutant mice as a model to
characterize the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying the basal ganglia
alterations. In these animals, the early differentiation of this tissue appeared
normal, whereas subsequent differentiation was impaired, leading to the
periventricular accumulation of immature neurons in both the lateral ganglionic
eminence and medial ganglionic eminence (MGE). Both tangential migration toward
the cortex and striatum and radial migration to the globus pallidus and striatum
were greatly reduced in the mutants, causing a periventricular accumulation of
NPY+ or calretinin+ neurons in the MGE. Arx mutant neurons retained their
differentiation potential in vitro but exhibited deficits in morphology and
migration ability. These findings imply that cell-autonomous defects in
migration underlie the neuronal localization defects. Furthermore, Arx mutants
lacked a large fraction of cholinergic neurons and displayed a strong impairment
of thalamocortical projections, in which major axon fiber tracts failed to
traverse the basal ganglia. Altogether, these results highlight the critical
functions of Arx in promoting neural migration and regulating basal ganglia
differentiation in mice, consistent with the phenotype of XLAG patients.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0417-07.2007
PMCID: PMC4916654
PMID: 17460091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
