---
reference_id: "PMID:32973163"
title: Epidermolysis bullosa.
authors:
- Bardhan A
- Bruckner-Tuderman L
- Chapple ILC
- Fine JD
- Harper N
- Has C
- Magin TM
- Marinkovich MP
- Marshall JF
- McGrath JA
- Mellerio JE
- Polson R
- Heagerty AH
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-020-0210-0
keywords:
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
- Humans
- Incidence
- "Skin/pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidermolysis bullosa.
**Authors:** Bardhan A, Bruckner-Tuderman L, Chapple ILC, Fine JD, Harper N, Has C, Magin TM, Marinkovich MP, Marshall JF, McGrath JA, Mellerio JE, Polson R, Heagerty AH
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-020-0210-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-020-0210-0)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2020 Sep 24;6(1):78. doi: 10.1038/s41572-020-0210-0.

Epidermolysis bullosa.

Bardhan A(1)(2), Bruckner-Tuderman L(3), Chapple ILC(4)(5), Fine JD(6), Harper 
N(7), Has C(3), Magin TM(8), Marinkovich MP(9), Marshall JF(10), McGrath JA(11), 
Mellerio JE(11)(12), Polson R(7), Heagerty AH(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Sciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, 
Birmingham, UK. a.bardhan@bham.ac.uk.
(2)Epidermolysis Bullosa Unit, Department of Dermatology, University Hospitals 
Birmingham National Health Service Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK. 
a.bardhan@bham.ac.uk.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Medical Center, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, 
Germany.
(4)Periodontal Research Group, Birmingham Dental School and Hospital, University 
of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(5)Birmingham Community Health National Health Service Trust, Edgbaston, 
Birmingham, UK.
(6)Vanderbilt University School of Medicine and National Epidermolysis Bullosa 
Registry, Nashville, TN, USA.
(7)Epidermolysis Bullosa Unit, Department of Dermatology, University Hospitals 
Birmingham National Health Service Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK.
(8)Institute of Biology and Translational Center for Regenerative Medicine, 
University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(9)Department of Dermatology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, 
CA, USA.
(10)Centre for Tumour Biology, John Vane Science Centre, Barts Cancer Institute, 
Queen Mary University of London, London, UK.
(11)St John's Institute of Dermatology, King's College London, Guy's Campus, 
London, UK.
(12)Guy's and St Thomas' Hospital National Health Service Foundation Trust, 
London, UK.
(13)Epidermolysis Bullosa Unit, Department of Dermatology, University Hospitals 
Birmingham National Health Service Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK. 
A.H.M.Heagerty@bham.ac.uk.
(14)Institute of Inflammation & Ageing, University of Birmingham, Queen 
Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, UK. A.H.M.Heagerty@bham.ac.uk.

Epidermolysis bullosa (EB) is an inherited, heterogeneous group of rare genetic 
dermatoses characterized by mucocutaneous fragility and blister formation, 
inducible by often minimal trauma. A broad phenotypic spectrum has been 
described, with potentially severe extracutaneous manifestations, morbidity and 
mortality. Over 30 subtypes are recognized, grouped into four major categories, 
based predominantly on the plane of cleavage within the skin and reflecting the 
underlying molecular abnormality: EB simplex, junctional EB, dystrophic EB and 
Kindler EB. The study of EB has led to seminal advances in our understanding of 
cutaneous biology. To date, pathogenetic mutations in 16 distinct genes have 
been implicated in EB, encoding proteins influencing cellular integrity and 
adhesion. Precise diagnosis is reliant on correlating clinical, electron 
microscopic and immunohistological features with mutational analyses. In the 
absence of curative treatment, multidisciplinary care is targeted towards 
minimizing the risk of blister formation, wound care, symptom relief and 
specific complications, the most feared of which - and also the leading cause of 
mortality - is squamous cell carcinoma. Preclinical advances in cell-based, 
protein replacement and gene therapies are paving the way for clinical successes 
with gene correction, raising hopes amongst patients and clinicians worldwide.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-020-0210-0
PMID: 32973163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]