---
reference_id: "PMID:33657294"
title: Terlipressin plus Albumin for the Treatment of Type 1 Hepatorenal Syndrome.
authors:
- Wong F
- Pappas SC
- Curry MP
- Reddy KR
- Rubin RA
- Porayko MK
- Gonzalez SA
- Mumtaz K
- Lim N
- Simonetto DA
- Sharma P
- Sanyal AJ
- Mayo MJ
- Frederick RT
- Escalante S
- Jamil K
- CONFIRM Study Investigators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2008290
keywords:
- Albumins/therapeutic use
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- "Hepatorenal Syndrome/drug therapy, etiology, mortality"
- Humans
- "Infusions, Intravenous"
- Liver Cirrhosis/complications
- Liver Transplantation
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Renal Replacement Therapy
- Respiratory Insufficiency/chemically induced
- "Terlipressin/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Treatment Outcome
- "Vasoconstrictor Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Terlipressin plus Albumin for the Treatment of Type 1 Hepatorenal Syndrome.
**Authors:** Wong F, Pappas SC, Curry MP, Reddy KR, Rubin RA, Porayko MK, Gonzalez SA, Mumtaz K, Lim N, Simonetto DA, Sharma P, Sanyal AJ, Mayo MJ, Frederick RT, Escalante S, Jamil K, CONFIRM Study Investigators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2008290](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2008290)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2021 Mar 4;384(9):818-828. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2008290.

Terlipressin plus Albumin for the Treatment of Type 1 Hepatorenal Syndrome.

Wong F(1), Pappas SC(1), Curry MP(1), Reddy KR(1), Rubin RA(1), Porayko MK(1),
Gonzalez SA(1), Mumtaz K(1), Lim N(1), Simonetto DA(1), Sharma P(1), Sanyal
AJ(1), Mayo MJ(1), Frederick RT(1), Escalante S(1), Jamil K(1); CONFIRM Study
Investigators.

Collaborators: Bissonnette J, Deschenes M, Ghali M, Tsein C, Wong F, Marquez V,
Feyssa E, Wong M, Vierling J, Gonzalez S, Trotter JF, Curry M, Frederick RT,
Zamor P, Sclair S, Gholam P, Brown R, Riera A, Patel V, Subramanian R, Landis C,
Swales C, Reddy KR, Patel J, Sass D, Keaveny A, Vargas H, Simonetto D, Rockey D,
Victor DW 3rd, Rudraraju M, Bajaj J, Satoskar R, Thuluvath P, Sigal S, Grewal P,
Olsen S, Ganger D, Velez J, Rubin R, Janardhan S, Pyrsopoulos N, Befeler A,
Frenette C, Hassanein T, Kumari R, Procaccini N, Kemmer N, Al-Osami A, Kalathil
S, Mumtaz K, McGuire B, Desai A, Boyer T, Kurtz I, Paul S, Reddy G, Bihorac A,
Sanchez A, Leventhal T, Gupta A, Bhamidimarri K, Sharma P, Lim N, Olivera M,
Kahn J, Guerrero J, Mayo M, Gallegos J, Caldwell S, Paine C, Porayko M, O'Leary
J, Shaikh O, Sanyal A, Korenblat K.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto (F.W.);
Orphan Therapeutics, Annandale (S.C.P.), and Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals,
Bedminster (S.E., K.J.) - both in New Jersey; the Department of Medicine, Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston (M.P.C.); the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia (K.R.R.); Piedmont Transplant Institute, Piedmont
Healthcare, Atlanta (R.A.R.); the Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville (M.K.P.); the Department of Medicine, Baylor Scott and
White All Saints Medical Center, Fort Worth (S.A.G.), and the Department of
Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas (M.J.M.) -
both in Texas; Ohio State University, Columbus (K.M.); the Department of
Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis (N.L.), and the Department of
Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester (D.A.S.) - both in Minnesota; the Department of
Medicine, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor (P.S.); Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond (A.J.S.); and Hepatology and Liver
Transplantation, California Pacific Medical Center, San Francisco (R.T.F.).

Comment in
    Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2021 May;18(5):286. doi:
10.1038/s41575-021-00442-4.
    N Engl J Med. 2021 Jun 10;384(23):e90. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2105498.
    N Engl J Med. 2021 Jun 10;384(23):e90. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2105498.
    N Engl J Med. 2021 Jun 10;384(23):e90. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2105498.

BACKGROUND: The vasoconstrictor terlipressin is used for type 1 hepatorenal
syndrome (HRS-1) in many parts of the world and is part of the clinical practice
guidelines in Europe.
METHODS: We conducted a phase 3 trial to confirm the efficacy and safety of
terlipressin plus albumin in adults with HRS-1. The patients were randomly
assigned in a 2:1 ratio to receive terlipressin or placebo for up to 14 days; in
both groups, concomitant use of albumin was strongly recommended. The primary
end point was verified reversal of HRS, defined as two consecutive serum
creatinine measurements of 1.5 mg per deciliter or less at least 2 hours apart
and survival without renal-replacement therapy for at least 10 days after the
completion of treatment. Four prespecified secondary end points were analyzed
with the Hochberg procedure to account for multiple comparisons.
RESULTS: A total of 300 patients underwent randomization - 199 were assigned to
the terlipressin group and 101 to the placebo group. Verified reversal of HRS
was reported in 63 patients (32%) in the terlipressin group and 17 patients
(17%) in the placebo group (P = 0.006). With respect to the prespecified
secondary end points, HRS reversal, defined as any serum creatinine level of 1.5
mg per deciliter or less during the first 14 days, was reported in 78 patients
(39%) in the terlipressin group and 18 (18%) in the placebo group (P<0.001); HRS
reversal without renal-replacement therapy by day 30, in 68 (34%) and 17 (17%),
respectively (P = 0.001); HRS reversal among patients with systemic inflammatory
response syndrome (84 patients in the terlipressin group and 48 patients in the
placebo group), in 31 (37%) and 3 (6%), respectively (P<0.001); and verified
reversal of HRS without recurrence by day 30, in 52 (26%) and 17 (17%),
respectively (P = 0.08). At day 90, liver transplantations had been performed in
46 patients (23%) in the terlipressin group and 29 patients (29%) in the placebo
group, and death occurred in 101 (51%) and 45 (45%), respectively. More adverse
events, including abdominal pain, nausea, diarrhea, and respiratory failure,
occurred with terlipressin than with placebo. Death within 90 days due to
respiratory disorders occurred in 22 patients (11%) in the terlipressin group
and 2 patients (2%) in the placebo group.
CONCLUSIONS: In this trial involving adults with cirrhosis and HRS-1,
terlipressin was more effective than placebo in improving renal function but was
associated with serious adverse events, including respiratory failure. (Funded
by Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals; CONFIRM ClinicalTrials.gov number,
NCT02770716.).

Copyright © 2021 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2008290
PMID: 33657294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
