---
reference_id: "PMID:39264246"
title: Update on Recommendations for Cancer Screening and Surveillance in Children with Genomic Instability Disorders.
authors:
- Nakano Y
- Kuiper RP
- Nichols KE
- Porter CC
- Lesmana H
- Meade J
- Kratz CP
- Godley LA
- Maese LD
- Achatz MI
- Khincha PP
- Savage SA
- Doria AS
- Greer MC
- Chang VY
- Wang LL
- Plon SE
- Walsh MF
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-1098
keywords:
- Humans
- Genomic Instability
- Child
- "Neoplasms/genetics, diagnosis, therapy"
- Early Detection of Cancer/methods
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update on Recommendations for Cancer Screening and Surveillance in Children with Genomic Instability Disorders.
**Authors:** Nakano Y, Kuiper RP, Nichols KE, Porter CC, Lesmana H, Meade J, Kratz CP, Godley LA, Maese LD, Achatz MI, Khincha PP, Savage SA, Doria AS, Greer MC, Chang VY, Wang LL, Plon SE, Walsh MF
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-1098](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-1098)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2024 Nov 15;30(22):5009-5020. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-1098.

Update on Recommendations for Cancer Screening and Surveillance in Children with
Genomic Instability Disorders.

Nakano Y(1), Kuiper RP(2), Nichols KE(3), Porter CC(4), Lesmana H(5), Meade
J(6), Kratz CP(7), Godley LA(8), Maese LD(9), Achatz MI(10), Khincha PP(11),
Savage SA(11), Doria AS(12), Greer MC(12), Chang VY(13), Wang LL(14), Plon
SE(15), Walsh MF(16).

Author information:
(1)Division of Haematology/Oncology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.
(2)Princess Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology and Department of Genetics,
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee.
(4)Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia.
(5)Department of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and BMT, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, Ohio.
(6)Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(7)Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany.
(8)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois.
(9)Huntsman Cancer Institute, Primary Children's Hospital, University of Utah,
Salt Lake City, Utah.
(10)Centro de Oncologia, Hospital Sirio-Libanes, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(11)Clinical Genetics Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics,
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland.
(12)Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, The Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(13)Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, University of California, Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, California.
(14)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas.
(15)Department of Pediatrics/Hematology-Oncology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas.
(16)Division of Solid Tumor and Clinical Genetics, Department of Medicine and
Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York.

Genomic instability disorders are characterized by DNA or chromosomal
instability, resulting in various clinical manifestations, including
developmental anomalies, immunodeficiency, and increased risk of developing
cancers beginning in childhood. Many of these genomic instability disorders also
present with exquisite sensitivity to anticancer treatments such as ionizing
radiation and chemotherapy, which may further increase the risk of second
cancers. In July 2023, the American Association for Cancer Research held the
second Childhood Cancer Predisposition Workshop, where multidisciplinary
international experts discussed, reviewed, and updated recommendations for
children with cancer predisposition syndromes. This article discusses childhood
cancer risks and surveillance recommendations for the group of genomic
instability disorders with predominantly recessive inheritance, including the
DNA repair disorders ataxia telangiectasia, Nijmegen breakage syndrome, Fanconi
anemia, xeroderma pigmentosum, Bloom syndrome, and Rothmund-Thomson syndrome, as
well as the telomere biology disorders and mosaic variegated aneuploidy.
Recognition of children with genomic instability disorders is important in order
to make the proper diagnosis, enable genetic counseling, and inform cancer
screening, cancer risk reduction, and choice of anticancer therapy.

©2024 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-1098
PMCID: PMC11705613
PMID: 39264246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
