---
reference_id: "PMID:23890587"
title: Dolichol kinase deficiency (DOLK-CDG) with a purely neurological presentation caused by a novel mutation.
authors:
- Helander A
- Stödberg T
- Jaeken J
- Matthijs G
- Eriksson M
- Eggertsen G
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.07.002
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/diagnosis, genetics"
- Female
- Genotype
- Glycosylation
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mutation
- "Phosphotransferases (Alcohol Group Acceptor)/deficiency, genetics"
- Siblings
- Transferrin/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dolichol kinase deficiency (DOLK-CDG) with a purely neurological presentation caused by a novel mutation.
**Authors:** Helander A, Stödberg T, Jaeken J, Matthijs G, Eriksson M, Eggertsen G
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.07.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.07.002)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2013 Nov;110(3):342-4. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.07.002. Epub
 2013 Jul 10.

Dolichol kinase deficiency (DOLK-CDG) with a purely neurological presentation 
caused by a novel mutation.

Helander A(1), Stödberg T, Jaeken J, Matthijs G, Eriksson M, Eggertsen G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; 
Karolinska University Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic address: 
anders.helander@ki.se.

A 4-month old boy presented with multiple epileptic seizure types including West 
syndrome. Screening for infectious and structural etiologies showed normal 
results. A metabolic investigation was undertaken to investigate the cause of 
his neurological disease. Screening for congenital disorders of glycosylation 
(CDG) by HPLC analysis of serum carbohydrate-deficient transferrin (CDT) showed 
a type 1 pattern with 18% disialotransferrin (reference < 2%) and 2% 
asialotransferrin (reference 0). An undiagnosed 10-year old sister with a 
similar clinical history with infantile spasms at age 4 months, intellectual 
disability and an autism spectrum disorder, also showed a type 1 CDT pattern. 
Both siblings lacked dysmorphic features and extra-cerebral symptoms. The boy 
had cytotoxic edema of the thalamus and mesencephalon on MRI at age 7 months, 
whereas the girl had normal MRI at age 8 months. Phosphomannomutase (PMM) and 
phosphomannose isomerase (MPI) activities in cultured fibroblasts were normal, 
excluding PMM2-CDG and MPI-CDG. Fibroblast lipid-linked oligosaccharide analysis 
was also normal, suggesting an early defect in glycan assembly. Sequence 
analysis of the dolichol kinase gene revealed a homozygous new missense mutation 
(p.M1?; c.2 T > C) in both siblings. In conclusion, two siblings were 
demonstrated to suffer from DOLK-CDG (MIM 610768) and to be homozygous for a new 
mutation. They presented with West syndrome and so far show a purely 
neurological phenotype.

© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.07.002
PMID: 23890587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]