---
reference_id: "PMID:26898852"
title: "Endovascular thrombectomy after large-vessel ischaemic stroke: a meta-analysis of individual patient data from five randomised trials."
authors:
- Goyal M
- Menon BK
- van Zwam WH
- Dippel DW
- Mitchell PJ
- Demchuk AM
- Dávalos A
- Majoie CB
- van der Lugt A
- de Miquel MA
- Donnan GA
- Roos YB
- Bonafe A
- Jahan R
- Diener HC
- van den Berg LA
- Levy EI
- Berkhemer OA
- Pereira VM
- Rempel J
- Millán M
- Davis SM
- Roy D
- Thornton J
- Román LS
- Ribó M
- Beumer D
- Stouch B
- Brown S
- Campbell BC
- van Oostenbrugge RJ
- Saver JL
- Hill MD
- Jovin TG
- HERMES collaborators
journal: Lancet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00163-X
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Brain Ischemia/complications, therapy"
- Endovascular Procedures/methods
- Female
- Fibrinolytic Agents/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Intracranial Hemorrhages/chemically induced
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Odds Ratio
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- "Stroke/etiology, therapy"
- Thrombectomy/methods
- Tissue Plasminogen Activator/therapeutic use
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endovascular thrombectomy after large-vessel ischaemic stroke: a meta-analysis of individual patient data from five randomised trials.
**Authors:** Goyal M, Menon BK, van Zwam WH, Dippel DW, Mitchell PJ, Demchuk AM, Dávalos A, Majoie CB, van der Lugt A, de Miquel MA, Donnan GA, Roos YB, Bonafe A, Jahan R, Diener HC, van den Berg LA, Levy EI, Berkhemer OA, Pereira VM, Rempel J, Millán M, Davis SM, Roy D, Thornton J, Román LS, Ribó M, Beumer D, Stouch B, Brown S, Campbell BC, van Oostenbrugge RJ, Saver JL, Hill MD, Jovin TG, HERMES collaborators
**Journal:** Lancet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00163-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00163-X)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2016 Apr 23;387(10029):1723-31. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00163-X.
Epub  2016 Feb 18.

Endovascular thrombectomy after large-vessel ischaemic stroke: a meta-analysis
of individual patient data from five randomised trials.

Goyal M(1), Menon BK(1), van Zwam WH(2), Dippel DW(3), Mitchell PJ(4), Demchuk
AM(1), Dávalos A(5), Majoie CB(6), van der Lugt A(3), de Miquel MA(7), Donnan
GA(8), Roos YB(6), Bonafe A(9), Jahan R(10), Diener HC(11), van den Berg LA(6),
Levy EI(12), Berkhemer OA(6), Pereira VM(13), Rempel J(14), Millán M(15), Davis
SM(16), Roy D(17), Thornton J(18), Román LS(19), Ribó M(20), Beumer D(2), Stouch
B(21), Brown S(22), Campbell BC(16), van Oostenbrugge RJ(2), Saver JL(23), Hill
MD(1), Jovin TG(24); HERMES collaborators.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Clinical Neuroscience and Radiology, Hotchkiss Brain
Institute, Cummings School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB,
Canada.
(2)Maastricht University Medical Center, Cardiovascular Research Institute
Maastricht (CARIM), Maastricht, Netherlands.
(3)Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(4)Department of Radiology, Royal Melbourne Hospital, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(5)Hospital Germans Trias y Pujol, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(7)Hospital de Bellvitge, Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(9)Hospital Guy de Chaulliac, Montpellier, France.
(10)UCLA Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(11)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany.
(12)State University of New York, Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(13)University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(14)University of Edmonton, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(15)Hospital Germans Trials y Pujol, Barcelona, Spain.
(16)Department of Medicine and Neurology, Melbourne Brain Centre, Royal
Melbourne Hospital, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(17)CHUM Notre-Dame Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(18)Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(19)Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain.
(20)Hospital Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain.
(21)Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(22)Altair Biostatistics, St Louis Park, MN, USA.
(23)David Geffen School of Medicine, University of Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA,
USA.
(24)University of Pittsburgh Medical Center Stroke Institute, Presbyterian
University Hospital, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Electronic address: jovintg@upmc.edu.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2016 Apr 23;387(10029):1695-7. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00351-2.
    Ann Intern Med. 2016 May 17;164(10):JC57. doi:
10.7326/ACPJC-2016-164-10-057.
    Lancet. 2016 Aug 20;388(10046):757-8. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31360-5.
    AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2017 Sep;38(9):E58-E59. doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A5249.

BACKGROUND: In 2015, five randomised trials showed efficacy of endovascular
thrombectomy over standard medical care in patients with acute ischaemic stroke
caused by occlusion of arteries of the proximal anterior circulation. In this
meta-analysis we, the trial investigators, aimed to pool individual patient data
from these trials to address remaining questions about whether the therapy is
efficacious across the diverse populations included.
METHODS: We formed the HERMES collaboration to pool patient-level data from five
trials (MR CLEAN, ESCAPE, REVASCAT, SWIFT PRIME, and EXTEND IA) done between
December, 2010, and December, 2014. In these trials, patients with acute
ischaemic stroke caused by occlusion of the proximal anterior artery circulation
were randomly assigned to receive either endovascular thrombectomy within 12 h
of symptom onset or standard care (control), with a primary outcome of reduced
disability on the modified Rankin Scale (mRS) at 90 days. By direct access to
the study databases, we extracted individual patient data that we used to assess
the primary outcome of reduced disability on mRS at 90 days in the pooled
population and examine heterogeneity of this treatment effect across
prespecified subgroups. To account for between-trial variance we used
mixed-effects modelling with random effects for parameters of interest. We then
used mixed-effects ordinal logistic regression models to calculate common odds
ratios (cOR) for the primary outcome in the whole population (shift analysis)
and in subgroups after adjustment for age, sex, baseline stroke severity
(National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score), site of occlusion (internal
carotid artery vs M1 segment of middle cerebral artery vs M2 segment of middle
cerebral artery), intravenous alteplase (yes vs no), baseline Alberta Stroke
Program Early CT score, and time from stroke onset to randomisation.
FINDINGS: We analysed individual data for 1287 patients (634 assigned to
endovascular thrombectomy, 653 assigned to control). Endovascular thrombectomy
led to significantly reduced disability at 90 days compared with control
(adjusted cOR 2.49, 95% CI 1.76-3.53; p<0.0001). The number needed to treat with
endovascular thrombectomy to reduce disability by at least one level on mRS for
one patient was 2.6. Subgroup analysis of the primary endpoint showed no
heterogeneity of treatment effect across prespecified subgroups for reduced
disability (pinteraction=0.43). Effect sizes favouring endovascular thrombectomy
over control were present in several strata of special interest, including in
patients aged 80 years or older (cOR 3.68, 95% CI 1.95-6.92), those randomised
more than 300 min after symptom onset (1.76, 1.05-2.97), and those not eligible
for intravenous alteplase (2.43, 1.30-4.55). Mortality at 90 days and risk of
parenchymal haematoma and symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage did not differ
between populations.
INTERPRETATION: Endovascular thrombectomy is of benefit to most patients with
acute ischaemic stroke caused by occlusion of the proximal anterior circulation,
irrespective of patient characteristics or geographical location. These findings
will have global implications on structuring systems of care to provide timely
treatment to patients with acute ischaemic stroke due to large vessel occlusion.
FUNDING: Medtronic.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00163-X
PMID: 26898852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]