---
reference_id: "PMID:17479413"
title: "Analysis of p16 gene mutation, deletion and methylation in patients with arseniasis produced by indoor unventilated-stove coal usage in Guizhou, China."
authors:
- Zhang AH
- Bin HH
- Pan XL
- Xi XG
journal: J Toxicol Environ Health A
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1080/15287390701290808
keywords:
- "Air Pollution, Indoor/adverse effects"
- "Arsenic Poisoning/complications, genetics, pathology"
- "Bowen's Disease/chemically induced, genetics, pathology"
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/chemically induced, genetics, pathology"
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/chemically induced, genetics, pathology"
- China
- Coal
- CpG Islands/genetics
- DNA Methylation
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Endemic Diseases
- Gene Deletion
- "Genes, p16"
- Heating
- Hyperplasia
- Inhalation Exposure
- "Keratosis/chemically induced, genetics, pathology"
- "Leukocytes, Mononuclear"
- Point Mutation
- "Skin Neoplasms/chemically induced, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of p16 gene mutation, deletion and methylation in patients with arseniasis produced by indoor unventilated-stove coal usage in Guizhou, China.
**Authors:** Zhang AH, Bin HH, Pan XL, Xi XG
**Journal:** J Toxicol Environ Health A (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15287390701290808](https://doi.org/10.1080/15287390701290808)

## Content

1. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 2007 Jun;70(11):970-5. doi:
10.1080/15287390701290808.

Analysis of p16 gene mutation, deletion and methylation in patients with
arseniasis produced by indoor unventilated-stove coal usage in Guizhou, China.

Zhang AH(1), Bin HH, Pan XL, Xi XG.

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health, Guiyang Medical College, GuiZhou Province, People's
Republic of China.

The aim of this study was to determine p16 gene mutation, deletion, and promoter
5' CpG island hypermethylation in peripheral blood mononuclear leukocyte of
patients with arseniasis as attributed to exposure to indoor unventilated coal
stove. The role of the aberrant change of p16 gene in the induction and
development of carcinogenesis in endemic arsenisiasis region in China was also
examined. Polymerase chain reaction single-strand conformation polymorphism
(PCR-SSCP), multiplex PCR (mPCR), methylation-specific PCR (MSP), and sequencing
techniques were performed to detect (1) mutation of the p16 gene exon 2, (2)
homozygous deletion of the p16 gene exon 1 and exon 2, and (3) hypermethylation
of the promoter CpG island in peripheral blood mononuclear leukocyte of patients
with arseniasis. Results showed no mutation was found in exon 2 of p16 gene. The
homozygous deletion frequency of p16 gene was 5 and 15% in control and
arseniasis patients, respectively. The homozygous deletion occurred mainly in
exon 2, with significant deletion frequencies of 9, 13, and 20% in mild,
intermediate, and severe arseniasis groups. The significant homozygous deletion
frequency was 9 and 39% in noncarcinoma and carcinoma individuals. The positive
rate of p16 gene promoter CpG island hyermethylation was 42 and 2% in the
exposed group and the control group, respectively. The positive rate was 26, 42,
and 50% in mild, intermediate, and severe arseniasis. The marked different
positive rate was 22 and 56% in noncarcinoma and carcinoma individuals,
respectively. In conclusion, homozygous deletion and hypermethylation of p16
gene may play an important role in the initiation and development of
manifestations seen in endemic arseniasis including carcinogenesis.

DOI: 10.1080/15287390701290808
PMID: 17479413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
