---
reference_id: "PMID:33972906"
title: Sucrase-Isomaltase Deficiency Causing Persistent Bloating and Diarrhea in an Adult Female.
authors:
- Chiruvella V
- Cheema A
- Arshad HMS
- Chan JT
- Yap JEL
journal: Cureus
year: '2021'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.14349
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sucrase-Isomaltase Deficiency Causing Persistent Bloating and Diarrhea in an Adult Female.
**Authors:** Chiruvella V, Cheema A, Arshad HMS, Chan JT, Yap JEL
**Journal:** Cureus (2021)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.14349](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.14349)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2021 Apr 7;13(4):e14349. doi: 10.7759/cureus.14349.

Sucrase-Isomaltase Deficiency Causing Persistent Bloating and Diarrhea in an 
Adult Female.

Chiruvella V(1), Cheema A(1), Arshad HMS(2), Chan JT(3), Yap JEL(2).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Medical College of Georgia at Augusta University, Augusta, 
USA.
(2)Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Medical College of Georgia at Augusta 
University, Augusta, USA.
(3)Pediatric Endocrinology, Medical College of Georgia at Augusta University, 
Augusta, USA.

Congenital sucrase isomaltase deficiency (CSID) is an autosomal recessive 
disorder which leads to chronic intestinal malabsorption of nutrients from 
ingested starch and sucrose. Symptoms usually present after consumption of 
fruits, juices, grains, and starches, leading to failure to thrive and 
malnutrition. Diagnosis is suspected on detailed patient history and confirmed 
by a disaccharidase assay using small intestinal biopsies or sucrose hydrogen 
breath test. Treatment of CSID consists of limiting sucrose in diet and 
replacement therapy with sacrosidase. Due to its nonspecific symptoms, CSID may 
be undiagnosed in many patients for several years. We present a case of a 
50-year-old woman with persistent symptoms of bloating in spite of extensive 
evaluation and treatment.

Copyright © 2021, Chiruvella et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.14349
PMCID: PMC8105231
PMID: 33972906

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.