---
reference_id: "PMID:37276163"
title: "Diacerein 1% Ointment for the Treatment of Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex: A Randomized, Controlled Trial."
authors:
- Teng J
- Paller AS
- Bruckner AL
- Murrell DF
- Mellerio JE
- Bodemer C
- Martinez AE
- Lugo-Somolinos A
- Sprecher E
- Laimer M
- Wally V
- Chan YM
- Lin SY
- Spellman M
- Bauer JW
journal: J Drugs Dermatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.36849/JDD.7108
keywords:
- Humans
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex/diagnosis, drug therapy, pathology"
- Ointments
- Anthraquinones/adverse effects
- Double-Blind Method
- Excipients
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diacerein 1% Ointment for the Treatment of Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex: A Randomized, Controlled Trial.
**Authors:** Teng J, Paller AS, Bruckner AL, Murrell DF, Mellerio JE, Bodemer C, Martinez AE, Lugo-Somolinos A, Sprecher E, Laimer M, Wally V, Chan YM, Lin SY, Spellman M, Bauer JW
**Journal:** J Drugs Dermatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.36849/JDD.7108](https://doi.org/10.36849/JDD.7108)

## Content

1. J Drugs Dermatol. 2023 Jun 1;22(6):599-604. doi: 10.36849/JDD.7108.

Diacerein 1% Ointment for the Treatment of Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex: A 
Randomized, Controlled Trial.

Teng J, Paller AS, Bruckner AL, Murrell DF, Mellerio JE, Bodemer C, Martinez AE, 
Lugo-Somolinos A, Sprecher E, Laimer M, Wally V, Chan YM, Lin SY, Spellman M, 
Bauer JW.

BACKGROUND: In epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBS), epithelial structural 
fragility results in blisters and erosions. Diacerein 1% ointment has been shown 
to reduce this blistering.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of diacerein 1% ointment in the 
treatment of EBS.
METHODS: A double-blind study of 54 patients with EBS were randomized to 
diacerein 1% or vehicle ointment once daily. The primary endpoint ( &ge;60% 
reduction in body surface area of EBS) and the key secondary endpoint ( 
&ge;2-point reduction in the Investigator&rsquo;s Global Assessment) were 
evaluated at 8 weeks.
RESULTS: There was no difference in the proportion of patients achieving either 
key efficacy endpoint between the diacerein 1% and vehicle groups (P&gt;0.05). 
No difference in treatment emergent adverse events were noted between the 
groups. In post hoc analysis stratified by EBS subtypes, an IGA score of 0 or 1 
was reported in 6 of 13 patients with severe EBS in the diacerein group (46.2%), 
compared with 2 of 13 patients with severe EBS in the vehicle group (15.4%); 
(relative risk= 3.08, 95% CI = 0.71, 13.4).
CONCLUSIONS: Although there was no significant difference in outcomes between 
the groups, further study may elucidate the effects of diacerein on EBS lesions, 
especially in patients with severe EBS. Teng J, Paller AS, Bruckner AL, et al. 
Diacerein 1% ointment for the treatment of epidermolysis bullosa simplex: a 
randomized, controlled trial. J Drugs Dermatol. 2023;22(6):599-604. 
doi:10.36849/JDD.7108.

DOI: 10.36849/JDD.7108
PMID: 37276163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]