---
reference_id: "PMID:37158955"
title: "ER stress induced immunopathology involving complement in CADASIL: implications for therapeutics."
authors:
- Panahi M
- Hase Y
- Gallart-Palau X
- Mitra S
- Watanabe A
- Low RC
- Yamamoto Y
- Sepulveda-Falla D
- Hainsworth AH
- Ihara M
- Sze SK
- Viitanen M
- Behbahani H
- Kalaria RN
journal: Acta Neuropathol Commun
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s40478-023-01558-1
keywords:
- Humans
- CADASIL/genetics
- Intercellular Adhesion Molecule-1
- Proteomics
- Complement System Proteins
- Cerebral Infarction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ER stress induced immunopathology involving complement in CADASIL: implications for therapeutics.
**Authors:** Panahi M, Hase Y, Gallart-Palau X, Mitra S, Watanabe A, Low RC, Yamamoto Y, Sepulveda-Falla D, Hainsworth AH, Ihara M, Sze SK, Viitanen M, Behbahani H, Kalaria RN
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol Commun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40478-023-01558-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40478-023-01558-1)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2023 May 8;11(1):76. doi: 10.1186/s40478-023-01558-1.

ER stress induced immunopathology involving complement in CADASIL: implications 
for therapeutics.

Panahi M(#)(1), Hase Y(#)(2), Gallart-Palau X(#)(3), Mitra S(1), Watanabe A(4), 
Low RC(2), Yamamoto Y(5), Sepulveda-Falla D(6), Hainsworth AH(7), Ihara M(5), 
Sze SK(8), Viitanen M(1)(9), Behbahani H(#)(1), Kalaria RN(#)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Center for Alzheimer 
Research, Clinical Geriatrics, Karolinska Institutet, BioClinicum J9:20 
Visionsgatan 4, Solna, 171 64, Sweden.
(2)Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Campus for Ageing and 
Vitality, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE4 5PL, UK.
(3)Biomedical Research Institute of Lleida (IRBLLEIDA) - +Pec Proteomics 
Research Group (+PPRG) - Neuroscience Area, University Hospital Arnau de 
Vilanova (HUAV) - Department of Psychology, University of Lleida (UdL), Lleida, 
Spain.
(4)Equipment Management Division, Center for Core Facility Administration, 
Research Institute, National Center for Geriatrics and Gerontology (NCGG), 
7-430, Morioka-cho, Obu-shi, 474-8511, Aichi, Japan.
(5)Department of Molecular Innovation in Lipidemiology and Department of 
Neurology, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, 6-1 Kishibeshinmachi, 
Suita, 564-8565, Osaka, Japan.
(6)Molecular Neuropathology of Alzheimer's Disease, Institute of Neuropathology, 
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 20246, Hamburg, Germany.
(7)Molecular and Clinical Sciences, St George's University of London, Cranmer 
Terrace, London, SW17 0RE, UK.
(8)Faculty of Applied Health Sciences, Brock University, St. Catharines, ON, L2S 
3A1, Canada.
(9)Department of Geriatrics, University of Turku, Turku City Hospital, 
Kunnallissairaalantie 20, Turku, 20700, Finland.
(10)Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Campus for Ageing and 
Vitality, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE4 5PL, UK. 
raj.kalaria@newcastle.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

Cerebral autosomal-dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and 
leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is caused by NOTCH3 mutations. Typical CADASIL is 
characterised by subcortical ischemic strokes due to severe arteriopathy and 
fibrotic thickening of small arteries. Arteriolar vascular smooth muscle cells 
(VSMCs) are the key target in CADASIL, but the potential mechanisms involved in 
their degeneration are still unclear. Focusing on cerebral microvessels in the 
frontal and anterior temporal lobes and the basal ganglia, we used advanced 
proteomic and immunohistochemical methods to explore the extent of inflammatory 
and immune responses in CADASIL subjects compared to similar age normal and 
other disease controls. There was variable loss of VSMC in medial layers of 
arteries in white matter as well as the cortex, that could not be distinguished 
whether NOTCH3 mutations were in the epidermal growth factor (EGFr) domains 1-6 
or EGFr7-34. Proteomics of isolated cerebral microvessels showed alterations in 
several proteins, many associated with endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress 
including heat shock proteins. Cerebral vessels with sparsely populated VSMCs 
also attracted robust accrual of perivascular microglia/macrophages in order 
CD45+ > CD163+ > CD68+cells, with > 60% of vessel walls exhibiting intercellular 
adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) immunoreactivity. Functional VSMC cultures bearing 
the NOTCH3 Arg133Cys mutation showed increased gene expression of the 
pro-inflammatory cytokine interleukin 6 and ICAM-1 by 16- and 50-fold, 
respectively. We further found evidence for activation of the alternative 
pathway of complement. Immunolocalisation of complement Factor B, C3d and C5-9 
terminal complex but not C1q was apparent in ~ 70% of cerebral vessels. 
Increased complement expression was corroborated in > 70% of cultured VSMCs 
bearing the Arg133Cys mutation independent of N3ECD immunoreactivity. Our 
observations suggest that ER stress and other cellular features associated with 
arteriolar VSMC damage instigate robust localized inflammatory and immune 
responses in CADASIL. Our study has important implications for immunomodulation 
approaches to counter the characteristic arteriopathy of CADASIL.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-023-01558-1
PMCID: PMC10169505
PMID: 37158955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to 
declare.