---
reference_id: "PMID:24568594"
title: Bacterial meningitis in adults in Iceland, 1995-2010.
authors:
- Thornórðardóttir A
- Erlendsdóttir H
- Sigurðardóttir B
- Harðardóttir H
- Reynisson IK
- Gottfreðsson M
- Guðmundsson S
journal: Scand J Infect Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.3109/00365548.2014.880184
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bacterial meningitis in adults in Iceland, 1995-2010.
**Authors:** Thornórðardóttir A, Erlendsdóttir H, Sigurðardóttir B, Harðardóttir H, Reynisson IK, Gottfreðsson M, Guðmundsson S
**Journal:** Scand J Infect Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.3109/00365548.2014.880184](https://doi.org/10.3109/00365548.2014.880184)

## Content

1. Scand J Infect Dis. 2014 May;46(5):354-60. doi: 10.3109/00365548.2014.880184. 
Epub 2014 Feb 25.

Bacterial meningitis in adults in Iceland, 1995-2010.

Thornórðardóttir A(1), Erlendsdóttir H, Sigurðardóttir B, Harðardóttir H, 
Reynisson IK, Gottfreðsson M, Guðmundsson S.

Author information:
(1)From the Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland , Reykjavik , Iceland.

INTRODUCTION: Bacterial meningitis is a serious disease with a mortality rate of 
15-20% in adults. We conducted a population-based study of bacterial meningitis 
in adults (≥ 16 y) in Iceland, 1995-2010.
METHODS: Cases were identified based on positive bacterial cultures from 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and/or the ICD codes for bacterial meningitis. Medical 
charts were reviewed and outcomes were assessed using the national population 
registry. The study period was divided into 2 equal parts, 1995-2002 and 
2003-2010, before and after implementation of routine childhood vaccination 
against serogroup C meningococci, respectively.
RESULTS: In total, 111 episodes occurred in 110 individuals. The most common 
causative organisms were Neisseria meningitidis (41%) and Streptococcus 
pneumoniae (30%). Only 30% of the patients presented with the classical symptom 
triad of fever, neck stiffness, and an altered mental status. The overall 
incidence was 3.2/100,000 inhabitants/y, and dropped significantly between the 
first and second halves of the study (p = 0.03). This drop was due to a reduced 
incidence of N. meningitidis meningitis: 34 and 12 cases in the first and second 
periods, respectively (p = 0.006). The incidence of meningitis caused by S. 
pneumoniae remained unchanged. The case fatality rates were 18% and 13% in the 
first and second halves of the study, respectively (difference not significant).
CONCLUSIONS: The incidence of bacterial meningitis has decreased since the 
implementation of meningococcal C vaccination in 2002. However, the case 
fatality rate has remained unchanged.

DOI: 10.3109/00365548.2014.880184
PMID: 24568594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]