---
reference_id: "PMID:35926321"
title: An expert consensus on practical clinical recommendations and guidance for patients with classic Fabry disease.
authors:
- Germain DP
- Altarescu G
- Barriales-Villa R
- Mignani R
- Pawlaczyk K
- Pieruzzi F
- Terryn W
- Vujkovac B
- Ortiz A
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.07.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An expert consensus on practical clinical recommendations and guidance for patients with classic Fabry disease.
**Authors:** Germain DP, Altarescu G, Barriales-Villa R, Mignani R, Pawlaczyk K, Pieruzzi F, Terryn W, Vujkovac B, Ortiz A
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.07.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.07.010)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2022 Sep-Oct;137(1-2):49-61. doi:
10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.07.010.  Epub 2022 Jul 26.

An expert consensus on practical clinical recommendations and guidance for 
patients with classic Fabry disease.

Germain DP(1), Altarescu G(2), Barriales-Villa R(3), Mignani R(4), Pawlaczyk 
K(5), Pieruzzi F(6), Terryn W(7), Vujkovac B(8), Ortiz A(9).

Author information:
(1)French Referral Center for Fabry disease and MetabERN European Reference 
Network for Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Division of Medical Genetics, 
University of Versailles, Paris-Saclay University, 2, allée de la source de la 
Bièvre, 78180 Montigny, France.
(2)Shaare Zedek Institute of Medical Genetics, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, 
Shmu'el Bait St 12, Jerusalem 9103102, Israel.
(3)Unidad de Cardiopatías Familiares, Hospital Universitario da Coruña, 
(INIBIC/CIBERCV), As Xubias, 84, 15006 A Coruña, Spain.
(4)Department of Nephrology, Infermi Hospital, Viale Luigi Settembrini, 2, 47923 
Rimini, RN, Italy.
(5)Department of Nephrology, Transplantology and Internal Medicine, Poznan 
University of Medical Sciences, Collegium Maius, Fredry 10, 61-701 Poznań, 
Poland.
(6)Nephrology Clinic, School of Medicine and Surgery, University of 
Milano-Bicocca, Piazza dell'Ateneo Nuovo, 1, 20126 Milano, MI, Italy; Nephrology 
and Dialysis Department, ASST-Monza, San-Gerardo Hospital, Via Aliprandi, 23, 
20900 Monza, MB, Italy.
(7)General Internal Medicine and Nephrology, Jan Yperman Hospital, Briekestraat 
12, 8900 Ypres, Belgium.
(8)Fabry Center, Slovenj Gradec General Hospital, Gosposvetska cesta 3, 2380 
Slovenj Gradec, Slovenia.
(9)Jiménez Díaz Foundation University Hospital, Avda. Reyes Católicos, 2, 28040 
Madrid, Spain; Department of Medicine, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Ciudad 
Universitaria de Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: 
aortiz@fjd.es.

Fabry disease is an X-linked inherited lysosomal disorder that causes 
accumulation of glycosphingolipids in body fluids and tissues, leading to 
progressive organ damage and reduced life expectancy. It can affect both males 
and females and can be classified into classic or later-onset phenotypes. In 
classic Fabry disease, α-galactosidase A (α-Gal A) activity is absent or 
severely reduced and disease manifestations have an early onset that can affect 
multiple organs. In contrast, in later-onset Fabry disease, patients have 
residual α-Gal A activity and clinical features are primarily confined to the 
heart. Individualized therapeutic goals in Fabry disease are required due to 
varying phenotypes and patient characteristics, and the wide spectrum of disease 
severity. An international group of expert physicians convened to discuss and 
develop practical clinical recommendations for disease- and organ-specific 
therapeutic goals in Fabry disease, based on expert consensus and evidence 
identified through a structured literature review. Biomarkers reflecting 
involvement of various organs in adult patients with classic Fabry disease are 
discussed and consensus recommendations for disease- and organ-specific 
therapeutic goals are provided. These consensus recommendations should support 
the establishment of individualized approaches to the management of patients 
with classic Fabry disease by considering identification, diagnosis, and 
initiation of disease-specific therapies before significant organ involvement, 
as well as routine monitoring, to reduce morbidity, optimize patient care, and 
improve patient health-related quality of life.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.07.010
PMID: 35926321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]