---
reference_id: "PMID:24352917"
title: Suppression of severe achondroplasia with developmental delay and acanthosis nigricans by the p.Thr651Pro mutation.
authors:
- Manickam K
- Donoghue DJ
- Meyer AN
- Snyder PJ
- Prior TW
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36236
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Suppression of severe achondroplasia with developmental delay and acanthosis nigricans by the p.Thr651Pro mutation.
**Authors:** Manickam K, Donoghue DJ, Meyer AN, Snyder PJ, Prior TW
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.36236](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.36236)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Jan;164A(1):243-50. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36236. Epub
2013  Oct 29.

Suppression of severe achondroplasia with developmental delay and acanthosis 
nigricans by the p.Thr651Pro mutation.

Manickam K(1), Donoghue DJ, Meyer AN, Snyder PJ, Prior TW.

Author information:
(1)Section of Human and Molecular Genetics, Nationwide Children's Hospital, 
Columbus, Ohio.

Severe achondroplasia with developmental delay and acanthosis nigricans (SADDAN) 
is an extremely rare severe skeletal dysplasia characterized by significant 
developmental delay, brain structural abnormalities, hearing loss, and 
acanthosis nigricans. The disorder is the result of a single missense mutation 
at codon 650 (p.Lys650Met) in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 gene 
(FGFR3). We describe a child who initially presented with a mild achondroplasia 
or hypochondroplasia like phenotype. Molecular analysis of the FGFR3 gene showed 
the common SADDAN mutation and a second novel mutation at codon 651 
(p.Thr651Pro). Both mutations were shown to occur on the same allele (cis) and 
de novo. Transient transfection studies with FGFR3 double mutant constructs show 
that the p.Thr651Pro mutation causes a dramatic decrease in constitutive 
receptor kinase activity than that observed by the p.Lys650Met mutation. Our 
data suggest that the molecular effect by the p.Thr651Pro is to elicit a 
conformational change that decreases the FGFR3 tyrosine kinase activity, which 
is constitutively activated by the SADDAN mutation. Due to the inheritance of 
both a gain-of-function and a loss-of-function mutation, we conclude that a 
reduction of constitutive activation caused the milder skeletal phenotype. 
Although the occurrence of double mutations are expected to be rare, the 
presence of other FGFR3 modifiers may be responsible for some of the clinically 
discrepant skeletal dysplasia cases.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36236
PMID: 24352917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]