---
reference_id: "PMID:2183516"
title: "Hepatitis B: transmission by sexual contact and needle sharing."
authors:
- Piot P
- Goilav C
- Kegels E
journal: Vaccine
year: '1990'
doi: 10.1016/0264-410x(90)90215-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis B: transmission by sexual contact and needle sharing.
**Authors:** Piot P, Goilav C, Kegels E
**Journal:** Vaccine (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0264-410x(90)90215-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/0264-410x(90)90215-8)

## Content

1. Vaccine. 1990 Mar;8 Suppl:S37-40; discussion S41-3. doi: 
10.1016/0264-410x(90)90215-8.

Hepatitis B: transmission by sexual contact and needle sharing.

Piot P(1), Goilav C, Kegels E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium.

In the Western world most cases of hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection are 
acquired through sexual intercourse and through needle sharing by intravenous 
drug users (IVDU). The major risk factors for HBV infection in homosexual men 
include the number of sex partners and receptive anal intercourse. In 
heterosexuals, this risk also rises with an increasing number of sex partners. 
IVDU consistently show the highest HBV infection rates in Europe and North 
America, presently accounting for 25 to 50% of all hepatitis B cases. Infection 
with the human immunodeficiency virus affects the course of HBV infection as 
well as the immunological response to hepatitis B vaccines. Thus, in the 
industrialized world, interventions against HBV infection should primarily be 
targeted to homosexual men, heterosexuals with multiple partners, and IVDU.

DOI: 10.1016/0264-410x(90)90215-8
PMID: 2183516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]