---
reference_id: "PMID:19218601"
title: Analysis of mutations of the PITX2 transcription factor found in patients with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.
authors:
- Footz T
- Idrees F
- Acharya M
- Kozlowski K
- Walter MA
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1167/iovs.08-3251
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of mutations of the PITX2 transcription factor found in patients with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.
**Authors:** Footz T, Idrees F, Acharya M, Kozlowski K, Walter MA
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1167/iovs.08-3251](https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.08-3251)

## Content

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2009 Jun;50(6):2599-606. doi: 10.1167/iovs.08-3251.
 Epub 2009 Feb 14.

Analysis of mutations of the PITX2 transcription factor found in patients with 
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.

Footz T(1), Idrees F, Acharya M, Kozlowski K, Walter MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, 
Canada.

PURPOSE: To assess the effects of previously uncharacterized PITX2 missense 
mutations found in patients with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome and to determine the 
functional roles of the C-terminal region of PITX2.
METHODS: Recombinant PITX2 proteins were analyzed with the use of cellular 
immunofluorescence, electrophoretic mobility shift, reporter transactivation, 
and protein half-life assays in human trabecular meshwork cells.
RESULTS: Two homeobox mutations, R43W and R90C, resulted in severely reduced 
DNA-binding and transcriptional activation despite normal nuclear localization. 
L105V, located C-terminal to the homeodomain, resulted in normal localization, 
reporter gene transactivation, and protein half-life, but with an altered 
mobility shift pattern of protein-DNA complexes. N108T, also located C-terminal 
to the homeodomain, resulted in an altered mobility shift pattern and with 
slightly increased reporter transactivation and shortened protein half-life. The 
PITX2 C-terminal region contains at least three domains, each with distinct 
modulating effects on reporter transactivation.
CONCLUSIONS: PITX2 homeobox mutations predictably resulted in decreased function 
of the protein. However, the two C-terminal mutations exhibited only subtle 
defects on PITX2 transactivation and protein-DNA binding, suggesting that ocular 
development is sensitive to even slight alterations of PITX2 function. The 
C-terminal mutations L105V and N108T lie in a domain that inhibits PITX2 
transcriptional activation. These two mutations produce electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay patterns representing altered protein-DNA interactions that may be 
important for accurate target gene selection. Additionally, N108T resulted in a 
less stable PITX2 mutant protein with elevated activity that may result in 
stochastic dysregulation during critical stages of development. Together, the 
results clearly indicate that stringent control of PITX2 is required for normal 
ocular development and function.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.08-3251
PMID: 19218601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]