---
reference_id: "PMID:30762202"
title: Chest Tuberculosis in Children.
authors:
- Naranje P
- Bhalla AS
- Sherwani P
journal: Indian J Pediatr
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s12098-018-02847-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chest Tuberculosis in Children.
**Authors:** Naranje P, Bhalla AS, Sherwani P
**Journal:** Indian J Pediatr (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12098-018-02847-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12098-018-02847-7)

## Content

1. Indian J Pediatr. 2019 May;86(5):448-458. doi: 10.1007/s12098-018-02847-7.
Epub  2019 Feb 14.

Chest Tuberculosis in Children.

Naranje P(1), Bhalla AS(2), Sherwani P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiodiagnosis, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi, 110029, India.
(2)Department of Radiodiagnosis, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi, 110029, India. ashubhalla1@yahoo.com.

Chest is the commonest site of involvement by tuberculosis (TB) in children; 
lungs being the most frequently affected region, followed by nodes, pleura and 
chest wall. It is difficult to diagnose TB in children due to lack of overt 
symptoms and difficulty in obtaining samples for microbiological confirmation. 
Hence various imaging modalities play an important role in diagnostic algorithm 
as well as in follow-up after treatment. Standardization of chest radiograph 
reporting in context of clinically suspected TB is the need of the hour so as to 
suggest a proper diagnosis and avoid over-diagnosis. This article aims to 
discuss the imaging features of chest tuberculosis according to the site of 
involvement on various imaging modalities in the pediatric population.

DOI: 10.1007/s12098-018-02847-7
PMID: 30762202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]