---
reference_id: "PMID:10835631"
title: Mutations in RAB27A cause Griscelli syndrome associated with haemophagocytic syndrome.
authors:
- Ménasché G
- Pastural E
- Feldmann J
- Certain S
- Ersoy F
- Dupuis S
- Wulffraat N
- Bianchi D
- Fischer A
- Le Deist F
- de Saint Basile G
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1038/76024
keywords:
- "B-Lymphocytes/immunology, metabolism"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 15/genetics"
- Cytoplasmic Granules/metabolism
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- Fungal Proteins/genetics
- Genetic Linkage/genetics
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Introns/genetics
- Lymphocyte Activation/immunology
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Myosin Type I
- Myosins/genetics
- "Pigmentation Disorders/genetics, immunology, pathology"
- Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins
- Syndrome
- "T-Lymphocytes, Cytotoxic/immunology, metabolism"
- "rab GTP-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- rab27 GTP-Binding Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in RAB27A cause Griscelli syndrome associated with haemophagocytic syndrome.
**Authors:** Ménasché G, Pastural E, Feldmann J, Certain S, Ersoy F, Dupuis S, Wulffraat N, Bianchi D, Fischer A, Le Deist F, de Saint Basile G
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/76024](https://doi.org/10.1038/76024)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2000 Jun;25(2):173-6. doi: 10.1038/76024.

Mutations in RAB27A cause Griscelli syndrome associated with haemophagocytic 
syndrome.

Ménasché G(1), Pastural E, Feldmann J, Certain S, Ersoy F, Dupuis S, Wulffraat 
N, Bianchi D, Fischer A, Le Deist F, de Saint Basile G.

Author information:
(1)[1] Unité de Recherches sur le Dévelopment Normal et Pathologique du Système 
Immunitaire INSERM U429, Paris, France.

Griscelli syndrome (GS, MIM 214450), a rare, autosomal recessive disorder, 
results in pigmentary dilution of the skin and the hair, the presence of large 
clumps of pigment in hair shafts and an accumulation of melanosomes in 
melanocytes. Most patients also develop an uncontrolled T-lymphocyte and 
macrophage activation syndrome (known as haemophagocytic syndrome, HS), leading 
to death in the absence of bone-marrow transplantation. In contrast, early in 
life some GS patients show a severe neurological impairment without apparent 
immune abnormalities. We previously mapped the GS locus to chromosome 15q21 and 
found a mutation in a gene (MYO5A) encoding a molecular motor in two patients. 
Further linkage analysis suggested a second gene associated with GS was in the 
same chromosomal region. Homozygosity mapping in additional families narrowed 
the candidate region to a 3.1-cM interval between D15S1003 and D15S962. We 
detected mutations in RAB27A, which lies within this interval, in 16 patients 
with GS. Unlike MYO5A, the GTP-binding protein RAB27A appears to be involved in 
the control of the immune system, as all patients with RAB27A mutations, but 
none with the MYO5A mutation, developed HS. In addition, RAB27A-deficient T 
cells exhibited reduced cytotoxicity and cytolytic granule exocytosis, whereas 
MYO5A-defective T cells did not. RAB27A appears to be a key effector of 
cytotoxic granule exocytosis, a pathway essential for immune homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1038/76024
PMID: 10835631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]