---
reference_id: "PMID:15509533"
title: PITX2 gain-of-function in Rieger syndrome eye model.
authors:
- Holmberg J
- Liu CY
- Hjalt TA
journal: Am J Pathol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)63420-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PITX2 gain-of-function in Rieger syndrome eye model.
**Authors:** Holmberg J, Liu CY, Hjalt TA
**Journal:** Am J Pathol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0002-9440(10)63420-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0002-9440(10)63420-7)

## Content

1. Am J Pathol. 2004 Nov;165(5):1633-41. doi: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)63420-7.

PITX2 gain-of-function in Rieger syndrome eye model.

Holmberg J(1), Liu CY, Hjalt TA.

Author information:
(1)Lund University, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Section for Cell 
and Developmental Biology, BMC B12, Tornavägen 10, SE-22184 Lund, Sweden.

The human autosomal-dominant disorder Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome presents with 
defects in development of the eyes, teeth, and umbilicus. The eye manifests with 
iris ruptures, irido-corneal adhesions, cloudy corneas, and glaucoma. 
Transcription factors such as PITX2 and FOXC1 have been found to carry point 
mutations, causing the disorder. However, for approximately 40% of the cases, 
the pathogenesis is unknown. It has been reported that some mutations in PITX2 
increase transactivation, whereas most mutations cause defects in DNA binding or 
transactivation. It is not known whether up-regulation of PITX2 activity can 
cause the disorder as well. Here we test this hypothesis directly by 
overexpressing PITX2A as a transgene in mouse corneal mesenchyme and iris, using 
keratocan-flanking sequences. The mice presented with corneal opacification, 
corneal hypertrophy, irido-corneal adhesions, and severely degenerated retina, 
resembling glaucoma. The corneal hypertrophy also resembles the corneal 
hypertrophy of Pitx2-/- mice. Control transgenic mice carrying point mutations 
T68P or K88E in PITX2A were normal. These findings indicate a novel pathogenetic 
mechanism in which excess corneal and iridal PITX2A cause glaucoma and anterior 
defects that closely resemble Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.

DOI: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)63420-7
PMCID: PMC1618668
PMID: 15509533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]