---
reference_id: "PMID:33016189"
title: Recommendations for Therapy following Nerve Transfer for Children with Acute Flaccid Myelitis.
authors:
- Werner JM
- Berggren J
- Kim G
- Loffredo K
- Pascual M
- Tiongson E
- Seruya M
journal: Phys Occup Ther Pediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/01942638.2020.1822981
keywords:
- "Central Nervous System Viral Diseases/rehabilitation, surgery"
- Child
- Humans
- "Myelitis/rehabilitation, surgery"
- Nerve Transfer
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/rehabilitation, surgery"
- Occupational Therapy/methods
- Physical Therapy Modalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recommendations for Therapy following Nerve Transfer for Children with Acute Flaccid Myelitis.
**Authors:** Werner JM, Berggren J, Kim G, Loffredo K, Pascual M, Tiongson E, Seruya M
**Journal:** Phys Occup Ther Pediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/01942638.2020.1822981](https://doi.org/10.1080/01942638.2020.1822981)

## Content

1. Phys Occup Ther Pediatr. 2021;41(2):209-226. doi:
10.1080/01942638.2020.1822981.  Epub 2020 Oct 4.

Recommendations for Therapy following Nerve Transfer for Children with Acute
Flaccid Myelitis.

Werner JM(1)(2), Berggren J(2), Kim G(2), Loffredo K(2), Pascual M(2), Tiongson
E(3)(4), Seruya M(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Nursing and Interprofessional Research, Children's Hospital Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Division of Pediatric Rehabilitation Medicine, Children's Hospital Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Division of Neurology, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Keck School of Medicine of USC, Los Angeles, CA,
USA.
(5)Division of Plastic and Maxillofacial Surgery, Children's Hospital Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(6)Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Keck School of Medicine of USC, Los
Angeles, CA, USA.

AIM: To provide recommendations for pre- and post-operative occupational and
physical therapy for children with acute flaccid myelitis (AFM).
METHODS: Writing panel members consisted of an interdisciplinary team of seven
healthcare professionals specializing in the care of children with AFM. The
panel reviewed background material on AFM, nerve transfer, and rehabilitation
principles applied to pediatrics. Recommendations were prioritized if evidence
was available. Where there was no known evidence to support a recommendation,
this was noted.
RECOMMENDATIONS: Communication and coordination among interprofessional team
members are vital to a comprehensive family-centered rehabilitation program.
Surgical planning should include team preparation accounting for frequency,
duration, and timing of treatment, as well as individual characteristics and
developmental status of the child. Recommendations for pre-operative and six
phases of post-operative therapy address assessment, strengthening, range of
motion, orthoses, performance of functional activity, and support of the family.
CONCLUSION: Rehabilitation following nerve transfer in children with AFM
requires interdisciplinary collaboration and a multisystem approach to
assessment and treatment. As new evidence becomes available, recommendations may
be revised or replaced accordingly.

DOI: 10.1080/01942638.2020.1822981
PMID: 33016189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
