---
reference_id: "PMID:22667193"
title: "[Bacterial meningitis]."
authors:
- Brouwer MC
- van de Beek D
journal: Ned Tijdschr Tandheelkd
year: '2012'
doi: 10.5177/ntvt.2012.05.11231
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Bacterial meningitis].
**Authors:** Brouwer MC, van de Beek D
**Journal:** Ned Tijdschr Tandheelkd (2012)
**DOI:** [10.5177/ntvt.2012.05.11231](https://doi.org/10.5177/ntvt.2012.05.11231)

## Content

1. Ned Tijdschr Tandheelkd. 2012 May;119(5):238-42. doi: 
10.5177/ntvt.2012.05.11231.

[Bacterial meningitis].

[Article in Dutch]

Brouwer MC(1), van de Beek D.

Author information:
(1)Uit de afdeling Neurologie, Center of Infection and Immunity Amsterdam 
(CINIMA) van het Academisch Medisch Centrum in Amsterdam. m.c.brouwer@amc.uva.nl

Bacterial meningitis is a severe disease which affects 35.000 Europeans each 
year and has a mortality rate of about 20%. During the past 25 years the 
epidemiology of bacterial meningitis has changed significantly due to the 
implementation of vaccination against Haemophilus influenzae, Neisseria 
meningtidis group C and Streptococcus pneumoniae. Due to these vaccines, 
meningitis is now predominantly a disease occurring in adults, caused especially 
by Streptococcus pneumoniae, while it was formerly a child disease which was 
largely caused by Haemophilus influenzae. Bacterial meningitis is often 
difficult to recognize since the classical presentation with neck stiffness, 
reduced awareness and fever occurs in less than half of the patients. The only 
way to diagnose or exclude bacterial meningitis is by performing low-threshold 
cerebrospinal fluid examination with a suspicion of bacterial meningitis. The 
treatment consists of the prescription of antibiotics and dexamethasone.

DOI: 10.5177/ntvt.2012.05.11231
PMID: 22667193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]