---
reference_id: "PMID:7845407"
title: "Anorectal manometry in the assessment of anorectal function in Parkinson's disease: a comparison with chronic idiopathic constipation."
authors:
- Ashraf W
- Pfeiffer RF
- Quigley EM
journal: Mov Disord
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1002/mds.870090612
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anorectal manometry in the assessment of anorectal function in Parkinson's disease: a comparison with chronic idiopathic constipation.
**Authors:** Ashraf W, Pfeiffer RF, Quigley EM
**Journal:** Mov Disord (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.870090612](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.870090612)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 1994 Nov;9(6):655-63. doi: 10.1002/mds.870090612.

Anorectal manometry in the assessment of anorectal function in Parkinson's 
disease: a comparison with chronic idiopathic constipation.

Ashraf W(1), Pfeiffer RF, Quigley EM.

Author information:
(1)Section of Digestive Diseases, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha 
68198-2000.

We investigated the role of anorectal manometry in evaluating constipation and 
anorectal function in 15 patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) and compared 
results with those of 9 patients with idiopathic constipation (IC) and 8 control 
(C) subjects. Anal sphincter pressures on voluntary squeeze were lower in the PD 
patients. Sustained squeeze pressures (mm Hg C versus IC versus PD: 46.8 +/- 5.2 
versus 31.2 +/- 3.6 versus 26.6 +/- 3.9; p < 0.05 PD versus C), squeeze duration 
(seconds: 53.6 +/- 2.5 versus 48.5 +/- 4.1 versus 33.6 +/- 9; p < 0.05 PD versus 
C) and squeeze index (area under the squeeze curve: 44.0 +/- 2.9 versus 34.5 +/- 
3.3 versus 21.4 +/- 2.9; p < 0.001 PD versus C) were significantly lower in the 
PD group in comparison to the control group. In contrast, none of the parameters 
of anorectal manometry differed between controls and patients with idiopathic 
constipation. Some Parkinson's disease patients demonstrated an abnormal, 
hypercontractile response on testing of the rectoanal inhibitory reflex. Anal 
sphincter length, basal sphincter pressures, maximal squeeze pressures, extent 
of relaxation on rectoanal inhibitory reflex and threshold volume for rectal 
sensation were similar in the three groups. We conclude that an impaired squeeze 
response is a specific feature of anorectal function in Parkinson's disease. 
This may indicate direct involvement of the pelvic floor musculature by the 
parkinsonian disease process.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.870090612
PMID: 7845407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]