---
reference_id: "PMID:28869677"
title: Fibroblasts derived from patients with opsismodysplasia display SHIP2-specific cell migration and adhesion defects.
authors:
- Ghosh S
- Huber C
- Siour Q
- Sousa SB
- Wright M
- Cormier-Daire V
- Erneux C
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/humu.23321
keywords:
- Cell Adhesion/genetics
- Cell Movement/genetics
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Female
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- "Genes, Reporter"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnostic imaging, enzymology, genetics"
- Phenotype
- "Phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-Trisphosphate 5-Phosphatases/genetics, metabolism"
- Pregnancy
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fibroblasts derived from patients with opsismodysplasia display SHIP2-specific cell migration and adhesion defects.
**Authors:** Ghosh S, Huber C, Siour Q, Sousa SB, Wright M, Cormier-Daire V, Erneux C
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.23321](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.23321)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2017 Dec;38(12):1731-1739. doi: 10.1002/humu.23321. Epub 2017 Sep
21.

Fibroblasts derived from patients with opsismodysplasia display SHIP2-specific 
cell migration and adhesion defects.

Ghosh S(1), Huber C(2)(3), Siour Q(2)(3), Sousa SB(4), Wright M(5), 
Cormier-Daire V(2)(3), Erneux C(1).

Author information:
(1)IRIBHM, Campus Erasme, ULB Bâtiment C, Bruxelles, Belgium.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Reference Center for Skeletal Dysplasia, 
INSERM UMR 1163, Laboratory of Molecular and Physiopathological Bases of 
Osteochondrodysplasia, Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité University, AP-HP, 
Institut Imagine, Paris, France.
(3)Hôpital Universitaire Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.
(4)Medical Genetics Unit, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalare Universitário 
de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
(5)Northern Genetics Service, Newcastle-upon-Tyne Hospitals, Newcastle- 
upon-Tyne, UK.

The SH2 domain containing inositol phosphatase 2 (SHIP2) dephosphorylates 
PI(3,4,5)P3 to generate PI(3,4)P2, a lipid involved in the control of cell 
migration and adhesion. The INPPL1 gene that encodes SHIP2 has been found to be 
mutated in several cases of opsismodysplasia (OPS), a rare autosomal recessive 
chondrodysplasia characterized by growth plate defects and delayed bone 
maturation. Reported mutations often result in premature stop codons or missense 
mutations in SHIP2 catalytic domain. SHIP2 biochemical properties are known from 
studies in cancer cells; its role in endochondral ossification is unknown. Here, 
we report two novel mutations in the INPPL1 gene and show that cell migration is 
very much decreased in fibroblasts derived from three OPS patients as compared 
with control individuals. In contrast, cell adhesion on fibronectin is increased 
in OPS fibroblasts. An inhibitory effect on migration was also observed when 
normal fibroblasts were incubated in the presence of a SHIP2 competitive 
inhibitor. We conclude that both migration and adhesion are very much disrupted 
in OPS-derived fibroblasts. It is suggested that signaling events linked to 
migration and particularly to adhesion, which are lost in OPS patients, would 
prevent normal endochondral ossification.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.23321
PMID: 28869677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]