---
reference_id: "PMID:36355098"
title: ABHD5-A Regulator of Lipid Metabolism Essential for Diverse Cellular Functions.
authors:
- Schratter M
- Lass A
- Radner FPW
journal: Metabolites
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/metabo12111015
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ABHD5-A Regulator of Lipid Metabolism Essential for Diverse Cellular Functions.
**Authors:** Schratter M, Lass A, Radner FPW
**Journal:** Metabolites (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/metabo12111015](https://doi.org/10.3390/metabo12111015)

## Content

1. Metabolites. 2022 Oct 24;12(11):1015. doi: 10.3390/metabo12111015.

ABHD5-A Regulator of Lipid Metabolism Essential for Diverse Cellular Functions.

Schratter M(1), Lass A(1)(2)(3), Radner FPW(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Biosciences, NAWI Graz, University of Graz, 8010 Graz, 
Austria.
(2)BioTechMed-Graz, 8010 Graz, Austria.
(3)Field of Excellence BioHealth, 8010 Graz, Austria.

The α/β-Hydrolase domain-containing protein 5 (ABHD5; also known as comparative 
gene identification-58, or CGI-58) is the causative gene of the Chanarin-Dorfman 
syndrome (CDS), a disorder mainly characterized by systemic triacylglycerol 
accumulation and a severe defect in skin barrier function. The clinical 
phenotype of CDS patients and the characterization of global and tissue-specific 
ABHD5-deficient mouse strains have demonstrated that ABHD5 is a crucial 
regulator of lipid and energy homeostasis in various tissues. Although ABHD5 
lacks intrinsic hydrolase activity, it functions as a co-activating enzyme of 
the patatin-like phospholipase domain-containing (PNPLA) protein family that is 
involved in triacylglycerol and glycerophospholipid, as well as sphingolipid and 
retinyl ester metabolism. Moreover, ABHD5 interacts with perilipins (PLINs) and 
fatty acid-binding proteins (FABPs), which are important regulators of lipid 
homeostasis in adipose and non-adipose tissues. This review focuses on the 
multifaceted role of ABHD5 in modulating the function of key enzymes in lipid 
metabolism.

DOI: 10.3390/metabo12111015
PMCID: PMC9694394
PMID: 36355098

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.