---
reference_id: "PMID:33753586"
title: An outbreak investigation of acute Diarrheal Disease, Nagpur District, Maharashtra, India.
authors:
- Sheoran P
- Rammayyan A
- Shukla HK
- Dikid T
- Yadav R
- Sodha SV
journal: Indian J Public Health
year: '2021'
doi: 10.4103/ijph.IJPH_962_20
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An outbreak investigation of acute Diarrheal Disease, Nagpur District, Maharashtra, India.
**Authors:** Sheoran P, Rammayyan A, Shukla HK, Dikid T, Yadav R, Sodha SV
**Journal:** Indian J Public Health (2021)
**DOI:** [10.4103/ijph.IJPH_962_20](https://doi.org/10.4103/ijph.IJPH_962_20)

## Content

1. Indian J Public Health. 2021 Jan;65(Supplement):S14-S17. doi: 
10.4103/ijph.IJPH_962_20.

An outbreak investigation of acute Diarrheal Disease, Nagpur District, 
Maharashtra, India.

Sheoran P(1), Rammayyan A(1), Shukla HK(1), Dikid T(2), Yadav R(3), Sodha SV(4).

Author information:
(1)India Epidemic Intelligence Services (EIS) Officer, Delhi, India.
(2)Joint Director, Division of Epidemiology, National Centre for Disease 
Control, Delhi, India.
(3)Public Health Specialist, US Center for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Delhi, India.
(4)Resident Advisor, US Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Delhi, India.

BACKGROUND: Acute diarrheal disease (ADD) accounts for 12 million cases and 1216 
deaths annually in India. On July 13, 2016, an ADD outbreak was reported from 
Sawargaon village from Nagpur district, Maharashtra.
OBJECTIVE: The outbreak was investigated to describe the epidemiology and 
suggest control and preventive measures.
METHODS: A case was defined as a person experiencing at least one loose stool in 
Sawargaon village between July 9, 2016, and July 31, 2016. We searched for cases 
by enhanced passive surveillance. We collected stool samples for bacterial 
culture and tested water from multiple water sources for fecal coliforms. We 
also reviewed sanitary practices and rainfall data.
RESULTS: A total of 889 cases were identified, with 51% female, 280 
hospitalizations (31%), and two deaths. The median age was 27 years (range 6 
months to 90 years). Cases started on July 9, a week after heavy rains. District 
authorities started chlorination of water sources on July 13 and cases declined 
soon after. Two of nine stool samples tested positive for Vibrio cholera O1 
serogroup. Of the 18 water samples collected, 16 (88%) samples from multiple 
sources, including wells, hand pumps, and taps, were positive for fecal 
coliforms. Of 1,885 households in the village, 450 (24%) households had no 
toilets and open defecation was commonly observed in the nearby river bed.
CONCLUSIONS: This ADD outbreak was likely associated with drinking contaminated 
groundwater, which probably occurred after heavy rainfall in an area of open 
defecation. We recommended providing chlorinated drinking water, promoting safe 
sanitation practices, including building more public and private toilets, and 
enhancing diagnostic laboratory capacity.

DOI: 10.4103/ijph.IJPH_962_20
PMID: 33753586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None