---
reference_id: "PMID:21325058"
title: Cortisone-reductase deficiency associated with heterozygous mutations in 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1.
authors:
- Lawson AJ
- Walker EA
- Lavery GG
- Bujalska IJ
- Hughes B
- Arlt W
- Stewart PM
- Ride JP
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1014934108
keywords:
- "11-beta-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase Type 1/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "11-beta-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenases/deficiency, genetics"
- "46, XX Disorders of Sex Development/genetics"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Catalytic Domain
- Cell Line
- Dimerization
- Female
- Heterozygote
- "Hirsutism/congenital, genetics"
- Humans
- Hydrocortisone/metabolism
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- "Steroid Metabolism, Inborn Errors"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cortisone-reductase deficiency associated with heterozygous mutations in 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1.
**Authors:** Lawson AJ, Walker EA, Lavery GG, Bujalska IJ, Hughes B, Arlt W, Stewart PM, Ride JP
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1014934108](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1014934108)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Mar 8;108(10):4111-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1014934108. Epub 2011 Feb 15.

Cortisone-reductase deficiency associated with heterozygous mutations in
11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1.

Lawson AJ(1), Walker EA, Lavery GG, Bujalska IJ, Hughes B, Arlt W, Stewart PM,
Ride JP.

Author information:
(1)School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, United
Kingdom.

In peripheral target tissues, levels of active glucocorticoid hormones are
controlled by 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 (11β-HSD1), a dimeric
enzyme that catalyzes the reduction of cortisone to cortisol within the
endoplasmic reticulum. Loss of this activity results in a disorder termed
cortisone reductase deficiency (CRD), typified by increased cortisol clearance
and androgen excess. To date, only mutations in H6PD, which encodes an enzyme
supplying cofactor for the reaction, have been identified as the cause of
disease. Here we examined the HSD11B1 gene in two cases presenting with
biochemical features indicative of a milder form of CRD in whom the H6PD gene
was normal. Novel heterozygous mutations (R137C or K187N) were found in the
coding sequence of HSD11B1. The R137C mutation disrupts salt bridges at the
subunit interface of the 11β-HSD1 dimer, whereas K187N affects a key active site
residue. On expression of the mutants in bacterial and mammalian cells, activity
was either abolished (K187N) or greatly reduced (R137C). Expression of either
mutant in a bacterial system greatly reduced the yield of soluble protein,
suggesting that both mutations interfere with subunit folding or dimer assembly.
Simultaneous expression of mutant and WT 11β-HSD1 in bacterial or mammalian
cells, to simulate the heterozygous condition, indicated a marked suppressive
effect of the mutants on both the yield and activity of 11β-HSD1 dimers. Thus,
these heterozygous mutations in the HSD11B1 gene have a dominant negative effect
on the formation of functional dimers and explain the genetic cause of CRD in
these patients.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1014934108
PMCID: PMC3054023
PMID: 21325058 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
