---
reference_id: "PMID:19864620"
title: Calcium influx is sufficient to induce muscular dystrophy through a TRPC-dependent mechanism.
authors:
- Millay DP
- Goonasekera SA
- Sargent MA
- Maillet M
- Aronow BJ
- Molkentin JD
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0906591106
keywords:
- Analysis of Variance
- Animals
- "Blotting, Western"
- Calcium/metabolism
- Immunohistochemistry
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Microarray Analysis
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism"
- "Muscular Dystrophies/etiology, metabolism"
- "TRPC Cation Channels/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Transgenes/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Calcium influx is sufficient to induce muscular dystrophy through a TRPC-dependent mechanism.
**Authors:** Millay DP, Goonasekera SA, Sargent MA, Maillet M, Aronow BJ, Molkentin JD
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0906591106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0906591106)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Nov 10;106(45):19023-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0906591106. Epub 2009 Oct 28.

Calcium influx is sufficient to induce muscular dystrophy through a 
TRPC-dependent mechanism.

Millay DP(1), Goonasekera SA, Sargent MA, Maillet M, Aronow BJ, Molkentin JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Muscular dystrophy is a general term encompassing muscle disorders that cause 
weakness and wasting, typically leading to premature death. Membrane 
instability, as a result of a genetic disruption within the 
dystrophin-glycoprotein complex (DGC), is thought to induce myofiber 
degeneration, although the downstream mechanism whereby membrane fragility leads 
to disease remains controversial. One potential mechanism that has yet to be 
definitively proven in vivo is that unregulated calcium influx initiates disease 
in dystrophic myofibers. Here we demonstrate that calcium itself is sufficient 
to cause a dystrophic phenotype in skeletal muscle independent of membrane 
fragility. For example, overexpression of transient receptor potential canonical 
3 (TRPC3) and the associated increase in calcium influx resulted in a phenotype 
of muscular dystrophy nearly identical to that observed in DGC-lacking 
dystrophic disease models, including a highly similar molecular signature of 
gene expression changes. Furthermore, transgene-mediated inhibition of TRPC 
channels in mice dramatically reduced calcium influx and dystrophic disease 
manifestations associated with the mdx mutation (dystrophin gene) and deletion 
of the delta-sarcoglycan (Scgd) gene. These results demonstrate that calcium 
itself is sufficient to induce muscular dystrophy in vivo, and that TRPC 
channels are key disease initiators downstream of the unstable membrane that 
characterizes many types of muscular dystrophy.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0906591106
PMCID: PMC2776441
PMID: 19864620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.