---
reference_id: "PMID:29857264"
title: "Muscle cramps: A comparison of the two-leading hypothesis."
authors:
- Giuriato G
- Pedrinolla A
- Schena F
- Venturelli M
journal: J Electromyogr Kinesiol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jelekin.2018.05.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Muscle cramps: A comparison of the two-leading hypothesis.
**Authors:** Giuriato G, Pedrinolla A, Schena F, Venturelli M
**Journal:** J Electromyogr Kinesiol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jelekin.2018.05.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jelekin.2018.05.006)

## Content

1. J Electromyogr Kinesiol. 2018 Aug;41:89-95. doi:
10.1016/j.jelekin.2018.05.006.  Epub 2018 May 26.

Muscle cramps: A comparison of the two-leading hypothesis.

Giuriato G(1), Pedrinolla A(1), Schena F(1), Venturelli M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Biomedicine and Movement Sciences, University of 
Verona, Italy.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, Biomedicine and Movement Sciences, University of 
Verona, Italy; Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah, USA. 
Electronic address: massimo.venturelli@univr.it.

Exercise-Associated Muscle Cramps (EAMC) are a common painful condition of 
muscle spasms. Despite scientists tried to understand the physiological 
mechanism that underlies these common phenomena, the etiology is still unclear. 
From 1900 to nowadays, the scientific world retracted several times the original 
hypothesis of heat cramps. However, recent literature seems to focus on two 
potential mechanisms: the dehydration or electrolyte depletion mechanism, and 
the neuromuscular mechanism. The aim of this review is to examine the recent 
literature, in terms of physiological mechanisms of EAMC. A comprehensive search 
was conducted on PubMed and Google Scholar. The following terminology was 
applied: muscle cramps, neuromuscular hypothesis (or thesis), dehydration 
hypothesis, Exercise-Associated muscle cramps, nocturnal cramps, muscle spasm, 
muscle fatigue. From the initial literature of 424 manuscripts, sixty-nine 
manuscripts were included, analyzed, compared and summarized. Literature 
analysis indicates that neuromuscular hypothesis may prevails over the initial 
hypothesis of the dehydration as the trigger event of muscle cramps. New 
evidence suggests that the action potentials during a muscle cramp are generated 
in the motoneuron soma, likely accompanied by an imbalance between the rising 
excitatory drive from the muscle spindles (Ia) and the decreasing inhibitory 
drive from the Golgi tendon organs. In conclusion, from the latest 
investigations there seem to be a spinal involvement rather than a peripheral 
excitation of the motoneurons.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jelekin.2018.05.006
PMID: 29857264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]