---
reference_id: "PMID:37962957"
title: Truncated titin is structurally integrated into the human dilated cardiomyopathic sarcomere.
authors:
- Kellermayer D
- Tordai H
- Kiss B
- Török G
- Péter DM
- Sayour AA
- Pólos M
- Hartyánszky I
- Szilveszter B
- Labeit S
- Gángó A
- Bedics G
- Bödör C
- Radovits T
- Merkely B
- Kellermayer MS
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1172/JCI169753
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Truncated titin is structurally integrated into the human dilated cardiomyopathic sarcomere.
**Authors:** Kellermayer D, Tordai H, Kiss B, Török G, Péter DM, Sayour AA, Pólos M, Hartyánszky I, Szilveszter B, Labeit S, Gángó A, Bedics G, Bödör C, Radovits T, Merkely B, Kellermayer MS
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI169753](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI169753)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2024 Jan 16;134(2):e169753. doi: 10.1172/JCI169753.

Truncated titin is structurally integrated into the human dilated 
cardiomyopathic sarcomere.

Kellermayer D(1)(2)(3), Tordai H(2), Kiss B(2), Török G(2), Péter DM(2), Sayour 
AA(1), Pólos M(1), Hartyánszky I(1), Szilveszter B(1), Labeit S(4), Gángó A(3), 
Bedics G(3), Bödör C(3), Radovits T(1), Merkely B(1), Kellermayer MS(2).

Author information:
(1)Heart and Vascular Center.
(2)Department of Biophysics and Radiation Biology, and.
(3)1st Department of Pathology and Experimental Cancer Research, Semmelweis 
University, Budapest, Hungary.
(4)DZHK Partnersite Mannheim-Heidelberg, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of 
Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany.

Comment in
    TTN truncation variants produce sarcomere-integrating proteins of uncertain 
functional significance.

Heterozygous (HET) truncating variant mutations in the TTN gene (TTNtvs), 
encoding the giant titin protein, are the most common genetic cause of dilated 
cardiomyopathy (DCM). However, the molecular mechanisms by which TTNtv mutations 
induce DCM are controversial. Here, we studied 127 clinically identified DCM 
human cardiac samples with next-generation sequencing (NGS), high-resolution gel 
electrophoresis, Western blot analysis, and super-resolution microscopy in order 
to dissect the structural and functional consequences of TTNtv mutations. The 
occurrence of TTNtv was found to be 15% in the DCM cohort. Truncated titin 
proteins matching, by molecular weight, the gene sequence predictions were 
detected in the majority of the TTNtv+ samples. Full-length titin was reduced in 
TTNtv+ compared with TTNtv- samples. Proteomics analysis of washed myofibrils 
and stimulated emission depletion (STED) super-resolution microscopy of 
myocardial sarcomeres labeled with sequence-specific anti-titin antibodies 
revealed that truncated titin was structurally integrated into the sarcomere. 
Sarcomere length-dependent anti-titin epitope position, shape, and intensity 
analyses pointed at possible structural defects in the I/A junction and the 
M-band of TTNtv+ sarcomeres, which probably contribute, possibly via faulty 
mechanosensor function, to the development of manifest DCM.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI169753
PMCID: PMC10763722
PMID: 37962957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]