---
reference_id: "PMID:15565658"
title: Prenatal ultrasound diagnosis of a case of Pfeiffer syndrome without cloverleaf skull and review of the literature.
authors:
- Nazzaro A
- Della Monica M
- Lonardo F
- Di Blasi A
- Baffico M
- Baldi M
- Nazzaro G
- De Placido G
- Scarano G
journal: Prenat Diagn
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1002/pd.844
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prenatal ultrasound diagnosis of a case of Pfeiffer syndrome without cloverleaf skull and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Nazzaro A, Della Monica M, Lonardo F, Di Blasi A, Baffico M, Baldi M, Nazzaro G, De Placido G, Scarano G
**Journal:** Prenat Diagn (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pd.844](https://doi.org/10.1002/pd.844)

## Content

1. Prenat Diagn. 2004 Nov;24(11):918-22. doi: 10.1002/pd.844.

Prenatal ultrasound diagnosis of a case of Pfeiffer syndrome without cloverleaf 
skull and review of the literature.

Nazzaro A(1), Della Monica M, Lonardo F, Di Blasi A, Baffico M, Baldi M, Nazzaro 
G, De Placido G, Scarano G.

Author information:
(1)Prenatal Diagnosis Unit, Gaetano Rummo Hospital, Benevento, Italy.

Pfeiffer syndrome is characterized by bilateral coronal craniosynostosis, 
midface hypoplasia, beaked nasal tip, broad and medially deviated thumbs and 
great toes. Originally, it was described in eight persons from three generations 
in a pedigree consistent with an autosomal dominant transmission. Since then, 
several reports have documented its high clinical and genetic heterogeneity. The 
condition is usually detected in the newborn period or later, and very few 
prenatal ultrasound diagnoses have been reported. We present a case of Pfeiffer 
syndrome prenatally diagnosed at 20 weeks' gestation, in which the sonographic 
features of craniosynostosis, hypertelorism associated with an extreme 
proptosis, and broad thumb led to the diagnosis, confirmed after termination of 
pregnancy by dysmorphological, pathological and radiological evaluation. DNA 
analysis of the fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) showed a missense 
mutation consisting in a transversion G --> C at nucleotide 870. This led to a 
Trp290Cys amino acidic substitution. We discuss the relevant findings of our and 
previously published cases. Our report demonstrates that a careful sonographic 
examination can lead to an early prenatal diagnosis of Pfeiffer syndrome also in 
cases without cloverleaf skull.

Copyright 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pd.844
PMID: 15565658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]