---
reference_id: "PMID:25355826"
title: Connective tissue anomalies in patients with spontaneous cervical artery dissection.
authors:
- Giossi A
- Ritelli M
- Costa P
- Morotti A
- Poli L
- Del Zotto E
- Volonghi I
- Chiarelli N
- Gamba M
- Bovi P
- Tomelleri G
- Carletti M
- Checcarelli N
- Meneghetti G
- Morra M
- Chinaglia M
- De Giuli V
- Colombi M
- Padovani A
- Pezzini A
journal: Neurology
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001030
keywords:
- Adult
- Case-Control Studies
- "Connective Tissue Diseases/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prospective Studies
- "Vertebral Artery Dissection/diagnosis, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Connective tissue anomalies in patients with spontaneous cervical artery dissection.
**Authors:** Giossi A, Ritelli M, Costa P, Morotti A, Poli L, Del Zotto E, Volonghi I, Chiarelli N, Gamba M, Bovi P, Tomelleri G, Carletti M, Checcarelli N, Meneghetti G, Morra M, Chinaglia M, De Giuli V, Colombi M, Padovani A, Pezzini A
**Journal:** Neurology (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000001030](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000001030)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2014 Nov 25;83(22):2032-7. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001030. Epub
2014 Oct 29.

Connective tissue anomalies in patients with spontaneous cervical artery
dissection.

Giossi A(1), Ritelli M(1), Costa P(1), Morotti A(1), Poli L(1), Del Zotto E(1),
Volonghi I(1), Chiarelli N(1), Gamba M(1), Bovi P(1), Tomelleri G(1), Carletti
M(1), Checcarelli N(1), Meneghetti G(1), Morra M(1), Chinaglia M(1), De Giuli
V(1), Colombi M(1), Padovani A(1), Pezzini A(2).

Author information:
(1)From the U.O. Neurologia (A.G.), Istituto Clinico S. Anna, Brescia;
Dipartimento di Scienze Cliniche e Sperimentali (P.C., A.M., L.P., I.V., V.D.G.,
A. Padovani, A. Pezzini), Clinica Neurologica, Università degli Studi di
Brescia; U.O. di Recupero e Rieducazione Funzionale (E.D.Z.), IRCCS Fondazione
Don Gnocchi, Milano; Stroke Unit (M.G.), Neurologia Vascolare, Spedali Civili di
Brescia; U.O. Neurologia (P.B., G.T., M. Carletti), Azienda
Ospedaliera-Universitaria Borgo Trento, Verona; U.O.C. Neurologia (N.
Checcarelli), Ospedale Valduce, Como; Dipartimento di Neuroscienze (G.M.),
Università di Padova; U.O.C. Neurologia (M.M.), Ospedale di Arzignano; S.O.C.
Neurologia (M. Chinaglia), Ospedale di Rovigo; and Sezione di Biologia e
Genetica (M.R., N. Chiarelli, M. Colombi), Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e
Traslazionale, Università degli Studi di Brescia, Italia.
(2)From the U.O. Neurologia (A.G.), Istituto Clinico S. Anna, Brescia;
Dipartimento di Scienze Cliniche e Sperimentali (P.C., A.M., L.P., I.V., V.D.G.,
A. Padovani, A. Pezzini), Clinica Neurologica, Università degli Studi di
Brescia; U.O. di Recupero e Rieducazione Funzionale (E.D.Z.), IRCCS Fondazione
Don Gnocchi, Milano; Stroke Unit (M.G.), Neurologia Vascolare, Spedali Civili di
Brescia; U.O. Neurologia (P.B., G.T., M. Carletti), Azienda
Ospedaliera-Universitaria Borgo Trento, Verona; U.O.C. Neurologia (N.
Checcarelli), Ospedale Valduce, Como; Dipartimento di Neuroscienze (G.M.),
Università di Padova; U.O.C. Neurologia (M.M.), Ospedale di Arzignano; S.O.C.
Neurologia (M. Chinaglia), Ospedale di Rovigo; and Sezione di Biologia e
Genetica (M.R., N. Chiarelli, M. Colombi), Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e
Traslazionale, Università degli Studi di Brescia, Italia.
ale_pezzini@hotmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the prevalence of connective tissue abnormalities in
patients with spontaneous cervical artery dissections (sCeAD).
METHODS: We systematically assessed clinically detectable signs of connective
tissue aberration in a series of consecutive patients with sCeAD and of age- and
sex-matched patients with ischemic stroke unrelated to CeAD (non-CeAD IS) by a
standard examination protocol including 68 items, and performed extensive
molecular investigation for hereditary connective tissue disorders in all
patients with sCeAD.
RESULTS: The study group included 84 patients with sCeAD (mean age, 44.5 ± 7.8
years; 66.7% men) and 84 patients with non-CeAD IS. None of the patients with
sCeAD met clinical or molecular diagnostic criteria for established hereditary
connective tissue disorder. Connective tissue abnormalities were detected more
frequently in the group of patients with sCeAD than in the group of those with
non-CeAD IS (mean number of pathologic findings, 4.5 ± 3.5 vs 1.9 ± 2.3; p <
0.001). Eighty-one patients (96.4%) in the sCeAD group had at least one
detectable sign compared with 55 patients (66.7%) in the group with non-CeAD IS
(p < 0.001). Skeletal, ocular, and skin abnormalities, as well as craniofacial
dysmorphisms, were the clinical signs more strongly associated with sCeAD. Signs
suggesting connective tissue abnormality were also more frequently represented
in patients with sCeAD than in patients with traumatic CeAD (28.6%, p < 0.001;
mean number of pathologic findings, 1.7 ± 3.7, p = 0.045).
CONCLUSIONS: Connective tissue abnormalities are frequent in patients with
sCeAD. This reinforces the hypothesis that systemic aberrations of the
connective tissue might be implicated in the pathogenesis of the disease.

© 2014 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001030
PMCID: PMC4248452
PMID: 25355826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
