---
reference_id: "PMID:31062377"
title: "Oropharyngeal Administration of Mother's Milk Prior to Gavage Feeding in Preterm Infants: A Pilot Randomized Control Trial."
authors:
- Abd-Elgawad M
- Eldegla H
- Khashaba M
- Nasef N
journal: JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/jpen.1601
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oropharyngeal Administration of Mother's Milk Prior to Gavage Feeding in Preterm Infants: A Pilot Randomized Control Trial.
**Authors:** Abd-Elgawad M, Eldegla H, Khashaba M, Nasef N
**Journal:** JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jpen.1601](https://doi.org/10.1002/jpen.1601)

## Content

1. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2020 Jan;44(1):92-104. doi: 10.1002/jpen.1601. 
Epub 2019 May 6.

Oropharyngeal Administration of Mother's Milk Prior to Gavage Feeding in Preterm 
Infants: A Pilot Randomized Control Trial.

Abd-Elgawad M(1), Eldegla H(2), Khashaba M(1)(3), Nasef N(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Mansoura University Children's Hospital, 
Mansoura, Dakahlia, Egypt.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Mansoura, Mansoura, Egypt.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Mansoura, 
Mansoura, Egypt.

BACKGROUND: Oropharyngeal administration of mother's colostrum in early days has 
an immunoprotective effect in preterm infants.
OBJECTIVES: Our aim was to study the effect of oropharyngeal administration of 
mother's milk (OPAMM) on decreasing the incidence of nosocomial sepsis.
METHODS: In a pilot prospective randomized study on preterm (<32 weeks gestation 
and 1500 g weight) infants, we compared OPAMM practice (applying 0.2 mL of 
mother's colostrum or milk prior to gavage feeding until full oral feeding is 
reached) with regular gavage feeding. The primary outcome was incidence of 
culture-proven nosocomial sepsis. Secondary outcomes included bacterial 
colonization of the gastrointestinal tract, feeding intolerance, time to reach 
full feeding, incidence of necrotizing enterocolitis, ventilator-associated 
pneumonia, duration of respiratory support, incidence of bronchopulmonary 
dysplasia (BPD), length of hospital stay, and neonatal mortality.
RESULTS: The outcomes of 200 neonates (100 in each group) were analyzed. OPAMM 
practice did not significantly reduce the incidence of culture proven nosocomial 
sepsis (8% vs 13%, P = 0.35). Infants in the OPAMM group had a significantly 
lower growth of Klebsiella species in the oropharyngeal pouch, borderline lower 
incidence of ventilator-associated pneumonia, shorter duration of oxygen 
therapy, less episodes of feeding intolerance, reached full feeding earlier, and 
had a shorter length of hospital stay. OPAMM practice did not affect the 
incidence of necrotizing enterocolitis, BPD, or neonatal mortality.
CONCLUSION: OPAMM prior to gavage feeding does not reduce the incidence of 
nosocomial sepsis but had beneficial effects on early achievement of feeding, 
and early hospital discharge in preterm very low-birth-weight infants.

© 2019 American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition.

DOI: 10.1002/jpen.1601
PMID: 31062377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]