---
reference_id: "PMID:28583446"
title: Phenotypic and genetic aspects of epithelial barrier function in asthmatic patients.
authors:
- Loxham M
- Davies DE
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2017.04.005
keywords:
- Animals
- "Asthma/genetics, immunology"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Phenotype
- "Respiratory Mucosa/immunology, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypic and genetic aspects of epithelial barrier function in asthmatic patients.
**Authors:** Loxham M, Davies DE
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2017.04.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2017.04.005)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2017 Jun;139(6):1736-1751. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2017.04.005.

Phenotypic and genetic aspects of epithelial barrier function in asthmatic 
patients.

Loxham M(1), Davies DE(2).

Author information:
(1)Clinical and Experimental Sciences and the Southampton NIHR Respiratory 
Biomedical Research Unit, University of Southampton Faculty of Medicine, Sir 
Henry Wellcome Laboratories, University Hospital Southampton, Southampton, 
United Kingdom.
(2)Clinical and Experimental Sciences and the Southampton NIHR Respiratory 
Biomedical Research Unit, University of Southampton Faculty of Medicine, Sir 
Henry Wellcome Laboratories, University Hospital Southampton, Southampton, 
United Kingdom. Electronic address: donnad@soton.ac.uk.

The bronchial epithelium is continuously exposed to a multitude of noxious 
challenges in inhaled air. Cellular contact with most damaging agents is reduced 
by the action of the mucociliary apparatus and by formation of a physical 
barrier that controls passage of ions and macromolecules. In conjunction with 
these defensive barrier functions, immunomodulatory cross-talk between the 
bronchial epithelium and tissue-resident immune cells controls the tissue 
microenvironment and barrier homeostasis. This is achieved by expression of an 
array of sensors that detect a wide variety of viral, bacterial, and 
nonmicrobial (toxins and irritants) agents, resulting in production of many 
different soluble and cell-surface molecules that signal to cells of the immune 
system. The ability of the bronchial epithelium to control the balance of 
inhibitory and activating signals is essential for orchestrating appropriate 
inflammatory and immune responses and for temporally modulating these responses 
to limit tissue injury and control the resolution of inflammation during tissue 
repair. In asthmatic patients abnormalities in many aspects of epithelial 
barrier function have been identified. We postulate that such abnormalities play 
a causal role in immune dysregulation in the airways by translating 
gene-environment interactions that underpin disease pathogenesis and 
exacerbation.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2017.04.005
PMCID: PMC5457128
PMID: 28583446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]