---
reference_id: "PMID:32297094"
title: "Intracranial growing teratoma syndrome (iGTS): an international case series and review of the literature."
authors:
- Michaiel G
- Strother D
- Gottardo N
- Bartels U
- Coltin H
- Hukin J
- Wilson B
- Zelcer S
- Hansford JR
- Hassall T
- AbdelBaki MS
- Cole KA
- Hoffman L
- Smiley NP
- Smith A
- Vinitsky A
- Vitanza NA
- Wright A
- Yeo KK
- Chow LML
- Vanan MI
- Dhall G
- Bouffet E
- Lafay-Cousin L
journal: J Neurooncol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s11060-020-03486-9
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Neoplasms, Germ Cell and Embryonal/complications, epidemiology"
- "Pinealoma/complications, epidemiology"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Teratoma/complications, epidemiology"
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intracranial growing teratoma syndrome (iGTS): an international case series and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Michaiel G, Strother D, Gottardo N, Bartels U, Coltin H, Hukin J, Wilson B, Zelcer S, Hansford JR, Hassall T, AbdelBaki MS, Cole KA, Hoffman L, Smiley NP, Smith A, Vinitsky A, Vitanza NA, Wright A, Yeo KK, Chow LML, Vanan MI, Dhall G, Bouffet E, Lafay-Cousin L
**Journal:** J Neurooncol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11060-020-03486-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11060-020-03486-9)

## Content

1. J Neurooncol. 2020 May;147(3):721-730. doi: 10.1007/s11060-020-03486-9. Epub 
2020 Apr 15.

Intracranial growing teratoma syndrome (iGTS): an international case series and 
review of the literature.

Michaiel G(1), Strother D(1), Gottardo N(2), Bartels U(3), Coltin H(4), Hukin 
J(5), Wilson B(6), Zelcer S(7), Hansford JR(8), Hassall T(9), AbdelBaki MS(10), 
Cole KA(11), Hoffman L(12), Smiley NP(13), Smith A(14), Vinitsky A(15), Vitanza 
NA(16), Wright A(17), Yeo KK(18), Chow LML(19), Vanan MI(20), Dhall G(18), 
Bouffet E(3), Lafay-Cousin L(21).

Author information:
(1)Section of Pediatric Hematology Oncology and Bone Marrow Transplantation, 
Alberta Children's Hospital, 28 Oki Drive NW, Calgary, AB, T3B 6A8, Canada.
(2)Division of Pediatric and Adolescent Haematology and Oncology, Perth 
Children's Hospital, 15 Hospital Avenue, Perth, Nedlands, WA, 6009, Australia.
(3)Pediatric Brain Tumor Program, Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University 
Avenue, Toronto, ON, M5G 1X8, Canada.
(4)Division of Pediatric Hematology Oncology, Children's Hospital of Eastern 
Ontario, 401 Smyth Rd, Ottawa, ON, K1H 8L1, Canada.
(5)Division of Neurology/Oncology, British Columbia Children's Hospital, 4480 
Oak Street, Vancouver, BC, V6H 3N1, Canada.
(6)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Stollery Children's Hospital, 11402 
University Avenue, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2J3, Canada.
(7)Division of Hematology/Oncology, London Health Science Centre, 800 
Commissioner's Road Est, London, ON, N6A 5W9, Canada.
(8)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Royal Children's Hospital, 50 Flemington 
Road, Parkville, VIC, 3052, Australia.
(9)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Queensland Children's Hospital, 501 Stanley 
Street, South Brisbane, QLD, 4101, Australia.
(10)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Nationwide Children's Hospital, 700 
Children's Drive, Columbus, OH, 43205, USA.
(11)Division of Oncology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 3501 Civic Center 
Blvd, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA.
(12)Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders, Children's Hospital of Colorado, 
13123 E. 16th Avenue, Aurora, CO, 80045, USA.
(13)Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital 
of Chicago, 225 East Chicago Ave, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA.
(14)Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Arnold Palmer Hospital for Children, 92 West 
Miller MP 318, Orlando, FL, 32806, USA.
(15)Department of Oncology, Saint Jude Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny 
Thomas Place, Memphis, TN, 38105, USA.
(16)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Seattle Children's Hospital, 4800 
Sand Point Way NE, Seattle, WA, 98105, USA.
(17)Division of Child Neurology, Lucile Packard Children's Hospital, 725 Welch 
Road, Palo Alto, CA, 94305, USA.
(18)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, 650 Sunset 
Blvd, Los Angeles, CA, 90027, USA.
(19)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center, 3333 Burnet Ave, Cincinnati, USA.
(20)Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Cancer Care Manitoba, 9675 McDermot Avenue, 
Winnipeg, MB, R3E 0V9, Canada.
(21)Section of Pediatric Hematology Oncology and Bone Marrow Transplantation, 
Alberta Children's Hospital, 28 Oki Drive NW, Calgary, AB, T3B 6A8, Canada. 
lucie.lafay-cousin@ahs.ca.

PURPOSE: Intracranial growing teratoma syndrome (iGTS) is a rare phenomenon of 
paradoxical growth of a germ cell tumor (GCT) during treatment despite 
normalization of tumor markers. We sought to evaluate the frequency, clinical 
characteristics and outcome of iGTS in Western countries.
METHODS: Pediatric patients from 22 North American and Australian institutions 
diagnosed with iGTS between 2000 and 2017 were retrospectively evaluated.
RESULTS: From a total of 777 cases of central nervous system (CNS) GCT, 39 cases 
of iGTS were identified for an overall frequency of 5%. Pineal region was a more 
frequent location for iGTS as compared to cases of GCT without iGTS 
(p < 0.00001). In patients with an initial tissue diagnosis of GCT, immature 
teratoma was present in 50%. Serum AFP or ßhCG was detectable in 87% of patients 
(median values 66 ng/mL and 44 IU/L, respectively). iGTS occurred at a median of 
2 months (range 0.5-32) from diagnosis, in the majority of patients. All 
patients underwent surgical resection, leading to gross total resection in 79%. 
Following surgery, all patients resumed adjuvant therapy or post treatment 
follow-up for GCT. At a median follow-up of 5.3 years (range 0.2-11.8), 37 (95%) 
of patients are alive, including 5 with stable residual mass.
CONCLUSION: iGTS occurs in 5% of patients with GCT in Western countries. Tumors 
of the pineal region and GCT containing immature teratoma appear to be 
associated with a higher risk of developing iGTS. Complete surgical resection is 
the mainstay of treatment. Overall survival of patients developing iGTS remains 
favorable.

DOI: 10.1007/s11060-020-03486-9
PMID: 32297094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]