---
reference_id: "PMID:32175940"
title: A review of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
authors:
- Miller E
- Grosel JM
journal: JAAPA
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1097/01.JAA.0000657160.48246.91
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A review of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
**Authors:** Miller E, Grosel JM
**Journal:** JAAPA (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.JAA.0000657160.48246.91](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.JAA.0000657160.48246.91)

## Content

1. JAAPA. 2020 Apr;33(4):23-28. doi: 10.1097/01.JAA.0000657160.48246.91.

A review of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.

Miller E(1), Grosel JM.

Author information:
(1)At the time this article was written, Erin Miller was a student in the PA 
program at Marietta (Ohio) College. She now practices urgent care and 
occupational health with McLaren Health in Flint, Mich. John M. Grosel is a 
radiologist at Riverside Radiology and Interventional Associates, Inc., based in 
Columbus, Ohio, and a McCoy associate professor in the PA program at Marietta 
College. The authors have disclosed no potential conflicts of interest, 
financial or otherwise.

Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) describes a group of heritable disorders of 
connective tissue comprising mutations in the genes involved in the structure 
and/or biosynthesis of collagen. Thirteen EDS subtypes are recognized, with a 
wide degree of symptom overlap among subtypes and with other connective tissue 
disorders. The clinical hallmarks of EDS are tissue fragility, joint 
hypermobility, and skin hyperextensibility. Appropriate diagnosis of EDS is 
important for correct multidisciplinary management and is associated with better 
clinical outcomes for patients.

DOI: 10.1097/01.JAA.0000657160.48246.91
PMID: 32175940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]