---
reference_id: "PMID:25616768"
title: "Genetics and Disease Expression in the CNGA3 Form of Achromatopsia: Steps on the Path to Gene Therapy."
authors:
- Zelinger L
- Cideciyan AV
- Kohl S
- Schwartz SB
- Rosenmann A
- Eli D
- Sumaroka A
- Roman AJ
- Luo X
- Brown C
- Rosin B
- Blumenfeld A
- Wissinger B
- Jacobson SG
- Banin E
- Sharon D
journal: Ophthalmology
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2014.11.025
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Arabs/genetics
- Child
- "Color Vision Defects/genetics, physiopathology, therapy"
- Consanguinity
- Cyclic Nucleotide-Gated Cation Channels/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Electroretinography
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- Founder Effect
- Gene Expression
- Genetic Therapy
- Humans
- Israel
- Jews/genetics
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Molecular Biology
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Photoreceptor Cells, Vertebrate/physiology"
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Retinal Degeneration/genetics, physiopathology, therapy"
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics and Disease Expression in the CNGA3 Form of Achromatopsia: Steps on the Path to Gene Therapy.
**Authors:** Zelinger L, Cideciyan AV, Kohl S, Schwartz SB, Rosenmann A, Eli D, Sumaroka A, Roman AJ, Luo X, Brown C, Rosin B, Blumenfeld A, Wissinger B, Jacobson SG, Banin E, Sharon D
**Journal:** Ophthalmology (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ophtha.2014.11.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ophtha.2014.11.025)

## Content

1. Ophthalmology. 2015 May;122(5):997-1007. doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2014.11.025.
Epub  2015 Jan 21.

Genetics and Disease Expression in the CNGA3 Form of Achromatopsia: Steps on the 
Path to Gene Therapy.

Zelinger L(1), Cideciyan AV(2), Kohl S(3), Schwartz SB(2), Rosenmann A(1), Eli 
D(1), Sumaroka A(2), Roman AJ(2), Luo X(2), Brown C(2), Rosin B(1), Blumenfeld 
A(1), Wissinger B(3), Jacobson SG(2), Banin E(1), Sharon D(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Hadassah Hebrew University Medical Center, 
Jerusalem, Israel.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Scheie Eye Institute, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(3)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Centre for 
Ophthalmology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Hadassah Hebrew University Medical Center, 
Jerusalem, Israel. Electronic address: dror.sharon1@gmail.com.

PURPOSE: Achromatopsia (ACHM) is a congenital, autosomal recessive retinal 
disease that manifests cone dysfunction, reduced visual acuity and color vision, 
nystagmus, and photoaversion. Five genes are known causes of ACHM. The present 
study took steps toward performing a trial of gene therapy in ACHM by 
characterizing the genetics of ACHM in Israel and the Palestinian Territories 
and analyzing retinal function and structure in CNGA3 ACHM patients from the 
Israeli-Palestinian population and US patients with other origins.
DESIGN: Case series study.
PARTICIPANTS: Patients with clinically suspected ACHM, cone dysfunction 
phenotypes, and unaffected family members were included. The protocol was 
approved by the local institutional review board and informed consent was 
obtained from all participants.
METHODS: Genetic analyses included homozygosity mapping and exome sequencing. 
Phenotype was assessed with electroretinography (ERG), optical coherence 
tomography, psychophysics, and photoaversion testing.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Single nucleotide polymorphism microarray, exome 
analysis, DNA sequence analysis, visual function testing including ERG, and 
photoaversion.
RESULTS: We identified 148 ACHM patients from 57 Israeli and Palestinian 
families; there were 16 CNGA3 mutations (5 novel) in 41 families and 5 CNGB3 
mutations (1 novel) in 8 families. Two CNGA3 founder mutations underlie >50% of 
cases. These mutations lead to a high ACHM prevalence of ∼1:5000 among 
Arab-Muslims residing in Jerusalem. Rod ERG abnormalities (in addition to cone 
dysfunction) were detected in 59% of patients. Retinal structure in CNGA3 ACHM 
patients revealed persistent but abnormal foveal cones. Under dark- and 
light-adapted conditions, patients use rod-mediated pathways. Photoaversion was 
readily demonstrated with transition from the dark to a dim light background.
CONCLUSIONS: Among Israeli and Palestinian patients, CNGA3 mutations are the 
leading cause of ACHM. Retinal structural results support the candidacy of CNGA3 
ACHM for clinical trials for therapy of cone photoreceptors. Efficacy outcome 
measures would include chromatic light-adapted psychophysics, with attention to 
the photoreceptor basis of the response, and quantitation of photoaversion.

Copyright © 2015 American Academy of Ophthalmology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2014.11.025
PMID: 25616768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]