---
reference_id: "PMID:37151140"
title: "Inflammatory Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy: A Broad Clinical Spectrum."
authors:
- de Souza A
- Tasker K
journal: J Clin Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3988/jcn.2022.0493
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inflammatory Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy: A Broad Clinical Spectrum.
**Authors:** de Souza A, Tasker K
**Journal:** J Clin Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3988/jcn.2022.0493](https://doi.org/10.3988/jcn.2022.0493)

## Content

1. J Clin Neurol. 2023 May;19(3):230-241. doi: 10.3988/jcn.2022.0493.

Inflammatory Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy: A Broad Clinical Spectrum.

de Souza A(1)(2), Tasker K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Launceston General Hospital, Launceston, Australia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Launceston Clinical School, University of Tasmania, 
Launceston, Australia. aaron.de.souza@ths.tas.gov.au.

Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) is a common central nervous system (CNS) 
vasculopathy, which in some cases is associated with subacute encephalopathy, 
seizures, headaches, or strokes due to vascular inflammation directed against 
vascular amyloid accumulation. The pathological subtypes of inflammatory CAA 
include CAA-related inflammation (CAAri) with mostly perivascular lymphocytic 
infiltrates, or amyloid-beta (Aβ)-related angiitis (ABRA) with transmural 
granulomatous inflammation. CAAri and ABRA probably represent part of the 
spectrum of CNS vasculopathies, intermediate between CAA and primary CNS 
vasculitis, and they are closely related to Aβ-related imaging abnormalities and 
other manifestations of an inflammatory response directed against Aβ in the 
leptomeninges and cerebral parenchyma. As treatment strategies in Alzheimer's 
disease shift toward potentially effective antiamyloid immunotherapy, the 
incidence rate of inflammatory CAA (which is probably an underrecognized 
condition) is likely to increase. Its clinical features are varied and include 
subacute encephalopathy, behavioral symptoms, headaches, seizures, and focal 
neurological deficits, which necessitate a high degree of suspicion for this 
disorder that often responds to treatment. The recent definition of the typical 
clinical and radiological syndrome has increased its recognition and may 
eliminate the need for invasive histological sampling in at least some affected 
patients. Here we review the pathophysiology, clinical spectrum, and approach to 
diagnosis, and discuss illustrative cases that highlight the wide range of 
clinical presentations.

Copyright © 2023 Korean Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.3988/jcn.2022.0493
PMCID: PMC10169922
PMID: 37151140

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no potential conflicts of 
interest to disclose.