---
reference_id: "PMID:32969800"
title: "Deafness, onychodystrophy, osteodystrophy, mental retardation, and seizures (DOORS) syndrome: a new case report from Indonesia and review of the literature."
authors:
- Danarti R
- Rahmayani S
- Wirohadidjojo YW
- Chen W
journal: Eur J Dermatol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1684/ejd.2020.3850
keywords:
- Dermatoglyphics
- Female
- Finger Phalanges/abnormalities
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/diagnosis"
- "Heart Septal Defects, Atrial/diagnosis"
- Humans
- Indonesia
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Intellectual Disability/diagnosis
- Mutation
- "Nails, Malformed/diagnosis"
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics
- Recurrence
- Seizures/diagnosis
- Strabismus/diagnosis
- Syndrome
- Tetralogy of Fallot/diagnosis
- Toe Phalanges/abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deafness, onychodystrophy, osteodystrophy, mental retardation, and seizures (DOORS) syndrome: a new case report from Indonesia and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Danarti R, Rahmayani S, Wirohadidjojo YW, Chen W
**Journal:** Eur J Dermatol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1684/ejd.2020.3850](https://doi.org/10.1684/ejd.2020.3850)

## Content

1. Eur J Dermatol. 2020 Aug 1;30(4):404-407. doi: 10.1684/ejd.2020.3850.

Deafness, onychodystrophy, osteodystrophy, mental retardation, and seizures 
(DOORS) syndrome: a new case report from Indonesia and review of the literature.

Danarti R(1), Rahmayani S(1), Wirohadidjojo YW(1), Chen W(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Faculty of Medicine, Public 
Health, and Nursing, Universitas Gadjah Mada/ Dr. Sardjito Hospital Yogyakarta, 
Indonesia.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Technische Universität München, 
MunichGermany, Department of Dermatology, Pingtung Hospital, Ministry of Health 
and Welfare, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: DOORS syndrome (deafness, onychodystrophy, osteodystrophy, mental 
retardation and seizures; MIM 220500) is a rare multisystem genetic disorder, 
mainly characterized by sensorineural deafness, shortened terminal phalanges 
with small nails of hands and feet, intellectual deficit, and seizures. The 
disease is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the TBC1 
domain family member 24 (TBC1D24) gene (gene locus/MIM 613577) on chromosome 
16p13.
OBJECTIVES: We report the first case of DOORS syndrome from Indonesia.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A review of the literature was conducted and cases 
compared.
RESULTS: A 27-day-old baby girl was brought to us with a history of recurrent 
seizures and absence of all finger- and toenails since birth. In addition, 
physical examination revealed left eye strabismus and a single transverse palmar 
crease on both hands. X-rays of the hands and feet showed absence of the distal 
phalanx of her right and left fingers II-V and the distal phalanx of her right 
and left toes I-V, respectively. Brainstem-evoked response audiometry test 
revealed profound bilateral sensorineural deafness. Pentalogy of Fallot was 
diagnosed by echocardiography, while an abnormal diffuse epileptiform pattern 
was found on electroencephalography.
CONCLUSION: This is the first report of an association between pentalogy of 
Fallot and single transverse palmar crease in DOORS syndrome.

DOI: 10.1684/ejd.2020.3850
PMID: 32969800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]