---
reference_id: "PMID:39990010"
title: "Aceruloplasminemia as a rare hereditary disease: four case reports in a single center."
authors:
- İstemihan Z
- İmanov Z
- Çavuş B
- Çifcibaşı Örmeci A
- Akyüz F
- Beşışık F
- Kaymakoğlu S
- Demir K
journal: Proc (Bayl Univ Med Cent)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1080/08998280.2024.2423506
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aceruloplasminemia as a rare hereditary disease: four case reports in a single center.
**Authors:** İstemihan Z, İmanov Z, Çavuş B, Çifcibaşı Örmeci A, Akyüz F, Beşışık F, Kaymakoğlu S, Demir K
**Journal:** Proc (Bayl Univ Med Cent) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1080/08998280.2024.2423506](https://doi.org/10.1080/08998280.2024.2423506)

## Content

1. Proc (Bayl Univ Med Cent). 2024 Nov 12;38(2):195-198. doi: 
10.1080/08998280.2024.2423506. eCollection 2025.

Aceruloplasminemia as a rare hereditary disease: four case reports in a single 
center.

İstemihan Z(1), İmanov Z(1), Çavuş B(1), Çifcibaşı Örmeci A(1), Akyüz F(1), 
Beşışık F(1), Kaymakoğlu S(1), Demir K(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterohepatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Istanbul 
Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Türkiye.

Aceruloplasminemia, which is a very rare iron metabolism disorder, may present 
with extremely nonspecific complaints, and disease screening should be 
considered, especially in patients with consanguineous marriages. We share four 
cases diagnosed with aceruloplasminemia and their characteristics. The first 
three cases were related to each other and have consanguineous marriages in 
their family history. Our first and fourth cases were diagnosed with 
aceruloplasminemia upon detecting hypochromic microcytic anemia, low transferrin 
saturation, and a high ferritin level in the examinations performed after a 
nonspecific complaint such as fatigue. Even though the second and third cases 
had no complaints, they were diagnosed during screening tests because they were 
relatives of the first case.

Plain Language Summary: Aceruloplasminemia is a rare autosomal recessive iron 
metabolism disorder.Patients with aceruloplasminemia often present with 
microcytic anemia, low transferrin saturation ratio, and high serum ferritin 
levels before the onset of symptoms.Some patients may present with only 
nonspecific complaints such as fatigue, some with neurological findings, and 
some with no complaints, only with laboratory abnormalities.It is important to 
differentiate aceruloplasminemia from Wilson disease, another disease with low 
ceruloplasmin.

Copyright © 2024 Baylor University Medical Center.

DOI: 10.1080/08998280.2024.2423506
PMCID: PMC11844920
PMID: 39990010

Conflict of interest statement: The planners and faculty for this activity have 
no relevant financial relationships to disclose. The authors report no funding. 
Permission to publish these cases was obtained from the patients and their 
families.