---
reference_id: "PMID:34889756"
title: "On Missingness Features in Machine Learning Models for Critical Care: Observational Study."
authors:
- Singh J
- Sato M
- Ohkuma T
journal: JMIR Med Inform
year: '2021'
doi: 10.2196/25022
content_type: abstract_only
---

# On Missingness Features in Machine Learning Models for Critical Care: Observational Study.
**Authors:** Singh J, Sato M, Ohkuma T
**Journal:** JMIR Med Inform (2021)
**DOI:** [10.2196/25022](https://doi.org/10.2196/25022)

## Content

1. JMIR Med Inform. 2021 Dec 8;9(12):e25022. doi: 10.2196/25022.

On Missingness Features in Machine Learning Models for Critical Care: 
Observational Study.

Singh J(1), Sato M(1), Ohkuma T(1).

Author information:
(1)Fuji Xerox Co, Ltd, Yokohama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Missing data in electronic health records is inevitable and 
considered to be nonrandom. Several studies have found that features indicating 
missing patterns (missingness) encode useful information about a patient's 
health and advocate for their inclusion in clinical prediction models. But their 
effectiveness has not been comprehensively evaluated.
OBJECTIVE: The goal of the research is to study the effect of including 
informative missingness features in machine learning models for various 
clinically relevant outcomes and explore robustness of these features across 
patient subgroups and task settings.
METHODS: A total of 48,336 electronic health records from the 2012 and 2019 
PhysioNet Challenges were used, and mortality, length of stay, and sepsis 
outcomes were chosen. The latter dataset was multicenter, allowing external 
validation. Gated recurrent units were used to learn sequential patterns in the 
data and classify or predict labels of interest. Models were evaluated on 
various criteria and across population subgroups evaluating discriminative 
ability and calibration.
RESULTS: Generally improved model performance in retrospective tasks was 
observed on including missingness features. Extent of improvement depended on 
the outcome of interest (area under the curve of the receiver operating 
characteristic [AUROC] improved from 1.2% to 7.7%) and even patient subgroup. 
However, missingness features did not display utility in a simulated prospective 
setting, being outperformed (0.9% difference in AUROC) by the model relying only 
on pathological features. This was despite leading to earlier detection of 
disease (true positives), since including these features led to a concomitant 
rise in false positive detections.
CONCLUSIONS: This study comprehensively evaluated effectiveness of missingness 
features on machine learning models. A detailed understanding of how these 
features affect model performance may lead to their informed use in clinical 
settings especially for administrative tasks like length of stay prediction 
where they present the greatest benefit. While missingness features, 
representative of health care processes, vary greatly due to intra- and 
interhospital factors, they may still be used in prediction models for 
clinically relevant outcomes. However, their use in prospective models producing 
frequent predictions needs to be explored further.

©Janmajay Singh, Masahiro Sato, Tomoko Ohkuma. Originally published in JMIR 
Medical Informatics (https://medinform.jmir.org), 08.12.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/25022
PMCID: PMC8701717
PMID: 34889756

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors have applied 
for a related patent (Japanese patent application number 2019-164443).