---
reference_id: "PMID:39455380"
title: "French protocol for diagnosis and management of Cogan's syndrome."
authors:
- Arnaud L
- Audemard-Verger A
- Belot A
- Bienvenu B
- Burillon C
- Chasset F
- Chaudot F
- Darbon R
- Delmotte A
- Ebbo M
- Espitia O
- Fauchais AL
- Guedon AF
- Hachulla E
- Hadjadj J
- Hautefort C
- Jachiet V
- Mamelle E
- Martin M
- Muraine M
- Papo T
- Pouchot J
- Pugnet G
- Sève P
- Zenone T
- Mekinian A
- contributors
journal: Rev Med Interne
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.revmed.2024.09.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# French protocol for diagnosis and management of Cogan's syndrome.
**Authors:** Arnaud L, Audemard-Verger A, Belot A, Bienvenu B, Burillon C, Chasset F, Chaudot F, Darbon R, Delmotte A, Ebbo M, Espitia O, Fauchais AL, Guedon AF, Hachulla E, Hadjadj J, Hautefort C, Jachiet V, Mamelle E, Martin M, Muraine M, Papo T, Pouchot J, Pugnet G, Sève P, Zenone T, Mekinian A, contributors
**Journal:** Rev Med Interne (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.revmed.2024.09.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.revmed.2024.09.007)

## Content

1. Rev Med Interne. 2025 Feb;46(2):74-88. doi: 10.1016/j.revmed.2024.09.007. Epub
 2024 Oct 24.

French protocol for diagnosis and management of Cogan's syndrome.

Arnaud L(1), Audemard-Verger A(2), Belot A(3), Bienvenu B(4), Burillon C(5), 
Chasset F(6), Chaudot F(7), Darbon R(8), Delmotte A(7), Ebbo M(9), Espitia 
O(10), Fauchais AL(11), Guedon AF(12), Hachulla E(13), Hadjadj J(7), Hautefort 
C(14), Jachiet V(7), Mamelle E(15), Martin M(16), Muraine M(17), Papo T(18), 
Pouchot J(19), Pugnet G(20), Sève P(21), Zenone T(22), Mekinian A(23); 
contributors.

Author information:
(1)INSERM UMRS-1109, Department of Rheumatology, National Reference Center for 
Autoimmune diseases (RESO), Strasbourg-Hautepierre University Hospital, 
Strasbourg, France.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Tours University Hospital, Tours, France.
(3)Department of Paediatric Nephrology, Rheumatology, Dermatology, Reference 
Centre for Rheumatic, AutoImmune and Systemic Diseases in Children (RAISE), 
Femme-Mère-Enfant Hospital, Hospices Civils of Lyon, Bron, France.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Saint-Joseph Hospital, Marseille, France.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Édouard-Herriot University Hospital, Hospices 
Civils of Lyon, Lyon, France.
(6)Department of Dermatology and Allergology, Tenon Hospital, Faculty of 
Medicine, Sorbonne University, Paris, France.
(7)Service de médecine interne, hôpital Saint-Antoine, AP-HP, Sorbonne 
université, 184, rue du Faubourg-Saint-Antoine, 75012 Paris, France.
(8)French Vasculitis Association, Paris, France.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine, Marseille University Hospital, Marseille, 
France.
(10)INSERM UMR1087/CNRS UMR 6291, Team III Vascular & Pulmonary diseases, 
Department of Internal and Vascular Medicine, institut du thorax, CHU of Nantes, 
Nantes université, F-44000 Nantes, France.
(11)Department of Internal Medicine, Dupuytren University Hospital, Limoges, 
France.
(12)Department of Internal Medicine, Saint-Antoine Hospital, Paris, France.
(13)INSERM, Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Immunology, Reference 
Centre for Auto-immune Systemic Rare Diseases of North and North-West of France 
(CeRAINO), Lille University Hospital, Lille University, Lille, France.
(14)Department of Ear, Nose, Throat, Lariboisière Hospital, université Paris 
Cité, Paris, France.
(15)Department of Ear, Nose, Throat, Rothschild Hospital, Paris, France.
(16)Department of Internal Medicine, Poitiers University Hospital, Poitiers, 
France.
(17)Department of Ophthalmology, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France.
(18)Department of Internal Medicine, Bichat Hospital, Paris, France.
(19)Department of Internal Medicine, Georges-Pompidou European Hospital, Paris, 
France.
(20)Department of Internal Medicine, Toulouse University Hospital, Toulouse, 
France.
(21)Department of Internal Medicine, La Croix-Rousse Hospital, Hospices Civils 
of Lyon, Lyon, France.
(22)Department of Internal Medicine, Valence Hospital Centre, Valence, France.
(23)Service de médecine interne, hôpital Saint-Antoine, AP-HP, Sorbonne 
université, 184, rue du Faubourg-Saint-Antoine, 75012 Paris, France. Electronic 
address: arsene.mekinian@aphp.fr.

Cogan's syndrome is a condition of unknown origin, classified as a systemic 
vasculitis. It is characterised by a predilection for the cornea and the inner 
ear. It mainly affects Caucasian individuals with a sex-ratio close to one. 
Ophthalmological and cochleo-vestibular involvement are the most common 
manifestations of the disease. The most frequent ophthalmological type of 
involvement is non-syphilitic interstitial keratitis. Cochleo-vestibular 
manifestations are similar to those of Meniere's syndrome. The disease 
progresses in ocular and ear-nose-throat (ENT) flares, which may occur 
simultaneously or in isolation. Association with other autoimmune diseases, 
particularly other forms of vasculitis such as polyarteritis nodosa or 
Takayasu's arteritis, is possible. Ocular involvement, as well as 
cochleo-vestibular involvement, can be inaugural and initially isolated. Onset 
is often abrupt. The characteristic involvement is "non-syphilitic" interstitial 
keratitis. It is usually bilateral from the outset or becomes so during the 
course of the disease. It presents as a red, painful eye, possibly associated 
with decreased visual acuity. Cochleo-vestibular involvement is usually 
bilateral from the outset. It is characterised by the sudden onset of continuous 
rotational vertigo associated with tinnitus, rapidly progressive sensorineural 
deafness. Approximately 30-70% of patients present with systemic manifestations. 
Deterioration in general status with fever may be present. Laboratory evidence 
of inflammatory syndrome is associated in 75% of cases. Cogan's syndrome is a 
presumed autoimmune type of vasculitis, although no specific autoantibodies have 
been identified. Ocular involvement is usually associated with a good prognosis, 
with total visual acuity recovery in the majority of cases. In contrast, 
cochleo-vestibular involvement can be severe and irreversible. Therapeutic 
management of Cogan's syndrome, given its rarity, lacks consensus since no 
prospective randomised studies have been conducted to date. Corticosteroid 
therapy is the first-line treatment. Combination with anti-TNF therapy should be 
promptly discussed.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.revmed.2024.09.007
PMID: 39455380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]