---
reference_id: "PMID:29609604"
title: Airway disease phenotypes in animal models of cystic fibrosis.
authors:
- McCarron A
- Donnelley M
- Parsons D
journal: Respir Res
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s12931-018-0750-y
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cystic Fibrosis/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Ferrets
- Gene Knockout Techniques/methods
- Humans
- Mice
- Phenotype
- Rats
- Swine
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Airway disease phenotypes in animal models of cystic fibrosis.
**Authors:** McCarron A, Donnelley M, Parsons D
**Journal:** Respir Res (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12931-018-0750-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12931-018-0750-y)

## Content

1. Respir Res. 2018 Apr 2;19(1):54. doi: 10.1186/s12931-018-0750-y.

Airway disease phenotypes in animal models of cystic fibrosis.

McCarron A(1)(2)(3), Donnelley M(4)(5)(6), Parsons D(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Adelaide Medical School, Discipline of Paediatrics, University of Adelaide, 
Adelaide, SA, Australia. alexandra.mccarron@adelaide.edu.au.
(2)Department of Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Women's and Children's 
Hospital, Adelaide, SA, Australia. alexandra.mccarron@adelaide.edu.au.
(3)Robinson Research Institute, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia. 
alexandra.mccarron@adelaide.edu.au.
(4)Adelaide Medical School, Discipline of Paediatrics, University of Adelaide, 
Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(5)Department of Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Women's and Children's 
Hospital, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(6)Robinson Research Institute, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia.

In humans, cystic fibrosis (CF) lung disease is characterised by chronic 
infection, inflammation, airway remodelling, and mucus obstruction. A lack of 
pulmonary manifestations in CF mouse models has hindered investigations of 
airway disease pathogenesis, as well as the development and testing of potential 
therapeutics. However, recently generated CF animal models including rat, ferret 
and pig models demonstrate a range of well characterised lung disease phenotypes 
with varying degrees of severity. This review discusses the airway phenotypes of 
currently available CF animal models and presents potential applications of each 
model in airway-related CF research.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-018-0750-y
PMCID: PMC5879563
PMID: 29609604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.