---
reference_id: "PMID:38753338"
title: Nationwide Prevalence of Inherited Retinal Diseases in the Israeli Population.
authors:
- Shalom S
- Ben-Yosef T
- Sher I
- Zag A
- Rotenstreich Y
- Poleg T
- Birk OS
- Gradstein L
- Ehrenberg M
- Deitch I
- Mezer E
- Hecht I
- Pras E
- Ramon D
- Khateb S
- Zur D
- Newman H
- Kharouba R
- Goldenberg-Cohen N
- Leibu R
- Soudry S
- Perlman I
- Banin E
- Sharon D
journal: JAMA Ophthalmol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2024.1461
keywords:
- Humans
- Israel/epidemiology
- Prevalence
- Male
- Female
- Adult
- Electroretinography
- "Retinal Diseases/epidemiology, genetics, diagnosis"
- Middle Aged
- Phenotype
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Aged
- Child
- "Eye Diseases, Hereditary/epidemiology, genetics"
- "Child, Preschool"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nationwide Prevalence of Inherited Retinal Diseases in the Israeli Population.
**Authors:** Shalom S, Ben-Yosef T, Sher I, Zag A, Rotenstreich Y, Poleg T, Birk OS, Gradstein L, Ehrenberg M, Deitch I, Mezer E, Hecht I, Pras E, Ramon D, Khateb S, Zur D, Newman H, Kharouba R, Goldenberg-Cohen N, Leibu R, Soudry S, Perlman I, Banin E, Sharon D
**Journal:** JAMA Ophthalmol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2024.1461](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2024.1461)

## Content

1. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2024 Jul 1;142(7):609-616. doi:
10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2024.1461.

Nationwide Prevalence of Inherited Retinal Diseases in the Israeli Population.

Shalom S(1)(2), Ben-Yosef T(3), Sher I(4)(5), Zag A(4)(5), Rotenstreich Y(4)(5),
Poleg T(6), Birk OS(6), Gradstein L(7), Ehrenberg M(8), Deitch I(4)(9), Mezer
E(3)(10), Hecht I(4)(11)(12), Pras E(4)(11)(12), Ramon D(4)(13), Khateb S(1),
Zur D(4)(13), Newman H(4)(13), Kharouba R(14)(15), Goldenberg-Cohen N(14)(15),
Leibu R(10), Soudry S(9)(10)(16), Perlman I(3)(13), Banin E(1), Sharon D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Hadassah Medical Center, Faculty of Medicine,
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.
(2)Department of Military Medicine and Tzameret, Faculty of Medicine, Hebrew
University of Jerusalem and Medical Corps, Israel Defense Forces, Jerusalem,
Israel.
(3)Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology,
Haifa, Israel.
(4)Faculty of medicine, Tel Aviv university, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(5)The Goldschleger Eye Institute, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel.
(6)Genetics Institute at Soroka Medical Center and the Morris Kahn Laboratory of
Human Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben Gurion University, Beer Sheva,
Israel.
(7)Department of Ophthalmology, Soroka Medical Center and Clalit Health
Services, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University, Beer Sheva, Israel.
(8)Ophthalmology Unit, Schneider Children's Medical Center in Israel, Petach
Tikva, Israel.
(9)Department of Ophthalmology, Rabin Medical Center, Petach Tikva, Israel.
(10)Department of Ophthalmology, Rambam Healthcare Campus, Haifa, Israel.
(11)Department of Ophthalmology, Shamir Medical Center, Zerifin, Israel.
(12)The Matlow's Ophthalmo-genetics Laboratory, Shamir Medical Center, Zerifin,
Israel.
(13)Ophthalmology Division, Tel Aviv Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(14)The Krieger Eye Research Laboratory, Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion
- Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.
(15)Department of Ophthalmology, Bnai-Zion Medical Center, Haifa, Israel.
(16)Ruth and Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion- Israel Institute of
Technology, Haifa, Israel.

IMPORTANCE: Data regarding the prevalence of various inherited retinal diseases
(IRDs) are limited and vary across populations; moreover, nationwide prevalence
studies may be limited to a specific IRD phenotype, potentially leading to
inaccurate prevalence estimations. Therefore, nationwide prevalence data are
needed.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the prevalence of 67 IRD phenotypes in the Israeli
population.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This cohort study collected nationwide data
regarding the number of individuals affected with IRD phenotypes assessed in 10
clinical and academic centers in Israel as part of the research activity of the
Israeli inherited retinal disease consortium. Data were collected in May 2023 on
9396 individuals residing in Israel who were diagnosed by an ophthalmologist
with an IRD using either electroretinography or retinal imaging where included.
Individuals with retinal diseases known to have a nonmendelian basis or without
a clear genetic basis and those who were reported as deceased at the time of
data collection were excluded from this study.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Prevalence of 67 IRD phenotypes.
RESULTS: Among the 9396 participants in our cohort, the most common IRD in
Israel was retinitis pigmentosa with a disease prevalence of approximately
1:2400 individuals, followed by cone-rod dystrophy (approximately 1:14 000),
Stargardt disease (approximately 1:16 000), Usher syndrome (approximately
1:16,000), and congenital stationary night blindness (approximately 1:18 000).
The prevalence of all IRDs combined was 1:1043 individuals.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: The current study provides large prevalence dataset
of 67 IRD phenotypes, some of which are extremely rare, with only a single
identified case. This analysis highlights the potential importance of performing
additional nationwide prevalence studies to potentially assist with determining
the prevalence of IRDs worldwide.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2024.1461
PMCID: PMC11099844
PMID: 38753338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Sharon
reported grants from the Foundation Fighting Blindness and the Israel Science
Foundation during the conduct of the study. No other disclosures were reported.
