---
reference_id: "PMID:39543746"
title: "Atypical Cogan syndrome: a case report."
authors:
- El Bouhmadi K
- Allaoui A
- El Khattab M
- Youbi M
- Anajar S
- Essaadi M
- Snoussi K
- Hajjij A
journal: J Med Case Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13256-024-04904-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atypical Cogan syndrome: a case report.
**Authors:** El Bouhmadi K, Allaoui A, El Khattab M, Youbi M, Anajar S, Essaadi M, Snoussi K, Hajjij A
**Journal:** J Med Case Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13256-024-04904-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13256-024-04904-6)

## Content

1. J Med Case Rep. 2024 Nov 14;18(1):551. doi: 10.1186/s13256-024-04904-6.

Atypical Cogan syndrome: a case report.

El Bouhmadi K(1), Allaoui A(2), El Khattab M(3), Youbi M(3), Anajar S(3), 
Essaadi M(3), Snoussi K(3), Hajjij A(3).

Author information:
(1)Vertigo Center, Cheikh Khalifa International University HospitalMohammed VI 
University of Health Sciences, Casablanca, Morocco. Elbkhadija25@gmail.com.
(2)Internal Medicine, Cheikh Khalifa International University Hospital, Mohammed 
VI University of Health Sciences, Casablanca, Morocco.
(3)Vertigo Center, Cheikh Khalifa International University HospitalMohammed VI 
University of Health Sciences, Casablanca, Morocco.

BACKGROUND: Cogan syndrome is a rare autoimmune systemic vasculitis presenting 
with interstitial keratitis and audiovestibular symptoms. The atypical form, 
characterized by more extensive ocular lesions with audiovestibular symptoms 
appearing with a longer delay and more frequent systemic features, is usually 
underdiagnosed, delaying treatment.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report the case of a 30-year-old Mediterranean female who 
presented recurrent left red and painful eye. The evolution in flare-ups during 
3 years, associated with a nonspecific biological inflammatory response, 
motivated ocular biopsies demonstrating diffuse inflammatory changes from the 
cornea to the sclera. Since Morocco is an endemic region for tuberculosis, the 
laboratory tests were expanded to identify the latent forms based on the 
tuberculin skin test and QuantiFERON TB Gold in tube assay, both positive for 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. Thus, antibacillary chemotherapy was 
started for 6 months, with reappearance of the symptoms at the end of treatment. 
Three years later, the patient presented isolated and fluctuating 
audiovestibular Ménière-like symptoms, with progressive sensorineural hearing 
loss. The nonstabilization under usual medical treatment along with her diffuse 
inflammatory ocular lesions led to the diagnosis of atypical Cogan syndrome. The 
patient received long-term corticosteroid with notable improvement.
CONCLUSION: Cogan syndrome is a rare autoimmune disease that should be 
considered when faced with ocular and audiovestibular manifestations, even in 
its atypical form, to provide early and adequate treatment, which is the main 
prognosis factor in the control of irreversible lesions. Thus, interdisciplinary 
collaboration is fundamental along with screening for other infectious and 
systemic disorders that should include tuberculosis.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13256-024-04904-6
PMCID: PMC11566406
PMID: 39543746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Ethics approval and consent to 
participate Obtained. Consent for publication Written informed consent was 
obtained from the patient’s legal guardian for publication of this case report 
and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for 
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Conflict of interest None.