---
reference_id: "PMID:18173876"
title: How good are systemic symptoms and blood inflammatory markers at detecting individuals with tuberculosis?
authors:
- Breen RA
- Leonard O
- Perrin FM
- Smith CJ
- Bhagani S
- Cropley I
- Lipman MC
journal: Int J Tuberc Lung Dis
year: '2008'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# How good are systemic symptoms and blood inflammatory markers at detecting individuals with tuberculosis?
**Authors:** Breen RA, Leonard O, Perrin FM, Smith CJ, Bhagani S, Cropley I, Lipman MC
**Journal:** Int J Tuberc Lung Dis (2008)

## Content

1. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2008 Jan;12(1):44-9.

How good are systemic symptoms and blood inflammatory markers at detecting 
individuals with tuberculosis?

Breen RA(1), Leonard O, Perrin FM, Smith CJ, Bhagani S, Cropley I, Lipman MC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, Royal Free Hospital, London, UK. 
rambreen@doctors.org.uk

Comment in
    Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2008 Oct;12(10):1217; author reply 1218.

SETTING: The diagnosis of tuberculosis (TB) may be rejected in the absence of 
symptoms such as fever, sweats or weight loss.
OBJECTIVES: To determine how frequently these features and blood test evidence 
of inflammation were absent in individuals with TB.
METHODS: Prospective cohort study of 175 unselected subjects diagnosed with TB 
at a UK TB service between 2003 and 2006.
RESULTS: Eight (5%) subjects identified by screening and 24 (14%) without 
culture confirmation were excluded. Of the remaining 143, fever, sweats or 
weight loss were absent in respectively 37%, 39% and 38%. All three symptoms 
were absent in 25%. In 88 subjects with pulmonary disease, all three symptoms 
were absent in 20% (10% of smear-positive cases). Overall, C-reactive protein 
was normal in 15%, erythrocyte sedimentation rate in 21% and lactate 
dehydrogenase in 55%. In a multivariable model, factors associated with absent 
symptoms included drug-resistant TB (adjusted odds ratio [aOR] 3.58, P = 0.004) 
and female sex (aOR 3.15, P = 0.004).
CONCLUSIONS: In our population, TB, including pulmonary disease, frequently 
presented without fever, sweats or weight loss and with normal blood 
inflammatory markers. This information is of as much relevance to policy makers 
seeking to improve active case detection as to clinicians and the general 
public.

PMID: 18173876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]