---
reference_id: "PMID:37129092"
title: "Clinical features and magnesium levels: Novel insights in 15q11.2 BP1-BP2 copy number variants."
authors:
- Meossi C
- Carrer A
- Ciaccio C
- Estienne M
- Silipigni R
- Sciacca FL
- Pantaleoni C
- "D'Arrigo S"
- Milani D
journal: J Intellect Disabil Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/jir.13038
keywords:
- Humans
- Chromosome Aberrations
- Magnesium
- DNA Copy Number Variations/genetics
- Neurodevelopmental Disorders/genetics
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Biomarkers
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical features and magnesium levels: Novel insights in 15q11.2 BP1-BP2 copy number variants.
**Authors:** Meossi C, Carrer A, Ciaccio C, Estienne M, Silipigni R, Sciacca FL, Pantaleoni C, D'Arrigo S, Milani D
**Journal:** J Intellect Disabil Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jir.13038](https://doi.org/10.1111/jir.13038)

## Content

1. J Intellect Disabil Res. 2023 Jul;67(7):679-689. doi: 10.1111/jir.13038. Epub
2023 May 2.

Clinical features and magnesium levels: Novel insights in 15q11.2 BP1-BP2 copy
number variants.

Meossi C(1), Carrer A(1), Ciaccio C(2), Estienne M(2), Silipigni R(3), Sciacca
FL(4), Pantaleoni C(2), D'Arrigo S(2), Milani D(5).

Author information:
(1)Università degli Studi di Milano and Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale
Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Pediatric Neuroscience, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico
C. Besta, Milan, Italy.
(3)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore
Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(4)Laboratory of Clinical Pathology and Medical Genetics, Fondazione IRCCS
Istituto Neurologico C. Besta, Milan, Italy.
(5)Pediatric Highly Intensive Care Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale
Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Investigating copy number variations (CNVs) such as microdeletions
or microduplications can significantly contribute to discover the aetiology of
neurodevelopmental disorders. 15q11.2 genomic region, including NIPA1 and NIPA2
genes, contains a recurrent but rare CNV, flanked by the break points BP1 and
BP2. Both BP1-BP2 microdeletion and microduplication have been associated with
intellectual disability (ID), neuropsychiatric/behavioural disturbances and mild
clinical features, even if with incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity.
The pathogenic role of this CNV is quite unclear though. Unknown variants in
other DNA regions and parent-of-origin effect (POE) are some of the mechanisms
that have been proposed as an explanation of the wide phenotypic variability. As
NIPA1 and NIPA2 encode for proteins that mediate magnesium (Mg2+ ) metabolism,
it has been suggested that urinary Mg2+ levels could potentially represent
informative and affordable biomarkers for a rapid screening of 15q11.2
duplications or deletions. Furthermore, magnesium supplementation has been
proposed as possible therapeutic strategy.
METHODS: Thirty one children with ID and/or other neurodevelopmental disorders
carrying either a duplication or a deletion in 15q11.2 BP1-BP2 region have been
recruited. When available, blood samples from parents have been analysed to
identify the CNV origin. All participants underwent family and medical data
collection, physical examination and neuropsychiatric assessment.
Electroencephalogram (EEG) and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan were
performed in 15 children. In addition, 11 families agreed to participate to the
assessment of blood and urinary Mg2+ levels.
RESULTS: We observed a highly variable phenotypic spectrum of developmental
issues encompassing ID in most subjects as well as a variety of behavioural
disorders such as autism and attention-deficit disorder/attention-deficit
hyperactivity disorder. Dysmorphic traits and malformations were detected only
in a minority of the participants, and no clear association with growth
anomalies was found. Abnormal brain MRI and/or EEG were reported respectively in
64% and 92% of the subjects. Inheritance assessment highlighted an excess of
duplication of maternal origin, while cardiac alterations were detected only in
children with 15q11.2 CNV inherited from the father. We found great variability
in Mg2+ urinary values, without correlation with 15q11.2 copy numbers. However,
the variance of urinary Mg2+ levels largely increases in individuals with
15q11.2 deletion/duplication.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides further evidence that 15q11.2 BP1-BP2 CNV is
associated with a broad spectrum of neurodevelopmental disorders and POE might
be an explanation for clinical variability. However, some issues may question
the real impact of 15q11.2 CNV on the phenotype in the carriers: DNA sequencing
could be useful to exclude other pathogenic gene mutations. Our results do not
support the possibility that urinary Mg2+ levels can be used as biomarkers to
screen children with neurodevelopmental disorders for 15q11.2
duplication/deletion. However, there are evidences of correlations between
15q11.2 BP1-BP2 CNV and Mg2+ metabolism and future studies may pave the way to
new therapeutic options.

© 2023 The Authors. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research published by
MENCAP and International Association of the Scientific Study of Intellectual and
Developmental Disabilities and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jir.13038
PMID: 37129092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
