---
reference_id: "PMID:33481812"
title: A novel score system of blood tests for differentiating Kawasaki disease from febrile children.
authors:
- Tsai CM
- Chu CH
- Liu X
- Weng KP
- Liu SF
- Huang YH
- Kuo HC
journal: PLoS One
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0244721
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel score system of blood tests for differentiating Kawasaki disease from febrile children.
**Authors:** Tsai CM, Chu CH, Liu X, Weng KP, Liu SF, Huang YH, Kuo HC
**Journal:** PLoS One (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0244721](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0244721)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2021 Jan 22;16(1):e0244721. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0244721. 
eCollection 2021.

A novel score system of blood tests for differentiating Kawasaki disease from 
febrile children.

Tsai CM(1), Chu CH(2), Liu X(3), Weng KP(4)(5), Liu SF(6)(7), Huang YH(1)(8), 
Kuo HC(1)(6)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang 
Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Statistics, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Baoan Women's and Children's Hospital, Jinan 
University, Shenzhen, China.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Respiratory Therapy, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, 
Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care 
Medicine, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, and Chang Gung University 
College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(8)Kawasaki Disease Center, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Kawasaki disease is the most common cause of acquired heart disease 
among febrile children under the age of 5 years old. It is also a clinically 
diagnosed disease. In this study, we developed and assessed a novel score system 
using objective parameters to differentiate Kawasaki disease from febrile 
children.
METHODS: We analyzed 6,310 febrile children and 485 Kawasaki disease subjects in 
this study. We collected biological parameters of a routine blood test, 
including complete blood count with differential, C-reactive protein, aspartate 
aminotransferase, and alanine aminotransferase. Receiver operating 
characteristic curve, logistic regression, and Youden's index were all used to 
develop the prediction model. Two other independent cohorts from different 
hospitals were used for verification.
RESULTS: We obtained eight independent predictors (platelets, eosinophil, 
alanine aminotransferase, C-reactive protein, hemoglobin, mean corpuscular 
hemoglobin, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration, and monocyte) and found 
the top three scores to be eosinophil >1.5% (score: 7), alanine aminotransferase 
>30 U/L (score: 6), and C-reactive protein>25 mg/L (score: 6). A score of 14 
represents the best sensitivity value plus specificity prediction rate for 
Kawasaki disease. The sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy for our cohort were 
0.824, 0.839, and 0.838, respectively. The verification test of two independent 
cohorts of Kawasaki disease patients (N = 103 and 170) from two different 
institutes had a sensitivity of 0.780 (213/273).
CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrate a novel score system with good 
discriminatory ability for differentiating between children with Kawasaki 
disease and other febrile children, as well as highlight the importance of 
eosinophil in Kawasaki disease. Using this novel score system can help 
first-line physicians diagnose and then treat Kawasaki disease early.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0244721
PMCID: PMC7822339
PMID: 33481812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.