---
reference_id: "PMID:27307783"
title: "46,XY disorder of sex development due to 17-beta hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 3 deficiency: a plea for timely genetic testing."
authors:
- Grimbly C
- Caluseriu O
- Metcalfe P
- Jetha MM
- Rosolowsky ET
journal: Int J Pediatr Endocrinol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s13633-016-0030-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 46,XY disorder of sex development due to 17-beta hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 3 deficiency: a plea for timely genetic testing.
**Authors:** Grimbly C, Caluseriu O, Metcalfe P, Jetha MM, Rosolowsky ET
**Journal:** Int J Pediatr Endocrinol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13633-016-0030-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13633-016-0030-x)

## Content

1. Int J Pediatr Endocrinol. 2016;2016:12. doi: 10.1186/s13633-016-0030-x. Epub
2016 Jun 15.

46,XY disorder of sex development due to 17-beta hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
type 3 deficiency: a plea for timely genetic testing.

Grimbly C(1), Caluseriu O(2), Metcalfe P(3), Jetha MM(1), Rosolowsky ET(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Alberta,
Edmonton Clinic Health Academy, 11405- 87th Ave., Edmonton, AB T6G 1C9 Canada.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, 8-39 Medical Sciences
Building, 8613 114 St., Edmonton, AB T6G 2H7 Canada.
(3)Division of Pediatric Urology, Department of Pediatric Surgery, University of
Alberta, 2C3.79 WC Mackenzie Health Sciences Centre, Edmonton, AB T6G 2R7
Canada.

BACKGROUND: 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 3 (17βHSD3) deficiency is a
rare cause of disorder of sex development (DSD) due to impaired conversion of
androstenedione to testosterone. Traditionally, the diagnosis was determined by
βHCG-stimulated ratios of testosterone:androstenedione < 0.8.
CASE PRESENTATION: An otherwise phenotypically female infant presented with
bilateral inguinal masses and a 46,XY karyotype. βHCG stimulation (1500 IU IM
for 2 days) suggested 17βHSD3 deficiency although androstenedione was only
minimally stimulated (4.5 nmol/L to 5.4 nmol/L). Expedient genetic testing for
the HSD17B3 gene provided the unequivocal diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: We advocate for urgent genetic testing in rare causes of DSD as
indeterminate hormone results can delay diagnosis and prolong intervention.

DOI: 10.1186/s13633-016-0030-x
PMCID: PMC4908721
PMID: 27307783
