---
reference_id: "PMID:21956414"
title: "Incidence and clinical characteristics of thyroid cancer in prospective series of individuals with Cowden and Cowden-like syndrome characterized by germline PTEN, SDH, or KLLN alterations."
authors:
- Ngeow J
- Mester J
- Rybicki LA
- Ni Y
- Milas M
- Eng C
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-1616
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Child
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- "Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Middle Aged
- PTEN Phosphohydrolase/genetics
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- Prospective Studies
- Succinate Dehydrogenase/genetics
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Tumor Suppressor Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence and clinical characteristics of thyroid cancer in prospective series of individuals with Cowden and Cowden-like syndrome characterized by germline PTEN, SDH, or KLLN alterations.
**Authors:** Ngeow J, Mester J, Rybicki LA, Ni Y, Milas M, Eng C
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2011-1616](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2011-1616)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Dec;96(12):E2063-71. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-1616. 
Epub 2011 Sep 28.

Incidence and clinical characteristics of thyroid cancer in prospective series 
of individuals with Cowden and Cowden-like syndrome characterized by germline 
PTEN, SDH, or KLLN alterations.

Ngeow J(1), Mester J, Rybicki LA, Ni Y, Milas M, Eng C.

Author information:
(1)Genomic Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, 
Ohio 44195, USA.

CONTEXT: Thyroid cancer is believed to be an important component of Cowden 
syndrome (CS). Germline PTEN and SDHx mutations and KLLN epimutation cause CS 
and CS-like phenotypes. Despite the established association, little is known 
about the incidence and clinical features of thyroid cancer found in CS/CS-like 
patients.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to compare incidence, clinical, and 
histological characteristics of epithelial thyroid cancers in CS/CS-like 
individuals, in the context of PTEN, SDHx, and KLLN status.
DESIGN AND PARTICIPANTS: The study encompassed a 5-yr, multicenter, prospective 
accrual of 2723 CS and CS-like patients, all of whom had comprehensive PTEN 
analysis. SDHx mutation analysis occurred in those without PTEN 
mutations/variations and elevated manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) levels. 
KLLN epimutation analysis was performed in the subset without any PTEN or SDHx 
mutation/deletion/ variant/polymorphism.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Gene-specific thyroid cancer histologies, demographic and 
clinical information, and adjusted standardized incidence rates were studied.
RESULTS: Of 2723 CS/CS-like patients, 664 had thyroid cancer. Standardized 
incidence rates for thyroid cancer were 72 [95% confidence interval (CI), 51-99; 
P < 0.001] for pathogenic PTEN mutations, 63 (95% CI, 42-92; P < 0.001) for SDHx 
variants, and 45 (95% CI, 26-73; P < 0.001) for KLLN epimutations. All six 
(16.7%) diagnosed under age 18 yr carried pathogenic PTEN mutations. Follicular 
thyroid cancer was overrepresented in PTEN mutation-positive cases compared to 
those with SDHx and KLLN alterations. PTEN frameshift mutations were found in 
31% of patients with thyroid cancer compared to 17% in those without thyroid 
cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: CS/CS-like patients have elevated risks of follicular thyroid 
cancer due to PTEN pathogenic mutations and of papillary thyroid cancer from 
SDHx and KLLN alterations. Children presenting with thyroid cancer should be 
tested for PTEN mutations.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2011-1616
PMCID: PMC3232626
PMID: 21956414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]