---
reference_id: "PMID:31472880"
title: The Evolution from Hypertension to Heart Failure.
authors:
- Sorrentino MJ
journal: Heart Fail Clin
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.hfc.2019.06.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Evolution from Hypertension to Heart Failure.
**Authors:** Sorrentino MJ
**Journal:** Heart Fail Clin (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hfc.2019.06.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hfc.2019.06.005)

## Content

1. Heart Fail Clin. 2019 Oct;15(4):447-453. doi: 10.1016/j.hfc.2019.06.005. Epub 
2019 Aug 7.

The Evolution from Hypertension to Heart Failure.

Sorrentino MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Cardiology, University of Chicago 
Medicine, 5841 South Maryland Avenue, MC 6080, Room B607, Chicago, IL 60637, 
USA. Electronic address: msorrent@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu.

Hypertensive heart disease includes the development of diastolic dysfunction, 
left ventricular hypertrophy, and heart failure with preserved and reduced 
ejection fraction. The development of heart failure can occur because of 
complications of ischemic heart disease or from progression of diastolic 
dysfunction to heart failure with preserved ejection fraction degenerating to a 
dilated heart with systolic dysfunction or heart failure with reduced ejection 
fraction. Hypertension clinical trials have shown that the treatment of 
hypertension can prevent the development of heart failure. In addition, 
lifestyle modification with exercise and weight loss can improve diastolic 
function and reduce the risk for heart failure.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hfc.2019.06.005
PMID: 31472880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]