---
reference_id: "PMID:1365885"
title: Alzheimer's disease untangled.
authors:
- Crawford F
- Goate A
journal: Bioessays
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1002/bies.950141102
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alzheimer's disease untangled.
**Authors:** Crawford F, Goate A
**Journal:** Bioessays (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1002/bies.950141102](https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.950141102)

## Content

1. Bioessays. 1992 Nov;14(11):727-34. doi: 10.1002/bies.950141102.

Alzheimer's disease untangled.

Crawford F(1), Goate A.

Author information:
(1)Suncoast Gerontology Center, University of South Florida, Tampa 33613.

The last year has seen major advances in the study of Alzheimer's disease (AD). 
Four mutations involving amino acid substitutions in exons 16 and 17 of the 
amyloid precursor protein (APP) gene, have been identified which co-segregate 
with the disease in some families multiply affected by early onset Alzheimer's 
disease. These mutations are strongly suggestive of a causative role for the 
amyloid precursor protein in Alzheimer's disease. Despite their rarity, these 
mutations are important because they represent the first known cause of 
Alzheimer's disease. Processing of APP must be central to the pathogenesis of 
the disease although the precise effects of these amino acid substitutions are 
not understood. Work is now being undertaken to characterise the processing 
pathways of APP and to identify other causes of AD. The development of models of 
AD using the APP mutations offers the possibility of identifying drug targets 
and developing more effective treatments than are presently available.

DOI: 10.1002/bies.950141102
PMID: 1365885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]