---
reference_id: "PMID:30721323"
title: Camurati-Engelmann Disease.
authors:
- Van Hul W
- Boudin E
- Vanhoenacker FM
- Mortier G
journal: Calcif Tissue Int
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s00223-019-00532-1
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- Bone and Bones/pathology
- Camurati-Engelmann Syndrome/diagnostic imaging
- Cell Proliferation
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Exons
- Gait
- Humans
- Losartan/therapeutic use
- Muscle Fatigue
- Muscle Weakness
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Radiography
- Skull/pathology
- Transforming Growth Factor beta1/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Camurati-Engelmann Disease.
**Authors:** Van Hul W, Boudin E, Vanhoenacker FM, Mortier G
**Journal:** Calcif Tissue Int (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00223-019-00532-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00223-019-00532-1)

## Content

1. Calcif Tissue Int. 2019 May;104(5):554-560. doi: 10.1007/s00223-019-00532-1.
Epub 2019 Feb 5.

Camurati-Engelmann Disease.

Van Hul W(1)(2), Boudin E(3), Vanhoenacker FM(4), Mortier G(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp and Antwerp University
Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium. Wim.vanhul@uantwerpen.be.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Prins Boudewijnlaan
43, 2650, Edegem, Belgium. Wim.vanhul@uantwerpen.be.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp and Antwerp University
Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium.
(4)AZ Sint-Maarten, Antwerp University Hospital and Ghent University, Mechelen,
Belgium.

Camurati-Engelmann disease or progressive diaphyseal dysplasia is a rare
autosomal dominant sclerosing bone dysplasia. Mainly the skull and the diaphyses
of the long tubular bones are affected. Clinically, the patients suffer from
bone pain, easy fatigability, and decreased muscle mass and weakness in the
proximal parts of the lower limbs resulting in gait disturbances. The
disease-causing mutations are located within the TGFβ-1 gene and expected to or
thought to disrupt the binding between TGFβ1 and its latency-associated peptide
resulting in an increased signaling of the pathway and subsequently accelerated
bone turnover. In preclinical studies, it was shown that targeting the type I
receptor ameliorates the high bone turnover. In patients, treatment options are
currently mostly limited to corticosteroids that may relieve the pain, and
improve the muscle weakness and fatigue. In this review, the clinical and
radiological characteristics as well as the molecular genetics of this condition
are discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/s00223-019-00532-1
PMID: 30721323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
