---
reference_id: "PMID:38911600"
title: Proteomics and lipidomic analysis reveal dysregulated pathways associated with loss of sacsin.
authors:
- Galatolo D
- Rocchiccioli S
- Di Giorgi N
- Dal Canto F
- Signore G
- Morani F
- Ceccherini E
- Doccini S
- Santorelli FM
journal: Front Neurosci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2024.1375299
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Proteomics and lipidomic analysis reveal dysregulated pathways associated with loss of sacsin.
**Authors:** Galatolo D, Rocchiccioli S, Di Giorgi N, Dal Canto F, Signore G, Morani F, Ceccherini E, Doccini S, Santorelli FM
**Journal:** Front Neurosci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnins.2024.1375299](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2024.1375299)

## Content

1. Front Neurosci. 2024 Jun 7;18:1375299. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2024.1375299.
eCollection 2024.

Proteomics and lipidomic analysis reveal dysregulated pathways associated with
loss of sacsin.

Galatolo D(#)(1), Rocchiccioli S(#)(2), Di Giorgi N(2), Dal Canto F(1), Signore
G(2)(3), Morani F(4), Ceccherini E(2), Doccini S(1), Santorelli FM(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Medicine, IRCCS Stella Maris Foundation, Pisa, Italy.
(2)Institute of Clinical Physiology, National Research Council, Pisa, Italy.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(4)The BioRobotics Institute, Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Pisa, Italy.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: Autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay (ARSACS)
is a rare incurable neurodegenerative disease caused by mutations in the SACS
gene, which codes for sacsin, a large protein involved in protein homeostasis,
mitochondrial function, cytoskeletal dynamics, autophagy, cell adhesion and
vesicle trafficking. However, the pathogenic mechanisms underlying sacsin
dysfunction are still largely uncharacterized, and so attempts to develop
therapies are still in the early stages.
METHODS: To achieve further understanding of how processes are altered by loss
of sacsin, we used untargeted proteomics to compare protein profiles in ARSACS
fibroblasts versus controls.
RESULTS: Our analyses confirmed the involvement of known biological pathways and
also implicated calcium and lipid homeostasis in ARSACS skin fibroblasts, a
finding further verified in SH-SY5Y SACS -/- cells. Validation through mass
spectrometry-based analysis and comparative quantification of lipids by LC-MS in
fibroblasts revealed increased levels of ceramides coupled with a reduction of
diacylglycerols.
DISCUSSION: In addition to confirming aberrant Ca2+ homeostasis in ARSACS, this
study described abnormal lipid levels associated with loss of sacsin.

Copyright © 2024 Galatolo, Rocchiccioli, Di Giorgi, Dal Canto, Signore, Morani,
Ceccherini, Doccini and Santorelli.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2024.1375299
PMCID: PMC11191878
PMID: 38911600

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
