---
reference_id: "PMID:22014002"
title: Chitotriosidase as a biomarker of cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy.
authors:
- Orchard PJ
- Lund T
- Miller W
- Rothman SM
- Raymond G
- Nascene D
- Basso L
- Cloyd J
- Tolar J
journal: J Neuroinflammation
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-8-144
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Adrenoleukodystrophy/enzymology, pathology, physiopathology"
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- "Brain/pathology, physiopathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Genotype
- "Hexosaminidases/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chitotriosidase as a biomarker of cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy.
**Authors:** Orchard PJ, Lund T, Miller W, Rothman SM, Raymond G, Nascene D, Basso L, Cloyd J, Tolar J
**Journal:** J Neuroinflammation (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1742-2094-8-144](https://doi.org/10.1186/1742-2094-8-144)

## Content

1. J Neuroinflammation. 2011 Oct 20;8:144. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-8-144.

Chitotriosidase as a biomarker of cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy.

Orchard PJ(1), Lund T, Miller W, Rothman SM, Raymond G, Nascene D, Basso L, 
Cloyd J, Tolar J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Program in Blood & Marrow Transplantation, 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA. orcha001@umn.edu

BACKGROUND: Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) is an X-linked peroxisomal disorder 
characterized by the abnormal beta-oxidation of very long chain fatty acids 
(VLCFA). In 35-40% of children with ALD, an acute inflammatory process occurs in 
the central nervous system (CNS) leading to demyelination that is rapidly 
progressive, debilitating and ultimately fatal. Allogeneic hematopoietic stem 
cell transplantation (HSCT) can halt disease progression in cerebral ALD (C-ALD) 
if performed early. In contrast, for advanced patients the risk of morbidity and 
mortality is increased with transplantation. To date there is no means of 
quantitating neuroinflammation in C-ALD, nor is there an accepted measure to 
determine prognosis for more advanced patients.
METHODS: As cellular infiltration has been observed in C-ALD, including 
activation of monocytes and macrophages, we evaluated the activity of 
chitotriosidase in the plasma and spinal fluid of boys with active C-ALD. Due to 
genotypic variations in the chitotriosidase gene, these were also evaluated.
RESULTS: We document elevations in chitotriosidase activity in the plasma of 
patients with C-ALD (n = 38; median activity 1,576 ng/mL/hr) vs. controls (n = 
16, median 765 ng/mL/hr, p = 0.0004), and in the CSF of C-ALD patients (n = 38; 
median activity 4,330 ng/mL/hr) vs. controls (n = 16, median 0 ng/mL/hr, p < 
0.0001). In addition, activity levels of plasma and CSF chitotriosidase prior to 
transplant correlated with progression as determined by the Moser/Raymond 
functional score 1 year following transplantation (p = 0.002 and < 0.0001, 
respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings confirm elevation of chitotriosidase activity in 
patients with active C-ALD, and suggest that these levels predict prognosis of 
patients with C-ALD undergoing transplantation.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-2094-8-144
PMCID: PMC3236018
PMID: 22014002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]