---
reference_id: "PMID:38204312"
title: Chest pain in children with familial Mediterranean fever.
authors:
- Sunar-Yayla EN
- Şenol PE
- Yıldırım DG
- Söylemezoğlu O
journal: Turk J Pediatr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.24953/turkjped.2023.227
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chest pain in children with familial Mediterranean fever.
**Authors:** Sunar-Yayla EN, Şenol PE, Yıldırım DG, Söylemezoğlu O
**Journal:** Turk J Pediatr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.24953/turkjped.2023.227](https://doi.org/10.24953/turkjped.2023.227)

## Content

1. Turk J Pediatr. 2023;65(6):973-979. doi: 10.24953/turkjped.2023.227.

Chest pain in children with familial Mediterranean fever.

Sunar-Yayla EN(1), Şenol PE(1), Yıldırım DG(1), Söylemezoğlu O(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Rheumatology, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of 
Medicine, Gazi University, Ankara, Türkiye.

BACKGROUND: Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is the most common and autosomal 
recessive inherited autoinflammatory disease. The most common signs and symptoms 
are fever, abdominal pain, chest pain, and arthritis. The aim of this study was 
to describe the clinical, laboratory and genetic differences between pediatric 
FMF patients with and without chest pain.
METHODS: Between January 2006 and January 2022, 1134 patients with FMF were 
analyzed retrospectively. Patients were divided into two groups including those 
with and without recurrent chest pain. These groups were compared in 
demographic, clinical, treatment, and MEFV gene analyses.
RESULTS: A hundred and sixty-two (14.3%) patients had recurrent chest pain. In 
patients with recurrent chest pain, the age of onset of symptoms was younger 
(p=0.003), and the family history of FMF was higher (p=0.002). Patients with 
chest pain had a higher annual attack frequency (p < 0.001), a longer attack 
duration (p < 0.001), and higher Pras disease activity scores (p < 0.001). The 
colchicine dose used in the treatment was higher in FMF patients with chest pain 
(p=0.005), and anti-IL-1treatment was higher (p < 0.001). M694V homozygous 
mutation was found more frequently (p=0.001), whereas M694V/V726A mutation was 
found less frequently in patients with recurrent chest pain (p=0.017).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with recurrent chest pain seem to have early onset 
symptoms, often are more likely to have family history, and have a higher 
disease severity. In addition, the presence of homozygous M694V mutation is more 
common in patients with chest pain.

DOI: 10.24953/turkjped.2023.227
PMID: 38204312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]