---
reference_id: "PMID:20727754"
title: Clinical and neuropathological findings in patients with TACO1 mutations.
authors:
- Seeger J
- Schrank B
- Pyle A
- Stucka R
- Lörcher U
- Müller-Ziermann S
- Abicht A
- Czermin B
- Holinski-Feder E
- Lochmüller H
- Horvath R
journal: Neuromuscul Disord
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2010.06.017
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Basal Ganglia/pathology
- Child
- "Cognition Disorders/enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- "Cytochrome-c Oxidase Deficiency/enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- "Electron Transport Complex IV/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Humans
- "Leigh Disease/genetics, pathology"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Microfilament Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/enzymology, pathology"
- Phenotype
- Sex Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and neuropathological findings in patients with TACO1 mutations.
**Authors:** Seeger J, Schrank B, Pyle A, Stucka R, Lörcher U, Müller-Ziermann S, Abicht A, Czermin B, Holinski-Feder E, Lochmüller H, Horvath R
**Journal:** Neuromuscul Disord (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nmd.2010.06.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nmd.2010.06.017)

## Content

1. Neuromuscul Disord. 2010 Nov;20(11):720-4. doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2010.06.017.
Epub  2010 Aug 19.

Clinical and neuropathological findings in patients with TACO1 mutations.

Seeger J(1), Schrank B, Pyle A, Stucka R, Lörcher U, Müller-Ziermann S, Abicht 
A, Czermin B, Holinski-Feder E, Lochmüller H, Horvath R.

Author information:
(1)Deutsche Klinik für Diagnostik, Wiesbaden, Germany.

We have recently identified mutations in the translation activator of cytochrome 
c oxidase 1 (TACO1) gene, leading to cytochrome c oxidase (COX) deficiency. 
Here, we report the clinical and neuroimaging findings of five members of a big 
consanguinous family homozygous for c.472insC in TACO1. All 5 patients had an 
uneventful early childhood and a subtle onset, slowly progressive cognitive 
dysfunction, dystonia or visual impairment between ages 4 and 16years. Affected 
girls had a milder phenotype and preserved ambulation into the late twenties. 
Brain MRI revealed bilateral, symmetric lesions of the basal ganglia in all 
affected family members, but less prominent in girls. TACO1 analysis showed no 
mutations in 17 patients with juvenile-onset Leigh syndrome and isolated COX or 
combined respiratory chain deficiency, indicating that TACO1 mutations are a 
rare cause of Leigh syndrome.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nmd.2010.06.017
PMID: 20727754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]