---
reference_id: "PMID:15623010"
title: Tuberculosis prevention and treatment.
authors:
- Toth A
- Fackelmann J
- Pigott W
- Tolomeo O
journal: Can Nurse
year: '2004'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tuberculosis prevention and treatment.
**Authors:** Toth A, Fackelmann J, Pigott W, Tolomeo O
**Journal:** Can Nurse (2004)

## Content

1. Can Nurse. 2004 Nov;100(9):27-30.

Tuberculosis prevention and treatment.

Toth A(1), Fackelmann J, Pigott W, Tolomeo O.

Author information:
(1)McMaster Institute of Environment and Health, McMaster University, Hamilton, 
Ontario.

Tuberculosis (TB) is one of the oldest known diseases and has claimed more lives 
than any other Today, about one-third of the world's population is infected with 
TB. In 2003, 1,379 cases of new, active and relapsed TB were reported in Canada. 
TB is caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Only 10 per cent of infected 
individuals will develop active TB. Pulmonary TB can be spread by an infectious 
person through the aerosolization of droplets when coughing, talking, spitting, 
sneezing or singing. Symptoms of pulmonary TB are a cough with or without sputum 
production lasting at least three weeks, chest pain, hemoptysis, fever, night 
sweats, weight loss, lack of appetite, chills and weakness. Extrapulmonary TB is 
generally not associated with person-to-person spread. Common sites include the 
throat, lymph nodes, abdomen, intestines, long bones of the legs, spine, 
kidneys, bladder, skin, eyes and meninges. The risk factors for TB infection and 
disease include close contact with an active pulmonary TB case, HIV infection or 
AIDS, inactive disease not adequately treated, low income, underlying medical 
condition, homelessness, alcoholism, injection drug use, aboriginal background 
or occupation in health care. Risk settings include travel or residence in an 
endemic area or work or residence in a correctional facility, shelter, rooming 
house, residential facility, hospital or long-term care facility. Nurses need to 
advocate for the prompt diagnosis and isolation of suspected and confirmed TB 
cases. Knowing when to institute such measures as isolation in a negative 
pressure room, using respirator masks and limiting interpersonal contacts is 
vital to the nursing care of TB patients. In addition, the role of the public 
health department needs to be understood; for example, all jurisdictions have 
legislated requirements for reporting new positive TB skin tests to public 
health.

PMID: 15623010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]