---
reference_id: "PMID:37001294"
title: ALK-JNK signaling promotes NLRP3 inflammasome activation and pyroptosis via NEK7 during Streptococcus pneumoniae infection.
authors:
- Wang X
- Zhao Y
- Wang D
- Liu C
- Qi Z
- Tang H
- Liu Y
- Zhang S
- Cui Y
- Li Y
- Liu R
- Shen Y
journal: Mol Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2023.03.016
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ALK-JNK signaling promotes NLRP3 inflammasome activation and pyroptosis via NEK7 during Streptococcus pneumoniae infection.
**Authors:** Wang X, Zhao Y, Wang D, Liu C, Qi Z, Tang H, Liu Y, Zhang S, Cui Y, Li Y, Liu R, Shen Y
**Journal:** Mol Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molimm.2023.03.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molimm.2023.03.016)

## Content

1. Mol Immunol. 2023 May;157:78-90. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2023.03.016. Epub 2023 
Mar 29.

ALK-JNK signaling promotes NLRP3 inflammasome activation and pyroptosis via NEK7 
during Streptococcus pneumoniae infection.

Wang X(1), Zhao Y(2), Wang D(2), Liu C(3), Qi Z(4), Tang H(2), Liu Y(2), Zhang 
S(2), Cui Y(5), Li Y(6), Liu R(7), Shen Y(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, West China Second University Hospital, 
Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, PR China.
(2)School of Medical Laboratory, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300203, PR 
China.
(3)School of Medical Laboratory, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300203, PR 
China; Key Laboratory of Emergency and Trauma of Ministry of Education, Hainan 
Medical University, Haikou 571199, PR China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Emergency and Trauma of Ministry of Education, Hainan 
Medical University, Haikou 571199, PR China.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, West China Second University Hospital, 
Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, PR China; Key Laboratory of Birth 
Defects and Related Diseases of Women and Children, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
Sichuan 610041, PR China.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, West China Second University Hospital, 
Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, PR China; Key Laboratory of Birth 
Defects and Related Diseases of Women and Children, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
Sichuan 610041, PR China. Electronic address: 272317706@qq.com.
(7)School of Medical Laboratory, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300203, PR 
China; The Third Central Hospital of Tianjin, 83 Jintang Road, Hedong District, 
Tianjin 300170, PR China; Tianjin Key Laboratory of Extracorporeal Life Support 
for Critical Diseases, Tianjin 300170, PR China; Artificial Cell Engineering 
Technology Research Center, Tianjin 300170, PR China; Tianjin Institute of 
Hepatobiliary Disease, Tianjin 300170, PR China. Electronic address: 
liuruiqing319@163.com.
(8)School of Medical Laboratory, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300203, PR 
China; Key Laboratory of Emergency and Trauma of Ministry of Education, Hainan 
Medical University, Haikou 571199, PR China. Electronic address: 
shenyanna@sina.com.

Streptococcus pneumoniae (S. pneumoniae), a clinically important pathogen 
worldwide, causes serious invasive diseases, such as pneumonia, otitis media, 
and meningitis. The NLR family pyrin domain-containing 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome, 
an important component of the innate immune system, plays a key role in defense 
against pathogen infection; however the specific activation mechanism induced by 
S. pneumoniae infection is not fully understood. Here, primary mouse macrophages 
were selected as the in vitro cell model, and the effect of kinases on S. 
pneumoniae infection-induced NLRP3 inflammasome activation was investigated in 
vivo and in vitro using the western blot/RT-PCR/Co-IP/immunofluorescence 
staining/ELISA with or without kinase inhibitor or siRNA pretreatment. In this 
study, we found that the formation of the NEK7-NLRP3 complex significantly 
increased during S. pneumoniae infection and that anaplastic lymphoma kinase 
(ALK) and Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) were phosphorylated rapidly. ALK and JNK 
inhibitors significantly reduced the ability of bacterial killing, the gene 
expression of NLRP3 inflammasome, the formation of apoptosis-associated 
speck-like protein containing caspase-recruitment domain (ASC) specks and the 
NEK7-NLRP3 complex, which in turn decreased the activation level of NLRP3 
inflammasome-associated molecules and the maturation of interleukin-1β (IL-1β). 
In addition, ALK regulated the phosphorylation of JNK. Interestingly, the 
ALK/JNK/NEK7-NLRP3 signaling pathway is also involved in regulating pyroptosis 
and IL-1β secretion triggered by S. pneumoniae infection. In conclusion, our 
data suggest, for the first time, that the ALK/JNK/NEK7-NLRP3 signaling pathway 
may play an important role in NLRP3 inflammasome activation and pyroptosis and 
consequently regulate the host immune response upon S. pneumoniae infection.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2023.03.016
PMID: 37001294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
the research has no potential conflict of interest.