---
reference_id: "PMID:37865086"
title: Identification of a robust DNA methylation signature for Fanconi anemia.
authors:
- Pagliara D
- Ciolfi A
- Pedace L
- Haghshenas S
- Ferilli M
- Levy MA
- Miele E
- Nardini C
- Cappelletti C
- Relator R
- Pitisci A
- De Vito R
- Pizzi S
- Kerkhof J
- McConkey H
- Nazio F
- Kant SG
- Di Donato M
- Agolini E
- Matraxia M
- Pasini B
- Pelle A
- Galluccio T
- Novelli A
- Barakat TS
- Andreani M
- Rossi F
- Mecucci C
- Savoia A
- Sadikovic B
- Locatelli F
- Tartaglia M
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.09.014
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of a robust DNA methylation signature for Fanconi anemia.
**Authors:** Pagliara D, Ciolfi A, Pedace L, Haghshenas S, Ferilli M, Levy MA, Miele E, Nardini C, Cappelletti C, Relator R, Pitisci A, De Vito R, Pizzi S, Kerkhof J, McConkey H, Nazio F, Kant SG, Di Donato M, Agolini E, Matraxia M, Pasini B, Pelle A, Galluccio T, Novelli A, Barakat TS, Andreani M, Rossi F, Mecucci C, Savoia A, Sadikovic B, Locatelli F, Tartaglia M
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.09.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.09.014)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2023 Nov 2;110(11):1938-1949. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.09.014.
 Epub 2023 Oct 20.

Identification of a robust DNA methylation signature for Fanconi anemia.

Pagliara D(1), Ciolfi A(2), Pedace L(1), Haghshenas S(3), Ferilli M(2), Levy 
MA(3), Miele E(1), Nardini C(1), Cappelletti C(2), Relator R(3), Pitisci A(1), 
De Vito R(4), Pizzi S(2), Kerkhof J(3), McConkey H(5), Nazio F(1), Kant SG(6), 
Di Donato M(7), Agolini E(7), Matraxia M(7), Pasini B(8), Pelle A(8), Galluccio 
T(9), Novelli A(7), Barakat TS(10), Andreani M(9), Rossi F(11), Mecucci C(12), 
Savoia A(13), Sadikovic B(5), Locatelli F(14), Tartaglia M(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology and Cell and Gene Therapy, Bambino Gesù 
Children's Hospital, IRCCS, 00146 Rome, Italy.
(2)Molecular Genetics and Functional Genomics, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, 
IRCCS, 00146 Rome, Italy.
(3)Verspeeten Clinical Genome Centre, London Health Sciences Centre, London, ON 
N6A 5W9, Canada.
(4)Department of Laboratories, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, 00146 
Rome, Italy.
(5)Verspeeten Clinical Genome Centre, London Health Sciences Centre, London, ON 
N6A 5W9, Canada; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Western 
University, London, ON N6A 3K7, Canada.
(6)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC University Medical Center, 3015 
Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(7)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Translational Cytogenomics Research Unit, 
Bambino Gesù Children Hospital, IRCCS, 00146 Rome, Italy.
(8)AOU Città della salute e della scienza di Torino, Molinette's Hospital, 10126 
Torino, Italy.
(9)Laboratory of Transplant Immunogenetics, Department of Hematology/Oncology, 
Cell and Gene Therapy, IRCCS Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, 00146 Rome, 
Italy.
(10)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC University Medical Center, 3015 
Rotterdam, the Netherlands; ENCORE Expertise Center for Neurodevelopmental 
Disorders, Erasmus MC University Medical Center, 3015 Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(11)Department of Woman, Child and of General and Specialist Surgery, University 
of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli," 80138 Naples, Italy.
(12)Institute of Hematology and Center for Hemato-Oncology Research, University 
and Hospital of Perugia, 06123 Perugia, Italy.
(13)Department of Neurosciences, Biomedicine and Movement Sciences, University 
of Verona, 37134 Verona, Italy.
(14)Department of Hematology/Oncology and Cell and Gene Therapy, Bambino Gesù 
Children's Hospital, IRCCS, 00146 Rome, Italy; Department of Pediatrics, 
Catholic University of the Sacred Hearth, 00168 Rome, Italy. Electronic address: 
franco.locatelli@opbg.net.
(15)Molecular Genetics and Functional Genomics, Bambino Gesù Children's 
Hospital, IRCCS, 00146 Rome, Italy. Electronic address: 
marco.tartaglia@opbg.net.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a clinically variable and genetically heterogeneous 
cancer-predisposing disorder representing the most common bone marrow failure 
syndrome. It is caused by inactivating predominantly biallelic mutations 
involving >20 genes encoding proteins with roles in the FA/BRCA DNA repair 
pathway. Molecular diagnosis of FA is challenging due to the wide spectrum of 
the contributing gene mutations and structural rearrangements. The assessment of 
chromosomal fragility after exposure to DNA cross-linking agents is generally 
required to definitively confirm diagnosis. We assessed peripheral blood 
genome-wide DNA methylation (DNAm) profiles in 25 subjects with molecularly 
confirmed clinical diagnosis of FA (FANCA complementation group) using 
Illumina's Infinium EPIC array. We identified 82 differentially methylated CpG 
sites that allow to distinguish subjects with FA from healthy individuals and 
subjects with other genetic disorders, defining an FA-specific DNAm signature. 
The episignature was validated using a second cohort of subjects with FA 
involving different complementation groups, documenting broader genetic 
sensitivity and demonstrating its specificity using the EpiSign Knowledge 
Database. The episignature properly classified DNA samples obtained from bone 
marrow aspirates, demonstrating robustness. Using the selected probes, we 
trained a machine-learning model able to classify EPIC DNAm profiles in 
molecularly unsolved cases. Finally, we show that the generated episignature 
includes CpG sites that do not undergo functional selective pressure, allowing 
diagnosis of FA in individuals with reverted phenotype due to gene conversion. 
These findings provide a tool to accelerate diagnostic testing in FA and broaden 
the clinical utility of DNAm profiling in the diagnostic setting.

Copyright © 2023 American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.09.014
PMCID: PMC10645556
PMID: 37865086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests Dr. Sadikovic is a 
shareholder in EpiSign Inc, a software company involved in commercialization of 
EpiSign Technology.