---
reference_id: "PMID:35796883"
title: Psychiatric symptoms in Salla disease.
authors:
- Aulanko I
- Rahikkala E
- Moilanen J
journal: Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00787-022-02031-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Psychiatric symptoms in Salla disease.
**Authors:** Aulanko I, Rahikkala E, Moilanen J
**Journal:** Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00787-022-02031-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00787-022-02031-5)

## Content

1. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2023 Oct;32(10):2043-2047. doi: 
10.1007/s00787-022-02031-5. Epub 2022 Jul 7.

Psychiatric symptoms in Salla disease.

Aulanko I(1)(2)(3)(4), Rahikkala E(5)(6)(7)(8), Moilanen J(5)(6)(8).

Author information:
(1)PEDEGO Research Unit, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland. 
ida.aulanko@helsinki.fi.
(2)Medical Research Center Oulu, University of Oulu and Oulu University 
Hospital, Oulu, Finland. ida.aulanko@helsinki.fi.
(3)Doctoral Programme in Clinical Research, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 
Finland. ida.aulanko@helsinki.fi.
(4)Department of Clinical Genetics, Oulu University Hospital, OYS, P.O. Box 23, 
90029, Oulu, Finland. ida.aulanko@helsinki.fi.
(5)PEDEGO Research Unit, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(6)Medical Research Center Oulu, University of Oulu and Oulu University 
Hospital, Oulu, Finland.
(7)Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(8)Department of Clinical Genetics, Oulu University Hospital, OYS, P.O. Box 23, 
90029, Oulu, Finland.

Salla disease (SD) is a rare lysosomal storage disorder characterised by 
intellectual disability ataxia, athetosis, nystagmus, and central nervous system 
demyelination. Although the neurological spectrum of SD's clinical phenotype is 
well defined, psychotic symptoms in SD remain unreported. We reviewed the 
presence of psychiatric symptoms in patients diagnosed with SD. Medical records 
of all SD patients at Oulu University Hospital during the years 1982-2015 were 
systematically reviewed to evaluate the presence of psychiatric symptoms. 
Psychiatric symptoms were frequently associated with SD (10/24, 42%), and two 
patients were described as developing psychosis as adolescents. We reported 
their clinical characteristics in detail and assessed the prevalence of 
psychiatric symptoms in a cohort of 24 patients. Other psychiatric factors 
associated with SD were sleeping disorders (8/24, 32%), aggressive behaviour 
disorders or restlessness (6/24, 25%), and off-label antipsychotic medication 
(4/24, 17%). This report expands the knowledge of the phenotypic spectrum of SD 
and demonstrates the importance of recognising the possibility of psychiatric 
symptoms, including psychosis, in persons with SD.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00787-022-02031-5
PMCID: PMC10533638
PMID: 35796883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors disclose no conflicts of interest.