---
reference_id: "PMID:25656502"
title: Proteomic analysis of mouse soleus muscles affected by hindlimb unloading and reloading.
authors:
- Wang F
- Zhang P
- Liu H
- Fan M
- Chen X
journal: Muscle Nerve
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/mus.24590
keywords:
- Animals
- Hindlimb/physiology
- Hindlimb Suspension/methods
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism"
- "Muscular Atrophy/genetics, metabolism"
- Proteomics/methods
- Weight-Bearing/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Proteomic analysis of mouse soleus muscles affected by hindlimb unloading and reloading.
**Authors:** Wang F, Zhang P, Liu H, Fan M, Chen X
**Journal:** Muscle Nerve (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mus.24590](https://doi.org/10.1002/mus.24590)

## Content

1. Muscle Nerve. 2015 Nov;52(5):803-11. doi: 10.1002/mus.24590. Epub 2015 Sep 3.

Proteomic analysis of mouse soleus muscles affected by hindlimb unloading and 
reloading.

Wang F(1), Zhang P(2), Liu H(2), Fan M(3), Chen X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)National Key Laboratory of Human Factors Engineering, China Astronaut 
Research and Training Center, No. 26 Beiqing Road, Beijing, 100094, P.R. 
Beijing, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Space Medicine Fundamentals and Application, China 
Astronaut Research and Training Center, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Cognitive Science, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, 
Beijing, 100850, China.

INTRODUCTION: Disuse muscle atrophy, induced by prolonged space flight, bed 
rest, or denervation, is a common process with obvious changes in slow-twitch 
soleus muscles.
METHODS: Proteomic analysis was performed on mouse soleus subjected to hindlimb 
unloading (HU) and hindlimb reloading (HR) to identify new dysregulated 
proteins.
RESULTS: Following HU, the mass and cross-sectional area of muscle fibers 
decreased, but they recovered after HR. Proteomic analyses revealed 9 
down-regulated and 7 up-regulated proteins in HU, and 2 down-regulated and 5 
up-regulated proteins in HR. The dysregulated proteins were mainly involved in 
energy metabolism, protein degradation, and cytoskeleton stability. Among the 
dysregulated proteins were fatty acid binding protein 3, α-B crystalline, and 
transthyretin.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that muscle atrophy induced by unloading is 
related to activation of proteolysis, metabolic alterations toward glycolysis, 
destruction of myofibrillar integrity, and dysregulation of heat shock proteins 
(HSPs). The dysregulated proteins may play a role in muscle atrophy and the 
recovery process.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mus.24590
PMID: 25656502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]