---
reference_id: "PMID:36914043"
title: Quantitative analysis of ethanolamine plasmalogen species in red blood cells using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry for diagnosing peroxisome biogenesis disorders.
authors:
- De Biase I
- Yuzyuk T
- Cui W
- Zuromski LM
- Moser AB
- Braverman NE
journal: Clin Chim Acta
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2023.117295
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Quantitative analysis of ethanolamine plasmalogen species in red blood cells using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry for diagnosing peroxisome biogenesis disorders.
**Authors:** De Biase I, Yuzyuk T, Cui W, Zuromski LM, Moser AB, Braverman NE
**Journal:** Clin Chim Acta (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cca.2023.117295](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cca.2023.117295)

## Content

1. Clin Chim Acta. 2023 Mar 1;542:117295. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2023.117295. Epub
2023  Mar 11.

Quantitative analysis of ethanolamine plasmalogen species in red blood cells 
using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry for diagnosing peroxisome 
biogenesis disorders.

De Biase I(1), Yuzyuk T(2), Cui W(3), Zuromski LM(4), Moser AB(5), Braverman 
NE(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake 
City, UT, USA; ARUP Institute for Clinical and Experimental Pathology, Salt Lake 
City, UT, USA. Electronic address: irene.de-biase@aruplab.com.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake 
City, UT, USA; ARUP Institute for Clinical and Experimental Pathology, Salt Lake 
City, UT, USA.
(3)Child Health and Human Development Program, Research Institute of the McGill 
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake 
City, UT, USA.
(5)Hugo W Moser Research Institute, Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD, 
USA.
(6)Child Health and Human Development Program, Research Institute of the McGill 
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department of Human Genetics and 
Pediatrics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Plasmalogens are glycerophospholipids characterized by a vinyl-ether bond with a 
fatty alcohol at the sn-1 position, a polyunsaturated fatty acid at the sn-2 
position, and a polar head at the sn-3 position, commonly phosphoethanolamine. 
Plasmalogens play crucial roles in several cellular processes. Reduced levels 
have been associated with Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease progression. 
Markedly reduced plasmalogens are a classic feature of peroxisome biogenesis 
disorders (PBD) because plasmalogen synthesis requires functional peroxisomes. 
Particularly, severe plasmalogen deficiency is the biochemical hallmark of 
rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata (RCDP). Traditionally, plasmalogens are 
evaluated in red blood cells (RBCs) by gas-chromatography/mass-spectrometry 
(GC-MS), which cannot distinguish individual species. We developed a 
liquid-chromatography/tandem mass-spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) method to quantify 
eighteen phosphoethanolamine plasmalogens in RBCs to diagnose PBD patients, 
especially RCDP. Validation results showed a specific, robust, and precise 
method with broad analytical range. Age-specific reference intervals were 
established; control medians were used to assess plasmalogen deficiency in 
patients' RBCs. Clinical utility was also confirmed in Pex7 deficient mouse 
models recapitulating severe and milder RCDP clinical phenotypes. To our 
knowledge, this is the first attempt to replace the GC-MS method in the clinical 
laboratory. In addition to diagnosing PBDs, structure-specific plasmalogen 
quantitation could help understand disease pathogenesis and monitor therapy.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2023.117295
PMID: 36914043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.