---
reference_id: "PMID:37490345"
title: Argininosuccinate lyase deficiency causes blood-brain barrier disruption via nitric oxide-mediated dysregulation of claudin expression.
authors:
- Kho J
- Polak U
- Jiang MM
- Odom JD
- Hunter JV
- Ali SM
- Burrage LC
- Nagamani SC
- Pautler RG
- Thompson HP
- Urayama A
- Jin Z
- Lee B
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.168475
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Argininosuccinate lyase deficiency causes blood-brain barrier disruption via nitric oxide-mediated dysregulation of claudin expression.
**Authors:** Kho J, Polak U, Jiang MM, Odom JD, Hunter JV, Ali SM, Burrage LC, Nagamani SC, Pautler RG, Thompson HP, Urayama A, Jin Z, Lee B
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.168475](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.168475)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2023 Sep 8;8(17):e168475. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.168475.

Argininosuccinate lyase deficiency causes blood-brain barrier disruption via 
nitric oxide-mediated dysregulation of claudin expression.

Kho J(1), Polak U(1), Jiang MM(1), Odom JD(1), Hunter JV(2)(3), Ali SM(1), 
Burrage LC(1)(3), Nagamani SC(1)(3), Pautler RG(4), Thompson HP(5), Urayama 
A(5), Jin Z(1), Lee B(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics and.
(2)Department of Radiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(3)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston, 
Texas, USA.

Nitric oxide (NO) is a critical signaling molecule that has been implicated in 
the pathogenesis of neurocognitive diseases. Both excessive and insufficient NO 
production have been linked to pathology. Previously, we have shown that 
argininosuccinate lyase deficiency (ASLD) is a novel model system to investigate 
cell-autonomous, nitric oxide synthase-dependent NO deficiency. Humans with ASLD 
are at increased risk for developing hyperammonemia due to a block in 
ureagenesis. However, natural history studies have shown that individuals with 
ASLD have multisystem disease including neurocognitive deficits that can be 
independent of ammonia. Here, using ASLD as a model of NO deficiency, we 
investigated the effects of NO on brain endothelial cells in vitro and the 
blood-brain barrier (BBB) in vivo. Knockdown of ASL in human brain microvascular 
endothelial cells (HBMECs) led to decreased transendothelial electrical 
resistance, indicative of increased cell permeability. Mechanistically, 
treatment with an NO donor or inhibition of Claudin-1 improved barrier integrity 
in ASL-deficient HBMECs. Furthermore, in vivo assessment of a hypomorphic mouse 
model of ASLD showed increased BBB leakage, which was partially rescued by NO 
supplementation. Our results suggest that ASL-mediated NO synthesis is required 
for proper maintenance of brain microvascular endothelial cell functions as well 
as BBB integrity.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.168475
PMCID: PMC10544197
PMID: 37490345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.