---
reference_id: "PMID:16236669"
title: Cotinine levels and green tobacco sickness among shade-tobacco workers.
authors:
- Trapé-Cardoso M
- Bracker A
- Dauser D
- Oncken C
- Barrera LV
- Gould B
- Grey MR
journal: J Agromedicine
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1300/J096v10n02_05
keywords:
- Adult
- "Agricultural Workers' Diseases/chemically induced, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Cohort Studies
- Connecticut/epidemiology
- Cotinine/analysis
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Nicotine/metabolism, poisoning"
- Prevalence
- Prospective Studies
- Saliva/chemistry
- Skin Absorption
- "Nicotiana/chemistry, poisoning"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cotinine levels and green tobacco sickness among shade-tobacco workers.
**Authors:** Trapé-Cardoso M, Bracker A, Dauser D, Oncken C, Barrera LV, Gould B, Grey MR
**Journal:** J Agromedicine (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1300/J096v10n02_05](https://doi.org/10.1300/J096v10n02_05)

## Content

1. J Agromedicine. 2005;10(2):27-37. doi: 10.1300/J096v10n02_05.

Cotinine levels and green tobacco sickness among shade-tobacco workers.

Trapé-Cardoso M(1), Bracker A, Dauser D, Oncken C, Barrera LV, Gould B, Grey MR.

Author information:
(1)Division of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, University of 
Connecticut School of Medicine, Farmington, CT, 06030, USA. trape@nso.uchc.edu

STUDY OBJECTIVE: Symptoms consistent with Green Tobacco Sickness (GTS) were 
found in 4% (13/331) to 15% (45/303) of the migrant, mostly Latino, 
shade-tobacco workers who sought medical care at a Connecticut clinic. The 
objective of this study was to determine whether or not shade-tobacco farm 
workers absorb nicotine from the tobacco leaves and have a corresponding 
increase in both salivary cotinine levels (a breakdown product of nicotine) and 
symptoms consistent with GTS.
METHODS: The study utilized a prospective cohort design to evaluate salivary 
cotinine and symptoms consistent with GTS in a population of shade tobacco farm 
workers compared to a control group of nursery workers. The workers were 
assessed at two points in time, the early tobacco planting season and the 
harvest season.
RESULTS: There was not a significant increase in salivary cotinine levels among 
shade-tobacco workers. Salivary cotinine levels over the work season did not 
significantly increase in shade-tobacco workers when compared with nursery 
workers. During the harvest season, none of the tobacco workers reported 
symptoms consistent with GTS.
CONCLUSIONS: Migrant workers in Connecticut who harvest shade-tobacco appear to 
have a low-risk of occupational nicotine dermal absorption and a low incidence 
of GTS. The work practices associated with harvesting shade-tobacco, in addition 
to the fact that shade tobacco may actually have a lower level of nicotine than 
either burley or flue cured tobacco, may explain these results. Our study 
appears to reinforce the GTS prevention recommendations made by investigators in 
other tobacco growing regions, specifically the importance of minimizing close 
skin contact with tobacco leaves and avoiding dermal contact with the plants 
when they are wet.

DOI: 10.1300/J096v10n02_05
PMID: 16236669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]