---
reference_id: "PMID:34138756"
title: Hematologic and systemic metabolic alterations due to Mediterranean class II G6PD deficiency in mice.
authors:
- D'Alessandro A
- Howie HL
- Hay AM
- Dziewulska KH
- Brown BC
- Wither MJ
- Karafin M
- Stone EF
- Spitalnik SL
- Hod EA
- Francis RO
- Fu X
- Thomas T
- Zimring JC
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.147056
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hematologic and systemic metabolic alterations due to Mediterranean class II G6PD deficiency in mice.
**Authors:** D'Alessandro A, Howie HL, Hay AM, Dziewulska KH, Brown BC, Wither MJ, Karafin M, Stone EF, Spitalnik SL, Hod EA, Francis RO, Fu X, Thomas T, Zimring JC
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.147056](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.147056)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2021 Jul 22;6(14):e147056. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.147056.

Hematologic and systemic metabolic alterations due to Mediterranean class II 
G6PD deficiency in mice.

D'Alessandro A(1), Howie HL(2)(3), Hay AM(2)(3), Dziewulska KH(2), Brown BC(1), 
Wither MJ(1), Karafin M(4), Stone EF(5), Spitalnik SL(5), Hod EA(5), Francis 
RO(5), Fu X(3), Thomas T(5), Zimring JC(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Colorado Denver Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Carter Immunology Center, School of Medicine, 
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.
(3)Bloodworks Northwest Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(4)Versiti Blood Center of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, New 
York, USA.

Deficiency of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) is the single most common 
enzymopathy, present in approximately 400 million humans (approximately 5%). Its 
prevalence is hypothesized to be due to conferring resistance to malaria. 
However, G6PD deficiency also results in hemolytic sequelae from oxidant stress. 
Moreover, G6PD deficiency is associated with kidney disease, diabetes, pulmonary 
hypertension, immunological defects, and neurodegenerative diseases. To date, 
the only available mouse models have decreased levels of WT stable G6PD caused 
by promoter mutations. However, human G6PD mutations are missense mutations that 
result in decreased enzymatic stability. As such, this results in very low 
activity in red blood cells (RBCs) that cannot synthesize new protein. To 
generate a more accurate model, the human sequence for a severe form of G6PD 
deficiency, Med(-), was knocked into the murine G6PD locus. As predicted, G6PD 
levels were extremely low in RBCs, and deficient mice had increased hemolytic 
sequelae to oxidant stress. Nonerythroid organs had metabolic changes consistent 
with mild G6PD deficiency, consistent with what has been observed in humans. 
Juxtaposition of G6PD-deficient and WT mice revealed altered lipid metabolism in 
multiple organ systems. Together, these findings both establish a mouse model of 
G6PD deficiency that more accurately reflects human G6PD deficiency and advance 
our basic understanding of altered metabolism in this setting.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.147056
PMCID: PMC8410095
PMID: 34138756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: ADA is the founder of Omix 
Technologies and Altis Biosciences LLC. ADA and SLS are consultants for Hemanext 
Inc. Bloodworks Northwest Research Institute (BloodworksNW), where the 
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase mouse was generated, has filed intellectual 
property (US 10,785,967) on use of this animal as a tool for screening 
toxicology of novel drugs.