---
reference_id: "PMID:25270050"
title: Clinico-pathological manifestations of variant late infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (vLINCL) caused by a novel mutation in MFSD8 gene.
authors:
- Mandel H
- Cohen Katsanelson K
- Khayat M
- Chervinsky I
- Vladovski E
- Iancu TC
- Indelman M
- Horovitz Y
- Sprecher E
- Shalev SA
- Spiegel R
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2014.09.004
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Consanguinity
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- Male
- Membrane Transport Proteins/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Neuronal Ceroid-Lipofuscinoses/genetics, pathology"
- Pedigree
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinico-pathological manifestations of variant late infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (vLINCL) caused by a novel mutation in MFSD8 gene.
**Authors:** Mandel H, Cohen Katsanelson K, Khayat M, Chervinsky I, Vladovski E, Iancu TC, Indelman M, Horovitz Y, Sprecher E, Shalev SA, Spiegel R
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2014.09.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2014.09.004)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2014 Nov-Dec;57(11-12):607-12. doi:
10.1016/j.ejmg.2014.09.004.  Epub 2014 Sep 28.

Clinico-pathological manifestations of variant late infantile neuronal ceroid
lipofuscinosis (vLINCL) caused by a novel mutation in MFSD8 gene.

Mandel H(1), Cohen Katsanelson K(2), Khayat M(3), Chervinsky I(4), Vladovski
E(5), Iancu TC(6), Indelman M(7), Horovitz Y(8), Sprecher E(9), Shalev SA(3),
Spiegel R(10).

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Unit, Rambam Medical Center, Israel; Rappaport School of Medicine,
Technion Haifa, Israel.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.
(3)Rappaport School of Medicine, Technion Haifa, Israel; Genetic Institute, Emek
Medical Center, Afula, Israel.
(4)Genetic Institute, Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel.
(5)Department of Pathology, Rambam Medical Center, Israel.
(6)Milman-David Biomedical Research Unit, Haifa, Israel.
(7)Rappaport School of Medicine, Technion Haifa, Israel; Department of
Dermatology, Rambam Medical Center, Israel.
(8)Rappaport School of Medicine, Technion Haifa, Israel; Pediatric Department
A', Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel.
(9)Department of Dermatology, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Israel;
Department of Human Molecular Genetics & Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Israel.
(10)Rappaport School of Medicine, Technion Haifa, Israel; Genetic Institute,
Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel; Pediatric Department A', Emek Medical
Center, Afula, Israel. Electronic address: spiegelr@zahav.net.il.

Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (NCL) refers to a growing heterogeneous group of
neurodegenerative disorders characterized by lysosomal accumulation of abnormal
autofluorescent material. NCLs are traditionally classified clinically according
to their age of onset. Variable late infantile NCL (vLINCL) is the most
genetically heterogeneous subtype as it has been shown to be caused by mutations
in at least six genes. We report on 5 patients of a consanguineous family who
presented in early childhood with intractable seizures, severe cognitive and
motor decline, behavioral impairment and progressive retinal degeneration.
Disease course was severe; all patients were in a vegetative state by the second
decade of life, and eventually die prematurely (except in one case).
Ultrastructural studies of brain and rectal mucosa disclosed accumulation of
storage material in various patterns including fingerprint, curvilinear, and
granular osmiophilic deposits consistent with the diagnosis of NCL. Brain
pathologic features from a living patient are first reported here and shed light
on disease progression and pathogenesis. Using a combination of whole genome
autozygosity mapping and candidate gene direct sequencing, we identified a
mutation in MFSD8, c.472G>A (p.Gly158Ser), which was found to segregate with the
disease phenotype in the family. This study underscores the importance of a
combined clinic-molecular workup in NCLs and other neurodegenerative conditions.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2014.09.004
PMID: 25270050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]