---
reference_id: "PMID:39365073"
title: "From soil to clinic: current advances in understanding Coccidioides and coccidioidomycosis."
authors:
- Jackson KM
- Teixeira MdM
- Barker BM
journal: Microbiol Mol Biol Rev
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1128/mmbr.00161-23
content_type: abstract_only
---

# From soil to clinic: current advances in understanding Coccidioides and coccidioidomycosis.
**Authors:** Jackson KM, Teixeira MdM, Barker BM
**Journal:** Microbiol Mol Biol Rev (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1128/mmbr.00161-23](https://doi.org/10.1128/mmbr.00161-23)

## Content

1. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev. 2024 Dec 18;88(4):e0016123. doi:
10.1128/mmbr.00161-23.  Epub 2024 Oct 4.

From soil to clinic: current advances in understanding Coccidioides and 
coccidioidomycosis.

Jackson KM(#)(1), Teixeira MdM(#)(1)(2), Barker BM(#)(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)The Pathogen and Microbiome Institute, Northern Arizona University, 
Flagstaff, Arizona, USA.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Brasília, Brasília-DF, Brasília, Brazil.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, 
Arizona, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

SUMMARYCoccidioides immitis and Coccidioides posadasii are fungal pathogens that 
cause systemic mycoses and are prevalent in arid regions in the Americas. While 
C. immitis mainly occurs in California and Washington, C. posadasii is widely 
distributed across North and South America. Both species induce 
coccidioidomycosis (San Joaquin Valley fever or, more commonly, Valley fever), 
with reported cases surging in the United States, notably in California and 
Arizona. Moreover, cases in Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico are on the rise. 
Climate change and environmental alterations conducive to Coccidioides spp. 
proliferation have been recently explored. Diagnostic challenges contribute to 
delayed treatment initiation, compounded by limited therapeutic options. 
Although antifungal drugs are often effective treatments, some patients do not 
respond to current therapies, underscoring the urgent need for a vaccine, 
particularly for vulnerable populations over 60 years old relocating to endemic 
areas. Despite recent progress, gaps persist in the understanding of 
Coccidioides ecology, host immune responses, and vaccine development. This 
review synthesizes recent research advancements in Coccidioides ecology, 
genomics, and immune responses, emphasizing ongoing efforts to develop a human 
vaccine.

DOI: 10.1128/mmbr.00161-23
PMCID: PMC11653724
PMID: 39365073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.