---
reference_id: "PMID:6873110"
title: "Laryngo-tracheo-oesophageal cleft. Clinical features, diagnosis and therapy."
authors:
- Roth B
- Rose KG
- Benz-Bohm G
- Günther H
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '1983'
doi: 10.1007/BF00661903
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Laryngo-tracheo-oesophageal cleft. Clinical features, diagnosis and therapy.
**Authors:** Roth B, Rose KG, Benz-Bohm G, Günther H
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (1983)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF00661903](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00661903)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 1983 Mar;140(1):41-6. doi: 10.1007/BF00661903.

Laryngo-tracheo-oesophageal cleft. Clinical features, diagnosis and therapy.

Roth B, Rose KG, Benz-Bohm G, Günther H.

The laryngo-tracheo-oesophageal cleft is marked by a missing anatomical 
separation of the oesophagus and the larynx. The cleft can be restricted to the 
dorsal part of the larynx (type I), extend to the upper area of the trachea 
(type II) or involve the whole of the trachea (type III). In reviewing our three 
cases and 82 cases in the literature, clinical features, diagnosis, and therapy 
of this rare condition are presented. The condition leads almost always to 
life-threatening disturbances in the form of asphyxia and aspiration pneumonia. 
The diagnosis is made through direct laryngoscopy. Radiological demonstration of 
swallowing and tracheo-oesophagoscopy are necessary additional investigations. 
In many cases further severe malformations of organs are found, i.e., 
oesophageal atresia and tracheo-oesophageal fistulae. Despite early detection 
the prognosis remains unfavourable with a mortality of 46%. With few exceptions, 
an early operative correction of the defect is required. Access to the dorsal 
laryngeal area is achieved usually by a lateral pharyngotomy. Difficulties arise 
in securing adequate closure of the dorsal larynx, because of lack of sufficient 
tissue material. Despite secure closure of the laryngo-tracheo-oesophageal 
cleft, disturbances of swallowing often persist. Development of speech is not 
impaired.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00661903
PMID: 6873110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]