---
reference_id: "PMID:3918814"
title: Rapid differential diagnosis of carboxylase deficiencies and evaluation for biotin-responsiveness in a single blood sample.
authors:
- Suormala T
- Wick H
- Bonjour JP
- Baumgartner ER
journal: Clin Chim Acta
year: '1985'
doi: 10.1016/0009-8981(85)90282-7
keywords:
- "Acyl Coenzyme A/blood, deficiency"
- Adult
- Amidohydrolases/blood
- Biotin
- Biotinidase
- Carbon-Carbon Ligases
- Carbon-Nitrogen Ligases
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Fibroblasts/enzymology
- Humans
- Infant
- "Ligases/antagonists & inhibitors, blood, deficiency"
- Lymphocytes/enzymology
- Pyruvate Carboxylase/blood
- Pyruvate Carboxylase Deficiency Disease
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rapid differential diagnosis of carboxylase deficiencies and evaluation for biotin-responsiveness in a single blood sample.
**Authors:** Suormala T, Wick H, Bonjour JP, Baumgartner ER
**Journal:** Clin Chim Acta (1985)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0009-8981(85)90282-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/0009-8981(85)90282-7)

## Content

1. Clin Chim Acta. 1985 Jan 30;145(2):151-62. doi: 10.1016/0009-8981(85)90282-7.

Rapid differential diagnosis of carboxylase deficiencies and evaluation for
biotin-responsiveness in a single blood sample.

Suormala T, Wick H, Bonjour JP, Baumgartner ER.

We have developed a method for rapid differential diagnosis of isolated or
multiple deficiencies of the 3 mitochondrial biotin-dependent carboxylases:
propionyl-CoA (PCC), 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA (MCC) and pyruvate carboxylase (PC),
and for simultaneous evaluation of biotin-responsiveness using a single blood
sample. Lymphocytes were isolated from heparinized blood and preincubated
without and with 10(-5) mol/l biotin in medium before determination of PCC, MCC
and PC activities. Plasma was used for estimation of biotin concentration and
biotinidase activity. A definitive diagnosis could be made in 7 of 9 patients
studied up to now: 4 patients suffered from biotin-nonresponsive isolated
PCC-deficiency, and 3 patients from biotin-responsive multiple carboxylase
deficiency caused by deficient biotinidase activity. In two patients, a
carboxylase deficiency was excluded. These results were confirmed in studies
using fibroblasts. In addition, a simple method for detection of deficiency in
holocarboxylase synthesis is described.

DOI: 10.1016/0009-8981(85)90282-7
PMID: 3918814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
