---
reference_id: "PMID:24269551"
title: A novel CHSY1 gene mutation underlies Temtamy preaxial brachydactyly syndrome in a Pakistani family.
authors:
- Sher G
- Naeem M
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2013.11.001
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- "Brachydactyly/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Child
- Consanguinity
- Conserved Sequence
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Deafness/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Glucuronosyltransferase
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mouth Abnormalities/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Multifunctional Enzymes
- "Mutation, Missense"
- N-Acetylgalactosaminyltransferases/genetics
- Pakistan
- Pedigree
- Radiography
- "Tooth Abnormalities/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel CHSY1 gene mutation underlies Temtamy preaxial brachydactyly syndrome in a Pakistani family.
**Authors:** Sher G, Naeem M
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2013.11.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2013.11.001)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2014 Jan;57(1):21-4. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2013.11.001. Epub
2013  Nov 20.

A novel CHSY1 gene mutation underlies Temtamy preaxial brachydactyly syndrome in 
a Pakistani family.

Sher G(1), Naeem M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad 45320, 
Pakistan.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad 45320, 
Pakistan. Electronic address: mnaeemqau@gmail.com.

Temtamy preaxial brachydactyly syndrome (TPBS) is an autosomal recessive rare 
disorder characterized by hyperphalangism of digits, facial dysmorphism, dental 
anomalies, sensorineural hearing loss, delayed motor and mental development, and 
growth retardation. Loss of function mutations have been recently reported in 
the CHSY1 gene to cause the TPBS. Here, we report a novel missense mutation 
(c.1897 G > A) in the CHSY1 gene in two TPBS patients from a consanguineous 
Pakistani family. The mutation predicted substitution of a highly conserved 
aspartate amino acid residue to asparagine at position 633 in the protein 
(D633N). Polyphen analysis supported the pathogenicity of D36N mutation. Our 
finding extends the body of recent evidence that supports the role of CHSY1 as a 
potential mediator of BMP signaling.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2013.11.001
PMID: 24269551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]