---
reference_id: "PMID:39508497"
title: High BRAF V600 Mutation Level Associated with Worse Outcome in Metastatic Melanoma Patients Receiving BRAF and MEK Inhibitors.
authors:
- Fizazi A
- Serrand C
- Evrard A
- Bergeret B
- Stoebner PE
- Marque M
journal: Acta Derm Venereol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.2340/actadv.v104.40913
keywords:
- Humans
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- "Melanoma/genetics, drug therapy, secondary, mortality, enzymology"
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Retrospective Studies
- "Skin Neoplasms/genetics, drug therapy, pathology, mortality"
- Mutation
- Aged
- Adult
- Progression-Free Survival
- Time Factors
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Risk Factors
- Treatment Outcome
- DNA Mutational Analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High BRAF V600 Mutation Level Associated with Worse Outcome in Metastatic Melanoma Patients Receiving BRAF and MEK Inhibitors.
**Authors:** Fizazi A, Serrand C, Evrard A, Bergeret B, Stoebner PE, Marque M
**Journal:** Acta Derm Venereol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.2340/actadv.v104.40913](https://doi.org/10.2340/actadv.v104.40913)

## Content

1. Acta Derm Venereol. 2024 Nov 7;104:adv40913. doi: 10.2340/actadv.v104.40913.

High BRAF V600 Mutation Level Associated with Worse Outcome in Metastatic
Melanoma Patients Receiving BRAF and MEK Inhibitors.

Fizazi A(1), Serrand C(2), Evrard A(3), Bergeret B(1), Stoebner PE(#)(4), Marque
M(#)(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, CHU Nîmes, University Montpellier, Nîmes, France.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology, Public Health and Innovation in
Methodology (BESPIM), CHU Nîmes, University Montpellier, Nîmes, France.
(3)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, CHU Nîmes, University
Montpellier, Nîmes, France; Institut de Recherche en Cancérologie de Montpellier
(IRCM), Institut régional du Cancer Montpellier (ICM), INSERM U1194, University
Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(4)Department of Dermatology, CHU Nîmes, University Montpellier, Nîmes, France;
Institut de Recherche en Cancérologie de Montpellier (IRCM), Institut régional
du Cancer Montpellier (ICM), INSERM U1194, University Montpellier, Montpellier,
France. pierre.stoebner@chu-nimes.fr.
(#)Contributed equally

The prognostic value of BRAF V600 mutation level on clinical outcomes in
patients with BRAF V600-mutated metastatic melanoma treated with BRAF and MEK
inhibitors remains uncertain. The association was retrospectively analysed
between BRAF V600 mutation level (defined as the ratio of the quantification of
the BRAF V600 allele to the percentage of tumoral cells in the sample analysed)
and progression-free and overall survival (PFS and OS, respectively) and 3-month
response rate in a cohort of 58 patients with metastatic melanoma who harboured
BRAF V600E/K mutations and received dual targeted-therapy BRAF/MEK inhibitors.
The BRAF mutation level cut-off determined by the area under the receiver
operating characteristic curve after internal validation by bootstrap methods
was 0.44. Risk of poor PFS and OS was associated with BRAF V600 mutation level
> 0.44 on multivariate analysis (p = 0.02 and p = 0.02, respectively) after
adjusting for major confounding factors (age, sex, lactate dehydrogenase level,
brain metastasis, and treatment line). No association was found between BRAF
mutation level and 3-month response rate. Our study shows that high BRAF V600
mutation level in melanoma tissue was associated with poor prognosis in patients
with metastatic melanoma treated with BRAF and MEK inhibitors.

DOI: 10.2340/actadv.v104.40913
PMCID: PMC11558860
PMID: 39508497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
declare.
