---
reference_id: "PMID:38175705"
title: Heterozygous mutations in the C-terminal domain of COPA underlie a complex autoinﬂammatory syndrome.
authors:
- Delafontaine S
- Iannuzzo A
- Bigley TM
- Mylemans B
- Rana R
- Baatsen P
- Poli MC
- Rymen D
- Jansen K
- Mekahli D
- Casteels I
- Cassiman C
- Demaerel P
- Lepelley A
- Frémond ML
- Schrijvers R
- Bossuyt X
- Vints K
- Huybrechts W
- Tacine R
- Willekens K
- Corveleyn A
- Boeckx B
- Baggio M
- Ehlers L
- Munck S
- Lambrechts D
- Voet A
- Moens L
- Bucciol G
- Cooper MA
- Davis CM
- Delon J
- Meyts I
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1172/JCI163604
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- Coatomer Protein/genetics
- "Coat Protein Complex I/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Syndrome
- "Golgi Apparatus/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heterozygous mutations in the C-terminal domain of COPA underlie a complex autoinﬂammatory syndrome.
**Authors:** Delafontaine S, Iannuzzo A, Bigley TM, Mylemans B, Rana R, Baatsen P, Poli MC, Rymen D, Jansen K, Mekahli D, Casteels I, Cassiman C, Demaerel P, Lepelley A, Frémond ML, Schrijvers R, Bossuyt X, Vints K, Huybrechts W, Tacine R, Willekens K, Corveleyn A, Boeckx B, Baggio M, Ehlers L, Munck S, Lambrechts D, Voet A, Moens L, Bucciol G, Cooper MA, Davis CM, Delon J, Meyts I
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI163604](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI163604)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2024 Jan 4;134(4):e163604. doi: 10.1172/JCI163604.

Heterozygous mutations in the C-terminal domain of COPA underlie a complex 
autoinﬂammatory syndrome.

Delafontaine S(1)(2), Iannuzzo A(3), Bigley TM(4), Mylemans B(5), Rana R(6), 
Baatsen P(7), Poli MC(8)(9), Rymen D(2), Jansen K(2), Mekahli D(10)(11), 
Casteels I(12), Cassiman C(12), Demaerel P(13), Lepelley A(14), Frémond 
ML(14)(15), Schrijvers R(16), Bossuyt X(17), Vints K(7), Huybrechts W(18), 
Tacine R(3), Willekens K(18), Corveleyn A(18), Boeckx B(19)(20), Baggio M(1), 
Ehlers L(1), Munck S(21), Lambrechts D(19)(20), Voet A(5), Moens L(1), Bucciol 
G(1)(2), Cooper MA(4), Davis CM(6), Delon J(3), Meyts I(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Inborn Errors of Immunity, Department of Microbiology, 
Immunology and Transplantation, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Université Paris Cité, CNRS, INSERM, Institut Cochin, Paris, France.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Rheumatology/Immunology, Washington 
University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(5)Laboratory of Biomolecular Modelling and Design, Department of Chemistry, KU 
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(6)Division of Immunology, Allergy and Retrovirology, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA.
(7)Electron Microscopy Platform of VIB Bio Imaging Core, KU Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Clínica Alemana de Santiago, Universidad del 
Desarollo, Santiago, Chile.
(9)Immunology and Rheumatology Unit, Hospital de Niños Dr. Roberto del Rio, 
Santiago, Chile.
(10)PKD Research Group, Laboratory of Ion Channel Research, Department of 
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(11)Department of Pediatric Nephrology.
(12)Department of Ophthalmology, and.
(13)Department of Radiology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(14)Université Paris Cité, Imagine Institute, Laboratory of Neurogenetics and 
Neuroinﬂammation, INSERM UMR 1163, Paris, France.
(15)Paediatric Haematology-Immunology and Rheumatology Unit, Necker Hospital, 
AP-HP.Centre - Université Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(16)Allergy and Clinical Immunology Research Group, Department of Microbiology, 
Immunology and Transplantation, and.
(17)Clinical and Diagnostic Immunology, Department of Microbiology, Immunology 
and Transplantation, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(18)Center for Human Genetics, Leuven University Hospitals, Leuven, Belgium.
(19)Laboratory for Translational Genetics, Department of Human Genetics, KU 
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(20)VIB Center for Cancer Biology, Leuven, Belgium.
(21)VIB Bio Imaging Core and VIB-KU Leuven Center for Brain & Disease Research, 
KU Leuven Department of Neurosciences, Leuven, Belgium.

Mutations in the N-terminal WD40 domain of coatomer protein complex subunit α 
(COPA) cause a type I interferonopathy, typically characterized by alveolar 
hemorrhage, arthritis, and nephritis. We described 3 heterozygous mutations in 
the C-terminal domain (CTD) of COPA (p.C1013S, p.R1058C, and p.R1142X) in 6 
children from 3 unrelated families with a similar syndrome of autoinflammation 
and autoimmunity. We showed that these CTD COPA mutations disrupt the integrity 
and the function of coat protein complex I (COPI). In COPAR1142X and COPAR1058C 
fibroblasts, we demonstrated that COPI dysfunction causes both an anterograde 
ER-to-Golgi and a retrograde Golgi-to-ER trafficking defect. The disturbed 
intracellular trafficking resulted in a cGAS/STING-dependent upregulation of the 
type I IFN signaling in patients and patient-derived cell lines, albeit through 
a distinct molecular mechanism in comparison with mutations in the WD40 domain 
of COPA. We showed that CTD COPA mutations induce an activation of ER stress and 
NF-κB signaling in patient-derived primary cell lines. These results demonstrate 
the importance of the integrity of the CTD of COPA for COPI function and 
homeostatic intracellular trafficking, essential to ER homeostasis. CTD COPA 
mutations result in disease by increased ER stress, disturbed intracellular 
transport, and increased proinﬂammatory signaling.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI163604
PMCID: PMC10866661
PMID: 38175705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]