---
reference_id: "PMID:31484880"
title: Fetal and Neonatal Circulatory Disorders in Twin to Twin Transfusion Syndrome (The Secondary Publication).
authors:
- Yoda H
journal: J Nippon Med Sch
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1272/jnms.JNMS.2019_86-301
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fetal and Neonatal Circulatory Disorders in Twin to Twin Transfusion Syndrome (The Secondary Publication).
**Authors:** Yoda H
**Journal:** J Nippon Med Sch (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1272/jnms.JNMS.2019_86-301](https://doi.org/10.1272/jnms.JNMS.2019_86-301)

## Content

1. J Nippon Med Sch. 2019;86(4):192-200. doi: 10.1272/jnms.JNMS.2019_86-301.

Fetal and Neonatal Circulatory Disorders in Twin to Twin Transfusion Syndrome 
(The Secondary Publication).

Yoda H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neonatology, Toho University, Faculty of Medicine.

Twin to twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS) is a major complication of 
monochorionic diamniotic (MD) twins, and its onset is known to be associated 
with placental vascular anastomoses and blood flow imbalance. In a typical case 
of TTTS, the recipient develops polyhydramnios, weight gain, cardiomegaly and 
hydrops fetalis in the uterus. In contrast, the donor develops oligohydramnios 
and intrauterine growth restriction. Recently, the significance of the 
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) that transfers from the donor to the 
recipient has attracted interest in the fetal circulation of TTTS. The donor has 
decreased renal blood flow due to decreased circulating blood volume. For this 
reason, the secretion of RAAS hormones is augmented in the fetal kidneys of the 
donor. In TTTS, these RAAS hormones from the donor transfer to the recipient 
through the anastomosed vessels. In addition to excess preload, the recipient 
heart is exposed to excess afterload due to systemic vasoconstriction through 
RAAS hormones. Commonly occurring complications in the recipient include 
myocardial hypertrophy, atrioventricular valve regurgitation, and pulmonary 
valve stenosis or pulmonary atresia. Fetoscopic laser photocoagulation (FLP) has 
been introduced recently because neither mortality nor neurological morbidity 
have been satisfactorily improved with conventional treatment. FLP is a curative 
method that may improve the prognosis of TTTS. In Japan, this procedure has been 
performed frequently, and positive neurological outcomes have been achieved.

DOI: 10.1272/jnms.JNMS.2019_86-301
PMID: 31484880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]