---
reference_id: "PMID:1739868"
title: "Osteogenesis imperfecta: a clinical study of the first ten years of life."
authors:
- Vetter U
- Pontz B
- Zauner E
- Brenner RE
- Spranger J
journal: Calcif Tissue Int
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1007/BF00297295
keywords:
- Body Height
- Body Weight
- Bone Development
- Bone and Bones/diagnostic imaging
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Fractures, Bone/etiology"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Insulin-Like Growth Factor I/analysis
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- Motor Skills
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/classification, complications, pathology, physiopathology"
- Radiography
- Scoliosis/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteogenesis imperfecta: a clinical study of the first ten years of life.
**Authors:** Vetter U, Pontz B, Zauner E, Brenner RE, Spranger J
**Journal:** Calcif Tissue Int (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF00297295](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00297295)

## Content

1. Calcif Tissue Int. 1992 Jan;50(1):36-41. doi: 10.1007/BF00297295.

Osteogenesis imperfecta: a clinical study of the first ten years of life.

Vetter U(1), Pontz B, Zauner E, Brenner RE, Spranger J.

Author information:
(1)NIH, NIDR, Bethesda, MD 20892.

One hundred twenty-seven children with osteogenesis imperfecta (O.I.) were
studied during the first 10 years of life. According to Sillence, 40 patients
were assigned to type I, 39 to type III, and 48 to type IV O.I. Centiles for
height, weight, and the annual number of fractures could be established for the
different types of O.I. The development of the skeletal changes could be
documented for the different forms of the disease. At birth, the skeletal
changes were significantly more severe in type III than in type IV patients.
During the first 10 years of life the number of fractures, extent of skeletal
deformities, and growth retardation did not differ between types III and IV.
Only fracture nonunion, dentinogenesis imperfecta, and congenital cardiac
malformations were more frequent in type III than in type IV. Papillary
calcifications of the kidney and kidney stones were diagnosed in 4 type III and
2 type IV patients. Hemihypertrophy of the body developed in 2 type I patients.
Although types III and IV patients suffered from severe short stature, serum
insulin-like growth factor (IGF) I was in the normal range.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00297295
PMID: 1739868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
