---
reference_id: "PMID:21692954"
title: Hepatitis B surface antigen monitoring and management of chronic hepatitis B.
authors:
- Sonneveld MJ
- Zoutendijk R
- Janssen HL
journal: J Viral Hepat
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2893.2011.01465.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis B surface antigen monitoring and management of chronic hepatitis B.
**Authors:** Sonneveld MJ, Zoutendijk R, Janssen HL
**Journal:** J Viral Hepat (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2893.2011.01465.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2893.2011.01465.x)

## Content

1. J Viral Hepat. 2011 Jul;18(7):449-57. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2893.2011.01465.x. 
Epub 2011 May 23.

Hepatitis B surface antigen monitoring and management of chronic hepatitis B.

Sonneveld MJ(1), Zoutendijk R, Janssen HL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus MC University Medical 
Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Serum hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) levels reflect intrahepatic hepatitis 
B virus (HBV) covalently closed circular DNA and may be a valuable addition to 
HBV DNA in the management of patients with chronic hepatitis B (CHB). Among 
HBeAg-negative CHB patients with low HBV DNA levels, HBsAg quantification may 
help distinguish those with active CHB from true inactive carriers with a very 
favourable prognosis, thus limiting the need for long-term intensive monitoring 
of ALT and HBV DNA levels. In patients treated with peginterferon (PEG-IFN), 
achievement of a decline in HBsAg during therapy appears to be an important 
marker for treatment outcome, and several groups have proposed stopping rules 
based on HBsAg thresholds. A recently described stopping rule incorporating a 
combination of HBsAg and HBV DNA levels can accurately identify HBeAg-negative 
patients, especially those with HBV genotype D, not responding to PEG-IFN. 
Current applications of HBsAg levels in the monitoring of patients treated with 
nucleo(s)tide analogues are still being evaluated. First data from these studies 
show that HBsAg decline, and thus subsequent clearance, is confined to those 
with an active immune response to HBV, such as HBeAg-positive patients with 
elevated ALT, or those who achieve HBeAg clearance.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2893.2011.01465.x
PMID: 21692954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]