---
reference_id: "PMID:10830026"
title: "Dexamethasone in bacterial meningitis: to use or not to use?"
authors:
- Kaul A
- Chandwani S
journal: Indian J Pediatr
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1007/BF02730800
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dexamethasone in bacterial meningitis: to use or not to use?
**Authors:** Kaul A, Chandwani S
**Journal:** Indian J Pediatr (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF02730800](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02730800)

## Content

1. Indian J Pediatr. 1996 Sep-Oct;63(5):583-9. doi: 10.1007/BF02730800.

Dexamethasone in bacterial meningitis: to use or not to use?

Kaul A(1), Chandwani S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, New York University School of Medicine, USA.

Permanent neurologic disabilities are seen in up to a quarter of survivors of 
bacterial meningitis despite major improvements in therapy. Experimental studies 
have demonstrated that most of the pathology in meningitis is mediated by 
inflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and interleukin-1 
(IL-1), which are produced by host cells in response to bacterial invasion of 
the meninges. Dexamethasone has been used in a number of clinical trials to 
moderate the host response and to improve neurologic outcome of meningitis. 
Results of six randomized, placebo controlled trials are summarized in this 
review. Dexamethasone treatment did not lower mortality. Only a moderate, but 
not a significant reduction in the neurologic and audiologic sequelae was seen 
in dexamethasone recipients when Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) was the 
causative agent of meningitis. Following routine use of Hib vaccine, meningitis 
caused by this agent has virtually disappeared in the USA. Hence, findings from 
these trials may no longer be applicable in countries with high rates of 
immunization against Hib. Presently, there is little or no evidence showing a 
benefit of dexamethasone therapy in meningitis caused by S. pneumoniae or N. 
meningitidis. Global emergence of penicillin and cephalosporin resistant S. 
pneumoniae has raised new concerns about the use of dexamethasone in 
pneumococcal meningitis. Since dexamethasone significantly decreases the 
penetration and concentration of vancomycin and ceftriaxone in the CSF and 
delays CSF sterilization, adjunctive dexamethasone therapy may increase the risk 
of treatment failure in meningitis caused by antibiotic resistant pneumococci. 
An antibiotic combination should be used in the treatment of meningitis caused 
by antibiotic resistant pneumococci, particularly if dexamethasone is also being 
administered concurrently.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02730800
PMID: 10830026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]