---
reference_id: "PMID:35095550"
title: "Small Airway Dysfunction in Cough Variant Asthma: Prevalence, Clinical, and Pathophysiological Features."
authors:
- Yi F
- Jiang Z
- Li H
- Guo C
- Lu H
- Luo W
- Chen Q
- Lai K
journal: Front Physiol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2021.761622
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Small Airway Dysfunction in Cough Variant Asthma: Prevalence, Clinical, and Pathophysiological Features.
**Authors:** Yi F, Jiang Z, Li H, Guo C, Lu H, Luo W, Chen Q, Lai K
**Journal:** Front Physiol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fphys.2021.761622](https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2021.761622)

## Content

1. Front Physiol. 2022 Jan 13;12:761622. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2021.761622. 
eCollection 2021.

Small Airway Dysfunction in Cough Variant Asthma: Prevalence, Clinical, and 
Pathophysiological Features.

Yi F(1), Jiang Z(1), Li H(1), Guo C(1), Lu H(1), Luo W(1), Chen Q(1), Lai K(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, National Clinical Research 
Center for Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health, The 
First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

Introduction: Small airway dysfunction (SAD) commonly presents in patients with 
classic asthma, which is associated with airway inflammation, disease severity, 
and asthma control. However, the prevalence of SAD, its relationship with cough 
severity and airway inflammation, and its development after antiasthmatic 
treatment in patients with cough variant asthma (CVA) need to be clarified. This 
study aimed to investigate the prevalence of SAD and its relationship with 
clinical and pathophysiological characteristics in patients with CVA and the 
change in small airway function after antiasthmatic treatment. Methods: We 
retrospectively analyzed 120 corticosteroid-naïve patients with CVA who had 
finished a standard questionnaire and relevant tests in a specialist cough 
clinic, such as cough visual analog scale (VAS), differential cells in induced 
sputum, fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) measurement, spirometry, and 
airway hyper-responsiveness. Information of 1-year follow-up was recorded in a 
part of patients who received complete cough relief after 2 months of treatment. 
SAD was defined as any two parameters of maximal mid-expiratory flow (MMEF)% 
pred, forced expiratory flow at 50% of forced vital capacity (FEF50%) pred, and 
forced expiratory flow at 75% of forced vital capacity (FEF75%) pred measuring 
<65%. Results: SAD occurred in 73 (60.8%) patients with CVA before treatment. 
The patients with SAD showed a significantly longer cough duration (24.0 vs. 
6.0, p = 0.031), a higher proportion of women (78.1 vs. 59.6%, p = 0.029), older 
mean age (41.9 vs. 35.4, p = 0.005), and significantly lower forced expiratory 
volume in 1 s (FEV1%) pred, FEV1/FVC, MMEF% pred, FEF50% pred, FEF75% pred, PEF% 
pred, and PD20 (all p < 0.01) as compared with patients without SAD. There were 
no significant differences in cough VAS, sputum eosinophils count, FeNO, and 
TIgE level between patients with SAD and those without SAD. Among 105 patients 
who completed 2 months of antiasthmatic treatment and repeatedly experienced 
spirometry measurement, 57 (54.3%) patients still had SAD, despite a significant 
improvement in cough VAS, sputum eosinophils, FeNO, FEF50% pred, and PEF% pred 
(all p < 0.01). As compared with patients without SAD, patients with SAD showed 
no significant differences in the relapse rate (50.0 vs. 41.9%, p = 0.483) and 
wheeze development rate (10.4 vs. 0%, p = 0.063) during the follow-up. 
Conclusions: Small airway dysfunction occurred in over half of patients with CVA 
and persisted after short-term antiasthmatic treatment, which showed distinctive 
clinical and pathophysiological features.

Copyright © 2022 Yi, Jiang, Li, Guo, Lu, Luo, Chen and Lai.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2021.761622
PMCID: PMC8793490
PMID: 35095550

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.