---
reference_id: "PMID:37651206"
title: Cell-free DNA reveals distinct pathology of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children.
authors:
- Andargie TE
- Roznik K
- Redekar N
- Hill T
- Zhou W
- Apalara Z
- Kong H
- Gordon O
- Meda R
- Park W
- Johnston TS
- Wang Y
- Brady S
- Ji H
- Yanovski JA
- Jang MK
- Lee CM
- Karaba AH
- Cox AL
- Agbor-Enoh S
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1172/JCI171729
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cell-free DNA reveals distinct pathology of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children.
**Authors:** Andargie TE, Roznik K, Redekar N, Hill T, Zhou W, Apalara Z, Kong H, Gordon O, Meda R, Park W, Johnston TS, Wang Y, Brady S, Ji H, Yanovski JA, Jang MK, Lee CM, Karaba AH, Cox AL, Agbor-Enoh S
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI171729](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI171729)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2023 Nov 1;133(21):e171729. doi: 10.1172/JCI171729.

Cell-free DNA reveals distinct pathology of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in 
children.

Andargie TE(1)(2), Roznik K(3), Redekar N(4), Hill T(4), Zhou W(5), Apalara 
Z(1), Kong H(1), Gordon O(6), Meda R(1), Park W(1), Johnston TS(3), Wang Y(5), 
Brady S(7), Ji H(5), Yanovski JA(7), Jang MK(1), Lee CM(2), Karaba AH(3), Cox 
AL(3), Agbor-Enoh S(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Genomic Research Alliance for Transplantation (GRAfT) and Laboratory of 
Applied Precision Omics, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI), NIH, 
Bethesda, Maryland, USA. GFAfT is detailed in Supplemental Acknowledgments.
(2)Department of Biology, Howard University, Washington DC, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(4)Integrated Data Sciences Section, Research Technologies Branch, National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, 
USA.
(5)Department of Biostatistics, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(6)Infectious Diseases Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Hadassah Medical Center, 
Faculty of Medicine, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.
(7)Section on Growth and Obesity, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of 
Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Erratum in
    J Clin Invest. 2024 Jan 2;134(1):e178008. doi: 10.1172/JCI178008.

Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) is a rare but 
life-threatening hyperinflammatory condition induced by infection with severe 
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) that causes pediatric 
COVID-19 (pCOVID-19). The relationship of the systemic tissue injury to the 
pathophysiology of MIS-C is poorly defined. We leveraged the high sensitivity of 
epigenomics analyses of plasma cell-free DNA (cfDNA) and plasma cytokine 
measurements to identify the spectrum of tissue injury and glean mechanistic 
insights. Compared with pediatric healthy controls (pHCs) and patients with 
pCOVID-19, patients with MIS-C had higher levels of cfDNA primarily derived from 
innate immune cells, megakaryocyte-erythroid precursor cells, and 
nonhematopoietic tissues such as hepatocytes, cardiac myocytes, and kidney 
cells. Nonhematopoietic tissue cfDNA levels demonstrated significant 
interindividual variability, consistent with the heterogenous clinical 
presentation of MIS-C. In contrast, adaptive immune cell-derived cfDNA levels 
were comparable in MIS-C and pCOVID-19 patients. Indeed, the cfDNA of innate 
immune cells in patients with MIS-C correlated with the levels of innate immune 
inflammatory cytokines and nonhematopoietic tissue-derived cfDNA, suggesting a 
primarily innate immunity-mediated response to account for the multisystem 
pathology. These data provide insight into the pathogenesis of MIS-C and support 
the value of cfDNA as a sensitive biomarker to map tissue injury in MIS-C and 
likely other multiorgan inflammatory conditions.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI171729
PMCID: PMC10617770
PMID: 37651206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: AHK reports receiving 
consulting fees from Roche.