---
reference_id: "PMID:33001918"
title: Modal-based nonlinear optimization algorithm for wavefront measurement with under-sampled data.
authors:
- Zhao L
- Bai J
- Hao Y
- Jing H
- Wang C
- Lu B
- Liang Y
- Wang K
journal: Opt Lett
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1364/OL.403459
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modal-based nonlinear optimization algorithm for wavefront measurement with under-sampled data.
**Authors:** Zhao L, Bai J, Hao Y, Jing H, Wang C, Lu B, Liang Y, Wang K
**Journal:** Opt Lett (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1364/OL.403459](https://doi.org/10.1364/OL.403459)

## Content

1. Opt Lett. 2020 Oct 1;45(19):5456-5459. doi: 10.1364/OL.403459.

Modal-based nonlinear optimization algorithm for wavefront measurement with 
under-sampled data.

Zhao L, Bai J, Hao Y, Jing H, Wang C, Lu B, Liang Y, Wang K.

The aliasing effect in the discrete Fourier transform inherent will impose a 
serious detrimental effect on conventional phase retrieval measurement accuracy 
with under-sampled intensity. In this Letter, we describe a modal-based 
nonlinear optimization phase retrieval approach that is capable of retrieving 
wavefront measurements using under-sampled intensities. The extended 
Nijboer-Zernike theory is introduced to establish an analytic solution between 
wavefront phase and intensity image, and then nonlinear optimization is further 
utilized to solve wavefront aberration coefficients from under-sampled intensity 
data. The feasibility and accuracy of the algorithm are verified by simulations 
and experiments. This is a promising method that is especially suitable for full 
field phase recovery of optical systems with a relatively high numerical 
aperture.

DOI: 10.1364/OL.403459
PMID: 33001918