---
reference_id: "PMID:39333966"
title: "Familial hypokalemic periodic paralysis: a case induced by concurrent hyperthyroidism."
authors:
- Hannouneh ZA
- Cervantes CE
- Sperati CJ
- Hanouneh M
journal: BMC Nephrol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12882-024-03749-x
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Adult
- "Hypokalemic Periodic Paralysis/genetics, etiology, diagnosis"
- "Hyperthyroidism/genetics, complications"
- "Graves Disease/genetics, complications"
- "Calcium Channels, L-Type/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial hypokalemic periodic paralysis: a case induced by concurrent hyperthyroidism.
**Authors:** Hannouneh ZA, Cervantes CE, Sperati CJ, Hanouneh M
**Journal:** BMC Nephrol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12882-024-03749-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12882-024-03749-x)

## Content

1. BMC Nephrol. 2024 Sep 27;25(1):315. doi: 10.1186/s12882-024-03749-x.

Familial hypokalemic periodic paralysis: a case induced by concurrent
hyperthyroidism.

Hannouneh ZA(1), Cervantes CE(2), Sperati CJ(2), Hanouneh M(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Al Andalus University for Medical Sciences, Tartus,
Syrian Arab Republic. zh19@au.edu.sy.
(2)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Nephrology Center of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: Familial hypokalemic periodic paralysis (HypoPP) is an uncommon
genetic disorder characterized by recurrent episodes of muscle weakness and
hypokalemia, typically starting in early adulthood. The existence of
hyperthyroidism in the presence of HypoPP is more strongly associated with a
diagnosis of thyrotoxic periodic paralysis (TPP), with most cases occurring in
Asian males with pathogenic KCNJ2 or KCNJ18 variants and without a family
history of the condition. This case is novel due to the combination of familial
HypoPP and hyperthyroidism induced by Graves' disease, a rare occurrence
especially in non-Asian populations.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 40-year-old African American man presented with profound
muscle weakness after consuming a high-salt meal. He had a significant family
history of hyperthyroidism and hypokalemia. On examination, he showed profound
weakness in all extremities. Laboratory tests confirmed hypokalemia and
hyperthyroidism, and genetic testing identified a pathogenic variant in the
CACNA1S gene (c.1583 G > A, p. R528H), with normal SCN4A, KCNJ2 and KCNJ18
sequencing. He was diagnosed with familial HypoPP and hyperthyroidism due to
Graves' disease. He was started on PO methimazole 10 mg three times a day and PO
acetazolamide 250 mg twice a day. He was advised to follow a low carbohydrate
and low salt diet.
CONCLUSIONS: This case highlights the importance of considering a genetic basis
for HypoPP in patients with a family history of the condition, even when
hyperthyroidism is present. The combination of familial HypoPP and Graves'
disease is rare and emphasizes the need for careful genetic and clinical
evaluation in similar cases. Management should focus on correcting hypokalemia,
treating hyperthyroidism, and lifestyle modifications to prevent recurrence.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12882-024-03749-x
PMCID: PMC11429431
PMID: 39333966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
