---
reference_id: "PMID:19855376"
title: "Collagenous sprue is not always associated with dismal outcomes: a clinicopathological study of 19 patients."
authors:
- Vakiani E
- Arguelles-Grande C
- Mansukhani MM
- Lewis SK
- Rotterdam H
- Green PH
- Bhagat G
journal: Mod Pathol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.151
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Collagenous sprue is not always associated with dismal outcomes: a clinicopathological study of 19 patients.
**Authors:** Vakiani E, Arguelles-Grande C, Mansukhani MM, Lewis SK, Rotterdam H, Green PH, Bhagat G
**Journal:** Mod Pathol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/modpathol.2009.151](https://doi.org/10.1038/modpathol.2009.151)

## Content

1. Mod Pathol. 2010 Jan;23(1):12-26. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.151. Epub 2009
Oct  23.

Collagenous sprue is not always associated with dismal outcomes: a 
clinicopathological study of 19 patients.

Vakiani E(1), Arguelles-Grande C, Mansukhani MM, Lewis SK, Rotterdam H, Green 
PH, Bhagat G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY, USA.

Collagenous sprue is associated with high morbidity; however, the etiology of 
this disorder is unclear. Data regarding the pathological and clinical 
manifestations of patients with collagenous sprue are also limited. We, thus, 
undertook this study to gain insight into the etiology, disease manifestations 
and outcomes of collagenous sprue. We searched our departmental database 
(1999-2008) to identify cases of collagenous sprue and to obtain clinical and 
laboratory data. Small bowel histology, including thickness of subepithelial 
collagen, intra-epithelial lymphocyte phenotype and results of T-cell clonality 
assays were evaluated. Nineteen patients (15 women, 4 men, age 22-80 years, mean 
57 years) were identified. Seventeen (89%) had celiac disease and two had 
unclassified sprue; 9 of 17 (53%) celiac disease patients had refractory 
disease; 5 of 15 (33%) lacked diarrhea (atypical presentation), including 2 of 6 
(33%) with active (untreated) celiac disease and 3 of 9 (33%) with refractory 
celiac disease. Autoimmune disorders were seen in 12 of 19 (63%) patients and 
microscopic colitis (n=7), lymphocytic gastritis (n=2) or collagenous gastritis 
(n=2) were seen in nine patients. Subepithelial collagen thickness was mildly 
(n=6), moderately (n=10), or markedly (n=3) increased and villous atrophy was 
total (n=13) or subtotal (n=6). Phenotypically aberrant intraepithelial 
lymphocytes were not detected in any case. Polymerase chain reaction analysis 
showed a dominant T-cell clone in the only patient with refractory celiac 
disease type II. Histological improvement occurred in 7 of 11 (64%) patients. 
Overall, 8 of 19 (42%) responded to gluten-free diet, including 2 of 9 (22%) 
with refractory celiac disease and 10 responded to immunomodulatory therapy, 
including 6 of 9 (67%) with refractory celiac disease. Only one patient died 
from complications of refractory celiac disease. No patient developed lymphoma. 
The vast majority of our patients with collagenous sprue had celiac disease. 
Although, many patients required immunomodulatory therapy for symptom control, a 
subset responded to gluten-free diet alone. In our experience, collagenous sprue 
patients had relatively good clinical outcomes.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.151
PMID: 19855376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]