---
reference_id: "PMID:39367055"
title: Missense mutation in the activation segment of the kinase CK2 models Okur-Chung neurodevelopmental disorder and alters the hippocampal glutamatergic synapse.
authors:
- Cruz-Gamero JM
- Ballardin D
- Lecis B
- Zhang CL
- Cobret L
- Gast A
- Morisset-Lopez S
- Piskorowski R
- Langui D
- Jose J
- Chevreux G
- Rebholz H
journal: Mol Psychiatry
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41380-024-02762-8
keywords:
- Animals
- Hippocampus/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Mice
- "Casein Kinase II/genetics, metabolism"
- "Neurodevelopmental Disorders/genetics, metabolism"
- "Synapses/metabolism, genetics"
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Gene Knock-In Techniques
- Male
- "Autism Spectrum Disorder/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Neurons/metabolism
- Female
- Glutamic Acid/metabolism
- Phosphorylation
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Missense mutation in the activation segment of the kinase CK2 models Okur-Chung neurodevelopmental disorder and alters the hippocampal glutamatergic synapse.
**Authors:** Cruz-Gamero JM, Ballardin D, Lecis B, Zhang CL, Cobret L, Gast A, Morisset-Lopez S, Piskorowski R, Langui D, Jose J, Chevreux G, Rebholz H
**Journal:** Mol Psychiatry (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41380-024-02762-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-024-02762-8)

## Content

1. Mol Psychiatry. 2025 Apr;30(4):1497-1509. doi: 10.1038/s41380-024-02762-8.
Epub  2024 Oct 4.

Missense mutation in the activation segment of the kinase CK2 models Okur-Chung
neurodevelopmental disorder and alters the hippocampal glutamatergic synapse.

Cruz-Gamero JM(1), Ballardin D(1), Lecis B(1)(2), Zhang CL(1), Cobret L(3), Gast
A(4), Morisset-Lopez S(3), Piskorowski R(1), Langui D(5), Jose J(4), Chevreux
G(6), Rebholz H(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Université Paris Cité, Institute of Psychiatry and Neuroscience of Paris
(IPNP), INSERM U1266, Laboratory of Signaling mechanisms in neurological
disorders, 75014, Paris, France.
(2)GHU-Paris Psychiatrie et Neurosciences, Hôpital Sainte Anne, F-75014, Paris,
France.
(3)Center for Molecular Biophysics-CNRS UPR 4301, Rue Charles Sadron, Orléans,
France.
(4)Institute of Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry, Pharmacampus, University
of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(5)Inserm, Institut du Cerveau, Plateforme ICM-Quant, Paris, France.
(6)Université Paris Cité, CNRS,Institut Jacques Monod, Paris, France.
(7)Université Paris Cité, Institute of Psychiatry and Neuroscience of Paris
(IPNP), INSERM U1266, Laboratory of Signaling mechanisms in neurological
disorders, 75014, Paris, France. heike.rebholz@inserm.fr.
(8)GHU-Paris Psychiatrie et Neurosciences, Hôpital Sainte Anne, F-75014, Paris,
France. heike.rebholz@inserm.fr.
(9)Center of Neurodegeneration, Faculty of Medicine, Danube Private University,
Krems, Austria. heike.rebholz@inserm.fr.

Exome sequencing has enabled the identification of causative genes of monogenic
forms of autism, amongst them, in 2016, CSNK2A1, the gene encoding the catalytic
subunit of the kinase CK2, linking this kinase to Okur-Chung Neurodevelopmental
Syndrome (OCNDS), a newly described neurodevelopmental condition with many
symptoms resembling those of autism spectrum disorder. Thus far, no preclinical
model of this condition exists. Here we describe a knock-in mouse model that
harbors the K198R mutation in the activation segment of the α subunit of CK2.
This region is a mutational hotspot, representing one-third of patients. These
mice exhibit behavioral phenotypes that mirror patient symptoms. Homozygous
knock-in mice die mid-gestation while heterozygous knock-in mice are born at
half of the expected mendelian ratio and are smaller in weight and size than
wildtype littermates. Heterozygous knock-in mice showed alterations in cognition
and memory-assessing paradigms, enhanced stereotypies, altered circadian
activity patterns, and nesting behavior. Phosphoproteome analysis from brain
tissue revealed alterations in the phosphorylation status of major pre- and
postsynaptic proteins of heterozygous knock-in mice. In congruence, we detect
reduced synaptic maturation in hippocampal neurons and attenuated long-term
potentiation in the hippocampus of knock-in mice. Taken together, heterozygous
knock-in mice (CK2αK198R/+) exhibit significant face validity, presenting
ASD-relevant phenotypes, synaptic deficits, and alterations in synaptic
plasticity, all of which strongly validate this line as a mouse model of OCNDS.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41380-024-02762-8
PMID: 39367055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no
competing interests. Ethical approval: All methods were performed in accordance
with the relevant guidelines and regulations. Animal procedures were approved by
the French Ministry of Higher Education and are in accordance with the local
IACUC CEEA-34 Université Paris Cité, Apafis No. 28822-2022011423502271 and No.
28822-2019081015485048.
