---
reference_id: "PMID:19617826"
title: "Bilateral Ménière's disease."
authors:
- Nabi S
- Parnes LS
journal: Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1097/MOO.0b013e3283304cb3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bilateral Ménière's disease.
**Authors:** Nabi S, Parnes LS
**Journal:** Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MOO.0b013e3283304cb3](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOO.0b013e3283304cb3)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2009 Oct;17(5):356-62. doi: 
10.1097/MOO.0b013e3283304cb3.

Bilateral Ménière's disease.

Nabi S(1), Parnes LS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Western Ontario, London Health 
Sciences Centre, University Hospital, London, Ontario, Canada. 
Shahin.Nabi@uwo.ca

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Bilateral Ménière's disease treatment can be extremely 
challenging and, like its unilateral variant, remains highly controversial. 
There are few articles in the literature that have focused specifically on the 
treatment of bilateral Ménière's disease, despite significant numbers of 
unilateral cases evolving toward bilaterality - a process which complicates 
management and is not simple to foresee. This study reviews the most up-to-date 
concepts in its diagnosis and treatment, with a special focus on recent 
advances.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recent advances in electrocochleography, vestibular-evoked 
myogenic potential, and intratympanic gadolinium-based contrast agent MRI may 
have the potential to diagnose bilateral endolymphatic hydrops, and predict 
unilateral to bilateral Ménière's disease progression. Although more prospective 
studies are necessary, recent studies show that intermittent pressure therapy 
(Meniett device), intratympanic steroids, and endolymphatic sac surgery appear 
to be efficacious and well tolerated nonablative management options. Moreover, 
triple semicircular canal occlusion surgery has recently been used successfully 
in Ménière's disease.
SUMMARY: Bilateral Ménière's disease can be challenging to diagnose via clinical 
suspicion and pure-tone audiometry alone. Therefore, adjunctive diagnostic tools 
including electrocochleography, vestibular-evoked myogenic potential, and 
intratympanic gadolinium-based contrast agent MRI are of even greater value, and 
may predict progression to bilaterality - allowing better optimization of 
treatment. Ablative treatments are relatively contraindicated due to the risks 
of bilateral vestibular and cochlear hypofunction. Nonablative treatments such 
as the Meniett device, intratympanic steroids, and endolymphatic sac surgery 
appear to be efficacious, and useful alternatives after conservative measures 
fail. Systemic aminoglycoside therapy is reserved for only the most severe and 
intractable cases.

DOI: 10.1097/MOO.0b013e3283304cb3
PMID: 19617826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]