---
reference_id: "PMID:39456956"
title: Identification of Genetic Variants Associated with Hereditary Thoracic Aortic Diseases (HTADs) Using Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) Technology and Genotype-Phenotype Correlations.
authors:
- Butnariu LI
- Russu G
- Luca AC
- Sandu C
- Trandafir LM
- Vasiliu I
- Popa S
- Ghiga G
- Bălănescu L
- Țarcă E
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms252011173
keywords:
- Humans
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing/methods
- Female
- Male
- Adult
- Genetic Association Studies
- "Aortic Aneurysm, Thoracic/genetics, diagnosis"
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Fibrillin-1/genetics
- "Receptor, Transforming Growth Factor-beta Type II/genetics"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Aorta, Thoracic/pathology"
- Loeys-Dietz Syndrome/genetics
- Marfan Syndrome/genetics
- Exome Sequencing/methods
- Adolescent
- Genetic Variation
- Young Adult
- Phenotype
- Pedigree
- Adipokines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of Genetic Variants Associated with Hereditary Thoracic Aortic Diseases (HTADs) Using Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) Technology and Genotype-Phenotype Correlations.
**Authors:** Butnariu LI, Russu G, Luca AC, Sandu C, Trandafir LM, Vasiliu I, Popa S, Ghiga G, Bălănescu L, Țarcă E
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms252011173](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms252011173)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Oct 17;25(20):11173. doi: 10.3390/ijms252011173.

Identification of Genetic Variants Associated with Hereditary Thoracic Aortic
Diseases (HTADs) Using Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) Technology and
Genotype-Phenotype Correlations.

Butnariu LI(1), Russu G(2), Luca AC(2)(3), Sandu C(4), Trandafir LM(3), Vasiliu
I(5), Popa S(1), Ghiga G(3), Bălănescu L(6), Țarcă E(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, "Grigore T. Popa"
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 700115 Iași, Romania.
(2)Departament of Cardiology, Saint Mary's Emergency Children Hospital, 700309
Iași, Romania.
(3)Department of Mother and Child, Faculty of Medicine, "Grigore T. Popa"
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 700115 Iași, Romania.
(4)Department of Medical Abilities, Faculty of Medicine, "Grigore T. Popa"
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 700115 Iași, Romania.
(5)Department of Morphofunctional Sciences II, Grigore T. Popa University of
Medicine and Pharmacy, 700115 Iași, Romania.
(6)Department of Pediatric Surgery and Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, "Carol
Davila" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 020021 Bucharest, Romania.
(7)Department of Surgery II-Pediatric Surgery, "Grigore T. Popa" University of
Medicine and Pharmacy, 700115 Iași, Romania.

Hereditary thoracic aorta diseases (HTADs) are a heterogeneous group of rare
disorders whose major manifestation is represented by aneurysm and/or dissection
frequently located at the level of the ascending thoracic aorta. The diseases
have an insidious evolution and can be encountered as an isolated manifestation
or can also be associated with systemic, extra-aortic manifestations (syndromic
HTADs). Along with the development of molecular testing technologies, important
progress has been made in deciphering the heterogeneous etiology of HTADs. The
aim of this study is to identify the genetic variants associated with a group of
patients who presented clinical signs suggestive of a syndromic form of HTAD.
Genetic testing based on next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology was
performed using a gene panel (Illumina TruSight Cardio Sequencing Panel) or
whole exome sequencing (WES). In the majority of cases (8/10), de novo mutations
in the FBN1 gene were detected and correlated with the Marfan syndrome
phenotype. In another case, a known mutation in the TGFBR2 gene associated with
Loeys-Dietz syndrome was detected. Two other pathogenic heterozygous variants
(one de novo and the other a known mutation) in the SLC2A10 gene (compound
heterozygous genotype) were identified in a patient diagnosed with arterial
tortuosity syndrome (ATORS). We presented the genotype-phenotype correlations,
especially related to the clinical evolution, highlighting the particularities
of each patient in a family context. We also emphasized the importance of
genetic testing and patient monitoring to avoid acute aortic events.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms252011173
PMCID: PMC11508433
PMID: 39456956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
