---
reference_id: "PMID:37179582"
title: Liver histopathological lesions is severe in patients with normal alanine transaminase and low to moderate hepatitis B virus DNA replication.
authors:
- Jiang SW
- Lian X
- Hu AR
- Lu JL
- He ZY
- Shi XJ
- Zhu DD
- Wang ZY
- Huang GC
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v29.i16.2479
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liver histopathological lesions is severe in patients with normal alanine transaminase and low to moderate hepatitis B virus DNA replication.
**Authors:** Jiang SW, Lian X, Hu AR, Lu JL, He ZY, Shi XJ, Zhu DD, Wang ZY, Huang GC
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.v29.i16.2479](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v29.i16.2479)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2023 Apr 28;29(16):2479-2494. doi: 
10.3748/wjg.v29.i16.2479.

Liver histopathological lesions is severe in patients with normal alanine 
transaminase and low to moderate hepatitis B virus DNA replication.

Jiang SW(1), Lian X(2), Hu AR(3), Lu JL(4), He ZY(1), Shi XJ(1), Zhu DD(1), Wang 
ZY(4), Huang GC(5).

Author information:
(1)Ningbo Institute of Liver Diseases, Ningbo No. 2 Hospital, Ningbo 315020, 
Zhejiang Province, China.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Xiangshan Hospital Affiliated to Wenzhou 
Medical University, Ningbo 315020, Zhejiang Province, China.
(3)Ningbo Institute of Liver Diseases, Ningbo No. 2 Hospital, Ningbo 315020, 
Zhejiang Province, China. huairong@ucas.edu.cn.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, The First Hospital of Ninghai County, 
Ningbo 315000, Zhejiang Province, China.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, The Affiliated Yang-Ming Hospital of 
Ningbo University, Ningbo 315400, Zhejiang Province, China.

BACKGROUND: Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection remains a major global 
public health problem. Chronic hepatitis B (CHB) patients can be divided into 
treatment indication and non-treatment indication individuals according to 
alanine transaminase (ALT), HBV DNA, serum hepatitis B e antigen status, disease 
status [liver cirrhosis, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), or liver failure], 
liver necroinflammation or fibrosis, patients' age, and family history of HCC or 
cirrhosis. For example, normal ALT patients in 'immune-tolerant' phase with HBV 
DNA higher than 107 or 2 × 107 IU/mL, and those in 'inactive-carrier' phase with 
HBV DNA lower than 2 × 103 IU/mL do not require antiviral therapy. However, is 
it reasonable to set the defined values of HBV DNA as the fundamental basis to 
estimate the disease state and to determine whether to start treatment? In fact, 
we should pay more attention to those who do not match the treatment indications 
(gray-zone patients both in the indeterminate phase and in the 
'inactive-carrier' phase).
AIM: To analyze the correlation of HBV DNA level and liver histopathological 
severity, and to explore the significance of HBV DNA for CHB with normal ALT.
METHODS: From January 2017 to December 2021, a retrospective cross-sectional set 
of 1299 patients with chronic HBV infection (HBV DNA > 30 IU/mL) who underwent 
liver biopsy from four hospitals, including 634 with ALT less than 40 U/L. None 
of the patients had received anti-HBV treatment. The degrees of liver 
necroinflammatory activity and liver fibrosis were evaluated according to the 
Metavir system. On the basis of the HBV DNA level, patients were divided into 
two groups: Low/moderate replication group, HBV DNA ≤ 107 IU/mL [7.00 Log IU/mL, 
the European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL) guidelines] or ≤ 2 × 
107 IU/mL [7.30 Log IU/mL, the Chinese Medical Association (CMA) guidelines]; 
high replication group, HBV DNA > 107 IU/mL or > 2 × 107 IU/mL. Relevant factors 
(demographic characteristics, laboratory parameters and noninvasive models) for 
liver histopathological severity were analyzed by univariate analysis, logistics 
analysis and propensity score-matched analysis.
RESULTS: At entry, there were 21.45%, 24.29%, and 30.28% of the patients had 
liver histopathological severities with ≥ A2, ≥ F2, and ≥ A2 or/and ≥ F2, 
respectively. HBV DNA level (negative correlation) and noninvasive model liver 
fibrosis 5 value (positive correlation) were independent risk factors for liver 
histopathological severities (liver necroinflammation, liver fibrosis, and 
treatment indication). The AUROCs of the prediction probabilities (PRE_) of the 
models mentioned above (< A2 vs ≥ A2, < F2 vs ≥ F2, < A2 and < F2 vs ≥ A2 or/and 
≥ F2) were 0.814 (95%CI: 0.770-0.859), 0.824 (95%CI: 0.785-0.863), and 0.799 
(95%CI: 0.760-0.838), respectively. HBV DNA level (negative correlation) was 
still an independent risk factor when diagnostic models were excluded, the P 
values (< A2 vs ≥ A2, < F2 vs ≥ F2, < A2 and < F2 vs ≥ A2 or/and ≥ F2) were 
0.011, 0.000, and 0.000, respectively. For the propensity score-matched pairs, 
whether based on EASL guidelines or CMA guidelines, the group with significant 
liver histology damage (≥ A2 or/and ≥ F2) showed much lower HBV DNA level than 
the group with non- significant liver histology damage (< A2 and < F2). Patients 
in the moderate replication group (with indeterminate phase) had the most 
serious liver disease pathologically and hematologically, followed by patients 
in the low replication group (with 'inactive-carrier' phase) and then the high 
replication group (with 'immune-tolerant' phase).
CONCLUSION: HBV DNA level is a negative risk factor for liver disease 
progression. The phase definition of CHB may be revised by whether the level of 
HBV DNA exceeds the detection low limit value. Patients who are in the 
indeterminate phase or 'inactive carriers' should receive antiviral therapy.

©The Author(s) 2023. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v29.i16.2479
PMCID: PMC10167902
PMID: 37179582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: We have no 
financial relationships to disclose.