---
reference_id: "PMID:20301525"
title: Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- McDonald J
- Gossage JR
- Stevenson DA
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, McDonald J, Gossage JR, Stevenson DA

## Content

1. Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia.

McDonald J(1), Gossage JR(2), Stevenson DA(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2000 Jun 26 [updated 2026 Feb 19].

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Utah Medical Center, Salt Lake City, 
Utah
(2)Augusta University, Augusta, Georgia
(3)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University, 
Stanford, California

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) is 
characterized by the presence of multiple arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) 
that lack intervening capillaries and result in direct connections between 
arteries and veins. The most common clinical manifestation is recurrent 
nosebleeds (epistaxis) beginning on average at age 12 years. Telangiectases 
(small AVMs) are characteristically found on the lips, tongue, buccal and 
gastrointestinal (GI) mucosa, fingers, and nose. The appearance of 
telangiectases is generally later than epistaxis but may be during childhood. 
Large AVMs occur most often in the lungs, liver, or brain; complications from 
bleeding or shunting may be sudden and catastrophic. Some individuals with HHT 
have GI bleeding, which is rarely seen before age 50 years.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The clinical diagnosis of HHT can be established in a proband 
with at least three of the following diagnostic criteria: recurrent epistaxis; 
mucocutaneous telangiectases in characteristic locations; visceral AVMs; a 
first-degree relative diagnosed with HHT on the basis of the preceding criteria. 
The molecular diagnosis is established by identification of a heterozygous 
pathogenic variant in ACVRL1, ENG, or SMAD4 by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapies: Oral tranexamic acid or intravenous bevacizumab 
for epistaxis and GI bleeding; pomalidomide or pazopanib for refractory 
epistaxis and GI bleeding. Supportive care: In addition to targeted therapies, 
epistaxis is treated with humidification, topical moisturizing therapy, 
hemostatic products, ablation therapy, septodermoplasty, and Young's nasal 
closure as needed. GI bleeding and anemia is treated with iron replacement 
therapy and (if needed) blood transfusions. Pulmonary AVMs with a feeding vessel 
2-3 mm or greater in diameter typically require occlusion for stroke prevention. 
When pulmonary shunting is present, use antibiotic prophylaxis for dental and 
non-sterile invasive procedures, taking care to prevent air bubbles from being 
introduced in intravenous lines; this may include an air filter when available 
and compatible with the medication being administered. Symptomatic hepatic AVMs 
are managed medically; liver transplantation is recommended for individuals who 
do not respond to medical therapy and who develop refractory high-output heart 
failure. Cerebral AVMs are treated as indicated by size, location, or symptoms 
by surgery, embolotherapy, and/or stereotactic radiosurgery. Treatment of 
pulmonary artery hypertension per cardiologist, pulmonologist, and other 
relevant specialists. Gastrointestinal polyps are treated according to 
guidelines for juvenile polyposis syndrome. Surveillance: Annual evaluation by a 
health care provider familiar with HHT for signs and symptoms of complications; 
annual hematocrit, hemoglobin, and ferritin; evaluation for pulmonary AVMs every 
five years with transthoracic contrast echocardiography (TCE) in adults and TCE 
or chest radiograph with pulse oximetry in children; brain MRI with and without 
contrast using sequences that detect blood products in infancy and again by age 
18-20 years for cerebral AVMs; clinical evaluation for manifestations of heart 
or liver failure and hepatic imaging in adults to screen for hepatic AVM; 
colonoscopy at age 15 years and repeated every three years if no polyps are 
found, or annually with esophagogastroduodenoscopy if colonic polyps are 
identified in those with SMAD4-related HHT. Agents/circumstances to avoid: 
Vigorous nose blowing; lifting heavy objects; straining during bowel movements; 
finger manipulation in the nose; anticoagulant and nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory agents that interfere with clotting (including aspirin) should 
be avoided in individuals with significant nose or GI bleeding unless required 
for treatment of other medical condition; scuba diving unless TCE within the 
last five years was negative for evidence of a right-to-left shunt; liver 
biopsy. Evaluation of relatives at risk: Molecular genetic testing should be 
offered to at-risk family members if the germline pathogenic variant has been 
identified in the family. If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, 
at-risk family members should be evaluated for signs and symptoms of HHT, and 
screening should be offered to at-risk family members if the diagnosis cannot be 
ruled out. Pregnancy management: Women with HHT considering pregnancy are 
screened and treated for pulmonary and cerebral AVMs; sizable pulmonary AVMs 
discovered during pregnancy are treated during the second trimester. Iron 
replacement is preferred for anemia, but transfusion of packed red blood cells 
may be necessary for symptomatic anemia despite aggressive iron replacement 
therapy.
GENETIC COUNSELING: HHT is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner with 
considerable intrafamilial variability and age-related penetrance of individual 
manifestations. Most individuals diagnosed with HHT have an affected parent. If 
a parent of the proband is affected and/or is known to have the HHT-related 
pathogenic variant identified in the proband, the risk to the sibs of inheriting 
the pathogenic variant is 50%. Each child of an individual with HHT has a 50% 
chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant. Once the HHT-related pathogenic 
variant has been identified in an affected family member, predictive testing for 
at-risk relatives and prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301525