---
reference_id: "PMID:23805374"
title: Occlusion of the anterior cerebral artery after head trauma.
authors:
- Paiva WS
- de Andrade AF
- Soares MS
- Amorim RL
- Figueiredo EG
- Teixeira MJ
journal: World J Radiol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.4329/wjr.v5.i5.226
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Occlusion of the anterior cerebral artery after head trauma.
**Authors:** Paiva WS, de Andrade AF, Soares MS, Amorim RL, Figueiredo EG, Teixeira MJ
**Journal:** World J Radiol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.4329/wjr.v5.i5.226](https://doi.org/10.4329/wjr.v5.i5.226)

## Content

1. World J Radiol. 2013 May 28;5(5):226-8. doi: 10.4329/wjr.v5.i5.226.

Occlusion of the anterior cerebral artery after head trauma.

Paiva WS(1), de Andrade AF, Soares MS, Amorim RL, Figueiredo EG, Teixeira MJ.

Author information:
(1)Wellingson Silva Paiva, Almir Ferreira de Andrade, Matheus Schmidt Soares, 
Robson Luis Amorim, Eberval Gadelha Figueiredo, Manoel Jacobsen Teixeira, 
Division of Neurological Surgery, Hospital Das Clinicas University of Sao Paulo 
Medical School, Sao Paulo 05406000, Brazil.

Intracranial arterial occlusion is rarely encountered in association with head 
injury. Only six cases of traumatic occlusion of the anterior cerebral artery 
(ACA) have previously been reported. In this paper, the authors describe a case 
of a posttraumatic occlusion of ACA. A 35-year-old male presented to the 
emergency room with severe head injury. Computed tomography (CT) scan displayed 
diffuse brain swelling with multiple skull fractures. Follow up CT scan showed 
extensive cerebral infarction in the territory of ACA. The patient underwent CT 
angiography that demonstrated occlusion of the ACA by a fracture of the anterior 
fossa. He died after 3 d. ACA traumatic occlusion is a rare condition, with poor 
prognosis. In this case, fracture was responsible for dissection and direct 
obstruction of the artery.

DOI: 10.4329/wjr.v5.i5.226
PMCID: PMC3692969
PMID: 23805374