---
reference_id: "PMID:38330421"
title: "Sensory Chronic Inflammatory Demyelinating Polyradiculoneuropathy: Neglected Immunotherapy-Responsive Sensory Neuropathy."
authors:
- Oh SJ
- King P
journal: J Clin Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3988/jcn.2023.0469
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sensory Chronic Inflammatory Demyelinating Polyradiculoneuropathy: Neglected Immunotherapy-Responsive Sensory Neuropathy.
**Authors:** Oh SJ, King P
**Journal:** J Clin Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3988/jcn.2023.0469](https://doi.org/10.3988/jcn.2023.0469)

## Content

1. J Clin Neurol. 2024 May;20(3):276-284. doi: 10.3988/jcn.2023.0469. Epub 2024
Feb  5.

Sensory Chronic Inflammatory Demyelinating Polyradiculoneuropathy: Neglected 
Immunotherapy-Responsive Sensory Neuropathy.

Oh SJ(1), King P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Veterans 
Affairs Medical Center, Birmingham, AL, USA. shinj.oh@icloud.com.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Veterans 
Affairs Medical Center, Birmingham, AL, USA.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: To report an improvement with immunotherapy in 34 
(85%)/40 patients who required an immunotherapy among 56 patients with sensory 
chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy (CIDP).
METHODS: Sensory CIDP was diagnosed when two inclusion criteria are met: 1) 
acquired, chronic progressive or relapsing symmetrical or asymmetrical sensory 
polyneuropathy that had progressed for >2 months; and 2) definite 
electrophysiological and/or biopsy evidence of demyelinating neuropathy.
RESULTS: Fifty-six patients with sensory CIDP were identified. Evidence of 
demyelination was obtained from by the routine motor nerve conduction study 
(NCS) in 39 (70%) patients, from a nerve biopsy in 10, and from a near-nerve 
needle sensory NCS in 7 patients. The most prominent laboratory abnormality was 
a high protein level in the cerebrospinal fluid in 21 (49%) of 43 tested 
patients. Immunotherapy was required in 41 (79%) of the 52 followed-up patients. 
An improvement with immunotherapy was observed in 36 (88%)/41 patients. In three 
patients, motor weakness developed in 5-8 years' follow-up period and so, their 
diagnosis was changed to CIDP.
CONCLUSIONS: Sensory CIDP is responded to an immunotherapy in 88% of the treated 
patients. Sensory CIDP was diagnosed by the routine motor NCS in 70% of patients 
and by a sural nerve biopsy in 18% of patients. Thus, sensory CIDP should be 
recognized as a treatable CIDP variant among the different types of "idiopathic 
sensory neuropathy."

Copyright © 2024 Korean Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.3988/jcn.2023.0469
PMCID: PMC11076188
PMID: 38330421

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no potential conflicts of 
interest to disclose.