---
reference_id: "PMID:37026012"
title: Insights into monkeypox pathophysiology, global prevalence, clinical manifestation and treatments.
authors:
- Niu L
- Liang D
- Ling Q
- Zhang J
- Li Z
- Zhang D
- Xia P
- Zhu Z
- Lin J
- Shi A
- Ma J
- Yu P
- Liu X
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1132250
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Insights into monkeypox pathophysiology, global prevalence, clinical manifestation and treatments.
**Authors:** Niu L, Liang D, Ling Q, Zhang J, Li Z, Zhang D, Xia P, Zhu Z, Lin J, Shi A, Ma J, Yu P, Liu X
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2023.1132250](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1132250)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2023 Mar 21;14:1132250. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1132250. 
eCollection 2023.

Insights into monkeypox pathophysiology, global prevalence, clinical 
manifestation and treatments.

Niu L(1)(2), Liang D(1)(3), Ling Q(1)(4), Zhang J(3), Li Z(4), Zhang D(5), Xia 
P(5), Zhu Z(5), Lin J(5), Shi A(6)(7), Ma J(6), Yu P(5), Liu X(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, The Second Affiliated Hospital of 
Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China.
(2)Huan Kui College of Nanchang University, Nanchang, China.
(3)Queen Mary College of Nanchang University, Nanchang, China.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang 
University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China.
(5)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Dexing Hospital of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Dexing, Jiangxi, China.
(6)Department of Pharmacology and Systems Physiology, University of Cincinnati 
College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, United States.
(7)School of Medicine, St. George University of London, London, United Kingdom.
(8)Department of Cardiology, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

On 23rd July 2022, the World Health Organization (WHO) recognized the ongoing 
monkeypox outbreak as a public medical crisis. Monkeypox virus (MPV), the 
etiological agent of monkeypox, is a zoonotic, linear, double-stranded DNA 
virus. In 1970, the Democratic Republic of the Congo reported the first case of 
MPV infection. Human-to-human transmission can happen through sexual contact, 
inhaled droplets, or skin-to-skin contact. Once inoculated, the viruses multiply 
rapidly and spread into the bloodstream to cause viremia, which then affect 
multiple organs, including the skin, gastrointestinal tract, genitals, lungs, 
and liver. By September 9, 2022, more than 57,000 cases had been reported in 103 
locations, especially in Europe and the United States. Infected patients are 
characterized by physical symptoms such as red rash, fatigue, backache, muscle 
aches, headache, and fever. A variety of medical strategies are available for 
orthopoxviruses, including monkeypox. Monkeypox prevention following the 
smallpox vaccine has shown up to 85% efficacy, and several antiviral drugs, such 
as Cidofovir and Brincidofovir, may slow the viral spread. In this article, we 
review the origin, pathophysiology, global epidemiology, clinical manifestation, 
and possible treatments of MPV to prevent the propagation of the virus and 
provide cues to generate specific drugs.

Copyright © 2023 Niu, Liang, Ling, Zhang, Li, Zhang, Xia, Zhu, Lin, Shi, Ma, Yu 
and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1132250
PMCID: PMC10070694
PMID: 37026012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.