---
reference_id: "PMID:32879043"
title: Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency and the Benefits of Early Screening.
authors:
- DelFavero JJ
- Jnah AJ
- Newberry D
journal: Neonatal Netw
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1891/0730-0832.39.5.270
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency and the Benefits of Early Screening.
**Authors:** DelFavero JJ, Jnah AJ, Newberry D
**Journal:** Neonatal Netw (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1891/0730-0832.39.5.270](https://doi.org/10.1891/0730-0832.39.5.270)

## Content

1. Neonatal Netw. 2020 Aug 1;39(5):270-282. doi: 10.1891/0730-0832.39.5.270.

Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency and the Benefits of Early 
Screening.

DelFavero JJ, Jnah AJ, Newberry D.

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, the most common enzymopathy 
worldwide, is an insufficient amount of the G6PD enzyme, which is vital to the 
protection of the erythrocyte. Deficient enzyme levels lead to oxidative damage, 
hemolysis, and resultant severe hyperbilirubinemia. If not promptly recognized 
and treated, G6PD deficiency can potentially lead to bilirubin-induced 
neurologic dysfunction, acute bilirubin encephalopathy, and kernicterus. 
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency is one of the three most common 
causes for pathologic hyperbilirubinemia. A change in migration patterns and 
intercultural marriages have created an increased incidence of G6PD deficiency 
in the United States. Currently, there is no universally mandated metabolic 
screening or clinical risk assessment tool for G6PD deficiency in the United 
States. Mandatory universal screening for G6PD deficiency, which includes 
surveillance and hospital-based risk assessment tools, can identify the at-risk 
infant and foster early identification, diagnosis, and treatment to eliminate 
neurotoxicity.

© Copyright 2020 Springer Publishing Company, LLC.

DOI: 10.1891/0730-0832.39.5.270
PMID: 32879043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]