---
reference_id: "PMID:27906067"
title: "Aspartylglycosaminuria: a review."
authors:
- Arvio M
- Mononen I
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-016-0544-6
keywords:
- "Acetylglucosamine/analogs & derivatives, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Aspartylglucosaminuria/enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- "Aspartylglucosylaminase/genetics, metabolism"
- Glycoproteins/metabolism
- Humans
- "Lysosomal Storage Diseases/enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aspartylglycosaminuria: a review.
**Authors:** Arvio M, Mononen I
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-016-0544-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-016-0544-6)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2016 Dec 1;11(1):162. doi: 10.1186/s13023-016-0544-6.

Aspartylglycosaminuria: a review.

Arvio M(1)(2)(3), Mononen I(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Päijät-Häme Social Welfare & Healthcare Joint Municipal Board, Lahti,
Finland. maria.arvio@phsotey.fi.
(2)KTO, The Special Welfare District of Southwestern Finland, Paimio, Finland.
maria.arvio@phsotey.fi.
(3)PEDEGO Research Unit, Oulu University Hospital, Finland, Oulu, Finland.
maria.arvio@phsotey.fi.
(4)Newborn Screening Center Finland, Saske, Turku University Central Hospital,
Turku, Finland.
(5)The Joint Clinical Chemistry Laboratory at Turku University Hospital, Turku,
Finland.
(6)Department of Clinical Chemistry, University of Turku, PO Box 52, FIN-20521,
Turku, Finland.

Aspartylglucosaminuria (AGU), a recessively inherited lysosomal storage disease,
is the most common disorder of glycoprotein degradation with a high prevalence
in the Finnish population. It is a lifelong condition affecting on the patient's
appearance, cognition, adaptive skills, physical growth, personality, body
structure, and health. An infantile growth spurt and development of
macrocephalia associated to hernias and respiratory infections are the key signs
to an early identification of AGU. Progressive intellectual and physical
disability is the main symptom leading to death usually before the age of
50 years.The disease is caused by the deficient activity of the lysosomal enzyme
glycosylasparaginase (aspartylglucosaminidase, AGA), which leads to a disorder
in the degradation of glycoasparagines - aspartylglucosamine or other
glycoconjugates with an aspartylglucosamine moiety at their reducing end - and
accumulation of these undegraded glycoasparagines in tissues and body fluids. A
single nucleotide change in the AGA gene resulting in a cysteine to serine
substitution (C163S) in the AGA enzyme protein causes the deficiency of the
glycosylasparaginase activity in the Finnish population. Homozygosity for the
single nucleotide change causing the C163S mutation is responsible for 98% of
the AGU cases in Finland simplifying the carrier detection and prenatal
diagnosis of the disorder in the Finnish population. A mouse strain, which
completely lacks the Aga activity has been generated through targeted disruption
of the Aga gene in embryonic stem cells. These Aga-deficient mice share most of
the clinical, histopathologic and biochemical characteristics of human AGU
disease. Treatment of AGU mice with recombinant AGA resulted in rapid correction
of the pathophysiologic characteristics of AGU in non-neuronal tissues of the
animals. The accumulation of aspartylglucosamine was reduced by up to 40% in the
brain tissue of the animals depending on the age of the animals and the
therapeutic protocol. Enzyme replacement trials on human AGU patients have not
been reported so far. Allogenic stem cell transplantation has not proved
effective in curing AGU.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-016-0544-6
PMCID: PMC5134220
PMID: 27906067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
