---
reference_id: "PMID:9442313"
title: Polymorphism in glutathione S-transferase loci as a risk factor for common cancers.
authors:
- Strange RC
- Lear JT
- Fryer AA
journal: Arch Toxicol Suppl
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-46856-8_37
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Polymorphism in glutathione S-transferase loci as a risk factor for common cancers.
**Authors:** Strange RC, Lear JT, Fryer AA
**Journal:** Arch Toxicol Suppl (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-642-46856-8_37](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-46856-8_37)

## Content

1. Arch Toxicol Suppl. 1998;20:419-28. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-46856-8_37.

Polymorphism in glutathione S-transferase loci as a risk factor for common 
cancers.

Strange RC(1), Lear JT, Fryer AA.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Biochemistry Research Group, School of Postgraduate Medicine, Keele 
University, North Staffordshire Hospital, Stoke-on-Trent, England.

Though a developing body of data indicates polymorphism at GST genes influences 
cancer susceptibility, it is unclear why a genotype is associated with one 
cancer but not another. We believe the GST exert a critical role in normal cell 
house-keeping activities. GSTM1, GSTM3 and GSTT1 influence tumorigenesis because 
these enzymes utilise the products of UV-induced oxidative stress. Further 
support for the importance of these genes in the protection of skin from UV 
comes from studies in systemic lupus erythematosus (Ollier et al, 1996). Thus, 
GSTM1 null is associated with increased anti-Ro (but not anti-La) antibodies, a 
phenotype associated with photosensitivity. At present there is no basis for 
predicting which cancers will be influenced by GST polymorphisms though other 
studies do indicate that the GSTs are critical in the metabolism of 
environmental carcinogens. For example, GSTT1 null confers an increased risk of 
astrocytoma (Hand et al, 1996). While brain tumours are not clearly associated 
with environmental pollutants, N-methyl-N-nitrosourea, processed meats and 
occupation have been implicated. Why GSTT1 but not GSTM1 or GSTM3 influences the 
risk of astrocytoma is unclear. GSTM3 appears a good susceptibility candidate, 
as some astrocytes demonstrate strong expression (Hand et al, 1996). 
Susceptibility to squamous cell cancer of the larynx, a pathology associated 
with chronic consumption of tobacco and alcohol, is also influenced by allelism 
at GSTM3 (Jahnke et al, 1996). The roles of CYP2D6 and CYP1A1 are even more 
unclear, though the finding that systemic agents such as arsenic predispose to 
multiple BCC, suggests that CYP2D6-mediated hepatic detoxification of 
photosensitizing agents may be important. Importantly, the extent of altered 
risk conferred by genotypes is generally 2-3 fold and it is necessary to 
identify which other genes interact with the GST so that haplotypes associated 
with 10-20 fold increases in risk can be defined.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-46856-8_37
PMID: 9442313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]