---
reference_id: "PMID:32155096"
title: "Dientamoeba fragilis in children: a systematic review on diagnostic considerations and efficacy of treatment."
authors:
- van Kalleveen MW
- van Gool T
- Klarenbeek N
- Benninga MA
- Savelkoul PHM
- de Meij T
- Plötz FB
journal: Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1080/17474124.2020.1739520
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dientamoeba fragilis in children: a systematic review on diagnostic considerations and efficacy of treatment.
**Authors:** van Kalleveen MW, van Gool T, Klarenbeek N, Benninga MA, Savelkoul PHM, de Meij T, Plötz FB
**Journal:** Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1080/17474124.2020.1739520](https://doi.org/10.1080/17474124.2020.1739520)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2020 Apr;14(4):231-242. doi: 
10.1080/17474124.2020.1739520. Epub 2020 Mar 21.

Dientamoeba fragilis in children: a systematic review on diagnostic 
considerations and efficacy of treatment.

van Kalleveen MW(1)(2), van Gool T(3), Klarenbeek N(1), Benninga MA(4), 
Savelkoul PHM(3)(5), de Meij T(4), Plötz FB(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tergooi Hospital, Blaricum, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Noordwest Hospital, Alkmaar, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology, Section Clinical Parasitology, Amsterdam 
UMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(5)Department of Medical Microbiology, NUTRIM School of Nutrition and 
Translational Research in Metabolism, Maastricht University Medical Centre, 
Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam UMC, University 
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Introduction: The presence of D. fragilis in feces is characterized by an 
asymptomatic carrier ship to a spectrum of gastrointestinal symptoms. However, a 
causal relationship remains to be elucidated. In this systematic review, we 
aimed to evaluate the relationship between the eradication of D. fragilis and 
symptoms to establish the strength of evidence that D. fragilis in symptomatic 
children warrants antibiotic treatment.Areas covered: This systematic review 
covers a challenge in daily clinical practice. Is it necessary to test for D. 
fragilis in children with gastrointestinal symptoms and does a positive fecal 
PCR test warrant treatment?Expert opinion: Testing for D. fragilis seems 
justified in a selection of children with persistent unexplained chronic 
abdominal pain and diarrhea. Treatment of D. fragilis should be withhold until 
other causes like celiac disease have been excluded. Both microscopic and Real 
Time-PCR methods (or a combination of the two) can be used for diagnosis. 
Paromomycin or clioquinol are antibiotics of choice based on their small 
spectrum of activity, fewer side effects, and better eradication rates than 
metronidazole. Future randomized studies, with strict inclusion criteria, 
appropriate diagnostic testing, and doses of antibiotics based on bodyweight are 
warranted.

DOI: 10.1080/17474124.2020.1739520
PMID: 32155096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]