---
reference_id: "PMID:38891774"
title: Revisiting Glutamate Excitotoxicity in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Age-Related Neurodegeneration.
authors:
- Arnold FJ
- Putka AF
- Raychaudhuri U
- Hsu S
- Bedlack RS
- Bennett CL
- La Spada AR
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25115587
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Revisiting Glutamate Excitotoxicity in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Age-Related Neurodegeneration.
**Authors:** Arnold FJ, Putka AF, Raychaudhuri U, Hsu S, Bedlack RS, Bennett CL, La Spada AR
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25115587](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25115587)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 May 21;25(11):5587. doi: 10.3390/ijms25115587.

Revisiting Glutamate Excitotoxicity in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and 
Age-Related Neurodegeneration.

Arnold FJ(1)(2), Putka AF(2), Raychaudhuri U(1), Hsu S(1), Bedlack RS(2), 
Bennett CL(1)(3), La Spada AR(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California 
Irvine, Irvine, CA 92617, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC 
27710, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of California Irvine, Irvine, CA 92617, 
USA.
(4)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California Irvine, Irvine, 
CA 92617, USA.
(5)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, University of California Irvine, 
Irvine, CA 92697, USA.
(6)UCI Center for Neurotherapeutics, University of California Irvine, Irvine, CA 
92697, USA.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is the most common motor neuron disorder. 
While there are five FDA-approved drugs for treating this disease, each has only 
modest benefits. To design new and more effective therapies for ALS, 
particularly for sporadic ALS of unknown and diverse etiologies, we must 
identify key, convergent mechanisms of disease pathogenesis. This review focuses 
on the origin and effects of glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity in ALS (the 
cortical hyperexcitability hypothesis), in which increased glutamatergic 
signaling causes motor neurons to become hyperexcitable and eventually die. We 
characterize both primary and secondary contributions to excitotoxicity, 
referring to processes taking place at the synapse and within the cell, 
respectively. 'Primary pathways' include upregulation of calcium-permeable AMPA 
receptors, dysfunction of the EAAT2 astrocytic glutamate transporter, increased 
release of glutamate from the presynaptic terminal, and reduced inhibition by 
cortical interneurons-all of which have been observed in ALS patients and model 
systems. 'Secondary pathways' include changes to mitochondrial morphology and 
function, increased production of reactive oxygen species, and endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) stress. By identifying key targets in the excitotoxicity cascade, 
we emphasize the importance of this pathway in the pathogenesis of ALS and 
suggest that intervening in this pathway could be effective for developing 
therapies for this disease.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25115587
PMCID: PMC11171854
PMID: 38891774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We declare no financial, personal, or 
professional conflicts of interest relating to this manuscript/subject matter.