---
reference_id: "PMID:32237942"
title: "Anifrolumab in systemic lupus erythematosus: current knowledge and future considerations."
authors:
- Anderson E
- Furie R
journal: Immunotherapy
year: '2020'
doi: 10.2217/imt-2020-0017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anifrolumab in systemic lupus erythematosus: current knowledge and future considerations.
**Authors:** Anderson E, Furie R
**Journal:** Immunotherapy (2020)
**DOI:** [10.2217/imt-2020-0017](https://doi.org/10.2217/imt-2020-0017)

## Content

1. Immunotherapy. 2020 Apr;12(5):275-286. doi: 10.2217/imt-2020-0017. Epub 2020
Apr  2.

Anifrolumab in systemic lupus erythematosus: current knowledge and future 
considerations.

Anderson E(1), Furie R(2).

Author information:
(1)Elmezzi Graduate School of Molecular Medicine, Feinstein Institutes for 
Medical Research, Northwell Health, 350 Community Drive, Manhasset, NY 11030, 
USA.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell, 865 
Northern Boulevard, Great Neck, NY 11021, USA.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic autoimmune disease that is 
potentially life-threatening and can affect any organ. The complex pathogenesis 
and heterogeneity of the disease, among other factors, present significant 
challenges in developing new therapies. Knowledge gained over many years has 
implicated type I interferon (IFN) in the pathogenesis of SLE and anti-IFN 
therapies hold promise as a much-needed future treatment for SLE. Anifrolumab, a 
human monoclonal antibody against the type I IFN receptor, has recently been 
evaluated in two Phase III clinical trials for the treatment of 
moderate-to-severe SLE. Here, we review the clinical efficacy and safety of 
anifrolumab and discuss the potential challenges in determining the optimal SLE 
patient subgroup for treatment.

DOI: 10.2217/imt-2020-0017
PMID: 32237942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]