---
reference_id: "PMID:11079795"
title: Management of malignant melanoma.
authors:
- Kroon BB
- Nieweg OE
journal: Ann Chir Gynaecol
year: '2000'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of malignant melanoma.
**Authors:** Kroon BB, Nieweg OE
**Journal:** Ann Chir Gynaecol (2000)

## Content

1. Ann Chir Gynaecol. 2000;89(3):242-50.

Management of malignant melanoma.

Kroon BB(1), Nieweg OE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, The Netherlands Cancer Institute / Antoni van 
Leeuwenhoek Hospital, Amsterdam. bkroon@nki.nl

The following guidelines are recommended in the management of malignant 
melanoma. An excisional biopsy is the appropriate diagnostic procedure for a 
skin lesion suspected of being a melanoma. The advised margin for diagnostic 
excision is 2 mm of macroscopically normal skin around the lesion; the margins 
for therapeutic excision are 1 cm of normal skin for a lesion with a Breslow 
thickness of < 2 mm and 2 cm when the Breslow thickness is > 2 and < or = 4 mm. 
A margin of at least 2 cm also appears to be justified for thicker melanomas. 
Elective lymph node dissection is not recommended. Sentinel node biopsy appears 
to be a promising method to detect occult metastases in the regional lymph 
nodes. If regional lymph node metastases are present, therapeutic regional lymph 
node dissection must be conducted. Isolated regional perfusion is indicated for 
inoperable tumour growth in an extremity. Radiotherapy can be applied 
palliatively or postoperatively (if non-radical resection is suspected). 
Adjuvant systemic therapy is still experimental. There is no standard treatment 
for patients with haematogenic metastasis and they should be entered in trials 
whenever possible. A follow-up period of 5 years is sufficient for patients with 
a melanoma of < or = 1.5 mm Breslow thickness and of 10 years when the Breslow 
thickness is > 1.5 mm. The patients should be actively involved in the follow-up 
(inspection, palpation). Regular routine blood tests and radiological 
examinations are not considered to be worthwhile. There is no evidence that the 
growth of micro-metastases is stimulated by hormonal changes during pregnancy or 
contraceptive pill use. Excessive exposure to ultraviolet radiation should be 
discouraged.

PMID: 11079795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]