---
reference_id: "PMID:28228640"
title: "Autosomal dominant cutis laxa with progeroid features due to a novel, de novo mutation in ALDH18A1."
authors:
- Bhola PT
- Hartley T
- Bareke E
- Care4Rare Canada Consortium
- Boycott KM
- Nikkel SM
- Dyment DA
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/jhg.2017.18
keywords:
- Aldehyde Dehydrogenase/genetics
- Child
- "Cutis Laxa/genetics, pathology"
- Genetic Counseling
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal dominant cutis laxa with progeroid features due to a novel, de novo mutation in ALDH18A1.
**Authors:** Bhola PT, Hartley T, Bareke E, Care4Rare Canada Consortium, Boycott KM, Nikkel SM, Dyment DA
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/jhg.2017.18](https://doi.org/10.1038/jhg.2017.18)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2017 Jun;62(6):661-663. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2017.18. Epub 2017 Feb
23.

Autosomal dominant cutis laxa with progeroid features due to a novel, de novo
mutation in ALDH18A1.

Bhola PT(1), Hartley T(2), Bareke E(3); Care4Rare Canada Consortium; Boycott
KM(1)(2), Nikkel SM(1)(2), Dyment DA(1)(2).

Collaborators: Boycott KM, MacKenzie AE, Majewski J, Brudno M, Bulman DE, Dyment
DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada.
(2)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation
Centre, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

De novo dominant mutations in the aldehyde dehydrogenase 18 family member A1
(ALDH18A1) gene have recently been shown to cause autosomal dominant cutis laxa
with progeroid features (MIM 616603). To date, all de novo dominant mutations
have been found in a single highly conserved amino acid residue at position
p.Arg138. We report an 8-year-old male with a clinical diagnosis of autosomal
dominant cutis laxa (ADCL) with progeroid features and a novel de novo missense
mutation in ALDH18A1 (NM_002860.3: c.377G>A (p.Arg126His)). This is the first
report of an individual with ALDH18A1-ADCL due to a substitution at a residue
other than p.Arg138. Knowledge of the complete spectrum of dominant-acting
mutations that cause this rare syndrome will have implications for molecular
diagnosis and genetic counselling of these families.

DOI: 10.1038/jhg.2017.18
PMID: 28228640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
