---
reference_id: "PMID:38929957"
title: Calcinosis Prevalence in Autoimmune Connective Tissue Diseases-A Retrospective Study.
authors:
- Róbert L
- Németh K
- Marschalkó M
- Holló P
- Hidvégi B
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/jcm13123428
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Calcinosis Prevalence in Autoimmune Connective Tissue Diseases-A Retrospective Study.
**Authors:** Róbert L, Németh K, Marschalkó M, Holló P, Hidvégi B
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm13123428](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm13123428)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2024 Jun 12;13(12):3428. doi: 10.3390/jcm13123428.

Calcinosis Prevalence in Autoimmune Connective Tissue Diseases-A Retrospective 
Study.

Róbert L(1), Németh K(1), Marschalkó M(1), Holló P(1), Hidvégi B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Dermatooncology, Semmelweis 
University, H-1085 Budapest, Hungary.

Background/Objectives: Calcinosis cutis is the deposition of insoluble calcium 
salts, which may cause inflammation, ulceration, pain, and restricted joint 
mobility. It rarely develops in damaged tissues (dystrophic subtype), most 
frequently in autoimmune connective tissue diseases (CTDs), but there is very 
limited data on the prevalence. Also, therapy remains an unsolved issue. In this 
study, we aimed to collect data on the prevalence of calcinosis in CTD patients 
to highlight that it is a considerable problem. Methods: A retrospective study 
was conducted in our department to assess the epidemiology of dystrophic 
calcinosis in CTDs between January 2003 and January 2024. Results: A total of 
839 CTD patients were identified, of whom 56 had calcinosis (6.67%). The mean 
age of the calcinosis patients at diagnosis of underlying CTD was 41.16 ± 19.47 
years. The mean time interval from the onset of calcinosis was 5.96 ± 8.62 
years. Systemic sclerosis was the most common CTD complicated by calcinosis (n = 
22). Conclusions: Our results are comparable to those reported previously in the 
literature. Although calcinosis is rare in the overall population, it is a 
present and unsolved problem in CTD patients. Therefore, further studies are 
needed on the factors involved in the development and progression of calcinosis 
as well as its treatment.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm13123428
PMCID: PMC11204081
PMID: 38929957

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.