---
reference_id: "PMID:38810948"
title: Evidence of mutant huntingtin and tau-related pathology within neuronal grafts in Huntington's disease cases.
authors:
- Salem S
- Kilgore MD
- Anwer M
- Maxan A
- Child D
- Bird TD
- Keene CD
- Cicchetti F
- Latimer C
journal: Neurobiol Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2024.106542
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evidence of mutant huntingtin and tau-related pathology within neuronal grafts in Huntington's disease cases.
**Authors:** Salem S, Kilgore MD, Anwer M, Maxan A, Child D, Bird TD, Keene CD, Cicchetti F, Latimer C
**Journal:** Neurobiol Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nbd.2024.106542](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2024.106542)

## Content

1. Neurobiol Dis. 2024 Aug;198:106542. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2024.106542. Epub 2024 
May 27.

Evidence of mutant huntingtin and tau-related pathology within neuronal grafts 
in Huntington's disease cases.

Salem S(1), Kilgore MD(2), Anwer M(3), Maxan A(3), Child D(2), Bird TD(4), Keene 
CD(2), Cicchetti F(5), Latimer C(6).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherche du CHU de Québec, Axe Neurosciences, T2-07, 2705, 
Boulevard Laurier, Québec, QC G1V 4G2, Canada; Departement de Médecine 
Moléculaire, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Neuropathology Division, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)Centre de Recherche du CHU de Québec, Axe Neurosciences, T2-07, 2705, 
Boulevard Laurier, Québec, QC G1V 4G2, Canada; Departement de Psychiatrie et 
Neurosciences, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada.
(4)Department of Neurology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA; 
Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center (GRECC), VA Puget Sound 
Health Care System, Seattle, WA, USA.
(5)Centre de Recherche du CHU de Québec, Axe Neurosciences, T2-07, 2705, 
Boulevard Laurier, Québec, QC G1V 4G2, Canada; Departement de Médecine 
Moléculaire, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada; Departement de Psychiatrie et 
Neurosciences, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada. Electronic address: 
francesca.cicchetti@crchudequebec.ulaval.ca.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Neuropathology Division, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. Electronic address: caitlinl@uw.edu.

A number of post-mortem studies conducted in transplanted Huntington's disease 
(HD) patients from various trials have reported the presence of pathological and 
misfolded proteins, in particular mutant huntingtin (mHtt) and phosphorylated 
tau neuropil threads, in the healthy grafted tissue. Here, we extended these 
observations with histological analysis of post-mortem tissue from three 
additional HD patients who had received similar striatal allografts from the 
fetal tissue transplantation trial conducted in Los Angeles in 1998. 
Immunohistochemical staining was performed using anti-mHtt antibodies, EM48 and 
MW7, as well as anti-hyperphosphorylated tau antibodies, AT8 and CP13. 
Immunofluorescence was used to assess the colocalization of EM48+ mHtt 
aggregates with the neuronal marker MAP2 and/or the extracellular matrix protein 
phosphacan in both the host and grafts. We confirmed the presence of mHtt 
aggregates within grafts of all three cases as well as tau neuropil threads in 
the grafts of two of the three transplanted HD patients. Phosphorylated tau was 
also variably expressed in the host cerebral cortex of all three subjects. While 
mHtt inclusions were present within neurons (immunofluorescence co-localization 
of MAP2 and EM48) as well as within the extracellular matrix of the host 
(immunofluorescence co-localization of phosphacan and EM48), their localization 
was limited to the extracellular matrix in the grafted tissue. This study 
corroborates previous findings that both mHtt and tau pathology can be found in 
the host and grafts of HD patients years post-grafting.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2024.106542
PMCID: PMC12448652
PMID: 38810948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no conflict of interest.