---
reference_id: "PMID:19634705"
title: Immunobiology of leishmaniasis.
authors:
- Sharma U
- Singh S
journal: Indian J Exp Biol
year: '2009'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunobiology of leishmaniasis.
**Authors:** Sharma U, Singh S
**Journal:** Indian J Exp Biol (2009)

## Content

1. Indian J Exp Biol. 2009 Jun;47(6):412-23.

Immunobiology of leishmaniasis.

Sharma U(1), Singh S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Microbiology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, All 
India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi 110 029, India.

Leishmaniasis is a parasitic disease caused by various species of Leishmania, a 
unicellular kinetoplastid protozoan flagellate. It manifests mainly in 3 
clinical forms; visceral leishmaniasis (VL), cutaneous leishmaniasis (CL) and 
mucocutaneous leishmaniasis (MCL), of which VL is the most severe form of the 
disease. VL is lethal if untreated and spontaneous cure is extremely rare. 
Cutaneous leishmaniasis usually has milder course and often results into a 
self-healing of ulcers. Resolution of leishmanial infection is dependent on the 
coordinated interactions between components of cell mediated immune response, 
specifically the activation of targeted T-cell populations for appropriate 
cytokine production and activation of macrophages. In murine model, the 
development of Thl response is associated with control of infection, and Th2 
response is associated with disease progression. However, Th1 and Th2 dichotomy 
in the human system is not as distinct as in mice and the murine model does not 
strictly apply to human leishmaniasis. This review focuses the dichotomy of 
immune response against various clinical forms of the disease. An in-depth 
knowledge of sequences involved in the immune response to the parasite would 
help in designing prophylactic and therapeutic strategies against leishmaniasis.

PMID: 19634705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]