---
reference_id: "PMID:10205269"
title: A third major locus for autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia maps to 1p34.1-p32.
authors:
- Varret M
- Rabès JP
- Saint-Jore B
- Cenarro A
- Marinoni JC
- Civeira F
- Devillers M
- Krempf M
- Coulon M
- Thiart R
- Kotze MJ
- Schmidt H
- Buzzi JC
- Kostner GM
- Bertolini S
- Pocovi M
- Rosa A
- Farnier M
- Martinez M
- Junien C
- Boileau C
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1086/302370
keywords:
- Adult
- Apolipoproteins B/genetics
- "Cholesterol, LDL"
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 1/genetics"
- Female
- Genetic Markers
- Humans
- Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II/genetics
- Lod Score
- Pedigree
- "Receptors, LDL/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A third major locus for autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia maps to 1p34.1-p32.
**Authors:** Varret M, Rabès JP, Saint-Jore B, Cenarro A, Marinoni JC, Civeira F, Devillers M, Krempf M, Coulon M, Thiart R, Kotze MJ, Schmidt H, Buzzi JC, Kostner GM, Bertolini S, Pocovi M, Rosa A, Farnier M, Martinez M, Junien C, Boileau C
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1086/302370](https://doi.org/10.1086/302370)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1999 May;64(5):1378-87. doi: 10.1086/302370.

A third major locus for autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia maps to
1p34.1-p32.

Varret M(1), Rabès JP, Saint-Jore B, Cenarro A, Marinoni JC, Civeira F,
Devillers M, Krempf M, Coulon M, Thiart R, Kotze MJ, Schmidt H, Buzzi JC,
Kostner GM, Bertolini S, Pocovi M, Rosa A, Farnier M, Martinez M, Junien C,
Boileau C.

Author information:
(1)Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale, Unit 383, Université René Descartes, 75743 Paris Cedex 15,
France.

Autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia (ADH), one of the most frequent
hereditary disorders, is characterized by an isolated elevation of LDL particles
that leads to premature mortality from cardiovascular complications. It is
generally assumed that mutations in the LDLR and APOB genes account for ADH. We
identified one large French pedigree (HC2) and 12 additional white families with
ADH in which we excluded linkage to the LDLR and APOB, implicating a new locus
we named "FH3." A LOD score of 3.13 at a recombination fraction of 0 was
obtained at markers D1S2892 and D1S2722. We localized the FH3 locus to a 9-cM
interval at 1p34.1-p32. We tested four regional markers in another set of 12 ADH
families. Positive LOD scores were obtained in three pedigrees, whereas linkage
was excluded in the others. Heterogeneity tests indicated linkage to FH3 in
approximately 27% of these non-LDLR/non-APOB ADH families and implied a fourth
locus. Radiation hybrid mapping located four candidate genes at 1p34.1-p32,
outside the critical region, showing no identity with FH3. Our results show that
ADH is genetically more heterogeneous than conventionally accepted.

DOI: 10.1086/302370
PMCID: PMC1377874
PMID: 10205269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
