---
reference_id: "PMID:16080122"
title: Homozygous deletion of the very low density lipoprotein receptor gene causes autosomal recessive cerebellar hypoplasia with cerebral gyral simplification.
authors:
- Boycott KM
- Flavelle S
- Bureau A
- Glass HC
- Fujiwara TM
- Wirrell E
- Davey K
- Chudley AE
- Scott JN
- McLeod DR
- Parboosingh JS
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1086/444400
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- Canada
- Cerebellar Ataxia/genetics
- "Cerebellum/abnormalities, pathology"
- "Cerebral Cortex/abnormalities, pathology"
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 9/genetics"
- Gene Deletion
- "Genes, Recessive/genetics"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Haplotypes/genetics
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Pedigree
- "Receptors, LDL/genetics"
- Reelin Protein
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homozygous deletion of the very low density lipoprotein receptor gene causes autosomal recessive cerebellar hypoplasia with cerebral gyral simplification.
**Authors:** Boycott KM, Flavelle S, Bureau A, Glass HC, Fujiwara TM, Wirrell E, Davey K, Chudley AE, Scott JN, McLeod DR, Parboosingh JS
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1086/444400](https://doi.org/10.1086/444400)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Sep;77(3):477-83. doi: 10.1086/444400. Epub 2005 Jul 22.

Homozygous deletion of the very low density lipoprotein receptor gene causes 
autosomal recessive cerebellar hypoplasia with cerebral gyral simplification.

Boycott KM(1), Flavelle S, Bureau A, Glass HC, Fujiwara TM, Wirrell E, Davey K, 
Chudley AE, Scott JN, McLeod DR, Parboosingh JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Alberta Children's Hospital and University of 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

An autosomal recessive syndrome of nonprogressive cerebellar ataxia and mental 
retardation is associated with inferior cerebellar hypoplasia and mild cerebral 
gyral simplification in the Hutterite population. An identity-by-descent mapping 
approach using eight patients from three interrelated Hutterite families 
localized the gene for this syndrome to chromosome region 9p24. Haplotype 
analysis identified familial and ancestral recombination events and refined the 
minimal region to a 2-Mb interval between markers D9S129 and D9S1871. A 199-kb 
homozygous deletion encompassing the entire very low density lipoprotein 
receptor (VLDLR) gene was present in all affected individuals. VLDLR is part of 
the reelin signaling pathway, which guides neuroblast migration in the cerebral 
cortex and cerebellum. To our knowledge, this syndrome represents the first 
human lipoprotein receptor malformation syndrome and the second human disease 
associated with a reelin pathway defect.

DOI: 10.1086/444400
PMCID: PMC1226212
PMID: 16080122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]