---
reference_id: "PMID:38454012"
title: Staphylococcal superantigen-like protein 3 triggers murine mast cell adhesion by binding to CD43 and augments mast cell activation.
authors:
- Kawano S
- Noda C
- Itoh S
- Urabe A
- Fujii C
- Ogawa I
- Suzuki R
- Hida S
journal: Genes Cells
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/gtc.13111
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Staphylococcal superantigen-like protein 3 triggers murine mast cell adhesion by binding to CD43 and augments mast cell activation.
**Authors:** Kawano S, Noda C, Itoh S, Urabe A, Fujii C, Ogawa I, Suzuki R, Hida S
**Journal:** Genes Cells (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/gtc.13111](https://doi.org/10.1111/gtc.13111)

## Content

1. Genes Cells. 2024 May;29(5):397-416. doi: 10.1111/gtc.13111. Epub 2024 Mar 7.

Staphylococcal superantigen-like protein 3 triggers murine mast cell adhesion by 
binding to CD43 and augments mast cell activation.

Kawano S(1), Noda C(1), Itoh S(1), Urabe A(1), Fujii C(2)(3)(4), Ogawa I(1), 
Suzuki R(5), Hida S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Health Sciences, Graduate School of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nagoya City University, Nagoya, Aichi Prefecture, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Shinshu 
University, Matsumoto, Nagano Prefecture, Japan.
(3)Department of Molecular Pathology, Shinshu University School of Medicine, 
Matsumoto, Nagano Prefecture, Japan.
(4)Center for Medical Education and Clinical Training, Shinshu University School 
of Medicine, Matsumoto, Nagano Prefecture, Japan.
(5)Laboratory of Hygienic Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Science, 
Institute of Medical, Pharmaceutical and Health Sciences, Kanazawa University, 
Kanazawa, Ishikawa Prefecture, Japan.

Staphylococcus aureus is a noteworthy pathogen in allergic diseases, as four 
staphylococcal exotoxins activate mast cells, a significant contributor to 
inflammation, in an IgE-independent manner. Although the adhesion of mast cells 
is an essential process for their immune responses, only a small number of 
exotoxins have been reported to affect the process. Here, we demonstrated that 
staphylococcal superantigen-like (SSL) 3, previously identified as a toll-like 
receptor 2 agonist, induced the adhesion of murine bone marrow-derived mast 
cells to culture substratum. SSL3-induced adhesion was mediated by fibronectin 
in an Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) sequence-dependent manner, suggesting the integrins were 
involved in the process. Additionally, SSL3 was found to bind to an 
anti-adhesive surface protein CD43. SSL3 induced the adhesion of HEK293 cells 
expressing exogenous CD43, suggesting that CD43 is the target molecule for 
adhesion induced by SSL3. Evaluation of SSL3-derived mutants showed that the 
C-terminal region (253-326), specifically T285 and H307, are necessary to induce 
adhesion. SSL3 augmented the IL-13 production of mast cells in response to 
immunocomplex and SSL12. These findings reveal a novel function of SSL3, 
triggering cell adhesion and enhancing mast cell activation. This study would 
clarify the correlation between S. aureus and allergic diseases such as atopic 
dermatitis.

© 2024 Molecular Biology Society of Japan and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/gtc.13111
PMID: 38454012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]