---
reference_id: "PMID:8651277"
title: Maternally inherited cardiomyopathy and hearing loss associated with a novel mutation in the mitochondrial tRNA(Lys) gene (G8363A).
authors:
- Santorelli FM
- Mak SC
- El-Schahawi M
- Casali C
- Shanske S
- Baram TZ
- Madrid RE
- DiMauro S
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1996'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Maternally inherited cardiomyopathy and hearing loss associated with a novel mutation in the mitochondrial tRNA(Lys) gene (G8363A).
**Authors:** Santorelli FM, Mak SC, El-Schahawi M, Casali C, Shanske S, Baram TZ, Madrid RE, DiMauro S
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1996)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1996 May;58(5):933-9.

Maternally inherited cardiomyopathy and hearing loss associated with a novel 
mutation in the mitochondrial tRNA(Lys) gene (G8363A).

Santorelli FM(1), Mak SC, El-Schahawi M, Casali C, Shanske S, Baram TZ, Madrid 
RE, DiMauro S.

Author information:
(1)H. Houston Merritt Center for Muscular Research and Related Disorders, 
Department of Neurology, Columbia University 10032, New York, USA.

A novel G8363A mutation in the mtDNA tRNA(Lys) gene was associated, in two 
unrelated families, with a syndrome consisting of encephalomyopathy, 
sensorineural hearing loss, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Muscle biopsies 
from the probands showed mitochondrial proliferation and partial defects of 
complexes I, III, and IV of the electron-transport chain. The G8363A mutation 
was very abundant (>95%) in muscle samples from the probands and was less 
copious in blood from 18 maternal relatives (mean 81.3% +/- 8.5%). 
Single-muscle-fiber analysis showed significantly higher levels of mutant 
genomes in cytochrome (c) oxidase-negative fibers than in cytochrome (c) 
oxidase-positive fibers. The mutation was not found in >200 individuals, 
including normal controls and patients with other mitochondrial 
encephalomyopathies, thus fulfilling accepted criteria for pathogenicity.

PMCID: PMC1914622
PMID: 8651277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]