---
reference_id: "PMID:15773042"
title: "A mutation in the saposin A coding region of the prosaposin gene in an infant presenting as Krabbe disease: first report of saposin A deficiency in humans."
authors:
- Spiegel R
- Bach G
- Sury V
- Mengistu G
- Meidan B
- Shalev S
- Shneor Y
- Mandel H
- Zeigler M
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2004.10.004
keywords:
- Amniocentesis
- Base Sequence
- DNA Primers
- Female
- Galactosylceramidase/metabolism
- Humans
- Infant
- "Leukodystrophy, Globoid Cell/enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Mutation
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Pregnancy
- Saposins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A mutation in the saposin A coding region of the prosaposin gene in an infant presenting as Krabbe disease: first report of saposin A deficiency in humans.
**Authors:** Spiegel R, Bach G, Sury V, Mengistu G, Meidan B, Shalev S, Shneor Y, Mandel H, Zeigler M
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2004.10.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2004.10.004)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2005 Feb;84(2):160-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2004.10.004.

A mutation in the saposin A coding region of the prosaposin gene in an infant 
presenting as Krabbe disease: first report of saposin A deficiency in humans.

Spiegel R(1), Bach G, Sury V, Mengistu G, Meidan B, Shalev S, Shneor Y, Mandel 
H, Zeigler M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, HaEmek Medical Center, Afula, Israel.

A six-month-old infant girl presenting with progressive encephalopathy and 
abnormal myelination in the cerebral white matter was originally diagnosed as 
suffering from Krabbe disease. The diagnosis was based on a deficiency of 
galactocerebrosidase activity found in leukocytes isolated from whole blood. 
When cultured skin fibroblasts did not show a similar enzyme deficiency and 
sulphatide (stearoyl-1-14C) uptake indicated an abnormal storage of 
galactosylceramide, a deficiency of an activator was implied. A three base pair 
deletion was found in the saposin A coding sequence of the prosaposin gene 
leading to the deletion of a conserved valine at amino acid number 11 of the 
saposin A protein. This deletion in saposin A is proposed as the cause for the 
abnormal galactosylceramide metabolism in this infant. This is the first report 
of a saposin A mutation in humans leading to pathological consequences.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2004.10.004
PMID: 15773042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]