---
reference_id: "PMID:39167747"
title: "Clinical Reasoning: A 50-Year-Old Man With Intracerebral Hemorrhage and Tortuous Retinal Arterioles."
authors:
- Bouchart J
- Weber S
- Coste T
- Laville MA
- Loisel M
- Nehme A
journal: Neurology
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000209796
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Cerebral Hemorrhage/diagnostic imaging, etiology"
- "Arterioles/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Clinical Reasoning
- "Retinal Artery/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Cerebral Small Vessel Diseases/diagnostic imaging, complications"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Reasoning: A 50-Year-Old Man With Intracerebral Hemorrhage and Tortuous Retinal Arterioles.
**Authors:** Bouchart J, Weber S, Coste T, Laville MA, Loisel M, Nehme A
**Journal:** Neurology (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000209796](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000209796)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2024 Sep 24;103(6):e209796. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000209796. Epub
 2024 Aug 21.

Clinical Reasoning: A 50-Year-Old Man With Intracerebral Hemorrhage and Tortuous 
Retinal Arterioles.

Bouchart J(1), Weber S(1), Coste T(1), Laville MA(1), Loisel M(1), Nehme A(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Neurology (J.B., S.W., M.L., A.N.), Genetics (S.W.), 
and Ophthalmology (M-A. L.), Université Caen-Normandie, CHU de Caen-Normandie, 
Caen; NeuroDiderot (T.C.), Université Paris Cité, Inserm UMR 1141; and Service 
de Génétique Moléculaire Neurovasculaire (T.C.), AP-HP, Hôpital Saint-Louis, 
Paris, France.

A 50-year-old man presented with headache. Examination showed left sided ataxic 
hemiparesis and elevated blood pressure. Brain imaging revealed an acute 
intracerebral hemorrhage in the right lentiform nucleus, deep and 
periventricular white matter hyperintensities, and predominantly deep cerebral 
microbleeds. Fundus examination showed important arteriolar tortuosity involving 
several blood vessels. In this young patient, we explain the diagnostic approach 
to intracerebral hemorrhage, the causes of cerebral small vessel disease, and 
the interpretation of biomolecular tests.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000209796
PMID: 39167747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]