---
reference_id: "PMID:41399325"
title: Recommendations for the diagnostic work-up of cutaneous small vessel vasculitis - Position Statement of the European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology Vasculitis and Vasculopathy Task Force.
authors:
- Alpsoy E
- Caproni M
- Wetter DA
- Goebeler M
- Levell NJ
- Schneider SW
- Salavastru C
- Llamas-Velasco M
- Marzano AV
- Akyol M
- Dutz J
- Jachiet M
- Kawakami T
- Mariotti EB
- Maronese CA
- Micheletti RG
- Monfort JB
- Piette W
- Ratzinger G
- Szepietowski JC
- Werth VP
- Sunderkötter C
journal: J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/jdv.70249
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recommendations for the diagnostic work-up of cutaneous small vessel vasculitis - Position Statement of the European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology Vasculitis and Vasculopathy Task Force.
**Authors:** Alpsoy E, Caproni M, Wetter DA, Goebeler M, Levell NJ, Schneider SW, Salavastru C, Llamas-Velasco M, Marzano AV, Akyol M, Dutz J, Jachiet M, Kawakami T, Mariotti EB, Maronese CA, Micheletti RG, Monfort JB, Piette W, Ratzinger G, Szepietowski JC, Werth VP, Sunderkötter C
**Journal:** J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jdv.70249](https://doi.org/10.1111/jdv.70249)

## Content

1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2025 Dec 16. doi: 10.1111/jdv.70249. Online
ahead  of print.

Recommendations for the diagnostic work-up of cutaneous small vessel vasculitis
- Position Statement of the European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology
Vasculitis and Vasculopathy Task Force.

Alpsoy E(1), Caproni M(2), Wetter DA(3), Goebeler M(4), Levell NJ(5), Schneider
SW(6), Salavastru C(7), Llamas-Velasco M(8), Marzano AV(9)(10), Akyol M(11),
Dutz J(12), Jachiet M(13), Kawakami T(14), Mariotti EB(15), Maronese CA(9)(10),
Micheletti RG(16), Monfort JB(17), Piette W(18)(19), Ratzinger G(20),
Szepietowski JC(21)(22), Werth VP(23)(24), Sunderkötter C(25)(26).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Akdeniz University, Antalya,
Türkiye.
(2)Rare Diseases Unit, Azienda USL Toscana Centro, Section of Dermatology,
Department of Health Sciences, European Reference Network Skin Member,
University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, European Reference
Network Skin Member, University Hospital Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(5)Dermatology Department, Norfolk and Norwich University Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Norwich, UK.
(6)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(7)Paediatric Dermatology Department, Carol Davila University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
(8)Dermatology Department, Hospital Universitario de La Princesa, Madrid, Spain.
(9)Dermatology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico,
Milan, Italy.
(10)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Università degli Studi di
Milano, Milan, Italy.
(11)Department of Dermatology, Sivas Cumhuriyet University Faculty of Medicine,
Sivas, Türkiye.
(12)Department of Dermatology and Skin Science, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(13)Dermatology Department, Saint Louis Hospital, Paris, France.
(14)Division of Dermatology, Tohoku Medical and Pharmaceutical University,
Sendai, Japan.
(15)Section of Dermatology, Department of Health Sciences, University of
Florence, Florence, Italy.
(16)Department of Dermatology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(17)Department of Dermatology, Tenon Hospital, Paris, France.
(18)Division of Dermatology, John H. Stroger Hospital of Cook County, Chicago,
Illinois, USA.
(19)Department of Dermatology, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago,
Illinois, USA.
(20)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, Medical University
Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(21)Department of Dermato-Venereology, 4th Military Hopsital, Wroclaw, Poland.
(22)Division of Dermatology, Venereology and Clinical Immunology, Faculty of
Medicine, Wroclaw University of Science and Technology, Wroclaw, Poland.
(23)Department of Dermatology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA.
(24)Corporal Michael J. Crescenz VAMC, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(25)Department of Dermatology, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle
(Saale), Germany.
(26)MSB Medical School Berlin, Hochschule für Gesundheit und Medizin, Berlin,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Small vessel vasculitides (SVV) comprise a heterogeneous group of
cutaneous SVV (CSVV) that can be skin-limited or systemic. Given their diverse
forms and symptoms and the lack of a standardized diagnostic approach, it is
crucial to establish clear and consensus-driven recommendations for diagnosis.
OBJECTIVES: To standardize diagnosis for the detection of the type, extent,
potential causes or underlying conditions of CSVV.
METHODS: International experts comprised the panel. The Delphi panel data was
collected through two rounds of questionnaires. Agreement was measured using an
11-point Likert scale (0 = strongly disagree, 10 = strongly agree). A 7-vote
minimum was required for agreement on each statement. Delphi panel statements
scoring 3-7 were discussed during the meeting.
RESULTS: 20 experts participated in the first round of the Delphi panel, while
17 experts took part in the second. They agreed that the diagnosis of CSVV
relies on a combination of clinical manifestations, laboratory findings and
histopathology. Palpable purpura on the lower extremities is recognized as the
most reliable hallmark for most SVV and a sign of immune complex vasculitis.
When the latter is suspected, a skin biopsy for direct immunofluorescence (DIF)
should be obtained from an early, partially blanchable macule because the type
of perivascular immunoglobulin is important for further diagnosis. The proper
selection of biopsy sites for routine HE biopsy depends on the morphology of
lesions. A comprehensive medical history and selected laboratory testing should
be conducted to investigate organ involvement, potential causes and associated
conditions. The extent of diagnostic procedures should be based on the severity,
duration, systemic symptoms and recurrence of SVV.
CONCLUSIONS: Experts reached a strong consensus on the management of CSVV
patients, culminating in the first International Consensus Statement for adult
CSVV. This statement proposes a practical management algorithm and underscores
the importance of collaboration in rare diseases management.

© 2025 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

DOI: 10.1111/jdv.70249
PMID: 41399325
