---
reference_id: "PMID:35908152"
title: Microduplication of BTRC detected in a Chinese family with split hand/foot malformation type 3.
authors:
- Qiu L
- Li C
- Zheng G
- Yang T
- Yang F
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/cge.14204
keywords:
- China
- "Foot Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Humans
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Micrognathism
- Pedigree
- "RNA, Messenger"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Microduplication of BTRC detected in a Chinese family with split hand/foot malformation type 3.
**Authors:** Qiu L, Li C, Zheng G, Yang T, Yang F
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.14204](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.14204)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2022 Nov;102(5):451-456. doi: 10.1111/cge.14204. Epub 2022 Aug 8.

Microduplication of BTRC detected in a Chinese family with split hand/foot 
malformation type 3.

Qiu L(1), Li C(2), Zheng G(1), Yang T(1), Yang F(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Fetal Medicine and Prenatal Diagnosis, Zhujiang Hospital, 
Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern 
Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Nanfang Hospital of Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

Split hand/foot malformation (SHFM) is a clinically heterogeneous genetic 
disorder, which is mainly characterized by median clefts of the hand/feet due to 
the absence of the central digital rays. Several subgroups of SHFM have been 
identified, including SHFM1 to SHFM6. SHFM3 is an autosomal dominant disease, 
which has been identified to associate with a 500 kb microduplication at 10q24. 
The duplication involved several genes, including LBX1, BTRC, POLL, FBXW4, and 
so forth. In the study, using trio clinical exome sequencing, a 120 kb 
microduplication containing only BTRC were identified in a Chinese family 
affected with SHFM3. Further confirmation was performed using qRT-PCR assay, 
which showed that the 120 kb duplication was co-segregated with SHFM phenotypes 
in the family. It is the smallest duplication which has ever been reported 
relating to SHFM3. Furthermore, the transcription levels of BTRC mRNA in 
lymphocyte of the proband was significantly higher than that in the healthy 
control. The study provided evidence for the limb malformation caused by 
abnormal BTRC expression, and suggested that next generation sequencing could 
provide more precise diagnosis to SHFM3 patients.

© 2022 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.14204
PMID: 35908152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]