---
reference_id: "PMID:28436958"
title: Local clearance of senescent cells attenuates the development of post-traumatic osteoarthritis and creates a pro-regenerative environment.
authors:
- Jeon OH
- Kim C
- Laberge RM
- Demaria M
- Rathod S
- Vasserot AP
- Chung JW
- Kim DH
- Poon Y
- David N
- Baker DJ
- van Deursen JM
- Campisi J
- Elisseeff JH
journal: Nat Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/nm.4324
keywords:
- Animals
- Anterior Cruciate Ligament/surgery
- Anterior Cruciate Ligament Injuries/complications
- Antiviral Agents/pharmacology
- "Cartilage, Articular/metabolism"
- Cellular Senescence/genetics
- Chondrocytes/metabolism
- "Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor p16/genetics, metabolism"
- "Extracellular Matrix Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- Ganciclovir/pharmacology
- Glycosaminoglycans/metabolism
- Humans
- Immunoblotting
- Immunohistochemistry
- In Vitro Techniques
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Osteoarthritis, Knee/etiology, genetics, metabolism"
- Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Regeneration/genetics
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Weight-Bearing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Local clearance of senescent cells attenuates the development of post-traumatic osteoarthritis and creates a pro-regenerative environment.
**Authors:** Jeon OH, Kim C, Laberge RM, Demaria M, Rathod S, Vasserot AP, Chung JW, Kim DH, Poon Y, David N, Baker DJ, van Deursen JM, Campisi J, Elisseeff JH
**Journal:** Nat Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nm.4324](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.4324)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2017 Jun;23(6):775-781. doi: 10.1038/nm.4324. Epub 2017 Apr 24.

Local clearance of senescent cells attenuates the development of post-traumatic 
osteoarthritis and creates a pro-regenerative environment.

Jeon OH(1), Kim C(1)(2), Laberge RM(3)(4), Demaria M(3)(5), Rathod S(1), 
Vasserot AP(4), Chung JW(1), Kim DH(1), Poon Y(4), David N(4), Baker DJ(6), van 
Deursen JM(6), Campisi J(3)(7), Elisseeff JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Translational Tissue Engineering Center, Wilmer Eye Institute and the 
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology, 
Ulsan, South Korea.
(3)Buck Institute for Research on Aging, Novato, California, USA.
(4)Unity Biotechnology, Inc., Brisbane, California, USA.
(5)European Research Institute for the Biology of Ageing (ERIBA), University 
Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Mayo Clinic College of 
Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(7)Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkley, California, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2017 Jul;13(7):388. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2017.73.
    Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2017 Jul;16(7):456. doi: 10.1038/nrd.2017.123.

Senescent cells (SnCs) accumulate in many vertebrate tissues with age and 
contribute to age-related pathologies, presumably through their secretion of 
factors contributing to the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP). 
Removal of SnCs delays several pathologies and increases healthy lifespan. Aging 
and trauma are risk factors for the development of osteoarthritis (OA), a 
chronic disease characterized by degeneration of articular cartilage leading to 
pain and physical disability. Senescent chondrocytes are found in cartilage 
tissue isolated from patients undergoing joint replacement surgery, yet their 
role in disease pathogenesis is unknown. To test the idea that SnCs might play a 
causative role in OA, we used the p16-3MR transgenic mouse, which harbors a 
p16INK4a (Cdkn2a) promoter driving the expression of a fusion protein containing 
synthetic Renilla luciferase and monomeric red fluorescent protein domains, as 
well as a truncated form of herpes simplex virus 1 thymidine kinase (HSV-TK). 
This mouse strain allowed us to selectively follow and remove SnCs after 
anterior cruciate ligament transection (ACLT). We found that SnCs accumulated in 
the articular cartilage and synovium after ACLT, and selective elimination of 
these cells attenuated the development of post-traumatic OA, reduced pain and 
increased cartilage development. Intra-articular injection of a senolytic 
molecule that selectively killed SnCs validated these results in transgenic, 
non-transgenic and aged mice. Selective removal of the SnCs from in vitro 
cultures of chondrocytes isolated from patients with OA undergoing total knee 
replacement decreased expression of senescent and inflammatory markers while 
also increasing expression of cartilage tissue extracellular matrix proteins. 
Collectively, these findings support the use of SnCs as a therapeutic target for 
treating degenerative joint disease.

DOI: 10.1038/nm.4324
PMCID: PMC5785239
PMID: 28436958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS The authors 
declare competing financial interests: details are available in the online 
version of the paper. COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS J.C., R.-M.L., Y.P., D.J.B., 
J.M.v.D., M.D., N.D. and J.H.E. own equity in Unity Biotechnology. Johns Hopkins 
University and Unity Biotechnology own intellectual property related to the 
research. O.H.J., C.K. and J.H.E. are inventors of Johns Hopkins University 
intellectual property licensed to Unity Biotechnology.