---
reference_id: "PMID:27008867"
title: Mutations in C8ORF37 cause Bardet Biedl syndrome (BBS21).
authors:
- Heon E
- Kim G
- Qin S
- Garrison JE
- Tavares E
- Vincent A
- Nuangchamnong N
- Scott CA
- Slusarski DC
- Sheffield VC
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddw096
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Animals
- "Bardet-Biedl Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- "Kupffer Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Mutation
- Proteins/genetics
- "Retinal Degeneration/genetics, pathology"
- "Retinal Dystrophies/genetics, pathology"
- Zebrafish/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in C8ORF37 cause Bardet Biedl syndrome (BBS21).
**Authors:** Heon E, Kim G, Qin S, Garrison JE, Tavares E, Vincent A, Nuangchamnong N, Scott CA, Slusarski DC, Sheffield VC
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddw096](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddw096)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Jun 1;25(11):2283-2294. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddw096. Epub 2016
 Mar 22.

Mutations in C8ORF37 cause Bardet Biedl syndrome (BBS21).

Heon E(1), Kim G(2), Qin S(3), Garrison JE(2), Tavares E(3), Vincent A(4), 
Nuangchamnong N(5), Scott CA(6), Slusarski DC(6), Sheffield VC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, M5G 1X8 Canada Department of Ophthalmology and Vision 
Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, M5G 1X8 Canada Program of Genetics and 
Genomic Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, M5G 1X8 Canada 
elise.heon@sickkids.ca.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, Wynn Institute for 
Vision Research, Carver College of Medicine.
(3)Program of Genetics and Genomic Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, M5G 1X8 Canada.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, M5G 1X8 Canada Department of Ophthalmology and Vision 
Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, M5G 1X8 Canada.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Carver College of Medicine.
(6)Department of Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Bardet Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a multisystem genetically heterogeneous 
ciliopathy that most commonly leads to obesity, photoreceptor degeneration, 
digit anomalies, genito-urinary abnormalities, as well as cognitive impairment 
with autism, among other features. Sequencing of a DNA sample from a 17-year-old 
female affected with BBS did not identify any mutation in the known BBS genes. 
Whole-genome sequencing identified a novel loss-of-function disease-causing 
homozygous mutation (K102*) in C8ORF37, a gene coding for a cilia protein. The 
proband was overweight (body mass index 29.1) with a slowly progressive rod-cone 
dystrophy, a mild learning difficulty, high myopia, three limb post-axial 
polydactyly, horseshoe kidney, abnormally positioned uterus and elevated liver 
enzymes. Mutations in C8ORF37 were previously associated with severe autosomal 
recessive retinal dystrophies (retinitis pigmentosa RP64 and cone-rod dystrophy 
CORD16) but not BBS. To elucidate the functional role of C8ORF37 in a vertebrate 
system, we performed gene knockdown in Danio rerio and assessed the cardinal 
features of BBS and visual function. Knockdown of c8orf37 resulted in impaired 
visual behavior and BBS-related phenotypes, specifically, defects in the 
formation of Kupffer's vesicle and delays in retrograde transport. Specificity 
of these phenotypes to BBS knockdown was shown with rescue experiments. 
Over-expression of human missense mutations in zebrafish also resulted in 
impaired visual behavior and BBS-related phenotypes. This is the first 
functional validation and association of C8ORF37 mutations with the BBS 
phenotype, which identifies BBS21. The zebrafish studies hereby show that 
C8ORF37 variants underlie clinically diagnosed BBS-related phenotypes as well as 
isolated retinal degeneration.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddw096
PMCID: PMC5081059
PMID: 27008867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]