---
reference_id: "PMID:41429672"
title: Neuro-Ophthalmic Manifestations of Neurosarcoidosis.
authors:
- Patel JN
journal: Int Ophthalmol Clin
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1097/IIO.0000000000000599
keywords:
- Humans
- "Sarcoidosis/diagnosis, complications"
- "Central Nervous System Diseases/diagnosis, complications"
- "Optic Nerve Diseases/diagnosis, etiology"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Eye Diseases/diagnosis, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuro-Ophthalmic Manifestations of Neurosarcoidosis.
**Authors:** Patel JN
**Journal:** Int Ophthalmol Clin (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1097/IIO.0000000000000599](https://doi.org/10.1097/IIO.0000000000000599)

## Content

1. Int Ophthalmol Clin. 2026 Jan 1;66(1):25-29. doi:
10.1097/IIO.0000000000000599.  Epub 2025 Dec 23.

Neuro-Ophthalmic Manifestations of Neurosarcoidosis.

Patel JN(1).

Author information:
(1)Barrow Neurological Institute, Phoenix, AZ.

Sarcoidosis is a systemic granulomatous disorder characterized by noncaseating
granulomas. This review focuses on the pathophysiology, clinical spectrum,
diagnostic strategies, and management of neuro-ophthalmic sarcoidosis. The
pathogenesis involves immune dysregulation in genetically predisposed
individuals exposed to environmental antigens, with granuloma formation as the
hallmark. Neuro-ophthalmic involvement is classified into afferent, efferent,
and general neurological categories. Afferent presentations include optic
neuropathy, optic neuritis, chiasmopathy, papilledema, and visual field defects
among others, while efferent signs include cranial neuropathies,
ophthalmoplegia, dorsal midbrain syndrome, and more. Diagnostic evaluation
includes MRI with contrast, cerebrospinal fluid analysis, chest imaging, and,
where possible, tissue biopsy. Management primarily involves corticosteroids,
with immunosuppressive and biological agents reserved for refractory cases.
Early diagnosis and treatment initiation are crucial to preserve visual function
and reduce relapse. Advances in biomarker discovery and imaging modalities hold
promise for more accurate and earlier diagnosis. Given its protean
manifestations and potential for vision-threatening complications, sarcoidosis
remains a critical consideration in the differential diagnosis of unexplained
neuro-ophthalmic symptoms.

Copyright © 2025 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/IIO.0000000000000599
PMID: 41429672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that there is no conflicts
of interest to disclose.
