---
reference_id: "PMID:33008511"
title: "Insights into pathophysiology and treatment of visual snow syndrome: A systematic review."
authors:
- Eren O
- Schankin CJ
journal: Prog Brain Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/bs.pbr.2020.05.020
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Insights into pathophysiology and treatment of visual snow syndrome: A systematic review.
**Authors:** Eren O, Schankin CJ
**Journal:** Prog Brain Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/bs.pbr.2020.05.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.pbr.2020.05.020)

## Content

1. Prog Brain Res. 2020;255:311-326. doi: 10.1016/bs.pbr.2020.05.020. Epub 2020
Jun  15.

Insights into pathophysiology and treatment of visual snow syndrome: A 
systematic review.

Eren O(1), Schankin CJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, LMU Munich, University Hospital-Großhadern, Munich, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Neurology, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University of 
Bern, Bern, Switzerland. Electronic address: christoph.schankin@insel.ch.

BACKGROUND: Visual snow syndrome is a debilitating disorder characterized by 
tiny flickering dots (like TV static) in the entire visual field and a set of 
accompanying visual (palinopsia, enhanced entoptic phenomena, photophobia, 
nyctalopia), nonvisual (e.g. tinnitus) and nonperceptional (e.g. concentration 
problems, irritability) symptoms. Its pathophysiology is enigmatic and therapy 
is often frustrating.
OBJECTIVES: To summarize our current understanding of pathophysiology and 
treatment of visual snow syndrome.
METHODS: A systematic search of PubMed database was performed using the key word 
"visual snow" and predefined in- and exclusion criteria. The results were 
stratified into "treatment" and "pathophysiology." Additionally, we conducted a 
search with the key words "persistent migraine aura" and "persistent visual 
aura" and screened for mis-diagnosed patients actually fulfilling the criteria 
for visual snow syndrome. The reference lists of most publications and any other 
relevant articles known to the authors were also reviewed and added if 
applicable.
RESULTS: From the 50 original papers found by searching for "visual snow," 21 
were included according to the inclusion and exclusion criteria. Additional four 
publications came searching for "persistent migraine aura" or "persistent visual 
aura." Further publications derived from literature references resulting in a 
total of 20 articles for pathophysiology and 15 for treatment with some 
overlaps. Regarding pathophysiology, hyperexcitability of the visual cortex and 
a processing problem of higher order visual function are assumed, but the 
location is still in discussion. In particular, it is unclear if the primary 
visual cortex, the visual association cortex or the thalamocortical pathway is 
involved. Regarding treatment, data is available on a total of 153 VSS patients 
with medication mentioned for 54 resulting in a total of 136 trials. From the 44 
different medications tried, only eight were effective at least once. The best 
data is available for lamotrigine being effective in 8/36 (22.2%, including one 
total response and no worsening), followed by topiramate being effective in 2/13 
(15.4%, no total response and one worsening). The only other medication 
resulting in worsening of VSS was amitriptyline according to our literature 
review. The others reported to be effective at least once were valproate, 
propranolol, verapamil, baclofen, naproxen and sertraline. The 
nonpharmacological approach using color filters of the yellow-blue color 
spectrum might also be helpful in some patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Visual snow syndrome is still far from being fully understood. In 
respect of pathophysiology, a disorder of visual processing is likely. The best 
pharmacological evidence exists for lamotrigine, which can be discussed 
off-label. As nonpharmacological option, patients might benefit from tinted 
glasses for everyday use.

© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.pbr.2020.05.020
PMID: 33008511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests O Eren has received 
honoraria for consulting within the past 3 years from Novartis Pharma. CJ 
Schankin has received travel grants and honoraria for consulting, advisory 
boards and presentations within the past 3 years from Novartis, Eli Lilly, TEVA 
Pharmaceuticals, Allergan, Almirall, Amgen, MindMed and Grünenthal.