---
reference_id: PMID:11576919
title: Vascular calcification and inorganic phosphate.
authors:
- Giachelli CM
- Jono S
- Shioi A
- Nishizawa Y
- Mori K
- Morii H
journal: Am J Kidney Dis
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1053/ajkd.2001.27394
keywords:
- "Actins/drug effects, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Calcinosis/etiology, metabolism"
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/etiology, metabolism"
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Down-Regulation
- Foscarnet/pharmacology
- Gene Expression
- Glycerophosphates/pharmacology
- Humans
- Membrane Proteins
- "Muscle, Smooth, Vascular/metabolism"
- Neoplasm Proteins
- Osteocalcin/metabolism
- "Phosphates/metabolism, pharmacokinetics"
- Phospholipid Transfer Proteins
- "Platelet-Derived Growth Factor/metabolism, pharmacology"
- "RNA, Messenger/metabolism"
- Sodium-Phosphate Cotransporter Proteins
- "Sodium-Phosphate Cotransporter Proteins, Type III"
- "Symporters/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Uremia/complications
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vascular calcification and inorganic phosphate.
**Authors:** Giachelli CM, Jono S, Shioi A, Nishizawa Y, Mori K, Morii H
**Journal:** Am J Kidney Dis (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1053/ajkd.2001.27394](https://doi.org/10.1053/ajkd.2001.27394)

## Content

1. Am J Kidney Dis. 2001 Oct;38(4 Suppl 1):S34-7. doi: 10.1053/ajkd.2001.27394.

Vascular calcification and inorganic phosphate.

Giachelli CM(1), Jono S, Shioi A, Nishizawa Y, Mori K, Morii H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. 
ceci@u.washington.edu

Vascular calcification is highly correlated with elevated serum phosphate levels 
in uremic patients. To shed light on this process, we examined the ability of 
extracellular inorganic phosphate (Pi) levels to regulate human aortic smooth 
muscle cell (HSMC) culture mineralization in vitro. When cultured in media 
containing normal physiological levels of Pi (1.4 mmol/L Pi), HSMC grew in 
monolayers and did not mineralize. In contrast, HSMC cultured in media 
containing Pi levels comparable to those seen in hyperphosphatemic individuals 
(>1.4 mmol/L), showed dose-dependent increases in cell culture calcium 
deposition. Mechanistic studies showed that elevated Pi treatment of HSMC also 
enhanced the expression of the osteogenic markers, osteocalcin and Cbfa-1. The 
effects of elevated Pi on HSMC were mediated by a sodium-dependent phosphate 
cotransporter (NPC), as indicated by the ability of the specific NPC inhibitor, 
phosphonoformic acid (PFA), to dose-dependently inhibit Pi-induced calcium 
deposition as well as osteocalcin and Cbfa-1 gene expression. Using polymerase 
chain reaction and Northern blot analyses, the NPC in HSMC was identified as 
Pit-1 (Glvr-1), a member of the type III NPCs. Interestingly, platelet-derived 
growth factor-BB (PDGF-BB), a potent atherogenic stimulus, increased the maximum 
velocity (Vmax) but not the affinity (Km) of phosphate uptake, enhanced the 
expression of Pit-1 mRNA, and induced HSMC culture calcification in a time- and 
dose-dependent manner. Importantly, in the presence of PDGF, HSMC culture 
calcification occurred under normophosphatemic conditions. These data suggest 
that elevated Pi may directly stimulate HSMC to undergo phenotypic changes that 
predispose to calcification and may help explain both the phenomena of human 
metastatic calcification under hyperphosphatemic conditions as well as increased 
calcification in PDGF-rich atherosclerotic lesions.

DOI: 10.1053/ajkd.2001.27394
PMID: 11576919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]