---
reference_id: "PMID:16583241"
title: "Type IV Bartter syndrome: report of two new cases."
authors:
- Zaffanello M
- Taranta A
- Palma A
- Bettinelli A
- Marseglia GL
- Emma F
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1007/s00467-006-0090-x
keywords:
- Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Non-Steroidal/therapeutic use"
- "Bartter Syndrome/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- Captopril/therapeutic use
- Chloride Channels
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Diuretics/therapeutic use
- Female
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- Indomethacin/therapeutic use
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type IV Bartter syndrome: report of two new cases.
**Authors:** Zaffanello M, Taranta A, Palma A, Bettinelli A, Marseglia GL, Emma F
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00467-006-0090-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00467-006-0090-x)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2006 Jun;21(6):766-70. doi: 10.1007/s00467-006-0090-x. Epub
2006 Apr 1.

Type IV Bartter syndrome: report of two new cases.

Zaffanello M(1), Taranta A, Palma A, Bettinelli A, Marseglia GL, Emma F.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology and Dialysis, Department of Nephrology and Urology,
Ospedale Bambino Gesù, Piazza S. Onofrio 4, 00165 Rome, Italy.

Bartter syndrome with sensorineural deafness (type IV Bartter syndrome) is a
subtype of this tubular disease, and is due to mutations in the BSND gene. Out
of a population of 92 patients with Bartter syndrome, five suffered from mild to
severe hypoacusia and were selected for mutational screening. A homozygous
mutation in the BSND gene was found in two female patients. The first patient
was found to have a substitution in intron 1 donor splice site at position +5
(c.420+5G>C), whereas the second patient has a homozygous 3G>A substitution
leading to the loss of the start codon for the translation of the BSND mRNA. The
clinical courses of these two patients were remarkable for severe
polyhydramnios, massive renal salt and water wasting, severe neonatal hypotonia,
poor growth and unresponsiveness to prostaglandin inhibitors. The diuretic
responses to furosemide and to hydrochlorothiazide were tested under KCl
supplementation in one patient. A lack of response to both drugs suggested that
inhibition of NaCl reabsorption in type IV Bartter syndrome is not restricted to
the thick ascending limb of Henle. In one patient, a combined therapy with
indomethacin and captopril was needed to discontinue intravenous fluids and
improve weight gain.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-006-0090-x
PMID: 16583241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
