---
reference_id: "PMID:22670140"
title: The 22q13.3 Deletion Syndrome (Phelan-McDermid Syndrome).
authors:
- Phelan K
- McDermid HE
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1159/000334260
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The 22q13.3 Deletion Syndrome (Phelan-McDermid Syndrome).
**Authors:** Phelan K, McDermid HE
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000334260](https://doi.org/10.1159/000334260)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2012 Apr;2(3-5):186-201. doi: 10.1159/000334260. Epub 2011 Nov 
22.

The 22q13.3 Deletion Syndrome (Phelan-McDermid Syndrome).

Phelan K(1), McDermid HE.

Author information:
(1)Hayward Genetics Center and Department of Pediatrics, Tulane University 
School of Medicine, New Orleans, La., USA.

The 22q13.3 deletion syndrome, also known as Phelan-McDermid syndrome, is a 
contiguous gene disorder resulting from deletion of the distal long arm of 
chromosome 22. In addition to normal growth and a constellation of minor 
dysmorphic features, this syndrome is characterized by neurological deficits 
which include global developmental delay, moderate to severe intellectual 
impairment, absent or severely delayed speech, and neonatal hypotonia. In 
addition, more than 50% of patients show autism or autistic-like behavior, and 
therefore it can be classified as a syndromic form of autism spectrum disorders 
(ASD). The differential diagnosis includes Angelman syndrome, velocardiofacial 
syndrome, fragile X syndrome, and FG syndrome. Over 600 cases of 22q13.3 
deletion syndrome have been documented. Most are terminal deletions of ∼100 kb 
to >9 Mb, resulting from simple deletions, ring chromosomes, and unbalanced 
translocations. Almost all of these deletions include the gene SHANK3 which 
encodes a scaffold protein in the postsynaptic densities of excitatory synapses, 
connecting membrane-bound receptors to the actin cytoskeleton. Two mouse 
knockout models and cell culture experiments show that SHANK3 is involved in the 
structure and function of synapses and support the hypothesis that the majority 
of 22q13.3 deletion syndrome neurological defects are due to haploinsufficiency 
of SHANK3, although other genes in the region may also play a role in the 
syndrome. The molecular connection to ASD suggests that potential future 
treatments may involve modulation of metabotropic glutamate receptors.

DOI: 10.1159/000334260
PMCID: PMC3366702
PMID: 22670140