---
reference_id: "PMID:11336512"
title: Human cytotrophoblast expression of the von Hippel-Lindau protein is downregulated during uterine invasion in situ and upregulated by hypoxia in vitro.
authors:
- Genbacev O
- Krtolica A
- Kaelin W
- Fisher SJ
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1006/dbio.2001.0231
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human cytotrophoblast expression of the von Hippel-Lindau protein is downregulated during uterine invasion in situ and upregulated by hypoxia in vitro.
**Authors:** Genbacev O, Krtolica A, Kaelin W, Fisher SJ
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1006/dbio.2001.0231](https://doi.org/10.1006/dbio.2001.0231)

## Content

1. Dev Biol. 2001 May 15;233(2):526-36. doi: 10.1006/dbio.2001.0231.

Human cytotrophoblast expression of the von Hippel-Lindau protein is 
downregulated during uterine invasion in situ and upregulated by hypoxia in 
vitro.

Genbacev O(1), Krtolica A, Kaelin W, Fisher SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Stomatology, University of California--San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California 94143-0512, USA.

The von Hippel-Lindau tumor-suppressor protein (pVHL) regulates the stability of 
HIF1 alpha and HIF2 alpha and thus is pivotal in cellular responses to changes 
in oxygen tension. Paradoxically, human cytotrophoblasts proliferate under 
hypoxic conditions comparable to those measured in the early gestation placenta 
(2% O(2)), but differentiate into tumorlike invasive cells under well-oxygenated 
conditions such as those found in the uterus. We sought to explain this 
phenomenon in terms of pVHL expression. In situ, pVHL immunolocalized to villous 
cytotrophoblast stem cells, and expression was enhanced at sites of cell column 
initiation; in both of these relatively hypoxic locations, cytoplasmic staining 
for HIF2 alpha was also detected. As cytotrophoblasts attached to and invaded 
the uterus, which results in their increased exposure to oxygen, pVHL staining 
was abruptly downregulated concordant with localization of HIF2 alpha to the 
nucleus. In vitro, hypoxia (2% O(2)) upregulated cytotrophoblast pVHL expression 
together with HIF2 alpha, which localized to the cytoplasm; culture under 
well-oxygenated conditions greatly reduced levels of both molecules. These 
results, together with the placental defects previously observed in VHL(-/-) 
mice, suggest that pVHL is a component of the mechanism that transduces local 
differences in oxygen tension at the maternal-fetal interface to changes in the 
biological behavior of cytotrophoblasts. Furthermore, these data provide the 
first example of oxygen-dependent changes in pVHL abundance.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/dbio.2001.0231
PMID: 11336512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]