---
reference_id: "PMID:19436114"
title: Prevention of hepatocarcinogenesis and increased susceptibility to acetaminophen-induced liver failure in transaldolase-deficient mice by N-acetylcysteine.
authors:
- Hanczko R
- Fernandez DR
- Doherty E
- Qian Y
- Vas G
- Niland B
- Telarico T
- Garba A
- Banerjee S
- Middleton FA
- Barrett D
- Barcza M
- Banki K
- Landas SK
- Perl A
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1172/JCI35722
keywords:
- Acetylcysteine/pharmacology
- Animals
- Apoptosis
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/metabolism"
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/enzymology, genetics, pathology, prevention & control"
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- JNK Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases/metabolism
- Liver Failure/chemically induced
- "Liver Neoplasms/enzymology, genetics, pathology, prevention & control"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- Phosphorylation
- "Transaldolase/deficiency, metabolism"
- alpha-Fetoproteins/metabolism
- beta Catenin/metabolism
- fas Receptor/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevention of hepatocarcinogenesis and increased susceptibility to acetaminophen-induced liver failure in transaldolase-deficient mice by N-acetylcysteine.
**Authors:** Hanczko R, Fernandez DR, Doherty E, Qian Y, Vas G, Niland B, Telarico T, Garba A, Banerjee S, Middleton FA, Barrett D, Barcza M, Banki K, Landas SK, Perl A
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI35722](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI35722)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2009 Jun;119(6):1546-57. doi: 10.1172/JCI35722. Epub 2009 May
11.

Prevention of hepatocarcinogenesis and increased susceptibility to
acetaminophen-induced liver failure in transaldolase-deficient mice by
N-acetylcysteine.

Hanczko R(1), Fernandez DR, Doherty E, Qian Y, Vas G, Niland B, Telarico T,
Garba A, Banerjee S, Middleton FA, Barrett D, Barcza M, Banki K, Landas SK, Perl
A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, State University of New York,
Syracuse, New York 13210, USA.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2009 Sep;50(3):979-81. doi: 10.1002/hep.23227.

Although oxidative stress has been implicated in acute acetaminophen-induced
liver failure and in chronic liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC),
no common underlying metabolic pathway has been identified. Recent case reports
suggest a link between the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) enzyme transaldolase
(TAL; encoded by TALDO1) and liver failure in children. Here, we show that
Taldo1-/- and Taldo1+/- mice spontaneously developed HCC, and Taldo1-/- mice had
increased susceptibility to acetaminophen-induced liver failure. Oxidative
stress in Taldo1-/- livers was characterized by the accumulation of
sedoheptulose 7-phosphate, failure to recycle ribose 5-phosphate for the
oxidative PPP, depleted NADPH and glutathione levels, and increased production
of lipid hydroperoxides. Furthermore, we found evidence of hepatic mitochondrial
dysfunction, as indicated by loss of transmembrane potential, diminished
mitochondrial mass, and reduced ATP/ADP ratio. Reduced beta-catenin
phosphorylation and enhanced c-Jun expression in Taldo1-/- livers reflected
adaptation to oxidative stress. Taldo1-/- hepatocytes were resistant to
CD95/Fas-mediated apoptosis in vitro and in vivo. Remarkably, lifelong
administration of the potent antioxidant N-acetylcysteine (NAC) prevented
acetaminophen-induced liver failure, restored Fas-dependent hepatocyte
apoptosis, and blocked hepatocarcinogenesis in Taldo1-/- mice. These data reveal
a protective role for the TAL-mediated branch of the PPP against
hepatocarcinogenesis and identify NAC as a promising treatment for liver disease
in TAL deficiency.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI35722
PMCID: PMC2689120
PMID: 19436114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
