---
reference_id: "PMID:38973571"
title: Temporal Bone Histopathology of Atypical Cogan Syndrome.
authors:
- Ishibashi Y
- Kondo K
- Suzuki Y
- Kaga K
journal: Laryngoscope
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/lary.31620
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Temporal Bone Histopathology of Atypical Cogan Syndrome.
**Authors:** Ishibashi Y, Kondo K, Suzuki Y, Kaga K
**Journal:** Laryngoscope (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/lary.31620](https://doi.org/10.1002/lary.31620)

## Content

1. Laryngoscope. 2024 Dec;134(12):5135-5138. doi: 10.1002/lary.31620. Epub 2024
Jul  8.

Temporal Bone Histopathology of Atypical Cogan Syndrome.

Ishibashi Y(1)(2), Kondo K(1), Suzuki Y(1)(2), Kaga K(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, 
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Kawakita General Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)National Institute of Sensory Organs, National Tokyo Medical Center, Tokyo, 
Japan.

Cogan's syndrome is a rare disorder first clinically defined in 1945, 
characterized by nonsyphilitic interstitial keratitis and progressive 
audiovestibular symptoms. Later, patients with audiovestibular dysfunction and 
various types of inflammatory eye disease were classified as having atypical 
Cogan's syndrome. The etiology and pathogenesis of Cogan's syndrome remain 
largely unknown. Here, we report a case of atypical Cogan's syndrome with a 
histological assessment of the temporal bone during the acute disease period. 
Temporal bone histology was compared to age- and gender-matched normal control, 
and our findings revealed endolymphatic hydrops and degenerative changes in 
various parts of the inner ear. Laryngoscope, 134:5135-5138, 2024.

© 2024 The American Laryngological, Rhinological and Otological Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.31620
PMCID: PMC11563850
PMID: 38973571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: We do not have 
any conflict of interest.