---
reference_id: "PMID:32741584"
title: Sensorineural hearing loss and hypoplastic cochlea in Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome with FOXC1 mutation.
authors:
- Yamazaki H
- Nakamura T
- Hosono K
- Yamaguchi T
- Hiratsuka Y
- Hotta Y
- Takahashi M
journal: Auris Nasus Larynx
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.anl.2020.07.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sensorineural hearing loss and hypoplastic cochlea in Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome with FOXC1 mutation.
**Authors:** Yamazaki H, Nakamura T, Hosono K, Yamaguchi T, Hiratsuka Y, Hotta Y, Takahashi M
**Journal:** Auris Nasus Larynx (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.anl.2020.07.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anl.2020.07.006)

## Content

1. Auris Nasus Larynx. 2021 Dec;48(6):1204-1208. doi: 10.1016/j.anl.2020.07.006. 
Epub 2020 Jul 30.

Sensorineural hearing loss and hypoplastic cochlea in Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome 
with FOXC1 mutation.

Yamazaki H(1), Nakamura T(2), Hosono K(3), Yamaguchi T(4), Hiratsuka Y(4), Hotta 
Y(3), Takahashi M(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Osaka Red Cross 
Hospital, Tennoji-ku, Osaka, 543-8555, Japan; Department of Otolaryngology, Kobe 
City Medical Center General Hospital, Chuo-ku, Kobe, 650-0047, Japan; Hearing 
Research Division, Center for Clinical Research and Innovation, Kobe City 
Medical Center General Hospital, Chuo-ku, Kobe, 650-0047, Japan. Electronic 
address: h_yamazaki@ent.kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Neurology, Osaka Red Cross Hospital, Tennoji-ku, Osaka, 
543-8555, Japan; Department of Neurology, Kyoto Takeda Hospital, Shimogyo-ku, 
Kyoto, 600-8884, Japan.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 
Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu, 431-3192, Japan.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Osaka Red Cross 
Hospital, Tennoji-ku, Osaka, 543-8555, Japan.
(5)Department of Neurology, Osaka Red Cross Hospital, Tennoji-ku, Osaka, 
543-8555, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS) type 3 is a rare autosomal dominant 
disease, characterized by anterior segment dysgenesis of the eye, hearing loss, 
and cardiac defects. ARS type 3 is highly associated with FOXC1 mutations, which 
induces developmental disorders of neural crest cells. Most studies about ARS 
patients focused on ophthalmologic findings, but details in their hearing loss 
have not yet been revealed. In this report, we investigated audiological and 
otological manifestations in the ARS type 3 patient who had the novel 
heterozygous FOXC1 mutation leading deletion at the forkhead DNA-binding domain.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Pure tone audiometry showed bilateral sensorineural hearing 
loss (SNHL) and audiological examinations confirmed that major dysfunctions 
existed in the cochlea, rather than the spiral ganglion neurons and the cochlear 
nerve. CT and MRI revealed the hypoplastic cochlea at both sides. Given that the 
6p25 deletion syndrome, lacking one allele of the FOXC1 gene, shows similar, but 
more severe cochlear malformations than the present case, the FOXC1 mutations 
might contribute to the hypoplasia and dysfunctions in the cochlea.
CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, this is the first report demonstrating that the 
ARS type 3 patient with the FOXC1 mutation has the hypoplasia and dysfunctions 
in the cochlea, which results in bilateral SNHL.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anl.2020.07.006
PMID: 32741584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]