---
reference_id: "PMID:12122007"
title: "Impaired renal NaCl absorption in mice lacking the ROMK potassium channel, a model for type II Bartter's syndrome."
authors:
- Lorenz JN
- Baird NR
- Judd LM
- Noonan WT
- Andringa A
- Doetschman T
- Manning PA
- Liu LH
- Miller ML
- Shull GE
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M205627200
keywords:
- Animals
- Bartter Syndrome/genetics
- Base Sequence
- Body Weight
- DNA Primers
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Gene Library
- Genotype
- Glomerular Filtration Rate/genetics
- Humans
- "Kidney/pathology, physiology, physiopathology"
- "Loop of Henle/metabolism, pathology, physiology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Phenotype
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Sodium Chloride/metabolism
- Tail
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impaired renal NaCl absorption in mice lacking the ROMK potassium channel, a model for type II Bartter's syndrome.
**Authors:** Lorenz JN, Baird NR, Judd LM, Noonan WT, Andringa A, Doetschman T, Manning PA, Liu LH, Miller ML, Shull GE
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M205627200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M205627200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Oct 4;277(40):37871-80. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M205627200. Epub
2002  Jul 16.

Impaired renal NaCl absorption in mice lacking the ROMK potassium channel, a
model for type II Bartter's syndrome.

Lorenz JN(1), Baird NR, Judd LM, Noonan WT, Andringa A, Doetschman T, Manning
PA, Liu LH, Miller ML, Shull GE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, the University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0524, USA.

ROMK is an apical K(+) channel expressed in the thick ascending limb of Henle
(TALH) and throughout the distal nephron of the kidney. Null mutations in the
ROMK gene cause type II Bartter's syndrome, in which abnormalities of
electrolyte, acid-base, and fluid-volume homeostasis occur because of defective
NaCl reabsorption in the TALH. To understand better the pathogenesis of type II
Bartter's syndrome, we developed a mouse lacking ROMK and examined its
phenotype. Young null mutants had hydronephrosis, were severely dehydrated, and
approximately 95% died before 3 weeks of age. ROMK-deficient mice that survived
beyond weaning grew to adulthood; however, they had metabolic acidosis, elevated
blood concentrations of Na(+) and Cl(-), reduced blood pressure, polydipsia,
polyuria, and poor urinary concentrating ability. Whole kidney glomerular
filtration rate was sharply reduced, apparently as a result of hydronephrosis,
and fractional excretion of electrolytes was elevated. Micropuncture analysis
revealed that the single nephron glomerular filtration rate was relatively
normal, absorption of NaCl in the TALH was reduced but not eliminated, and
tubuloglomerular feedback was severely impaired. These data show that the loss
of ROMK in the mouse causes perturbations of electrolyte, acid-base, and
fluid-volume homeostasis, reduced absorption of NaCl in the TALH, and impaired
tubuloglomerular feedback.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M205627200
PMID: 12122007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
