---
reference_id: "PMID:22055541"
title: "Examining how antiphospholipid antibodies activate intracellular signaling pathways: a systematic review."
authors:
- Poulton K
- Rahman A
- Giles I
journal: Semin Arthritis Rheum
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2011.09.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Examining how antiphospholipid antibodies activate intracellular signaling pathways: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Poulton K, Rahman A, Giles I
**Journal:** Semin Arthritis Rheum (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semarthrit.2011.09.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semarthrit.2011.09.004)

## Content

1. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2012 Apr;41(5):720-36. doi: 
10.1016/j.semarthrit.2011.09.004. Epub 2011 Nov 4.

Examining how antiphospholipid antibodies activate intracellular signaling 
pathways: a systematic review.

Poulton K(1), Rahman A, Giles I.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Rheumatology Research, Division of Medicine, University College 
London, London, UK. k.bell@ucl.ac.uk

OBJECTIVES: Diverse experimental evidence exists implicating the activation of 
various different cell surface receptors and intracellular pathways by 
antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL). This evidence has been generated using a 
number of different cell types with varying numbers of aPL from different 
sources and disease subtypes. This experimental variability complicates the 
comparison of results from different studies. We therefore undertook a 
systematic review of the literature to provide a critical analysis of the 
strength of the evidence that specific receptors and signaling pathways are 
important in the pathogenesis of antiphospholipid syndrome.
METHODS: We searched PubMed and EMBASE for studies in which the effects of aPL 
on cell surface receptors or intracellular signaling pathways were measured in 
vitro or in vivo. Each publication was systematically examined to note the 
following points: antibody type and source, outcome measures, use of 
receptor/signaling pathway inhibitors, and cell type and origin.
RESULTS: We identified 10 original studies on toll-like receptors (TLR), 14 on 
protein kinases, and 13 on nuclear factor kappa B (NFκB). There was considerable 
heterogeneity between studies. Nevertheless, convincing evidence from multiple 
approaches implicates TLR4, p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), and 
NFκB in mediating pathogenic effects of antiphospholipid antibodies.
CONCLUSIONS: TLR4, p38 MAPK and NFκB are involved in mediating pathogenic 
effects of aPL on different cell types and may be potential therapeutic targets 
in antiphospholipid syndrome.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2011.09.004
PMID: 22055541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]