---
reference_id: "PMID:19917992"
title: Study of 962 patients indicates progressive muscular atrophy is a form of ALS.
authors:
- Kim WK
- Liu X
- Sandner J
- Pasmantier M
- Andrews J
- Rowland LP
- Mitsumoto H
journal: Neurology
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181c1dea3
keywords:
- Age Factors
- Age of Onset
- "Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/classification, diagnosis, epidemiology, mortality"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Interviews as Topic
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Motor Neuron Disease/classification, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Muscular Atrophy, Spinal/classification, diagnosis, epidemiology, mortality"
- Prognosis
- Proportional Hazards Models
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Severity of Illness Index
- Sex Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Study of 962 patients indicates progressive muscular atrophy is a form of ALS.
**Authors:** Kim WK, Liu X, Sandner J, Pasmantier M, Andrews J, Rowland LP, Mitsumoto H
**Journal:** Neurology (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181c1dea3](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181c1dea3)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2009 Nov 17;73(20):1686-92. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181c1dea3.

Study of 962 patients indicates progressive muscular atrophy is a form of ALS.

Kim WK(1), Liu X, Sandner J, Pasmantier M, Andrews J, Rowland LP, Mitsumoto H.

Author information:
(1)The Eleanor and Lou Gehrig MDA/ALS Research Center, The Neurological 
Institute of New York, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, 
USA.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2010 Jun 8;74(23):1926; author reply 1926-7. doi: 
10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181e03b59.
    Neurology. 2010 Jun 8;74(23):1926; author reply 1926. doi: 
10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181e03ac0.

BACKGROUND: Progressive muscular atrophy (PMA) is clinically characterized by 
signs of lower motor neuron dysfunction and may evolve into amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS). Whether PMA is actually a form of ALS has important 
consequences clinically and for therapeutic trials. We compared the survival of 
patients with PMA or ALS to analyze the clinical features that influence 
survival in PMA.
METHODS: We reviewed the medical records of patients with PMA (n = 91) or ALS (n 
= 871) from our ALS Center and verified survival by telephoning the families or 
using the National Death Index.
RESULTS: In PMA, patients were more likely to be male (p < 0.001), older (p = 
0.007), and lived longer (p = 0.01) than in ALS. Cox model analysis suggested 
that the risk of death increased with age at onset in both patient groups (p < 
0.005). Upper motor neuron (UMN) signs developed in 22% of patients with PMA 
within 61 months after diagnosis. Demographic and other clinical variables did 
not differ at diagnosis between those who did or did not develop UMN signs. In 
PMA, the factors present at diagnosis that predicted shorter survival were 
greater number of body regions affected, lower forced vital capacity, and lower 
ALS Functional Rating Scale-Revised score. Noninvasive ventilation and 
gastrostomy were used frequently in PMA.
CONCLUSION: Although patients with progressive muscular atrophy (PMA) tended to 
live longer than those with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), shorter 
survival in PMA is associated with the same risk factors that predict poor 
survival in ALS. Additionally, PMA is relentlessly progressive, and UMN 
involvement can occur, as also reported in imaging and postmortem studies. For 
these reasons, PMA should be considered a form of ALS.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181c1dea3
PMCID: PMC2788803
PMID: 19917992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]