---
reference_id: "PMID:38155415"
title: "Isolation of three different sizes of exosomes in an Asian population with different retinal diseases before and after treatment: preliminary results."
authors:
- Wu SY
- Hung YC
- Chou CC
- Chen C
- Cheng CM
- Chen C
- Liou JC
- Hsu MY
journal: Bioengineered
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/21655979.2023.2297320
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Isolation of three different sizes of exosomes in an Asian population with different retinal diseases before and after treatment: preliminary results.
**Authors:** Wu SY, Hung YC, Chou CC, Chen C, Cheng CM, Chen C, Liou JC, Hsu MY
**Journal:** Bioengineered (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/21655979.2023.2297320](https://doi.org/10.1080/21655979.2023.2297320)

## Content

1. Bioengineered. 2024 Dec;15(1):2297320. doi: 10.1080/21655979.2023.2297320.
Epub  2023 Dec 28.

Isolation of three different sizes of exosomes in an Asian population with 
different retinal diseases before and after treatment: preliminary results.

Wu SY(1)(2)(3), Hung YC(1)(2)(3), Chou CC(4)(5)(6)(7), Chen C(3)(8)(9), Cheng 
CM(10), Chen C(11)(12), Liou JC(1)(3), Hsu MY(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, 
Taichung, Taiwan.
(4)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, 
Taiwan.
(6)School of Medicine, College of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Post-Baccalaureate Medicine, College of Medicine, National 
Chung Hsing University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Optometry, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(9)Institute of Optometry, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(10)Institute of Biomedical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, 
Taiwan.
(11)Institute of Nanoengineering and Microsystem, National Tsing Hua University, 
Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(12)Department of Power Mechanical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, 
Hsinchu, Taiwan.

Exosomes are membranous structures measuring between 40-120 nm that are secreted 
by various cells of the human body into the body fluid system. Exosomes contain 
proteins, mRNA, miRNA, and signaling molecules, and physiologically they assist 
in the intercellular transport of proteins and RNA molecules. In this study, we 
used an immunoaffinity filter paper platform combined with scanning electron 
microscopy and microfluidic systems to detect the size of exosomes within the 
aqueous humor. Eight aqueous humor samples showed three distinct sizes of 
exosomes that were significantly different on scanning electron 
microscopy(P < 0.01). We further used nanoparticle tracking analysis to assess 
the size distribution of exosomes within the aqueous humor. We found 
significantly different distributions of exosomes between patients with three 
different ocular diseases and patients with normal cataracts as controls. An 
obvious peak of exomeres(size around 35 nm)was found in the patients with 
central retinal vein occlusion and vitreous hemorrhage. Flare-ups of large 
exosomes(size 90-120 nm)were found in the patients with the inflammatory ocular 
disease pars planitis. No obvious peaks in exomeres or large exosomes were found 
in the control group. There was a high association between the distribution of 
exosomes and the pathogenesis of ocular diseases. After intravitreal 
anti-vascular endothelial growth factor treatment, the aqueous humor from the 
patients with neovascular diseases showed a significant reduction in exosomes in 
nanoparticle tracking analysis. These findings suggest that at least three 
distinct sizes of exosomes exist in the aqueous 
humor:(1)exomeres:<35 nm;(2)small exosomes:60-80 nm; and (3)large 
exosomes:90-120 nm. Different sizes of exosomes may have different implications 
in normal or diseased eyes.

Plain Language Summary: Three different sized exosomes were identified in 
aqueous humor.The distribution of exosome size was significantly different 
between the patients with inflammatory and neovascularization retinal 
diseases.After intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor treatment, 
the aqueous humor from patients with neovascular diseases showed a significant 
reduction in exosomes in nanoparticle tracking analysis.

DOI: 10.1080/21655979.2023.2297320
PMCID: PMC10761085
PMID: 38155415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).