---
reference_id: "PMID:27596081"
title: "[Analysis of diagnosis and treatment of Alport syndrome]."
authors:
- An XG
- Zhang YQ
- Ding J
- Wang F
- Xiao HJ
- Yao Y
journal: Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi
year: '2016'
doi: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.0578-1310.2016.09.008
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Basement Membrane
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- China
- Collagen Type IV
- Diagnostic Errors
- Edema
- Female
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- Genetic Testing
- Hematuria
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents
- Male
- "Microscopy, Electron"
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/diagnostic imaging, therapy"
- Pregnancy
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- Proteinuria
- Retrospective Studies
- Skin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Analysis of diagnosis and treatment of Alport syndrome].
**Authors:** An XG, Zhang YQ, Ding J, Wang F, Xiao HJ, Yao Y
**Journal:** Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi (2016)
**DOI:** [10.3760/cma.j.issn.0578-1310.2016.09.008](https://doi.org/10.3760/cma.j.issn.0578-1310.2016.09.008)

## Content

1. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2016 Sep;54(9):669-73. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0578-1310.2016.09.008.

[Analysis of diagnosis and treatment of Alport syndrome].

[Article in Chinese]

An XG(1), Zhang YQ, Ding J, Wang F, Xiao HJ, Yao Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 100034,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clinical characteristics and the status of
diagnosis and treatment of patients with Alport syndrome in China.
METHOD: Patients with affirmative diagnosis of Alport syndrome from Department
of Pedatrics, Peking University First Hospital in the past 20 years (1995-2015)
were analyzed retrospectively. The clinical data including initial symptoms,
visit reasons, age at onset of disease, family history, hereditary mode, methods
of diagnosis, misdiagnosis and mistreatment were collected.
RESULT: A total of 398 patients with Alport syndrome were included in this
study, 48.2% of patients had the onset of symptoms before age of 3 years. The
rate of onset of symptoms and diagnosis before age of 17 years were 95.7%. The
initial symptoms included gross hematuria (37.2%), microscopic hematuria and
proteinuria (25.1%), microscopic hematuria (14.8%), edema of eyelid and lower
limbs (10.3%), increased foam in urine (4.3%), etc.; 39.5% of patients had no
symptoms of urinary tract. Only 14.0% of the patients were diagnosed as Alport
syndrome for the first time, and 86.0% of the patients were misdiagnosed.
Hormones and immunosuppressive agents were used in 19.0% of patients diagnosed
as Alport syndrome, and in 43.0% of patients there was misdiagnosis. Skin biopsy
and immunofluorescence of type Ⅳ collagen ɑ5 chain in epithelial basement
membrane had a detection rate of 77.8%. Electron microscopy of glomerular
basement membrane had a detection rate of 92.6%, and genetic testing 96.6%. The
time interval of diagnosis was 18.2 months and was gradually shortened in recent
years.
CONCLUSION: Alport syndrome developed at a very young age. Hematuria was the
most frequent initial symptom. There was a high rate of misdiagnosis and
mistreatment for Alport syndrome. Genetic testing for Alport syndrome had
advantages of high detection rate, genetic consultation and prenatal diagnosis.

DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.0578-1310.2016.09.008
PMID: 27596081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
