---
reference_id: "PMID:458828"
title: Genetic heterogeneity in osteogenesis imperfecta.
authors:
- Sillence DO
- Senn A
- Danks DM
journal: J Med Genet
year: '1979'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.16.2.101
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Australia
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Genes, Dominant"
- "Genes, Lethal"
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genetic Variation
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/epidemiology, genetics"
- Pedigree
- Sclera/abnormalities
- Syndrome
- Terminology as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic heterogeneity in osteogenesis imperfecta.
**Authors:** Sillence DO, Senn A, Danks DM
**Journal:** J Med Genet (1979)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.16.2.101](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.16.2.101)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 1979 Apr;16(2):101-16. doi: 10.1136/jmg.16.2.101.

Genetic heterogeneity in osteogenesis imperfecta.

Sillence DO, Senn A, Danks DM.

An epidemiological and genetical study of osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) in 
Victoria, Australia confirmed that there are at least four distinct syndromes at 
present called OI. The largest group of patients showed autosomal dominant 
inheritance of osteoporosis leading to fractures and distinctly blue sclerae. A 
large proportion of adults had presenile deafness or a family history of 
presenile conductive hearing loss. A second group, who comprised the majority of 
newborns with neonatal fractures, all died before or soon after birth. These had 
characteristic broad, crumpled femora and beaded ribs in skeletal x-rays. 
Autosomal recessive inheritance was likely for some, if not all, of these cases. 
A third group, two thirds of whom had fractures at birth, showed severe 
progressive deformity of limbs and spine. The density of scleral blueness 
appeared less than that seen in the first group of patients and approximated 
that seen in normal children and adults. Moreover, the blueness appeared to 
decrease with age. All patients in this group were sporadic cases. The mode of 
inheritance was not resolved by the study, but it is likely that the group is 
heterogeneous with both dominant and recessive genotypes responsible for the 
syndrome. The fourth group of patients showed dominant inheritance of 
osteoporosis leading to fractures, with variable deformity of long bones, but 
normal sclerae.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.16.2.101
PMCID: PMC1012733
PMID: 458828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]