---
reference_id: "PMID:38377969"
title: Modelling Disease Progression of Multiple Sclerosis in a South Wales Cohort.
authors:
- Uzochukwu EC
- Harding KE
- Hrastelj J
- Kreft KL
- Holmans P
- Robertson NP
- Tallantyre EC
- Lawton M
journal: Neuroepidemiology
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1159/000536427
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modelling Disease Progression of Multiple Sclerosis in a South Wales Cohort.
**Authors:** Uzochukwu EC, Harding KE, Hrastelj J, Kreft KL, Holmans P, Robertson NP, Tallantyre EC, Lawton M
**Journal:** Neuroepidemiology (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000536427](https://doi.org/10.1159/000536427)

## Content

1. Neuroepidemiology. 2024;58(3):218-226. doi: 10.1159/000536427. Epub 2024 Feb
20.

Modelling Disease Progression of Multiple Sclerosis in a South Wales Cohort.

Uzochukwu EC(1), Harding KE(2), Hrastelj J(3), Kreft KL(3), Holmans P(1)(4), 
Robertson NP(1)(3), Tallantyre EC(1)(3), Lawton M(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, School of 
Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.
(2)Department of Neurology, Royal Gwent Hospital, Newport, UK.
(3)Department of Neurology, University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, UK.
(4)Medical Research Council Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, 
Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.
(5)Population Health Sciences, Bristol Medical School, University of Bristol, 
Bristol, UK.

OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study was to model multiple sclerosis (MS) 
disease progression and compare disease trajectories by sex, age of onset, and 
year of diagnosis.
STUDY DESIGN AND SETTING: Longitudinal EDSS scores (20,854 observations) were 
collected for 1,787 relapse-onset MS patients at MS clinics in South Wales and 
modelled using a multilevel model (MLM). The MLM adjusted for covariates (sex, 
age of onset, year of diagnosis, and disease-modifying treatments), and included 
interactions between baseline covariates and time variables.
RESULTS: The optimal model was truncated at 30 years after disease onset and 
excluded EDSS recorded within 3 months of relapse. As expected, older age of 
onset was associated with faster disease progression at 15 years (effect size 
(ES): 0.75; CI: 0.63, 0.86; p: &lt;0.001) and female-sex progressed more slowly 
at 15 years (ES: -0.43; CI: -0.68, -0.18; p: &lt;0.001). Patients diagnosed more 
recently (defined as 2007-2011 and &gt;2011) progressed more slowly than those 
diagnosed historically (&lt;2006); (ES: -0.46; CI: -0.75, -0.16; p: 0.006) and 
(ES: -0.95; CI: -1.20, -0.70; p: &lt;0.001), respectively.
CONCLUSION: We present a novel model of MS outcomes, accounting for the 
non-linear trajectory of MS and effects of baseline covariates, validating 
well-known risk factors (sex and age of onset) associated with disease 
progression. Also, patients diagnosed more recently progressed more slowly than 
those diagnosed historically.

© 2024 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000536427
PMCID: PMC11151968
PMID: 38377969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: K.E.H. reports speaker and personal fees from 
Roche, Merck, and Biogen, and travel grants to attend educational meetings from 
Roche, Novartis, Merck, and Biogen. E.C.T. has received honoraria for consulting 
work from Novartis, Merck, Biogen and Roche, and funding to attend or speak at 
educational meetings from Biogen, Janssen, Merck, Roche, Takeda, and Novartis. 
N.P.R. reports honoraria from Roche, Sanofi Genzyme and Novartis, and research 
grants from Novartis, Sanofi Genzyme, and Biogen. M.L. received fees for 
advising on a secondary analysis of an R.C.T. sponsored by North Bristol NHS 
Trust. E.C.U. declares no financial interests. P.H. is a member of the 
Scientific Review Committee of Enroll-HD, for which he receives a small 
Honorarium. K.L.K. received consultancy fees from Biogen, speaker fees from 
Biogen and Roche, and travel grants from Merck, Janssen and Novartis.