---
reference_id: PMID:40105068
title: "Basal Cell Nevus Syndrome and Sporadic Basal Cell Carcinoma: A Comparative Study of Clinicopathological Features."
authors:
- Wang CY
- Chen CB
- Ilagan FMD
- Lin JY
- Sung WY
- Lu LY
- Liau JY
- Chen YH
- Liao YH
- Chen JS
- Sheen YS
- Chang YY
- Hong JB
journal: Acta Derm Venereol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.2340/actadv.v105.40692
keywords:
- Humans
- "Basal Cell Nevus Syndrome/pathology, surgery, genetics, epidemiology"
- Male
- "Skin Neoplasms/pathology, surgery, epidemiology, genetics"
- Female
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/pathology, surgery, epidemiology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Taiwan/epidemiology
- Aged
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Basal Cell Nevus Syndrome and Sporadic Basal Cell Carcinoma: A Comparative Study of Clinicopathological Features.
**Authors:** Wang CY, Chen CB, Ilagan FMD, Lin JY, Sung WY, Lu LY, Liau JY, Chen YH, Liao YH, Chen JS, Sheen YS, Chang YY, Hong JB
**Journal:** Acta Derm Venereol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.2340/actadv.v105.40692](https://doi.org/10.2340/actadv.v105.40692)

## Content

1. Acta Derm Venereol. 2025 Mar 19;105:adv40692. doi: 10.2340/actadv.v105.40692.

Basal Cell Nevus Syndrome and Sporadic Basal Cell Carcinoma: A Comparative Study 
of Clinicopathological Features.

Wang CY(1), Chen CB(2), Ilagan FMD(3), Lin JY(4), Sung WY(5), Lu LY(6), Liau 
JY(7), Chen YH(8), Liao YH(3), Chen JS(3), Sheen YS(3), Chang YY(9), Hong 
JB(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Taipei City Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of dermatology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Linkou and 
Keelung, Taiwan; Drug Hypersensitivity Clinical and Research Center, Chang Gung 
Memorial Hospital, Linkou, Taoyuan, Taiwan; College of Medicine, Chang Gung 
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan; School of Medicine, National Tsing Hua University, 
Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Dermatology, National Taiwan University Hospital and National 
Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of dermatology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Linkou and 
Keelung, Taiwan; Drug Hypersensitivity Clinical and Research Center, Chang Gung 
Memorial Hospital, Linkou, Taoyuan, Taiwan; College of Medicine, Chang Gung 
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital, Kaohsiung 
City, Taiwan.
(6)Department of dermatology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Linkou and 
Keelung, Taiwan; College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan; 
Department of Dermatology and Aesthetic Medicine Center, Jen-Ai Hospital, 
Taichung, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Pathology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; 
Graduate Institute of Pathology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Pathology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital Linkou-Branch, Taoyuan, 
Taiwan.
(9)Department of dermatology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Linkou and 
Keelung, Taiwan; College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(10)Department of Dermatology, National Taiwan University Hospital and National 
Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan. jbtouching@gmail.com.

Basal cell nevus syndrome is caused by mutations in the Sonic hedgehog pathway 
and characterized by early-onset basal cell carcinoma. The features of basal 
cell carcinoma in basal cell nevus syndrome compared with sporadic basal cell 
carcinoma have not been explored. This study is a retrospective study of 
patients with basal cell nevus syndrome in two medical centres in Taiwan from 
1991 to 2021 and patients with sporadic basal cell carcinoma excised from 2015 
to 2020. An analysis of 18 patients with basal cell nevus syndrome showed an 
older mean age at the first diagnosis of basal cell carcinoma (37.5 years) than 
reported in Western countries. The majority of basal cell carcinomas were 
located in the head and neck region (80.7%), with nodular BCC being the most 
common tumour type (47.0%). Compared with sporadic basal cell carcinomas, basal 
cell carcinomas in basal cell nevus syndrome patients occurred more frequently 
on the scalp (34.7% vs 6.1%, p < 0.001). In addition, the superficial type of 
basal cell carcinoma was more likely to be seen in basal cell nevus syndrome 
(24.7% vs 10.4%, p < 0.001). The limitations were that some features of the 
basal cell nevus syndrome patients might not have been present yet at the time 
of examination or they did not receive thorough screening. In conclusion, the 
distinct features of basal cell carcinomas in basal cell nevus syndrome patients 
have important implications for the prevention, diagnosis, and management of 
basal cell carcinoma in basal cell nevus syndrome patients.

DOI: 10.2340/actadv.v105.40692
PMCID: PMC11971840
PMID: 40105068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.