---
reference_id: "PMID:36563616"
title: Association of health literacy with physical and mental health in people with chronic diseases.
authors:
- Arsenović S
- Trajković G
- Pekmezović T
- Gazibara T
journal: Rev Epidemiol Sante Publique
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.respe.2022.101419
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of health literacy with physical and mental health in people with chronic diseases.
**Authors:** Arsenović S, Trajković G, Pekmezović T, Gazibara T
**Journal:** Rev Epidemiol Sante Publique (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.respe.2022.101419](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respe.2022.101419)

## Content

1. Rev Epidemiol Sante Publique. 2023 Feb;71(1):101419. doi: 
10.1016/j.respe.2022.101419. Epub 2022 Dec 21.

Association of health literacy with physical and mental health in people with 
chronic diseases.

Arsenović S(1), Trajković G(2), Pekmezović T(3), Gazibara T(4).

Author information:
(1)Public Health Institute of Republic of Srpska, Regional Center Foča, 
Njegoševa 15, 73301 Foča, Republic of Srpska, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
(2)Institute of Medical Statistics and Informatics, Dr Subotica 15, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Belgrade, 11 000 Belgrade, Serbia.
(3)Institute of Epidemiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, 
Višegradska 26A, 11 000 Belgrade, Serbia.
(4)Institute of Epidemiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, 
Višegradska 26A, 11 000 Belgrade, Serbia. Electronic address: 
tatjanagazibara@yahoo.com.

OBJECTIVE: to explore the association of health literacy domains with physical 
and mental quality of life in people with selected chronic diseases.
METHODS: Community-dwelling people with selected chronic diseases planned for 
immunization against influenza in 2017/2018 were included in the study. All 
non-vaccinated people and the corresponding number of randomly selected 
vaccinated people matched on town of residence were included. Data were 
collected by means of socio-demographic questionnaire, Health Literacy 
Questionnaire (HLQ) and Short Form-36 (SF-36). The Physical and Mental Composite 
Scores as well as their domains were observed as the study outcomes.
RESULTS: A total of 295 people were studied. The adjusted logistic regression 
showed that Physical and Mental composite scores were associated with all HLQ 
domains except 5) Appraisal of health information. Better Physical Functioning 
was associated with higher scores on 1) Feeling understood and supported by 
healthcare providers, 6) Ability to actively engage with healthcare providers, 
7) Navigating the healthcare system and 8) Ability to find good health 
information. Better scores on Vitality, Social Functioning, Role Emotional and 
Mental Health were associated with higher scores on all HLQ domains except 5) 
Appraisal of health information.
CONCLUSION: Health literacy is important for physical and mental quality of life 
among people with chronic diseases. Health care providers and other stakeholders 
should continuously work to improve health literacy of their patients.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.respe.2022.101419
PMID: 36563616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest None.