---
reference_id: "PMID:19110213"
title: Mutations of the SYCP3 gene in women with recurrent pregnancy loss.
authors:
- Bolor H
- Mori T
- Nishiyama S
- Ito Y
- Hosoba E
- Inagaki H
- Kogo H
- Ohye T
- Tsutsumi M
- Kato T
- Tong M
- Nishizawa H
- Pryor-Koishi K
- Kitaoka E
- Sawada T
- Nishiyama Y
- Udagawa Y
- Kurahashi H
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.12.002
keywords:
- "Abortion, Habitual/genetics"
- Adult
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- DNA-Binding Proteins
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Mutation
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Pregnancy
- Synaptonemal Complex/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations of the SYCP3 gene in women with recurrent pregnancy loss.
**Authors:** Bolor H, Mori T, Nishiyama S, Ito Y, Hosoba E, Inagaki H, Kogo H, Ohye T, Tsutsumi M, Kato T, Tong M, Nishizawa H, Pryor-Koishi K, Kitaoka E, Sawada T, Nishiyama Y, Udagawa Y, Kurahashi H
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.12.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.12.002)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2009 Jan;84(1):14-20. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.12.002. Epub
2008  Dec 24.

Mutations of the SYCP3 gene in women with recurrent pregnancy loss.

Bolor H(1), Mori T, Nishiyama S, Ito Y, Hosoba E, Inagaki H, Kogo H, Ohye T, 
Tsutsumi M, Kato T, Tong M, Nishizawa H, Pryor-Koishi K, Kitaoka E, Sawada T, 
Nishiyama Y, Udagawa Y, Kurahashi H.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, Institute for Comprehensive Medical Science, 
Fujita Health University, Toyoake, Aichi 470-1192, Japan.

Aneuploidy, a chromosomal numerical abnormality in the conceptus or fetus, 
occurs in at least 5% of all pregnancies and is the leading cause of early 
pregnancy loss in humans. Accumulating evidence now suggests that the correct 
segregation of chromosomes is affected by events occurring in prophase during 
meiosis I. These events include homologous chromosome pairing, sister-chromatid 
cohesion, and meiotic recombination. In our current study, we show that 
mutations in SYCP3, a gene encoding an essential component of the synaptonemal 
complex that is central to the interaction of homologous chromosomes, are 
associated with recurrent pregnancy loss. Two out of 26 women with recurrent 
pregnancy loss of unknown cause were found to carry independent heterozygous 
nucleotide alterations in this gene, neither of which was present among a group 
of 150 fertile women. Analysis of transcripts from minigenes harboring each of 
these two mutations revealed that both affected normal splicing, possibly 
resulting in the production of C-terminally mutated proteins. The mutant 
proteins were found to interact with their wild-type counterpart in vitro and 
inhibit the normal fiber formation of the SYCP3 protein when coexpressed in a 
heterologous system. These data suggest that these mutations are likely to 
generate an aberrant synaptonemal complex in a dominant-negative manner and 
contribute to abnormal chromosomal behavior that might lead to recurrent 
miscarriage. Combined with the fact that similar mutations have been previously 
identified in two males with azoospermia, our current data suggest that sexual 
dimorphism in response to meiotic disruption occurs even in humans.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.12.002
PMCID: PMC2668043
PMID: 19110213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]