---
reference_id: "PMID:17458872"
title: "Clinical, biochemical, and mutational spectrum of peroxisomal acyl-coenzyme A oxidase deficiency."
authors:
- Ferdinandusse S
- Denis S
- Hogenhout EM
- Koster J
- van Roermund CW
- IJlst L
- Moser AB
- Wanders RJ
- Waterham HR
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1002/humu.20535
keywords:
- Acyl-CoA Oxidase
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Biomarkers/analysis
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Cohort Studies
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Fatty Acids/analysis
- "Fibroblasts/chemistry, enzymology"
- Genotype
- Humans
- Isoenzymes/genetics
- "Lipid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics, pathology"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- "Oxidoreductases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Peroxisomal Disorders/genetics, pathology"
- Phenotype
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical, biochemical, and mutational spectrum of peroxisomal acyl-coenzyme A oxidase deficiency.
**Authors:** Ferdinandusse S, Denis S, Hogenhout EM, Koster J, van Roermund CW, IJlst L, Moser AB, Wanders RJ, Waterham HR
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.20535](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.20535)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2007 Sep;28(9):904-12. doi: 10.1002/humu.20535.

Clinical, biochemical, and mutational spectrum of peroxisomal acyl-coenzyme A 
oxidase deficiency.

Ferdinandusse S(1), Denis S, Hogenhout EM, Koster J, van Roermund CW, IJlst L, 
Moser AB, Wanders RJ, Waterham HR.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Academic Medical Center at the 
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. S.Ferdinandusse@amc.uva.nl

Peroxisomal acyl-coenzyme A (acyl-CoA) oxidase deficiency is an autosomal 
recessive inborn error of peroxisomal fatty acid oxidation due to a deficiency 
of straight-chain acyl-CoA oxidase (SCOX). The biochemical hallmark of this 
disorder is the accumulation of very long-chain fatty acids. Although some case 
reports and small series of patients have been published, a comprehensive 
overview of the clinical, biochemical, and mutational spectrum of this disorder 
is still lacking. For this reason, we report clinical information for a cohort 
of 22 patients with peroxisomal acyl-CoA oxidase deficiency and the results from 
biochemical and mutation analyses in fibroblasts of the patients. No clear 
genotype-phenotype correlation was observed. An intriguing mutation in the 
alternatively-spliced transcript encoding the isoform SCOX-exon 3II in a patient 
with normal expression of the transcript encoding the isoform SCOX-exon 3I, 
prompted us to characterize these two isoforms of human SCOX. The recombinant 
SCOX-exon 3I displayed activity toward medium-chain fatty acyl-CoAs and was not 
active with very long-chain fatty acyl-CoAs. In contrast, recombinant SCOX-exon 
3II was capable of oxidizing a broad range of substrates, including very 
long-chain fatty acyl-CoAs. These results explain why this patient with a 
mutation in exon 3II of the ACOX1 gene, but with normal expression of exon 3I, 
was indistinguishable from other patients with peroxisomal acyl-CoA oxidase 
deficiency with respect to his clinical presentation and the biochemical 
abnormalities in his fibroblasts.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20535
PMID: 17458872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]