---
reference_id: "PMID:37941380"
title: Pathogenicity and virulence of Francisella tularensis.
authors:
- Degabriel M
- Valeva S
- Boisset S
- Henry T
journal: Virulence
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1080/21505594.2023.2274638
keywords:
- Humans
- Francisella tularensis/genetics
- Virulence
- Tularemia/microbiology
- "Virulence Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- Phagosomes/microbiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenicity and virulence of Francisella tularensis.
**Authors:** Degabriel M, Valeva S, Boisset S, Henry T
**Journal:** Virulence (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1080/21505594.2023.2274638](https://doi.org/10.1080/21505594.2023.2274638)

## Content

1. Virulence. 2023 Dec;14(1):2274638. doi: 10.1080/21505594.2023.2274638. Epub
2023  Nov 8.

Pathogenicity and virulence of Francisella tularensis.

Degabriel M(1), Valeva S(1), Boisset S(1)(2), Henry T(1).

Author information:
(1)CIRI, Centre International de Recherche en Infectiologie, Inserm U1111, 
Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS, UMR5308, ENS de Lyon, Univ Lyon, LYON, 
France.
(2)Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CHU Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, CEA, UMR5075, Institut de 
Biologie Structurale, Grenoble, France.

Tularaemia is a zoonotic disease caused by the Gram-negative bacterium, 
Francisella tularensis. Depending on its entry route into the organism, F. 
tularensis causes different diseases, ranging from life-threatening pneumonia to 
less severe ulceroglandular tularaemia. Various strains with different 
geographical distributions exhibit different levels of virulence. F. tularensis 
is an intracellular bacterium that replicates primarily in the cytosol of the 
phagocytes. The main virulence attribute of F. tularensis is the type 6 
secretion system (T6SS) and its effectors that promote escape from the 
phagosome. In addition, F. tularensis has evolved a peculiar envelope that 
allows it to escape detection by the immune system. In this review, we cover 
tularaemia, different Francisella strains, and their pathogenicity. We 
particularly emphasize the intracellular life cycle, associated virulence 
factors, and metabolic adaptations. Finally, we present how F. tularensis 
largely escapes immune detection to be one of the most infectious and lethal 
bacterial pathogens.

DOI: 10.1080/21505594.2023.2274638
PMCID: PMC10653695
PMID: 37941380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the authors.