---
reference_id: "PMID:27777266"
title: A Proposal for a Serology-Based Approach to Membranous Nephropathy.
authors:
- De Vriese AS
- Glassock RJ
- Nath KA
- Sethi S
- Fervenza FC
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2016070776
keywords:
- Algorithms
- Autoantibodies/blood
- "Glomerulonephritis, Membranous/blood, diagnosis, therapy"
- Humans
- Kidney Transplantation
- Prognosis
- "Receptors, Phospholipase A2/immunology"
- Serologic Tests
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Proposal for a Serology-Based Approach to Membranous Nephropathy.
**Authors:** De Vriese AS, Glassock RJ, Nath KA, Sethi S, Fervenza FC
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2016070776](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2016070776)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2017 Feb;28(2):421-430. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2016070776. Epub
2016  Oct 24.

A Proposal for a Serology-Based Approach to Membranous Nephropathy.

De Vriese AS(1), Glassock RJ(2), Nath KA(3), Sethi S(4), Fervenza FC(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, AZ Sint-Jan Brugge-Oostende, Brugge, Belgium;
an.devriese@azsintjan.be fervenza.fernando@mayo.edu.
(2)Department of Medicine, Geffen School of Medicine, University of California,
Los Angeles, California; and.
(3)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension and.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota.
(5)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension and an.devriese@azsintjan.be
fervenza.fernando@mayo.edu.

Primary membranous nephropathy (MN) is an autoimmune disease mainly caused by
autoantibodies against the recently discovered podocyte antigens: the M-type
phospholipase A2 receptor 1 (PLA2R) and thrombospondin type 1 domain-containing
7A (THSD7A). Assays for quantitative assessment of anti-PLA2R antibodies are
commercially available, but a semiquantitative test to detect anti-THSD7A
antibodies has been only recently developed. The presence or absence of
anti-PLA2R and anti-THSD7A antibodies adds important information to clinical and
immunopathologic data in discriminating between primary and secondary MN. Levels
of anti-PLA2R antibodies and possibly, anti-THSD7A antibodies tightly correlate
with disease activity. Low baseline and decreasing anti-PLA2R antibody levels
strongly predict spontaneous remission, thus favoring conservative therapy.
Conversely, high baseline or increasing anti-PLA2R antibody levels associate
with nephrotic syndrome and progressive loss of kidney function, thereby
encouraging prompt initiation of immunosuppressive therapy. Serum anti-PLA2R
antibody profiles reliably predict response to therapy, and levels at completion
of therapy may forecast long-term outcome. Re-emergence of or increase in
antibody titers precedes a clinical relapse. Persistence or reappearance of
anti-PLA2R antibodies after kidney transplant predicts development of recurrent
disease. We propose that an individualized serology-based approach to MN, used
to complement and refine the traditional proteinuria-driven approach, will
improve the outcome in this disease.

Copyright © 2017 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2016070776
PMCID: PMC5280030
PMID: 27777266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
