---
reference_id: "PMID:30218021"
title: Susceptibility to Plasmodium vivax malaria associated with DARC (Duffy antigen) polymorphisms is influenced by the time of exposure to malaria.
authors:
- Kano FS
- de Souza AM
- de Menezes Torres L
- Costa MA
- Souza-Silva FA
- Sanchez BAM
- Fontes CJF
- Soares IS
- de Brito CFA
- Carvalho LH
- Sousa TN
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-32254-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Susceptibility to Plasmodium vivax malaria associated with DARC (Duffy antigen) polymorphisms is influenced by the time of exposure to malaria.
**Authors:** Kano FS, de Souza AM, de Menezes Torres L, Costa MA, Souza-Silva FA, Sanchez BAM, Fontes CJF, Soares IS, de Brito CFA, Carvalho LH, Sousa TN
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-018-32254-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-32254-z)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2018 Sep 14;8(1):13851. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-32254-z.

Susceptibility to Plasmodium vivax malaria associated with DARC (Duffy antigen) 
polymorphisms is influenced by the time of exposure to malaria.

Kano FS(1), de Souza AM(1), de Menezes Torres L(1), Costa MA(2), Souza-Silva 
FA(1), Sanchez BAM(3), Fontes CJF(4), Soares IS(5), de Brito CFA(1), Carvalho 
LH(1), Sousa TN(6).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology and Malaria Immunology Research Group, Instituto René 
Rachou, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (FIOCRUZ), Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Engenharia de Produção, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, 
Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(3)Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso, Cuiabá, Mato Grosso, Brazil.
(4)Hospital Julio Muller, Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso, Cuiabá, Mato 
Grosso, Brazil.
(5)Departamento de Análises Clínicas e Toxicológicas, Faculdade de Ciências 
Farmacêuticas, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(6)Molecular Biology and Malaria Immunology Research Group, Instituto René 
Rachou, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (FIOCRUZ), Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil. 
tais@minas.fiocruz.br.

Malaria has provided a major selective pressure and has modulated the genetic 
diversity of the human genome. The variants of the Duffy Antigen/Receptor for 
Chemokines (DARC) gene have probably been selected by malaria parasites, 
particularly the FY*O allele, which is fixed in sub-Saharan Africa and confers 
resistance to Plasmodium vivax infection. Here, we showed the influence of 
genomic ancestry on the distribution of DARC genotypes in a highly admixed 
Brazilian population and confirmed the decreased susceptibility of the FY*A/FY*O 
genotype to clinical P. vivax malaria. FY*B/FY*O individuals were associated 
with a greater risk of developing clinical malaria. A remarkable difference 
among DARC variants concerning the susceptibility to clinical malaria was more 
evident for individuals who were less exposed to malaria, as measured by the 
time of residence in the endemic area. Additionally, we found that DARC-negative 
and FY*A/FY*O individuals had a greater chance of acquiring high levels of 
antibodies against the 19-kDa C-terminal region of the P. vivax merozoite 
surface protein-1. Altogether, our results provide evidence that DARC 
polymorphisms modulate the susceptibility to clinical P. vivax malaria and 
influence the naturally-acquired humoral immune response to malaria blood 
antigens, which may interfere with the efficacy of a future vaccine against 
malaria.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-32254-z
PMCID: PMC6138695
PMID: 30218021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.