---
reference_id: "PMID:28690896"
title: Late Diagnosis of 5-α-Reductase Type 2 Deficiency in an Adolescent Girl with Primary Amenorrhoea.
authors:
- Hummadi AA
- Yahya AO
- Al-Qahtani AM
journal: Sultan Qaboos Univ Med J
year: '2017'
doi: 10.18295/squmj.2016.17.02.014
keywords:
- "3-Oxo-5-alpha-Steroid 4-Dehydrogenase/deficiency, genetics"
- Adolescent
- Amenorrhea/enzymology
- Delayed Diagnosis
- "Disorder of Sex Development, 46,XY/diagnosis, genetics"
- Female
- Humans
- "Hypospadias/diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- Pelvis/diagnostic imaging
- Saudi Arabia
- Sex Characteristics
- Gender-Affirming Surgery
- "Steroid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, genetics"
- Virilism/diagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Late Diagnosis of 5-α-Reductase Type 2 Deficiency in an Adolescent Girl with Primary Amenorrhoea.
**Authors:** Hummadi AA, Yahya AO, Al-Qahtani AM
**Journal:** Sultan Qaboos Univ Med J (2017)
**DOI:** [10.18295/squmj.2016.17.02.014](https://doi.org/10.18295/squmj.2016.17.02.014)

## Content

1. Sultan Qaboos Univ Med J. 2017 May;17(2):e218-e220. doi:
10.18295/squmj.2016.17.02.014. Epub 2017 Jun 20.

Late Diagnosis of 5-α-Reductase Type 2 Deficiency in an Adolescent Girl with
Primary Amenorrhoea.

Hummadi AA(1), Yahya AO(1), Al-Qahtani AM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology & Internal Medicine, King Fahad Central Hospital,
Jizan, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Family & Community Medicine, College of Medicine, Najran
University, Najran, Saudi Arabia.

Deficiency of the 5-α-reductase enzyme has been found to affect male sexual
development. We report an 18-year-old patient who was referred to an
endocrinology clinic in Jizan, Saudi Arabia, in April 2014 with primary
amenorrhoea, virilisation and a lack of secondary sex characteristics. As female
external genitalia were present at birth, she had been raised as a female.
Magnetic resonance imaging revealed no uterine or ovarian tissue in the pelvis
and the presence of a scrotal sac. She was diagnosed with 5-α-reductase type 2
deficiency, a 46,XY disorder of sexual development. Typically, affected males
have pseudovaginal perineoscrotal hypospadias and ambiguous genitalia at birth.
Individuals who have been raised as female manifest characteristics of
virilisation at puberty, including deepening of the vocal tone, phallus
enlargement, scrotal hyperpigmentation and increased muscle mass.

DOI: 10.18295/squmj.2016.17.02.014
PMCID: PMC5488825
PMID: 28690896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
