---
reference_id: "PMID:34922394"
title: Clinical Significance of Insulin Peptide-specific Interferon-γ-related Immune Responses in Ketosis-prone Type 2 Diabetes.
authors:
- Satomura A
- Oikawa Y
- Haisa A
- Suzuki S
- Nakanishi S
- Katsuki T
- Shimada A
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1210/clinem/dgab912
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Significance of Insulin Peptide-specific Interferon-γ-related Immune Responses in Ketosis-prone Type 2 Diabetes.
**Authors:** Satomura A, Oikawa Y, Haisa A, Suzuki S, Nakanishi S, Katsuki T, Shimada A
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1210/clinem/dgab912](https://doi.org/10.1210/clinem/dgab912)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2022 Apr 19;107(5):e2124-e2132. doi: 
10.1210/clinem/dgab912.

Clinical Significance of Insulin Peptide-specific Interferon-γ-related Immune 
Responses in Ketosis-prone Type 2 Diabetes.

Satomura A(1), Oikawa Y(1), Haisa A(1), Suzuki S(1), Nakanishi S(1), Katsuki 
T(2), Shimada A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, School of Medicine, Saitama Medical 
University, Saitama 350-0495, Japan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Saiseikai Central Hospital, Tokyo 
108-0073, Japan.

CONTEXT: Unprovoked A-β+ ketosis-prone type 2 diabetes (KPD) is characterized by 
the sudden onset of diabetic ketosis/ketoacidosis (DK/DKA) without precipitating 
factors, negative anti-islet autoantibodies ("A-"), and preservation of β-cell 
function ("β+") after recovery from DKA. Although this phenotype often appears 
with acute hyperglycemia and DK/DKA just like acute-onset type 1 diabetes 
(AT1D), the involvement of anti-islet immune responses remains unknown.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to clarify the immunological role of insulin-associated 
molecules in unprovoked A-β+ KPD.
METHODS: In this cross-sectional study, blood samples from 75 participants (42 
with AT1D and 33 with KPD) were evaluated for interferon (IFN)-γ-secreting 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) reactive to 4 insulin B-chain amino 
acid 9-23-related peptides (B:9-23rPep) using an enzyme-linked immunospot 
(ELISpot) assay.
RESULTS: Overall, 36.4% (12/33) of KPD participants showed positive IFN-γ 
ELISpot assay results; the positivity rate in KPD was similar to that in AT1D 
(38.1%; 16/42) and statistically significantly higher than the previously 
reported rate in type 2 diabetes (8%; 2/25; P < .0167). Moreover, 
B:9-23rPep-specific IFN-γ-producing PBMC frequency was negatively correlated 
with age and ad lib serum C-peptide levels in all KPD participants and 
positively correlated with glycated hemoglobin A1c level in KPD participants 
with positive IFN-γ ELISpot results.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest the involvement of B:9-23rPep-specific 
IFN-γ-related immunoreactivity in the pathophysiology of some unprovoked A-β+ 
KPD. Moreover, increased immunoreactivity may reflect transiently decreased 
β-cell function and increased disease activity at the onset of DK/DKA, thereby 
playing a key role in DK/DKA development in this KPD phenotype.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Endocrine Society. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1210/clinem/dgab912
PMID: 34922394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]