---
reference_id: "PMID:30106381"
title: Activity-dependent neuroprotective protein deficiency models synaptic and developmental phenotypes of autism-like syndrome.
authors:
- Hacohen-Kleiman G
- Sragovich S
- Karmon G
- Gao AYL
- Grigg I
- Pasmanik-Chor M
- Le A
- Korenková V
- McKinney RA
- Gozes I
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1172/JCI98199
keywords:
- Amino Acid Motifs
- Animals
- "Autistic Disorder/genetics, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Behavior, Animal"
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- "Cell Membrane/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Dendritic Spines/metabolism, pathology"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Homeodomain Proteins
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Microtubules/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Models, Neurological"
- Mutation
- Naphthoquinones/pharmacology
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/deficiency
- "Synapses/metabolism, pathology"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Activity-dependent neuroprotective protein deficiency models synaptic and developmental phenotypes of autism-like syndrome.
**Authors:** Hacohen-Kleiman G, Sragovich S, Karmon G, Gao AYL, Grigg I, Pasmanik-Chor M, Le A, Korenková V, McKinney RA, Gozes I
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI98199](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI98199)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2018 Nov 1;128(11):4956-4969. doi: 10.1172/JCI98199. Epub 2018 
Sep 24.

Activity-dependent neuroprotective protein deficiency models synaptic and 
developmental phenotypes of autism-like syndrome.

Hacohen-Kleiman G(1), Sragovich S(1), Karmon G(1), Gao AYL(2), Grigg I(1), 
Pasmanik-Chor M(3), Le A(2), Korenková V(4), McKinney RA(2), Gozes I(1).

Author information:
(1)The Lily and Avraham Gildor Chair for the Investigation of Growth Factors; 
The Elton Laboratory for Neuroendocrinology; Department of Human Molecular 
Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Sagol School of 
Neuroscience and Adams Super Center for Brain Studies, Tel Aviv University, Tel 
Aviv, Israel.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada.
(3)Bioinformatics Unit, George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv 
University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(4)BIOCEV, Institute of Biotechnology CAS, Vestec, Czech Republic.

Previous findings showed that in mice, complete knockout of activity-dependent 
neuroprotective protein (ADNP) abolishes brain formation, while 
haploinsufficiency (Adnp+/-) causes cognitive impairments. We hypothesized that 
mutations in ADNP lead to a developmental/autistic syndrome in children. Indeed, 
recent phenotypic characterization of children harboring ADNP mutations (ADNP 
syndrome children) revealed global developmental delays and intellectual 
disabilities, including speech and motor dysfunctions. Mechanistically, ADNP 
includes a SIP motif embedded in the ADNP-derived snippet drug candidate NAP 
(NAPVSIPQ, also known as CP201), which binds to microtubule end-binding protein 
3, essential for dendritic spine formation. Here, we established a unique 
neuronal membrane-tagged, GFP-expressing Adnp+/- mouse line allowing in vivo 
synaptic pathology quantification. We discovered that Adnp deficiency reduced 
dendritic spine density and altered synaptic gene expression, both of which were 
partly ameliorated by NAP treatment. Adnp+/-mice further exhibited global 
developmental delays, vocalization impediments, gait and motor dysfunctions, and 
social and object memory impairments, all of which were partially reversed by 
daily NAP administration (systemic/nasal). In conclusion, we have connected 
ADNP-related synaptic pathology to developmental and behavioral outcomes, 
establishing NAP in vivo target engagement and identifying potential biomarkers. 
Together, these studies pave a path toward the clinical development of NAP 
(CP201) for the treatment of ADNP syndrome.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI98199
PMCID: PMC6205398
PMID: 30106381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: IG is the chief scientific 
officer of Coronis Neurosciences, which is developing NAP (CP201) for ADNP 
syndrome. NAP (CP201) use is under patent protection (US patent nos. US7960334, 
US8618043, and US7452867; patent publication no. WO2017130190A1.)