---
reference_id: "PMID:38639096"
title: Single-Cell Gene-Regulatory Networks of Advanced Symptomatic Atherosclerosis.
authors:
- Mocci G
- Sukhavasi K
- Örd T
- Bankier S
- Singha P
- Arasu UT
- Agbabiaje OO
- Mäkinen P
- Ma L
- Hodonsky CJ
- Aherrahrou R
- Muhl L
- Liu J
- Gustafsson S
- Byandelger B
- Wang Y
- Koplev S
- Lendahl U
- Owens GK
- Leeper NJ
- Pasterkamp G
- Vanlandewijck M
- Michoel T
- Ruusalepp A
- Hao K
- Ylä-Herttuala S
- Väli M
- Järve H
- Mokry M
- Civelek M
- Miller CJ
- Kovacic JC
- Kaikkonen MU
- Betsholtz C
- Björkegren JLM
journal: Circ Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.123.323184
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single-Cell Gene-Regulatory Networks of Advanced Symptomatic Atherosclerosis.
**Authors:** Mocci G, Sukhavasi K, Örd T, Bankier S, Singha P, Arasu UT, Agbabiaje OO, Mäkinen P, Ma L, Hodonsky CJ, Aherrahrou R, Muhl L, Liu J, Gustafsson S, Byandelger B, Wang Y, Koplev S, Lendahl U, Owens GK, Leeper NJ, Pasterkamp G, Vanlandewijck M, Michoel T, Ruusalepp A, Hao K, Ylä-Herttuala S, Väli M, Järve H, Mokry M, Civelek M, Miller CJ, Kovacic JC, Kaikkonen MU, Betsholtz C, Björkegren JLM
**Journal:** Circ Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.123.323184](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.123.323184)

## Content

1. Circ Res. 2024 May 24;134(11):1405-1423. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.123.323184. 
Epub 2024 Apr 19.

Single-Cell Gene-Regulatory Networks of Advanced Symptomatic Atherosclerosis.

Mocci G(#)(1), Sukhavasi K(#)(2), Örd T(3), Bankier S(4), Singha P(3), Arasu 
UT(3), Agbabiaje OO(3), Mäkinen P(3), Ma L(5), Hodonsky CJ(6)(7), Aherrahrou 
R(7)(8), Muhl L(1), Liu J(1), Gustafsson S(1), Byandelger B(1), Wang Y(9)(10), 
Koplev S(5)(11), Lendahl U(1), Owens GK(6), Leeper NJ(9)(10), Pasterkamp 
G(12)(13), Vanlandewijck M(1), Michoel T(4), Ruusalepp A(2), Hao K(5), 
Ylä-Herttuala S(3), Väli M(14)(15), Järve H(2), Mokry M(3)(12), Civelek M(7)(8), 
Miller CJ(6), Kovacic JC(16)(17)(18), Kaikkonen MU(#)(3), Betsholtz C(#)(1)(14), 
Björkegren JLM(1)(5)(19).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (Huddinge), Karolinska Institutet, Sweden (G.M., L. 
Muhl, J.L., S.G., B.B., U.L., M.V., C.B., J.L.M.B.).
(2)Department of Cardiac Surgery and The Heart Clinic, Tartu University Hospital 
and Department of Cardiology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Tartu University, 
Estonia (K.S., A.R., H.J.).
(3)A. I. Virtanen Institute for Molecular Sciences, University of Eastern 
Finland, Kuopio (T.O., P.S., U.T.A., O.O.A., P.M., S.Y.-H., M.U.K.).
(4)Computational Biology Unit, Department of Informatics, University of Bergen, 
Norway (S.B., T.M.).
(5)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Institute of Genomics and 
Multiscale Biology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York (L. Ma, 
S.K., K.H., J.L.M.B.).
(6)Robert M. Berne Cardiovascular Research Center (C.J.H., G.K.O., C.J.M.), 
University of Virginia, Charlottesville.
(7)Center for Public Health Genomics (C.J.H., R.A., M.C.), University of 
Virginia, Charlottesville.
(8)Department of Biomedical Engineering (R.A., M.C.), University of Virginia, 
Charlottesville.
(9)Division of Vascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, Stanford University 
School of Medicine, CA (Y.W., N.J.L.).
(10)Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University, CA (Y.W., N.J.L.).
(11)Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Li Ka Shing 
Centre, United Kingdom (S.K.).
(12)Laboratory of Experimental Cardiology (G.P., M.M.), University Medical 
Center Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(13)Central Diagnostics Laboratory (G.P., M.M.), University Medical Center 
Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(14)Department of Immunology, Genetics, and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, 
Uppsala University, Sweden (M.V., C.B.).
(15)Department of Pathological anatomy and Forensic medicine, Institute of 
Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, Estonia (M.V.).
(16)Cardiovascular Research Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York (J.C.K.).
(17)Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, Darlinghurst, Australia (J.C.K.).
(18)St. Vincent's Clinical School, University of NSW, Sydney, Australia 
(J.C.K.).
(19)Clinical Gene Networks AB, Stockholm, Sweden (J.L.M.B.).
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2024 May 24;134(11):1424-1426. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.124.324239.

BACKGROUND: While our understanding of the single-cell gene expression patterns 
underlying the transformation of vascular cell types during the progression of 
atherosclerosis is rapidly improving, the clinical and pathophysiological 
relevance of these changes remains poorly understood.
METHODS: Single-cell RNA sequencing data generated with SmartSeq2 (≈8000 
genes/cell) in 16 588 single cells isolated during atherosclerosis progression 
in Ldlr-/-Apob100/100 mice with human-like plasma lipoproteins and from humans 
with asymptomatic and symptomatic carotid plaques was clustered into multiple 
subtypes. For clinical and pathophysiological context, the advanced-stage and 
symptomatic subtype clusters were integrated with 135 tissue-specific 
(atherosclerotic aortic wall, mammary artery, liver, skeletal muscle, and 
visceral and subcutaneous, fat) gene-regulatory networks (GRNs) inferred from 
600 coronary artery disease patients in the STARNET (Stockholm-Tartu 
Atherosclerosis Reverse Network Engineering Task) study.
RESULTS: Advanced stages of atherosclerosis progression and symptomatic carotid 
plaques were largely characterized by 3 smooth muscle cells (SMCs), and 3 
macrophage subtype clusters with extracellular matrix organization/osteogenic 
(SMC), and M1-type proinflammatory/Trem2-high lipid-associated (macrophage) 
phenotypes. Integrative analysis of these 6 clusters with STARNET revealed 
significant enrichments of 3 arterial wall GRNs: GRN33 (macrophage), GRN39 
(SMC), and GRN122 (macrophage) with major contributions to coronary artery 
disease heritability and strong associations with clinical scores of coronary 
atherosclerosis severity. The presence and pathophysiological relevance of GRN39 
were verified in 5 independent RNAseq data sets obtained from the human coronary 
and aortic artery, and primary SMCs and by targeting its top-key drivers, FRZB 
and ALCAM in cultured human coronary artery SMCs.
CONCLUSIONS: By identifying and integrating the most gene-rich single-cell 
subclusters of atherosclerosis to date with a coronary artery disease framework 
of GRNs, GRN39 was identified and independently validated as being critical for 
the transformation of contractile SMCs into an osteogenic phenotype promoting 
advanced, symptomatic atherosclerosis.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.123.323184
PMCID: PMC11122742
PMID: 38639096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures J.L.M. Björkegren and A. Ruusalepp 
are shareholders of Clinical Gene Networks AB (CGN) that has an invested 
interest in STARNET.