---
reference_id: "PMID:30837697"
title: Atypical COL3A1 variants (glutamic acid to lysine) cause vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome with a consistent phenotype of tissue fragility and skin hyperextensibility.
authors:
- Ghali N
- Baker D
- Brady AF
- Burrows N
- Cervi E
- Cilliers D
- Frank M
- Germain DP
- Hulmes DJS
- Jacquemont ML
- Kannu P
- Lefroy H
- Legrand A
- Pope FM
- Robertson L
- Vandersteen A
- von Klemperer K
- Warburton R
- Whiteford M
- van Dijk FS
journal: Genet Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41436-019-0470-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atypical COL3A1 variants (glutamic acid to lysine) cause vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome with a consistent phenotype of tissue fragility and skin hyperextensibility.
**Authors:** Ghali N, Baker D, Brady AF, Burrows N, Cervi E, Cilliers D, Frank M, Germain DP, Hulmes DJS, Jacquemont ML, Kannu P, Lefroy H, Legrand A, Pope FM, Robertson L, Vandersteen A, von Klemperer K, Warburton R, Whiteford M, van Dijk FS
**Journal:** Genet Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41436-019-0470-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41436-019-0470-9)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2019 Sep;21(9):2081-2091. doi: 10.1038/s41436-019-0470-9. Epub 2019
 Mar 6.

Atypical COL3A1 variants (glutamic acid to lysine) cause vascular Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome with a consistent phenotype of tissue fragility and skin 
hyperextensibility.

Ghali N(1), Baker D(2), Brady AF(3), Burrows N(4), Cervi E(5), Cilliers D(6), 
Frank M(7), Germain DP(8), Hulmes DJS(9), Jacquemont ML(10), Kannu P(11), Lefroy 
H(6), Legrand A(12), Pope FM(13), Robertson L(14), Vandersteen A(15), von 
Klemperer K(16), Warburton R(2), Whiteford M(17), van Dijk FS(3).

Author information:
(1)Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome National Diagnostic Service London, North West Thames 
Regional Genetics Service, London North West Healthcare University NHS Trust, 
Harrow, Middlesex, UK. neeti.ghali@nhs.net.
(2)Connective Tissue Disorders Service, Sheffield Diagnostic Genetics Service, 
Sheffield, UK.
(3)Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome National Diagnostic Service London, North West Thames 
Regional Genetics Service, London North West Healthcare University NHS Trust, 
Harrow, Middlesex, UK.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust, Cambridge, UK.
(5)Centre of Inherited Cardiovascular Diseases, Great Ormond Street Hospital NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(6)Oxford Centre for Genomic Medicine, Oxford University NHS Foundation Trust, 
Oxford, UK.
(7)AP-HP Hopital Europeen Georges Pompidou, Departement de Genetique et Centre 
de Reference des Maladies Vasculaires Rares, Paris, France.
(8)Division of Medical Genetics, University of Versailles, Paris-Saclay 
University, Montigny, France.
(9)UMR5305, CNRS / Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Lyon, France.
(10)Medical Genetics Unit, CHU La Réunion, Saint-Pierre, France.
(11)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(12)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, 
Centre de Référence des Maladies Vasculaires Rares, Paris, France.
(13)Department of Dermatology, Chelsea & Westminster Hospital NHS Foundation 
Trust, London, UK.
(14)Department of Clinical Genetics, Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, Scotland, UK.
(15)Maritime Medical Genetics Service, IWK Health Centre, Halifax, NS, Canada.
(16)Department of Cardiology, St Barthlomew's Hospital, London, UK.
(17)Clinical Genetics West of Scotland Regional Genetics Service, Queen 
Elizabeth University Hospital Glasgow, Scotland, UK.

PURPOSE: The Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDS) are a group of rare inherited 
connective tissue disorders. Vascular EDS (vEDS) is caused by pathogenic 
variants in COL3A1, most frequently glycine substitutions. We describe the 
phenotype of the largest series of vEDS patients with glutamic acid to lysine 
substitutions (Glu>Lys) in COL3A1, which were all previously considered to be 
variants of unknown significance.
METHODS: Clinical and molecular data for seven families with three different 
Glu>Lys substitutions in COL3A1 were analyzed.
RESULTS: These Glu>Lys variants were reclassified from variants of unknown 
significance to either pathogenic or likely pathogenic in accordance with 
American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics guidelines. All individuals 
with these atypical variants exhibited skin hyperextensibility as seen in 
individuals with classical EDS and classical-like EDS and evidence of tissue 
fragility as seen in individuals with vEDS.
CONCLUSION: The clinical data demonstrate the overlap between the different EDS 
subtypes and underline the importance of next-generation sequencing gene panel 
analysis. The three different Glu>Lys variants point toward a new variant type 
in COL3A1 causative of vEDS, which has consistent clinical features. This is 
important knowledge for COL3A1 variant interpretation. Further follow-up data 
are required to establish the severity of tissue fragility complications 
compared with patients with other recognized molecular causes of vEDS.

DOI: 10.1038/s41436-019-0470-9
PMID: 30837697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]