---
reference_id: "PMID:34800169"
title: Neurofilament light in plasma is a potential biomarker of central nervous system involvement in systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Lauvsnes MB
- Zetterberg H
- Blennow K
- Kvaløy JT
- Tjensvoll AB
- Maroni S
- Beyer MK
- Greve OJ
- Kvivik I
- Alves G
- Gøransson LG
- Harboe E
- Hirohata S
- Omdal R
journal: J Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-021-10893-z
keywords:
- Albumins
- Biomarkers/blood
- Central Nervous System/physiopathology
- Creatinine
- Humans
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/complications, diagnosis"
- "Neurofilament Proteins/blood, cerebrospinal fluid"
- White Matter
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurofilament light in plasma is a potential biomarker of central nervous system involvement in systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Lauvsnes MB, Zetterberg H, Blennow K, Kvaløy JT, Tjensvoll AB, Maroni S, Beyer MK, Greve OJ, Kvivik I, Alves G, Gøransson LG, Harboe E, Hirohata S, Omdal R
**Journal:** J Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-021-10893-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-021-10893-z)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2022 Jun;269(6):3064-3074. doi: 10.1007/s00415-021-10893-z. Epub
2021  Nov 20.

Neurofilament light in plasma is a potential biomarker of central nervous system
involvement in systemic lupus erythematosus.

Lauvsnes MB(1), Zetterberg H(2)(3)(4)(5), Blennow K(2)(3), Kvaløy JT(6)(7),
Tjensvoll AB(8), Maroni S(9), Beyer MK(10)(11), Greve OJ(12), Kvivik I(6), Alves
G(8)(13)(14), Gøransson LG(15)(16), Harboe E(15), Hirohata S(17), Omdal
R(18)(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Stavanger University Hospital, Pb. 8100 Forus,
4068, Stavanger, Norway. mariaboge@hotmail.com.
(2)Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Mölndal,
Sweden.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and
Physiology, The Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Mölndal,
Sweden.
(4)UK Dementia Research Institute at UCL, London, UK.
(5)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Institute of Neurology, London,
UK.
(6)Research Department, Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger, Norway.
(7)Department of Mathematics and Physics, Bioscience and Environmental
Engineering, University of Stavanger, Stavanger, Norway.
(8)Department of Neurology, Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger, Norway.
(9)Clinical Neuropsychology Unit, Division of Psychiatry, Stavanger University
Hospital, Stavanger, Norway.
(10)Instiute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(11)Division of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo,
Norway.
(12)Department of Radiology, Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger, Norway.
(13)The Norwegian Centre for Movement Disorders, Stavanger University Hospital,
Stavanger, Norway.
(14)Department of Chemistry, Bioscience and Environmental Engineering,
University of Stavanger, Stavanger, Norway.
(15)Department of Internal Medicine, Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger,
Norway.
(16)Department of Clinical Science, Faculty of Medicine, University of Bergen,
Bergen, Norway.
(17)Department of Rheumatology and Infectious Diseases, Kitasato University
School of Medicine, Sagamihara, Japan.
(18)Department of Rheumatology, Stavanger University Hospital, Pb. 8100 Forus,
4068, Stavanger, Norway.

Erratum in
    J Neurol. 2024 May;271(5):2926-2927. doi: 10.1007/s00415-024-12238-y.

BACKGROUND: Neuropsychiatric manifestations (NP) are common in systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE). However, the pathophysiological mechanisms are not
completely understood. Neurofilament light protein (NfL) is part of the neuronal
cytoskeleton. Increased NfL concentrations, reflecting neurodegeneration, is
observed in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in several neurodegenerative and
neuroinflammatory conditions. We aimed to explore if plasma NfL could serve as a
biomarker for central nervous system (CNS) involvement in SLE.
METHODS: Sixty-seven patients with SLE underwent neurological examination; 52
underwent lumbar puncture, while 62 underwent cerebral magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI). We measured selected auto-antibodies and other laboratory
variables postulated to have roles in NP pathophysiology in the blood and/or
CSF. We used SPM12 software for MRI voxel-based morphometry.
RESULTS: Age-adjusted linear regression analyses revealed increased plasma NfL
concentrations with increasing creatinine (β = 0.01, p < 0.001) and Q-albumin
(β = 0.07, p = 0.008). We observed higher plasma NfL concentrations in patients
with a history of seizures (β = 0.57, p = 0.014), impaired motor function
(β = 0.36, p = 0.008), increasing disease activity (β = 0.04, p = 0.008), and
organ damage (β = 0.10, p = 0.002). Voxel-based morphometry suggested an
association between increasing plasma NfL concentrations and the loss of
cerebral white matter in the corpus callosum and hippocampal gray matter.
CONCLUSION: Increased plasma NfL concentrations were associated with some
abnormal neurological, cognitive, and neuroimaging findings. However, plasma NfL
was also influenced by other factors, such as damage accrual, creatinine, and
Q-albumin, thereby obscuring the interpretation of how plasma NfL reflects CNS
involvement. Taken together, NfL in CSF seems a better marker of neuronal injury
than plasma NfL in patients with SLE.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-021-10893-z
PMID: 34800169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
