---
reference_id: "PMID:40104258"
title: "Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease: a clinical review."
authors:
- Deshwal H
- Sarkar S
- Basu A
- Jalil BA
journal: Breathe (Sheff)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1183/20734735.0098-2024
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease: a clinical review.
**Authors:** Deshwal H, Sarkar S, Basu A, Jalil BA
**Journal:** Breathe (Sheff) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1183/20734735.0098-2024](https://doi.org/10.1183/20734735.0098-2024)

## Content

1. Breathe (Sheff). 2025 Mar 18;21(1):240098. doi: 10.1183/20734735.0098-2024. 
eCollection 2025 Jan.

Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease: a clinical review.

Deshwal H(1), Sarkar S(1), Basu A(2), Jalil BA(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Sleep and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, West Virginia University School of Medicine, Morgantown, WV, USA.
(2)Cardiothoracic and Surgical Pathology, Department of Anatomic Pathology, 
Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Heart and Vascular Institute, West Virginia University School of Medicine, 
Morgantown, WV, USA.

Pulmonary vasculopathy presents as a spectrum of diseases affecting the 
precapillary pulmonary arterioles, the capillaries and the venules. Pulmonary 
veno-occlusive disease (PVOD) is classified under group 1 pulmonary arterial 
hypertension (PAH) as subgroup 1.5 (PAH with features of capillary/venous 
involvement), and represents a progressive and fatal spectrum of pulmonary 
vascular disorders. PVOD and pulmonary capillary haemangiomatosis (PCH) can be 
clinically indistinguishable and often coexist, along with the same risk factors 
and genetic alterations; they are referred to together as PVOD/PCH in the 
literature. For brevity, we use the clinical term PVOD in this article. PVOD 
cannot be distinguished from other forms of PAH based on symptoms and 
haemodynamics. Risk factors include exposure to toxins/chemotherapeutic drugs 
and genetic mutation in the EIF2AK4 gene. Radiographic features such as 
mediastinal adenopathy, centrilobular ground-glass opacities, and interlobular 
septal thickening, along with the presence of hypoxia and reduced diffusion 
capacity of the lung may be required for a clinical diagnosis of PVOD, as lung 
biopsy carries a high risk for bleeding. Characteristic histological findings 
include narrowing/occlusion of small pulmonary veins. The development of 
pulmonary oedema with pulmonary vasodilator therapy limits therapeutic options 
for PVOD. With limited treatment options, lung transplantation remains the only 
curative treatment.

Copyright ©ERS 2025.

DOI: 10.1183/20734735.0098-2024
PMCID: PMC11915124
PMID: 40104258

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: H. Deshwal, S. Sarkar, A. 
Basu and B.A. Jalil have no conflict of interest or financial disclosures to 
declare for this manuscript.