---
reference_id: "PMID:34582479"
title: "Knocking out TMEM38B in human foetal osteoblasts hFOB 1.19 by CRISPR/Cas9: A model for recessive OI type XIV."
authors:
- Leoni L
- Tonelli F
- Besio R
- Gioia R
- Moccia F
- Rossi A
- Forlino A
journal: PLoS One
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0257254
keywords:
- Animals
- CRISPR-Cas Systems
- Calcium/metabolism
- Cell Line
- Cell Proliferation
- Collagen/chemistry
- Electrophysiology
- Extracellular Matrix/metabolism
- Gene Knockout Techniques
- Humans
- In Vitro Techniques
- Ion Channels/genetics
- Mice
- Mutation
- Osteoblasts/metabolism
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Knocking out TMEM38B in human foetal osteoblasts hFOB 1.19 by CRISPR/Cas9: A model for recessive OI type XIV.
**Authors:** Leoni L, Tonelli F, Besio R, Gioia R, Moccia F, Rossi A, Forlino A
**Journal:** PLoS One (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0257254](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0257254)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2021 Sep 28;16(9):e0257254. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0257254. 
eCollection 2021.

Knocking out TMEM38B in human foetal osteoblasts hFOB 1.19 by CRISPR/Cas9: A 
model for recessive OI type XIV.

Leoni L(1), Tonelli F(1), Besio R(1), Gioia R(1), Moccia F(2), Rossi A(1), 
Forlino A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Biochemistry Unit, University of Pavia, 
Pavia, Italy.
(2)Department of Biology and Biotechnology "L. Spallanzani", Laboratory of 
General Physiology, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) type XIV is a rare recessive bone disorder 
characterized by variable degree of severity associated to osteopenia. It is 
caused by mutations in TMEM38B encoding for the trimeric intracellular cation 
channel TRIC-B, specific for potassium and ubiquitously present in the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane. OI type XIV molecular basis is largely 
unknown and, due to the rarity of the disease, the availability of patients' 
osteoblasts is challenging. Thus, CRISPR/Cas9 was used to knock out (KO) TMEM38B 
in the human Foetal Osteoblast hFOB 1.19 to obtain an OI type XIV model. 
CRISPR/Cas9 is a powerful technology to generate in vitro and in vivo models for 
heritable disorders. Its limited cost and ease of use make this technique widely 
applicable in most laboratories. Nevertheless, to fully take advantage of this 
approach, it is important to be aware of its strengths and limitations. Three 
gRNAs were used and several KO clones lacking the expression of TRIC-B were 
obtained. Few clones were validated as good models for the disease since they 
reproduce the altered ER calcium flux, collagen I structure and impaired 
secretion and osteoblastic markers expression detected in patients' cells. 
Impaired proliferation and mineralization in KO clones unveiled the relevance of 
TRIC-B in osteoblasts functionality.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0257254
PMCID: PMC8478202
PMID: 34582479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.