---
reference_id: "PMID:8883642"
title: Imaging findings of the developing temporal bone in fetal specimens.
authors:
- Nemzek WR
- Brodie HA
- Chong BW
- Babcook CJ
- Hecht ST
- Salamat S
- Ellis WG
- Seibert JA
journal: AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
year: '1996'
keywords:
- Cartilage/embryology
- Cochlea/embryology
- "Ear Canal/embryology, growth & development"
- "Ear, Inner/embryology"
- "Ear, Middle/embryology"
- Fetus
- Gestational Age
- Humans
- Labyrinth Diseases/congenital
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Mammography
- "Mastoid/embryology, growth & development"
- Osteogenesis
- "Petrous Bone/embryology, growth & development"
- Semicircular Canals/embryology
- Temporal Bone/embryology
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- "Vestibular Aqueduct/embryology, growth & development"
- "Vestibule, Labyrinth/embryology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Imaging findings of the developing temporal bone in fetal specimens.
**Authors:** Nemzek WR, Brodie HA, Chong BW, Babcook CJ, Hecht ST, Salamat S, Ellis WG, Seibert JA
**Journal:** AJNR Am J Neuroradiol (1996)

## Content

1. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 1996 Sep;17(8):1467-77.

Imaging findings of the developing temporal bone in fetal specimens.

Nemzek WR(1), Brodie HA, Chong BW, Babcook CJ, Hecht ST, Salamat S, Ellis WG, 
Seibert JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, University of California Davis Medical Center, 
Sacramento, USA.

PURPOSE: To trace the development of the normal fetal temporal bone by means of 
plain radiography, MR, and CT.
METHODS: Eighteen formalin-fixed fetal specimens, 13.5 to 24.4 weeks' 
gestational age, were examined with a mammographic plain film technique, CT, and 
MR imaging at 1.5 T. Temporal bone development and ossification were assessed.
RESULTS: The membranous labyrinth grows with amazing rapidity and attains adult 
size by the middle of the gestation period. The cochlea, vestibule, and 
semicircular canals are very prominent and easily recognized on MR images. The 
otic capsule develops from a cartilage model. Ossification of the otic capsule 
proceeds rapidly between 18 and 24 weeks from multiple ossification centers that 
replace the cartilaginous framework. The mastoid, internal auditory canal, 
vestibular aqueduct, and external auditory canal continue to grow after birth.
CONCLUSION: The study of fetal developmental anatomy may lead to a better 
understanding of congenital disorders of the ear. Faster MR scanning techniques 
may provide a method for in utero evaluation of the fetal temporal bone.

PMCID: PMC8338718
PMID: 8883642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]