---
reference_id: "PMID:38765414"
title: "Congenital Dyserythropoietic Anemia Type II With Myelofibrosis in an Adult Patient: A Report of a Rare Case With a Brief Review."
authors:
- Shemawat S
- Bansal S
- Mathur A
- Mittal A
- Sharma M
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.58515
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital Dyserythropoietic Anemia Type II With Myelofibrosis in an Adult Patient: A Report of a Rare Case With a Brief Review.
**Authors:** Shemawat S, Bansal S, Mathur A, Mittal A, Sharma M
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.58515](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.58515)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Apr 18;16(4):e58515. doi: 10.7759/cureus.58515. eCollection 2024 
Apr.

Congenital Dyserythropoietic Anemia Type II With Myelofibrosis in an Adult 
Patient: A Report of a Rare Case With a Brief Review.

Shemawat S(1), Bansal S(1), Mathur A(1), Mittal A(1), Sharma M(1).

Author information:
(1)Pathology, Mahatma Gandhi University of Medical Sciences & Technology, 
Jaipur, IND.

Congenital dyserythropoietic anemias (CDAs) are rare hereditary disorders, of 
which type II CDA is the most common. Mutations in the SEC23B gene located on 
chromosome 20 result in this autosomal recessive disorder. In this case report, 
we present a case of CDA II with unique biopsy findings being detected via 
genetic testing. A female aged 30 years presented with major complaints of 
pallor weakness and easy fatiguability since childhood. The patient gave a 
history of 25 units of blood transfusion, the majority of which were transfused 
during pregnancy, followed by regular transfusions thereafter. On examination, 
all her vitals were in the normal range. Pallor, frontal bossing, and 
malocclusion of teeth were noted. Her laboratory workup showed the following: 
hemoglobin (Hb): 3.7 g/dl; mean corpuscular volume: 83 fl; mean corpuscular Hb: 
29 g/dl; mean corpuscular Hb concentration: 34.9 g/dl; red cell distribution 
width: 30.4%; reticulocyte count (RC): 6.2%; corrected RC: 1.3%; lactate 
dehydrogenase: 441 IU/L; direct Coombs test/indirect Coombs test: negative; 
serum iron: 242 microgram/dl; transferrin saturation: 96.08%; ferritin: 1,880 
ng/ml; and normal high-performance liquid chromatography and eosin-5'-maleimide 
binding test. The peripheral blood film showed normocytic normochromic anemia 
with anisopoikilocytosis in the form of a few spherocytes. No immature cells 
were seen. After obtaining the patient's consent, we performed a hereditary 
hemolytic anemia gene analysis test, which showed homozygous missense variation 
in exon 12 of the SEC23B gene. The bone marrow examination showed hyperplasia in 
the erythroid series with dyserythropoiesis, and surprisingly, myelofibrosis 
grade I-II (WHO 2017) was also observed on biopsy. Patients with CDA type II 
generally present with variable degrees of anemia along with pallor, icterus, 
splenomegaly, gallstones, and iron overload. In our case, the diagnosis of CDA 
type II was made at an adult age. Also, evidence of myelofibrosis was noted in 
our case, making it worth reporting. The use of a hereditary hemolytic anemia 
gene analysis panel test came as a rescue for its exact diagnosis. This case 
report emphasizes the role of molecular genetic testing for early and accurate 
diagnosis, which, in turn, could help in appropriate treatment planning and 
proper genetic counseling. The prevalence of CDA type II is still vaguely known; 
hence, extensive workup of persistent anemias and proper follow-up would be 
beneficial.

Copyright © 2024, Shemawat et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.58515
PMCID: PMC11101602
PMID: 38765414

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.