---
reference_id: "PMID:11448940"
title: "Mutations in the diastrophic dysplasia sulfate transporter (DTDST) gene: correlation between sulfate transport activity and chondrodysplasia phenotype."
authors:
- Karniski LP
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/10.14.1485
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the diastrophic dysplasia sulfate transporter (DTDST) gene: correlation between sulfate transport activity and chondrodysplasia phenotype.
**Authors:** Karniski LP
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/10.14.1485](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/10.14.1485)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Jul 1;10(14):1485-90. doi: 10.1093/hmg/10.14.1485.

Mutations in the diastrophic dysplasia sulfate transporter (DTDST) gene: 
correlation between sulfate transport activity and chondrodysplasia phenotype.

Karniski LP(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Epithelial Transport, Department of Internal Medicine, Veterans 
Affairs Medical Center and University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA 
52242, USA. lawrence-karniski@uiowa.edu

The diastrophic dysplasia sulfate transporter (DTDST) gene encodes a 
transmembrane protein that transports sulfate into chondrocytes to maintain 
adequate sulfation of proteoglycans. Mutations in this gene are responsible for 
four recessively inherited chondrodysplasias that include diastrophic dysplasia, 
multiple epiphyseal dysplasia, atelosteogenesis type 2 and achondrogenesis 1B 
(ACG-1B). To determine whether the DTDST mutations found in individuals with 
these chondrodysplasias differ functionally from each other, we compared the 
sulfate transport activity of 11 reported DTDST mutations. Five mutations, 
G255E, Delta a1751, L483P, R178X and N425D, had minimal sulfate transport 
function following expression in Xenopus laevis oocytes. Two mutations, Delta 
V340 and R279W, transported sulfate at rates of 17 and 32%, respectively, of 
wild-type DTDST. Four mutations, A715V, C653S, Q454P and G678V, had rates of 
sulfate transport nearly equal to that of wild-type DTDST. Transport kinetics 
were not different among the four mutations with near-normal sulfate transport 
function and wild-type DTDST. When the sulfate transport function of the 
different DTDST mutations are grouped according to the general phenotypes, 
individuals with the most severe form, ACG-1B, tend to be homozygous for null 
mutations, individuals with the moderately severe atelosteogenesis type 2 have 
at least one allele with a loss-of-function mutation, and individuals with the 
mildest forms are typically homozygous for mutations with residual sulfate 
transport function. However, in the X.laevis oocyte expression system, the 
correlation between residual transport function and the severity of phenotype 
was not absolute, suggesting that factors in addition to the intrinsic sulfate 
transport properties of the DTDST protein may influence the phenotype in 
individuals with DTDST mutations.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/10.14.1485
PMID: 11448940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]