---
reference_id: PMID:17023659
title: Ubiquitinated TDP-43 in frontotemporal lobar degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
authors:
- Neumann M
- Sampathu DM
- Kwong LK
- Truax AC
- Micsenyi MC
- Chou TT
- Bruce J
- Schuck T
- Grossman M
- Clark CM
- McCluskey LF
- Miller BL
- Masliah E
- Mackenzie IR
- Feldman H
- Feiden W
- Kretzschmar HA
- Trojanowski JQ
- Lee VM
journal: Science
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1126/science.1134108
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/metabolism, pathology"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal"
- Brain Chemistry
- "Cerebral Cortex/chemistry, pathology"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/analysis, chemistry, genetics, immunology"
- "Dementia/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- "Hippocampus/chemistry, pathology"
- Humans
- Immunoblotting
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Motor Neurons/chemistry, pathology"
- "Neurons/chemistry, pathology"
- Peptide Fragments/chemistry
- Phosphorylation
- "Spinal Cord/chemistry, pathology"
- Ubiquitin/analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ubiquitinated TDP-43 in frontotemporal lobar degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
**Authors:** Neumann M, Sampathu DM, Kwong LK, Truax AC, Micsenyi MC, Chou TT, Bruce J, Schuck T, Grossman M, Clark CM, McCluskey LF, Miller BL, Masliah E, Mackenzie IR, Feldman H, Feiden W, Kretzschmar HA, Trojanowski JQ, Lee VM
**Journal:** Science (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1134108](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1134108)

## Content

1. Science. 2006 Oct 6;314(5796):130-3. doi: 10.1126/science.1134108.

Ubiquitinated TDP-43 in frontotemporal lobar degeneration and amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis.

Neumann M(1), Sampathu DM, Kwong LK, Truax AC, Micsenyi MC, Chou TT, Bruce J, 
Schuck T, Grossman M, Clark CM, McCluskey LF, Miller BL, Masliah E, Mackenzie 
IR, Feldman H, Feiden W, Kretzschmar HA, Trojanowski JQ, Lee VM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2006 Oct 6;314(5796):42-3. doi: 10.1126/science.314.5796.42.

Ubiquitin-positive, tau- and alpha-synuclein-negative inclusions are hallmarks 
of frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-positive inclusions and 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Although the identity of the ubiquitinated 
protein specific to either disorder was unknown, we showed that TDP-43 is the 
major disease protein in both disorders. Pathologic TDP-43 was 
hyper-phosphorylated, ubiquitinated, and cleaved to generate C-terminal 
fragments and was recovered only from affected central nervous system regions, 
including hippocampus, neocortex, and spinal cord. TDP-43 represents the common 
pathologic substrate linking these neurodegenerative disorders.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1134108
PMID: 17023659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]