---
reference_id: "PMID:38085235"
title: Lentiviral Gene Therapy for Mucopolysaccharidosis II with Tagged Iduronate 2-Sulfatase Prevents Life-Threatening Pathology in Peripheral Tissues But Fails to Correct Cartilage.
authors:
- Catalano F
- Vlaar EC
- Dammou Z
- Katsavelis D
- Huizer TF
- Zundo G
- Hoogeveen-Westerveld M
- Oussoren E
- van den Hout HJMP
- Schaaf G
- Pike-Overzet K
- Staal FJT
- van der Ploeg AT
- Pijnappel WWMP
journal: Hum Gene Ther
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1089/hum.2023.177
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- Mucopolysaccharidosis II/genetics
- Iduronic Acid/metabolism
- "Lentivirus/genetics, metabolism"
- Tissue Distribution
- Iduronate Sulfatase/genetics
- Genetic Therapy/methods
- "Cartilage/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lentiviral Gene Therapy for Mucopolysaccharidosis II with Tagged Iduronate 2-Sulfatase Prevents Life-Threatening Pathology in Peripheral Tissues But Fails to Correct Cartilage.
**Authors:** Catalano F, Vlaar EC, Dammou Z, Katsavelis D, Huizer TF, Zundo G, Hoogeveen-Westerveld M, Oussoren E, van den Hout HJMP, Schaaf G, Pike-Overzet K, Staal FJT, van der Ploeg AT, Pijnappel WWMP
**Journal:** Hum Gene Ther (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1089/hum.2023.177](https://doi.org/10.1089/hum.2023.177)

## Content

1. Hum Gene Ther. 2024 Apr;35(7-8):256-268. doi: 10.1089/hum.2023.177. Epub 2024
Feb 2.

Lentiviral Gene Therapy for Mucopolysaccharidosis II with Tagged Iduronate
2-Sulfatase Prevents Life-Threatening Pathology in Peripheral Tissues But Fails
to Correct Cartilage.

Catalano F(1)(2)(3), Vlaar EC(1)(2)(3), Dammou Z(1)(2)(3), Katsavelis
D(1)(2)(3), Huizer TF(1)(2)(3), Zundo G(1)(2)(3), Hoogeveen-Westerveld M(1)(3),
Oussoren E(2)(3), van den Hout HJMP(2)(3), Schaaf G(1)(2)(3), Pike-Overzet K(4),
Staal FJT(4)(5), van der Ploeg AT(2)(3), Pijnappel WWMP(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC University Medical Center,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands.
(3)Center for Lysosomal and Metabolic Diseases, Erasmus MC University Medical
Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Immunology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Deficiency of iduronate 2-sulfatase (IDS) causes Mucopolysaccharidosis type II
(MPS II), a lysosomal storage disorder characterized by systemic accumulation of
glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), leading to a devastating cognitive decline and
life-threatening respiratory and cardiac complications. We previously found that
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell-mediated lentiviral gene therapy
(HSPC-LVGT) employing tagged IDS with insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2) or
ApoE2, but not receptor-associated protein minimal peptide (RAP12x2),
efficiently prevented brain pathology in a murine model of MPS II. In this
study, we report on the effects of HSPC-LVGT on peripheral pathology and we
analyzed IDS biodistribution. We found that HSPC-LVGT with all vectors
completely corrected GAG accumulation and lysosomal pathology in liver, spleen,
kidney, tracheal mucosa, and heart valves. Full correction of tunica media of
the great heart vessels was achieved only with IDS.IGF2co gene therapy, while
the other vectors provided near complete (IDS.ApoE2co) or no (IDSco and
IDS.RAP12x2co) correction. In contrast, tracheal, epiphyseal, and articular
cartilage remained largely uncorrected by all vectors tested. These efficacies
were closely matched by IDS protein levels following HSPC-LVGT. Our results
demonstrate the capability of HSPC-LVGT to correct pathology in tissues of high
clinical relevance, including those of the heart and respiratory system, while
challenges remain for the correction of cartilage pathology.

DOI: 10.1089/hum.2023.177
PMCID: PMC11044872
PMID: 38085235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.T.v.d.P. has received consulting fees from
Sanofi Genzyme and has provided consulting services, participated in advisory
board meetings, and received grants for premarketing studies and research from
industries through agreements between Erasmus MC and the industry. W.W.M.P.P.
and A.T.v.d.P. are advisors of LentiCure B.V., a company for the development of
lentiviral gene therapy. F.C., E.C.V., A.T.v.d.P., and W.W.M.P.P. are inventors
on patents in the field of lentiviral gene therapy.
