---
reference_id: "PMID:36115290"
title: "Deficient mismatch repair/microsatellite unstable colorectal cancer: Diagnosis, prognosis and treatment."
authors:
- Taieb J
- Svrcek M
- Cohen R
- Basile D
- Tougeron D
- Phelip JM
journal: Eur J Cancer
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2022.07.020
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deficient mismatch repair/microsatellite unstable colorectal cancer: Diagnosis, prognosis and treatment.
**Authors:** Taieb J, Svrcek M, Cohen R, Basile D, Tougeron D, Phelip JM
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejca.2022.07.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2022.07.020)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer. 2022 Nov;175:136-157. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2022.07.020. Epub 2022
 Sep 14.

Deficient mismatch repair/microsatellite unstable colorectal cancer: Diagnosis, 
prognosis and treatment.

Taieb J(1), Svrcek M(2), Cohen R(3), Basile D(4), Tougeron D(5), Phelip JM(6).

Author information:
(1)Université Paris-Cité, Department of Gastroenterology and Digestive Oncology, 
Georges Pompidou European Hospital, SIRIC CARPEM, Paris, France. Electronic 
address: jtaieb75@gmail.com.
(2)Sorbonne Université, Department of Pathology, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, AP-HP, 
and INSERM UMRS 938, Équipe Instabilité des Microsatellites et Cancer, Équipe 
Labellisée par la Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer et SIRIC CURAMUS, Centre de 
Recherche Saint Antoine, Paris, France.
(3)Sorbonne Université, Department of Medical Oncology, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, 
AP-HP, and INSERM UMRS 938, Équipe Instabilité des Microsatellites et Cancer, 
Équipe Labellisée par la Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer et SIRIC CURAMUS, 
Centre de Recherche Saint Antoine, Paris, France.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, San Giovanni di Dio Hospital, 88900 Crotone, 
Italy.
(5)Université de Poitiers, Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 
Poitiers University Hospital, Poitiers, France.
(6)University Hospital of Saint Etienne, Saint Etienne, France; Unité HESPER 
EA-7425 Université Jean Monnet/Claude Bernard Lyon 1, France.

Microsatellite unstable (MSI) colorectal cancers (CRCs) are due to DNA mismatch 
repair (MMR) deficiency and occurs in15% of non-metastatic diseases and 5% in 
the metastatic setting. Nearly 30% of MSI CRCs occur in a context of 
constitutional mutation of the MMR system (Lynch syndrome). Others are sporadic 
cancers linked to a hypermethylation of the MLH-1 promoter. The pathogenic 
alterations of MMR genes lead to the accumulation of frequent somatic mutational 
events and these tumours arbour a high antigen burden and are highly infiltrated 
with cytotoxic T-cell lymphocytes. Microsatellite instability/DNA mismatch 
repair deficiency (MSI/dMMR) status has prognostic and predictive implications 
in non-metastatic and metastatic CRCs. The prognostic value of MSI status in 
non-metastatic CRCs has been studied extensively, yet the data are more limited 
for its predictive value in terms of adjuvant chemotherapy efficacy. In both 
cases (metastatic and non-metastatic settings) treatment with immune check-point 
inhibitors (ICIs) have shown a remarkable effectiveness in the context of 
MSI/dMMR status. Indeed, recent data from prospective cohorts and randomised 
trials have shown a dramatical improvement of survival with immunotherapy 
(programmed death-ligand 1 [PD-(L)1]   cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated antigen 
4 [CTLA-4] blockage) in metastatic or non-metastatic MSI/dMMR CRC. In this 
review we report and discuss how and for whom to test for the MSI/dMMR 
phenotype, as well as the prognostic value of this phenotype and the new 
treatment recommendations options for this unique CRC population. Despite their 
efficacy, primary and secondary resistance to immune checkpoint inhibitors 
(ICIs) are observed in more than 50% MSI-H/dMMR CRC patients and in the future 
how to identify these patients and to overcome resistance will be an important 
challenge.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2022.07.020
PMID: 36115290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement JT has received 
honoraria as a speaker or in an advisory role from Amgen, Astellas, BMS, 
Merck-Serono, MSD, Novartis, Pierre Fabre, Roche and Servier. MS has received 
honoraria as a speaker or in an advisory role from BMS, Astellas, Bayer, MSD 
Oncology, Owkin, Sanofi (consulting or advisory role), BMS, Ventana/Roche 
(travel, accommodation, expenses); RC has received honoraria as a speaker or in 
an advisory role from MSD Oncology, Bristol Myers Squibb and Pierre Fabre and 
travel fees from MSD Oncology, Bristol Myers Squibb and MYLAN Medical. DT has 
received honoraria as a speaker or in an advisory role from Amgen, Sandoz, 
Sanofi, BMS, Merck-Serono, MSD, Pierre Fabre, Roche and Servier. DB declares no 
conflict of interest. JMP has received honoraria for speaker or advisory role 
from Amgen, BMS, Sanofi, Merck-Serono, MSD, Pierre Fabre, Roche and Servier.