---
reference_id: "PMID:38564053"
title: "Progressive demyelinating polyneuropathy after hematopoietic cell transplantation in metachromatic leukodystrophy: a case series."
authors:
- Beerepoot S
- Boelens JJ
- Lindemans C
- de Witte MA
- Nierkens S
- Vrancken AFJE
- van der Knaap MS
- Bugiani M
- Wolf NI
journal: J Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-024-12322-3
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Young Adult
- "Demyelinating Diseases/etiology, therapy"
- Disease Progression
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation/adverse effects
- "Leukodystrophy, Metachromatic/therapy"
- "Polyneuropathies/etiology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Progressive demyelinating polyneuropathy after hematopoietic cell transplantation in metachromatic leukodystrophy: a case series.
**Authors:** Beerepoot S, Boelens JJ, Lindemans C, de Witte MA, Nierkens S, Vrancken AFJE, van der Knaap MS, Bugiani M, Wolf NI
**Journal:** J Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-024-12322-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-024-12322-3)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2024 Jul;271(7):4028-4038. doi: 10.1007/s00415-024-12322-3. Epub
2024  Apr 2.

Progressive demyelinating polyneuropathy after hematopoietic cell 
transplantation in metachromatic leukodystrophy: a case series.

Beerepoot S(1)(2)(3)(4), Boelens JJ(3)(5), Lindemans C(4)(6), de Witte MA(7), 
Nierkens S(3)(4), Vrancken AFJE(8), van der Knaap MS(1)(2)(9), Bugiani M(2)(10), 
Wolf NI(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Amsterdam UMC, Department of Child Neurology, Amsterdam Leukodystrophy 
Center, Emma's Children's Hospital, VU University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Neuroscience, Cellular & Molecular Mechanisms, VU University, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Center for Translational Immunology, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)Princess Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Stem Cell Transplant and Cellular Therapies, 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
(6)Regenerative Medicine Institute, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, 
The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Hematology, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(8)Department of Neurology, Brain Centre University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(9)Department of Functional Genomics, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive 
Research, VU University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(10)Amsterdam UMC, Department of Pathology, VU University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(11)Amsterdam UMC, Department of Child Neurology, Amsterdam Leukodystrophy 
Center, Emma's Children's Hospital, VU University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
n.wolf@amsterdamumc.nl.
(12)Neuroscience, Cellular & Molecular Mechanisms, VU University, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. n.wolf@amsterdamumc.nl.

Metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD) is a neuro-metabolic disorder due to 
arylsulfatase A deficiency, causing demyelination of the central and peripheral 
nervous system. Hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) can provide a 
symptomatic and survival benefit for pre-symptomatic and early symptomatic 
patients by stabilizing CNS disease. This case series, however, illustrates the 
occurrence of severely progressive polyneuropathy shortly after HCT in two 
patients with late-infantile, one with late-juvenile, and one with adult MLD, 
leading to the inability to walk or sit without support. The patients had 
demyelinating polyneuropathy before HCT, performed at the ages of 2 years in the 
first two patients and at 14 and 23 years in the other two patients. The 
myeloablative conditioning regimen consisted of busulfan, fludarabine and, in 
one case, rituximab, with anti-thymocyte globulin, cyclosporine, steroids, 
and/or mycophenolate mofetil for GvHD prophylaxis. Polyneuropathy after HCT 
progressed parallel with tapering immunosuppression and paralleled bouts of 
infection and graft-versus-host disease (GvHD). Differential diagnoses included 
MLD progression, neurological GvHD or another (auto)inflammatory cause. 
Laboratory, electroneurography and pathology investigations were inconclusive. 
In two patients, treatment with immunomodulatory drugs led to temporary 
improvement, but not sustained stabilization of polyneuropathy. One patient 
showed recovery to pre-HCT functioning, except for a Holmes-like tremor, for 
which a peripheral origin cannot be excluded. One patient showed marginal 
response to immunosuppressive treatment and died ten months after HCT due to 
respiratory failure. The extensive diagnostic and therapeutic attempts highlight 
the challenge of characterizing and treating progressive polyneuropathy in 
patients with MLD shortly after HCT. We advise to consider repeat 
electro-neurography and possibly peripheral nerve biopsy in such patients. Nerve 
conduction blocks, evidence of the presence of T lymphocytes and macrophages in 
the neuronal and surrounding nerve tissue, and beneficial effects of 
immunomodulatory drugs may indicate a partially (auto)immune-mediated pathology. 
Polyneuropathy may cause major residual disease burden after HCT. MLD patients 
with progressive polyneuropathy could potentially benefit from a more 
intensified immunomodulatory drug regime following HCT, especially at times of 
immune activation.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-024-12322-3
PMCID: PMC11233286
PMID: 38564053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SB, MAW, SN, and AFJEV report no competing 
interests. JJB consulting Bluerock, Sanofi, Sobi, Omeros, SmartImmune, Immusoft, 
Advanced Clinical. CL is advisor in Orchard and Bluebird Bio expertise panels. 
MB is co-investigator to Cerevance and Covance, both within projects or 
remyelinating compounds and without personal payment. MSvdK is co-investigator 
to Ionis (trial in Alexander disease); and consultant to Calico, all without 
personal payment. She has a patent P112686CA00, therapeutic effects of Guanabenz 
treatment in vanishing white matter, to VU University Medical Center. NIW is 
advisor and/or co-investigator for trials in Metachromatic Leukodystrophy and 
other leukodystrophies (Shire/Takeda, Orchard, Ionis, PassageBio, VigilNeuro, 
Sana Biotech), without personal payment.