---
reference_id: "PMID:9590292"
title: SHOX mutations in dyschondrosteosis (Leri-Weill syndrome).
authors:
- Belin V
- Cusin V
- Viot G
- Girlich D
- Toutain A
- Moncla A
- Vekemans M
- Le Merrer M
- Munnich A
- Cormier-Daire V
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1038/ng0198-67
keywords:
- Female
- Genotype
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics
- Pedigree
- Short Stature Homeobox Protein
- "Translocation, Genetic"
- X Chromosome
- Y Chromosome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SHOX mutations in dyschondrosteosis (Leri-Weill syndrome).
**Authors:** Belin V, Cusin V, Viot G, Girlich D, Toutain A, Moncla A, Vekemans M, Le Merrer M, Munnich A, Cormier-Daire V
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0198-67](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0198-67)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1998 May;19(1):67-9. doi: 10.1038/ng0198-67.

SHOX mutations in dyschondrosteosis (Leri-Weill syndrome).

Belin V(1), Cusin V, Viot G, Girlich D, Toutain A, Moncla A, Vekemans M, Le 
Merrer M, Munnich A, Cormier-Daire V.

Author information:
(1)Département de Génétique et Unité de Recherches sur les Handicaps Génétiques 
de l'Enfant INSERM U393, Hôpital des Enfants Malades, Paris, France.

Dyschondrosteosis (DCS) is an autosomal dominant form of mesomelic dysplasia 
with deformity of the forearm (Madelung deformity; ref. 3). Based on the 
observation of XY translocations (p22,q12; refs 4-6) in DCS patients, we tested 
the pseudoautosomal region in eight families with DCS and showed linkage of the 
DCS gene to a microsatellite DNA marker at the DXYS233 locus (Zmax=6.26 at 
theta=0). The short stature homeobox-containing gene (SHOX), involved in 
idiopathic growth retardation and possibly Turner short stature, maps to this 
region and was therefore regarded as a strong candidate gene in DCS. Here, we 
report large-scale deletions (in seven families) and a nonsense mutation (in one 
family) of SHOX in patients with DCS and show that Langer mesomelic dwarfism 
results from homozygous mutations at the DCS locus.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0198-67
PMID: 9590292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]