---
reference_id: "PMID:25516398"
title: "Early-onset heart failure, alopecia, and cutaneous abnormalities associated with a novel compound heterozygous mutation in desmoplakin."
authors:
- Antonov NK
- Kingsbery MY
- Rohena LO
- Lee TM
- Christiano A
- Garzon MC
- Lauren CT
journal: Pediatr Dermatol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/pde.12484
keywords:
- Alopecia/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- Desmoplakins/genetics
- Heart Failure/genetics
- Humans
- "Keratoderma, Palmoplantar/genetics"
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early-onset heart failure, alopecia, and cutaneous abnormalities associated with a novel compound heterozygous mutation in desmoplakin.
**Authors:** Antonov NK, Kingsbery MY, Rohena LO, Lee TM, Christiano A, Garzon MC, Lauren CT
**Journal:** Pediatr Dermatol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pde.12484](https://doi.org/10.1111/pde.12484)

## Content

1. Pediatr Dermatol. 2015 Jan-Feb;32(1):102-8. doi: 10.1111/pde.12484. Epub 2014 
Dec 16.

Early-onset heart failure, alopecia, and cutaneous abnormalities associated with 
a novel compound heterozygous mutation in desmoplakin.

Antonov NK(1), Kingsbery MY, Rohena LO, Lee TM, Christiano A, Garzon MC, Lauren 
CT.

Author information:
(1)College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, New York.

Mutations in the desmosomal protein desmoplakin have been associated with 
various conditions affecting the skin and heart. The prototype is Carvajal 
syndrome, characterized by cardiomyopathy, woolly hair, palmoplantar keratoderma 
(PPK), and skin fragility. We report the case of a 3-year-old boy presenting 
with severe left-sided heart failure with a preceding history of cutaneous 
abnormalities including congenital alopecia, PPK, nail dystrophy, and follicular 
hyperkeratosis on the extensor surfaces. Genetic testing revealed a novel 
combination of two heterozygous mutations in the DSP gene encoding desmoplakin: 
R1400X and R2284X. Both are predicted to be deleterious to protein function. 
This case adds to our understanding of the spectrum of clinical presentations of 
syndromes associated with desmoplakin mutations and highlights the need for 
cardiac examination in patients with characteristic cutaneous findings.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/pde.12484
PMID: 25516398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]