---
reference_id: "PMID:40484382"
title: The phosphatase activity of the PPP2R5D-PP2A holoenzyme modulates liprin-α1 liquid-liquid phase separation.
authors:
- Mayer A
- Derua R
- Spahn E
- Verbinnen I
- Zhang Y
- Guzman M
- Swingle MR
- Wadzinski BE
- Honkanen R
- Janssens V
- Xia H
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2025.110349
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The phosphatase activity of the PPP2R5D-PP2A holoenzyme modulates liprin-α1 liquid-liquid phase separation.
**Authors:** Mayer A, Derua R, Spahn E, Verbinnen I, Zhang Y, Guzman M, Swingle MR, Wadzinski BE, Honkanen R, Janssens V, Xia H
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jbc.2025.110349](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbc.2025.110349)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2025 Jul;301(7):110349. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2025.110349. Epub 2025
 Jun 6.

The phosphatase activity of the PPP2R5D-PP2A holoenzyme modulates liprin-α1 
liquid-liquid phase separation.

Mayer A(1), Derua R(2), Spahn E(3), Verbinnen I(4), Zhang Y(3), Guzman M(5), 
Swingle MR(6), Wadzinski BE(5), Honkanen R(6), Janssens V(7), Xia H(8).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Graduate Program, Department of Neuroscience, University of 
Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Protein Phosphorylation & Proteomics, Department of Cellular & 
Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; Sybioma, KU Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, University of Rochester Medical 
Center, Rochester, New York, USA.
(4)Laboratory of Protein Phosphorylation & Proteomics, Department of Cellular & 
Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; KU Leuven Institute for Rare 
Diseases (Leuven.IRD), Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of South 
Alabama, Mobile, Alabama, USA.
(7)Laboratory of Protein Phosphorylation & Proteomics, Department of Cellular & 
Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; KU Leuven Institute for Rare 
Diseases (Leuven.IRD), Leuven, Belgium. Electronic address: 
veerle.janssens@kuleuven.be.
(8)Neuroscience Graduate Program, Department of Neuroscience, University of 
Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York, USA; Department of Pharmacology 
and Physiology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York, 
USA. Electronic address: Houhui_xia@urmc.rochester.edu.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 Jun 22:2024.06.18.599485. doi: 10.1101/2024.06.18.599485.

Liprin-α1 is a widely expressed scaffolding protein known to regulate cellular 
processes such as cell motility and synaptic transmission through assembly of 
localized higher-order molecular complexes. However, the dynamic regulation of 
these complexes remains poorly understood. Liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) 
is a process that concentrates proteins into cellular nanodomains, facilitating 
efficient spatiotemporal signaling. Whether liprin-α1 undergoes regulated LLPS 
remains unclear. Mass spectrometry-based interactomics identified PPP2R5D, the 
regulatory B56δ subunit of PP2A, as a liprin-α1 interaction partner via a 
canonical short linear motif (SLiM) in its N terminal dimerization domain. 
Mutation of SLiM4 nearly abolished liprin-α1 interaction with PP2A holoenzyme 
and resulted in a significant increase in GFP-liprin-α1 LLPS in HEK293 cells. 
Consistently, GFP-liprin-α1 exhibited increased droplet formation in PPP2R5D KO 
HEK293 cells. Phospho-analysis of liprin-α1 SLiM4 mutant via mass spectrometry 
revealed increased phosphorylation of multiple Ser/Thr sites, including S763, as 
validated by a novel phospho-specific antibody. A liprin-α1 S763E 
phospho-mimetic mutant appeared sufficient to drive LLPS. Expression of the 
PPP2R5D missense variant E420K, recurrently found in Houge-Janssens syndrome 
type 1 compromised suppression of liprin-α1 LLPS, correlating with increased 
liprin-α1 S763 phosphorylation. Mechanistically, a liprin-α1 E942A mutant unable 
to bind liprin-β1 underwent increased LLPS, despite preserved PPP2R5D holoenzyme 
binding. Furthermore, liprin-α1/β1 heterodimerization significantly decreased 
under conditions where liprin-α1 LLPS was promoted, i.e. upon SLiM4 or S763E 
mutation in WT cells, or in PPP2R5D KO and PPP2R5D E420K knock-in cells. Our 
findings identify liprin-β1 and PPP2R5D-PP2A as potent inhibitors of liprin-α1 
LLPS, with PP2A contributing to liprin-α1/β1 heterodimerization via 
phosphorylation of at least liprin-α1 S763.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2025.110349
PMCID: PMC12273559
PMID: 40484382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest I. V. is a junior 
postdoctoral research fellow of the FWO-Vlaanderen (12X4222N) and recipient of a 
PDM fellowship of the Internal Funds of KU Leuven. B. E. W. is co-founder of 
Turkey Creek Biotechnology LLC (Waverly, TN) but no Turkey Creek Biotechnology 
products were used in the present report. The other authors declare that they 
have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.