---
reference_id: "PMID:24495259"
title: Review of findings in prophylactic gynaecological specimens in Lynch syndrome with literature review and recommendations for grossing.
authors:
- Downes MR
- Allo G
- McCluggage WG
- Sy K
- Ferguson SE
- Aronson M
- Pollett A
- Gallinger S
- Bilbily E
- Shaw P
- Clarke BA
journal: Histopathology
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1111/his.12386
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Review of findings in prophylactic gynaecological specimens in Lynch syndrome with literature review and recommendations for grossing.
**Authors:** Downes MR, Allo G, McCluggage WG, Sy K, Ferguson SE, Aronson M, Pollett A, Gallinger S, Bilbily E, Shaw P, Clarke BA
**Journal:** Histopathology (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1111/his.12386](https://doi.org/10.1111/his.12386)

## Content

1. Histopathology. 2014 Aug;65(2):228-39. doi: 10.1111/his.12386. Epub 2014 Apr
16.

Review of findings in prophylactic gynaecological specimens in Lynch syndrome 
with literature review and recommendations for grossing.

Downes MR(1), Allo G, McCluggage WG, Sy K, Ferguson SE, Aronson M, Pollett A, 
Gallinger S, Bilbily E, Shaw P, Clarke BA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada.

AIMS: Prophylactic hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy is being 
increasingly undertaken in patients with Lynch syndrome (LS). The pathological 
features in such specimens are not well described and, unlike the SEE-FIM 
protocol for salpingo-oophorectomy specimens in BRCA1/2 mutation carriers and 
the gastrectomy grossing protocols for patients with CDH1 (E-cadherin) 
mutations, guidelines have not been devised for the grossing of prophylactic 
gynaecological specimens from LS patients. We aimed to review the pathological 
findings in a series of prophylactic gynaecological specimens from LS patients 
and develop guidelines for the grossing of these specimens.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We reviewed the pathological findings in 25 prophylactic 
gynaecological specimens from LS patients and audited the grossing protocols in 
different centres across Ontario, Canada. We found a 32% incidence of 
endometrial carcinoma or a precursor lesion; the two endometrial cancers 
identified were low-grade, low-stage endometrioid adenocarcinomas. To address 
the absence of guidelines for pathological examination, we undertook a 
literature review of gynaecological malignancies and incidental findings in 
prophylactic specimens in LS patients.
CONCLUSION: We provide recommendations regarding the grossing of such specimens 
which includes in-toto examination of the lower uterine segment, endometrium, 
ovaries and fallopian tubes with representative sampling of the cervix.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/his.12386
PMID: 24495259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]