---
reference_id: "PMID:14765194"
title: Mutations in VKORC1 cause warfarin resistance and multiple coagulation factor deficiency type 2.
authors:
- Rost S
- Fregin A
- Ivaskevicius V
- Conzelmann E
- Hörtnagel K
- Pelz HJ
- Lappegard K
- Seifried E
- Scharrer I
- Tuddenham EG
- Müller CR
- Strom TM
- Oldenburg J
journal: Nature
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1038/nature02214
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- COS Cells
- Cell Line
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Coagulation Protein Disorders/enzymology, genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Drug Resistance/genetics
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mixed Function Oxygenases/antagonists & inhibitors, chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, metabolism"
- Rats
- Vitamin K Epoxide Reductases
- Warfarin/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in VKORC1 cause warfarin resistance and multiple coagulation factor deficiency type 2.
**Authors:** Rost S, Fregin A, Ivaskevicius V, Conzelmann E, Hörtnagel K, Pelz HJ, Lappegard K, Seifried E, Scharrer I, Tuddenham EG, Müller CR, Strom TM, Oldenburg J
**Journal:** Nature (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature02214](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature02214)

## Content

1. Nature. 2004 Feb 5;427(6974):537-41. doi: 10.1038/nature02214.

Mutations in VKORC1 cause warfarin resistance and multiple coagulation factor 
deficiency type 2.

Rost S(1), Fregin A, Ivaskevicius V, Conzelmann E, Hörtnagel K, Pelz HJ, 
Lappegard K, Seifried E, Scharrer I, Tuddenham EG, Müller CR, Strom TM, 
Oldenburg J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Würzburg, Biozentrum, Am Hubland, 
97074 Würzburg, Germany.

Comment in
    Nature. 2004 Feb 5;427(6974):493-4. doi: 10.1038/427493a.

Coumarin derivatives such as warfarin represent the therapy of choice for the 
long-term treatment and prevention of thromboembolic events. Coumarins target 
blood coagulation by inhibiting the vitamin K epoxide reductase multiprotein 
complex (VKOR). This complex recycles vitamin K 2,3-epoxide to vitamin K 
hydroquinone, a cofactor that is essential for the post-translational 
gamma-carboxylation of several blood coagulation factors. Despite extensive 
efforts, the components of the VKOR complex have not been identified. The 
complex has been proposed to be involved in two heritable human diseases: 
combined deficiency of vitamin-K-dependent clotting factors type 2 (VKCFD2; 
Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) 607473), and resistance to 
coumarin-type anticoagulant drugs (warfarin resistance, WR; OMIM 122700). Here 
we identify, by using linkage information from three species, the gene vitamin K 
epoxide reductase complex subunit 1 (VKORC1), which encodes a small 
transmembrane protein of the endoplasmic reticulum. VKORC1 contains missense 
mutations in both human disorders and in a warfarin-resistant rat strain. 
Overexpression of wild-type VKORC1, but not VKORC1 carrying the VKCFD2 mutation, 
leads to a marked increase in VKOR activity, which is sensitive to warfarin 
inhibition.

DOI: 10.1038/nature02214
PMID: 14765194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]