---
reference_id: "PMID:36835153"
title: Differential Expression of MED12-Associated Coding RNA Transcripts in Uterine Leiomyomas.
authors:
- Chuang TD
- Gao J
- Quintanilla D
- McSwiggin H
- Boos D
- Yan W
- Khorram O
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms24043742
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Leiomyoma/genetics
- Mediator Complex/genetics
- Mutation
- RNA
- Uterine Neoplasms/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differential Expression of MED12-Associated Coding RNA Transcripts in Uterine Leiomyomas.
**Authors:** Chuang TD, Gao J, Quintanilla D, McSwiggin H, Boos D, Yan W, Khorram O
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms24043742](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24043742)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Feb 13;24(4):3742. doi: 10.3390/ijms24043742.

Differential Expression of MED12-Associated Coding RNA Transcripts in Uterine 
Leiomyomas.

Chuang TD(1)(2), Gao J(2), Quintanilla D(2), McSwiggin H(2), Boos D(2), Yan 
W(2)(3), Khorram O(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, 
Torrance, CA 90502, USA.
(2)The Lundquist Institute for Biomedical Innovation, Torrance, CA 90502, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine at University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90502, USA.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, David Geffen School of Medicine at 
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90502, USA.

Recent studies have demonstrated that somatic MED12 mutations in exon 2 occur at 
a frequency of up to 80% and have a functional role in leiomyoma pathogenesis. 
The objective of this study was to elucidate the expression profile of coding 
RNA transcripts in leiomyomas, with and without these mutations, and their 
paired myometrium. Next-generation RNA sequencing (NGS) was used to 
systematically profile the differentially expressed RNA transcripts from paired 
leiomyomas (n = 19). The differential analysis indicated there are 394 genes 
differentially and aberrantly expressed only in the mutated tumors. These genes 
were predominantly involved in the regulation of extracellular constituents. Of 
the differentially expressed genes that overlapped in the two comparison groups, 
the magnitude of change in gene expression was greater for many genes in tumors 
bearing MED12 mutations. Although the myometrium did not express MED12 
mutations, there were marked differences in the transcriptome landscape of the 
myometrium from mutated and non-mutated specimens, with genes regulating the 
response to oxygen-containing compounds being most altered. In conclusion, MED12 
mutations have profound effects on the expression of genes pivotal to leiomyoma 
pathogenesis in the tumor and the myometrium which could alter tumor 
characteristics and growth potential.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24043742
PMCID: PMC9960582
PMID: 36835153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have nothing to declare and no 
competing financial interest.