---
reference_id: "PMID:30345884"
title: Maintenance Olaparib in Patients with Newly Diagnosed Advanced Ovarian Cancer.
authors:
- Moore K
- Colombo N
- Scambia G
- Kim BG
- Oaknin A
- Friedlander M
- Lisyanskaya A
- Floquet A
- Leary A
- Sonke GS
- Gourley C
- Banerjee S
- Oza A
- González-Martín A
- Aghajanian C
- Bradley W
- Mathews C
- Liu J
- Lowe ES
- Bloomfield R
- DiSilvestro P
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1810858
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Maintenance Olaparib in Patients with Newly Diagnosed Advanced Ovarian Cancer.
**Authors:** Moore K, Colombo N, Scambia G, Kim BG, Oaknin A, Friedlander M, Lisyanskaya A, Floquet A, Leary A, Sonke GS, Gourley C, Banerjee S, Oza A, González-Martín A, Aghajanian C, Bradley W, Mathews C, Liu J, Lowe ES, Bloomfield R, DiSilvestro P
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1810858](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1810858)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2018 Dec 27;379(26):2495-2505. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1810858. Epub 
2018 Oct 21.

Maintenance Olaparib in Patients with Newly Diagnosed Advanced Ovarian Cancer.

Moore K(1), Colombo N(1), Scambia G(1), Kim BG(1), Oaknin A(1), Friedlander 
M(1), Lisyanskaya A(1), Floquet A(1), Leary A(1), Sonke GS(1), Gourley C(1), 
Banerjee S(1), Oza A(1), González-Martín A(1), Aghajanian C(1), Bradley W(1), 
Mathews C(1), Liu J(1), Lowe ES(1), Bloomfield R(1), DiSilvestro P(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Stephenson Cancer Center at the University of Oklahoma, Oklahoma 
City (K.M.); University of Milan-Bicocca, European Institute of Oncology 
Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico, Milan (N.C.), and 
Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS Università Cattolica, Rome 
(G.S.) - both in Italy; Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School 
of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea (B.-G.K.); Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, 
Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology, Barcelona (A. Oaknin), and M.D. Anderson 
Cancer Centre Madrid, Madrid (A.G.-M.) - both in Spain; University of New South 
Wales Clinical School, Prince of Wales Hospital, Randwick, Australia (M.F.); St. 
Petersburg City Oncology Dispensary, St. Petersburg, Russia (A. Lisyanskaya); 
Groupe d'Investigateurs Nationaux pour l'Etude des Cancers Ovariens, Paris 
(A.F., A. Leary), Institut Bergonié, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Bordeaux 
(A.F.), and Gustave-Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif (A. Leary) - all in France; 
the Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam (G.S.S.); Cancer Research UK 
Edinburgh Centre, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh (C.G.), the Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust and 
Institute of Cancer Research, London (S.B.), and AstraZeneca, Cambridge (R.B.) - 
all in the United Kingdom; Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto (A. Oza); 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York (C.A.); Froedtert and the 
Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee (W.B.); Women and Infants Hospital, 
Providence, RI (C.M., P.D.); Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston (J.L.); and 
AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD (E.S.L.).

Comment in
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2018 Dec;15(12):725. doi: 10.1038/s41571-018-0126-8.
    N Engl J Med. 2018 Dec 27;379(26):2567-2568. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1812644.

BACKGROUND: Most women with newly diagnosed advanced ovarian cancer have a 
relapse within 3 years after standard treatment with surgery and platinum-based 
chemotherapy. The benefit of the oral poly(adenosine diphosphate-ribose) 
polymerase inhibitor olaparib in relapsed disease has been well established, but 
the benefit of olaparib as maintenance therapy in newly diagnosed disease is 
uncertain.
METHODS: We conducted an international, randomized, double-blind, phase 3 trial 
to evaluate the efficacy of olaparib as maintenance therapy in patients with 
newly diagnosed advanced (International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics 
stage III or IV) high-grade serous or endometrioid ovarian cancer, primary 
peritoneal cancer, or fallopian-tube cancer (or a combination thereof) with a 
mutation in BRCA1, BRCA2, or both ( BRCA1/2) who had a complete or partial 
clinical response after platinum-based chemotherapy. The patients were randomly 
assigned, in a 2:1 ratio, to receive olaparib tablets (300 mg twice daily) or 
placebo. The primary end point was progression-free survival.
RESULTS: Of the 391 patients who underwent randomization, 260 were assigned to 
receive olaparib and 131 to receive placebo. A total of 388 patients had a 
centrally confirmed germline BRCA1/2 mutation, and 2 patients had a centrally 
confirmed somatic BRCA1/2 mutation. After a median follow-up of 41 months, the 
risk of disease progression or death was 70% lower with olaparib than with 
placebo (Kaplan-Meier estimate of the rate of freedom from disease progression 
and from death at 3 years, 60% vs. 27%; hazard ratio for disease progression or 
death, 0.30; 95% confidence interval, 0.23 to 0.41; P<0.001). Adverse events 
were consistent with the known toxic effects of olaparib.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of maintenance therapy with olaparib provided a substantial 
benefit with regard to progression-free survival among women with newly 
diagnosed advanced ovarian cancer and a BRCA1/2 mutation, with a 70% lower risk 
of disease progression or death with olaparib than with placebo. (Funded by 
AstraZeneca and Merck; SOLO1 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01844986 .).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1810858
PMID: 30345884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]