---
reference_id: "PMID:40765373"
title: A Comprehensive Review of Novel Advances in Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus.
authors:
- Ebrahimpour Y
- Khatami S
- Saffar M
- Fereidouni A
- Biniaz Z
- Erfanian N
- Fereidouni M
journal: J Diabetes
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/1753-0407.70120
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Comprehensive Review of Novel Advances in Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus.
**Authors:** Ebrahimpour Y, Khatami S, Saffar M, Fereidouni A, Biniaz Z, Erfanian N, Fereidouni M
**Journal:** J Diabetes (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1753-0407.70120](https://doi.org/10.1111/1753-0407.70120)

## Content

1. J Diabetes. 2025 Aug;17(8):e70120. doi: 10.1111/1753-0407.70120.

A Comprehensive Review of Novel Advances in Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus.

Ebrahimpour Y(1), Khatami S(1), Saffar M(1), Fereidouni A(2), Biniaz Z(1), 
Erfanian N(2), Fereidouni M(2).

Author information:
(1)Student Research Committee, Birjand University of Medical Sciences, Birjand, 
Iran.
(2)Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Birjand University of Medical 
Sciences, Birjand, Iran.

Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) is a chronic autoimmune disorder where the 
immune system targets and destroys insulin-producing β-cells in the pancreas. It 
generally emerges during childhood or adolescence, but individuals of any age 
can be affected. In contrast to Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) which is often 
associated with lifestyle factors, T1DM cannot be prevented and necessitates 
lifelong management. Currently, there is no definitive cure for T1DM, and 
patients rely on continuous insulin injections for their entire lives. Ongoing 
developments in insulin treatment, such as insulin pumps, continuous glucose 
monitoring, and hybrid closed-loop systems, offer promising alternatives. 
Despite advancements in intensive glycemic control that have reduced the 
occurrence of microvascular and macrovascular complications, a significant 
number of T1DM patients still these issues. Extensive research efforts are 
crucial to achieve early detection, prevent the loss of β-cells, and devise 
improved treatment strategies to enhance the quality of life and prognosis for 
those affected. This review explores the most noteworthy and recent advancements 
in the field of T1DM.

© 2025 The Author(s). Journal of Diabetes published by Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai 
JiaoTong University School of Medicine and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1753-0407.70120
PMCID: PMC12326085
PMID: 40765373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.