---
reference_id: "PMID:17924332"
title: Specific sequence variations within the 4q35 region are associated with facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy.
authors:
- Lemmers RJ
- Wohlgemuth M
- van der Gaag KJ
- van der Vliet PJ
- van Teijlingen CM
- de Knijff P
- Padberg GW
- Frants RR
- van der Maarel SM
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1086/521986
keywords:
- Alleles
- Base Pairing
- Base Sequence
- Case-Control Studies
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 4/genetics"
- Consensus Sequence
- Female
- Genetic Markers
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Facioscapulohumeral/genetics"
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- "Repetitive Sequences, Nucleic Acid"
- Telomere/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Specific sequence variations within the 4q35 region are associated with facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy.
**Authors:** Lemmers RJ, Wohlgemuth M, van der Gaag KJ, van der Vliet PJ, van Teijlingen CM, de Knijff P, Padberg GW, Frants RR, van der Maarel SM
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1086/521986](https://doi.org/10.1086/521986)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Nov;81(5):884-94. doi: 10.1086/521986. Epub 2007 Sep 7.

Specific sequence variations within the 4q35 region are associated with
facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy.

Lemmers RJ(1), Wohlgemuth M, van der Gaag KJ, van der Vliet PJ, van Teijlingen
CM, de Knijff P, Padberg GW, Frants RR, van der Maarel SM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Autosomal dominant facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) is mainly
characterized by progressive wasting and weakness of the facial, shoulder, and
upper-arm muscles. FSHD is caused by contraction of the macrosatellite repeat
D4Z4 on chromosome 4q35. The D4Z4 repeat is very polymorphic in length, and D4Z4
rearrangements occur almost exclusively via intrachromosomal gene conversions.
Several disease mechanisms have been proposed, but none of these models can
comprehensively explain FSHD, because repeat contraction alone is not sufficient
to cause disease. Almost-identical D4Z4-repeat arrays have been identified on
chromosome 10q26 and on two equally common chromosome 4 variants, 4qA and 4qB.
Yet only repeat contractions of D4Z4 on chromosome 4qA cause FSHD; contractions
on the other chromosomes are nonpathogenic. We hypothesized that allele-specific
sequence differences among 4qA, 4qB, and 10q alleles underlie the 4qA
specificity of FSHD. Sequence variations between these alleles have been
described before, but the extent and significance of these variations proximal
to, within, and distal to D4Z4 have not been studied in detail. We examined
additional sequence variations in the FSHD locus, including a relatively stable
simple sequence-length polymorphism proximal to D4Z4, a single-nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) within D4Z4, and the A/B variation distal to D4Z4. On the
basis of these polymorphisms, we demonstrate that the subtelomeric domain of
chromosome 4q can be subdivided into nine distinct haplotypes, of which three
carry the distal 4qA variation. Interestingly, we show that repeat contractions
in two of the nine haplotypes, one of which is a 4qA haplotype, are not
associated with FSHD. We also show that each of these haplotypes has its unique
sequence signature, and we propose that specific SNPs in the disease haplotype
are essential for the development of FSHD.

DOI: 10.1086/521986
PMCID: PMC2265642
PMID: 17924332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
