---
reference_id: "PMID:6749365"
title: "Replacement treatment with insulin in diabetes mellitus: problems and promise."
authors:
- Dupre J
- Champion MC
- Rodger NW
journal: Clin Invest Med
year: '1982'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Replacement treatment with insulin in diabetes mellitus: problems and promise.
**Authors:** Dupre J, Champion MC, Rodger NW
**Journal:** Clin Invest Med (1982)

## Content

1. Clin Invest Med. 1982;5(2-3):109-19.

Replacement treatment with insulin in diabetes mellitus: problems and promise.

Dupre J, Champion MC, Rodger NW.

The results of epidemiological and clinical studies of diabetes in man and of 
studies of experimental diabetes in animals provide strong evidence: (1) that 
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus is due to absolute or severe deficiency of 
insulin; (2) that replacement treatment with insulin is potentially capable of 
normalizing the metabolic abnormalities; and (3) that normalization of the 
metabolic abnormalities can be expected to prevent or ameliorate the 
complications of the disease. However, consideration of the problems involved in 
replacement treatment with insulin raises practical and physiological questions 
regarding the appropriate patterns and routes of delivery of the hormone. 
Studies with glucose-controlled automatic infusion systems delivering into 
systemic or portal vessels point to the question whether the homeostatic 
mechanism can be viewed as one dominated by the responses of the endocrine 
pancreas to glucose. Nevertheless, empirical studies with non-glucose-controlled 
portable programmed infusion systems delivering insulin by intravenous, 
subcutaneous, or intraperitoneal routes have suggested that these techniques can 
produce near-normoglycemia under everyday conditions in a high proportion of 
insulin-dependent diabetic subjects. The blood levels of biologically active 
insulin resulting from these treatments are not higher, and may be lower, than 
those with conventional depot injection therapy. It appears also that the 
results of intensive depot injection therapy making use of 3 or 4 injections 
day-1 of crystalline and intermediate-acting insulins can approximate the 
effects of insulin infusion treatment. It is argued that the intensive insulin 
treatment regimens with continuous or intermittent use of the subcutaneous route 
of delivery can be viewed as options in the management of insulin-dependent 
diabetes mellitus when adequate supervision and monitoring is available, and 
that clinical systems fulfilling these conditions must be provided.

PMID: 6749365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]