---
reference_id: "PMID:26467175"
title: Arginase-1 deficiency.
authors:
- Sin YY
- Baron G
- Schulze A
- Funk CD
journal: J Mol Med (Berl)
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s00109-015-1354-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arginase-1 deficiency.
**Authors:** Sin YY, Baron G, Schulze A, Funk CD
**Journal:** J Mol Med (Berl) (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00109-015-1354-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00109-015-1354-3)

## Content

1. J Mol Med (Berl). 2015 Dec;93(12):1287-96. doi: 10.1007/s00109-015-1354-3.
Epub  2015 Oct 14.

Arginase-1 deficiency.

Sin YY(1), Baron G(1), Schulze A(2)(3), Funk CD(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical and Molecular Sciences, Queen's University, 433 
Botterell Hall, 18 Stuart Street, Kingston, ON, K7L 3N6, Canada.
(2)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital for Sick Children 
and University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Genetics and Genome Biology Program, Peter Gilgan Centre for Research and 
Learning, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Department of Biomedical and Molecular Sciences, Queen's University, 433 
Botterell Hall, 18 Stuart Street, Kingston, ON, K7L 3N6, Canada. 
funkc@queensu.ca.

Arginase-1 (ARG1) deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive disorder that affects 
the liver-based urea cycle, leading to impaired ureagenesis. This genetic 
disorder is caused by 40+ mutations found fairly uniformly spread throughout the 
ARG1 gene, resulting in partial or complete loss of enzyme function, which 
catalyzes the hydrolysis of arginine to ornithine and urea. ARG1-deficient 
patients exhibit hyperargininemia with spastic paraparesis, progressive 
neurological and intellectual impairment, persistent growth retardation, and 
infrequent episodes of hyperammonemia, a clinical pattern that differs 
strikingly from other urea cycle disorders. This review briefly highlights the 
current understanding of the etiology and pathophysiology of ARG1 deficiency 
derived from clinical case reports and therapeutic strategies stretching over 
several decades and reports on several exciting new developments regarding the 
pathophysiology of the disorder using ARG1 global and inducible knockout mouse 
models. Gene transfer studies in these mice are revealing potential therapeutic 
options that can be exploited in the future. However, caution is advised in 
extrapolating results since the lethal disease phenotype in mice is much more 
severe than in humans indicating that the mouse models may not precisely 
recapitulate human disease etiology. Finally, some of the functions and 
implications of ARG1 in non-urea cycle activities are considered. Lingering 
questions and future areas to be addressed relating to the clinical 
manifestations of ARG1 deficiency in liver and brain are also presented. 
Hopefully, this review will spark invigorated research efforts that lead to 
treatments with better clinical outcomes.

DOI: 10.1007/s00109-015-1354-3
PMID: 26467175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]