---
reference_id: "PMID:26527582"
title: Aganglionosis with the absence of hypertrophied nerve fibres predicts disease proximal to rectosigmoid colon.
authors:
- Narayanan SK
- Soundappan SS
- Kwan E
- Cohen RC
- Charlton A
- Cass DT
journal: Pediatr Surg Int
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s00383-015-3835-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aganglionosis with the absence of hypertrophied nerve fibres predicts disease proximal to rectosigmoid colon.
**Authors:** Narayanan SK, Soundappan SS, Kwan E, Cohen RC, Charlton A, Cass DT
**Journal:** Pediatr Surg Int (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00383-015-3835-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00383-015-3835-4)

## Content

1. Pediatr Surg Int. 2016 Mar;32(3):221-6. doi: 10.1007/s00383-015-3835-4. Epub 
2015 Nov 2.

Aganglionosis with the absence of hypertrophied nerve fibres predicts disease 
proximal to rectosigmoid colon.

Narayanan SK(1), Soundappan SS(2), Kwan E(2), Cohen RC(2), Charlton A(2), Cass 
DT(2).

Author information:
(1)The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, New South Wales, Australia. 
drsharat77@gmail.com.
(2)The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, New South Wales, Australia.

PURPOSE: The gold standard for the diagnosis of Hirschsprung's disease (HSCR) is 
the pathologic evaluation of a rectal biopsy that demonstrates the absence of 
ganglion cells and nerve fibre hypertrophy. However, it has been frequently 
reported that hypertrophic nerves may not be present in some variants like 
long-segment HSCR, total colonic aganglionosis, premature and very young 
infants. The aim of this study was to determine this association.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective review of the HSCR database at our 
tertiary care children's hospital from 2000 to 2013. In order to analyse the 
relationship between the diameter of the nerve fibres and the level of 
aganglionosis, we classified the patient sample into two groups-fibres ≤40 and 
>40 μm. The groups were statistically compared with P < 0.05 being significant.
RESULTS: Rectal biopsies of 92 patients confirmed as HSCR with definitive 
operation performed at the same institution were reviewed. The mean nerve 
diameter was 50.1 μm (range 20-87.5 μm). Nerve fibre diameter ≤40 μm was 
predictive of transition zone above the sigmoid colon. A specificity of 77.3 % 
and a likelihood ratio of 2.03 supported this perception. No correlation was 
noted between nerve fibre diameter and gestational age at birth, birth weight or 
age at biopsy.
CONCLUSION: The absence of nerve fibre hypertrophy in the presence of 
aganglionosis on rectal biopsy specimens is predictive of long-segment HSCR.

DOI: 10.1007/s00383-015-3835-4
PMID: 26527582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]