---
reference_id: "PMID:29219151"
title: Familial hypercholesterolaemia.
authors:
- Defesche JC
- Gidding SS
- Harada-Shiba M
- Hegele RA
- Santos RD
- Wierzbicki AS
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2017.93
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial hypercholesterolaemia.
**Authors:** Defesche JC, Gidding SS, Harada-Shiba M, Hegele RA, Santos RD, Wierzbicki AS
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrdp.2017.93](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrdp.2017.93)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2017 Dec 7;3:17093. doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2017.93.

Familial hypercholesterolaemia.

Defesche JC(1), Gidding SS(2), Harada-Shiba M(3), Hegele RA(4)(5), Santos 
RD(6)(7), Wierzbicki AS(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Centre, PO Box 22 660, 
University of Amsterdam, 1100 DD Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Nemours Cardiac Center, Alfred I. DuPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, 
Delaware, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Innovation in Lipidology, National Cerebral and 
Cardiovascular Center Research Institute, Suita, Osaka, Japan.
(4)Department of Medicine, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, 
Ontario, Canada.
(5)Robarts Research Institute, 4288A 1151 Richmond Street North, University of 
Western Ontario, N6A 5B7 London, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Lipid Clinic Heart Institute (Incor), University of São Paulo, Medical School 
Hospital, São Paulo, Brazil.
(7)Preventive Medicine Centre and Cardiology Program Hospital Israelita Albert 
Einstein, São Paulo, Brazil.
(8)Metabolic Medicine and Chemical Pathology, Guy's and St. Thomas' Hospitals, 
London, UK.

Familial hypercholesterolaemia is a common inherited disorder characterized by 
abnormally elevated serum levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol 
from birth, which in time can lead to cardiovascular disease (CVD). Most cases 
are caused by autosomal dominant mutations in LDLR, which encodes the LDL 
receptor, although mutations in other genes coding for proteins involved in 
cholesterol metabolism or LDLR function and processing, such as APOB and PCSK9, 
can also be causative, although less frequently. Several sets of diagnostic 
criteria for familial hypercholesterolaemia are available; common diagnostic 
features are an elevated LDL cholesterol level and a family history of 
hypercholesterolaemia or (premature) CVD. DNA-based methods to identify the 
underlying genetic defect are desirable but not essential for diagnosis. Cascade 
screening can contribute to early diagnosis of the disease in family members of 
an affected individual, which is crucial because familial hypercholesterolaemia 
can be asymptomatic for decades. Clinical severity depends on the nature of the 
gene that harbours the causative mutation, among other factors, and is further 
modulated by the type of mutation. Lifelong LDL cholesterol-lowering treatment 
substantially improves CVD-free survival and longevity. Statins are the 
first-line therapy, but additional drugs, such as ezetimibe, bile acid 
sequestrants, PCSK9 inhibitors and other emerging therapies, are often required.

DOI: 10.1038/nrdp.2017.93
PMID: 29219151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]