---
reference_id: "PMID:3103564"
title: Acute-subacute lead poisoning. Clinical findings and comparative study of diagnostic tests.
authors:
- Carton JA
- Maradona JA
- Arribas JM
journal: Arch Intern Med
year: '1987'
doi: 10.1001/archinte.147.4.697
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Disease Outbreaks
- Edetic Acid
- Erythrocytes/enzymology
- Female
- Flour
- Food Contamination
- Humans
- "Lead/blood, urine"
- Lead Poisoning/diagnosis
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Porphobilinogen Synthase/blood
- Spain
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute-subacute lead poisoning. Clinical findings and comparative study of diagnostic tests.
**Authors:** Carton JA, Maradona JA, Arribas JM
**Journal:** Arch Intern Med (1987)
**DOI:** [10.1001/archinte.147.4.697](https://doi.org/10.1001/archinte.147.4.697)

## Content

1. Arch Intern Med. 1987 Apr;147(4):697-703. doi: 10.1001/archinte.147.4.697.

Acute-subacute lead poisoning. Clinical findings and comparative study of 
diagnostic tests.

Carton JA, Maradona JA, Arribas JM.

A prospective study of an epidemic outbreak of acute lead poisoning 
characterized by unusual clinical and analytic manifestations was carried out. 
Its source was traced to lead-contaminated flour. Thirty-two adult patients 
presented with classic clinical symptoms of saturnism; however, 13 severely 
poisoned patients simultaneously manifested unusual clinical features such as 
hemolytic anemia and multiorgan dysfunction. We compared the diagnostic value of 
the different toxicity markers in 68 of 136 adults exposed to lead. Porphyrin 
precursors, urine levels of lead, and results from an edetic acid-provocative 
test gave poor diagnostic information and low correlation values with lead 
levels in blood. However, erythrocyte delta-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase 
activity showed a closer correlation with lead levels in blood, although we 
observed a frequent overlap of results in severe cases. The test for levels of 
lead in blood was the most reliable, suitable, and simplest test performed, and 
gave the best correlation with the external dose of lead, the clinical 
situation, and the toxicologic effects described by 12 different analytic data.

DOI: 10.1001/archinte.147.4.697
PMID: 3103564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]