---
reference_id: "PMID:17584774"
title: ETFDH mutations as a major cause of riboflavin-responsive multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenation deficiency.
authors:
- Olsen RK
- Olpin SE
- Andresen BS
- Miedzybrodzka ZH
- Pourfarzam M
- Merinero B
- Frerman FE
- Beresford MW
- Dean JC
- Cornelius N
- Andersen O
- Oldfors A
- Holme E
- Gregersen N
- Turnbull DM
- Morris AA
journal: Brain
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awm135
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ETFDH mutations as a major cause of riboflavin-responsive multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenation deficiency.
**Authors:** Olsen RK, Olpin SE, Andresen BS, Miedzybrodzka ZH, Pourfarzam M, Merinero B, Frerman FE, Beresford MW, Dean JC, Cornelius N, Andersen O, Oldfors A, Holme E, Gregersen N, Turnbull DM, Morris AA
**Journal:** Brain (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awm135](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awm135)

## Content

1. Brain. 2007 Aug;130(Pt 8):2045-54. doi: 10.1093/brain/awm135. Epub 2007 Jun
20.

ETFDH mutations as a major cause of riboflavin-responsive multiple acyl-CoA 
dehydrogenation deficiency.

Olsen RK(1), Olpin SE, Andresen BS, Miedzybrodzka ZH, Pourfarzam M, Merinero B, 
Frerman FE, Beresford MW, Dean JC, Cornelius N, Andersen O, Oldfors A, Holme E, 
Gregersen N, Turnbull DM, Morris AA.

Author information:
(1)The Research Unit for Molecular Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital and 
Faculty of Health Sciences, Skejby Sygehus, Aarhus, Denmark. 
rikke.olsen@ki.au.dk

Multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenation deficiency (MADD) is a disorder of fatty acid, 
amino acid and choline metabolism that can result from defects in two 
flavoproteins, electron transfer flavoprotein (ETF) or ETF: ubiquinone 
oxidoreductase (ETF:QO). Some patients respond to pharmacological doses of 
riboflavin. It is unknown whether these patients have defects in the 
flavoproteins themselves or defects in the formation of the cofactor, FAD, from 
riboflavin. We report 15 patients from 11 pedigrees. All the index cases 
presented with encephalopathy or muscle weakness or a combination of these 
symptoms; several had previously suffered cyclical vomiting. Urine organic acid 
and plasma acyl-carnitine profiles indicated MADD. Clinical and biochemical 
parameters were either totally or partly corrected after riboflavin treatment. 
All patients had mutations in the gene for ETF:QO. In one patient, we show that 
the ETF:QO mutations are associated with a riboflavin-sensitive impairment of 
ETF:QO activity. This patient also had partial deficiencies of flavin-dependent 
acyl-CoA dehydrogenases and respiratory chain complexes, most of which were 
restored to control levels after riboflavin treatment. Low activities of 
mitochondrial flavoproteins or respiratory chain complexes have been reported 
previously in two of our patients with ETF:QO mutations. We postulate that 
riboflavin-responsive MADD may result from defects of ETF:QO combined with 
general mitochondrial dysfunction. This is the largest collection of 
riboflavin-responsive MADD patients ever reported, and the first demonstration 
of the molecular genetic basis for the disorder.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awm135
PMID: 17584774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]