---
reference_id: "PMID:25596811"
title: Vitiligo.
authors:
- Ezzedine K
- Eleftheriadou V
- Whitton M
- van Geel N
journal: Lancet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60763-7
keywords:
- Dermatologic Agents/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Mental Disorders/etiology
- Phototherapy/methods
- "Vitiligo/diagnosis, epidemiology, immunology, psychology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vitiligo.
**Authors:** Ezzedine K, Eleftheriadou V, Whitton M, van Geel N
**Journal:** Lancet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60763-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60763-7)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2015 Jul 4;386(9988):74-84. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60763-7. Epub 
2015 Jan 15.

Vitiligo.

Ezzedine K(1), Eleftheriadou V(2), Whitton M(2), van Geel N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Paediatric Dermatology, National Centre for 
Rare Skin disorders, Hôpital Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France; Institut National de 
la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale. U1035, University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, 
France. Electronic address: khaled.ezzedine@chu-bordeaux.fr.
(2)Centre of Evidence Based Dermatology, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, 
UK.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

Vitiligo, an acquired pigmentary disorder of unknown origin, is the most 
frequent cause of depigmentation worldwide, with an estimated prevalence of 1%. 
The disorder can be psychologically devastating and stigmatising, especially in 
dark skinned individuals. Vitiligo is clinically characterised by the 
development of white macules due to the loss of functioning melanocytes in the 
skin or hair, or both. Two forms of the disease are well recognised: segmental 
and non-segmental vitiligo (the commonest form). To distinguish between these 
two forms is of prime importance because therapeutic options and prognosis are 
quite different. The importance of early treatment and understanding of the 
profound psychosocial effect of vitiligo will be emphasised throughout this 
Seminar.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60763-7
PMID: 25596811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]