---
reference_id: "PMID:26048914"
title: "The transthyretin amyloidoses: advances in therapy."
authors:
- Dubrey S
- Ackermann E
- Gillmore J
journal: Postgrad Med J
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1136/postgradmedj-2014-133224
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The transthyretin amyloidoses: advances in therapy.
**Authors:** Dubrey S, Ackermann E, Gillmore J
**Journal:** Postgrad Med J (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1136/postgradmedj-2014-133224](https://doi.org/10.1136/postgradmedj-2014-133224)

## Content

1. Postgrad Med J. 2015 Aug;91(1078):439-48. doi:
10.1136/postgradmedj-2014-133224.  Epub 2015 Jun 5.

The transthyretin amyloidoses: advances in therapy.

Dubrey S(1), Ackermann E(2), Gillmore J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Hillingdon & Mount Vernon Hospitals NHS Trust, 
Uxbridge, Middlesex, UK.
(2)Isis Pharmaceuticals, Carlsbad, California, USA.
(3)Division of Medicine, National Amyloidosis Centre, University College London, 
London, UK.

There are two forms of transthyretin (TTR) amyloidosis: non-hereditary and 
hereditary. The non-hereditary form (ATTRwt) is caused by native or wild-type 
TTR and was previously referred to as senile systemic amyloidosis. The 
hereditary form (ATTRm) is caused by variant TTR which results from a genetic 
mutation of TTR. The predominant effect of ATTRwt amyloidosis is on the heart, 
with patients having a greater left ventricular wall thickness at presentation 
than the devastating form which is light chain (AL) amyloidosis. ATTRm 
amyloidosis is broadly split into two categories: a type that predominantly 
affects the nervous system (often called familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP)) 
and one with a predilection for the heart (often called familial amyloid 
cardiomyopathy (FAC)). Approximately half of all TTR mutations known to express 
a clinical phenotype cause a cardiomyopathy. Since the introduction of 
orthotopic liver transplantation for ATTRm amyloidosis in 1991, several 
additional therapies have been developed. These therapies aim to provide a 
reduction or elimination of TTR from the plasma (through genetic approaches), 
stabilisation of the TTR molecule (to prevent deposition) and dissolution of the 
amyloid matrix. We describe the latest developments in these approaches to 
management, many of which are also applicable to wild-type amyloidosis.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/postgradmedj-2014-133224
PMID: 26048914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]