---
reference_id: "PMID:36434163"
title: "Germline mutations in prostate cancer: a systematic review of the evidence for personalized medicine."
authors:
- Marino F
- Totaro A
- Gandi C
- Bientinesi R
- Moretto S
- Gavi F
- Pierconti F
- Iacovelli R
- Bassi P
- Sacco E
journal: Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41391-022-00609-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Germline mutations in prostate cancer: a systematic review of the evidence for personalized medicine.
**Authors:** Marino F, Totaro A, Gandi C, Bientinesi R, Moretto S, Gavi F, Pierconti F, Iacovelli R, Bassi P, Sacco E
**Journal:** Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41391-022-00609-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41391-022-00609-3)

## Content

1. Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis. 2023 Dec;26(4):655-664. doi: 
10.1038/s41391-022-00609-3. Epub 2022 Nov 24.

Germline mutations in prostate cancer: a systematic review of the evidence for 
personalized medicine.

Marino F(1), Totaro A(2), Gandi C(2), Bientinesi R(2), Moretto S(2), Gavi F(2), 
Pierconti F(3), Iacovelli R(4), Bassi P(2), Sacco E(2).

Author information:
(1)Urology Department, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Fondazione 
Policlinico Universitario Agostino Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy. 
dr.filippomarino@gmail.com.
(2)Urology Department, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Fondazione 
Policlinico Universitario Agostino Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(3)Anatomic Pathology and Histology Department, Università Cattolica del Sacro 
Cuore, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario Agostino Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(4)Medical Oncology Department, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Fondazione 
Policlinico Universitario Agostino Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The goal of precision medicine in prostate cancer (PCa) is to 
individualize the treatment according to the patient's germline mutation status. 
PCa has a very high rate of genetic predisposition compared with other cancers 
in men, with an estimated rate of cancers ascribable to hereditary factors of 
5-15%.
METHODS: A systematic search (PubMed, Web of Science, and ClinicalTrials.gov) of 
English literature from 2000 to 2022, using the keywords "prostate cancer", 
"germline mutations", "family history", and "inheritance" was conducted, 
according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and 
Meta-analyses guidelines.
RESULTS: The search identified 980 publications. Of these, 200 papers were 
removed before screening (duplicates, non-English literature, and publication 
year before 2000) and 245 records were excluded after title/abstract screening. 
Finally, 50 articles were included in the final analysis. We analyze the latest 
evidence on the genetic basis of PCa predisposition and clinical implications 
for more personalized screening protocols and therapeutic management of this 
high-prevalent cancer.
DISCUSSION: Emerging data show that germline mutations in homologous 
recombination genes (BRCA1/2, ATM, CHECK2), in mismatch repair genes (MLH1, 
MLH2, MSH6), and other additional genes are associated with the development and 
aggressiveness of PCa. Germline testing and genetic counseling have increasingly 
important implications in cancer screening and therapeutic decisions making for 
patients affected by PCa. Patients with localized PCa and some gene mutations 
are more likely to develop aggressive cancer, so active treatment may be 
preferable to active surveillance for these patients. Moreover, in patients with 
metastatic PCa, these gene alterations may be useful biomarkers for predicting 
response to specific therapy such as PARP inhibitors, recently approved for the 
treatment of metastatic castration-resistant PCa. The evidence supports recent 
guidelines and recommendations considering germline genetic testing for patients 
with a positive family history of PCa or men with high risk or metastatic 
disease.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41391-022-00609-3
PMID: 36434163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]