---
reference_id: "PMID:25307765"
title: Meta-analyses of human gut microbes associated with obesity and IBD.
authors:
- Walters WA
- Xu Z
- Knight R
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.09.039
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Meta-analyses of human gut microbes associated with obesity and IBD.
**Authors:** Walters WA, Xu Z, Knight R
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2014.09.039](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2014.09.039)

## Content

1. FEBS Lett. 2014 Nov 17;588(22):4223-33. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.09.039.
Epub  2014 Oct 13.

Meta-analyses of human gut microbes associated with obesity and IBD.

Walters WA(1), Xu Z(2), Knight R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of 
Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA.
(2)BioFrontiers Institute, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA.
(3)BioFrontiers Institute, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA; 
Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 
80309, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boulder, CO 80309, USA. Electronic 
address: rob@colorado.edu.

Recent studies have linked human gut microbes to obesity and inflammatory bowel 
disease, but consistent signals have been difficult to identify. Here we test 
for indicator taxa and general features of the microbiota that are generally 
consistent across studies of obesity and of IBD, focusing on studies involving 
high-throughput sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene (which we could process using a 
common computational pipeline). We find that IBD has a consistent signature 
across studies and allows high classification accuracy of IBD from non-IBD 
subjects, but that although subjects can be classified as lean or obese within 
each individual study with statistically significant accuracy, consistent with 
the ability of the microbiota to experimentally transfer this phenotype, 
signatures of obesity are not consistent between studies even when the data are 
analyzed with consistent methods. The results suggest that correlations between 
microbes and clinical conditions with different effect sizes (e.g. the large 
effect size of IBD versus the small effect size of obesity) may require 
different cohort selection and analysis strategies.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.09.039
PMCID: PMC5050012
PMID: 25307765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]