---
reference_id: "PMID:25231261"
title: "Clinical efficacy of enzyme replacement therapy in paediatric Hunter patients, an independent study of 3.5 years."
authors:
- Tomanin R
- Zanetti A
- "D'Avanzo F"
- Rampazzo A
- Gasparotto N
- Parini R
- Pascarella A
- Concolino D
- Procopio E
- Fiumara A
- Borgo A
- Frigo AC
- Scarpa M
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-014-0129-1
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy/methods
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Glycosaminoglycans/urine
- Humans
- Iduronate Sulfatase/therapeutic use
- Infant
- Male
- "Mucopolysaccharidosis II/diagnosis, drug therapy, urine"
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical efficacy of enzyme replacement therapy in paediatric Hunter patients, an independent study of 3.5 years.
**Authors:** Tomanin R, Zanetti A, D'Avanzo F, Rampazzo A, Gasparotto N, Parini R, Pascarella A, Concolino D, Procopio E, Fiumara A, Borgo A, Frigo AC, Scarpa M
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-014-0129-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-014-0129-1)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2014 Sep 18;9:129. doi: 10.1186/s13023-014-0129-1.

Clinical efficacy of enzyme replacement therapy in paediatric Hunter patients,
an independent study of 3.5 years.

Tomanin R, Zanetti A, D'Avanzo F, Rampazzo A, Gasparotto N, Parini R, Pascarella
A, Concolino D, Procopio E, Fiumara A, Borgo A, Frigo AC, Scarpa M.

BACKGROUND: Hunter Syndrome is an X-linked lysosomal storage disorder due to the
deficit of iduronate 2-sulfatase, an enzyme catalysing the degradation of the
glycosaminoglycans (GAG) dermatan- and heparan-sulfate. Treatment of the disease
is mainly performed by Enzyme Replacement Therapy (ERT) with idursulfase, in use
since 2006. Clinical efficacy of ERT has been monitored mainly by the Hunter
Outcome Survey (HOS) while very few independent studies have been so far
conducted. The present study is a 3.5-years independent follow-up of 27 Hunter
patients, starting ERT between 1.6 and 27 years of age, with the primary aim to
evaluate efficacy of the therapy started at an early age (<12 years).
METHODS: In this study, we evaluated: urinary GAG content, hepato/splenomegaly,
heart valvulopathies, otorinolaryngological symptoms, joint range of motion,
growth, distance covered in the 6-minute walk test, neurological involvement.
For data analysis, the 27 patients were divided into three groups according to
the age at start of ERT: ≤5 years, >5 and ≤ 12 years and > 12 years. Patients
were analysed both as 3 separate groups and also as one group; in addition, the
20 patients who started ERT up to 12 years of age were analysed as one group.
Finally, patients presenting a "severe" phenotype were compared with
"attenuated" ones.
RESULTS: Data analysis revealed a statistically significant reduction of the
urinary GAG in patients ≤5 years and ≤ 12 years and of the hepatomegaly in the
group aged >5 and ≤ 12 years. Although other clinical signs improved in some of
the patients monitored, statistical analysis of their variation did not reveal
any significant changes following enzyme administration. The evaluation of ERT
efficacy in relation to the severity of the disease evidenced slightly higher
improvements as for hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, otological disorders and
adenotonsillar hypertrophy in severe vs attenuated patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the present protocol of idursulfase administration may
result efficacious in delaying the MPS II somatic disease progression at some
extent, in this study we observed that several signs and symptoms did not
improve during the therapy. Therefore, a strict monitoring of the efficacy
obtained in the patients under ERT is becoming mandatory for clinical, ethical
and economic reasons.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-014-0129-1
PMCID: PMC4180060
PMID: 25231261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
