---
reference_id: "PMID:36727144"
title: "A case of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome presenting as short stature: a novel mutation in SLC39A13 causing spondylodysplastic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome."
authors:
- Agrawal P
- Kaur H
- Kondekar A
- Rathi S
journal: Oxf Med Case Reports
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/omcr/omac107
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome presenting as short stature: a novel mutation in SLC39A13 causing spondylodysplastic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
**Authors:** Agrawal P, Kaur H, Kondekar A, Rathi S
**Journal:** Oxf Med Case Reports (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/omcr/omac107](https://doi.org/10.1093/omcr/omac107)

## Content

1. Oxf Med Case Reports. 2023 Jan 28;2023(1):omac107. doi: 10.1093/omcr/omac107. 
eCollection 2023 Jan.

A case of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome presenting as short stature: a novel mutation 
in SLC39A13 causing spondylodysplastic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.

Agrawal P, Kaur H(1), Kondekar A(1), Rathi S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, TNMC and BYL Nair Ch Hospital, Mumbai, India.

Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a heritable connective tissue disorder 
characterized by a varying degree of skin hyperextensibility and joint 
hypermobility. EDS is classified into 13 subtypes according to the most recent 
classification. These subtypes are clinically and genetically heterogenous. The 
spondylodysplastic subvariety of EDS (spEDS) is caused by homozygous mutations 
in B4GALT7, B3GALT6 and SLC39A13. To date, 13 individuals with molecularly 
diagnosed SLC39A13-related spEDS have been reported. The spEDS caused by 
biallelic pathogenic SLC39A13 variants are characterized by short stature, 
protuberant eyes with bluish sclera, finely wrinkled palms, hypermobile joints, 
hyperextensible skin and characteristic radiological findings. Herein, we report 
a case of 7-year-old-female child with spEDS associated with novel homozygous 
(pathogenic/likely pathogenic) missense variation of the SLC39A13 gene.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/omcr/omac107
PMCID: PMC9885422
PMID: 36727144