---
reference_id: "PMID:38791074"
title: "Comprehensive Molecular Analysis of Disease-Related Genes as First-Tier Test for Early Diagnosis, Classification, and Management of Patients Affected by Nonsyndromic Ichthyosis."
authors:
- Fioretti T
- Martora F
- De Maggio I
- Ambrosio A
- Piscopo C
- Vallone S
- Amato F
- Passaro D
- Acquaviva F
- Gaudiello F
- Di Girolamo D
- Maiolo V
- Zarrilli F
- Esposito S
- Vitiello G
- Auricchio L
- Sammarco E
- De Brasi D
- Petillo R
- Gambale A
- Cattaneo F
- Ammendola R
- Nappa P
- Esposito G
journal: Biomedicines
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/biomedicines12051112
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comprehensive Molecular Analysis of Disease-Related Genes as First-Tier Test for Early Diagnosis, Classification, and Management of Patients Affected by Nonsyndromic Ichthyosis.
**Authors:** Fioretti T, Martora F, De Maggio I, Ambrosio A, Piscopo C, Vallone S, Amato F, Passaro D, Acquaviva F, Gaudiello F, Di Girolamo D, Maiolo V, Zarrilli F, Esposito S, Vitiello G, Auricchio L, Sammarco E, De Brasi D, Petillo R, Gambale A, Cattaneo F, Ammendola R, Nappa P, Esposito G
**Journal:** Biomedicines (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biomedicines12051112](https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines12051112)

## Content

1. Biomedicines. 2024 May 17;12(5):1112. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines12051112.

Comprehensive Molecular Analysis of Disease-Related Genes as First-Tier Test for 
Early Diagnosis, Classification, and Management of Patients Affected by 
Nonsyndromic Ichthyosis.

Fioretti T(1), Martora F(2), De Maggio I(3), Ambrosio A(1), Piscopo C(3), 
Vallone S(1)(4), Amato F(1)(4), Passaro D(4), Acquaviva F(5), Gaudiello F(2), Di 
Girolamo D(6), Maiolo V(4), Zarrilli F(1)(4), Esposito S(1)(4), Vitiello G(7), 
Auricchio L(2), Sammarco E(8), De Brasi D(5), Petillo R(3), Gambale A(7), 
Cattaneo F(4), Ammendola R(4), Nappa P(2), Esposito G(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)CEINGE Advanced Biotechnologies Franco Salvatore, 80145 Naples, Italy.
(2)Section of Dermatology, Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, School 
of Medicine, University of Naples "Federico II", 80131 Naples, Italy.
(3)Medical and Laboratory Genetics Unit, AORN A. Cardarelli, 80131 Naples, 
Italy.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnologies, School of 
Medicine, University of Naples "Federico II", 80131 Naples, Italy.
(5)Medical Genetics Unit, Department of General and Emergency Paediatrics, AORN 
Santobono-Pausilipon, 80122 Naples, Italy.
(6)Department of Biology, University of Naples "Federico II", 80126 Naples, 
Italy.
(7)Medical Genetics Unit, Integrated Care Department of Laboratory and 
Transfusion Medicine, Federico II Hospital, 80131 Naples, Italy.
(8)Pediatric Dermatology Unit, Department of Dermo-Immuno-Rheumatology 
Paediatrics, AORN Santobono-Pausilipon, 80122 Naples, Italy.

Inherited ichthyoses are a group of clinically and genetically heterogeneous 
rare disorders of skin keratinization with overlapping phenotypes. The clinical 
picture and family history are crucial to formulating the diagnostic hypothesis, 
but only the identification of the genetic defect allows the correct 
classification. In the attempt to molecularly classify 17 unrelated Italian 
patients referred with congenital nonsyndromic ichthyosis, we performed 
massively parallel sequencing of over 50 ichthyosis-related genes. Genetic data 
of 300 Italian unaffected subjects were also analyzed to evaluate frequencies of 
putative disease-causing alleles in our population. For all patients, we 
identified the molecular cause of the disease. Eight patients were affected by 
autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis associated with ALOX12B, NIPAL4, and 
TGM1 mutations. Three patients had biallelic loss-of-function variants in FLG, 
whereas 6/11 males were affected by X-linked ichthyosis. Among the 24 different 
disease-causing alleles we identified, 8 carried novel variants, including a 
synonymous TGM1 variant that resulted in a splicing defect. Moreover, we 
generated a priority list of the ichthyosis-related genes that showed a 
significant number of rare and novel variants in our population. In conclusion, 
our comprehensive molecular analysis resulted in an effective first-tier test 
for the early classification of ichthyosis patients. It also expands the 
genetic, mutational, and phenotypic spectra of inherited ichthyosis and provides 
new insight into the current understanding of etiologies and epidemiology of 
this group of rare disorders.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines12051112
PMCID: PMC11117922
PMID: 38791074

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.