---
reference_id: "PMID:22642865"
title: "3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency: clinical, biochemical, enzymatic and molecular studies in 88 individuals."
authors:
- Grünert SC
- Stucki M
- Morscher RJ
- Suormala T
- Bürer C
- Burda P
- Christensen E
- Ficicioglu C
- Herwig J
- Kölker S
- Möslinger D
- Pasquini E
- Santer R
- Schwab KO
- Wilcken B
- Fowler B
- Yue WW
- Baumgartner MR
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-31
keywords:
- "Carbon-Carbon Ligases/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Line
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- "Urea Cycle Disorders, Inborn/genetics, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency: clinical, biochemical, enzymatic and molecular studies in 88 individuals.
**Authors:** Grünert SC, Stucki M, Morscher RJ, Suormala T, Bürer C, Burda P, Christensen E, Ficicioglu C, Herwig J, Kölker S, Möslinger D, Pasquini E, Santer R, Schwab KO, Wilcken B, Fowler B, Yue WW, Baumgartner MR
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-7-31](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-7-31)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2012 May 29;7:31. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-31.

3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency: clinical, biochemical, enzymatic
and molecular studies in 88 individuals.

Grünert SC(1), Stucki M, Morscher RJ, Suormala T, Bürer C, Burda P, Christensen
E, Ficicioglu C, Herwig J, Kölker S, Möslinger D, Pasquini E, Santer R, Schwab
KO, Wilcken B, Fowler B, Yue WW, Baumgartner MR.

Author information:
(1)Division of Metabolism and Children's Research Center (CRC), University
Children's Hospital Zurich, and Zürich Center for Integrative Human Physiology
(ZHIP), University of Zürich, Steinwiesstraße 75, 8032, Zürich, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Isolated 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (MCC) deficiency is an
autosomal recessive disorder of leucine metabolism caused by mutations in MCCC1
or MCCC2 encoding the α and β subunit of MCC, respectively. The phenotype is
highly variable ranging from acute neonatal onset with fatal outcome to
asymptomatic adults.
METHODS: We report clinical, biochemical, enzymatic and mutation data of 88 MCC
deficient individuals, 53 identified by newborn screening, 26 diagnosed due to
clinical symptoms or positive family history and 9 mothers, identified following
the positive newborn screening result of their baby.
RESULTS: Fifty-seven percent of patients were asymptomatic while 43% showed
clinical symptoms, many of which were probably not related to MCC deficiency but
due to ascertainment bias. However, 12 patients (5 of 53 identified by newborn
screening) presented with acute metabolic decompensations. We identified 15
novel MCCC1 and 16 novel MCCC2 mutant alleles. Additionally, we report
expression studies on 3 MCCC1 and 8 MCCC2 mutations and show an overview of all
132 MCCC1 and MCCC2 variants known to date.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data confirm that MCC deficiency, despite low penetrance, may
lead to a severe clinical phenotype resembling classical organic acidurias.
However, neither the genotype nor the biochemical phenotype is helpful in
predicting the clinical course.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-31
PMCID: PMC3495011
PMID: 22642865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
