---
reference_id: PMID:28459979
title: "Ocular congenital cranial dysinnervation disorders (CCDDs): insights into axon growth and guidance."
authors:
- Whitman MC
- Engle EC
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddx168
keywords:
- Animals
- "Axons/metabolism, physiology"
- Congenital Abnormalities
- "Duane Retraction Syndrome/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Eye Diseases, Hereditary/genetics"
- "Fibrosis/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- "Kinesins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- Mutation
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Ocular Motility Disorders/genetics
- "Oculomotor Muscles/abnormalities, pathology"
- "Ophthalmoplegia/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Skull/physiopathology
- Tubulin/genetics
- Congenital Cranial Dysinnervation Disorders
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ocular congenital cranial dysinnervation disorders (CCDDs): insights into axon growth and guidance.
**Authors:** Whitman MC, Engle EC
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddx168](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddx168)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2017 Aug 1;26(R1):R37-R44. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddx168.

Ocular congenital cranial dysinnervation disorders (CCDDs): insights into axon 
growth and guidance.

Whitman MC(1)(2)(3), Engle EC(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)F.M. Kirby Neurobiology Center, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, 
USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, 
USA.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(6)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA.

Unraveling the genetics of the paralytic strabismus syndromes known as 
congenital cranial dysinnervation disorders (CCDDs) is both informing physicians 
and their patients and broadening our understanding of development of the ocular 
motor system. Genetic mutations underlying ocular CCDDs alter either motor 
neuron specification or motor nerve development, and highlight the importance of 
modulations of cell signaling, cytoskeletal transport, and microtubule dynamics 
for axon growth and guidance. Here we review recent advances in our 
understanding of two CCDDs, congenital fibrosis of the extraocular muscles 
(CFEOM) and Duane retraction syndrome (DRS), and discuss what they have taught 
us about mechanisms of axon guidance and selective vulnerability. CFEOM presents 
with congenital ptosis and restricted eye movements, and can be caused by 
heterozygous missense mutations in the kinesin motor protein KIF21A or in the 
β-tubulin isotypes TUBB3 or TUBB2B. CFEOM-causing mutations in these genes alter 
protein function and result in axon growth and guidance defects. DRS presents 
with inability to abduct one or both eyes. It can be caused by decreased 
function of several transcription factors critical for abducens motor neuron 
identity, including MAFB, or by heterozygous missense mutations in CHN1, which 
encodes α2-chimaerin, a Rac-GAP GTPase that affects cytoskeletal dynamics. 
Examination of the orbital innervation in mice lacking Mafb has established that 
the stereotypical misinnervation of the lateral rectus by fibers of the 
oculomotor nerve in DRS is secondary to absence of the abducens nerve. Studies 
of a CHN1 mouse model have begun to elucidate mechanisms of selective 
vulnerability in the nervous system.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddx168
PMCID: PMC5886468
PMID: 28459979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]