---
reference_id: "PMID:14523039"
title: Congenital sick sinus syndrome caused by recessive mutations in the cardiac sodium channel gene (SCN5A).
authors:
- Benson DW
- Wang DW
- Dyment M
- Knilans TK
- Fish FA
- Strieper MJ
- Rhodes TH
- George AL Jr
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1172/JCI18062
keywords:
- Electrocardiography
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- NAV1.5 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel
- Protein Subunits
- "Sick Sinus Syndrome/congenital, genetics, physiopathology"
- Sodium Channels/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital sick sinus syndrome caused by recessive mutations in the cardiac sodium channel gene (SCN5A).
**Authors:** Benson DW, Wang DW, Dyment M, Knilans TK, Fish FA, Strieper MJ, Rhodes TH, George AL Jr
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI18062](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI18062)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2003 Oct;112(7):1019-28. doi: 10.1172/JCI18062.

Congenital sick sinus syndrome caused by recessive mutations in the cardiac 
sodium channel gene (SCN5A).

Benson DW(1), Wang DW, Dyment M, Knilans TK, Fish FA, Strieper MJ, Rhodes TH, 
George AL Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital, Ohio, USA. 
woody.benson@cchmc.org

Sick sinus syndrome (SSS) describes an arrhythmia phenotype attributed to sinus 
node dysfunction and diagnosed by electrocardiographic demonstration of sinus 
bradycardia or sinus arrest. Although frequently associated with underlying 
heart disease and seen most often in the elderly, SSS may occur in the fetus, 
infant, and child without apparent cause. In this setting, SSS is presumed to be 
congenital. Based on prior associations with disorders of cardiac rhythm and 
conduction, we screened the alpha subunit of the cardiac sodium channel (SCN5A) 
as a candidate gene in ten pediatric patients from seven families who were 
diagnosed with congenital SSS during the first decade of life. Probands from 
three kindreds exhibited compound heterozygosity for six distinct SCN5A alleles, 
including two mutations previously associated with dominant disorders of cardiac 
excitability. Biophysical characterization of the mutants using heterologously 
expressed recombinant human heart sodium channels demonstrate loss of function 
or significant impairments in channel gating (inactivation) that predict reduced 
myocardial excitability. Our findings reveal a molecular basis for some forms of 
congenital SSS and define a recessive disorder of a human heart voltage-gated 
sodium channel.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI18062
PMCID: PMC198523
PMID: 14523039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]