---
reference_id: "PMID:36533556"
title: Variable phenotypes and penetrance between and within different zebrafish ciliary transition zone mutants.
authors:
- Wang J
- Thomas HR
- Thompson RG
- Waldrep SC
- Fogerty J
- Song P
- Li Z
- Ma Y
- Santra P
- Hoover JD
- Yeo NC
- Drummond IA
- Yoder BK
- Amack JD
- Perkins B
- Parant JM
journal: Dis Model Mech
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1242/dmm.049568
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variable phenotypes and penetrance between and within different zebrafish ciliary transition zone mutants.
**Authors:** Wang J, Thomas HR, Thompson RG, Waldrep SC, Fogerty J, Song P, Li Z, Ma Y, Santra P, Hoover JD, Yeo NC, Drummond IA, Yoder BK, Amack JD, Perkins B, Parant JM
**Journal:** Dis Model Mech (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dmm.049568](https://doi.org/10.1242/dmm.049568)

## Content

1. Dis Model Mech. 2022 Dec 1;15(12):dmm049568. doi: 10.1242/dmm.049568. Epub
2022  Dec 19.

Variable phenotypes and penetrance between and within different zebrafish 
ciliary transition zone mutants.

Wang J(1), Thomas HR(1), Thompson RG(1), Waldrep SC(1), Fogerty J(2), Song P(2), 
Li Z(3), Ma Y(1), Santra P(4), Hoover JD(1), Yeo NC(1), Drummond IA(5), Yoder 
BK(3), Amack JD(4), Perkins B(2), Parant JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham School of Medicine, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmic Research, Cole Eye Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.
(3)Department of Cell, Developmental and Integrative Biology, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.
(4)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, SUNY Upstate Medical 
University, Syracuse, NY 13210, USA.
(5)Davis Center for Aging and Regeneration, Mount Desert Island Biological 
Laboratory, 159 Old Bar Harbor Road, Bar Harbor, ME 04609, USA.

Meckel syndrome, nephronophthisis, Joubert syndrome and Bardet-Biedl syndrome 
are caused by mutations in proteins that localize to the ciliary transition zone 
(TZ). The phenotypically distinct syndromes suggest that these TZ proteins have 
differing functions. However, mutations in a single TZ gene can result in 
multiple syndromes, suggesting that the phenotype is influenced by modifier 
genes. We performed a comprehensive analysis of ten zebrafish TZ mutants, 
including mks1, tmem216, tmem67, rpgrip1l, cc2d2a, b9d2, cep290, tctn1, nphp1 
and nphp4, as well as mutants in ift88 and ift172. Our data indicate that 
variations in phenotypes exist between different TZ mutants, supporting 
different tissue-specific functions of these TZ genes. Further, we observed 
phenotypic variations within progeny of a single TZ mutant, reminiscent of 
multiple disease syndromes being associated with mutations in one gene. In some 
mutants, the dynamics of the phenotype became complex with transitory phenotypes 
that are corrected over time. We also demonstrated that multiple-guide-derived 
CRISPR/Cas9 F0 'crispant' embryos recapitulate zygotic null phenotypes, and 
rapidly identified ciliary phenotypes in 11 cilia-associated gene candidates 
(ankfn1, ccdc65, cfap57, fhad1, nme7, pacrg, saxo2, c1orf194, ttc26, zmynd12 and 
cfap52).

© 2022. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.049568
PMCID: PMC9844136
PMID: 36533556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.