---
reference_id: "PMID:26293599"
title: KANSL1 gene disruption associated with the full clinical spectrum of 17q21.31 microdeletion syndrome.
authors:
- Moreno-Igoa M
- Hernández-Charro B
- Bengoa-Alonso A
- Pérez-Juana-del-Casal A
- Romero-Ibarra C
- Nieva-Echebarria B
- Ramos-Arroyo MA
journal: BMC Med Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1186/s12881-015-0211-0
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17/genetics"
- DNA Primers/genetics
- Female
- Haploinsufficiency/genetics
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, pathology"
- Karyotyping
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Phenotype
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# KANSL1 gene disruption associated with the full clinical spectrum of 17q21.31 microdeletion syndrome.
**Authors:** Moreno-Igoa M, Hernández-Charro B, Bengoa-Alonso A, Pérez-Juana-del-Casal A, Romero-Ibarra C, Nieva-Echebarria B, Ramos-Arroyo MA
**Journal:** BMC Med Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12881-015-0211-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12881-015-0211-0)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genet. 2015 Aug 22;16:68. doi: 10.1186/s12881-015-0211-0.

KANSL1 gene disruption associated with the full clinical spectrum of 17q21.31 
microdeletion syndrome.

Moreno-Igoa M(1), Hernández-Charro B(2), Bengoa-Alonso A(3), 
Pérez-Juana-del-Casal A(4), Romero-Ibarra C(5), Nieva-Echebarria B(6), 
Ramos-Arroyo MA(7).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Department, Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, IdiSNA, 
Navarra Institute for Health Research, Irunlarrea 4, 31008, Pamplona, Navarra, 
Spain. maria.moreno.igoa@navarra.es.
(2)Medical Genetics Department, Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, IdiSNA, 
Navarra Institute for Health Research, Irunlarrea 4, 31008, Pamplona, Navarra, 
Spain. blanca.hernandez.charro@navarra.es.
(3)Medical Genetics Department, Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, IdiSNA, 
Navarra Institute for Health Research, Irunlarrea 4, 31008, Pamplona, Navarra, 
Spain. amaya.bengoa.alonso@navarra.es.
(4)Medical Genetics Department, Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, IdiSNA, 
Navarra Institute for Health Research, Irunlarrea 4, 31008, Pamplona, Navarra, 
Spain. aranzazu.perezjuana.delcasal@navarra.es.
(5)Paediatric-cardiology Unit, Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, IdiSNA, Navarra 
Institute for Health Research, Irunlarrea 4, 31008, Pamplona, Navarra, Spain. 
cromeroi@navarra.es.
(6)Cellular Genetics Unit, Policlínica Gipuzkoa, Paseo Miramón 174, Donostia, 
20014, Gipuzkoa, Spain. bnievae@euskalnet.net.
(7)Medical Genetics Department, Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, IdiSNA, 
Navarra Institute for Health Research, Irunlarrea 4, 31008, Pamplona, Navarra, 
Spain. ma.ramos.arroyo@navarra.es.

BACKGROUND: Chromosome 17q21.31 microdeletion syndrome is a multisystem genomic 
disorder caused by a recurrent 600-kb-long deletion, or haploinsufficiency of 
the chromatin modifier gene KANSL1, which maps to that region. Patients with 
KANSL1 intragenic mutations have been reported to display the major clinical 
features of 17q21.31 microdeletion syndrome. However, they did not exhibit the 
full clinical spectrum of this disorder, which might indicate that an additional 
gene or genes, located in the 17q21.31 locus, might also be involved in the 
syndrome's phenotype.
METHODS: Conventional and molecular karyotypes were performed on a female 
patient with intellectual disability, agenesis of the corpus callosum, heart 
defects, hydronephrosis, hypotonia, pigmentary skin anomalies and facial 
dysmorphic features. FISH analysis was conducted for chromosomal breakpoint 
localization. qRT-PCR was applied for the comparative gene expression of KANSL1 
gene in the patient and a control group.
RESULTS: Herein, we present the first report of disruption and 
haploinsufficiency of the KANSL1 gene, secondary to a t(1;17)(q12;q21)dn 
chromosomal translocation in a girl that also carried a de novo ~289-kb deletion 
on 16p11.2. KANSL1 gene expression studies and comparative clinical analysis of 
patients with 17q21.31 deletions and intragenic KANSL1 gene defects indicate 
that KANSL1 dysfunction is associated with the full spectrum of the 17q21.31 
microdeletion syndrome, which includes characteristic facial features, 
hypotonia, intellectual disability, and structural defects of the brain, heart 
and genitourinary system, as well as, musculoskeletal and neuroectodermal 
anomalies. Moreover, we provide further evidence for the overlapping clinical 
phenotype of this condition with the cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome.
CONCLUSIONS: KANSL1 gene haploinsufficiency is necessary and sufficient to cause 
the full spectrum of the 17q21.31 microdeletion syndrome. We hypothesize that 
the KANSL1 gene might have an effect on the Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase 
(MAPK) pathway activity, which is known to be deregulated in the CFC syndrome. 
This pathway has a crucial role in the development of the heart and craniofacial 
morphology, as well as the skin, eye, brain and musculoskeletal systems.

DOI: 10.1186/s12881-015-0211-0
PMCID: PMC4593202
PMID: 26293599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]