---
reference_id: "PMID:22259056"
title: Activation of cyclic AMP signaling leads to different pathway alterations in lesions of the adrenal cortex caused by germline PRKAR1A defects versus those due to somatic GNAS mutations.
authors:
- Almeida MQ
- Azevedo MF
- Xekouki P
- Bimpaki EI
- Horvath A
- Collins MT
- Karaviti LP
- Jeha GS
- Bhattacharyya N
- Cheadle C
- Watkins T
- Bourdeau I
- Nesterova M
- Stratakis CA
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-3000
keywords:
- "Adrenal Cortex/metabolism, pathology"
- "Adrenal Cortex Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Adrenal Insufficiency/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Adrenocortical Hyperfunction/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Cell Cycle
- Chromogranins
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Cyclic AMP/metabolism
- "Cyclic AMP-Dependent Protein Kinase RIalpha Subunit/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cyclic AMP-Dependent Protein Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Focal Adhesion Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits, Gs/genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Humans
- MAP Kinase Signaling System
- Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis
- "RNA, Messenger"
- "Receptors, Cell Surface/genetics, metabolism"
- Second Messenger Systems
- Wnt Signaling Pathway
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Activation of cyclic AMP signaling leads to different pathway alterations in lesions of the adrenal cortex caused by germline PRKAR1A defects versus those due to somatic GNAS mutations.
**Authors:** Almeida MQ, Azevedo MF, Xekouki P, Bimpaki EI, Horvath A, Collins MT, Karaviti LP, Jeha GS, Bhattacharyya N, Cheadle C, Watkins T, Bourdeau I, Nesterova M, Stratakis CA
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2011-3000](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2011-3000)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Apr;97(4):E687-93. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-3000.
Epub  2012 Jan 18.

Activation of cyclic AMP signaling leads to different pathway alterations in 
lesions of the adrenal cortex caused by germline PRKAR1A defects versus those 
due to somatic GNAS mutations.

Almeida MQ(1), Azevedo MF, Xekouki P, Bimpaki EI, Horvath A, Collins MT, 
Karaviti LP, Jeha GS, Bhattacharyya N, Cheadle C, Watkins T, Bourdeau I, 
Nesterova M, Stratakis CA.

Author information:
(1)Section on Endocrinology and Genetics, Program on Developmental Endocrinology 
and Genetics, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and 
Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Building 10, CRC, Room 1-3330, 
10 Center Drive, MSC1103, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

CONTEXT: The overwhelming majority of benign lesions of the adrenal cortex 
leading to Cushing syndrome are linked to one or another abnormality of the cAMP 
or protein kinase pathway. PRKAR1A-inactivating mutations are responsible for 
primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease, whereas somatic GNAS 
activating mutations cause macronodular disease in the context of 
McCune-Albright syndrome, ACTH-independent macronodular hyperplasia, and, 
rarely, cortisol-producing adenomas.
OBJECTIVE AND DESIGN: The whole-genome expression profile (WGEP) of normal 
(pooled) adrenals, PRKAR1A- (3) and GNAS-mutant (3) was studied. Quantitative 
RT-PCR and Western blot were used to validate WGEP findings.
RESULTS: MAPK and p53 signaling pathways were highly overexpressed in all 
lesions against normal tissue. GNAS-mutant tissues were significantly enriched 
for extracellular matrix receptor interaction and focal adhesion pathways when 
compared with PRKAR1A-mutant (fold enrichment 3.5, P < 0.0001 and 2.1, P < 
0.002, respectively). NFKB, NFKBIA, and TNFRSF1A were higher in GNAS-mutant 
tumors (P < 0.05). Genes related to the Wnt signaling pathway (CCND1, CTNNB1, 
LEF1, LRP5, WISP1, and WNT3) were overexpressed in PRKAR1A-mutant lesions.
CONCLUSION: WGEP analysis revealed that not all cAMP activation is the same: 
adrenal lesions harboring PRKAR1A or GNAS mutations share the downstream 
activation of certain oncogenic signals (such as MAPK and some cell cycle genes) 
but differ substantially in their effects on others.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2011-3000
PMCID: PMC3319183
PMID: 22259056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]