---
reference_id: "PMID:20513134"
title: "Stickler syndrome and the vitreous phenotype: mutations in COL2A1 and COL11A1."
authors:
- Richards AJ
- McNinch A
- Martin H
- Oakhill K
- Rai H
- Waller S
- Treacy B
- Whittaker J
- Meredith S
- Poulson A
- Snead MP
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1002/humu.21257
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stickler syndrome and the vitreous phenotype: mutations in COL2A1 and COL11A1.
**Authors:** Richards AJ, McNinch A, Martin H, Oakhill K, Rai H, Waller S, Treacy B, Whittaker J, Meredith S, Poulson A, Snead MP
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.21257](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.21257)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2010 Jun;31(6):E1461-71. doi: 10.1002/humu.21257.

Stickler syndrome and the vitreous phenotype: mutations in COL2A1 and COL11A1.

Richards AJ(1), McNinch A, Martin H, Oakhill K, Rai H, Waller S, Treacy B, 
Whittaker J, Meredith S, Poulson A, Snead MP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QP, UK.

Stickler syndrome is a dominantly inherited disorder affecting the fibrillar 
type II/XI collagen molecules expressed in vitreous and cartilage. Mutations 
have been found in COL2A1, COL11A1 and COL11A2. It has a highly variable 
phenotype that can include midline clefting, hearing loss, premature 
osteoarthritis, congenital high myopia and blindness through retinal detachment. 
Although the systemic phenotype is highly variable, the vitreous phenotype has 
been used successfully to differentiate between patients with mutations in these 
different genes. Mutations in COL2A1 usually result in a congenital membranous 
vitreous anomaly. In contrast mutations in COL11A1 result in a different 
vitreous phenotype where the lamellae have an irregular and beaded appearance. 
However, it is now apparent that a new sub-group of COL2A1 mutations is emerging 
that result in a different phenotype with a hypoplastic vitreous that fills the 
posterior chamber of the eye, and is either optically empty or has sparse 
irregular lamellae. Here we characterise a further 89 families with Stickler 
syndrome or a type II collagenopathy, and correlate the mutations with the 
vitreous phenotype. We have identified 57 novel mutations including missense 
changes in both COL2A1 and COL11A1 and have also detected two cases of complete 
COL2A1 gene deletions using MLPA.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.21257
PMID: 20513134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]