---
reference_id: "PMID:38719981"
title: "Early-stage hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma treated with radical radiotherapy at a uniform dose of 70 Gy in 35 fractions: a single-center study."
authors:
- Katano A
- Yamashita H
journal: Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00405-024-08722-w
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hypopharyngeal Neoplasms/radiotherapy, pathology, mortality"
- Male
- Female
- Retrospective Studies
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Staging
- Aged
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/radiotherapy, pathology, mortality"
- "Dose Fractionation, Radiation"
- Adult
- Survival Rate
- "Squamous Cell Carcinoma of Head and Neck/radiotherapy, pathology, mortality"
- Disease-Free Survival
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early-stage hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma treated with radical radiotherapy at a uniform dose of 70 Gy in 35 fractions: a single-center study.
**Authors:** Katano A, Yamashita H
**Journal:** Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00405-024-08722-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00405-024-08722-w)

## Content

1. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2024 Aug;281(8):4401-4407. doi: 
10.1007/s00405-024-08722-w. Epub 2024 May 8.

Early-stage hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma treated with radical 
radiotherapy at a uniform dose of 70 Gy in 35 fractions: a single-center study.

Katano A(1), Yamashita H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, The University of Tokyo Hospital, 7-3-1 Hongo, 
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan. katanoa-rad@h.u-tokyo.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Radiology, The University of Tokyo Hospital, 7-3-1 Hongo, 
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (HSCC) is often undetected 
until advanced stages, which contributes to poor survival rates. Recent advances 
in diagnostic techniques have enhanced the feasibility of early detection, and 
this study evaluated the efficacy and safety of radical radiotherapy that 
specifically targets early stage HSCC.
METHODS: This retrospective cohort study consecutively analyzed patients with 
clinical stage I or II HSCC between December 2008 and February 2023. These 
patients underwent radical radiotherapy with a uniform dose of 70 Gy delivered 
in 35 fractions to the primary site, followed by elective nodal irradiation. We 
assessed clinical outcomes, including overall survival (OS), disease-free 
survival (DFS), and 5-year locoregional control (LRC). Multivariate analyses 
were performed to identify the independent prognostic factors for OS.
RESULTS: The 5-year OS rate of the entire cohort was 80.7% (95% confidence 
interval [CI] = 66.5-89.4%), with no significant difference between patients 
with clinical stage I and II HSCC. Stratified by subsite, the 5-year OS for 
pyriform sinus, posterior pharyngeal wall, and postcricoid region were 81.6, 
68.2, and 100%, respectively. The ECOG-Performance status (PS) was identified as 
an independent risk factor for OS (hazard ratio [HR] = 8.457; 95% CI 
1.325-53.970; p = 0.024). DFS at 5 years was 66.4%, with local recurrence being 
the most frequent, and LRC rate at 5 years was 79.3%. Acute and late-phase 
toxicities were predominantly mild to moderate, with no grade 3 or higher 
toxicities reported.
CONCLUSION: This study supports radical radiotherapy as an effective approach 
for optimal tumor control in patients with early stage HSCC. Despite the 
limitations of this study, including its retrospective design and single-center 
confinement, our results revealed the effectiveness and feasibility of radical 
radiotherapy in the management of early stage HSCC.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-024-08722-w
PMCID: PMC11266369
PMID: 38719981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]