---
reference_id: "PMID:37265600"
title: Compromised white matter is related to lower cognitive performance in adults with phenylketonuria.
authors:
- Muri R
- Maissen-Abgottspon S
- Reed MB
- Kreis R
- Hoefemann M
- Radojewski P
- Pospieszny K
- Hochuli M
- Wiest R
- Lanzenberger R
- Trepp R
- Everts R
journal: Brain Commun
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcad155
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Compromised white matter is related to lower cognitive performance in adults with phenylketonuria.
**Authors:** Muri R, Maissen-Abgottspon S, Reed MB, Kreis R, Hoefemann M, Radojewski P, Pospieszny K, Hochuli M, Wiest R, Lanzenberger R, Trepp R, Everts R
**Journal:** Brain Commun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/braincomms/fcad155](https://doi.org/10.1093/braincomms/fcad155)

## Content

1. Brain Commun. 2023 May 15;5(3):fcad155. doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcad155. 
eCollection 2023.

Compromised white matter is related to lower cognitive performance in adults 
with phenylketonuria.

Muri R(1)(2)(3)(4), Maissen-Abgottspon S(1)(4), Reed MB(5), Kreis R(4)(6), 
Hoefemann M(4)(6), Radojewski P(2)(4), Pospieszny K(2), Hochuli M(1), Wiest 
R(2)(4), Lanzenberger R(5), Trepp R(1), Everts R(1)(4)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology, Nutritional Medicine and Metabolism, 
Inselspital, Bern University Hospital and University of Bern, 3010 Bern, 
Switzerland.
(2)Support Center for Advanced Neuroimaging (SCAN), University Institute of 
Diagnostic and Interventional Neuroradiology, Inselspital, Bern University 
Hospital and University of Bern, 3010 Bern, Switzerland.
(3)Graduate School for Health Sciences, University of Bern, 3012 Bern, 
Switzerland.
(4)Translational Imaging Center (TIC), Swiss Institute for Translational and 
Entrepreneurial Medicine, 3010 Bern, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Medical University of Vienna, 
1090 Vienna, Austria.
(6)Magnetic Resonance Methodology, Institute of Diagnostic and Interventional 
Neuroradiology, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital and University of Bern, 
3010 Bern, Switzerland.
(7)Division of Neuropaediatrics, Development and Rehabilitation, Department of 
Paediatrics, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital and University of Bern, 3010 
Bern, Switzerland.

Despite increasing knowledge about the effects of phenylketonuria on brain 
structure and function, it is uncertain whether white matter microstructure is 
affected and if it is linked to patients' metabolic control or cognitive 
performance. Thus, we quantitatively assessed white matter characteristics in 
adults with phenylketonuria and assessed their relationship to concurrent brain 
and blood phenylalanine levels, historical metabolic control and cognitive 
performance. Diffusion tensor imaging and 1H spectroscopy were performed in 30 
adults with early-treated classical phenylketonuria (median age 35.5 years) and 
54 healthy controls (median age 29.3 years). Fractional anisotropy and mean, 
axial and radial diffusivity were investigated using tract-based spatial 
statistics, and white matter lesion load was evaluated. Brain phenylalanine 
levels were measured with 1H spectroscopy whereas concurrent plasma 
phenylalanine levels were assessed after an overnight fast. Retrospective 
phenylalanine levels were collected to estimate historical metabolic control, 
and a neuropsychological evaluation assessed the performance in executive 
functions, attention and processing speed. Widespread reductions in mean 
diffusivity, axial diffusivity and fractional anisotropy occurred in patients 
compared to controls. Mean diffusivity and axial diffusivity were decreased in 
several white matter tracts and were most restricted in the optic radiation 
(effect size rrb = 0.66 to 0.78, P < 0.001) and posterior corona radiata (rrb = 
0.83 to 0.90, P < 0.001). Lower fractional anisotropy was found in the optic 
radiation and posterior corona radiata (rrb = 0.43 to 0.49, P < 0.001). White 
matter microstructure in patients was significantly associated with cognition. 
Specifically, inhibition was related to axial diffusivity in the external 
capsule (rs = -0.69, P < 0.001) and the superior (rs = -0.58, P < 0.001) and 
inferior longitudinal fasciculi (rs = -0.60, P < 0.001). Cognitive flexibility 
was associated with mean diffusivity of the posterior limb of the internal 
capsule (rs = -0.62, P < 0.001), and divided attention correlated with 
fractional anisotropy of the external capsule (rs = -0.61, P < 0.001). Neither 
concurrent nor historical metabolic control was significantly associated with 
white matter microstructure. White matter lesions were present in 29 out of 30 
patients (96.7%), most often in the parietal and occipital lobes. However, total 
white matter lesion load scores were unrelated to patients' cognitive 
performance and metabolic control. In conclusion, our findings demonstrate that 
white matter alterations in early-treated phenylketonuria persist into 
adulthood, are most prominent in the posterior white matter and are likely to be 
driven by axonal damage. Furthermore, diffusion tensor imaging metrics in adults 
with phenylketonuria were related to performance in attention and executive 
functions.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/braincomms/fcad155
PMCID: PMC10231812
PMID: 37265600

Conflict of interest statement: R.L. received travel grants and/or conference 
speaker honoraria from Bruker BioSpin within the last 3 years and 
investigator-initiated research funding from Siemens Healthcare regarding 
clinical research using Positron Emission Tomography-Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
(PET/MRI). He has been a shareholder of the start-up company BM Health GmbH 
since 2019. All other authors report no competing interests.