---
reference_id: "PMID:37621721"
title: Long-Term Treatment of Narcolepsy and Idiopathic Hypersomnia with Low-Sodium Oxybate.
authors:
- Schneider LD
- Morse AM
- Strunc MJ
- Lee-Iannotti JK
- Bogan RK
journal: Nat Sci Sleep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.2147/NSS.S412793
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-Term Treatment of Narcolepsy and Idiopathic Hypersomnia with Low-Sodium Oxybate.
**Authors:** Schneider LD, Morse AM, Strunc MJ, Lee-Iannotti JK, Bogan RK
**Journal:** Nat Sci Sleep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.2147/NSS.S412793](https://doi.org/10.2147/NSS.S412793)

## Content

1. Nat Sci Sleep. 2023 Aug 19;15:663-675. doi: 10.2147/NSS.S412793. eCollection 
2023.

Long-Term Treatment of Narcolepsy and Idiopathic Hypersomnia with Low-Sodium 
Oxybate.

Schneider LD(1), Morse AM(2), Strunc MJ(3), Lee-Iannotti JK(4), Bogan RK(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(2)Janet Weis Children's Hospital, Geisinger Medical Center, Danville, PA, USA.
(3)The Center for Pediatric Sleep Medicine, Children's Hospital of The King's 
Daughters, Norfolk, VA, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, The University of Arizona College of Medicine, 
Phoenix, AZ, USA.
(5)Department of Pulmonology, University of South Carolina School of Medicine, 
Columbia, SC, USA.

Narcolepsy and idiopathic hypersomnia are chronic conditions that negatively 
affect alertness, mental and physical energy, functioning, and quality of life 
(QoL). Calcium, magnesium, potassium, and sodium oxybates (low-sodium oxybate; 
LXB) is an oxybate formulation with 92% less sodium than sodium oxybate (SXB; a 
treatment for narcolepsy) and the same active moiety. LXB is approved in the US 
for treatment of cataplexy or excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) in patients 7 
years of age or older with narcolepsy, and idiopathic hypersomnia in adults. In 
Phase 3 clinical trials, LXB exhibited a safety profile consistent with that of 
SXB in narcolepsy. Besides continued efficacy in treating symptoms, potential 
benefits of long-term LXB treatment include flexible optimization of dosing and 
regimen, improvement of QoL and functioning, weight loss, and (relative to SXB 
in narcolepsy) health benefits of reduced sodium content. Dosing of LXB is twice 
nightly (for narcolepsy) or once or twice nightly (for idiopathic hypersomnia) 
based on patient characteristics and response, and individualized titration can 
be leveraged over the long term as a patient's life circumstances change. 
Patients with narcolepsy transitioning from SXB initiate LXB at the same dose, 
and most patients require no further changes to achieve similar efficacy and 
tolerability. Improvements in functioning and QoL with LXB treatment could have 
cascading positive effects in multiple domains, particularly in younger 
patients. In clinical trials, LXB was associated with weight loss in both 
narcolepsy (in which obesity is a well-established comorbidity) and idiopathic 
hypersomnia, only occasionally leading participants to be underweight. As both 
narcolepsy and idiopathic hypersomnia are associated with increased risk of 
cardiometabolic and cardiovascular comorbidities, limiting medication-related 
sodium intake with LXB may have significant health benefits, although this has 
not yet been verified prospectively due to the prolonged follow-up required. LXB 
is a promising long-term treatment for narcolepsy and idiopathic hypersomnia.

Plain Language Summary: Narcolepsy and idiopathic hypersomnia are disorders that 
make people feel very sleepy. Low-sodium oxybate (LXB) is a medicine for these 
disorders. Doctors think LXB works on parts of the brain that keep people awake. 
LXB may quiet those brain parts down at night by reducing their electrical 
activity, which helps people sleep better. LXB wears off by the morning, so 
people can wake up normally and feel more alert the next day. LXB has less 
sodium (which is part of salt) than a medicine called sodium oxybate. Sodium 
oxybate has been used for narcolepsy for more than 20 years. LXB has several 
benefits. First, LXB may be healthier than medicines that contain a lot of 
sodium, such as a high-sodium oxybate. This is because sodium can increase blood 
pressure and risk of heart disease. Second, LXB can be taken twice each night 
for narcolepsy, or once or twice each night for idiopathic hypersomnia. This 
depends on a person’s lifestyle, how well the medicine is working, and side 
effects. Third, people taking LXB are more able to work and do other activities 
and have better quality of life. Finally, people taking LXB may lose weight. 
This can help overweight or obese people.

© 2023 Schneider et al.

DOI: 10.2147/NSS.S412793
PMCID: PMC10445641
PMID: 37621721

Conflict of interest statement: Logan D. Schneider is a compensated member of 
advisory boards and speakers bureaus for Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Eisai, and 
Harmony Biosciences. Anne Marie Morse has received research/grant support and 
consultancy fees from Avadel, Geisinger Health Plan, ResMed Foundation, Harmony 
Biosciences, Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Takeda Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, NLS 
Pharmaceuticals, Alkermes, UCB Pharmaceuticals, and NIH. She is also a paid 
expert consultant of Irish State Claims Agency; CEO of DAMM Good Sleep, LLC. 
Michael J. Strunc has participated in advisory boards for Jazz Pharmaceuticals. 
Joyce K. Lee-Iannotti has no conflicts of interest to disclose. Richard K. Bogan 
is a shareholder of Watermark Medical and Healthy Humming, LLC; serves on the 
board of directors for Watermark; is a medical consultant to Jazz 
Pharmaceuticals, Harmony Biosciences, Avadel Pharmaceuticals, Takeda, and 
Oventus; has conducted industry-funded research for Avadel, Axsome, Bresotec, 
Bayer, Idorsia, Suven, Jazz, Balance, NLS, Vanda, Merck, Eisai, Philips, Fresca, 
Takeda, LivaNova, Roche, Sanofi, Sommetrics, and Noctrix; and is on the speakers 
bureau for Jazz, Eisai, and Harmony.