---
reference_id: "PMID:15855349"
title: "Subcellular localization of ALMS1 supports involvement of centrosome and basal body dysfunction in the pathogenesis of obesity, insulin resistance, and type 2 diabetes."
authors:
- Hearn T
- Spalluto C
- Phillips VJ
- Renforth GL
- Copin N
- Hanley NA
- Wilson DI
journal: Diabetes
year: '2005'
doi: 10.2337/diabetes.54.5.1581
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Antibodies
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- Centrosome/metabolism
- Conserved Sequence
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/physiopathology"
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- In Situ Nick-End Labeling
- Insulin Resistance/physiology
- Jurkat Cells
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Obesity/physiopathology
- Peptide Fragments/analysis
- "Proteins/analysis, genetics"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Subcellular localization of ALMS1 supports involvement of centrosome and basal body dysfunction in the pathogenesis of obesity, insulin resistance, and type 2 diabetes.
**Authors:** Hearn T, Spalluto C, Phillips VJ, Renforth GL, Copin N, Hanley NA, Wilson DI
**Journal:** Diabetes (2005)
**DOI:** [10.2337/diabetes.54.5.1581](https://doi.org/10.2337/diabetes.54.5.1581)

## Content

1. Diabetes. 2005 May;54(5):1581-7. doi: 10.2337/diabetes.54.5.1581.

Subcellular localization of ALMS1 supports involvement of centrosome and basal
body dysfunction in the pathogenesis of obesity, insulin resistance, and type 2
diabetes.

Hearn T(1), Spalluto C, Phillips VJ, Renforth GL, Copin N, Hanley NA, Wilson DI.

Author information:
(1)Human Genetics Division, University of Southampton, Duthie Building (MP808),
Southampton General Hospital, Tremona Road, Southampton SO16 6YD, United
Kingdom.

Alström syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in a
novel gene of unknown function, ALMS1. Central features of Alström syndrome
include obesity, insulin resistance, and type 2 diabetes, and therefore
investigating ALMS1 function stands to offer new insights into the pathogenesis
of these common conditions. To begin this process, we have analyzed the
subcellular localization and tissue distribution of ALMS1 by immunofluorescence.
We show that ALMS1 is widely expressed and localizes to centrosomes and to the
base of cilia. Fibroblasts with disrupted ALMS1 assemble primary cilia and
microtubule cytoskeletons that appear normal, suggesting that the Alström
syndrome phenotype results from impaired function rather than abnormal
development. Coupled with recent data on the complex phenotype of Bardet-Biedl
syndrome, our findings imply an unexpected central role for basal body and
centrosome dysfunction in the pathogenesis of obesity, insulin resistance, and
type 2 diabetes. Unraveling the molecular mechanisms underlying the Alström
syndrome phenotype will be important in the search for new therapeutic targets
for these conditions.

DOI: 10.2337/diabetes.54.5.1581
PMID: 15855349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
