---
reference_id: "PMID:37924152"
title: Clinical and biological relevance of glial fibrillary acidic protein in Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Yang Z
- Sreenivasan K
- Toledano Strom EN
- Osse AML
- Pasia LG
- Cosme CG
- Mugosa MRN
- Chevalier EL
- Ritter A
- Miller JB
- Cordes D
- Cummings JL
- Kinney JW
journal: Alzheimers Res Ther
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13195-023-01340-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and biological relevance of glial fibrillary acidic protein in Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Yang Z, Sreenivasan K, Toledano Strom EN, Osse AML, Pasia LG, Cosme CG, Mugosa MRN, Chevalier EL, Ritter A, Miller JB, Cordes D, Cummings JL, Kinney JW
**Journal:** Alzheimers Res Ther (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13195-023-01340-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13195-023-01340-4)

## Content

1. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2023 Nov 3;15(1):190. doi: 10.1186/s13195-023-01340-4.

Clinical and biological relevance of glial fibrillary acidic protein in 
Alzheimer's disease.

Yang Z(1)(2), Sreenivasan K(3)(4), Toledano Strom EN(4), Osse AML(4), Pasia 
LG(4), Cosme CG(5), Mugosa MRN(4), Chevalier EL(4), Ritter A(6), Miller JB(3), 
Cordes D(3)(4)(7), Cummings JL(4)(8), Kinney JW(4)(8).

Author information:
(1)Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, Las Vegas, NV, USA. 
yangz@ccf.org.
(2)Department of Brain Health, University of Nevada Las Vegas, Las Vegas, NV, 
USA. yangz@ccf.org.
(3)Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, Las Vegas, NV, USA.
(4)Department of Brain Health, University of Nevada Las Vegas, Las Vegas, NV, 
USA.
(5)Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine, University of Nevada Las Vegas, Las Vegas, 
NV, USA.
(6)Hoag's Pickup Family Neurosciences Institute, Newport Beach, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of Colorado, Boulder, 
CO, 80309, USA.
(8)Chambers-Grundy Center for Transformative Neuroscience, Pam Quirk Brain 
Health and Biomarker Laboratory, Department of Brain Health, University of 
Nevada Las Vegas, Las Vegas, NV, USA.

INTRODUCTION: There is a tremendous need for identifying reliable blood-based 
biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease (AD) that are tied to the biological ATN 
(amyloid, tau and neurodegeneration) framework as well as clinical assessment 
and progression.
METHODS: One hundred forty-four elderly participants underwent 18F-AV45 positron 
emission tomography (PET) scan, structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
scan, and blood sample collection. The composite standardized uptake value ratio 
(SUVR) was derived from 18F-AV45 PET to assess brain amyloid burden, and the 
hippocampal volume was determined from structural MRI scans. Plasma glial 
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), phosphorylated tau-181 (ptau-181), and 
neurofilament light (NfL) measured by single molecular array (SIMOA) technology 
were assessed with respect to ATN framework, genetic risk factor, age, clinical 
assessment, and future functional decline among the participants.
RESULTS: Among the three plasma markers, GFAP best discriminated participants 
stratified by clinical diagnosis and brain amyloid status. Age was strongly 
associated with NfL, followed by GFAP and ptau-181 at much weaker extent. Brain 
amyloid was strongly associated with plasma GFAP and ptau-181 and to a lesser 
extent with plasma NfL. Moderate association was observed between plasma 
markers. Hippocampal volume was weakly associated with all three markers. 
Elevated GFAP and ptau-181 were associated with worse cognition, and plasma GFAP 
was the most predictive of future functional decline. Combining GFAP and 
ptau-181 together was the best model to predict brain amyloid status across all 
participants (AUC = 0.86) or within cognitively impaired participants 
(AUC = 0.93); adding NfL as an additional predictor only had a marginal 
improvement.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that GFAP is of potential clinical utility in 
screening amyloid pathology and predicting future cognitive decline. GFAP, NfL, 
and ptau-181 were moderately associated with each other, with discrepant 
relevance to age, sex, and AD genetic risk, suggesting their relevant but 
differential roles for AD assessment. The combination of GFAP with ptau-181 
provides an accurate model to predict brain amyloid status, with the superior 
performance of GFAP over ptau-181 when the prediction is limited to cognitively 
impaired participants.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-023-01340-4
PMCID: PMC10623866
PMID: 37924152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.