---
reference_id: "PMID:10545952"
title: "Fatal infantile cardioencephalomyopathy with COX deficiency and mutations in SCO2, a COX assembly gene."
authors:
- Papadopoulou LC
- Sue CM
- Davidson MM
- Tanji K
- Nishino I
- Sadlock JE
- Krishna S
- Walker W
- Selby J
- Glerum DM
- Coster RV
- Lyon G
- Scalais E
- Lebel R
- Kaplan P
- Shanske S
- De Vivo DC
- Bonilla E
- Hirano M
- DiMauro S
- Schon EA
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1038/15513
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- "Cardiomyopathies/enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- Carrier Proteins
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- Conserved Sequence/genetics
- "Cysteine/genetics, metabolism"
- Cytochrome-c Oxidase Deficiency
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Electron Transport Complex IV/metabolism
- Fatal Outcome
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Isoenzymes/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Mitochondrial Proteins
- Molecular Chaperones
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- "Myocardium/enzymology, metabolism, pathology"
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- "Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length"
- "Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "RNA, Messenger/analysis, genetics"
- Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fatal infantile cardioencephalomyopathy with COX deficiency and mutations in SCO2, a COX assembly gene.
**Authors:** Papadopoulou LC, Sue CM, Davidson MM, Tanji K, Nishino I, Sadlock JE, Krishna S, Walker W, Selby J, Glerum DM, Coster RV, Lyon G, Scalais E, Lebel R, Kaplan P, Shanske S, De Vivo DC, Bonilla E, Hirano M, DiMauro S, Schon EA
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1038/15513](https://doi.org/10.1038/15513)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1999 Nov;23(3):333-7. doi: 10.1038/15513.

Fatal infantile cardioencephalomyopathy with COX deficiency and mutations in 
SCO2, a COX assembly gene.

Papadopoulou LC(1), Sue CM, Davidson MM, Tanji K, Nishino I, Sadlock JE, Krishna 
S, Walker W, Selby J, Glerum DM, Coster RV, Lyon G, Scalais E, Lebel R, Kaplan 
P, Shanske S, De Vivo DC, Bonilla E, Hirano M, DiMauro S, Schon EA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 
Thessaloniki, Macedonia, Greece.

Mammalian cytochrome c oxidase (COX) catalyses the transfer of reducing 
equivalents from cytochrome c to molecular oxygen and pumps protons across the 
inner mitochondrial membrane. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) encodes three COX 
subunits (I-III) and nuclear DNA (nDNA) encodes ten. In addition, ancillary 
proteins are required for the correct assembly and function of COX (refs 2, 3, 
4, 5, 6). Although pathogenic mutations in mtDNA-encoded COX subunits have been 
described, no mutations in the nDNA-encoded subunits have been uncovered in any 
mendelian-inherited COX deficiency disorder. In yeast, two related COX assembly 
genes, SCO1 and SCO2 (for synthesis of cytochrome c oxidase), enable subunits I 
and II to be incorporated into the holoprotein. Here we have identified 
mutations in the human homologue, SCO2, in three unrelated infants with a newly 
recognized fatal cardioencephalomyopathy and COX deficiency. Immunohistochemical 
studies implied that the enzymatic deficiency, which was most severe in cardiac 
and skeletal muscle, was due to the loss of mtDNA-encoded COX subunits. The 
clinical phenotype caused by mutations in human SCO2 differs from that caused by 
mutations in SURF1, the only other known COX assembly gene associated with a 
human disease, Leigh syndrome.

DOI: 10.1038/15513
PMID: 10545952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]