---
reference_id: "PMID:24624349"
title: Identification of a de novo heterozygous missense FLNB mutation in lethal atelosteogenesis type I by exome sequencing.
authors:
- Jeon GW
- Lee MN
- Jung JM
- Hong SY
- Kim YN
- Sin JB
- Ki CS
journal: Ann Lab Med
year: '2014'
doi: 10.3343/alm.2014.34.2.134
keywords:
- Exome
- Female
- "Filamins/chemistry, genetics"
- Gene Frequency
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Radiography
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of a de novo heterozygous missense FLNB mutation in lethal atelosteogenesis type I by exome sequencing.
**Authors:** Jeon GW, Lee MN, Jung JM, Hong SY, Kim YN, Sin JB, Ki CS
**Journal:** Ann Lab Med (2014)
**DOI:** [10.3343/alm.2014.34.2.134](https://doi.org/10.3343/alm.2014.34.2.134)

## Content

1. Ann Lab Med. 2014 Mar;34(2):134-8. doi: 10.3343/alm.2014.34.2.134. Epub 2014
Feb  13.

Identification of a de novo heterozygous missense FLNB mutation in lethal 
atelosteogenesis type I by exome sequencing.

Jeon GW(1), Lee MN(2), Jung JM(1), Hong SY(3), Kim YN(4), Sin JB(1), Ki CS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Inje University College of Medicine, Busan Paik 
Hospital, Busan, Korea.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Genetics, Samsung Medical Center, 
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Catholic University of Daegu, Daegu 
Catholic University Medical Center, Daegu, Korea.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Inje University College of Medicine, 
Busan Paik Hospital, Busan, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Atelosteogenesis type I (AO-I) is a rare lethal skeletal dysplastic 
disorder characterized by severe short-limbed dwarfism and dislocated hips, 
knees, and elbows. AO-I is caused by mutations in the filamin B (FLNB) gene; 
however, several other genes can cause AO-like lethal skeletal dysplasias.
METHODS: In order to screen all possible genes associated with AO-like lethal 
skeletal dysplasias simultaneously, we performed whole-exome sequencing in a 
female newborn having clinical features of AO-I.
RESULTS: Exome sequencing identified a novel missense variant (c.517G>A; 
p.Ala173Thr) in exon 2 of the FLNB gene in the patient. Sanger sequencing 
validated this variant, and genetic analysis of the patient's parents suggested 
a de novo occurrence of the variant.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that exome sequencing can be a useful tool for the 
identification of causative mutations in lethal skeletal dysplasia patients.

DOI: 10.3343/alm.2014.34.2.134
PMCID: PMC3948826
PMID: 24624349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflicts of interest relevant to 
this article were reported.