---
reference_id: "PMID:29299961"
title: Erythromelalgia.
authors:
- Klein-Weigel PF
- Volz TS
- Richter JG
journal: Vasa
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1024/0301-1526/a000675
keywords:
- "Erythromelalgia/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, therapy"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Molecular Diagnostic Techniques
- Pain Measurement
- Phenotype
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Risk Factors
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Erythromelalgia.
**Authors:** Klein-Weigel PF, Volz TS, Richter JG
**Journal:** Vasa (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1024/0301-1526/a000675](https://doi.org/10.1024/0301-1526/a000675)

## Content

1. Vasa. 2018 Feb;47(2):91-97. doi: 10.1024/0301-1526/a000675. Epub 2018 Jan 4.

Erythromelalgia.

Klein-Weigel PF(1), Volz TS(1), Richter JG(2).

Author information:
(1)1 Klinik für Angiologie, Helios Klinik Berlin-Buch, Berlin, Germany.
(2)2 Poliklinik, Funktionsbereich und Hiller Forschungszentrum für 
Rheumatologie, Medizinische Fakultät, Universitätsklinikum Düsseldorf, 
Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.

Erythromelalgia is a rare syndrome characterized by the intermittent or, less 
commonly, by the permanent occurrence of extremely painful hyperperfused skin 
areas mainly located in the distal extremities. Primary erythromelalgia is 
nowadays considered to be a genetically determined neuropathic disorder 
affecting SCN9A, SCN10A, and SCN11A coding for NaV1.7, NaV1.8, and NaV1.9 
neuronal sodium channels. Secondary forms might be associated with 
myeloproliferative disorders, connective tissue disease, cancer, infections, and 
poisoning. Between the pain episodes, the affected skin areas are usually 
asymptomatic, but there are patients with typical features of acrocyanosis 
and/or Raynaud's phenomenon preceding or occurring in between the episodes of 
erythromelalgia. Diagnosis is made by ascertaining the typical clinical 
features. Thereafter, the differentiation between primary and secondary forms 
should be made. Genetic testing is recommended, especially in premature cases 
and in cases of family clustering in specialized genetic institutions after 
genetic counselling. Multimodal therapeutic intervention aims toward attenuation 
of pain and improvement of the patient's quality of life. For this purpose, a 
wide variety of nonpharmacological approaches and pharmacological substances for 
topical and systemic use have been proposed, which are usually applied 
individually in a step-by-step approach. Prognosis mainly depends on the 
underlying condition and the ability of the patients and their relatives to cope 
with the disease.

DOI: 10.1024/0301-1526/a000675
PMID: 29299961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]