---
reference_id: "PMID:23095510"
title: "Gastrointestinal surgery and related complications in patients with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome: a systematic review."
authors:
- Burcharth J
- Rosenberg J
journal: Dig Surg
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1159/000343738
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gastrointestinal surgery and related complications in patients with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Burcharth J, Rosenberg J
**Journal:** Dig Surg (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000343738](https://doi.org/10.1159/000343738)

## Content

1. Dig Surg. 2012;29(4):349-57. doi: 10.1159/000343738. Epub 2012 Oct 22.

Gastrointestinal surgery and related complications in patients with 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome: a systematic review.

Burcharth J(1), Rosenberg J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Herlev Hospital, Herlev, Denmark. 
jakobburcharth@gmail.com

Comment in
    Dig Surg. 2012;29(6):453-5. doi: 10.1159/000346068.
    Dig Surg. 2012;29(6):456. doi: 10.1159/000345998.

INTRODUCTION: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a rare inherited group of 
connective tissue diseases characterized by joint hypermobility, skin 
hyperextensibility and bruising tendency. Common features of patients with EDS 
include vascular and gastrointestinal perforations. The purpose of this 
systematic review is to address gastrointestinal diseases and the complications 
associated with surgical treatment of diseases relating to the gastrointestinal 
system in patients with EDS.
METHODS: PubMed search including the Medical Subject Heading (MeSH) terms 
'Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome' and 'Gastrointestinal Diseases', and an Embase search 
including the Map Term to Subject Heading 'Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome' with 'AND' 
function of the keyword 'Gastrointestinal'.
RESULTS: The literature search resulted in inclusion of 53 articles after 
application of eligibility criteria. The primary results drawn from the 
literature was that spontaneous ruptures of vessels and spontaneous perforations 
of the sigmoid colon occur in patients with EDS.
CONCLUSION: Surgery in patients with EDS is associated with a high risk of 
complications, which is why preoperative indications should be considered. 
Optimal therapy for these patients includes the awareness that EDS is a systemic 
disease involving fragility, bleeding and spontaneous perforations from almost 
all organ systems. Often, a nonsurgical approach can be the best choice for 
these patients, depending on the condition.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000343738
PMID: 23095510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]