---
reference_id: "PMID:24741580"
title: "Revisiting the molecular mechanism of neurological manifestations in antiphospholipid syndrome: beyond vascular damage."
authors:
- Carecchio M
- Cantello R
- Comi C
journal: J Immunol Res
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1155/2014/239398
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Revisiting the molecular mechanism of neurological manifestations in antiphospholipid syndrome: beyond vascular damage.
**Authors:** Carecchio M, Cantello R, Comi C
**Journal:** J Immunol Res (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2014/239398](https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/239398)

## Content

1. J Immunol Res. 2014;2014:239398. doi: 10.1155/2014/239398. Epub 2014 Mar 13.

Revisiting the molecular mechanism of neurological manifestations in 
antiphospholipid syndrome: beyond vascular damage.

Carecchio M(1), Cantello R(1), Comi C(2).

Author information:
(1)Section of Neurology, Department of Translational Medicine, University of 
Eastern Piedmont, "Amedeo Avogadro", Via Solaroli 17, 28100 Novara, Italy.
(2)Section of Neurology, Department of Translational Medicine, University of 
Eastern Piedmont, "Amedeo Avogadro", Via Solaroli 17, 28100 Novara, Italy ; 
Interdisciplinary Research Center of Autoimmune Diseases (IRCAD), University of 
Eastern Piedmont, "Amedeo Avogadro", Via Solaroli 17, 28100 Novara, Italy.

Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is a multiorgan disease often affecting the 
central nervous system (CNS). Typically, neurological manifestations of APS 
include thrombosis of cerebral vessels leading to stroke and requiring prompt 
initiation of treatment with antiplatelet drugs or anticoagulant therapy. In 
these cases, alterations of the coagulation system at various levels caused by 
multiple effects of antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL) have been postulated to 
explain the vascular damage to the CNS in APS. However, several nonvascular 
neurological manifestations of APS have progressively emerged over the past 
years. Nonthrombotic, immune-mediated mechanisms altering physiological basal 
ganglia function have been recently suggested to play a central role in the 
pathogenesis of these manifestations that include, among others, movement 
disorders such as chorea and behavioral and cognitive alterations. Similar 
clinical manifestations have been described in other autoimmune CNS diseases 
such as anti-NMDAR and anti-VGCK encephalitis, suggesting that the spectrum of 
immune-mediated basal ganglia disorders is expanding, possibly sharing some 
pathophysiological mechanisms. In this review, we will focus on thrombotic and 
nonthrombotic neurological manifestations of APS with particular attention to 
immune-mediated actions of aPL on the vascular system and the basal ganglia.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/239398
PMCID: PMC3987798
PMID: 24741580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]