---
reference_id: "PMID:36293539"
title: Physiological and Pathological Remodeling of Cerebral Microvessels.
authors:
- Tregub PP
- Averchuk AS
- Baranich TI
- Ryazanova MV
- Salmina AB
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms232012683
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Physiological and Pathological Remodeling of Cerebral Microvessels.
**Authors:** Tregub PP, Averchuk AS, Baranich TI, Ryazanova MV, Salmina AB
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms232012683](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms232012683)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Oct 21;23(20):12683. doi: 10.3390/ijms232012683.

Physiological and Pathological Remodeling of Cerebral Microvessels.

Tregub PP(1), Averchuk AS(1), Baranich TI(1), Ryazanova MV(1), Salmina AB(1).

Author information:
(1)Federal State Budgetary Scientific Institution Research Center of Neurology, 
125367 Moscow, Russia.

There is growing evidence that the remodeling of cerebral microvessels plays an 
important role in plastic changes in the brain associated with development, 
experience, learning, and memory consolidation. At the same time, abnormal 
neoangiogenesis, and deregulated regulation of microvascular regression, or 
pruning, could contribute to the pathogenesis of neurodevelopmental diseases, 
stroke, and neurodegeneration. Aberrant remodeling of microvesselsis associated 
with blood-brain barrier breakdown, development of neuroinflammation, inadequate 
microcirculation in active brain regions, and leads to the dysfunction of the 
neurovascular unit and progressive neurological deficits. In this review, we 
summarize current data on the mechanisms of blood vessel regression and pruning 
in brain plasticity and in Alzheimer's-type neurodegeneration. We discuss some 
novel approaches to modulating cerebral remodeling and preventing 
degeneration-coupled aberrant microvascular activity in chronic 
neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms232012683
PMCID: PMC9603917
PMID: 36293539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.