---
reference_id: "PMID:23615177"
title: Hirschsprung disease.
authors:
- Langer JC
journal: Curr Opin Pediatr
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1097/MOP.0b013e328360c2a0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hirschsprung disease.
**Authors:** Langer JC
**Journal:** Curr Opin Pediatr (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MOP.0b013e328360c2a0](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOP.0b013e328360c2a0)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2013 Jun;25(3):368-74. doi: 10.1097/MOP.0b013e328360c2a0.

Hirschsprung disease.

Langer JC(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of General and Thoracic Surgery Hospital for Sick Children, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. jacob.langer@sickkids.ca

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Hirschsprung disease is relatively common in children. 
Surgical techniques are available to remove the aganglionic bowel and 
reconstruct the intestinal tract. Despite many advances, these children may 
still be difficult to diagnose, and may have ongoing functional problems after 
surgical correction.
RECENT FINDINGS: The genetic basis and cause of Hirschsprung disease are 
becoming increasingly clearer. Definitive diagnosis is based on rectal biopsy, 
but more sophisticated techniques are permitting earlier and more accurate 
diagnosis. Surgical correction has evolved from routine use of a colostomy and 
open laparotomy to one-stage transanal and laparoscopic approaches. The range of 
postoperative problems is reviewed so that the practicing pediatrician and 
primary care physician can effectively care for these children. Future advances 
may include better genotype-phenotype correlation and development of neuronal 
stem cell techniques.
SUMMARY: Pediatricians and primary care physicians have an important role to 
play in diagnosing and managing children with Hirschsprung disease.

DOI: 10.1097/MOP.0b013e328360c2a0
PMID: 23615177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]