---
reference_id: "PMID:25426043"
title: "Reading the dyslexic brain: multiple dysfunctional routes revealed by a new meta-analysis of PET and fMRI activation studies."
authors:
- Paulesu E
- Danelli L
- Berlingeri M
journal: Front Hum Neurosci
year: '2014'
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00830
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reading the dyslexic brain: multiple dysfunctional routes revealed by a new meta-analysis of PET and fMRI activation studies.
**Authors:** Paulesu E, Danelli L, Berlingeri M
**Journal:** Front Hum Neurosci (2014)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnhum.2014.00830](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00830)

## Content

1. Front Hum Neurosci. 2014 Nov 11;8:830. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00830. 
eCollection 2014.

Reading the dyslexic brain: multiple dysfunctional routes revealed by a new 
meta-analysis of PET and fMRI activation studies.

Paulesu E(1), Danelli L(2), Berlingeri M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Milano-Bicocca Milan, Italy ; 
NEUROMI- Milan Center for Neuroscience, University of Milano-Bicocca Milan, 
Italy ; fMRI - Unit, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico 
Galeazzi Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Milano-Bicocca Milan, Italy ; 
NEUROMI- Milan Center for Neuroscience, University of Milano-Bicocca Milan, 
Italy.

Developmental dyslexia has been the focus of much functional anatomical 
research. The main trust of this work is that typical developmental dyslexics 
have a dysfunction of the phonological and orthography to phonology conversion 
systems, in which the left occipito-temporal cortex has a crucial role. It 
remains to be seen whether there is a systematic co-occurrence of dysfunctional 
patterns of different functional systems perhaps converging on the same brain 
regions associated with the reading deficit. Such evidence would be relevant for 
theories like, for example, the magnocellular/attentional or the 
motor/cerebellar ones, which postulate a more basic and anatomically distributed 
disorder in dyslexia. We addressed this issue with a meta-analysis of all the 
imaging literature published until September 2013 using a combination of 
hierarchical clustering and activation likelihood estimation methods. The 
clustering analysis on 2360 peaks identified 193 clusters, 92 of which proved 
spatially significant. Following binomial tests on the clusters, we found left 
hemispheric network specific for normal controls (i.e., of reduced involvement 
in dyslexics) including the left inferior frontal, premotor, supramarginal 
cortices and the left infero-temporal and fusiform regions: these were 
preferentially associated with reading and the visual-to-phonology processes. 
There was also a more dorsal left fronto-parietal network: these clusters 
included peaks from tasks involving phonological manipulation, but also motoric 
or visuo-spatial perception/attention. No cluster was identified in area V5 for 
no task, nor cerebellar clusters showed a reduced association with dyslexics. We 
conclude that the examined literature demonstrates a specific lack of activation 
of the left occipito-temporal cortex in dyslexia particularly for reading and 
reading-like behaviors and for visuo-phonological tasks. Additional deficits of 
motor and attentional systems relevant for reading may be associated with 
altered functionality of dorsal left fronto-parietal cortex.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00830
PMCID: PMC4227573
PMID: 25426043