---
reference_id: "PMID:30083701"
title: "Association of Endometrial Cancer Risk With Postmenopausal Bleeding in Women: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis."
authors:
- Clarke MA
- Long BJ
- Del Mar Morillo A
- Arbyn M
- Bakkum-Gamez JN
- Wentzensen N
journal: JAMA Intern Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2018.2820
keywords:
- Biopsy
- "Endometrial Neoplasms/complications, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Female
- Global Health
- Humans
- Postmenopause
- Prevalence
- Risk Factors
- "Uterine Hemorrhage/epidemiology, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of Endometrial Cancer Risk With Postmenopausal Bleeding in Women: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Clarke MA, Long BJ, Del Mar Morillo A, Arbyn M, Bakkum-Gamez JN, Wentzensen N
**Journal:** JAMA Intern Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamainternmed.2018.2820](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2018.2820)

## Content

1. JAMA Intern Med. 2018 Sep 1;178(9):1210-1222. doi: 
10.1001/jamainternmed.2018.2820.

Association of Endometrial Cancer Risk With Postmenopausal Bleeding in Women: A 
Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.

Clarke MA(1), Long BJ(2), Del Mar Morillo A(1), Arbyn M(3), Bakkum-Gamez JN(2), 
Wentzensen N(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, 
Rockville, Maryland.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(3)Unit of Cancer Epidemiology, Belgian Cancer Centre, Sciensano, Brussels, 
Belgium.

Comment in
    JAMA Intern Med. 2018 Sep 1;178(9):1222-1223. doi: 
10.1001/jamainternmed.2018.2819.

IMPORTANCE: As the worldwide burden of endometrial cancer continues to rise, 
interest is growing in the evaluation of early detection and prevention 
strategies among women at increased risk. Focusing efforts on women with 
postmenopausal bleeding (PMB), a common symptom of endometrial cancer, may be a 
useful strategy; however, PMB is not specific for endometrial cancer and is 
often caused by benign conditions.
OBJECTIVE: To provide a reference of the prevalence of PMB in endometrial 
cancers and the risk of endometrial cancer in women with PMB.
DATA SOURCES: For this systematic review and meta-analysis, PubMed and Embase 
were searched for English-language studies published January 1, 1977, through 
January 31, 2017.
STUDY SELECTION: Observational studies reporting the prevalence of PMB in women 
with endometrial cancer and the risk of endometrial cancer in women with PMB in 
unselected populations were selected.
DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: Two independent reviewers evaluated study quality 
and risk of bias using items from the Newcastle-Ottawa Quality Assessment Scale 
and the Quality Assessment of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies tool. Studies that 
included highly selected populations, lacked detailed inclusion criteria, and/or 
included 25 or fewer women were excluded.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The pooled prevalence of PMB in women with 
endometrial cancer and the risk of endometrial cancer in women with PMB.
RESULTS: A total of 129 unique studies, including 34 432 unique patients with 
PMB and 6358 with endometrial cancer (40 790 women), were analyzed. The pooled 
prevalence of PMB among women with endometrial cancer was 91% (95% CI, 87%-93%), 
irrespective of tumor stage. The pooled risk of endometrial cancer among women 
with PMB was 9% (95% CI, 8%-11%), with estimates varying by use of hormone 
therapy (range, 7% [95% CI, 6%-9%] to 12% [95% CI, 9%-15%]; P < .001 for 
heterogeneity) and geographic region (range, 5% [95% CI, 3%-11%] in North 
America to 13% [95% CI, 9%-19%] in Western Europe; P = .09 for heterogeneity).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Early detection strategies focused on women with PMB 
have the potential to capture as many as 90% of endometrial cancers; however, 
most women with PMB will not be diagnosed with endometrial cancer. These results 
can aid in the assessment of the potential clinical value of new early detection 
markers and clinical management strategies for endometrial cancer and will help 
to inform clinical and epidemiologic risk prediction models to support decision 
making.

DOI: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2018.2820
PMCID: PMC6142981
PMID: 30083701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.