---
reference_id: "PMID:35624360"
title: Detecting anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene rearrangements with next-generation sequencing remains a reliable approach in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Ding Y
- Sun C
- Su W
- Miao C
- He X
- Wang JS
- Zhang ZH
journal: Virchows Arch
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00428-022-03339-y
keywords:
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/genetics
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/pathology"
- Gene Rearrangement
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing/methods
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence/methods"
- Lung Neoplasms/pathology
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- RNA/therapeutic use
- Reproducibility of Results
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Detecting anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene rearrangements with next-generation sequencing remains a reliable approach in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Ding Y, Sun C, Su W, Miao C, He X, Wang JS, Zhang ZH
**Journal:** Virchows Arch (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00428-022-03339-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00428-022-03339-y)

## Content

1. Virchows Arch. 2022 Sep;481(3):405-419. doi: 10.1007/s00428-022-03339-y. Epub
2022 May 28.

Detecting anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene rearrangements with
next-generation sequencing remains a reliable approach in patients with
non-small-cell lung cancer.

Ding Y(1), Sun C(2), Su W(2), Miao C(1), He X(1), Wang JS(3), Zhang ZH(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, 210029, China.
(2)The First School of Clinical Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing,
210029, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, 210000, China.
(4)Department of Pathology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, 210029, China. zhangzh@njmu.edu.cn.

Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is rapidly becoming routine in clinical
oncology practice to identify therapeutic biomarkers, including gene
rearrangements in anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK). Our study investigated the
concordance of ALK positivity evaluated by DNA-based NGS with orthogonal ALK
testing methods such as fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH),
immunohistochemistry (IHC), and RNA-based NGS (RNA-NGS). Thirty-eight patients
with lung adenocarcinoma who were detected with ALK rearrangements using DNA-NGS
and also had adequate tissue samples submitted for FISH, IHC, and RNA-NGS, were
included in this study. Of the 38 patients, RNA samples from 3 patients failed
quality control for RNA-NGS. The concordance of ALK positivity was calculated
relative to DNA-NGS results. The concordance rates were 97.1% (34/35) for
RNA-NGS, 94.7% (36/38) for IHC, and 97.4% (37/38) for FISH. DNA-NGS detected
single ALK rearrangements in 14 (35.0%) patients and complex ALK rearrangements
in 26 (65.0%). RNA-NGS detected only single transcripts of the primary ALK
fusions. A novel LANCL1-ALK (L7:A20) detected using DNA-NGS was detected as
EML4-ALK (E13:A20) transcripts using RNA-NGS. Interestingly, patients with
single ALK rearrangements were more likely to be detected with atypical isolated
red signals (p < 0.001), while patients with complex ALK rearrangements were
more likely to be detected with atypical split red and green signals less than 2
signal diameters apart (p < 0.001). Our study highlights the reliability of NGS
in the accurate detection of specific ALK fusion variants and concomitant
mutations that are crucial for individualized treatment decisions in patients
with lung cancer.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00428-022-03339-y
PMID: 35624360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
