---
reference_id: "PMID:14976160"
title: A mutation in the nerve growth factor beta gene (NGFB) causes loss of pain perception.
authors:
- Einarsdottir E
- Carlsson A
- Minde J
- Toolanen G
- Svensson O
- Solders G
- Holmgren G
- Holmberg D
- Holmberg M
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddh096
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Animals
- Cattle
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Guinea Pigs
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Nerve Growth Factor/genetics
- Pain/genetics
- "Pain Insensitivity, Congenital/genetics"
- Pedigree
- "Protein Structure, Secondary"
- Rats
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A mutation in the nerve growth factor beta gene (NGFB) causes loss of pain perception.
**Authors:** Einarsdottir E, Carlsson A, Minde J, Toolanen G, Svensson O, Solders G, Holmgren G, Holmberg D, Holmberg M
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddh096](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddh096)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2004 Apr 15;13(8):799-805. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddh096. Epub 2004
Feb  19.

A mutation in the nerve growth factor beta gene (NGFB) causes loss of pain 
perception.

Einarsdottir E(1), Carlsson A, Minde J, Toolanen G, Svensson O, Solders G, 
Holmgren G, Holmberg D, Holmberg M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biosciences, Unit of Clinical and Medical Genetics, 
Umeå University, SE-90187 Umeå, Sweden.

Identification of genes associated with pain insensitivity syndromes can 
increase the understanding of the pathways involved in pain and contribute to 
the understanding of how sensory pathways relate to other neurological 
functions. In this report we describe the mapping and identification of the gene 
responsible for loss of deep pain perception in a large family from northern 
Sweden. The loss of pain perception in this family is characterized by 
impairment in the sensing of deep pain and temperature but with normal mental 
abilities and with most other neurological responses intact. A severe reduction 
of unmyelinated nerve fibers and a moderate loss of thin myelinated nerve fibers 
are observed in the patients. Thus the cases in this study fall into the class 
of patients with loss of pain perception with underlying peripheral neuropathy. 
Clinically they best fit into HSAN V. Using a model of recessive inheritance we 
identified an 8.3 Mb region on chromosome 1p11.2-p13.2 shared by the affected 
individuals in the family. Analysis of functional candidate genes in the disease 
critical region revealed a mutation in the coding region of the nerve 
growth-factor beta (NGFB) gene specific for the disease haplotype. This NGF 
mutation seems to separate the effects of NGF involved in development of central 
nervous system functions such as mental abilities, from those involved in 
peripheral pain pathways. This mutation could therefore potentially provide an 
important tool to study different roles of NGF, and of pain control.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddh096
PMID: 14976160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]