---
reference_id: "PMID:18034589"
title: "Crohn's disease: a review of current treatment with a focus on biologics."
authors:
- Panés J
- Gomollón F
- Taxonera C
- Hinojosa J
- Clofent J
- Nos P
journal: Drugs
year: '2007'
doi: 10.2165/00003495-200767170-00005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Crohn's disease: a review of current treatment with a focus on biologics.
**Authors:** Panés J, Gomollón F, Taxonera C, Hinojosa J, Clofent J, Nos P
**Journal:** Drugs (2007)
**DOI:** [10.2165/00003495-200767170-00005](https://doi.org/10.2165/00003495-200767170-00005)

## Content

1. Drugs. 2007;67(17):2511-37. doi: 10.2165/00003495-200767170-00005.

Crohn's disease: a review of current treatment with a focus on biologics.

Panés J(1), Gomollón F, Taxonera C, Hinojosa J, Clofent J, Nos P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain. 
jpanes@clinic.ub.es

Crohn's disease is a debilitating and expensive disease that is growing in 
incidence in both developing and developed countries. While conventional 
therapies, such as corticosteroids and immunosuppressants, continue to play a 
vital role in treating this condition, it is evident that many affected 
individuals do not respond to therapy or develop intolerable adverse effects. 
The addition of modern biological therapies to the Crohn's disease armamentarium 
is providing a change in expectations for disease outcome. Infliximab and 
adalimumab are currently the only biological agents approved for induction and 
maintenance treatment in adults (infliximab and adalimumab) and children 
(infliximab) with Crohn's disease. Furthermore, infliximab has a beneficial 
effect on perianal fistulas. Other tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha 
inhibitors, such as certolizumab pegol, also demonstrate promising results in 
adults with moderate to severe active disease. In addition, adalimumab and 
certolizumab pegol have shown clinical efficacy in patients who are intolerant 
to or lose response to infliximab, suggesting that switching between agents may 
allow response to be maintained over time. The primary safety concerns with 
TNFalpha inhibitors include increased risk of serious infection (including 
reactivation of tuberculosis), malignancy (particularly lymphoma) and 
demyelinating disease. Other agents in development include recombinant human 
anti-inflammatory cytokines, agents that target pro-inflammatory cytokines and 
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factors. Further prospective studies 
will provide interesting insight into different mechanisms by which factors 
involved in the pathophysiology of Crohn's disease can be modulated.

DOI: 10.2165/00003495-200767170-00005
PMID: 18034589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]