---
reference_id: "PMID:26685159"
title: Reduced cholesterol levels impair Smoothened activation in Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome.
authors:
- Blassberg R
- Macrae JI
- Briscoe J
- Jacob J
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv507
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Cholesterol/metabolism
- Dehydrocholesterols/metabolism
- Humans
- Mice
- Mutation
- NIH 3T3 Cells
- "Oxidoreductases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Oxidoreductases Acting on CH-CH Group Donors/genetics, metabolism"
- Phenotype
- "Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome/genetics, metabolism"
- "Smoothened Receptor/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reduced cholesterol levels impair Smoothened activation in Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome.
**Authors:** Blassberg R, Macrae JI, Briscoe J, Jacob J
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddv507](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddv507)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Feb 15;25(4):693-705. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv507. Epub 2015
Dec  18.

Reduced cholesterol levels impair Smoothened activation in Smith-Lemli-Opitz
syndrome.

Blassberg R(1), Macrae JI(1), Briscoe J(1), Jacob J(2).

Author information:
(1)The Francis Crick Institute, Mill Hill Laboratory, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA,
UK.
(2)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, John Radcliffe Hospital, Level
6, West Wing, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK, Department of Neurology, Milton Keynes
Hospital, Standing Way, Milton Keynes, Buckinghamshire MK6 5LD, UK and
Department of Neurology, John Radcliffe Hospital, Headley Way, Oxford OX3 9DU,
UK john.jacob@ndcn.ox.ac.uk.

Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is a common autosomal-recessive disorder that
results from mutations in the gene encoding the cholesterol biosynthetic enzyme
7-dehydrocholesterol reductase (DHCR7). Impaired DHCR7 function is associated
with a spectrum of congenital malformations, intellectual impairment,
epileptiform activity and autism spectrum disorder. Biochemically, there is a
deficit in cholesterol and an accumulation of its metabolic precursor
7-dehydrocholesterol (7DHC) in developing tissues. Morphological abnormalities
in SLOS resemble those seen in congenital Sonic Hedgehog (SHH)-deficient
conditions, leading to the proposal that the pathogenesis of SLOS is mediated by
aberrant SHH signalling. SHH signalling is transduced through the transmembrane
protein Smoothened (SMO), which localizes to the primary cilium of a cell on
activation and is both positively and negatively regulated by sterol molecules
derived from cholesterol biosynthesis. One proposed mechanism of SLOS involves
SMO dysregulation by altered sterol levels, but the salient sterol species has
not been identified. Here, we clarify the relationship between disrupted
cholesterol metabolism and reduced SHH signalling in SLOS by modelling the
disorder in vitro. Our results indicate that a deficit in cholesterol, as
opposed to an accumulation of 7DHC, impairs SMO activation and its localization
to the primary cilium.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddv507
PMCID: PMC4743690
PMID: 26685159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
