---
reference_id: "PMID:38734383"
title: "Bulevirtide monotherapy in patients with chronic HDV: Efficacy and safety results through week 96 from a phase III randomized trial."
authors:
- Wedemeyer H
- Aleman S
- Brunetto M
- Blank A
- Andreone P
- Bogomolov P
- Chulanov V
- Mamonova N
- Geyvandova N
- Morozov V
- Sagalova O
- Stepanova T
- Berger A
- Ciesek S
- Manuilov D
- Mercier RC
- Da BL
- Chee GM
- Li M
- Flaherty JF
- Lau AH
- Osinusi A
- Schulze Zur Wiesch J
- Cornberg M
- Zeuzem S
- Lampertico P
journal: J Hepatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2024.05.001
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- "Antiviral Agents/therapeutic use, adverse effects, administration & dosage"
- Adult
- "Hepatitis D, Chronic/drug therapy"
- "Hepatitis Delta Virus/drug effects, genetics"
- Treatment Outcome
- "RNA, Viral/blood"
- Alanine Transaminase/blood
- Aged
- Viral Load/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bulevirtide monotherapy in patients with chronic HDV: Efficacy and safety results through week 96 from a phase III randomized trial.
**Authors:** Wedemeyer H, Aleman S, Brunetto M, Blank A, Andreone P, Bogomolov P, Chulanov V, Mamonova N, Geyvandova N, Morozov V, Sagalova O, Stepanova T, Berger A, Ciesek S, Manuilov D, Mercier RC, Da BL, Chee GM, Li M, Flaherty JF, Lau AH, Osinusi A, Schulze Zur Wiesch J, Cornberg M, Zeuzem S, Lampertico P
**Journal:** J Hepatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jhep.2024.05.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2024.05.001)

## Content

1. J Hepatol. 2024 Oct;81(4):621-629. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2024.05.001. Epub 2024 
May 9.

Bulevirtide monotherapy in patients with chronic HDV: Efficacy and safety 
results through week 96 from a phase III randomized trial.

Wedemeyer H(1), Aleman S(2), Brunetto M(3), Blank A(4), Andreone P(5), Bogomolov 
P(6), Chulanov V(7), Mamonova N(7), Geyvandova N(8), Morozov V(9), Sagalova 
O(10), Stepanova T(11), Berger A(12), Ciesek S(12), Manuilov D(13), Mercier 
RC(13), Da BL(13), Chee GM(13), Li M(13), Flaherty JF(13), Lau AH(13), Osinusi 
A(13), Schulze Zur Wiesch J(14), Cornberg M(15), Zeuzem S(16), Lampertico P(17).

Author information:
(1)Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Klinik für Gastroenterologie, Hepatologie, 
Infektiologie und Endokrinologie, Hannover, Germany. Electronic address: 
Wedemeyer.heiner@mh-hannover.de.
(2)Karolinska University Hospital/Karolinska Institute, Department of Infectious 
Diseases, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)University Hospital of Pisa, Hepatology Unit, Reference Center of the Tuscany 
Region for Chronic Liver Disease and Cancer, Pisa, Italy; University of Pisa, 
Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Pisa, Italy.
(4)Heidelberg University Medical Faculty, Heidelberg University Hospital, 
Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacoepidemiology, Heidelberg, 
Germany.
(5)University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Internal Medicine, Baggiovara 
Hospital, Modena, Italy.
(6)State Budgetary Institution of Health Care of Moscow Region, Moscow Regional 
Research Clinical Institute Named After M.F. Vladimirsky, Moscow, Russian 
Federation.
(7)FSBI National Research Medical Center for Phthisiopulmonology and Infectious 
Diseases of the Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russian 
Federation.
(8)Stavropol Regional Hospital, Stavropol, Russian Federation.
(9)Hepatolog, LLC, Samara, Russian Federation.
(10)Federal State-Funded Institution of Higher Education, South Ural State 
Medical University of Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation, Chelyabinsk, 
Russian Federation.
(11)Clinic of Modern Medicine, Moscow, Russian Federation.
(12)Institute for Medical Virology, German Centre for Infection Research, 
External Partner Site Frankfurt, University Hospital, Goethe University, 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(13)Gilead Sciences, Foster City, CA, United States.
(14)Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, Medizinische Klinik Studienambulanz 
Hepatologie, Hamburg, Germany.
(15)Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Klinik für Gastroenterologie, Hepatologie, 
Infektiologie und Endokrinologie, Hannover, Germany.
(16)University Hospital Frankfurt, Department of Medicine, Frankfurt am Main, 
Germany.
(17)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Foundation IRCCS Ca' Granda 
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy; CRC A. M. and A. Migliavacca Center 
for Liver Disease, Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, University 
of Milan, Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Bulevirtide (BLV), a first-in-class entry inhibitor, is 
approved in Europe for the treatment of chronic hepatitis delta (CHD). BLV 
monotherapy was superior to delayed treatment at week (W) 48, the primary 
efficacy endpoint, in the MYR301 study (NCT03852719). Here, we assessed if 
continued BLV therapy until W96 would improve virologic and biochemical response 
rates, particularly among patients who did not achieve virologic response at 
W24.
METHODS: In this ongoing, open-label, randomized phase III study, patients with 
CHD (N = 150) were randomized (1:1:1) to treatment with BLV 2 mg/day (n = 49) or 
10 mg/day (n = 50), each for 144 weeks, or to delayed treatment for 48 weeks 
followed by BLV 10 mg/day for 96 weeks (n = 51). Combined response was defined 
as undetectable hepatitis delta virus (HDV) RNA or a decrease in HDV RNA by ≥2 
log10 IU/ml from baseline and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) normalization. 
Other endpoints included virologic response, ALT normalization, and change in 
HDV RNA.
RESULTS: Of 150 patients, 143 (95%) completed 96 weeks of the study. Efficacy 
responses were maintained and/or improved between W48 and W96, with similar 
combined, virologic, and biochemical response rates between BLV 2 and 10 mg. Of 
the patients with a suboptimal early virologic response at W24, 43% of 
non-responders and 82% of partial responders achieved virologic response at W96. 
Biochemical improvement often occurred independently of virologic response. 
Adverse events were mostly mild, with no serious adverse events related to BLV.
CONCLUSIONS: Virologic and biochemical responses were maintained and/or 
increased with longer term BLV therapy, including in those with suboptimal early 
virologic response. BLV monotherapy for CHD was safe and well tolerated through 
W96.
IMPACT AND IMPLICATIONS: In July 2023, bulevirtide was fully approved for the 
treatment of chronic hepatitis delta (CHD) in Europe based on clinical study 
results from up to 48 weeks of treatment. Understanding the efficacy and safety 
of bulevirtide over the longer term is important for healthcare providers. In 
this analysis, we demonstrate that bulevirtide monotherapy for 96 weeks in 
patients with CHD was associated with continued improvements in combined, 
virologic, and biochemical responses as well as liver stiffness from week 48 at 
both the 2 mg and 10 mg doses. Patients with suboptimal virologic responses to 
bulevirtide at week 24 also benefited from continued therapy, with the majority 
achieving virologic response or biochemical improvement by week 96.
GOV IDENTIFIER: NCT03852719.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2024.05.001
PMID: 38734383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]