---
reference_id: PMID:30451936
title: Recent trends in mucopolysaccharidosis research.
authors:
- Kobayashi H
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s10038-018-0534-8
keywords:
- Animals
- Combined Modality Therapy
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Therapy
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Humans
- "Mucopolysaccharidoses/diagnosis, etiology, metabolism, therapy"
- Phenotype
- Prevalence
- Research
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent trends in mucopolysaccharidosis research.
**Authors:** Kobayashi H
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s10038-018-0534-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s10038-018-0534-8)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2019 Feb;64(2):127-137. doi: 10.1038/s10038-018-0534-8. Epub 2018
 Nov 19.

Recent trends in mucopolysaccharidosis research.

Kobayashi H(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gene Therapy, Research Center for Medical Sciences, Department of 
Pediatrics, The Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 105-8461, Japan. 
hrkb@jikei.ac.jp.

Mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) is a group of inherited conditions involving 
metabolic dysfunction. Lysosomal enzyme deficiency leads to the accumulation of 
glycosaminoglycan (GAG) resulting in systemic symptoms, and is categorized into 
seven types caused by deficiency in one of eleven different enzymes. The 
pathophysiological mechanism of these diseases has been investigated, indicating 
impaired autophagy in neuronal damage initiation, association of activated 
microglia and astrocytes with the neuroinflammatory processes, and involvement 
of tauopathy. A new inherited error of metabolism resulting in a multisystem 
disorder with features of the MPS was also identified. Additionally, new 
therapeutic methods are being developed that could improve conventional 
therapies, such as new recombinant enzymes that can penetrate the blood brain 
barrier, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation with reduced intensity 
conditioning, gene therapy using a viral vector system or gene editing, and 
substrate reduction therapy. In this review, we discuss the recent developments 
in MPS research and provide a framework for developing strategies.

DOI: 10.1038/s10038-018-0534-8
PMID: 30451936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]