---
reference_id: "PMID:38429929"
title: ASOs are an effective treatment for disease-associated oligodendrocyte signatures in premanifest and symptomatic SCA3 mice.
authors:
- Schuster KH
- Zalon AJ
- DiFranco DM
- Putka AF
- Stec NR
- Jarrah SI
- Naeem A
- Haque Z
- Zhang H
- Guan Y
- McLoughlin HS
journal: Mol Ther
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2024.02.033
keywords:
- Animals
- Oligodendroglia/metabolism
- Mice
- "Machado-Joseph Disease/genetics, therapy, pathology, metabolism"
- "Oligonucleotides, Antisense"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Ataxin-3/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Repressor Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ASOs are an effective treatment for disease-associated oligodendrocyte signatures in premanifest and symptomatic SCA3 mice.
**Authors:** Schuster KH, Zalon AJ, DiFranco DM, Putka AF, Stec NR, Jarrah SI, Naeem A, Haque Z, Zhang H, Guan Y, McLoughlin HS
**Journal:** Mol Ther (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymthe.2024.02.033](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymthe.2024.02.033)

## Content

1. Mol Ther. 2024 May 1;32(5):1359-1372. doi: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2024.02.033. Epub 
2024 Feb 29.

ASOs are an effective treatment for disease-associated oligodendrocyte 
signatures in premanifest and symptomatic SCA3 mice.

Schuster KH(1), Zalon AJ(1), DiFranco DM(1), Putka AF(2), Stec NR(1), Jarrah 
SI(1), Naeem A(1), Haque Z(1), Zhang H(3), Guan Y(3), McLoughlin HS(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA; 
Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(3)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. 
Electronic address: hayleymc@med.umich.edu.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (SCA3) is the most common dominantly inherited 
ataxia. Currently, no preventive or disease-modifying treatments exist for this 
progressive neurodegenerative disorder, although efforts using gene silencing 
approaches are under clinical trial investigation. The disease is caused by a 
CAG repeat expansion in the mutant gene, ATXN3, producing an enlarged 
polyglutamine tract in the mutant protein. Similar to other paradigmatic 
neurodegenerative diseases, studies evaluating the pathogenic mechanism focus 
primarily on neuronal implications. Consequently, therapeutic interventions 
often overlook non-neuronal contributions to disease. Our lab recently reported 
that oligodendrocytes display some of the earliest and most progressive 
dysfunction in SCA3 mice. Evidence of disease-associated oligodendrocyte 
signatures has also been reported in other neurodegenerative diseases, including 
Alzheimer's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, and 
Huntington's disease. Here, we assess the effects of anti-ATXN3 antisense 
oligonucleotide (ASO) treatment on oligodendrocyte dysfunction in premanifest 
and symptomatic SCA3 mice. We report a severe, but modifiable, deficit in 
oligodendrocyte maturation caused by the toxic gain-of-function of mutant ATXN3 
early in SCA3 disease that is transcriptionally, biochemically, and functionally 
rescued with anti-ATXN3 ASO. Our results highlight the promising use of an ASO 
therapy across neurodegenerative diseases that requires glial targeting in 
addition to affected neuronal populations.

Copyright © 2024 The American Society of Gene and Cell Therapy. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2024.02.033
PMCID: PMC11081874
PMID: 38429929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.