---
reference_id: "PMID:26478444"
title: Seizures in oligodendroglial tumors.
authors:
- Kerkhof M
- Benit C
- Duran-Pena A
- Vecht CJ
journal: CNS Oncol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.2217/cns.15.29
keywords:
- Brain Neoplasms/complications
- Glioma/complications
- Humans
- Seizures/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Seizures in oligodendroglial tumors.
**Authors:** Kerkhof M, Benit C, Duran-Pena A, Vecht CJ
**Journal:** CNS Oncol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.2217/cns.15.29](https://doi.org/10.2217/cns.15.29)

## Content

1. CNS Oncol. 2015;4(5):347-56. doi: 10.2217/cns.15.29. Epub 2015 Oct 19.

Seizures in oligodendroglial tumors.

Kerkhof M(1), Benit C(1), Duran-Pena A(2), Vecht CJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical Center The Hague, The Netherlands.
(2)Service Neurologie Mazarin, GH Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.

Epilepsy develops in more than 70-90% of oligodendroglial tumors and represents 
a favorable indicator for long-term survival if present as the first clinical 
sign. Presence of IDH1 mutation is frequently associated with seizures in 
oligodendrogliomas, next to alterations of glutamate and GABA metabolism in the 
origin of glioma-associated epilepsy. Treatment by surgery or radiotherapy 
results in seizure freedom in about two-thirds of patients, and chemotherapy to 
a seizure reduction in about 50%. Symptomatic anticonvulsive therapy with 
levetiracetam and valproic acid as monotherapy are both evidence-based drugs for 
the partial epilepsies, and their effective use in brain tumors is supported by 
a large amount of additional data. Pharmacoresistance against anticonvulsants is 
more prevalent among oligodendrogliomas, occurring in about 40% despite 
polytherapy with two anticonvulsants or more. Toxic signs of anticonvulsants in 
brain tumors involve cognition, bone marrow and skin. Previous neurosurgery, 
radiation therapy or chemotherapy add to the risks of cognitive dysfunction.

DOI: 10.2217/cns.15.29
PMCID: PMC6082346
PMID: 26478444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Financial & competing interests disclosure The 
authors have no relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any 
organization or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict with 
the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript. This includes 
employment, consultancies, honoraria, stock ownership or options, expert 
testimony, grants or patents received or pending, or royalties. No writing 
assistance was utilized in the production of this manuscript.