---
reference_id: "PMID:33250269"
title: New treatment for myocardial diseases.
authors:
- Onoue K
- Saito Y
journal: J Cardiol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.jjcc.2020.10.016
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New treatment for myocardial diseases.
**Authors:** Onoue K, Saito Y
**Journal:** J Cardiol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jjcc.2020.10.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jjcc.2020.10.016)

## Content

1. J Cardiol. 2021 Jun;77(6):620-625. doi: 10.1016/j.jjcc.2020.10.016. Epub 2020 
Nov 26.

New treatment for myocardial diseases.

Onoue K(1), Saito Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Medicine, Nara Medical University, Nara, Japan. Electronic 
address: konoue@naramed-u.ac.jp.
(2)Cardiovascular Medicine, Nara Medical University, Nara, Japan.

Treatment of myocardial diseases with renin-angiotensin system inhibitors and 
β-blockers has greatly contributed to improving prognosis. However, these 
treatments are non-specific, and with the exception of some treatments, radical 
treatments according to the cause of each disease have not been developed until 
recent years. But in the past decade, more specific and more upstream treatments 
based on the molecular mechanism of disease onset have been developed and are 
emerging. Some of the effects have been shown in clinical practice and already 
approved. This article outlines the mechanism of action and clinical data of 
novel therapeutic agents specific for myocardial diseases such as dilated 
cardiomyopathy, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, Fabry disease, cardiac amyloidosis, 
and myocarditis. In the future, we hope that the molecular mechanisms will be 
further elucidated and new and upstream treatment methods will be developed.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jjcc.2020.10.016
PMID: 33250269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]