---
reference_id: "PMID:36511140"
title: Laforin targets malin to glycogen in Lafora progressive myoclonus epilepsy.
authors:
- Mitra S
- Chen B
- Wang P
- Chown EE
- Dear M
- Guisso DR
- Mariam U
- Wu J
- Gumusgoz E
- Minassian BA
journal: Dis Model Mech
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1242/dmm.049802
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- Glycogen/metabolism
- "Lafora Disease/genetics, metabolism"
- "Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases, Non-Receptor/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Laforin targets malin to glycogen in Lafora progressive myoclonus epilepsy.
**Authors:** Mitra S, Chen B, Wang P, Chown EE, Dear M, Guisso DR, Mariam U, Wu J, Gumusgoz E, Minassian BA
**Journal:** Dis Model Mech (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dmm.049802](https://doi.org/10.1242/dmm.049802)

## Content

1. Dis Model Mech. 2023 Jan 1;16(1):dmm049802. doi: 10.1242/dmm.049802. Epub 2023
 Jan 6.

Laforin targets malin to glycogen in Lafora progressive myoclonus epilepsy.

Mitra S(1), Chen B(1), Wang P(2), Chown EE(2), Dear M(1), Guisso DR(1), Mariam
U(1), Wu J(1), Gumusgoz E(3), Minassian BA(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
(2)Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children
Research Institute, Toronto, ON M5G 0A4, Canada.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Glycogen is the largest cytosolic macromolecule and is kept in solution through
a regular system of short branches allowing hydration. This structure was
thought to solely require balanced glycogen synthase and branching enzyme
activities. Deposition of overlong branched glycogen in the fatal epilepsy
Lafora disease (LD) indicated involvement of the LD gene products laforin and
the E3 ubiquitin ligase malin in regulating glycogen structure. Laforin binds
glycogen, and LD-causing mutations disrupt this binding, laforin-malin
interactions and malin's ligase activity, all indicating a critical role for
malin. Neither malin's endogenous function nor location had previously been
studied due to lack of suitable antibodies. Here, we generated a mouse in which
the native malin gene is tagged with the FLAG sequence. We show that the tagged
gene expresses physiologically, malin localizes to glycogen, laforin and malin
indeed interact, at glycogen, and malin's presence at glycogen depends on
laforin. These results, and mice, open the way to understanding unknown
mechanisms of glycogen synthesis critical to LD and potentially other much more
common diseases due to incompletely understood defects in glycogen metabolism.

© 2023. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.049802
PMCID: PMC9844227
PMID: 36511140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no
competing or financial interests.
