---
reference_id: "PMID:18977817"
title: "Neurosarcoidosis: a study of 30 new cases."
authors:
- Joseph FG
- Scolding NJ
journal: J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1136/jnnp.2008.151977
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- Adult
- Biopsy
- Brain/pathology
- "Brain Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology, pathology"
- "Cranial Nerve Diseases/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Disability Evaluation
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- England
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neurologic Examination
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- "Sarcoidosis/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology, pathology"
- Wales
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurosarcoidosis: a study of 30 new cases.
**Authors:** Joseph FG, Scolding NJ
**Journal:** J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jnnp.2008.151977](https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.2008.151977)

## Content

1. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2009 Mar;80(3):297-304. doi:
10.1136/jnnp.2008.151977. Epub 2008 Oct 31.

Neurosarcoidosis: a study of 30 new cases.

Joseph FG(1), Scolding NJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Neurosciences, Frenchay Hospital, Bristol BS16 1LE, UK.

METHODS: The frequency, nature, relationship to systemic features, value of
investigation findings and outcomes for a cohort of patients with
neurosarcoidosis (NS) were studied by performing a retrospective survey of case
records from nine District General or Regional Centre hospitals in south-west
England and south Wales over a 12-year period (1990-2002). Thirty patients (29
Caucasians) were included--16 (53%) males and 14 (47%) females, including 13
with histological confirmation of CNS disease, making this one of the largest
series of biopsy-confirmed NS; the remaining cases had "Probable" NS according
to the Zajicek criteria. The male preponderance is of interest particularly
considering the female predominance of systemic sarcoidosis.
RESULTS: The indicative prevalence of NS in this geographical area was estimated
at one per 100,000, given an approximate population of 3 million. The most
frequent features were headaches, visual failure, ataxia and vomiting. Cranial
neuropathy occurred in 80% of patients, and as a presenting feature in
50%--though facial nerve involvement was seen in only 23%, and in none of those
with definite disease. Unsurprisingly, no diagnostic clinical patterns emerged
overall when only definite cases were analysed, but within our definite group of
patients, meningeal and/or parenchymal lesion enhancement was observed in all
but one case, while distinction from multiple sclerosis might also be aided by
the observation that in all NS cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples with positive
oligoclonal bands (27%), banding was accompanied by elevations of CSF protein.
CONCLUSION: From a prognostic perspective, the reported association of seizures
in NS with a poor long-term outcome was not supported, while the suggestion that
myelopathy also predicts an adverse prognosis was confirmed.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2008.151977
PMID: 18977817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
