---
reference_id: "PMID:23430541"
title: On the role of natural killer cells in neurodegenerative diseases.
authors:
- Maghazachi AA
journal: Toxins (Basel)
year: '2013'
doi: 10.3390/toxins5020363
content_type: abstract_only
---

# On the role of natural killer cells in neurodegenerative diseases.
**Authors:** Maghazachi AA
**Journal:** Toxins (Basel) (2013)
**DOI:** [10.3390/toxins5020363](https://doi.org/10.3390/toxins5020363)

## Content

1. Toxins (Basel). 2013 Feb 19;5(2):363-75. doi: 10.3390/toxins5020363.

On the role of natural killer cells in neurodegenerative diseases.

Maghazachi AA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Institute of Basic Medical, University of Oslo, 
Oslo, Norway. azzam.maghazachi@medisin.uio.no

Natural killer (NK) cells exert important immunoregulatory functions by 
releasing several inflammatory molecules, such as IFN-γ and members of 
chemokines, which include CCL3/MIP-1α and CCL4/MIP-1β. These cells also express 
heptahelical receptors, which are coupled to heterotrimeric G proteins that 
guide them into inflamed and injured tissues. NK cells have been shown to 
recognize and destroy transformed cells and virally-infected cells, but their 
roles in neurodegenerative diseases have not been examined in detail. In this 
review, I will summarize the effects of NK cells in two neurodegenerative 
diseases, namely multiple sclerosis and globoid cell leukodystrophy. It is hoped 
that the knowledge obtained from these diseases may facilitate building rational 
protocols for treating these and other neurodegenerative or autoimmune diseases 
using NK cells and drugs that activate them as therapeutic tools.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins5020363
PMCID: PMC3640540
PMID: 23430541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]