---
reference_id: "PMID:37675753"
title: "Renal Involvement in Primary Sjogren's Syndrome: A Case Series of Three Cases with Various Clinicopathological Presentations."
authors:
- Agnani B
- Solanki R
- Hemrajani D
journal: Saudi J Kidney Dis Transpl
year: '2022'
doi: 10.4103/1319-2442.384195
keywords:
- Humans
- "Acidosis, Renal Tubular/diagnosis, etiology"
- Kidney
- Kidney Calculi
- "Nephritis, Interstitial/diagnosis, etiology"
- "Sjogren's Syndrome/complications, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Renal Involvement in Primary Sjogren's Syndrome: A Case Series of Three Cases with Various Clinicopathological Presentations.
**Authors:** Agnani B, Solanki R, Hemrajani D
**Journal:** Saudi J Kidney Dis Transpl (2022)
**DOI:** [10.4103/1319-2442.384195](https://doi.org/10.4103/1319-2442.384195)

## Content

1. Saudi J Kidney Dis Transpl. 2022 Aug;33(Supplement):S255-S259. doi: 
10.4103/1319-2442.384195.

Renal Involvement in Primary Sjogren's Syndrome: A Case Series of Three Cases 
with Various Clinicopathological Presentations.

Agnani B(1), Solanki R(1), Hemrajani D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Sawai Man Singh Medical College, Jaipur, Rajasthan, 
India.

Sjogren's syndrome is a prevalent and underdiagnosed systemic disease that 
primarily affects epithelial tissue. It may affect renal function, either as an 
epithelial disease causing tubulointerstitial nephritis (TIN) or as an immune 
complex-mediated glomerulopathy. These lesions may cause a variety of clinical 
features, both overt and occult. The epithelial disease is mediated by B and T 
cells. The prevalence of renal involvement in primary Sjogren's syndrome has 
been reported to range approximately from 10% to 30%. Patients with renal 
involvement in primary Sjogren's syndrome may have renal manifestations, such as 
renal tubular acidosis (RTA) Type I, TIN, diabetes insipidus, nephrolithiasis, 
and Fanconi syndrome. Distal RTA was reported more commonly than proximal RTA, 
which can present as acute hypokalemic paralysis. We present three cases of 
primary Sjogren's syndrome with significant renal involvement and various 
clinicopathological presentations.

DOI: 10.4103/1319-2442.384195
PMID: 37675753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]