---
reference_id: "PMID:39157460"
title: "Update on non-infectious uveitis treatment: anti-TNF-alpha and beyond."
authors:
- Chauhan K
- Tyagi M
journal: Front Ophthalmol (Lausanne)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fopht.2024.1412930
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update on non-infectious uveitis treatment: anti-TNF-alpha and beyond.
**Authors:** Chauhan K, Tyagi M
**Journal:** Front Ophthalmol (Lausanne) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fopht.2024.1412930](https://doi.org/10.3389/fopht.2024.1412930)

## Content

1. Front Ophthalmol (Lausanne). 2024 Aug 2;4:1412930. doi: 
10.3389/fopht.2024.1412930. eCollection 2024.

Update on non-infectious uveitis treatment: anti-TNF-alpha and beyond.

Chauhan K(1)(2), Tyagi M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Saroja A Rao Centre for Uveitis, L V Prasad Eye Institute, Hyderabad, India.
(2)Smt. Kanuri Santhamma Centre for Vitreo-Retinal Diseases, L V Prasad Eye 
Institute, Hyderabad, India.

Non-infectious uveitis (NIU) encompasses a range of conditions marked by 
inflammation within various layers of the eye. NIU is a significant contributor 
to irreversible vision loss among the working-age population in developed 
countries. The aim of treating uveitis is to manage inflammation, prevent its 
recurrences and to restore or salvage vision. Presently, the standard treatment 
protocol for NIU involves initiating corticosteroids as the primary therapeutic 
agents, although more aggressive approaches and steroid sparing agent may be 
necessary in certain cases. These advanced treatments option include synthetic 
immunosuppressants like antimetabolites, calcineurin inhibitors and alkylating 
agents. For patients who exhibit an intolerance or resistance to corticosteroids 
and conventional immunosuppressive therapies, biologic agents have emerged as a 
promising alternative. Notably, among the biologic treatments evaluated, TNF-α 
inhibitors, anti-CD20 therapy and alkylating agents have shown considerable 
efficacy. In this review, we delve into the latest evidence surrounding the 
effectiveness of biologic therapy and introduce novel therapeutic strategies 
targeting immune components as potential avenues for advancing treatment of NIU.

Copyright © 2024 Chauhan and Tyagi.

DOI: 10.3389/fopht.2024.1412930
PMCID: PMC11327136
PMID: 39157460

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.