---
reference_id: "PMID:28646995"
title: "Executive summary of the 2017 KDIGO Chronic Kidney Disease-Mineral and Bone Disorder (CKD-MBD) Guideline Update: what's changed and why it matters."
authors:
- Ketteler M
- Block GA
- Evenepoel P
- Fukagawa M
- Herzog CA
- McCann L
- Moe SM
- Shroff R
- Tonelli MA
- Toussaint ND
- Vervloet MG
- Leonard MB
journal: Kidney Int
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2017.04.006
keywords:
- Biomarkers/blood
- Bone Remodeling/drug effects
- Calcium/blood
- "Chelating Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Chronic Kidney Disease-Mineral and Bone Disorder/blood, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Consensus
- Dietary Supplements/adverse effects
- Evidence-Based Medicine/standards
- Humans
- Nephrology/standards
- Parathyroid Hormone/blood
- Phosphates/blood
- Risk Factors
- Treatment Outcome
- "Vitamin D/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Executive summary of the 2017 KDIGO Chronic Kidney Disease-Mineral and Bone Disorder (CKD-MBD) Guideline Update: what's changed and why it matters.
**Authors:** Ketteler M, Block GA, Evenepoel P, Fukagawa M, Herzog CA, McCann L, Moe SM, Shroff R, Tonelli MA, Toussaint ND, Vervloet MG, Leonard MB
**Journal:** Kidney Int (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.kint.2017.04.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.kint.2017.04.006)

## Content

1. Kidney Int. 2017 Jul;92(1):26-36. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2017.04.006.

Executive summary of the 2017 KDIGO Chronic Kidney Disease-Mineral and Bone 
Disorder (CKD-MBD) Guideline Update: what's changed and why it matters.

Ketteler M(1), Block GA(2), Evenepoel P(3), Fukagawa M(4), Herzog CA(5), McCann 
L(6), Moe SM(7), Shroff R(8), Tonelli MA(9), Toussaint ND(10), Vervloet MG(11), 
Leonard MB(12).

Author information:
(1)Klinikum Coburg, Coburg, Germany. Electronic address: 
markus.ketteler@klinikum-coburg.de.
(2)Denver Nephrology, Denver, Colorado, USA.
(3)University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(4)Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara, Japan.
(5)Hennepin County Medical Center, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(6)Eagle, Idaho, USA.
(7)Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA; Roudebush 
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(8)Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(9)University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada.
(10)The Royal Melbourne Hospital, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(11)VU University Medical Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(12)Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA. 
Electronic address: leonard5@stanford.edu.

Erratum in
    Kidney Int. 2017 Dec;92(6):1558. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2017.10.001.

The KDIGO 2017 Clinical Practice Guideline Update for the Diagnosis, Evaluation, 
Prevention, and Treatment of CKD-MBD represents a selective update of the prior 
CKD-MBD Guideline published in 2009. This update, along with the 2009 
publication, is intended to assist the practitioner caring for adults and 
children with chronic kidney disease (CKD), those on chronic dialysis therapy, 
or individuals with a kidney transplant. This review highlights key aspects of 
the 2017 CKD-MBD Guideline Update, with an emphasis on the rationale for the 
changes made to the original guideline document. Topic areas encompassing 
updated recommendations include diagnosis of bone abnormalities in CKD-mineral 
and bone disorder (MBD), treatment of CKD-MBD by targeting phosphate lowering 
and calcium maintenance, treatment of abnormalities in parathyroid hormone in 
CKD-MBD, treatment of bone abnormalities by antiresorptives and other 
osteoporosis therapies, and evaluation and treatment of kidney transplant bone 
disease.

Copyright © 2017 KDIGO. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.kint.2017.04.006
PMID: 28646995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]