---
reference_id: "PMID:6267939"
title: "A case of lead intoxication: clinical and biochemical studies."
authors:
- Miwa S
- Ishida Y
- Takegawa S
- Urata G
- Toyoda T
journal: Am J Hematol
year: '1981'
doi: 10.1002/ajh.2830110112
keywords:
- "5'-Nucleotidase"
- Adult
- "Anemia, Hemolytic/blood, chemically induced"
- Erythrocytes/enzymology
- Glutathione/blood
- Humans
- "Lead Poisoning/blood, complications"
- Male
- Nucleotidases/deficiency
- Porphobilinogen Synthase/deficiency
- Pyrimidine Nucleotides/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case of lead intoxication: clinical and biochemical studies.
**Authors:** Miwa S, Ishida Y, Takegawa S, Urata G, Toyoda T
**Journal:** Am J Hematol (1981)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajh.2830110112](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajh.2830110112)

## Content

1. Am J Hematol. 1981;11(1):99-105. doi: 10.1002/ajh.2830110112.

A case of lead intoxication: clinical and biochemical studies.

Miwa S, Ishida Y, Takegawa S, Urata G, Toyoda T.

A 23-year-old Japanese male with severe lead intoxication accompanied by 
hemolytic anemia was studied. The patient had taken 12 g to lead in about a 
month. He had moderate hemolytic anemia (Hb 8.9 g/100 ml) with reticulocytosis 
ranging from 2.5 to 11.7%. Peripheral blood smear showed nucleated red cells 
(42/200 white blood cells) and marked basophilic stippling in the red cells. 
Activities of erythrocyte enzymes were either normal or increased except for 
pyrimidine 5'-nucleotidase (P5N) and delta-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase 
(ALA-D) both of which were found to be decreased, being 48.8% and 4.1% of the 
normal controls respectively. Erythrocyte reduced glutathione (GSH) was high 
(145.6 mg/100 ml RBC). Erythrocyte pyrimidine nucleotides were accumulated up to 
10.2% of total nucleotides. The level of lead in peripheral blood was 112 
microgram per 100 ml blood. Ca2+-Na2-EDTA was given to the patient as treatment. 
The level of lead in the blood decreased gradually and hemolytic anemia 
improved. Basophilic stippling in the red cells disappeared. These results 
confirmed the findings of Valentine et al [1] that lead-induced deficiency of 
P5N resulted in basophilic stippling and hemolytic anemia just like hereditary 
hemolytic anemia due to P5N deficiency.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.2830110112
PMID: 6267939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]