---
reference_id: "PMID:28597146"
title: "Human IκBα Gain of Function: a Severe and Syndromic Immunodeficiency."
authors:
- Boisson B
- Puel A
- Picard C
- Casanova JL
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-017-0400-z
keywords:
- Alleles
- Animals
- Enzyme Activation
- Gain of Function Mutation
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Immunity/genetics
- "Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/diagnosis, etiology, metabolism, therapy"
- "NF-KappaB Inhibitor alpha/genetics, metabolism"
- Organ Specificity/genetics
- Phenotype
- Phosphorylation
- Proteolysis
- Severity of Illness Index
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human IκBα Gain of Function: a Severe and Syndromic Immunodeficiency.
**Authors:** Boisson B, Puel A, Picard C, Casanova JL
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-017-0400-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-017-0400-z)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2017 Jul;37(5):397-412. doi: 10.1007/s10875-017-0400-z. Epub 
2017 Jun 9.

Human IκBα Gain of Function: a Severe and Syndromic Immunodeficiency.

Boisson B(1)(2)(3), Puel A(4)(5)(6), Picard C(5)(6)(7)(8), Casanova 
JL(4)(5)(6)(7)(9).

Author information:
(1)St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller 
Branch, Rockefeller University, New York, USA. bebo283@rockefeller.edu.
(2)Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, INSERM 
UMR1163, Necker Hospital for Sick Children, Paris, France. 
bebo283@rockefeller.edu.
(3)Imagine Institute, Paris Descartes University, Paris, France. 
bebo283@rockefeller.edu.
(4)St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller 
Branch, Rockefeller University, New York, USA.
(5)Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, INSERM 
UMR1163, Necker Hospital for Sick Children, Paris, France.
(6)Imagine Institute, Paris Descartes University, Paris, France.
(7)Pediatric Hematology-Immunology and Rheumatology Unit, AP-HP, Necker Hospital 
for Sick Children, Paris, France.
(8)Study Center for Immunodeficiencies, AP-HP, Necker Hospital for Sick 
Children, Paris, France.
(9)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York, NY, USA.

Germline heterozygous gain-of-function (GOF) mutations of NFKBIA, encoding IκBα, 
cause an autosomal dominant (AD) form of anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with 
immunodeficiency (EDA-ID). Fourteen unrelated patients have been reported since 
the identification of the first case in 2003. All mutations enhanced the 
inhibitory activity of IκBα, by preventing its phosphorylation on serine 32 or 
36 and its subsequent degradation. The mutation certainly or probably occurred 
de novo in 13 patients, whereas it was inherited from a parent with somatic 
mosaicism in one patient. Eleven mutations, belonging to two groups, were 
identified: (i) missense mutations affecting S32, S36, or neighboring residues 
(8 mutations, 11 patients) and (ii) nonsense mutations upstream from S32 
associated with the reinitiation of translation downstream from S36 (3 
mutations, 3 patients). Thirteen patients had developmental features of EDA, the 
severity and nature of which differed between cases. All patient cells tested 
displayed impaired NF-κB-mediated responses to the stimulation of various 
surface receptors involved in cell-intrinsic (fibroblasts), innate (monocytes), 
and adaptive (B and T cells) immunity, including TLRs, IL-1Rs, TNFRs, TCR, and 
BCR. All patients had profound B-cell deficiency. Specific immunological 
features, found in some, but not all patients, included a lack of peripheral 
lymph nodes, lymphocytosis, dysfunctional α/β T cells, and a lack of circulating 
γ/δ T cells. The patients had various pyogenic, mycobacterial, fungal, and viral 
severe infections. Patients with a missense mutation tended to display more 
severe phenotypes, probably due to higher levels of GOF proteins. In the absence 
of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT), this condition cause death 
before the age of 1 year (one child). Two survivors have been on prophylaxis (at 
9 and 22 years). Six children died after HSCT. Five survived, four of whom have 
been on prophylaxis (3 to 21 years post HSCT), whereas one has been well with no 
prophylaxis. Heterozygous GOF mutations in IκBα underlie a severe and syndromic 
immunodeficiency, the interindividual variability of which might partly be 
ascribed to the dichotomy of missense and nonsense mutations, and the 
hematopoietic component of which can be rescued by HSCT.

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-017-0400-z
PMCID: PMC5563390
PMID: 28597146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement The authors 
declared that they have no conflict of interest.