---
reference_id: "PMID:27233232"
title: Arginine-Glycine Amidinotransferase Deficiency and Functional Characterization of Missense Variants in GATM.
authors:
- DesRoches CL
- Bruun T
- Wang P
- Marshall CR
- Mercimek-Mahmutoglu S
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/humu.23018
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Amidinotransferases/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics, metabolism"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- "Developmental Disabilities/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- Infant
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Speech Disorders/genetics, metabolism"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arginine-Glycine Amidinotransferase Deficiency and Functional Characterization of Missense Variants in GATM.
**Authors:** DesRoches CL, Bruun T, Wang P, Marshall CR, Mercimek-Mahmutoglu S
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.23018](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.23018)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2016 Sep;37(9):926-32. doi: 10.1002/humu.23018. Epub 2016 Jun 27.

Arginine-Glycine Amidinotransferase Deficiency and Functional Characterization
of Missense Variants in GATM.

DesRoches CL(1), Bruun T(1), Wang P(1), Marshall CR(1)(2), Mercimek-Mahmutoglu
S(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Genome Biology Program, Research Institute, The Hospital for
Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, M5G 1×8, Canada.
(2)Genome Diagnostics, Department of Paediatric Laboratory Medicine, The
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, M5G 1×8, Canada.
(3)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, The
Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, M5G 1×8,
Canada.

Arginine-glycine amidinotransferase (GATM) deficiency is an autosomal-recessive
disorder caused by pathogenic variants in GATM. Clinical features include
intellectual disability, hypotonia, and myopathy. Due to normal neurodevelopment
in asymptomatic individuals on creatine monotherapy, GATM deficiency is a good
candidate for newborn screening. To determine the carrier frequency of GATM
deficiency, we performed functional characterization of rare missense variants
in GATM reported as heterozygous in the Exome Variant Server database. To assess
phenotype and genotype correlation, we developed a clinical severity scoring
system. Two patients with mild phenotype had a nonsense missense variant. Severe
phenotype was present in patients with missense as well as truncating variants.
There seems to be no phenotype and genotype correlation. We cloned a novel GATM
transcript. We found seven missense variants retaining 0% of wild-type GATM
activity indicating putative pathogenicity. Based on our study results, high
Genomic Evolutionary Rate Profiling conservation score, conserved amino acid
substitution in species, and low allele frequency in exome databases would be
the most sensitive in silico analysis tools to predict pathogenicity of missense
variants. We present first study of the functional characterization of missense
variants in GATM as well as clinical severity score of patients with GATM
deficiency.

© 2016 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.23018
PMID: 27233232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
