---
reference_id: "PMID:31452510"
title: "Mutationally-activated PI3'-kinase-α promotes de-differentiation of lung tumors initiated by the BRAF(V600E) oncoprotein kinase."
authors:
- van Veen JE
- Scherzer M
- Boshuizen J
- Chu M
- Liu A
- Landman A
- Green S
- Trejo C
- McMahon M
journal: Elife
year: '2019'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.43668
keywords:
- Adenocarcinoma/pathology
- Animals
- "Class I Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Lung Neoplasms/pathology
- Mice
- "Mutant Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutationally-activated PI3'-kinase-α promotes de-differentiation of lung tumors initiated by the BRAF(V600E) oncoprotein kinase.
**Authors:** van Veen JE, Scherzer M, Boshuizen J, Chu M, Liu A, Landman A, Green S, Trejo C, McMahon M
**Journal:** Elife (2019)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.43668](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.43668)

## Content

1. Elife. 2019 Aug 27;8:e43668. doi: 10.7554/eLife.43668.

Mutationally-activated PI3'-kinase-α promotes de-differentiation of lung tumors
initiated by the BRAF(V600E) oncoprotein kinase.

van Veen JE(1)(2)(3)(4), Scherzer M(1)(2), Boshuizen J(3)(4), Chu M(3)(4), Liu
A(1)(2), Landman A(1)(4), Green S(3)(4), Trejo C(3)(4), McMahon M(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, United States.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, United States.
(3)Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, United States.
(4)Department of Cellular & Molecular Pharmacology, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, United States.

Human lung adenocarcinoma exhibits a propensity for de-differentiation,
complicating diagnosis and treatment, and predicting poorer patient survival. In
genetically engineered mouse models of lung cancer, expression of the BRAFV600E
oncoprotein kinase initiates the growth of benign tumors retaining
characteristics of their cell of origin, AT2 pneumocytes. Cooperating
alterations that activate PI3'-lipid signaling promote progression of
BRAFV600E-driven benign tumors to malignant adenocarcinoma. However, the
mechanism(s) by which this cooperation occurs remains unclear. To address this,
we generated mice carrying a conditional BrafCAT allele in which CRE-mediated
recombination leads to co-expression of BRAFV600E and tdTomato. We demonstrate
that co-expression of BRAFV600E and PIK3CAH1047R in AT2 pneumocytes leads to
rapid cell de-differentiation, without decreased expression of the transcription
factors NKX2-1, FOXA1, or FOXA2. Instead, we propose a novel role for PGC1α in
maintaining AT2 pneumocyte identity. These findings provide insight into how
these pathways may cooperate in the pathogenesis of human lung adenocarcinoma.

© 2019, van Veen et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.43668
PMCID: PMC6711745
PMID: 31452510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Jv, MS, JB, MC, AL, AL, SG, CT No competing
interests declared, MM Reviewing editor, eLife
