---
reference_id: "PMID:19289823"
title: "Seizures, sensorineural deafness, ataxia, mental retardation, and electrolyte imbalance (SeSAME syndrome) caused by mutations in KCNJ10."
authors:
- Scholl UI
- Choi M
- Liu T
- Ramaekers VT
- Häusler MG
- Grimmer J
- Tobe SW
- Farhi A
- Nelson-Williams C
- Lifton RP
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0901749106
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/etiology, genetics"
- Animals
- Ataxia
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 1"
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/genetics"
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation
- "Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying/deficiency, genetics, physiology"
- Seizures/genetics
- Syndrome
- Tissue Distribution
- Water-Electrolyte Balance/genetics
- Kcnj10 Channel
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Seizures, sensorineural deafness, ataxia, mental retardation, and electrolyte imbalance (SeSAME syndrome) caused by mutations in KCNJ10.
**Authors:** Scholl UI, Choi M, Liu T, Ramaekers VT, Häusler MG, Grimmer J, Tobe SW, Farhi A, Nelson-Williams C, Lifton RP
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0901749106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0901749106)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Apr 7;106(14):5842-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0901749106. Epub 2009 Mar 16.

Seizures, sensorineural deafness, ataxia, mental retardation, and electrolyte 
imbalance (SeSAME syndrome) caused by mutations in KCNJ10.

Scholl UI(1), Choi M, Liu T, Ramaekers VT, Häusler MG, Grimmer J, Tobe SW, Farhi 
A, Nelson-Williams C, Lifton RP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, The Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University 
School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

We describe members of 4 kindreds with a previously unrecognized syndrome 
characterized by seizures, sensorineural deafness, ataxia, mental retardation, 
and electrolyte imbalance (hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, and 
hypomagnesemia). By analysis of linkage we localize the putative causative gene 
to a 2.5-Mb segment of chromosome 1q23.2-23.3. Direct DNA sequencing of KCNJ10, 
which encodes an inwardly rectifying K(+) channel, identifies previously 
unidentified missense or nonsense mutations on both alleles in all affected 
subjects. These mutations alter highly conserved amino acids and are absent 
among control chromosomes. Many of these mutations have been shown to cause loss 
of function in related K(+) channels. These findings demonstrate that 
loss-of-function mutations in KCNJ10 cause this syndrome, which we name SeSAME. 
KCNJ10 is expressed in glia in the brain and spinal cord, where it is believed 
to take up K(+) released by neuronal repolarization, in cochlea, where it is 
involved in the generation of endolymph, and on the basolateral membrane in the 
distal nephron. We propose that KCNJ10 is required in the kidney for normal salt 
reabsorption in the distal convoluted tubule because of the need for K(+) 
recycling across the basolateral membrane to enable normal activity of the 
Na(+)-K(+)-ATPase; loss of this function accounts for the observed electrolyte 
defects. Mice deficient for KCNJ10 show a related phenotype with seizures, 
ataxia, and hearing loss, further supporting KCNJ10's role in this syndrome. 
These findings define a unique human syndrome, and establish the essential role 
of basolateral K(+) channels in renal electrolyte homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0901749106
PMCID: PMC2656559
PMID: 19289823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.