---
reference_id: "PMID:29265708"
title: The expanding phenotype of RNU4ATAC pathogenic variants to Lowry Wood syndrome.
authors:
- Farach LS
- Little ME
- Duker AL
- Logan CV
- Jackson A
- Hecht JT
- Bober M
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38581
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The expanding phenotype of RNU4ATAC pathogenic variants to Lowry Wood syndrome.
**Authors:** Farach LS, Little ME, Duker AL, Logan CV, Jackson A, Hecht JT, Bober M
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.38581](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.38581)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2018 Feb;176(2):465-469. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38581. Epub
2017  Dec 19.

The expanding phenotype of RNU4ATAC pathogenic variants to Lowry Wood syndrome.

Farach LS(1), Little ME(2), Duker AL(2), Logan CV(3), Jackson A(3), Hecht JT(4), 
Bober M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, McGovern Medical 
School, University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston at Houston, Texas.
(2)Division of Medical Genetics, Nemours/Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children, 
Wilmington, Delaware.
(3)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, 
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Research Center, McGovern Medical School 
and School of Dentistry, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, 
Houston, Texas.

RNU4ATAC pathogenic variants to date have been associated with microcephalic 
osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism, type 1 and Roifman syndrome. Both 
conditions are clinically distinct skeletal dysplasias with microcephalic 
osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism, type 1 having a more severe phenotype than 
Roifman syndrome. Some of the overlapping features of the two conditions include 
developmental delay, microcephaly, and immune deficiency. The features also 
overlap with Lowry Wood syndrome, another rare but well-defined skeletal 
dysplasia for which the genetic etiology has not been identified. Characteristic 
features include multiple epiphyseal dysplasia and microcephaly. Here, we 
describe three patients with Lowry Wood syndrome with biallelic RNU4ATAC 
pathogenic variants. This report expands the phenotypic spectrum for biallelic 
RNU4ATAC disorder causing variants and is the first to establish the genetic 
cause for Lowry Wood syndrome.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38581
PMCID: PMC6774248
PMID: 29265708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]