---
reference_id: "PMID:36745300"
title: "Worldwide prevalence of neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD) and neuromyelitis optica (NMO): a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Bagherieh S
- Afshari-Safavi A
- Vaheb S
- Kiani M
- Ghaffary EM
- Barzegar M
- Shaygannejad V
- Zabeti A
- Mirmosayyeb O
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10072-023-06617-y
keywords:
- Male
- Female
- Humans
- "Neuromyelitis Optica/epidemiology, diagnosis"
- Prevalence
- Multiple Sclerosis/epidemiology
- Central Nervous System
- Incidence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Worldwide prevalence of neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD) and neuromyelitis optica (NMO): a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Bagherieh S, Afshari-Safavi A, Vaheb S, Kiani M, Ghaffary EM, Barzegar M, Shaygannejad V, Zabeti A, Mirmosayyeb O
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10072-023-06617-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-023-06617-y)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2023 Jun;44(6):1905-1915. doi: 10.1007/s10072-023-06617-y. Epub
2023  Feb 6.

Worldwide prevalence of neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD) and 
neuromyelitis optica (NMO): a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Bagherieh S(1), Afshari-Safavi A(2), Vaheb S(1), Kiani M(1), Ghaffary EM(1), 
Barzegar M(1)(3), Shaygannejad V(1)(3), Zabeti A(4), Mirmosayyeb O(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Isfahan Neurosciences Research Center, Isfahan University of Medical 
Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
(2)Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Faculty of Health, North 
Khorasan University of Medical Sciences, Bojnurd, Iran.
(3)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, Isfahan University of Medical 
Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
(4)Department of Neurology and Rehabilitation Medicine, University of 
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(5)Isfahan Neurosciences Research Center, Isfahan University of Medical 
Sciences, Isfahan, Iran. omid.mirmosayyeb@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, Isfahan University of Medical 
Sciences, Isfahan, Iran. omid.mirmosayyeb@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD) is a progressive 
demyelinating disease of the central nervous system that has overlapping 
symptoms with multiple sclerosis (MS) but differs from it in a variety of ways. 
Previous studies have reported conflicting results trying to estimate the number 
of individuals affected by them which is why we designed this systematic review 
and meta-analysis to estimate the worldwide prevalence and incidence of 
NMOSD/NMO based on current evidence.
METHODS: We searched PubMed, Scopus, EMBASE, Web of Science, and gray literature 
including references from the identified studies, review studies, and conference 
abstracts which were published up to February 1, 2022. We used all MeSH terms 
pertaining to "NMOSD," "NMO," and all the terms on "prevalence," "incidence," 
and "epidemiology" to identify the search components. Pooled effect sizes were 
measured using random-effect model by DerSimonian-Laird.
RESULTS: The prevalence and incidence rates of NMOSD/NMO ranged from 0.07 to 10 
and 0.029 to 0.880 per 100,000 population, respectively. The overall pooled 
prevalence of NMO per 100,000 population was 1.54 (I2: 98.4%, 95% CI: 1.13-1.96, 
P< 0.001) based on the 2006 criteria, 1.51 (I2: 99.4%, 95% CI: 1.21-1.81, P < 
0.001) based on the 2015 criteria and 2.16 (I2: 89.4%, 95% CI: 1.46-2.86, P < 
0.001) based on the 2006/2015 criteria. The overall annual incidence of NMO per 
100,000 population was 0.155 (I2: 95%, 95% CI: 0.115-0.195, P < 0.001) based on 
the 2006 criteria and 0.278 (I2: 100%, 95% CI: 0.135-0.420, P < 0.001) based on 
the 2015 criteria. The prevalence rates were highest in French West Indies and 
South Korea, and lowest in Cuba and Australia, based on the 2006 and 2015 
criteria, respectively. Also, the highest annual incidence rates were obtained 
for Sweden and Slovak republic and the lowest for Cuba and Australia based on 
the 2006 and 2015 criteria, respectively. All estimated rates were higher among 
females compared to males.
CONCLUSION: Although rare, NMOSD/NMO impact affected individuals in devastating 
ways. Several large-scale prospective studies are required to reach a 
comprehension of the epidemiological aspects of these notorious demyelinating 
conditions.

© 2023. Fondazione Società Italiana di Neurologia.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-023-06617-y
PMID: 36745300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]