---
reference_id: "PMID:32172442"
title: "Generalized Arterial Calcification of Infancy: New Insights, Controversies, and Approach to Management."
authors:
- Boyce AM
- Gafni RI
- Ferreira CR
journal: Curr Osteoporos Rep
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s11914-020-00577-4
keywords:
- Adenosine Monophosphate/metabolism
- Bone Density Conservation Agents/therapeutic use
- "Calcinosis/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology, therapy"
- Cardiovascular Agents/therapeutic use
- Chelating Agents/therapeutic use
- Diphosphates/metabolism
- Diphosphonates/therapeutic use
- "Familial Hypophosphatemic Rickets/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Genotype
- Hearing Loss/physiopathology
- Humans
- "ATP-Binding Cassette, Sub-Family C Proteins/genetics"
- Phenotype
- Phosphoric Diester Hydrolases/genetics
- "Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Pyrophosphatases/genetics
- Thiosulfates/therapeutic use
- Tooth Diseases/physiopathology
- "Vascular Calcification/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology, therapy"
- Vitamin D/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Generalized Arterial Calcification of Infancy: New Insights, Controversies, and Approach to Management.
**Authors:** Boyce AM, Gafni RI, Ferreira CR
**Journal:** Curr Osteoporos Rep (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11914-020-00577-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11914-020-00577-4)

## Content

1. Curr Osteoporos Rep. 2020 Jun;18(3):232-241. doi: 10.1007/s11914-020-00577-4.

Generalized Arterial Calcification of Infancy: New Insights, Controversies, and
Approach to Management.

Boyce AM(1), Gafni RI(2), Ferreira CR(3).

Author information:
(1)Skeletal Diseases and Mineral Homeostasis Section, National Institute of
Dental and Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health, 30 Convent
Drive Room 218 MSC 4320, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA. boyceam@mail.nih.gov.
(2)Skeletal Diseases and Mineral Homeostasis Section, National Institute of
Dental and Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health, 30 Convent
Drive Room 218 MSC 4320, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA.
(3)Medical Genomics and Metabolic Genetics Branch, National Human Genome
Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review summarizes current understanding of generalized
arterial calcification of infancy (GACI), emphasizing pathophysiology, clinical
presentation, and approaches and controversies in management.
RECENT FINDINGS: Identification of causative ENPP1 mutations revealed that GACI
arises from deficiencies in inorganic pyrophosphate (leading to calcifications)
and adenosine monophosphate (leading to intimal proliferation). Identification
of genotypic and phenotypic overlap with pseudoxanthoma elasticum and autosomal
recessive hypophosphatemic rickets further advanced understanding of GACI as a
complex, multisystemic disease. Clinical data is limited to small, retrospective
samples; it is therefore unknown whether commonly used medications, such as
bisphosphonates and hypophosphatemia treatment, are therapeutic or potentially
harmful. ENPP1-Fc replacement represents a promising approach warranting further
study. Knowledge gaps in natural history place clinicians at high risk of
assigning causality to interventions that are correlated with changes in
clinical status. There is thus a critical need for improved natural history
studies to develop and test targeted therapies.

DOI: 10.1007/s11914-020-00577-4
PMCID: PMC9506683
PMID: 32172442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
