---
reference_id: "PMID:40165885"
title: "Exploring therapeutic applications of PTEN, TMPRSS2:ERG fusion, and tumour molecular subtypes in prostate cancer management."
authors:
- Bugoye FC
- Torrorey-Sawe R
- Biegon R
- Dharsee N
- Mafumiko F
- Kibona H
- Aboud S
- Patel K
- Mining S
journal: Front Oncol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2025.1521204
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exploring therapeutic applications of PTEN, TMPRSS2:ERG fusion, and tumour molecular subtypes in prostate cancer management.
**Authors:** Bugoye FC, Torrorey-Sawe R, Biegon R, Dharsee N, Mafumiko F, Kibona H, Aboud S, Patel K, Mining S
**Journal:** Front Oncol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fonc.2025.1521204](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2025.1521204)

## Content

1. Front Oncol. 2025 Mar 17;15:1521204. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2025.1521204.
eCollection  2025.

Exploring therapeutic applications of PTEN, TMPRSS2:ERG fusion, and tumour
molecular subtypes in prostate cancer management.

Bugoye FC(1)(2), Torrorey-Sawe R(2), Biegon R(2), Dharsee N(3), Mafumiko F(1),
Kibona H(4), Aboud S(5), Patel K(2), Mining S(2).

Author information:
(1)Directorate of Forensic Science and DNA Services, Government Chemist
Laboratory Authority, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(2)Department of Pathology, Moi University, Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital,
Eldoret, Kenya.
(3)Clinical Research, Training and Consultancy Unit, Ocean Road Cancer
Institute, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(4)Department of Urology, Muhimbili National Hospital, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(5)Head Office, National Institute for Medical Research, Dar es Salaam,
Tanzania.

BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer is defined by the suppression of genes that suppress
tumours and the activation of proto-oncogenes. These are the hallmarks of
prostate cancer, and they have been linked to numerous genomic variations, which
lead to unfavourable treatment outcomes. Prostate cancer can be categorised into
various risk groups of tumour molecular subtypes grounded in the idea of genomic
structural variations connected to TMPRSS2:ERG fusion and loss of PTEN. Research
suggests that certain genomic alterations may be more prevalent or exhibit
different patterns in prostate cancer tumours across populations. Studies have
reported a higher frequency of PTEN loss and TMPRSS2:ERG fusion in prostate
tumours of Black/African American men, which may contribute to the more
aggressive nature of the disease in this population. Thus, therapeutically
important information can be obtained from these structural variations,
including correlations with poor prognosis and disease severity.
METHODS: Peer-reviewed articles from 1998 to 2024 were sourced from PubMed and
Google Scholar. During the review process, the following search terms were
employed: "Tumour suppressor genes OR variations OR alterations OR oncogenes OR
diagnostics OR ethnicity OR biomarkers OR prostate cancer genomics OR prostate
cancer structural variations OR tumour and molecular subtypes OR therapeutic
implications OR immunotherapy OR immunogenetics."
RESULTS: There was a total of 13,012 results for our search query: 5,903
publications from Google Scholar with the patent and citation unchecked filer
options, and 7127 articles from PubMed with the abstract, free full text, and
full-text options selected. Unpublished works were not involved. Except for four
articles published between 1998 and 1999, all other selected articles published
in 2000 and later were considered. However, papers with irrelevant information
or redundant or duplicate content were not chosen for this review. Thus, 134 met
the inclusion criteria and were ultimately retained for this review.
CONCLUSION: This review extracted 134 relevant articles about genomic structure
variations in prostate cancer. Our findings demonstrate the importance of PTEN
and TMPRSS2:ERG fusion and tumour molecular subtyping in prostate cancer
precision medicine.

Copyright © 2025 Bugoye, Torrorey-Sawe, Biegon, Dharsee, Mafumiko, Kibona,
Aboud, Patel and Mining.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2025.1521204
PMCID: PMC11956161
PMID: 40165885

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
