---
reference_id: "PMID:28253325"
title: "Cholera forecast for Dhaka, Bangladesh, with the 2015-2016 El Niño: Lessons learned."
authors:
- Martinez PP
- Reiner RC Jr
- Cash BA
- Rodó X
- Shahjahan Mondal M
- Roy M
- Yunus M
- Faruque AS
- Huq S
- King AA
- Pascual M
journal: PLoS One
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0172355
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cholera forecast for Dhaka, Bangladesh, with the 2015-2016 El Niño: Lessons learned.
**Authors:** Martinez PP, Reiner RC Jr, Cash BA, Rodó X, Shahjahan Mondal M, Roy M, Yunus M, Faruque AS, Huq S, King AA, Pascual M
**Journal:** PLoS One (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0172355](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0172355)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2017 Mar 2;12(3):e0172355. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0172355. 
eCollection 2017.

Cholera forecast for Dhaka, Bangladesh, with the 2015-2016 El Niño: Lessons 
learned.

Martinez PP(1), Reiner RC Jr(2), Cash BA(3), Rodó X(4)(5), Shahjahan Mondal 
M(6), Roy M(7), Yunus M(8), Faruque AS(8), Huq S(8), King AA(7)(9), Pascual 
M(1)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Chicago, Chicago, 
Illinois, United States of America.
(2)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Indiana University Bloomington 
School of Public Health, Bloomington, Indiana, United States of America.
(3)Center for Ocean-Land-Atmosphere Studies, George Mason University, Fairfax, 
Virginia, United States of America.
(4)Catalan Institution for Research and Advanced Studies (ICREA), Catalunya, 
Spain.
(5)Climate and Health Program, ISGlobal, Catalunya, Spain.
(6)Institute of Water and Flood Management, Bangladesh University of Engineering 
and Technology, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(7)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.
(8)International Centre for Diarrheal Disease Research, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(9)Department of Mathematics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 
United States of America.
(10)Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe, New Mexico, United States of America.

A substantial body of work supports a teleconnection between the El 
Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and cholera incidence in Bangladesh. In 
particular, high positive anomalies during the winter (Dec-Feb) in sea surface 
temperatures (SST) in the tropical Pacific have been shown to exacerbate the 
seasonal outbreak of cholera following the monsoons from August to November. 
Climate studies have indicated a role of regional precipitation over Bangladesh 
in mediating this long-distance effect. Motivated by this previous evidence, we 
took advantage of the strong 2015-2016 El Niño event to evaluate the 
predictability of cholera dynamics for the city in recent times based on two 
transmission models that incorporate SST anomalies and are fitted to the earlier 
surveillance records starting in 1995. We implemented a mechanistic temporal 
model that incorporates both epidemiological processes and the effect of ENSO, 
as well as a previously published statistical model that resolves space at the 
level of districts (thanas). Prediction accuracy was evaluated with "out-of-fit" 
data from the same surveillance efforts (post 2008 and 2010 for the two models 
respectively), by comparing the total number of cholera cases observed for the 
season to those predicted by model simulations eight to twelve months ahead, 
starting in January each year. Although forecasts were accurate for the low 
cholera risk observed for the years preceding the 2015-2016 El Niño, the models 
also predicted a high probability of observing a large outbreak in fall 2016. 
Observed cholera cases up to Oct 2016 did not show evidence of an anomalous 
season. We discuss these predictions in the context of regional and local 
climate conditions, which show that despite positive regional rainfall 
anomalies, rainfall and inundation in Dhaka remained low. Possible explanations 
for these patterns are given together with future implications for cholera 
dynamics and directions to improve their prediction for the city.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0172355
PMCID: PMC5333828
PMID: 28253325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.