---
reference_id: "PMID:38193957"
title: "Age-Related Macular Degeneration: A Review."
authors:
- Fleckenstein M
- Schmitz-Valckenberg S
- Chakravarthy U
journal: JAMA
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1001/jama.2023.26074
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Age-Related Macular Degeneration: A Review.
**Authors:** Fleckenstein M, Schmitz-Valckenberg S, Chakravarthy U
**Journal:** JAMA (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.2023.26074](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2023.26074)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2024 Jan 9;331(2):147-157. doi: 10.1001/jama.2023.26074.

Age-Related Macular Degeneration: A Review.

Fleckenstein M(1), Schmitz-Valckenberg S(1)(2), Chakravarthy U(3).

Author information:
(1)John A. Moran Eye Center, University of Utah Health, Salt Lake City.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(3)Queens University of Belfast, Belfast, Northern Ireland.

IMPORTANCE: Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) affects approximately 20 
million people in the US and 196 million people worldwide. AMD is a leading 
cause of severe vision impairment in older people and is expected to affect 
approximately 288 million people worldwide by 2040.
OBSERVATIONS: Older age, genetic factors, and environmental factors, such as 
cigarette smoking, are associated with development of AMD. AMD occurs when 
extracellular deposits accumulate in the outer retina, ultimately leading to 
photoreceptor degeneration and loss of central vision. The late stages of AMD 
are characterized by outer retinal atrophy, termed geographic atrophy, or 
neovascularization associated with subretinal and/or intraretinal exudation, 
termed exudative neovascular AMD. The annual incidence of AMD ranges from 0.3 
per 1000 in people who are aged 55 to 59 years to 36.7 per 1000 in people aged 
90 years or older. The estimated heritability of late-stage AMD is approximately 
71% (95% CI, 18%-88%). Long-term prospective cohort studies show a significantly 
higher AMD incidence in people who smoke more than 20 cigarettes per day 
compared with people who never smoked. AMD is diagnosed primarily with clinical 
examination that includes a special lens that focuses light of the slit lamp 
through the pupil. Exudative neovascular AMD is best identified using 
angiography and by optical coherence tomography. Individuals with AMD who take 
nutritional supplements consisting of high-dose vitamin C, vitamin E, 
carotenoids, and zinc have a 20% probability to progress to late-stage AMD at 5 
years vs a 28% probability for those taking a placebo. In exudative neovascular 
AMD, 94.6% of patients receiving monthly intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial 
growth factor (anti-VEGF) injections experience less than a 15-letter visual 
acuity loss after 12 months compared with 62.2% receiving sham treatment.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: The prevalence of AMD is anticipated to increase 
worldwide to 288 million individuals by 2040. Intravitreally administered 
anti-VEGF treatment is first-line therapy for exudative neovascular AMD.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2023.26074
PMID: 38193957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]