---
reference_id: "PMID:37113859"
title: L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria - review of literature and case series.
authors:
- Ahmed S
- Siddiqui A
- DeBerardinis RJ
- Ni M
- Gu Lai W
- Cai F
- Vu HS
- Afroze B
journal: Ann Med Surg (Lond)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/MS9.0000000000000326
content_type: abstract_only
---

# L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria - review of literature and case series.
**Authors:** Ahmed S, Siddiqui A, DeBerardinis RJ, Ni M, Gu Lai W, Cai F, Vu HS, Afroze B
**Journal:** Ann Med Surg (Lond) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MS9.0000000000000326](https://doi.org/10.1097/MS9.0000000000000326)

## Content

1. Ann Med Surg (Lond). 2023 Apr 4;85(4):712-717. doi: 
10.1097/MS9.0000000000000326. eCollection 2023 Apr.

L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria - review of literature and case series.

Ahmed S(1), Siddiqui A(2), DeBerardinis RJ(3), Ni M(3), Gu Lai W(3), Cai F(3), 
Vu HS(3), Afroze B(4).

Author information:
(1)Section of Clinical Chemistry, Department of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine.
(2)Medical College.
(3)Children's Medical Center Research Institute at UT Southwestern, Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(4)Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, the Aga Khan University (AKU) 
Hospital, Karachi Pakistan.

L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria (L2HGA) is an autosomal recessive, slowly 
progressive neurodegenerative disease characterized by psychomotor delay and 
cerebellar dysfunction. The biochemical hallmark is increased concentrations of 
L2HG in body fluids. Brain MRI exhibits characteristic centripetal extension of 
the white matter involvement that differentiates it from other leukodystrophies. 
The authors report two sisters from Pakistan with L2HGA with 4 years of 
follow-up. The authors have also compared the clinical outcome of our patients 
with 45 previously reported patients with L2HGA for whom treatment and clinical 
outcome was reported.
CASE PRESENTATION: The authors report two sisters with L2HGA from Pakistan born 
to consanguineous parents. The 15- and 17-year-old girls presented with 
psychomotor delay, seizures, ataxia, intentional tremors, and dysarthria. Both 
had normal anthropometric measurements for age. Exaggerated tendon reflexes and 
bilateral sustained ankle clonus were observed in addition to cerebellar signs. 
Urine organic acids analysis showed marked excretion of 2-hydroxyglutaric acid, 
chiral differentiation of 2-hydroxyglutaric acid showed it to be L2HGA. Brain 
MRI of the 15-year-old showed diffuse subcortical white matter changes evident 
by T2/FLAIR hyperintense signals bilaterally, particularly in the frontal region 
in the centripetal distribution with some diffusion restriction along 
involvement of globus pallidus. The characteristic MRI pattern raised the 
suspicion of L2HGA. Targeted L2HGDH sequencing identified a homozygous 
pathogenic variant, c.829C>T (p.Arg227*) in L2HGDH gene in both girls. Both 
parents were heterozygous carriers of the familial variant.
CONCLUSION: Neuroradiological features of centripetal subcortical 
leukoencephalopathy with basal ganglia and dentate nuclei involvement are rather 
specific to L2HGA and should lead to further biochemical investigations to look 
for L2HGA and L2HGDH gene sequencing.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MS9.0000000000000326
PMCID: PMC10129278
PMID: 37113859

Conflict of interest statement: None.Sponsorships or competing interests that 
may be relevant to content are disclosed at the end of this article