---
reference_id: "PMID:21763481"
title: Disruption of a ciliary B9 protein complex causes Meckel syndrome.
authors:
- Dowdle WE
- Robinson JF
- Kneist A
- Sirerol-Piquer MS
- Frints SG
- Corbit KC
- Zaghloul NA
- van Lijnschoten G
- Mulders L
- Verver DE
- Zerres K
- Reed RR
- Attié-Bitach T
- Johnson CA
- García-Verdugo JM
- Katsanis N
- Bergmann C
- Reiter JF
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.06.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disruption of a ciliary B9 protein complex causes Meckel syndrome.
**Authors:** Dowdle WE, Robinson JF, Kneist A, Sirerol-Piquer MS, Frints SG, Corbit KC, Zaghloul NA, van Lijnschoten G, Mulders L, Verver DE, Zerres K, Reed RR, Attié-Bitach T, Johnson CA, García-Verdugo JM, Katsanis N, Bergmann C, Reiter JF
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.06.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.06.003)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Jul 15;89(1):94-110. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.06.003.

Disruption of a ciliary B9 protein complex causes Meckel syndrome.

Dowdle WE(1), Robinson JF, Kneist A, Sirerol-Piquer MS, Frints SG, Corbit KC, 
Zaghloul NA, van Lijnschoten G, Mulders L, Verver DE, Zerres K, Reed RR, 
Attié-Bitach T, Johnson CA, García-Verdugo JM, Katsanis N, Bergmann C, Reiter 
JF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Cardiovascular Research Institute, 
University of California, San Francisco, 94158, USA.

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Oct 7;89(4):589. Zaghloul, Norran A [corrected to 
Zaghloul, Norann A].

Nearly every ciliated organism possesses three B9 domain-containing proteins: 
MKS1, B9D1, and B9D2. Mutations in human MKS1 cause Meckel syndrome (MKS), a 
severe ciliopathy characterized by occipital encephalocele, liver ductal plate 
malformations, polydactyly, and kidney cysts. Mouse mutations in either Mks1 or 
B9d2 compromise ciliogenesis and result in phenotypes similar to those of MKS. 
Given the importance of these two B9 proteins to ciliogenesis, we examined the 
role of the third B9 protein, B9d1. Mice lacking B9d1 displayed polydactyly, 
kidney cysts, ductal plate malformations, and abnormal patterning of the neural 
tube, concomitant with compromised ciliogenesis, ciliary protein localization, 
and Hedgehog (Hh) signal transduction. These data prompted us to screen MKS 
patients for mutations in B9D1 and B9D2. We identified a homozygous c.301A>C 
(p.Ser101Arg) B9D2 mutation that segregates with MKS, affects an evolutionarily 
conserved residue, and is absent from controls. Unlike wild-type B9D2 mRNA, the 
p.Ser101Arg mutation failed to rescue zebrafish phenotypes induced by the 
suppression of b9d2. With coimmunoprecipitation and mass spectrometric analyses, 
we found that Mks1, B9d1, and B9d2 interact physically, but that the p.Ser101Arg 
mutation abrogates the ability of B9d2 to interact with Mks1, further suggesting 
that the mutation compromises B9d2 function. Our data indicate that B9d1 is 
required for normal Hh signaling, ciliogenesis, and ciliary protein localization 
and that B9d1 and B9d2 are essential components of a B9 protein complex, 
disruption of which causes MKS.

Copyright © 2011 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.06.003
PMCID: PMC3135817
PMID: 21763481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]