---
reference_id: "PMID:23908629"
title: Abnormal iron homeostasis and neurodegeneration.
authors:
- Muhoberac BB
- Vidal R
journal: Front Aging Neurosci
year: '2013'
doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2013.00032
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abnormal iron homeostasis and neurodegeneration.
**Authors:** Muhoberac BB, Vidal R
**Journal:** Front Aging Neurosci (2013)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnagi.2013.00032](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2013.00032)

## Content

1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2013 Jul 30;5:32. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2013.00032.
eCollection 2013.

Abnormal iron homeostasis and neurodegeneration.

Muhoberac BB(1), Vidal R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Indiana University-Purdue
University Indianapolis Indianapolis, IN, USA.

Abnormal iron metabolism is observed in many neurodegenerative diseases,
however, only two have shown dysregulation of brain iron homeostasis as the
primary cause of neurodegeneration. Herein, we review one of these - hereditary
ferritinopathy (HF) or neuroferritinopathy, which is an autosomal dominant,
adult onset degenerative disease caused by mutations in the ferritin light chain
(FTL) gene. HF has a clinical phenotype characterized by a progressive movement
disorder, behavioral disturbances, and cognitive impairment. The main pathologic
findings are cystic cavitation of the basal ganglia, the presence of ferritin
inclusion bodies (IBs), and substantial iron deposition. Mutant FTL subunits
have altered sequence and length but assemble into soluble 24-mers that are
ultrastructurally indistinguishable from those of the wild type. Crystallography
shows substantial localized disruption of the normally tiny 4-fold pores between
the ferritin subunits because of unraveling of the C-termini into multiple
polypeptide conformations. This structural alteration causes attenuated net iron
incorporation leading to cellular iron mishandling, ferritin aggregation, and
oxidative damage at physiological concentrations of iron and ascorbate. A
transgenic murine model parallels several features of HF, including a
progressive neurological phenotype, ferritin IB formation, and misregulation of
iron metabolism. These studies provide a working hypothesis for the pathogenesis
of HF by implicating (1) a loss of normal ferritin function that triggers iron
accumulation and overproduction of ferritin polypeptides, and (2) a gain of
toxic function through radical production, ferritin aggregation, and oxidative
stress. Importantly, the finding that ferritin aggregation can be reversed by
iron chelators and oxidative damage can be inhibited by radical trapping may be
used for clinical investigation. This work provides new insights into the role
of abnormal iron metabolism in neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2013.00032
PMCID: PMC3726993
PMID: 23908629
