---
reference_id: "PMID:24716463"
title: Attack rates of dengue fever in Swedish travellers.
authors:
- Rocklöv J
- Lohr W
- Hjertqvist M
- Wilder-Smith A
journal: Scand J Infect Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.3109/00365548.2014.887222
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Attack rates of dengue fever in Swedish travellers.
**Authors:** Rocklöv J, Lohr W, Hjertqvist M, Wilder-Smith A
**Journal:** Scand J Infect Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.3109/00365548.2014.887222](https://doi.org/10.3109/00365548.2014.887222)

## Content

1. Scand J Infect Dis. 2014 Jun;46(6):412-7. doi: 10.3109/00365548.2014.887222. 
Epub 2014 Mar 19.

Attack rates of dengue fever in Swedish travellers.

Rocklöv J(1), Lohr W, Hjertqvist M, Wilder-Smith A.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Epidemiology and 
Global Health, Umeå University , Umeå , Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Dengue is endemic in many countries visited by Swedish travellers. 
We aimed to determine the attack rate of dengue in Swedish travellers and 
analyse the trends over time and the geographical variation.
METHODS: We obtained the following data from the Swedish Institute for 
Communicable Disease Control for the y 1995-2010: number of Swedish residents 
with confirmed dengue, the country and year of infection. We also obtained 
registers on the Swedish annual air traveller arrivals to dengue endemic areas 
from the United Nations World Tourist Organization for the time period. We 
estimated attack rates with 95% confidence intervals (CI).
RESULTS: In total, 925 Swedish travellers with confirmed dengue were reported. 
We found an increasing trend over time for most destinations. The majority of 
the dengue cases were acquired in Thailand (492 out of 925 travellers; 53%), 
with an attack rate of 13.6 (95% CI 12.7, 14.4) per 100,000 travellers. However, 
the 2 highest attack rates per 100,000 travellers were found for Sri Lanka 
(45.3, 95% CI 34.3, 56.4) and Bangladesh (42.6, 95% CI 23.8, 61.5).
CONCLUSIONS: Information on attack rates in travellers is more helpful in 
guiding travel medicine practitioners than reports of absolute numbers, as the 
latter reflect travel preferences rather than the true risk. Although the 
majority of dengue infections in Swedish travellers were acquired in Thailand, 
the attack rates for dengue in travellers to Sri Lanka and Bangladesh were much 
higher. These data aid in refining information on the risk of dengue in 
travellers.

DOI: 10.3109/00365548.2014.887222
PMID: 24716463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]