---
reference_id: "PMID:24647023"
title: "Metronidazole therapy for treating dientamoebiasis in children is not associated with better clinical outcomes: a randomized, double-blinded and placebo-controlled clinical trial."
authors:
- Röser D
- Simonsen J
- Stensvold CR
- Olsen KE
- Bytzer P
- Nielsen HV
- Mølbak K
journal: Clin Infect Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/cid/ciu188
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Metronidazole therapy for treating dientamoebiasis in children is not associated with better clinical outcomes: a randomized, double-blinded and placebo-controlled clinical trial.
**Authors:** Röser D, Simonsen J, Stensvold CR, Olsen KE, Bytzer P, Nielsen HV, Mølbak K
**Journal:** Clin Infect Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cid/ciu188](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciu188)

## Content

1. Clin Infect Dis. 2014 Jun;58(12):1692-9. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciu188. Epub 2014
Mar  18.

Metronidazole therapy for treating dientamoebiasis in children is not associated 
with better clinical outcomes: a randomized, double-blinded and 
placebo-controlled clinical trial.

Röser D(1), Simonsen J(2), Stensvold CR(1), Olsen KE(1), Bytzer P(3), Nielsen 
HV(1), Mølbak K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Infection Control.
(2)Division of Health Surveillance and Research, Statens Serum Institut, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Faculty of Health Sciences, Department of Medicine, Copenhagen University, 
Køge University Hospital, Denmark.

Comment in
    J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2022 Feb 1;74(2):e40. doi: 
10.1097/MPG.0000000000003267.

BACKGROUND: There is a paucity of evidence documenting the pathogenicity of 
Dientamoeba fragilis, an intestinal protozoan common in children. As case 
reports on successful treatment are numerous, many authors advocate treatment, 
despite no placebo-controlled trials being available. Metronidazole is often 
used for treatment, though eradication rates are relatively low (60%-80%). In 
the present study we determined the clinical and microbiological efficacy of 
metronidazole in Danish children.
METHODS: In this parallel placebo-controlled double-blinded trial, children aged 
3-12 years with >4 weeks of gastrointestinal symptoms were allocated using block 
randomization in a 1:1 ratio to a 10-day course of oral metronidazole or 
placebo. Primary outcome was change in level of gastrointestinal symptoms, 
measured on a visual-analog-scale (VAS), and secondary outcome was eradication 
of D. fragilis infection. Participants, caregivers, investigators, and sponsor 
were all blinded to group assignment. The trial was registered with 
clinicaltrials.gov (NCT01314976) prior to start.
RESULTS: Of 96 participants, 48 were allocated to the metronidazole and placebo 
group each. Mean VAS change from pre- to post-treatment did not differ 
significantly (P = .8) between the metronidazole (-1.8 CI, [-2.5, -1.1]) and the 
placebo group (-1.6 CI, [-2.3, -.9]). Eradication of D. fragilis was 
significantly greater in the metronidazole group, although it declined rapidly 
from 62.5% 2 weeks after end of treatment to 24.9% 8 weeks after end of 
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings do not provide evidence to support routine 
metronidazole treatment of D. fragilis positive children with chronic 
gastrointestinal symptoms. Study funded by Statens Serum Institut.
CLINICAL TRIALS REGISTRATION: Trial was registered with clinicaltrials.gov 
(NCT01314976).

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions, 
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciu188
PMID: 24647023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]