---
reference_id: "PMID:18230725"
title: Mutations in NALP12 cause hereditary periodic fever syndromes.
authors:
- Jéru I
- Duquesnoy P
- Fernandes-Alnemri T
- Cochet E
- Yu JW
- Lackmy-Port-Lis M
- Grimprel E
- Landman-Parker J
- Hentgen V
- Marlin S
- McElreavey K
- Sarkisian T
- Grateau G
- Alnemri ES
- Amselem S
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0708616105
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- Child
- "Codon, Nonsense/genetics"
- Familial Mediterranean Fever/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- "Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- NF-kappa B/metabolism
- Pedigree
- RNA Splice Sites
- RNA Splicing/genetics
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in NALP12 cause hereditary periodic fever syndromes.
**Authors:** Jéru I, Duquesnoy P, Fernandes-Alnemri T, Cochet E, Yu JW, Lackmy-Port-Lis M, Grimprel E, Landman-Parker J, Hentgen V, Marlin S, McElreavey K, Sarkisian T, Grateau G, Alnemri ES, Amselem S
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0708616105](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0708616105)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Feb 5;105(5):1614-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0708616105. Epub 2008 Jan 29.

Mutations in NALP12 cause hereditary periodic fever syndromes.

Jéru I(1), Duquesnoy P, Fernandes-Alnemri T, Cochet E, Yu JW, Lackmy-Port-Lis M, 
Grimprel E, Landman-Parker J, Hentgen V, Marlin S, McElreavey K, Sarkisian T, 
Grateau G, Alnemri ES, Amselem S.

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U.654, Université 
Paris 6 Pierre et Marie Curie, 75012 Paris, France.

NALP proteins, also known as NLRPs, belong to the CATERPILLER protein family 
involved, like Toll-like receptors, in the recognition of microbial molecules 
and the subsequent activation of inflammatory and immune responses. Current 
advances in the function of NALPs support the recently proposed model of a 
disease continuum bridging autoimmune and autoinflammatory disorders. Among 
these diseases, hereditary periodic fevers (HPFs) are Mendelian disorders 
associated with sequence variations in very few genes; these variations are 
mostly missense mutations whose deleterious effect, which is particularly 
difficult to assess, is often questionable. The growing number of identified 
sporadic cases of periodic fever syndrome, together with the lack of 
discriminatory clinical criteria, has greatly hampered the identification of new 
disease-causing genes, a step that is, however, essential for appropriate 
management of these disorders. Using a candidate gene approach, we identified 
nonambiguous mutations in NALP12 (i.e., nonsense and splice site) in two 
families with periodic fever syndromes. As shown by means of functional studies, 
these two NALP12 mutations have a deleterious effect on NF-kappaB signaling. 
Overall, these data identify a group of HPFs defined by molecular defects in 
NALP12, opening up new ways to manage these disorders. The identification of 
these first NALP12 mutations in patients with autoinflammatory disorder also 
clearly demonstrates the crucial role of NALP12 in inflammatory signaling 
pathways, thereby assigning a precise function to this particular member of an 
emerging family of proteins whose putative biological properties are currently 
inferred essentially through in vitro means.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0708616105
PMCID: PMC2234193
PMID: 18230725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.