---
reference_id: "PMID:24041880"
title: Venous thromboembolism during primary treatment of ovarian clear cell carcinoma is associated with decreased survival.
authors:
- Diaz ES
- Walts AE
- Karlan BY
- Walsh CS
journal: Gynecol Oncol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2013.09.005
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma, Clear Cell/blood, drug therapy, pathology, surgery, therapy"
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/blood, pathology"
- Neoplasm Staging
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/blood, drug therapy, pathology, surgery, therapy"
- Survival Rate
- "Venous Thromboembolism/etiology, physiopathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Venous thromboembolism during primary treatment of ovarian clear cell carcinoma is associated with decreased survival.
**Authors:** Diaz ES, Walts AE, Karlan BY, Walsh CS
**Journal:** Gynecol Oncol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ygyno.2013.09.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygyno.2013.09.005)

## Content

1. Gynecol Oncol. 2013 Dec;131(3):541-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2013.09.005. Epub
2013 Sep 14.

Venous thromboembolism during primary treatment of ovarian clear cell carcinoma
is associated with decreased survival.

Diaz ES(1), Walts AE, Karlan BY, Walsh CS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Gynecologic Oncology,
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 8635 West 3rd Street, Suite 160W, Los Angeles, CA
90048, USA. Electronic address: Elena.Diaz@cshs.org.

OBJECTIVES: To determine the impact of venous thromboembolism (VTE) during
primary treatment of ovarian clear cell carcinoma (OCCC) on survival.
METHODS: After Institutional Review Board approval, 74 cases of OCCC were
retrieved from our pathology files. Clinical and pathological data were obtained
by medical record and pathology review. Standard statistical analyses were
performed.
RESULTS: Among 74 patients with OCCC, VTE was diagnosed in 11 (15%) during
primary treatment and 7 (9%) at time of cancer recurrence. 56 (76%) patients
never developed VTE. Patients with VTE during OCCC primary treatment had shorter
progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) than OCCC patients
without VTE (median PFS 11 vs. 76 months, p=0.01, median OS 19 vs. 90 months,
p=0.001). Patients with VTE during OCCC primary treatment had a 3.9-fold
increase in risk of recurrence (p=0.007) and a 6.3-fold increase in risk of
death (p<0.001). After controlling for cancer stage, VTE during OCCC primary
treatment remained an independent prognostic factor for death (HR=3.6, p=0.005).
No patient died of VTE.
CONCLUSIONS: VTE during OCCC primary treatment is associated with a
significantly higher risk of cancer recurrence and death. This increased risk is
not attributable to VTE-related mortality and raises the possibility that a
paracrine circuit involving thrombosis might contribute to a more aggressive
tumor biology.

© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2013.09.005
PMID: 24041880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
