---
reference_id: "PMID:36814936"
title: Atypical Presentations of Collagenous Gastritis Mimicking Celiac Sprue.
authors:
- Evans MG
- Guccione JP
- Crymes A
- Li X
- Johnson CA
- Chandan VS
- Lu Y
journal: Case Rep Gastrointest Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1155/2023/4073588
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atypical Presentations of Collagenous Gastritis Mimicking Celiac Sprue.
**Authors:** Evans MG, Guccione JP, Crymes A, Li X, Johnson CA, Chandan VS, Lu Y
**Journal:** Case Rep Gastrointest Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2023/4073588](https://doi.org/10.1155/2023/4073588)

## Content

1. Case Rep Gastrointest Med. 2023 Feb 13;2023:4073588. doi:
10.1155/2023/4073588.  eCollection 2023.

Atypical Presentations of Collagenous Gastritis Mimicking Celiac Sprue.

Evans MG(1), Guccione JP(2), Crymes A(3), Li X(4), Johnson CA(5), Chandan VS(5), 
Lu Y(6).

Author information:
(1)Caris Life Sciences, Phoenix, AZ, USA.
(2)Los Angeles County Medical Examiner-Coroner, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Kaiser Permanente Redwood City Medical Center, Redwood, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California 
Irvine (UCI) Medical Center, Orange, CA, USA.
(6)CellNetix Pathology and Laboratories, Tacoma, WA, USA.

Collagenous gastritis has been reported as a rare cause of nausea, diarrhea, 
weight changes, and early satiety in female patients. Here, we describe two 
women aged 43 and 71 years who presented with similar symptoms. Gastric biopsies 
from both individuals showed thickened, irregular subepithelial collagen bands 
(>10 μm). The pathogenesis of collagenous gastritis is poorly understood, but it 
may be the presenting symptom for many underlying autoimmune conditions. In 
particular, there is a well-established connection between collagenous disorders 
of the gastrointestinal tract and celiac sprue, Sjögren syndrome, and 
lymphocytic colitis; however, none of these conditions had been diagnosed in our 
patients. The older woman had incidentally discovered hypogammaglobinemia and 
IgA deficiency, whereas the younger woman suffered from fibromyalgia. Although a 
gluten-free diet and budesonide have been effective in some cases, there is no 
standardized therapy for collagenous gastritis. Our patients trialed diet 
modification and have required no additional medical interventions.

Copyright © 2023 Mark G. Evans et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2023/4073588
PMCID: PMC9940950
PMID: 36814936

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.