---
reference_id: "PMID:28803710"
title: "Intrathecal 2-hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin decreases neurological disease progression in Niemann-Pick disease, type C1: a non-randomised, open-label, phase 1-2 trial."
authors:
- Ory DS
- Ottinger EA
- Farhat NY
- King KA
- Jiang X
- Weissfeld L
- Berry-Kravis E
- Davidson CD
- Bianconi S
- Keener LA
- Rao R
- Soldatos A
- Sidhu R
- Walters KA
- Xu X
- Thurm A
- Solomon B
- Pavan WJ
- Machielse BN
- Kao M
- Silber SA
- McKew JC
- Brewer CC
- Vite CH
- Walkley SU
- Austin CP
- Porter FD
journal: Lancet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31465-4
keywords:
- "2-Hydroxypropyl-beta-cyclodextrin/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Adolescent
- "Biomarkers/blood, cerebrospinal fluid"
- Calbindins/cerebrospinal fluid
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Disease Progression
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Fatty Acid Binding Protein 3/cerebrospinal fluid
- Female
- "Hearing Loss, High-Frequency/chemically induced"
- Humans
- "Hydroxycholesterols/blood, cerebrospinal fluid"
- "Injections, Spinal"
- Male
- "Niemann-Pick Disease, Type C/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, drug therapy"
- Rare Diseases/drug therapy
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intrathecal 2-hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin decreases neurological disease progression in Niemann-Pick disease, type C1: a non-randomised, open-label, phase 1-2 trial.
**Authors:** Ory DS, Ottinger EA, Farhat NY, King KA, Jiang X, Weissfeld L, Berry-Kravis E, Davidson CD, Bianconi S, Keener LA, Rao R, Soldatos A, Sidhu R, Walters KA, Xu X, Thurm A, Solomon B, Pavan WJ, Machielse BN, Kao M, Silber SA, McKew JC, Brewer CC, Vite CH, Walkley SU, Austin CP, Porter FD
**Journal:** Lancet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31465-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31465-4)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2017 Oct 14;390(10104):1758-1768. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31465-4. 
Epub 2017 Aug 10.

Intrathecal 2-hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin decreases neurological disease 
progression in Niemann-Pick disease, type C1: a non-randomised, open-label, 
phase 1-2 trial.

Ory DS(1), Ottinger EA(2), Farhat NY(3), King KA(4), Jiang X(1), Weissfeld L(5), 
Berry-Kravis E(6), Davidson CD(7), Bianconi S(3), Keener LA(3), Rao R(8), 
Soldatos A(9), Sidhu R(1), Walters KA(5), Xu X(2), Thurm A(10), Solomon B(11), 
Pavan WJ(12), Machielse BN(8), Kao M(13), Silber SA(14), McKew JC(2), Brewer 
CC(4), Vite CH(15), Walkley SU(7), Austin CP(2), Porter FD(16).

Author information:
(1)Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA.
(2)National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes of 
Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human 
Services, Bethesda, MD USA.
(4)National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, National 
Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD, 
USA.
(5)Statistics Collaborative, Washington, DC, USA.
(6)Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA.
(7)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.
(8)Vtesse Inc, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.
(9)National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes 
of Health, Department of Health and Human Services Bethesda, MD, USA.
(10)National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, 
Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(11)Mark O Hatfield Clinical Research Center, National Institutes of Health, 
Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(12)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(13)Preclinical Development and Safety, Janssen R&D, Raritan, NJ, USA.
(14)Global Public Health, Johnson & Johnson, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(15)School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA.
(16)Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human 
Services, Bethesda, MD USA. Electronic address: fdporter@mail.nih.gov.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2017 Oct 14;390(10104):1720-1721. doi: 
10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31631-8.

BACKGROUND: Niemann-Pick disease, type C1 (NPC1) is a lysosomal storage disorder 
characterised by progressive neurodegeneration. In preclinical testing, 
2-hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrins (HPβCD) significantly delayed cerebellar 
Purkinje cell loss, slowed progression of neurological manifestations, and 
increased lifespan in mouse and cat models of NPC1. The aim of this study was to 
assess the safety and efficacy of lumbar intrathecal HPβCD.
METHODS: In this open-label, dose-escalation phase 1-2a study, we gave monthly 
intrathecal HPβCD to participants with NPC1 with neurological manifestation at 
the National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA. To explore the 
potential effect of 2-week dosing, three additional participants were enrolled 
in a parallel study at Rush University Medical Center (RUMC), Chicago, IL, USA. 
Participants from the NIH were non-randomly, sequentially assigned in cohorts of 
three to receive monthly initial intrathecal HPβCD at doses of 50, 200, 300, or 
400 mg per month. A fifth cohort of two participants received initial doses of 
900 mg. Participants from RUMC initially received 200 or 400 mg every 2 weeks. 
The dose was escalated based on tolerance or safety data from higher dose 
cohorts. Serum and CSF 24(S)-hydroxycholesterol (24[S]-HC), which serves as a 
biomarker of target engagement, and CSF protein biomarkers were evaluated. NPC 
Neurological Severity Scores (NNSS) were used to compare disease progression in 
HPβCD-treated participants relative to a historical comparison cohort of 21 NPC1 
participants of similar age range.
FINDINGS: Between Sept 21, 2013, and Jan 19, 2015, 32 participants with NPC1 
were assessed for eligibility at the National Institutes of Health. 18 patients 
were excluded due to inclusion criteria not met (six patients), declined to 
participate (three patients), pursued independent expanded access and obtained 
the drug outside of the study (three patients), enrolled in the RUMC cohort (one 
patient), or too late for the trial enrolment (five patients). 14 patients were 
enrolled and sequentially assigned to receive intrathecal HPβCD at a starting 
dose of 50 mg per month (three patients), 200 mg per month (three patients), 300 
mg per month (three patients), 400 mg per month (three patients), or 900 mg per 
month (two patients). During the first year, two patients had treatment 
interrupted for one dose, based on grade 1 ototoxicity. All 14 patients were 
assessed at 12 months. Between 12 and 18 months, one participant had treatment 
interrupted at 17 months due to hepatocellular carcinoma, one patient had dose 
interruption for 2 doses based on caregiver hardship and one patient had 
treatment interrupted for 1 dose for mastoiditis. 11 patients were assessed at 
18 months. Between Dec 11, 2013, and June 25, 2014, three participants were 
assessed for eligibility and enrolled at RUMC, and were assigned to receive 
intrathecal HPβCD at a starting dose of 200 mg every 2 weeks (two patients), or 
400 mg every two weeks (one patient). There were no dropouts in this group and 
all 3 patients were assessed at 18 months. Biomarker studies were consistent 
with improved neuronal cholesterol homoeostasis and decreased neuronal 
pathology. Post-drug plasma 24(S)-HC area under the curve (AUC8-72) values, an 
indicator of neuronal cholesterol homoeostasis, were significantly higher than 
post-saline plasma 24(S)-HC AUC8-72 after doses of 900 mg (p=0·0063) and 1200 mg 
(p=0·0037). CSF 24(S)-HC concentrations in three participants given either 600 
or 900 mg of HPβCD were increased about two fold (p=0·0032) after drug 
administration. No drug-related serious adverse events were observed. 
Mid-frequency to high-frequency hearing loss, an expected adverse event, was 
documented in all participants. When managed with hearing aids, this did not 
have an appreciable effect on daily communication. The NNSS for the 14 
participants treated monthly increased at a rate of 1·22, SEM 0·34 points per 
year compared with 2·92, SEM 0·27 points per year (p=0·0002) for the 21 patient 
comparison group. Decreased progression was observed for NNSS domains of 
ambulation (p=0·0622), cognition (p=0·0040) and speech (p=0·0423).
INTERPRETATION: Patients with NPC1 treated with intrathecal HPβCD had slowed 
disease progression with an acceptable safety profile. These data support the 
initiation of a multinational, randomised, controlled trial of intrathecal 
HPβCD.
FUNDING: National Institutes of Health, Dana's Angels Research Trust, Ara 
Parseghian Medical Research Foundation, Hope for Haley, Samantha's Search for 
the Cure Foundation, National Niemann-Pick Disease Foundation, Support of 
Accelerated Research for NPC Disease, Vtesse, Janssen Research and Development, 
a Johnson & Johnson company, and Johnson & Johnson.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31465-4
PMCID: PMC6176479
PMID: 28803710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]