---
reference_id: "PMID:30012901"
title: Tricaprin Rescues Myocardial Abnormality in a Mouse Model of Triglyceride Deposit Cardiomyovasculopathy.
authors:
- Suzuki A
- Yamaguchi S
- Li M
- Hara Y
- Miyauchi H
- Ikeda Y
- Zhang B
- Higashi M
- Ikeda Y
- Takagi A
- Nagasaka H
- Kobayashi K
- Magata Y
- Aoyama T
- Hirano KI
journal: J Oleo Sci
year: '2018'
doi: 10.5650/jos.ess18037
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Fatty Acids/metabolism
- Heart/diagnostic imaging
- Humans
- Lipase/deficiency
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Myocardium/metabolism
- "Triglycerides/administration & dosage, metabolism"
- Acyltransferases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tricaprin Rescues Myocardial Abnormality in a Mouse Model of Triglyceride Deposit Cardiomyovasculopathy.
**Authors:** Suzuki A, Yamaguchi S, Li M, Hara Y, Miyauchi H, Ikeda Y, Zhang B, Higashi M, Ikeda Y, Takagi A, Nagasaka H, Kobayashi K, Magata Y, Aoyama T, Hirano KI
**Journal:** J Oleo Sci (2018)
**DOI:** [10.5650/jos.ess18037](https://doi.org/10.5650/jos.ess18037)

## Content

1. J Oleo Sci. 2018 Aug 1;67(8):983-989. doi: 10.5650/jos.ess18037. Epub 2018 Jul
 17.

Tricaprin Rescues Myocardial Abnormality in a Mouse Model of Triglyceride 
Deposit Cardiomyovasculopathy.

Suzuki A(1), Yamaguchi S(1), Li M(1), Hara Y(1), Miyauchi H(2), Ikeda Y(3), 
Zhang B(4), Higashi M(5), Ikeda Y(1), Takagi A(1), Nagasaka H(6), Kobayashi 
K(7), Magata Y(8), Aoyama T(9), Hirano KI(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Novel, Non-Invasive, and Nutritional 
Therapeutics (CNT), Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Chiba University Graduate School of 
Medicine.
(3)Department of Pathology, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Fukuoka University Medical School.
(5)Department of Radiology, Osaka National Hospital.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Takarazuka City Hospital.
(7)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus, Fukuoka University 
Chikushi Hospital.
(8)Preeminent Medical Photonics Education & Research Center, Hamamatsu 
University School of Medicine.
(9)Daitocacao Co.,LTD.

Triglyceride deposit cardiomyovasculopathy (TGCV) is an intractable 
cardiovascular disease for which a specific treatment is urgently required. In 
TGCV, adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL) deficiency results in the abnormal 
intracellular metabolism of long-chain fatty acid (LCFA) which leads to TG 
deposition. Medium-chain triglycerides have been used as an important functional 
food for various human diseases. To address the potential activities of 
tricaprin, a medium-chain triglyceride, on cardiac dysfunctions of TGCV, we 
examined the effects of tricaprin diet on Atgl knock out (KO) mice, an animal 
model for TGCV. Cardiac imaging tests showed that the tricaprin diet reduced TG 
accumulation, resulting from improvement of LCFA metabolism, and improved left 
ventricular function in Atgl KO mice compared to that in mice fed the control 
diet. In conclusion, tricaprin improved myocardial abnormality in the TGCV 
model, thus, it may be useful for the treatment of patients with TGCV.

DOI: 10.5650/jos.ess18037
PMID: 30012901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]