---
reference_id: "PMID:37971656"
title: Beneficial Effect of Fingolimod in a Lafora Disease Mouse Model by Preventing Reactive Astrogliosis-Derived Neuroinflammation and Brain Infiltration of T-lymphocytes.
authors:
- Rubio T
- Campos-Rodríguez Á
- Sanz P
journal: Mol Neurobiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s12035-023-03766-1
keywords:
- Animals
- "Gliosis/pathology, drug therapy"
- "Lafora Disease/pathology, drug therapy"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Brain/pathology, drug effects, metabolism"
- "T-Lymphocytes/drug effects, immunology"
- "Neuroinflammatory Diseases/drug therapy, pathology"
- "Fingolimod Hydrochloride/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Mice
- "Astrocytes/drug effects, pathology, metabolism"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Beneficial Effect of Fingolimod in a Lafora Disease Mouse Model by Preventing Reactive Astrogliosis-Derived Neuroinflammation and Brain Infiltration of T-lymphocytes.
**Authors:** Rubio T, Campos-Rodríguez Á, Sanz P
**Journal:** Mol Neurobiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12035-023-03766-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-023-03766-1)

## Content

1. Mol Neurobiol. 2024 Jun;61(6):3105-3120. doi: 10.1007/s12035-023-03766-1. Epub
 2023 Nov 16.

Beneficial Effect of Fingolimod in a Lafora Disease Mouse Model by Preventing 
Reactive Astrogliosis-Derived Neuroinflammation and Brain Infiltration of 
T-lymphocytes.

Rubio T(1), Campos-Rodríguez Á(1), Sanz P(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones 
Científicas (CSIC), Jaime Roig 11, 46010, Valencia, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones 
Científicas (CSIC), Jaime Roig 11, 46010, Valencia, Spain. sanz@ibv.csic.es.
(3)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), 
46010, Valencia, Spain. sanz@ibv.csic.es.

Lafora disease (LD; OMIM#254780) is a rare, devastating, and fatal form of 
progressive myoclonus epilepsy that affects young adolescents and has no 
treatment yet. One of the hallmarks of the disease is the accumulation of 
aberrant poorly branched forms of glycogen (polyglucosans, PGs) in the brain and 
peripheral tissues. The current hypothesis is that this accumulation is 
causative of the pathophysiology of the disease. Another hallmark of LD is the 
presence of neuroinflammation. We have recently reported the presence of 
reactive glia-derived neuroinflammation in LD mouse models and defined the main 
inflammatory pathways that operate in these mice, mainly TNF and IL-6 signaling 
pathways. In addition, we described the presence of infiltration of peripheral 
immune cells in the brain parenchyma, which could cooperate and aggravate the 
neuroinflammatory landscape of LD. In this work, we have checked the beneficial 
effect of two compounds with the capacity to ameliorate neuroinflammation and 
reduce leukocyte infiltration into the brain, namely fingolimod and dimethyl 
fumarate. Our results indicate a beneficial effect of fingolimod in reducing 
reactive astrogliosis-derived neuroinflammation and T-lymphocyte infiltration, 
which correlated with the improved behavioral performance of the treated 
Epm2b-/- mice. On the contrary, dimethyl fumarate, although it was able to 
reduce reactive astrogliosis, was less effective in preventing neuroinflammation 
and T-lymphocyte infiltration and in modifying behavioral tests.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-023-03766-1
PMCID: PMC11087365
PMID: 37971656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.