---
reference_id: "PMID:28424289"
title: "Disruption of MDA5-Mediated Innate Immune Responses by the 3C Proteins of Coxsackievirus A16, Coxsackievirus A6, and Enterovirus D68."
authors:
- Rui Y
- Su J
- Wang H
- Chang J
- Wang S
- Zheng W
- Cai Y
- Wei W
- Gordy JT
- Markham R
- Kong W
- Zhang W
- Yu XF
journal: J Virol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1128/JVI.00546-17
keywords:
- 3C Viral Proteases
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/metabolism"
- Cysteine Endopeptidases/metabolism
- "Enterovirus/immunology, pathogenicity"
- Host-Pathogen Interactions
- Immune Evasion
- "Immunity, Innate"
- "Interferon-Induced Helicase, IFIH1/antagonists & inhibitors"
- MAP Kinase Kinase Kinases/metabolism
- Proteolysis
- Signal Transduction
- Viral Proteins/metabolism
- MAP Kinase Kinase Kinase 7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disruption of MDA5-Mediated Innate Immune Responses by the 3C Proteins of Coxsackievirus A16, Coxsackievirus A6, and Enterovirus D68.
**Authors:** Rui Y, Su J, Wang H, Chang J, Wang S, Zheng W, Cai Y, Wei W, Gordy JT, Markham R, Kong W, Zhang W, Yu XF
**Journal:** J Virol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.00546-17](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.00546-17)

## Content

1. J Virol. 2017 Jun 9;91(13):e00546-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00546-17. Print 2017
Jul  1.

Disruption of MDA5-Mediated Innate Immune Responses by the 3C Proteins of
Coxsackievirus A16, Coxsackievirus A6, and Enterovirus D68.

Rui Y(1)(2)(3), Su J(1)(2)(3)(4), Wang H(1), Chang J(1), Wang S(1), Zheng W(1),
Cai Y(3), Wei W(1), Gordy JT(2), Markham R(2), Kong W(3), Zhang W(5), Yu
XF(5)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)First Hospital of Jilin University, Institute of Virology and AIDS Research,
Changchun, Jilin Province, China.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(3)School of Life Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin Province, China.
(4)Cancer Institute (Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Intervention, China
National Ministry of Education), The Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(5)First Hospital of Jilin University, Institute of Virology and AIDS Research,
Changchun, Jilin Province, China zhangwenyan@jlu.edu.cn xyu2@jhu.edu.

Coxsackievirus A16 (CV-A16), CV-A6, and enterovirus D68 (EV-D68) belong to the
Picornaviridae family and are major causes of hand, foot, and mouth disease
(HFMD) and pediatric respiratory disease worldwide. The biological
characteristics of these viruses, especially their interplay with the host
innate immune system, have not been well investigated. In this study, we
discovered that the 3Cpro proteins from CV-A16, CV-A6, and EV-D68 bind melanoma
differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5) and inhibit its interaction with MAVS.
Consequently, MDA5-triggered type I interferon (IFN) signaling in the retinoic
acid-inducible gene I-like receptor (RLR) pathway was blocked by the CV-A16,
CV-A6, and EV-D68 3Cpro proteins. Furthermore, the CV-A16, CV-A6, and EV-D68
3Cpro proteins all cleave transforming growth factor β-activated kinase 1
(TAK1), resulting in the inhibition of NF-κB activation, a host response also
critical for Toll-like receptor (TLR)-mediated signaling. Thus, our data
demonstrate that circulating HFMD-associated CV-A16 and CV-A6, as well as severe
respiratory disease-associated EV-D68, have developed novel mechanisms to
subvert host innate immune responses by targeting key factors in the RLR and TLR
pathways. Blocking the ability of 3Cpro proteins from diverse enteroviruses and
coxsackieviruses to interfere with type I IFN induction should restore IFN
antiviral function, offering a potential novel antiviral strategy.IMPORTANCE
CV-A16, CV-A6, and EV-D68 are emerging pathogens associated with hand, foot, and
mouth disease and pediatric respiratory disease worldwide. The pathogenic
mechanisms of these viruses are largely unknown. Here we demonstrate that the
CV-A16, CV-A6, and EV-D68 3Cpro proteins block MDA5-triggered type I IFN
induction. The 3Cpro proteins of these viruses bind MDA5 and inhibit its
interaction with MAVS. In addition, the CV-A16, CV-A6, and EV-D68 3Cpro proteins
cleave TAK1 to inhibit the NF-κB response. Thus, our data demonstrate that
circulating HFMD-associated CV-A16 and CV-A6, as well as severe respiratory
disease-associated EV-D68, have developed a mechanism to subvert host innate
immune responses by simultaneously targeting key factors in the RLR and TLR
pathways. These findings indicate the potential merit of targeting the CV-A16,
CV-A6, and EV-D68 3Cpro proteins as an antiviral strategy.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00546-17
PMCID: PMC5469270
PMID: 28424289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
