---
reference_id: "PMID:27491214"
title: "The GM1 and GM2 Gangliosidoses: Natural History and Progress toward Therapy."
authors:
- Regier DS
- Proia RL
- "D'Azzo A"
- Tifft CJ
journal: Pediatr Endocrinol Rev
year: '2016'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The GM1 and GM2 Gangliosidoses: Natural History and Progress toward Therapy.
**Authors:** Regier DS, Proia RL, D'Azzo A, Tifft CJ
**Journal:** Pediatr Endocrinol Rev (2016)

## Content

1. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2016 Jun;13 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):663-73.

The GM1 and GM2 Gangliosidoses: Natural History and Progress toward Therapy.

Regier DS, Proia RL, D'Azzo A, Tifft CJ.

The gangliosidoses are lysosomal storage disorders caused by accumulation of GM1 
or GM2 gangliosides. GM1 gangliosidosis has both central nervous system and 
systemic findings; while, GM2 gangliosidosis is restricted primarily to the 
central nervous system. Both disorders have autosomal recessive modes of 
inheritance and a continuum of clinical presentations from a severe infantile 
form to a milder, chronic adult form. Both are devastating diseases without cure 
or specific treatment however, with the use of supportive aggressive medical 
management, the lifespan and quality of life has been extended for both 
diseases. Naturally occurring and engineered animal models that mimic the human 
diseases have enhanced our understanding of the pathogenesis of disease 
progression. Some models have shown significant improvement in symptoms and 
lifespan with enzyme replacement, substrate reduction, and anti-inflammatory 
treatments alone or in combination. More recently gene therapy has shown 
impressive results in large and small animal models. Treatment with FDA-approved 
glucose analogs to reduce the amount of ganglioside substrate is used as 
off-label treatments for some patients. Therapies also under clinical 
development include small molecule chaperones and gene therapy.

PMCID: PMC8186028
PMID: 27491214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors have no conflicts of 
interest to declare