---
reference_id: "PMID:17631447"
title: Neural crest progenitors and stem cells.
authors:
- Dupin E
- Calloni G
- Real C
- Gonçalves-Trentin A
- Le Douarin NM
journal: C R Biol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.crvi.2007.04.004
keywords:
- Animals
- Chick Embryo
- Embryonic Development/physiology
- Humans
- Melanocytes/physiology
- "Neural Crest/cytology, physiology"
- Neuroglia/physiology
- Quail
- Stem Cells/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neural crest progenitors and stem cells.
**Authors:** Dupin E, Calloni G, Real C, Gonçalves-Trentin A, Le Douarin NM
**Journal:** C R Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.crvi.2007.04.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crvi.2007.04.004)

## Content

1. C R Biol. 2007 Jun-Jul;330(6-7):521-9. doi: 10.1016/j.crvi.2007.04.004. Epub
2007 May 10.

Neural crest progenitors and stem cells.

Dupin E(1), Calloni G, Real C, Gonçalves-Trentin A, Le Douarin NM.

Author information:
(1)CNRS UPR2197 DEPSN, Institut de neurobiologie Alfred-Fessard, 91198
Gif-sur-Yvette, France. Elisabeth.dupin@inaf.cnrs-gif.fr

In the vertebrate embryo, multiple cell types originate from a common structure,
the neural crest (NC), which forms at the dorsal tips of the neural epithelium.
The NC gives rise to migratory cells that colonise a wide range of embryonic
tissues and later differentiate into neurones and glial cells of the peripheral
nervous system (PNS), pigment cells (melanocytes) in the skin and endocrine
cells in the adrenal and thyroid glands. In the head and the neck, the NC also
yields mesenchymal cells that form craniofacial cartilages, bones, dermis,
adipose tissue, and vascular smooth muscle cells. The NC is therefore a model
system to study cell diversification during embryogenesis and phenotype
maintenance in the adult. By analysing the developmental potentials of quail NC
cells in clonal cultures, we have shown that the migratory NC is a collection of
heterogeneous progenitors, including various types of intermediate precursors
and highly multipotent cells, some of which being endowed of self-renewal
capacity. We also have identified common progenitors for mesenchymal derivatives
and neural/melanocytic cells in the cephalic NC. These results are consistent
with a hierarchical model of lineage segregation wherein environmental cytokines
control the fate of progenitors and stem cells. One of these cytokines, the
endothelin3 peptide, promotes the survival, proliferation, and self-renewal
capacity of common progenitors for glial cells and melanocytes. At
post-migratory stages, when they have already differentiated, NC-derived cells
exhibit phenotypic plasticity. Epidermal pigment cells and Schwann cells from
peripheral nerves in single-cell culture are able to reverse into multipotent
NC-like progenitors endowed with self-renewal. Therefore, stem cell properties
are expressed by a variety of NC progenitors and can be re-acquired by
differentiated cells of NC origin, suggesting potential function for repair.

DOI: 10.1016/j.crvi.2007.04.004
PMID: 17631447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
