---
reference_id: "PMID:19812481"
title: Antimicrobial prophylaxis for primary immunodeficiencies.
authors:
- Freeman AF
- Holland SM
journal: Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1097/ACI.0b013e328332be33
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antimicrobial prophylaxis for primary immunodeficiencies.
**Authors:** Freeman AF, Holland SM
**Journal:** Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1097/ACI.0b013e328332be33](https://doi.org/10.1097/ACI.0b013e328332be33)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2009 Dec;9(6):525-30. doi: 
10.1097/ACI.0b013e328332be33.

Antimicrobial prophylaxis for primary immunodeficiencies.

Freeman AF(1), Holland SM.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Infectious Diseases, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 
20892, USA. freemaal@mail.nih.gov

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Antibiotic prophylaxis is one of the mainstays of therapy of 
primary immunodeficiencies. We aim to summarize what is known about antibiotic 
prophylaxis for select primary immunodeficiencies.
RECENT FINDINGS: In recent years, there has been a push towards more 
evidence-based practices for antimicrobial prophylaxis for many conditions such 
as antifungal prophylaxis for extremely premature neonates and antibiotic 
prophylaxis for neutropenia associated with chemotherapy. However, there are 
remarkably few data regarding antibiotic prophylaxis in primary 
immunodeficiencies and regimens vary greatly between practices.
SUMMARY: Currently, antibiotic prophylaxis is guided by the common microbial 
pathogens seen in specific immunodeficiencies, and experience with other chronic 
illnesses such as cystic fibrosis, HIV, and immunosuppression from 
transplantation. Controlled studies are necessary to address the preferred 
antimicrobial and immunomodulator regimens for most of the primary 
immunodeficiencies.

DOI: 10.1097/ACI.0b013e328332be33
PMID: 19812481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]