---
reference_id: "PMID:31178067"
title: "Computed tomographic and clinical features of pulmonary veno-occlusive disease: raising the radiologist's awareness."
authors:
- Ali N
- Loughborough WW
- Rodrigues JCL
- Suntharalingam J
- Hudson B
- Hall T
- Augustine D
- Mackenzie R
- Robinson G
journal: Clin Radiol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.crad.2019.04.023
keywords:
- Biopsy
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- Prognosis
- Pulmonary Veno-Occlusive Disease/diagnostic imaging
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed/methods"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Computed tomographic and clinical features of pulmonary veno-occlusive disease: raising the radiologist's awareness.
**Authors:** Ali N, Loughborough WW, Rodrigues JCL, Suntharalingam J, Hudson B, Hall T, Augustine D, Mackenzie R, Robinson G
**Journal:** Clin Radiol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.crad.2019.04.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crad.2019.04.023)

## Content

1. Clin Radiol. 2019 Sep;74(9):655-662. doi: 10.1016/j.crad.2019.04.023. Epub
2019  Jun 6.

Computed tomographic and clinical features of pulmonary veno-occlusive disease: 
raising the radiologist's awareness.

Ali N(1), Loughborough WW(2), Rodrigues JCL(1), Suntharalingam J(1), Hudson 
B(1), Hall T(1), Augustine D(1), Mackenzie R(1), Robinson G(3).

Author information:
(1)Royal United Hospital, Combe Park, Avon BA13NG, UK.
(2)The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, Fulham Road, SW36JJ London, UK.
(3)Royal United Hospital, Combe Park, Avon BA13NG, UK. Electronic address: 
grobinson1@nhs.net.

Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease (PVOD) is a rare subtype of pulmonary arterial 
hypertension (PAH) characterised by preferential remodelling of the pulmonary 
venules. Differentiation from other subtypes of PAH is essential as the 
management can differ significantly; for example, initiation of vasodilator 
therapy may cause fatal pulmonary oedema in a patient with PVOD misdiagnosed 
with idiopathic PAH. PVOD also carries a substantially worse prognosis. Lung 
biopsy is required for definitive diagnosis, but this is hazardous, and ideally, 
should be avoided in pulmonary hypertension. Computed tomography (CT) may 
suggest the diagnosis, directing the patient towards specialist review. 
Potential distinguishing CT features between PVOD and other subtypes of PAH 
include interlobular septal thickening, mediastinal lymphadenopathy, and 
centrilobular ground-glass opacities. No evidence-based medical therapy exists 
for PVOD at present and lung transplantation remains the definitive treatment 
for eligible patients. Therefore, early radiological identification of this 
challenging diagnosis facilitates timely referral for transplant.

Crown Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.crad.2019.04.023
PMID: 31178067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]