---
reference_id: "PMID:29891884"
title: Expanding the clinical and molecular findings in RASA1 capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation.
authors:
- Wooderchak-Donahue WL
- Johnson P
- McDonald J
- Blei F
- Berenstein A
- Sorscher M
- Mayer J
- Scheuerle AE
- Lewis T
- Grimmer JF
- Richter GT
- Steeves MA
- Lin AE
- Stevenson DA
- Bayrak-Toydemir P
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/s41431-018-0196-1
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Arteriovenous Malformations/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Capillaries/abnormalities, physiopathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Port-Wine Stain/genetics, physiopathology"
- Young Adult
- p120 GTPase Activating Protein/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanding the clinical and molecular findings in RASA1 capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation.
**Authors:** Wooderchak-Donahue WL, Johnson P, McDonald J, Blei F, Berenstein A, Sorscher M, Mayer J, Scheuerle AE, Lewis T, Grimmer JF, Richter GT, Steeves MA, Lin AE, Stevenson DA, Bayrak-Toydemir P
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41431-018-0196-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-018-0196-1)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2018 Oct;26(10):1521-1536. doi: 10.1038/s41431-018-0196-1.
Epub  2018 Jun 11.

Expanding the clinical and molecular findings in RASA1 capillary 
malformation-arteriovenous malformation.

Wooderchak-Donahue WL(1)(2), Johnson P(1), McDonald J(2)(3), Blei F(4), 
Berenstein A(5), Sorscher M(5), Mayer J(6), Scheuerle AE(7), Lewis T(1), Grimmer 
JF(8), Richter GT(9), Steeves MA(10), Lin AE(10), Stevenson DA(11), 
Bayrak-Toydemir P(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)ARUP Institute for Clinical and Experimental Pathology, Salt Lake City, UT, 
USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(3)HHT Center, Department of Radiology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, 
USA.
(4)Vascular Anomalies Program of Lenox Hill Hospital, Northwell Health, Hofstra 
School of Medicine, New York City, NY, USA.
(5)Pediatric Endovascular Surgery Ichan School of Medicine, Mt. Sinai Health 
System, New York City, NY, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, All Children's Hospital 
Johns Hopkins Medicine, St. Petersburg, FL, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, USA.
(8)Division of Otolaryngology, Department of Surgery, University of Utah, Salt 
Lake City, UT, USA.
(9)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Arkansas 
for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA.
(10)Medical Genetics, Mass General Hospital for Children, Boston, MA, USA.
(11)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University, 
Stanford, CA, USA.
(12)ARUP Institute for Clinical and Experimental Pathology, Salt Lake City, UT, 
USA. pinar.bayrak-toydemir@aruplab.com.
(13)Department of Pathology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. 
pinar.bayrak-toydemir@aruplab.com.

RASA1-related disorders are vascular malformation syndromes characterized by 
hereditary capillary malformations (CM) with or without arteriovenous 
malformations (AVM), arteriovenous fistulas (AVF), or Parkes Weber syndrome. The 
number of cases reported is relatively small; and while the main clinical 
features are CMs and AVMs/AVFs, the broader phenotypic spectrum caused by 
variants in the RASA1 gene is still being defined. Here, we report the clinical 
and molecular findings in 69 unrelated cases with a RASA1 variant identified at 
ARUP Laboratories. Sanger sequencing and multiplex ligation-dependent probe 
amplification were primarily used to evaluate RASA1. Several atypical cases were 
evaluated using next-generation sequencing (NGS) and array-comparative genomic 
hybridization (aCGH). Sixty individuals had a deleterious RASA1 variant of which 
29 were novel. Nine individuals had a variant of uncertain significance. Five 
large RASA1 deletions were detected, giving an overall deletion/duplication rate 
of 8.3% (5/60) among positive cases. Most (75.4%) individuals with a RASA1 
variant had CMs, and 44.9% had an AVM/AVF. Clinical findings in several cases 
expand the RASA1 phenotype. Our data suggest that screening for large RASA1 
deletions and duplications in this disorder is important and suggest that NGS 
multi-gene panel testing is beneficial for the molecular diagnosis of cases with 
complex vascular phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-018-0196-1
PMCID: PMC6138627
PMID: 29891884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.