---
reference_id: "PMID:19389931"
title: Establishment of experimental eosinophilic vasculitis by IgE-mediated cutaneous reverse passive arthus reaction.
authors:
- Ishii T
- Fujita T
- Matsushita T
- Yanaba K
- Hasegawa M
- Nakashima H
- Ogawa F
- Shimizu K
- Takehara K
- Tedder TF
- Sato S
- Fujimoto M
journal: Am J Pathol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2009.080223
keywords:
- Animals
- Antigen-Antibody Complex
- Arthus Reaction/immunology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- E-Selectin/immunology
- "Eosinophilia/immunology, pathology"
- Immunoglobulin E/immunology
- Immunoglobulin G/immunology
- Immunohistochemistry
- Intercellular Adhesion Molecule-1/immunology
- L-Selectin/immunology
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- P-Selectin/immunology
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Skin Diseases/immunology, pathology"
- "Vasculitis, Leukocytoclastic, Cutaneous/immunology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Establishment of experimental eosinophilic vasculitis by IgE-mediated cutaneous reverse passive arthus reaction.
**Authors:** Ishii T, Fujita T, Matsushita T, Yanaba K, Hasegawa M, Nakashima H, Ogawa F, Shimizu K, Takehara K, Tedder TF, Sato S, Fujimoto M
**Journal:** Am J Pathol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.2353/ajpath.2009.080223](https://doi.org/10.2353/ajpath.2009.080223)

## Content

1. Am J Pathol. 2009 Jun;174(6):2225-33. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2009.080223. Epub
2009  Apr 23.

Establishment of experimental eosinophilic vasculitis by IgE-mediated cutaneous
reverse passive arthus reaction.

Ishii T(1), Fujita T, Matsushita T, Yanaba K, Hasegawa M, Nakashima H, Ogawa F,
Shimizu K, Takehara K, Tedder TF, Sato S, Fujimoto M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medical
Science, 13-1 Takaramachi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8641, Japan.

Prominent eosinophil infiltration is a characteristic of some forms of
vasculitis, such as Churg-Strauss syndrome, also known as allergic granulomatous
vasculitis. In the current study, we established a mouse model of cutaneous
eosinophilic vasculitis by the cutaneous reverse passive Arthus reaction using
IgE injection instead of IgG. Wild-type C57BL/6 mice were injected with IgE
anti-trinitrophenyl antibodies, followed immediately by intravenous
administration of trinitrophenyl bovine serum albumin. IgE-mediated immune
complex challenge induced substantial hemorrhage with marked infiltration of
eosinophils in which neutrophils, mast cells, and macrophages were also mixed.
This finding contrasted remarkably with the neutrophil-dominant infiltration
pattern in IgG-mediated immune complex challenge. In the lesion, the expression
level of monocyte chemotactic protein-3 was increased, and anti-monocyte
chemotactic protein-3 treatment resulted in a significant but incomplete
blockade of eosinophil recruitment. Furthermore, mice lacking E-selectin,
P-selectin, L-selectin, or intercellular adhesion molecule-1, as well as
wild-type mice that received anti-vascular cell adhesion molecule-1-blocking
antibodies were assessed for the IgE-mediated Arthus reaction. After 24 hours,
the loss of P-selectin resulted in a significant reduction in eosinophil
accumulation compared with both wild-type mice and other mouse mutants.
Collectively, the Fc class of immunoglobulins, which forms these immune
complexes, critically determines the disease manifestation of vasculitis. The
IgE-mediated cutaneous reverse passive Arthus reaction may serve as an
experimental model for cutaneous eosinophilic infiltration in vasculitis as well
as in other diseases.

DOI: 10.2353/ajpath.2009.080223
PMCID: PMC2684187
PMID: 19389931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
