---
reference_id: "PMID:38984133"
title: Update on ocular manifestations of the main monogenic and polygenic autoinflammatory diseases.
authors:
- Fonollosa A
- Carreño E
- Vitale A
- Jindal AK
- Ramanan AV
- Pelegrín L
- Santos-Zorrozua B
- Gómez-Caverzaschi V
- Cantarini L
- Fabiani C
- Hernández-Rodríguez J
journal: Front Ophthalmol (Lausanne)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fopht.2024.1337329
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update on ocular manifestations of the main monogenic and polygenic autoinflammatory diseases.
**Authors:** Fonollosa A, Carreño E, Vitale A, Jindal AK, Ramanan AV, Pelegrín L, Santos-Zorrozua B, Gómez-Caverzaschi V, Cantarini L, Fabiani C, Hernández-Rodríguez J
**Journal:** Front Ophthalmol (Lausanne) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fopht.2024.1337329](https://doi.org/10.3389/fopht.2024.1337329)

## Content

1. Front Ophthalmol (Lausanne). 2024 Feb 22;4:1337329. doi: 
10.3389/fopht.2024.1337329. eCollection 2024.

Update on ocular manifestations of the main monogenic and polygenic 
autoinflammatory diseases.

Fonollosa A(1)(2), Carreño E(3)(4), Vitale A(5), Jindal AK(6), Ramanan AV(7), 
Pelegrín L(8), Santos-Zorrozua B(9), Gómez-Caverzaschi V(10), Cantarini L(5), 
Fabiani C(11), Hernández-Rodríguez J(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Biocruces Bizkaia Health Research Institute, 
Cruces University Hospital, University of the Basque Country, Barakaldo, Spain.
(2)Department of Retina, Instituto Oftalmológico Bilbao, Bilbao, Spain.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Rey Juan Carlos University Hospital, Madrid, 
Spain.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospital, 
Madrid, Spain.
(5)Research Center of Systemic Autoinflammatory Diseases and Behçet's Disease 
Clinic, Department of Medical Sciences, Surgery and Neurosciences, University of 
Siena, Center of the European Reference Network (ERN) for Rare Immunodeficiency, 
Autoinflammatory and Autoimmune Diseases (RITA), Siena, Italy.
(6)Allergy Immunology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Advanced Pediatrics 
Centre, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER), 
Chandigarh, India.
(7)Department of Paediatric Rheumatology, Bristol Royal Hospital for Children 
and Translational Health Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, United 
Kingdom.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology, Institut Clínic d'Oftalmologia (ICOF), Hospital 
Clinic de Barcelona, University of Barcelona, Institut de Investigacions 
Biomediques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain.
(9)Department of Biostatistics, Biocruces Bizkaia Health Research Institute, 
Bilbao, Spain.
(10)Autoinflammatory Diseases Clinical Unit, Department of Autoimmune Diseases, 
Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, University of Barcelona, Institut d'Investigacions 
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Center of the European Reference 
Network (ERN) for Rare Immunodeficiency, Autoinflammatory and Autoimmune 
Diseases (RITA), Spanish Center of the Centros, Servicios y Unidades de 
Referencia (CSUR) and Catalan Center of the Xarxa d'Unitats d'Expertesa Clínica 
(XUEC) for Autoinflammatory Diseases, Barcelona, Spain.
(11)Ophthalmology Unit, Department of Medicine, Surgery and Neurosciences, 
University of Siena, Center of the European Reference Network (ERN) for Rare 
Immunodeficiency, Autoinflammatory and Autoimmune Diseases (RITA), Siena, Italy.

Autoinflammatory diseases include disorders with a genetic cause and also 
complex syndromes associated to polygenic or multifactorial factors. Eye 
involvement is present in many of them, with different extent and severity. The 
present review covers ophthalmological lesions in the most prevalent monogenic 
autoinflammatory diseases, including FMF (familial Mediterranean fever), TRAPS 
(TNF receptor-associated periodic syndrome), CAPS (cryopyrin-associated periodic 
syndromes), Blau syndrome, DADA2 (deficiency of adenosine deaminase 2), DITRA 
(deficiency of the interleukin-36 receptor antagonist), other monogenic 
disorders, including several ubiquitinopathies, interferonopathies, and the 
recently described ROSAH (retinal dystrophy, optic nerve edema, splenomegaly, 
anhidrosis, and headache) syndrome, and VEXAS (vacuoles, E1 enzyme, X-linked, 
autoinflammatory, somatic) syndrome. Among polygenic autoinflammatory diseases, 
ocular manifestations have been reviewed in Behçet's disease, PFAPA (periodic 
fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis and cervical adenitis) syndrome, Still's 
disease and autoinflammatory bone diseases, which encompass CRMO (chronic 
recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis) and SAPHO (synovitis, acne, pustulosis, 
hyperostosis and osteitis) syndrome.

Copyright © 2024 Fonollosa, Carreño, Vitale, Jindal, Ramanan, Pelegrín, 
Santos-Zorrozua, Gómez-Caverzaschi, Cantarini, Fabiani and Hernández-Rodríguez.

DOI: 10.3389/fopht.2024.1337329
PMCID: PMC11182141
PMID: 38984133

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that 
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. 
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.