---
reference_id: "PMID:8553964"
title: "Laryngeal tuberculosis: CT findings."
authors:
- Moon WK
- Han MH
- Chang KH
- Kim HJ
- Im JG
- Yeon KM
- Han MC
journal: AJR Am J Roentgenol
year: '1996'
doi: 10.2214/ajr.166.2.8553964
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Laryngeal tuberculosis: CT findings.
**Authors:** Moon WK, Han MH, Chang KH, Kim HJ, Im JG, Yeon KM, Han MC
**Journal:** AJR Am J Roentgenol (1996)
**DOI:** [10.2214/ajr.166.2.8553964](https://doi.org/10.2214/ajr.166.2.8553964)

## Content

1. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 1996 Feb;166(2):445-9. doi: 10.2214/ajr.166.2.8553964.

Laryngeal tuberculosis: CT findings.

Moon WK(1), Han MH, Chang KH, Kim HJ, Im JG, Yeon KM, Han MC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, South 
Korea.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the CT findings of 
laryngeal tuberculosis (TB).
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: CT scans, laryngoscopic examinations, and chest 
radiographs of 12 patients (21-63 years old) with histologically (n = 8) or 
bacteriologically (n = 4) confirmed laryngeal TB were retrospectively reviewed.
RESULTS: Bilateral diffuse thickening of the vocal cords and diffuse thickening 
and increased density of the aryepiglottic folds and paralaryngeal tissues were 
present in all patients. Diffuse thickening of the epiglottis was observed in 
seven patients. In four patients, a focal mass was noted in the anterior 
portions of the vocal cords (n = 3) or tip of the epiglottis (n =1). Destruction 
or sclerosis of cartilage was not found. Subglottic extension of the lesion was 
suspected in only one patient. Enlarged cervical lymph nodes were found in five 
patients. On laryngoscopic examinations, swelling of the vocal cords (n = 12) or 
epiglottis (n = 6) was present in all patients and was bilateral in nine 
patients. Vocal cord mobility was impaired in only one patient. Radiographic 
findings consistent with active pulmonary TB were present in all patients.
CONCLUSION: Although the CT appearances of laryngeal TB are not specific, the 
possibility of laryngeal TB should be raised when bilateral and diffuse 
laryngeal lesions are encountered without destruction of the laryngeal 
architecture in patients with pulmonary TB.

DOI: 10.2214/ajr.166.2.8553964
PMID: 8553964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]