---
reference_id: "PMID:37179808"
title: "Cerebral amyloid angiopathy related inflammation: An under recognized but treatable complication of cerebral amyloid angiopathy."
authors:
- Berry-Noronha A
- Bonavia L
- Smith T
- Sahathevan R
journal: Radiol Case Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.radcr.2023.04.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebral amyloid angiopathy related inflammation: An under recognized but treatable complication of cerebral amyloid angiopathy.
**Authors:** Berry-Noronha A, Bonavia L, Smith T, Sahathevan R
**Journal:** Radiol Case Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.radcr.2023.04.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radcr.2023.04.013)

## Content

1. Radiol Case Rep. 2023 Apr 29;18(7):2362-2365. doi:
10.1016/j.radcr.2023.04.013.  eCollection 2023 Jul.

Cerebral amyloid angiopathy related inflammation: An under recognized but 
treatable complication of cerebral amyloid angiopathy.

Berry-Noronha A(1), Bonavia L(1), Smith T(1), Sahathevan R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Grampians Health Ballarat, Ballarat, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Deakin, Geelong, Victoria, Australia.

Cerebral amyloid angiopathy-related inflammation (CAA-ri) is a subset of 
cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) causing a reversible encephalopathy 
characterized by seizures and focal neurological deficit. Previously, biopsy was 
required to make this diagnosis, distinct radiological features have allowed 
development for clinicoradiological criteria to assist in diagnosis. CAA-ri is 
an important condition to recognize as patients respond to high dose 
corticosteroids with significant resolution of symptoms. A 79-year-old woman 
presents with new onset seizures and delirium with prior history of mild 
cognitive impairment. An initial computed tomography (CT) brain demonstrated 
vasogenic oedema in the right temporal lobe, and magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) showed bilateral subcortical white matter change and multiple 
microhemorrhages. The MRI findings were suggestive of cerebral amyloid 
angiopathy. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis demonstrated raised protein and 
oligoclonal bands. A thorough septic and autoimmune screen demonstrated no 
abnormality. Following a multidisciplinary discussion, a diagnosis of CAA-ri was 
made. She was commenced on dexamethasone and her delirium improved. CAA-ri is an 
important diagnostic consideration in an elderly patient who presents with new 
seizures. Clinicoradiological criteria are useful diagnostic tools and may avoid 
the need for invasive histopathological diagnosis.

Crown Copyright © 2023 Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of University of 
Washington.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radcr.2023.04.013
PMCID: PMC10172615
PMID: 37179808