---
reference_id: "PMID:41040055"
title: The Head Circumference Height Index (HCH-I) to Quantify Relative Macrocephaly and Aid Identification of Hypochondroplasia in Children.
authors:
- Cheung MS
- Lanzafame R
- Low KJ
- Cole TJ
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.64266
keywords:
- Humans
- "Lordosis/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Dwarfism/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Male
- Child
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3/genetics"
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Infant
- "Megalencephaly/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Bone and Bones/abnormalities, pathology"
- Body Height/genetics
- Head
- Adolescent
- Growth Charts
- Cephalometry
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Head Circumference Height Index (HCH-I) to Quantify Relative Macrocephaly and Aid Identification of Hypochondroplasia in Children.
**Authors:** Cheung MS, Lanzafame R, Low KJ, Cole TJ
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.64266](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.64266)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2026 Feb;200(2):353-359. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.64266. Epub
2025  Oct 3.

The Head Circumference Height Index (HCH-I) to Quantify Relative Macrocephaly 
and Aid Identification of Hypochondroplasia in Children.

Cheung MS(1)(2), Lanzafame R(1), Low KJ(3)(4), Cole TJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Great Ormond Street Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Department of Paediatric 
Endocrinology, London, UK.
(2)UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, UK.
(3)Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospitals Bristol and Weston NHS 
Foundation Trust, Bristol, UK.
(4)Centre for Academic Child Health, Bristol Medical School, University of 
Bristol, Bristol, UK.

Hypochondroplasia (HCH) is a rare skeletal dysplasia caused by pathogenic 
variants in the FGFR3 gene. We hypothesized that the relative disproportion 
between head circumference and height in HCH might be diagnostically informative 
and generated a simple index of head-stature disproportion to help pediatricians 
diagnose HCH. The Head Circumference Height Index (HCH-I), based on formal 
statistical principles, is defined as height Z-score - 1/2 head circumference 
Z-score, with the Z-scores based here on the UK90 growth reference. An HCH-I 
below the cut-off of -2 indicates substantial head-height disproportion. We 
validated the index by comparing children diagnosed with HCH (n = 364), using 
data from the recent European HCH growth charts, to children from the Cambridge 
Infant Growth Study (CIGS) (n = 4620). The mean (SD) HCH-I was -3.0 (1.2) in the 
HCH cohort, compared to -0.2 (0.9) in the CIGS cohort. An HCH-I below -2 
correctly identified 78% of children with HCH, while only 2.4% of CIGS children 
fell below the cut-off. An HCH-I below -2 identifies children with head-height 
disproportion who may have HCH or another genetic disorder. The index is 
deliberately simple to calculate and should prove useful in clinical practice.

© 2025 The Author(s). American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.64266
PMID: 41040055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]