---
reference_id: "PMID:37115960"
title: "Secondary hypertension: evaluation and management."
authors:
- Tandan N
- Lavie CJ
- Stewart MH
- Milani RV
- Ventura HO
journal: Curr Opin Cardiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/HCO.0000000000001059
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Secondary hypertension: evaluation and management.
**Authors:** Tandan N, Lavie CJ, Stewart MH, Milani RV, Ventura HO
**Journal:** Curr Opin Cardiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/HCO.0000000000001059](https://doi.org/10.1097/HCO.0000000000001059)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2023 Jul 1;38(4):318-325. doi:
10.1097/HCO.0000000000001059.  Epub 2023 Apr 25.

Secondary hypertension: evaluation and management.

Tandan N(1), Lavie CJ, Stewart MH, Milani RV, Ventura HO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Diseases, John Ochsner Heart and Vascular 
Institute, Ochsner Clinical School, The University of Queensland School of 
Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Hypertension (HTN) that can be attributed to a particular 
source is known as secondary HTN (SH). Often, SH is difficult to control and 
thus referred to as resistant HTN, although the two terms are not mutually 
exclusive.
RECENT FINDINGS: A common theme across several contributors to SH are 
coactivation of the sympathetic drive and hormonal changes, independent of 
hormonal axis activation. The key to effective management of SH is early 
recognition and treatment to avoid catastrophic cardiovascular disease effects 
and mortality.
SUMMARY: This review article provides a contemporary summary of the conditions 
associated with SH and briefly reviews diagnostics and management.

Copyright © 2023 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/HCO.0000000000001059
PMID: 37115960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]