---
reference_id: "PMID:33904596"
title: "Fatal airway obstruction due to Ludwig's angina from severe odontogenic infection during antipsychotic medication: A case report and a literature review."
authors:
- Yamaguchi R
- Sakurada K
- Saitoh H
- Yoshida M
- Makino Y
- Torimitsu S
- Mizuno S
- Iwase H
journal: J Forensic Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/1556-4029.14740
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fatal airway obstruction due to Ludwig's angina from severe odontogenic infection during antipsychotic medication: A case report and a literature review.
**Authors:** Yamaguchi R, Sakurada K, Saitoh H, Yoshida M, Makino Y, Torimitsu S, Mizuno S, Iwase H
**Journal:** J Forensic Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1556-4029.14740](https://doi.org/10.1111/1556-4029.14740)

## Content

1. J Forensic Sci. 2021 Sep;66(5):1980-1985. doi: 10.1111/1556-4029.14740. Epub 
2021 Apr 27.

Fatal airway obstruction due to Ludwig's angina from severe odontogenic 
infection during antipsychotic medication: A case report and a literature 
review.

Yamaguchi R(1)(2), Sakurada K(3), Saitoh H(2), Yoshida M(2), Makino Y(1)(2), 
Torimitsu S(1)(2), Mizuno S(1), Iwase H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Forensic Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, The University 
of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Legal Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 
Chiba City, Chiba, Japan.
(3)Department of Forensic Dentistry, Graduate School of Medical and Dental 
Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Ludwig's angina is characterized by inflammation of the sublingual and 
submandibular spaces and is mainly caused by odontogenic infection, which leads 
to cellulitis of the soft tissues of the floor of the mouth and the neck. This 
causes asphyxia due to elevation and posterior deviation of the tissues of the 
floor of the mouth. We report a fatal case of airway obstruction due to Ludwig's 
angina. A woman in her forties who had no physical complications, but had a 
mental illness, was undergoing outpatient dental treatment for caries in the 
first premolar of the left mandible. She was admitted to a psychiatric hospital 
because of insomnia caused by pain, where she developed cardiopulmonary arrest 
while sleeping and died 14 days after onset of the dental infection. Postmortem 
computed tomography (PMCT) prior to autopsy showed swelling of the soft 
tissues-from the floor of the mouth to the oropharyngeal cavity, the 
supraglottic larynx, and the prevertebral tissue. Autopsy revealed a markedly 
swollen face and neck, an elevated tongue, and a highly edematous epiglottis and 
laryngopharyngeal mucosa. There was also cellulitis and abscess of the facial, 
suprahyoid, and neck musculature, which suggested that the cause of death was 
asphyxiation due to airway obstruction. This was an alarming case, with mental 
illness leading to risk of severe odontogenic infection, and in which obesity 
and use of antipsychotic medication might have acted synergistically leading to 
airway obstruction. This is also a case of Ludwig's angina captured by PMCT, 
which has rarely been reported.

© 2021 American Academy of Forensic Sciences.

DOI: 10.1111/1556-4029.14740
PMID: 33904596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]