---
reference_id: "PMID:15723066"
title: "Nephrocystin-5, a ciliary IQ domain protein, is mutated in Senior-Loken syndrome and interacts with RPGR and calmodulin."
authors:
- Otto EA
- Loeys B
- Khanna H
- Hellemans J
- Sudbrak R
- Fan S
- Muerb U
- "O'Toole JF"
- Helou J
- Attanasio M
- Utsch B
- Sayer JA
- Lillo C
- Jimeno D
- Coucke P
- De Paepe A
- Reinhardt R
- Klages S
- Tsuda M
- Kawakami I
- Kusakabe T
- Omran H
- Imm A
- Tippens M
- Raymond PA
- Hill J
- Beales P
- He S
- Kispert A
- Margolis B
- Williams DS
- Swaroop A
- Hildebrandt F
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1038/ng1520
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Blotting, Northern"
- Calmodulin/metabolism
- "Calmodulin-Binding Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Eye Proteins/metabolism
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Syndrome
- Two-Hybrid System Techniques
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nephrocystin-5, a ciliary IQ domain protein, is mutated in Senior-Loken syndrome and interacts with RPGR and calmodulin.
**Authors:** Otto EA, Loeys B, Khanna H, Hellemans J, Sudbrak R, Fan S, Muerb U, O'Toole JF, Helou J, Attanasio M, Utsch B, Sayer JA, Lillo C, Jimeno D, Coucke P, De Paepe A, Reinhardt R, Klages S, Tsuda M, Kawakami I, Kusakabe T, Omran H, Imm A, Tippens M, Raymond PA, Hill J, Beales P, He S, Kispert A, Margolis B, Williams DS, Swaroop A, Hildebrandt F
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1520](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1520)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2005 Mar;37(3):282-8. doi: 10.1038/ng1520. Epub 2005 Feb 20.

Nephrocystin-5, a ciliary IQ domain protein, is mutated in Senior-Loken syndrome 
and interacts with RPGR and calmodulin.

Otto EA(1), Loeys B, Khanna H, Hellemans J, Sudbrak R, Fan S, Muerb U, O'Toole 
JF, Helou J, Attanasio M, Utsch B, Sayer JA, Lillo C, Jimeno D, Coucke P, De 
Paepe A, Reinhardt R, Klages S, Tsuda M, Kawakami I, Kusakabe T, Omran H, Imm A, 
Tippens M, Raymond PA, Hill J, Beales P, He S, Kispert A, Margolis B, Williams 
DS, Swaroop A, Hildebrandt F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, 
USA.

Nephronophthisis (NPHP) is the most frequent genetic cause of chronic renal 
failure in children. Identification of four genes mutated in NPHP subtypes 1-4 
(refs. 4-9) has linked the pathogenesis of NPHP to ciliary functions. Ten 
percent of affected individuals have retinitis pigmentosa, constituting the 
renal-retinal Senior-Loken syndrome (SLSN). Here we identify, by positional 
cloning, mutations in an evolutionarily conserved gene, IQCB1 (also called 
NPHP5), as the most frequent cause of SLSN. IQCB1 encodes an IQ-domain protein, 
nephrocystin-5. All individuals with IQCB1 mutations have retinitis pigmentosa. 
Hence, we examined the interaction of nephrocystin-5 with RPGR (retinitis 
pigmentosa GTPase regulator), which is expressed in photoreceptor cilia and 
associated with 10-20% of retinitis pigmentosa. We show that nephrocystin-5, 
RPGR and calmodulin can be coimmunoprecipitated from retinal extracts, and that 
these proteins localize to connecting cilia of photoreceptors and to primary 
cilia of renal epithelial cells. Our studies emphasize the central role of 
ciliary dysfunction in the pathogenesis of SLSN.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1520
PMID: 15723066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]