---
reference_id: "PMID:33946069"
title: "Chronic Abdominal Pain: Gastroenterologist Approach."
authors:
- Lukic S
- Mijac D
- Filipovic B
- Sokic-Milutinovic A
- Tomasevic R
- Krstic M
- Milosavljevic T
journal: Dig Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1159/000516977
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic Abdominal Pain: Gastroenterologist Approach.
**Authors:** Lukic S, Mijac D, Filipovic B, Sokic-Milutinovic A, Tomasevic R, Krstic M, Milosavljevic T
**Journal:** Dig Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000516977](https://doi.org/10.1159/000516977)

## Content

1. Dig Dis. 2022;40(2):181-186. doi: 10.1159/000516977. Epub 2021 May 4.

Chronic Abdominal Pain: Gastroenterologist Approach.

Lukic S(1), Mijac D(1), Filipovic B(2), Sokic-Milutinovic A(1), Tomasevic R(3), 
Krstic M(1), Milosavljevic T(4).

Author information:
(1)Clinic for Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Clinical Center of Serbia, School 
of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
(2)Clinical and Hospital center "Dr Dragisa Misovic-Dedinje", School of 
Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Clinical and Hospital center "Zemun", School 
of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
(4)Internal Medicine, Gastroenterology "Euromedic" Hospital, Belgrade, Serbia.

BACKGROUND: Abdominal pain is a common symptom of gastroenterology examination. 
Chronic abdominal pain is present for >3 months.
SUMMARY: Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is one of the most common 
gastrointestinal diseases encountered by both gastroenterologists and general 
practitioners. GERD is usually a chronic disease presented with a set of 
symptoms including heartburn and/or regurgitation, and less commonly epigastric 
pain. Epigastric pain syndrome is characterized by the following symptoms: 
epigastric pain and/or burning. It does not necessarily occur after meal 
ingestion, may occur during fasting, and can be even improved by meal ingestion. 
Duodenal ulcers tend to cause abdominal pain that is localized in the epigastric 
region and commence several hours after eating, often at night. Hunger provokes 
pain in most of the cases and decreases after meal. Gastric ulcer pain occurs 
immediately after eating, and consuming food increases pain. Pain is localized 
in the epigastrium and can radiate to the back. Abdominal pain in irritable 
bowel syndrome is related to defecation. A typical symptom of chronic 
pancreatitis is pain that radiates to the back. In Crohn's disease, inflammation 
causes pain. Key Messages: Pain can occur at different locations with diverse 
intensity and propagation and is often associated with other symptoms. For any 
gastroenterologist, abdominal pain is a big challenge.

© 2021 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000516977
PMID: 33946069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]