---
reference_id: "PMID:40503331"
title: Phenotypic and genotypic characterization of familial adult myoclonus epilepsy in a Chinese case series.
authors:
- Zeng S
- Zhou Y
- Zhao Y
- Li M
- Zhou C
- Wang X
- Quan H
- Che T
- Li J
- Sun Q
- Tang B
journal: Brain Commun
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcaf214
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypic and genotypic characterization of familial adult myoclonus epilepsy in a Chinese case series.
**Authors:** Zeng S, Zhou Y, Zhao Y, Li M, Zhou C, Wang X, Quan H, Che T, Li J, Sun Q, Tang B
**Journal:** Brain Commun (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/braincomms/fcaf214](https://doi.org/10.1093/braincomms/fcaf214)

## Content

1. Brain Commun. 2025 Jun 4;7(3):fcaf214. doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcaf214. 
eCollection 2025.

Phenotypic and genotypic characterization of familial adult myoclonus epilepsy 
in a Chinese case series.

Zeng S(1), Zhou Y(2), Zhao Y(2), Li M(3)(4), Zhou C(5), Wang X(6)(7), Quan H(8), 
Che T(8), Li J(9)(10)(11), Sun Q(10)(11)(12), Tang B(2)(4)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatrics, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, Hunan 410011, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, Hunan 410008, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of University of South 
China, Hengyang, Hunan 421001, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital & Clinical Research 
Center for Immune-Related Encephalopathy of Hunan Province, Hengyang Medical 
School, University of South China, Hengyang, Hunan 421001, China.
(5)Department of Neurology, Changde Hospital, Xiangya School of Medicine, 
Central South University (The First People's Hospital of Changde City), Changde 
City, Hunan 415000, China.
(6)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou 450052, China.
(7)Institute of Parkinson and Movement Disorder, Zhengzhou University, 
Zhengzhou, Henan 450052, China.
(8)Bioinformatics Center, Annoroad Gene Technology, Beijing 100176, China.
(9)Center for Medical Genetics, School of Life Sciences, Central South 
University, Changsha, Hunan 410008, China.
(10)Bioinformatics Center, National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric 
Disorders, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410008, 
China.
(11)Key Laboratory of Hunan Province in Neurodegenerative Disorders, Central 
South University, Changsha, Hunan 410008, China.
(12)Department of Geriatric Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, Hunan 410008, China.

Familial adult myoclonus epilepsy is a type of repeat expansion disorders caused 
by insertion of the causative pentanucleotide TTTCA repeat into an intronic 
polymorphic TTTTA repeat in different genes. We aimed to characterize the 
clinical features and elucidate the exact genetic basis of TTTTA/TTTCA repeat 
expansion in familial adult myoclonus epilepsy from mainland China. Eighty-five 
individuals including 36 patients and 49 normal phenotype relatives from seven 
pedigrees with familial adult myoclonus epilepsy, were recruited in a case 
series from mainland China. Repeat-primed PCR was used for initial screening. 
Long-range PCR-based enrichment, followed by targeted deep HiFi long-read 
sequencing, was performed to precisely clarify the detailed information of 
causative pentanucleotide TTTTA/TTTCA repeat expansion. The results indicated 
there exists obvious clinical heterogeneity both within and between families in 
our patient group. All patients were genetically diagnosed with familial adult 
myoclonus epilepsy type 1. The number of pentanucleotide repeats was extremely 
unstable, with median TTTCA repeat sizes ranging from 10 to 647 in the affected 
members of our case series under a mean sequence depth of coverage above 50 000. 
The [(TTTTA)exp (TTTCA)exp] motif was the only configuration of expanded SAMD12 
repeats in our case series. An inverse correlation was found between the age of 
onset and the number of TTTCA repeats and the total number of TTTTA/TTTCA 
repeats. Clinical anticipation was observed for tremor and seizure symptoms. 
However, we did not demonstrate a link between parent-offspring differences in 
repeat sizes and their changes in age of onset. In summary, we determined the 
nature of the expanded repeats and a reliable phenotype-genotypic correlation in 
our case series of familial adult myoclonus epilepsy through targeted deep HiFi 
long-read sequencing technologies.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/braincomms/fcaf214
PMCID: PMC12152537
PMID: 40503331

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.