---
reference_id: PMID:20955914
title: "Travel-associated Legionnaires disease: clinical features of 17 cases and a review of the literature."
authors:
- Erdogan H
- Erdogan A
- Lakamdayali H
- Yilmaz A
- Arslan H
journal: Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2010.07.023
keywords:
- Adult
- Age Distribution
- Aged
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- Bradycardia/epidemiology
- "Community-Acquired Infections/diagnosis, epidemiology, mortality, pathology"
- Diabetes Complications
- Female
- "Gastrointestinal Diseases/complications, epidemiology"
- Humans
- "Legionnaires' Disease/diagnosis, epidemiology, mortality, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Nervous System Diseases/complications, epidemiology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Travel
- Turkey
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Travel-associated Legionnaires disease: clinical features of 17 cases and a review of the literature.
**Authors:** Erdogan H, Erdogan A, Lakamdayali H, Yilmaz A, Arslan H
**Journal:** Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2010.07.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2010.07.023)

## Content

1. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis. 2010 Nov;68(3):297-303. doi: 
10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2010.07.023.

Travel-associated Legionnaires disease: clinical features of 17 cases and a 
review of the literature.

Erdogan H(1), Erdogan A, Lakamdayali H, Yilmaz A, Arslan H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Clinical Microbiology, Baskent 
University, Ankara, Turkey. erdoganhaluk@hotmail.com

We retrospectively investigated patients with Legionnaires disease (LD) who had 
been admitted to the Baskent University Alanya Teaching and Research Hospital, 
Ankara, Turkey, from January 2002 to September 2009. Twenty definitive cases 
were followed as LD, 17 (85%) of which were travel associated. The mean age was 
61.5 ± 9.5 years (range, 39-77 years). Diabetes mellitus was found in 7 (41.2%) 
of those patients. Gastrointestinal or neurologic abnormalities were found 
approximately in two-thirds and relative bradycardia in 9 (52.9%). LD was severe 
in 11 (64.7%) patients, which required intensive care unit follow-up. Although 
appropriate antibiotic therapy was initiated in all patients on admission day, 4 
(23.5%) deaths occurred. In conclusion, clinicians should remain vigilant about 
the diagnosis of LD in patients with community-acquired pneumonia, especially in 
the presence of extrapulmonary involvement, risk factors for LD, and a history 
of recent travel. As in our cases, mortality is still high in sporadic cases 
despite early appropriate treatment.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2010.07.023
PMID: 20955914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]