---
reference_id: "PMID:23132514"
title: The epidemiology of thyroid cancer in the Czech Republic in comparison with other countries.
authors:
- Lukas J
- Drabek J
- Lukas D
- Dusek L
- Gatek J
journal: Biomed Pap Med Fac Univ Palacky Olomouc Czech Repub
year: '2013'
doi: 10.5507/bp.2012.086
keywords:
- Adult
- Age Distribution
- Aged
- Czech Republic/epidemiology
- Environmental Exposure/adverse effects
- Epidemiologic Methods
- Female
- Humans
- Lymphatic Metastasis
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mortality/trends
- Neoplasm Metastasis
- Neoplasm Staging
- Prognosis
- Radiation Injuries/epidemiology
- Sex Distribution
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/epidemiology, mortality, pathology"
- Tumor Burden
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The epidemiology of thyroid cancer in the Czech Republic in comparison with other countries.
**Authors:** Lukas J, Drabek J, Lukas D, Dusek L, Gatek J
**Journal:** Biomed Pap Med Fac Univ Palacky Olomouc Czech Repub (2013)
**DOI:** [10.5507/bp.2012.086](https://doi.org/10.5507/bp.2012.086)

## Content

1. Biomed Pap Med Fac Univ Palacky Olomouc Czech Repub. 2013 Sep;157(3):266-75.
doi: 10.5507/bp.2012.086. Epub 2012 Nov 2.

The epidemiology of thyroid cancer in the Czech Republic in comparison with
other countries.

Lukas J(1), Drabek J, Lukas D, Dusek L, Gatek J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Na Homolce Hospital,
Prague and Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Pilsen, Czech Republic.

BACKGROUND: Thyroid cancer includes a broad spectrum of tumours with different
prognoses. The global incidence has been increasing in recent years. Variables
affecting its etiology are dietary, especially iodine intake and to a lesser
extent selenium, environmental, like - ionizing radiation and, increased TSH
level. These factors interplay with epigenetic and genetic changes within the
cell. This review article presents thyroid cancer epidemiology, describes its
main characteristics and the influence of environmental and lifestyle risk
factors in the Czech Republic in comparison with other countries.
METHODS AND RESULTS: An epidemiological study of Czech patients with malignant
thyroid carcinoma was made on the basis of the National Oncologic Registry (NOR)
and Czech Statistical Office data summarized on the web portal SVOD. The data
were compared with international data from the project GLOBOCAN 2008 Cancer
Incidence and Mortality Worldwide. Apart from risk factors, prognostic factors
with effect on patient survival were also analyzed. The survey showed that the
incidence of thyroid cancer has been steadily growing in the Czech Republic.
Since the beginning of the 1980s, it has increased 4 fold. It has a higher
incidence than most other European countries but it is ranked with countries
with an average and decreasing mortality. Obviously, the improved detection
methods do not explain the growing incidence. The highest incidence is found for
papillary carcinoma (PTC), now over 80% of cases. For follicular and medullar
cancers, the incidence has not increased and for anaplastic carcinoma there is a
slight decrease. Women over 40 years of age constitute the highest risk group.
CONCLUSIONS: There are a number of reasons for these trends, such as improved
diagnostic techniques using ultrasound and FNAB and more radical surgery. There
are also dietary/environmental factors (iodine deficiency and to a lesser extent
selenium), nitrates, polychlorinated biphenyls, increased ionizing radiation,
and prolonged increase in TSH. The prognosis of patients with DTC depends on the
age at the time of diagnosis. A favorable prognosis also depends on timely
detection.

DOI: 10.5507/bp.2012.086
PMID: 23132514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
