---
reference_id: "PMID:30304666"
title: "Epigenetic alterations caused by aflatoxin b1: a public health risk in the induction of hepatocellular carcinoma."
authors:
- Ferreira RG
- Cardoso MV
- de Souza Furtado KM
- Espíndola KMM
- Amorim RP
- Monteiro MC
journal: Transl Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.trsl.2018.09.001
keywords:
- Aflatoxin B1/toxicity
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/chemically induced, genetics"
- DNA Methylation
- "Epigenesis, Genetic/drug effects"
- Histones/metabolism
- Humans
- "Liver Neoplasms/chemically induced, genetics"
- MicroRNAs/physiology
- Protein Biosynthesis
- Public Health
- "RNA, Long Noncoding/physiology"
- Risk
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epigenetic alterations caused by aflatoxin b1: a public health risk in the induction of hepatocellular carcinoma.
**Authors:** Ferreira RG, Cardoso MV, de Souza Furtado KM, Espíndola KMM, Amorim RP, Monteiro MC
**Journal:** Transl Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.trsl.2018.09.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trsl.2018.09.001)

## Content

1. Transl Res. 2019 Feb;204:51-71. doi: 10.1016/j.trsl.2018.09.001. Epub 2018 Sep
 15.

Epigenetic alterations caused by aflatoxin b1: a public health risk in the
induction of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Ferreira RG(1), Cardoso MV(2), de Souza Furtado KM(3), Espíndola KMM(4), Amorim
RP(5), Monteiro MC(6).

Author information:
(1)Neurosciences and Cell Biology Post-Graduation Program, Biological Sciences
Institute, Federal University of Pará/UFPA, Belém, Pará, Brazil. Electronic
address: roseguiferreira@yahoo.com.br.
(2)Pharmaceutical Science Post-Graduation Program, Health Science Institute,
Federal University of Pará/UFPA, Belém, Pará, Brazil. Electronic address:
magda.card@hotmail.com.
(3)Health Science Institute, Federal University of Pará/UFPA, Belém, Pará,
Brazil. Electronic address: Karinemsfurtado@gmail.com.
(4)Exact and Natural Sciences Institute, Federal University of Pará/UFPA, Belém,
Pará, Brazil. Electronic address: kaioespindola@hotmail.com.
(5)Health Science Institute, Federal University of Pará/UFPA, Belém, Pará,
Brazil. Electronic address: ra.ruanderson@gmail.com.
(6)Neurosciences and Cell Biology Post-Graduation Program, Pharmaceutical
Science Post-Graduation Program, Health Science Institute, Federal University of
Pará/UFPA, Belém, Pará, Brazil. Electronic address: martachagas2@yahoo.com.br.

Aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) is currently the most commonly studied mycotoxin due to its
great toxicity, its distribution in a wide variety of foods such as grains and
cereals and its involvement in the development of + (hepatocellular carcinoma;
HCC). HCC is one of the main types of liver cancer, and has become a serious
public health problem, due to its high incidence mainly in Southeast Asia and
Africa. Studies show that AFB1 acts in synergy with other risk factors such as
hepatitis B and C virus leading to the development of HCC through genetic and
epigenetic modifications. The genetic modifications begin in the liver through
the biomorphic AFB1, the AFB1-exo-8.9-Epoxy active, which interacts with DNA to
form adducts of AFB1-DNA. These adducts induce mutation in codon 249, mediated
by a transversion of G-T in the p53 tumor suppressor gene, causing HCC. Thus,
this review provides an overview of the evidence for AFB1-induced epigenetic
alterations and the potential mechanisms involved in the development of HCC,
focusing on a critical analysis of the importance of severe legislation in the
detection of aflatoxins.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.trsl.2018.09.001
PMID: 30304666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
