---
reference_id: "PMID:36517414"
title: Plasma proteome profiling of healthy subjects undergoing bed rest reveals unloading-dependent changes linked to muscle atrophy.
authors:
- Murgia M
- Brocca L
- Monti E
- Franchi MV
- Zwiebel M
- Steigerwald S
- Giacomello E
- Sartori R
- Zampieri S
- Capovilla G
- Gasparini M
- Biolo G
- Sandri M
- Mann M
- Narici MV
journal: J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/jcsm.13146
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- Proteome
- Bed Rest/adverse effects
- Healthy Volunteers
- Cachexia
- Proteomics
- Muscular Atrophy/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Plasma proteome profiling of healthy subjects undergoing bed rest reveals unloading-dependent changes linked to muscle atrophy.
**Authors:** Murgia M, Brocca L, Monti E, Franchi MV, Zwiebel M, Steigerwald S, Giacomello E, Sartori R, Zampieri S, Capovilla G, Gasparini M, Biolo G, Sandri M, Mann M, Narici MV
**Journal:** J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcsm.13146](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcsm.13146)

## Content

1. J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle. 2023 Feb;14(1):439-451. doi: 10.1002/jcsm.13146.
 Epub 2022 Dec 14.

Plasma proteome profiling of healthy subjects undergoing bed rest reveals 
unloading-dependent changes linked to muscle atrophy.

Murgia M(1)(2), Brocca L(3), Monti E(1), Franchi MV(1)(4), Zwiebel M(2), 
Steigerwald S(2), Giacomello E(5), Sartori R(1)(6), Zampieri S(1)(4)(7), 
Capovilla G(7), Gasparini M(8), Biolo G(5), Sandri M(1)(6), Mann M(2)(9), Narici 
MV(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Padua, Italy.
(2)Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(4)CIR-MYO Myology Center, Padua, Italy.
(5)Department of Medicine, Surgery and Health Sciences, University of Trieste, 
Trieste, Italy.
(6)Veneto Institute of Molecular Medicine, Padova, Italy.
(7)Department of Surgical, Oncological and Gastroenterological Sciences, Padova 
University Hospital, Padua, Italy.
(8)Izola General Hospital, Izola, Slovenia.
(9)NNF Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Inactivity and unloading induce skeletal muscle atrophy, loss of 
strength and detrimental metabolic effects. Bed rest is a model to study the 
impact of inactivity on the musculoskeletal system. It not only provides 
information for bed-ridden patients care, but it is also a ground-based 
spaceflight analogue used to mimic the challenges of long space missions for the 
human body. In both cases, it would be desirable to develop a panel of 
biomarkers to monitor muscle atrophy in a minimally invasive way at point of 
care to limit the onset of muscle loss in a personalized fashion.
METHODS: We applied mass spectrometry-based proteomics to measure plasma protein 
abundance changes in response to 10 days of bed rest in 10 young males. To 
validate the correlation between muscle atrophy and the significant hits 
emerging from our study, we analysed in parallel, with the same pipeline, a 
cohort of cancer patients with or without cachexia and age-matched controls. Our 
analysis resulted in the quantification of over 500 proteins.
RESULTS: Unloading affected plasma concentration of proteins of the complement 
cascade, lipid carriers and proteins derived from tissue leakage. Among the 
latter, teneurin-4 increased 1.6-fold in plasma at bed rest day 10 (BR10) 
compared with BR0 (6.E9 vs. 4.3E9, P = 0.02) and decreased to 0.6-fold the 
initial abundance after 2 days of recovery at normal daily activity (R + 2, 
2.7E9, P = 3.3E-4); the extracellular matrix protein lumican was decreased to 
0.7-fold (1.2E9 vs. 8.5E8, P = 1.5E-4) at BR10 and remained as low at R + 2. We 
identified six proteins distinguishing subjects developing unloading-mediated 
muscle atrophy (decrease of >4% of quadriceps cross-sectional area) from those 
largely maintaining their initial muscle mass. Among them, transthyretin, a 
thyroid hormone-binding protein, was significantly less abundant at BR10 in the 
plasma of subjects with muscle atrophy compared with those with no atrophy 
(1.6E10 vs. 2.6E10, P = 0.001). Haptoglobin-related protein was also 
significantly reduced in the serum of cancer patients with cachexia compared 
with that of controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings highlight a combination or proteomic changes that can 
be explored as potential biomarkers of muscle atrophy occurring under different 
conditions. The panel of significant proteomic differences distinguishing 
atrophy-prone and atrophy-resistant subjects after 10 days of bed rest need to 
be tested in a larger cohort to validate their potential to predict 
inactivity-triggered muscle loss in humans.

© 2022 The Authors. Journal of Cachexia, Sarcopenia and Muscle published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Society on Sarcopenia, Cachexia and Wasting 
Disorders.

DOI: 10.1002/jcsm.13146
PMCID: PMC9891930
PMID: 36517414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.