---
reference_id: "PMID:34958010"
title: Preoperative erythrocyte sedimentation rate in patients with rheumatoid arthritis predicts deep vein thrombosis following total knee arthroplasty.
authors:
- Ying P
- Lu T
- Xu Y
- Miu Y
- Xue Y
- Huang Z
- Ding W
- Dai X
journal: Clin Hemorheol Microcirc
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3233/CH-211286
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Preoperative erythrocyte sedimentation rate in patients with rheumatoid arthritis predicts deep vein thrombosis following total knee arthroplasty.
**Authors:** Ying P, Lu T, Xu Y, Miu Y, Xue Y, Huang Z, Ding W, Dai X
**Journal:** Clin Hemorheol Microcirc (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3233/CH-211286](https://doi.org/10.3233/CH-211286)

## Content

1. Clin Hemorheol Microcirc. 2022;81(1):23-31. doi: 10.3233/CH-211286.

Preoperative erythrocyte sedimentation rate in patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis predicts deep vein thrombosis following total knee arthroplasty.

Ying P(1), Lu T(1), Xu Y(1), Miu Y(1), Xue Y(1), Huang Z(2), Ding W(2), Dai 
X(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Changshu Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing University 
of Chinese Medicine, Changshu, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Department of Orthopedics, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Soochow 
University, Changzhou, Jiangsu, China.

PURPOSE: To thoroughly evaluate preoperative risk factors for deep venous 
thrombosis (DVT) in patients with knee rheumatoid arthritis (RA) undergoing 
unilateral total knee arthroplasty (TKA).
METHODS: Clinical data of 106 patients with knee RA who underwent unilateral TKA 
from August 2014 to October 2020 were collected. All patients received 
ultrasonic examination of the veins of both lower extremities on the third day 
after TKA and were divided into DVT and non-DVT groups. The associations between 
age, gender, body mass index (BMI), history of diabetes/hypertension, common 
serum lipid levels, indicators related to coagulation function, blood viscosity, 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and postoperative DVT were statistically 
compared and analyzed.
RESULTS: ESR was significantly correlated with DVT risk after TKA (OR = 1.844, 
95% CI = 1.022-2.981, P = 0.019). Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve 
analysis showed the optimal cut-off point of ESR for predicting DVT was 42 mm/h 
with a sensitivity of 95.5% and specificity of 66.7%.
CONCLUSION: An increased preoperative ESR value is a risk factor for DVT in 
patients with knee RA following unilateral TKA. Pre-surgery control of ESR level 
and prevention of postoperative DVT in these patients are worthy of attention.

DOI: 10.3233/CH-211286
PMID: 34958010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]