---
reference_id: "PMID:38765012"
title: "KMT2D regulates activation, localization, and integrin expression by T-cells."
authors:
- Potter SJ
- Zhang L
- Kotliar M
- Wu Y
- Schafer C
- Stefan K
- Boukas L
- "Qu'd D"
- Bodamer O
- Simpson BN
- Barski A
- Lindsley AW
- Bjornsson HT
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1341745
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Mice
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Face/abnormalities
- Gene Expression Regulation/genetics
- Hematologic Diseases
- "Histone-Lysine N-Methyltransferase/genetics, metabolism"
- "Integrins/metabolism, genetics"
- Lymphocyte Activation/genetics
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Myeloid-Lymphoid Leukemia Protein
- "Neoplasm Proteins/genetics, immunology, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- "T-Lymphocytes/immunology, metabolism"
- "Vestibular Diseases/genetics, immunology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# KMT2D regulates activation, localization, and integrin expression by T-cells.
**Authors:** Potter SJ, Zhang L, Kotliar M, Wu Y, Schafer C, Stefan K, Boukas L, Qu'd D, Bodamer O, Simpson BN, Barski A, Lindsley AW, Bjornsson HT
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2024.1341745](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2024.1341745)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2024 May 3;15:1341745. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1341745. 
eCollection 2024.

KMT2D regulates activation, localization, and integrin expression by T-cells.

Potter SJ(#)(1), Zhang L(#)(2), Kotliar M(1), Wu Y(1), Schafer C(1), Stefan 
K(1), Boukas L(2)(3), Qu'd D(4), Bodamer O(5)(6)(7), Simpson BN(4)(8), Barski 
A(1)(4)(8), Lindsley AW(#)(1)(8), Bjornsson HT(#)(2)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergy & Immunology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States.
(2)McKusick-Nathans Department of Genetics, The Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, MD, United States.
(4)Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, OH, United States.
(5)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, 
United States.
(6)The Roya Kabuki Program, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, United 
States.
(7)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard 
University, Cambridge, MA, United States.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati, OH, United States.
(9)Faculty of Medicine, The University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(10)Department of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Landspitali University 
Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(#)Contributed equally

Individuals with Kabuki syndrome present with immunodeficiency; however, how 
pathogenic variants in the gene encoding the histone-modifying enzyme lysine 
methyltransferase 2D (KMT2D) lead to immune alterations remain poorly 
understood. Following up on our prior report of KMT2D-altered integrin 
expression in B-cells, we performed targeted analyses of KMT2D's influence on 
integrin expression in T-cells throughout development (thymocytes through 
peripheral T-cells) in murine cells with constitutive- and conditional-targeted 
Kmt2d deletion. Using high-throughput RNA-sequencing and flow cytometry, we 
reveal decreased expression (both at the transcriptional and translational 
levels) of a cluster of leukocyte-specific integrins, which perturb aspects of 
T-cell activation, maturation, adhesion/localization, and effector function. 
H3K4me3 ChIP-PCR suggests that these evolutionary similar integrins are under 
direct control of KMT2D. KMT2D loss also alters multiple downstream 
programming/signaling pathways, including integrin-based localization, which can 
influence T-cell populations. We further demonstrated that KMT2D deficiency is 
associated with the accumulation of murine CD8+ single-positive (SP) thymocytes 
and shifts in both human and murine peripheral T-cell populations, including the 
reduction of the CD4+ recent thymic emigrant (RTE) population. Together, these 
data show that the targeted loss of Kmt2d in the T-cell lineage recapitulates 
several distinct features of Kabuki syndrome-associated immune deficiency and 
implicates epigenetic mechanisms in the regulation of integrin signaling.

Copyright © 2024 Potter, Zhang, Kotliar, Wu, Schafer, Stefan, Boukas, Qu’d, 
Bodamer, Simpson, Barski, Lindsley and Bjornsson.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1341745
PMCID: PMC11099208
PMID: 38765012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AB is a cofounder of Datirium, the developer of 
Scientific Data Analysis Platform https://SciDAP.com used here for processing 
RNA-Seq data. AB and MK developed CWL-Airflow licensed to Datirium, LLC. AL is 
an employee of Amgen Inc. HB is a consultant for Mahzi therapeutics. The 
remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any 
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.