---
reference_id: "PMID:37061780"
title: "EHRA expert consensus document on the management of arrhythmias in frailty syndrome, endorsed by the Heart Rhythm Society (HRS), Asia Pacific Heart Rhythm Society (APHRS), Latin America Heart Rhythm Society (LAHRS), and Cardiac Arrhythmia Society of Southern Africa (CASSA)."
authors:
- Savelieva I
- Fumagalli S
- Kenny RA
- Anker S
- Benetos A
- Boriani G
- Bunch J
- Dagres N
- Dubner S
- Fauchier L
- Ferrucci L
- Israel C
- Kamel H
- Lane DA
- Lip GYH
- Marchionni N
- Obel I
- Okumura K
- Olshansky B
- Potpara T
- Stiles MK
- Tamargo J
- Ungar A
- Kosiuk J
- Larsen TB
- Dinov B
- Estner H
- Garcia R
- Moscoso Costa FM
- Lampert R
- Lin YJ
- Chin A
- Rodriguez HA
- Strandberg T
- Grodzicki T
journal: Europace
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/europace/euac123
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EHRA expert consensus document on the management of arrhythmias in frailty syndrome, endorsed by the Heart Rhythm Society (HRS), Asia Pacific Heart Rhythm Society (APHRS), Latin America Heart Rhythm Society (LAHRS), and Cardiac Arrhythmia Society of Southern Africa (CASSA).
**Authors:** Savelieva I, Fumagalli S, Kenny RA, Anker S, Benetos A, Boriani G, Bunch J, Dagres N, Dubner S, Fauchier L, Ferrucci L, Israel C, Kamel H, Lane DA, Lip GYH, Marchionni N, Obel I, Okumura K, Olshansky B, Potpara T, Stiles MK, Tamargo J, Ungar A, Kosiuk J, Larsen TB, Dinov B, Estner H, Garcia R, Moscoso Costa FM, Lampert R, Lin YJ, Chin A, Rodriguez HA, Strandberg T, Grodzicki T
**Journal:** Europace (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/europace/euac123](https://doi.org/10.1093/europace/euac123)

## Content

1. Europace. 2023 Apr 15;25(4):1249-1276. doi: 10.1093/europace/euac123.

EHRA expert consensus document on the management of arrhythmias in frailty 
syndrome, endorsed by the Heart Rhythm Society (HRS), Asia Pacific Heart Rhythm 
Society (APHRS), Latin America Heart Rhythm Society (LAHRS), and Cardiac 
Arrhythmia Society of Southern Africa (CASSA).

Savelieva I(1), Fumagalli S(2), Kenny RA(3), Anker S(4)(5)(6)(7), Benetos A(8), 
Boriani G(9), Bunch J(10)(11), Dagres N(12), Dubner S(13), Fauchier L(14), 
Ferrucci L(15), Israel C(16), Kamel H(17), Lane DA(18)(19)(20)(21), Lip 
GYH(18)(19)(20)(21), Marchionni N(22), Obel I(23), Okumura K(24), Olshansky 
B(25)(26)(27), Potpara T(28)(29), Stiles MK(30), Tamargo J(31), Ungar A(2), 
Kosiuk J(32), Larsen TB(33), Dinov B(32), Estner H(34), Garcia R(35), Moscoso 
Costa FM(36), Lampert R(37), Lin YJ(38), Chin A(39), Rodriguez HA(40), 
Strandberg T(41), Grodzicki T(42).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Clinical Academic Group, Molecular and Clinical Sciences 
Research Institute, St George's University of London, London, UK.
(2)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Geriatric Intensive Care 
Unit and Geriatric Arrhythmia Unit, University of Florence and AOU Careggi, 
Florence, Italy.
(3)Mercer's Institute for Successful Ageing, Department of Medical Gerontology, 
St James's Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(4)Department of Cardiology (CVK), Germany.
(5)Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), Germany.
(6)German Centre for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK) partner site Berlin, 
Germany.
(7)Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany.
(8)Department of Geriatric Medicine CHRU de Nancy and INSERM U1116, Université 
de Lorraine, Nancy, France.
(9)Cardiology Division, Department of Biomedical, Metabolic and Neural Sciences, 
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Policlinico di Modena, Modena, Italy.
(10)(HRS representative): Intermountain Medical Center, Cardiology Department, 
Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(11)Stanford University, Department of Internal Medicine, Palo Alto, CA, USA.
(12)Heart Center Leipzig, Department of Electrophysiology, Leipzig, Germany.
(13)(LAHRS representative): Clinica Suizo Argentina, Cardiology Department, 
Buenos Aires Capital Federal, Argentina.
(14)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Trousseau et Université François Rabelais, 
Tours, France.
(15)National Institute on Aging, MD, USA.
(16)Evangelisches Krankenhaus Bielefeld GmbH, Bielefeld, Germany.
(17)Department of Neurology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA.
(18)Liverpool Centre for Cardiovascular Science, University of Liverpool, 
Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(19)Department of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Medicine, Institute of Life 
Course and Medical Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(20)Liverpool Heart and Chest Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(21)Aalborg Thrombosis Research Unit, Department of Clinical Medicine, Aalborg 
University, Aalborg, Denmark.
(22)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, General Cardiology 
Division, University of Florence and AOU Careggi, Florence, Italy.
(23)(CASSA representative): Milpark Hospital, Cardiology Unit, Johannesburg, 
South Africa.
(24)(APHRS representative): Saiseikai Kumamoto Hospital, Kumamoto, Japan.
(25)University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City Iowa, USA.
(26)Covenant Hospital, Waterloo, Iowa, USA.
(27)Mercy Hospital Mason City, Iowa, USA.
(28)School of Medicine, Belgrade University, Serbia.
(29)Cardiology Clinic, Clinical Center of Serbia, Serbia.
(30)(APHRS representative): Waikato Clinical School, University of Auckland and 
Waikato Hospital, Hamilton, New Zealand.
(31)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, CIBERCV, Universidad 
Complutense, Madrid, Spain.
(32)Department of Electrophysiology, Heart Center Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(33)Department of Cardiology, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark.
(34)Klinikum d. Universität München Campus, München, Germany.
(35)Chu De Poitiers, Service De Cardiologie, Poitiers, France.
(36)Cardiology Department, Hospital Santa Cruz, Lisbon, Portugal.
(37)Yale University School of Medicine, Section of Cardiovascular Medicine, CT, 
USA.
(38)Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Cardiology Division, Taipei, Taiwan.
(39)UCT Private Academic Hospital, Cape Town, South Africa.
(40)Centro Medico Docente la Trinidad, Cardiology Unit, Caracas, Miranda, 
Venezuela.
(41)Department of Health Sciences/Geriatrics, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(42)Jagiellonian University Medical College, Cracow, Poland.

There is an increasing proportion of the general population surviving to old age 
with significant chronic disease, multi-morbidity, and disability. The 
prevalence of pre-frail state and frailty syndrome increases exponentially with 
advancing age and is associated with greater morbidity, disability, 
hospitalization, institutionalization, mortality, and health care resource use. 
Frailty represents a global problem, making early identification, evaluation, 
and treatment to prevent the cascade of events leading from functional decline 
to disability and death, one of the challenges of geriatric and general 
medicine. Cardiac arrhythmias are common in advancing age, chronic illness, and 
frailty and include a broad spectrum of rhythm and conduction abnormalities. 
However, no systematic studies or recommendations on the management of 
arrhythmias are available specifically for the elderly and frail population, and 
the uptake of many effective antiarrhythmic therapies in these patients remains 
the slowest. This European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA) consensus document 
focuses on the biology of frailty, common comorbidities, and methods of 
assessing frailty, in respect to a specific issue of arrhythmias and conduction 
disease, provide evidence base advice on the management of arrhythmias in 
patients with frailty syndrome, and identifies knowledge gaps and directions for 
future research.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
European Society of Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1093/europace/euac123
PMCID: PMC10105859
PMID: 37061780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: The authors have provided 
declaration of interest information for all relationships that might be 
perceived as real or potential sources of conflicts of interest. The full 
disclosures can be viewed in the supplementary material for this article.