---
reference_id: "PMID:39566012"
title: "Long-Term Cognitive, Functional, and Patient-Reported Outcomes in Patients With Anti-NMDAR Encephalitis."
authors:
- Brenner J
- Ruhe CJ
- Kulderij I
- Bastiaansen AEM
- Crijnen YS
- Kret CN
- Verkoelen JCP
- Tolido AAG
- Thomassen B
- Kersten LP
- de Bruijn MAAM
- Olijslagers SHC
- Mandarakas MR
- Kerstens J
- van Steenhoven RW
- de Vries JM
- Veenbergen S
- Schreurs MWJ
- Neuteboom RF
- Sillevis Smitt PAE
- van den Berg E
- Titulaer MJ
journal: Neurology
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000210109
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- "Anti-N-Methyl-D-Aspartate Receptor Encephalitis/complications, psychology"
- Patient Reported Outcome Measures
- Adult
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Prospective Studies
- Young Adult
- Neuropsychological Tests
- Cognition/physiology
- Recovery of Function
- Adolescent
- Cohort Studies
- Middle Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-Term Cognitive, Functional, and Patient-Reported Outcomes in Patients With Anti-NMDAR Encephalitis.
**Authors:** Brenner J, Ruhe CJ, Kulderij I, Bastiaansen AEM, Crijnen YS, Kret CN, Verkoelen JCP, Tolido AAG, Thomassen B, Kersten LP, de Bruijn MAAM, Olijslagers SHC, Mandarakas MR, Kerstens J, van Steenhoven RW, de Vries JM, Veenbergen S, Schreurs MWJ, Neuteboom RF, Sillevis Smitt PAE, van den Berg E, Titulaer MJ
**Journal:** Neurology (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000210109](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000210109)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2024 Dec 24;103(12):e210109. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000210109.
Epub  2024 Nov 20.

Long-Term Cognitive, Functional, and Patient-Reported Outcomes in Patients With 
Anti-NMDAR Encephalitis.

Brenner J(1), Ruhe CJ(1), Kulderij I(1), Bastiaansen AEM(1), Crijnen YS(1), Kret 
CN(1), Verkoelen JCP(1), Tolido AAG(1), Thomassen B(1), Kersten LP(1), de Bruijn 
MAAM(1), Olijslagers SHC(1), Mandarakas MR(1), Kerstens J(1), van Steenhoven 
RW(1), de Vries JM(1), Veenbergen S(1), Schreurs MWJ(1), Neuteboom RF(1), 
Sillevis Smitt PAE(1), van den Berg E(1), Titulaer MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neurology (J.B., C.J.R., I.K., A.E.M.B., Y.S.C., 
C.N.K., J.C.P.V., A.A.G.T., B.T., L.P.K., M.A.A.M.d.B., M.R.M., J.K., R.W.v.S., 
J.M.d.V., R.F.N., P.A.E.S.S., M.J.T.), Erasmus University Medical Center, 
Rotterdam; Department of Neurology (S.H.C.O.), Amsterdam University Medical 
Center; Department of Immunology (S.V.), Erasmus University Medical Center, 
Rotterdam; Laboratory of Medical Microbiology and Immunology Microvida 
(M.W.J.S.), Tilburg; and Department of Neurology & Alzheimer Center (E.v.d.B.), 
Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Anti-NMDA receptor (anti-NMDAR) encephalitis 
generally manifests in young adults. Although 80%-90% returns to independence, 
the majority experience persistent cognitive and psychosocial difficulties. 
Studies have demonstrated that cognitive recovery may continue for years; the 
temporal trajectory is largely unknown, as are factors influencing 
cognitive/psychosocial recovery. Objectives were to (1) describe the cognitive 
recovery trajectory, (2) assess self-reported outcomes, (3) identify factors 
relating to outcome, and (4) explore the relation between cognitive and 
self-reported outcomes, and participation.
METHODS: We performed a large-scale cross-sectional and prospective cohort 
study. We addressed our nationwide cohort, provided they were (1) older than 16 
years, (2) independent preillness, and (3) able to perform cognitive tests 
and/or self-report. Patients completed Patient-Reported Outcome Measures and 
neuropsychological assessments (memory, language, perception and construction, 
and attention and executive functions), and functional outcomes were established 
(modified Rankin Scale [mRS] score and return-to-work/-education). Outcomes were 
compared with references and between groups based on clinical characteristics 
and functional outcomes (T-tests for normalized data and nonparametric tests for 
patient-reported data). Recovery was visualized by plotting outcomes against 
time-of-assessment.
RESULTS: We included 92 patients (age 29 ± 2 years; 77% female). Cognitive 
scores improved with time-of-assessment, up to 36 months after diagnosis (R = 
0.35, p = 0.022), with the most enhanced improvement in the first 6 months. This 
result could be reproduced in prospective patients (n = 12). Beyond 36 months (n 
= 44), 34% of patients had a persistent impairment (z-score <-1.5 SD) and 65% 
scored below-average (<-1 SD) in 1 or more cognitive domains, despite a 
"favorable" outcome measured by mRS (≤2) in the majority (91%). Most affected 
were memory (mean -0.67 ± 0.89 SD, p = 0.25) and language (-0.75 ± 1.06 SD, p = 
0.23). Self-reported complaints remained in emotional well-being (mean 72 ± 25 
SD vs norm 82 ± 33 SD, p < 0.001), social functioning (73 ± 26 SD vs 84 ± 22 SD, 
p < 0.001), energy levels (57 ± 19 SD vs 69 ± 19 SD, p < 0.001), and quality of 
life (0.85 ± 0.14 SD vs 0.93 ± 0.11 SD, p < 0.001). Many patients did not resume 
school/work (30%) or needed adjustments (18%). Resuming school/work related to 
processing speed (-0.14 ± 0.78 SD vs -0.84 ± 1.05 SD, p = 0.039) and well-being 
(EuroQol 5 Dimensions 5 Levels median 0.90 vs 0.81, p = 0.016).
DISCUSSION: Recovery from anti-NMDAR encephalitis may continue for 3 years, with 
risk of persisting cognitive deficits, notably in memory and language, and 
sequelae in social functioning, energy levels, and well-being. The frequently 
applied outcome measure mRS does not fully capture outcomes. Almost half of 
patients struggled resuming school/work, associated with cognitive deficits and 
well-being.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000210109
PMCID: PMC11627176
PMID: 39566012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J. Brenner was funded by Dioraphte (2001 0403). 
C.J. Ruhe and I. Kulderij report no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. 
A.E.M. Bastiaansen was funded by ZonMw (Memorabel program). Y.S. Crijnen has 
received funds from the Dutch Epilepsy Foundation (NEF 19-08). C.N. Kret, J.C.P. 
Verkoelen, A.A.G. Tolido, B. Thomassen, and L.P. Kersten report no disclosures 
relevant to the manuscript. M.A.A.M. de Bruijn has received funds from the Dutch 
Epilepsy Foundation (NEF 14-19). S.H.C. Olijslagers and M.R. Mandarakas report 
no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. J. Kerstens was funded by the Erasmus 
Trust Fund. R.W. van Steenhoven received funding from Alzheimer Nederland, and 
the Autoimmune Encephalitis Alliance. J.M. de Vries received funding from the 
Autoimmune Encephalitis Alliance. S. Veenbergen, M.W.J. Schreurs, and R.F. 
Neuteboom report no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. P.A.E. Sillevis 
Smitt holds a patent for the detection of anti-DNER and received research 
support from Euroimmun. E. van den Berg reports no disclosures relevant to the 
manuscript. M.J. Titulaer has received funds for serving on a scientific 
advisory board of AmGen and UCB, received funds from Dioraphte (2001 0403), 
filed a patent for methods for typing neurologic disorders and cancer, and 
devices for use therein, received research funds for consultation at Guidepoint 
Global LLC, an unrestricted research grant from CSL Behring, and an unrestricted 
research grant from Euroimmun, was supported by an Interlaken Leadership Award 
and an E-RARE3 grant (UltraAIE). Go to Neurology.org/N for full disclosures.