---
reference_id: PMID:40178655
title: "Prevalence and symptoms of incidental meningiomas: a population-based study."
authors:
- de Dios E
- Näslund O
- Choudhry M
- Berglund M
- Skoglund T
- Sarovic D
- Rydén L
- Kern S
- Skoog I
- Thurin E
journal: Acta Neurochir (Wien)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s00701-025-06506-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence and symptoms of incidental meningiomas: a population-based study.
**Authors:** de Dios E, Näslund O, Choudhry M, Berglund M, Skoglund T, Sarovic D, Rydén L, Kern S, Skoog I, Thurin E
**Journal:** Acta Neurochir (Wien) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00701-025-06506-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00701-025-06506-7)

## Content

1. Acta Neurochir (Wien). 2025 Apr 3;167(1):98. doi: 10.1007/s00701-025-06506-7.

Prevalence and symptoms of incidental meningiomas: a population-based study.

de Dios E(1)(2), Näslund O(3)(4), Choudhry M(5), Berglund M(5), Skoglund 
T(3)(6), Sarovic D(5)(7)(8), Rydén L(9), Kern S(9)(10), Skoog I(9), Thurin 
E(5)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, 
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. eddie.dedios@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Radiology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Region Västra 
Götaland, Gothenburg, Sweden. eddie.dedios@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)Department of General Surgery, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Region Västra 
Götaland, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(5)Department of Radiology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Region Västra 
Götaland, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(6)Department of Neurosurgery, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Region Västra 
Götaland, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(7)Department of Radiology, Harvard Medical School, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(8)Athinoula a. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Department of Radiology, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(9)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, Sahlgrenska Academy, Center for Ageing and Health (AGECAP) at the 
University of Gothenburg, Mölndal, Sweden.
(10)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Region Västra Götaland, Sahlgrenska 
University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Meningioma is the most common intracranial primary neoplasm and is 
often discovered accidentally. Common and non-specific symptoms such as headache 
and dizziness may be wrongfully attributed to meningiomas, which can lead to 
unnecessary surgery and anxiety for the patient. Understanding the prevalence of 
meningioma is therefore pivotal to assess the burden of this disease and 
determine indications for surgery.
METHOD: Participants in this study were recruited through "The Gothenburg H70 
Birth cohort study" wherein the health of 70-year-olds is examined. Clinical 
characteristics and symptoms such as sex, body mass index, history of smoking, 
previous head trauma, previous seizure, headache, dizziness, dementia, and life 
quality were evaluated. The associations between these variables and the 
presence of meningioma on MRI were determined.
RESULTS: MRI examinations were collected from 792 participants (415 [52.4%] 
women) in "The Gothenburg H70 Birth cohort study". The prevalence of meningioma 
was 1.8% (n = 14). Meningiomas were more common in women (n = 12) than men, but 
no other significant differences were observed between participants with and 
without meningiomas.
CONCLUSIONS: Meningiomas are common among older women, yet often asymptomatic. 
Caution should be exercised when attributing symptoms to incidentally discovered 
small meningiomas, and a conservative approach to treatment may be warranted in 
these cases.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00701-025-06506-7
PMCID: PMC11968542
PMID: 40178655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethical approval: This study was 
conducted according to the Helsinki Declaration and approved by the Regional 
Ethical Review Board in Gothenburg (approval numbers: 869–13, T076-14, T166-14, 
976–13, 127–14, T936-15, 006–14, T703-14, 006–14, T201-17, T915-14, 959–15, 
T139-15), and by the Radiation Protection Committee (approval number: 13–64). 
Study participants provided written informed consent prior to any examinations 
related to the study. If a participant was unable to provide consent, for 
instance due to dementia, consent was obtained from a close relative. Competing 
interests: The authors declare no competing interests. Human ethics and consent 
to participate declarations: This study was conducted according to the Helsinki 
Declaration and approved by the Regional Ethical Review Board in Gothenburg 
(approval numbers: 869–13, T076-14, T166-14, 976–13, 127–14, T936-15, 006–14, 
T703-14, 006–14, T201-17, T915-14, 959–15, T139-15), and by the Radiation 
Protection Committee (approval number: 13–64). Study participants provided 
written informed consent prior to any examinations related to the study. If a 
participant was unable to provide consent, for instance due to dementia, consent 
was obtained from a close relative.