---
reference_id: "PMID:28793284"
title: "Growth Hormone Therapy in Children with Kabuki Syndrome: 1-year Treatment Results."
authors:
- Schott DA
- Gerver WJM
- Stumpel CTRM
journal: Horm Res Paediatr
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1159/000479368
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/drug therapy, genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- "Dwarfism, Pituitary/drug therapy, genetics"
- Face/abnormalities
- Female
- "Hematologic Diseases/drug therapy, genetics"
- Histone Demethylases/genetics
- Hormone Replacement Therapy
- Human Growth Hormone/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Proteins/genetics
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Treatment Outcome
- "Vestibular Diseases/drug therapy, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Growth Hormone Therapy in Children with Kabuki Syndrome: 1-year Treatment Results.
**Authors:** Schott DA, Gerver WJM, Stumpel CTRM
**Journal:** Horm Res Paediatr (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000479368](https://doi.org/10.1159/000479368)

## Content

1. Horm Res Paediatr. 2017;88(3-4):258-264. doi: 10.1159/000479368. Epub 2017 Aug
 9.

Growth Hormone Therapy in Children with Kabuki Syndrome: 1-year Treatment
Results.

Schott DA(1), Gerver WJM(2), Stumpel CTRM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Zuyderland Medical Centre, Heerlen, the
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Paediatrics Endocrinology, Maastricht UMC+, Maastricht, the
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Clinical Genetics and GROW - School for Oncology and
Developmental Biology, Maastricht UMC+, Maastricht, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a rare genetic malformation syndrome,
resulting in characteristic features such as short stature. We investigate
whether growth hormone (GH) treatment increases linear height and influences
body proportions in KS children.
METHODS: In this prospective study, 18 genetically confirmed prepubertal KS
children (9 females and 9 males) aged from 3.8 to 10.1 years (mean 6.8 ± 2.1
years) were treated with recombinant human GH (rhGH) for 1 year. Calculations
for height, height velocity, BMI, sitting height, and subischial leg length were
made. Bone age, insulin-like growth factor (IGF-I), and IGF binding protein 3
(IGFBP-3) were also measured.
RESULTS: This study showed an increase in height standard deviation score (SDS)
for the whole group from -2.40 to -1.69 (p < 0.05) after 1 year of rhGH
treatment. The change in height SDS within 1 year was >0.7 SDS for 10 subjects
and >0.5 SDS for 3 subjects. The mean IGF-I SDS at the start of the study was
-0.70 (±1.07), which increased after 12 months to 1.41 (±0.91) (p < 0.05). KS
children who received rhGH at a younger age displayed significantly greater
increases in height than those who started when they were older. The same was
true for both gene mutation KMT2D versus KDM6A and for GH deficiency versus
non-GH deficiency KS children (p < 0.05). Throughout the course of rhGH
treatment, the subjects' body proportions remained normal.
CONCLUSIONS: All participants experienced catch-up growth during the year of
rhGH treatment, but without an influence on body proportions.

© 2017 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000479368
PMID: 28793284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
