---
reference_id: "PMID:32481620"
title: "TRPV4: A Physio and Pathophysiologically Significant Ion Channel."
authors:
- Rosenbaum T
- Benítez-Angeles M
- Sánchez-Hernández R
- Morales-Lázaro SL
- Hiriart M
- Morales-Buenrostro LE
- Torres-Quiroz F
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3390/ijms21113837
keywords:
- Animals
- Calcium/metabolism
- Cattle
- "Endothelium, Vascular/metabolism"
- Humans
- Kidney/metabolism
- Mice
- Microcirculation
- Pain/metabolism
- Permeability
- Prognosis
- Protein Domains
- Rats
- Retinal Vessels
- Skin/metabolism
- TRPV Cation Channels/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TRPV4: A Physio and Pathophysiologically Significant Ion Channel.
**Authors:** Rosenbaum T, Benítez-Angeles M, Sánchez-Hernández R, Morales-Lázaro SL, Hiriart M, Morales-Buenrostro LE, Torres-Quiroz F
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms21113837](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21113837)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 May 28;21(11):3837. doi: 10.3390/ijms21113837.

TRPV4: A Physio and Pathophysiologically Significant Ion Channel.

Rosenbaum T(1), Benítez-Angeles M(1), Sánchez-Hernández R(1), Morales-Lázaro 
SL(1), Hiriart M(1), Morales-Buenrostro LE(2), Torres-Quiroz F(3).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Neurociencia Cognitiva, División Neurociencias, Instituto de 
Fisiología Celular, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City 04510, 
Mexico.
(2)Departamento de Nefrología y Metabolismo Mineral, Instituto Nacional de 
Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, Mexico City 14080, Mexico.
(3)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Estructural, División Investigación 
Básica, Instituto de Fisiología Celular, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de 
México, Mexico City 04510, Mexico.

Transient Receptor Potential (TRP) channels are a family of ion channels whose 
members are distributed among all kinds of animals, from invertebrates to 
vertebrates. The importance of these molecules is exemplified by the variety of 
physiological roles they play. Perhaps, the most extensively studied member of 
this family is the TRPV1 ion channel; nonetheless, the activity of TRPV4 has 
been associated to several physio and pathophysiological processes, and its 
dysfunction can lead to severe consequences. Several lines of evidence derived 
from animal models and even clinical trials in humans highlight TRPV4 as a 
therapeutic target and as a protein that will receive even more attention in the 
near future, as will be reviewed here.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21113837
PMCID: PMC7312103
PMID: 32481620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.