---
reference_id: "PMID:23159715"
title: Epidemiology of dementias and Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Sosa-Ortiz AL
- Acosta-Castillo I
- Prince MJ
journal: Arch Med Res
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2012.11.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of dementias and Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Sosa-Ortiz AL, Acosta-Castillo I, Prince MJ
**Journal:** Arch Med Res (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.arcmed.2012.11.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arcmed.2012.11.003)

## Content

1. Arch Med Res. 2012 Nov;43(8):600-8. doi: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2012.11.003. Epub
2012  Nov 15.

Epidemiology of dementias and Alzheimer's disease.

Sosa-Ortiz AL(1), Acosta-Castillo I, Prince MJ.

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Demencias, Instituto Nacional de Neurología y Neurocirugía, 
Mexico, D.F., México. drasosa@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Global population aging has been one of the defining 
processes of the twentieth century, with profound economic, political and social 
consequences. It is driving the current epidemic of dementia, both in terms of 
its extent and global distribution. The aim of the study was to summarize recent 
findings relevant to the epidemiological knowledge of dementia and Alzheimer's 
disease (AD).
METHODS: A narrative mini-review of the literature relevant to the epidemiology 
of dementia and AD is presented, summarizing important findings and analyzing 
their implications.
RESULTS: It was estimated that in 2010 there were 36.5 million people living 
with dementia, with 7.7 million new cases yearly and a new case of dementia 
every 4 sec. The number of persons living with dementia will nearly double every 
20 years. Most of these persons will be living in low- and middle-income 
countries (LMIC).
CONCLUSIONS: There are a substantial number of people with dementia worldwide 
and these numbers will continue to increase mainly in LMIC, producing a wide 
range of impacts. It is important to make dementia a national public health and 
social care priority worldwide. Recent reviews and meta-analyses have failed to 
clearly identify a singular causal or preventive pathway for AD that seems to be 
a multicausal, heterogeneous and age-related condition.

Copyright © 2012 IMSS. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2012.11.003
PMID: 23159715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]