---
reference_id: "PMID:20643162"
title: Real-time PCR assays for the specific detection of monkeypox virus West African and Congo Basin strain DNA.
authors:
- Li Y
- Zhao H
- Wilkins K
- Hughes C
- Damon IK
journal: J Virol Methods
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2010.07.012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Real-time PCR assays for the specific detection of monkeypox virus West African and Congo Basin strain DNA.
**Authors:** Li Y, Zhao H, Wilkins K, Hughes C, Damon IK
**Journal:** J Virol Methods (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jviromet.2010.07.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jviromet.2010.07.012)

## Content

1. J Virol Methods. 2010 Oct;169(1):223-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2010.07.012. 
Epub 2010 Jul 17.

Real-time PCR assays for the specific detection of monkeypox virus West African 
and Congo Basin strain DNA.

Li Y(1), Zhao H, Wilkins K, Hughes C, Damon IK.

Author information:
(1)Poxvirus and Rabies Branch, Division of High-Consequence Pathogens and 
Pathology (Proposed), National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious 
Diseases (Proposed), Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA 
30333, United States. yuli@cdc.gov

Orthopoxvirus monkeypox (MPXV) forms two distinct clades: the MPXV Congo Basin 
clade viruses are endemic in the Congo Basin, human illness typically presents 
with symptoms similar to discrete, ordinary smallpox and has a case fatality 
rate of approximately 10% in unvaccinated populations; the MPXV West African 
clade viruses have been isolated in West Africa and appear to cause a less 
severe, and less inter-human transmissible disease. Recently, monkeypox 
outbreaks were reported in US and Sudan caused by MPXV West African and Congo 
Basin strains respectively. These events demonstrated the ability and trend of 
the virus to exploit new hosts and emerge globally; it also emphasizes the need 
for the diagnosis of MPXV, especially the ability to distinguish between Congo 
Basin and West African monkeypox strains. In this study, three new real-time PCR 
assays based on TaqMan probe technology were reported: the MPXV West African 
specific, Congo Basin strain specific and MPXV generic assays. The new assays 
demonstrated good specificity and sensitivity in the validation study with 
multiple platforms and various PCR reagent kits, and will improve the rapid 
detection and differentiation of monkeypox infections from other rash illness.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2010.07.012
PMCID: PMC9628942
PMID: 20643162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]