---
reference_id: "PMID:34811961"
title: Real-world prognostic factors for survival among treated patients with metastatic pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
authors:
- Yu KH
- Ozer M
- Cockrum P
- Surinach A
- Wang S
- Chu BC
journal: Cancer Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/cam4.4415
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma/mortality, pathology"
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Carcinoma, Pancreatic Ductal/mortality, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Metastasis
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- Survival Analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Real-world prognostic factors for survival among treated patients with metastatic pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
**Authors:** Yu KH, Ozer M, Cockrum P, Surinach A, Wang S, Chu BC
**Journal:** Cancer Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cam4.4415](https://doi.org/10.1002/cam4.4415)

## Content

1. Cancer Med. 2021 Dec;10(24):8934-8943. doi: 10.1002/cam4.4415. Epub 2021 Nov
22.

Real-world prognostic factors for survival among treated patients with 
metastatic pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.

Yu KH(1), Ozer M(2), Cockrum P(3), Surinach A(4), Wang S(4), Chu BC(4).

Author information:
(1)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and Weill Cornell Medical College, New 
York, New York, USA.
(2)Capital Health Medical Center, Trenton, New Jersey, USA.
(3)Ipsen, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Genesis Research, Hoboken, New Jersey, USA.

BACKGROUND: Many real-world studies of patients with metastatic pancreatic 
ductal adenocarcinoma (mPDAC) are restricted to single centers, limiting the 
generalizability of their insights. This study aimed to identify important 
population-based predictors for survival in patients diagnosed with mPDAC in a 
broader setting.
METHODS: Data between 1 January 2017 and 31 December 2019 were extracted from 
the Flatiron Health EHR database. Treatment-specific predictive models were 
generated for patients treated with first-line gemcitabine+nab-paclitaxel (GNP), 
FOLFIRINOX, gemcitabine monotherapy (gem-mono), and second-line liposomal 
irinotecan-based regimens. The holdout method was used for cross-validation. Age 
at diagnosis, sex, BMI, smoking status, and ECOG performance score were included 
in all models with additional demographic, clinical characteristics, and 
hematological function assessed for inclusion.
RESULTS: Of the 3625 patients, 43% received GNP, 26% received FOLFIRINOX, 7% 
received gem-mono, and 23% received other regimens; 40% (n = 1448) advanced to 
the second line. Among all first-line patients, the following were included in 
the final model: prior surgery, white blood cell (WBC) counts, serum albumin 
(SA), liver function tests (LFTs), serum bilirubin, serum carbohydrate antigen 
19-9, and ascites. Models for patients receiving specific therapies differed 
from the overall model, GNP (ascites removed), FOLFIRINOX (stage at initial 
diagnosis added), and gem-mono (LFTs omitted). Alkaline phosphatase (ALP), SA, 
and WBC counts were important predictors of survival among patients treated with 
second-line liposomal irinotecan. Across all regimens, the strongest predictors 
of survival were ECOG score, SA, and ALP.
CONCLUSIONS: In this real-world study of patients with mPDAC, important 
population prognostic factors of survival were identified in a large cohort of 
patients receiving systemic treatment.

© 2021 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.4415
PMCID: PMC8683530
PMID: 34811961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: KHY receives research funding from Ipsen and 
Bristol Myers Squibb; MO reports no conflict of interest; PC is an employee and 
has stock in Ipsen; AS and SW are employees of Genesis Research which receives 
research funding from Ipsen; BCC was an employee of Genesis Research at the time 
of the study.