---
reference_id: "PMID:7795615"
title: "Anti-beta 2-glycoprotein I antibodies: a marker of antiphospholipid syndrome?"
authors:
- Balestrieri G
- Tincani A
- Spatola L
- Allegri F
- Prati E
- Cattaneo R
- Valesini G
- Del Papa N
- Meroni P
journal: Lupus
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1177/096120339500400208
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anti-beta 2-glycoprotein I antibodies: a marker of antiphospholipid syndrome?
**Authors:** Balestrieri G, Tincani A, Spatola L, Allegri F, Prati E, Cattaneo R, Valesini G, Del Papa N, Meroni P
**Journal:** Lupus (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1177/096120339500400208](https://doi.org/10.1177/096120339500400208)

## Content

1. Lupus. 1995 Apr;4(2):122-30. doi: 10.1177/096120339500400208.

Anti-beta 2-glycoprotein I antibodies: a marker of antiphospholipid syndrome?

Balestrieri G(1), Tincani A, Spatola L, Allegri F, Prati E, Cattaneo R, Valesini 
G, Del Papa N, Meroni P.

Author information:
(1)Servizio di Immunologia Clinica, Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy.

Anticardiolipin (aCL) and anti-beta 2-glycoprotein I(anti beta 2GPI) antibodies 
have been shown in animal models as not cross-reacting antibody populations. 
This observation prompted us to prove if anti-beta 2GPI exist in human sera by 
using a reliable method and then to investigate if these are independent from 
aCl antibodies. We have developed a new ELISA for the detection of anti-beta 
2GPI antibodies employing the coating of the protein in carbonate buffer to 
irradiated microtitre plates and the filtration of serum samples, that makes 
irrelevant the binding to the uncoated wells. IgG F(ab)2 fragments from IgG 
positive sera were shown bind beta 2GPI, providing that the binding was a 
specific antibody binding, mediated by the antigen binding site of the antibody 
molecule: moreover the antibodies were not able to differentiate native and 
delipidated beta 2GPI coated plates, making a possible role of a phospholipid 
contaminant unlikely. On the other hand, the phosphorus content of native as 
well as delipitated beta 2GPI was undetectable. IgG, but not IgM, anti-beta 2GPI 
antibodies were classically inhibited by the addition of soluble beta 2GPI, 
while cardiolipin liposomes appear to modify the reaction in a completely 
different way, possibly by the described interaction between cardiolipin and 
beta 2GPI.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1177/096120339500400208
PMID: 7795615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]