---
reference_id: "PMID:23622387"
title: Disorders of pyruvate metabolism.
authors:
- De Meirleir L
journal: Handb Clin Neurol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-59565-2.00034-4
keywords:
- "Brain Diseases, Metabolic, Inborn/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Pyruvate Carboxylase/genetics, metabolism"
- "Pyruvate Carboxylase Deficiency Disease/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- "Pyruvate Dehydrogenase (Lipoamide)/genetics, metabolism"
- Pyruvic Acid/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disorders of pyruvate metabolism.
**Authors:** De Meirleir L
**Journal:** Handb Clin Neurol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/B978-0-444-59565-2.00034-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-59565-2.00034-4)

## Content

1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2013;113:1667-73. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-59565-2.00034-4.

Disorders of pyruvate metabolism.

De Meirleir L(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Neurology and Metabolism, Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel,
Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address: linda.demeirleir@uzbrussel.be.

Pyruvate dehydrogenase and pyruvate carboxylase deficiency are the most common
disorders in pyruvate metabolism. Diagnosis is made by enzymatic and DNA
analysis after basic biochemical tests in plasma, urine, and CSF. Pyruvate
dehydrogenase has three main subunits, an additional E3-binding protein and two
complex regulatory enzymes. Most frequent are deficiencies in PDH-E1α. There is
a spectrum of clinical presentations in E1α deficiency, ranging in boys from
severe neonatal lactic acidosis, Leigh encephalopathy, to later onset of
neurological disease such as intermittent ataxia or dystonia. Females tend to
have a more uniform presentation resembling nonprogressive cerebral palsy.
Neuroradiological abnormalities such as corpus callosum agenesis are seen more
frequently in girls, basal ganglia and midbrain disturbances in boys.
Deficiencies in the other subunits have also been described, but in a smaller
number of patients. Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency has three clinical
phenotypes. The infantile type is characterized mainly by severe developmental
delay, failure to thrive, and seizures. The second type is characterized by
neonatal onset of severe lactic acidosis with rigidity and hypokinesia. A third
form is rarer with intermittent episodes of lactic acidosis and ketoacidosis.
Neuroradiological findings such as cystic periventricular leukomalacia have been
described.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-444-59565-2.00034-4
PMID: 23622387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
