---
reference_id: "PMID:30480729"
title: "Effect of Lanadelumab Compared With Placebo on Prevention of Hereditary Angioedema Attacks: A Randomized Clinical Trial."
authors:
- Banerji A
- Riedl MA
- Bernstein JA
- Cicardi M
- Longhurst HJ
- Zuraw BL
- Busse PJ
- Anderson J
- Magerl M
- Martinez-Saguer I
- Davis-Lorton M
- Zanichelli A
- Li HH
- Craig T
- Jacobs J
- Johnston DT
- Shapiro R
- Yang WH
- Lumry WR
- Manning ME
- Schwartz LB
- Shennak M
- Soteres D
- Zaragoza-Urdaz RH
- Gierer S
- Smith AM
- Tachdjian R
- Wedner HJ
- Hebert J
- Rehman SM
- Staubach P
- Schranz J
- Baptista J
- Nothaft W
- Maurer M
- HELP Investigators
journal: JAMA
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1001/jama.2018.16773
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized"
- Child
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- "Hereditary Angioedema Types I and II/classification, prevention & control"
- Humans
- "Injections, Subcutaneous/adverse effects"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Plasma Kallikrein/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Quality of Life
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of Lanadelumab Compared With Placebo on Prevention of Hereditary Angioedema Attacks: A Randomized Clinical Trial.
**Authors:** Banerji A, Riedl MA, Bernstein JA, Cicardi M, Longhurst HJ, Zuraw BL, Busse PJ, Anderson J, Magerl M, Martinez-Saguer I, Davis-Lorton M, Zanichelli A, Li HH, Craig T, Jacobs J, Johnston DT, Shapiro R, Yang WH, Lumry WR, Manning ME, Schwartz LB, Shennak M, Soteres D, Zaragoza-Urdaz RH, Gierer S, Smith AM, Tachdjian R, Wedner HJ, Hebert J, Rehman SM, Staubach P, Schranz J, Baptista J, Nothaft W, Maurer M, HELP Investigators
**Journal:** JAMA (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.2018.16773](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2018.16773)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2018 Nov 27;320(20):2108-2121. doi: 10.1001/jama.2018.16773.

Effect of Lanadelumab Compared With Placebo on Prevention of Hereditary
Angioedema Attacks: A Randomized Clinical Trial.

Banerji A(1), Riedl MA(2), Bernstein JA(3), Cicardi M(4), Longhurst HJ(5), Zuraw
BL(2), Busse PJ(6), Anderson J(7), Magerl M(8), Martinez-Saguer I(9),
Davis-Lorton M(10), Zanichelli A(4), Li HH(11), Craig T(12), Jacobs J(13),
Johnston DT(14), Shapiro R(15), Yang WH(16), Lumry WR(17), Manning ME(18),
Schwartz LB(19), Shennak M(20), Soteres D(21), Zaragoza-Urdaz RH(22), Gierer
S(23), Smith AM(24), Tachdjian R(25), Wedner HJ(26), Hebert J(27), Rehman
SM(28), Staubach P(29), Schranz J(30), Baptista J(30), Nothaft W(30), Maurer
M(8); HELP Investigators.

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and Immunology, Department of Medicine,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy & Immunology, University of California, San
Diego.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine/Allergy Section Cincinnati, University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(4)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Luigi Sacco, University of
Milan, ASST Fatebenefratelli Sacco, Milan, Italy.
(5)Barts Health NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York.
(7)Clinical Research Center of Alabama, Birmingham.
(8)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Dermatological Allergology,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(9)Haemophilia Centre Rhine Main, Mörfelden-Walldorf, Germany.
(10)Rheumatology Allergy and Immunology, NYU Winthrop Hospital, Mineola, New
York.
(11)Institute for Asthma and Allergy, Chevy Chase, Maryland.
(12)Department of Medicine and Pediatrics, Pennsylvania State University,
Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology, Hershey.
(13)Allergy and Asthma Clinical Research, Walnut Creek, California.
(14)Clinical Research of Charlotte, Charlotte, North Carolina.
(15)Immunology Department, Midwest Immunology Clinic, Plymouth, Minnesota.
(16)Ottawa Allergy Research Corporation and University of Ottawa Medical School,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(17)Allergy Asthma Research Associates Research Center, Dallas, Texas.
(18)Medical Research of Arizona, Scottsdale.
(19)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond.
(20)Triumpharma, Amman, Jordan.
(21)Asthma and Allergy Associates PC, Colorado Springs, Colorado.
(22)University of Puerto Rico School of Medicine, San Juan.
(23)Division of Allergy, Clinical Immunology & Rheumatology, University of
Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City.
(24)Allergy Associates of Utah, Murray.
(25)AIRE Medical of Los Angeles, University of California, Los Angeles.
(26)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Washington University, St Louis,
Missouri.
(27)Centre de Recherche Appliqué en Allergie de Québec, Quebec, Canada.
(28)Toledo Institute of Clinical Research, Toledo, Ohio.
(29)Department of Dermatology, University Medicine Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
(30)Shire, Lexington, Massachusetts.

Erratum in
    JAMA. 2019 Apr 23;321(16):1636. doi: 10.1001/jama.2019.4254.

IMPORTANCE: Current treatments for long-term prophylaxis in hereditary
angioedema have limitations.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the efficacy of lanadelumab, a fully human monoclonal
antibody that selectively inhibits active plasma kallikrein, in preventing
hereditary angioedema attacks.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Phase 3, randomized, double-blind,
parallel-group, placebo-controlled trial conducted at 41 sites in Canada,
Europe, Jordan, and the United States. Patients were randomized between March 3,
2016, and September 9, 2016; last day of follow-up was April 13, 2017.
Randomization was 2:1 lanadelumab to placebo; patients assigned to lanadelumab
were further randomized 1:1:1 to 1 of the 3 dose regimens. Patients 12 years or
older with hereditary angioedema type I or II underwent a 4-week run-in period
and those with 1 or more hereditary angioedema attacks during run-in were
randomized.
INTERVENTIONS: Twenty-six-week treatment with subcutaneous lanadelumab 150 mg
every 4 weeks (n = 28), 300 mg every 4 weeks (n = 29), 300 mg every 2 weeks
(n = 27), or placebo (n = 41). All patients received injections every 2 weeks,
with those in the every-4-week group receiving placebo in between active
treatments.
MAIN OUTCOME AND MEASURES: Primary efficacy end point was the number of
investigator-confirmed attacks of hereditary angioedema over the treatment
period.
RESULTS: Among 125 patients randomized (mean age, 40.7 years [SD, 14.7 years];
88 females [70.4%]; 113 white [90.4%]), 113 (90.4%) completed the study. During
the run-in period, the mean number of hereditary angioedema attacks per month in
the placebo group was 4.0; for the lanadelumab groups, 3.2 for the every-4-week
150-mg group; 3.7 for the every-4-week 300-mg group; and 3.5 for the
every-2-week 300-mg group. During the treatment period, the mean number of
attacks per month for the placebo group was 1.97; for the lanadelumab groups,
0.48 for the every-4-week 150-mg group; 0.53 for the every-4-week 300-mg group;
and 0.26 for the every-2-week 300-mg group. Compared with placebo, the mean
differences in the attack rate per month were -1.49 (95% CI, -1.90 to -1.08;
P < .001); -1.44 (95% CI, -1.84 to -1.04; P < .001); and -1.71 (95% CI, -2.09 to
-1.33; P < .001). The most commonly occurring adverse events with greater
frequency in the lanadelumab treatment groups were injection site reactions
(34.1% placebo, 52.4% lanadelumab) and dizziness (0% placebo, 6.0% lanadelumab).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among patients with hereditary angioedema type I or
II, treatment with subcutaneous lanadelumab for 26 weeks significantly reduced
the attack rate compared with placebo. These findings support the use of
lanadelumab as a prophylactic therapy for hereditary angioedema. Further
research is needed to determine long-term safety and efficacy.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: EudraCT Identifier: 2015-003943-20; ClinicalTrials.gov
Identifier: NCT02586805.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2018.16773
PMCID: PMC6583584
PMID: 30480729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Banerji
reports grants from Shire, and being on advisory boards for Alnylam, BioCryst,
CSL Behring, Pharming, and Shire. Dr Riedl reports grants, scientific consulting
fees, and speaking fees to his institution from BioCryst, CSL Behring, Pharming,
and Shire; and scientific consulting fees to his institution from Adverum,
Alnylam, Ionis, and Kalvista. Dr Bernstein reports grants and personal fees from
CSL Behring, Pharming, and Shire; and personal fees from BioCryst. Dr Cicardi
reports grants, membership on advisory boards, and speaker fees from Pharming
and Shire; and advisory boards and speaker fees from Adverum, BioCryst, and CSL
Behring. Dr Longhurst reports personal fees for consulting and travel support
for scientific meetings from Shire; personal fees and nonfinancial and other
support from BioCryst and CSL Behring; other support from Pharming; and personal
fees from Kalvista. Dr Zuraw reports personal fees for consultations from
Adverum, BioCryst, CSL Behring, and Shire; chair, advisory board membership, and
grants from the US Hereditary Angioedema Association; and adjudication board
membership with Genentech, Novartis, and Sanofi. Dr Busse reports consulting and
research fees from Pharming, and Shire; consulting fees from CSL Behring, Global
Life Sciences, Pearl Therapeutics, and Teva; and medico-legal fees support from
the Law Offices of Victoria Broussard. Dr Anderson reports personal fees and
other support for clinical research and consultation from CSL Behring and Shire;
personal fees and other support for consultation from Pharming; and clinical
research fees from BioCryst. Dr Magerl reports clinical research fees, personal
fees, and nonfinancial support for consultations from Shire; and personal fees
and nonfinancial support for consultations from BioCryst, CSL Behring, and
Pharming. Dr Martinez-Saguer reports honoraria, research funding, travel grants
from, serving as a consultant for, and being on the advisory boards of BioCryst,
CSL Behring, Pharming, and Shire. Dr Davis-Lorton reports being a principal
investigator for Novartis and Shire; advisory boards for CSL Behring, Pharming,
and Shire; and speaker bureaus for CSL Behring, Pharming, and Shire. Dr Li
reports grants, personal fees, and nonfinancial support from CSL Behring,
Pharming, and Shire. Dr Craig reports grants and personal fees for
consultations, research, and speaking from CSL Behring and Shire; grants and
personal fees for speaking from Grifols; grants and personal fees for research
and consultations from BioCryst; and advisory medical board membership for the
US Hereditary Angioedema Association. Dr Jacobs reports grants and personal fees
from CSL Behring and Shire; and personal fees from Pharming. Dr Johnston reports
personal fees for consultations and speaking from CSL Behring and Shire; and
consulting fees from BioCryst and Pharming. Dr Shapiro reports personal fees for
clinical research and speaking from Shire and research support from Dyax and
BioCryst. Dr Yang reports being a consultant and a member of the advisory board
for CSL Behring and Shire; an unrestrictive educational grants from CSL Behring,
Novartis, and Shire; and research grants from Aimmune, AstraZeneca, BioCryst,
CSL Behring, DBV Technologies, Dyax/Shire, Galderma, Genentech/Roche,
GlaxoSmithKline, Merck, Pfizer, Pharming, Sanofi-Genzyme, and Shire; and
membership on the Canadian Hereditary Networks Guideline Publication Committee,
and medical advisor to Hereditary Angioedema Canada. Dr Lumry reports grants
from BioCryst, CSL Behring, Pharming, and Shire; consulting fees to his
institution from Adverum, BioCryst, CSL Behring, Pharming, and Shire; travel
support from CSL Behring and Shire; fees to his institution for being on the
advisory board for BioCryst, speakers bureau fees to his institution from Alk,
Genentech, and Stallergenes/Geer; manuscript preparation fees to his institution
from Pharmacy Times; development of educational presentations to his institution
from Medscape/WebMD; and medical advisory board payment to his institution from
the US Hereditary Angioedema Association. Dr Manning reports grants and personal
fees from CSL Behring and Shire; advisory board member for Shire; grants from
Dyax; speaker bureau fees from Pharming; and personal fees and advisory board
member for Salix. Dr Schwartz reports consulting fees from Dyax, Helix,
Sanofi-Aventis, and ViroPharma; research support from CSL Behring, Dyax, and
Merck; royalties from Virginia Commonwealth University Innovation Gateway; and
payment to participate in the “Atopic Dermatitis in America” study from the
Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America. Dr Soteres reports other income from
Shire; being an investigator in the conduct of the study; and personal fees for
consulting, advisory boards, and speaking from Shire. Dr Zaragoza-Urdaz reports
consulting fees from BioCryst, Shire, and ViroPharma; and lecture fees from
Baxter, Dyax, Pharming, Shire, Teva, and ViroPharma. Dr Gierer reports research
grants from Dyax, Genentech/Novartis, and Shire. Dr Smith reports investigator
fees from Shire. Dr Tachdjian reports advisory board and speaking honoraria from
Shire, CSL Behring, and Pharming; and research grants from Shire and CSL
Behring. Dr Wedner reports grants from Shire. Dr Hebert reports investigator
fees from and being on an advisory board of Shire and consultant fees from
GlaxoSmithKline, Merck, Novartis, Teva, Shire, CSL Behring, and Sanofi. Dr
Staubach reports fees for advisory board membership from AbbVie, Beiersdorf,
Celgene, CSL Behring, Genentech, Janssen, Leti, MSD, Novartis, Octapharma,
Sanofi, Shire, Sobi, and UCB; consulting fees from CSL Behring; grants from
Novartis and Shire; speaker fees from AbbVie, Astellas, CSL Behring, Janssen,
Leo, Leti, Lilly, MSD, Pfleger, Novartis, and Shire; and travel support from CSL
Behring, Janssen, MSD, Novartis, and Pfizer. Dr Schranz reports being a
full-time employee of and owning stock/options in Shire. Ms Baptista reports
being a full-time employee of and owning stock and options in Shire. Dr Nothaft
reports being a full-time employee of and owning stock and options in Shire. Dr
Maurer reports grants and personal fees for consultations and speaking from
Shire; and grants and personal fees from BioCryst, Pharming, and Shire. No other
disclosures were reported.
