---
reference_id: "PMID:37402894"
title: "Proton beam radiation therapy for vestibular schwannomas-tumor control and hearing preservation rates: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Santacroce A
- Trandafirescu MF
- Levivier M
- Peters D
- Fürweger C
- Toma-Dasu I
- George M
- Daniel RT
- Maire R
- Nakamura M
- Faouzi M
- Schiappacasse L
- Dasu A
- Tuleasca C
journal: Neurosurg Rev
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10143-023-02060-x
keywords:
- Humans
- "Neuroma, Acoustic/radiotherapy, surgery, pathology"
- Proton Therapy
- Hearing
- Cranial Nerves
- Facial Nerve/pathology
- Radiosurgery/methods
- Treatment Outcome
- Follow-Up Studies
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Proton beam radiation therapy for vestibular schwannomas-tumor control and hearing preservation rates: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Santacroce A, Trandafirescu MF, Levivier M, Peters D, Fürweger C, Toma-Dasu I, George M, Daniel RT, Maire R, Nakamura M, Faouzi M, Schiappacasse L, Dasu A, Tuleasca C
**Journal:** Neurosurg Rev (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10143-023-02060-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10143-023-02060-x)

## Content

1. Neurosurg Rev. 2023 Jul 4;46(1):163. doi: 10.1007/s10143-023-02060-x.

Proton beam radiation therapy for vestibular schwannomas-tumor control and 
hearing preservation rates: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Santacroce A(1)(2)(3), Trandafirescu MF(4), Levivier M(5)(6), Peters D(5)(6), 
Fürweger C(1), Toma-Dasu I(7)(8), George M(9), Daniel RT(5)(6), Maire R(9), 
Nakamura M(10)(11), Faouzi M(12), Schiappacasse L(13), Dasu A(14)(15), Tuleasca 
C(16)(17)(18).

Author information:
(1)European Radiosurgery Centre Munich, Munich, Germany.
(2)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Health, Witten/Herdecke University, 
Witten, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, St. Barbara-Klinik Hamm-Heessen, Hamm, 59073, 
Germany.
(4)University of Medicine and Pharmacy "Gr. T. Popa", Iasi, Germany.
(5)Neurosurgery Service and Gamma Knife Center, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire 
Vaudois, Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV), Rue du Bugnon 44-46, BH-08, 
CH-1011, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(6)Faculty of Biology and Medicine (FBM), University of Lausanne (UNIL), 
Lausanne, Switzerland.
(7)Oncology Pathology Department, Karolinska Institutet and Stockholm 
University, Stockholm, Sweden.
(8)Medical Radiation Physics, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.
(9)ENT Department, Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland.
(10)Department of Neurosurgery, Academic Hospital Köln-Merheim, Köln, 51058, 
Germany.
(11)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Health, Witten/Herdecke University, 
Witten, 58455, Germany.
(12)Division of Biostatistics, Center for Primary Care and Public Health 
(Unisanté), University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(13)Radiation Oncology Department, Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV), 
Lausanne, Switzerland.
(14)The Skandion Clinic and Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(15)Medical Radiation Sciences, Department of Immunology, Genetics and 
Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(16)Neurosurgery Service and Gamma Knife Center, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV), Rue du Bugnon 44-46, 
BH-08, CH-1011, Lausanne, Switzerland. constantin.tuleasca@gmail.com.
(17)Faculty of Biology and Medicine (FBM), University of Lausanne (UNIL), 
Lausanne, Switzerland. constantin.tuleasca@gmail.com.
(18)Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL, LTS-5), Lausanne, 
Switzerland. constantin.tuleasca@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: Proton beam therapy is considered, by some authors, as having the 
advantage of delivering dose distributions more conformal to target compared 
with stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS). Here, we performed a systematic review and 
meta-analysis of proton beam for VSs, evaluating tumor control and cranial nerve 
preservation rates, particularly with regard to facial and hearing preservation.
METHODS: We reviewed, using the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews 
and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) articles published between 1968 and September 30, 
2022. We retained 8 studies reporting 587 patients.
RESULTS: Overall rate of tumor control (both stability and decrease in volume) 
was 95.4% (range 93.5-97.2%, p heterogeneity= 0.77, p<0.001). Overall rate of 
tumor progression was 4.6% (range 2.8-6.5%, p heterogeneity < 0.77, p<0.001). 
Overall rate of trigeminal nerve preservation (absence of numbness) was 95.6% 
(range 93.5-97.7%, I2 = 11.44%, p heterogeneity= 0.34, p<0.001). Overall rate of 
facial nerve preservation was 93.7% (range 89.6-97.7%, I2 = 76.27%, p 
heterogeneity<0.001, p<0.001). Overall rate of hearing preservation was 40.6% 
(range 29.4-51.8%, I2 = 43.36%, p heterogeneity= 0.1, p<0.001).
CONCLUSION: Proton beam therapy for VSs achieves high tumor control rates, as 
high as 95.4%. Facial rate preservation overall rates are 93%, which is lower 
compared to the most SRS series. Compared with most currently reported SRS 
techniques, proton beam radiation therapy for VSs does not offer an advantage 
for facial and hearing preservation compared to most of the currently reported 
SRS series.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10143-023-02060-x
PMCID: PMC10319703
PMID: 37402894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]