---
reference_id: "PMID:17618155"
title: "HSD17B10: a gene involved in cognitive function through metabolism of isoleucine and neuroactive steroids."
authors:
- Yang SY
- He XY
- Miller D
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2007.06.001
keywords:
- "3-Hydroxyacyl CoA Dehydrogenases/genetics, physiology"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Cognition Disorders/enzymology
- Humans
- Isoleucine/metabolism
- "X-Linked Intellectual Disability/enzymology, etiology"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Neurotransmitter Agents/metabolism
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Steroids/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HSD17B10: a gene involved in cognitive function through metabolism of isoleucine and neuroactive steroids.
**Authors:** Yang SY, He XY, Miller D
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2007.06.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2007.06.001)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2007 Sep-Oct;92(1-2):36-42. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2007.06.001.
 Epub 2007 Jul 6.

HSD17B10: a gene involved in cognitive function through metabolism of isoleucine 
and neuroactive steroids.

Yang SY(1), He XY, Miller D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurochemistry, New York State Institute for Basic Research in 
Developmental Disabilities, 1050 Forest Hill Road, Staten Island, NY 10314, USA. 
syang@mail.csi.cuny.edu

The HSD17B10 gene maps on chromosome Xp11.2, a region highly associated with 
X-linked mental retardation. This gene encodes HSD10, a mitochondrial 
multifunctional enzyme that plays a significant part in the metabolism of 
neuroactive steroids and the degradation of isoleucine. The HSD17B10 gene is 
composed of six exons and five introns. Its exon 5 is an alternative exon such 
that there are several HSD17B10 mRNA isoforms in brain. A silent mutation 
(c.605C-->A) and three missense mutations (c.395C-->G; c.419C-->T; c.771A-->G), 
respectively, cause the X-linked mental retardation, choreoathetosis, and 
abnormal behavior (MRXS10) and the hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase II deficiency. 
The latter condition seems to be a multifactorial disease due to the disturbance 
of more than one metabolic pathway by the HSD10 deficiency. HSD10 inactivates 
the positive modulators of GABAA receptors, and plays a role in the maintenance 
of GABAergic neuronal function. This working model may account for the mental 
retardation of these patients. The dehydrogenase activity is slightly inhibited 
by the binding of amyloid-beta peptide to the loop D of HSD10. Elevated levels 
of HSD10 were observed in hippocampi of Alzheimer disease patients so this 
multifunctional enzyme may be related to Alzheimer disease pathogenesis; 
however, the molecular mechanism of its involvement remains to be ascertained.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2007.06.001
PMID: 17618155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]