---
reference_id: "PMID:29722743"
title: Ongoing Photosensitivity in An Elderly Patient With Jeavons Sydrome.
authors:
- Gülen Abanoz Y
- Abanoz Y
- Özkara Ç
journal: Neurologist
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1097/NRL.0000000000000175
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ongoing Photosensitivity in An Elderly Patient With Jeavons Sydrome.
**Authors:** Gülen Abanoz Y, Abanoz Y, Özkara Ç
**Journal:** Neurologist (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1097/NRL.0000000000000175](https://doi.org/10.1097/NRL.0000000000000175)

## Content

1. Neurologist. 2018 May;23(3):94-97. doi: 10.1097/NRL.0000000000000175.

Ongoing Photosensitivity in An Elderly Patient With Jeavons Sydrome.

Gülen Abanoz Y(1), Abanoz Y, Özkara Ç.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Cerrahpasa School of Medicine, İstanbul University.

INTRODUCTION: Photosensitivity, which is a main feature of Jeavons syndrome, can 
be seen in other types of idiopathic or genetic epilepsies with focal or 
generalized seizures and tends to disappear spontaneously usually in the second 
decade. Although it responds well to antiepileptic treatment, especially to 
valproic acid, it may continue into adulthood in rare cases.
CASE REPORT: We describe a 63-year-old male patient with eyelid myoclonia with 
absences, generalized tonic-clonic seizures, and severe photosensitivity 
accompanied by eyelid myoclonia. Seizures were treated with antiepileptic 
treatment, whereas photosensitivity still continued on electroencephalogram 
without clinical findings.
CONCLUSION: Our elderly patient with Jeavons syndrome with ongoing remarkable 
photosensitivity demonstrated that it may continue to older ages, although it is 
uncommon.

DOI: 10.1097/NRL.0000000000000175
PMID: 29722743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]