---
reference_id: "PMID:24172221"
title: The neurology of rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata.
authors:
- Bams-Mengerink AM
- Koelman JH
- Waterham H
- Barth PG
- Poll-The BT
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-174
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The neurology of rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata.
**Authors:** Bams-Mengerink AM, Koelman JH, Waterham H, Barth PG, Poll-The BT
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-8-174](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-8-174)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2013 Oct 30;8:174. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-174.

The neurology of rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata.

Bams-Mengerink AM(1), Koelman JH, Waterham H, Barth PG, Poll-The BT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology/Emma Children's Hospital, Academic Medical 
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
b.t.pollthe@amc.uva.nl.

BACKGROUND: To describe the neurologic profiles of Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia 
punctata (RCDP); a peroxisomal disorder clinically characterized by skeletal 
abnormalities, congenital cataracts, severe growth and developmental impairments 
and immobility of joints. Defective plasmalogen biosynthesis is the main 
biochemical feature.
METHODS: Observational study including review of clinical and biochemical 
abnormalities, genotype, presence of seizures and neurophysiological studies of 
a cohort of 16 patients with RCDP.
RESULTS: Patients with the severe phenotype nearly failed to achieve any motor 
or cognitive skills, whereas patients with the milder phenotype had profound 
intellectual disability but were able to walk and had verbal communication 
skills. Eighty-eight percent of patients developed epileptic seizures. The age 
of onset paralleled the severity of the clinical and biochemical phenotype. 
Myoclonic jerks, followed by atypical absences were most frequently observed. 
All patients with clinical seizures had interictal encephalographic evidence of 
epilepsy. Visual evoked (VEP) and brain auditory potential (BAEP) studies showed 
initial normal latency times in 93% of patients. Deterioration of VEP occurred 
in a minority in both the severe and the milder phenotype. BAEP and 
somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEP) were more likely to become abnormal in 
the severe phenotype. Plasmalogens were deficient in all patients. In the milder 
phenotype levels of plasmalogens were significantly higher in erythrocytes than 
in the severe phenotype. Phytanic acid levels ranged from normal to severely 
increased, but had no relation with the neurological phenotype.
CONCLUSION: Neurodevelopmental deficits and age-related occurrence of seizures 
are characteristic of RCDP and are related to the rest-activity in plasmalogen 
biosynthesis. Evoked potential studies are more likely to become abnormal in the 
severe phenotype, but are of no predictive value in single cases of RCDP.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-174
PMCID: PMC4228450
PMID: 24172221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]