---
reference_id: PMID:25506359
title: "Determinants of Weight Loss prior to Diagnosis in Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Retrospective Observational Study."
authors:
- Elsherif Y
- Alexakis C
- Mendall M
journal: Gastroenterol Res Pract
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1155/2014/762191
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Determinants of Weight Loss prior to Diagnosis in Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Retrospective Observational Study.
**Authors:** Elsherif Y, Alexakis C, Mendall M
**Journal:** Gastroenterol Res Pract (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2014/762191](https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/762191)

## Content

1. Gastroenterol Res Pract. 2014;2014:762191. doi: 10.1155/2014/762191. Epub 2014
 Nov 23.

Determinants of Weight Loss prior to Diagnosis in Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A
Retrospective Observational Study.

Elsherif Y(1), Alexakis C(1), Mendall M(1).

Author information:
(1)Gastroenterology Department, Croydon University Hospital, London Road,
Croydon, London CR7 7YE, UK.

Aims. To identify prevalence, severity, and environmental determinants of weight
loss in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) patients just prior to time of formal
diagnosis. Methodology. IBD patients attending outpatient clinic were questioned
about weight loss prior to diagnosis and other environmental and demographic
variables. The percentage BMI loss was calculated for each subject and factors
associated with weight loss were determined. Results. Four hundred and
ninety-four subjects were recruited (237 cases of Crohn's disease (CD) and 257
cases of ulcerative colitis (UC)). Overall, 57% of subjects with CD and 51% of
subjects with UC experienced significant weight loss prior to diagnosis (>5% BMI
loss). Younger age at diagnosis and history of previous IBD surgery were
significantly associated with both lower BMI at diagnosis and increased weight
loss prior to diagnosis. In CD patients, increasing age at diagnosis was
inversely associated with weight loss prior to diagnosis. Ileal disease was a
risk factor of weight loss, whereas prior appendectomy was associated with
reduced risk of weight loss. Conclusions. Weight loss is a significant problem
for many IBD patients at presentation, especially in younger age and CD with
ileal involvement. Appendectomy is associated with diminished weight loss.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/762191
PMCID: PMC4259140
PMID: 25506359
