---
reference_id: "PMID:17208005"
title: Comparative activity of antiemetic drugs.
authors:
- Jordan K
- Schmoll HJ
- Aapro MS
journal: Crit Rev Oncol Hematol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2006.08.003
keywords:
- "Antiemetics/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Humans
- "Nausea/chemically induced, prevention & control"
- Neoplasms/drug therapy
- "Vomiting/chemically induced, prevention & control"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparative activity of antiemetic drugs.
**Authors:** Jordan K, Schmoll HJ, Aapro MS
**Journal:** Crit Rev Oncol Hematol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.critrevonc.2006.08.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.critrevonc.2006.08.003)

## Content

1. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2007 Feb;61(2):162-75. doi:
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2006.08.003.

Comparative activity of antiemetic drugs.

Jordan K(1), Schmoll HJ, Aapro MS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine IV, Haematology/Oncology,
Martin-Luther-University Halle/Wittenberg, Ernst-Grube-Str. 40, 06120
Halle/Saale, Germany. Karin.Jordan@medizin.uni-halle.de

Nausea and vomiting continues to be an important problem for cancer patients
receiving chemotherapy. Chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) are
classified as acute, occurring within the first 24h, or delayed, occurring after
the first 24h. A number of antiemetic agents are available for the management of
nausea and vomiting, including 5-HT3-receptor-antagonists, corticosteroids,
NK-1-receptor-antagonists, dopamine-receptor antagonists, benzodiazepines,
neuroleptics and cannabinoids. With modern antiemetic therapy, vomiting can be
prevented in 70-80% of patients, whereas the control of nausea remains
suboptimal. The development of acute emesis is known to depend on serotonin. The
pathophysiology of delayed emesis is less well understood, and multiple
mechanisms may contribute, including substance P. Here, the most recent
developments in the antiemetic therapy, including new antiemetic drugs and the
latest guidelines for antiemetic prophylaxis, are reviewed.

DOI: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2006.08.003
PMID: 17208005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
