---
reference_id: "PMID:29678282"
title: Multiple hormone resistance and alterations of G-protein-coupled receptors signaling.
authors:
- Mantovani G
- Elli FM
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.beem.2018.01.002
keywords:
- Drug Resistance/genetics
- "Endocrine System Diseases/genetics, metabolism"
- Hormones/metabolism
- Humans
- Parathyroid Hormone/metabolism
- "Pseudohypoparathyroidism/genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled/physiology"
- Signal Transduction/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiple hormone resistance and alterations of G-protein-coupled receptors signaling.
**Authors:** Mantovani G, Elli FM
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.beem.2018.01.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beem.2018.01.002)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2018 Apr;32(2):141-154. doi: 
10.1016/j.beem.2018.01.002. Epub 2018 Jan 31.

Multiple hormone resistance and alterations of G-protein-coupled receptors 
signaling.

Mantovani G(1), Elli FM(2).

Author information:
(1)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Endocrinology 
Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy. Electronic address: giovanna.mantovani@unimi.it.
(2)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Endocrinology 
Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy. Electronic address: francesca.elli@unimi.it.

Metabolic disorders deriving from the non-responsiveness of target organs to 
hormones, which manifest clinically similar to the deficiency of a given hormone 
itself, derive from molecular alterations affecting specific hormone receptors. 
Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) and related disorders exemplify an unusual form 
of hormone resistance as the underlying molecular defect is a partial deficiency 
of the α subunit of the stimulatory G protein (Gsα), a key regulator of cAMP 
signaling pathway, or, as more recently described, of downstream effector 
proteins of the same pathway, such as PKA regulatory subunit 1A (R1A) and 
phosphodyestarase type 4D (PDE4D). In this group of diseases, resistance to 
hormones such as PTH, TSH, gonadotropins and GHRH may be variably present, so 
that the clinical and molecular overlap among these different but related 
disorders represents a challenge for endocrinologists as to differential 
diagnosis and genetic counseling. This review will describe the presenting 
features of multiple resistance in PHP and related disorders, focusing on both 
our current understanding and future challenges.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.beem.2018.01.002
PMID: 29678282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]