---
reference_id: "PMID:32192819"
title: "Acute Flaccid Myelitis Among Hospitalized Children in Texas, 2016."
authors:
- Downey R
- McElvain D
- Murphey DK
- Bailey A
- Patel B
- Fernandez M
- Loftis L
- Carreno CG
- Eger L
- Aguilera EA
- Wootton S
- Castagnini LA
- Hauger SB
journal: Pediatr Neurol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2020.01.007
keywords:
- Activities of Daily Living
- Adolescent
- "Central Nervous System Viral Diseases/drug therapy, epidemiology, etiology"
- Child
- "Child, Hospitalized/statistics & numerical data"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Enterovirus Infections/complications
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Myelitis/drug therapy, epidemiology, etiology"
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/drug therapy, epidemiology, etiology"
- "Outcome Assessment, Health Care"
- Retrospective Studies
- Texas/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute Flaccid Myelitis Among Hospitalized Children in Texas, 2016.
**Authors:** Downey R, McElvain D, Murphey DK, Bailey A, Patel B, Fernandez M, Loftis L, Carreno CG, Eger L, Aguilera EA, Wootton S, Castagnini LA, Hauger SB
**Journal:** Pediatr Neurol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2020.01.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2020.01.007)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neurol. 2020 May;106:50-55. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2020.01.007.
Epub 2020 Feb 7.

Acute Flaccid Myelitis Among Hospitalized Children in Texas, 2016.

Downey R(1), McElvain D(2), Murphey DK(3), Bailey A(4), Patel B(5), Fernandez
M(3), Loftis L(6), Carreno CG(7), Eger L(8), Aguilera EA(9), Wootton S(9),
Castagnini LA(10), Hauger SB(3).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Dell Children's Medical Group, Austin, Texas;
Dell Children's Medical Center of Central Texas, Austin, Texas. Electronic
address: rdquick@ascension.org.
(2)Dell Children's Medical Center of Central Texas, Austin, Texas; Pediatric
Neurology, Child Neurology Consultants of Austin, Austin Texas.
(3)Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Dell Children's Medical Group, Austin, Texas;
Dell Children's Medical Center of Central Texas, Austin, Texas; The University
of Texas at Austin Dell Medical School, Austin, Texas.
(4)Infection Prevention, Dell Children's Medical Center of Central Texas,
Austin, Texas.
(5)Dell Children's Medical Center of Central Texas, Austin, Texas;
Neuroradiology, Austin Radiological Association, Austin Texas.
(6)Pediatrics and Medical Ethics, Baylor College of Medicine, Section of
Pediatric Critical Care, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas.
(7)Pediatric Infectious Diseases, PID Associates, Carrollton, Texas.
(8)Infectious Diseases, Cook Children's Medical Center, Fort Worth, Texas.
(9)Pediatrics, Infectious Diseases, The University of Texas, McGovern Medical
School, Houston Texas.
(10)Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Section Chief of Pediatric
Infectious Diseases, San Antonio, Texas; Children's Hospital of San Antonio, San
Antonio, Texas.

Comment in
    Pediatr Neurol. 2020 Sep;110:102. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2020.03.006.
    Pediatr Neurol. 2020 Sep;110:102-103. doi:
10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2020.04.008.

BACKGROUND: Acute flaccid myelitis is characterized by acute-onset flaccid limb
weakness with predominantly gray matter lesions in the spinal cord spanning one
or more segments. Rates of full recovery are poor, and there is no standard
treatment or definitive cause.
METHODS: This is a retrospective review of children diagnosed with acute flaccid
myelitis in Texas during 2016. Patients were identified through a Texas
collaborative of six hospitals in four major metropolitan areas. Data
abstraction included health history, illness presentation, medical treatments,
laboratory studies, imaging data, recovery, and ability to perform activities of
daily living up to approximately two years from illness onset.
RESULTS: Among all sites, 21 patients met inclusion criteria. Treatments varied
with the most common being intravenous immunoglobulin, high-dose
methylprednisolone, and plasmapheresis. No differences were seen in response to
medical treatments. A potential etiology was found in 12 (57%) cases, including
four with enterovirus D68. Five cases recovered fully. Of the 16 patients
without full recovery, abilities ranged from (1) able to perform all activities
of daily living for age independently (n = 5), (2) mild deficits (n = 5), and
(3) substantial reliance on caregivers for activities of daily living (n = 6).
CONCLUSION: Many reports describe symptoms and outcomes of acute flaccid
myelitis, but limited data are available on long-term functional outcomes. We
were unable to make a strong case for any single cause or treatment modality.
Fortunately, the majority of patients (15, 71%) were able to perform activities
of daily living with complete independence or only mild deficits.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2020.01.007
PMID: 32192819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
