---
reference_id: "PMID:19047232"
title: Eight-year clinical outcomes of long-term enzyme replacement therapy for 884 children with Gaucher disease type 1.
authors:
- Andersson H
- Kaplan P
- Kacena K
- Yee J
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1542/peds.2007-2144
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Eight-year clinical outcomes of long-term enzyme replacement therapy for 884 children with Gaucher disease type 1.
**Authors:** Andersson H, Kaplan P, Kacena K, Yee J
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.2007-2144](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2007-2144)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2008 Dec;122(6):1182-90. doi: 10.1542/peds.2007-2144.

Eight-year clinical outcomes of long-term enzyme replacement therapy for 884 
children with Gaucher disease type 1.

Andersson H(1), Kaplan P, Kacena K, Yee J.

Author information:
(1)Hayward Genetics Center, SL-31, Tulane University Medical School, 1430 Tulane 
Ave, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA. handers@tulane.edu

OBJECTIVE: The goal was to analyze the clinical responses to enzyme replacement 
therapy with alglucerase or imiglucerase in a large international cohort of 
children with Gaucher disease type 1.
METHODS: Anonymized data from 884 children in the International Collaborative 
Gaucher Group Gaucher Registry were analyzed to determine the effects of 
long-term enzyme replacement therapy with alglucerase or imiglucerase on 
hematologic and visceral manifestations, linear growth, and skeletal disease. 
The parameters measured were hemoglobin levels, platelet counts, spleen and 
liver volumes, z scores for height and bone mineral density, and reports of bone 
pain and bone crises.
RESULTS: The median height z score for the study population was -1.4 at 
baseline. After 8 years of treatment, the median height approximated the median 
value for the normal population. Anemia, although not severe, was present in 
>50% of patients at baseline and resolved for all patients after 8 years of 
treatment. More than 50% of patients had platelet counts of <100000 platelets 
per mm3 at baseline, but >95% had platelet counts above this level after 8 years 
of treatment. Liver and spleen volumes decreased over 8 years of treatment. The 
mean bone mineral density z score was -0.34 at baseline, and values normalized 
within 6.6 years of treatment. Seventeen percent of patients reported a bone 
crisis before treatment and in the first 2 years of treatment, but no bone 
crises were reported after 2 years of enzyme replacement therapy. Few patients 
(2.5%) without bone crises before enzyme replacement therapy had a crisis after 
the start of treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: These longitudinal data quantitate the benefits of continuous 
enzyme replacement therapy with alglucerase/imiglucerase for children with 
Gaucher disease type 1. Within 8 years of enzyme replacement therapy, most 
clinical parameters studied became normal or nearly normal.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2007-2144
PMID: 19047232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]