---
reference_id: "PMID:33769630"
title: Diabetes insipidus secondary to sellar/parasellar lesions.
authors:
- Angelousi A
- Mytareli C
- Xekouki P
- Kassi E
- Barkas K
- Grossman A
- Kaltsas G
journal: J Neuroendocrinol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/jne.12954
keywords:
- Adenoma/pathology
- "Diabetes Insipidus, Neurogenic/epidemiology, etiology"
- Humans
- "Pituitary Diseases/complications, epidemiology, physiopathology, surgery"
- Pituitary Neoplasms/pathology
- Postoperative Complications
- Prevalence
- Sella Turcica/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diabetes insipidus secondary to sellar/parasellar lesions.
**Authors:** Angelousi A, Mytareli C, Xekouki P, Kassi E, Barkas K, Grossman A, Kaltsas G
**Journal:** J Neuroendocrinol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jne.12954](https://doi.org/10.1111/jne.12954)

## Content

1. J Neuroendocrinol. 2021 Mar;33(3):e12954. doi: 10.1111/jne.12954.

Diabetes insipidus secondary to sellar/parasellar lesions.

Angelousi A(1), Mytareli C(1), Xekouki P(2), Kassi E(3)(4), Barkas K(5),
Grossman A(6)(7), Kaltsas G(4).

Author information:
(1)1st Department of Internal Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of
Athens, Athens, Greece.
(2)Endocrinology and Diabetes Clinic, University General Hospital of Heraklion,
Heraklion, Greece.
(3)Department of Biological Chemistry, Medical School, National and Kapodistrian
University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(4)1st Department of Propaedeutic and Internal Medicine, National and
Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, General Hospital of Nikaia-Pireas, Agios
Panteleimon, Athens, Greece.
(6)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(7)Centre for Endocrinology, Barts and the London School of Medicine, London,
UK.

Diabetes insipidus (DI) is a well-recognised transient or permanent complication
following transsphenoidal surgery for pituitary adenomas or other
sellar/parasellar lesions. However, data regarding the prevalence of
pre-operative DI in sellar/parasellar lesions other than pituitary adenomas are
scarce. We systematically reviewed the existing data for defining the prevalence
of DI before any treatment in adult patients with sellar/parasellar lesions,
excluding pituitary adenomas and metastatic lesions. In total, 646 patients with
sellar/parasellar lesions presenting with DI at diagnosis were identified. The
most common pathologies of sellar/parasellar lesions presenting with DI at
diagnosis were lymphocytic hypophysitis (26.5%), craniopharyngiomas (23.4%),
Langerhans's cell histiocytosis (18.9%) and Rathke's cleft cyst (12.7%),
accounting for the vast majority (more than 80%) of these lesions. Overall, DI
at diagnosis was found in 23.4% of all patients with sellar/parasellar lesions,
albeit with a wide range from 10.6% to 76.7%, depending on the nature of the
pathology. The highest prevalence of DI was found in less commonly encountered
lesions namely germ-cell tumours (76.7%), abscesses (55.4%) and neurosarcoidosis
(54.5%), each accounting for less than 3% of all sellar/parasellar lesions. Most
DI cases (68.8%) were associated with anterior pituitary hormonal deficiencies,
in contrast to pituitary adenomas that rarely present with DI. The enlargement
and enhancement of the pituitary stalk were the most common findings on magnetic
resonance imaging besides the loss of the high signal of the posterior pituitary
on T1-weighted images. Resolution of DI spontaneously or following systemic and
surgical management occurred in 22.4% of cases. Post-operative DI, not evident
before surgery, was found in 27.8% of non-adenomatous sellar/parasellar lesions,
and was transient in 11.6% of them. Besides distinctive imaging features and
symptoms, early recognition of DI in such lesions is important because it
directs the diagnosis towards a non-adenomatous sellar/parasellar tumour and the
early initiation of appropriate treatment.

© 2021 British Society for Neuroendocrinology.

DOI: 10.1111/jne.12954
PMID: 33769630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
