---
reference_id: "PMID:29726638"
title: Folliculotropic mycosis fungoides.
authors:
- Mitteldorf C
- Stadler R
- Sander CA
- Kempf W
journal: J Dtsch Dermatol Ges
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/ddg.13514
keywords:
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- "Mycosis Fungoides/diagnosis, pathology"
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Folliculotropic mycosis fungoides.
**Authors:** Mitteldorf C, Stadler R, Sander CA, Kempf W
**Journal:** J Dtsch Dermatol Ges (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ddg.13514](https://doi.org/10.1111/ddg.13514)

## Content

1. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2018 May;16(5):543-557. doi: 10.1111/ddg.13514. Epub
2018  May 4.

Folliculotropic mycosis fungoides.

Mitteldorf C(1)(2), Stadler R(3), Sander CA(4), Kempf W(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, HELIOS Medical Center
Hildesheim, Hildesheim, Germany.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, Göttingen University
Medical Center, Göttingen, Germany.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Venereology, Allergology, and Phlebology,
Mühlenkreiskliniken, Johannes Wesling Medical Center, Minden, Germany.
(4)Eduard Arning Department of Dermatology and Allergology, Asklepios Klinik St.
Georg, Hamburg, Germany.
(5)Kempf und Pfaltz, Dermatopathology Laboratory, Zurich, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, Zurich University
Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland.

Accepted by the WHO and EORTC as a variant of classic mycosis fungoides,
folliculotropic (syn.: follicular or pilotropic) mycosis fungoides (FMF) is
characterized by a broad clinical and histological spectrum with numerous
differential diagnoses. Recent studies have shown that FMF can be divided into
two prognostically different subgroups, both marked by histological as well as
clinical differences. Treatment should therefore be tailored to the various
subtypes and clinical courses. The present review highlights the clinical and
histological manifestations of FMF as well as the new subclassification.
Moreover, important differential diagnoses and therapeutic options are
discussed.

© 2018 Deutsche Dermatologische Gesellschaft (DDG). Published by John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ddg.13514
PMID: 29726638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
