---
reference_id: "PMID:20301638"
title: GLI3-Related Pallister-Hall Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Biesecker LG
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GLI3-Related Pallister-Hall Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Biesecker LG

## Content

1. GLI3-Related Pallister-Hall Syndrome.

Biesecker LG(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2000 May 25 [updated 2024 Feb 22].

Author information:
(1)Center for Precision Health Research, National Human Genome Research 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: GLI3-related Pallister-Hall syndrome (GLI3-PHS) is 
characterized by a spectrum of anomalies ranging from polydactyly, asymptomatic 
bifid epiglottis, and hypothalamic hamartoma at the mild end to laryngotracheal 
cleft with neonatal lethality at the severe end. Individuals with mild GLI3-PHS 
may be incorrectly diagnosed as having isolated postaxial polydactyly type A. 
Individuals with GLI3-PHS can have pituitary insufficiency and may die as 
neonates from undiagnosed and untreated adrenal insufficiency.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of GLI3-PHS can be established in a proband 
with both hypothalamic hamartoma and mesoaxial polydactyly. Identification of a 
heterozygous pathogenic variant in GLI3 confirms the diagnosis.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Urgent treatment for endocrine 
abnormalities, especially cortisol deficiency; symptomatic treatment of 
seizures; elective repair of polydactyly. Management of epiglottic abnormalities 
depending on the abnormality and the extent of respiratory compromise; bifid 
epiglottis, the most common abnormality, typically does not need treatment. 
Treatment of behavioral issues per psychologist &/or psychiatrist; seizures may 
begin or worsen with use of stimulants for attention-deficit disorder; 
developmental intervention and/or special education for developmental delays; 
standard treatment of anal atresia or stenosis. Surveillance: Annually during 
childhood: assess growth, monitor for signs of precocious puberty, and assess 
developmental progress, educational needs, and behavioral issues. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Biopsy or resection of hypothalamic hamartoma may 
result in complications and lifelong need for hormone replacement. Some 
stimulants used for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder may exacerbate 
seizures.
GENETIC COUNSELING: GLI3-PHS is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. 
Individuals with GLI3-PHS may have an affected parent or may have the disorder 
as the result of a de novo pathogenic variant. About 25% of individuals have a 
de novo pathogenic variant. Persons with a de novo pathogenic variant are 
generally more severely affected than those with a family history of GLI3-PHS. 
The risk to offspring of an affected individual is 50%. Prenatal testing for 
pregnancies at increased risk is possible if the pathogenic variant in the 
family is known. The reliability of ultrasound examination for prenatal 
diagnosis is unknown.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301638