---
reference_id: "PMID:36593435"
title: "Rotenone-Induced Model of Parkinson's Disease: Beyond Mitochondrial Complex I Inhibition."
authors:
- Ibarra-Gutiérrez MT
- Serrano-García N
- Orozco-Ibarra M
journal: Mol Neurobiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s12035-022-03193-8
keywords:
- Rats
- Animals
- Parkinson Disease
- Rotenone
- "1-Methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine"
- Dopamine/physiology
- Oxidopamine
- Electron Transport Complex I
- "Disease Models, Animal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rotenone-Induced Model of Parkinson's Disease: Beyond Mitochondrial Complex I Inhibition.
**Authors:** Ibarra-Gutiérrez MT, Serrano-García N, Orozco-Ibarra M
**Journal:** Mol Neurobiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12035-022-03193-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-022-03193-8)

## Content

1. Mol Neurobiol. 2023 Apr;60(4):1929-1948. doi: 10.1007/s12035-022-03193-8. Epub
 2023 Jan 3.

Rotenone-Induced Model of Parkinson's Disease: Beyond Mitochondrial Complex I 
Inhibition.

Ibarra-Gutiérrez MT(1), Serrano-García N(1), Orozco-Ibarra M(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Neurobiología Molecular y Celular, Instituto Nacional de 
Neurología y Neurocirugía, Av. Insurgentes Sur No. 3877 Col. La Fama, Tlalpan, 
C.P. 14269, Ciudad de Mexico, Mexico.
(2)Laboratorio de Neurobiología Molecular y Celular, Instituto Nacional de 
Neurología y Neurocirugía, Av. Insurgentes Sur No. 3877 Col. La Fama, Tlalpan, 
C.P. 14269, Ciudad de Mexico, Mexico. marisol.orozco@innn.edu.mx.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is usually diagnosed through motor symptoms that make 
the patient incapable of carrying out daily activities; however, numerous 
non-motor symptoms include olfactory disturbances, constipation, depression, 
excessive daytime sleepiness, and rapid eye movement at sleep; they begin years 
before motor symptoms. Therefore, several experimental models have been studied 
to reproduce several PD functional and neurochemical characteristics; however, 
no model mimics all the PD motor and non-motor symptoms to date, which becomes a 
limitation for PD study. It has become increasingly relevant to find ways to 
study the disease from its slowly progressive nature. The experimental models 
most frequently used to reproduce PD are based on administering toxic chemical 
compounds, which aim to imitate dopamine deficiency. The most used toxic 
compounds to model PD have been 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine 
(MPTP) and 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA), which inhibit the complex I of the 
electron transport chain but have some limitations. Another toxic compound that 
has drawn attention recently is rotenone, the classical inhibitor of 
mitochondrial complex I. Rotenone triggers the progressive death of dopaminergic 
neurons and α-synuclein inclusions formation in rats; also, rotenone induces 
microtubule destabilization. This review presents information about the 
experimental model of PD induced by rotenone, emphasizing its molecular 
characteristics beyond the inhibition of mitochondrial complex I.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-022-03193-8
PMID: 36593435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]