---
reference_id: "PMID:18434082"
title: Lycopene has limited effect on cell proliferation in only two of seven human cell lines (both cancerous and noncancerous) in an in vitro system with doses across the physiological range.
authors:
- Burgess LC
- Rice E
- Fischer T
- Seekins JR
- Burgess TP
- Sticka SJ
- Klatt K
journal: Toxicol In Vitro
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2008.03.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lycopene has limited effect on cell proliferation in only two of seven human cell lines (both cancerous and noncancerous) in an in vitro system with doses across the physiological range.
**Authors:** Burgess LC, Rice E, Fischer T, Seekins JR, Burgess TP, Sticka SJ, Klatt K
**Journal:** Toxicol In Vitro (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tiv.2008.03.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tiv.2008.03.001)

## Content

1. Toxicol In Vitro. 2008 Aug;22(5):1297-300. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2008.03.001.
Epub  2008 Mar 14.

Lycopene has limited effect on cell proliferation in only two of seven human 
cell lines (both cancerous and noncancerous) in an in vitro system with doses 
across the physiological range.

Burgess LC(1), Rice E, Fischer T, Seekins JR, Burgess TP, Sticka SJ, Klatt K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Natural Sciences, Dickinson State University, Dickinson, ND 
58061, USA. lynn.burgess@dickinsonstate.edu

Epidemiological studies have shown a relationship between diets rich in tomato 
and/or lycopene and a reduction in cancer rates. Several studies reported 
reductions in proliferation of certain cell lines when treated with lycopene. 
This study used seven human cell lines to measure the effect of lycopene on cell 
proliferation across normal human plasma concentrations of lycopene. Seven cell 
types, cancerous and noncancerous, were treated with lycopene from 0.0001 to 10 
microM for 24, 48, and 72 h and counted electronically. Controls and 
experimental samples were compared using the Mann-Whitney U-test at a 95% 
confidence level. All cells grew normally and there was no significant 
difference between any of the controls. The Hep-G2, liver adenocarcinoma cell 
line, showed a reduction at the high doses after 24 h and the IMR-90, 
noncancerous lung cell line, showed a reduction at the highest dose after 72 h 
when compared to the solvent control. The A431, skin carcinoma, DU-145, prostate 
carcinoma, HS-68, noncancerous skin, A549, lung carcinoma, and HS-578T, breast 
carcinoma, all showed no reduction in proliferation. This indicated that 
lycopene at the physiological range does not significantly affect cell 
proliferation in an in vitro model and requires more careful investigations.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tiv.2008.03.001
PMCID: PMC2494863
PMID: 18434082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]