---
reference_id: "PMID:36064700"
title: "Duplication of SOX3 in an SRY-negative 46,XX male with prostatic utricle: case report and literature review."
authors:
- Wei J
- Liu C
- Zhang M
- Liu S
- Fu J
- Lin P
journal: BMC Med Genomics
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s12920-022-01347-0
keywords:
- Disorders of Sex Development/pathology
- Humans
- Hypospadias
- Male
- Postoperative Complications/pathology
- SOXB1 Transcription Factors/genetics
- Saccule and Utricle
- Testis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Duplication of SOX3 in an SRY-negative 46,XX male with prostatic utricle: case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Wei J, Liu C, Zhang M, Liu S, Fu J, Lin P
**Journal:** BMC Med Genomics (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12920-022-01347-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12920-022-01347-0)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genomics. 2022 Sep 5;15(1):188. doi: 10.1186/s12920-022-01347-0.

Duplication of SOX3 in an SRY-negative 46,XX male with prostatic utricle: case 
report and literature review.

Wei J(1), Liu C(2), Zhang M(2), Liu S(2), Fu J(2), Lin P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Urology, Fuzhou Children's Hospital of Fujian 
Province, 145 Ba-yi-qi road, Fuzhou, Fujian Province, China. 
wjs0831169@outlook.com.
(2)Department of Pediatric Urology, Fuzhou Children's Hospital of Fujian 
Province, 145 Ba-yi-qi road, Fuzhou, Fujian Province, China.

BACKGROUND: 46,XX male disorders of sex development are rare. Approximately 80% 
of cases of testicular tissue differentiation may be due to translocation of SRY 
to the X chromosome or an autosome. SRY-negative 46,XX males show overexpression 
of pro-testis genes, such as SOX9 and SOX3, or failure of pro-ovarian genes, 
such as WNT4 and RSPO1, which induces testis differentiation, however, almost 
all testicles exhibit dysgenesis. Following inadequate exposure to androgens 
during the embryo stage, remnants of the Mullerian duct and incomplete closure 
of the urogenital sinus lead to enlargement of prostatic utricles. This 
condition is associated with proximal hypospadias and disorders of sex 
development. Many cases are asymptomatic, but show increased rates of 
postoperative complications and surgical failure.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 5-year-old Chinese boy with scrotal hypospadias and 
bilateral cryptorchidism with prostatic utricles was presented. Gonadal 
histology showed ovo-testicular tissue on the right side and testicular tissue 
on the left side; all testicular tissue exhibited dysgenesis. Furthermore, 
chromosome karyotype analysis revealed 46,XX and, the presence of SRY was ruled 
out by polymerase chain reaction analysis. Whole-genome analysis showed the boy 
has a 1.4-Mb duplication in the Xq27.1q27.2 region 
(arr[hg19]Xq27.1q27.2:139585794-140996652) involving SOX3. No SOX3 duplication 
was observed in the parents, who had a normal phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: We report the first case of an SRY-negative 46 XX male with 
prostatic utricle caused by SOX3 duplication. SOX3 duplication may cause sex 
reversal, and all 46,XX SRY-negative males should be screened for SOX3 
mutations. Gonadal biopsy is recommended to evaluate ovarian and testicular 
tissue development. Testicular dysgenesis and low exposure to male hormones 
during fetal development can lead to enlarged prostatic utricles. Thus 
endoscopic examination should be performed preoperatively to detect prostatic 
utricles in SRY-negative 46,XX males to determine the surgical plan and reduce 
postoperative complications.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12920-022-01347-0
PMCID: PMC9446824
PMID: 36064700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.