---
reference_id: "PMID:26104444"
title: "Dengue Antibody-Dependent Enhancement: Knowns and Unknowns."
authors:
- Halstead SB
journal: Microbiol Spectr
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1128/microbiolspec.AID-0022-2014
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue Antibody-Dependent Enhancement: Knowns and Unknowns.
**Authors:** Halstead SB
**Journal:** Microbiol Spectr (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1128/microbiolspec.AID-0022-2014](https://doi.org/10.1128/microbiolspec.AID-0022-2014)

## Content

1. Microbiol Spectr. 2014 Dec;2(6). doi: 10.1128/microbiolspec.AID-0022-2014.

Dengue Antibody-Dependent Enhancement: Knowns and Unknowns.

Halstead SB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine and Biometrics, Uniformed Services 
University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD 20814.

Dengue provides the most abundant example in human medicine and the greatest 
human illness burden caused by the phenomenon of intrinsic antibody-dependent 
infection enhancement (iADE). In this immunopathological phenomenon infection of 
monocytes or macrophages using infectious immune complexes suppresses innate 
antiviral systems, permitting logarithmic intracellular growth of dengue virus. 
The four dengue viruses evolved from a common ancestor yet retain similar 
ecology and pathogenicity, but although infection with one virus provides 
short-term cross-protection against infection with a different type, millions of 
secondary dengue infections occur worldwide each year. When individuals are 
infected in the virtual absence of cross-protective dengue antibodies, the 
dengue vascular permeability syndrome (DVPS) may ensue. This occurs in around 2 
to 4% of second heterotypic dengue infections. A complete understanding of the 
biologic mechanism of iADE, dengue biology, and the mechanism of host responses 
to dengue infection should lead to a comprehensive and complete understanding of 
the pathogenesis of DVPS. A crucial emphasis must be placed on understanding 
ADE. Clinical and epidemiological observations of DVPS define the research 
questions and provide research parameters. This article will review knowledge 
related to dengue ADE and point to areas where there has been little research 
progress. These observations relate to the two stages of dengue illnesses: 
afferent phenomena are those that promote the success of the microorganism to 
infect and survive; efferent phenomena are those mounted by the host to inhibit 
infection and replication and to eliminate the infectious agent and infected 
tissues. Data will be discussed as "knowns" and "unknowns."

DOI: 10.1128/microbiolspec.AID-0022-2014
PMID: 26104444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]