---
reference_id: "PMID:39453259"
title: "What Do Travelers Know about Traveler's Diarrhea? Impact of a Pre-Travel Consultation in the Lisbon Area, Portugal."
authors:
- Estrada J
- Conceição C
- Augusto GF
- Teodósio R
journal: Trop Med Infect Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/tropicalmed9100232
content_type: abstract_only
---

# What Do Travelers Know about Traveler's Diarrhea? Impact of a Pre-Travel Consultation in the Lisbon Area, Portugal.
**Authors:** Estrada J, Conceição C, Augusto GF, Teodósio R
**Journal:** Trop Med Infect Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/tropicalmed9100232](https://doi.org/10.3390/tropicalmed9100232)

## Content

1. Trop Med Infect Dis. 2024 Oct 8;9(10):232. doi: 10.3390/tropicalmed9100232.

What Do Travelers Know about Traveler's Diarrhea? Impact of a Pre-Travel 
Consultation in the Lisbon Area, Portugal.

Estrada J(1)(2), Conceição C(3)(4), Augusto GF(5), Teodósio R(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)NOVA National School of Public Health, Universidade NOVA de Lisboa, UNL, 
1600-560 Lisbon, Portugal.
(2)Public Health Unit, Local Health Unit Algarve, Rua de Antero Nobre, 8700-240 
Olhão, Portugal.
(3)Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical, IHMT, Universidade NOVA de Lisboa, 
UNL, Rua da Junqueira 100, 1349-008 Lisboa, Portugal.
(4)Global Health and Tropical Medicine, GHTM, Associate Laboratory in 
Translation and Innovation Towards Global Health, LA-REAL, Instituto de Higiene 
e Medicina Tropical, IHMT, Universidade NOVA de Lisboa, UNL, Rua da Junqueira 
100, 1349-008 Lisboa, Portugal.
(5)NOVA National School of Public Health, Public Health Research Centre, 
Comprehensive Health Research Center, CHRC, Universidade NOVA de Lisboa, UNL, 
1600-560 Lisbon, Portugal.

Traveler's diarrhea (TD) is one of the most common travel-related health 
problems, largely interfering with planned activities and potentially 
contributing to antimicrobial resistance. This study aimed to characterize the 
knowledge about TD among pre-travel consultation users of one Portuguese travel 
clinic and determine the impact of the consultation on knowledge levels. Using a 
quasi-experimental, separate-sample pretest-posttest design, participants were 
randomly assigned to two groups: control/pre-consultation group (CG) or 
experimental/post-consultation group (EG). An anonymous self-administered 
questionnaire was used. A total of 470 participants were analyzed (227 CG; 243 
EG). The EG/post-consultation group showed significant improvement in knowledge, 
with correct answers increasing from 63% to 75% (p < 0.001). However, knowledge 
gaps persisted: over 50% were unaware of TD's self-limited nature, 30% did not 
recognize loperamide as a symptom reliever, and 36% believed all travelers 
should take antibiotics to prevent TD. The educational level and previous travel 
outside Europe influenced baseline knowledge; previous travel medicine 
consultations and information on TD improved knowledge in both groups and made 
it easier to acquire knowledge on the subject. Thus, a pre-travel consultation 
effectively increased travelers' TD knowledge. However, post-consultation 
knowledge levels remained suboptimal, indicating the need for targeted 
interventions to increase travelers' literacy and optimize pre-travel 
consultations.

DOI: 10.3390/tropicalmed9100232
PMCID: PMC11510960
PMID: 39453259

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.