---
reference_id: "PMID:40678848"
title: "Identification and Characterization of a Novel Biallelic SLC12A2 Variant Associated With Kilquist Syndrome (OMIM #619080)."
authors:
- Leone P
- Nisco A
- de Gennaro L
- Tolomeo M
- Lorefice E
- Petrosillo G
- Russo S
- De Giovanni D
- Catacchio CR
- Lepri FR
- Ventura M
- Simonetti S
- Tummolo A
- Barile M
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.64188
keywords:
- Humans
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology, diagnosis"
- Alleles
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/genetics, diagnosis, pathology"
- "Hyperventilation/genetics, diagnosis"
- "Muscle Hypotonia/genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Solute Carrier Family 12, Member 2/genetics, chemistry"
- Infant
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification and Characterization of a Novel Biallelic SLC12A2 Variant Associated With Kilquist Syndrome (OMIM #619080).
**Authors:** Leone P, Nisco A, de Gennaro L, Tolomeo M, Lorefice E, Petrosillo G, Russo S, De Giovanni D, Catacchio CR, Lepri FR, Ventura M, Simonetti S, Tummolo A, Barile M
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.64188](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.64188)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2025 Dec;197(12):e64188. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.64188. Epub
2025  Jul 18.

Identification and Characterization of a Novel Biallelic SLC12A2 Variant 
Associated With Kilquist Syndrome (OMIM #619080).

Leone P(1), Nisco A(1), de Gennaro L(1), Tolomeo M(2), Lorefice E(3), Petrosillo 
G(2), Russo S(4), De Giovanni D(5), Catacchio CR(1), Lepri FR(3), Ventura M(1), 
Simonetti S(4), Tummolo A(5), Barile M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, Biotechnology and Environment, University of Bari 
A. Moro, Bari, Italy.
(2)Bioenergetics and Molecular Biotechnology, CNR Institute of Biomembranes, 
Bari, Italy.
(3)Laboratory of Medical Genetics Translational Cytogenomics Research Unit, 
Bambino Gesù Children Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(4)Regional Centre for Neonatal Screening Children's Hospital Giovanni XXIII, 
Bari, Italy.
(5)Metabolic Diseases and Clinical Genetics Unit Children's Hospital Giovanni 
XXIII, Bari, Italy.

This study presents the case of a child with multiple congenital anomalies, 
severe hypotonia, and profound bilateral sensorineural hearing loss. Functional 
bioenergetic assessments showed no significant mitochondrial respiratory 
defects, and riboflavin (Rf) status evaluation excluded a deficiency in Rf 
transporters as a cause of hearing loss. Clinical findings were consistent with 
Kilquist syndrome (KILQS), and genetic investigations confirmed the diagnosis by 
identifying a novel homozygous splice-site variant, c.[3101-1G>C];[3101-1G>C], 
in the SLC12A2 gene, which encodes the Na+-K+-2Cl- Cotransporter 1 (NKCC1) 
protein. The effect of this mutation was further investigated using exon-walking 
PCR and Sanger sequencing, which confirmed exon 23 skipping in the patient's 
mRNA, resulting in a truncated NKCC1 protein. In silico structural modeling 
suggested compromised dimerization stability, which was supported by 
immunoblotting analysis, revealing the absence of the dimeric form of NKCC1 in 
patient-derived peripheral blood mononuclear cells. This study provides critical 
insights into the molecular and structural consequences of NKCC1 disruption, 
contributing to the understanding of its role in KILQS pathogenesis. Further 
studies are needed to elucidate the precise molecular mechanisms and explore 
potential therapeutic interventions.

© 2025 The Author(s). American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.64188
PMID: 40678848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]