---
reference_id: "PMID:24552285"
title: Mutant adenosine deaminase 2 in a polyarteritis nodosa vasculopathy.
authors:
- Navon Elkan P
- Pierce SB
- Segel R
- Walsh T
- Barash J
- Padeh S
- Zlotogorski A
- Berkun Y
- Press JJ
- Mukamel M
- Voth I
- Hashkes PJ
- Harel L
- Hoffer V
- Ling E
- Yalcinkaya F
- Kasapcopur O
- Lee MK
- Klevit RE
- Renbaum P
- Weinberg-Shukron A
- Sener EF
- Schormair B
- Zeligson S
- Marek-Yagel D
- Strom TM
- Shohat M
- Singer A
- Rubinow A
- Pras E
- Winkelmann J
- Tekin M
- Anikster Y
- King MC
- Levy-Lahad E
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1307362
keywords:
- "Adenosine Deaminase/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Adolescent
- Age of Onset
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Exome
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Georgia (Republic)
- Humans
- Infant
- "Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Jews/genetics
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Polyarteritis Nodosa/genetics, pathology"
- Turkey
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutant adenosine deaminase 2 in a polyarteritis nodosa vasculopathy.
**Authors:** Navon Elkan P, Pierce SB, Segel R, Walsh T, Barash J, Padeh S, Zlotogorski A, Berkun Y, Press JJ, Mukamel M, Voth I, Hashkes PJ, Harel L, Hoffer V, Ling E, Yalcinkaya F, Kasapcopur O, Lee MK, Klevit RE, Renbaum P, Weinberg-Shukron A, Sener EF, Schormair B, Zeligson S, Marek-Yagel D, Strom TM, Shohat M, Singer A, Rubinow A, Pras E, Winkelmann J, Tekin M, Anikster Y, King MC, Levy-Lahad E
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1307362](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1307362)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2014 Mar 6;370(10):921-31. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1307362. Epub 2014
 Feb 19.

Mutant adenosine deaminase 2 in a polyarteritis nodosa vasculopathy.

Navon Elkan P(1), Pierce SB, Segel R, Walsh T, Barash J, Padeh S, Zlotogorski A, 
Berkun Y, Press JJ, Mukamel M, Voth I, Hashkes PJ, Harel L, Hoffer V, Ling E, 
Yalcinkaya F, Kasapcopur O, Lee MK, Klevit RE, Renbaum P, Weinberg-Shukron A, 
Sener EF, Schormair B, Zeligson S, Marek-Yagel D, Strom TM, Shohat M, Singer A, 
Rubinow A, Pras E, Winkelmann J, Tekin M, Anikster Y, King MC, Levy-Lahad E.

Author information:
(1)The authors' affiliations are listed in the Appendix.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2014 Jun;10(6):323-4. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2014.75.
    N Engl J Med. 2014 Jul 31;371(5):478. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1405506.
    N Engl J Med. 2014 Jul 31;371(5):478-9. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1405506.
    N Engl J Med. 2014 Jul 31;371(5):478-80. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1405506.
    N Engl J Med. 2014 Jul 31;371(5):480. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1405506.
    N Engl J Med. 2014 Jul 31;371(5):481. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1405506.
    Sci Transl Med. 2014 Apr 16;6(232):232ec67. doi: 
10.1126/scitranslmed.3009248.

BACKGROUND: Polyarteritis nodosa is a systemic necrotizing vasculitis with a 
pathogenesis that is poorly understood. We identified six families with multiple 
cases of systemic and cutaneous polyarteritis nodosa, consistent with autosomal 
recessive inheritance. In most cases, onset of the disease occurred during 
childhood.
METHODS: We carried out exome sequencing in persons from multiply affected 
families of Georgian Jewish or German ancestry. We performed targeted sequencing 
in additional family members and in unrelated affected persons, 3 of Georgian 
Jewish ancestry and 14 of Turkish ancestry. Mutations were assessed by testing 
their effect on enzymatic activity in serum specimens from patients, analysis of 
protein structure, expression in mammalian cells, and biophysical analysis of 
purified protein.
RESULTS: In all the families, vasculitis was caused by recessive mutations in 
CECR1, the gene encoding adenosine deaminase 2 (ADA2). All the Georgian Jewish 
patients were homozygous for a mutation encoding a Gly47Arg substitution, the 
German patients were compound heterozygous for Arg169Gln and Pro251Leu 
mutations, and one Turkish patient was compound heterozygous for Gly47Val and 
Trp264Ser mutations. In the endogamous Georgian Jewish population, the Gly47Arg 
carrier frequency was 0.102, which is consistent with the high prevalence of 
disease. The other mutations either were found in only one family member or 
patient or were extremely rare. ADA2 activity was significantly reduced in serum 
specimens from patients. Expression in human embryonic kidney 293T cells 
revealed low amounts of mutant secreted protein.
CONCLUSIONS: Recessive loss-of-function mutations of ADA2, a growth factor that 
is the major extracellular adenosine deaminase, can cause polyarteritis nodosa 
vasculopathy with highly varied clinical expression. (Funded by the Shaare Zedek 
Medical Center and others.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1307362
PMID: 24552285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]