---
reference_id: "PMID:36996880"
title: Biopsy Diagnosis of Hirschsprung's Disease Using a Single Excisional Biopsy Based on the Anorectal Line.
authors:
- Takeda M
- Ochi T
- Koga H
- Tsuboi K
- Arakawa A
- Lane GJ
- Yamataka A
journal: Eur J Pediatr Surg
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1055/a-2065-9071
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biopsy Diagnosis of Hirschsprung's Disease Using a Single Excisional Biopsy Based on the Anorectal Line.
**Authors:** Takeda M, Ochi T, Koga H, Tsuboi K, Arakawa A, Lane GJ, Yamataka A
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr Surg (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1055/a-2065-9071](https://doi.org/10.1055/a-2065-9071)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2024 Jun;34(3):274-281. doi: 10.1055/a-2065-9071. Epub
2023  Mar 30.

Biopsy Diagnosis of Hirschsprung's Disease Using a Single Excisional Biopsy 
Based on the Anorectal Line.

Takeda M(1), Ochi T(1), Koga H(1), Tsuboi K(1), Arakawa A(2), Lane GJ(1), 
Yamataka A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric General and Urogenital Surgery, Juntendo University 
School of Medicine, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Human Pathology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, 
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

INTRODUCTION:  A biopsy protocol for diagnosing Hirschsprung's disease (HD) in 
children using the anorectal line (ARL).
MATERIALS AND METHODS:  The ARL was adopted for diagnosing HD in 2016 using two 
excisional submucosal rectal biopsies performed at different levels, 
sequentially; the first just above the ARL and the second, further proximal 
(2-ARL). Currently, only the first-level biopsy is performed (1-ARL) and 
examined intraoperatively. Management was observation if normoganglionic, 
pull-through if aganglionic, and a second-level biopsy if hypoganglionic. 
Hypoganglionosis was considered physiologic if the second-level biopsy was 
normoganglionic and pathologic if hypoganglionic. Colon caliber change and bowel 
obstructive symptoms reflect the severity of hypoganglionosis.
RESULTS:  For 2-ARL (n = 54), results were: normoganglionosis (n = 31/54; 
57.4%), aganglionosis (n = 19/54; 35.2%), and hypoganglionosis (n = 4/54; 7.4%); 
physiologic (n = 3/54; 5.6%) and pathologic (n = 1/54; 1.9%). Normoganglionosis 
and aganglionosis were always duplicated in 2-ARL (kappa = 1.0). For 1-ARL 
(n = 36), results were: normoganglionosis (n = 17/36; 47.2%), aganglionosis 
(n = 17/36; 47.2%), and hypoganglionosis (n = 2/36; 5.6%). Second-level biopsies 
were normoganglionic (physiologic: n = 1) and hypoganglionic (pathologic: 
n = 1). All normoganglionic cases, except one, resolved conservatively. All 
aganglionic cases had pull-through with HD confirmed on histopathology. Both 
pathologic hypoganglionic cases had caliber change and severe obstructive 
symptoms as definitive indications for pull-through with hypoganglionosis of the 
entire rectum confirmed on histopathology. Physiologic hypoganglionic cases were 
observed and currently have regular defecation.
CONCLUSION:  Because the ARL is an objective functional, neurologic, and 
anatomic demarcation, normoganglionosis and aganglionosis can be diagnosed 
accurately with a single excisional biopsy. Only hypoganglionosis requires a 
second-level biopsy.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/a-2065-9071
PMID: 36996880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.