---
reference_id: "PMID:21929534"
title: Desmosomal genodermatoses.
authors:
- Petrof G
- Mellerio JE
- McGrath JA
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2011.10640.x
keywords:
- Desmocollins/genetics
- Desmogleins/genetics
- Desmoplakins/genetics
- "Desmosomes/genetics, physiology, ultrastructure"
- Epidermolysis Bullosa/classification
- Glycoproteins/genetics
- Humans
- Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- Plakophilins/genetics
- Skin Diseases/genetics
- gamma Catenin/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Desmosomal genodermatoses.
**Authors:** Petrof G, Mellerio JE, McGrath JA
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2133.2011.10640.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2133.2011.10640.x)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2012 Jan;166(1):36-45. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2011.10640.x.

Desmosomal genodermatoses.

Petrof G(1), Mellerio JE, McGrath JA.

Author information:
(1)St John's Institute of Dermatology, King's College London (Guy's Campus), 
London SE1 9RT, UK.

Desmosomes are intercellular junctions that contribute to cell-cell adhesion, 
signalling, development and differentiation in various tissues, including the 
skin. Composed of a network of transmembranous and intracellular plaque 
proteins, pathogenic autosomal dominant or recessive mutations have been 
reported in 10 different desmosomal genes, resulting in a spectrum of phenotypes 
variably affecting skin, hair and heart. This review summarizes the molecular 
pathology and phenotypes that predominantly affect the skin/hair. Recent 
desmosomal genodermatoses described include lethal congenital epidermolysis 
bullosa (plakoglobin), cardiomyopathy with alopecia and palmoplantar keratoderma 
(plakoglobin), hypotrichosis with scalp vesicles (desmocollin 3), and 
generalized peeling skin disease (corneodesmosin). Understanding the range of 
clinical phenotypes in combination with knowledge of the inherent desmosome gene 
mutation(s) is helpful in managing and counselling patients, as well as 
providing insight into the biological function of specific components of 
desmosomes in skin and other tissues.

© 2011 The Authors. BJD © 2011 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2011.10640.x
PMID: 21929534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]