---
reference_id: "PMID:32100974"
title: "Nevus-associated melanoma: facts and controversies."
authors:
- Pampena R
- Lai M
- Piana S
- Lallas A
- Pellacani G
- Longo C
journal: G Ital Dermatol Venereol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.23736/S0392-0488.19.06534-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nevus-associated melanoma: facts and controversies.
**Authors:** Pampena R, Lai M, Piana S, Lallas A, Pellacani G, Longo C
**Journal:** G Ital Dermatol Venereol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.23736/S0392-0488.19.06534-9](https://doi.org/10.23736/S0392-0488.19.06534-9)

## Content

1. G Ital Dermatol Venereol. 2020 Feb;155(1):65-75. doi: 
10.23736/S0392-0488.19.06534-9.

Nevus-associated melanoma: facts and controversies.

Pampena R(1), Lai M(1), Piana S(2), Lallas A(3), Pellacani G(4), Longo C(5)(4).

Author information:
(1)Centro Oncologico ad Alta Tecnologia Diagnostica, Azienda Unità Sanitaria 
Locale - IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, Reggio Emilia, Italy.
(2)Unit of Pathology, Azienda Unità Sanitaria Locale - IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, 
Reggio Emilia, Italy.
(3)First Department of Dermatology, Aristotle University, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(4)Department of Dermatology, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, 
Italy.
(5)Centro Oncologico ad Alta Tecnologia Diagnostica, Azienda Unità Sanitaria 
Locale - IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, Reggio Emilia, Italy - 
longo.caterina@gmail.com.

Nevus-associated melanoma (NAM) is defined on histopathological basis by the 
coexistence of melanoma and nevus components. Melanomas developing on 
pre-existing congenital or acquired nevi are usually of the superficial 
spreading subtype and harbor the BRAFV600E mutation. NAM accounts for almost 
one-third of melanoma cases As compared to de novo melanoma, NAM develops on 
younger patients, is more frequently located on the trunk, and is associated 
with a high nevus count, light eye color and history of frequent sunburns. NAM 
has been regarded as a model to investigate melanoma origin. Molecular analysis 
defining the mutation profile of NAM's nevus and melanoma components supported 
the existence of two pathways of melanoma development, the first not involving 
clinically visible precursors, the second involving melanocytic nevi as 
precursors. Concerning diagnosis, dermatoscopy may identify nevus and melanoma 
components when located side-by-side, but no specific criteria have been 
described when superimposed. In-vivo reflectance confocal microscopy 
significantly enhances the recognition of NAM by allowing the detection of nevus 
remnants when superficially located. Regarding prognosis, NAM is generally 
thinner and more frequently in-situ than de-novo melanoma. Furthermore, studies 
reporting survival analysis demonstrated a trend towards better overall, 
distant-metastasis-free and recurrence-free survival. Although a clinical, 
phenotypic and molecular profile of NAM has been defined, controversies still 
exist. In the current review, we widely report and discuss facts and 
controversies on NAM.

DOI: 10.23736/S0392-0488.19.06534-9
PMID: 32100974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]