---
reference_id: "PMID:24618541"
title: Interaction between bone morphogenetic protein receptor type 2 and estrogenic compounds in pulmonary arterial hypertension.
authors:
- Fessel JP
- Chen X
- Frump A
- Gladson S
- Blackwell T
- Kang C
- Johnson J
- Loyd JE
- Hemnes A
- Austin E
- West J
journal: Pulm Circ
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1086/674312
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interaction between bone morphogenetic protein receptor type 2 and estrogenic compounds in pulmonary arterial hypertension.
**Authors:** Fessel JP, Chen X, Frump A, Gladson S, Blackwell T, Kang C, Johnson J, Loyd JE, Hemnes A, Austin E, West J
**Journal:** Pulm Circ (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1086/674312](https://doi.org/10.1086/674312)

## Content

1. Pulm Circ. 2013 Sep;3(3):564-77. doi: 10.1086/674312. Epub 2013 Dec 2.

Interaction between bone morphogenetic protein receptor type 2 and estrogenic 
compounds in pulmonary arterial hypertension.

Fessel JP(1), Chen X, Frump A, Gladson S, Blackwell T, Kang C, Johnson J, Loyd 
JE, Hemnes A, Austin E, West J.

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
Tennessee, USA.

Abstract The majority of heritable pulmonary arterial hypertension (HPAH) cases 
are associated with mutations in bone morphogenetic protein receptor type 2 
(BMPR2). BMPR2 mutation carries about a 20% lifetime risk of PAH development, 
but penetrance is approximately three times higher in females. Previous studies 
have shown a correlation between estrogen metabolism and penetrance, with 
increased levels of the estrogen metabolite 16α-hydroxyestrone (16αOHE) and 
reduced levels of the metabolite 2-methoxyestrogen (2ME) associated with 
increased risk of disease. The goal of this study was to determine whether 
16αOHE increased and 2ME decreased penetrance of disease in Bmpr2 mutant mice 
and, if so, by what mechanism. We found that 16αOHE∶2ME ratio was high in male 
human HPAH patients. Bmpr2 mutant male mice receiving chronic 16αOHE had doubled 
disease penetrance, associated with reduced cardiac output. 2ME did not have a 
significant protective effect, either alone or in combination with 16αOHE. In 
control mice but not in Bmpr2 mutant mice, 16αOHE suppressed bone morphogenetic 
protein signaling, probably directly through suppression of Bmpr2 protein. Bmpr2 
mutant pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells were insensitive to estrogen 
signaling through canonical pathways, associated with aberrant intracellular 
localization of estrogen receptor α. In both control and Bmpr2 mutant mice, 
16αOHE was associated with suppression of cytokine expression but with increased 
alternate markers of injury, including alterations in genes related to 
thrombotic function, angiogenesis, planar polarity, and metabolism. These data 
support a causal relationship between increased 16αOHE and increased PAH 
penetrance, with the likely molecular mechanisms including suppression of BMPR2, 
alterations in estrogen receptor translocation, and induction of vascular injury 
and insulin resistance-related pathways.

DOI: 10.1086/674312
PMCID: PMC4070799
PMID: 24618541