---
reference_id: "PMID:36573139"
title: Evaluation of Superior Semicircular Canal Morphology and Its Relationship with Glenoid Fossa Roof Thickness Using Cone Beam Computed Tomography.
authors:
- Davvaz B
- Hasani M
- Haghnegahdar A
journal: Radiol Res Pract
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1155/2022/1565038
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of Superior Semicircular Canal Morphology and Its Relationship with Glenoid Fossa Roof Thickness Using Cone Beam Computed Tomography.
**Authors:** Davvaz B, Hasani M, Haghnegahdar A
**Journal:** Radiol Res Pract (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2022/1565038](https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/1565038)

## Content

1. Radiol Res Pract. 2022 Dec 17;2022:1565038. doi: 10.1155/2022/1565038. 
eCollection 2022.

Evaluation of Superior Semicircular Canal Morphology and Its Relationship with 
Glenoid Fossa Roof Thickness Using Cone Beam Computed Tomography.

Davvaz B(1)(2), Hasani M(2), Haghnegahdar A(2).

Author information:
(1)Student Research Committee, Dental School, Shiraz University of Medical 
Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Radiology, Dental School, Shiraz 
University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.

PURPOSE: This study aimed to evaluate the bone thickness of the superior 
semicircular canal (SSC) roof and its relationship with the roof thickness of 
the glenoid fossa (RGF).
METHODS: The cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) images of 280 patients (560 
temporal regions) were surveyed. The lowest thickness of the SSC roof was 
measured and categorized based on the radiological patterns of the Cisneros et 
al. classification. The thickness of GF and the presence of dehiscence in this 
part were determined, as well. The relationship between the thickness of the GF 
roof and the bone thickness covering the SSC was also assessed.
RESULTS: The mean thickness of the SSC roof was 0.93 ± 0.48 mm, with no 
significant difference among different age groups and genders (p > 0.05). 
However, superior semicircular canal dehiscence (SSCD) was more prevalent among 
females over 45 years old. Similarly, the individuals with the dehiscence of the 
GF roof had a 12.93-fold higher chance of SSCD development.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicated that the thickness of the bone overlying the 
SSC was significantly related to the roof thickness of the GF. However, an 
increase in age resulted in no significant change in the bone thickness of the 
SSC roof. Gender also had no role in changing the thickness of the bone 
overlying the SSC. Considering the decrease in the thickness of the SSC roof 
among females over 45 years of age, menopause may be responsible for this 
occurrence as well as for the increase in the prevalence of SSCD.

Copyright © 2022 Bahare Davvaz et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/1565038
PMCID: PMC9789904
PMID: 36573139

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.