---
reference_id: "PMID:31868674"
title: Correlations Between Mutant Huntingtin Aggregates and Behavioral Changes in R6/1 Mice.
authors:
- Cabanas M
- Piquemal M
- Pistono C
- Arnaud S
- Rakesh D
- Poinama E
- Guillou JL
- Garret M
- Cho YH
journal: J Huntingtons Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3233/JHD-190352
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Correlations Between Mutant Huntingtin Aggregates and Behavioral Changes in R6/1 Mice.
**Authors:** Cabanas M, Piquemal M, Pistono C, Arnaud S, Rakesh D, Poinama E, Guillou JL, Garret M, Cho YH
**Journal:** J Huntingtons Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JHD-190352](https://doi.org/10.3233/JHD-190352)

## Content

1. J Huntingtons Dis. 2020;9(1):33-45. doi: 10.3233/JHD-190352.

Correlations Between Mutant Huntingtin Aggregates and Behavioral Changes in R6/1 
Mice.

Cabanas M(1)(2), Piquemal M(1)(2), Pistono C(1)(2), Arnaud S(1)(2), Rakesh 
D(1)(2), Poinama E(1)(2), Guillou JL(1)(2), Garret M(1)(2), Cho YH(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cognitive and Integrative Neuroscience of Aquitaine, CNRS UMR 
5287, Pessac Cedex, France.
(2)Institute of Cognitive and Integrative Neuroscience of Aquitaine, University 
of Bordeaux, Bordeaux Cedex, France.

BACKGROUND: Huntington's disease (HD) is a neurodegenerative disorder caused by 
the expansion of the trinucleotide CAG in the HD gene. While the presence of 
nuclear aggregates of mutant huntingtin (mHtt) in neurons is a hallmark of HD, 
the reason behind its toxicity remains elusive.
OBJECTIVE: The present study was conducted to assess a correlation between the 
number of mHtt aggregates and the severity of HD symptoms in R6/1 mice.
METHODS: We investigated correlations between behavioral deficits and the level 
of nuclear mHtt aggregates in different neuroanatomical regions in 3-month-old 
R6/1 mice, the age at which a large variability of symptom severity between 
animals has been observed.
RESULTS: R6/1 mice were deficient in instinctive and anxiety related behaviors 
as well as long-term memory capabilities. Significant differences were also 
found between the sexes; female transgenic mice displayed less severe deficits 
than males. While the level of mHtt aggregates was correlated with the severity 
of HD phenotypes in most regions of interest, an opposite relationship also was 
found for some other regions examined.
CONCLUSIONS: The obtained results suggest harmful and region-specific roles of 
mHtt aggregates in HD symptoms.

DOI: 10.3233/JHD-190352
PMID: 31868674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]