---
reference_id: "PMID:35095905"
title: "The Spectrum of the Deficiency of Adenosine Deaminase 2: An Observational Analysis of a 60 Patient Cohort."
authors:
- Barron KS
- Aksentijevich I
- Deuitch NT
- Stone DL
- Hoffmann P
- Videgar-Laird R
- Soldatos A
- Bergerson J
- Toro C
- Cudrici C
- Nehrebecky M
- Romeo T
- Jones A
- Boehm M
- Kanakry JA
- Dimitrova D
- Calvo KR
- Alao H
- Kapuria D
- Ben-Yakov G
- Pichard DC
- Hathaway L
- Brofferio A
- McRae E
- Moura NS
- Schnappauf O
- Rosenzweig S
- Heller T
- Cowen EW
- Kastner DL
- Ombrello AK
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.811473
keywords:
- Adenosine Deaminase/deficiency
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- COVID-19/metabolism
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation/methods
- Humans
- Infant
- Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/deficiency
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Tumor Necrosis Factor Inhibitors/metabolism
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Spectrum of the Deficiency of Adenosine Deaminase 2: An Observational Analysis of a 60 Patient Cohort.
**Authors:** Barron KS, Aksentijevich I, Deuitch NT, Stone DL, Hoffmann P, Videgar-Laird R, Soldatos A, Bergerson J, Toro C, Cudrici C, Nehrebecky M, Romeo T, Jones A, Boehm M, Kanakry JA, Dimitrova D, Calvo KR, Alao H, Kapuria D, Ben-Yakov G, Pichard DC, Hathaway L, Brofferio A, McRae E, Moura NS, Schnappauf O, Rosenzweig S, Heller T, Cowen EW, Kastner DL, Ombrello AK
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2021.811473](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2021.811473)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2022 Jan 10;12:811473. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.811473. 
eCollection 2021.

The Spectrum of the Deficiency of Adenosine Deaminase 2: An Observational 
Analysis of a 60 Patient Cohort.

Barron KS(1), Aksentijevich I(2), Deuitch NT(2), Stone DL(2), Hoffmann P(2), 
Videgar-Laird R(2), Soldatos A(3), Bergerson J(1), Toro C(4), Cudrici C(5), 
Nehrebecky M(2), Romeo T(2), Jones A(2), Boehm M(5), Kanakry JA(6), Dimitrova 
D(6), Calvo KR(7), Alao H(8), Kapuria D(8), Ben-Yakov G(8), Pichard DC(9), 
Hathaway L(9), Brofferio A(5), McRae E(2), Moura NS(2), Schnappauf O(2), 
Rosenzweig S(2), Heller T(8), Cowen EW(9), Kastner DL(2), Ombrello AK(2).

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, United States.
(2)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health 
(NIH), Bethesda, MD, United States.
(3)National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Strokes, National Institutes 
of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, United States.
(4)Undiagnosed Disease Program, National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, 
MD, United States.
(5)National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health 
(NIH), Bethesda, MD, United States.
(6)National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, 
United States.
(7)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Clinical Center, National Institutes of 
Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, United States.
(8)National Institute of Digestive Diseases and Kidney Diseases, National 
Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, United States.
(9)National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, 
National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, United States.

The deficiency of adenosine deaminase 2 (DADA2) is an autosomal recessively 
inherited disease that has undergone extensive phenotypic expansion since being 
first described in patients with fevers, recurrent strokes, livedo racemosa, and 
polyarteritis nodosa in 2014. It is now recognized that patients may develop 
multisystem disease that spans multiple medical subspecialties. Here, we 
describe the findings from a large single center longitudinal cohort of 60 
patients, the broad phenotypic presentation, as well as highlight the cohort's 
experience with hematopoietic cell transplantation and COVID-19. Disease 
manifestations could be separated into three major phenotypes: 
inflammatory/vascular, immune dysregulatory, and hematologic, however, most 
patients presented with significant overlap between these three phenotype 
groups. The cardinal features of the inflammatory/vascular group included 
cutaneous manifestations and stroke. Evidence of immune dysregulation was 
commonly observed, including hypogammaglobulinemia, absent to low class-switched 
memory B cells, and inadequate response to vaccination. Despite these findings, 
infectious complications were exceedingly rare in this cohort. Hematologic 
findings including pure red cell aplasia (PRCA), immune-mediated neutropenia, 
and pancytopenia were observed in half of patients. We significantly extended 
our experience using anti-TNF agents, with no strokes observed in 2026 patient 
months on TNF inhibitors. Meanwhile, hematologic and immune features had a more 
varied response to anti-TNF therapy. Six patients received a total of 10 
allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplant (HCT) procedures, with secondary graft 
failure necessitating repeat HCTs in three patients, as well as unplanned donor 
cell infusions to avoid graft rejection. All transplanted patients had been on 
anti-TNF agents prior to HCT and received varying degrees of reduced-intensity 
or non-myeloablative conditioning. All transplanted patients are still alive and 
have discontinued anti-TNF therapy. The long-term follow up afforded by this 
large single-center study underscores the clinical heterogeneity of DADA2 and 
the potential for phenotypes to evolve in any individual patient.

Copyright © 2022 Barron, Aksentijevich, Deuitch, Stone, Hoffmann, Videgar-Laird, 
Soldatos, Bergerson, Toro, Cudrici, Nehrebecky, Romeo, Jones, Boehm, Kanakry, 
Dimitrova, Calvo, Alao, Kapuria, Ben-Yakov, Pichard, Hathaway, Brofferio, McRae, 
Moura, Schnappauf, Rosenzweig, Heller, Cowen, Kastner and Ombrello.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.811473
PMCID: PMC8790931
PMID: 35095905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The handling editor declared a 
past co-authorship with several of the authors IA, DLK, and AO.