---
reference_id: "PMID:25758994"
title: The type of variants at the COL3A1 gene associates with the phenotype and severity of vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
authors:
- Frank M
- Albuisson J
- Ranque B
- Golmard L
- Mazzella JM
- Bal-Theoleyre L
- Fauret AL
- Mirault T
- Denarié N
- Mousseaux E
- Boutouyrie P
- Fiessinger JN
- Emmerich J
- Messas E
- Jeunemaitre X
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.32
keywords:
- Adult
- Collagen Type III/genetics
- "Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The type of variants at the COL3A1 gene associates with the phenotype and severity of vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
**Authors:** Frank M, Albuisson J, Ranque B, Golmard L, Mazzella JM, Bal-Theoleyre L, Fauret AL, Mirault T, Denarié N, Mousseaux E, Boutouyrie P, Fiessinger JN, Emmerich J, Messas E, Jeunemaitre X
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2015.32](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2015.32)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Dec;23(12):1657-64. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.32. Epub 2015
 Mar 11.

The type of variants at the COL3A1 gene associates with the phenotype and 
severity of vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.

Frank M(1)(2), Albuisson J(1)(2)(3), Ranque B(2)(3)(4), Golmard L(1)(3), 
Mazzella JM(1), Bal-Theoleyre L(5), Fauret AL(1)(3), Mirault T(1)(3), Denarié 
N(1), Mousseaux E(3)(6), Boutouyrie P(2)(3)(7), Fiessinger JN(1)(3), Emmerich 
J(1)(3), Messas E(1)(2)(3), Jeunemaitre X(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)AP-HP, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Département de Génétique, Service 
de Médecine Vasculaire et Centre de Référence des Maladies Vasculaires Rares, 
Paris, France.
(2)INSERM, U970, Paris centre de Recherche Cardiovasculaire-PARCC, Paris, 
France.
(3)Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Faculté de Médecine, Paris, 
France.
(4)AP-HP, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Service de Médecine Interne, Paris, 
France.
(5)AP-HM, Service de Médecine Vasculaire, Hôpital de la Timone, Av Jean Moulin, 
Marseille, France.
(6)AP-HP, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Service de Radiologie 
Cardiovasculaire, Paris, France.
(7)AP-HP, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Service de Pharmacologie, Paris, 
France.

Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (vEDS) is a rare and severe autosomal dominant 
disorder caused by variants at the COL3A1 gene. Clinical characteristics and 
course of disease of 215 molecularly proven patients (146 index cases and 69 
relatives) were analysed. We found 126 distincts variants that were divided into 
five groups: (1) Glycine substitutions (n=71), (2) splice-site and in-frame 
insertions-deletions (n=36), (3) variants leading to haplo-insufficiency (n=7), 
(4) non-glycine missense variants within the triple helix (n=4 variants), and 
(5) non-glycine missense variants or in-frame insertions-deletions, in the N- or 
C-terminal part of the protein (n=8). Overall, our cohort confirmed the severity 
of the disease with a median age at first complication of 29 years (IQR 22-39), 
the most frequent being arterial (48%) and digestive (24%) ruptures. Groups 2 
and 1 were significantly more severe than groups 3-5, with extreme median ages 
at first major complication of 23-47 years. Patients of groups 3-5 had a less 
typical phenotype and remarkably absence of digestive events. The distribution 
of glycine-replacing amino acids was strongly biased towards more destabilizing 
residues of the collagen assembly. Thus the natural course of vEDS and the 
clinical phenotype of patients are influenced by the type of COL3A1 variant. 
This study also confirms that patients with variants located in the C- and 
N-termini or leading to haplo-insufficiency have milder course of the disease 
and less prevalent diagnostic criteria. These findings may help refine 
diagnostic strategy, genetic counselling and clinical care.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.32
PMCID: PMC4795191
PMID: 25758994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]