---
reference_id: "PMID:37812817"
title: "Antisense oligonucleotides restore excitability, GABA signalling and sodium current density in a Dravet syndrome model."
authors:
- Yuan Y
- Lopez-Santiago L
- Denomme N
- Chen C
- "O'Malley HA"
- Hodges SL
- Ji S
- Han Z
- Christiansen A
- Isom LL
journal: Brain
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awad349
keywords:
- Mice
- Animals
- Humans
- "Oligonucleotides, Antisense/pharmacology"
- Parvalbumins/metabolism
- "Epilepsies, Myoclonic/genetics"
- NAV1.1 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel/genetics
- Interneurons/metabolism
- gamma-Aminobutyric Acid
- "Disease Models, Animal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antisense oligonucleotides restore excitability, GABA signalling and sodium current density in a Dravet syndrome model.
**Authors:** Yuan Y, Lopez-Santiago L, Denomme N, Chen C, O'Malley HA, Hodges SL, Ji S, Han Z, Christiansen A, Isom LL
**Journal:** Brain (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awad349](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awad349)

## Content

1. Brain. 2024 Apr 4;147(4):1231-1246. doi: 10.1093/brain/awad349.

Antisense oligonucleotides restore excitability, GABA signalling and sodium 
current density in a Dravet syndrome model.

Yuan Y(1), Lopez-Santiago L(1), Denomme N(1), Chen C(1), O'Malley HA(1), Hodges 
SL(1), Ji S(2), Han Z(2), Christiansen A(2), Isom LL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(2)Stoke Therapeutics, Inc., Bedford, MA 01730, USA.

Dravet syndrome is an intractable developmental and epileptic encephalopathy 
caused by de novo variants in SCN1A resulting in haploinsufficiency of the 
voltage-gated sodium channel Nav1.1. We showed previously that administration of 
the antisense oligonucleotide STK-001, also called ASO-22, generated using 
targeted augmentation of nuclear gene output technology to prevent inclusion of 
the nonsense-mediated decay, or poison, exon 20N in human SCN1A, increased 
productive Scn1a transcript and Nav1.1 expression and reduced the incidence of 
electrographic seizures and sudden unexpected death in epilepsy in a mouse model 
of Dravet syndrome. Here, we investigated the mechanism of action of ASO-84, a 
surrogate for ASO-22 that also targets splicing of SCN1A exon 20N, in Scn1a+/- 
Dravet syndrome mouse brain. Scn1a +/- Dravet syndrome and wild-type mice 
received a single intracerebroventricular injection of antisense oligonucleotide 
or vehicle at postnatal Day 2. We examined the electrophysiological properties 
of cortical pyramidal neurons and parvalbumin-positive fast-spiking interneurons 
in brain slices at postnatal Days 21-25 and measured sodium currents in 
parvalbumin-positive interneurons acutely dissociated from postnatal Day 21-25 
brain slices. We show that, in untreated Dravet syndrome mice, intrinsic 
cortical pyramidal neuron excitability was unchanged while cortical 
parvalbumin-positive interneurons showed biphasic excitability with initial 
hyperexcitability followed by hypoexcitability and depolarization block. Dravet 
syndrome parvalbumin-positive interneuron sodium current density was decreased 
compared to wild-type. GABAergic signalling to cortical pyramidal neurons was 
reduced in Dravet syndrome mice, suggesting decreased GABA release from 
interneurons. ASO-84 treatment restored action potential firing, sodium current 
density and GABAergic signalling in Dravet syndrome parvalbumin-positive 
interneurons. Our work suggests that interneuron excitability is selectively 
affected by ASO-84. This new work provides critical insights into the mechanism 
of action of this antisense oligonucleotide and supports the potential of 
antisense oligonucleotide-mediated upregulation of Nav1.1 as a successful 
strategy to treat Dravet syndrome.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awad349
PMCID: PMC10994531
PMID: 37812817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.C., S.J. and Z.H. were employees of Stoke 
Therapeutics at the time this work was completed. A portion of the work was 
funded by a grant from Stoke Therapeutics to the Regents of the University of 
Michigan.