---
reference_id: "PMID:35812751"
title: "Expanding the HPSE2 Genotypic Spectrum in Urofacial Syndrome, A Disease Featuring a Peripheral Neuropathy of the Urinary Bladder."
authors:
- Beaman GM
- Lopes FM
- Hofmann A
- Roesch W
- Promm M
- Bijlsma EK
- Patel C
- Akinci A
- Burgu B
- Knijnenburg J
- Ho G
- Aufschlaeger C
- Dathe S
- Voelckel MA
- Cohen M
- Yue WW
- Stuart HM
- Mckenzie EA
- Elvin M
- Roberts NA
- Woolf AS
- Newman WG
journal: Front Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.896125
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanding the HPSE2 Genotypic Spectrum in Urofacial Syndrome, A Disease Featuring a Peripheral Neuropathy of the Urinary Bladder.
**Authors:** Beaman GM, Lopes FM, Hofmann A, Roesch W, Promm M, Bijlsma EK, Patel C, Akinci A, Burgu B, Knijnenburg J, Ho G, Aufschlaeger C, Dathe S, Voelckel MA, Cohen M, Yue WW, Stuart HM, Mckenzie EA, Elvin M, Roberts NA, Woolf AS, Newman WG
**Journal:** Front Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2022.896125](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2022.896125)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2022 Jun 23;13:896125. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.896125.
eCollection  2022.

Expanding the HPSE2 Genotypic Spectrum in Urofacial Syndrome, A Disease 
Featuring a Peripheral Neuropathy of the Urinary Bladder.

Beaman GM(1)(2), Lopes FM(3), Hofmann A(4), Roesch W(4), Promm M(4), Bijlsma 
EK(5), Patel C(6), Akinci A(7), Burgu B(7), Knijnenburg J(5), Ho G(8)(9), 
Aufschlaeger C(4), Dathe S(4)(10), Voelckel MA(11), Cohen M(12), Yue WW(13), 
Stuart HM(1)(2), Mckenzie EA(14), Elvin M(15), Roberts NA(3), Woolf AS(3)(16), 
Newman WG(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester University NHS Foundation 
Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(2)Division of Evolution, Infection, and Genomics, Faculty of Biology, Medicine, 
and Human Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(3)Division of Cell Matrix Biology and Regenerative Medicine, School of 
Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology Medicine and Health, University of 
Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Pediatric Urology, KUNO Clinic St. Hedwig Clinic, University 
Medical Center Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
(5)Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, 
Netherlands.
(6)Genetic Health Queensland, Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital, Herston, QLD, 
Australia.
(7)Department of Pediatric Urology, Ankara University School of Medicine, Cebeci 
Children's Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(8)Sydney Genome Diagnostics, Children's Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, NSW, 
Australia.
(9)Disciplines of Child and Adolescent Health and Genomic Medicine, University 
of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(10)Städtisches Klinikum Dessau, Dessau-Roslau, Germany.
(11)Department of Medical Genetics, Hospital La Timone, Marseille, France.
(12)Center for Human Genetics and Laboratory Diagnostics (AHC) Medical Labs 
Martinsried, Martinsried, Germany.
(13)Biosciences Institute, Medical School, Newcastle University, Newcastle, 
United Kingdom.
(14)Protein Expression Facility, Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, 
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(15)Peak Proteins Ltd., Macclesfield, United Kingdom.
(16)Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, Manchester University NHS Foundation 
Trust, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom.

Urofacial (also called Ochoa) syndrome (UFS) is an autosomal recessive 
congenital disorder of the urinary bladder featuring voiding dysfunction and a 
grimace upon smiling. Biallelic variants in HPSE2, coding for the secreted 
protein heparanase-2, are described in around half of families genetically 
studied. Hpse2 mutant mice have aberrant bladder nerves. We sought to expand the 
genotypic spectrum of UFS and make insights into its pathobiology. Sanger 
sequencing, next generation sequencing and microarray analysis were performed in 
four previously unreported families with urinary tract disease and grimacing. In 
one, the proband had kidney failure and was homozygous for the previously 
described pathogenic variant c.429T>A, p.(Tyr143*). Three other families each 
carried a different novel HPSE2 variant. One had homozygous triplication of 
exons 8 and 9; another had homozygous deletion of exon 4; and another carried a 
novel c.419C>G variant encoding the missense p.Pro140Arg in trans with 
c.1099-1G>A, a previously reported pathogenic splice variant. Expressing the 
missense heparanase-2 variant in vitro showed that it was secreted as normal, 
suggesting that 140Arg has aberrant functionality after secretion. Bladder 
autonomic neurons emanate from pelvic ganglia where resident neural cell bodies 
derive from migrating neural crest cells. We demonstrated that, in normal human 
embryos, neuronal precursors near the developing hindgut and lower urinary tract 
were positive for both heparanase-2 and leucine rich repeats and immunoglobulin 
like domains 2 (LRIG2). Indeed, biallelic variants of LRIG2 have been implicated 
in rare UFS families. The study expands the genotypic spectrum in HPSE2 in UFS 
and supports a developmental neuronal pathobiology.

Copyright © 2022 Beaman, Lopes, Hofmann, Roesch, Promm, Bijlsma, Patel, Akinci, 
Burgu, Knijnenburg, Ho, Aufschlaeger, Dathe, Voelckel, Cohen, Yue, Stuart, 
Mckenzie, Elvin, Roberts, Woolf and Newman.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.896125
PMCID: PMC9259970
PMID: 35812751

Conflict of interest statement: Author ME was employed by the company Peak 
Proteins Ltd. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in 
the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed 
as a potential conflict of interest.