---
reference_id: "PMID:22820256"
title: Medulloblastoma exome sequencing uncovers subtype-specific somatic mutations.
authors:
- Pugh TJ
- Weeraratne SD
- Archer TC
- Pomeranz Krummel DA
- Auclair D
- Bochicchio J
- Carneiro MO
- Carter SL
- Cibulskis K
- Erlich RL
- Greulich H
- Lawrence MS
- Lennon NJ
- McKenna A
- Meldrim J
- Ramos AH
- Ross MG
- Russ C
- Shefler E
- Sivachenko A
- Sogoloff B
- Stojanov P
- Tamayo P
- Mesirov JP
- Amani V
- Teider N
- Sengupta S
- Francois JP
- Northcott PA
- Taylor MD
- Yu F
- Crabtree GR
- Kautzman AG
- Gabriel SB
- Getz G
- Jäger N
- Jones DT
- Lichter P
- Pfister SM
- Roberts TM
- Meyerson M
- Pomeroy SL
- Cho YJ
journal: Nature
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1038/nature11329
keywords:
- "Cerebellar Neoplasms/classification, genetics"
- Child
- "DEAD-box RNA Helicases/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "DNA Helicases/chemistry, genetics"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Exome/genetics
- "Genome, Human/genetics"
- Hedgehog Proteins/metabolism
- Histone Methyltransferases
- "Histone-Lysine N-Methyltransferase/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics
- LIM Domain Proteins/genetics
- "Medulloblastoma/classification, genetics"
- "Models, Molecular"
- Mutation/genetics
- Neoplasm Proteins/genetics
- "Nuclear Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- Patched Receptors
- Patched-1 Receptor
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic/genetics"
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary/genetics"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics
- "Receptors, Cell Surface/genetics"
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
- Signal Transduction
- TCF Transcription Factors/metabolism
- "Transcription Factors/chemistry, genetics"
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics
- Wnt Proteins/metabolism
- "beta Catenin/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Medulloblastoma exome sequencing uncovers subtype-specific somatic mutations.
**Authors:** Pugh TJ, Weeraratne SD, Archer TC, Pomeranz Krummel DA, Auclair D, Bochicchio J, Carneiro MO, Carter SL, Cibulskis K, Erlich RL, Greulich H, Lawrence MS, Lennon NJ, McKenna A, Meldrim J, Ramos AH, Ross MG, Russ C, Shefler E, Sivachenko A, Sogoloff B, Stojanov P, Tamayo P, Mesirov JP, Amani V, Teider N, Sengupta S, Francois JP, Northcott PA, Taylor MD, Yu F, Crabtree GR, Kautzman AG, Gabriel SB, Getz G, Jäger N, Jones DT, Lichter P, Pfister SM, Roberts TM, Meyerson M, Pomeroy SL, Cho YJ
**Journal:** Nature (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature11329](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature11329)

## Content

1. Nature. 2012 Aug 2;488(7409):106-10. doi: 10.1038/nature11329.

Medulloblastoma exome sequencing uncovers subtype-specific somatic mutations.

Pugh TJ(1), Weeraratne SD, Archer TC, Pomeranz Krummel DA, Auclair D, Bochicchio 
J, Carneiro MO, Carter SL, Cibulskis K, Erlich RL, Greulich H, Lawrence MS, 
Lennon NJ, McKenna A, Meldrim J, Ramos AH, Ross MG, Russ C, Shefler E, 
Sivachenko A, Sogoloff B, Stojanov P, Tamayo P, Mesirov JP, Amani V, Teider N, 
Sengupta S, Francois JP, Northcott PA, Taylor MD, Yu F, Crabtree GR, Kautzman 
AG, Gabriel SB, Getz G, Jäger N, Jones DT, Lichter P, Pfister SM, Roberts TM, 
Meyerson M, Pomeroy SL, Cho YJ.

Author information:
(1)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.

Medulloblastomas are the most common malignant brain tumours in children. 
Identifying and understanding the genetic events that drive these tumours is 
critical for the development of more effective diagnostic, prognostic and 
therapeutic strategies. Recently, our group and others described distinct 
molecular subtypes of medulloblastoma on the basis of transcriptional and copy 
number profiles. Here we use whole-exome hybrid capture and deep sequencing to 
identify somatic mutations across the coding regions of 92 primary 
medulloblastoma/normal pairs. Overall, medulloblastomas have low mutation rates 
consistent with other paediatric tumours, with a median of 0.35 non-silent 
mutations per megabase. We identified twelve genes mutated at statistically 
significant frequencies, including previously known mutated genes in 
medulloblastoma such as CTNNB1, PTCH1, MLL2, SMARCA4 and TP53. Recurrent somatic 
mutations were newly identified in an RNA helicase gene, DDX3X, often concurrent 
with CTNNB1 mutations, and in the nuclear co-repressor (N-CoR) complex genes 
GPS2, BCOR and LDB1. We show that mutant DDX3X potentiates transactivation of a 
TCF promoter and enhances cell viability in combination with mutant, but not 
wild-type, β-catenin. Together, our study reveals the alteration of WNT, 
hedgehog, histone methyltransferase and now N-CoR pathways across 
medulloblastomas and within specific subtypes of this disease, and nominates the 
RNA helicase DDX3X as a component of pathogenic β-catenin signalling in 
medulloblastoma.

DOI: 10.1038/nature11329
PMCID: PMC3413789
PMID: 22820256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]