---
reference_id: "PMID:23059950"
title: "Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome: phenotype, natural history, and epidemiology."
authors:
- Nowaczyk MJ
- Irons MB
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31343
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Dehydrocholesterols/metabolism
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Oxidoreductases Acting on CH-CH Group Donors/genetics
- Phenotype
- Pregnancy
- "Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome: phenotype, natural history, and epidemiology.
**Authors:** Nowaczyk MJ, Irons MB
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.31343](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.31343)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2012 Nov 15;160C(4):250-62. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.c.31343. Epub 2012 Oct 11.

Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome: phenotype, natural history, and epidemiology.

Nowaczyk MJ(1), Irons MB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine and Department of Pediatrics,
McMaster University McMaster University Medical Centre, Room 3N16, 1200 Main
Street West, Hamilton ON, Canada L8S 4J9. nowaczyk@hhsc.ca

Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is a congenital multiple anomaly/intellectual
disability syndrome caused by a deficiency of cholesterol synthesis resulting
from a deficiency of 7-dehydrocholesterol (7DHC) reductase encoded by DHCR7.
SLOS is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. It is characterized by
prenatal and postnatal growth retardation, microcephaly, a variable degree of
intellectual disability that encompasses normal intelligence to severe
intellectual deficiency, and multiple major and minor malformations. External
malformations include distinctive facial features, cleft palate, postaxial
polydactyly, 2-3 syndactyly of the toes, and underdeveloped external genitalia
in males, while internal anomalies may affect every organ system. The clinical
spectrum is wide, and rare individuals have been described with normal
development and only minor malformations. The clinical diagnosis of SLOS is
confirmed by demonstrating an abnormally elevated concentration of the
cholesterol precursor, 7DHC, in serum or other tissues, or by the presence of
two DHCR7 mutations. The enzymatic deficiency results in decreased cholesterol
and increased 7DHC levels, both during embryonic development and after birth.
The malformations found in SLOS may result from decreased cholesterol, increased
7DHC or a combination of these two factors. This review discusses the physical
and behavioral phenotype of SLOS, the diagnostic approaches, the natural history
from the prenatal period to adulthood, and current understanding of the
pathophysiology of SLOS.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31343
PMID: 23059950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
