---
reference_id: "PMID:22521219"
title: Pesticide exposure and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
authors:
- Kamel F
- Umbach DM
- Bedlack RS
- Richards M
- Watson M
- Alavanja MC
- Blair A
- Hoppin JA
- Schmidt S
- Sandler DP
journal: Neurotoxicology
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2012.04.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pesticide exposure and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
**Authors:** Kamel F, Umbach DM, Bedlack RS, Richards M, Watson M, Alavanja MC, Blair A, Hoppin JA, Schmidt S, Sandler DP
**Journal:** Neurotoxicology (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuro.2012.04.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro.2012.04.001)

## Content

1. Neurotoxicology. 2012 Jun;33(3):457-62. doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2012.04.001. Epub
 2012 Apr 12.

Pesticide exposure and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Kamel F(1), Umbach DM, Bedlack RS, Richards M, Watson M, Alavanja MC, Blair A, 
Hoppin JA, Schmidt S, Sandler DP.

Author information:
(1)Epidemiology Branch, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA. kamel@niehs.nih.gov

Our objectives were to summarize literature on the association of amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis (ALS) with pesticides as a group and to evaluate associations 
of ALS with specific pesticides. We conducted a meta-analysis of published 
studies of ALS and pesticides as a group and investigated the association of ALS 
with specific pesticides, using data from the Agricultural Health Study (AHS), a 
cohort including 84,739 private pesticide applicators and spouses. AHS 
participants provided information on pesticide use at enrollment in 1993-1997. 
In mortality data collected through February 2010, ALS was recorded on death 
certificates of 41 individuals whom we compared to the remaining cohort 
(controls), using unconditional logistic regression adjusted for age and gender 
to calculate odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals. In the 
meta-analysis, ALS was associated with use of pesticides as a group (1.9, 
1.1-3.1). In the AHS, ALS was not associated with pesticides as a group, but was 
associated with use of organochlorine insecticides (OCs) (1.6, 0.8-3.5), 
pyrethroids (1.4, 0.6-3.4), herbicides (1.6, 0.7-3.7), and fumigants (1.8, 
0.8-3.9). ORs were elevated forever use of the specific OCs aldrin (2.1, 
0.8-5.1), dieldrin (2.6, 0.9-7.3), DDT (2.1, 0.9-5.0), and toxaphene (2.0, 
0.8-4.9). None of these associations was statistically significant. Similar 
results were observed in an analysis restricted to men. In conclusion, the 
meta-analysis suggests that ALS risk is associated with use of pesticides as a 
group, and our analysis of AHS data points to OC use in particular. The latter 
results are novel but based on a small number of cases and require replication 
in other populations.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuro.2012.04.001
PMCID: PMC3358481
PMID: 22521219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST STATEMENT The authors 
declare that there are no conflicts of interest.