---
reference_id: "PMID:34207491"
title: "Mechanisms Associated with Trypanosoma cruzi Host Target Cell Adhesion, Recognition and Internalization."
authors:
- Rodríguez-Bejarano OH
- Avendaño C
- Patarroyo MA
journal: Life (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/life11060534
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms Associated with Trypanosoma cruzi Host Target Cell Adhesion, Recognition and Internalization.
**Authors:** Rodríguez-Bejarano OH, Avendaño C, Patarroyo MA
**Journal:** Life (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/life11060534](https://doi.org/10.3390/life11060534)

## Content

1. Life (Basel). 2021 Jun 9;11(6):534. doi: 10.3390/life11060534.

Mechanisms Associated with Trypanosoma cruzi Host Target Cell Adhesion, 
Recognition and Internalization.

Rodríguez-Bejarano OH(1), Avendaño C(2), Patarroyo MA(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Health Sciences Faculty, Universidad de Ciencias Aplicadas y Ambientales 
(U.D.C.A), Calle 222#55-37, Bogotá 111166, Colombia.
(2)Animal Science Faculty, Universidad de Ciencias Aplicadas y Ambientales 
(U.D.C.A), Calle 222#55-37, Bogotá 111166, Colombia.
(3)Molecular Biology and Immunology Department, Fundación Instituto de 
Inmunología de Colombia (FIDIC), Carrera 50#26-20, Bogotá 111321, Colombia.
(4)Health Sciences Division, Main Campus, Universidad Santo Tomás, Carrera 
9#51-11, Bogotá 110231, Colombia.
(5)Microbiology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad Nacional de 
Colombia, Carrera 45#26-85, Bogotá 111321, Colombia.

Chagas disease is caused by the kinetoplastid parasite Trypanosoma cruzi, which 
is mainly transmitted by hematophagous insect bites. The parasite's lifecycle 
has an obligate intracellular phase (amastigotes), while metacyclic and 
bloodstream-trypomastigotes are its infective forms. Mammalian host cell 
recognition of the parasite involves the interaction of numerous parasite and 
host cell plasma membrane molecules and domains (known as lipid rafts), thereby 
ensuring internalization by activating endocytosis mechanisms triggered by 
various signaling cascades in both host cells and the parasite. This increases 
cytoplasmatic Ca2+ and cAMP levels; cytoskeleton remodeling and endosome and 
lysosome intracellular system association are triggered, leading to 
parasitophorous vacuole formation. Its membrane becomes modified by containing 
the parasite's infectious form within it. Once it has become internalized, the 
parasite seeks parasitophorous vacuole lysis for continuing its intracellular 
lifecycle, fragmenting such a vacuole's membrane. This review covers the 
cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in T. cruzi adhesion to, recognition 
of and internalization in host target cells.

DOI: 10.3390/life11060534
PMCID: PMC8227291
PMID: 34207491

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.