---
reference_id: "PMID:37947611"
title: Signaling Pathways and Therapeutic Strategies in Advanced Basal Cell Carcinoma.
authors:
- Vallini G
- Calabrese L
- Canino C
- Trovato E
- Gentileschi S
- Rubegni P
- Tognetti L
journal: Cells
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cells12212534
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- "Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- Hedgehog Proteins/metabolism
- Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/drug therapy, genetics"
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Signaling Pathways and Therapeutic Strategies in Advanced Basal Cell Carcinoma.
**Authors:** Vallini G, Calabrese L, Canino C, Trovato E, Gentileschi S, Rubegni P, Tognetti L
**Journal:** Cells (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells12212534](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells12212534)

## Content

1. Cells. 2023 Oct 27;12(21):2534. doi: 10.3390/cells12212534.

Signaling Pathways and Therapeutic Strategies in Advanced Basal Cell Carcinoma.

Vallini G(1), Calabrese L(2)(3), Canino C(4), Trovato E(2), Gentileschi S(5), 
Rubegni P(2), Tognetti L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnologies, University of Siena, 53100 Siena, 
Italy.
(2)Department of Medical, Surgical and Neurological Sciences, Division of 
Dermatology, University of Siena, 53100 Siena, Italy.
(3)Institute of Dermatology, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, 00168 
Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Haematology, Oncology and Cell and Gene Therapy, IRCCS Bambino 
Gesù Children's Hospital, 00165 Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Medical, Surgical and Neurological Sciences, Division of 
Rheumatology, University of Siena, 53100 Siena, Italy.

Non-melanoma skin cancers (NMSCs) are the most common human neoplasms 
world-wide. In detail, basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most frequent 
malignancy in the fair-skinned population. The incidence of BCC remains 
difficult to assess due to the poor registration practice; however, it has been 
increasing in the last few years. Approximately, 85% of sporadic BCCs carry 
mutations in Hedgehog pathway genes, especially in PTCH, SUFU and SMO genes, 
which lead to the aberrant activation of GLI transcriptional factors, typically 
silent in cells of adult individuals. The management of advanced BCC (aBCC), 
both metastatic (mBCC) and locally advanced BCC (laBCC), not candidates for 
surgical excision or radiotherapy, remains challenging. The discovery of 
mutations in the Hh signaling pathway has paved the way for the development of 
Hh pathway inhibiting agents, such as vismodegib and sonidegib, which have 
represented a breakthrough in the aBCC management. However, the use of these 
agents is limited by the frequent occurrence of adverse events or the 
development of drug resistance. In this review, we thoroughly describe the 
current knowledge regarding the available options for the pharmacological 
management of aBCCs and provide a forward-looking update on novel therapeutic 
strategies that could enrich the therapeutic armamentarium of BCC in the near 
future.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12212534
PMCID: PMC10647618
PMID: 37947611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.