---
reference_id: "PMID:25877329"
title: "A RASopathy gene commonly mutated in cancer: the neurofibromatosis type 1 tumour suppressor."
authors:
- Ratner N
- Miller SJ
journal: Nat Rev Cancer
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/nrc3911
keywords:
- GTPase-Activating Proteins/genetics
- "Genes, Tumor Suppressor"
- "Genes, ras/genetics"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Mutation
- Neurofibromatosis 1/genetics
- Neurofibromin 1/genetics
- Signal Transduction/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A RASopathy gene commonly mutated in cancer: the neurofibromatosis type 1 tumour suppressor.
**Authors:** Ratner N, Miller SJ
**Journal:** Nat Rev Cancer (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrc3911](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrc3911)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Cancer. 2015 May;15(5):290-301. doi: 10.1038/nrc3911. Epub 2015 Apr
16.

A RASopathy gene commonly mutated in cancer: the neurofibromatosis type 1 tumour
suppressor.

Ratner N(1), Miller SJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Experimental Hematology and Cancer Biology, Cancer and Blood
Diseases Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital, 3333 Burnet Avenue,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a common genetic disorder that predisposes
affected individuals to tumours. The NF1 gene encodes a RAS GTPase-activating
protein called neurofibromin and is one of several genes that (when mutant)
affect RAS-MAPK signalling, causing related diseases collectively known as
RASopathies. Several RASopathies, beyond NF1, are cancer predisposition
syndromes. Somatic NF1 mutations also occur in 5-10% of human sporadic cancers
and may contribute to resistance to therapy. To highlight areas for
investigation in RASopathies and sporadic tumours with NF1 mutations, we
summarize current knowledge of NF1 disease, the NF1 gene and neurofibromin,
neurofibromin signalling pathways and recent developments in NF1 therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1038/nrc3911
PMCID: PMC4822336
PMID: 25877329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests statement The authors
declare no competing interests.
