---
reference_id: "PMID:26258847"
title: Genomic analysis of mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome identifies recurrent alterations in TNFR2.
authors:
- Ungewickell A
- Bhaduri A
- Rios E
- Reuter J
- Lee CS
- Mah A
- Zehnder A
- Ohgami R
- Kulkarni S
- Armstrong R
- Weng WK
- Gratzinger D
- Tavallaee M
- Rook A
- Snyder M
- Kim Y
- Khavari PA
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/ng.3370
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology
- Base Sequence
- Bortezomib/pharmacology
- CD28 Antigens/genetics
- CTLA-4 Antigen/genetics
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm"
- Gene Expression
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Genomics
- Humans
- Mycosis Fungoides/genetics
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- Point Mutation
- "Receptors, Tumor Necrosis Factor, Type II/genetics, metabolism"
- Sezary Syndrome/genetics
- Signal Transduction
- Skin Neoplasms/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genomic analysis of mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome identifies recurrent alterations in TNFR2.
**Authors:** Ungewickell A, Bhaduri A, Rios E, Reuter J, Lee CS, Mah A, Zehnder A, Ohgami R, Kulkarni S, Armstrong R, Weng WK, Gratzinger D, Tavallaee M, Rook A, Snyder M, Kim Y, Khavari PA
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.3370](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.3370)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2015 Sep;47(9):1056-60. doi: 10.1038/ng.3370. Epub 2015 Aug 10.

Genomic analysis of mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome identifies recurrent
alterations in TNFR2.

Ungewickell A(1)(2), Bhaduri A(1), Rios E(1), Reuter J(3), Lee CS(1), Mah A(1),
Zehnder A(1), Ohgami R(4), Kulkarni S(5)(6)(7), Armstrong R(8), Weng WK(8),
Gratzinger D(4), Tavallaee M(9), Rook A(10), Snyder M(3), Kim Y(9), Khavari
PA(1)(11).

Author information:
(1)Program in Epithelial Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California,
USA.
(2)Division of Hematology, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA.
(3)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri, USA.
(7)Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA.
(8)Division of Blood and Marrow Transplantation, Stanford University, Stanford,
California, USA.
(9)Multidisciplinary Cutaneous Lymphoma Program, Stanford University, Stanford,
California, USA.
(10)Department of Dermatology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(11)Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Healthcare System, Palo Alto, California, USA.

Mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome comprise the majority of cutaneous T cell
lymphomas (CTCLs), disorders notable for their clinical heterogeneity that can
present in skin or peripheral blood. Effective treatment options for CTCL are
limited, and the genetic basis of these T cell lymphomas remains incompletely
characterized. Here we report recurrent point mutations and genomic gains of
TNFRSF1B, encoding the tumor necrosis factor receptor TNFR2, in 18% of patients
with mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome. Expression of the recurrent TNFR2
Thr377Ile mutant in T cells leads to enhanced non-canonical NF-κB signaling that
is sensitive to the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib. Using an integrative
genomic approach, we additionally discovered a recurrent CTLA4-CD28 fusion, as
well as mutations in downstream signaling mediators of these receptors.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.3370
PMCID: PMC6091217
PMID: 26258847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
