---
reference_id: "PMID:18687887"
title: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 knockin mice develop a progressive neuronal dysfunction with age-dependent accumulation of mutant CaV2.1 channels.
authors:
- Watase K
- Barrett CF
- Miyazaki T
- Ishiguro T
- Ishikawa K
- Hu Y
- Unno T
- Sun Y
- Kasai S
- Watanabe M
- Gomez CM
- Mizusawa H
- Tsien RW
- Zoghbi HY
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0804350105
keywords:
- Aging/physiology
- Alternative Splicing/genetics
- Animals
- "Calcium Channels, N-Type/genetics, metabolism"
- Disease Progression
- Electrophysiology
- Exons/genetics
- Gene Expression
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Mutant Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation/genetics
- "Nervous System Diseases/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Phenotype
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Transgenes/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 knockin mice develop a progressive neuronal dysfunction with age-dependent accumulation of mutant CaV2.1 channels.
**Authors:** Watase K, Barrett CF, Miyazaki T, Ishiguro T, Ishikawa K, Hu Y, Unno T, Sun Y, Kasai S, Watanabe M, Gomez CM, Mizusawa H, Tsien RW, Zoghbi HY
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0804350105](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0804350105)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Aug 19;105(33):11987-92. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0804350105. Epub 2008 Aug 7.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 knockin mice develop a progressive neuronal 
dysfunction with age-dependent accumulation of mutant CaV2.1 channels.

Watase K(1), Barrett CF, Miyazaki T, Ishiguro T, Ishikawa K, Hu Y, Unno T, Sun 
Y, Kasai S, Watanabe M, Gomez CM, Mizusawa H, Tsien RW, Zoghbi HY.

Author information:
(1)Twenty-First Century Center of Excellence Program on Brain Integration and 
Its Disorders, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, 
Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 (SCA6) is a neurodegenerative disorder caused by 
CAG repeat expansions within the voltage-gated calcium (Ca(V)) 2.1 channel gene. 
It remains controversial whether the mutation exerts neurotoxicity by changing 
the function of Ca(V)2.1 channel or through a gain-of-function mechanism 
associated with accumulation of the expanded polyglutamine protein. We generated 
three strains of knockin (KI) mice carrying normal, expanded, or hyperexpanded 
CAG repeat tracts in the Cacna1a locus. The mice expressing hyperexpanded 
polyglutamine (Sca6(84Q)) developed progressive motor impairment and aggregation 
of mutant Ca(V)2.1 channels. Electrophysiological analysis of cerebellar 
Purkinje cells revealed similar Ca(2+) channel current density among the three 
KI models. Neither voltage sensitivity of activation nor inactivation was 
altered in the Sca6(84Q) neurons, suggesting that expanded CAG repeat per se 
does not affect the intrinsic electrophysiological properties of the channels. 
The pathogenesis of SCA6 is apparently linked to an age-dependent process 
accompanied by accumulation of mutant Ca(V)2.1 channels.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0804350105
PMCID: PMC2503926
PMID: 18687887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.