---
reference_id: "PMID:29287304"
title: "The Tumor-Like Phenotype of Rheumatoid Synovium: Molecular Profiling and Prospects for Precision Medicine."
authors:
- You S
- Koh JH
- Leng L
- Kim WU
- Bucala R
journal: Arthritis Rheumatol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/art.40406
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Tumor-Like Phenotype of Rheumatoid Synovium: Molecular Profiling and Prospects for Precision Medicine.
**Authors:** You S, Koh JH, Leng L, Kim WU, Bucala R
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheumatol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/art.40406](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.40406)

## Content

1. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2018 May;70(5):637-652. doi: 10.1002/art.40406. Epub 2018
 Mar 31.

The Tumor-Like Phenotype of Rheumatoid Synovium: Molecular Profiling and 
Prospects for Precision Medicine.

You S(1), Koh JH(2), Leng L(3), Kim WU(2), Bucala R(3).

Author information:
(1)Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California.
(2)The Catholic University of Korea and Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, Seoul, South 
Korea.
(3)Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune disease characterized by 
destructive hyperplasia of the synovium. Fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) are 
a major component of synovial pannus and actively participate in the pathologic 
progression of RA. How rheumatoid FLS acquire and sustain such a uniquely 
aggressive phenotype remains poorly understood. We describe the current state of 
knowledge of the molecular alterations in rheumatoid FLS at the genomic, 
epigenomic, transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolomic levels, which offers a 
means to reconstruct the pathways leading to rheumatoid pannus. Such data 
provide new pathologic insight and suggest means to more sensitively assess 
disease activity and response to therapy, as well as support new avenues for 
therapeutic development.

© 2018, American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/art.40406
PMCID: PMC5920713
PMID: 29287304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]