---
reference_id: "PMID:34392127"
title: Clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical study of breast angiosarcoma.
authors:
- Yan M
- Gilmore H
- Bomeisl P
- Harbhajanka A
journal: Ann Diagn Pathol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2021.151795
keywords:
- Aged
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/metabolism"
- "Breast Neoplasms/diagnosis, pathology"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Epithelioid Cells/pathology
- Female
- Hemangiosarcoma/pathology
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry/methods
- Middle Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical study of breast angiosarcoma.
**Authors:** Yan M, Gilmore H, Bomeisl P, Harbhajanka A
**Journal:** Ann Diagn Pathol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2021.151795](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2021.151795)

## Content

1. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2021 Oct;54:151795. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2021.151795.
Epub 2021 Jul 19.

Clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical study of breast angiosarcoma.

Yan M(1), Gilmore H(2), Bomeisl P(2), Harbhajanka A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center,
Cleveland, OH, United States of America. Electronic address:
Mingfei.Yan@UHhospitals.org.
(2)Department of Pathology, University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center,
Cleveland, OH, United States of America.

Breast angiosarcoma (AS) is a rare malignancy which can be classified into
primary or secondary as a result of breast cancer therapy. On histology, breast
AS has a wide spectrum of morphologic presentations, and its diagnosis can be
challenging based on morphologic evaluation alone. Here, we studied 10 cases of
breast AS diagnosed at our institution during a 20-year period, in which 7 cases
were radiation-associated AS (RA-AS) and 3 cases were primary AS (P-AS). The
average latency between radiotherapy and RA-AS was 8.1 years. RA-AS mostly
occurred in breast skin, while all P-AS involved breast parenchyma. All 10 AS
cases were high grade, including 4 RA-AS cases demonstrating epithelioid
morphology. Histologic morphologies of AS varied from confluent growth of
atypical spindle or epithelioid cells to scattered marked pleomorphic cells.
Some cases appeared deceptively bland or low grade, but the presence of areas of
haemorrhage ('blood lake') or necrosis upgraded them to high grade lesions.
Additionally, some epithelioid RA-AS cases with lymphatic differentiation (D2-40
positive) showed pseudopapillary morphology characterized by discohesive cells
sloughing off at periphery of vascular cores, resembling papillary breast
carcinoma. P-AS did not show prominent vesicular nuclei and/or conspicuous
nucleoli, which were features observed in RA-AS. C-MYC immunostain results
showed P-AS was completely negative or focal weakly positive in hypercellular
areas. In comparison, RA-AS were consistently positive for c-MYC. Epithelioid
RA-AS with lymphatic differentiation tended to show stronger and/or more diffuse
c-MYC positivity than other AS cases. CD31 and ERG immunostains showed
positivity in all cases, while CD34 were negative in some cases with lymphatic
differentiation. This study offers a detailed morphologic and
immunohistochemical assessment of a rare tumor of the breast that is important
to recognize. Common differential diagnosis for breast AS, including
post-radiation atypical vascular proliferation (AVP), are also reviewed and
discussed.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2021.151795
PMID: 34392127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
