---
reference_id: "PMID:39296666"
title: The first review on prenatal drug exposure and ocular malformation occurrence.
authors:
- Dubucs C
- Plaisancié J
- Courtade-Saidi M
- Damase-Michel C
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2024.1379875
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The first review on prenatal drug exposure and ocular malformation occurrence.
**Authors:** Dubucs C, Plaisancié J, Courtade-Saidi M, Damase-Michel C
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2024.1379875](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2024.1379875)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2024 Sep 4;12:1379875. doi: 10.3389/fped.2024.1379875. 
eCollection 2024.

The first review on prenatal drug exposure and ocular malformation occurrence.

Dubucs C(1)(2), Plaisancié J(3), Courtade-Saidi M(1), Damase-Michel C(2).

Author information:
(1)Département d'Anatomie et Cytologie Pathologiques, Institut Universitaire du 
Cancer de Toulouse Oncopole, Toulouse, France.
(2)Department of Medical and Clinical Pharmacology, University Hospital Center, 
CERPOP INSERM UMR 1295 - SPHERE Team, Toulouse, France.
(3)Service de Génétique Médicale, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Toulouse, 
Toulouse, France.

Even though a non-negligible portion of congenital eye anomalies has a clear 
genetic origin, an etiology is not found for most patients. Prenatal medication 
exposure is recognized to be involved in fetal malformations and several 
medications are specifically known to alter eye morphogenesis during embryonic 
development leading to congenital eye defects. We explored and reviewed the role 
of medications described in the genesis of ocular malformations, a role that has 
been little evaluated and probably still underestimated especially since several 
studies have shown the wide exposure of pregnant women to medication. We present 
our results in two sections; the first describes medications reported to be 
associated with ocular malformations in humans; the second details medications 
responsible for ocular malformations in animal models. We have summarized these 
results in tables, providing a relevant tool for clinicians. As most of the 
associations between medication exposure and congenital eye defects are either 
old or single case reports, this study highlights the needs for high 
epidemiological vigilance, accurate clinical description as well as a 
combination of studies on human genetics and experimental studies. Since 
medication exposures are potentially modifiable risk factors for congenital 
anomalies, this represents an important opportunity to implement preventive 
measures.

© 2024 Dubucs, Plaisancié, Courtade-Saidi and Damase-Michel.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2024.1379875
PMCID: PMC11408236
PMID: 39296666

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.