---
reference_id: "PMID:11764294"
title: Cochlear melanocytes and MITF signaling.
authors:
- Tachibana M
journal: J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1046/j.0022-202x.2001.00017.x
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cochlea/cytology, embryology, growth & development, physiology"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- Deafness/genetics
- Embryonic and Fetal Development/physiology
- Humans
- Melanocytes/physiology
- Microphthalmia-Associated Transcription Factor
- Mutation
- Signal Transduction/physiology
- Transcription Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cochlear melanocytes and MITF signaling.
**Authors:** Tachibana M
**Journal:** J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.0022-202x.2001.00017.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.0022-202x.2001.00017.x)

## Content

1. J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc. 2001 Nov;6(1):95-8. doi:
10.1046/j.0022-202x.2001.00017.x.

Cochlear melanocytes and MITF signaling.

Tachibana M(1).

Author information:
(1)Saitama Cancer Center, Research Institute, Japan.

Melanocytes occur not only in the skin and eyes but in the cochlea, where they
exist as intermediate cells of the stria vascularis. Intermediate cells play an
important role for cochlear function: Na+K+-ATPase and potassium channels of
intermediate cells are essential for production of endocochlear potential and
for preparation of ionic milieu in the stria. Consistent with this notion,
melanocyte deficiency due to some gene disruptions results in hearing impairment
in mice and humans. Mitf/MITF is essential for development and maturation of
melanocytes, including strial intermediate cells. Disruption of MITF causes
deafness, heterochromia irides, and leucodermia in Waardenburg syndrome type 2
individuals, whereas that of Mitf causes phenotypes of deafness, microphthalmia,
and white coat in mice. Again, all of these phenotypes may be explained by a
lack of melanocytes. Many signal transduction pathways target the Mitf/MITF gene
or Mitf/MITF protein, and disruption of these pathways sometimes results in the
phenotype similar to that caused by Mitf/MITF disruption. If not all, certainly
many roads lead to MITF in melanocytes.

DOI: 10.1046/j.0022-202x.2001.00017.x
PMID: 11764294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
