---
reference_id: "PMID:36636586"
title: "Use of Elamipretide in patients assigned treatment in the compassionate use program: Case series in pediatric patients with rare orphan diseases."
authors:
- Koenig MK
- Russo SN
- McBride KL
- Bjornsson HT
- Gunnarsdottir BB
- Goldstein A
- Falk SA
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/jmd2.12335
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Use of Elamipretide in patients assigned treatment in the compassionate use program: Case series in pediatric patients with rare orphan diseases.
**Authors:** Koenig MK, Russo SN, McBride KL, Bjornsson HT, Gunnarsdottir BB, Goldstein A, Falk SA
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmd2.12335](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmd2.12335)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2022 Sep 21;64(1):65-70. doi: 10.1002/jmd2.12335. eCollection 2023 
Jan.

Use of Elamipretide in patients assigned treatment in the compassionate use 
program: Case series in pediatric patients with rare orphan diseases.

Koenig MK(1), Russo SN(1), McBride KL(2), Bjornsson HT(3)(4)(5), Gunnarsdottir 
BB(3), Goldstein A(6), Falk SA(7).

Author information:
(1)The University of Texas McGovern Medical School, Center for the Treatment of 
Pediatric Neurodegenerative Disease Houston Texas USA.
(2)Division of Genetic and Genomic Medicine and the Heart Center Nationwide 
Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatrics College of Medicine Ohio State 
University Columbus Ohio USA.
(3)Landspitali University Hospital Reykjavik Iceland.
(4)Faculty of Medicine University of Iceland Reykjavik Iceland.
(5)Mckusick-Nathans Department of Genetic Medicine Johns Hopkins University 
Baltimore Maryland USA.
(6)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Philadelphia Pennsylvania USA.
(7)Perelman School of Medicine of the University of Pennsylvania Philadelphia 
Pennsylvania USA.

Several mitochondrial diseases are caused by pathogenic variants that impair 
membrane phospholipid remodeling, with no FDA-approved therapies. Elamipretide 
targets the inner mitochondrial membrane where it binds to cardiolipin, 
resulting in improved membrane stability, cellular respiration, and ATP 
production. In clinical trials, elamipretide produced clinical and functional 
improvements in adults and adolescents with mitochondrial disorders, such as 
primary mitochondrial myopathy and Barth syndrome; however, experience in 
younger patients is limited and to our knowledge, these are the first case 
reports on the safety and efficacy of elamipretide treatment in children under 
12 years of age. We describe the use of elamipretide in patients with 
mitochondrial disorders to provide dosing parameters in patients aged <12 years.

© 2022 The Authors. JIMD Reports published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of 
SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jmd2.12335
PMCID: PMC9830009
PMID: 36636586

Conflict of interest statement: Hans Tomas Bjornsson is on a patent describing 
Elamipretide for Sengers syndrome. All other authors declare no conflict of 
interest.