---
reference_id: "PMID:36550798"
title: Neonatal maple syrup urine disease case report and literature review.
authors:
- Liu Q
- Li F
- Zhou J
- Liu X
- Peng J
- Gong L
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000032174
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neonatal maple syrup urine disease case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Liu Q, Li F, Zhou J, Liu X, Peng J, Gong L
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000032174](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000032174)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2022 Dec 16;101(50):e32174. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000032174.

Neonatal maple syrup urine disease case report and literature review.

Liu Q(1), Li F(2), Zhou J(1), Liu X(2), Peng J(2), Gong L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Imaging Center, Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang
University, Nanchang, China.
(2)Department of Medical Imaging Center, Ganzhou People's Hospital, Ganzhou,
China.

RATIONALE: The main clinical symptoms of maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) are
dehydration, acidosis, nervous system symptoms and intellectual disability. The
brain imaging findings were mainly caused by cytotoxic edema. The lesions
usually occur at the site consistent with the myelination process of normal
neonates. The distribution is mostly symmetric, and the diffusion is obviously
limited.
PATIENT CONCERNS: Herein, we report a rare case of an 8-day-old female patient
who presented with abnormal symptoms, such as difficulty eating, convulsions,
slow reaction, difficulty in correcting hypoglycemia and severe metabolic
disorders. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed abnormal signal
intensity mainly involving the brainstem, cervical spinal cord, bilateral
cerebellar hemispheres, basal ganglia, thalamus, precentral gyrus, and
postcentral gyrus with characteristic hyperintensity on diffusion-weighted
imaging (DWI) sequence. MSUD is rarely reported, while cervical spinal cord
involvement is extremely rare.
DIAGNOSES: Blood tandem mass spectrometry, urine organic acid detection, and
genetic disease overall genetic tests were performed to further confirm the
diagnosis of MSUD.
INTERVENTIONS: Under general anesthesia, she underwent open surgical procedures
for liver transplantation.
OUTCOMES: The child was in a stable condition after liver transplantation, and
the diet was not restricted.
LESSONS: MSUD in neonates is rare. Our case report and literature review was aim
to describe the clinic and imaging characteristics of it, and highlight
physicians must be aware of this entity in newborns so as to reduce misdiagnosis
due to unfamiliarity.

Copyright © 2022 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000032174
PMCID: PMC9771221
PMID: 36550798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.
