---
reference_id: "PMID:22200164"
title: "Arsenic, vinyl chloride, viral hepatitis, and hepatic angiosarcoma: a hospital-based study and review of literature in Taiwan."
authors:
- Huang NC
- Wann SR
- Chang HT
- Lin SL
- Wang JS
- Guo HR
journal: BMC Gastroenterol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1186/1471-230X-11-142
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Arsenic/toxicity
- Female
- "Hemangiosarcoma/epidemiology, etiology, pathology"
- Hepatitis C/complications
- "Hospitals, Teaching"
- Humans
- "Liver Neoplasms/epidemiology, etiology, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Taiwan/epidemiology
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- Vinyl Chloride/toxicity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arsenic, vinyl chloride, viral hepatitis, and hepatic angiosarcoma: a hospital-based study and review of literature in Taiwan.
**Authors:** Huang NC, Wann SR, Chang HT, Lin SL, Wang JS, Guo HR
**Journal:** BMC Gastroenterol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1471-230X-11-142](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-230X-11-142)

## Content

1. BMC Gastroenterol. 2011 Dec 26;11:142. doi: 10.1186/1471-230X-11-142.

Arsenic, vinyl chloride, viral hepatitis, and hepatic angiosarcoma: a
hospital-based study and review of literature in Taiwan.

Huang NC(1), Wann SR, Chang HT, Lin SL, Wang JS, Guo HR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Hepatic angiosarcoma (HAS) is a rare type of liver cancer that is
often fatal, and arsenic and vinyl chloride monomer (VCM) are two major causal
agents. Whereas Taiwan is an endemic area of liver cancer, epidemiologic data on
HAS are limited. We reviewed the cases observed at a teaching hospital to
evaluate the roles of VCM, arsenic, and viral hepatitis in the occurrence of
HAS.
METHODS: We reviewed the medical records of patients with pathological proof of
HAS from January 2000 to August 2010 at a teaching hospital which is adjacent to
the major VCM processing area in Taiwan and nearby an endemic area of arsenic
exposure from drinking water. We also conducted a literature review and included
all patients of HAS reported in Taiwan.
RESULTS: Six male and three female cases aged from 56 to 83 years (64.6 ± 8.2
years) were identified at the hospital. The differences in clinical features
between men and women were not statistically significant. None of them had
exposure to VCM or arsenic in drinking water. Two had evidence of hepatitis C
infection, but none had evidence of hepatitis B infection. Five male and four
female cases aged 30 to 82 years (58.6 ± 15.5 years) were identified in the
literature, including two with arsenic exposure and one with chronic hepatitis B
infection.
CONCLUSIONS: HAS is rare in Taiwan, and we found no evidence supporting a major
role of VCM, arsenic in drinking water, or viral hepatitis in its occurrence.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-230X-11-142
PMCID: PMC3280174
PMID: 22200164 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
