---
reference_id: "PMID:27663151"
title: "Novel MBTPS2 missense mutation causes a keratosis follicularis spinulosa decalvans phenotype: mutation update and review of the literature."
authors:
- Zhang J
- Wang Y
- Cheng R
- Ni C
- Liang J
- Li M
- Yao Z
journal: Clin Exp Dermatol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1111/ced.12889
keywords:
- Asian People
- Child
- China
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics"
- Humans
- Ichthyosis/genetics
- Male
- Metalloendopeptidases/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- "Skin Diseases, Genetic/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel MBTPS2 missense mutation causes a keratosis follicularis spinulosa decalvans phenotype: mutation update and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Zhang J, Wang Y, Cheng R, Ni C, Liang J, Li M, Yao Z
**Journal:** Clin Exp Dermatol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ced.12889](https://doi.org/10.1111/ced.12889)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2016 Oct;41(7):757-60. doi: 10.1111/ced.12889.

Novel MBTPS2 missense mutation causes a keratosis follicularis spinulosa
decalvans phenotype: mutation update and review of the literature.

Zhang J(1), Wang Y(1), Cheng R(1), Ni C(1), Liang J(1), Li M(1), Yao Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. dermatology.yao@sohu.com.

Keratosis follicularis spinulosa decalvans (KFSD) is an X-linked condition
characterized by keratotic follicular papules and progressive alopecia, which is
caused by mutations in the MBTPS2 gene. We carried out a genetic study on a
child who was suspected clinically to have KFSD. Sanger sequencing was performed
to detect mutations in the entire coding region of MBTPS2. A novel missense
mutation (c.599C>T) was identified in the patient, confirming a diagnosis of
KFSD. We reviewed related cases with MBTPS2 mutations for evidence of
genotype-phenotype correlations.

© 2016 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/ced.12889
PMID: 27663151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
