---
reference_id: "PMID:36584346"
title: Amniotic band syndrome and limb body wall complex in Europe 1980-2019.
authors:
- Bergman JEH
- Barišić I
- Addor MC
- Braz P
- Cavero-Carbonell C
- Draper ES
- Echevarría-González-de-Garibay LJ
- Gatt M
- Haeusler M
- Khoshnood B
- Klungsøyr K
- Kurinczuk JJ
- Latos-Bielenska A
- Luyt K
- Martin D
- Mullaney C
- Nelen V
- Neville AJ
- "O'Mahony MT"
- Perthus I
- Pierini A
- Randrianaivo H
- Rankin J
- Rissmann A
- Rouget F
- Sayers G
- Schaub B
- Stevens S
- Tucker D
- Verellen-Dumoulin C
- Wiesel A
- Gerkes EH
- Perraud A
- Loane MA
- Wellesley D
- de Walle HEK
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63107
keywords:
- Pregnancy
- Humans
- Female
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Amniotic Band Syndrome/complications
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/epidemiology"
- Europe/epidemiology
- Maternal Age
- Stillbirth/epidemiology
- Registries
- Prevalence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Amniotic band syndrome and limb body wall complex in Europe 1980-2019.
**Authors:** Bergman JEH, Barišić I, Addor MC, Braz P, Cavero-Carbonell C, Draper ES, Echevarría-González-de-Garibay LJ, Gatt M, Haeusler M, Khoshnood B, Klungsøyr K, Kurinczuk JJ, Latos-Bielenska A, Luyt K, Martin D, Mullaney C, Nelen V, Neville AJ, O'Mahony MT, Perthus I, Pierini A, Randrianaivo H, Rankin J, Rissmann A, Rouget F, Sayers G, Schaub B, Stevens S, Tucker D, Verellen-Dumoulin C, Wiesel A, Gerkes EH, Perraud A, Loane MA, Wellesley D, de Walle HEK
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.63107](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.63107)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2023 Apr;191(4):995-1006. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63107. Epub
2022  Dec 30.

Amniotic band syndrome and limb body wall complex in Europe 1980-2019.

Bergman JEH(1), Barišić I(2), Addor MC(3), Braz P(4), Cavero-Carbonell C(5),
Draper ES(6), Echevarría-González-de-Garibay LJ(7), Gatt M(8), Haeusler M(9),
Khoshnood B(10), Klungsøyr K(11)(12), Kurinczuk JJ(13), Latos-Bielenska A(14),
Luyt K(15), Martin D(16), Mullaney C(17), Nelen V(18), Neville AJ(19), O'Mahony
MT(20), Perthus I(21), Pierini A(22), Randrianaivo H(23), Rankin J(15)(24),
Rissmann A(25), Rouget F(26), Sayers G(27), Schaub B(28), Stevens S(16), Tucker
D(29), Verellen-Dumoulin C(30), Wiesel A(31), Gerkes EH(1), Perraud A(32), Loane
MA(33), Wellesley D(34), de Walle HEK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Children's Hospital Zagreb, Centre of Excellence for Reproductive and
Regenerative Medicine, Medical School University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
(3)Department of Woman-Mother-Child, University Medical Center CHUV, Lausanne,
Switzerland.
(4)RENAC-Registo Nacional de Anomalias Congénitas, Epidemiology Department,
National Institute of Health Doutor Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon, Portugal.
(5)Rare Diseases Research Unit, Foundation for the Promotion of the Research in
Healthcare and Biomedicine, Valencia, Spain.
(6)Department of Health Sciences, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK.
(7)Directorate for Healthcare Planning, Organisation and Evaluation, Ministry of
Health of the Basque Government, Vitoria Gasteiz, Spain.
(8)Malta Congenital Anomalies Registry, Directorate for Health Information and
Research, G'mangia, Malta.
(9)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Medical University of Graz, Graz,
Austria.
(10)Université de Paris Cité, Obstetrical Perinatal and Paediatric Epidemiology
Research Team (EPOPé), CRESS, INSERM, INRA, Paris, France.
(11)Department of Global Public Health and Primary Care, University of Bergen,
Bergen, Norway.
(12)Department of Health Promotion, Norwegian Institute of Public Health,
Bergen, Norway.
(13)National Perinatal Epidemiology Unit, Nuffield Department of Population
Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(14)Polish Registry of Congenital Malformations, Department of Medical Genetics,
Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
(15)South West Congenital Anomaly Register (SWCAR), Bristol Medical School,
University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.
(16)NCARDRS, NHS Digital, Leeds, UK.
(17)Department of Public Health, HSE South East Area, Dublin, Ireland.
(18)Provincial Institute of Hygiene, Antwerp, Belgium.
(19)IMER Registry, Centre for Clinical and Epidemiological Research, University
of Ferrara and Azienda Ospedaliero Universitario di Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(20)Department of Public Health HSE-South, St Finbarr's Hospital, Cork, Ireland.
(21)Auvergne Registry of Congenital Anomalies (CEMC-Auvergne), Department of
Clinical Genetics, Centre de Référence des Maladies Rares, University Hospital
of Clermont-Ferrand, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(22)Unit of Epidemiology of Rare Diseases and Congenital Anomalies, Institute of
Clinical Physiology, National Research Council, Pisa, Italy.
(23)Unit of Genetic Medical and Register of Congenital Malformations, CHU St
Pierre La Reunion, Réunion, France.
(24)Population Health Sciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon
Tyne, UK.
(25)Malformation Monitoring Centre Saxony-Anhalt, Medical Faculty
Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany.
(26)Brittany Registry of Congenital Anomalies, CHU Rennes, Univ Rennes, Inserm,
EHESP, Irset (Institut de recherche en santé, environnement et travail), UMR_S
1085, Rennes, France.
(27)National Health Intelligence Unit, R&D Health Service Executive, Dublin,
Ireland.
(28)French West Indies Registry, Registre des Malformations des Antilles
(REMALAN), Maison de la Femme de la Mère et de l'Enfant, University Hospital of
Martinique, Fort-de-France, France.
(29)Congenital Anomaly Register & Information Service for Wales (CARIS), Public
Health Wales, Swansea, UK.
(30)Eurocat Hainaut-Namur, Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique, Charleroi,
Belgium.
(31)Births Registry Mainz Model, University of Mainz Medical Center, Mainz,
Germany.
(32)European Commission, Joint Research Centre (JRC), Ispra, Italy.
(33)Faculty of Life & Health Sciences, Ulster University, Northern Ireland, UK.
(34)Faculty of Medicine and Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Princess Anne
Hospital, University Hospital Southampton, Southampton, UK.

Amniotic band syndrome (ABS) and limb body wall complex (LBWC) have an
overlapping phenotype of multiple congenital anomalies and their etiology is
unknown. We aimed to determine the prevalence of ABS and LBWC in Europe from
1980 to 2019 and to describe the spectrum of congenital anomalies. In addition,
we investigated maternal age and multiple birth as possible risk factors for the
occurrence of ABS and LBWC. We used data from the European surveillance of
congenital anomalies (EUROCAT) network including data from 30 registries over
1980-2019. We included all pregnancy outcomes, including live births,
stillbirths, and terminations of pregnancy for fetal anomalies. ABS and LBWC
cases were extracted from the central EUROCAT database using coding information
responses from the registries. In total, 866 ABS cases and 451 LBWC cases were
included in this study. The mean prevalence was 0.53/10,000 births for ABS and
0.34/10,000 births for LBWC during the 40 years. Prevalence of both ABS and LBWC
was lower in the 1980s and higher in the United Kingdom. Limb anomalies and
neural tube defects were commonly seen in ABS, whereas in LBWC abdominal and
thoracic wall defects and limb anomalies were most prevalent. Twinning was
confirmed as a risk factor for both ABS and LBWC. This study includes the
largest cohort of ABS and LBWC cases ever reported over a large time period
using standardized EUROCAT data. Prevalence, clinical characteristics, and the
phenotypic spectrum are described, and twinning is confirmed as a risk factor.

© 2022 The Authors. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A published by
Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63107
PMID: 36584346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
