---
reference_id: "PMID:28231576"
title: "Molecular Markers Involved in Tumorigenesis of Thyroid Carcinoma: Focus on Aggressive Histotypes."
authors:
- Penna GC
- Vaisman F
- Vaisman M
- Sobrinho-Simões M
- Soares P
journal: Cytogenet Genome Res
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1159/000456576
keywords:
- Carcinogenesis/genetics
- Genetic Markers
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Markers Involved in Tumorigenesis of Thyroid Carcinoma: Focus on Aggressive Histotypes.
**Authors:** Penna GC, Vaisman F, Vaisman M, Sobrinho-Simões M, Soares P
**Journal:** Cytogenet Genome Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000456576](https://doi.org/10.1159/000456576)

## Content

1. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2016;150(3-4):194-207. doi: 10.1159/000456576. Epub 2017
 Feb 24.

Molecular Markers Involved in Tumorigenesis of Thyroid Carcinoma: Focus on 
Aggressive Histotypes.

Penna GC(1), Vaisman F, Vaisman M, Sobrinho-Simões M, Soares P.

Author information:
(1)Programa de Pós Graduação em Endocrinologia da Faculdade de Medicina da 
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Thyroid cancer derived from follicular cells (TCDFC) comprises 
well-differentiated (papillary and follicular) carcinoma, poorly differentiated 
carcinoma, and anaplastic carcinoma. Papillary thyroid carcinoma is the most 
common endocrine cancer, and its incidence is steadily increasing. Lethality and 
aggressiveness of TCDFC is inversely correlated with differentiation degree. In 
this review, an emphasis has been put on molecular markers involved in 
tumorigenesis of thyroid carcinoma with a focus on aggressive histotypes and the 
role of such biomarkers in predicting thyroid cancer outcome. Genetic 
rearrangements in TCDFC (RET/PTC, PAX8/PPARG) and mutations in RAS, BRAF, TERT 
promoter (TERTp), TP53, PIK3CA, and AKT1 are discussed. The majority of the 
studies to date indicate that TERTp mutations can serve as a marker of more 
aggressive disease in all the subtypes of thyroid carcinoma, being the best 
current marker of poor prognosis, due to its independent association with 
distant metastases and increased disease-specific mortality. Some studies 
suggested that a more accurate prediction of thyroid cancer outcome may be 
possible through a more extensive genetic analysis. The same is true concerning 
the identification of other mutations that are only relatively frequent in 
advanced tumors (e.g., TP53, PIK3CA, or AKT1). A better understanding of the 
prognostic role of TERTp mutation (together with additional ones like BRAF, RAS, 
PIK3CA, AKT1, or TP53) and the clarification of their putative role in 
fine-needle aspiration biopsies are likely to allow, in the future, an early 
refinement of the stratification risk in patients with well-differentiated 
carcinomas. It is worth noting that, as with any categorical staging system, the 
risk evaluation within each category (low, intermediate, and high) varies 
depending on the specific clinicopathologic features of individual patients and 
the specific biological behavior of the tumor. Finally, besides the diagnostic 
and/or prognostic significance of the above-mentioned mutations, it is crucial 
to understand that the molecular pathways and epigenetic alterations will likely 
turn into interesting targets for new therapies.

© 2017 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000456576
PMID: 28231576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]