---
reference_id: "PMID:23254930"
title: "NLRP3 is activated in Alzheimer's disease and contributes to pathology in APP/PS1 mice."
authors:
- Heneka MT
- Kummer MP
- Stutz A
- Delekate A
- Schwartz S
- Vieira-Saecker A
- Griep A
- Axt D
- Remus A
- Tzeng TC
- Gelpi E
- Halle A
- Korte M
- Latz E
- Golenbock DT
journal: Nature
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1038/nature11729
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Alzheimer Disease/enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- Amyloid beta-Peptides/metabolism
- Animals
- "Behavior, Animal"
- "Brain/enzymology, pathology"
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Caspase 1/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cognitive Dysfunction/enzymology, physiopathology"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Enzymologic"
- Humans
- Inflammasomes/metabolism
- Interleukin-1beta/metabolism
- Memory
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "NLR Family, Pyrin Domain-Containing 3 Protein"
- Nitric Oxide Synthase Type II/metabolism
- Phagocytosis/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NLRP3 is activated in Alzheimer's disease and contributes to pathology in APP/PS1 mice.
**Authors:** Heneka MT, Kummer MP, Stutz A, Delekate A, Schwartz S, Vieira-Saecker A, Griep A, Axt D, Remus A, Tzeng TC, Gelpi E, Halle A, Korte M, Latz E, Golenbock DT
**Journal:** Nature (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature11729](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature11729)

## Content

1. Nature. 2013 Jan 31;493(7434):674-8. doi: 10.1038/nature11729. Epub 2012 Dec
19.

NLRP3 is activated in Alzheimer's disease and contributes to pathology in 
APP/PS1 mice.

Heneka MT(1), Kummer MP, Stutz A, Delekate A, Schwartz S, Vieira-Saecker A, 
Griep A, Axt D, Remus A, Tzeng TC, Gelpi E, Halle A, Korte M, Latz E, Golenbock 
DT.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Neuroscience Unit, Department of Neurology, University of Bonn, 
Sigmund-Freud-Strasse 25, 53127 Bonn, Germany. michael.Heneka@ukb.uni-bonn.de

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2013 Feb;13(2):69. doi: 10.1038/nri3392.

Alzheimer's disease is the world's most common dementing illness. Deposition of 
amyloid-β peptide drives cerebral neuroinflammation by activating microglia. 
Indeed, amyloid-β activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome in microglia is 
fundamental for interleukin-1β maturation and subsequent inflammatory events. 
However, it remains unknown whether NLRP3 activation contributes to Alzheimer's 
disease in vivo. Here we demonstrate strongly enhanced active caspase-1 
expression in human mild cognitive impairment and brains with Alzheimer's 
disease, suggesting a role for the inflammasome in this neurodegenerative 
disease. Nlrp3(-/-) or Casp1(-/-) mice carrying mutations associated with 
familial Alzheimer's disease were largely protected from loss of spatial memory 
and other sequelae associated with Alzheimer's disease, and demonstrated reduced 
brain caspase-1 and interleukin-1β activation as well as enhanced amyloid-β 
clearance. Furthermore, NLRP3 inflammasome deficiency skewed microglial cells to 
an M2 phenotype and resulted in the decreased deposition of amyloid-β in the 
APP/PS1 model of Alzheimer's disease. These results show an important role for 
the NLRP3/caspase-1 axis in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease, and suggest 
that NLRP3 inflammasome inhibition represents a new therapeutic intervention for 
the disease.

DOI: 10.1038/nature11729
PMCID: PMC3812809
PMID: 23254930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]