---
reference_id: "PMID:19910029"
title: "Hypereosinophilic syndrome: a multicenter, retrospective analysis of clinical characteristics and response to therapy."
authors:
- Ogbogu PU
- Bochner BS
- Butterfield JH
- Gleich GJ
- Huss-Marp J
- Kahn JE
- Leiferman KM
- Nutman TB
- Pfab F
- Ring J
- Rothenberg ME
- Roufosse F
- Sajous MH
- Sheikh J
- Simon D
- Simon HU
- Stein ML
- Wardlaw A
- Weller PF
- Klion AD
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2009.09.022
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Adrenal Cortex Hormones/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized"
- Benzamides
- Chemokine CCL17/blood
- Child
- "Cyclosporine/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- "Eosinophils/drug effects, immunology, metabolism"
- Female
- Humans
- "Hydroxyurea/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Hypereosinophilic Syndrome/drug therapy, immunology, metabolism"
- Imatinib Mesylate
- "Interferon-alpha/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Interleukin-5/blood
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/immunology, metabolism"
- "Piperazines/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Pyrimidines/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Receptor, Platelet-Derived Growth Factor alpha/immunology, metabolism"
- Retrospective Studies
- Tryptases/blood
- Young Adult
- "mRNA Cleavage and Polyadenylation Factors/immunology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypereosinophilic syndrome: a multicenter, retrospective analysis of clinical characteristics and response to therapy.
**Authors:** Ogbogu PU, Bochner BS, Butterfield JH, Gleich GJ, Huss-Marp J, Kahn JE, Leiferman KM, Nutman TB, Pfab F, Ring J, Rothenberg ME, Roufosse F, Sajous MH, Sheikh J, Simon D, Simon HU, Stein ML, Wardlaw A, Weller PF, Klion AD
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2009.09.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2009.09.022)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2009 Dec;124(6):1319-25.e3. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2009.09.022.

Hypereosinophilic syndrome: a multicenter, retrospective analysis of clinical 
characteristics and response to therapy.

Ogbogu PU(1), Bochner BS, Butterfield JH, Gleich GJ, Huss-Marp J, Kahn JE, 
Leiferman KM, Nutman TB, Pfab F, Ring J, Rothenberg ME, Roufosse F, Sajous MH, 
Sheikh J, Simon D, Simon HU, Stein ML, Wardlaw A, Weller PF, Klion AD.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Laboratory of 
Parasitic Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. 
aklion@nih.gov

Comment in
    J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010 Jun;125(6):1399-1401.e2. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2010.02.024.

BACKGROUND: Hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES) is a heterogeneous group of rare 
disorders defined by persistent blood eosinophilia > or =1.5 x 10(9)/L, absence 
of a secondary cause, and evidence of eosinophil-associated pathology. With the 
exception of a recent multicenter trial of mepolizumab (anti-IL-5 mAb), 
published therapeutic experience has been restricted to case reports and small 
case series.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of the study was to collect and summarize baseline 
demographic, clinical, and laboratory characteristics in a large, diverse cohort 
of patients with HES and to review responses to treatment with conventional and 
novel therapies.
METHODS: Clinical and laboratory data from 188 patients with HES, seen between 
January 2001 and December 2006 at 11 institutions in the United States and 
Europe, were collected retrospectively by chart review.
RESULTS: Eighteen of 161 patients (11%) tested were Fip1-like 1-platelet-derived 
growth factor receptor alpha (FIP1L1-PDGFRA) mutation-positive, and 29 of 168 
patients tested (17%) had a demonstrable aberrant or clonal T-cell population. 
Corticosteroid monotherapy induced complete or partial responses at 1 month in 
85% (120/141) of patients with most remaining on maintenance doses (median, 10 
mg prednisone equivalent daily for 2 months to 20 years). Hydroxyurea and 
IFN-alpha (used in 64 and 46 patients, respectively) were also effective, but 
their use was limited by toxicity. Imatinib (used in 68 patients) was more 
effective in patients with the FIP1L1-PDGFRA mutation (88%) than in those 
without (23%; P < .001).
CONCLUSION: This study, the largest clinical analysis of patients with HES to 
date, not only provides useful information for clinicians but also should 
stimulate prospective trials to optimize treatment of HES.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2009.09.022
PMCID: PMC2829669
PMID: 19910029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]