---
reference_id: "PMID:16721178"
title: Medical complications of anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa.
authors:
- Mitchell JE
- Crow S
journal: Curr Opin Psychiatry
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1097/01.yco.0000228768.79097.3e
keywords:
- "Anorexia Nervosa/complications, mortality"
- Bone Diseases/etiology
- "Bulimia Nervosa/complications, mortality"
- Cardiovascular Diseases/etiology
- Endocrine System Diseases/etiology
- Gastrointestinal Diseases/etiology
- Humans
- Leptin/blood
- Lung Diseases/etiology
- Nutrition Disorders/etiology
- Skin Diseases/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Medical complications of anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa.
**Authors:** Mitchell JE, Crow S
**Journal:** Curr Opin Psychiatry (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.yco.0000228768.79097.3e](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.yco.0000228768.79097.3e)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Psychiatry. 2006 Jul;19(4):438-43. doi:
10.1097/01.yco.0000228768.79097.3e.

Medical complications of anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa.

Mitchell JE(1), Crow S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, University of North Dakota School of
Medicine and the Neuropsychiatric Research Institute, Fargo, North Dakota 58103,
USA . mitchell@medicine.nodak.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review focuses on recent publications concerning medical
complications in patients with eating disorders, including anorexia nervosa and
bulimia nervosa.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recent literature continues to reflect that multiple organ
systems are frequently affected by eating disorders. The literature underscores
the frequently cited risk of premature death in those with anorexia nervosa. A
plethora of dermatologic changes have been described, some signaling serious
underlying pathophysiology, such as purpura, which indicates a bleeding
diathesis. Much of the literature continues to delineate the fact that diabetic
patients with eating disorders are at high risk of developing diabetic
complications. Gastrointestinal complications can be serious, including gastric
dilatation and severe liver dysfunction. Acrocyanosis is common, and patients
with anorexia nervosa are at risk of various arrhythmias. Low-weight patients
are at high risk for osteopenia/osteoporosis. Nutritional abnormalities are also
common, including sodium depletion and hypovolemia, hypophosphatemia and
hypomagnesemia. Resting energy expenditure, although very low in low-weight
patients, increases dramatically early in refeeding.
SUMMARY: Medical complications are common and often serious in patients with
eating disorders, particularly those with anorexia nervosa.

DOI: 10.1097/01.yco.0000228768.79097.3e
PMID: 16721178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
