---
reference_id: "PMID:36801633"
title: "Monkeypox (mpox) virus: Classification, origin, transmission, genome organization, antiviral drugs, and molecular diagnosis."
authors:
- Karagoz A
- Tombuloglu H
- Alsaeed M
- Tombuloglu G
- AlRubaish AA
- Mahmoud A
- Smajlović S
- Ćordić S
- Rabaan AA
- Alsuhaimi E
journal: J Infect Public Health
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jiph.2023.02.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monkeypox (mpox) virus: Classification, origin, transmission, genome organization, antiviral drugs, and molecular diagnosis.
**Authors:** Karagoz A, Tombuloglu H, Alsaeed M, Tombuloglu G, AlRubaish AA, Mahmoud A, Smajlović S, Ćordić S, Rabaan AA, Alsuhaimi E
**Journal:** J Infect Public Health (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jiph.2023.02.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiph.2023.02.003)

## Content

1. J Infect Public Health. 2023 Apr;16(4):531-541. doi:
10.1016/j.jiph.2023.02.003.  Epub 2023 Feb 9.

Monkeypox (mpox) virus: Classification, origin, transmission, genome 
organization, antiviral drugs, and molecular diagnosis.

Karagoz A(1), Tombuloglu H(2), Alsaeed M(3), Tombuloglu G(4), AlRubaish AA(5), 
Mahmoud A(6), Smajlović S(7), Ćordić S(8), Rabaan AA(9), Alsuhaimi E(10).

Author information:
(1)Quality Assurance Department, Turk Pharmaceutical and Serum Ind. Inc., 
Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Department of Genetics Research, Institute for Research and Medical 
Consultations (IRMC), Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, P.O. Box 1982, 
Dammam 34221, Saudi Arabia. Electronic address: htoglu@iau.edu.sa.
(3)Department of Genetics Research, Institute for Research and Medical 
Consultations (IRMC), Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, P.O. Box 1982, 
Dammam 34221, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Biophysics, Institute for Research and Medical Consultations 
(IRMC), Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, P.O. Box 1982, Dammam 34221, 
Saudi Arabia.
(5)College of Medicine, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, Dammam 31441, 
Saudi Arabia.
(6)Department of Bioinformatics, Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology Research 
Institute (GEBRI), University of Sadat City, Egypt.
(7)Laboratory Diagnostics Institute Dr. Dedić, Bihać 77000, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina.
(8)Cantonal hospital "Dr. Irfan Ljubijankić", Microbiological laboratory, Bihać 
77000, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
(9)Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, Johns Hopkins Aramco Healthcare, Dhahran 
31311, Saudi Arabia; College of Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh 11533, 
Saudi Arabia; Department of Public Health and Nutrition. The University of 
Haripur, Haripur 22610, Pakistan.
(10)Biology Department, College of Science and Institute for Research and 
Medical Consultations (IRMC), Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, Dammam 
31441, Saudi Arabia.

Monkeypox virus (MPXV) is a double-stranded DNA virus belonging to the 
Poxviridae family of the genus Orthopoxvirus with two different clades known as 
West African and Congo Basin. Monkeypox (MPX) is a zoonosis that arises from the 
MPXV and causes a smallpox-like disease. The endemic disease status of MPX was 
updated to an outbreak worldwide in 2022. Thus, the condition was declared a 
global health emergency independent of travel issues, accounting for the primary 
reason for its prevalence outside Africa. In addition to identified transmission 
mediators through animal-to-human and human-to-human, especially sexual 
transmission among men who have sex with men came to prominence in the 2022 
global outbreak. Although the severity and prevalence of the disease differ 
depending on age and gender, some symptoms are commonly observed. Clinical signs 
such as fever, muscle and headache pain, swollen lymph nodes, and skin rashes in 
defined body regions are standard and an indicator for the first step of 
diagnosis. By following the clinical signs, laboratory diagnostic tests like 
conventional polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or real-time PCR (RT-PCR) are the 
most common and accurate diagnostic methods. Antiviral drugs such as 
tecovirimat, cidofovir, and brincidofovir are used for symptomatic treatment. 
There is no MPXV-specific vaccine; however, currently available vaccines against 
smallpox enhance the immunization rate. This comprehensive review covers the MPX 
disease history and the current state of knowledge by assessing broad topics and 
views related to disease origin, transmission, epidemiology, severity, genome 
organization and evolution, diagnosis, treatment, and prevention.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jiph.2023.02.003
PMCID: PMC9908738
PMID: 36801633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.