---
reference_id: "PMID:35449152"
title: HGF/c-Met pathway facilitates the perineural invasion of pancreatic cancer by activating the mTOR/NGF axis.
authors:
- Qin T
- Xiao Y
- Qian W
- Wang X
- Gong M
- Wang Q
- An R
- Han L
- Duan W
- Ma Q
- Wang Z
journal: Cell Death Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41419-022-04799-5
keywords:
- Cell Movement
- Hepatocyte Growth Factor
- Humans
- Neoplasm Invasiveness/pathology
- Nerve Growth Factor/metabolism
- Pancreatic Neoplasms/pathology
- TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HGF/c-Met pathway facilitates the perineural invasion of pancreatic cancer by activating the mTOR/NGF axis.
**Authors:** Qin T, Xiao Y, Qian W, Wang X, Gong M, Wang Q, An R, Han L, Duan W, Ma Q, Wang Z
**Journal:** Cell Death Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41419-022-04799-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41419-022-04799-5)

## Content

1. Cell Death Dis. 2022 Apr 21;13(4):387. doi: 10.1038/s41419-022-04799-5.

HGF/c-Met pathway facilitates the perineural invasion of pancreatic cancer by 
activating the mTOR/NGF axis.

Qin T(1), Xiao Y(1), Qian W(1), Wang X(1), Gong M(1), Wang Q(1), An R(1), Han 
L(1)(2), Duan W(1)(2), Ma Q(3)(4)(5), Wang Z(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an 
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China.
(2)Centre for Pancreatic Diseases of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China.
(3)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an 
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China. qyma56@mail.xjtu.edu.cn.
(4)Centre for Pancreatic Diseases of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China. 
qyma56@mail.xjtu.edu.cn.
(5)Key Laboratory of Environment and Genes Related to Diseases, Xi'an Jiaotong 
University, Xi'an, China. qyma56@mail.xjtu.edu.cn.
(6)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an 
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China. zheng.wang11@mail.xjtu.edu.cn.
(7)Centre for Pancreatic Diseases of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China. 
zheng.wang11@mail.xjtu.edu.cn.
(8)Key Laboratory of Environment and Genes Related to Diseases, Xi'an Jiaotong 
University, Xi'an, China. zheng.wang11@mail.xjtu.edu.cn.

Perineural invasion (PNI) is a pathologic feature of pancreatic cancer and is 
associated with poor outcomes, metastasis, and recurrence in pancreatic cancer 
patients. However, the molecular mechanism of PNI remains unclear. The present 
study aimed to investigate the mechanism that HGF/c-Met pathway facilitates the 
PNI of pancreatic cancer. In this study, we confirmed that c-Met expression was 
correlated with PNI in pancreatic cancer tissues. Activating the HGF/c-Met 
signaling pathway potentiated the expression of nerve growth factor (NGF) to 
recruit nerves and promote the PNI. Activating the HGF/c-Met signaling pathway 
also enhanced the migration and invasion ability of cancer cells to facilitate 
cancer cells invading nerves. Mechanistically, HGF/c-Met signaling pathway can 
active the mTOR/NGF axis to promote the PNI of pancreatic cancer. Additionally, 
we found that knocking down c-Met expression inhibited cancer cell migration 
along the nerve, reduced the damage of the sciatic nerve caused by cancer cells 
and protected the function of the sciatic nerve in vivo. Taken together, our 
findings suggest a supportive mechanism of the HGF/c-Met signaling pathway in 
promoting PNI by activating the mTOR/NGF axis in pancreatic cancer. Blocking the 
HGF/c-Met signaling pathway may be an effective target for the treatment of PNI.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-022-04799-5
PMCID: PMC9023560
PMID: 35449152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.