---
reference_id: "PMID:34887981"
title: Nevus pigmentosus et pilosus.
authors:
- Nagarathinam S
- Baalann KP
journal: Pan Afr Med J
year: '2021'
doi: 10.11604/pamj.2021.40.107.26779
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nevus pigmentosus et pilosus.
**Authors:** Nagarathinam S, Baalann KP
**Journal:** Pan Afr Med J (2021)
**DOI:** [10.11604/pamj.2021.40.107.26779](https://doi.org/10.11604/pamj.2021.40.107.26779)

## Content

1. Pan Afr Med J. 2021 Oct 18;40:107. doi: 10.11604/pamj.2021.40.107.26779. 
eCollection 2021.

Nevus pigmentosus et pilosus.

Nagarathinam S(1), Baalann KP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Community Medicine, Sree Balaji Medical College and Hospital, 
Bharath Institute of Higher Education and Research, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.

Congenital melanocytic nevus (CMN) is a proliferation of melanocytes that 
presents at birth or shortly after birth as light brown to black patches or 
plaques, covering any part of the body occasionally exhibiting hypertrichosis. 
The estimated prevalence of such large forms is 0.002% of the births, resulting 
from mutations of genes coding for NRAS and KRAS proteins, usually during the 
first twelve weeks of pregnancy. Giant CMN also known as "bathing trunk nevus," 
"giant hairy nevus", and "nevus pigmentosus et pilosus" has highest potential to 
turn into malignant melanoma. We present a case of a 7 year old boy who came to 
our clinic with complaints of itching over his left shoulder and back for 4 
months duration. He gave history of black patches on those areas since birth 
that gradually grew in size and attained the current presentation. On 
examination, well demarcated black patches were noted over his left shoulder, 
arm, trunk (A) and extending from nape of the neck and the entire back with 
excessive hair growth (B). A diagnosis of congenital melanocytic nevus was 
established and since it could potentially evolve into a melanoma, prophylactic 
surgery with skin grafting was suggested but the patient's parents refused. 
Hence dermabrasion was done to lighten the dark pigmentation and reduce hair 
growth within nevi. Parents were counselled about complications of CMN and 
advised to follow up with a dermatologist regularly. Clinicians should 
scrupulously examine the child to facilitate timely surgical intervention 
thereby reducing morbidity and mortality associated with this condition.

Copyright: Supraja Nagarathinam et al.

DOI: 10.11604/pamj.2021.40.107.26779
PMCID: PMC8627136
PMID: 34887981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]