---
reference_id: "PMID:11821690"
title: Genetic analysis of PITX2 and FOXC1 in Rieger Syndrome patients from Brazil.
authors:
- Borges AS
- Susanna R Jr
- Carani JC
- Betinjane AJ
- Alward WL
- Stone EM
- Sheffield VC
- Nishimura DY
journal: J Glaucoma
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1097/00061198-200202000-00010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic analysis of PITX2 and FOXC1 in Rieger Syndrome patients from Brazil.
**Authors:** Borges AS, Susanna R Jr, Carani JC, Betinjane AJ, Alward WL, Stone EM, Sheffield VC, Nishimura DY
**Journal:** J Glaucoma (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00061198-200202000-00010](https://doi.org/10.1097/00061198-200202000-00010)

## Content

1. J Glaucoma. 2002 Feb;11(1):51-6. doi: 10.1097/00061198-200202000-00010.

Genetic analysis of PITX2 and FOXC1 in Rieger Syndrome patients from Brazil.

Borges AS(1), Susanna R Jr, Carani JC, Betinjane AJ, Alward WL, Stone EM, 
Sheffield VC, Nishimura DY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Otorrinolaryngology, Glaucoma Service 
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

PURPOSE: Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome is a genetically heterogeneous, autosomal 
dominant disorder that is characterized by anterior segment defects, glaucoma, 
and extraocular anomalies. This study examined the two genes known to cause 
Rieger syndrome, PITX2 and FOXC1, for mutations in five Brazilian families with 
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.
METHODS: Five families with a total of 23 persons affected by Axenfeld-Rieger 
syndrome were recruited for this study. A sequencing-based mutation screen was 
undertaken for the PITX2 and FOXC1 genes. Linkage analysis was used to study one 
large family for which no mutations were detected in the PITX2 or FOXC1 genes.
RESULTS: Two of the five families harbored mutations in the PITX2 gene, but none 
of the families had a detectable FOXC1 mutation. Haplotypic analysis of three 
Rieger syndrome regions in a large family with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome excluded 
linkage to the 4q25 (PITX2), 6p25 (FOXC1), and 13q14 (RIEG2) regions.
CONCLUSIONS: It appears that the PITX2 gene is responsible for a significant 
portion of Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome in the Brazilian population. Furthermore, 
there is also evidence for the presence of genetic heterogeneity of the disorder 
within the Brazilian population. Finally, a large family with Axenfeld-Rieger 
syndrome has been identified that does not appear to harbor any of the three 
known loci. Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome gene segregation in this family likely 
represents a novel locus.

DOI: 10.1097/00061198-200202000-00010
PMID: 11821690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]