---
reference_id: "PMID:38251601"
title: "Safety and efficacy of secukinumab in patients with giant cell arteritis (TitAIN): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 2 trial."
authors:
- Venhoff N
- Schmidt WA
- Bergner R
- Rech J
- Unger L
- Tony HP
- Finzel S
- Andreica I
- Kofler DM
- Weiner SM
- Lamprecht P
- Schulze-Koops H
- App C
- Pournara E
- Mendelson MH
- Sieder C
- Maricos M
- Thiel J
journal: Lancet Rheumatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/S2665-9913(23)00101-7
keywords:
- Aged
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized"
- Bayes Theorem
- Giant Cell Arteritis/drug therapy
- Glucocorticoids
- Prednisolone
- Double-Blind Method
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Safety and efficacy of secukinumab in patients with giant cell arteritis (TitAIN): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 2 trial.
**Authors:** Venhoff N, Schmidt WA, Bergner R, Rech J, Unger L, Tony HP, Finzel S, Andreica I, Kofler DM, Weiner SM, Lamprecht P, Schulze-Koops H, App C, Pournara E, Mendelson MH, Sieder C, Maricos M, Thiel J
**Journal:** Lancet Rheumatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2665-9913(23)00101-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2665-9913(23)00101-7)

## Content

1. Lancet Rheumatol. 2023 Jun;5(6):e341-e350. doi: 10.1016/S2665-9913(23)00101-7.

Safety and efficacy of secukinumab in patients with giant cell arteritis 
(TitAIN): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 2 trial.

Venhoff N(1), Schmidt WA(2), Bergner R(3), Rech J(4), Unger L(5), Tony HP(6), 
Finzel S(1), Andreica I(7), Kofler DM(8), Weiner SM(9), Lamprecht P(10), 
Schulze-Koops H(11), App C(12), Pournara E(13), Mendelson MH(14), Sieder C(12), 
Maricos M(12), Thiel J(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Medical Centre-University 
of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Immanuel Krankenhaus Berlin, Medical Centre for Rheumatology Berlin-Buch, 
Berlin, Germany.
(3)Medizinische Klinik A, Klinikum der Stadt Ludwigshafen, Ludwigshafen, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine 3 - Rheumatology and Immunology, Deutsches 
Zentrum Immuntherapie, Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nürnberg and 
Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.
(5)Medical Department 1, Städtisches Klinikum Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(6)Department of Medicine 2, Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, University of 
Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany.
(7)Rheumazentrum Ruhrgebiet Herne, Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
(8)Division of Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, Department I of Internal 
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Cologne and University Hospital 
Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(9)Medical Department 2, Krankenhaus der Barmherzigen Brüder Trier, Medical 
Campus of the Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz, Trier, Germany.
(10)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, University of Lübeck, 
Lübeck, Germany.
(11)Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Department of Internal 
Medicine IV, Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(12)Novartis Pharma, Nuremberg, Germany.
(13)Novartis Pharma, Basel, Switzerland.
(14)Novartis Pharmaceuticals, East Hanover, NJ, USA.
(15)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Medical 
Centre-University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, 
Freiburg, Germany; Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria. Electronic 
address: jens.thiel@uniklinik-freiburg.de.

Comment in
    Lancet Rheumatol. 2023 Jun;5(6):e307-e308. doi: 
10.1016/S2665-9913(23)00126-1.

BACKGROUND: The treatment of giant cell arteritis with glucocorticoid-sparing 
agents is an unmet medical need. We evaluated the efficacy and safety of 
secukinumab, an anti-interleukin-17A monoclonal antibody, in patients with giant 
cell arteritis.
METHODS: We conducted a Bayesian randomised, parallel-group, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled, multicentre, phase 2 study at 11 clinics or hospitals in 
Germany. Patients aged 50 years or older with new-onset or relapsing giant cell 
arteritis who were naive to biological therapy and already receiving 
glucocorticoids with a prednisolone equivalent dose of 25-60 mg/day were 
eligible for inclusion. Participants were assigned (1:1) to receive 300 mg 
secukinumab or placebo subcutaneously once a week up to week 4 and every 4 weeks 
thereafter. In both treatment groups, prednisolone dose was tapered down to 0 mg 
over a 26-week period. Patients, investigator staff, and clinical trial team 
were masked to the treatment assignment. The primary endpoint was the median 
proportion (Bayesian analysis) of patients with sustained remission until week 
28 in the full analysis set (ie, all patients who received at least one dose of 
assigned treatment, analysed according to treatment assigned at randomisation). 
Sustained remission rate of the placebo group from a previous trial of 
tocilizumab in patients with giant cell arteritis was used to derive the prior 
distribution of placebo sustained remission rate for the primary endpoint. The 
safety of secukinumab was assessed in the safety set (ie, all patients who 
received at least one dose of study treatment, analysed according to study 
treatment received). This trial is completed and is registered with 
ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03765788.
FINDINGS: Of the 65 patients who were assessed for eligibility, 52 patients 
(median age 75 years [IQR 69-79]; 35 [67%] female and 17 [33%] male, 52 [100%] 
White) were enrolled between Jan 30, 2019 and March 30, 2020 and were randomly 
assigned to receive secukinumab (n=27) or placebo (n=25). Four of 27 patients in 
the secukinumab group and eight of 25 patients in the placebo group discontinued 
treatment by week 28 of the study. On the basis of the Bayesian analysis, the 
median proportion of patients in sustained remission until week 28 was 70% (95% 
credibility interval 52-85) in the secukinumab group versus 20% (12-30) in the 
placebo group. The incidence of adverse events was similar in the secukinumab 
(27 [100%] of 27 patients had any adverse event) and placebo groups (24 [96%] of 
25 patients had any adverse event); the most common adverse events were 
hypertension (six [22%] of 27 patients in the secukinumab group and eight [32%] 
of 25 patients in the placebo group) and nasopharyngitis (five [19%] of 27 
patients in the secukinumab group and five [20%] of 25 patients in the placebo 
group). Two patients (one in each group) died during the study, neither of which 
was considered to be related to study treatment.
INTERPRETATION: Patients with active giant cell arteritis had a higher sustained 
remission rate in the secukinumab group than in the placebo group at week 28, in 
combination with glucocorticoid taper regimen. Secukinumab was tolerated well 
with no new safety concerns. This proof-of-concept phase 2 study further 
supports the development of secukinumab as a treatment option for people with 
giant cell arteritis.
FUNDING: Novartis Pharma.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2665-9913(23)00101-7
PMID: 38251601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests NV declares speaker 
honorarium from AbbVie, AstraZeneca, Novartis, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol 
Myers Squibb, Chugai, Roche, UCB, GlaxoSmithKline, and Vifor; being an advisory 
board member for AbbVie, Chugai, Novartis, UCB, and Vifor; consulting fees from 
Novartis, AbbVie, Chugai, and Vifor; research grants from Bristol Myers Squibb 
and Novartis; meeting or travel grants from Bristol Myers Squibb, Novartis, 
AbbVie, and Vifor; and expert testimony for Novartis, Vifor, and AbbVie. WAS is 
part of speaker bureaus for AbbVie, Chugai, Medac, Novartis, Roche, and Sanofi; 
is an advisory board member for AbbVie, Chugai, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, 
Roche, and Sanofi; and received research grants from AbbVie, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Novartis, and Sanofi. RB is part of speaker bureaus for AbbVie, Bristol Myers 
Squibb, Chugai, Novartis, Roche, Galapagos, and Glaxo Smith Kline; is an 
advisory board member for Galapagos, GlaxoSmithKline, and Vifor; received 
research grants from Vifor; and is an unpaid board member for Commission für 
student education—German Rheumatology Society. JR is part of speaker bureaus for 
AbbVie, Biogen, Bristol Myers Squibb, Chugai, GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen, Lilly, 
MSD, Novartis, Roche, Sanofi, Sobi, and UCB and received consulting fees from 
AbbVie, Biogen, Bristol Myers Squibb, Chugai, GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen, Lilly, 
MSD, Novartis, Roche, Sanofi, Sobi, and UCB. LU received payments for speeches 
and seminar presentations from Novartis. H-PT is an advisory board member for 
AbbVie, Bristol Myers Squibb, Chugai, Gilead, Lilly, Novartis, Roche, and 
Sanofi. SF received consulting fees from Amgen and Novartis; speaker honorarium 
from AbbVie, Amgen, Galapagos, Novartis, and UCB; and meeting or travel grants 
from Novartis, UCB, Galapagos, and Sobi. IA received consulting fees from Amgen, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Chugai, Galapagos, Lilly, Novartis, Pfizer, Sobi, Takeda, 
and UCB; is part of speaker bureaus for AbbVie, Chugai, Gilead, Lilly, MSD, 
Novartis, Pfizer, Sobi, and UCB; received payments for other services (receipt 
of equipment, materials, drugs, medical writing, and gifts) from Novartis; and 
received research grants from Lilly. SMW is an advisory board member for 
Novartis; received speaker honorarium from AbbVie, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, 
Bristol Myers Squibb, Daiichi-Sankyo, MSD, Novartis, Otsuka, Pfizer, and Roche; 
received meeting or travel grants from Abbvie, Amgen, Bristol Myers Squibb, 
Otsuka, Pfizer, and UCB; and is an unpaid board member for 
Saarländisch-Pfälzische Internistengesellschaft and Arbeitskreis Nephrologie 
Saar-Pfalz Mosel. PL received speaker honorarium from Bristol Myers Squibb, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen, UCB, and Vifor; is an advisory board member for 
GlaxoSmithKline and Vifor; and received research grants from Bundesministerium 
für Bildung und Forschung, Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, John Grube 
Foundation, and Vifor. HS-K is part of speaker bureaus for AbbVie, Bristol Myers 
Squibb, Chugai, GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen, Medac, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, 
Sanofi, and UCB; is an advisory board member for AbbVie, Bristol Myers Squibb, 
Chugai, Janssen, Medac, Pfizer, Novartis, Roche, Sanofi, and UCB; and received 
research grants from AbbVie and Novartis. CA is an employee of Novartis Pharma. 
EP is an employee of Novartis Pharma and owns Novartis stock. MHM is an employee 
and shareholder of Novartis Pharmaceuticals and is named on the patent for 
secukinumab in the treatment of giant cell arteritis, as an employee of 
Novartis, the funder. CS is an employee of Novartis Pharma and has Novartis 
stock options. MM is an employee of Novartis Pharma. JT declares speaker 
honorarium from Novartis, GlaxoSmithKline, Bristol Myers Squibb, Roche, 
AstraZeneca, and Vifor; is an advisory board member for Novartis; received 
consulting fees from Novartis, Janssen, and GlaxoSmithKline; and received 
research grants from Bristol Myers Squibb and Novartis. DMK declares no 
competing interests.