---
reference_id: "PMID:35405682"
title: Mycoplasma pneumoniae Infection Associated with Anti-Factor H Autoantibodies in Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome.
authors:
- Valoti E
- Piras R
- Mele C
- Alberti M
- Liguori L
- Breno M
- Bertulli C
- Bresin E
- Donadelli R
journal: Nephron
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1159/000523998
keywords:
- Humans
- "Child, Preschool"
- Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome
- Autoantibodies
- "Pneumonia, Mycoplasma"
- Homozygote
- Sequence Deletion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mycoplasma pneumoniae Infection Associated with Anti-Factor H Autoantibodies in Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome.
**Authors:** Valoti E, Piras R, Mele C, Alberti M, Liguori L, Breno M, Bertulli C, Bresin E, Donadelli R
**Journal:** Nephron (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000523998](https://doi.org/10.1159/000523998)

## Content

1. Nephron. 2022;146(6):593-598. doi: 10.1159/000523998. Epub 2022 Apr 11.

Mycoplasma pneumoniae Infection Associated with Anti-Factor H Autoantibodies in
Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome.

Valoti E(1), Piras R(1), Mele C(1), Alberti M(1), Liguori L(1), Breno M(1),
Bertulli C(2), Bresin E(1), Donadelli R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rare Diseases, Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri
- IRCCS, Bergamo, Italy.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna,
Bologna, Italy.

Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) is a rare disease characterized by hemolytic
anemia, thrombocytopenia, and renal impairment mostly triggered by strains of
Shiga-like toxin-producing Escherichia coli (STEC-HUS). A rarer form of HUS,
defined as atypical HUS (aHUS), is associated with genetic or acquired
dysregulation of the alternative pathway of the complement system and presents a
poorer prognosis than STEC-HUS. Factor H autoantibodies (anti-FHs) have been
reported in aHUS in 5-11% of cases and are strongly associated with the
homozygous deletion of CFHR3-CFHR1 genes. In the large majority of patients,
anti-FH-associated aHUS is commonly preceded by gastrointestinal or respiratory
tract infections. Here, we described the clinical case of a 3-year-old boy who
was hospitalized for aHUS preceded by Mycoplasma pneumoniae (MP) infection. He
resulted positive for anti-FHs and carried the homozygous deletion of
CFHR3-CFHR1. Of relevance, he also showed a variant of unknown significance in
the C5 gene. The patient was successfully treated with eculizumab and achieved
hematological and renal remission. The anti-FH titer decreased, became negative
after 6 months of mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) treatment, and remained negative
for 21-month follow-up indicating that immunosuppression was effective and could
prevent the reappearance of anti-FHs. We hypothesized that MP, likely through an
evasion strategy of immunosurveillance based on binding of pathogen to FH,
triggers anti-FH antibody generation and aHUS in a subject genetically
predisposed. In conclusion, to the best of our knowledge, here, we reported the
first case of anti-FH-mediated aHUS after an MP infection who benefited from
eculizumab and immunosuppressive therapy based on MMF. Hence, monitoring of
anti-FHs in patients with post-MP infection glomerulonephritis could be
recommended, especially in those with low C3 plasma levels.

© 2022 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000523998
PMID: 35405682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
