---
reference_id: "PMID:24595236"
title: Demographic and clinico-epidemiological features of dengue fever in Faisalabad, Pakistan.
authors:
- Raza FA
- Rehman Su
- Khalid R
- Ahmad J
- Ashraf S
- Iqbal M
- Hasnain S
journal: PLoS One
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089868
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Demographic and clinico-epidemiological features of dengue fever in Faisalabad, Pakistan.
**Authors:** Raza FA, Rehman Su, Khalid R, Ahmad J, Ashraf S, Iqbal M, Hasnain S
**Journal:** PLoS One (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0089868](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0089868)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 3;9(3):e89868. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089868.
eCollection  2014.

Demographic and clinico-epidemiological features of dengue fever in Faisalabad, 
Pakistan.

Raza FA(1), Rehman Su(2), Khalid R(3), Ahmad J(4), Ashraf S(5), Iqbal M(6), 
Hasnain S(2).

Author information:
(1)Pakistan Medical Research Council, Research Centre, Punjab Medical College, 
Faisalabad, Pakistan; Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, 
University of the Punjab, Quaid-e-Azam Campus, Lahore, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of the Punjab, 
Quaid-e-Azam Campus, Lahore, Pakistan.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, University of the Punjab, Quaid-e-Azam Campus, 
Lahore, Pakistan.
(4)Department of Pathology, Allied Hospital, Faisalabad, Pakistan.
(5)Nano Bio Energy Engineering School of Integrative Engineering, Chung-Ang 
University, Seoul, Korea.
(6)Pakistan Medical Research Council, Research Centre, Punjab Medical College, 
Faisalabad, Pakistan.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(10):e112196.
    PLoS One. 2014;9(11):e113174.

This cross-sectional study was carried out to explore the epidemiological and 
clinical features of dengue fever in Faisalabad, Pakistan during 2011 and 2012. 
During the study period, anti-dengue IgM positive cases were reported in the 
post-monsoon period during the months of August-December. Certain hotspots for 
the dengue infection were identified in the city that coincide with the clusters 
of densely populated urban regions of the city. Out of total 299 IgM positive 
patients (male 218 and female 81); there were 239 dengue fever (DF) and 60 
dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) patients. There was decrease in the median age of 
dengue patients from 31 years in 2011 to 21.5 years in 2012 (p<0.001). Abdominal 
pain was seen in 35% DHF patients followed by nausea in 28.3%, epistaxis in 25% 
and rash in 20% patients (p<0.05). Patients reported to be suffering from 
high-grade fever for an average of 8.83 days in DHF as compared to 5.82 days in 
DF before being hospitalized. Co-morbidities were found to be risk factor for 
the development of DHF in dengue patients. Clinical and laboratory features of 
dengue cases studied could be used for the early identification of patients at 
risk of severe dengue fever.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089868
PMCID: PMC3940608
PMID: 24595236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.