---
reference_id: PMID:33203220
title: "Quantitative EEG Analysis in Angelman Syndrome: Candidate Method for Assessing Therapeutics."
authors:
- Martinez LA
- Born HA
- Harris S
- Regnier-Golanov A
- Grieco JC
- Weeber EJ
- Anderson AE
journal: Clin EEG Neurosci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1177/1550059420973095
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- "Angelman Syndrome/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Electroencephalography
- Minocycline/therapeutic use
- Retrospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Quantitative EEG Analysis in Angelman Syndrome: Candidate Method for Assessing Therapeutics.
**Authors:** Martinez LA, Born HA, Harris S, Regnier-Golanov A, Grieco JC, Weeber EJ, Anderson AE
**Journal:** Clin EEG Neurosci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1550059420973095](https://doi.org/10.1177/1550059420973095)

## Content

1. Clin EEG Neurosci. 2023 Mar;54(2):203-212. doi: 10.1177/1550059420973095. Epub
 2020 Nov 18.

Quantitative EEG Analysis in Angelman Syndrome: Candidate Method for Assessing 
Therapeutics.

Martinez LA(1)(2)(3), Born HA(1)(2)(3), Harris S(1)(2)(3), Regnier-Golanov 
A(1)(2)(3), Grieco JC(4), Weeber EJ(4), Anderson AE(1)(2)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(2)The Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute, Texas Children's 
Hospital, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)The Gordon and Mary Cain Pediatric Neurology Research Foundation 
Laboratories, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology, University of South 
Florida, Tampa, FL, USA.
(5)Departments of Neuroscience and Neurology, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.

The goal of these studies was to use quantitative (q)EEG techniques on data from 
children with Angelman syndrome (AS) using spectral power analysis, and to 
evaluate this as a potential biomarker and quantitative method to evaluate 
therapeutics. Although characteristic patterns are evident in visual inspection, 
using qEEG techniques has the potential to provide quantitative evidence of 
treatment efficacy. We first assessed spectral power from baseline EEG 
recordings collected from children with AS compared to age-matched neurotypical 
controls, which corroborated the previously reported finding of increased total 
power driven by elevated delta power in children with AS. We then 
retrospectively analyzed data collected during a clinical trial evaluating the 
safety and tolerability of minocycline (3 mg/kg/d) to compare pretreatment 
recordings from children with AS (4-12 years of age) to EEG activity at the end 
of treatment and following washout for EEG spectral power and epileptiform 
events. At baseline and during minocycline treatment, the AS subjects 
demonstrated increased delta power; however, following washout from minocycline 
treatment the AS subjects had significantly reduced EEG spectral power and 
epileptiform activity. Our findings support the use of qEEG analysis in 
evaluating AS and suggest that this technique may be useful to evaluate 
therapeutic efficacy in AS. Normalizing EEG power in AS therefore may become an 
important metric in screening therapeutics to gauge overall efficacy. As 
therapeutics transition from preclinical to clinical studies, it is vital to 
establish outcome measures that can quantitatively evaluate putative treatments 
for AS and neurological disorders with distinctive EEG patterns.

DOI: 10.1177/1550059420973095
PMID: 33203220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]