---
reference_id: "PMID:21406719"
title: Aberrant DNA methylation characterizes juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia with poor outcome.
authors:
- Olk-Batz C
- Poetsch AR
- Nöllke P
- Claus R
- Zucknick M
- Sandrock I
- Witte T
- Strahm B
- Hasle H
- Zecca M
- Stary J
- Bergstraesser E
- De Moerloose B
- Trebo M
- van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM
- Wojcik D
- Locatelli F
- Plass C
- Niemeyer CM
- Flotho C
- European Working Group of Myelodysplastic Syndromes in Childhood (EWOG-MDS)
journal: Blood
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-08-298968
keywords:
- Bone Morphogenetic Protein 4/genetics
- Calcitonin/genetics
- Calcitonin Gene-Related Peptide
- Case-Control Studies
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- CpG Islands
- Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor p15/genetics
- DNA Methylation
- "DNA, Neoplasm/genetics, metabolism"
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Humans
- Infant
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- "Leukemia, Myelomonocytic, Juvenile/genetics, metabolism, therapy"
- Male
- Prognosis
- Protein Precursors/genetics
- "Receptors, Retinoic Acid/genetics"
- Risk Factors
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aberrant DNA methylation characterizes juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia with poor outcome.
**Authors:** Olk-Batz C, Poetsch AR, Nöllke P, Claus R, Zucknick M, Sandrock I, Witte T, Strahm B, Hasle H, Zecca M, Stary J, Bergstraesser E, De Moerloose B, Trebo M, van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM, Wojcik D, Locatelli F, Plass C, Niemeyer CM, Flotho C, European Working Group of Myelodysplastic Syndromes in Childhood (EWOG-MDS)
**Journal:** Blood (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2010-08-298968](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2010-08-298968)

## Content

1. Blood. 2011 May 5;117(18):4871-80. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-08-298968. Epub
2011  Mar 15.

Aberrant DNA methylation characterizes juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia with
poor outcome.

Olk-Batz C(1), Poetsch AR, Nöllke P, Claus R, Zucknick M, Sandrock I, Witte T,
Strahm B, Hasle H, Zecca M, Stary J, Bergstraesser E, De Moerloose B, Trebo M,
van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM, Wojcik D, Locatelli F, Plass C, Niemeyer CM, Flotho
C; European Working Group of Myelodysplastic Syndromes in Childhood (EWOG-MDS).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Medical Center,
Freiburg, Germany.

Aberrant DNA methylation contributes to the malignant phenotype in virtually all
types of cancer, including myeloid leukemia. We hypothesized that CpG island
hypermethylation also occurs in juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) and
investigated whether it is associated with clinical, hematologic, or prognostic
features. Based on quantitative measurements of DNA methylation in 127 JMML
cases using mass spectrometry (MassARRAY), we identified 4 gene CpG islands with
frequent hypermethylation: BMP4 (36% of patients), CALCA (54%), CDKN2B (22%),
and RARB (13%). Hypermethylation was significantly associated with poor
prognosis: when the methylation data were transformed into prognostic scores
using a LASSO Cox regression model, the 5-year overall survival was 0.41 for
patients in the top tertile of scores versus 0.72 in the lowest score tertile (P
= .002). Among patients given allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation, the 5-year cumulative incidence of relapse was 0.52 in the
highest versus 0.10 in the lowest score tertile (P = .007). In multivariate
models, DNA methylation retained prognostic value independently of other
clinical risk factors. Longitudinal analyses indicated that some cases acquired
a more extensively methylated phenotype at relapse. In conclusion, our data
suggest that a high-methylation phenotype characterizes an aggressive biologic
variant of JMML and is an important molecular predictor of outcome.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2010-08-298968
PMID: 21406719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
