---
reference_id: "PMID:26757869"
title: "[Ebola: characterization, history and cutaneous manifestations]."
authors:
- Kolbach M
- Carrasco-Zuber JE
- Vial-Letelier V
journal: Rev Med Chil
year: '2015'
doi: 10.4067/S0034-98872015001100010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Ebola: characterization, history and cutaneous manifestations].
**Authors:** Kolbach M, Carrasco-Zuber JE, Vial-Letelier V
**Journal:** Rev Med Chil (2015)
**DOI:** [10.4067/S0034-98872015001100010](https://doi.org/10.4067/S0034-98872015001100010)

## Content

1. Rev Med Chil. 2015 Nov;143(11):1444-8. doi: 10.4067/S0034-98872015001100010.

[Ebola: characterization, history and cutaneous manifestations].

[Article in Spanish]

Kolbach M, Carrasco-Zuber JE, Vial-Letelier V.

Ebola virus (EV) is one of the most virulent human pathogens. Fruits bats are 
its natural reservoir, the transmission to humans is across wild animals 
(especially primates) and the propagation in human populations is through bodily 
fluid contact. The actual outbreak started in December 2013 and crossed 
continental borders. Up to now, there are 17,145 suspected and confirmed cases 
with 6,070 deaths, resulting a total case fatality rate of 35%. Clinical 
manifestations can be divided in 3 phases. In phase I, symptoms are similar to 
flu, which may appear in a range of 2 to 21 days. In phase II which occurs in 
over 50% of cases, visceral symptoms and mucocutaneous manifestations appear 
within 4 and 5 days of the onset of symptoms. The main symptoms are a macular or 
maculopapular non-pruritic rash, desquamation and mucosal involvement of eyes, 
mouth and pharynx. In phase III, recovery or death occurs. The diagnosis is made 
on clinical grounds, epidemiological suspicion and a positive polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) test. The treatment is supportive. If there is a suspected case, 
it should be notified immediately and all relevant safety measures should be 
instituted.

DOI: 10.4067/S0034-98872015001100010
PMID: 26757869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]