---
reference_id: "PMID:40555085"
title: Multiorgan involvement and genetic spectrum of 20 Chinese patients with PMM2-CDG.
authors:
- Zhang H
- Zhang J
- Ma W
- Ma X
- He R
- Ding Y
- Liu Y
- Zhang W
- Dong H
- Zhang Y
- He M
- Yang Y
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2025.109178
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- China
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/genetics, pathology"
- Genotype
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Phosphotransferases (Phosphomutases)/genetics, deficiency"
- Retrospective Studies
- East Asian People/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiorgan involvement and genetic spectrum of 20 Chinese patients with PMM2-CDG.
**Authors:** Zhang H, Zhang J, Ma W, Ma X, He R, Ding Y, Liu Y, Zhang W, Dong H, Zhang Y, He M, Yang Y
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2025.109178](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2025.109178)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2025 Aug;145(4):109178. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2025.109178.
Epub  2025 Jun 15.

Multiorgan involvement and genetic spectrum of 20 Chinese patients with
PMM2-CDG.

Zhang H(1), Zhang J(1), Ma W(1), Ma X(1), He R(2), Ding Y(3), Liu Y(4), Zhang
W(5), Dong H(1), Zhang Y(1), He M(6), Yang Y(7).

Author information:
(1)Children's Medical Center, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 102600,
China.
(2)Department of Respiration, Beijing Children's Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing 100045, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Genetics and Metabolism, Beijing Children's
Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100045, China.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Peking University People's Hospital, Beijing
100044, China.
(5)Michael Palmieri Metabolic and Advanced Diagnostic Laboratory and the
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia PA19104, USA.
(6)Michael Palmieri Metabolic and Advanced Diagnostic Laboratory and the
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia PA19104, USA. Electronic
address: HeM@chop.edu.
(7)Children's Medical Center, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 102600,
China. Electronic address: yanlingy@bjmu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVE: The most common congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) is the
phosphomannomutase 2 (PMM2) deficiency (PMM2-CDG). PMM2-CDG is a complex genetic
disorder that often found in infancy or early childhood with a clinically
heterogeneous variety of neurological and non- neurological symptoms. To expand
the phenotypic and genetic spectrum of PMM2-CDG, we summarized the
characteristics of 20 Chinese patients.
METHODS: All patients were diagnosed by genetic analysis. Clinical
characteristics, genotypes, imaging, electrophysiological, and metabolic data
were analyzed retrospectively.
RESULTS: Twelve males and eight females with PMM2-CDG were included. The median
age at diagnosis was 12.0 (ranging from 6.0 to 52.0) months, while the median
age at final follow-up was 10.3 (ranging from 5.1 to 12.8) years. All patients
exhibited multisystem symptoms and various neurological symptoms were observed.
Developmental delay was the primary initial symptoms. Dystaxia, growth
retardation and liver damage were also common phenotypes. Cerebellar atrophy was
the characteristic abnormality on brain imaging. Fourteen variants of the PMM2
gene were identified, of which five, c.82A > G (p.M28V), c.551C > T (p. P184L),
c.640G > T (p.G214C), c.656A > T (p.E219V) and c.712C > G (p.R238G), were newly
reported. The most prevalent variant was c.430 T > C (p.F144L), which was
identified in 65.0 % of patients, followed by c.395 T > C (p.I132T). Consistent
with reports from other populations, missense variants constituted the
predominant type of PMM2 gene alterations.
CONCLUSION: PMM2-CDG presents as a multi-system disease with diverse clinical
phenotypes, posing challenges to early identification and diagnosis. The most
common pathogenic variant in this Chinese cohort was c.430 T > C (p.F144L),
which is close to, but different from, the common pathogenic variant c.422G > A
(p.R141H) among European PMM2-CDG patients.

Copyright © 2025. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2025.109178
PMID: 40555085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare no conflicts of interest.
