---
reference_id: "PMID:26685157"
title: "Loss of the smallest subunit of cytochrome c oxidase, COX8A, causes Leigh-like syndrome and epilepsy."
authors:
- Hallmann K
- Kudin AP
- Zsurka G
- Kornblum C
- Reimann J
- Stüve B
- Waltz S
- Hattingen E
- Thiele H
- Nürnberg P
- Rüb C
- Voos W
- Kopatz J
- Neumann H
- Kunz WS
journal: Brain
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awv357
keywords:
- Child
- "Electron Transport Complex IV/genetics, physiology"
- "Epilepsy/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- Fatal Outcome
- Female
- Humans
- "Leigh Disease/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- Mutation/genetics
- Protein Subunits/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of the smallest subunit of cytochrome c oxidase, COX8A, causes Leigh-like syndrome and epilepsy.
**Authors:** Hallmann K, Kudin AP, Zsurka G, Kornblum C, Reimann J, Stüve B, Waltz S, Hattingen E, Thiele H, Nürnberg P, Rüb C, Voos W, Kopatz J, Neumann H, Kunz WS
**Journal:** Brain (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awv357](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awv357)

## Content

1. Brain. 2016 Feb;139(Pt 2):338-45. doi: 10.1093/brain/awv357. Epub 2015 Dec 17.

Loss of the smallest subunit of cytochrome c oxidase, COX8A, causes Leigh-like 
syndrome and epilepsy.

Hallmann K(1), Kudin AP(1), Zsurka G(1), Kornblum C(2), Reimann J(2), Stüve 
B(3), Waltz S(3), Hattingen E(4), Thiele H(5), Nürnberg P(6), Rüb C(7), Voos 
W(7), Kopatz J(8), Neumann H(8), Kunz WS(9).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Epileptology and Life and Brain Centre, University of Bonn, 
Bonn, Germany.
(2)2 Department of Neurology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(3)3 Children's Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(4)4 Department of Radiology, Division of Neuroradiology, University of Bonn, 
Bonn, Germany.
(5)5 Cologne Centre for Genomics (CCG), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(6)5 Cologne Centre for Genomics (CCG), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany 
6 Centre for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, 
Germany 7 Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in 
Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(7)8 Institut für Biochemie und Molekularbiologie, University of Bonn, Bonn, 
Germany.
(8)9 Neural Regeneration Group, Institute of Reconstructive Neurobiology, 
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(9)1 Department of Epileptology and Life and Brain Centre, University of Bonn, 
Bonn, Germany wolfram.kunz@ukb.uni-bonn.de.

Isolated cytochrome c oxidase (complex IV) deficiency is one of the most 
frequent respiratory chain defects in humans and is usually caused by mutations 
in proteins required for assembly of the complex. Mutations in nuclear-encoded 
structural subunits are very rare. In a patient with Leigh-like syndrome 
presenting with leukodystrophy and severe epilepsy, we identified a homozygous 
splice site mutation in COX8A, which codes for the ubiquitously expressed 
isoform of subunit VIII, the smallest nuclear-encoded subunit of complex IV. The 
mutation, affecting the last nucleotide of intron 1, leads to aberrant splicing, 
a frame-shift in the highly conserved exon 2, and decreased amount of the COX8A 
transcript. The loss of the wild-type COX8A protein severely impairs the 
stability of the entire cytochrome c oxidase enzyme complex and manifests in 
isolated complex IV deficiency in skeletal muscle and fibroblasts, similar to 
the frequent c.845_846delCT mutation in the assembly factor SURF1 gene. 
Stability and activity of complex IV could be rescued in the patient's 
fibroblasts by lentiviral expression of wild-type COX8A. Our findings 
demonstrate that COX8A is indispensable for function of human complex IV and its 
mutation causes human disease.

© The Author (2015). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awv357
PMID: 26685157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]