---
reference_id: "PMID:32576599"
title: p38α Regulates Expression of DUX4 in a Model of Facioscapulohumeral Muscular Dystrophy.
authors:
- Rojas LA
- Valentine E
- Accorsi A
- Maglio J
- Shen N
- Robertson A
- Kazmirski S
- Rahl P
- Tawil R
- Cadavid D
- Thompson LA
- Ronco L
- Chang AN
- Cacace AM
- Wallace O
journal: J Pharmacol Exp Ther
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1124/jpet.119.264689
keywords:
- Cell Death/physiology
- Cell Line
- Gene Expression Regulation/physiology
- Homeodomain Proteins/metabolism
- Humans
- Muscle Cells/metabolism
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism"
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Facioscapulohumeral/metabolism"
- p38 Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# p38α Regulates Expression of DUX4 in a Model of Facioscapulohumeral Muscular Dystrophy.
**Authors:** Rojas LA, Valentine E, Accorsi A, Maglio J, Shen N, Robertson A, Kazmirski S, Rahl P, Tawil R, Cadavid D, Thompson LA, Ronco L, Chang AN, Cacace AM, Wallace O
**Journal:** J Pharmacol Exp Ther (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1124/jpet.119.264689](https://doi.org/10.1124/jpet.119.264689)

## Content

1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2020 Sep;374(3):489-498. doi: 10.1124/jpet.119.264689.
Epub 2020 Jun 23.

p38α Regulates Expression of DUX4 in a Model of Facioscapulohumeral Muscular
Dystrophy.

Rojas LA(1), Valentine E(2), Accorsi A(2), Maglio J(2), Shen N(2), Robertson
A(2), Kazmirski S(2), Rahl P(2), Tawil R(2), Cadavid D(2), Thompson LA(2), Ronco
L(2), Chang AN(2), Cacace AM(2), Wallace O(2).

Author information:
(1)Fulcrum Therapeutics, Cambridge, Massachusetts (L.A.R., E.V., A.A., J.M.,
N.S., A.R., S.K., P.R., D.C., L.A.T., L.R., A.N.C., A.M.C., O.W.) and University
of Rochester Medical Center, Department of Neurology, Rochester, New York (R.T.)
arojas@fulcrumtx.com.
(2)Fulcrum Therapeutics, Cambridge, Massachusetts (L.A.R., E.V., A.A., J.M.,
N.S., A.R., S.K., P.R., D.C., L.A.T., L.R., A.N.C., A.M.C., O.W.) and University
of Rochester Medical Center, Department of Neurology, Rochester, New York
(R.T.).

Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) is caused by the loss of
repression at the D4Z4 locus leading to aberrant double homeobox 4 (DUX4)
expression in skeletal muscle. Activation of this early embryonic transcription
factor results in the expression of its target genes causing muscle fiber death.
Although progress toward understanding the signals driving DUX4 expression has
been made, the factors and pathways involved in the transcriptional activation
of this gene remain largely unknown. Here, we describe the identification and
characterization of p38α as a novel regulator of DUX4 expression in FSHD
myotubes. By using multiple highly characterized, potent, and specific
inhibitors of p38α/β, we show a robust reduction of DUX4 expression, activity,
and cell death across patient-derived FSHD1 and FSHD2 lines. RNA-seq profiling
reveals that a small number of genes are differentially expressed upon p38α/β
inhibition, the vast majority of which are DUX4 target genes. Our results reveal
a novel and apparently critical role for p38α in the aberrant activation of DUX4
in FSHD and support the potential of p38α/β inhibitors as effective therapeutics
to treat FSHD at its root cause. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Using patient-derived
facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) myotubes, we characterize the
pharmacological relationships between p38α/β inhibition, double homeobox 4
(DUX4) expression, its downstream transcriptional program, and muscle cell
death. p38α/β inhibition results in potent and specific DUX4 downregulation
across multiple genotypes without significant effects in the process of
myogenesis in vitro. These findings highlight the potential of p38α/β inhibitors
for the treatment of FSHD, a condition that today has no approved therapies.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.119.264689
PMID: 32576599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
