---
reference_id: "PMID:19747722"
title: Cleft lip and palate.
authors:
- Mossey PA
- Little J
- Munger RG
- Dixon MJ
- Shaw WC
journal: Lancet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60695-4
keywords:
- "Cleft Lip/embryology, epidemiology, surgery"
- "Cleft Palate/embryology, epidemiology, surgery"
- Humans
- International Cooperation
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cleft lip and palate.
**Authors:** Mossey PA, Little J, Munger RG, Dixon MJ, Shaw WC
**Journal:** Lancet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60695-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60695-4)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2009 Nov 21;374(9703):1773-85. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60695-4.
Epub  2009 Sep 9.

Cleft lip and palate.

Mossey PA(1), Little J, Munger RG, Dixon MJ, Shaw WC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dental and Oral Health, University of Dundee, Dental Hospital 
and School, Dundee, UK. p.a.mossey@dundee.ac.uk

Clefts of the lip and palate are generally divided into two groups, isolated 
cleft palate and cleft lip with or without cleft palate, representing a 
heterogeneous group of disorders affecting the lips and oral cavity. These 
defects arise in about 1.7 per 1000 liveborn babies, with ethnic and geographic 
variation. Effects on speech, hearing, appearance, and psychology can lead to 
longlasting adverse outcomes for health and social integration. Typically, 
children with these disorders need multidisciplinary care from birth to 
adulthood and have higher morbidity and mortality throughout life than do 
unaffected individuals. This Seminar describes embryological developmental 
processes, epidemiology, known environmental and genetic risk factors, and their 
interaction. Although access to care has increased in recent years, especially 
in developing countries, quality of care still varies substantially. Prevention 
is the ultimate objective for clefts of the lip and palate, and a prerequisite 
of this aim is to elucidate causes of the disorders. Technological advances and 
international collaborations have yielded some successes.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60695-4
PMID: 19747722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]