---
reference_id: "PMID:28645799"
title: Genotype-phenotype evaluation of MED13L defects in the light of a novel truncating and a recurrent missense mutation.
authors:
- Asadollahi R
- Zweier M
- Gogoll L
- Schiffmann R
- Sticht H
- Steindl K
- Rauch A
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2017.06.004
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 9/genetics"
- "Craniofacial Abnormalities/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Genotype
- Haploinsufficiency
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- Mediator Complex/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotype-phenotype evaluation of MED13L defects in the light of a novel truncating and a recurrent missense mutation.
**Authors:** Asadollahi R, Zweier M, Gogoll L, Schiffmann R, Sticht H, Steindl K, Rauch A
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2017.06.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2017.06.004)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2017 Sep;60(9):451-464. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2017.06.004. Epub
 2017 Jun 21.

Genotype-phenotype evaluation of MED13L defects in the light of a novel 
truncating and a recurrent missense mutation.

Asadollahi R(1), Zweier M(1), Gogoll L(1), Schiffmann R(2), Sticht H(3), Steindl 
K(1), Rauch A(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schlieren-Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Metabolic Disease, Baylor Scott & White Research Institute, 
Dallas, TX, USA.
(3)Institute of Biochemistry, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, 
Germany.
(4)Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schlieren-Zurich, 
Switzerland; Neuroscience Center Zurich, University of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland; Zurich Center of Integrative Human Physiology, University of 
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. Electronic address: anita.rauch@medgen.uzh.ch.

A decade after the designation of MED13L as a gene and its link to intellectual 
disability (ID) and dextro-looped transposition of great arteries in 2003, we 
previously described a recognizable syndrome due to MED13L haploinsufficiency. 
Subsequent reports of 22 further patients diagnosed by genome-wide testing 
further delineated the syndrome with expansion of the phenotypic spectrum and 
showed reduced penetrance for congenital heart defects. We now report two novel 
patients identified by whole exome sequencing, one with a de novo MED13L 
truncating mutation and the other with a de novo missense mutation. The first 
patient indicates some facial resemblance to Kleefstra syndrome as a novel 
differential diagnosis, and the second patient shows, for the first time, 
recurrence of a MED13L missense mutation (p.(Asp860Gly)). Notably, our in silico 
modelling predicted this missense mutation to decrease the stability of an 
alpha-helix and thereby affecting the MED13L secondary structure, while the 
majority of published missense mutations remain variants of uncertain 
significance. Review of the reported patients with MED13L haploinsufficiency 
indicates moderate to severe ID and facial anomalies in all patients, as well as 
severe speech delay and muscular hypotonia in the majority. Further common signs 
include abnormal MRI findings of myelination defects and abnormal corpus 
callosum, ataxia and coordination problems, autistic features, seizures/abnormal 
EEG, or congenital heart defects, present in about 20-50% of the patients. With 
reference to facial anomalies, the majority of patients were reported to show 
broad/prominent forehead, low set ears, bitemporal narrowing, upslanting 
palpebral fissures, depressed/flat nasal bridge, bulbous nose, and abnormal 
chin, but macroglossia and horizontal eyebrows were also observed in ∼30%. The 
latter are especially important in the differential diagnosis of 1p36 deletion 
and Kleefstra syndromes, while the more common facial gestalt shows some 
resemblance to 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. Despite the fact that MED13L was found 
to be one of the most common ID genes in the Deciphering Developmental Disorders 
Study, further detailed patient descriptions are needed to explore the full 
clinical spectrum, potential genotype-phenotype correlations, as well as the 
role of missense mutations and potential mutational hotspots along the gene.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2017.06.004
PMID: 28645799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]