---
reference_id: "PMID:11780064"
title: Gene defect in ectodermal dysplasia implicates a death domain adapter in development.
authors:
- Headon DJ
- Emmal SA
- Ferguson BM
- Tucker AS
- Justice MJ
- Sharpe PT
- Zonana J
- Overbeek PA
journal: Nature
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1038/414913a
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Cell Line
- Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics
- Edar Receptor
- Gene Expression
- Humans
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C3H"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- NF-kappa B/metabolism
- Protein Binding
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- "Receptors, Ectodysplasin"
- "Receptors, Tumor Necrosis Factor/chemistry, genetics, physiology"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gene defect in ectodermal dysplasia implicates a death domain adapter in development.
**Authors:** Headon DJ, Emmal SA, Ferguson BM, Tucker AS, Justice MJ, Sharpe PT, Zonana J, Overbeek PA
**Journal:** Nature (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/414913a](https://doi.org/10.1038/414913a)

## Content

1. Nature. 2001 Dec 20-27;414(6866):913-6. doi: 10.1038/414913a.

Gene defect in ectodermal dysplasia implicates a death domain adapter in 
development.

Headon DJ(1), Emmal SA, Ferguson BM, Tucker AS, Justice MJ, Sharpe PT, Zonana J, 
Overbeek PA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, 77030, USA.

Members of the tumour-necrosis factor receptor (TNFR) family that contain an 
intracellular death domain initiate signalling by recruiting cytoplasmic death 
domain adapter proteins. Edar is a death domain protein of the TNFR family that 
is required for the development of hair, teeth and other ectodermal derivatives. 
Mutations in Edar-or its ligand, Eda-cause hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia in 
humans and mice. This disorder is characterized by sparse hair, a lack of sweat 
glands and malformation of teeth. Here we report the identification of a death 
domain adapter encoded by the mouse crinkled locus. The crinkled mutant has an 
hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia phenotype identical to that of the edar 
(downless) and eda (Tabby) mutants. This adapter, which we have called Edaradd 
(for Edar-associated death domain), interacts with the death domain of Edar and 
links the receptor to downstream signalling pathways. We also identify a 
missense mutation in its human orthologue, EDARADD, that is present in a family 
affected with hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia. Our findings show that the 
death receptor/adapter signalling mechanism is conserved in developmental, as 
well as apoptotic, signalling.

DOI: 10.1038/414913a
PMID: 11780064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]