---
reference_id: "PMID:12522768"
title: Identification of PEX7 as the second gene involved in Refsum disease.
authors:
- van den Brink DM
- Brites P
- Haasjes J
- Wierzbicki AS
- Mitchell J
- Lambert-Hamill M
- de Belleroche J
- Jansen GA
- Waterham HR
- Wanders RJ
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1086/346093
keywords:
- "Acetyl-CoA C-Acetyltransferase/genetics, metabolism"
- Adult
- Alleles
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 6"
- Female
- "Fibroblasts/cytology, enzymology"
- Genetic Linkage
- Humans
- Male
- "Mixed Function Oxygenases/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Peroxisomal Targeting Signal 2 Receptor
- Phytanic Acid/blood
- "Plasmalogens/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Receptors, Cytoplasmic and Nuclear/genetics"
- "Refsum Disease/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Siblings
- Skin/cytology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of PEX7 as the second gene involved in Refsum disease.
**Authors:** van den Brink DM, Brites P, Haasjes J, Wierzbicki AS, Mitchell J, Lambert-Hamill M, de Belleroche J, Jansen GA, Waterham HR, Wanders RJ
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1086/346093](https://doi.org/10.1086/346093)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2003 Feb;72(2):471-7. doi: 10.1086/346093. Epub 2003 Jan 9.

Identification of PEX7 as the second gene involved in Refsum disease.

van den Brink DM(1), Brites P, Haasjes J, Wierzbicki AS, Mitchell J,
Lambert-Hamill M, de Belleroche J, Jansen GA, Waterham HR, Wanders RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Emma Children's Hospital, Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Patients affected with Refsum disease (RD) have elevated levels of phytanic acid
due to a deficiency of the peroxisomal enzyme phytanoyl-CoA hydroxylase (PhyH).
In most patients with RD, disease-causing mutations in the PHYH gene have been
identified, but, in a subset, no mutations could be found, indicating that the
condition is genetically heterogeneous. Linkage analysis of a few patients
diagnosed with RD, but without mutations in PHYH, suggested a second locus on
chromosome 6q22-24. This region includes the PEX7 gene, which codes for the
peroxin 7 receptor protein required for peroxisomal import of proteins
containing a peroxisomal targeting signal type 2. Mutations in PEX7 normally
cause rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata type 1, a severe peroxisomal
disorder. Biochemical analyses of the patients with RD revealed defects not only
in phytanic acid alpha-oxidation but also in plasmalogen synthesis and
peroxisomal thiolase. Furthermore, we identified mutations in the PEX7 gene. Our
data show that mutations in the PEX7 gene may result in a broad clinical
spectrum ranging from severe rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata to relatively
mild RD and that clinical diagnosis of conditions involving retinitis
pigmentosa, ataxia, and polyneuropathy may require a full screen of peroxisomal
functions.

DOI: 10.1086/346093
PMCID: PMC379239
PMID: 12522768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
