---
reference_id: "PMID:22121117"
title: A meckelin-filamin A interaction mediates ciliogenesis.
authors:
- Adams M
- Simms RJ
- Abdelhamed Z
- Dawe HR
- Szymanska K
- Logan CV
- Wheway G
- Pitt E
- Gull K
- Knowles MA
- Blair E
- Cross SH
- Sayer JA
- Johnson CA
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr557
keywords:
- Animals
- "Blotting, Western"
- "Ciliary Motility Disorders/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Contractile Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Filamins
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- Humans
- Immunoenzyme Techniques
- Immunoprecipitation
- Male
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Microfilament Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- "RNA, Small Interfering/genetics"
- Two-Hybrid System Techniques
- Zebrafish/embryology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A meckelin-filamin A interaction mediates ciliogenesis.
**Authors:** Adams M, Simms RJ, Abdelhamed Z, Dawe HR, Szymanska K, Logan CV, Wheway G, Pitt E, Gull K, Knowles MA, Blair E, Cross SH, Sayer JA, Johnson CA
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddr557](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddr557)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Mar 15;21(6):1272-86. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr557. Epub 2011
Nov  25.

A meckelin-filamin A interaction mediates ciliogenesis.

Adams M(1), Simms RJ, Abdelhamed Z, Dawe HR, Szymanska K, Logan CV, Wheway G,
Pitt E, Gull K, Knowles MA, Blair E, Cross SH, Sayer JA, Johnson CA.

Author information:
(1)Ciliopathy Research Group, Section of Ophthalmology and Neurosciences, Leeds
Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Leeds, Leeds LS9 7TF, UK.

MKS3, encoding the transmembrane receptor meckelin, is mutated in Meckel-Gruber
syndrome (MKS), an autosomal-recessive ciliopathy. Meckelin localizes to the
primary cilium, basal body and elsewhere within the cell. Here, we found that
the cytoplasmic domain of meckelin directly interacts with the actin-binding
protein filamin A, potentially at the apical cell surface associated with the
basal body. Mutations in FLNA, the gene for filamin A, cause periventricular
heterotopias. We identified a single consanguineous patient with an MKS-like
ciliopathy that presented with both MKS and cerebellar heterotopia, caused by an
unusual in-frame deletion mutation in the meckelin C-terminus at the region of
interaction with filamin A. We modelled this mutation and found it to abrogate
the meckelin-filamin A interaction. Furthermore, we found that loss of filamin A
by siRNA knockdown, in patient cells, and in tissues from Flna(Dilp2) null mouse
embryos results in cellular phenotypes identical to those caused by meckelin
loss, namely basal body positioning and ciliogenesis defects. In addition,
morpholino knockdown of flna in zebrafish embryos significantly increases the
frequency of dysmorphology and severity of ciliopathy developmental defects
caused by mks3 knockdown. Our results suggest that meckelin forms a functional
complex with filamin A that is disrupted in MKS and causes defects in neuronal
migration and Wnt signalling. Furthermore, filamin A has a crucial role in the
normal processes of ciliogenesis and basal body positioning. Concurrent with
these processes, the meckelin-filamin A signalling axis may be a key regulator
in maintaining correct, normal levels of Wnt signalling.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddr557
PMCID: PMC3284117
PMID: 22121117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
