---
reference_id: "PMID:33497541"
title: "Von Willebrand disease type 2N: An update."
authors:
- Seidizadeh O
- Peyvandi F
- Mannucci PM
journal: J Thromb Haemost
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/jth.15247
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Von Willebrand disease type 2N: An update.
**Authors:** Seidizadeh O, Peyvandi F, Mannucci PM
**Journal:** J Thromb Haemost (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jth.15247](https://doi.org/10.1111/jth.15247)

## Content

1. J Thromb Haemost. 2021 Apr;19(4):909-916. doi: 10.1111/jth.15247. Epub 2021
Mar  26.

Von Willebrand disease type 2N: An update.

Seidizadeh O(1), Peyvandi F(1)(2), Mannucci PM(1).

Author information:
(1)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Angelo Bianchi 
Bonomi Hemophilia and Thrombosis Center and Fondazione Luigi Villa, Milan, 
Italy.
(2)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Università degli Studi di 
Milano, Milan, Italy.

Quantitative or qualitative defects of von Willebrand factor (VWF) are 
responsible for the most common inherited bleeding disorder, von Willebrand 
disease (VWD). Type 2N VWD is an uncommon recessive disorder that results from 
gene mutations located in the region coding for the binding site of VWF for 
factor VIII (FVIII). This narrative review describes the pathophysiology, 
diagnostic procedures and treatment as well as the molecular biology of type 2N 
VWD. Although other VWF-dependent functions like binding to platelets and 
collagen are preserved, FVIII plasma levels are low due to the rapid clearance 
of this moiety in the absence or reduction of its binding to VWF. The diagnosis 
of type 2N should be considered in patients with low FVIII coagulant activity 
(FVIII:C) and disproportionally higher VWF antigen, especially when they present 
with an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. Because an accurate 
diagnosis is essential for genetic counseling and optimal treatment, type 2N 
must be distinguished from mild/moderate hemophilia A and its carrier state. 
This differential diagnosis can be obtained by using the laboratory assay of the 
FVIII binding capacity of VWF (VWF:FVIIIB) or analysis of the FVIII binding site 
on the VWF gene.

© 2021 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

DOI: 10.1111/jth.15247
PMID: 33497541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]