---
reference_id: "PMID:9678703"
title: The fragile X syndrome.
authors:
- de Vries BB
- Halley DJ
- Oostra BA
- Niermeijer MF
journal: J Med Genet
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.35.7.579
keywords:
- Chromosome Fragile Sites
- Chromosome Fragility
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Fragile X Messenger Ribonucleoprotein 1
- "Fragile X Syndrome/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Genetic Testing
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Male
- Minisatellite Repeats
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Phenotype
- RNA-Binding Proteins
- X Chromosome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The fragile X syndrome.
**Authors:** de Vries BB, Halley DJ, Oostra BA, Niermeijer MF
**Journal:** J Med Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.35.7.579](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.35.7.579)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 1998 Jul;35(7):579-89. doi: 10.1136/jmg.35.7.579.

The fragile X syndrome.

de Vries BB(1), Halley DJ, Oostra BA, Niermeijer MF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital Dijkzigt and Erasmus
University, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    J Med Genet. 1999 Feb;36(2):171-2.

The fragile X syndrome is characterised by mental retardation, behavioural
features, and physical features, such as a long face with large protruding ears
and macro-orchidism. In 1991, after identification of the fragile X mental
retardation (FMR1) gene, the cytogenetic marker (a fragile site at Xq27.3)
became replaced by molecular diagnosis. The fragile X syndrome was one of the
first examples of a "novel" class of disorders caused by a trinucleotide repeat
expansion. In the normal population, the CGG repeat varies from six to 54 units.
Affected subjects have expanded CGG repeats (>200) in the first exon of the FMR1
gene (the full mutation). Phenotypically normal carriers of the fragile X
syndrome have a repeat in the 43 to 200 range (the premutation). The cloning of
the FMR1 gene led to the characterisation of its protein product FMRP,
encouraged further clinical studies, and opened up the possibility of more
accurate family studies and fragile X screening programmes.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.35.7.579
PMCID: PMC1051369
PMID: 9678703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
