---
reference_id: "PMID:35319359"
title: "A Review On Huntington Protein: Insight Into Protein Aggregation and Therapeutic Interventions."
authors:
- Srinivasan E
- Ram V
- Rajasekaran R
journal: Curr Drug Metab
year: '2022'
doi: 10.2174/1389200223666220321103942
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Review On Huntington Protein: Insight Into Protein Aggregation and Therapeutic Interventions.
**Authors:** Srinivasan E, Ram V, Rajasekaran R
**Journal:** Curr Drug Metab (2022)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1389200223666220321103942](https://doi.org/10.2174/1389200223666220321103942)

## Content

1. Curr Drug Metab. 2022;23(4):260-282. doi: 10.2174/1389200223666220321103942.

A Review On Huntington Protein: Insight Into Protein Aggregation and Therapeutic 
Interventions.

Srinivasan E(1), Ram V(1), Rajasekaran R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, Saveetha School of Engineering, Saveetha 
Institute of Medical and Technical Sciences (SIMATS), Thandalam, Chennai - 
602105, Tamil Nadu, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, School of Bio Sciences and Technology, 
Quantitative Biology Lab, Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore - 632014, 
Tamil Nadu, India.

Huntington's disease (HD) is a distressing, innate neurodegenerative disease 
that descends from CAG repeat expansion in the huntingtin gene causing 
behavioral changes, motor dysfunction, and dementia in children and adults. 
Mutation in huntingtin (HTT) protein has been suggested to cause neuron loss in 
the cortex and striatum through various mechanisms, including abnormal 
regulation of transcription, proteasomal dysfunction, posttranslational 
modification, and other events regulating toxicity. Pathogenesis of HD involves 
cleavage of the huntingtin protein followed by the neuronal accumulation of its 
aggregated form. Several research groups made possible efforts to reduce 
huntingtin gene expression, protein accumulation, and protein aggregation using 
inhibitors and molecular chaperones as developing drugs against HD. Herein, we 
review the mechanism proposed towards the formation of HTT protein aggregation 
and the impact of therapeutic strategies for the treatment of HD.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1389200223666220321103942
PMID: 35319359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]