---
reference_id: "PMID:34626221"
title: "Uterine cellular leiomyomas are characterized by common HMGA2 aberrations, followed by chromosome 1p deletion and MED12 mutation: morphological, molecular, and immunohistochemical study of 52 cases."
authors:
- Dundr P
- Gregová M
- Hojný J
- Krkavcová E
- Michálková R
- Němejcová K
- Bártů M
- Hájková N
- Laco J
- Mára M
- Richtárová A
- Zima T
- Stružinská I
journal: Virchows Arch
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00428-021-03217-z
keywords:
- "Chromosomes/chemistry, metabolism"
- Endometrial Neoplasms/genetics
- Female
- HMGA2 Protein
- Humans
- Leiomyoma/pathology
- "Mediator Complex/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Neprilysin/analysis
- Uterine Neoplasms/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Uterine cellular leiomyomas are characterized by common HMGA2 aberrations, followed by chromosome 1p deletion and MED12 mutation: morphological, molecular, and immunohistochemical study of 52 cases.
**Authors:** Dundr P, Gregová M, Hojný J, Krkavcová E, Michálková R, Němejcová K, Bártů M, Hájková N, Laco J, Mára M, Richtárová A, Zima T, Stružinská I
**Journal:** Virchows Arch (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00428-021-03217-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00428-021-03217-z)

## Content

1. Virchows Arch. 2022 Feb;480(2):281-291. doi: 10.1007/s00428-021-03217-z. Epub 
2021 Oct 9.

Uterine cellular leiomyomas are characterized by common HMGA2 aberrations, 
followed by chromosome 1p deletion and MED12 mutation: morphological, molecular, 
and immunohistochemical study of 52 cases.

Dundr P(1), Gregová M(2), Hojný J(2), Krkavcová E(2), Michálková R(2), Němejcová 
K(2), Bártů M(2), Hájková N(2), Laco J(3), Mára M(4), Richtárová A(4), Zima 
T(5), Stružinská I(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and 
General University Hospital in Prague, Studničkova 2, 12800, Prague 2, Czech 
Republic. pavel.dundr@vfn.cz.
(2)Institute of Pathology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and 
General University Hospital in Prague, Studničkova 2, 12800, Prague 2, Czech 
Republic.
(3)The Fingerland Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine in Hradec 
Králové, University Hospital in Hradec Králové, Charles University, Hradec 
Králové, Czech Republic.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles 
University and General University Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
(5)Institute of Medical Biochemistry and Laboratory Diagnostics, First Faculty 
of Medicine, Charles University and General University Hospital in Prague, 
Prague, Czech Republic.

Cellular leiomyoma (CL) represents an uncommon variant of uterine leiomyoma with 
limited data concerning its immunohistochemical and molecular profile. We 
performed a comprehensive analysis of 52 CL cases all of which were analyzed 
immunohistochemically. Molecular analysis was possible in 32 cases with 
sufficient DNA, and 38 cases with sufficient RNA. The immunohistochemical 
results showed a high expression of smooth muscle markers (calponin (100%), 
desmin (100%), smooth muscle actin (98.1%), caldesmon (96.1%), transgelin 
(96.1%), smooth muscle myosin heavy chain (86.5%), and smoothelin (61.5%)). 
Concerning markers of endometrial stromal differentiation, the expression of 
CD10 was observed in 65.4% cases (42.2% with H-score > 50), and IFITM1 in 36.5% 
cases (1.9% with H-score > 50). 36.5% showed HMGA2 overexpression at the IHC 
level, associated with increased mRNA expression in 14/14 cases. The 
rearrangement of the HMGA2 gene was detected in 13.2%. Chromosome 1p deletion 
was found in 19.3%, while 9.4% of tumors showed a pathogenic mutation in the 
MED12 gene. In conclusion, CL is immunohistochemically characterized by a high 
expression of "smooth muscle" markers commonly associated with a co-expression 
of "endometrial stromal" markers, where IFITM1 shows superior performance 
compared to CD10 regarding its specificity for differentiation from endometrial 
stromal tumors. The sensitivity of smoothelin in CL seems rather low, but no 
data is available to assess its specificity. On a molecular level, the most 
common mutually exclusive aberration in CL affects HMGA2, followed by chromosome 
1p deletions and MED12 mutations.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00428-021-03217-z
PMID: 34626221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]