---
reference_id: PMID:23290072
title: "Mutations in MEOX1, encoding mesenchyme homeobox 1, cause Klippel-Feil anomaly."
authors:
- Mohamed JY
- Faqeih E
- Alsiddiky A
- Alshammari MJ
- Ibrahim NA
- Alkuraya FS
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.11.016
keywords:
- Child
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Homeodomain Proteins
- Humans
- Klippel-Feil Syndrome/genetics
- Male
- Mutation
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in MEOX1, encoding mesenchyme homeobox 1, cause Klippel-Feil anomaly.
**Authors:** Mohamed JY, Faqeih E, Alsiddiky A, Alshammari MJ, Ibrahim NA, Alkuraya FS
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.11.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.11.016)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Jan 10;92(1):157-61. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.11.016.
Epub  2013 Jan 3.

Mutations in MEOX1, encoding mesenchyme homeobox 1, cause Klippel-Feil anomaly.

Mohamed JY(1), Faqeih E, Alsiddiky A, Alshammari MJ, Ibrahim NA, Alkuraya FS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, 
Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia.

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2013 Jul;84(1):19. doi: 10.1111/cge.12159.

Klippel-Feil syndrome (KFS) is a segmentation malformation of the cervical 
spine; clinically, it manifests as a short neck with reduced mobility and a low 
posterior hairline. Several genes have been proposed as candidates for KFS when 
it is present with other associated anomalies, but the genetics of isolated KFS 
have been difficult to study because of the syndrome's mostly sporadic 
occurrence. We describe a multiplex consanguineous family in which isolated KFS 
maps to a single 17q21.31 locus that harbors a homozygous frameshift deletion in 
MEOX1; this deletion results in complete instability of the transcript. Direct 
sequencing of this gene in two siblings from another consanguineous family 
affected by isolated KFS uncovered another homozygous truncating (nonsense) 
MEOX1 mutation that also leads to complete degradation of the transcript. This 
gene encodes a transcription factor with a well-established and nonredundant 
role in somite development, and homozygous null alleles of Meox1 in mice have a 
cervical skeletal defect that is remarkably similar to the one we observe in 
human individuals with MEOX1 mutations. Our data strongly suggest that KFS is 
the human phenotypic equivalent of the sclerotome polarity defect that results 
from Meox1 deficiency in mice.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.11.016
PMCID: PMC3542464
PMID: 23290072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]