---
reference_id: "PMID:1524274"
title: "Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome: clinical, pathologic, and therapeutic considerations."
authors:
- Sussman GL
- Yang WH
- Steinberg S
journal: Ann Allergy
year: '1992'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Biopsy
- Child
- Clofazimine/therapeutic use
- Female
- Humans
- Lip/pathology
- Male
- "Melkersson-Rosenthal Syndrome/pathology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Middle Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome: clinical, pathologic, and therapeutic considerations.
**Authors:** Sussman GL, Yang WH, Steinberg S
**Journal:** Ann Allergy (1992)

## Content

1. Ann Allergy. 1992 Sep;69(3):187-94.

Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome: clinical, pathologic, and therapeutic 
considerations.

Sussman GL(1), Yang WH, Steinberg S.

Author information:
(1)University of Toronto, Division of Clinical Immunology, Wellesley Hospital, 
Canada.

Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome (MRS) has been described as a rare disease. 
Localized swelling (usually of the lips) with noncaseating epithelioid granuloma 
is necessary for diagnosis. We report 11 patients with biopsy-proven MRS. Mean 
age was 28 years (range 12-47 years). Mean duration of lesions was 4.4 years. 
Lip biopsy confirmed typical sarcoid-like granuloma. Five additional patients 
with typical symptoms are awaiting or refused lip biopsy. Clinically all 
patients presented with localized swelling of the lips. Treatment with 
clofazimine (100 mg 4 times weekly for 3-11 months) was associated with complete 
remission in 5/10 patients and clinical improvement in 3/10 patients with 
moderate constant swelling. Two patients (one severe and one moderate swelling) 
failed to respond to treatment. Rebiopsy in four patients confirmed improvement 
with disappearance or decreased granulomatous inflammation in 3/4. Complete 
spontaneous remission was also seen in three untreated patients. We conclude MRS 
is not uncommon, clofazimine may be effective treatment in moderate lesions and 
spontaneous remissions can occur.

PMID: 1524274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]