---
reference_id: "PMID:35162168"
title: Occupational Exposure to Wood Dust and the Burden of Nasopharynx and Sinonasal Cancer in Canada.
authors:
- Mofidi A
- Tompa E
- Kalcevich C
- McLeod C
- Lebeau M
- Song C
- Kim J
- Demers PA
journal: Int J Environ Res Public Health
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijerph19031144
keywords:
- Dust
- Humans
- Nasopharynx
- Occupational Diseases/epidemiology
- Occupational Exposure/analysis
- Paranasal Sinus Neoplasms
- Quality of Life
- Wood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Occupational Exposure to Wood Dust and the Burden of Nasopharynx and Sinonasal Cancer in Canada.
**Authors:** Mofidi A, Tompa E, Kalcevich C, McLeod C, Lebeau M, Song C, Kim J, Demers PA
**Journal:** Int J Environ Res Public Health (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijerph19031144](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19031144)

## Content

1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2022 Jan 20;19(3):1144. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph19031144.

Occupational Exposure to Wood Dust and the Burden of Nasopharynx and Sinonasal 
Cancer in Canada.

Mofidi A(1), Tompa E(1)(2)(3), Kalcevich C(1), McLeod C(1)(4), Lebeau M(5), Song 
C(6), Kim J(6), Demers PA(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Work & Health, Toronto, ON M5G 1S5, Canada.
(2)Department of Economics, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8S 4L8, Canada.
(3)Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5T 
3M7, Canada.
(4)School of Population and Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z3, Canada.
(5)Institut de Recherche Robert-Sauvé en Santé et en Sécurité du Travail 
(IRSST), Montreal, QC H3A 3C2, Canada.
(6)Occupational Cancer Research Centre (OCRC), Toronto, ON M5G 1X3, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Millions of workers around the world are exposed to wood dust, as a 
by-product of woodworking. Nasopharynx cancers (NPCs) and sinonasal cancers 
(SNCs) are two cancers that can be caused by occupational exposure to wood dust, 
but there is little evidence regarding their burden in Canada.
OBJECTIVE: the aim of this study was to estimate the incidence and economic 
burden of newly diagnosed cases of NPC and SNC in 2011 in Canada, attributable 
to occupational exposures to wood dust.
METHODS: calculating the incidence of cancer attributable to occupational 
exposure involved three steps of defining relative risk, assessing the 
prevalence of exposure and population modelling. We estimated the lifetime costs 
of newly diagnosed NPC and SNC from the societal perspective. The three major 
cost categories that we considered were direct costs (healthcare costs, 
out-of-pocket costs, and informal caregiving costs), indirect costs (labour 
productivity/output costs, employer adjustment costs, and home production 
losses), and intangible costs (health-related quality of life losses). To 
generate an estimate of economic burden, we used secondary data from multiple 
sources and applied them to our computational model developed from an extensive 
literature review.
RESULTS: From approximately 1.3 million workers exposed to wood dust, we 
expected 28%, 43% and 29% were exposed to low, medium, and high levels, 
respectively. We estimated from 235 newly diagnosed cases of NPC and 245 newly 
diagnosed cases of SNC, 4.6% (11 cases) and 4.4% (11 cases) were attributed to 
occupational exposure to wood dust, respectively. Our estimates of the economic 
burden of occupational NPC and SNC were about CAD 5.4 million (CAD 496,311 
per-case) and CAD 6.7 million (CAD 627,437 per-case), respectively. For NPC 
direct costs constituted approximately 20% of all costs, and indirect and 
intangible costs accounted for 55% and 25%, while for SNC the breakdown 
distribution were 16%, 42% and 42%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Our estimates highlighted the importance of occupational NPC and 
SNC amongst other occupational cancers, especially in countries with large 
wood-related industries. This paper also serves the information needs of 
policymakers who are seeking to make evidence-based decisions about occupational 
cancer prevention efforts.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph19031144
PMCID: PMC8834578
PMID: 35162168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.