---
reference_id: "PMID:19681701"
title: "Enterovirus 71: epidemiology, pathogenesis and management."
authors:
- Wang SM
- Liu CC
journal: Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1586/eri.09.45
keywords:
- Adult
- Brain Stem/virology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Disease Management
- "Encephalitis, Viral/drug therapy, epidemiology, physiopathology, virology"
- "Enterovirus A, Human/pathogenicity"
- "Enterovirus Infections/drug therapy, epidemiology, physiopathology, virology"
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulins, Intravenous/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Immunologic Factors/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Infant
- "Milrinone/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Paraplegia/therapy, virology"
- "Pulmonary Edema/therapy, virology"
- Taiwan/epidemiology
- "Vasodilator Agents/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Enterovirus 71: epidemiology, pathogenesis and management.
**Authors:** Wang SM, Liu CC
**Journal:** Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1586/eri.09.45](https://doi.org/10.1586/eri.09.45)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther. 2009 Aug;7(6):735-42. doi: 10.1586/eri.09.45.

Enterovirus 71: epidemiology, pathogenesis and management.

Wang SM(1), Liu CC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University and Hospital, 138 Sheng Li Road, Tainan, 70428, Taiwan. 
pedwang@mail.ncku.edu.tw

Enterovirus 71 (EV71) has emerged as a major cause of neurological threat in the 
world following the eradication of poliovirus. Most EV71 infections commonly 
result in hand-foot-mouth disease or herpangina, and some cases are associated 
with brainstem encephalitis and acute flaccid paralysis. Mortality was high in 
EV71 brainstem encephalitis complicated with pulmonary edema, particularly in 
children below 5 years of age. Destruction of vasomotor in the brainstem by EV71 
produces autonomic nervous system dysregulation prior to the pulmonary edema. 
The pulmonary edema is the result of increased pulmonary vascular permeability 
caused by the direct brainstem lesions and/or a systemic inflammatory response 
syndrome produced by the release of cytokines and chemokines. There is currently 
no specific antiviral agent to treat or vaccine to prevent EV71 diseases. 
Treating severe EV71 brainstem encephalitis patients with intravenous IgG and 
milrinone is associated with significantly decreased mortality by attenuated 
sympathetic activity and cytokine production.

DOI: 10.1586/eri.09.45
PMID: 19681701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]