---
reference_id: "PMID:2803853"
title: Pulmonary hypoplasia and osteogenesis imperfecta type II with defective synthesis of alpha I(1) procollagen.
authors:
- Shapiro JR
- Burn VE
- Chipman SD
- Jacobs JB
- Schloo B
- Reid L
- Larsen N
- Louis F
journal: Bone
year: '1989'
doi: 10.1016/8756-3282(89)90049-5
keywords:
- Culture Techniques
- Female
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Lung/abnormalities, embryology, pathology"
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/complications, metabolism"
- "Procollagen/analysis, biosynthesis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pulmonary hypoplasia and osteogenesis imperfecta type II with defective synthesis of alpha I(1) procollagen.
**Authors:** Shapiro JR, Burn VE, Chipman SD, Jacobs JB, Schloo B, Reid L, Larsen N, Louis F
**Journal:** Bone (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1016/8756-3282(89)90049-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/8756-3282(89)90049-5)

## Content

1. Bone. 1989;10(3):165-71. doi: 10.1016/8756-3282(89)90049-5.

Pulmonary hypoplasia and osteogenesis imperfecta type II with defective 
synthesis of alpha I(1) procollagen.

Shapiro JR(1), Burn VE, Chipman SD, Jacobs JB, Schloo B, Reid L, Larsen N, Louis 
F.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Saint Vincent Hospital, Worcester, MA 01604.

Perinatal lethal osteogenesis imperfecta (OI type II), a heritable disorder of 
connective tissue occurs approximately once in 60,000 live births. Phenotypic 
characteristics include defective cranial ossification and severe skeletal 
deformity due to intrauterine rib and long bone fractures. Lethal OI may be 
associated with intracranial hemorrhage or severe respiratory insufficiency. 
Pulmonary hypoplasia has been previously observed in OI type II, but has not 
been defined clinically. The infant described herein was born with OI type II 
and pulmonary hypoplasia. Pathological examination of airway branching patterns 
indicated that lung development had progressed to only the 10 week stage with 
immature acinar development. Investigation type I collagen synthesis by cultured 
dermal fibroblasts revealed the presence of electrophoretically abnormal alpha 
1(I) polypeptides. These findings suggest that biochemically regulated 
processes, as well as mechanical factors, may impeded pulmonary development in 
similar cases of OI type II.

DOI: 10.1016/8756-3282(89)90049-5
PMID: 2803853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]