---
reference_id: "PMID:27572862"
title: Pediatric optic neuritis.
authors:
- Yeh EA
- Graves JS
- Benson LA
- Wassmer E
- Waldman A
journal: Neurology
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002822
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- Neuroimaging
- "Optic Neuritis/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Pediatrics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric optic neuritis.
**Authors:** Yeh EA, Graves JS, Benson LA, Wassmer E, Waldman A
**Journal:** Neurology (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000002822](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000002822)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2016 Aug 30;87(9 Suppl 2):S53-8. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002822.

Pediatric optic neuritis.

Yeh EA(1), Graves JS(2), Benson LA(2), Wassmer E(2), Waldman A(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Division of Neurology (E.A.Y.), Hospital for Sick Children, Hospital 
for Sick Children Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Neurology (J.S.G.), University of 
California, San Francisco; Department of Neurology (L.A.B.), Boston Children's 
Hospital, Boston, MA; Department of Neurology (E.W.), Birmingham Children's 
Hospital, Birmingham, UK; and Department of Neurology (A.W.), The Children's 
Hospital of Philadelphia, PA. ann.yeh@sickkids.ca.
(2)From the Division of Neurology (E.A.Y.), Hospital for Sick Children, Hospital 
for Sick Children Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Neurology (J.S.G.), University of 
California, San Francisco; Department of Neurology (L.A.B.), Boston Children's 
Hospital, Boston, MA; Department of Neurology (E.W.), Birmingham Children's 
Hospital, Birmingham, UK; and Department of Neurology (A.W.), The Children's 
Hospital of Philadelphia, PA.

Optic neuritis (ON) is a common presenting symptom in pediatric CNS 
demyelinating disorders and may be associated with dramatic visual loss. 
Knowledge regarding clinical presentation, associated diseases, therapy, and 
outcomes in ON in children has grown over the past decade. These studies have 
shown that younger children (<10 years of age) are more likely to present with 
bilateral ON and older children with unilateral ON. Furthermore, studies 
focusing on visual recovery have shown excellent recovery of high-contrast 
visual acuity in the majority of children, but functional and structural studies 
have shown evidence of irreversible injury and functional decline after ON in 
children. Although randomized controlled treatment trials have not been 
performed in children and adolescents with ON, standard of care suggests that 
the use of high-dose pulse steroids is safe and likely effective. This article 
reviews current knowledge about the clinical presentation and management of 
pediatric ON, with attention to associated syndromes and evaluative tools that 
may inform diagnosis and interventions.

© 2016 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002822
PMCID: PMC10688071
PMID: 27572862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: E. A. Yeh receives funding from the National MS 
Society, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, the Mario Batali 
Foundation, the Dairy Farmers of Ontario, SickKids Foundation, SickKids 
Innovation Fund, CMSMS/PHAC, the Canadian Multiple Sclerosis Scientific Research 
Foundation, and the MS Society of Canada. J. Graves reports no disclosures 
relevant to the manuscript. L. Benson receives funding from Boston Children's 
Hospital Faculty Career Development fellowship and National MS Society. E. 
Wassmer received honoraria for speaking/travel costs from BiogenIdec, Teva, 
Genzyme, Shire, UCB, and Merck Serono. She is an investigator in trials with 
BiogenIdec, Sanofi, and Novartis. Her MS research projects have been funded by 
the UK MS Society, Action Medical Research, and Birmingham Children's Hospital 
Research Foundation. A. Waldman receives funding from the NIH (NINDS K23), NMSS, 
Novartis, and Biogen. Go to Neurology.org for full disclosures.