---
reference_id: "PMID:32266705"
title: "Eculizumab: A Review in Neuromyelitis Optica Spectrum Disorder."
authors:
- Frampton JE
journal: Drugs
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s40265-020-01297-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Eculizumab: A Review in Neuromyelitis Optica Spectrum Disorder.
**Authors:** Frampton JE
**Journal:** Drugs (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40265-020-01297-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40265-020-01297-w)

## Content

1. Drugs. 2020 May;80(7):719-727. doi: 10.1007/s40265-020-01297-w.

Eculizumab: A Review in Neuromyelitis Optica Spectrum Disorder.

Frampton JE(1).

Author information:
(1)Springer Nature, Mairangi Bay, Private Bag 65901, Auckland, 0754, New 
Zealand. demail@springer.com.

Erratum in
    Drugs. 2020 May;80(7):729. doi: 10.1007/s40265-020-01315-x.
    Drugs. 2020 May;80(7):731. doi: 10.1007/s40265-020-01316-w.

The terminal complement protein (C5) inhibitor eculizumab (Soliris®) is the 
first agent to be specifically approved in the EU, USA, Canada and Japan for the 
treatment of neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD) in adults who are 
aquaporin-4 water channel autoantibody (AQP4-IgG) seropositive and (in the EU 
only) for those with a relapsing course of disease. In the phase III PREVENT 
trial, eculizumab significantly reduced the risk of adjudicated relapse relative 
to placebo in patients with AQP4-IgG-seropositive NMOSD, approximately a quarter 
of whom did not receive concomitant immunosuppressive therapies. The beneficial 
effect of eculizumab was seen across all patient subgroups analysed and was 
accompanied by improvements in neurological and functional disability 
assessments, as well as generic health-related quality of life measures; it was 
sustained through 4 years of treatment, according to combined data from the 
PREVENT trial and an interim analysis of its ongoing open-label extension study. 
The safety profile of eculizumab in AQP4-IgG-seropositive NMOSD was consistent 
with that seen for the drug in other approved indications. Thus, eculizumab 
provides an effective, generally well tolerated and approved treatment option 
for this rare, disabling and potentially life-threatening condition.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-020-01297-w
PMCID: PMC7183484
PMID: 32266705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: James Frampton is a salaried employee of Adis 
International Ltd/Springer Nature, is responsible for the article content and 
declares no relevant conflicts of interest.