---
reference_id: "PMID:16278264"
title: Serial analysis of gene expression in adrenocortical hyperplasia caused by a germline PRKAR1A mutation.
authors:
- Horvath A
- Mathyakina L
- Vong Q
- Baxendale V
- Pang AL
- Chan WY
- Stratakis CA
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2005-1301
keywords:
- "Adrenal Cortex Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism"
- Child
- Cyclic AMP-Dependent Protein Kinase RIalpha Subunit
- Cyclic AMP-Dependent Protein Kinases
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic/physiology"
- Gene Library
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Proteins/genetics
- "RNA, Messenger/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serial analysis of gene expression in adrenocortical hyperplasia caused by a germline PRKAR1A mutation.
**Authors:** Horvath A, Mathyakina L, Vong Q, Baxendale V, Pang AL, Chan WY, Stratakis CA
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2005-1301](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2005-1301)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Feb;91(2):584-96. doi: 10.1210/jc.2005-1301.
Epub  2005 Nov 8.

Serial analysis of gene expression in adrenocortical hyperplasia caused by a 
germline PRKAR1A mutation.

Horvath A(1), Mathyakina L, Vong Q, Baxendale V, Pang AL, Chan WY, Stratakis CA.

Author information:
(1)Section on Endocrinology and Genetics, Developmental Endocrinology Branch, 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development/NIH, Building 10, 
Clinical Research Center, Room I-1330, 10 Center Drive, MSC 1103, Bethesda, MD 
20892-1103, USA.

CONTEXT: Adrenocortical tumors have been studied at the molecular genetic and 
cytogenetic levels, but the gene expression profiles of normal and tumor adrenal 
tissue have not been extensively investigated.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to obtain information about 
transcriptome differences in hyperplastic adrenal cells.
DESIGN AND PATIENTS: We performed serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE) on 
control adrenal tissue and primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease 
(PPNAD) tissue from two adolescent female patients.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: The main outcome measure was to provide quantitative 
datasets of the vast majority of the transcripts implicated in normal and 
pathogenic adrenal functioning.
RESULTS: The libraries of 28,705 and 31,278 tags represented 14,846 and 16,698 
unique mRNAs from the control and PPNAD tissue, respectively. A total of 842 
tags from the two libraries did not match any known sequences. We found 127 
tags, including 70 no-match tags, to be expressed almost exclusively in control 
and/or PPNAD adrenals and to be absent or very rare in other human tissues. 
Examples of well-characterized genes expressed at significantly higher levels in 
PPNAD included steroidogenic acute regulator, chromogranin A, and those coding 
for the steroidogenic enzymes P450 cytochromes CYP17A1 and CYP21A2. Pathway 
analysis revealed Wnt signaling as the most up-regulated in PPNAD. These data 
were confirmed for selected genes by quantitative RT-PCR and/or 
immunohistochemistry.
CONCLUSIONS: This study was the first of its kind for adrenal tissue and 
provides important information about the adrenal transcriptome and aberrant 
signaling in an inherited form of adrenocortical hyperplasia.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2005-1301
PMID: 16278264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]