---
reference_id: "PMID:25294601"
title: "Serial intervals of respiratory infectious diseases: a systematic review and analysis."
authors:
- Vink MA
- Bootsma MC
- Wallinga J
journal: Am J Epidemiol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/aje/kwu209
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serial intervals of respiratory infectious diseases: a systematic review and analysis.
**Authors:** Vink MA, Bootsma MC, Wallinga J
**Journal:** Am J Epidemiol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/aje/kwu209](https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwu209)

## Content

1. Am J Epidemiol. 2014 Nov 1;180(9):865-75. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwu209. Epub 2014
Oct  7.

Serial intervals of respiratory infectious diseases: a systematic review and 
analysis.

Vink MA, Bootsma MC, Wallinga J.

The serial interval of an infectious disease represents the duration between 
symptom onset of a primary case and symptom onset of its secondary cases. A good 
evidence base for such values is essential, because they allow investigators to 
identify epidemiologic links between cases and serve as an important parameter 
in epidemic transmission models used to design infection control strategies. We 
reviewed the literature for available data sets containing serial intervals and 
for reported values of serial intervals. We were able to collect data on 
outbreaks within households, which we reanalyzed to infer a mean serial interval 
using a common statistical method. We estimated the mean serial intervals for 
influenza A(H3N2) (2.2 days), pandemic influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 (2.8 days), 
respiratory syncytial virus (7.5 days), measles (11.7 days), varicella (14.0 
days), smallpox (17.7 days), mumps (18.0 days), rubella (18.3 days), and 
pertussis (22.8 days). For varicella, we found an evidence-based value that 
deviates substantially from the 21 days commonly used in transmission models. 
This value of the serial interval for pertussis is, to the best of our 
knowledge, the first that is based on observations. Our review reveals that, for 
most infectious diseases, there is very limited evidence to support the serial 
intervals that are often cited.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Johns 
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/aje/kwu209
PMID: 25294601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]