---
reference_id: "PMID:27920633"
title: "Lesch-Nyhan Syndrome: Models, Theories, and Therapies."
authors:
- Bell S
- Kolobova I
- Crapper L
- Ernst C
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1159/000449296
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lesch-Nyhan Syndrome: Models, Theories, and Therapies.
**Authors:** Bell S, Kolobova I, Crapper L, Ernst C
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000449296](https://doi.org/10.1159/000449296)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2016 Nov;7(6):302-311. doi: 10.1159/000449296. Epub 2016 Sep
24.

Lesch-Nyhan Syndrome: Models, Theories, and Therapies.

Bell S(1), Kolobova I(1), Crapper L(1), Ernst C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Douglas Hospital Research Institute, McGill 
University, Montreal, Que., Canada.

Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (LNS) is a rare X-linked disorder caused by mutations in 
HPRT1, an important enzyme in the purine salvage pathway. Symptoms of LNS 
include dystonia, gout, intellectual disability, and self-mutilation. Despite 
having been characterized over 50 years ago, it remains unclear precisely how 
deficits in hypoxanthine and guanine recycling can lead to such a profound 
neurological phenotype. Several studies have proposed different hypotheses 
regarding the etiology of this disease, and several treatments have been tried 
in patients, though none have led to a satisfactory explanation of the disease. 
New technologies such as next-generation sequencing, optogenetics, genome 
editing, and induced pluripotent stem cells provide a unique opportunity to map 
the precise sequential pathways leading from genotype to phenotype.

DOI: 10.1159/000449296
PMCID: PMC5131334
PMID: 27920633