---
reference_id: "PMID:12709567"
title: Role of heme oxygenase-1 in the regulation of blood pressure and cardiac function.
authors:
- Chen YH
- Yet SF
- Perrella MA
journal: Exp Biol Med (Maywood)
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1177/15353702-0322805-03
keywords:
- Animals
- "Blood Pressure/drug effects, physiology"
- Cardiovascular Physiological Phenomena
- Endotoxemia/metabolism
- "Heme Oxygenase (Decyclizing)/genetics, metabolism"
- Heme Oxygenase-1
- Kidney/metabolism
- Lipopolysaccharides/pharmacology
- Membrane Proteins
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Myocardial Infarction/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of heme oxygenase-1 in the regulation of blood pressure and cardiac function.
**Authors:** Chen YH, Yet SF, Perrella MA
**Journal:** Exp Biol Med (Maywood) (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1177/15353702-0322805-03](https://doi.org/10.1177/15353702-0322805-03)

## Content

1. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2003 May;228(5):447-53. doi:
10.1177/15353702-0322805-03.

Role of heme oxygenase-1 in the regulation of blood pressure and cardiac
function.

Chen YH(1), Yet SF, Perrella MA.

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Heme oxygenase (HO) is a cytoprotective enzyme that degrades heme (a potent
oxidant) to generate carbon monoxide (a vasodilatory gas that has
anti-inflammatory properties), bilirubin (an antioxidant derived from
biliverdin), and iron (sequestered by ferritin). Because of the properties of
inducible HO (HO-1) and its products, we hypothesized that HO-1 would play an
important role in the regulation of cardiovascular function. In this article, we
will review the role of HO-1 in the regulation of blood pressure and cardiac
function and highlight previous studies from our laboratory using gene deletion
and gene overexpression transgenic approaches in mice. These studies will
include the investigation of HO-1 in the setting of hypertension (renovascular),
hypotension (endotoxemia), and ischemia/reperfusion injury (heart). In a chronic
renovascular hypertension model, hypertension, cardiac hypertrophy, acute renal
failure, and acute mortality induced by one kidney-one clip surgery were more
severe in HO-1-null mice. In addition, HO-1-null mice with endotoxemia had
earlier resolution of hypotension, yet the mortality and the incidence of
end-organ damage were higher in the absence of HO-1. In contrast, mice with
cardiac-specific overexpression of HO-1 had an improvement in cardiac function,
smaller myocardial infarctions, and reduced inflammatory and oxidative damage
after coronary artery ligation and reperfusion. Taken together, these studies
suggest that an absence of HO-1 has detrimental consequences, whereas
overexpression of HO-1 plays a protective role in hypoperfusion and
ischemia/reperfusion injury.

DOI: 10.1177/15353702-0322805-03
PMID: 12709567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
