---
reference_id: "PMID:32092619"
title: "An evidence-based guideline on the application of molecular testing in the diagnosis, prediction of prognosis, and selection of therapy in non-GIST soft tissue sarcomas."
authors:
- Yao X
- Ghert M
- Dickson BC
- Popovic S
- Purgina BM
- Verma S
- Werier J
- Kandel RA
journal: Cancer Treat Rev
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2020.101987
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An evidence-based guideline on the application of molecular testing in the diagnosis, prediction of prognosis, and selection of therapy in non-GIST soft tissue sarcomas.
**Authors:** Yao X, Ghert M, Dickson BC, Popovic S, Purgina BM, Verma S, Werier J, Kandel RA
**Journal:** Cancer Treat Rev (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ctrv.2020.101987](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ctrv.2020.101987)

## Content

1. Cancer Treat Rev. 2020 Apr;85:101987. doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2020.101987. Epub
2020  Feb 14.

An evidence-based guideline on the application of molecular testing in the 
diagnosis, prediction of prognosis, and selection of therapy in non-GIST soft 
tissue sarcomas.

Yao X(1), Ghert M(2), Dickson BC(3), Popovic S(4), Purgina BM(5), Verma S(6), 
Werier J(7), Kandel RA(8).

Author information:
(1)Program in Evidence-Based Care, Cancer Care Ontario, Department of Oncology, 
McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: 
yaoxia@mcmaster.ca.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: ghertm@mcmaster.ca.
(3)Division of Orthopedic Surgery, Juravinski Cancer Centre, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: 
Brendan.Dickson@sinaihealthsystem.ca.
(4)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, Ontario. Electronic address: popovics@hhsc.ca.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Ottawa Hospital Cancer 
Centre, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: bpurgina@toh.ca.
(6)Division of Medical Oncology, The Ottawa Hospital Cancer Centre, Ottawa, 
Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: sverma@toh.ca.
(7)Division of Orthopedic Surgery, The Ottawa Hospital Cancer Centre, Ottawa, 
Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: jwerier@toh.ca.
(8)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: ccopgi@mcmaster.ca.

AIMS: To make recommendations on the indications for molecular testing regarding 
the diagnosis, prediction of prognosis, and treatment selection in adult 
patients with s oft tissue sarcomas (STS) excluding gastrointestinal stromal 
tumour.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This guideline was developed by the Cancer Care Ontario's 
Program in Evidence-Based Care (PEBC) and the Sarcoma Disease Site Group (DSG). 
The medline, embase, and Cochrane Library databases, main guideline websites, 
abstracts of relevant annual meetings, and PROSPERO databases were searched 
(January 2005 to October 2016). Internal and external reviews were conducted, 
with final approval by the PEBC and the Sarcoma DSG.
RESULTS: Based on the available evidence, we made three S trong Recommendations, 
14 Recommendations, 9 Qualified Statements, and seven No Recommendations. The 
three Strong Recommendations include: i) MDM2 amplification by fluorescence in 
situ hybridization (FISH) is recommended as a sensitive and specific test to 
differentiate patients with atypical lipomatous tumour/well-differentiated 
liposarcoma, or dedifferentiated liposarcoma from lipoma or other STS in the 
differential diagnosis; ii) SS18 (SYT) break-apart by FISH or SS18-SSX (SYT-SSX) 
fusion by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction is recommended as a 
sensitive and specific test to differentiate patients with synovial sarcoma from 
other sarcomas; iii) CTNNB1 S45F mutation by polymerase chain reaction is 
recommended as a prognostic factor for poor recurrence-free survival in patients 
with desmoid tumours.
CONCLUSION: This guideline may serve as a framework for the thoughtful 
implementation of molecular studies at cancer centres and other jurisdictions. 
Some of the recommendations may need to be updated when new evidence appears in 
the future.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2020.101987
PMID: 32092619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest BCD has 
received molecular test kits (free of charge) from Illumina, and MG has declared 
that she received more than $5,000 in 2017 to act in a consulting capacity from 
Wright Medical and Kuros Biosciences. The other authors have declared no 
conflicts of interest.