---
reference_id: "PMID:27287386"
title: Developmental interneuron subtype deficits after targeted loss of Arx.
authors:
- Marsh ED
- Nasrallah MP
- Walsh C
- Murray KA
- Nicole Sunnen C
- McCoy A
- Golden JA
journal: BMC Neurosci
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s12868-016-0265-8
keywords:
- Animals
- Calbindin 2/metabolism
- Calbindins/metabolism
- Cell Count
- Cell Movement/physiology
- "Hippocampus/growth & development, metabolism, pathology"
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Immunohistochemistry
- In Situ Hybridization
- "Interneurons/cytology, metabolism, pathology"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Neocortex/growth & development, metabolism, pathology"
- "Neural Stem Cells/cytology, metabolism, pathology"
- Neuropeptide Y/metabolism
- Parvalbumins/metabolism
- "Transcription Factors/deficiency, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Developmental interneuron subtype deficits after targeted loss of Arx.
**Authors:** Marsh ED, Nasrallah MP, Walsh C, Murray KA, Nicole Sunnen C, McCoy A, Golden JA
**Journal:** BMC Neurosci (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12868-016-0265-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12868-016-0265-8)

## Content

1. BMC Neurosci. 2016 Jun 10;17(1):35. doi: 10.1186/s12868-016-0265-8.

Developmental interneuron subtype deficits after targeted loss of Arx.

Marsh ED(1)(2)(3), Nasrallah MP(4)(5), Walsh C(6), Murray KA(6), Nicole Sunnen
C(4), McCoy A(6), Golden JA(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA, USA. marshe@email.chop.edu.
(2)Division of Child Neurology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Room 502E,
Abramson Research Building, 3615 Civic Center Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA,
19014, USA. marshe@email.chop.edu.
(3)Department of Neurology, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. marshe@email.chop.edu.
(4)Department of Pathology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)Division of Child Neurology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Room 502E,
Abramson Research Building, 3615 Civic Center Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA,
19014, USA.
(7)Department of Pathology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA, USA. jagolden@partners.org.
(8)Department of Pathology, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. jagolden@partners.org.
(9)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, 75 Francis St., Boston, MA, 02115, USA. jagolden@partners.org.

BACKGROUND: Aristaless-related homeobox (ARX) is a paired-like homeodomain
transcription factor that functions primarily as a transcriptional repressor and
has been implicated in neocortical interneuron specification and migration.
Given the role interneurons appear to play in numerous human conditions
including those associated with ARX mutations, it is essential to understand the
consequences of mutations in this gene on neocortical interneurons. Previous
studies have examined the effect of germline loss of Arx, or targeted mutations
in Arx, on interneuron development. We now present the effect of conditional
loss of Arx on interneuron development.
RESULTS: To further elucidate the role of Arx in forebrain development we
performed a series of anatomical and developmental studies to determine the
effect of conditional loss of Arx specifically from developing interneurons in
the neocortex and hippocampus. Analysis and cell counts were performed from
mouse brains using immunohistochemical and in situ hybridization assays at 4
times points across development. Our data indicate that early in development,
instead of a loss of ventral precursors, there is a shift of these precursors to
more ventral locations, a deficit that persists in the adult nervous system. The
result of this developmental shift is a reduced number of interneurons (all
subtypes) at early postnatal and later time periods. In addition, we find that X
inactivation is stochastic, and occurs at the level of the neural progenitors.
CONCLUSION: These data provide further support that the role of Arx in
interneuron development is to direct appropriate migration of ventral neuronal
precursors into the dorsal cortex and that the loss of Arx results in a failure
of interneurons to reach the cortex and thus a deficiency in interneurons.

DOI: 10.1186/s12868-016-0265-8
PMCID: PMC4902966
PMID: 27287386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
