---
reference_id: "PMID:39440224"
title: Liver Characterization of a Cohort of Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency Patients with and without Lung Disease.
authors:
- Mohammad N
- Oshins R
- Gu T
- Clark V
- Lascano J
- Assarzadegan N
- Marek G
- Brantly M
- Khodayari N
journal: J Clin Transl Hepatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.14218/JCTH.2024.00201
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liver Characterization of a Cohort of Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency Patients with and without Lung Disease.
**Authors:** Mohammad N, Oshins R, Gu T, Clark V, Lascano J, Assarzadegan N, Marek G, Brantly M, Khodayari N
**Journal:** J Clin Transl Hepatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.14218/JCTH.2024.00201](https://doi.org/10.14218/JCTH.2024.00201)

## Content

1. J Clin Transl Hepatol. 2024 Oct 28;12(10):845-856. doi: 
10.14218/JCTH.2024.00201. Epub 2024 Sep 14.

Liver Characterization of a Cohort of Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency Patients 
with and without Lung Disease.

Mohammad N(1), Oshins R(1), Gu T(2), Clark V(3), Lascano J(1), Assarzadegan 
N(4), Marek G(5), Brantly M(1), Khodayari N(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, College of Medicine, 
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(2)Interdisciplinary Center for Biotechnology Research, Bioinformatics Core, 
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, College of Medicine, 
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(4)Division of Pathology, Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine, College of 
Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(5)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) is a genetic disorder 
characterized by the misfolding and accumulation of the mutant variant of 
alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) within hepatocytes, which limits its access to the 
circulation and exposes the lungs to protease-mediated tissue damage. This 
results in progressive liver disease secondary to AAT polymerization and 
accumulation, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) due to deficient 
levels of AAT within the lungs. Our goal was to characterize the unique effects 
of COPD secondary to AATD on liver disease and gene expression.
METHODS: A subcohort of AATD individuals with COPD (n = 33) and AATD individuals 
without COPD (n = 14) were evaluated in this study from our previously reported 
cross-sectional cohort. We used immunohistochemistry to assess the AATD liver 
phenotype, and RNA sequencing to explore liver transcriptomics. We observed a 
distinct transcriptomic profile in liver tissues from AATD individuals with COPD 
compared to those without.
RESULTS: A total of 339 genes were differentially expressed. Canonical pathways 
related to fibrosis, extracellular matrix remodeling, collagen deposition, 
hepatocellular damage, and inflammation were significantly upregulated in the 
livers of AATD individuals with COPD. Histopathological analysis also revealed 
higher levels of fibrosis and hepatocellular damage in these individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data supports a relationship between the development of COPD 
and liver disease in AATD and introduces genes and pathways that may play a role 
in AATD liver disease when COPD is present. We believe addressing lung 
impairment and airway inflammation may be an approach to managing AATD-related 
liver disease.

© 2024 Authors.

DOI: 10.14218/JCTH.2024.00201
PMCID: PMC11491504
PMID: 39440224

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interests 
related to this publication.