---
reference_id: "PMID:20127976"
title: Biochemical and structural analysis of 14 mutant adsl enzyme complexes and correlation to phenotypic heterogeneity of adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency.
authors:
- Zikanova M
- Skopova V
- Hnizda A
- Krijt J
- Kmoch S
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1002/humu.21212
keywords:
- "Adenylosuccinate Lyase/chemistry, deficiency, genetics"
- "Electrophoresis, Polyacrylamide Gel"
- Enzyme Stability
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Multienzyme Complexes/chemistry, deficiency, genetics"
- "Mutant Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Protein Structure, Secondary"
- Structure-Activity Relationship
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biochemical and structural analysis of 14 mutant adsl enzyme complexes and correlation to phenotypic heterogeneity of adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency.
**Authors:** Zikanova M, Skopova V, Hnizda A, Krijt J, Kmoch S
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.21212](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.21212)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2010 Apr;31(4):445-55. doi: 10.1002/humu.21212.

Biochemical and structural analysis of 14 mutant adsl enzyme complexes and
correlation to phenotypic heterogeneity of adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency.

Zikanova M(1), Skopova V, Hnizda A, Krijt J, Kmoch S.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Charles University in Prague,
First Faculty of Medicine, Ke Karlovu 2, Prague 2, Czech Republic.

Adenylosuccinate lyase (ADSL) deficiency is neurometabolic disease characterized
by accumulation of dephosphorylated enzyme substrates SAICA-riboside (SAICAr)
and succinyladenosine (S-Ado) in body fluids of affected individuals. The
phenotypic severity differs considerably among patients: neonatal fatal, severe
childhood, and moderate phenotypic forms correlating with different values for
the ratio between S-Ado and SAICAr concentrations in cerebrospinal fluid have
been distinguished. To reveal the biochemical and structural basis for this
phenotypic heterogeneity, we expressed and characterized 19 ADSL mutant proteins
identified in 16 patients representing clinically distinct subgroups. Respecting
compound heterozygosity and considering the homotetrameric structure of ADSL, we
used intersubunit complementation and prepared and characterized
genotype-specific heteromeric mutant ADSL complexes. We correlated clinical
phenotypes with biochemical properties of the mutant proteins and predicted
structural impacts of the mutations. We found that phenotypic severity in ADSL
deficiency is correlated with residual enzymatic activity and structural
stability of the corresponding mutant ADSL complexes and does not seem to result
from genotype-specific disproportional catalytic activities toward one of the
enzyme substrates. This suggests that the S-Ado/SAICAr ratio is probably not
predictive of phenotype severity; rather, it may be secondary to the degree of
the patient's development (i.e., to the age of the patient at the time of sample
collection).

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.21212
PMID: 20127976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
