---
reference_id: "PMID:37345800"
title: Ventilatory Efficiency Is Reduced in People With Hypertension During Exercise.
authors:
- Hope K
- Chant B
- Hinton T
- Kendrick AH
- Nightingale AK
- Paton JFR
- Hart EC
journal: J Am Heart Assoc
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1161/JAHA.121.024335
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ventilatory Efficiency Is Reduced in People With Hypertension During Exercise.
**Authors:** Hope K, Chant B, Hinton T, Kendrick AH, Nightingale AK, Paton JFR, Hart EC
**Journal:** J Am Heart Assoc (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1161/JAHA.121.024335](https://doi.org/10.1161/JAHA.121.024335)

## Content

1. J Am Heart Assoc. 2023 Jul 4;12(13):e024335. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.121.024335.
Epub  2023 Jun 22.

Ventilatory Efficiency Is Reduced in People With Hypertension During Exercise.

Hope K(1), Chant B(1), Hinton T(1), Kendrick AH(1)(2), Nightingale AK(1)(3), 
Paton JFR(4), Hart EC(1).

Author information:
(1)Bristol Heart Institute CardioNomics Research Group, School of Physiology, 
Pharmacology and Neuroscience, Biomedical Sciences University of Bristol Bristol 
United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine University Hospitals Bristol National 
Health Service Foundation Trust Bristol United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Cardiology Bristol Heart Institute, University Hospitals 
Bristol National Health Service Foundation Trust Bristol United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences The 
University of Auckland Auckland New Zealand.

Background An elevated ventilatory efficiency slope during exercise (minute 
ventilation/volume of expired CO2; VE/VCO2 slope) is a strong prognostic 
indicator in heart failure. It is elevated in people with heart failure with 
preserved ejection, many of whom have hypertension. However, whether the VE/VCO2 
slope is also elevated in people with primary hypertension versus normotensive 
individuals is unknown. We hypothesize that there is a spectrum of ventilatory 
inefficiency in cardiovascular disease, reflecting an increasingly abnormal 
physiological response to exercise. The aim of this study was to evaluate the 
VE/VCO2 slope in patients with hypertension compared with age-, peak oxygen 
consumption-, and sex-matched healthy subjects. Methods and Results Ramped 
cardiovascular pulmonary exercise tests to peak oxygen consumption were 
completed on a bike ergometer in 55 patients with primary hypertension and 24 
normotensive controls. The VE/VCO2 slope was assessed from the onset of exercise 
to peak oxygen consumption. Data were compared using unpaired Student t test. 
Age (mean±SD, 66±6 versus 64±6 years; P=0.18), body mass index (25.4±3.5 versus 
24±2.4 kg/m2; P=0.13), and peak oxygen consumption (23.2±6.6 versus 
24±7.3 mL/min per kg; P=0.64) were similar between groups. The VE/VCO2 slope was 
elevated in the hypertensive group versus controls (31.8±4.5 versus 28.4±3.4; 
P=0.002). Only 27% of the hypertensive group were classified as having a normal 
VE/VCO2 slope (20-30) versus 71% in the control group. Conclusions Ventilatory 
efficiency is impaired people with hypertension without a diagnosis of heart 
failure versus normotensive individuals. Future research needs to establish 
whether those patients with hypertension with elevated VE/VCO2 slopes are at 
risk of developing future heart failure.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.121.024335
PMCID: PMC10356072
PMID: 37345800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]