---
reference_id: "PMID:33295057"
title: "Cystathionine β-synthase deficiency in the E-HOD registry-part I: pyridoxine responsiveness as a determinant of biochemical and clinical phenotype at diagnosis."
authors:
- Kožich V
- Sokolová J
- Morris AAM
- Pavlíková M
- Gleich F
- Kölker S
- Krijt J
- Dionisi-Vici C
- Baumgartner MR
- Blom HJ
- Huemer M
- E-HOD consortium
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12338
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cystathionine beta-Synthase/deficiency
- Delayed Diagnosis
- Europe
- Female
- "Homocystinuria/diagnosis, drug therapy, enzymology"
- Humans
- Infant
- Linear Models
- Male
- Methionine/blood
- Middle Aged
- Phenotype
- Pyridoxine/therapeutic use
- Registries
- Severity of Illness Index
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cystathionine β-synthase deficiency in the E-HOD registry-part I: pyridoxine responsiveness as a determinant of biochemical and clinical phenotype at diagnosis.
**Authors:** Kožich V, Sokolová J, Morris AAM, Pavlíková M, Gleich F, Kölker S, Krijt J, Dionisi-Vici C, Baumgartner MR, Blom HJ, Huemer M, E-HOD consortium
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12338](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12338)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2021 May;44(3):677-692. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12338. Epub
2020  Dec 28.

Cystathionine β-synthase deficiency in the E-HOD registry-part I: pyridoxine 
responsiveness as a determinant of biochemical and clinical phenotype at 
diagnosis.

Kožich V(1), Sokolová J(1), Morris AAM(2), Pavlíková M(3), Gleich F(4), Kölker 
S(4), Krijt J(1), Dionisi-Vici C(5), Baumgartner MR(6)(7), Blom HJ(8), Huemer 
M(6)(9); E-HOD consortium.

Collaborators: Aldámiz-Echevarría L, Arantes RR, Arrieta F, Blasco-Alonso J, 
Brouwers M, Brunner-Krainz M, Bueno M, Peláez RB, Cano A, Couce ML, Crushell E, 
Ficicioglu C, Forny P, García Jiménez MC, Gaspar A, González-Lamuño Leguina D, 
Chapman KA, Chien YH, Janssen MCH, Ješina P, Lachmann R, Lavigne C, Lund AM, 
Lüsebrink N, Maillot F, Martins AM, Olivas SM, Mention K, Mochel F, Monavari A, 
Moreira S, Moreno CA, Muačević-Katanec D, Mundy H, Murphy E, Olivieri G, Paquay 
S, Pedrón-Giner C, Quintana LP, Porras-Hurtado GL, Fraile PQ, Redonnet-Vernhet 
I, Rennings AJM, Pons MR, Santra S, Servais A, Schiaffino MC, Schiff M, Schwahn 
BC, Schwartz IVD, Sremba LJ, Stainforth C, Stepien KM, Sykut-Cegielska J, Terry 
A, Tran C, Miñana IV, Vives-Piñera I, Williams M, Zeman J, Zielonka M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Charles 
University-First Faculty of Medicine and General University Hospital in Prague, 
Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester University Hospitals NHS 
Trust, Manchester, UK.
(3)Department of Probability and Mathematical Statistics, Charles 
University-Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Prague, Czech Republic.
(4)Division of Neuropaediatrics and Metabolic Medicine, Centre for Paediatric 
and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)Division of Metabolism, Bambino Gesù Children's Research Hospital, IRCCS, 
Rome, Italy.
(6)Division of Metabolism and Children's Research Center, University Children's 
Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland.
(7)University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(8)Department of Clinical Genetics, Center for Lysosomal and Metabolic Diseases, 
Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Landeskrankenhaus Bregenz, Bregenz, Austria.

Cystathionine β-synthase (CBS) deficiency has a wide clinical spectrum, ranging 
from neurodevelopmental problems, lens dislocation and marfanoid features in 
early childhood to adult onset disease with predominantly thromboembolic 
complications. We have analysed clinical and laboratory data at the time of 
diagnosis in 328 patients with CBS deficiency from the E-HOD (European network 
and registry for Homocystinurias and methylation Defects) registry. We developed 
comprehensive criteria to classify patients into four groups of pyridoxine 
responsivity: non-responders (NR), partial, full and extreme responders (PR, FR 
and ER, respectively). All groups showed overlapping concentrations of plasma 
total homocysteine while pyridoxine responsiveness inversely correlated with 
plasma/serum methionine concentrations. The FR and ER groups had a later age of 
onset and diagnosis and a longer diagnostic delay than NR and PR patients. Lens 
dislocation was common in all groups except ER but the age of dislocation 
increased with increasing responsiveness. Developmental delay was commonest in 
the NR group while no ER patient had cognitive impairment. Thromboembolism was 
the commonest presenting feature in ER patients, whereas it was least likely at 
presentation in the NR group. This probably is due to the differences in ages at 
presentation: all groups had a similar number of thromboembolic events per 1000 
patient-years. Clinical severity of CBS deficiency depends on the degree of 
pyridoxine responsiveness. Therefore, a standardised pyridoxine-responsiveness 
test in newly diagnosed patients and a critical review of previous assessments 
is indispensable to ensure adequate therapy and to prevent or reduce long-term 
complications.

© 2020 The Authors. Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12338
PMCID: PMC8247016
PMID: 33295057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Viktor Kožich, Jitka Sokolová and Jakub Krijt 
declare that Charles University‐First Faculty of Medicine received a partial 
reimbursement for preclinical testing of OT‐58 from Orphan Technologies. Andrew 
A.M. Morris received honoraria for lectures from Recordati & Nutricia and 
Advisory Board fees from Nutricia; he is an Expert Witness for a relevant 
medicolegal case. Stefan Kölker received funding from Recordati Rare Diseases 
for postmarketing authorization studies on Cystadane (betaine anhydrous). 
Martina Huemer has received honoraria for a lecture from Aeglea and research 
grant from Nutricia Metabolics. Carlo Dionisi‐Vici received a research fund and 
reimbursement for attending a symposium from Medifood, honoraria from 
Recordati‐Orphan Europe and Nutricia, and consulting fee from Nutricia. Markéta 
Pavlíková, Florian Gleich, Henk Blom and Matthias M.R. Baumgartner declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.