---
reference_id: "PMID:20494327"
title: Management of postpolio syndrome.
authors:
- Gonzalez H
- Olsson T
- Borg K
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70095-8
keywords:
- Humans
- "Postpoliomyelitis Syndrome/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of postpolio syndrome.
**Authors:** Gonzalez H, Olsson T, Borg K
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70095-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70095-8)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2010 Jun;9(6):634-42. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70095-8.

Management of postpolio syndrome.

Gonzalez H(1), Olsson T, Borg K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Rehabilitation Medicine, Department of Clinical Sciences, 
Danderyd Hospital, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. 
henrik.gonzales@telia.com

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2010 Jun;9(6):561-3. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70110-1.

Postpolio syndrome is characterised by the exacerbation of existing or new 
health problems, most often muscle weakness and fatigability, general fatigue, 
and pain, after a period of stability subsequent to acute polio infection. 
Diagnosis is based on the presence of a lower motor neuron disorder that is 
supported by neurophysiological findings, with exclusion of other disorders as 
causes of the new symptoms. The muscle-related effects of postpolio syndrome are 
possibly associated with an ongoing process of denervation and reinnervation, 
reaching a point at which denervation is no longer compensated for by 
reinnervation. The cause of this denervation is unknown, but an inflammatory 
process is possible. Rehabilitation in patients with postpolio syndrome should 
take a multiprofessional and multidisciplinary approach, with an emphasis on 
physiotherapy, including enhanced or individually modified physical activity, 
and muscle training. Patients with postpolio syndrome should be advised to avoid 
both inactivity and overuse of weak muscles. Evaluation of the need for orthoses 
and assistive devices is often required.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70095-8
PMID: 20494327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]