---
reference_id: "PMID:25361008"
title: "EBV-driven LMP1 and IFN-γ up-regulate PD-L1 in nasopharyngeal carcinoma: Implications for oncotargeted therapy."
authors:
- Fang W
- Zhang J
- Hong S
- Zhan J
- Chen N
- Qin T
- Tang Y
- Zhang Y
- Kang S
- Zhou T
- Wu X
- Liang W
- Hu Z
- Ma Y
- Zhao Y
- Tian Y
- Yang Y
- Xue C
- Yan Y
- Hou X
- Huang P
- Huang Y
- Zhao H
- Zhang L
journal: Oncotarget
year: '2014'
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.2608
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- B7-H1 Antigen/biosynthesis
- "Blotting, Western"
- Carcinoma
- Disease-Free Survival
- Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
- Epstein-Barr Virus Infections/metabolism
- Female
- Flow Cytometry
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic/physiology"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Viral/physiology"
- "Herpesvirus 4, Human"
- Humans
- Interferon-gamma/metabolism
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma
- "Nasopharyngeal Neoplasms/metabolism, mortality, virology"
- "RNA, Small Interfering"
- Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Transfection
- Up-Regulation
- Viral Matrix Proteins/metabolism
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EBV-driven LMP1 and IFN-γ up-regulate PD-L1 in nasopharyngeal carcinoma: Implications for oncotargeted therapy.
**Authors:** Fang W, Zhang J, Hong S, Zhan J, Chen N, Qin T, Tang Y, Zhang Y, Kang S, Zhou T, Wu X, Liang W, Hu Z, Ma Y, Zhao Y, Tian Y, Yang Y, Xue C, Yan Y, Hou X, Huang P, Huang Y, Zhao H, Zhang L
**Journal:** Oncotarget (2014)
**DOI:** [10.18632/oncotarget.2608](https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.2608)

## Content

1. Oncotarget. 2014 Dec 15;5(23):12189-202. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.2608.

EBV-driven LMP1 and IFN-γ up-regulate PD-L1 in nasopharyngeal carcinoma: 
Implications for oncotargeted therapy.

Fang W(1), Zhang J(2), Hong S(1), Zhan J(1), Chen N(3), Qin T(1), Tang Y(3), 
Zhang Y(1), Kang S(1), Zhou T(1), Wu X(1), Liang W(1), Hu Z(1), Ma Y(1), Zhao 
Y(1), Tian Y(1), Yang Y(1), Xue C(1), Yan Y(1), Hou X(1), Huang P(1), Huang 
Y(1), Zhao H(1), Zhang L(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key laboratory of Oncology in South China, Department of Medical 
Oncology, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, P. R. China. 
Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University 
Cancer Center, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(2)Department of Oncology, the Sixth Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(3)Department of Oncology, the Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Zhuhai, Guangdong, China.

PD-L1 expression is a feature of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) associated 
malignancies such as nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). Here, we found that 
EBV-induced latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) and IFN-γ pathways cooperate to 
regulate programmed cell death protein 1 ligand (PD-L1). Expression of PD-L1 was 
higher in EBV positive NPC cell lines compared with EBV negative cell lines. 
PD-L1 expression could be increased by exogenous and endogenous induction of 
LMP1 induced PD-L1. In agreement, expression of PD-L1 was suppressed by knocking 
down LMP1 in EBV positive cell lines. We further demonstrated that LMP1 
up-regulated PD-L1 through STAT3, AP-1, and NF-κB pathways. Besides, IFN-γ was 
independent of but synergetic with LMP1 in up-regulating PD-L1 in NPC. 
Furthermore, we showed that PD-L1 was associated with worse disease-free 
survival in NPC patients. These results imply that blocking both the LMP1 
oncogenic pathway and PD-1/PD-L1 checkpoints may be a promising therapeutic 
approach for EBV positive NPC patients.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.2608
PMCID: PMC4322961
PMID: 25361008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest 
The authors state that they have no conflicts of interest.