---
reference_id: "PMID:8923944"
title: Clinical analysis of a large kindred with the Pallister ulnar-mammary syndrome.
authors:
- Bamshad M
- Root S
- Carey JC
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '1996'
doi: "10.1002/(SICI)1096-8628(19961111)65:4<325::AID-AJMG15>3.0.CO;2-W"
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, physiopathology"
- Apocrine Glands/abnormalities
- Breast/abnormalities
- Female
- Fingers/abnormalities
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Pedigree
- Syndrome
- Tooth Abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical analysis of a large kindred with the Pallister ulnar-mammary syndrome.
**Authors:** Bamshad M, Root S, Carey JC
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1002/(SICI)1096-8628(19961111)65:4<325::AID-AJMG15>3.0.CO;2-W](https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1096-8628(19961111)65:4<325::AID-AJMG15>3.0.CO;2-W)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 1996 Nov 11;65(4):325-31. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1096-8628(19961111)65:4<325::AID-AJMG15>3.0.CO;2-W.

Clinical analysis of a large kindred with the Pallister ulnar-mammary syndrome.

Bamshad M(1), Root S, Carey JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt 
Lake City 84132-1001, USA.

The ulnar-mammary syndrome (UMS) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized 
by posterior limb deficiencies or duplications, apocrine/mammary gland 
hypoplasia and/or dysfunction, abnormal dentition, delayed puberty in males, and 
genital anomalies. We present the clinical descriptions of 33 members of a six 
generation kindred with UMS. The number of affected individuals in this family 
is more than the sum of all previously reported cases of UMS. The clinical 
expression of UMS is highly variable. While most patients have limb 
deficiencies, the range of abnormalities extends from hypoplasia of the terminal 
phalanx of the 5th digit to complete absence of the ulna and 3rd, 4th, and 5th 
digits. Moreover, affected individuals may have posterior digital duplications 
with or without contralateral limb deficiencies. Apocrine gland abnormalities 
range from diminished axillary perspiration with normal breast development and 
lactation, to complete absence of the breasts and no axillary perspiration. 
Dental abnormalities include misplaced or absent teeth. Affected males 
consistently undergo delayed puberty, and both sexes have diminished to absent 
axillary hair. Imperforate hymen were seen in some affected women. A gene for 
UMS was mapped to chromosome area 12q23-q24.1. A mutation in the gene causing 
UMS can interfere with limb patterning in the proximal/distal, 
anterior/posterior, and dorsal/ventral axes. This mutation disturbs development 
of the posterior elements of forearm, wrist, and hand while growth and 
development of the anterior elements remain normal.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1096-8628(19961111)65:4<325::AID-AJMG15>3.0.CO;2-W
PMID: 8923944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]