---
reference_id: "PMID:18942156"
title: "Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase laboratory assay: How, when, and why?"
authors:
- Minucci A
- Giardina B
- Zuppi C
- Capoluongo E
journal: IUBMB Life
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1002/iub.137
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase laboratory assay: How, when, and why?
**Authors:** Minucci A, Giardina B, Zuppi C, Capoluongo E
**Journal:** IUBMB Life (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/iub.137](https://doi.org/10.1002/iub.137)

## Content

1. IUBMB Life. 2009 Jan;61(1):27-34. doi: 10.1002/iub.137.

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase laboratory assay: How, when, and why?

Minucci A(1), Giardina B, Zuppi C, Capoluongo E.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and 
Clinical Biochemistry, Catholic University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is the most common defect of 
red blood cells. Although some different laboratory techniques or methods are 
employed for the biochemical screening, a strict relationship between 
biochemists, clinicians, and molecular biologists is necessary for a definitive 
diagnosis. This article represents an overview on the current laboratory tests 
finalized to the screening or to the definitive diagnosis of G6PD-deficiency, 
underlying the problems regarding the biochemical and molecular identification 
of heterozygote females other than those regarding the standardization of the 
clinical and laboratory diagnostic procedures. Finally, this review is aimed to 
give a flow-chart for the complete diagnostic approach of G6PD-deficiency.

DOI: 10.1002/iub.137
PMID: 18942156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]