---
reference_id: "PMID:27534439"
title: Dengue infection.
authors:
- Guzman MG
- Gubler DJ
- Izquierdo A
- Martinez E
- Halstead SB
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2016.55
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue infection.
**Authors:** Guzman MG, Gubler DJ, Izquierdo A, Martinez E, Halstead SB
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrdp.2016.55](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrdp.2016.55)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2016 Aug 18;2:16055. doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2016.55.

Dengue infection.

Guzman MG(1), Gubler DJ(2), Izquierdo A(1), Martinez E(1), Halstead SB(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Tropical Medicine 'Pedro Kouri', PAHO/WHO Collaborating Center 
for the Study of Dengue and its Vector, Autopista Novia del Mediodia, Km 6 1/2, 
Havana 11400, Cuba.
(2)Program in Emerging Infectious Diseases, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, 
Singapore.
(3)Department of Preventive Medicine and Biometrics, Uniformed Services 
University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Dengue is widespread throughout the tropics and local spatial variation in 
dengue virus transmission is strongly influenced by rainfall, temperature, 
urbanization and distribution of the principal mosquito vector Aedes aegypti. 
Currently, endemic dengue virus transmission is reported in the Eastern 
Mediterranean, American, South-East Asian, Western Pacific and African regions, 
whereas sporadic local transmission has been reported in Europe and the United 
States as the result of virus introduction to areas where Ae. aegypti and Aedes 
albopictus, a secondary vector, occur. The global burden of the disease is not 
well known, but its epidemiological patterns are alarming for both human health 
and the global economy. Dengue has been identified as a disease of the future 
owing to trends toward increased urbanization, scarce water supplies and, 
possibly, environmental change. According to the WHO, dengue control is 
technically feasible with coordinated international technical and financial 
support for national programmes. This Primer provides a general overview on 
dengue, covering epidemiology, control, disease mechanisms, diagnosis, treatment 
and research priorities.

DOI: 10.1038/nrdp.2016.55
PMID: 27534439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]