---
reference_id: "PMID:32029911"
title: "Processed meat intake and incidence of colorectal cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective observational studies."
authors:
- Händel MN
- Rohde JF
- Jacobsen R
- Nielsen SM
- Christensen R
- Alexander DD
- Frederiksen P
- Heitmann BL
journal: Eur J Clin Nutr
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41430-020-0576-9
keywords:
- "Colorectal Neoplasms/epidemiology, etiology"
- Humans
- Incidence
- Meat
- Observational Studies as Topic
- Prospective Studies
- Reproducibility of Results
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Processed meat intake and incidence of colorectal cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective observational studies.
**Authors:** Händel MN, Rohde JF, Jacobsen R, Nielsen SM, Christensen R, Alexander DD, Frederiksen P, Heitmann BL
**Journal:** Eur J Clin Nutr (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41430-020-0576-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41430-020-0576-9)

## Content

1. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2020 Aug;74(8):1132-1148. doi: 10.1038/s41430-020-0576-9.
Epub  2020 Feb 6.

Processed meat intake and incidence of colorectal cancer: a systematic review
and meta-analysis of prospective observational studies.

Händel MN(1), Rohde JF(2), Jacobsen R(2)(3), Nielsen SM(2)(4), Christensen
R(2)(4), Alexander DD(5), Frederiksen P(2), Heitmann BL(2)(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)The Parker Institute, Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg Hospital, Frederiksberg,
Denmark. mina.nicole.holmgaard.handel@regionh.dk.
(2)The Parker Institute, Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg Hospital, Frederiksberg,
Denmark.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Research Unit of Rheumatology, Department of Clinical Research, University of
Southern Denmark, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark.
(5)EpidStat Institute, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(6)National Institute of Public Health, University of Southern Denmark, Odense,
Denmark.
(7)The Boden Institute of Obesity, Nutrition, Exercise & Eating Disorders,
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(8)Department of Public Health, Section for Clinical Practice, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

The objective was to use accumulated evidence to explore the association between
processed meat intake and risk of colorectal cancer (CRC) and to investigate the
reliability of associations by evaluating patterns of risk by study population
characteristics and research quality parameters. We included 29 observational
prospective cohort studies with relative risk estimates and 95% confidence
intervals for CRC according to various levels of processed meat consumption.
Risk of bias was assessed using Risk Of Bias In Non-randomized Studies-of
Interventions (ROBINS-I) tool. Data sources were PubMed and Embase up to January
2017. The summary relative risks for high versus low processed meat consumption
and risk of CRC, colon, and rectal cancer were 1.13 (95% CI: 1.01, 1.26), 1.19
(95% CI: 1.09, 1.31), and 1.21 (95% CI: 0.98, 1.49), respectively. Similar
estimates were observed for the dose-response analyses. Heterogeneity across
studies was detected in most analytical models. The overall judgment showed that
two out of 29 studies had a moderate risk of bias, 25 had a serious risk of
bias, and 2 had a critical risk of bias. The bias domains most often rated
critical were bias due to risk of confounding, bias due to missing data, and
selective outcome reporting bias. Although this meta-analysis indicates a modest
association between processed meat intake and an increased risk of CRC, our
assessment of internal validity warrants a cautious interpretation of these
results, as most of the included studies were judged to have serious or critical
risks of bias.

DOI: 10.1038/s41430-020-0576-9
PMID: 32029911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
