---
reference_id: "PMID:38361968"
title: "Incidence and prevalence of mtDNA-related adult mitochondrial disease in Southwest Finland, 2009-2022: an observational, population-based study."
authors:
- Martikainen MH
- Majamaa K
journal: BMJ Neurol Open
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1136/bmjno-2023-000546
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence and prevalence of mtDNA-related adult mitochondrial disease in Southwest Finland, 2009-2022: an observational, population-based study.
**Authors:** Martikainen MH, Majamaa K
**Journal:** BMJ Neurol Open (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bmjno-2023-000546](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjno-2023-000546)

## Content

1. BMJ Neurol Open. 2024 Feb 14;6(1):e000546. doi: 10.1136/bmjno-2023-000546. 
eCollection 2024.

Incidence and prevalence of mtDNA-related adult mitochondrial disease in 
Southwest Finland, 2009-2022: an observational, population-based study.

Martikainen MH(1)(2)(3)(4), Majamaa K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Unit of Clinical Medicine, Neurology, University of Oulu, Oulu, 
Finland.
(2)Neurocenter and Medical Research Center, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, 
Finland.
(3)Clinical Neurosciences, Dept. of Clinical Medicine, University of Turku, 
Turku, Finland.
(4)Neurocenter, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Mitochondrial diseases are common inherited metabolic disorders. Due 
to improved case ascertainment and diagnosis methods, the detection of new 
diagnoses of mitochondrial disease can be expected to increase. In December 
2009, the prevalence of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)-related mitochondrial disease 
was 4.6/100 000 (95% CI, 2.7 to 7.2) in the adult population of Southwest 
Finland. We investigated the number of new diagnoses and the incidence of 
mitochondrial disease in Southwest Finland between December 2009 and December 
2022.
METHODS: We collected data on all adult patients from Southwest Finland 
diagnosed with mitochondrial disease on 31 December 2009 and 31 December 2022. 
Most patients had been diagnosed at the Turku University Hospital (TUH) 
neurology outpatient clinic. Patients were also identified by searching the TUH 
electronic patient database for relevant International Classification of 
Diseases, Tenth Revision codes and conducted mtDNA analyses.
RESULTS: 42 new patients were diagnosed giving a mean annual rate of 3.2 new 
diagnoses. In 2022, the minimum prevalence estimate of adult mtDNA-related 
mitochondrial disease was 9.2/100 000 (95% CI, 6.5 to 12.7). The prevalence of 
adult mtDNA disease associated with m.3243A>G was 4.2/100 000 (95% CI, 2.5 to 
6.7), and that with large-scale mtDNA deletions was 1.3/100 000 (95% CI, 0.4 to 
2.9). During the 13-year period, the annual incidence of adult mtDNA disease was 
0.6/100 000 and that of adult m.3243A>G-related disease 0.3/100 000.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that improved means of diagnostics and dedicated 
effort increase the detection of mitochondrial disease.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2024. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjno-2023-000546
PMCID: PMC10868302
PMID: 38361968

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.