---
reference_id: "PMID:26093659"
title: "Epigenetics and Vasculitis: a Comprehensive Review."
authors:
- Renauer P
- Coit P
- Sawalha AH
journal: Clin Rev Allergy Immunol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s12016-015-8495-6
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antibodies, Antineutrophil Cytoplasmic/immunology"
- CpG Islands
- DNA Methylation
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Histones/metabolism
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin A/immunology
- MicroRNAs/genetics
- Signal Transduction
- "Vasculitis/diagnosis, genetics, immunology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epigenetics and Vasculitis: a Comprehensive Review.
**Authors:** Renauer P, Coit P, Sawalha AH
**Journal:** Clin Rev Allergy Immunol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12016-015-8495-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12016-015-8495-6)

## Content

1. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2016 Jun;50(3):357-66. doi:
10.1007/s12016-015-8495-6.

Epigenetics and Vasculitis: a Comprehensive Review.

Renauer P(1), Coit P(1), Sawalha AH(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. asawalha@umich.edu.
(3)Center for Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI, USA. asawalha@umich.edu.
(4), 5520 MSRB-1, SPC 5680, 1150 W. Medical Center Drive, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109,
USA. asawalha@umich.edu.

Vasculitides represent a group of relatively rare systemic inflammatory diseases
of the blood vessels. Despite recent progress in understanding the genetic basis
and the underlying pathogenic mechanisms in vasculitis, the etiology and
pathogenesis of vasculitis remain incompletely understood. Epigenetic
dysregulation plays an important role in immune-mediated diseases, and the
contribution of epigenetic aberrancies in vasculitis is increasingly being
recognized. Histone modifications in the PR3 and MPO gene loci might be
mechanistically involved in the pathogenesis of anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic
antibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitis. Similarly, other studies revealed
important epigenetic contribution to other vasculitides, including Kawasaki
disease and IgA vasculitis. More recently, genome-wide epigenomic studies have
been performed in several vasculitides. A recent genome-wide DNA methylation
study uncovered an important role for epigenetic remodeling of
cytoskeleton-related genes in the pathogenesis of Behçet's disease and suggested
that reversal of some of these DNA methylation changes associates with disease
remission. Genome-wide DNA methylation profiling characterized the inflammatory
response in temporal artery tissue from patients with giant cell arteritis and
showed increased activation of calcineurin/nuclear factor of activated T cells
(NFAT) signaling, prompting the suggestion that a specific calcineurin/NFAT
inhibitor that is well tolerated and with the added beneficial anti-platelet
activity, such as dipyridamole, might be of therapeutic potential in giant cell
arteritis. While epigenetic studies in systemic vasculitis are still in their
infancy, currently available data clearly indicate that investigating the
epigenetic mechanisms underlying these diseases will help to better understand
the pathogenesis of vasculitis and provide novel targets for the development of
disease biomarkers and new therapies.

DOI: 10.1007/s12016-015-8495-6
PMID: 26093659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
