---
reference_id: "PMID:37215500"
title: "Novel compound heterozygous mutations in TELO2 in an infant with You-Hoover-Fong syndrome: A case report and literature review."
authors:
- Zhao Y
- Han Y
- Li N
- Fu W
- Luo G
- Tan Y
- Qian X
journal: Open Life Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1515/biol-2022-0602
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel compound heterozygous mutations in TELO2 in an infant with You-Hoover-Fong syndrome: A case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Zhao Y, Han Y, Li N, Fu W, Luo G, Tan Y, Qian X
**Journal:** Open Life Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1515/biol-2022-0602](https://doi.org/10.1515/biol-2022-0602)

## Content

1. Open Life Sci. 2023 May 19;18(1):20220602. doi: 10.1515/biol-2022-0602. 
eCollection 2023.

Novel compound heterozygous mutations in TELO2 in an infant with You-Hoover-Fong 
syndrome: A case report and literature review.

Zhao Y(1), Han Y(1), Li N(1), Fu W(1), Luo G(1), Tan Y(1), Qian X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Children Rehabilitation, Nanhai Women and Children's Hospital 
Affiliated to Guangzhou University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, No. 6, 
Guiping West Road, Nanhai District, Foshan, Guangdong Province, 528200, China.

We report here the clinical diagnosis and treatment and genetic mutations of an 
infant with You-Hoover-Fong syndrome (YHFS). The relevant literature review was 
conducted. A female infant aged 17 months was admitted to Nanhai Affiliated 
Maternity and Children's Hospital of Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine 
due to "global development delay complicated with postnatal growth retardation 
for more than 1 year." The infant was diagnosed with YHFS due to the onset of 
extremely severe mental retardation, microcephaly, abnormal hearing, severe 
protein-energy malnutrition, congenital cataract, cleft palate (I°), congenital 
atrial septal defect, brain atrophy, hydrocephalus, and brain hypoplasia. The 
whole exon sequencing revealed two compound heterozygous mutations, including a 
likely pathogenic TELO2 variant, c.2245A > T (p.K749X) from her mother and an 
uncertain variant, c.2299C > T (p.R767C) from her father, validated by Sanger 
sequencing. After bilateral cataract surgery, the infant obtained better visual 
acuity and showed more responses and interactions with her parents. Diagnosis 
and treatment of this case prompt that these TELO2 variants have not been 
reported, deepening the understanding of the molecular and genetic mechanism of 
YHFS in clinical practice.

© 2023 the author(s), published by De Gruyter.

DOI: 10.1515/biol-2022-0602
PMCID: PMC10199318
PMID: 37215500

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: Authors state no conflict 
of interest.