---
reference_id: "PMID:38644701"
title: Examination of quality of life and psychiatric symptoms in childhood Graves' disease.
authors:
- Yazkan Akgül G
- Köprülü Ö
journal: J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1515/jpem-2023-0550
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Examination of quality of life and psychiatric symptoms in childhood Graves' disease.
**Authors:** Yazkan Akgül G, Köprülü Ö
**Journal:** J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1515/jpem-2023-0550](https://doi.org/10.1515/jpem-2023-0550)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2024 Apr 22;37(5):445-450. doi: 
10.1515/jpem-2023-0550. Print 2024 May 27.

Examination of quality of life and psychiatric symptoms in childhood Graves' 
disease.

Yazkan Akgül G(1), Köprülü Ö(2).

Author information:
(1)Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Department, School of Medicine, Marmara 
University, İstanbul, Türkiye.
(2)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Tekirdağ IFC City Hospital, Tekirdağ, 
Türkiye.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of our study is to examine the emotional, behavioral 
problems, and psychiatric symptoms of children diagnosed with Graves' disease 
(GD), to assess their quality of life, and to compare with control group.
METHODS: The research was planned as a cross-sectional study and included 16 
patients with GD (13 female and three male) and 29 healthy children for control 
group (19 female and 10 male). Sociodemographic form, Pediatric Quality of Life 
Inventory, Revised Child Anxiety and Depression Scale-Child Version (RCADS-CV), 
Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ), Turgay DSM-IV-Based Child and 
Adolescent Behavior Disorders Screening and Rating Scale (T-DSM-IV-S), and 
Affective Reactivity Index scale were applied to the children and their 
families.
RESULTS: Eighty one percent of GD group (GG) (n=13, mean age 15.1 ± 2.2) and 
66 % of control group (CG) (n=19, 14.6 ± 2.2) were girls. No significant 
difference was found between GG and CG in terms of quality of life, anxiety, and 
depression scores. GG had higher scores in affective reactivity index, SDQ-P 
total score, and T-DSM-IV-S total scores (p values 0.039; 0.009; 0.023, 
respectively). While no significant difference was detected in the 
T-DSM-IV-S-inattention and hyperactivity scores, significantly higher scores 
were detected in oppositional defiance and conduct disorder scores (p values 
0.172; 0.294; 0.019; 0.027, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: In children with GD, irritability, oppositional defiant, and 
conduct disorder symptoms have been detected. Children with these mental health 
symptoms experience behavioral and emotional difficulties in their daily lives. 
It is important to follow up children with GD for possible comorbid psychiatric 
disorders.

© 2024 Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin/Boston.

DOI: 10.1515/jpem-2023-0550
PMID: 38644701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]