---
reference_id: "PMID:39156960"
title: "Case report: Comprehensive exploration of a novel PFKM mutation in glycogen storage disease Type VII."
authors:
- Chen Y
- Wang X
- Ji N
- Fang Q
- Chang X
- Liu M
journal: Front Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1422908
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report: Comprehensive exploration of a novel PFKM mutation in glycogen storage disease Type VII.
**Authors:** Chen Y, Wang X, Ji N, Fang Q, Chang X, Liu M
**Journal:** Front Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2024.1422908](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2024.1422908)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2024 Aug 2;15:1422908. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1422908.
eCollection  2024.

Case report: Comprehensive exploration of a novel PFKM mutation in glycogen
storage disease Type VII.

Chen Y(1), Wang X(2), Ji N(1), Fang Q(1), Chang X(2), Liu M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou, China.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou, China.

Glycogen Storage Disease Type VII (GSD VII) is a rare glycogen metabolism
disorder resulting from mutations in the PFKM gene, inherited in an autosomal
recessive manner. It is characterized by exercise intolerance, muscle cramps,
myoglobinuria, compensatory hemolysis, and later onset de novo myasthenia and
mild myopathy, contributing to its clinical heterogeneity and diagnostic
challenges. Here, we report a rare case of a 17-year-old Chinese woman
exhibiting substantial muscle weakness and compensated hemolysis. Muscle
biopsies showed glycogen deposition, and blood tests showed hyperuricemia and
significantly elevated creatine kinase. Whole genome sequencing (WGS) and whole
exome sequencing (WES) identified two compound heterozygous mutations in the
PFKM (NM_000289.6) gene: c.626G>A and c.1376G>A in exons 7 and 15, respectively.
According to the clinical presentation, diagnostic examination, and WES results,
the patient was finally diagnosed with GSDVII. The discovery of these two new
PFKM mutations expands the genetic spectrum, and understanding the clinical
manifestations of these mutations is critical to preventing diagnostic delays
and timely intervention and treatment.

Copyright © 2024 Chen, Wang, Ji, Fang, Chang and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1422908
PMCID: PMC11327043
PMID: 39156960

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
