---
reference_id: "PMID:9793401"
title: "[Clear cell sarcoma of soft tissues. Clinico-pathological and ultrastructural analysis of a case in the head-neck region and a literature review]."
authors:
- Bisceglia M
- Carosi I
- Lelli G
- Pasquinelli G
- Martinelli GN
journal: Pathologica
year: '1998'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Clear cell sarcoma of soft tissues. Clinico-pathological and ultrastructural analysis of a case in the head-neck region and a literature review].
**Authors:** Bisceglia M, Carosi I, Lelli G, Pasquinelli G, Martinelli GN
**Journal:** Pathologica (1998)

## Content

1. Pathologica. 1998 Aug;90(4):391-6.

[Clear cell sarcoma of soft tissues. Clinico-pathological and ultrastructural 
analysis of a case in the head-neck region and a literature review].

[Article in Italian]

Bisceglia M(1), Carosi I, Lelli G, Pasquinelli G, Martinelli GN.

Author information:
(1)Servizio di Anatomia Patologica, IRCCS-Ospedale Casa Sollievo della 
Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, FG.

BACKGROUND: Clear cell sarcoma of soft tissues (CCSST), even synonymically 
termed malignant melanoma of soft tissues, is a peculiar malignant tumor with 
both a prolonged clinical course and a final poor prognosis. Whilst its 
neuroectodermal histogenesis is most likely, its nosological position is still a 
matter of debate. Light microscopy (LM), immunocytochemistry (ICC), and electron 
microscopy (EM) investigations have shown both a melanocytic and schwannian 
differentiation. Recent findings from cytogenetic analysis documenting a 
reciprocal translocation between the long arms of chromosomes 12 and 22 
[t(12:22)(q13;q12.2)] not seen in cutaneous melanomas nor in other neurogenic 
sarcomas support CCSST as a distinct entity.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A case of CCSST arising in the preparotid region of a 
young man with a clinical history of two previous surgical interventions was 
admitted in 1994 and is herein reported. This patient was previously cured twice 
in different institutions: the first time he was diagnosed with a "melanoma, 
NOS" of the face and surgically treated 10 years earlier. The second 
time--meaning one year earlier the admission--this patient was again surgically 
treated for a local recurrence which was interpreted as a myoepithelioma (clear 
cell type) of salivary gland origin. A morphological, immunocytochemical, and 
ultrastructural analysis performed on the last recurrence is herein presented.
RESULTS: On LM the tumor exhibited the classic morphological appearance 
comprised both of clear and eosinophilic cells with prominent nucleoli, focally 
containing cytoplasmic granules of melanin pigment. At ICC expression of 
vimentin and S-100 protein was diffusely demonstrated as well as the melanoma 
associated antigen HMB-45 was even albeit focally documented.

PMID: 9793401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]