---
reference_id: "PMID:31163979"
title: Inducible Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Cardiomyocytes Reveal Aberrant Extracellular Regulated Kinase 5 and Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase Kinase 1/2 Signaling Concomitantly Promote Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy in RAF1-Associated Noonan Syndrome.
authors:
- Jaffré F
- Miller CL
- Schänzer A
- Evans T
- Roberts AE
- Hahn A
- Kontaridis MI
journal: Circulation
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.037227
keywords:
- Adolescent
- CRISPR-Cas Systems/physiology
- "Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Child
- Female
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/physiology
- "MAP Kinase Kinase 1/genetics, metabolism"
- "MAP Kinase Kinase 2/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- "Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase 7/genetics, metabolism"
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/physiology"
- "Noonan Syndrome/genetics, metabolism"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-raf/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Inducible Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Cardiomyocytes Reveal Aberrant Extracellular Regulated Kinase 5 and Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase Kinase 1/2 Signaling Concomitantly Promote Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy in RAF1-Associated Noonan Syndrome.
**Authors:** Jaffré F, Miller CL, Schänzer A, Evans T, Roberts AE, Hahn A, Kontaridis MI
**Journal:** Circulation (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.037227](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.037227)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2019 Jul 16;140(3):207-224. doi:
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.037227.  Epub 2019 Jun 5.

Inducible Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Cardiomyocytes Reveal Aberrant
Extracellular Regulated Kinase 5 and Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase Kinase 1/2
Signaling Concomitantly Promote Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy in RAF1-Associated
Noonan Syndrome.

Jaffré F(1)(2)(3), Miller CL(4), Schänzer A(5), Evans T(3), Roberts AE(6), Hahn
A(7), Kontaridis MI(1)(8)(2)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center (F.J., M.I.K.).
(2)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA (F.J., M.I.K.).
(3)Department of Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY (F.J.,
T.E.).
(4)Center for Public Health Genomics, Department of Public Health Sciences,
Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, and Biomedical Engineering, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville (C.L.M.).
(5)Institute of Neuropathology (A.S.), University Hospital Giessen, Justus
Liebig University Giessen, Germany.
(6)Department of Cardiology, Division of Genetics, Boston Children's Hospital,
MA (A.E.R.).
(7)Department of Child Neurology (A.H.), University Hospital Giessen, Justus
Liebig University Giessen, Germany.
(8)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology (M.I.K.).
(9)Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA (M.I.K.).
(10)Masonic Medical Research Institute, Utica, NY (M.I.K.).

BACKGROUND: More than 90% of individuals with Noonan syndrome (NS) with
mutations clustered in the CR2 domain of RAF1 present with severe and often
lethal hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). The signaling pathways by which NS
RAF1 mutations promote HCM remain elusive, and so far, there is no known
treatment for NS-associated HCM.
METHODS: We used patient-derived RAF1S257L/+ and CRISPR-Cas9-generated isogenic
control inducible pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived cardiomyocytes to model
NS RAF1-associated HCM and to further delineate the molecular mechanisms
underlying the disease.
RESULTS: We show that mutant iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes phenocopy the pathology
seen in hearts of patients with NS by exhibiting hypertrophy and structural
defects. Through pharmacological and genetic targeting, we identify 2 perturbed
concomitant pathways that, together, mediate HCM in RAF1 mutant iPSC-derived
cardiomyocytes. Hyperactivation of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 1/2
(MEK1/2), but not extracellular regulated kinase 1/2, causes myofibrillar
disarray, whereas the enlarged cardiomyocyte phenotype is a direct consequence
of increased extracellular regulated kinase 5 (ERK5) signaling, a pathway not
previously known to be involved in NS. RNA-sequencing reveals genes with
abnormal expression in RAF1 mutant iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes and identifies
subsets of genes dysregulated by aberrant MEK1/2 or ERK5 pathways that could
contribute to the NS-associated HCM.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, the results of our study identify the molecular
mechanisms by which NS RAF1 mutations cause HCM and reveal downstream effectors
that could serve as therapeutic targets for treatment of NS and perhaps other,
more common, congenital HCM disorders.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.037227
PMCID: PMC6709678
PMID: 31163979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Noonan syndrome (NS) is a common, autosomal dominant, congenital disease with a frequency of ~1 in 2,000 live births. It belongs to the RASopathies family of rare genetic diseases, which also includes NS with Multiple Lentigines (NSML, formerly LEOPARD Syndrome), Cardio-Facio-Cutaneous Syndrome (CFC), and Costello Syndrome (CS). As its name implies, “RASopathies” are caused by germ-line mutations that affect genes along the canonical RAS-Mitogen Activating Protein Kinase (MAPK) pathway. Specifically, NS is caused by gain-of-function (GOF) mutations in this pathway, particularly in PTPN11, SOS1, RAF1 (or c-RAF), KRAS, NRAS and BRAF genes1, however, additional mutations in other genes have also been recently described2.

Phenotypically, NS patients present with cranio-facial defects, short stature, bleeding anomalies and skeletal malformations, as well as a panoply of cardiac defects, the most common of which are atrio-ventricular septal defects and pulmonary valve stenosis. However, ~15-20% of NS patients, often infants or young children, develop hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), a life threatening condition that has no treatment, is associated with sudden death, and often quickly deteriorates into heart failure3. Indeed, individuals with NS present with HCM at earlier ages than most other familial or idiopathic congenital heart diseases (CHD), often accompanied by congestive heart failure and leading to ~22% mortality rate by the end of the first year of life3. Hence, identifying and developing efficient therapeutic options to treat HCM in NS patients is urgently needed.

The RAF1 gene, located on chromosome 3, codes for a serine/threonine protein kinase of 648 amino acids and is comprised of three main regions: a conserved region (CR1) containing a RAS binding domain and a C1 domain, a hinge region (CR2), and a kinase domain (CR3). Wild type RAF1 (or C-RAF) binds to its target downstream effector, mitogen activated protein kinase kinase (MEK1/2), albeit with reduced affinity as compared to other RAF (A-RAF and B-RAF) family members. As such, RAF1 only modestly activates downstream extracellular regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) signaling4, suggesting that it may play a critical role in growth factor-dependent modulation of ERK1/2-independent pathways. In line with this, RAF1 has demonstrated kinase-independent functions and serves as a scaffold for ERK1/2 pathway-independent proteins5.

Among NS patients, 8% have a mutation in RAF16. Most clinical features are typical of NS; however, ~73% of RAF1-associated NS patients also exhibit HCM, an atypical characteristic of NS6. Interestingly, the frequency of HCM varies, depending on the location of the mutation. The most common RAF1 mutation, RAF1S257L/+ , is located in the CR2 region, and leads to severe, often lethal, HCM in 90% of cases7.

Since NS mutations are GOF mutations, it has been suggested that hyper-activation of the ERK1/2 pathway leads to development of HCM8. However, whether other, RAF1-specific, pathways contribute to this process has not yet been considered. There is an unusually high incidence of HCM in RAF1-associated NS patients, as compared to other NS disease-causing genes in the ERK1/2 pathway. Therefore, NS RAF1 mutations, such as RAF1S257L/+, may trigger HCM via a yet unidentified, ERK1/2-independent pathway. Herein, we utilized RAF1 patient-specific inducible pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived cardiomyocytes, as well as genome editing (CRISPR-Cas9), biochemical, and RNA-sequencing technologies, to elucidate the molecular mechanisms and signaling pathways by which RAF1-associated NS mutations cause HCM. Together, this integrative approach identified novel signaling pathways and promising therapeutic targets for treating NS-associated HCM, as well as other, more common, forms of congenital heart disease.

The data, analytical methods, and study materials will be made available to other researchers for purposes of reproducing the results or replicating the procedures. Please directly contact the corresponding authors with any inquiry.

Wnt-C59 (#S7037), Trametinib (#S2673), BIX02189 (#S1531) and cyclosporin A (#S2286) were obtained from Selleckchem. PD98059 (#1213) and U0126 (#1144) were obtained from Tocris Bioscience. Phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (#P8139) and ionomycin from Cayman Chemical (#11932). CHIR99021 was obtained from Stem Cell Technologies (#72052).

Cell cultures were maintained at 37°C, 5% CO2. Human skin fibroblasts were cultured in DMEM (ThermoFisher, #11965092) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and passaged by trypsinization (0.25% trypsin EDTA, ThermoFisher, #25200056). HEK293 cells were cultured in DMEM high glucose (Life Technologies, #11965084), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Sigma). Human iPSCs were maintained on Matrigel (hESC-Qualified matrix, Corning, #354277) with mTeSR1 medium (Stem Cell Technologies, #05850). Media was changed every 24 hours and iPSC lines were passaged with Accutase (Millipore, # SCR005) with 5 min incubation at 37°C. For replating iPSCs, mTeSR1 medium was supplemented with the Y27632 ROCK inhibitor (10 µM, Selleckchem, #S1049).

Low-passage skin fibroblasts were obtained from a skin biopsy from a Noonan syndrome female patient carrying a S257L/+ mutation in RAF1 or from a healthy pediatric male individual with informed consent under protocols concerning research with biomaterials approved by the local ethics committee of the medical faculty at the Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Germany. The NS RAF1S257L/+ and healthy male pediatric iPSC lines were generated using episomal reprogramming vectors. Electroporation of 1 million dermal fibroblasts (Neon Transfection System, Life Technologies, 1,650 Volts, 3 pulses, 10ms) was performed to deliver five reprogramming factors (OCT¾, SOX2, KLF4, L-MYC, LIN28) contained in three different vectors (1μg each, gift from Shinya Yamanaka, Addgene plasmids # 27076, 27078 and 27080). An episomal vector coding for EBNA1 (1μg, gift from Shinya Yamanaka, Addgene plasmid # 37624) was co-electroporated to enhance transfection efficiency and expression from the episomal plasmids. After 2-3 weeks culture in reprogramming medium (Pluriton, Stemgent, #00-0070), iPSC clones with an embryonic stem cell morphology were picked manually and cultured further in mTeSR1 medium on Matrigel (Corning, #354277) coated plates. Additional characterization was performed by qRT-PCR and immunofluorescence for pluripotent markers, as described in the corresponding methods sections. Karyotyping was performed by Cell Line Genetics.

To correct the RAF1S257L/+ mutation directly in the iPSC NS line, we took advantage of the CRISPR double nickase technology9. We first designed two gRNAs flanking the mutation site using the MIT Optimized CRISPR Design software and a 90 pb donor single-stranded oligonucleotide (ssODN, Integrated DNA Technologies) carrying the WT or mutant sequence which contains a SalI restriction site. Several silent mutations were introduced in the ssODN in order to prevent re-cutting by CRISPR-Cas9dn. Each gRNA (Supplemental Table 1) was cloned in the PX462 V2.0 vector (pSpCas9nBB-2A-Puro V2.0, a gift from Feng Zhang; Addgene plasmid #62987) as described previously10. Correct insertion of the gRNA was verified by Sanger Sequencing using a U6 primer (Supplemental Table 2). The pair of gRNA was first tested in HEK293 cells. The two PX462 vectors were transfected using Lipofectamine 3000 (#L3000008, Life Technologies) and occurrence of Indels was detected using the Surveyor Assay (Transgenomic, #706025) as described previously10. Next, 2-3 million NS RAF1 iPSCs were electroporated (Neon Transfection System, Life Technologies, 1,400 Volts, 1 pulse, 20 ms) with 2.5 µg of each PX462 vector concomitantly with 3 µL of 100 µM ssODN. After 24 hours, the medium was changed, and an antibiotic selection was performed for 48 hours with 0.5µg/ml puromycin. iPSCs were further cultured for 3-4 days in mTeSR1 medium, were next passaged with Accutase (Millipore, #SCR005) and reseeded at low density (20-30,00 cells) in mTeSR1 containing 10 µM Y27632 onto 10 cm Matrigel-coated plates. Medium was changed every day, and 10-15 days later, single clones were manually picked and replated on two 96-well plates. After 3-4 days of expansion in mTeSR1 medium, DNA was extracted using QuickExtract DNA Extraction Solution (Epicentre, #QE09050). To screen individual clones for correction or introduction, we performed a Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (RFLP). To screen for correction, introduction or occurrence of Indels, a 402 bp DNA region around the mutation site was PCR amplified with specific primers (Supplemental Table 2). The purified PCR products (Qiagen, QIAquick PCR purification kit #28104) were next digested overnight at 37°C with SalI restriction enzyme. The digested PCR products were electrophoresed on 2% agarose gels and clones with a single PCR product were sent for Sanger sequencing (GENEWIZ). We selected several unmodified clones, clones with the mutation corrected or introduced (resulting from homology-directed repair, HDR) but also clones containing Indels resulting from non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) to generate knockout RAF1 iPSC lines.

Cardiomyocyte differentiation was induced as previously reported with minor modifications11. Briefly, iPSC lines were detached using Accutase and seeded as single cells in mTeSR1 medium containing 10 µM Y27632 onto Matrigel-coated plates (1 million/60mm plate or 2 million/100mm plate) and cultured for 3-4 days in mTeSR1 until they reached 90% confluency. To induce cardiac differentiation of iPSCs (Day 0), the medium was changed with RPMI (RPMI-1640 #11875085, Life Technologies) containing 6µM CHIR99021 (Stem Cell Technologies, #72052) for 24 hours. On Day 1, medium was changed to RPMI +B27 minus insulin (B27 without insulin #A1895601, Life Technologies) for 2 days. On Day 3, the culture medium was subsequently replaced with RPMI+B27 minus insulin containing 2 µM Wnt-C59 (Selleckchem, #S7037) for 2 days. From Day 5 to Day 7, the culture medium was replaced with RPMI+B27 minus insulin. On Day 7, the medium was changed with RPMI+B27 supplement containing insulin (Life Technologies, #17504044) for 2 days. Culture medium was refreshed every 2 days with similar medium.

We purified our cultures by performing a DL-Lactate supplementation. Briefly, at Day 12-15, the medium was changed to RPMI without glucose (Life Technologies, #11879020) containing 5 mM sodium DL-Lactate (Sigma, #4263), 213 µg/mL L-ascorbic acid (Sigma, #A4403) and 500µg/mL human albumin (Sigma, #A9731). Medium was changed every 2 days and after 4 days of DL-Lactate supplementation, the beating cardiomyocytes were thereafter maintained in RPMI+B27 supplement or RPMI+10% FBS. Hence, we were able to obtain highly pure cardiomyocyte cultures, with more than 90% cardiomyocytes at day 20.

At Day 20, 60mm or 10 cm dish iCMs cultures were incubated with 1-2 mL trypsin-EDTA (ThermoFisher Scientific, #25200056) for 5 min at 37°C. To individualize iCMs, cells were pipetted 10 times using a 1 mL pipette tip and transferred onto 1 mL RPMI supplemented with 20% FCS. iCMs were counted and reseeded on 0.1% gelatin-coated plates. For Western blot analysis and RNA extraction, 750,000 to 1 million cells were plated in each well of a 6-well plate. For immunofluorescence imaging, 40,000 iCMs were plated onto 60mm glass bottom dishes (MatTek, #P35G-1.5-14-C).

Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Pierce, #88668) for 10 min on ice. Lysates were collected and cleared by centrifugation at 12,000g for 10 min at 4°C. Protein concentration was determined using the BCA protein assay kit (Pierce, #23227). Samples containing 10-50 µg of protein were separated by SDS-PAGE (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bolt 10% Bis-Tris Plus mini-gels, #NW00100BOX) and transferred to PVDF membranes (Millipore, #IPVH00010). Membranes were blocked with 5% milk or 5% BSA in TBS-Tween 20 for 1 hour at room temperature and probed with primary antibodies overnight at 4°C. Adequate secondary HRP antibodies were incubated at room temperature for 1 hour. A detail list of primary antibodies used in this study for Western Blot is available in Supplemental Table 3. Western blot images were analyzed using the AlphaView software (Cell Biosciences).

The experiments were not randomized, and no statistical method was used to predetermine sample size. The investigators were not blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment. Data were expressed as mean ± SEM. All experiments are average of at least three independent experiments, and for cell number, surface area or organized myofibrils calculation in immunostaining assays, 200-300 cells per sample were counted for each independent experiment. Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 7.01 software. An unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test was used to calculate significant differences between two groups. When comparing more than two groups, one-way ANOVA was used, followed by Tukey’s Post Hoc HSD test. A p-value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant. For RT-qPCR data, an unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test was used to calculate significant ΔCt differences between two groups.

A detailed Materials and Methods section is available in the Supplemental Expanded Materials and Methods.

NS-associated RAF1 mutations have a high frequency of HCM. We recently identified a female pediatric patient diagnosed with NS and carrying the RAF1S257L/+ mutation (c.770C>T). The pregnancy was complicated with development of polyhydramnion and fetal arrhythmia. The NS patient was born after 36 weeks of gestation by caesarean section without complication. Some minor abnormalities, such as medial epicanthus, low-set ears, deep hair line, right sided ptosis, and lateralized mammilla, were noticeable at birth and during the postnatal follow-up (Fig.1A). Immediately after birth, the electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed atrial arrhythmias (Supplemental Figure 1A), which required treatment with atenolol. Echocardiogram confirmed a biventricular obstructive HCM, but genetic testing was not performed at that time. However, septal hypertrophy worsened within the next year, resulting in obstruction of the left ventricular outflow tract (Supplemental Table 4).

At age 5 1/2 years, a cardiac catheterization examination revealed cardiac hypertrophy with left-ventricular intracavity pressure gradient of 70 mmHg, prompting an immediate transaortic septal myectomy. Histological analyses of the myectomized cardiac tissue showed severe perivascular and endocardial fibrosis, endothelial thickening, and focal accumulation of lymphocytes and granulocytes, primarily in endocardium (arrows) (Supplemental Figure 1B.1–4). Moderate variations in cardiomyocyte size and enlarged nuclei were also apparent, though expression of desmin, a marker for sarcomeric architecture, appeared normal (Supplemental Figure 1B.5–7). Finally, electron microscopy (EM) demonstrated perinuclear mitochondrial aggregates with autophagic vacuoles containing myelin-like bodies (Supplemental Figure 1B.8).

At 8 years of age, the patient suffered an afebrile seizure. At that time, short stature was noticed (height 114cm, 3cm < third percentile), but no lentigines or other cutaneous symptoms were apparent. NS was therefore suspected due to the conjunction of her craniofacial features (Fig.1A), her short stature, and the obstructive HCM. Genetic testing revealed a S257L/+ point mutation located in exon 7 of RAF1 (RAF1S257L/+).

At her last follow-up, at age 16, the patient’s cardiac status was stable, as demonstrated by MRI (Supplemental Figure 1C). Her height was 146 cm (5cm < third percentile). The status of this patient’s HCM was considered non-progressive, and at this stage, did not limit daily-life activities.

To study the molecular consequences of this patient’s RAF1 mutation in human cardiomyocytes, we generated footprint-free iPSCs by electroporating four episomal vectors expressing OCT¾, LIN28, SOX2, KLF4 and L-MYC into the above-mentioned NS-associated RAF1S257L/+ patient’s dermal fibroblasts (Fig.1B). We confirmed pluripotency of the iPSC lines by immunofluorescence (Fig.1B) and mRNA expression of pluripotent markers (Supplemental Figure 2A).

Lack of genetically matched, non-diseased controls renders interpretation of observed phenotypes in iPSCs difficult to attribute only to the disease-causing mutations. Moreover, different genetic backgrounds between various iPSC lines can confound interpretation of the data. To overcome these issues, and to specifically focus on the consequences of the NS-associated RAF1 mutation, we corrected the iPSC-derived RAF1S257L/+ mutant cells using CRISPR-Cas9 double nickase technology (CRISPR-Cas9dn) to generate an isogenic control line (Fig.1C–D and Supplemental Figure 2B). CRISPR-Cas9dn allows for specific targeting of a genomic locus and, unlike Cas9, generates extremely low off-target events9. Using HEK293 cells, we tested a pair of 20 nucleotide-long guide ribonucleic acids (gRNAs) specific to the targeted region and flanking the mutated site (Supplemental Figure 2C); we observed insertions/deletions (Indels) only in the cells transfected with both gRNAs (Supplemental Figure 2D). We next electroporated the RAF1S257L/+ iPSCs with both the gRNAs and the ssODN repair template (Supplemental Figure 2C). After puromycin selection and restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP)-based screening (Supplemental Figure 2E), we obtained several corrected clones (RAF1corr/+), as demonstrated by Sanger sequencing (Fig.1C). The mRNA and protein levels of RAF1 remained unchanged between parental mutant and corrected isogenic iPSC lines (Fig.1E–G).

In addition, we also leveraged CRISPR-Cas9dn to generate an isogenic RAF1 knock-out line (RAF1−/−) (Fig. 1D). To do this, we selected clones with various genomic Indels near the mutated site and analyzed the RAF1 mRNA and protein expression levels in each clone. Several of our selected clones displayed reduced RAF1 mRNA (Fig.1E) and complete ablation of RAF1 protein (Fig.1F–G), demonstrating that some targeted site deletions lead to mRNA instability, and therefore, RAF1−/− isogenic iPSC lines. Pluripotency and chromosomal integrity of the RAF1corr/+ or RAF1−/− iPSC lines were not impaired, as demonstrated by immunofluorescence and karyotyping analyses, respectively (Fig. 1D and Supplemental Figure 2F).

To study the molecular mechanisms underlying HCM in RAF1S257L/+ patients, we differentiated isogenic iPSC lines into beating cardiomyocytes (iCMs) using small molecules that modulate GSK3 and Wnt-β-catenin pathways, as previously described11 (See Supplemental Video 1). After supplementation of the cultures with DL-lactate, we obtained a highly pure population of iCMs (>90%) from all three genotypes (RAF1S257L/+, RAF1corr/+, RAF1−/−) (Supplemental Figure 3). Because the ERK1/2 pathway plays a central role in the proliferation of cardiomyocytes12, we next assessed the proliferation rate of RAF1corr/+ , RAF1S257L/+ and RAF1−/− iCMs by measuring the number of Ki67 positive (Ki67+) iCMs. Interestingly, proliferation rates of mutant and isogenic control iCMs were comparable (Fig.2A–B). However, deletion of RAF1 reduced iCMs proliferation by 30% (Fig.2B), suggesting RAF1 may be necessary for cardiomyocyte proliferation, but that its increased kinase activity does not potentiate this process.

To determine whether RAF1S257L/+ triggers cell-autonomous cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, we measured cell surface area of individual iCMs. RAF1S257L/+ iCMs exhibited a significant increase in cell surface area (+170%), as compared to RAF1corr/+ cells (Fig. 2C–D and Supplemental Figure 4A–B). In contrast, genetic deletion of RAF1 did not influence iCM cell surface area (Fig.2C-D). Next, we investigated the sarcomeric organization of mutant iCMs using ACTN2 immunofluorescence staining as a marker for sarcomeric integrity. While a high number of RAF1corr/+ and RAF1−/− iCMs showed well‐organized striated myofibrils, with a typical pattern of cross-striations that correspond to the Z bands of sarcomeres (Fig.2E–F), the RAF1S257L/+ mutant iCMs displayed significant myofibrillar disarray (Fig.2E–F and Supplemental Figure 4C), a typical characteristic of pathophysiology observed in NS patients with HCM13. Moreover, a large number of mutant iCMs showed disorganized α-actinin fibers, with evidence of punctate sarcomeric α-actinin distribution, as well as narrowing and elongation of sarcomeres, as shown by confocal microscopy in cells stained for TNNT2 (Fig.2G and Supplemental Figure 4D) or ACTN2 (Supplemental Figure 4E). Despite this difference in myofibrillar structure, expression of the sarcomeric protein ACTN2 was similar between corrected and RAF1 mutant iCMs (Supplemental Figure 4F–G).

Validation of these findings were made in a second, unrelated iPSC line derived from a healthy pediatric patient, where we used CRISPR-Cas9dn to introduce the RAF1 S257L heterozygous mutation into iPSCs derived from a healthy pediatric individual (RAF1S257LIntr./+) (Supplemental Figure 5A–D). Here, we similarly observed enlarged cardiomyocyte cell size (Supplemental Figure 5E–F) and an increased myofiber disarray (Supplemental Figure 5G–H) compared to the isogenic control (RAF1+/+) iCMs. These data confirm that RAF1S257L/+ alone is sufficient to induce the NS-associated features of HCM. Interestingly, the extent to which the mutation induced cell size and myofibrillar disarray was different between the two mutant iPSC lines; the HCM phenotype observed in RAF1S257LIntr./+ iCMs was less pronounced compared to NS patient RAF1S257L/+ iCMs, suggesting that there may be genetic modifiers that contribute to the severity of the disease and that, consequently, using patient-derived iCMs with a monogenic mutation might constitute a better model for studying disease than introducing the mutation in an unrelated iPSC line.

We next assayed the contractility at Day 30 of the mutant iCMs. RAF1S257L/+ iCMs had normal amplitude, time to peak, and contraction duration (Supplemental Figure 6A–E), but had decreased beating rate and impaired relaxation time (Supplemental Figure 6A–B, S6F–G and Supplemental Videos 2–3). These data are indicative of a defect in diastolic relaxation, results that are similarly observed in NS patients with HCM14. Together, these data suggest that the impaired contractility, at least in part, may contribute to the hypertrophic phenotype in RAF1S257L/+ iCMs.

Dephosphorylation of the RAF1 Ser259 residue is required for initiation of RAF1 activation. In an ectopic overexpression system, the S257L RAF1 mutation drastically reduced Ser259 phosphorylation by preventing RAF1 binding to 14-3-3, causing RAF1 to preferentially adapt an open and active conformation15. Here, we found that Ser259 phosphorylation was significantly attenuated in RAF1S257L/+ iCMs (Fig.3A–B). In contrast, Ser338, which is phosphorylated by p21 activated kinase 1 (PAK1), was hyper-phosphorylated in mutant iCMs (Fig.3A–B), suggesting that access to Ser338 is facilitated by the more open conformation of the RAF1 mutant. RAF1 protein expression was similar between RAF1S257L/+ and RAF1corr/+ iCMs (Fig.3A–B).

In addition, activation of MEK1/2, the only known downstream target of RAF1 and a direct readout of RAF1 kinase activity, was strongly increased in RAF1S257L/+ iCMs (5 fold over control levels), as compared to isogenic corrected control iCMs (Fig.3C–D and Supplemental Figure 7A). Activity of ERK1/2 also increased in RAF1S257L/+ iCMs, but to a more modest extent (1.8 fold over control level) (Fig.3E–F and Supplemental Figure 7B). Similarly, MEK1/2 activity was increased in RAF1S257LIntr./+ iCMs, as compared to isogenic control cells (Supplemental Figure 6I-J). However, unlike in RAF1S257L/+ iCMs, we did not observe a significant increase in ERK1/2 activity in RAF1S257LIntr./+ iCMs, suggesting that, as mentioned previously, introducing a mutation in unrelated iPSC lines may not allow the full recapitulation of the molecular mechanisms underlying a monogenic disease.

Interestingly, complete ablation of RAF1 did not reduce the baseline activity of either MEK1/2 or ERK1/2 in RAF1−/− iCMs (Fig.3C–F), suggesting that RAF1 may be dispensable for activation of ERK1/2 in these iCMs. Although not statistically significant, MEK1/2 phosphorylation was slightly increased in RAF1−/− iCMs; this is well in line with findings from a previous study that found increased MEK1/2 activity in RAF1 KO mouse embryonic fibroblasts was mediated by increased BRAF activity16. Therefore, we next measured BRAF protein levels in our iCMs; we similarly found that BRAF protein expression was slightly increased in the KO iCMs (but not in the RAF1S257L/+ iCMs), as compared to isogenic control iCMs (Supplemental Figure 7C–D). It is likely that deletion of RAF1 triggers a feedback mechanism that induces BRAF expression in an effort to maintain sufficient levels of ERK1/2 activity, and to allow for cell survival.

Because of the discrepancy in levels of activation between MEK1/2 and ERK1/2 in RAF1S257L/+ iCMs, we hypothesized that a feedback loop may also be induced to regulate the hyperactivity of the pathway. Indeed, we found that protein expression levels of MAPK phosphatase 3 (MKP3), a phosphatase known to specifically target hyper-phosphorylated ERK1/2, was induced in RAF1S257L/+ iCMs, as compared to RAF1corr/+ or RAF1−/− iCMs (5 fold over control or KO levels) (Fig.3E–G and Supplemental Figure 7E).

To test whether activation of ERK1/2 is responsible for the mutant iCM hypertrophy and structural defects, we treated RAF1S257L/+ iCMs with three different MEK1/2 inhibitors (U0126, PD98059 and Trametinib) for 48 hours. As expected, all three inhibitors dramatically reduced ERK1/2 phosphorylation in mutant iCMs (Fig.4A–B and Supplemental Figure 7F). Interestingly, pharmacological suppression of ERK1/2 activity, through inhibition of MEK1/2 activity, led to significantly increased MEK1/2 phosphorylation, likely due to the abrogation of activated ERK1/2-dependent negative feedback mechanisms regulating RAS and RAF activities (Fig.4A–B and Supplemental Figure 7F), as previously shown17. Similar results were found in RAF1corr/+ (Supplemental Figure 8A–B) and isogenic control RAF1+/+ iCMs, indicating that increased MEK1/2 phosphorylation is a direct result of ERK1/2 inhibition specifically, and not a consequence of the NS-associated RAF1 mutation in iCMs. Strikingly, treatment of RAF1S257L/+ iCMs with U0126 or Trametinib also reduced MEK1/2 protein levels, in addition to inhibiting downstream signaling in RAF1S257L/+ (Fig.4A–B), RAF1corr/+ (Supplemental Figure 8A–B) and RAF1+/+ (Supplemental Figure 8C) iCMs. This is likely due to inhibitor-mediated (not mutation-mediated) protein degradation, as MEK1/2 mRNA levels were similar, both in the presence or absence of inhibitor, and in the presence or absence of the NS mutation (Supplemental Figure 8D). Importantly, despite reducing phosphorylation of ERK1/2, MEK1/2 inhibitors did not elicit cell death in mutant cardiomyocytes (Supplemental Figure 9).

Importantly, although ERK1/2 activation was strongly reduced, there was no significant effect on hypertrophy in RAF1S257L/+ iCMs in response to treatment with either PD98059 or Trametinib (Fig.4C–D), suggesting that MEK1/2-ERK1/2 activation is not the principal driver of hypertrophy in NS-associated RAF1 mutations. Remarkably, however, inhibition of RAF1S257L/+ iCMs by these inhibitors, resolved the myofibrillar disarray (Fig.4E–F), suggesting that proper regulation of MEK1/2 and/or ERK1/2 signaling is required to maintain the structural integrity of cardiomyocytes. Surprisingly, treatment of RAF1S257L/+ iCMs with U0126 did, in fact, significantly reduce cell surface area (Fig.4C–D), without having any effect on myofibrillar disarray (Fig 4E–F). These data suggest that this inhibitor likely has an additional, MEK1/2-ERK1/2-independent, target required to modulate hypertrophy in RAF1 mutant iCMs.

PD98059 and Trametinib block RAF-dependent activation of MEK1/2, whereas U0126 blocks direct activation of ERK1/2 by MEK1/218,19. Therefore, to delineate the contribution of MEK1/2 and/or ERK1/2 on the HCM phenotype, we sought to directly suppress ERK1/2 activity, through overexpression of MKP3 in RAF1S257L/+ iCMs. Using a GFP-expressing adenovirus, we tested the optimal MOI required to infect the majority of mutant iCMs. We found that >90% RAF1S257L/+ iCMs were GFP+ and overexpressed MKP3 when infected with Ad-GFP or Ad-MKP3, respectively, at MOI 20 (Supplemental Figure 10A–B). As expected, overexpression of MKP3 in RAF1S257L/+ iCMs strongly reduced phosphorylation of ERK1/2, as compared to cells with GFP expression alone (Fig.5A–B). Importantly, like the MEK1/2 inhibitors PD98059 and Trametinib, targeted inhibition of ERK1/2 activity with Ad-MKP3 did not reduce the increased cell surface area of RAF1S257L/+ iCMs (Fig.5C–D). However, unlike these inhibitors, Ad-MKP3 had no effect on myofiber disarray (Fig.5E–F), suggesting that the myofiber abnormalities in the RAF1S257L/+ mutant iCMs are mediated by MEK1/2, and not ERK1/2, hyperactivity.

To identify the most likely targets for the hypertrophic phenotype in our RAF1 mutant iCMs, we systematically analyzed several signaling pathways previously suggested to be causal to hypertrophy in response to elevated RAF1 activity. Cyclosporin A, a calcineurin inhibitor, has previously been proposed to prevent hypertrophy in rodent cardiomyocytes with ectopic overexpression of various RAF1 mutants20. However, here, we did not observe significant reduction of hypertrophy in RAF1S257L/+ iCMs following treatment with cyclosporin A (10 μM, 48 hours) (Supplemental Figure 11A–B), despite an observed overall decreased activity in calcineurin in response to the inhibitor (Supplemental Figure 11C). In addition, while baseline NFAT transcriptional activity was increased in the RAF1S257L/+ iCMs, as compared to the RAF1corr/+ iCMs (Supplemental Figure 11D), treatment with cyclosporin A had no effect on this baseline activity in either the RAF1corr/+ or the RAF1S257L/+ iCMs. Interestingly, cyclosporin A reduced NFAT activity in RAF1corr/+ and RAF1S257L/+ iCMs, but only in response to induced calcineurin activity by phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) and ionomycin (Supplemental Figure 11D). Indeed, similar results on NFAT activity has been previously reported in neonatal rat cardiomyocytes overexpressing MEK1 or constitutively active RAF120,21. Taken together, our data demonstrate that activation of the calcineurin-NFAT pathway does not drive hypertrophy in RAF1 mutant cardiomyocytes.

Because the AKT/mTOR pathway has also been previously implicated in RASopathy-associated hypertrophy22, we next asked whether the activation of this pathway could trigger hypertrophy in RAF1S257L/+ iCMs. Activation of AKT or its downstream effectors, PRAS40 and GSK3, were unchanged in mutant cells, as compared to controls (Supplemental Figure 12A–D). Similarly, activation of mTOR (Supplemental Figure 12A–B) and its downstream targets, ribosomal S6 (Supplemental Figure 12A–B) or EiF4E (Supplemental Figure 12E–F), were not modified by expression of the RAF1S257L/+ mutation in iCMs.

Finally, we also did not observe changes in activation of p38 or JNK MAPK signaling (Supplemental Figure 12G–J). Taken together, our data indicate that hypertrophy of RAF1S257L/+ iCMs is not mediated by an increase in AKT/mTOR, p38 or JNK signaling pathways.

Although U0126 is primarily defined as a MEK1/2 inhibitor19, several reports have demonstrated that, even at low doses (and contrary to PD98059 and Trametinib), U0126 also inhibits MEK5/ERK5 signaling by targeting MEK5 activity23, suggesting that inhibition of MEK5/ERK5 could underlie the unexpected capacity of U0126 to reduce RAF1S257L/+ iCM surface area. To test whether activation of the MEK5/ERK5 pathway might be responsible for the hypertrophic phenotype in RAF1S257L/+ iCMs, we specifically inhibited this pathway with BIX02189, a highly potent and specific inhibitor of both MEK5 (IC50=1.5 nM) and ERK5 (IC50=59 nM), but which has no affinity to RAF1, ERK1/2 or MEK1/2, even at high concentrations (>100 μM)24. We found that treatment of RAF1S257L/+ iCMs with BIX02189 significantly reduced cell surface area (Fig.6A–B), indicating that the MEK5/ERK5 signaling pathway may be responsible for the hypertrophy in RAF1 mutant iCMs. Interestingly, BIX02189 did not affect RAF1corr/+ iCM size (Fig.6A–B), indicating that MEK5/ERK5 signaling is not required for normal cardiomyocyte homeostasis. At the structural level, and like U0126, inhibition of the MEK5/ERK5 pathway did not ameliorate myofibrillar disarray (Fig.6C–D). Treatment with both BIX02189 and PD98059 did, however, improve the RAF1S257L/+ iCMs structure (Fig.6C–D) to levels similar to those of PD98059 treatment alone, suggesting that the effects of either inhibitor is not additive, but rather, specific to its targeted signaling pathway.

To further validate these results, we expressed a dominant negative ERK5 (ERK5dn) by transducing RAF1S257L/+ iCMs with Ad-ERK5dn (Supplemental Figure 13A) and found that it reduced cardiac cell size (Supplemental Figure 13B–C) but did not improve myofibrillar structure (Supplemental Figure 13D–E), confirming that the RAF1S257L/+ mutation elicits hypertrophy specifically through activation of the ERK5 signaling pathway.

MEK5 and ERK5 were not previously thought to be targets of RAF1 kinase activity25. Accordingly, neither differences in phosphorylation of ERK5 at the TEY site (Thr218/Tyr220), nor variations in the overall electrophoretic mobility (phosphorylation shift) of ERK5, was observed between RAF1S257L/+ and RAF1corr/+ iCMs (Supplemental Figure 13F–G). However, because ERK5 activity, defined by its capacity to activate downstream effectors, does not always correlate with its kinase activity or its phosphorylation status26, we also measured MEF2 transcriptional activity, a major downstream target of MEK5/ERK5. In this regard, we found that MEF2 activity was significantly increased in RAF1S257L/+ iCMs and that inhibition of MEK5/ERK5 signaling with BIX02189 drastically reduced MEF2 activity (Fig.6E). We observed a similar increased in MEF2 activity in RAF1S257LIntr./+ iCMs (Supplemental Figure 5K). Interestingly, the PD98059 inhibitor led to a slight, but significant increase in MEF2 activity, suggesting that the MEK1/2-ERK1/2 pathway negatively regulates MEF2 activity in mutant iCMs (Fig.6E).

To determine the mechanism by which RAF1 modulates ERK5 signaling, we tested whether RAF1 might bind to and interact with ERK5 in iCMs. We performed a co-immunoprecipitation assay and found that RAF1 complexes with MEK1/2 and ERK5, with the same affinity, in both RAF1S257L/+ and RAF1corr/+ iCMs (Fig.6F). This observed RAF1 co-immunoprecipitation is specific, as we only observed the complex between RAF1 and ERK5 in RAF1S257L/+ iCMs, but not in RAF1−/− iCMs (Fig.6G). Because ERK5 can be differentially localized to either the cytosol or nucleus, we next investigated whether RAF1S257L/+ could influence ERK5 localization. We found that while ERK5 predominantly localized to the nucleus in both RAF1S257L/+ and RAF1corr/+ iCMs (Supplemental Figure 13H), its localization was significantly augmented in the mutant iCMs (Supplemental Figure 13H–I), suggesting that RAF1S257L/+ may increase ERK5 transcriptional activity by enhancing its nuclear translocation. Taken together, these data are the first to identify that aberrant regulation of the MEK5/ERK5 pathway leads to a hypertrophic phenotype in RAF1-associated NS.

Although several studies have uncovered abnormal signaling pathways in RASopathy disorders, little is known about the alterations of the cardiac transcriptome induced by NS mutations. Hence, to gain insights into the transcriptional alterations induced by the NS-associated RAF1S257L/+ mutation in human cardiomyocytes, we performed quantitative transcriptome profiling by RNA-sequencing, which revealed 150 differentially expressed genes (FDR < 0.05) in mutant versus isogenic RAF1corr/+ iCMs, of which 85 were upregulated and 65 were downregulated (Fig.7A and Supplemental Table 5). We validated these findings by reverse transcriptase quantitative PCR (qRT-qPCR) analysis of a subset of the top up- or down-regulated genes (Fig.7B–C).

Interestingly, the most upregulated gene in mutant iCMs was the recently uncovered lncRNA LOC100128252 or MORT27 (Fig.7A and Supplemental Table 5); its function remains elusive, but MORT expression has been shown to be epigenetically silenced in many human cancers, suggesting MORT mediates control of cellular proliferation27. Hence, increased expression of MORT in NS iCMs could be due to a negative feedback regulation of proliferation, mediated by the sustained activation of the MEK1/2-ERK1/2 signaling pathway in RAF1S257L/+ mutant cells. RNA-seq also revealed that HAND1, HEY2 and TBX20, three critical cardiac transcription factors crucial for cardiac development, were significantly downregulated in mutant iCMs (Fig.7A–B and Supplemental Table 5).

To determine the relationship between gene expression alteration and phenotypic change, we used gene ontology analysis to rank enriched biological processes in mutant iCMs. We found that RAF1S257L/+ disrupted expression of genes involved in ErbB receptor signaling (ERBB2/4, NRG1, AREG) (Fig.7D and Supplemental Table 5), an essential pathway critical for trabeculae formation during cardiac development28. In addition, genes involved in HCM or dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) were dysregulated as well, suggesting that transcriptional alteration in genes involved with sarcomeric structure, such as MYH7, TNNC1, ACTG1, TNNT2, TPM1 or MYBPC3 (Fig.7D and Supplemental Table 5), contribute to the abnormal myofibrillar phenotype of RAF1S257L/+ iCMs. Similarly, we also found strong enrichment of genes involved in regulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) homeostasis (COL8A1, MMPs, ADAMTS9), laminin interactions (LAMA2, NID2) or focal adhesion (THBS1, LAMA4) (Fig.7D and Supplemental Table 5), which may be involved in the hypertrophy phenotype of these cells.

We next identified the gene transcriptional profiles that were specifically affected by either MEK5-ERK5 or MEK1/2-ERK1/2 activation in RAF1S257L/+ iCMs. To do this, we examined genes whose expression was altered in mutant RAF1S257L/+ iCMs but normalized after either BIX02189 or PD98059 treatment. We found that among the 150 genes dysregulated in mutant cells, 15 were specifically altered by the ERK5 inhibitor, 14 of which became normalized to levels similar to that of control isogenic iCMs (Fig.7E and Supplemental Table 6). Specifically, BIX02189, which reduced RAF1S257L/+ iCM size, normalized the mRNA expression of several ECM genes, such as COL8A1, ADAMTS9, HAPLN1 or TINAGL1 (Fig.7F). In addition, expression of SMPX, a protein which localizes to the costameric cytoskeleton of muscle cells to regulate cytoskeletal dynamics29, was also normalized by BIX02189 (Fig.7F).

Surprisingly, the number of genes normalized specifically by the MEK1/2 inhibitor was more limited (Fig.7G and Supplemental Table 7). PD98059 reduced or normalized expression of genes known to regulate actin polymerization, such as DOCK11, a positive activator of CDC4230, and TMSB4X, one of the main intracellular actin sequestering factor31. These data suggest that activation of the MEK1/2-ERK1/2 pathway alters actin filament dynamics, likely accounting for the myofiber disarray phenotype observed in RAF1S257L/+ iCMs. Moreover, expression of CYR61, a ligand of integrin receptors32, was also normalized by PD98059 (Fig.7G and Supplemental Table 7). Hence, since integrin receptors connect the ECM to the sarcomere33, abnormal levels of CYR61 could also participate in development of myofibrillar disarray in the mutant iCMs.

Taken together, our data reveal that NS RAF1S257L/+ elicits HCM through aberrant activation of both MEK5-ERK5 and MEK1/2 pathways in human cardiomyocytes, driving hypertrophy and myofibrillar disarray respectively (Fig.7H). At the transcriptional level, we identified defined subsets of genes downstream of MEK1/2 or ERK5 involved in sarcomeric structure and extracellular matrix homeostasis that could contribute to the NS-associated HCM phenotype.

We generated iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes from an NS RAF1S257L/+ patient with HCM, as well as developed control lines using genome editing. Mutant iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes phenocopy the hypertrophic pathology (increased cell surface area, myofibrillar disarray) observed in human patients. Moreover, while MEK1/2 signaling is aberrant in RAF1S257L/+ iCMs, leading to abnormal organization of the sarcomere, it is the cell-autonomous activation of the MEK5-ERK5 pathway that elicits the cardiomyocyte hypertrophy in RAF1S257L/+-associated NS. In this regard, inhibition of MEK1/2, but not ERK1/2, reversed the sarcomeric disarray in these iCMs, while, conversely, inhibition of MEK5/ERK5 reversed the hypertrophic phenotype. Finally, using RNA-seq, we uncovered that mutant iCMs display altered expression of several genes essential for cardiac development, sarcomeric function and ECM homeostasis. Of these, we identified several ECM and cytoskeletal regulatory genes that were dysregulated by hyper-activation of ERK5, whereas genes involved in actin dynamic regulation were altered in response to hyper-activation of MEK1/2-ERK1/2 signaling.

Our study is the first to reveal that MEK5-ERK5 signaling is abnormally activated in NS-associated RAF1-mutations, suggesting its activation is a key driver for cardiomyocyte hypertrophy in these patients. These data are in agreement with previous studies, where aberrant ERK5-MEF2 activity induces cardiac hypertrophy34. Our study shows that RAF1S257L/+ iCMs have deregulated expression of ECM genes, which are normalized by BIX02189, a specific inhibitor of the MEK5-ERK5 pathway. These data suggest that increased expression of ECM and cytoskeletal network genes in RAF1 mutant iCMs may be causal to the increased cell size phenotype in RAF1S257L/+ NS.

RAF1S257L/+ does not increase ERK5 activity by phosphorylation of its TEY site of the kinase domain or other regions of ERK5 known to be important for kinase activity. Interestingly, it was previously suggested that RAF1 forms a complex with ERK5 in HEK293 cells35. Though RAF1 does not phosphorylate ERK5 directly, it is conceivable that RAF1 serves as a scaffold to stabilize ERK5 conformation and promote translocation to the nucleus, particularly since ERK5 retains its transcriptional activity even in its kinase-inactive form26. Exactly how NS-associated RAF1 mutations enhance ERK5 nuclear localization remains to be investigated.

Both RAF1 and ERK5 can localize to the nucleus36,37. RAF1 can translocate to the nucleus in response to growth factor stimulation36, but because it lacks a nuclear localization sequence (NLS), its mechanism of translocation remains unclear. Unlike RAF1, however, ERK5 does contain an NLS sequence, which is unmasked upon phosphorylation of its TEY site by MEK5 (prevented by BIX02189, U0126 or ERK5dn), allowing ERK5 auto-phosphorylation and translocation into the nucleus where it can induce gene transcription. In addition, it is also possible that ERK5 is a protein chaperone, allowing RAF1 to translocate to the cardiomyocyte nucleus, where GOF RAF1 might mediate hyper-phosphorylation of downstream nuclear targets that trigger transcriptional activation of hypertrophic genes.

Our data confirm that cyclosporin A efficiently inhibits calcineurin activity in iCMs (Fig S11C), but that calcineurin signaling is not the primary pathway driving the increased cell size in RAF1S257L/+ iCMs. Contrary to Dhandapany et al.20, our data show that calcineurin does not mediate hypertrophy in RAF1S257L/+ iCMs. In their experiments, Dhandapany et al. overexpressed RAF1 WT and RAF1 S257L in rat cardiomyocytes and used 3H leucine incorporation as a readout for cardiomyocyte hypertrophy; they did not directly report cell size or structural organization in RAF1 S257L overexpressed cells. Moreover, they reported similar increases in 3H leucine incorporation between RAF1 WT and RAF1 S257L overexpressed myocytes, and similar reduction in 3H leucine incorporation following cyclosporin A treatment between RAF1 WT and S257L cells, suggesting that cyclosporin A reduced increased translation/protein synthesis when RAF1 is overexpressed, independently of the RAF1 mutation. Indeed, cyclosporin A has been shown to alter protein synthesis in various organs including kidneys, heart or liver38.

Strikingly, while U0126, PD98059, Trametinib, and Ad-MKP3 all reduced ERK1/2 phosphorylation, only PD98059 and Trametinib rescued myofiber disarray in the RAF1S257L/+ iCMs. Although the inhibitors all bind MEK1/2, U0126 binds activated MEK1/2 specifically18,19, thereby inhibiting MEK1/2-dependent phosphorylation of ERK1/2. In contrast, PD98059 and Trametinib bind inactive MEK1/2, directly preventing MEK1/2 activation by RAF18,19. Hence, this suggests that hyper-activation of MEK1/2 underlies the myofibril disarray in RAF1S257L/+ iCMs, a possibility reinforced by the absence of structural improvement in the mutant iCMs by treatment with Ad-MKP3, which only targets phosphorylated ERK1/2. Moreover, all three inhibitors also reduced MEK1/2 expression in RAF1S257L/+ iCMs, suggesting additional regulatory mechanisms are required to modulate these signaling enzymes. Interestingly, ERK1/2 and MEK1/2 are known to associate directly with cytoskeletal molecules including actin fibers39, intermediate filaments40, tubulin microtubules41 as well as to localize in the sarcomere where MEK1/2-ERK1/2 can phosphorylate the N2B domain of titin42, suggesting that MEK1/2 activity, independent of ERK1/2, may regulate myofilament homeostasis at the transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels. Further studies are required to delineate these molecular mechanisms.

Besides HCM, NS RAF1 patients display other congenital heart defects (CHD)6. Our RNA-seq data suggest that CHD in NS could be caused by altered expression of genes central to cardiac development, such as HAND1, HEY2 or TBX20. Indeed, mice with targeted deletions of any one of these factors exhibited ASD or VSD43,44,45. Moreover, LOF mutations in HAND1, HEY2 or TBX20 are associated with severe septation defects in humans46,47,48. Interestingly, left ventricular non-compaction has been recently documented in NS patients49, which might be mediated, at least in part, by decreased expression of ERBB2 and ERBB428, as was observed in our RAF1S257L/+ iCMs. However, neither the inhibition of MEK5-ERK5 nor MEK1/2 rescued the aberrant downregulation of these cardiac developmental genes, suggesting that other, yet unknown, signaling pathways could control their expression in RAF1S257L/+ iCMs.

In conclusion, our iPSC-based disease modeling platform identifies that HCM in RAF1S257L/+ human iCMs is concomitantly driven by activation of both ERK5 and MEK1/2 signaling, to induce increased cell size and myofibrillar disarray, respectively (Fig.7H). Combining ERK5 and MEK1/2 inhibitors may better treat severe NS-associated RAF1S257L/+ HCM. Whether targeting MEK5/ERK5 could also prevent hypertrophy in patients with other HCM-associated diseases remains to be determined. Interestingly though, systemic injection of the MEK1/2 inhibitor PD0325901 in mice carrying a mutation in the CR3 domain of RAF1 (RAF1L613V/+ ) prevented HCM, suggesting that activation of the MEK1/2-ERK1/2 pathway underlies the phenotype8. Because PD0325901 also inhibits MEK5 activity50, we speculate that RAF1 mutations localized to the CR3 domain may also elicit hypertrophy via activation of MEK5/ERK5 signaling. Future work will delineate the nature of the RAF1 and ERK5 interaction and will decipher the exact function of MEK1/2 in the regulation of cardiomyocyte structural organization. We will also investigate whether effects of the RAF1S257L/+ mutation in non-cardiomyocyte cells of the heart, such as fibroblasts, endothelial or smooth muscle cells, contribute to the severity of the HCM in these patients.
