---
reference_id: "PMID:40132388"
title: "PIS as a regulator of cellular heterogeneity, prognostic significance, and immune landscape in thyroid cancer."
authors:
- Wu X
- Dai L
- Zhang W
- Le Q
- Xie Y
- Wang Y
journal: Transl Oncol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.tranon.2025.102296
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PIS as a regulator of cellular heterogeneity, prognostic significance, and immune landscape in thyroid cancer.
**Authors:** Wu X, Dai L, Zhang W, Le Q, Xie Y, Wang Y
**Journal:** Transl Oncol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tranon.2025.102296](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tranon.2025.102296)

## Content

1. Transl Oncol. 2025 May;55:102296. doi: 10.1016/j.tranon.2025.102296. Epub 2025
 Mar 24.

PIS as a regulator of cellular heterogeneity, prognostic significance, and
immune landscape in thyroid cancer.

Wu X(1), Dai L(1), Zhang W(1), Le Q(1), Xie Y(1), Wang Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Ningbo Second Hospital, Ningbo 315100, China.
(2)Ningbo Second Hospital, Ningbo 315100, China. Electronic address:
475145514@qq.com.

Thyroid cancer (THCA) is a common endocrine malignancy with diverse clinical
outcomes and tumor characteristics. In this study, we used single-cell RNA
sequencing (scRNA-seq) to explore the cellular makeup and gene expression
patterns of THCA. We identified distinct tumor subpopulations with varying
differentiation and immune evasion properties. Our analysis revealed how tumor
progression is influenced by dynamic gene expression changes over time. We also
observed differences in immune cell infiltration across tumor subpopulations,
with some showing immune-suppressive traits. A prognostic model, based on genes
from a specific tumor subpopulation (RGS5+), outperformed existing models in
predicting patient outcomes. Additionally, we found that high PIS (prognostic
immune score) was linked to genetic instability, including increased tumor
mutations and copy number variations. Key biological pathways associated with
different tumor subpopulations were also identified, suggesting potential
therapeutic targets. Finally, our analysis indicated that PIS could help predict
responses to immunotherapy, with higher scores correlating with poorer treatment
outcomes. Our findings highlight the complexity of THCA and emphasize the
importance of considering tumor heterogeneity in personalized treatment
strategies.

Copyright © 2025. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tranon.2025.102296
PMCID: PMC11985066
PMID: 40132388

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
manuscript.
