---
reference_id: "PMID:25456393"
title: "Lymph node metastases of melanoma: challenges for BRAF mutation detection."
authors:
- Chen G
- Dudley J
- Tseng LH
- Smith K
- Gurda GT
- Gocke CD
- Eshleman JR
- Lin MT
journal: Hum Pathol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.09.014
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Allelic Imbalance
- Biopsy
- Child
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- "Lymph Nodes/enzymology, pathology"
- Lymphatic Metastasis
- Male
- "Melanoma/enzymology, genetics, secondary"
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Prognosis
- Proto-Oncogene Mas
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- "Skin Neoplasms/enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lymph node metastases of melanoma: challenges for BRAF mutation detection.
**Authors:** Chen G, Dudley J, Tseng LH, Smith K, Gurda GT, Gocke CD, Eshleman JR, Lin MT
**Journal:** Hum Pathol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.humpath.2014.09.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humpath.2014.09.014)

## Content

1. Hum Pathol. 2015 Jan;46(1):113-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.09.014. Epub
2014  Oct 7.

Lymph node metastases of melanoma: challenges for BRAF mutation detection.

Chen G(1), Dudley J(2), Tseng LH(3), Smith K(4), Gurda GT(4), Gocke CD(5),
Eshleman JR(5), Lin MT(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, 21287 USA; Department of Pathology, Penn State Hershey Medical
Center, Hershey, PA, 17033 USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, 21287 USA; Departments of Pathology, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA, 02114 USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, 21287 USA; Department of Medical Genetics, National Taiwan
University Hospital, Taipei, 100, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, 21287 USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, 21287 USA; Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 21287 USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, 21287 USA. Electronic address: mlin36@jhmi.edu.

Detection of B-Raf proto-oncogene, serine/threonine kinase (BRAF) mutations is
required to predict response to BRAF or mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase
1 and 2 inhibitors in metastatic melanoma. Lymph node (LN) specimens carrying
melanoma cells intermingled with abundant lymphocytes often contain low tumor
cellularity. This study is aimed to examine challenges in the clinical detection
of BRAF mutations in LN specimens with metastatic melanoma and to illustrate
characteristic features of p.V600E and non-p.V600E mutations. In this
retrospective study for quality assessment of the pyrosequencing assay, we
compared characteristics of 53 LN and 135 non-LN formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded specimens with metastatic melanoma submitted for BRAF mutation
detection over a 40-month period. LN specimens showed a significantly higher
incidence of p.V600E mutations than non-LN specimens (49% versus 22%, P < .01)
but a significantly lower tumor cellularity, particularly in the case of
subcapsular or infiltrative metastases. Mutant allele-specific imbalance of the
p.V600E mutation was predominantly present in specimens with distant organ
metastases (79% versus 27% in LN metastases versus 13% in primary cutaneous
tumors or adjacent soft tissue, P < .001). p.V600K was detected in 23% of men
older than 60 years old, compared with 6% in women older than 60 years old and
2% in both men and women younger than 60 years old (P < .001). LN specimens with
low tumor cellularity due to numerous adjacent lymphocytes may pose a challenge
to clinical detection of BRAF mutations of melanoma. The higher incidence of
p.V600E mutations in LNs may prompt further studies to elucidate if the p.V600E
mutation in primary tumors is associated with a higher risk of LN metastasis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.09.014
PMID: 25456393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
