---
reference_id: "PMID:1873910"
title: Defective expression of alpha-L-fucosidase by lymphoid cells of a fucosidosis patient.
authors:
- DiCioccio RA
- Gordon BA
journal: Clin Biochem
year: '1991'
doi: 10.1016/0009-9120(91)80018-x
keywords:
- B-Lymphocytes/enzymology
- Cell Division
- Cell Line
- Fibroblasts/enzymology
- "Fucosidosis/enzymology, genetics"
- Glycoside Hydrolases/metabolism
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Methionine/metabolism
- Molecular Weight
- Precipitin Tests
- "alpha-L-Fucosidase/chemistry, deficiency, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defective expression of alpha-L-fucosidase by lymphoid cells of a fucosidosis patient.
**Authors:** DiCioccio RA, Gordon BA
**Journal:** Clin Biochem (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0009-9120(91)80018-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/0009-9120(91)80018-x)

## Content

1. Clin Biochem. 1991 Jun;24(3):265-70. doi: 10.1016/0009-9120(91)80018-x.

Defective expression of alpha-L-fucosidase by lymphoid cells of a fucosidosis
patient.

DiCioccio RA(1), Gordon BA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, Roswell Park Memorial Institute, Buffalo,
NY 14263.

Fucosidosis is an inherited lysosomal storage disease due to a deficiency of
alpha-L-fucosidase activity. Exponentially growing lymphoid cell cultures from a
fucosidosis patient (JH) had 16-fold lower extracellular alpha-L-fucosidase
protein and 72-fold lower intracellular alpha-L-fucosidase protein with
negligible catalytic activity as compared with the mean of 19 control cultures.
The percentage of total alpha-L-fucosidase protein released extracellularly by
JH cells was 71% as compared with 35% +/- 9% for control cells. During a 1.5 h
pulse with 35S-methionine, alpha-L-fucosidase was synthesized by JH cells as an
intracellular doublet with Mr of 58,000 and 56,000 and by control cells as an
intracellular form with Mr = 58,000. During a subsequent 21 h chase with
unlabeled methionine, JH alpha-L-fucosidase was entirely secreted. In contrast,
only 25%-30% of control enzyme was secreted with the remainder retained
intracellularly. Thus, JH lymphoid cells synthesized a reduced amount of
alpha-L-fucosidase that was catalytically inefficient and was hypersecreted.
Treatment of JH alpha-L-fucosidase with N-glycanase produced polypeptide chains
with Mr of 52,000 and 54,000. Previously, treatment of control
alpha-L-fucosidase with N-glycancase produced a single polypeptide chain with Mr
of 52,000 (Biochem Genet 1988; 26: 401-20). The doublet polypeptide chains of
alpha-L-fucosidase in JH cultures may represent expression of two distinct
allelic forms of mutant alpha-L-fucosidase.

DOI: 10.1016/0009-9120(91)80018-x
PMID: 1873910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
