---
reference_id: "PMID:39741883"
title: "Congenital hyperinsulinism in the Ukraine: a 10-year national study."
authors:
- Globa E
- Christesen HT
- Mortensen MB
- Houghton JAL
- Nielsen AL
- Detlefsen S
- Flanagan SE
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2024.1497579
keywords:
- Humans
- "Congenital Hyperinsulinism/genetics, epidemiology, surgery, diagnosis"
- Ukraine/epidemiology
- Female
- Male
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Infant
- Sulfonylurea Receptors/genetics
- "Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying/genetics"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Genetic Testing
- Child
- Registries
- Kcnj11 Channel
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital hyperinsulinism in the Ukraine: a 10-year national study.
**Authors:** Globa E, Christesen HT, Mortensen MB, Houghton JAL, Nielsen AL, Detlefsen S, Flanagan SE
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2024.1497579](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2024.1497579)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2024 Dec 17;15:1497579. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2024.1497579. eCollection 2024.

Congenital hyperinsulinism in the Ukraine: a 10-year national study.

Globa E(1), Christesen HT(2), Mortensen MB(3), Houghton JAL(4), Nielsen AL(5), 
Detlefsen S(6), Flanagan SE(7).

Author information:
(1)Ukrainian Scientific and Practical Center of Endocrine Surgery, 
Transplantation of Endocrine Organs and Tissues of MoH of Ukraine, Kyiv, 
Ukraine.
(2)Hans Christian Andersen Children's Hospital, Odense University Hospital, 
Odense, Denmark.
(3)Department of Surgery, Upper GI and HPB Section, Odense University Hospital, 
Odense, Denmark.
(4)The Genomics Laboratory, Royal Devon University Healthcare NHS Foundation 
Trust, Exeter, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark.
(6)Department of Pathology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark.
(7)Department of Clinical and Biomedical Science, University of Exeter Medical 
School, Exeter, United Kingdom.

INTRODUCTION: Congenital Hyperinsulinism (CHI) has not been previously studied 
in Ukraine. We therefore aimed to elucidate the genetics, clinical phenotype, 
histological subtype, treatment and long-term outcomes of Ukrainian patients 
with CHI.
METHODS: Forty-one patients with CHI were recruited to the Ukrainian national 
registry between the years 2014-2023. Genetic testing (n=40), 
18F-fluorodihydroxyphenylalanin and 68Ga-DOTANOC PET/CT imaging followed by 
surgical treatment and subsequent histological analysis (n=19) was performed 
through international collaboration.
RESULTS: Pathogenic variants were identified in 19/22 (86.3%) individuals with 
persistent CHI (p-CHI) and 8/18 (44.4%) with early remission CHI (er-CHI). 
Pathogenic variants in the K-ATP channel genes were the only identified genetic 
cause of p-CHI (ABCC8 (n=17) and KCNJ11 (n=2)) with greater genetic 
heterogeneity observed in those with er-CHI (ABCC8 (n=3), KMT2D (Kabuki 
Syndrome, n=1), Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (n=2) and INSR (Donohue syndrome 
(n=2)). Histological analysis performed on 19 children with persistent CHI 
confirmed focal disease in 14 (73.7%), diffuse disease in two (10.5%) and 
atypical histology in three (15.8%). After surgery, complete recovery was 
observed in all 14 with focal disease, while relapse occurred in three patients 
with diffuse or atypical histology.
CONCLUSION: A genetic diagnosis was achieved for 67.5% (27/40) of the cohort 
with a higher pick-up rate observed in those with p-CHI. The genetics and 
imaging studies enabled subtype-targeted treatment with surgical cure achieved 
in all individuals with focal disease.

Copyright © 2024 Globa, Christesen, Mortensen, Houghton, Nielsen, Detlefsen and 
Flanagan.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2024.1497579
PMCID: PMC11686448
PMID: 39741883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.