---
reference_id: "PMID:32614046"
title: "Online Social Cognition Training in Schizophrenia: A Double-Blind, Randomized, Controlled Multi-Site Clinical Trial."
authors:
- Nahum M
- Lee H
- Fisher M
- Green MF
- Hooker CI
- Ventura J
- Jordan JT
- Rose A
- Kim SJ
- Haut KM
- Merzenich MM
- Vinogradov S
journal: Schizophr Bull
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbaa085
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Online Social Cognition Training in Schizophrenia: A Double-Blind, Randomized, Controlled Multi-Site Clinical Trial.
**Authors:** Nahum M, Lee H, Fisher M, Green MF, Hooker CI, Ventura J, Jordan JT, Rose A, Kim SJ, Haut KM, Merzenich MM, Vinogradov S
**Journal:** Schizophr Bull (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/schbul/sbaa085](https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbaa085)

## Content

1. Schizophr Bull. 2021 Jan 23;47(1):108-117. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbaa085.

Online Social Cognition Training in Schizophrenia: A Double-Blind, Randomized, 
Controlled Multi-Site Clinical Trial.

Nahum M(1)(2), Lee H(2), Fisher M(3), Green MF(4)(5), Hooker CI(6), Ventura 
J(5), Jordan JT(7), Rose A(2), Kim SJ(2), Haut KM(6), Merzenich MM(2), 
Vinogradov S(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Occupational Therapy, Faculty of Medicine, Hebrew University, 
Jerusalem, Israel.
(2)Department of Research and Development, Posit Science Inc., San Francisco, 
CA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, MN.
(4)VA Greater Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA.
(6)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Rush University Medical 
Center, Chicago, IL.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, CA.

Social cognition (SC), the mental operations underlying social functioning, are 
impaired in schizophrenia. Their direct link to functional outcome and illness 
status have made them an important therapeutic target. However, no effective 
treatment for these deficits is currently applied as a standard of care. To 
address this need, we have developed SocialVille-an online, plasticity-based 
training program that targets SC deficits in schizophrenia. Here we report the 
outcomes of a double-blind, controlled, randomized, multi-site clinical trial of 
SocialVille. Outpatients with schizophrenia were randomized to complete 40 
sessions of either SocialVille (N = 55 completers) or active control (computer 
games; N = 53 completers) from home. The a priori co-primary outcome measures 
were a social cognitive composite and a functional capacity outcome (UCSD 
Performance-based Skills Assessment [UPSA-2]). Secondary outcomes included a 
virtual functional capacity measure (VRFCAT), social functioning, quality of 
life, and motivation. Linear mixed models revealed a group × time interaction 
favoring the treatment group for the social cognitive composite (b = 2.81; P < 
.001) but not for the UPSA-2 measure. Analysis of secondary outcome measures 
showed significant group × time effects favoring the treatment group on SC and 
social functioning, on the virtual functional capacity measure and a motivation 
subscale, although these latter findings were nonsignificant with FDR 
correction. These results provide support for the efficacy of a remote, 
plasticity-based social cognitive training program in improving SC and social 
functioning in schizophrenia. Such treatments may serve as a cost-effective 
adjunct to existing psychosocial treatments. Trial Registration: NCT02246426.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Maryland Psychiatric Research Center. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/schbul/sbaa085
PMCID: PMC7825077
PMID: 32614046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]