---
reference_id: "PMID:39027323"
title: Novel ocular observations in a child with Joubert syndrome type 6 due to pathogenic variant in TMEM67 gene.
authors:
- Elsayed MEA
- Ali SM
- Gardner C
- Kozak I
journal: Am J Ophthalmol Case Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajoc.2024.102091
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel ocular observations in a child with Joubert syndrome type 6 due to pathogenic variant in TMEM67 gene.
**Authors:** Elsayed MEA, Ali SM, Gardner C, Kozak I
**Journal:** Am J Ophthalmol Case Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajoc.2024.102091](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajoc.2024.102091)

## Content

1. Am J Ophthalmol Case Rep. 2024 Jun 14;36:102091. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajoc.2024.102091. eCollection 2024 Dec.

Novel ocular observations in a child with Joubert syndrome type 6 due to 
pathogenic variant in TMEM67 gene.

Elsayed MEA(1), Ali SM(2)(3)(4), Gardner C(5), Kozak I(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Oxford Eye Hospital, Oxford, UK.
(2)Moorfields Eye Hospitals UAE, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
(3)Danat Al Emarat Hospital, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
(4)Mohammed Bin Rashed University, Dubai, United Arab Emirates.
(5)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.

PURPOSE: To describe unique ocular features in a child with Joubert syndrome 
type 6.
OBSERVATIONS: A 4-year-old male patient presented with right microphthalmia and 
non-dilating pupil and left primary position nystagmus. Brain MRI revealed a 
"molar tooth sign" of the midbrain and a "batwing sign" of the fourth ventricle 
along with large retroorbital cysts bilaterally. The diagnosis of autosomal 
recessive Joubert syndrome type 6 due to homozygous pathogenic variant 
c.725A > G p. (Asn242Ser) in TMEM67 gene was confirmed by whole exome 
sequencing. Left eye had nystagmus and the left optic nerve and retina showed 
epipapillary and subretinal fibrosis, respectively. Scleral buckle was performed 
for left non-rhegmatogenous retinal detachment which then improved and has been 
stable.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPORTANCE: We present a rare case of JS with some unique 
ophthalmic features which expand clinical knowledge on this complex systemic and 
ocular entity.

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajoc.2024.102091
PMCID: PMC11253217
PMID: 39027323

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.