---
reference_id: "PMID:28543629"
title: "Epidemiology and Predisposing Factors for Erythema Toxicum Neonatorum and Transient Neonatal Pustular: A Multicenter Study."
authors:
- Reginatto FP
- Muller FM
- Peruzzo J
- Cestari TF
journal: Pediatr Dermatol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/pde.13179
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology and Predisposing Factors for Erythema Toxicum Neonatorum and Transient Neonatal Pustular: A Multicenter Study.
**Authors:** Reginatto FP, Muller FM, Peruzzo J, Cestari TF
**Journal:** Pediatr Dermatol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pde.13179](https://doi.org/10.1111/pde.13179)

## Content

1. Pediatr Dermatol. 2017 Jul;34(4):422-426. doi: 10.1111/pde.13179. Epub 2017
May  25.

Epidemiology and Predisposing Factors for Erythema Toxicum Neonatorum and 
Transient Neonatal Pustular: A Multicenter Study.

Reginatto FP(1), Muller FM(2), Peruzzo J(3), Cestari TF(3).

Author information:
(1)Programa de Pós Graduação em Saúde da Criança e Adolescente, Universidade 
Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Santa Casa de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, RS, 
Brazil.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Porto 
Alegre, RS, Brazil.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: Erythema toxicum neonatorum (ETN) and transient neonatal 
pustular melanosis (TNPM) are benign pustular skin conditions that are 
relatively common in newborns, but the predisposing factors for these conditions 
are unknown. Our goal was to verify the prevalence of ETN and TNPM and their 
predisposing factors in a large sample of neonates.
METHODS: In this prospective 1-year multicenter study, 2,831 neonates (age ≤72 
hours) born in southern Brazil were randomized to undergo skin examination by a 
dermatologist.
RESULTS: Most were Caucasian (of European descent). There were 602 cases of ETN 
(21.3% prevalence) and 97 cases of TNPM (3.4% prevalence). ETN was more 
prevalent in Caucasian neonates, male neonates, those with 1-minute Apgar scores 
from 8 to 10, those who had no gestational risk factors, and those not admitted 
to a neonatal intensive care unit (NICU). Positive correlations were observed 
between ETN and gestational age and birthweight. ETN was least frequent in the 
winter. No NICU admission or birth during the spring was associated with TNPM.
CONCLUSIONS: At least in the region where this study was conducted, seasonality 
affects these benign pustular skin conditions. The health of the child at birth, 
gestational age, and birthweight influenced the development of ETN. This finding 
may indicate a role of immune system maturity in ETN, but additional studies are 
needed to confirm this.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/pde.13179
PMID: 28543629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]