---
reference_id: "PMID:36352624"
title: "Complexities in Genetic Counseling and Testing of Huntington's Disease: A Perspective from India."
authors:
- Ratna N
- Pasupulati SL
- Nadella RK
- Purushottam M
- Jain S
journal: Neurol India
year: '2022'
doi: 10.4103/0028-3886.359184
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Complexities in Genetic Counseling and Testing of Huntington's Disease: A Perspective from India.
**Authors:** Ratna N, Pasupulati SL, Nadella RK, Purushottam M, Jain S
**Journal:** Neurol India (2022)
**DOI:** [10.4103/0028-3886.359184](https://doi.org/10.4103/0028-3886.359184)

## Content

1. Neurol India. 2022 Sep-Oct;70(5):2141-2144. doi: 10.4103/0028-3886.359184.

Complexities in Genetic Counseling and Testing of Huntington's Disease: A 
Perspective from India.

Ratna N(1), Pasupulati SL(2), Nadella RK(2), Purushottam M(2), Jain S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Molecular Genetics Laboratory, National 
Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences (NIMHANS), Bangalore, Karnataka, 
India.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Molecular Genetics Laboratory, National Institute 
of Mental Health and Neurosciences (NIMHANS), Bangalore, Karnataka, India.

BACKGROUND: Huntington's Disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant, progressive 
neuropsychiatric illness caused by CAG repeat expansion. The high penetrance of 
the mutation and limited treatment options make it challenging for patients and 
caretakers. Proper counseling enables families to cope better and make informed 
life choices.
OBJECTIVE: To explore some complex issues in genetic counseling and testing 
(GCAT) in HD.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Vignettes of patients who underwent genetic testing along 
with pre and post-test counseling at our GCAT clinic.
RESULTS: Case 1: Diagnosis of juvenile HD meant that the healthy parent was an 
obligate carrier of the mutation. Case 2: Consanguinity resulted in a dense 
prevalence of HD and >50% risk for the progeny. Case 3: Predictive testing in 
youth with healthy parents but affected uncles and aunts revealed a HD 
expansion.
CONCLUSIONS: HD can present with complex inheritance patterns and proper 
counseling is necessary for better outcomes.

DOI: 10.4103/0028-3886.359184
PMID: 36352624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None