---
reference_id: PMID:38894941
title: "Spinocerebellar ataxias: from pathogenesis to recent therapeutic advances."
authors:
- Cui ZT
- Mao ZT
- Yang R
- Li JJ
- Jia SS
- Zhao JL
- Zhong FT
- Yu P
- Dong M
journal: Front Neurosci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2024.1422442
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinocerebellar ataxias: from pathogenesis to recent therapeutic advances.
**Authors:** Cui ZT, Mao ZT, Yang R, Li JJ, Jia SS, Zhao JL, Zhong FT, Yu P, Dong M
**Journal:** Front Neurosci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnins.2024.1422442](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2024.1422442)

## Content

1. Front Neurosci. 2024 Jun 4;18:1422442. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2024.1422442. 
eCollection 2024.

Spinocerebellar ataxias: from pathogenesis to recent therapeutic advances.

Cui ZT(1), Mao ZT(2), Yang R(1), Li JJ(1), Jia SS(1), Zhao JL(1), Zhong FT(1), 
Yu P(3), Dong M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neuroscience Center, The First Hospital of Jilin 
University, Changchun, China.
(2)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, The First Hospital of Jilin 
University, Changchun, China.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, the Second Hospital of Jilin University, 
Changchun, China.

Spinocerebellar ataxia is a phenotypically and genetically heterogeneous group 
of autosomal dominant-inherited degenerative disorders. The gene mutation 
spectrum includes dynamic expansions, point mutations, duplications, insertions, 
and deletions of varying lengths. Dynamic expansion is the most common form of 
mutation. Mutations often result in indistinguishable clinical phenotypes, thus 
requiring validation using multiple genetic testing techniques. Depending on the 
type of mutation, the pathogenesis may involve proteotoxicity, RNA toxicity, or 
protein loss-of-function. All of which may disrupt a range of cellular 
processes, such as impaired protein quality control pathways, ion channel 
dysfunction, mitochondrial dysfunction, transcriptional dysregulation, DNA 
damage, loss of nuclear integrity, and ultimately, impairment of neuronal 
function and integrity which causes diseases. Many disease-modifying therapies, 
such as gene editing technology, RNA interference, antisense oligonucleotides, 
stem cell technology, and pharmacological therapies are currently under clinical 
trials. However, the development of curative approaches for genetic diseases 
remains a global challenge, beset by technical, ethical, and other challenges. 
Therefore, the study of the pathogenesis of spinocerebellar ataxia is of great 
importance for the sustained development of disease-modifying molecular 
therapies.

Copyright © 2024 Cui, Mao, Yang, Li, Jia, Zhao, Zhong, Yu and Dong.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2024.1422442
PMCID: PMC11185097
PMID: 38894941

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.