---
reference_id: "PMID:29019756"
title: Imaging of Skeletal Disorders Caused by Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor Gene Mutations.
authors:
- Sargar KM
- Singh AK
- Kao SC
journal: Radiographics
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1148/rg.2017170017
keywords:
- "Bone Diseases/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Child
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Mutation/genetics
- "Receptors, Fibroblast Growth Factor/genetics"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Imaging of Skeletal Disorders Caused by Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor Gene Mutations.
**Authors:** Sargar KM, Singh AK, Kao SC
**Journal:** Radiographics (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1148/rg.2017170017](https://doi.org/10.1148/rg.2017170017)

## Content

1. Radiographics. 2017 Oct;37(6):1813-1830. doi: 10.1148/rg.2017170017.

Imaging of Skeletal Disorders Caused by Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor Gene 
Mutations.

Sargar KM(1), Singh AK(1), Kao SC(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, 510 S Kingshighway Blvd, Campus Box 8131, St Louis, MO 63110 (K.M.S.); 
Department of Radiology, University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio, 
San Antonio, Tex (A.K.S.); and Department of Radiology, University of Iowa 
College of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa (S.C.K.).

Fibroblast growth factors and fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFRs) play 
important roles in human axial and craniofacial skeletal development. FGFR1, 
FGFR2, and FGFR3 are crucial for both chondrogenesis and osteogenesis. Mutations 
in the genes encoding FGFRs, types 1-3, are responsible for various skeletal 
dysplasias and craniosynostosis syndromes. Many of these disorders are 
relatively common in the pediatric population, and diagnosis is often 
challenging. These skeletal disorders can be classified based on which FGFR is 
affected. Skeletal disorders caused by type 1 mutations include Pfeiffer 
syndrome (PS) and osteoglophonic dysplasia, and disorders caused by type 2 
mutations include Crouzon syndrome (CS), Apert syndrome (AS), and PS. Disorders 
caused by type 3 mutations include achondroplasia, hypochondroplasia, 
thanatophoric dysplasia (TD), severe achondroplasia with developmental delay and 
acanthosis nigricans, Crouzonodermoskeletal syndrome, and Muenke syndrome. Most 
of these mutations are inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion and are 
gain-of-function-type mutations. Imaging plays a key role in the evaluation of 
these skeletal disorders. Knowledge of the characteristic imaging and clinical 
findings can help confirm the correct diagnosis and guide the appropriate 
molecular genetic tests. Some characteristics and clinical findings include 
premature fusion of cranial sutures and deviated broad thumbs and toes in PS; 
premature fusion of cranial sutures and syndactyly of the hands and feet in AS; 
craniosynostosis, ocular proptosis, and absence of hand and foot abnormalities 
in CS; rhizomelic limb shortening, caudal narrowing of the lumbar 
interpediculate distance, small and square iliac wings, and trident hands in 
achondroplasia; and micromelia, bowing of the femora, and platyspondyly in TD. 
©RSNA, 2017.

DOI: 10.1148/rg.2017170017
PMID: 29019756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]