---
reference_id: "PMID:31454018"
title: "Systemic Therapy for Locally Advanced and Metastatic Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer: A Review."
authors:
- Arbour KC
- Riely GJ
journal: JAMA
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1001/jama.2019.11058
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis"
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics, secondary"
- Cell Cycle Checkpoints
- "Genes, erbB-1"
- Humans
- Immunotherapy
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- Mutation
- "Programmed Cell Death 1 Receptor/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- Progression-Free Survival
- Survival Rate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systemic Therapy for Locally Advanced and Metastatic Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer: A Review.
**Authors:** Arbour KC, Riely GJ
**Journal:** JAMA (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.2019.11058](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2019.11058)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2019 Aug 27;322(8):764-774. doi: 10.1001/jama.2019.11058.

Systemic Therapy for Locally Advanced and Metastatic Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer:
A Review.

Arbour KC(1), Riely GJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Thoracic Oncology Service, Division of Solid Tumor, Department of Medicine,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York,
New York.

IMPORTANCE: Non-small cell lung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer death
in the United States. Until the last decade, the 5-year overall survival rate
for patients with metastatic non-small cell lung cancer was less than 5%.
Improved understanding of the biology of lung cancer has resulted in the
development of new biomarker-targeted therapies and led to improvements in
overall survival for patients with advanced or metastatic disease.
OBSERVATIONS: Systemic therapy for metastatic non-small cell lung cancer is
selected according to the presence of specific biomarkers. Therefore, all
patients with metastatic non-small cell lung cancer should undergo molecular
testing for relevant mutations and expression of the protein PD-L1 (programmed
death ligand 1). Molecular alterations that predict response to treatment (eg,
EGFR mutations, ALK rearrangements, ROS1 rearrangements, and BRAF V600E
mutations) are present in approximately 30% of patients with non-small cell lung
cancer. Targeted therapy for these alterations improves progression-free
survival compared with cytotoxic chemotherapy. For example, somatic activating
mutations in the EGFR gene are present in approximately 20% of patients with
advanced non-small cell lung cancer. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as
gefitinib, erlotinib, and afatinib improve progression-free survival in patients
with susceptible EGFR mutations. In patients with overexpression of ALK protein,
the response rate was significantly better with crizotinib (a tyrosine kinase
inhibitor) than with the combination of pemetrexed and either cisplatin or
carboplatin (platinum-based chemotherapy) (74% vs 45%, respectively; P < .001)
and progression-free survival (median, 10.9 months vs 7.0 months; P < .001).
Subsequent generations of tyrosine kinase inhibitors have improved these agents.
For patients without biomarkers indicating susceptibility to specific targeted
treatments, immune checkpoint inhibitor-containing regimens either as
monotherapy or in combination with chemotherapy are superior vs chemotherapy
alone. These advances in biomarker-directed therapy have led to improvements in
overall survival. For example, the 5-year overall survival rate currently
exceeds 25% among patients whose tumors have high PD-L1 expression (tumor
proportion score of ≥50%) and 40% among patients with ALK-positive tumors.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Improved understanding of the biology and molecular
subtypes of non-small cell lung cancer have led to more biomarker-directed
therapies for patients with metastatic disease. These biomarker-directed
therapies and newer empirical treatment regimens have improved overall survival
for patients with metastatic non-small cell lung cancer.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2019.11058
PMID: 31454018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
