---
reference_id: "PMID:37476682"
title: "Adolescence Onset Primary Coenzyme Q10 Deficiency With Rare CoQ8A Gene Mutation: A Case Report and Review of Literature."
authors:
- Hojabri M
- Gilani A
- Irilouzadian R
- Nejad Biglari H
- Sarmadian R
journal: Clin Med Insights Case Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1177/11795476231188061
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adolescence Onset Primary Coenzyme Q10 Deficiency With Rare CoQ8A Gene Mutation: A Case Report and Review of Literature.
**Authors:** Hojabri M, Gilani A, Irilouzadian R, Nejad Biglari H, Sarmadian R
**Journal:** Clin Med Insights Case Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1177/11795476231188061](https://doi.org/10.1177/11795476231188061)

## Content

1. Clin Med Insights Case Rep. 2023 Jul 18;16:11795476231188061. doi:
10.1177/11795476231188061. eCollection 2023.

Adolescence Onset Primary Coenzyme Q10 Deficiency With Rare CoQ8A Gene Mutation:
A Case Report and Review of Literature.

Hojabri M(1), Gilani A(2), Irilouzadian R(3), Nejad Biglari H(4), Sarmadian
R(5).

Author information:
(1)Student Research Committee, School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran.
(3)Burn Research Center, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Kerman University of Medical Sciences,
Kerman, Iran.
(5)Infectious Diseases Research Center, Arak University of Medical Sciences,
Arak, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Primary deficiency of coenzyme Q10 deficiency-4 (CoQ10D4) is a
heterogeneous disorder affecting different age groups. The main clinical
manifestation consists of cerebellar ataxia, exercise intolerance, and dystonia.
CASE REPORT: We provide a case of adolescence-onset ataxia, head tremor, and
proximal muscle weakness accompanied by psychiatric features and abnormal serum
urea (49.4 mg/dL), lactate (7.5 mmol/L), and CoQ10 level (0.4 µg/mL). Brain-MRI
demonstrated cerebellar atrophy, thinning of the corpus callosum, and loss of
white matter. Whole exome sequencing showed a homozygous missense mutation
(c.911C>T; p.A304V) in CoQ8A gene which is a rare mutation and responsible
variant of CoQ10D4. After supplementary treatment with CoQ10 50 mg/twice a day
for 2 months the clinical symptoms improved.
CONCLUSION: These observations highlight the significance of the early diagnosis
of potentially treatable CoQ8A mutation as well as patient education and
follow-up. Our findings widen the spectrum of CoQ8A phenotypic features so that
clinicians be familiar with the disease not only in severe childhood-onset
ataxia but also in adolescence with accompanying psychiatric problems.

© The Author(s) 2023.

DOI: 10.1177/11795476231188061
PMCID: PMC10354825
PMID: 37476682

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.
