---
reference_id: "PMID:33162734"
title: "Cannabis hyperemesis syndrome: an update on the pathophysiology and management."
authors:
- Perisetti A
- Gajendran M
- Dasari CS
- Bansal P
- Aziz M
- Inamdar S
- Tharian B
- Goyal H
journal: Ann Gastroenterol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.20524/aog.2020.0528
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cannabis hyperemesis syndrome: an update on the pathophysiology and management.
**Authors:** Perisetti A, Gajendran M, Dasari CS, Bansal P, Aziz M, Inamdar S, Tharian B, Goyal H
**Journal:** Ann Gastroenterol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.20524/aog.2020.0528](https://doi.org/10.20524/aog.2020.0528)

## Content

1. Ann Gastroenterol. 2020 Nov-Dec;33(6):571-578. doi: 10.20524/aog.2020.0528.
Epub  2020 Sep 16.

Cannabis hyperemesis syndrome: an update on the pathophysiology and management.

Perisetti A(1), Gajendran M(2), Dasari CS(3), Bansal P(4), Aziz M(5), Inamdar 
S(6), Tharian B(6), Goyal H(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR (Abhilash Perisetti).
(2)Paul L. Foster School of Medicine, Texas Tech University Health Sciences 
Center El Paso (Mahesh Gajendran).
(3)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Kansas City VA Medical Center 
(Chandra Shekhar Dasari).
(4)Division of Gastroenterology, Moses Taylor Hospital and Reginal Hospital of 
Scranton, Scranton, PA (Pardeep Bansal).
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, The University of Toledo, Toledo, OH 
(Muhammad Aziz).
(6)Endoscopy Fellowship, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little 
Rock, AR (Sumant Inamdar, Benjamin Tharian).
(7)The Wright Center for Graduate Medical Education, Scranton, PA (Hemant 
Goyal), USA.

Cannabis hyperemesis syndrome (CHS) is a form of functional gut-brain axis 
disorder characterized by bouts of episodic nausea and vomiting worsened by 
cannabis intake. It is considered as a variant of cyclical vomiting syndrome 
seen in cannabis users especially characterized by compulsive hot 
bathing/showers to relieve the symptoms. CHS was reported for the first time in 
2004, and since then, an increasing number of cases have been reported. With 
cannabis use increasing throughout the world as the threshold for legalization 
becomes lower, its user numbers are expected to rise over time. Despite this 
trend, a strict criterion for the diagnosis of CHS is lacking. Early recognition 
of CHS is essential to prevent complications related to severe volume depletion. 
The recent body of research recognizes that patients with CHS impose a burden on 
the healthcare systems. Understanding the pathophysiology of the endocannabinoid 
system (ECS) remains central in explaining the clinical features and potential 
drug targets for the treatment of CHS. The frequency and prevalence of CHS 
change in accordance with the doses of tetrahydrocannabinol and other 
cannabinoids in various formulations of cannabis. CHS is unique in presentation, 
because of the cannabis's biphasic effect as anti-emetic at low doses and 
pro-emetic at higher doses, and the association with pathological hot water 
bathing. In this narrative review, we elaborate on the role of the ECS, its 
management, and the identification of gaps in our current knowledge of CHS to 
further enhance its understanding in the future.

Copyright: © Hellenic Society of Gastroenterology.

DOI: 10.20524/aog.2020.0528
PMCID: PMC7599351
PMID: 33162734

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: Hemant Goyal holds stocks 
in Rimrock Gold Corp., Tauriga Sciences and SinglePoint Inc.