---
reference_id: "PMID:28730896"
title: "Cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome: potential mechanisms for the benefit of capsaicin and hot water hydrotherapy in treatment."
authors:
- Richards JR
- Lapoint JM
- Burillo-Putze G
journal: Clin Toxicol (Phila)
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1080/15563650.2017.1349910
keywords:
- Body Temperature Regulation
- Cannabinoids/toxicity
- "Capsaicin/pharmacokinetics, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Endocannabinoids/physiology
- Humans
- Hydrotherapy
- TRPV Cation Channels/physiology
- "Vomiting/chemically induced, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome: potential mechanisms for the benefit of capsaicin and hot water hydrotherapy in treatment.
**Authors:** Richards JR, Lapoint JM, Burillo-Putze G
**Journal:** Clin Toxicol (Phila) (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15563650.2017.1349910](https://doi.org/10.1080/15563650.2017.1349910)

## Content

1. Clin Toxicol (Phila). 2018 Jan;56(1):15-24. doi:
10.1080/15563650.2017.1349910.  Epub 2017 Jul 21.

Cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome: potential mechanisms for the benefit of
capsaicin and hot water hydrotherapy in treatment.

Richards JR(1), Lapoint JM(2), Burillo-Putze G(3).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Emergency Medicine , University of California Davis Medical
Center , Sacramento , CA , USA.
(2)b Department of Emergency Medicine, Southern California Permanente Medical
Group , San Diego , CA , USA.
(3)c Área de Toxicología Clínica, Servicio de Urgencias, Universidad Europea de
Canarias , Tenerife , Spain.

INTRODUCTION: Cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome is a clinical disorder that has
become more prevalent with increasing use of cannabis and synthetic
cannabinoids, and which is difficult to treat. Standard antiemetics commonly
fail to alleviate the severe nausea and vomiting characteristic of the syndrome.
Curiously, cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome patients often report dramatic
relief of symptoms with hot showers and baths, and topical capsaicin.
OBJECTIVES: In this review, we detail the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
of capsaicin and explore possible mechanisms for its beneficial effect,
including activation of transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 and
neurohumoral regulation. Putative mechanisms responsible for the benefit of hot
water hydrotherapy are also investigated.
METHODS: An extensive search of PubMed, OpenGrey, and Google Scholar from
inception to April 2017 was performed to identify known and theoretical
thermoregulatory mechanisms associated with the endocannabinoid system. The
searches resulted in 2417 articles. These articles were screened for relevant
mechanisms behind capsaicin and heat activation having potential antiemetic
effects. References from the selected articles were also hand-searched. A total
of 137 articles were considered relevant and included. Capsaicin: Topical
capsaicin is primarily used for treatment of neuropathic pain, but it has also
been used successfully in some 20 cases of cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome. The
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of capsaicin as a transient receptor
potential vanilloid 1 agonist may explain this effect. Topical capsaicin has a
longer half-life than oral administration, thus its potential duration of
benefit is longer. Capsaicin and transient receptor potential vanilloid 1:
Topical capsaicin binds and activates the transient receptor potential vanilloid
1 receptor, triggering influx of calcium and sodium, as well as release of
inflammatory neuropeptides leading to transient burning, stinging, and itching.
This elicits a novel type of desensitization analgesia. Transient receptor
potential vanilloid 1 receptors also respond to noxious stimuli, such as heat
(>43 °C), acids (pH <6), pain, change in osmolarity, and endovanilloids. The
action of topical capsaicin may mimic the effect of heat-activation of transient
receptor potential vanilloid 1. Endocannabinoid system and transient receptor
potential vanilloid 1: Cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome may result from a
derangement in the endocannabinoid system secondary to chronic exogenous
stimulation. The relief of cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome symptoms from heat
and use of transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 agonists suggests a complex
interrelation between the endocannabinoid system and transient receptor
potential vanilloid 1. Temperature regulation: Hot water hydrotherapy is a
mainstay of self-treatment for cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome patients. This
may be explained by heat-induced transient receptor potential vanilloid 1
activation. "Sensocrine" antiemetic effects: Transient receptor potential
vanilloid 1 activation by heat or capsaicin results in modulation of
tachykinins, somatostatin, pituitary adenylate-cyclase activating polypeptide,
and calcitonin gene-related peptide as well as histaminergic, cholinergic, and
serotonergic transmission. These downstream effects represent further possible
explanations for transient receptor potential vanilloid 1-associated antiemesis.
CONCLUSIONS: These complex interactions between the endocannabinoid systems and
transient receptor potential vanilloid 1, in the setting of cannabinoid receptor
desensitization, may yield important clues into the pathophysiology and
treatment of cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome. This knowledge can provide
clinicians caring for these patients with additional treatment options that may
reduce length of stay, avoid unnecessary imaging and laboratory testing, and
decrease the use of potentially harmful medications such as opioids.

DOI: 10.1080/15563650.2017.1349910
PMID: 28730896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
