---
reference_id: "PMID:36749925"
title: Quality of Life and Mortality Outcomes for Augmentation Naïve and Augmented Patients with Severe Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency.
authors:
- Ellis PR
- Holm KE
- Choate R
- Mannino DM
- Stockley RA
- Sandhaus RA
- Turner AM
journal: Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.15326/jcopdf.2022.0339
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Quality of Life and Mortality Outcomes for Augmentation Naïve and Augmented Patients with Severe Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency.
**Authors:** Ellis PR, Holm KE, Choate R, Mannino DM, Stockley RA, Sandhaus RA, Turner AM
**Journal:** Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.15326/jcopdf.2022.0339](https://doi.org/10.15326/jcopdf.2022.0339)

## Content

1. Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis. 2023 Apr 27;10(2):139-147. doi: 
10.15326/jcopdf.2022.0339.

Quality of Life and Mortality Outcomes for Augmentation Naïve and Augmented 
Patients with Severe Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency.

Ellis PR(1), Holm KE(2)(3), Choate R(4), Mannino DM(4), Stockley RA(5), Sandhaus 
RA(3)(6), Turner AM(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Applied Health Research, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, 
United Kingdom.
(2)Division of Neurology and Behavioral Health, National Jewish Health, Denver, 
Colorado, United States.
(3)AlphaNet, Kissimmee, Florida, United States.
(4)University of Kentucky College of Public Health, Lexington, Kentucky, United 
States.
(5)Lung Investigation Unit, Queen Eilizabeth Hospital Birmingham, University 
Hospitals Birmingham, National Health Service Foundation Trust, Birmingham, 
United Kingdom.
(6)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, National Jewish 
Health, Denver, Colorado, United States.

BACKGROUND: Intravenous alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) augmentation therapy is the 
only specific treatment available for alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency 
(AATD)-related lung disease. It is widely used worldwide but remains unavailable 
to patients with AATD in the United Kingdom. While randomized trials of 
augmentation therapy have demonstrated biochemical efficacy and lung tissue 
preservation using computed tomography (CT) densitometry, these studies were not 
adequately powered to demonstrate effectiveness in well-accepted clinical 
endpoints such as quality of life (QOL) or survival. We used large, 
prospectively followed AATD patient populations in the United States and United 
Kingdom to explore these important clinical endpoints.
METHODS: Our inclusion criterion was adults with severe AATD and associated lung 
disease. The treatment group was U.S. AATD patients receiving augmentation 
therapy for lung disease. The control group was augmentation therapy naïve AATD 
patients. Multivariable regression and survival analyses were used to assess QOL 
and mortality outcomes respectively.
RESULTS: Mean annual deterioration of the St George's Respiratory Questionnaire 
total score was 1.43 points greater/year in the control group compared to those 
receiving augmentation therapy (95% confidence interval [CI] 0.47 to 2.39, 
p=0.003). At 7 years, median survival was 82.7% (95% CI 75.3 to 90.7) for the 
control group versus 87.8% (95% CI 82.8 to 93.2) in the augmentation group, 
p=0.66. There was significant heterogeneity between cohorts.
CONCLUSIONS: A comparison of 2 highly characterized AATD cohorts was not able to 
reliably determine if AAT augmentation therapy improves QOL or mortality in 
patients with severe AATD-related lung disease. Alternative surrogate biomarkers 
of disease progression, such as CT lung density, may be a more pragmatic option.

JCOPDF © 2023.

DOI: 10.15326/jcopdf.2022.0339
PMCID: PMC10392875
PMID: 36749925

Conflict of interest statement: PE and RC have no conflicts of interest. KM 
reports personal fees from AlphaNet. DM reports salary and shares of stock from 
GlaxoSmithKline, outside the submitted work. RASt reports grants and personal 
fees from CSL Behring, and personal fees from Boehringer, Astra Zeneca, 
Mereobiopharma, Shire, Chiesi, and Akari, outside the submitted work. RASa is 
employed by AlphaNet, reports personal fees from Grifols and CSL Behring, 
non-financial support from Inhibrx and Arrowhead, and grants from Matrx, outside 
the submitted work. AT reports grants from Grifols biotherapeutics and the 
Alpha-1 Foundation, personal fees from CSL Behring, and grants and non-financial 
support from Arrowhead, outside the submitted work.