---
reference_id: "PMID:26963841"
title: "Varicella-Zoster Virus in Perth, Western Australia: Seasonality and Reactivation."
authors:
- Korostil IA
- Regan DG
journal: PLoS One
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0151319
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Varicella-Zoster Virus in Perth, Western Australia: Seasonality and Reactivation.
**Authors:** Korostil IA, Regan DG
**Journal:** PLoS One (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0151319](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0151319)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 10;11(3):e0151319. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0151319. 
eCollection 2016.

Varicella-Zoster Virus in Perth, Western Australia: Seasonality and 
Reactivation.

Korostil IA(1), Regan DG(1).

Author information:
(1)The Kirby Institute, UNSW Australia, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Identification of the factors affecting reactivation of 
varicella-zoster virus (VZV) largely remains an open question. Exposure to solar 
ultra violet (UV) radiation is speculated to facilitate reactivation. Should the 
role of UV in reactivation be significant, VZV reactivation patterns would 
generally be expected to be synchronous with seasonal UV profiles in temperate 
climates.
METHODS: We analysed age and gender specific VZV notification time series data 
from Perth, Western Australia (WA). This city has more daily sunshine hours than 
any other major Australian city. Using the cosinor and generalized linear 
models, we tested these data for seasonality and correlation with UV and 
temperature.
RESULTS: We established significant seasonality of varicella notifications and 
showed that while herpes-zoster (HZ) was not seasonal it had a more stable 
seasonal component in males over 60 than in any other subpopulation tested. We 
also detected significant association between HZ notifications and UV for the 
entire Perth population as well as for females and males separately. In most 
cases, temperature proved to be a significant factor as well.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that UV radiation may be important for VZV 
reactivation, under the assumption that notification data represent an 
acceptably accurate qualitative measure of true VZV incidence.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0151319
PMCID: PMC4786334
PMID: 26963841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.