---
reference_id: "PMID:9353155"
title: CTLA-4 gene polymorphism confers susceptibility to insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) independently from age and from other genetic or immune disease markers. The Belgian Diabetes Registry.
authors:
- Van der Auwera BJ
- Vandewalle CL
- Schuit FC
- Winnock F
- De Leeuw IH
- Van Imschoot S
- Lamberigts G
- Gorus FK
journal: Clin Exp Immunol
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2249.1997.5121410.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CTLA-4 gene polymorphism confers susceptibility to insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) independently from age and from other genetic or immune disease markers. The Belgian Diabetes Registry.
**Authors:** Van der Auwera BJ, Vandewalle CL, Schuit FC, Winnock F, De Leeuw IH, Van Imschoot S, Lamberigts G, Gorus FK
**Journal:** Clin Exp Immunol (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-2249.1997.5121410.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2249.1997.5121410.x)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Immunol. 1997 Oct;110(1):98-103. doi: 
10.1046/j.1365-2249.1997.5121410.x.

CTLA-4 gene polymorphism confers susceptibility to insulin-dependent diabetes 
mellitus (IDDM) independently from age and from other genetic or immune disease 
markers. The Belgian Diabetes Registry.

Van der Auwera BJ(1), Vandewalle CL, Schuit FC, Winnock F, De Leeuw IH, Van 
Imschoot S, Lamberigts G, Gorus FK.

Author information:
(1)Diabetes Research Centre, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium.

Apart from genes in the HLA complex (IDDM1) and the variable number of tandem 
repeats in the 5' region of the insulin gene (INS VNTR, IDDM2), several other 
loci have been proposed to contribute to IDDM susceptibility. Recently, linkage 
and association have been shown between the cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated 
protein 4 (CTLA-4) gene on chromosome 2q and IDDM. In a registry-based group of 
525 recent-onset IDDM patients <40 years old we investigated the possible 
interactions of a CTLA-4 gene A-to-G transition polymorphism with age at 
clinical disease onset and with the presence or absence of established genetic 
(HLA-DQ, INS VNTR) and immune disease markers (autoantibodies against islet cell 
cytoplasm (ICA); insulin (IAA); glutamate decarboxylase (GAD65-Ab); IA-2 protein 
tyrosine phosphatase (IA-2-Ab)) determined within the first week of insulin 
treatment. In new-onset IDDM patients. G-allele-containing CTLA-4 genotypes 
(relative risk (RR)= 1.5; 95% confidence interval (CI) = 1.2-2.0; P < 0.005) 
were not preferentially associated with age at clinical presentation or with the 
presence of other genetic (HLA-DR3 or DR4 alleles; HLA-DQA1*0301-DQB1*0302 
and/or DQA1*0501-DQB1*0201 risk haplotypes; INS VNTR I/I risk genotype) or 
immune (ICA, IAA, IA-2-Ab, GAD65-Ab) markers of diabetes. For 151 patients, 
thyrogastric autoantibodies (anti-thyroid peroxidase, anti-thyroid-stimulating 
hormone (TSH) receptor, anti-parietal cell, anti-intrinsic factor) were 
determined, but association between CTLA-4 risk genotypes and markers of 
polyendocrine autoimmunity could not be demonstrated before or after 
stratification for HLA- or INS-linked risk. In conclusion, the presence of a 
G-containing CTLA-4 genotype confers a moderate but significant RR for IDDM that 
is independent of age and genetic or immune disease markers.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2249.1997.5121410.x
PMCID: PMC1904800
PMID: 9353155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]