---
reference_id: "PMID:39263357"
title: Subpial transplantation of adipose-derived stem cells alleviates paraplegia in a rat model of aortic occlusion/reperfusion-induced spinal cord infarction.
authors:
- Takahara E
- Kamizato K
- Kakinohana M
- Sunami H
- Kise Y
- Furukawa K
- Ntege EH
- Shimizu Y
journal: Regen Ther
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.reth.2024.08.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Subpial transplantation of adipose-derived stem cells alleviates paraplegia in a rat model of aortic occlusion/reperfusion-induced spinal cord infarction.
**Authors:** Takahara E, Kamizato K, Kakinohana M, Sunami H, Kise Y, Furukawa K, Ntege EH, Shimizu Y
**Journal:** Regen Ther (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.reth.2024.08.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.reth.2024.08.005)

## Content

1. Regen Ther. 2024 Aug 21;26:611-619. doi: 10.1016/j.reth.2024.08.005.
eCollection  2024 Jun.

Subpial transplantation of adipose-derived stem cells alleviates paraplegia in a
rat model of aortic occlusion/reperfusion-induced spinal cord infarction.

Takahara E(1), Kamizato K(2), Kakinohana M(2), Sunami H(3), Kise Y(4), Furukawa
K(4), Ntege EH(1), Shimizu Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Graduate School of
Medicine, University of the Ryukyus, Okinawa 903-0215, Japan.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of the
Ryukyus, Okinawa 903-0215, Japan.
(3)Center for Advanced Medical Research, School of Medicine, University of the
Ryukyus, Nishihara 903-0215, Japan.
(4)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Graduate School of
Medicine, University of the Ryukyus, Okinawa 903-0215, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Thoracoabdominal periprocedural occlusion/reperfusion injury of the
spinal cord (SCII/R) can lead to devastating paraplegia, underscoring the
critical need for effective interventions. However, our knowledge of optimal
medical strategies and their efficacy remains limited. Preclinical
investigations have shown promise in harnessing adult stem cells, including
pluripotent and multipotent stem cells such as mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), to
address SCII/R by enhancing neuro-inflammation, axonal growth, and myelination.
Particularly, growth factors derived from adipose tissue-derived MSCs (ADSCs)
have been proposed to facilitate recovery. Despite advancements, achieving
complete recovery remains a formidable challenge. Therefore, gaining a more
profound insight into the role of ADSCs in alleviating SCII/R-induced
paraplegia, including optimizing the delivery systems for therapies, is
imperative.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this study, we assessed the impact of subpial
allogeneic rat adipose tissue-derived MSCs (rADSCs) transplantation on
paraplegia using a rat SCII/R model induced by ephemeral aortic occlusion, known
as the Taira-Marsala model. rADSCs were isolated from adipose tissue of male
Sprague-Dawley rats, cultured, characterized, and cryopreserved. One week
following the induction of paraplegia, rADSCs (n = 6) or physiological saline
(n = 6) were transplanted. Hind limb motor function was evaluated before
treatment and at 3-, 7-, and 14-days post-treatment using the
Basso-Beattie-Bresnahan scoring system.
RESULTS: The rADSC-treated group demonstrated a significant improvement in hind
limb motor function compared to the saline-treated group (p < 0.05), with 5 out
of 6 rats exhibiting enhanced motor function following treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that subpial rADSC engraftment may enhance
SCII/R-induced paraplegia recovery. These initial results drive further research
to validate this potential, understand the molecular mechanisms, and optimize
therapies.

© 2024 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.reth.2024.08.005
PMCID: PMC11387535
PMID: 39263357

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared
to influence the work reported in this paper.
