---
reference_id: PMID:28880010
title: Chronic pancreatitis.
authors:
- Kleeff J
- Whitcomb DC
- Shimosegawa T
- Esposito I
- Lerch MM
- Gress T
- Mayerle J
- Drewes AM
- Rebours V
- Akisik F
- Muñoz JED
- Neoptolemos JP
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2017.60
keywords:
- Humans
- "Pancreatitis, Chronic/diagnosis, epidemiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic pancreatitis.
**Authors:** Kleeff J, Whitcomb DC, Shimosegawa T, Esposito I, Lerch MM, Gress T, Mayerle J, Drewes AM, Rebours V, Akisik F, Muñoz JED, Neoptolemos JP
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrdp.2017.60](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrdp.2017.60)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2017 Sep 7;3:17060. doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2017.60.

Chronic pancreatitis.

Kleeff J(1)(2), Whitcomb DC(3), Shimosegawa T(4), Esposito I(5), Lerch MM(6), 
Gress T(7), Mayerle J(8), Drewes AM(9), Rebours V(10), Akisik F(11), Muñoz 
JED(12), Neoptolemos JP(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Visceral, Vascular and Endocrine Surgery, University Hospital 
Halle (Saale), Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Ernst-Grube-Str. 40, 
06120 Halle (Saale), Germany.
(2)Department of Molecular and Clinical Cancer Medicine, Institute of 
Translational Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
(3)Department of Medicine, Cell Biology &Physiology, and Human Genetics, 
University of Pittsburgh &UPMC, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Division of Gastroenterology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Sendai, Japan.
(5)Institute of Pathology, Heinrich-Heine University and University Hospital, 
Düsseldorf, Germany.
(6)Department of Medicine A, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, 
Germany.
(7)Department of Gastroenterology and Endocrinology, Philipps-University 
Marburg, Marburg, Germany.
(8)Department of Medicine II, University Hospital Grosshadern, 
Ludwig-Maximillian University Munich, Munich, Germany.
(9)Mech-Sense &Centre for Pancreatic Diseases, Department of Gastroenterology 
&Hepatology, Clinical Institute, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark.
(10)Pancreatology Unit, DHU UNITY, INSERM UMR1149, Beaujon Hospital, Clichy, 
France.
(11)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(12)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Health Research Institute 
(IDIS), University Hospital of Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, 
Spain.
(13)Department of General Surgery, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 
Germany.

Chronic pancreatitis is defined as a pathological fibro-inflammatory syndrome of 
the pancreas in individuals with genetic, environmental and/or other risk 
factors who develop persistent pathological responses to parenchymal injury or 
stress. Potential causes can include toxic factors (such as alcohol or smoking), 
metabolic abnormalities, idiopathic mechanisms, genetics, autoimmune responses 
and obstructive mechanisms. The pathophysiology of chronic pancreatitis is 
fairly complex and includes acinar cell injury, acinar stress responses, duct 
dysfunction, persistent or altered inflammation, and/or neuro-immune crosstalk, 
but these mechanisms are not completely understood. Chronic pancreatitis is 
characterized by ongoing inflammation of the pancreas that results in 
progressive loss of the endocrine and exocrine compartment owing to atrophy 
and/or replacement with fibrotic tissue. Functional consequences include 
recurrent or constant abdominal pain, diabetes mellitus (endocrine 
insufficiency) and maldigestion (exocrine insufficiency). Diagnosing early-stage 
chronic pancreatitis is challenging as changes are subtle, ill-defined and 
overlap those of other disorders. Later stages are characterized by variable 
fibrosis and calcification of the pancreatic parenchyma; dilatation, distortion 
and stricturing of the pancreatic ducts; pseudocysts; intrapancreatic bile duct 
stricturing; narrowing of the duodenum; and superior mesenteric, portal and/or 
splenic vein thrombosis. Treatment options comprise medical, radiological, 
endoscopic and surgical interventions, but evidence-based approaches are 
limited. This Primer highlights the major progress that has been made in 
understanding the pathophysiology, presentation, prevalence and management of 
chronic pancreatitis and its complications.

DOI: 10.1038/nrdp.2017.60
PMID: 28880010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]