---
reference_id: "PMID:38988666"
title: "Assessing the risk of reoperation for mild pulmonary vein obstruction post-TAPVC repair: a retrospective cohort study."
authors:
- Alifu A
- Wang H
- Chen R
journal: Front Cardiovasc Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2024.1399659
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Assessing the risk of reoperation for mild pulmonary vein obstruction post-TAPVC repair: a retrospective cohort study.
**Authors:** Alifu A, Wang H, Chen R
**Journal:** Front Cardiovasc Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcvm.2024.1399659](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2024.1399659)

## Content

1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2024 Jun 26;11:1399659. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2024.1399659. 
eCollection 2024.

Assessing the risk of reoperation for mild pulmonary vein obstruction post-TAPVC 
repair: a retrospective cohort study.

Alifu A(1), Wang H(1), Chen R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Hainan Women and Children's Medical 
Center, Haikou, Hainan, China.

OBJECTIVE: This study investigates the impact of mild pulmonary vein 
obstruction, detected via echocardiography before hospital discharge, on the 
likelihood of reoperation in patients who have undergone repair for Total 
Anomalous Pulmonary Venous Connection (TAPVC).
METHOD: Utilizing a single-center, retrospective cohort approach, we analyzed 38 
cases from October 2017 to December 2023, excluding patients with functionally 
univentricular circulations or atrial isomerism. Our primary outcome was the 
necessity for reoperation within one year due to anatomical issues related to 
the initial TAPVC repair. Mild obstruction was defined as a pulmonary vein flow 
velocity ≥1.2 m/s.
RESULT: Our findings revealed that 31.6% of patients exhibited pre-discharge 
mild obstruction. During the median follow-up of 10 months, reoperations were 
notably higher in the mild obstruction group compared to the normal group, with 
a significant association between pre-discharge mild obstruction and increased 
risk of reoperation. Specifically, in the fully adjusted model, mild obstruction 
was linked to a 13.9-fold increased risk of reoperation.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that a pre-discharge echocardiography Doppler 
velocity threshold of 1.2 m/s could serve as a critical predictor for 
reoperation, emphasizing the need for targeted follow-up strategies for at-risk 
patients.

© 2024 Alifu, Wang and Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2024.1399659
PMCID: PMC11233719
PMID: 38988666

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.