---
reference_id: "PMID:22301540"
title: "Carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1A deficiency: a look at classic and arctic variants."
authors:
- Dykema DM
journal: Adv Neonatal Care
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1097/ANC.0b013e318242df6d
keywords:
- Alaska
- Arctic Regions
- "Carnitine O-Palmitoyltransferase/deficiency, genetics"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- "Hypoglycemia/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Inuit
- "Lipid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Neonatal Screening
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1A deficiency: a look at classic and arctic variants.
**Authors:** Dykema DM
**Journal:** Adv Neonatal Care (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1097/ANC.0b013e318242df6d](https://doi.org/10.1097/ANC.0b013e318242df6d)

## Content

1. Adv Neonatal Care. 2012 Feb;12(1):23-7. doi: 10.1097/ANC.0b013e318242df6d.

Carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1A deficiency: a look at classic and arctic 
variants.

Dykema DM(1).

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital Colarado, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA. 
deanna.dykema@childrenscolorado.org

Carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1A (CPT-1A) deficiency is a defect of fatty acid 
metabolism that presents as an autosomal recessive inheritance. Carnitine 
palmitoyltransferase-1A is the rate-limiting enzyme that allows the body to 
process fats to provide energy during times of fasting and illness. Patients 
usually present between birth and 18 months of age following an illness with 
various symptoms including hypoketotic hypoglycemia, lethargy, and seizures. 
Diagnosis can be achieved through newborn metabolic screening. Long-term 
treatment is managed through dietary management. A milder form has been found to 
occur at a much higher incidence in the Inuit population. Since the recent 
discovery of CPT-1A deficiency, much is yet to be learned. Researchers are busy 
identifying and studying groups of people who are presenting with CPT-1A 
deficiency at significantly higher rates than the general population. This 
research will lead to a better understanding and future care of individuals 
diagnosed with CPT-1A deficiency.

DOI: 10.1097/ANC.0b013e318242df6d
PMID: 22301540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]