---
reference_id: "PMID:38337530"
title: "Cholesteatoma Severity Determines the Risk of Recurrent Paediatric Cholesteatoma More Than the Surgical Approach."
journal: J Clin Med
year: "2024"
doi: 10.3390/jcm13030836
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cholesteatoma Severity Determines the Risk of Recurrent Paediatric Cholesteatoma More Than the Surgical Approach.

## Content

Objective: To evaluate factors that influence the rate of cholesteatoma
recurrence (growth of new retraction cholesteatoma) in children.

Methods: Review of children with primary acquired or congenital cholesteatoma.
Severity was classified by extent and EAONO-JOS stage, and surgery by SAMEO-ATO.
Primary outcome measure was 5-year recurrence rate using Kaplan-Meier or Cox
regression analysis.

Results: Median age was 10.7 years for 408 cholesteatomas from which 64
recurred. Median follow up was 4.6 years (0-13.5 years) with 5-year recurrence
rate of 16% and 10-year of 29%. Congenital cholesteatoma (n = 51) had 15% 5-year
recurrence. Of 216 pars tensa cholesteatomas, 5-year recurrence was similar at
14%, whereas recurrence from 100 pars flaccida cholesteatomas was more common at
23%. Sub-division of EAONO-JOS Stage 2 showed more recurrence in those with than
without mastoid cholesteatoma (22.1% versus 10%), with more in Stage 3 (31.9%).
Surgery without mastoidectomy, including totally endoscopic ear surgery, had 11%
5-year recurrence. Canal wall-up tympanomastoidectomy (CWU) and canal wall-down/
mastoid obliteration both had 23% 5-year recurrence. Multivariate analysis
showed increased recurrence for EAONO-JOS Stage 3, at risk syndromes and age
< 7 years, but not for surgical category or other factors.

Conclusion: Young age and more extensive cholesteatoma increase the risk of
recurrent cholesteatoma in children. When controlling for these factors,
surgical approach does not have a significant effect on this outcome. Other
objectives, such as lower post-operative morbidity and better hearing outcome,
may prove to be more appropriate parameters for selecting optimal surgical
approach in children.
