---
reference_id: "PMID:31862401"
title: Hypomorphic zebrafish models mimic the musculoskeletal phenotype of β4GalT7-deficient Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
authors:
- Delbaere S
- Van Damme T
- Syx D
- Symoens S
- Coucke P
- Willaert A
- Malfait F
journal: Matrix Biol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2019.12.002
keywords:
- Animals
- Body Patterning
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome/genetics, pathology, psychology"
- Embryonic Development
- Galactosyltransferases/genetics
- Gene Knockdown Techniques
- Gene Knockout Techniques
- Loss of Function Mutation
- Zebrafish
- Zebrafish Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypomorphic zebrafish models mimic the musculoskeletal phenotype of β4GalT7-deficient Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
**Authors:** Delbaere S, Van Damme T, Syx D, Symoens S, Coucke P, Willaert A, Malfait F
**Journal:** Matrix Biol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.matbio.2019.12.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matbio.2019.12.002)

## Content

1. Matrix Biol. 2020 Jul;89:59-75. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2019.12.002. Epub 2019
Dec  17.

Hypomorphic zebrafish models mimic the musculoskeletal phenotype of 
β4GalT7-deficient Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.

Delbaere S(1), Van Damme T(1), Syx D(1), Symoens S(1), Coucke P(1), Willaert 
A(1), Malfait F(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent 
University and Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(2)Center for Medical Genetics, Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent 
University and Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: 
fransiska.malfait@ugent.be.

β4GalT7 is a transmembrane Golgi enzyme, encoded by B4GALT7, that plays a 
pivotal role in the proteoglycan linker region formation during proteoglycan 
biosynthesis. Defects in this enzyme give rise to a rare autosomal recessive 
form of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), currently known as 'spondylodysplastic EDS 
(spEDS-B4GALT7)'. This EDS subtype is mainly characterized by short stature, 
hypotonia and skeletal abnormalities, thereby illustrating its pleiotropic 
importance during human development. Insights into the pathogenic mechanisms 
underlying this disabling disease are very limited, in part due to the lack of a 
relevant in vivo model. As the majority of mutations identified in patients with 
spEDS-B4GALT7 are hypomorphic, we generated zebrafish models with partial loss 
of B4galt7 function, including different knockdown (morphant) and mosaic 
knockout (crispant) b4galt7 zebrafish models and studied the morphologic, 
functional and molecular aspects in embryonic and larval stages. Morphant and 
crispant zebrafish show highly similar morphological abnormalities in early 
development including a small, round head, bowed pectoral fins, short body-axis 
and mild developmental delay. Several craniofacial cartilage and bone structures 
are absent or strongly misshapen. In addition, the total amount of sulfated 
glycosaminoglycans is significantly diminished and particularly heparan and 
chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan levels are greatly reduced. We also show 
impaired cartilage patterning and loss of chondrocyte organization in a 
cartilage-specific Tg(Col2a1aBAC:mcherry) zebrafish reporter line. The 
occurrence of the same abnormalities in the different models confirms these are 
specifically caused by B4galt7 deficiency. A disturbed actin pattern, along with 
a lack of muscle tone, was only noted in morphants in which translation of 
b4galt7 was blocked. In conclusion, we generated the first viable animal models 
for spEDS-B4GALT7, and show that in early development the human spEDS-B4GALT7 
phenotype is faithfully mimicked in these zebrafish models. Our findings 
underscore a key role for β4GalT7 in early development of cartilage, bone and 
muscle. These models will lead to a better understanding of spEDS-B4GALT7 and 
can be used in future efforts focusing on therapeutic applications.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.matbio.2019.12.002
PMID: 31862401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None declared.