---
reference_id: "PMID:22886820"
title: Arrhythmias in Fabry cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Acharya D
- Robertson P
- Kay GN
- Jackson L
- Warnock DG
- Plumb VJ
- Tallaj JA
journal: Clin Cardiol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/clc.22047
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac/etiology"
- Cardiomyopathies/complications
- Fabry Disease/complications
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arrhythmias in Fabry cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Acharya D, Robertson P, Kay GN, Jackson L, Warnock DG, Plumb VJ, Tallaj JA
**Journal:** Clin Cardiol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/clc.22047](https://doi.org/10.1002/clc.22047)

## Content

1. Clin Cardiol. 2012 Dec;35(12):738-40. doi: 10.1002/clc.22047. Epub 2012 Aug 9.

Arrhythmias in Fabry cardiomyopathy.

Acharya D(1), Robertson P, Kay GN, Jackson L, Warnock DG, Plumb VJ, Tallaj JA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, Alabama, USA. dacharya@cardiology.uab.edu

BACKGROUND: Prior studies suggest that the incidence of ventricular arrhythmias
is high in patients with Fabry cardiomyopathy. This study evaluated the
incidence of significant arrhythmias in a series of patients with Fabry
cardiomyopathy.
HYPOTHESIS: Arrhythmias are important causes of morbidity and mortality in Fabry
Cardiomyopathy.
METHODS: This study was a retrospective chart review of 19 patients with known
Fabry cardiomyopathy. Device interrogation reports were reviewed for those who
had implantable devices. Electrocardiogram, Holter monitor, and event monitors
were reviewed in those who did not have implantable devices.
RESULTS: Eighteen of nineteen patients were on enzyme replacement therapy (ERT).
Nine (47%) out of 19 patients had implantable devices. Implant indications
included symptomatic bradycardia, nonsustained ventricular tachycardia,
conduction abnormalities, palpitations, and syncope. Mean follow-up in the
patients with devices was 50 ± 23 months. Two patients received implantable
cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) shocks, 1 of which was inappropriate for atrial
fibrillation. Patients were paced in the atrium 71% ± 37% of the time and paced
in the ventricle 49% ± 52% of the time. Four patients with devices were paced
more than 95% of the time. Patients with an ICD had lower heart rates prior to
ICD implant than the group that did not have devices (60 ± 10 vs 78 ± 16, P =
0.03). Of the patients without devices, only 1 had sudden cardiac death.
Patients with implanted devices had higher left ventricular (LV) mass indices
compared to patients without implanted devices (136 ± 40 g/m(2) vs 93 ± 19
g/m(2), P = 0.008).
CONCLUSIONS: Significant ventricular arrhythmias are uncommon in patients with
Fabry cardiomyopathy on ERT, but utilization of pacing is high. Sudden cardiac
death in Fabry cardiomyopathy may be related to bradycardia.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/clc.22047
PMCID: PMC6652687
PMID: 22886820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
