---
reference_id: "PMID:33485870"
title: The Impact of Sociological and Environmental Factors for Dengue Infection in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
authors:
- Adnan RA
- Ramli MF
- Othman HF
- Asha'ri ZH
- Ismail SNS
- Samsudin S
journal: Acta Trop
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2021.105834
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Impact of Sociological and Environmental Factors for Dengue Infection in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
**Authors:** Adnan RA, Ramli MF, Othman HF, Asha'ri ZH, Ismail SNS, Samsudin S
**Journal:** Acta Trop (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.actatropica.2021.105834](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actatropica.2021.105834)

## Content

1. Acta Trop. 2021 Apr;216:105834. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2021.105834. Epub 
2021 Jan 22.

The Impact of Sociological and Environmental Factors for Dengue Infection in 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

Adnan RA(1), Ramli MF(2), Othman HF(3), Asha'ri ZH(1), Ismail SNS(4), Samsudin 
S(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environment, Faculty of Forestry and Environment, Universiti 
Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Environment, Faculty of Forestry and Environment, Universiti 
Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia. Electronic address: 
firuz@upm.edu.my.
(3)Department of Diagnostic and Applied Health Science, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia.
(4)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, Faculty of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
(5)Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.

BACKGROUND: Dengue incidence has grown dramatically around the world in recent 
years. Vector control is the only method to reduce dengue incidence due to the 
lack of a vaccine available. By understanding the factors contributed to the 
vector densities such as environmental and sociological factors, dengue 
prevention and control may succeed.
OBJECTIVE: This study is aimed at determining the impact of sociological and 
environmental factors contributing to dengue cases.
METHODS: The study surveyed 379 respondents with dengue history. The 
socio-environmental factors were evaluated by chi-square and binary regression.
RESULT: The chi-square results revealed sociological factors associated between 
family with dengue experience such as older age (p =0.012), fewer than four 
people in the household (p= 0.008), working people (p= 0.004) and 
apartment/terrace houses (p=0.023). Similarly, there is a significant 
association between respondent's dengue history and houses that are shaded with 
vegetation (p= 0.012) and the present of public playground areas near the 
residential (p = 0.011).
CONCLUSION: The study identified socio-environmental factors that play an 
important role in the abundance of Aedes mosquitoes and also for the local 
dengue control measures.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2021.105834
PMID: 33485870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]