---
reference_id: "PMID:9425895"
title: "A novel potassium channel gene, KCNQ2, is mutated in an inherited epilepsy of newborns."
authors:
- Singh NA
- Charlier C
- Stauffer D
- DuPont BR
- Leach RJ
- Melis R
- Ronen GM
- Bjerre I
- Quattlebaum T
- Murphy JV
- McHarg ML
- Gagnon D
- Rosales TO
- Peiffer A
- Anderson VE
- Leppert M
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1038/ng0198-25
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- "Cell Line, Transformed"
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 20"
- "DNA, Complementary"
- Epilepsy/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- KCNQ2 Potassium Channel
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Potassium Channels/genetics
- "Potassium Channels, Voltage-Gated"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel potassium channel gene, KCNQ2, is mutated in an inherited epilepsy of newborns.
**Authors:** Singh NA, Charlier C, Stauffer D, DuPont BR, Leach RJ, Melis R, Ronen GM, Bjerre I, Quattlebaum T, Murphy JV, McHarg ML, Gagnon D, Rosales TO, Peiffer A, Anderson VE, Leppert M
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0198-25](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0198-25)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1998 Jan;18(1):25-9. doi: 10.1038/ng0198-25.

A novel potassium channel gene, KCNQ2, is mutated in an inherited epilepsy of 
newborns.

Singh NA(1), Charlier C, Stauffer D, DuPont BR, Leach RJ, Melis R, Ronen GM, 
Bjerre I, Quattlebaum T, Murphy JV, McHarg ML, Gagnon D, Rosales TO, Peiffer A, 
Anderson VE, Leppert M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City 84112, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1998 Jan;18(1):6-8. doi: 10.1038/ng0198-6.

Idiopathic generalized epilepsies account for about 40% of epilepsy up to age 40 
and commonly have a genetic basis. One type is benign familial neonatal 
convulsions (BFNC), a dominantly inherited disorder of newborns. We have 
identified a sub-microscopic deletion of chromosome 20q13.3 that co-segregates 
with seizures in a BFNC family. Characterization of cDNAs spanning the deleted 
region identified one encoding a novel voltage-gated potassium channel, KCNQ2, 
which belongs to a new KQT-like class of potassium channels. Five other BFNC 
probands were shown to have KCNQ2 mutations, including two transmembrane 
missense mutations, two frameshifts and one splice-site mutation. This finding 
in BFNC provides additional evidence that defects in potassium channels are 
involved in the mammalian epilepsy phenotype.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0198-25
PMID: 9425895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]