---
reference_id: "PMID:40890957"
title: Exploring Novel Biomarkers for Rosacea Through Cohort Study and Mendelian Randomisation.
authors:
- Mao R
- Wang F
- Zhang T
- Li J
journal: Exp Dermatol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/exd.70161
keywords:
- Humans
- "Rosacea/genetics, blood, epidemiology"
- Mendelian Randomization Analysis
- Biomarkers/blood
- Cohort Studies
- Male
- Female
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Proteomics
- United Kingdom
- Blood Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exploring Novel Biomarkers for Rosacea Through Cohort Study and Mendelian Randomisation.
**Authors:** Mao R, Wang F, Zhang T, Li J
**Journal:** Exp Dermatol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/exd.70161](https://doi.org/10.1111/exd.70161)

## Content

1. Exp Dermatol. 2025 Sep;34(9):e70161. doi: 10.1111/exd.70161.

Exploring Novel Biomarkers for Rosacea Through Cohort Study and Mendelian 
Randomisation.

Mao R(1)(2)(3), Wang F(1)(2)(3), Zhang T(4), Li J(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, China.
(2)Hunan Key Laboratory of Aging Biology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, China.
(3)National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric Disorders, Xiangya Hospital, 
Central South University, Changsha, China.
(4)Center of Gastrointestinal and Minimally Invasive Surgery, Department of 
General Surgery, The Third People's Hospital of Chengdu, Affiliated Hospital of 
Southwest Jiaotong University & The Second Affiliated Hospital of Chengdu, 
Chongqing Medical University, Chengdu, China.

The current therapeutic landscape for rosacea is notably deficient in targeted 
medications, underscoring an urgent need for the identification of novel 
biomarkers. Utilising a longitudinal cohort of 54 306 individuals from the UK 
Biobank (UKB), we conducted a comprehensive assessment of the associations 
between 2923 serum proteins and the risk for rosacea. Our cohort analysis 
identified 18 proteins significantly associated with rosacea risk. Next, we 
complemented the two-sample Mendelian randomisation (TSMR) and Mendelian 
randomisation (SMR) analysis based on pooled data to identify genetic links 
between protein targets and rosacea. TSMR analysis refined this list to nine 
proteins demonstrating significant causal relationships with at least one form 
of rosacea. Further refinement through SMR and differential expression analysis 
reduced this to five key proteins, including four (ABHD14B, CHMP6, DBNL and 
MCFD2) that inhibit rosacea onset and one (MSR1) that promotes it. The 
differential expression of these five biomarkers was validated by multiple omics 
datasets as well as in vitro experiments. We calculated the protein score based 
on the expression levels of these proteins, noting that participants with higher 
scores demonstrated an increased incidence of rosacea. The integrative 
examination of proteomic and genetic data from a European adult cohort provides 
robust causal evidence for several proteins as promising new biomarkers for the 
development of rosacea treatments.

© 2025 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/exd.70161
PMID: 40890957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]