---
reference_id: "PMID:25859752"
title: An international consensus approach to the management of atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome in children.
authors:
- Loirat C
- Fakhouri F
- Ariceta G
- Besbas N
- Bitzan M
- Bjerre A
- Coppo R
- Emma F
- Johnson S
- Karpman D
- Landau D
- Langman CB
- Lapeyraque AL
- Licht C
- Nester C
- Pecoraro C
- Riedl M
- van de Kar NC
- Van de Walle J
- Vivarelli M
- Frémeaux-Bacchi V
- HUS International
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s00467-015-3076-8
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Age Factors
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/therapeutic use"
- "Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome/diagnosis, epidemiology, immunology, therapy"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Complement Activation/drug effects
- Cooperative Behavior
- Drug Monitoring
- Humans
- Immunologic Factors/therapeutic use
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- International Cooperation
- Kidney Transplantation
- Liver Transplantation
- "Monitoring, Immunologic"
- Nephrology/standards
- Patient Selection
- Plasma Exchange
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Risk Factors
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An international consensus approach to the management of atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome in children.
**Authors:** Loirat C, Fakhouri F, Ariceta G, Besbas N, Bitzan M, Bjerre A, Coppo R, Emma F, Johnson S, Karpman D, Landau D, Langman CB, Lapeyraque AL, Licht C, Nester C, Pecoraro C, Riedl M, van de Kar NC, Van de Walle J, Vivarelli M, Frémeaux-Bacchi V, HUS International
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00467-015-3076-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00467-015-3076-8)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2016 Jan;31(1):15-39. doi: 10.1007/s00467-015-3076-8. Epub
2015  Apr 11.

An international consensus approach to the management of atypical hemolytic 
uremic syndrome in children.

Loirat C(1), Fakhouri F(2), Ariceta G(3), Besbas N(4), Bitzan M(5), Bjerre A(6), 
Coppo R(7), Emma F(8), Johnson S(9), Karpman D(10), Landau D(11), Langman 
CB(12), Lapeyraque AL(13), Licht C(14), Nester C(15), Pecoraro C(16), Riedl 
M(17), van de Kar NC(18), Van de Walle J(19), Vivarelli M(8), Frémeaux-Bacchi 
V(20); HUS International.

Author information:
(1)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Robert Debré, Department of 
Pediatric Nephrology, Université Paris Diderot Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, 
France. chantal.loirat@rdb.aphp.fr.
(2)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Nantes, Department of Nephrology and 
Immunology, ITUN and INSERM UMR S-1064, Nantes, France.
(3)Pediatric Nephrology, Vall d'Hebron Hospital, Autonoma University of 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(5)Division of Nephrology, Montreal Children's Hospital and Mc Gill University, 
Montreal, Canada.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Oslo University Hospital, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, 
Norway.
(7)City of the Health and the Science of Turin Health Agency, Regina Margherita 
Children's Hospital, Turin, Italy.
(8)Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(9)Department of Paediatric Nephrology, Great North Children's Hospital, 
Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(11)Soroka University Medical Center, Beer Sheva, Israel.
(12)The Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Feinberg School 
of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA.
(13)Service de Néphrologie, Département de Pédiatrie, CHU Sainte-Justine, 
Université de Montréal, Montréal, Canada.
(14)The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada.
(15)Departments of Internal Medicine and the Stead Family Department of 
Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
(16)Santobono Children's Hospital, Naples, Italy.
(17)Department of Pediatrics, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria.
(18)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Amalia Children's Hospital, Radboud 
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(19)University Hospital Ghent, Ghent, Belgium.
(20)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, 
Laboratory of Immunology, INSERM UMRS 1138, Paris, France.

Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS) emerged during the last decade as a 
disease largely of complement dysregulation. This advance facilitated the 
development of novel, rational treatment options targeting terminal complement 
activation, e.g., using an anti-C5 antibody (eculizumab). We review treatment 
and patient management issues related to this therapeutic approach. We present 
consensus clinical practice recommendations generated by HUS International, an 
international expert group of clinicians and basic scientists with a focused 
interest in HUS. We aim to address the following questions of high relevance to 
daily clinical practice: Which complement investigations should be done and 
when? What is the importance of anti-factor H antibody detection? Who should be 
treated with eculizumab? Is plasma exchange therapy still needed? When should 
eculizumab therapy be initiated? How and when should complement blockade be 
monitored? Can the approved treatment schedule be modified? What approach should 
be taken to kidney and/or combined liver-kidney transplantation? How should we 
limit the risk of meningococcal infection under complement blockade therapy? A 
pressing question today regards the treatment duration. We discuss the need for 
prospective studies to establish evidence-based criteria for the continuation or 
cessation of anticomplement therapy in patients with and without identified 
complement mutations.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-015-3076-8
PMID: 25859752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]