---
reference_id: "PMID:17503335"
title: Matthew-Wood syndrome is caused by truncating mutations in the retinol-binding protein receptor gene STRA6.
authors:
- Golzio C
- Martinovic-Bouriel J
- Thomas S
- Mougou-Zrelli S
- Grattagliano-Bessieres B
- Bonniere M
- Delahaye S
- Munnich A
- Encha-Razavi F
- Lyonnet S
- Vekemans M
- Attie-Bitach T
- Etchevers HC
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1086/518177
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- Consanguinity
- Exons
- Fetal Growth Retardation/genetics
- Frameshift Mutation
- Gene Deletion
- Genetic Markers
- Haplotypes
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Lung Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- "Microphthalmos/genetics, pathology"
- "Mutagenesis, Insertional"
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- "Receptors, Cell Surface/genetics"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Matthew-Wood syndrome is caused by truncating mutations in the retinol-binding protein receptor gene STRA6.
**Authors:** Golzio C, Martinovic-Bouriel J, Thomas S, Mougou-Zrelli S, Grattagliano-Bessieres B, Bonniere M, Delahaye S, Munnich A, Encha-Razavi F, Lyonnet S, Vekemans M, Attie-Bitach T, Etchevers HC
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1086/518177](https://doi.org/10.1086/518177)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Jun;80(6):1179-87. doi: 10.1086/518177. Epub 2007 Apr 11.

Matthew-Wood syndrome is caused by truncating mutations in the retinol-binding 
protein receptor gene STRA6.

Golzio C(1), Martinovic-Bouriel J, Thomas S, Mougou-Zrelli S, 
Grattagliano-Bessieres B, Bonniere M, Delahaye S, Munnich A, Encha-Razavi F, 
Lyonnet S, Vekemans M, Attie-Bitach T, Etchevers HC.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U781, Hopital Necker, Paris Cedex, France.

Retinoic acid (RA) is a potent teratogen in all vertebrates when tight 
homeostatic controls on its endogenous dose, location, or timing are perturbed 
during early embryogenesis. STRA6 encodes an integral cell-membrane protein that 
favors RA uptake from soluble retinol-binding protein; its transcription is 
directly regulated by RA levels. Molecular analysis of STRA6 was undertaken in 
two human fetuses from consanguineous families we previously described with 
Matthew-Wood syndrome in a context of severe microphthalmia, pulmonary agenesis, 
bilateral diaphragmatic eventration, duodenal stenosis, pancreatic 
malformations, and intrauterine growth retardation. The fetuses had either a 
homozygous insertion/deletion in exon 2 or a homozygous insertion in exon 7 
predicting a premature stop codon in STRA6 transcripts. Five other fetuses 
presenting at least one of the two major signs of clinical anophthalmia or 
pulmonary hypoplasia with at least one of the two associated signs of 
diaphragmatic closure defect or cardiopathy had no STRA6 mutations. These 
findings suggest a molecular basis for the prenatal manifestations of 
Matthew-Wood syndrome and suggest that phenotypic overlap with other 
associations may be due to genetic heterogeneity of elements common to the RA- 
and fibroblast growth factor-signaling cascades.

DOI: 10.1086/518177
PMCID: PMC1867105
PMID: 17503335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]