---
reference_id: "PMID:28601886"
title: "AUNA2: A Novel Type of Non-Syndromic Slowly Progressive Auditory Synaptopathy/Auditory Neuropathy with Autosomal-Dominant Inheritance."
authors:
- Lang-Roth R
- Fischer-Krall E
- Kornblum C
- Nürnberg G
- Meschede D
- Goebel I
- Nürnberg P
- Beutner D
- Kubisch C
- Walger M
- Volk AE
journal: Audiol Neurootol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1159/000474929
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Audiometry, Evoked Response"
- "Audiometry, Pure-Tone"
- Child
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 12/genetics"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 13/genetics"
- Cochlear Nerve/physiopathology
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Genetic Linkage
- Germany
- "Hearing Loss, Central/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/genetics, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Vestibulocochlear Nerve Diseases/genetics, physiopathology"
- White People/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# AUNA2: A Novel Type of Non-Syndromic Slowly Progressive Auditory Synaptopathy/Auditory Neuropathy with Autosomal-Dominant Inheritance.
**Authors:** Lang-Roth R, Fischer-Krall E, Kornblum C, Nürnberg G, Meschede D, Goebel I, Nürnberg P, Beutner D, Kubisch C, Walger M, Volk AE
**Journal:** Audiol Neurootol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000474929](https://doi.org/10.1159/000474929)

## Content

1. Audiol Neurootol. 2017;22(1):30-40. doi: 10.1159/000474929. Epub 2017 Jun 10.

AUNA2: A Novel Type of Non-Syndromic Slowly Progressive Auditory 
Synaptopathy/Auditory Neuropathy with Autosomal-Dominant Inheritance.

Lang-Roth R(1), Fischer-Krall E, Kornblum C, Nürnberg G, Meschede D, Goebel I, 
Nürnberg P, Beutner D, Kubisch C, Walger M, Volk AE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University of 
Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Auditory synaptopathy/neuropathy (AS/AN) is a heterogeneous 
disorder, which may be caused by environmental factors like postnatal 
hyperbilirubinemia or by genetic factors. The genetic forms are subdivided into 
syndromic and non-syndromic types, and show different inheritance patterns with 
a strong preponderance of autosomal-recessive forms. To date, only a single 
locus for non-syndromic autosomal-dominant AS/AN (AUNA1) has been reported in a 
single family, in which a non-coding DIAPH3 mutation was subsequently described 
as causative.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Here, we report detailed clinical data on a large German 
AS/AN family with slowly progressive postlingual hearing loss. Affected family 
members developed their first symptoms in their second decade. Moderate hearing 
loss in the fourth decade then progressed to profound hearing impairment in 
older family members. Comprehensive audiological and neurological tests were 
performed in the affected family members. Genetic testing comprised linkage 
analyses with polymorphic markers and a genome-wide linkage analysis using the 
Affymetrix GeneChip® Human Mapping 250K.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: We identified a large family with autosomal-dominant 
AS/AN. By means of linkage analyses, the AUNA1 locus was excluded, and 
putatively linked regions on chromosomal bands 12q24 and 13q34 were identified 
as likely carrying the second locus for autosomal-dominant AS/AN (AUNA2). AUNA2 
is associated with a slowly progressive postlingual hearing loss without any 
evidence for additional symptoms in other organ systems.

© 2017 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000474929
PMID: 28601886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]