---
reference_id: "PMID:39050850"
title: HLA and KIR genetic association and NK cells in anti-NMDAR encephalitis.
authors:
- Peris Sempere V
- Luo G
- Muñiz-Castrillo S
- Pinto AL
- Picard G
- Rogemond V
- Titulaer MJ
- Finke C
- Leypoldt F
- Kuhlenbäumer G
- GENERATE study group
- Jones HF
- Dale RC
- Binks S
- Irani SR
- Bastiaansen AE
- de Vries JM
- de Bruijn MAAM
- Roelen DL
- Kim TJ
- Chu K
- Lee ST
- Kanbayashi T
- Pollock NR
- Kichula KM
- Mumme-Monheit A
- Honnorat J
- Norman PJ
- Mignot E
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1423149
keywords:
- Humans
- "Killer Cells, Natural/immunology, metabolism"
- "Anti-N-Methyl-D-Aspartate Receptor Encephalitis/genetics, immunology"
- "Receptors, KIR/genetics"
- Female
- Male
- Adult
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- "HLA Antigens/genetics, immunology"
- Middle Aged
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HLA and KIR genetic association and NK cells in anti-NMDAR encephalitis.
**Authors:** Peris Sempere V, Luo G, Muñiz-Castrillo S, Pinto AL, Picard G, Rogemond V, Titulaer MJ, Finke C, Leypoldt F, Kuhlenbäumer G, GENERATE study group, Jones HF, Dale RC, Binks S, Irani SR, Bastiaansen AE, de Vries JM, de Bruijn MAAM, Roelen DL, Kim TJ, Chu K, Lee ST, Kanbayashi T, Pollock NR, Kichula KM, Mumme-Monheit A, Honnorat J, Norman PJ, Mignot E
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2024.1423149](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2024.1423149)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2024 Jul 10;15:1423149. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1423149. 
eCollection 2024.

HLA and KIR genetic association and NK cells in anti-NMDAR encephalitis.

Peris Sempere V(#)(1), Luo G(#)(1), Muñiz-Castrillo S(1), Pinto AL(2)(3), Picard 
G(2)(3), Rogemond V(2)(3), Titulaer MJ(4), Finke C(5)(6), Leypoldt F(7)(8), 
Kuhlenbäumer G(7); GENERATE study group; Jones HF(9), Dale RC(10), Binks 
S(11)(12), Irani SR(11)(13), Bastiaansen AE(4), de Vries JM(4), de Bruijn 
MAAM(4), Roelen DL(14), Kim TJ(15), Chu K(16), Lee ST(16), Kanbayashi T(17), 
Pollock NR(18)(19), Kichula KM(18)(19), Mumme-Monheit A(18)(19), Honnorat 
J(#)(2)(3), Norman PJ(#)(18)(19), Mignot E(#)(1).

Author information:
(1)Stanford Center for Sleep Science and Medicine, Stanford University, Palo 
Alto, CA, United States.
(2)French Reference Center on Paraneoplastic Neurological Syndrome and 
Autoimmune Encephalitis, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France.
(3)Institut MeLiS INSERM U1314/CNRS UMR 5284, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, 
Lyon, France.
(4)Department of Neurology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(5)Department of Neurology and Experimental Neurology, 
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(6)Berlin School of Mind and Brain, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, 
Germany.
(7)Department of Neurology, Christian-Albrechts-University/University Hospital 
Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany.
(8)Neuroimmunology, Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital 
Schleswig-Holstein Kiel/Lübeck, Kiel, Germany.
(9)Starship Hospital, Centre for Brain Research, Faculty of Medical and Health 
Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(10)Kids Neuroscience Centre, Children's Hospital at Westmead clinical school, 
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(11)Oxford Autoimmune Neurology Group, Nuffield Department of Clinical 
Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(12)Department of Neurology, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(13)Departments of Neurology and Neurosciences, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, 
United States.
(14)Department of Immunogenetics and Transplantation Immunology, Leiden 
University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands.
(15)Department of Neurology, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, Republic 
of Korea.
(16)Department of Neurology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul National 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(17)Department of Neurology, Teikyo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(18)Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Colorado School of 
Medicine, Aurora, CO, United States.
(19)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado School of 
Medicine, Aurora, CO, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: Genetic predisposition to autoimmune encephalitis with antibodies 
against N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) is poorly understood. Given the 
diversity of associated environmental factors (tumors, infections), we 
hypothesized that human leukocyte antigen (HLA) and killer-cell 
immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIR), two extremely polymorphic gene complexes 
key to the immune system, might be relevant for the genetic predisposition to 
anti-NMDAR encephalitis. Notably, KIR are chiefly expressed by Natural Killer 
(NK) cells, recognize distinct HLA class I allotypes and play a major role in 
anti-tumor and anti-infection responses.
METHODS: We conducted a Genome Wide Association Study (GWAS) with subsequent 
control-matching using Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and HLA imputation, in 
a multi-ethnic cohort of anti-NMDAR encephalitis (n=479); KIR and HLA were 
further sequenced in a large subsample (n=323). PCA-controlled logistic 
regression was then conducted for carrier frequencies (HLA and KIR) and copy 
number variation (KIR). HLA-KIR interaction associations were also modeled. 
Additionally, single cell sequencing was conducted in peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells from 16 cases and 16 controls, NK cells were sorted and 
phenotyped.
RESULTS: Anti-NMDAR encephalitis showed a weak HLA association with 
DRB1*01:01~DQA1*01:01~DQB1*05:01 (OR=1.57, 1.51, 1.45; respectively), and 
DRB1*11:01 (OR=1.60); these effects were stronger in European descendants and in 
patients without an underlying ovarian teratoma. More interestingly, we found 
increased copy number variation of KIR2DL5B (OR=1.72), principally due to an 
overrepresentation of KIR2DL5B*00201. Further, we identified two allele 
associations in framework genes, KIR2DL4*00103 (25.4% vs. 12.5% in controls, 
OR=1.98) and KIR3DL3*00302 (5.3% vs. 1.3%, OR=4.44). Notably, the ligands of 
these KIR2DL4 and KIR3DL3, respectively, HLA-G and HHLA2, are known to act as 
immune checkpoint with immunosuppressive functions. However, we did not find 
differences in specific KIR-HLA ligand interactions or HLA-G polymorphisms 
between cases and controls. Similarly, gene expression of CD56dim or CD56bright 
NK cells did not differ between cases and controls.
DISCUSSION: Our observations for the first time suggest that the HLA-KIR axis 
might be involved in anti-NMDAR encephalitis. While the genetic risk conferred 
by the identified polymorphisms appears small, a role of this axis in the 
pathophysiology of this disease appears highly plausible and should be analyzed 
in future studies.

Copyright © 2024 Peris Sempere, Luo, Muñiz-Castrillo, Pinto, Picard, Rogemond, 
Titulaer, Finke, Leypoldt, Kuhlenbäumer, GENERATE study group, Jones, Dale, 
Binks, Irani, Bastiaansen, de Vries, de Bruijn, Roelen, Kim, Chu, Lee, 
Kanbayashi, Pollock, Kichula, Mumme-Monheit, Honnorat, Norman and Mignot.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1423149
PMCID: PMC11266021
PMID: 39050850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MT has filed a patent, on behalf of the Erasmus 
MC, for methods for typing neurologic disorders and cancer, and devices for use 
therein; has received research funds for serving on a scientific advisory board 
of AmGen, for consultation at Guidepoint Global LLC, for consultation at UCB; 
and has received an unrestricted research grant from Euroimmun AG and from CSL 
Behring. FL discloses speaker honoraria from Grifols, Teva, Biogen, Bayer, 
Roche, Novartis, Fresenius, travel funding from Merck, Grifols and Bayer and 
serving on advisory boards for Roche, Biogen and Alexion. SI is a co-applicant 
and receives royalties on patent application WO/210/046716 U.K. patent no., 
PCT/GB2009/051441 entitled “Neurological Autoimmune Disorders”; the patent has 
been licensed for the development of assays for LGI1 and other VGKC-complex 
antibodies; has filed a patent Diagnostic Strategy to improve specificity of 
CASPR2 antibody detection; Ref. JA94536P.GBA; has received research support from 
and/or consultancy with UCB, RocheADC therapeutics, CSL Behring and ONO 
Pharmaceuticals. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted 
in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be 
construed as a potential conflict of interest.