---
reference_id: "PMID:23425390"
title: Right-sided rhabdoid colorectal tumors might be related to the serrated pathway.
authors:
- Pancione M
- Remo A
- Sabatino L
- Zanella C
- Votino C
- Fucci A
- Di Blasi A
- Lepore G
- Daniele B
- Fenizia F
- Molinari E
- Normanno N
- Manfrin E
- Vendraminelli R
- Colantuoni V
journal: Diagn Pathol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1186/1746-1596-8-31
keywords:
- "Adenoma/chemistry, genetics, pathology"
- Aged
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis, genetics"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 22"
- "Colorectal Neoplasms/chemistry, genetics, pathology, therapy"
- CpG Islands
- DNA Methylation
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Disease Progression
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Fatal Outcome
- Female
- Gene Rearrangement
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- "Intestinal Mucosa/chemistry, pathology"
- Microsatellite Instability
- Mutation
- Paraffin Embedding
- Phenotype
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- "Rhabdoid Tumor/chemistry, genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Right-sided rhabdoid colorectal tumors might be related to the serrated pathway.
**Authors:** Pancione M, Remo A, Sabatino L, Zanella C, Votino C, Fucci A, Di Blasi A, Lepore G, Daniele B, Fenizia F, Molinari E, Normanno N, Manfrin E, Vendraminelli R, Colantuoni V
**Journal:** Diagn Pathol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1746-1596-8-31](https://doi.org/10.1186/1746-1596-8-31)

## Content

1. Diagn Pathol. 2013 Feb 20;8:31. doi: 10.1186/1746-1596-8-31.

Right-sided rhabdoid colorectal tumors might be related to the serrated pathway.

Pancione M(1), Remo A, Sabatino L, Zanella C, Votino C, Fucci A, Di Blasi A,
Lepore G, Daniele B, Fenizia F, Molinari E, Normanno N, Manfrin E, Vendraminelli
R, Colantuoni V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, University
of Sannio, Benevento, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Rhabdoid colorectal tumor (RCT) is a rare, highly aggressive
neoplasm recurrent in elderly patients, commonly at the caecum. The molecular
mechanisms underlying RCT pathogenesis remain poorly elucidated. The
differential diagnosis is with the malignant rhabdoid tumors of infancy
characterized by genetic inactivation of SMARCB1 (INI1) or deletions of
chromosome 22q12 locus.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To shed light on RCT pathogenesis, we investigated
genetic and epigenetic alterations in two cases of pure and composite RCT and
compared them with the profiles of matched adenomas and normal mucosa.
Immunohistochemical analysis, FISH, methylation specific PCR and DNA sequencing
analysis were performed on paraffin-embedded tissues.
RESULTS: Loss of epithelial markers, (CK20, CDX2 and E-cadherin) and intense
vimentin expression was observed in RCTs but neither in the normal mucosa or
adenomas. INI1 expression was detected in normal mucosa, adenomas and retained
in pure RCT, while it was undetected in composite RCT. Rearrangement of the
22q12 locus was found only in pure RCT. The APC/β-catenin pathway was not
altered, while MLH1 immunostaining was negative in RCTs and positive in adenomas
and normal mucosa. These expression profiles were associated with V600E BRAF
mutation, a progressive accumulation of promoter methylation at specific CIMP
loci and additional genes from the normal mucosa to tubular adenoma and RCT.
CONCLUSIONS: Right-sided RCT could be characterized by epigenetic events and
molecular features likely similar to those occurring in the serrated pathway and
associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition. These extremely rare tumors
may benefit from the use of new biological molecules specific for colorectal
carcinoma.
VIRTUAL SLIDES: The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here:
http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/1641385210804556.

DOI: 10.1186/1746-1596-8-31
PMCID: PMC3640919
PMID: 23425390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
