---
reference_id: "PMID:38053977"
title: Targeting complement in IgA nephropathy.
authors:
- Caravaca-Fontán F
- Gutiérrez E
- Sevillano ÁM
- Praga M
journal: Clin Kidney J
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/ckj/sfad198
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeting complement in IgA nephropathy.
**Authors:** Caravaca-Fontán F, Gutiérrez E, Sevillano ÁM, Praga M
**Journal:** Clin Kidney J (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ckj/sfad198](https://doi.org/10.1093/ckj/sfad198)

## Content

1. Clin Kidney J. 2023 Dec 4;16(Suppl 2):ii28-ii39. doi: 10.1093/ckj/sfad198. 
eCollection 2023 Dec.

Targeting complement in IgA nephropathy.

Caravaca-Fontán F(1), Gutiérrez E(2), Sevillano ÁM(2), Praga M(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Instituto de Investigación Hospital 12 de Octubre 
(imas12), Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre (imas12), 
Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Medicine, Complutense University, Madrid, Spain.

Immunoglobulin A nephropathy (IgAN) is the most common primary 
glomerulonephritis worldwide. Recent years have witnessed significant 
improvements in the understanding of the pathogenesis of IgAN and particularly, 
the pathogenic role of complement activation. The alternative complement pathway 
is the major complement cascade activator in IgAN, and glomerular C3 deposition 
has been shown to correlate with disease progression. In addition, several 
studies have provided insight into the pathogenic role of factor H-related 
proteins -1 and -5 in IgAN, as independent players in complement dysregulation. 
The lectin pathway has also been shown to be associated with the severity of 
IgAN. Glomerular deposition of C4d has been associated with increased histologic 
disease activity, faster decline in estimated glomerular filtration rate and 
higher risk of kidney failure. On the other hand, although overlooked in the 
Oxford classification, numerous studies have shown that the coexistence of 
thrombotic microangiopathy in IgAN is a significant indicator of a poorer 
prognosis. All the breakthroughs in the understanding of the contributing role 
of complement in IgAN have paved the way for the development of new 
complement-targeted therapies in this disease. Several ongoing trials are 
evaluating the efficacy of new agents against factor B (iptacopan, 
Ionis-FB-LRX), C3 (pegcetacoplan), factor D (vemircopan, pelecopan), C5 
(ravulizumab, cemdisiran) and C5a receptor 1 (avacopan). In this study, we 
provide a comprehensive review of the role of complement in IgAN, including the 
emerging mechanisms of complement activation and the promising potential of 
complement inhibitors as a viable treatment option for IgAN.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the ERA.

DOI: 10.1093/ckj/sfad198
PMCID: PMC10695513
PMID: 38053977

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.