---
reference_id: "PMID:23304077"
title: Headache as the sole symptom of nasopharyngeal carcinoma and its clinical implications.
authors:
- Lee YL
- Ho CY
journal: ScientificWorldJournal
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1100/2012/143829
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Carcinoma
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Headache/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma
- "Nasopharyngeal Neoplasms/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- Retrospective Studies
- Symptom Assessment/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Headache as the sole symptom of nasopharyngeal carcinoma and its clinical implications.
**Authors:** Lee YL, Ho CY
**Journal:** ScientificWorldJournal (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1100/2012/143829](https://doi.org/10.1100/2012/143829)

## Content

1. ScientificWorldJournal. 2012;2012:143829. doi: 10.1100/2012/143829. Epub 2012 
Dec 5.

Headache as the sole symptom of nasopharyngeal carcinoma and its clinical 
implications.

Lee YL(1), Ho CY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, No. 201, 
Section 2, Shih-Pai Road, Taipei 11217, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: This study aimed to investigate the clinical features of NPC 
presenting with headache as the primary or sole symptom.
METHODS: The authors retrospectively identified 14 cases of NPC with headache as 
the initial presentation between 2003 and 2008. Headache characteristics, tumor 
staging, and treatment outcomes were assessed.
RESULTS: Most patients had either T4 (n = 12) or T3 (n = 1) tumor. The average 
duration of headaches prior to NPC diagnosis was 7.9 months. The location of the 
headaches was most commonly described as temporal or parietal with various pain 
patterns. Six patients (43%) experienced unilateral headache during attacks 
while the remaining patients reported bilateral or diffuse pain. Of the 14 
patients, 10 (71%) experienced significant improvement in head pain during or 
after the treatment; most of them reported relief shortly after chemoradiation 
was initiated. The 5-year overall survival of these patients was similar to that 
of other NPC patients.
CONCLUSION: Headache can be the only symptom of NPC. A timely diagnosis, albeit 
challenging to physicians, provides good outcomes in terms of both pain relief 
and tumor control.

DOI: 10.1100/2012/143829
PMCID: PMC3523584
PMID: 23304077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]