---
reference_id: "PMID:34362315"
title: "Stress hyperglycemia as first sign of asymptomatic type 1 diabetes: an instructive case."
authors:
- Wang WD
- Chu CH
- Tien CH
- Wang SY
- Liu SY
- Lin CM
journal: BMC Pediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1186/s12887-021-02811-z
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Stress hyperglycemia as first sign of asymptomatic type 1 diabetes: an instructive case.
**Authors:** Wang WD, Chu CH, Tien CH, Wang SY, Liu SY, Lin CM
**Journal:** BMC Pediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12887-021-02811-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12887-021-02811-z)

## Content

1. BMC Pediatr. 2021 Aug 6;21(1):335. doi: 10.1186/s12887-021-02811-z.

Stress hyperglycemia as first sign of asymptomatic type 1 diabetes: an 
instructive case.

Wang WD(1)(2), Chu CH(1)(2), Tien CH(1), Wang SY(3), Liu SY(4), Lin CM(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense 
Medical Center, No. 325, Cheng-Kung Road, Section 2, Neihu 114, Taipei, Taiwan, 
Republic of China.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Kaohsiung Armed Forces General Hospital Zuoying 
Branch, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung 
Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital and College of 
Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense 
Medical Center, No. 325, Cheng-Kung Road, Section 2, Neihu 114, Taipei, Taiwan, 
Republic of China. ming.sandra@msa.hinet.net.

BACKGROUND: Stress hyperglycemia (SH) is considered a transient manifestation 
and routine diagnostic evaluation was thought to be unnecessary due to the lack 
of definite correlation with diabetes mellitus (DM). Although SH was usually 
benign and long-term treatment was superfluous, it might be the first sign of 
insulinopenic status such as type 1 DM (T1DM).
CASE PRESENTATION: We reported a boy with acute asthma attack presented 
incidentally with high blood glucose levels exceeding 300 mg/dL and obvious 
glycemic variability. A prolonged hyperglycemic duration of more than 48 h was 
also noticed. To elucidate his unique situation, glucagon test and insulin 
autoantibody survey were done which showed insulinopenia with positive 
anti-insulin antibody and glutamic acid decarboxylase antibody despite the 
absence of overt DM symptoms and signs.
CONCLUSIONS: This case highlights that SH might be a prodromal presentation in 
T1DM children, especially when accompanied simultaneously with extreme 
hyperglycemia, apparent glucose variability, as well as prolonged hyperglycemic 
duration.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12887-021-02811-z
PMCID: PMC8343951
PMID: 34362315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.

Stress hyperglycemia (SH) is a common clinical manifestation in children with acute illness. It is caused by the increased levels of cortisol, catecholamine and proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IL-1 and IL-6) mediated by the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and the sympathoadrenal system. Since the physiological response of SH increases the glucose uptake of the brain and immune system at a time of stress which in turn enhances the chances of survival, the meticulous investigation and aggressive management to SH were thought to be unnecessary in clinical practice [1]. The prevalence of hyperglycemia, defined as glucose level≧150 mg/dl, has been reported to be ranged from 3.8 to 4.9% children in the emergency department [2–4]. On the other hand, among ill children in intensive care unit (ICU), SH accounted for 36.6 and 44.5% of them at the initial time and within 24 h of the admission, respectively [5]. Because the SH seems associated with the severity of underlying disease, it was usually regarded as a benign phenomenon in acute illness. However, whether the coexistence of other pathogenic etiology could mask or aggravate SH has never been emphasized in the literature.

Previous studies showed no obvious association between SH and type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) [2, 3, 6–10]; therefore, the routine workup for children with SH to confirm T1DM is not recommended while there is no overt signs and/or symptoms of DM. To add a new dimension to the physiological role of SH, we herein reported an asthmatic boy having unique SH with manifestations of extreme hyperglycemia, glucose variability (GV), and prolonged hyperglycemic duration, finally confirmed as T1DM. This instructive case highlights an unusual pattern of SH with possible hidden pathogenesis and further investigation should be considered for precise early diagnosis to prevent subsequent diabetic ketoacidosis.

An 8-year-2-month old Taiwanese boy presented with dyspnea for 1 day. He had no preceding symptoms such as polyphagia, polydipsia, polyuria, or body weight loss during this episode. His past medical history is notable for bronchial asthma and allergic rhinitis without using regular medication. Family history revealed no T1DM or T2DM in family members. Two days before admission, he was noted to have runny nose, productive cough and fever. He was treated with antitussives and antipyretics at a local clinic initially. Because dyspnea along with decreased oral intake was noticed 1 day later, he was sent to primary healthcare center where inhaled terbutaline sulfate and intramuscular dexamethasone were given in consideration of acute exacerbation of bronchial asthma (AEBA). After treatment, laboratory tests showed no acidosis or alkalosis; however, hyperglycemia was noticed (Table 1). Owing to persistent dyspnea, he was referred to our hospital.
Table 1Laboratory data of patientAt primary healthcare centerBiochemistryVenous blood gas analysisGlucose381 mg/dL(70–100)pH7.391(7.32–7.43)Na+133 mmol/L(136–145)PvCO231 mmHg(38–49)K+4.3 mmol/L(3.5–5.1)PvO253.4 mmHg(30–50)Ketone0.7 mmol/L(<  0.6)HCO319.0 mmol/L(22–29)CRP0.5 mg/dL(<  0.8)BE−4.4 mmol/L(− 4 − + 2)On admissionBH 127 cm (25-50th percentile), BW 23 kg (15th percentile), BT 37.1 °C, HR 116 beats/minRR 32 breaths/min, BP 115/64 mmHg, SpO2 99% (nasal cannula with O2 flow rate 3 L/min)Blood cell countUrinalysisWBC10,690/μL(4000–12,000)pH5.0(4.5–8.0)Hb13 g/dL(11.5–14.5)Glucose4+(negative)Plt25.8 × 104 /μL(15 × 104–40 × 104)Ketone body2+(negative)Neutrophil91%(54–62)Occult blood–(negative)Lymphocyte6.7%(25–33)Strip WBC–(negative)BiochemistryArterial blood gas analysisGlucose373 mg/dL(70–100)pH7.318(7.35–7.45)Na+134 mmol/L(136–145)PaCO249 mmHg(35–45)K+4.1 mmol/L(3.5–5.1)PaO267.6 mmHg(75–100)Cl−98 mmol/L(98–107)HCO324.8 mmol/L(21–28)AST14 IU/L(<  50)BE−1.8 mmol/L(−4 − + 2)ALT8 IU/L(<  45)SaO292%(> 95)BUN12 mg/dL(5–18)Cre0.5 mg/dL(0.3–0.7)Ketone0.9 mmol/L(<  0.6)HbA1C7.7%(4.0–5.7)Islet autoantibodiesGlucagon stimulation testInsulin Ab5.7% B/T(<  5.5)TimeC-peptideAnti-GAD7.5 U/mL(<  1.0)0 min0.43 ng/ml(>  0.5)Anti-TPO15.2 U/mL(<  35)6 min1.16 ng/ml(> 1.8)Anti-TG5.0 U/mL(<  20)Ab antibody, Anti-GAD anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase antibody, Anti-TPO anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody, Anti-TG anti-thyroglobulin antibody, AST aspartate aminotransferase, ALT alanine aminotransferase, BE base excess, BH body height, BP blood pressure, BT body temperature, BUN blood urea nitrogen, BW body weight, Cl- chloride, Cre creatinine, CRP C-reactive protein, Hb hemoglobin, HbA1C hemoglobin A1c, HR heart rate, K+ potassium, Na+ sodium, Plt platelet, RR respiratory rate, SaO2 arterial oxygen saturation, SpO2 O2 saturation by pulse oximetry, WBC white blood cells

Laboratory data of patient

BH 127 cm (25-50th percentile), BW 23 kg (15th percentile), BT 37.1 °C, HR 116 beats/min

RR 32 breaths/min, BP 115/64 mmHg, SpO2 99% (nasal cannula with O2 flow rate 3 L/min)

Ab antibody, Anti-GAD anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase antibody, Anti-TPO anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody, Anti-TG anti-thyroglobulin antibody, AST aspartate aminotransferase, ALT alanine aminotransferase, BE base excess, BH body height, BP blood pressure, BT body temperature, BUN blood urea nitrogen, BW body weight, Cl- chloride, Cre creatinine, CRP C-reactive protein, Hb hemoglobin, HbA1C hemoglobin A1c, HR heart rate, K+ potassium, Na+ sodium, Plt platelet, RR respiratory rate, SaO2 arterial oxygen saturation, SpO2 O2 saturation by pulse oximetry, WBC white blood cells

On examination, the patient was alert but distressed. He had normal skin turgor and no dehydrated mucous membranes. Use of accessory muscle and bilateral diffuse wheezing were noticed. There was no acanthosis nigricans over posterior neck or axillae. The thyroid was non-palpable. Laboratory tests showed hyperglycemia, ketonuria and ketonemia (Table 1). Chest radiograph revealed bilateral pulmonary infiltration. Under impression of AEBA, he was admitted to pediatric ICU (PICU).

On observing hyperglycemia, exclusively half-normal saline was infused on the first day of hospitalization. Inhaled beta-2 agonists and intravenous corticosteroids were also given. Nevertheless, blood glucose monitoring disclosed fluctuating hyperglycemia. Although this SH might result from AEBA per se and/or medication, his baseline blood glucose levels were inexplicably higher than 150 mg/dL within the first 24 h and frequently rose above 300 mg/dL or even 400 mg/dL (Fig. 1). The delta blood glucose levels (△BG) could reach 150 to 300 mg/dL in a single hour, suggesting extremely high GV. Moreover, blood glucose exceeding 150 mg/dL could be detected even at 48 h after admission, indicating prolonged hyperglycemic duration. To elucidate this unusual fluctuation of glucose values, further investigations were done which showed increased hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c), positive islet autoantibodies, and insulinopenia in glucagon test (Table 1). Finally, he was diagnosed as T1DM despite the absence of classical DM symptoms.
Fig. 1Blood glucose monitoring of patient after admission. Blood glucose concentration (orange line and dots) measured by regular fingerstick testing over two consecutive days after admission. Delta blood glucose (blue bars) was defined as change in blood glucose values between two adjacent time points, which also represents the trend of glycemic variability over time. Green arrows indicate the use of beta-2 agonists or corticosteroids

Blood glucose monitoring of patient after admission. Blood glucose concentration (orange line and dots) measured by regular fingerstick testing over two consecutive days after admission. Delta blood glucose (blue bars) was defined as change in blood glucose values between two adjacent time points, which also represents the trend of glycemic variability over time. Green arrows indicate the use of beta-2 agonists or corticosteroids

SH is regarded as benign and transient hyperglycemia during acute stress. Accumulating studies have demonstrated that SH was unrelated to T1DM, thus rendering routine confirmatory investigation unnecessary [2, 3, 6–10] (Table 2). Furthermore, extreme SH (ESH), glucose levels ≥300 mg/dL, was rarely seen in children; and it was also unrelated to subsequent DM [10]. Crucially, previous studies showed that only 13% of ESH patients had ketonuria [10]. In view of this, ketonuria in our young boy might be taken as a feature of glucose dysregulation in that ketone body forms rapidly in insufficient insulin environment. Therefore, the current latent T1DM case is an exceptional didactic experience worthy of attention.
Table 2Summary of studies on the relationship between stress hyperglycemia and diabetes mellitusStudyNumbers/Age/CountryAnalysis and ResultsSH association with DMStrengthLimitationOur caseA boy with AEBA 8 yrsTaiwanCase reportAnalyze the SH pattern by regular stick blood glucose testEvaluate HbA1C, glucagon test, insulin Ab, urinalysisSubclinical T1DM is associated with ESH (>  300 mg/dL), high glucose variability (△BG > 150 mg/dL), prolonged hyperglycemic duration (> 48 h) and ketonuriaOffer unique hints of lactent DM during SHDelicate evaluation of T1DM (HbA1C, glucagon test, insulin Ab)Evaluate glucose variabilityCase reportGupta et al. 1997 [2]758 ill children1 m/o to 6 yrs.Delhi, IndiaCross-sectional studySH defined as ≥150 mg/dLSH prevalence: 4.7% (36/758)All SH resolved within 24 h from admissionNo significant association between SH and severity of illnessOGTT were performed in 31 SH subjects and all revealed normal resultsUrinalysis were performed in 30 SH subjects and no ketonuria was foundLarge population-basedUsing OGTT to confirm DMExclude subjects with beta 2 agonist and steroid TxWithout insulin Ab evaluationBhisitkul et al. 1994 [3]926 ill children3 days to 21 yrs.Norfolk,VirginiaCross-sectional and longitudinal studySH defined as ≥150 mg/dLSH prevalence: 3.8% (35/926)SH is associated with severity such as high fever, ICU admission, and intravenous hydrationNo SH subjects were diagnosed with DMLarge population-basedCross-sectional and longitudinal(mean f/u 4 to 9 m/o)Exclude subjects with beta 2 agonist and steroid TxShehadeh et al. 1997 [6]36 ill children1 to 17 yrs.Haifa, IsraelLongitudinal studySH defined as ≥150 mg/dLNo subject was diagnosed with DMSH is a low risk factor of T1DMLongitudinal analysis(mean f/u 3.2 yrs)Evaluation of T1DM(serum Ab, IVGTT)Small population-basedNo asthmatic subjectNo control groupHerskowitz-Dumont et al. 1993 [7]63 children with transient hyperglycemia1 to 18 yrs.Boston, MassachusettsLongitudinal studyHyperglycemia defined as ≥150 mg/dL19 healthy subjects; 44 with illness (11 asthmatic subjects)32% (6/19) healthy subjects and 2.3% (1/44) ill subjects were diagnosed with T1DMTransient hyperglycemia is a high risk to develop T1DM in healthy subjects, but a low risk in ill subjectsNo asthmatic subject developed T1DMLongitudinal analysis (mean f/u 7 yrs)Evaluation of T1DM(serum Ab, IVGTT)Enrolled asthmatic subjectsSmall population-basedNo control groupEshraghi et al. 2014 [8]50 children with history of SHAverage 9.8 yrs.Babol, IranRetrospective cohort studySH defined as ≥200 mg/dLNo subjects were diagnosed with DMInsulin resistance in 16% (8/50) subjectsSH is a low risk factor of T1DM but may be related to Insulin resistanceEvaluation of T1DM(serum Ab, OGTT)Small population-basedExclude subjects with beta 2 agonist and steroid TxBhisitkul et al. 1996 [9]30 ill children with SH,30 ill children without SH,30 healthy subjects4 weeks to 12.4 yrs.Norfolk, VirginiaCase-control and longitudinal studySH defined as ≥150 mg/dLNo subjects were diagnosed with DMSH is a low risk factor of T1DMLongitudinal analysis(mean f/u 31 to 36 m/o)Evaluation of T1DM (serum Ab)Compared with two control goupsExclude subjects with beta 2 agonist and steroid TxNo asthmatic subjectWeiss et al. 2010 [10]55,120 ill children including72 ESH subjectsAverage 8.8 yrs. (ESH subject)Boston, MassachusettsRetrospective cohort studyESH defined as ≥300 mg/dLESH prevalence: 0.13% (72/55120)Asthmatic children account for 31% (22/72) ESH subjectsESH is associated with increased mortality and severity of illnessOnly one subject was diagnosed with steroid induced DMNo asthmatic subject developed T1DM or T2DMNo association between ESH and DMUrinalysis was performed in 53% (38/72) ESH subjects and ketonuria was found in 13% of themLarge population-basedEnrolled asthmatic subjectsInclude subjects with β2 agonist and steroid TxNo control groupJin-Sun Chang et al. 2013 [11]Mice with diabetes(animal model)Animal studyAnalyze the SH pattern of diabetic mice under predator stress (cat)Distinct SH pattern among different types of DMT1DM exhibited the “fast & slow” pattern during SHDescribe glucose fluctuationNot human modelPsychiatric stress may be different from physiological stressAbbreviation: Ab autoantibody, AEBA acute exacerbation of bronchial asthma, DM diabetes mellitus, ESH extreme stress hyperglycemia, f/u follow up, IVGTT intravenous glucose tolerance test, MetS metabolic syndrome, m/o month, OGTT oral glucose tolerance test, SH stress hyperglycemia, T1DM type 1 diabetes mellitus, T2DM type 2 diabetes mellitus, Tx treatment, yrs. years

Summary of studies on the relationship between stress hyperglycemia and diabetes mellitus

758 ill children

1 m/o to 6 yrs.

Delhi, India

Cross-sectional study

SH defined as ≥150 mg/dL

SH prevalence: 4.7% (36/758)

All SH resolved within 24 h from admission

No significant association between SH and severity of illness

OGTT were performed in 31 SH subjects and all revealed normal results

Urinalysis were performed in 30 SH subjects and no ketonuria was found

Large population-based

Using OGTT to confirm DM

Exclude subjects with beta 2 agonist and steroid Tx

Without insulin Ab evaluation

926 ill children

3 days to 21 yrs.

Norfolk,Virginia

Cross-sectional and longitudinal study

SH defined as ≥150 mg/dL

SH prevalence: 3.8% (35/926)

SH is associated with severity such as high fever, ICU admission, and intravenous hydration

Large population-based

Cross-sectional and longitudinal

(mean f/u 4 to 9 m/o)

36 ill children

1 to 17 yrs.

Haifa, Israel

Longitudinal study

SH defined as ≥150 mg/dL

No subject was diagnosed with DM

Longitudinal analysis

(mean f/u 3.2 yrs)

Evaluation of T1DM

(serum Ab, IVGTT)

Small population-based

No asthmatic subject

No control group

63 children with transient hyperglycemia

1 to 18 yrs.

Boston, Massachusetts

Longitudinal study

Hyperglycemia defined as ≥150 mg/dL

19 healthy subjects; 44 with illness (11 asthmatic subjects)

32% (6/19) healthy subjects and 2.3% (1/44) ill subjects were diagnosed with T1DM

Transient hyperglycemia is a high risk to develop T1DM in healthy subjects, but a low risk in ill subjects

No asthmatic subject developed T1DM

Longitudinal analysis (mean f/u 7 yrs)

Evaluation of T1DM

(serum Ab, IVGTT)

Enrolled asthmatic subjects

Small population-based

No control group

50 children with history of SH

Average 9.8 yrs.

Babol, Iran

Retrospective cohort study

SH defined as ≥200 mg/dL

No subjects were diagnosed with DM

Insulin resistance in 16% (8/50) subjects

Evaluation of T1DM

(serum Ab, OGTT)

Small population-based

Exclude subjects with beta 2 agonist and steroid Tx

30 ill children with SH,

30 ill children without SH,

30 healthy subjects

4 weeks to 12.4 yrs.

Norfolk, Virginia

Case-control and longitudinal study

SH defined as ≥150 mg/dL

No subjects were diagnosed with DM

Longitudinal analysis

(mean f/u 31 to 36 m/o)

Evaluation of T1DM (serum Ab)

Compared with two control goups

Exclude subjects with beta 2 agonist and steroid Tx

No asthmatic subject

55,120 ill children including

72 ESH subjects

Average 8.8 yrs. (ESH subject)

Boston, Massachusetts

Retrospective cohort study

ESH defined as ≥300 mg/dL

ESH prevalence: 0.13% (72/55120)

Asthmatic children account for 31% (22/72) ESH subjects

ESH is associated with increased mortality and severity of illness

Only one subject was diagnosed with steroid induced DM

No asthmatic subject developed T1DM or T2DM

No association between ESH and DM

Urinalysis was performed in 53% (38/72) ESH subjects and ketonuria was found in 13% of them

Large population-based

Enrolled asthmatic subjects

Include subjects with β2 agonist and steroid Tx

Mice with diabetes

(animal model)

Animal study

Analyze the SH pattern of diabetic mice under predator stress (cat)

Distinct SH pattern among different types of DM

Not human model

Psychiatric stress may be different from physiological stress

Abbreviation: Ab autoantibody, AEBA acute exacerbation of bronchial asthma, DM diabetes mellitus, ESH extreme stress hyperglycemia, f/u follow up, IVGTT intravenous glucose tolerance test, MetS metabolic syndrome, m/o month, OGTT oral glucose tolerance test, SH stress hyperglycemia, T1DM type 1 diabetes mellitus, T2DM type 2 diabetes mellitus, Tx treatment, yrs. years

In addition to AEBA per se, beta-2 agonists and corticosteroids also increase blood glucose mediated by promoting gluconeogenesis. Accordingly, previous studies regarding SH almost excluded beta-2 agonists and corticosteroids intervention [2, 3, 8, 9] (Table 2); therefore, asthmatic children with underlying DM might be excluded and then underestimated. Interestingly, asthma and T1DM are both immune-mediated disease but their association was not fully clarified. It was reported that children with asthma increase the risk of subsequent T1DM development by 41% when compared to normal population [12]. To date, there were only two studies on a total of 33 asthmatic children exploring the relationship between transient hyperglycemia and asthma, but none of the subjects was diagnosed to have DM eventually [7, 10].

Likewise, in our patient, bronchodilator and steroid might contribute to hyperglycemia and aggravate the severity of SH; hence, drug effect on glucose metabolism should be taken into consideration. Burgess C. et al. reported that only high doses of inhaled beta-2 agonist can significantly increase blood glucose to the peak level of 133 mg/dL after 5 h of treatment in mild-to-moderate asthma subjects [13]. Another study showed that asthmatic patients had a peak value of glucose 293 mg/dL after 4 h of combined treatment with beta-2 agonist and corticosteroid [14]. In the present case, extreme values of blood glucose were inconsistent with the time point of beta-2 agonists and corticosteroids intervention (Fig. 1). Moreover, the inexplicably higher glucose concentration (≥ 300 mg/dL) than those in previous studies, which together supported that dysglycemia of our case might be caused not only by acute stress and drug effect but also by underlying insulinopenia. In addition to peak blood glucose, the duration of SH could be another crucial clue for early detection of latent DM. It has been reported that 67% of ESH subjects normalized their blood glucose levels below 150 mg/dL within 48 h and none of them was subsequently diagnosed with DM [10]. Similarly, Gupta et al. also demonstrated the restoration of SH could be observed within 24 h in all enrolled children with illness and the result of oral glucose tolerance tests done for 86% participants were normal [2]. In the present case, blood glucose above 150 mg/dL was detected even at 48 h after admission (Fig. 1), indicating that this prolonged SH might be caused by latent DM.

To elucidate the pattern of glucose fluctuation under psychiatric stress, T1DM animal models under a predator stress circumstance showed the SH was characterized as “fast and slow” pattern, in which blood glucose rapidly increased and slowly decreased thereafter [11]. Although we cannot fully extrapolate the animal results to humans, blood glucose levels of the present case indeed rapidly increased from 174 mg/dl to 400 mg/dL within 2 h (9th–11th hours after admission), maintained peak levels above 400 mg/dL for 5 h (11th–15th hours after admission) and then decreased slowly to 89 mg/dL (Fig. 1), suggesting a human “fast and slow” pattern along with prolonged SH course in insulinopenic status.

Although HbA1c was a pivotal biomarker of long-term glycemic control with the usefulness to reflect the cumulative glycemic history of the preceding two to three months [15], it cannot tell GV to clinicians. It has been reported that GV was associated with diabetes complication and increased mortality rate in PICU [16, 17]. Hanefeld et al. monitored blood glucose values with continuous glucose measurement systems (CGMS) in abnormal glucose tolerance subjects and control ones and demonstrated a significantly higher amplitude of glucose excursion and standard deviation (SD) in those with abnormal glucose tolerance, suggesting higher GV [18]. Another study focusing on children with positive islet autoantibodies (high risk to future T1DM) revealed those with blood glucose above 140 mg/dL accounted for over 20% study time during a 5- to 7- day -period of CGMS monitor could be used to predict the future development of DM. Compared to patients with negative antibody, a higher SD of blood glucose was noted in those with positive islet autoantibodies [19].

Owing to unconfirmed diagnosis of DM at admission, regular stick blood glucose test was performed for our patient to evaluate his GV under stress instead of real-time CGMS. Significant change of blood glucose was noticed initially after stress exposure; however, obvious variation unexpectedly existed after the resolution of acute stress (Fig. 1). This interesting finding illuminated persistent high GV after stress might be a potent risk factor for underlying T1DM, but further study with more patients is needed to confirm our current findings.

To our knowledge, there has been no prospective study exploring the difference in SH between diabetic and nondiabetic children. This first case highlights an important but still complex relationship between SH (glucose dysregulation) and subclinical T1DM (insulinopenia). We suggest that clinicians should be aware of pathological SH, particularly when it was characterized by features such as ESH (> 300 mg/dl), high GV even after acute phase of illness, prolonged hyperglycemic duration (longer than 48 h) or ketonuria (urine ketone ≥2+), all suggesting that dysglycemia might result from latent diabetes. Then further investigations to traditionally benign SH should be conducted even there were no clinical signs or symptoms of diabetes.