---
reference_id: "PMID:38634969"
title: Characterization of NEB pathogenic variants in patients reveals novel nemaline myopathy disease mechanisms and omecamtiv mecarbil force effects.
authors:
- Karimi E
- Gohlke J
- van der Borgh M
- Lindqvist J
- Hourani Z
- Kolb J
- Cossette S
- Lawlor MW
- Ottenheijm C
- Granzier H
journal: Acta Neuropathol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00401-024-02726-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of NEB pathogenic variants in patients reveals novel nemaline myopathy disease mechanisms and omecamtiv mecarbil force effects.
**Authors:** Karimi E, Gohlke J, van der Borgh M, Lindqvist J, Hourani Z, Kolb J, Cossette S, Lawlor MW, Ottenheijm C, Granzier H
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00401-024-02726-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-024-02726-w)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol. 2024 Apr 18;147(1):72. doi: 10.1007/s00401-024-02726-w.

Characterization of NEB pathogenic variants in patients reveals novel nemaline 
myopathy disease mechanisms and omecamtiv mecarbil force effects.

Karimi E(1), Gohlke J(1), van der Borgh M(1), Lindqvist J(1), Hourani Z(1), Kolb 
J(1), Cossette S(2), Lawlor MW(2)(3), Ottenheijm C(1)(4), Granzier H(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
AZ, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA.
(3)Diverge Translational Science Laboratory, Milwaukee, WI, USA.
(4)Department of Physiology, Amsterdam UMC (Location VUMC), Amsterdam, 
Netherlands.
(5)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
AZ, USA. granzier@arizona.edu.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Dec 21:2023.12.20.572678. doi: 10.1101/2023.12.20.572678.

Nebulin, a critical protein of the skeletal muscle thin filament, plays 
important roles in physiological processes such as regulating thin filament 
length (TFL), cross-bridge cycling, and myofibril alignment. Pathogenic variants 
in the nebulin gene (NEB) cause NEB-based nemaline myopathy (NEM2), a 
genetically heterogeneous disorder characterized by hypotonia and muscle 
weakness, currently lacking curative therapies. In this study, we examined a 
cohort of ten NEM2 patients, each with unique pathogenic variants, aiming to 
understand their impact on mRNA, protein, and functional levels. Results show 
that pathogenic truncation variants affect NEB mRNA stability and lead to 
nonsense-mediated decay of the mutated transcript. Moreover, a high incidence of 
cryptic splice site activation was found in patients with pathogenic splicing 
variants that are expected to disrupt the actin-binding sites of nebulin. 
Determination of protein levels revealed patients with either relatively normal 
or markedly reduced nebulin. We observed a positive relation between the 
reduction in nebulin and a reduction in TFL, or reduction in tension (both 
maximal and submaximal tension). Interestingly, our study revealed a pathogenic 
duplication variant in nebulin that resulted in a four-copy gain in the 
triplicate region of NEB and a much larger nebulin protein and longer TFL. 
Additionally, we investigated the effect of Omecamtiv mecarbil (OM), a 
small-molecule activator of cardiac myosin, on force production of type 1 muscle 
fibers of NEM2 patients. OM treatment substantially increased submaximal tension 
across all NEM2 patients ranging from 87 to 318%, with the largest effects in 
patients with the lowest level of nebulin. In summary, this study indicates that 
post-transcriptional or post-translational mechanisms regulate nebulin 
expression. Moreover, we propose that the pathomechanism of NEM2 involves not 
only shortened but also elongated thin filaments, along with the disruption of 
actin-binding sites resulting from pathogenic splicing variants. Significantly, 
our findings highlight the potential of OM treatment to improve skeletal muscle 
function in NEM2 patients, especially those with large reductions in nebulin 
levels.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-024-02726-w
PMCID: PMC11026289
PMID: 38634969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests related to this study.