---
reference_id: "PMID:24700731"
title: The WNT10A gene in ectodermal dysplasias and selective tooth agenesis.
authors:
- Mues G
- Bonds J
- Xiang L
- Vieira AR
- Seymen F
- Klein O
- "D'Souza RN"
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36520
keywords:
- Alleles
- Anodontia
- Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics
- Gene Frequency/genetics
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Mutation/genetics
- Odontogenesis/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide/genetics"
- Tooth/pathology
- Tooth Abnormalities/genetics
- Wnt Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The WNT10A gene in ectodermal dysplasias and selective tooth agenesis.
**Authors:** Mues G, Bonds J, Xiang L, Vieira AR, Seymen F, Klein O, D'Souza RN
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.36520](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.36520)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Oct;164A(10):2455-60. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36520. Epub 
2014 Apr 3.

The WNT10A gene in ectodermal dysplasias and selective tooth agenesis.

Mues G(1), Bonds J, Xiang L, Vieira AR, Seymen F, Klein O, D'Souza RN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University-HSC Baylor College of 
Dentistry, Dallas, Texas.

Mutations in the WNT10A gene were first detected in the rare syndrome 
odonto-onycho-dermal dysplasia (OODD, OMIM257980) but have now also been found 
to cause about 35-50% of selective tooth agenesis (STHAG4, OMIM150400), a common 
disorder that mostly affects the permanent dentition. In our random sample of 
tooth agenesis patients, 40% had at least one mutation in the WNT10A gene. The 
WNT10A Phe228Ile variant alone reached an allele frequency of 0.21 in the tooth 
agenesis cohort, about 10 times higher than the allele frequency reported in 
large SNP databases for Caucasian populations. Patients with bi-allelic WNT10A 
mutations have severe tooth agenesis while heterozygous individuals are either 
unaffected or have a mild phenotype. Mutations in the coding areas of the WNT10B 
gene, which is co-expressed with WNT10A during odontogenesis, and the WNT6 gene 
which is located at the same chromosomal locus as WNT10A in humans, do not 
contribute to the tooth agenesis phenotype.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36520
PMCID: PMC4167166
PMID: 24700731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]