---
reference_id: PMID:22095454
title: Molecular mimicry as a mechanism of autoimmune disease.
authors:
- Cusick MF
- Libbey JE
- Fujinami RS
journal: Clin Rev Allergy Immunol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1007/s12016-011-8294-7
keywords:
- Animals
- Antigens/immunology
- Autoimmune Diseases/immunology
- Autoimmunity/immunology
- Humans
- Molecular Mimicry/immunology
- "Receptors, Antigen, T-Cell/immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular mimicry as a mechanism of autoimmune disease.
**Authors:** Cusick MF, Libbey JE, Fujinami RS
**Journal:** Clin Rev Allergy Immunol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12016-011-8294-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12016-011-8294-7)

## Content

1. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2012 Feb;42(1):102-11. doi:
10.1007/s12016-011-8294-7.

Molecular mimicry as a mechanism of autoimmune disease.

Cusick MF(1), Libbey JE, Fujinami RS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA.

A variety of mechanisms have been suggested as the means by which infections can 
initiate and/or exacerbate autoimmune diseases. One mechanism is molecular 
mimicry, where a foreign antigen shares sequence or structural similarities with 
self-antigens. Molecular mimicry has typically been characterized on an antibody 
or T cell level. However, structural relatedness between pathogen and self does 
not account for T cell activation in a number of autoimmune diseases. A proposed 
mechanism that could have been misinterpreted for molecular mimicry is the 
expression of dual T cell receptors (TCR) on a single T cell. These T cells have 
dual reactivity to both foreign and self-antigens leaving the host vulnerable to 
foreign insults capable of triggering an autoimmune response. In this review, we 
briefly discuss what is known about molecular mimicry followed by a discussion 
of the current understanding of dual TCRs. Finally, we discuss three mechanisms, 
including molecular mimicry, dual TCRs, and chimeric TCRs, by which dual 
reactivity of the T cell may play a role in autoimmune diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/s12016-011-8294-7
PMCID: PMC3266166
PMID: 22095454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]