---
reference_id: "PMID:35366614"
title: "A rare cause of primary amenorrhea: LHCGR gene mutations."
authors:
- Aktar Karakaya A
- Çayır A
- Unal E
- Beştaş A
- Ece Solmaz A
- Kenan Haspolat Y
journal: Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejogrb.2022.03.033
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A rare cause of primary amenorrhea: LHCGR gene mutations.
**Authors:** Aktar Karakaya A, Çayır A, Unal E, Beştaş A, Ece Solmaz A, Kenan Haspolat Y
**Journal:** Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejogrb.2022.03.033](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejogrb.2022.03.033)

## Content

1. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2022 May;272:193-197. doi: 
10.1016/j.ejogrb.2022.03.033. Epub 2022 Mar 19.

A rare cause of primary amenorrhea: LHCGR gene mutations.

Aktar Karakaya A(1), Çayır A(2), Unal E(3), Beştaş A(3), Ece Solmaz A(4), Kenan 
Haspolat Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Faculty of Medicine, Dicle University, 
Diyarbakir, Turkey. Electronic address: aktarkarakaya@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Erzurum Regional Training and Research 
Hospital Erzurum, Turkey.
(3)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Faculty of Medicine, Dicle University, 
Diyarbakir, Turkey.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Ege University, İzmir, 
Turkey.

INTRODUCTION: The luteinizing hormone/choriogonadotropin receptor (LHCGR) plays 
a critical role in sexual differentiation and reproductive functions in men and 
women. Inactivating mutations in this gene lead to Leydig cell hypoplasia (LCH), 
and cause disorders of sex development (DSD) in patients with 46,XY. In this 
study, it was aimed to discuss the clinical, laboratory and molecular genetic 
analysis results of nine patients with 46,XY karyotype who had mutations in the 
LHCGR gene.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The ages, complaints, anthropometric measurements and 
hormonal results (follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), 
testosterone) of the patients at the time of admission were recorded 
retrospectively from their medical records. The mutations in the LHCGR gene were 
investigated using the Sanger sequencing method.
FINDINGS: In this study, LHCGR gene mutations were detected in a total of nine 
patients as a result of the analysis of the index patients presenting with 
primary amenorrhea from four different families and the examination of the 
families. In the first three families with no consanguinity between, the same 
mutation was detected in seven patients in total (Homozygous c.161 + 4A > G). A 
different mutation was detected in the fourth family (Homozygous p.A483D 
c.1448C > A).
CONCLUSION: In this study, nine patients with karyotype 46,XY, most of whom 
presented with the complaint of delayed puberty/primary amenorrhea, were 
diagnosed with LCH. Especially in patients, in whom the elevation of LH is 
pronounced and there is no testosterone synthesis, LCH should be considered.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejogrb.2022.03.033
PMID: 35366614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]