---
reference_id: "PMID:37508007"
title: "Biosynthesis, Deficiency, and Supplementation of Coenzyme Q."
authors:
- Staiano C
- García-Corzo L
- Mantle D
- Turton N
- Millichap LE
- Brea-Calvo G
- Hargreaves I
journal: Antioxidants (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/antiox12071469
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biosynthesis, Deficiency, and Supplementation of Coenzyme Q.
**Authors:** Staiano C, García-Corzo L, Mantle D, Turton N, Millichap LE, Brea-Calvo G, Hargreaves I
**Journal:** Antioxidants (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/antiox12071469](https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox12071469)

## Content

1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2023 Jul 21;12(7):1469. doi: 10.3390/antiox12071469.

Biosynthesis, Deficiency, and Supplementation of Coenzyme Q.

Staiano C(1)(2)(3), García-Corzo L(1)(2)(3), Mantle D(4), Turton N(5), Millichap 
LE(5), Brea-Calvo G(1)(2)(3), Hargreaves I(5).

Author information:
(1)Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo, Universidad Pablo de 
Olavide-CSIC-JA, 41013 Sevilla, Spain.
(2)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red en Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), 
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 28029 Madrid, Spain.
(3)Departamento de Fisiología, Anatomía y Biología Celular, Universidad Pablo de 
Olavide, 41013 Sevilla, Spain.
(4)Pharma Nord (UK) Ltd., Morpeth NE61 2DB, UK.
(5)School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Sciences, Liverpool John Moores 
University, Merseyside L3 5UX, UK.

Originally identified as a key component of the mitochondrial respiratory chain, 
Coenzyme Q (CoQ or CoQ10 for human tissues) has recently been revealed to be 
essential for many different redox processes, not only in the mitochondria, but 
elsewhere within other cellular membrane types. Cells rely on endogenous CoQ 
biosynthesis, and defects in this still-not-completely understood pathway result 
in primary CoQ deficiencies, a group of conditions biochemically characterised 
by decreased tissue CoQ levels, which in turn are linked to functional defects. 
Secondary CoQ deficiencies may result from a wide variety of cellular 
dysfunctions not directly linked to primary synthesis. In this article, we 
review the current knowledge on CoQ biosynthesis, the defects leading to 
diminished CoQ10 levels in human tissues and their associated clinical 
manifestations.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox12071469
PMCID: PMC10375973
PMID: 37508007

Conflict of interest statement: D.M. is a medical adviser to Pharma Nord (UK) 
Ltd. The company had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, 
analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the 
decision to publish the results.