---
reference_id: "PMID:38479735"
title: "HFE genotypes, haemochromatosis diagnosis and clinical outcomes at age 80 years: a prospective cohort study in the UK Biobank."
authors:
- Lucas MR
- Atkins JL
- Pilling LC
- Shearman JD
- Melzer D
journal: BMJ Open
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2023-081926
keywords:
- Adult
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Biological Specimen Banks
- Delirium/complications
- Genotype
- "Hemochromatosis/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Hemochromatosis Protein/genetics
- Histocompatibility Antigens Class I/genetics
- Homozygote
- Liver Diseases/complications
- Mutation
- Prospective Studies
- UK Biobank
- Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HFE genotypes, haemochromatosis diagnosis and clinical outcomes at age 80 years: a prospective cohort study in the UK Biobank.
**Authors:** Lucas MR, Atkins JL, Pilling LC, Shearman JD, Melzer D
**Journal:** BMJ Open (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bmjopen-2023-081926](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2023-081926)

## Content

1. BMJ Open. 2024 Mar 13;14(3):e081926. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2023-081926.

HFE genotypes, haemochromatosis diagnosis and clinical outcomes at age 80 years: 
a prospective cohort study in the UK Biobank.

Lucas MR(#)(1), Atkins JL(#)(1), Pilling LC(1), Shearman JD(2), Melzer D(3).

Author information:
(1)Epidemiology and Public Health Group, Department of Clinical and Biomedical 
Sciences, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, South Warwickshire University NHS Foundation 
Trust, Warwick, UK.
(3)Epidemiology and Public Health Group, Department of Clinical and Biomedical 
Sciences, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK 
d.melzer@exeter.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVES: HFE haemochromatosis genetic variants have an uncertain clinical 
penetrance, especially to older ages and in undiagnosed groups. We estimated 
p.C282Y and p.H63D variant cumulative incidence of multiple clinical outcomes in 
a large community cohort.
DESIGN: Prospective cohort study.
SETTING: 22 assessment centres across England, Scotland, and Wales in the UK 
Biobank (2006-2010).
PARTICIPANTS: 451 270 participants genetically similar to the 1000 Genomes 
European reference population, with a mean of 13.3-year follow-up through 
hospital inpatient, cancer registries and death certificate data.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Cox proportional HRs of incident clinical outcomes and 
mortality in those with HFE p.C282Y/p.H63D mutations compared with those with no 
variants, stratified by sex and adjusted for age, assessment centre and genetic 
stratification. Cumulative incidences were estimated from age 40 years to 80 
years.
RESULTS: 12.1% of p.C282Y+/+ males had baseline (mean age 57 years) 
haemochromatosis diagnoses, with a cumulative incidence of 56.4% at age 80 
years. 33.1% died vs 25.4% without HFE variants (HR 1.29, 95% CI: 1.12 to 1.48, 
p=4.7×10-4); 27.9% vs 17.1% had joint replacements, 20.3% vs 8.3% had liver 
disease, and there were excess delirium, dementia, and Parkinson's disease but 
not depression. Associations, including excess mortality, were similar in the 
group undiagnosed with haemochromatosis. 3.4% of women with p.C282Y+/+ had 
baseline haemochromatosis diagnoses, with a cumulative incidence of 40.5% at age 
80 years. There were excess incident liver disease (8.9% vs 6.8%; HR 1.62, 
95% CI: 1.27 to 2.05, p=7.8×10-5), joint replacements and delirium, with similar 
results in the undiagnosed. p.C282Y/p.H63D and p.H63D+/+ men or women had no 
statistically significant excess fatigue or depression at baseline and no excess 
incident outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Male and female p.C282Y homozygotes experienced greater excess 
morbidity than previously documented, including those undiagnosed with 
haemochromatosis in the community. As haemochromatosis diagnosis rates were low 
at baseline despite treatment being considered effective, trials of screening to 
identify people with p.C282Y homozygosity early appear justified.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2024. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2023-081926
PMCID: PMC10936495
PMID: 38479735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.