---
reference_id: "PMID:19865100"
title: Pediatric mastocytosis is a clonal disease associated with D816V and other activating c-KIT mutations.
authors:
- Bodemer C
- Hermine O
- Palmérini F
- Yang Y
- Grandpeix-Guyodo C
- Leventhal PS
- Hadj-Rabia S
- Nasca L
- Georgin-Lavialle S
- Cohen-Akenine A
- Launay JM
- Barete S
- Feger F
- Arock M
- Catteau B
- Sans B
- Stalder JF
- Skowron F
- Thomas L
- Lorette G
- Plantin P
- Bordigoni P
- Lortholary O
- de Prost Y
- Moussy A
- Sobol H
- Dubreuil P
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1038/jid.2009.281
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Age of Onset
- Animals
- Biopsy
- COS Cells
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chlorocebus aethiops
- Clone Cells
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- Genomics
- Genotype
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Mast Cells/pathology, physiology"
- "Mastocytosis, Cutaneous/genetics, pathology"
- Phenotype
- Point Mutation
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-kit/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric mastocytosis is a clonal disease associated with D816V and other activating c-KIT mutations.
**Authors:** Bodemer C, Hermine O, Palmérini F, Yang Y, Grandpeix-Guyodo C, Leventhal PS, Hadj-Rabia S, Nasca L, Georgin-Lavialle S, Cohen-Akenine A, Launay JM, Barete S, Feger F, Arock M, Catteau B, Sans B, Stalder JF, Skowron F, Thomas L, Lorette G, Plantin P, Bordigoni P, Lortholary O, de Prost Y, Moussy A, Sobol H, Dubreuil P
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/jid.2009.281](https://doi.org/10.1038/jid.2009.281)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 2010 Mar;130(3):804-15. doi: 10.1038/jid.2009.281. Epub
2009  Oct 29.

Pediatric mastocytosis is a clonal disease associated with D816V and other 
activating c-KIT mutations.

Bodemer C(1), Hermine O, Palmérini F, Yang Y, Grandpeix-Guyodo C, Leventhal PS, 
Hadj-Rabia S, Nasca L, Georgin-Lavialle S, Cohen-Akenine A, Launay JM, Barete S, 
Feger F, Arock M, Catteau B, Sans B, Stalder JF, Skowron F, Thomas L, Lorette G, 
Plantin P, Bordigoni P, Lortholary O, de Prost Y, Moussy A, Sobol H, Dubreuil P.

Author information:
(1)Service de Dermatologie, Hôpital Necker, CEREMAST, Centre de Référence des 
Mastocytoses, Faculté Necker, Université René Descartes Paris V, Paris, France. 
christine.bodemer@nck.aphp.fr

Comment in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2010 Mar;130(3):639. doi: 10.1038/jid.2009.448.
    J Invest Dermatol. 2010 Mar;130(3):648-50. doi: 10.1038/jid.2009.291.

Adult mastocytosis is an incurable clonal disease associated with c-KIT 
mutations, mostly in exon 17 (D816V). In contrast, pediatric mastocytosis often 
spontaneously regresses and is considered a reactive disease. Previous studies 
on childhood mastocytosis assessed only a few patients and focused primarily on 
codon 816 mutations, with various results. In this study, we analyzed the entire 
c-KIT sequence from cutaneous biopsies of 50 children with mastocytosis (ages 
0-16 years). A mutation of codon 816 (exon 17) was found in 42% of cases, and 
mutations outside exon 17 were observed in 44%. Unexpectedly, half of the 
mutations were located in the fifth Ig loop of c-KIT's extracellular domain, 
which is encoded by exons 8 and 9. All mutations identified in this study were 
somatic and caused a constitutive activation of c-KIT. There was no clear 
phenotype-genotype correlation, no clear relationship between the mutations and 
familial versus spontaneous disease, and no significant change in the relative 
expression of the c-KIT GNNK+ and GNNK isoforms. These findings strongly support 
the idea that, although pediatric mastocytosis can spontaneously regress, it is 
a clonal disease most commonly associated with activating mutations in c-KIT.

DOI: 10.1038/jid.2009.281
PMID: 19865100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]