---
reference_id: "PMID:37488103"
title: μeV electron spectromicroscopy using free-space light.
authors:
- Auad Y
- Dias EJC
- Tencé M
- Blazit JD
- Li X
- Zagonel LF
- Stéphan O
- Tizei LHG
- García de Abajo FJ
- Kociak M
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-39979-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# μeV electron spectromicroscopy using free-space light.
**Authors:** Auad Y, Dias EJC, Tencé M, Blazit JD, Li X, Zagonel LF, Stéphan O, Tizei LHG, García de Abajo FJ, Kociak M
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-023-39979-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-39979-0)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2023 Jul 24;14(1):4442. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-39979-0.

μeV electron spectromicroscopy using free-space light.

Auad Y(1), Dias EJC(2), Tencé M(1), Blazit JD(1), Li X(1), Zagonel LF(3),
Stéphan O(1), Tizei LHG(1), García de Abajo FJ(4)(5), Kociak M(6).

Author information:
(1)Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Laboratoire de Physique des Solides, 91405,
Orsay, France.
(2)ICFO-Institut de Ciencies Fotoniques, The Barcelona Institute of Science and
Technology, 08860, Castelldefels, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Gleb Wataghin Institute of Physics, University of Campinas - UNICAMP,
13083-859, Campinas, SP, Brazil.
(4)ICFO-Institut de Ciencies Fotoniques, The Barcelona Institute of Science and
Technology, 08860, Castelldefels, Barcelona, Spain.
javier.garciadeabajo@nanophotonics.es.
(5)ICREA-Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats, Passeig Lluís
Companys 23, 08010, Barcelona, Spain. javier.garciadeabajo@nanophotonics.es.
(6)Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Laboratoire de Physique des Solides, 91405,
Orsay, France. mathieu.kociak@universite-paris-saclay.fr.

The synergy between free electrons and light has recently been leveraged to
reach an impressive degree of simultaneous spatial and spectral resolution,
enabling applications in microscopy and quantum optics. However, the required
combination of electron optics and light injection into the spectrally narrow
modes of arbitrary specimens remains a challenge. Here, we demonstrate
microelectronvolt spectral resolution with a sub-nanometer probe of photonic
modes with quality factors as high as 104. We rely on mode matching of a tightly
focused laser beam to whispering gallery modes to achieve a 108-fold increase in
light-electron coupling efficiency. By adapting the shape and size of free-space
optical beams to address specific physical questions, our approach allows us to
interrogate any type of photonic structure with unprecedented spectral and
spatial detail.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-39979-0
PMCID: PMC10366080
PMID: 37488103

Conflict of interest statement: M.K. is a consultant for Attolight. M.K.,
L.F.Z., M.T., and J.L.D. have licensed know-how and patents to Attolight. M.T.
has licensed know-how to Quantum Detectors. Other authors declare no conflicts
of interest.
