---
reference_id: "PMID:36993809"
title: "Long-term outcome of Bartter syndrome in 54 patients: A multicenter study in Korea."
authors:
- Choi N
- Kim SH
- Bae EH
- Yang EM
- Lee KH
- Lee SH
- Lee JH
- Ahn YH
- Cheong HI
- Kang HG
- Hyun HS
- Kim JH
journal: Front Med (Lausanne)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1099840
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term outcome of Bartter syndrome in 54 patients: A multicenter study in Korea.
**Authors:** Choi N, Kim SH, Bae EH, Yang EM, Lee KH, Lee SH, Lee JH, Ahn YH, Cheong HI, Kang HG, Hyun HS, Kim JH
**Journal:** Front Med (Lausanne) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmed.2023.1099840](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2023.1099840)

## Content

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2023 Mar 13;10:1099840. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1099840. 
eCollection 2023.

Long-term outcome of Bartter syndrome in 54 patients: A multicenter study in 
Korea.

Choi N(1)(2), Kim SH(1)(2), Bae EH(3), Yang EM(4), Lee KH(5), Lee SH(6), Lee 
JH(7), Ahn YH(1)(2)(8), Cheong HI(9), Kang HG(1)(2)(8)(10), Hyun HS(11), Kim 
JH(1)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University Children's Hospital, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Medical School, Chonnam National University, 
Gwangju, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Chonnam National University Hospital, Gwangju, 
Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Kyung Hee University Hospital at Gangdong, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Ulsan University Asan Medical Center, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.
(8)Kidney Research Institute, Seoul National University Medical Research Center, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Anyang, 
Republic of Korea.
(10)Wide River Institute of Immunology, Seoul National University, Hongcheon, 
Republic of Korea.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, St. Vincent's Hospital, The 
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seongnam, Republic of Korea.

Erratum in
    Front Med (Lausanne). 2023 May 31;10:1225353. doi: 
10.3389/fmed.2023.1225353.

INTRODUCTION: Bartter syndrome (BS) is a rare salt-wasting tubulopathy caused by 
mutations in genes encoding sodium, potassium, or chloride transporters of the 
thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle and/or the distal convoluted tubule of 
the kidney. BS is characterized by polyuria, failure to thrive, hypokalemia, 
metabolic alkalosis, hyperreninemia, and hyperaldosteronism. Potassium and/or 
sodium supplements, potassium-sparing diuretics, and nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs can be used to treat BS. While its symptoms and initial 
management are relatively well known, long-term outcomes and treatments are 
scarce.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed 54 Korean patients who were clinically or 
genetically diagnosed with BS from seven centers in Korea.
RESULTS: All patients included in this study were clinically or genetically 
diagnosed with BS at a median age of 5 (range, 0-271) months, and their median 
follow-up was 8 (range, 0.5-27) years. Genetic diagnosis of BS was confirmed in 
39 patients: 4 had SLC12A1 gene mutations, 1 had KCNJ1 gene mutations, 33 had 
CLCNKB gene mutations, and 1 had BSND mutation. Potassium chloride supplements 
and potassium-sparing diuretics were administered in 94% and 68% of patients, 
respectively. The mean dosage of potassium chloride supplements was 5.0 and 
2.1 mEq/day/kg for patients younger and older than 18 years, respectively. 
Nephrocalcinosis was a common finding of BS, and it also improved with age in 
some patients. At the last follow-up of 8 years after the initial diagnosis, 41% 
had short stature (height less than 3rd percentile) and impaired kidney function 
was observed in six patients [chronic kidney disease (CKD) G3, n = 4; CKD G5, 
n = 2].
CONCLUSION: BS patients require a large amount of potassium supplementation 
along with potassium-sparing agents throughout their lives, but tend to improve 
with age. Despite management, a significant portion of this population exhibited 
growth impairment, while 11% developed CKD G3-G5.

Copyright © 2023 Choi, Kim, Bae, Yang, Lee, Lee, Lee, Ahn, Cheong, Kang, Hyun 
and Kim.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1099840
PMCID: PMC10040751
PMID: 36993809

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.