---
reference_id: "PMID:37569275"
title: Alternations of NF-κB Signaling by Natural Compounds in Muscle-Derived Cancers.
authors:
- Radzka J
- Łapińska Z
- Szwedowicz U
- Gajewska-Naryniecka A
- Gizak A
- Kulbacka J
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms241511900
keywords:
- Humans
- NF-kappa B/metabolism
- Signal Transduction
- "Curcumin/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Rhabdomyosarcoma
- Muscles/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alternations of NF-κB Signaling by Natural Compounds in Muscle-Derived Cancers.
**Authors:** Radzka J, Łapińska Z, Szwedowicz U, Gajewska-Naryniecka A, Gizak A, Kulbacka J
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms241511900](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms241511900)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Jul 25;24(15):11900. doi: 10.3390/ijms241511900.

Alternations of NF-κB Signaling by Natural Compounds in Muscle-Derived Cancers.

Radzka J(1), Łapińska Z(2), Szwedowicz U(2), Gajewska-Naryniecka A(2), Gizak
A(1), Kulbacka J(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Neurobiology, Faculty of Biology,
University of Wroclaw, 50-335 Wroclaw, Poland.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Wroclaw
Medical University, 50-556 Wroclaw, Poland.
(3)Department of Immunology, State Research Institute Centre for Innovative
Medicine, 08410 Vilnius, Lithuania.

The NF-κB-signaling pathway plays a crucial role in cancer progression,
including muscle-derived cancers such as rhabdomyosarcoma or sarcoma. Several
natural compounds have been studied for their ability to alter NF-κB signaling
in these types of cancers. This review paper summarizes the current knowledge on
the effects of natural compounds, including curcumin, resveratrol, quercetin,
epigallocatechin-3-gallate, and berberine, on NF-κB signaling in muscle-derived
cancers. These compounds have been shown to inhibit NF-κB signaling in
rhabdomyosarcoma cells through various mechanisms, such as inhibiting the
activation of the IKK complex and the NF-κB transcription factor. These findings
suggest that natural compounds could be potential therapeutic agents for
muscle-derived cancers. However, further research is needed to fully understand
their mechanisms of action and potential clinical applications.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241511900
PMCID: PMC10418583
PMID: 37569275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
