---
reference_id: "PMID:25453570"
title: Varicella-zoster virus and virus DNA in the blood and oropharynx of people with latent or active varicella-zoster virus infections.
authors:
- Levin MJ
journal: J Clin Virol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2014.09.012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Varicella-zoster virus and virus DNA in the blood and oropharynx of people with latent or active varicella-zoster virus infections.
**Authors:** Levin MJ
**Journal:** J Clin Virol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jcv.2014.09.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcv.2014.09.012)

## Content

1. J Clin Virol. 2014 Dec;61(4):487-95. doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2014.09.012. Epub 2014
 Oct 2.

Varicella-zoster virus and virus DNA in the blood and oropharynx of people with 
latent or active varicella-zoster virus infections.

Levin MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, University of Colorado School of 
Medicine, Aurora, CO, United States. Electronic address: 
myron.levin@ucdenver.edu.

Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) can be detected in the blood from approximately 5 
days before to 4 days after varicella. VZV DNA, primarily in T-lymphocytes, is 
detected as early as 8-10 days prior to rash and can persist for a week. The 
duration and magnitude of VZV DNAemia correlates with immune status and the 
efficacy of antiviral therapy. VZV DNA is also readily detected in the 
oropharynx just prior to rash and for 1-2 weeks thereafter. Detection of VZV DNA 
in blood and saliva has been useful for diagnosis and prognosis in atypical 
cases of varicella. Herpes zoster (HZ) is also characterized by VZV DNAemia at 
onset and for many weeks thereafter, and VZV DNA is present in the oropharynx 
shortly after HZ onset. Detection of VZV DNA in blood and saliva facilitates the 
diagnosis of zoster sine herpete and other atypical manifestations of VZV 
reactivation, such as neurologic syndromes when cerebrospinal fluid is not 
available, Bell's palsy, and atypical pain syndromes. VZV DNA is sometimes 
present in the blood and saliva of asymptomatic individuals. In total these 
observations extend understanding of the pathophysiology and epidemiology of 
VZV, and increasingly contribute to the clinical management of VZV infections.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcv.2014.09.012
PMID: 25453570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]