---
reference_id: "PMID:21797750"
title: "Cardiovascular surgery in Marfan syndrome: implications of new molecular concepts in thoracic aortic disease."
authors:
- Schoenhoff FS
- Cameron DE
- Matyas G
- Carrel TP
journal: Future Cardiol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.2217/fca.11.37
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiovascular surgery in Marfan syndrome: implications of new molecular concepts in thoracic aortic disease.
**Authors:** Schoenhoff FS, Cameron DE, Matyas G, Carrel TP
**Journal:** Future Cardiol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.2217/fca.11.37](https://doi.org/10.2217/fca.11.37)

## Content

1. Future Cardiol. 2011 Jul;7(4):557-69. doi: 10.2217/fca.11.37.

Cardiovascular surgery in Marfan syndrome: implications of new molecular 
concepts in thoracic aortic disease.

Schoenhoff FS(1), Cameron DE, Matyas G, Carrel TP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, University Hospital Bern, 
Freiburgstrasse, 3010 Bern, Switzerland.

Acute dissection and rupture of aortic aneurysms comprise for 1-2% of all deaths 
in industrialized countries. Dilation of the aorta is caused by a multitude of 
mechanisms including inherited connective tissue disorders such as Marfan 
syndrome (MFS). MFS is one of the most common inherited connective tissue 
disorders affecting 1 in 5000 individuals. Although the phenotype of MFS can be 
quite variable, aneurysmal dilation of the aortic root and consecutive acute 
aortic dissection is the leading cause of death in this patient population. Over 
the past years it has been shown that a comprehensive understanding of this 
disorder provides greater understanding of vascular wall biology and identifies 
pathways relevant to aortic aneurysms and dissection in general. The current 
review discusses the surgical management of patients with MFS with a special 
emphasis on indications for surgery in this complex group of patients.

DOI: 10.2217/fca.11.37
PMID: 21797750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]