---
reference_id: "PMID:34860720"
title: "Cholesteatoma Is Associated With Pediatric Progressive Sensorineural Hearing Loss."
journal: Ear Hear
year: "2022"
doi: 10.1097/AUD.0000000000001176
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cholesteatoma Is Associated With Pediatric Progressive Sensorineural Hearing Loss.

## Content

Objectives: This study identified an association between cholesteatoma and
progressive sensorineural hearing loss using a large pediatric longitudinal
audiologic dataset. Cholesteatoma is a potential sequela of chronic otitis media
with effusion, a commonly observed auditory pathology that can contribute to
hearing loss in children. The purpose of this report is to (i) describe the
process of identifying the association between cholesteatoma and progressive
sensorineural hearing loss in a large pediatric dataset and (ii) describe the
audiologic data acquired over time in patients identified with
cholesteatoma-associated progressive sensorineural hearing loss.

Design: Records of patients included in the Audiologic and Genetics Database
(n = 175,215 patients) were examined using specified criteria defining
progressive hearing loss. A linear regression model examined the log frequency of
all diagnostic codes in the electronic health record assigned to patients for a
progressive hearing loss cohort compared with a stable hearing loss group. Based
on findings from the linear regression analysis, longitudinal audiometric air
(AC) and bone conduction (BC) thresholds were extracted for groups of subjects
with cholesteatoma-associated progressive (n = 58 subjects) and stable
(n = 55 subjects) hearing loss to further analyze changes in hearing over time.

Results: The linear regression analyses identified that diagnostic codes for
cholesteatoma were associated with progressive sensorineural hearing loss in
children. The longitudinal audiometric data demonstrated within-subject changes
in masked BC sensitivity consistent with progressive sensorineural hearing loss
in children diagnosed with cholesteatoma. Additional analyses showed that
mastoidectomy surgeries did not appear to contribute to the observed progressive
hearing loss and that a high number of cholesteatoma patients with progressive
hearing loss had normal-hearing thresholds at their first test.

Conclusions: The statistical analyses demonstrated an association between
cholesteatoma and pediatric progressive sensorineural hearing loss. These
findings inform clinical management by suggesting that children with cholesteatoma
diagnoses may be at increased risk for progressive sensorineural hearing loss and
should receive continued monitoring even after a normal masked BC baseline has
been established.
