---
reference_id: "PMID:17547743"
title: Ellis-van Creveld syndrome.
authors:
- Baujat G
- Le Merrer M
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-27
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ellis-van Creveld syndrome.
**Authors:** Baujat G, Le Merrer M
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-2-27](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-2-27)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2007 Jun 4;2:27. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-27.

Ellis-van Creveld syndrome.

Baujat G(1), Le Merrer M.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Référence des Maladies Osseuses Constitutionnelles, Hôpital 
Necker-Enfants Malades, 149 rue de Sèvres 75743, Paris Cedex 15, France. 
genevieve.baujat@nck.aphp.fr

Ellis-van Creveld syndrome (EVC) is a chondral and ectodermal dysplasia 
characterized by short ribs, polydactyly, growth retardation, and ectodermal and 
heart defects. It is a rare disease with approximately 150 cases reported 
worldwide. The exact prevalence is unknown, but the syndrome seems more common 
among the Amish community. Prenatal abnormalities (that may be detected by 
ultrasound examination) include narrow thorax, shortening of long bones, 
hexadactyly and cardiac defects. After birth, cardinal features are short 
stature, short ribs, polydactyly, and dysplastic fingernails and teeth. Heart 
defects, especially abnormalities of atrial septation, occur in about 60% of 
cases. Cognitive and motor development is normal. This rare condition is 
inherited as an autosomal recessive trait with variable expression. Mutations of 
the EVC1 and EVC2 genes, located in a head to head configuration on chromosome 
4p16, have been identified as causative. EVC belongs to the short 
rib-polydactyly group (SRP) and these SRPs, especially type III (Verma-Naumoff 
syndrome), are discussed in the prenatal differential diagnosis. Postnatally, 
the essential differential diagnoses include Jeune dystrophy, McKusick-Kaufman 
syndrome and Weyers syndrome. The management of EVC is multidisciplinary. 
Management during the neonatal period is mostly symptomatic, involving treatment 
of the respiratory distress due to narrow chest and heart failure. Orthopedic 
follow-up is required to manage the bones deformities. Professional dental care 
should be considered for management of the oral manifestations. Prognosis is 
linked to the respiratory difficulties in the first months of life due to 
thoracic narrowness and possible heart defects. Prognosis of the final body 
height is difficult to predict.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-27
PMCID: PMC1891277
PMID: 17547743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]