---
reference_id: "PMID:23831613"
title: Tubacin prevents neuronal migration defects and epileptic activity caused by rat Srpx2 silencing in utero.
authors:
- Salmi M
- Bruneau N
- Cillario J
- Lozovaya N
- Massacrier A
- Buhler E
- Cloarec R
- Tsintsadze T
- Watrin F
- Tsintsadze V
- Zimmer C
- Villard C
- Lafitte D
- Cardoso C
- Bao L
- Lesca G
- Rudolf G
- Muscatelli F
- Pauly V
- Khalilov I
- Durbec P
- Ben-Ari Y
- Burnashev N
- Represa A
- Szepetowski P
journal: Brain
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awt161
keywords:
- Anilides/pharmacology
- Animals
- "Cell Movement/drug effects, genetics"
- "Cerebral Cortex/cytology, drug effects, metabolism"
- "Epilepsy/genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Silencing
- Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors/pharmacology
- Humans
- Hydroxamic Acids/pharmacology
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- "Neurons/cytology, drug effects, metabolism"
- Rats
- "Tubulin/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tubacin prevents neuronal migration defects and epileptic activity caused by rat Srpx2 silencing in utero.
**Authors:** Salmi M, Bruneau N, Cillario J, Lozovaya N, Massacrier A, Buhler E, Cloarec R, Tsintsadze T, Watrin F, Tsintsadze V, Zimmer C, Villard C, Lafitte D, Cardoso C, Bao L, Lesca G, Rudolf G, Muscatelli F, Pauly V, Khalilov I, Durbec P, Ben-Ari Y, Burnashev N, Represa A, Szepetowski P
**Journal:** Brain (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awt161](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awt161)

## Content

1. Brain. 2013 Aug;136(Pt 8):2457-73. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt161. Epub 2013 Jul 5.

Tubacin prevents neuronal migration defects and epileptic activity caused by rat
Srpx2 silencing in utero.

Salmi M(1), Bruneau N, Cillario J, Lozovaya N, Massacrier A, Buhler E, Cloarec
R, Tsintsadze T, Watrin F, Tsintsadze V, Zimmer C, Villard C, Lafitte D, Cardoso
C, Bao L, Lesca G, Rudolf G, Muscatelli F, Pauly V, Khalilov I, Durbec P,
Ben-Ari Y, Burnashev N, Represa A, Szepetowski P.

Author information:
(1)INSERM UMR_S901, Parc Scientifique de Luminy, 13273 Marseille, France.

Altered development of the human cerebral cortex can cause severe malformations
with often intractable focal epileptic seizures and may participate in common
pathologies, notably epilepsy. This raises important conceptual and therapeutic
issues. Two missense mutations in the sushi repeat-containing protein SRPX2 had
been previously identified in epileptic disorders with or without structural
developmental alteration of the speech cortex. In the present study, we aimed to
decipher the precise developmental role of SRPX2, to have a better knowledge on
the consequences of its mutations, and to start addressing therapeutic issues
through the design of an appropriate animal model. Using an in utero Srpx2
silencing approach, we show that SRPX2 influences neuronal migration in the
developing rat cerebral cortex. Wild-type, but not the mutant human SRPX2
proteins, rescued the neuronal migration phenotype caused by Srpx2 silencing in
utero, and increased alpha-tubulin acetylation. Following in utero Srpx2
silencing, spontaneous epileptiform activity was recorded post-natally. The
neuronal migration defects and the post-natal epileptic consequences were
prevented early in embryos by maternal administration of tubulin deacetylase
inhibitor tubacin. Hence epileptiform manifestations of developmental origin
could be prevented in utero, using a transient and drug-based therapeutic
protocol.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awt161
PMID: 23831613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
