---
reference_id: "PMID:39971915"
title: Unravelling genotype-phenotype correlations in Stargardt disease using patient-derived retinal organoids.
authors:
- Watson A
- Queen R
- Ferrández-Peral L
- Dorgau B
- Collin J
- Nelson A
- Hussain R
- Coxhead J
- McCorkindale M
- Atkinson R
- Zerti D
- Chichagova V
- Conesa A
- Armstrong L
- Cremers FPM
- Lako M
journal: Cell Death Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41419-025-07420-7
keywords:
- Humans
- "Organoids/metabolism, pathology"
- "Stargardt Disease/genetics, pathology"
- "Retina/pathology, metabolism"
- Genetic Association Studies
- "Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- "ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Differentiation
- Male
- Female
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unravelling genotype-phenotype correlations in Stargardt disease using patient-derived retinal organoids.
**Authors:** Watson A, Queen R, Ferrández-Peral L, Dorgau B, Collin J, Nelson A, Hussain R, Coxhead J, McCorkindale M, Atkinson R, Zerti D, Chichagova V, Conesa A, Armstrong L, Cremers FPM, Lako M
**Journal:** Cell Death Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41419-025-07420-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41419-025-07420-7)

## Content

1. Cell Death Dis. 2025 Feb 19;16(1):108. doi: 10.1038/s41419-025-07420-7.

Unravelling genotype-phenotype correlations in Stargardt disease using 
patient-derived retinal organoids.

Watson A(1)(2), Queen R(1), Ferrández-Peral L(3), Dorgau B(1), Collin J(1), 
Nelson A(4), Hussain R(1), Coxhead J(1), McCorkindale M(1), Atkinson R(1), Zerti 
D(5), Chichagova V(2), Conesa A(3), Armstrong L(1)(2), Cremers FPM(6), Lako 
M(7).

Author information:
(1)Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(2)Newcells Biotech Ltd., Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(3)Institute for Integrative Systems Biology, University of Valencia, Valencia, 
Spain.
(4)NU-OMICs, Northumbria University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK.
(5)Department of Biotechnological and Applied Clinical Sciences, Università 
degli Studi dell'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy.
(6)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
the Netherlands.
(7)Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. 
majlinda.lako@ncl.ac.uk.

Stargardt disease is an inherited retinopathy affecting approximately 1:8000 
individuals. It is characterised by biallelic variants in ABCA4 which encodes a 
vital protein for the recycling of retinaldehydes in the retina. Despite its 
prevalence and impact, there are currently no treatments available for this 
condition. Furthermore, 35% of STGD1 cases remain genetically unsolved. To 
investigate the cellular and molecular characteristics associated with STGD1, we 
generated iPSCs from two monoallelic unresolved (PT1 & PT2), late-onset STGD1 
cases with the heterozygous complex allele - c.[5461-10 T > C;5603 A > T]. Both 
patient iPSCs and those from a biallelic affected control (AC) carrying 
-c.4892 T > C and c.4539+2001G > A, were differentiated to retinal organoids, 
which developed all key retinal neurons and photoreceptors with outer segments 
positive for ABCA4 expression. We observed patient-specific disruption to 
lamination with OPN1MW/LW+ cone photoreceptor retention in the retinal organoid 
centre during differentiation. Photoreceptor retention was more severe in the AC 
case affecting both cones and rods, suggesting a genotype/phenotype correlation. 
scRNA-Seq suggests retention may be due to the induction of stress-related 
pathways in photoreceptors. Whole genome sequencing successfully identified the 
missing alleles in both cases; PT1 reported c.-5603A > T in homozygous state and 
PT2 uncovered a rare hypomorph - c.-4685T > C. Furthermore, retinal organoids 
were able to recapitulate the retina-specific splicing defect in PT1 as shown by 
long-read RNA-seq data. Collectively, these results highlight the suitability of 
retinal organoids in STGD1 modelling. Their ability to display 
genotype-phenotype correlations enhances their utility as a platform for 
therapeutic development.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-025-07420-7
PMCID: PMC11840025
PMID: 39971915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests Ethics approval and consent to participate: All participants 
in this research study were identified and enlisted with informed consent by 
collaborators in the Marie-Skłodowska Curie Innovative Training Network – StarT 
(Grant no: 813490). All samples were collected in accordance with the tenets of 
the Declaration of Helsinki and written informed consent was obtained for all 
patients participating in the study.