---
reference_id: PMID:39524166
title: "Recurrence of Retinopathy of Prematurity Following Anti-vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (Anti-VEGF) Therapy: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Dablouk M
- Chhabra A
- Masoud AT
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.73286
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recurrence of Retinopathy of Prematurity Following Anti-vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (Anti-VEGF) Therapy: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Dablouk M, Chhabra A, Masoud AT
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.73286](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.73286)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Nov 8;16(11):e73286. doi: 10.7759/cureus.73286. eCollection 2024 
Nov.

Recurrence of Retinopathy of Prematurity Following Anti-vascular Endothelial 
Growth Factor (Anti-VEGF) Therapy: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Dablouk M(1), Chhabra A(2), Masoud AT(3).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Mersey and West Lancashire Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, 
Merseyside, GBR.
(2)Ophthalmology, Lancashire Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Preston, 
GBR.
(3)Epidemiology and Public Health, Fayoum University, Faiyum, EGY.

Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) is a neovascular disorder which affects 
premature infants and can lead to childhood blindness. Treatment includes laser 
photocoagulation and intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor 
(anti-VEGF) injections, both effective options. However, laser photocoagulation 
can lead to refractive errors, while anti-VEGF therapy can result in disease 
recurrence. Our systematic review aimed to evaluate the recurrence rates of ROP 
following treatment with anti-VEGF agents compared to other anti-VEGF agents and 
laser photocoagulation. We also aimed to measure the retreatment intervals and 
assess successful retreatment rates to identify the most effective treatment 
modality. Our review adhered to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic 
Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines and included both randomized 
controlled trials (RCTs) and non-randomized comparative studies (NCS). A 
thorough search of MEDLINE, EMBASE, Web of Science, and Cochrane Central 
Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) databases was performed. Studies were 
assessed using the Cochrane Risk of Bias (RoB2) tool and the Newcastle-Ottawa 
Scale (NOS). Random-effects and fixed-effects models were used to measure pooled 
estimates. The outcomes were reported as risk ratios (RR) and standardized mean 
differences (SMD). A total of 21 studies (six RCTs and 15 NCS) with 6,152 eyes 
were included. Overall, anti-VEGF agents showed a higher risk of recurrence 
compared to laser photocoagulation (RR=2.14, 95% CI: 1.06-4.33, p=0.03). 
Conbercept demonstrated a significantly lower risk of recurrence than laser 
photocoagulation and ranibizumab (RR=0.47, 95% CI: 0.39-0.58, p<0.00001), while 
aflibercept showed a higher recurrence risk compared to bevacizumab (RR=12.61, 
95% CI: 6.43-24.73, p<0.00001). Bevacizumab was associated with a longer 
retreatment interval than laser photocoagulation (SMD=0.89, 95% CI: 0.61-1.17, 
p<0.00001). No significant differences in retreatment success rates between 
bevacizumab and laser photocoagulation were observed. Anti-VEGF therapy is 
effective in the treatment of ROP; however, it is associated with a higher risk 
of recurrence compared to laser photocoagulation. Conbercept shows greater 
efficacy in reducing recurrence risk and prolonging the retreatment interval 
compared to ranibizumab. Aflibercept demonstrated inconsistent outcomes. No 
significant difference in recurrence rates was observed between bevacizumab and 
ranibizumab. Recurrences occurred significantly later when anti-VEGF therapy was 
used compared to laser photocoagulation. Successful retreatment rates between 
bevacizumab and laser photocoagulation were similar.

Copyright © 2024, Dablouk et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.73286
PMCID: PMC11550109
PMID: 39524166

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the 
ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: 
Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no financial support was 
received from any organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships: 
All authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present 
or within the previous three years with any organizations that might have an 
interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All authors have declared 
that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have 
influenced the submitted work.