---
reference_id: "PMID:17883863"
title: "2-methylbutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency associated with autism and mental retardation: a case report."
authors:
- Kanavin OJ
- Woldseth B
- Jellum E
- Tvedt B
- Andresen BS
- Stromme P
journal: J Med Case Rep
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1186/1752-1947-1-98
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 2-methylbutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency associated with autism and mental retardation: a case report.
**Authors:** Kanavin OJ, Woldseth B, Jellum E, Tvedt B, Andresen BS, Stromme P
**Journal:** J Med Case Rep (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1752-1947-1-98](https://doi.org/10.1186/1752-1947-1-98)

## Content

1. J Med Case Rep. 2007 Sep 20;1:98. doi: 10.1186/1752-1947-1-98.

2-methylbutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency associated with autism and mental
retardation: a case report.

Kanavin OJ(1), Woldseth B, Jellum E, Tvedt B, Andresen BS, Stromme P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
oivind.kanavin@ulleval.no.

BACKGROUND: 2-methylbutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency or short/branched chain
acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (SBCADD) is caused by a defect in the
degradation pathway of the amino acid L-isoleucine.
METHODS: We report a four-year-old mentally retarded Somali boy with autism and
a history of seizures, who was found to excrete increased amounts of
2-methylbutyryl glycine in the urine. The SBCAD gene was examined with sequence
analysis. His development was assessed with psychometric testing before and
after a trial with low protein diet.
RESULTS: We found homozygosity for A > G changing the +3 position of intron 3
(c.303+3A > G) in the SBCAD gene. Psychometric testing showed moderate mental
retardation and behavioral scores within the autistic spectrum. No beneficial
effect was detected after 5 months with a low protein diet.
CONCLUSION: This mutation was also found in two previously reported cases with
SBCADD, both originating from Somalia and Eritrea, indicating that it is
relatively prevalent in this population. Autism has not previously been
described with mutations in this gene, thus expanding the clinical spectrum of
SBCADD.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-1947-1-98
PMCID: PMC2045671
PMID: 17883863
