---
reference_id: "PMID:35639255"
title: Potassium Channel KCNH1 Activating Variants Cause Altered Functional and Morphological Ciliogenesis.
authors:
- Napoli G
- Panzironi N
- Traversa A
- Catalanotto C
- Pace V
- Petrizzelli F
- Giovannetti A
- Lazzari S
- Cogoni C
- Tartaglia M
- Carella M
- Mazza T
- Pizzuti A
- Parisi C
- Caputo V
journal: Mol Neurobiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s12035-022-02886-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Potassium Channel KCNH1 Activating Variants Cause Altered Functional and Morphological Ciliogenesis.
**Authors:** Napoli G, Panzironi N, Traversa A, Catalanotto C, Pace V, Petrizzelli F, Giovannetti A, Lazzari S, Cogoni C, Tartaglia M, Carella M, Mazza T, Pizzuti A, Parisi C, Caputo V
**Journal:** Mol Neurobiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12035-022-02886-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-022-02886-4)

## Content

1. Mol Neurobiol. 2022 Aug;59(8):4825-4838. doi: 10.1007/s12035-022-02886-4. Epub
 2022 May 31.

Potassium Channel KCNH1 Activating Variants Cause Altered Functional and 
Morphological Ciliogenesis.

Napoli G(1), Panzironi N(2), Traversa A(2), Catalanotto C(3), Pace V(4), 
Petrizzelli F(4)(5), Giovannetti A(2), Lazzari S(4), Cogoni C(3), Tartaglia 
M(6), Carella M(7), Mazza T(5), Pizzuti A(4), Parisi C(8), Caputo V(9).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, CNR-National Research Council, 
Monterotondo Scalo, Rome, Italy.
(2)Laboratory of Clinical Genomics, Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo Della 
Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo (FG), Italy.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, 
Italy.
(5)Unit of Bioinformatics, Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo Della Sofferenza, San 
Giovanni Rotondo (FG), Italy.
(6)Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino 
Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(7)Research Unit of Medical Genetics, Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo Della 
Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo (FG), Italy.
(8)Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, CNR-National Research Council, 
Monterotondo Scalo, Rome, Italy. chiara.parisi@cnr.it.
(9)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, 
Italy. viviana.caputo@uniroma1.it.

The primary cilium is a non-motile sensory organelle that extends from the 
surface of most vertebrate cells and transduces signals regulating 
proliferation, differentiation, and migration. Primary cilia dysfunctions have 
been observed in cancer and in a group of heterogeneous disorders called 
ciliopathies, characterized by renal and liver cysts, skeleton and limb 
abnormalities, retinal degeneration, intellectual disability, ataxia, and heart 
disease and, recently, in autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia, and epilepsy. 
The potassium voltage-gated channel subfamily H member 1 (KCNH1) gene encodes a 
member of the EAG (ether-à-go-go) family, which controls potassium flux 
regulating resting membrane potential in both excitable and non-excitable cells 
and is involved in intracellular signaling, cell proliferation, and 
tumorigenesis. KCNH1 missense variants have been associated with syndromic 
neurodevelopmental disorders, including Zimmermann-Laband syndrome 1 (ZLS1, MIM 
#135500), Temple-Baraitser syndrome (TMBTS, MIM #611816), and, recently, with 
milder phenotypes as epilepsy. In this work, we provide evidence that KCNH1 
localizes at the base of the cilium in pre-ciliary vesicles and ciliary pocket 
of human dermal fibroblasts and retinal pigment epithelial (hTERT RPE1) cells 
and that the pathogenic missense variants (L352V and R330Q; NP_002229.1) perturb 
cilia morphology, assembly/disassembly, and Sonic Hedgehog signaling, disclosing 
a multifaceted role of the protein. The study of KCNH1 localization, its 
functions related to primary cilia, and the alterations introduced by mutations 
in ciliogenesis, cell cycle coordination, cilium morphology, and cilia signaling 
pathways could help elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying neurological 
phenotypes and neurodevelopmental disorders not considered as classical 
ciliopathies but for which a significant role of primary cilia is emerging.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-022-02886-4
PMCID: PMC9363390
PMID: 35639255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.