---
reference_id: "PMID:16691587"
title: "Clinical and molecular characterization of individuals with 18p deletion: a genotype-phenotype correlation."
authors:
- Wester U
- Bondeson ML
- Edeby C
- Annerén G
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31260
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Chromosome Banding
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosome Disorders/genetics, pathology"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 18/genetics"
- Female
- Genotype
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Infant
- Karyotyping
- Male
- Microsatellite Repeats
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and molecular characterization of individuals with 18p deletion: a genotype-phenotype correlation.
**Authors:** Wester U, Bondeson ML, Edeby C, Annerén G
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.31260](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.31260)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Jun 1;140(11):1164-71. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31260.

Clinical and molecular characterization of individuals with 18p deletion: a 
genotype-phenotype correlation.

Wester U(1), Bondeson ML, Edeby C, Annerén G.

Author information:
(1)Unit of Paediatrics, Department of Women and Children's Health, Uppsala 
University, Sweden.

The deletion 18p syndrome is one of the most common chromosome abnormalities. 
The medical problems are mental and postnatal growth retardation, and sometimes 
malformations of the heart and brain. The individuals have some typical 
features, which might be easy to overlook and which are: ptosis, strabismus, 
hypertelorism, broad flat nose, micrognathia, big and low set ears. The aims of 
present study were to clinically and molecularly characterize the syndrome 
further in seven subjects with de novo 18p deletions and to perform 
genotype-phenotype correlation. All seven subjects had terminal deletions and no 
interstitial deletion was observed with subtelomeric FISH analyses. To define 
the extent of the 18p deletions and the parental origin of the deletion 
microsatellite- and FISH analyses were performed on genomic DNA and on 
lymphoblastoid cell lines of the study participants. Totally 19 chromosomes, 18 
specific polymorphic microsatellite markers, and 5 BAC clones were used. The 
results revealed that the deletions were located in the centromeric region at 
18p11.1 in four of the seven subjects. In the remaining three the breakpoints 
were located distal to 18p11.1 (18p11.21-p11.22). Four of the individuals had a 
paternal and three a maternal origin of the deletion. Genotype-phenotype 
correlation of the seven subjects suggests a correlation between the extent of 
the deleted region and the mental development. All the four children with a 
deletion in the centromeric region at 18p11.1 had a mental retardation (MR). Two 
of the three children with a more distal breakpoint (distal 18p11.21) had a 
normal mental development and one had a border-line mental retardation. There 
might be a critical region for the mental retardation located between 18p11.1 
and 18p11.21. The children with a breakpoint at 18p11.1 had all a broad face, 
which was observed in only one of those with a more distal breakpoint, otherwise 
no genotype-phenotype correlation of the features was observed.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31260
PMID: 16691587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]