---
reference_id: "PMID:20301392"
title: FLNA Deficiency.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Chen MH
- Walsh CA
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FLNA Deficiency.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Chen MH, Walsh CA

## Content

1. FLNA Deficiency.

Chen MH(1), Walsh CA(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2002 Oct 8 [updated 2021 Sep 30].

Author information:
(1)Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
(2)Boston Children's Hospital, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: FLNA deficiency is associated with a phenotypic 
spectrum that includes FLNA-related periventricular nodular heterotopia 
(Huttenlocher syndrome), congenital heart disease (patent ductus arteriosus, 
atrial and ventricular septal defects), valvular dystrophy, dilatation and 
rupture of the thoracic aorta, pulmonary disease (pulmonary hypertension, 
alveolar hypoplasia, emphysema, asthma, chronic bronchitis), gastrointestinal 
dysmotility and obstruction, joint hypermobility, and macrothrombocytopenia.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of FLNA deficiency is established in a proband 
by identification of a heterozygous FLNA pathogenic variant in a female or a 
hemizygous FLNA pathogenic variant in a male.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment of epilepsy generally follows 
principles for a seizure disorder caused by a known structural brain 
abnormality. Anti-seizure medication is typically selected based on specific 
attributes (e.g., teratogenic risk during pregnancy, tolerability, and 
efficacy). Standard treatment for aortic or carotid dissection, congenital heart 
disease, and valvular disease. Because of the risk for aortic or carotid 
dissection, ensure good blood pressure control. Good pulmonary toilet is 
recommended to preserve lung function. Sildenafil and medical management for 
pulmonary hypertension. Standard treatments for impaired bowel motility. 
Treatment of joint hypermobility as recommended by orthopedist, physical 
therapist, and/or occupational therapist. Treatment of bleeding diathesis per 
hematologist. If needed, early intervention services and special education 
support may be considered. Surveillance: Monitor for seizures, constipation, 
joint issues, bleeding diathesis, and developmental issues at each visit. 
Cardiology evaluations, echocardiogram, stress testing, and cardiac MRI as 
recommended by cardiologist. Follow up with pulmonologist for any lung issues. 
Evaluation of relatives at risk: Given the risk for vascular disease in 
neurologically asymptomatic individuals, it is appropriate to evaluate the older 
and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as 
early as possible those who would benefit from echocardiogram and cardiac MRI to 
screen for FLNA-associated structural heart disease and thoracic aortic 
aneurysms. Pregnancy management: The teratogenic risk to the fetus associated 
with the use of anti-seizure medication during pregnancy depends on the type of 
anti-seizure medication used, the dose, and the gestational age of the fetus. 
There are currently no guidelines regarding the most appropriate surveillance 
for and management of cardiac, vascular, and connective tissue problems during 
pregnancy.
GENETIC COUNSELING: FLNA deficiency is inherited in an X-linked manner. The 
condition is prenatally or neonatally lethal in most males; therefore, the 
majority of affected individuals are female. About 50% of affected females 
inherit the pathogenic variant from their mother and at least 50% have a de novo 
pathogenic variant. For women with FLNA deficiency, the risk of passing the 
pathogenic variant to each child is 50%. Because of the high rate of prenatal 
lethality in males, most sons born to women with FLNA deficiency are unaffected. 
Prenatal diagnosis by molecular genetic testing is possible once the pathogenic 
variant has been identified in an affected family member. Periventricular 
nodules may be visualized by imaging as early as 24 weeks' gestation; however, 
the sensitivity of imaging for the prenatal detection of PVNH is not known.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301392