---
reference_id: "PMID:34553824"
title: "Rheumatoid arthritis is a preventable disease: 11 ways to reduce your patients' risk."
authors:
- Koller-Smith L
- Mehdi AM
- March L
- Tooth L
- Mishra GD
- Thomas R
journal: Intern Med J
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/imj.15537
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rheumatoid arthritis is a preventable disease: 11 ways to reduce your patients' risk.
**Authors:** Koller-Smith L, Mehdi AM, March L, Tooth L, Mishra GD, Thomas R
**Journal:** Intern Med J (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/imj.15537](https://doi.org/10.1111/imj.15537)

## Content

1. Intern Med J. 2022 May;52(5):711-716. doi: 10.1111/imj.15537.

Rheumatoid arthritis is a preventable disease: 11 ways to reduce your patients' 
risk.

Koller-Smith L(1)(2), Mehdi AM(1), March L(3), Tooth L(4), Mishra GD(4), Thomas 
R(1).

Author information:
(1)UQ Diamantina Institute, The University of Queensland, Princess Alexandra 
Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(2)School of Medicine, The University of Newcastle, Newcastle, New South Wales, 
Australia.
(3)Florance and Cope Professorial Department of Rheumatology, Royal North Shore 
Hospital and Institute of Bone and Joint Research, Faculty of Medicine and 
Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(4)School of Public Health, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, 
Australia.

New evidence shows that up to 40% of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) cases are 
attributable to exposure to potentially modifiable factors. We can now identify 
people at higher risk of RA (pre-RA) through their family history, risk factors, 
autoantibodies and symptoms. Counselling these patients to act to modify factors 
known to be associated with RA risk could prevent the development of RA, and 
evidence shows that informing individuals of their risk and of ways to reduce it 
leads to positive behavioural change and is not harmful. This consumer-focussed 
narrative review is targeted at primary care providers and physicians to 
describe 11 changes that can be made, based on current evidence linking 
potentially modifiable factors to RA risk. These evidence-based recommendations 
are: (i) cease smoking; (ii) reduce exposure to inhaled silica, dusts and 
occupational risks; (iii) maintain a healthy weight; (iv) increase leisure time 
physical activity; (v) maintain good dental hygiene; (vi) maximise breastfeeding 
if able; (vii) maximise dietary quality and avoid high-salt diets; (viii) 
consume high levels of omega-3 fatty acids and fish; (ix) reduce consumption of 
sugar-sweetened soft drinks; (x) consume moderate levels of alcohol; and (xi) 
remain vitamin D replete.

© 2021 Royal Australasian College of Physicians.

DOI: 10.1111/imj.15537
PMID: 34553824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]