---
reference_id: "PMID:36167577"
title: Species-specific climate Suitable Conditions Index and dengue transmission in Guangdong, China.
authors:
- Lu X
- Bambrick H
- Frentiu FD
- Huang X
- Davis C
- Li Z
- Yang W
- Devine GJ
- Hu W
journal: Parasit Vectors
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s13071-022-05453-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Species-specific climate Suitable Conditions Index and dengue transmission in Guangdong, China.
**Authors:** Lu X, Bambrick H, Frentiu FD, Huang X, Davis C, Li Z, Yang W, Devine GJ, Hu W
**Journal:** Parasit Vectors (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13071-022-05453-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13071-022-05453-x)

## Content

1. Parasit Vectors. 2022 Sep 27;15(1):342. doi: 10.1186/s13071-022-05453-x.

Species-specific climate Suitable Conditions Index and dengue transmission in 
Guangdong, China.

Lu X(1), Bambrick H(1)(2), Frentiu FD(3), Huang X(3), Davis C(1), Li Z(4), Yang 
W(4)(5), Devine GJ(6), Hu W(7).

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health and Social Work, Queensland University of Technology, 
Brisbane, Australia.
(2)National Centre for Epidemiology and Population Health, The Australian 
National University, Canberra ACT, Australia.
(3)Centre for Immunology and Infection Control, School of Biomedical Sciences, 
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia.
(4)Division of Infectious Disease, Key Laboratory of Surveillance and Early 
Warning of Infectious Disease, Chinese Centre for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Beijing, China.
(5)School of Population Medicine & Public Health, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Science, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(6)Mosquito Control Laboratory, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, 
Brisbane, Australia.
(7)School of Public Health and Social Work, Queensland University of Technology, 
Brisbane, Australia. w2.hu@qut.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Optimal climatic conditions for dengue vector mosquito species may 
play a significant role in dengue transmission. We previously developed a 
species-specific Suitable Conditions Index (SCI) for Aedes aegypti and Aedes 
albopictus, respectively. These SCIs rank geographic locations based on their 
climatic suitability for each of these two dengue vector species and 
theoretically define parameters for transmission probability. The aim of the 
study presented here was to use these SCIs together with socio-environmental 
factors to predict dengue outbreaks in the real world.
METHODS: A negative binomial regression model was used to assess the 
relationship between vector species-specific SCI and autochthonous dengue cases 
after accounting for potential confounders in Guangdong, China. The potential 
interactive effect between the SCI for Ae. albopictus and the SCI for Ae. 
aegypti on dengue transmission was assessed.
RESULTS: The SCI for Ae. aegypti was found to be positively associated with 
autochthonous dengue transmission (incidence rate ratio: 1.06, 95% confidence 
interval: 1.03, 1.09). A significant interaction effect between the SCI of Ae. 
albopictus and the SCI of Ae. aegypti was found, with the SCI of Ae. albopictus 
significantly reducing the effect of the SCI of Ae. aegypti on autochthonous 
dengue cases. The difference in SCIs had a positive effect on autochthonous 
dengue cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that dengue fever is more transmittable in 
regions with warmer weather conditions (high SCI for Ae. aegypti). The SCI of 
Ae. aegypti would be a useful index to predict dengue transmission in Guangdong, 
China, even in dengue epidemic regions with Ae. albopictus present. The results 
also support the benefit of the SCI for evaluating dengue outbreak risk in terms 
of vector sympatry and interactions in the absence of entomology data in future 
research.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-022-05453-x
PMCID: PMC9516795
PMID: 36167577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.