---
reference_id: "PMID:35560062"
title: Patient-specific structural connectivity informs outcomes of responsive neurostimulation for temporal lobe epilepsy.
authors:
- Charlebois CM
- Anderson DN
- Johnson KA
- Philip BJ
- Davis TS
- Newman BJ
- Peters AY
- Arain AM
- Dorval AD
- Rolston JD
- Butson CR
journal: Epilepsia
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/epi.17298
keywords:
- Epilepsy/therapy
- "Epilepsy, Temporal Lobe/diagnostic imaging, therapy"
- Gyrus Cinguli
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Retrospective Studies
- Temporal Lobe
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Patient-specific structural connectivity informs outcomes of responsive neurostimulation for temporal lobe epilepsy.
**Authors:** Charlebois CM, Anderson DN, Johnson KA, Philip BJ, Davis TS, Newman BJ, Peters AY, Arain AM, Dorval AD, Rolston JD, Butson CR
**Journal:** Epilepsia (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/epi.17298](https://doi.org/10.1111/epi.17298)

## Content

1. Epilepsia. 2022 Aug;63(8):2037-2055. doi: 10.1111/epi.17298. Epub 2022 Jun 4.

Patient-specific structural connectivity informs outcomes of responsive
neurostimulation for temporal lobe epilepsy.

Charlebois CM(1)(2), Anderson DN(3)(4), Johnson KA(5)(6), Philip BJ(1)(3), Davis
TS(3), Newman BJ(7), Peters AY(7), Arain AM(7), Dorval AD(1), Rolston
JD(1)(2)(3), Butson CR(5)(6)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City,
Utah, USA.
(2)Scientific Computing & Imaging Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City,
Utah, USA.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City,
Utah, USA.
(5)Norman Fixel Institute for Neurological Diseases, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(7)Department of Neurology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(8)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(9)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Responsive neurostimulation is an effective therapy for patients with
refractory mesial temporal lobe epilepsy. However, clinical outcomes are
variable, few patients become seizure-free, and the optimal stimulation location
is currently undefined. The aim of this study was to quantify responsive
neurostimulation in the mesial temporal lobe, identify stimulation-dependent
networks associated with seizure reduction, and determine if stimulation
location or stimulation-dependent networks inform outcomes.
METHODS: We modeled patient-specific volumes of tissue activated and created
probabilistic stimulation maps of local regions of stimulation across a
retrospective cohort of 22 patients with mesial temporal lobe epilepsy. We then
mapped the network stimulation effects by seeding tractography from the volume
of tissue activated with both patient-specific and normative diffusion-weighted
imaging. We identified networks associated with seizure reduction across
patients using the patient-specific tractography maps and then predicted seizure
reduction across the cohort.
RESULTS: Patient-specific stimulation-dependent connectivity was correlated with
responsive neurostimulation effectiveness after cross-validation (p = .03);
however, normative connectivity derived from healthy subjects was not (p = .44).
Increased connectivity from the volume of tissue activated to the medial
prefrontal cortex, cingulate cortex, and precuneus was associated with greater
seizure reduction.
SIGNIFICANCE: Overall, our results suggest that the therapeutic effect of
responsive neurostimulation may be mediated by specific networks connected to
the volume of tissue activated. In addition, patient-specific tractography was
required to identify structural networks correlated with outcomes. It is
therefore likely that altered connectivity in patients with epilepsy may be
associated with the therapeutic effect and that utilizing patient-specific
imaging could be important for future studies. The structural networks
identified here may be utilized to target stimulation in the mesial temporal
lobe and to improve seizure reduction for patients treated with responsive
neurostimulation.

© 2022 International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1111/epi.17298
PMCID: PMC11265293
PMID: 35560062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest AMA has served as a
consultant for NeuroPace. JDR has served as a consultant for Medtronic,
NeuroPace, and Corlieve Therapeutics. CRB has recently served as a consultant
for NeuraModix and Abbott and holds intellectual property related to
neuromodulation therapy. The remaining authors have no conflicts of interest.
