---
reference_id: "PMID:31151683"
title: Surgical approach of non-small cell lung cancer with extrapulmonary metastasis.
authors:
- Muñoz Molina GM
- Ovejero Díaz AP
- Gorospe Sarasúa L
journal: Med Clin (Barc)
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.medcli.2019.02.025
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surgical approach of non-small cell lung cancer with extrapulmonary metastasis.
**Authors:** Muñoz Molina GM, Ovejero Díaz AP, Gorospe Sarasúa L
**Journal:** Med Clin (Barc) (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.medcli.2019.02.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.medcli.2019.02.025)

## Content

1. Med Clin (Barc). 2019 Aug 2;153(3):115-121. doi: 10.1016/j.medcli.2019.02.025.
 Epub 2019 May 29.

Surgical approach of non-small cell lung cancer with extrapulmonary metastasis.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Muñoz Molina GM(1), Ovejero Díaz AP(2), Gorospe Sarasúa L(3).

Author information:
(1)Cirugía Torácica, Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, España. Electronic address: 
gmunozmolina@yahoo.es.
(2)Cirugía Torácica, Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, España.
(3)Radiodiagnóstico, Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, España.

Bronchogenic carcinoma is the leading cause of death due to cancer worldwide. 
Nearly 75% of patients have a disseminated carcinoma at diagnosis. Up to 50% of 
patients with a localized disease will develop metastasis. Nevertheless, the 
current scientific evidence has demonstrated that when the metastatic disease is 
limited, particularly in specific locations such as the brain and the adrenal 
glands, a multidisciplinary approach with radical intent could achieve a longer 
survival. This review analyses the clinical evidence available in the literature 
that supports the treatment of both the primary and the metastatic disease, as 
well as the preoperative study and the most widely accepted indications.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.medcli.2019.02.025
PMID: 31151683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]