---
reference_id: "PMID:35638523"
title: Effect of Mutagens on Yield and its Components of Two Varieties of Faba Bean (Vicia faba L.).
authors:
- Haridy MH
- Ahmed BH
- Mahdy AY
- El-Said MAA
journal: Pak J Biol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3923/pjbs.2022.296.303
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of Mutagens on Yield and its Components of Two Varieties of Faba Bean (Vicia faba L.).
**Authors:** Haridy MH, Ahmed BH, Mahdy AY, El-Said MAA
**Journal:** Pak J Biol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3923/pjbs.2022.296.303](https://doi.org/10.3923/pjbs.2022.296.303)

## Content

1. Pak J Biol Sci. 2022 Jan;25(4):296-303. doi: 10.3923/pjbs.2022.296.303.

Effect of Mutagens on Yield and its Components of Two Varieties of Faba Bean 
(Vicia faba L.).

Haridy MH, Ahmed BH, Mahdy AY, El-Said MAA.

&lt;b&gt;Background and Objective:&lt;/b&gt; It is known that any genetic 
improvement depends on the presence of many genetic variations so that the plant 
breeder can choose the desired traits such as the trait of the crop or 
resistance to some diseases. Different or it can be used for selection, whether 
for yield, early maturity or other characteristics. This study aimed to use 
gamma irradiation and the chemical mutagen Dimethyl sulfoxide for the induction 
of genetic variation in two types of beans. &lt;b&gt;Materials and 
Methods:&lt;/b&gt; The Giza 429 and Misr 1 genotypes were treated with three 
different concentrations of dimethyl sulfur oxide (1000, 2000 and 3000 ppm) and 
gamma radiation doses (10, 15 and 20 kr) to perform mutagenesis treatments. 
&lt;b&gt;Results:&lt;/b&gt; In the first and second seasons of the study, all 
the mutations resulting from the radiological and chemical mutagenic treatments 
of the two Egyptian bean cultivars, Giza 429 and Misr 1, were highly significant 
for all treatments in the following traits: Number of branches/plant, plant 
height, number of pods/plant with the weight of 100 seeds (g) and seed 
yield/plant (g). &lt;b&gt;Conclusion:&lt;/b&gt; The benefit of this research was 
obtained from plants that outperformed the two cultivars Giza 429 and Misr 1 and 
are considered among the promising plants that can be used in mixed breeding 
programs or direct selection for high productivity.

DOI: 10.3923/pjbs.2022.296.303
PMID: 35638523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]