---
reference_id: "PMID:31479440"
title: Inhibition of Notch signaling rescues cardiovascular development in Kabuki Syndrome.
authors:
- Serrano MLA
- Demarest BL
- Tone-Pah-Hote T
- Tristani-Firouzi M
- Yost HJ
journal: PLoS Biol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000087
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/etiology, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Ear, Middle/abnormalities"
- Endothelial Cells/metabolism
- Face/abnormalities
- Heart/embryology
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/genetics"
- "Hematologic Diseases/etiology, metabolism"
- Histone-Lysine N-Methyltransferase/genetics
- Immunoglobulin J Recombination Signal Sequence-Binding Protein/metabolism
- Mutation
- "Neovascularization, Physiologic/genetics"
- Palate/abnormalities
- Phenotype
- "Receptors, Notch/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- "Vestibular Diseases/etiology, metabolism"
- Zebrafish
- "Zebrafish Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inhibition of Notch signaling rescues cardiovascular development in Kabuki Syndrome.
**Authors:** Serrano MLA, Demarest BL, Tone-Pah-Hote T, Tristani-Firouzi M, Yost HJ
**Journal:** PLoS Biol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pbio.3000087](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3000087)

## Content

1. PLoS Biol. 2019 Sep 3;17(9):e3000087. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000087. 
eCollection 2019 Sep.

Inhibition of Notch signaling rescues cardiovascular development in Kabuki 
Syndrome.

Serrano MLA(1), Demarest BL(1), Tone-Pah-Hote T(2), Tristani-Firouzi M(3), Yost 
HJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Medicine Program-Neurobiology and Anatomy Department, University of 
Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America.
(2)University of Minnesota, Morris, Minnesota, United States of America.
(3)Nora Eccles Harrison Cardiovascular Research and Training Institute and 
Division of Pediatric Cardiology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, 
United States of America.

Kabuki Syndrome patients have a spectrum of congenital disorders, including 
congenital heart defects, the primary determinant of mortality. Seventy percent 
of Kabuki Syndrome patients have mutations in the histone methyl-transferase 
KMT2D. However, the underlying mechanisms that drive these congenital disorders 
are unknown. Here, we generated and characterized zebrafish kmt2d null mutants 
that recapitulate the cardinal phenotypic features of Kabuki Syndrome, including 
microcephaly, palate defects, abnormal ear development, and cardiac defects. The 
cardiac phenotype consists of a previously unknown vasculogenesis defect that 
affects endocardium patterning and, consequently, heart ventricle lumen 
formation. Additionally, zebrafish kmt2d null mutants have angiogenesis defects 
depicted by abnormal aortic arch development, hyperactive ectopic blood vessel 
sprouting, and aberrant patterning of the brain vascular plexus. We demonstrate 
that zebrafish kmt2d null mutants have robust Notch signaling hyperactivation in 
endocardial and endothelial cells, including increased protein levels of the 
Notch transcription factor Rbpj. Our zebrafish Kabuki Syndrome model reveals a 
regulatory link between the Notch pathway and Kmt2d during endothelium and 
endocardium patterning and shows that pharmacological inhibition of Notch 
signaling rebalances Rbpj protein levels and rescues the cardiovascular 
phenotype by enhancing endothelial and endocardial cell proliferation and 
stabilizing endocardial patterning. Taken together, these findings demonstrate 
that Kmt2d regulates vasculogenesis and angiogenesis, provide evidence for 
interactions between Kmt2d and Notch signaling in Kabuki Syndrome, and suggest 
future directions for clinical research.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000087
PMCID: PMC6743796
PMID: 31479440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: "The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist."