---
reference_id: "PMID:37443841"
title: "Genetic Primary Microcephalies: When Centrosome Dysfunction Dictates Brain and Body Size."
authors:
- Farcy S
- Hachour H
- Bahi-Buisson N
- Passemard S
journal: Cells
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cells12131807
keywords:
- Humans
- "Microcephaly/genetics, metabolism"
- Centrosome/metabolism
- Brain/metabolism
- Brain Diseases/metabolism
- Body Size
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/metabolism
- "Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic Primary Microcephalies: When Centrosome Dysfunction Dictates Brain and Body Size.
**Authors:** Farcy S, Hachour H, Bahi-Buisson N, Passemard S
**Journal:** Cells (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells12131807](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells12131807)

## Content

1. Cells. 2023 Jul 7;12(13):1807. doi: 10.3390/cells12131807.

Genetic Primary Microcephalies: When Centrosome Dysfunction Dictates Brain and 
Body Size.

Farcy S(1)(2), Hachour H(3), Bahi-Buisson N(4)(5), Passemard S(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)UMR144, Institut Curie, 75005 Paris, France.
(2)Inserm UMR-S 1163, Institut Imagine, 75015 Paris, France.
(3)Service de Neurologie Pédiatrique, DMU INOV-RDB, APHP, Hôpital Robert Debré, 
75019 Paris, France.
(4)Service de Neurologie Pédiatrique, DMU MICADO, APHP, Hôpital Necker Enfants 
Malades, 75015 Paris, France.
(5)Université Paris Cité, Inserm UMR-S 1163, Institut Imagine, 75015 Paris, 
France.
(6)Université Paris Cité, Inserm UMR 1141, NeuroDiderot, 75019 Paris, France.

Primary microcephalies (PMs) are defects in brain growth that are detectable at 
or before birth and are responsible for neurodevelopmental disorders. Most are 
caused by biallelic or, more rarely, dominant mutations in one of the likely 
hundreds of genes encoding PM proteins, i.e., ubiquitous centrosome or 
microtubule-associated proteins required for the division of neural progenitor 
cells in the embryonic brain. Here, we provide an overview of the different 
types of PMs, i.e., isolated PMs with or without malformations of cortical 
development and PMs associated with short stature (microcephalic dwarfism) or 
sensorineural disorders. We present an overview of the genetic, developmental, 
neurological, and cognitive aspects characterizing the most representative PMs. 
The analysis of phenotypic similarities and differences among patients has led 
scientists to elucidate the roles of these PM proteins in humans. Phenotypic 
similarities indicate possible redundant functions of a few of these proteins, 
such as ASPM and WDR62, which play roles only in determining brain size and 
structure. However, the protein pericentrin (PCNT) is equally required for 
determining brain and body size. Other PM proteins perform both functions, 
albeit to different degrees. Finally, by comparing phenotypes, we considered the 
interrelationships among these proteins.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12131807
PMCID: PMC10340463
PMID: 37443841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.