---
reference_id: "PMID:36417785"
title: Embryology and anatomy of Hirschsprung disease.
authors:
- Hei Ha JL
- Hang Lui VC
- Hang Tam PK
journal: Semin Pediatr Surg
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.sempedsurg.2022.151227
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Embryology and anatomy of Hirschsprung disease.
**Authors:** Hei Ha JL, Hang Lui VC, Hang Tam PK
**Journal:** Semin Pediatr Surg (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.sempedsurg.2022.151227](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sempedsurg.2022.151227)

## Content

1. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2022 Dec;31(6):151227. doi: 
10.1016/j.sempedsurg.2022.151227. Epub 2022 Nov 16.

Embryology and anatomy of Hirschsprung disease.

Hei Ha JL(1), Hang Lui VC(2), Hang Tam PK(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, School of Clinical Medicine, The University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong.
(2)Department of Surgery, School of Clinical Medicine, The University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong; Dr. Li Dak-Sum Research Centre, The University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong.
(3)Department of Surgery, School of Clinical Medicine, The University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong; Faculty of Medicine, Macau University of Science and 
Technology, Macau SAR, China. Electronic address: pkhtam@must.edu.mo.

Bowel has its own elegant nervous system - the enteric nervous system (ENS) 
which is a complex network of neurons and glial clones. Derived from neural 
crest cells (NCCs), this little brain controls muscle contraction, motility, and 
bowel activities in response to stimuli. Failure of developing enteric ganglia 
at the distal bowel results in intestinal obstruction and Hirschsprung disease 
(HSCR). This Review summarises the important embryological development of the 
ENS including proliferation, migration, and differentiation of NCCs. We address 
the signalling pathways which determine NCC cell fate and discuss how they are 
altered in the context of HSCR. Finally, we outline the anatomical defects and 
the mechanisms underlying gut motility in HSCR.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sempedsurg.2022.151227
PMID: 36417785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest Authors 
declare no conflict of interest