---
reference_id: "PMID:12895417"
title: "Triple-transgenic model of Alzheimer's disease with plaques and tangles: intracellular Abeta and synaptic dysfunction."
authors:
- Oddo S
- Caccamo A
- Shepherd JD
- Murphy MP
- Golde TE
- Kayed R
- Metherate R
- Mattson MP
- Akbari Y
- LaFerla FM
journal: Neuron
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(03)00434-3
keywords:
- "Alzheimer Disease/genetics, pathology"
- Amyloid beta-Peptides/genetics
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- Intracellular Fluid/metabolism
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Neurofibrillary Tangles/genetics, pathology"
- "Plaque, Amyloid/genetics, pathology"
- "Synapses/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Triple-transgenic model of Alzheimer's disease with plaques and tangles: intracellular Abeta and synaptic dysfunction.
**Authors:** Oddo S, Caccamo A, Shepherd JD, Murphy MP, Golde TE, Kayed R, Metherate R, Mattson MP, Akbari Y, LaFerla FM
**Journal:** Neuron (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0896-6273(03)00434-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0896-6273(03)00434-3)

## Content

1. Neuron. 2003 Jul 31;39(3):409-21. doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(03)00434-3.

Triple-transgenic model of Alzheimer's disease with plaques and tangles:
intracellular Abeta and synaptic dysfunction.

Oddo S(1), Caccamo A, Shepherd JD, Murphy MP, Golde TE, Kayed R, Metherate R,
Mattson MP, Akbari Y, LaFerla FM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, University of California, Irvine,
Irvine, California 92697, USA.

The neuropathological correlates of Alzheimer's disease (AD) include
amyloid-beta (Abeta) plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. To study the
interaction between Abeta and tau and their effect on synaptic function, we
derived a triple-transgenic model (3xTg-AD) harboring PS1(M146V), APP(Swe), and
tau(P301L) transgenes. Rather than crossing independent lines, we microinjected
two transgenes into single-cell embryos from homozygous PS1(M146V) knockin mice,
generating mice with the same genetic background. 3xTg-AD mice progressively
develop plaques and tangles. Synaptic dysfunction, including LTP deficits,
manifests in an age-related manner, but before plaque and tangle pathology.
Deficits in long-term synaptic plasticity correlate with the accumulation of
intraneuronal Abeta. These studies suggest a novel pathogenic role for
intraneuronal Abeta with regards to synaptic plasticity. The recapitulation of
salient features of AD in these mice clarifies the relationships between Abeta,
synaptic dysfunction, and tangles and provides a valuable model for evaluating
potential AD therapeutics as the impact on both lesions can be assessed.

DOI: 10.1016/s0896-6273(03)00434-3
PMID: 12895417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
