---
reference_id: "PMID:35381862"
title: A reaction-advection-diffusion model of cholera epidemics with seasonality and human behavior change.
authors:
- Wang X
- Wu R
- Zhao XQ
journal: J Math Biol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00285-022-01733-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A reaction-advection-diffusion model of cholera epidemics with seasonality and human behavior change.
**Authors:** Wang X, Wu R, Zhao XQ
**Journal:** J Math Biol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00285-022-01733-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00285-022-01733-3)

## Content

1. J Math Biol. 2022 Apr 6;84(5):34. doi: 10.1007/s00285-022-01733-3.

A reaction-advection-diffusion model of cholera epidemics with seasonality and 
human behavior change.

Wang X(1), Wu R(2), Zhao XQ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Washington State University, 
Pullman, WA, 99164, USA.
(2)Department of Mathematics, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 510632, China. 
ruiwenwu@jnu.edu.cn.
(3)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Memorial University of 
Newfoundland, St. John's, NL, A1C 5S7, Canada.

Cholera is a water- and food-borne infectious disease caused by V. cholerae. To 
investigate multiple effects of human behavior change, seasonality and spatial 
heterogeneity on cholera spread, we propose a reaction-advection-diffusion model 
that incorporates human hosts and aquatic reservoir of V. cholerae. We derive 
the basic reproduction number [Formula: see text] for this system and then 
establish a threshold type result on its global dynamics in terms of [Formula: 
see text]. Further, we show that the bacterial loss at the downstream end of the 
river due to water flux can reduce the disease risk, and describe the asymptotic 
behavior of [Formula: see text] for small and large diffusion in a special case 
(where the diffusion rates of infected human and the pathogen are constant). We 
also study the transmission dynamics at the early stage of cholera outbreak 
numerically, and find that human behavior change may lower the infection level 
and delay the disease peak. Moreover, the relative rate of bacterial loss, 
together with convection rate, plays an important role in identifying the 
severely infected areas. Meanwhile spatial heterogeneity may dilute or amplify 
cholera infection, which in turn would increase the complexity of disease 
spread.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00285-022-01733-3
PMID: 35381862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]