---
reference_id: "PMID:3281011"
title: "Autoantibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase in a patient with stiff-man syndrome, epilepsy, and type I diabetes mellitus."
authors:
- Solimena M
- Folli F
- Denis-Donini S
- Comi GC
- Pozza G
- De Camilli P
- Vicari AM
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '1988'
doi: 10.1056/NEJM198804213181602
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoantibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase in a patient with stiff-man syndrome, epilepsy, and type I diabetes mellitus.
**Authors:** Solimena M, Folli F, Denis-Donini S, Comi GC, Pozza G, De Camilli P, Vicari AM
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJM198804213181602](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJM198804213181602)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 1988 Apr 21;318(16):1012-20. doi: 10.1056/NEJM198804213181602.

Autoantibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase in a patient with stiff-man 
syndrome, epilepsy, and type I diabetes mellitus.

Solimena M(1), Folli F, Denis-Donini S, Comi GC, Pozza G, De Camilli P, Vicari 
AM.

Author information:
(1)Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche Center for Cytopharmacology, Milan.

Stiff-man syndrome is a rare disorder of the central nervous system consisting 
of progressive, fluctuating muscle rigidity with painful spasms. It is 
occasionally associated with endocrine disorders, including insulin-dependent 
diabetes, and with epilepsy. We investigated the possible existence of 
autoimmunity against the nervous system in a patient with stiff-man syndrome 
associated with epilepsy and Type I diabetes mellitus. Levels of IgG, which had 
an oligoclonal pattern, were elevated in the cerebrospinal fluid. The serum and 
the cerebrospinal fluid produced an identical, intense staining of all 
gray-matter regions when used to stain brain sections according to an indirect 
light-microscopical immunocytochemical procedure. The staining patterns were 
identical to those produced by antibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase (the 
enzyme responsible for the synthesis of gamma-aminobutyric acid). A band 
comigrating with glutamic acid decarboxylase in sodium dodecyl 
sulfate-polyacrylamide gels appeared to be the only nervous-tissue antigen 
recognized by cerebrospinal fluid antibodies, and the predominant antigen 
recognized by serum antibodies. These findings support the idea that an 
impairment of neuronal pathways that operate through gamma-aminobutyric acid is 
involved in the pathogenesis of stiff-man syndrome, and they raise the 
possibility of an autoimmune pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJM198804213181602
PMID: 3281011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]