---
reference_id: "PMID:21666320"
title: Unusual presentation in Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.
authors:
- Parikh RS
- Parikh SR
- Debashish B
- Harsha BL
- Thomas R
journal: Indian J Ophthalmol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.4103/0301-4738.82003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unusual presentation in Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.
**Authors:** Parikh RS, Parikh SR, Debashish B, Harsha BL, Thomas R
**Journal:** Indian J Ophthalmol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.4103/0301-4738.82003](https://doi.org/10.4103/0301-4738.82003)

## Content

1. Indian J Ophthalmol. 2011 Jul-Aug;59(4):312-4. doi: 10.4103/0301-4738.82003.

Unusual presentation in Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.

Parikh RS(1), Parikh SR, Debashish B, Harsha BL, Thomas R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Glaucoma and Clinical Research, Bombay City Eye Institute and 
Research Centre, Mumbai, India. drparikhs@gmail.com

We report an unusual presentation of a case of Axenfeld-Rieger (A-R) syndrome. A 
14-year-old male presented with gradual dimness of vision for 1 year and redness 
of left eye for 3 days. The patient had megalocornea with Haab's striae in the 
right eye and posterior embryotoxon in both the eyes. In the left eye, there was 
a white cord-like structure traversing the anterior chamber with adhesions to 
iris tissue along its course. On two antiglaucoma medications, his intraocular 
pressure (IOP) was 22 mm Hg in the right eye and 18 mm Hg in the left eye. 
Gonioscopy revealed a cord-like structure originating at the level of Schwalbe's 
line. He underwent right eye trabeculectomy with mitomycin-C. This case 
highlights a rare presentation of a strange cord-like structure, a rare 
presentation of A-R syndrome.

DOI: 10.4103/0301-4738.82003
PMCID: PMC3129760
PMID: 21666320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]