---
reference_id: "PMID:24026681"
title: "A mutation in a ganglioside biosynthetic enzyme, ST3GAL5, results in salt & pepper syndrome, a neurocutaneous disorder with altered glycolipid and glycoprotein glycosylation."
authors:
- Boccuto L
- Aoki K
- Flanagan-Steet H
- Chen CF
- Fan X
- Bartel F
- Petukh M
- Pittman A
- Saul R
- Chaubey A
- Alexov E
- Tiemeyer M
- Steet R
- Schwartz CE
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt434
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Apoptosis
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 2"
- Conserved Sequence
- "Embryo, Nonmammalian/metabolism"
- Exome
- Female
- G(M3) Ganglioside/biosynthesis
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Gene Knockdown Techniques
- Genetic Variation
- Glycolipids/metabolism
- Glycoproteins/metabolism
- Glycosylation
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Neurocutaneous Syndromes/genetics, metabolism"
- Neurons/metabolism
- Pedigree
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Sialyltransferases/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Zebrafish/embryology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A mutation in a ganglioside biosynthetic enzyme, ST3GAL5, results in salt & pepper syndrome, a neurocutaneous disorder with altered glycolipid and glycoprotein glycosylation.
**Authors:** Boccuto L, Aoki K, Flanagan-Steet H, Chen CF, Fan X, Bartel F, Petukh M, Pittman A, Saul R, Chaubey A, Alexov E, Tiemeyer M, Steet R, Schwartz CE
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddt434](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddt434)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Jan 15;23(2):418-33. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt434. Epub 2013
Sep  10.

A mutation in a ganglioside biosynthetic enzyme, ST3GAL5, results in salt &
pepper syndrome, a neurocutaneous disorder with altered glycolipid and
glycoprotein glycosylation.

Boccuto L(1), Aoki K, Flanagan-Steet H, Chen CF, Fan X, Bartel F, Petukh M,
Pittman A, Saul R, Chaubey A, Alexov E, Tiemeyer M, Steet R, Schwartz CE.

Author information:
(1)Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC 29646, USA.

'Salt & Pepper' syndrome is an autosomal recessive condition characterized by
severe intellectual disability, epilepsy, scoliosis, choreoathetosis, dysmorphic
facial features and altered dermal pigmentation. High-density SNP array analysis
performed on siblings first described with this syndrome detected four shared
regions of loss of heterozygosity (LOH). Whole-exome sequencing narrowed the
candidate region to chromosome 2p11.2. Sanger sequencing confirmed a homozygous
c.994G>A transition (p.E332K) in the ST3GAL5 gene, which encodes for a
sialyltransferase also known as GM3 synthase. A different homozygous mutation of
this gene has been previously associated with infantile-onset epilepsy syndromes
in two other cohorts. The ST3GAL5 enzyme synthesizes ganglioside GM3, a
glycosophingolipid enriched in neural tissue, by adding sialic acid to
lactosylceramide. Unlike disorders of glycosphingolipid (GSL) degradation, very
little is known regarding the molecular and pathophysiologic consequences of
altered GSL biosynthesis. Glycolipid analysis confirmed a complete lack of GM3
ganglioside in patient fibroblasts, while microarray analysis of
glycosyltransferase mRNAs detected modestly increased expression of ST3GAL5 and
greater changes in transcripts encoding enzymes that lie downstream of ST3GAL5
and in other GSL biosynthetic pathways. Comprehensive glycomic analysis of
N-linked, O-linked and GSL glycans revealed collateral alterations in response
to loss of complex gangliosides in patient fibroblasts and in zebrafish embryos
injected with antisense morpholinos that targeted zebrafish st3gal5 expression.
Morphant zebrafish embryos also exhibited increased apoptotic cell death in
multiple brain regions, emphasizing the importance of GSL expression in normal
neural development and function.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddt434
PMCID: PMC3869362
PMID: 24026681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
