---
reference_id: "PMID:27422805"
title: "Acute flaccid myelitis: A clinical review of US cases 2012-2015."
authors:
- Messacar K
- Schreiner TL
- Van Haren K
- Yang M
- Glaser CA
- Tyler KL
- Dominguez SR
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/ana.24730
keywords:
- Child
- "Enterovirus D, Human/pathogenicity"
- Enterovirus Infections/complications
- Humans
- Motor Neurons/pathology
- "Myelitis/diagnostic imaging, etiology, physiopathology"
- "Paralysis/diagnostic imaging, etiology, physiopathology"
- United States
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute flaccid myelitis: A clinical review of US cases 2012-2015.
**Authors:** Messacar K, Schreiner TL, Van Haren K, Yang M, Glaser CA, Tyler KL, Dominguez SR
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.24730](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.24730)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2016 Sep;80(3):326-38. doi: 10.1002/ana.24730. Epub 2016 Aug 4.

Acute flaccid myelitis: A clinical review of US cases 2012-2015.

Messacar K(1)(2), Schreiner TL(3), Van Haren K(4), Yang M(3), Glaser CA(5),
Tyler KL(6), Dominguez SR(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Hospital Medicine, Children's Hospital
Colorado and University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO.
Kevin.messacar@childrenscolorado.org.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Pediatric Infectious Diseases,
Children's Hospital Colorado and University of Colorado School of Medicine,
Aurora, CO. Kevin.messacar@childrenscolorado.org.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Neurology, Children's Hospital Colorado
and University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO.
(4)Department of Neurology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA.
(5)Kaiser Permanente Medical Center, Oakland, CA, and University of California
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA.
(6)Departments of Neurology, Medicine and Immunology-Microbiology at the
University of Colorado School of Medicine and Neurology Service at the Denver
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Denver, CO.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Pediatric Infectious Diseases,
Children's Hospital Colorado and University of Colorado School of Medicine,
Aurora, CO.

This review highlights clinical features of the increasing cases of acute
flaccid paralysis associated with anterior myelitis noted in the United States
from 2012 to 2015. Acute flaccid myelitis refers to acute flaccid limb weakness
with spinal cord gray matter lesions on imaging or evidence of spinal cord motor
neuron injury on electrodiagnostic testing. Although some individuals
demonstrated improvement in motor weakness and functional deficits, most have
residual weakness a year or more after onset. Epidemiological evidence and
biological plausibility support an association between enterovirus D68 and the
recent increase in acute flaccid myelitis cases in the United States. Ann Neurol
2016;80:326-338.

© 2016 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.24730
PMCID: PMC5098271
PMID: 27422805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential Conflicts of Interest Nothing to
report.
