---
reference_id: "PMID:35866234"
title: "Impact of gut microbiome on skin health: gut-skin axis observed through the lenses of therapeutics and skin diseases."
authors:
- Mahmud MR
- Akter S
- Tamanna SK
- Mazumder L
- Esti IZ
- Banerjee S
- Akter S
- Hasan MR
- Acharjee M
- Hossain MS
- Pirttilä AM
journal: Gut Microbes
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/19490976.2022.2096995
keywords:
- Dysbiosis/therapy
- Gastrointestinal Microbiome
- Humans
- Microbiota
- Prebiotics
- Probiotics/therapeutic use
- Skin
- Skin Diseases/therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of gut microbiome on skin health: gut-skin axis observed through the lenses of therapeutics and skin diseases.
**Authors:** Mahmud MR, Akter S, Tamanna SK, Mazumder L, Esti IZ, Banerjee S, Akter S, Hasan MR, Acharjee M, Hossain MS, Pirttilä AM
**Journal:** Gut Microbes (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/19490976.2022.2096995](https://doi.org/10.1080/19490976.2022.2096995)

## Content

1. Gut Microbes. 2022 Jan-Dec;14(1):2096995. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2022.2096995.

Impact of gut microbiome on skin health: gut-skin axis observed through the
lenses of therapeutics and skin diseases.

Mahmud MR(1), Akter S(2), Tamanna SK(2), Mazumder L(2), Esti IZ(2), Banerjee
S(2), Akter S(2), Hasan MR(2), Acharjee M(3), Hossain MS(4), Pirttilä AM(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Production Animal Medicine, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Jagannath University, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(3)Department of Bioscience, Graduate School of Science and Technology, Shizuoka
University, Shizuoka, Japan.
(4)Institute of Biology, Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary.
(5)Ecology and Genetics, Faculty of Science, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.

The human intestine hosts diverse microbial communities that play a significant
role in maintaining gut-skin homeostasis. When the relationship between gut
microbiome and the immune system is impaired, subsequent effects can be
triggered on the skin, potentially promoting the development of skin diseases.
The mechanisms through which the gut microbiome affects skin health are still
unclear. Enhancing our understanding on the connection between skin and gut
microbiome is needed to find novel ways to treat human skin disorders. In this
review, we systematically evaluate current data regarding microbial ecology of
healthy skin and gut, diet, pre- and probiotics, and antibiotics, on gut
microbiome and their effects on skin health. We discuss potential mechanisms of
the gut-skin axis and the link between the gut and skin-associated diseases,
such as psoriasis, atopic dermatitis, acne vulgaris, rosacea, alopecia areata,
and hidradenitis suppurativa. This review will increase our understanding of the
impacts of gut microbiome on skin conditions to aid in finding new medications
for skin-associated diseases.

DOI: 10.1080/19490976.2022.2096995
PMCID: PMC9311318
PMID: 35866234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported
by the authors.
