---
reference_id: "PMID:26365832"
title: Thrombus Characteristics Are Related to Collaterals and Angioarchitecture in Acute Stroke.
authors:
- Qazi EM
- Sohn SI
- Mishra S
- Almekhlafi MA
- Eesa M
- "d'Esterre CD"
- Qazi AA
- Puig J
- Goyal M
- Demchuk AM
- Menon BK
journal: Can J Neurol Sci
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1017/cjn.2015.291
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thrombus Characteristics Are Related to Collaterals and Angioarchitecture in Acute Stroke.
**Authors:** Qazi EM, Sohn SI, Mishra S, Almekhlafi MA, Eesa M, d'Esterre CD, Qazi AA, Puig J, Goyal M, Demchuk AM, Menon BK
**Journal:** Can J Neurol Sci (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1017/cjn.2015.291](https://doi.org/10.1017/cjn.2015.291)

## Content

1. Can J Neurol Sci. 2015 Nov;42(6):381-8. doi: 10.1017/cjn.2015.291. Epub 2015
Sep  14.

Thrombus Characteristics Are Related to Collaterals and Angioarchitecture in 
Acute Stroke.

Qazi EM(1), Sohn SI(2), Mishra S(1), Almekhlafi MA(1), Eesa M(1), d'Esterre 
CD(1), Qazi AA(1), Puig J(3), Goyal M(1), Demchuk AM(1), Menon BK(1).

Author information:
(1)1Calgary Stroke Program,Department of Clinical Neurosciences,Hotchkiss Brain 
Institute,University of Calgary,Canada.
(2)2Department of Neurology,Dongsan Medical Center,Keimyung 
University,Daegu,South Korea.
(3)5Department of Radiology,Girona Biomedical Research Institute,Diagnostic 
Imaging Institute,Girona,Spain.

BACKGROUND: We have theorized that clots with stasis are longer. We therefore 
explored the relationship between thrombus imaging characteristics on 
noncontrast computed tomography (NCCT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with 
clot length and pial collaterals on baseline computed tomography angiography 
(CTA).
METHODS: Prospective study of acute ischemic stroke patients (2005-2009) from 
Keimyung University. Patients with known stroke symptom onset time, baseline 
CTA, MRI, and with M1-Middle Cerebral Artery (MCA)±intracranial internal carotid 
artery (ICA) occlusions were included. Clot length and pial collaterals were 
measured on baseline CTA.
RESULTS: A total of 104 patients (mean age 65.1±12.28 years, 56.7% male, median 
baseline National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale 13) with intracranial ICA + 
MCA (n=50) or isolated M1-MCA (n=54) occlusions were included. Hyperdense sign 
on NCCT had a median clot length of 42.3 mm versus 29.5 mm when hyperdense 
negative (p=0.02). Clots showing blooming artifact on gradient recall echo MRI 
had a median length of 39.1 mm versus 24.5 mm without blooming (p=0.005). 
Patients with poor baseline collaterals on CTA had longer clots than those with 
intermediate/good collaterals (median clot length 49.4 mm vs 34.9 mm vs 20.5 mm 
respectively, p<0.001). In censored logistic regression modeling, clot length 
was an independent predictor of hyperdense sign (p=0.05) and of the presence of 
blooming artifact (p=0.006).
CONCLUSIONS: Clot length and baseline collateral status are independent 
predictors of clot hyperdensity on NCCT and blooming artifact on gradient recall 
echo. Longer clots are more likely to be hyperdense and to bloom more, probably 
because portions of these clots are freshly formed locally due to of stasis of 
blood around the original clot. This stasis could be because of poor collaterals 
and inefficient angio-architecture within the cerebral arterial tree.

DOI: 10.1017/cjn.2015.291
PMID: 26365832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]