---
reference_id: "PMID:29697154"
title: A Phase-by-Phase Review of Migraine Pathophysiology.
authors:
- Dodick DW
journal: Headache
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/head.13300
keywords:
- "Analgesics/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Brain/drug effects, physiopathology"
- "Cortical Spreading Depression/drug effects, physiology"
- Humans
- "Migraine Disorders/drug therapy, physiopathology"
- "Neural Pathways/drug effects, physiopathology"
- "Nociception/drug effects, physiology"
- Prodromal Symptoms
- "Trigeminal Nerve/drug effects, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Phase-by-Phase Review of Migraine Pathophysiology.
**Authors:** Dodick DW
**Journal:** Headache (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/head.13300](https://doi.org/10.1111/head.13300)

## Content

1. Headache. 2018 May;58 Suppl 1:4-16. doi: 10.1111/head.13300.

A Phase-by-Phase Review of Migraine Pathophysiology.

Dodick DW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, AZ, USA.

Migraine is a common, disabling neurological disorder characterized by multiple 
phases: premonitory, aura, headache, postdrome, and interictal. Our 
understanding of the pathophysiology of each phase of migraine has evolved over 
recent years. The premonitory phase begins as early as 3 days before the 
headache phase, and involves a complex interplay between various cortical and 
subcortical brain regions, including the hypothalamus and brainstem nuclei that 
modulate nociceptive signaling. The headache phase involves activation of the 
trigeminovascular system, a pathway that is well characterized. In one-third of 
patients, an aura phase may occur during some attacks and likely correlates with 
a cortical spreading depression-like event; a slowly propagating wave of 
neuronal and glial cell depolarization and hyperpolarization. Improved 
characterization of the pathophysiological processes involved at each stage of 
the migraine attack will aid the identification of new therapeutic targets for 
migraine prevention. This review provides an update on prevailing concepts of 
migraine pathophysiology.

© 2018 American Headache Society.

DOI: 10.1111/head.13300
PMID: 29697154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]