---
reference_id: "PMID:35241120"
title: "Association of COL5A1 gene polymorphisms and musculoskeletal soft tissue injuries: a meta-analysis based on 21 observational studies."
authors:
- Guo R
- Ji Z
- Gao S
- Aizezi A
- Fan Y
- Wang Z
- Ning K
journal: J Orthop Surg Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s13018-022-03020-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of COL5A1 gene polymorphisms and musculoskeletal soft tissue injuries: a meta-analysis based on 21 observational studies.
**Authors:** Guo R, Ji Z, Gao S, Aizezi A, Fan Y, Wang Z, Ning K
**Journal:** J Orthop Surg Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13018-022-03020-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13018-022-03020-9)

## Content

1. J Orthop Surg Res. 2022 Mar 3;17(1):129. doi: 10.1186/s13018-022-03020-9.

Association of COL5A1 gene polymorphisms and musculoskeletal soft tissue 
injuries: a meta-analysis based on 21 observational studies.

Guo R(1), Ji Z(1), Gao S(2), Aizezi A(1), Fan Y(1), Wang Z(3), Ning K(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedic Center, People's Hospital of Xinjiang Uygur 
Autonomous Region, No.91 Tianchi Road, Urumqi, 830001, Xinjiang, China.
(2)Department of Spine Surgery, Xinjiang Medical University First Affiliated 
Hospital, Urumqi, 830054, Xinjiang, China.
(3)Department of Orthopedic Center, People's Hospital of Xinjiang Uygur 
Autonomous Region, No.91 Tianchi Road, Urumqi, 830001, Xinjiang, China. 
rmyygr@126.com.
(4)Department of Orthopedic Center, People's Hospital of Xinjiang Uygur 
Autonomous Region, No.91 Tianchi Road, Urumqi, 830001, Xinjiang, China. 
13579233099@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: Inconsistent findings existed on the correlation of collagen type V 
α1 (COL5A1) gene polymorphisms and musculoskeletal soft tissue injuries (MSTIs). 
The purpose of this study was to collect and combine the current evidences by a 
meta-analysis approach.
METHODS: Six online databases were searched up to August, 2021. The 
methodological quality of each individual study was evaluated based upon 
Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS). The strength of the effect size was presented by 
odds ratio (OR) with 95% confidence interval (95%CI) in five genetic models. The 
data were analyzed using Review Manager 5.3.
RESULTS: Twenty-one studies were eligible to this meta-analysis. The study 
quality was deemed fair to excellent according to NOS. In the overall analyses, 
the merged data suggested that rs12722, rs71746744, and rs3196378 polymorphisms 
were correlated to an increased susceptibility to MSTIs. But the association was 
not established in rs13946 or rs11103544 polymorphism. For rs12722 polymorphism, 
stratified analyses by injury type and ethnicity identified the association 
mainly existed in ligament injury and among Caucasian population. For rs13946 
polymorphism, subgroup analysis suggested the association existed in tendon and 
ligament injuries.
CONCLUSION: This study supports that rs12722 is associated with an elevated 
susceptibility to ligament injury, especially in the Caucasian population. 
Rs13946 polymorphism appears to increase the risk to tendon and ligament 
injuries. Rs71746744 and rs3196378 polymorphisms have a tendency to confer an 
elevated risk to MSTIs. However, no relevance is found between rs11103544 
polymorphism and MSTIs.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13018-022-03020-9
PMCID: PMC8895797
PMID: 35241120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.