---
reference_id: "PMID:24690222"
title: "Treacher Collins Syndrome: the genetics of a craniofacial disease."
authors:
- Kadakia S
- Helman SN
- Badhey AK
- Saman M
- Ducic Y
journal: Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2014.03.006
keywords:
- Animals
- DNA-Directed RNA Polymerases/genetics
- Humans
- "Mandibulofacial Dysostosis/diagnosis, genetics"
- Mutation
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Phosphoproteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treacher Collins Syndrome: the genetics of a craniofacial disease.
**Authors:** Kadakia S, Helman SN, Badhey AK, Saman M, Ducic Y
**Journal:** Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijporl.2014.03.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijporl.2014.03.006)

## Content

1. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2014 Jun;78(6):893-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijporl.2014.03.006. Epub 2014 Mar 13.

Treacher Collins Syndrome: the genetics of a craniofacial disease.

Kadakia S(1), Helman SN(2), Badhey AK(2), Saman M(3), Ducic Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, New York Eye and Ear 
Infirmary, New York, NY, United States. Electronic address: skadakia@nyee.edu.
(2)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, United States.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, New York Eye and Ear 
Infirmary, New York, NY, United States.
(4)Department of Facial Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United States.

OBJECTIVES: The molecular underpinnings of Treacher Collins Syndrome (TCS) are 
diverse. This article codifies the most recent findings in this complex area of 
research to further current understanding of the disease process. Elucidating 
the genetic causes of the disorder can be useful in earlier detection and better 
treatment planning.
DESIGN: Articles from 1991 to 2013 were selected and reviewed by five 
researchers utilizing the most recent literature of the genetics and 
pathophysiology of TCS.
RESULTS: Mutations in TCOF1, POLR1C and POLR1D have all been implicated in 
causing TCS. The association of the TCOF1 gene product, Treacle, and gene 
products of POLR1C and POLR1D with ribosome biosynthesis suggests that a loss of 
function mutation in these genes disrupts ribosome biosynthesis in constituent 
neural crest cells and neuroepithelium leading to apoptosis. However, recent 
data illustrating that P53 heterozygosity is protective against TCS, and that 
P53 and TCOF1 hemizygous embryos do not affect ribosomal function, implicates 
P53 or elements downstream of P53 as playing a role in TCS pathogenesis.
CONCLUSION: Our study codified nascent findings of the molecular determinants of 
TCS. These findings add to a burgeoning database of TCS-associated mutations, 
and as such, can be used to establish TCS diagnosis and further clarify TCS 
pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2014.03.006
PMID: 24690222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]