---
reference_id: "PMID:27923328"
title: Modeling Stroma-Induced Drug Resistance in a Tissue-Engineered Tumor Model of Ewing Sarcoma.
authors:
- Santoro M
- Menegaz BA
- Lamhamedi-Cherradi SE
- Molina ER
- Wu D
- Priebe W
- Ludwig JA
- Mikos AG
journal: Tissue Eng Part A
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2016.0369
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology
- "Bone Neoplasms/drug therapy, metabolism, pathology"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm"
- Humans
- "Models, Biological"
- "Neoplasm Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- "Sarcoma, Ewing/drug therapy, metabolism, pathology"
- Tumor Microenvironment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modeling Stroma-Induced Drug Resistance in a Tissue-Engineered Tumor Model of Ewing Sarcoma.
**Authors:** Santoro M, Menegaz BA, Lamhamedi-Cherradi SE, Molina ER, Wu D, Priebe W, Ludwig JA, Mikos AG
**Journal:** Tissue Eng Part A (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1089/ten.TEA.2016.0369](https://doi.org/10.1089/ten.TEA.2016.0369)

## Content

1. Tissue Eng Part A. 2017 Jan;23(1-2):80-89. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2016.0369.

Modeling Stroma-Induced Drug Resistance in a Tissue-Engineered Tumor Model of
Ewing Sarcoma.

Santoro M(1)(2), Menegaz BA(2), Lamhamedi-Cherradi SE(2), Molina ER(3), Wu D(4),
Priebe W(5), Ludwig JA(2), Mikos AG(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Rice University ,
Houston, Texas.
(2)2 Department of Sarcoma Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center , Houston, Texas.
(3)3 Department of Bioengineering, Rice University , Houston, Texas.
(4)4 Department of BioSciences, Rice University , Houston, Texas.
(5)5 Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center , Houston, Texas.

Three-dimensional (3D) tumor models are gaining traction in the research
community given their capacity to mimic aspects of the tumor microenvironment
absent in monolayer systems. In particular, the ability to spatiotemporally
control cell placement within ex vivo 3D systems has enabled the study of
tumor-stroma interactions. Furthermore, by regulating biomechanical stimuli, one
can reveal how biophysical cues affect stromal cell phenotype and how their
phenotype impacts tumor drug sensitivity. Both tumor architecture and shear
force have profound effects on Ewing sarcoma (ES) cell behavior and are known to
elicit ligand-mediated activation of the insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor
(IGF-1R), thereby mediating resistance of ES cells to IGF-1R inhibitors. Here,
we demonstrate that these same biophysical cues-modeled by coculturing ES cells
and mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) in 3D scaffolds within a flow perfusion
bioreactor-activate interleukin-6 and transcription factor Stat3. Critically, an
active Stat3 pathway drastically alters the equilibrium of IGF-1R-targeted
ligands (IGF-1) and antagonists (IGFBP-3) secreted by MSCs. To elucidate how
this might promote ES tumor growth under physiological shear-stress conditions,
ES cells and MSCs were co-cultured by using a flow perfusion bioreactor at
varying ratios that simulate a wide range of native MSC abundance. Our results
indicate that ES cells and MSCs stimulate each other's growth. Co-targeting
IGF-1R and Stat3 enhanced antineoplastic activity over monotherapy treatment.
Although this discovery requires prospective clinical validation in patients, it
reveals the power of employing a more physiological tissue-engineered 3D tumor
model to elucidate how tumor cells co-opt stromal cells to acquire drug
resistance.

DOI: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2016.0369
PMCID: PMC5240012
PMID: 27923328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Statement No competing financial interests
exist.
