---
reference_id: "PMID:33329964"
title: "Chediak-Higashi Syndrome With Epstein-Barr Virus Triggered Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis: A Case Report."
authors:
- Gopaal N
- Sharma JN
- Agrawal V
- Lora SS
- Jadoun LS
journal: Cureus
year: '2020'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.11467
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chediak-Higashi Syndrome With Epstein-Barr Virus Triggered Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Gopaal N, Sharma JN, Agrawal V, Lora SS, Jadoun LS
**Journal:** Cureus (2020)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.11467](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.11467)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2020 Nov 13;12(11):e11467. doi: 10.7759/cureus.11467.

Chediak-Higashi Syndrome With Epstein-Barr Virus Triggered Hemophagocytic 
Lymphohistiocytosis: A Case Report.

Gopaal N(1), Sharma JN(1), Agrawal V(1), Lora SS(1), Jadoun LS(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Medicine, Swai Man Singh Medical College, Jaipur, IND.

Chediak-Higashi syndrome (CHS) is a rare, autosomal-recessive disorder 
characterized by oculocutaneous albinism, recurrent bacterial infections, 
progressive neurologic abnormalities, coagulation defects and a high risk of 
developing hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis characterized by pancytopenia, 
high fever, and lymphohistiocytic infiltration of liver, spleen, and lymph 
nodes. Treatment of accelerated-phase CHS is difficult with poor 
prognosis. Here, we report a two-and-a-half-year-old male child who was 
diagnosed with Chediak-Higashi Syndrome based on silvery hair, pathognomonic 
hair microscopy and giant azurophilic granules in granulocytes. The patient was 
in advanced stage of HLH induced by an Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection and 
given etoposide, cyclosporine and dexamethasone according to hemophagocytic 
lymphohistiocytosis (HLH)-2004 protocol but did not survive.

Copyright © 2020, Gopaal et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.11467
PMCID: PMC7733776
PMID: 33329964

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.