---
reference_id: "PMID:2888784"
title: "Toxic multinodular goiter: a variant of autoimmune hyperthyroidism."
authors:
- Kraiem Z
- Glaser B
- Yigla M
- Pauker J
- Sadeh O
- Sheinfeld M
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '1987'
doi: 10.1210/jcem-65-4-659
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Toxic multinodular goiter: a variant of autoimmune hyperthyroidism.
**Authors:** Kraiem Z, Glaser B, Yigla M, Pauker J, Sadeh O, Sheinfeld M
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (1987)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jcem-65-4-659](https://doi.org/10.1210/jcem-65-4-659)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1987 Oct;65(4):659-64. doi: 10.1210/jcem-65-4-659.

Toxic multinodular goiter: a variant of autoimmune hyperthyroidism.

Kraiem Z(1), Glaser B, Yigla M, Pauker J, Sadeh O, Sheinfeld M.

Author information:
(1)Endocrine Research Unit, Carmel Hospital, Haifa, Israel.

The aim of this study was to examine whether at least a subgroup of patients 
with toxic multinodular goiter may have autoimmune thyroid disease. 
Thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin (TSI) activity, measured by a sensitive 
bioassay employing cultured human thyroid cells, was determined in patients with 
toxic multinodular goiter and other thyroid disorders. All patients with active 
Graves' disease (n = 47) had detectable serum TSI activity, whereas TSI was 
undetectable in patients with thyroid disease not believed to be of autoimmune 
origin: toxic adenoma (n = 13), cold nodule (n = 5), and nontoxic goiter (n = 
19), with a single exception in the latter group. Toxic multinodular goiter (n = 
26) was diagnosed based on clinical and laboratory evidence of hyperthyroidism 
associated with a multinodular goiter on palpation and scintiscan. The toxic 
multinodular goiter group was then subclassified according to scintiscan pattern 
(type A, diffuse but uneven distribution of technetium uptake; type B, multiple 
discrete nodules of varying size and function). All but 1 of the 11 TSI-positive 
toxic multinodular goiter patients had a type A scintiscan pattern. The patients 
with the type A scintiscan pattern were younger and more often had elevated 
antithyroid antibody titers, ophthalmopathy, and concurrent development of 
goiter and hyperthyroidism (rather than long-standing goiter preceding 
hyperthyroidism) compared to the type B patients. Thus, a subgroup of patients 
with clinically defined toxic multinodular goiter (type A) probably have 
autoimmune hyperthyroidism (a variant of Graves' disease), while in another 
subgroup (type B) hyperthyroidism is not related to an autoimmune etiology (a 
variant of toxic adenoma).

DOI: 10.1210/jcem-65-4-659
PMID: 2888784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]