---
reference_id: "PMID:36474804"
title: "The prevalence and long-term health effects of Long Covid among hospitalised and non-hospitalised populations: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- "O'Mahoney LL"
- Routen A
- Gillies C
- Ekezie W
- Welford A
- Zhang A
- Karamchandani U
- Simms-Williams N
- Cassambai S
- Ardavani A
- Wilkinson TJ
- Hawthorne G
- Curtis F
- Kingsnorth AP
- Almaqhawi A
- Ward T
- Ayoubkhani D
- Banerjee A
- Calvert M
- Shafran R
- Stephenson T
- Sterne J
- Ward H
- Evans RA
- Zaccardi F
- Wright S
- Khunti K
journal: EClinicalMedicine
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2022.101762
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The prevalence and long-term health effects of Long Covid among hospitalised and non-hospitalised populations: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** O'Mahoney LL, Routen A, Gillies C, Ekezie W, Welford A, Zhang A, Karamchandani U, Simms-Williams N, Cassambai S, Ardavani A, Wilkinson TJ, Hawthorne G, Curtis F, Kingsnorth AP, Almaqhawi A, Ward T, Ayoubkhani D, Banerjee A, Calvert M, Shafran R, Stephenson T, Sterne J, Ward H, Evans RA, Zaccardi F, Wright S, Khunti K
**Journal:** EClinicalMedicine (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.eclinm.2022.101762](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eclinm.2022.101762)

## Content

1. EClinicalMedicine. 2022 Dec 1;55:101762. doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2022.101762. 
eCollection 2023 Jan.

The prevalence and long-term health effects of Long Covid among hospitalised and 
non-hospitalised populations: A systematic review and meta-analysis.

O'Mahoney LL(1), Routen A(1), Gillies C(1)(2), Ekezie W(1), Welford A(1), Zhang 
A(3), Karamchandani U(4), Simms-Williams N(5), Cassambai S(1), Ardavani A(1), 
Wilkinson TJ(1), Hawthorne G(1), Curtis F(1), Kingsnorth AP(1), Almaqhawi A(6), 
Ward T(7), Ayoubkhani D(2)(8), Banerjee A(9)(10), Calvert M(5)(11)(12), Shafran 
R(3), Stephenson T(3), Sterne J(13), Ward H(4), Evans RA(7)(14), Zaccardi 
F(1)(2), Wright S(15), Khunti K(1).

Author information:
(1)Diabetes Research Centre, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK.
(2)Leicester Real World Evidence Unit, Diabetes Research Centre, University of 
Leicester, Leicester, UK.
(3)Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, University College London, 
London, UK.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, School of Public Health, Imperial College London, 
London, UK.
(5)Institute of Applied Health Research, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, 
UK.
(6)Department of Family and Community Medicine, College of Medicine, King Faisal 
University, Al Ahsa, Saudi Arabia.
(7)Department of Respiratory Sciences, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK.
(8)Office for National Statistics, Government Buildings, Newport, UK.
(9)Faculty of Population Health Sciences, Institute of Health Informatics, 
University College London, London, UK.
(10)Department of Population Science and Experimental Medicine, University 
College London, London, UK.
(11)NIHR Birmingham Biomedical Research Centre and NIHR Applied Research 
Collaboration West Midlands, University Hospital Birmingham and University of 
Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(12)Birmingham Health Partners Centre for Regulatory Science and Innovation and 
Centre for Patient Reported Outcomes Research, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, UK.
(13)Population Health Sciences, Bristol Medical School, University of Bristol, 
Bristol, UK.
(14)NIHR Leicester Biomedical Research Centre, Respiratory Department, 
University Hospitals of Leicester NHS Trust, Leicester, UK.
(15)Patient Partner, UK.

Erratum in
    EClinicalMedicine. 2023 May;59:101959. doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2023.101959.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to systematically synthesise the global 
evidence on the prevalence of persistent symptoms in a general post COVID-19 
population.
METHODS: A systematic literature search was conducted using multiple electronic 
databases (MEDLINE and The Cochrane Library, Scopus, CINAHL, and medRxiv) until 
January 2022. Studies with at least 100 people with confirmed or self-reported 
COVID-19 symptoms at ≥28 days following infection onset were included. 
Patient-reported outcome measures and clinical investigations were both 
assessed. Results were analysed descriptively, and meta-analyses were conducted 
to derive prevalence estimates. This study was pre-registered (PROSPERO-ID: 
CRD42021238247).
FINDINGS: 194 studies totalling 735,006 participants were included, with five 
studies conducted in those <18 years of age. Most studies were conducted in 
Europe (n = 106) or Asia (n = 49), and the time to follow-up ranged from ≥28 
days to 387 days. 122 studies reported data on hospitalised patients, 18 on 
non-hospitalised, and 54 on hospitalised and non-hospitalised combined (mixed). 
On average, at least 45% of COVID-19 survivors, regardless of hospitalisation 
status, went on to experience at least one unresolved symptom (mean follow-up 
126 days). Fatigue was frequently reported across hospitalised (28.4%; 95% CI 
24.7%-32.5%), non-hospitalised (34.8%; 95% CI 17.6%-57.2%), and mixed (25.2%; 
95% CI 17.7%-34.6%) cohorts. Amongst the hospitalised cohort, abnormal CT 
patterns/x-rays were frequently reported (45.3%; 95% CI 35.3%-55.7%), alongside 
ground glass opacification (41.1%; 95% CI 25.7%-58.5%), and impaired diffusion 
capacity for carbon monoxide (31.7%; 95% CI 25.8%-3.2%).
INTERPRETATION: Our work shows that 45% of COVID-19 survivors, regardless of 
hospitalisation status, were experiencing a range of unresolved symptoms at ∼ 4 
months. Current understanding is limited by heterogeneous study design, 
follow-up durations, and measurement methods. Definition of subtypes of Long 
Covid is unclear, subsequently hampering effective treatment/management 
strategies.
FUNDING: No funding.

© 2022 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2022.101762
PMCID: PMC9714474
PMID: 36474804

Conflict of interest statement: This work was supported by National Institute 
for Health Research (NIHR) ARC East Midlands. AB is PI of the NIHR funded 
STIMULATE-ICP study (COV-LT2-0043) and has also received other research funding 
from Astra Zeneca, NIHR, BMA, UK Research and Innovation (UKRI) and EU. MC is 
Director of the Birmingham Health Partners Centre for Regulatory Science and 
Innovation, Director of the Centre for the Centre for Patient Reported Outcomes 
Research and is a NIHR Senior Investigator. MC receives funding from the NIHR, 
UKRI, NIHR Birmingham Biomedical Research Centre, the NIHR Surgical 
Reconstruction and Microbiology Research Centre, NIHR ARC West Midlands, UK 
SPINE, European Regional Development Fund–Demand Hub and Health Data Research UK 
at the University of Birmingham and University Hospitals Birmingham NHS 
Foundation Trust, Innovate UK (part of UKRI), Macmillan Cancer Support, UCB 
Pharma, Janssen, GSK and Gilead. She is senior author of the Symptom Burden 
Questionnaire™ for Long COVID. MC has received personal fees from Aparito Ltd, 
CIS Oncology, Takeda, Merck, Daiichi Sankyo, Glaukos, GSK and the 
Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI) outside the submitted work. 
In addition, a family member owns shares in GSK. TS and RS receive funding from 
the NIHR, and by the UKRI who have awarded funding grant number COVLT0022. All 
research at Great Ormond Street Hospital NHS Foundation Trust and UCL Great 
Ormond Street Institute of Child Health is made possible by the NIHR Great 
Ormond Street Hospital Biomedical Research Centre. The views expressed are those 
of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR or the 
Department of Health. HW is an NIHR Senior Investigator Award, and acknowledges 
support from the NIHR Imperial Biomedical Research Centre, Health Data Research 
UK, NIHR Applied Research Collaborative North West London, and the Wellcome 
Trust. KK is Chair of the Ethnicity Subgroup of the UK Scientific Advisory Group 
for Emergencies (SAGE) and Member of SAGE and also Chair of the National Long 
Covid working group which reports to the Chief Medical Officer. TW receives 
funding from the NIHR, the views expressed are those of the author(s) and not 
necessarily those of the NIHR or the Department of Health and Social Care. JS 
receives funding from the NIHR and UKRI.