---
reference_id: "PMID:7651446"
title: "L-dihydroxyphenylalanine and complex I deficiency in Parkinson's disease brain."
authors:
- Cooper JM
- Daniel SE
- Marsden CD
- Schapira AH
journal: Mov Disord
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1002/mds.870100311
content_type: abstract_only
---

# L-dihydroxyphenylalanine and complex I deficiency in Parkinson's disease brain.
**Authors:** Cooper JM, Daniel SE, Marsden CD, Schapira AH
**Journal:** Mov Disord (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.870100311](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.870100311)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 1995 May;10(3):295-7. doi: 10.1002/mds.870100311.

L-dihydroxyphenylalanine and complex I deficiency in Parkinson's disease brain.

Cooper JM(1), Daniel SE, Marsden CD, Schapira AH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Royal Free Hospital School of Medicine, 
London, England, U.K.

There is evidence for a 37% deficiency of complex I activity in Parkinson's 
disease (PD), which appears to be specific for PD amongst parkinsonian syndromes 
and selective for the substantia nigra within the central nervous system. Rat 
studies have shown that, in the context of a normal nigrostriatal dopaminergic 
cell population, L-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-dopa) causes a reversible 25% 
defect of complex I activity in nigral and striatal tissue. Analysis of striatal 
tissue from PD patients after prolonged exposure to high-dose L-dopa does not 
show such a defect. Results of these and other studies suggest that L-dopa 
therapy does not cause complex I deficiency in PD striatum. However, it cannot 
be excluded that, in the particular environment of the PD substantia nigra, 
L-dopa may enhance a preexisting complex I defect.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.870100311
PMID: 7651446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]