---
reference_id: "PMID:24278358"
title: "Biopersistent granular dust and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Brüske I
- Thiering E
- Heinrich J
- Huster K
- Nowak D
journal: PLoS One
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080977
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biopersistent granular dust and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Brüske I, Thiering E, Heinrich J, Huster K, Nowak D
**Journal:** PLoS One (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0080977](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0080977)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 20;8(11):e80977. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080977. 
eCollection 2013.

Biopersistent granular dust and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Brüske I(1), Thiering E, Heinrich J, Huster K, Nowak D.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Epidemiology I, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research 
Center for Environmental Health, Munich, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Applying a systematic review to identify studies eligible for 
meta-analysis of the association between occupational exposure to inorganic dust 
and the development of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and 
conducting a meta-analysis.
DATA SOURCES: Searches of PubMed and Embase for the time period 1970-2010 
yielded 257 cross-sectional and longitudinal studies on people exposed to 
inorganic dust at the workplace with data on lung function. These studies were 
independently abstracted and evaluated by two authors; any disagreement was 
resolved by a third reviewer. Of 55 publications accepted for meta-analysis, 27 
investigated the effects of occupational exposure to biopersistent granular dust 
(bg-dust).
METHODS: A random effects meta-analysis allowed us to provide an estimate of the 
average exposure effect on spirometric parameters presented in forest plots. 
Between-study heterogeneity was assessed by using I(2) statistics, with I(2)>25% 
indicating significant heterogeneity. Publication bias was investigated by 
visual inspection of funnel plots. The influence of individual studies was 
assessed by dropping the respective study before pooling study-specific 
estimates.
RESULTS: The mean FEV1 of workers exposed to bg-dust was 160 ml lower or 5.7% 
less than predicted compared to workers with no/low exposure. The risk of an 
obstructive airway disease--defined as FEV1/FVC < 70%--increased by 7% per 1 mg 
· m(-3) respirable bg-dust.
CONCLUSION: Occupational inhalative exposure to bg-dust was associated with a 
statistically significant decreased FEV1 and FEV1/FVC revealing airway 
obstruction consistent with COPD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080977
PMCID: PMC3835577
PMID: 24278358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.