---
reference_id: "PMID:16007086"
title: TACI is mutant in common variable immunodeficiency and IgA deficiency.
authors:
- Castigli E
- Wilson SA
- Garibyan L
- Rachid R
- Bonilla F
- Schneider L
- Geha RS
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1038/ng1601
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TACI is mutant in common variable immunodeficiency and IgA deficiency.
**Authors:** Castigli E, Wilson SA, Garibyan L, Rachid R, Bonilla F, Schneider L, Geha RS
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1601](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1601)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2005 Aug;37(8):829-34. doi: 10.1038/ng1601. Epub 2005 Jul 10.

TACI is mutant in common variable immunodeficiency and IgA deficiency.

Castigli E(1), Wilson SA, Garibyan L, Rachid R, Bonilla F, Schneider L, Geha RS.

Author information:
(1)Division of Immunology, Children's Hospital and Department of Pediatrics, 
Harvard Medical School, 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2005 Aug;37(8):793-4. doi: 10.1038/ng0805-793.

The tumor necrosis factor receptor family member TACI (transmembrane activator 
and calcium-modulator and cyclophilin ligand interactor) mediates isotype 
switching in B cells. We found that 4 of 19 unrelated individuals with common 
variable immunodeficiency (CVID) and 1 of 16 individuals with IgA deficiency 
(IgAD) had a missense mutation in one allele of TNFRSF13B (encoding TACI). One 
of the four individuals with CVID had a single nucleotide insertion in the other 
TNFRSF13B allele. None of these mutations were present in 50 healthy subjects. 
TNFRSF13B mutations cosegregated with the phenotype of CVID or IgAD in family 
members of four index individuals that we studied. B cells from individuals with 
TACI mutations expressed TACI but did not produce IgG and IgA in response to the 
TACI ligand APRIL, probably reflecting impaired isotype switching. These results 
suggest that TACI mutations can result in CVID and IgAD.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1601
PMID: 16007086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]