---
reference_id: "PMID:26751728"
title: A Novel Domain-Specific Mutation in a Sclerosteosis Patient Suggests a Role of LRP4 as an Anchor for Sclerostin in Human Bone.
authors:
- Fijalkowski I
- Geets E
- Steenackers E
- Van Hoof V
- Ramos FJ
- Mortier G
- Fortuna AM
- Van Hul W
- Boudin E
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2782
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
- Amino Acid Substitution
- "Bone Morphogenetic Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Genetic Markers/genetics
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- "Hyperostosis/genetics, metabolism"
- "LDL-Receptor Related Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Protein Binding
- Protein Domains
- "Syndactyly/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Novel Domain-Specific Mutation in a Sclerosteosis Patient Suggests a Role of LRP4 as an Anchor for Sclerostin in Human Bone.
**Authors:** Fijalkowski I, Geets E, Steenackers E, Van Hoof V, Ramos FJ, Mortier G, Fortuna AM, Van Hul W, Boudin E
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.2782](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.2782)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2016 Apr;31(4):874-81. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2782. Epub 2016 Jan
 24.

A Novel Domain-Specific Mutation in a Sclerosteosis Patient Suggests a Role of
LRP4 as an Anchor for Sclerostin in Human Bone.

Fijalkowski I(1), Geets E(1), Steenackers E(1), Van Hoof V(2), Ramos FJ(3),
Mortier G(1), Fortuna AM(4), Van Hul W(1), Boudin E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp and Antwerp University
Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium.
(2)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp,
Belgium.
(3)Unidad de Genética, Servicio de Pediatria, Hospital Clinico Universitario
"Lozano Blesa", GCV-CIBERER, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Zaragoza,
Zaragoza, Spain.
(4)Centro de Genética Médica, Centro Hospitalar do Porto, and Unit for
Multidisciplinary Research in Biomedicine, UMIB, ICBAS-UP,, Porto, Portugal.

Mutations in the LRP4 gene, coding for a Wnt signaling coreceptor, have been
found to cause several allelic conditions. Among these, two are characterized by
a strong skeletal involvement, namely sclerosteosis and Cenani-Lenz syndrome. In
this work, we evaluated the role of LRP4 in the pathophysiology of these
diseases. First, we report a novel LRP4 mutation, leading to the substitution of
arginine at position 1170 in glutamine, identified in a patient with
sclerosteosis. This mutation is located in the central cavity of the third
β-propeller domain, which is in line with two other sclerosteosis mutations we
previously described. Reporter assays demonstrate that this mutation leads to
impaired sclerostin inhibition of Wnt signaling. Moreover, we compared the
effect of this novel variant to mutations causing Cenani-Lenz syndrome and show
that impaired membrane trafficking of the LRP4 protein is the likely mechanism
underlying Cenani-Lenz syndrome. This is in contrast to sclerosteosis mutations,
previously shown to impair the binding between LRP4 and sclerostin. In addition,
to better understand the biology of LRP4, we investigated the circulating
sclerostin levels in the serum of a patient suffering from sclerosteosis owing
to a LRP4 mutation. We demonstrate that impaired sclerostin binding to the
mutated LRP4 protein leads to dramatic increase in circulating sclerostin in
this patient. With this study, we provide the first evidence suggesting that
LRP4 is responsible for the retention of sclerostin in the bone environment in
humans. These findings raise potential concerns about the utility of determining
circulating sclerostin levels as a marker for other bone-related parameters.
Although more studies are needed to fully understand the mechanism whereby LRP4
facilitates sclerostin action, it is clear that this protein represents a potent
target for future osteoporosis therapies and an interesting alternative for the
antisclerostin treatment currently under study.

© 2016 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.2782
PMID: 26751728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
