---
reference_id: "PMID:30285347"
title: Nonsyndromic Leber Congenital Amaurosis / Early-Onset Severe Retinal Dystrophy Overview.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Kumaran N
- Pennesi ME
- Yang P
- Trzupek KM
- Michaelides M
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nonsyndromic Leber Congenital Amaurosis / Early-Onset Severe Retinal Dystrophy Overview.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Kumaran N, Pennesi ME, Yang P, Trzupek KM, Michaelides M

## Content

1. Nonsyndromic Leber Congenital Amaurosis / Early-Onset Severe Retinal Dystrophy
 Overview.

Kumaran N(1)(2), Pennesi ME(3)(4), Yang P(4), Trzupek KM(5), Michaelides M(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2018 Oct 4 [updated 2025 Dec 4].

Author information:
(1)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, Moorfields Eye 
Hospital, London, United Kingdom
(2)Epsom and St Helier University Hospitals NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom
(3)Retina Foundation of the Southwest, Dallas, Texas
(4)Casey Eye Institute, Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland, Oregon
(5)InformedDNA, St Petersburg, Florida

The purpose of this overview is to: 1.. Briefly describe the clinical 
characteristics of nonsyndromic Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) / early-onset 
severe retinal dystrophy (EOSRD); 2.. Review the genetic causes of nonsyndromic 
LCA/EOSRD; 3.. Review the differential diagnosis of nonsyndromic LCA/EOSRD with 
a focus on genetic conditions; 4.. Provide an evaluation strategy to identify 
the genetic cause of nonsyndromic LCA/EOSRD in a proband (when possible); 5.. 
Inform (when possible) medical management of nonsyndromic LCA/EOSRD based on 
genetic cause; 6.. Inform risk assessment and surveillance of at-risk relatives 
for early detection and treatment of nonsyndromic LCA/EOSRD.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 30285347