---
reference_id: "PMID:29042326"
title: The molecular and cellular basis of rhodopsin retinitis pigmentosa reveals potential strategies for therapy.
authors:
- Athanasiou D
- Aguila M
- Bellingham J
- Li W
- McCulley C
- Reeves PJ
- Cheetham ME
journal: Prog Retin Eye Res
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2017.10.002
keywords:
- Apoptosis Regulatory Proteins/therapeutic use
- Cell Death
- Cholagogues and Choleretics
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
- Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Molecular Chaperones/therapeutic use
- Mutation
- Photoreceptor Cells/metabolism
- Protein Folding/drug effects
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational/genetics, physiology"
- "Retinitis Pigmentosa/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- "Rhodopsin/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The molecular and cellular basis of rhodopsin retinitis pigmentosa reveals potential strategies for therapy.
**Authors:** Athanasiou D, Aguila M, Bellingham J, Li W, McCulley C, Reeves PJ, Cheetham ME
**Journal:** Prog Retin Eye Res (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.preteyeres.2017.10.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.preteyeres.2017.10.002)

## Content

1. Prog Retin Eye Res. 2018 Jan;62:1-23. doi: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2017.10.002. 
Epub 2017 Oct 16.

The molecular and cellular basis of rhodopsin retinitis pigmentosa reveals 
potential strategies for therapy.

Athanasiou D(1), Aguila M(1), Bellingham J(1), Li W(1), McCulley C(1), Reeves 
PJ(2), Cheetham ME(3).

Author information:
(1)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, 11-43 Bath Street, London EC1V 9EL, UK.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, University of Essex, Wivenhoe Park, Essex CO4 
3SQ, UK. Electronic address: preeves@essex.ac.uk.
(3)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, 11-43 Bath Street, London EC1V 9EL, UK. 
Electronic address: michael.cheetham@ucl.ac.uk.

Inherited mutations in the rod visual pigment, rhodopsin, cause the degenerative 
blinding condition, retinitis pigmentosa (RP). Over 150 different mutations in 
rhodopsin have been identified and, collectively, they are the most common cause 
of autosomal dominant RP (adRP). Mutations in rhodopsin are also associated with 
dominant congenital stationary night blindness (adCSNB) and, less frequently, 
recessive RP (arRP). Recessive RP is usually associated with loss of rhodopsin 
function, whereas the dominant conditions are a consequence of gain of function 
and/or dominant negative activity. The in-depth characterisation of many 
rhodopsin mutations has revealed that there are distinct consequences on the 
protein structure and function associated with different mutations. Here we 
categorise rhodopsin mutations into seven discrete classes; with defects ranging 
from misfolding and disruption of proteostasis, through mislocalisation and 
disrupted intracellular traffic to instability and altered function. Rhodopsin 
adRP offers a unique paradigm to understand how disturbances in photoreceptor 
homeostasis can lead to neuronal cell death. Furthermore, a wide range of 
therapies have been tested in rhodopsin RP, from gene therapy and gene editing 
to pharmacological interventions. The understanding of the disease mechanisms 
associated with rhodopsin RP and the development of targeted therapies offer the 
potential of treatment for this currently untreatable neurodegeneration.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2017.10.002
PMCID: PMC5779616
PMID: 29042326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]