---
reference_id: "PMID:34100905"
title: Activated microglia mitigate Aβ-associated tau seeding and spreading.
authors:
- Gratuze M
- Chen Y
- Parhizkar S
- Jain N
- Strickland MR
- Serrano JR
- Colonna M
- Ulrich JD
- Holtzman DM
journal: J Exp Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1084/jem.20210542
keywords:
- Amyloid beta-Peptides/metabolism
- Animals
- Apolipoproteins E/metabolism
- Homeostasis
- Macrophages/metabolism
- "Membrane Glycoproteins/deficiency, metabolism"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Microglia/metabolism
- "Neurites/metabolism, pathology"
- Phenotype
- "Plaque, Amyloid/pathology"
- "Receptors, Immunologic/deficiency, metabolism"
- tau Proteins/metabolism
- Mice
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Activated microglia mitigate Aβ-associated tau seeding and spreading.
**Authors:** Gratuze M, Chen Y, Parhizkar S, Jain N, Strickland MR, Serrano JR, Colonna M, Ulrich JD, Holtzman DM
**Journal:** J Exp Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1084/jem.20210542](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20210542)

## Content

1. J Exp Med. 2021 Aug 2;218(8):e20210542. doi: 10.1084/jem.20210542. Epub 2021
Jun  8.

Activated microglia mitigate Aβ-associated tau seeding and spreading.

Gratuze M(1)(2)(3), Chen Y(1)(4)(2)(3), Parhizkar S(1)(2)(3), Jain N(1)(2)(3),
Strickland MR(1)(2)(3), Serrano JR(1)(2)(3), Colonna M(4)(2)(3), Ulrich
JD(1)(2)(3), Holtzman DM(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO.
(2)Hope Center for Neurological Disorders, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO.
(3)Knight Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO.
(4)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO.

In Alzheimer's disease (AD) models, AD risk variants in the microglial-expressed
TREM2 gene decrease Aβ plaque-associated microgliosis and increase neuritic
dystrophy as well as plaque-associated seeding and spreading of tau aggregates.
Whether this Aβ-enhanced tau seeding/spreading is due to loss of microglial
function or a toxic gain of function in TREM2-deficient microglia is unclear.
Depletion of microglia in mice with established brain amyloid has no effect on
amyloid but results in less spine and neuronal loss. Microglial repopulation in
aged mice improved cognitive and neuronal deficits. In the context of AD
pathology, we asked whether microglial removal and repopulation decreased
Aβ-driven tau seeding and spreading. We show that both TREM2KO and microglial
ablation dramatically enhance tau seeding and spreading around plaques.
Interestingly, although repopulated microglia clustered around plaques, they had
a reduction in disease-associated microglia (DAM) gene expression and elevated
tau seeding/spreading. Together, these data suggest that TREM2-dependent
activation of the DAM phenotype is essential in delaying Aβ-induced pathological
tau propagation.

© 2021 Gratuze et al.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20210542
PMCID: PMC8190588
PMID: 34100905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: M. Colonna reported "other" from
Vigil Neuroscience, and grants from Ono and Pfizer outside the submitted work;
in addition, M. Colonna had a patent to TREM2 pending. J.D. Ulrich reported a
patent to anti-TREM2 agonist antibodies pending. D.M. Holtzman reported grants
from NIH, JPB Foundation, Charles and Helen Schwab Foundation, and Edward N. and
Della L. Thome Memorial Foundation during the conduct of the study; "other" from
C2N Diagnostics; and personal fees from Denali, Genentech, Merck, Cajal
Neurosciences, and Takeda outside the submitted work; in addition, D.M. Holtzman
had a patent to anti-tau antibodies licensed and a provisional patent on
anti-TREM2 antibodies pending. No other disclosures were reported.
