---
reference_id: "PMID:2804774"
title: Fiber type disproportion in nemaline myopathy.
authors:
- Huang CC
- Lee CC
- Chen SS
journal: Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi (Taipei)
year: '1989'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fiber type disproportion in nemaline myopathy.
**Authors:** Huang CC, Lee CC, Chen SS
**Journal:** Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi (Taipei) (1989)

## Content

1. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi (Taipei). 1989 Apr;43(4):229-32.

Fiber type disproportion in nemaline myopathy.

Huang CC, Lee CC, Chen SS.

A 21-year-old female with nemaline myopathy and concomitant dysmorphism 
characteristic of elongated face, high arched palate, scoliosis and pes cavus is 
reported. Neurological examination revealed mild bilateral facial weakness, 
moderate proximal muscle weakness, and generalized absence of deep tendon 
reflexes in all limbs. Electromyography disclosed a moderate amount of 
fibrillations and positive, and short duration polyphasic waves. A biopsied 
specimen, obtained from the vastus lateralis muscle, showed abundant nemaline 
bodies from pathological study, and electron dense particles on Z-line by 
electron-microscopic examination. In addition, a twin-peaked population curve in 
fiber diameter, selective type 1 muscle fiber atrophy (34.3 um +/- 8.7 um in 
diameter) as well as type II fiber hypertrophy (117.0 +/- 55.8 um in diameter), 
and type 1 fiber grouping were observed. We report the case and raise another 
important clue of fiber type disproportion in the diagnosis of nemaline 
myopathy.

PMID: 2804774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]