---
reference_id: "PMID:10086613"
title: "Selective laryngeal adductor denervation-reinnervation: a new surgical treatment for adductor spasmodic dysphonia."
authors:
- Berke GS
- Blackwell KE
- Gerratt BR
- Verneil A
- Jackson KS
- Sercarz JA
journal: Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1177/000348949910800302
keywords:
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Laryngeal Muscles/innervation
- Male
- Muscle Denervation
- Nerve Transfer
- Otorhinolaryngologic Surgical Procedures/methods
- Patient Satisfaction
- Postoperative Complications
- Recurrent Laryngeal Nerve/surgery
- Voice Disorders/surgery
- Voice Quality
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Selective laryngeal adductor denervation-reinnervation: a new surgical treatment for adductor spasmodic dysphonia.
**Authors:** Berke GS, Blackwell KE, Gerratt BR, Verneil A, Jackson KS, Sercarz JA
**Journal:** Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1177/000348949910800302](https://doi.org/10.1177/000348949910800302)

## Content

1. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 1999 Mar;108(3):227-31. doi: 
10.1177/000348949910800302.

Selective laryngeal adductor denervation-reinnervation: a new surgical treatment 
for adductor spasmodic dysphonia.

Berke GS(1), Blackwell KE, Gerratt BR, Verneil A, Jackson KS, Sercarz JA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Head and Neck Surgery, University of California Los Angeles, 
School of Medicine 90095, USA.

During the past decade, botulinum toxin (Botox) has emerged as the accepted 
treatment for adductor spasmodic dysphonia (ASD). This therapy, which produces 
bilateral weakness of the thyroarytenoid muscle, undoubtedly produces 
physiologic effects that are beneficial to patients with ASD. However, it also 
has important limitations, including the need for repeated injections, the 
unpredictable relationship between dosage and response, and the possibility of 
short-term swallowing and voice problems. In this study, we will report our 
preliminary experience with a new surgical treatment for ASD. In this new 
procedure, the adductor branch of the recurrent laryngeal nerve is selectively 
denervated bilaterally, and its distal nerve stumps are reinnervated with 
branches of the ansa cervicalis nerve. Each of the patients was followed for at 
least 12 months; the median follow-up is 36 months. The outcome of the operation 
in 21 consecutive patients is reported. Nineteen of the 21 patients were judged 
to have an overall severity of dysphonia that was "absent to mild" following the 
procedure. Only 1 patient underwent further treatment with Botox 
postoperatively. The implications of this new procedure for ASD are discussed.

DOI: 10.1177/000348949910800302
PMID: 10086613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]