---
reference_id: "PMID:16291595"
title: "Lactate dehydrogenase as a biomarker of hemolysis-associated nitric oxide resistance, priapism, leg ulceration, pulmonary hypertension, and death in patients with sickle cell disease."
authors:
- Kato GJ
- McGowan V
- Machado RF
- Little JA
- Taylor J 6th
- Morris CR
- Nichols JS
- Wang X
- Poljakovic M
- Morris SM Jr
- Gladwin MT
journal: Blood
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2005-06-2373
keywords:
- Adult
- "Anemia, Sickle Cell/blood, complications"
- Biomarkers/blood
- Clinical Enzyme Tests
- Death
- Female
- Hemolysis
- Humans
- "Hypertension, Pulmonary/diagnosis"
- L-Lactate Dehydrogenase/blood
- Leg Ulcer/diagnosis
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Priapism/diagnosis
- Vascular Diseases/diagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lactate dehydrogenase as a biomarker of hemolysis-associated nitric oxide resistance, priapism, leg ulceration, pulmonary hypertension, and death in patients with sickle cell disease.
**Authors:** Kato GJ, McGowan V, Machado RF, Little JA, Taylor J 6th, Morris CR, Nichols JS, Wang X, Poljakovic M, Morris SM Jr, Gladwin MT
**Journal:** Blood (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2005-06-2373](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2005-06-2373)

## Content

1. Blood. 2006 Mar 15;107(6):2279-85. doi: 10.1182/blood-2005-06-2373. Epub 2005
Nov 15.

Lactate dehydrogenase as a biomarker of hemolysis-associated nitric oxide
resistance, priapism, leg ulceration, pulmonary hypertension, and death in
patients with sickle cell disease.

Kato GJ(1), McGowan V, Machado RF, Little JA, Taylor J 6th, Morris CR, Nichols
JS, Wang X, Poljakovic M, Morris SM Jr, Gladwin MT.

Author information:
(1)Vascular Medicine Branch, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National
Institutes of Health, 10 Center Dr, MSC 1476, Bldg 10CRC, Rm 5-5140, Bethesda,
MD 20892, USA. gkato@mail.nih.gov

Pulmonary hypertension is prevalent in adult patients with sickle cell disease
and is strongly associated with early mortality and markers of hemolysis, in
particular, serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). Intravascular hemolysis leads to
impaired bioavailability of nitric oxide (NO), mediated by NO scavenging by
plasma oxyhemoglobin and by arginine degradation by plasma arginase. We
hypothesized that serum LDH may represent a convenient biomarker of
intravascular hemolysis and NO bioavailability, characterizing a clinical
subphenotype of hemolysis-associated vasculopathy. In a cohort of 213 patients
with sickle cell disease, we found statistically significant associations of
steady-state LDH with low levels of hemoglobin and haptoglobin and high levels
of reticulocytes, bilirubin, plasma hemoglobin, aspartate aminotransferase,
arginase, and soluble adhesion molecules. LDH isoenzyme fractionation confirmed
predominance of LD1 and LD2, the principal isoforms within erythrocytes. In a
subgroup, LDH levels closely correlated with plasma cell-free hemoglobin,
accelerated NO consumption by plasma, and impaired vasodilatory responses to an
NO donor. Remarkably, this simple biomarker was associated with a clinical
subphenotype of pulmonary hypertension, leg ulceration, priapism, and risk of
death in patients with sickle cell disease. We propose that LDH elevation
identifies patients with a syndrome of hemolysis-associated NO resistance,
endothelial dysfunction, and end-organ vasculopathy.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2005-06-2373
PMCID: PMC1895723
PMID: 16291595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
