---
reference_id: "PMID:28051217"
title: Changes of Crohn's disease phenotype over time.
authors:
- Ouaz A
- Fekih M
- Labidi A
- Ben Mustapha N
- Serghini M
- Zouiten L
- Boubaker J
- Filali A
journal: Tunis Med
year: '2016'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Changes of Crohn's disease phenotype over time.
**Authors:** Ouaz A, Fekih M, Labidi A, Ben Mustapha N, Serghini M, Zouiten L, Boubaker J, Filali A
**Journal:** Tunis Med (2016)

## Content

1. Tunis Med. 2016 Jun;94(6):167-170.

Changes of Crohn's disease phenotype over time.

Ouaz A, Fekih M, Labidi A, Ben Mustapha N, Serghini M, Zouiten L, Boubaker J, 
Filali A.

Background - Crohn's disease is a clinically heterogeneous condition. Our aim 
was to identify the phenotype evolution of Crohn's disease over time according 
to the Montreal Classification and to precise predictive factors of the need for 
immunosuppressant treatment or surgery. Methods - We included Crohn's disease 
patients who were followed up for at least 5 years. We excluded patients who 
were lost to follow up before five. Patients were classified according to the 
Montreal classification for phenotype at diagnosis and five years later. The 
evolution of phenotype over time and the need for surgery, immunosuppressive or 
immunomodulatory drugs were evaluated. Results - One hundred twenty consecutive 
patients were recruited: 70 males and 50 females. At diagnosis, 68% of patients 
belong to A2 as determined by the Montreal classification. Disease was most 
often localized in the colon. The disease location in Crohn's disease remains 
relatively stable over time, with 93.4% of patients showing no change in disease 
location. Crohn's disease phenotype changed during follow up, with an increase 
in stricturing and penetrating phenotypes from 6% to 11% after 5 years. The only 
predictive factor of phenotype change was the small bowel involvement (OR=3.7 
[1.2-7.6]). During follow-up, 82% of patients have presented a severe disease as 
attested by the use of immunosuppressive drugs or surgery. The factors 
associated with the disease severity were: small bowel involvement (L1), the 
stricturing (B2) and penetrating (B3) phenotypes and perineal lesions (OR=17.3 
[8.4-19.7]; 12 [7.6-17.2]; 3[1.7-8.3] and 2.8 [2.2-5.1] respectively), without 
association with age, sex or smoking habits. Conclusion - Crohn's disease 
evolves over time: inflammatory diseases progress to more aggressive stricturing 
and penetrating phenotypes. The ileal location, the stricturing and penetrating 
forms and perineal lesions were predictive of surgery and immunosuppressant or 
immunomodulatory treatment.

PMID: 28051217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]