---
reference_id: "PMID:21387089"
title: The metabolic burden of creatine synthesis.
authors:
- Brosnan JT
- da Silva RP
- Brosnan ME
journal: Amino Acids
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s00726-011-0853-y
keywords:
- Animals
- Creatine/metabolism
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The metabolic burden of creatine synthesis.
**Authors:** Brosnan JT, da Silva RP, Brosnan ME
**Journal:** Amino Acids (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00726-011-0853-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00726-011-0853-y)

## Content

1. Amino Acids. 2011 May;40(5):1325-31. doi: 10.1007/s00726-011-0853-y. Epub 2011
 Mar 9.

The metabolic burden of creatine synthesis.

Brosnan JT(1), da Silva RP, Brosnan ME.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's,
NL, Canada. jbrosnan@mun.ca

Creatine synthesis is required in adult animals to replace creatine that is
spontaneously converted to creatinine and excreted in the urine. Additionally,
in growing animals it is necessary to provide creatine to the expanding tissue
mass. Creatine synthesis requires three amino acids: glycine, methionine and
arginine, and three enzymes: L-arginine:glycine amidinotransferase (AGAT),
methionine adenosyltransferase (MAT) and guanidinoacetate methyltransferase
(GAMT). The entire glycine molecule is consumed in creatine synthesis but only
the methyl and amidino groups, respectively, from methionine and arginine.
Creatinine loss averages approximately 2 g (14.6 mmol) for 70 kg males in the
20- to 39-year age group. Creatinine loss is lower in females and in older age
groups because of lower muscle mass. Approximately half of this creatine lost to
creatinine can be replaced, in omnivorous individuals, by dietary creatine.
However, since dietary creatine is only provided in animal products, principally
in meat and fish, virtually all of the creatine loss in vegetarians must be
replaced via endogenous synthesis. Creatine synthesis does not appear to place a
major burden on glycine metabolism in adults since this amino acid is readily
synthesized. However, creatine synthesis does account for approximately 40% of
all of the labile methyl groups provided by S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) and, as
such, places an appreciable burden on the provision of such methyl groups,
either from the diet or via de novo methylneogenesis. Creatine synthesis
consumes some 20-30% of arginine's amidino groups, whether provided in the diet
or synthesized within the body. Creatine synthesis is, therefore, a
quantitatively major pathway in amino acid metabolism and imposes an appreciable
burden on the metabolism of methionine and of arginine.

DOI: 10.1007/s00726-011-0853-y
PMID: 21387089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
