---
reference_id: "PMID:18845250"
title: "VCP disease associated with myopathy, Paget disease of bone and frontotemporal dementia: review of a unique disorder."
authors:
- Kimonis VE
- Fulchiero E
- Vesa J
- Watts G
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2008.09.003
keywords:
- Adenosine Triphosphatases/genetics
- Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics
- "Dementia/genetics, pathology"
- Frontal Lobe/physiopathology
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- "Muscular Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Mutation/genetics
- "Osteitis Deformans/genetics, pathology"
- Valosin Containing Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# VCP disease associated with myopathy, Paget disease of bone and frontotemporal dementia: review of a unique disorder.
**Authors:** Kimonis VE, Fulchiero E, Vesa J, Watts G
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbadis.2008.09.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbadis.2008.09.003)

## Content

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 Dec;1782(12):744-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2008.09.003. Epub 2008 Sep 18.

VCP disease associated with myopathy, Paget disease of bone and frontotemporal
dementia: review of a unique disorder.

Kimonis VE(1), Fulchiero E, Vesa J, Watts G.

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University of
California, Irvine, 101 The City Drive, ZOT 4482, Orange, CA 92868, USA.
vkimonis@uci.edu

Inclusion body myopathy (IBM) associated with Paget disease of the bone (PDB)
and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) (now called IBMPFD), is a progressive
autosomal dominant disorder that was recently identified as being caused by
mutations in the VCP (p97 or CDC48) gene which plays a key role in the
ubiquitin-proteasome dependent degradation of cytosolic proteins and in the
retro translocation of misfolded proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum into
the cytoplasm. Approximately 90% of the affected persons in the study have
myopathy or muscle weakness particularly of the shoulder and hip girdles, which
can lead to loss of walking ability and even death by complications of
respiratory and cardiac failure. About half of affected study participants have
Paget disease of bone characterized by abnormal rates of bone growth that can
result in bone pain, enlargement and fractures. Findings of premature FTD
affecting behavior and personality are seen in a third of affected individuals.
Within 20 IBMPFD families whose data was analyzed for this study, ten missense
mutations have been identified, the majority of which are located in the
N-terminal ubiquitin binding domain. Inclusions seen in the muscle, brain and
heart in VCP disease contain ubiquitin, beta amyloid and TDP-43, also seen in
other neurodegenerative disorders thus implicating common pathways in their
pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2008.09.003
PMID: 18845250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
