---
reference_id: "PMID:17165009"
title: "[Antiphospholipid syndrome]."
authors:
- Specker C
journal: Z Rheumatol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1007/s00393-006-0127-3
keywords:
- "Abortion, Habitual/immunology, prevention & control"
- "Antibodies, Anticardiolipin/blood"
- "Antibodies, Antiphospholipid/blood"
- Anticoagulants/therapeutic use
- "Antiphospholipid Syndrome/diagnosis, drug therapy, immunology"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- Lupus Coagulation Inhibitor/blood
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Pregnancy
- Secondary Prevention
- "Thromboembolism/diagnosis, drug therapy, immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Antiphospholipid syndrome].
**Authors:** Specker C
**Journal:** Z Rheumatol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00393-006-0127-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00393-006-0127-3)

## Content

1. Z Rheumatol. 2007 Feb;66(1):41-50; quiz 51-2. doi: 10.1007/s00393-006-0127-3.

[Antiphospholipid syndrome].

[Article in German]

Specker C(1).

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Rheumatologie & Klinische Immunologie, Katholisches Krankenhaus 
St. Josef, Zentrum für Innere Medizin der Kliniken Essen Süd, Essen. 
specker@rheumanet.org

Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is characterized by recurrent arterial or venous 
thromboembolism or pregnancy loss in association with antibodies directed 
against anionic phospholipids or plasma proteins bound to anionic phospholipids. 
A common cause of the huge variety of clinical manifestations is vaso-occlusive 
disease and not vasculitis in venous or arterial blood vessels of different 
sizes and sites (i.e. deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, cerebrovascular 
disease). In accordance with this, fetal abortion, typically beyond the tenth 
week of gestation, is also caused by infarctions of blood vessels in the 
placenta. Establishing the correct diagnosis of APS is not easy. To estimate the 
risk of thrombotic complications is challenging, as well as the questions of, 
which, how long and in what strength anticoagulation is recommended. This paper 
should enable the reader to apply international consensus classification 
criteria correctly, to interpret the different laboratory tests for 
anti-phospholipid antibodies and to gain an awareness of the different forms of 
anticoagulation in order to stratify therapeutic decisions.

DOI: 10.1007/s00393-006-0127-3
PMID: 17165009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]