---
reference_id: "PMID:30670449"
title: "Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia: who's the driver at the wheel?"
authors:
- Niemeyer CM
- Flotho C
journal: Blood
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2018-11-844688
keywords:
- Alleles
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Congenital Abnormalities/genetics
- DNA Methylation
- Disease-Free Survival
- Epigenomics
- GTP Phosphohydrolases/genetics
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Myelomonocytic, Juvenile/complications, genetics"
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- "Neurofibromatosis 1/complications, genetics"
- "Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11/genetics"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)/genetics
- Signal Transduction
- Syndrome
- "Transplantation, Homologous"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia: who's the driver at the wheel?
**Authors:** Niemeyer CM, Flotho C
**Journal:** Blood (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2018-11-844688](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2018-11-844688)

## Content

1. Blood. 2019 Mar 7;133(10):1060-1070. doi: 10.1182/blood-2018-11-844688. Epub
2019 Jan 22.

Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia: who's the driver at the wheel?

Niemeyer CM(1), Flotho C(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatrics and
Adolescent Medicine, Medical Center, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.

Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) is a unique clonal hematopoietic
disorder of early childhood. It is classified as an overlap
myeloproliferative/myelodysplastic neoplasm by the World Health Organization and
shares some features with chronic myelomonocytic leukemia in adults. JMML
pathobiology is characterized by constitutive activation of the Ras signal
transduction pathway. About 90% of patients harbor molecular alterations in 1 of
5 genes (PTPN11, NRAS, KRAS, NF1, or CBL), which define genetically and
clinically distinct subtypes. Three of these subtypes, PTPN11-, NRAS-, and
KRAS-mutated JMML, are characterized by heterozygous somatic gain-of-function
mutations in nonsyndromic children, whereas 2 subtypes, JMML in
neurofibromatosis type 1 and JMML in children with CBL syndrome, are defined by
germline Ras disease and acquired biallelic inactivation of the respective genes
in hematopoietic cells. The clinical course of the disease varies widely and can
in part be predicted by age, level of hemoglobin F, and platelet count. The
majority of children require allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
for long-term leukemia-free survival, but the disease will eventually resolve
spontaneously in ∼15% of patients, rendering the prospective identification of
these cases a clinical necessity. Most recently, genome-wide DNA methylation
profiles identified distinct methylation signatures correlating with clinical
and genetic features and highly predictive for outcome. Understanding the
genomic and epigenomic basis of JMML will not only greatly improve precise
decision making but also be fundamental for drug development and future
collaborative trials.

© 2019 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2018-11-844688
PMID: 30670449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
