---
reference_id: "PMID:20493594"
title: "[Autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy: a case series of six patients and literature review]."
authors:
- Parize P
- Gaultier JB
- Badet F
- André-Obadia N
- Dupond JL
- Rousset H
- Durieu I
journal: Rev Med Interne
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.revmed.2010.01.008
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Autoimmune Diseases
- Female
- "Ganglia, Autonomic"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Peripheral Nervous System Diseases/immunology
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy: a case series of six patients and literature review].
**Authors:** Parize P, Gaultier JB, Badet F, André-Obadia N, Dupond JL, Rousset H, Durieu I
**Journal:** Rev Med Interne (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.revmed.2010.01.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.revmed.2010.01.008)

## Content

1. Rev Med Interne. 2010 Jul;31(7):476-80. doi: 10.1016/j.revmed.2010.01.008.
Epub  2010 May 20.

[Autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy: a case series of six patients and 
literature review].

[Article in French]

Parize P(1), Gaultier JB, Badet F, André-Obadia N, Dupond JL, Rousset H, Durieu 
I.

Author information:
(1)Service de médecine interne, centre hospitalier Lyon-Sud, hospices civils de 
Lyon, 69495 Pierre Benite cedex, France. pparize@hotmail.com

PURPOSE: Auto-immune autonomic ganglionopathy is a recently described clinical 
entity within the spectrum of autonomic neuropathies. Patients with auto-immune 
autonomic ganglionopathy typically present with rapid onset of severe autonomic 
failure. Acetylcholine receptor ganglionic antibodies, directed against 
ganglionic synapsis, disrupt synaptic transmission in autonomic ganglia and lead 
to autonomic failure. These antibodies are specific for auto-immune autonomic 
ganglionopathy and are present in 50% of patients.
METHODS: Descriptive retrospective study. We report six French patients who 
presented with auto-immune autonomic ganglionopathy diagnosed between 1996 and 
2002.
RESULTS: Four patients were men and the median age at diagnosis was 45 years. 
All patients presented with a subacute autonomic failure with constant severe 
orthostatic hypotension. Serological testing of acetylcholine receptor 
ganglionic antibodies was performed in four out of the six patients and was 
found positive in three. All the patients received intravenous immunoglobulin 
and a clinical improvement was observed in four of them.
CONCLUSION: Auto-immune autonomic ganglionopathy is an unusual and overlooked 
disorder. However, this autonomic neuropathy deserves to be better known as most 
of the patients respond to immunomodulatory therapy.

DOI: 10.1016/j.revmed.2010.01.008
PMID: 20493594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]