---
reference_id: "PMID:30657919"
title: A homozygous pathogenic missense variant broadens the phenotypic and mutational spectrum of CREB3L1-related osteogenesis imperfecta.
authors:
- Guillemyn B
- Kayserili H
- Demuynck L
- Sips P
- De Paepe A
- Syx D
- Coucke PJ
- Malfait F
- Symoens S
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddz017
keywords:
- "Astrocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- COP-Coated Vesicles/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Collagen Type I/chemistry, genetics"
- "Cyclic AMP Response Element-Binding Protein/chemistry, genetics"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress/genetics
- Female
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Male
- "Models, Molecular"
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Protein Binding
- Protein Domains/genetics
- Vesicular Transport Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A homozygous pathogenic missense variant broadens the phenotypic and mutational spectrum of CREB3L1-related osteogenesis imperfecta.
**Authors:** Guillemyn B, Kayserili H, Demuynck L, Sips P, De Paepe A, Syx D, Coucke PJ, Malfait F, Symoens S
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddz017](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddz017)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2019 Jun 1;28(11):1801-1809. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddz017.

A homozygous pathogenic missense variant broadens the phenotypic and mutational 
spectrum of CREB3L1-related osteogenesis imperfecta.

Guillemyn B(1), Kayserili H(2), Demuynck L(1), Sips P(1), De Paepe A(1), Syx 
D(1), Coucke PJ(1), Malfait F(1), Symoens S(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University Hospital, Department of 
Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent, Belgium.
(2)KOÇUniversity School of Medicine (KUSoM) Medical Genetics Department, Topkapi 
Zeytinburnu, Istanbul, Turkey.

The cyclic adenosine monophosphate responsive element binding protein 3-like 1 
(CREB3L1) gene codes for the endoplasmic reticulum stress transducer old 
astrocyte specifically induced substance (OASIS), which has an important role in 
osteoblast differentiation during bone development. Deficiency of OASIS is 
linked to a severe form of autosomal recessive osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), but 
only few patients have been reported. We identified the first homozygous 
pathogenic missense variant [p.(Ala304Val)] in a patient with lethal OI, which 
is located within the highly conserved basic leucine zipper domain, four amino 
acids upstream of the DNA binding domain. In vitro structural modeling and 
luciferase assays demonstrate that this missense variant affects a critical 
residue in this functional domain, thereby decreasing the type I collagen 
transcriptional binding ability. In addition, overexpression of the mutant OASIS 
protein leads to decreased transcription of the SEC23A and SEC24D genes, which 
code for components of the coat protein complex type II (COPII), and aberrant 
OASIS signaling also results in decreased protein levels of SEC24D. Our findings 
therefore provide additional proof of the potential involvement of the COPII 
secretory complex in the context of bone-associated disease.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddz017
PMID: 30657919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]