---
reference_id: "PMID:25734254"
title: "Partial and generalized lipodystrophy: comparison of baseline characteristics and response to metreleptin."
authors:
- Diker-Cohen T
- Cochran E
- Gorden P
- Brown RJ
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-4491
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Leptin/analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use"
- "Lipodystrophy/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- "Lipodystrophy, Congenital Generalized/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Partial and generalized lipodystrophy: comparison of baseline characteristics and response to metreleptin.
**Authors:** Diker-Cohen T, Cochran E, Gorden P, Brown RJ
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2014-4491](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2014-4491)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 May;100(5):1802-10. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-4491. 
Epub 2015 Mar 3.

Partial and generalized lipodystrophy: comparison of baseline characteristics 
and response to metreleptin.

Diker-Cohen T(1), Cochran E, Gorden P, Brown RJ.

Author information:
(1)Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Obesity Branch, National Institute of Diabetes 
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland 20892.

CONTEXT: Lipodystrophies are extreme forms of metabolic syndrome. Metreleptin 
was approved in the United States for generalized lipodystrophy (GLD) but not 
partial lipodystrophy (PLD).
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to test metreleptin's efficacy in PLD 
vs GLD and find predictors for treatment response.
DESIGN: This was a prospective, single-arm, open-label study since 2000 with 
continuous enrollment. Current analysis included metreleptin treatment for 6 
months or longer as of January 2014.
SETTING: The study was conducted at the National Institutes of Health (Bethesda, 
Maryland).
PARTICIPANTS: Patients clinically diagnosed with lipodystrophy, leptin less than 
8 ng/mL (males) or less than 12 (females), age older than 6 months, and one or 
more metabolic abnormalities (diabetes, insulin resistance, or 
hypertriglyceridemia) participated in the study.
INTERVENTION: The interventions included sc metreleptin injections (0.06-0.24 
mg/kg · d).
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Changes in glycated hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) and 
triglycerides after 6 and 12 months of metreleptin were measured.
RESULTS: Baseline metabolic parameters were similar in 55 GLD [HbA1c 8.4% ± 
2.3%; triglycerides, geometric mean (25th, 75th percentile), 467 mg/dL (200, 
847)] and 31 PLD patients [HbA1c 8.1% ± 2.2%, triglycerides 483 mg/dL (232, 
856)] despite different body fat and endogenous leptin. At 12 months, 
metreleptin decreased HbA1c (to 6.4% ± 1.5%, GLD, P < .001; 7.3% ± 1.6%, PLD, P 
= .004) and triglycerides [to 180 mg/dL (106, 312), GLD, P < .001; 326 mg/dL 
(175, 478), PLD, P = .02]. HbA1c and triglyceride changes over time 
significantly differed between GLD and PLD. In subgroup analyses, metreleptin 
improved HbA1c and triglycerides in all GLD subgroups except those with baseline 
triglycerides less than 300 mg/dL and all PLD subgroups except baseline 
triglycerides less than 500 mg/dL, HbA1c less than 8%, or endogenous leptin 
greater than 4 ng/mL.
CONCLUSIONS: In addition to its proven efficacy in GLD, metreleptin is effective 
in selected PLD patients with severe metabolic derangements or low leptin.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2014-4491
PMCID: PMC4422900
PMID: 25734254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]