---
reference_id: "PMID:37815464"
title: Altered binding affinity of SIX1-Q177R correlates with enhanced WNT5A and WNT pathway effector expression in Wilms tumor.
authors:
- Stevenson MJ
- Phanor SK
- Patel U
- Gisselbrecht SS
- Bulyk ML
- "O'Brien LL"
journal: Dis Model Mech
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1242/dmm.050208
keywords:
- Humans
- Wnt Signaling Pathway
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/genetics"
- "Wilms Tumor/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Wnt-5a Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Kidney Neoplasms/genetics
- "Homeodomain Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Altered binding affinity of SIX1-Q177R correlates with enhanced WNT5A and WNT pathway effector expression in Wilms tumor.
**Authors:** Stevenson MJ, Phanor SK, Patel U, Gisselbrecht SS, Bulyk ML, O'Brien LL
**Journal:** Dis Model Mech (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dmm.050208](https://doi.org/10.1242/dmm.050208)

## Content

1. Dis Model Mech. 2023 Nov 1;16(11):dmm050208. doi: 10.1242/dmm.050208. Epub
2023  Nov 17.

Altered binding affinity of SIX1-Q177R correlates with enhanced WNT5A and WNT 
pathway effector expression in Wilms tumor.

Stevenson MJ(1), Phanor SK(2), Patel U(1), Gisselbrecht SS(2), Bulyk ML(2)(3), 
O'Brien LL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
(2)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Wilms tumors present as an amalgam of varying proportions of tissues located 
within the developing kidney, one being the nephrogenic blastema comprising 
multipotent nephron progenitor cells (NPCs). The recurring missense mutation 
Q177R in NPC transcription factors SIX1 and SIX2 is most correlated with tumors 
of blastemal histology and is significantly associated with relapse. Yet, the 
transcriptional regulatory consequences of SIX1/2-Q177R that might promote tumor 
progression and recurrence have not been investigated extensively. Utilizing 
multiple Wilms tumor transcriptomic datasets, we identified upregulation of the 
gene encoding non-canonical WNT ligand WNT5A in addition to other WNT pathway 
effectors in SIX1/2-Q177R mutant tumors. SIX1 ChIP-seq datasets from Wilms 
tumors revealed shared binding sites for SIX1/SIX1-Q177R within a promoter of 
WNT5A and at putative distal cis-regulatory elements (CREs). We demonstrate 
colocalization of SIX1 and WNT5A in Wilms tumor tissue and utilize in vitro 
assays that support SIX1 and SIX1-Q177R activation of expression from the WNT5A 
CREs, as well as enhanced binding affinity within the WNT5A promoter that may 
promote the differential expression of WNT5A and other WNT pathway effectors 
associated with SIX1-Q177R tumors.

© 2023. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.050208
PMCID: PMC10668032
PMID: 37815464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.