---
reference_id: "PMID:36864181"
title: "Novel deleterious splicing variant in HFM1 causes gametogenesis defect and recurrent implantation failure: concerning the risk of chromosomal abnormalities in embryos."
authors:
- Tang F
- Gao Y
- Li K
- Tang D
- Hao Y
- Lv M
- Wu H
- Cheng H
- Fei J
- Jin Z
- Wang C
- Xu Y
- Wei Z
- Zhou P
- Zhang Z
- He X
- Cao Y
journal: J Assist Reprod Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10815-023-02761-8
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Pregnancy
- Azoospermia/genetics
- Chromosome Aberrations
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- DNA Helicases/genetics
- Embryo Implantation/genetics
- Gametogenesis
- Protein Isoforms
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel deleterious splicing variant in HFM1 causes gametogenesis defect and recurrent implantation failure: concerning the risk of chromosomal abnormalities in embryos.
**Authors:** Tang F, Gao Y, Li K, Tang D, Hao Y, Lv M, Wu H, Cheng H, Fei J, Jin Z, Wang C, Xu Y, Wei Z, Zhou P, Zhang Z, He X, Cao Y
**Journal:** J Assist Reprod Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10815-023-02761-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10815-023-02761-8)

## Content

1. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2023 Jul;40(7):1689-1702. doi: 
10.1007/s10815-023-02761-8. Epub 2023 Mar 3.

Novel deleterious splicing variant in HFM1 causes gametogenesis defect and 
recurrent implantation failure: concerning the risk of chromosomal abnormalities 
in embryos.

Tang F(#)(1)(2)(3), Gao Y(#)(1)(2)(3), Li K(#)(1)(2)(4), Tang D(1)(2)(4), Hao 
Y(1)(2)(5), Lv M(1)(2)(3), Wu H(1)(2)(4), Cheng H(2)(4)(5), Fei J(6), Jin Z(6), 
Wang C(1)(2)(3), Xu Y(1)(2)(4), Wei Z(1)(2)(3), Zhou P(1)(2)(3), Zhang 
Z(7)(8)(9), He X(10)(11)(12), Cao Y(13)(14)(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Reproductive Medicine Center, The 
First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University, No 218 Jixi Road, Hefei, 
Anhui, China.
(2)NHC Key Laboratory of Study on Abnormal Gametes and Reproductive Tract, Anhui 
Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Population Health Across Life Cycle, Ministry of Education 
of the People's Republic of China, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, 
China.
(4)Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Reproductive Health and Genetics, Hefei, 
Anhui, China.
(5)Anhui Provincial Engineering Research Center of Biopreservation and 
Artificial Organs, Hefei, Anhui, China.
(6)Peking Jabrehoo Med Tech Co., Ltd., Beijing, China.
(7)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Reproductive Medicine Center, The 
First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University, No 218 Jixi Road, Hefei, 
Anhui, China. zhangzhiguo@ahmu.edu.cn.
(8)NHC Key Laboratory of Study on Abnormal Gametes and Reproductive Tract, Anhui 
Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, China. zhangzhiguo@ahmu.edu.cn.
(9)Key Laboratory of Population Health Across Life Cycle, Ministry of Education 
of the People's Republic of China, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, 
China. zhangzhiguo@ahmu.edu.cn.
(10)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Reproductive Medicine Center, The 
First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University, No 218 Jixi Road, Hefei, 
Anhui, China. hxj0117@126.com.
(11)NHC Key Laboratory of Study on Abnormal Gametes and Reproductive Tract, 
Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, China. hxj0117@126.com.
(12)Key Laboratory of Population Health Across Life Cycle, Ministry of Education 
of the People's Republic of China, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, 
China. hxj0117@126.com.
(13)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Reproductive Medicine Center, The 
First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University, No 218 Jixi Road, Hefei, 
Anhui, China. caoyunxia5972@ahmu.edu.cn.
(14)NHC Key Laboratory of Study on Abnormal Gametes and Reproductive Tract, 
Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, China. caoyunxia5972@ahmu.edu.cn.
(15)Key Laboratory of Population Health Across Life Cycle, Ministry of Education 
of the People's Republic of China, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, 
China. caoyunxia5972@ahmu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Poor ovarian response (POR) affects approximately 9% to 24% of women 
undergoing in vitro fertilization (IVF) cycles, resulting in fewer eggs obtained 
and increasing clinical cycle cancellation rates. The pathogenesis of POR is 
related to gene variations. Our study included a Chinese family comprising two 
siblings with infertility born to consanguineous parents. Poor ovarian response 
(POR) was identified in the female patient who had multiple embryo implantation 
failures occurring in subsequent assisted reproductive technology cycles. 
Meanwhile, the male patient was diagnosed with non-obstructive azoospermia 
(NOA).
METHODS: Whole-exome sequencing and rigorous bioinformatics analyses were 
conducted to identify the underlying genetic causes. Moreover, the pathogenicity 
of the identified splicing variant was assessed using a minigene assay in vitro. 
The remaining poor-quality blastocyst and abortion tissues from the female 
patient were detected for copy number variations.
RESULTS: We identified a novel homozygous splicing variant in HFM1 
(NM_001017975.6: c.1730-1G > T) in two siblings. Apart from NOA and POI, 
biallelic variants in HFM1 were also associated with recurrent implantation 
failure (RIF). Additionally, we demonstrated that splicing variants caused 
abnormal alternative splicing of HFM1. Using copy number variation sequencing, 
we found that the embryos of the female patients had either euploidy or 
aneuploidy; however, both harbored chromosomal microduplications of maternal 
origin.
CONCLUSION: Our results reveal the different effects of HFM1 on reproductive 
injury in males and females, extend the phenotypic and mutational spectrum of 
HFM1, and show the potential risk of chromosomal abnormalities under the RIF 
phenotype. Moreover, our study provides new diagnostic markers for the genetic 
counseling of POR patients.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10815-023-02761-8
PMCID: PMC10352197
PMID: 36864181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.