---
reference_id: "PMID:24728701"
title: Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis syndrome in Dengue hemorrhagic fever.
authors:
- Raju S
- Kalyanaraman S
- Swaminathan K
- Nisha A
- Praisid S
journal: Indian J Pediatr
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s12098-014-1425-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis syndrome in Dengue hemorrhagic fever.
**Authors:** Raju S, Kalyanaraman S, Swaminathan K, Nisha A, Praisid S
**Journal:** Indian J Pediatr (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12098-014-1425-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12098-014-1425-4)

## Content

1. Indian J Pediatr. 2014 Dec;81(12):1381-3. doi: 10.1007/s12098-014-1425-4. Epub
 2014 Apr 15.

Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis syndrome in Dengue hemorrhagic fever.

Raju S(1), Kalyanaraman S, Swaminathan K, Nisha A, Praisid S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Krishna Hospitals, Tirunelveli, Tamilnadu, India.

Comment in
    Indian J Pediatr. 2015 Jun;82(6):576. doi: 10.1007/s12098-014-1655-5.
    Indian J Pediatr. 2015 Jun;82(6):575. doi: 10.1007/s12098-014-1656-4.

Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is a life threatening florid activation 
of macrophages of the lymphoreticular system. It is reported to be associated 
with dengue in children in India and carries a high mortality. Patients present 
with high fever, worsening blood cell counts, splenomegaly, abnormal liver 
enzymes with features of liver failure, coagulopathy and neurological 
complications. The diagnosis is according to "Diagnostic Guidelines for HLH 
2004", based on a triad of clinical, blood parameters and bone marrow cytology. 
In the present study, data of 212 children admitted with dengue were analyzed. 
Of 212 children, 31 children were classified as suspect HLH and advised bone 
marrow evaluation; of whom 23 children had marrow evidence of HLH. Worsening of 
blood cell counts were recorded in all children with a mean platelet count of 
58,303.03 cells/cumm, low hematocrit in 95.65 %, low mean hemoglobin level of 
8.37 g/dL, high erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and prolonged pro-thrombin 
time/international normalization ratio (PT/INR). Serum triglycerides, ferritin 
and transaminases were high. Of the 23 children, 19 patients received 
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) and all of these children recovered. Dengue 
with multi-organ dysfunction is commonly concurrent to HLH in the marrow and 
hence, an early diagnosis based on clinical, laboratory and bone marrow 
evaluation is significant. A bone marrow evaluation confirms the diagnosis of 
HLH.

DOI: 10.1007/s12098-014-1425-4
PMID: 24728701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]