---
reference_id: "PMID:28846365"
title: Varicella-Zoster Virus (Chickenpox).
authors:
- Saleh HM
- Ayoade F
- Kumar S
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Varicella-Zoster Virus (Chickenpox).
**Authors:** Saleh HM, Ayoade F, Kumar S

## Content

1. Varicella-Zoster Virus (Chickenpox).

Saleh HM(1), Ayoade F(2), Kumar S(3).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 
Jan–.
2025 Apr 27.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Ain Shams University
(2)University of Miami
(3)VA Medical Center

Chickenpox, or varicella, is a contagious disease caused by the varicella-zoster 
virus (VZV). The virus causes chickenpox, typically a primary infection in 
nonimmune hosts, and herpes zoster, or shingles, which results from the 
reactivation of a latent infection. In 1767, Heberden first differentiated 
chickenpox from smallpox. The word "chickenpox" has been thought to come from 
either the French word "chiche-pois," which means "chickpea" (referring to the 
size of the vesicles), or the Old English word "gigan," which means "to itch." 
The association between varicella and herpes zoster was initially identified in 
1888, when von Bokay documented the onset of varicella in children after contact 
with individuals with herpes zoster illness. Kundratitz (1922) and Bruusgaard 
(1932) more conclusively established the correlation between the 2 diseases 
through the occurrence of varicella in susceptible infants implanted with 
vesicle fluid from patients with herpes zoster. The discovery of the same virus 
in both cases confirmed their identical etiologies. Chickenpox is an airborne 
disease spread worldwide by coughing, sneezing, and contact with skin lesions. 
Symptoms begin 10 to 21 days after exposure; the average incubation period is 
about 2 weeks. Chickenpox results in a skin rash forming small, itchy blisters 
that scab over (see Image. Chickenpox [Varicella]). The rash typically starts on 
the chest, back, and face and then spreads, accompanied by fever, fatigue, 
pharyngitis, and headaches, usually lasting 5 to 7 days. The virus may spread 1 
to 2 days before the rash appears until all lesions are crusted over. 
Complications include pneumonia, brain inflammation, and bacterial skin 
infections. The disease is more severe in adults than in children.  Chickenpox 
is diagnosed based on the presenting symptoms and confirmed by polymerase chain 
reaction testing of the blister fluid or scabs. Tests for antibodies may be 
performed to determine if immunity is present. Although reinfections by 
varicella may occur, these reinfections are usually asymptomatic and much milder 
than the primary infection. Since its introduction in 1995, the varicella 
vaccine has significantly reduced the number of cases and complications,  
preventing about 70% to 90% of infections and 95% of severe disease. Routine 
immunization for children is recommended. Immunization within 3 days of exposure 
may still improve outcomes in children.

Copyright © 2025, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 28846365

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Haitham Saleh declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Folusakin Ayoade 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: Sandeep Kumar declares no relevant financial relationships with 
ineligible companies.