---
reference_id: "PMID:20487487"
title: "The journey through Pick's Disease with a loved one: a personal account."
authors:
- McFarland DM
journal: Int Nurs Rev
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1111/j.1466-7657.2009.00743.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The journey through Pick's Disease with a loved one: a personal account.
**Authors:** McFarland DM
**Journal:** Int Nurs Rev (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1466-7657.2009.00743.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1466-7657.2009.00743.x)

## Content

1. Int Nurs Rev. 2010 Mar;57(1):142-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1466-7657.2009.00743.x.

The journey through Pick's Disease with a loved one: a personal account.

McFarland DM(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Nursing, University of Botswana, Gaborone, Botswana. 
mcfarland@mopipi.ub.bw

BACKGROUND: The aim of this short communication is to share my personal 
experience of caring for a terminally ill family member who was afflicted with 
Pick's disease. I tell my story in the hope of increasing society's awareness on 
this little known but devastating disease and assisting those who might be 
facing a similar situation. Pick's disease is a rare and incurable type of 
dementia that is associated with atrophy of the frontal and temporal lobes of 
the brain over time as a result of accumulation of tau protein fibres known as 
Pick's bodies. The exact cause is not known, but genetic predisposition is 
implicated in some disease cases. Pick's disease tends to affect men and women 
alike. It affects thinking, language and problem solving.
METHODS: Data supporting this document were obtained from a thorough review of 
the literature and Internet search on Pick's disease, as well as from a personal 
experience with Pick's disease as it was unfolding.
RESULTS: Clinical features, diagnosis and treatment, and stages of the disease 
are presented.
CONCLUSION: Very little is known about Pick's disease. Additional research is 
needed to inform practice about tau protein dementias.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1466-7657.2009.00743.x
PMID: 20487487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]