---
reference_id: "PMID:36764582"
title: "Dermatologic manifestations and diagnostic assessments of the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes: A clinical review."
authors:
- Doolan BJ
- Lavallee M
- Hausser I
- Pope FM
- Seneviratne SL
- Winship IM
- Burrows NP
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2023.01.034
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dermatologic manifestations and diagnostic assessments of the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes: A clinical review.
**Authors:** Doolan BJ, Lavallee M, Hausser I, Pope FM, Seneviratne SL, Winship IM, Burrows NP
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaad.2023.01.034](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2023.01.034)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2023 Sep;89(3):551-559. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2023.01.034. 
Epub 2023 Feb 8.

Dermatologic manifestations and diagnostic assessments of the Ehlers-Danlos 
syndromes: A clinical review.

Doolan BJ(1), Lavallee M(2), Hausser I(3), Pope FM(4), Seneviratne SL(5), 
Winship IM(6), Burrows NP(7).

Author information:
(1)St John's Institute of Dermatology, School of Basic and Medical Biosciences, 
King's College London, London, UK; St John's Institute of Dermatology, Guy's and 
St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK. Electronic address: 
b.doolan@nhs.net.
(2)Department of Orthopedics, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center of Central 
PA, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(3)Institute of Pathology, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Chelsea and Westminster Hospital NHS Foundation 
Trust (West Middlesex University Hospital), London, UK.
(5)Institute of Immunity and Transplantation, Royal Free Hospital and University 
College London, London, UK; Nawaloka Hospital Research and Education Foundation, 
Nawaloka Hospitals, Colombo, Sri Lanka.
(6)Department of Genetic Medicine, The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia; Department of Medicine, The University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(7)Department of Dermatology, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust, Cambridge, UK.

BACKGROUND: The Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDSs) comprise a group of connective 
tissue disorders that manifest with skin hyperextensibility, easy bruising, 
joint hypermobility and fragility of skin, soft tissues, and some organs. A 
correct assessment of cutaneous features along with the use of adjunct 
technologies can improve diagnostic accuracy.
OBJECTIVES: To systematically review the cutaneous features and adjunct 
investigations of EDS.
METHODS: A search of PubMed and Web of Science for EDS-related cutaneous 
features and additional investigations was undertaken from publication of the 
2017 International Classification of EDS until January 15, 2022.
RESULTS: One-hundred-and-forty studies involved 839 patients with EDS. The EDS 
female-to-male ratio was 1.36:1 (P < .001). A high prevalence of skin 
hyperextensibility, bruising, and soft skin were noted. Most patients with 
vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome showed venous visibility, skin fragility, and 
acrogeria. Classical EDS showed subcutaneous spheroids and molluscoid 
pseudotumours. In patients that underwent skin biopsies, only 30.3% and 71.4% 
showed features suggestive of EDS using light microscopy and transmission 
electron microscopy, respectively.
LIMITATIONS: Retrospective study and small cases numbers for some EDS-subtypes.
CONCLUSIONS: An accurate clinical diagnosis increases the chances of a molecular 
diagnosis, particularly for rarer EDS subtypes, whilst decreasing the need for 
genetic testing where there is a low clinical suspicion for a monogenic 
EDS-subtype.

Copyright © 2023 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2023.01.034
PMID: 36764582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest None disclosed.