---
reference_id: "PMID:36007687"
title: "Monkeypox outbreak: a perspective on Africa's diagnostic and containment capacity."
authors:
- Moyo E
- Musuka G
- Murewanhema G
- Moyo P
- Dzinamarira T
journal: Int J Infect Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2022.08.016
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monkeypox outbreak: a perspective on Africa's diagnostic and containment capacity.
**Authors:** Moyo E, Musuka G, Murewanhema G, Moyo P, Dzinamarira T
**Journal:** Int J Infect Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijid.2022.08.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2022.08.016)

## Content

1. Int J Infect Dis. 2022 Oct;123:127-130. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2022.08.016. Epub 
2022 Aug 22.

Monkeypox outbreak: a perspective on Africa's diagnostic and containment 
capacity.

Moyo E(1), Musuka G(2), Murewanhema G(3), Moyo P(1), Dzinamarira T(4).

Author information:
(1)Medical Centre Oshakati, Oshakati, Namibia.
(2)International Initiative for Impact Evaluation, Harare, Zimbabwe.
(3)University of Zimbabwe, Harare, Zimbabwe.
(4)ICAP at Columbia University, Kigali, Rwanda. Electronic address: 
td2581@cumc.columbia.edu.

Since the first monkeypox (MPX) case was reported in humans in 1970, there have 
been several outbreaks of the disease. MPX is endemic in central and western 
Africa. MPX virus infection is confirmed using the conventional polymerase chain 
reaction, which detects the viral DNA in samples from the rash. Of concern is 
that the current outbreak has affected five regions of the world. Although MPX 
confirmatory tests are available worldwide, there are concerns about Africa's 
capacity to diagnose and contain the disease. The challenges faced by Africa 
include a lack of adequate laboratory infrastructure and health care workers, 
weak disease surveillance systems, and a lack of MPX knowledge among health care 
workers and communities. These challenges can be addressed by mobilizing 
resources for MPX virus testing, strengthening surveillance systems, 
collaboration among countries, training health care workers, task shifting, and 
engaging communities.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2022.08.016
PMCID: PMC9534167
PMID: 36007687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors have no known 
competing interests to declare.