---
reference_id: "PMID:38038734"
title: Practical guidelines for the treatment of vitiligo with the melanocyte-keratinocyte transplantation procedure.
authors:
- Yousif J
- Ceresnie MS
- Hamzavi IH
- Mohammad TF
journal: Arch Dermatol Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00403-023-02761-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Practical guidelines for the treatment of vitiligo with the melanocyte-keratinocyte transplantation procedure.
**Authors:** Yousif J, Ceresnie MS, Hamzavi IH, Mohammad TF
**Journal:** Arch Dermatol Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00403-023-02761-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00403-023-02761-9)

## Content

1. Arch Dermatol Res. 2023 Dec 1;316(1):10. doi: 10.1007/s00403-023-02761-9.

Practical guidelines for the treatment of vitiligo with the 
melanocyte-keratinocyte transplantation procedure.

Yousif J(1), Ceresnie MS(2), Hamzavi IH(2), Mohammad TF(3).

Author information:
(1)Wayne State University School of Medicine, 540 E. Canfield Ave, Detroit, MI, 
USA.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Henry Ford Health System, 3031 W. Grand Blvd, 
Suite 700, Detroit, MI, 48202, USA.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Henry Ford Health System, 3031 W. Grand Blvd, 
Suite 700, Detroit, MI, 48202, USA. tmohamm2@hfhs.org.

Vitiligo manifests as depigmented macules and patches on the skin and can 
significantly impact a patient's quality of life. Despite the availability of 
several treatment modalities, rates of repigmentation can vary widely among 
individuals and disease subtypes. For patients with stable vitiligo who have not 
achieved satisfactory results with medical treatments, the 
melanocyte-keratinocyte transplantation procedure (MKTP) is a viable option. 
While variations of this autologous non-cultured cellular grafting procedure are 
performed by dermatologic surgeons worldwide and has shown good tolerability and 
effectiveness, it remains under utilized in the United States. We present a 
comprehensive overview of MKTP, highlighting evidence-based and practical 
techniques to enhance patient outcomes. By serving as a valuable resource, this 
review aims to support dermatologic surgeons seeking to incorporate MKTP into 
their practice and promote awareness regarding its benefits, ultimately 
fostering a more comprehensive approach to vitiligo care.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00403-023-02761-9
PMID: 38038734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]