---
reference_id: "PMID:17369503"
title: The original Lujan syndrome family has a novel missense mutation (p.N1007S) in the MED12 gene.
authors:
- Schwartz CE
- Tarpey PS
- Lubs HA
- Verloes A
- May MM
- Risheg H
- Friez MJ
- Futreal PA
- Edkins S
- Teague J
- Briault S
- Skinner C
- Bauer-Carlin A
- Simensen RJ
- Joseph SM
- Jones JR
- Gecz J
- Stratton MR
- Raymond FL
- Stevenson RE
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2006.048637
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Male
- Mediator Complex
- "X-Linked Intellectual Disability/genetics, pathology"
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Receptors, Thyroid Hormone/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The original Lujan syndrome family has a novel missense mutation (p.N1007S) in the MED12 gene.
**Authors:** Schwartz CE, Tarpey PS, Lubs HA, Verloes A, May MM, Risheg H, Friez MJ, Futreal PA, Edkins S, Teague J, Briault S, Skinner C, Bauer-Carlin A, Simensen RJ, Joseph SM, Jones JR, Gecz J, Stratton MR, Raymond FL, Stevenson RE
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2006.048637](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2006.048637)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2007 Jul;44(7):472-7. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2006.048637. Epub 2007 Mar
 16.

The original Lujan syndrome family has a novel missense mutation (p.N1007S) in
the MED12 gene.

Schwartz CE, Tarpey PS, Lubs HA, Verloes A, May MM, Risheg H, Friez MJ, Futreal
PA, Edkins S, Teague J, Briault S, Skinner C, Bauer-Carlin A, Simensen RJ,
Joseph SM, Jones JR, Gecz J, Stratton MR, Raymond FL, Stevenson RE.

A novel missense mutation in the mediator of RNA polymerase II transcription
subunit 12 (MED12) gene has been found in the original family with Lujan
syndrome and in a second family (K9359) that was initially considered to have
Opitz-Kaveggia (FG) syndrome. A different missense mutation in the MED12 gene
has been reported previously in the original family with FG syndrome and in five
other families with compatible clinical findings. Neither sequence alteration
has been found in over 1400 control X chromosomes. Lujan (Lujan-Fryns) syndrome
is characterised by tall stature with asthenic habitus, macrocephaly, a tall
narrow face, maxillary hypoplasia, a high narrow palate with dental crowding, a
small or receding chin, long hands with hyperextensible digits, hypernasal
speech, hypotonia, mild-to-moderate mental retardation, behavioural aberrations
and dysgenesis of the corpus callosum. Although Lujan syndrome has not been
previously considered to be in the differential diagnosis of FG syndrome, there
are some overlapping clinical manifestations. Specifically, these are dysgenesis
of the corpus callosum, macrocephaly/relative macrocephaly, a tall forehead,
hypotonia, mental retardation and behavioural disturbances. Thus, it seems that
these two X-linked mental retardation syndromes are allelic, with mutations in
the MED12 gene.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2006.048637
PMCID: PMC2597996
PMID: 17369503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None.
