---
reference_id: "PMID:36292755"
title: The Genetic Factors of the Airway Epithelium Associated with the Pathology of Asthma.
authors:
- Ranjbar M
- Whetstone CE
- Omer H
- Power L
- Cusack RP
- Gauvreau GM
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/genes13101870
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Genetic Factors of the Airway Epithelium Associated with the Pathology of Asthma.
**Authors:** Ranjbar M, Whetstone CE, Omer H, Power L, Cusack RP, Gauvreau GM
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes13101870](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes13101870)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2022 Oct 15;13(10):1870. doi: 10.3390/genes13101870.

The Genetic Factors of the Airway Epithelium Associated with the Pathology of 
Asthma.

Ranjbar M(1), Whetstone CE(1), Omer H(1), Power L(2), Cusack RP(2), Gauvreau 
GM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8N 3Z5, Canada.
(2)Respirology Department, Galway University Hospital, H91 YR71 Galway, Ireland.

Asthma is a chronic disease of the airways characterized by inflammation, 
tightened muscles, and thickened airway walls leading to symptoms such as 
shortness of breath, chest tightness, and cough in patients. The increased risk 
of asthma in children of asthmatics parents supports the existence of genetic 
factors involved in the pathogenesis of this disease. Genome-wide association 
studies have discovered several single nucleotide polymorphisms associated with 
asthma. These polymorphisms occur within several genes and can contribute to 
different asthma phenotypes, affect disease severity, and clinical response to 
different therapies. The complexity in the etiology of asthma also results from 
interactions between environmental and genetic factors. Environmental exposures 
have been shown to increase the prevalence of asthma in individuals who are 
genetically susceptible. This review summarizes what is currently known about 
the genetics of asthma in relation to risk, response to common treatments, and 
gene-environmental interactions.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13101870
PMCID: PMC9601469
PMID: 36292755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.