---
reference_id: PMID:39487134
title: Autoimmune haemolytic anaemias.
authors:
- Michel M
- Crickx E
- Fattizzo B
- Barcellini W
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-024-00566-2
keywords:
- Humans
- "Anemia, Hemolytic, Autoimmune/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
- "Autoantibodies/blood, analysis"
- Rituximab/therapeutic use
- Splenectomy/methods
- Erythrocytes/immunology
- Coombs Test/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmune haemolytic anaemias.
**Authors:** Michel M, Crickx E, Fattizzo B, Barcellini W
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-024-00566-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-024-00566-2)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2024 Nov 1;10(1):82. doi: 10.1038/s41572-024-00566-2.

Autoimmune haemolytic anaemias.

Michel M(1), Crickx E(2), Fattizzo B(3)(4), Barcellini W(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Immunology, National Reference 
Centre for Adult Immune Cytopenias, Henri Mondor University Hospital, Assistance 
Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Université Paris-Est Créteil, Créteil, France. 
marc.michel2@aphp.fr.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Immunology, National Reference 
Centre for Adult Immune Cytopenias, Henri Mondor University Hospital, Assistance 
Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Université Paris-Est Créteil, Créteil, France.
(3)Hematology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, 
Department of Oncology and Hemato-Oncology, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(4)Department of Oncology and Hemato-Oncology, University of Milan, Milan, 
Italy.

Adult autoimmune haemolytic anaemias (AIHAs) include different subtypes of a 
rare autoimmune disease in which autoantibodies targeting autoantigens expressed 
on the membrane of autologous red blood cells (RBCs) are produced, leading to 
their accelerated destruction. In the presence of haemolytic anaemia, the direct 
antiglobulin test is the cornerstone of AIHA diagnosis. AIHAs are classified 
according to the isotype and the thermal optimum of the autoantibody into warm 
(wAIHAs), cold and mixed AIHAs. wAIHAs, the most frequent type of AIHAs, are 
associated with underlying conditions in ~50% of cases. In wAIHA, IgG 
autoantibody reacts with autologous RBCs at 37 °C, leading to antibody-dependent 
cell-mediated cytotoxicity and increased phagocytosis of RBCs in the spleen. 
Cold AIHAs include cold agglutinin disease (CAD) and cold agglutinin syndrome 
(CAS) when there is an underlying condition. CAD and cold agglutinin syndrome 
are IgM cold antibody-driven AIHAs characterized by classical complement 
pathway-mediated haemolysis. The management of wAIHAs has long been based around 
corticosteroids and splenectomy and on symptomatic measures and non-specific 
cytotoxic agents for CAD. Rituximab and the development of complement 
inhibitors, such as the anti-C1s antibody sutimlimab, have changed the 
therapeutic landscape of AIHAs, and new promising targeted therapies are under 
investigation.

© 2024. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-024-00566-2
PMID: 39487134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]