---
reference_id: "PMID:37168645"
title: Juvenile Hemochromatosis in an Asymptomatic Patient-Importance of Early Diagnosis.
authors:
- Nashed B
- Fonseca C
- Vander Pols W
- Kumar S
- Lyons H
- Berman B
- Guzzardo GM
journal: JPGN Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1097/PG9.0000000000000228
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Juvenile Hemochromatosis in an Asymptomatic Patient-Importance of Early Diagnosis.
**Authors:** Nashed B, Fonseca C, Vander Pols W, Kumar S, Lyons H, Berman B, Guzzardo GM
**Journal:** JPGN Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PG9.0000000000000228](https://doi.org/10.1097/PG9.0000000000000228)

## Content

1. JPGN Rep. 2022 Jul 29;3(3):e228. doi: 10.1097/PG9.0000000000000228.
eCollection  2022 Aug.

Juvenile Hemochromatosis in an Asymptomatic Patient-Importance of Early 
Diagnosis.

Nashed B(1), Fonseca C(2), Vander Pols W(2)(3), Kumar S(4), Lyons H(4), Berman 
B(5)(6), Guzzardo GM(5).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Internal Medicine, Ascension St. John Hospital, 
Detroit, MI.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Ascension St. John Children's Hospital, Detroit, 
MI.
(3)Michigan State University College of Human Medicine, East Lansing, MI.
(4)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Ascension St. John Children's 
Hospital, Detroit, MI.
(5)Division of Pediatric Hematology Oncology, Children's Hospital of Michigan, 
Detroit, MI.
(6)Central Michigan University College of Medicine, Detroit, MI.

Juvenile hemochromatosis is a rare inherited disorder of iron regulation leading 
to iron overload, which usually presents before the age of 30. One of the most 
serious clinical characteristics associated with early-onset iron overload is 
liver disease with eventual cirrhosis, often associated with a reduced life 
expectancy even after treatment. This case report summarizes an asymptomatic 
pediatric patient with persistently elevated transaminase levels, which led to a 
diagnosis of juvenile hemochromatosis relatively early in the course of his 
disease. The aim of this case report is to increase awareness and stress the 
importance of early diagnosis and treatment, as it is vital to prevent 
life-threatening complications and optimize patient outcomes. Consideration 
should be taken to recognize potential manifestations despite the rarity of the 
condition. Patients with signs of hepatocellular injury without explanation 
should prompt evaluation including consideration for iron overload after other 
common causes are ruled out.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the European Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and 
Nutrition and the North American Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, 
Hepatology, and Nutrition.

DOI: 10.1097/PG9.0000000000000228
PMCID: PMC10158276
PMID: 37168645

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no funding and conflicts of 
interest.