---
reference_id: "PMID:40013423"
title: Pathogenesis and detection methods of anti-acetylcholine receptor antibodies in myasthenia gravis.
authors:
- Suzuki S
journal: Immunol Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1080/25785826.2025.2472449
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenesis and detection methods of anti-acetylcholine receptor antibodies in myasthenia gravis.
**Authors:** Suzuki S
**Journal:** Immunol Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1080/25785826.2025.2472449](https://doi.org/10.1080/25785826.2025.2472449)

## Content

1. Immunol Med. 2025 Jun;48(2):117-123. doi: 10.1080/25785826.2025.2472449. Epub 
2025 Feb 27.

Pathogenesis and detection methods of anti-acetylcholine receptor antibodies in 
myasthenia gravis.

Suzuki S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Tokyo Metropolitan Neurological Hospital, Fuchu, 
Japan.

Myasthenia gravis (MG), which affects the endplate region of the postsynaptic 
neuromuscular junction, is the best-understood autoimmune disease. MG is driven 
by anti-acetylcholine receptor (AChR) or muscle-specific receptor tyrosine 
kinase, and 65% of MG patients have anti-AChR-positive generalized MG. 
Experimental autoimmune MG is a useful model to investigate the pathogenic 
mechanisms of anti-AChR antibodies and to evaluate the efficacy of new 
immunotherapies. Since long-term drug treatment is usually necessary for MG 
patients, the selection of immunotherapy must be chosen based on an 
understanding of the pathophysiology, including the roles of the thymus, T 
cells, B cells, autoantibodies, and neuromuscular junction. The main pathogenic 
mechanism of MG is the activation of the complement system caused by the attack 
of anti-AChR antibodies. Molecular technology using the neonatal Fc receptor 
(FcRn) is currently being applied to the development of new MG therapies. Many 
biological drugs targeting B cells, interleukin-6, FcRn and complement show 
promise as potential therapeutics for anti-AChR-positive generalized MG. With 
regard to anti-AChR antibody detection, the overall agreement rate between 
radioimmunoassay and enzyme linked immunosorbent assay is 91%, with positive 
agreement of 87% and negative agreement of 99%.

DOI: 10.1080/25785826.2025.2472449
PMID: 40013423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]