---
reference_id: "PMID:39166960"
title: "Genomic landscape of gallbladder cancer: insights from whole exome sequencing."
authors:
- Awasthi S
- Kumar R
- Pradhan D
- Rawal N
- Goel H
- Sahu P
- Sisodiya S
- Rana R
- Kumar S
- Dash NR
- Das P
- Agrawal U
- Rath GK
- Kaur T
- Dhaliwal RS
- Hussain S
- Saluja SS
- Tanwar P
journal: Int J Surg
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/JS9.0000000000002031
keywords:
- Humans
- Gallbladder Neoplasms/genetics
- Exome Sequencing
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Male
- Mutation
- Aged
- Adult
- Genomics
- India
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genomic landscape of gallbladder cancer: insights from whole exome sequencing.
**Authors:** Awasthi S, Kumar R, Pradhan D, Rawal N, Goel H, Sahu P, Sisodiya S, Rana R, Kumar S, Dash NR, Das P, Agrawal U, Rath GK, Kaur T, Dhaliwal RS, Hussain S, Saluja SS, Tanwar P
**Journal:** Int J Surg (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/JS9.0000000000002031](https://doi.org/10.1097/JS9.0000000000002031)

## Content

1. Int J Surg. 2024 Nov 1;110(11):6883-6897. doi: 10.1097/JS9.0000000000002031.

Genomic landscape of gallbladder cancer: insights from whole exome sequencing.

Awasthi S(1), Kumar R(1), Pradhan D(2), Rawal N(1), Goel H(1), Sahu P(3), 
Sisodiya S(4), Rana R(5), Kumar S(6), Dash NR(7), Das P(8), Agrawal U(9), Rath 
GK(10), Kaur T(11), Dhaliwal RS(11), Hussain S(4), Saluja SS(3), Tanwar P(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory Oncology Unit, Dr. BRA-IRCH, AIIMS.
(2)Centralized Core Research Facility, AIIMS.
(3)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Govind Ballabh Pant Institute of 
Postgraduate Medical Education and Research.
(4)Division of Molecular Oncology, ICMR-National Institute of Cancer Prevention 
Research, Noida, India.
(5)Department of Biotechnology and Research, GRIPMER.
(6)Department of Surgical Oncology, Dr. BRA-IRCH, AIIMS.
(7)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, AIIMS.
(8)Department of Pathology, AIIMS.
(9)Ex Director, ICMR National Institute of Pathology.
(10)Ex Chief & Professor, Department of Radiotherapy, Dr. BRA-IRCH, AIIMS, New 
Delhi.
(11)Division of Non-Communicable Diseases, Indian Council of Medical Research.

BACKGROUND: Gallbladder cancer (GBC) is a common gastrointestinal malignancy 
noted for its aggressive characteristics and poor prognosis, which is mostly 
caused by delayed detection. However, the scarcity of information regarding 
somatic mutations in Indian patients with GBC has hampered the development of 
efficient therapeutic options. In the present study, the authors attempted to 
bridge this gap by revealing the mutational profile of GBC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To evaluate the somatic mutation profile, whole exome 
sequencing (WES) was performed on 66 tumor and matched blood samples from 
individuals with GBC. Somatic variant calling was performed using GATK pipeline. 
Variants were annotated at pathogenic and oncogenic levels, using ANNOVAR, VEP 
tools and the OncoKB database. Mutational signature analysis, oncogenic pathway 
analysis and cancer driver genes identification were performed at the functional 
level by using the maftools package.
RESULTS: Our findings focused on the eight most altered genes with pathogenic 
and oncogenic mutations: TP53, SMAD4, ERBB3, KRAS, ARID1A, PIK3CA, RB1, and 
AXIN1. Genes with pathogenic single nucleotide variations (SNVs) were enriched 
in oncogenic signaling pathways, particularly RTK-RAS, WNT, and TP53 pathways. 
Furthermore, our research related certain mutational signatures, such as cosmic 
1, cosmic 6, and cosmic 18, 29, to known characteristics including patient age 
and tobacco smoking, providing important insights into disease etiology.
CONCLUSIONS: Given the scarcity of exome-based sequencing studies focusing on 
the Indian population, this study represents a significant step forward in 
providing a framework for additional in-depth mutational analysis. Genes with 
substantial oncogenic and pathogenic mutations are promising candidates for 
developing targeted mutation panels, particularly for GBC detection.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/JS9.0000000000002031
PMCID: PMC11573093
PMID: 39166960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no financial 
conflict of interest with regard to the content of this report.