---
reference_id: "PMID:9922100"
title: Estrogen receptor mutations.
authors:
- Taylor JA
- Lewis KJ
- Lubahn DB
journal: Mol Cell Endocrinol
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1016/s0303-7207(98)00170-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Estrogen receptor mutations.
**Authors:** Taylor JA, Lewis KJ, Lubahn DB
**Journal:** Mol Cell Endocrinol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0303-7207(98)00170-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0303-7207(98)00170-1)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1998 Oct 25;145(1-2):61-6. doi: 
10.1016/s0303-7207(98)00170-1.

Estrogen receptor mutations.

Taylor JA(1), Lewis KJ, Lubahn DB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia 65211, USA.

The purpose of this paper is to review potential novel functional pathways by 
which estradiol and estrogenic compounds elicit biological responses in mammals. 
We will limit our approach to those novel functions suggested by phenotypes 
associated with estrogen receptor-alpha (ER alpha) gene mutations and 
polymorphisms. The study of these pathways has been greatly aided by the 
availability of ER alpha-minus mice, which lack classic biological responses to 
estradiol. In addition, the availability of an ER alpha-minus human family, 
aromatase-minus human families, and in the near future an aromatase-minus mouse 
model will allow correlations of novel phenotypes with the lack of active ER 
alpha protein. The ER alpha-minus mice can potentially be used to characterize 
in depth novel clinical phenotypes that link the functions of estrogens with 
sexual maturation, cardiovascular disease, osteoporosis, diabetes, and cancer.

DOI: 10.1016/s0303-7207(98)00170-1
PMID: 9922100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]