---
reference_id: "PMID:30864219"
title: Circulating plasmablasts contribute to antiphospholipid antibody production, associated with type I interferon upregulation.
authors:
- Hisada R
- Kato M
- Sugawara E
- Kanda M
- Fujieda Y
- Oku K
- Bohgaki T
- Amengual O
- Horita T
- Yasuda S
- Atsumi T
journal: J Thromb Haemost
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/jth.14427
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Circulating plasmablasts contribute to antiphospholipid antibody production, associated with type I interferon upregulation.
**Authors:** Hisada R, Kato M, Sugawara E, Kanda M, Fujieda Y, Oku K, Bohgaki T, Amengual O, Horita T, Yasuda S, Atsumi T
**Journal:** J Thromb Haemost (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jth.14427](https://doi.org/10.1111/jth.14427)

## Content

1. J Thromb Haemost. 2019 Jul;17(7):1134-1143. doi: 10.1111/jth.14427. Epub 2019 
Mar 30.

Circulating plasmablasts contribute to antiphospholipid antibody production, 
associated with type I interferon upregulation.

Hisada R(1), Kato M(1), Sugawara E(1), Kanda M(1), Fujieda Y(1), Oku K(1), 
Bohgaki T(1), Amengual O(1), Horita T(1), Yasuda S(1), Atsumi T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Endocrinology and Nephrology, Faculty of Medicine 
and Graduate School of Medicine, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.

Comment in
    J Thromb Haemost. 2019 Jul;17(7):1030-1032. doi: 10.1111/jth.14492.

Essentials The mechanism of antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL) production remains 
unclear. We investigated lymphocyte subset, single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNP), and aPL-producing cells. The increase of circulating plasmablasts was 
associated with type I interferon upregulation. Our novel ex vivo assay revealed 
circulating plasmablasts as a major source of aPL. SUMMARY: Background/objective 
Antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL) are pathogenic autoantibodies in 
antiphospholipid syndrome (APS). This study aimed to clarify the mechanism of 
aPL production. Methods T cell and B cell subsets were evaluated in peripheral 
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of 26 primary APS (PAPS), 19 systemic lupus 
erythematosus-associated APS (SLE/APS) patients and 10 healthy controls. The 
SLE-related or APS-related single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) were analyzed 
in those patients. Interferon (IFN) score was calculated based on the mRNA 
expression of Ly6e, Mx1, IFIT1, and IFIT3 in PBMCs. The PBMCs obtained from APS 
patients were cultured ex vivo following depletion of CD20 positive or negative 
B cells and the culture supernatants were applied to aPL measurements. Results 
In PAPS and SLE/APS patients, Th2, Th17, and plasmablasts were increased while 
regulatory T, memory B, and regulatory B cells were decreased compared to 
healthy controls. Genetic analysis revealed that the increase of plasmablasts 
was more pronounced in patients carrying a risk allele of toll like receptor 
(TLR) 7 SNP rs3853839. The IFN score was significantly higher in the risk allele 
carriers. Ex vivo experiments showed that aPL were present in the culture 
supernatant of PBMCs lacking CD20+CD19+ subset, but not in that of cells lacking 
CD20-CD19+ subset. Conclusions Our data indicate an important role of 
plasmablasts in the production of aPL. Furthermore, the increase of plasmablasts 
was associated with TLR 7 and type I IFN, suggesting a common pathophysiology in 
SLE and APS. Targeting plasmablasts might be a novel immunological therapeutic 
approach in the treatment of APS.

© 2019 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

DOI: 10.1111/jth.14427
PMID: 30864219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]