---
reference_id: "PMID:12160730"
title: X-linked recessive atrophic macular degeneration from RPGR mutation.
authors:
- Ayyagari R
- Demirci FY
- Liu J
- Bingham EL
- Stringham H
- Kakuk LE
- Boehnke M
- Gorin MB
- Richards JE
- Sieving PA
journal: Genomics
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1006/geno.2002.6815
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- "Chromosomes, Human, X"
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Eye Proteins
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Macular Degeneration/genetics, physiopathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retina/pathology
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# X-linked recessive atrophic macular degeneration from RPGR mutation.
**Authors:** Ayyagari R, Demirci FY, Liu J, Bingham EL, Stringham H, Kakuk LE, Boehnke M, Gorin MB, Richards JE, Sieving PA
**Journal:** Genomics (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1006/geno.2002.6815](https://doi.org/10.1006/geno.2002.6815)

## Content

1. Genomics. 2002 Aug;80(2):166-71. doi: 10.1006/geno.2002.6815.

X-linked recessive atrophic macular degeneration from RPGR mutation.

Ayyagari R(1), Demirci FY, Liu J, Bingham EL, Stringham H, Kakuk LE, Boehnke M,
Gorin MB, Richards JE, Sieving PA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, 48105, USA.

We mapped a new X-linked recessive atrophic macular degeneration locus to
Xp21.1-p11.4 and show allelic involvement of the gene RPGR, which normally
causes severe peripheral retinal degeneration leading to global blindness. Ten
affected males whom we examined had primarily macular atrophy causing
progressive loss of visual acuity with minimal peripheral visual impairment. One
additional male showed extensive macular degeneration plus peripheral loss of
retinal pigment epithelium and choriocapillaries. Full-field electroretinograms
(ERGs) showed normal cone and rod responses in some affected males despite
advanced macular degeneration, emphasizing the dissociation of atrophic macular
degeneration from generalized cone degenerations, including X-linked cone
dystrophy (COD1). The RPGR gene nonsense mutation G-->T at open reading frame
(ORF)15+1164 cosegregated with the disease and may create a donor splice site.
Identification of an RPGR mutation in atrophic maculardegeneration expands the
phenotypic range associated with this gene and provides a new tool for the
dissection of the relationship between clinically different retinal pathologies.

DOI: 10.1006/geno.2002.6815
PMID: 12160730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
