---
reference_id: "PMID:20301621"
title: Zellweger Spectrum Disorder.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Steinberg SJ
- Raymond GV
- Braverman NE
- Moser AB
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Zellweger Spectrum Disorder.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Steinberg SJ, Raymond GV, Braverman NE, Moser AB

## Content

1. Zellweger Spectrum Disorder.

Steinberg SJ(1), Raymond GV(2), Braverman NE(3), Moser AB(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2003 Dec 12 [updated 2020 Oct 29].

Author information:
(1)ARUP Laboratories, Salt Lake City, Utah
(2)Department of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland
(3)Departments of Pediatrics and Human Genetics, McGill University and Research 
Institute of the McGill University Health Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
(4)The Peroxisomal Diseases Laboratory, Kennedy Krieger Institute, Department of 
Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Zellweger spectrum disorder (ZSD) is a phenotypic 
continuum ranging from severe to mild. While individual phenotypes (e.g., 
Zellweger syndrome [ZS], neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy [NALD], and infantile 
Refsum disease [IRD]) were described in the past before the biochemical and 
molecular bases of this spectrum were fully determined, the term "ZSD" is now 
used to refer to all individuals with a defect in one of the ZSD-PEX genes 
regardless of phenotype. Individuals with ZSD usually come to clinical attention 
in the newborn period or later in childhood. Affected newborns are hypotonic and 
feed poorly. They have distinctive facies, congenital malformations (neuronal 
migration defects associated with neonatal-onset seizures, renal cysts, and bony 
stippling [chondrodysplasia punctata] of the patella[e] and the long bones), and 
liver disease that can be severe. Infants with severe ZSD are significantly 
impaired and typically die during the first year of life, usually having made no 
developmental progress. Individuals with intermediate/milder ZSD do not have 
congenital malformations, but rather progressive peroxisome dysfunction variably 
manifest as sensory loss (secondary to retinal dystrophy and sensorineural 
hearing loss), neurologic involvement (ataxia, polyneuropathy, and 
leukodystrophy), liver dysfunction, adrenal insufficiency, and renal oxalate 
stones. While hypotonia and developmental delays are typical, intellect can be 
normal. Some have osteopenia; almost all have ameleogenesis imperfecta in the 
secondary teeth.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of ZSD is established in a proband with the 
suggestive clinical and biochemical findings above by identification of 
biallelic pathogenic variants in one of the 13 known ZSD-PEX genes. One PEX6 
variant, p.Arg860Trp, has been associated with ZSD in the heterozygous state due 
to allelic expression imbalance dependent on allelic background.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: The focus is on symptomatic therapy and 
may include gastrostomy to provide adequate calories, hearing aids, cataract 
removal, glasses to correct refractive errors, supplementation of fat-soluble 
vitamins, and cholic acid supplementation; varices can be treated with 
sclerosing therapies; anti-seizure medication, early intervention services for 
developmental delay and intellectual disability; adrenal replacement therapy; 
vitamin D supplementation and consideration of bisphosphonates for osteopenia; 
treatment as per dentist for ameliogenesis imperfecta. Supportive treatment for 
renal oxalate stones has included hydration, lithotripsy, and surgical 
intervention. Annual influenza and respiratory syncytial virus vaccines should 
be provided. Surveillance: Growth and nutrition should be assessed at each 
visit. Annual audiology and ophthalmologic evaluations; annual monitoring of 
liver function and coagulation factors, and ultrasound and/or fibroscan to 
evaluate liver architecture; monitor for changes in seizure activity; head MRI 
to evaluate for white matter changes that may explain changes in cognitive 
and/or motor ability; monitor developmental progress and educational needs; ACTH 
and cortisol levels by age one year and annually thereafter. Dental examinations 
every six months. Annual urine oxalate-to-creatinine ratio with consideration of 
kidney imaging when performing liver imaging. Assessment of family needs at each 
visit.
GENETIC COUNSELING: ZSD is typically inherited in an autosomal recessive manner 
(one PEX6 variant, p.Arg860Trp, has been associated with ZSD in the heterozygous 
state). At conception, each sib of an individual with biallelic ZSD-causing 
pathogenic variants has a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an 
asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. 
Carrier testing for at-risk relatives is possible if the pathogenic variants 
have been identified in an affected family member. Prenatal testing for a 
pregnancy at increased risk is possible by DNA testing if both ZSD-related 
pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected family member, or by 
biochemical testing if the biochemical defects have been confirmed in cultured 
fibroblasts from an affected family member.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301621