---
reference_id: "PMID:38253735"
title: High incidence of EDNRB gene mutation in seven southern Chinese familial cases with Hirschsprung's disease.
authors:
- Ding HY
- Lei W
- Xiao SJ
- Deng H
- Yuan LK
- Xu L
- Zhou JL
- Huang R
- Fang YL
- Wang QY
- Zhang Y
- Zhang L
- Zhu XC
journal: Pediatr Surg Int
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00383-023-05620-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High incidence of EDNRB gene mutation in seven southern Chinese familial cases with Hirschsprung's disease.
**Authors:** Ding HY, Lei W, Xiao SJ, Deng H, Yuan LK, Xu L, Zhou JL, Huang R, Fang YL, Wang QY, Zhang Y, Zhang L, Zhu XC
**Journal:** Pediatr Surg Int (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00383-023-05620-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00383-023-05620-w)

## Content

1. Pediatr Surg Int. 2024 Jan 22;40(1):38. doi: 10.1007/s00383-023-05620-w.

High incidence of EDNRB gene mutation in seven southern Chinese familial cases 
with Hirschsprung's disease.

Ding HY(#)(1), Lei W(#)(2), Xiao SJ(1), Deng H(2), Yuan LK(1), Xu L(1), Zhou 
JL(1), Huang R(1), Fang YL(1), Wang QY(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhang L(3), Zhu XC(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neonatal Surgery, Guangdong Women and Children Hospital, 
Guangzhou, 511400, China.
(2)Maternal and Child Health Research Institute, Translational Medicine Center, 
Guangdong Women and Children Hospital, Guangzhou, 511400, China.
(3)Maternal and Child Health Research Institute, Translational Medicine Center, 
Guangdong Women and Children Hospital, Guangzhou, 511400, China. 
zhangliang1999@tsinghua.org.cn.
(4)Department of Neonatal Surgery, Guangdong Women and Children Hospital, 
Guangzhou, 511400, China. zhuxc11@126.com.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Hirschsprung's disease (HSCR) is the leading cause of neonatal 
functional intestinal obstruction, which has been identified in many familial 
cases. HSCR, a multifactorial disorder of enteric nervous system (ENS) 
development, is associated with at least 24 genes and seven chromosomal loci, 
with RET and EDNRB as its major genes. We present a genetic investigation of 
familial HSCR to clarify the genotype-phenotype relationship.
METHODS: We performed whole exome sequencing (WES) on Illumina HiSeq X Ten 
platform to investigate genetic backgrounds of core family members, and 
identified the possibly harmful mutation genes. Mutation carriers and pedigree 
relatives were validated by Sanger sequencing for evaluating the gene 
penetrance.
RESULTS: Four familial cases showed potential disease-relative variants in EDNRB 
and RET gene, accounting for all detection rate of 57.1%. Three familial cases 
exhibited strong pathogenic variants as frameshift or missense mutations in 
EDNRB gene. A novel c.367delinsTT mutation of EDNRB was identified in one family 
member. The other two EDNRB mutations, c.553G>A in family 2 and c.877delinsTT in 
family 5, have been reported in previous literatures. The penetrance of EDNRB 
variants was 33-50% according mutation carries. In family 6, the RET c.1858T>C 
(C620R) point mutation has previously been reported to cause HSCR, with 28.5% 
penetrance.
CONCLUSION: We identified a novel EDNRB (deleted C and inserted TT) mutation in 
this study using WES. Heterozygote variations in EDNRB gene were significantly 
enriched in three families and RET mutations were identified in one family. 
EDNRB variants showed an overall higher incidence and penetrance than RET in 
southern Chinese families cases.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00383-023-05620-w
PMID: 38253735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]