---
reference_id: "PMID:40019005"
title: "Recent Guidelines on Anal Cancer Screening: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Albuquerque A
- Fontes F
journal: J Low Genit Tract Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1097/LGT.0000000000000878
keywords:
- Humans
- Anus Neoplasms/diagnosis
- "Early Detection of Cancer/methods, standards"
- Female
- Papillomavirus Infections/diagnosis
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/diagnosis"
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent Guidelines on Anal Cancer Screening: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Albuquerque A, Fontes F
**Journal:** J Low Genit Tract Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1097/LGT.0000000000000878](https://doi.org/10.1097/LGT.0000000000000878)

## Content

1. J Low Genit Tract Dis. 2025 Apr 1;29(2):180-185. doi: 
10.1097/LGT.0000000000000878. Epub 2025 Feb 28.

Recent Guidelines on Anal Cancer Screening: A Systematic Review.

Albuquerque A, Fontes F(1).

Author information:
(1)Precancerous Lesions and Early Cancer Management Research Group RISE@CI-IPO 
(Health Research Network), Portuguese Oncology Institute of Porto (IPO-Porto), 
Porto, Portugal.

OBJECTIVES: Reports have recently been published on the risk stratification of 
anal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) in several populations and the benefits of 
treating precancerous anal lesions to reduce the risk of progression to anal 
SCC. These studies have led several societies to publish new recommendations for 
anal cancer screening. This study systematically reviews anal cancer screening 
recommendations across different societies and institutes published after the 
ANCHOR trial.
METHODS: The authors systematically reviewed society recommendations for anal 
cancer screening that have been published since July 2022.
RESULTS: This study included 6 publications: 3 societies made recommendations 
only for individuals living with HIV, and 3 made recommendations for other 
high-risk groups, such as women with vulvar cancer/high-grade squamous 
intraepithelial lesions (HSILs) and female transplant recipients. Four societies 
recommended anal cytology, with or without human papillomavirus (HPV) testing, 
as the first screening method. One society recommended anal cytology, HPV 
testing, or cotesting as possible options, while 1 suggested HPV type 16 
testing. Only 1 society has made recommendations on screening discontinuation. 
High-resolution anoscopy was recommended during follow-ups for individuals with 
abnormal results, although the referral threshold varied between societies 
according to the screening method results. All societies that mentioned anal 
HSIL treatment recommended it. Four societies expanded their recommendations 
beyond screening and treatment to include smoking cessation and/or HPV 
vaccination.
CONCLUSIONS: Currently, there are several recommendations for anal cancer 
screening that include target groups, screening methods, treatment, follow-up, 
and other anal SCC prevention methods.

Copyright © 2025, ASCCP.

DOI: 10.1097/LGT.0000000000000878
PMID: 40019005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.A. received an IQVIA consultant fee. F.F. has 
declared that there are no conflicts of interest.