---
reference_id: "PMID:22931735"
title: "Early-onset ataxia with progressive external ophthalmoplegia associated with POLG mutation: autosomal recessive mitochondrial ataxic syndrome or SANDO?"
authors:
- Habek M
- Barun B
- Adamec I
- Mitrović Z
- Ozretić D
- Brinar VV
journal: Neurologist
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1097/NRL.0b013e318266f5a6
keywords:
- Adult
- "Ataxia/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Brain/pathology, physiopathology"
- DNA Polymerase gamma
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/genetics"
- DNA-Directed DNA Polymerase/genetics
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Dysarthria/diagnosis, genetics"
- Female
- "Hereditary Sensory and Motor Neuropathy/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Mutation/genetics
- "Ophthalmoplegia/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early-onset ataxia with progressive external ophthalmoplegia associated with POLG mutation: autosomal recessive mitochondrial ataxic syndrome or SANDO?
**Authors:** Habek M, Barun B, Adamec I, Mitrović Z, Ozretić D, Brinar VV
**Journal:** Neurologist (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1097/NRL.0b013e318266f5a6](https://doi.org/10.1097/NRL.0b013e318266f5a6)

## Content

1. Neurologist. 2012 Sep;18(5):287-9. doi: 10.1097/NRL.0b013e318266f5a6.

Early-onset ataxia with progressive external ophthalmoplegia associated with 
POLG mutation: autosomal recessive mitochondrial ataxic syndrome or SANDO?

Habek M(1), Barun B, Adamec I, Mitrović Z, Ozretić D, Brinar VV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, 
Croatia. mhabek@mef.hr

Autosomal recessive ataxias caused by mutations of the polymerase γ (POLG) gene 
make an important group of progressive ataxias accompanied by a diverse spectrum 
of neurological disorders. Because the clinical picture can be quite 
miscellaneous, it is challenging to assort patients to any of the currently 
described syndromes; therefore, to provide such a patient with a conclusive 
diagnosis can be challenging for the neurologist. A typical magnetic resonance 
imaging finding is probably the most useful landmark in the diagnostic process, 
which will steer the clinician toward POLG gene testing. To illustrate this, we 
present a case of progressive ataxia caused by A467T and W748S mutations of POLG 
gene, who presented with overlapping symptoms of autosomal recessive 
mitochondrial ataxic syndrome and SANDO, as well as choreoathetotic movements 
and dysphonia. After lengthy investigations, magnetic resonance imaging showed 
T2 and FLAIR hyperintensities in the thalamus, inferior olives, and cerebellum, 
which led us to the analysis of POLG mutations.

DOI: 10.1097/NRL.0b013e318266f5a6
PMID: 22931735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]