---
reference_id: "PMID:24695011"
title: Prevalence and clinical characteristics of adult polymyositis and dermatomyositis; data from a large and unselected Norwegian cohort.
authors:
- Dobloug C
- Garen T
- Bitter H
- Stjärne J
- Stenseth G
- Grøvle L
- Sem M
- Gran JT
- Molberg Ø
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-205127
keywords:
- Adult
- "Dermatomyositis/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Humans
- Norway/epidemiology
- "Polymyositis/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Prevalence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence and clinical characteristics of adult polymyositis and dermatomyositis; data from a large and unselected Norwegian cohort.
**Authors:** Dobloug C, Garen T, Bitter H, Stjärne J, Stenseth G, Grøvle L, Sem M, Gran JT, Molberg Ø
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-205127](https://doi.org/10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-205127)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2015 Aug;74(8):1551-6. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-205127.
Epub  2014 Apr 2.

Prevalence and clinical characteristics of adult polymyositis and 
dermatomyositis; data from a large and unselected Norwegian cohort.

Dobloug C(1), Garen T(1), Bitter H(2), Stjärne J(3), Stenseth G(4), Grøvle L(5), 
Sem M(6), Gran JT(1), Molberg Ø(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, Sørlandets sykehus, Kristiansand, Norway.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, Betanien Hospital, Skien, Norway.
(4)Revmatismesykehuset, Lillehammer, Norway.
(5)Department of Rheumatology, Sykehuset Østfold, Moss, Norway.
(6)Department of Neurology, Sykehuset Østfold, Fredrikstad, Norway.
(7)Department of Rheumatology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway Institute 
of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

OBJECTIVES: The occurrence of polymyositis (PM) and dermatomyositis (DM) in the 
general population is largely unknown and unbiased data on clinical and 
laboratory features in PM/DM are missing. Here, we aim to identify and 
characterise every PM/DM patient living in southeast Norway (denominator 
population 2.64 million), 2003-2012.
METHOD: Due to the structure of the Norwegian health system, all patients with 
PM/DM are followed at public hospitals. Hence, all public hospital databases in 
southeast Norway were screened for patients having ICD-10 codes compatible with 
myositis. Manual chart review was then performed to identify all cases meeting 
the Peter & Bohan and/or Targoff classification criteria for PM/DM.
RESULTS: The ICD-10 search identified 3160 potential myositis patients, but only 
208/3160 patients met the Peter & Bohan criteria and 230 the Targoff criteria 
(100 PM, 130 DM). With 56 deaths during the observation period, point prevalence 
of PM/DM was calculated to 8.7/100 000. Estimated annual incidences ranged from 
6 to 10 /1 000 000, with peak incidences at 50-59 (DM) and 60-69 years (PM). 
Myositis specific antibodies (Jo-1, PL-7, PL-12, signal recognition particle 
(SRP) and Mi-2) were present in 53% (109/204), while 137/163 (87%) had 
pathological muscle MRI. Frequent clinical features included myalgia (75%), 
arthritis (41%) dyspnoea (62%) and dysphagia (58%). Positive anti-Jo-1, present 
in 39% of DM and 22% of PM cases, was associated with dyspnoea, arthritis and 
mechanic hands.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that the population prevalence of PM/DM in 
Caucasians is quite low, but underscores the complexity and severity of the 
disorders.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-205127
PMID: 24695011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]