---
reference_id: "PMID:31131842"
title: Patisiran for the treatment of patients with familial amyloid polyneuropathy.
authors:
- Rizk M
- Tüzmen S
journal: Drugs Today (Barc)
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1358/dot.2019.55.5.2958475
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Patisiran for the treatment of patients with familial amyloid polyneuropathy.
**Authors:** Rizk M, Tüzmen S
**Journal:** Drugs Today (Barc) (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1358/dot.2019.55.5.2958475](https://doi.org/10.1358/dot.2019.55.5.2958475)

## Content

1. Drugs Today (Barc). 2019 May;55(5):315-327. doi:
10.1358/dot.2019.55.5.2958475.

Patisiran for the treatment of patients with familial amyloid polyneuropathy.

Rizk M(1), Tüzmen S(2).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics and Genomics Program, School of Medicine, Dentistry, and 
Nursing, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of 
Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland; Molecular Biology and Genetics Program, Department 
of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Eastern Mediterranean 
University (EMU), Famagusta, North Cyprus, Turkey.
(2)Molecular Biology and Genetics Program, Department of Biological Sciences, 
Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Eastern Mediterranean University (EMU), Famagusta, 
North Cyprus, Turkey. sukru.tuzmen@emu.edu.tr.

Onpattro, also commonly known as patisiran, is a small interfering RNA (siRNA) 
molecule packaged within a lipid nanoparticle and is transported into the cell 
to target transthyretin gene (TTR) messenger mRNA (mRNA) by attaching to its 
complementary sequence. The target mRNA is degraded and both mutant and 
wild-type amyloid transthyretin (ATTR) protein production becomes suppressed. 
This drug was developed by Alnylam Pharmaceuticals to treat a rare disease 
called hereditary ATTR (hATTR) amyloidosis. This disease develops as a result of 
the deposition of toxic aggregates of misfolded TTR protein, and is progressive 
causing the affected individual to be bed bound and to eventually die if left 
untreated. However, variable expressivity and incomplete penetrance cause 
carriers of TTR gene variants to be asymptomatic for a prolonged time. The 
heterogeneity of symptoms makes correct diagnosis of the disease difficult, 
therefore management of symptoms and proper treatment are delayed as a result. 
However, certain TTR variants are found in endemic or cluster regions, which 
facilitates their detection. In this review paper, different aspects of the drug 
are discussed in detail, including its preclinical and clinical studies, as well 
as its pharmacokinetic properties along with drug interactions leading to its 
approval by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the European 
Medicines Agency (EMA).

Copyright 2019 Clarivate Analytics.

DOI: 10.1358/dot.2019.55.5.2958475
PMID: 31131842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]