---
reference_id: "PMID:15063231"
title: WHO histologic classification is a prognostic indicator in thymoma.
authors:
- Kondo K
- Yoshizawa K
- Tsuyuguchi M
- Kimura S
- Sumitomo M
- Morita J
- Miyoshi T
- Sakiyama S
- Mukai K
- Monden Y
journal: Ann Thorac Surg
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2003.07.042
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prognosis
- Survival Rate
- "Thymoma/classification, mortality, pathology"
- "Thymus Neoplasms/classification, mortality, pathology"
- World Health Organization
content_type: abstract_only
---

# WHO histologic classification is a prognostic indicator in thymoma.
**Authors:** Kondo K, Yoshizawa K, Tsuyuguchi M, Kimura S, Sumitomo M, Morita J, Miyoshi T, Sakiyama S, Mukai K, Monden Y
**Journal:** Ann Thorac Surg (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.athoracsur.2003.07.042](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.athoracsur.2003.07.042)

## Content

1. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004 Apr;77(4):1183-8. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2003.07.042.

WHO histologic classification is a prognostic indicator in thymoma.

Kondo K(1), Yoshizawa K, Tsuyuguchi M, Kimura S, Sumitomo M, Morita J, Miyoshi
T, Sakiyama S, Mukai K, Monden Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncological and Regenerative Surgery, School of Medicine,
University of Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan. kondo@clin.med.tokushima-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: The histologic classification of thymoma has remained a subject of
controversy for many years. In 1999, the World Health Organization Consensus
Committee published a histologic typing system for tumors of the thymus.
METHODS: We reclassified a series of 100 thymomas resected at Tokushima
University Hospital and four affiliated hospitals in Japan between 1973 and 2001
according to the World Health Organization histologic classification and
reported its clinicopathologic relationship and prognostic relevance.
RESULTS: There were 8 type A, 17 type AB, 27 type B1, 8 type B2, 12 type B3, and
28 type C thymomas. The frequency of invasion to neighboring organs increased
according to tumor subtype in the order A (0%), AB (6%), B1 (19%), B2 (25%), B3
(42%), and C (89%). There was no recurrence in patients with type A, AB, or B2
thymoma. The recurrence rates of patients with B1, B3, or C thymoma were 15%,
36%, and 47%, respectively. The disease-free survival rates were 100% for types
A and AB, 83% for types B1 and B2, 36% for type B3, and 28% for type C thymoma
at 10 years. There were significant differences in disease-free survival between
types A and AB and types B1 and B2 (p = 0.0436), and between type B3 and type C
(p = 0.042). By multivariate analysis, only Masaoka clinical stage (p = 0.002)
showed significant independent effects on disease-free survival. The 10-year
survival rates of types A and AB, types B1 and B2, type B3, and type C thymoma
were 100%, 94%, 92%, and 58%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The current study confirmed the World Health Organization
histologic classification as a good prognostic factor.

DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2003.07.042
PMID: 15063231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
