---
reference_id: "PMID:22527882"
title: "Selenoprotein N in skeletal muscle: from diseases to function."
authors:
- Castets P
- Lescure A
- Guicheney P
- Allamand V
journal: J Mol Med (Berl)
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1007/s00109-012-0896-x
keywords:
- Animals
- Calcium/metabolism
- Humans
- Muscle Development
- "Muscle Proteins/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism"
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/genetics, metabolism"
- Oxidative Stress
- Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/metabolism
- "Selenoproteins/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
- Stem Cells/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Selenoprotein N in skeletal muscle: from diseases to function.
**Authors:** Castets P, Lescure A, Guicheney P, Allamand V
**Journal:** J Mol Med (Berl) (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00109-012-0896-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00109-012-0896-x)

## Content

1. J Mol Med (Berl). 2012 Oct;90(10):1095-107. doi: 10.1007/s00109-012-0896-x.
Epub  2012 Apr 14.

Selenoprotein N in skeletal muscle: from diseases to function.

Castets P(1), Lescure A, Guicheney P, Allamand V.

Author information:
(1)Neuromuscular Centre, University Hospital of Basel, 4056, Basel, Switzerland.

Selenoprotein N (SelN) deficiency causes several inherited neuromuscular 
disorders collectively termed SEPN1-related myopathies, characterized by early 
onset, generalized muscle atrophy, and muscle weakness affecting especially 
axial muscles and leading to spine rigidity, severe scoliosis, and respiratory 
insufficiency. SelN is ubiquitously expressed and is located in the membrane of 
the endoplasmic reticulum; however, its function remains elusive. The 
predominant expression of SelN in human fetal tissues and the embryonic muscle 
phenotype reported in mutant zebrafish suggest that it is involved in 
myogenesis. In mice, SelN is also mostly expressed during embryogenesis and 
especially in the myotome, but no defect was detected in muscle development and 
growth in the Sepn1 knock-out mouse model. By contrast, we recently demonstrated 
that SelN is essential for muscle regeneration and satellite cell maintenance in 
mice and humans, hence opening new avenues regarding the pathomechanism(s) 
leading to SEPN1-related myopathies. At the cellular level, recent data 
suggested that SelN participates in oxidative and calcium homeostasis, with a 
potential role in the regulation of the ryanodine receptor activity. Despite the 
recent and exciting progress regarding the physiological function(s) of SelN in 
muscle tissue, the pathogenesis leading to SEPN1-related myopathies remains 
largely unknown, with several unsolved questions, and no treatment available. In 
this review, we introduce SelN, its properties and expression pattern in 
zebrafish, mice, and humans, and we discuss its potential roles in muscle tissue 
and the ensuing clues for the development of therapeutic options.

DOI: 10.1007/s00109-012-0896-x
PMID: 22527882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]