---
reference_id: "PMID:39110231"
title: "Audiovestibular outcomes in adult patients with cogan syndrome: a systematic review."
authors:
- Marrero-Gonzalez AR
- Ward C
- Nguyen SA
- Jeong SS
- Rizk HG
journal: Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s00405-024-08878-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Audiovestibular outcomes in adult patients with cogan syndrome: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Marrero-Gonzalez AR, Ward C, Nguyen SA, Jeong SS, Rizk HG
**Journal:** Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00405-024-08878-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00405-024-08878-5)

## Content

1. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2025 Jan;282(1):23-35. doi: 
10.1007/s00405-024-08878-5. Epub 2024 Aug 7.

Audiovestibular outcomes in adult patients with cogan syndrome: a systematic 
review.

Marrero-Gonzalez AR(1), Ward C(2), Nguyen SA(3), Jeong SS(4), Rizk HG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Medical University of 
South Carolina, 135 Rutledge Avenue, MSC550, Charleston, SC, 29425, USA.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, 
SC, USA.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Medical University of 
South Carolina, 135 Rutledge Avenue, MSC550, Charleston, SC, 29425, USA. 
nguyensh@musc.edu.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology and Communication Sciences, SUNY Upstate Medical 
University, Syracuse, NY, USA.

PURPOSE: To determine factors associated with steroid responsiveness and 
efficacy of biologic disease-modifying anti-rheumatic (DMARD) use in patients 
with Cogan Syndrome (CS).
METHODS: A systematic search of Cochrane Library, PubMed, CINAHL, and Scopus was 
conducted following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and 
Meta-analyses guidelines. Any study describing audiometric or vestibular data 
and pharmacologic treatment in patients with CS was included. Due to limited 
literature, only case reports/case series were included.
RESULTS: Seventy case reports or case series studies comprising 79 individual 
cases of CS were included. A difference in vestibular symptoms with a higher 
prevalence in the steroid-resistant group than the steroid-responsive group was 
found (79.5% vs 57.9%, p = 0.04). Eighteen (60.0%) patients treated only with 
oral steroids had no audiological improvement, while twelve (n = 12; 85.7%) 
patients treated with biologic DMARD showed audiological improvement. The 
steroid-responsive group had an overall better response to DMARDs than the 
steroid-resistant group (62.1% vs 45.0%; 100.0% vs 77.8%).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study synthesized the available literature to better 
characterize steroid resistance in patients with Cogan syndrome and treatment 
outcomes. Vestibular symptoms were noted to be more prevalent in patients who 
were eventually labeled as steroid resistant. There were higher rates of 
audiological improvement in patients given biologic DMARDs rather than 
conventional DMARDs or steroids only. Further studies are needed to characterize 
each individual vestibular symptom and investigate the utility and timing of 
biologic DMARDs in managing patients with Cogan syndrome.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-024-08878-5
PMCID: PMC11735566
PMID: 39110231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: The authors 
have no conflict of interest to disclose.