---
reference_id: "PMID:17548563"
title: Pathogenesis of myelin/oligodendrocyte damage in multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Dhib-Jalbut S
journal: Neurology
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000275228.13012.7b
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenesis of myelin/oligodendrocyte damage in multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Dhib-Jalbut S
**Journal:** Neurology (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1212/01.wnl.0000275228.13012.7b](https://doi.org/10.1212/01.wnl.0000275228.13012.7b)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2007 May 29;68(22 Suppl 3):S13-21; discussion S43-54. doi: 
10.1212/01.wnl.0000275228.13012.7b.

Pathogenesis of myelin/oligodendrocyte damage in multiple sclerosis.

Dhib-Jalbut S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New 
Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ 08901-2160, USA. 
jalbutsu@umdnj.edu

Substantial evidence supports autoimmune activity as the etiologic mechanism 
underlying multiple sclerosis (MS). Both the innate and the adaptive arms of the 
immune system are involved in the aberrant response to several antigens 
associated with the myelin sheath and oligodendrocytes (OGCs) after the 
activation of immune cells by self- or cross-reactive microbial pathogens. The 
CD4(+) Th1 cell, in particular, has been implicated, but it is abetted by a 
variety of other cell types (CD8(+) cells, B cells, macrophages, and microglia) 
and soluble products (proteases, cytokines, and nitric oxide [NO]) that act both 
outside of and within the CNS. This review describes recent and salient findings 
from animal models and human clinical studies that have established our current 
understanding of the distinct steps in the development of immune autoreactivity 
that culminates in the CNS lesions associated with MS.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000275228.13012.7b
PMID: 17548563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]