---
reference_id: PMID:27773430
title: Mutations in CRADD Result in Reduced Caspase-2-Mediated Neuronal Apoptosis and Cause Megalencephaly with a Rare Lissencephaly Variant.
authors:
- Di Donato N
- Jean YY
- Maga AM
- Krewson BD
- Shupp AB
- Avrutsky MI
- Roy A
- Collins S
- Olds C
- Willert RA
- Czaja AM
- Johnson R
- Stover JA
- Gottlieb S
- Bartholdi D
- Rauch A
- Goldstein A
- Boyd-Kyle V
- Aldinger KA
- Mirzaa GM
- Nissen A
- Brigatti KW
- Puffenberger EG
- Millen KJ
- Strauss KA
- Dobyns WB
- Troy CM
- Jinks RN
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.09.010
keywords:
- "Amyloid beta-Peptides/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- Apoptosis
- CRADD Signaling Adaptor Protein/genetics
- "Caspase 2/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Survival
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- Cognition
- "Cysteine Endopeptidases/genetics, metabolism"
- Dendritic Cells/metabolism
- Ethnicity/genetics
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Immunoprecipitation
- Lissencephaly/genetics
- Megalencephaly/genetics
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation
- Neurons/metabolism
- PC12 Cells
- Rats
- Signal Transduction
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Mutations in CRADD Result in Reduced Caspase-2-Mediated Neuronal Apoptosis and Cause Megalencephaly with a Rare Lissencephaly Variant.
**Authors:** Di Donato N, Jean YY, Maga AM, Krewson BD, Shupp AB, Avrutsky MI, Roy A, Collins S, Olds C, Willert RA, Czaja AM, Johnson R, Stover JA, Gottlieb S, Bartholdi D, Rauch A, Goldstein A, Boyd-Kyle V, Aldinger KA, Mirzaa GM, Nissen A, Brigatti KW, Puffenberger EG, Millen KJ, Strauss KA, Dobyns WB, Troy CM, Jinks RN
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.09.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.09.010)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2016 Nov 3;99(5):1117-1129. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.09.010.
Epub 2016 Oct 20.

Mutations in CRADD Result in Reduced Caspase-2-Mediated Neuronal Apoptosis and
Cause Megalencephaly with a Rare Lissencephaly Variant.

Di Donato N(1), Jean YY(2), Maga AM(3), Krewson BD(4), Shupp AB(4), Avrutsky
MI(2), Roy A(5), Collins S(5), Olds C(5), Willert RA(4), Czaja AM(4), Johnson
R(4), Stover JA(4), Gottlieb S(6), Bartholdi D(7), Rauch A(8), Goldstein A(9),
Boyd-Kyle V(4), Aldinger KA(5), Mirzaa GM(10), Nissen A(11), Brigatti KW(12),
Puffenberger EG(12), Millen KJ(5), Strauss KA(13), Dobyns WB(14), Troy CM(15),
Jinks RN(16).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Clinical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine Carl Gustav Carus, TU
Dresden, 01307 Dresden, Germany; Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle
Children's Research Institute, Seattle, WA 98105, USA. Electronic address:
nataliya.didonato@uniklinikum-dresden.de.
(2)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, NY 10032, USA.
(3)Center for Developmental Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Seattle
Children's Research Institute, Seattle, WA 98105, USA; Division of Craniofacial
Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98105,
USA.
(4)Department of Biology, Biological Foundations of Behavior Program, Franklin &
Marshall College, Lancaster, PA 17604, USA.
(5)Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute,
Seattle, WA 98105, USA.
(6)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Nemours Alfred I. DuPont Hospital for
Children, Wilmington, DE 19803, USA.
(7)Department of Human Genetics, Inselspital, 3010 Bern, Switzerland.
(8)Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, 8952 Schlieren,
Switzerland.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC, Pittsburgh, PA 15224, USA.
(10)Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children's Research
Institute, Seattle, WA 98105, USA; Department of Pediatrics, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(11)Medical Genetics Center, 80335 Munich, Germany.
(12)Department of Biology, Biological Foundations of Behavior Program, Franklin
& Marshall College, Lancaster, PA 17604, USA; Clinic for Special Children,
Strasburg, PA 17579, USA.
(13)Department of Biology, Biological Foundations of Behavior Program, Franklin
& Marshall College, Lancaster, PA 17604, USA; Clinic for Special Children,
Strasburg, PA 17579, USA; Lancaster General Hospital, Lancaster, PA 17602, USA.
(14)Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children's Research
Institute, Seattle, WA 98105, USA; Department of Pediatrics, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA; Department of Neurology, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(15)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University Medical
Center, New York, NY 10032, USA; The Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer
Disease and the Aging Brain, Columbia University Medical Center; Department of
Neurology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA.
(16)Department of Biology, Biological Foundations of Behavior Program, Franklin
& Marshall College, Lancaster, PA 17604, USA. Electronic address:
rjinks@fandm.edu.

Lissencephaly is a malformation of cortical development typically caused by
deficient neuronal migration resulting in cortical thickening and reduced
gyration. Here we describe a "thin" lissencephaly (TLIS) variant characterized
by megalencephaly, frontal predominant pachygyria, intellectual disability, and
seizures. Trio-based whole-exome sequencing and targeted re-sequencing
identified recessive mutations of CRADD in six individuals with TLIS from four
unrelated families of diverse ethnic backgrounds. CRADD (also known as RAIDD) is
a death-domain-containing adaptor protein that oligomerizes with PIDD and
caspase-2 to initiate apoptosis. TLIS variants cluster in the CRADD death
domain, a platform for interaction with other death-domain-containing proteins
including PIDD. Although caspase-2 is expressed in the developing mammalian
brain, little is known about its role in cortical development. CRADD/caspase-2
signaling is implicated in neurotrophic factor withdrawal- and amyloid-β-induced
dendritic spine collapse and neuronal apoptosis, suggesting a role in cortical
sculpting and plasticity. TLIS-associated CRADD variants do not disrupt
interactions with caspase-2 or PIDD in co-immunoprecipitation assays, but still
abolish CRADD's ability to activate caspase-2, resulting in reduced neuronal
apoptosis in vitro. Homozygous Cradd knockout mice display megalencephaly and
seizures without obvious defects in cortical lamination, supporting a role for
CRADD/caspase-2 signaling in mammalian brain development. Megalencephaly and
lissencephaly associated with defective programmed cell death from loss of CRADD
function in humans implicate reduced apoptosis as an important
pathophysiological mechanism of cortical malformation. Our data suggest that
CRADD/caspase-2 signaling is critical for normal gyration of the developing
human neocortex and for normal cognitive ability.

Copyright © 2016 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.09.010
PMCID: PMC5097945
PMID: 27773430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Folding of the human cerebral cortex into its complex pattern of gyri and sulci and the precise layering of neurons within the cortex (cortical lamination) depend upon a finely tuned program of neuronal proliferation, migration, connectivity, and pruning.1, 2, 3, 4, 5 Lissencephaly is a cortical malformation characterized by abnormally broad or absent gyri with unusually thick cortex (10–20 mm, normal range 1–4.5 mm6) that is classically caused by deficient neuronal migration.7, 8, 9, 10 From review of phenotypes in more than 1,400 subjects with lissencephaly, we identified a relatively mild variant characterized by anterior-predominant pachygyria with shallow and unusually wide sulci, mildly thick cortex (5–7 mm) in at least the frontal regions, and no non-cortical malformations in 13 families, a pattern we refer to as “thin” lissencephaly (TLIS). Several families had multiple affected siblings, indicative of autosomal-recessive inheritance. Similar phenotypes have been reported a few times, but with no underlying cause identified (MIM: 610279).11, 12, 13, 14 We performed trio-based whole-exome sequencing in two families with TLIS and detected a homozygous mutation of CRADD (GenBank: NM_003805.3; c.382G>C [p.Gly128Arg] [MIM: 603454]) in two siblings from a Mennonite family. Targeted re-sequencing of an additional 18 unrelated individuals with TLIS identified two other homozygous missense mutations in CRADD (c.508C>T [p.Arg170Cys] and c.509G>A [p.Arg170His]) in families of Turkish and Finnish ancestry, respectively, and a fourth missense change (c.491T>G [p.Phe164Cys]) in trans with a 3.07 Mb deletion of chromosome 12q22 that includes CRADD in an affected child of a fourth family.

CRADD encodes caspase-recruitment-domain and death domain (DD)-containing protein (also known as RAIDD, receptor-interacting protein-associated ICH-1/CED-3 homologous protein with a death domain), which is required for activation of caspase-2-mediated apoptosis.15, 16 In general, CRADD serves as an adaptor between PIDD (p53-induced death domain-containing protein 1, PIDD1 [MIM: 605247]) and caspase-2 (CASP2 [MIM: 600639]) during formation of the apoptosis-promoting PIDDosome.15, 16, 17, 18 Phosphorylation of PIDD by signaling associated with cellular or genotoxic stress stimulates binding of the PIDD-DD to the CRADD-DD, which in turn allows the caspase recruitment domain (CARD) of CRADD to bind and activate caspase-2.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 Dendritic spine collapse and neuronal apoptosis induced by neurotrophic factor withdrawal or amyloid-β aggregation can be initiated by CRADD/caspase-2 signaling in the absence of PIDD, suggesting that formation of the PIDDosome may not be required for caspase-2-driven synaptic remodeling and neuronal apoptosis.21, 22

The caspases are intracellular proteases that maintain homeostasis through regulation of inflammation (caspase-1, -4, -5, -12) and apoptosis (caspase-2, -3, -6, -7, -8, -9).4 During mammalian brain development, caspase-3 (CASP3 [MIM: 600636]) is the primary executioner of synaptic and neuronal pruning and is activated by the mitochondrial (intrinsic) apoptotic cascade through APAF1 (apoptotic protease-activating factor 1 [MIM: 602233])/caspase-9 (CASP9 [MIM: 602234]) activation.2, 4, 23, 24 Although caspase-2 is expressed in neurons in the embryonic and adult mammalian brain,25, 26, 27, 28 its role in brain development has been elusive.4

Here we show that the human CRADD variants associated with TLIS abrogate CRADD’s ability to activate caspase-2 and drive neuronal apoptosis. The megalencephaly, lissencephaly variant, and intellectual disability associated with loss of CRADD/caspase-2-mediated apoptosis imply a role for CRADD/caspase-2 signaling in development of the human cerebral cortex.

W.B.D. has ascertained ∼1,400 children with lissencephaly or subcortical band heterotopia over the last 30 years. Clinical information and results of genetic testing were obtained from medical records submitted together with MRI scans by referring physicians or parents of the subjects. Genetic testing included results of chromosome analysis, fluorescence in situ hybridization for deletion 17p13.3 (MIM: 247200), chromosome microarrays, MLPA for LIS1 (PAFAH1B1 [MIM: 601545]) and DCX (MIM: 300121), Sanger sequencing of single genes (LIS1, DCX, ARX [MIM: 300382], TUBA1A [MIM: 602529], TUBB2B [MIM: 612850], RELN [MIM: 600514], VLDLR [MIM: 192977], ACTB [MIM: 102630], and ACTG1 [MIM: 102560]), targeted gene panels, and whole-exome sequencing. We re-reviewed scans of 188 subjects ascertained between 2009 and 2015, when high-resolution scans were available for most individuals. All were reviewed with particular attention to the severity and gradient of the gyral malformation, cortical thickness, and presence of associated brain malformations.

Thin undulating LIS with normal cerebellum (TLIS) was seen in 9 of 188 subjects (5%). We also searched W.B.D.’s large research database for subjects with frontal pachygyria and normal cerebellum and corpus callosum and identified 12 additional individuals with the specific TLIS pattern. Several had large or relatively large occipitofrontal circumference (OFC), which we subdivide into true (OFC > 3 SD above the mean), mild (OFC 2–3 SD above the mean), and relative (OFC more than 2 SD greater than height) megalencephaly.29

Institutional review boards at The University of Chicago and Seattle Children’s Hospital approved this study. Seven members of an additional Mennonite family carrying CRADD c.382G>C and receiving medical care at the Clinic for Special Children (Strasburg, PA) were added to the study (see Results). Their participation was approved by the Institutional Review Board at Lancaster General Hospital. Informed consent signed by the parents or legal guardians was obtained for all participating individuals.

Exome capture and sequencing were done using Agilent SureSelect Human All Exon V5 enrichment and Illumina HiSeq 2500 sequencing (paired-end 2 × 100 nt). The sequencing data were processed using CLC Biomedical Genomics Workbench (QIAGEN) including read alignment to UCSC Genome Browser hg19, variant calling (SNPs and indels), annotation, and filtering against three public databases (ExAC, dbSNP, and 1000 Genomes Project). For each sample, the average coverage through the exome was 80-fold and more than 90% of the exome was covered at least 20-fold. We focused on protein-altering and splice-site variants absent in databases or present with allele frequencies below 0.01. We filtered variants to systematically identify homozygous variants that were heterozygous in both parents, compound-heterozygous variants inherited from one parent, as well as de novo variants.

Using an established MIPGEN pipeline,30 we designed a pool of 673 single-molecule molecular inversion probes (smMIP) targeting the coding regions of 16 known LIS-associated genes—ACTB, ACTG1, ARX, DCX, DYNC1H1 (MIM: 600112), KIF2A (MIM: 602591), KIF5C (MIM: 604593), LIS1, RELN, TUBA1A, TUBA8 (MIM: 605742), TUBB (MIM: 191130), TUBB2B (MIM: 612850), TUBB3 (MIM: 602661), TUBG1 (MIM: 191135), and VLDLR—and our candidate gene, CRADD. In total, smMIPs were tiled across 47,975 bp of coding sequence. Capture reactions (100 ng) were performed in parallel using previously published protocols.30, 31 Massively parallel sequencing was done on the Illumina HiSeq and MiSeq platforms. The average collapsed coverage (number of single-molecule consensus sequences or “smc-reads”)31 across all samples was 21.

Cradd−/− mice on a C57BL/6 background were obtained from the Jackson Laboratories with permission from Prof. Tak Mak (University of Toronto).17 Wild-type (WT) C57BL/6 mice were also obtained from the Jackson Laboratories and all mice were maintained under pathogen-free conditions. All animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees (IACUC) of Franklin & Marshall College and Columbia University Medical Center.

Transcardial perfusion fixation was used to prepare mouse heads/brains (as described elsewhere32) for micro-CT and histological analyses. In brief, mice were anesthetized by intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection of ketamine/xylazine mixture (up to 80 mg/kg body weight ketamine and 10 mg/kg body weight xylazine). When a surgical plane of anesthesia was achieved, the heart was exposed, a 23G cannula inserted into the ascending aorta via the left ventricle, and a perfusate exit hole placed in the right atrium. The circulation was slowly flushed with 20–30 mL of phosphate buffered saline (PBS; pH 7.4) followed by perfusion of 30–40 mL of 0.22 μm sterile-filtered, freshly prepared 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS. Upon complete blanching of the liver and mesentery, mice were decapitated and intact skulls and brains were postfixed overnight in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS at 4°C.

Dissected brains were infiltrated with 30% sucrose in PBS, embedded in optimum cutting temperature (OCT) compound, and sectioned at 20 μm on a cryostat. Every 10th section was placed on a slide and stained in 0.1% cresyl violet solution for 10 min, rinsed quickly in PBS, dehydrated in 95% ethanol, and left in xylene before being coverslipped with Permount (Fisher Scientific). Brightfield images were taken using a Leica MZFLIII microscope with a Leica DFC425 camera and LAS V3.8 software.

A total of 17 skulls were imaged at the Small Animal Tomographic Analysis Lab at Seattle Children’s Research Institute using a Skyscan 1076C microtomograph (Bruker) with settings optimized for mouse skulls (voltage, 55 kV; current, 180 μA; 0.5 mm Al filter; 100 ms exposure; 0.6° rotation steps; three frames averaged per rotation; 360° degree full rotation). Scan duration was approximately 10 min per sample. 600 shadow images were acquired per specimen, which were reconstructed as image stacks at 34.42-micron resolution using the manufacturer’s proprietary software. All reconstructed image stacks were brought into standardized anatomical orientation using Dataviewer (Bruker) and converted to NIfTI volumetric format to be loaded into 3D Slicer to visualize the skull morphology. Skull measurements were also taken using 3D Slicer.33 Soft tissue, such as brain, cannot be effectively imaged via micro-CT. Instead, we chose to look at the endocranial volume, which is tightly correlated with brain size. Although segmenting the endocranial space using automated watershed algorithms from the skull is straightforward, it requires all cranial openings to be sealed digitally, so that segmentation does not leak into other regions. To reduce the amount of manual segmentation and avoid rater bias on measurements, we chose to construct an unbiased atlas of our study population, segment the endocranial space, and warp it back to the constituent samples using deformable registration. We used the open-source DRAMMS deformable registration software and atlas-building pipeline in this study.34, 35 The DRAMMS registration software consists of two major components: attribute matching and mutual-saliency weighting. Attribute matching characterizes each voxel by a high dimensional vector of multi-scale and multi-orientation Gabor attributes. This method provides more information than the intensity information traditionally used (see Developmental Brain ADC Atlas in Web Resources).34, 35, 36, 37 Because the reliability and accessibly of correspondence varies across anatomical structures, mutual-saliency upweights regions of the volume where correspondence can be reliably established between the source and target images. The preferred use of reliable correspondence reduces the negative impact of outlier regions on the registration quality (see Developmental Brain ADC Atlas in Web Resources).34, 35, 36, 37 Atlas construction was performed using the DRAMMS deformable registration in a classic unbiased population registration framework.37 The atlas construction framework iteratively finds a virtual space that resides in the centroid of the study population (centroid meaning that the deformations needed to transform all subjects into this virtual space sum up to zero everywhere in this virtual space). Therefore, the constructed atlas is unbiased to any subject in the population and is hence representative of the mean anatomy/geometry of the population (see Developmental Brain ADC Atlas in Web Resources).37 The constructed atlas was segmented using the editor module of 3D Slicer. This reference segmentation was then mapped onto the individual samples by inversing their transformation into the atlas (Figure S7). Individual volumes of endocranial space were calculated after this transformation and are reported in Table S2.

Full-length human CRADD coding cDNA (GenBank: NM_003805.3) and the coding sequence for the PIDD death domain (PIDD-DD) (PIDD1 [GenBank: NM_145886.3]) were amplified by PCR from cDNA reverse transcribed from human ARPE-19 cell mRNA using Moloney Murine Leukemia Virus (M-MuLV) reverse transcriptase (NEB). PCR products were ligated into pENTR/D-TOPO (ThermoFisher), and CRADD TLIS mutations (c.382G>C, c.491T>G, c.508C>T, c.509G>A) were introduced with site-directed mutagenesis (QuikChange II, Agilent Technologies). LR recombination (LR Clonase II, ThermoFisher) was used to generate FLAG (pCAGIG/RFC-A/N-FLAG) or V5 (pcDNA3.1/N-V5) mammalian expression plasmids from pENTR clones. All clones were verified with Sanger sequencing.

CRADD cDNAs—WT and CRADD TLIS variants described above—were subcloned into the Novagen pET15b expression system in-frame with an N/C-terminal polyhistidine sequence downstream of the T7 promoter and expressed in BL21 cells that express the T7 RNA polymerase under an IPTG-inducible promoter. The expressed proteins were purified on a Ni2+ resin as previously described.38 Penetratin 1 (Pen1) was mixed at a 2:1 molar ratio with purified CRADD and incubated 2 hr at 37°C to generate disulfide-linked Pen1-CRADD. Linkage was assessed by 20% SDS-PAGE and by western blotting with anti-His antibody and anti-CRADD antibody as previously described.39 To ensure uniform protein transduction across cultures, Pen1-CRADD was used at the same concentration (27 nM). PC12 cells and mouse sympathetic neurons take up Pen1 proteins with near 100% efficiency. This approach is more efficient, less cytotoxic, and easier to titrate than transient transfection of cDNA constructs.40, 41

ARPE-19, HEK293T, and Neuro2a cells used in this study were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). ARPE-19 cells were cultured in DMEM:F12 with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), and HEK293T and Neuro2a were cultured in DMEM with 10% FBS. Cells were transfected with FuGENE 6 (Roche) at a 3:1 FuGENE6:DNA ratio according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Primary cultures of dermal fibroblasts from skin biopsies from CRADD TLIS-affected individuals (homozygous c.382G>C [p.Gly128Arg]) and their heterozygous parents were established by the Coriell Institute, and normal human dermal fibroblasts were acquired from Coriell. Fibroblasts were cultured at low passage (≤10) in DMEM with 10% FBS. Unless otherwise noted, all cells were maintained at 37°C and 5% CO2. To assess CRADD abundance in subject fibroblasts, cells were lysed in RIPA buffer (50 mM NaCl, 1.0% IGEPAL CA-630, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 50 mM Tris [pH 8.0] [Sigma]) containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), phosphatase inhibitor (PhosSTOP, Roche), and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) for 15 min at 4°C. Total protein concentration was normalized across affected subject, heterozygous parents, and normal fibroblast samples using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad), and equal protein loading for immunoblotting was confirmed with mouse monoclonal anti-β-actin labeling (Sigma, 1:1,000,000). CRADD abundance was assessed with rabbit monoclonal anti-human RAIDD antibodies (Abcam cat# ab52621 and ab76465, RRID: AB_882269 and AB_1524296; 1:1,000). Goat anti-mouse IgG-HRP (Cell Signaling, 1:1,500) and goat anti-rabbit IgG-HRP (Cell Signaling, 1:1,500) were used as secondary antibodies. Blots were imaged with enhanced chemiluminescence using SignalFire Plus (Cell Signaling).

PC12 cells obtained from the ATCC were grown as described previously21 at 7.5% CO2 on rat-tail collagen-coated dishes in RPMI 1640 medium (Life Sciences) containing 1% penicillin/streptomycin (P/S), 5% fetal calf serum (FCS), and 10% heat-inactivated horse serum (HS, complete medium). PC12 cell survival was scored as reported previously.42 Culture medium was removed by aspiration and 100 μL of detergent-containing lysis solution was added to the well. This solution dissolves cell membranes, providing a suspension of intact nuclei that were quantified using a hemocytometer. Triplicate wells were scored and values reported as mean ± SEM. Significance was calculated by Student’s t test.

Neurons were cultured as described previously.22, 43 In brief, sympathetic neurons were dissected from 1-day-old WT and CRADD-null17 (Cradd−/−) mouse pups. Cultures were maintained in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% horse serum and mouse nerve growth factor (NGF; 100 ng/ml) on collagen-coated 24-well dishes. At 1 day after plating, uridine (10 μM) and 5-fluorodeoxyuridine (10 μM) were added for 3 days to eliminate non-neuronal cells. Experiments were conducted after 6 days of culture. Viability was determined as previously reported.22 Each culture was scored as numbers of living phase-bright neurons counted in the same field at various times. Three replicate cultures were assessed for each condition; data were normalized to the number of neurons present in each culture at the time of Pen1-CRADD treatment and are reported as means ± SEM.

Cells cultured on uncoated German glass coverslips transfected with pCAG/FLAG-CRADD WT or CRADD-TLIS variant cDNAs were rinsed with PBS at 37°C and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde at 21°C for 15 min. Cells were then prepared for immunofluorescence microscopy and documented as described previously.44 The primary and secondary antibodies used were anti-FLAG M2 (Sigma, 1:1,000) and Alexa Fluor 488-goat anti-mouse IgG1 (ThermoFisher, 1:400), respectively. Nuclei were stained with 1 μg/mL DAPI (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), and coverslips were mounted with Fluoromount-G (Electron Microscopy Sciences).

Co-immunoprecipitation was performed as described previously.44, 45 In brief, pCAG/FLAG-CRADD WT and CRADD-TLIS variant cDNAs or empty vector were co-transfected with pcDNA3.1/V5-PIDD1-DD cDNA in Neuro2a and HEK293T cells for 40–48 hr, after which whole-cell lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 15 min and incubated with anti-FLAG M2 affinity resin (Sigma) for 2 hr with end-over-end mixing at 4°C. Resin beads were pelleted and washed 3× in Tris-buffered saline (pH 7.2) with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), phosphatase inhibitor (PhosSTOP, Roche), 1 mM PMSF, and 0.5%–1% Tween-20, before elution with 150 ng/μL 3x-FLAG peptide (Sigma). Input lysates and eluates were denatured in sample buffer at 100°C for 10 min and then immunoblotted with anti-FLAG (Sigma, 1:1,000) and anti-V5 (ThermoFisher, 1:5,000) antibodies.

Mouse IgG or rabbit IgG magnetic beads (Invitrogen) were precoated with affinity-purified anti-caspase-2 antibody42 for 2 hr at 4°C on a rotator. In total, 10 μL of anti-caspase-2 antibody was used per 30 μL of beads. PC12 cells were transduced with Pen1-CRADD for 5 hr. Cell lysates were prepared using CHAPS lysis buffer (150 mM KCl, 50 mM HEPES, 0.1% CHAPS, and protease inhibitor cocktail [pH 7.4]).22 Lysates (70–120 μg) were loaded onto anti-caspase-2 antibody pre-coated beads and incubated overnight at 4°C on a rotator. After overnight incubation, the captured proteins were boiled off the beads at 100°C for 5 min. The immunoprecipitated samples, along with inputs, were then subjected to western blot analysis using an anti-CRADD antibody (Abnova), an anti-caspase-2 antibody (Alexis), or an anti-ERK antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Proteins were detected using the Odyssey Infrared Imaging System (LI-COR Biosciences).

We adapted an unbiased caspase-2 activity measurement from Jean et al.43 bVAD-fmk (biotin-Val-Ala-DL-Asp-fluoromethylketone; 50 μM, MP Biomedicals), a biotinylated pan-caspase inhibitor that traps active caspases, was added to PC12 cultures 1 hr prior to treatment with Pen1-CRADD. Cells were lysed in CHAPS buffer. Active caspase-bVAD-fmk complexes were pulled out with streptavidin-coated beads (Invitrogen). Active caspase-2 was detected by western blotting using affinity-purified polyclonal anti-caspase-2 antibody.42

Review of brain neuroimaging from more than 1,400 subjects with lissencephaly revealed a relatively mild lissencephaly variant characterized by megalencephaly, anterior-predominant pachygyria with shallow and unusually wide sulci, mildly thick cortex (5–7 mm) especially in the frontal regions (TLIS), and no non-cortical malformations in 13 families (Figures 1, S1, and S2). Pedigree analysis suggested autosomal-recessive inheritance. Trio-based whole-exome sequencing (WES) in two families with TLIS detected a homozygous mutation of CRADD (GenBank: NM_003805.3; c.382G>C [p.Gly128Arg]) in two siblings from a Mennonite family that segregated in the parents.

To identify additional mutations, we performed Sanger sequencing of the two coding exons of CRADD in another 18 subjects with TLIS and detected homozygous missense mutations in two affected siblings born to consanguineous Turkish parents (c.508C>T [p.Arg170Cys]) and a proband with Finnish ancestry (c.509G>A [p.Arg170His]), as well as a single variant (c.491T>G [p.Phe164Cys]) in an American boy of Western European background (Table 1). Notably, we previously detected a 3.07 Mb deletion of chromosome 12q22 (chr12: 92,443,579–95,515,465; hg38) in this boy that includes the remaining CRADD allele.46 Targeted panel sequencing in another 148 LIS-affected subjects for whom molecular genetic testing did not detect mutations in any of the known LIS-associated genes did not reveal additional CRADD mutations.

The four CRADD mutations identified in six individuals from four unrelated families with different ethnic backgrounds are all rare variants (ExAC allele frequency < 0.0005) with high pathogenicity scores (Table 1) that alter highly conserved residues within the CRADD death domain (Figure 2A). The first CRADD mutation (c.382G>C [p.Gly128Arg]) that we identified was previously reported in another large family with multiple members presenting with mild to moderate ID;44 both families belong to the Mennonite (Plain) population of Pennsylvania. The prior family was added to the study, and brain MRI performed in three of seven affected individuals revealed TLIS with normal cerebellum, in line with the MRI features in all other CRADD-TLIS-affected subjects.

Brain imaging and additional clinical data for all affected individuals are shown in Figures 1 and S2 and summarized in Table S1 and Figure S1. Case reports are provided in the Supplemental Data. Of 13 CRADD-TLIS-affected subjects, 9 (69%) had mild intellectual disability (ID), while three had mild to moderate ID and one had borderline ID (IQ = 70–75). Seizures (3 of 13) and additional abnormalities such as hydrocephalus due to Chiari malformation (MIM: 118420) were associated with lower cognitive function. None of the CRADD-TLIS-affected subjects had congenital anomalies other than TLIS, and all were in good general health. Clinical course of the TLIS-affected subjects without CRADD mutations was similar to the CRADD-associated group. However, all TLIS-affected individuals without CRADD mutations had either normal or small head size. In summary, individuals with recessive CRADD mutations (n = 13) presented with TLIS, mild to moderate ID, epilepsy (3 of 13), and either enlarged head size with occipitofrontal circumference (OFC) 2–3 SD (mild megalencephaly in 9 of 13) or true megalencephaly with OFC > 3 SD (2 of 13). One individual had relative megalencephaly, and 1 of the 13 TLIS-affected individuals studied did not have megalencephaly (Table S1).

In response to intrinsic death signals (e.g., genotoxic stress or neurotrophic factor withdrawal), the C-terminal CRADD-DD interacts with the PIDD-DD to form the PIDDosome enabling the N-terminal CRADD CARD domain to interact with and activate caspase-2.17, 18 TLIS-associated CRADD variants (p.Gly128Arg, p.Phe164Cys, p.Arg170Cys, and p.Arg170His) cluster in the DD (Figure 2A), suggesting that they may disrupt interaction with the PIDD-DD.

To determine the functional impact of the TLIS-CRADD death domain mutations, we first investigated binding of the CRADD variants to PIDD and caspase-2 and then assessed their ability to induce apoptosis by activating caspase-2. Ultimately, these experiments showed that TLIS-CRADD variants fail to drive caspase-2-initiated apoptosis without significant loss of binding to either PIDD or caspase-2.

In human cells, exogenously expressed p.Gly128Arg CRADD is present at very low abundance, indicating decreased protein stability relative to wild-type (WT) CRADD (Figure 2B). Additionally, it forms abnormal cytosolic clusters (Figure S3) and fails to interact with PIDD in vitro18, 44 (Figure 2D). Dermal fibroblasts from p.Gly128Arg CRADD TLIS-affected subjects are essentially null for CRADD abundance (Figure 2C) relative to heterozygous parent and normal human dermal fibroblasts. Fibroblasts were not available from other CRADD TLIS-affected individuals. However, recombinant p.Phe164Cys, p.Arg170Cys, and p.Arg170His CRADD overexpressed in human cells (ARPE-19, HEK293T) and mouse neuroblasts (Neuro2a) displayed protein abundance and cellular localization comparable to that observed for WT CRADD (Figures 2B and S3), suggesting that the reduced protein abundance observed for p.Gly128Arg CRADD is not a primary pathogenic mechanism in TLIS.

Because the TLIS-CRADD mutations cluster in the DD (Figure 2A) where CRADD and PIDD interact,18 we investigated whether the CRADD variants disrupted interaction with PIDD (PIDD-DD) as we observed for p.Gly128Arg CRADD.44 Immunoprecipitation of recombinant FLAG-CRADD overexpressed in Neuro2a (data not shown) and HEK293T cells co-precipitated V5-PIDD-DD for each of the CRADD-TLIS variants except p.Gly128Arg (Figure 2D). These data suggest a pathophysiological mechanism other than disrupted PIDD interaction, consistent with our protein structural modeling (see Figure S4 and Discussion) and with the earlier finding that neuronal caspase-2 activation requires CRADD expression but can occur independent of PIDD expression.22

Upon activation, the N-terminal caspase-recruitment domain (CARD) of CRADD (Figure 2A) binds with caspase-2 to induce caspase-2 activity.15, 16 To determine whether CRADD-TLIS variants can activate caspase-2, we first determined whether they could bind to caspase-2. To efficiently deliver CRADD-TLIS variant proteins into cells without the cytotoxic side effects of transient transfection, CRADD-TLIS protein variants were directly linked to Penetratin-1 (Pen1) by a disulfide bond. Pen1 facilitates high-efficiency cellular uptake of linked proteins, and the reducing environment of the cytosol then cleaves the disulfide linkage releasing the transported protein.40, 41 PC12 cells were transduced with Pen1-linked constructs of each of the CRADD-TLIS variants and caspase-2 was immunoprecipitated from whole-cell lysates 5 hr after transduction. Immunoprecipitated caspase-2 pulled down each of the CRADD-TLIS variants, suggesting that all of the CRADD-TLIS variants can interact with caspase-2 when the blots are normalized for CRADD abundance (Figures 2E and 2F).

One parsimonious explanation for TLIS could be that loss of CRADD function results in reduction of caspase-2-mediated apoptosis, resulting in megalencephaly and TLIS from failure to prune inappropriate neurons and/or neuropil. Overexpression of WT CRADD in PC12 and other mammalian cells (e.g., HEK293) is sufficient to activate caspase-2 and promote apoptosis.15, 47 To examine whether CRADD-TLIS variants fail to induce apoptosis, PC12 cells were transduced with Pen1-linked human WT and CRADD-TLIS variants and cell survival was measured 1 day after treatment. Only WT CRADD import induced apoptosis in PC12 cells. Transduction of PC12 cells with Pen1-linked CRADD-TLIS variants (p.Gly128Arg, p.Phe164Cys, p.Arg170Cys, and p.Arg170His) failed to induce cell death (Figure 3A). To confirm this finding in neurons lacking endogenous CRADD, primary sympathetic neurons from Cradd knockout (Cradd−/−) mice were transduced with Pen1-linked human WT and p.Gly128Arg CRADD. CRADD WT resulted in significant cell death of primary sympathetic neurons from Cradd−/− mice 1 day after transduction, whereas cell survival after transduction of p.Gly128Arg CRADD was indistinguishable from that of non-transduced cells (Figure 3B).

All CRADD-TLIS variants bind to caspase-2 but only WT CRADD induces cell death, so we next determined whether CRADD-TLIS variants can induce caspase-2 activation. To measure caspase-2 activity, we used the caspase-affinity ligand biotin-Val-Ala-DL-Asp-fluoromethylketone (bVAD-fmk), a pan-caspase substrate/inhibitor that binds to the first active caspase, and which we previously showed is effective in measuring caspase-2 activity in PC12 cells.42, 43 PC12 cells were treated with bVAD-fmk for 1 hr prior to transduction with Pen1-CRADD WT and TLIS variants. Two hours after transduction, cells were harvested for streptavidin pulldown of bVAD-fmk:caspase complexes followed by western blotting for caspase-2 (Figure 3C). We found that only WT CRADD induces caspase-2 activity; the CRADD-TLIS variants do not. This suggests that although the CRADD-TLIS variants can bind caspase-2, they are unable to activate caspase-2 and induce apoptosis. In sum, in vitro experiments demonstrated functional defects in caspase-2 activation despite no consistent defects in protein interactions with PIDD or caspase-2.

To determine whether loss of CRADD function results in a TLIS-like phenotype in mice, we analyzed cortical morphology and head size in Cradd−/− mice. The Cradd−/− mice used were previously reported to have normal development, although brain morphology and head size were not studied.17 Volumetric micro-CT skull analysis of Cradd−/− mice relative to heterozygous (Cradd+/−) and WT controls demonstrated that all mutant mice had a statistically significant increase in endocast volume that corresponds to increased brain volume (Figure 4). Morphological analysis of Cradd−/− cortex revealed normal layering indistinguishable from WT mice (Figure S5). Notably, 8 of 31 (26%) Cradd−/− mice displayed handling-induced seizures; no WT or Cradd+/− littermates (0 of 60) had seizures.

Megalencephaly with normal cortical morphology in Cradd−/− mice coupled with loss of function in driving apoptosis through caspase-2 activation in the CRADD-TLIS variants in vitro suggest that the cortical malformation in CRADD-TLIS more likely results from reduced caspase-2-mediated apoptosis during cortical development than a neuronal migration disorder.

Here, we describe a mild “thin” lissencephaly (TLIS) resulting from loss of CRADD function and reduced caspase-2-initiated neuronal apoptosis. Recent reviews have postulated that decreased apoptosis could underlie some human brain overgrowth disorders (e.g., megalencephaly).48 However, to date no human cortical malformations associated with decreased apoptosis have been reported. The potential impact of reduced apoptosis during mammalian brain development was previously demonstrated by brain malformations in caspase-3-,49 caspase-9-,50, 51 and Apaf1-52 deficient mouse embryos and by increased forebrain size in EphA7−/− mice53 resulting from decreased apoptosis of cortical progenitor cells. In contrast to the pachygyria and mildly thick cortex associated with TLIS in humans, caspase-3 (Casp3), caspase-9 (Casp9), and Apaf1 (Apaf1) knockout mice displayed neural tube closure defects, forebrain protrusions of ectopic masses of cortical tissue that deformed the anterior skull, and widespread increased cell density from decreased apoptosis of progenitor cells throughout the brain including the cortex, cerebellum, and brainstem. Overgrowth of progenitors in these mice is thought to result largely from loss of apoptosis of morphogen-producing cells early in development (e.g., FGF8), altering the spatiotemporal morphogen gradients that regulate progenitor expansion and ensure proper forebrain development.54 During zebrafish development, excessive activation of CRADD/caspase-2 signaling through persistent phosphomimetic activation of Pidd (pidd1) resulted in a severe microcephaly phenotype.19

The recent published structure of the PIDDosome in solution suggests that the PIDDosome core is composed of a CRADD-DD:PIDD-DD stoichiometry of 5:5 with 1–2 additional loosely associated CRADD-DDs.55 The solution structure suggests that the amino acids altered by TLIS CRADD mutations do not participate in intra- or inter-molecular interactions that are critical to the core structure of the PIDDosome, and as such should not alter caspase-2 activation through disrupted CRADD-DD:PIDD-DD interaction. To explore this further, we generated three protein models including the CRADD-TLIS substitutions using SWISS-MODEL, IRECS, and PyMOL (Figure S4). Based on our models and the published data, CRADD Arg170 forms a hydrogen bond with Glu188 on another CRADD-DD, while the adjacent amino acid Ala169 interacts either with Val189 on another CRADD-DD or Arg862 and Arg864 on a PIDD-DD (Figure S4). The substitution of CRADD Arg170 to Cys or His should inhibit hydrogen bond formation with Glu188. However, others recently determined that the 5:5 CRADD-DD:PIDD-DD PIDDosome core is not disrupted by substitution of CRADD Glu188 with Lys and that Glu188 is solvent accessible in the core PIDDosome molecule in solution. This suggests that Arg170 interaction with Glu188 is not fundamentally important to formation of the PIDDosome.55 Our models also predicted that Gly128 and Phe164 do not participate in an interaction interface and should therefore have no direct contact with any residues of the PIDD-DD (Figure S4).

Our co-immunoprecipitation data showing that all FLAG-CRADD TLIS variants except for p.Gly128Arg CRADD co-precipitate V5-PIDD-DD at abundances similar to FLAG-CRADD WT support the modeling data which suggest that TLIS-associated pathophysiology does not result from impaired CRADD-DD:PIDD-DD interactions. Previous in vitro mutational analysis suggested that p.Arg170Ala-substituted CRADD exhibited a dominant-negative effect interfering with formation of the PIDDosome core by disrupting the interaction between CRADD and PIDD death domains.56 However, p.Arg170His and p.Arg170Cys CRADD co-precipitated PIDD-DD at abundances comparable to those co-precipitated by wild-type CRADD in our experiments (Figure 2D). Further, adult CRADD p.Arg170His and p.Arg170Cys heterozygotes had no symptoms suggestive of impaired CRADD function, including no unusual sensitivity to genotoxic stress. This suggests that the recent resolution of the structure of the PIDDosome in solution55 provides a more physiologically relevant model consistent with our data.

The lack of significant phenotypic differences between TLIS-affected individuals homozygous for p.Gly128Arg CRADD that disrupts interaction with the PIDD-DD versus TLIS-affected individuals with CRADD variants that do not disrupt PIDD-DD binding suggests that activation of caspase-2 may be the only function of the PIDDosome during brain development. Alternatively, formation of the PIDDosome may not be required for neuronal apoptosis during brain development. Amyloid-β-induced, CRADD/caspase-2-initiated neuronal apoptosis persists in rat hippocampal neurons depleted of PIDD and NGF withdrawal induces CRADD/caspase-2 driven death of PIDD-null (Pidd1−/−) mouse sympathetic neurons.22

Complete loss of CRADD expression during brain development in Cradd−/− mice resulted in megalencephaly (Figure 4) and seizures without obvious changes in cortical thickness or lamination (Figure S5). This is in distinct contrast to the severe malformations of brain development described above for caspase-3-, caspase-9-, and Apaf1-null mice.

Previous work demonstrated that Casp2−/− mice have significantly reduced body weight and bone volume.57 We also observed reduced body weight in Cradd−/− mice. Further study showed significantly decreased limb size, indicating that the low weight correlated with small body size (Table S2, Figure S6). The decreased body weight and bone volume in Casp2−/− and Cradd−/− mice correlates with our functional results, which demonstrate loss of caspase-2 activation in the absence of active CRADD. The head size of Casp2−/− mice has not yet been assessed.

CRADD activation of caspase-2 in neurons is required for neurotrophic factor withdrawal-induced apoptosis and for dendritic spine collapse and neuronal apoptosis in response to amyloid-β aggregation,22, 58 suggesting a role for CRADD/caspase-2 signaling in synaptic plasticity and cortical architecture during mammalian brain development. The relative lack of a significant CNS phenotype in early studies of Casp2−/− mice and the mild megalencephaly described in this study for Cradd−/− mice, in contrast to the lissencephaly variant and ID observed in CRADD-TLIS-affected subjects, suggests that caspase-2 activity may be less important in development of the mouse brain than it is in the human brain.

Caspase-dependent apoptosis is characterized by ordered disruption of the cell without induction of inflammation.59 Caspase activation can be triggered by extracellular signals (extrinsic pathway regulated by multiple death receptors) or intrinsic stress signals such as DNA damage (intrinsic or mitochondrial pathway).60 Caspase-dependent apoptosis is involved in several different human diseases including neurodegenerative, cardiovascular, and autoimmune disorders and cancer (reviewed by Favaloro et al.59). Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome is a Mendelian disorder caused by impaired caspase-mediated apoptosis (MIM: 601859, 603909, and 607271)61 associated with mutations in FAS,62
FASLG,63
CASP10,64 and CASP865 (MIM: 134637, 134638, 601762, and 601763, respectively). Individuals with this syndrome develop chronic lymphoproliferation with lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, autoimmunity, and increased rates of malignancy61 but have normal development and intellectual function.

Our data suggest that CRADD/caspase-2 signaling is required for normal development of the human neocortex and normal cognitive function and that decreased caspase-2-mediated apoptosis during human development can result in cortical malformation. Further investigation is required to delineate the role of CRADD/caspase-2 signaling in homeostatic regulation of cortical development. It is not clear whether the megalencephaly, undulating pachygyria, increased cortical thickness, and intellectual disability characteristic of CRADD-TLIS result from reduced pruning of synaptic connections, decreased programmed cell death of inappropriate neurons, or a combination of the two.
