---
reference_id: "PMID:24313775"
title: Biomarkers that predict and guide therapy for exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
authors:
- Brightling CE
journal: Ann Am Thorac Soc
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201302-023AW
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biomarkers that predict and guide therapy for exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
**Authors:** Brightling CE
**Journal:** Ann Am Thorac Soc (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1513/AnnalsATS.201302-023AW](https://doi.org/10.1513/AnnalsATS.201302-023AW)

## Content

1. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2013 Dec;10 Suppl:S214-9. doi: 
10.1513/AnnalsATS.201302-023AW.

Biomarkers that predict and guide therapy for exacerbations of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Brightling CE(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Lung Health, Department of Infection, Immunity and 
Inflammation, The University of Leicester, United Kingdom.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a heterogeneous disease. COPD 
exacerbations have a major impact on morbidity and mortality. The etiology of 
COPD exacerbations is largely due to viral and bacterial infections in 
combination with underlying inflammation that is typically neutrophilic, 
although it is eosinophilic in 10 to 25% of cases. We review the recent studies 
that have defined novel biological clusters at exacerbation events and 
consequently identified important biomarkers to direct therapy. These biomarkers 
include C-reactive protein, procalcitonin, and peripheral blood eosinophil 
count, which are readily available. We are therefore at a point of making 
personalized antibiotic and corticosteroid therapy in COPD exacerbations a 
reality. Integration of the wealth of emerging data to further define the 
complexity of exacerbations also promises to identify new targets and biomarkers 
to treat COPD exacerbations.

DOI: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201302-023AW
PMID: 24313775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]