---
reference_id: "PMID:15177059"
title: "Occupational and environmental risk factors for Parkinson's disease."
authors:
- Lai BC
- Marion SA
- Teschke K
- Tsui JK
journal: Parkinsonism Relat Disord
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/s1353-8020(01)00054-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Occupational and environmental risk factors for Parkinson's disease.
**Authors:** Lai BC, Marion SA, Teschke K, Tsui JK
**Journal:** Parkinsonism Relat Disord (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1353-8020(01)00054-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1353-8020(01)00054-2)

## Content

1. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2002 Jun;8(5):297-309. doi: 
10.1016/s1353-8020(01)00054-2.

Occupational and environmental risk factors for Parkinson's disease.

Lai BC(1), Marion SA, Teschke K, Tsui JK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Neurology, Neurodegenerative Disorders 
Centre, The University of British Columbia, Purdy Pavilion, 2221 Wesbrook Mall, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T 2B5.

The etiology of Parkinson's disease (PD) remains obscure. Current research 
suggests that a variety of occupational and environmental risk factors may be 
linked to PD. This paper provides an overview of major occupational and 
environmental factors that have been associated with the development of PD and 
tries to assess current thinking about these factors and their possible 
mechanisms of operation. While clear links to rural living, dietary factors, 
exposure to metals, head injury, and exposure to infectious diseases during 
childhood have not been established, there is general agreement that smoking and 
exposure to pesticides affect the probability of developing PD.

DOI: 10.1016/s1353-8020(01)00054-2
PMID: 15177059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]