---
reference_id: "PMID:25897040"
title: Myocardial fibrosis progression on cardiac magnetic resonance in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Choi HM
- Kim KH
- Lee JM
- Yoon YE
- Lee SP
- Park EA
- Lee W
- Kim YJ
- Cho GY
- Sohn DW
- Kim HK
journal: Heart
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2014-306555
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myocardial fibrosis progression on cardiac magnetic resonance in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Choi HM, Kim KH, Lee JM, Yoon YE, Lee SP, Park EA, Lee W, Kim YJ, Cho GY, Sohn DW, Kim HK
**Journal:** Heart (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1136/heartjnl-2014-306555](https://doi.org/10.1136/heartjnl-2014-306555)

## Content

1. Heart. 2015 Jun;101(11):870-6. doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2014-306555. Epub 2015
Apr  20.

Myocardial fibrosis progression on cardiac magnetic resonance in hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy.

Choi HM(1), Kim KH(2), Lee JM(1), Yoon YE(1), Lee SP(1), Park EA(3), Lee W(3), 
Kim YJ(1), Cho GY(1), Sohn DW(1), Kim HK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Cardiovascular Center, Seoul National 
University College of Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Sejong General 
Hospital.
(3)Department of Radiology, Cardiovascular Section, Seoul National University 
College of Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.

Comment in
    Heart. 2015 Oct;101(19):1602. doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2015-308276.

OBJECTIVE: We hypothesised that, in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), late 
gadolinium enhancement (LGE) on cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) is progressive 
and can be predicted by baseline CMR findings and HCM phenotype.
METHODS: In this single-centre cohort study, 71 patients with HCM (59±13 years; 
48 men) were prospectively enrolled with clinical, echocardiographic and CMR 
data. Two consecutive CMR scans were performed with a time interval of 
582±174 days. The LGE extent was quantified as a proportion of total LV 
myocardium (%LGE).
RESULTS: LGE was present in 65 patients (91.5%) at the first CMR (CMR-1). In 
all, LGE extent was significantly increased (p<0.001). A difference in %LGE 
between the two CMR scans was correlated with the initial %LGE (r=0.44, 
p<0.001). LGE progression, defined as >4% increase in LGE at the second CMR, was 
present in 19 patients with non-apical HCM (36.5%), but in only one apical HCM 
(5.3%). Also, LGE progression rate was significantly higher in non-apical 
(0.15%/month) versus apical HCM (0.025%/month) (p=0.001). On the multivariate 
model #1 including only clinical variables (age, history of paroxysmal atrial 
fibrillation, LV outflow tract obstruction on echocardiography, beta-blocker 
use, family history of sudden death, family history of HCM, syncope, 
non-sustained ventricular tachycardia, rate pressure product, and HCM 
phenotype), only apical HCM phenotype was associated with less LGE progression 
(p=0.038). On the multivariate model #2 including CMR variables additional to 
the model #1, %LGE at CMR-1 was the only determinant for LGE progression 
(p=0.007). When the analysis was limited to patients with preserved EF, results 
remained unchanged.
CONCLUSIONS: Myocardial fibrosis in HCM is a progressive phenomenon. Non-apical 
phenotype and a higher LGE extent at CMR-1 are both associated with greater LGE 
progression.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/heartjnl-2014-306555
PMID: 25897040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]