---
reference_id: "PMID:8159622"
title: Coombs-positive autoimmune hemolytic anemia and postinfantile giant cell hepatitis in children.
authors:
- Perez-Atayde AR
- Sirlin SM
- Jonas M
journal: Pediatr Pathol
year: '1994'
doi: 10.3109/15513819409022027
keywords:
- "Anemia, Hemolytic, Autoimmune/complications"
- Coombs Test
- Fatal Outcome
- Female
- Giant Cells
- "Hepatitis/complications, pathology, therapy"
- Humans
- Infant
- Liver Cirrhosis/complications
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Coombs-positive autoimmune hemolytic anemia and postinfantile giant cell hepatitis in children.
**Authors:** Perez-Atayde AR, Sirlin SM, Jonas M
**Journal:** Pediatr Pathol (1994)
**DOI:** [10.3109/15513819409022027](https://doi.org/10.3109/15513819409022027)

## Content

1. Pediatr Pathol. 1994 Jan-Feb;14(1):69-77. doi: 10.3109/15513819409022027.

Coombs-positive autoimmune hemolytic anemia and postinfantile giant cell 
hepatitis in children.

Perez-Atayde AR(1), Sirlin SM, Jonas M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115.

We report a 23-month-old girl and a 9-month-old boy who presented with 
autoimmune hemolytic anemia followed by recurrent episodes of severe hepatitis. 
The first episode of hepatitis occurred 1 week and 15 months after presentation, 
respectively. Histologically, the livers showed loss of lobular architecture 
with diffuse giant cell transformation of hepatocytes and portal and 
pericellular fibrosis. The first patient died at 4 1/2 months after her initial 
presentation with a well-established micronodular cirrhosis. The second patient 
responded to steroid therapy and the hepatitis recurred when steroids were 
tapered. Postinfantile giant cell hepatitis may occur in association with 
Coombs-positive hemolytic anemia, it is thought to have an autoimmune mechanism, 
and early and sustained immunosuppression may control the progressive 
hepatocellular damage and prevent cirrhosis.

DOI: 10.3109/15513819409022027
PMID: 8159622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]