---
reference_id: "PMID:28904734"
title: "A 17-year-old male with a Small Bowel Neuroendocrine Tumor: flushing differential diagnosis."
authors:
- Forero Molina MA
- Garcia E
- Gonzalez-Devia D
- García-Duperly R
- Vera A
journal: World Allergy Organ J
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s40413-017-0161-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A 17-year-old male with a Small Bowel Neuroendocrine Tumor: flushing differential diagnosis.
**Authors:** Forero Molina MA, Garcia E, Gonzalez-Devia D, García-Duperly R, Vera A
**Journal:** World Allergy Organ J (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40413-017-0161-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40413-017-0161-4)

## Content

1. World Allergy Organ J. 2017 Sep 4;10(1):30. doi: 10.1186/s40413-017-0161-4. 
eCollection 2017.

A 17-year-old male with a Small Bowel Neuroendocrine Tumor: flushing 
differential diagnosis.

Forero Molina MA(1)(2), Garcia E(1)(3), Gonzalez-Devia D(1)(4), García-Duperly 
R(1)(5), Vera A(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá, Colombia.
(2)Hospital Universitario Fundación Santa Fe de Bogotá, Av 9 N° 116-20, oficina 
213, Bogotá, D.C, Colombia.
(3)Allergy Section, Hospital Universitario Fundación Santa Fe de Bogotá, Bogotá, 
Colombia.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine-Endocrinology, Hospital Universitario 
Fundación Santa Fe de Bogotá, Bogotá, Colombia.
(5)Department of Surgery, Hospital Universitario Fundación Santa Fe de Bogotá, 
Bogotá, Colombia.

BACKGROUND: Neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) are heterogeneous neoplasms that 
originate from cells with a secretory function. Small bowel NETs (SB-NETs) are 
related to serotonin hypersecretion which causes: flushing, diarrhea, abdominal 
pain, bronchoconstriction and heart involvement, also known as carcinoid 
syndrome (CS). CS can be confused with an allergic reaction and thus should be 
considered as a differential diagnosis in the allergy consult. We present the 
case of a pediatric patient initially referred under the suspicion of food 
allergies.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present the case of a 17-year-old male with evanescent 
non-pruriginous erythematous lesions- flushing that appeared with food 
consumption, associated with conjunctival injection, warmth and diaphoresis 
after the lesions disappeared. He denied abdominal pain, diarrhea, cough or 
wheezing. The 24-h urinary 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) excretion was 
elevated. The CT scan showed thickening of the distal ileum and multiple lesions 
on both hepatic lobules and the colonoscopy revealed a tumor in the ileocecal 
valve. Hepatic and intestinal biopsies reported a well-differentiated NET of the 
ileocecal valve with hepatic metastasis. He was started on octreotide and 
underwent a wide hepatectomy and right hemicolectomy with improvement of 
symptoms.
CONCLUSIONS: NETs can present as carcinoid syndrome (flushing, diarrhea, 
abdominal pain, wheezing), which constitutes vague symptomatology and represents 
a challenging diagnosis for physicians. They can be confused with an allergic 
reaction and the allergist should consider it as a differential diagnosis. 
Accurate diagnostic tests will help to diagnose NETs earlier and potentially 
prevent carcinoid heart disease, bowel obstruction, and improve quality of life 
and mortality in these patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s40413-017-0161-4
PMCID: PMC5582400
PMID: 28904734

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
present study complied with the ethical requirements (in accordance with Law 
8430 of 1993) established by Colombian law, and was approved by the Ethics 
Committee from the Hospital Universitario Fundación Santa Fe de Bogotá Colombia. 
CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Written informed consent was obtained from the patient 
for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the 
written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. COMPETING 
INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.