---
reference_id: "PMID:35383900"
title: "Outcomes based on histopathologic response to preoperative chemotherapy in children with bilateral Wilms tumor: A prospective study (COG AREN0534)."
authors:
- Chintagumpala MM
- Perlman EJ
- Tornwall B
- Chi YY
- Kim Y
- Hoffer FA
- Kalapurakal JA
- Warwick AB
- Shamberger RC
- Khanna G
- Hamilton TE
- Gow KW
- Paulino AC
- Gratias EJ
- Mullen EA
- Geller JI
- Fernandez CV
- Ritchey ML
- Grundy PE
- Dome JS
- Ehrlich PF
journal: Cancer
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/cncr.34219
keywords:
- Anaplasia/pathology
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- Child
- Humans
- Infant
- "Kidney Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology, surgery"
- Neoplasm Staging
- Nephrectomy
- Prospective Studies
- Vincristine
- "Wilms Tumor/drug therapy, pathology, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcomes based on histopathologic response to preoperative chemotherapy in children with bilateral Wilms tumor: A prospective study (COG AREN0534).
**Authors:** Chintagumpala MM, Perlman EJ, Tornwall B, Chi YY, Kim Y, Hoffer FA, Kalapurakal JA, Warwick AB, Shamberger RC, Khanna G, Hamilton TE, Gow KW, Paulino AC, Gratias EJ, Mullen EA, Geller JI, Fernandez CV, Ritchey ML, Grundy PE, Dome JS, Ehrlich PF
**Journal:** Cancer (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cncr.34219](https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.34219)

## Content

1. Cancer. 2022 Jul 1;128(13):2493-2503. doi: 10.1002/cncr.34219. Epub 2022 Apr
5.

Outcomes based on histopathologic response to preoperative chemotherapy in 
children with bilateral Wilms tumor: A prospective study (COG AREN0534).

Chintagumpala MM(1), Perlman EJ(2), Tornwall B(3), Chi YY(4), Kim Y(5), Hoffer 
FA(6), Kalapurakal JA(7), Warwick AB(8), Shamberger RC(9), Khanna G(10), 
Hamilton TE(9), Gow KW(11), Paulino AC(12), Gratias EJ(13), Mullen EA(9), Geller 
JI(14), Fernandez CV(15), Ritchey ML(16), Grundy PE(17), Dome JS(18), Ehrlich 
PF(19).

Author information:
(1)Texas Children's Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.
(2)Department of Pathology, Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital, 
Chicago, Illinois.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, College of Public Health & Health Professions 
and College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida.
(4)Cancer and Blood Disease Institute, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Keck 
School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California.
(5)Merck Research Laboratories, Merck & Company Inc, Rahway, New Jersey.
(6)Department of Radiology, Fred Hutchison Cancer Center, University of 
Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(7)Department of Radiation Oncology, Northwestern Memorial Hospital, 
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Uniformed Services University, Walter Reed National 
Military Medical Center, Washington, DC.
(9)Department of Surgery, Boston Children's Hospital and Dana Farber Cancer 
Center, Boston, Massachusetts.
(10)School of Medicine, Washington University of St Louis, St Louis, Missouri.
(11)Department of Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(12)Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, Texas.
(13)Children's Oncology Group, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(14)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital, Cincinnati, 
Ohio.
(15)Pediatrics and Bioethics, IWK Health Center, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(16)Department of Urology, Phoenix Children's Hospital, Phoenix, Arizona.
(17)Department of Pediatrics and Oncology, University of Alberta Children's 
Hospital, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(18)Pediatric Surgery, Children's National Hospital and George Washington 
University School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Washington, DC.
(19)Section of Pediatric Surgery, C.S. Mott Children's Hospital, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.

BACKGROUND: An objective of the Children's Oncology Group AREN0534 Study was to 
improve the survival of patients with bilateral Wilms tumors (BWT) by using 
preoperative chemotherapy of limited duration and tailoring postoperative 
therapy based on histopathologic response. The authors report outcomes based on 
postoperative histopathologic responses.
METHODS: Patients with BWT received treatment with vincristine, dactinomycin, 
and doxorubicin for 6 or 12 weeks followed by surgery. Postoperative therapy was 
prescribed based on the highest risk tumor according to the International 
Society of Pediatric Oncology classification and the Children's Oncology Group 
staging system.
RESULTS: Analyses were performed on data from 180 evaluable children. The 4-year 
event-free survival (EFS) and overall survival (OS) rates were 81% (95% CI, 
74%-87%) and 95% (95% CI, 91%-99%), respectively. Seven patients who had 
completely necrotic tumors had a 4-year EFS rate of 100%. Of 118 patients who 
had tumors with intermediate-risk histopathology, the 4-year EFS and OS rates 
were 82% (95% CI, 74%-90%) and 97% (95% CI, 94%-100%), respectively. Fourteen 
patients who had blastemal-type tumors had 4-year EFS and OS rates of 79% (95% 
CI, 56%-100%) and 93% (95% CI, 79%-100%), respectively. Eighteen patients who 
had diffuse anaplasia had 4-year EFS and OS rates of 61% (95% CI, 35%-88%) and 
72% (95% CI, 47%-97%), respectively; and the 4-year EFS and OS rates of 7 
patients who had focal anaplasia were 71% (95% CI, 38%-100%) and 100%, 
respectively. There was no difference in the outcomes of patients who had 
different histopathologic subtypes within the intermediate-risk group (P = .54).
CONCLUSIONS: A risk-adapted treatment approach for BWT results in excellent 
outcomes. This approach was not successful in improving the outcome of patients 
who had diffuse anaplasia.

© 2022 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.34219
PMCID: PMC9177742
PMID: 35383900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest