---
reference_id: "PMID:20622029"
title: "Hereditary pulmonary alveolar proteinosis: pathogenesis, presentation, diagnosis, and therapy."
authors:
- Suzuki T
- Sakagami T
- Young LR
- Carey BC
- Wood RE
- Luisetti M
- Wert SE
- Rubin BK
- Kevill K
- Chalk C
- Whitsett JA
- Stevens C
- Nogee LM
- Campo I
- Trapnell BC
journal: Am J Respir Crit Care Med
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1164/rccm.201002-0271OC
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- Autoantibodies/physiology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Disease Progression
- Dyspnea/etiology
- Female
- "Genetic Diseases, Inborn/diagnosis, etiology, genetics, therapy"
- Genetic Markers/genetics
- Genotype
- Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor/blood
- Humans
- Infant
- Lung/pathology
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Pulmonary Alveolar Proteinosis/diagnosis, genetics, pathology, therapy"
- "Receptors, Granulocyte Colony-Stimulating Factor/blood, genetics, physiology"
- "Receptors, Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor/genetics, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary pulmonary alveolar proteinosis: pathogenesis, presentation, diagnosis, and therapy.
**Authors:** Suzuki T, Sakagami T, Young LR, Carey BC, Wood RE, Luisetti M, Wert SE, Rubin BK, Kevill K, Chalk C, Whitsett JA, Stevens C, Nogee LM, Campo I, Trapnell BC
**Journal:** Am J Respir Crit Care Med (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1164/rccm.201002-0271OC](https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.201002-0271OC)

## Content

1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2010 Nov 15;182(10):1292-304. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201002-0271OC. Epub 2010 Jul 9.

Hereditary pulmonary alveolar proteinosis: pathogenesis, presentation,
diagnosis, and therapy.

Suzuki T(1), Sakagami T, Young LR, Carey BC, Wood RE, Luisetti M, Wert SE, Rubin
BK, Kevill K, Chalk C, Whitsett JA, Stevens C, Nogee LM, Campo I, Trapnell BC.

Author information:
(1)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, OH 45229-3039, USA.

RATIONALE: We identified a 6-year-old girl with pulmonary alveolar proteinosis
(PAP), impaired granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)
receptor function, and increased GM-CSF.
OBJECTIVES: Increased serum GM-CSF may be useful to identify individuals with
PAP caused by GM-CSF receptor dysfunction.
METHODS: We screened 187 patients referred to us for measurement of GM-CSF
autoantibodies to diagnose autoimmune PAP. Five were children with PAP and
increased serum GM-CSF but without GM-CSF autoantibodies or any disease causing
secondary PAP; all were studied with family members, subsequently identified
patients, and controls.
MEASUREMENT AND MAIN RESULTS: Eight children (seven female, one male) were
identified with PAP caused by recessive CSF2RA mutations. Six presented with
progressive dyspnea of insidious onset at 4.8 ± 1.6 years and two were
asymptomatic at ages 5 and 8 years. Radiologic and histopathologic
manifestations were similar to those of autoimmune PAP. Molecular analysis
demonstrated that GM-CSF signaling was absent in six and severely reduced in two
patients. The GM-CSF receptor β chain was detected in all patients, whereas the
α chain was absent in six and abnormal in two, paralleling the GM-CSF signaling
defects. Genetic analysis revealed multiple distinct CSF2RA abnormalities,
including missense, duplication, frameshift, and nonsense mutations; exon and
gene deletion; and cryptic alternative splicing. All symptomatic patients
responded well to whole-lung lavage therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: CSF2RA mutations cause a genetic form of PAP presenting as
insidious, progressive dyspnea in children that can be diagnosed by a
combination of characteristic radiologic findings and blood tests and treated
successfully by whole-lung lavage.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201002-0271OC
PMCID: PMC3001266
PMID: 20622029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
