---
reference_id: "PMID:17881745"
title: STAT3 mutations in the hyper-IgE syndrome.
authors:
- Holland SM
- DeLeo FR
- Elloumi HZ
- Hsu AP
- Uzel G
- Brodsky N
- Freeman AF
- Demidowich A
- Davis J
- Turner ML
- Anderson VL
- Darnell DN
- Welch PA
- Kuhns DB
- Frucht DM
- Malech HL
- Gallin JI
- Kobayashi SD
- Whitney AR
- Voyich JM
- Musser JM
- Woellner C
- Schäffer AA
- Puck JM
- Grimbacher B
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa073687
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Cytokines/blood
- Female
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Humans
- Interleukin-6/physiology
- Job Syndrome/genetics
- Leukocytes/immunology
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis
- Pedigree
- STAT3 Transcription Factor/genetics
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Sequence Deletion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# STAT3 mutations in the hyper-IgE syndrome.
**Authors:** Holland SM, DeLeo FR, Elloumi HZ, Hsu AP, Uzel G, Brodsky N, Freeman AF, Demidowich A, Davis J, Turner ML, Anderson VL, Darnell DN, Welch PA, Kuhns DB, Frucht DM, Malech HL, Gallin JI, Kobayashi SD, Whitney AR, Voyich JM, Musser JM, Woellner C, Schäffer AA, Puck JM, Grimbacher B
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa073687](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa073687)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2007 Oct 18;357(16):1608-19. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa073687. Epub
2007  Sep 19.

STAT3 mutations in the hyper-IgE syndrome.

Holland SM(1), DeLeo FR, Elloumi HZ, Hsu AP, Uzel G, Brodsky N, Freeman AF, 
Demidowich A, Davis J, Turner ML, Anderson VL, Darnell DN, Welch PA, Kuhns DB, 
Frucht DM, Malech HL, Gallin JI, Kobayashi SD, Whitney AR, Voyich JM, Musser JM, 
Woellner C, Schäffer AA, Puck JM, Grimbacher B.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, MD 20892, 
USA. smh@nih.gov

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2007 Oct 18;357(16):1655-8. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe078197.

BACKGROUND: The hyper-IgE syndrome (or Job's syndrome) is a rare disorder of 
immunity and connective tissue characterized by dermatitis, boils, cyst-forming 
pneumonias, elevated serum IgE levels, retained primary dentition, and bone 
abnormalities. Inheritance is autosomal dominant; sporadic cases are also found.
METHODS: We collected longitudinal clinical data on patients with the hyper-IgE 
syndrome and their families and assayed the levels of cytokines secreted by 
stimulated leukocytes and the gene expression in resting and stimulated cells. 
These data implicated the signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 
gene (STAT3) as a candidate gene, which we then sequenced.
RESULTS: We found increased levels of proinflammatory gene transcripts in 
unstimulated peripheral-blood neutrophils and mononuclear cells from patients 
with the hyper-IgE syndrome, as compared with levels in control cells. In vitro 
cultures of mononuclear cells from patients that were stimulated with 
lipopolysaccharide, with or without interferon-gamma, had higher tumor necrosis 
factor alpha levels than did identically treated cells from unaffected persons 
(P=0.003). In contrast, the cells from patients with the hyper-IgE syndrome 
generated lower levels of monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 in response to the 
presence of interleukin-6 (P=0.03), suggesting a defect in interleukin-6 
signaling through its downstream mediators, one of which is STAT3. We identified 
missense mutations and single-codon in-frame deletions in STAT3 in 50 familial 
and sporadic cases of the hyper-IgE syndrome. Eighteen discrete mutations, five 
of which were hot spots, were predicted to directly affect the DNA-binding and 
SRC homology 2 (SH2) domains.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in STAT3 underlie sporadic and dominant forms of the 
hyper-IgE syndrome, an immunodeficiency syndrome involving increased innate 
immune response, recurrent infections, and complex somatic features.

Copyright 2007 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa073687
PMID: 17881745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]