---
reference_id: "PMID:36001963"
title: Disruption of nuclear envelope integrity as a possible initiating event in tauopathies.
authors:
- Prissette M
- Fury W
- Koss M
- Racioppi C
- Fedorova D
- Dragileva E
- Clarke G
- Pohl T
- Dugan J
- Ahrens D
- Chiu J
- Hunt C
- Siao CJ
- Young T
- Bhowmick A
- Rogulin V
- Desclaux M
- Hayden EY
- Podgorski M
- Gao M
- Macdonald LE
- Frendewey D
- Yancopoulos GD
- Zambrowicz B
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111249
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disruption of nuclear envelope integrity as a possible initiating event in tauopathies.
**Authors:** Prissette M, Fury W, Koss M, Racioppi C, Fedorova D, Dragileva E, Clarke G, Pohl T, Dugan J, Ahrens D, Chiu J, Hunt C, Siao CJ, Young T, Bhowmick A, Rogulin V, Desclaux M, Hayden EY, Podgorski M, Gao M, Macdonald LE, Frendewey D, Yancopoulos GD, Zambrowicz B
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111249](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111249)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2022 Aug 23;40(8):111249. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111249.

Disruption of nuclear envelope integrity as a possible initiating event in 
tauopathies.

Prissette M(1), Fury W(2), Koss M(2), Racioppi C(2), Fedorova D(2), Dragileva 
E(2), Clarke G(2), Pohl T(2), Dugan J(2), Ahrens D(2), Chiu J(2), Hunt C(2), 
Siao CJ(2), Young T(2), Bhowmick A(2), Rogulin V(2), Desclaux M(2), Hayden 
EY(2), Podgorski M(2), Gao M(2), Macdonald LE(2), Frendewey D(2), Yancopoulos 
GD(2), Zambrowicz B(2).

Author information:
(1)Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Tarrytown, NY, USA. Electronic address: 
marine.prissette@regeneron.com.
(2)Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Tarrytown, NY, USA.

The microtubule-associated protein tau is an abundant component of neurons of 
the central nervous system. In Alzheimer's disease and other neurodegenerative 
tauopathies, tau is found hyperphosphorylated and aggregated in neurofibrillary 
tangles. To obtain a better understanding of the cellular perturbations that 
initiate tau pathogenesis, we performed a CRISPR-Cas9 screen for genetic 
modifiers that enhance tau aggregation. This initial screen yielded three genes, 
BANF1, ANKLE2, and PPP2CA, whose inactivation promotes the accumulation of tau 
in a phosphorylated and insoluble form. In a complementary screen, we identified 
three additional genes, LEMD2, LEMD3, and CHMP7, that, when overexpressed, 
provide protection against tau aggregation. The proteins encoded by the 
identified genes are mechanistically linked and recognized for their roles in 
the maintenance and repair of the nuclear envelope. These results implicate the 
disruption of nuclear envelope integrity as a possible initiating event in 
tauopathies and reveal targets for therapeutic intervention.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111249
PMID: 36001963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of interest The authors are 
employees of and shareholders in Regeneron Pharmaceuticals (“Regeneron”). 
Regeneron has filed patent applications around the described work. The authors 
declare no competing interests.