---
reference_id: "PMID:31748124"
title: "Genotypic and phenotypic spectra of FGFR1, FGF8, and FGF17 mutations in a Chinese cohort with idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism."
authors:
- Men M
- Wu J
- Zhao Y
- Xing X
- Jiang F
- Zheng R
- Li JD
journal: Fertil Steril
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2019.08.069
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Asian People/genetics
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Fibroblast Growth Factor 8/genetics
- Fibroblast Growth Factors/genetics
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Hypogonadism/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 1/genetics"
- Retrospective Studies
- Exome Sequencing/methods
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotypic and phenotypic spectra of FGFR1, FGF8, and FGF17 mutations in a Chinese cohort with idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.
**Authors:** Men M, Wu J, Zhao Y, Xing X, Jiang F, Zheng R, Li JD
**Journal:** Fertil Steril (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.fertnstert.2019.08.069](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2019.08.069)

## Content

1. Fertil Steril. 2020 Jan;113(1):158-166. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2019.08.069.
 Epub 2019 Nov 17.

Genotypic and phenotypic spectra of FGFR1, FGF8, and FGF17 mutations in a
Chinese cohort with idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.

Men M(1), Wu J(2), Zhao Y(2), Xing X(2), Jiang F(2), Zheng R(3), Li JD(4).

Author information:
(1)Health Management Center, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, People's Republic of China; School of Life Sciences, Central South
University, Changsha, People's Republic of China.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Central South University, Changsha, People's
Republic of China; Hunan Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Central South
University, Changsha, People's Republic of China; Hunan Key Laboratory of Animal
Models for Human Diseases, Central South University, Changsha, People's Republic
of China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, People's Hospital of Henan Province, Zhengzhou,
People's Republic of China.
(4)School of Life Sciences, Central South University, Changsha, People's
Republic of China; Hunan Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Central South
University, Changsha, People's Republic of China; Hunan Key Laboratory of Animal
Models for Human Diseases, Central South University, Changsha, People's Republic
of China. Electronic address: lijiada@sklmg.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the prevalence of FGFR1, FGF8, and FGF17 mutations in a
Chinese cohort with idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH) and to
characterize the clinical presentations and therapeutic outcomes of IHH patients
with FGFR1, FGF8, and FGF17 mutations.
DESIGN: Retrospective cohort.
SETTING: University hospital.
PATIENT(S): A total of 145 IHH probands (125 men and 20 women) were recruited
for this study.
INTERVENTIONS(S): Hormone assays.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Whole-exome sequencing, polymerase chain
reaction-Sanger sequencing, in silico functional prediction.
RESULT(S): Six novel mutations (p.154_158del, p.E496Rfs*12, p.W190X, p.S134D,
p.W10X, and c.1552 + 3insT) in FGFR1, two novel mutations (p.E176K and p.R184C)
in FGF8, three novel mutations (p.48_52del, p.P120L, and p.K191R) in FGF17, and
five reported mutations (p.W289X, p.G237S, p.V102I, p.R250Q, and p.T340M) in
FGFR1 were identified in 18 IHH patients. The functional consequences of all
mutations were analyzed in silico. In addition to hypogonadotropic hypogonadism,
44.4% (8/18) patients exhibited other clinical deformities, including dental
agenesis (3/18, 16.7%), hearing loss (3/18, 16.7%), and hand malformation (2/18,
11.1%). hCG/hMG therapy was effective in promoting sexual development in IHH
patients with FGFR1, FGF8, and FGF17 mutations.
CONCLUSION(S): We extended the mutational spectrum of FGFR1, FGF8, and FGF17 in
IHH patients. The prevalence of FGFR1, FGF8, and FGF17 mutations in IHH was
12.4%. hCG/hMG therapy was effective to acquire fertility for patients with
FGFR1, FGF8, and FGF17 mutations but has a risk of transmitting the mutations
and IHH to the next generation.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2019.08.069
PMID: 31748124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
