---
reference_id: "PMID:15901860"
title: "Transplantation of umbilical-cord blood in babies with infantile Krabbe's disease."
authors:
- Escolar ML
- Poe MD
- Provenzale JM
- Richards KC
- Allison J
- Wood S
- Wenger DA
- Pietryga D
- Wall D
- Champagne M
- Morse R
- Krivit W
- Kurtzberg J
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa042604
keywords:
- "Brain/anatomy & histology"
- Child Development
- Cord Blood Stem Cell Transplantation
- Disease Progression
- Electroencephalography
- Evoked Potentials
- Female
- Fetal Blood/transplantation
- "Galactosylceramidase/cerebrospinal fluid, metabolism"
- Graft Survival
- Growth
- Histocompatibility Testing
- Humans
- Infant
- Infant Behavior
- "Infant, Newborn/growth & development"
- "Leukodystrophy, Globoid Cell/mortality, physiopathology, therapy"
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- Motor Skills
- Motor Skills Disorders/etiology
- Neural Conduction
- Survival Analysis
- Transplantation Conditioning
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transplantation of umbilical-cord blood in babies with infantile Krabbe's disease.
**Authors:** Escolar ML, Poe MD, Provenzale JM, Richards KC, Allison J, Wood S, Wenger DA, Pietryga D, Wall D, Champagne M, Morse R, Krivit W, Kurtzberg J
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa042604](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa042604)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2005 May 19;352(20):2069-81. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa042604.

Transplantation of umbilical-cord blood in babies with infantile Krabbe's 
disease.

Escolar ML(1), Poe MD, Provenzale JM, Richards KC, Allison J, Wood S, Wenger DA, 
Pietryga D, Wall D, Champagne M, Morse R, Krivit W, Kurtzberg J.

Author information:
(1)Program for Neurodevelopmental Function in Rare Disorders, Clinical Center 
for the Study of Development and Learning, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill 27599-7255, USA. maria.escolar@cdl.unc.edu

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2005 May 19;352(20):2124-6. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe058071.

BACKGROUND: Infantile Krabbe's disease produces progressive neurologic 
deterioration and death in early childhood. We hypothesized that transplantation 
of umbilical-cord blood from unrelated donors before the development of symptoms 
would favorably alter the natural history of the disease among newborns in whom 
the disease was diagnosed because of a family history. We compared the outcomes 
among these newborns with the outcomes among infants who underwent 
transplantation after the development of symptoms and with the outcomes in an 
untreated cohort of affected children.
METHODS: Eleven asymptomatic newborns (age range, 12 to 44 days) and 14 
symptomatic infants (age range, 142 to 352 days) with infantile Krabbe's disease 
underwent transplantation of umbilical-cord blood from unrelated donors after 
myeloablative chemotherapy. Engraftment, survival, and neurodevelopmental 
function were evaluated longitudinally for four months to six years.
RESULTS: The rates of donor-cell engraftment and survival were 100 percent and 
100 percent, respectively, among the asymptomatic newborns (median follow-up, 
3.0 years) and 100 percent and 43 percent, respectively, among the symptomatic 
infants (median follow-up, 3.4 years). Surviving patients showed durable 
engraftment of donor-derived hematopoietic cells with restoration of normal 
blood galactocerebrosidase levels. Infants who underwent transplantation before 
the development of symptoms showed progressive central myelination and continued 
gains in developmental skills, and most had age-appropriate cognitive function 
and receptive language skills, but a few had mild-to-moderate delays in 
expressive language and mild-to-severe delays in gross motor function. Children 
who underwent transplantation after the onset of symptoms had minimal neurologic 
improvement.
CONCLUSIONS: Transplantation of umbilical-cord blood from unrelated donors in 
newborns with infantile Krabbe's disease favorably altered the natural history 
of the disease. Transplantation in babies after symptoms had developed did not 
result in substantive neurologic improvement.

Copyright 2005 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa042604
PMID: 15901860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]