---
reference_id: "PMID:16990356"
title: "The pathophysiology of coronary artery aneurysms in Kawasaki disease: role of matrix metalloproteinases."
authors:
- Senzaki H
journal: Arch Dis Child
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1136/adc.2005.087437
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The pathophysiology of coronary artery aneurysms in Kawasaki disease: role of matrix metalloproteinases.
**Authors:** Senzaki H
**Journal:** Arch Dis Child (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1136/adc.2005.087437](https://doi.org/10.1136/adc.2005.087437)

## Content

1. Arch Dis Child. 2006 Oct;91(10):847-51. doi: 10.1136/adc.2005.087437.

The pathophysiology of coronary artery aneurysms in Kawasaki disease: role of 
matrix metalloproteinases.

Senzaki H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Saitama Heart Institute, Saitama Medical 
University Hospital, 38 Morohongo, Moroyama, Saitama 350-0495, Japan. 
hsenzaki@saitama-med.ac.jp

Kawasaki disease is an acute inflammatory syndrome that takes the form of 
systemic vasculitis, and predominantly affects children. Important complications 
of this disease are coronary artery dilation and aneurysm formation. Recent 
studies indicate that Kawasaki disease patients have elevated expression, 
activity, or protein levels of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), and suggest 
that imbalances in MMPs or MMP/tissue inhibitor of MMP (TIMP) play important 
pathophysiological roles in the development of coronary artery lesions in this 
disease. However, it remains unclear whether MMP activities at the site of 
coronary artery lesions are indeed increased. Further studies on the effects of 
MMP inhibition on coronary outcome are needed to define the roles of MMPs and 
TIMPs in the formation of coronary artery lesions in Kawasaki disease; findings 
of such studies may support the use of MMP inhibitors for the prevention of 
coronary artery complications in patients with this disease.

DOI: 10.1136/adc.2005.087437
PMCID: PMC2066006
PMID: 16990356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: none declared