---
reference_id: "PMID:31255436"
title: "Current treatment for citrin deficiency during NICCD and adaptation/compensation stages: Strategy to prevent CTLN2."
authors:
- Okano Y
- Ohura T
- Sakamoto O
- Inui A
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2019.06.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current treatment for citrin deficiency during NICCD and adaptation/compensation stages: Strategy to prevent CTLN2.
**Authors:** Okano Y, Ohura T, Sakamoto O, Inui A
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2019.06.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2019.06.004)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2019 Jul;127(3):175-183. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2019.06.004.
Epub  2019 Jun 15.

Current treatment for citrin deficiency during NICCD and adaptation/compensation 
stages: Strategy to prevent CTLN2.

Okano Y(1), Ohura T(2), Sakamoto O(3), Inui A(4).

Author information:
(1)Okano Children's Clinic, and Department of Pediatrics, Hyogo College of 
Medicine, 1-20-1 Izumifutyu, Izumi 594-0071, Japan. Electronic address: 
okano@med.osaka-cu.ac.jp.
(2)Division of Pediatrics, Sendai City Hospital, 1-1-1 Asutonagamachi, 
Taihaku-ku, Sendai 982-8502, Japan; Department of Pediatrics, Tohoku University 
School of Medicine, 1-1 Seiryomachi, Aobaku, Sendai 980-8574, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Tohoku University School of Medicine, 1-1 
Seiryomachi, Aobaku, Sendai 980-8574, Japan.
(4)Department of Pediatric Hepatology and Gastroenterology, Saiseikai 
Yokohamashi Tobu Hospital, Kanagawa, Japan.

Identification of the genes responsible for adult-onset type II citrullinemia 
(CTLN2) and citrin protein function have enhanced our understanding of citrin 
deficiency. Citrin deficiency is characterized by 1) neonatal intrahepatic 
cholestasis caused by citrin deficiency (NICCD); 2) adaptation/compensation 
stage with unique food preference from childhood to adulthood; and 3) CTLN2. The 
treatment of NICCD aims to prevent the progression of cholestasis, and it 
includes medium chain triglycerides (MCT) milk and lactose-free milk, in 
addition to medications (e.g., vitamin K2, lipid-soluble vitamins and 
ursodeoxycholic acid). Spontaneous remission around the age of one is common in 
NICCD, though prolonged cholestasis can lead to irreversible liver failure and 
may require liver transplantation. The adaptation/compensation stage (after one 
year of age) is characterized by the various signs and symptoms such as 
hypoglycemia, fatty liver, easy fatigability, weight loss, and neuropsychiatric 
symptoms. Some poorly-controlled patients show failure to thrive and 
dyslipidemia caused by citrin deficiency (FTTDCD). Diet therapy is the key in 
the adaptation/compensation stage. Protein- and fat-rich diet with a protein: 
fat: carbohydrate ratio being 15-25%: 40-50%: 30-40% along with the appropriate 
energy intake is recommended. The use of MCT oil and sodium pyruvate is also 
effective. The toxicity of carbohydrate is well known in the progression to 
CTLN2 if the consumption is over a long term or intense. Alcohol can also 
trigger CTLN2. Continuous intravenous hyperalimentation with high glucose 
concentration needs to be avoided. Administration of Glyceol® (an osmotic agent 
containing glycerol and fructose) is contraindicated. Because the intense 
treatment such as liver transplantation may become necessary to cure CTLN2, the 
effective preventative treatment during the adaptation/compensation stage is 
very important. At present, there is no report of a case with patients reported 
having the onset of CTLN2 who are on the diet therapy and under the appropriate 
medical support during the adaptation/compensation stage.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2019.06.004
PMID: 31255436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]