---
reference_id: "PMID:1947766"
title: "Kaposi's sarcoma and AIDS: frequency of gastrointestinal involvement and its effect on survival. A prospective study in a heterogeneous population."
authors:
- Parente F
- Cernuschi M
- Orlando G
- Rizzardini G
- Lazzarin A
- Bianchi Porro G
journal: Scand J Gastroenterol
year: '1991'
doi: 10.3109/00365529109003949
keywords:
- "Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome/complications, mortality"
- Adult
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Gastrointestinal Neoplasms/etiology, mortality"
- Homosexuality
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prognosis
- Prospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- "Sarcoma, Kaposi/etiology, mortality"
- "Skin Neoplasms/etiology, mortality"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kaposi's sarcoma and AIDS: frequency of gastrointestinal involvement and its effect on survival. A prospective study in a heterogeneous population.
**Authors:** Parente F, Cernuschi M, Orlando G, Rizzardini G, Lazzarin A, Bianchi Porro G
**Journal:** Scand J Gastroenterol (1991)
**DOI:** [10.3109/00365529109003949](https://doi.org/10.3109/00365529109003949)

## Content

1. Scand J Gastroenterol. 1991 Oct;26(10):1007-12. doi:
10.3109/00365529109003949.

Kaposi's sarcoma and AIDS: frequency of gastrointestinal involvement and its
effect on survival. A prospective study in a heterogeneous population.

Parente F(1), Cernuschi M, Orlando G, Rizzardini G, Lazzarin A, Bianchi Porro G.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Infectious Diseases, L. Sacco Hospital, Milan, Italy.

The frequency and distribution of gastrointestinal Kaposi's sarcoma were
prospectively investigated in 33 consecutive AIDS patients with heterogeneous
risk factors and established skin or lymph-node disease. The influence of
visceral involvement and degree of immunosuppression at the time of diagnosis on
patient survival was also evaluated. Gastrointestinal lesions were found in 17
cases (51%): 5 patients (15%) had both upper and lower GI tract involvement, 8
patients (24%) had only gastroduodenal lesions, and 4 (12%) only lower tract
disease. No difference in the frequency of visceral involvement was found
between the two major risk groups (homosexuals and intravenous drug abusers).
The degree of immunosuppression at diagnosis was the major determinant of
survival, whereas gastrointestinal involvement did not in itself significantly
influence patient survival. Morbidity from enteric Kaposi's sarcoma was quite
low, 80% of these lesions being clinically silent during the follow-up period.

DOI: 10.3109/00365529109003949
PMID: 1947766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
