---
reference_id: "PMID:25009745"
title: "Differential diagnoses of overgrowth syndromes: the most important clinical and radiological disease manifestations."
authors:
- Lacerda Lda S
- Alves UD
- Zanier JF
- Machado DC
- Camilo GB
- Lopes AJ
journal: Radiol Res Pract
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1155/2014/947451
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differential diagnoses of overgrowth syndromes: the most important clinical and radiological disease manifestations.
**Authors:** Lacerda Lda S, Alves UD, Zanier JF, Machado DC, Camilo GB, Lopes AJ
**Journal:** Radiol Res Pract (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2014/947451](https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/947451)

## Content

1. Radiol Res Pract. 2014;2014:947451. doi: 10.1155/2014/947451. Epub 2014 Jun 9.

Differential diagnoses of overgrowth syndromes: the most important clinical and 
radiological disease manifestations.

Lacerda Lda S(1), Alves UD(1), Zanier JF(1), Machado DC(2), Camilo GB(2), Lopes 
AJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, State University of Rio de Janeiro, 20551-030 Rio de 
Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(2)Department of Radiology, State University of Rio de Janeiro, 20551-030 Rio de 
Janeiro, RJ, Brazil ; Postgraduate Programme in Medical Sciences, State 
University of Rio de Janeiro, 20550-170 Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(3)Postgraduate Programme in Medical Sciences, State University of Rio de 
Janeiro, 20550-170 Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.

Overgrowth syndromes comprise a heterogeneous group of diseases that are 
characterized by excessive tissue development. Some of these syndromes may be 
associated with dysfunction in the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)/PI3K/AKT 
pathway, which results in an increased expression of the insulin receptor. In 
the current review, four overgrowth syndromes were characterized (Proteus 
syndrome, Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber syndrome, Madelung's disease, and 
neurofibromatosis type I) and illustrated using cases from our institution. 
Because these syndromes have overlapping clinical manifestations and have no 
established genetic tests for their diagnosis, radiological methods are 
important contributors to the diagnosis of many of these syndromes. The 
correlation of genetic discoveries and molecular pathways that may contribute to 
the phenotypic expression is also of interest, as this may lead to potential 
therapeutic interventions.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/947451
PMCID: PMC4070411
PMID: 25009745