---
reference_id: "PMID:35963325"
title: Transcranial direct current stimulation as a preventive treatment in multiple sclerosis? Preclinical evidence.
authors:
- Marenna S
- Huang SC
- Rossi E
- Castoldi V
- Comi G
- Leocani L
journal: Exp Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2022.114201
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcranial direct current stimulation as a preventive treatment in multiple sclerosis? Preclinical evidence.
**Authors:** Marenna S, Huang SC, Rossi E, Castoldi V, Comi G, Leocani L
**Journal:** Exp Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.expneurol.2022.114201](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expneurol.2022.114201)

## Content

1. Exp Neurol. 2022 Nov;357:114201. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2022.114201. Epub
2022  Aug 10.

Transcranial direct current stimulation as a preventive treatment in multiple 
sclerosis? Preclinical evidence.

Marenna S(1), Huang SC(2), Rossi E(3), Castoldi V(4), Comi G(5), Leocani L(6).

Author information:
(1)Experimental Neurophysiology Unit, Institute of Experimental Neurology 
(INSPE) - IRCCS-San Raffaele Hospital, via Olgettina 60, 20132 Milan, Italy. 
Electronic address: marenna.silvia@hsr.it.
(2)Experimental Neurophysiology Unit, Institute of Experimental Neurology 
(INSPE) - IRCCS-San Raffaele Hospital, via Olgettina 60, 20132 Milan, Italy. 
Electronic address: huang.suchun@hsr.it.
(3)Experimental Neurophysiology Unit, Institute of Experimental Neurology 
(INSPE) - IRCCS-San Raffaele Hospital, via Olgettina 60, 20132 Milan, Italy. 
Electronic address: rossi.elena@hsr.it.
(4)Experimental Neurophysiology Unit, Institute of Experimental Neurology 
(INSPE) - IRCCS-San Raffaele Hospital, via Olgettina 60, 20132 Milan, Italy. 
Electronic address: castoldi.valerio@hsr.it.
(5)Università Vita-Salute, San Raffaele Hospital, via Olgettina 60, 20132 Milan, 
Italy; Casa di Cura del Policlinico, Milan, Italy. Electronic address: 
comi.giancarlo@unisr.it.
(6)Experimental Neurophysiology Unit, Institute of Experimental Neurology 
(INSPE) - IRCCS-San Raffaele Hospital, via Olgettina 60, 20132 Milan, Italy; 
Università Vita-Salute, San Raffaele Hospital, via Olgettina 60, 20132 Milan, 
Italy. Electronic address: leocani.letizia@unisr.it.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory demyelinating disease of the central 
nervous system, presenting with optic neuritis in about 20-30% of cases. Optic 
nerve demyelination, associated with delay of visual evoked potentials (VEPs), 
is also observed prior to motor signs in the preclinical MS model Experimental 
Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis (EAE). Transcranial direct current stimulation 
(tDCS), inducing polarity-dependent changes in neuronal excitability, is widely 
used to promote neuroplasticity in several neurological disorders. However, its 
potential effects on inflammation and demyelination are largely unknown. We 
tested the effectiveness of a preventive, 5-day tDCS treatment started 3 days 
post-immunization, in reducing the severity of VEP delays observed in early EAE. 
In mice undergoing cathodal tDCS (n = 6/26 eyes) VEPs were significantly less 
delayed compared with eyes from EAE-Sham (n = 24/32 eyes) and EAE-Anodal 
(n = 22/32 eyes). Optic nerve immunohistochemistry revealed a significantly 
lower cell density of microglia/macrophages, and less axonal loss in 
EAE-Cathodal vs EAE-Sham and EAE-Anodal, while the percent demyelination with 
Luxol-fast blue staining was comparable among EAE groups. Considering the latter 
result, immunofluorescence paranodal staining was performed, revealing a 
significantly higher number of complete paranode domains in EAE-Cathodal, closer 
to healthy mice, compared with EAE-Sham and EAE-Anodal groups. These results 
were reflected by the negative correlation between the number of complete 
paranode domains and VEP latency increase with respect to pre-immunization. 
Finally, cathodal tDCS was associated with a lower number, closer to healthy, of 
single paranodes in contrast to EAE-Sham. The effects of cathodal stimulation in 
preventing VEPs delays and optic nerve myelin damage were already observed in 
the pre-motor onset EAE stage, and were associated with a lower density of 
inflammatory cells. These findings suggest that tDCS may exert an 
anti-inflammatory effect with potential therapeutic application to be further 
explored in autoimmune demyelinating diseases.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2022.114201
PMID: 35963325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare no conflict of interests.