---
reference_id: PMID:27903593
title: "Respiratory Syncytial Virus: Infection, Detection, and New Options for Prevention and Treatment."
authors:
- Griffiths C
- Drews SJ
- Marchant DJ
journal: Clin Microbiol Rev
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1128/CMR.00010-16
keywords:
- Antiviral Agents/therapeutic use
- Clinical Trials as Topic
- Humans
- Point-of-Care Systems
- "Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infections/diagnosis, prevention & control, therapy"
- Respiratory Syncytial Viruses/pathogenicity
- Viral Vaccines/therapeutic use
- Virulence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Respiratory Syncytial Virus: Infection, Detection, and New Options for Prevention and Treatment.
**Authors:** Griffiths C, Drews SJ, Marchant DJ
**Journal:** Clin Microbiol Rev (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1128/CMR.00010-16](https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.00010-16)

## Content

1. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2017 Jan;30(1):277-319. doi: 10.1128/CMR.00010-16.

Respiratory Syncytial Virus: Infection, Detection, and New Options for 
Prevention and Treatment.

Griffiths C(1), Drews SJ(2)(3), Marchant DJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Li Ka Shing Institute of Virology, Department of Medical Microbiology and 
Immunology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Alberta Provincial Laboratory for Public Health, ProvLab, Edmonton, Alberta, 
Canada steven.drews@albertahealthservices.ca marchant@ualberta.ca.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(4)Li Ka Shing Institute of Virology, Department of Medical Microbiology and 
Immunology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada 
steven.drews@albertahealthservices.ca marchant@ualberta.ca.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection is a significant cause of 
hospitalization of children in North America and one of the leading causes of 
death of infants less than 1 year of age worldwide, second only to malaria. 
Despite its global impact on human health, there are relatively few therapeutic 
options available to prevent or treat RSV infection. Paradoxically, there is a 
very large volume of information that is constantly being refined on RSV 
replication, the mechanisms of RSV-induced pathology, and community 
transmission. Compounding the burden of acute RSV infections is the exacerbation 
of preexisting chronic airway diseases and the chronic sequelae of RSV 
infection. A mechanistic link is even starting to emerge between asthma and 
those who suffer severe RSV infection early in childhood. In this article, we 
discuss developments in the understanding of RSV replication, pathogenesis, 
diagnostics, and therapeutics. We attempt to reconcile the large body of 
information on RSV and why after many clinical trials there is still no 
efficacious RSV vaccine and few therapeutics.

Copyright © 2016 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/CMR.00010-16
PMCID: PMC5217795
PMID: 27903593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]