---
reference_id: "PMID:31339007"
title: Activated M2 Macrophages Contribute to the Pathogenesis of IgG4-Related Disease via Toll-like Receptor 7/Interleukin-33 Signaling.
authors:
- Ishiguro N
- Moriyama M
- Furusho K
- Furukawa S
- Shibata T
- Murakami Y
- Chinju A
- Haque ASMR
- Gion Y
- Ohta M
- Maehara T
- Tanaka A
- Yamauchi M
- Sakamoto M
- Mochizuki K
- Ono Y
- Hayashida JN
- Sato Y
- Kiyoshima T
- Yamamoto H
- Miyake K
- Nakamura S
journal: Arthritis Rheumatol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/art.41052
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Animals
- Case-Control Studies
- Female
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulin G4-Related Disease/genetics, immunology, metabolism"
- Interleukin-33/immunology
- Macrophages/immunology
- Male
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Middle Aged
- Sialadenitis
- Signal Transduction
- "Sjogren's Syndrome"
- Submandibular Gland
- Th2 Cells/immunology
- "Toll-Like Receptor 4/genetics, immunology"
- "Toll-Like Receptor 7/agonists, genetics, immunology"
- "Toll-Like Receptor 8/genetics, immunology"
- "Toll-Like Receptor 9/genetics, immunology"
- Up-Regulation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Activated M2 Macrophages Contribute to the Pathogenesis of IgG4-Related Disease via Toll-like Receptor 7/Interleukin-33 Signaling.
**Authors:** Ishiguro N, Moriyama M, Furusho K, Furukawa S, Shibata T, Murakami Y, Chinju A, Haque ASMR, Gion Y, Ohta M, Maehara T, Tanaka A, Yamauchi M, Sakamoto M, Mochizuki K, Ono Y, Hayashida JN, Sato Y, Kiyoshima T, Yamamoto H, Miyake K, Nakamura S
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheumatol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/art.41052](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.41052)

## Content

1. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2020 Jan;72(1):166-178. doi: 10.1002/art.41052. Epub 2019
 Nov 29.

Activated M2 Macrophages Contribute to the Pathogenesis of IgG4-Related Disease
via Toll-like Receptor 7/Interleukin-33 Signaling.

Ishiguro N(1), Moriyama M(1), Furusho K(2), Furukawa S(1), Shibata T(3),
Murakami Y(3), Chinju A(1), Haque ASMR(1), Gion Y(4), Ohta M(1), Maehara T(1),
Tanaka A(1), Yamauchi M(1), Sakamoto M(1), Mochizuki K(1), Ono Y(1), Hayashida
JN(1), Sato Y(4), Kiyoshima T(1), Yamamoto H(5), Miyake K(3), Nakamura S(1).

Author information:
(1)Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(2)Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan, and University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Okayama, Japan.
(5)Kyushu University Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: IgG4-related disease (IgG4-RD) is a unique inflammatory disorder in
which Th2 cytokines promote IgG4 production. In addition, recent studies have
implicated the Toll-like receptor (TLR) pathway. This study was undertaken to
examine the expression of TLRs in salivary glands (SGs) from patients with
IgG4-RD.
METHODS: SGs from 15 patients with IgG4-RD, 15 patients with Sjögren's syndrome
(SS), 10 patients with chronic sialadenitis, and 10 healthy controls were
examined histologically. TLR family gene expression (TLR-1 through TLR-10) was
analyzed by DNA microarray in the submandibular glands (SMGs). Up-regulation of
TLRs was confirmed in SGs from patients with IgG4-RD. Finally, the phenotype of
human TLR-7 (huTLR-7)-transgenic C57BL/6 mice was assessed before and after
stimulation with TLR agonist.
RESULTS: In patients with IgG4-RD, TLR-4, TLR-7, TLR-8, and TLR-9 were
overexpressed. Polymerase chain reaction validated the up-regulation of TLR-7 in
IgG4-RD compared with the other groups. Immunohistochemical analysis confirmed
strong infiltration of TLR-7-positive cells in the SGs of patients with IgG4-RD.
Double immunohistochemical staining showed that TLR-7 expression colocalized
with CD163+ M2 macrophages. After in vitro stimulation with a TLR-7 agonist,
CD163+ M2 macrophages produced higher levels of interleukin-33 (IL-33), which is
a Th2-activating cytokine. In huTLR-7-transgenic mice, the focus and fibrosis
scores in SMGs, pancreas, and lungs were significantly higher than those in
wild-type mice (P < 0.05). Moreover, the concentration of serum IgG, IgG1, and
IL-33 in huTLR-7-transgenic mice was distinctly increased upon stimulation with
a TLR-7 agonist (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: TLR-7-expressing M2 macrophages may promote the activation of Th2
immune responses via IL-33 secretion in IgG4-RD.

© 2019 The Authors. Arthritis & Rheumatology published by Wiley Periodicals,
Inc. on behalf of American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/art.41052
PMCID: PMC6972995
PMID: 31339007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
