---
reference_id: "PMID:36870438"
title: "Cardiomyopathies in children: An overview."
authors:
- Tsatsopoulou A
- Protonotarios I
- Xylouri Z
- Papagiannis I
- Anastasakis A
- Germanakis I
- Patrianakos A
- Nyktari E
- Gavras C
- Papadopoulos G
- Meditskou S
- Lazarou E
- Miliou A
- Lazaros G
journal: Hellenic J Cardiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.hjc.2023.02.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiomyopathies in children: An overview.
**Authors:** Tsatsopoulou A, Protonotarios I, Xylouri Z, Papagiannis I, Anastasakis A, Germanakis I, Patrianakos A, Nyktari E, Gavras C, Papadopoulos G, Meditskou S, Lazarou E, Miliou A, Lazaros G
**Journal:** Hellenic J Cardiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hjc.2023.02.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hjc.2023.02.007)

## Content

1. Hellenic J Cardiol. 2023 Jul-Aug;72:43-56. doi: 10.1016/j.hjc.2023.02.007.
Epub  2023 Mar 3.

Cardiomyopathies in children: An overview.

Tsatsopoulou A(1), Protonotarios I(2), Xylouri Z(2), Papagiannis I(3), 
Anastasakis A(4), Germanakis I(5), Patrianakos A(6), Nyktari E(7), Gavras C(8), 
Papadopoulos G(9), Meditskou S(10), Lazarou E(11), Miliou A(11), Lazaros G(12).

Author information:
(1)General Paediatrics and Clinical Research, Private Clinic, Naxos, Greece; 
Unit of Inherited Cardiac Conditions and Sports Cardiology, 1st Department of 
Cardiology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece; Unit 
of Inherited and Rare Cardiovascular Diseases, Onassis Cardiac Surgery Centre, 
Athens, Greece; Laboratory of Histology and Embryology, Department of Medicine, 
School of Life Sciences, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, 
Greece.
(2)University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust, Tremona Road, 
Southampton, Hampshire, SO16 6YD, UK.
(3)Department of Paediatric Cardiology and Adult Congenital Heart Disease, 
Onassis Cardiac Surgery Centre, Athens, Greece.
(4)Unit of Inherited and Rare Cardiovascular Diseases, Onassis Cardiac Surgery 
Centre, Athens, Greece.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, University Hospital Heraklion, School of Medicine, 
University of Crete, Heraklion, Greece.
(6)Cardiology Department, University Hospital, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
(7)Cardiac MRI Unit, Onassis Cardiac Surgery Center, Greece.
(8)Athens Medical Croup, Interbalkan Medical Centre, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(9)Paediatric Cardiology, Agia Sofia Children's Hospital, Athens, Greece.
(10)Laboratory of Histology and Embryology, Department of Medicine, School of 
Life Sciences, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(11)Unit of Inherited Cardiac Conditions and Sports Cardiology, 1st Department 
of Cardiology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(12)Unit of Inherited Cardiac Conditions and Sports Cardiology, 1st Department 
of Cardiology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece. 
Electronic address: glaz35@hotmail.com.

Paediatric cardiomyopathies form a heterogeneous group of disorders 
characterized by structural and electrical abnormalities of the heart muscle, 
commonly due to a gene variant of the myocardial cell structure. Mostly 
inherited as a dominant or occasionally recessive trait, they might be part of a 
syndromic disorder of underlying metabolic or neuromuscular defects or combine 
early developing extracardiac abnormalities (i.e., Naxos disease). The annual 
incidence of 1 per 100,000 children appears higher during the first two years of 
life. Dilated and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy phenotypes share an incidence of 
60% and 25%, respectively. Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy 
(ARVC), restrictive cardiomyopathy, and left ventricular noncompaction are less 
commonly diagnosed. Adverse events such as severe heart failure, heart 
transplantation, or death usually appear early after the initial presentation. 
In ARVC patients, high-intensity aerobic exercise has been associated with worse 
clinical outcomes and increased penetrance in at-risk genotype-positive 
relatives. Acute myocarditis in children has an incidence of 1.4-2.1 cases/per 
100,000 children per year, with a 6-14% mortality rate during the acute phase. A 
genetic defect is considered responsible for the progression to dilated 
cardiomyopathy phenotype. Similarly, a dilated or arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy 
phenotype might emerge with an episode of acute myocarditis in childhood or 
adolescence. This review provides an overview of childhood cardiomyopathies 
focusing on clinical presentation, outcome, and pathology.

Copyright © 2023 Hellenic Society of Cardiology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hjc.2023.02.007
PMID: 36870438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]