---
reference_id: "PMID:19273357"
title: Death of effector memory T cells characterizes AIDS.
authors:
- Mireille L
- Anna S
- Marie-Christine C
- Valerie M
- Bruno H
- Jerome E
journal: Front Biosci (Landmark Ed)
year: '2009'
doi: 10.2741/3535
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Death of effector memory T cells characterizes AIDS.
**Authors:** Mireille L, Anna S, Marie-Christine C, Valerie M, Bruno H, Jerome E
**Journal:** Front Biosci (Landmark Ed) (2009)
**DOI:** [10.2741/3535](https://doi.org/10.2741/3535)

## Content

1. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2009 Jan 1;14(11):4386-400. doi: 10.2741/3535.

Death of effector memory T cells characterizes AIDS.

Mireille L(1), Anna S, Marie-Christine C, Valerie M, Bruno H, Jerome E.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U 841, Creteil, Paris, France.

The adaptive effector CD4+ T helper-mediated immune response is highly 
heterogeneous, based on the development of distinct subsets that are 
characterized by the expression of different profiles of cell surface markers. 
Functional impairment of T cells is characteristic of many chronic mouse and 
human viral infections. Excessive induction of apoptosis in infected and 
uninfected CD4+ T cells has been proposed as one of the pathogenic mechanisms 
that may impair the immune response and cause the development of acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome (AIDS). Thus, the death of effector/memory CD4+ T cells 
during both the acute and chronic phase represents one the main characteristic 
of such viral infection that predicts disease outcome. Improving our 
understanding of the molecular mechanisms leading to the death of memory CD4+ T 
cells should enable us to improve vaccination protocols and treatments, by 
combining them with antiretroviral drugs and molecules designed to decrease 
apoptotic phenomena.

DOI: 10.2741/3535
PMID: 19273357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]