---
reference_id: "PMID:20301438"
title: Pompe Disease.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Sperry E
- Leslie N
- Berry L
- Pena L
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pompe Disease.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Sperry E, Leslie N, Berry L, Pena L

## Content

1. Pompe Disease.

Sperry E(1), Leslie N(2), Berry L(1), Pena L.

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2007 Aug 31 [updated 2025 Aug 21].

Author information:
(1)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio
(2)Cincinnati STAR Center for Lysosomal Diseases, Division of Human Genetics,
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Pompe disease can be classified by age of onset, organ
involvement, severity, and rate of progression into infantile-onset Pompe
disease (IOPD) (i.e., individuals with onset before age 12 months with
cardiomyopathy) and late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD) (i.e., individuals with
onset before age 12 months without cardiomyopathy, and all individuals with
onset after age 12 months). Untreated individuals with IOPD typically have
hypotonia, generalized muscle weakness, feeding difficulties, poor growth, and
respiratory distress. Cardiomegaly and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is usually
identified in the first weeks of life and progress to left ventricular outflow
obstruction and diminished lung volume. Progressive deposition of glycogen
results in conduction defects with shortening of the PR interval on EKG. In
untreated infants, death commonly occurs in the first two years of life from
cardiopulmonary insufficiency. In those in whom enzyme replacement therapy (ERT)
is initiated before age six months and before the need for ventilatory
assistance, a majority have improved survival, improved ventilator-independent
survival, reduced cardiac mass, and significantly improved acquisition of motor
skills compared to untreated individuals. LOPD can manifest from the first
decade to as late as the seventh decade of life with progressive proximal muscle
weakness primarily affecting the lower limbs, which may require use of a
wheelchair. Respiratory insufficiency progressing to respiratory failure is a
significant cause of morbidity and mortality. Some adults have developed
arteriopathy, including dilatation of the ascending thoracic aorta. Scoliosis is
also frequent.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of Pompe disease is established in a proband
who has deficiency of acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) enzyme activity in isolated
lymphocytes or mixed leukocytes and/or by identification of biallelic pathogenic
(or likely pathogenic) variants in GAA by molecular genetic testing in a proband
with an out-of-range newborn screening result and/or suggestive clinical
features.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapies: Although ERT should be initiated as soon as the
diagnosis of IOPD or symptomatic Pompe disease is established, it is appropriate
to determine cross-reactive immunologic material (CRIM) status prior to
initiating ERT, as individuals who do not produce CRIM (i.e., who are CRIM
negative) generally develop high titer anti-rhGAA antibodies during ERT and
require modified therapy protocols using immunomodulation early in the treatment
course, optimally before the first infusion. ERT options include alglucosidase
alfa for both IOPD and LOPD; avalglucosidase for individuals with LOPD who are
older than age one year; and cipaglucosidase alfa with miglustat for adults with
LOPD who weigh at least 40 kg and are not improving on their current ERT
regimen. Supportive care: Medical intervention for cardiomyopathy needs to be
individualized as use of standard drugs may be contraindicated in certain stages
of the disease process. Management of conduction disturbances includes avoidance
of stress, infection, fever, dehydration, and anesthesia; medical therapy, if
indicated, often necessitates a careful balance of ventricular function and
should be undertaken by a cardiologist familiar with Pompe disease. Speech
therapy and augmented communication devices may be helpful for those with
communication difficulties. Feeding therapy and consideration of a gastrostomy
tube is recommended for those who have feeding/nutritional difficulties.
Respiratory support for those with respiratory insufficiency may include CPAP
and BiPAP; tracheostomy may be considered in those with macroglossia and severe
respiratory insufficiency. Standard treatment for arteriopathy, muscle weakness,
scoliosis, osteoporosis, and hearing loss. Surveillance: At each visit, measure
growth parameters and evaluate nutritional status and safety of oral intake;
monitor those with seizures as clinically indicated; assess for new
manifestations (seizures, changes in tone, movement disorders); monitor
developmental progress and educational needs; assess mobility and self-help
skills; assess for scoliosis; monitor for evidence of aspiration and respiratory
insufficiency; assess respiratory status with regard to cough, difficulty
breathing, wheezing, fatigability, and exercise intolerance; obtain
electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, liver function tests, CK level, and urine total
glucotetrasaccharide (Hex4) level. At least annually, bone mineral density
screening (DXA) in those with LOPD (in those with IOPD, DXA scan every two to
three years until puberty, then every one to two years); pulmonary function
tests; echocardiography (to include assessment for aortic dilatation in those
with LOPD); EKG; audiology evaluation; BNP level (if there are concerns for
evolving cardiomyopathy). At least every five years, MR cerebral angiography to
evaluate for progressive dilation of cerebral vasculature. As clinically
indicated, brain imaging to evaluate for intracranial vasculopathy (in those
with LOPD); chest radiograph; whole-body MRI to evaluate muscle disease burden;
polysomnography; videofluoroscopic swallow study; 24-hour ambulatory EKG (Holter
monitoring). Agents/circumstances to avoid: The use of digoxin, ionotropes,
diuretics, and afterload-reducing agents may worsen left ventricular outflow
obstruction, although they may be indicated in later stages of the disease;
hypotension and volume depletion should be avoided. Anesthesia should be used
only when absolutely necessary because reduced cardiovascular return and
underlying respiratory insufficiency pose significant risks. Evaluation of
relatives at risk: Testing of all at-risk sibs of any age is warranted to allow
for early diagnosis and treatment with ERT. If a molecular diagnosis has been
established in the proband, molecular genetic prenatal testing of a fetus at
risk may be performed; for at-risk newborn sibs (when prenatal testing was not
performed), in parallel with newborn screening, either test for the familial GAA
pathogenic variants or measure GAA enzyme activity. Pregnancy management:
Several women with LOPD have been treated with ERT during pregnancy and
lactation with no reported adverse effects on the fetus and no adverse events
during infusions.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Pompe disease is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
If both parents are known to be heterozygous for a GAA pathogenic variant, each
sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected,
a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being
unaffected and not a carrier. Once the GAA pathogenic variants have been
identified in an affected family member, molecular genetic carrier testing for
at-risk relatives and prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301438
