---
reference_id: "PMID:39025972"
title: "Malaria vaccines: a new era of prevention and control."
authors:
- Duffy PE
- Gorres JP
- Healy SA
- Fried M
journal: Nat Rev Microbiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41579-024-01065-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Malaria vaccines: a new era of prevention and control.
**Authors:** Duffy PE, Gorres JP, Healy SA, Fried M
**Journal:** Nat Rev Microbiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41579-024-01065-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-024-01065-7)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2024 Dec;22(12):756-772. doi: 10.1038/s41579-024-01065-7. 
Epub 2024 Jul 18.

Malaria vaccines: a new era of prevention and control.

Duffy PE(1), Gorres JP(2), Healy SA(2), Fried M(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Malaria Immunology and Vaccinology, National Institute of 
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 
USA. patrick.duffy@nih.gov.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria Immunology and Vaccinology, National Institute of 
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 
USA.

Malaria killed over 600,000 people in 2022, a death toll that has not improved 
since 2015. Additionally, parasites and mosquitoes resistant to existing 
interventions are spreading across Africa and other regions. Vaccines offer hope 
to reduce the mortality burden: the first licensed malaria vaccines, RTS,S and 
R21, will be widely deployed in 2024 and should substantially reduce childhood 
deaths. In this Review, we provide an overview of the malaria problem and the 
Plasmodium parasite, then describe the RTS,S and R21 vaccines (the first 
vaccines for any human parasitic disease), summarizing their benefits and 
limitations. We explore next-generation vaccines designed using new knowledge of 
malaria pathogenesis and protective immunity, which incorporate antigens and 
platforms to elicit effective immune responses against different parasite stages 
in human or mosquito hosts. We describe a decision-making process that 
prioritizes malaria vaccine candidates for development in a resource-constrained 
environment. Future vaccines might improve upon the protective efficacy of RTS,S 
or R21 for children, or address the wider malaria scourge by preventing 
pregnancy malaria, reducing the burden of Plasmodium vivax or accelerating 
malaria elimination.

© 2024. This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the 
US; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1038/s41579-024-01065-7
PMID: 39025972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.