---
reference_id: "PMID:22122058"
title: Alopecia as a rare but distinct manifestation of pemphigus vulgaris.
authors:
- Veraitch O
- Ohyama M
- Yamagami J
- Amagai M
journal: J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1111/j.1468-3083.2011.04363.x
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- Adult
- Aged
- "Alopecia/drug therapy, etiology, pathology"
- "Biopsy, Needle"
- Cohort Studies
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Japan
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Pemphigus/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Rare Diseases
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Assessment
- Severity of Illness Index
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alopecia as a rare but distinct manifestation of pemphigus vulgaris.
**Authors:** Veraitch O, Ohyama M, Yamagami J, Amagai M
**Journal:** J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1468-3083.2011.04363.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-3083.2011.04363.x)

## Content

1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2013 Jan;27(1):86-91. doi: 
10.1111/j.1468-3083.2011.04363.x. Epub 2011 Nov 28.

Alopecia as a rare but distinct manifestation of pemphigus vulgaris.

Veraitch O(1), Ohyama M, Yamagami J, Amagai M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Keio University School of Medicine, Shinjuku-ku, 
Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Pemphigus vulgaris (PV) patients may develop scalp erosions, 
however, the development of alopecia has been reported to be extremely rare.
OBJECTIVE: To delineate the clinicopathological features of alopecia in PV and 
provide insight into the pathogenesis of this rarely observed manifestation.
METHODS: A retrospective case note review was performed on five PV patients 
presenting with progressive hair loss and alopecic patches. Data were collected 
on demographics and clinical findings. Results for hair pull tests, direct 
immunofluorescence study of plucked hairs, established laboratory tests to 
detect anti-desmoglein 1 and 3 autoantibodies and scalp swab culture were 
recorded. A combination of vertical and horizontal sectioning technique enabled 
detailed histopathological analysis of alopecic patches. Clinical course was 
monitored.
RESULTS: Anagen hair follicles with the outer root sheath structure were easily 
pulled from perilesional scalp, with intercellular IgG deposition on the outer 
root sheath keratinocytes. Acantholysis between outer root sheath keratinocytes 
extending from the infundibulum to suprabalbar level was evident in anagen hair 
follicles of affected lesions. Perifollicular cell infiltration was observed in 
the lesions where scalp swabs detected micro-organisms. The bulge stem cell area 
was mostly intact. Alopecia was non-scarring and following 4 weeks of therapy 
hair re-growth was seen in all patients.
CONCLUSION: In PV, the combination of anti-desmoglein autoantibody-mediated 
acantholysis in conjunction with secondary factors, such as inflammatory changes 
due to infection, may cause weakening of hair follicle anchorage resulting in 
hair loss and alopecic patches. This unusual clinical phenotype should alert 
physicians to PV as a potential diagnosis.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and 
Venereology © 2011 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-3083.2011.04363.x
PMID: 22122058 [Indexed for MEDLINE]