---
reference_id: "PMID:28620280"
title: Pathophysiology of Chemotherapy-Induced Peripheral Neuropathy.
authors:
- Starobova H
- Vetter I
journal: Front Mol Neurosci
year: '2017'
doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2017.00174
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology of Chemotherapy-Induced Peripheral Neuropathy.
**Authors:** Starobova H, Vetter I
**Journal:** Front Mol Neurosci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnmol.2017.00174](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnmol.2017.00174)

## Content

1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2017 May 31;10:174. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2017.00174. 
eCollection 2017.

Pathophysiology of Chemotherapy-Induced Peripheral Neuropathy.

Starobova H(1), Vetter I(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Pain Research, Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of 
QueenslandSt Lucia, QLD, Australia.
(2)School of Pharmacy, University of QueenslandSt Lucia, QLD, Australia.

Chemotherapy-induced neuropathy is a common, dose-dependent adverse effect of 
several antineoplastics. It can lead to detrimental dose reductions and 
discontinuation of treatment, and severely affects the quality of life of cancer 
survivors. Clinically, chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy presents as 
deficits in sensory, motor, and autonomic function which develop in a glove and 
stocking distribution due to preferential effects on longer axons. The 
pathophysiological processes are multi-factorial and involve oxidative stress, 
apoptotic mechanisms, altered calcium homeostasis, axon degeneration and 
membrane remodeling as well as immune processes and neuroinflammation. This 
review focusses on the commonly used antineoplastic substances oxaliplatin, 
cisplatin, vincristine, docetaxel, and paclitaxel which interfere with the 
cancer cell cycle-leading to cell death and tumor degradation-and cause severe 
acute and chronic peripheral neuropathies. We discuss drug mechanism of action 
and pharmacokinetic disposition relevant to the development of peripheral 
neuropathy, the epidemiology and clinical presentation of chemotherapy-induced 
neuropathy, emerging insight into genetic susceptibilities as well as current 
understanding of the pathophysiology and treatment approaches.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2017.00174
PMCID: PMC5450696
PMID: 28620280