---
reference_id: "PMID:40484454"
title: "Health outcomes of children with Prader-Willi or Angelman syndromes: a European population-based multicentre study."
authors:
- Abate MV
- Barisic I
- Santoro M
- Coi A
- Tan J
- Garne E
- Loane M
- Odak L
- Ballardini E
- Cavero-Carbonell C
- Gatt M
- Gissler M
- Jordan S
- Klungsøyr K
- Monier I
- Wellesley DG
- Morris JK
journal: Arch Dis Child
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1136/archdischild-2025-328786
keywords:
- Humans
- "Prader-Willi Syndrome/mortality, epidemiology, therapy"
- "Angelman Syndrome/mortality, epidemiology, therapy"
- Male
- Female
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Infant
- Europe/epidemiology
- "Hospitalization/statistics & numerical data"
- "Length of Stay/statistics & numerical data"
- Adolescent
- Registries
- "Infant, Newborn"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Health outcomes of children with Prader-Willi or Angelman syndromes: a European population-based multicentre study.
**Authors:** Abate MV, Barisic I, Santoro M, Coi A, Tan J, Garne E, Loane M, Odak L, Ballardini E, Cavero-Carbonell C, Gatt M, Gissler M, Jordan S, Klungsøyr K, Monier I, Wellesley DG, Morris JK
**Journal:** Arch Dis Child (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1136/archdischild-2025-328786](https://doi.org/10.1136/archdischild-2025-328786)

## Content

1. Arch Dis Child. 2025 Oct 17;110(11):899-904. doi: 
10.1136/archdischild-2025-328786.

Health outcomes of children with Prader-Willi or Angelman syndromes: a European 
population-based multicentre study.

Abate MV(1), Barisic I(2)(3), Santoro M(4), Coi A(4), Tan J(5), Garne E(6), 
Loane M(7), Odak L(8), Ballardini E(9), Cavero-Carbonell C(10), Gatt M(11), 
Gissler M(12)(13), Jordan S(14), Klungsøyr K(15)(16), Monier I(17)(18), 
Wellesley DG(19), Morris JK(20).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Epidemiology of Rare Diseases and Congenital Anomalies, Institute of 
Clinical Physiology, National Research Council, Pisa, Italy 
mariavalentinaabate@cnr.it.
(2)Centre of Excellence for Reproductive and Regenerative Medicine, Children's 
Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
(3)Medical School, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
(4)Unit of Epidemiology of Rare Diseases and Congenital Anomalies, Institute of 
Clinical Physiology, National Research Council, Pisa, Italy.
(5)NIHR GOSH BRC, London, UK.
(6)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Lillebaelt Hospital, 
Kolding, Denmark.
(7)Institute of Nursing and Health Research, Ulster University, Belfast, UK.
(8)Department of Medical and Laboratory Genetics, Endocrinology and Diabetology 
with Daily Care Unit, Children's Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
(9)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Paediatric Section, IMER Registry (Emilia 
Romagna Registry of Birth Defects), Department of Medical Sciences, University 
of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(10)Joint Research Unit on Rare Diseases, FISABIO-UVEG, FISABIO, Valencia, 
Spain.
(11)Department of Health Information, Directorate for Health Information and 
Research, Pietà, Malta.
(12)Finish Institute for Health and Welfare, Department of Data and Analytics, 
THL, Helsinki, Finland.
(13)Academic Primary Health Care Centre, Region Stockholm, Stockholm, Sweden.
(14)Faculty of Medicine, Health and Life Science, Swansea University, Swansea, 
UK.
(15)Department of Global Public Health and Primary Care, University of Bergen, 
Bergen, Norway.
(16)Division of Mental and Physical Health, Norwegian Institute of Public 
Health, Bergen, Norway.
(17)Centre of Research in Epidemiology and Statistics (CRESS), Université Paris 
Cité Faculté de Santé, Paris, France.
(18)Obstetrical Perinatal and Pediatric Epidemiology Research Team (EPOPé), 
INSERM, Paris, France.
(19)Wessex Clinical Genetic Service, University Hospital Southampton NHS 
Foundation Trust Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Southampton, UK.
(20)School of Health and Medical Sciences, St George's University, London, UK.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) and Angelman syndrome (AS) are rare 
imprinting disorders caused by the aberrant expression of 15q11.2-q13 imprinted 
genes. Due to their rarity, data on health outcomes during infancy are limited. 
This EUROlinkCAT study aimed to investigate major health outcomes of children 
with these chromosomal disorders.
METHODS: Data of children born in 1995-2014 and diagnosed with PWS (n=150) or AS 
(n=46), collected by 11 population-based congenital anomaly registries, were 
linked to local electronic healthcare and mortality databases and analysed.
RESULTS: Children with PWS had a survival rate of 94% (95% CI 89.5% to 98.7%) by 
10 years of age. Nearly all children (99.5%, 95% CI 97.6% to 99.9%) with PWS 
required hospitalisation during the first year of life with a median length of 
stay of 25 days; a high proportion continued to need hospital care later in life 
(93.2% at 1-4 years and 79.6% at 5-9 years) with shorter stays (1.2 and 0.5 days 
per year, respectively). In comparison, no deaths occurred among children with 
AS by 10 years of age. Fewer children with AS required hospitalisation in the 
first year of life (59.0%, 95% CI 39.6% to 74.0%); as they grew older, the 
proportion admitted was 68% (95% CI 40.0% to 85.0%) at 5-9 years. Children with 
PWS and AS underwent first surgery at approximately 1.8 years and 2.5 years, 
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides valuable evidence for improving family 
counselling and promoting an adequate healthcare support system.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2025. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ Group.

DOI: 10.1136/archdischild-2025-328786
PMID: 40484454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.