---
reference_id: "PMID:35148201"
title: Protein kinase R is an innate immune sensor of proteotoxic stress via accumulation of cytoplasmic IL-24.
authors:
- Davidson S
- Yu CH
- Steiner A
- Ebstein F
- Baker PJ
- Jarur-Chamy V
- Hrovat Schaale K
- Laohamonthonkul P
- Kong K
- Calleja DJ
- Harapas CR
- Balka KR
- Mitchell J
- Jackson JT
- Geoghegan ND
- Moghaddas F
- Rogers KL
- Mayer-Barber KD
- De Jesus AA
- De Nardo D
- Kile BT
- Sadler AJ
- Poli MC
- Krüger E
- Goldbach Mansky R
- Masters SL
journal: Sci Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1126/sciimmunol.abi6763
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Humans
- "Immunity, Innate/immunology"
- Interleukins/immunology
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "eIF-2 Kinase/deficiency, immunology"
- Interleukin-24
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Protein kinase R is an innate immune sensor of proteotoxic stress via accumulation of cytoplasmic IL-24.
**Authors:** Davidson S, Yu CH, Steiner A, Ebstein F, Baker PJ, Jarur-Chamy V, Hrovat Schaale K, Laohamonthonkul P, Kong K, Calleja DJ, Harapas CR, Balka KR, Mitchell J, Jackson JT, Geoghegan ND, Moghaddas F, Rogers KL, Mayer-Barber KD, De Jesus AA, De Nardo D, Kile BT, Sadler AJ, Poli MC, Krüger E, Goldbach Mansky R, Masters SL
**Journal:** Sci Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1126/sciimmunol.abi6763](https://doi.org/10.1126/sciimmunol.abi6763)

## Content

1. Sci Immunol. 2022 Feb 11;7(68):eabi6763. doi: 10.1126/sciimmunol.abi6763. Epub
 2022 Feb 11.

Protein kinase R is an innate immune sensor of proteotoxic stress via
accumulation of cytoplasmic IL-24.

Davidson S(1)(2), Yu CH(1)(2), Steiner A(1)(2)(3), Ebstein F(4), Baker PJ(5),
Jarur-Chamy V(6), Hrovat Schaale K(1), Laohamonthonkul P(1), Kong K(1), Calleja
DJ(7), Harapas CR(1)(2), Balka KR(8), Mitchell J(9), Jackson JT(10), Geoghegan
ND(11), Moghaddas F(1)(2), Rogers KL(11), Mayer-Barber KD(5), De Jesus AA(9), De
Nardo D(8), Kile BT(8)(12), Sadler AJ(13)(14), Poli MC(6)(15), Krüger E(4),
Goldbach Mansky R(9), Masters SL(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Inflammation Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.
(2)Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria
3010, Australia.
(3)Institute of Structural Biology, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn 53127,
Germany.
(4)University Medicine Greifswald, Institute of Medical Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Greifswald 17475, Germany.
(5)Inflammation and Innate Immunity Unit, Laboratory of Clinical Immunology and
Microbiology, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(6)Immunogenetics and Translational Immunology Program. Facultad de Medicina,
Universidad del Desarrollo Clínica Alemana, Santiago, Chile.
(7)Ubiquitin Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.
(8)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Monash Biomedicine Discovery
Institute, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.
(9)Translational Autoinflammatory Disease Studies (TADS), Laboratory of Clinical
Immunology and Microbiology, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(10)Immunology Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.
(11)Centre for Dynamic Imaging, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.
(12)Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Adelaide, Adelaide,
South Australia 5000, Australia.
(13)Centre for Innate Immunity and Infectious Diseases, Hudson Institute of
Medical Research, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.
(14)Department of Molecular and Translational Sciences, Monash University,
Clayton, Victoria, Australia.
(15)Division of Pediatric Immunology, Allergy, and Rheumatology, Department of
Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2022 Apr;22(4):205. doi: 10.1038/s41577-022-00702-7.

Proteasome dysfunction can lead to autoinflammatory disease associated with
elevated type I interferon (IFN-αβ) and NF-κB signaling; however, the innate
immune pathway driving this is currently unknown. Here, we identified protein
kinase R (PKR) as an innate immune sensor for proteotoxic stress. PKR activation
was observed in cellular models of decreased proteasome function and in multiple
cell types from patients with proteasome-associated autoinflammatory disease
(PRAAS). Furthermore, genetic deletion or small-molecule inhibition of PKR in
vitro ameliorated inflammation driven by proteasome deficiency. In vivo,
proteasome inhibitor-induced inflammatory gene transcription was blunted in
PKR-deficient mice compared with littermate controls. PKR also acted as a
rheostat for proteotoxic stress by triggering phosphorylation of eIF2α, which
can prevent the translation of new proteins to restore homeostasis. Although
traditionally known as a sensor of RNA, under conditions of proteasome
dysfunction, PKR sensed the cytoplasmic accumulation of a known interactor,
interleukin-24 (IL-24). When misfolded IL-24 egress into the cytosol was blocked
by inhibition of the endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation pathway, PKR
activation and subsequent inflammatory signaling were blunted. Cytokines such as
IL-24 are normally secreted from cells; therefore, cytoplasmic accumulation of
IL-24 represents an internal danger-associated molecular pattern. Thus, we have
identified a mechanism by which proteotoxic stress is detected, causing
inflammation observed in the disease PRAAS.

DOI: 10.1126/sciimmunol.abi6763
PMCID: PMC11036408
PMID: 35148201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare that
they have no competing interests.
