---
reference_id: "PMID:24659173"
title: Impact of homocysteine-thiolactone on plasma fibrin networks.
authors:
- Genoud V
- Lauricella AM
- Kordich LC
- Quintana I
journal: J Thromb Thrombolysis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s11239-014-1063-8
keywords:
- Animals
- "Blood Coagulation/drug effects, physiology"
- Cattle
- "Fibrin/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Homocysteine/analogs & derivatives, pharmacology"
- Humans
- "Plasma/chemistry, drug effects, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of homocysteine-thiolactone on plasma fibrin networks.
**Authors:** Genoud V, Lauricella AM, Kordich LC, Quintana I
**Journal:** J Thromb Thrombolysis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11239-014-1063-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11239-014-1063-8)

## Content

1. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 2014 Nov;38(4):540-5. doi: 10.1007/s11239-014-1063-8.

Impact of homocysteine-thiolactone on plasma fibrin networks.

Genoud V(1), Lauricella AM, Kordich LC, Quintana I.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Hemostasis and Thrombosis, Department of Biological Chemistry,
School of Exact and Natural Sciences, University of Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Epidemiologic studies have shown that hyperhomocysteinemia is an independent
risk factor for vascular disease. Homocysteine (Hcy) circulates as different
species, mostly protein bound, and approximately 1% as its reduced form and the
cyclic thioester homocysteine-thiolactone (HTL). Despite the level of plasma
thiolactone being markedly low, detrimental effects are related to its high
reactivity. HTL reacts with proteins by acylation of free basic amino groups; in
particular, the epsilon-amino group of lysine residues forms adducts and induces
structural and functional changes in plasma proteins. In order to assess the
effects of HTL on plasma fibrin networks, a pool of normal plasma incubated with
HTL (100, 500 and 1,000 μmol/L, respectively) was evaluated by global
coagulation tests and fibrin formation kinetic assays, and the resulting fibrin
was observed by scanning electron microscopy. HTL significantly prolonged global
coagulation tests in a concentration-dependent manner with respect to control,
and increases were up to 14.5%. Fibrin formation kinetic parameters displayed
statistically significant differences between HTL-treated plasma and control in
a concentration-dependent way, showing higher lag phase and lower maximum
reaction velocity and final network optical density. Electron microscopy
analysis of HTL plasma networks revealed a compact architecture, with more
branches and shorter fibers than control. We can conclude that HTL induced a
slower coagulation process, rendering more tightly packed fibrin clots. Since
these features of the networks have been related to impaired fibrinolysis, the
N-homocysteinylation reactions would be involved in the prothrombotic effects
associated to hyperhomocysteinemia.

DOI: 10.1007/s11239-014-1063-8
PMID: 24659173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
