---
reference_id: "PMID:38066848"
title: Clinical manifestations of telomere biology disorders in adults.
authors:
- Niewisch MR
- Beier F
- Savage SA
journal: Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1182/hematology.2023000490
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Hematologic Diseases
- "Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics"
- Telomere/genetics
- Biology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical manifestations of telomere biology disorders in adults.
**Authors:** Niewisch MR, Beier F, Savage SA
**Journal:** Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1182/hematology.2023000490](https://doi.org/10.1182/hematology.2023000490)

## Content

1. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2023 Dec 8;2023(1):563-572. doi: 
10.1182/hematology.2023000490.

Clinical manifestations of telomere biology disorders in adults.

Niewisch MR(1), Beier F(2)(3), Savage SA(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Hannover Medical School, 
Hannover, Germany.
(2)Department of Hematology, Oncology, Hemostaseology and Stem Cell 
Transplantation, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen University, Germany.
(3)Center for Integrated Oncology Aachen Bonn Cologne Düsseldorf (CIO ABCD), 
Germany.
(4)Clinical Genetics Branch, Division of Cancer and Epidemiology and Genetics, 
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.

Telomere biology disorders (TBDs) are a spectrum of inherited bone marrow 
failure syndromes caused by impaired telomere function due to pathogenic 
germline variants in genes involved in telomere maintenance. TBDs can affect 
many organ systems and are often thought of as diseases of childhood. However, 
TBDs may present in mid- or even late adulthood with features similar to but not 
always the same as the childhood-onset TBDs. Adult-onset TBDs are often cryptic 
with isolated pulmonary, liver, or hematologic disease, or cancer, and may lack 
the classic disease-defining triad of abnormal skin pigmentation, nail 
dysplasia, and oral leukoplakia. Diagnostics include detection of very short 
leukocyte telomeres and germline genetic testing. Notably, adult-onset TBDs may 
show telomeres in the 1st to 10th percentile for age, and some cases may not 
have an identifiable genetic cause. TBD genetic etiology includes all modes of 
inheritance, with autosomal dominant the most frequent in adult-onset disease. 
Variable symptom onset due to incomplete penetrance, variable expressivity, and 
genetic anticipation add to the diagnostic challenges. Adult-onset TBDs are 
likely underrecognized, but their correct identification is of utmost 
importance, since affected patients are faced with numerous clinical 
complications, including but not limited to an increased risk of malignancies 
requiring close surveillance for early detection. Currently lung, liver, or 
hematopoietic cell transplants are the only curative therapeutic approaches but 
can be complicated by comorbidities, despite improved medical care. This review 
highlights the challenges of identifying adult-onset TBDs and addresses 
currently recommended clinical screening measures and therapy options.

Copyright © 2023 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/hematology.2023000490
PMCID: PMC10726987
PMID: 38066848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Marena R. Niewisch: no competing financial 
interests to declare. Fabian Beier: no competing financial interests to declare. 
Sharon A. Savage: no competing financial interests to declare.