---
reference_id: "PMID:35584922"
title: Sensitivity of the Social Behavior Observer Checklist to Early Symptoms of Patients With Frontotemporal Dementia.
authors:
- Toller G
- Cobigo Y
- Ljubenkov PA
- Appleby BS
- Dickerson BC
- Domoto-Reilly K
- Fong JC
- Forsberg LK
- Gavrilova RH
- Ghoshal N
- Heuer HW
- Knopman DS
- Kornak J
- Lapid MI
- Litvan I
- Lucente DE
- Mackenzie IR
- McGinnis SM
- Miller BL
- Pedraza O
- Rojas JC
- Staffaroni AM
- Wong B
- Wszolek ZK
- Boeve BF
- Boxer AL
- Rosen HJ
- Rankin KP
- and the ALLFTD research consortium
journal: Neurology
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000200582
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sensitivity of the Social Behavior Observer Checklist to Early Symptoms of Patients With Frontotemporal Dementia.
**Authors:** Toller G, Cobigo Y, Ljubenkov PA, Appleby BS, Dickerson BC, Domoto-Reilly K, Fong JC, Forsberg LK, Gavrilova RH, Ghoshal N, Heuer HW, Knopman DS, Kornak J, Lapid MI, Litvan I, Lucente DE, Mackenzie IR, McGinnis SM, Miller BL, Pedraza O, Rojas JC, Staffaroni AM, Wong B, Wszolek ZK, Boeve BF, Boxer AL, Rosen HJ, Rankin KP, and the ALLFTD research consortium
**Journal:** Neurology (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000200582](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000200582)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2022 Aug 1;99(5):e488-e499. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000200582.

Sensitivity of the Social Behavior Observer Checklist to Early Symptoms of 
Patients With Frontotemporal Dementia.

Toller G(1), Cobigo Y(2), Ljubenkov PA(2), Appleby BS(2), Dickerson BC(2), 
Domoto-Reilly K(2), Fong JC(2), Forsberg LK(2), Gavrilova RH(2), Ghoshal N(2), 
Heuer HW(2), Knopman DS(2), Kornak J(2), Lapid MI(2), Litvan I(2), Lucente 
DE(2), Mackenzie IR(2), McGinnis SM(2), Miller BL(2), Pedraza O(2), Rojas JC(2), 
Staffaroni AM(2), Wong B(2), Wszolek ZK(2), Boeve BF(2), Boxer AL(2), Rosen 
HJ(2), Rankin KP(2); and the ALLFTD research consortium.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neurology (G.T., Y.C., P.A.L., J.C.F., H.W.H., B.L.M., 
J.C.R., A.M.S., A.L.B., H.J.R., K.P.R.), Memory and Aging Center, University of 
California, San Francisco; Department of Neurology (B.S.A.), Case Western 
Reserve University, Cleveland, OH; Frontotemporal Disorders Unit (B.C.D., 
D.E.L., S.M.M., B.W.), Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston; Department of Neurology (K.D.-R.), University of 
Washington, Seattle; Department of Neurology (L.K.F., R.H.G., D.S.K., B.F.B.), 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; Department of Neurology (N.G.), Washington 
University, St. Louis, MO; Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics (J.K.), 
University of California, San Francisco; Department of Psychiatry and Psychology 
(M.I.L.), Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; Department of Neurology (I.L.), Feinberg 
School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL; Department of 
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine (I.R.M.), University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada; Departments of Psychiatry and Psychology (O.P.), and 
Neurology (Z.K.W.), Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL. gianina.toller@kssg.ch.
(2)From the Department of Neurology (G.T., Y.C., P.A.L., J.C.F., H.W.H., B.L.M., 
J.C.R., A.M.S., A.L.B., H.J.R., K.P.R.), Memory and Aging Center, University of 
California, San Francisco; Department of Neurology (B.S.A.), Case Western 
Reserve University, Cleveland, OH; Frontotemporal Disorders Unit (B.C.D., 
D.E.L., S.M.M., B.W.), Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston; Department of Neurology (K.D.-R.), University of 
Washington, Seattle; Department of Neurology (L.K.F., R.H.G., D.S.K., B.F.B.), 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; Department of Neurology (N.G.), Washington 
University, St. Louis, MO; Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics (J.K.), 
University of California, San Francisco; Department of Psychiatry and Psychology 
(M.I.L.), Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; Department of Neurology (I.L.), Feinberg 
School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL; Department of 
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine (I.R.M.), University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada; Departments of Psychiatry and Psychology (O.P.), and 
Neurology (Z.K.W.), Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Changes in social behavior are common symptoms of 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) and Alzheimer disease syndromes. For 
early identification of individual patients and differential diagnosis, 
sensitive clinical measures are required that are able to assess patterns of 
behaviors and detect syndromic differences in both asymptomatic and symptomatic 
stages. We investigated whether the examiner-based Social Behavior Observer 
Checklist (SBOCL) is sensitive to early behavior changes and reflects disease 
severity within and between neurodegenerative syndromes.
METHODS: Asymptomatic individuals and patients with neurodegenerative disease 
were selected from the multisite ALLFTD cohort study. In a sample of 
participants with at least 1 time point of SBOCL data, we investigated whether 
the Disorganized, Reactive, and Insensitive subscales of the SBOCL change as a 
function of disease stage within and between these syndromes. In a longitudinal 
subsample with both SBOCL and neuroimaging data, we examined whether change over 
time on each subscale corresponds to progressive gray matter atrophy.
RESULTS: A total of 1,082 FTLD pathogenic variant carriers and noncarriers were 
enrolled (282 asymptomatic, 341 behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia, 114 
semantic and 95 nonfluent variant primary progressive aphasia, 137 progressive 
supranuclear palsy, and 113 Alzheimer disease syndrome). The Disorganized score 
increased between asymptomatic to very mild (p = 0.016, estimate = -1.10, 95% CI 
= -1.99 to -0.22), very mild to mild (p = 0.013, estimate = -1.17, 95% CI = 
-2.08 to -0.26), and mild to moderate/severe (p < 0.001, estimate = -2.00, 95% 
CI = -2.55 to -1.45) disease stages in behavioral variant frontotemporal 
dementia regardless of pathogenic variant status. Asymptomatic GRN pathogenic 
gene variant carriers showed more reactive behaviors (preoccupation with time: p 
= 0.001, estimate = 1.11, 95% CI = 1.06 to 1.16; self-consciousness: p = 0.003, 
estimate = 1.77, 95% CI = 1.52 to 2.01) than asymptomatic noncarriers (estimate 
= 1.01, 95% CI = 0.98 to 1.03; estimate = 1.31, 95% CI = 1.20 to 1.41). The 
Insensitive score increased to a clinically abnormal level in advanced stages of 
behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (p = 0.003, estimate = -0.73, 95% CI 
= -1.18 to -0.29). Higher scores on each subscale corresponded with higher 
caregiver burden (p < 0.001). Greater change over time corresponded to greater 
fronto-subcortical atrophy in the semantic-appraisal and fronto-parietal 
intrinsically connected networks.
DISCUSSION: The SBOCL is sensitive to early symptoms and reflects disease 
severity, with some evidence for progression across asymptomatic and symptomatic 
stages of FTLD syndromes; thus, it may hold promise for early measurement and 
monitoring of behavioral symptoms in clinical practice and treatment trials.
CLASSIFICATION OF EVIDENCE: This study provides Class II evidence that the SBOCL 
is sensitive to early behavioral changes in FTLD pathogenic variants and early 
symptomatic individuals in a highly educated patient cohort.

© 2022 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000200582
PMCID: PMC9421596
PMID: 35584922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]