---
reference_id: "PMID:37272516"
title: Vorasidenib in IDH1- or IDH2-Mutant Low-Grade Glioma.
authors:
- Mellinghoff IK
- van den Bent MJ
- Blumenthal DT
- Touat M
- Peters KB
- Clarke J
- Mendez J
- Yust-Katz S
- Welsh L
- Mason WP
- Ducray F
- Umemura Y
- Nabors B
- Holdhoff M
- Hottinger AF
- Arakawa Y
- Sepulveda JM
- Wick W
- Soffietti R
- Perry JR
- Giglio P
- de la Fuente M
- Maher EA
- Schoenfeld S
- Zhao D
- Pandya SS
- Steelman L
- Hassan I
- Wen PY
- Cloughesy TF
- INDIGO Trial Investigators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2304194
keywords:
- Humans
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- Disease Progression
- Double-Blind Method
- "Glioma/drug therapy, genetics"
- Isocitrate Dehydrogenase/genetics
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/drug therapy"
- Pyridines/adverse effects
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Enzyme Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Diamines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vorasidenib in IDH1- or IDH2-Mutant Low-Grade Glioma.
**Authors:** Mellinghoff IK, van den Bent MJ, Blumenthal DT, Touat M, Peters KB, Clarke J, Mendez J, Yust-Katz S, Welsh L, Mason WP, Ducray F, Umemura Y, Nabors B, Holdhoff M, Hottinger AF, Arakawa Y, Sepulveda JM, Wick W, Soffietti R, Perry JR, Giglio P, de la Fuente M, Maher EA, Schoenfeld S, Zhao D, Pandya SS, Steelman L, Hassan I, Wen PY, Cloughesy TF, INDIGO Trial Investigators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2304194](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2304194)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2023 Aug 17;389(7):589-601. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2304194. Epub
2023  Jun 4.

Vorasidenib in IDH1- or IDH2-Mutant Low-Grade Glioma.

Mellinghoff IK(1), van den Bent MJ(1), Blumenthal DT(1), Touat M(1), Peters 
KB(1), Clarke J(1), Mendez J(1), Yust-Katz S(1), Welsh L(1), Mason WP(1), Ducray 
F(1), Umemura Y(1), Nabors B(1), Holdhoff M(1), Hottinger AF(1), Arakawa Y(1), 
Sepulveda JM(1), Wick W(1), Soffietti R(1), Perry JR(1), Giglio P(1), de la 
Fuente M(1), Maher EA(1), Schoenfeld S(1), Zhao D(1), Pandya SS(1), Steelman 
L(1), Hassan I(1), Wen PY(1), Cloughesy TF(1); INDIGO Trial Investigators.

Collaborators: Mason W, Macdonald D, Thiessen B, Perry J, Owen S, Chinot O, 
Ducray F, Touat M, Vauleon E, Glas M, Westphal M, Wick W, Bumes E, Platten M, 
Blumenthal DT, Yust-Katz S, Lossos A, Taliansky A, Soffietti R, Simonelli M, 
Pace A, Lombardi G, Franceschi E, Arakawa Y, Hashimoto N, Sugiyama K, Saito R, 
Tanaka S, Narita Y, Date I, Hirose Y, Mukasa A, Vos F, van den Bent M, Taphoorn 
M, Vaz MA, Sepulveda JM, Vieito M, Hottinger A, Weller M, Migliorini D, McBain 
C, Mulholland P, Welsh L, Erridge S, Lewis J, Puduvalli V, Arrillaga-Romany I, 
Park D, Fink K, Peters K, Cloughesy T, Portnow J, Mellinghoff I, Kumthekar P, 
Jaeckle K, Campian J, Giglio P, Maher E, De La Fuente M, Spigel D, Omuro A, Wen 
P, Mendez J, Nagpal S, Lindhorst S, Clarke J, McGranahan T, Schiff D, Piccioni 
D, Bota D, Ormond D, Tuncer T, Nabors B, Fonkem E, Walbert T, Pearlman M, 
Drappatz J, Holdhoff M, Moots P, Nevel K, Hormigo A, Umemura Y, Villano J, Desai 
A, Lassman A, Lu-Emerson C, Ji Y, Galanis E, Raslan A, Jeyapalan S.

Author information:
(1)From Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York (I.K.M.); the Brain 
Tumor Center, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Rotterdam, the Netherlands (M.J.B.); 
Tel Aviv Medical Center, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv (D.T.B., S.Y.-K.), and 
the Davidoff Cancer Center, Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva (S.Y.-K.) - both 
in Israel; Sorbonne Université, Institut du Cerveau, Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpitaux Universitaires la Pitié Salpêtrière-Charles 
Foix, Paris (M.T.), and Hôpital Neurologique Pierre Wertheimer, Hospices Civils 
de Lyon, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Lyon, Lyon (F.D.) - both in 
France; Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC (K.B.P.); the University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco (J.C.); Huntsman Cancer Institute, 
University of Utah, Salt Lake City (J.M.); the Royal Marsden Hospital, London 
(L.W.); Princess Margaret Cancer Centre (W.P.M.), and Sunnybrook Health Sciences 
Centre (J.R.P.), University of Toronto (W.P.M.) - both in Toronto; the 
University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ann Arbor (Y.U.); the 
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham (B.N.); Sidney Kimmel 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore (M.H.); Lundin Family Brain Tumor Research Center, University Hospital 
of Lausanne, and the University of Lausanne - both in Lausanne, Switzerland 
(A.F.H.); Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan (Y.A.); 
Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, Madrid (J.M.S.); Universitätsklinikum 
Heidelberg and the German Cancer Research Center - both in Heidelberg, Germany 
(W.W.); the University of Turin, Turin, Italy (R.S.); Ohio State University 
Wexner Medical Center, Columbus (P.G.); Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center 
and the Department of Neurology, University of Miami, Miami (M.F.); University 
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas (E.A.M.); Servier Pharmaceuticals 
(S.S., D.Z., S.S.P., L.S., I.H.) and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute (P.Y.W.) - 
both in Boston; and the University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles 
(T.F.C.).

Comment in
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2023 Nov;20(11):737-738. doi: 
10.1038/s41571-023-00804-8.

BACKGROUND: Isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH)-mutant grade 2 gliomas are malignant 
brain tumors that cause considerable disability and premature death. 
Vorasidenib, an oral brain-penetrant inhibitor of mutant IDH1 and IDH2 enzymes, 
showed preliminary activity in IDH-mutant gliomas.
METHODS: In a double-blind, phase 3 trial, we randomly assigned patients with 
residual or recurrent grade 2 IDH-mutant glioma who had undergone no previous 
treatment other than surgery to receive either oral vorasidenib (40 mg once 
daily) or matched placebo in 28-day cycles. The primary end point was 
imaging-based progression-free survival according to blinded assessment by an 
independent review committee. The key secondary end point was the time to the 
next anticancer intervention. Crossover to vorasidenib from placebo was 
permitted on confirmation of imaging-based disease progression. Safety was also 
assessed.
RESULTS: A total of 331 patients were assigned to receive vorasidenib (168 
patients) or placebo (163 patients). At a median follow-up of 14.2 months, 226 
patients (68.3%) were continuing to receive vorasidenib or placebo. 
Progression-free survival was significantly improved in the vorasidenib group as 
compared with the placebo group (median progression-free survival, 27.7 months 
vs. 11.1 months; hazard ratio for disease progression or death, 0.39; 95% 
confidence interval [CI], 0.27 to 0.56; P<0.001). The time to the next 
intervention was significantly improved in the vorasidenib group as compared 
with the placebo group (hazard ratio, 0.26; 95% CI, 0.15 to 0.43; P<0.001). 
Adverse events of grade 3 or higher occurred in 22.8% of the patients who 
received vorasidenib and in 13.5% of those who received placebo. An increased 
alanine aminotransferase level of grade 3 or higher occurred in 9.6% of the 
patients who received vorasidenib and in no patients who received placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with grade 2 IDH-mutant glioma, vorasidenib 
significantly improved progression-free survival and delayed the time to the 
next intervention. (Funded by Servier; INDIGO ClinicalTrials.gov number, 
NCT04164901.).

Copyright © 2023 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2304194
PMCID: PMC11445763
PMID: 37272516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]