---
reference_id: "PMID:26732483"
title: Recent developments in antivirals against hepatitis B virus.
authors:
- Wang YJ
- Yang L
- Zuo JP
journal: Virus Res
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2015.12.014
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent developments in antivirals against hepatitis B virus.
**Authors:** Wang YJ, Yang L, Zuo JP
**Journal:** Virus Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.virusres.2015.12.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.virusres.2015.12.014)

## Content

1. Virus Res. 2016 Feb 2;213:205-213. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2015.12.014. Epub 
2015 Dec 28.

Recent developments in antivirals against hepatitis B virus.

Wang YJ(1), Yang L(2), Zuo JP(3).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Zuchongzhi 
Road 555, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(2)Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Zuchongzhi 
Road 555, Shanghai, People's Republic of China. Electronic address: 
yangli@simm.ac.cn.
(3)Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Zuchongzhi 
Road 555, Shanghai, People's Republic of China. Electronic address: 
jpzuo@simm.ac.cn.

Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection (CHB) is a major cause of cirrhosis 
and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Although the availability of HBV vaccines 
effectively reduces the incidence of HBV infection, the healthcare burden from 
CHB remains high. Several antiviral agents, such as (pegylated-) interferon-α 
and nucleos(t)ide analogs are approved by US FDA for chronic HBV infection 
management. Entecavir (ETV) and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF) have been 
recommended as the first-line anti-HBV drugs for excellent viral suppression 
with a low risk of antiviral resistance, but the cost and need for essentially 
life-long treatment are considerable challenges. And none of these current 
treatments can eradicate the intracellular virus. Given these issues, there is 
still an unmet medical need for an efficient HBV cure. We summarize here the key 
developments of antivirals against hepatitis B virus, including HBV replication 
cycle inhibitors and host immune regulators.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2015.12.014
PMID: 26732483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]