---
reference_id: "PMID:9930576"
title: Synovial sarcoma.
authors:
- Fisher C
journal: Ann Diagn Pathol
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1016/s1092-9134(98)80042-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Synovial sarcoma.
**Authors:** Fisher C
**Journal:** Ann Diagn Pathol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1092-9134(98)80042-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1092-9134(98)80042-7)

## Content

1. Ann Diagn Pathol. 1998 Dec;2(6):401-21. doi: 10.1016/s1092-9134(98)80042-7.

Synovial sarcoma.

Fisher C(1).

Author information:
(1)Royal Marsden NHS Trust, London, UK.

Synovial sarcoma is a rare soft tissue tumor of children and adults that is 
unrelated to synovium and can occur in almost any part of the body. The familiar 
biphasic synovial sarcoma has discernible glandular or solid epithelial 
structures, and monophasic forms have characteristic ovoid or spindle cells with 
only immunohistochemical or ultrastructural evidence of epithelial 
differentiation. There are several morphologic patterns, including myxoid and 
hemangiopericytic, and behaviorally distinct calcifying, ossifying, and poorly 
differentiated subtypes can be recognized. Most synovial sarcomas are 
immunoreactive for cytokeratin, epithelial membrane antigen, and bc12 protein, 
and negative for CD34, and many express S100 protein and CD99 (MIC2). Nearly all 
synovial sarcomas have a specific t(x;18) (p11.2;q11.2) chromosomal abnormality, 
resulting in fusion of either of two variants of the SSX gene with the SYT gene; 
the genetic features may relate to morphology and outcome. The differential 
diagnosis can include a wide range of spindled, polygonal, or round cell 
sarcomas. Clinically, there have been marked recent improvements in local 
control of disease and lesser ones in management of metastases. The pathology, 
differential diagnosis, and behavior of this unique tumor are reviewed.

DOI: 10.1016/s1092-9134(98)80042-7
PMID: 9930576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]