---
reference_id: "PMID:15846745"
title: Risperidone versus olanzapine for schizophrenia.
authors:
- Jayaram MB
- Hosalli P
journal: Cochrane Database Syst Rev
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD005237
keywords:
- Antipsychotic Agents/therapeutic use
- Benzodiazepines/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Male
- Olanzapine
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Risperidone/therapeutic use
- Schizophrenia/drug therapy
- Schizophrenic Psychology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risperidone versus olanzapine for schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Jayaram MB, Hosalli P
**Journal:** Cochrane Database Syst Rev (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/14651858.CD005237](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD005237)

## Content

1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005 Apr 18;(2):CD005237. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD005237.

Risperidone versus olanzapine for schizophrenia.

Jayaram MB(1), Hosalli P.

Author information:
(1)Becklin Centre, St James University Hospital, Leeds, West Yorkshire, UK, LS9 
3BE. maheshbj@hotmail.com

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2006 Apr 19;(2):CD005237. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD005237.pub2.

BACKGROUND: Antipsychotic medication is a mainstay of treatment for 
schizophrenia and risperidone and olanzapine are the most popular treatment 
choice of the new generation drugs.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the clinical effects, safety and cost effectiveness of 
risperidone compared with olanzapine for treating schizophrenia.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Schizophrenia Group's Register (June 
2004) which is based on regular searches of, amongst others, BIOSIS, CENTRAL, 
CINAHL, EMBASE, MEDLINE and PsycINFO. References of all identified studies were 
inspected for further trials. We also contacted relevant pharmaceutical 
companies for additional information.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included all clinical randomised trials comparing 
risperidone with olanzapine for schizophrenia and schizophrenia-like psychoses.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We extracted data independently. For homogenous 
dichotomous data we calculated random effects, relative risk (RR), 95% 
confidence intervals (CI) and, where appropriate, numbers needed to treat/harm 
(NNT/H) on an intention-to-treat basis. For continuous data, we calculated 
weighted mean differences (WMD).
MAIN RESULTS: We found no difference for the outcome of unchanged or worse in 
the short term (n=548, 2 RCTs, RR 1.00 CI 0.88 to 1.15). One study, sponsored by 
the manufactures of olanzapine, favoured this drug for the outcome of 
relapse/rehospitalisation by 12 months (n=279, RR 2.16 CI 1.31 to 3.54, NNT 7 CI 
4 to 25). Most mental state data showed the two drugs to as effective as each 
other (n=552, 2 RCTs, RR 'no <20% decrease PANSS by eight weeks' 1.01 CI 0.87 to 
1.16). At least two thirds of people given risperidone or olanzapine experienced 
an adverse event (n=300, 2 RCTs, RR 1.16 CI 0.70 to 1.94). About 20% had 
anticholinergic symptoms (n=719, 3 RCTs, RR 1.12 CI 0.77 to 1.63) and 20% of 
both groups experienced insomnia (n=594, 3 RCTs, RR 1.33 CI 0.95 to 1.85) and 
approximately 33% sleepiness (n=719, 4 RCTs, 0.99 CI 0.79 to 1.23). One third of 
people given either drug experienced some extrapyramidal symptoms (n=893, 3 
RCTs, RR 1.18 CI 0.75 to 1.88) but 25% of people using risperidone require 
medication to alleviate extrapyramidal adverse effects (n=419, 2 RCTs, RR 1.76 
CI 1.25 to 2.48, NNH 8 CI 4 to 25). People allocated to risperidone were less 
likely to gain weight compared with those given olanzapine and the weight gain 
resulting from olanzapine can be considerable and of rapid onset (n=377, 1 RCT, 
RR gain more than 7% of their baseline weight 0.40 CI 0.23 to 0.70, NNT 8 CI 6 
to 17). Risperidone may cause more sexual dysfunction than olanzapine (n=370, 2 
RCTs, RR abnormal ejaculation 4.36 CI 1.38 to 13.76, NNH 20 CI 6 to 176; n=31, 1 
RCT, RR impotence 2.43 CI 0.24 to 24.07). Within trials both drugs are 
associated with equal attrition (n=1217, 7 RCTs, RR leaving the study early 1.17 
CI 0.92 to 1.49).
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Data regarding quality of life and economic outcomes are 
difficult to interpret, and for both these highly marketed new drugs we know 
very little from evaluative studies regarding service outcomes, general 
functioning and behaviour, engagement with services and treatment satisfaction. 
There is little to differentiate between risperidone and olanzapine except on 
the issue of adverse effects and both these drugs have unpleasant adverse 
effects. Risperidone is particularly associated with movement disorders and 
sexual dysfunction. Olanzapine can cause considerable rapid weight gain.This 
review highlights the need for large, independent, well designed, conducted and 
reported pragmatic randomised studies.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD005237
PMID: 15846745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]