---
reference_id: "PMID:12938084"
title: Update of the UMD-FBN1 mutation database and creation of an FBN1 polymorphism database.
authors:
- Collod-Béroud G
- Le Bourdelles S
- Ades L
- Ala-Kokko L
- Booms P
- Boxer M
- Child A
- Comeglio P
- De Paepe A
- Hyland JC
- Holman K
- Kaitila I
- Loeys B
- Matyas G
- Nuytinck L
- Peltonen L
- Rantamaki T
- Robinson P
- Steinmann B
- Junien C
- Béroud C
- Boileau C
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1002/humu.10249
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update of the UMD-FBN1 mutation database and creation of an FBN1 polymorphism database.
**Authors:** Collod-Béroud G, Le Bourdelles S, Ades L, Ala-Kokko L, Booms P, Boxer M, Child A, Comeglio P, De Paepe A, Hyland JC, Holman K, Kaitila I, Loeys B, Matyas G, Nuytinck L, Peltonen L, Rantamaki T, Robinson P, Steinmann B, Junien C, Béroud C, Boileau C
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.10249](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.10249)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2003 Sep;22(3):199-208. doi: 10.1002/humu.10249.

Update of the UMD-FBN1 mutation database and creation of an FBN1 polymorphism 
database.

Collod-Béroud G(1), Le Bourdelles S, Ades L, Ala-Kokko L, Booms P, Boxer M, 
Child A, Comeglio P, De Paepe A, Hyland JC, Holman K, Kaitila I, Loeys B, Matyas 
G, Nuytinck L, Peltonen L, Rantamaki T, Robinson P, Steinmann B, Junien C, 
Béroud C, Boileau C.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, IURC, Montpellier, France. 
gwenaelle.beroud@igh.cnrs.fr

Fibrillin is the major component of extracellular microfibrils. Mutations in the 
fibrillin gene on chromosome 15 (FBN1) were first described in the heritable 
connective disorder, Marfan syndrome (MFS). FBN1 has also been shown to harbor 
mutations related to a spectrum of conditions phenotypically related to MFS, 
called "type-1 fibrillinopathies." In 1995, in an effort to standardize the 
information regarding these mutations and to facilitate their mutational 
analysis and identification of structure/function and phenotype/genotype 
relationships, we created a human FBN1 mutation database, UMD-FBN1. This 
database gives access to a software package that provides specific routines and 
optimized multicriteria research and sorting tools. For each mutation, 
information is provided at the gene, protein, and clinical levels. This tool is 
now a worldwide reference and is frequently used by teams working in the field; 
more than 220,000 interrogations have been made to it since January 1998. The 
database has recently been modified to follow the guidelines on mutation 
databases of the HUGO Mutation Database Initiative (MDI) and the Human Genome 
Variation Society (HGVS), including their approved mutation nomenclature. The 
current update shows 559 entries, of which 421 are novel. UMD-FBN1 is accessible 
at www.umd.be/. We have also recently developed a FBN1 polymorphism database in 
order to facilitate diagnostics.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.10249
PMID: 12938084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]