---
reference_id: "PMID:34634966"
title: Distinct features of youth-onset primary antiphospholipid syndrome.
authors:
- Baleeiro C
- Duran CS
- Signorelli F
- Balbi GG
- Bonfá E
- Andrade DC
journal: Lupus
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1177/09612033211038054
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distinct features of youth-onset primary antiphospholipid syndrome.
**Authors:** Baleeiro C, Duran CS, Signorelli F, Balbi GG, Bonfá E, Andrade DC
**Journal:** Lupus (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1177/09612033211038054](https://doi.org/10.1177/09612033211038054)

## Content

1. Lupus. 2021 Oct;30(12):1888-1895. doi: 10.1177/09612033211038054. Epub 2021
Oct  12.

Distinct features of youth-onset primary antiphospholipid syndrome.

Baleeiro C(1), Duran CS(1), Signorelli F(1)(2), Balbi GG(1)(3), Bonfá E(1), 
Andrade DC(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Hospital Das Clínicas HCFMUSP, Faculdade de 
Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo (USP), São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, 28130Hospital Universitário Pedro Ernesto da 
Universidade Do Estado Do Rio de Janeiro(UERJ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Division of Rheumatology, Hospital Universitário da Universidade Federal de 
Juiz de Fora (UFJF), Juiz de Fora, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Characteristics of primary APS (PAPS) in the youth population have 
never been studied. In contrast with children, pregnancy is genuinely relevant 
in the youth age, and understanding clinical characteristics of PAPS patients 
within this specific age stratum may also provide insights regarding the 
well-known risk of poor obstetric outcomes during the adolescence.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate clinical and laboratory characteristics of patients with 
youth-onset PAPS (15-24 years) and compare them with adult-onset PAPS (over 24 
years old).
METHODS: This was a cross-sectional study derived from two rheumatology 
outpatient clinics. Patients who fulfilled Sidney criteria and who were 15 years 
of age or older at disease onset were included. Secondary APS patients were 
excluded. We subdivided patients into two groups: youth- (15-24 years) and 
adult-onset (over 24 years) and compared them regarding demographic 
characteristics, criteria and non-criteria manifestations, cardiovascular risk 
factors, and aPL status. For the pregnancy outcomes analysis, ever-pregnant 
patients were divided in three groups: youth-onset, early adult-onset (25-34 
years), and late adult-onset (35-49 years).
RESULTS: A total of 250 consecutive PAPS patients were included. Groups had a 
comparable female and Caucasian distribution. We found a similar disease 
duration (14.0±7.9 vs 17.0±10.1 years, p = 0.079) and similar rates of 
thrombotic arterial (34.2% vs. 42.0%, p = 0.250) and venous events (69.7% vs. 
69.5%, p = 0.975) between them. Skin ulcers were more frequent in the 
youth-onset group (17.1% vs. 4.0%, p = 0.001), whereas nephropathy was less 
common (1.3% vs. 8.0%, p = 0.039). No differences were observed for the other 
criteria and non-criteria manifestations. The adult-onset group presented more 
frequently with hypertension (p = 0.002), hyperlipidemia (p = 0.008), and 
smoking (p = 0.003). The youth-onset group presented a higher frequency of 
obstetric events as the first manifestation of PAPS (30.3% vs. 21.7%, p = 
0.005), with worse pregnancy outcomes, namely, fetal death (58.5% vs. 46.4% vs. 
24.1%, p = 0.012) and premature delivery (35.8% vs. 19.0% vs. 10.3%, p = 0.016). 
Of note, all groups had a comparable number of pregnancies (2.81±2.52 vs 
2.74±2.07, p = 0.899).
CONCLUSION: This study provides novel evidence that youth-onset PAPS presents a 
higher frequency of obstetric complications as its first manifestation, with an 
increased risk of fetal death and preterm delivery. Early recognition of this 
condition by obstetricians is essential to improve prognosis.

DOI: 10.1177/09612033211038054
PMID: 34634966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]