---
reference_id: "PMID:33580596"
title: "Dysarthria following acute ischemic stroke: Prospective evaluation of characteristics, type and severity."
authors:
- De Cock E
- Oostra K
- Bliki L
- Volkaerts AS
- Hemelsoet D
- De Herdt V
- Batens K
journal: Int J Lang Commun Disord
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/1460-6984.12607
keywords:
- Aged
- "Brain Ischemia/complications, diagnosis"
- "Dysarthria/diagnosis, etiology"
- Female
- Humans
- Ischemic Stroke
- Speech Intelligibility
- Stroke/complications
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dysarthria following acute ischemic stroke: Prospective evaluation of characteristics, type and severity.
**Authors:** De Cock E, Oostra K, Bliki L, Volkaerts AS, Hemelsoet D, De Herdt V, Batens K
**Journal:** Int J Lang Commun Disord (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1460-6984.12607](https://doi.org/10.1111/1460-6984.12607)

## Content

1. Int J Lang Commun Disord. 2021 May;56(3):549-557. doi:
10.1111/1460-6984.12607.  Epub 2021 Feb 12.

Dysarthria following acute ischemic stroke: Prospective evaluation of
characteristics, type and severity.

De Cock E(1)(2), Oostra K(2), Bliki L(3), Volkaerts AS(3), Hemelsoet D(1), De
Herdt V(1), Batens K(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Stroke Unit, Department of Neurology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent,
Belgium.
(2)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Ghent University
Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Department of Speech, Language and Hearing Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent,
Belgium.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Dysarthria is a common symptom following stroke and represents an
important cause of functional impairment in stroke patients. A better
characterization of dysarthria could facilitate differential diagnosis and
optimize healthcare service distribution.
AIM: To determine the speech characteristics, dysarthria type and severity in
the acute phase following ischemic stroke in a comprehensive stroke centre.
METHODS & PROCEDURES: First-ever ischemic stroke patients consecutively admitted
to the Stroke Unit of Ghent University Hospital were included in this
prospective clinical study between March 2018 and October 2019. All participants
admitted to the Stroke Unit were screened for dysarthria by a speech-language
pathologist within 72 h after admission. When dysarthria was identified, speech
characteristics were evaluated via auditory-perceptual assessment and objective
measurement of acoustic parameters. Dysarthria type was determined based on the
Mayo Classification System. Severity of impairment was scored at function and
activity level using the Radboud Dysarthria Assessment and the evaluation of
speech intelligibility at sentence level using the Dutch Speech Intelligibility
Assessment. In addition, dysarthria recovery was separately evaluated in all
participants using the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) at
hospital admission, day 3 ± 2 and day 7.
OUTCOMES & RESULTS: A total of 67 out of 151 participants (44%; mean age = 69
years; SD = 13; 28 females) were diagnosed with dysarthria in the acute phase
following stroke. Standardized assessments were possible in 72% (48/67) of
participants. Imprecise articulation of consonants, harsh voice quality and
audible inspiration were the most frequent observed speech characteristics. The
acoustic parameters maximum phonation time and maximum loudness deviated most
from normative values. Unilateral upper motor neuron (UUMN) was the main
dysarthria type present in 52% (25/48) of participants. A total of 58% (28/48)
and 71% (34/48) of participants had no/minimal/mild difficulties at the
functional and activity levels, respectively. Speech intelligibility was mildly
impaired (median = 91%; IQR = 73-97). According to the NIHSS, sub-item speech
score at hospital admission, 46% (70/151) of participants had dysarthria, of
which half recovered completely from their dysarthria within 1 week after stroke
symptom onset.
CONCLUSIONS & IMPLICATIONS: UUMN was the dominant dysarthria type, and the
majority of participants had a mild dysarthria. Half the participants showed
complete recovery within 1 week following symptom onset. The observed speech
characteristics mainly reflect impairments in the subsystem's articulation,
phonation and respiration. Objective measurements of acoustic parameters
corroborate these findings. Future research should focus on longitudinal
assessment to investigate recovery of symptoms and the long-term impact of
dysarthria on social participation. What this paper adds What is already known
on the subject There are few data concerning the presentation of dysarthria
following acute ischemic stroke. Moreover, previous research did not include
objective measurements of speech characteristics and dysarthria severity. There
was a need to determine prospectively speech characteristics, dysarthria type
and severity in a stroke population using standardized assessments. What this
paper adds to existing knowledge The findings of this study show a high
prevalence of dysarthria following acute ischemic stroke. This study confirms
previous findings that the speech of dysarthric patients following acute
ischemic stroke was mostly characterized by imprecise articulation of
consonants, a harsh voice quality and audible inspiration. The results of the
objective measures confirm these findings. We added evidence that UUMN is the
most prevalent dysarthria type in a stroke population, and that the majority of
participants had mild dysarthria. A high rate of dysarthria recovery was seen in
the first week following symptom onset. What are the potential or actual
clinical implications of this work? The findings of this study contribute to the
limited research performed regarding post-stroke dysarthria. The results can
help optimize the distribution of healthcare resources. The majority of
participants have a mild dysarthria, making the identification of the specific
needs of this group an important area of concern. The evaluation of impaired
speech subsystems and characteristics, especially supplemented with objective
measures of acoustic parameters, and the classification of the type and severity
of dysarthria can be helpful to monitor early progress in the acute phase
post-stroke.

© 2021 Royal College of Speech and Language Therapists.

DOI: 10.1111/1460-6984.12607
PMID: 33580596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]