---
reference_id: "PMID:36936877"
title: Interaction between inorganic phosphate concentration and glucose metabolism in mild refeeding syndrome model.
authors:
- Tanaka S
- Kawamura H
- Imoto Y
- Urata Y
- Hontama S
- Oda M
- Sakaue M
- Ito M
journal: J Clin Biochem Nutr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3164/jcbn.22-99
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interaction between inorganic phosphate concentration and glucose metabolism in mild refeeding syndrome model.
**Authors:** Tanaka S, Kawamura H, Imoto Y, Urata Y, Hontama S, Oda M, Sakaue M, Ito M
**Journal:** J Clin Biochem Nutr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3164/jcbn.22-99](https://doi.org/10.3164/jcbn.22-99)

## Content

1. J Clin Biochem Nutr. 2023 Mar;72(2):126-131. doi: 10.3164/jcbn.22-99. Epub
2023  Feb 8.

Interaction between inorganic phosphate concentration and glucose metabolism in 
mild refeeding syndrome model.

Tanaka S(1), Kawamura H(1), Imoto Y(2), Urata Y(2), Hontama S(2), Oda M(2), 
Sakaue M(1), Ito M(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Human Science and Environment, University of Hyogo, 1-1-12 
Shinzaike-Honcho, Himeji, Hyogo 670-0092, Japan.
(2)School of Human Science and Environment, University of Hyogo, 1-1-12 
Shinzaike-Honcho, Himeji, Hyogo 670-0092, Japan.

Refeeding syndrome is a major clinical problem that leads to fatal complications 
in patients suffering from malnutrition. Hypophosphatemia inevitably is observed 
at the onset of refeeding syndrome and therefore is monitored during refeeding; 
however, the causes of metabolic changes in phosphate concentration during 
refeeding remain poorly understood. In a previous study, we established a 
refeeding syndrome model employing total parenteral nutrition with 
insulin-induced hypophosphatemia, but the symptoms were severe and the metabolic 
mechanisms in this model may not have been representative of clinical 
conditions. Therefore, we established a new animal model of mild refeeding 
syndrome by using a shorter fasting period followed by a single refeeding. These 
mild refeeding syndrome-model rats exhibited hypophosphatemia without increases 
in urinary phosphate excretion. Interestingly, administration of the combination 
of phosphate and insulin during refeeding promoted insulin secretion during 
refeeding. This model implies that Pi may directly promote insulin secretion in 
pancreatic cells. These results clarify the interaction between phosphate and 
glucose metabolism pancreatic cells during refeeding syndrome in a mild 
refeeding syndrome model.

Copyright © 2023 JCBN.

DOI: 10.3164/jcbn.22-99
PMCID: PMC10017325
PMID: 36936877

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflicts of interest were 
disclosed.