---
reference_id: "PMID:36268734"
title: "Epidemiology of acute flaccid myelitis in children in the Netherlands, 2014 to 2019."
authors:
- Helfferich J
- de Lange MM
- Benschop KS
- Jacobs BC
- Van Leer-Buter CC
- Meijer A
- Bakker DP
- de Bie E
- Braakman HM
- Brandsma R
- Neuteboom RF
- Niks EH
- Niermeijer JM
- Roelfsema V
- Schoenmaker N
- Sie LT
- Niesters HG
- Brouwer OF
- Te Wierik MJ
journal: Euro Surveill
year: '2022'
doi: 10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2022.27.42.2200157
keywords:
- Humans
- Child
- Adolescent
- Netherlands/epidemiology
- "Myelitis/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Central Nervous System Viral Diseases/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Enterovirus D, Human"
- "Enterovirus Infections/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Enterovirus A, Human"
- Poliomyelitis
- Neuromuscular Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of acute flaccid myelitis in children in the Netherlands, 2014 to 2019.
**Authors:** Helfferich J, de Lange MM, Benschop KS, Jacobs BC, Van Leer-Buter CC, Meijer A, Bakker DP, de Bie E, Braakman HM, Brandsma R, Neuteboom RF, Niks EH, Niermeijer JM, Roelfsema V, Schoenmaker N, Sie LT, Niesters HG, Brouwer OF, Te Wierik MJ
**Journal:** Euro Surveill (2022)
**DOI:** [10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2022.27.42.2200157](https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2022.27.42.2200157)

## Content

1. Euro Surveill. 2022 Oct;27(42):2200157. doi:
10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2022.27.42.2200157.

Epidemiology of acute flaccid myelitis in children in the Netherlands, 2014 to
2019.

Helfferich J(1), de Lange MM(2), Benschop KS(2), Jacobs BC(3), Van Leer-Buter
CC(4), Meijer A(2), Bakker DP(5), de Bie E(5), Braakman HM(6), Brandsma R(7),
Neuteboom RF(8), Niks EH(9), Niermeijer JM(10), Roelfsema V(11), Schoenmaker
N(12), Sie LT(13), Niesters HG(4), Brouwer OF(1), Te Wierik MJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(2)Centre for Infectious Disease Control (CIb), National Institute for Public
Health and the Environment (RIVM), Bilthoven, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Neurology and Immunology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infection Prevention, University of
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Amsterdam University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Amalia Children's Hospital, Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(7)Department of Paediatric Neurology, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(8)Department of Neurology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(9)Department of Neurology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the
Netherlands.
(10)Department of Neurology, Elisabeth-Tweesteden Hospital, Tilburg, the
Netherlands.
(11)Department of Paediatrics, Martini Hospital, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(12)Department of Neurology, Isala Hospital, Zwolle, the Netherlands.
(13)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Haga Hospital, the Hague, the
Netherlands.

BackgroundAcute flaccid myelitis (AFM) is a polio-like condition affecting
mainly children and involving the central nervous system (CNS). AFM has been
associated with different non-polio-enteroviruses (EVs), in particular EV-D68
and EV-A71. Reliable incidence rates in European countries are not
available.AimTo report AFM incidence in children in the Netherlands and its
occurrence relative to EV-D68 and EV-A71 detections.MethodsIn 10 Dutch
hospitals, we reviewed electronic health records of patients diagnosed with a
clinical syndrome including limb weakness and/or CNS infection and who
were < 18 years old when symptoms started. After excluding those with a clear
alternative diagnosis to AFM, those without weakness, and removing duplicate
records, only patients diagnosed in January 2014-December 2019 were retained and
further classified according to current diagnostic criteria. Incidence rates
were based on definite and probable AFM cases. Cases' occurrences during the
study period were co-examined with laboratory-surveillance detections of EV-D68
and EV-A71.ResultsAmong 143 patients included, eight were classified as definite
and three as probable AFM. AFM mean incidence rate was 0.06/100,000
children/year (95% CI: -0.03 to 0.14). All patient samples were negative for
EV-A71. Of respiratory samples in seven patients, five were EV-D68 positive. AFM
cases clustered in periods with increased EV-D68 and EV-A71
detections.ConclusionsAFM is rare in children in the Netherlands. The temporal
coincidence of EV-D68 circulation and AFM and the detection of this virus in
several cases' samples support its association with AFM. Increased AFM awareness
among clinicians, adequate diagnostics and case registration matter to monitor
the incidence.

DOI: 10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2022.27.42.2200157
PMCID: PMC9585879
PMID: 36268734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: Jelte Helfferich, Marit
M.A. de Lange, Kimberley S.M. Benschop, Bart C. Jacobs, Coretta C. Van
Leer-Buter, Adam Meijer, Dewi P. Bakker, Eva de Bie, Hilde M.H. Braakman, Rick
Brandsma, Rinze F. Neuteboom, Erik H. Niks, Jikke-Mien Niermeijer, Vincent
Roelfsema, Niels Schoenmaker, Lilian T. Sie, Hubert G. Niesters, Oebele F.
Brouwer, Margreet J.M. te Wierik declare no potential conflict of interest in
relation to this study.
