---
reference_id: "PMID:23043324"
title: The developmental genetics of Hirschsprung's disease.
authors:
- Bergeron KF
- Silversides DW
- Pilon N
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1111/cge.12032
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The developmental genetics of Hirschsprung's disease.
**Authors:** Bergeron KF, Silversides DW, Pilon N
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.12032](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.12032)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2013 Jan;83(1):15-22. doi: 10.1111/cge.12032. Epub 2012 Nov 7.

The developmental genetics of Hirschsprung's disease.

Bergeron KF(1), Silversides DW, Pilon N.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Genetics of Development Laboratory, Department of Biological 
Sciences, University of Quebec at Montreal, Canada.

Hirschsprung's disease (HSCR), also known as aganglionic megacolon, derives from 
a congenital malformation of the enteric nervous system (ENS). It displays an 
incidence of 1 in 5000 live births with a 4:1 male to female sex ratio. Clinical 
signs include severe constipation and distended bowel due to a non-motile colon. 
If left untreated, aganglionic megacolon is lethal. This severe congenital 
condition is caused by the absence of colonic neural ganglia and thus lack of 
intrinsic innervation of the colon due in turn to improper colonization of the 
developing intestines by ENS progenitor cells. These progenitor cells are 
derived from a transient stem cell population called neural crest cells (NCC). 
The genetics of HSCR is complex and can involve mutations in multiple genes. 
However, it is estimated that mutations in known genes account for less than 
half of the cases of HSCR observed clinically. The male sex bias is currently 
unexplained. The objective of this review is to provide an overview of the 
pathophysiology and genetics of HSCR, within the context of our current 
knowledge of NCC development, sex chromosome genetics and laboratory models.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.12032
PMID: 23043324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]