---
reference_id: "PMID:37435539"
title: Innate immune responses in Behçet disease and relapsing polychondritis.
authors:
- Shimizu J
- Murayama MA
- Mizukami Y
- Arimitsu N
- Takai K
- Miyabe Y
journal: Front Med (Lausanne)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1055753
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Innate immune responses in Behçet disease and relapsing polychondritis.
**Authors:** Shimizu J, Murayama MA, Mizukami Y, Arimitsu N, Takai K, Miyabe Y
**Journal:** Front Med (Lausanne) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmed.2023.1055753](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2023.1055753)

## Content

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2023 Jun 26;10:1055753. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1055753. 
eCollection 2023.

Innate immune responses in Behçet disease and relapsing polychondritis.

Shimizu J(1), Murayama MA(2), Mizukami Y(1), Arimitsu N(1), Takai K(1), Miyabe 
Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology and Parasitology, St. Marianna University of School 
of Medicine, Kawasaki, Kanagawa, Japan.
(2)Department of Animal Models for Human Diseases, Institute of Biomedical 
Science, Kansai Medical University, Hirakata, Osaka, Japan.

Behçet disease (BD) and relapsing polychondritis (RP) are chronic multisystem 
disorders characterized by recurrent flare-ups of tissue inflammation. Major 
clinical manifestations of BD are oral aphthae, genital aphthous ulcers, skin 
lesions, arthritis, and uveitis. Patients with BD may develop rare but serious 
neural, intestinal, and vascular complications, with high relapse rates. 
Meanwhile, RP is characterized by the inflammation of the cartilaginous tissues 
of the ears, nose, peripheral joints, and tracheobronchial tree. Additionally, 
it affects the proteoglycan-rich structures in the eyes, inner ear, heart, blood 
vessels, and kidneys. The mouth and genital ulcers with inflamed cartilage 
(MAGIC) syndrome is a common characteristic of BD and RP. The immunopathology of 
these two diseases may be closely related. It is established that the genetic 
predisposition to BD is related to the human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-B51 gene. 
Skin histopathology demonstrates the overactivation of innate immunity, such as 
neutrophilic dermatitis/panniculitis, in patients with BD. Monocytes and 
neutrophils frequently infiltrate cartilaginous tissues of patients with RP. 
Somatic mutations in UBA1, which encodes a ubiquitylation-related enzyme, cause 
vacuoles, E1 enzyme, X-linked, autoinflammatory, somatic syndrome (VEXAS) with 
severe systemic inflammation and activation of myeloid cells. VEXAS prompts 
auricular and/or nasal chondritis, with neutrophilic infiltration around the 
cartilage in 52-60% of patients. Thus, innate immune cells may play an important 
role in the initiation of inflammatory processes underlying both diseases. This 
review summarizes the recent advances in our understanding of the innate 
cell-mediated immunopathology of BD and RP, with a focus on the common and 
distinct features of these mechanisms.

Copyright © 2023 Shimizu, Murayama, Mizukami, Arimitsu, Takai and Miyabe.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1055753
PMCID: PMC10331610
PMID: 37435539

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.