---
reference_id: "PMID:33197049"
title: "Primary myelofibrosis: 2021 update on diagnosis, risk-stratification and management."
authors:
- Tefferi A
journal: Am J Hematol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/ajh.26050
keywords:
- Disease-Free Survival
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Primary Myelofibrosis/diagnosis, genetics, mortality, therapy"
- Risk Assessment
- Survival Rate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary myelofibrosis: 2021 update on diagnosis, risk-stratification and management.
**Authors:** Tefferi A
**Journal:** Am J Hematol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajh.26050](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajh.26050)

## Content

1. Am J Hematol. 2021 Jan;96(1):145-162. doi: 10.1002/ajh.26050. Epub 2020 Dec 2.

Primary myelofibrosis: 2021 update on diagnosis, risk-stratification and 
management.

Tefferi A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota, USA.

DISEASE OVERVIEW: Primary myelofibrosis (PMF) is a myeloproliferative neoplasm 
(MPN) characterized by stem cell-derived clonal myeloproliferation that is often 
but not always accompanied by JAK2, CALR, or MPL mutations. Additional disease 
features include bone marrow reticulin/collagen fibrosis, aberrant inflammatory 
cytokine expression, anemia, hepatosplenomegaly, extramedullary hematopoiesis 
(EMH), constitutional symptoms, cachexia, leukemic progression, and shortened 
survival.
DIAGNOSIS: Bone marrow morphology is the primary basis for diagnosis. Presence 
of JAK2, CALR, or MPL mutation, expected in around 90% of the patients, is 
supportive but not essential for diagnosis; these mutations are also prevalent 
in the closely related MPNs, namely polycythemia vera (PV) and essential 
thrombocythemia (ET). The 2016 World Health Organization classification system 
distinguishes "prefibrotic" from "overtly fibrotic" PMF; the former might mimic 
ET in its presentation. Furthermore, approximately 15% of patients with ET or PV 
might progress into a PMF-like phenotype (post-ET/PV MF) during their clinical 
course.
ADVERSE MUTATIONS: SRSF2, ASXL1, and U2AF1-Q157 mutations predict inferior 
survival in PMF, independent of each other and other risk factors. RAS/CBL 
mutations predicted resistance to ruxolitinib therapy.
ADVERSE KARYOTYPE: Very high risk abnormalities include -7, inv (3), i(17q), 
+21, +19, 12p-, and 11q-.
RISK STRATIFICATION: Two new prognostic systems for PMF have recently been 
introduced: GIPSS (genetically-inspired prognostic scoring system) and MIPSS70+ 
version 2.0 (MIPSSv2; mutation- and karyotype-enhanced international prognostic 
scoring system). GIPSS is based exclusively on mutations and karyotype. MIPSSv2 
includes, in addition, clinical risk factors. GIPSS features four and MIPSSv2 
five risk categories.
RISK-ADAPTED THERAPY: Observation alone is advised for MIPSSv2 "low" and "very 
low" risk disease (estimated 10-year survival 56%-92%); allogeneic hematopoietic 
stem cell transplant (AHSCT) is the preferred treatment for "very high" and 
"high" risk disease (estimated 10-year survival 0%-13%); treatment-requiring 
patients with intermediate-risk disease (estimated 10-year survival 30%) are 
best served by participating in clinical trials. In non-transplant candidates, 
conventional treatment for anemia includes androgens, prednisone, thalidomide, 
and danazol; for symptomatic splenomegaly, hydroxyurea and ruxolitinib; and for 
constitutional symptoms, ruxolitinib. Fedratinib, another JAK2 inhibitor, has 
now been FDA-approved for use in ruxolitinib failures. Splenectomy is considered 
for drug-refractory splenomegaly and involved field radiotherapy for 
non-hepatosplenic EMH and extremity bone pain.
NEW DIRECTIONS: A number of new agents, alone or in combination with 
ruxolitinib, are currently under investigation for MF treatment 
(ClinicalTrials.gov); preliminary results from some of these clinical trials 
were presented at the 2020 ASH annual meeting and highlighted in the current 
document.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.26050
PMID: 33197049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]