---
reference_id: "PMID:21142846"
title: Twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS).
authors:
- WAPM Consensus Group on Twin-to-Twin Transfusion
- Baschat A
- Chmait RH
- Deprest J
- Gratacós E
- Hecher K
- Kontopoulos E
- Quintero R
- Skupski DW
- Valsky DV
- Ville Y
journal: J Perinat Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1515/jpm.2010.147
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS).
**Authors:** WAPM Consensus Group on Twin-to-Twin Transfusion, Baschat A, Chmait RH, Deprest J, Gratacós E, Hecher K, Kontopoulos E, Quintero R, Skupski DW, Valsky DV, Ville Y
**Journal:** J Perinat Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1515/jpm.2010.147](https://doi.org/10.1515/jpm.2010.147)

## Content

1. J Perinat Med. 2011 Mar;39(2):107-12. doi: 10.1515/jpm.2010.147. Epub 2010 Dec
 13.

Twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS).

WAPM Consensus Group on Twin-to-Twin Transfusion(1); Baschat A, Chmait RH, 
Deprest J, Gratacós E, Hecher K, Kontopoulos E, Quintero R, Skupski DW, Valsky 
DV, Ville Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, University of 
Maryland, School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS) is a severe complication of 
monochorionic (MC) twin pregnancies, characterized by the development of 
unbalanced chronic blood transfer from one twin, defined as donor twin, to the 
other, defined as recipient, through placental anastomoses. If left untreated, 
TTTS is associated with very high perinatal mortality and morbidity rates, due 
to a combination of fetal and/or obstetric complications. The reported 
prevalence is 10-15% of all MC twins, or about 1 in 2000 pregnancies. This 
consensus document reviews available evidence and offers practical guidance to 
clinicians by providing recommendations on various aspects concerning diagnosis 
and management of TTTS.

DOI: 10.1515/jpm.2010.147
PMID: 21142846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]