---
reference_id: "PMID:34956305"
title: Fatal Neonatal DOLK-CDG as a Rare Form of Syndromic Ichthyosis.
authors:
- Komlosi K
- Claris O
- Collardeau-Frachon S
- Kopp J
- Hausser I
- Mazereeuw-Hautier J
- Jonca N
- Zimmer AD
- Sanlaville D
- Fischer J
journal: Front Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.719624
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fatal Neonatal DOLK-CDG as a Rare Form of Syndromic Ichthyosis.
**Authors:** Komlosi K, Claris O, Collardeau-Frachon S, Kopp J, Hausser I, Mazereeuw-Hautier J, Jonca N, Zimmer AD, Sanlaville D, Fischer J
**Journal:** Front Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2021.719624](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2021.719624)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2021 Dec 8;12:719624. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.719624. eCollection
 2021.

Fatal Neonatal DOLK-CDG as a Rare Form of Syndromic Ichthyosis.

Komlosi K(1), Claris O(2)(3), Collardeau-Frachon S(4)(5), Kopp J(1), Hausser 
I(6), Mazereeuw-Hautier J(7), Jonca N(8)(9), Zimmer AD(1), Sanlaville D(10)(11), 
Fischer J(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Center, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Department of Neonatology, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Hôpital Femme Mère 
Enfant, Bron, France.
(3)Claude Bernard University, Lyon, France.
(4)Hospices Civils de Lyon, Hôpital Femme Mère Enfant, Institut de Pathologie, 
Bron, France.
(5)Faculté de médecine Lyon Est, Claude Bernard University, Lyon, France.
(6)Institute of Pathology, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(7)Dermatology Department, Reference Center for Rare Skin Diseases, CHU Larrey, 
Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France.
(8)Infinity, CNRS, Inserm, UPS, Université Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
(9)CHU Toulouse, Hôpital Purpan, Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire et 
Cytologie, Institut Fédératif de Biologie, Toulouse, France.
(10)Hospices Civils de Lyon, Hôpital Femme Mère Enfant, Service de Génétique, 
Bron, France.
(11)Institut Neuromyogène, Université de Lyon, Lyon, France.

Neonatal collodion baby or ichthyosis can pose a diagnostic challenge, and in 
many cases, only additional organ involvement or the course of the disease will 
help differentiate between non-syndromic and syndromic forms. Skin abnormalities 
are described in about 20% of the congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG). 
Among those, some rare CDG forms constitute a special group among the syndromic 
ichthyoses and can initially misdirect the diagnosis towards non-syndromic 
genodermatosis. DOLK-CDG is such a rare subtype, resulting from a defect in 
dolichol kinase, in which the congenital skin phenotype (often ichthyosis) is 
later associated with variable extracutaneous features such as dilatative 
cardiomyopathy, epilepsy, microcephaly, visual impairment, and hypoglycemia and 
may lead to a fatal course. We report two neonatal cases of lethal ichthyosis 
from the same family, with distal digital constrictions and a progressive course 
leading to multi-organ failure and death. Postmortem trio whole-exome sequencing 
revealed the compound heterozygous variants NM_014908.3: c.1342G>A, 
p.(Gly448Arg) and NM_014908.3: c.1558A>G, p.(Thr520Ala) in the DOLK gene in the 
first affected child, which were confirmed in the affected sibling. Reduced 
staining with anti-α-Dystroglycan antibody was observed in frozen heart tissue 
of the second child as an expression of reduced O-mannosylation due to the 
dolichol kinase deficiency. In addition to the detailed dermatopathological 
changes, both cases presented hepatic and extrahepatic hemosiderosis on 
histological examination. Our patients represent an early and fatal form of 
DOLK-CDG with a striking presentation at birth resembling severe collodion baby. 
Both cases emphasize the phenotypic variability of glycosylation disorders and 
the importance to broaden the differential diagnosis of ichthyosis and to 
actively search for organ involvement in neonates with ichthyosis.

Copyright © 2021 Komlosi, Claris, Collardeau-Frachon, Kopp, Hausser, 
Mazereeuw-Hautier, Jonca, Zimmer, Sanlaville and Fischer.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2021.719624
PMCID: PMC8693085
PMID: 34956305

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.