---
reference_id: "PMID:34652969"
title: "Meckel's Diverticulum with Dieulafoy's Lesion: A Cause of Severe Hematochezia."
authors:
- Takeyama J
journal: Fetal Pediatr Pathol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/15513815.2021.1989529
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Meckel's Diverticulum with Dieulafoy's Lesion: A Cause of Severe Hematochezia.
**Authors:** Takeyama J
**Journal:** Fetal Pediatr Pathol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15513815.2021.1989529](https://doi.org/10.1080/15513815.2021.1989529)

## Content

1. Fetal Pediatr Pathol. 2022 Oct;41(5):865-870. doi: 
10.1080/15513815.2021.1989529. Epub 2021 Oct 15.

Meckel's Diverticulum with Dieulafoy's Lesion: A Cause of Severe Hematochezia.

Takeyama J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Miyagi Children's Hospital, Sendai, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Meckel's diverticulum (MD) is a remnant of the omphalomesenteric 
duct. Although the majority of MD are asymptomatic, it can present with severe 
hematochezia. Hematochezia is generally considered to result from a peptic ulcer 
caused by ectopic gastric mucosa in MD. However, this hypothesis has not been 
proved.
METHODS: 10 cases of surgically resected MD initially presenting with severe 
hematochezia were histologically examined.
RESULTS: Ectopic gastric mucosa was present in 9 cases, two of which also 
contained ectopic pancreas. No ectopic tissue was found in one case, which shows 
that bleeding can occur in MD without ectopic gastric mucosa. In addition, a 
rupture of aberrant submucosal arterioles through the overlying mucosa, a 
vascular abnormality called Dieulafoy's lesion, was detected in all the 10 
cases.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that the actual cause of massive bleeding in MD 
is not a peptic ulcer, but Dieulafoy's lesion.

DOI: 10.1080/15513815.2021.1989529
PMID: 34652969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]