---
reference_id: "PMID:38962337"
title: Clinicopathological study of otomycosis in a tertiary hospital in South-west Nigeria.
authors:
- Sogebi OA
- Oyewole EA
- Osinupebi OA
journal: Afr Health Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.4314/ahs.v24i1.9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinicopathological study of otomycosis in a tertiary hospital in South-west Nigeria.
**Authors:** Sogebi OA, Oyewole EA, Osinupebi OA
**Journal:** Afr Health Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.4314/ahs.v24i1.9](https://doi.org/10.4314/ahs.v24i1.9)

## Content

1. Afr Health Sci. 2024 Mar;24(1):69-75. doi: 10.4314/ahs.v24i1.9.

Clinicopathological study of otomycosis in a tertiary hospital in South-west 
Nigeria.

Sogebi OA(1), Oyewole EA(1), Osinupebi OA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Obafemi Awolowo College of Health Sciences, Olabisi 
Onabanjo University, Sagamu, Nigeria.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, Olabisi Onabanjo 
University Teaching Hospital, Sagamu, Nigeria.

BACKGROUND: Otomycosis is common in environments with hot, humid weather, and it 
may be challenging to manage.
OBJECTIVES: To profile common clinical presentations, the pathogenic fungi, the 
treatment modalities with responses, and explore clinical factors associated 
with having positive fungal culture in Otomycosis.
METHODS: Retrospective review of patients with Otomycosis. Demographic and 
clinical parameters, otoscopic findings and mycological study results were 
recorded. The treatment modalities used and treatment response were summarized. 
Comparative statistical analyses of associated factors to positive fungal 
culture were performed with Chi square test, and Student's t-test, using SPSS 
version 22.0.
RESULTS: Total of 71 patients with M: F=1:1.8, mean age 38.5±19.8 years. Average 
duration of symptoms was 5.4 ±4.6 weeks; common presenting complaint was itchy 
ear (33.8%). Majority of patients (85.9%) had unilateral ear involvement, 50.0% 
applied ototopic medications before presentation, 8.5% had multiple 
co-morbidities. 20 patients had positive fungal culture results; common fungal 
isolate was Aspergillus niger 9 (45.0%).Clinical factors associated with 
positive culture of fungus were age, non-previous use of ototopic drugs, and 
presence of co-morbidity. The most common treatment was local ear debridement 
and use of topical antifungal creams. Majority (91.5%) of the patients responded 
with resolution of fungal infection. Complications rate was 8.4%.
CONCLUSIONS: Otomycosis commonly present with itchy ears, the pathogenic fungi 
commonly being Aspergillus species. The factors associated with positive fungal 
culture were age, non-usage of ototopic agents and presence of co-morbidity. 
Treatment modality used was local debridement and topical antifungal agents, 
which produced favourable response in most patients.

© 2024 Sogebi OA et al.

DOI: 10.4314/ahs.v24i1.9
PMCID: PMC11217849
PMID: 38962337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All the authors have no conflict of interest to 
disclose.