---
reference_id: "PMID:31111319"
title: "Clinical, Immunological, and Genetic Features in Patients with Activated PI3Kδ Syndrome (APDS): a Systematic Review."
authors:
- Jamee M
- Moniri S
- Zaki-Dizaji M
- Olbrich P
- Yazdani R
- Jadidi-Niaragh F
- Aghamahdi F
- Abolhassani H
- Condliffe AM
- Aghamohammadi A
- Azizi G
journal: Clin Rev Allergy Immunol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s12016-019-08738-9
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Autoimmunity
- Biomarkers
- Child
- "Class I Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- Disease Susceptibility
- Female
- Gain of Function Mutation
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Male
- Phenotype
- "Primary Immunodeficiency Diseases/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical, Immunological, and Genetic Features in Patients with Activated PI3Kδ Syndrome (APDS): a Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Jamee M, Moniri S, Zaki-Dizaji M, Olbrich P, Yazdani R, Jadidi-Niaragh F, Aghamahdi F, Abolhassani H, Condliffe AM, Aghamohammadi A, Azizi G
**Journal:** Clin Rev Allergy Immunol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12016-019-08738-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12016-019-08738-9)

## Content

1. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2020 Dec;59(3):323-333. doi: 
10.1007/s12016-019-08738-9.

Clinical, Immunological, and Genetic Features in Patients with Activated PI3Kδ 
Syndrome (APDS): a Systematic Review.

Jamee M(1)(2), Moniri S(1)(2), Zaki-Dizaji M(3)(4), Olbrich P(5), Yazdani R(4), 
Jadidi-Niaragh F(6)(7), Aghamahdi F(2)(8), Abolhassani H(9), Condliffe AM(10), 
Aghamohammadi A(4), Azizi G(11).

Author information:
(1)Student Research Committee, Alborz University of Medical Sciences, Karaj, 
Iran.
(2)Non-communicable Diseases Research Center, Alborz University of Medical 
Sciences, Karaj, Iran.
(3)Legal Medicine Research Center, Legal Medicine Organization, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Research Center for Immunodeficiencies, Children's Medical Center, Tehran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Sección de Infectología e Inmunopatología, Unidad de Pediatría, Hospital 
Virgen del Rocío/Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS), Seville, Spain.
(6)Immunology Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, 
Iran.
(7)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Tabriz University of Medical 
Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(8)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, School of Medicine, Alborz University 
of Medical Sciences, Karaj, Iran.
(9)Division of Clinical Immunology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, 
Karolinska Institute, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(10)Department of Infection, Immunity and Cardiovascular Diseases, University of 
Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.
(11)Non-communicable Diseases Research Center, Alborz University of Medical 
Sciences, Karaj, Iran. azizi@abzums.ac.ir.

Activated phosphoinositide 3-kinase delta syndrome (APDS) is a novel primary 
immunodeficiency (PID) caused by heterozygous gain of function mutations in 
PI3Kδ catalytic p110δ (PIK3CD) or regulatory p85α (PIK3R1) subunits leading to 
APDS1 and APDS2, respectively. Patients with APDS present a spectrum of clinical 
manifestations, particularly recurrent respiratory infections and 
lymphoproliferation. We searched PubMed, Web of Science, and Scopus databases 
for APDS patients and screened for eligibility criteria. A total of 243 APDS 
patients were identified from 55 articles. For all patients, demographic, 
clinical, immunologic, and molecular data were collected. Overall, 179 APDS1 and 
64 APDS2 patients were identified. The most common clinical manifestations were 
respiratory tract infections (pneumonia (43.6%), otitis media (28.8%), and 
sinusitis (25.9%)), lymphoproliferation (70.4%), autoimmunity (28%), enteropathy 
(26.7%), failure to thrive (20.6%), and malignancy (12.8%). The predominant 
immunologic phenotype was hyper-IgM syndrome (48.1%). Immunologic profiling 
showed decreased B cells in 74.8% and CD4+ T cells in 64.8% of APDS patients. 
The c.3061 G>A (p. E1021K) mutation in APDS1 with 85% frequency and c.1425+1 G> 
(A, C, T) (p.434-475del) mutation in APDS2 with 79% frequency were hotspot 
mutations. The majority of APDS patients were placed on long-term immunoglobulin 
replacement therapy. Immunosuppressive agents such as rituximab, tacrolimus, 
rapamycin, and leniolisib were also administered for autoimmunity and 
inflammatory complications. In addition, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
(HSCT) was used in 12.8% of patients. APDS has heterogynous clinical 
manifestations. It should be suspected in patients with history of recurrent 
respiratory infections, lymphoproliferation, and raised IgM levels. Moreover, 
HSCT should be considered in patients with severe and complicated clinical 
manifestations with no or insufficient response to the conventional therapies.

DOI: 10.1007/s12016-019-08738-9
PMID: 31111319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]