---
reference_id: "PMID:22066755"
title: "Predicting the onset of Addison's disease: ACTH, renin, cortisol and 21-hydroxylase autoantibodies."
authors:
- Baker PR
- Nanduri P
- Gottlieb PA
- Yu L
- Klingensmith GJ
- Eisenbarth GS
- Barker JM
journal: Clin Endocrinol (Oxf)
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2265.2011.04276.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predicting the onset of Addison's disease: ACTH, renin, cortisol and 21-hydroxylase autoantibodies.
**Authors:** Baker PR, Nanduri P, Gottlieb PA, Yu L, Klingensmith GJ, Eisenbarth GS, Barker JM
**Journal:** Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2265.2011.04276.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2265.2011.04276.x)

## Content

1. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2012 May;76(5):617-24. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2011.04276.x.

Predicting the onset of Addison's disease: ACTH, renin, cortisol and 
21-hydroxylase autoantibodies.

Baker PR(1), Nanduri P, Gottlieb PA, Yu L, Klingensmith GJ, Eisenbarth GS, 
Barker JM.

Author information:
(1)Barbara Davis Center for Childhood Diabetes, University of Colorado Denver, 
Aurora, CO, USA.

CONTEXT: Autoantibodies to 21-hydroxylase (21OH-AA) precede onset of autoimmune 
Addison's disease (AD). Progression to AD can take months to years, and early 
detection of metabolic decompensation may prevent morbidity and mortality.
OBJECTIVE: To define optimal methods of predicting progression to overt AD 
(defined by subnormal peak cortisol response to Cosyntropin) in 21OH-AA+ 
individuals.
DESIGN, SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: Individuals were screened for 21OH-AA at the 
Barbara Davis Center from 1993 to 2011. Subjects positive for 21OH-AA (n = 87) 
were tested, and the majority prospectively followed for the development of 
Addison's disease, including seven diagnosed with AD upon 21OH-AA discovery 
(discovered), seven who progressed to AD (progressors) and 73 nonprogressors.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURED: Plasma renin activity (PRA), ACTH, baseline cortisol, 
peak cortisol and 21OH-AA were measured at various time points relative to 
diagnosis of AD or last AD-free follow-up.
RESULTS: Compared with nonprogressors, in the time period 2 months-2 years prior 
to the onset of AD, progressors were significantly more likely to have elevated 
ACTH (11-22 pM, P < 1E-4), with no significant differences in mean PRA (P = 
0·07) or baseline cortisol (P = 0·08), and significant but less distinct 
differences seen with 21OH-AA levels (P < 1E-4) and poststimulation cortisol 
levels (P = 6E-3).
CONCLUSION: Moderately elevated ACTH is a more useful early indicator of 
impending AD than 21OH-AA, PRA or peak cortisol, in the 2 months-2 years 
preceding the onset of AD.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2265.2011.04276.x
PMCID: PMC4963152
PMID: 22066755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]