---
reference_id: "PMID:37336770"
title: "A rare cause of intellectual disability: Novel mutations of NFIX gene in two patients with clinical features of Marshall-Smith syndrome and Malan syndrome."
authors:
- Uzman CY
- Gürsoy S
- Hazan F
journal: Int J Dev Neurosci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/jdn.10280
keywords:
- "Intellectual Disability/complications, genetics"
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- NFI Transcription Factors/genetics
- Craniofacial Abnormalities
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Mutation/genetics
- Septo-Optic Dysplasia
- Phenotype
- Humans
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A rare cause of intellectual disability: Novel mutations of NFIX gene in two patients with clinical features of Marshall-Smith syndrome and Malan syndrome.
**Authors:** Uzman CY, Gürsoy S, Hazan F
**Journal:** Int J Dev Neurosci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jdn.10280](https://doi.org/10.1002/jdn.10280)

## Content

1. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2023 Aug;83(5):479-485. doi: 10.1002/jdn.10280. Epub 2023 
Jun 19.

A rare cause of intellectual disability: Novel mutations of NFIX gene in two 
patients with clinical features of Marshall-Smith syndrome and Malan syndrome.

Uzman CY(1), Gürsoy S(1), Hazan F(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Genetics, S.B.Ü. Dr. Behçet Uz Children's Education 
and Research Hospital, Izmir, Turkey.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, S.B.Ü. Dr. Behçet Uz Children's Education and 
Research Hospital, Izmir, Turkey.

Marshall-Smith syndrome (MSS) and Malan syndrome (MS) are both allelic disorders 
caused by mutations in the NFIX gene. MS is characterized by overgrowth, 
intellectual disability, distinctive facial features, and accelerated skeletal 
maturation. On the other hand, clinical features of MSS consist of advanced bone 
age, dysmorphic features, intellectual disability, and failure to thrive at 
birth. In this study, we presented the clinical and molecular findings of two 
different patients with MS and MSS as a rare cause of intellectual disability 
and reported two novel variants in the NFIX gene. NFIX gene sequencing revealed 
a novel heterozygous c.1287delC (p.G430Vfs*34) mutation in patient 1 whose 
clinical diagnosis was compatible with Marshall-Smith syndrome, and in the 
second patient, physical features consistent with Malan syndrome, was detected a 
heterozygous one nucleotide duplication, c.303dupC (pCys102LeufsTer17).

© 2023 International Society for Developmental Neuroscience.

DOI: 10.1002/jdn.10280
PMID: 37336770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]