---
reference_id: "PMID:33052444"
title: "Menorrhagia due to uterine amyloidosis in familial Mediterranean fever: case-based review."
authors:
- Cansu DÜ
- Teke HÜ
- Arik D
- Korkmaz C
journal: Rheumatol Int
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00296-020-04721-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Menorrhagia due to uterine amyloidosis in familial Mediterranean fever: case-based review.
**Authors:** Cansu DÜ, Teke HÜ, Arik D, Korkmaz C
**Journal:** Rheumatol Int (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00296-020-04721-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00296-020-04721-2)

## Content

1. Rheumatol Int. 2021 Jan;41(1):205-211. doi: 10.1007/s00296-020-04721-2. Epub 
2020 Oct 14.

Menorrhagia due to uterine amyloidosis in familial Mediterranean fever: 
case-based review.

Cansu DÜ(1), Teke HÜ(2), Arik D(3), Korkmaz C(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, School of 
Medicine, Eskişehir Osmangazi University, 26480, Eskişehir, Turkey. 
ducansu@hotmail.com.
(2)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Eskişehir Osmangazi 
University, Eskişehir, Turkey.
(3)Division of Pathology, Eskişehir Osmangazi University, Eskişehir, Turkey.
(4)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, School of 
Medicine, Eskişehir Osmangazi University, 26480, Eskişehir, Turkey.

Amyloidosis is described by the deposition of misfolded proteins in the tissues. 
Amyloidoses are classified into two as systemic and localized. Out of the 
systemic forms, AL (light chain) amyloidosis is the most prevalent type; 
however, amyloid A (AA) amyloidosis is more frequently encountered in the 
rheumatology practice. AA amyloidosis stands out as a major complication of 
familial Mediterranean fever (FMF). Splenic and renal involvement is more likely 
in FMF-associated systemic amyloidosis. The involvement of thyroid and adrenal 
glands has also been described, although infrequently. Amyloidoses have a 
heterogeneous plethora of clinical manifestations, with certain phenotypes 
associated with specific amyloid forms. Gynecological amyloidosis is a rare 
condition. Uterine involvement may occur in a localized fashion or may also 
arise as a part of systemic involvement, albeit at a lesser ratio. Several cases 
of uterine AL amyloidosis have been documented so far as an organ involvement in 
systemic AL amyloidosis. On the other hand, uterine amyloidosis associated with 
AA amyloidosis has been described merely in one case with rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA). Here, we presented a 40-year-old female patient with FMF known for 
38 years who underwent splenectomy and hysterectomy due to massive splenomegaly, 
deep anemia, and persistent menometrorrhagia. Histological examinations of 
materials revealed uterine and splenic AA amyloidosis. This case report is 
first-of-its-kind to describe FMF-associated uterine AA amyloidosis and also 
provides a discussion of possible mechanisms of amyloidosis-induced uterine 
bleeding.

DOI: 10.1007/s00296-020-04721-2
PMCID: PMC7556576
PMID: 33052444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.