---
reference_id: "PMID:39048366"
title: Spinal Dural Arteriovenous Fistulas in a Patient with Cowden Syndrome and a Phosphatase and Tensin Homolog Mutation.
authors:
- Fuse A
- Fukae J
- Nakajima A
- Mitsuhashi T
- Kurita A
- Teranishi K
- Arai M
- Shimo Y
- Hattori N
journal: Intern Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.3809-24
keywords:
- Aged
- Humans
- "Central Nervous System Vascular Malformations/genetics, complications, therapy, diagnosis, diagnostic imaging"
- "Embolization, Therapeutic"
- "Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple/genetics, complications, diagnosis"
- Mutation/genetics
- PTEN Phosphohydrolase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinal Dural Arteriovenous Fistulas in a Patient with Cowden Syndrome and a Phosphatase and Tensin Homolog Mutation.
**Authors:** Fuse A, Fukae J, Nakajima A, Mitsuhashi T, Kurita A, Teranishi K, Arai M, Shimo Y, Hattori N
**Journal:** Intern Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.2169/internalmedicine.3809-24](https://doi.org/10.2169/internalmedicine.3809-24)

## Content

1. Intern Med. 2025 Mar 1;64(5):763-767. doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.3809-24. 
Epub 2024 Jul 25.

Spinal Dural Arteriovenous Fistulas in a Patient with Cowden Syndrome and a 
Phosphatase and Tensin Homolog Mutation.

Fuse A(1), Fukae J(1), Nakajima A(1), Mitsuhashi T(2), Kurita A(3), Teranishi 
K(4), Arai M(5), Shimo Y(1), Hattori N(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Juntendo University Nerima Hospital, Japan.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Juntendo University Nerima Hospital, Japan.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Juntendo University Nerima Hospital, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, Juntendo University Faculty of Medicine, Japan.
(5)Department of Clinical Genetics, Juntendo University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Japan.
(6)Department of Neurology, Juntendo University Faculty of Medicine, Japan.

Cowden syndrome (CS) is an autosomal dominant syndrome characterized by the 
development of hamartomas and an increased cancer risk. Most CS patients harbor 
mutations in the phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) gene. We herein report a 
70-year-old patient with CS who presented with lower extremity weakness caused 
by multiple thoracic dural arteriovenous fistulas (AVFs). Genetic testing 
revealed a truncated PTEN mutation (c.485_487delACAinsCC and p.D162Afs*5). 
Vascular malformations are common in CS, particularly in the extremities. 
However, spinal dural AVFs are extremely rare. Furthermore, in our case, the 
number of AVFs increased, and both lower limbs became flaccid four months after 
embolization. Therefore, we suggest that physicians carefully observe the 
changes in symptoms for prolonged periods after embolization.

DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.3809-24
PMCID: PMC11949654
PMID: 39048366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors state that they have no Conflict of 
Interest (COI).