---
reference_id: "PMID:29183082"
title: "Hidradenitis Suppurativa: Advances in Diagnosis and Treatment."
authors:
- Saunte DML
- Jemec GBE
journal: JAMA
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1001/jama.2017.16691
keywords:
- Algorithms
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- Female
- "Hidradenitis Suppurativa/diagnosis, drug therapy, pathology, surgery"
- Humans
- Male
- Severity of Illness Index
- "Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha/antagonists & inhibitors"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hidradenitis Suppurativa: Advances in Diagnosis and Treatment.
**Authors:** Saunte DML, Jemec GBE
**Journal:** JAMA (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.2017.16691](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2017.16691)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2017 Nov 28;318(20):2019-2032. doi: 10.1001/jama.2017.16691.

Hidradenitis Suppurativa: Advances in Diagnosis and Treatment.

Saunte DML(1), Jemec GBE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Zealand University Hospital, Roskilde, Denmark; 
Health Sciences Faculty, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

Comment in
    JAMA. 2018 Apr 17;319(15):1617-1618. doi: 10.1001/jama.2018.0814.
    JAMA. 2018 Apr 17;319(15):1618. doi: 10.1001/jama.2018.0818.

IMPORTANCE: Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is relatively common, with the 
prevalence of 0.05% to 4.10%, yet many patients receive inadequate treatment.
OBJECTIVE: To review the diagnosis, epidemiology, and treatment of HS with an 
emphasis on advances in the last 5 years.
EVIDENCE REVIEW: A literature search was conducted using PubMed, MEDLINE 
(Medical Subject Headings [MeSH]), and EMBASE to include recently published 
treatment studies (searched from September 1, 2011, to May 1, 2017). Reviews, 
guidelines, conference abstracts, and studies with less than 10 patients were 
excluded. Furthermore, internet searches for guidelines on hidradenitis 
suppurativa using Baidu, Bing, Google, and Qwant browsers were performed.
FINDINGS: The diagnosis of HS is made by lesion morphology (nodules, abscesses, 
tunnels, and scars), location (axillae, inframammary folds, groin, perigenital, 
or perineal), and lesion progression (2 recurrences within 6 months or chronic 
or persistent lesions for ≥3 months). HS is more common than was previously 
thought based on epidemiological analysis (0.05%-4.10%). Disability from HS can 
be significant. Patients with HS may have significant comorbidities (eg, 
obesity, metabolic syndrome, diabetes, and arthritis) and increased all-cause 
mortality (incidence rate ratio, 1.35 [95% CI, 1.15-1.59]). Antibiotic treatment 
with combinations of clindamycin and rifampicin, or ertapenem followed by 
combination rifampicin, moxifloxacin, and metronidazole for 6 months is 
effective. Adalimumab is effective in a significant proportion of patients and 
treatment with IL-1 and IL-12 receptor subunit beta 1 (Rb1) antibodies may also 
be useful. Tissue-sparing surgical techniques and carbon dioxide laser 
treatments also are available, but the evidence on clinical outcomes with these 
approaches is limited.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Hidradenitis suppurativa is more common than 
previously thought and may be treated by an array of pharmacological and 
surgical techniques. Hidradenitis suppurativa should be considered in the 
differential diagnosis of nodular lesions or sinus tracts present in the 
axillae, groin, perineal, and mammillary fold regions.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2017.16691
PMID: 29183082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]