---
reference_id: "PMID:9924029"
title: "Thymidine phosphorylase gene mutations in MNGIE, a human mitochondrial disorder."
authors:
- Nishino I
- Spinazzola A
- Hirano M
journal: Science
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1126/science.283.5402.689
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 22/genetics"
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/genetics, metabolism"
- Exons
- Gastrointestinal Motility
- Humans
- Introns
- "Mitochondria, Muscle/genetics"
- "Mitochondrial Encephalomyopathies/enzymology, genetics"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Neovascularization, Physiologic"
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- RNA Splicing
- Sequence Deletion
- Thymidine/metabolism
- "Thymidine Phosphorylase/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thymidine phosphorylase gene mutations in MNGIE, a human mitochondrial disorder.
**Authors:** Nishino I, Spinazzola A, Hirano M
**Journal:** Science (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.283.5402.689](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.283.5402.689)

## Content

1. Science. 1999 Jan 29;283(5402):689-92. doi: 10.1126/science.283.5402.689.

Thymidine phosphorylase gene mutations in MNGIE, a human mitochondrial disorder.

Nishino I(1), Spinazzola A, Hirano M.

Author information:
(1)Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, Department of 
Neurology, 630 West 168 Street, P & S 4-443, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy (MNGIE) is an autosomal 
recessive human disease associated with multiple deletions of skeletal muscle 
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), which have been ascribed to a defect in communication 
between the nuclear and mitochondrial genomes. Examination of 12 MNGIE probands 
revealed homozygous or compound-heterozygous mutations in the gene specifying 
thymidine phosphorylase (TP), located on chromosome 22q13.32-qter. TP activity 
in leukocytes from MNGIE patients was less than 5 percent of controls, 
indicating that loss-of-function mutations in TP cause the disease. The 
pathogenic mechanism may be related to aberrant thymidine metabolism, leading to 
impaired replication or maintenance of mtDNA, or both.

DOI: 10.1126/science.283.5402.689
PMID: 9924029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]