---
reference_id: "PMID:40565527"
title: "Retinal Changes in Early-Onset cblC Methylmalonic Acidemia Identified Through Expanded Newborn Screening: Highlights from a Case Study and Literature Review."
authors:
- Michieletto P
- Baldo F
- Madonia M
- Zupin L
- Pensiero S
- Bonati MT
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/genes16060635
keywords:
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, genetics, pathology, complications"
- Electroretinography
- "Homocystinuria/genetics, diagnosis, pathology, complications"
- Neonatal Screening/methods
- "Retina/pathology, diagnostic imaging"
- "Retinal Degeneration/genetics, diagnosis, pathology"
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Oxidoreductases
- Vitamin B 12 Deficiency/congenital
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retinal Changes in Early-Onset cblC Methylmalonic Acidemia Identified Through Expanded Newborn Screening: Highlights from a Case Study and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Michieletto P, Baldo F, Madonia M, Zupin L, Pensiero S, Bonati MT
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes16060635](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes16060635)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2025 May 25;16(6):635. doi: 10.3390/genes16060635.

Retinal Changes in Early-Onset cblC Methylmalonic Acidemia Identified Through
Expanded Newborn Screening: Highlights from a Case Study and Literature Review.

Michieletto P(1), Baldo F(1), Madonia M(1), Zupin L(1), Pensiero S(1), Bonati
MT(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Maternal and Child Health "Burlo Garofolo", 34137 Trieste, TS,
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Methylmalonic acidemia combined with homocystinuria (cblC) can lead
to infantile maculopathy. Although significant visual deterioration is commonly
reported in early-onset cblC, we found poor awareness regarding formal
assessments of ocular complications, especially in newborns, and of how these
complications relate to the timing of therapy initiation. In this work, we
present our experience and perform a literature review.
METHODS: We performed sequential fundus examinations, optical coherence
tomography (OCT) and full-field electroretinography (ERG) under sedation
following detection of signs of retinal degeneration. We also assessed visual
fields using kinetic attraction perimetry.
RESULTS: We report a newborn who was referred on the eighth day of life,
following a diagnosis of cblC through newborn screening (NBS), and who began
treatment that same day. Close monitoring of retinal changes through fundus
examinations allowed the detection of signs of retinal degeneration at 3 months,
which progressed when checked at 5 months. At 7 months, OCT showed retinal
thinning with the appearance of bull's eye maculopathy in the corresponding
region on fundoscopy; ERG revealed a reduction in the amplitude of both scotopic
and photopic components, whereas kinetic attraction perimetry showed no
abnormalities. Genetic investigation confirmed the disease, compound
heterozygous for a nonsense variant in MMACHC and a splicing one in PRDX1.
CONCLUSIONS: In cblC, retinal degeneration occurs in the first months of life
despite timely treatment and adequate biochemical control, and it may manifest
before any signs of visual deprivation appear. However, there is an early,
narrow window during which therapy may slow down retinal degeneration enough to
prevent sensory nystagmus. We recommend initiating therapy immediately after
biochemical diagnosis, along with close ophthalmological monitoring, before the
appearance of any signs.

DOI: 10.3390/genes16060635
PMCID: PMC12193327
PMID: 40565527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
