---
reference_id: "PMID:24925403"
title: Mites and allergy.
authors:
- Fernández-Caldas E
- Puerta L
- Caraballo L
journal: Chem Immunol Allergy
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1159/000358860
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mites and allergy.
**Authors:** Fernández-Caldas E, Puerta L, Caraballo L
**Journal:** Chem Immunol Allergy (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000358860](https://doi.org/10.1159/000358860)

## Content

1. Chem Immunol Allergy. 2014;100:234-42. doi: 10.1159/000358860. Epub 2014 May
22.

Mites and allergy.

Fernández-Caldas E(1), Puerta L, Caraballo L.

Author information:
(1)Inmunotek SL, Madrid, Spain.

Allergic diseases triggered by mite allergens include allergic 
rhinoconjunctivitis, asthma, atopic dermatitis and other skin diseases. Since 
the early discovery of the allergenic role of mites of the genus 
Dermatophagoides in the mid 1960s, numerous species have been described as the 
source of allergens capable of sensitizing and inducing allergic symptoms in 
sensitized and genetically predisposed individuals. The main sources of 
allergens in house dust worldwide are the fecal pellets of the mite species D. 
pteronyssinus, D. farinae, Euroglyphus maynei and the storage mites Blomia 
tropicalis, Lepidoglyphus destructor and Tyropahgus putrescentiae. Group 1 and 2 
allergens are major house dust mite allergens. The main allergens in storage 
mites include fatty acid-binding proteins, tropomyosin and paramyosin 
homologues, apolipophorin-like proteins, α-tubulins and others, such as group 2, 
5 and 7 allergens. Cross-reactivity is an important and common immunological 
feature among mites. Currently, purified native or recombinant allergens, 
epitope mapping, proteomic approaches and T cell proliferation techniques are 
being used to assess cross-reactivity. Mites contain potent enzymes capable of 
degrading a wide range of substrates. Most mite allergens are enzymes. Advances 
in genomics and molecular biology will improve our ability to understand the 
genetics of specific IgE responses to mites. Mite allergen avoidance and 
immunotherapy are the only two allergen-specific ways to treat mite-induced 
respiratory and cutaneous diseases.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000358860
PMID: 24925403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]