---
reference_id: "PMID:17076533"
title: Nucleophosmin gene mutations in acute myeloid leukemia.
authors:
- Chen W
- Rassidakis GZ
- Medeiros LJ
journal: Arch Pathol Lab Med
year: '2006'
doi: 10.5858/2006-130-1687-NGMIAM
keywords:
- Cytogenetic Analysis
- Genetic Techniques
- Hematologic Neoplasms/genetics
- Humans
- Immunophenotyping
- "Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute/genetics, immunology, pathology, physiopathology"
- Lymphatic Diseases/genetics
- Molecular Biology
- Mutation
- Neoplasms/genetics
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Nucleophosmin
- Prognosis
- "Translocation, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nucleophosmin gene mutations in acute myeloid leukemia.
**Authors:** Chen W, Rassidakis GZ, Medeiros LJ
**Journal:** Arch Pathol Lab Med (2006)
**DOI:** [10.5858/2006-130-1687-NGMIAM](https://doi.org/10.5858/2006-130-1687-NGMIAM)

## Content

1. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2006 Nov;130(11):1687-92. doi:
10.5858/2006-130-1687-NGMIAM.

Nucleophosmin gene mutations in acute myeloid leukemia.

Chen W(1), Rassidakis GZ, Medeiros LJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd, Unit 72, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
weinachen@mdanderson.org

CONTEXT: Heterozygous mutation of the nucleophosmin gene (NPM1) has recently
been described as one of the most frequent genetic lesions in acute myeloid
leukemia (AML).
OBJECTIVE: (1) To discuss the clinical, morphologic, immunophenotypic, and
genetic features of AML with NPM1 gene mutations, along with various detection
methods, (2) To explore the mechanisms by which NPM1 gene mutations contribute
to leukemogenesis. DATA SOURCES/EXTRACTION: Data were analyzed from 7 recently
published papers.
RESULTS: NPM1 gene mutations tend to occur more frequently in women, and also
tend to be associated with a higher white blood cell count. There is no
significant age difference. NPM1-mutated AML is preferentially associated with
AML with monocytic differentiation (in particular FAB M5b), lack of CD34, normal
cytogenetics, FLT3 gene mutations, and a trend toward favorable clinical
outcome, especially in patients without FLT3 gene mutation. NPM1 gene mutations
cause a frame shift in the C-terminus of exon 12, disrupting the NPM
nucleolar-localization signal or generating a leucine-rich nuclear export motif,
resulting in abnormal cytoplasmic accumulation of NPM. Several methods are
suitable for detecting NPM1 gene mutation, including molecular and
immunohistochemical studies. These mutations may contribute to leukemogenesis,
at least in part, through disruption of the p14(ARF) (alternative reading frame)
MDM2-p53 pathway and centrosomal duplication.
CONCLUSIONS: Detection of NPM1 gene mutations may allow dissection of the
heterogeneous group of AML with normal karyotype into prognostically different
subgroups. Exploring the mechanisms may lead to a better understanding of how
mutant NPM protein becomes leukemogenic, thereby providing insights for the
development of new chemotherapeutic agents.

DOI: 10.5858/2006-130-1687-NGMIAM
PMID: 17076533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
