---
reference_id: "PMID:31756356"
title: Impact of therapeutic lifestyle changes in resistant hypertension.
authors:
- Ozemek C
- Tiwari S
- Sabbahi A
- Carbone S
- Lavie CJ
journal: Prog Cardiovasc Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.pcad.2019.11.012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of therapeutic lifestyle changes in resistant hypertension.
**Authors:** Ozemek C, Tiwari S, Sabbahi A, Carbone S, Lavie CJ
**Journal:** Prog Cardiovasc Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pcad.2019.11.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pcad.2019.11.012)

## Content

1. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2020 Jan-Feb;63(1):4-9. doi: 10.1016/j.pcad.2019.11.012. 
Epub 2019 Nov 20.

Impact of therapeutic lifestyle changes in resistant hypertension.

Ozemek C(1), Tiwari S(2), Sabbahi A(3), Carbone S(4), Lavie CJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Therapy, College of Applied Health Sciences, 
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. Electronic address: 
ozemek@uic.edu.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at 
Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Department of Physical Therapy, College of Applied Health Sciences, 
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA; School of Physical Therapy, 
South College, Knoxville, TN.
(4)Department of Kinesiology & Health Sciences, College of Humanities & 
Sciences, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA; VCU Pauley Heart 
Center, Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, Virginia 
Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA.
(5)Department of Cardiovascular Diseases, John Ochsner Heart and Vascular 
Institute, Ochsner Clinical School, the University of Queensland School of 
Medicine, New Orleans, LA, USA.

Comment in
    Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2021 Jul-Aug;67:114-115. doi: 
10.1016/j.pcad.2021.07.012.

Hypertensive individuals are at an increased risk of developing heart disease 
and stroke. Adopting healthy lifestyles, such as being active on ≥4 days per 
week, weight-loss in the presence of obesity, consuming a diet rich in fruits 
and vegetables, and sodium below the recommended threshold, avoiding high 
alcohol consumption and refraining from smoking have been effective lifestyle 
therapies to prevent or control stage 1 hypertension (HTN). Among the 1 in 3 
Americans who have HTN (systolic blood pressure ≥ 130 mmHg or diastolic blood 
pressure ≥ 80 mmHg), 16% are diagnosed with resistant HTN (RHT). Although there 
are comparatively fewer studies examining the blood pressure lowering effects of 
therapeutic lifestyle interventions in patients with resistant HTN, the 
available literature appears promising. This paper reviews key studies that 
quantify the blood pressure lowering effects of certain therapeutic lifestyles 
in patients with RHT and highlights areas needing more attention.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pcad.2019.11.012
PMCID: PMC7257910
PMID: 31756356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: None