---
reference_id: "PMID:27642538"
title: "Efficacy and Safety of Metreleptin in Patients with Partial Lipodystrophy: Lessons from an Expanded Access Program."
authors:
- Ajluni N
- Dar M
- Xu J
- Neidert AH
- Oral EA
journal: J Diabetes Metab
year: '2016'
doi: 10.4172/2155-6156.1000659
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and Safety of Metreleptin in Patients with Partial Lipodystrophy: Lessons from an Expanded Access Program.
**Authors:** Ajluni N, Dar M, Xu J, Neidert AH, Oral EA
**Journal:** J Diabetes Metab (2016)
**DOI:** [10.4172/2155-6156.1000659](https://doi.org/10.4172/2155-6156.1000659)

## Content

1. J Diabetes Metab. 2016 Mar;7(3):659. doi: 10.4172/2155-6156.1000659. Epub 2016
 Mar 23.

Efficacy and Safety of Metreleptin in Patients with Partial Lipodystrophy: 
Lessons from an Expanded Access Program.

Ajluni N(1), Dar M(2), Xu J(3), Neidert AH(1), Oral EA(1).

Author information:
(1)Brehm Center for Diabetes Research and Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology 
and Diabetes, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)Greenville Veterans Affairs Health Care Center, Division of Endocrinology and 
Metabolism, Brody School of Medicine, East Carolina University, Greenville, NC, 
USA.
(3)AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Patients with lipodystrophy have severe metabolic abnormalities 
(insulin resistance, diabetes, and hypertriglyceridemia) that may increase 
morbidity and mortality. Metreleptin is approved by the United States Food and 
Drug Administration for treatment of generalized forms of lipodystrophy. We 
aimed to determine the efficacy and safety of metreleptin among patients with 
partial lipodystrophy using an expanded-access model.
METHODS: Study FHA101 (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT00677313) was an 
open-label, expanded-access, long-term clinical effectiveness and safety study 
in 23 patients with partial lipodystrophy and diabetes and/or 
hypertriglyceridemia with no prespecified leptin level. Metreleptin was 
administered subcutaneously at 0.02 mg/kg twice daily (BID) at Week 1, followed 
by 0.04 mg/kg BID at Week 2. Dose adjustments thereafter were based on patient 
response (maximum dose of 0.08 mg/kg BID). One-year changes in glycated 
hemoglobin (HbA1c), fasting plasma glucose, triglycerides, alanine and aspartate 
aminotransferases, and treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs) were evaluated.
RESULTS: HbA1c, fasting plasma glucose, and triglycerides were numerically 
decreased throughout 1 year, with mean (standard error) changes from baseline of 
-0.88 (0.62)%, -42.0 (22.4) mg/dL, and -119.8 (84.1) mg/dL, respectively, which 
were greater among patients with higher baseline abnormalities. Liver enzymes 
did not worsen, and the most frequently observed TEAEs (≥ 10% incidence) were 
mild to moderate and included nausea (39.1%), hypoglycemia (26.1%), and urinary 
tract infections (26.1%)-all reported previously. There were no reports of 
clinically significant immune-related adverse events or new safety signals.
CONCLUSIONS: Our clinical observations document the large heterogeneity and 
disease burden of partial lipodystrophy syndromes and suggest that metreleptin 
treatment benefits may extend to patients with partial lipodystrophy. Additional 
studies are needed to confirm these preliminary findings.

DOI: 10.4172/2155-6156.1000659
PMCID: PMC5026130
PMID: 27642538