---
reference_id: "PMID:25150764"
title: Management of central nervous system teratoma.
authors:
- Zygourakis CC
- Davis JL
- Kaur G
- Ames CP
- Gupta N
- Auguste KI
- Parsa AT
journal: J Clin Neurosci
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2014.03.039
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Central Nervous System Neoplasms/diagnosis, therapy"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Disease Management
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- "Teratoma/diagnosis, therapy"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of central nervous system teratoma.
**Authors:** Zygourakis CC, Davis JL, Kaur G, Ames CP, Gupta N, Auguste KI, Parsa AT
**Journal:** J Clin Neurosci (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jocn.2014.03.039](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocn.2014.03.039)

## Content

1. J Clin Neurosci. 2015 Jan;22(1):98-104. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2014.03.039. Epub 
2014 Aug 21.

Management of central nervous system teratoma.

Zygourakis CC(1), Davis JL(2), Kaur G(3), Ames CP(4), Gupta N(5), Auguste KI(5), 
Parsa AT(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California at San 
Francisco, 505 Parnassus Avenue, Box 0112, San Francisco, CA 94143-0112, USA. 
Electronic address: zygourakisc@neurosurg.ucsf.edu.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of California at San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California at San 
Francisco, 505 Parnassus Avenue, Box 0112, San Francisco, CA 94143-0112, USA; 
Department of Neurological Surgery, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern 
University, Chicago, IL, USA.
(4)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California at San 
Francisco, 505 Parnassus Avenue, Box 0112, San Francisco, CA 94143-0112, USA.
(5)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California at San 
Francisco, 505 Parnassus Avenue, Box 0112, San Francisco, CA 94143-0112, USA; 
Department of Pediatrics, University of California at San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.

Central nervous system (CNS) teratomas are very rare neoplasms that contain 
tissues derived from all three germ cell layers (endoderm, mesoderm, and 
ectoderm). Patients with teratomas usually have a good prognosis. Given the 
paucity of cases in the literature, we present a retrospective review of 15 CNS 
teratomas treated over a 25 year period at the University of California, San 
Francisco. We describe the presentation, location, treatment, and adjuvant 
therapy for these patients, and highlight three unique cases that emphasize the 
diverse presentation and treatment of these rare tumors.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2014.03.039
PMID: 25150764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]