---
reference_id: "PMID:36898766"
title: Microglia activation in the presence of intact blood-brain barrier and disruption of hippocampal neurogenesis via IL-6 and IL-18 mediate early diffuse neuropsychiatric lupus.
authors:
- Nikolopoulos D
- Manolakou T
- Polissidis A
- Filia A
- Bertsias G
- Koutmani Y
- Boumpas DT
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/ard-2022-223506
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Mice
- Animals
- Infant
- Blood-Brain Barrier
- "Lupus Vasculitis, Central Nervous System"
- Interleukin-6
- Interleukin-18
- Microglia
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic"
- Cytokines
- Neurogenesis
- Interferons
- Hippocampus
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Microglia activation in the presence of intact blood-brain barrier and disruption of hippocampal neurogenesis via IL-6 and IL-18 mediate early diffuse neuropsychiatric lupus.
**Authors:** Nikolopoulos D, Manolakou T, Polissidis A, Filia A, Bertsias G, Koutmani Y, Boumpas DT
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/ard-2022-223506](https://doi.org/10.1136/ard-2022-223506)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2023 May;82(5):646-657. doi: 10.1136/ard-2022-223506. Epub 2023
 Mar 10.

Microglia activation in the presence of intact blood-brain barrier and
disruption of hippocampal neurogenesis via IL-6 and IL-18 mediate early diffuse
neuropsychiatric lupus.

Nikolopoulos D(1)(2), Manolakou T(3)(2), Polissidis A(4), Filia A(3), Bertsias
G(5)(6), Koutmani Y(4), Boumpas DT(1)(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Center of Clinical, Experimental Surgery and Translational Research,
Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece
dsnikolopoulos@gmail.com boumpasd@uoc.gr.
(2)School of Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens,
Greece.
(3)Center of Clinical, Experimental Surgery and Translational Research,
Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(4)Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy, Athens, Greece.
(5)Laboratory of Autoimmunity-Inflammation, Institute of Molecular Biology and
Biotechnology, Heraklion, Greece.
(6)Rheumatology, Clinical Immunology and Allergy Department, Medical School
University of Crete, Heraklion, Greece.
(7)Medical School, University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus.

INTRODUCTION: Inflammatory mediators are detected in the cerebrospinal fluid of
systemic lupus erythematosus patients with central nervous system involvement
(NPSLE), yet the underlying cellular and molecular mechanisms leading to
neuropsychiatric disease remain elusive.
METHODS: We performed a comprehensive phenotyping of NZB/W-F1 lupus-prone mice
including tests for depression, anxiety and cognition. Immunofluorescence, flow
cytometry, RNA-sequencing, qPCR, cytokine quantification and blood-brain barrier
(BBB) permeability assays were applied in hippocampal tissue obtained in both
prenephritic (3-month-old) and nephritic (6-month-old) lupus mice and matched
control strains. Healthy adult hippocampal neural stem cells (hiNSCs) were
exposed ex vivo to exogenous inflammatory cytokines to assess their effects on
proliferation and apoptosis.
RESULTS: At the prenephritic stage, BBB is intact yet mice exhibit
hippocampus-related behavioural deficits recapitulating the human diffuse
neuropsychiatric disease. This phenotype is accounted by disrupted hippocampal
neurogenesis with hiNSCs exhibiting increased proliferation combined with
decreased differentiation and increased apoptosis in combination with microglia
activation and increased secretion of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines.
Among these cytokines, IL-6 and IL-18 directly induce apoptosis of adult hiNSCs
ex vivo. During the nephritic stage, BBB becomes disrupted which facilitates
immune components of peripheral blood, particularly B-cells, to penetrate into
the hippocampus further augmenting inflammation with locally increased levels of
IL-6, IL-12, IL-18 and IL-23. Of note, an interferon gene signature was observed
only at nephritic-stage.
CONCLUSION: An intact BBB with microglial activation disrupting the formation of
new neurons within the hippocampus represent early events in NPSLE. Disturbances
of the BBB and interferon signature are evident later in the course of the
disease.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/ard-2022-223506
PMCID: PMC10176423
PMID: 36898766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.
