---
reference_id: "PMID:37820077"
title: Treating obesity in type 1 diabetes mellitus - review of efficacy and safety.
authors:
- Freeby M
- Lane K
journal: Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/MED.0000000000000841
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treating obesity in type 1 diabetes mellitus - review of efficacy and safety.
**Authors:** Freeby M, Lane K
**Journal:** Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MED.0000000000000841](https://doi.org/10.1097/MED.0000000000000841)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2024 Feb 1;31(1):1-7. doi: 
10.1097/MED.0000000000000841. Epub 2023 Oct 11.

Treating obesity in type 1 diabetes mellitus - review of efficacy and safety.

Freeby M(1), Lane K.

Author information:
(1)David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, California, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Obesity is an epidemic in the United States with serious 
concomitant co-morbid conditions; people living with type 1 diabetes mellitus 
(T1D) are not immune to the risk either. Weight gain in T1D is likely 
multifactorial, due to genetic, environmental and treatment-related factors. 
FDA-approved and other adjunctive weight loss therapies may benefit people 
living with T1D but there are risks to consider when providing recommendations 
or prescribing medications.
RECENT FINDINGS: We performed a PubMed search of studies assessing clinical 
outcomes of both approved and off-label medications used in the treatment of 
type 1 diabetes. Search terms included 'type 1 diabetes, obesity' and the 
following: (1) metformin, (2) pramlintide, (3) glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) 
receptor agonists, (4) dual GLP-1 and gastric inhibitory polypeptide (GIP) 
agonists, (5) sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors, (6) surgical 
treatment of obesity, (7) insulin pump, (8) insulin, (9) medical nutrition 
therapy, (10) diabetes self-management education, (11) exercise, (12) 
naltrexone-buproprion, (13) orlistat, and (14) phentermine-topiramate.
SUMMARY: Weight loss treatments provide a wide-range of benefits in reducing 
both morbidity and mortality in those who are obese. Treatments also have 
varying adverse effect profiles which may impact T1D treatment. In this review, 
we aim to summarize study outcomes in people with T1D, including risks and 
benefits, of on- and off-label weight loss treatments.

Copyright © 2023 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MED.0000000000000841
PMID: 37820077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]