---
reference_id: "PMID:16381491"
title: Reduction in kidney cancer mortality following installation of a tap water supply system in an arsenic-endemic area of Taiwan.
authors:
- Yang CY
- Chiu HF
- Wu TN
- Chuang HY
- Ho SC
journal: Arch Environ Health
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1080/00039890409603430
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Arsenic/isolation & purification"
- "Arsenic Poisoning/complications, prevention & control"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Environmental Exposure
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Kidney Neoplasms/mortality, prevention & control"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Quality Control
- Retrospective Studies
- Taiwan
- Water Purification
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reduction in kidney cancer mortality following installation of a tap water supply system in an arsenic-endemic area of Taiwan.
**Authors:** Yang CY, Chiu HF, Wu TN, Chuang HY, Ho SC
**Journal:** Arch Environ Health (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00039890409603430](https://doi.org/10.1080/00039890409603430)

## Content

1. Arch Environ Health. 2004 Sep;59(9):484-8. doi: 10.1080/00039890409603430.

Reduction in kidney cancer mortality following installation of a tap water
supply system in an arsenic-endemic area of Taiwan.

Yang CY(1), Chiu HF, Wu TN, Chuang HY, Ho SC.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Public Health, Kaohsiung Medical University, Taiwan.
chunyuh@kmu.edu.tw

Arsenic is the major risk factor for blackfoot disease, a peripheral vascular
disease that has been endemic to the southwest coast of Taiwan for more than 50
yr because of the consumption of local artesian well water containing high
levels of arsenic. Long-term arsenic exposure has been associated with kidney
cancer mortality in a dose-response relationship. In the early 1960s, a tap
water supply system was implemented in the blackfoot-endemic areas. After the
mid-1970s, artesian well water was no longer used for drinking or cooking in the
region. The authors examined whether kidney cancer mortality decreased after the
elimination of arsenic exposure from artesian well water. Standardized mortality
ratios for kidney cancer were calculated for the blackfoot-endemic area for the
years 1971-2000. Study results showed that mortality from kidney cancer declined
gradually during this time; therefore, the association of arsenic exposure with
kidney cancer mortality was likely causal.

DOI: 10.1080/00039890409603430
PMID: 16381491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
