---
reference_id: "PMID:37130455"
title: Tumor immune evasion through loss of MHC class-I antigen presentation.
authors:
- Sari G
- Rock KL
journal: Curr Opin Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2023.102329
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tumor immune evasion through loss of MHC class-I antigen presentation.
**Authors:** Sari G, Rock KL
**Journal:** Curr Opin Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.coi.2023.102329](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coi.2023.102329)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Immunol. 2023 Aug;83:102329. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2023.102329. Epub
2023  Apr 30.

Tumor immune evasion through loss of MHC class-I antigen presentation.

Sari G(1), Rock KL(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Massachusetts Medical School, Department of Pathology, 
Worcester, MA, USA.
(2)University of Massachusetts Medical School, Department of Pathology, 
Worcester, MA, USA. Electronic address: Kenneth.Rock@umassmed.edu.

CD8 T cells recognize cancers when they detect antigenic peptides presented on a 
tumor's surface MHC-I molecules. Since MHC-I antigen presentation is not 
essential for cell growth or survival, many cancers inactivate this pathway, and 
thereby escape control by CD8 T cells. Such immune evasion allows cancers to 
progress and also become resistant to CD8 T- cell-based immunotherapies, such as 
checkpoint blockade. Here, we review recent findings about the various different 
mechanisms that cancers use to impair antigen presentation, the consequence of 
such changes, and, in some cases, the potential to reverse these defects.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.coi.2023.102329
PMCID: PMC10524158
PMID: 37130455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.