---
reference_id: "PMID:38601387"
title: "Interprofessional Collaboration: Differentiating Netherton Syndrome and Atopic Dermatitis in an African American Infant."
authors:
- Park EG
- Besly K
- Campos JJ
- Rezk A
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.55905
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interprofessional Collaboration: Differentiating Netherton Syndrome and Atopic Dermatitis in an African American Infant.
**Authors:** Park EG, Besly K, Campos JJ, Rezk A
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.55905](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.55905)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Mar 10;16(3):e55905. doi: 10.7759/cureus.55905. eCollection 2024 
Mar.

Interprofessional Collaboration: Differentiating Netherton Syndrome and Atopic 
Dermatitis in an African American Infant.

Park EG(1), Besly K(1), Campos JJ(2), Rezk A(3).

Author information:
(1)Medicine, Alabama College of Osteopathic Medicine, Panama City, USA.
(2)Medicine, Alabama College of Osteopathic Medicine, Dothan, USA.
(3)Pediatrics, Rainbow Pediatrics, Panama City, USA.

Netherton syndrome is a rare, autosomal recessive disorder that clinically 
presents with a triad of congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma, hair shaft 
abnormalities, and immune dysregulation, which is confirmed with genetic testing 
for mutations in the serine protease inhibitor Kazal-type 5 (SPINK5) gene. This 
diagnosis was included in our differential due to the patient's recurring and 
unimproving rash with desquamating skin. While eczema was included in our 
differential diagnoses, the patient's systemic symptoms, including failure to 
thrive, prompted our team to consider other diagnoses. This patient endured 
numerous treatments and diagnostic tests to eliminate underlying 
immunodeficiencies and autoinflammatory diseases. In this case report, we 
present a two-month-old male who was originally brought into the outpatient 
pediatric clinic for severe eczema, periorbital swelling, and failure to thrive. 
The patient returned with a continuing exudative rash after amoxicillin 
suspension treatment and was ultimately hospitalized for IV antibiotic 
treatment. The patient was then transferred to multiple hospitals for treatment 
and final diagnosis of severe seborrheic dermatitis and atopic dermatitis. 
Multiple inpatient hospitals and outpatient clinics had to collaborate and 
communicate effectively to reach a diagnosis. The diagnosis for this patient was 
found after a true display of the value of interdisciplinary collaboration as 
several outpatient clinics and inpatient hospitals worked together for this 
outcome.

Copyright © 2024, Park et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.55905
PMCID: PMC11004508
PMID: 38601387

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.