---
reference_id: "PMID:34991944"
title: "An observational, prospective, multicenter, natural history study of patients with mucopolysaccharidosis type IIIA."
authors:
- Wijburg FA
- Aiach K
- Chakrapani A
- Eisengart JB
- Giugliani R
- Héron B
- Muschol N
- "O'Neill C"
- Olivier S
- Parker S
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.12.002
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cognition
- Cognitive Dysfunction
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mucopolysaccharidosis III/diagnosis
- Prospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An observational, prospective, multicenter, natural history study of patients with mucopolysaccharidosis type IIIA.
**Authors:** Wijburg FA, Aiach K, Chakrapani A, Eisengart JB, Giugliani R, Héron B, Muschol N, O'Neill C, Olivier S, Parker S
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.12.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.12.002)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2022 Feb;135(2):133-142. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.12.002.
Epub  2021 Dec 10.

An observational, prospective, multicenter, natural history study of patients
with mucopolysaccharidosis type IIIA.

Wijburg FA(1), Aiach K(2), Chakrapani A(3), Eisengart JB(4), Giugliani R(5),
Héron B(6), Muschol N(7), O'Neill C(8), Olivier S(2), Parker S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Metabolic Diseases, Emma Children's Hospital,
Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands; Amsterdam Lysosome Center "Sphinx",
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Electronic address:
f.a.wijburg@amsterdamumc.nl.
(2)Lysogene SA, Neuilly sur Seine, France.
(3)Metabolic Medicine Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS
Foundation Trust, Great Ormond Street, London, UK.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(5)Department of Genetics, UFRGS, Medical Genetics Service and DR Brazil, HCPA,
Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(6)Reference Center for Lysosomal Diseases, Pediatric Neurology Department,
Armand Trousseau University Hospital, APHP, Paris, France.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, International Center for Lysosomal Disorders
(ICLD), University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(8)Cure Sanfilippo Foundation, Columbia, SC, USA.

Mucopolysaccharidosis type IIIA (MPS IIIA, also known as Sanfilippo syndrome) is
a rare genetic lysosomal storage disease characterized by early and progressive
neurodegeneration resulting in a rapid decline in cognitive function affecting
speech and language, adaptive behavior, and motor skills. We carried out a
prospective observational study to assess the natural history of patients with
MPS IIIA, using both standardized tests and patient-centric measures to
determine the course of disease progression over a 2-year period. A cohort of 23
patients (7 girls, 16 boys; mean age 28-105 months at baseline) with a confirmed
diagnosis of MPS IIIA were assessed and followed up at intervals of 3-6 months;
cognitive function was measured using Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler
Development 3rd edition (BSID-III) to derive cognitive development quotients
(DQ). Daily living, speech/language development and motor skills were measured
using the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale (VABS-II). Sleep-wake patterns,
behavior and quality-of-life questionnaires were also reported at each visit
using parent/caregiver reported outcome tools. All patients had early onset
severe MPS IIIA, were diagnosed before 74 months of age, and had cognitive
scores below normal developmental levels at baseline. Patients less than
40 months of age at baseline were more likely to continue developing new skills
over the first 6-12 months of follow-up. There was a high variability in
cognitive developmental age (DA) in patients between 40 and 70 months of age;
two-thirds of these patients already had profound cognitive decline, with a DA
≤10 months. The highest cognitive DA achieved in the full study cohort was
34 months. Post hoc, patients were divided into two groups based on baseline
cognitive DQ (DQ ≥50 or <50). Cognitive DQ decreased linearly over time, with a
decrease from baseline of 30.1 and 9.0 points in patients with cognitive DQ ≥50
at baseline and cognitive DQ <50 at baseline, respectively. Over the 2-year
study, VABS-II language scores declined progressively. Motor skills, including
walking, declined over time, although significantly later than cognitive
decline. No clear pattern of sleep disturbance was observed, but night waking
was common in younger patients. Pain scores, as measured on the quality-of-life
questionnaire, increased over the study period. The findings of this study
strengthen the natural history data on cognitive decline in MPS IIIA and
importantly provide additional data on endpoints, validated by the patient
community as important to treat, that may form the basis of a multidomain
endpoint capturing the disease complexity.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.12.002
PMID: 34991944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest Frits A.
Wijburg has served as a consultant for Orchard Therapeutics and Lysogene. Anupam
Chakrapani declares institutionally funded research from Actelion, Aegela,
Biomarin, Lysogene, Malinckrodt, Sanofi, and Takeda; consulting fees, travel
grants, and honoraria from Actelion, Biomarin, Lysogene, Orchard Therapeutics,
Recordati, Sanofi, and Takeda. Julie B. Eisengart has received research support
from Lysogene, Sangamo and Shire/Takeda; consulting fees from ArmaGen, Denali
Therapeutics, JCR Pharmaceutical, Orchard Therapeutics, ReGenXBio, and
Shire/Takeda; and honoraria from Amicus Therapeutics, bluebird bio, Orchard
Therapeutics, ReGenXBio, Sanofi Genzyme, and Shire/Takeda. Roberto Giugliani has
served as speaker, consultant, and advisory board member for Abeona
Therapeutics, Amicus Therapeutics, BioMarin, Inventiva, Janssen, JCR
Pharmaceuticals, Lysogene, PTC Therapeutics, ReGenXBio, Sanofi Genzyme, Sobi,
Takeda, and Ultragenyx; research grants from Allievex, Amicus Therapeutics,
Armagen, BioMarin, GC Pharma, JCR Pharmaceuticals, Lysogene, ReGenXBio, Sanofi
Genzyme, and Takeda; and travel expenses to attend scientific meetings from
Amicus Therapeutics, BioMarin, JCR Pharmaceuticals, Sanofi Genzyme, Takeda, and
Ultragenyx. Bénédicte Héron has received honoraria for advisory boards from
Actelion, Orchard Therapeutics, Orphazyme, and Shire/Takeda; honoraria/travel
support from Actelion, BioMarin, and Shire/Takeda; and is principal investigator
for Abeona, Chiesi, Lysogene, Idorsia, Mallinckrodt, and Orphazyme studies.
Nicole Muschol has received consulting fees from Amicus, BioMarin, Chiesi, JCR
Pharmaceuticals, Lysogene, Sanofi Genzyme, Shire/Takeda, and Sobi;
grant/research support from BioMarin, Sanofi Genzyme, and Shire/Takeda; and
honoraria/travel support from Actelion, Amicus Therapeutics, BioMarin, Sanofi
Genzyme, and Shire/Takeda. Cara O'Neill has received consulting fees from
Lysogene and JCR Pharmaceuticals. Karen Aiach, Sophie Olivier, and Samantha
Parker are, or were, employees of Lysogene, at the time of writing this paper.
