---
reference_id: "PMID:19811377"
title: Defining disease modification in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
authors:
- Halpin DM
- Tashkin DP
journal: COPD
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1080/15412550902918402
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defining disease modification in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
**Authors:** Halpin DM, Tashkin DP
**Journal:** COPD (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15412550902918402](https://doi.org/10.1080/15412550902918402)

## Content

1. COPD. 2009 Jun;6(3):211-25. doi: 10.1080/15412550902918402.

Defining disease modification in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Halpin DM(1), Tashkin DP.

Author information:
(1)Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, Barrack Road, Exeter, EX2 5DW, UK. 
david.halpin@rdeft.nhs.uk

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a debilitating condition 
characterized by airflow limitation that is not fully reversible. It is a major 
cause of morbidity and mortality and represents substantial economic and social 
burden throughout the world. A range of interventions has been developed that 
decrease symptoms and address complications associated with COPD. However, to 
date few interventions have been unequivocally demonstrated to modify disease 
progression. Assessment of the potential for interventions to modify disease 
progression is complicated by the lack of a clear definition of disease 
modification and disagreement over appropriate markers by which modification 
should be evaluated. To clarify these issues, a working group of physicians and 
scientists from the USA, Canada and Europe was convened. The proposed working 
definition of disease modification resulting from the group discussions was "an 
improvement in, or stabilization of, structural or functional parameters as a 
result of reduction in the rate of progression of these parameters which occurs 
whilst an intervention is applied and may persist even if the intervention is 
withdrawn". According to this definition, pharmacologic interventions may be 
considered disease-modifying if they provide consistent and sustained 
improvements in structural and functional parameters. Smoking cessation and lung 
volume reduction surgery would both qualify as disease-modifying interventions.

DOI: 10.1080/15412550902918402
PMCID: PMC2699950
PMID: 19811377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]