---
reference_id: "PMID:16752402"
title: Mutations in two regions of FLNB result in atelosteogenesis I and III.
authors:
- Farrington-Rock C
- Firestein MH
- Bicknell LS
- Superti-Furga A
- Bacino CA
- Cormier-Daire V
- Le Merrer M
- Baumann C
- Roume J
- Rump P
- Verheij JB
- Sweeney E
- Rimoin DL
- Lachman RS
- Robertson SP
- Cohn DH
- Krakow D
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1002/humu.20348
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in two regions of FLNB result in atelosteogenesis I and III.
**Authors:** Farrington-Rock C, Firestein MH, Bicknell LS, Superti-Furga A, Bacino CA, Cormier-Daire V, Le Merrer M, Baumann C, Roume J, Rump P, Verheij JB, Sweeney E, Rimoin DL, Lachman RS, Robertson SP, Cohn DH, Krakow D
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.20348](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.20348)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2006 Jul;27(7):705-10. doi: 10.1002/humu.20348.

Mutations in two regions of FLNB result in atelosteogenesis I and III.

Farrington-Rock C(1), Firestein MH, Bicknell LS, Superti-Furga A, Bacino CA, 
Cormier-Daire V, Le Merrer M, Baumann C, Roume J, Rump P, Verheij JB, Sweeney E, 
Rimoin DL, Lachman RS, Robertson SP, Cohn DH, Krakow D.

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, 
California 90048, USA.

The filamins are a family of cytoplasmic proteins that bind to and organize 
actin filaments, link membrane proteins to the cytoskeleton, and provide a 
scaffold for signaling molecules. Mutations in the gene encoding filamin B 
(FLNB) cause a spectrum of osteochondrodysplasias, including atelosteogenesis 
type I (AOI) and atelosteogenesis type III (AOIII). AOI and AOIII are autosomal 
dominant lethal skeletal dysplasias characterized by overlapping clinical 
findings that include vertebral abnormalities, disharmonious skeletal 
maturation, hypoplastic long bones, and joint dislocations. Previous studies 
have shown that heterozygosity for missense mutations that alter the CH2 domain 
and repeat 6 region of filamin B produce AOI and AOIII. In this study, 14 novel 
missense mutations in FLNB were found in 15 unrelated patients with AOI and 
AOIII. The majority of the mutations resided in exon 2 and exon 3, which encode 
the CH2 domain of the actin-binding region of filamin B. The remaining mutations 
were found in exon 28 and exon 29, which encode repeats 14 and 15 of filamin B. 
These results show that clustering of mutations in two regions of FLNB produce 
AOI/AOIII, and highlight the important role of this cytoskeletal protein in 
normal skeletogenesis.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20348
PMID: 16752402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]