---
reference_id: "PMID:24736102"
title: Mutation spectrum of hepatocellular carcinoma from eastern-European patients betrays the impact of a complex exposome.
authors:
- Tanase AM
- Marchio A
- Dumitrascu T
- Dima S
- Herlea V
- Oprisan G
- Dejean A
- Popescu I
- Pineau P
journal: J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/jes.2014.16
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/chemically induced, genetics"
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/drug effects"
- Environmental Exposure/adverse effects
- Environmental Pollutants/toxicity
- Female
- Genetic Markers
- Humans
- "Liver Neoplasms/chemically induced, genetics"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Oxidative Stress/drug effects, genetics"
- Point Mutation/drug effects
- Prospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Romania
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation spectrum of hepatocellular carcinoma from eastern-European patients betrays the impact of a complex exposome.
**Authors:** Tanase AM, Marchio A, Dumitrascu T, Dima S, Herlea V, Oprisan G, Dejean A, Popescu I, Pineau P
**Journal:** J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/jes.2014.16](https://doi.org/10.1038/jes.2014.16)

## Content

1. J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol. 2015 May;25(3):256-63. doi: 10.1038/jes.2014.16.
 Epub 2014 Apr 16.

Mutation spectrum of hepatocellular carcinoma from eastern-European patients
betrays the impact of a complex exposome.

Tanase AM(1), Marchio A(2), Dumitrascu T(1), Dima S(1), Herlea V(3), Oprisan
G(4), Dejean A(2), Popescu I(1), Pineau P(2).

Author information:
(1)Center of General Surgery and Liver Transplantation, Fundeni Clinical
Institute, Sos. Fundeni, Bucharest, Romania.
(2)Unité d'Organisation Nucléaire et Oncogenèse, INSERM U993, Institut Pasteur,
rue du Docteur Roux, Paris, France.
(3)Department of Pathology, Fundeni Clinical Institute, Sos. Fundeni, Bucharest,
Romania.
(4)Molecular Biology Laboratory, National Institute for Research/Development of
Microbiology and Immunology Cantacuzino, Splaiul Independentei, Bucharest,
Romania.

Genomic analysis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has been shown to provide
clues about local risk factors. In the last decades, the mortality from
malignant liver tumors increased sharply in Romania, where both hepatitis
viruses and environmental pollutants are known to be highly prevalent. To date,
HCC from this country has not been subject to molecular characterization. We
analyzed a series of 48 consecutive HCC cases. Point mutations were searched in
9 nuclear genes and the mitochondrial D-loop. Oxidative stress response was
monitored through measurement of gene expression (NRF2, KEAP1, SRXN1, and CES1)
by qRT-PCR. An atypical mutation spectrum was observed, as more than 40% of DNA
changes were oxidative stress-associated T>C or T>G lesions (T>S). These
mutations affected primarily genes encoding for β-catenin and NRF2 (P<0.0001).
Besides, tumors from patients born in Greater Bucharest carried TP53 mutations
more frequently than others (45 vs 10%, P=0.02). Finally, a R249S mutation of
TP53, well-known hallmark of aflatoxin B1 exposure, was found. Our findings
indicate, therefore, that distinct mutagenic processes affect Romanian patients
with HCC. Further analyses are now warranted in order to identify causal
lifestyle or environmental factors.

DOI: 10.1038/jes.2014.16
PMID: 24736102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
