---
reference_id: "PMID:36588099"
title: "Primary ciliary dyskinesia: A multicenter survey on clinical practice and patient management in Italy."
authors:
- Ullmann N
- Santamaria F
- Allegorico A
- Fainardi V
- Borrelli M
- Ferraro VA
- Proietti E
- Parisi GF
- Romagnoli V
- Lucca F
- Gallucci M
- Mappa L
- Lelli M
- Amato D
- Petrarca L
- Cimino G
- Sacco O
- Calogero C
- Patria MF
- Acquafredda A
- Ferlisi A
- Maschio M
- Kantar A
- Cutrera R
journal: Pediatr Pulmonol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ppul.26303
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary ciliary dyskinesia: A multicenter survey on clinical practice and patient management in Italy.
**Authors:** Ullmann N, Santamaria F, Allegorico A, Fainardi V, Borrelli M, Ferraro VA, Proietti E, Parisi GF, Romagnoli V, Lucca F, Gallucci M, Mappa L, Lelli M, Amato D, Petrarca L, Cimino G, Sacco O, Calogero C, Patria MF, Acquafredda A, Ferlisi A, Maschio M, Kantar A, Cutrera R
**Journal:** Pediatr Pulmonol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ppul.26303](https://doi.org/10.1002/ppul.26303)

## Content

1. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2023 Apr;58(4):1127-1135. doi: 10.1002/ppul.26303. Epub 2023
 Jan 9.

Primary ciliary dyskinesia: A multicenter survey on clinical practice and 
patient management in Italy.

Ullmann N(1), Santamaria F(2), Allegorico A(1), Fainardi V(3), Borrelli M(2), 
Ferraro VA(4), Proietti E(5), Parisi GF(6), Romagnoli V(7), Lucca F(8), Gallucci 
M(9), Mappa L(10), Lelli M(11), Amato D(12), Petrarca L(13), Cimino G(14), Sacco 
O(15), Calogero C(16), Patria MF(11), Acquafredda A(17), Ferlisi A(18), Maschio 
M(19), Kantar A(20), Cutrera R(1).

Author information:
(1)Academic Department of Pediatrics (DPUO), Pediatric Pulmonology & Respiratory 
Intermediate Care Unit, Sleep and Long Term Ventilation Unit, Bambino Gesù 
Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Translational Medical Sciences, Pediatric Pulmonology, Federico 
II University, Naples, Italy.
(3)Department of Medicine and Surgery, Pediatric Clinic, Pietro Barilla 
Children's Hospital, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(4)Department of Women's and Children's Health, University of Padua, Padova, 
Italy.
(5)Pediatric Unit, Rovereto Hospital, Rovereto, Italy.
(6)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Catania, 
Catania, Italy.
(7)Department of Mother and Child Health, Pediatric Unit, G. Salesi Children's 
Hospital, Ancona, Italy.
(8)Cystic Fibrosis Centre, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Integrata di 
Verona, Verona, Italy.
(9)Pediatric Unit-IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, Bologna, 
Italy.
(10)Department of Interdisciplinary Medicine (D.I.M.), Pediatric Unit 
"Trambusti" Cystic Fibrosis, University of Bari, Bari, Italy.
(11)Pediatric Highly Intensive Care Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale 
Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Hospital Giovanni XXIII, University of 
Bari, Bari, Italy.
(13)Department of Maternal Infantile and Urological Sciences, Sapienza 
University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(14)Cystic Fibrosis Regional Reference Center, A.O.U. Policlinico Umberto I, 
Rome, Italy.
(15)Department of Pediatrics, Pulmonary Disease Unit, G. Gaslini Research 
Institute and University Hospital, Genoa, Italy.
(16)Pediatric Pulmonary Unit, Meyer Children's University Hospital, Florence, 
Italy.
(17)Cystic Fibrosis Unit, G. Tatarella Hospital, ASL Foggia, Foggia, Italy.
(18)Cystic Fibrosis and Respiratory Pediatric Center, Children's Hospital G. Di 
Cristina, ARNAS Civico-Di Cristina-Benfratelli, Palermo, Italy.
(19)Institute for Maternal and Child Health, IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, 
Italy.
(20)Pediatric Asthma and Cough Centre, Istituti Ospedalieri Bergamaschi - Gruppo 
Ospedaliero San Donato, Bergamo, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: There are no recent data on primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) 
distribution, diagnosis and treatment in Italy.
METHODS: A descriptive study based on a survey questionnaire. It consisted of 
three sections (patients, diagnosis, and treatment), and sent to all the Italian 
PCD Centers.
RESULTS: Questionnaires obtained from 20/22 centers in 12/20 regions showed that 
the total number of PCD patients treated at the participating centers was of 
416. Out of all centers, 55% follow <20 patients, two centers have >40 patients, 
and 75% follow both pediatric and adults. Age at diagnosis was between 4 and 8 
years in 45% of the centers, <3 years in three centers. Nasal nitric oxide, 
transmission electron microscopy and ciliary high-speed video microscopy are 
performed in 75%, 90%, and 40% of centers, respectively. Immunofluorescence is 
available in five centers. Genetic analysis is offered in 55% of the centers, 
and in seven centers >50% of the patients have a known genetic profile. Patients 
treated at all centers receive inhaled saline solutions, corticosteroids and 
chest physiotherapy. Prophylactic antibiotics and mucolytics are prescribed in 
95% and 50% of the centers, respectively. Pseudomonas infection is treated with 
oral or inhaled antibiotics.
CONCLUSIONS: Many Italian centers care for a small number of pediatric and adult 
patients, and diagnosis is often delayed. We found a great variability in the 
available diagnostic procedures, as well in the prescribed therapies. Our study 
will help to uniform diagnostic algorithm and share treatments protocols for PCD 
in Italy and allowed to set specific national goals.

© 2023 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ppul.26303
PMID: 36588099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]