---
reference_id: "PMID:39830741"
title: "EGFR inhibitors plus dabrafenib and trametinib in patients with EGFR-mutant lung cancer and resistance mediated by BRAF(V600E) mutation: a multi-center real-world experience in China."
authors:
- Yang W
- Feng X
- Ni J
- Zhang X
- Yu H
- Wu X
- Wang H
- Zhao X
- Hu Z
- Yu B
- Zhang Y
- Lin Y
- Xiang Y
- Wang J
journal: Transl Lung Cancer Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.21037/tlcr-24-803
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EGFR inhibitors plus dabrafenib and trametinib in patients with EGFR-mutant lung cancer and resistance mediated by BRAF(V600E) mutation: a multi-center real-world experience in China.
**Authors:** Yang W, Feng X, Ni J, Zhang X, Yu H, Wu X, Wang H, Zhao X, Hu Z, Yu B, Zhang Y, Lin Y, Xiang Y, Wang J
**Journal:** Transl Lung Cancer Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.21037/tlcr-24-803](https://doi.org/10.21037/tlcr-24-803)

## Content

1. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2024 Dec 31;13(12):3500-3512. doi:
10.21037/tlcr-24-803.  Epub 2024 Dec 27.

EGFR inhibitors plus dabrafenib and trametinib in patients with EGFR-mutant lung
cancer and resistance mediated by BRAF(V600E) mutation: a multi-center
real-world experience in China.

Yang W(#)(1)(2)(3), Feng X(#)(4), Ni J(5), Zhang X(1)(2)(3), Yu H(1)(2)(3), Wu
X(1)(2)(3), Wang H(1)(2)(3), Zhao X(1)(2)(3), Hu Z(1)(2)(3), Yu B(1)(2)(3),
Zhang Y(1)(2)(3), Lin Y(1)(2)(3), Xiang Y(4), Wang J(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center,
Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China.
(3)Institute of Thoracic Oncology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center,
Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Ruijin Hospital,
Institute of Respiratory Diseases, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong
University, Shanghai, China.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, School of
Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The combination therapy of the B-Raf proto-oncogene (BRAF) inhibitor
dabrafenib and the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK) inhibitor
Trametinib has shown favorable outcomes in patients initially identified with
BRAFV600E mutations. However, there are currently no large-scale study data
focusing on the use of a triple therapy regimen of epidermal growth factor
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) plus dabrafenib and trametinib in
patients with newly concomitant BRAF mutations after acquiring resistance to
EGFR-TKIs. Our study aimed to explore the efficacy and safety of the triple
therapy regimen through a multi-center real-world experience.
METHODS: We reviewed the medical records of 1,861 patients who were treated with
EGFR-TKI targeted drugs at three major medical centers in Shanghai between June
2015 and August 2024. Among 1,288 patients who developed disease progression, we
identified 14 patients who were treated with a triple therapy regimen of
EGFR-TKI plus dabrafenib and trametinib due to newly acquired BRAFV600E mutation
after EGFR-TKI resistance. The assessments comprised progression-free survival
(PFS), overall survival (OS), objective response rate (ORR), disease control
rate (DCR), and adverse events (AEs). We also performed further subgroup
analysis to aid in identifying potential factors that influence treatment
outcomes and enhance clinical decision-making.
RESULTS: At the time of the data cutoff (August 1, 2024), the estimated median
PFS was 6.7 months [95% confidence interval (CI): 2.5-not evaluated (NE)]. The
median OS was not reached in 14 patients. ORR was 35.7% (95% CI: 14.0-64.4%) and
DCR was 78.6% (95% CI: 52.4-92.4%). Three patients (21.4%) reported progressive
disease (PD) and that was the best response. The median PFS was 8.35 months (95%
CI: 2.0-NE) in 8 patients receiving third-generation TKI followed by
first-/second-generation EGFR-TKIs and 6.9 months (95% CI: 2.5-NE) in 6 patients
receiving third-generation TKI as first-line treatment directly. There was no
significant difference in PFS between the two groups of patients receiving
third-generation TKIs in different treatment sequences above [hazard ratio (HR):
1.107; 95% CI: 0.318-3.854; P=0.85]. Subgroup analysis indicated that a complex
genetic mutation background may be a potential factor contributing to poorer
PFS. No unexpected adverse effects were reported. Apart from pyrexia,
gastrointestinal-related adverse reactions and skin-related adverse reactions
warrant close attention.
CONCLUSIONS: The triple therapy regimen of EGFR-TKI plus dabrafenib and
trametinib was found to have substantial and durable clinical benefit, with a
manageable safety profile, in patients with newly concomitant BRAFV600E
mutations after osimertinib failure.

2024 AME Publishing Company. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tlcr-24-803
PMCID: PMC11736577
PMID: 39830741

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at
https://tlcr.amegroups.com/article/view/10.21037/tlcr-24-803/coif). The authors
have no conflicts of interest to declare.
