---
reference_id: "PMID:20040766"
title: "Autosomal dominant and sporadic monocytopenia with susceptibility to mycobacteria, fungi, papillomaviruses, and myelodysplasia."
authors:
- Vinh DC
- Patel SY
- Uzel G
- Anderson VL
- Freeman AF
- Olivier KN
- Spalding C
- Hughes S
- Pittaluga S
- Raffeld M
- Sorbara LR
- Elloumi HZ
- Kuhns DB
- Turner ML
- Cowen EW
- Fink D
- Long-Priel D
- Hsu AP
- Ding L
- Paulson ML
- Whitney AR
- Sampaio EP
- Frucht DM
- DeLeo FR
- Holland SM
journal: Blood
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-03-208629
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Female
- Fungi
- "Genetic Diseases, Inborn/blood, complications, genetics"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Humans
- Leukocyte Count
- "Leukopenia/blood, complications, genetics"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mycobacterium
- "Mycobacterium Infections/blood, etiology, genetics"
- "Mycoses/blood, etiology, genetics"
- "Myelodysplastic Syndromes/blood, etiology, genetics"
- "Neoplasms/blood, etiology, genetics"
- Papillomaviridae
- "Papillomavirus Infections/blood, etiology, genetics"
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal dominant and sporadic monocytopenia with susceptibility to mycobacteria, fungi, papillomaviruses, and myelodysplasia.
**Authors:** Vinh DC, Patel SY, Uzel G, Anderson VL, Freeman AF, Olivier KN, Spalding C, Hughes S, Pittaluga S, Raffeld M, Sorbara LR, Elloumi HZ, Kuhns DB, Turner ML, Cowen EW, Fink D, Long-Priel D, Hsu AP, Ding L, Paulson ML, Whitney AR, Sampaio EP, Frucht DM, DeLeo FR, Holland SM
**Journal:** Blood (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2009-03-208629](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2009-03-208629)

## Content

1. Blood. 2010 Feb 25;115(8):1519-29. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-03-208629. Epub
2009  Dec 29.

Autosomal dominant and sporadic monocytopenia with susceptibility to
mycobacteria, fungi, papillomaviruses, and myelodysplasia.

Vinh DC(1), Patel SY, Uzel G, Anderson VL, Freeman AF, Olivier KN, Spalding C,
Hughes S, Pittaluga S, Raffeld M, Sorbara LR, Elloumi HZ, Kuhns DB, Turner ML,
Cowen EW, Fink D, Long-Priel D, Hsu AP, Ding L, Paulson ML, Whitney AR, Sampaio
EP, Frucht DM, DeLeo FR, Holland SM.

Author information:
(1)Immunopathogenesis Section, Laboratory of Clinical Infectious Diseases,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

We identified 18 patients with the distinct clinical phenotype of susceptibility
to disseminated nontuberculous mycobacterial infections, viral infections,
especially with human papillomaviruses, and fungal infections, primarily
histoplasmosis, and molds. This syndrome typically had its onset in adulthood
(age range, 7-60 years; mean, 31.1 years; median, 32 years) and was
characterized by profound circulating monocytopenia (mean, 13.3 cells/microL;
median, 14.5 cells/microL), B lymphocytopenia (mean, 9.4 cells/microL; median, 4
cells/microL), and NK lymphocytopenia (mean, 16 cells/microL; median, 5.5
cells/microL). T lymphocytes were variably affected. Despite these peripheral
cytopenias, all patients had macrophages and plasma cells at sites of
inflammation and normal immunoglobulin levels. Ten of these patients developed 1
or more of the following malignancies: 9 myelodysplasia/leukemia, 1 vulvar
carcinoma and metastatic melanoma, 1 cervical carcinoma, 1 Bowen disease of the
vulva, and 1 multiple Epstein-Barr virus(+) leiomyosarcoma. Five patients
developed pulmonary alveolar proteinosis without mutations in the
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor receptor or
anti-granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor autoantibodies. Among
these 18 patients, 5 families had 2 generations affected, suggesting autosomal
dominant transmission as well as sporadic cases. This novel clinical syndrome
links susceptibility to mycobacterial, viral, and fungal infections with
malignancy and can be transmitted in an autosomal dominant pattern.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2009-03-208629
PMCID: PMC2830758
PMID: 20040766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
