---
reference_id: "PMID:20135270"
title: Prevalence of cholera in pediatric patients with acute dehydrating diarrhea.
authors:
- Kuttiat VS
- Lodha R
- Das B
- Kohli U
journal: Indian J Pediatr
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1007/s12098-010-0009-1
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Child
- "Cholera/epidemiology, microbiology"
- Dehydration/epidemiology
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Prevalence
- "Vibrio cholerae/isolation & purification"
- Vipoma/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of cholera in pediatric patients with acute dehydrating diarrhea.
**Authors:** Kuttiat VS, Lodha R, Das B, Kohli U
**Journal:** Indian J Pediatr (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12098-010-0009-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12098-010-0009-1)

## Content

1. Indian J Pediatr. 2010 Jan;77(1):67-71. doi: 10.1007/s12098-010-0009-1. Epub 
2010 Feb 5.

Prevalence of cholera in pediatric patients with acute dehydrating diarrhea.

Kuttiat VS(1), Lodha R, Das B, Kohli U.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, All-India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 
India.

OBJECTIVE: To estimate the prevalence of culture-confirmed cholera in patients 
with acute dehydrating diarrhea, at a tertiary care center in north India, 
during a 6-month period from March to August, 2006.
METHODS: We studied 145 children, who presented to the pediatric emergency 
services of a tertiary care teaching hospital in north India with acute 
dehydrating diarrhea. Each patient had his/her stool sample collected for Vibrio 
cholerae culture and hanging drop preparation for darting motility. The stool 
specimen for hanging drop analysis was immediately transported to the emergency 
laboratory, where a trained technician prepared the slides and examined them for 
darting motility characteristic of Vibrio cholerae.
RESULTS: V. cholerae was isolated in 36 (24.8%) patients. Forty-nine (33.7%) 
patients had a positive hanging drop examination. Hanging drop examination had a 
sensitivity and specificity of 85.8% and 81.7%, respectively. Severe dehydration 
(OR 4.3; P<0.01) and hanging drop positivity (OR 12.42; P<0.001) were associated 
with higher odds of cholera after adjustment for other risk factors.
CONCLUSION: Cholera is an important cause of acute watery diarrhea in pediatric 
patients in urban north India and should be ruled out in all children presenting 
with acute dehydrating diarrhea, particularly those with severe dehydration. 
Hanging drop test is useful for diagnosis in the emergency setting.

DOI: 10.1007/s12098-010-0009-1
PMID: 20135270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]