---
reference_id: "PMID:11992252"
title: Mutations in COL6A3 cause severe and mild phenotypes of Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy.
authors:
- Demir E
- Sabatelli P
- Allamand V
- Ferreiro A
- Moghadaszadeh B
- Makrelouf M
- Topaloglu H
- Echenne B
- Merlini L
- Guicheney P
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1086/340608
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 2/genetics"
- "Collagen Type VI/deficiency, genetics"
- Consanguinity
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- Humans
- Introns/genetics
- Lod Score
- Male
- Microsatellite Repeats/genetics
- "Muscular Dystrophies/congenital, genetics, physiopathology"
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational"
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in COL6A3 cause severe and mild phenotypes of Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy.
**Authors:** Demir E, Sabatelli P, Allamand V, Ferreiro A, Moghadaszadeh B, Makrelouf M, Topaloglu H, Echenne B, Merlini L, Guicheney P
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1086/340608](https://doi.org/10.1086/340608)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2002 Jun;70(6):1446-58. doi: 10.1086/340608. Epub 2002 Apr 24.

Mutations in COL6A3 cause severe and mild phenotypes of Ullrich congenital
muscular dystrophy.

Demir E(1), Sabatelli P, Allamand V, Ferreiro A, Moghadaszadeh B, Makrelouf M,
Topaloglu H, Echenne B, Merlini L, Guicheney P.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U 523, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, 47 boulevard de
l'Hôpital, 75651 Paris cedex 13, France.

Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy (UCMD) is an autosomal recessive disorder
characterized by generalized muscular weakness, contractures of multiple joints,
and distal hyperextensibility. Homozygous and compound heterozygous mutations of
COL6A2 on chromosome 21q22 have recently been shown to cause UCMD. We performed
a genomewide screening with microsatellite markers in a consanguineous family
with three sibs affected with UCMD. Linkage of the disease to chromosome 2q37
was found in this family and in two others. We analyzed COL6A3, which encodes
the alpha3 chain of collagen VI, and identified one homozygous mutation per
family. In family I, the three sibs carried an A-->G transition in the
splice-donor site of intron 29 (6930+5A-->G), leading to the skipping of exon
29, a partial reduction of collagen VI in muscle biopsy, and an intermediate
phenotype. In family II, the patient had an unusual mild phenotype, despite a
nonsense mutation, R465X, in exon 5. Analysis of the patient's COL6A3
transcripts showed the presence of various mRNA species-one of which lacked
several exons, including the exon containing the nonsense mutation. The deleted
splice variant encodes collagen molecules that have a shorter N-terminal domain
but that may assemble with other chains and retain a functional role. This could
explain the mild phenotype of the patient who was still ambulant at age 18 years
and who showed an unusual combination of hyperlaxity and finger contractures. In
family III, the patient had a nonsense mutation, R2342X, causing absence of
collagen VI in muscle and fibroblasts, and a severe phenotype, as has been
described in patients with UCMD. Mutations in COL6A3 are described in UCMD for
the first time and illustrate the wide spectrum of phenotypes which can be
caused by collagen VI deficiency.

DOI: 10.1086/340608
PMCID: PMC419991
PMID: 11992252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
