---
reference_id: "PMID:8393173"
title: Postexposure prophylaxis of varicella in family contact by oral acyclovir.
authors:
- Asano Y
- Yoshikawa T
- Suga S
- Kobayashi I
- Nakashima T
- Yazaki T
- Ozaki T
- Yamada A
- Imanishi J
journal: Pediatrics
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Postexposure prophylaxis of varicella in family contact by oral acyclovir.
**Authors:** Asano Y, Yoshikawa T, Suga S, Kobayashi I, Nakashima T, Yazaki T, Ozaki T, Yamada A, Imanishi J
**Journal:** Pediatrics (1993)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 1993 Aug;92(2):219-22.

Postexposure prophylaxis of varicella in family contact by oral acyclovir.

Asano Y(1), Yoshikawa T, Suga S, Kobayashi I, Nakashima T, Yazaki T, Ozaki T, 
Yamada A, Imanishi J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Fujita Health University School of Medicine, 
Toyoake, Japan.

Comment in
    Pediatrics. 1996 Jan;97(1):150-1.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether varicella can be prevented by administration of 
oral acyclovir (ACV) during the incubation period of the disease.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: ACV (40 or 80 mg/kg daily in four divided doses) was given 
orally to 25 exposed infants and children for 7 days, starting 7 to 9 days after 
exposure from the index case in their families. Their clinical features were 
compared with those of 25 age-matched control subjects who had been exposed in 
their families but did not receive ACV. A fluorescent antibody to membrane 
antigen assay was used for determination of the antibody to varicella-zoster 
virus, and a nested polymerase chain reaction method was used for detection of 
viremia.
RESULTS: Among the 25 who received ACV, 4 (16%) developed the disease and 1 (4%) 
had a fever. On the other hand, all of 25 control subjects developed the disease 
and 17 (68%) had a fever. The incidence of fever and the severity of skin rashes 
were significantly lower (P < .01) in the subjects who received oral ACV than in 
the control group. Seroconversion was observed in 84% of subjects who received 
ACV. In some cases, varicella-zoster virus DNA was detected by polymerase chain 
reaction amplification in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from blood drawn 
approximately 14 days after exposure.
CONCLUSIONS: Varicella can be prevented or modified by administration of oral 
ACV late in the incubation period.

PMID: 8393173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]