---
reference_id: "PMID:37289678"
title: "Characterizing dengue transmission in rural areas: A systematic review."
authors:
- Man O
- Kraay A
- Thomas R
- Trostle J
- Lee GO
- Robbins C
- Morrison AC
- Coloma J
- Eisenberg JNS
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0011333
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterizing dengue transmission in rural areas: A systematic review.
**Authors:** Man O, Kraay A, Thomas R, Trostle J, Lee GO, Robbins C, Morrison AC, Coloma J, Eisenberg JNS
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0011333](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0011333)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2023 Jun 8;17(6):e0011333. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0011333. eCollection 2023 Jun.

Characterizing dengue transmission in rural areas: A systematic review.

Man O(1), Kraay A(2)(3), Thomas R(1), Trostle J(4), Lee GO(5)(6), Robbins C(4), 
Morrison AC(7), Coloma J(8), Eisenberg JNS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 
United States of America.
(2)Department of Kinesiology and Community Health, University of Illinois, 
Urbana, Illinois, United States of America.
(3)Institution for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois, 
United States of America.
(4)Department of Anthropology, Trinity College, Hartford, Connecticut, United 
States of America.
(5)Rutgers Global Health Institute, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, 
New Brunswick, New Jersey, United States of America.
(6)Rutgers Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, School of Public 
Health, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey, 
United States of America.
(7)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, School of Veterinary 
Medicine, University of California, Davis, Davis, California, United States of 
America.
(8)Division of Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology, School of Public Health, 
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California, United States of 
America.

Dengue has historically been considered an urban disease associated with dense 
human populations and the built environment. Recently, studies suggest 
increasing dengue virus (DENV) transmission in rural populations. It is unclear 
whether these reports reflect recent spread into rural areas or ongoing 
transmission that was previously unnoticed, and what mechanisms are driving this 
rural transmission. We conducted a systematic review to synthesize research on 
dengue in rural areas and apply this knowledge to summarize aspects of rurality 
used in current epidemiological studies of DENV transmission given changing and 
mixed environments. We described how authors defined rurality and how they 
defined mechanisms for rural dengue transmission. We systematically searched 
PubMed, Web of Science, and Embase for articles evaluating dengue prevalence or 
cumulative incidence in rural areas. A total of 106 articles published between 
1958 and 2021 met our inclusion criteria. Overall, 56% (n = 22) of the 48 
estimates that compared urban and rural settings reported rural dengue incidence 
as being as high or higher than in urban locations. In some rural areas, the 
force of infection appears to be increasing over time, as measured by increasing 
seroprevalence in children and thus likely decreasing age of first infection, 
suggesting that rural dengue transmission may be a relatively recent phenomenon. 
Authors characterized rural locations by many different factors, including 
population density and size, environmental and land use characteristics, and by 
comparing their context to urban areas. Hypothesized mechanisms for rural dengue 
transmission included travel, population size, urban infrastructure, vector and 
environmental factors, among other mechanisms. Strengthening our understanding 
of the relationship between rurality and dengue will require a more nuanced 
definition of rurality from the perspective of DENV transmission. Future studies 
should focus on characterizing details of study locations based on their 
environmental features, exposure histories, and movement dynamics to identify 
characteristics that may influence dengue transmission.

Copyright: © 2023 Man et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0011333
PMCID: PMC10249895
PMID: 37289678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors declare competing interests.