---
reference_id: "PMID:26940925"
title: Gene-Specific Therapy With Mexiletine Reduces Arrhythmic Events in Patients With Long QT Syndrome Type 3.
authors:
- Mazzanti A
- Maragna R
- Faragli A
- Monteforte N
- Bloise R
- Memmi M
- Novelli V
- Baiardi P
- Bagnardi V
- Etheridge SP
- Napolitano C
- Priori SG
journal: J Am Coll Cardiol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2015.12.033
keywords:
- "Administration, Oral"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Electrocardiography
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Genetic Therapy/methods
- Heart Rate/drug effects
- Humans
- "Long QT Syndrome/genetics, physiopathology, therapy"
- Male
- "Mexiletine/administration & dosage"
- Retrospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
- "Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel Blockers/administration & dosage"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gene-Specific Therapy With Mexiletine Reduces Arrhythmic Events in Patients With Long QT Syndrome Type 3.
**Authors:** Mazzanti A, Maragna R, Faragli A, Monteforte N, Bloise R, Memmi M, Novelli V, Baiardi P, Bagnardi V, Etheridge SP, Napolitano C, Priori SG
**Journal:** J Am Coll Cardiol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jacc.2015.12.033](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2015.12.033)

## Content

1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016 Mar 8;67(9):1053-1058. doi:
10.1016/j.jacc.2015.12.033.

Gene-Specific Therapy With Mexiletine Reduces Arrhythmic Events in Patients With
Long QT Syndrome Type 3.

Mazzanti A(1), Maragna R(1), Faragli A(1), Monteforte N(1), Bloise R(1), Memmi
M(1), Novelli V(1), Baiardi P(1), Bagnardi V(2), Etheridge SP(3), Napolitano
C(1), Priori SG(4).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Cardiology, IRCCS Salvatore Maugeri Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
(2)Department of Statistics and Quantitative Methods, University of
Milan-Bicocca, Milan, Italy.
(3)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Primary Children's Hospital and University
of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
(4)Molecular Cardiology, IRCCS Salvatore Maugeri Foundation, Pavia, Italy;
Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. Electronic
address: silvia.priori@fsm.it.

Comment in
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016 Mar 8;67(9):1059-1061. doi:
10.1016/j.jacc.2015.12.030.
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017 Jan 17;69(2):248-249. doi:
10.1016/j.jacc.2016.09.981.
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017 Jan 17;69(2):248. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2016.06.083.

BACKGROUND: Long QT syndrome type 3 (LQT3) is a lethal disease caused by
gain-of-function mutations in the SCN5A gene, coding for the alpha-subunit of
the sodium channel NaV1.5. Mexiletine is used to block late sodium current and
to shorten QT interval in LQT3 patients.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to determine whether mexiletine prevents
arrhythmic events (arrhythmic syncope, aborted cardiac arrest, or sudden cardiac
death) in LQT3 patients.
METHODS: The endpoint of this retrospective cohort study, which studied
consecutive LQT3 patients who were referred to our center and treated with
mexiletine, was to evaluate the antiarrhythmic efficacy of mexiletine by
comparing the number of arrhythmic events per patient and the annual rate of
arrhythmic events during observation periods of equal duration before and after
the beginning of therapy with mexiletine.
RESULTS: The study population comprised 34 LQT3 patients, 19 (56%) of whom were
male. The median age at beginning of treatment with mexiletine was 22 years, and
median QTc interval before therapy 509 ms. The median duration of oral
mexiletine therapy was 36 months, at an average daily dose of 8 ± 0.5 mg/kg.
Mexiletine significantly shortened QTc (by 63 ± 6 ms; p < 0.0001) and reduced
the percentage of patients with arrhythmic events (from 22% to 3%; p = 0.031),
the mean number of arrhythmic events per patient (from 0.43 ± 0.17 to 0.03 ±
0.03; p = 0.027), and the annual rate of arrhythmic events (from 10.3% to 0.7%;
p = 0.0097).
CONCLUSIONS: Besides shortening QTc interval, mexiletine caused a major
reduction of life-threatening arrhythmic events in LQT3 patients, thus
representing an efficacious therapeutic strategy.

Copyright © 2016 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacc.2015.12.033
PMCID: PMC4773513
PMID: 26940925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
