---
reference_id: "PMID:28395030"
title: "Clinical Features, Molecular Heterogeneity, and Prognostic Implications in YARS2-Related Mitochondrial Myopathy."
authors:
- Sommerville EW
- Ng YS
- Alston CL
- Dallabona C
- Gilberti M
- He L
- Knowles C
- Chin SL
- Schaefer AM
- Falkous G
- Murdoch D
- Longman C
- de Visser M
- Bindoff LA
- Rawles JM
- Dean JCS
- Petty RK
- Farrugia ME
- Haack TB
- Prokisch H
- McFarland R
- Turnbull DM
- Donnini C
- Taylor RW
- Gorman GS
journal: JAMA Neurol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2016.4357
keywords:
- "Acidosis, Lactic/ethnology, etiology, genetics"
- Adult
- Aged
- "Anemia, Sideroblastic/ethnology, etiology, genetics"
- "Cardiomyopathies/ethnology, etiology, genetics"
- England/ethnology
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mitochondrial Myopathies/complications, ethnology, genetics"
- "Muscle Weakness/ethnology, etiology, genetics"
- Mutation
- Prognosis
- "Respiratory Insufficiency/ethnology, etiology, genetics"
- Scotland/ethnology
- Tyrosine-tRNA Ligase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Features, Molecular Heterogeneity, and Prognostic Implications in YARS2-Related Mitochondrial Myopathy.
**Authors:** Sommerville EW, Ng YS, Alston CL, Dallabona C, Gilberti M, He L, Knowles C, Chin SL, Schaefer AM, Falkous G, Murdoch D, Longman C, de Visser M, Bindoff LA, Rawles JM, Dean JCS, Petty RK, Farrugia ME, Haack TB, Prokisch H, McFarland R, Turnbull DM, Donnini C, Taylor RW, Gorman GS
**Journal:** JAMA Neurol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaneurol.2016.4357](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2016.4357)

## Content

1. JAMA Neurol. 2017 Jun 1;74(6):686-694. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2016.4357.

Clinical Features, Molecular Heterogeneity, and Prognostic Implications in
YARS2-Related Mitochondrial Myopathy.

Sommerville EW(1), Ng YS(1), Alston CL(1), Dallabona C(2), Gilberti M(2), He
L(1), Knowles C(1), Chin SL(1), Schaefer AM(1), Falkous G(1), Murdoch D(3),
Longman C(4), de Visser M(5), Bindoff LA(6), Rawles JM(7), Dean JCS(8), Petty
RK(9), Farrugia ME(9), Haack TB(10), Prokisch H(10), McFarland R(1), Turnbull
DM(1), Donnini C(2), Taylor RW(1), Gorman GS(1).

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Institute of Neuroscience,
The Medical School, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, England.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, Glasgow,
Scotland.
(4)West of Scotland Regional Genetics Service, Queen Elizabeth University
Hospital, Glasgow, Scotland.
(5)Department of Neurology, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Clinical Medicine, Department of Clinical Medicine, University
of Bergen, Bergen, Norway7Department of Neurology, Haukeland University
Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(7)Department of Medicine, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, Scotland (retired).
(8)Department of Medical Genetics, Medical School Building, University of
Aberdeen, Aberdeen, Scotland.
(9)Institute of Neurological Sciences, Queen Elizabeth University Hospital,
Glasgow, Scotland.
(10)Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg,
Germany12Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, Munich,
Germany.

IMPORTANCE: YARS2 mutations have been associated with a clinical triad of
myopathy, lactic acidosis, and sideroblastic anemia in predominantly Middle
Eastern populations. However, the identification of new patients expands the
clinical and molecular spectrum of mitochondrial disorders.
OBJECTIVES: To review the clinical, molecular, and genetic features of
YARS2-related mitochondrial disease and to demonstrate a new Scottish founder
variant.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: An observational case series study was
conducted at a national diagnostic center for mitochondrial disease in Newcastle
upon Tyne, England, and review of cases published in the literature. Six adults
in a well-defined mitochondrial disease cohort and 11 additional cases described
in the literature were identified with YARS2 variants between January 1, 2000,
and January 31, 2015.
MAIN OUTCOME AND MEASURES: The spectrum of clinical features and disease
progression in unreported and reported patients with pathogenic YARS2 variants.
RESULTS: Seventeen patients (median [interquartile range] age at onset, 1.5
[9.8] years) with YARS2-related mitochondrial myopathy were identified. Fifteen
individuals (88%) exhibited an elevated blood lactate level accompanied by
generalized myopathy; only 12 patients (71%) manifested with sideroblastic
anemia. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (9 [53%]) and respiratory insufficiency (8
[47%]) were also prominent clinical features. Central nervous system involvement
was rare. Muscle studies showed global cytochrome-c oxidase deficiency in all
patients tested and severe, combined respiratory chain complex activity
deficiencies. Microsatellite genotyping demonstrated a common founder effect
shared between 3 Scottish patients with a p.Leu392Ser variant. Immunoblotting
from fibroblasts and myoblasts of an affected Scottish patient showed normal
YARS2 protein levels and mild respiratory chain complex defects. Yeast modeling
of novel missense YARS2 variants closely correlated with the severity of
clinical phenotypes.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: The p.Leu392Ser variant is likely a newly identified
founder YARS2 mutation. Testing for pathogenic YARS2 variants should be
considered in patients presenting with mitochondrial myopathy, characterized by
exercise intolerance and muscle weakness even in the absence of sideroblastic
anemia irrespective of ethnicity. Regular surveillance and early treatment for
cardiomyopathy and respiratory muscle weakness is advocated because early
treatment may mitigate the significant morbidity and mortality associated with
this genetic disorder.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2016.4357
PMCID: PMC5822212
PMID: 28395030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.
