---
reference_id: "PMID:37957373"
title: "IRAK4 degrader in hidradenitis suppurativa and atopic dermatitis: a phase 1 trial."
authors:
- Ackerman L
- Acloque G
- Bacchelli S
- Schwartz H
- Feinstein BJ
- La Stella P
- Alavi A
- Gollerkeri A
- Davis J
- Campbell V
- McDonald A
- Agarwal S
- Karnik R
- Shi K
- Mishkin A
- Culbertson J
- Klaus C
- Enerson B
- Massa V
- Kuhn E
- Sharma K
- Keaney E
- Barnes R
- Chen D
- Zheng X
- Rong H
- Sabesan V
- Ho C
- Mainolfi N
- Slavin A
- Gollob JA
journal: Nat Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41591-023-02635-7
keywords:
- Humans
- Hidradenitis Suppurativa/drug therapy
- "Dermatitis, Atopic/drug therapy"
- Interleukin-1 Receptor-Associated Kinases
- Treatment Outcome
- Skin/pathology
- Double-Blind Method
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IRAK4 degrader in hidradenitis suppurativa and atopic dermatitis: a phase 1 trial.
**Authors:** Ackerman L, Acloque G, Bacchelli S, Schwartz H, Feinstein BJ, La Stella P, Alavi A, Gollerkeri A, Davis J, Campbell V, McDonald A, Agarwal S, Karnik R, Shi K, Mishkin A, Culbertson J, Klaus C, Enerson B, Massa V, Kuhn E, Sharma K, Keaney E, Barnes R, Chen D, Zheng X, Rong H, Sabesan V, Ho C, Mainolfi N, Slavin A, Gollob JA
**Journal:** Nat Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41591-023-02635-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-023-02635-7)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2023 Dec;29(12):3127-3136. doi: 10.1038/s41591-023-02635-7. Epub 2023
 Nov 13.

IRAK4 degrader in hidradenitis suppurativa and atopic dermatitis: a phase 1 
trial.

Ackerman L(1), Acloque G(2), Bacchelli S(3), Schwartz H(4), Feinstein BJ(5), La 
Stella P(6), Alavi A(7), Gollerkeri A(8), Davis J(8), Campbell V(8), McDonald 
A(8), Agarwal S(8), Karnik R(8), Shi K(8), Mishkin A(8), Culbertson J(8), Klaus 
C(8), Enerson B(8), Massa V(8), Kuhn E(8), Sharma K(8), Keaney E(8), Barnes 
R(8), Chen D(8), Zheng X(8), Rong H(8), Sabesan V(8), Ho C(8), Mainolfi N(8), 
Slavin A(8), Gollob JA(9).

Author information:
(1)Medical Dermatology Specialists, Phoenix, AZ, USA.
(2)Encore Medical Research, LLC, Hollywood, FL, USA.
(3)Encore Medical Research, LLC, Weston, FL, USA.
(4)CenExel RCA, Hollywood, FL, USA.
(5)Encore Medical Research, LLC, Boynton Beach, FL, USA.
(6)TKL Research, Fair Lawn, NJ, USA.
(7)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(8)Kymera Therapeutics, Inc., Watertown, MA, USA.
(9)Kymera Therapeutics, Inc., Watertown, MA, USA. jared@kymeratx.com.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2024 Jan;23(1):18. doi: 10.1038/d41573-023-00197-4.

Toll-like receptor-driven and interleukin-1 (IL-1) receptor-driven inflammation 
mediated by IL-1 receptor-associated kinase 4 (IRAK4) is involved in the 
pathophysiology of hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) and atopic dermatitis (AD). 
KT-474 (SAR444656), an IRAK4 degrader, was studied in a randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 1 trial where the primary objective was 
safety and tolerability. Secondary objectives included pharmacokinetics, 
pharmacodynamics and clinical activity in patients with moderate to severe HS 
and in patients with moderate to severe AD. KT-474 was administered as a single 
dose and then daily for 14 d in 105 healthy volunteers (HVs), followed by dosing 
for 28 d in an open-label cohort of 21 patients. Degradation of IRAK4 was 
observed in HV blood, with mean reductions after a single dose of ≥93% at 
600-1,600 mg and after 14 daily doses of ≥95% at 50-200 mg. In patients, similar 
IRAK4 degradation was achieved in blood, and IRAK4 was normalized in skin 
lesions where it was overexpressed relative to HVs. Reduction of 
disease-relevant inflammatory biomarkers was demonstrated in the blood and skin 
of patients with HS and patients with AD and was associated with improvement in 
skin lesions and symptoms. There were no drug-related infections. These results, 
from what, to our knowledge, is the first published clinical trial using a 
heterobifunctional degrader, provide initial proof of concept for KT-474 in HS 
and AD to be further confirmed in larger trials. ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: 
NCT04772885 .

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41591-023-02635-7
PMCID: PMC10719089
PMID: 37957373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.G., V.C., A.D., S.A., R.K., K.S., A.M., C.K., 
B.E., V.M., E.K., K.S., E.K., R.B., D.C., X.Z., V.S., C.H., N.M., A.S. and 
J.A.G. are Kymera Therapeutics employees and may have stock or stock options. 
J.D. and H.R. are former Kymera Therapeutics employees and may have stock or 
stock options. J.C. is a full-time consultant working for Kymera Therapeutics. 
All other authors (L.A., G.A., S.B., H.S., B.J.F., P.L. and A.A.) are employees 
of their respective companies; they were investigators from clinical sites in 
the trial and received payment for their participation in the trial.