---
reference_id: "PMID:21938556"
title: "Paraneoplastic encephalomyelopathies: pathology and mechanisms."
authors:
- McKeon A
- Pittock SJ
journal: Acta Neuropathol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s00401-011-0876-1
keywords:
- Humans
- "Paraneoplastic Syndromes, Nervous System/immunology, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Paraneoplastic encephalomyelopathies: pathology and mechanisms.
**Authors:** McKeon A, Pittock SJ
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00401-011-0876-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-011-0876-1)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol. 2011 Oct;122(4):381-400. doi: 10.1007/s00401-011-0876-1.
Epub  2011 Sep 22.

Paraneoplastic encephalomyelopathies: pathology and mechanisms.

McKeon A(1), Pittock SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, College of 
Medicine, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA. mckeon.andrew@mayo.edu

The last three decades have seen major advances in the understanding of 
paraneoplastic and idiopathic autoimmune disorders affecting the central nervous 
system (CNS). Neural-specific autoantibodies and their target antigens have been 
discovered, immunopathology and neuroimaging patterns recognized and pathogenic 
mechanisms elucidated. Disorders accompanied by autoantibody markers of neural 
peptide-specific cytotoxic effector T cells [such as anti-neuronal nuclear 
antibody type 1 (ANNA-1, aka anti-Hu), Purkinje cell antibody type 1 (PCA-1, aka 
anti-Yo) and CRMP-5 IgG] are generally poorly responsive to immunotherapy. 
Disorders accompanied by neural plasma membrane-reactive autoantibodies [the 
effectors of synaptic disorders, which include antibodies targeting 
voltage-gated potassium channel (VGKC) complex proteins, NMDA and GABA-B 
receptors] generally respond well to early immunotherapy. Here we describe in 
detail the neuropathological findings and pathophysiology of paraneoplastic CNS 
disorders with reference to antigen-specific serology and neurological and 
oncological contexts.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-011-0876-1
PMID: 21938556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]