---
reference_id: "PMID:31944632"
title: Concurrence of elevated FeNO and airway hyperresponsiveness in nonasthmatic adolescents.
authors:
- Kalm-Stephens P
- Malinovschi A
- Janson C
- Venge P
- Nordvall L
- Alving K
journal: Pediatr Pulmonol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/ppul.24578
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Concurrence of elevated FeNO and airway hyperresponsiveness in nonasthmatic adolescents.
**Authors:** Kalm-Stephens P, Malinovschi A, Janson C, Venge P, Nordvall L, Alving K
**Journal:** Pediatr Pulmonol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ppul.24578](https://doi.org/10.1002/ppul.24578)

## Content

1. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2020 Mar;55(3):571-579. doi: 10.1002/ppul.24578. Epub 2020
Jan  15.

Concurrence of elevated FeNO and airway hyperresponsiveness in nonasthmatic 
adolescents.

Kalm-Stephens P(1), Malinovschi A(2), Janson C(3), Venge P(4), Nordvall L(1), 
Alving K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden.
(2)Department of Medical Sciences: Clinical Physiology, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Department of Medical Sciences: Respiratory, Allergy, and Sleep Research, 
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(4)Department of Medical Sciences: Clinical Chemistry, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to investigate airway responsiveness and 
eosinophil and neutrophil inflammatory markers in clinically confirmed 
nonasthmatic adolescents with elevated fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO), a 
marker of type-2 inflammation in the airways.
METHODOLOGY: A total of 959 subjects from a general population, aged 12 to 15 
years, answered a standardised questionnaire and underwent FeNO measurements at 
a screening visit at school. Adolescents without asthma, who had elevated FeNO 
(FeNO100  > 15 ppb) (n = 19), and control subjects, with low FeNO (FeNO100  < 5 
ppb) and without reported symptoms of asthma or allergy (n = 28), participated 
in a follow-up study where FeNO50 , airway responsiveness to methacholine (PD20 
), blood eosinophil counts, and serum neutrophil lipocalin (HNL) and 
myeloperoxidase (MPO) levels were measured. Questionnaire follow-ups were 
performed 4 and 16 years later.
RESULTS: Airway responsiveness (PD20 : 6.94 [1.87, 11.39] vs 11.42 [6.33, 
59.4] µmol; P < .05) and blood eosinophil counts (0.31 [0.20, 0.44] vs 0.13 
[0.1, 0.22] 109 /L; P < .001) (geometric mean [95% CI]) were higher among cases 
than controls. A significant correlation between blood eosinophils and FeNO was 
found (rho = 0.41; P = .005). In contrast, serum HNL and MPO were lower in cases 
than controls (P < .05 both), and there was a negative correlation between HNL 
and FeNO (r = -0.31; P = .04). At both follow-ups, a higher proportion of 
subjects reported allergic symptoms compared with baseline (P = .02, P = .01).
CONCLUSIONS: Elevated FeNO in nonasthmatic adolescents was associated with 
airway hyperresponsiveness, elevated blood eosinophil counts, and lower systemic 
activation of neutrophils.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ppul.24578
PMID: 31944632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]