---
reference_id: "PMID:33972689"
title: ARP-T1-associated Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome is an inherited basal cell cancer with ciliary defects characteristic of ciliopathies.
authors:
- Park HS
- Papanastasi E
- Blanchard G
- Chiticariu E
- Bachmann D
- Plomann M
- Morice-Picard F
- Vabres P
- Smahi A
- Huber M
- Pich C
- Hohl D
journal: Commun Biol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s42003-021-02054-9
keywords:
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Cilia/metabolism, pathology"
- "Ciliopathies/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- "Hypotrichosis/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Keratinocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- "Microfilament Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- "Neoplasms, Basal Cell/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Skin Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ARP-T1-associated Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome is an inherited basal cell cancer with ciliary defects characteristic of ciliopathies.
**Authors:** Park HS, Papanastasi E, Blanchard G, Chiticariu E, Bachmann D, Plomann M, Morice-Picard F, Vabres P, Smahi A, Huber M, Pich C, Hohl D
**Journal:** Commun Biol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s42003-021-02054-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-021-02054-9)

## Content

1. Commun Biol. 2021 May 10;4(1):544. doi: 10.1038/s42003-021-02054-9.

ARP-T1-associated Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome is an inherited basal cell
cancer with ciliary defects characteristic of ciliopathies.

Park HS(#)(1), Papanastasi E(#)(1), Blanchard G(1), Chiticariu E(1), Bachmann
D(1), Plomann M(2), Morice-Picard F(3), Vabres P(4), Smahi A(5)(6), Huber M(1),
Pich C(1), Hohl D(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, CHUV-FBM UNIL, Hôpital de Beaumont, Lausanne,
Switzerland.
(2)Center for Biochemistry, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(3)Department of Dermatology, CHU, Hôpital Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France.
(4)Department of Dermatology, CHU, Hôpital du Bocage, Dijon, France.
(5)Paris Descartes University, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(6)IMAGINE Institute INSERM UMR 1163, Paris, France.
(7)Department of Dermatology, CHUV-FBM UNIL, Hôpital de Beaumont, Lausanne,
Switzerland. daniel.hohl@chuv.ch.
(#)Contributed equally

Actin-Related Protein-Testis1 (ARP-T1)/ACTRT1 gene mutations cause the
Bazex-Dupré-Christol Syndrome (BDCS) characterized by follicular atrophoderma,
hypotrichosis, and basal cell cancer. Here, we report an ARP-T1 interactome
(PXD016557) that includes proteins involved in ciliogenesis, endosomal
recycling, and septin ring formation. In agreement, ARP-T1 localizes to the
midbody during cytokinesis and the basal body of primary cilia in interphase.
Tissue samples from ARP-T1-associated BDCS patients have reduced ciliary length.
The severity of the shortened cilia significantly correlates with the ARP-T1
levels, which was further validated by ACTRT1 knockdown in culture cells. Thus,
we propose that ARP-T1 participates in the regulation of cilia length and that
ARP-T1-associated BDCS is a case of skin cancer with ciliopathy characteristics.

DOI: 10.1038/s42003-021-02054-9
PMCID: PMC8110579
PMID: 33972689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
