---
reference_id: "PMID:19945616"
title: Herlitz junctional epidermolysis bullosa.
authors:
- Laimer M
- Lanschuetzer CM
- Diem A
- Bauer JW
journal: Dermatol Clin
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.det.2009.10.006
keywords:
- Cell Adhesion Molecules/genetics
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa, Junctional/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Laminin/genetics
- Skin/pathology
- Kalinin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Herlitz junctional epidermolysis bullosa.
**Authors:** Laimer M, Lanschuetzer CM, Diem A, Bauer JW
**Journal:** Dermatol Clin (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.det.2009.10.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.det.2009.10.006)

## Content

1. Dermatol Clin. 2010 Jan;28(1):55-60. doi: 10.1016/j.det.2009.10.006.

Herlitz junctional epidermolysis bullosa.

Laimer M(1), Lanschuetzer CM, Diem A, Bauer JW.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Dermatology, Department of Dermatology, General 
Hospital Salzburg, Paracelsus Medical University Salzburg, Muellner Hauptstrasse 
48, A-5020 Salzburg, Austria. m.laimer@salk.at

Junctional epidermolysis bullosa type Herlitz (JEB-H) is the autosomal 
recessively inherited, more severe variant of "lucidolytic" JEB. Characterized 
by generalized, extensive mucocutaneous blistering at birth and early lethality, 
this devastating condition is most often caused by homozygous null mutations in 
the genes LAMA3, LAMB3, or LAMC2, each encoding for 1 of the 3 chains of the 
heterotrimer laminin-332. The JEB-H subtype usually presents as a severe and 
clinically diverse variant of the EB group of mechanobullous genodermatoses. 
This article outlines the epidemiology, presentation, and diagnosis of JEB-H. 
Morbidity and mortality are high, necessitating optimized protocols for early 
(including prenatal) diagnosis and palliative care. Gene therapy remains the 
most promising perspective.

DOI: 10.1016/j.det.2009.10.006
PMID: 19945616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]