---
reference_id: "PMID:40200228"
title: Lower respiratory rate during sleep in children with angelman syndrome compared to age-matched controls.
authors:
- Gschwind L
- Holst SC
- Nobbs D
- Lipsmeier F
- Buzasi K
- Boonsimma P
- Rotenberg A
- Kolodyazhniy V
- Hipp JF
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-03553-2
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Child
- Angelman Syndrome/physiopathology
- "Child, Preschool"
- Infant
- Sleep/physiology
- Respiratory Rate/physiology
- Polysomnography/methods
- Case-Control Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lower respiratory rate during sleep in children with angelman syndrome compared to age-matched controls.
**Authors:** Gschwind L, Holst SC, Nobbs D, Lipsmeier F, Buzasi K, Boonsimma P, Rotenberg A, Kolodyazhniy V, Hipp JF
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-025-03553-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-025-03553-2)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2025 Apr 8;20(1):167. doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-03553-2.

Lower respiratory rate during sleep in children with angelman syndrome compared
to age-matched controls.

Gschwind L(#)(1), Holst SC(#)(2), Nobbs D(1), Lipsmeier F(3), Buzasi K(4),
Boonsimma P(5), Rotenberg A(6), Kolodyazhniy V(1), Hipp JF(7).

Author information:
(1)Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Data and Analytics, Roche
Innovation Center Basel, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Neuroscience and Rare Diseases,
Roche Innovation Center Basel, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., Basel, Switzerland.
sebastian.holst@roche.com.
(3)Roche Informatics Solutions, Data, Analytics and Research, F. Hoffmann-La
Roche Ltd., Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Fortrea Development Limited, Budapest, Hungary.
(5)Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Neuroscience and Rare Diseases,
Roche Innovation Center Basel, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., Basel, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Neuroscience and Rare Diseases,
Roche Innovation Center Basel, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., Basel, Switzerland.
joerg.hipp@roche.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Angelman syndrome (AS) is a rare genetic neurodevelopmental disorder
caused by the absence of a functional UBE3A gene, leading to developmental,
behavioral, and medical challenges. Sleep disturbances, including
sleep-disordered breathing, are common in AS. This study, for the first time,
investigates nocturnal respiration in individuals with AS and healthy controls
at home in a long term setting.
METHODS: A non-invasive ballistocardiography-based (BCG) sleep monitoring device
("sleep mat") placed under the participants' mattresses, was used to remotely
monitor children with AS aged 1 to 12 years (6.0 ± 3.2 years, n = 40) and
age-matched typically developing controls (TDC) (6.2 ± 3.5 years, n = 20) for
approximately 12 months. The sleep mat recorded physiological signals during
times in bed. We applied fast-Fourier transformation (FFT) to exclude segments
without a clear respiratory signal, thereby minimizing the impact of large body
movements, wakefulness, or seizure activity. Moreover, polysomnography (PSG) was
collected for up to three nights for each participant in their home. Clinical
characteristics, genotype, and Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development®
(Bayley-III) were also analyzed.
RESULTS: The average median BCG-derived respiratory rate over the entire study
duration was significantly lower in AS compared to TDCs (Cohen's d = 1.31).
PSG-derived respiration data corroborated the lower breathing rate in AS
(Cohen's d = 0.77) and revealed a strong correlation between BCG and PSG derived
respiration (r = 0.85) and thus a strong convergent validity of the sleep mat
against "gold standard" measures. Next, we defined two groups of AS individuals
based on their respiratory rates: a normal respiration group with rates above
the minimum in TDC, and a low respiratory rate group with rates below the TDC
group's minimum. A higher prevalence of respiratory abnormalities was observed
in deletion carriers (55.2%) versus non-deletion carriers (9.1%). Pulse oximetry
data indicated lower oxygen saturation levels in AS individuals (Cohen's
d = 1.60). Moreover, lower Bayley-III scores were observed in the low
respiration group, suggesting a link between respiratory dysfunction and
neurodevelopmental outcomes in AS. Medication use, particularly antiepileptic
drugs, was found to suppress respiratory rates, highlighting the complex
interplay between concomitant medication use, genotype, and sleep in AS.
CONCLUSION: Our study provides the first long-term observational evidence of a
persistent bradypnea-like phenotype in individuals with AS, which may have
significant implications for their clinical management. The successful use of
the sleep mat device as a non-invasive physiological ambulatory monitoring tool
demonstrates its potential as a digital health technology for detecting
respiratory abnormalities in pediatric neurodevelopmental disorders. These
findings should be further assessed and may have biomarker and clinical utility
in AS, particularly in relation to seizure management and cognitive development.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-025-03553-2
PMCID: PMC11980168
PMID: 40200228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to
participate: All participants provided informed consent before being enrolled in
the study. This study was conducted in compliance with Good Clinical Practice,
including International Conference on Harmonization Guidelines and was
consistent with the most recent version of the Declaration of Helsinki.
Additionally, all applicable local laws and regulatory requirements were adhered
to. Before recruiting participants, all study documents were submitted to and
approved by an independent institutional review board at each site. All personal
data were managed to ensure compliance with applicable national and/or local
laws, and regulations on personal data protection. Consent for publication: Not
applicable. Competing interests: LG, SCH, DN, FL, PB, VK and JFH are employees
of F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. KB was an employee of Fortrea Development Limited,
Budapest, Hungary, providing services to F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., when this
study was conducted. AR has been a paid consultant and has received research
support from F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. He has also consulted, participated on
advisory boards or received recent research support from Autifony, BioMarin,
Brainsway, CRE Medical, CURE, Encoded, LouLou Foundation, Marino’s, Neurocrine,
Neuroelectrics, Ovid, SSADH Foundation, and Takeda. He is co-founder and has
equity in Neuromotion, PrevEp, and Galibra.
