---
reference_id: "PMID:22421994"
title: Orofacial features of hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia.
authors:
- de Aquino SN
- Paranaíba LM
- Swerts MS
- Martelli DR
- de Barros LM
- Martelli Júnior H
journal: Head Neck Pathol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1007/s12105-012-0349-4
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia 1, Anhidrotic/pathology"
- Face/abnormalities
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Mouth Abnormalities/pathology
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Orofacial features of hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia.
**Authors:** de Aquino SN, Paranaíba LM, Swerts MS, Martelli DR, de Barros LM, Martelli Júnior H
**Journal:** Head Neck Pathol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12105-012-0349-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12105-012-0349-4)

## Content

1. Head Neck Pathol. 2012 Dec;6(4):460-6. doi: 10.1007/s12105-012-0349-4. Epub
2012  Mar 16.

Orofacial features of hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia.

de Aquino SN(1), Paranaíba LM, Swerts MS, Martelli DR, de Barros LM, Martelli 
Júnior H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Diagnosis, School of Dentistry, State University of 
Campinas, Av. Limeira 901, Piracicaba, São Paulo, 13414-018, Brazil. 
sibeleaquino1@yahoo.com.br

Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED) is a type of genodermatosis 
characterized by the abnormal development of sweat glands, teeth, and hair. The 
most prevalent form of HED is X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia 
(XLHED), which is associated with mutations in the EDA gene. The aim of this 
case report was to describe a family with XLHED with emphasis on differences in 
orofacial features between members. Family members were systematically evaluated 
to characterize the pattern of inheritance and clinical features. Dental 
examination included evaluation of agenesis and abnormal teeth structure. The 
pedigree of the last seven generations of the family was constructed. Clinical 
examination and medical history revealed five males affected by HED and nine 
female as heterozygous carriers. The males exhibited the classic phenotype of 
XLHED, with dental abnormalities, hypohydrosis, and craniofacial 
dysmorphologies. The heterozygous carriers of the X-linked gene defect 
principally exhibited dental agenesis of the lateral maxillary incisors. Careful 
clinical examination, including dental evaluation, is an important way to detect 
heterozygous carriers of X-linked HED. Heterozygous parents of patients with HED 
may also show some features of the disorder. The identification of female 
carriers results in genetic counseling being offered to affected families, as 
well as providing adequate treatment as necessary and long-term follow-up of 
these patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s12105-012-0349-4
PMCID: PMC3500897
PMID: 22421994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]