---
reference_id: "PMID:38371949"
title: "Battling a rarity: A case of kindler syndrome from a developing country."
authors:
- Ahmed A
- Zehra T
- Moin A
- Rehman Usmani SU
journal: SAGE Open Med Case Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1177/2050313X241231518
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Battling a rarity: A case of kindler syndrome from a developing country.
**Authors:** Ahmed A, Zehra T, Moin A, Rehman Usmani SU
**Journal:** SAGE Open Med Case Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1177/2050313X241231518](https://doi.org/10.1177/2050313X241231518)

## Content

1. SAGE Open Med Case Rep. 2024 Feb 16;12:2050313X241231518. doi: 
10.1177/2050313X241231518. eCollection 2024.

Battling a rarity: A case of kindler syndrome from a developing country.

Ahmed A(1), Zehra T(2), Moin A(3), Rehman Usmani SU(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Dr. Ruth K. M. Pfau Civil Hospital, Karachi, 
Pakistan.
(2)Geriatric Medicine, Sherwood Forest Hospitals NHS Foundation Trusts, 
Mansfield, UK.
(3)Dow University of Health Sciences, Karachi, Pakistan.

Kindler syndrome, a rare branching of inherited epidermolysis bullosa, is an 
autosomal recessive condition characterized by the eruption of painful blisters 
and hemorrhagic vesicles in infancy. With age, the eruption of blisters are seen 
to decline leaving behind fibrosed, scarred, and paper-like skin, and 
poikilodermic features. To this date, about 400 cases have been reported 
worldwide for this disease only. This report aims to discuss the presence and 
diagnosis of Kindler Syndrome using limited resources in developing countries. 
It describes the presence of clinically diagnosed Kindler Syndrome in a young 
male of Pakistani descent that started in infancy and presented with a variety 
of clinical features over the years. Even though genetic analysis remains the 
gold standard diagnostic for Kindler syndrome, for third world countries, 
relying on Diagnostic clinical criteria remains helpful in establishing a 
diagnosis of Kindler syndrome for further management, as seen in our patient.

© The Author(s) 2024.

DOI: 10.1177/2050313X241231518
PMCID: PMC10874135
PMID: 38371949

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.