---
reference_id: "PMID:32754646"
title: SLC12A2 mutations cause NKCC1 deficiency with encephalopathy and impaired secretory epithelia.
authors:
- Stödberg T
- Magnusson M
- Lesko N
- Wredenberg A
- Martin Munoz D
- Stranneheim H
- Wedell A
journal: Neurol Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000000478
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SLC12A2 mutations cause NKCC1 deficiency with encephalopathy and impaired secretory epithelia.
**Authors:** Stödberg T, Magnusson M, Lesko N, Wredenberg A, Martin Munoz D, Stranneheim H, Wedell A
**Journal:** Neurol Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1212/NXG.0000000000000478](https://doi.org/10.1212/NXG.0000000000000478)

## Content

1. Neurol Genet. 2020 Jul 2;6(4):e478. doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000000478. 
eCollection 2020 Aug.

SLC12A2 mutations cause NKCC1 deficiency with encephalopathy and impaired 
secretory epithelia.

Stödberg T(1), Magnusson M(1), Lesko N(1), Wredenberg A(1), Martin Munoz D(1), 
Stranneheim H(1), Wedell A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health (T.S.), Department of Molecular 
Medicine and Surgery (M.M., N.L., H.S., A. Wedell), Science for Life Laboratory 
(M.M., H.S., A. Wedell), Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics (A. 
Wredenberg), and Department of Clinical Neuroscience (D.M.M.), Karolinska 
Institutet; and Department of Pediatric Neurology (T.S.), Centre for Inherited 
Metabolic Diseases (N.L., A. Wredenberg, H.S., A. Wedell), and Department of 
Neuroradiology (D.M.M.), Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the phenotype in 2 sisters with a rare constellation of 
neurologic symptoms and secretory impairments and to identify the etiology by 
the use of whole-genome sequencing (WGS).
METHODS: After an extensive workup failed to reveal the cause of disease, in a 
girl with a previously not reported phenotype, WGS of the proband, her diseased 
older sister, an older healthy brother, and their parents was performed, and 
potentially pathogenic variants were analyzed.
RESULTS: The proband and her older sister both presented with neonatal 
Staphylococcus aureus parotitis, apneas, disappearance of the Moro reflex, and 
hypotonia. The proband survived. Her brain MRI showed white matter and basal 
ganglia abnormalities, and CSF damage biomarkers were increased. At age 8 years, 
she exhibits a constellation of symptoms including severe neurodevelopmental 
disorder, hearing impairment, gastrointestinal problems, and a striking lack of 
tear fluid, saliva, and sweat. Her respiratory mucosa is dry with potentially 
life-threatening mucus plugging. Through WGS, 2 loss-of-function variants in 
SLC12A2 were identified that follow an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together with a single previously reported case and the close 
resemblance to the phenotypes of corresponding mouse models, our study firmly 
establishes biallelic variants in SLC12A2 as causing human disease and adds data 
regarding the neurologic phenotype.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000000478
PMCID: PMC7357422
PMID: 32754646