---
reference_id: "PMID:36306524"
title: Sleep impairment in patients with empty nose syndrome.
authors:
- Huang CC
- Lee CC
- Wu PW
- Chuang CC
- Lee YS
- Chang PH
- Huang CC
- Fu CH
- Lee TJ
journal: Rhinology
year: '2023'
doi: 10.4193/Rhin22.117
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sleep impairment in patients with empty nose syndrome.
**Authors:** Huang CC, Lee CC, Wu PW, Chuang CC, Lee YS, Chang PH, Huang CC, Fu CH, Lee TJ
**Journal:** Rhinology (2023)
**DOI:** [10.4193/Rhin22.117](https://doi.org/10.4193/Rhin22.117)

## Content

1. Rhinology. 2023 Feb 1;61(1):47-53. doi: 10.4193/Rhin22.117.

Sleep impairment in patients with empty nose syndrome.

Huang CC(1), Lee CC(2), Wu PW(3), Chuang CC(4), Lee YS(5), Chang PH(6), Huang 
CC(1), Fu CH(1), Lee TJ(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rhinology, Department of Otolaryngology, Chang Gung Memorial 
Hospital and Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan; Graduate Institute of 
Clinical Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taiwan; 
School of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(2)School of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan; Department of 
Neurosurgery, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Linkou and Chang Gung University, 
Taiwan; Department of Biomedical Engineering, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Division of Rhinology, Department of Otolaryngology, Chang Gung Memorial 
Hospital and Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan; School of Medicine, Chang 
Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan; Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck 
Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung University, Keelung, 
Taiwan.
(4)School of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan; Department of 
Neurosurgery, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Linkou and Chang Gung University, 
Taiwan.
(5)Genomic Medicine Research Core Laboratory, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, 
Taoyuan, Taiwan; Department of Biotechnology, Ming Chuan University, Taoyuan, 
Taiwan.
(6)Division of Rhinology, Department of Otolaryngology, Chang Gung Memorial 
Hospital and Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan; Graduate Institute of 
Clinical Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taiwan.
(7)Division of Rhinology, Department of Otolaryngology, Chang Gung Memorial 
Hospital and Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan; School of Medicine, Chang 
Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan; Department of Otolaryngology, Xiamen Chang 
Gung Hospital, Xiamen, China.

BACKGROUND: Empty nose syndrome (ENS) is characterized by paradoxical nasal 
obstruction that usually occurs after turbinate surgery. Patients with ENS may 
also experience significant psychiatric symptoms and sleep dysfunction, which 
negatively affect the quality of life of affected subjects. This study aimed to 
evaluate sleep impairment and sleepiness in patients with ENS.
METHODS: Patients with ENS and control participants were recruited 
prospectively. The Sino-Nasal Outcome Test-25 (SNOT-25), Empty Nose Syndrome 
6-item Questionnaire (ENS6Q), Epworth Sleepiness Scale (EpSS), and modified 
sleep quality index (MSQI) were used to evaluate the participants before and 
after nasal surgery.
RESULTS: Forty-eight patients with ENS and forty-eight age- and sex-matched 
control subjects were enrolled. The SNOT-25, ENS6Q, EpSS, and MSQI scores in the 
ENS group were all significantly higher than those in the control group before 
and after surgery. After surgery, ENS patients all exhibited significant 
improvements in SNOT-25, ENS6Q, EpSS, and MSQI scores. Regression analysis 
revealed that SNOT-25 score was a significant predictor of EpSS and MSQI in 
preoperative evaluations. ENS patients experiencing daytime sleepiness suffered 
from significantly more "dryness of nose" and "suffocation" than those not 
experiencing daytime sleepiness.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with ENS experienced significantly impaired sleep quality 
and sleepiness. Nasal reconstruction surgery improved the sleep quality of ENS 
patients. The severity of sleep dysfunction is associated with the severity of 
ENS symptoms. Recognizing individuals with significant sleep impairment and 
sleepiness and providing appropriate management are critical issues for ENS 
patients.

DOI: 10.4193/Rhin22.117
PMID: 36306524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]