---
reference_id: "PMID:17599809"
title: "Risk for premenstrual dysphoric disorder is associated with genetic variation in ESR1, the estrogen receptor alpha gene."
authors:
- Huo L
- Straub RE
- Roca C
- Schmidt PJ
- Shi K
- Vakkalanka R
- Weinberger DR
- Rubinow DR
journal: Biol Psychiatry
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2006.12.019
keywords:
- Adult
- Catechol O-Methyltransferase/genetics
- Chi-Square Distribution
- Estrogen Receptor alpha/genetics
- Estrogen Receptor beta/genetics
- Female
- Gene Frequency
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Linkage Disequilibrium
- "Luteal Phase/genetics, psychology"
- Middle Aged
- "Mood Disorders/complications, genetics"
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Premenstrual Syndrome/complications, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk for premenstrual dysphoric disorder is associated with genetic variation in ESR1, the estrogen receptor alpha gene.
**Authors:** Huo L, Straub RE, Roca C, Schmidt PJ, Shi K, Vakkalanka R, Weinberger DR, Rubinow DR
**Journal:** Biol Psychiatry (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biopsych.2006.12.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2006.12.019)

## Content

1. Biol Psychiatry. 2007 Oct 15;62(8):925-33. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsych.2006.12.019.  Epub 2007 Jun 27.

Risk for premenstrual dysphoric disorder is associated with genetic variation in 
ESR1, the estrogen receptor alpha gene.

Huo L(1), Straub RE, Roca C, Schmidt PJ, Shi K, Vakkalanka R, Weinberger DR, 
Rubinow DR.

Author information:
(1)Behavioral Endocrinology Branch, National Institute of Mental Health, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

BACKGROUND: Premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) is a heritable mood disorder 
that is triggered by gonadal steroids during the luteal phase in susceptible 
women.
METHODS: We performed haplotype analyses of estrogen receptors alpha and beta 
(ESR1 and ESR2) in 91 women with prospectively confirmed PMDD and 56 control 
subjects to investigate possible sources of the genetic susceptibility to 
affective dysregulation induced by normal levels of gonadal steroids. We also 
examined associations with the valine (Val)158methionine (Met) single nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) of the gene for catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), an 
enzyme involved in estrogen metabolism and prefrontal cortical activation.
RESULTS: Four SNPs in intron 4 of ESR1 showed significantly different genotype 
and allele distributions between patients and control subjects. Significant 
case-control differences were seen in sliding-window analyses of two-, three-, 
and four-marker haplotypes but only in those haplotypes containing SNPs in 
intron 4 that were positive in the single-locus analysis. No significant 
associations were observed with ESR2 or with the COMT Val158Met polymorphism, 
although the significant associations with ESR1 were observed only in those with 
the Val/Val genotype.
CONCLUSIONS: These are the first positive (albeit preliminary) genetic findings 
in this reproductive endocrine-related mood disorder and involve the receptor 
for a hormone that is pathogenically relevant.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2006.12.019
PMCID: PMC2762203
PMID: 17599809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]