---
reference_id: "PMID:37980175"
title: von Hippel-Lindau disease-related neoplasia with an emphasis on renal manifestations.
authors:
- Tekin B
- Erickson LA
- Gupta S
journal: Semin Diagn Pathol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1053/j.semdp.2023.11.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# von Hippel-Lindau disease-related neoplasia with an emphasis on renal manifestations.
**Authors:** Tekin B, Erickson LA, Gupta S
**Journal:** Semin Diagn Pathol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.semdp.2023.11.003](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.semdp.2023.11.003)

## Content

1. Semin Diagn Pathol. 2024 Jan;41(1):20-27. doi: 10.1053/j.semdp.2023.11.003.
Epub  2023 Nov 8.

von Hippel-Lindau disease-related neoplasia with an emphasis on renal 
manifestations.

Tekin B(1), Erickson LA(1), Gupta S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First 
Street, Southwest, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First 
Street, Southwest, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. Electronic address: 
gupta.sounak@mayo.edu.

von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease is characterized by biallelic inactivation of 
the VHL gene leading to abnormal or absent VHL protein function, and 
constitutive activation of hypoxia-inducible factors (HIF) that leads to 
pro-tumorigenic signaling. Individuals with VHL disease develop numerous cysts 
and tumors involving multiple organs including the kidneys, central nervous 
system, endolymphatic sac, lungs, pancreatobiliary system, adrenal glands, 
epididymis, and/or broad ligament. On histologic examination, these lesions show 
morphologic overlap as they are frequently characterized by cells with clear 
cytoplasm and prominent vascularity. In addition to distinguishing non-renal 
tumors from metastatic clear cell renal cell carcinoma, understanding 
site-specific histopathologic and immunophenotypic features of these tumors has 
several applications. This includes distinguishing VHL-related tumors from those 
that arise sporadically and lack VHL gene alterations, guiding further genetic 
workup, and helping distinguish between different genetic predisposition 
syndromes. In this context, immunohistochemical studies for markers such as 
paired box 8 (PAX-8), carbonic anhydrase 9 (CA9), and glucose transporter 1 
(GLUT-1) have an important role in routine clinical practice and represent 
cost-effective diagnostic tools. The recent development of targeted therapeutics 
directed against HIF-mediated signaling represents a significant milestone in 
the management of VHL disease and highlights the importance of accurately 
diagnosing and characterizing the wide spectrum of VHL disease-associated 
lesions.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.semdp.2023.11.003
PMID: 37980175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.