---
reference_id: "PMID:30204230"
title: Acute changes in cardiac function by direct acting antiviral therapy for hepatitis C-infected patients with thalassemia.
authors:
- Khosravi A
- Karimi-Sari H
- Abedi-Andani M
- Behnava B
- Namvar A
- Anvar A
- Alavian SM
journal: J Med Virol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/jmv.25314
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Antiviral Agents/adverse effects
- Benzimidazoles/adverse effects
- Female
- Fluorenes/adverse effects
- "Heart/drug effects, physiopathology"
- "Heart Diseases/chemically induced, virology"
- Heart Function Tests
- Hepacivirus/drug effects
- "Hepatitis C, Chronic/drug therapy"
- Humans
- Male
- Prospective Studies
- Sofosbuvir/adverse effects
- Thalassemia/complications
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute changes in cardiac function by direct acting antiviral therapy for hepatitis C-infected patients with thalassemia.
**Authors:** Khosravi A, Karimi-Sari H, Abedi-Andani M, Behnava B, Namvar A, Anvar A, Alavian SM
**Journal:** J Med Virol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmv.25314](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.25314)

## Content

1. J Med Virol. 2019 Mar;91(3):419-427. doi: 10.1002/jmv.25314. Epub 2018 Oct 9.

Acute changes in cardiac function by direct acting antiviral therapy for
hepatitis C-infected patients with thalassemia.

Khosravi A(1)(2)(3), Karimi-Sari H(1)(2)(4), Abedi-Andani M(1)(2)(3), Behnava
B(1)(2), Namvar A(5), Anvar A(5), Alavian SM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Baqiyatallah Research Center for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases (BRCGL),
Baqiyatallah University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Middle East Liver Diseases (MELD) Center, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Atherosclerosis Research Center, Baqiyatallah University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran.
(4)Student Research Committee, Baqiyatallah University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran.
(5)Iranian Comprehensive Hemophilia Care Center, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Patients with thalassemia may also have cardiac abnormalities due to
congenital problems, anemia, and increased burden of iron in their myocardium.
This study was designed to evaluate the effects of direct acting antiviral (DAA)
therapy on the cardiac function of hepatitis C virus (HCV)-infected patients
with thalassemia.
METHOD: HCV-infected thalassemia patients were enrolled to this prospective
evaluation. Daily tablets of 90 mg Ledipasvir (or 60 mg Daclatasvir) plus 400 mg
Sofosbuvir (±ribavirin) were prescribed for the patients according to the Iran
Hepatitis Network's guidelines. An echocardiography fellow collected the
echocardiography findings before and after the treatment of all the patients.
The patients were followed up for any cardiac events within 12 weeks after
finishing the treatment.
RESULTS: Thirty-two patients with the mean age of 24.2 ± 6.4 years were
evaluated. All patients showed a sustained virological response at the 12th week
after finishing the treatment. The patients' left ventricular end systolic
diameter (3.0 vs 3.24; P = 0.003) and volume (33.8 vs 43.6; P = 0.001), global
longitudinal strain of the left ventricle (-22.0 vs -20.6, P = 0.046), and
average (-21.4 vs -20.3; P = 0.048), and the right ventricle size (3.12 vs 3.31;
P = 0.012) were significantly increased after finishing the treatment. Changes
in the abovementioned parameters were not correlated with the patients'
myocardium iron load. There were no significant differences in other
echocardiographic parameters ( P > 0.05) before and after the treatment.
CONCLUSION: Sofosbuvir-based regimens for HCV treatment were safe for our
HCV-infected patients with thalassemia. Our patients' ejection fraction remained
unchanged. Hence, more specialized echocardiographic evaluations were
recommended for those with a history of cardiac abnormalities, cardiac iron
overload, and in case of any cardiac adverse event during DAA therapy in
patients with thalassemia.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.25314
PMID: 30204230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
