---
reference_id: "PMID:34383451"
title: Sinus Node Dysfunction.
authors:
- Hawks MK
- Paul MLB
- Malu OO
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '2021'
keywords:
- "Cardiac Pacing, Artificial/methods"
- Electrocardiography
- Heart Rate/physiology
- Humans
- "Sick Sinus Syndrome/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
- Sinoatrial Node/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sinus Node Dysfunction.
**Authors:** Hawks MK, Paul MLB, Malu OO
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (2021)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 2021 Aug 1;104(2):179-185.

Sinus Node Dysfunction.

Hawks MK(1), Paul MLB(2), Malu OO(3).

Author information:
(1)Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Fort Belvoir Community Hospital, Fort Belvoir, VA, USA.
(3)DiLorenzo Health Clinic, Washington, DC, USA.

Sinus node dysfunction, previously known as sick sinus syndrome, describes 
disorders related to abnormal conduction and propagation of electrical impulses 
at the sinoatrial node. An abnormal atrial rate may result in the inability to 
meet physiologic demands, especially during periods of stress or physical 
activity. Sinus node dysfunction may occur at any age, but is usually more 
common in older persons. The causes of sinus node dysfunction are intrinsic 
(e.g., degenerative idiopathic fibrosis, cardiac remodeling) or extrinsic (e.g., 
medications, metabolic abnormalities) to the sinoatrial node. Many extrinsic 
causes are reversible. Electrocardiography findings include sinus bradycardia, 
sinus pauses or arrest, sinoatrial exit block, chronotropic incompetence, or 
alternating bradycardia and tachycardia (i.e., bradycardia-tachycardia 
syndrome). Clinical symptoms result from the hypoperfusion of end organs. About 
50% of patients present with cerebral hypoperfusion (e.g., syncope, presyncope, 
lightheadedness, cerebrovascular accident). Other symptoms include palpitations, 
decreased physical activity tolerance, angina, muscular fatigue, or oliguria. A 
diagnosis is made by directly correlating symptoms with a bradyarrhythmia and 
eliminating potentially reversible extrinsic causes. Heart rate monitoring using 
electrocardiography or ambulatory cardiac event monitoring is performed based on 
the frequency of symptoms. An exercise stress test should be performed when 
symptoms are associated with exertion. The patient's inability to reach a heart 
rate of at least 80% of their predicted maximum (220 beats per minute - age) may 
indicate chronotropic incompetence, which is present in 50% of patients with 
sinus node dysfunction. First-line treatment for patients with confirmed sinus 
node dysfunction is permanent pacemaker placement with atrial-based pacing and 
limited ventricular pacing when necessary.

PMID: 34383451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]