---
reference_id: "PMID:35427471"
title: "Pembrolizumab versus chemotherapy for microsatellite instability-high or mismatch repair-deficient metastatic colorectal cancer (KEYNOTE-177): final analysis of a randomised, open-label, phase 3 study."
authors:
- Diaz LA Jr
- Shiu KK
- Kim TW
- Jensen BV
- Jensen LH
- Punt C
- Smith D
- Garcia-Carbonero R
- Benavides M
- Gibbs P
- de la Fourchardiere C
- Rivera F
- Elez E
- Le DT
- Yoshino T
- Zhong WY
- Fogelman D
- Marinello P
- Andre T
- KEYNOTE-177 Investigators
journal: Lancet Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(22)00197-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pembrolizumab versus chemotherapy for microsatellite instability-high or mismatch repair-deficient metastatic colorectal cancer (KEYNOTE-177): final analysis of a randomised, open-label, phase 3 study.
**Authors:** Diaz LA Jr, Shiu KK, Kim TW, Jensen BV, Jensen LH, Punt C, Smith D, Garcia-Carbonero R, Benavides M, Gibbs P, de la Fourchardiere C, Rivera F, Elez E, Le DT, Yoshino T, Zhong WY, Fogelman D, Marinello P, Andre T, KEYNOTE-177 Investigators
**Journal:** Lancet Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1470-2045(22)00197-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(22)00197-8)

## Content

1. Lancet Oncol. 2022 May;23(5):659-670. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(22)00197-8. Epub
 2022 Apr 12.

Pembrolizumab versus chemotherapy for microsatellite instability-high or 
mismatch repair-deficient metastatic colorectal cancer (KEYNOTE-177): final 
analysis of a randomised, open-label, phase 3 study.

Diaz LA Jr(1), Shiu KK(2), Kim TW(3), Jensen BV(4), Jensen LH(5), Punt C(6), 
Smith D(7), Garcia-Carbonero R(8), Benavides M(9), Gibbs P(10), de la 
Fourchardiere C(11), Rivera F(12), Elez E(13), Le DT(14), Yoshino T(15), Zhong 
WY(16), Fogelman D(17), Marinello P(17), Andre T(18); KEYNOTE-177 Investigators.

Author information:
(1)Division of Solid Tumor Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, NY, USA. Electronic address: diazl5@mskcc.org.
(2)University College Hospital, NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(3)Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan, Seoul, South Korea.
(4)Herlev and Gentofte Hospital, Herlev, Denmark.
(5)University Hospital of Southern Denmark, Vejle, Denmark.
(6)Amsterdam University Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands; Department of Epidemiology, Julius Center for Health Sciences and 
Primary Care, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, 
Netherlands.
(7)Bordeaux University Hospital, Bordeaux, France.
(8)Oncology Department, Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, Imas 12, UCM, 
Madrid, Spain.
(9)Hospital Universitario Regional y Virgen de la Victoria, IBIMA, Málaga, 
Spain.
(10)Western Health, St Albans, VIC, Australia.
(11)Léon Bérard Center, Lyon, France.
(12)Hospital Universitario Marques de Valdecilla, IDIVAL, Santander, Spain.
(13)Vall d'Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus, Vall d'Hebron Institute of 
Oncology, Barcelona, Spain.
(14)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, MD, 
USA.
(15)National Cancer Center Hospital East, Chiba, Japan.
(16)MSD China, Shanghai, China.
(17)Merck, Kenilworth, NJ, USA.
(18)Sorbonne Université, Hospital Saint Antoine and INSERM 938 and SIRIC 
CURAMUS, Paris, France.

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2022 Jun;23(6):e245. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(22)00258-3.
    Lancet Oncol. 2022 Jun;23(6):e246. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(22)00299-6.

BACKGROUND: Pembrolizumab has shown improved progression-free survival versus 
chemotherapy in patients with newly diagnosed microsatellite instability-high or 
mismatch repair-deficient metastatic colorectal cancer. However, the treatment's 
effect on overall survival in this cohort of patients was unknown. Here, we 
present the final overall survival analysis of the KEYNOTE-177 study.
METHODS: This randomised, open-label, phase 3 study was done in 193 academic 
medical centres and hospitals in 23 countries. We recruited patients aged at 
least 18 years, with an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of 
0 or 1, and who had previously untreated microsatellite instability-high or 
mismatch repair-deficient metastatic colorectal cancer. Patients were randomly 
assigned (1:1) in blocks of four using an interactive voice response system or 
integrated web response system to intravenous pembrolizumab 200 mg every 3 weeks 
or to the investigator's choice of intravenous mFOLFOX6 (oxaliplatin 85 mg/m2 on 
day 1, leucovorin 400 mg/m2 on day 1, and fluorouracil 400 mg/m2 bolus on day 1 
followed by a continuous infusion of 1200 mg/m2 per day for 2 days on days 1-2) 
or intravenous FOLFIRI (irinotecan 180 mg/m2 on day 1, leucovorin 400 mg/m2 on 
day 1, and fluorouracil 400 mg/m2 bolus on day 1 followed by a continuous 
infusion of 1200 mg/m2 per day for 2 days on days 1-2), every 2 weeks with or 
without intravenous bevacizumab 5 mg/kg every 2 weeks or intravenous weekly 
cetuximab (first dose 400 mg/m2, then 250 mg/m2 for every subsequent dose). 
Patients receiving chemotherapy could cross over to pembrolizumab for up to 35 
treatment cycles after progression. The co-primary endpoints were overall 
survival and progression-free survival in the intention-to-treat population. 
KEYNOTE-177 is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT02563002, and is no longer 
enrolling patients.
FINDINGS: Between Feb 11, 2016, and Feb 19, 2018, 852 patients were screened, of 
whom 307 (36%) were randomly assigned to pembrolizumab (n=153) or chemotherapy 
(n=154). 93 (60%) patients crossed over from chemotherapy to anti-PD-1 or 
anti-PD-L1 therapy (56 patients to on-study pembrolizumab and 37 patients to 
off-study therapy). At final analysis (median follow-up of 44·5 months [IQR 
39·7-49·8]), median overall survival was not reached (NR; 95% CI 49·2-NR) with 
pembrolizumab vs 36·7 months (27·6-NR) with chemotherapy (hazard ratio [HR] 
0·74; 95% CI 0·53-1·03; p=0·036). Superiority of pembrolizumab versus 
chemotherapy for overall survival was not demonstrated because the prespecified 
α of 0·025 needed for statistical significance was not achieved. At this updated 
analysis, median progression-free survival was 16·5 months (95% CI 5·4-38·1) 
with pembrolizumab versus 8·2 months (6·1-10·2) with chemotherapy (HR 0·59, 95% 
CI 0·45-0·79). Treatment-related adverse events of grade 3 or worse occurred in 
33 (22%) of 153 patients in the pembrolizumab group versus 95 (66%) of 143 
patients in the chemotherapy group. Common adverse events of grade 3 or worse 
that were attributed to pembrolizumab were increased alanine aminotransferase, 
colitis, diarrhoea, and fatigue in three (2%) patients each, and those 
attributed to chemotherapy were decreased neutrophil count (in 24 [17%] 
patients), neutropenia (22 [15%]), diarrhoea (14 [10%]), and fatigue (13 [9%]). 
Serious adverse events attributed to study treatment occurred in 25 (16%) 
patients in the pembrolizumab group and in 41 (29%) patients in the chemotherapy 
group. No deaths attributed to pembrolizumab occurred; one death due to 
intestinal perforation was attributed to chemotherapy.
INTERPRETATION: In this updated analysis, although pembrolizumab continued to 
show durable antitumour activity and fewer treatment-related adverse events 
compared with chemotherapy, there was no significant difference in overall 
survival between the two treatment groups. These findings support pembrolizumab 
as an efficacious first-line therapy in patients with microsatellite 
instability-high or mismatch repair-deficient metastatic colorectal cancer.
FUNDING: MSD.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(22)00197-8
PMCID: PMC9533375
PMID: 35427471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests LAD Jr reports 
membership on the board of directors of Personal Genome Diagnostics and Jounce 
Therapeutics; honoraria for consulting and advisory role to Personal Genome 
Diagnostics, 4Paws, and Neophore; uncompensated advisory and consulting role for 
Merck Sharp & Dohme; clinical trial funding paid to institution from Merck Sharp 
& Dohme; and patents for circulating tumour DNA analyses and mismatch repair 
deficiency for diagnosis and therapy with checkpoint blockade from Johns Hopkins 
University, the latter licensed to Personal Genome Diagnostics and Qiagen (some 
licenses and relationships are associated with equity or royalty payments 
directly to Johns Hopkins and LAD Jr); and equity in 4Paws, Personal Genome 
Diagnostics, Jounce Therapeutics, Thrive Earlier Detection and Neophore; his 
spouse holds equity in Amgen. The terms of all these arrangements are being 
managed by Johns Hopkins and Memorial Sloan Kettering in accordance with their 
conflict of interest policies. K-KS reports honoraria including compensation for 
travel, accommodation, and expenses from Bayer, Bristol Myers Squibb, Guardant 
Health, Daiichi-Sankyo, Innovent Biologics, Merck KGaA, Merck Sharp & Dohme, 
Mirati Therapeutics, Roche, and Servier; and Institutional Funding for Research 
from Adaptimmune Therapeutics, AstraZeneca, Merck KGaA, Merck Sharp & Dohme, and 
Roche. T-WK reports clinical trial funding paid to institution from Merck Sharp 
& Dohme and Merck Serono. BVJ, DS, MB, and PG report clinical trial funding paid 
to institution funding paid to institution from Merck Sharp & Dohme. LHJ reports 
research funding to the institution from Merck Sharp & Dohme, 2cureX, Incyte, 
and Bristol Myers Squibb. CP reports research funding to the institution from 
Merck Sharp & Dohme; and a consulting and advisory role to Bayer, Nordic Pharma, 
and Servier. RG-C reports clinical trial funding paid to institution from Merck 
Sharp & Dohme, Bristol Myers Squibb, Ipsen, Roche, Servier, Novartis, Pfizer, 
Merck, Bayer, and Pharma Mar; and honoraria from Roche, Sanofi Aventis, Servier, 
Novartis, Pfizer, Merck, Bayer, Pharma Mar, AAA, Advandz Pharma, Midatech 
Pharma, and Pierre Fabre. CdlF reports clinical trial funding paid to 
institution funding paid to institution from Merck Sharp & Dohme; a consulting 
and advisory role for Merck Sharp & Dohme (ESMO 2019). FR reports clinical trial 
funding paid to institution funding paid to institution from Merck Sharp & 
Dohme, Roche, Merck-Serono, Amgen, Pierre-Fabre, Sanofi-Aventis, Bayer, Servier, 
and Lilly; a consulting and advisory role for Roche, Merck-Serono, Amgen, Pierre 
Fabre, Sanofi-Aventis, Bayer, Servier, Lilly, AstraZeneca, and Bristol Myers 
Squibb; honoraria from Merck Sharp & Dohme, Roche, Merck-Serono, Amgen, 
Pierre-Fabre, Sanofi-Aventis, Bayer, Servier, Lilly, AstraZeneca, Pfizer, and 
Bristol Myers Squibb; and non-financial support from Merck Sharp & Dohme, Roche, 
Merck-Serono, Amgen, Pierre-Fabre, Sanofi-Aventis, Bayer, and Servier. Exrts 
clinical trial funding paid to institution from Merck Sharp & Dohme and Sanofi; 
honoraria from Amgen, Sanofi, Servier, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Pierre Fabre, and 
Hoffman La Roche; and non-financial support from Amgen, Sanofi, Merck Sharp & 
Dohme, and Hoffman La Roche. DTL serves on advisory boards for Merck, Bristol 
Myers Squibb, and Janssen; has received research funding from Merck, Bristol 
Myers Squibb, Aduro Biotech, Curegenix, Medivir, Nouscom, and AbbVie; has 
received speaking honoraria from Merck; and is an inventor of licensed 
intellectual property related to technology for mismatch repair deficiency for 
diagnosis and therapy (WO2016077553A1) from Johns Hopkins University. The terms 
of these arrangements are being managed by Johns Hopkins. TY reports grants from 
Merck Sharp & Dohme for the submitted work; and grants from Ono, Sanofi, Daiichi 
Sankyo, Chugai, Parexel International, Taiho, Amgen, and Sumitomo Dainippon, 
outside the submitted work; WYZ, DF, and PM are employees of Merck Sharp & 
Dohme, a subsidiary of Merck, and hold stock in Merck. TA reports honoraria from 
Amgen, Astellas Pharma, AstraZeneca, Bristol Myers Squibb, Chugai, Clovis, 
Gritstone Oncology, GSK, Haliodx, Kaleido Biosciences, Merck, Pierre Fabre, 
Roche/Ventana, Sanofi, Transgene, Seagen, and Servier; and compensation for 
travel, accommodation, and expenses from Roche/Genentech, Merck Sharp & Dohme, 
and Bristol Myers Squibb.