---
reference_id: "PMID:10686466"
title: "Type I sialidosis: a clinical, biochemical and neuroradiological study."
authors:
- Palmeri S
- Villanova M
- Malandrini A
- van Diggelen OP
- Huijmans JG
- Ceuterick C
- Rufa A
- DeFalco D
- Ciacci G
- Martin JJ
- Guazzi G
journal: Eur Neurol
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1159/000008141
keywords:
- Adult
- "Brain/diagnostic imaging, pathology, physiopathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Microscopy, Electron"
- "Mucolipidoses/diagnostic imaging, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Skin/pathology, ultrastructure"
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type I sialidosis: a clinical, biochemical and neuroradiological study.
**Authors:** Palmeri S, Villanova M, Malandrini A, van Diggelen OP, Huijmans JG, Ceuterick C, Rufa A, DeFalco D, Ciacci G, Martin JJ, Guazzi G
**Journal:** Eur Neurol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000008141](https://doi.org/10.1159/000008141)

## Content

1. Eur Neurol. 2000;43(2):88-94. doi: 10.1159/000008141.

Type I sialidosis: a clinical, biochemical and neuroradiological study.

Palmeri S(1), Villanova M, Malandrini A, van Diggelen OP, Huijmans JG, Ceuterick
C, Rufa A, DeFalco D, Ciacci G, Martin JJ, Guazzi G.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neurological Sciences, University of Siena, Italy.
palmeri@unisi.it

We report biochemical, morphological and neuroradiological findings in a
40-year-old woman affected with type I sialidosis. The clinical symptoms,
consisting of a cerebellar syndrome, were first noted at the age of 17 years.
The macular cherry-red spot was first observed after 23 years of disease. A CT
scan performed at 21 years of age showed enlargement of the fourth ventricle.
Nuclear magnetic resonance imaging of the brain performed at the age of 40
showed severe atrophy of the cerebellum and pontine region; atrophy of cerebral
hemispheres and of the corpus callosum was also observed. We emphasize the
prolonged course of illness in this patient, observed over a long period of
time. Of particular interest is the neuroradiological study showing our findings
both at the beginning of the disease and after 20 years.

Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000008141
PMID: 10686466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
