---
reference_id: "PMID:27918765"
title: Development of a Biochemical Diagnosis of Parkinson Disease by Detection of α-Synuclein Misfolded Aggregates in Cerebrospinal Fluid.
authors:
- Shahnawaz M
- Tokuda T
- Waragai M
- Mendez N
- Ishii R
- Trenkwalder C
- Mollenhauer B
- Soto C
journal: JAMA Neurol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2016.4547
keywords:
- "Amyloid beta-Peptides/cerebrospinal fluid, chemistry"
- Biochemical Phenomena
- "Diagnostic Tests, Routine"
- Female
- Humans
- In Vitro Techniques
- Lewy Body Disease/cerebrospinal fluid
- Male
- Multiple System Atrophy/cerebrospinal fluid
- "Outcome Assessment, Health Care"
- "Parkinson Disease/cerebrospinal fluid, diagnosis, etiology"
- "Peptide Fragments/cerebrospinal fluid, chemistry"
- Predictive Value of Tests
- "Protein Aggregation, Pathological/complications"
- Proteostasis Deficiencies/complications
- Retrospective Studies
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- Severity of Illness Index
- alpha-Synuclein/cerebrospinal fluid
- "tau Proteins/cerebrospinal fluid, chemistry"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Development of a Biochemical Diagnosis of Parkinson Disease by Detection of α-Synuclein Misfolded Aggregates in Cerebrospinal Fluid.
**Authors:** Shahnawaz M, Tokuda T, Waragai M, Mendez N, Ishii R, Trenkwalder C, Mollenhauer B, Soto C
**Journal:** JAMA Neurol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaneurol.2016.4547](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2016.4547)

## Content

1. JAMA Neurol. 2017 Feb 1;74(2):163-172. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2016.4547.

Development of a Biochemical Diagnosis of Parkinson Disease by Detection of 
α-Synuclein Misfolded Aggregates in Cerebrospinal Fluid.

Shahnawaz M(1), Tokuda T(2), Waragai M(3), Mendez N(1), Ishii R(4), Trenkwalder 
C(5), Mollenhauer B(6), Soto C(1).

Author information:
(1)Mitchell Center for Alzheimer's Disease and Related Brain Disorders, The 
University of Texas School of Medicine at Houston.
(2)Department of Neurology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, 
Japan3Department of Molecular Pathobiology of Brain Diseases, Kyoto Prefectural 
University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan4Japan Agency for Medical Research and 
Development-Core Research for Evolutionary Medical Science and Technology, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology, Higashi Matsudo Municipal Hospital, Matsudo, Japan.
(4)Department of Neurology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, 
Japan3Department of Molecular Pathobiology of Brain Diseases, Kyoto Prefectural 
University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(5)Paracelsus-Elena-Klinik Kassel, Kassel, Germany7Institute of Neuropathology, 
University Medical Center Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany8Clinic for 
Neurosurgery, University Medical Center, Goettingen, Germany.
(6)Paracelsus-Elena-Klinik Kassel, Kassel, Germany7Institute of Neuropathology, 
University Medical Center Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany9Department of 
Neurosurgery, University Medical Center Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany.

Comment in
    JAMA Neurol. 2017 Feb 1;74(2):146-147. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2016.4813.

IMPORTANCE: Parkinson disease (PD) is a highly prevalent and incurable 
neurodegenerative disease associated with the accumulation of misfolded 
α-synuclein (αSyn) aggregates. An important problem in this disease is the lack 
of a sensitive, specific, and noninvasive biochemical diagnosis to help in 
clinical evaluation, monitoring of disease progression, and early differential 
diagnosis from related neurodegenerative diseases.
OBJECTIVE: To develop a novel assay with high sensitivity and specificity to 
detect small quantities of αSyn aggregates circulating in cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) of patients affected by PD and related synucleinopathies.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: The strategy evaluated in this 
proof-of-concept study uses the protein misfolding cyclic amplification (PMCA) 
technology that detects minute amounts of misfolded oligomers by taking 
advantage of their ability to nucleate further aggregation, enabling a very high 
amplification of the signal. The technology was first adapted with synthetic 
αSyn oligomers prepared in vitro and used to screen in 2 blinded cohorts of CSF 
samples from German and Japanese patients with PD (n = 76) and individuals 
serving as controls affected by other neurologic disorders (n = 65), 
neurodegenerative diseases (n = 18), and Alzheimer disease (n = 14). The 
kinetics of αSyn aggregation were measured by αSyn-PMCA in the presence of CSF 
samples from the participants to detect αSyn oligomeric seeds present in this 
biological fluid. The assays were conducted from November 15, 2013, to August 
28, 2015.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Kinetic parameters correlated with disease severity 
at the time of sample collection, measured by the Hoehn and Yahr scale, with the 
lowest grade indicating unilateral involvement with minimal or no functional 
impairment, and the highest grade defining patients with complete confinement to 
wheelchair or bed.
RESULTS: Studies with synthetic αSyn aggregates showed that αSyn-PMCA enabled to 
detect as little as 0.1 pg/mL of αSyn oligomers. The αSyn-PMCA signal was 
directly proportional to the amount of αSyn oligomers added to the reaction. A 
blinded study of CSF samples correctly identified patients affected by PD with 
an overall sensitivity of 88.5% (95% CI, 79.2%-94.6%) and specificity of 96.9% 
(95% CI, 89.3%-99.6%). The αSyn-PMCA results for different patients correlated 
with the severity of the clinical symptoms of PD (Japanese cohort: rs = -0.54, 
P = .006; German cohort: rs = -0.36, P = .02).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: The findings suggest that detection of αSyn oligomers 
by αSyn-PMCA in the CSF of patients affected by PD may offer a good opportunity 
for a sensitive and specific biochemical diagnosis of the disease. Further 
studies are needed to investigate the usefulness of αSyn-PMCA to monitor disease 
progression and for preclinical identification of patients who may develop PD.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2016.4547
PMID: 27918765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]