---
reference_id: "PMID:16125261"
title: "Coronary artery fistulas: clinical and therapeutic considerations."
authors:
- Gowda RM
- Vasavada BC
- Khan IA
journal: Int J Cardiol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2005.01.067
keywords:
- "Arterio-Arterial Fistula/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- "Arteriovenous Fistula/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- Coronary Angiography
- "Coronary Vessel Anomalies/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Heart Murmurs
- Humans
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Coronary artery fistulas: clinical and therapeutic considerations.
**Authors:** Gowda RM, Vasavada BC, Khan IA
**Journal:** Int J Cardiol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijcard.2005.01.067](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcard.2005.01.067)

## Content

1. Int J Cardiol. 2006 Feb 8;107(1):7-10. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2005.01.067. Epub
 2005 Aug 24.

Coronary artery fistulas: clinical and therapeutic considerations.

Gowda RM(1), Vasavada BC, Khan IA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Long Island College Hospital, Brooklyn, NY, USA.

Coronary artery fistulas vary widely in their morphological appearance and 
presentation. These fistulas are congenital or acquired coronary artery 
abnormalities in which blood is shunted into a cardiac chamber, great vessel, or 
other structure, bypassing the myocardial capillary network. The majority of 
these fistulas arise from the right coronary artery and the left anterior 
descending coronary artery; the circumflex coronary artery is rarely involved. 
Clinical manifestations vary considerably and the long-term outcome is not fully 
known. The patients with coronary fistulas may present with dyspnea, congestive 
heart failure, angina, endocarditis, arrhythmias, or myocardial infarction. A 
continuous murmur is often present and is highly suggestive of a coronary artery 
fistula. Differential diagnosis includes persistent ductus arteriosus, pulmonary 
arteriovenous fistula, ruptured sinus of Valsalva aneurysm, aortopulmonary 
window, prolapse of the right aortic cusp with a supracristal ventricular septal 
defect, internal mammary artery to pulmonary artery fistula, and systemic 
arteriovenous fistula. Although noninvasive imaging may facilitate the diagnosis 
and identification of the origin and insertion of coronary artery fistulas, 
cardiac catheterization and coronary angiography is necessary for the precise 
delineation of coronary anatomy, for assessment of hemodynamics, and to show the 
presence of concomitant atherosclerosis and other structural anomalies. 
Treatment is advocated for symptomatic patients and for those asymptomatic 
patients who are at risk for future complications. Possible therapeutic options 
include surgical correction and transcatheter embolization. Historical 
perspectives, demographics, clinical presentations, diagnostic evaluation, and 
management of coronary artery fistula are elaborated.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2005.01.067
PMID: 16125261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]