---
reference_id: "PMID:1356056"
title: Fetal and neonatal hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism due to maternal TSH receptor antibodies.
authors:
- McKenzie JM
- Zakarija M
journal: Thyroid
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1089/thy.1992.2.155
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fetal and neonatal hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism due to maternal TSH receptor antibodies.
**Authors:** McKenzie JM, Zakarija M
**Journal:** Thyroid (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1089/thy.1992.2.155](https://doi.org/10.1089/thy.1992.2.155)

## Content

1. Thyroid. 1992 Summer;2(2):155-9. doi: 10.1089/thy.1992.2.155.

Fetal and neonatal hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism due to maternal TSH 
receptor antibodies.

McKenzie JM(1), Zakarija M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Miami School of Medicine, Florida.

Comment in
    Thyroid. 1992 Summer;2(2):161-3. doi: 10.1089/thy.1992.2.161.

Autoimmune thyroid disease is a generic term that includes Graves' disease and 
Hashimoto's thyroiditis. In the former, there is overactivity of the thyroid due 
to the action of a thyroid-stimulating antibody (TSAb). Pathogenesis of 
Hashimoto's thyroiditis is largely cell-mediated immune destruction of the 
thyroid. Nonetheless, there may be either a goiter or an atrophic gland. There 
is evidence that in some patients the lack of goiter is associated with the 
presence in the blood of an antibody that inhibits the binding of TSH to its 
receptor. This TSH-binding inhibiting antibody (TBIAb), therefore, prevents TSH 
from stimulating the thyroid and constitutes an acceptable explanation for an 
agoitrous state. Collectively, TSAb and TBIAb, both of which are IgG, are known 
as TSH receptor antibodies (TRAb).

DOI: 10.1089/thy.1992.2.155
PMID: 1356056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]