---
reference_id: "PMID:29247126"
title: Preference phenotypes to facilitate shared decision-making in rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Fraenkel L
- Nowell WB
- Michel G
- Wiedmeyer C
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2017-212407
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Preference phenotypes to facilitate shared decision-making in rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Fraenkel L, Nowell WB, Michel G, Wiedmeyer C
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1136/annrheumdis-2017-212407](https://doi.org/10.1136/annrheumdis-2017-212407)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2018 May;77(5):678-683. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2017-212407. 
Epub 2017 Dec 15.

Preference phenotypes to facilitate shared decision-making in rheumatoid 
arthritis.

Fraenkel L(1)(2), Nowell WB(3), Michel G(1)(2), Wiedmeyer C(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(2)VA Connecticut Healthcare System, West Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(3)CreakyJoints, Global Healthy Living Foundation, New York City, New York, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Implementing treat-to-target (TTT) strategies requires that patients 
with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and their rheumatologists decide on how best to 
escalate care when indicated. The objective of this study was to develop 
preference phenotypes to facilitate shared decision-making at the point of care 
for patients failing methotrexate monotherapy.
METHODS: We developed a conjoint analysis survey to measure the preferences of 
patient with RA for triple therapy, biologics and Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors. 
The survey included seven attributes: administration, onset, bothersome side 
effects, serious infection, very rare side effects, amount of information and 
cost. Each choice set (n=12) included three hypothetical profiles. Preference 
phenotypes were identified by applying latent class analysis to the conjoint 
data.
RESULTS: 1273 participants completed the survey. A five-group solution was 
chosen based on progressively lower values of the Akaike and Bayesian 
information criteria. Members of the largest group (group 3: 38.4%) were most 
strongly impacted by the cost of the medication. The next largest group (group 
1: 25.8%) was most strongly influenced by the risk of bothersome side effects. 
Members of group 2 (11.2%) were also risk averse, but were most concerned with 
the risk of very rare side effects. Group 4 (6.6%) strongly preferred oral over 
parenteral medications. Members of group 5 (18.0%) were most strongly and 
equally influenced by onset of action and the risk of serious infections.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment preferences of patients with RA can be measured and 
represented by distinct phenotypes. Our results underscore the variability in 
patients' values and the importance of using a shared decision-making approach 
to implement TTT.

© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of 
the article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless 
otherwise expressly granted.

DOI: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2017-212407
PMCID: PMC5898982
PMID: 29247126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.