---
reference_id: "PMID:21749694"
title: "Classification, diagnosis and potential mechanisms in pontocerebellar hypoplasia."
authors:
- Namavar Y
- Barth PG
- Poll-The BT
- Baas F
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-6-50
keywords:
- Animals
- Arginine-tRNA Ligase/genetics
- Brain/pathology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Endoribonucleases/genetics
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Mutation
- "Olivopontocerebellar Atrophies/classification, diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- Radiography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Classification, diagnosis and potential mechanisms in pontocerebellar hypoplasia.
**Authors:** Namavar Y, Barth PG, Poll-The BT, Baas F
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-6-50](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-6-50)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2011 Jul 12;6:50. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-6-50.

Classification, diagnosis and potential mechanisms in pontocerebellar
hypoplasia.

Namavar Y(1), Barth PG, Poll-The BT, Baas F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genome Analysis, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Pontocerebellar Hypoplasia (PCH) is group of very rare, inherited progressive
neurodegenerative disorders with prenatal onset. Up to now seven different
subtypes have been reported (PCH1-7). The incidence of each subtype is unknown.
All subtypes share common characteristics, including hypoplasia/atrophy of
cerebellum and pons, progressive microcephaly, and variable cerebral
involvement. Patients have severe cognitive and motor handicaps and seizures are
often reported. Treatment is only symptomatic and prognosis is poor, as most
patients die during infancy or childhood. The genetic basis of different
subtypes has been elucidated, which makes prenatal testing possible in families
with mutations. Mutations in three tRNA splicing endonuclease subunit genes were
found to be responsible for PCH2, PCH4 and PCH5. Mutations in the nuclear
encoded mitochondrial arginyl- tRNA synthetase gene underlie PCH6. The tRNA
splicing endonuclease, the mitochondrial arginyl- tRNA synthetase and the
vaccinia related kinase1 are mutated in the minority of PCH1 cases. These genes
are involved in essential processes in protein synthesis in general and tRNA
processing in particular. In this review we describe the neuroradiological,
neuropathological, clinical and genetic features of the different PCH subtypes
and we report on in vitro and in vivo studies on the tRNA splicing endonuclease
and mitochondrial arginyl-tRNA synthetase and discuss their relation to
pontocerebellar hypoplasia.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-6-50
PMCID: PMC3159098
PMID: 21749694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
