---
reference_id: "PMID:30924322"
title: Two de novo GJA1 mutation in two sporadic patients with erythrokeratodermia variabilis et progressiva.
authors:
- Li C
- Liang J
- Chen P
- Zeng K
- Xue R
- Tian X
- Liang L
- Wang Q
- Shi M
- Zhang X
journal: Mol Genet Genomic Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.670
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- "Connexin 43/genetics, metabolism"
- Connexins/genetics
- Erythrokeratodermia Variabilis/genetics
- Female
- Genotype
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two de novo GJA1 mutation in two sporadic patients with erythrokeratodermia variabilis et progressiva.
**Authors:** Li C, Liang J, Chen P, Zeng K, Xue R, Tian X, Liang L, Wang Q, Shi M, Zhang X
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomic Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mgg3.670](https://doi.org/10.1002/mgg3.670)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2019 Jun;7(6):e670. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.670. Epub 2019
Mar  29.

Two de novo GJA1 mutation in two sporadic patients with erythrokeratodermia 
variabilis et progressiva.

Li C(1), Liang J(2), Chen P(1), Zeng K(1), Xue R(2), Tian X(2), Liang L(1), Wang 
Q(1), Shi M(1), Zhang X(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, 
Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Guangzhou Institute of Dermatology, Guangzhou, 
China.

BACKGROUND: Erythrokeratodermia variabilis et progressiva (EKVP, OMIM 133200) is 
a rare hereditary disorder characterized by varies from transient, fast moving 
erythema to persistent brown hyperkeratotic plaques. Recently, mutations in the 
genes gap junction alpha 1 gene (GJA1), GJB3, and GJB4 have been reported to 
cause EKVP. Here, we report the identification of two de novo missense mutations 
in the GJA1 gene in two unrelated individuals with EKVP.
METHODS: The patients and his family members were subjected to mutation 
detection in the candidate gene GJA1, GJB3, and GJB4 by Sanger sequencing. The 
expression of connexin (Cx) 43 was detected by immunohistochemistry and 
immunofluorescence (IF) studies in the lesions.
RESULTS: A 12-year-old boy presented with multiple hyperkeratotic plaques on the 
face, neck, elbows, wrists, limbs, knees, inguinal region, hands, and feet. A 
7-year-old girl presented with symmetrical erythematous, plaques on the hands, 
feet, wrists, and ankles. A novel heterozygous missense mutation c.848C > T 
(p.P283L) in exon 2 of the GJA1 gene was identified in both patients. A novel 
heterozygous missense mutation c.869C > A (p.T290N) in exon 2 of the GJA1 gene 
was also identified in the boy. These mutations were not found in the unaffected 
family members and 100 normal controls. In the patients' lesions, Cx43 protein 
was located to the cytomembrane and cytoplasm in the stratum corneum, and 
granular layer. Compound heterozygous mutations in the boy showed a more severe 
clinical phenotype and cytoplasmic mislocalization.
CONCLUSIONS: The novel mutations c.848C > T (p.P283L) and c.869C > A(p.T290N) 
arose de novo and were considered as the cause of two Chinese EKVP. GJA1 P283L 
and T290N mutations lead to Cx43 protein cytoplasmic mislocalization. Our 
finding expands the mutant spectrum of GJA1 gene and adds new understanding of 
the genotype-phenotype correlation.

© 2019 The Authors. Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.670
PMCID: PMC6565561
PMID: 30924322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors state no conflict of interests.