---
reference_id: "PMID:40745396"
title: Neuropathological correlations of (18)F-florzolotau PET in a case with Pick’s disease.
authors:
- Suzuki H
- Kubota M
- Kurose S
- Tagai K
- Endo H
- Onaya M
- Yamamoto Y
- Sahara N
- Ohgidani M
- Haga C
- Hara H
- Akiyama H
- Takahata K
- Higuchi M
journal: EJNMMI Res
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s13550-025-01296-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuropathological correlations of (18)F-florzolotau PET in a case with Pick’s disease.
**Authors:** Suzuki H, Kubota M, Kurose S, Tagai K, Endo H, Onaya M, Yamamoto Y, Sahara N, Ohgidani M, Haga C, Hara H, Akiyama H, Takahata K, Higuchi M
**Journal:** EJNMMI Res (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13550-025-01296-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13550-025-01296-6)

## Content

1. EJNMMI Res. 2025 Jul 31;15(1):96. doi: 10.1186/s13550-025-01296-6.

Neuropathological correlations of (18)F-florzolotau PET in a case with Pick’s 
disease.

Suzuki H(#)(1)(2)(3), Kubota M(#)(4)(5), Kurose S(1)(2)(6), Tagai K(1)(7), Endo 
H(1), Onaya M(2)(3), Yamamoto Y(1)(2), Sahara N(1)(8), Ohgidani M(9), Haga 
C(10), Hara H(10), Akiyama H(10), Takahata K(1)(2), Higuchi M(1)(11).

Author information:
(1)Advanced Neuroimaging Center, Institute for Quantum Medical Science, National 
Institutes for Quantum Science and Technology, 4- 9-1 Anagawa, Inage, Chiba, 
263-8555, Japan.
(2)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku, Tokyo, 160-8582, Japan.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, National Hospital Organization Shimofusa 
Psychiatric Center, 578 Heta-cho, Midori-ku, Chiba, 266-0007, Japan.
(4)Advanced Neuroimaging Center, Institute for Quantum Medical Science, National 
Institutes for Quantum Science and Technology, 4- 9-1 Anagawa, Inage, Chiba, 
263-8555, Japan. m_kubota@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, 54 
Shogoin Kawahara-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8507, Japan. 
m_kubota@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(6)Department of Clinical Laboratory, National Center of Neurology and 
Psychiatry, 4-1-1 Ogawahigashi, Kodaira, Tokyo, 187-8551, Japan.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, Jikei University Graduate School of Medicine, 
3-19-18 Nishi-Shinbashi, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 105-8461, Japan.
(8)Department of Neuroscience and Pathobiology, Research Institute of 
Environmental Medicine, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Aichi, 
464-8601, Japan.
(9)Department of Functional Anatomy and Neuroscience, Asahikawa Medical 
University, 2-1-1-1 Midorigaoka Higashi, Asahikawa, Hokkaido, 078-8510, Japan.
(10)Dementia Research Project, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, 
2-1-6 Kamikitazawa, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, 156-8506, Japan.
(11)Neuroetiology and Diagnostic Science, Osaka Metropolitan University Graduate 
School of Medicine, 1-4-3 Asahimachi, Abeno-ku, Osaka, 545-8585, Japan.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Pick's disease (PiD) is classified as frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration with pathological tau aggregates. Positron emission tomography 
(PET) with 18F-florzolotau provides high-contrast imaging of diverse tau 
fibrils. While our previous work demonstrated the detectability of three repeat 
(3R) tau pathology by 18F-florzolotau PET in an autopsy-confirmed PiD patient, 
its potential for quantitative assessment of 3R tau aggregates in living 
individuals remains unclear. In this study, we analyzed correlations between in 
vivo 18F-florzolotau retentions and postmortem neuropathological data across 
brain regions in the same case with PiD.
CASE PRESENTATION: The patient was 60 years of age at the time of death and had 
been diagnosed with behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia. The patient 
underwent 18F-florzolotau PET one year prior to death and was given the 
pathological diagnosis of PiD by brain autopsy. Regional tau pathology was 
assessed using Bodian's silver staining and immunohistochemistry with a 
monoclonal antibody (AT8). Histopathological assays revealed abundant 
intraneuronal Pick bodies along with neuropil threads in frontotemporal and 
other brain areas. In the cerebral cortex, AT8-positive areas exhibited a 
significant positive correlation with 18F-florzolotau binding in the 
corresponding regions (Pearson's r = 0.81, p < 0.001) estimated as standardized 
uptake value ratio corrected for partial volume effect. In contrast, no such 
associations were found in subcortical structures. Furthermore, a substantial 
proportion of Pick bodies displayed fluorescence co-labelled with florzolotau 
and AT8 antibodies.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, the present findings support the capability of 
18F-florzolotau PET for the in vivo quantification of 3R tau fibrils.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13550-025-01296-6
PMCID: PMC12314175
PMID: 40745396

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: This study was approved by the Radiation Drug Safety Committee and 
the Institutional Review Board of the National Institutes for Quantum Science 
and Technology, Japan, and the Institutional Ethical Review Board of the 
Shimofusa Psychiatric Medical Center, Japan. This study was conducted in 
accordance with the Code of Ethics of the World Medical Association. After a 
complete description of the study, written informed consent was obtained from 
the patient’s legal representative. Consent for publication: Written informed 
consent was obtained from the legal representative of the patient for the 
publication of this case report and accompanying images. Competing interests: 
All authors declare that they have no conflict of interest regarding financial 
support or relationships.