---
reference_id: "PMID:19776033"
title: A mouse model for Meckel syndrome reveals Mks1 is required for ciliogenesis and Hedgehog signaling.
authors:
- Weatherbee SD
- Niswander LA
- Anderson KV
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp422
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A mouse model for Meckel syndrome reveals Mks1 is required for ciliogenesis and Hedgehog signaling.
**Authors:** Weatherbee SD, Niswander LA, Anderson KV
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddp422](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddp422)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Dec 1;18(23):4565-75. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp422. Epub 2009
Sep  22.

A mouse model for Meckel syndrome reveals Mks1 is required for ciliogenesis and 
Hedgehog signaling.

Weatherbee SD(1), Niswander LA, Anderson KV.

Author information:
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, NY 10065, 
USA. scott.weatherbee@yale.edu

Meckel syndrome (MKS) is a rare autosomal recessive disease causing perinatal 
lethality associated with a complex syndrome that includes occipital 
meningoencephalocele, hepatic biliary ductal plate malformation, postaxial 
polydactyly and polycystic kidneys. The gene mutated in type 1 MKS encodes a 
protein associated with the base of the cilium in vertebrates and nematodes. 
However, shRNA knockdown studies in cell culture have reported conflicting 
results on the role of Mks1 in ciliogenesis. Here we show that loss of function 
of mouse Mks1 results in an accurate model of human MKS, with structural 
abnormalities in the neural tube, biliary duct, limb patterning, bone 
development and the kidney that mirror the human syndrome. In contrast to cell 
culture studies, loss of Mks1 in vivo does not interfere with apical 
localization of epithelial basal bodies but rather leads to defective cilia 
formation in most, but not all, tissues. Analysis of patterning in the neural 
tube and the limb demonstrates altered Hedgehog (Hh) pathway signaling underlies 
some MKS defects, although both tissues show an expansion of the domain of 
response to Shh signaling, unlike the phenotypes seen in other mutants with 
cilia loss. Other defects in the skull, lung, rib cage and long bones are likely 
to be the result of the disruption of Hh signaling, and the basis of defects in 
the liver and kidney require further analysis. Thus the disruption of Hh 
signaling can explain many, but not all, of the defects caused by loss of Mks1.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddp422
PMCID: PMC2773271
PMID: 19776033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]