---
reference_id: "PMID:35785170"
title: "Homologous Recombination Deficiency in Ovarian, Breast, Colorectal, Pancreatic, Non-Small Cell Lung and Prostate Cancers, and the Mechanisms of Resistance to PARP Inhibitors."
authors:
- Mekonnen N
- Yang H
- Shin YK
journal: Front Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.880643
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homologous Recombination Deficiency in Ovarian, Breast, Colorectal, Pancreatic, Non-Small Cell Lung and Prostate Cancers, and the Mechanisms of Resistance to PARP Inhibitors.
**Authors:** Mekonnen N, Yang H, Shin YK
**Journal:** Front Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fonc.2022.880643](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2022.880643)

## Content

1. Front Oncol. 2022 Jun 17;12:880643. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.880643. eCollection
 2022.

Homologous Recombination Deficiency in Ovarian, Breast, Colorectal, Pancreatic,
Non-Small Cell Lung and Prostate Cancers, and the Mechanisms of Resistance to
PARP Inhibitors.

Mekonnen N(1)(2), Yang H(1), Shin YK(1)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Science, Seoul
National University College of Pharmacy, Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Department of Veterinary Science, School of Animal Science and Veterinary
Medicine, Bahir Dar University, Bahir Dar, Ethiopia.
(3)Bio-MAX/N-Bio, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine and Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Seoul
National University Graduate School of Convergence Science and Technology,
Seoul, South Korea.
(5)LOGONE Bio Convergence Research Foundation, Center for Companion Diagnostics,
Seoul, South Korea.

Homologous recombination (HR) is a highly conserved DNA repair mechanism that
protects cells from exogenous and endogenous DNA damage. Breast cancer 1 (BRCA1)
and breast cancer 2 (BRCA2) play an important role in the HR repair pathway by
interacting with other DNA repair proteins such as Fanconi anemia (FA) proteins,
ATM, RAD51, PALB2, MRE11A, RAD50, and NBN. These pathways are frequently
aberrant in cancer, leading to the accumulation of DNA damage and genomic
instability known as homologous recombination deficiency (HRD). HRD can be
caused by chromosomal and subchromosomal aberrations, as well as by epigenetic
inactivation of tumor suppressor gene promoters. Deficiency in one or more HR
genes increases the risk of many malignancies. Another conserved mechanism
involved in the repair of DNA single-strand breaks (SSBs) is base excision
repair, in which poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) enzymes play an important
role. PARP inhibitors (PARPIs) convert SSBs to more cytotoxic double-strand
breaks, which are repaired in HR-proficient cells, but remain unrepaired in HRD.
The blockade of both HR and base excision repair pathways is the basis of PARPI
therapy. The use of PARPIs can be expanded to sporadic cancers displaying the
"BRCAness" phenotype. Although PARPIs are effective in many cancers, their
efficacy is limited by the development of resistance. In this review, we
summarize the prevalence of HRD due to mutation, loss of heterozygosity, and
promoter hypermethylation of 35 DNA repair genes in ovarian, breast, colorectal,
pancreatic, non-small cell lung cancer, and prostate cancer. The underlying
mechanisms and strategies to overcome PARPI resistance are also discussed.

Copyright © 2022 Mekonnen, Yang and Shin.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2022.880643
PMCID: PMC9247200
PMID: 35785170

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
