---
reference_id: "PMID:33112199"
title: "Update on ACR TI-RADS: Successes, Challenges, and Future Directions, From the AJR Special Series on Radiology Reporting and Data Systems."
authors:
- Hoang JK
- Middleton WD
- Tessler FN
journal: AJR Am J Roentgenol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.2214/AJR.20.24608
keywords:
- "Biopsy, Fine-Needle"
- "Diagnostic Errors/prevention & control"
- Forecasting
- Humans
- "Medical Overuse/prevention & control"
- Observer Variation
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
- Radiologists
- Radiology/trends
- Radiology Information Systems
- Risk Assessment/methods
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- "Societies, Medical"
- "Thyroid Gland/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Thyroid Nodule/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Tumor Burden
- Ultrasonography/trends
- United States
- Unnecessary Procedures
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update on ACR TI-RADS: Successes, Challenges, and Future Directions, From the AJR Special Series on Radiology Reporting and Data Systems.
**Authors:** Hoang JK, Middleton WD, Tessler FN
**Journal:** AJR Am J Roentgenol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.2214/AJR.20.24608](https://doi.org/10.2214/AJR.20.24608)

## Content

1. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2021 Mar;216(3):570-578. doi: 10.2214/AJR.20.24608. Epub
2021 Jan 21.

Update on ACR TI-RADS: Successes, Challenges, and Future Directions, From the
AJR Special Series on Radiology Reporting and Data Systems.

Hoang JK(1), Middleton WD(2), Tessler FN(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology and Radiological Science, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, 601 N Caroline St, Baltimore, MD 21231.
(2)Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO.
(3)Department of Radiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL.

Comment in
    AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2021 May;216(5):W17. doi: 10.2214/AJR.20.25112.
    AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2021 May;216(5):W18. doi: 10.2214/AJR.21.25503.

The American College of Radiology (ACR) Thyroid Imaging Reporting and Data
System (TI-RADS) is an ultrasound-based risk stratification system (RSS) for
thyroid nodules that was released in 2017. Since publication, research has shown
that ACR TI-RADS has a higher specificity than other RSSs and reduces the number
of unnecessary biopsies of benign nodules compared with other systems by
19.9-46.5%. The risk of missing significant cancers using ACR TI-RADS is
mitigated by the follow-up recommendations for nodules that do not meet criteria
for biopsy. In practice, after a nodule's ultrasound features have been
enumerated, the ACR TI-RADS points-based approach leads to clear management
recommendations. Practices seeking to implement ACR TI-RADS must engage their
radiologists in understanding how the system addresses the problems of thyroid
cancer overdiagnosis and unnecessary surgeries by reducing unnecessary biopsies.
This review compares ACR TI-RADS to other RSSs and explores key clinical
questions faced by practices considering its implementation. We also address the
challenge of reducing interobserver variability in assigning ultrasound
features. Finally, we highlight emerging imaging techniques and recognize the
ongoing international effort to develop a system that harmonizes multiple RSSs,
including ACR TI-RADS.

DOI: 10.2214/AJR.20.24608
PMID: 33112199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
