---
reference_id: "PMID:23208308"
title: The spectrum of disease in chronic traumatic encephalopathy.
authors:
- McKee AC
- Stern RA
- Nowinski CJ
- Stein TD
- Alvarez VE
- Daneshvar DH
- Lee HS
- Wojtowicz SM
- Hall G
- Baugh CM
- Riley DO
- Kubilus CA
- Cormier KA
- Jacobs MA
- Martin BR
- Abraham CR
- Ikezu T
- Reichard RR
- Wolozin BL
- Budson AE
- Goldstein LE
- Kowall NW
- Cantu RC
journal: Brain
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/brain/aws307
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The spectrum of disease in chronic traumatic encephalopathy.
**Authors:** McKee AC, Stern RA, Nowinski CJ, Stein TD, Alvarez VE, Daneshvar DH, Lee HS, Wojtowicz SM, Hall G, Baugh CM, Riley DO, Kubilus CA, Cormier KA, Jacobs MA, Martin BR, Abraham CR, Ikezu T, Reichard RR, Wolozin BL, Budson AE, Goldstein LE, Kowall NW, Cantu RC
**Journal:** Brain (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/aws307](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/aws307)

## Content

1. Brain. 2013 Jan;136(Pt 1):43-64. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws307. Epub 2012 Dec 2.

The spectrum of disease in chronic traumatic encephalopathy.

McKee AC(1), Stern RA, Nowinski CJ, Stein TD, Alvarez VE, Daneshvar DH, Lee HS, 
Wojtowicz SM, Hall G, Baugh CM, Riley DO, Kubilus CA, Cormier KA, Jacobs MA, 
Martin BR, Abraham CR, Ikezu T, Reichard RR, Wolozin BL, Budson AE, Goldstein 
LE, Kowall NW, Cantu RC.

Author information:
(1)United States Department of Veterans Affairs, VA Boston Healthcare System, 
Boston, MA 02130, USA. ann.mckee@va.gov

Erratum in
    Brain. 2013 Oct;136(Pt 10):e255.

Chronic traumatic encephalopathy is a progressive tauopathy that occurs as a 
consequence of repetitive mild traumatic brain injury. We analysed post-mortem 
brains obtained from a cohort of 85 subjects with histories of repetitive mild 
traumatic brain injury and found evidence of chronic traumatic encephalopathy in 
68 subjects: all males, ranging in age from 17 to 98 years (mean 59.5 years), 
including 64 athletes, 21 military veterans (86% of whom were also athletes) and 
one individual who engaged in self-injurious head banging behaviour. Eighteen 
age- and gender-matched individuals without a history of repetitive mild 
traumatic brain injury served as control subjects. In chronic traumatic 
encephalopathy, the spectrum of hyperphosphorylated tau pathology ranged in 
severity from focal perivascular epicentres of neurofibrillary tangles in the 
frontal neocortex to severe tauopathy affecting widespread brain regions, 
including the medial temporal lobe, thereby allowing a progressive staging of 
pathology from stages I-IV. Multifocal axonal varicosities and axonal loss were 
found in deep cortex and subcortical white matter at all stages of chronic 
traumatic encephalopathy. TAR DNA-binding protein 43 immunoreactive inclusions 
and neurites were also found in 85% of cases, ranging from focal pathology in 
stages I-III to widespread inclusions and neurites in stage IV. Symptoms in 
stage I chronic traumatic encephalopathy included headache and loss of attention 
and concentration. Additional symptoms in stage II included depression, 
explosivity and short-term memory loss. In stage III, executive dysfunction and 
cognitive impairment were found, and in stage IV, dementia, word-finding 
difficulty and aggression were characteristic. Data on athletic exposure were 
available for 34 American football players; the stage of chronic traumatic 
encephalopathy correlated with increased duration of football play, survival 
after football and age at death. Chronic traumatic encephalopathy was the sole 
diagnosis in 43 cases (63%); eight were also diagnosed with motor neuron disease 
(12%), seven with Alzheimer's disease (11%), 11 with Lewy body disease (16%) and 
four with frontotemporal lobar degeneration (6%). There is an ordered and 
predictable progression of hyperphosphorylated tau abnormalities through the 
nervous system in chronic traumatic encephalopathy that occurs in conjunction 
with widespread axonal disruption and loss. The frequent association of chronic 
traumatic encephalopathy with other neurodegenerative disorders suggests that 
repetitive brain trauma and hyperphosphorylated tau protein deposition promote 
the accumulation of other abnormally aggregated proteins including TAR 
DNA-binding protein 43, amyloid beta protein and alpha-synuclein.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/aws307
PMCID: PMC3624697
PMID: 23208308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]