---
reference_id: "PMID:37213054"
title: "Pathophysiology and Nutritional Approaches in Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS): A Comprehensive Review."
authors:
- Di Lorenzo M
- Cacciapuoti N
- Lonardo MS
- Nasti G
- Gautiero C
- Belfiore A
- Guida B
- Chiurazzi M
journal: Curr Nutr Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s13668-023-00479-8
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Polycystic Ovary Syndrome/complications, drug therapy"
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2"
- Hyperandrogenism/complications
- Obesity/complications
- Insulin Resistance
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology and Nutritional Approaches in Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS): A Comprehensive Review.
**Authors:** Di Lorenzo M, Cacciapuoti N, Lonardo MS, Nasti G, Gautiero C, Belfiore A, Guida B, Chiurazzi M
**Journal:** Curr Nutr Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13668-023-00479-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13668-023-00479-8)

## Content

1. Curr Nutr Rep. 2023 Sep;12(3):527-544. doi: 10.1007/s13668-023-00479-8. Epub
2023 May 22.

Pathophysiology and Nutritional Approaches in Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS):
A Comprehensive Review.

Di Lorenzo M(#)(1)(2), Cacciapuoti N(#)(1), Lonardo MS(1), Nasti G(1), Gautiero
C(1), Belfiore A(1), Guida B(1), Chiurazzi M(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, University of Naples "Federico
II", Naples, Italy.
(2)Infectious Diseases and Gender Medicine Unit, Cotugno Hospital, AO Dei Colli,
Naples, Italy.
(3)Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, University of Naples "Federico
II", Naples, Italy. martina.chiurazzi88@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, AO "A. Cardarelli", Naples, Italy.
martina.chiurazzi88@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is the most common endocrine
and metabolic disorder in women of reproductive age worldwide. This disease
causes menstrual, metabolic, and biochemical abnormalities such as
hyperandrogenism, oligo-anovulatory menstrual cycles, polycystic ovary,
hyperleptinemia, insulin resistance (IR), and cardiometabolic disorders, often
associated with overweight or obesity and visceral adiposity.
RECENT FINDINGS: The etiology and pathophysiology of PCOS are not yet fully
understood, but insulin seems to play a key role in this disease. PCOS shares an
inflammatory state with other chronic diseases such as obesity, type II
diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases; however, recent studies have shown that a
healthy nutritional approach can improve IR and metabolic and reproductive
functions, representing a valid therapeutic strategy to ameliorate PCOS
symptomatology. This review aimed to summarize and collect evidence about
different nutritional approaches such as the Mediterranean diet (MedDiet) and
the ketogenic diet (KD), as well as bariatric surgery and nutraceutical
supplementation as probiotics, prebiotics, and synbiotics, among the others,
used in patients with PCOS.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s13668-023-00479-8
PMCID: PMC10444658
PMID: 37213054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
