---
reference_id: "PMID:40023555"
title: Predictors of visual outcome in optic neuropathy of sarcoidosis.
authors:
- Nakirikanti AS
- El Sammak S
- Tyor W
- Hutto SK
journal: J Neuroimmunol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2025.578529
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Sarcoidosis/complications, diagnosis, diagnostic imaging"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- Retrospective Studies
- "Optic Nerve Diseases/diagnosis, etiology, physiopathology"
- Visual Acuity/physiology
- "Central Nervous System Diseases/complications, diagnosis"
- Prognosis
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Aged
- "Vision Disorders/etiology, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predictors of visual outcome in optic neuropathy of sarcoidosis.
**Authors:** Nakirikanti AS, El Sammak S, Tyor W, Hutto SK
**Journal:** J Neuroimmunol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jneuroim.2025.578529](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroim.2025.578529)

## Content

1. J Neuroimmunol. 2025 Mar 15;400:578529. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2025.578529.
Epub 2025 Jan 25.

Predictors of visual outcome in optic neuropathy of sarcoidosis.

Nakirikanti AS(1), El Sammak S(2), Tyor W(3), Hutto SK(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New
York, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine,
Atlanta, GA, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA,
USA; Neuroscience Service Line, Atlanta VA Medical Center, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA,
USA. Electronic address: shutto@emory.edu.

BACKGROUND: Up to 25 % of patients with neurosarcoidosis develop optic
neuropathy, and prior observational studies have demonstrated a sizeable portion
of these patients will remain significantly visually impaired. Despite its major
influence on future disability, no prognostic factors are available to predict
the potential for visual recovery.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate clinical and paraclinical data for their ability to
predict final visual outcomes in sarcoid optic neuropathy.
METHODS: Between 01/2011 and 03/2023, patients with neurosarcoidosis were
included if they experienced an inflammatory optic neuropathy as a symptomatic
disease manifestation and adequate clinical details were available for
retrospective review. The cohort was divided into those with better (visual
acuity better than 20/100) and worse (visual acuity 20/100 or worse) final
visual outcomes. Presenting clinical features, radiographic findings, results of
ancillary testing, and subsequent clinical course were compared between the two
groups to identify factors predictive of final visual outcome. Means and
proportions were compared between groups using the two-sample t-test for
continuous variables and the Chi-squared test for categorical variables.
RESULTS: 36 cases (36/247 or 14.6 % of the total neurosarcoidosis cohort, 17
patients excluded) were included (mean age of visual onset 46.5 ±11.3 years,
24/36 or 66.7 % female, 28/36 or 80 % Black), of which 20 (55.6 %) and 16
(44.4 %) were observed to have better and worse visual outcomes at last
follow-up, respectively. The majority had inflammation along the optic nerves in
the orbital apex and optic canals (29/32, 90.6 %), predominantly in a perineural
fashion in isolation (14/32, 43.8 %) or with enhancement of the optic nerve
intrinsically (10/32, 31.3 %). Inflammation outside of the optic apparatus,
neurologically or systemically, was almost always present (35/36, 97.2 %).
Predictors of future worse visual outcomes included: diagnostic classification
of definite (p = 0.03), significantly impaired visual acuity at onset (20/100 or
worse, p = 0.001), impaired visual fields at onset (p = 0.004), dyschromatopsia
at onset (p = 0.01), optic disc pallor or atrophy at initial evaluation
(p = 0.033), and at least one recurrence of inflammatory optic neuropathy over
the course of follow-up (p = 0.038). A pattern of optic perineuritis on MRI
(p = 0.025) and use of azathioprine as the initial disease modifying treatment
(p = 0.027) was predictive of a better visual outcome. Laterality (uni- vs bi-)
of visual impairment, inflammatory localization within the visual apparatus
(anterior vs posterior, longitudinal extent), associated MRI features (of
inflammatory deposits not affecting the visual apparatus), delay in diagnosis,
delay in initiation of steroids as an initial treatment, and delay in initiation
of the initial maintenance treatment regimen were not predictive of final visual
outcomes in this cohort. Mean follow-up duration was 67.5 months.
CONCLUSIONS: Predictors of a worse visual outcome at last follow-up included a
presenting visual exam with significant deficits (visual acuity, visual fields,
color vision, optic disc pallor), a diagnostic classification of definite
neurosarcoidosis, and occurrence of relapses. Those with less impaired visual
exams at presentation and a perineural pattern of optic nerve enhancement on MRI
experienced better visual outcomes.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2025.578529
PMID: 40023555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.
