---
reference_id: "PMID:31707371"
title: Awareness of Chorea in Huntington's Disease.
authors:
- Hergert DC
- Sanchez-Ramos J
- Cimino CR
journal: J Huntingtons Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3233/JHD-190381
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Awareness of Chorea in Huntington's Disease.
**Authors:** Hergert DC, Sanchez-Ramos J, Cimino CR
**Journal:** J Huntingtons Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JHD-190381](https://doi.org/10.3233/JHD-190381)

## Content

1. J Huntingtons Dis. 2020;9(1):99-103. doi: 10.3233/JHD-190381.

Awareness of Chorea in Huntington's Disease.

Hergert DC(1), Sanchez-Ramos J(2), Cimino CR(3).

Author information:
(1)New Mexico VA Health Care System, Albuquerque, NM, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA.

BACKGROUND: Anosognosia, or unawareness of illness of deficits, has been 
observed in Huntington's disease (HD) in relation to motor and cognitive signs 
and symptoms. Most studies of awareness in HD have used self-report 
questionnaire methodology rather than asking patients to report on their 
symptoms in real-time. The two studies in which patients were asked about their 
chorea in real-time had small sample sizes and only examined patients early in 
disease progression.
OBJECTIVE: To examine awareness of chorea in real-time in HD patients across a 
broad range of disease progression.
METHODS: Fifty HD patients across motor and cognitive impairment severity were 
asked if they noticed any involuntary movements after completing a simple 
working memory task used to elicit chorea. A movement disorders specialist rated 
the presence or absence of chorea while the patients completed the task. 
Disagreement between the patient and movement disorders specialist's ratings was 
considered to be an indicator of unawareness.
RESULTS: Approximately 46% of patients who exhibited chorea did not report 
chorea. Eighty-eight percent of participants who acknowledged chorea did not 
report chorea in all parts of the body that chorea was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: HD patients demonstrate unawareness of chorea across cognitive and 
motor sign severity.

DOI: 10.3233/JHD-190381
PMID: 31707371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]