---
reference_id: "PMID:39677667"
title: CHD4 Interacts With TBX5 to Maintain the Gene Regulatory Network of Postnatal Atrial Cardiomyocytes.
authors:
- Sweat ME
- Shi W
- Keating EM
- Ponek A
- Li J
- Ma Q
- Park C
- Trembley MA
- Wang Y
- Bezzerides VJ
- Conlon FL
- Pu WT
journal: bioRxiv
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1101/2024.12.04.626894
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CHD4 Interacts With TBX5 to Maintain the Gene Regulatory Network of Postnatal Atrial Cardiomyocytes.
**Authors:** Sweat ME, Shi W, Keating EM, Ponek A, Li J, Ma Q, Park C, Trembley MA, Wang Y, Bezzerides VJ, Conlon FL, Pu WT
**Journal:** bioRxiv (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1101/2024.12.04.626894](https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.04.626894)

## Content

1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Dec 5:2024.12.04.626894. doi: 
10.1101/2024.12.04.626894.

CHD4 Interacts With TBX5 to Maintain the Gene Regulatory Network of Postnatal 
Atrial Cardiomyocytes.

Sweat ME, Shi W, Keating EM, Ponek A, Li J, Ma Q, Park C, Trembley MA, Wang Y, 
Bezzerides VJ, Conlon FL, Pu WT.

Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common sustained arrhythmia, affecting 59 
million individuals worldwide. Impairment of atrial cardiomyocyte (aCM) gene 
regulatory mechanisms predisposes to atrial fibrillation. The transcription 
factor TBX5 is essential for normal atrial rhythm, and its inactivation causes 
loss of aCM enhancer accessibility, looping, and transcriptional identity. Here 
we investigated the mechanisms by which TBX5 regulates chromatin organization. 
We found that TBX5 recruits CHD4, a chromatin remodeling ATPase, to 33,170 
genomic regions (TBX5-enhanced CHD4 sites). As a component of the NuRD complex, 
CHD4 functions to repress gene transcription. However, combined snRNA-seq and 
snATAC-seq of CHD4 knockout (KO) and control aCMs revealed that CHD4 has both 
gene activator and repressor functions. Genes repressed by CHD4 in aCMs included 
sarcomeric proteins from non-CM cell lineages. Genes activated by CHD4 in aCMs 
were characterized by TBX5-enhanced CHD4 recruitment, which enhanced chromatin 
accessibility and promoted the expression of aCM identity genes. This mechanism 
of TBX5 recruitment of CHD4 was critical for sinus rhythm because Chd4 AKO mice 
had increased vulnerability to AF from electrical pacing and a fraction had 
spontaneous AF. Our findings reveal that CHD4 is essential for maintaining aCM 
gene expression, aCM identity, and atrial rhythm homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.12.04.626894
PMCID: PMC11643115
PMID: 39677667