---
reference_id: "PMID:19496388"
title: Identification and management of latent tuberculosis infection.
authors:
- Hauck FR
- Neese BH
- Panchal AS
- El-Amin W
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '2009'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification and management of latent tuberculosis infection.
**Authors:** Hauck FR, Neese BH, Panchal AS, El-Amin W
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (2009)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 2009 May 15;79(10):879-86.

Identification and management of latent tuberculosis infection.

Hauck FR(1), Neese BH, Panchal AS, El-Amin W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Medicine, University of Virginia School of Medicine, 
Charlottesville, Virginia 22908-0729, USA. frh8e@virginia.edu

Comment in
    Am Fam Physician. 2009 May 15;79(10):845-6.

Latent tuberculosis infection (LTBI) is a condition in which a person is 
infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis, but does not currently have active 
tuberculosis disease. An estimated 10 to 15 million persons in the United States 
have LTBI. Because 5 to 10 percent of persons with LTBI are at risk of 
progressing to active disease, identification and treatment of LTBI are 
essential for the elimination of tuberculosis. Screening is recommended for 
high-risk persons, including immigrants; residents and employees of congregate 
living facilities; and persons infected with human immunodeficiency virus. 
Targeted tuberculin skin testing remains the most acceptable method of LTBI 
screening. New tests are being developed, the most promising of which are in 
vitro interferon-gamma release assays. All screened persons found to have LTBI 
should be offered treatment, regardless of age. Before initiating treatment, 
active tuberculosis must be ruled out by patient history, physical examination, 
and chest radiography. The treatment of choice for LTBI is isoniazid for nine 
months. Hepatotoxicity is the most severe adverse effect. Isoniazid should be 
discontinued if transaminase levels are greater than three times the upper limit 
of normal in symptomatic patients or five times the upper limit of normal in 
asymptomatic patients.

PMID: 19496388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]