---
reference_id: "PMID:38264181"
title: "Diabetic Macular Edema Management: A Review of Anti-Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) Therapies."
authors:
- Cheema AA
- Cheema HR
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.52676
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diabetic Macular Edema Management: A Review of Anti-Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) Therapies.
**Authors:** Cheema AA, Cheema HR
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.52676](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.52676)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Jan 21;16(1):e52676. doi: 10.7759/cureus.52676. eCollection 2024 
Jan.

Diabetic Macular Edema Management: A Review of Anti-Vascular Endothelial Growth 
Factor (VEGF) Therapies.

Cheema AA(1), Cheema HR(2).

Author information:
(1)Ophthalmology, Royal Glamorgan Hospital, Cardiff, GBR.
(2)Ophthalmology, Royal Berkshire Hospital, Reading, GBR.

Diabetic macular edema (DME) is a major cause of vision impairment in diabetic 
individuals, characterized by fluid accumulation in the macula due to a 
breakdown of the blood-retinal barrier (BRB). This review article explores the 
role of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) therapies in the 
management of DME. Anti-VEGF treatments, including ranibizumab, bevacizumab, and 
aflibercept, have revolutionized DME management by targeting VEGF, a key 
mediator in DME pathogenesis. We critically examined the efficacy of these 
therapies in reducing macular edema and improving visual acuity, assessed their 
safety and tolerability, and explored the variability in treatment response. The 
review highlights the latest advancements and future directions in anti-VEGF 
therapy, including novel drug delivery systems and emerging treatment paradigms. 
By providing a comprehensive overview of current anti-VEGF therapies, this 
review seeks to inform clinical practice, guide future research, and contribute 
to improved patient outcomes in DME management.

Copyright © 2024, Cheema et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.52676
PMCID: PMC10804209
PMID: 38264181

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.