---
reference_id: "PMID:33835498"
title: Global transcriptomic analysis of a murine osteocytic cell line subjected to spaceflight.
authors:
- Uda Y
- Spatz JM
- Hussein A
- Garcia JH
- Lai F
- Dedic C
- Fulzele K
- Dougherty S
- Eberle M
- Adamson C
- Misener L
- Gerstenfeld L
- Divieti Pajevic P
journal: FASEB J
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1096/fj.202100059R
keywords:
- Animals
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Glucose/metabolism
- "Mechanotransduction, Cellular"
- Mice
- "Osteocytes/cytology, metabolism"
- Oxygen Consumption
- Space Flight/methods
- Transcriptome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Global transcriptomic analysis of a murine osteocytic cell line subjected to spaceflight.
**Authors:** Uda Y, Spatz JM, Hussein A, Garcia JH, Lai F, Dedic C, Fulzele K, Dougherty S, Eberle M, Adamson C, Misener L, Gerstenfeld L, Divieti Pajevic P
**Journal:** FASEB J (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.202100059R](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.202100059R)

## Content

1. FASEB J. 2021 May;35(5):e21578. doi: 10.1096/fj.202100059R.

Global transcriptomic analysis of a murine osteocytic cell line subjected to 
spaceflight.

Uda Y(1), Spatz JM(2)(3), Hussein A(4), Garcia JH(3), Lai F(1), Dedic C(1), 
Fulzele K(1), Dougherty S(5), Eberle M(5), Adamson C(5), Misener L(5), 
Gerstenfeld L(4), Divieti Pajevic P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Dental Medicine, Boston University Henry M. 
Goldman School of Dental Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Endocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(3)School of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, 
CA, USA.
(4)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Boston University School of Medicine, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(5)CALM Technologies Inc., Kingston, ON, Canada.

Bone loss is a major health concern for astronauts during long-term spaceflight 
and for patients during prolonged bed rest or paralysis. Growing evidence 
suggests that osteocytes, the most abundant cells in the mineralized bone 
matrix, play a key role in sensing mechanical forces applied to the skeleton and 
integrating the orchestrated response into subcellular biochemical signals to 
modulate bone homeostasis. However, the precise molecular mechanisms underlying 
both mechanosensation and mechanotransduction in late-osteoblast-to-osteocyte 
cells under microgravity (µG) have yet to be elucidated. To unravel the 
mechanisms by which late osteoblasts and osteocytes sense and respond to 
mechanical unloading, we exposed the osteocytic cell line, Ocy454, to 2, 4, or 
6 days of µG on the SpaceX Dragon-6 resupply mission to the International Space 
Station. Our results showed that µG impairs the differentiation of osteocytes, 
consistent with prior osteoblast spaceflight experiments, which resulted in the 
downregulation of key osteocytic genes. Importantly, we demonstrate the 
modulation of critical glycolysis pathways in osteocytes subjected to 
microgravity and discovered a set of mechanical sensitive genes that are 
consistently regulated in multiple cell types exposed to microgravity suggesting 
a common, yet to be fully elucidated, genome-wide response to microgravity. 
Ground-based simulated microgravity experiments utilizing the NASA 
rotating-wall-vessel were unable to adequately replicate the changes in 
microgravity exposure highlighting the importance of spaceflight missions to 
understand the unique environmental stress that microgravity presents to diverse 
cell types. In summary, our findings demonstrate that osteocytes respond to µG 
with an increase in glucose metabolism and oxygen consumption.

© 2021 Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.202100059R
PMID: 33835498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]