---
reference_id: "PMID:29939543"
title: Rhabdomyosarcoma.
authors:
- Kaseb H
- Kuhn J
- Gasalberti DP
- Babiker HM
year: '2026'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rhabdomyosarcoma.
**Authors:** Kaseb H, Kuhn J, Gasalberti DP, Babiker HM

## Content

1. Rhabdomyosarcoma.

Kaseb H(1), Kuhn J(2), Gasalberti DP(3), Babiker HM(4).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2026 
Jan–.
2024 Feb 12.

Author information:
(1)Cleveland Clinic
(2)Aventura Hospital and Medical Center
(3)Inspira Health Network
(4)University of Arizona Cancer Center

Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is a malignant soft tissue sarcoma that is believed to 
originate from primitive mesenchymal cells that typically differentiate into 
skeletal tissue. However, these tumors can also arise in other types of tissue 
and any anatomic area. RMS is the most common soft tissue sarcoma diagnosed in 
children; only 1% of these cancers are found in adults. The etiology and risk 
factors remain largely unknown. Most cases of rhabdomyosarcoma are sporadic; 
however, the disease can be associated with familial syndromes. Rhabdomyosarcoma 
is classified into histologic subtypes: embryonal, alveolar, pleomorphic, 
spindle, and mixed-type. Embryonal is the most commonly occurring subtype and 
also has the best prognosis. The management approach is tailored to a patient's 
risk stratification. Two systems are used to characterize risk stratification 
for RMS: the Clinical Group or the Stage. Each system uses different factors to 
categorize patients according to risk, and most authorities use both to 
determine the most appropriate therapeutic approach. Currently, treatment is 
multimodal, combining surgery, when feasible, to completely remove the primary 
tumor and chemotherapy to control disease spread, even if no evidence of 
metastasis is present on imaging because most patients have been found to have 
micrometastasis in studies. Radiotherapy is used to treat most high and 
intermediate-risk patients as well. The survival of rhabdomyosarcoma patients 
has improved due to interprofessional collaboration, leading to advancements in 
diagnosis and management approaches. Healthcare professionals should seek to 
enhance their competence when managing rhabdomyosarcoma. Furthermore, they 
should have updated knowledge, skills, and strategies for timely diagnosis and 
effective interventions to improve patient outcomes and reduce morbidity.

Copyright © 2026, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 29939543

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Hatem Kaseb declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: James Kuhn 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: David Gasalberti declares no relevant financial relationships with 
ineligible companies. Disclosure: Hani Babiker declares no relevant financial 
relationships with ineligible companies.