---
reference_id: "PMID:32809532"
title: Bismuth Subsalicylate.
authors:
- Budisak P
- Patel P
- Abbas M
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bismuth Subsalicylate.
**Authors:** Budisak P, Patel P, Abbas M

## Content

1. Bismuth Subsalicylate.

Budisak P(1), Patel P, Abbas M(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 
Jan–.
2024 Apr 21.

Author information:
(1)Virginia Commonwealth University’s School of Dentistry
(2)Corewell Health

This educational activity focuses on bismuth subsalicylate's applications in 
managing gastrointestinal discomfort and traveler's diarrhea. The drug's 
mechanism of action, potential adverse reactions, and contraindications will be 
discussed. By also exploring bismuth subsalicylate's pharmacokinetics, optimal 
administration methods, and necessary monitoring protocols, this program aims to 
enhance professionals' proficiency in clinical toxicology related to the 
medication. The goal of this program is to furnish healthcare professionals with 
the requisite expertise to administer bismuth subsalicylate optimally. By 
providing evidence-based information, this discussion facilitates informed 
decision-making, enabling practitioners to tailor treatment strategies to 
individual patient needs. By understanding bismuth subsalicylate's intricacies, 
healthcare professionals can mitigate adverse reactions, optimize dosages, and 
deliver precise, safe, and individualized care.

Copyright © 2025, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 32809532

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Patrick Budisak declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Preeti Patel 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: Malak Abbas declares no relevant financial relationships with 
ineligible companies.