---
reference_id: "PMID:34651205"
title: Analysis of multiple organ involvement in Kawasaki disease.
authors:
- Hu J
- Ren W
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00431-021-04291-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of multiple organ involvement in Kawasaki disease.
**Authors:** Hu J, Ren W
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00431-021-04291-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00431-021-04291-w)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 2022 Mar;181(3):951-957. doi: 10.1007/s00431-021-04291-w. Epub 
2021 Oct 14.

Analysis of multiple organ involvement in Kawasaki disease.

Hu J(1), Ren W(1).

Author information:
(1)Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, China.

This study aimed to explore the incidence and clinical characteristics of 
multiple complications in children with Kawasaki disease (KD). All patients were 
diagnosed in our hospital between January 2016 and December 2020. A total of 640 
cases were included, 43 patients had coronary artery aneurysm, 51 patients had 
coronary artery dilation, and 546 patients had no coronary artery damage. The 
patients were divided into three subgroups based on age: < 1 year old, 1-5 years 
old, and > 5 years old. The multiple complications of all the KD children and 
the correlation between extracardiac complications and cardiovascular 
complications were analyzed. Among the 640 KD children, most were 1-5 years old 
(415/640, 64.8%). Children < 1 year old (31.6%) and > 5 years old (28.3%) were 
more likely to have cardiovascular complications. The incidence of respiratory 
complications was highest in 1-5 year olds (57.1%). Involvement of the digestive 
and the hematological systems gradually decreased with age, whereas involvement 
of the nervous system, the urinary system, and the joints gradually increased 
with age. The incidence of cardiovascular injury with extracardiac complications 
(22.3%) was higher than that without extracardiac complications (16.3%), 
although the difference was not statistically significant 
(p > 0.05).Conclusions: KD can be complicated by multiple-organ injury but there 
was no significant relationship between the occurrence of extracardiac 
complications and cardiovascular complications. What is Known: • Cardiovascular 
disease is generally believed to be the most common and serious complication of 
Kawasaki disease (KD). • Over recent years, we have found that 
extracardiovascular complications of KD are more common than generally supposed 
and, because they have some effect on prognosis, we believe that more attention 
should be paid to these complications. What is New: • There was no significant 
relationship between the occurrence of extracardiac complications and 
cardiovascular complications.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-021-04291-w
PMID: 34651205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]