---
reference_id: "PMID:39660705"
title: "Otologic Manifestations in Patients with Achondroplasia: A Multicenter Study."
authors:
- Kim D
- Yoon J
- Suh MW
- Ho Lee J
- Kyun Park M
journal: J Int Adv Otol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.5152/iao.2024.241523
keywords:
- Humans
- Achondroplasia/complications
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- Female
- Child
- Adolescent
- Republic of Korea/epidemiology
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Hearing Loss, Conductive/etiology, diagnosis"
- Adult
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/etiology, epidemiology, diagnosis"
- Middle Ear Ventilation/methods
- Young Adult
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- "Otitis Media with Effusion/etiology, epidemiology, complications, surgery"
- Adenoidectomy/methods
- Audiometry/methods
- Treatment Outcome
- Prevalence
- "Temporal Bone/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Otologic Manifestations in Patients with Achondroplasia: A Multicenter Study.
**Authors:** Kim D, Yoon J, Suh MW, Ho Lee J, Kyun Park M
**Journal:** J Int Adv Otol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.5152/iao.2024.241523](https://doi.org/10.5152/iao.2024.241523)

## Content

1. J Int Adv Otol. 2024 Nov 25;20(6):517-522. doi: 10.5152/iao.2024.241523.

Otologic Manifestations in Patients with Achondroplasia: A Multicenter Study.

Kim D(1), Yoon J(1), Suh MW(1)(2), Ho Lee J(1)(2), Kyun Park M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Seoul National 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Sensory Organ Research Institute, Seoul National University Medical Research 
Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Achondroplasia, the most prevalent form of skeletal dysplasia 
involving short stature, necessitates a multidisciplinary approach that includes 
otology and auditory rehabilitation. Despite this, the clinical characteristics 
of hearing loss and otologic manifestations in achondroplasia patients remain 
poorly defined. This study aimed to explore the prevalence and treatment 
outcomes of otologic disease in individuals with achondroplasia.
METHODS: A retrospective review of medical records was conducted for 70 patients 
who visited the otolaryngology clinic at 3 institutions in South Korea from 1999 
to 2023. Demographic and clinical characteristics, including audiometric 
findings, imaging studies, treatment modalities, and outcomes, were analyzed.
RESULTS: Among 53 patients who underwent audiometry, 26 showed conductive 
hearing loss, 2 had mixed-type hearing loss, and 4 had sensorineural hearing 
loss. Fifty-one patients (72.9%) had middle ear effusion at least once. 
Myringotomy or ventilation tube insertion was performed on 33 patients (47.1%), 
and 16 patients (22.9%) required multiple insertions. Eighteen patients (25.7%) 
had adenoid hypertrophy, and 16 (22.9%) underwent adenoidectomy. Temporal bone 
computed tomography (TBCT) scans were taken in 9 patients (12.9%) for middle ear 
evaluation. Computed tomography (CT) scans showed a high jugular bulb and 
rotated inner ear structures. Chronic otitis media with cholesteatoma was 
diagnosed in 2 patients (2.9%), in whom tympanomastoidectomy was performed.
CONCLUSION: Half of the children with achondroplasia experienced hearing loss, 
most commonly due to conductive hearing loss. Threequarters of these children 
exhibited otitis media with effusions, often necessitating the insertion of a 
ventilation tube and adenoidectomy. Given the anatomical variations present in 
these children, such as a high jugular bulb and rotated structures of the inner 
ear and facial nerve, a cautious approach is essential when performing middle 
ear surgery.

DOI: 10.5152/iao.2024.241523
PMCID: PMC11639576
PMID: 39660705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.