---
reference_id: PMID:24073994
title: Mutation in MEOX1 gene causes a recessive Klippel-Feil syndrome subtype.
authors:
- Bayrakli F
- Guclu B
- Yakicier C
- Balaban H
- Kartal U
- Erguner B
- Sagiroglu MS
- Yuksel S
- Ozturk AR
- Kazanci B
- Ozum U
- Kars HZ
journal: BMC Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-14-95
keywords:
- Adult
- Animals
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17"
- Female
- Genetic Linkage
- "Genome, Human"
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Homeodomain Proteins
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Klippel-Feil Syndrome/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Lod Score
- Male
- Mice
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Spine/abnormalities
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation in MEOX1 gene causes a recessive Klippel-Feil syndrome subtype.
**Authors:** Bayrakli F, Guclu B, Yakicier C, Balaban H, Kartal U, Erguner B, Sagiroglu MS, Yuksel S, Ozturk AR, Kazanci B, Ozum U, Kars HZ
**Journal:** BMC Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1471-2156-14-95](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2156-14-95)

## Content

1. BMC Genet. 2013 Sep 28;14:95. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-14-95.

Mutation in MEOX1 gene causes a recessive Klippel-Feil syndrome subtype.

Bayrakli F(1), Guclu B, Yakicier C, Balaban H, Kartal U, Erguner B, Sagiroglu 
MS, Yuksel S, Ozturk AR, Kazanci B, Ozum U, Kars HZ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Cumhuriyet University School of Medicine, Kampus, 
Merkez, 58140, Sivas, Turkey. fbayrakli@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Klippel-Feil syndrome (KFS) is characterized by the developmental 
failure of the cervical spine and has two dominantly inherited subtypes. 
Affected individuals who are the children of a consanguineous marriage are 
extremely rare in the medical literature, but the gene responsible for this 
recessive trait subtype of KFS has recently been reported.
RESULTS: We identified a family with the KFS phenotype in which their parents 
have a consanguineous marriage. Radiological examinations revealed that they 
carry fusion defects and numerical abnormalities in the cervical spine, 
scoliosis, malformations of the cranial base, and Sprengel's deformity. We 
applied whole genome linkage and whole-exome sequencing analysis to identify the 
chromosomal locus and gene mutated in this family. Whole genome linkage analysis 
revealed a significant linkage to chromosome 17q12-q33 with a LOD score of 4.2. 
Exome sequencing identified the G > A p.Q84X mutation in the MEOX1 gene, which 
is segregated based on pedigree status. Homozygous MEOX1 mutations have 
reportedly caused a similar phenotype in knockout mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Here, we report a truncating mutation in the MEOX1 gene in a KFS 
family with an autosomal recessive trait. Together with another recently 
reported study and the knockout mouse model, our results suggest that mutations 
in MEOX1 cause a recessive KFS phenotype in humans.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2156-14-95
PMCID: PMC3849745
PMID: 24073994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]