---
reference_id: "PMID:36211152"
title: The Genetic Landscape of Polymicrogyria.
authors:
- James J
- Iype M
- Surendran MO
- Anitha A
- Thomas SV
journal: Ann Indian Acad Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.4103/aian.aian_97_22
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Genetic Landscape of Polymicrogyria.
**Authors:** James J, Iype M, Surendran MO, Anitha A, Thomas SV
**Journal:** Ann Indian Acad Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.4103/aian.aian_97_22](https://doi.org/10.4103/aian.aian_97_22)

## Content

1. Ann Indian Acad Neurol. 2022 Jul-Aug;25(4):616-626. doi:
10.4103/aian.aian_97_22. Epub 2022 May 5.

The Genetic Landscape of Polymicrogyria.

James J(1), Iype M(2)(3)(4), Surendran MO(5), Anitha A(1), Thomas SV(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurogenetics, Institute for Communicative and Cognitive
Neurosciences (ICCONS), Shoranur, Palakkad, Kerala, India.
(2)Department of Neurology, Institute for Communicative and Cognitive
Neurosciences (ICCONS), Shoranur, Palakkad, Kerala, India.
(3)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Government Medical College,
Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India.
(4)Department of Neurology, ICCONS, Pulayanarkotta, Thriruvananthapuram, Kerala,
India.
(5)Radiology Division, Hindlabs Imaging Center, Thriruvananthapuram, Kerala,
India.

Polymicrogyria (PMG) is a relatively common complex malformation with cortical
development, characterized by an exorbitant number of abnormally tiny gyri
separated by shallow sulci. It is a neuronal migration disorder. Familial cases
of PMG and the manifestation of PMG in patients with chromosomal aberrations and
mutations indicate their important role of genetics in this disorder. The highly
stereotyped and well-conserved nature of the cortical folding pattern in humans
is suggestive of the genetic regulation of the process. The chromosomal
abnormalities observed in PMG include deletions, duplications, chromosomal
rearrangements, and aneuploidies. Two of the most common deletions in PMG are
22q11.2 deletion and 1p36 deletion. Further, mutations in several genes such as
GPR56, TUBB2B, SRPX2, PAX6, EOMES, WDR62, TUBA8, KIAA1279, and COL18A1 are known
to be associated with PMG. Intriguingly, these genes are responsible only for a
small number of cases of PMG. The protein products of these genes are implicated
in diverse molecular and cellular functions. Taken together, PMG could be the
result of the disruption of several biological pathways. Different modes of
Mendelian inheritance and non-Mendelian inheritance are seen in PMG. We have
suggested a gene panel that can be used for the detection of malformations of
cortical development.

Copyright: © 2022 Annals of Indian Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.4103/aian.aian_97_22
PMCID: PMC9540929
PMID: 36211152

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.
