---
reference_id: "PMID:40773291"
title: Overexpression of the signaling coordinator GAB2 can play an important role in acute myeloid leukemia progression.
authors:
- Kramer MH
- Richardson SN
- Li Y
- Yin T
- Helton NM
- George DR
- Cai M
- Ramakrishnan SM
- Katerndahl CD
- Miller CA
- Ley TJ
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1172/JCI195929
keywords:
- Nucleophosmin
- Animals
- "Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute/genetics, pathology, metabolism"
- Mice
- Humans
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- Disease Progression
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Leukemic"
- Mutation
- "Mice, Transgenic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Overexpression of the signaling coordinator GAB2 can play an important role in acute myeloid leukemia progression.
**Authors:** Kramer MH, Richardson SN, Li Y, Yin T, Helton NM, George DR, Cai M, Ramakrishnan SM, Katerndahl CD, Miller CA, Ley TJ
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI195929](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI195929)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2025 Aug 7;135(21):e195929. doi: 10.1172/JCI195929. eCollection
 2025 Nov 3.

Overexpression of the signaling coordinator GAB2 can play an important role in
acute myeloid leukemia progression.

Kramer MH, Richardson SN, Li Y, Yin T, Helton NM, George DR, Cai M, Ramakrishnan
SM, Katerndahl CD, Miller CA, Ley TJ.

Comment in
    GAB2 couples genetic drivers and signaling networks in acute myeloid
leukemia.

Mutations that initiate acute myeloid leukemia (AML) can cause clonal expansion
without transformation (clonal hematopoiesis). Cooperating mutations, usually in
signaling genes, are needed to cause overt disease, but these may require a
specific fitness state to be tolerated. Here, we show that nearly all AMLs
arising in a mouse model expressing 2 common AML-initiating mutations
(Dnmt3aR878H and Npm1cA) acquired a single copy amplification of chromosome 7
(chr7), followed by activating mutations in signaling genes. We show that
overexpression of a single gene on chr7 (Gab2, which coordinates signaling
pathways) was tolerated in the presence of the Npm1cA mutation, could accelerate
the development of AML, and was important for the survival of fully transformed
AML cells. GAB2 is likewise overexpressed in many human AMLs with mutations in
NPM1 and/or signaling genes, and also in acute promyelocytic leukemia initiated
by PML::RARA; the PML::RARA fusion protein may activate GAB2 by directly binding
to its 5' flanking region. A similar pattern of GAB2 overexpression preceding
mutations in signaling genes has been described in other human malignancies.
GAB2 overexpression may represent an oncogene-driven adaptation that facilitates
the action of signaling mutations, suggesting an important (and potentially
targetable) missing link between the initiating and progression mutations
associated with AML.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI195929
PMCID: PMC12578389
PMID: 40773291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared
that no conflicts of interest exist.
