---
reference_id: "PMID:10437379"
title: Clinicopathological characteristics of atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor.
authors:
- Oka H
- Scheithauer BW
journal: Neurol Med Chir (Tokyo)
year: '1999'
doi: 10.2176/nmc.39.510
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Brain Neoplasms/pathology, therapy"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- "Germinoma/pathology, therapy"
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Medulloblastoma/pathology, therapy"
- Prognosis
- Recurrence
- "Rhabdoid Tumor/pathology, therapy"
- "Teratoma/pathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinicopathological characteristics of atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor.
**Authors:** Oka H, Scheithauer BW
**Journal:** Neurol Med Chir (Tokyo) (1999)
**DOI:** [10.2176/nmc.39.510](https://doi.org/10.2176/nmc.39.510)

## Content

1. Neurol Med Chir (Tokyo). 1999 Jul;39(7):510-7; discussion 517-8. doi:
10.2176/nmc.39.510.

Clinicopathological characteristics of atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor.

Oka H(1), Scheithauer BW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota, USA.

The clinicopathological features of atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor, a new
entity among malignant pediatric brain tumors, and the differential diagnosis
from primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET)/medulloblastoma, and germ cell tumor
are described. Histologically, atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor is defined as a
polymorphous neoplasm often featuring rhabdoid, PNET, epithelial, and
mesenchymal components. Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors usually include PNET
components and occur mainly in the posterior fossa, so mimic medulloblastoma.
Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor is characterized by the cytogenetic finding of
monosomy 22 rather than i(17q). The tumor is similarly mistaken for PNET at
supratentorial sites. Germ cell tumors also enter into the differential
diagnosis due to their histological immunophenotypic diversity, particularly
features indicative of epithelial and mesenchymal differentiation. Nonetheless,
the remarkable spectrum of tissues that typify teratoma is absent in atypical
teratoid/rhabdoid tumor. The same is true of germ cell marker in tumor tissues
and serum. The prognosis of atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor is far less
favorable than that of PNET/medulloblastoma of malignant or germ cell tumor.
Meta-analysis of 133 cases, including 15 new and 118 reported cases, confirm
that atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor is as a clinicopathological entity and
emphasizes the necessity for distinguishing this unique tumor from other
pediatric central nervous system neoplasms.

DOI: 10.2176/nmc.39.510
PMID: 10437379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
