---
reference_id: "PMID:35674301"
title: A Novel Compound Heterozygous Gene Mutation of Dolichol Kinase Deficiency (DOLK-CDG).
authors:
- Yu S
- Zhang Y
- Chen Z
- Song J
- Wang C
journal: Endocr Metab Immune Disord Drug Targets
year: '2023'
doi: 10.2174/1871530322666220607123739
keywords:
- Male
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Child
- Humans
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- Genetic Testing
- "Phosphotransferases (Alcohol Group Acceptor)/genetics, deficiency"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Novel Compound Heterozygous Gene Mutation of Dolichol Kinase Deficiency (DOLK-CDG).
**Authors:** Yu S, Zhang Y, Chen Z, Song J, Wang C
**Journal:** Endocr Metab Immune Disord Drug Targets (2023)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1871530322666220607123739](https://doi.org/10.2174/1871530322666220607123739)

## Content

1. Endocr Metab Immune Disord Drug Targets. 2023;23(2):235-241. doi: 
10.2174/1871530322666220607123739.

A Novel Compound Heterozygous Gene Mutation of Dolichol Kinase Deficiency 
(DOLK-CDG).

Yu S(1), Zhang Y(2), Chen Z(2), Song J(2), Wang C(2).

Author information:
(1)Qingdao University, Qingdao, Shandong, China.
(2)Children's Medical Center, Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, Shandong, China.

BACKGROUND: Congenital disorder of glycosylation caused by mutation of the 
DOLK(DOLK-CDG) is a group of rare autosomal recessive diseases with an 
early-onset age and poor prognosis. DOLK-CDG can cause the dysfunction of 
multiple systems and organs such as the heart, skin, nerves, and bones.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report a child with DOLK-CDG diagnosed and treated in the 
Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University. The child was born with neonatal 
asphyxia, Ichthyoid rash, and congenital heart disease. His fingers of both the 
hands looked like lotus roots, and the palm and foot were covered by a white 
membrane. He was hospitalized with a severe infection at 4 months after birth. 
Physical examination showed that he was complicated with development delay and 
hypotonia. He experienced convulsions 1 hour after admission and died of 
multiple organ failure 2 hours after admission. Blood samples were taken for 
genetic testing before the child died. The results showed that there was a novel 
compound heterozygous mutation in DOLK, c.1268C>G (P.P423R) and c.1581_1583del 
(P.527_528del).
CONCLUSION: This mutation is new and not included in the human gene mutation 
library. The discovery of the novel mutation broadened the mutation spectrum of 
DOLK. At the same time, we sorted out the DOLK-CDG gene mutation sites and 
related clinical manifestations reported by August 2021 through a literature 
review.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1871530322666220607123739
PMID: 35674301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]