---
reference_id: "PMID:27307151"
title: Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors with multilayered rosettes in the pineal region.
authors:
- Wang J
- Liu Z
- Fang J
- Du J
- Cui Y
- Xu L
- Li G
journal: Brain Tumor Pathol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s10014-016-0267-3
keywords:
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Neoplasms, Multiple Primary"
- Pineal Gland/surgery
- "Pinealoma/diagnosis, pathology, surgery"
- "Rhabdoid Tumor/diagnosis, pathology, surgery"
- "Teratoma/diagnosis, pathology, surgery"
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors with multilayered rosettes in the pineal region.
**Authors:** Wang J, Liu Z, Fang J, Du J, Cui Y, Xu L, Li G
**Journal:** Brain Tumor Pathol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10014-016-0267-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10014-016-0267-3)

## Content

1. Brain Tumor Pathol. 2016 Oct;33(4):261-266. doi: 10.1007/s10014-016-0267-3.
Epub  2016 Jun 15.

Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors with multilayered rosettes in the pineal 
region.

Wang J(1), Liu Z(1), Fang J(1), Du J(1), Cui Y(1), Xu L(1), Li G(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Beijing Neurosurgical Institute, China National 
Clinical Research Center for Neurological Diseases (NCRC-ND), Brain Tumor 
Center, Beijing Institute for Brain Disorders, Beijing Key Brain Tumor 
Laboratory, Capital Medical University, No. 6 Tiantan Xili, Dongcheng, Beijing, 
100050, China.
(2)Department of Neuropathology, Beijing Neurosurgical Institute, China National 
Clinical Research Center for Neurological Diseases (NCRC-ND), Brain Tumor 
Center, Beijing Institute for Brain Disorders, Beijing Key Brain Tumor 
Laboratory, Capital Medical University, No. 6 Tiantan Xili, Dongcheng, Beijing, 
100050, China. liguilin2015@sina.com.

Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor (AT/RT) is a rare, highly malignant tumor of 
the central nervous system (CNS) that typically occurs during infancy. These 
tumors exhibit morphologic heterogeneity and differentiate along multiple 
lineages, thus posing a diagnostic challenge. Here, we present two cases of 
AT/RT with a primitive neuroectodermal component and histological pattern 
resembling an embryonal tumor with multilayered rosettes (ETMR), a rare but 
distinctive embryonal entity with different therapeutic implications. Patient 1, 
a 23-month-old girl, presented with a history of gait unsteadiness and headache; 
cranial computed tomography (CT) identified a mass in the pineal and third 
ventricular regions. Patient 2, a 26-month-old girl, presented with headache and 
vomiting; CT revealed a mass in the posterior third ventricle. Both patients 
were treated via gross total tumor resection. Although histologically, AT/RT 
cases variably comprise primitive neuroectodermal, mesenchymal, and classic 
rhabdoid cells, the most striking feature of both cases was the presence of 
multilayered rosettes with a few Homer Wright rosettes and occasional primitive 
neuroepithelial tubes in focal primitive component areas. Immunohistochemistry 
revealed considerable heterogeneity within the tumors. We further present our 
findings in the context of the relevant literature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10014-016-0267-3
PMID: 27307151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]