---
reference_id: "PMID:18755702"
title: The immunodeficiency of chronic lymphocytic leukaemia.
authors:
- Hamblin AD
- Hamblin TJ
journal: Br Med Bull
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1093/bmb/ldn034
keywords:
- "Agammaglobulinemia/immunology, therapy"
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- Cancer Vaccines/therapeutic use
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulins, Intravenous/therapeutic use"
- "Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/immunology, therapy"
- "Leukemia, Lymphocytic, Chronic, B-Cell/immunology, therapy"
- T-Lymphocytes/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The immunodeficiency of chronic lymphocytic leukaemia.
**Authors:** Hamblin AD, Hamblin TJ
**Journal:** Br Med Bull (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bmb/ldn034](https://doi.org/10.1093/bmb/ldn034)

## Content

1. Br Med Bull. 2008;87:49-62. doi: 10.1093/bmb/ldn034. Epub 2008 Aug 27.

The immunodeficiency of chronic lymphocytic leukaemia.

Hamblin AD(1), Hamblin TJ.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Sciences Division, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Patients with chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) have progressive 
immunodeficiency and infection is the commonest cause of death. This review 
seeks to identify the extent of the abnormality, its cause, clinical 
significance and any possible remedy.
SOURCES OF DATA: TJH has studied CLL for the past 40 years and has scanned or 
read every paper he could find published on the topic since 1970 and most of 
those of historical importance published before that date. He has read around 
the subject, covering relevant articles on immunology, cell biology, oncology 
and genetics. Furthermore, he has attended most major meetings dealing with CLL 
in this time and has written many reviews to update the state of knowledge about 
the topic. He receives weekly updates of papers published on CLL from PubMed and 
Science Direct with the keywords 'chronic lymphocytic leukaemia'.
AREAS OF AGREEMENT: The immunodeficiency chiefly manifests as 
hypogammaglobulinaemia but involves all elements of the immune system. It is 
caused by the interpolation of tumour cells among immunological cells and 
mediated by bi-directional cell contact and secretion of cytokines, which both 
sustain and invigorate the tumour and suppress immunity. CLL treatment generally 
makes the immunodeficiency worse. Intravenous immunoglobulin is clinically 
effective but not cost-effective, while prophylactic antibiotics are useful in 
appropriate circumstances. Vaccination against infectious disease is usually 
ineffective.
AREAS OF CONTROVERSY: Exactly how the presence of tumour cells in the immune 
organs renders the patient immunodeficient is controversial as is the clinical 
significance of minor degrees of immunodeficiency in early or indolent cases. 
The immunosuppressive effect of most forms of treatment is agreed, but how much 
this should figure in the choice of treatment is a matter of dispute.
GROWING POINTS: The study of tumour-stromal interactions is an area of intense 
research.
AREAS TIMELY FOR DEVELOPING RESEARCH: There has been little done to develop 
better vaccination strategies in patients with CLL, and although effective 
antimicrobials have been developed to protect against opportunistic infections, 
many are both expensive and inconvenient. More work is necessary to define 
precisely which patients should be offered them and when.

DOI: 10.1093/bmb/ldn034
PMID: 18755702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]