---
reference_id: "PMID:28742265"
title: "Congenital disorders of glycosylation: The Saudi experience."
authors:
- Alsubhi S
- Alhashem A
- Faqeih E
- Alfadhel M
- Alfaifi A
- Altuwaijri W
- Alsahli S
- Aldhalaan H
- Alkuraya FS
- Hundallah K
- Mahmoud A
- Alasmari A
- Mutairi FA
- Abduraouf H
- AlRasheed L
- Alshahwan S
- Tabarki B
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38358
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Vesicular Transport/genetics"
- Adolescent
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/epidemiology, genetics"
- Female
- Glycosylation
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mannosyltransferases/genetics
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mixed Function Oxygenases/genetics
- Monosaccharide Transport Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- N-Acetylglucosaminyltransferases/genetics
- Phenotype
- Retrospective Studies
- Saudi Arabia/epidemiology
- UDP-Galactose Translocators
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital disorders of glycosylation: The Saudi experience.
**Authors:** Alsubhi S, Alhashem A, Faqeih E, Alfadhel M, Alfaifi A, Altuwaijri W, Alsahli S, Aldhalaan H, Alkuraya FS, Hundallah K, Mahmoud A, Alasmari A, Mutairi FA, Abduraouf H, AlRasheed L, Alshahwan S, Tabarki B
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.38358](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.38358)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2017 Oct;173(10):2614-2621. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38358. Epub 
2017 Jul 25.

Congenital disorders of glycosylation: The Saudi experience.

Alsubhi S(1), Alhashem A(2), Faqeih E(3), Alfadhel M(4), Alfaifi A(4), 
Altuwaijri W(5), Alsahli S(4), Aldhalaan H(6), Alkuraya FS(7)(8), Hundallah 
K(1), Mahmoud A(3), Alasmari A(3), Mutairi FA(4), Abduraouf H(2), AlRasheed 
L(2), Alshahwan S(1), Tabarki B(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Prince Sultan 
Military Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics; Prince Sultan Military 
Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Pediatric Subspecialties, Children's Hospital, King Fahad 
Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, King Abdulaziz Medical City, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, King Abdulaziz 
Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(6)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Neurosciences, King Faisal 
Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(7)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(8)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, Alfaisal 
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

We retrospectively reviewed Saudi patients who had a congenital disorder of 
glycosylation (CDG). Twenty-seven Saudi patients (14 males, 13 females) from 13 
unrelated families were identified. Based on molecular studies, the 27 CDG 
patients were classified into different subtypes: ALG9-CDG (8 patients, 29.5%), 
ALG3-CDG (7 patients, 26%), COG6-CDG (7 patients, 26%), MGAT2-CDG (3 patients, 
11%), SLC35A2-CDG (1 patient), and PMM2-CDG (1 patient). All the patients had 
homozygous gene mutations. The combined carrier frequency of CDG for the 
encountered founder mutations in the Saudi population is 11.5 per 10,000, which 
translates to a minimum disease burden of 14 patients per 1,000,000. Our study 
provides comprehensive epidemiologic information and prevalence figures for each 
of these CDG in a large cohort of congenital disorder of glycosylation patients.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38358
PMID: 28742265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]