---
reference_id: "PMID:21643921"
title: Cognitive reserve and its implications for rehabilitation and Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Liberati G
- Raffone A
- Olivetti Belardinelli M
journal: Cogn Process
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1007/s10339-011-0410-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cognitive reserve and its implications for rehabilitation and Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Liberati G, Raffone A, Olivetti Belardinelli M
**Journal:** Cogn Process (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10339-011-0410-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10339-011-0410-3)

## Content

1. Cogn Process. 2012 Feb;13(1):1-12. doi: 10.1007/s10339-011-0410-3. Epub 2011
Jun  4.

Cognitive reserve and its implications for rehabilitation and Alzheimer's 
disease.

Liberati G(1), Raffone A, Olivetti Belardinelli M.

Author information:
(1)Interuniversity Centre for Research on Cognitive Processing in Natural and 
Artificial Systems (ECONA), IT, Rome, Italy. giulialiberati@uniroma1.it

According to the Cognitive reserve hypothesis, several factors related to mental 
engagement, such as level of education, type of occupation, leisure activities 
and social network, appear to affect the risk of developing clinical dementia. 
The present article provides an overview of the studies that have investigated 
the effects of mental engagement and cognitive stimulation specifically on 
dementia of the Alzheimer's type (AD). Mental training and cognitive stimulation 
interventions in AD have been shown to be useful in increasing patients' ability 
in performing activities of daily living (ADL), allowing them to maintain 
relative independence. Since cognitive engagement and stimulation are known to 
modify the brain processes to perform tasks, by recruiting alternative and more 
efficient networks, this review is especially focused on cognitive 
rehabilitation in AD patients, which has been shown to improve their global 
functioning and cognition. This perspective stresses the idea that cognitive 
reserve is not a fixed factor, but can be continuously modified by life 
experiences, even when the brain is already affected by neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1007/s10339-011-0410-3
PMID: 21643921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]