---
reference_id: "PMID:36796138"
title: "Diagnosis and management of glycogen storage disease type IV, including adult polyglucosan body disease: A clinical practice resource."
authors:
- Koch RL
- Soler-Alfonso C
- Kiely BT
- Asai A
- Smith AL
- Bali DS
- Kang PB
- Landstrom AP
- Akman HO
- Burrow TA
- Orthmann-Murphy JL
- Goldman DS
- Pendyal S
- El-Gharbawy AH
- Austin SL
- Case LE
- Schiffmann R
- Hirano M
- Kishnani PS
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107525
keywords:
- "Glycogen Storage Disease/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Neurodegenerative Diseases
- "Child, Preschool"
- Nervous System Diseases
- Humans
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type IV/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Glycogen
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and management of glycogen storage disease type IV, including adult polyglucosan body disease: A clinical practice resource.
**Authors:** Koch RL, Soler-Alfonso C, Kiely BT, Asai A, Smith AL, Bali DS, Kang PB, Landstrom AP, Akman HO, Burrow TA, Orthmann-Murphy JL, Goldman DS, Pendyal S, El-Gharbawy AH, Austin SL, Case LE, Schiffmann R, Hirano M, Kishnani PS
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107525](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107525)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2023 Mar;138(3):107525. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107525.
Epub  2023 Jan 25.

Diagnosis and management of glycogen storage disease type IV, including adult
polyglucosan body disease: A clinical practice resource.

Koch RL(1), Soler-Alfonso C(2), Kiely BT(3), Asai A(4), Smith AL(5), Bali DS(3),
Kang PB(6), Landstrom AP(7), Akman HO(8), Burrow TA(9), Orthmann-Murphy JL(10),
Goldman DS(11), Pendyal S(3), El-Gharbawy AH(3), Austin SL(3), Case LE(12),
Schiffmann R(13), Hirano M(8), Kishnani PS(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA. Electronic address: rebecca.koch@duke.edu.
(2)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH, USA; Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati,
OH, USA.
(5)Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, University of Pennsylvania Health
System, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)Paul and Sheila Wellstone Muscular Dystrophy Center, Department of Neurology,
University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(7)Division of Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University School of
Medicine, Durham, NC, USA; Department of Cell Biology, Duke University School of
Medicine, Durham, NC, USA.
(8)Department of Neurology, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York
City, NY, USA.
(9)Section of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Arkansas Children's Hospital, Little Rock, AR,
USA.
(10)Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(11)Adult Polyglucosan Body Disease Research Foundation, Brooklyn, NY, USA.
(12)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA; Doctor of Physical Therapy Division, Department
of Orthopedic Surgery, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, USA.
(13)Texas Neurology Group, Dallas, TX, USA.

Glycogen storage disease type IV (GSD IV) is an ultra-rare autosomal recessive
disorder caused by pathogenic variants in GBE1 which results in reduced or
deficient glycogen branching enzyme activity. Consequently, glycogen synthesis
is impaired and leads to accumulation of poorly branched glycogen known as
polyglucosan. GSD IV is characterized by a remarkable degree of phenotypic
heterogeneity with presentations in utero, during infancy, early childhood,
adolescence, or middle to late adulthood. The clinical continuum encompasses
hepatic, cardiac, muscular, and neurologic manifestations that range in
severity. The adult-onset form of GSD IV, referred to as adult polyglucosan body
disease (APBD), is a neurodegenerative disease characterized by neurogenic
bladder, spastic paraparesis, and peripheral neuropathy. There are currently no
consensus guidelines for the diagnosis and management of these patients,
resulting in high rates of misdiagnosis, delayed diagnosis, and lack of
standardized clinical care. To address this, a group of experts from the United
States developed a set of recommendations for the diagnosis and management of
all clinical phenotypes of GSD IV, including APBD, to support clinicians and
caregivers who provide long-term care for individuals with GSD IV. The
educational resource includes practical steps to confirm a GSD IV diagnosis and
best practices for medical management, including (a) imaging of the liver,
heart, skeletal muscle, brain, and spine, (b) functional and
neuromusculoskeletal assessments, (c) laboratory investigations, (d) liver and
heart transplantation, and (e) long-term follow-up care. Remaining knowledge
gaps are detailed to emphasize areas for improvement and future research.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107525
PMID: 36796138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
