---
reference_id: "PMID:35046639"
title: Clinical Utility of Elosulfase Alfa in the Treatment of Morquio A Syndrome.
authors:
- Lee CL
- Chuang CK
- Chiu HC
- Tu RY
- Lo YT
- Chang YH
- Lin SP
- Lin HY
journal: Drug Des Devel Ther
year: '2022'
doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S219433
keywords:
- Chondroitinsulfatases/therapeutic use
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy
- Humans
- Mucopolysaccharidosis IV/drug therapy
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Utility of Elosulfase Alfa in the Treatment of Morquio A Syndrome.
**Authors:** Lee CL, Chuang CK, Chiu HC, Tu RY, Lo YT, Chang YH, Lin SP, Lin HY
**Journal:** Drug Des Devel Ther (2022)
**DOI:** [10.2147/DDDT.S219433](https://doi.org/10.2147/DDDT.S219433)

## Content

1. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2022 Jan 10;16:143-154. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S219433.
eCollection 2022.

Clinical Utility of Elosulfase Alfa in the Treatment of Morquio A Syndrome.

Lee CL(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Chuang CK(6)(7), Chiu HC(1), Tu RY(6), Lo YT(5), Chang
YH(1)(5), Lin SP(1)(3)(5)(6)(8), Lin HY(1)(3)(4)(5)(6)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, MacKay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming Chiao-Tung University,
Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Medicine, MacKay Medical College, New Taipei City, Taiwan.
(4)MacKay Junior College of Medicine, Nursing and Management, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Rare Disease Center, MacKay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Medical Research, MacKay
Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(7)College of Medicine, Fu-Jen Catholic University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Infant and Child Care, National Taipei University of Nursing
and Health Sciences, Taipei, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Medical Research, China Medical University Hospital, China
Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.

Mucopolysaccharidosis type IVA (MPS IVA or Morquio A) is an autosomal recessive
disorder and is one of the lysosomal storage diseases. Patients with MPS IVA
have a striking skeletal phenotype but normal intellect. The phenotypic
continuum of MPS IVA ranges from severe and rapid progress to mild and slow
progress. The diagnosis of MPS IVA is usually suspected based on abnormal bone
findings and dysplasia on physical examination and radiographic investigation in
the preschool years. In the past, only supportive care was available. Due to the
early and severe skeletal abnormalities, the orthopedic specialist was usually
the main care provider. However, patients need aggressive monitoring and
management of their systemic disease. Therefore, they need an interdisciplinary
team for their care, comprising medical geneticists, cardiologists, pulmonary
specialists, gastroenterologists, otolaryngologists, audiologists, and
ophthalmologists. After the US Food and Drug Administration approved elosulfase
alfa in 2014, patients older than 5 years could benefit from this treatment.
Clinical trials showed clinically meaningful improvements with once-a-week
intravenous dosing (2.0 mg/kg per week), significantly improving the 6min walk
test, the 3min stair climb test, and respiratory function when compared with
placebo. Elosulfase alfa is well-tolerated, and there is a good response
indicated by decreasing urine glycosaminoglycans.

© 2022 Lee et al.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S219433
PMCID: PMC8759989
PMID: 35046639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest.
