---
reference_id: "PMID:23796814"
title: Cumulative life course impairment in vitiligo.
authors:
- Krüger C
- Schallreuter KU
journal: Curr Probl Dermatol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1159/000350010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cumulative life course impairment in vitiligo.
**Authors:** Krüger C, Schallreuter KU
**Journal:** Curr Probl Dermatol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000350010](https://doi.org/10.1159/000350010)

## Content

1. Curr Probl Dermatol. 2013;44:102-17. doi: 10.1159/000350010. Epub 2013 May 24.

Cumulative life course impairment in vitiligo.

Krüger C(1), Schallreuter KU.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Pigmentary Disorders, Biotechnikum, Greifswald, Germany.

Vitiligo is an acquired, idiopathic skin disease characterized by the mostly 
progressive loss of the inherited skin color leading to white patches and in 
some cases to total depigmentation. The course of this ancient disease is still 
unknown. The worldwide prevalence range is 0.5-1%. The disease burden includes 
stigmatization, depression, impaired quality of life, lack of self-confidence, 
embarrassment and self-consciousness. To the best of our knowledge, the extent 
to which this chronic disease may exert an influence upon the life course of 
affected individuals has, to date, not been investigated. The material presented 
herein is the result of an accurate analysis of published literature. Moreover, 
we included our own data collected in two studies. To apply the concept of 
cumulative life course impairment in vitiligo, we looked at possible trigger 
factors, role of patient's age and the age at disease onset, disease duration 
and stigmatization. Stigmatization had the strongest impact. It is common in 
patients with an early disease onset, often leading to other disturbances. Our 
data revealed that older patients or those with a disease onset later in life 
adjust better to this chronic skin disorder and that they are less socially 
avoidant. However, long disease duration can also lead to impaired quality of 
life and obsession, while this group seems to be less depressed or embarrassed. 
Results from our own work with peer groups of these patients strongly support a 
positive long-lasting effect of treatment on quality of life of children, 
adolescents and adults. To which extent vitiligo may contribute to a cumulative 
life course impairment remains to be shown.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000350010
PMID: 23796814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]