---
reference_id: "PMID:30817854"
title: "SLC35A2-CDG: Functional characterization, expanded molecular, clinical, and biochemical phenotypes of 30 unreported Individuals."
authors:
- Ng BG
- Sosicka P
- Agadi S
- Almannai M
- Bacino CA
- Barone R
- Botto LD
- Burton JE
- Carlston C
- Chung BH
- Cohen JS
- Coman D
- Dipple KM
- Dorrani N
- Dobyns WB
- Elias AF
- Epstein L
- Gahl WA
- Garozzo D
- Hammer TB
- Haven J
- Héron D
- Herzog M
- Hoganson GE
- Hunter JM
- Jain M
- Juusola J
- Lakhani S
- Lee H
- Lee J
- Lewis K
- Longo N
- Lourenço CM
- Mak CCY
- McKnight D
- Mendelsohn BA
- Mignot C
- Mirzaa G
- Mitchell W
- Muhle H
- Nelson SF
- Olczak M
- Palmer CGS
- Partikian A
- Patterson MC
- Pierson TM
- Quinonez SC
- Regan BM
- Ross ME
- Guillen Sacoto MJ
- Scaglia F
- Scheffer IE
- Segal D
- Singhal NS
- Striano P
- Sturiale L
- Symonds JD
- Tang S
- Vilain E
- Willis M
- Wolfe LA
- Yang H
- Yano S
- Powis Z
- Suchy SF
- Rosenfeld JA
- Edmondson AC
- Grunewald S
- Freeze HH
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/humu.23731
keywords:
- Animals
- Biopsy
- CHO Cells
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Cricetulus
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Monosaccharide Transport Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Uridine Diphosphate Galactose/metabolism
- UDP-Galactose Translocators
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SLC35A2-CDG: Functional characterization, expanded molecular, clinical, and biochemical phenotypes of 30 unreported Individuals.
**Authors:** Ng BG, Sosicka P, Agadi S, Almannai M, Bacino CA, Barone R, Botto LD, Burton JE, Carlston C, Chung BH, Cohen JS, Coman D, Dipple KM, Dorrani N, Dobyns WB, Elias AF, Epstein L, Gahl WA, Garozzo D, Hammer TB, Haven J, Héron D, Herzog M, Hoganson GE, Hunter JM, Jain M, Juusola J, Lakhani S, Lee H, Lee J, Lewis K, Longo N, Lourenço CM, Mak CCY, McKnight D, Mendelsohn BA, Mignot C, Mirzaa G, Mitchell W, Muhle H, Nelson SF, Olczak M, Palmer CGS, Partikian A, Patterson MC, Pierson TM, Quinonez SC, Regan BM, Ross ME, Guillen Sacoto MJ, Scaglia F, Scheffer IE, Segal D, Singhal NS, Striano P, Sturiale L, Symonds JD, Tang S, Vilain E, Willis M, Wolfe LA, Yang H, Yano S, Powis Z, Suchy SF, Rosenfeld JA, Edmondson AC, Grunewald S, Freeze HH
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.23731](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.23731)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2019 Jul;40(7):908-925. doi: 10.1002/humu.23731. Epub 2019 Apr 24.

SLC35A2-CDG: Functional characterization, expanded molecular, clinical, and 
biochemical phenotypes of 30 unreported Individuals.

Ng BG(1), Sosicka P(1), Agadi S(2), Almannai M(2), Bacino CA(2)(3), Barone 
R(4)(5), Botto LD(6), Burton JE(7), Carlston C(8), Chung BH(9), Cohen JS(10), 
Coman D(11)(12), Dipple KM(13)(14)(15), Dorrani N(16), Dobyns WB(17)(18), Elias 
AF(19), Epstein L(20), Gahl WA(21)(22), Garozzo D(5), Hammer TB(23), Haven 
J(19), Héron D(24), Herzog M(15), Hoganson GE(7), Hunter JM(25), Jain M(10), 
Juusola J(26), Lakhani S(27), Lee H(15)(28), Lee J(29)(30), Lewis K(11), Longo 
N(6), Lourenço CM(31), Mak CCY(9), McKnight D(26), Mendelsohn BA(32), Mignot 
C(24), Mirzaa G(17)(18), Mitchell W(33)(34), Muhle H(35), Nelson SF(15)(28)(36), 
Olczak M(37), Palmer CGS(15)(36)(38), Partikian A(39), Patterson MC(40), Pierson 
TM(41)(42)(43), Quinonez SC(44), Regan BM(45), Ross ME(27), Guillen Sacoto 
MJ(26), Scaglia F(2)(3)(46), Scheffer IE(45)(47), Segal D(27)(48), Singhal 
NS(49), Striano P(50), Sturiale L(5), Symonds JD(51), Tang S(25), Vilain E(52), 
Willis M(53), Wolfe LA(21)(22), Yang H(26), Yano S(54), Powis Z(25), Suchy 
SF(25), Rosenfeld JA(26), Edmondson AC(2), Grunewald S(55), Freeze HH(56).

Author information:
(1)Human Genetics Program, Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, 
La Jolla, California.
(2)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas.
(3)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas.
(4)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Child Neurology and 
Psychiatry, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.
(5)CNR, Institute for Polymers, Composites and Biomaterials, Catania, Italy.
(6)Departments of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, University of Utah, 
Salt Lake City, Utah.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, University of Illinois College of Medicine, Peoria, 
Illinois.
(8)Department of Pathology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
(9)Department of Paediatrics & Adolescent Medicine, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(10)Division of Neurogenetics and Hugo W. Moser Research Institute, Kennedy 
Krieger Institute, Baltimore, Maryland.
(11)Department of Metabolic Medicine, Queensland Children's Hospital, Brisbane, 
Australia.
(12)Schools of Medicine, University of Queensland Brisbane, Griffith University 
Gold Coast, Brisbane, Australia.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(14)Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, Washington.
(15)Department of Human Genetics, UCLA, Los Angeles, California.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, UCLA, Los Angeles, California.
(17)Departments of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(18)Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children's Research 
Institute, Seattle, Washington.
(19)Department of Medical Genetics, Shodair Children's Hospital, Helena, 
Montana.
(20)Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois.
(21)Office of the Clinical Director, National Human Genome Research Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(22)Undiagnosed Diseases Program, Common Fund, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland.
(23)Danish Epilepsy Center-Filadelfia, Dianalund, Denmark.
(24)APHP,Genetics Department, GH Pity Salpetriere, CRMR Intellectual 
Disabilities of Rare Causes, Sorbonne University, Paris, France.
(25)Ambry Genetics, Aliso Viejo, California.
(26)GeneDx, Gaithersburg, Maryland.
(27)Center for Neurogenetics Brain and Mind Research Institute Weill Cornell 
Medicine, New York, New York.
(28)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, 
California.
(29)Department of Metabolic Medicine, The Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, 
Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(30)Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.
(31)Clinical Genetics and Neurogenetics, Centro Universitario Estacio de 
Ribeirao Preto, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil.
(32)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California.
(33)Neurology Division Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California.
(34)Department of Neurology, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, California.
(35)Department of Neuropediatrics, Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, Kiel, 
Germany.
(36)Department of Psychiatry & Biobehavioral Sciences, UCLA, Los Angeles, 
California.
(37)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biotechnology, University of Wroclaw, 
Wroclaw, Poland.
(38)Institute for Society and Genetics, UCLA, Los Angeles, California.
(39)Departments of Pediatrics & Neurology, Keck School of Medicine of University 
of Southern California, Los Angeles, California.
(40)Division of Child and Adolescent Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota.
(41)Department of Pediatrics, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, 
California.
(42)Department of Neurology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, 
California.
(43)Board of Governors Regenerative Medicine Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical 
Center, Los Angeles, California.
(44)Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Metabolism and Genomic 
Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(45)The University of Melbourne, Austin Health, Melbourne, Australia.
(46)Joint BCM-CUHK Center of Medical Genetics, Prince of Wales Hospital, ShaTin, 
Hong Kong SAR.
(47)The University of Melbourne, Royal Children's Hospital, Florey Institute and 
Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia.
(48)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Child Neurology, Weill Cornell 
Medicine, New York, New York.
(49)Neurology & Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, California.
(50)Department of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, 
Maternal and Child Health, Pediatric Neurology and Muscular Diseases Unit, G. 
Gaslini Institute, University of Genoa, Genova, Italy.
(51)Paediatric Neurosciences Research Group, Royal Hospital for Children, Queen 
Elizabeth University Hospitals, Glasgow, UK.
(52)Center for Genetic Medicine Research, Children's National Medical Center, 
Columbia, Washington.
(53)Department of Pediatrics, Naval Medical Center, San Diego, California.
(54)Department of Pediatrics, Genetics Division, LAC+USC Medical Center, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California.
(55)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Human Genetics, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(56)Metabolic Unit, Great Ormond Street Hospital NHS Trust, Institute for Child 
Health UCL, London, UK.

Pathogenic de novo variants in the X-linked gene SLC35A2 encoding the major 
Golgi-localized UDP-galactose transporter required for proper protein and lipid 
glycosylation cause a rare type of congenital disorder of glycosylation known as 
SLC35A2-congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG; formerly CDG-IIm). To date, 
29 unique de novo variants from 32 unrelated individuals have been described in 
the literature. The majority of affected individuals are primarily characterized 
by varying degrees of neurological impairments with or without skeletal 
abnormalities. Surprisingly, most affected individuals do not show abnormalities 
in serum transferrin N-glycosylation, a common biomarker for most types of CDG. 
Here we present data characterizing 30 individuals and add 26 new variants, the 
single largest study involving SLC35A2-CDG. The great majority of these 
individuals had normal transferrin glycosylation. In addition, expanding the 
molecular and clinical spectrum of this rare disorder, we developed a robust and 
reliable biochemical assay to assess SLC35A2-dependent UDP-galactose transport 
activity in primary fibroblasts. Finally, we show that transport activity is 
directly correlated to the ratio of wild-type to mutant alleles in fibroblasts 
from affected individuals.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.23731
PMCID: PMC6661012
PMID: 30817854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT The Department of 
Molecular and Human Genetics at Baylor College of Medicine derives revenue from 
clinical genetic testing completed at Baylor Genetics Laboratories. Fernando 
Scaglia is involved in clinical trials supported by BioElectron, Reata 
Pharmaceuticals, and Stealth BioTherapeutics. Mary Willis declares views 
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the 
official policy or position of the Department of the Navy, Department of 
Defense, or the U.S. Government. Zöe Powis, Jesse M. Hunter, Sha Tang are 
employed by Ambry Genetics. Sharon F. Suchy, Jane Juusola, Dianalee McKnight, 
Maria Guillen Sacato and Hui Yang are employed by GeneDx, Inc., a wholly-owned 
subsidiary of OPKO Health, Inc. The other authors have no conflict.