---
reference_id: "PMID:38172242"
title: Immune and inflammatory mechanisms in hypertension.
authors:
- Guzik TJ
- Nosalski R
- Maffia P
- Drummond GR
journal: Nat Rev Cardiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41569-023-00964-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immune and inflammatory mechanisms in hypertension.
**Authors:** Guzik TJ, Nosalski R, Maffia P, Drummond GR
**Journal:** Nat Rev Cardiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41569-023-00964-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41569-023-00964-1)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2024 Jun;21(6):396-416. doi: 10.1038/s41569-023-00964-1. Epub
 2024 Jan 3.

Immune and inflammatory mechanisms in hypertension.

Guzik TJ(1)(2)(3), Nosalski R(4), Maffia P(5)(6)(7), Drummond GR(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. 
tguzik@ed.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Medicine and Omicron Medical Genomics Laboratory, Jagiellonian 
University, Collegium Medicum, Kraków, Poland. tguzik@ed.ac.uk.
(3)Africa-Europe Cluster of Research Excellence (CoRE) in Non-Communicable 
Diseases & Multimorbidity, African Research Universities Alliance ARUA & The 
Guild, Glasgow, UK. tguzik@ed.ac.uk.
(4)Centre for Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(5)Africa-Europe Cluster of Research Excellence (CoRE) in Non-Communicable 
Diseases & Multimorbidity, African Research Universities Alliance ARUA & The 
Guild, Glasgow, UK.
(6)School of Infection & Immunity, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life 
Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(7)Department of Pharmacy, School of Medicine and Surgery, University of Naples 
Federico II, Naples, Italy.
(8)Department of Microbiology, Anatomy, Physiology and Pharmacology, La Trobe 
University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(9)Centre for Cardiovascular Biology and Disease Research, La Trobe University, 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

Hypertension is a global health problem, with >1.3 billion individuals with high 
blood pressure worldwide. In this Review, we present an inflammatory paradigm 
for hypertension, emphasizing the crucial roles of immune cells, cytokines and 
chemokines in disease initiation and progression. T cells, monocytes, 
macrophages, dendritic cells, B cells and natural killer cells are all 
implicated in hypertension. Neoantigens, the NLRP3 inflammasome and increased 
sympathetic outflow, as well as cytokines (including IL-6, IL-7, IL-15, IL-18 
and IL-21) and a high-salt environment, can contribute to immune activation in 
hypertension. The activated immune cells migrate to target organs such as 
arteries (especially the perivascular fat and adventitia), kidneys, the heart 
and the brain, where they release effector cytokines that elevate blood pressure 
and cause vascular remodelling, renal damage, cardiac hypertrophy, cognitive 
impairment and dementia. IL-17 secreted by CD4+ T helper 17 cells and γδ T 
cells, and interferon-γ and tumour necrosis factor secreted by immunosenescent 
CD8+ T cells, exert crucial effector roles in hypertension, whereas IL-10 and 
regulatory T cells are protective. Effector mediators impair nitric oxide 
bioavailability, leading to endothelial dysfunction and increased vascular 
contractility. Inflammatory effector mediators also alter renal sodium and water 
balance and promote renal fibrosis. These mechanisms link hypertension with 
obesity, autoimmunity, periodontitis and COVID-19. A comprehensive understanding 
of the immune and inflammatory mechanisms of hypertension is crucial for safely 
and effectively translating the findings to clinical practice.

© 2024. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41569-023-00964-1
PMID: 38172242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]