---
reference_id: "PMID:24792633"
title: "Giant cell hepatitis with autoimmune hemolytic anemia in children: proposal for therapeutic approach."
authors:
- Bakula A
- Socha P
- Klaudel-Dreszler M
- Karolczyk G
- Wozniak M
- Rutynowska-Pronicka O
- Matysiak M
journal: J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1097/MPG.0000000000000270
keywords:
- "Anemia, Hemolytic, Autoimmune/complications"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Murine-Derived/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Biopsy
- Coombs Test
- Female
- Giant Cells/pathology
- "Hepatitis/drug therapy, immunology, pathology"
- Hepatocytes/pathology
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Infant
- Male
- Prognosis
- Remission Induction
- Rituximab
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Giant cell hepatitis with autoimmune hemolytic anemia in children: proposal for therapeutic approach.
**Authors:** Bakula A, Socha P, Klaudel-Dreszler M, Karolczyk G, Wozniak M, Rutynowska-Pronicka O, Matysiak M
**Journal:** J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MPG.0000000000000270](https://doi.org/10.1097/MPG.0000000000000270)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2014 May;58(5):669-73. doi: 
10.1097/MPG.0000000000000270.

Giant cell hepatitis with autoimmune hemolytic anemia in children: proposal for 
therapeutic approach.

Bakula A(1), Socha P, Klaudel-Dreszler M, Karolczyk G, Wozniak M, 
Rutynowska-Pronicka O, Matysiak M.

Author information:
(1)*Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Eating Disorders, Children's 
Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw †Department of Hemato-Oncology, Children's 
Hospital, Kielce ‡Department of Oncology, Children's Memorial Health Institute 
§Department of Pediatrics, Hematology and Oncology, Medical University of 
Warsaw, Poland.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Giant cell hepatitis (GCH) with autoimmune hemolytic 
anemia (AIHA) is a rare, progressive disorder in infants and young children. The 
disease is aggressive and may lead to liver or multiorgan failure with fatal 
prognosis. Therapy with anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody, rituximab (Rtx), proved 
effective. The primary objective of the study was to evaluate therapy for severe 
GCH with AIHA.
METHODS: We report on 5 cases of severe GCH with AIHA treated in our department 
between 2006 and 2011.
RESULTS: The median age of the children was 7 months (2-12 months), follow-up 
lasted 44 months (12-78 months), median (min-max), and the main observed 
symptoms were jaundice and hepatosplenomegaly. All of the children had positive 
direct Coombs test and biopsy-proven giant cell transformation of hepatocytes. 
Liver failure was observed in 3 children. First-line therapy (prednisone, 
azathioprine) proved ineffective in all but 1 of the patients, who initially 
responded to the treatment but relapsed after 4 months. The child subsequently 
developed hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis and died 2 months after hemopoietic 
stem cell transplantation. Four remaining patients finally achieved complete 
remission after 4 to 6 doses of Rtx.
CONCLUSIONS: We propose Rtx as the treatment of choice for severe GCH with AIHA 
in the early stages of the disease, provided steroids and azathioprine are 
ineffective.

DOI: 10.1097/MPG.0000000000000270
PMID: 24792633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]