---
reference_id: "PMID:31257434"
title: A new in vitro model of polymyositis reveals CD8+ T cell invasion into muscle cells and its cytotoxic role.
authors:
- Kamiya M
- Mizoguchi F
- Takamura A
- Kimura N
- Kawahata K
- Kohsaka H
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/kez248
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A new in vitro model of polymyositis reveals CD8+ T cell invasion into muscle cells and its cytotoxic role.
**Authors:** Kamiya M, Mizoguchi F, Takamura A, Kimura N, Kawahata K, Kohsaka H
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/kez248](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/kez248)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2020 Jan 1;59(1):224-232. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/kez248.

A new in vitro model of polymyositis reveals CD8+ T cell invasion into muscle 
cells and its cytotoxic role.

Kamiya M(1), Mizoguchi F(1), Takamura A(1), Kimura N(1), Kawahata K(1), Kohsaka 
H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 
Tokyo Medical and Dental University (TMDU), Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: The hallmark histopathology of PM is the presence of CD8+ T cells in 
the non-necrotic muscle cells. The aim of this study was to clarify the 
pathological significance of CD8+ T cells in muscle cells.
METHODS: C2C12 cells were transduced retrovirally with the genes encoding MHC 
class I (H2Kb) and SIINFEKL peptide derived from ovalbumin (OVA), and then 
differentiated to myotubes (H2KbOVA-myotubes). H2KbOVA-myotubes were co-cultured 
with OT-I CD8+ T cells derived from OVA-specific class I restricted T cell 
receptor transgenic mice as an in vitro model of PM to examine whether the CD8+ 
T cells invade into the myotubes and if the myotubes with the invasion are more 
prone to die than those without. Muscle biopsy samples from patients with PM 
were examined for the presence of CD8+ T cells in muscle cells. The clinical 
profiles were compared between the patients with and without CD8+ T cells in 
muscle cells.
RESULTS: Analysis of the in vitro model of PM with confocal microscopy 
demonstrated the invasion of OT-I CD8+ T cells into H2KbOVA-myotubes. 
Transmission electron microscopic analysis revealed an electron-lucent area 
between the invaded CD8+ T cell and the cytoplasm of H2KbOVA-myotubes. The 
myotubes invaded with OT-I CD8+ T cells died earlier than the uninvaded 
myotubes. The level of serum creatinine kinase was higher in patients with CD8+ 
T cells in muscle cells than those without these cells.
CONCLUSION: CD8+ T cells invade into muscle cells and contribute to muscle 
injury in PM. Our in vitro model of PM is useful to examine the mechanisms 
underlying muscle injury induced by CD8+ T cells.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
British Society for Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/kez248
PMCID: PMC6927901
PMID: 31257434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]