---
reference_id: "PMID:41633558"
title: Two Cases of vNOTES Assisted Vaginal Adnexectomy in Management of Paraneoplastic Anti-N-Methyl-D-Aspartate Receptor Encephalitis Secondary to Ovarian Teratoma.
authors:
- Yoong W
- Samaee S
- Wylie S
- Mylona E
- Yoong J
journal: Asian J Endosc Surg
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1111/ases.70254
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Teratoma/complications, surgery, diagnosis"
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/complications, surgery, diagnosis"
- "Anti-N-Methyl-D-Aspartate Receptor Encephalitis/etiology, surgery"
- Adult
- Natural Orifice Endoscopic Surgery/methods
- Vagina/surgery
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two Cases of vNOTES Assisted Vaginal Adnexectomy in Management of Paraneoplastic Anti-N-Methyl-D-Aspartate Receptor Encephalitis Secondary to Ovarian Teratoma.
**Authors:** Yoong W, Samaee S, Wylie S, Mylona E, Yoong J
**Journal:** Asian J Endosc Surg (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ases.70254](https://doi.org/10.1111/ases.70254)

## Content

1. Asian J Endosc Surg. 2026 Jan-Dec;19(1):e70254. doi: 10.1111/ases.70254.

Two Cases of vNOTES Assisted Vaginal Adnexectomy in Management of Paraneoplastic 
Anti-N-Methyl-D-Aspartate Receptor Encephalitis Secondary to Ovarian Teratoma.

Yoong W(1), Samaee S(1), Wylie S(1), Mylona E(2), Yoong J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, North Middlesex University 
Hospital, London, UK.
(2)Department of Cellular Pathology, Royal Free London NHS Foundation Trust, 
London, UK.
(3)Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, UK.

Anti-N-Methyl-D-Aspartate receptor encephalitis typically presents with 
neuropsychiatric symptoms, followed by autonomic dysregulation sometimes 
necessitating Intensive Care admission. It has a 15% mortality rate and when 
associated with ovarian teratoma, early surgical excision improves recovery rate 
by 25%. We describe the first two cases of vaginal Natural Orifice Transluminal 
Endoscopic Surgery (vNOTES) assisted vaginal adnexectomy for surgical treatment 
of ovarian teratoma associated anti-NMDA encephalitis and highlight the 
advantages of this novel approach. These include low insufflation pressures, 
shorter duration of surgery, avoidance of abdominal scarring, lower pain scores 
and more rapid recovery. While the outcomes in these two cases suggest that 
ovarian teratoma associated anti-NMDA encephalitis could be surgically managed 
through the vNOTES route rather than conventional laparoscopy, more randomized 
data still need to be available before this becomes standard approach.

© 2026 Asia Endosurgery Task Force and Japan Society of Endoscopic Surgery and 
John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ases.70254
PMID: 41633558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]