---
reference_id: "PMID:35018160"
title: "Early diagnosis of focal congenital hyperinsulinism: A fluorine-18-labeled l-dihydroxyphenylalanine positron emission tomography/computed tomography study."
authors:
- Burroni L
- Palucci A
- Biscontini G
- Cherubini V
journal: World J Nucl Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.4103/wjnm.wjnm_159_20
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early diagnosis of focal congenital hyperinsulinism: A fluorine-18-labeled l-dihydroxyphenylalanine positron emission tomography/computed tomography study.
**Authors:** Burroni L, Palucci A, Biscontini G, Cherubini V
**Journal:** World J Nucl Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.4103/wjnm.wjnm_159_20](https://doi.org/10.4103/wjnm.wjnm_159_20)

## Content

1. World J Nucl Med. 2021 Nov 1;20(4):395-397. doi: 10.4103/wjnm.wjnm_159_20. 
eCollection 2021 Oct-Dec.

Early diagnosis of focal congenital hyperinsulinism: A fluorine-18-labeled 
l-dihydroxyphenylalanine positron emission tomography/computed tomography study.

Burroni L(1), Palucci A(1), Biscontini G(1), Cherubini V(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Ospedali Riuniti Hospital, Ancona, Italy.
(2)Department of Woman's and Children's Health, Pediatric Endocrinology and 
Diabetology Unit, Ospedali Riuniti Hospital, Ancona, Italy.

Congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) is responsible for hyperinsulinemic 
hypoglycemia which needs aggressive treatment in order to prevent neurological 
damages. Recent advances in genetics have linked CHI to mutations in many 
different genes that play a key role in regulating insulin secretion from 
pancreatic ß-cells. Furthermore, histopathological lesions, diffuse and focal, 
have been associated with these different genetic alterations. This short 
manuscript describes how the advent of fluorine-18-labeled 
L-dihydroxyphenylalanine-positron emission tomography/computed tomography 
(18F-DOPA-PET/CT) scanning has changed the management of patients with CHI. 
18F-DOPA PET/CT imaging differentiates focal from diffuse disease and is 100% 
accurate in localizing the focal lesion. In these patients, the lesion can be 
surgically removed allowing complete resolution of clinical alterations. We 
report a case in which clinical experience together with rapid genetic analysis 
and imaging with 18F-DOPA-PET/CT, were able to guide the correct clinical 
management of this condition. We confirm that advances in molecular genetics, 
imaging methods (18F-DOPA PET-CT), medical therapy, and surgical approach have 
completely changed the management and improved the outcome of these children.

Copyright: © 2021 World Journal of Nuclear Medicine.

DOI: 10.4103/wjnm.wjnm_159_20
PMCID: PMC8686735
PMID: 35018160

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.