---
reference_id: "PMID:30672094"
title: "Growth hormone deficiency, aortic dilation, and neurocognitive issues in Feingold syndrome 2."
authors:
- Muriello M
- Kim AY
- Sondergaard Schatz K
- Beck N
- Gunay-Aygun M
- Hoover-Fong JE
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61037
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- Adult
- Aged
- Aorta/abnormalities
- Cognition
- Eyelids/abnormalities
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies/methods
- Growth Charts
- Human Growth Hormone/deficiency
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/diagnosis, genetics"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Microcephaly/diagnosis, genetics"
- Phenotype
- Radiography
- "Tracheoesophageal Fistula/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Growth hormone deficiency, aortic dilation, and neurocognitive issues in Feingold syndrome 2.
**Authors:** Muriello M, Kim AY, Sondergaard Schatz K, Beck N, Gunay-Aygun M, Hoover-Fong JE
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.61037](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.61037)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2019 Mar;179(3):410-416. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61037. Epub
2019  Jan 23.

Growth hormone deficiency, aortic dilation, and neurocognitive issues in 
Feingold syndrome 2.

Muriello M(1)(2), Kim AY(1), Sondergaard Schatz K(1), Beck N(1)(3), Gunay-Aygun 
M(1), Hoover-Fong JE(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, Maryland.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
(3)Greenberg Center for Skeletal Dysplasia, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
Maryland.

We report three patients with Feingold 2 syndrome with the novel features of 
growth hormone deficiency associated with adenohypophyseal compression, aortic 
dilation, phalangeal joint contractures, memory, and sleep problems in addition 
to the typical features of microcephaly, brachymesophalangy, toe syndactyly, 
short stature, and cardiac anomalies. Microdeletions of chromosome 13q that 
include the MIR17HG gene were found in all three. One of the patients was 
treated successfully with growth hormone. In addition to expanding the phenotype 
of Feingold 2 syndrome, we suggest management of patients with Feingold 2 
syndrome include echocardiography at the time of diagnosis in all patients and 
consideration of evaluation for growth hormone deficiency in patients with short 
stature.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61037
PMCID: PMC7038632
PMID: 30672094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest related to the publication of this article.