---
reference_id: "PMID:37189438"
title: Nuclear Receptor Gene Variants Underlying Disorders/Differences of Sex Development through Abnormal Testicular Development.
authors:
- Hattori A
- Fukami M
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/biom13040691
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- "Disorder of Sex Development, 46,XY/genetics"
- Mutation
- Ovotesticular Disorders of Sex Development/genetics
- Phenotype
- Sexual Development
- Testis
- "Receptors, Cytoplasmic and Nuclear/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nuclear Receptor Gene Variants Underlying Disorders/Differences of Sex Development through Abnormal Testicular Development.
**Authors:** Hattori A, Fukami M
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom13040691](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom13040691)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2023 Apr 19;13(4):691. doi: 10.3390/biom13040691.

Nuclear Receptor Gene Variants Underlying Disorders/Differences of Sex 
Development through Abnormal Testicular Development.

Hattori A(1)(2), Fukami M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, National Research Institute for Child 
Health and Development, 2-10-1 Okura, Setagaya, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan.
(2)Division of Diversity Research, National Research Institute for Child Health 
and Development, 2-10-1 Okura, Setagaya, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan.

Gonadal development is the first step in human reproduction. Aberrant gonadal 
development during the fetal period is a major cause of disorders/differences of 
sex development (DSD). To date, pathogenic variants of three nuclear receptor 
genes (NR5A1, NR0B1, and NR2F2) have been reported to cause DSD via atypical 
testicular development. In this review article, we describe the clinical 
significance of the NR5A1 variants as the cause of DSD and introduce novel 
findings from recent studies. NR5A1 variants are associated with 46,XY DSD and 
46,XX testicular/ovotesticular DSD. Notably, both 46,XX DSD and 46,XY DSD caused 
by the NR5A1 variants show remarkable phenotypic variability, to which 
digenic/oligogenic inheritances potentially contribute. Additionally, we discuss 
the roles of NR0B1 and NR2F2 in the etiology of DSD. NR0B1 acts as an 
anti-testicular gene. Duplications containing NR0B1 result in 46,XY DSD, whereas 
deletions encompassing NR0B1 can underlie 46,XX testicular/ovotesticular DSD. 
NR2F2 has recently been reported as a causative gene for 46,XX 
testicular/ovotesticular DSD and possibly for 46,XY DSD, although the role of 
NR2F2 in gonadal development is unclear. The knowledge about these three nuclear 
receptors provides novel insights into the molecular networks involved in the 
gonadal development in human fetuses.

DOI: 10.3390/biom13040691
PMCID: PMC10135730
PMID: 37189438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.