---
reference_id: "PMID:35896399"
title: Systemic lupus erythematosus and secondary antiphospholipid syndrome in native sisters with reduced fertility.
authors:
- Ulčová-Gallová Zdenka
- Mukenšnabl Petr
- Dzurillová Žaneta
- Lošan Petr
journal: Ceska Gynekol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.48095/cccg2022198
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systemic lupus erythematosus and secondary antiphospholipid syndrome in native sisters with reduced fertility.
**Authors:** Ulčová-Gallová Zdenka, Mukenšnabl Petr, Dzurillová Žaneta, Lošan Petr
**Journal:** Ceska Gynekol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.48095/cccg2022198](https://doi.org/10.48095/cccg2022198)

## Content

1. Ceska Gynekol. 2022;87(3):198-201. doi: 10.48095/cccg2022198.

Systemic lupus erythematosus and secondary antiphospholipid syndrome in native 
sisters with reduced fertility.

[Article in English]

Ulčová-Gallová Zdenka, Mukenšnabl Petr, Dzurillová Žaneta, Lošan Petr.

OBJECTIVE: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and secondary anti-phospholipid 
syndrome (APS II) can cause increased morbidity and mortality of the fetus. We 
followed the course of fertility of two sisters with these two basic diseases.
METHODS: In the Center for Immunology of Reproduction, we confi rmed both 
sisters had increased levels of some selected anti-phospholipid antibodies 
(against phosphatidylserine, phosphatidylethanolamine, phosphatidylinositol, 
DL-glycerole, anexin V, phoshatidic acid, cardiolipin, beta2-glycoprotein I), 
anti-nuclear, and anti-DNA antibodies. During the established immunosuppressive 
and hormonal therapy at the time of SLE remission, both sisters became pregnant. 
There was a physiological progression of pregnancy until the 19th week.
RESULTS: At the 20th week of pregnancy, the older sister miscarried again, and 
the younger sister developed hypertension in the 31st week of pregnancy which 
was terminated by caesarean section.
CONCLUSION: In our causal evaluation, we addressed two serious autoimmune 
diseases (SLE, APS II) in two sisters and described their course of pregnancy. 
However, only one of them became a happy mother.

DOI: 10.48095/cccg2022198
PMID: 35896399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]