---
reference_id: "PMID:37573005"
title: TCF4 Mutations Disrupt Synaptic Function Through Dysregulation of RIMBP2 in Patient-Derived Cortical Neurons.
authors:
- Davis BA
- Chen HY
- Ye Z
- Ostlund I
- Tippani M
- Das D
- Sripathy SR
- Wang Y
- Martin JM
- Shim G
- Panchwagh NM
- Moses RL
- Farinelli F
- Bohlen JF
- Li M
- Luikart BW
- Jaffe AE
- Maher BJ
journal: Biol Psychiatry
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2023.07.021
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- "Autism Spectrum Disorder/genetics, metabolism"
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Neurons/metabolism
- "Transcription Factor 4/genetics, metabolism"
- "Retinol-Binding Proteins, Cellular"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TCF4 Mutations Disrupt Synaptic Function Through Dysregulation of RIMBP2 in Patient-Derived Cortical Neurons.
**Authors:** Davis BA, Chen HY, Ye Z, Ostlund I, Tippani M, Das D, Sripathy SR, Wang Y, Martin JM, Shim G, Panchwagh NM, Moses RL, Farinelli F, Bohlen JF, Li M, Luikart BW, Jaffe AE, Maher BJ
**Journal:** Biol Psychiatry (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biopsych.2023.07.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2023.07.021)

## Content

1. Biol Psychiatry. 2024 Apr 1;95(7):662-675. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsych.2023.07.021.  Epub 2023 Aug 10.

TCF4 Mutations Disrupt Synaptic Function Through Dysregulation of RIMBP2 in 
Patient-Derived Cortical Neurons.

Davis BA(1), Chen HY(2), Ye Z(2), Ostlund I(2), Tippani M(2), Das D(2), Sripathy 
SR(2), Wang Y(2), Martin JM(2), Shim G(2), Panchwagh NM(2), Moses RL(2), 
Farinelli F(2), Bohlen JF(2), Li M(3), Luikart BW(3), Jaffe AE(4), Maher BJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Lieber Institute for Brain Development, Johns Hopkins Medical Campus, 
Baltimore, Maryland; Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(2)Lieber Institute for Brain Development, Johns Hopkins Medical Campus, 
Baltimore, Maryland.
(3)Department of Molecular and Systems Biology, Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth, Hanover, New Hampshire.
(4)Lieber Institute for Brain Development, Johns Hopkins Medical Campus, 
Baltimore, Maryland; Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland; McKusick-Nathans Institute, 
Department of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland; Department of Biostatistics, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School 
of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland; Department of Mental Health, Johns 
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland.
(5)Lieber Institute for Brain Development, Johns Hopkins Medical Campus, 
Baltimore, Maryland; Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland; Solomon H. Snyder 
Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland. Electronic address: brady.maher@libd.org.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Jan 20:2023.01.19.524788. doi: 10.1101/2023.01.19.524788.

BACKGROUND: Genetic variation in the TCF4 (transcription factor 4) gene is 
associated with risk for a variety of developmental and psychiatric conditions, 
which includes a syndromic form of autism spectrum disorder called Pitt-Hopkins 
syndrome (PTHS). TCF4 encodes an activity-dependent transcription factor that is 
highly expressed during cortical development and in animal models has been shown 
to regulate various aspects of neuronal development and function. However, our 
understanding of how disease-causing mutations in TCF4 confer pathophysiology in 
a human context is lacking.
METHODS: To model PTHS, we differentiated human cortical neurons from human 
induced pluripotent stem cells that were derived from patients with PTHS and 
neurotypical individuals. To identify pathophysiology and disease mechanisms, we 
assayed cortical neurons with whole-cell electrophysiology, Ca2+ imaging, 
multielectrode arrays, immunocytochemistry, and RNA sequencing.
RESULTS: Cortical neurons derived from patients with TCF4 mutations showed 
deficits in spontaneous synaptic transmission, network excitability, and 
homeostatic plasticity. Transcriptomic analysis indicated that these phenotypes 
resulted in part from altered expression of genes involved in presynaptic 
neurotransmission and identified the presynaptic binding protein RIMBP2 as the 
most differentially expressed gene in PTHS neurons. Remarkably, TCF4-dependent 
deficits in spontaneous synaptic transmission and network excitability were 
rescued by increasing RIMBP2 expression in presynaptic neurons.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these results identify TCF4 as a critical 
transcriptional regulator of human synaptic development and plasticity and 
specifically identifies dysregulation of presynaptic function as an early 
pathophysiology in PTHS.

Copyright © 2023 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2023.07.021
PMCID: PMC10858293
PMID: 37573005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors report no 
biomedical financial interests or potential conflicts of interest.