---
reference_id: "PMID:33239231"
title: "Hypothesis: Alpha-1-antitrypsin is a promising treatment option for COVID-19."
authors:
- Bai X
- Hippensteel J
- Leavitt A
- Maloney JP
- Beckham D
- Garcia C
- Li Q
- Freed BM
- Ordway D
- Sandhaus RA
- Chan ED
journal: Med Hypotheses
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2020.110394
keywords:
- Acute Lung Injury/drug therapy
- Anti-Inflammatory Agents/therapeutic use
- Antithrombins/therapeutic use
- Antiviral Agents/therapeutic use
- Apoptosis/drug effects
- COVID-19/physiopathology
- Extracellular Traps/drug effects
- "Host Microbial Interactions/drug effects, physiology"
- Humans
- "Leukocyte Elastase/antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Models, Biological"
- Pandemics
- "SARS-CoV-2/drug effects, pathogenicity, physiology"
- "Serine Endopeptidases/drug effects, physiology"
- Virus Internalization/drug effects
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- COVID-19 Drug Treatment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypothesis: Alpha-1-antitrypsin is a promising treatment option for COVID-19.
**Authors:** Bai X, Hippensteel J, Leavitt A, Maloney JP, Beckham D, Garcia C, Li Q, Freed BM, Ordway D, Sandhaus RA, Chan ED
**Journal:** Med Hypotheses (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mehy.2020.110394](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mehy.2020.110394)

## Content

1. Med Hypotheses. 2021 Jan;146:110394. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2020.110394. Epub
2020  Nov 12.

Hypothesis: Alpha-1-antitrypsin is a promising treatment option for COVID-19.

Bai X(1), Hippensteel J(2), Leavitt A(3), Maloney JP(4), Beckham D(5), Garcia
C(6), Li Q(7), Freed BM(8), Ordway D(9), Sandhaus RA(10), Chan ED(11).

Author information:
(1)Rocky Mountain Regional Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Aurora, CO, USA;
Departments of Academic Affairs and Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver,
CO, USA; Division of Pulmonary Sciences and Critical Care Medicine, USA.
(2)Division of Pulmonary Sciences and Critical Care Medicine, USA; Denver
Health, Denver, CO, USA.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, USA.
(4)Rocky Mountain Regional Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Aurora, CO, USA;
Division of Pulmonary Sciences and Critical Care Medicine, USA.
(5)Rocky Mountain Regional Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Aurora, CO, USA;
Department of Immunology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus,
Aurora, CO, USA.
(6)Rocky Mountain Regional Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Aurora, CO, USA.
(7)Departments of Academic Affairs and Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver,
CO, USA; School of Public Health, San Diego State University, San Diego, CA,
USA.
(8)Department of Immunology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus,
Aurora, CO, USA.
(9)Department of Microbiology, Immunlogy, and Pathology, Colorado State
University, Fort Collins, CO, USA.
(10)Departments of Academic Affairs and Medicine, National Jewish Health,
Denver, CO, USA.
(11)Rocky Mountain Regional Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Aurora, CO, USA;
Departments of Academic Affairs and Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver,
CO, USA; Division of Pulmonary Sciences and Critical Care Medicine, USA.
Electronic address: ChanE@NJHealth.org.

No definitive treatment for COVID-19 exists although promising results have been
reported with remdesivir and glucocorticoids. Short of a truly effective
preventive or curative vaccine against SARS-CoV-2, it is becoming increasingly
clear that multiple pathophysiologic processes seen with COVID-19 as well as
SARS-CoV-2 itself should be targeted. Because alpha-1-antitrypsin (AAT) embraces
a panoply of biologic activities that may antagonize several pathophysiologic
mechanisms induced by SARS-CoV-2, we hypothesize that this naturally occurring
molecule is a promising agent to ameliorate COVID-19. We posit at least seven
different mechanisms by which AAT may alleviate COVID-19. First, AAT is a serine
protease inhibitor (SERPIN) shown to inhibit TMPRSS-2, the host serine protease
that cleaves the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2, a necessary preparatory step for
the virus to bind its cell surface receptor ACE2 to gain intracellular entry.
Second, AAT has anti-viral activity against other RNA viruses HIV and influenza
as well as induces autophagy, a known host effector mechanism against MERS-CoV,
a related coronavirus that causes the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome. Third,
AAT has potent anti-inflammatory properties, in part through inhibiting both
nuclear factor-kappa B (NFκB) activation and ADAM17 (also known as tumor
necrosis factor-alpha converting enzyme), and thus may dampen the
hyper-inflammatory response of COVID-19. Fourth, AAT inhibits neutrophil
elastase, a serine protease that helps recruit potentially injurious neutrophils
and implicated in acute lung injury. AAT inhibition of ADAM17 also prevents
shedding of ACE2 and hence may preserve ACE2 inhibition of bradykinin, reducing
the ability of bradykinin to cause a capillary leak in COVID-19. Fifth, AAT
inhibits thrombin, and venous thromboembolism and in situ microthrombi and
macrothrombi are increasingly implicated in COVID-19. Sixth, AAT inhibition of
elastase can antagonize the formation of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs),
a complex extracellular structure comprised of neutrophil-derived DNA, histones,
and proteases, and implicated in the immunothrombosis of COVID-19; indeed, AAT
has been shown to change the shape and adherence of non-COVID-19-related NETs.
Seventh, AAT inhibition of endothelial cell apoptosis may limit the endothelial
injury linked to severe COVID-19-associated acute lung injury, multi-organ
dysfunction, and pre-eclampsia-like syndrome seen in gravid women. Furthermore,
because both NETs formation and the presence of anti-phospholipid antibodies are
increased in both COVID-19 and non-COVID pre-eclampsia, it suggests a similar
vascular pathogenesis in both disorders. As a final point, AAT has an excellent
safety profile when administered to patients with AAT deficiency and is dosed
intravenously once weekly but also comes in an inhaled preparation. Thus, AAT is
an appealing drug candidate to treat COVID-19 and should be studied.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2020.110394
PMCID: PMC7659642
PMID: 33239231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Robert A. Sandhaus is the Medical Director
of AlphaNet.
