---
reference_id: "PMID:36803942"
title: "Joubert syndrome: Molecular basis and treatment."
authors:
- Spahiu L
- Behluli E
- Grajçevci-Uka V
- Liehr T
- Temaj G
journal: J Mother Child
year: '2022'
doi: 10.34763/jmotherandchild.20222601.d-22-00034
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Joubert syndrome: Molecular basis and treatment.
**Authors:** Spahiu L, Behluli E, Grajçevci-Uka V, Liehr T, Temaj G
**Journal:** J Mother Child (2022)
**DOI:** [10.34763/jmotherandchild.20222601.d-22-00034](https://doi.org/10.34763/jmotherandchild.20222601.d-22-00034)

## Content

1. J Mother Child. 2023 Feb 22;26(1):118-123. doi: 
10.34763/jmotherandchild.20222601.d-22-00034. eCollection 2022 Mar 1.

Joubert syndrome: Molecular basis and treatment.

Spahiu L(1), Behluli E(1), Grajçevci-Uka V(1), Liehr T(2), Temaj G(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Prishtina, Prishtina, Kosovo.
(2)Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Jena, Friedrich Schiller 
Universität, Jena, Germany.
(3)Human Genetics, College UBT, Faculty of Pharmacy Prishtina, Prishtina Kosovo.

Joubert syndrome (JS; MIM PS213300) is a rare genetic autosomal recessive 
disease characterized by cerebellar vermis hypoplasia, a distinctive 
malformation of the cerebellum and the so-called "molar tooth sign." Other 
characteristic features are hypotonia with lateral ataxia, intellectual 
disability/mental retardation, oculomotor apraxia, retinal dystrophy, 
abnormalities in the respiratory system, renal cysts, hepatic fibrosis, and 
skeletal changes. Such pleiotropic characteristics are typical of many disorders 
involving primary cilium aberrations, providing a significant overlap between JS 
and other ciliopathies such as nephronophthisis, Meckel syndrome, and 
Bardet-Biedl syndrome. This review will describe some characteristics of JS 
associated with changes in 35 genes, and will also address subtypes of JS, 
clinical diagnosis, and the future of therapeutic developments.

© 2022 Lidvana Spahiu et al., published by Sciendo.

DOI: 10.34763/jmotherandchild.20222601.d-22-00034
PMCID: PMC10032320
PMID: 36803942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors report no 
conflict of interest.