---
reference_id: "PMID:20301704"
title: Treacher Collins Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Barbosa M
- Jabs EW
- Huston S
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treacher Collins Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Barbosa M, Jabs EW, Huston S

## Content

1. Treacher Collins Syndrome.

Barbosa M(1), Jabs EW(2), Huston S(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2004 Jul 20 [updated 2024 Jun 20].

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, New York
(2)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern 
University;, Lurie Children’s Hospital, Chicago, Illinois

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Treacher Collins syndrome (TCS) is characterized by 
lower eyelid abnormalities, malar hypoplasia, downslanted palpebral fissures, 
and micro- or retrognathia due to symmetric hypoplasia of the zygomatic bones, 
maxilla, and mandible. External ear anomalies include absent, small, malformed, 
and/or posteriorly rotated ears and atresia or stenosis of the external auditory 
canals. About 40%-50% of individuals have conductive hearing loss attributed 
most commonly to malformation of the ossicles and hypoplasia of the middle ear 
cavities. Inner ear structures tend to be normal. Significant respiratory and 
feeding difficulties can be present in infancy. Other, less common abnormalities 
include cleft palate and unilateral or bilateral choanal stenosis or atresia. 
Typically, intellect is normal.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of TCS is established in a proband with 
characteristic clinical features and/or a heterozygous pathogenic variant in 
TCOF1, POLR1D, or POLR1B, biallelic pathogenic variants in POLR1C, or, rarely, 
biallelic pathogenic variants in POLR1D identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment should be tailored to the 
specific needs of each individual, preferably by a multidisciplinary 
craniofacial management team. Neonates with airway issues may require airway 
management at delivery, special positioning, or tracheostomy to facilitate 
ventilation. Tube feeding may be needed for adequate caloric intake. Cleft 
palate repair (if needed) occurs at about age one year. Hearing loss is treated 
with bone conduction amplification, speech therapy, and educational 
intervention. Management of ocular issues is per ophthalmologist. Standard 
management for cardiac, gastrointestinal, renal, and limb anomalies. 
Craniofacial reconstruction is often necessary: zygomatic and orbital 
reconstruction at about age five to seven years, and bilateral microtia and/or 
narrow ear canal reconstruction after age six years. Botulinum toxin and 
subsequent surgery for coloboma of the lower eyelid. Eyelid reconstruction as 
needed for downslanted palpebral fissures. Orthodonture for misaligned teeth. 
The age of maxillomandibular reconstruction varies by severity; orthognathic 
therapies are typically before age 16 years. Surveillance: Annual ophthalmology 
and audiology evaluations; assess for manifestations of obstructive sleep apnea, 
growth, and caloric intake at each visit; dental exams every six months with 
orthodontia exams as needed; assess speech development and educational progress 
annually or as needed.
GENETIC COUNSELING: TCS can be inherited in an autosomal dominant or autosomal 
recessive manner. Autosomal dominant inheritance accounts for most of TCS, most 
commonly heterozygous pathogenic variants in TCOF1 and less commonly 
heterozygous pathogenic variants in POLR1B or POLR1D. Autosomal recessive 
inheritance (biallelic pathogenic variants in POLR1C or POLR1D) accounts for a 
minority of TCS. Significant intrafamilial clinical variability is common. 
Autosomal dominant TCS: About 55%-61% of individuals with autosomal dominant TCS 
have the disorder as the result of a de novo pathogenic variant. Each child of 
an individual with autosomal dominant TCS has a 50% chance of inheriting the 
pathogenic variant. Autosomal recessive TCS: The parents of a child with 
autosomal recessive TCS are presumed to be heterozygous for a POLR1C or POLR1D 
pathogenic variant. If both parents are known to be heterozygous for a 
TCS-causing pathogenic variant, each sib of an individual with autosomal 
recessive TCS has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance of 
being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a 
carrier. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives requires prior identification of 
the TCS-related pathogenic variants in the family. Once the TCS-related 
pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in an affected family member, 
prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301704