---
reference_id: "PMID:15131399"
title: Cancer variation associated with the position of the mutation in the BRCA2 gene.
authors:
- Lubinski J
- Phelan CM
- Ghadirian P
- Lynch HT
- Garber J
- Weber B
- Tung N
- Horsman D
- Isaacs C
- Monteiro AN
- Sun P
- Narod SA
journal: Fam Cancer
year: '2004'
doi: "10.1023/B:FAME.0000026816.32400.45"
keywords:
- BRCA2 Protein/genetics
- "Breast Neoplasms, Male/genetics"
- Cluster Analysis
- Cohort Studies
- Colonic Neoplasms/genetics
- Female
- "Genes, BRCA2"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genetic Variation
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Melanoma/genetics
- Mutation
- "Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Odds Ratio
- Ovarian Neoplasms/genetics
- Pancreatic Neoplasms/genetics
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Prostatic Neoplasms/genetics
- Stomach Neoplasms/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cancer variation associated with the position of the mutation in the BRCA2 gene.
**Authors:** Lubinski J, Phelan CM, Ghadirian P, Lynch HT, Garber J, Weber B, Tung N, Horsman D, Isaacs C, Monteiro AN, Sun P, Narod SA
**Journal:** Fam Cancer (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1023/B:FAME.0000026816.32400.45](https://doi.org/10.1023/B:FAME.0000026816.32400.45)

## Content

1. Fam Cancer. 2004;3(1):1-10. doi: 10.1023/B:FAME.0000026816.32400.45.

Cancer variation associated with the position of the mutation in the BRCA2 gene.

Lubinski J(1), Phelan CM, Ghadirian P, Lynch HT, Garber J, Weber B, Tung N,
Horsman D, Isaacs C, Monteiro AN, Sun P, Narod SA.

Author information:
(1)Hereditary Cancer Center-Department of Genetics and Pathology, Pomeranian
Academy of Medicine, Szczecin, Poland.

Inherited mutations of the BRCA2 gene give rise to a multi-site cancer phenotype
which includes breast cancer (in female and males), ovarian, pancreatic and
prostate cancer, ocular and other melanomas, laryngeal, colon and stomach
cancers. Interpretation of test results and risk assessment is therefore
complex. It has been proposed that families with mutations in the ovarian cancer
cluster region (OCCR) of exon 11 (nucleotides 3035-6629) express a higher ratio
of ovarian to breast cancer, than families with mutations elsewhere in the BRCA2
gene. In this study we have investigated the presence of 7 types of cancer
(ovary, male breast, pancreas, prostate, colon, stomach and melanoma) in first-
and second-degree relatives of mutation-positive individuals in 440 families
with a BRCA2 mutation. We reviewed histories of cancer in relatives among
families with mutations distributed throughout the gene. Families with ovarian
cancer were more likely to harbour mutations in the OCCR (nucleotides 3035-6629)
than elsewhere in the gene (OR = 2.21; P = 0.0002). We also compared cancer
risks according to ethnic group. Ashkenazi Jewish families with the 6174delT
founder mutation were more likely to have a family member with ovarian cancer
(OR = 1.58; P = 0.002) and less likely to have a family member with prostate
cancer (OR = 0.62; P = 0.04) than were non-Jewish families. In contrast, a
reduced presence of ovarian cancer was found in families of French-Canadian
ancestry, compared to other ancestries (OR = 0.37; P = 0.0026). A high risk of
male breast cancer was observed with the 6503delTT mutation (OR = 15.7; P =
0.023). Families of Polish ancestry had a reduced frequency of pancreatic cancer
(OR = 0.0; P = 0.03) compared to families of other ethnic origins. In
conclusion, both the position of mutation and the ethnic background of the
family appear to contribute to the phenotypic variation observed in families
with BRCA2 mutations.

DOI: 10.1023/B:FAME.0000026816.32400.45
PMID: 15131399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
