---
reference_id: "PMID:39229055"
title: Discovery of potent SARS-CoV-2 nsp3 macrodomain inhibitors uncovers lack of translation to cellular antiviral response.
authors:
- Lee AA
- Amick I
- Aschenbrenner JC
- Barr HM
- Benjamin J
- Brandis A
- Cohen G
- Diaz-Tapia R
- Duberstein S
- Dixon J
- Cousins D
- Fairhead M
- Fearon D
- Frick J
- Gayvert J
- Godoy AS
- Griffin EJ
- Huber K
- Koekemoer L
- Lahav N
- Marples PG
- McGovern BL
- Mehlman T
- Robinson MC
- Singh U
- Szommer T
- Tomlinson CWE
- Vargo T
- von Delft F
- Wang S
- White K
- Williams E
- Winokan M
journal: bioRxiv
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1101/2024.08.19.608619
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Discovery of potent SARS-CoV-2 nsp3 macrodomain inhibitors uncovers lack of translation to cellular antiviral response.
**Authors:** Lee AA, Amick I, Aschenbrenner JC, Barr HM, Benjamin J, Brandis A, Cohen G, Diaz-Tapia R, Duberstein S, Dixon J, Cousins D, Fairhead M, Fearon D, Frick J, Gayvert J, Godoy AS, Griffin EJ, Huber K, Koekemoer L, Lahav N, Marples PG, McGovern BL, Mehlman T, Robinson MC, Singh U, Szommer T, Tomlinson CWE, Vargo T, von Delft F, Wang S, White K, Williams E, Winokan M
**Journal:** bioRxiv (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1101/2024.08.19.608619](https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.08.19.608619)

## Content

1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Aug 21:2024.08.19.608619. doi:
10.1101/2024.08.19.608619.

Discovery of potent SARS-CoV-2 nsp3 macrodomain inhibitors uncovers lack of
translation to cellular antiviral response.

Lee AA(1)(2), Amick I(1)(2), Aschenbrenner JC(1)(3)(4), Barr HM(1)(5), Benjamin
J(1)(6), Brandis A(1)(7), Cohen G(5), Diaz-Tapia R(1)(6), Duberstein S(1)(5),
Dixon J(1)(8), Cousins D(1)(9), Fairhead M(1)(8), Fearon D(1)(3)(4), Frick
J(1)(2), Gayvert J(1)(2), Godoy AS(1)(10), Griffin EJ(1)(9), Huber K(1)(8),
Koekemoer L(1)(8), Lahav N(1)(5), Marples PG(1)(3)(4), McGovern BL(1)(6),
Mehlman T(1)(7), Robinson MC(1)(2), Singh U(1)(8), Szommer T(1)(8), Tomlinson
CWE(1)(3)(4), Vargo T(1)(2), von Delft F(1)(3)(8)(4), Wang S(1)(8), White
K(1)(6), Williams E(1)(8), Winokan M(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)ASAP Discovery Consortium.
(2)PostEra Inc, 1 Broadway, Cambridge MA 02142.
(3)Diamond Light Source Ltd, Harwell Science and Innovation Campus, Didcot OX11
0QX, UK.
(4)Research Centre at Harwell, Harwell Science and Innovation Campus, Didcot
OX11 0QX, UK.
(5)The Wohl Drug Discovery Institute of the Nancy and Stephen Grand Israel
National Center for Personalized Medicine, Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot 7610001, Israel.
(6)Icahn School of Medicine, Mount Sinai, New York, New York, United States of
America.
(7)Life Sciences Core Facilities, The Weizmann Institute of Science Rehovot
7610001, Israel.
(8)Centre for Medicines Discovery, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7FZ, UK.
(9)MedChemica Consultancy Ltd, Macclesfield, Cheshire, SK11 6DU, UK.
(10)São Carlos Institute of Physics, University of São Paulo, Av. Joao Dagnone,
1100 - Jardim Santa Angelina, Sao Carlos, 13563-120, Brazil.

A strategy for pandemic preparedness is the development of antivirals against a
wide set of viral targets with complementary mechanisms of action. SARS-CoV-2
nsp3-mac1 is a viral macrodomain with ADP-ribosylhydrolase activity, which
counteracts host immune response. Targeting the virus' immunomodulatory
functionality offers a differentiated strategy to inhibit SARS-CoV-2 compared to
approved therapeutics, which target viral replication directly. Here we report a
fragment-based lead generation campaign guided by computational approaches. We
discover tool compounds which inhibit nsp3-mac1 activity at low nanomolar
concentrations, and with responsive structure-activity relationships, high
selectivity, and drug-like properties. Using our inhibitors, we show that
inhibition of nsp3-mac1 increases ADP-ribosylation, but surprisingly does not
translate to demonstrable antiviral activity in cell culture and iPSC-derived
pneumocyte models. Further, no synergistic activity is observed in combination
with interferon gamma, a main protease inhibitor, nor a papain-like protease
inhibitor. Our results question the extent to which targeting modulation of
innate immunity-driven ADP-ribosylation can influence SARS-CoV-2 replication.
Moreover, these findings suggest that nsp3-mac1 might not be a suitable target
for antiviral therapeutics development.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.08.19.608619
PMCID: PMC11370477
PMID: 39229055
