---
reference_id: "PMID:38174379"
title: "Comparison of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors (PARPis) as maintenance therapy for newly-diagnosed and platinum-sensitive recurrent ovarian cancer with BRCA mutational status: a systematic review and network meta-analysis."
authors:
- Zhou S
- Jiang Y
- Luo C
- Yuan L
journal: Expert Rev Anticancer Ther
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/14737140.2023.2298832
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Adenosine Diphosphate/therapeutic use
- "Carcinoma, Ovarian Epithelial/drug therapy"
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/drug therapy"
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitors/adverse effects
- Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerases
- Ribose/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparison of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors (PARPis) as maintenance therapy for newly-diagnosed and platinum-sensitive recurrent ovarian cancer with BRCA mutational status: a systematic review and network meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Zhou S, Jiang Y, Luo C, Yuan L
**Journal:** Expert Rev Anticancer Ther (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14737140.2023.2298832](https://doi.org/10.1080/14737140.2023.2298832)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2024 Jan-Feb;24(1-2):59-69. doi: 
10.1080/14737140.2023.2298832. Epub 2024 Feb 12.

Comparison of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors (PARPis) as maintenance 
therapy for newly-diagnosed and platinum-sensitive recurrent ovarian cancer with 
BRCA mutational status: a systematic review and network meta-analysis.

Zhou S(1), Jiang Y(1), Luo C(1), Yuan L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynaecology, The First Affiliated Hospital with Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.

BACKGROUND: Poly(adenosine diphosphate [ADP]-ribose) polymerase inhibitors 
(PARPi) treatment for ovarian cancer (OC) are ever-changing. This study aimed to 
compare the efficacy and overall safety of available PARPi as maintenance 
therapy for BRCA mutation status in patients with newly diagnosed and 
platinum-sensitive recurrent (PSR) OC patients.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Relevant RCTs were systematically retrieved from 
PubMed and Embase until 31 May 2022. Progression-free survival (PFS) and overall 
survival (OS) based on BRCA mutation status and adverse events (AEs) regardless 
of mutation were efficacy and safety endpoints.
RESULTS: In newly diagnosed BRCAm-OC patients, olaparib (HR: 0.33; 95% 
confidence interval [CI]: 0.25, 0.43) and other PARPis [niraparib (HR: 0.40; 95% 
CI: 0.29, 0.55), rucaparib (HR: 0.40; 95% CI: 0.21, 0.76) and veliparib (HR: 
0.44; 95% CI: 0.28, 0.69)] had a statistically significant effect on PFS versus 
placebo. In BRCAm-PSROC patients, Olaparib exhibited significant benefit (HR: 
0.69; 95% CI: 0.54, 0.88) for OS compared to other PARPis. In BRCAwt-PSR OC 
patients, Olaparib showed a favorable OS benefit than other PARPis (HR: 0.84; 
95% CI: 0.57,1.22). Overall, safety profile of all PARPis was acceptable.
CONCLUSION: All PARPis showed significant benefit, with olaparib showing greater 
benefit in newly diagnosed and PSR OC women.
REGISTRATION: CRD42021288932.

DOI: 10.1080/14737140.2023.2298832
PMID: 38174379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]