---
reference_id: "PMID:38677323"
title: "Pityriasis lichenoides: assessment of 41 pediatric patients."
authors:
- Fatturi AL
- Morgan MAP
- Markus JR
- Noguera-Morel L
- Carvalho VO
journal: J Pediatr (Rio J)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jped.2024.03.011
keywords:
- Humans
- "Pityriasis Lichenoides/therapy, drug therapy, pathology"
- Child
- Male
- Female
- Adolescent
- Retrospective Studies
- "Child, Preschool"
- Longitudinal Studies
- Treatment Outcome
- Infant
- Phototherapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pityriasis lichenoides: assessment of 41 pediatric patients.
**Authors:** Fatturi AL, Morgan MAP, Markus JR, Noguera-Morel L, Carvalho VO
**Journal:** J Pediatr (Rio J) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jped.2024.03.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jped.2024.03.011)

## Content

1. J Pediatr (Rio J). 2024 Sep-Oct;100(5):527-532. doi:
10.1016/j.jped.2024.03.011.  Epub 2024 Apr 24.

Pityriasis lichenoides: assessment of 41 pediatric patients.

Fatturi AL(1), Morgan MAP(2), Markus JR(2), Noguera-Morel L(3), Carvalho VO(2).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Dermatology Division, Department of Pediatrics, Federal University 
of Paraná, UFPR, Curitiba, Brazil. Electronic address: aluhinefatturi@gmail.com.
(2)Pediatric Dermatology Division, Department of Pediatrics, Federal University 
of Paraná, UFPR, Curitiba, Brazil.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Hospital Infantil Universitario Niño Jesus, 
Madrid, Spain.

OBJECTIVES: This study aims to evaluate the characteristics and treatment 
response of patients with pityriasis lichenoides seen in the last 43 years in a 
pediatric dermatology service.
METHODS: This was a retrospective, analytical, longitudinal study of patients 
under 15 years of age. The medical records were reviewed and data were presented 
as frequencies, means and variances. Student's t-test, Mann-Whitney test, 
Fisher's exact test, Pearson/Yates chi-square test and multivariate logistic 
regression model were used, with p < 0.05 considered.
RESULTS: 41 patients were included, 32 (78.0%) with pityriasis lichenoides 
chronica (PLC), five (12.2%) with pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta 
(PLEVA) and four (9.8%) with clinical PLC without biopsy. The age range of 
school children and adolescents was 19 (46.3%) and 13 (31.7%) respectively and 
27 (65.8%) were male. Two peaks of the highest frequency were observed between 
2004 and 2006 (10 patients - 24.4%) and another between 2019 and 2021 (6 
patients - 14.7%). There was remission in 71.9% (n = 23), with 56.6% (n = 17) of 
those who used antibiotic therapy and 80% (n = 4) of those who had phototherapy. 
The chance of remission was 13 times greater in patients with disease onset 
after 5 years of age.
CONCLUSIONS: The clinical form most commonly found was PLC mainly in school 
children and adolescents. The frequency peaks coincided with infectious 
outbreaks. The remission rate was satisfactory with antibiotic therapy, but 
higher with phototherapy. Remission was greater in patients with disease onset 
after 5 years of age.

Copyright © 2024 Sociedade Brasileira de Pediatria. Published by Elsevier 
Editora Ltda. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jped.2024.03.011
PMCID: PMC11361870
PMID: 38677323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest Aluhine Lopes Fatturi, 
Mariana Aparecida Pasa Morgan, Lucero Noguera Morel and Jandrei Rogerio Markus 
has nothing to declare. Vânia Oliveira de Carvalho has been an investigator of 
Sanofi Genzyme and speaker for Expanscience, Johnson & Johnson Consumer Health, 
Galderma, Mantecorp, Megalabs and Royal Canin.