---
reference_id: "PMID:2286169"
title: Disintegration of the motor unit in post-polio syndrome. Part II. Electrophysiological findings in patients with post-polio syndrome.
authors:
- Emeryk B
- Rowińska-Marcińska K
- Ryniewicz B
- Hausmanowa-Petrusewicz I
journal: Electromyogr Clin Neurophysiol
year: '1990'
keywords:
- Adult
- Electromyography
- Evoked Potentials/physiology
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Motor Neurons/physiology
- Postpoliomyelitis Syndrome/physiopathology
- Spinal Cord/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disintegration of the motor unit in post-polio syndrome. Part II. Electrophysiological findings in patients with post-polio syndrome.
**Authors:** Emeryk B, Rowińska-Marcińska K, Ryniewicz B, Hausmanowa-Petrusewicz I
**Journal:** Electromyogr Clin Neurophysiol (1990)

## Content

1. Electromyogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1990 Dec;30(8):451-8.

Disintegration of the motor unit in post-polio syndrome. Part II. 
Electrophysiological findings in patients with post-polio syndrome.

Emeryk B(1), Rowińska-Marcińska K, Ryniewicz B, Hausmanowa-Petrusewicz I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical School, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw.

The aim of the study is to investigate the motor unit abnormalities in late 
postpolio muscular atrophy (PPMA) as compared to those found in patients who had 
polio 20-30 years prior to examination without any new clinical signs. The 
quantitative concentric needle EMG and a single fiber EMG techniques were 
employed. Spontaneous activity, the parameters of individual motor units 
potentials (MUP), number of complex potentials and their stability, jitter and 
blocking as well as fiber density (FD) have been evaluated. In PPMA patients (5 
subjects) we found in newly weakened muscles: spontaneous activity, high 
percentage of complex potentials, increased jitter, increased FD. The EMG 
findings in muscles previously affected but without any signs of progression 
have been similar. In the patients with stable nonprogressing postpolio muscle 
atrophy (12) all MUP-s parameters indicated changes similar to PPMA but less 
marked in initially affected muscle with complete or incomplete recovery as well 
as sometimes in initially clinically unaffected muscles. These findings suggest 
that the signs of ongoing reinnervation processes persist many years after polio 
and that PPMA occurring later in life represents disintegration of the 
previously reinnervated motor units. It is still unclear whether this 
disintegration depends on decompensation by different factors of fully 
reinnervated motor units or whether most of the motor units after polio never 
regained a stable reinnervation.

PMID: 2286169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]