---
reference_id: "PMID:40620719"
title: "Pamidronate Treatment of a Patient with Opsismodysplasia and a Novel INPPL1 Variant: Efficacy, Mechanism, and Clinical Outcomes."
authors:
- Tabanli G
- Hazan F
- Ozer G
- Koprulu O
- Nalbantoglu O
- Ozkan B
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1159/000546324
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pamidronate Treatment of a Patient with Opsismodysplasia and a Novel INPPL1 Variant: Efficacy, Mechanism, and Clinical Outcomes.
**Authors:** Tabanli G, Hazan F, Ozer G, Koprulu O, Nalbantoglu O, Ozkan B
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000546324](https://doi.org/10.1159/000546324)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2026 Feb;17(1):96-100. doi: 10.1159/000546324. Epub 2025 Jun 3.

Pamidronate Treatment of a Patient with Opsismodysplasia and a Novel INPPL1 
Variant: Efficacy, Mechanism, and Clinical Outcomes.

Tabanli G(1), Hazan F(2), Ozer G(1), Koprulu O(1), Nalbantoglu O(1), Ozkan B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Dr. Behçet Uz Children's Hospital, 
University of Health Sciences, Izmir, Turkey.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Dr. Behçet Uz Children's Hospital, University 
of Health Sciences, Izmir, Turkey.

INTRODUCTION: Opsismodysplasia (OPS) is a rare skeletal dysplasia characterized 
by delayed bone maturation, distinctive skeletal deformities, and severe growth 
impairment. Mutations in the INPPL1 gene, particularly homozygous variants, are 
the primary genetic cause of this condition. While bisphosphonate therapy has 
shown efficacy in OPS cases with hypophosphatemic rickets, its role in cases 
without this complication remains unclear.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 2-year-and-2-month-old girl with OPS was treated with 
intravenous pamidronate (0.5 mg/kg/3 months). Initial evaluations showed severe 
short stature and low bone mineral density (DEXA SDS: -3.16). After three 
courses of treatment, the patient achieved independent walking, and her DEXA SDS 
improved to -2.5 over 1 year.
DISCUSSION: Pamidronate is effective in treating OPS even in the absence of 
hypophosphatemic rickets, showing potential as a therapeutic option for this 
rare condition.

© 2025 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000546324
PMCID: PMC12227215
PMID: 40620719

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.