---
reference_id: "PMID:39003499"
title: "Arabidopsis WRKY1 promotes monocarpic senescence by integrative regulation of flowering, leaf senescence, and nitrogen remobilization."
authors:
- Zhang W
- Tang S
- Li X
- Chen Y
- Li J
- Wang Y
- Bian R
- Jin Y
- Zhu X
- Zhang K
journal: Mol Plant
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.molp.2024.07.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arabidopsis WRKY1 promotes monocarpic senescence by integrative regulation of flowering, leaf senescence, and nitrogen remobilization.
**Authors:** Zhang W, Tang S, Li X, Chen Y, Li J, Wang Y, Bian R, Jin Y, Zhu X, Zhang K
**Journal:** Mol Plant (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molp.2024.07.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molp.2024.07.005)

## Content

1. Mol Plant. 2024 Aug 5;17(8):1289-1306. doi: 10.1016/j.molp.2024.07.005. Epub 
2024 Jul 14.

Arabidopsis WRKY1 promotes monocarpic senescence by integrative regulation of 
flowering, leaf senescence, and nitrogen remobilization.

Zhang W(1), Tang S(1), Li X(1), Chen Y(1), Li J(1), Wang Y(1), Bian R(1), Jin 
Y(1), Zhu X(1), Zhang K(2).

Author information:
(1)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Biotechnology on Specialty Economic 
Plants, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, Zhejiang 
321004, P.R. China.
(2)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Biotechnology on Specialty Economic 
Plants, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, Zhejiang 
321004, P.R. China. Electronic address: kwzhang@zjnu.edu.cn.

Monocarpic senescence, characterized by whole-plant senescence following a 
single flowering phase, is widespread in seed plants, particularly in crops, 
determining seed harvest time and quality. However, how external and internal 
signals are systemically integrated into monocarpic senescence remains largely 
unknown. Here, we report that the Arabidopsis thaliana transcription factor 
WRKY1 plays essential roles in multiple key steps of monocarpic senescence. 
WRKY1 expression is induced by age, salicylic acid (SA), and nitrogen 
(N) deficiency. Flowering and leaf senescence are accelerated in the WRKY1 
overexpression lines but are delayed in the wrky1 mutants. The combined DNA 
affinity purification sequencing and RNA sequencing analyses uncover the direct 
target genes of WRKY1. Further studies show that WRKY1 coordinately regulates 
three processes in monocarpic senescence: (1) suppressing FLOWERING LOCUS C gene 
expression to initiate flowering, (2) inducing SA biosynthesis genes to promote 
leaf senescence, and (3) activating the N assimilation and transport genes to 
trigger N remobilization. In summary, our study reveals how one 
stress-responsive transcription factor, WRKY1, integrates flowering, leaf 
senescence, and N remobilization processes into monocarpic senescence, providing 
important insights into plant lifetime regulation.

Copyright © 2024 The Author. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molp.2024.07.005
PMID: 39003499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]