---
reference_id: "PMID:37365384"
title: A virtual memory CD8(+) T cell-originated subset causes alopecia areata through innate-like cytotoxicity.
authors:
- Seok J
- Cho SD
- Lee J
- Choi Y
- Kim SY
- Lee SM
- Kim SH
- Jeong S
- Jeon M
- Lee H
- Kim AR
- Choi B
- Ha SJ
- Jung I
- Yoon KJ
- Park JE
- Kim JH
- Kim BJ
- Shin EC
- Park SH
journal: Nat Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41590-023-01547-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A virtual memory CD8(+) T cell-originated subset causes alopecia areata through innate-like cytotoxicity.
**Authors:** Seok J, Cho SD, Lee J, Choi Y, Kim SY, Lee SM, Kim SH, Jeong S, Jeon M, Lee H, Kim AR, Choi B, Ha SJ, Jung I, Yoon KJ, Park JE, Kim JH, Kim BJ, Shin EC, Park SH
**Journal:** Nat Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41590-023-01547-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-023-01547-5)

## Content

1. Nat Immunol. 2023 Aug;24(8):1308-1317. doi: 10.1038/s41590-023-01547-5. Epub 
2023 Jun 26.

A virtual memory CD8(+) T cell-originated subset causes alopecia areata through 
innate-like cytotoxicity.

Seok J(#)(1)(2), Cho SD(#)(1), Lee J(1), Choi Y(1), Kim SY(2), Lee SM(3)(4), Kim 
SH(5), Jeong S(1), Jeon M(1), Lee H(5), Kim AR(1), Choi B(3), Ha SJ(6), Jung 
I(3), Yoon KJ(3)(4), Park JE(1), Kim JH(7), Kim BJ(2), Shin EC(8)(9), Park 
SH(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Medical Science and Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute 
of Science and Technology, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Chung-Ang University Hospital, Chung-Ang 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Biological Science, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and 
Technology, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(4)KAIST Stem Cell Center, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, 
Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(5)The Center for Viral Immunology, Korea Virus Research Institute, Institute 
for Basic Science (IBS), Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, College of Life Science and Biotechnology, Yonsei 
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(7)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology Research Institute, Gangnam 
Severance Hospital, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.
(8)Graduate School of Medical Science and Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute 
of Science and Technology, Daejeon, Republic of Korea. ecshin@kaist.ac.kr.
(9)The Center for Viral Immunology, Korea Virus Research Institute, Institute 
for Basic Science (IBS), Daejeon, Republic of Korea. ecshin@kaist.ac.kr.
(10)Graduate School of Medical Science and Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute 
of Science and Technology, Daejeon, Republic of Korea. park3@kaist.ac.kr.
(11)The Center for Epidemic Preparedness, KAIST Institute, Daejeon, Republic of 
Korea. park3@kaist.ac.kr.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Nat Immunol. 2025 Nov 5. doi: 10.1038/s41590-025-02358-6.

Virtual memory T (TVM) cells are a T cell subtype with a memory phenotype but no 
prior exposure to foreign antigen. Although TVM cells have antiviral and 
antibacterial functions, whether these cells can be pathogenic effectors of 
inflammatory disease is unclear. Here we identified a TVM cell-originated 
CD44super-high(s-hi)CD49dlo CD8+ T cell subset with features of tissue 
residency. These cells are transcriptionally, phenotypically and functionally 
distinct from conventional CD8+ TVM cells and can cause alopecia areata. 
Mechanistically, CD44s-hiCD49dlo CD8+ T cells could be induced from conventional 
TVM cells by interleukin (IL)-12, IL-15 and IL-18 stimulation. Pathogenic 
activity of CD44s-hiCD49dlo CD8+ T cells was mediated by NKG2D-dependent 
innate-like cytotoxicity, which was further augmented by IL-15 stimulation and 
triggered disease onset. Collectively, these data suggest an immunological 
mechanism through which TVM cells can cause chronic inflammatory disease by 
innate-like cytotoxicity.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature America, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s41590-023-01547-5
PMID: 37365384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]