---
reference_id: "PMID:22617823"
title: Infections and vaccines in the etiology of antiphospholipid syndrome.
authors:
- Cruz-Tapias P
- Blank M
- Anaya JM
- Shoenfeld Y
journal: Curr Opin Rheumatol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e32835448b8
keywords:
- "Adjuvants, Immunologic/adverse effects"
- "Antiphospholipid Syndrome/etiology, immunology"
- Autoantibodies/biosynthesis
- Cross Reactions/immunology
- Humans
- Infections/complications
- Molecular Mimicry
- Tetanus Toxoid/adverse effects
- beta 2-Glycoprotein I/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Infections and vaccines in the etiology of antiphospholipid syndrome.
**Authors:** Cruz-Tapias P, Blank M, Anaya JM, Shoenfeld Y
**Journal:** Curr Opin Rheumatol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BOR.0b013e32835448b8](https://doi.org/10.1097/BOR.0b013e32835448b8)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2012 Jul;24(4):389-93. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e32835448b8.

Infections and vaccines in the etiology of antiphospholipid syndrome.

Cruz-Tapias P(1), Blank M, Anaya JM, Shoenfeld Y.

Author information:
(1)Zabludowitz Center for Autoimmune Diseases, Sheba Medical Center affiliated 
to Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Israel.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To present scientific evidence supporting the infectious 
origin for the antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) by molecular mimicry between 
pathogens, infection and vaccination with β2-glycoprotein I (β2-GPI) molecule.
RECENT FINDINGS: APS is characterized by the presence of pathogenic 
autoantibodies against β2-GPI. The infection etiology of APS was well 
established. Likewise, a link between vaccination such as tetanus toxoid may 
trigger antibodies targeting tetanus toxoid and β2-GPI, due to molecular mimicry 
between the two molecules. During the years, the pathogenic potential of 
anti-tetanus toxoid antibodies cross reactive with β2-GPI were found to be 
pathogenic in animal models, inducing experimental APS.
SUMMARY: Accumulated evidence supports that the presence of anti-β2-GPI 
antibodies is associated with a history of infections and the main mechanism to 
explain this correlation is molecular mimicry. The relationship between tetanus 
toxoid vaccination and APS reveals a novel view on the 
autoimmune/autoinflammatory syndrome induced by adjuvants (ASIA).

DOI: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e32835448b8
PMID: 22617823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]