---
reference_id: "PMID:26888576"
title: Neuroimaging evidence of deficient axon myelination in Wolfram syndrome.
authors:
- Lugar HM
- Koller JM
- Rutlin J
- Marshall BA
- Kanekura K
- Urano F
- Bischoff AN
- Shimony JS
- Hershey T
- Washington University Wolfram Syndrome Research Study Group
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/srep21167
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Axons/metabolism
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Myelin Sheath/metabolism
- Neuroimaging
- "Visual Cortex/diagnostic imaging, metabolism"
- "White Matter/diagnostic imaging, metabolism"
- "Wolfram Syndrome/diagnostic imaging, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuroimaging evidence of deficient axon myelination in Wolfram syndrome.
**Authors:** Lugar HM, Koller JM, Rutlin J, Marshall BA, Kanekura K, Urano F, Bischoff AN, Shimony JS, Hershey T, Washington University Wolfram Syndrome Research Study Group
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/srep21167](https://doi.org/10.1038/srep21167)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 18;6:21167. doi: 10.1038/srep21167.

Neuroimaging evidence of deficient axon myelination in Wolfram syndrome.

Lugar HM(1), Koller JM(1), Rutlin J(1), Marshall BA(2)(3), Kanekura K(4), Urano
F(4), Bischoff AN(1), Shimony JS(5), Hershey T(1)(6)(5); Washington University
Wolfram Syndrome Research Study Group.

Collaborators: Austin P, Beato B, Bihun E, Doty T, Earhart G, Eisenstein S,
Hoekel J, Karzon R, Licis A, Manwaring L, Paciorkowski AR, Pepino de Gruev Y,
Permutt A, Pickett K, Ranck S, Reiersen A, Tychsen L, Viehoever A, Wasson J,
White NH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, MO, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, MO, USA.
(3)Department of Cell Biology, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, MO, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO, USA.
(5)Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO, USA.

Wolfram syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive genetic disease characterized by
insulin dependent diabetes and vision, hearing and brain abnormalities which
generally emerge in childhood. Mutations in the WFS1 gene predispose cells to
endoplasmic reticulum stress-mediated apoptosis and may induce myelin
degradation in neuronal cell models. However, in vivo evidence of this
phenomenon in humans is lacking. White matter microstructure and regional
volumes were measured using magnetic resonance imaging in children and young
adults with Wolfram syndrome (n = 21) and healthy and diabetic controls (n =
50). Wolfram patients had lower fractional anisotropy and higher radial
diffusivity in major white matter tracts and lower volume in the basilar
(ventral) pons, cerebellar white matter and visual cortex. Correlations were
found between key brain findings and overall neurological symptoms. This pattern
of findings suggests that reduction in myelin is a primary neuropathological
feature of Wolfram syndrome. Endoplasmic reticulum stress-related dysfunction in
Wolfram syndrome may interact with the development of myelin or promote
degeneration of myelin during the progression of the disease. These measures may
provide objective indices of Wolfram syndrome pathophysiology that will be
useful in unraveling the underlying mechanisms and in testing the impact of
treatments on the brain.

DOI: 10.1038/srep21167
PMCID: PMC4758056
PMID: 26888576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: F.U. has a financial relationship with Ono
Pharmaceutical, Takeda Pharmaceutical, and Amarantus Bioscience.
