---
reference_id: "PMID:38834915"
title: Mini-heterochromatin domains constrain the cis-regulatory impact of SVA transposons in human brain development and disease.
authors:
- Horváth V
- Garza R
- Jönsson ME
- Johansson PA
- Adami A
- Christoforidou G
- Karlsson O
- Castilla Vallmanya L
- Koutounidou S
- Gerdes P
- Pandiloski N
- Douse CH
- Jakobsson J
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41594-024-01320-8
keywords:
- Humans
- "TATA-Binding Protein Associated Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- "Transcription Factor TFIID/genetics, metabolism"
- "Heterochromatin/metabolism, genetics"
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Short Interspersed Nucleotide Elements/genetics
- DNA Methylation
- Brain/metabolism
- "Histone Acetyltransferases/genetics, metabolism"
- Neural Stem Cells/metabolism
- Minisatellite Repeats/genetics
- Retroelements/genetics
- Alu Elements/genetics
- "Repressor Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Dystonic Disorders/genetics, metabolism"
- "Histones/metabolism, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mini-heterochromatin domains constrain the cis-regulatory impact of SVA transposons in human brain development and disease.
**Authors:** Horváth V, Garza R, Jönsson ME, Johansson PA, Adami A, Christoforidou G, Karlsson O, Castilla Vallmanya L, Koutounidou S, Gerdes P, Pandiloski N, Douse CH, Jakobsson J
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41594-024-01320-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41594-024-01320-8)

## Content

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2024 Oct;31(10):1543-1556. doi:
10.1038/s41594-024-01320-8.  Epub 2024 Jun 4.

Mini-heterochromatin domains constrain the cis-regulatory impact of SVA 
transposons in human brain development and disease.

Horváth V(1), Garza R(1), Jönsson ME(1), Johansson PA(1), Adami A(1), 
Christoforidou G(1)(2), Karlsson O(1), Castilla Vallmanya L(1), Koutounidou 
S(2), Gerdes P(1), Pandiloski N(1)(2), Douse CH(2), Jakobsson J(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neurogenetics, Department of Experimental Medical 
Science, Wallenberg Neuroscience Center and Lund Stem Cell Center, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Laboratory of Epigenetics and Chromatin Dynamics, Department of Experimental 
Medical Science, Wallenberg Neuroscience Center and Lund Stem Cell Center, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden.
(3)Laboratory of Molecular Neurogenetics, Department of Experimental Medical 
Science, Wallenberg Neuroscience Center and Lund Stem Cell Center, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden. johan.jakobsson@med.lu.se.

SVA (SINE (short interspersed nuclear element)-VNTR (variable number of tandem 
repeats)-Alu) retrotransposons remain active in humans and contribute to 
individual genetic variation. Polymorphic SVA alleles harbor gene regulatory 
potential and can cause genetic disease. However, how SVA insertions are 
controlled and functionally impact human disease is unknown. Here we dissect the 
epigenetic regulation and influence of SVAs in cellular models of X-linked 
dystonia parkinsonism (XDP), a neurodegenerative disorder caused by an SVA 
insertion at the TAF1 locus. We demonstrate that the KRAB zinc finger protein 
ZNF91 establishes H3K9me3 and DNA methylation over SVAs, including polymorphic 
alleles, in human neural progenitor cells. The resulting mini-heterochromatin 
domains attenuate the cis-regulatory impact of SVAs. This is critical for XDP 
pathology; removal of local heterochromatin severely aggravates the XDP 
molecular phenotype, resulting in increased TAF1 intron retention and reduced 
expression. Our results provide unique mechanistic insights into how human 
polymorphic transposon insertions are recognized and how their regulatory impact 
is constrained by an innate epigenetic defense system.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41594-024-01320-8
PMCID: PMC11479940
PMID: 38834915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.