---
reference_id: "PMID:34699526"
title: Prevalence of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency (G6PDd), CareStart qualitative rapid diagnostic test performance, and genetic variants in two malaria-endemic areas in Sudan.
authors:
- Ali Albsheer MM
- Lover AA
- Eltom SB
- Omereltinai L
- Mohamed N
- Muneer MS
- Mohamad AO
- Abdel Hamid MM
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0009720
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency (G6PDd), CareStart qualitative rapid diagnostic test performance, and genetic variants in two malaria-endemic areas in Sudan.
**Authors:** Ali Albsheer MM, Lover AA, Eltom SB, Omereltinai L, Mohamed N, Muneer MS, Mohamad AO, Abdel Hamid MM
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0009720](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0009720)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2021 Oct 26;15(10):e0009720. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0009720. eCollection 2021 Oct.

Prevalence of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency (G6PDd), CareStart 
qualitative rapid diagnostic test performance, and genetic variants in two 
malaria-endemic areas in Sudan.

Ali Albsheer MM(1)(2), Lover AA(3), Eltom SB(1), Omereltinai L(1), Mohamed N(4), 
Muneer MS(1)(5), Mohamad AO(5), Abdel Hamid MM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Parasitology and Medical Entomology, Institute of Endemic 
Diseases, University of Khartoum, Khartoum, Sudan.
(2)Faculty of Medical Laboratory Sciences, Sinnar University, Sennar, Sudan.
(3)Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, School of Public Health and 
Health Sciences, University of Massachusetts-Amherst; Amherst, Massachusetts, 
United States of America.
(4)Department of Parasitology and Medical Entomology, Faculty of Medical 
Laboratory Sciences, Nile University, Khartoum, Sudan.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Khartoum, 
Khartoum, Sudan.

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency (G6PDd) is the most common 
enzymopathy globally, and deficient individuals may experience severe hemolysis 
following treatment with 8-aminoquinolines. With increasing evidence of 
Plasmodium vivax infections throughout sub-Saharan Africa, there is a pressing 
need for population-level data at on the prevalence of G6PDd. Such 
evidence-based data will guide the expansion of primaquine and potentially 
tafenoquine for radical cure of P. vivax infections. This study aimed to 
quantify G6PDd prevalence in two geographically distinct areas in Sudan, and 
evaluating the performance of a qualitative CareStart rapid diagnostic test as a 
point-of-care test. Blood samples were analyzed from 491 unrelated healthy 
persons in two malaria-endemic sites in eastern and central Sudan. A 
pre-structured questionnaire was used which included demographic data, risk 
factors and treatment history. G6PD levels were measured using spectrophotometry 
(SPINREACT) and first-generation qualitative CareStart rapid tests. G6PD 
variants (202 G>A; 376 A>G) were determined by PCR/RFLP, with a subset confirmed 
by Sanger sequencing. The prevalence of G6PDd by spectrophotometry was 5.5% 
(27/491; at 30% of adjusted male median, AMM); 27.3% (134/491; at 70% of AMM); 
and 13.1% (64/490) by qualitative CareStart rapid diagnostic test. The 
first-generation CareStart rapid diagnostic test had an overall sensitivity of 
81.5% (95%CI: 61.9 to 93.7) and negative predictive value of 98.8% (97.3 to 
99.6). All persons genotyped across both study sites were wild type for the G6PD 
G202 variant. For G6PD A376G all participants in New Halfa had wild type AA 
(100%), while in Khartoum the AA polymorphism was found in 90.7%; AG in 2.5%; 
and GG in 6.8%. Phenotypic G6PD B was detected in 100% of tested participants in 
New Halfa while in Khartoum, the phenotypes observed were B (96.2%), A (2.8%), 
and AB (1%). The African A- phenotype was not detected in this study population. 
Overall, G6PDd prevalence in Sudan is low-to-moderate but highly heterogeneous. 
Point-of-care testing with the qualitative CareStart rapid diagnostic test 
demonstrated moderate performance with moderate sensitivity and specificity but 
high negative predicative value. The two sites harbored primarily the African B 
phenotype. A country-wide survey is recommended to understand GP6PD deficiencies 
more comprehensively in Sudan.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0009720
PMCID: PMC8547650
PMID: 34699526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.