---
reference_id: "PMID:22500628"
title: Somatic activation of AKT3 causes hemispheric developmental brain malformations.
authors:
- Poduri A
- Evrony GD
- Cai X
- Elhosary PC
- Beroukhim R
- Lehtinen MK
- Hills LB
- Heinzen EL
- Hill A
- Hill RS
- Barry BJ
- Bourgeois BF
- Riviello JJ
- Barkovich AJ
- Black PM
- Ligon KL
- Walsh CA
journal: Neuron
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.03.010
keywords:
- "Cerebrum/abnormalities, growth & development, pathology"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 1/genetics"
- "Epilepsy/etiology, pathology, surgery"
- Humans
- "Malformations of Cortical Development/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Neurogenesis/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt/genetics
- Trisomy/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Somatic activation of AKT3 causes hemispheric developmental brain malformations.
**Authors:** Poduri A, Evrony GD, Cai X, Elhosary PC, Beroukhim R, Lehtinen MK, Hills LB, Heinzen EL, Hill A, Hill RS, Barry BJ, Bourgeois BF, Riviello JJ, Barkovich AJ, Black PM, Ligon KL, Walsh CA
**Journal:** Neuron (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2012.03.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2012.03.010)

## Content

1. Neuron. 2012 Apr 12;74(1):41-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.03.010.

Somatic activation of AKT3 causes hemispheric developmental brain malformations.

Poduri A(1), Evrony GD, Cai X, Elhosary PC, Beroukhim R, Lehtinen MK, Hills LB, 
Heinzen EL, Hill A, Hill RS, Barry BJ, Bourgeois BF, Riviello JJ, Barkovich AJ, 
Black PM, Ligon KL, Walsh CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital Boston, 300 Longwood Avenue, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Hemimegalencephaly (HMG) is a developmental brain disorder characterized by an 
enlarged, malformed cerebral hemisphere, typically causing epilepsy that 
requires surgical resection. We studied resected HMG tissue to test whether the 
condition might reflect somatic mutations affecting genes critical to brain 
development. We found that two out of eight HMG samples showed trisomy of 
chromosome 1q, which encompasses many genes, including AKT3, a gene known to 
regulate brain size. A third case showed a known activating mutation in AKT3 
(c.49G→A, creating p.E17K) that was not present in the patient's blood cells. 
Remarkably, the E17K mutation in AKT3 is exactly paralogous to E17K mutations in 
AKT1 and AKT2 recently discovered in somatic overgrowth syndromes. We show that 
AKT3 is the most abundant AKT paralog in the brain during neurogenesis and that 
phosphorylated AKT is abundant in cortical progenitor cells. Our data suggest 
that somatic mutations limited to the brain could represent an important cause 
of complex neurogenetic disease.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.03.010
PMCID: PMC3460551
PMID: 22500628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]