---
reference_id: "PMID:39225104"
title: "Wider recognition and greater understanding of postinfectious, antibiotic-refractory Lyme arthritis."
authors:
- Steere AC
- Lemieux JE
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1172/JCI184109
keywords:
- Humans
- "Lyme Disease/immunology, drug therapy, pathology"
- "Borrelia burgdorferi/immunology, genetics"
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- "HLA-DRB1 Chains/genetics, immunology"
- "T-Lymphocytes, Helper-Inducer/immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wider recognition and greater understanding of postinfectious, antibiotic-refractory Lyme arthritis.
**Authors:** Steere AC, Lemieux JE
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI184109](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI184109)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2024 Sep 3;134(17):e184109. doi: 10.1172/JCI184109.

Wider recognition and greater understanding of postinfectious, 
antibiotic-refractory Lyme arthritis.

Steere AC(1), Lemieux JE(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Immunology and Inflammatory Diseases, Division of Rheumatology, 
Allergy, and Immunology and.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Comment on
    Disease-specific T cell receptors maintain pathogenic T helper cell 
responses in postinfectious Lyme arthritis.

Lyme disease, caused by Borrelia burgdorferi (Bb), can progress to Lyme 
arthritis (LA). While most patients with LA respond successfully to antibiotic 
therapy, a small percentage fail to improve, a condition known as 
antibiotic-refractory Lyme arthritis (ARLA). While T cell responses are known to 
drive ARLA, molecular mechanisms for ARLA remain unknown. In this issue of the 
JCI, Dirks et al. isolated disease-specific Th cells from patients with ARLA 
residing in Germany. A distinct TCR-β motif distinguished ARLA from other 
rheumatic diseases. Notably, the TCR-β motif was linked predominantly to 
HLA-DRB1*11 or 13 alleles, which differed from alleles in patients from North 
America. It also mapped primarily to T peripheral helper (Tph) cells, as opposed 
to classical Th1 cells. These findings provide a roadmap explaining how T cell 
responses necessary for control of an infection can, despite antibiotic therapy, 
drive a disadvantageous T cell response, resulting in a postinfectious, 
inflammatory arthritis.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI184109
PMCID: PMC11364397
PMID: 39225104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.