---
reference_id: "PMID:12715904"
title: "Congenital long QT syndrome: 50 years of electrophysiological research from cell to bedside."
authors:
- Wang L
journal: Acta Cardiol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.2143/AC.58.2.2005265
keywords:
- "Adrenergic beta-Antagonists/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Cardiac Pacing, Artificial"
- "Defibrillators, Implantable"
- Electrocardiography
- "Electrophysiologic Techniques, Cardiac"
- Heart Conduction System/drug effects
- Humans
- "Long QT Syndrome/congenital, drug therapy, physiopathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital long QT syndrome: 50 years of electrophysiological research from cell to bedside.
**Authors:** Wang L
**Journal:** Acta Cardiol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.2143/AC.58.2.2005265](https://doi.org/10.2143/AC.58.2.2005265)

## Content

1. Acta Cardiol. 2003 Apr;58(2):133-8. doi: 10.2143/AC.58.2.2005265.

Congenital long QT syndrome: 50 years of electrophysiological research from cell
to bedside.

Wang L(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, Charles Sturt University, Wagga Wagga,
Australia. lwang@csu.edu.au

Congenital long QT syndrome (LQTS) is a group of ion channel disorders of
ventricular myocytes due to genetic mutations. The main symptoms of LQTS are
pre-syncopal or syncopal attacks and cardiac arrest. Anti-adrenergic therapy
with beta-blockers has been the mainstay of treatment. Left cardiac
sympathectomy has also been used as an alternative in those in whom
beta-blockers failed. ICDs are highly effective in preventing mortality and
should be the first choice of therapy for those with cardiac arrest as the first
symptom or those with LQT3 genotype not responding to anti-adrenergic therapy
alone. Research on new therapeutic options, specifically those targeting at
defective genes or mutant ion channels, may provide more effective treatment for
this rare but potentially fatal electrophysiological disorder.

DOI: 10.2143/AC.58.2.2005265
PMID: 12715904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
