---
reference_id: "PMID:15710863"
title: Isolated mitochondrial myopathy associated with muscle coenzyme Q10 deficiency.
authors:
- Lalani SR
- Vladutiu GD
- Plunkett K
- Lotze TE
- Adesina AM
- Scaglia F
journal: Arch Neurol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1001/archneur.62.2.317
keywords:
- Biopsy/methods
- Child
- Coenzymes
- Creatine Kinase/urine
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/metabolism"
- Electron Transport/physiology
- Humans
- Lactic Acid/urine
- Male
- "Microscopy, Electron, Transmission/methods"
- "Mitochondria, Muscle/enzymology, pathology, ultrastructure"
- "Mitochondrial Myopathies/diet therapy, enzymology, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Muscle Weakness/drug therapy, enzymology, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/enzymology, pathology, physiopathology, ultrastructure"
- Staining and Labeling/methods
- "Ubiquinone/administration & dosage, analogs & derivatives, deficiency"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Isolated mitochondrial myopathy associated with muscle coenzyme Q10 deficiency.
**Authors:** Lalani SR, Vladutiu GD, Plunkett K, Lotze TE, Adesina AM, Scaglia F
**Journal:** Arch Neurol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1001/archneur.62.2.317](https://doi.org/10.1001/archneur.62.2.317)

## Content

1. Arch Neurol. 2005 Feb;62(2):317-20. doi: 10.1001/archneur.62.2.317.

Isolated mitochondrial myopathy associated with muscle coenzyme Q10 deficiency.

Lalani SR(1), Vladutiu GD, Plunkett K, Lotze TE, Adesina AM, Scaglia F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. seemal@bcm.tmc.edu

BACKGROUND: Primary coenzyme Q(10) (CoQ(10)) deficiency is rare. The
encephalomyopathic form, described in few families, is characterized by exercise
intolerance, recurrent myoglobinuria, developmental delay, ataxia, and seizures.
OBJECTIVE: To report a rare manifestation of CoQ(10) deficiency with isolated
mitochondrial myopathy without central nervous system involvement.
METHODS: The patient was evaluated for progressive muscle weakness.
Comprehensive clinical evaluation and muscle biopsy were performed for
histopathologic analysis and mitochondrial DNA and respiratory chain enzyme
studies. The patient began taking 150 mg/d of a CoQ(10) supplement.
RESULTS: The elevated creatine kinase and lactate levels with abnormal urine
organic acid and acylcarnitine profiles in this patient suggested a
mitochondrial disorder. Skeletal muscle histochemical evaluation revealed ragged
red fibers, and respiratory chain enzyme analyses showed partial reductions in
complex I, I + III, and II + III activities with greater than 200% of normal
citrate synthase activity. The CoQ(10) concentration in skeletal muscle was 46%
of the normal reference mean. The in vitro addition of 50 micromol/L of coenzyme
Q(1) to the succinate cytochrome-c reductase assay of the patient's skeletal
muscle whole homogenate increased the succinate cytochrome-c reductase activity
8-fold compared with 2.8-fold in the normal control homogenates. Follow-up of
the patient in 6 months demonstrated significant clinical improvement with
normalization of creatine kinase and lactate levels.
CONCLUSIONS: The absence of central nervous system involvement and recurrent
myoglobinuria expands the clinical phenotype of this treatable mitochondrial
disorder. The complete recovery of myopathy with exogenous CoQ(10)
supplementation observed in this patient highlights the importance of early
identification and treatment of this genetic disorder.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.62.2.317
PMID: 15710863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
