---
reference_id: "PMID:30060095"
title: Whole-Blood Transcriptional Signatures Composed of Erythropoietic and NRF2-Regulated Genes Differ Between Cerebral Malaria and Severe Malarial Anemia.
authors:
- Nallandhighal S
- Park GS
- Ho YY
- Opoka RO
- John CC
- Tran TM
journal: J Infect Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiy468
keywords:
- "Anemia/complications, metabolism"
- "Anemia, Sickle Cell/complications, metabolism"
- Biomarkers/blood
- Chemokine CXCL10/metabolism
- Chemokines/metabolism
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Dendritic Cells/metabolism
- Down-Regulation
- Erythroid Cells/metabolism
- Erythropoiesis/genetics
- Erythropoietin/metabolism
- Female
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Gene Expression Regulation
- "Heme Oxygenase-1/blood, metabolism"
- Hemoglobins
- Humans
- Infant
- Interferon Regulatory Factor-2/metabolism
- "Malaria, Cerebral/complications, metabolism"
- "Malaria, Falciparum/blood"
- Male
- Monocytes
- "NF-E2-Related Factor 2/genetics, metabolism"
- Plasmodium falciparum
- Reticulocytes/metabolism
- Toll-Like Receptors/metabolism
- Transcriptome
- Uganda
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whole-Blood Transcriptional Signatures Composed of Erythropoietic and NRF2-Regulated Genes Differ Between Cerebral Malaria and Severe Malarial Anemia.
**Authors:** Nallandhighal S, Park GS, Ho YY, Opoka RO, John CC, Tran TM
**Journal:** J Infect Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/infdis/jiy468](https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiy468)

## Content

1. J Infect Dis. 2019 Jan 1;219(1):154-164. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiy468.

Whole-Blood Transcriptional Signatures Composed of Erythropoietic and
NRF2-Regulated Genes Differ Between Cerebral Malaria and Severe Malarial Anemia.

Nallandhighal S(1), Park GS(2), Ho YY(3), Opoka RO(4), John CC(1)(2)(5), Tran
TM(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis.
(2)Division of Global Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis.
(3)Department of Statistics, College of Arts and Sciences, University of South
Carolina, Columbia.
(4)Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Makerere University, Kampala,
Uganda.
(5)Ryan White Center for Pediatric Infectious Disease and Global Health, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis.

Comment in
    J Infect Dis. 2019 Jul 2;220(3):540-542. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiz120.
    J Infect Dis. 2019 Jul 2;220(3):542-544. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiz121.

BACKGROUND: Among the severe malaria syndromes, severe malarial anemia (SMA) is
the most common, whereas cerebral malaria (CM) is the most lethal. However, the
mechanisms that lead to CM and SMA are unclear.
METHODS: We compared transcriptomic profiles of whole blood obtained from
Ugandan children with acute CM (n = 17) or SMA (n = 17) and community children
without Plasmodium falciparum infection (n = 12) and determined the
relationships among gene expression, hematological indices, and relevant plasma
biomarkers.
RESULTS: Both CM and SMA demonstrated predominantly upregulated enrichment of
dendritic cell activation, inflammatory/Toll-like receptor/chemokines, and
monocyte modules, but downregulated enrichment of lymphocyte modules. Nuclear
factor, erythroid 2 like 2 (Nrf2)-regulated genes were overexpressed in children
with SMA relative to CM, with the highest expression in children with both SMA
and sickle cell disease (HbSS), corresponding with elevated plasma heme
oxygenase-1 in this group. Erythroid and reticulocyte-specific signatures were
markedly decreased in CM relative to SMA despite higher hemoglobin levels and
appropriate increases in erythropoietin. Viral sensing/interferon-regulatory
factor 2 module expression and plasma interferon-inducible protein-10/CXCL10
negatively correlated with reticulocyte-specific signatures.
CONCLUSIONS: Compared with SMA, CM is associated with downregulation of
Nrf2-related and erythropoiesis signatures by whole-blood transcriptomics.
Future studies are needed to confirm these findings and assess pathways that may
be amenable to interventions to ameliorate CM and SMA.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiy468
PMCID: PMC6284545
PMID: 30060095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
