---
reference_id: "PMID:35946002"
title: "Orthostatic Myoclonic Jerks in a Case of Hashimoto's Encephalopathy."
authors:
- Singh AS
- Sidhu AS
journal: J Neurosci Rural Pract
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1055/s-0042-1748176
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Orthostatic Myoclonic Jerks in a Case of Hashimoto's Encephalopathy.
**Authors:** Singh AS, Sidhu AS
**Journal:** J Neurosci Rural Pract (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0042-1748176](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0042-1748176)

## Content

1. J Neurosci Rural Pract. 2022 Jun 20;13(3):561-562. doi:
10.1055/s-0042-1748176.  eCollection 2022 Jul.

Orthostatic Myoclonic Jerks in a Case of Hashimoto's Encephalopathy.

Singh AS(1), Sidhu AS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Fortis Hospital, Mohali, Punjab, India.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Fortis Hospital, Mohali, Punjab, India.

Hashimoto's encephalopathy (HE) is an uncommon syndrome with the characteristic 
triad of positive antithyroid antibodies (most commonly antibodies to thyroid 
peroxidase), response to steroids, and clinical picture presenting either as 
stroke-like pattern of focal neurological deficit or slowly progressive 
cognitive impairment. Myoclonus or tremors, seizures, and psychosis are other 
associated features which can be seen in HE. Herein, we report a girl with an 
uncommon presentation of orthostatic axial and myoclonic jerks in bilateral 
lower limbs in a case of HE.

Association for Helping Neurosurgical Sick People. This is an open access 
article published by Thieme under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonDerivative-NonCommercial License, permitting copying and 
reproduction so long as the original work is given appropriate credit. Contents 
may not be used for commercial purposes, or adapted, remixed, transformed or 
built upon. ( https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).

DOI: 10.1055/s-0042-1748176
PMCID: PMC9357497
PMID: 35946002

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None declared.