---
reference_id: "PMID:40802116"
title: Immunotherapeutic targeting of NY-ESO-1 in malignant meningiomas with TCR-transduced T-cells.
authors:
- Sun MZ
- Contreras E
- Treger J
- Imbroane M
- Orpilla J
- Ko M
- Reynoso J
- Khattab S
- Lai TJ
- Tsang JE
- Vitte J
- Giovannini M
- Liau LM
- Prins R
- Everson RG
journal: J Neurooncol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s11060-025-05200-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunotherapeutic targeting of NY-ESO-1 in malignant meningiomas with TCR-transduced T-cells.
**Authors:** Sun MZ, Contreras E, Treger J, Imbroane M, Orpilla J, Ko M, Reynoso J, Khattab S, Lai TJ, Tsang JE, Vitte J, Giovannini M, Liau LM, Prins R, Everson RG
**Journal:** J Neurooncol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11060-025-05200-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11060-025-05200-z)

## Content

1. J Neurooncol. 2025 Dec;175(3):1079-1089. doi: 10.1007/s11060-025-05200-z. Epub
 2025 Aug 13.

Immunotherapeutic targeting of NY-ESO-1 in malignant meningiomas with 
TCR-transduced T-cells.

Sun MZ(1)(2), Contreras E(3), Treger J(3), Imbroane M(3), Orpilla J(3), Ko M(3), 
Reynoso J(3), Khattab S(3), Lai TJ(3), Tsang JE(3), Vitte J(3), Giovannini M(3), 
Liau LM(3), Prins R(3), Everson RG(4).

Author information:
(1)University of Texas Southwestern School of Medicine, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd 
Mail Ext Code: 8855, Dallas, TX, 75390, USA. Matthew.sun@utsouthwestern.edu.
(2)University of California Los Angeles, 300 Stein Plaza Driveway Suite 420, Los 
Angeles, CA, 90095, USA. Matthew.sun@utsouthwestern.edu.
(3)University of California Los Angeles, 300 Stein Plaza Driveway Suite 420, Los 
Angeles, CA, 90095, USA.
(4)University of California Los Angeles, 300 Stein Plaza Driveway Suite 420, Los 
Angeles, CA, 90095, USA. REverson@mednet.ucla.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Malignant meningiomas lack effective immunotherapeutic options. 
NY-ESO-1 is a potential immunotherapeutic target, because it is the most 
frequently expressed cancer-testis-antigen in meningiomas. We investigated the 
efficacy of T-Cell-Receptor-Transduced T-Cells (TCR-T) targeting NY-ESO-1 in 
vitro and in vivo in meningiomas.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was performed on Grade I-III meningioma specimens. 
Primary meningioma culture LB3750(Grade I) and immortalized cultures 
SF1335(Grade I) and CH157-HLA-A2.1(Grade III) were established and maintained in 
vitro. NY-ESO-1 TCR-T (HLA-A2.1 restricted) cells were co-cultured with primary 
and immortalized meningioma cells and assessed for real-time tumor killing in 
vitro. Immunodeficient NSG mice were intracranially implanted with 
CH157-HLA-A2.1 and SF1335 cells, treated with systemic adoptive cell transfer 
(ACT) of TCR-T, and assessed for overall survival in vivo.
RESULTS: NY-ESO-1 expression correlated with tumor grade (n = 35; p < 0.01). 
High NY-ESO-1 nuclear expression predicted a worse progression-free-survival 
(p = 0.0167). CH157-HLA-A2.1 cells, with native high NY-ESO-1 expression, 
experienced > 60% and then nearly 100% cytolysis after co-culture with TCR-T for 
10 and 24 h, respectively, compared with control T-cells (p < 0.0001). SF1335 
and LB3750 cells, with low NY-ESO-1 expression, experienced 20% cytolysis after 
24 h of co-culture with TCR-T compared to the control (p < 0.0001). Systemic ACT 
of TCR-T significantly increased the median overall survival in NSG mice bearing 
intracranial xenografts of CH157-HLA-A2.1 by 49% (p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: NY-ESO-1 TCR-T induces cytolysis in meningiomas in vitro, and its 
efficacy correlates with NY-ESO-1 expression. Systemic ACT results in 
significantly increased survival in vivo in high-grade meningioma. Therefore, 
targeting NY-ESO-1 may be a clinically feasible immunotherapeutic strategy for 
treating high-grade meningiomas.

Publisher: No effective immunotherapy exists for malignant meningioma. NY-ESO-1 
is widely expressed in meningiomas but not in normal cells, making it an ideal 
immunotherapeutic target. Engineered T cells have been used to target NY-ESO-1 
in melanomas and sarcomas but not in brain tumors. We found that T cells 
targeting NY-ESO-1 effectively killed meningiomas in vitro, with the efficacy 
correlating with tumor NY-ESO-1 expression. Adoptive cell transfer of these T 
cells results in significantly increased survival in vivo in high-grade 
meningiomas. Our study demonstrated that targeting NY-ESO-1 with T cells may be 
a clinically feasible adjuvant immunotherapeutic strategy for treating 
high-grade meningiomas.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11060-025-05200-z
PMID: 40802116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors 
declare no competing interests.