---
reference_id: "PMID:39217537"
title: "Pathophysiology of Prurigo Nodularis: Neuroimmune Dysregulation and the Role of Type 2 Inflammation."
authors:
- Kwatra SG
- Ständer S
- Yosipovitch G
- Kim BS
- Levit NA
- "O'Malley JT"
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jid.2024.06.1276
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology of Prurigo Nodularis: Neuroimmune Dysregulation and the Role of Type 2 Inflammation.
**Authors:** Kwatra SG, Ständer S, Yosipovitch G, Kim BS, Levit NA, O'Malley JT
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jid.2024.06.1276](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jid.2024.06.1276)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 2025 Feb;145(2):249-256. doi: 10.1016/j.jid.2024.06.1276. 
Epub 2024 Aug 30.

Pathophysiology of Prurigo Nodularis: Neuroimmune Dysregulation and the Role of 
Type 2 Inflammation.

Kwatra SG(1), Ständer S(2), Yosipovitch G(3), Kim BS(4), Levit NA(5), O'Malley 
JT(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA; Maryland Itch Center, University of Maryland School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Center for Chronic Pruritus, University 
Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany.
(3)Miami Itch Center, Dr. Philip Frost Department of Dermatology & Cutaneous 
Surgery, University of Miami, Miami, Florida, USA.
(4)Mark Lebwohl Center for Neuroinflammation and Sensation, Department of 
Dermatology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(5)Dermatology Physicians of Connecticut, Fairfield, Connecticut, USA.
(6)Sanofi, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. Electronic address: 
john.o'malley2@sanofi.com.

Prurigo nodularis (PN) is a chronic, inflammatory skin condition characterized 
by multiple, intensely pruritic, distinctive nodular lesions. Subsequent 
scratching can further intensify the pruritus, culminating in a self-reinforcing 
itch-scratch cycle, which drives lesion development. The latest data indicate 
dysregulation of the neuroimmune axis in PN pathogenesis, including the 
involvement of sensory neurons, key effector immune cells, proinflammatory 
cytokines, dermal fibroblasts, and pruritogens. In this review, we highlight 
evidence supporting the role of type 2 immune axis dysregulation in driving the 
clinical presentation of PN and discuss how related signaling pathways may offer 
effective therapeutic targets to control PN signs and symptoms.

Copyright © 2024 Sanofi and Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jid.2024.06.1276
PMID: 39217537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]