---
reference_id: "PMID:10655512"
title: Correction of ornithine accumulation prevents retinal degeneration in a mouse model of gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina.
authors:
- Wang T
- Steel G
- Milam AH
- Valle D
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.97.3.1224
keywords:
- Amino Acids/blood
- Animals
- "Arginine/administration & dosage"
- Choroid/pathology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Electroretinography
- "Gyrate Atrophy/complications, diet therapy, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Ornithine/metabolism
- Ornithine-Oxo-Acid Transaminase/deficiency
- Retina/pathology
- "Retinal Degeneration/diet therapy, etiology, pathology, prevention & control"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Correction of ornithine accumulation prevents retinal degeneration in a mouse model of gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina.
**Authors:** Wang T, Steel G, Milam AH, Valle D
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.97.3.1224](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.97.3.1224)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Feb 1;97(3):1224-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.97.3.1224.

Correction of ornithine accumulation prevents retinal degeneration in a mouse
model of gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina.

Wang T(1), Steel G, Milam AH, Valle D.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Deficiency of ornithine-delta-aminotransferase (OAT) in humans results in gyrate
atrophy of the choroid and retina (GA), an autosomal recessive disorder
characterized by ornithine accumulation and a progressive chorioretinal
degeneration of unknown pathogenesis. To determine whether chronic, systemic
reduction of ornithine can prevent this form of retinal degeneration, we used an
arginine-restricted diet to maintain long term reduction of ornithine in a mouse
model of OAT-deficiency (Oat(-/-)) produced by gene targeting. We evaluated the
mice over a 12-month period by measurement of plasma amino acids,
electroretinograms, and retinal histologic and ultrastructural studies. We found
that an arginine-restricted diet substantially reduces plasma ornithine levels
and completely prevents retinal degeneration in Oat(-/-). This result indicates
that ornithine accumulation is a necessary factor in the pathophysiology of the
retinal degeneration in GA and that restoration of OAT activity in retina is not
required for effective treatment of GA.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.97.3.1224
PMCID: PMC15576
PMID: 10655512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
