---
reference_id: "PMID:22980259"
title: "Congenital melanocytic nevi: where are we now? Part II. Treatment options and approach to treatment."
authors:
- Ibrahimi OA
- Alikhan A
- Eisen DB
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2012.06.022
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital melanocytic nevi: where are we now? Part II. Treatment options and approach to treatment.
**Authors:** Ibrahimi OA, Alikhan A, Eisen DB
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaad.2012.06.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2012.06.022)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2012 Oct;67(4):515.e1-13; quiz 528-30. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaad.2012.06.022.

Congenital melanocytic nevi: where are we now? Part II. Treatment options and 
approach to treatment.

Ibrahimi OA(1), Alikhan A, Eisen DB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Connecticut Health Center, 
Farmington, Connecticut, USA.

Treatment of congenital melanocytic nevi (CMN) is generally undertaken for 2 
reasons: (1) to reduce the chances of cutaneous malignant melanoma and (2) for 
cosmetic reasons. Over the past century, a large number of treatments for CMN 
have been described in the literature. These include excision, dermabrasion, 
curettage, chemical peels, radiation therapy, cryotherapy, electrosurgery, and 
lasers. Only low-level evidence supporting these approaches is available, and 
large randomized controlled trials have not been published. This article 
explores therapeutic controversies and makes recommendations based on the best 
available evidence.

Copyright © 2012 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. Published by Mosby, Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2012.06.022
PMID: 22980259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]