---
reference_id: "PMID:23141292"
title: Defective presynaptic choline transport underlies hereditary motor neuropathy.
authors:
- Barwick KE
- Wright J
- Al-Turki S
- McEntagart MM
- Nair A
- Chioza B
- Al-Memar A
- Modarres H
- Reilly MM
- Dick KJ
- Ruggiero AM
- Blakely RD
- Hurles ME
- Crosby AH
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.09.019
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Motor Neuron Disease/genetics, metabolism"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Presynaptic Terminals/metabolism
- "Symporters/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defective presynaptic choline transport underlies hereditary motor neuropathy.
**Authors:** Barwick KE, Wright J, Al-Turki S, McEntagart MM, Nair A, Chioza B, Al-Memar A, Modarres H, Reilly MM, Dick KJ, Ruggiero AM, Blakely RD, Hurles ME, Crosby AH
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.09.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.09.019)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Dec 7;91(6):1103-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.09.019. Epub
 2012 Nov 8.

Defective presynaptic choline transport underlies hereditary motor neuropathy.

Barwick KE(1), Wright J, Al-Turki S, McEntagart MM, Nair A, Chioza B, Al-Memar 
A, Modarres H, Reilly MM, Dick KJ, Ruggiero AM, Blakely RD, Hurles ME, Crosby 
AH.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Human Genetics, St. George's University of London, Cranmer 
Terrace, London SW17 0RE, UK.

The neuromuscular junction (NMJ) is a specialized synapse with a complex 
molecular architecture that provides for reliable transmission between the nerve 
terminal and muscle fiber. Using linkage analysis and whole-exome sequencing of 
DNA samples from subjects with distal hereditary motor neuropathy type VII, we 
identified a mutation in SLC5A7, which encodes the presynaptic choline 
transporter (CHT), a critical determinant of synaptic acetylcholine synthesis 
and release at the NMJ. This dominantly segregating SLC5A7 mutation truncates 
the encoded product just beyond the final transmembrane domain, eliminating 
cytosolic-C-terminus sequences known to regulate surface transporter 
trafficking. Choline-transport assays in both transfected cells and monocytes 
from affected individuals revealed significant reductions in 
hemicholinium-3-sensitive choline uptake, a finding consistent with a 
dominant-negative mode of action. The discovery of CHT dysfunction underlying 
motor neuropathy identifies a biological basis for this group of conditions and 
widens the spectrum of disorders that derive from impaired NMJ transmission. Our 
findings compel consideration of mutations in SLC5A7 or its functional partners 
in relation to unexplained motor neuronopathies.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.09.019
PMCID: PMC3516609
PMID: 23141292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]