---
reference_id: "PMID:27775819"
title: Genomic analysis of hepatoblastoma identifies distinct molecular and prognostic subgroups.
authors:
- Sumazin P
- Chen Y
- Treviño LR
- Sarabia SF
- Hampton OA
- Patel K
- Mistretta TA
- Zorman B
- Thompson P
- Heczey A
- Comerford S
- Wheeler DA
- Chintagumpala M
- Meyers R
- Rakheja D
- Finegold MJ
- Tomlinson G
- Parsons DW
- López-Terrada D
journal: Hepatology
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/hep.28888
keywords:
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Genomics
- "Hepatoblastoma/classification, genetics"
- Humans
- "Liver Neoplasms/classification, genetics"
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genomic analysis of hepatoblastoma identifies distinct molecular and prognostic subgroups.
**Authors:** Sumazin P, Chen Y, Treviño LR, Sarabia SF, Hampton OA, Patel K, Mistretta TA, Zorman B, Thompson P, Heczey A, Comerford S, Wheeler DA, Chintagumpala M, Meyers R, Rakheja D, Finegold MJ, Tomlinson G, Parsons DW, López-Terrada D
**Journal:** Hepatology (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/hep.28888](https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.28888)

## Content

1. Hepatology. 2017 Jan;65(1):104-121. doi: 10.1002/hep.28888. Epub 2016 Nov 29.

Genomic analysis of hepatoblastoma identifies distinct molecular and prognostic 
subgroups.

Sumazin P(1)(2)(3), Chen Y(4), Treviño LR(5)(6), Sarabia SF(7), Hampton 
OA(5)(6), Patel K(7), Mistretta TA(7), Zorman B(1)(2), Thompson P(1)(2), Heczey 
A(1)(2)(3), Comerford S(8), Wheeler DA(5)(6), Chintagumpala M(1)(2)(3), Meyers 
R(9), Rakheja D(10), Finegold MJ(1)(2)(3)(7), Tomlinson G(11), Parsons 
DW(1)(2)(3)(5)(6), López-Terrada D(1)(2)(3)(7).

Author information:
(1)Texas Children's Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX.
(3)Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX.
(4)Departments of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Medicine, University 
of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX.
(5)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX.
(6)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX.
(7)Pathology & Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX.
(8)Departments of Molecular Genetics and Pediatrics, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX.
(9)Department of Pediatric Surgery, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT.
(10)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX.
(11)Departments of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, School of Medicine, 
University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2017 Oct;66(4):1351-1352. doi: 10.1002/hep.29262.

Despite being the most common liver cancer in children, hepatoblastoma (HB) is a 
rare neoplasm. Consequently, few pretreatment tumors have been molecularly 
profiled, and there are no validated prognostic or therapeutic biomarkers for HB 
patients. We report on the first large-scale effort to profile pretreatment HBs 
at diagnosis. Our analysis of 88 clinically annotated HBs revealed three 
risk-stratifying molecular subtypes that are characterized by differential 
activation of hepatic progenitor cell markers and metabolic pathways: high-risk 
tumors were characterized by up-regulated nuclear factor, erythroid 2-like 2 
activity; high lin-28 homolog B, high mobility group AT-hook 2, spalt-like 
transcription factor 4, and alpha-fetoprotein expression; and high coordinated 
expression of oncofetal proteins and stem-cell markers, while low-risk tumors 
had low lin-28 homolog B and lethal-7 expression and high hepatic nuclear factor 
1 alpha activity.
CONCLUSION: Analysis of immunohistochemical assays using antibodies targeting 
these genes in a prospective study of 35 HBs suggested that these candidate 
biomarkers have the potential to improve risk stratification and guide treatment 
decisions for HB patients at diagnosis; our results pave the way for clinical 
collaborative studies to validate candidate biomarkers and test their potential 
to improve outcome for HB patients. (Hepatology 2017;65:104-121).

© 2016 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.28888
PMID: 27775819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]