---
reference_id: "PMID:39246649"
title: Enterovirus-D68 - A Reemerging Non-Polio Enterovirus that Causes Severe Respiratory and Neurological Disease in Children.
authors:
- Grizer CS
- Messacar K
- Mattapallil JJ
journal: Front Virol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fviro.2024.1328457
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Enterovirus-D68 - A Reemerging Non-Polio Enterovirus that Causes Severe Respiratory and Neurological Disease in Children.
**Authors:** Grizer CS, Messacar K, Mattapallil JJ
**Journal:** Front Virol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fviro.2024.1328457](https://doi.org/10.3389/fviro.2024.1328457)

## Content

1. Front Virol. 2024;4:1328457. doi: 10.3389/fviro.2024.1328457. Epub 2024 Feb
14.

Enterovirus-D68 - A Reemerging Non-Polio Enterovirus that Causes Severe
Respiratory and Neurological Disease in Children.

Grizer CS(1), Messacar K(2), Mattapallil JJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, The Henry M. Jackson Foundation for
Military Medicine, Uniformed Services University, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.
(2)The Children's Hospital Colorado and University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Uniformed Services University,
Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.

The past decade has seen the global reemergence and rapid spread of enterovirus
D68 (EV-D68), a respiratory pathogen that causes severe respiratory illness and
paralysis in children. EV-D68 was first isolated in 1962 from children with
pneumonia. Sporadic cases and small outbreaks have been reported since then with
a major respiratory disease outbreak in 2014 associated with an increased number
of children diagnosed with polio-like paralysis. From 2014-2018, major outbreaks
have been reported every other year in a biennial pattern with > 90% of the
cases occurring in children under the age of 16. With the outbreak of SARS-CoV-2
and the subsequent COVID-19 pandemic, there was a significant decrease in the
prevalence EV-D68 cases along with other respiratory diseases. However, since
the relaxation of pandemic social distancing protocols and masking mandates the
number of EV-D68 cases have begun to rise again - culminating in another
outbreak in 2022. Here we review the virology, pathogenesis, and the immune
response to EV-D68, and discuss the epidemiology of EV-D68 infections and the
divergence of contemporary strains from historical strains. Finally, we
highlight some of the key challenges in the field that remain to be addressed.

DOI: 10.3389/fviro.2024.1328457
PMCID: PMC11378966
PMID: 39246649

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no financial conflicts of
interest.
