---
reference_id: "PMID:36983120"
title: Long-Term Results of a Phase I/II Clinical Trial of Autologous Mesenchymal Stem Cell Therapy for Femoral Head Osteonecrosis.
authors:
- Blanco JF
- Garcia-Garcia FJ
- Villarón EM
- da Casa C
- Fidalgo H
- López-Parra M
- Santos JA
- Sánchez-Guijo F
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/jcm12062117
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-Term Results of a Phase I/II Clinical Trial of Autologous Mesenchymal Stem Cell Therapy for Femoral Head Osteonecrosis.
**Authors:** Blanco JF, Garcia-Garcia FJ, Villarón EM, da Casa C, Fidalgo H, López-Parra M, Santos JA, Sánchez-Guijo F
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm12062117](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm12062117)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2023 Mar 8;12(6):2117. doi: 10.3390/jcm12062117.

Long-Term Results of a Phase I/II Clinical Trial of Autologous Mesenchymal Stem 
Cell Therapy for Femoral Head Osteonecrosis.

Blanco JF(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Garcia-Garcia FJ(1), Villarón EM(2)(3)(4)(6), da Casa 
C(2), Fidalgo H(2), López-Parra M(2)(3)(4)(6), Santos JA(2)(7)(8), Sánchez-Guijo 
F(2)(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Orthopaedic Surgery and Traumatology Department, University Hospital of 
Salamanca, 37007 Salamanca, Spain.
(2)Biomedical Research Institute of Salamanca (IBSAL), 37007 Salamanca, Spain.
(3)Regenerative Medicine and Cell Therapy Network Center of Castilla y Leon, 
Gerencia Regional de Salud, 47011 Valladolid, Spain.
(4)Health Outcomes-Oriented Cooperative Research Networks in Advanced Therapies 
(RICORS TERAV), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 28220 Madrid, Spain.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Salamanca, 37007 Salamanca, Spain.
(6)Cell Therapy Unit, Hematology Department, University Hospital of Salamanca, 
37007 Salamanca, Spain.
(7)Radiology Department, University Hospital of Salamanca, 37007 Salamanca, 
Spain.
(8)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Diagnostics, University of Salamanca, 
37007 Salamanca, Spain.

(1) Background: Osteonecrosis of the femoral head (ONFH) is characterized by 
impaired vascularization with ischemia resulting in bone cell death, leading to 
the deterioration of the hip joint. Mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs) are an 
attractive potential therapeutic approach in this setting. The aim of this study 
is to evaluate the clinical improvement in terms of pain and quality of life, as 
well as the safety of the procedure during the follow-up of patients. (2) 
Methods: A Phase I-II Open-Label Non-Randomized Prospective clinical trial was 
conducted. Eight patients with idiopathic ONFH and stage < IIC in the ARCO 
classification were included. Four weeks before therapy, 40 mL of autologous 
bone marrow was obtained, and MSCs were expanded under 
Good-Manufacturing-Practice (GMP) standards. Study medication consisted of a 
suspension of autologous BM-derived MSCs (suspended in a solution of 5-10 mL of 
saline and 5% human albumin) in a single dose of 0.5-1 × 106 cells/kg of the 
patient, administered intraosseously with a trocar and under radioscopic 
control. Per-protocol monitoring of patients included a postoperative period of 
12 months, with a clinical and radiological assessment that included the visual 
analog scale (VAS), the Harris scale, the SF-36, and the radiological evolution 
of both hips. In addition, all patients were further followed up for eight years 
to assess the need for long-term total hip replacement (THR) surgery. (3) 
Results: Median age of patients included was 48.38 ± 7.38 years, and all 
patients were men. Autologous MSCs were expanded in all cases. There were no 
adverse effects related to cell administration. Regarding efficacy, both VAS and 
ODI scores improved after surgery. Radiologically, 12.5% of patients improved at 
the end of follow-up, whereas 50% improved clinically. No adverse effects 
related to the procedure were recorded, and none of the patients needed THR 
surgery within the first year after MSC therapy. (4) Conclusions: The use of 
autologous MSCs for patients with ONFH disease is feasible, safe in the long 
term, and potentially effective.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm12062117
PMCID: PMC10051457
PMID: 36983120

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
FS-G has received honoraria and/or research support from Celgene/BMS, 
Kite/Gilead, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche and Takeda, but unrelated to the current 
manuscript.