---
reference_id: "PMID:32243864"
title: DNA Methylation Signature for EZH2 Functionally Classifies Sequence Variants in Three PRC2 Complex Genes.
authors:
- Choufani S
- Gibson WT
- Turinsky AL
- Chung BHY
- Wang T
- Garg K
- Vitriolo A
- Cohen ASA
- Cyrus S
- Goodman S
- Chater-Diehl E
- Brzezinski J
- Brudno M
- Ming LH
- White SM
- Lynch SA
- Clericuzio C
- Temple IK
- Flinter F
- McConnell V
- Cushing T
- Bird LM
- Splitt M
- Kerr B
- Scherer SW
- Machado J
- Imagawa E
- Okamoto N
- Matsumoto N
- Testa G
- Iascone M
- Tenconi R
- Caluseriu O
- Mendoza-Londono R
- Chitayat D
- Cytrynbaum C
- Tatton-Brown K
- Weksberg R
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.03.008
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- Congenital Hypothyroidism/genetics
- Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics
- DNA Methylation
- Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 Protein/genetics
- Female
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Humans
- Infant
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Male
- Mosaicism
- Mutation
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Neoplasm Proteins
- Polycomb Repressive Complex 2/genetics
- Reproducibility of Results
- Transcription Factors
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DNA Methylation Signature for EZH2 Functionally Classifies Sequence Variants in Three PRC2 Complex Genes.
**Authors:** Choufani S, Gibson WT, Turinsky AL, Chung BHY, Wang T, Garg K, Vitriolo A, Cohen ASA, Cyrus S, Goodman S, Chater-Diehl E, Brzezinski J, Brudno M, Ming LH, White SM, Lynch SA, Clericuzio C, Temple IK, Flinter F, McConnell V, Cushing T, Bird LM, Splitt M, Kerr B, Scherer SW, Machado J, Imagawa E, Okamoto N, Matsumoto N, Testa G, Iascone M, Tenconi R, Caluseriu O, Mendoza-Londono R, Chitayat D, Cytrynbaum C, Tatton-Brown K, Weksberg R
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.03.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.03.008)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2020 May 7;106(5):596-610. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.03.008.
Epub  2020 Apr 2.

DNA Methylation Signature for EZH2 Functionally Classifies Sequence Variants in 
Three PRC2 Complex Genes.

Choufani S(1), Gibson WT(2), Turinsky AL(3), Chung BHY(4), Wang T(1), Garg K(1), 
Vitriolo A(5), Cohen ASA(6), Cyrus S(2), Goodman S(1), Chater-Diehl E(1), 
Brzezinski J(7), Brudno M(8), Ming LH(9), White SM(10), Lynch SA(11), Clericuzio 
C(12), Temple IK(13), Flinter F(14), McConnell V(15), Cushing T(12), Bird 
LM(16), Splitt M(17), Kerr B(18), Scherer SW(19), Machado J(20), Imagawa E(21), 
Okamoto N(22), Matsumoto N(21), Testa G(23), Iascone M(24), Tenconi R(25), 
Caluseriu O(26), Mendoza-Londono R(27), Chitayat D(28), Cytrynbaum C(29), 
Tatton-Brown K(30), Weksberg R(31).

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 
1X8, Canada.
(2)British Columbia Children's Hospital Research Institute, Vancouver, BC V5Z 
4H4, Canada; Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, BC V6H 3N1, Canada.
(3)Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 
1X8, Canada; Centre for Computational Medicine, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada.
(4)Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital and Hong Kong 
Children's Hospital, The University of Hong Kong, 999077 Hong Kong.
(5)Department of Oncology and Hemato-oncology, University of Milan, Milan 20122, 
Italy; Laboratory of Stem Cell Epigenetics, IEO, European Institute of Oncology, 
IRCCS, Milan 20139, Italy.
(6)British Columbia Children's Hospital Research Institute, Vancouver, BC V5Z 
4H4, Canada; Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, BC V6H 3N1, Canada; Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(7)Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 
1X8, Canada; Division of Haematology and Oncology, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada; Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada.
(8)Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 
1X8, Canada; Centre for Computational Medicine, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada; Department of Computer Science, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3H5, Canada.
(9)Clinical Genetic Service, Department of Health, 999077 Hong Kong.
(10)Victorian Clinical Genetics Service, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, 
Melbourne, VIC 3052, Australia; Department of Paediatrics, University of 
Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3052, Australia.
(11)Department of Clinical Genetics, Temple Street Children's University 
Hospital, Dublin, D01 XD99, Ireland.
(12)Pediatric Genetics, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA.
(13)Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton and the Wessex Clinical 
Genetics Service, University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust, 
Southampton SO16 6YD, UK.
(14)Department of Clinical Genetics, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, 
London SE1 9RT, UK.
(15)Northern Ireland Regional Genetics Service, Belfast City Hospital, Belfast 
BT9 7AB, UK.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA 
92093, USA; Division of Genetics, Rady Children's Hospital of San Diego, San 
Diego, CA 92123, USA.
(17)Northern Genetics Service, Institute of Genetics Medicine, Newcastle upon 
Tyne NE1 3BZ, UK.
(18)Division of Evolution and Genomic Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, 
University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, UK; Manchester Centre for Genomic 
Medicine, Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester 
Academic Health Sciences Centre, Manchester M13 9WL, UK.
(19)Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 
1X8, Canada; Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
ON M5S 1A1, Canada; The Centre for Applied Genomics, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8 Canada; McLaughlin Centre, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON M5S 1A1, Canada.
(20)PreventionGenetics, Marshfield, WI 54449, USA.
(21)Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Fukuura 3-9, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama 236-0004, Japan.
(22)Department of Medical Genetics, Osaka Medical Center and Research Institute 
for Maternal and Child Health, Osaka 594-1101, Japan.
(23)Department of Oncology and Hemato-oncology, University of Milan, Milan 
20122, Italy; Laboratory of Stem Cell Epigenetics, IEO, European Institute of 
Oncology, IRCCS, Milan 20139, Italy; Human Technopole, Center for Neurogenomics, 
Via Cristina Belgioioso 171, Milan 20157, Italy.
(24)Laboratorio di Genetica Medica, ASST Papa Giovanni XXIII, Piazza OMS 1, 
24127 Bergamo, Italy.
(25)Dipartimento Pediatria, University of Padova, Via Giustiani 3, 35128 Padova, 
Italy.
(26)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2H7, 
Canada; The Stollery Pediatric Hospital, Edmonton, AB T6G 2H7, Canada.
(27)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada; Department of Pediatrics, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON M5S 1A1, Canada.
(28)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada; Department of Pediatrics, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON M5S 1A1, Canada; Prenatal Diagnosis and Medical Genetics Program, 
Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON M5G 1X5, Canada.
(29)Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 
1X8, Canada; Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada; Department of Molecular Genetics, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A1, Canada.
(30)St George's University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, London SW17 0QT, UK; 
St George's, University of London, London SW17 0RE, UK; Section of Cancer 
Genetics, Institute of Cancer Research, Surrey SM2 5NG, UK.
(31)Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 
1X8, Canada; Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada; Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A1, Canada; Department of Molecular Genetics, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A1, Canada; Institute of Medical 
Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, Canada. Electronic 
address: rweksb@sickkids.ca.

Weaver syndrome (WS), an overgrowth/intellectual disability syndrome (OGID), is 
caused by pathogenic variants in the histone methyltransferase EZH2, which 
encodes a core component of the Polycomb repressive complex-2 (PRC2). Using 
genome-wide DNA methylation (DNAm) data for 187 individuals with OGID and 969 
control subjects, we show that pathogenic variants in EZH2 generate a highly 
specific and sensitive DNAm signature reflecting the phenotype of WS. This 
signature can be used to distinguish loss-of-function from gain-of-function 
missense variants and to detect somatic mosaicism. We also show that the 
signature can accurately classify sequence variants in EED and SUZ12, which 
encode two other core components of PRC2, and predict the presence of pathogenic 
variants in undiagnosed individuals with OGID. The discovery of a functionally 
relevant signature with utility for diagnostic classification of sequence 
variants in EZH2, EED, and SUZ12 supports the emerging paradigm shift for 
implementation of DNAm signatures into diagnostics and translational research.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.03.008
PMCID: PMC7212265
PMID: 32243864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.