---
reference_id: "PMID:35189895"
title: "How mycobacterium tuberculosis infection could lead to the increasing risks of chronic fatigue syndrome and the potential immunological effects: a population-based retrospective cohort study."
authors:
- Yang TY
- Lin CL
- Yao WC
- Lio CF
- Chiang WP
- Lin K
- Kuo CF
- Tsai SY
journal: J Transl Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s12967-022-03301-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# How mycobacterium tuberculosis infection could lead to the increasing risks of chronic fatigue syndrome and the potential immunological effects: a population-based retrospective cohort study.
**Authors:** Yang TY, Lin CL, Yao WC, Lio CF, Chiang WP, Lin K, Kuo CF, Tsai SY
**Journal:** J Transl Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12967-022-03301-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967-022-03301-1)

## Content

1. J Transl Med. 2022 Feb 21;20(1):99. doi: 10.1186/s12967-022-03301-1.

How mycobacterium tuberculosis infection could lead to the increasing risks of 
chronic fatigue syndrome and the potential immunological effects: a 
population-based retrospective cohort study.

Yang TY(#)(1)(2), Lin CL(#)(2)(3), Yao WC(#)(4), Lio CF(5), Chiang WP(6), Lin 
K(5), Kuo CF(6)(7), Tsai SY(8)(9)(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Genomic Epidemiology Center, China Medical University Hospital, 
Taichung City, 404, Taiwan.
(2)College of Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung City, 404, Taiwan.
(3)Management Office for Health Data, China Medical University Hospital, 
Taichung City, 404, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Min-Sheng General Hospital, 
Tao-Yuan City, 330, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei City, 
104, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Medicine, Mackay Medical College, New Taipei City, 252, Taiwan.
(7)Institute of Infectious Disease, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei City, 104, 
Taiwan.
(8)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei City, 
104, Taiwan. stsai22@jhu.edu.
(9)Department of Medicine, Mackay Medical College, New Taipei City, 252, Taiwan. 
stsai22@jhu.edu.
(10)Graduate Institute of Long-Term Care, Mackay Medical College, New Taipei 
City, 252, Taiwan. stsai22@jhu.edu.
(11)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Mackay Medical College, New 
Taipei City, 252, Taiwan. stsai22@jhu.edu.
(12)Department of Health Policy and Management, Johns Hopkins University 
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, 21205, USA. stsai22@jhu.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) has been shown to be associated with 
infections. Tuberculosis (TB) is a highly prevalent infectious disease. Patients 
with chronic fatigue syndrome and post-tuberculosis experience similar symptoms. 
Furthermore, chronic fatigue syndrome and tuberculosis share similar plasma 
immunosignatures. This study aimed to clarify the risk of chronic fatigue 
syndrome following the diagnosis of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection (MTI), 
by analyzing the National Health Insurance Research Database of Taiwan.
METHODS: 7666 patients aged 20 years or older with newly diagnosed Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis infection during 2000-2011 and 30,663 participants without 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection were identified. Both groups were followed 
up until the diagnoses of chronic fatigue syndrome were made at the end of 2011.
RESULTS: The relationship between Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection and the 
subsequent risk of chronic fatigue syndrome was estimated through Cox 
proportional hazards regression analysis, with the incidence density rates being 
3.04 and 3.69 per 1000 person-years among the non-Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
infection and Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection populations, respectively 
(adjusted hazard ratio [HR] = 1.23, with 95% confidence interval [CI] 
1.03-1.47). In the stratified analysis, the Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection 
group were consistently associated with a higher risk of chronic fatigue 
syndrome in the male sex (HR = 1.27, 95% CI 1.02-1.58) and age group 
of ≥ 65 years old (HR = 2.50, 95% CI 1.86-3.38).
CONCLUSIONS: The data from this population-based retrospective cohort study 
revealed that Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection is associated with an 
elevated risk of subsequent chronic fatigue syndrome.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12967-022-03301-1
PMCID: PMC8862378
PMID: 35189895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.