---
reference_id: "PMID:35435397"
title: "Lynch syndrome: An unusal case of familial cancer unearthed."
authors:
- Dhar S
- Mannan AU
- Singh JJ
- Dhar S
- Pradhan S
journal: Indian J Pathol Microbiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.4103/IJPM.IJPM_809_19
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lynch syndrome: An unusal case of familial cancer unearthed.
**Authors:** Dhar S, Mannan AU, Singh JJ, Dhar S, Pradhan S
**Journal:** Indian J Pathol Microbiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.4103/IJPM.IJPM_809_19](https://doi.org/10.4103/IJPM.IJPM_809_19)

## Content

1. Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2022 Apr-Jun;65(2):465-467. doi: 
10.4103/IJPM.IJPM_809_19.

Lynch syndrome: An unusal case of familial cancer unearthed.

Dhar S(1), Mannan AU(2), Singh JJ(3), Dhar S(4), Pradhan S(5).

Author information:
(1)Consultant Pathologist, Kolkata Reference Lab, SRL Ltd, Kolkata, West Bengal, 
India.
(2)Basic Research Scientist, Department of Clinical Genetics and Genomics, 
Strand Life Science Private Limited, Bangaluru, Karnataka, India.
(3)Basic Research Scientist, Strand Life Science Private Limited, Bangaluru, 
Karnataka, India.
(4)Department of Pediatric Dermatology, Institute of Child Health, Kolkata, 
India.
(5)Department of Dermatology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Patna, 
Bihar, India.

Lynch syndrome or hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is a type of 
inherited cancer syndrome with a genetic predisposition to different types of 
cancer. There is an increased predisposition to cancers in the endometrium, 
colon, stomach, ovary, uterus, skin, kidney, and brain in patients of Lynch 
syndrome. We are reporting a 48-year-old male who presented with a pea-sized 
growth in his left arm which was found to be sebaceoma on histopathology. On 
further detailed history, examination, and genetic study, it was proved to be a 
familial case of Lynch syndrome. The case is being reported to stress the 
importance of knowledge about clinical manifestation, associated neoplasms, and 
molecular genetic profile of Lynch syndrome which will enable physicians and 
pathologists to provide highly targeted surveillance and management for patients 
with high cancer risk.

DOI: 10.4103/IJPM.IJPM_809_19
PMID: 35435397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None