---
reference_id: "PMID:34751583"
title: "Hip decompression combined with bone marrow concentrate and platelet-rich plasma for corticosteroid-induced osteonecrosis of the femoral head : mid-term update from a prospective study."
authors:
- Houdek MT
- Wyles CC
- Smith JH
- Terzic A
- Behfar A
- Sierra RJ
journal: Bone Jt Open
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1302/2633-1462.211.BJO-2021-0132.R1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hip decompression combined with bone marrow concentrate and platelet-rich plasma for corticosteroid-induced osteonecrosis of the femoral head : mid-term update from a prospective study.
**Authors:** Houdek MT, Wyles CC, Smith JH, Terzic A, Behfar A, Sierra RJ
**Journal:** Bone Jt Open (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1302/2633-1462.211.BJO-2021-0132.R1](https://doi.org/10.1302/2633-1462.211.BJO-2021-0132.R1)

## Content

1. Bone Jt Open. 2021 Nov;2(11):926-931. doi: 
10.1302/2633-1462.211.BJO-2021-0132.R1.

Hip decompression combined with bone marrow concentrate and platelet-rich plasma 
for corticosteroid-induced osteonecrosis of the femoral head : mid-term update 
from a prospective study.

Houdek MT(1), Wyles CC(2), Smith JH(1), Terzic A(1), Behfar A(1), Sierra RJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Orthopaedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(2)Ortho Surgery, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

AIMS: Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells obtained from bone marrow 
aspirate concentrate (BMAC) with platelet-rich plasma (PRP), has been used as an 
adjuvant to hip decompression. Early results have shown promise for hip 
preservation in patients with osteonecrosis (ON) of the femoral head. The 
purpose of the current study is to examine the mid-term outcome of this 
treatment in patients with precollapse corticosteroid-induced ON of the femoral 
head.
METHODS: In all, 22 patients (35 hips; 11 males and 11 females) with precollapse 
corticosteroid-induced ON of the femoral head underwent hip decompression 
combined with BMAC and PRP. Mean age and BMI were 43 years (SD 12) and 31 kg/m² 
(SD 6), respectively, at the time of surgery. Survivorship free from femoral 
head collapse and total hip arthroplasty (THA) and risk factors for progression 
were evaluated at minimum five-years of clinical follow-up with a mean follow-up 
of seven years (5 to 8).
RESULTS: Survivorship free from femoral head collapse and THA for any reason was 
84% and 67% at seven years postoperatively, respectively. Risk factors for 
conversion to THA included a high preoperative modified Kerboul angle (grade 3 
or 4) based on preoperative MRI (hazard ratio (HR) 3.96; p = 0.047) and 
corticosteroid use at the time of decompression (HR 4.15; p = 0.039). The 
seven-year survivorship for patients with grade 1 or 2 Kerboul angles for 
conversion to THA for articular collapse, and THA for any reason, were 96% and 
72%, respectively, versus THA for articular collapse and THA for any reason in 
patients with grade 3 or 4 Kerboul angles of 40% (p = 0.003) and 40% (p = 
0.032).
CONCLUSION: At seven years, hip decompression augmented with BMAC and PRP 
provided a 67% survivorship free from THA in patients with 
corticosteroid-induced ON. Ideal candidates for this procedure are patients with 
low preoperative Kerboul angles and can stop corticosteroid treatment prior to 
decompression. Cite this article: Bone Jt Open 2021;2(11):926-931.

DOI: 10.1302/2633-1462.211.BJO-2021-0132.R1
PMCID: PMC8636295
PMID: 34751583

Conflict of interest statement: ICMJE COI statement: A. Behfar declares board 
membership to Rion, which is outside of this submitted work. M. Houdek reports 
research supplies for Zimmer/Biomet Orthopedics, which is related to this work. 
R. J. Sierra reports grants/grants pending from Cytori, Zimmer Biomet, and Link, 
and stock/stock options from OrthAlign, all of which is unrelated. A. Terzic 
declares board membership to Rion, grants/grants pending from the NIH, and 
royalties from the Mayo Clinic, all of which is also unrelated.