---
reference_id: "PMID:36368568"
title: Clinically relevant urine creatinine underestimation in the low concentration range on the Siemens Dimension Vista®.
authors:
- Raynor A
- Raulet-Bussian C
- Robert-Mercier T
- Bruneel A
- Vidal-Petiot E
- Flamant M
- Boutten A
journal: Clin Biochem
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2022.10.013
keywords:
- Humans
- Creatinine
- Urinalysis
- Kidney Function Tests
- Biomarkers/urine
- "Laboratories, Clinical"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinically relevant urine creatinine underestimation in the low concentration range on the Siemens Dimension Vista®.
**Authors:** Raynor A, Raulet-Bussian C, Robert-Mercier T, Bruneel A, Vidal-Petiot E, Flamant M, Boutten A
**Journal:** Clin Biochem (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2022.10.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2022.10.013)

## Content

1. Clin Biochem. 2023 Jan;111:87-90. doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2022.10.013. Epub
 2022 Nov 8.

Clinically relevant urine creatinine underestimation in the low concentration
range on the Siemens Dimension Vista®.

Raynor A(1), Raulet-Bussian C(1), Robert-Mercier T(1), Bruneel A(1),
Vidal-Petiot E(2), Flamant M(2), Boutten A(3).

Author information:
(1)Département de Biochimie, Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris Nord Val de Seine -
site Bichat, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(2)Département de Physiologie, Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris Nord Val de Seine -
site Bichat, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France; INSERM U1149,
Centre de recherche sur l'inflammation, Université Paris-Diderot, Paris, France.
(3)Département de Biochimie, Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris Nord Val de Seine -
site Bichat, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France. Electronic
address: anne.boutten@aphp.fr.

While considerable efforts have been accomplished to standardize the measurement
of plasma creatinine (PCr), urine creatinine (UCr) has not been subject to the
same scrutiny. UCr is importantly used when measuring biomarkers in spot urines,
to assess urine output and variable dilution of urine samples. Here, we report
underestimation of Jaffe UCr measurements on the Siemens Dimension Vista®
analyzer, critically affecting samples with UCr ≤2 mmol/L. We demonstrate that
this error is caused by automatic urine pre-dilution by the Vista's «urine
mode», and that UCr measured in «plasma mode» without pre-dilution does not
present this error. In the absence of a comprehensive solution proposed by
Siemens, we propose simple formulae that can be easily implemented in a
laboratory to correct these low UCr measurements. Importantly, the observed UCr
underestimation can significantly influence reported results for biomarkers/UCr
ratios measured in spot urine. Indeed, these results can be overestimated up to
+84.4 % before correction using our formulae. This can sometimes lead to
misclassification according to clinical thresholds, e.g. Kidney disease:
improving global outcomes (KDIGO) guidelines for urine albumin/creatinine. This
highlights the need for every clinical laboratory to assess the detection limits
of their assays, including for lesser-discussed parameters such as UCr. Indeed,
the error we reported here may affect other urine assays performing systematic
urine pre-dilution and could have significant repercussions on the clinical
management of patients.

Copyright © 2022 The Canadian Society of Clinical Chemists. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2022.10.013
PMID: 36368568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
