---
reference_id: "PMID:32045938"
title: Axenfeld-Rieger Anomaly and Neuropsychiatric Problems-More than Meets the Eye.
authors:
- Saffari A
- Ziegler A
- Merkenschlager A
- Krüger S
- Kölker S
- Hoffmann GF
- Syrbe S
journal: Neuropediatrics
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1055/s-0039-3402037
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Axenfeld-Rieger Anomaly and Neuropsychiatric Problems-More than Meets the Eye.
**Authors:** Saffari A, Ziegler A, Merkenschlager A, Krüger S, Kölker S, Hoffmann GF, Syrbe S
**Journal:** Neuropediatrics (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0039-3402037](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0039-3402037)

## Content

1. Neuropediatrics. 2020 Jun;51(3):192-197. doi: 10.1055/s-0039-3402037. Epub
2020  Feb 11.

Axenfeld-Rieger Anomaly and Neuropsychiatric Problems-More than Meets the Eye.

Saffari A(1), Ziegler A(1), Merkenschlager A(2), Krüger S(3), Kölker S(1), 
Hoffmann GF(1), Syrbe S(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Child Neurology and Metabolic Medicine, Centre for Paediatrics 
and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Department of Neuropediatrics, University Hospital of Children, Leipzig, 
Germany.
(3)Gemeinschaftspraxis für Humangenetik, Dresden, Germany.
(4)Division of Pediatric Epileptology, Centre for Paediatrics and Adolescent 
Medicine, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: The main purpose of this article is to demonstrate the co-occurrence 
of Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly and neuropsychiatric problems as clinical signs of 
genetically determined cerebral small vessel disease in two patients.
CASE STUDY: We report on two adolescent individuals with ocular anterior segment 
dysgenesis (Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly) presenting with neuropsychiatric symptoms. 
Both patients underwent cerebral magnetic resonance imaging showing white matter 
T2-hyperintensities involving different brain regions, suspective of cerebral 
small vessel disease. Genetic analysis revealed pathogenic mutations in the 
FOXC1 gene (patient 1) and the COL4A1 gene (patient 2), respectively.
CONCLUSION: We report on the co-occurrence of ocular anterior segment dysgenesis 
(Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly) and neuropsychiatric symptoms as clinical signs of 
genetically determined cerebral small vessel disease in two patients. In both 
patients, the cerebral lesions involved the frontotemporal regions, brain 
regions that control social behavior as well as executive and cognitive 
function, highlighting the fact that neuropsychiatric symptoms may be early 
clinical presentations of cerebral small vessel disease. We further provide a 
review of monogenic causes of pediatric cerebral small vessel disease, 
emphasizing the links to childhood-onset neuropsychiatric disease.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0039-3402037
PMID: 32045938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Ziegler reports personal fees from Biogen, 
personal fees from Avexis, and personal fees from PTC, outside the submitted 
work.