---
reference_id: "PMID:19282408"
title: Keratoderma hereditarium mutilans (Vohwinkel syndrome).
authors:
- Sinha M
- Watson SB
journal: J Hand Surg Eur Vol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1177/1753193408098901
keywords:
- Adult
- "Constriction, Pathologic"
- Female
- Fingers/pathology
- Humans
- "Keratoderma, Palmoplantar/surgery"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Recurrence
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Keratoderma hereditarium mutilans (Vohwinkel syndrome).
**Authors:** Sinha M, Watson SB
**Journal:** J Hand Surg Eur Vol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1753193408098901](https://doi.org/10.1177/1753193408098901)

## Content

1. J Hand Surg Eur Vol. 2009 Apr;34(2):235-7. doi: 10.1177/1753193408098901. Epub
 2009 Mar 12.

Keratoderma hereditarium mutilans (Vohwinkel syndrome).

Sinha M(1), Watson SB.

Author information:
(1)Canniesburn Plastic Surgery Unit, Glasgow Royal Infirmary, Glasgow UK. 
drmanish@hotmail.com

Keratoderma hereditarium mutilans, or Vohwinkel syndrome, is a very rare genetic 
skin condition which causes palmoplantar hyperkeratosis and constricting rings 
of the fingers and toes. Approximately 50 cases have been reported in the 
literature with only three having been managed surgically. All three had a high 
rate of recurrence and unfavourable results in the long term. We report two more 
cases managed surgically with a follow up of 5 and 8 years respectively. Our 
experience suggests that the use of full thickness grafts to line the released 
contractures does not work in the long term as the grafts become raised and 
painful, requiring multiple revisions. Surgical correction was easy to achieve 
but difficult to maintain and achieved poor outcomes in general. We therefore 
feel that the indication for surgical treatment should be a neurovascular 
compromise.

DOI: 10.1177/1753193408098901
PMID: 19282408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]