---
reference_id: "PMID:30101460"
title: Genetic regulatory pathways of split-hand/foot malformation.
authors:
- Kantaputra PN
- Carlson BM
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/cge.13434
keywords:
- Bone Morphogenetic Proteins/genetics
- Fibroblast Growth Factor 8/genetics
- "Foot Deformities, Congenital/genetics, pathology"
- Gene Expression Regulation/genetics
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/genetics, pathology"
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- "Syndactyly/genetics, pathology"
- Wnt Signaling Pathway/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic regulatory pathways of split-hand/foot malformation.
**Authors:** Kantaputra PN, Carlson BM
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.13434](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.13434)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2019 Jan;95(1):132-139. doi: 10.1111/cge.13434. Epub 2018 Sep 10.

Genetic regulatory pathways of split-hand/foot malformation.

Kantaputra PN(1)(2)(3), Carlson BM(4).

Author information:
(1)Center of Excellence in Medical Genetics Research, Chiang Mai University, 
Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(2)Division of Pediatric Dentistry, Department of Orthodontics and Pediatric 
Dentistry, Faculty of Dentistry, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(3)Dentaland Clinic, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan.

Split-hand/foot malformation (SHFM) is caused by mutations in TP63, DLX5, DLX6, 
FGF8, FGFR1, WNT10B, and BHLHA9. The clinical features of SHFM caused by 
mutations of these genes are not distinguishable. This implies that in normal 
situations these SHFM-associated genes share an underlying regulatory pathway 
that is involved in the development of the central parts of the hands and feet. 
The mutations in SHFM-related genes lead to dysregulation of Fgf8 in the central 
portion of the apical ectodermal ridge (AER) and subsequently lead to 
misexpression of a number of downstream target genes, failure of stratification 
of the AER, and thus SHFM. Syndactyly of the remaining digits is most likely the 
effects of dysregulation of Fgf-Bmp-Msx signaling on apoptotic cell death. Loss 
of digit identity in SHFM is hypothesized to be the effects of misexpression of 
HOX genes, abnormal SHH gradient, or the loss of balance between GLI3A and 
GLI3R. Disruption of canonical and non-canonical Wnt signaling is involved in 
the pathogenesis of SHFM. Whatever the causative genes of SHFM are, the 
mutations seem to lead to dysregulation of Fgf8 in AER cells of the central 
parts of the hands and feet and disruption of Wnt-Bmp-Fgf signaling pathways in 
AER.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.13434
PMID: 30101460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]