---
reference_id: "PMID:24271325"
title: Natural history of pulmonary function in collagen VI-related myopathies.
authors:
- Foley AR
- Quijano-Roy S
- Collins J
- Straub V
- McCallum M
- Deconinck N
- Mercuri E
- Pane M
- "D'Amico A"
- Bertini E
- North K
- Ryan MM
- Richard P
- Allamand V
- Hicks D
- Lamandé S
- Hu Y
- Gualandi F
- Auh S
- Muntoni F
- Bönnemann CG
journal: Brain
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awt284
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- "Collagen Type VI/deficiency, genetics"
- Disability Evaluation
- Europe
- Female
- Humans
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Linear Models
- "Lung Diseases/etiology, genetics, therapy"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Motor Activity
- "Muscular Diseases/classification, complications, epidemiology, genetics"
- "Respiration, Artificial"
- Retrospective Studies
- United States
- Vital Capacity/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural history of pulmonary function in collagen VI-related myopathies.
**Authors:** Foley AR, Quijano-Roy S, Collins J, Straub V, McCallum M, Deconinck N, Mercuri E, Pane M, D'Amico A, Bertini E, North K, Ryan MM, Richard P, Allamand V, Hicks D, Lamandé S, Hu Y, Gualandi F, Auh S, Muntoni F, Bönnemann CG
**Journal:** Brain (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awt284](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awt284)

## Content

1. Brain. 2013 Dec;136(Pt 12):3625-33. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt284. Epub 2013 Nov
22.

Natural history of pulmonary function in collagen VI-related myopathies.

Foley AR(1), Quijano-Roy S, Collins J, Straub V, McCallum M, Deconinck N,
Mercuri E, Pane M, D'Amico A, Bertini E, North K, Ryan MM, Richard P, Allamand
V, Hicks D, Lamandé S, Hu Y, Gualandi F, Auh S, Muntoni F, Bönnemann CG.

Author information:
(1)1 Dubowitz Neuromuscular Centre, University College London Institute of Child
Health and Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London, WC1N 1EH, UK.

The spectrum of clinical phenotypes associated with a deficiency or dysfunction
of collagen VI in the extracellular matrix of muscle are collectively termed
'collagen VI-related myopathies' and include Ullrich congenital muscular
dystrophy, Bethlem myopathy and intermediate phenotypes. To further define the
clinical course of these variants, we studied the natural history of pulmonary
function in correlation to motor abilities in the collagen VI-related myopathies
by analysing longitudinal forced vital capacity data in a large international
cohort. Retrospective chart reviews of genetically and/or pathologically
confirmed collagen VI-related myopathy patients were performed at 10
neuromuscular centres: USA (n = 2), UK (n = 2), Australia (n = 2), Italy (n =
2), France (n = 1) and Belgium (n = 1). A total of 486 forced vital capacity
measurements obtained in 145 patients were available for analysis. Patients at
the severe end of the clinical spectrum, conforming to the original description
of Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy were easily identified by severe muscle
weakness either preventing ambulation or resulting in an early loss of
ambulation, and demonstrated a cumulative decline in forced vital capacity of
2.6% per year (P < 0.0001). Patients with better functional abilities, in whom
walking with/without assistance was achieved, were initially combined,
containing both intermediate and Bethlem myopathy phenotypes in one group.
However, one subset of patients demonstrated a continuous decline in pulmonary
function whereas the other had stable pulmonary function. None of the patients
with declining pulmonary function attained the ability to hop or run; these
patients were categorized as intermediate collagen VI-related myopathy and the
remaining patients as Bethlem myopathy. Intermediate patients had a cumulative
decline in forced vital capacity of 2.3% per year (P < 0.0001) whereas the
relationship between age and forced vital capacity in patients with Bethlem
myopathy was not significant (P = 0.1432). Nocturnal non-invasive ventilation
was initiated in patients with Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy by 11.3
years (±4.0) and in patients with intermediate collagen VI-related myopathy by
20.7 years (±1.5). The relationship between maximal motor ability and forced
vital capacity was highly significant (P < 0.0001). This study demonstrates that
pulmonary function profiles can be used in combination with motor function
profiles to stratify collagen VI-related myopathy patients phenotypically. These
findings improve our knowledge of the natural history of the collagen VI-related
myopathies, enabling proactive optimization of care and preparing this patient
population for clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awt284
PMCID: PMC3859224
PMID: 24271325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
