---
reference_id: "PMID:15735647"
title: Sarcoidosis is associated with a truncating splice site mutation in BTNL2.
authors:
- Valentonyte R
- Hampe J
- Huse K
- Rosenstiel P
- Albrecht M
- Stenzel A
- Nagy M
- Gaede KI
- Franke A
- Haesler R
- Koch A
- Lengauer T
- Seegert D
- Reiling N
- Ehlers S
- Schwinger E
- Platzer M
- Krawczak M
- Müller-Quernheim J
- Schürmann M
- Schreiber S
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1038/ng1519
keywords:
- Bronchoalveolar Lavage
- Butyrophilins
- Green Fluorescent Proteins/metabolism
- "HLA-DR Antigens/genetics, metabolism"
- HLA-DRB1 Chains
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- Membrane Glycoproteins/genetics
- "Monocytes/microbiology, physiology"
- Mycobacterium tuberculosis/pathogenicity
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Protein Conformation
- RNA Splice Sites/genetics
- RNA Splicing/genetics
- Recombinant Fusion Proteins
- Risk Factors
- "Sarcoidosis/genetics, immunology, metabolism"
- Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sarcoidosis is associated with a truncating splice site mutation in BTNL2.
**Authors:** Valentonyte R, Hampe J, Huse K, Rosenstiel P, Albrecht M, Stenzel A, Nagy M, Gaede KI, Franke A, Haesler R, Koch A, Lengauer T, Seegert D, Reiling N, Ehlers S, Schwinger E, Platzer M, Krawczak M, Müller-Quernheim J, Schürmann M, Schreiber S
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1519](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1519)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2005 Apr;37(4):357-64. doi: 10.1038/ng1519. Epub 2005 Feb 27.

Sarcoidosis is associated with a truncating splice site mutation in BTNL2.

Valentonyte R(1), Hampe J, Huse K, Rosenstiel P, Albrecht M, Stenzel A, Nagy M, 
Gaede KI, Franke A, Haesler R, Koch A, Lengauer T, Seegert D, Reiling N, Ehlers 
S, Schwinger E, Platzer M, Krawczak M, Müller-Quernheim J, Schürmann M, 
Schreiber S.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University 
Kiel, Universitätsklinikum Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Schittenhelmstr. 12, 
24105 Kiel, Germany.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet. 2005 Jun;37(6):652.

Sarcoidosis is a polygenic immune disorder with predominant manifestation in the 
lung. Genome-wide linkage analysis previously indicated that the extended major 
histocompatibility locus on chromosome 6p was linked to susceptibility to 
sarcoidosis. Here, we carried out a systematic three-stage SNP scan of 16.4 Mb 
on chromosome 6p21 in as many as 947 independent cases of familial and sporadic 
sarcoidosis and found that a 15-kb segment of the gene butyrophilin-like 2 
(BTNL2) was associated with the disease. The primary disease-associated variant 
(rs2076530; P(TDT) = 3 x 10(-6), P(case-control) = 1.1 x 10(-8); replication 
P(TDT) = 0.0018, P(case-control) = 1.8 x 10(-6)) represents a risk factor that 
is independent of variation in HLA-DRB1. BTNL2 is a member of the immunoglobulin 
superfamily and has been implicated as a costimulatory molecule involved in 
T-cell activation on the basis of its homology to B7-1. The G --> A transition 
constituting rs2076530 leads to the use of a cryptic splice site located 4 bp 
upstream of the affected wild-type donor site. Transcripts of the 
risk-associated allele have a premature stop in the spliced mRNA. The resulting 
protein lacks the C-terminal IgC domain and transmembrane helix, thereby 
disrupting the membrane localization of the protein, as shown in experiments 
using green fluorescent protein and V5 fusion proteins.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1519
PMID: 15735647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]