---
reference_id: "PMID:37748514"
title: Distinguishing features of long COVID identified through immune profiling.
authors:
- Klein J
- Wood J
- Jaycox JR
- Dhodapkar RM
- Lu P
- Gehlhausen JR
- Tabachnikova A
- Greene K
- Tabacof L
- Malik AA
- Silva Monteiro V
- Silva J
- Kamath K
- Zhang M
- Dhal A
- Ott IM
- Valle G
- Peña-Hernández M
- Mao T
- Bhattacharjee B
- Takahashi T
- Lucas C
- Song E
- McCarthy D
- Breyman E
- Tosto-Mancuso J
- Dai Y
- Perotti E
- Akduman K
- Tzeng TJ
- Xu L
- Geraghty AC
- Monje M
- Yildirim I
- Shon J
- Medzhitov R
- Lutchmansingh D
- Possick JD
- Kaminski N
- Omer SB
- Krumholz HM
- Guan L
- Dela Cruz CS
- van Dijk D
- Ring AM
- Putrino D
- Iwasaki A
journal: Nature
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06651-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distinguishing features of long COVID identified through immune profiling.
**Authors:** Klein J, Wood J, Jaycox JR, Dhodapkar RM, Lu P, Gehlhausen JR, Tabachnikova A, Greene K, Tabacof L, Malik AA, Silva Monteiro V, Silva J, Kamath K, Zhang M, Dhal A, Ott IM, Valle G, Peña-Hernández M, Mao T, Bhattacharjee B, Takahashi T, Lucas C, Song E, McCarthy D, Breyman E, Tosto-Mancuso J, Dai Y, Perotti E, Akduman K, Tzeng TJ, Xu L, Geraghty AC, Monje M, Yildirim I, Shon J, Medzhitov R, Lutchmansingh D, Possick JD, Kaminski N, Omer SB, Krumholz HM, Guan L, Dela Cruz CS, van Dijk D, Ring AM, Putrino D, Iwasaki A
**Journal:** Nature (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-023-06651-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06651-y)

## Content

1. Nature. 2023 Nov;623(7985):139-148. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06651-y. Epub 2023
 Sep 25.

Distinguishing features of long COVID identified through immune profiling.

Klein J(#)(1), Wood J(#)(2), Jaycox JR(#)(1), Dhodapkar RM(#)(1)(3), Lu P(#)(1), 
Gehlhausen JR(#)(1)(4), Tabachnikova A(#)(1), Greene K(1), Tabacof L(2), Malik 
AA(5), Silva Monteiro V(1), Silva J(1), Kamath K(6), Zhang M(6), Dhal A(6), Ott 
IM(1), Valle G(7), Peña-Hernández M(1)(8), Mao T(1), Bhattacharjee B(1), 
Takahashi T(1), Lucas C(1)(9), Song E(1), McCarthy D(2), Breyman E(2), 
Tosto-Mancuso J(2), Dai Y(1), Perotti E(1), Akduman K(1), Tzeng TJ(1), Xu L(1), 
Geraghty AC(10), Monje M(10)(11), Yildirim I(5)(9)(12)(13), Shon J(6), Medzhitov 
R(1)(9)(11), Lutchmansingh D(7), Possick JD(7), Kaminski N(7), Omer 
SB(5)(9)(13)(14), Krumholz HM(9)(15)(16)(17), Guan L(9)(18), Dela Cruz CS(7)(9), 
van Dijk D(19)(20)(21), Ring AM(22)(23), Putrino D(24)(25), Iwasaki 
A(26)(27)(28).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(2)Abilities Research Center, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, USA.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, USC Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, 
USA.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(5)Yale Institute for Global Health, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, 
CT, USA.
(6)SerImmune, Goleta, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine (Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep 
Medicine), Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(8)Department of Microbiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(9)Center for Infection and Immunity, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 
USA.
(10)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University, Palo 
Alto, CA, USA.
(11)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD, USA.
(12)Department of Pediatrics (Infectious Diseases), Yale New Haven Hospital, New 
Haven, CT, USA.
(13)Department of Epidemiology of Microbial Diseases, Yale School of Public 
Health, New Haven, CT, USA.
(14)Department of Internal Medicine (Infectious Diseases), Yale School of 
Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(15)Center for Outcomes Research and Evaluation, Yale New Haven Hospital, New 
Haven, CT, USA.
(16)Section of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale 
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(17)Department of Health Policy and Management, Yale School of Public Health, 
New Haven, CT, USA.
(18)Department of Biostatistics, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, CT, 
USA.
(19)Center for Infection and Immunity, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 
USA. david.vandijk@yale.edu.
(20)Department of Computer Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. 
david.vandijk@yale.edu.
(21)Department of Internal Medicine (Cardiology), Yale School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT, USA. david.vandijk@yale.edu.
(22)Department of Immunobiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. 
aaron.ring@yale.edu.
(23)Center for Infection and Immunity, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 
USA. aaron.ring@yale.edu.
(24)Abilities Research Center, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY, USA. david.putrino@mountsinai.org.
(25)Department of Rehabilitation and Human Performance, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. david.putrino@mountsinai.org.
(26)Department of Immunobiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. 
akiko.iwasaki@yale.edu.
(27)Center for Infection and Immunity, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 
USA. akiko.iwasaki@yale.edu.
(28)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD, USA. 
akiko.iwasaki@yale.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2023 Nov;23(11):703. doi: 10.1038/s41577-023-00958-7.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2022 Aug 10:2022.08.09.22278592. doi: 10.1101/2022.08.09.22278592.

Post-acute infection syndromes may develop after acute viral disease1. Infection 
with SARS-CoV-2 can result in the development of a post-acute infection syndrome 
known as long COVID. Individuals with long COVID frequently report unremitting 
fatigue, post-exertional malaise, and a variety of cognitive and autonomic 
dysfunctions2-4. However, the biological processes that are associated with the 
development and persistence of these symptoms are unclear. Here 275 individuals 
with or without long COVID were enrolled in a cross-sectional study that 
included multidimensional immune phenotyping and unbiased machine learning 
methods to identify biological features associated with long COVID. Marked 
differences were noted in circulating myeloid and lymphocyte populations 
relative to the matched controls, as well as evidence of exaggerated humoral 
responses directed against SARS-CoV-2 among participants with long COVID. 
Furthermore, higher antibody responses directed against non-SARS-CoV-2 viral 
pathogens were observed among individuals with long COVID, particularly 
Epstein-Barr virus. Levels of soluble immune mediators and hormones varied among 
groups, with cortisol levels being lower among participants with long COVID. 
Integration of immune phenotyping data into unbiased machine learning models 
identified the key features that are most strongly associated with long COVID 
status. Collectively, these findings may help to guide future studies into the 
pathobiology of long COVID and help with developing relevant biomarkers.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-023-06651-y
PMCID: PMC10620090
PMID: 37748514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: In the past three years, H.M.K. received 
expenses and/or personal fees from UnitedHealth, Element Science, Eyedentifeye 
and F-Prime; he is a co-founder of Refactor Health and HugoHealth; and is 
associated with contracts, through Yale New Haven Hospital, from the Centers for 
Medicare & Medicaid Services and through Yale University from the Food and Drug 
Administration, Johnson & Johnson, Google and Pfizer. N.K. is a scientific 
founder at Thyron; served as a consultant to Boehringer Ingelheim, Pliant, Astra 
Zeneca, RohBar, Veracyte, Galapagos, Fibrogen and Thyron over the past 3 years; 
reports equity in Pliant and Thyron; and acknowledges grants from Veracyte, 
Boehringer Ingelheim and BMS. A.I. co-founded and consults for RIGImmune, Xanadu 
Bio and PanV; consults for Paratus Sciences and InvisiShield Technologies; and 
is a member of the Board of Directors of Roche Holding. A.M.R. and Y.D. are 
listed as inventors on a patent describing the REAP technology. A.M.R. is the 
founder and director of Seranova Bio. A.M.R. and Y.D. hold equity in Seranova 
Bio. The other authors declare no competing interests.