---
reference_id: "PMID:39577422"
title: Elucidating acquired PARP inhibitor resistance in advanced prostate cancer.
authors:
- Seed G
- Beije N
- Yuan W
- Bertan C
- Goodall J
- Lundberg A
- Tyler M
- Figueiredo I
- Pereira R
- Baker C
- Bogdan D
- Gallagher L
- Cieslik JP
- Greening S
- Lambros M
- Neves R
- Magraner-Pardo L
- Fowler G
- Ebbs B
- Miranda S
- Flohr P
- Bianchini D
- Rescigno P
- Porta N
- Hall E
- Gurel B
- Tunariu N
- Sharp A
- Pettit S
- Stoecklein NH
- Sandhu S
- Quigley D
- Lord CJ
- Mateo J
- Carreira S
- de Bono J
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2024.10.015
keywords:
- Humans
- "Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitors/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Male
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/genetics"
- "Prostatic Neoplasms, Castration-Resistant/genetics, drug therapy, pathology"
- BRCA2 Protein/genetics
- Mutation
- "Phthalazines/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Elucidating acquired PARP inhibitor resistance in advanced prostate cancer.
**Authors:** Seed G, Beije N, Yuan W, Bertan C, Goodall J, Lundberg A, Tyler M, Figueiredo I, Pereira R, Baker C, Bogdan D, Gallagher L, Cieslik JP, Greening S, Lambros M, Neves R, Magraner-Pardo L, Fowler G, Ebbs B, Miranda S, Flohr P, Bianchini D, Rescigno P, Porta N, Hall E, Gurel B, Tunariu N, Sharp A, Pettit S, Stoecklein NH, Sandhu S, Quigley D, Lord CJ, Mateo J, Carreira S, de Bono J
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccell.2024.10.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2024.10.015)

## Content

1. Cancer Cell. 2024 Dec 9;42(12):2113-2123.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2024.10.015.
 Epub 2024 Nov 21.

Elucidating acquired PARP inhibitor resistance in advanced prostate cancer.

Seed G(1), Beije N(2), Yuan W(1), Bertan C(1), Goodall J(1), Lundberg A(1),
Tyler M(1), Figueiredo I(1), Pereira R(1), Baker C(1), Bogdan D(1), Gallagher
L(1), Cieslik JP(3), Greening S(1), Lambros M(1), Neves R(3), Magraner-Pardo
L(1), Fowler G(1), Ebbs B(1), Miranda S(1), Flohr P(1), Bianchini D(4), Rescigno
P(1), Porta N(1), Hall E(1), Gurel B(1), Tunariu N(4), Sharp A(2), Pettit S(1),
Stoecklein NH(3), Sandhu S(4), Quigley D(5), Lord CJ(1), Mateo J(6), Carreira
S(1), de Bono J(7).

Author information:
(1)The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK.
(2)The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK; The Royal Marsden NHS
Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(3)Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(4)The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(5)UCSF, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(6)Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain.
(7)The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK; The Royal Marsden NHS
Foundation Trust, London, UK. Electronic address: johann.de-bono@icr.ac.uk.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Urol. 2025 Jan;22(1):3. doi: 10.1038/s41585-024-00984-7.

PARP inhibition (PARPi) has anti-tumor activity against castration-resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC) with homologous recombination repair (HRR) defects.
However, mechanisms underlying PARPi resistance are not fully understood. While
acquired mutations restoring BRCA genes are well documented, their clinical
relevance, frequency, and mechanism of generation remain unclear. Moreover, how
resistance emerges in BRCA2 homozygously deleted (HomDel) CRPC is unknown.
Evaluating samples from patients with metastatic CRPC treated in the TOPARP-B
trial, we identify reversion mutations in most BRCA2/PALB2-mutated tumors (79%)
by end of treatment. Among reversions mediated by frameshift deletions, 60% are
flanked by DNA microhomologies, implicating POLQ-mediated repair. The number of
reversions and time of their detection associate with radiological
progression-free survival and overall survival (p < 0.01). For BRCA2 HomDels,
selection for rare subclones without BRCA2-HomDel is observed following PARPi,
confirmed by single circulating-tumor-cell genomics, biopsy fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH), and RNAish. These data support the need for restored HRR
function in PARPi resistance.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccell.2024.10.015
PMCID: PMC7618010
PMID: 39577422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests J.d.B. reports personal
fees from AstraZeneca, grants and personal fees from Astellas, grants and
personal fees from Amgen, grants and personal fees from Bayer, personal fees
from BioXcel Therapeutics, personal fees from Crescendo, grants and personal
fees from Daiichi, other support from Acai Therapeutics and Dark Blue
Therapeutics, personal fees from Genentech/Roche, personal fees from ImCheck
Therapeutics, grants from Immunic Therapeutics, grants and personal fees from
Janssen, grants and personal fees from Merck Serono, grants and personal fees
from Merck Sharp & Dohme, grants and personal fees from MetaCurUm, grant from
Myricx, personal fees and other support from Novartis, grant from Nurix
Therapeutics, grants and personal fees from Oncternal, grants and personal fees
from Orion, grants and other support from Pfizer, grants and personal fees from
Sanofi Aventis, and grants and other support from Takeda, outside submitted
work; in addition, he has a patent for DNA damage repair inhibitors for
treatment of cancer licensed to AstraZeneca and a patent for 17-substituted
steroids useful in cancer treatment licensed to Janssen. J.d.B. was named as an
inventor, with no financial interest for patent 8,822,438, submitted by Janssen
that covers the use of abiraterone acetate with corticosteroids. He has been the
CI/PI of many industry-sponsored clinical trials. J.d.B. is a National Institute
for Health Research (NIHR) Senior Investigator. P.R. had received fee for
advisory board/consulting activities from Janssen, AstraZeneca, Pfizer, Merck,
and MSD and received travel support from Ipsen. C.J.L. makes the following
disclosures: receives and/or has received research funding from: AstraZeneca,
Merck KGaA, Artios, and Neophore; received consultancy, SAB membership, or
honoraria payments from: FoRx, Syncona, Sun Pharma, Gerson Lehrman Group, Merck
KGaA, Vertex, AstraZeneca, Tango Therapeutics, 3rd Rock, Ono Pharma, Artios,
Abingworth, Tesselate, Dark Blue Therapeutics, Pontifax, Astex, Neophore,
GlaxoSmithKline, Dawn Bioventures, Blacksmith Medicines, and ForEx; and has
stock in: Tango, Ovibio, Hysplex, and Tesselate. C.J.L. is also a named inventor
on patents describing the use of DNA repair inhibitors and stands to gain from
their development and use as part of the ICR “Rewards to Inventors” scheme and
also reports benefits from this scheme associated with patents for PARPi paid
into C.J.L.’s personal account and research accounts at the Institute of Cancer
Research. A.S. is an employee of the ICR, which has a commercial interest in
abiraterone, PARP inhibition in DNA repair defective cancers, and PI3K/AKT
pathway inhibitors (no personal income). A.S. has received travel support from
Sanofi, Roche-Genentech, and Nurix and speaker honoraria from Astellas Pharma
and Merck Sharp & Dohme. He has served as an advisor to DE Shaw Research, CHARM
Therapeutics, Ellipses Pharma, and Droia Ventures. A.S. has been the CI/PI of
industry-sponsored clinical trials. J.M. has served as advisor for AstraZeneca,
Amunix/Sanofi, Daichii-Sankyo, Janssen, MSD, Pfizer, and Roche. He is the PI of
research grants to institution funded by AstraZeneca, Pfizer, and Amgen, none of
them related to this work.
