---
reference_id: "PMID:965496"
title: "Lead poisoning: association with hemolytic anemia, basophilic stippling, erythrocyte pyrimidine 5'-nucleotidase deficiency, and intraerythrocytic accumulation of pyrimidines."
authors:
- Valentine WN
- Paglia DE
- Fink K
- Madokoro G
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1976'
doi: 10.1172/JCI108545
keywords:
- Adult
- "Anemia, Hemolytic/etiology"
- Basophils
- Cytidine/analysis
- "Erythrocytes/enzymology, metabolism"
- Humans
- Lead/blood
- Lead Poisoning/complications
- Male
- "Nucleotidases/deficiency, metabolism"
- Pyrimidine Nucleotides/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lead poisoning: association with hemolytic anemia, basophilic stippling, erythrocyte pyrimidine 5'-nucleotidase deficiency, and intraerythrocytic accumulation of pyrimidines.
**Authors:** Valentine WN, Paglia DE, Fink K, Madokoro G
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1976)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI108545](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI108545)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 1976 Oct;58(4):926-32. doi: 10.1172/JCI108545.

Lead poisoning: association with hemolytic anemia, basophilic stippling, 
erythrocyte pyrimidine 5'-nucleotidase deficiency, and intraerythrocytic 
accumulation of pyrimidines.

Valentine WN, Paglia DE, Fink K, Madokoro G.

Lead intoxication is accompanied by an acquired deficiency of erythrocyte 
pryimidine-specific, 5'-nucleotidase. Genetically determined deficiency of this 
enzyme is associated with chronic hemolysis, marked basophilic stippling of 
erythrocytes on stained blood films, and unique intraerythrocytic accumulations 
of pyrimidine-containing nucleotides. The present report documents that 
lead-induced deficiency when sufficiently severe gives rise to findings similar 
to the hereditary disorder. Whereas pyrimidine-containing nucleotides are 
virutally absent in the erythrocytes of normal and reticulocyte-rich blood, 12% 
of erythrocyte nucloetides in the blood of a patient with lead intoxication 
contained cytidine. Nucleotidase activity was about 25% that in normal 
erythrocytes and 15% or less of that expected in comparable reticulocyte-rich 
blood. The distribution of nucleotidase activity in patient erythrocytes is 
unknown, and much more severe deficiency could have been present in subsets of 
the cell populations analyzed. The findings indicate that the hemolytic anemia 
and increased basophilic stippling characteristic of certain cases of lead 
intoxication may share a common etiology with essentially identical features of 
the genetically determined disorder.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI108545
PMCID: PMC333255
PMID: 965496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]