---
reference_id: "PMID:36152026"
title: "The natural history of fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva: A prospective, global 36-month study."
authors:
- Pignolo RJ
- Baujat G
- Brown MA
- De Cunto C
- Hsiao EC
- Keen R
- Al Mukaddam M
- Le Quan Sang KH
- Wilson A
- Marino R
- Strahs A
- Kaplan FS
journal: Genet Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2022.08.013
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Myositis Ossificans/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology"
- "Ossification, Heterotopic/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Pain
- Prospective Studies
- "Child, Preschool"
- Child
- Young Adult
- Middle Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The natural history of fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva: A prospective, global 36-month study.
**Authors:** Pignolo RJ, Baujat G, Brown MA, De Cunto C, Hsiao EC, Keen R, Al Mukaddam M, Le Quan Sang KH, Wilson A, Marino R, Strahs A, Kaplan FS
**Journal:** Genet Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gim.2022.08.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gim.2022.08.013)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2022 Dec;24(12):2422-2433. doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2022.08.013. Epub
2022  Sep 24.

The natural history of fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva: A prospective,
global 36-month study.

Pignolo RJ(1), Baujat G(2), Brown MA(3), De Cunto C(4), Hsiao EC(5), Keen R(6),
Al Mukaddam M(7), Le Quan Sang KH(2), Wilson A(8), Marino R(8), Strahs A(8),
Kaplan FS(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN. Electronic address:
pignolo.robert@mayo.edu.
(2)Département de Génétique, Hôpital Universitaire Necker-Enfants Malades,
Institut Imagine, Université Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(3)Department of Medicine and Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Life Sciences and
Medicine, School of Basic and Medical Biosciences, King's College London,
London, United Kingdom; Genomics England, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Pediatric Rheumatology Section, Department of Pediatrics, Hospital Italiano
de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(5)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, the UCSF Metabolic Bone Clinic, the
Eli and Edyth Broad Institute for Regeneration Medicine, and the Institute of
Human Genetics, Department of Medicine, and the UCSF Program in Craniofacial
Biology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA.
(6)Centre for Metabolic Bone Disease, Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital,
Stanmore, United Kingdom.
(7)Departments of Orthopaedic Surgery and Medicine, Center for Research in FOP
and Related Disorders, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA.
(8)Ipsen, Cambridge, MA.
(9)Departments of Orthopaedic Surgery and Medicine, Center for Research in FOP
and Related Disorders, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA. Electronic address: Frederick.Kaplan@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.

PURPOSE: We report the first prospective, international, natural history study
of the ultra-rare genetic disorder fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP).
FOP is characterized by painful, recurrent flare-ups, and disabling, cumulative
heterotopic ossification (HO) in soft tissues.
METHODS: Individuals aged ≤65 years with classical FOP (ACVR1R206H variant) were
assessed at baseline and over 36 months.
RESULTS: In total, 114 individuals participated; 33 completed the study (mean
follow up: 26.8 months). Median age was 15.0 (range: 4-56) years; 54.4% were
male. During the study, 82 (71.9%) individuals reported 229 flare-ups (upper
back: 17.9%, hip: 14.8%, shoulder: 10.9%). After 84 days, 14 of 52 (26.9%)
imaged flare-ups had new HO at the flare-up site (mean new HO volume: 28.8 × 103
mm3). Mean baseline low-dose whole-body computed tomography (excluding head) HO
volume was 314.4 × 103 mm3; lowest at 2 to <8 years (68.8 × 103 mm3) and
increasing by age (25-65 years: 575.2 × 103 mm3). The mean annualized volume of
new HO was 23.6 × 103 mm3/year; highest at 8 to <15 and 15 to <25 years (21.9 ×
103 and 41.5 × 103 mm3/year, respectively) and lowest at 25 to 65 years (4.6 ×
103 mm3/year).
CONCLUSION: Results from individuals receiving standard care for up to 3 years
in this natural history study show the debilitating effect and progressive
nature of FOP cross-sectionally and longitudinally, with greatest progression
during childhood and early adulthood.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gim.2022.08.013
PMID: 36152026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest R.J.P. is a research
investigator at Clementia Pharmaceuticals/Ipsen and Regeneron Pharmaceuticals,
Inc and is part of the advisory board as President of the International Clinical
Council on Fibrodysplasia Ossificans Progressiva. G.B. is part of the advisory
boards of Clementia Pharmaceuticals/Ipsen, FOP European Consortium, and
International Clinical Council on FOP and is a speaker at Clementia
Pharmaceuticals/Ipsen. M.A.B. is part of the advisory boards of AbbVie, Janssen,
Pfizer, UCB Pharma, and Novartis; receives grant support from AbbVie; is a
research investigator at AbbVie, Clementia Pharmaceuticals/Ipsen, Janssen,
Novartis, Pathios Therapeutics Ltd, and Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc; and is a
speaker at AbbVie, United States, Janssen, Novartis, Switzerland, Pfizer, United
States, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc, United States, and UCB Pharma, United
Kingdom. C.D.C. is a research investigator at Clementia Pharmaceuticals/Ipsen
and is a speaker at Novartis. E.C.H. is part (all voluntary) of the Fibrous
Dysplasia Foundation Advisory Board, International Fibrodysplasia Ossificans
Progressiva Association (IFOPA), United States Registry Medical Advisory Board,
and International Clinical Council on FOP Advisory Board; receives clinical
research support from Clementia Pharmaceuticals/Ipsen, France, Neurocrine
Biosciences Inc, United States, and Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc; and is a
research investigator at Clementia Pharmaceuticals/Ipsen. R.K. is a research
investigator at Clementia Pharmaceuticals/Ipsen, Kyowa Kirin, and Regeneron
Pharmaceuticals, Inc and is part of the IFOPA Fibrodysplasia Ossificans
Progressiva Registry Medical Advisory Board and International Clinical Council
on Fibrodysplasia Ossificans Progressiva Advisory Board. M.A.M. receives
research support from Clementia Pharmaceuticals/Ipsen and Regeneron
Pharmaceuticals, Inc; is a non-paid consultant for BioCryst Pharmaceuticals,
Inc, United States, Blueprint Medicines, Daiichi Sankyo, Incyte, and Keros
Therapeutics; is part (all voluntary) of the IFOPA Registry Medical Advisory
Board, Incyte Advisory Board, and International Clinical Council on FOP Advisory
Board; and receives non-restricted educational fund from Excel and Catalyst
sponsored by Ipsen. K.-H.L.Q.S. is a coordinator of Ipsen FOP-program and
multiple osteochondromas-trial. A.W., R.M., and A.S. are employees of Ipsen.
F.S.K. is a research investigator at Clementia/Ipsen and Regeneron
Pharmaceuticals, Inc, is part of the IFOPA Medical Advisory Board, is a Founder
and immediate past President of the International Clinical Council on FOP, and
is the Chair of the Publications Committee of the International Clinical
Council. In April 2019, Ipsen acquired Clementia Pharmaceuticals.
