---
reference_id: PMID:15731008
title: "MKKS/BBS6, a divergent chaperonin-like protein linked to the obesity disorder Bardet-Biedl syndrome, is a novel centrosomal component required for cytokinesis."
authors:
- Kim JC
- Ou YY
- Badano JL
- Esmail MA
- Leitch CC
- Fiedrich E
- Beales PL
- Archibald JM
- Katsanis N
- Rattner JB
- Leroux MR
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1242/jcs.01676
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Bardet-Biedl Syndrome/metabolism
- COS Cells
- Cell Division
- "Centrifugation, Density Gradient"
- Centrioles/metabolism
- "Centrosome/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- Cilia/metabolism
- Cytokinesis
- Dyneins/chemistry
- Epithelium/metabolism
- Gene Silencing
- Green Fluorescent Proteins/metabolism
- Group II Chaperonins
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Immunoprecipitation
- In Situ Hybridization
- Mice
- "Microscopy, Fluorescence"
- "Molecular Chaperones/metabolism, physiology"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- NIH 3T3 Cells
- Obesity/metabolism
- Phylogeny
- Plasmids/metabolism
- Protein Binding
- RNA Interference
- "RNA, Small Interfering/metabolism"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Sucrose/pharmacology
- Transfection
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MKKS/BBS6, a divergent chaperonin-like protein linked to the obesity disorder Bardet-Biedl syndrome, is a novel centrosomal component required for cytokinesis.
**Authors:** Kim JC, Ou YY, Badano JL, Esmail MA, Leitch CC, Fiedrich E, Beales PL, Archibald JM, Katsanis N, Rattner JB, Leroux MR
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.01676](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.01676)

## Content

1. J Cell Sci. 2005 Mar 1;118(Pt 5):1007-20. doi: 10.1242/jcs.01676.

MKKS/BBS6, a divergent chaperonin-like protein linked to the obesity disorder 
Bardet-Biedl syndrome, is a novel centrosomal component required for 
cytokinesis.

Kim JC(1), Ou YY, Badano JL, Esmail MA, Leitch CC, Fiedrich E, Beales PL, 
Archibald JM, Katsanis N, Rattner JB, Leroux MR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University, 
8888 University Drive, Burnaby, BC, V5A 1S6, Canada.

Chaperonins are multisubunit, cylinder-shaped molecular chaperones involved in 
folding newly synthesized polypeptides. Here we show that MKKS/BBS6, one of 
several proteins associated with Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS), is a Group II 
chaperonin-like protein that has evolved recently in animals from a subunit of 
the eukaryotic chaperonin CCT/TRiC, and diverged rapidly to acquire distinct 
functions. Unlike other chaperonins, cytosolic BBS6 does not oligomerize, and 
the majority of BBS6 resides within the pericentriolar material (PCM), a 
proteinaceous tube surrounding centrioles. During interphase, BBS6 is confined 
to the lateral surfaces of the PCM but during mitosis it relocalizes throughout 
the PCM and is found at the intercellular bridge. Its predicted 
substrate-binding apical domain is sufficient for centrosomal association, and 
several patient-derived mutations in this domain cause mislocalization of BBS6. 
Consistent with an important centrosomal function, silencing of the BBS6 
transcript by RNA interference in different cell types leads to multinucleate 
and multicentrosomal cells with cytokinesis defects. The restricted tissue 
distribution of BBS6 further suggests that it may play important roles in 
ciliated epithelial tissues, which is consistent with the probable functions of 
BBS proteins in basal bodies (modified centrioles) and cilia. Our findings 
provide the first insight into the nature and cellular function of BBS6, and 
shed light on the potential causes of several ailments, including obesity, 
retinal degeneration, kidney dysfunction and congenital heart disease.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.01676
PMID: 15731008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]