---
reference_id: "PMID:27778219"
title: Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of cystathionine beta-synthase deficiency.
authors:
- Morris AA
- Kožich V
- Santra S
- Andria G
- Ben-Omran TI
- Chakrapani AB
- Crushell E
- Henderson MJ
- Hochuli M
- Huemer M
- Janssen MC
- Maillot F
- Mayne PD
- McNulty J
- Morrison TM
- Ogier H
- "O'Sullivan S"
- Pavlíková M
- de Almeida IT
- Terry A
- Yap S
- Blom HJ
- Chapman KA
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-016-9979-0
keywords:
- Betaine/metabolism
- Cystathionine beta-Synthase/deficiency
- Homocysteine/metabolism
- "Homocystinuria/diet therapy, drug therapy"
- Humans
- Methionine/metabolism
- Pyridoxine/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of cystathionine beta-synthase deficiency.
**Authors:** Morris AA, Kožich V, Santra S, Andria G, Ben-Omran TI, Chakrapani AB, Crushell E, Henderson MJ, Hochuli M, Huemer M, Janssen MC, Maillot F, Mayne PD, McNulty J, Morrison TM, Ogier H, O'Sullivan S, Pavlíková M, de Almeida IT, Terry A, Yap S, Blom HJ, Chapman KA
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-016-9979-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-016-9979-0)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2017 Jan;40(1):49-74. doi: 10.1007/s10545-016-9979-0.
Epub  2016 Oct 24.

Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of cystathionine beta-synthase 
deficiency.

Morris AA(1)(2), Kožich V(3), Santra S(4), Andria G(5), Ben-Omran TI(6), 
Chakrapani AB(7), Crushell E(8), Henderson MJ(9)(10), Hochuli M(11), Huemer 
M(12)(13)(14), Janssen MC(15), Maillot F(16), Mayne PD(17), McNulty J(8), 
Morrison TM(18), Ogier H(19), O'Sullivan S(20), Pavlíková M(3), de Almeida 
IT(21), Terry A(22)(23), Yap S(24), Blom HJ(25), Chapman KA(26).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Development, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. 
Andrew.morris@cmft.nhs.uk.
(2)Willink Unit, Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Central Manchester 
University Hospitals, St Mary's Hospital, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9WL, UK. 
Andrew.morris@cmft.nhs.uk.
(3)Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Charles University in 
Prague-First Faculty of Medicine and General University Hospital in Prague, 
Prague, Czech Republic.
(4)Clinical IMD, Birmingham Children's Hospital, Birmingham, UK.
(5)Department of translational medicine, Federico II University, Naples, Italy.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar.
(7)Department of Metabolic Medicine, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, UK.
(8)National Centre for Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Temple Street Children's 
University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(9)Willink Unit, Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Central Manchester 
University Hospitals, St Mary's Hospital, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9WL, UK.
(10)Biochemical Genetics, St James' University Hospital, Leeds, UK.
(11)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Clinical Nutrition, University 
Hospital Zürich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(12)Division of Metabolism and Children's Research Center, University Children's 
Hospital Zürich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(13)Rare Disease Initiative Zürich, University of Zürich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(14)Dept. of Paediatrics, Landeskrankenhaus Bregenz, Bregenz, Austria.
(15)Department of Internal medicine, Radboud University Medical Center, 
Nijmegen, Netherlands.
(16)CHRU de Tours, Université François Rabelais, Tours, France.
(17)Newborn Bloodspot Screening Laboratory, Temple Street Children's University 
Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(18)HCU Network, Baulkham Hills, Australia.
(19)Service de Neurologie Pédiatrique et des Maladies Métaboliques, Hôpital 
Robert Debré, Paris, France.
(20)Royal Belfast Hospital for Sick Children, Belfast, UK.
(21)Metabolism & Genetics Group, Faculty of Pharmacy at University of Lisboa, 
Lisboa, Portugal.
(22)Institute of Human Development, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(23)Dietetic Department, Alder Hey Hospital, Liverpool, UK.
(24)Dept of Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Sheffield Children's Hospital, 
Sheffield, UK.
(25)Laboratory of Clinical Biochemistry and Metabolism, Department of General 
Pediatrics, Adolescent Medicine and Neonatology, University Medical Centre 
Freiburg, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany.
(26)Division of Genetic and Metabolism, Children's National Health System, 
Washington, DC, USA.

Comment in
    J Inherit Metab Dis. 2017 Jan;40(1):1-2. doi: 10.1007/s10545-016-9998-x.

Cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) deficiency is a rare inherited disorder in the 
methionine catabolic pathway, in which the impaired synthesis of cystathionine 
leads to accumulation of homocysteine. Patients can present to many different 
specialists and diagnosis is often delayed. Severely affected patients usually 
present in childhood with ectopia lentis, learning difficulties and skeletal 
abnormalities. These patients generally require treatment with a low-methionine 
diet and/or betaine. In contrast, mildly affected patients are likely to present 
as adults with thromboembolism and to respond to treatment with pyridoxine. In 
this article, we present recommendations for the diagnosis and management of CBS 
deficiency, based on a systematic review of the literature. Unfortunately, the 
quality of the evidence is poor, as it often is for rare diseases. We strongly 
recommend measuring the plasma total homocysteine concentrations in any patient 
whose clinical features suggest the diagnosis. Our recommendations may help to 
standardise testing for pyridoxine responsiveness. Current evidence suggests 
that patients are unlikely to develop complications if the plasma total 
homocysteine concentration is maintained below 120 μmol/L. Nevertheless, we 
recommend keeping the concentration below 100 μmol/L because levels fluctuate 
and the complications associated with high levels are so serious.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-016-9979-0
PMCID: PMC5203861
PMID: 27778219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Compliance with ethical standards Competing 
interests The authors of these guidelines declare no competing interests but 
disclose the following: Andrew Morris, Tawfeg Ben-Omran, Anupam Chakrapani, 
Ellen Crushell, Martina Huemer, Sufin Yap, Henk Blom and Kimberly Chapman have 
received honoraria for lectures and/or hotel/travel expenses for relevant 
meetings from Orphan Europe or the Recordati Rare Disease Foundation. Henk Blom 
has received a research grant from Orphan Europe. Charles University in 
Prague-First Faculty of Medicine received support from the Recordati Rare 
Disease Foundation for organizing an educational course on homocystinurias and 
methylation defects, and reimbursement for laboratory analyses from Orphan 
Technologies. HCU Network Australia has received sponsorship from Orphan 
Technologies and support from the Recordati Rare Disease Foundation for a 
patient expert meet.