---
reference_id: "PMID:34568242"
title: "PIK3CA-Related Overgrowth Spectrum From Diagnosis to Targeted Therapy: A Case of CLOVES Syndrome Treated With Alpelisib."
authors:
- Pagliazzi A
- Oranges T
- Traficante G
- Trapani C
- Facchini F
- Martin A
- Semeraro A
- Perrone A
- Filippeschi C
- Giglio S
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2021.732836
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PIK3CA-Related Overgrowth Spectrum From Diagnosis to Targeted Therapy: A Case of CLOVES Syndrome Treated With Alpelisib.
**Authors:** Pagliazzi A, Oranges T, Traficante G, Trapani C, Facchini F, Martin A, Semeraro A, Perrone A, Filippeschi C, Giglio S
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2021.732836](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2021.732836)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2021 Sep 9;9:732836. doi: 10.3389/fped.2021.732836. eCollection
 2021.

PIK3CA-Related Overgrowth Spectrum From Diagnosis to Targeted Therapy: A Case of 
CLOVES Syndrome Treated With Alpelisib.

Pagliazzi A(1), Oranges T(2), Traficante G(1), Trapani C(3), Facchini F(4), 
Martin A(4), Semeraro A(5), Perrone A(5), Filippeschi C(2), Giglio S(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children's University Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(2)Dermatology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Meyer Children's University 
Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Meyer Children's University Hospital, Florence, 
Italy.
(4)Department of Plastic Surgery, Meyer Children's University Hospital, 
Florence, Italy.
(5)Department of Radiology, Meyer Children's University Hospital, Florence, 
Italy.
(6)Department of Medical Sciences and Public Health, University of Cagliari, 
Cagliari, Italy.

PIK3CA-related overgrowth spectrum (PROS) is an umbrella term referring to 
various clinical entities, which share the same pathogenetic mechanism. These 
conditions are caused by somatic gain-of-function mutations in PIK3CA, which 
encodes the 110-kD catalytic α subunit of PI3K (p110α). These PIK3CA mutations 
occur as post-zygotic events and lead to a gain of function of PI3K, with 
consequent constitutional activation of the downstream cascades (e.g., AKT/mTOR 
pathway), involved in cellular proliferation, survival and growth, as well as in 
vascular development in the embryonic stage. PIK3CA-related cancers and PROS 
share almost the same PIK3CA mutational profile, with about 80% of mutations 
occurring at three hotspots, E542, E545, and H1047. These hotspot mutations show 
the most potent effect on enzymatic activation of PI3K and consequent downstream 
biological responses. If present at the germinal level, these gain-of-function 
mutations would be lethal to the embryo, therefore we only see them in the 
mosaic state. The common clinical denominator of PROS disorders is that they are 
sporadic conditions, presenting with congenital or early childhood onset 
overgrowth with a typical mosaic distribution. However, the severity of PROS is 
highly variable, ranging from localized and apparently isolate overgrowth to 
progressive and extensive lipomatous overgrowth associated with life-threatening 
vascular malformations, as seen in CLOVES syndrome. Traditional therapeutic 
approaches, such as sclerotherapy and surgical debulking, are often not curative 
in PROS patients, leading to a recrudescence of the overgrowth in the treated 
area. Specific attention has been recently paid to molecules that are used and 
studied in the oncogenic setting and that are targeted on specific alterations 
of the pathway PI3K/AKT/mTOR. In June 2018, Venot et al. showed the effect of 
Alpelisib (BYL719), a specific inhibitor for the p110α subunit of PI3K, in 
patients with PROS disorders who had severe or life-threatening complications 
and were not sensitive to any other treatment. In these cases, dramatic 
anatomical and functional improvements occurred in all patients across many 
types of affected organ. Molecular testing in PROS patients is a crucial step in 
providing the conclusive diagnosis and then the opportunity for tailored 
therapy. The somatic nature of this group of diseases makes challenging to reach 
a molecular diagnosis, requiring deep sequencing methods that have to be 
performed on DNA extracted from affected tissue. Moreover, even analyzing the 
DNA extracted from affected tissue there is no guarantee to succeed in detection 
of the casual somatic mutation, since the affected tissue itself is highly 
heterogeneous and biopsy approaches can be burdened by incorrect sampling or 
inadequate tissue sample. We present an 8-year-old girl with CLOVES syndrome, 
born with a large cystic lymphangioma involving the left hemithorax and flank, 
multiple lipomas, and hypertrophy of the left foot and leg. She developed severe 
scoliosis. Many therapeutic approaches have been attempted, including Sildenafil 
treatment, scleroembolization, laser therapy, and multiple debulking surgeries, 
but none of these were of benefit to our patient's clinical status. She then 
started treatment with Rapamycin from May 2019, without significant improvement 
in both vascular malformation and leg hypertrophy. A high-coverage Whole Exome 
Sequencing analysis performed on DNA extracted from a skin sample showed a 
mosaic gain-of-function variant in the PIK3CA gene (p.H1047R, 11% of variant 
allele frequency). Once molecular confirmation of our clinical suspicion was 
obtained, after a multidisciplinary evaluation, we decided to discontinue 
Sirolimus and start targeted therapy with Alpelisib (50 mg/day). We noticed a 
decrease in fibroadipose overgrowth at the dorsal level, an improvement in in 
posture and excellent tolerability. The treatment is still ongoing.

Copyright © 2021 Pagliazzi, Oranges, Traficante, Trapani, Facchini, Martin, 
Semeraro, Perrone, Filippeschi and Giglio.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2021.732836
PMCID: PMC8459713
PMID: 34568242

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.