---
reference_id: "PMID:27542302"
title: "Adalimumab for prevention of uveitic flare in patients with inactive non-infectious uveitis controlled by corticosteroids (VISUAL II): a multicentre, double-masked, randomised, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial."
authors:
- Nguyen QD
- Merrill PT
- Jaffe GJ
- Dick AD
- Kurup SK
- Sheppard J
- Schlaen A
- Pavesio C
- Cimino L
- Van Calster J
- Camez AA
- Kwatra NV
- Song AP
- Kron M
- Tari S
- Brézin AP
journal: Lancet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31339-3
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Adalimumab/therapeutic use
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- Adult
- Aged
- Anti-Inflammatory Agents/therapeutic use
- Chronic Disease
- Disease-Free Survival
- Double-Blind Method
- Evidence-Based Medicine
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Treatment Failure
- Treatment Outcome
- "Uveitis/drug therapy, prevention & control"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adalimumab for prevention of uveitic flare in patients with inactive non-infectious uveitis controlled by corticosteroids (VISUAL II): a multicentre, double-masked, randomised, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial.
**Authors:** Nguyen QD, Merrill PT, Jaffe GJ, Dick AD, Kurup SK, Sheppard J, Schlaen A, Pavesio C, Cimino L, Van Calster J, Camez AA, Kwatra NV, Song AP, Kron M, Tari S, Brézin AP
**Journal:** Lancet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31339-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31339-3)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2016 Sep 17;388(10050):1183-92. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31339-3.
Epub  2016 Aug 16.

Adalimumab for prevention of uveitic flare in patients with inactive 
non-infectious uveitis controlled by corticosteroids (VISUAL II): a multicentre, 
double-masked, randomised, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial.

Nguyen QD(1), Merrill PT(2), Jaffe GJ(3), Dick AD(4), Kurup SK(5), Sheppard 
J(6), Schlaen A(7), Pavesio C(8), Cimino L(9), Van Calster J(10), Camez AA(11), 
Kwatra NV(12), Song AP(12), Kron M(11), Tari S(12), Brézin AP(13).

Author information:
(1)Ocular Imaging Research and Reading Center (OIRRC), Omaha, NE, USA. 
Electronic address: quan.nguyen@unmc.edu.
(2)Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(4)University of Bristol, Bristol Eye Hospital, Bristol, UK; National Institute 
for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre, London, UK.
(5)Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center, Winston-Salem, NC, USA.
(6)Lions Medical Eye Bank of Eastern Virginia, Eastern Virginia Medical School 
and Virginia Eye Consultants, Norfolk, VA, USA.
(7)Austral University, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(8)Moorfields Eye Hospital and University College London, Institute of 
Ophthalmology, London, UK.
(9)Arcispedale Santa Maria Nuova IRCCS, Reggio Emilia RE, Italy.
(10)University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(11)AbbVie Deutschland, Ludwigshafen, Germany.
(12)AbbVie, North Chicago, IL, USA.
(13)Université Paris Descartes, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France.

Erratum in
    Lancet. 2016 Sep 17;388(10050):1160. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31538-0.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2016 Sep 17;388(10050):1134-6. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31327-7.

BACKGROUND: Non-infectious uveitis is a potentially sight-threatening ocular 
disorder caused by chronic inflammation and its complications. Therapeutic 
success is limited by systemic adverse effects associated with long-term 
corticosteroid and immunomodulator use if topical medication is not sufficient 
to control the inflammation. We aimed to assess the efficacy and safety of 
adalimumab in patients with inactive, non-infectious uveitis controlled by 
systemic corticosteroids.
METHODS: We did this multicentre, double-masked, randomised, placebo-controlled 
phase 3 trial at 62 study sites in 21 countries in the USA, Canada, Europe, 
Israel, Australia, and Latin America. Patients (aged ≥18 years) with inactive, 
non-infectious intermediate, posterior, or panuveitic uveitis controlled by 
10-35 mg/day of prednisone were randomly assigned (1:1), via an interactive 
voice and web response system with a block size of four, to receive either 
subcutaneous adalimumab (loading dose 80 mg; biweekly dose 40 mg) or placebo, 
with a mandatory prednisone taper from week 2. Randomisation was stratified by 
baseline immunosuppressant treatment. Sponsor personnel with direct oversight of 
the conduct and management of the study, investigators, study site personnel, 
and patients were masked to treatment allocation. The primary efficacy endpoint 
was time to treatment failure, a multicomponent endpoint encompassing new active 
inflammatory chorioretinal or inflammatory retinal vascular lesions, anterior 
chamber cell grade, vitreous haze grade, and visual acuity. Analysis was done in 
the intention-to-treat population. This trial is registered with 
ClinicalTrials.gov number NCT01124838.
FINDINGS: Between Aug 10, 2010, and May 14, 2015, we randomly assigned 229 
patients to receive placebo (n=114) or adalimumab (n=115); 226 patients 
comprised the intention-to-treat population. Median follow-up time was 155 days 
(IQR 77-357) in the placebo group and 245 days (119-564) in the adalimumab 
group. Treatment failure occurred in 61 (55%) of 111 patients in the placebo 
group compared with 45 (39%) of 115 patients in the adalimumab group. Time to 
treatment failure was significantly improved in the adalimumab group compared 
with the placebo group (median not estimated [>18 months] vs 8·3 months; hazard 
ratio 0·57, 95% CI 0·39-0·84; p=0·004). The 40th percentile for time to 
treatment failure was 4·8 months in the placebo group and 10·2 months in the 
adalimumab group. No patients in either group had opportunistic infections 
(excluding oral candidiasis and tuberculosis). No malignancies were reported in 
the placebo group whereas one (1%) patient in the adalimumab group reported 
non-serious squamous cell carcinoma. The most common adverse events were 
arthralgia (12 [11%] patients in the placebo group and 27 [23%] patients in the 
adalimumab group), nasopharyngitis (16 [17%] and eight [16%] patients, 
respectively), and headache (17 [15%] patients in each group).
INTERPRETATION: Adalimumab significantly lowered the risk of uveitic flare or 
loss of visual acuity upon corticosteroid withdrawal in patients with inactive, 
non-infectious intermediate, posterior, or panuveitic uveitis controlled by 
systemic corticosteroids. No new safety signals were observed and the rate of 
adverse events was similar between groups. These findings suggest that 
adalimumab is well tolerated and could be an effective treatment option in this 
patient population. An open-label extension study (NCT01148225) is ongoing to 
provide long-term safety data for adalimumab in patients with non-infectious 
uveitis.
FUNDING: AbbVie.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31339-3
PMID: 27542302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]