---
reference_id: "PMID:37704498"
title: Prophylactic HPV vaccines in patients with HPV-associated diseases and cancer.
authors:
- Reuschenbach M
- Doorbar J
- Del Pino M
- Joura EA
- Walker C
- Drury R
- Rauscher A
- Saah AJ
journal: Vaccine
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2023.08.047
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Papillomavirus Vaccines
- "Papillomavirus Infections/complications, prevention & control, epidemiology"
- Uterine Cervical Neoplasms
- Human Papillomavirus Viruses
- Vaccination
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prophylactic HPV vaccines in patients with HPV-associated diseases and cancer.
**Authors:** Reuschenbach M, Doorbar J, Del Pino M, Joura EA, Walker C, Drury R, Rauscher A, Saah AJ
**Journal:** Vaccine (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.vaccine.2023.08.047](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2023.08.047)

## Content

1. Vaccine. 2023 Oct 6;41(42):6194-6205. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2023.08.047. Epub
 2023 Sep 12.

Prophylactic HPV vaccines in patients with HPV-associated diseases and cancer.

Reuschenbach M(1), Doorbar J(2), Del Pino M(3), Joura EA(4), Walker C(2), Drury 
R(5), Rauscher A(6), Saah AJ(6).

Author information:
(1)Merck & Co., Inc., 2025 E Scott Ave, Rahway, NJ, USA; MSD Sharp & Dohme GmbH, 
Levelingstraße 4a, 81673 Munich, Germany. Electronic address: 
miriam.reuschenbach@msd.de.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, 
Cambridge CB2 1QP, United Kingdom.
(3)Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Universitat de Barcelona, Gran Via de les Corts 
Catalanes, 585, 08007 Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Medical University of Vienna, Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, BT86/E 01, Spitalgasse 23, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
(5)MSD, 10-12 Cours Michelet, 92800 Puteaux, France.
(6)Merck & Co., Inc., 2025 E Scott Ave, Rahway, NJ, USA.

Individuals with human papillomavirus (HPV)-related disease remain at risk for 
subsequent HPV infection and related disease after treatment of specific 
lesions. Prophylactic HPV vaccines have shown benefits in preventing subsequent 
HPV-related disease when administered before or soon after treatment. Based on 
our understanding of the HPV life cycle and vaccine mechanism of action, 
prophylactic HPV vaccination is not expected to clear active persistent HPV 
infection or unresected HPV-associated dysplastic tissue remaining after 
surgery. However, vaccination may reasonably be expected to prevent new HPV 
infections caused by a different HPV type as well as re-infection with the same 
HPV type, whether from a new exposure to an infected partner or through 
autoinoculation from an adjacent or distant productively infected site. In this 
review, we describe the evidence for using prophylactic HPV vaccines in patients 
with HPV-associated disease before, during, or after treatment and discuss 
potential mechanisms by which individuals with HPV-associated disease may or may 
not benefit from prophylactic vaccines. We also consider how precise terminology 
relating to the use of prophylactic vaccines in this population is critical to 
avoid the incorrect implication that prophylactic vaccines have direct 
therapeutic potential, which would be counter to the vaccine's mechanism of 
action, as well as considered off-label. In other words, the observed effects 
occur through the known mechanism of action of prophylactic HPV vaccines, namely 
by preventing virus of the same or a different HPV type from infecting the 
patient after the procedure.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2023.08.047
PMID: 37704498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: JD has no competing interests. CW 
has received a grant for doctoral study from Hughes Hall Cambridge Trust 
International Scholarship. In the past, she received a research grant for 
postgraduate study from Hologic Inc. MdP has received personal fees for 
scientific advisory committee meetings and speaking fees from MSD. EAJ has 
received advisory board and speaker honoraria, and research grants through his 
institution from MSD. RD, AR, MR, and AJS are employees of Merck Sharp & Dohme 
LLC, a subsidiary of Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA, who may own stock 
and/or hold stock options in Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA.