---
reference_id: "PMID:22879519"
title: The NOD2insC polymorphism is associated with worse outcome following ileal pouch-anal anastomosis for ulcerative colitis.
authors:
- Tyler AD
- Milgrom R
- Stempak JM
- Xu W
- Brumell JH
- Muise AM
- Sehgal R
- Cohen Z
- Koltun W
- Shen B
- Silverberg MS
journal: Gut
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-301957
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The NOD2insC polymorphism is associated with worse outcome following ileal pouch-anal anastomosis for ulcerative colitis.
**Authors:** Tyler AD, Milgrom R, Stempak JM, Xu W, Brumell JH, Muise AM, Sehgal R, Cohen Z, Koltun W, Shen B, Silverberg MS
**Journal:** Gut (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1136/gutjnl-2011-301957](https://doi.org/10.1136/gutjnl-2011-301957)

## Content

1. Gut. 2013 Oct;62(10):1433-9. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-301957. Epub 2012 Aug 9.

The NOD2insC polymorphism is associated with worse outcome following ileal 
pouch-anal anastomosis for ulcerative colitis.

Tyler AD(1), Milgrom R, Stempak JM, Xu W, Brumell JH, Muise AM, Sehgal R, Cohen 
Z, Koltun W, Shen B, Silverberg MS.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.

Comment in
    Gut. 2013 Oct;62(10):1390-1. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2012-303188.

BACKGROUND: Inflammatory complications after ileal pouch-anal anastomosis (IPAA) 
for ulcerative colitis (UC) are common.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether genetic factors are associated with adverse 
pouch outcomes such as chronic pouchitis (CP) and a Crohn's disease-like (CDL) 
phenotype.
DESIGN: 866 patients were recruited from three centres in North America: Mount 
Sinai Hospital (Toronto, Ontario, Canada), the Cleveland Clinic (Cleveland, 
Ohio, USA) and Penn State Milton S Hershey Medical Center (Hershey, 
Pennsylvania, USA). DNA and clinical and demographic information were collected. 
Subjects were classified into post-surgical outcome groups: no chronic pouchitis 
(NCP), CP and CDL phenotype.
RESULTS: Clinical and genetic data were available on 714 individuals. 487 
(68.2%) were classified as NCP, 118 (16.5%) CP and 109 (15.3%) CDL. The presence 
of arthritis or arthropathy (p=0.02), primary sclerosing cholangitis (p=0.009) 
and duration of time from ileostomy closure to recruitment (p=0.001) were 
significantly associated with outcome. The NOD2insC (rs2066847) risk variant was 
the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) most significantly associated with 
pouch outcome (p=7.4×10(-5)). Specifically, it was associated with both CP and 
CDL in comparison with NCP (OR=3.2 and 4.3, respectively). Additionally, SNPs in 
NOX3 (rs6557421, rs12661812), DAGLB (rs836518) and NCF4 (rs8137602) were shown 
to be associated with pouch outcome with slightly weaker effects. A 
multivariable risk model combining previously identified clinical (smoking 
status, family history of inflammatory bowel disease), serological 
(anti-Saccharomyces cerevisiae antibody IgG, perinuclear antineutrophil 
cytoplasmic antibody and anti-CBir1) and genetic markers was constructed and 
resulted in an OR of 2.72 (p=8.89×10(-7)) for NCP versus CP/CDL and 3.22 
(p=4.11×10(-8)) for NCP versus CDL, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Genetic polymorphisms, in particular, the NOD2insC risk allele, are 
associated with chronic inflammatory pouch outcomes among patients with UC and 
IPAA.

DOI: 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-301957
PMID: 22879519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]