---
reference_id: "PMID:2149963"
title: Neuropathology of Down syndrome and Alzheimer disease.
authors:
- Cork LC
journal: Am J Med Genet Suppl
year: '1990'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320370756
keywords:
- Alzheimer Disease/pathology
- Brain/pathology
- Down Syndrome/pathology
- Humans
- Neurofibrils/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuropathology of Down syndrome and Alzheimer disease.
**Authors:** Cork LC
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet Suppl (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.1320370756](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.1320370756)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet Suppl. 1990;7:282-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320370756.

Neuropathology of Down syndrome and Alzheimer disease.

Cork LC(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Comparative Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205.

Patients with Down syndrome (DS) over 40 years of age, prematurely and
consistently develop neurofibrillary tangles (NFT), intracytoplasmic inclusions
of highly insoluble straight or paired helical 12-16 nm filaments, and senile
plaques (SP) composed of abnormal neurites surrounding a core of beta amyloid.
These two lesions occur in distributions similar to those seen in Alzheimer
disease (AD). SP and NFT are detected also in some younger individuals with DS
(10-30+ years) when immunocytochemical and/or silver staining techniques are
used. Retrospective and prospective attempts to relate neuropathological lesions
and clinical dementia in DS have produced conflicting results. Clinical evidence
of dementia and large numbers of SP and NFT were not always concordant. The
predictable and consistent appearance of the AD-like neuropathologic changes in
DS provides an unusual opportunity to examine the sequential development of SP
and NFT. By combining morphological, immunocytochemical, and morphometric
techniques with molecular biological approaches, the evolution of the structural
and chemical changes in DS and AD can be examined and their relationship to
clinical deficits can be evaluated.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.1320370756
PMID: 2149963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
