---
reference_id: "PMID:29763093"
title: Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis.
authors:
- Chandra D
- Cherian SV
year: '2026'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis.
**Authors:** Chandra D, Cherian SV

## Content

1. Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis.

Chandra D(1), Cherian SV(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2026 
Jan–.
2023 Jul 10.

Author information:
(1)Sutter Roseville
(2)UT Health-McGovern Medical School, Houston

Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP) classified as an interstitial lung disease is 
characterized by a complex immunological reaction of the lung parenchyma in 
response to repetitive inhalation of a sensitized allergen. The name HP defines 
the disease more appropriately than the previous term extrinsic allergic 
alveolitis, as the inflammation involves not only the alveoli but the 
bronchioles as well. The severity of the disease and clinical presentation 
varies depending on the inhaled antigen and quantity. The first detailed 
clinical descriptions of the disease came out in 1932 describing symptoms in 
workers exposed to a fungus on Maple bark at a Michigan company and agricultural 
workers exposed to moldy hay in England. Since these initial observations, 
numerous exposures have been described from all over the world that causes HP. 
Traditionally it has been classified into acute, sub-acute and chronic forms 
based on the time course and the presentation. But more recently classifying 
it to Acute or Inflammatory HP (symptoms less than six months) and Chronic or 
fibrotic HP has been proposed based on clinical, radiologic and pathologic 
characteristics.

Copyright © 2026, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 29763093

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Deepak Chandra declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Sujith Cherian 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.