---
reference_id: "PMID:28572266"
title: Cancer Screening Recommendations for Individuals with Li-Fraumeni Syndrome.
authors:
- Kratz CP
- Achatz MI
- Brugières L
- Frebourg T
- Garber JE
- Greer MC
- Hansford JR
- Janeway KA
- Kohlmann WK
- McGee R
- Mullighan CG
- Onel K
- Pajtler KW
- Pfister SM
- Savage SA
- Schiffman JD
- Schneider KA
- Strong LC
- Evans DGR
- Wasserman JD
- Villani A
- Malkin D
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-17-0408
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cancer Screening Recommendations for Individuals with Li-Fraumeni Syndrome.
**Authors:** Kratz CP, Achatz MI, Brugières L, Frebourg T, Garber JE, Greer MC, Hansford JR, Janeway KA, Kohlmann WK, McGee R, Mullighan CG, Onel K, Pajtler KW, Pfister SM, Savage SA, Schiffman JD, Schneider KA, Strong LC, Evans DGR, Wasserman JD, Villani A, Malkin D
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-17-0408](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-17-0408)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2017 Jun 1;23(11):e38-e45. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-17-0408.

Cancer Screening Recommendations for Individuals with Li-Fraumeni Syndrome.

Kratz CP(1), Achatz MI(2), Brugières L(3), Frebourg T(4), Garber JE(5), Greer 
MC(6), Hansford JR(7)(8), Janeway KA(9), Kohlmann WK(10), McGee R(11), Mullighan 
CG(12), Onel K(13), Pajtler KW(14)(15), Pfister SM(14)(15), Savage SA(2), 
Schiffman JD(16), Schneider KA(5), Strong LC(17), Evans DGR(18), Wasserman 
JD(18), Villani A(19), Malkin D(19).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany.
(2)Clinical Genetics Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland.
(3)Child and Adolescent Cancer Department, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, 
Villejuif, France.
(4)Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France.
(5)Center for Cancer Genetics and Prevention, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 
Boston, Massachusetts.
(6)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, The Hospital for Sick Children, Department 
of Medical Imaging, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(7)Children's Cancer Centre, Royal Children's Hospital, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Australia.
(8)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 
Australia.
(9)Harvard Medical School, Pediatric Solid Tumor Center, Dana-Farber Cancer 
Institute, Boston Children's Hospital Cancer Center, Boston, Massachusetts.
(10)Huntsman Cancer Institute, Salt Lake City, Utah.
(11)Department of Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, 
Tennessee.
(12)Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, 
Tennessee.
(13)Hofstra Northwell School of Medicine, Cohen Children's Medical Center, 
Northwell Health, Manhasset, New York.
(14)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology & Immunology, Heidelberg 
University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(15)Division of Pediatric Neuro-Oncology, German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), 
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(16)Department of Pediatrics and Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, 
Salt Lake City, Utah.
(17)Department of Genetics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas.
(18)Medical Genetics and Cancer Epidemiology, Genomic Medicine, Manchester 
Academic Health Science Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, United 
Kingdom.
(19)Division of Endocrinology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Department of 
Pediatrics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 
david.malkin@sickkids.ca anita.villani@sickkids.ca.

Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is an autosomal dominantly inherited condition caused 
by germline mutations of the TP53 tumor suppressor gene encoding p53, a 
transcription factor triggered as a protective cellular mechanism against 
different stressors. Loss of p53 function renders affected individuals highly 
susceptible to a broad range of solid and hematologic cancers. It has recently 
become evident that children and adults with LFS benefit from intensive 
surveillance aimed at early tumor detection. In October 2016, the American 
Association for Cancer Research held a meeting of international LFS experts to 
evaluate the current knowledge on LFS and propose consensus surveillance 
recommendations. Herein, we briefly summarize clinical and genetic aspects of 
this aggressive cancer predisposition syndrome. In addition, the expert panel 
concludes that there are sufficient existing data to recommend that all patients 
with LFS be offered cancer surveillance as soon as the clinical or molecular LFS 
diagnosis is established. Specifically, the panel recommends adoption of a 
modified version of the "Toronto protocol" that includes a combination of 
physical exams, blood tests, and imaging. The panel also recommends that further 
research be promoted to explore the feasibility and effectiveness of these 
risk-adapted surveillance and cancer prevention strategies while addressing the 
psychosocial needs of individuals and families with LFS. Clin Cancer Res; 
23(11); e38-e45. ©2017 AACRSee all articles in the online-only CCR Pediatric 
Oncology Series.

©2017 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-17-0408
PMID: 28572266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]