---
reference_id: "PMID:20301734"
title: Phosphoribosylpyrophosphate Synthetase Superactivity.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- de Brouwer APM
- Christodoulou J
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phosphoribosylpyrophosphate Synthetase Superactivity.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, de Brouwer APM, Christodoulou J

## Content

1. Phosphoribosylpyrophosphate Synthetase Superactivity.

de Brouwer APM(1), Christodoulou J(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2008 Sep 23 [updated 2022 Feb 17].

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center,
Nijmegen, the Netherlands
(2)Director and Genetics Theme/Group Co-Leader, Brain and Mitochondrial Research
Group, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Chair in Genomic Medicine,
Department of Pædiatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase (PRS)
superactivity comprises two phenotypes, both characterized by hyperuricemia and
hyperuricosuria. The mild phenotype (~75% of affected males) with onset in the
second or third decade of life is typically limited to these biochemical
findings, whereas the severe phenotype (~25% of affected males) with onset in
the first decade of life has in addition to these biochemical findings variable
combinations of developmental delay (DD) / intellectual disability (ID),
sensorineural hearing loss, hypotonia, and ataxia. In the mild phenotype, uric
acid crystalluria or a urinary stone is commonly the first clinical finding,
followed later by gouty arthritis if serum urate concentration is not
controlled.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: In male probands with the mild phenotype, detection of high
activity or lack of allosteric regulation of the PRS-I enzyme (PRS-I enzyme
assay) establishes the diagnosis. Molecular genetic testing of PRPS1 fails to
detect a hemizygous pathogenic variant. In male probands with the severe
phenotype, molecular genetic testing establishes the diagnosis by identification
of a hemizygous PRPS1 pathogenic variant in males and a heterozygous PRPS1
pathogenic variant in females. In symptomatic female probands, PRS-I enzyme
assay and/or PRPS1 molecular genetic testing establishes the diagnosis.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: In all individuals, hyperuricemia and
hyperuricosuria can be reduced by treatment with allopurinol or febuxostat to
reduce uric acid formation and thus serum urate and urinary uric acid; high
daily fluid intake; and, as needed, potassium citrate to alkalinize the urine.
In individuals with the severe phenotype, DD/ID, sensorineural hearing loss,
hypotonia, and ataxia are managed per standard care. Surveillance: All
individuals: monthly measurement of 24-hour urinary uric acid excretion or a
spot urinary urate-to-creatinine ratio helps in assessing the response to
treatment; once a normal serum urate concentration is achieved, serum urate
concentration should be monitored at a minimum annually to assure that target
urate concentration is maintained; a 24-hour urine should be monitored at least
annually for urate and xanthine particularly to ensure that urinary xanthine
does not exceed solubility (<1 mmol/L). In the severe phenotype: monitor
development / educational needs, neurologic manifestations, and hearing.
Agents/circumstances to minimize or avoid: In all individuals: high-purine meats
(i.e., red and organ meats), shellfish, oily fish (e.g., anchovies, sardines),
beer, high-fructose corn syrup-containing beverages and foods, dehydration, and
if possible, urate-retaining medications (e.g., low-dose aspirin, thiazide
diuretics). Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is appropriate to screen
apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an individual
with PRS superactivity in order to identify as early as possible those who would
benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures for hyperuricemia
and hyperuricosuria. Evaluations include: In male and female relatives:
molecular genetic testing if a PRPS1 pathogenic variant has been identified in
an affected family member; In male relatives at risk: measurement of serum urate
concentration and 24-hour urinary uric acid excretion or spot urinary
urate-to-creatinine ratio. Note: Biochemical testing is unlikely to be
informative in asymptomatic females.
GENETIC COUNSELING: PRS superactivity caused by a pathogenic variant in PRPS1 is
inherited in an X-linked manner. Females who are heterozygous for a PRPS1
pathogenic variant have a 50% chance of transmitting the pathogenic variant in
each pregnancy: males who inherit the pathogenic variant will be severely
affected; females who inherit the pathogenic variant will be heterozygous and
may be asymptomatic or have a range of features. Males with a PRPS1 pathogenic
variant transmit the pathogenic variant to all of their daughters and none of
their sons. If a PRPS1 pathogenic variant has been identified in the proband,
heterozygote testing for at-risk female relatives, prenatal testing for a
pregnancy at increased risk, and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.
PRS superactivity caused by elevated PRPS1 mRNA levels is also inherited in an
X-linked manner; however, because the underlying genetic alteration has not been
characterized, the mode of inheritance cannot be confirmed with certainty.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301734
