---
reference_id: "PMID:41566887"
title: "Clinical risk factors and antimicrobial resistance associated with campylobacteriosis in Melbourne, Australia: a retrospective analysis."
authors:
- Yerramilli A
- Bond K
- Cronin K
- Chan E
journal: Intern Med J
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1111/imj.70310
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical risk factors and antimicrobial resistance associated with campylobacteriosis in Melbourne, Australia: a retrospective analysis.
**Authors:** Yerramilli A, Bond K, Cronin K, Chan E
**Journal:** Intern Med J (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1111/imj.70310](https://doi.org/10.1111/imj.70310)

## Content

1. Intern Med J. 2026 Jan 21. doi: 10.1111/imj.70310. Online ahead of print.

Clinical risk factors and antimicrobial resistance associated with 
campylobacteriosis in Melbourne, Australia: a retrospective analysis.

Yerramilli A(1)(2)(3)(4), Bond K(1)(2)(4)(5), Cronin K(1)(2)(4)(5), Chan 
E(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia.
(2)Victorian Infectious Diseases Service, The Royal Melbourne Hospital, 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia.
(4)The Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

Antimicrobial resistance in Campylobacter is a global concern. We conducted a 
single-centre retrospective observational study to investigate antimicrobial 
resistance in adult patients with Campylobacter gastroenteritis (2020-2023). 
From our cohort of 331 patients over 3 years, there was 22% ciprofloxacin 
resistance and 100% susceptibility to erythromycin. Compared to prior literature 
in Australia, ciprofloxacin resistance has increased over time. Ongoing 
antimicrobial surveillance, stewardship and review of treatment guidelines are 
recommended.

© 2026 Royal Australasian College of Physicians.

DOI: 10.1111/imj.70310
PMID: 41566887