---
reference_id: "PMID:39000457"
title: "Parotid Gland Tumors: Molecular Diagnostic Approaches."
authors:
- Vrinceanu D
- Dumitru M
- Bratiloveanu M
- Marinescu A
- Serboiu C
- Manole F
- Palade DO
- Costache A
- Costache M
- Patrascu O
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25137350
keywords:
- Humans
- "Parotid Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Carcinoma, Mucoepidermoid/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Molecular Diagnostic Techniques/methods
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence/methods"
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Parotid Gland Tumors: Molecular Diagnostic Approaches.
**Authors:** Vrinceanu D, Dumitru M, Bratiloveanu M, Marinescu A, Serboiu C, Manole F, Palade DO, Costache A, Costache M, Patrascu O
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25137350](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25137350)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Jul 4;25(13):7350. doi: 10.3390/ijms25137350.

Parotid Gland Tumors: Molecular Diagnostic Approaches.

Vrinceanu D(1), Dumitru M(1), Bratiloveanu M(2), Marinescu A(3), Serboiu C(4), 
Manole F(5), Palade DO(6), Costache A(2), Costache M(2), Patrascu O(2).

Author information:
(1)ENT Department, Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 050474 
Bucharest, Romania.
(2)Pathology Department, Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
050474 Bucharest, Romania.
(3)Radiology Department, Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
050474 Bucharest, Romania.
(4)Molecular Biology and Histology Department, Carol Davila University of 
Medicine and Pharmacy, 050474 Bucharest, Romania.
(5)ENT Department, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oradea, 410073 Oradea, 
Romania.
(6)ENT Department, Grigore Popa University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 700115 
Iasi, Romania.

Parotid gland pathology represents a web of differential diagnoses. There are 
many complex cases that require extensive diagnostic tests for a complete and 
correct final pathology diagnosis. Currently the official classification of 
parotid gland tumors extends over more than 40 subtypes. We performed a query of 
the PubMed database regarding the use of molecular biology tests in performing a 
better characterization of the tumors in specific cases. By using fluorescence 
in situ hybridization (FISH), reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction 
(RT-PCR) or next-generation sequencing, the team managing complex cases can 
offer a personalized therapeutic solution. We review the molecular differential 
diagnosis according to published articles in the last 5 years for many types of 
parotid gland tumors ranging from benign to borderline malign tumors to malign 
aggressive tumors. Mucoepidermoid carcinoma is a distinct subtype of parotid 
malignancy that was the subject of a consistent number of articles. However, the 
molecular biology diagnosis techniques helped more in excluding the diagnosis of 
mucoepidermoid carcinoma, and probably retrospectively limiting the number of 
cases with this final diagnosis. In Romania, the molecular biology diagnosis is 
available only in limited research facilities and should receive more consistent 
funding that will make it available on a larger scale. The novelty of this 
scoping review is that we propose an algorithm for molecular differential 
diagnosis of the tumors that could be encountered in the parotid gland.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25137350
PMCID: PMC11242036
PMID: 39000457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.