---
reference_id: "PMID:34407376"
title: "Type 1 Diabetes and Associated Cardiovascular Damage: Contribution of Extracellular Vesicles in Tissue Crosstalk."
authors:
- Garavelli S
- Prattichizzo F
- Ceriello A
- Galgani M
- de Candia P
journal: Antioxid Redox Signal
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1089/ars.2021.0053
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type 1 Diabetes and Associated Cardiovascular Damage: Contribution of Extracellular Vesicles in Tissue Crosstalk.
**Authors:** Garavelli S, Prattichizzo F, Ceriello A, Galgani M, de Candia P
**Journal:** Antioxid Redox Signal (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1089/ars.2021.0053](https://doi.org/10.1089/ars.2021.0053)

## Content

1. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2022 Apr;36(10-12):631-651. doi: 10.1089/ars.2021.0053.
 Epub 2021 Aug 18.

Type 1 Diabetes and Associated Cardiovascular Damage: Contribution of 
Extracellular Vesicles in Tissue Crosstalk.

Garavelli S(1), Prattichizzo F(2), Ceriello A(2), Galgani M(1)(3), de Candia 
P(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Endocrinology and Experimental Oncology "G. Salvatore," 
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (C.N.R.), Naples, Italy.
(2)IRCCS MultiMedica, Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of 
Naples "Federico II," Italy.

Significance: Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is characterized by the autoimmune 
destruction of the insulin secreting β-cells, with consequent aberrant blood 
glucose levels. Hyperglycemia is the common denominator for most of the chronic 
diabetic vascular complications, which represent the main cause of life 
reduction in T1D patients. For this disease, three interlaced medical needs 
remain: understanding the underlying mechanisms involved in pancreatic β-cell 
loss; identifying biomarkers able to predict T1D progression and its related 
complications; recognizing novel therapeutic targets. Recent Advances: 
Extracellular vesicles (EVs), released by most cell types, were discovered to 
contain a plethora of different molecules (including microRNAs) with regulatory 
properties, which are emerging as mediators of cell-to-cell communication at the 
paracrine and endocrine level. Recent knowledge suggests that EVs may act as 
pathogenic factors, and be developed into disease biomarkers and therapeutic 
targets in the context of several human diseases. Critical Issues: EVs have been 
recently shown to sustain a dysregulated cellular crosstalk able to exacerbate 
the autoimmune response in the pancreatic islets of T1D; moreover, EVs were 
shown to be able to monitor and/or predict the progression of T1D and the 
insurgence of vasculopathies. Future Directions: More mechanistic studies are 
needed to investigate whether the dysregulation of EVs in T1D patients is solely 
reflecting the progression of diabetes and related complications, or EVs also 
directly participate in the disease process, thus pointing to a potential use of 
EVs as therapeutic targets/tools in T1D. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 36, 631-651.

DOI: 10.1089/ars.2021.0053
PMID: 34407376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]