---
reference_id: "PMID:31599243"
title: Tuberculosis in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Patients.
authors:
- Ahmmed MF
- Islam MN
- Ferdous S
- Azad AK
- Ferdous N
journal: Mymensingh Med J
year: '2019'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tuberculosis in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Patients.
**Authors:** Ahmmed MF, Islam MN, Ferdous S, Azad AK, Ferdous N
**Journal:** Mymensingh Med J (2019)

## Content

1. Mymensingh Med J. 2019 Oct;28(4):797-807.

Tuberculosis in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Patients.

Ahmmed MF(1), Islam MN, Ferdous S, Azad AK, Ferdous N.

Author information:
(1)Dr Md Faysal Ahmmed, Consultant, BRB Hospital, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

The tubercular infections (TB) are most important cause of morbidity and 
mortality in SLE patients worldwide and an ongoing alarming issue in developing 
countries. This observational study was carried out in SLE clinic of BSMMU, 
Bangladesh from April 2015 to March 2016 after taking ethical clearance from IRB 
to observe frequency and risk factors of tuberculosis in SLE patients. A total 
230 consecutive SLE patients were enrolled. Patient's clinical characteristics, 
history of TB, SLEDAI score, cumulative doses of immunosuppressants were 
recorded. In clinically suspected cases tuberculin test, chest X-ray, spot and 
first morning sputum for AFB, Gene Xpert MTB/RIF, ADA, FNAC and tissue biopsy 
were requested along with routine tests. The multivariate logistic regressions 
were done for risk factors. Out of 230 patients TB was documented in 23 (10%) 
subjects. Among TB cases 16 women and 7 men. Mean age of patients was 27.56±9.3 
years and mean duration of occurrence of tuberculosis after SLE diagnosis was 
4.26±5.38 years. Present and past TB was observed in 10 and 13 cases 
respectively. Cough, night sweat, fever, anorexia were significant presenting 
features. Fifteen and 8 patients had pulmonary and extra pulmonary TB 
respectively. Organ involvement pattern was multi-lobed lungs, joint, meninges, 
lymph nodes, peritoneum and pleura. High disease activity disease (SLEDAI score 
>12), total intake of prednisolone >1000mg were risk factors of TB. Frequency of 
tuberculosis was high (10%) in SLE patients. Awareness including prevention of 
flares and judicious use of steroids might reduce the rate of TB.

PMID: 31599243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]