---
reference_id: "PMID:40229831"
title: Microvesicles carrying EV71 virions cross BBB through endocytic pathway to induce brain injury.
authors:
- Tian X
- Liu B
- Li L
- Yuan M
- You Q
- Zhang R
- Chen D
- Cheng M
- Zheng N
- He M
- Wu Z
journal: Cell Commun Signal
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s12964-025-02195-y
keywords:
- Animals
- "Enterovirus A, Human/physiology"
- "Blood-Brain Barrier/virology, metabolism, pathology"
- Virion/metabolism
- Mice
- "Brain Injuries/virology, pathology, metabolism"
- Endocytosis
- Humans
- "Cell-Derived Microparticles/metabolism, virology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Microvesicles carrying EV71 virions cross BBB through endocytic pathway to induce brain injury.
**Authors:** Tian X, Liu B, Li L, Yuan M, You Q, Zhang R, Chen D, Cheng M, Zheng N, He M, Wu Z
**Journal:** Cell Commun Signal (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12964-025-02195-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12964-025-02195-y)

## Content

1. Cell Commun Signal. 2025 Apr 14;23(1):183. doi: 10.1186/s12964-025-02195-y.

Microvesicles carrying EV71 virions cross BBB through endocytic pathway to 
induce brain injury.

Tian X(1), Liu B(1), Li L(1), Yuan M(1), You Q(1), Zhang R(2), Chen D(1)(3), 
Cheng M(1), Zheng N(4)(5), He M(6), Wu Z(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Center for Public Health Research, Medical School, Nanjing University, 22 
Hankou Rd, Nanjing, 210093, China.
(2)Medical School, The Drum Tower Hospital, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Bengbu Medical University, Bengbu, China.
(4)Center for Public Health Research, Medical School, Nanjing University, 22 
Hankou Rd, Nanjing, 210093, China. nanzheng@nju.edu.cn.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Analytical Chemistry for Life Science, Nanjing 
University, Nanjing, China. nanzheng@nju.edu.cn.
(6)School of Pharmacy, Dali University, Dali, Yunnan, 671000, P.R. China. 
hemiao@dali.edu.cn.
(7)Center for Public Health Research, Medical School, Nanjing University, 22 
Hankou Rd, Nanjing, 210093, China. wzhw@nju.edu.cn.
(8)School of Pharmacy, Dali University, Dali, Yunnan, 671000, P.R. China. 
wzhw@nju.edu.cn.
(9)State Key Laboratory of Analytical Chemistry for Life Science, Nanjing 
University, Nanjing, China. wzhw@nju.edu.cn.

Enterovirus 71 (EV71) is a major etiologic pathogen for hand-foot-and-mouth 
disease (HFMD) in young children. Severe cases of EV71 infection could lead to 
neurological complications and even death, while the mechanism inducing 
neurological complications remains poorly understood. In this study, we firstly 
proved that microvesicles (MVs) could carry EV71 virions and mediate a higher 
efficiency in infection. Utilizing an in vitro blood-brain barrier (BBB) model, 
we observed that MVs containing virions (MVsEV71) could cross the BBB with 
greater efficiency compared to EV71 alone. Through in vivo imaging, we confirmed 
the ability of MVs to cross the BBB. qPCR assays showed a higher copy number of 
EV71 in both blood and brain samples in the mice treated with MVsEV71 compared 
to those treated with free EV71. Also, our investigation unveiled that MVsEV71 
infection of animals induced cerebral hemorrhage and more severe inflammatory 
infiltration in the brain compared to animals infected by EV71 in vivo. 
Furthermore, we found a reduction in the expression of junction proteins such as 
zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1) and occludin. Moreover, the uptake of MVs by brain 
cells was examined using chemical inhibitor to block the endocytic pathway. Our 
experiments elucidated that the internalization of MVs occurred via a 
non-clathrin-dependent mechanism and a portion of the internalized MVs proceeded 
to enter lysosomes. In addition, we identified damaged mitochondria as the 
"cargo" of MVs, which facilitated MVsEV71 crossing the BBB and inducing cellular 
apoptosis. Meanwhile, MVsEV71 crossing the BBB further induced mitochondrial 
damaged and activated NOX4-derived ROS pathway in U251 cells. Taken together, 
these findings suggested that MVs transported EV71 virions across the BBB, while 
damaged mitochondria facilitated this process and aggravated the brain injury. 
Overall, these observations provide new insights into EV71-induced neurogenic 
complications and present a novel therapeutic target for the treatment of viral 
encephalitis.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12964-025-02195-y
PMCID: PMC11995561
PMID: 40229831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors 
declare no competing interests.