---
reference_id: "PMID:33350506"
title: "Vitiligo: an update on systemic treatments."
authors:
- Searle T
- Al-Niaimi F
- Ali FR
journal: Clin Exp Dermatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/ced.14435
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vitiligo: an update on systemic treatments.
**Authors:** Searle T, Al-Niaimi F, Ali FR
**Journal:** Clin Exp Dermatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ced.14435](https://doi.org/10.1111/ced.14435)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2021 Mar;46(2):248-258. doi: 10.1111/ced.14435. Epub 2020
Dec  22.

Vitiligo: an update on systemic treatments.

Searle T(1), Al-Niaimi F(2), Ali FR(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Birmingham, Birmingham, West Midlands, UK.
(2)Dermatology Department, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark.
(3)Vernova Healthcare Community Interest Company, Macclesfield, Cheshire, UK.

Vitiligo is an autoimmune skin condition characterized by depigmented macules 
and patches, and has a huge psychosocial impact on patients. Treatment of 
vitiligo aims to prevent the spread of disease and facilitate repigmentation of 
affected lesions. The mainstay of treatment for unstable vitiligo has been 
topical agents (corticosteroids, calcineurin inhibitors) and phototherapy. 
However, systemic treatments are increasingly being shown to have a significant 
impact on the course of the disease as monotherapy or adjunctive therapy. Of 
note, oral mini-pulsed corticosteroid therapy, methotrexate, minocycline, 
ciclosporin, Janus kinase inhibitors and certain supplements have been used in 
the systemic treatment of vitiligo. We review the underlying evidence supporting 
the use of each of these systemic treatments.

© 2020 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/ced.14435
PMID: 33350506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]