---
reference_id: "PMID:21525302"
title: "Evidence for a continuum of genetic, phenotypic, and biochemical abnormalities in children with growth hormone insensitivity."
authors:
- David A
- Hwa V
- Metherell LA
- Netchine I
- Camacho-Hübner C
- Clark AJ
- Rosenfeld RG
- Savage MO
journal: Endocr Rev
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1210/er.2010-0023
keywords:
- Animals
- Child
- Growth
- Human Growth Hormone/physiology
- Humans
- Insulin-Like Growth Factor I/physiology
- "Laron Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evidence for a continuum of genetic, phenotypic, and biochemical abnormalities in children with growth hormone insensitivity.
**Authors:** David A, Hwa V, Metherell LA, Netchine I, Camacho-Hübner C, Clark AJ, Rosenfeld RG, Savage MO
**Journal:** Endocr Rev (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1210/er.2010-0023](https://doi.org/10.1210/er.2010-0023)

## Content

1. Endocr Rev. 2011 Aug;32(4):472-97. doi: 10.1210/er.2010-0023. Epub 2011 Apr
27.

Evidence for a continuum of genetic, phenotypic, and biochemical abnormalities 
in children with growth hormone insensitivity.

David A(1), Hwa V, Metherell LA, Netchine I, Camacho-Hübner C, Clark AJ, 
Rosenfeld RG, Savage MO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Barts and the London School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, London, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Horm Res Paediatr. 2017;88(6):418-420. doi: 10.1159/000481285.

GH insensitivity (GHI) presents in childhood as growth failure and in its severe 
form is associated with dysmorphic and metabolic abnormalities. GHI may be 
caused by genetic defects in the GH-IGF-I axis or by acquired states such as 
chronic illness. This article discusses the former category. The field of GHI 
due to mutations affecting GH action has evolved considerably since the original 
description of the extreme phenotype related to homozygous GH receptor (GHR) 
mutations over 40 yr ago. A continuum of genetic, phenotypic, and biochemical 
abnormalities can be defined associated with clinically relevant defects in 
linear growth. The role and mechanisms of the GH-IGF-I axis in normal human 
growth is discussed, followed by descriptions of mutations in GHR, STAT5B, 
PTPN11, IGF1, IGFALS, IGF1R, and GH1 defects causing bioinactive GH or anti-GH 
antibodies. These defects are associated with a range of genetic, clinical, and 
hormonal characteristics. Genetic abnormalities causing growth failure that is 
less severe than the extreme phenotype are emphasized, together with an analysis 
of height and serum IGF-I across the spectrum of different types of GHR defects. 
An overall view of genotype and phenotype relationships is presented, together 
with an updated approach to the assessment of the patient with GHI, focusing on 
investigation of the GH-IGF-I axis and relevant molecular studies contributing 
to this diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1210/er.2010-0023
PMID: 21525302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]