---
reference_id: "PMID:36385047"
title: Transient and Recurrent Pulmonary Infiltrations Associated with Familial Mediterranean Fever.
authors:
- Nishiyama M
- Takahashi K
- Morizumi S
- Takahashi Y
- Iwamura S
- Sumitomo K
- Nakano S
- Shinohara T
journal: Intern Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.8951-21
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transient and Recurrent Pulmonary Infiltrations Associated with Familial Mediterranean Fever.
**Authors:** Nishiyama M, Takahashi K, Morizumi S, Takahashi Y, Iwamura S, Sumitomo K, Nakano S, Shinohara T
**Journal:** Intern Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.2169/internalmedicine.8951-21](https://doi.org/10.2169/internalmedicine.8951-21)

## Content

1. Intern Med. 2022;61(22):3415-3419. doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.8951-21. Epub
 2022 Nov 15.

Transient and Recurrent Pulmonary Infiltrations Associated with Familial 
Mediterranean Fever.

Nishiyama M(1), Takahashi K(1), Morizumi S(1)(2), Takahashi Y(1), Iwamura S(3), 
Sumitomo K(1), Nakano S(4), Shinohara T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Internal Medicine, Japan Agricultural Cooperatives Kochi 
Hospital, Japan.
(2)Department of Community Medicine for Respirology, Graduate School of 
Biomedical Sciences, Tokushima University, Japan.
(3)Japan Agricultural Cooperatives Kochi Health Care Center, Japan.
(4)Division of Otolaryngology, National Hospital Organization Kochi Hospital, 
Japan.

Chest symptoms and pleural effusion due to serositis in familial Mediterranean 
fever (FMF) are occasionally misdiagnosed as acute pneumonia. However, the 
actual pulmonary involvement of FMF is extremely rare. A 67-year-old man was 
referred to our hospital due to repeated and transient anterior chest pain. 
Chest images revealed a moderate amount of pericardial fluid, slight bilateral 
pleural effusion, and infiltrations in both lower lung lobes. Colchicine 
treatment without antibiotics rapidly improved these symptoms and findings. 
Pericarditis, pleurisy and the response to colchicine indicated FMF. FMF should 
be considered as a causative disease of pulmonary infiltrations, especially if 
it occurs repeatedly.

DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.8951-21
PMCID: PMC9751738
PMID: 36385047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors state that they have no Conflict of 
Interest (COI).