---
reference_id: "PMID:29925425"
title: Value of peripheral blood count for dengue severity prediction.
authors:
- Ralapanawa U
- Alawattegama ATM
- Gunrathne M
- Tennakoon S
- Kularatne SAM
- Jayalath T
journal: BMC Res Notes
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s13104-018-3505-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Value of peripheral blood count for dengue severity prediction.
**Authors:** Ralapanawa U, Alawattegama ATM, Gunrathne M, Tennakoon S, Kularatne SAM, Jayalath T
**Journal:** BMC Res Notes (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13104-018-3505-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13104-018-3505-4)

## Content

1. BMC Res Notes. 2018 Jun 20;11(1):400. doi: 10.1186/s13104-018-3505-4.

Value of peripheral blood count for dengue severity prediction.

Ralapanawa U(1), Alawattegama ATM(2), Gunrathne M(2), Tennakoon S(3), Kularatne 
SAM(2), Jayalath T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Peradeniya, 
Peradeniya, Sri Lanka. udayapralapanawa@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Peradeniya, 
Peradeniya, Sri Lanka.
(3)Department of Community Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Peradeniya, Peradeniya, Sri Lanka.

OBJECTIVE: This retrospective study was conducted in 2017 with the objective of 
evaluating the value of acute phase peripheral blood parameters in predicting 
dengue haemorrhagic fever (DHF). Patients, who were admitted to Teaching 
Hospital Peradeniya between January and August 2017 due to dengue illness, were 
recruited into this study.
RESULTS: A total of 515 patients participated in the study. Among them, 333 were 
DHF patients while 182 patients were managed as DF. There was a significant 
difference in mean values of platelets and haemoglobin observed during acute 
phase in non-leakers compared to the patients who progressed to DHF, while no 
significant difference was observed for white blood cells, neutrophils, 
lymphocytes and haematocrit values. A significantly higher mean value was 
observed in white blood cells and hemoglobin in leakers compared to non-leakers 
during day 5. Mean day 5 platelet value was significantly lower among leakers 
compared to non-leakers but no significant difference between haematocrit, 
neutrophil and lymphocyte values were observed. ROC curve performed for acute 
phase platelet values and haemoglobin values to gain a predictive value for 
female and male DHF patients and cut off values with high sensitivity and 
specificity to predict DHF could be obtained for the platelet count.

DOI: 10.1186/s13104-018-3505-4
PMCID: PMC6011352
PMID: 29925425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]