---
reference_id: "PMID:27916589"
title: A Novel Mechanism for Human Cardiac Ankyrin-B Syndrome due to Reciprocal Chromosomal Translocation.
authors:
- Huq AJ
- Pertile MD
- Davis AM
- Landon H
- James PA
- Kline CF
- Vohra J
- Mohler PJ
- Delatycki MB
journal: Heart Lung Circ
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.hlc.2016.09.013
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, physiopathology"
- Adult
- Ankyrins/genetics
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 4/genetics"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 9/genetics"
- Family
- Female
- "Fetal Diseases/genetics, physiopathology"
- Haploinsufficiency
- Humans
- Male
- Pregnancy
- "Translocation, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Novel Mechanism for Human Cardiac Ankyrin-B Syndrome due to Reciprocal Chromosomal Translocation.
**Authors:** Huq AJ, Pertile MD, Davis AM, Landon H, James PA, Kline CF, Vohra J, Mohler PJ, Delatycki MB
**Journal:** Heart Lung Circ (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hlc.2016.09.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hlc.2016.09.013)

## Content

1. Heart Lung Circ. 2017 Jun;26(6):612-618. doi: 10.1016/j.hlc.2016.09.013. Epub
2016 Nov 16.

A Novel Mechanism for Human Cardiac Ankyrin-B Syndrome due to Reciprocal
Chromosomal Translocation.

Huq AJ(1), Pertile MD(2), Davis AM(3), Landon H(4), James PA(5), Kline CF(4),
Vohra J(6), Mohler PJ(4), Delatycki MB(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Austin Hospital, Melbourne, Vic, Australia;
Department of Genetic Medicine, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Vic,
Australia. Electronic address: aamira.huq@mh.org.au.
(2)Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Melbourne, Vic, Australia; Department
of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Vic, Australia.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Vic,
Australia; Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Vic,
Australia; Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Vic, Australia.
(4)Dorothy M. Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute; Departments of Physiology
& Cell Biology and Internal Medicine; Ohio State University Wexner Medical
Center, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(5)Department of Genetic Medicine, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Vic,
Australia; Department of Pathology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Vic,
Australia.
(6)Department of Genetic Medicine, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Vic,
Australia; Department of Cardiology, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Vic,
Australia.
(7)Department of Clinical Genetics, Austin Hospital, Melbourne, Vic, Australia;
Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Melbourne, Vic, Australia; Department of
Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Vic, Australia; Bruce Lefroy
Centre, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Vic, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Cardiac rhythm abnormalities are a leading cause of morbidity and
mortality in developed countries. Loss-of-function variants in the ANK2 gene can
cause a variety of cardiac rhythm abnormalities including sinus node
dysfunction, atrial fibrillation and ventricular arrhythmias (called the
"ankyrin-B syndrome"). ANK2 encodes ankyrin-B, a molecule critical for the
membrane targeting of key cardiac ion channels, transporters, and signalling
proteins.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Here, we describe a family with a reciprocal chromosomal
translocation between chromosomes 4q25 and 9q26 that transects the ANK2 gene on
chromosome 4 resulting in loss-of-function of ankyrin-B. Select family members
with ankyrin-B haploinsufficiency due to the translocation displayed clinical
features of ankyrin-B syndrome. Furthermore, evaluation of primary lymphoblasts
from a carrier of the translocation showed altered levels of ankyrin-B as well
as a reduced expression of downstream ankyrin-binding partners.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, our data conclude that, similar to previously described ANK2
loss-of-function "point mutations", large chromosomal translocations resulting
in ANK2 haploinsufficiency are sufficient to cause the human cardiac ankyrin-B
syndrome. The unexpected ascertainment of ANK2 dysfunction via the discovery of
a chromosomal translocation in this family, the determination of the familial
phenotype, as well as the complexities in formulating screening and treatment
strategies are discussed.

Copyright © 2016 Australian and New Zealand Society of Cardiac and Thoracic
Surgeons (ANZSCTS) and the Cardiac Society of Australia and New Zealand (CSANZ).
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hlc.2016.09.013
PMCID: PMC5413386
PMID: 27916589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: The authors declare no conflicts of
interest.
