---
reference_id: "PMID:36730360"
title: Endothelial dysfunction in ME/CFS patients.
authors:
- Sandvik MK
- Sørland K
- Leirgul E
- Rekeland IG
- Stavland CS
- Mella O
- Fluge Ø
journal: PLoS One
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0280942
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endothelial dysfunction in ME/CFS patients.
**Authors:** Sandvik MK, Sørland K, Leirgul E, Rekeland IG, Stavland CS, Mella O, Fluge Ø
**Journal:** PLoS One (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0280942](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0280942)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2023 Feb 2;18(2):e0280942. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0280942. 
eCollection 2023.

Endothelial dysfunction in ME/CFS patients.

Sandvik MK(1), Sørland K(2), Leirgul E(3), Rekeland IG(2)(4), Stavland CS(4), 
Mella O(2)(4), Fluge Ø(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Addiction, Telemark Hospital Trust, Skien, 
Norway.
(2)Department of Oncology and Medical Physics, Haukeland University Hospital, 
Bergen, Norway.
(3)Department of Heart Disease, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

OBJECTIVE: A few earlier studies have found impaired endothelial function in 
patients with Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS). The 
present study investigated large-vessel and small-vessel endothelial function in 
patients with ME/CFS.
STUDY DESIGN: The study was a substudy of the RituxME trial, a national, 
multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase III study on the 
effect of rituximab vs. placebo in ME/CFS patients in Norway. Flow-mediated 
dilation (FMD) and post-occlusive reactive hyperemia (PORH) was measured at 
baseline and after 18 months of treatment in 39 patients and compared with 
healthy controls. Other outcome measures were symptom severity and various 
physical function measures.
RESULTS: ME/CFS patients had markedly reduced FMD compared to healthy controls 
at baseline (5.1% vs. 8.2%, p< 0.0001, adjusted for arterial diameter and sex), 
and significantly lower microvascular regulation measured by PORH than healthy 
controls (1354 PU vs. 2208 PU, p = 0.002). There were no differences between the 
treatment and placebo groups in symptom changes or vascular measures. As a 
group, the ME/CSF patients experienced a slight, but significant improvement in 
clinical symptoms after 18 months. PORH, but not FMD, was similarly improved 
(1360 to 1834 PU, p = 0.028). There was no significant correlation between FMD 
and PORH. There were non-significant tendencies towards associations between 
symptom severity/physical function measures and lower FMD and PORH, and a 
significant correlation between PORH and steps per 24 hours at baseline.
CONCLUSIONS: ME/CFS patients had reduced macro- and microvascular endothelial 
function, indicating that vascular homeostasis may play a role in the clinical 
presentation of this disease.

Copyright: © 2023 Sandvik et al. This is an open access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0280942
PMCID: PMC9894436
PMID: 36730360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.