---
reference_id: "PMID:38697731"
title: "Diagnosis, treatment, and surveillance of Diamond-Blackfan anaemia syndrome: international consensus statement."
authors:
- Wlodarski MW
- Vlachos A
- Farrar JE
- Da Costa LM
- Kattamis A
- Dianzani I
- Belendez C
- Unal S
- Tamary H
- Pasauliene R
- Pospisilova D
- de la Fuente J
- Iskander D
- Wolfe L
- Liu JM
- Shimamura A
- Albrecht K
- Lausen B
- Bechensteen AG
- Tedgard U
- Puzik A
- Quarello P
- Ramenghi U
- Bartels M
- Hengartner H
- Farah RA
- Al Saleh M
- Hamidieh AA
- Yang W
- Ito E
- Kook H
- Ovsyannikova G
- Kager L
- Gleizes PE
- Dalle JH
- Strahm B
- Niemeyer CM
- Lipton JM
- Leblanc TM
- international Diamond-Blackfan anaemia syndrome guideline panel
journal: Lancet Haematol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/S2352-3026(24)00063-2
keywords:
- Humans
- "Anemia, Diamond-Blackfan/diagnosis, therapy, genetics"
- Disease Management
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis, treatment, and surveillance of Diamond-Blackfan anaemia syndrome: international consensus statement.
**Authors:** Wlodarski MW, Vlachos A, Farrar JE, Da Costa LM, Kattamis A, Dianzani I, Belendez C, Unal S, Tamary H, Pasauliene R, Pospisilova D, de la Fuente J, Iskander D, Wolfe L, Liu JM, Shimamura A, Albrecht K, Lausen B, Bechensteen AG, Tedgard U, Puzik A, Quarello P, Ramenghi U, Bartels M, Hengartner H, Farah RA, Al Saleh M, Hamidieh AA, Yang W, Ito E, Kook H, Ovsyannikova G, Kager L, Gleizes PE, Dalle JH, Strahm B, Niemeyer CM, Lipton JM, Leblanc TM, international Diamond-Blackfan anaemia syndrome guideline panel
**Journal:** Lancet Haematol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2352-3026(24)00063-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2352-3026(24)00063-2)

## Content

1. Lancet Haematol. 2024 May;11(5):e368-e382. doi: 10.1016/S2352-3026(24)00063-2.

Diagnosis, treatment, and surveillance of Diamond-Blackfan anaemia syndrome: 
international consensus statement.

Wlodarski MW(1), Vlachos A(2), Farrar JE(3), Da Costa LM(4), Kattamis A(5), 
Dianzani I(6), Belendez C(7), Unal S(8), Tamary H(9), Pasauliene R(10), 
Pospisilova D(11), de la Fuente J(12), Iskander D(12), Wolfe L(13), Liu JM(14), 
Shimamura A(15), Albrecht K(16), Lausen B(17), Bechensteen AG(18), Tedgard 
U(19), Puzik A(20), Quarello P(21), Ramenghi U(21), Bartels M(22), Hengartner 
H(23), Farah RA(24), Al Saleh M(25), Hamidieh AA(26), Yang W(27), Ito E(28), 
Kook H(29), Ovsyannikova G(30), Kager L(31), Gleizes PE(32), Dalle JH(33), 
Strahm B(20), Niemeyer CM(34), Lipton JM(2), Leblanc TM(33); international 
Diamond-Blackfan anaemia syndrome guideline panel.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 
USA; Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatrics and 
Adolescent Medicine, Medical Center, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. Electronic address: marcin.wlodarski@stjude.org.
(2)Cohen Children's Medical Center, Hematology/Oncology and Stem Cell 
Transplantation, Hew Hyde Park, NY, USA; Feinstein Institutes for Medical 
Research, Manhasset, NY, USA; Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell, 
Hempstead, NY, USA.
(3)Arkansas Children's Research Institute and Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA.
(4)Hôpital R. DEBRE, Groupe Hospitalier Universitaire, Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris Nord, Université de Paris Cité, Paris, France; 
HEMATIM, EA4666, UPJV, Amiens, France; Le LabEx Gr-Ex - Biogénèse et Pathologies 
du Globule Rouge, Paris, France.
(5)First Department of Pediatrics, National and Kapodistrian University of 
Athens, Athens, Greece.
(6)Department of Health Sciences, Università del Piemonte Orientale, Novara, 
Italy.
(7)Pediatric Hematology and Oncology Department, Hospital Universitario Gregorio 
Marañón, Madrid, Spain; Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, 
Madrid, Spain; Instituto Investigación Sanitaria Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, 
Spain; Instituto Nacional de Investigación Biomédica en Enfermedades Raras 
(CIBERER), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(8)Hacettepe University, Department of Pediatric Hematology and Research Center 
for Fanconi Anemia and Other Inherited Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(9)The Rina Zaizov Hematology-Oncology Division, Schneider Children's Medical 
Center of Israel, Peta Tikvah, Israel; Felsenstein Medical Research Center, 
Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(10)Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty Hospital of Palacky University, Olomouc, 
Czech Republic.
(12)Department of Paediatrics, St Mary's Hospital, Imperial College Healthcare 
NHS Trust, London, UK; Department of Immunology and Inflammation, Imperial 
College London, London, UK.
(13)Cohen Children's Medical Center, Hematology/Oncology and Stem Cell 
Transplantation, Hew Hyde Park, NY, USA; Zucker School of Medicine at 
Hofstra/Northwell, Hempstead, NY, USA.
(14)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, The Tisch Cancer Institute, New York, NY, USA.
(15)Dana Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(16)Department of Oncology, Paediatric Haematology, Clinical Transplantology and 
Paediatrics, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(17)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Rigshospitalet, University 
of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(18)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Oslo University Hospital, 
Oslo, Norway.
(19)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Skåne University Hospital, 
Lund, Sweden.
(20)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatrics and 
Adolescent Medicine, Medical Center, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(21)Department of Pediatric and Public Health Sciences, University of Turin, 
Turin, Italy.
(22)Pediatric Hematology Department, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, 
Netherlands.
(23)Pediatric Hospital of Eastern Switzerland St Gallen, St Gallen, Switzerland.
(24)Department of Pediatrics, LAU Medical Center-Rizk Hospital, Beirut, Lebanon.
(25)King Faisal Hospital and Research Center Riyadh, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(26)Pediatric Cell and Gene Therapy Research Center, Gene, Cell & Tissue 
Research Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(27)State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, National Clinical Research 
Center for Blood Diseases, Haihe Laboratory of Cell Ecosystem, Institute of 
Hematology and Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(28)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Hirosaki, Japan.
(29)Chonnam National University Hwasun Hospital, Gwangju, South Korea.
(30)Dmitry Rogachev National Medical Research Center of Pediatric Hematology, 
Oncology and Immunology, Moscow, Russia.
(31)St. Anna Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Medical University 
Vienna, Vienna, Austria; Children's Cancer Research Institute, Vienna, Austria.
(32)MCD, Centre de Biologie Intégrative, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UT3, 
Toulouse, France.
(33)Pediatric Immunology and Hematology Department and CRMR aplasies 
médullaires, Robert Debré Hospital, Groupe Hospitalier Universitaire, Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris Nord, Université de Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(34)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatrics and 
Adolescent Medicine, Medical Center, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany; German Cancer Consortium, Freiburg, Germany; German 
Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany.

Diamond-Blackfan anaemia (DBA), first described over 80 years ago, is a 
congenital disorder of erythropoiesis with a predilection for birth defects and 
cancer. Despite scientific advances, this chronic, debilitating, and 
life-limiting disorder continues to cause a substantial physical, psychological, 
and financial toll on patients and their families. The highly complex medical 
needs of affected patients require specialised expertise and multidisciplinary 
care. However, gaps remain in effectively bridging scientific discoveries to 
clinical practice and disseminating the latest knowledge and best practices to 
providers. Following the publication of the first international consensus in 
2008, advances in our understanding of the genetics, natural history, and 
clinical management of DBA have strongly supported the need for new consensus 
recommendations. In 2014 in Freiburg, Germany, a panel of 53 experts including 
clinicians, diagnosticians, and researchers from 27 countries convened. With 
support from patient advocates, the panel met repeatedly over subsequent years, 
engaging in ongoing discussions. These meetings led to the development of new 
consensus recommendations in 2024, replacing the previous guidelines. To account 
for the diverse phenotypes including presentation without anaemia, the panel 
agreed to adopt the term DBA syndrome. We propose new simplified diagnostic 
criteria, describe the genetics of DBA syndrome and its phenocopies, and 
introduce major changes in therapeutic standards. These changes include lowering 
the prednisone maintenance dose to maximum 0·3 mg/kg per day, raising the 
pre-transfusion haemoglobin to 9-10 g/dL independent of age, recommending early 
aggressive chelation, broadening indications for haematopoietic stem-cell 
transplantation, and recommending systematic clinical surveillance including 
early colorectal cancer screening. In summary, the current practice guidelines 
standardise the diagnostics, treatment, and long-term surveillance of patients 
with DBA syndrome of all ages worldwide.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2352-3026(24)00063-2
PMCID: PMC12424227
PMID: 38697731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests AK declares honoraria 
from chiesi and Novartis and a research grant from Novaris. AK is on the 
advisory board of Chiesi and Novartis. FML declares honoraria from Chiesi and is 
on the advisory board of Chiesi. LK is on the advisory board of Agios, Amgen, 
Bayer, and Novartis. All other authors declare no competing interests.