---
reference_id: "PMID:38654277"
title: Integrating spatial transcriptomics and single-cell RNA-sequencing reveals the alterations in epithelial cells during nodular formation in benign prostatic hyperplasia.
authors:
- Fei X
- Liu J
- Xu J
- Jing H
- Cai Z
- Yan J
- Wu Z
- Li H
- Wang Z
- Shen Y
journal: J Transl Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12967-024-05212-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Integrating spatial transcriptomics and single-cell RNA-sequencing reveals the alterations in epithelial cells during nodular formation in benign prostatic hyperplasia.
**Authors:** Fei X, Liu J, Xu J, Jing H, Cai Z, Yan J, Wu Z, Li H, Wang Z, Shen Y
**Journal:** J Transl Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12967-024-05212-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967-024-05212-9)

## Content

1. J Transl Med. 2024 Apr 23;22(1):380. doi: 10.1186/s12967-024-05212-9.

Integrating spatial transcriptomics and single-cell RNA-sequencing reveals the 
alterations in epithelial cells during nodular formation in benign prostatic 
hyperplasia.

Fei X(#)(1), Liu J(#)(2), Xu J(#)(3)(4), Jing H(2), Cai Z(4), Yan J(4), Wu Z(1), 
Li H(5), Wang Z(6), Shen Y(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Qingpu Branch of Zhongshan Hospital Affiliated to 
Fudan University, Shanghai, 201799, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Qingpu Branch of Zhongshan Hospital Affiliated to 
Fudan University, Shanghai, 201799, People's Republic of China.
(3)University of Shanghai for Science and Technology, Shanghai, 200093, People's 
Republic of China.
(4)Department of Urology and Andrology, Gongli Hospital, the Second Military 
Medical University, Shanghai, 200135, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Urology, Qingpu Branch of Zhongshan Hospital Affiliated to 
Fudan University, Shanghai, 201799, People's Republic of China. 
urologylihf1301@sina.com.
(6)Department of Urology and Andrology, Gongli Hospital, the Second Military 
Medical University, Shanghai, 200135, People's Republic of China. 
zhongwang2010@sina.com.
(7)Department of Urology and Andrology, Gongli Hospital, the Second Military 
Medical University, Shanghai, 200135, People's Republic of China. 
shenyanting798@126.com.
(8)Department of Urology, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200011, People's Republic of China. 
shenyanting798@126.com.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVE: Proliferative nodular formation represents a characteristic 
pathological feature of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) and serves as the 
primary cause for prostate volume enlargement and consequent lower urinary tract 
symptoms (LUTS). Its specific mechanism is largely unknown, although several 
cellular processes have been reported to be involved in BPH initiation and 
development and highlighted the crucial role of epithelial cells in 
proliferative nodular formation. However, the technological limitations hinder 
the in vivo investigation of BPH patients.
METHODS: The robust cell type decomposition (RCTD) method was employed to 
integrate spatial transcriptomics and single cell RNA sequencing profiles, 
enabling the elucidation of epithelial cell alterations during nodular 
formation. Immunofluorescent and immunohistochemical staining was performed for 
verification.
RESULTS: The alterations of epithelial cells during the formation of nodules in 
BPH was observed, and a distinct subgroup of basal epithelial (BE) cells, 
referred to as BE5, was identified to play a crucial role in driving this 
progression through the hypoxia-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) 
signaling pathway. BE5 served as both the initiating cell during nodular 
formation and the transitional cell during the transformation from luminal 
epithelial (LE) to BE cells. A distinguishing characteristic of the BE5 cell 
subgroup in patients with BPH was its heightened hypoxia and upregulated 
expression of FOS. Histological verification results confirmed a significant 
association between c-Fos expression and key biological processes such as 
hypoxia and cell proliferation, as well as the close relationship between 
hypoxia and EMT in BPH tissues. Furthermore, a strong link between c-Fos 
expression and the progression of BPH was also been validated. Additionally, 
notable functional differences were observed in glandular and stromal nodules 
regarding BE5 cells, with BE5 in glandular nodules exhibiting enhanced 
capacities for EMT and cell proliferation characterized by club-like cell 
markers.
CONCLUSIONS: This study elucidated the comprehensive landscape of epithelial 
cells during in vivo nodular formation in patients, thereby offering novel 
insights into the initiation and progression of BPH.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12967-024-05212-9
PMCID: PMC11036735
PMID: 38654277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.