---
reference_id: "PMID:15328326"
title: Distinct clinical features of paraganglioma syndromes associated with SDHB and SDHD gene mutations.
authors:
- Neumann HP
- Pawlu C
- Peczkowska M
- Bausch B
- McWhinney SR
- Muresan M
- Buchta M
- Franke G
- Klisch J
- Bley TA
- Hoegerle S
- Boedeker CC
- Opocher G
- Schipper J
- Januszewicz A
- Eng C
- European-American Paraganglioma Study Group
journal: JAMA
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1001/jama.292.8.943
keywords:
- Abdominal Neoplasms/genetics
- Adrenal Gland Neoplasms/genetics
- Adult
- Aged
- Female
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Germany
- Head and Neck Neoplasms/genetics
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Iron-Sulfur Proteins
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Middle Aged
- Paraganglioma/genetics
- Pheochromocytoma/genetics
- Poland
- Protein Subunits/genetics
- Registries
- Succinate Dehydrogenase/genetics
- Syndrome
- Thoracic Neoplasms/genetics
- Thyroid Neoplasms/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distinct clinical features of paraganglioma syndromes associated with SDHB and SDHD gene mutations.
**Authors:** Neumann HP, Pawlu C, Peczkowska M, Bausch B, McWhinney SR, Muresan M, Buchta M, Franke G, Klisch J, Bley TA, Hoegerle S, Boedeker CC, Opocher G, Schipper J, Januszewicz A, Eng C, European-American Paraganglioma Study Group
**Journal:** JAMA (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.292.8.943](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.292.8.943)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2004 Aug 25;292(8):943-51. doi: 10.1001/jama.292.8.943.

Distinct clinical features of paraganglioma syndromes associated with SDHB and 
SDHD gene mutations.

Neumann HP(1), Pawlu C, Peczkowska M, Bausch B, McWhinney SR, Muresan M, Buchta 
M, Franke G, Klisch J, Bley TA, Hoegerle S, Boedeker CC, Opocher G, Schipper J, 
Januszewicz A, Eng C; European-American Paraganglioma Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, Albert-Ludwigs-University, 
Freiburg, Germany. neumann@med1.ukl.uni-freiburg.de

Erratum in
    JAMA. 2004 Oct 13;292(14):1686.

CONTEXT: Germline mutations of the genes encoding succinate dehydrogenase 
subunits B (SDHB) and D (SDHD) predispose to paraganglioma syndromes type 4 
(PGL-4) and type 1 (PGL-1), respectively. In both syndromes, pheochromocytomas 
as well as head and neck paragangliomas occur; however, details for individual 
risks and other clinical characteristics are unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the differences in clinical features in carriers of SDHB 
mutations and SDHD mutations.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PATIENTS: Population-based genetic screening for SDHB and 
SDHD germline mutations in 417 unrelated patients with adrenal or extra-adrenal 
abdominal or thoracic pheochromocytomas (n = 334) or head and neck 
paragangliomas (n = 83), but without syndromic features, from 2 registries based 
in Germany and central Poland, conducted from April 1, 2000, until May 15, 2004.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Demographic and clinical findings with respect to gene 
mutation in SDHB vs SDHD compared with nonmutation carriers.
RESULTS: A total of 49 (12%) of 417 registrants carried SDHB or SDHD mutations. 
In addition, 28 SDHB and 23 SDHD mutation carriers were newly detected among 
relatives of these carriers. Comparison of 53 SDHB and 47 SDHD total mutation 
carriers showed similar ages at diagnosis but differences in penetrance and of 
tumor manifestations. Head and neck paragangliomas (10/32 vs 27/34, 
respectively, P<.001) and multifocal (9/32 vs 25/34, respectively, P<.001) 
tumors were more frequent in carriers of SDHD mutations. In contrast, SDHB 
mutation carriers have an increased frequency of malignant disease (11/32 vs 
0/34, P<.001). Renal cell cancer was observed in 2 SDHB mutation carriers and 
papillary thyroid cancer in 1 SDHB mutation carrier and 1 SDHD mutation carrier.
CONCLUSIONS: In contrast with SDHD mutation carriers (PGL-1) who have more 
frequent multifocal paragangliomas, SDHB mutation carriers (PGL-4) are more 
likely to develop malignant disease and possibly extraparaganglial neoplasias, 
including renal cell and thyroid carcinomas. Appropriate and timely clinical 
screening is recommended in all patients with PGL-1 and PGL-4.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.292.8.943
PMID: 15328326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]