---
reference_id: "PMID:38856639"
title: "FDA Approval Summary: Durvalumab and Pembrolizumab, Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors for the Treatment of Biliary Tract Cancer."
authors:
- Casak SJ
- Kumar V
- Song C
- Yuan M
- Amatya AK
- Cheng J
- Mishra-Kalyani PS
- Tang S
- Lemery SJ
- Auth D
- Davis G
- Kluetz PG
- Pazdur R
- Fashoyin-Aje LA
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-0517
keywords:
- Humans
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/therapeutic use, adverse effects, administration & dosage"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/therapeutic use, administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- United States
- "Biliary Tract Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology"
- Drug Approval
- "Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors/therapeutic use, adverse effects, administration & dosage"
- United States Food and Drug Administration
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- Male
- Female
- Aged
- Middle Aged
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Gemcitabine
- Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FDA Approval Summary: Durvalumab and Pembrolizumab, Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors for the Treatment of Biliary Tract Cancer.
**Authors:** Casak SJ, Kumar V, Song C, Yuan M, Amatya AK, Cheng J, Mishra-Kalyani PS, Tang S, Lemery SJ, Auth D, Davis G, Kluetz PG, Pazdur R, Fashoyin-Aje LA
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-0517](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-0517)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2024 Aug 15;30(16):3371-3377. doi: 
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-0517.

FDA Approval Summary: Durvalumab and Pembrolizumab, Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors 
for the Treatment of Biliary Tract Cancer.

Casak SJ(1), Kumar V(1), Song C(1), Yuan M(1), Amatya AK(1), Cheng J(1), 
Mishra-Kalyani PS(1), Tang S(1), Lemery SJ(1), Auth D(1), Davis G(1), Kluetz 
PG(1)(2), Pazdur R(1)(2), Fashoyin-Aje LA(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 
Silver Spring, Maryland.
(2)Oncology Center of Excellence, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Silver 
Spring, Maryland.

On September 2, 2022, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved durvalumab 
in combination with cisplatin and gemcitabine, for the treatment of patients 
with unresectable or metastatic biliary tract cancers (BTC). On October 31, 
2023, the FDA approved pembrolizumab in combination with cisplatin and 
gemcitabine for the same indication. Approvals were based on two randomized, 
multiregional, placebo-controlled trials that randomly allocated patients to 
receive durvalumab (TOPAZ-1) or pembrolizumab (KEYNOTE-966) in combination with 
chemotherapy or placebo in combination with chemotherapy. Overall survival (OS) 
was the primary endpoint in both studies. In both studies, a statistically 
significant and clinically meaningful improvement in OS was demonstrated. In the 
TOPAZ-1 trial, the median OS of patients receiving durvalumab was 12.8 months 
[95% confidence interval (CI), 11.1-14.0] and 11.5 months (95% CI, 10.1-12.5) in 
patients receiving placebo [hazard ratio (HR), 0.80 (95% CI, 0.66-0.97)]. In the 
KEYNOTE-966 trial, the median OS of patients receiving pembrolizumab was 12.7 
months (95% CI, 11.5-13.6) and 10.9 months (95% CI, 9.9-11.6) in patients 
receiving placebo [HR, 0.83 (95% CI, 0.72-0.95)]. The addition of checkpoint 
inhibitors to standard of care chemotherapy for this indication did not reveal 
any new adverse event signals, and the safety profile was generally consistent 
with the known clinical experience with durvalumab, pembrolizumab, and the 
backbone chemotherapy regimen. The approvals of durvalumab and pembrolizumab in 
combination with standard of care cisplatin and gemcitabine for the treatment of 
unresectable or metastatic BTC add two new therapeutic options for these 
patients.

©2024 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-0517
PMCID: PMC11326973
PMID: 38856639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest: 
The authors report no financial interests or relationships with the commercial 
sponsors of any products discussed in this report.