---
reference_id: "PMID:29020340"
title: "Relationship Between Viremia and Specific Organ Damage in Ebola Patients: A Cohort Study."
authors:
- Lanini S
- Portella G
- Vairo F
- Kobinger GP
- Pesenti A
- Langer M
- Kabia S
- Brogiato G
- Amone J
- Castilletti C
- Miccio R
- Capobianchi MR
- Strada G
- Zumla A
- Di Caro A
- Ippolito G
- INMI-EMERGENCY EBOV Sierra Leone Study Group
journal: Clin Infect Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/cid/cix704
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relationship Between Viremia and Specific Organ Damage in Ebola Patients: A Cohort Study.
**Authors:** Lanini S, Portella G, Vairo F, Kobinger GP, Pesenti A, Langer M, Kabia S, Brogiato G, Amone J, Castilletti C, Miccio R, Capobianchi MR, Strada G, Zumla A, Di Caro A, Ippolito G, INMI-EMERGENCY EBOV Sierra Leone Study Group
**Journal:** Clin Infect Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cid/cix704](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/cix704)

## Content

1. Clin Infect Dis. 2018 Jan 6;66(1):36-44. doi: 10.1093/cid/cix704.

Relationship Between Viremia and Specific Organ Damage in Ebola Patients: A 
Cohort Study.

Lanini S(1)(2), Portella G(3), Vairo F(1)(2), Kobinger GP(2)(4), Pesenti 
A(3)(5), Langer M(3)(6), Kabia S(7), Brogiato G(3), Amone J(8), Castilletti 
C(9), Miccio R(3), Capobianchi MR(9), Strada G(2)(3), Zumla A(2)(10), Di Caro 
A(1)(2), Ippolito G(1)(2); INMI-EMERGENCY EBOV Sierra Leone Study Group.

Collaborators: Biava M, Cannas A, Chiappini R, Coen S, Colavita F, Grassi G, 
Lapa D, Mazzarelli A, Meschi S, Minosse C, Quartu S, Valli MB, Venditti C, 
Vulcano A, Zaccaro P, Ahmad U, Checcarelli E, Guanti MD, Giovanella E, 
Gottardello D, Guastalegname M, Jocic M, Monti G, Parsons C, Rossi N, Salvati G, 
Scaccabarozzi G, Sisillo E, Tagliabue P, Turella M, Valdatta C.

Author information:
(1)National Institute for Infectious Diseases "Lazzaro Spallanzani," Istituto di 
Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico, Rome, Italy.
(2)International Public Health Crisis Group, Milan, Italy.
(3)EMERGENCY, Milan, Italy.
(4)Research Centre on Infectious Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, Université 
Laval, Québec, Canada.
(5)Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care Medicine and Emergency, Fondazione 
Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico Cà Granda-Ospedale Maggiore 
Policlinico, and Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, University 
of Milan.
(6)Department of Oncology and Onco-Hematology, University of Milan, and 
Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy.
(7)Connaught Hospital Tower Hill, Freetown, Sierra Leone.
(8)Department of Clinical Services, Ministry of Health, Kampala, Uganda.
(9)National Institute for Infectious Diseases "Lazzaro Spallanzani," Istituto di 
Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico , Rome, Italy.
(10)Division of Infection and Immunity, University College London, and National 
Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre at University College 
London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Clin Infect Dis. 2018 Apr 17;66(9):1480-1481. doi: 10.1093/cid/cix1026.
    Clin Infect Dis. 2018 Apr 17;66(9):1479-1480. doi: 10.1093/cid/cix1025.

BACKGROUND: Pathogenesis of Ebola virus disease remains poorly understood. We 
used concomitant determination of routine laboratory biomarkers and Ebola 
viremia to explore the potential role of viral replication in specific organ 
damage.
METHODS: We recruited patients with detectable Ebola viremia admitted to the 
EMERGENCY Organizzazione Non Governativa Organizzazione Non Lucrativa di Utilità 
Sociale (ONG ONLUS) Ebola Treatment Center in Sierra Leone. Repeated measure of 
Ebola viremia, alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 
bilirubin, creatine phosphokinase (CPK), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), activated 
prothrombin time (aPTT), international normalized ratio (INR), creatinine, and 
blood urea nitrogen (BUN) were recorded. Patients were followed up from 
admission until death or discharge.
RESULTS: One hundred patients (49 survivors and 51 nonsurvivors) were included 
in the analysis. Unadjusted analysis to compare survivors and nonsurvivors 
provided evidence that all biomarkers were significantly above the normal range 
and that the extent of these abnormalities was generally higher in nonsurvivors 
than in survivors. Multivariable mixed-effects models provided strong evidence 
for a biological gradient (suggestive of a direct role in organ damage) between 
the viremia levels and either ALT, AST, CPK LDH, aPTT, and INR. In contrast, no 
direct linear association was found between viremia and either creatinine, BUN, 
or bilirubin.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides evidence to support that Ebola virus may have a 
direct role in muscular damage and imbalance of the coagulation system. We did 
not find strong evidence suggestive of a direct role of Ebola virus in kidney 
damage. The role of the virus in liver damage remains unclear, but our evidence 
suggests that acute severe liver injury is not a typical feature of Ebola virus 
disease.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious 
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/cix704
PMID: 29020340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]