---
reference_id: "PMID:31526046"
title: AAGAB Mutations in 18 Canadian Families With Punctate Palmoplantar Keratoderma and a Possible Link to Cancer.
authors:
- Elhaji Y
- Hedlin C
- Nath A
- Price EL
- Gallant C
- Northgrave S
- Hull PR
journal: J Cutan Med Surg
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1177/1203475419878161
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Vesicular Transport/genetics, metabolism"
- Adult
- Canada/epidemiology
- DNA/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- "Keratoderma, Palmoplantar/complications, genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Neoplasms/etiology, genetics, metabolism"
- Pedigree
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# AAGAB Mutations in 18 Canadian Families With Punctate Palmoplantar Keratoderma and a Possible Link to Cancer.
**Authors:** Elhaji Y, Hedlin C, Nath A, Price EL, Gallant C, Northgrave S, Hull PR
**Journal:** J Cutan Med Surg (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1203475419878161](https://doi.org/10.1177/1203475419878161)

## Content

1. J Cutan Med Surg. 2020 Jan/Feb;24(1):28-32. doi: 10.1177/1203475419878161.
Epub  2019 Sep 16.

AAGAB Mutations in 18 Canadian Families With Punctate Palmoplantar Keratoderma 
and a Possible Link to Cancer.

Elhaji Y(1), Hedlin C(2), Nath A(1), Price EL(1), Gallant C(1), Northgrave S(1), 
Hull PR(1).

Author information:
(1)3688 Division of Clinical Dermatology and Cutaneous Science, Department of 
Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada.
(2)7235 Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, University of 
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Punctate palmoplantar keratoderma type 1 (PPPK1) presents in late 
childhood to adulthood with multiple small discrete hyperkeratotic papules on 
palms and soles. PPPK1 is an autosomal dominant skin disease caused by AAGAB 
mutations. It has been suggested that PPPK1 may be associated with an increased 
predisposition to systemic malignancies.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the presence of AAGAB mutations in Canadian families 
with PPPK1 and the possible increased predisposition to systemic malignancies.
METHODS: Eighteen unrelated Canadian families with PPPK1 were recruited for this 
study. Genomic DNA was extracted from saliva and PCR amplification was performed 
for all AAGAB exons and exon/intron junctions. PCR products were sequenced and 
analyzed for mutations. A family history of malignancy was obtained from the 
index case and, when possible, from other family members.
RESULTS: We have identified 5 heterozygous AAGAB loss of function mutations in 
11 families. The mutation c.370 C>T, p.Arg124* was the most prevalent and was 
identified in 6 families. A splice site mutation, c.451+3delAAGT, was identified 
in 2 families. The other mutations c.473delG, p.Gly158Glufs*0; c.550-551insAAT, 
p.Gly183*; and c.505-506 dupAA, p.Asn169Lysfs*6 were each identified in 1 
family. Different cancers were reported in 11 families (Table 1 and Supplemental 
Figure S1).
CONCLUSIONS: AAGAB mutations were found in 11 of 18 families with PPPK1. In some 
families there appears to be an association with cancer.

DOI: 10.1177/1203475419878161
PMID: 31526046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]