---
reference_id: "PMID:14622600"
title: Munc13-4 is essential for cytolytic granules fusion and is mutated in a form of familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL3).
authors:
- Feldmann J
- Callebaut I
- Raposo G
- Certain S
- Bacq D
- Dumont C
- Lambert N
- Ouachée-Chardin M
- Chedeville G
- Tamary H
- Minard-Colin V
- Vilmer E
- Blanche S
- Le Deist F
- Fischer A
- de Saint Basile G
journal: Cell
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00855-9
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- Cell Degranulation
- Cell Polarity
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Exocytosis
- Female
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Genetic Complementation Test
- "Histiocytosis, Non-Langerhans-Cell/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- Male
- Membrane Fusion
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Organ Specificity
- Pedigree
- Protein Conformation
- "Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, metabolism"
- "Secretory Vesicles/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- "T-Lymphocytes, Cytotoxic/immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Munc13-4 is essential for cytolytic granules fusion and is mutated in a form of familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL3).
**Authors:** Feldmann J, Callebaut I, Raposo G, Certain S, Bacq D, Dumont C, Lambert N, Ouachée-Chardin M, Chedeville G, Tamary H, Minard-Colin V, Vilmer E, Blanche S, Le Deist F, Fischer A, de Saint Basile G
**Journal:** Cell (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00855-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00855-9)

## Content

1. Cell. 2003 Nov 14;115(4):461-73. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00855-9.

Munc13-4 is essential for cytolytic granules fusion and is mutated in a form of 
familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL3).

Feldmann J(1), Callebaut I, Raposo G, Certain S, Bacq D, Dumont C, Lambert N, 
Ouachée-Chardin M, Chedeville G, Tamary H, Minard-Colin V, Vilmer E, Blanche S, 
Le Deist F, Fischer A, de Saint Basile G.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U429, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, 75743 Paris, France.

Comment in
    Cell. 2003 Nov 14;115(4):372-3. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00894-8.

Secretion of cytolytic granules content at the immunological synapse is a highly 
regulated process essential for lymphocyte cytotoxicity. This process requires 
the rapid transfer of perforin containing lytic granules to the target cell 
interface, followed by their docking and fusion with the plasma membrane. 
Defective cytotoxicity characterizes a genetically heterogeneous condition named 
familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL), which can be associated with 
perforin deficiency. The locus of a perforin (+) FHL subtype (FHL3), observed in 
10 patients, was mapped to 17q25. This region contains hMunc13-4, a member of 
the Munc13 family of proteins involved in vesicle priming function. HMunc13-4 
mutations were shown to cause FHL3. HMunc13-4 deficiency results in defective 
cytolytic granule exocytosis, despite polarization of the secretory granules and 
docking with the plasma membrane. Expressed tagged hMunc13-4 localizes with 
cytotoxic granules at the immunological synapse. HMunc13-4 is therefore 
essential for the priming step of cytolytic granules secretion preceding vesicle 
membrane fusion.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00855-9
PMID: 14622600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]