---
reference_id: "PMID:10950782"
title: Natural history of infection with Bartonella bacilliformis in a nonendemic population.
authors:
- Kosek M
- Lavarello R
- Gilman RH
- Delgado J
- Maguiña C
- Verástegui M
- Lescano AG
- Mallqui V
- Kosek JC
- Recavarren S
- Cabrera L
journal: J Infect Dis
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1086/315797
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Animals
- Bartonella
- "Bartonella Infections/epidemiology, pathology"
- Child
- Educational Status
- Female
- Humans
- Humidity
- Male
- Peru/epidemiology
- Rabbits
- Skin/pathology
- Temperature
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural history of infection with Bartonella bacilliformis in a nonendemic population.
**Authors:** Kosek M, Lavarello R, Gilman RH, Delgado J, Maguiña C, Verástegui M, Lescano AG, Mallqui V, Kosek JC, Recavarren S, Cabrera L
**Journal:** J Infect Dis (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1086/315797](https://doi.org/10.1086/315797)

## Content

1. J Infect Dis. 2000 Sep;182(3):865-72. doi: 10.1086/315797. Epub 2000 Aug 17.

Natural history of infection with Bartonella bacilliformis in a nonendemic
population.

Kosek M(1), Lavarello R, Gilman RH, Delgado J, Maguiña C, Verástegui M, Lescano
AG, Mallqui V, Kosek JC, Recavarren S, Cabrera L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Harbor-University of California Los Angeles
Medical Center, Torrance, California, USA.

An investigation was performed after an outbreak of bartonellosis in a region of
Peru nonendemic for this disorder. Symptoms of acute and chronic bartonellosis
were recorded. Serological analysis was performed on 55% of the affected
population (554 individuals), 77.5% of whom demonstrated previous infection with
Bartonella bacilliformis. The attack rate of Oroya fever was 13.8% (123 cases);
the case-fatality rate was 0.7%. The attack rate of verruga peruana was 17.6%. A
new specific immunostain was developed and used to confirm the presence of B.
bacilliformis in the biopsied skin lesions. Most seropositive individuals (56%)
were asymptomatic. The symptoms that were associated with prior infection, as
determined by Western blot, included fever (37.2% of the seropositive vs. 17.2%
of the seronegative population; P<.001), bone and joint pain (27% vs. 9%;
P<.001), headache (27% vs. 12.3%; P <.001), and skin lesions described as
verruga peruana (26.8% vs. 4.9%; P<.001). Our findings suggest that infection
with B. bacilliformis causes a broad spectrum of disease that is significantly
milder in severity than that frequently reported.

DOI: 10.1086/315797
PMID: 10950782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
