---
reference_id: "PMID:29036223"
title: Evaluation of blood-brain barrier function by quotient alpha2 macroglobulin and its relationship with interleukin-6 and complement component 3 levels in neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Asano T
- Ito H
- Kariya Y
- Hoshi K
- Yoshihara A
- Ugawa Y
- Sekine H
- Hirohata S
- Yamaguchi Y
- Sato S
- Kobayashi H
- Migita K
- Ohira H
- Hashimoto Y
- Watanabe H
journal: PLoS One
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0186414
keywords:
- Adult
- Blood-Brain Barrier/metabolism
- Case-Control Studies
- Complement C3/cerebrospinal fluid
- Female
- Glucose/cerebrospinal fluid
- Humans
- Interleukin-6/cerebrospinal fluid
- "Lupus Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/blood, cerebrospinal fluid"
- Male
- alpha-Macroglobulins/cerebrospinal fluid
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of blood-brain barrier function by quotient alpha2 macroglobulin and its relationship with interleukin-6 and complement component 3 levels in neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Asano T, Ito H, Kariya Y, Hoshi K, Yoshihara A, Ugawa Y, Sekine H, Hirohata S, Yamaguchi Y, Sato S, Kobayashi H, Migita K, Ohira H, Hashimoto Y, Watanabe H
**Journal:** PLoS One (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0186414](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0186414)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2017 Oct 16;12(10):e0186414. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0186414.
eCollection 2017.

Evaluation of blood-brain barrier function by quotient alpha2 macroglobulin and
its relationship with interleukin-6 and complement component 3 levels in
neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus.

Asano T(1), Ito H(2), Kariya Y(2), Hoshi K(2), Yoshihara A(3), Ugawa Y(3),
Sekine H(4), Hirohata S(5), Yamaguchi Y(6), Sato S(1), Kobayashi H(1), Migita
K(1), Ohira H(7), Hashimoto Y(2), Watanabe H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, School of Medicine, Fukushima Medical University,
Fukushima, Japan.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Fukushima Medical University,
Fukushima, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, Fukushima Medical University,
Fukushima, Japan.
(4)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Fukushima Medical University,
Fukushima, Japan.
(5)Department of Rheumatology and Infectious Diseases, Kitasato University
School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan.
(6)Structural Glycobiology Team, Systems Glycobiology Research Group, RIKEN-Max
Planck Joint Research Center, RIKEN Global Research Cluster, Wako, Saitama,
Japan.
(7)Department of Gastroenterology, School of Medicine, Fukushima Medical
University, Fukushima, Japan.

Although quotient of alpha2 macroglobulin (Qα2MG) was previously reported to be
useful for the evaluation of blood-brain barrier (BBB) function, it is not
commonly used. We therefore evaluated BBB function among the various subsets of
neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus (NPSLE) using quotient Q α2MG.
Furthermore, we determined the correlation between Q α2MG and cerebrospinal
(CSF) interleukin (IL)-6 level and quotient complement component 3 (Q C3). To
determine intrathecal production of C3, the C3 index (Q C3/Q α2MG) was also
calculated. Fifty-six patients with SLE were included in this study. Of these,
48 were diagnosed with NPSLE, consisting of 30 diffuse NPSLE patients (acute
confusional state (ACS): n = 14, non-ACS: n = 16) and 18 patients with focal
NPSLE. CSF IL-6 concentration, and paired serum and CSF levels of α2MG and C3,
were measured by enzyme-linked immuno solvent assay (ELISA). The Q α2MG, Q C3,
and C3 index were then calculated. Q α2MG, Q C3, and IL-6 concentrations in the
CSF were significantly elevated in NPSLE compared with non-NPSLE. Among the
subsets of NPSLE, significant increases in Q α2MG, CSF IL-6, and Q C3 were
observed in ACS compared with non-ACS or focal NPSLE. There was a positive
correlation between CSF IL-6 level and Q α2MG, as well as between Q C3 and Q
α2MG, in diffuse NPSLE. There were no significant differences in C3 index
between NPSLE and non-NPSLE, as well as among the subgroups of NPSLE. Our study
suggests that BBB disruption is present in ACS, and elevated levels of IL-6 and
C3 in CSF in diffuse NPSLE, especially in ACS, might result from their entry to
the CSF from the systemic circulation through the damaged BBB, as well as
increased intrathecal production. Furthermore, Q α2MG might be useful for the
evaluation of BBB integrity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0186414
PMCID: PMC5643139
PMID: 29036223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.
