---
reference_id: "PMID:19876930"
title: "Disorders of left-right asymmetry: heterotaxy and situs inversus."
authors:
- Sutherland MJ
- Ware SM
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.30228
keywords:
- Animals
- Body Patterning/genetics
- Cilia/pathology
- Ciliary Motility Disorders/genetics
- "Congenital Abnormalities/genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Functional Laterality
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Humans
- Male
- "Models, Biological"
- "Models, Genetic"
- Phenotype
- "Situs Inversus/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disorders of left-right asymmetry: heterotaxy and situs inversus.
**Authors:** Sutherland MJ, Ware SM
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.30228](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.30228)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2009 Nov 15;151C(4):307-17. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.c.30228.

Disorders of left-right asymmetry: heterotaxy and situs inversus.

Sutherland MJ(1), Ware SM.

Author information:
(1)Divisions of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, Human Genetics, and Cardiology
at Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Cilia function is critical to the development of proper organ laterality.
Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) causes randomization of situs. Heterotaxy, or
situs ambiguus, is an abnormal arrangement of the thoracic and abdominal organs
that results in congenital anomalies. Animal models and developmental biological
approaches have defined pathways required during embryogenesis for proper
left-right pattern formation. New candidates for genetic causes of human
laterality disorders have emerged from recent studies on the assembly,
transport, and signaling functions of cilia at the node as well as
identification of cilia within the developing heart. There is evidence that
deleterious genetic variants within one or more developmental pathways may
disrupt signaling in a synergistic or combinatorial fashion to cause congenital
anomalies. The molecular pathways underlying PCD and heterotaxy are being
discovered at a rapid pace, and there is increasing recognition of the overlap
between these two categories of laterality disorders and their relationship to
isolated cardiovascular malformations. This review focuses on the clinical
manifestations, molecular mechanisms, and human genetics of these disorders of
laterality.

Copyright 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.30228
PMID: 19876930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
