---
reference_id: "PMID:39950390"
title: "Bleeding Episodes in Patients With Haemophilia B Receiving Prophylactic Factor IX Treatment: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Franchini M
- Pasca S
- Mengoli C
- Focosi D
- Mannucci PM
journal: Haemophilia
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/hae.70006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bleeding Episodes in Patients With Haemophilia B Receiving Prophylactic Factor IX Treatment: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Franchini M, Pasca S, Mengoli C, Focosi D, Mannucci PM
**Journal:** Haemophilia (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/hae.70006](https://doi.org/10.1111/hae.70006)

## Content

1. Haemophilia. 2025 Mar;31(2):173-186. doi: 10.1111/hae.70006. Epub 2025 Feb 14.

Bleeding Episodes in Patients With Haemophilia B Receiving Prophylactic Factor 
IX Treatment: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Franchini M(1), Pasca S(2), Mengoli C(1), Focosi D(3), Mannucci PM(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Transfusion Medicine and Hematology, Carlo Poma Hospital, 
Mantua, Italy.
(2)Transfusion and Immunohematology Department, Azienda Provinciale Servizi 
Sanitari (APSS) - Trento, Trento, Italy.
(3)North-Western Tuscany Blood Bank, Pisa University Hospital, Pisa, Italy.
(4)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda-Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico and University of 
Milan, Angelo Bianchi Bonomi Hemophilia and Thrombosis Center, Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Prophylaxis with coagulation factor concentrates is the mainstay of 
treatment in severe hemophilia A and B. Data on bleeding rates in persons with 
congenital haemophilia B (PwcHB) receiving prophylaxis are inconsistent.
AIM: This systematic review and meta-analysis were aimed at assessing bleeding 
outcomes, including annualised bleeding rates (ABR) and the proportion of 
patients with zero bleeding events, in PwcHB receiving prophylaxis with 
plasma-derived or recombinant FIX products with standard (rSHL) or extended 
half-life (rEHL).
METHODS: A systematic search was conducted using the bibliographic database 
Medline, Embase and Cochrane Central Register. The protocol was registered on 
PROSPERO (registration number: CRD42024592785).
RESULTS: The search yielded 2440 citations and a total of 42 studies (2 
randomised and 40 nonrandomised) were included in the final analysis. The pooled 
estimated mean (95% confidence interval [CI]) ABR was significantly lower in 
PwcHB treated prophylactically with rEHL FIX than in those receiving rSHL FIX 
products (1.29 [95% CI: 0.91, 1.66] vs. 3.12 [95% CI: 2.63, 3.62], p < 0.01). 
The proportion of participants with zero bleeding events was significantly 
higher in PwcHB treated prophylactically with rEHL FIX than in those receiving 
rSHL FIX (0.53 [95% CI: 0.37, 0.69] vs. 0.24 [95% CI: 0.14, 0.39], p = 0.01). 
The ABR did not differ according to age groups (more or less than 12 years).
CONCLUSION: The results of this meta-analysis suggest that compared to standard 
half-life FIX concentrates, prophylaxis with rEHL FIX products is associated 
with a reduction in ABR and a higher proportion of patients with no bleeding 
episodes.

© 2025 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/hae.70006
PMID: 39950390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]