---
reference_id: "PMID:9335099"
title: Side lobes and grating lobes artifacts in ultrasound imaging.
authors:
- Barthez PY
- Léveillé R
- Scrivani PV
journal: Vet Radiol Ultrasound
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1111/j.1740-8261.1997.tb02104.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Side lobes and grating lobes artifacts in ultrasound imaging.
**Authors:** Barthez PY, Léveillé R, Scrivani PV
**Journal:** Vet Radiol Ultrasound (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1740-8261.1997.tb02104.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1740-8261.1997.tb02104.x)

## Content

1. Vet Radiol Ultrasound. 1997 Sep-Oct;38(5):387-93. doi: 
10.1111/j.1740-8261.1997.tb02104.x.

Side lobes and grating lobes artifacts in ultrasound imaging.

Barthez PY(1), Léveillé R, Scrivani PV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Ohio State University, Columbus 43210-1089, USA.

Side lobes and grating lobes are both unwanted parts of the ultrasound beam 
emitted off axis that produce image artifacts due to error in positioning the 
returning echo. The purpose of this study was to reproduce artifacts associated 
with side lobes and grating lobes in vitro using different transducer types and 
recognize these artifacts in vivo. A phantom, composed of a water bath, a 
metallic wire, and a wooden tongue depressor, was imaged using a linear array, a 
curved linear a vector array, and a sector mechanical transducer. When imaging 
the metallic wire in a transverse plane, an echogenic artifact was constantly 
seen on each side of the wire, with a shape and intensity variable with the 
transducer type. The artifact was curvilinear and concave (linear and curved 
linear arrays), or curvilinear and convex (vector array and the mechanical 
transducer). When the tongue depressor was imaged in a longitudinal plane, the 
artifact was a straight line (linear array), a curved convex line (curved 
array), a series of convex curvilinear echo (vector array) or a small convex 
curvilinear echo (mechanical transducer). In vivo situations similar to the 
phantom experiment were investigated using clinical patients. Artifacts produced 
in vitro were recognized in vivo when a highly reflective object (urinary 
bladder wall) was imaged adjacent to an anechoic region (urine). These artifacts 
corresponded to the principle of secondary ultrasound lobes, and were therefore 
interpreted as such.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1740-8261.1997.tb02104.x
PMID: 9335099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]