---
reference_id: "PMID:32784118"
title: "Spotlight on the treatment of infantile fibrosarcoma in the era of neurotrophic tropomyosin receptor kinase inhibitors: International consensus and remaining controversies."
authors:
- Orbach D
- Sparber-Sauer M
- Laetsch TW
- Minard-Colin V
- Bielack SS
- Casanova M
- Corradini N
- Koscielniak E
- Scheer M
- Hettmer S
- Bisogno G
- Hawkins DS
- Ferrari A
journal: Eur J Cancer
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2020.06.028
keywords:
- Female
- Fibrosarcoma/drug therapy
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Tropomyosin/antagonists & inhibitors, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spotlight on the treatment of infantile fibrosarcoma in the era of neurotrophic tropomyosin receptor kinase inhibitors: International consensus and remaining controversies.
**Authors:** Orbach D, Sparber-Sauer M, Laetsch TW, Minard-Colin V, Bielack SS, Casanova M, Corradini N, Koscielniak E, Scheer M, Hettmer S, Bisogno G, Hawkins DS, Ferrari A
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejca.2020.06.028](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2020.06.028)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer. 2020 Sep;137:183-192. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2020.06.028. Epub 2020
 Aug 9.

Spotlight on the treatment of infantile fibrosarcoma in the era of neurotrophic
tropomyosin receptor kinase inhibitors: International consensus and remaining
controversies.

Orbach D(1), Sparber-Sauer M(2), Laetsch TW(3), Minard-Colin V(4), Bielack
SS(5), Casanova M(6), Corradini N(7), Koscielniak E(8), Scheer M(2), Hettmer
S(9), Bisogno G(10), Hawkins DS(11), Ferrari A(6).

Author information:
(1)SIREDO Oncology Center (Care, Innovation and Research for Children and AYA
with Cancer), PSL Research University, Institut Curie, Paris, France. Electronic
address: Daniel.orbach@curie.fr.
(2)Klinikum Stuttgart - Olgahospital, Stuttgart Cancer Center, Zentrum für
Kinder-, Jugend- und Frauenmedizin, Pädiatrie 5 (Onkologie, Hämatologie,
Immunologie), Stuttgart, Germany.
(3)Department of Pediatrics and Harold C. Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center/Children's Health, Dallas, TX,
USA.
(4)Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Oncology, Gustave Roussy, Université
Paris-Saclay, Villejuif, France.
(5)Klinikum Stuttgart - Olgahospital, Stuttgart Cancer Center, Zentrum für
Kinder-, Jugend- und Frauenmedizin, Pädiatrie 5 (Onkologie, Hämatologie,
Immunologie), Stuttgart, Germany; University of Muenster, Department of
Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Muenster, Germany.
(6)Pediatric Oncology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Dei Tumori di
Milano, Milano, Italy.
(7)Department of Paediatric Haematology and Oncology, Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon,
France.
(8)Klinikum Stuttgart - Olgahospital, Stuttgart Cancer Center, Zentrum für
Kinder-, Jugend- und Frauenmedizin, Pädiatrie 5 (Onkologie, Hämatologie,
Immunologie), Stuttgart, Germany; Department of Pediatric Oncology, University
of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.
(9)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Division of Pediatric
Hematology and Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Germany.
(10)Hematology and Oncology Division, Department for Women's and Children's
Health, Padua University, Padua, Italy.
(11)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Seattle Children's Hospital, University of
Washington, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA.

Targeted neurotrophic tropomyosin receptor kinase (TRK) inhibitors offer a
highly specific therapeutic option for patients with infantile fibrosarcoma
(IFS) carrying the NTRK gene translocation. International recommendations are
needed to define the role of TRK inhibitors (TRKI) for infants with IFS. We
analysed retrospective data for all published patients with IFS in the European
Paediatric Soft tissue sarcoma Study Group and Cooperative
Weichteilsarkomstudiengruppe (CWS) experience and developed a consensus strategy
with the Children's Oncology Group. Therapies consisted of tumour resection
and/or perioperative chemotherapy for extensive tumours. Among the 172 European
patients treated, 162 were alive at the end of the follow-up. Sixty-five
patients (40% of all survivors) were treated with surgery alone and 64 patients
(39%) with surgery combined with chemotherapy. Radiotherapy was delivered to 3%
of survivors (five patients). In addition, 28 survivors (17%) exclusively
received chemotherapy. Among the 129 patients treated with surgery, 91% had
conservative surgery (118 cases). Overall, nine patients died of disease, one
from toxicity (6%) and 20 patients (12%) survived with major functional deficits
or had mutilating surgery. Overall, conventional conservative strategies before
the era of targeted therapy, even in the case of extensive tumours, demonstrate
efficacy in IFS, but are associated with acute and some chronic side effects.
TRKI have demonstrated very rapid responses in the vast majority of children
with IFS with limited acute toxicity. With the current state of our knowledge,
both conventional chemotherapy and TRKI should be regarded as options for
patients with localised disease at the physician's and parent's discretion. TRKI
should be considered in patients with metastatic disease, and before mutilating
surgery when conventional chemotherapy fails. Outside a clinical trial,
additional data are needed to resolve the lack of consensus about front-line use
of conventional chemotherapy versus TRKI in patients with localised disease.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2020.06.028
PMID: 32784118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]