---
reference_id: "PMID:24227816"
title: "GATA2 deficiency: a protean disorder of hematopoiesis, lymphatics, and immunity."
authors:
- Spinner MA
- Sanchez LA
- Hsu AP
- Shaw PA
- Zerbe CS
- Calvo KR
- Arthur DC
- Gu W
- Gould CM
- Brewer CC
- Cowen EW
- Freeman AF
- Olivier KN
- Uzel G
- Zelazny AM
- Daub JR
- Spalding CD
- Claypool RJ
- Giri NK
- Alter BP
- Mace EM
- Orange JS
- Cuellar-Rodriguez J
- Hickstein DD
- Holland SM
journal: Blood
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-07-515528
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Child
- Female
- "GATA2 Transcription Factor/deficiency, genetics"
- Genetic Association Studies
- Haploinsufficiency
- Hematopoiesis
- Humans
- "Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/genetics, mortality, pathology"
- Infant
- "Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute/genetics, mortality, pathology"
- Lymphatic System
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Myelodysplastic Syndromes/genetics, mortality, pathology"
- Prognosis
- Prospective Studies
- Survival Rate
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GATA2 deficiency: a protean disorder of hematopoiesis, lymphatics, and immunity.
**Authors:** Spinner MA, Sanchez LA, Hsu AP, Shaw PA, Zerbe CS, Calvo KR, Arthur DC, Gu W, Gould CM, Brewer CC, Cowen EW, Freeman AF, Olivier KN, Uzel G, Zelazny AM, Daub JR, Spalding CD, Claypool RJ, Giri NK, Alter BP, Mace EM, Orange JS, Cuellar-Rodriguez J, Hickstein DD, Holland SM
**Journal:** Blood (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2013-07-515528](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2013-07-515528)

## Content

1. Blood. 2014 Feb 6;123(6):809-21. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-07-515528. Epub 2013
Nov 13.

GATA2 deficiency: a protean disorder of hematopoiesis, lymphatics, and immunity.

Spinner MA(1), Sanchez LA, Hsu AP, Shaw PA, Zerbe CS, Calvo KR, Arthur DC, Gu W,
Gould CM, Brewer CC, Cowen EW, Freeman AF, Olivier KN, Uzel G, Zelazny AM, Daub
JR, Spalding CD, Claypool RJ, Giri NK, Alter BP, Mace EM, Orange JS,
Cuellar-Rodriguez J, Hickstein DD, Holland SM.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Infectious Diseases, and.

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 Feb 6;123(6):799-800. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-12-539858.

Haploinsufficiency of the hematopoietic transcription factor GATA2 underlies
monocytopenia and mycobacterial infections; dendritic cell, monocyte, B, and
natural killer (NK) lymphoid deficiency; familial myelodysplastic syndromes
(MDS)/acute myeloid leukemia (AML); and Emberger syndrome (primary lymphedema
with MDS). A comprehensive examination of the clinical features of GATA2
deficiency is currently lacking. We reviewed the medical records of 57 patients
with GATA2 deficiency evaluated at the National Institutes of Health from
January 1, 1992, to March 1, 2013, and categorized mutations as missense, null,
or regulatory to identify genotype-phenotype associations. We identified a broad
spectrum of disease: hematologic (MDS 84%, AML 14%, chronic myelomonocytic
leukemia 8%), infectious (severe viral 70%, disseminated mycobacterial 53%, and
invasive fungal infections 16%), pulmonary (diffusion 79% and ventilatory
defects 63%, pulmonary alveolar proteinosis 18%, pulmonary arterial hypertension
9%), dermatologic (warts 53%, panniculitis 30%), neoplastic (human
papillomavirus+ tumors 35%, Epstein-Barr virus+ tumors 4%), vascular/lymphatic
(venous thrombosis 25%, lymphedema 11%), sensorineural hearing loss 76%,
miscarriage 33%, and hypothyroidism 14%. Viral infections and lymphedema were
more common in individuals with null mutations (P = .038 and P = .006,
respectively). Monocytopenia, B, NK, and CD4 lymphocytopenia correlated with the
presence of disease (P < .001). GATA2 deficiency unites susceptibility to
MDS/AML, immunodeficiency, pulmonary disease, and vascular/lymphatic
dysfunction. Early genetic diagnosis is critical to direct clinical management,
preventive care, and family screening.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2013-07-515528
PMCID: PMC3916876
PMID: 24227816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
