---
reference_id: "PMID:35177220"
title: "Preeclampsia and eclampsia: the conceptual evolution of a syndrome."
authors:
- Erez O
- Romero R
- Jung E
- Chaemsaithong P
- Bosco M
- Suksai M
- Gallo DM
- Gotsch F
journal: Am J Obstet Gynecol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajog.2021.12.001
keywords:
- Albuminuria/complications
- Eclampsia
- Edema/complications
- Female
- Fetal Mortality
- Gene-Environment Interaction
- HELLP Syndrome
- "History, 19th Century"
- "History, Ancient"
- Humans
- Placenta/metabolism
- Placenta Growth Factor/metabolism
- Pre-Eclampsia
- Pregnancy
- Proteinuria/complications
- Puerperal Disorders
- Seizures/complications
- Severity of Illness Index
- Terminology as Topic
- Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Receptor-1/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Preeclampsia and eclampsia: the conceptual evolution of a syndrome.
**Authors:** Erez O, Romero R, Jung E, Chaemsaithong P, Bosco M, Suksai M, Gallo DM, Gotsch F
**Journal:** Am J Obstet Gynecol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajog.2021.12.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajog.2021.12.001)

## Content

1. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2022 Feb;226(2S):S786-S803. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajog.2021.12.001.

Preeclampsia and eclampsia: the conceptual evolution of a syndrome.

Erez O(1), Romero R(2), Jung E(3), Chaemsaithong P(4), Bosco M(3), Suksai M(3), 
Gallo DM(3), Gotsch F(3).

Author information:
(1)Perinatology Research Branch, Division of Obstetrics and Maternal-Fetal 
Medicine, Division of Intramural Research, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, 
United States Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD, and 
Detroit, MI; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wayne State University 
School of Medicine, Detroit, MI; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, HaEmek 
Medical Center, Afula, Israel.
(2)Perinatology Research Branch, Division of Obstetrics and Maternal-Fetal 
Medicine, Division of Intramural Research, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, 
United States Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD, and 
Detroit, MI; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI; Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Michigan State 
University, East Lansing, MI; Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne 
State University, Detroit, MI; Detroit Medical Center, Detroit, MI. Electronic 
address: prbchiefstaff@med.wayne.edu.
(3)Perinatology Research Branch, Division of Obstetrics and Maternal-Fetal 
Medicine, Division of Intramural Research, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, 
United States Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD, and 
Detroit, MI; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wayne State University 
School of Medicine, Detroit, MI.
(4)Perinatology Research Branch, Division of Obstetrics and Maternal-Fetal 
Medicine, Division of Intramural Research, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, 
United States Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD, and 
Detroit, MI; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wayne State University 
School of Medicine, Detroit, MI; Faculty of Medicine, Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Preeclampsia, one of the most enigmatic complications of pregnancy, is 
considered a pregnancy-specific disorder caused by the placenta and cured only 
by delivery. This article traces the condition from its origins-once thought to 
be a disease of the central nervous system, recognized by the occurrence of 
seizures (ie, eclampsia)-to the present time when preeclampsia is conceptualized 
primarily as a vascular disorder. We review the epidemiologic data that led to 
the recommendation to use diastolic hypertension and proteinuria as diagnostic 
criteria, as their combined presence was associated with an increased risk of 
fetal death and the birth of small-for-gestational-age neonates. However, 
preeclampsia is a multisystemic disorder with protean manifestations, and the 
condition can be present even in the absence of hypertension and proteinuria. 
Toxins gaining access to the maternal circulation have been proposed to mediate 
the clinical manifestations-hence, the term "toxemia of pregnancy," which was 
used for several decades. The search for putative toxins has challenged 
investigators for more than a century, and a growing body of evidence suggests 
that products of an ischemic or a stressed placenta are responsible for the 
vascular changes that characterize this syndrome. The discovery that the 
placenta can produce antiangiogenic factors, which regulate endothelial cell 
function and induce intravascular inflammation, has been a major step forward in 
the understanding of preeclampsia. We view the release of antiangiogenic factors 
by the placenta as an adaptive response to improve uterine perfusion by 
modulating endothelial function and maternal cardiovascular performance. 
However, this homeostatic response can become maladaptive and lead to damage of 
target organs during pregnancy or the postpartum period. Early-onset 
preeclampsia has many features in common with atherosclerosis, whereas 
late-onset preeclampsia seems to result from a mismatch of fetal demands and 
maternal supply, that is, a metabolic crisis. Preeclampsia, as it is understood 
today, is essentially vascular dysfunction unmasked or caused by pregnancy. A 
subset of patients diagnosed with preeclampsia are at greater risk of the 
subsequent development of hypertension, ischemic heart disease, heart failure, 
vascular dementia, and end-stage renal disease. However, these adverse events 
may be the result of a preexisting vascular pathologic process; it is not known 
if the occurrence of preeclampsia increases the baseline risk. Therefore, the 
understanding, prediction, prevention, and treatment of preeclampsia are 
healthcare priorities.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajog.2021.12.001
PMCID: PMC8941666
PMID: 35177220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The authors declare no conflicts of 
interest.