---
reference_id: "PMID:34797442"
title: No Benefit of Continuing 5-Aminosalicylates in Patients with Crohn's Disease Treated with Anti-metabolite Therapy.
authors:
- Picetti D
- Kim J
- Zhu W
- Sandborn WJ
- Jairath V
- Singh S
journal: Dig Dis Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s10620-021-07301-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# No Benefit of Continuing 5-Aminosalicylates in Patients with Crohn's Disease Treated with Anti-metabolite Therapy.
**Authors:** Picetti D, Kim J, Zhu W, Sandborn WJ, Jairath V, Singh S
**Journal:** Dig Dis Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10620-021-07301-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10620-021-07301-x)

## Content

1. Dig Dis Sci. 2022 Jul;67(7):3115-3123. doi: 10.1007/s10620-021-07301-x. Epub 
2021 Nov 19.

No Benefit of Continuing 5-Aminosalicylates in Patients with Crohn's Disease 
Treated with Anti-metabolite Therapy.

Picetti D(1), Kim J(2)(3), Zhu W(3)(4), Sandborn WJ(1), Jairath V(4)(5)(6), 
Singh S(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biomedical Informatics, University of California San Diego, 9452 
Medical Center Dr, ACTRI 1W501, La Jolla, San Diego, CA, 92093, USA.
(2)Visting Fellow, OptumLabs, Eden Prairie, MN, USA.
(3)Altman Clinical and Translational Research Institute, University of 
California San Diego, La Jolla, San Diego, CA, USA.
(4)Robarts Clinical Trials, Inc. London, London, ON, Canada.
(5)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Western University, London, ON, 
Canada.
(6)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University Hospital, 
London, ON, Canada.
(7)Division of Biomedical Informatics, University of California San Diego, 9452 
Medical Center Dr, ACTRI 1W501, La Jolla, San Diego, CA, 92093, USA. 
sis040@ucsd.edu.
(8)Visting Fellow, OptumLabs, Eden Prairie, MN, USA. sis040@ucsd.edu.
(9)Altman Clinical and Translational Research Institute, University of 
California San Diego, La Jolla, San Diego, CA, USA. sis040@ucsd.edu.

Comment in
    Dig Dis Sci. 2022 Jul;67(7):2699-2700. doi: 10.1007/s10620-021-07304-8.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: 5-aminosalicylates (5-ASA) are frequently used in the 
management of Crohn's disease (CD). We used a de-identified administrative 
claims database to compare patterns and outcomes of continuing versus stopping 
5-ASA in patients with CD who escalated to anti-metabolite monotherapy.
METHODS: Patients with CD on 5-ASA who were new users of anti-metabolite 
monotherapy and followed for at least 12 months from OptumLabs® Data Warehouse. 
Three patterns of 5-ASA use were identified: stopped 5-ASA, short-term 5-ASA 
(use for < 6 months after starting anti-metabolites), or persistent 5-ASA (use 
for > 6 months after starting anti-metabolites). Outcomes (need for 
corticosteroids, risk of CD-related hospitalization and/or surgery, treatment 
escalation to biologic therapy) were compared using Cox proportional hazard 
analysis adjusting for key covariates, with a 12-month immortal time period.
RESULTS: Of 3036 patients with CD who were new-users of anti-metabolite 
monotherapy, 667 (21.9%), 626 (20.6%), and 1743 (57.4%) stopped 5-ASA, used 
5-ASA transiently or persistently, respectively. Compared to patients who 
stopped 5-ASA after starting anti-metabolites, persistent 5-ASA use was 
associated with a higher risk of corticosteroid use (HR, 1.24 [1.08-1.42]), 
without an increase in risk of CD-related hospitalization (HR, 1.21 
[0.98-1.49]), CD-related surgery (HR, 1.28 [0.90-1.80]) or treatment escalation 
(HR, 0.85 [0.62-1.20]). Sensitivity analyses using a 3-month window after 
initiation of anti-metabolites to classify patients as continuing vs. stopping 
5-ASA showed similar results. Residual confounding by disease severity could not 
be excluded.
CONCLUSION: 5-ASAs are frequently continued long-term even after escalation to 
anti-metabolite therapy in patients with CD but offer no clinical benefit over 
stopping 5-ASA.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10620-021-07301-x
PMCID: PMC9117569
PMID: 34797442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]