---
reference_id: "PMID:22411252"
title: Pick's disease.
authors:
- Takeda N
- Kishimoto Y
- Yokota O
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-0653-2_23
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pick's disease.
**Authors:** Takeda N, Kishimoto Y, Yokota O
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-1-4614-0653-2_23](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-0653-2_23)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2012;724:300-16. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-0653-2_23.

Pick's disease.

Takeda N(1), Kishimoto Y, Yokota O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Okayama University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan.

Picks disease is a major clinicopathological disease having circumscribed 
atrophy in the frontotemporal lobe. Demented patients with frontotemporal 
atrophy are now clinically diagnosed as frontotemporal lobar degeneration 
(FTLD). Other underlying pathologies in patients with FTLD include FTLD with 
TDP-43-positive inclusions, corticobasal degeneration, progressive supranuclear 
palsy, basophilic inclusion body disease, neuronal intermediate filament 
inclusion disease and argyrophilic grain disease. In this chapter, recent 
findings regarding the distinct clinical and histopathological features of these 
pathological disease entities are presented including the discussion on the 
possibility of future antemortem diagnosis of patients with the disease.In this 
chapter, recent findings regarding the distinct clinical and histopathological 
features of these pathological disease entities are presented including the 
discussion on the possibility of future antemortem diagnosis of patients with 
the disease.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4614-0653-2_23
PMID: 22411252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]