---
reference_id: "PMID:31239087"
title: City-Specific Air Quality Warnings for Improved Asthma Self-Management.
authors:
- Raun LH
- Ensor KB
- Pederson JE
- Campos LA
- Persse DE
journal: Am J Prev Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2019.03.022
content_type: abstract_only
---

# City-Specific Air Quality Warnings for Improved Asthma Self-Management.
**Authors:** Raun LH, Ensor KB, Pederson JE, Campos LA, Persse DE
**Journal:** Am J Prev Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amepre.2019.03.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2019.03.022)

## Content

1. Am J Prev Med. 2019 Aug;57(2):165-171. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2019.03.022. Epub
 2019 Jun 22.

City-Specific Air Quality Warnings for Improved Asthma Self-Management.

Raun LH(1), Ensor KB(2), Pederson JE(2), Campos LA(2), Persse DE(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Statistics, Rice University, Houston, Texas; Bureau of 
Community and Children's Environmental Health, Houston, Texas. Electronic 
address: raun@rice.edu.
(2)Department of Statistics, Rice University, Houston, Texas.
(3)Department of Medicine and Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
Texas; City of Houston Emergency Medical Services, Houston, Texas.

INTRODUCTION: This study presents a framework for identifying "high-risk" days 
for asthma attacks associated with elevated concentrations of criteria 
pollutants using local information to warn citizens on days when the 
concentrations differ from Environmental Protection Agency Air Quality Index 
(AQI) warnings. Studies that consider the unique mixture of pollutants and the 
health data specific to a city provide additional information for asthma 
self-management. This framework is applied to air pollution and asthma data to 
identify supplemental warning days in Houston, Texas.
METHODS: A four-step framework was established to identify days with pollutant 
levels that pose meaningful increased risk for asthma attacks compared with 
baseline. Historical associations between 18,542 ambulance-treated asthma 
attacks and air pollutant concentrations in Houston, Texas (2004-2016; analyzed 
in 2018), were analyzed using a case-crossover study design with conditional 
logistic regression. Days with historically high associations between pollution 
and asthma attacks were identified as supplemental warning days.
RESULTS: Days with 8-hour maximum ozone >66.6 parts per billion for the 3 
previous days and same-day 24-hour nitrogen dioxide >19.3 parts per billion pose 
an RR of 15% above baseline; concentrations above these levels pose an increased 
risk of 15% (RR=1.15, 95% CI=1.14, 1.16) and 30% (RR=1.30, 95% CI=1.29, 1.32), 
respectively. These warnings add an additional 12% days per year over the AQI 
warnings.
CONCLUSIONS: Houston uses this framework to identify supplemental air quality 
warnings to improve asthma self-management. Supplemental days reflect risk lower 
than the National Ambient Air Quality Standards and consecutive poor air quality 
days, differing from the AQI.

Copyright © 2019 American Journal of Preventive Medicine. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amepre.2019.03.022
PMID: 31239087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]