---
reference_id: PMID:39278389
title: "Prevalence Estimates and Genetic Diversity for Autosomal Dominant Retinitis Pigmentosa Due to RHO, c.68C>A (p.P23H) Variant."
authors:
- Leenders M
- Gaastra M
- Jayagopal A
- Malone KE
journal: Am J Ophthalmol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2024.08.038
keywords:
- Humans
- "Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics, epidemiology, diagnosis"
- Prevalence
- Gene Frequency
- United States/epidemiology
- Rhodopsin/genetics
- Genetic Variation
- "Genes, Dominant"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence Estimates and Genetic Diversity for Autosomal Dominant Retinitis Pigmentosa Due to RHO, c.68C>A (p.P23H) Variant.
**Authors:** Leenders M, Gaastra M, Jayagopal A, Malone KE
**Journal:** Am J Ophthalmol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajo.2024.08.038](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajo.2024.08.038)

## Content

1. Am J Ophthalmol. 2024 Dec;268:340-347. doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2024.08.038. Epub
2024  Sep 14.

Prevalence Estimates and Genetic Diversity for Autosomal Dominant Retinitis 
Pigmentosa Due to RHO, c.68C>A (p.P23H) Variant.

Leenders M(1), Gaastra M(2), Jayagopal A(3), Malone KE(4).

Author information:
(1)Technical University (M.L.), Delft, The Netherlands; Erasmus Medical Center 
(M.L.), Rotterdam, The Netherlands; GeneScape (M.L., M.G., K.E.M.), Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(2)GeneScape (M.L., M.G., K.E.M.), Leiden, The Netherlands.
(3)Opus Genetics (A.J.), Durham, North Carolina, USA; Ocuphire Pharma (A.J.), 
Farmington Hills, Michigan, USA.
(4)GeneScape (M.L., M.G., K.E.M.), Leiden, The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
Karen@GeneScape.nl.

OBJECTIVE: To provide the most up-to-date clinical prevalence estimate for 
autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa (adRP) patients due to RHO c.68C>A, 
(p.P23H) in the United States, supported by two independent approaches; 
literature based meta-analysis of reported patients and population genetics 
modeling.
DESIGN: Systematic review and meta-analysis plus population genetics modeling.
METHODS: Systematic review of the literature describing RP patients attributed 
to RHO variants was conducted to support a meta-analysis used to estimate the 
clinical prevalence of the RHO P23H patients diagnosed in the US. In parallel, 
large-scale genetic diversity studies describing the US population and 
non-European cohorts of the Americas (PAGE II), were evaluated to ascertain the 
allele frequencies of variant RHO c.68C>A, (p.P23H). The genetic prevalence for 
variant RHO c.68C>A, (p.P23H) was calculated using Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. 
Further demographic data, including age and average age of onset for visual 
impairment were incorporated into a basic distribution model to estimate 
clinical prevalence of genetically predisposed persons.
RESULTS: The estimated clinical prevalence of adRP due to RHO P23H based on 
literature review was approximately 2000-3000 patients. In comparison the 
genetic prevalence of persons with RHO c.68C>A, (p.P23H) in the United States 
was an estimated 6176 (90% CI: 3333-11398) and only half of them are expected to 
cluster with European genetic ancestry. This variant was found enriched in 
subgroups of African American or other non-European biogeographic ancestries. Of 
the estimated 6200 persons carrying this variant in the US, ∼3500 (estimate 
range: 1900-6500) are expected to show clinical signs of visual impairment as 
modeled by average age of onset previously reported for patients with this 
variant.
CONCLUSIONS: We utilized two independent approaches to estimate the total number 
of adRP patients due to RHO c.68C>A, (p.P23H) in the United States; systematic 
literature review based meta-analysis and population genetics modeling. Both 
approaches yielded similar, overlapping estimates of adRP patients due to RHO 
P23H. However, comparison of these estimates provides some indication for a 
diagnosis gap. Unexpectedly, this variant is present at relatively higher 
frequency in some predominantly non-European genetic ancestries in the US. While 
this genetic analysis supports our estimates of clinical prevalence of adRP due 
to RHO P23H in the United States, it also has implications for diagnosing 
potential adRP patients due to this variant, raising questions of 
genotype-phenotype correlation and access to genetic testing.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajo.2024.08.038
PMID: 39278389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]