---
reference_id: PMID:25047754
title: Cost-effectiveness analysis of HLA-B5801 genotyping in the treatment of gout patients with chronic renal insufficiency in Korea.
authors:
- Park DJ
- Kang JH
- Lee JW
- Lee KE
- Wen L
- Kim TJ
- Park YW
- Park SH
- Lee SS
journal: Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken)
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/acr.22409
keywords:
- "Allopurinol/adverse effects, economics"
- Cost-Benefit Analysis
- Decision Trees
- "Drug Eruptions/economics, genetics"
- Genotype
- Genotyping Techniques/economics
- "Gout/complications, drug therapy, genetics"
- "Gout Suppressants/adverse effects, economics"
- HLA-B Antigens/genetics
- Humans
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/complications, genetics"
- Republic of Korea
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cost-effectiveness analysis of HLA-B5801 genotyping in the treatment of gout patients with chronic renal insufficiency in Korea.
**Authors:** Park DJ, Kang JH, Lee JW, Lee KE, Wen L, Kim TJ, Park YW, Park SH, Lee SS
**Journal:** Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/acr.22409](https://doi.org/10.1002/acr.22409)

## Content

1. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2015 Feb;67(2):280-7. doi: 10.1002/acr.22409.

Cost-effectiveness analysis of HLA-B5801 genotyping in the treatment of gout 
patients with chronic renal insufficiency in Korea.

Park DJ(1), Kang JH, Lee JW, Lee KE, Wen L, Kim TJ, Park YW, Park SH, Lee SS.

Author information:
(1)Chonnam National University Medical School & Hospital, Gwangju, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Allopurinol-induced severe cutaneous adverse reactions (SCARs) are 
relatively rare but cause high rates of morbidity and mortality. Studies have 
shown that the HLA-B5801 allele and renal impairment are strongly associated 
with SCARs. Recent American College of Rheumatology guidelines recommend that, 
prior to treatment with allopurinol, the HLA-B5801 genotype of gout patients at 
high risk for SCARs, including Korean patients with chronic renal insufficiency, 
should be determined. However, whether such genotyping is cost-effective is 
unknown. This study evaluated the cost-effectiveness of HLA-B5801 genotyping for 
the treatment of gout in patients with chronic renal insufficiency in Korea.
METHODS: A decision analytical model over a time period of 12 months was 
employed to compare the cost and outcomes of treatment informed by HLA-B5801 
genotyping with that of a conventional treatment strategy using a hypothetical 
cohort of gout patients with chronic renal insufficiency. Direct medical costs 
were obtained from real patients with SCARs from 2 tertiary hospitals. Outcomes 
were measured as a total expected cost and an incremental cost-effectiveness 
ratio.
RESULTS: In the base model, the total expected cost and probability of 
continuation of gout treatment without SCARs for the conventional and HLA-B5801 
screening strategies were $1,193 and 97.8% and $1,055 and 100%, respectively. 
The results were robust according to sensitivity analyses.
CONCLUSION: Our model suggests that gout treatment informed by HLA-B5801 
genotyping is less costly and more effective than treatment without genotyping, 
and HLA-B5801 genotyping could considerably reduce the occurrence of 
allopurinol-induced SCARs and related deaths.

Copyright © 2015 by the American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/acr.22409
PMID: 25047754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]