---
reference_id: "PMID:37919294"
title: Congenital lung malformations.
authors:
- Pederiva F
- Rothenberg SS
- Hall N
- Ijsselstijn H
- Wong KKY
- von der Thüsen J
- Ciet P
- Achiron R
- "Pio d'Adamo A"
- Schnater JM
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-023-00470-1
keywords:
- Infant
- Female
- Humans
- Pregnancy
- "Bronchogenic Cyst/diagnosis, surgery"
- "Bronchopulmonary Sequestration/diagnosis, surgery"
- Lung Diseases
- "Lung/diagnostic imaging, abnormalities"
- "Cystic Adenomatoid Malformation of Lung, Congenital/therapy, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital lung malformations.
**Authors:** Pederiva F, Rothenberg SS, Hall N, Ijsselstijn H, Wong KKY, von der Thüsen J, Ciet P, Achiron R, Pio d'Adamo A, Schnater JM
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-023-00470-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-023-00470-1)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2023 Nov 2;9(1):60. doi: 10.1038/s41572-023-00470-1.

Congenital lung malformations.

Pederiva F(1), Rothenberg SS(2), Hall N(3), Ijsselstijn H(4), Wong KKY(5), von 
der Thüsen J(6), Ciet P(7)(8), Achiron R(9), Pio d'Adamo A(10)(11), Schnater 
JM(12).

Author information:
(1)Paediatric Surgery, "F. Del Ponte" Hospital, ASST Settelaghi, Varese, Italy. 
federica_pederiva@yahoo.it.
(2)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Rocky Mountain Hospital for Children, 
Denver, CO, USA.
(3)University Surgery Unit, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, 
Southampton, UK.
(4)Department of Paediatric Surgery and Intensive Care, Erasmus MC Sophia 
Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Surgery, University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital, Hong 
Kong, China.
(6)Department of Pathology and Clinical Bioinformatics, Erasmus MC Sophia 
Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)Departments of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine and Respiratory Medicine and 
Allergology, Erasmus MC Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Radiology, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.
(9)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Fetal Medicine Unit, The Chaim Sheba 
Medical Center Tel-Hashomer, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, 
Tel Aviv, Israel.
(10)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Institute for Maternal and Child Health - 
IRCCS "Burlo Garofolo", Trieste, Italy.
(11)Department of Medical, Surgical and Health Sciences, University of Trieste, 
Trieste, Italy.
(12)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Erasmus MC Sophia Children's Hospital, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Congenital lung malformations (CLMs) are rare developmental anomalies of the 
lung, including congenital pulmonary airway malformations (CPAM), 
bronchopulmonary sequestration, congenital lobar overinflation, bronchogenic 
cyst and isolated congenital bronchial atresia. CLMs occur in 4 out of 10,000 
live births. Postnatal presentation ranges from an asymptomatic infant to 
respiratory failure. CLMs are typically diagnosed with antenatal ultrasonography 
and confirmed by chest CT angiography in the first few months of life. Although 
surgical treatment is the gold standard for symptomatic CLMs, a consensus on 
asymptomatic cases has not been reached. Resection, either thoracoscopically or 
through thoracotomy, minimizes the risk of local morbidity, including recurrent 
infections and pneumothorax, and avoids the risk of malignancies that have been 
associated with CPAM, bronchopulmonary sequestration and bronchogenic cyst. 
However, some surgeons suggest expectant management as the incidence of adverse 
outcomes, including malignancy, remains unknown. In either case, a planned 
follow-up and a proper transition to adult care are needed. The biological 
mechanisms through which some CLMs may trigger malignant transformation are 
under investigation. KRAS has already been confirmed to be somatically mutated 
in CPAM and other genetic susceptibilities linked to tumour development have 
been explored. By summarizing current progress in CLM diagnosis, management and 
molecular understanding we hope to highlight open questions that require urgent 
attention.

© 2023. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-023-00470-1
PMID: 37919294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]