---
reference_id: "PMID:22801960"
title: Combined immunodeficiency with life-threatening EBV-associated lymphoproliferative disorder in patients lacking functional CD27.
authors:
- Salzer E
- Daschkey S
- Choo S
- Gombert M
- Santos-Valente E
- Ginzel S
- Schwendinger M
- Haas OA
- Fritsch G
- Pickl WF
- Förster-Waldl E
- Borkhardt A
- Boztug K
- Bienemann K
- Seidel MG
journal: Haematologica
year: '2013'
doi: 10.3324/haematol.2012.068791
keywords:
- "Epstein-Barr Virus Infections/complications, immunology"
- Female
- "Herpesvirus 4, Human/immunology"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Lymphoproliferative Disorders/genetics, immunology, virology"
- Male
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Severe Combined Immunodeficiency/complications, genetics, immunology"
- "Tumor Necrosis Factor Receptor Superfamily, Member 7/deficiency, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Combined immunodeficiency with life-threatening EBV-associated lymphoproliferative disorder in patients lacking functional CD27.
**Authors:** Salzer E, Daschkey S, Choo S, Gombert M, Santos-Valente E, Ginzel S, Schwendinger M, Haas OA, Fritsch G, Pickl WF, Förster-Waldl E, Borkhardt A, Boztug K, Bienemann K, Seidel MG
**Journal:** Haematologica (2013)
**DOI:** [10.3324/haematol.2012.068791](https://doi.org/10.3324/haematol.2012.068791)

## Content

1. Haematologica. 2013 Mar;98(3):473-8. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2012.068791. Epub
2012 Jul 16.

Combined immunodeficiency with life-threatening EBV-associated
lymphoproliferative disorder in patients lacking functional CD27.

Salzer E(1), Daschkey S, Choo S, Gombert M, Santos-Valente E, Ginzel S,
Schwendinger M, Haas OA, Fritsch G, Pickl WF, Förster-Waldl E, Borkhardt A,
Boztug K, Bienemann K, Seidel MG.

Author information:
(1)CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine, Austrian Academy of Sciences,
Vienna, Austria.

CD27, a tumor necrosis factor receptor family member, interacts with CD70 and
influences T-, B- and NK-cell functions. Disturbance of this axis impairs
immunity and memory generation against viruses including Epstein Barr virus
(EBV), influenza, and others. CD27 is commonly used as marker of memory B cells
for the classification of B-cell deficiencies including common variable immune
deficiency. Flow cytometric immunophenotyping including expression analysis of
CD27 on lymphoid cells was followed by capillary sequencing of CD27 in index
patients, their parents, and non-affected siblings. More comprehensive genetic
analysis employed single nucleotide polymorphism-based homozygosity mapping and
whole exome sequencing. Analysis of exome sequencing data was performed at two
centers using slightly different data analysis pipelines, each based on the
Genome Analysis ToolKit Best Practice version 3 recommendations. A comprehensive
clinical characterization was correlated to genotype. We report the simultaneous
confirmation of human CD27 deficiency in 3 independent families (8 patients) due
to a homozygous mutation (p. Cys53Tyr) revealed by whole exome sequencing,
leading to disruption of an evolutionarily conserved cystein knot motif of the
transmembrane receptor. Phenotypes varied from asymptomatic memory B-cell
deficiency (n=3) to EBV-associated hemophagocytosis and lymphoproliferative
disorder (LPD; n=3) and malignant lymphoma (n=2; +1 after LPD). Following EBV
infection, hypogammaglobulinemia developed in at least 3 of the affected
individuals, while specific anti-viral and anti-polysaccharide antibodies and
EBV-specific T-cell responses were detectable. In severely affected patients,
numbers of iNKT cells and NK-cell function were reduced. Two of 8 patients died,
2 others underwent allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
successfully, and one received anti-CD20 (rituximab) therapy repeatedly. Since
homozygosity mapping and exome sequencing did not reveal additional modifying
factors, our findings suggest that lack of functional CD27 predisposes towards a
combined immunodeficiency associated with potentially fatal EBV-driven
hemo-phagocytosis, lymphoproliferation, and lymphoma development.

DOI: 10.3324/haematol.2012.068791
PMCID: PMC3659923
PMID: 22801960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
