---
reference_id: "PMID:23731537"
title: A recurrent PDGFRB mutation causes familial infantile myofibromatosis.
authors:
- Cheung YH
- Gayden T
- Campeau PM
- LeDuc CA
- Russo D
- Nguyen VH
- Guo J
- Qi M
- Guan Y
- Albrecht S
- Moroz B
- Eldin KW
- Lu JT
- Schwartzentruber J
- Malkin D
- Berghuis AM
- Emil S
- Gibbs RA
- Burk DL
- Vanstone M
- Lee BH
- Orchard D
- Boycott KM
- Chung WK
- Jabado N
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.04.026
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Female
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Genetic Association Studies
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- "Models, Molecular"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Myofibromatosis/congenital, genetics"
- Pedigree
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- "Receptor, Notch3"
- "Receptor, Platelet-Derived Growth Factor beta/chemistry, genetics"
- "Receptors, Notch/genetics"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A recurrent PDGFRB mutation causes familial infantile myofibromatosis.
**Authors:** Cheung YH, Gayden T, Campeau PM, LeDuc CA, Russo D, Nguyen VH, Guo J, Qi M, Guan Y, Albrecht S, Moroz B, Eldin KW, Lu JT, Schwartzentruber J, Malkin D, Berghuis AM, Emil S, Gibbs RA, Burk DL, Vanstone M, Lee BH, Orchard D, Boycott KM, Chung WK, Jabado N
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.04.026](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.04.026)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Jun 6;92(6):996-1000. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.04.026.
Epub  2013 May 23.

A recurrent PDGFRB mutation causes familial infantile myofibromatosis.

Cheung YH(1), Gayden T, Campeau PM, LeDuc CA, Russo D, Nguyen VH, Guo J, Qi M,
Guan Y, Albrecht S, Moroz B, Eldin KW, Lu JT, Schwartzentruber J, Malkin D,
Berghuis AM, Emil S, Gibbs RA, Burk DL, Vanstone M, Lee BH, Orchard D, Boycott
KM, Chung WK, Jabado N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2013 Oct;84(4):340-1. doi: 10.1111/cge.12238.
    Ann Dermatol Venereol. 2013 Dec;140(12):833-4. doi:
10.1016/j.annder.2013.08.004.

Infantile myofibromatosis (IM) is the most common benign fibrous tumor of soft
tissues affecting young children. By using whole-exome sequencing, RNA
sequencing, and targeted sequencing, we investigated germline and tumor DNA in
individuals from four distinct families with the familial form of IM and in five
simplex IM cases with no previous family history of this disease. We identified
a germline mutation c.1681C>T (p.Arg561Cys) in platelet-derived growth factor
receptor β (PDGFRB) in all 11 affected individuals with familial IM, although
none of the five individuals with nonfamilial IM had mutations in this gene. We
further identified a second heterozygous mutation in PDGFRB in two myofibromas
from one of the affected familial cases, indicative of a potential second hit in
this gene in the tumor. PDGFR-β promotes growth of mesenchymal cells, including
blood vessels and smooth muscles, which are affected in IM. Our findings
indicate p.Arg561Cys substitution in PDGFR-β as a cause of the dominant form of
this disease. They provide a rationale for further investigations of this
specific mutation and gene to assess the benefits of targeted therapies against
PDGFR-β in aggressive life-threatening familial forms of the disease.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.04.026
PMCID: PMC3675240
PMID: 23731537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
