---
reference_id: "PMID:38049801"
title: Human monoclonal antibodies inhibit invasion of transgenic Plasmodium knowlesi expressing Plasmodium vivax Duffy binding protein.
authors:
- Watson QD
- Carias LL
- Malachin A
- Redinger KR
- Bosch J
- Bardelli M
- Baldor L
- Feufack-Donfack LB
- Popovici J
- Moon RW
- Draper SJ
- Zimmerman PA
- King CL
journal: Malar J
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12936-023-04766-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human monoclonal antibodies inhibit invasion of transgenic Plasmodium knowlesi expressing Plasmodium vivax Duffy binding protein.
**Authors:** Watson QD, Carias LL, Malachin A, Redinger KR, Bosch J, Bardelli M, Baldor L, Feufack-Donfack LB, Popovici J, Moon RW, Draper SJ, Zimmerman PA, King CL
**Journal:** Malar J (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12936-023-04766-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12936-023-04766-1)

## Content

1. Malar J. 2023 Dec 4;22(1):369. doi: 10.1186/s12936-023-04766-1.

Human monoclonal antibodies inhibit invasion of transgenic Plasmodium knowlesi 
expressing Plasmodium vivax Duffy binding protein.

Watson QD(1), Carias LL(1), Malachin A(1), Redinger KR(1), Bosch J(1), Bardelli 
M(2), Baldor L(3), Feufack-Donfack LB(3), Popovici J(3), Moon RW(4), Draper 
SJ(2), Zimmerman PA(5), King CL(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Center for Global Health and Diseases, Case Western Reserve University School 
of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(3)Malaria Research Unit, Institut Pasteur du Cambodge, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
(4)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene and 
Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(5)Center for Global Health and Diseases, Case Western Reserve University School 
of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA. paz@case.edu.
(6)Center for Global Health and Diseases, Case Western Reserve University School 
of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA. cxk21@case.edu.
(7)Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Cleveland, OH, USA. cxk21@case.edu.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Mar 08:2023.03.07.531647. doi: 10.1101/2023.03.07.531647.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium vivax has been more resistant to various control measures 
than Plasmodium falciparum malaria because of its greater transmissibility and 
ability to produce latent parasite forms. Therefore, developing P. vivax 
vaccines and therapeutic monoclonal antibodies (humAbs) remains a high priority. 
The Duffy antigen receptor for chemokines (DARC) expressed on erythrocytes is 
central to P. vivax invasion of reticulocytes. P. vivax expresses a Duffy 
binding protein (PvDBP) on merozoites, a DARC ligand, and the DARC: PvDBP 
interaction is critical for P. vivax blood stage malaria. Therefore, PvDBP is a 
leading vaccine candidate for P. vivax and a target for therapeutic human 
monoclonal antibodies (humAbs).
METHODS: Here, the functional activity of humAbs derived from naturally exposed 
and vaccinated individuals are compared for the first time using easily cultured 
Plasmodium knowlesi (P. knowlesi) that had been genetically modified to replace 
its endogenous PkDBP orthologue with PvDBP to create a transgenic parasite, 
PkPvDBPOR. This transgenic parasite requires DARC to invade human erythrocytes 
but is not reticulocyte restricted. This model was used to evaluate the invasion 
inhibition potential of 12 humAbs (9 naturally acquired; 3 vaccine-induced) 
targeting PvDBP individually and in combinations using growth inhibition assays 
(GIAs).
RESULTS: The PvDBP-specific humAbs demonstrated 70-100% inhibition of PkPvDBPOR 
invasion with the IC50 values ranging from 51 to 338 µg/mL for the 9 naturally 
acquired (NA) humAbs and 33 to 99 µg/ml for the 3 vaccine-induced (VI) humAbs. 
To evaluate antagonistic, additive, or synergistic effects, six pairwise 
combinations were performed using select humAbs. Of these combinations tested, 
one NA/NA (099100/094083) combination demonstrated relatively strong additive 
inhibition between 10 and 100 µg/mL; all combinations of NA and VI humAbs showed 
additive inhibition at concentrations below 25 µg/mL and antagonism at higher 
concentrations. None of the humAb combinations showed synergy. Invasion 
inhibition efficacy by some mAbs shown with PkPvDBPOR was closely replicated 
using P. vivax clinical isolates.
CONCLUSION: The PkPvDBPOR transgenic model is a robust surrogate of P. vivax to 
assess invasion and growth inhibition of human monoclonal Abs recognizing PvDBP 
individually and in combination. There was no synergistic interaction for growth 
inhibition with the humAbs tested here that target different epitopes or 
subdomains of PvDBP, suggesting little benefit in clinical trials using 
combinations of these humAbs.

© 2023. This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the 
US; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-023-04766-1
PMCID: PMC10696754
PMID: 38049801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors declare they have no competing 
interests.