---
reference_id: "PMID:2304128"
title: Malnutrition-related diabetes mellitus in young adult diabetic patients attending a Nigerian diabetic clinic.
authors:
- Akanji AO
journal: J Trop Med Hyg
year: '1990'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Malnutrition-related diabetes mellitus in young adult diabetic patients attending a Nigerian diabetic clinic.
**Authors:** Akanji AO
**Journal:** J Trop Med Hyg (1990)

## Content

1. J Trop Med Hyg. 1990 Feb;93(1):35-8.

Malnutrition-related diabetes mellitus in young adult diabetic patients 
attending a Nigerian diabetic clinic.

Akanji AO(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Medicine, University of Ibadan, Nigeria.

Although malnutrition-related diabetes mellitus (MRDM) is reported to affect 
about 40-50% of young adult diabetics in the Indian subcontinent and possibly 
other tropical and subtropical countries, anecdotal reports have suggested its 
relative uncommonness in Africa. The presentation of subjects (aged 15-30 years) 
attending a major Nigerian diabetic clinic in 1984 was therefore reviewed. The 
results (i) confirm previous observations on the rarity of diabetes in young 
adult Africans: only 45 of a total of 756 registered diabetics presented when 
aged 15-30 years; (ii) indicate that classical MRDM from established clinical 
criteria was uncommon, affecting only about 6% of the subjects, the majority of 
whom were either atypically or classically insulin-dependent (about 90%), 
although a small proportion (about 6%) appeared non-insulin-dependent. These 
observations suggest that diabetes in young adult Nigerians is heterogeneous in 
clinical presentation and aetiopathogenesis and, furthermore, that classical 
malnutrition-related diabetes mellitus is rarely seen, being much the least 
common mode of presentation, unlike the indication of the WHO Expert Committee 
on Diabetes Report (1985).

PMID: 2304128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]