---
reference_id: "PMID:17206682"
title: NOD2/CARD15 disease associations other than Crohn's disease.
authors:
- Henckaerts L
- Vermeire S
journal: Inflamm Bowel Dis
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1002/ibd.20066
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NOD2/CARD15 disease associations other than Crohn's disease.
**Authors:** Henckaerts L, Vermeire S
**Journal:** Inflamm Bowel Dis (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ibd.20066](https://doi.org/10.1002/ibd.20066)

## Content

1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2007 Feb;13(2):235-41. doi: 10.1002/ibd.20066.

NOD2/CARD15 disease associations other than Crohn's disease.

Henckaerts L(1), Vermeire S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, U.Z. Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium.

At this moment, few confirmed associations between NOD2 mutations and diseases 
other than Crohn's disease (CD) and Blau syndrome (BS) have been reported, but 
research is ongoing in several fields where a genetic susceptibility factor 
and/or a role for the innate immune system is suspected. Whether the 
Crohn's-associated CARD15 mutations lead to a loss or gain of function of the 
NOD2 receptor is subject to controversy, and by which mechanisms this change in 
function might increase the susceptibility to CD is still under investigation. 
The possible involvement of NOD2/CARD15 in the pathogenesis of certain diseases 
with already (partially) unraveled pathophysiologic mechanisms might contribute 
to our further understanding of NOD2/CARD15 and its function in CD. We review 
studies on the association of CARD15 variants with diseases other than CD. The 
association of NOD2/CARD15 mutations with CD and BS, and possibly also early 
onset sarcoidosis, suggests a role for the gene in the development of 
granulomata and granulomatous diseases, possibly by inappropriate activation of 
the immune system. The data from the oncology field suggest that this 
inappropriate activation might even lead to uncontrolled proliferation of 
certain cell types. The studies in allergic diseases and atopy are the largest 
so far, and the association of NOD2/CARDI5 mutations with atopic phenotypes 
might be an indication that CARD15 also plays a role in the Th2 pathway. 
Finally, transplantation studies indicate that the genetic background of a 
patient should be taken into account when considering hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation, given the increased risk of mortality and graft versus host 
disease observed. Whether NOD2 variants are also associated with an increased 
risk for infections and sepsis in patients receiving immunosuppressive therapies 
is unclear.

DOI: 10.1002/ibd.20066
PMID: 17206682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]