---
reference_id: "PMID:17945527"
title: "2-Methylbutyryl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency: functional and molecular studies on a defect in isoleucine catabolism."
authors:
- Sass JO
- Ensenauer R
- Röschinger W
- Reich H
- Steuerwald U
- Schirrmacher O
- Engel K
- Häberle J
- Andresen BS
- Mégarbané A
- Lehnert W
- Zschocke J
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2007.09.002
keywords:
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism, urine"
- "Butyryl-CoA Dehydrogenase/deficiency, genetics"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Genotype
- "Glycine/analogs & derivatives, urine"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Isoleucine/administration & dosage, metabolism"
- Male
- Metabolism
- Valerates/urine
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 2-Methylbutyryl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency: functional and molecular studies on a defect in isoleucine catabolism.
**Authors:** Sass JO, Ensenauer R, Röschinger W, Reich H, Steuerwald U, Schirrmacher O, Engel K, Häberle J, Andresen BS, Mégarbané A, Lehnert W, Zschocke J
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2007.09.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2007.09.002)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2008 Jan;93(1):30-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2007.09.002. Epub
2007 Oct 22.

2-Methylbutyryl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency: functional and molecular
studies on a defect in isoleucine catabolism.

Sass JO(1), Ensenauer R, Röschinger W, Reich H, Steuerwald U, Schirrmacher O,
Engel K, Häberle J, Andresen BS, Mégarbané A, Lehnert W, Zschocke J.

Author information:
(1)Zentrum für Kinder-und Jugendmedizin, Universitätsklinikum Freiburg,
Mathildenstrasse 1, Freiburg, Germany. joern.oliver.sass@uniklinik-freiburg.de

2-Methylbutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase (MBD; coded by the ACADSB gene) catalyzes the
step in isoleucine metabolism that corresponds to the isovaleryl-CoA
dehydrogenase reaction in the degradation of leucine. Deficiencies of both
enzymes may be detected by expanded neonatal screening with tandem-mass
spectrometry due to elevated pentanoylcarnitine (C5 acylcarnitine) in blood, but
little information is available on the clinical relevance of MBD deficiency. We
biochemically and genetically characterize six individuals with MBD deficiency
from four families of different ethnic backgrounds. None of the six individuals
showed clinical symptoms attributable to MBD deficiency although the defect in
isoleucine catabolism was demonstrated both in vivo and in vitro. Several
mutations in the ACADSB gene were identified, including a novel one. MBD
deficiency may be a harmless metabolic variant although significant impairment
of valproic acid metabolism cannot be excluded and further study is required to
assess the long-term outcome of individuals with this condition. The relatively
high prevalence of ACADSB gene mutations in control subjects suggests that MBD
deficiency may be more common than previously thought but is not detected
because of its usually benign nature.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2007.09.002
PMID: 17945527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
