---
reference_id: "PMID:29961824"
title: Oligomerization of Prph2 and Rom1 is essential for photoreceptor outer segment formation.
authors:
- Zulliger R
- Conley SM
- Mwoyosvi ML
- Al-Ubaidi MR
- Naash MI
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy240
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Line
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Eye Proteins/metabolism
- Female
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/metabolism
- Mice
- Mutation
- "Peripherins/genetics, metabolism"
- Protein Interaction Domains and Motifs
- Protein Multimerization
- "Retinal Degeneration/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Retinal Photoreceptor Cell Outer Segment/metabolism, physiology"
- Tetraspanins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oligomerization of Prph2 and Rom1 is essential for photoreceptor outer segment formation.
**Authors:** Zulliger R, Conley SM, Mwoyosvi ML, Al-Ubaidi MR, Naash MI
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddy240](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddy240)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2018 Oct 15;27(20):3507-3518. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy240.

Oligomerization of Prph2 and Rom1 is essential for photoreceptor outer segment
formation.

Zulliger R(1), Conley SM(2), Mwoyosvi ML(1), Al-Ubaidi MR(1), Naash MI(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Houston, Houston, TX,
USA.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK, USA.

Mutations in peripherin 2 (PRPH2, also known as Rds), a tetraspanin protein
found in photoreceptor outer segments (OSs), cause retinal degeneration ranging
from rod-dominant retinitis pigmentosa (RP) to cone-dominant macular dystrophy
(MD). Understanding why some Prph2 mutants affect rods while others affect cones
remains a critical unanswered question. Prph2 is essential for OS structure and
function and exhibits a very specific pattern of oligomerization with its
homolog Rom1. Non-covalent Prph2/Rom1 homo- and hetero-tetramers assemble into
higher-order covalently linked complexes held together by an intermolecular
disulfide bond at Prph2-C150/Rom1-C153. Here we disrupt this crucial bond using
a C150S-Prph2 knockin mouse line to study the role of Prph2 higher-order complex
formation. We find that C150S-Prph2 traffics to the OS, interacts with Rom1 and
forms non-covalent tetramers, but alone cannot support normal OS structure and
function. However, C150S-Prph2 supports the initiation or elaboration of OS disc
structures, and improves rod OS ultrastructure in the presence of wild-type (WT)
Prph2 (i.e. Prph2C150S/+ versus Prph2+/-). Prph2C150S/+ animals exhibit
haploinsufficiency in rods, but a dominant-negative phenotype in cones,
suggesting cones have a different requirement for large Prph2 complexes than
rods. Importantly, cone but not rod function can be improved by the addition of
one Prph2Y141C allele, a mutation responsible for pattern dystrophy owing to the
extra cysteine. Combined these findings show that covalently linked Prph2
complexes are essential for OS formation, but not for Prph2 targeting to the OS,
and that cones are especially sensitive to having a broad distribution of Prph2
complex types (i.e. tetramers and large complexes).

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddy240
PMCID: PMC6168975
PMID: 29961824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
