---
reference_id: "PMID:29523605"
title: Lead in a case of encephalopathy.
authors:
- Talbot A
- Lippiatt C
- Tantry A
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2017-222388
keywords:
- "Brain Diseases/diagnostic imaging, etiology"
- Chelating Agents/therapeutic use
- Chelation Therapy/methods
- "Child, Preschool"
- Humans
- "Lead/blood, toxicity"
- "Lead Poisoning, Nervous System, Childhood/blood, complications, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- Paint/adverse effects
- "Pica/complications, psychology"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lead in a case of encephalopathy.
**Authors:** Talbot A, Lippiatt C, Tantry A
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2017-222388](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2017-222388)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2018 Mar 9;2018:bcr2017222388. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2017-222388.

Lead in a case of encephalopathy.

Talbot A(1), Lippiatt C(2), Tantry A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds, UK.
(2)Department of Specialist Laboratory Medicine, Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS 
Trust, Leeds, UK.

A 2-year-old boy with a history of pica was admitted with vomiting and treated 
overnight for viral tonsillitis. A week later, he presented with a prolonged 
afebrile seizure and required intubation and ventilation. Antibiotics and 
acyclovir were started. Despite extensive investigations including MRI head, no 
cause was identified. Four days later, he deteriorated with signs of raised 
intracranial pressure. On day 5, blood lead concentration in the sample 
collected at admission was reported as grossly elevated, consistent with a 
diagnosis of severe lead poisoning from ingesting lead-containing paint at the 
family home. Chelation therapy was started but, unfortunately, he did not make a 
neurological recovery, and care was withdrawn. A serious case review identified 
a lack of awareness of lead poisoning and its relation to pica as a root cause. 
We report this case to share our experience and the importance of considering 
lead poisoning in children with pica.

© BMJ Publishing Group Ltd (unless otherwise stated in the text of the article) 
2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise 
expressly granted.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2017-222388
PMCID: PMC5847830
PMID: 29523605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.