---
reference_id: "PMID:36858037"
title: Minor Salivary Gland Biopsy for the Diagnosis of Neurosarcoidosis.
authors:
- Fournier N
- Jamilloux Y
- Gerfaud-Valentin M
- Streichenberger N
- Vukusic S
- Marignier R
- Androdias G
- Sève P
journal: Eur Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1159/000529920
keywords:
- Humans
- Retrospective Studies
- "Salivary Glands, Minor/pathology"
- Central Nervous System Diseases/diagnosis
- "Sarcoidosis/diagnosis, pathology"
- Biopsy
- Guanidines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Minor Salivary Gland Biopsy for the Diagnosis of Neurosarcoidosis.
**Authors:** Fournier N, Jamilloux Y, Gerfaud-Valentin M, Streichenberger N, Vukusic S, Marignier R, Androdias G, Sève P
**Journal:** Eur Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000529920](https://doi.org/10.1159/000529920)

## Content

1. Eur Neurol. 2023;86(3):171-177. doi: 10.1159/000529920. Epub 2023 Mar 1.

Minor Salivary Gland Biopsy for the Diagnosis of Neurosarcoidosis.

Fournier N(1), Jamilloux Y(2)(3), Gerfaud-Valentin M(2), Streichenberger
N(4)(3), Vukusic S(5)(3), Marignier R(5)(3), Androdias G(5), Sève P(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Hospices Civils de Lyon, Hôpital de la Croix-Rousse, Service de Médecine
Interne, Lyon, France, nicolas.fournier@free.fr.
(2)Hospices Civils de Lyon, Hôpital de la Croix-Rousse, Service de Médecine
Interne, Lyon, France.
(3)Université Claude Bernard Lyon-I, Research on Healthcare Performance
(RESHAPE), INSERM U1290, Lyon, France.
(4)Hospices Civils de Lyon, Service d'Anatomie et de Cytologie Pathologiques
Est, Bron, France.
(5)Hospices Civils de Lyon, Hôpital Pierre Wertheimer, Service de Neurologie -
Sclérose en Plaques, Pathologies de la Myéline et Neuro-Inflammation, Bron,
France.

INTRODUCTION: The definite diagnosis of neurosarcoidosis is challenging since it
requires a compatible histology of the nervous system. When neurosarcoidosis is
suspected, other systemic manifestations are investigated to confirm the
diagnosis. A minor salivary gland biopsy (MSGB) is often performed since it is
minimally invasive. The objective of the present study was to assess its
performance for the diagnosis of neurosarcoidosis.
METHODS: A retrospective single-center study included patients who underwent a
MSGB in a tertiary neurological university hospital (Lyon, France) between 2015
and 2018. Clinical presentations unlikely to be compatible with neurosarcoidosis
were excluded. Positive cases of neurosarcoidosis were defined as definite,
probable, and possible cases, according to the latest international
neurosarcoidosis diagnostic criteria from the Neurosarcoidosis Consortium
Consensus Group.
RESULTS: A total of 529 patients underwent a MSGB for clinical manifestations
compatible with neurosarcoidosis. Among the 13 who fulfilled the criteria for
neurosarcoidosis, only one had a positive MSGB. The sensitivity of MSGB was 7.7%
(95% CI [0.2-36.0%]) and the specificity was 100.0% (95% CI [99.3-100%]).
CONCLUSION: Considering the low sensitivity of MSGB for the diagnosis of NS,
MSGB should be performed in selected indications, including a suspicion of
spinal cord sarcoidosis, or when there is a strong clinical, laboratory, and
radiological suspicion of NS. MSGB should rather not be performed when the chest
CT-scan does not show signs of pulmonary or lymph node sarcoidosis.

© 2023 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000529920
PMID: 36858037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
