---
reference_id: "PMID:33741715"
title: EWS-FLI1 and Menin Converge to Regulate ATF4 Activity in Ewing Sarcoma.
authors:
- Jiménez JA
- Apfelbaum AA
- Hawkins AG
- Svoboda LK
- Kumar A
- Ruiz RO
- Garcia AX
- Haarer E
- Nwosu ZC
- Bradin J
- Purohit T
- Chen D
- Cierpicki T
- Grembecka J
- Lyssiotis CA
- Lawlor ER
journal: Mol Cancer Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-20-0679
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EWS-FLI1 and Menin Converge to Regulate ATF4 Activity in Ewing Sarcoma.
**Authors:** Jiménez JA, Apfelbaum AA, Hawkins AG, Svoboda LK, Kumar A, Ruiz RO, Garcia AX, Haarer E, Nwosu ZC, Bradin J, Purohit T, Chen D, Cierpicki T, Grembecka J, Lyssiotis CA, Lawlor ER
**Journal:** Mol Cancer Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-20-0679](https://doi.org/10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-20-0679)

## Content

1. Mol Cancer Res. 2021 Jul;19(7):1182-1195. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-20-0679. 
Epub 2021 Mar 19.

EWS-FLI1 and Menin Converge to Regulate ATF4 Activity in Ewing Sarcoma.

Jiménez JA(1), Apfelbaum AA(1)(2)(3), Hawkins AG(4)(5), Svoboda LK(6), Kumar 
A(1), Ruiz RO(1), Garcia AX(1), Haarer E(1), Nwosu ZC(7), Bradin J(1), Purohit 
T(8), Chen D(8), Cierpicki T(8), Grembecka J(8), Lyssiotis CA(7)(9), Lawlor 
ER(10)(2)(3)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(3)Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, Washington.
(4)New York Genome Center, New York, New York.
(5)Sandra and Edward Meyer Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, New 
York.
(6)School of Public Health, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(7)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan 
Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(8)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan. Beth.Lawlor@seattlechildrens.org.

Ewing sarcomas are driven by EWS-ETS fusions, most commonly EWS-FLI1, which 
promotes widespread metabolic reprogramming, including activation of serine 
biosynthesis. We previously reported that serine biosynthesis is also activated 
in Ewing sarcoma by the scaffolding protein menin through as yet undefined 
mechanisms. Here, we investigated whether EWS-FLI1 and/or menin orchestrate 
serine biosynthesis via modulation of ATF4, a stress-response gene that acts as 
a master transcriptional regulator of serine biosynthesis in other tumors. Our 
results show that in Ewing sarcoma, ATF4 levels are high and that ATF4 modulates 
transcription of core serine synthesis pathway (SSP) genes. Inhibition of either 
EWS-FLI1 or menin leads to loss of ATF4, and this is associated with diminished 
expression of SSP transcripts and proteins. We identified and validated an 
EWS-FLI1 binding site at the ATF4 promoter, indicating that the fusion can 
directly activate ATF4 transcription. In contrast, our results suggest that 
menin-dependent regulation of ATF4 is mediated by transcriptional and 
post-transcriptional mechanisms. Importantly, our data also reveal that the 
downregulation of SSP genes that occurs in the context of EWS-FLI1 or menin loss 
is indicative of broader inhibition of ATF4-dependent transcription. Moreover, 
we find that menin inhibition similarly leads to loss of ATF4 and the 
ATF4-dependent transcriptional signature in MLL-rearranged B-cell acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia, extending our findings to another cancer in which menin 
serves an oncogenic role. IMPLICATIONS: These studies provide new insights into 
metabolic reprogramming in Ewing sarcoma and also uncover a previously 
undescribed role for menin in the regulation of ATF4.

©2021 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-20-0679
PMCID: PMC8462528
PMID: 33741715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: Dr. Grembecka and Dr. 
Cierpicki receive research support from Kura Oncology, Inc. and have equity 
ownership in the company.