---
reference_id: "PMID:19327768"
title: Reversible hypogonadism in Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
authors:
- Desai A
- Jha O
- Iyer V
- Dada R
- Kumar R
- Tandon N
journal: Fertil Steril
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2009.02.023
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reversible hypogonadism in Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
**Authors:** Desai A, Jha O, Iyer V, Dada R, Kumar R, Tandon N
**Journal:** Fertil Steril (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.fertnstert.2009.02.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2009.02.023)

## Content

1. Fertil Steril. 2009 Jul;92(1):391.e13-5. doi:
10.1016/j.fertnstert.2009.02.023.  Epub 2009 Mar 26.

Reversible hypogonadism in Bardet-Biedl syndrome.

Desai A(1), Jha O, Iyer V, Dada R, Kumar R, Tandon N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences, New Delhi, India.

OBJECTIVE: To report a patient with Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) with known 
hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism who developed spontaneous reversal of 
hypogonadism in adulthood.
DESIGN: Case report and discussion.
SETTING: Endocrine unit of a tertiary hospital.
PATIENT(S): A 30-year-old male patient with BBS.
INTERVENTION(S): Clinical evaluation, fine-needle aspiration of the testes, 
hormonal, cytogenetic, and pathologic evaluation.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Serum gonadotropins and testosterone levels and 
presence of spermatogenesis in testicular aspirate.
RESULT(S): Serum testosterone and gonadotropin levels were within the normal 
adult male range. Testicular aspirates showed spermatogenic cells of all series, 
including numerous spermatozoa and a few intact seminiferous tubules. The 
overall picture appeared to be consistent with normal spermatogenesis.
CONCLUSION(S): This is the first case of reversal of hypogonadotrophic 
hypogonadism in a male patient with BBS. Clinicians should look for such 
reversal in other patients with hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism and give 
appropriate prognosis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2009.02.023
PMID: 19327768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]