---
reference_id: "PMID:27905128"
title: "Ehlers-Danlos syndrome related to FKBP14 mutations: detailed cutaneous phenotype."
authors:
- Bursztejn AC
- Baumann M
- Lipsker D
journal: Clin Exp Dermatol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/ced.12983
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ehlers-Danlos syndrome related to FKBP14 mutations: detailed cutaneous phenotype.
**Authors:** Bursztejn AC, Baumann M, Lipsker D
**Journal:** Clin Exp Dermatol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ced.12983](https://doi.org/10.1111/ced.12983)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2017 Jan;42(1):64-67. doi: 10.1111/ced.12983. Epub 2016 Nov
 30.

Ehlers-Danlos syndrome related to FKBP14 mutations: detailed cutaneous 
phenotype.

Bursztejn AC(1), Baumann M(2), Lipsker D(1).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology Department, University Hospital of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, 
France.
(2)Department of Paediatrics I, Paediatric Neurology and Inherited Metabolic 
Disorders, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria.

In 2012, a new Ehlers-Danlos (ED) variant, characterized by severe progressive 
kyphoscoliosis, neonatal myopathy and hearing loss, with normal urinary 
lysylpyridinoline to hydroxylysylpyridinoline ratio and most often a recurrent 
homozygous mutation in the FKBP14 gene, was reported. Because one of the major 
affected tissues in ED syndrome is the skin, recognition of the cutaneous 
features of this newly recognized EDS variant is important. We describe the 
cutaneous phenotype of an adolescent girl harbouring the recurrent homozygous 
FKBP14 mutation. Distinctive features included molluscoid pseudotumours and 
multiple isolated comedones. Molluscoid pseudotumours are a characteristic 
finding in patients with the classic ED variant, but are rarely reported in 
other variants. We discuss the cutaneous phenotype of FKBP14-deficient EDS and 
compare it with other kyphoscoliotic variants.

© 2016 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/ced.12983
PMID: 27905128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]