---
reference_id: "PMID:31647584"
title: Comparison of flow-FISH and MM-qPCR telomere length assessment techniques for the screening of telomeropathies.
authors:
- Ferreira MSV
- Kirschner M
- Halfmeyer I
- Estrada N
- Xicoy B
- Isfort S
- Vieri M
- Zamora L
- Abels A
- Bouillon AS
- Begemann M
- Schemionek M
- Maurer A
- Koschmieder S
- Wilop S
- Panse J
- Brümmendorf TH
- Beier F
journal: Ann N Y Acad Sci
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/nyas.14248
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Bone Marrow Failure Disorders/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Case-Control Studies
- Cohort Studies
- "Dyskeratosis Congenita/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Female
- "Genetic Diseases, Inborn/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence/methods"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Multiplex Polymerase Chain Reaction/methods
- Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction/methods
- Telomere/genetics
- Telomere Homeostasis/physiology
- Telomere Shortening/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparison of flow-FISH and MM-qPCR telomere length assessment techniques for the screening of telomeropathies.
**Authors:** Ferreira MSV, Kirschner M, Halfmeyer I, Estrada N, Xicoy B, Isfort S, Vieri M, Zamora L, Abels A, Bouillon AS, Begemann M, Schemionek M, Maurer A, Koschmieder S, Wilop S, Panse J, Brümmendorf TH, Beier F
**Journal:** Ann N Y Acad Sci (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/nyas.14248](https://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.14248)

## Content

1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2020 Apr;1466(1):93-103. doi: 10.1111/nyas.14248. Epub 2019 
Oct 24.

Comparison of flow-FISH and MM-qPCR telomere length assessment techniques for 
the screening of telomeropathies.

Ferreira MSV(1), Kirschner M(1), Halfmeyer I(1), Estrada N(2), Xicoy B(2), 
Isfort S(1), Vieri M(1), Zamora L(2), Abels A(1), Bouillon AS(1), Begemann M(3), 
Schemionek M(1), Maurer A(1), Koschmieder S(1), Wilop S(1), Panse J(1), 
Brümmendorf TH(1), Beier F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology, Hemostaseology and Stem Cell 
Transplantation, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen University, University Hospital 
Aachen, Aachen, Germany.
(2)Hematology Service, Institut Català d'Oncologia (ICO)-Hospital Germans Trias 
i Pujol, Institut de Recerca Contra la Leucèmia Josep Carreras, Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona, Badalona, Spain.
(3)Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, 
Germany.

Assessment of telomere length (TL) in peripheral blood leukocytes is part of the 
diagnostic algorithm applied to patients with acquired bone marrow failure 
syndromes (BMFSs) and dyskeratosis congenita (DKC). Monochrome 
multiplex-quantitative polymerase chain reaction (MM-qPCR) and fluorescence in 
situ hybridization (flow-FISH) are methodologies available for TL screening. 
Dependent on TL expressed in relation to percentiles of healthy controls, 
further genetic testing for inherited mutations in telomere maintenance genes is 
recommended. However, the correct threshold to trigger this genetic workup is 
still under debate. Here, we prospectively compared MM-qPCR and flow-FISH 
regarding their capacity for accurate identification of DKC patients. All 
patients (n = 105) underwent genetic testing by next-generation sequencing and 
in 16 patients, mutations in DKC-relevant genes were identified. Whole leukocyte 
TL of patients measured by MM-qPCR was found to be moderately correlated with 
lymphocyte TL measured by flow-FISH (r² = 0.34; P < 0.0001). The sensitivity of 
both methods was high, but the specificity of MM-qPCR (29%) was significantly 
lower compared with flow-FISH (58%). These results suggest that MM-qPCR of 
peripheral blood cells is inferior to flow-FISH for clinical routine screening 
for suspected DKC in adult patients with BMFS due to lower specificity and a 
higher rate of false-positive results.

© 2019 The Authors. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences published by 
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of New York Academy of Sciences.

DOI: 10.1111/nyas.14248
PMID: 31647584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]