---
reference_id: "PMID:41904107"
title: "Bone marrow failure in telomere biology disorders: Current understanding and the emerging landscape of non-transplant therapies."
authors:
- Wen JM
- Gloude NJ
- Ebens CL
journal: Semin Hematol
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1053/j.seminhematol.2026.03.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bone marrow failure in telomere biology disorders: Current understanding and the emerging landscape of non-transplant therapies.
**Authors:** Wen JM, Gloude NJ, Ebens CL
**Journal:** Semin Hematol (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.seminhematol.2026.03.002](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.seminhematol.2026.03.002)

## Content

1. Semin Hematol. 2026 Mar 6:S0037-1963(26)00014-4. doi: 
10.1053/j.seminhematol.2026.03.002. Online ahead of print.

Bone marrow failure in telomere biology disorders: Current understanding and the 
emerging landscape of non-transplant therapies.

Wen JM(1), Gloude NJ(2), Ebens CL(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Blood and Marrow Transplant & Cellular Therapy, 
Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.
(2)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Rady 
Children's Hospital San Diego, University of California San Diego, San Diego, 
CA.
(3)Division of Pediatric Blood and Marrow Transplant & Cellular Therapy, 
Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN. Electronic 
address: ebens012@umn.edu.

Telomere biology disorders (TBDs) are a heterogeneous group of inherited 
systemic diseases caused by pathogenic variants in genes encoding telomerase or 
proteins involved in telomere maintenance or protection. With very short and/or 
dysfunctional telomeres, patients with TBD have clinical manifestations 
clustered in tissues with high rates of cell proliferation. Bone marrow failure 
(BMF) is the most common hematologic complication of a TBD and can precede the 
development of more difficult-to-treat malignant transformation. However, not 
all patients with TBD develop BMF, and some genotype/phenotype correlations are 
emerging. While allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplant (HCT) is curative for 
BMF in TBD, toxicities of the conditioning regimen can be detrimental to other 
organs. Balancing the risk of malignant transformation with HCT toxicity is a 
core challenge for providers who care for patients with TBD-associated BMF. 
Herein, we review the clinical presentation, pathophysiology, surveillance, and 
non-HCT treatment of BMF in TBD, including supportive care, androgens, 
thrombopoietin receptor agonists, and investigational approaches.

Copyright © 2026 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.seminhematol.2026.03.002
PMID: 41904107

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.