---
reference_id: "PMID:2843079"
title: A treatable multifocal motor neuropathy with antibodies to GM1 ganglioside.
authors:
- Pestronk A
- Cornblath DR
- Ilyas AA
- Baba H
- Quarles RH
- Griffin JW
- Alderson K
- Adams RN
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '1988'
doi: 10.1002/ana.410240113
keywords:
- Adult
- Autoantibodies/analysis
- "Autoimmune Diseases/drug therapy, immunology"
- Cyclophosphamide/therapeutic use
- Female
- G(M1) Ganglioside/immunology
- Humans
- "Infusions, Intravenous"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Motor Neurons/immunology
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/drug therapy, immunology"
- Synaptic Transmission/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A treatable multifocal motor neuropathy with antibodies to GM1 ganglioside.
**Authors:** Pestronk A, Cornblath DR, Ilyas AA, Baba H, Quarles RH, Griffin JW, Alderson K, Adams RN
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.410240113](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.410240113)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 1988 Jul;24(1):73-8. doi: 10.1002/ana.410240113.

A treatable multifocal motor neuropathy with antibodies to GM1 ganglioside.

Pestronk A(1), Cornblath DR, Ilyas AA, Baba H, Quarles RH, Griffin JW, Alderson 
K, Adams RN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 
21205.

We report 2 patients with a treatable, immune-mediated motor polyneuropathy 
associated with antibodies to defined neural antigens. In these patients 
asymmetrical weakness developed in one arm and progressed over 2 to 3 years to 
involve the other arm, legs, and trunk. Both patients were initially diagnosed 
as having lower motor neuron forms of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. However, 
repeated electrophysiological testing eventually showed multifocal conduction 
blocks in motor but not sensory fibers compatible with patchy selective 
demyelination. Serum testing by thin-layer chromatography and enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay revealed that both patients had high titers of antibody 
directed against GM1 and other gangliosides. Initial therapeutic trials of 
prednisone (100 mg daily for 4 to 6 months) and plasmapheresis were 
unsuccessful. Treatment with cyclophosphamide, however, was followed by marked 
improvement in strength in both patients.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410240113
PMID: 2843079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]