---
reference_id: "PMID:33121234"
title: Recapitulation of erythropoiesis in congenital dyserythropoietic anaemia type I (CDA-I) identifies defects in differentiation and nucleolar abnormalities.
authors:
- Scott C
- Downes DJ
- Brown JM
- Beagrie R
- Olijnik AA
- Gosden M
- Schwessinger R
- Fisher CA
- Rose A
- Ferguson DJP
- Johnson E
- Hill QA
- Okoli S
- Renella R
- Ryan K
- Brand M
- Hughes J
- Roy NBA
- Higgs DR
- Babbs C
- Buckle VJ
journal: Haematologica
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3324/haematol.2020.260158
keywords:
- "Anemia, Dyserythropoietic, Congenital/diagnosis, genetics"
- Erythroid Cells
- Erythropoiesis
- Glycoproteins/genetics
- Humans
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recapitulation of erythropoiesis in congenital dyserythropoietic anaemia type I (CDA-I) identifies defects in differentiation and nucleolar abnormalities.
**Authors:** Scott C, Downes DJ, Brown JM, Beagrie R, Olijnik AA, Gosden M, Schwessinger R, Fisher CA, Rose A, Ferguson DJP, Johnson E, Hill QA, Okoli S, Renella R, Ryan K, Brand M, Hughes J, Roy NBA, Higgs DR, Babbs C, Buckle VJ
**Journal:** Haematologica (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3324/haematol.2020.260158](https://doi.org/10.3324/haematol.2020.260158)

## Content

1. Haematologica. 2021 Nov 1;106(11):2960-2970. doi:
10.3324/haematol.2020.260158.

Recapitulation of erythropoiesis in congenital dyserythropoietic anaemia type I 
(CDA-I) identifies defects in differentiation and nucleolar abnormalities.

Scott C(1), Downes DJ(2), Brown JM(2), Beagrie R(2), Olijnik AA(2), Gosden M(2), 
Schwessinger R(2), Fisher CA(2), Rose A(2), Ferguson DJP(3), Johnson E(4), Hill 
QA(5), Okoli S(6), Renella R(7), Ryan K(8), Brand M(9), Hughes J(2), Roy 
NBA(10), Higgs DR(2), Babbs C(2), Buckle VJ(11).

Author information:
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford University, Oxford. 
caroline.scott@imm.ox.ac.uk.
(2)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford University, Oxford.
(3)Ultrastructural Morphology Group, NDCLS, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford.
(4)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, Oxford University, Oxford.
(5)Leeds Teaching Hospital NHS Trust.
(6)Imperial College, The Commonwealth Building, The Hammersmith Hospital, Du 
Cane Rd, London.
(7)Pediatric Hematology-Oncology Research Laboratory, CHUV-UNIL Lausanne 
Switzerland.
(8)Department of Haematology, Manchester Royal Infirmary, Oxford Rd, Manchester.
(9)Sprott Center for Stem Cell Research, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, 
Ottawa.
(10)Department of Haematology, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, Churchill 
Hospital, Old Rd, Headington, and NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford.
(11)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford University, Oxford. 
veronica.buckle@imm.ox.ac.uk.

The investigation of inherited disorders of erythropoiesis has elucidated many 
of the principles underlying the production of normal red blood cells and how 
this is perturbed in human disease. Congenital Dyserythropoietic Anaemia type 1 
(CDA-I) is a rare form of anaemia caused by mutations in two genes of unknown 
function: CDAN1 and CDIN1 (previously called C15orf41), whilst in some cases, 
the underlying genetic abnormality is completely unknown. Consequently, the 
pathways affected in CDA-I remain to be discovered. To enable detailed analysis 
of this rare disorder we have validated a culture system which recapitulates all 
of the cardinal haematological features of CDA-I, including the formation of the 
pathognomonic 'spongy' heterochromatin seen by electron microscopy. Using a 
variety of cell and molecular biological approaches we discovered that erythroid 
cells in this condition show a delay during terminal erythroid differentiation, 
associated with increased proliferation and widespread changes in chromatin 
accessibility. We also show that the proteins encoded by CDAN1 and CDIN1 are 
enriched in nucleoli which are structurally and functionally abnormal in CDA-I. 
Together these findings provide important pointers to the pathways affected in 
CDA-I which for the first time can now be pursued in the tractable culture 
system utilised here.

DOI: 10.3324/haematol.2020.260158
PMCID: PMC8561284
PMID: 33121234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]