---
reference_id: "PMID:35004896"
title: "The Mechanism of Ajmaline and Thus Brugada Syndrome: Not Only the Sodium Channel!"
authors:
- Monasky MM
- Micaglio E
- "D'Imperio S"
- Pappone C
journal: Front Cardiovasc Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.782596
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Mechanism of Ajmaline and Thus Brugada Syndrome: Not Only the Sodium Channel!
**Authors:** Monasky MM, Micaglio E, D'Imperio S, Pappone C
**Journal:** Front Cardiovasc Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcvm.2021.782596](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2021.782596)

## Content

1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2021 Dec 23;8:782596. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.782596.
eCollection 2021.

The Mechanism of Ajmaline and Thus Brugada Syndrome: Not Only the Sodium
Channel!

Monasky MM(1), Micaglio E(1), D'Imperio S(1), Pappone C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Arrhythmology Department, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, San Donato Milanese,
Milan, Italy.
(2)Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy.

Ajmaline is an anti-arrhythmic drug that is used to unmask the type-1 Brugada
syndrome (BrS) electrocardiogram pattern to diagnose the syndrome. Thus, the
disease is defined at its core as a particular response to this or other drugs.
Ajmaline is usually described as a sodium-channel blocker, and most research
into the mechanism of BrS has centered around this idea that the sodium channel
is somehow impaired in BrS, and thus the genetics research has placed much
emphasis on sodium channel gene mutations, especially the gene SCN5A, to the
point that it has even been suggested that only the SCN5A gene should be
screened in BrS patients. However, pathogenic rare variants in SCN5A are
identified in only 20-30% of cases, and recent data indicates that SCN5A
variants are actually, in many cases, prognostic rather than diagnostic,
resulting in a more severe phenotype. Furthermore, the misconception by some
that ajmaline only influences the sodium current is flawed, in that ajmaline
actually acts additionally on potassium and calcium currents, as well as
mitochondria and metabolic pathways. Clinical studies have implicated several
candidate genes in BrS, encoding not only for sodium, potassium, and calcium
channel proteins, but also for signaling-related, scaffolding-related,
sarcomeric, and mitochondrial proteins. Thus, these proteins, as well as any
proteins that act upon them, could prove absolutely relevant in the mechanism of
BrS.

Copyright © 2021 Monasky, Micaglio, D'Imperio and Pappone.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.782596
PMCID: PMC8733296
PMID: 35004896

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
