---
reference_id: "PMID:26359340"
title: The ophthalmic phenotype of IFT140-related ciliopathy ranges from isolated to syndromic congenital retinal dystrophy.
authors:
- Bifari IN
- Elkhamary SM
- Bolz HJ
- Khan AO
journal: Br J Ophthalmol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1136/bjophthalmol-2015-307555
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Ciliopathies/etiology, genetics, metabolism"
- DNA/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Electroretinography
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Retina/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- "Retinal Dystrophies/complications, congenital, genetics"
- Retrospective Studies
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The ophthalmic phenotype of IFT140-related ciliopathy ranges from isolated to syndromic congenital retinal dystrophy.
**Authors:** Bifari IN, Elkhamary SM, Bolz HJ, Khan AO
**Journal:** Br J Ophthalmol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bjophthalmol-2015-307555](https://doi.org/10.1136/bjophthalmol-2015-307555)

## Content

1. Br J Ophthalmol. 2016 Jun;100(6):829-33. doi:
10.1136/bjophthalmol-2015-307555.  Epub 2015 Sep 10.

The ophthalmic phenotype of IFT140-related ciliopathy ranges from isolated to 
syndromic congenital retinal dystrophy.

Bifari IN(1), Elkhamary SM(2), Bolz HJ(3), Khan AO(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Ophthalmology, King Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Division of Radiology, King Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia.
(3)Center for Human Genetics, Bioscientia, Ingelheim, Germany Institute of Human 
Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Conorenal syndrome is a systemic skeletal ciliopathy characterised 
by skeletal and renal findings and caused by biallelic mutations in the gene 
intraflagellar transport 140 Chlamydomonas homologue (IFT140). Most studies have 
focused on syndromic features and are by non-ophthalmologists. We highlight the 
ophthalmic phenotype.
METHODS: Retrospective consecutive case series (2010-2014).
RESULTS: Twelve subjects with confirmed homozygous mutations were identified (11 
consanguineous families; 7 boys; assessed at age 10 months to 20 years, average 
and median age 6.5 and 4 years). All were homozygous for the same IFT140 
mutation (c.1990G>A; p.Glu664Lys) except one who was homozygous for 
c.1541_1542delinsAA. All had poor vision and nystagmus since birth, with visual 
acuity after 5 years old of hand motions or light perception. In early 
childhood, nine were noted to stare at lights, four were noted to have a happy 
demeanour, high hyperopia was typical, and electroretinography was 
non-recordable. Fundus appearance was grossly normal before the age of 1 year 
but thereafter appeared dystrophic. Eight children had developmental delay, two 
had short stubby fingers, and one had renal disease, but four had no evident 
extraocular disease, including one aged 18 years who also had two older affected 
siblings in their twenties who remained non-syndromic and were excelling 
academically.
CONCLUSIONS: Recessive IFT140 mutations cause a severe congenital retinal 
dystrophy with high hyperopia and often early photophilia. Developmental delay 
is common but not universal and not all patients have obvious extraocular 
findings. The c.1990G>A mutation represents a founder effect or mutational 
hotspot on the Arabian Peninsula.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

DOI: 10.1136/bjophthalmol-2015-307555
PMID: 26359340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]