---
reference_id: "PMID:16926243"
title: "Molecular evolution of the tprC, D, I, K, G, and J genes in the pathogenic genus Treponema."
authors:
- Gray RR
- Mulligan CJ
- Molini BJ
- Sun ES
- Giacani L
- Godornes C
- Kitchen A
- Lukehart SA
- Centurion-Lara A
journal: Mol Biol Evol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1093/molbev/msl092
keywords:
- Animals
- "Evolution, Molecular"
- Gene Duplication
- "Genes, Bacterial"
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Phylogeny
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Rabbits
- "Recombination, Genetic"
- Sequence Alignment
- "Treponema pallidum/genetics, isolation & purification"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular evolution of the tprC, D, I, K, G, and J genes in the pathogenic genus Treponema.
**Authors:** Gray RR, Mulligan CJ, Molini BJ, Sun ES, Giacani L, Godornes C, Kitchen A, Lukehart SA, Centurion-Lara A
**Journal:** Mol Biol Evol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1093/molbev/msl092](https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msl092)

## Content

1. Mol Biol Evol. 2006 Nov;23(11):2220-33. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msl092. Epub 2006
Aug 22.

Molecular evolution of the tprC, D, I, K, G, and J genes in the pathogenic genus
Treponema.

Gray RR(1), Mulligan CJ, Molini BJ, Sun ES, Giacani L, Godornes C, Kitchen A,
Lukehart SA, Centurion-Lara A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anthropology, University of Florida, USA.

We investigated the evolution of 6 genes from the Treponema pallidum repeat
(tpr) gene family, which encode potential virulence factors and are assumed to
have evolved through gene duplication and gene conversion events. The 6 loci
(tprC, D, G, J, I, and K) were sequenced and analyzed in several members of the
genus Treponema, including the 3 subspecies of human T. pallidum (T. pallidum
subsp. pallidum, pertenue, and endemicum), Treponema paraluiscuniculi (rabbit
syphilis), and the unclassified Fribourg-Blanc (simian) isolate. Phylogenetic
methods, recombination analysis, and measures of nucleotide diversity were used
to investigate the evolutionary history of the tpr genes. Numerous instances of
gene conversion were detected by all 3 methods including both homogenizing gene
conversion that involved the entire length of the sequence as well as
site-specific conversions that affected smaller regions. We determined the
relative age and directionality of the gene conversion events whenever possible.
Our data are also relevant to a discussion of the evolution of the treponemes
themselves. Higher levels of variation exist between the human subspecies than
within them, supporting the classification of the human treponemes into 3
subspecies. In contrast to published theories, the divergence and diversity of
T. pallidum subsp. pertenue relative to the other subspecies does not support a
much older origin of yaws at the emergence of modern human, nor is the level of
divergence seen in T. pallidum subsp. pallidum consistent with a very recent (<
500 years) origin of this subspecies. In general, our results demonstrate that
intragenomic recombination has played a significant role in the evolution of the
studied tpr genes and emphasize that efforts to infer evolutionary history of
the treponemes can be complicated if past recombination events are not
recognized.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msl092
PMID: 16926243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
