---
reference_id: "PMID:28285824"
title: CLASP2 Links Reelin to the Cytoskeleton during Neocortical Development.
authors:
- Dillon GM
- Tyler WA
- Omuro KC
- Kambouris J
- Tyminski C
- Henry S
- Haydar TF
- Beffert U
- Ho A
journal: Neuron
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2017.02.039
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cell Adhesion Molecules, Neuronal/metabolism"
- Cell Movement/physiology
- Cytoskeleton/metabolism
- Down-Regulation
- Extracellular Matrix Proteins/metabolism
- Female
- Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3 beta/metabolism
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mice, Neurologic Mutants"
- "Microtubule-Associated Proteins/metabolism, physiology"
- "Neocortex/growth & development, physiology"
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Neurites/physiology
- Neurogenesis/physiology
- Neurons/metabolism
- Phosphorylation
- Primary Cell Culture
- Reelin Protein
- Serine Endopeptidases/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CLASP2 Links Reelin to the Cytoskeleton during Neocortical Development.
**Authors:** Dillon GM, Tyler WA, Omuro KC, Kambouris J, Tyminski C, Henry S, Haydar TF, Beffert U, Ho A
**Journal:** Neuron (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2017.02.039](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2017.02.039)

## Content

1. Neuron. 2017 Mar 22;93(6):1344-1358.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2017.02.039.
Epub  2017 Mar 9.

CLASP2 Links Reelin to the Cytoskeleton during Neocortical Development.

Dillon GM(1), Tyler WA(2), Omuro KC(1), Kambouris J(1), Tyminski C(1), Henry
S(1), Haydar TF(2), Beffert U(3), Ho A(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, 24 Cummington Mall, Boston, MA
02215, USA.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Boston University School of Medicine,
72 East Concord Street, Boston, MA 02118, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, Boston University, 24 Cummington Mall, Boston, MA
02215, USA. Electronic address: ub1@bu.edu.
(4)Department of Biology, Boston University, 24 Cummington Mall, Boston, MA
02215, USA. Electronic address: aho1@bu.edu.

The Reelin signaling pathway plays a crucial role in regulating neocortical
development. However, little is known about how Reelin controls the cytoskeleton
during neuronal migration. Here, we identify CLASP2 as a key cytoskeletal
effector in the Reelin signaling pathway. We demonstrate that CLASP2 has
distinct roles during neocortical development regulating neuron production and
controlling neuron migration, polarity, and morphogenesis. We found
downregulation of CLASP2 in migrating neurons leads to mislocalized cells in
deeper cortical layers, abnormal positioning of the centrosome-Golgi complex,
and aberrant length/orientation of the leading process. We discovered that
Reelin regulates several phosphorylation sites within the positively charged
serine/arginine-rich region that constitute consensus GSK3β phosphorylation
motifs of CLASP2. Furthermore, phosphorylation of CLASP2 regulates its
interaction with the Reelin adaptor Dab1 and this association is required for
CLASP2 effects on neurite extension and motility. Together, our data reveal that
CLASP2 is an essential Reelin effector orchestrating cytoskeleton dynamics
during brain development.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2017.02.039
PMCID: PMC5405870
PMID: 28285824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing conflict of
interests.
