---
reference_id: "PMID:40701686"
title: Cerebral malaria.
authors:
- Postels DG
- Katangwe-Chirwa T
journal: Semin Pediatr Neurol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.spen.2025.101206
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebral malaria.
**Authors:** Postels DG, Katangwe-Chirwa T
**Journal:** Semin Pediatr Neurol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.spen.2025.101206](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spen.2025.101206)

## Content

1. Semin Pediatr Neurol. 2025 Jul;54:101206. doi: 10.1016/j.spen.2025.101206.
Epub  2025 Jun 20.

Cerebral malaria.

Postels DG(1), Katangwe-Chirwa T(2).

Author information:
(1)Blantyre Malaria Project, Kamuzu University of Health Sciences, Blantyre, 
Malawi; Division of Neurology, Children's National Hospital/ George Washington 
University, 111 Michigan Avenue NW, Washington DC 20010, USA. Electronic 
address: dpostels@childrensnational.org.
(2)Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Kamuzu University of Health 
Sciences, Blantyre, Malawi; Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, 
Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa.

Cerebral malaria is the most lethal form of Plasmodium falciparum infection. The 
disease is defined clinically as an otherwise unexplained coma in someone with 
malaria parasitemia. One in 6 children with cerebral malaria dies and many 
survivors are left with neurologic, cognitive, or behavioral sequelae. Acute 
seizures are common and increasing numbers of them during the index illness are 
associated with a greater likelihood of adverse outcomes. Optimal treatment 
pathways for children with cerebral malaria have been standardized but the 
search for an adjunctive therapy that decreases cerebral malaria mortality or 
morbidity has, so far, remained elusive. After hospital discharge, care gaps for 
survivors continue in the diagnosis and management of educational challenges, 
behavioral abnormalities, and epilepsy, especially in the rural settings where 
malaria incidence is highest. In the past decade, science has elucidated much 
about cerebral malaria pathogenesis. Observational studies using magnetic 
resonance imaging, electroencephalogram, and transcranial doppler have all 
provided insight on the pathway from the initial infection transmitted by a 
mosquito, to death. Findings from each of these high technology modalities are 
also associated with outcomes in children with cerebral malaria. We review the 
epidemiology, clinical features, diagnostic considerations, optimal clinical 
care pathways, neurological sequalae, and existing care gaps in the management 
of cerebral malaria and its complications.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.spen.2025.101206
PMID: 40701686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.