---
reference_id: "PMID:36897497"
title: "Chromosome 22q11.2 Deletion (DiGeorge Syndrome): Immunologic Features, Diagnosis, and Management."
authors:
- Biggs SE
- Gilchrist B
- May KR
journal: Curr Allergy Asthma Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s11882-023-01071-4
keywords:
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Humans
- "DiGeorge Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Chromosome Deletion
- Neonatal Screening
- "Lymphopenia/complications, genetics"
- Chromosomes
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chromosome 22q11.2 Deletion (DiGeorge Syndrome): Immunologic Features, Diagnosis, and Management.
**Authors:** Biggs SE, Gilchrist B, May KR
**Journal:** Curr Allergy Asthma Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11882-023-01071-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11882-023-01071-4)

## Content

1. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep. 2023 Apr;23(4):213-222. doi:
10.1007/s11882-023-01071-4. Epub 2023 Mar 10.

Chromosome 22q11.2 Deletion (DiGeorge Syndrome): Immunologic Features,
Diagnosis, and Management.

Biggs SE(1), Gilchrist B(1), May KR(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergy-Immunology & Pediatric Rheumatology, Department of
Pediatrics, Medical College of Georgia at Augusta University, Augusta, GA, USA.
(2)Division of Allergy-Immunology & Pediatric Rheumatology, Department of
Pediatrics, Medical College of Georgia at Augusta University, Augusta, GA, USA.
kamay@augusta.edu.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review focuses on immunologic findings, relationships
among immunologic findings and associated conditions of autoimmunity and atopy,
and management of immunologic disease in chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome
(22q11.2DS, historically known as DiGeorge syndrome).
RECENT FINDINGS: The implementation of assessment of T cell receptor excision
circles (TRECs) in newborn screening has led to increased detection of 22q11.2
deletion syndrome. While not yet applied in clinical practice, cell-free DNA
screening for 22q11.2DS also has the potential to improve early detection, which
may benefit prompt evaluation and management. Multiple studies have further
elucidated phenotypic features and potential biomarkers associated with
immunologic outcomes, including the development of autoimmune disease and atopy.
The clinical presentation of 22q11.2DS is highly variable particularly with
respect to immunologic manifestations. Time to recovery of immune system
abnormalities is not well-defined in current literature. An understanding of the
underlying causes of immunologic changes found in 22q11.2DS, and the progression
and evolution of immunologic changes over the lifespan have expanded over time
and with improved survival. An included case highlights the variability of
presentation and potential severity of T cell lymphopenia in partial DiGeorge
syndrome and demonstrates successful spontaneous immune reconstitution in
partial DiGeorge syndrome despite initial severe T cell lymphopenia.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11882-023-01071-4
PMCID: PMC9999075
PMID: 36897497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
