---
reference_id: "PMID:35718780"
title: Novel copy number variations within SYCE1 caused meiotic arrest and non-obstructive azoospermia.
authors:
- Huang Y
- Tian R
- Xu J
- Ji Z
- Zhang Y
- Zhao L
- Yang C
- Li P
- Zhi E
- Bai H
- Han S
- Luo J
- Zhao J
- Zhang J
- Zhou Z
- Li Z
- Yao C
journal: BMC Med Genomics
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s12920-022-01288-8
keywords:
- Azoospermia/genetics
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Infertility, Male/genetics"
- Male
- Mutation
- Sequence Deletion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel copy number variations within SYCE1 caused meiotic arrest and non-obstructive azoospermia.
**Authors:** Huang Y, Tian R, Xu J, Ji Z, Zhang Y, Zhao L, Yang C, Li P, Zhi E, Bai H, Han S, Luo J, Zhao J, Zhang J, Zhou Z, Li Z, Yao C
**Journal:** BMC Med Genomics (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12920-022-01288-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12920-022-01288-8)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genomics. 2022 Jun 19;15(1):137. doi: 10.1186/s12920-022-01288-8.

Novel copy number variations within SYCE1 caused meiotic arrest and 
non-obstructive azoospermia.

Huang Y(#)(1), Tian R(#)(1), Xu J(#)(1), Ji Z(2), Zhang Y(1), Zhao L(1)(3), Yang 
C(1), Li P(1), Zhi E(1), Bai H(1), Han S(1), Luo J(1), Zhao J(2), Zhang J(4), 
Zhou Z(5), Li Z(6)(7), Yao C(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Andrology, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, 
The Center for Men's Health, Urologic Medical Center, Shanghai General Hospital, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200080, China.
(2)State Key Lab of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 
211166, China.
(3)School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, 
201210, China.
(4)Reproductive Medicine Research Center, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital of Sun 
Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, 510620, China.
(5)School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, 
201210, China. zhouzhi@shanghaitech.edu.cn.
(6)Department of Andrology, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, 
The Center for Men's Health, Urologic Medical Center, Shanghai General Hospital, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200080, China. 
lizhengboshi@sjtu.edu.cn.
(7)State Key Lab of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 
211166, China. lizhengboshi@sjtu.edu.cn.
(8)Department of Andrology, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, 
The Center for Men's Health, Urologic Medical Center, Shanghai General Hospital, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200080, China. yaochencheng@126.com.
(9)School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, 
201210, China. yaochencheng@126.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA) is the most severe disease in male 
infertility, but the genetic causes for majority of NOA remain unknown.
METHODS: Two Chinese NOA-affected patients were recruited to identify the 
genetic causal factor of infertility. Whole-exome sequencing (WES) was conducted 
in the two patients with NOA. Sanger sequencing and CNV array were used to 
ascertain the WES results. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining and 
immunofluorescence (IF) were carried out to evaluate the stage of 
spermatogenesis arrested in the affected cases.
RESULTS: Novel heterozygous deletion (LOH) within SYCE1 (seq[GRCh37] 
del(10)(10q26.3)chr10:g.135111754_135427143del) and heterozygous loss of 
function (LoF) variant in SYCE1 (NM_001143763: c.689_690 del:p.F230fs) were 
identified in one NOA-affected patient. While homozygous deletion within SYCE1 
(seq[GRCh37] del(10)(10q26.3)chr10:g.135340247_135379115del) was detected in the 
other patient with meiotic arrest. H&E and IF staining demonstrated that the 
spermatogenesis was arrested at pachytene stage in the two patients with NOA, 
suggesting these two novel CNVs within SYCE1 could lead to meiotic defect and 
NOA.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified that two novel CNVs within SYCE1 are associated with 
meiotic arrest and male infertility. Thus, our study expands the knowledge of 
variants in SYCE1 and provides a new insight to understand the genetic 
etiologies of NOA.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12920-022-01288-8
PMCID: PMC9208180
PMID: 35718780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.