---
reference_id: "PMID:20040311"
title: "Autophagy in skeletal muscle: implications for Pompe disease."
authors:
- Shea L
- Raben N
journal: Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther
year: '2009'
doi: 10.5414/cpp47042
keywords:
- Animals
- Autophagy/physiology
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy/methods
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type II/pathology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/pathology, ultrastructure"
- "alpha-Glucosidases/deficiency, genetics, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autophagy in skeletal muscle: implications for Pompe disease.
**Authors:** Shea L, Raben N
**Journal:** Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther (2009)
**DOI:** [10.5414/cpp47042](https://doi.org/10.5414/cpp47042)

## Content

1. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2009;47 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):S42-7. doi:
10.5414/cpp47042.

Autophagy in skeletal muscle: implications for Pompe disease.

Shea L(1), Raben N.

Author information:
(1)The Arthritis and Rheumatism Branch, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD,
USA.

Pompe disease is caused by an inherited deficiency of acid a-glucosidase (GAA),
a lysosomal enzyme that catalyzes the breakdown of glycogen to glucose. In the
absence of GAA, enlarged, glycogen-laden lysosomes accumulate in multiple
tissues, although the major clinical manifestations are seen in cardiac and
skeletal muscle. For many years, it was believed that the rupture of
glycogen-filled lysosomes was the major cause of the profound muscle damage
observed in patients with Pompe disease. Here, we present evidence that a
failure of productive autophagy in muscle tissue contributes strongly to disease
pathology in both patients with Pompe disease and GAA-knockout mice. In the
GAA-knockout mouse model, progressive accumulation of autophagic vesicles is
restricted to Type II-rich muscle fibers. Not only does this build-up of
autophagosomes disrupt the contractile apparatus in the muscle fibers, it also
interferes with enzyme replacement therapy by acting as a sink for the
recombinant enzyme and preventing its efficient delivery to the lysosomes. Our
data indicate that a re-examination of the presumed pathological mechanism in
Pompe disease is necessary, and suggest that successful treatment of patients
with Pompe disease will require consideration of the dramatic failure of
autophagy that occurs in this disease.

DOI: 10.5414/cpp47042
PMCID: PMC2948975
PMID: 20040311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
