---
reference_id: "PMID:41591404"
title: "Effects of teriparatide on hip structure and bone microarchitecture in women with anorexia nervosa: a placebo-controlled randomized trial."
authors:
- Amorim T
- David NL
- Moturi S
- Turnquist LR
- Holmes TM
- Bouxsein ML
- Fazeli PK
journal: Osteoporos Int
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1007/s00198-026-07846-5
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Anorexia Nervosa/physiopathology, complications, drug therapy"
- "Teriparatide/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Bone Density/drug effects
- "Bone Density Conservation Agents/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Young Adult
- "Hip Joint/physiopathology, drug effects, diagnostic imaging"
- "Cancellous Bone/physiopathology, drug effects"
- Double-Blind Method
- Adolescent
- "Absorptiometry, Photon/methods"
- "Cortical Bone/physiopathology, drug effects, pathology"
- Biomarkers/blood
- "Osteoporosis/etiology, physiopathology, drug therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of teriparatide on hip structure and bone microarchitecture in women with anorexia nervosa: a placebo-controlled randomized trial.
**Authors:** Amorim T, David NL, Moturi S, Turnquist LR, Holmes TM, Bouxsein ML, Fazeli PK
**Journal:** Osteoporos Int (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00198-026-07846-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00198-026-07846-5)

## Content

1. Osteoporos Int. 2026 Mar;37(3):749-758. doi: 10.1007/s00198-026-07846-5. Epub
2026 Jan 27.

Effects of teriparatide on hip structure and bone microarchitecture in women
with anorexia nervosa: a placebo-controlled randomized trial.

Amorim T(1)(2)(3), David NL(1)(2)(3), Moturi S(1), Turnquist LR(1), Holmes
TM(4), Bouxsein ML(5)(6)(7), Fazeli PK(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Neuroendocrinology Unit, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, University
of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 3459 Fifth Avenue, NW815, Pittsburgh, PA,
15213, USA.
(2)Aging Institute, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA,
USA.
(3)Center for Human Integrative Physiology, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(4)Translational and Clinical Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Center for Advanced Orthopaedic Studies, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Endocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(8)Neuroendocrinology Unit, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, University
of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 3459 Fifth Avenue, NW815, Pittsburgh, PA,
15213, USA. pkfazeli@pitt.edu.
(9)Center for Human Integrative Physiology, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. pkfazeli@pitt.edu.

Women with anorexia nervosa have low bone mineral density and increased fracture
risk. We conducted a randomized, placebo-controlled trial investigating the
effects of 6 months of teriparatide in anorexia nervosa. Teriparatide led to
trends in improvements in bone structure. Longer-term studies are needed to
evaluate the benefit of teriparatide in anorexia nervosa.
PURPOSE: Women with anorexia nervosa have low BMD and increased fracture risk.
Currently, there are no approved therapies for bone loss in anorexia nervosa.
This study investigated the effects of teriparatide (TPT) on bone
microarchitecture and structure in anorexia nervosa.
METHODS: We conducted a randomized placebo-controlled study including women with
anorexia nervosa and a T-score: ≤ - 2.5. Twenty-one women were randomized to (1)
TPT (N = 10; 47.7 ± 8.6yrs) or (2) placebo (N = 11; 47.7 ± 7.7yrs) for 6 months.
Primary outcomes included changes in trabecular and cortical bone
microarchitecture (HR-pQCT) and hip structural analysis parameters (HSA
program). Secondary outcomes included bone turnover markers (ELISA).
RESULTS: After TPT treatment, no changes were observed in bone
microarchitecture, but trends in HSA parameters in the intertrochanteric region
(IT) of the proximal femur were noted. IT cortical thickness increased by 13%
(p = 0.075 vs. baseline) after TPT (vs. a non-significant decrease in IT
cortical thickness in placebo), and IT buckling ratio decreased 9% (vs baseline)
in the TPT group (vs a 5% increase in placebo, p = 0.076). After TPT treatment,
circulating levels of osteocalcin and osteopontin increased significantly in TPT
(osteocalcin: 216.4%, p = 0.01 vs. baseline and osteopontin: 68.6%, p = 0.03 vs.
baseline). No significant changes in osteocalcin or osteopontin levels were
observed in the placebo group.
CONCLUSION: Six months of TPT treatment in women with anorexia nervosa led to
trends in improvements in bone structure. Long-term studies are needed to
evaluate the potential benefit of TPT in anorexia nervosa.

© 2026. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to the International Osteoporosis
Foundation and the Bone Health and Osteoporosis Foundation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00198-026-07846-5
PMID: 41591404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: TA, NLD, SM,
LRT, TMH, and MLB declare that they have no conflict of interest. PKF has served
as a consultant for Crinetics, Chiesi, Camurus, Regeneron, Xeris, and Quest and
has received research support from Crinetics, Corcept, and Quest. These
disclosures are not related to the content of the study. Eli Lilly and Company
(Lilly) provided the study medication (teriparatide and placebo).
