---
reference_id: "PMID:19013374"
title: Deforming arthropathy in systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Pipili C
- Sfritzeri A
- Cholongitas E
journal: Eur J Intern Med
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2008.01.017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deforming arthropathy in systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Pipili C, Sfritzeri A, Cholongitas E
**Journal:** Eur J Intern Med (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejim.2008.01.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejim.2008.01.017)

## Content

1. Eur J Intern Med. 2008 Nov;19(7):482-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2008.01.017. Epub 
2008 Apr 1.

Deforming arthropathy in systemic lupus erythematosus.

Pipili C(1), Sfritzeri A, Cholongitas E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, General Hospital of Sitia, GR-72300, Greece. 
chrisapi2001@yahoo.gr

Systemic lupus erythematosus is an autoimmune and inflammatory disease 
characterized by a variety of symptoms, including arthropathy. The clinical 
presentation of joint involvement varies, ranging from arthralgia without 
erosions or deformity to an erosive arthropathy and severe functional 
disability. This paper reviews the main forms of deforming arthropathy observed 
in lupus patients. It includes a) non-erosive arthropathy (it is the most 
frequent form and characterized as Jaccoud's), b) erosive symmetrical 
polyarthritis with deformities similar to rheumatoid arthritis, named as rhupus, 
and c) mild deforming arthropathy. Even though enough such cases of patients 
have been reported in the international bibliography, no definite criteria for 
their diagnosis have been published yet. The use of contemporary radiological 
and immunological methods will facilitate their prevention and treatment.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejim.2008.01.017
PMID: 19013374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]