---
reference_id: "PMID:32112390"
title: Systematic review of the efficacies and adverse effects of treatments for pityriasis lichenoides.
authors:
- Jung F
- Sibbald C
- Bohdanowicz M
- Ingram JR
- Piguet V
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/bjd.18977
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones
- Adult
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- Child
- Humans
- Phototherapy
- Pityriasis Lichenoides/drug therapy
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systematic review of the efficacies and adverse effects of treatments for pityriasis lichenoides.
**Authors:** Jung F, Sibbald C, Bohdanowicz M, Ingram JR, Piguet V
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bjd.18977](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjd.18977)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2020 Dec;183(6):1026-1032. doi: 10.1111/bjd.18977. Epub 2020
May  10.

Systematic review of the efficacies and adverse effects of treatments for 
pityriasis lichenoides.

Jung F(1), Sibbald C(1), Bohdanowicz M(1), Ingram JR(2), Piguet V(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, University of Toronto School 
of Medicine, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Dermatology, Division of Infection & Immunity, Cardiff University, Cardiff, 
UK.
(3)Division of Dermatology, Women's College Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Pityriasis lichenoides (PL) is a papulosquamous dermatosis affecting 
both children and adults, for which no standard treatment currently exists.
OBJECTIVES: To characterize different treatment options and develop an 
evidence-based treatment algorithm for PL.
METHODS: A systematic search of published literature on PL treatments was 
performed on 23 December 2017 via the MEDLINE, Embase, CINAHL, CENTRAL, 
ClinicalTrials.gov and the EU Clinical Trials Register databases.
RESULTS: Of 1090 abstracts retrieved, 27 full-text articles with 502 
participants were included for analysis. Seventeen of the full-text articles 
were retrospective cohort studies and two were randomized controlled studies. 
Treatment modalities included in these articles were phototherapy, antibiotics, 
methotrexate, pyrimethamine and trisulfapyrimidine, corticosteroids and 
conservative treatment. Of these treatments, phototherapy led to complete 
remission in the highest proportion of patients, and topical corticosteroids 
were found to have been trialled in the highest number of patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The current literature consists almost entirely of uncontrolled 
studies, and none provides compelling data to support an evidence-based approach 
to PL treatment. Pityriasis lichenoides chronica and pityriasis lichenoides et 
varioliformis acuta should be distinguished in response to treatment, and 
definitions of response to treatment must be standardized. Additional randomized 
control studies with longer follow-up will help better differentiate between 
treatment efficacies and adverse effects.

© 2020 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/bjd.18977
PMID: 32112390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]