---
reference_id: "PMID:28921836"
title: "Clinical assessment of coronary arteries in Kawasaki disease: Focus on echocardiographic assessment."
authors:
- Altman CA
journal: Congenit Heart Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/chd.12496
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical assessment of coronary arteries in Kawasaki disease: Focus on echocardiographic assessment.
**Authors:** Altman CA
**Journal:** Congenit Heart Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/chd.12496](https://doi.org/10.1111/chd.12496)

## Content

1. Congenit Heart Dis. 2017 Sep;12(5):636-640. doi: 10.1111/chd.12496. Epub 2017 
Sep 18.

Clinical assessment of coronary arteries in Kawasaki disease: Focus on 
echocardiographic assessment.

Altman CA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas, 
USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.

Echocardiography is an excellent noninvasive imaging modality for evaluation and 
follow-up of cardiac lesions, especially coronary artery changes occurring as a 
result of Kawasaki disease. The information obtained has prognostic implications 
and can be complemented with other modes of imaging for risk stratification and 
optimization of both medical and interventional therapy. The aim of this article 
is to describe the time line of echocardiographic follow-up of patients affected 
with Kawasaki disease. The classification of coronary artery changes and 
transthoracic echocardiographic views recommended for detailed evaluation of the 
coronary arteries are delineated in detail in this report.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/chd.12496
PMID: 28921836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]