---
reference_id: "PMID:40053270"
title: "Hereditary Angioedema with Normal C1 Inhibitor: an Updated International Consensus Paper on Diagnosis, Pathophysiology, and Treatment."
authors:
- Zuraw BL
- Bork K
- Bouillet L
- Christiansen SC
- Farkas H
- Germenis AE
- Grumach AS
- Kaplan A
- López-Lera A
- Magerl M
- Riedl MA
- Adatia A
- Banerji A
- Betschel S
- Boccon-Gibod I
- Bova M
- Boysen HB
- Caballero T
- Cancian M
- Castaldo AJ
- Cohn DM
- Corcoran D
- Drouet C
- Fukunaga A
- Hide M
- Katelaris CH
- Li PH
- Longhurst H
- Peter J
- Psarros F
- Reshef A
- Ritchie B
- Selva CN
- Zanichelli A
- Maurer M
journal: Clin Rev Allergy Immunol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s12016-025-09027-4
keywords:
- Humans
- "Angioedemas, Hereditary/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Complement C1 Inhibitor Protein/metabolism, genetics"
- Disease Management
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary Angioedema with Normal C1 Inhibitor: an Updated International Consensus Paper on Diagnosis, Pathophysiology, and Treatment.
**Authors:** Zuraw BL, Bork K, Bouillet L, Christiansen SC, Farkas H, Germenis AE, Grumach AS, Kaplan A, López-Lera A, Magerl M, Riedl MA, Adatia A, Banerji A, Betschel S, Boccon-Gibod I, Bova M, Boysen HB, Caballero T, Cancian M, Castaldo AJ, Cohn DM, Corcoran D, Drouet C, Fukunaga A, Hide M, Katelaris CH, Li PH, Longhurst H, Peter J, Psarros F, Reshef A, Ritchie B, Selva CN, Zanichelli A, Maurer M
**Journal:** Clin Rev Allergy Immunol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12016-025-09027-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12016-025-09027-4)

## Content

1. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2025 Mar 7;68(1):24. doi:
10.1007/s12016-025-09027-4.

Hereditary Angioedema with Normal C1 Inhibitor: an Updated International
Consensus Paper on Diagnosis, Pathophysiology, and Treatment.

Zuraw BL(#)(1)(2), Bork K(#)(3), Bouillet L(4)(5), Christiansen SC(6), Farkas
H(7), Germenis AE(8), Grumach AS(9), Kaplan A(10), López-Lera A(11), Magerl
M(12)(13), Riedl MA(6), Adatia A(14), Banerji A(15), Betschel S(16),
Boccon-Gibod I(4), Bova M(17), Boysen HB(18)(19), Caballero T(11)(20), Cancian
M(21), Castaldo AJ(18)(19), Cohn DM(22), Corcoran D(18)(19), Drouet C(23),
Fukunaga A(24), Hide M(25)(26), Katelaris CH(27), Li PH(28), Longhurst H(29),
Peter J(30)(31), Psarros F(32), Reshef A(33), Ritchie B(34), Selva CN(19),
Zanichelli A(35)(36), Maurer M(#)(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy & Immunology, University of
California San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, Mail Code 0732, La Jolla, CA, 92093,
USA. bzuraw@health.ucsd.edu.
(2)Medicine Service, San Diego VA Healthcare, San Diego, USA.
bzuraw@health.ucsd.edu.
(3)Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center, Johannes Gutenberg
University Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
(4)University Grenoble Alpes, T-RAIG Unit, CNRS, UMR 5525, TIMC, Grenoble,
France.
(5)French National Reference Center for Angioedema (CREAK), Internal Medicine
Department, Grenoble University Hospital, Grenoble, France.
(6)Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy & Immunology, University of
California San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, Mail Code 0732, La Jolla, CA, 92093,
USA.
(7)Hungarian Angioedema Center of Reference and Excellence, Department of
Internal Medicine and Haematology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
(8)Department of Immunology & Histocompatibility, School of Medicine, University
of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece.
(9)Angioedema Center of Reference and Excellence (ACARE), Centro Universitario
Faculdade de Medicina ABC (CEUFMABC), São Paulo, Brazil.
(10)Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.
(11)Hospital La Paz Institute for Health Research (IdiPAZ), CIBERER (U754),
Madrid, Spain.
(12)Angioedema Center of Reference and Excellence (ACARE), Institute of
Allergology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie
Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität Zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(13)Fraunhofer Institute for Translational Medicine and Pharmacology ITMP,
Immunology and Allergology, Berlin, Germany.
(14)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(15)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(16)Division of Clinical Immunology and Allergy, University of Toronto, Toronto,
ON, Canada.
(17)Division of Internal Medicine 2, Department of Medicine and Medical
Specialties, A. Cardarelli Hospital, Naples, Italy.
(18)HAE International (HAEi), Fairfax, VA, USA.
(19)US Hereditary Angioedema Association (HAEA), Fairfax, VA, USA.
(20)Department of Allergy, La Paz University Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
(21)Department of Systems Medicine, University of Padua, Padua, Italy.
(22)Department of Vascular Medicine, Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences,
Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(23)Institut Cochin, Université Paris Cité, INSERM U1016, Paris, France.
(24)Department of Dermatology, Division of Medicine for Function and Morphology
of Sensory Organs, Faculty of Medicine, Osaka Medical and Pharmaceutical
University, Takatsuki-City, Osaka, Japan.
(25)Department of Dermatology, Hiroshima City Hiroshima Citizens Hospital,
Hiroshima, Japan.
(26)Department of Dermatology, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.
(27)Immunology & Allergy Unit, Dept of Medicine, Campbelltown Hospital and
Western Sydney University, Sydney, Australia.
(28)Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Department of Medicine,
Queen Mary Hospital, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(29)Department of Medicine, University of Auckland and Department of Immunology,
Auckland City Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand.
(30)Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Department of Medicine, Groote
Schuur Hospital, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(31)Allergy and Immunology Unit, University of Cape Town Lung Institute, Cape
Town, South Africa.
(32)Department of Allergy, Athens Naval Hospital, Athens, Greece.
(33)Angioedema Research Unit, Barzilai University Medical Center, Ashkelon,
Israel.
(34)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(35)Operative Unit of Medicine, Angioedema Center, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato,
San Donato Milanese, Milan, Italy.
(36)Dipartimento Di Scienze Biomediche Per La Salute, University of Milan,
Milan, Italy.
(#)Contributed equally

Hereditary angioedema (HAE) has been recognized for almost 150 years. The newest
form of HAE, where C1 inhibitor levels are normal (HAE-nC1INH), was first
described in 2000. Over the last two decades, new types of apparent non-mast
cell-mediated angioedema with normal quantity and activity of C1INH have been
described, in some cases with proven genetic pathogenic variants that
co-segregate with angioedema expression within families. Like HAE due to C1INH
deficiency, HAE-nC1INH patients are at risk of serious morbidity and mortality.
Therefore, proactive management and treatment of HAE-nC1INH patients after an
expert physician diagnosis is critically important. The underlying
pathophysiology responsible for the angioedema has also been clarified in some
of the HAE-nC1INH types. While several clinical guidelines and practice
parameters including HAE-nC1INH have been published, we have made substantial
progress in our understanding encompassing diagnostic criteria, pathophysiology,
and treatment outcomes. HAE International (HAEi) and the US HAE Association
(HAEA) convened a symposium of global HAE-nC1INH experts to synthesize our
current knowledge in the area. Given the paucity of high-level evidence in
HAE-nC1INH, all recommendations are based on expert opinion. This review and
expert opinion on the best practice approach to diagnosing and treating
HAE-nC1INH will support physicians to better manage patients with HAE-nC1INH.

© 2025. This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the
US; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1007/s12016-025-09027-4
PMCID: PMC11889046
PMID: 40053270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics Approval: Not applicable
for this literature review. Competing Interests: B.L.Z has served as a
consultant for CSL Behring, KalVista, and BioCryst, on the DMSB for CSL Behring
and BioMarin, and has had a laboratory service agreement with Ionis. K.B.
reports no conflicts in relation to this manuscript. L.B. has consulted/served
as speaker for, engaged in research and educational projects with or accepted
travel grants from the following companies: BioCryst, CSL Behring, Takeda,
Novartis, GSK, Blueprint, Kalvista, Pharvaris. S.C.C. has served on medical
advisory boards for BioCryst, KalVista, and CSL Behring. She is a member of the
Medical Advisory Board of the US HAEA. H.F. has received speaker fee and travel
grants from CSL Behring, Pharming, Takeda, KalVista, and Pharvaris and served as
an advisor/consultant for these companies and for Astria, BioCryst, Intellia,
Ionis, and ONO Pharmaceutical. A.E.G. reports no conflicts in relation to this
manuscript. A.S.G. receives a productivity grant from National Council of
Research (CNPq) and a grant from researcher initiative from Shire/Takeda. A.S.G.
reports speaking and/or consultancy fees from Catalyst, CSL Behring, Exeltis,
KalVista, Multicare, Pharvaris, Pint-pharma, and Takeda. A.K. reports no
conflicts in relation to this manuscript. A.L.L. reports conference travel
support and speaking fees from Takeda and CSL Behring. M.Ml. reports honoraria
or consultation fees from Astria, BioCryst, CSL Behring, Intellia, KalVista,
Pharvaris, Shire/Takeda. M.A.R. has served as a research investigator for
BioCryst, BioMarin, CSL Behring, Ionis, KalVista, Pharvaris, Takeda and a
consultant for Astria, BioCryst, BioMarin, Celldex, CSL Behring, Cycle Pharma,
Grifols, Intellia, Ionis, KalVista, Pfizer, Pharming, Pharvaris,
Sanofi-Regeneron, Takeda. A.A. reports conference travel support and/or
honoraria from BioCryst, CSL Behring, Intellia, and Takeda, and clinical trial
support from Astria, CSL Behring, Ionis, KalVista, Octapharma, Pharvaris, and
Takeda, outside of the submitted work. A.B. reports research funding from Ionis,
Astria, and Intellia, and advisory boards with CSL Behring, Ionis, Pharvaris,
Intellia, KalVista, Astria, Takeda. S.B. reports speaker and/or advisor fees
from Astria, BioCryst, CSL Behring, Ionis, KalVista Pharmaceuticals, Pharvaris,
and Takeda, and research funding from CSL Behring and Takeda. Chair of the
Canadian Hereditary Angioedema Network. I.B-G. is or recently was a speaker,
advisor, engaged in research and educational projects, and/or received research
and consultancy grants from Takeda, CSL Behring, Pharming, KalVista, Pharvaris,
and BioCryst. M.B. reports conference travel support and research/advisory fees
from Takeda, KalVista, and CSL Behring. H.B.B. reports no conflicts in relation
to this manuscript. T.C. is or recently was a speaker, advisor, engaged in
research and educational projects, received research grants and/or received
funding to attend conferences and educational events from Astria, BioCryst, CSL
Behring, IONIS, KalVista, Novartis, Otsuka, Pharming, Pharvaris, and Takeda. She
is a researcher in the Hospital La Paz Institute for Health Research (IdiPAZ)
program for promoting research activities. M.C. received grant research support
and/or speaker/consultancy fees from BioCryst, CSL Behring, KalVista, Novartis,
Pharming, Pharvaris, Sanofi, Shire-Takeda, and SOBI. A.J.C. reports no conflicts
in relation to this manuscript. D.M.C reports speaking and/or consultancy fees
from Astria, BioCryst, CSL Behring, Intellia, Ionis, KalVista, Pharming,
Pharvaris, and Takeda. D.C. reports no conflicts in relation to this manuscript.
C.D. reports no conflicts in relation to this manuscript. A.F. has received
honoraria from CSL Behring, Takeda and Torii, and a consulting fee from
KalVista. M.H. has received speaker/consultancy fees for BioCryst, CSL Behring,
KalVista, Pharvaris, Takeda, and Torii. C.H.K. reports speaking and/or
consultancy fees from CSL Behring, Takeda, BioCryst, KalVista, Pharvaris, and
Intellia, outside of the submitted work. P.H.L. reports speaking and/or
consultancy fees from CSL Behring, KalVista, Pharvaris, and Takeda, outside of
the submitted work. H.L. has collaborated in research and educational projects
with, served as a speaker or advisor for, or received educational support from
the following companies: CSL Behring, Intellia, KalVista, Pharvaris, Takeda.
J.P. reports educational grant support from Takeda and speaking or advisory
board fees from Astria, BioCryst, CSL Behring, KalVista, Pharvaris, and Takeda.
F.P. reports speaking and/or consultancy fees from CSL Behring, Pharvaris, and
Takeda. A.R. reports advisory boards and consultancy from BioCryst, CSL Behring,
Ionis, Pharming, Pharvaris, and Takeda and received speaker’s honoraria from
BioCryst, CSL Behring, and Takeda. Received research funding from BioCryst, CSL
Behring, Ionis, Pharvaris, Shulov, and Takeda (formerly: Shire). B.R. reports
conference travel support from CSL Behring, Octapharma, Takeda, and clinical
trial support from CSL Behring. C.N.S. reports no conflicts in relation to this
manuscript. A.Z. received speaker/consultancy fees from Astria, BioCryst, CSL
Behring, KalVista, Otsuka, Pharming, Pharvaris, and Takeda. M.Mr. reports grants
or speaker/advisor fees from Astria, BioCryst, CSL Behring, KalVista, Pharvaris
and Takeda.
