---
reference_id: "PMID:36555791"
title: PS1 Affects the Pathology of Alzheimer's Disease by Regulating BACE1 Distribution in the ER and BACE1 Maturation in the Golgi Apparatus.
authors:
- Li N
- Qiu Y
- Wang H
- Zhao J
- Qing H
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms232416151
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PS1 Affects the Pathology of Alzheimer's Disease by Regulating BACE1 Distribution in the ER and BACE1 Maturation in the Golgi Apparatus.
**Authors:** Li N, Qiu Y, Wang H, Zhao J, Qing H
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms232416151](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms232416151)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Dec 18;23(24):16151. doi: 10.3390/ijms232416151.

PS1 Affects the Pathology of Alzheimer's Disease by Regulating BACE1 
Distribution in the ER and BACE1 Maturation in the Golgi Apparatus.

Li N(1)(2), Qiu Y(2), Wang H(1), Zhao J(2), Qing H(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Medical Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 
100081, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine and Biotherapy, Department of Biology, 
School of Life Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China.

Neuritic plaques are one of the major pathological hallmarks of Alzheimer's 
disease. They are formed by the aggregation of extracellular amyloid-β protein 
(Aβ), which is derived from the sequential cleavage of amyloid-β precursor 
protein (APP) by β- and γ-secretase. BACE1 is the main β-secretase in the 
pathogenic process of Alzheimer's disease, which is believed to be a 
rate-limiting step of Aβ production. Presenilin 1 (PS1) is the active center of 
the γ-secretase that participates in the APP hydrolysis process. Mutations in 
the PS1 gene (PSEN1) are the most common cause of early onset familial 
Alzheimer's disease (FAD). The PSEN1 mutations can alter the activity of 
γ-secretase on the cleavage of APP. Previous studies have shown that PSEN1 
mutations increase the expression and activity of BACE1 and that BACE1 
expression and activity are elevated in the brains of PSEN1 mutant knock-in 
mice, compared with wild-type mice, as well as in the cerebral cortex of FAD 
patients carrying PSEN1 mutations, compared with sporadic AD patients and 
controls. Here, we used a Psen1 knockout cell line and a PS1 inhibitor to show 
that PS1 affects the expression of BACE1 in vitro. Furthermore, we used sucrose 
gradient fractionation combined with western blotting to analyze the 
distribution of BACE1, combined with a time-lapse technique to show that PS1 
upregulates the distribution and trafficking of BACE1 in the endoplasmic 
reticulum, Golgi, and endosomes. More importantly, we found that the PSEN1 
mutant S170F increases the distribution of BACE1 in the endoplasmic reticulum 
and changes the ratio of mature BACE1 in the trans-Golgi network. The effect of 
PSEN1 mutations on BACE1 may contribute to determining the phenotype of early 
onset FAD.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms232416151
PMCID: PMC9782474
PMID: 36555791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.