---
reference_id: "PMID:15962502"
title: "[Transitional cell carcinoma of the upper urinary tract new concepts in management]."
authors:
- Rouprêt M
- Cussenot O
journal: Presse Med
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/s0755-4982(05)83989-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Transitional cell carcinoma of the upper urinary tract new concepts in management].
**Authors:** Rouprêt M, Cussenot O
**Journal:** Presse Med (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0755-4982(05)83989-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0755-4982(05)83989-2)

## Content

1. Presse Med. 2005 Apr 23;34(8):601-7. doi: 10.1016/s0755-4982(05)83989-2.

[Transitional cell carcinoma of the upper urinary tract new concepts in 
management].

[Article in French]

Rouprêt M(1), Cussenot O.

Author information:
(1)Services d'urologie du GHU Est Pitié-Tenon, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de 
Paris, Groupe CeRePP, UFR Biomédicale, Université Paris V et unité EA 3104, 
Université Paris VII (75). mroupret@club-internet.fr

Transitional cell carcinomas of the upper urinary tract (UUT-TCCs) are rare: 
they account for approximately 5% of all urothelial carcinomas. 30% of patients 
with UUT-TCC have a history of bladder TCC, but fewer than 2% of patients with 
bladder TCC have UUT-TCC. Tumor microsatellite instability (MSI) is an indicator 
of the clonal expansion of neoplasms; it was first identified in tumors from 
patients with hereditary non-polyposis colorectal carcinoma (HNPCC). UUT-TCC 
occurs in 5% of patients with HNPCC. High-frequency microsatellite instability 
is present in almost 20% of cases of sporadic UUT-TCC. In cases of UUT-TCC with 
high-frequency MSI, hereditary cancer must be sought, especially if the patient 
is younger than 60 years or has a personal or family history of an HNPCC-related 
cancer: such patients should undergo DNA sequencing for the MSH2 gene germline 
mutation. Invasive UUT-TCC has a poor prognosis. 5-year survival is less than 
50% for stage T2-T3 tumors and less than 10% for T4 or N+/M+ tumors. The main 
prognostic factors are age and tumor stage and grade. High-frequency MSI is a 
positive prognostic factor, especially in patients younger than 70 years with 
T2/T3/N0-M0 tumors.

DOI: 10.1016/s0755-4982(05)83989-2
PMID: 15962502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]