---
reference_id: "PMID:40044766"
title: Pathogenic variants in the Alport genes are prevalent in the Singapore multiethnic population with highest frequency in the Chinese.
authors:
- Lim TST
- Koh CT
- Savige J
- Ng AY
- Ng JL
- Chin HL
- Lim WK
- Chan GC
- Yeo SC
- Leow EHM
- Yan BJ
- Ng KH
- Zhang Y
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-92520-9
keywords:
- Humans
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/genetics, epidemiology"
- Singapore/epidemiology
- Collagen Type IV/genetics
- Male
- Prevalence
- Female
- Autoantigens/genetics
- Adult
- East Asian People
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenic variants in the Alport genes are prevalent in the Singapore multiethnic population with highest frequency in the Chinese.
**Authors:** Lim TST, Koh CT, Savige J, Ng AY, Ng JL, Chin HL, Lim WK, Chan GC, Yeo SC, Leow EHM, Yan BJ, Ng KH, Zhang Y
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-025-92520-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-92520-9)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2025 Mar 5;15(1):7691. doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-92520-9.

Pathogenic variants in the Alport genes are prevalent in the Singapore
multiethnic population with highest frequency in the Chinese.

Lim TST(1)(2), Koh CT(2), Savige J(3), Ng AY(4), Ng JL(1)(2), Chin HL(1)(2), Lim
WK(5)(6), Chan GC(7)(8), Yeo SC(9), Leow EHM(10), Yan BJ(1)(4), Ng KH(11)(12),
Zhang Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Khoo Teck Puat-National University Children's Medical Institute, National
University Health System, Singapore, Singapore.
(3)University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Molecular Diagnosis Centre, National
University Hospital, Singapore, Singapore.
(5)Cancer & Stem Cell Biology Program, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore,
Singapore.
(6)Laboratory of Genome Variation Analytics, Genome Institute of Singapore,
Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore, Singapore.
(7)Department of Medicine, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University
of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(8)Department of Medicine, National University Health System, Singapore,
Singapore.
(9)Department of Renal Medicine, Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore, Singapore.
(10)Department of Paediatrics, Nephrology Service, KK Women's and Children's
Hospital, Singapore, Singapore.
(11)Department of Paediatrics, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. paenkh@nus.edu.sg.
(12)Khoo Teck Puat-National University Children's Medical Institute, National
University Health System, Singapore, Singapore. paenkh@nus.edu.sg.

Alport syndrome is a common monogenic kidney disease resulting from pathogenic
variants in COL4A3, COL4A4 or COL4A5 genes. The estimated global population
prevalence is one in 106 individuals for autosomal dominant (AD) and one in
2,320 for sex-linked (XL) conditions. Here, we aimed to estimate the population
prevalence of individuals carrying pathogenic variants that cause Alport
syndrome in Singapore, and to stratify the prevalence by ancestry. We used
population-scale genomic data of 9,051 unrelated subjects, comprising 5,443
(60.8%) Chinese, 1,922 (21.4%) Indian and 1,686 (17.8%) Malay individuals. The
prevalence of individuals with pathogenic variants that cause AD and XL Alport
syndrome are 1 in 165 and 1 in 2,262 respectively. Additionally, 0.8% of Chinese
and 0.3% of Malay populations carry pathogenic Alport syndrome variants, with
Chinese individuals being 2.7 times more affected than Malays (95%
CI:1.147-6.437, P = 0.027). Interestingly, each pathogenic variant was
associated with people of a single ancestry. The two most prevalent pathogenic
variants, COL4A3: c.3856G > A (p.Gly1286Arg) (n = 8) and COL4A3: c.4793T > G
(p.Leu1598Arg) (n = 4), were exclusively found in the Chinese population. In
conclusion, AD Alport syndrome may be prevalent in Singapore, with higher
frequencies among the Chinese. Furthermore, founder effects may exist within the
ancestries.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-025-92520-9
PMCID: PMC11883019
PMID: 40044766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors
declare no competing interests.
