---
reference_id: "PMID:34091457"
title: "MLH1 Exon 12 Gene Deletion Leading to Lynch Syndrome: A Case Report."
authors:
- Cui S
- Zhang X
- Zou R
- Ye F
- Wang Y
- Sun J
journal: Oncol Res Treat
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1159/000516659
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MLH1 Exon 12 Gene Deletion Leading to Lynch Syndrome: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Cui S, Zhang X, Zou R, Ye F, Wang Y, Sun J
**Journal:** Oncol Res Treat (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000516659](https://doi.org/10.1159/000516659)

## Content

1. Oncol Res Treat. 2021;44(7-8):414-421. doi: 10.1159/000516659. Epub 2021 Jun
4.

MLH1 Exon 12 Gene Deletion Leading to Lynch Syndrome: A Case Report.

Cui S(1), Zhang X(2), Zou R(2), Ye F(2), Wang Y(2), Sun J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, China, cuishiyun@njmu.edu.cn.
(2)The First School of Clinical Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 
China.
(3)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, China.

INTRODUCTION: Deleterious heterozygous mutation of the MLH1 gene is an important 
cause of Lynch syndrome (LS), an autosomal dominant cancer caused by functional 
defects in the DNA mismatch repair (MMR) complex.
CASE REPORT: The proband was a 35-year-old patient with confirmed colorectal 
cancer (CRC). Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining revealed the absence of MLH1 
and PMS2 expression in the colorectal tissue specimens of the patient. Genetic 
counselling and tumor gene testing were performed using next-generation 
sequencing technology. The genetic tumor verification report showed the deletion 
of 4 bases in exon 12 of the tested MLH1 gene and a transcoding mutation. To our 
knowledge, this germline splice site mutation of MLH1 has not been reported 
before. The proband accepted several therapeutic regimens including PD-1 
inhibitor and ultimately died of multiple organ failure.
CONCLUSION: Nonsense mutations and frameshift mutations of MMR genes are the 
most common causes of LS. Common mutations include those in MSH2, MLH1, MSH6, 
and PMS2. We report a mutation of MLH1 that has never been reported before. We 
recommend that patients with a history of colon or rectal cancer receive 
universal MMR or MSI testing and checkpoint inhibitor therapy for the first-line 
treatment of deficient MMR CRC.

© 2021 The Author(s) Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000516659
PMCID: PMC8495764
PMID: 34091457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interests to 
declare.