---
reference_id: "PMID:29102673"
title: Amblyopia due to intermediate uveitis as the presenting symptom of Crohn's disease in a 6-year-old boy.
authors:
- Symeonidis C
- Matsou A
- Tzetzi D
- Dermenoudi M
- Brazitikos P
- Mataftsi A
journal: J AAPOS
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaapos.2017.07.218
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Amblyopia due to intermediate uveitis as the presenting symptom of Crohn's disease in a 6-year-old boy.
**Authors:** Symeonidis C, Matsou A, Tzetzi D, Dermenoudi M, Brazitikos P, Mataftsi A
**Journal:** J AAPOS (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaapos.2017.07.218](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaapos.2017.07.218)

## Content

1. J AAPOS. 2017 Dec;21(6):512-514. doi: 10.1016/j.jaapos.2017.07.218. Epub 2017 
Nov 2.

Amblyopia due to intermediate uveitis as the presenting symptom of Crohn's 
disease in a 6-year-old boy.

Symeonidis C(1), Matsou A(2), Tzetzi D(2), Dermenoudi M(2), Brazitikos P(2), 
Mataftsi A(2).

Author information:
(1)2nd Department of Ophthalmology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 
Papageorgiou General Hospital, Thessaloniki, Macedonia, Greece. Electronic 
address: chrys2209@gmail.com.
(2)2nd Department of Ophthalmology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 
Papageorgiou General Hospital, Thessaloniki, Macedonia, Greece.

A 6-year-old boy presented with unexplained unilateral low visual acuity. 
Best-corrected visual acuity was counting fingers in the right eye and 20/20 in 
the left eye. Fundus examination of the right eye revealed intermediate uveitis, 
with moderate vitritis, snowballs, and snowbanking. Infectious and noninfectious 
conditions known to be associated with intermediate uveitis were excluded. 
Vitreous inflammation gradually resolved with oral steroids, and amblyopia 
treatment with left eye patching was advised. Several months later the boy 
suffered acute monoarthritis and episodes of mucopurulent diarrhea; a terminal 
ileum biopsy was consistent with Crohn's disease. This case of Crohn's disease 
and uveitis is unusual in that ocular inflammation preceded intestinal 
involvement, with the atypical feature of chronic intermediate uveitis.

Copyright © 2017 American Association for Pediatric Ophthalmology and 
Strabismus. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaapos.2017.07.218
PMID: 29102673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]