---
reference_id: "PMID:39441221"
title: Normalized Interferon Signatures and Clinical Improvements by IFNAR1 Blocking Antibody (Anifrolumab) in Patients with Type I Interferonopathies.
authors:
- Kretzschmar G
- Páez LP
- Tan Z
- Wang J
- Gonzalez L
- Mugabo CH
- Johnsson A
- Chen Y
- Mikeš J
- Lakshmikanth T
- James A
- Goldbach-Mansky R
- Fischer M
- Palmblad K
- Alehashemi S
- Horne A
- Brodin P
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-024-01826-2
keywords:
- Humans
- "Receptor, Interferon alpha-beta/genetics"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/therapeutic use"
- Interferon Type I
- Female
- Male
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- "Antibodies, Blocking/therapeutic use"
- Sulfonamides/therapeutic use
- Treatment Outcome
- Pyrazoles/therapeutic use
- Janus Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Azetidines
- Purines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Normalized Interferon Signatures and Clinical Improvements by IFNAR1 Blocking Antibody (Anifrolumab) in Patients with Type I Interferonopathies.
**Authors:** Kretzschmar G, Páez LP, Tan Z, Wang J, Gonzalez L, Mugabo CH, Johnsson A, Chen Y, Mikeš J, Lakshmikanth T, James A, Goldbach-Mansky R, Fischer M, Palmblad K, Alehashemi S, Horne A, Brodin P
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-024-01826-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-024-01826-2)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2024 Oct 23;45(1):31. doi: 10.1007/s10875-024-01826-2.

Normalized Interferon Signatures and Clinical Improvements by IFNAR1 Blocking
Antibody (Anifrolumab) in Patients with Type I Interferonopathies.

Kretzschmar G(1)(2), Páez LP(1), Tan Z(1), Wang J(1), Gonzalez L(1), Mugabo
CH(1), Johnsson A(1), Chen Y(1), Mikeš J(1), Lakshmikanth T(1), James A(1),
Goldbach-Mansky R(3), Fischer M(4), Palmblad K(1)(2), Alehashemi S(3), Horne
A(1)(2), Brodin P(5)(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Unit for Clinical Pediatrics, Dept. of Women's and Children's Health,
Karolinska Institutet, 17165, Solna, Sweden.
(2)Unit for Pediatric Rheumatology, Astrid Lindgren's Children's Hospital,
Karolinska University Hospital, Solna, Sweden.
(3)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, MD,
20892, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Rheumatology Unit, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden.
(5)Unit for Clinical Pediatrics, Dept. of Women's and Children's Health,
Karolinska Institutet, 17165, Solna, Sweden. petter.brodin@ki.se.
(6)Unit for Pediatric Rheumatology, Astrid Lindgren's Children's Hospital,
Karolinska University Hospital, Solna, Sweden. petter.brodin@ki.se.
(7)Department of Immunology and Inflammation, Imperial College London, London,
W12 0NN, UK. petter.brodin@ki.se.
(8)Medical Research Council, Laboratory of Medical Sciences (LMS), Imperial
College Hammersmith Campus, London, UK. petter.brodin@ki.se.

PURPOSE: A causal role of type-I interferons (IFN-I) in autoinflammatory type-I
interferonopathies such as SAVI (STING-associated vasculopathy with onset in
infancy) and CANDLE (chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatosis with lipodystrophy
and elevated temperatures) is suggested by elevated expression of IFN-I
stimulated genes (ISGs). Hitherto, the lack of specific inhibitors of IFN-I
signaling has prevented the verification of a causal role for IFN-I in these
conditions. Commonly used inhibitors of the JAK/STAT pathway exert broad effects
on multiple signaling pathways leading to more general immunosuppression beyond
IFN-I signaling.
METHODS: Here we show in four patients with SAVI and one patient with CANDLE
syndrome that blockade of the IFNAR1 receptor (Anifrolumab) exerts an additive
effect over JAK-inhibitor alone. In two patients with SAVI, monotherapy with
Anifrolumab is sufficient to retain a suppressed IFN-I signature and clinical
improvement.
RESULTS: Anifrolumab normalizes IFN-I signature genes and relieves symptoms
beyond what is typically achieved by a JAK-inhibitor (Baricitinib) alone in
patients with type-I interferonopathies. In two patients Anifrolumab was used
successfully as monotherapy. Addition of Anifrolumab enabled steroid tapering
and cessation with reduced overall immunosuppression and lower risks of
opportunistic infections and improved metabolic states and growth which is
highly beneficial in these young patients.
CONCLUSION: These results verify a causal role of IFN-I signaling in type-I
Interferonopathies SAVI and CANDLE and suggests Anifrolumab as an important new
treatment option in autoinflammatory diseases with elevated IFN-I induced gene
expression. Genia Kretzschmar, Laura Piñero Páez, and Ziyang Tan are
shared-first authors. Sara Alehashemi, AnnaCarin Horne, and Petter Brodin are
co-senior author.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-024-01826-2
PMCID: PMC11499543
PMID: 39441221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: P.B, T.L and J.M are cofounders of Cytodelics AB
(Stockholm, Sweden) which produce and distribute whole blood cell stabilizer
solutions used to preserve samples for cytometry analyses within this study.
