---
reference_id: "PMID:35748970"
title: "Human Inborn Errors of Immunity: 2022 Update on the Classification from the International Union of Immunological Societies Expert Committee."
authors:
- Tangye SG
- Al-Herz W
- Bousfiha A
- Cunningham-Rundles C
- Franco JL
- Holland SM
- Klein C
- Morio T
- Oksenhendler E
- Picard C
- Puel A
- Puck J
- Seppänen MRJ
- Somech R
- Su HC
- Sullivan KE
- Torgerson TR
- Meyts I
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-022-01289-3
keywords:
- Humans
- Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/diagnosis
- Immune System Diseases
- Phenotype
- Research Report
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human Inborn Errors of Immunity: 2022 Update on the Classification from the International Union of Immunological Societies Expert Committee.
**Authors:** Tangye SG, Al-Herz W, Bousfiha A, Cunningham-Rundles C, Franco JL, Holland SM, Klein C, Morio T, Oksenhendler E, Picard C, Puel A, Puck J, Seppänen MRJ, Somech R, Su HC, Sullivan KE, Torgerson TR, Meyts I
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-022-01289-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-022-01289-3)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2022 Oct;42(7):1473-1507. doi: 10.1007/s10875-022-01289-3.
Epub  2022 Jun 24.

Human Inborn Errors of Immunity: 2022 Update on the Classification from the 
International Union of Immunological Societies Expert Committee.

Tangye SG(1)(2), Al-Herz W(3), Bousfiha A(4), Cunningham-Rundles C(5), Franco 
JL(6), Holland SM(7), Klein C(8), Morio T(9), Oksenhendler E(10), Picard 
C(11)(12), Puel A(13)(14), Puck J(15), Seppänen MRJ(16), Somech R(17), Su HC(7), 
Sullivan KE(18), Torgerson TR(19), Meyts I(20).

Author information:
(1)Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst, Sydney, NSW, 2010, 
Australia. s.tangye@garvan.org.au.
(2)St Vincent's Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine & Health, UNSW Sydney, 
Darlinghurst, NSW, Australia. s.tangye@garvan.org.au.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Kuwait University, Kuwait 
City, Kuwait.
(4)Laboratoire d'Immunologie Clinique, d'Inflammation et d'Allergy LICIA 
Clinical Immunology Unit, Casablanca Children's Hospital, Ibn Rochd Medical 
School, King Hassan II University, Casablanca, Morocco.
(5)Departments of Medicine and Pediatrics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New 
York, NY, USA.
(6)Grupo de Inmunodeficiencias Primarias, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de 
Antioquia UdeA, Medellin, Colombia.
(7)Laboratory of Clinical Immunology & Microbiology, National Institute of 
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 
USA.
(8)Dr von Hauner Children's Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, 
Munich, Germany.
(9)Department of Pediatrics and Developmental Biology, Tokyo Medical and Dental 
University, Tokyo, Japan.
(10)Department of Clinical Immunology, Hôpital Saint-Louis, APHP, Université 
Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(11)Study Center for Primary Immunodeficiencies, Necker Hospital for Sick 
Children, APHP, Paris, France.
(12)Laboratory of Lymphocyte Activation and Susceptibility to EBV, INSERM 
UMR1163, Imagine Institute, Necker Hospital for Sick Children, Université Paris 
Cité, Paris, France.
(13)Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, INSERM U1163, Necker 
Hospital, 75015, Paris, France.
(14)Université Paris Cité, Imagine Institute, 75015, Paris, France.
(15)Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Francisco and UCSF 
Benioff Children's Hospital, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(16)Adult Immunodeficiency Unit, Infectious Diseases, Inflammation Center and 
Rare Diseases Center, Children's Hospital, University of Helsinki and Helsinki 
University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(17)Pediatric Department and Immunology Unit, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Aviv, 
Israel.
(18)Division of Allergy Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's 
Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(19)Allen Institute for Immunology, Seattle, WA, USA.
(20)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Laboratory for Inborn Errors of 
Immunity, Department of Pediatrics, University Hospitals Leuven and KU Leuven, 
3000, Leuven, Belgium.

Comment in
    Allergy Asthma Proc. 2024 Sep 1;45(5):291-293. doi: 
10.2500/aap.2024.45.240062.

We report the updated classification of inborn errors of immunity, compiled by 
the International Union of Immunological Societies Expert Committee. This report 
documents the key clinical and laboratory features of 55 novel monogenic gene 
defects, and 1 phenocopy due to autoantibodies, that have either been discovered 
since the previous update (published January 2020) or were characterized earlier 
but have since been confirmed or expanded in subsequent studies. While variants 
in additional genes associated with immune diseases have been reported in the 
literature, this update includes only those that the committee assessed that 
reached the necessary threshold to represent novel inborn errors of immunity. 
There are now a total of 485 inborn errors of immunity. These advances in 
discovering the genetic causes of human immune diseases continue to 
significantly further our understanding of molecular, cellular, and 
immunological mechanisms of disease pathogenesis, thereby simultaneously 
enhancing immunological knowledge and improving patient diagnosis and 
management. This report is designed to serve as a resource for immunologists and 
geneticists pursuing the molecular diagnosis of individuals with heritable 
immunological disorders and for the scientific dissection of cellular and 
molecular mechanisms underlying monogenic and related human immune diseases.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-022-01289-3
PMCID: PMC9244088
PMID: 35748970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.