---
reference_id: "PMID:29382611"
title: Novel variant in Sp7/Osx associated with recessive osteogenesis imperfecta with bone fragility and hearing impairment.
authors:
- Fiscaletti M
- Biggin A
- Bennetts B
- Wong K
- Briody J
- Pacey V
- Birman C
- Munns CF
journal: Bone
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2018.01.031
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Biopsy
- Bone and Bones/pathology
- Cell Differentiation
- Collagen/metabolism
- Family Health
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genetic Variation
- Hearing Loss/genetics
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Osteoblasts/metabolism
- Osteogenesis
- Osteogenesis Imperfecta/genetics
- Pedigree
- Porosity
- Risk Factors
- Sp7 Transcription Factor/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel variant in Sp7/Osx associated with recessive osteogenesis imperfecta with bone fragility and hearing impairment.
**Authors:** Fiscaletti M, Biggin A, Bennetts B, Wong K, Briody J, Pacey V, Birman C, Munns CF
**Journal:** Bone (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bone.2018.01.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2018.01.031)

## Content

1. Bone. 2018 May;110:66-75. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2018.01.031. Epub 2018 Jan 31.

Novel variant in Sp7/Osx associated with recessive osteogenesis imperfecta with 
bone fragility and hearing impairment.

Fiscaletti M(1), Biggin A(2), Bennetts B(3), Wong K(4), Briody J(5), Pacey V(6), 
Birman C(7), Munns CF(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Endocrinology and Diabetes, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, 
Sydney, NSW, Australia. Electronic address: 
melissa.fiscaletti@health.nsw.gov.au.
(2)Institute of Endocrinology and Diabetes, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, 
Sydney, NSW, Australia; Discipline of Child & Adolescent Health, Sydney Medical 
School, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(3)Discipline of Child & Adolescent Health, Sydney Medical School, University of 
Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia; Molecular Genetics Department, Western Sydney 
Genetics Program, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, NSW, Australia; 
Discipline of Genetic Medicine, Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, 
Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(4)Molecular Genetics Department, Western Sydney Genetics Program, The 
Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, NSW, Australia; Discipline of Genetic 
Medicine, Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(5)Department of Nuclear Medicine, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, 
NSW, Australia.
(6)Institute of Endocrinology and Diabetes, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, 
Sydney, NSW, Australia; Department of Health Professions, Macquarie University, 
Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(7)Department of ENT and Discipline of Paediatrics and Child health, The 
Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a connective tissue disorder characterized by 
low bone density and recurrent fractures with a wide genotypic and phenotypic 
spectrum. Common features include short stature, opalescent teeth, blue sclerae 
and hearing impairment. The majority (>90%) of patients with OI have autosomal 
dominant variants in COL1A1/COL1A2, which lead to defects in type 1 collagen. 
More recently, numerous recessive variants involving other genes have also been 
identified. Sp7/Osx gene, is a protein coding gene that encodes a zinc finger 
transcription factor, osterix, which is a member of the Sp subfamily of 
sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins. Osterix is expressed primarily by 
osteoblasts and has been shown to be vital for bone formation and bone 
homeostasis by promoting osteoblast differentiation and maturation. In animal 
models, Sp7/Osx has also been shown to regulate biomineralization of otoliths, 
calcium carbonate structures found in the inner ear of vertebrates. Until 
recently, only one report of a boy with an Sp7/Osx pathogenic variant presenting 
with bone fragility, limb deformities and normal hearing has been described in 
the literature. We have identified a novel Sp7/Osx variant in another sibship 
that presented with osteoporosis, low-trauma fractures and short stature. 
Progressive moderate-to-severe and severe-to-profound hearing loss secondary to 
otospongiosis and poor mineralization of ossicles and petrous temporal bone was 
also noted in two of the siblings. A homozygous pathogenic variant in exon 2 of 
the Sp7/Osx gene was found in all affected relatives; c.946C>T (p.Arg316Cys). 
Bone biopsies in the proband and his male sibling revealed significant cortical 
porosity and high trabecular bone turnover. This is the second report to 
describe children with OI associated with an Sp7/Osx variant. However, it is the 
first to describe the bone histomorphometry associated with this disorder and 
identifies a significant hearing loss as a potential feature in this OI subtype. 
Early audiology screening in these children is therefore warranted.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2018.01.031
PMID: 29382611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]