---
reference_id: "PMID:33677974"
title: "Management of Central Retinal Artery Occlusion: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association."
authors:
- Mac Grory B
- Schrag M
- Biousse V
- Furie KL
- Gerhard-Herman M
- Lavin PJ
- Sobrin L
- Tjoumakaris SI
- Weyand CM
- Yaghi S
- "American Heart Association Stroke Council; Council on Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis and Vascular Biology; Council on Hypertension; and Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease"
journal: Stroke
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000366
keywords:
- American Heart Association
- Disease Management
- Emergency Medical Services/methods
- Humans
- Neurosurgical Procedures/methods
- Prospective Studies
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic/methods
- Retinal Artery/diagnostic imaging
- "Retinal Artery Occlusion/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, therapy"
- Retrospective Studies
- Secondary Prevention/methods
- "Tissue Plasminogen Activator/administration & dosage"
- Triage/methods
- United States/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of Central Retinal Artery Occlusion: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association.
**Authors:** Mac Grory B, Schrag M, Biousse V, Furie KL, Gerhard-Herman M, Lavin PJ, Sobrin L, Tjoumakaris SI, Weyand CM, Yaghi S, American Heart Association Stroke Council; Council on Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis and Vascular Biology; Council on Hypertension; and Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease
**Journal:** Stroke (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1161/STR.0000000000000366](https://doi.org/10.1161/STR.0000000000000366)

## Content

1. Stroke. 2021 Jun;52(6):e282-e294. doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000366. Epub 2021
 Mar 8.

Management of Central Retinal Artery Occlusion: A Scientific Statement From the 
American Heart Association.

Mac Grory B, Schrag M, Biousse V, Furie KL, Gerhard-Herman M, Lavin PJ, Sobrin 
L, Tjoumakaris SI, Weyand CM, Yaghi S; American Heart Association Stroke 
Council; Council on Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis and Vascular Biology; Council 
on Hypertension; and Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease.

Erratum in
    Stroke. 2021 Jun;52(6):e309. doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000374.

PURPOSE: Central retinal artery occlusion (CRAO) is a form of acute ischemic 
stroke that causes severe visual loss and is a harbinger of further 
cerebrovascular and cardiovascular events. There is a paucity of scientific 
information on the appropriate management of CRAO, with most strategies based on 
observational literature and expert opinion. In this scientific statement, we 
critically appraise the literature on CRAO and provide a framework within which 
to consider acute treatment and secondary prevention.
METHODS: We performed a literature review of randomized controlled clinical 
trials, prospective and retrospective cohort studies, case-control studies, case 
reports, clinical guidelines, review articles, basic science articles, and 
editorials concerning the management of CRAO. We assembled a panel comprising 
experts in the fields of vascular neurology, neuro-ophthalmology, vitreo-retinal 
surgery, immunology, endovascular neurosurgery, and cardiology, and document 
sections were divided among the writing group members. Each member received an 
assignment to perform a literature review, synthesize the data, and offer 
considerations for practice. Multiple drafts were circulated among the group 
until consensus was achieved.
RESULTS: Acute CRAO is a medical emergency. Systems of care should evolve to 
prioritize early recognition and triage of CRAO to emergency medical attention. 
There is considerable variability in management patterns among practitioners, 
institutions, and subspecialty groups. The current literature suggests that 
treatment with intravenous tissue plasminogen activator may be effective. 
Patients should undergo urgent screening and treatment of vascular risk factors. 
There is a need for high-quality, randomized clinical trials in this field.

DOI: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000366
PMID: 33677974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]