---
reference_id: "PMID:30903929"
title: Otorhinolaryngological manifestations and delayed diagnosis in Kawasaki disease.
authors:
- Rouault M
- Coudert A
- Hermann R
- Gillet Y
- Truy E
- Ayari-Khalfallah S
journal: Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2019.02.035
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Otorhinolaryngological manifestations and delayed diagnosis in Kawasaki disease.
**Authors:** Rouault M, Coudert A, Hermann R, Gillet Y, Truy E, Ayari-Khalfallah S
**Journal:** Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijporl.2019.02.035](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijporl.2019.02.035)

## Content

1. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2019 Jun;121:137-142. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijporl.2019.02.035. Epub 2019 Feb 26.

Otorhinolaryngological manifestations and delayed diagnosis in Kawasaki disease.

Rouault M(1), Coudert A(2), Hermann R(3), Gillet Y(4), Truy E(5), 
Ayari-Khalfallah S(6).

Author information:
(1)Service d'ORL Pédiatrique, Hôpital Femme Mère Enfants, Centre Hospitalier et 
Universitaire, Lyon, France; Université de Lyon, Lyon, France. Electronic 
address: Marion.rouault@chu-lyon.fr.
(2)Service d'ORL Pédiatrique, Hôpital Femme Mère Enfants, Centre Hospitalier et 
Universitaire, Lyon, France; Université de Lyon, Lyon, France.
(3)Service d'ORL, Hôpital Edouard Herriot, Centre Hospitalier et Universitaire, 
Lyon, France; Université de Lyon, Lyon, France.
(4)Service d'urgences Pédiatriques, Hôpital Femme Mère Enfants, Centre 
Hospitalier et Universitaire, Lyon, France.
(5)Service d'ORL Pédiatrique, Hôpital Femme Mère Enfants, Centre Hospitalier et 
Universitaire, Lyon, France; Service d'ORL, Hôpital Edouard Herriot, Centre 
Hospitalier et Universitaire, Lyon, France; Université de Lyon, Lyon, France; 
INSERM, U1028, CNRS, UMR5292, Lyon Neuroscience Research Center, IMPACT Team, 
Lyon, France.
(6)Service d'ORL Pédiatrique, Hôpital Femme Mère Enfants, Centre Hospitalier et 
Universitaire, Lyon, France; Service d'ORL, Hôpital Edouard Herriot, Centre 
Hospitalier et Universitaire, Lyon, France.

OBJECTIVES: Kawasaki disease (KD) is a febrile multisystemic vasculitis of 
unknown etiology whose coronary prognosis is improved by early diagnosis and 
management. The objective of this study was to describe ENT manifestations 
encountered and to look for a delayed diagnosis associated with these 
manifestations.
METHODS: A retrospective descriptive single-center study was conducted in Lyon 
between January 2009 and December 2017. All children treated for Kawasaki 
disease were included in the study. Clinical, biological and cardiac ultrasound 
data were collected. According to the diagnosis made at the first medical visit, 
children were classified into two groups: diagnosis of ENT spectrum or non-ENT 
diagnosis. The diagnostic times were compared by a Student test.
RESULTS: 142 patients were included: 64 in the ENT diagnostic group, 78 in the 
non-ENT diagnostic group. When the initial diagnosis was of ENT spectrum, the 
diagnostic time of KD was significantly longer: 8.51 days vs 5.77 days - 
(p < 0.01). The total duration of fever was also longer - 10.92 vs 8.32 days - 
(p = 0.013) - and the frequency of antibiotics intake more important - 92.2% vs 
46.2% - (p < 0.01). Four children underwent surgery in the ENT diagnostic group: 
two retro-pharyngeal abscesses, one paracentesis and one cervicectomy.
CONCLUSIONS: ENT manifestations are frequently at the forefront of KD and 
constitute a misleading clinical picture responsible for delayed diagnosis and 
potentially inappropriate medico-surgical management. It is necessary to provide 
more education to practitioners for earlier recognition of Kawasaki disease.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2019.02.035
PMID: 30903929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]