---
reference_id: "PMID:36634024"
title: Cholera Outbreak - Haiti, September 2022-January 2023.
authors:
- Vega Ocasio D
- Juin S
- Berendes D
- Heitzinger K
- Prentice-Mott G
- Desormeaux AM
- Jn Charles PD
- Rigodon J
- Pelletier V
- Louis RJ
- Vertefeuille J
- Boncy J
- Joseph G
- Compère V
- Lafontant D
- Andrecy LL
- Michel E
- Pierre K
- Thermidor E
- Fitter D
- Grant-Greene Y
- Lozier M
- Marseille S
- CDC Haiti Cholera Response Group
journal: MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.15585/mmwr.mm7202a1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cholera Outbreak - Haiti, September 2022-January 2023.
**Authors:** Vega Ocasio D, Juin S, Berendes D, Heitzinger K, Prentice-Mott G, Desormeaux AM, Jn Charles PD, Rigodon J, Pelletier V, Louis RJ, Vertefeuille J, Boncy J, Joseph G, Compère V, Lafontant D, Andrecy LL, Michel E, Pierre K, Thermidor E, Fitter D, Grant-Greene Y, Lozier M, Marseille S, CDC Haiti Cholera Response Group
**Journal:** MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.15585/mmwr.mm7202a1](https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7202a1)

## Content

1. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2023 Jan 13;72(2):21-25. doi:
10.15585/mmwr.mm7202a1.

Cholera Outbreak - Haiti, September 2022-January 2023.

Vega Ocasio D, Juin S, Berendes D, Heitzinger K, Prentice-Mott G, Desormeaux AM, 
Jn Charles PD, Rigodon J, Pelletier V, Louis RJ, Vertefeuille J, Boncy J, Joseph 
G, Compère V, Lafontant D, Andrecy LL, Michel E, Pierre K, Thermidor E, Fitter 
D, Grant-Greene Y, Lozier M, Marseille S; CDC Haiti Cholera Response Group.

Collaborators: Andujar A(1), Baez-Nieves A(1), Breakwell L(1), Breese S(1), 
Brunkard J(1), Dualeh M(1), Handzel T(1), Lee C(1), Martinsen A(1), Osborne 
T(1), Shih D(1), Tiffany A(1), Turnsek M(1).

Author information:
(1)CDC.

On September 30, 2022, after >3 years with no confirmed cholera cases (1), the 
Directorate of Epidemiology, Laboratories and Research (DELR) of the Haitian 
Ministry of Public Health and Population (Ministère de la Santé Publique et de 
la Population [MSPP]) was notified of two patients with acute, watery diarrhea 
in the metropolitan area of Port-au-Prince. Within 2 days, Haiti's National 
Public Health Laboratory confirmed the bacterium Vibrio cholerae O1 in specimens 
from the two patients with suspected cholera infection, and an outbreak 
investigation began immediately. As of January 3, 2023, >20,000 suspected 
cholera cases had been reported throughout the country, and 79% of patients have 
been hospitalized. The moving 14-day case fatality ratio (CFR) was 3.0%. 
Cholera, which is transmitted through ingestion of water or food contaminated 
with fecal matter, can cause acute, severe, watery diarrhea that can rapidly 
lead to dehydration, shock, and death if not treated promptly (2). Haiti is 
currently facing ongoing worsening of gang violence, population displacement, 
social unrest, and insecurity, particularly in the metropolitan area of 
Port-au-Prince, including Belair, Bas-Delmas, Centre-Ville, Martissant, Cité 
Soleil, Croix-des Bouquets, and Tabarre, creating an environment that has 
facilitated the current resurgence of cholera (3). This report describes the 
initial investigation, ongoing outbreak, and public health response to cholera 
in Haiti. Cholera outbreak responses require a multipronged, multisectoral 
approach including surveillance; case management; access to safe water, 
sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) services; targeted oral cholera vaccine (OCV) 
campaigns; risk communication; and community engagement. This activity was 
reviewed by CDC and was conducted consistent with applicable federal law and CDC 
policy.

DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.mm7202a1
PMCID: PMC9869732
PMID: 36634024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have completed and submitted the 
International Committee of Medical Journal Editors form for disclosure of 
potential conflicts of interest. No potential conflicts of interest were 
disclosed.