---
reference_id: "PMID:31562043"
title: "Vinorelbine and continuous low-dose cyclophosphamide as maintenance chemotherapy in patients with high-risk rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS 2005): a multicentre, open-label, randomised, phase 3 trial."
authors:
- Bisogno G
- De Salvo GL
- Bergeron C
- Gallego Melcón S
- Merks JH
- Kelsey A
- Martelli H
- Minard-Colin V
- Orbach D
- Glosli H
- Chisholm J
- Casanova M
- Zanetti I
- Devalck C
- Ben-Arush M
- Mudry P
- Ferman S
- Jenney M
- Ferrari A
- European paediatric Soft tissue sarcoma Study Group
journal: Lancet Oncol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(19)30617-5
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Argentina
- Brazil
- Child
- "Cyclophosphamide/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Disease Progression
- Disease-Free Survival
- Europe
- Female
- Humans
- Israel
- "Maintenance Chemotherapy/adverse effects, mortality"
- Male
- Remission Induction
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma, Alveolar/drug therapy, mortality, pathology"
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma, Embryonal/drug therapy, mortality, pathology"
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
- Time Factors
- "Vinorelbine/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vinorelbine and continuous low-dose cyclophosphamide as maintenance chemotherapy in patients with high-risk rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS 2005): a multicentre, open-label, randomised, phase 3 trial.
**Authors:** Bisogno G, De Salvo GL, Bergeron C, Gallego Melcón S, Merks JH, Kelsey A, Martelli H, Minard-Colin V, Orbach D, Glosli H, Chisholm J, Casanova M, Zanetti I, Devalck C, Ben-Arush M, Mudry P, Ferman S, Jenney M, Ferrari A, European paediatric Soft tissue sarcoma Study Group
**Journal:** Lancet Oncol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1470-2045(19)30617-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(19)30617-5)

## Content

1. Lancet Oncol. 2019 Nov;20(11):1566-1575. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(19)30617-5.
Epub 2019 Sep 24.

Vinorelbine and continuous low-dose cyclophosphamide as maintenance chemotherapy
in patients with high-risk rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS 2005): a multicentre,
open-label, randomised, phase 3 trial.

Bisogno G(1), De Salvo GL(2), Bergeron C(3), Gallego Melcón S(4), Merks JH(5),
Kelsey A(6), Martelli H(7), Minard-Colin V(8), Orbach D(9), Glosli H(10),
Chisholm J(11), Casanova M(12), Zanetti I(13), Devalck C(14), Ben-Arush M(15),
Mudry P(16), Ferman S(17), Jenney M(18), Ferrari A(12); European paediatric Soft
tissue sarcoma Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Haematology Oncology Division, Department of Women's and Children's Health,
University of Padova, Padova, Italy. Electronic address:
gianni.bisogno@unipd.it.
(2)Clinical Research Unit, Istituto Oncologico Veneto IOV-IRCCS, Padova, Italy.
(3)Institut d'Hématologie et d'Oncologie Pédiatrique, Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon,
France.
(4)Servicio de Oncología y Hematología Pediatrica, Hospital Universitari Vall
d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Princess Máxima Center for Paediatric Oncology, Utrecht, Netherlands;
Department of Paediatric Oncology, Emma Children's Hospital-Academic Medical
Center Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(6)Department of Paediatric Histopathology, Royal Manchester Children's
Hospital, Manchester, UK.
(7)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Hôpital Bicêtre-Hôpitaux Universitaires
Paris Sud, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, Paris,
France.
(8)Department of Paediatric and Adolescent Oncology, Gustave-Roussy, Villejuif,
France.
(9)SIREDO Oncology Center, Institut Curie, PSL University, Paris, France.
(10)Department of Paediatric Research and Department of Paediatric and
Adolescent Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(11)Children and Young Peoples Unit, Royal Marsden Hospital, Sutton, Surrey, UK.
(12)Paediatric Oncology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori,
Milan, Italy.
(13)Haematology Oncology Division, Department of Women's and Children's Health,
University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(14)Paediatric Haematology and Oncology, Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants Reine
Fabiola, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.
(15)Joan and Sanford Weill Pediatric Hematology Oncology and Bone Marrow
Transplantation Division, Ruth Rappaport Children's Hospital, Rambam Medical
Center, Haifa, Israel.
(16)University Children's Hospital Brno, Czech Republic.
(17)Instituto Nacional de Câncer, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(18)Department of Paediatric Oncology, Children's Hospital for Wales, Heath
Park, Cardiff, UK.

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2019 Nov;20(11):1476-1477. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(19)30618-7.
    Trends Cancer. 2019 Dec;5(12):756-759. doi: 10.1016/j.trecan.2019.10.004.
    Lancet Oncol. 2020 Jan;21(1):e1. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(19)30731-4.
    Lancet Oncol. 2020 Jan;21(1):e2. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(19)30784-3.
    Lancet Oncol. 2020 Jan;21(1):e3. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(19)30812-5.

BACKGROUND: For more than three decades, standard treatment for rhabdomyosarcoma
in Europe has included 6 months of chemotherapy. The European paediatric Soft
tissue sarcoma Study Group (EpSSG) aimed to investigate whether prolonging
treatment with maintenance chemotherapy would improve survival in patients with
high-risk rhabdomyosarcoma.
METHODS: RMS 2005 was a multicentre, open-label, randomised, controlled, phase 3
trial done at 102 hospitals in 14 countries. We included patients aged 6 months
to 21 years with rhabdomyosarcoma who were considered to be at high risk of
relapse: those with non-metastatic incompletely resected embryonal
rhabdomyosarcoma occurring at unfavourable sites with unfavourable age (≥10
years) or tumour size (>5 cm), or both; those with any non-metastatic
rhabdomyosarcoma with nodal involvement; and those with non-metastatic alveolar
rhabdomyosarcoma but without nodal involvement. Patients in remission after
standard treatment (nine cycles of ifosfamide, vincristine, dactinomycin with or
without doxorubicin, and surgery or radiotherapy, or both) were randomly
assigned (1:1) to stop treatment or continue maintenance chemotherapy (six
cycles of intravenous vinorelbine 25 mg/m2 on days 1, 8, and 15, and daily oral
cyclophosphamide 25 mg/m2, on days 1-28). Randomisation was done by use of a
web-based system and was stratified (block size of four) by enrolling country
and risk subgroup. Neither investigators nor patients were masked to treatment
allocation. The primary outcome was disease-free survival in the
intention-to-treat population. Secondary outcomes were overall survival and
toxicity. This trial is registered with EudraCT, number 2005-000217-35, and
ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00339118, and follow-up is ongoing.
FINDINGS: Between April 20, 2006, and Dec 21, 2016, 371 patients were enrolled
and randomly assigned to the two groups: 186 to stop treatment and 185 to
receive maintenance chemotherapy. Median follow-up was 60·3 months (IQR
32·4-89·4). In the intention-to-treat population, 5-year disease-free survival
was 77·6% (95% CI 70·6-83·2) with maintenance chemotherapy versus 69·8%
(62·2-76·2) without maintenance chemotherapy (hazard ratio [HR] 0·68 [95% CI
0·45-1·02]; p=0·061), and 5-year overall survival was 86·5% (95% CI 80·2-90·9)
with maintenance chemotherapy versus 73·7% (65·8-80·1) without (HR 0·52 [95% CI
0·32-0·86]; p=0·0097). Toxicity was manageable in patients who received
maintenance chemotherapy: 136 (75%) of 181 patients had grade 3-4 leucopenia,
148 (82%) had grade 3-4 neutropenia, 19 (10%) had anaemia, two (1%) had
thrombocytopenia, and 56 (31%) had an infection. One (1%) patient had a grade 4
non-haematological toxicity (neurotoxicity). Two treatment-related serious
adverse events occurred: one case of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone
secretion and one of a severe steppage gait with limb pain, both of which
resolved.
INTERPRETATION: Adding maintenance chemotherapy seems to improve survival for
patients with high-risk rhabdomyosarcoma. This approach will be the new standard
of care for patients with high-risk rhabdomyosarcoma in future EpSSG trials.
FUNDING: Fondazione Città della Speranza, Association Léon Berard Enfant
Cancéreux, Clinical Research Hospital Program (French Ministry of Health), and
Cancer Research UK.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(19)30617-5
PMID: 31562043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
