---
reference_id: "PMID:26122630"
title: Screening Mucopolysaccharidosis Type IX in Patients with Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis.
authors:
- Kiykim E
- Barut K
- Cansever MS
- Zeybek CA
- Zubarioglu T
- Aydin A
- Kasapcopur O
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/8904_2015_467
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Screening Mucopolysaccharidosis Type IX in Patients with Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis.
**Authors:** Kiykim E, Barut K, Cansever MS, Zeybek CA, Zubarioglu T, Aydin A, Kasapcopur O
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/8904_2015_467](https://doi.org/10.1007/8904_2015_467)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2016;25:21-24. doi: 10.1007/8904_2015_467. Epub 2015 Jun 30.

Screening Mucopolysaccharidosis Type IX in Patients with Juvenile Idiopathic 
Arthritis.

Kiykim E(1), Barut K(2), Cansever MS(3), Zeybek CA(4), Zubarioglu T(4), Aydin 
A(4), Kasapcopur O(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nutrition and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, Cerrahpasa 
Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey. 
ertugrulkiykim@hotmail.com.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Pediatrics, Cerrahpasa Medical 
Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Central Laboratory, Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical, Istanbul, 
Turkey.
(4)Division of Nutrition and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, Cerrahpasa 
Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.

Mucopolysaccharidosis is a group of lysosomal disorders of a deficiency of 
specific enzyme required for glycosaminoglycan degradation. 
Mucopolysaccharidosis type IX is the rarest form of mucopolysaccharidosis. To 
date, only four patients have been reported. The first reported patient had mild 
short stature and periarticular soft tissue masses; the other reported patients 
are clinically indistinguishable from juvenile idiopathic arthritis. In the 
present study, we screened mucopolysaccharidosis type IX among patients with 
juvenile idiopathic arthritis with hyaluronidase enzyme assay. One hundred and 
eight patients with JIA and 50 healthy age-matched control subjects were 
enrolled in the study. Among all patients, none had deficient hyaluronidase 
activity. Though serum Hyal-1 activity was significantly increased in JIA 
patients, compared with control subjects (p < 0.000), no correlation was found 
between CRP, ESR, and Hyal-1 activity (p = 0.187). In conclusion, the data 
reported in our study indicates that systemic metabolic investigation for 
hyaluronidase activity is not recommended in all patients with JIA.

DOI: 10.1007/8904_2015_467
PMCID: PMC5059191
PMID: 26122630