---
reference_id: "PMID:38732027"
title: "Antisense Oligonucleotides (ASOs) in Motor Neuron Diseases: A Road to Cure in Light and Shade."
authors:
- Cantara S
- Simoncelli G
- Ricci C
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25094809
keywords:
- Humans
- "Oligonucleotides, Antisense/therapeutic use"
- "Motor Neuron Disease/genetics, therapy"
- Animals
- "Muscular Atrophy, Spinal/therapy, genetics"
- "Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/genetics, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antisense Oligonucleotides (ASOs) in Motor Neuron Diseases: A Road to Cure in Light and Shade.
**Authors:** Cantara S, Simoncelli G, Ricci C
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25094809](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25094809)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Apr 28;25(9):4809. doi: 10.3390/ijms25094809.

Antisense Oligonucleotides (ASOs) in Motor Neuron Diseases: A Road to Cure in 
Light and Shade.

Cantara S(1), Simoncelli G(2), Ricci C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical, Surgical and Neurological Sciences, University of 
Siena, 53100 Siena, Italy.
(2)Unit of Neurology and Clinical Neurophysiology, Department of Neurological 
and Motor Sciences, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Senese, 53100 Siena, 
Italy.

Antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) are short oligodeoxynucleotides designed to 
bind to specific regions of target mRNA. ASOs can modulate pre-mRNA splicing, 
increase levels of functional proteins, and decrease levels of toxic proteins. 
ASOs are being developed for the treatment of motor neuron diseases (MNDs), 
including spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and 
spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA). The biggest success has been the ASO 
known as nusinersen, the first effective therapy for SMA, able to improve 
symptoms and slow disease progression. Another success is tofersen, an ASO 
designed to treat ALS patients with SOD1 gene mutations. Both ASOs have been 
approved by the FDA and EMA. On the other hand, ASO treatment in ALS patients 
with the C9orf72 gene mutation did not show any improvement in disease 
progression. The aim of this review is to provide an up-to-date overview of ASO 
research in MNDs, from preclinical studies to clinical trials and, where 
available, regulatory approval. We highlight the successes and failures, 
underline the strengths and limitations of the current ASO research, and suggest 
possible approaches that could lead to more effective treatments.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25094809
PMCID: PMC11083842
PMID: 38732027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.