---
reference_id: "PMID:36004681"
title: "Prevalence of RPGR-mutated X-linked retinitis pigmentosa among males"
authors:
- Vinikoor-Imler LC
- Simpson C
- Narayanan D
- Abbasi S
- Lally C
journal: Ophthalmic Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/13816810.2022.2109686
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of RPGR-mutated X-linked retinitis pigmentosa among males
**Authors:** Vinikoor-Imler LC, Simpson C, Narayanan D, Abbasi S, Lally C
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/13816810.2022.2109686](https://doi.org/10.1080/13816810.2022.2109686)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Genet. 2022 Oct;43(5):581-588.

Prevalence of RPGR-mutated X-linked retinitis pigmentosa among males.

Vinikoor-Imler LC, Simpson C, Narayanan D, Abbasi S, Lally C.

Background: X-linked retinitis pigmentosa (XLRP) is a rare inherited retinal
disease predominantly affecting males.

Materials and methods: A comprehensive literature review was conducted to
determine the prevalence of retinitis pigmentosa GTPase regulator
(RPGR)-mutated XLRP. Identified studies were used to estimate four components
among males: the prevalence of retinitis pigmentosa (RP), the proportion of RP
that was X-linked, the proportion of misclassified inheritance type among RP
cases, and the proportion of XLRP that was RPGR-mutated. Studies providing a
direct estimate of XLRP prevalence were also included. The components' sample
size-weighted averages were combined to determine an overall prevalence
estimate.

Results: The prevalence of XLRP was estimated to be between 2.7-3.5 per 100,000
males in the US, Europe, and Australia. After correction for misclassification,
the prevalence increased to 4.0-5.2 per 100,000 males. Finally, the proportion
of XLRP cases due to RPGR mutations was applied, resulting in an RPGR-mutated
XLRP estimate of 3.4-4.4 per 100,000 males. Studies from other countries were
consistent with the results for the overall XLRP prevalence but were not
included in the final calculation because of regional variations and lack of
detailed information.

Conclusions: These findings address an important gap in the understanding of
RPGR-mutated XLRP by summarizing the global burden of this condition.

DOI: 10.1080/13816810.2022.2109686
PMID: 36004681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
