---
reference_id: "PMID:25647239"
title: Measurement of salivary cortisol level for the diagnosis of critical illness-related corticosteroid insufficiency in children.
authors:
- Gunnala V
- Guo R
- Minutti C
- Durazo-Arvizu R
- Laporte C
- Mathews H
- Kliethermis S
- Bhatia R
journal: Pediatr Crit Care Med
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1097/PCC.0000000000000361
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Measurement of salivary cortisol level for the diagnosis of critical illness-related corticosteroid insufficiency in children.
**Authors:** Gunnala V, Guo R, Minutti C, Durazo-Arvizu R, Laporte C, Mathews H, Kliethermis S, Bhatia R
**Journal:** Pediatr Crit Care Med (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PCC.0000000000000361](https://doi.org/10.1097/PCC.0000000000000361)

## Content

1. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2015 May;16(4):e101-6. doi:
10.1097/PCC.0000000000000361.

Measurement of salivary cortisol level for the diagnosis of critical 
illness-related corticosteroid insufficiency in children.

Gunnala V(1), Guo R, Minutti C, Durazo-Arvizu R, Laporte C, Mathews H, 
Kliethermis S, Bhatia R.

Author information:
(1)1Division of Pediatric Critical Care, Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children's 
Hospital, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL. 2Clinical Research Office, 
Stritch School of Medicine, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, IL. 3Division of 
Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, Stritch School of Medicine, 
Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood, IL. 4Department of Biostatistics and 
Epidemiology, Stritch School of Medicine, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, 
IL. 5Department of Pediatrics, Stritch School of Medicine, Loyola University 
Medical Center, Maywood, IL. 6Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stritch 
School of Medicine, Loyola University of Chicago, Maywood, IL. 7Division of 
Pediatric Critical Care, Department of Pediatrics, Stritch School of Medicine, 
Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood, IL.

Comment in
    Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2015 May;16(4):385-6. doi: 
10.1097/PCC.0000000000000388.

OBJECTIVE: To compare serum total, serum free and salivary cortisol in 
critically ill children.
DESIGN: Prospective observational cohort study.
SETTING: Tertiary pediatric critical care unit at Ronald McDonald Children's 
Hospital at Loyola University Medical Center.
PATIENTS: We enrolled 59 patients (4 weeks to 18 years of age) between January 
2012 and May 2013. Thirty-four patients were included in the salivary to serum 
free cortisol correlational analysis.
INTERVENTIONS: Blood and saliva samples were obtained simultaneously within 24 
hours of admission between the hours of 6 AM and 12 PM. Salivary cortisol was 
tested by liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry, serum free cortisol by 
liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry followed by equilibrium dialysis, 
and serum total cortisol by liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Salivary and serum free cortisol values from 34 
patients had a correlation coefficient (r) of 0.87 (95% CI, 0.75-0.93; p < 
0.0001). The total serum and salivary cortisol values had a correlation 
coefficient (r) of 0.67 (95% CI, 0.42-0.81; p < 0.0001). The total serum and 
serum free cortisol values had a correlation coefficient (r) of 0.83 (95% CI, 
0.69-0.91; p < 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Serum free and salivary cortisol values correlate in critically ill 
children. Salivary cortisol can be used as a surrogate for serum free cortisol 
in critically ill pediatric patients. Salivary cortisol is a cost-effective and 
less invasive measure of bioavailable cortisol and offers an alternate and 
accurate method for assessing critical illness-related corticosteroid 
insufficiency in children.

DOI: 10.1097/PCC.0000000000000361
PMID: 25647239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]