---
reference_id: "PMID:21205143"
title: Treatment of HBeAg-positive chronic hepatitis B with nucleos(t)ide analogues.
authors:
- Leung N
journal: Liver Int
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2010.02387.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of HBeAg-positive chronic hepatitis B with nucleos(t)ide analogues.
**Authors:** Leung N
**Journal:** Liver Int (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1478-3231.2010.02387.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1478-3231.2010.02387.x)

## Content

1. Liver Int. 2011 Jan;31 Suppl 1:85-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2010.02387.x.

Treatment of HBeAg-positive chronic hepatitis B with nucleos(t)ide analogues.

Leung N(1).

Author information:
(1)Alice Ho Miu Ling Nethersole Hospital, Hong Kong, China The Chinese 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. leungwyn@ha.org.hk

HBeAg seropositivity is a marker for active viral replication. In the natural 
history of chronic hepatitis B infection, HBeAg marks the first two of the four 
phases, namely the immune tolerant phase and the immune clearance phase, and is 
associated with highly replicative activity of the hepatitis B virus (HBV). Most 
HBV consensus reports and guidelines recommend antiviral therapy if the immune 
clearance phase is prolonged and if there is evidence of significant 
necroinflammation and fibrosis. Two main types of antiviral agents have been 
approved for treating patients in the immune clearance phase: interferon and 
nucleos(t)ide analogues (NUCs). The endpoints of therapy are viral suppression 
with HBeAg seroconversion, undetectable serum HBV DNA, normalization of serum 
alanine transaminase and improvement in the histological necroinflammatory and 
fibrosis scores. The ultimate goal of therapy is to obtain clinical benefit for 
the patient by reducing complications including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). 
The choice between interferon-based immune modulators or NUCs that target the 
HBV DNA polymerase must be carefully weighed on an individual basis. Therapy 
with NUCs is often preferred by doctors and patients because it is easy to 
administer, with predictable efficacy and minimal side-effects. In specific 
patient subgroups such as those with decompensated disease, poor predictors of 
response or lack of response to interferon-based therapy and/or significant 
comorbidities that cannot tolerate interferon-induced side effects, NUCs therapy 
is the obvious choice. Entecavir and tenofovir are the treatments of choice 
because their efficacy and safety profile are better than lamivudine, adefovir 
and telbivudine. More importantly, there is a minimal risk of drug resistance 
during long-term therapy with these agents.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2010.02387.x
PMID: 21205143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]