---
reference_id: "PMID:35709927"
title: "Genetic determinants of lung cancer: Understanding the oncogenic potential of somatic missense mutations."
authors:
- Dhakar R
- Dakal TC
- Sharma A
journal: Genomics
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2022.110401
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic determinants of lung cancer: Understanding the oncogenic potential of somatic missense mutations.
**Authors:** Dhakar R, Dakal TC, Sharma A
**Journal:** Genomics (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ygeno.2022.110401](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygeno.2022.110401)

## Content

1. Genomics. 2022 Jul;114(4):110401. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2022.110401. Epub 2022 
Jun 14.

Genetic determinants of lung cancer: Understanding the oncogenic potential of 
somatic missense mutations.

Dhakar R(1), Dakal TC(2), Sharma A(3).

Author information:
(1)Genome and Computational Biology Lab, Department of Biotechnology, Mohanlal 
Sukhadia, University, Udaipur 313001, Rajasthan, India.
(2)Genome and Computational Biology Lab, Department of Biotechnology, Mohanlal 
Sukhadia, University, Udaipur 313001, Rajasthan, India. Electronic address: 
tc.dakal@mlsu.ac.in.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, University Clinic Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Treatment of lung cancer is getting more personalized nowadays and 
medical practitioners are moving away from conventional histology-driven 
empirical treatments, platinum-based chemotherapy, and other invasive surgical 
resections and have started adopting alternate therapies in which therapeutic 
targets are patient's molecular oncogenic drivers.
AIM: The aim of the current study is to extract meaningful information from the 
online somatic mutation data (retrieved from cBioPortal) of 16 most 
significantly mutated oncogenes in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), namely 
EGFR, NRAS, KRAS, HER2 (ERBB2), RET, MET, ROS1, FGFR1, BRAF, AKT1, MEK1 
(MAP2K1), PIK3CA, PTEN, DDR2, LKB1 (STK11) and ALK, for improving our 
understanding of the pathobiology of the lung cancer that can aid 
decision-making on critical clinical and therapeutic considerations.
METHODS: Using an integrated approach comprising 4 steps, the oncogenic 
potential of 661 missense non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(nsSNPs) in 16 genes was ascertained using 2059 NSCLC (1575 lung 
adenocarcinomas, 484 lung squamous cell carcinomas) patients' online mutation 
data. The steps used comprise sequence/structure homology-based prediction, 
scoring of conservation of mutated residues and positions, prediction of 
resulting molecular and functional consequences using machine-learning and 
structure-guided approach.
RESULTS: Out of a total of 661 nsSNPs analyzed, a set of 29 nsSNPs has been 
identified as conserved high confidence mutations in 10 of 16 genes relevant to 
the under study. Out of 29 conserved high confidence nsSNPs, 4 nsSNPs (EGFR 
N1094Y, BRAF M620I, DDR2 R307L, ALK P1350T) have been found to be putative novel 
rare genetic markers for NSCLC.
CONCLUSIONS: The current study, the first of its kind, has provided a list of 
deleterious non-synonymous somatic mutations in a selected pool of oncogenes 
that can be considered as a promising target for future drug design and therapy 
for patients with lung adenocarcinomas and squamous cell carcinomas.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2022.110401
PMID: 35709927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]