---
reference_id: "PMID:25591200"
title: "Initial evaluation, diagnosis, and treatment of anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa."
authors:
- Harrington BC
- Jimerson M
- Haxton C
- Jimerson DC
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '2015'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Anorexia Nervosa/diagnosis, etiology, physiopathology, psychology, therapy"
- Body Mass Index
- "Bulimia Nervosa/diagnosis, etiology, physiopathology, psychology, therapy"
- "Depression/diagnosis, therapy"
- Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
- Disease Management
- "Family Practice/methods, standards"
- Female
- Hospitalization
- Humans
- Male
- Mass Screening/methods
- Practice Guidelines as Topic/standards
- Psychotherapy/methods
- Social Environment
- Social Support
- Symptom Assessment/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Initial evaluation, diagnosis, and treatment of anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa.
**Authors:** Harrington BC, Jimerson M, Haxton C, Jimerson DC
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (2015)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 2015 Jan 1;91(1):46-52.

Initial evaluation, diagnosis, and treatment of anorexia nervosa and bulimia 
nervosa.

Harrington BC(1), Jimerson M(1), Haxton C(2), Jimerson DC(3).

Author information:
(1)Yampa Valley Medical Center Associates, P.C., Steamboat Springs, CO, USA.
(2)Fort Collins, CO, USA.
(3)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 
USA.

Eating disorders are life-threatening conditions that are challenging to 
address; however, the primary care setting provides an important opportunity for 
critical medical and psychosocial intervention. The recently published 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed., includes updated 
diagnostic criteria for anorexia nervosa (e.g., elimination of amenorrhea as a 
diagnostic criterion) and for bulimia nervosa (e.g., criterion for frequency of 
binge episodes decreased to an average of once per week). In addition to the 
role of environmental triggers and societal expectations of body size and shape, 
research has suggested that genes and discrete biochemical signals contribute to 
the development of eating disorders. Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa occur 
most often in adolescent females and are often accompanied by depression and 
other comorbid psychiatric disorders. For low-weight patients with anorexia 
nervosa, virtually all physiologic systems are affected, ranging from 
hypotension and osteopenia to life-threatening arrhythmias, often requiring 
emergent assessment and hospitalization for metabolic stabilization. In patients 
with frequent purging or laxative abuse, the presence of electrolyte 
abnormalities requires prompt intervention. Family-based treatment is helpful 
for adolescents with anorexia nervosa, whereas short-term psychotherapy, such as 
cognitive behavior therapy, is effective for most patients with bulimia nervosa. 
The use of psychotropic medications is limited for anorexia nervosa, whereas 
treatment studies have shown a benefit of antidepressant medications for 
patients with bulimia nervosa. Treatment is most effective when it includes a 
multidisciplinary, teambased approach.

PMID: 25591200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]