---
reference_id: "PMID:38508330"
title: "Management of Clostridioides difficile Infection: Diagnosis, Treatment, and Future Perspectives."
authors:
- Cymbal M
- Chatterjee A
- Baggott B
- Auron M
journal: Am J Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2024.03.024
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of Clostridioides difficile Infection: Diagnosis, Treatment, and Future Perspectives.
**Authors:** Cymbal M, Chatterjee A, Baggott B, Auron M
**Journal:** Am J Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amjmed.2024.03.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjmed.2024.03.024)

## Content

1. Am J Med. 2024 Jul;137(7):571-576. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2024.03.024. Epub
2024  Mar 18.

Management of Clostridioides difficile Infection: Diagnosis, Treatment, and 
Future Perspectives.

Cymbal M(1), Chatterjee A(1), Baggott B(2), Auron M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology & Nutrition, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, Ohio.
(3)Department of Hospital Medicine, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio; Outcomes 
Research Consortium, Cleveland, Ohio. Electronic address: auronm@ccf.org.

Clostridioides difficile infection is the most common healthcare-associated 
infection in the United States, with potential life-threatening complications 
and a significant impact on the costs of care. Antibiotic stewardship as well as 
discontinuation of chronic acid suppressive therapy are key for its prevention 
and treatment. Effective infection management requires appropriate 
interpretation of diagnostic tests, as well as the use of vancomycin and 
fidaxomicin as first-line treatment. Novel treatments such as Bezlotoxumab, 
fecal microbiota transplant, and live biotherapeutic products are proven 
effective in recurrent C. difficile infection and address dysbiosis.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2024.03.024
PMID: 38508330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]