---
reference_id: "PMID:37539644"
title: Association between early childhood sleep difficulties and subsequent psychiatric illness.
authors:
- Pease E
- Shekunov J
- Savitz ST
- Golebiowski R
- Dang V
- Arbon J
- Pines A
- Lloyd R
- Baughn J
- Romanowicz M
journal: J Clin Sleep Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.5664/jcsm.10756
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association between early childhood sleep difficulties and subsequent psychiatric illness.
**Authors:** Pease E, Shekunov J, Savitz ST, Golebiowski R, Dang V, Arbon J, Pines A, Lloyd R, Baughn J, Romanowicz M
**Journal:** J Clin Sleep Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.5664/jcsm.10756](https://doi.org/10.5664/jcsm.10756)

## Content

1. J Clin Sleep Med. 2023 Dec 1;19(12):2059-2063. doi: 10.5664/jcsm.10756.

Association between early childhood sleep difficulties and subsequent 
psychiatric illness.

Pease E(1), Shekunov J(1), Savitz ST(2)(3), Golebiowski R(1), Dang V(1), Arbon 
J(4), Pines A(5), Lloyd R(6), Baughn J(6), Romanowicz M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(2)Robert D. and Patricia E. Kern Center for the Science of Health Care 
Delivery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(3)Division of Health Care Delivery Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(6)Center for Sleep Medicine, Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: Chronic disruptions to sleep in childhood are associated with 
increased prevalence of psychiatric disease later in development. When sleep 
disruptions remit before adolescence, the increased prevalence of psychiatric 
disease is no longer observed, highlighting the importance of early detection 
and intervention. Clinicians typically rely on caregivers' reports for diagnosis 
and management of childhood sleep challenges. We examined whether findings on 
polysomnogram (PSG) can offer similar insight into childhood sleep difficulties 
and the risk of subsequent psychiatric illness.
METHODS: A cohort was identified of 348 children ages 5 years 11 months and 
younger with sleep difficulties rising to the level of formal clinical workup. A 
retrospective review of caregiver-reported sleep concerns, PSG results, and 
subsequent psychiatric illness was completed. PSG findings were compared to 
presence of psychiatric illness later in life as well as caregivers' reported 
concerns. Chi-squared and Fisher's exact tests were completed to evaluate 
correlations and Cohen's kappa was used to evaluate agreement.
RESULTS: With only a few exceptions, comparisons between clinician findings on 
PSG and subsequent psychiatric diagnoses were statistically nonsignificant. 
Similarly, the relationship between caregivers' subjective reports about sleep 
and clinicians' findings on PSG demonstrated only slight to fair agreement, 
suggesting reported concerns were not predictive of PSG results.
CONCLUSIONS: Parental reports of subjective sleep concerns are indicative of 
different sleep pathologies compared to sleep pathologies detected on PSG. The 
addition of PSG to caregiver-reported data appears to have limited clinical 
utility in understanding sleep concerns associated with the risk of subsequent 
psychiatric illness in young children.
CITATION: Pease E, Shekunov J, Savitz ST, et al. Association between early 
childhood sleep difficulties and subsequent psychiatric illness. J Clin Sleep 
Med. 2023;19(12):2059-2063.

© 2023 American Academy of Sleep Medicine.

DOI: 10.5664/jcsm.10756
PMCID: PMC10692938
PMID: 37539644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have seen and approved the 
manuscript. This study used the resources of the Rochester Epidemiology Project 
(REP) medical records-linkage system, which is supported by the National 
Institute on Aging (AG 058738), by the Mayo Clinic Research Committee, and by 
fees paid annually by REP users. The content of this article is solely the 
responsibility of the authors and does not represent the official views of the 
National Institutes of Health or the Mayo Clinic. Dr. Savitz’s time was 
supported by the Robert D. and Patricia E. Kern Center for the Science of Health 
Care Delivery at Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota. All other authors report no 
conflicts of interest.