---
reference_id: "PMID:37764167"
title: The Gut-Wrenching Effects of Cryptosporidiosis and Giardiasis in Children.
authors:
- Prabakaran M
- Weible LJ
- Champlain JD
- Jiang RY
- Biondi K
- Weil AA
- Van Voorhis WC
- Ojo KK
journal: Microorganisms
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/microorganisms11092323
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Gut-Wrenching Effects of Cryptosporidiosis and Giardiasis in Children.
**Authors:** Prabakaran M, Weible LJ, Champlain JD, Jiang RY, Biondi K, Weil AA, Van Voorhis WC, Ojo KK
**Journal:** Microorganisms (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/microorganisms11092323](https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms11092323)

## Content

1. Microorganisms. 2023 Sep 15;11(9):2323. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms11092323.

The Gut-Wrenching Effects of Cryptosporidiosis and Giardiasis in Children.

Prabakaran M(1), Weible LJ(1), Champlain JD(1), Jiang RY(1), Biondi K(2), Weil 
AA(1), Van Voorhis WC(1), Ojo KK(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Emerging and Reemerging Infectious Diseases (CERID), Division of 
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
(2)Human Center for Artificial Intelligence, Department of Computer Science, 
University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816, USA.

Cryptosporidium species and Giardia duodenalis are infectious intestinal 
protozoan pathogens that cause alarming rates of morbidity and mortality 
worldwide. Children are more likely to have clinical symptoms due to their less 
developed immune systems and factors such as undernutrition, especially in low- 
and middle-income countries. The severity of the symptoms and clinical 
manifestations in children may vary from asymptomatic to life-threatening 
depending on the Cryptosporidium species/G. duodenalis strains and the resulting 
complex stepwise interactions between the parasite, the host nutritional and 
immunologic status, and the gut microbiome profile. Structural damages inflicted 
by both parasites to epithelial cells in the large and small intestines could 
severely impair children's gut health, including the ability to absorb 
nutrients, resulting in stunted growth, diminished neurocognitive development, 
and other long-term effects. Clinically approved cryptosporidiosis and 
giardiasis drugs have broad antimicrobial effects that have incomprehensible 
impacts on growing children's gut health.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms11092323
PMCID: PMC10538111
PMID: 37764167

Conflict of interest statement: Wesley C. Van Voorhis is the president and 
co-owner of ParaTheraTech Inc., a company that is developing BKIs for animal 
health. Van Voorhis edited this paper. The other authors declare that they have 
no competing interests.