---
reference_id: "PMID:26974895"
title: A Practical Approach to the Evaluation of Gastrointestinal Tract Carcinomas for Lynch Syndrome.
authors:
- Pai RK
- Pai RK
journal: Am J Surg Pathol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000620
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Practical Approach to the Evaluation of Gastrointestinal Tract Carcinomas for Lynch Syndrome.
**Authors:** Pai RK, Pai RK
**Journal:** Am J Surg Pathol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PAS.0000000000000620](https://doi.org/10.1097/PAS.0000000000000620)

## Content

1. Am J Surg Pathol. 2016 Apr;40(4):e17-34. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000620.

A Practical Approach to the Evaluation of Gastrointestinal Tract Carcinomas for 
Lynch Syndrome.

Pai RK(1), Pai RK.

Author information:
(1)*Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ 
†Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, 
PA.

Lynch syndrome accounts for roughly 1 of every 35 patients with colorectal 
carcinoma, making it the most common hereditary form of colorectal carcinoma. 
Identifying patients at risk for Lynch syndrome is essential, as these patients 
can develop additional Lynch syndrome-related tumors, and patients and their 
relatives benefit from genetic counseling. The hallmark of Lynch 
syndrome-associated neoplasms is DNA mismatch repair protein deficiency. In most 
instances, the pathologist is the first to identify patients at risk for Lynch 
syndrome and is tasked with communicating these results to treating clinicians 
and genetics counselors. This review will attempt to provide the tools for 
pathologists to identify patients at risk for Lynch syndrome through evaluation 
of tumors of the gastrointestinal tract and provide up-to-date knowledge on 
evaluating mismatch repair protein deficiency in tumors of the gastrointestinal 
tract.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000620
PMID: 26974895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]