---
reference_id: "PMID:20301610"
title: Tyrosine Hydroxylase Deficiency.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Furukawa Y
- Kish S
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tyrosine Hydroxylase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Furukawa Y, Kish S

## Content

1. Tyrosine Hydroxylase Deficiency.

Furukawa Y(1), Kish S(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2008 Feb 8 [updated 2017 May 11].

Author information:
(1)Vice-President, Juntendo Tokyo Koto Geriatric Medical Center, Professor,
Department of Neurology, Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan
(2)Professor, Departments of Psychiatry and Pharmacology, University of Toronto,
Head, Human Brain Laboratory, Research Imaging Centre, Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) deficiency is associated
with a broad phenotypic spectrum. Based on severity of symptoms/signs as well as
responsiveness to levodopa therapy, clinical phenotypes caused by pathogenic
variants in TH are divided into (1) TH-deficient dopa-responsive dystonia (the
mild form of TH deficiency), (2) TH-deficient infantile parkinsonism with motor
delay (the severe form), and (3) TH-deficient progressive infantile
encephalopathy (the very severe form). In individuals with TH-deficient
dopa-responsive dystonia (DYT5b, DYT-TH), onset is between age 12 months and 12
years; initial symptoms are typically lower-limb dystonia and/or difficulty in
walking. Diurnal fluctuation of symptoms (worsening of the symptoms toward the
evening and their alleviation in the morning after sleep) may be present. In
most individuals with TH-deficient infantile parkinsonism with motor delay,
onset is between age three and 12 months. In contrast to TH-deficient DRD, motor
milestones are overtly delayed in this severe form. Affected infants demonstrate
truncal hypotonia and parkinsonian symptoms and signs (hypokinesia, rigidity of
extremities, and/or tremor). In individuals with TH-deficient progressive
infantile encephalopathy, onset is before age three to six months. Fetal
distress is reported in most. Affected individuals have marked delay in motor
development, truncal hypotonia, severe hypokinesia, limb hypertonia (rigidity
and/or spasticity), hyperreflexia, oculogyric crises, ptosis, intellectual
disability, and paroxysmal periods of lethargy (with increased sweating and
drooling) alternating with irritability.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of TH deficiency is established in a proband by
identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in TH by molecular genetic
testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: All individuals with TH-deficient DRD
demonstrate complete responsiveness of symptoms to levodopa (with a
decarboxylase inhibitor). Individuals with TH-deficient infantile parkinsonism
with motor delay demonstrate a marked response to levodopa. However, in contrast
to TH-deficient DRD, the responsiveness is generally not complete and/or it
takes several months or even years before the full effects of treatment become
established. Some individuals are hypersensitive to levodopa and prone to side
effects (i.e., dopa-induced dyskinesias which develop at initiation of levodopa
treatment). Individuals with TH-deficient progressive infantile encephalopathy
are extremely sensitive to levodopa therapy. In this very severe form, treatment
with levodopa is often limited by intolerable dyskinesias. Prevention of primary
manifestations: Levodopa therapy from early infancy may prevent manifestations
of some symptoms and signs in TH-deficient infantile parkinsonism with motor
delay; however, no levodopa trials in the early postnatal period of infants with
this type of TH deficiency and biallelic TH pathogenic variants have been
reported. Prevention of secondary complications: Side effects associated with
levodopa (e.g., gastroesophageal reflux, vomiting, significant suppression of
appetite) may be ameliorated with dose adjustment and supportive intervention.
Surveillance: Examination by a movement disorder specialist in pediatric or
adult neurology at least several times yearly. Agents/circumstances to avoid:
The prokinetic agent Reglan® and other related antidopaminergic agents.
Evaluation of relatives at risk: Sibs of affected individuals should be examined
for mild dystonic and/or parkinsonian symptoms or unexplained gait disorders. It
is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to
identify as early as possible those who would benefit from treatment.
GENETIC COUNSELING: TH deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
Heterozygotes (carriers) are generally asymptomatic. At conception, each sib of
an affected individual has a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being
an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier.
Carrier testing for at-risk relatives, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at
increased risk, and preimplantation genetic testing are possible if both TH
pathogenic variants in a family are known.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301610
