---
reference_id: "PMID:37731305"
title: Palliative care in colorectal and anal malignancies from diagnosis to death.
authors:
- Karlekar M
- Almhanna K
- Guyer D
journal: Ann Palliat Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.21037/apm-22-1390
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Female
- Palliative Care/methods
- Quality of Life/psychology
- Gastrointestinal Neoplasms
- "Anus Neoplasms/diagnosis, therapy"
- Pain
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Palliative care in colorectal and anal malignancies from diagnosis to death.
**Authors:** Karlekar M, Almhanna K, Guyer D
**Journal:** Ann Palliat Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.21037/apm-22-1390](https://doi.org/10.21037/apm-22-1390)

## Content

1. Ann Palliat Med. 2023 Nov;12(6):1382-1395. doi: 10.21037/apm-22-1390. Epub
2023  Sep 20.

Palliative care in colorectal and anal malignancies from diagnosis to death.

Karlekar M(1), Almhanna K(2), Guyer D(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of General Internal Medicine and Public Health, Department of 
Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(2)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Rhode Island 
Hospital, Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.
(3)Division of Geriatrics and Palliative Medicine, Department of Medicine, Rhode 
Island Hospital, Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.

Colorectal (CRC) and anal (AC) cancer, both lower gastrointestinal (GI) cancers 
vary in their presentation and treatment. Overall, the incidence of CRC has 
decreased. However, the incidence of CRCs in younger adults has increased over 
the last 5 years. The incidence of ACs has increased, too. Women are 
disproportionally impacted by AC which is frequently associated with human 
papilloma virus (HPV). Patients diagnosed with both cancers often experience 
multiple symptoms including pain, constipation, nausea, and vomiting. 
Psychosocial distress including embarrassment and shame often results from both 
the cancers itself as well as surgical procedures such as creation of ostomy. 
Palliative care (PC) is an emerging specialty that focuses on maximizing the 
quality of life (QOL) for patients through expert symptom assessment and 
management, psychosocial support, and improved communication around illness. The 
evidence to support earlier integration of PC has steadily increased over the 
last ten years. The literature shows that early involvement of PC for these 
populations can result in improved QOL, improved symptom control and decreased 
intensity of care at the end of life. This article will review the palliative 
needs of patients diagnosed with CRC and discuss how PC as a specialty is well 
poised to support these needs.

DOI: 10.21037/apm-22-1390
PMID: 37731305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]