---
reference_id: "PMID:11096143"
title: Renal cancer and malformations in relatives of patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
authors:
- Beales PL
- Reid HA
- Griffiths MH
- Maher ER
- Flinter FA
- Woolf AS
journal: Nephrol Dial Transplant
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1093/ndt/15.12.1977
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Renal cancer and malformations in relatives of patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
**Authors:** Beales PL, Reid HA, Griffiths MH, Maher ER, Flinter FA, Woolf AS
**Journal:** Nephrol Dial Transplant (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ndt/15.12.1977](https://doi.org/10.1093/ndt/15.12.1977)

## Content

1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2000 Dec;15(12):1977-85. doi: 10.1093/ndt/15.12.1977.

Renal cancer and malformations in relatives of patients with Bardet-Biedl 
syndrome.

Beales PL(1), Reid HA, Griffiths MH, Maher ER, Flinter FA, Woolf AS.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College 
London, London, UK. pbeales@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is an autosomal recessive disorder with 
five loci identified thus far. The spectrum of disease includes diverse 
malformations of the kidney and lower urinary tract. The incidence of BBS is 
approximately 1/100,000 with a predicted heterozygote frequency of 1/160, and it 
has been suggested that heterozygotes are at increased risk of obesity and 
hypertension.
METHODS: We describe renal disease in relatives of 109 UK BBS patients. Using 
PCR with fluorescent microsatellite markers we amplified DNA derived from renal 
tumours of affected parents to determine whether there was loss of 
heterozygosity at any of four BBS loci and two other gene loci associated with 
clear cell renal cell carcinoma (CC-RCC).
RESULTS: CC-RCC was diagnosed in three of 180 BBS parents and there was loss of 
heterozygosity at BBS1 (11q13) in the tumour tissue of one of these subjects. In 
addition, there was a high incidence of renal agenesis in siblings of BBS 
patients and two BBS families were identified with apparently dominant 
inheritance of renal malformations. In one family we were able to demonstrate 
that renal malformations segregated with the BBS2 locus (16q21).
CONCLUSIONS: Since all parents and two-thirds of siblings of BBS patients must 
be heterozygous for BBS mutations, our observations may implicate BBS genes in 
the pathogenesis of both renal cancer and malformations, both disorders of 
precursor cell growth and differentiation. We suggest these observations may 
have important implications for screening potential BBS carriers for kidney 
disease and may lead to a greater understanding of the aetiology of renal 
disease in the general population.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/15.12.1977
PMID: 11096143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]