---
reference_id: "PMID:7354254"
title: "Krabbe disease: a galactosylsphingosine (psychosine) lipidosis."
authors:
- Svennerholm L
- Vanier MT
- Månsson JE
journal: J Lipid Res
year: '1980'
keywords:
- Brain Chemistry
- Carbohydrates/analysis
- "Child, Preschool"
- Fatty Acids/analysis
- Galactosylceramidase/deficiency
- Galactosylceramides/analysis
- Globosides/analysis
- Glucosylceramides/analysis
- Humans
- Infant
- Lactosylceramides/analysis
- "Leukodystrophy, Globoid Cell/enzymology"
- Psychosine/analysis
- "Sphingosine/analogs & derivatives, analysis"
- Trihexosylceramides
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Krabbe disease: a galactosylsphingosine (psychosine) lipidosis.
**Authors:** Svennerholm L, Vanier MT, Månsson JE
**Journal:** J Lipid Res (1980)

## Content

1. J Lipid Res. 1980 Jan;21(1):53-64.

Krabbe disease: a galactosylsphingosine (psychosine) lipidosis.

Svennerholm L, Vanier MT, Månsson JE.

The primary genetic defect underlying Krabbe disease or globoid cell 
leukodystrophy is considered to be a deficiency of 
galactosylceramide-beta-galactosidase. In the present study of the brains from 
18 patients who had died from Krabbe disease at 7-37 months of age, the 
concentration of galactosylceramide of cerebral and cerebellar white matter was 
severely reduced to 10-20% of that in age-matched controls. The lowest values 
were found in the most long-standing cases. Lactosylceramide was reduced to 
about 50% of normal, while globotriaosylceramide, blobotetraosylceramide and 
III3-alpha-fucosylneolactotetraosylceramide were increased 10 to 100-fold. Two 
glycosphingolipids, which have never before been isolated from normal human 
brains were now isolated and characterized: galactosylsphingosine (psychosine) 
and galactosyl beta 1 leads to 4 galactosylceramide. We were unable to identify 
galactosylsphingosine in normal human brains with certainty. We estimate its 
concentration in the cerebral white matter in Krabbe disease to be increased at 
least 100-fold (higher than normal). Psychosine was isolated also from the 
cerebral cortex in Psychosine was isolated also from the cerebral cortex in 
Krabbe disease after derivatization to the N-acetyl form. Its concentration 
there was 1 nmol/g tissue compared with 6-10 nmol/g in the white matter. All the 
neutral glycosphingolipids were isolated and their structure proved by the 
quantitative determination of their components, degradation by acid and specific 
glycohydrolases and permethylation and gas-liquid chromatographic-mass 
spectrometric assay of the methylated sugars. The paradoxical findings of a 
severely reduced concentration of galactosylceramide and a primary deficiency of 
cerebroside-beta-galactosidase can be explained by the present finding of the 
accumulation of galactosylsphingosine in the brains from patients who had died 
from Krabbe disease. The enzyme has a broad specificity and it normally also 
degrades galactosylsphingosine. Because of competitive inhibition by the 
accumulated galactosylceramide its lysosomal hydrolysis will be blocked. The 
concentration of psychosine will steadily increase and reach toxic levels and 
kill the oligodendroglial cells. This results in an arrest of the 
galactosylceramide biosynthesis. Therefore, we feel that galactosylsphingosine 
and not galactosylceramide is the primary storage substance in the brain in 
Krabbe disease that the disease is a psychosine lipidosis.

PMID: 7354254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]