---
reference_id: "PMID:27643390"
title: "Cockayne syndrome: a diffusion tensor imaging and volumetric study."
authors:
- Koob M
- Rousseau F
- Laugel V
- Meyer N
- Armspach JP
- Girard N
- Dietemann JL
journal: Br J Radiol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1259/bjr.20151033
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Anisotropy
- Case-Control Studies
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cockayne Syndrome/diagnostic imaging
- Diffusion Tensor Imaging/methods
- Female
- Humans
- "Image Interpretation, Computer-Assisted"
- "Imaging, Three-Dimensional"
- Infant
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cockayne syndrome: a diffusion tensor imaging and volumetric study.
**Authors:** Koob M, Rousseau F, Laugel V, Meyer N, Armspach JP, Girard N, Dietemann JL
**Journal:** Br J Radiol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1259/bjr.20151033](https://doi.org/10.1259/bjr.20151033)

## Content

1. Br J Radiol. 2016 Nov;89(1067):20151033. doi: 10.1259/bjr.20151033. Epub 2016 
Sep 19.

Cockayne syndrome: a diffusion tensor imaging and volumetric study.

Koob M(1)(2), Rousseau F(2)(3), Laugel V(4), Meyer N(5), Armspach JP(2), Girard 
N(6), Dietemann JL(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)1 Service de Radiopédiatrie/Imagerie 2, CHU de Strasbourg, Hôpital de 
Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France.
(2)2 Laboratoire ICube, UMR 7357/FMTS/Université de Strasbourg-CNRS, Strasbourg, 
France.
(3)3 Institut Mines-Telecom, Telecom Bretagne, INSERM, LATIM UMR, Brest, France.
(4)4 Service de Neurologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, 
France.
(5)5 Département de santé publique, d'Informatique médicale et de 
biostatistiques, CHU de Strasbourg, Hôpital civil, Strasbourg, France.
(6)6 Service de Neuroradiologie Diagnostique et Interventionnelle, APHM Timone, 
Aix Marseille Université, CRMBM, UMR CNRS, Marseille, France.
(7)7 Service de Neuroradiologie/Imagerie 2, CHU de Strasbourg, Hôpital de 
Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France.

OBJECTIVE: Cockayne syndrome (CS) is a rare disorder characterized by severe 
brain atrophy, white matter (WM) hypomyelination and basal ganglia 
calcifications. This study aimed to quantify atrophy and WM abnormalities using 
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) and volumetric analysis, to evaluate possible 
differences between CS subtypes and to determine whether DTI findings may 
correspond to a hypomyelinating disorder.
METHODS: 14 patients with CS and 14 controls underwent brain MRI including DTI 
and a volumetric three-dimensional T1 weighted sequence. DTI analysis was made 
through regions of interest within the whole brain to obtain fractional 
anisotropy (FA) and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) values and in the left 
centrum semiovale to obtain DTI eigenvalues. The Student's t-test was used to 
compare patients and controls, and CS subtypes. Given the small number of 
patients with CS, they were pooled into two groups: moderate (CS1/CS3) and 
severe (CS2/cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome).
RESULTS: Total brain volume in CS was reduced by 57%, predominantly in the 
infratentorial area (68%) (p < 0.001). Total brain volume reduction was greater 
in the severe group, but there was no difference in the degree of infratentorial 
atrophy in the two groups (p = 0.7). Mean FA values were lower, whereas ADC was 
higher in most of the WM in patients with CS (p < 0.05). ADC in the splenium of 
the corpus callosum and the posterior limb of the internal capsule and FA in the 
cerebral peduncles were significantly different between the two groups 
(p < 0.05). Mean ADC values corresponded to a hypomyelinating disorder. All DTI 
eigenvalues were higher in patients with CS, mainly for transverse diffusivity 
(+51%) (p < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: DTI and volumetric analysis provide quantitative information for the 
characterization of CS and may be particularly useful for evaluating therapeutic 
intervention. Advances in knowledge: DTI combined with volumetric analysis 
provides additional information useful for not only the characterization of CS 
and distinction of clinical subtypes but also monitoring of therapeutic 
interventions.

DOI: 10.1259/bjr.20151033
PMCID: PMC5124826
PMID: 27643390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]