---
reference_id: "PMID:27881786"
title: Neuronal Dysfunction in iPSC-Derived Medium Spiny Neurons from Chorea-Acanthocytosis Patients Is Reversed by Src Kinase Inhibition and F-Actin Stabilization.
authors:
- Stanslowsky N
- Reinhardt P
- Glass H
- Kalmbach N
- Naujock M
- Hensel N
- Lübben V
- Pal A
- Venneri A
- Lupo F
- De Franceschi L
- Claus P
- Sterneckert J
- Storch A
- Hermann A
- Wegner F
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0456-16.2016
keywords:
- Actins/metabolism
- Adult
- Cell Differentiation
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Corpus Striatum/metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- "GABAergic Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- "Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- "Neuroacanthocytosis/metabolism, pathology"
- Neurons
- Synaptic Transmission
- "src-Family Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuronal Dysfunction in iPSC-Derived Medium Spiny Neurons from Chorea-Acanthocytosis Patients Is Reversed by Src Kinase Inhibition and F-Actin Stabilization.
**Authors:** Stanslowsky N, Reinhardt P, Glass H, Kalmbach N, Naujock M, Hensel N, Lübben V, Pal A, Venneri A, Lupo F, De Franceschi L, Claus P, Sterneckert J, Storch A, Hermann A, Wegner F
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0456-16.2016](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0456-16.2016)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2016 Nov 23;36(47):12027-12043. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0456-16.2016.

Neuronal Dysfunction in iPSC-Derived Medium Spiny Neurons from
Chorea-Acanthocytosis Patients Is Reversed by Src Kinase Inhibition and F-Actin
Stabilization.

Stanslowsky N(1), Reinhardt P(2), Glass H(3), Kalmbach N(1), Naujock M(1)(4),
Hensel N(5), Lübben V(5), Pal A(2)(3)(6), Venneri A(1), Lupo F(7), De Franceschi
L(7), Claus P(5), Sterneckert J(2), Storch A(2)(3)(6)(8), Hermann A(2)(3)(6)(9),
Wegner F(10)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and.
(2)Center for Regenerative Therapies Dresden.
(3)Division of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Department of Neurology.
(4)Center for Systems Neuroscience, 30559 Hannover, Germany.
(5)Institute of Neuroanatomy, Hannover Medical School, 30625 Hanover, Germany.
(6)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases Dresden, and.
(7)Department of Medicine, University of Verona and AOUI Verona, Policlinico GB
Rossi, 37134 Verona, Italy, and.
(8)Department of Neurology, University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany.
(9)Universitäts Centrum für seltene Erkrankungen, Technische Universität
Dresden, 01307 Dresden, Germany.
(10)Department of Neurology and Wegner.Florian@mh-hannover.de.

Chorea-acanthocytosis (ChAc) is a fatal neurological disorder characterized by
red blood cell acanthocytes and striatal neurodegeneration. Recently, severe
cell membrane disturbances based on depolymerized cortical actin and an elevated
Lyn kinase activity in erythrocytes from ChAc patients were identified. How this
contributes to the mechanism of neurodegeneration is still unknown. To gain
insight into the pathophysiology, we established a ChAc patient-derived induced
pluripotent stem cell model and an efficient differentiation protocol providing
a large population of human striatal medium spiny neurons (MSNs), the main
target of neurodegeneration in ChAc. Patient-derived MSNs displayed enhanced
neurite outgrowth and ramification, whereas synaptic density was similar to
controls. Electrophysiological analysis revealed a pathologically elevated
synaptic activity in ChAc MSNs. Treatment with the F-actin stabilizer
phallacidin or the Src kinase inhibitor PP2 resulted in the significant
reduction of disinhibited synaptic currents to healthy control levels,
suggesting a Src kinase- and actin-dependent mechanism. This was underlined by
increased G/F-actin ratios and elevated Lyn kinase activity in patient-derived
MSNs. These data indicate that F-actin stabilization and Src kinase inhibition
represent potential therapeutic targets in ChAc that may restore neuronal
function.
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Chorea-acanthocytosis (ChAc) is a fatal
neurodegenerative disease without a known cure. To gain pathophysiological
insight, we newly established a human in vitro model using skin biopsies from
ChAc patients to generate disease-specific induced pluripotent stem cells
(iPSCs) and developed an efficient iPSC differentiation protocol providing
striatal medium spiny neurons. Using patch-clamp electrophysiology, we detected
a pathologically enhanced synaptic activity in ChAc neurons. Healthy control
levels of synaptic activity could be restored by treatment of ChAc neurons with
the F-actin stabilizer phallacidin and the Src kinase inhibitor PP2. Because Src
kinases are involved in bridging the membrane to the actin cytoskeleton by
membrane protein phosphorylation, our data suggest an actin-dependent mechanism
of this dysfunctional phenotype and potential treatment targets in ChAc.

Copyright © 2016 the authors 0270-6474/16/3612028-17$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0456-16.2016
PMCID: PMC6604921
PMID: 27881786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
