---
reference_id: "PMID:38310530"
title: The autonomic nervous system in anorexia nervosa - an implication for the fat tissue.
authors:
- Boryczko A
- Skowron K
- Kurnik-Łucka M
- Gil K
journal: Folia Med Cracov
year: '2023'
doi: 10.24425/fmc.2023.147215
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Adolescent
- Anorexia Nervosa
- Autonomic Nervous System/physiology
- Adipose Tissue
- Norepinephrine
- Heart Rate/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The autonomic nervous system in anorexia nervosa - an implication for the fat tissue.
**Authors:** Boryczko A, Skowron K, Kurnik-Łucka M, Gil K
**Journal:** Folia Med Cracov (2023)
**DOI:** [10.24425/fmc.2023.147215](https://doi.org/10.24425/fmc.2023.147215)

## Content

1. Folia Med Cracov. 2023 Oct 30;63(3):75-90. doi: 10.24425/fmc.2023.147215.

The autonomic nervous system in anorexia nervosa - an implication for the fat
tissue.

Boryczko A(1), Skowron K(2), Kurnik-Łucka M(2), Gil K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathophysiology; Doctoral School of Medical and Health
Sciences, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Kraków, Poland.
(2)Department of Pathophysiology, Jagiellonian University Medical College,
Kraków, Poland.
(3)Department of Pathophysiology, Jagiellonian University Medical College,
Kraków, Poland. krzysztof.m.gil@uj.edu.pl.

Eating disorders are a heterogeneous group of diseases affecting mainly young
people in developed countries. Among them, anorexia nervosa (AN) is the one with
the highest mortality, up to five times higher compared to healthy individuals.
The etiology of this medical condition is complex and still un- certain.
However, disturbances of the autonomic nervous system (ANS) and increased
lipolysis resulting in a decrease of the adipose tissue volume are common
findings among AN patients. Since ANS is directly connected to adipocyte tissue,
thus significantly affecting the body's metabolic homeostasis, we suspect that
this relationship may be a potential pathophysiological underpinning for the
development of AN. In this narrative review, we have analyzed scientific reports
on ANS activity in AN considering different phases of the disease in humans as
well as animal models. Due to the different effects of the disease itself on the
ANS as well as specific variations within animal models, the common feature
seems to be dysregulation of its function without the identification of one
universal pattern. Nonetheless, higher norepinephrine concentrations have been
reported in adipocyte tissue, suggesting local dominance of the sym- pathetic
nervous system. Further studies should explore in depth the modulation of
sympathetic in adipose tissue factor and help answer key questions that arise
during this brief narrative review.

DOI: 10.24425/fmc.2023.147215
PMID: 38310530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
