---
reference_id: "PMID:22461703"
title: Type 1 diabetes-associated IL2RA variation lowers IL-2 signaling and contributes to diminished CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cell function.
authors:
- Garg G
- Tyler JR
- Yang JH
- Cutler AJ
- Downes K
- Pekalski M
- Bell GL
- Nutland S
- Peakman M
- Todd JA
- Wicker LS
- Tree TI
journal: J Immunol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100272
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type 1 diabetes-associated IL2RA variation lowers IL-2 signaling and contributes to diminished CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cell function.
**Authors:** Garg G, Tyler JR, Yang JH, Cutler AJ, Downes K, Pekalski M, Bell GL, Nutland S, Peakman M, Todd JA, Wicker LS, Tree TI
**Journal:** J Immunol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.1100272](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.1100272)

## Content

1. J Immunol. 2012 May 1;188(9):4644-53. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100272. Epub 2012
 Mar 28.

Type 1 diabetes-associated IL2RA variation lowers IL-2 signaling and contributes 
to diminished CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cell function.

Garg G(1), Tyler JR, Yang JH, Cutler AJ, Downes K, Pekalski M, Bell GL, Nutland 
S, Peakman M, Todd JA, Wicker LS, Tree TI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunobiology, School of Medicine, King's College London, 
London SE1 9RT, United Kingdom.

Numerous reports have demonstrated that CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory T cells (Tregs) 
from individuals with a range of human autoimmune diseases, including type 1 
diabetes, are deficient in their ability to control autologous proinflammatory 
responses when compared with nondiseased, control individuals. Treg dysfunction 
could be a primary, causal event or may result from perturbations in the immune 
system during disease development. Polymorphisms in genes associated with Treg 
function, such as IL2RA, confer a higher risk of autoimmune disease. Although 
this suggests a primary role for defective Tregs in autoimmunity, a link between 
IL2RA gene polymorphisms and Treg function has not been examined. We addressed 
this by examining the impact of an IL2RA haplotype associated with type 1 
diabetes on Treg fitness and suppressive function. Studies were conducted using 
healthy human subjects to avoid any confounding effects of disease. We 
demonstrated that the presence of an autoimmune disease-associated IL2RA 
haplotype correlates with diminished IL-2 responsiveness in Ag-experienced 
CD4(+) T cells, as measured by phosphorylation of STAT5a, and is associated with 
lower levels of FOXP3 expression by Tregs and a reduction in their ability to 
suppress proliferation of autologous effector T cells. These data offer a 
rationale that contributes to the molecular and cellular mechanisms through 
which polymorphisms in the IL-2RA gene affect immune regulation, and 
consequently upon susceptibility to autoimmune and inflammatory diseases.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100272
PMCID: PMC3378653
PMID: 22461703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]