---
reference_id: "PMID:37879520"
title: Province-Wide Ascertainment of Lynch Syndrome in Manitoba.
authors:
- Rothenmund H
- Lambert P
- Khan D
- Kim C
- Sharma B
- Serfas K
- Chodirker B
- Singh H
journal: Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.cgh.2023.10.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Province-Wide Ascertainment of Lynch Syndrome in Manitoba.
**Authors:** Rothenmund H, Lambert P, Khan D, Kim C, Sharma B, Serfas K, Chodirker B, Singh H
**Journal:** Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cgh.2023.10.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cgh.2023.10.005)

## Content

1. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2024 Mar;22(3):642-652.e2. doi: 
10.1016/j.cgh.2023.10.005. Epub 2023 Oct 23.

Province-Wide Ascertainment of Lynch Syndrome in Manitoba.

Rothenmund H(1), Lambert P(2), Khan D(2), Kim C(3), Sharma B(4), Serfas K(1), 
Chodirker B(5), Singh H(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, Max Rady College of 
Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, 
Manitoba, Canada.
(2)Paul Albrechtsen Research Institute CancerCare Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 
Canada.
(3)Paul Albrechtsen Research Institute CancerCare Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 
Canada; Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Max 
Rady College of Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of 
Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
(4)Section of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Max Rady 
College of Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, 
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, Max Rady College of 
Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, 
Manitoba, Canada; Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Max Rady College of 
Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, 
Manitoba, Canada.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, Max Rady College of 
Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, 
Manitoba, Canada; Paul Albrechtsen Research Institute CancerCare Manitoba, 
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada; Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Max Rady College of Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada; Section of 
Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Max Rady College of Medicine, 
Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 
Canada; Department of Community Health Sciences, Max Rady College of Medicine, 
Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 
Canada. Electronic address: Harminder.singh@umanitoba.ca.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: We describe the experience of Lynch syndrome (LS) diagnosis 
in the province of Manitoba, Canada, over the past 20 years.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective review of charts from the provincial 
Genetics Clinic from January 1, 2000, to May 31, 2023. We extracted data on 
individuals identified to carry a germline pathogenic or likely pathogenic LS 
gene variant, the mode of ascertainment, family history, and cascade genetic 
testing (CGT). Data were stratified and compared before and after the year of 
implementation (October 2013) of the provincial LS screening program (LSSP) and 
ascertainment by the LSSP vs clinic referrals (CRs).
RESULTS: Between 2014 and 2021, 50 of 101 (49.5%) index cases were identified by 
the LSSP compared with 51 of 101 (50.5%) from CRs. The proportion of PMS2 
variants was 34% (17 of 50) for LSSP index cases compared with 21.6% (11 of 51) 
for CRs from 2014 to 2021 (P < .001). Among CRs from 2014 to 2021, 24 of 51 
(47.1%) families met the Amsterdam criteria, compared with 11 of 50 (22.0%) for 
the LSSP (P = .01). CGT occurred among 46.8% (95 of 203; average, 1.9 
relatives/index) of first-degree relatives of CR index cases vs 36.5% (84 of 
230; average, 1.7 relatives/index) of first-degree relatives of LSSP index cases 
(P = .03). Daughters were most likely to undergo CGT.
CONCLUSIONS: A tumor screening program is more effective at detecting 
individuals with lower penetrant gene variants and families who do not meet 
traditional family history-based criteria. Cascade genetic testing is higher 
among clinic referrals compared with the screening program. These findings 
suggest a complementary role of these 2 ascertainment methods for Lynch 
syndrome.

Copyright © 2024 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cgh.2023.10.005
PMID: 37879520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]