---
reference_id: "PMID:17054399"
title: "Kallmann syndrome: mutations in the genes encoding prokineticin-2 and prokineticin receptor-2."
authors:
- Dodé C
- Teixeira L
- Levilliers J
- Fouveaut C
- Bouchard P
- Kottler ML
- Lespinasse J
- Lienhardt-Roussie A
- Mathieu M
- Moerman A
- Morgan G
- Murat A
- Toublanc JE
- Wolczynski S
- Delpech M
- Petit C
- Young J
- Hardelin JP
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.0020175
keywords:
- Chromosome Segregation/genetics
- "Chromosomes, Human/genetics"
- Cohort Studies
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- Gastrointestinal Hormones/genetics
- Humans
- Kallmann Syndrome/genetics
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Neuropeptides/genetics
- Pedigree
- "Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled/genetics"
- "Receptors, Peptide/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kallmann syndrome: mutations in the genes encoding prokineticin-2 and prokineticin receptor-2.
**Authors:** Dodé C, Teixeira L, Levilliers J, Fouveaut C, Bouchard P, Kottler ML, Lespinasse J, Lienhardt-Roussie A, Mathieu M, Moerman A, Morgan G, Murat A, Toublanc JE, Wolczynski S, Delpech M, Petit C, Young J, Hardelin JP
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.0020175](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.0020175)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2006 Oct 20;2(10):e175. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.0020175. Epub
2006  Sep 1.

Kallmann syndrome: mutations in the genes encoding prokineticin-2 and 
prokineticin receptor-2.

Dodé C(1), Teixeira L, Levilliers J, Fouveaut C, Bouchard P, Kottler ML, 
Lespinasse J, Lienhardt-Roussie A, Mathieu M, Moerman A, Morgan G, Murat A, 
Toublanc JE, Wolczynski S, Delpech M, Petit C, Young J, Hardelin JP.

Author information:
(1)Institut Cochin, INSERM U567, Université René Descartes, Paris, France. 
dode@cochin.inserm.fr

Kallmann syndrome combines anosmia, related to defective olfactory bulb 
morphogenesis, and hypogonadism due to gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
deficiency. Loss-of-function mutations in KAL1 and FGFR1 underlie the X 
chromosome-linked form and an autosomal dominant form of the disease, 
respectively. Mutations in these genes, however, only account for approximately 
20% of all Kallmann syndrome cases. In a cohort of 192 patients we took a 
candidate gene strategy and identified ten and four different point mutations in 
the genes encoding the G protein-coupled prokineticin receptor-2 (PROKR2) and 
one of its ligands, prokineticin-2 (PROK2), respectively. The mutations in PROK2 
were detected in the heterozygous state, whereas PROKR2 mutations were found in 
the heterozygous, homozygous, or compound heterozygous state. In addition, one 
of the patients heterozygous for a PROKR2 mutation was also carrying a missense 
mutation in KAL1, thus indicating a possible digenic inheritance of the disease 
in this individual. These findings reveal that insufficient 
prokineticin-signaling through PROKR2 leads to abnormal development of the 
olfactory system and reproductive axis in man. They also shed new light on the 
complex genetic transmission of Kallmann syndrome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.0020175
PMCID: PMC1617130
PMID: 17054399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests. The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.