---
reference_id: "PMID:21124083"
title: IgG4-related inflammatory abdominal aortic aneurysm.
authors:
- Kasashima S
- Zen Y
journal: Curr Opin Rheumatol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e32833ee95f
keywords:
- "Aortic Aneurysm, Abdominal/classification, immunology, pathology"
- "Aortitis/classification, immunology, pathology"
- "Autoimmune Diseases/immunology, pathology"
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulin G/blood, metabolism"
- "Inflammation/immunology, pathology"
- "Plasma Cells/immunology, pathology"
- "Retroperitoneal Fibrosis/immunology, pathology"
- Sclerosis/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IgG4-related inflammatory abdominal aortic aneurysm.
**Authors:** Kasashima S, Zen Y
**Journal:** Curr Opin Rheumatol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BOR.0b013e32833ee95f](https://doi.org/10.1097/BOR.0b013e32833ee95f)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2011 Jan;23(1):18-23. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e32833ee95f.

IgG4-related inflammatory abdominal aortic aneurysm.

Kasashima S(1), Zen Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, National Hospital Organization, Kanazawa Medical
Center, 1-1 Shimoisibikimachi, Kanazawa 920-8650, Japan.
sato-kasa@kinbyou.hosp.go.jp

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: IgG4-related systemic disease is a recently proposed entity
characterized by high serum IgG4 concentrations, sclerosing inflammation
containing numerous IgG4-positive plasmacytes, dramatic responsiveness to
steroid therapy, and occurrence of multiple organs. This review described that
some cases of inflammatory abdominal aortic aneurysm (IAAA) have similar
clinicopathological features that are now considered to represent aortic lesions
of IgG4-related systemic disease under the concept of IgG4-related IAAA.
RECENT FINDINGS: IgG4-related IAAA is characterized by high serum IgG4 and
immunoglobulin E levels, high titers of antinuclear antibodies, and high
prevalence of allergic disorders such as bronchial asthma. The patients show a
risk of developing IgG4-related systemic diseases in other organs during their
life. Histologically, sclerosing inflammation containing numerous IgG4-positive
plasmacytes is observed predominantly in the adventitia. Similar lesions have
also been reported in the thoracic aorta and large arteries.
SUMMARY: Recognition of the fact that IgG4-related systemic disease could
involve the vascular lesions offers potential new management of those. However,
only 3 years have passed since the first report of IgG4-related IAAA. Further
studies are necessary to elucidate other vascular lesions associated with
IgG4-related systemic disease, the usefulness of steroid therapy for the
management of IgG4-IAAA, and underlying pathological and immunological
characteristics.

DOI: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e32833ee95f
PMID: 21124083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
