---
reference_id: "PMID:32206577"
title: Peritoneal mesothelioma.
authors:
- Greenbaum A
- Alexander HR
journal: Transl Lung Cancer Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.21037/tlcr.2019.12.15
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peritoneal mesothelioma.
**Authors:** Greenbaum A, Alexander HR
**Journal:** Transl Lung Cancer Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.21037/tlcr.2019.12.15](https://doi.org/10.21037/tlcr.2019.12.15)

## Content

1. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2020 Feb;9(Suppl 1):S120-S132. doi:
10.21037/tlcr.2019.12.15.

Peritoneal mesothelioma.

Greenbaum A(1), Alexander HR(1).

Author information:
(1)Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ, USA.

Malignant peritoneal mesothelioma (MPM) is a rare and lethal disease of the
peritoneal lining, with high variability in biologic aggressiveness. Morbidity
and mortality of the disease are related to progressive locoregional effects
within the abdominal cavity, such as distention, pain, early satiety, and
decreased oral intake that can ultimately lead to bowel obstruction and
cachexia. The standard of care for patients with resectable disease remains
cytoreductive surgery and hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (CRS-HIPEC),
with potential survival outcomes greater than 5 years in appropriately selected
patients. Patients with inoperable MPM can be offered systemic treatment,
although the disease is usually refractory to standard chemotherapic regimens.
Patients with MPM should be treated at high volume centers with strong
consideration for inclusion in tumor registries and clinical trials. In 2020,
research will continue to explore promising genetic and immunologic targets and
focus on refinement of surgical methods to optimize CRS-HIPEC approaches.

2020 Translational Lung Cancer Research. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tlcr.2019.12.15
PMCID: PMC7082256
PMID: 32206577

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no
conflicts of interest to declare.
