---
reference_id: "PMID:33340656"
title: "Dominant optic atrophy: Culprit mitochondria in the optic nerve."
authors:
- Lenaers G
- Neutzner A
- Le Dantec Y
- Jüschke C
- Xiao T
- Decembrini S
- Swirski S
- Kieninger S
- Agca C
- Kim US
- Reynier P
- Yu-Wai-Man P
- Neidhardt J
- Wissinger B
journal: Prog Retin Eye Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2020.100935
keywords:
- Animals
- "GTP Phosphohydrolases/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Mice
- Mitochondria
- "Optic Atrophy, Autosomal Dominant/genetics, metabolism"
- Optic Nerve/metabolism
- Retinal Ganglion Cells/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dominant optic atrophy: Culprit mitochondria in the optic nerve.
**Authors:** Lenaers G, Neutzner A, Le Dantec Y, Jüschke C, Xiao T, Decembrini S, Swirski S, Kieninger S, Agca C, Kim US, Reynier P, Yu-Wai-Man P, Neidhardt J, Wissinger B
**Journal:** Prog Retin Eye Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.preteyeres.2020.100935](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.preteyeres.2020.100935)

## Content

1. Prog Retin Eye Res. 2021 Jul;83:100935. doi: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2020.100935.
 Epub 2020 Dec 17.

Dominant optic atrophy: Culprit mitochondria in the optic nerve.

Lenaers G(1), Neutzner A(2), Le Dantec Y(3), Jüschke C(4), Xiao T(5), Decembrini 
S(6), Swirski S(4), Kieninger S(5), Agca C(7), Kim US(8), Reynier P(9), 
Yu-Wai-Man P(10), Neidhardt J(11), Wissinger B(12).

Author information:
(1)MitoLab Team, UMR CNRS 6015 - INSERM U1083, Institut MitoVasc, Angers 
University and Hospital, Angers, France. Electronic address: 
guy.lenaers@inserm.fr.
(2)Department of Biomedicine, University Hospital Basel, University of Basel, 
Basel, Switzerland; Department of Ophthalmology University Hospital Basel, 
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
albert.neutzner@unibas.ch.
(3)MitoLab Team, UMR CNRS 6015 - INSERM U1083, Institut MitoVasc, Angers 
University and Hospital, Angers, France.
(4)Human Genetics, Faculty VI - School of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
University of Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany.
(5)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Center for 
Ophthalmology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(6)Department of Biomedicine, University Hospital Basel, University of Basel, 
Basel, Switzerland; Department of Ophthalmology University Hospital Basel, 
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(7)Molecular Biology, Genetics and Bioengineering Program, Sabanci University, 
Istanbul, Turkey; Nanotechnology Research and Application Center (SUNUM), 
Sabanci University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(8)Kim's Eye Hospital, Seoul, South Korea; Cambridge Centre for Brain Repair and 
MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University 
of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; Cambridge Eye Unit, Addenbrooke's Hospital, 
Cambridge University Hospitals, Cambridge, UK; Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, 
UK.
(9)MitoLab Team, UMR CNRS 6015 - INSERM U1083, Institut MitoVasc, Angers 
University and Hospital, Angers, France; Department of Biochemistry, University 
Hospital of Angers, Angers, France.
(10)Cambridge Centre for Brain Repair and MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit, 
Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; 
Cambridge Eye Unit, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge University Hospitals, 
Cambridge, UK; Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, UK; UCL Institute of 
Ophthalmology, University College London, London, UK.
(11)Human Genetics, Faculty VI - School of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
University of Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany; Research Center Neurosensory 
Science, University Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany. Electronic address: 
john.neidhardt@uni-oldenburg.de.
(12)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Center for 
Ophthalmology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. Electronic address: 
bernd.wissinger@uni-tuebingen.de.

Dominant optic atrophy (DOA) is an inherited mitochondrial disease leading to 
specific degeneration of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs), thus compromising 
transmission of visual information from the retina to the brain. Usually, DOA 
starts during childhood and evolves to poor vision or legal blindness, affecting 
the central vision, whilst sparing the peripheral visual field. In 20% of cases, 
DOA presents as syndromic disorder, with secondary symptoms affecting neuronal 
and muscular functions. Twenty years ago, we demonstrated that heterozygous 
mutations in OPA1 are the most frequent molecular cause of DOA. Since then, 
variants in additional genes, whose functions in many instances converge with 
those of OPA1, have been identified by next generation sequencing. OPA1 encodes 
a dynamin-related GTPase imported into mitochondria and located to the inner 
membrane and intermembrane space. The many OPA1 isoforms, resulting from 
alternative splicing of three exons, form complex homopolymers that structure 
mitochondrial cristae, and contribute to fusion of the outer membrane, thus 
shaping the whole mitochondrial network. Moreover, OPA1 is required for 
oxidative phosphorylation, maintenance of mitochondrial genome, calcium 
homeostasis and regulation of apoptosis, thus making OPA1 the Swiss army-knife 
of mitochondria. Understanding DOA pathophysiology requires the understanding of 
RGC peculiarities with respect to OPA1 functions. Besides the tremendous energy 
requirements of RGCs to relay visual information from the eye to the brain, 
these neurons present unique features related to their differential environments 
in the retina, and to the anatomical transition occurring at the lamina 
cribrosa, which parallel major adaptations of mitochondrial physiology and 
shape, in the pre- and post-laminar segments of the optic nerve. Three DOA mouse 
models, with different Opa1 mutations, have been generated to study intrinsic 
mechanisms responsible for RGC degeneration, and these have further revealed 
secondary symptoms related to mitochondrial dysfunctions, mirroring the more 
severe syndromic phenotypes seen in a subgroup of patients. Metabolomics 
analyses of cells, mouse organs and patient plasma mutated for OPA1 revealed new 
unexpected pathophysiological mechanisms related to mitochondrial dysfunction, 
and biomarkers correlated quantitatively to the severity of the disease. Here, 
we review and synthesize these data, and propose different approaches for 
embracing possible therapies to fulfil the unmet clinical needs of this disease, 
and provide hope to affected DOA patients.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2020.100935
PMID: 33340656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]