---
reference_id: PMID:36292647
title: From Genotype to Phenotype-A Review of Kabuki Syndrome.
authors:
- Barry KK
- Tsaparlis M
- Hoffman D
- Hartman D
- Adam MP
- Hung C
- Bodamer OA
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/genes13101761
keywords:
- Quality of Life
- Phenotype
- Histone Demethylases/genetics
- Genotype
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- Face/abnormalities
- Hematologic Diseases
- Vestibular Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# From Genotype to Phenotype-A Review of Kabuki Syndrome.
**Authors:** Barry KK, Tsaparlis M, Hoffman D, Hartman D, Adam MP, Hung C, Bodamer OA
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes13101761](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes13101761)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2022 Sep 29;13(10):1761. doi: 10.3390/genes13101761.

From Genotype to Phenotype-A Review of Kabuki Syndrome.

Barry KK(1), Tsaparlis M(2), Hoffman D(3), Hartman D(4), Adam MP(5), Hung C(2), 
Bodamer OA(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02111, USA.
(2)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 
02115, USA.
(3)Takeda Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
(4)Orexia Therapeutics, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(5)Division of Genetic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(6)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a rare neuro-developmental disorder caused by variants 
in genes of histone modification, including KMT2D and KDM6A. This review 
assesses our current understanding of KS, which was originally named 
Niikawa-Kuroki syndrome, and aims to guide surveillance and medical care of 
affected individuals as well as identify gaps in knowledge and unmet patient 
needs. Ovid MEDLINE and EMBASE databases were searched from 1981 to 2021 to 
identify reports related to genotype and systems-based phenotype 
characterization of KS. A total of 2418 articles were retrieved, and 152 were 
included in this review, representing a total of 1369 individuals with KS. 
Genotype, phenotype, and the developmental and behavioral profile of KS are 
reviewed. There is a continuous clinical phenotype spectrum associated with KS 
with notable variability between affected individuals and an emerging 
genotype-phenotype correlation. The observed clinical variability may be 
attributable to differences in genotypes and/or unknown genetic and epigenetic 
factors. Clinical management is symptom oriented, fragmented, and lacks 
established clinical care standards. Additional research should focus on 
enhancing understanding of the burden of illness, the impact on quality of life, 
the adult phenotype, life expectancy and development of standard-of-care 
guidelines.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13101761
PMCID: PMC9601850
PMID: 36292647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Kelly Barry and Deborah Hoffman were employed at 
Takeda Pharmaceuticals at the time this study was initiated. Takeda 
Pharmaceuticals had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, 
analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the 
decision to publish the results. All other authors have no conflicts of interest 
to disclose.