---
reference_id: "PMID:40149486"
title: "Effects of Levetiracetam on Episodic Ataxia Type 2 and Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 6 with Episodic Ataxic Symptoms: A Case Series."
authors:
- Shimazaki H
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/genes16030335
keywords:
- Humans
- Acetazolamide/therapeutic use
- Anticonvulsants/therapeutic use
- "Ataxia/drug therapy, genetics"
- Calcium Channels/genetics
- "Levetiracetam/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- Mutation
- "Nystagmus, Pathologic/drug therapy"
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Calcium Channels, N-Type"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of Levetiracetam on Episodic Ataxia Type 2 and Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 6 with Episodic Ataxic Symptoms: A Case Series.
**Authors:** Shimazaki H
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes16030335](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes16030335)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2025 Mar 13;16(3):335. doi: 10.3390/genes16030335.

Effects of Levetiracetam on Episodic Ataxia Type 2 and Spinocerebellar Ataxia
Type 6 with Episodic Ataxic Symptoms: A Case Series.

Shimazaki H(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Common Education, Faculty of Health and Medical Care, Saitama
Medical University, Saitama 350-1241, Japan.
(2)Department of Neurology, Jichi Medical University, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology, Saitama Medical University, Saitama 350-0495, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Episodic ataxia type 2 (EA2) is a rare disorder characterized by
paroxysmal gait instability, dysarthria, and dizziness. It is caused by CACNA1A
mutations. Spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 (SCA6) rarely causes episodic
ataxia-like symptoms. Acetazolamide has limited effectiveness for treating
episodic ataxia.
METHODS: We investigated the effect of drug therapy in two patients with EA2 and
one patient with SCA6 who presented with episodic ataxia. All three cases were
CACNA1A-associated diseases.
RESULTS: In these three cases, acetazolamide administration was partially and
transiently effective for episodic ataxia attacks. After levetiracetam addition,
the number of ataxic attacks was significantly reduced, although the durations
of attacks were not changed. The effect of levetiracetam was stable and
continued for seven years. Levetiracetam and acetazolamide reduced chronic
cerebellar ataxia in an SCA6 patient.
CONCLUSIONS: In this small number of cases, levetiracetam was considered
effective in two patients with EA2 and mildly effective in one patient with
SCA6.

DOI: 10.3390/genes16030335
PMCID: PMC11942281
PMID: 40149486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflicts of interest.
