---
reference_id: "PMID:25151973"
title: Cervical spine involvement in rheumatoid arthritis--a systematic review.
authors:
- Joaquim AF
- Appenzeller S
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2014.08.014
keywords:
- "Arthritis, Rheumatoid/complications, immunology, therapy"
- Cervical Vertebrae/immunology
- Disease Progression
- Humans
- Prevalence
- Risk Factors
- "Spinal Diseases/complications, immunology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cervical spine involvement in rheumatoid arthritis--a systematic review.
**Authors:** Joaquim AF, Appenzeller S
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2014.08.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2014.08.014)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2014 Dec;13(12):1195-202. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2014.08.014.
Epub  2014 Aug 22.

Cervical spine involvement in rheumatoid arthritis--a systematic review.

Joaquim AF(1), Appenzeller S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, State University of Campinas (UNICAMP), 13083-970 
Campinas, SP, Brazil. Electronic address: andjoaquim@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Medicine, State University of Campinas (UNICAMP), 13083-970 
Campinas, SP, Brazil.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic chronic inflammatory disorder that can 
compromise the cervical spine in up to 80% of the cases. The most common 
radiological presentations of cervical involvement are atlantoaxial subluxation 
(AAS), cranial settling and subaxial subluxation (SAS). We performed a 
systematic review in the PubMed Database of articles published later 2005 to 
evaluate the prevalence, progression and risk factors for cervical spine 
involvement in RA patients. Articles were classified according to their level of 
evidence. Our literature review reported a wide range in the prevalence of 
cervical spine disease, probably explained by the different studied populations 
and disease characteristics. Uncontrolled RA is probably the main risk factor 
for developing a spinal instability. Adequate treatment with DMARD and BA can 
prevent development of cervical instabilities but did not avoid progression of a 
pre-existing injury. MRI is the best radiological method for diagnosis cervical 
spine involvement. AAS is the most common form of RA. Long term radiological 
follow-up is necessary to diagnosis patients with late instabilities and 
monitoring progression of diagnosed injuries.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2014.08.014
PMID: 25151973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]