---
reference_id: "PMID:32059735"
title: "3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A lyase deficiency: one disease - many faces."
authors:
- Grünert SC
- Sass JO
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-020-1319-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A lyase deficiency: one disease - many faces.
**Authors:** Grünert SC, Sass JO
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-020-1319-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-020-1319-7)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2020 Feb 14;15(1):48. doi: 10.1186/s13023-020-1319-7.

3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A lyase deficiency: one disease - many 
faces.

Grünert SC(1), Sass JO(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Pediatrics, Adolescent Medicine and Neonatology, 
Medical Center - University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Mathildenstr. 1, 
79106, Freiburg, Germany. Sarah.gruenert@uniklinik-freiburg.de.
(2)Research Group Inborn Errors of Metabolism, Department of Natural Sciences & 
Institute for Functional Gene Analytics (IFGA), Bonn-Rhein-Sieg University of 
Applied Sciences, von-Liebig-Str. 20, 53359, Rheinbach, Germany. 
joern.oliver.sass@h-brs.de.

Erratum in
    Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2022 Jan 10;17(1):16. doi: 10.1186/s13023-021-02154-z.

BACKGROUND: 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A lyase deficiency (HMGCLD) is 
an autosomal recessive disorder of ketogenesis and leucine degradation due to 
mutations in HMGCL.
METHOD: We performed a systematic literature search to identify all published 
cases. Two hundred eleven patients of whom relevant clinical data were available 
were included in this analysis. Clinical course, biochemical findings and 
mutation data are highlighted and discussed. An overview on all published HMGCL 
variants is provided.
RESULTS: More than 95% of patients presented with acute metabolic 
decompensation. Most patients manifested within the first year of life, 42.4% 
already neonatally. Very few individuals remained asymptomatic. The neurologic 
long-term outcome was favorable with 62.6% of patients showing normal 
development.
CONCLUSION: This comprehensive data analysis provides a systematic overview on 
all published cases with HMGCLD including a list of all known HMGCL mutations.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-020-1319-7
PMCID: PMC7023732
PMID: 32059735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SCG declares that she does not have competing 
interests. JOS serves as consultant of a medical diagnostic laboratory in ketone 
body metabolism and he and his institution have received honoraria/a 
reimbursement by Swedish Orphan Biovitrum GmbH.