---
reference_id: "PMID:25930180"
title: "[Progressive scotoma with perception of photopsia]."
authors:
- Bemme S
- Pleyer U
- Salehi N
- Naxer S
- Callizo J
- Hoerauf H
- Feltgen N
journal: Ophthalmologe
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s00347-015-0012-z
keywords:
- Adult
- "Antiviral Agents/administration & dosage"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Hallucinations/diagnosis, etiology, prevention & control"
- Humans
- "Immunosuppressive Agents/administration & dosage"
- Male
- Ophthalmoscopy/methods
- "Scotoma/complications, diagnostic imaging, drug therapy"
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence/methods"
- Treatment Outcome
- White Dot Syndromes
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Progressive scotoma with perception of photopsia].
**Authors:** Bemme S, Pleyer U, Salehi N, Naxer S, Callizo J, Hoerauf H, Feltgen N
**Journal:** Ophthalmologe (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00347-015-0012-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00347-015-0012-z)

## Content

1. Ophthalmologe. 2016 Jan;113(1):66-70. doi: 10.1007/s00347-015-0012-z.

[Progressive scotoma with perception of photopsia].

[Article in German]

Bemme S(1), Pleyer U(2), Salehi N(3), Naxer S(3), Callizo J(3), Hoerauf H(3),
Feltgen N(3).

Author information:
(1)Abteilung für Augenheilkunde, Universitätsmedizin Göttingen, Robert-Koch-Str.
40, 37075, Göttingen, Deutschland. Sebboem@gmx.de.
(2)Klinik für Augenheilkunde, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus
Virchow-Klinikum, Berlin, Deutschland.
(3)Abteilung für Augenheilkunde, Universitätsmedizin Göttingen, Robert-Koch-Str.
40, 37075, Göttingen, Deutschland.

Acute annular outer retinopathy (AAOR) is a very rare variant of acute zonal
occult outer retinopathy (AZOOR). Both variants are characterized by the
perception of a progressive visual field defect and can be accompanied by
photopsia. In contrast to AZOOR, a progressive whitish and annular demarcation
of the involved retina is observed in AAOR using ophthalmoscopy. Optical
coherence tomography (OCT) reveals morphological changes predominantly in the
outer retinal layers. Although there is no proof of an effective therapy, in the
case presented here further progression could be stopped by a combination of
antiviral and immunosuppressive therapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s00347-015-0012-z
PMID: 25930180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
