---
reference_id: "PMID:20021319"
title: Progressive structural brain changes in schizophrenia.
authors:
- Puri BK
journal: Expert Rev Neurother
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1586/ern.09.142
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Progressive structural brain changes in schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Puri BK
**Journal:** Expert Rev Neurother (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1586/ern.09.142](https://doi.org/10.1586/ern.09.142)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Neurother. 2010 Jan;10(1):33-42. doi: 10.1586/ern.09.142.

Progressive structural brain changes in schizophrenia.

Puri BK(1).

Author information:
(1)Imperial College London, MRI Unit, Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, W12 
0HS, London, UK. basant.puri@imperial.ac.uk

Several important progressive brain changes occur in schizophrenia. Continuous 
progressive brain tissue decreases and lateral ventricular volume increases in 
chronically ill patients, up to at least 20 years after their first symptoms. 
The total duration of psychosis may be negatively associated with the grey 
matter volume change, and positively associated with the volume change of each 
of the lateral ventricles and the third ventricle. There are progressive frontal 
changes in males with adolescent-onset psychosis. Ultra high-risk patients who 
subsequently develop psychosis and first-episode psychosis patients develop 
significant grey matter reduction in the planum polare, planum temporale and 
caudal region; a progressive process in the superior temporal gyrus may precede 
the first expression of florid psychosis. The rate of decline in the sizes of 
the putamen and corpus callosum is greater in patients with a poor outcome 
compared to those with a good-outcome. In addition to describing these 
phenomena, their potential causes are discussed.

DOI: 10.1586/ern.09.142
PMID: 20021319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]