---
reference_id: "PMID:10749987"
title: Mutations in SCO2 are associated with a distinct form of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and cytochrome c oxidase deficiency.
authors:
- Jaksch M
- Ogilvie I
- Yao J
- Kortenhaus G
- Bresser HG
- Gerbitz KD
- Shoubridge EA
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/9.5.795
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- "Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic/enzymology, genetics"
- Carrier Proteins
- DNA Primers
- Electron Transport Complex IV/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mitochondrial Proteins
- Molecular Chaperones
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- "Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in SCO2 are associated with a distinct form of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and cytochrome c oxidase deficiency.
**Authors:** Jaksch M, Ogilvie I, Yao J, Kortenhaus G, Bresser HG, Gerbitz KD, Shoubridge EA
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/9.5.795](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/9.5.795)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2000 Mar 22;9(5):795-801. doi: 10.1093/hmg/9.5.795.

Mutations in SCO2 are associated with a distinct form of hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy and cytochrome c oxidase deficiency.

Jaksch M(1), Ogilvie I, Yao J, Kortenhaus G, Bresser HG, Gerbitz KD, Shoubridge 
EA.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Chemistry, Molecular Diagnostics and Mitochondrial 
Genetics, Institute of Diabetes Research of the Academic Hospital Schwabing, 
Munich, Germany.

Mutations in SCO2, a cytochrome c oxidase (COX) assembly gene located on 
chromosome 22, have recently been reported in patients with fatal infantile 
cardio-encephalomyopathy and severe COX deficiency in heart and skeletal muscle. 
The Sco2 protein is thought to function as a copper chaperone. To investigate 
the extent to which mutations in SCO2 are responsible for this phenotype, a 
complete sequence analysis of the gene was performed on ten patients in nine 
families. Mutations in SCO2 were found in three patients in two unrelated 
families. We detected two missense mutations, one of which (G1541A) results in 
an E140K substitution adjacent to the highly conserved CxxxC metal-binding site. 
The other (C1634T) results in an R171W substitution more distant from the 
copper-binding site. A nonsense codon was found on one allele in two siblings 
presenting with a rapidly progressive fatal cardio-encephalomyopathy. 
Interestingly, all patients so far reported are compound heterozygotes for the 
G1541A mutation, suggesting that this is either an ancient allele or a 
mutational hotspot. The COX deficiency in patient fibroblasts (approximately 
50%) did not result in a measurable decrease in the steady-state levels of COX 
complex polypeptide subunits and could be rescued by transferring chromosome 22, 
but not other chromosomes. These data indicate that mutations in SCO2 cause a 
fatal infantile mitochondrial disorder characterized by hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy and encephalopathy, and point to the presence of one or more 
other genes, perhaps in the copper delivery pathway, in this clinical phenotype.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/9.5.795
PMID: 10749987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]