---
reference_id: "PMID:17932229"
title: "Claudin-18: a dominant tight junction protein in Barrett's esophagus and likely contributor to its acid resistance."
authors:
- Jovov B
- Van Itallie CM
- Shaheen NJ
- Carson JL
- Gambling TM
- Anderson JM
- Orlando RC
journal: Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1152/ajpgi.00158.2007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Claudin-18: a dominant tight junction protein in Barrett's esophagus and likely contributor to its acid resistance.
**Authors:** Jovov B, Van Itallie CM, Shaheen NJ, Carson JL, Gambling TM, Anderson JM, Orlando RC
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpgi.00158.2007](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpgi.00158.2007)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2007 Dec;293(6):G1106-13. doi: 
10.1152/ajpgi.00158.2007. Epub 2007 Oct 11.

Claudin-18: a dominant tight junction protein in Barrett's esophagus and likely 
contributor to its acid resistance.

Jovov B(1), Van Itallie CM, Shaheen NJ, Carson JL, Gambling TM, Anderson JM, 
Orlando RC.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Medicine, Univ. of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 
27599, USA. bjovov@med.unc.edu

Barrett's esophagus (BE) is a specialized columnar epithelium (SCE) that 
develops as replacement for damaged squamous epithelium (SqE) in subjects with 
reflux disease, and as such it is apparently more acid resistant than SqE. How 
SCE resists acid injury is poorly understood; one means may involve altered 
tight junctions (TJs) since the TJ in SqE is an early target of attack and 
damage by acid in reflux disease. To assess this possibility, quantitative 
RT-PCR for 21 claudins was performed on endoscopic biopsies on SCE of BE and 
from healthy SqE from subjects without esophageal disease. In SCE, Cldn-18 was 
the most highly expressed at the mRNA level and this finding is paralleled by 
marked elevation in protein expression on immunoblots. In contrast in SqE, 
Cldn-18 was minimally expressed at the mRNA level and undetectable at the 
protein level. Immunofluorescence studies showed membrane localization of 
Cldn-18 and colocalization with the tight junction protein, zonula occludens-1. 
When Cldn-18 was overexpressed in MDCK II cells and mounted as monolayers in 
Ussing chambers, it raised electrical resistance and, as shown by lower dilution 
potentials to a NaCl gradient and lower diffusion potentials to acidic 
gradients, selectively reduced paracellular permeability to both Na(+) and H(+) 
compared with parental MDCK cells. We conclude that Cldn-18 is the dominant 
claudin in the TJ of SCE and propose that the change from a Cldn-18-deficient TJ 
in SqE to a Cldn-18-rich TJ in SCE contributes to the greater acid resistance of 
BE.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.00158.2007
PMID: 17932229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]