---
reference_id: "PMID:35227579"
title: Clinical and biochemical footprints of inherited metabolic disorders. VII. Ocular phenotypes.
authors:
- Garanto A
- Ferreira CR
- Boon CJF
- van Karnebeek CDM
- Blau N
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.02.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and biochemical footprints of inherited metabolic disorders. VII. Ocular phenotypes.
**Authors:** Garanto A, Ferreira CR, Boon CJF, van Karnebeek CDM, Blau N
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.02.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.02.002)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2022 Apr;135(4):311-319. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.02.002.
Epub  2022 Feb 15.

Clinical and biochemical footprints of inherited metabolic disorders. VII. 
Ocular phenotypes.

Garanto A(1), Ferreira CR(2), Boon CJF(3), van Karnebeek CDM(4), Blau N(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Amalia Children's Hospital Radboud Center for 
Mitochondrial and Metabolic Diseases, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life 
Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands; 
Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, 
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. Electronic 
address: alex.garanto@radboudumc.nl.
(2)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA. Electronic address: carlos.ferreira@nih.gov.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands and Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Academic Medical Center, 
Department of Ophthalmology, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands. Electronic address: camiel.boon@amsterdamumc.nl.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Amalia Children's Hospital Radboud Center for 
Mitochondrial and Metabolic Diseases, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life 
Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands; 
Departments of Pediatrics and Human Genetics, Emma Children's Hospital, 
Amsterdam Reproduction and Development, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
c.d.vankarnebeek@amsterdamumc.nl.
(5)Division of Metabolism, University Children's Hospital, Zürich, Switzerland. 
Electronic address: nenad.blau@kispi.uzh.ch.

Ocular manifestations are observed in approximately one third of all inherited 
metabolic disorders (IMDs). Although ocular involvement is not life-threatening, 
it can result in severe vision loss, thereby leading to an additional burden for 
the patient. Retinal degeneration with or without optic atrophy is the most 
frequent phenotype, followed by oculomotor problems, involvement of the cornea 
and lens, and refractive errors. These phenotypes can provide valuable clues 
that contribute to its diagnosis. In this issue we found 577 relevant IMDs 
leading to ophthalmologic manifestations. This article is the seventh of a 
series attempting to create and maintain a comprehensive list of clinical and 
metabolic differential diagnoses according to system involvement.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.02.002
PMCID: PMC10518078
PMID: 35227579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]