---
reference_id: "PMID:36322898"
title: "Identification of Diagnostic Variants in FGFR2 and NPR2 Genes in a Chinese Family Affected by Crouzon Syndrome and Acromesomelic Dysplasia, Type Maroteaux."
authors:
- Zhu J
- Meng R
- Zhao H
- Cai L
- Wen X
- Zeng W
- Luo Y
- Qi H
journal: DNA Cell Biol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1089/dna.2022.0453
keywords:
- Pregnancy
- Humans
- Female
- "Dwarfism/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Craniofacial Dysostosis/genetics
- Mutation
- China
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 2/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of Diagnostic Variants in FGFR2 and NPR2 Genes in a Chinese Family Affected by Crouzon Syndrome and Acromesomelic Dysplasia, Type Maroteaux.
**Authors:** Zhu J, Meng R, Zhao H, Cai L, Wen X, Zeng W, Luo Y, Qi H
**Journal:** DNA Cell Biol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1089/dna.2022.0453](https://doi.org/10.1089/dna.2022.0453)

## Content

1. DNA Cell Biol. 2022 Nov;41(11):996-1006. doi: 10.1089/dna.2022.0453. Epub 2022
 Nov 2.

Identification of Diagnostic Variants in FGFR2 and NPR2 Genes in a Chinese 
Family Affected by Crouzon Syndrome and Acromesomelic Dysplasia, Type Maroteaux.

Zhu J(1), Meng R(1), Zhao H(1), Cai L(1), Wen X(1), Zeng W(1), Luo Y(1), Qi 
H(1).

Author information:
(1)Prenatal Diagnosis Center, Haidian District Maternal and Child Health Care 
Hospital, Beijing, P.R. China.

This study aims to conduct a comprehensive clinical and genetic investigation on 
a large family with members having various phenotypes, including acromesomelic 
dysplasia, type Maroteaux (AMDM), idiopathic short stature (ISS), Crouzon 
syndrome (CS). Prenatal diagnosis was performed on the high-risk fetus. We 
performed the whole-exome sequencing on three members with AMDM, ISS, or CS. 
Detailed genotypes and phenotypes were investigated on members of this 
4-generation family. Genetic analysis identified three variants, which were 
designated as p.Val548del, p.Arg989Gln in natriuretic peptide receptor 
B/guanylate cyclase B (NPR2), and p.Cys342Tyr in fibroblast growth factor 
receptor-2 (FGFR2). Compound heterozygous variation consisting of p.Val548del 
and p.Arg989Gln caused AMDM. NPR2 heterozygous variant carriers exhibited normal 
height or ISS. The p.Cys342Tyr mutation of FGFR2 causes the typical clinical 
phenotype of CS. The fetus carried the heterozygous p.Val548del and p.Cys342Tyr 
mutations, with ultrasound results showing exophthalmos, parrot-beaked nose, low 
and flat frontal skull, and intrauterine growth retardation at the second and 
third trimesters of gestation. We are reporting those two novel mutations 
(p.Val548del and p.Arg989Gln) in NPR2 and a p.Cys342Tyr mutation in FGFR2 in an 
extended Chinese family. This finding extended the genotype-phenotype spectra of 
ISS, AMDM, and CS related to pathogenic variants.

DOI: 10.1089/dna.2022.0453
PMID: 36322898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]