---
reference_id: "PMID:35578286"
title: "Intravenous administration of a branched-chain amino-acid-free solution in children and adults with acute decompensation of maple syrup urine disease: a prospective multicentre observational study."
authors:
- Alili JM
- Berleur MP
- Husson MC
- Mention K
- Schiff M
- Arnoux JB
- Brassier A
- Guemman AS
- Grisel C
- Dubois S
- Abi-Wardé MT
- Broissand C
- Servais A
- Dao M
- de Lonlay P
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02353-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intravenous administration of a branched-chain amino-acid-free solution in children and adults with acute decompensation of maple syrup urine disease: a prospective multicentre observational study.
**Authors:** Alili JM, Berleur MP, Husson MC, Mention K, Schiff M, Arnoux JB, Brassier A, Guemman AS, Grisel C, Dubois S, Abi-Wardé MT, Broissand C, Servais A, Dao M, de Lonlay P
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-022-02353-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-022-02353-2)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2022 May 16;17(1):202. doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02353-2.

Intravenous administration of a branched-chain amino-acid-free solution in 
children and adults with acute decompensation of maple syrup urine disease: a 
prospective multicentre observational study.

Alili JM(1)(2), Berleur MP(3), Husson MC(3), Mention K(4)(5), Schiff M(5)(6), 
Arnoux JB(5)(6), Brassier A(5)(6), Guemman AS(5)(6), Grisel C(5)(6), Dubois 
S(5)(6), Abi-Wardé MT(5)(6), Broissand C(7), Servais A(8), Dao M(8), de Lonlay 
P(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Pôle EPHP, AGEPS, AP-HP, Paris, France. jean-meidi.alili@aphp.fr.
(2)Service Des Maladies Métaboliques, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, 149 rue de 
Sèvres, 75015, Paris, France. jean-meidi.alili@aphp.fr.
(3)Pôle EPHP, AGEPS, AP-HP, Paris, France.
(4)Metabolic Disease Reference Centre, Lille University Hospital, Lille, France.
(5)G2M Network, MetabERN, Paris, France.
(6)Metabolic Disease Reference Centre, Necker's Children University Hospital, 
AP-HP, Paris, France.
(7)Deparment of Pharmacy, Necker's Children University Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, 
France.
(8)Department of Nephrology, Necker's Children University Hospital, AP-HP, 
Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Patients with maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) experiencing 
metabolic decompensations have traditionally been treated with branched-chain 
amino acid (BCAA)-free mixture via oral or nasogastric administration routes. In 
some patients, enteral administration is not possible, either because the 
patient presents with vomiting, coma, or refuses nasogastric administration, 
thus intravenous (IV) BCAA-free solution is an appropriate intervention for 
these challenging cases.
AIMS: This study aimed to evaluate the effectiveness and safety of managing 
metabolic decompensations by administering an IV BCAA-free solution.
METHODS: This is an observational prospective study of data from MSUD patients 
hospitalised for decompensation episodes between 2010 and 2016 at 6 centres for 
rare metabolic diseases in France.
RESULTS: A total of 24 patients (16 males; 8 females) experiencing 126 MSUD 
metabolic decompensation episodes (39 in children; 87 in adults) were admitted 
to hospital. At presentation, mean leucine plasma concentration was ≥ 381 µmol/L 
in 113/126 (89.7%) episodes. Children were treated with continuous IV BCAA-free 
solution at doses of 0.8 to 2.0 g/kg/day, for 4.8 days and adults for 3.8 days 
at doses of 0.5 to 2.6 g/kg/day. In the efficacy set of 102 analysable episodes 
leucine concentrations were normalised (to below 381 µmol/L) in 82% (n = 18/22) 
of episodes in children and in 84% (n = 67/80) of episodes in adults. Mean time 
to leucine normalisation was 3.0 days. This was significantly (p < 0.001) 
shorter than the algorithmically predicted time to leucine normalisation with 
traditional BCAA-free mixture. Duration of hospitalisation was significantly 
longer for children than for adults (7.1 days in children vs 5.2 days in adults, 
p = 0.012). No treatment-related adverse events were reported in any patients on 
IV BCAA-free solution.
CONCLUSION: The IV BCAA-free solution is safe and effective in normalising 
leucine concentrations during MSUD decompensation episodes in both children and 
adults, offering a practical treatment alternative for those patients who cannot 
receive BCAA-free mixture via oral or nasogastric routes.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-022-02353-2
PMCID: PMC9112564
PMID: 35578286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Drs Jean-Meidi Alili, Marie-Pierre Berleur and 
Marie-Caroline Husson work or used to work in the French public institution, 
Pharmaceutical Establishment of Paris Hospitals (AGEPS) that distributed the IV 
BCAA-free solution in France as a hospital preparation. The other authors 
declare having no particular conflicts of interest with regard to this research 
or their contributions to this manuscript.