---
reference_id: PMID:21095116
title: 2010 update of EORTC guidelines for the use of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor to reduce the incidence of chemotherapy-induced febrile neutropenia in adult patients with lymphoproliferative disorders and solid tumours.
authors:
- Aapro MS
- Bohlius J
- Cameron DA
- Dal Lago L
- Donnelly JP
- Kearney N
- Lyman GH
- Pettengell R
- Tjan-Heijnen VC
- Walewski J
- Weber DC
- Zielinski C
- European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer
journal: Eur J Cancer
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2010.10.013
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/adverse effects
- Female
- "Fever/etiology, prevention & control"
- Granulocyte Colony-Stimulating Factor/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Lymphoproliferative Disorders/drug therapy
- Male
- Neoplasms/drug therapy
- "Neutropenia/chemically induced, prevention & control"
- Recombinant Proteins
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 2010 update of EORTC guidelines for the use of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor to reduce the incidence of chemotherapy-induced febrile neutropenia in adult patients with lymphoproliferative disorders and solid tumours.
**Authors:** Aapro MS, Bohlius J, Cameron DA, Dal Lago L, Donnelly JP, Kearney N, Lyman GH, Pettengell R, Tjan-Heijnen VC, Walewski J, Weber DC, Zielinski C, European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejca.2010.10.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2010.10.013)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer. 2011 Jan;47(1):8-32. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2010.10.013. Epub 2010 
Nov 20.

2010 update of EORTC guidelines for the use of granulocyte-colony stimulating 
factor to reduce the incidence of chemotherapy-induced febrile neutropenia in 
adult patients with lymphoproliferative disorders and solid tumours.

Aapro MS(1), Bohlius J, Cameron DA, Dal Lago L, Donnelly JP, Kearney N, Lyman 
GH, Pettengell R, Tjan-Heijnen VC, Walewski J, Weber DC, Zielinski C; European 
Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer.

Author information:
(1)Multidisciplinary Oncology Institute, Clinique de Genolier, 1, route du 
Muids, 1272 Genolier, Switzerland. maapro@genolier.net

Chemotherapy-induced neutropenia is a major risk factor for infection-related 
morbidity and mortality and also a significant dose-limiting toxicity in cancer 
treatment. Patients developing severe (grade 3/4) or febrile neutropenia (FN) 
during chemotherapy frequently receive dose reductions and/or delays to their 
chemotherapy. This may impact the success of treatment, particularly when 
treatment intent is either curative or to prolong survival. In Europe, 
prophylactic treatment with granulocyte-colony stimulating factors (G-CSFs), 
such as filgrastim (including approved biosimilars), lenograstim or 
pegfilgrastim is available to reduce the risk of chemotherapy-induced 
neutropenia. However, the use of G-CSF prophylactic treatment varies widely in 
clinical practice, both in the timing of therapy and in the patients to whom it 
is offered. The need for generally applicable, European-focused guidelines led 
to the formation of a European Guidelines Working Party by the European 
Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) and the publication in 
2006 of guidelines for the use of G-CSF in adult cancer patients at risk of 
chemotherapy-induced FN. A new systematic literature review has been undertaken 
to ensure that recommendations are current and provide guidance on clinical 
practice in Europe. We recommend that patient-related adverse risk factors, such 
as elderly age (≥65 years) and neutrophil count be evaluated in the overall 
assessment of FN risk before administering each cycle of chemotherapy. It is 
important that after a previous episode of FN, patients receive prophylactic 
administration of G-CSF in subsequent cycles. We provide an expanded list of 
common chemotherapy regimens considered to have a high (≥20%) or intermediate 
(10-20%) risk of FN. Prophylactic G-CSF continues to be recommended in patients 
receiving a chemotherapy regimen with high risk of FN. When using a chemotherapy 
regimen associated with FN in 10-20% of patients, particular attention should be 
given to patient-related risk factors that may increase the overall risk of FN. 
In situations where dose-dense or dose-intense chemotherapy strategies have 
survival benefits, prophylactic G-CSF support is recommended. Similarly, if 
reductions in chemotherapy dose intensity or density are known to be associated 
with a poor prognosis, primary G-CSF prophylaxis may be used to maintain 
chemotherapy. Clinical evidence shows that filgrastim, lenograstim and 
pegfilgrastim have clinical efficacy and we recommend the use of any of these 
agents to prevent FN and FN-related complications where indicated. Filgrastim 
biosimilars are also approved for use in Europe. While other forms of G-CSF, 
including biosimilars, are administered by a course of daily injections, 
pegfilgrastim allows once-per-cycle administration. Choice of formulation 
remains a matter for individual clinical judgement. Evidence from multiple low 
level studies derived from audit data and clinical practice suggests that some 
patients receive suboptimal daily G-CSFs; the use of pegfilgrastim may avoid 
this problem.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2010.10.013
PMID: 21095116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]