---
reference_id: "PMID:21194675"
title: A clinical scoring system for selection of patients for PTEN mutation testing is proposed on the basis of a prospective study of 3042 probands.
authors:
- Tan MH
- Mester J
- Peterson C
- Yang Y
- Chen JL
- Rybicki LA
- Milas K
- Pederson H
- Remzi B
- Orloff MS
- Eng C
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.11.013
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Child
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Genetic Testing
- Germ-Line Mutation
- "Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases/analysis, genetics"
- "Models, Genetic"
- "PTEN Phosphohydrolase/genetics, metabolism"
- Patient Selection
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic/genetics"
- Prospective Studies
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt/analysis, genetics"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A clinical scoring system for selection of patients for PTEN mutation testing is proposed on the basis of a prospective study of 3042 probands.
**Authors:** Tan MH, Mester J, Peterson C, Yang Y, Chen JL, Rybicki LA, Milas K, Pederson H, Remzi B, Orloff MS, Eng C
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.11.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.11.013)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Jan 7;88(1):42-56. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.11.013. Epub 
2010 Dec 30.

A clinical scoring system for selection of patients for PTEN mutation testing is 
proposed on the basis of a prospective study of 3042 probands.

Tan MH(1), Mester J, Peterson C, Yang Y, Chen JL, Rybicki LA, Milas K, Pederson 
H, Remzi B, Orloff MS, Eng C.

Author information:
(1)Genomic Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Cowden syndrome (CS) and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome are allelic, defined 
by germline PTEN mutations, and collectively referred to as PTEN hamartoma tumor 
syndrome. To date, there are no existing criteria based on large prospective 
patient cohorts to select patients for PTEN mutation testing. To address these 
issues, we conducted a multicenter prospective study in which 3042 probands 
satisfying relaxed CS clinical criteria were accrued. PTEN mutation scanning, 
including promoter and large deletion analysis, was performed for all subjects. 
Pathogenic mutations were identified in 290 individuals (9.5%). To evaluate 
clinical phenotype and PTEN genotype against protein expression, we performed 
immunoblotting (PTEN, P-AKT1, P-MAPK1/2) for a patient subset (n = 423). In 
order to obtain an individualized estimation of pretest probability of germline 
PTEN mutation, we developed an optimized clinical practice model to identify 
adult and pediatric patients. For adults, a semiquantitative score-the Cleveland 
Clinic (CC) score-resulted in a well-calibrated estimation of pretest 
probability of PTEN status. Overall, decreased PTEN protein expression 
correlated with PTEN mutation status; decreasing PTEN protein expression 
correlated with increasing CC score (p < 0.001), but not with the National 
Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) criteria (p = 0.11). For pediatric patients, 
we identified highly sensitive criteria to guide PTEN mutation testing, with 
phenotypic features distinct from the adult setting. Our model improved 
sensitivity and positive predictive value for germline PTEN mutation relative to 
the NCCN 2010 criteria in both cohorts. We present the first evidence-based 
clinical practice model to select patients for genetics referral and PTEN 
mutation testing, further supported biologically by protein correlation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.11.013
PMCID: PMC3014373
PMID: 21194675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]