---
reference_id: "PMID:39567785"
title: Genetic defects of brain immunity in childhood herpes simplex encephalitis.
authors:
- Zhang SY
- Casanova JL
journal: Nature
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-08119-z
keywords:
- Animals
- Child
- Humans
- "Brain/immunology, pathology, physiopathology, virology"
- "Encephalitis, Herpes Simplex/genetics, immunology, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Herpesvirus 1, Human/pathogenicity"
- Neurons/immunology
- "Toll-Like Receptor 3/genetics, deficiency"
- Membrane Proteins/metabolism
- Receptor-Interacting Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/metabolism
- "Receptor, Interferon alpha-beta/metabolism"
- Neoplasm Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic defects of brain immunity in childhood herpes simplex encephalitis.
**Authors:** Zhang SY, Casanova JL
**Journal:** Nature (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-024-08119-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-08119-z)

## Content

1. Nature. 2024 Nov;635(8039):563-573. doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-08119-z. Epub 2024
 Nov 20.

Genetic defects of brain immunity in childhood herpes simplex encephalitis.

Zhang SY(1)(2)(3), Casanova JL(4)(5)(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)St Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller 
Branch, Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA. shzh289@rockefeller.edu.
(2)Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, INSERM, 
Necker Hospital for Sick Children, Paris, France. shzh289@rockefeller.edu.
(3)Paris Cité University, Imagine Institute, Paris, France. 
shzh289@rockefeller.edu.
(4)St Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller 
Branch, Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA. casanova@rockefeller.edu.
(5)Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, INSERM, 
Necker Hospital for Sick Children, Paris, France. casanova@rockefeller.edu.
(6)Paris Cité University, Imagine Institute, Paris, France. 
casanova@rockefeller.edu.
(7)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York, NY, USA. casanova@rockefeller.edu.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Necker Hospital for Sick Children, Paris, France. 
casanova@rockefeller.edu.

Herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) encephalitis (HSE) is the most common sporadic 
viral encephalitis in humans. It is life-threatening and has a first peak of 
incidence in childhood, during primary infection. Children with HSE are not 
particularly prone to other infections, including HSV-1 infections of tissues 
other than the brain. About 8-10% of childhood cases are due to monogenic inborn 
errors of 19 genes, two-thirds of which are recessive, and most of which display 
incomplete clinical penetrance. Childhood HSE can therefore be sporadic but 
genetic, enabling new diagnostic and therapeutic approaches. In this Review, we 
examine essential cellular and molecular mechanisms of cell-intrinsic antiviral 
immunity in the brain that are disrupted in individuals with HSE. These 
mechanisms include both known (such as mutations in the TLR3 pathway) and 
previously unknown (such as the TMEFF1 restriction factor) antiviral pathways, 
which may be dependent (for example, IFNAR1) or independent (for example, 
through RIPK3) of type I interferons. They operate in cortical or brainstem 
neurons, and underlie forebrain and brainstem infections, respectively. 
Conversely, the most severe inborn errors of leukocytes, including a complete 
lack of myeloid and/or lymphoid blood cells, do not underlie HSE. Thus 
congenital defects in intrinsic immunity in brain-resident neurons that underlie 
HSE broaden natural host defences against HSV-1 from the leukocytes of the 
immune system to other cells in the organism.

© 2024. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-024-08119-z
PMCID: PMC11822754
PMID: 39567785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests.