---
reference_id: "PMID:28407396"
title: A further family of Stromme syndrome carrying CENPF mutation.
authors:
- Ozkinay F
- Atik T
- Isik E
- Gormez Z
- Sagiroglu M
- Sahin OA
- Corduk N
- Onay H
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38173
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, physiopathology"
- Base Sequence
- "Chromosomal Proteins, Non-Histone/genetics"
- "Eye Abnormalities/genetics, physiopathology"
- Female
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- "Intestinal Atresia/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Microcephaly/genetics, physiopathology"
- Microfilament Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Siblings
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A further family of Stromme syndrome carrying CENPF mutation.
**Authors:** Ozkinay F, Atik T, Isik E, Gormez Z, Sagiroglu M, Sahin OA, Corduk N, Onay H
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.38173](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.38173)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2017 Jun;173(6):1668-1672. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38173. Epub
2017 Apr 13.

A further family of Stromme syndrome carrying CENPF mutation.

Ozkinay F(1), Atik T(1), Isik E(1), Gormez Z(2), Sagiroglu M(2), Sahin OA(3),
Corduk N(4), Onay H(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of
Medicine, Ege University, Izmir, Turkey.
(2)Advanced Genomics and Bioinformatics Research Center, TUBITAK-BILGEM,
Kocaeli, Turkey.
(3)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institude of Health Sciences, Acibadem
University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(4)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Pamukkale University,
Denizli, Turkey.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Ege University, Izmir,
Turkey.

Stromme syndrome is a rare genetic disorder characterized by microcephaly,
anterior ocular chamber anomalies, and "apple peel" type jejunal atresia. Here,
we report a Stromme syndrome family with two affected siblings with a homozygous
truncating frameshift mutation in CENPF. A 3-month-old girl was hospitalized due
to prenatally diagnosed microcephaly, microphthalmia, and dysmorphological
features. The history of a previous child with the same findings in addition to
"apple peel" intestinal atresia had been noted. Regarding the clinical features
of both affected siblings, a diagnosis of Stromme syndrome was established.
Exome-sequencing of these two cases showed the homozygous mutation
(c.5912_5913insA)/(p.T1974Nfs*9) in CENPF. While confirmation of this gene being
responsible for Stromme syndrome was pending our results, Filges et al. reported
that CENPF was indeed underlying the reason for Stromme syndrome. This is the
second case report identifying CENPF mutation as the cause of Stromme syndrome.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38173
PMID: 28407396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
