---
reference_id: "PMID:37171606"
title: A new mouse model of ATR-X syndrome carrying a common patient mutation exhibits neurological and morphological defects.
authors:
- Tillotson R
- Yan K
- Ruston J
- DeYoung T
- Córdova A
- Turcotte-Cardin V
- Yee Y
- Taylor C
- Visuvanathan S
- Babbs C
- Ivakine EA
- Sled JG
- Nieman BJ
- Picketts DJ
- Justice MJ
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddad075
keywords:
- Animals
- Male
- Mice
- alpha-Thalassemia/genetics
- X-Linked Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Microcephaly/genetics
- Mutation
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- X-linked Nuclear Protein/genetics
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A new mouse model of ATR-X syndrome carrying a common patient mutation exhibits neurological and morphological defects.
**Authors:** Tillotson R, Yan K, Ruston J, DeYoung T, Córdova A, Turcotte-Cardin V, Yee Y, Taylor C, Visuvanathan S, Babbs C, Ivakine EA, Sled JG, Nieman BJ, Picketts DJ, Justice MJ
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddad075](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddad075)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2023 Jul 20;32(15):2485-2501. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddad075.

A new mouse model of ATR-X syndrome carrying a common patient mutation exhibits 
neurological and morphological defects.

Tillotson R(1)(2), Yan K(3), Ruston J(1), DeYoung T(4), Córdova A(3), 
Turcotte-Cardin V(3)(5), Yee Y(4)(6), Taylor C(1), Visuvanathan S(1), Babbs 
C(2), Ivakine EA(1)(7), Sled JG(4)(6)(8), Nieman BJ(4)(6)(8)(9), Picketts 
DJ(3)(5), Justice MJ(1)(10).

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Genome Biology Program, The Hospital for Sick Children, The 
Peter Gilgan Centre for Research and Learning, Toronto, ON M5G 0A4, Canada.
(2)MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, 
John Radcliffe Hospital/Headley Way, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.
(3)Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, ON 
K1H 8L6, Canada.
(4)Mouse Imaging Centre, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5T 3H7, 
Canada.
(5)Cellular & Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1H 8M5, 
Canada.
(6)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 1L7, 
Canada.
(7)Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, Canada.
(8)Translational Medicine Program, The Hospital for Sick Children, The Peter 
Gilgan Centre for Research and Learning, Toronto, ON M5G 0A4, Canada.
(9)Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, ON M5G 0A3, Canada.
(10)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 
1A1, Canada.

ATRX is a chromatin remodelling ATPase that is involved in transcriptional 
regulation, DNA damage repair and heterochromatin maintenance. It has been 
widely studied for its role in ALT-positive cancers, but its role in 
neurological function remains elusive. Hypomorphic mutations in the X-linked 
ATRX gene cause a rare form of intellectual disability combined with 
alpha-thalassemia called ATR-X syndrome in hemizygous males. Clinical features 
also include facial dysmorphism, microcephaly, short stature, musculoskeletal 
defects and genital abnormalities. As complete deletion of ATRX in mice results 
in early embryonic lethality, the field has largely relied on conditional 
knockout models to assess the role of ATRX in multiple tissues. Given that null 
alleles are not found in patients, a more patient-relevant model was needed. 
Here, we have produced and characterized the first patient mutation knock-in 
model of ATR-X syndrome, carrying the most common causative mutation, R246C. 
This is one of a cluster of missense mutations located in the chromatin-binding 
domain and disrupts its function. The knock-in mice recapitulate several aspects 
of the patient disorder, including craniofacial defects, microcephaly, reduced 
body size and impaired neurological function. They provide a powerful model for 
understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying ATR-X syndrome and testing 
potential therapeutic strategies.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddad075
PMCID: PMC10360390
PMID: 37171606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]