---
reference_id: "PMID:32007091"
title: Compound heterozygous IFT140 variants in two Polish families with Sensenbrenner syndrome and early onset end-stage renal disease.
authors:
- Walczak-Sztulpa J
- Posmyk R
- Bukowska-Olech EM
- Wawrocka A
- Jamsheer A
- Oud MM
- Schmidts M
- Arts HH
- Latos-Bielenska A
- Wasilewska A
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-020-1303-2
keywords:
- Bone and Bones/abnormalities
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- Craniosynostoses
- Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics
- Humans
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/genetics"
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Poland
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Compound heterozygous IFT140 variants in two Polish families with Sensenbrenner syndrome and early onset end-stage renal disease.
**Authors:** Walczak-Sztulpa J, Posmyk R, Bukowska-Olech EM, Wawrocka A, Jamsheer A, Oud MM, Schmidts M, Arts HH, Latos-Bielenska A, Wasilewska A
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-020-1303-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-020-1303-2)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2020 Feb 1;15(1):36. doi: 10.1186/s13023-020-1303-2.

Compound heterozygous IFT140 variants in two Polish families with Sensenbrenner 
syndrome and early onset end-stage renal disease.

Walczak-Sztulpa J(1), Posmyk R(2), Bukowska-Olech EM(3), Wawrocka A(3), Jamsheer 
A(3), Oud MM(4)(5), Schmidts M(4)(6), Arts HH(7)(8), Latos-Bielenska A(3), 
Wasilewska A(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 
Rokietnicka 8 Street, 60-608, Poznan, Poland. jsztulpa@ump.edu.pl.
(2)Department of Perinatology, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, 
Poland.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 
Rokietnicka 8 Street, 60-608, Poznan, Poland.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.
(5)Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical 
Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(6)Center for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Freiburg University Hospital, 
Freiburg University Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany.
(7)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Dalhousie University, 
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(8)IWK Health Centre, Clinical Genomics Laboratory, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 
Canada.
(9)Department of Pediatrics and Nephrology, Medical University of Bialystok, 
Bialystok, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Sensenbrenner syndrome, which is also known as cranioectodermal 
dysplasia (CED), is a rare, autosomal recessive ciliary chondrodysplasia 
characterized by a variety of clinical features including a distinctive 
craniofacial appearance as well as skeletal, ectodermal, liver and renal 
anomalies. Progressive renal disease can be life-threatening in this condition. 
CED is a genetically heterogeneous disorder. Currently, variants in any of six 
genes (IFT122, WDR35, IFT140, IFT43, IFT52 and WDR19) have been associated with 
this syndrome. All of these genes encode proteins essential for intraflagellar 
transport (IFT) a process that is required for cilium assembly, maintenance and 
function. Intra- and interfamilial clinical variability has been reported in 
CED, which is consistent with CED's genetic heterogeneity and is indicative of 
genetic background effects.
RESULTS: Two male CED patients from two unrelated Polish families were included 
in this study. Clinical assessment revealed distinctive clinical features of 
Sensenbrenner syndrome, such as dolichocephaly, shortening of long bones and 
early onset renal failure. Ectodermal anomalies also included thin hair, short 
and thin nails, and small teeth in both patients. Next generation sequencing 
(NGS) techniques were performed in order to determine the underlying genetic 
cause of the disorder using whole exome sequencing (WES) for patient 1 and a 
custom NGS-based panel for patient 2. Subsequent qPCR and duplex PCR analysis 
were conducted for both patients. Genetic analyses identified compound 
heterozygous variants in the IFT140 gene in both affected individuals. Both 
patients harbored a tandem duplication variant p.Tyr1152_Thr1394dup on one 
allele. In addition, a novel missense variant, p.(Leu109Pro), and a previously 
described p.(Gly522Glu) variant were identified in the second allele in patients 
1 and 2, respectively. Segregation analysis of the variants was consistent with 
the expected autosomal recessive disease inheritance pattern. Both patients had 
severe renal failure requiring kidney transplantation in early childhood.
CONCLUSION: The finding of compound heterozygous IFT140 mutations in two 
unrelated CED patients provide further evidence that IFT140 gene mutations are 
associated with this syndrome. Our studies confirm that IFT140 changes in 
patients with CED are associated with early onset end-stage renal disease. 
Moreover, this report expands our knowledge of the clinical- and molecular 
genetics of Sensenbrenner syndrome and it highlights the importance of 
multidisciplinary approaches in the care of CED patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-020-1303-2
PMCID: PMC6995138
PMID: 32007091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.