---
reference_id: "PMID:35444443"
title: A Review on Cutaneous and Musculoskeletal Manifestations of CLOVES Syndrome.
authors:
- Öztürk Durmaz E
- Demircioğlu D
- Yalınay Dikmen P
- Alanay Y
- Alanay A
- Demirkesen C
- Tokat F
- Karaarslan E
journal: Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.2147/CCID.S351637
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Review on Cutaneous and Musculoskeletal Manifestations of CLOVES Syndrome.
**Authors:** Öztürk Durmaz E, Demircioğlu D, Yalınay Dikmen P, Alanay Y, Alanay A, Demirkesen C, Tokat F, Karaarslan E
**Journal:** Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.2147/CCID.S351637](https://doi.org/10.2147/CCID.S351637)

## Content

1. Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol. 2022 Apr 13;15:621-630. doi: 
10.2147/CCID.S351637. eCollection 2022.

A Review on Cutaneous and Musculoskeletal Manifestations of CLOVES Syndrome.

Öztürk Durmaz E(1), Demircioğlu D(1), Yalınay Dikmen P(2), Alanay Y(3), Alanay 
A(4), Demirkesen C(5), Tokat F(5), Karaarslan E(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Acıbadem Mehmet Ali Aydınlar University School of 
Medicine, İstanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Neurology, Acıbadem Mehmet Ali Aydınlar University School of 
Medicine, İstanbul, Turkey.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Acıbadem Mehmet Ali Aydınlar University School of 
Medicine, İstanbul, Turkey.
(4)Department of Orthopedics, Acıbadem Mehmet Ali Aydınlar University School of 
Medicine, İstanbul, Turkey.
(5)Department of Pathology, Acıbadem Mehmet Ali Aydınlar University School of 
Medicine, İstanbul, Turkey.
(6)Department of Radiology, Acıbadem Mehmet Ali Aydınlar University School of 
Medicine, İstanbul, Turkey.

CLOVES syndrome is a novel sporadic mosaic segmental overgrowth syndrome, 
currently categorized under the canopy of PROS (PIK3CA-related overgrowth 
spectrum) disorders. All PROS disorders harbor heterozygous postzygotic 
activating somatic mutations involving the PIK3CA gene. As an upstream regulator 
of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR signal transduction pathway, activating mutations of PIK3CA 
gene commence in uncontrolled growth of cutaneous, vascular (capillaries, veins, 
and lymphatics), adipose, neural, and musculoskeletal tissues. The excessive 
growth is segmental, patchy, asymmetric, and confined to body parts affected by 
the mutation. The term 'CLOVES' is an acronym denoting congenital lipomatous 
overgrowth, vascular malformations, epidermal nevi and spinal (scoliosis) and/ 
or skeletal anomalies. The syndrome is characterized by an admixture of 
overgrown tissues, derived mainly from mesoderm and neuroectoderm. Among PROS 
disorders, CLOVES syndrome represents the extreme end of the spectrum with 
massive affection of almost the entire body. The syndrome might judiciously be 
treated with medications hampering with the PI3K/AKT/mTOR signal transduction 
pathway. This article aims at reviewing the cutaneous and musculoskeletal 
manifestations of CLOVES syndrome, as the paradigm for PROS disorders. CLOVES 
syndrome and other PROS disorders are still misdiagnosed, underdiagnosed, 
underreported, and undertreated by the dermatology community.

© 2022 Öztürk Durmaz et al.

DOI: 10.2147/CCID.S351637
PMCID: PMC9013705
PMID: 35444443

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.