---
reference_id: "PMID:32336638"
title: "Large-scale second-hit AIP deletion causing a pediatric growth hormone-secreting pituitary adenoma: Case report and review of literature."
authors:
- Gummadavelli A
- Dinauer C
- McGuone D
- Vining EM
- Erson-Omay EZ
- Omay SB
journal: J Clin Neurosci
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2020.04.103
keywords:
- Child
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 11/genetics"
- Germ-Line Mutation
- "Gigantism/etiology, genetics"
- "Growth Hormone-Secreting Pituitary Adenoma/complications, pathology, surgery"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics
- Male
- Phenotype
- "Pituitary Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Sequence Deletion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Large-scale second-hit AIP deletion causing a pediatric growth hormone-secreting pituitary adenoma: Case report and review of literature.
**Authors:** Gummadavelli A, Dinauer C, McGuone D, Vining EM, Erson-Omay EZ, Omay SB
**Journal:** J Clin Neurosci (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jocn.2020.04.103](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocn.2020.04.103)

## Content

1. J Clin Neurosci. 2020 Aug;78:420-422. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2020.04.103. Epub
2020  Apr 24.

Large-scale second-hit AIP deletion causing a pediatric growth hormone-secreting 
pituitary adenoma: Case report and review of literature.

Gummadavelli A(1), Dinauer C(2), McGuone D(3), Vining EM(4), Erson-Omay EZ(5), 
Omay SB(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar 
Street, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
(2)Department of Surgery (Pediatric Endocrinology), Yale University School of 
Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar 
Street, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
(4)Department of Surgery (Otolaryngology), Yale University School of Medicine, 
333 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar 
Street, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. Electronic address: zeynep.erson@yale.edu.
(6)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar 
Street, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. Electronic address: sacit.omay@yale.edu.

Gigantism (early-onset acromegaly) is a rare pediatric disorder caused by a 
growth hormone (GH)-secreting pituitary adenoma. Approximately 50% patients of 
gigantism have a germline mutation, most commonly an inactivating mutation in 
the aryl-hydrocarbon interacting receptor protein (AIP) gene on chromosome 
11q13.2. We present an 11-year-old male patient with a GH-secreting pituitary 
macroadenoma who presented with excessive growth spurts, behavioral changes, and 
frontal headaches. He was successfully treated with an endoscopic endonasal 
gross total resection and subsequently demonstrated biochemical cure. 
Whole-exome sequencing showed a heterozygous germline mutation in the AIP gene 
suggesting pituitary adenoma predisposition. Analysis of the tumor tissue 
revealed a large-scale deletion on chromosome 11 overlapping with AIP leading to 
bi-allelic AIP loss. Coincident germline and somatic AIP mutations were likely 
causal in formation of a GH-secreting adenoma with an aggressive phenotype. This 
case exemplifies the need for early diagnosis and curative surgery in the 
management of AIP-mutated pituitary adenomas.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2020.04.103
PMID: 32336638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]