---
reference_id: "PMID:25214437"
title: Hidradenitis suppurativa.
authors:
- Margesson LJ
- Danby FW
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2014.07.012
keywords:
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Hidradenitis Suppurativa/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- Humans
- Quality of Life
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hidradenitis suppurativa.
**Authors:** Margesson LJ, Danby FW
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2014.07.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2014.07.012)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol. 2014 Oct;28(7):1013-27. doi: 
10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2014.07.012. Epub 2014 Aug 1.

Hidradenitis suppurativa.

Margesson LJ(1), Danby FW(2).

Author information:
(1)Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, 721 Chestnut Street, 
Manchester, NH 03104-3002, USA. Electronic address: ljmderm@hotmail.com.
(2)Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, 721 Chestnut Street, 
Manchester, NH 03104-3002, USA. Electronic address: billd860@gmail.com.

Hidradenitis suppurativa is a chronic relapsing disorder of the 
folliculopilosebaceous units (FPSUs). Its negative impact on quality of life is 
extreme, mainly due to the lack of early recognition, accurate diagnosis, and 
appropriate management. The support structure of the FPSUs is defective. Under 
the influence of endogenous reproductive hormones, exogenous hormones, androgens 
and their precursors in dairy products, and other dietary factors, the 
follicular unit is plugged and distended by retained keratin. Friction, shearing 
forces, and pressure lead to rupture and leakage of the ductal contents from the 
weakened FPSU, causing an inflammatory reaction mediated mainly by the innate 
immune system. Therapy requires patient comprehension and cooperation, 
counseling, aggressive hormonal and dietary modification, avoidance of the 
trauma that leads to rupture, active multimodal anti-inflammatory therapy, and 
early unroofing and debridement. The full therapeutic program is needed to avoid 
the aggressive surgery required if the condition is not diagnosed early and 
managed appropriately.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2014.07.012
PMID: 25214437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]