---
reference_id: "PMID:32614993"
title: A systematic review and critical appraisal of metagenomic and culture studies in hidradenitis suppurativa.
authors:
- Williams SC
- Frew JW
- Krueger JG
journal: Exp Dermatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/exd.14141
keywords:
- "Hidradenitis Suppurativa/genetics, microbiology"
- Humans
- Metagenomics
- Microbiota
- Skin/microbiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A systematic review and critical appraisal of metagenomic and culture studies in hidradenitis suppurativa.
**Authors:** Williams SC, Frew JW, Krueger JG
**Journal:** Exp Dermatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/exd.14141](https://doi.org/10.1111/exd.14141)

## Content

1. Exp Dermatol. 2021 Oct;30(10):1388-1397. doi: 10.1111/exd.14141. Epub 2020 Aug
 11.

A systematic review and critical appraisal of metagenomic and culture studies in
hidradenitis suppurativa.

Williams SC(1)(2), Frew JW(1), Krueger JG(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Investigative Dermatology, Rockefeller University, New York,
New York.
(2)Weill Cornell/Rockefeller/Sloan Kettering Tri-Institutional MD-PhD Program,
Weill Cornell Medical School, New York, New York.

Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS), also known as acne inversa, is a chronic
inflammatory skin disease with still largely unknown pathogenesis. While
infectious organisms have been identified in lesions of the disease since the
1980s, questions remain over the role that bacteria and microbiome play. Recent
studies using 16S ribosomal RNA gene sequencing and larger culture-based studies
have begun to paint a clearer picture of the microbial world of HS. With this
systematic review, we summarize all the work that has been done to date in HS
bacteriology, analyse potential pitfalls and limitations of the current studies,
and address future directions of investigation. This systematic review attempted
to collate and analyse all bacteriology studies done to date. This review was
prospectively registered with PROSPERO (1670769) performed in line with the
PRISMA checklist. Twenty two studies were identified comprising 862 individual
HS patients for culture studies and 206 HS patients for 16S rRNA gene sequencing
studies. Methodology tended to be varied, with different sampling, culturing and
sequencing methods as well as amount of analysis and stratification of patients.
Bacteria identified as elevated in HS lesions in sequencing studies as well as
grown from HS lesions in culture studies are identified and discussed. These
primarily included the anerobic Gram-negative bacilli Prevotella, Porphyromonas
and Fusibacterium, the Gram-positive bacilli Corynebacterium, and the
Gram-positive cocci Staphylococcus, Streptococcus and Parvimonas. Potential
interactions, as well as work in other disease models with related bacteria are
also discussed. Areas of further investigation include in vitro studies of
interactions between bacteria and keratinocytes, gut and oral microbiome studies
and deep sequencing studies for virulence and phage factors.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/exd.14141
PMCID: PMC7775883
PMID: 32614993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: J. G. Krueger has
received research support (grants paid to institution) from AbbVie, Amgen, BMS,
Boehringer, EMD Serono, Innovaderm, Kineta, LEO Pharma, Novan, Novartis,
Paraxel, Pfizer, Regeneron, and Vitae and personal fees from AbbVie, Acros,
Allergan, Aurigne, BiogenIdec, Boehringer, Escalier, Janssen, Lilly, Novartis,
Pfizer, Roche, and Valeant. The other authors declare they have no relevant
conflicts of interest.
