---
reference_id: "PMID:29246562"
title: Crohn's disease.
authors:
- Ballester Ferré MP
- Boscá-Watts MM
- Mínguez Pérez M
journal: Med Clin (Barc)
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.medcli.2017.10.036
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Crohn's disease.
**Authors:** Ballester Ferré MP, Boscá-Watts MM, Mínguez Pérez M
**Journal:** Med Clin (Barc) (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.medcli.2017.10.036](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.medcli.2017.10.036)

## Content

1. Med Clin (Barc). 2018 Jul 13;151(1):26-33. doi: 10.1016/j.medcli.2017.10.036. 
Epub 2017 Dec 13.

Crohn's disease.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Ballester Ferré MP(1), Boscá-Watts MM(2), Mínguez Pérez M(2).

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Medicina Digestiva, Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valencia, 
Valencia, España. Electronic address: mapibafe@gmail.com.
(2)Servicio de Medicina Digestiva, Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valencia, 
Valencia, España.

Crohn's disease is a chronic inflammatory bowel disease of unknown etiology 
associated with an impaired immune response, with periods of activity and 
remission. It is characterised by patchy and transmural lesions which can affect 
the entire gastrointestinal tract, from the mouth to the anus. The most frequent 
symptoms are abdominal pain and diarrhoea, which can seriously affect patients' 
quality of life. The increasing incidence and prevalence of the disease in our 
area has had a large impact on clinical practice, with the rapid development of 
diagnostic and therapeutic techniques. To reduce the risk of complications, 
primary care physicians and gastroenterologists should be familiar with the 
management of the disease.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.medcli.2017.10.036
PMID: 29246562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]