---
reference_id: "PMID:37680892"
title: "Long-term efficacy and safety of osilodrostat in patients with Cushing's disease: results from the LINC 4 study extension."
authors:
- Gadelha M
- Snyder PJ
- Witek P
- Bex M
- Belaya Z
- Turcu AF
- Feelders RA
- Heaney AP
- Paul M
- Pedroncelli AM
- Auchus RJ
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1236465
keywords:
- Humans
- Pituitary ACTH Hypersecretion/drug therapy
- Hydrocortisone
- Quality of Life
- Adrenocortical Hyperfunction
- Imidazoles
- Pyridines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term efficacy and safety of osilodrostat in patients with Cushing's disease: results from the LINC 4 study extension.
**Authors:** Gadelha M, Snyder PJ, Witek P, Bex M, Belaya Z, Turcu AF, Feelders RA, Heaney AP, Paul M, Pedroncelli AM, Auchus RJ
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2023.1236465](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2023.1236465)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2023 Aug 23;14:1236465. doi:
10.3389/fendo.2023.1236465. eCollection 2023.

Long-term efficacy and safety of osilodrostat in patients with Cushing's
disease: results from the LINC 4 study extension.

Gadelha M(1), Snyder PJ(2), Witek P(3), Bex M(4), Belaya Z(5), Turcu AF(6),
Feelders RA(7), Heaney AP(8), Paul M(9), Pedroncelli AM(10), Auchus RJ(6)(11).

Author information:
(1)Neuroendocrinology Research Center, Endocrinology Section, Medical School and
Hospital Universitário Clementino Fraga Filho, Universidade Federal do Rio de
Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA,
United States.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Endocrinology and Diabetes, Medical
University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Department of Neuroendocrinology and Bone Disease, Endocrinology Research
Centre, Moscow, Russia.
(6)Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology and Diabetes, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI, United States.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Endocrine Section, Erasmus Medical Center,
Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(8)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Department of Medicine,
David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA, United States.
(9)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(10)Recordati AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(11)Department of Pharmacology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United
States.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the long-term efficacy and safety of osilodrostat in
patients with Cushing's disease.
METHODS: The multicenter, 48-week, Phase III LINC 4 clinical trial had an
optional extension period that was initially intended to continue to week 96.
Patients could continue in the extension until a managed-access program or
alternative treatment became available locally, or until a protocol amendment
was approved at their site that specified that patients should come for an
end-of-treatment visit within 4 weeks or by week 96, whichever occurred first.
Study outcomes assessed in the extension included: mean urinary free cortisol
(mUFC) response rates; changes in mUFC, serum cortisol and late-night salivary
cortisol (LNSC); changes in cardiovascular and metabolic-related parameters;
blood pressure, waist circumference and weight; changes in physical
manifestations of Cushing's disease; changes in patient-reported outcomes for
health-related quality of life; changes in tumor volume; and adverse events.
Results were analyzed descriptively; no formal statistical testing was
performed.
RESULTS: Of 60 patients who entered, 53 completed the extension, with 29
patients receiving osilodrostat for more than 96 weeks (median osilodrostat
duration: 87.1 weeks). The proportion of patients with normalized mUFC observed
in the core period was maintained throughout the extension. At their
end-of-trial visit, 72.4% of patients had achieved normal mUFC. Substantial
reductions in serum cortisol and LNSC were also observed. Improvements in most
cardiovascular and metabolic-related parameters, as well as physical
manifestations of Cushing's disease, observed in the core period were maintained
or continued to improve in the extension. Osilodrostat was generally well
tolerated; the safety profile was consistent with previous reports.
CONCLUSION: Osilodrostat provided long-term control of cortisol secretion that
was associated with sustained improvements in clinical signs and physical
manifestations of hypercortisolism. Osilodrostat is an effective long-term
treatment for patients with Cushing's disease.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov, identifier NCT02180217.

Copyright © 2023 Gadelha, Snyder, Witek, Bex, Belaya, Turcu, Feelders, Heaney,
Paul, Pedroncelli and Auchus.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1236465
PMCID: PMC10482037
PMID: 37680892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Author MG has received speaker fees from
Recordati, Ipsen, Crinetics Pharmaceuticals, and Novo Nordisk and attended
advisory boards for Novo Nordisk, Recordati, Ipsen, and Crinetics
Pharmaceuticals. Author PS reports consultancy for Teva Pharmaceuticals. Author
PW reports receiving travel grants and speaker fees from Novartis, Ipsen,
Recordati, Novo Nordisk, Strongbridge Biopharma now Xeris Pharmaceuticals, and
Lilly. Author MB reports receiving travel grants from Novartis, Ipsen, and
Pfizer and consultancy for Novartis. Author ZB has nothing to disclose. Author
AT reports consultancy for CinCor and PhaseBio. Author RF reports consultancy
for HRA Pharma and Recordati and a research grant from Corcept Therapeutics.
Author AH reports speaker fees from Chiasma and Ipsen and has been an advisor to
Strongbridge Biopharma now Xeris Pharmaceuticals, Novo Nordisk, and Lundbeck
Pharma. Author MP is employed by the company Novartis Pharma AG. Author AP was
employed by the company Recordati AG at the time of manuscript development.
Author RA reports grants and personal fees from Xeris Pharmaceuticals, Spruce
Biosciences, Neurocrine Biosciences, Corcept Therapeutics, Diurnal Ltd, Sparrow
Pharmaceuticals, and Novartis and personal fees from Adrenas Therapeutics,
Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Quest Diagnostics, Crinetics Pharmaceuticals, PhaseBio
Pharmaceuticals, H Lundbeck A/S, Novo Nordisk, and Recordati Rare Diseases.
