---
reference_id: "PMID:27951522"
title: Brain lesion distribution criteria distinguish MS from AQP4-antibody NMOSD and MOG-antibody disease.
authors:
- Juryńczyk M
- Tackley G
- Kong Y
- Geraldes R
- Matthews L
- Woodhall M
- Waters P
- Kuker W
- Craner M
- Weir A
- DeLuca GC
- Kremer S
- Leite MI
- Vincent A
- Jacob A
- de Sèze J
- Palace J
journal: J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1136/jnnp-2016-314005
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Aquaporin 4/immunology
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- "Brain/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Multiple Sclerosis/diagnosis, immunology, pathology"
- Myelin-Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein/immunology
- "Neuromyelitis Optica/diagnosis, immunology, pathology"
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brain lesion distribution criteria distinguish MS from AQP4-antibody NMOSD and MOG-antibody disease.
**Authors:** Juryńczyk M, Tackley G, Kong Y, Geraldes R, Matthews L, Woodhall M, Waters P, Kuker W, Craner M, Weir A, DeLuca GC, Kremer S, Leite MI, Vincent A, Jacob A, de Sèze J, Palace J
**Journal:** J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jnnp-2016-314005](https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp-2016-314005)

## Content

1. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2017 Feb;88(2):132-136. doi:
10.1136/jnnp-2016-314005. Epub 2016 Oct 8.

Brain lesion distribution criteria distinguish MS from AQP4-antibody NMOSD and
MOG-antibody disease.

Juryńczyk M(1), Tackley G(1), Kong Y(1), Geraldes R(1), Matthews L(1), Woodhall
M(1), Waters P(1), Kuker W(1), Craner M(1), Weir A(1), DeLuca GC(1), Kremer
S(2)(3), Leite MI(1), Vincent A(1), Jacob A(4), de Sèze J(5)(6), Palace J(1).

Author information:
(1)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford,
UK.
(2)ICube (UMR 7357, UdS, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique),
Fédération de médecine translationelle de Strasbourg, University de Strasbourg,
Strasbourg, France.
(3)Department of Radiology, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg,
France.
(4)NMO Clinical Service, The Walton Centre, Liverpool, UK.
(5)Department of Neurology, University Hospital of Strasbourg, Strasbourg,
France.
(6)Fédération de médecine translationelle de Strasbourg, CIC 1434, University of
Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.

IMPORTANCE: Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders (NMOSD) can present with
very similar clinical features to multiple sclerosis (MS), but the international
diagnostic imaging criteria for MS are not necessarily helpful in distinguishing
these two diseases.
OBJECTIVE: This multicentre study tested previously reported criteria of '(1) at
least 1 lesion adjacent to the body of the lateral ventricle and in the inferior
temporal lobe; or (2) the presence of a subcortical U-fibre lesion or (3) a
Dawson's finger-type lesion' in an independent cohort of relapsing-remitting
multiple sclerosis (RRMS) and AQP4-ab NMOSD patients and also assessed their
value in myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG)-ab positive and ab-negative
NMOSD.
DESIGN: Brain MRI scans were anonymised and scored on the criteria by 2 of 3
independent raters. In case of disagreement, the final opinion was made by the
third rater.
PARTICIPANTS: 112 patients with NMOSD (31 AQP4-ab-positive, 21 MOG-ab-positive,
16 ab-negative) or MS (44) were selected from 3 centres (Oxford, Strasbourg and
Liverpool) for the presence of brain lesions.
RESULTS: MRI brain lesion distribution criteria were able to distinguish RRMS
with a sensitivity of 90.9% and with a specificity of 87.1% against AQP4-ab
NMOSD, 95.2% against MOG-ab NMOSD and 87.5% in the heterogenous ab-negative
NMOSD cohort. Over the whole NMOSD group, the specificity was 89.7%.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that the brain MRI criteria for differentiating
RRMS from NMOSD are sensitive and specific for all phenotypes.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2016-314005
PMID: 27951522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
