---
reference_id: "PMID:33733653"
title: Exploring the Seasonal Drivers of Varicella Zoster Virus Transmission and Reactivation.
authors:
- Bakker KM
- Eisenberg MC
- Woods R
- Martinez ME
journal: Am J Epidemiol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/aje/kwab073
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exploring the Seasonal Drivers of Varicella Zoster Virus Transmission and Reactivation.
**Authors:** Bakker KM, Eisenberg MC, Woods R, Martinez ME
**Journal:** Am J Epidemiol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/aje/kwab073](https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwab073)

## Content

1. Am J Epidemiol. 2021 Sep 1;190(9):1814-1820. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwab073.

Exploring the Seasonal Drivers of Varicella Zoster Virus Transmission and 
Reactivation.

Bakker KM, Eisenberg MC, Woods R, Martinez ME.

Varicella zoster virus (VZV) is a herpesvirus that causes chickenpox and 
shingles. The biological mechanisms underpinning the multidecadal latency of VZV 
in the body and subsequent viral reactivation-which occurs in approximately 30% 
of individuals-are largely unknown. Because chickenpox and shingles are endemic 
worldwide, understanding the relationship between VZV transmission and 
reactivation is important for informing disease treatment and control. While 
chickenpox is a vaccine-preventable childhood disease with a rich legacy of 
research, shingles is not a notifiable disease in most countries. To date, 
population-level studies of shingles have had to rely on small-scale hospital or 
community-level data sets. Here, we examined chickenpox and shingles 
notifications from Thailand and found strong seasonal incidence in both 
diseases, with a 3-month lag between peak chickenpox transmission season and 
peak shingles reactivation. We tested and fitted 14 mathematical models 
examining the biological drivers of chickenpox and shingles over an 8-year 
period to estimate rates of VZV transmission, reactivation, and 
immunity-boosting, wherein reexposure to VZV boosts VZV-specific immunity to 
reinforce protection against shingles. The models suggested that the seasonal 
cycles of chickenpox and shingles have different underlying mechanisms, with 
ambient levels of ultraviolet radiation being correlated with shingles 
reactivation.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/aje/kwab073
PMCID: PMC8579026
PMID: 33733653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]