---
reference_id: "PMID:39819503"
title: Epigenetic age acceleration and methylation differences in IgG4-related cholangitis and primary sclerosing cholangitis.
authors:
- Noble A
- Motta R
- Cabras S
- Flores BM
- Nowak J
- Glapa-Nowak A
- Geremia A
- Satsangi J
- Culver E
journal: Clin Epigenetics
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s13148-024-01803-x
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cholangitis, Sclerosing/genetics"
- DNA Methylation
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Adult
- Aged
- Immunoglobulin G
- "Colitis, Ulcerative/genetics"
- Case-Control Studies
- Age Factors
- Immunoglobulin G4-Related Disease/genetics
- Cholangitis/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epigenetic age acceleration and methylation differences in IgG4-related cholangitis and primary sclerosing cholangitis.
**Authors:** Noble A, Motta R, Cabras S, Flores BM, Nowak J, Glapa-Nowak A, Geremia A, Satsangi J, Culver E
**Journal:** Clin Epigenetics (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13148-024-01803-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13148-024-01803-x)

## Content

1. Clin Epigenetics. 2025 Jan 16;17(1):6. doi: 10.1186/s13148-024-01803-x.

Epigenetic age acceleration and methylation differences in IgG4-related 
cholangitis and primary sclerosing cholangitis.

Noble A(#)(1), Motta R(#)(1), Cabras S(1), Flores BM(1), Nowak J(2), Glapa-Nowak 
A(2), Geremia A(1), Satsangi J(#)(3)(4), Culver E(#)(1).

Author information:
(1)Translational Gastroenterology and Liver Unit, John Radcliffe Hospital, 
Headley Way, Headington, Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK.
(2)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Metabolic Diseases, Poznan 
University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
(3)Translational Gastroenterology and Liver Unit, John Radcliffe Hospital, 
Headley Way, Headington, Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK. jack.satsangi@ndm.ox.ac.uk.
(4)Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 
jack.satsangi@ndm.ox.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: IgG4-related cholangitis (IgG4-SC) and primary sclerosing 
cholangitis (PSC) are chronic fibro-inflammatory hepatobiliary conditions, with 
genetic, environmental, and immunologic risk factors, in which epigenetic 
alterations may provide insights into pathophysiology and novel biomarkers. This 
study is the first to assess methylation signatures in IgG4-SC.
RESULTS: Whole blood DNA methylation profiling and genotyping was performed in 
264 individuals; 47 with IgG4-SC, 65 with PSC, 64 with ulcerative colitis (UC), 
and 88 healthy controls. We identified 19 significant methylation differences 
between IgG4-SC and controls and 38 between PSC and controls. IgG4-SC and PSC 
shared 8 probes. Inflammatory genes (including CEP97, IFNAR1, TXK, HERC6, 
C5orf36, PYY, and MTRNR2L1) were predominantly involved in dysregulated 
methylation. Epigenetic age acceleration was observed in patients with IgG4-SC, 
but not in those with PSC or UC. meQTL analyses to identify genetic determinants 
of methylation revealed a strong human leucocyte antigen (HLA) signal in both 
PSC and IgG4-SC (HLA-DQB2, HLA-DPA1, HLA-F and HLA-DRA).
CONCLUSIONS: We identify novel epigenetic alterations in IgG4-SC and PSC, with 
biological age acceleration in IgG4-SC, providing insights into disease 
pathogenesis, and highlight the role of genetic variation especially within the 
HLA region in shaping the methylome.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13148-024-01803-x
PMCID: PMC11740490
PMID: 39819503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: Ethical approval for the study was obtained from the Research 
Ethics Committee Oxfordshire (10/H0604/51) and the Oxford Radcliffe Biobank 
(19/SC/0173). Competing interests: EC provides educational material and consults 
for Amgen (Horizon Therapeutics), Zenus BioPharma, Falk Pharma, Ipsen, Mirum, 
Intercept, Advance Therapeutics and Moderna. JS has received lecture fees from 
Takeda and from the Falk Foundation.