---
reference_id: "PMID:24902970"
title: Mechanisms of plaque formation and rupture.
authors:
- Bentzon JF
- Otsuka F
- Virmani R
- Falk E
journal: Circ Res
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.114.302721
keywords:
- "Acute Coronary Syndrome/etiology, pathology"
- "Coronary Artery Disease/etiology, pathology"
- Humans
- "Plaque, Atherosclerotic/etiology, pathology"
- "Rupture, Spontaneous/etiology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms of plaque formation and rupture.
**Authors:** Bentzon JF, Otsuka F, Virmani R, Falk E
**Journal:** Circ Res (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.114.302721](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.114.302721)

## Content

1. Circ Res. 2014 Jun 6;114(12):1852-66. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.114.302721.

Mechanisms of plaque formation and rupture.

Bentzon JF(1), Otsuka F(1), Virmani R(1), Falk E(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Clinical Medicine (J.F.B., E.F.), Aarhus University, 
and Department of Cardiology (J.F.B., E.F.), Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, 
Denmark; and CVPath Institute Inc, Gaithersburg, MD (F.O., R.V.).
(2)From the Department of Clinical Medicine (J.F.B., E.F.), Aarhus University, 
and Department of Cardiology (J.F.B., E.F.), Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, 
Denmark; and CVPath Institute Inc, Gaithersburg, MD (F.O., R.V.). 
erling.falk@ki.au.dk.

Atherosclerosis causes clinical disease through luminal narrowing or by 
precipitating thrombi that obstruct blood flow to the heart (coronary heart 
disease), brain (ischemic stroke), or lower extremities (peripheral vascular 
disease). The most common of these manifestations is coronary heart disease, 
including stable angina pectoris and the acute coronary syndromes. 
Atherosclerosis is a lipoprotein-driven disease that leads to plaque formation 
at specific sites of the arterial tree through intimal inflammation, necrosis, 
fibrosis, and calcification. After decades of indolent progression, such plaques 
may suddenly cause life-threatening coronary thrombosis presenting as an acute 
coronary syndrome. Most often, the culprit morphology is plaque rupture with 
exposure of highly thrombogenic, red cell-rich necrotic core material. The 
permissive structural requirement for this to occur is an extremely thin fibrous 
cap, and thus, ruptures occur mainly among lesions defined as thin-cap 
fibroatheromas. Also common are thrombi forming on lesions without rupture 
(plaque erosion), most often on pathological intimal thickening or 
fibroatheromas. However, the mechanisms involved in plaque erosion remain 
largely unknown, although coronary spasm is suspected. The calcified nodule has 
been suggested as a rare cause of coronary thrombosis in highly calcified and 
tortious arteries in older individuals. To characterize the severity and 
prognosis of plaques, several terms are used. Plaque burden denotes the extent 
of disease, whereas plaque activity is an ambiguous term, which may refer to one 
of several processes that characterize progression. Plaque vulnerability 
describes the short-term risk of precipitating symptomatic thrombosis. In this 
review, we discuss mechanisms of atherosclerotic plaque initiation and 
progression; how plaques suddenly precipitate life-threatening thrombi; and the 
concepts of plaque burden, activity, and vulnerability.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.114.302721
PMID: 24902970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]