---
reference_id: "PMID:23981756"
title: "Incidence and prevalence of idiopathic inflammatory myopathies in South Australia: a 30-year epidemiologic study of histology-proven cases."
authors:
- Tan JA
- Roberts-Thomson PJ
- Blumbergs P
- Hakendorf P
- Cox SR
- Limaye V
journal: Int J Rheum Dis
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1111/j.1756-185X.2011.01669.x
keywords:
- Adult
- Age Distribution
- Age Factors
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Biopsy
- Chi-Square Distribution
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Muscles/pathology
- "Myositis/epidemiology, pathology"
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Prevalence
- Risk Factors
- Sex Distribution
- Sex Factors
- Socioeconomic Factors
- South Australia/epidemiology
- Time Factors
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence and prevalence of idiopathic inflammatory myopathies in South Australia: a 30-year epidemiologic study of histology-proven cases.
**Authors:** Tan JA, Roberts-Thomson PJ, Blumbergs P, Hakendorf P, Cox SR, Limaye V
**Journal:** Int J Rheum Dis (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1756-185X.2011.01669.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1756-185X.2011.01669.x)

## Content

1. Int J Rheum Dis. 2013 Jun;16(3):331-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1756-185X.2011.01669.x. 
Epub 2011 Oct 13.

Incidence and prevalence of idiopathic inflammatory myopathies in South 
Australia: a 30-year epidemiologic study of histology-proven cases.

Tan JA(1), Roberts-Thomson PJ, Blumbergs P, Hakendorf P, Cox SR, Limaye V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, SA Pathology, Flinders Medical Centre, South 
Australia, Australia. juann.tan@health.sa.gov.au

AIM: To describe the epidemiology of biopsy-proven idiopathic inflammatory 
myopathies (IIM) in South Australia (SA).
METHODS: Cases of IIM were ascertained by review of all muscle biopsy reports 
from the Neuropathology Laboratory, Hanson Institute (wherein all adult muscle 
biopsies in SA are reported) from 1980 to 2009. Clinical correlation of these 
patients by review of medical records was undertaken. SA population denominator 
numbers were obtained from the Australian Bureau of Statistics.
RESULTS: Three hundred and fifty-two biopsy-proven cases of IIM were identified 
between 1980 and 2009. The overall annual incidence of IIM appeared to be rising 
with a mean incidence of eight cases per million population (95% CI: 7.2-8.9). 
This corresponded with an increasing annual incidence of inclusion body myositis 
(IBM) (prevalence of 50.5 cases per million population in 2009, 95% CI: 
40.2-62.7). A female preponderance was noted in both dermatomyositis (DM) (F : M 
= 2.75 : 1.00) and polymyositis (PM) (F : M = 1.55 : 1.00) but gender 
distribution was almost equal in IBM (F : M = 1.1 : 1.0). Mean age at diagnosis 
for IBM (67.5 years) was higher than for DM (55.1 years) and PM (59.0 years). A 
higher proportion of DM patients reported living in urban dwellings and DM 
patients tended to be predominantly professionals.
CONCLUSIONS: In SA there is an increasing incidence of IBM and the prevalence is 
one of the highest reported to date. This may reflect an increase in the number 
of biopsies performed, improved histological techniques or a genuine increase in 
incidence.

© 2013 The Authors. International Journal of Rheumatic Diseases © 2013 Asia 
Pacific League of Associations for Rheumatology and Blackwell Publishing Asia 
Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1756-185X.2011.01669.x
PMID: 23981756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]