---
reference_id: "PMID:26524895"
title: "[Progress of Autoantibody Examinations for Connective Tissue Diseases]."
authors:
- Akashi K
- Saegusa J
- Morinobu A
journal: Rinsho Byori
year: '2015'
keywords:
- Autoantibodies/blood
- Biomarkers/blood
- "Connective Tissue Diseases/diagnosis, immunology"
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Progress of Autoantibody Examinations for Connective Tissue Diseases].
**Authors:** Akashi K, Saegusa J, Morinobu A
**Journal:** Rinsho Byori (2015)

## Content

1. Rinsho Byori. 2015 May;63(5):562-9.

[Progress of Autoantibody Examinations for Connective Tissue Diseases].

[Article in Japanese]

Akashi K, Saegusa J, Morinobu A.

Connective tissue diseases are chronic inflammatory diseases that can affect
multiple organs and, thus, have a broad spectrum of clinical presentations.
Various autoantibodies are detected in patients with connective tissue diseases,
represented by anti-nuclear antibody for systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE),
systemic sclerosis (SSc), polymyositis/dermatomyositis (PM/DM), Sjögren's
syndrome, and mixed connective tissue disease. Assessment of the autoantibody
profile is fundamental for the clinical management of patients with connective
tissue diseases, providing important data for the diagnosis, clinical
characterization, and disease activity evaluation. Anti-ribosomal P antibody and
anti-NMDA receptor antibody are associated with neuropsychiatric SLE.
Anti-synthetase syndrome comprises the association of myositis (PM/DM),
interstitial lung disease, fever, Raynaud's phenomenon, mechanic's hands, and
anti-aminoacyl tRNA synthetase antibodies. Anti-MDA5 antibody is detected in
patients with clinically amyopathic DM, often complicated by rapidly progressive
interstitial lung disease. Between 50 and 75% of malignancy-associated DM
patients are positive for anti-TIF1-γ antibody. Anti-RNA polymerase III antibody
is associated with diffuse cutaneous SSc and renal crisis. This review focuses
on the importance and usefulness of these autoantibodies for the diagnosis and
management of patients with connective tissue diseases in clinical practice.

PMID: 26524895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
