---
reference_id: "PMID:37553209"
title: "Rising Kawasaki disease incidence in New Zealand: analysis of national population incidence and outcomes 2000-2017."
authors:
- Gee P
- Burgner D
- Gee W
- Forbes A
- Frampton CMA
- McCombie A
journal: Arch Dis Child
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/archdischild-2023-325667
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rising Kawasaki disease incidence in New Zealand: analysis of national population incidence and outcomes 2000-2017.
**Authors:** Gee P, Burgner D, Gee W, Forbes A, Frampton CMA, McCombie A
**Journal:** Arch Dis Child (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/archdischild-2023-325667](https://doi.org/10.1136/archdischild-2023-325667)

## Content

1. Arch Dis Child. 2023 Nov;108(11):916-921. doi:
10.1136/archdischild-2023-325667.  Epub 2023 Aug 8.

Rising Kawasaki disease incidence in New Zealand: analysis of national 
population incidence and outcomes 2000-2017.

Gee P(1)(2), Burgner D(3)(4), Gee W(5), Forbes A(6), Frampton CMA(6), McCombie 
A(2).

Author information:
(1)Emergency Medicine, Christchurch Hospital Te Whata Ora, Christchurch, New 
Zealand paul.gee@cdhb.health.nz.
(2)Department of Surgery and Critical Care, University of Otago, Christchurch 
School of Medicine, Christchurch, New Zealand.
(3)Infection and Immunity Theme, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, 
Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(4)Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.
(5)Department of Radiology, Auckland City Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand.
(6)Department of Medicine, University of Otago, Christchurch, New Zealand.

OBJECTIVE: The recent epidemiology of Kawasaki disease (KD) in New Zealand (NZ) 
is unknown. Our aim was to describe the incidence, seasonal variation, long-term 
outcomes and mortality for KD in NZ.
DESIGN: Retrospective national database analysis.
SETTING: New Zealand.
PATIENTS: First hospitalisation and deaths diagnosed with KD.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Data were extracted for all hospital admissions in NZ 
coded as KD (International Classification of Diseases (ICD)-9 and ICD-10) from 
the National Minimum Dataset 1 January 2000 to 31 December 2017. Age, sex, 
ethnicity and associated diagnoses were available to review. Intervention rates 
for immunoglobulin administration were also analysed.
RESULTS: Over the study period, there were 1008 children with initial 
hospitalisation for KD. The mean age was 39.8 months (SD 37) and 592 (59%) were 
boys. The annual incidence rate of KD has increased from 12.2 to 19.5 per 100 
000 children <5 years old (0.46 case increase per year; 95% CI 0.09 to 0.83). 
Children of Asian and Pacific Island ethnicities had the highest incidence (51.2 
and 26.1/100 000, respectively). The highest growth in incidence was among East 
Asian children. The case mortality rate was low (12 of 1008, 1.2%); however, 
Māori were over-represented (6 of 12 deaths).
CONCLUSIONS: There is evidence of increasing KD hospitalisation in NZ, similar 
to recent studies from Northeast Asia and Australia. KD incidence data were 
available for retrospective review from a national database, but data on 
complications and outcomes were incomplete. Notification for KD and an active 
national surveillance system are recommended to improve care. Future work should 
focus on factors contributing to poorer outcomes in Māori.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/archdischild-2023-325667
PMID: 37553209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.