---
reference_id: "PMID:38907905"
title: "Object Recognition Memory Deficits in ADHD: A Meta-analysis."
authors:
- Lobato-Camacho FJ
- Faísca L
journal: Neuropsychol Rev
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s11065-024-09645-3
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- Humans
- "Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/complications, physiopathology, psychology"
- "Memory Disorders/etiology, physiopathology"
- "Pattern Recognition, Visual/physiology"
- "Recognition, Psychology/physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Object Recognition Memory Deficits in ADHD: A Meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Lobato-Camacho FJ, Faísca L
**Journal:** Neuropsychol Rev (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11065-024-09645-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11065-024-09645-3)

## Content

1. Neuropsychol Rev. 2025 Sep;35(3):517-534. doi: 10.1007/s11065-024-09645-3.
Epub  2024 Jun 22.

Object Recognition Memory Deficits in ADHD: A Meta-analysis.

Lobato-Camacho FJ(1), Faísca L(2).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Psicología Experimental, Facultad de Psicología, Universidad
de Sevilla, Calle Camilo José Cela, 41018, Seville, S/N, Spain.
fralobcam@alum.us.es.
(2)Departamento de Psicología e Ciências da Educação & Center for Research in
Health Technologies and Information Systems (CINTESIS@RISE), Universidade Do
Algarve, 8005-139, Faro, Portugal.

Object recognition memory allows us to identify previously seen objects. This
type of declarative memory is a primary process for learning. Despite its
crucial role in everyday life, object recognition has received far less
attention in ADHD research compared to verbal recognition memory. In addition to
the existence of a small number of published studies, the results have been
inconsistent, possibly due to the diversity of tasks used to assess recognition
memory. In the present meta-analysis, we have collected studies from Web of
Science, Scopus, PubMed, and Google Scholar databases up to May 2023. We have
compiled studies that assessed visual object recognition memory with specific
visual recognition tests (sample-match delayed tasks) in children and
adolescents diagnosed with ADHD. A total of 28 studies with 1619 participants
diagnosed with ADHD were included. The studies were assessed for risk of bias
using the Quadas-2 tool and for each study, Cohen's d was calculated to estimate
the magnitude of the difference in performance between groups. As a main result,
we have found a worse recognition memory performance in ADHD participants when
compared to their matched controls (overall Cohen's d ~ 0.492). We also observed
greater heterogeneity in the magnitude of this deficit among medicated
participants compared to non-medicated individuals, as well as a smaller deficit
in studies with a higher proportion of female participants. The magnitude of the
object recognition memory impairment in ADHD also seems to depend on the
assessment method used.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11065-024-09645-3
PMID: 38907905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics Approval: The study was
conducted according to the guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki, and
approved by the Comité de Ética de la Investigación de la Universidad de
Sevilla, dependent Comité Coordinador de Ética de la Investigación Biomédica de
Andalucía, Junta de Andalucía (Spain) with the code (2099-N22). Competing
Interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
