---
reference_id: "PMID:32765936"
title: A Novel Splice-Site Variant in SLC12A6 Causes Andermann Syndrome without Agenesis of the Corpus Callosum.
authors:
- Al Shibli N
- Al-Maawali A
- Elmanzalawy A
- Al-Nabhani M
- Koul R
- Gabr A
- Al Murshedi F
journal: J Pediatr Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1055/s-0039-1700975
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Novel Splice-Site Variant in SLC12A6 Causes Andermann Syndrome without Agenesis of the Corpus Callosum.
**Authors:** Al Shibli N, Al-Maawali A, Elmanzalawy A, Al-Nabhani M, Koul R, Gabr A, Al Murshedi F
**Journal:** J Pediatr Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0039-1700975](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0039-1700975)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Genet. 2020 Dec;9(4):293-295. doi: 10.1055/s-0039-1700975. Epub 2020
 Jan 6.

A Novel Splice-Site Variant in SLC12A6 Causes Andermann Syndrome without
Agenesis of the Corpus Callosum.

Al Shibli N(1), Al-Maawali A(2)(3), Elmanzalawy A(4), Al-Nabhani M(3), Koul
R(5), Gabr A(1)(2), Al Murshedi F(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Child Health, Sultan Qaboos University Hospital, Muscat, Oman.
(2)Genetic and Developmental Medicine Clinic, Sultan Qaboos University Hospital,
Muscat, Oman.
(3)Department of Genetics, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, Sultan
Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman.
(4)Department of Radiology and Molecular Imaging, Sultan Qaboos University
Hospital, Muscat, Oman.
(5)Department of Neurology, Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences, Vasant
Kunj, New Delhi, India.

Andermann syndrome, otherwise known as agenesis of the corpus callosum with
peripheral neuropathy (ACCPN), is an autosomal recessive motor and sensory
neuropathy known to be associated with ACC and mild-to-moderate intellectual
disability. We present a 7-year-old girl with infantile-onset hypotonia, mild
intellectual disability, and severe motor and sensory demyelinating peripheral
neuropathy. Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed intact corpus callosum.
Whole exome sequencing showed a novel splice-site pathogenic variant in the
SLC12A6 gene. We confirm that ACC is not a mandatory feature and suggest that
the term ACCPN may be misleading.

© Thieme Medical Publishers.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0039-1700975
PMCID: PMC7396463
PMID: 32765936

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None declared.
