---
reference_id: "PMID:19811945"
title: "Caring for Machado-Joseph disease: current understanding and how to help patients."
authors:
- "D'Abreu A"
- França MC Jr
- Paulson HL
- Lopes-Cendes I
journal: Parkinsonism Relat Disord
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2009.08.012
keywords:
- Ataxin-3
- Diagnostic Imaging
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Machado-Joseph Disease/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology, therapy"
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Phenotype
- "Repressor Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Caring for Machado-Joseph disease: current understanding and how to help patients.
**Authors:** D'Abreu A, França MC Jr, Paulson HL, Lopes-Cendes I
**Journal:** Parkinsonism Relat Disord (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.parkreldis.2009.08.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parkreldis.2009.08.012)

## Content

1. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2010 Jan;16(1):2-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2009.08.012. Epub 2009 Oct 6.

Caring for Machado-Joseph disease: current understanding and how to help 
patients.

D'Abreu A(1), França MC Jr, Paulson HL, Lopes-Cendes I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, São 
Paulo, Brazil.

Machado-Joseph disease or spinocerebellar ataxia 3 (MJD/SCA3) is a clinically 
heterogeneous, neurodegenerative disorder characterized by varying degrees of 
ataxia, ophthalmoplegia, peripheral neuropathy, pyramidal dysfunction and 
movement disorder. MJD/SCA3 is caused by a CAG repeat expansion mutation in the 
protein coding region of the ATXN3 gene located at chromosome 14q32.1. Current 
hypotheses regarding pathogenesis favor the view that mutated ataxin-3, with its 
polyglutamine expansion, is prone to adopt an abnormal conformation, engage in 
altered protein-protein interactions and aggregate. Expanded CAG repeat length 
correlates with the range and severity of the clinical manifestations and 
inversely correlates with age of disease onset. Though MJD/SCA3 is classically 
described as affecting the cerebellum, brainstem and basal ganglia, recent 
neuropathology and neuroimaging series demonstrate involvement of other areas 
such as the thalamus and cerebral cortex. Clinically, much emphasis has been 
placed in the description and recognition of the non-motor symptoms observed in 
these patients, such as pain, cramps, fatigue and depression. Currently, no 
disease modifying treatment exists for MJD/SCA3. Standard of care includes 
genetic counseling, exercise/physical therapy programs, and speech and swallow 
evaluation. Symptomatic treatment for clinical findings such as depression, 
sleep disorders, parkinsonism, dystonia, cramps, and pain is important to 
improve the quality of life for those with MJD/SCA3.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2009.08.012
PMCID: PMC2818316
PMID: 19811945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]