---
reference_id: "PMID:35573950"
title: "Hereditary Systemic Autoinflammatory Diseases: Therapeutic Stratification."
authors:
- Kul Cinar O
- Putland A
- Wynne K
- Eleftheriou D
- Brogan PA
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2022.867679
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary Systemic Autoinflammatory Diseases: Therapeutic Stratification.
**Authors:** Kul Cinar O, Putland A, Wynne K, Eleftheriou D, Brogan PA
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2022.867679](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2022.867679)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2022 Apr 28;10:867679. doi: 10.3389/fped.2022.867679.
eCollection  2022.

Hereditary Systemic Autoinflammatory Diseases: Therapeutic Stratification.

Kul Cinar O(1)(2), Putland A(1), Wynne K(1), Eleftheriou D(1)(3)(4), Brogan 
PA(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Rheumatology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for 
Children NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Division of Medicine, National Amyloidosis Centre and Centre for Acute Phase 
Proteins, University College London, Royal Free Campus, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Section of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, Institute of Child Health, 
University College London Great Ormond Street, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Paediatric Rheumatology, ARUK Centre for Adolescent Rheumatology, Institute 
of Child Health, University College London (UCL) Great Ormond Street Hospital, 
London, United Kingdom.

Hereditary systemic autoinflammatory diseases (SAIDs) are rare, often severe 
conditions characterised by mutations in the key regulators of innate immune 
responses. Dramatic advances in the molecular genetics and next-generation 
sequencing in the past decade enabled identification of novel mutations that 
play a pivotal role in the mechanistic pathways of inflammation. Although 
genetic testing may not always provide straightforward guidance in diagnosis and 
clinical decision making, through translational research, it sheds light into 
molecular immunopathogenesis, particularly in IL-1 inflammasome and cytokine 
signalling pathways. These remarkable insights provided a better understanding 
of autoinflammatory conditions and their association with the innate and 
adaptive immune systems, as well as leading to development of cytokine-targetted 
biologic treatments. Use of targetted therapeutics not only helps control 
disease flares, reduce acute-phase responses and prevent devastating 
complications such as amyloidosis, but also improves health-related quality of 
lives and support patients to pursue almost a normal life. Herein, we discuss 
the commonest monogenic SAIDs, describe their immunopathology, and summarise the 
approaches in the management and targetted treatment of these conditions, 
including presentation of novel data based on a cohort of children with these 
rare diseases from a single quaternary referral centre in London.

Copyright © 2022 Kul Cinar, Putland, Wynne, Eleftheriou and Brogan.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2022.867679
PMCID: PMC9096795
PMID: 35573950

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.