---
reference_id: "PMID:40937626"
title: "Mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A synthase 2 deficiency with severe hyperglycemia in a child: A rare case report."
authors:
- Dong C
- Lu T
- Jiang Y
- Yan Z
- Zhu S
journal: J Int Med Res
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1177/03000605251375537
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Hyperglycemia/genetics, diagnosis, pathology"
- Infant
- "Hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA Synthase/deficiency, genetics"
- Mutation
- "Mitochondria/enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A synthase 2 deficiency with severe hyperglycemia in a child: A rare case report.
**Authors:** Dong C, Lu T, Jiang Y, Yan Z, Zhu S
**Journal:** J Int Med Res (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1177/03000605251375537](https://doi.org/10.1177/03000605251375537)

## Content

1. J Int Med Res. 2025 Sep;53(9):3000605251375537. doi:
10.1177/03000605251375537.  Epub 2025 Sep 12.

Mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A synthase 2 deficiency with
severe hyperglycemia in a child: A rare case report.

Dong C(1), Lu T(1), Jiang Y(1), Yan Z(1), Zhu S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Affiliated Suqian Hospital of Xuzhou Medical
University, China.

Mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A synthase 2 (HMGCS2)
deficiency is an exceptionally rare autosomal recessive metabolic disorder that
impairs ketogenesis. It is typically characterized by hypoketotic hypoglycemia
during periods of fasting or metabolic stress. Notably, severe hyperglycemia as
an initial presenting symptom has not been previously reported. We report the
case of a 6-month-old girl who suddenly developed coma after 1 day of fasting
due to repeated vomiting during pneumonia. At presentation, she had
hyperglycemia (25.8 mmol/L), ketonuria (1+), glucosuria (3+), metabolic acidosis
(pH 6.90), elevated serum alanine transaminase and aspartate aminotransferase
levels, increased blood ammonia levels, and liver enlargement on ultrasound.
However, fasting insulin, glucagon, and glycated hemoglobin levels were all
within the normal range. Whole-exome sequencing identified compound heterozygous
mutations in the HMGCS2 gene-c.1175C>T (p.S392L) inherited from the father and
c.719A>T (p.A240V) inherited from the mother-thereby confirming the diagnosis of
HMGCS2 deficiency. This case highlights severe hyperglycemia as an atypical
clinical feature of HMGCS2 deficiency. Increased awareness of such rare
manifestations may assist in improving early diagnosis and treatment of this
condition.

DOI: 10.1177/03000605251375537
PMCID: PMC12432301
PMID: 40937626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interestThe authors
declare that there are no conflicts of interest.
