---
reference_id: PMID:25784053
title: The biology of proteostasis in aging and disease.
authors:
- Labbadia J
- Morimoto RI
journal: Annu Rev Biochem
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1146/annurev-biochem-060614-033955
keywords:
- Aging/pathology
- Animals
- Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress
- Humans
- Metabolic Networks and Pathways
- Neurodegenerative Diseases/pathology
- Proteins/metabolism
- Proteolysis
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# The biology of proteostasis in aging and disease.
**Authors:** Labbadia J, Morimoto RI
**Journal:** Annu Rev Biochem (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev-biochem-060614-033955](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-biochem-060614-033955)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Biochem. 2015;84:435-64. doi: 10.1146/annurev-biochem-060614-033955. 
Epub 2015 Mar 12.

The biology of proteostasis in aging and disease.

Labbadia J(1), Morimoto RI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Rice Institute for Biomedical Research, 
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208; email: 
r-morimoto@northwestern.edu.

Loss of protein homeostasis (proteostasis) is a common feature of aging and 
disease that is characterized by the appearance of nonnative protein aggregates 
in various tissues. Protein aggregation is routinely suppressed by the 
proteostasis network (PN), a collection of macromolecular machines that operate 
in diverse ways to maintain proteome integrity across subcellular compartments 
and between tissues to ensure a healthy life span. Here, we review the 
composition, function, and organizational properties of the PN in the context of 
individual cells and entire organisms and discuss the mechanisms by which 
disruption of the PN, and related stress response pathways, contributes to the 
initiation and progression of disease. We explore emerging evidence that disease 
susceptibility arises from early changes in the composition and activity of the 
PN and propose that a more complete understanding of the temporal and spatial 
properties of the PN will enhance our ability to develop effective treatments 
for protein conformational diseases.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-biochem-060614-033955
PMCID: PMC4539002
PMID: 25784053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]