---
reference_id: "PMID:34543737"
title: "Hypoparathyroidism, neutropenia and nephrotic syndrome in a patient with mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiency: A case report and review of the literature."
authors:
- Li Y
- He C
- Li S
- Wang J
- Jiang L
- Guo Y
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2021.104344
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypoparathyroidism, neutropenia and nephrotic syndrome in a patient with mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiency: A case report and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Li Y, He C, Li S, Wang J, Jiang L, Guo Y
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2021.104344](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2021.104344)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2021 Dec;64(12):104344. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2021.104344. Epub
 2021 Sep 17.

Hypoparathyroidism, neutropenia and nephrotic syndrome in a patient with 
mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiency: A case report and review of the 
literature.

Li Y(1), He C(1), Li S(1), Wang J(2), Jiang L(2), Guo Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, 
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders, 
Chongqing, 400014, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, 
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders, 
Chongqing, 400014, China; China International Science and Technology Cooperation 
Base of Child Development and Critical Disorders, Chongqing, 400014, China; 
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Pediatrics, Chongqing, 400014, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, 
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders, 
Chongqing, 400014, China; China International Science and Technology Cooperation 
Base of Child Development and Critical Disorders, Chongqing, 400014, China; 
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Pediatrics, Chongqing, 400014, China. Electronic 
address: yiguo_cq@hotmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: Mitochondrial trifunctional protein (TFP) deficiency is an 
autosomal recessive disorder that causes a clinical spectrum of diseases ranging 
from severe infantile cardiomyopathy to mild chronic progressive neuromyopathy, 
however, parathyroid glands, hematologic system and kidney damage are not the 
common presentations of this disease.
METHODS: We describe the clinical, biochemical and molecular features of the TFP 
deficiency patient at our institution. We also provide an extensive literature 
review of previous published cases with emphasis on the clinical/biochemical 
phenotype-genotype correlation of this disorder.
RESULTS: Our case is a complete TFP deficiency patient dominated presented with 
hypoparathyroidism, neutropenia and nephrotic syndrome, which caused by compound 
heterozygoues variants in HADHB gene. Based on the retrospective study of 157 
cases, TFP patients presented with diverse clinical, biochemical and molecular 
features. The onset age is typically before early childhood. Neuromuscular 
system is more vulnerable involved. Severe form is generally characterized by 
multiorgan involvement. A notable feature of severe and intermediate form is 
respiratory failure. Neuropathy and rhabdomyolysis are the typical 
manifestations of mild form. Increased long-chain 3-OH-acylcarnitines (C16-OH, 
C18:1-OH) are the most common biochemical finding. The mortality of the present 
study is as high as 57.9%, which is linked with the onset age, phenotype, 
mutation type and muscular histology. Mutations in HADHB are more frequent in 
Asian descent with complete TFP deficiency and usually presented with atypical 
presentations. The type of mutation, rather than residual enzyme activity seem 
to be more related to the phenotype and prognosis. The most common HADHA variant 
is 1528G > C, no common HADHB variant were detected.
CONCLUSIONS: TFP deficiency is heterogeneous at both the molecular and 
phenotypic levels, generally a high mortality. Although there is no strict 
clinical/biochemical phenotype-genotype correlation, difference in ethnic and 
subunit mutations still have certain characteristics.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2021.104344
PMID: 34543737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]