---
reference_id: "PMID:33892852"
title: "Rett Syndrome: A Timely Review From Recognition to Current Clinical Approaches and Clinical Study Updates."
authors:
- Ivy AS
- Standridge SM
journal: Semin Pediatr Neurol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.spen.2021.100881
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rett Syndrome: A Timely Review From Recognition to Current Clinical Approaches and Clinical Study Updates.
**Authors:** Ivy AS, Standridge SM
**Journal:** Semin Pediatr Neurol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.spen.2021.100881](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spen.2021.100881)

## Content

1. Semin Pediatr Neurol. 2021 Apr;37:100881. doi: 10.1016/j.spen.2021.100881.
Epub  2021 Mar 18.

Rett Syndrome: A Timely Review From Recognition to Current Clinical Approaches 
and Clinical Study Updates.

Ivy AS(1), Standridge SM(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Child Neurology, Children's Hospital Orange County, Orange, CA; 
Departments of Pediatrics and Neurology, University of California- Irvine School 
of Medicine, Irvine, CA.
(2)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Division of Neurology, 
Cincinnati, OH; University of Cincinnati, College of Medicine, Department of 
Pediatrics, Cincinnati, OH. Electronic address: Shannon.Standridge@cchmc.org.

Since the discovery of the genetic basis of Rett syndrome in 1999, our 
understanding has grown considerably both in the scientific and the clinical 
realms. In the last two decades, we have learned about the far-reaching effects 
of the aberrant MeCP2 protein, the growing list of involved genetic factors, and 
the genotype-phenotype clinical expression of common MECP2 mutations. This 
knowledge has led to several basic science research and clinical trials, 
focusing specifically on emerging treatments of Rett syndrome. As the 
pathophysiology behind the disease is better understood, treatments aimed at 
specific molecular targets will become available for clinicians to improve the 
life of individuals with Rett syndrome.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.spen.2021.100881
PMID: 33892852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest Autumn Ivy: 
None; Shannon Standridge: Speaker for GW Biosciences, Consultant for Acadia 
Pharmaceuticals and Zogenix Incorporated.