---
reference_id: "PMID:18936492"
title: Faecalibacterium prausnitzii is an anti-inflammatory commensal bacterium identified by gut microbiota analysis of Crohn disease patients.
authors:
- Sokol H
- Pigneur B
- Watterlot L
- Lakhdari O
- Bermúdez-Humarán LG
- Gratadoux JJ
- Blugeon S
- Bridonneau C
- Furet JP
- Corthier G
- Grangette C
- Vasquez N
- Pochart P
- Trugnan G
- Thomas G
- Blottière HM
- Doré J
- Marteau P
- Seksik P
- Langella P
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0804812105
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Faecalibacterium prausnitzii is an anti-inflammatory commensal bacterium identified by gut microbiota analysis of Crohn disease patients.
**Authors:** Sokol H, Pigneur B, Watterlot L, Lakhdari O, Bermúdez-Humarán LG, Gratadoux JJ, Blugeon S, Bridonneau C, Furet JP, Corthier G, Grangette C, Vasquez N, Pochart P, Trugnan G, Thomas G, Blottière HM, Doré J, Marteau P, Seksik P, Langella P
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0804812105](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0804812105)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Oct 28;105(43):16731-6. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0804812105. Epub 2008 Oct 20.

Faecalibacterium prausnitzii is an anti-inflammatory commensal bacterium 
identified by gut microbiota analysis of Crohn disease patients.

Sokol H(1), Pigneur B, Watterlot L, Lakhdari O, Bermúdez-Humarán LG, Gratadoux 
JJ, Blugeon S, Bridonneau C, Furet JP, Corthier G, Grangette C, Vasquez N, 
Pochart P, Trugnan G, Thomas G, Blottière HM, Doré J, Marteau P, Seksik P, 
Langella P.

Author information:
(1)Unité Ecologie et Physiologie du Système Digestif, Institut National de la 
Recherche Agronomique U910, Domaine de Vilvert, 78350 Jouy-en-Josas, France.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Oct 28;105(43):16418-25. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0805811105.
    Am J Transplant. 2013 Apr;13(4):829. doi: 10.1111/ajt.12232.

A decrease in the abundance and biodiversity of intestinal bacteria within the 
dominant phylum Firmicutes has been observed repeatedly in Crohn disease (CD) 
patients. In this study, we determined the composition of the mucosa-associated 
microbiota of CD patients at the time of surgical resection and 6 months later 
using FISH analysis. We found that a reduction of a major member of Firmicutes, 
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, is associated with a higher risk of postoperative 
recurrence of ileal CD. A lower proportion of F. prausnitzii on resected ileal 
Crohn mucosa also was associated with endoscopic recurrence at 6 months. To 
evaluate the immunomodulatory properties of F. prausnitzii we analyzed the 
anti-inflammatory effects of F. prausnitzii in both in vitro (cellular models) 
and in vivo [2,4,6-trinitrobenzenesulphonic acid (TNBS)-induced] colitis in 
mice. In Caco-2 cells transfected with a reporter gene for NF-kappaB activity, 
F. prausnitzii had no effect on IL-1beta-induced NF-kappaB activity, whereas the 
supernatant abolished it. In vitro peripheral blood mononuclear cell stimulation 
by F. prausnitzii led to significantly lower IL-12 and IFN-gamma production 
levels and higher secretion of IL-10. Oral administration of either live F. 
prausnitzii or its supernatant markedly reduced the severity of TNBS colitis and 
tended to correct the dysbiosis associated with TNBS colitis, as demonstrated by 
real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) analysis. F. prausnitzii exhibits 
anti-inflammatory effects on cellular and TNBS colitis models, partly due to 
secreted metabolites able to block NF-kappaB activation and IL-8 production. 
These results suggest that counterbalancing dysbiosis using F. prausnitzii as a 
probiotic is a promising strategy in CD treatment.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0804812105
PMCID: PMC2575488
PMID: 18936492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.