---
reference_id: "PMID:22035393"
title: Rheumatoid arthritis of the cervical spine--clinical considerations.
authors:
- Wasserman BR
- Moskovich R
- Razi AE
journal: Bull NYU Hosp Jt Dis
year: '2011'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rheumatoid arthritis of the cervical spine--clinical considerations.
**Authors:** Wasserman BR, Moskovich R, Razi AE
**Journal:** Bull NYU Hosp Jt Dis (2011)

## Content

1. Bull NYU Hosp Jt Dis. 2011;69(2):136-48.

Rheumatoid arthritis of the cervical spine--clinical considerations.

Wasserman BR(1), Moskovich R, Razi AE.

Author information:
(1)Departmentof Sports Medicine, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, 
Pennsylvania, USA.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic, systemic inflammatory disorder affecting 
multiple organ systems, joints, ligaments, and bones and commonly involves the 
cervical spine. Chronic synovitis may result in bony erosion and ligamentous 
laxity that result in instability and subluxation. Anterior atlantoaxial 
subluxation (AAS) is the most frequently occurring deformity, due to laxity of 
the primary and secondary ligamentous restraints. Additional manifestations of 
RA include cranial settling, subaxial subluxation, or a combination of these. 
Although clinical findings can be confounded by the severity of multifocal joint 
and systemic involvement, a careful history is critical to identify symptoms of 
cervical disease; serial physical examination is the best noninvasive diagnostic 
tool. Thorough physical and neurologic examinations should be performed in all 
patients and serial functional assessments charted. Radiographs of the cervical 
spine with lateral flexion-extension dynamic views should be obtained 
periodically and used to "clear" the cervical spine before elective surgery 
requiring general anesthesia. Advanced imaging, such as magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) or myelography and computed tomography (CT), may be necessary to 
evaluate the neuraxis. Early initiation of pharmacotherapy may slow progression 
of rheumatoid cervical disease. Operative intervention before the onset of 
advanced myelopathy results in improved outcomes compared to the surgical 
stabilization of patients whose conditions are more advanced. A 
multidisciplinary approach involving rheumatology, surgery, and rehabilitation 
is beneficial to optimize outcomes.

PMID: 22035393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]