---
reference_id: "PMID:29080811"
title: Genetics of Sost/SOST in sclerosteosis and van Buchem disease animal models.
authors:
- Sebastian A
- Loots GG
journal: Metabolism
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2017.10.005
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
- Animals
- Bone Morphogenetic Proteins/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Genetic Markers/genetics
- Humans
- "Hyperostosis/genetics, pathology"
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics, pathology"
- "Syndactyly/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics of Sost/SOST in sclerosteosis and van Buchem disease animal models.
**Authors:** Sebastian A, Loots GG
**Journal:** Metabolism (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.metabol.2017.10.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.metabol.2017.10.005)

## Content

1. Metabolism. 2018 Mar;80:38-47. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2017.10.005. Epub 2017
Oct  25.

Genetics of Sost/SOST in sclerosteosis and van Buchem disease animal models.

Sebastian A(1), Loots GG(2).

Author information:
(1)Biology and Biotechnology Division, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory,
7000 East Avenue, L-452, Livermore, CA 94550, USA.
(2)Biology and Biotechnology Division, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory,
7000 East Avenue, L-452, Livermore, CA 94550, USA; School of Natural Sciences,
University of California, Merced, CA 95343, USA. Electronic address:
Loots1@llnl.gov.

Sclerosteosis and van Buchem disease (VBD) are two rare autosomal recessive
disorders that results from osteoblast hyperactivity, in which progressive bone
overgrowth leads to very dense bones, distortion of the face, and entrapment of
cranial nerves. Sclerosteosis is caused by loss-of-function mutations in the
SOST gene which encodes a secreted glycoprotein, sclerostin. VBD is caused by a
noncoding deletion that removes a SOST-specific regulatory element in bone. In
bone, SOST is expressed predominantly by osteocytes and sclerostin suppresses
bone formation by inhibiting the canonical Wnt signaling pathway. Here we
describe how human genetics studies in sclerosteosis and VBD patients, in
combination with the generation of transgenic and knockout mice, has led to a
better understanding of the role of sclerostin in bone metabolism.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.metabol.2017.10.005
PMID: 29080811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
