---
reference_id: "PMID:29633588"
title: "Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and Management."
authors:
- Tauqeer Z
- Yonekawa Y
journal: Asia Pac J Ophthalmol (Phila)
year: '2018'
doi: 10.22608/APO.201855
keywords:
- "Diagnostic Techniques, Ophthalmological"
- "Eye Diseases, Hereditary"
- Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathies
- Genetic Therapy/methods
- Humans
- "Retinal Diseases/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
- Visual Acuity
- Vitreoretinal Surgery/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and Management.
**Authors:** Tauqeer Z, Yonekawa Y
**Journal:** Asia Pac J Ophthalmol (Phila) (2018)
**DOI:** [10.22608/APO.201855](https://doi.org/10.22608/APO.201855)

## Content

1. Asia Pac J Ophthalmol (Phila). 2018 May-Jun;7(3):176-182. doi: 
10.22608/APO.201855. Epub 2018 Apr 9.

Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and 
Management.

Tauqeer Z(1), Yonekawa Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Retina Service, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Pediatric Retina Surgery, Department of Ophthalmology, Boston Children's 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.

Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy (FEVR) is a heritable vitreoretinopathy 
characterized by anomalous retinal vascular development. The principal feature 
of the disease is an avascular peripheral retina. This in turn can cause further 
pathological changes including neovascularization, exudation, hemorrhage, and 
retinal detachment. The biological basis of the disease is thought to be from 
defects in the Wnt signaling pathway. Many gene mutations have been implicated, 
and these can be inherited in an autosomal dominant (most common), autosomal 
recessive, and X-linked recessive fashion. Examination with wide-field 
fluorescein angiography is essential and can identify the disease in its earlier 
stages, enabling timely treatment, in addition to helping identify asymptomatic 
family members. The current treatment paradigm involves laser photocoagulation 
of the avascular peripheral retina for neovascular sequelae and vitreoretinal 
surgery for progressive retinal detachment. Further studies are underway to 
better characterize this complex vitreoretinopathy.

Copyright 2018 Asia-Pacific Academy of Ophthalmology.

DOI: 10.22608/APO.201855
PMID: 29633588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]