---
reference_id: "PMID:12926840"
title: "Reflexology treatment relieves symptoms of multiple sclerosis: a randomized controlled study."
authors:
- Siev-Ner I
- Gamus D
- Lerner-Geva L
- Achiron A
journal: Mult Scler
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1191/1352458503ms925oa
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reflexology treatment relieves symptoms of multiple sclerosis: a randomized controlled study.
**Authors:** Siev-Ner I, Gamus D, Lerner-Geva L, Achiron A
**Journal:** Mult Scler (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1191/1352458503ms925oa](https://doi.org/10.1191/1352458503ms925oa)

## Content

1. Mult Scler. 2003 Aug;9(4):356-61. doi: 10.1191/1352458503ms925oa.

Reflexology treatment relieves symptoms of multiple sclerosis: a randomized 
controlled study.

Siev-Ner I(1), Gamus D, Lerner-Geva L, Achiron A.

Author information:
(1)Complementary Medicine Clinic, Department of Orthopedic Rehabilitation, Sheba 
Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effect of reflexology on symptoms of multiple 
sclerosis (MS) in a randomized, sham-controlled clinical trial.
METHODS: Seventy-one MS patients were randomized to either study or control 
group, to receive an 11-week treatment. Reflexology treatment included manual 
pressure on specific points in the feet and massage of the calf area. The 
control group received nonspecific massage of the calf area. The intensity of 
paresthesias, urinary symptoms, muscle strength and spasticity was assessed in a 
masked fashion at the beginning of the study, after 1.5 months of treatment, end 
of study and at three months of follow-up.
RESULTS: Fifty-three patients completed this study. Significant improvement in 
the differences in mean scores of paresthesias (P = 0.01), urinary symptoms (P = 
0.03) and spasticity (P = 0.03) was detected in the reflexology group. 
Improvement with borderline significance was observed in the differences in mean 
scores of muscle strength between the reflexology group and the controls (P = 
0.06). The improvement in the intensity of paresthesias remained significant at 
three months of follow-up (P = 0.04).
CONCLUSIONS: Specific reflexology treatment was of benefit in alleviating motor; 
sensory and urinary symptoms in MS patients.

DOI: 10.1191/1352458503ms925oa
PMID: 12926840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]