---
reference_id: "PMID:37916482"
title: "Cryoglobulinemic vasculitis: a 2023 update."
authors:
- Moretti M
- Ferro F
- Baldini C
- Mosca M
- Talarico R
journal: Curr Opin Rheumatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000989
keywords:
- Humans
- Rituximab/therapeutic use
- Antiviral Agents/therapeutic use
- "Hepatitis C, Chronic/complications"
- Hepatitis C/complications
- "Vasculitis/drug therapy, etiology"
- "Cryoglobulinemia/etiology, complications"
- Hepacivirus
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cryoglobulinemic vasculitis: a 2023 update.
**Authors:** Moretti M, Ferro F, Baldini C, Mosca M, Talarico R
**Journal:** Curr Opin Rheumatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BOR.0000000000000989](https://doi.org/10.1097/BOR.0000000000000989)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2024 Jan 1;36(1):27-34. doi:
10.1097/BOR.0000000000000989.  Epub 2023 Nov 1.

Cryoglobulinemic vasculitis: a 2023 update.

Moretti M(1), Ferro F, Baldini C, Mosca M, Talarico R.

Author information:
(1)Rheumatology Unit, Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria Pisana, University of 
Pisa, Pisa, Italy.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Cryoglobulinemic vasculitis (CV) is an immune complex 
mediated small vessel vasculitis characterized by the presence of cryoglobulins 
in serum, often associated with hepatitis C infection, systemic autoimmune 
diseases or hematological conditions. The focus of this review is to provide an 
update on new insights into pathogenesis, epidemiology and therapies of 
infectious and noninfectious type II and type III CV.
RECENT FINDINGS: The introduction of new antiviral drugs for treatment of 
hepatitis C infection implied major changes in HCV-related CV, allowing to shed 
new lights on CV pathogenesis and mechanisms of relapse and, therefore, to 
increase the relevance of autoimmune diseases in CV epidemiology. Specific 
B-cell clones are involved in the production of pathogenic immune complexes that 
leads to small-vessel vasculitis. Therefore, both antiviral treatments 
[direct-acting antivirals (DAAs) and oral nucleot(s)ide analogues] and targeted 
anti-CD20 therapies (rituximab) prove to be safe and effective options, leading 
to a better prognosis. Association of Sjögren syndrome and CV defines a specific 
phenotype of patients, characterized by severe manifestations and poor outcome.
SUMMARY: Removing viral stimulation on B-cells through direct-acting antivirals 
and blocking B-cells proliferation and differentiation with rituximab are the 
goals of treatment of CV. However, further research is needed to identify 
prognostic factors of refractory and relapsing disease.

Copyright © 2023 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000989
PMID: 37916482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]