---
reference_id: "PMID:21128317"
title: Management of mucinous cystic neoplasms of the pancreas.
authors:
- Testini M
- Gurrado A
- Lissidini G
- Venezia P
- Greco L
- Piccinni G
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v16.i45.5682
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of mucinous cystic neoplasms of the pancreas.
**Authors:** Testini M, Gurrado A, Lissidini G, Venezia P, Greco L, Piccinni G
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.v16.i45.5682](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v16.i45.5682)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2010 Dec 7;16(45):5682-92. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v16.i45.5682.

Management of mucinous cystic neoplasms of the pancreas.

Testini M(1), Gurrado A, Lissidini G, Venezia P, Greco L, Piccinni G.

Author information:
(1)Unit of Endocrine, Digestive and Emergency Surgery, Department of Biomedical 
Sciences and Human Oncology, Section of General and Oncologic Surgery, 
University Medical School of Bari, Policlinico, Piazza Giulio Cesare, 11, 70124 
Bari, Italy. mario.testini@chirgen2.uniba.it

The purpose of this study was to investigate the actual management of mucinous 
cystic neoplasm (MCN) of the pancreas. A systematic review was performed in 
December 2009 by consulting PubMed MEDLINE for publications and matching the key 
words "pancreatic mucinous cystic neoplasm", "pancreatic mucinous cystic 
tumour", "pancreatic mucinous cystic mass", "pancreatic cyst", and "pancreatic 
cystic neoplasm" to identify English language articles describing the diagnosis 
and treatment of the mucinous cystic neoplasm of the pancreas. In total, 16 322 
references ranging from January 1969 to December 2009 were analysed and 77 
articles were identified. No articles published before 1996 were selected 
because MCNs were not previously considered to be a completely autonomous 
disease. Definition, epidemiology, anatomopathological findings, clinical 
presentation, preoperative evaluation, treatment and prognosis were reviewed. 
MCNs are pancreatic mucin-producing cysts with a distinctive ovarian-type stroma 
localized in the body-tail of the gland and occurring in middle-aged females. 
The majority of MCNs are slow growing and asymptomatic. The prevalence of 
invasive carcinoma varies between 6% and 55%. Preoperative diagnosis depends on 
a combination of clinical features, tumor markers, computed tomography (CT), 
magnetic resonance imaging, endoscopic ultrasound with cyst fluid analysis, and 
positron emission tomography-CT. Surgery is indicated for all MCNs.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v16.i45.5682
PMCID: PMC2997983
PMID: 21128317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]