---
reference_id: "PMID:31484714"
title: The epileptology of alternating hemiplegia of childhood.
authors:
- Uchitel J
- Helseth A
- Prange L
- McLean M
- Ghusayni R
- Sachdev M
- Hunanyan A
- Mikati MA
journal: Neurology
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000008159
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Electroencephalography/methods
- "Epilepsy/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Female
- "Hemiplegia/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Seizures/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Sodium-Potassium-Exchanging ATPase/metabolism
- "Status Epilepticus/etiology, physiopathology"
- Vagus Nerve Stimulation/adverse effects
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The epileptology of alternating hemiplegia of childhood.
**Authors:** Uchitel J, Helseth A, Prange L, McLean M, Ghusayni R, Sachdev M, Hunanyan A, Mikati MA
**Journal:** Neurology (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000008159](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000008159)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2019 Sep 24;93(13):e1248-e1259. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000008159. 
Epub 2019 Sep 4.

The epileptology of alternating hemiplegia of childhood.

Uchitel J(1), Helseth A(1), Prange L(1), McLean M(1), Ghusayni R(1), Sachdev 
M(1), Hunanyan A(1), Mikati MA(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Division of Pediatric Neurology, Duke University Health System, Duke 
University School of Medicine, Durham NC.
(2)From the Division of Pediatric Neurology, Duke University Health System, Duke 
University School of Medicine, Durham NC. mohamad.mikati@dm.duke.edu.

Erratum in
    Neurology. 2020 Oct 13;95(15):708. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000010180.

OBJECTIVE: To report our experience and investigate 5 original hypotheses: (1) 
multiple types of epileptic seizures occur in alternating hemiplegia of 
childhood (AHC), and these can be the initial presentation; (2) epileptiform 
abnormalities often appear well after clinical seizures; (3) nonepileptic 
reduced awareness spells (RAS) occur frequently; (4) epilepsy is commonly drug 
resistant but may respond to vagal nerve stimulation (VNS); and (5) status 
epilepticus (SE) is common and is usually refractory and recurrent.
METHODS: We analyzed a cohort of 51 consecutive patients with AHC.
RESULTS: Thirty-two of 51 patients had epilepsy: 18 focal seizures, frontal more 
frequently than temporal, and then posterior. Eleven had primary generalized 
seizures (tonic-clonic, myoclonic, and/or absence). Epileptic seizures preceded 
other AHC paroxysmal events in 8 (lag 5.63 ± 6.55 months; p = 0.0365). In 7 of 
32, initial EEGs were normal, with the first epileptiform EEG lagging behind by 
3.53 ± 4.65 years (p = 0.0484). RAS occurred equally in patients with epilepsy 
(16 of 32) and patients without epilepsy (10 of 19, p = 1.0). Twenty-eight 
patients had video-EEG; captured RAS showed no concomitant EEG changes. Nineteen 
patients (59%) were drug resistant. VNS resulted in >50% reduction in seizures 
in 5 of 6 (p < 0.04). Twelve patients (38%) had SE (9 of 12 multiple episodes), 
refractory/superrefractory in all (p < 0.001), and 4 of 12 had regression after 
SE.
CONCLUSIONS: Epilepsy in AHC can be focal or generalized. Epileptic seizures may 
be the first paroxysmal symptom. EEG may become epileptiform only on follow-up. 
Epilepsy, although frequently drug resistant, can respond to VNS. RAS are 
frequent and nonepileptic. SE often recurs and is usually 
refractory/superrefractory. Our observations are consistent with current data on 
AHC-ATP1A3 pathophysiology.

© 2019 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000008159
PMID: 31484714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]