---
reference_id: "PMID:24474919"
title: "A case of autosomal recessive woolly hair/hypotrichosis with alternation in severity: deterioration and improvement with age."
authors:
- Matsuno N
- Kunisada M
- Kanki H
- Simomura Y
- Nishigori C
journal: Case Rep Dermatol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1159/000357208
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case of autosomal recessive woolly hair/hypotrichosis with alternation in severity: deterioration and improvement with age.
**Authors:** Matsuno N, Kunisada M, Kanki H, Simomura Y, Nishigori C
**Journal:** Case Rep Dermatol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000357208](https://doi.org/10.1159/000357208)

## Content

1. Case Rep Dermatol. 2013 Dec 7;5(3):363-7. doi: 10.1159/000357208. eCollection 
2013 Sep.

A case of autosomal recessive woolly hair/hypotrichosis with alternation in 
severity: deterioration and improvement with age.

Matsuno N(1), Kunisada M(1), Kanki H(1), Simomura Y(1), Nishigori C(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Dermatology, Department of Internal Related, Kobe University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Niigata, Japan.

Autosomal recessive woolly hair/hypotrichosis (ARWH/H) is a nonsyndromic hair 
abnormality characterized by sparse, short and curly hair (WH/H). We report the 
case of a 3-year-old female, with no consanguineous ancestry, who exhibited 
WH/H. Normal hair was observed at birth, but severe hair loss had developed 
within the first 6 months; however, her hair density had improved somewhat by 
age 3. Light microscopy showed hair shaft invaginations, and polarized light 
microscopy suggested complete medullary disruption of the hair. Direct sequence 
analysis of peripheral blood showed a homozygous missense mutation in exon 6 of 
the lipase H gene (LIPH: c.736T>A, p.Cys246Ser), and the exact same mutation was 
found in the heterozygous state in both parents. The initial deterioration 
followed by improvement with age observed in this case suggests that the 
clinical course of ARWH/H may vary among patients with the same mutation in LIPH 
detected in this case, indicating that additional factors may influence the 
effect of LIPH on hair development.

DOI: 10.1159/000357208
PMCID: PMC3901624
PMID: 24474919