---
reference_id: "PMID:24102428"
title: Serum angiopoietin-2 and CRP levels during COPD exacerbations.
authors:
- Nikolakopoulou S
- Hillas G
- Perrea D
- Tentolouris N
- Loukides S
- Kostikas K
- Simoes D
- Georgakopoulou E
- Vogiatzakis E
- Veldekis D
- Bakakos P
journal: COPD
year: '2014'
doi: 10.3109/15412555.2013.829436
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serum angiopoietin-2 and CRP levels during COPD exacerbations.
**Authors:** Nikolakopoulou S, Hillas G, Perrea D, Tentolouris N, Loukides S, Kostikas K, Simoes D, Georgakopoulou E, Vogiatzakis E, Veldekis D, Bakakos P
**Journal:** COPD (2014)
**DOI:** [10.3109/15412555.2013.829436](https://doi.org/10.3109/15412555.2013.829436)

## Content

1. COPD. 2014 Feb;11(1):46-51. doi: 10.3109/15412555.2013.829436. Epub 2013 Oct
8.

Serum angiopoietin-2 and CRP levels during COPD exacerbations.

Nikolakopoulou S(1), Hillas G, Perrea D, Tentolouris N, Loukides S, Kostikas K, 
Simoes D, Georgakopoulou E, Vogiatzakis E, Veldekis D, Bakakos P.

Author information:
(1)1Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Research Unit, 
"Sotiria" Chest Diseases Hospital , Athens , Greece.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Angiopoietin-2 (Ang-2) is an important mediator of 
angiogenesis and has been implicated in many inflammatory diseases. COPD is 
characterized by systemic inflammation, which is enhanced during exacerbations 
and may be assessed by measuring serum C-reactive protein (CRP). The aim of the 
study was to evaluate serum CRP and Ang-2 levels on the first (D1) and seventh 
day (D7) of hospitalization due to a COPD exacerbation and to examine possible 
associations of CRP and Ang-2 levels and kinetics with the length of hospital 
stay and outcome.
METHODS: We conducted a prospective study and evaluated 90 patients admitted to 
the hospital with a diagnosis of an acute exacerbation of COPD. A venous blood 
sample was obtained from all patients on D1 and D7 of hospitalization, for the 
measurement of Ang-2 and CRP.
RESULTS: Serum Ang-2 levels were significantly higher on D1 compared to D7 
during the course of COPD exacerbation (p < 0.001). Serum CRP levels were also 
significantly higher on D1 compared to D7 (p < 0.001). Serum Ang-2 presented a 
significant positive correlation with CRP levels both on D1 and D7 (r = 0.315 
and r = 0.228, respectively). Patients with unfavorable outcome had 
significantly higher Ang-2 levels both on D1 (p = 0.04) and D7 (p = 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Serum Ang-2 levels are elevated at the onset of COPD exacerbations 
and are positively associated with CRP levels. Ang-2 levels decrease during the 
course of COPD exacerbations in patients with favorable outcome. Serum Ang-2 may 
serve as a biomarker that could predict the outcome of a COPD exacerbation.

DOI: 10.3109/15412555.2013.829436
PMID: 24102428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]