---
reference_id: "PMID:34996091"
title: "Mistaken Identity: The Role of Autoantibodies in Endocrine Disease."
authors:
- Nelson HA
- Joshi HR
- Straseski JA
journal: J Appl Lab Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/jalm/jfab128
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mistaken Identity: The Role of Autoantibodies in Endocrine Disease.
**Authors:** Nelson HA, Joshi HR, Straseski JA
**Journal:** J Appl Lab Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jalm/jfab128](https://doi.org/10.1093/jalm/jfab128)

## Content

1. J Appl Lab Med. 2022 Jan 5;7(1):206-220. doi: 10.1093/jalm/jfab128.

Mistaken Identity: The Role of Autoantibodies in Endocrine Disease.

Nelson HA(1), Joshi HR(1), Straseski JA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt Lake 
City, UT, USA.

BACKGROUND: Autoimmune endocrine diseases can be thought of as a case of 
mistaken identity. The immune system mistakenly attacks one's own cells, as if 
they were foreign, which typically results in endocrine gland hypofunction and 
inadequate hormone production. Type 1 diabetes mellitus and autoimmune thyroid 
disorders (Hashimoto and Graves diseases) are the most common autoimmune 
endocrine disorders, while conditions such as Addison disease are encountered 
less frequently. Autoantibody production can precede clinical presentation, and 
their measurement may aid verification of an autoimmune process and guide 
appropriate treatment modalities.
CONTENT: In this review, we discuss type 1 diabetes mellitus, autoimmune thyroid 
disorders, and Addison disease, emphasizing their associated autoantibodies and 
methods for clinical detection. We will also discuss efforts to standardize 
measurement of autoantibodies.
CONCLUSIONS: Autoimmune endocrine disease progression may take months to years 
and detection of associated autoantibodies may precede clinical onset of 
disease. Although detection of autoantibodies is not necessary for diagnosis, 
they may be useful to verify an autoimmune process.

© American Association for Clinical Chemistry 2021. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jalm/jfab128
PMID: 34996091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]