---
reference_id: "PMID:39045627"
title: "Integration of CTCF loops, methylome, and transcriptome in differentiating LUHMES as a model for imprinting dynamics of the 15q11-q13 locus in human neurons."
authors:
- Gutierrez Fugón OJ
- Sharifi O
- Heath N
- Soto DC
- Gomez JA
- Yasui DH
- Mendiola AJP
- "O'Geen H"
- Beitnere U
- Tomkova M
- Haghani V
- Dillon G
- Segal DJ
- LaSalle JM
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddae111
keywords:
- Humans
- Genomic Imprinting/genetics
- "CCCTC-Binding Factor/metabolism, genetics"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 15/genetics"
- Neurons/metabolism
- DNA Methylation/genetics
- Transcriptome/genetics
- "Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Differentiation/genetics
- "Angelman Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- "RNA, Long Noncoding/genetics"
- "Prader-Willi Syndrome/genetics, pathology, metabolism"
- "snRNP Core Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Alleles
- Cell Line
- Epigenome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Integration of CTCF loops, methylome, and transcriptome in differentiating LUHMES as a model for imprinting dynamics of the 15q11-q13 locus in human neurons.
**Authors:** Gutierrez Fugón OJ, Sharifi O, Heath N, Soto DC, Gomez JA, Yasui DH, Mendiola AJP, O'Geen H, Beitnere U, Tomkova M, Haghani V, Dillon G, Segal DJ, LaSalle JM
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddae111](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddae111)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2024 Sep 19;33(19):1711-1725. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddae111.

Integration of CTCF loops, methylome, and transcriptome in differentiating
LUHMES as a model for imprinting dynamics of the 15q11-q13 locus in human
neurons.

Gutierrez Fugón OJ(1)(2), Sharifi O(2), Heath N(1), Soto DC(1)(3), Gomez
JA(2)(4), Yasui DH(2), Mendiola AJP(2), O'Geen H(1), Beitnere U(1)(5), Tomkova
M(1)(6), Haghani V(2), Dillon G(7), Segal DJ(1), LaSalle JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Genome Center, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University
of California Davis, 451 Health Sciences Dr., Davis, CA 95616, United States.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine,
University of California Davis, 1275 Med Science Dr, Davis, CA 95616, United
States.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, University of California
Los Angeles, 757 Westwood Plaza #4, Los Angeles, CA 90095, United States.
(4)Department of Natural Science, Seaver College, Pepperdine University, 24255
Pacific Coast Hwy, Malibu, CA 90263, United States.
(5)Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Robert-Rössle-Straße 10, 13125
Berlin, Germany.
(6)Ludwig Cancer Research Center, University of Oxford, Old Road Campus Research
Build, Roosevelt Dr, Headington, Oxford OX3 7DQ, United Kingdom.
(7)Genetics and Neurodevelopmental Disorders Unit, Biogen, 225 Binney Street
Cambridge, MA 02142 United States.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 Mar 29:2024.03.26.586689. doi: 10.1101/2024.03.26.586689.

Human cell line models, including the neuronal precursor line LUHMES, are
important for investigating developmental transcriptional dynamics within
imprinted regions, particularly the 15q11-q13 Angelman (AS) and Prader-Willi
(PWS) syndrome locus. AS results from loss of maternal UBE3A in neurons, where
the paternal allele is silenced by a convergent antisense transcript UBE3A-ATS,
a lncRNA that terminates at PWAR1 in non-neurons. qRT-PCR analysis confirmed the
exclusive and progressive increase in UBE3A-ATS in differentiating LUHMES
neurons, validating their use for studying UBE3A silencing. Genome-wide
transcriptome analyses revealed changes to 11 834 genes during neuronal
differentiation, including the upregulation of most genes within the 15q11-q13
locus. To identify dynamic changes in chromatin loops linked to transcriptional
activity, we performed a HiChIP validated by 4C, which identified two
neuron-specific CTCF loops between MAGEL2-SNRPN and PWAR1-UBE3A. To determine if
allele-specific differentially methylated regions (DMR) may be associated with
CTCF loop anchors, whole genome long-read nanopore sequencing was performed. We
identified a paternally hypomethylated DMR near the SNRPN upstream loop anchor
exclusive to neurons and a paternally hypermethylated DMR near the PWAR1 CTCF
anchor exclusive to undifferentiated cells, consistent with increases in
neuronal transcription. Additionally, DMRs near CTCF loop anchors were observed
in both cell types, indicative of allele-specific differences in chromatin loops
regulating imprinted transcription. These results provide an integrated view of
the 15q11-q13 epigenetic landscape during LUHMES neuronal differentiation,
underscoring the complex interplay of transcription, chromatin looping, and DNA
methylation. They also provide insights for future therapeutic approaches for AS
and PWS.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddae111
PMCID: PMC11413648
PMID: 39045627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
