---
reference_id: "PMID:37840151"
title: TP53 mutation and human papilloma virus status as independent prognostic factors in a Norwegian cohort of vulva squamous cell carcinoma.
authors:
- Dongre HN
- Elnour R
- Tornaas S
- Fromreide S
- Thomsen LCV
- Kolseth IBM
- Nginamau ES
- Johannessen AC
- Vintermyr OK
- Costea DE
- Bjørge L
journal: Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/aogs.14689
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Prognosis
- Human Papillomavirus Viruses
- Papillomavirus Infections
- Retrospective Studies
- Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor p16/metabolism
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/pathology"
- Vulvar Neoplasms/pathology
- DNA
- "RNA, Messenger"
- "Vulva/chemistry, metabolism, pathology"
- Papillomaviridae/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TP53 mutation and human papilloma virus status as independent prognostic factors in a Norwegian cohort of vulva squamous cell carcinoma.
**Authors:** Dongre HN, Elnour R, Tornaas S, Fromreide S, Thomsen LCV, Kolseth IBM, Nginamau ES, Johannessen AC, Vintermyr OK, Costea DE, Bjørge L
**Journal:** Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/aogs.14689](https://doi.org/10.1111/aogs.14689)

## Content

1. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2024 Jan;103(1):165-175. doi: 10.1111/aogs.14689. 
Epub 2023 Oct 15.

TP53 mutation and human papilloma virus status as independent prognostic factors 
in a Norwegian cohort of vulva squamous cell carcinoma.

Dongre HN(1), Elnour R(1), Tornaas S(1), Fromreide S(1), Thomsen LCV(2)(3), 
Kolseth IBM(3), Nginamau ES(4), Johannessen AC(1)(4), Vintermyr OK(1)(4), Costea 
DE(1)(4), Bjørge L(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Cancer Biomarkers CCBIO and Gade Laboratory of Pathology, 
Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(2)Center for Cancer Biomarkers CCBIO, Department of Clinical Science, 
University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Haukeland University Hospital, 
Bergen, Norway.
(4)Department of Pathology, Laboratory Clinic, Haukeland University Hospital, 
Bergen, Norway.

INTRODUCTION: Vulva squamous cell carcinoma (VSCC) develops through two separate 
molecular pathways-one involving high-risk human papilloma virus infection 
(HPV-associated), and the other without HPV infection (HPV-independent) often 
involving TP53 mutation. HPV-associated VSCC generally has a better 
progression-free survival than HPV-independent VSCC. The aim of this study was 
to determine TP53 mutation status using immunohistochemistry, compare different 
methods of HPV detection and correlate both with survival in a retrospective 
cohort of 123 patients with VSCC.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Immunohistochemistry for p53, Ki67 and p16INK4A (a 
surrogate marker for HPV infection) was performed on formalin-fixed 
paraffin-embedded tissues from a cohort of surgically treated VSCC patients to 
identify molecular subtypes of VSCC. Presence of HPV infection was detected by 
HPV DNA PCR and HPV mRNA in situ hybridization (ISH). The Pearson chi-square 
test and multivariable Cox regression model were used to investigate the 
association of different parameters with progression-free survival and 
disease-specific survival (DSS), and Kaplan-Meier curves were used to show the 
association of different parameters with survival.
RESULTS: The results of p53 and p16INK4A immunohistochemistry confirmed three 
VSCC subtypes associated with different prognosis. The TP53 mutation status was 
identified as an independent prognostic factor of worse progression-free 
survival (p = 0.024) after adjustment for FIGO stage. p16INK4A 
immunohistochemistry, mRNA ISH, and DNA PCR had excellent concordance in terms 
of HPV detection. According to the multivariable Cox regression model, the 
presence of hrHPV mRNA correlated significantly with increased progression-free 
survival (p = 0.040) and DSS (p = 0.045), after adjustment for other 
confounders.
CONCLUSIONS: p53 and p16INK4A immunohistochemistry stratify VSCC cohort into 
three subtypes with TP53mutated patients having the worst prognosis. The 
detection of hrHPV mRNA by ISH was an independent predictor of increased 
survival. Thus, the combined detection of p53 and HPV mRNA might improve risk 
stratification in VSCC.

© 2023 The Authors. Acta Obstetricia et Gynecologica Scandinavica published by 
John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Nordic Federation of Societies of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology (NFOG).

DOI: 10.1111/aogs.14689
PMCID: PMC10755123
PMID: 37840151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: LCVT and LB report institutional funding 
received from AstraZeneca for an ovarian cancer clinical trial; LCVT received 
honoraria from Bayer and Astra Zeneca and advisory board/consulting speaker fees 
from Eisai Co.; LB reports payment for expert testimony on patent application 
and a leadership role in the Nordic Society of Gynecological Oncology (NSGO) 
clinical trial unit and oncology forum. The authors declare that they have no 
known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have 
appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.