---
reference_id: "PMID:9178843"
title: "Mantle cell lymphoma: diagnostic criteria, clinical aspects and therapeutic problems."
authors:
- Meusers P
- Hense J
- Brittinger G
journal: Leukemia
year: '1997'
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/therapeutic use"
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Clinical Trials as Topic
- Female
- Genetic Therapy
- Humans
- Immunotherapy
- "Lymphoma, Non-Hodgkin/classification, diagnosis, therapy"
- Male
- Multicenter Studies as Topic
- Prognosis
- Sex Characteristics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mantle cell lymphoma: diagnostic criteria, clinical aspects and therapeutic problems.
**Authors:** Meusers P, Hense J, Brittinger G
**Journal:** Leukemia (1997)

## Content

1. Leukemia. 1997 Apr;11 Suppl 2:S60-4.

Mantle cell lymphoma: diagnostic criteria, clinical aspects and therapeutic 
problems.

Meusers P(1), Hense J, Brittinger G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Essen, Germany.

In 1992, after a history of more than two decades a subgroup within the diffuse 
low-grade B cell lymphomas designated centrocytic lymphoma, lymphocytic lymphoma 
of intermediate differentiation or mantle zone lymphoma gained general 
acceptance, now referred to as mantle cell lymphoma. Similarities between these 
entities were emphasized by identification of rearrangement and overexpression 
of CCND1 (bcl1/PRAD1) gene in the majority of cases. Unlike in all other 
non-Hodgkin's lymphomas sex distribution demonstrates a striking preponderance 
of males over females with a ratio of 3:1. Initial parameters in all published 
series are advanced disease with generalized lymphadenopathy in 90%, bone marrow 
infiltration in 60-75%, splenomegaly in 55%, hepatomegaly in 35%, 
gastrointestinal involvement in about 25% and peripheral blood lymphocytosis in 
20-30% of patients. In generalized disease, clinical course is characterized by 
continuous progression with a median survival probability of 3-4 years within 
most series. Overall response rates of 56-88% with complete remissions in the 
range of 9-58% are attainable but relapse occurs predominantly within 20 months. 
At present there is no evidence that any conventional regimen is curative. 
Prospective multicenter studies are mandatory to overcome this therapeutic 
dilemma. Patients suitable for some form of maintenance or consolidation therapy 
should initially be treated intensively by anthracycline-containing regimens. 
Whether maintenance with interferon or intermittent chemotherapy including new 
agents, like purine analogues or (un)conjugated monoclonal antibodies are able 
to influence overall survival is a matter of (ongoing) investigations. Further 
experimental approaches arise from antisense oligonucleotides or ribozymes 
blocking the overexpression of bcl-1 especially in this lymphoma entity. At 
present high-dose myeloablative consolidation radiochemotherapy followed by stem 
cell rescue in first remission seems to be the most attractive option in younger 
patients.

PMID: 9178843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]