---
reference_id: "PMID:37735743"
title: Ancestral Origin and Dissemination Dynamics of Reemerging Toxigenic Vibrio cholerae, Haiti.
authors:
- Mavian CN
- Tagliamonte MS
- Alam MT
- Sakib SN
- Cash MN
- Moir M
- Jimenez JP
- Riva A
- Nelson EJ
- Cato ET
- Ajayakumar J
- Louis R
- Curtis A
- De Rochars VMB
- Rouzier V
- Pape JW
- de Oliveira T
- Morris JG Jr
- Salemi M
- Ali A
journal: Emerg Infect Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3201/eid2910.230554
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ancestral Origin and Dissemination Dynamics of Reemerging Toxigenic Vibrio cholerae, Haiti.
**Authors:** Mavian CN, Tagliamonte MS, Alam MT, Sakib SN, Cash MN, Moir M, Jimenez JP, Riva A, Nelson EJ, Cato ET, Ajayakumar J, Louis R, Curtis A, De Rochars VMB, Rouzier V, Pape JW, de Oliveira T, Morris JG Jr, Salemi M, Ali A
**Journal:** Emerg Infect Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3201/eid2910.230554](https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2910.230554)

## Content

1. Emerg Infect Dis. 2023 Oct;29(10):2072-2082. doi: 10.3201/eid2910.230554.

Ancestral Origin and Dissemination Dynamics of Reemerging Toxigenic Vibrio 
cholerae, Haiti.

Mavian CN, Tagliamonte MS, Alam MT, Sakib SN, Cash MN, Moir M, Jimenez JP, Riva 
A, Nelson EJ, Cato ET, Ajayakumar J, Louis R, Curtis A, De Rochars VMB, Rouzier 
V, Pape JW, de Oliveira T, Morris JG Jr, Salemi M, Ali A.

The 2010 cholera epidemic in Haiti was thought to have ended in 2019, and the 
Prime Minister of Haiti declared the country cholera-free in February 2022. On 
September 25, 2022, cholera cases were again identified in Port-au-Prince. We 
compared genomic data from 42 clinical Vibrio cholerae strains from 2022 with 
data from 327 other strains from Haiti and 1,824 strains collected worldwide. 
The 2022 isolates were homogeneous and closely related to clinical and 
environmental strains circulating in Haiti during 2012-2019. Bayesian hypothesis 
testing indicated that the 2022 clinical isolates shared their most recent 
common ancestor with an environmental lineage circulating in Haiti in July 2018. 
Our findings strongly suggest that toxigenic V. cholerae O1 can persist for 
years in aquatic environmental reservoirs and ignite new outbreaks. These 
results highlight the urgent need for improved public health infrastructure and 
possible periodic vaccination campaigns to maintain population immunity against 
V. cholerae.

DOI: 10.3201/eid2910.230554
PMCID: PMC10521621
PMID: 37735743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]