---
reference_id: "PMID:24311643"
title: Phase II study of everolimus in children and adults with neurofibromatosis type 2 and progressive vestibular schwannomas.
authors:
- Karajannis MA
- Legault G
- Hagiwara M
- Giancotti FG
- Filatov A
- Derman A
- Hochman T
- Goldberg JD
- Vega E
- Wisoff JH
- Golfinos JG
- Merkelson A
- Roland JT
- Allen JC
journal: Neuro Oncol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/neuonc/not150
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacokinetics, therapeutic use"
- Child
- Disease Progression
- Everolimus
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Neoplasm Staging
- "Neurofibromatosis 2/complications, drug therapy, mortality"
- "Neuroma, Acoustic/complications, drug therapy, mortality"
- Prognosis
- Prospective Studies
- "Sirolimus/analogs & derivatives, pharmacokinetics, therapeutic use"
- Survival Rate
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phase II study of everolimus in children and adults with neurofibromatosis type 2 and progressive vestibular schwannomas.
**Authors:** Karajannis MA, Legault G, Hagiwara M, Giancotti FG, Filatov A, Derman A, Hochman T, Goldberg JD, Vega E, Wisoff JH, Golfinos JG, Merkelson A, Roland JT, Allen JC
**Journal:** Neuro Oncol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/neuonc/not150](https://doi.org/10.1093/neuonc/not150)

## Content

1. Neuro Oncol. 2014 Jan;16(2):292-7. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/not150. Epub 2013 Dec
4.

Phase II study of everolimus in children and adults with neurofibromatosis type 
2 and progressive vestibular schwannomas.

Karajannis MA(1), Legault G, Hagiwara M, Giancotti FG, Filatov A, Derman A, 
Hochman T, Goldberg JD, Vega E, Wisoff JH, Golfinos JG, Merkelson A, Roland JT, 
Allen JC.

Author information:
(1)Corresponding author: Matthias A. Karajannis, MD, MS, NYU Langone Medical 
Center, Hassenfeld Children's Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders, 160 East 
32nd Street, 2nd floor, New York, NY 10016. matthias.karajannis@nyumc.org.

BACKGROUND: Activation of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling 
pathway is thought to be a key driver of tumor growth in Merlin (NF2)-deficient 
tumors. Everolimus is an oral inhibitor of mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) with 
antitumor activity in a variety of cancers.
METHODS: We conducted a single-institution, prospective, 2-stage, open-label 
phase II study to estimate the response rate to everolimus in neurofibromatosis 
type 2 (NF2) patients with progressive vestibular schwannoma (VS). Ten eligible 
patients were enrolled, including 2 pediatric patients. Everolimus was 
administered at a daily dose of 10 mg (adults) or 5 mg/m(2)/day (children <18 y) 
orally in continuous 28-day courses, for up to 12 courses. Response was assessed 
every 3 months with MRI, using 3-dimensional volumetric tumor analysis, and 
audiograms. Nine patients were evaluable for the primary response, defined as 
≥15% decrease in VS volume. Hearing response was evaluable as a secondary 
endpoint in 8 patients.
RESULTS: None of the 9 patients with evaluable disease experienced a clinical or 
MRI response. No objective imaging or hearing responses were observed in stage 1 
of the trial, and the study was closed according to predefined stopping rules.
CONCLUSION: Everolimus is ineffective for the treatment of progressive VS in NF2 
patients. We are currently conducting a pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic ("phase 
0") study of everolimus in presurgical VS patients to elucidate the biological 
basis for apparent treatment resistance to mTORC1 inhibition in these tumors.

DOI: 10.1093/neuonc/not150
PMCID: PMC3895376
PMID: 24311643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]