---
reference_id: "PMID:10029536"
title: Crystal structure of an inactive duck delta II crystallin mutant with bound argininosuccinate.
authors:
- Vallée F
- Turner MA
- Lindley PL
- Howell PL
journal: Biochemistry
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1021/bi982149h
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Argininosuccinic Acid/chemistry, metabolism"
- Asparagine/genetics
- Binding Sites/genetics
- Catalysis
- "Crystallins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Crystallography, X-Ray"
- Ducks
- Enzyme Activation/genetics
- Histidine/genetics
- "Models, Molecular"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutagenesis, Site-Directed"
- Protein Conformation
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- Substrate Specificity/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Crystal structure of an inactive duck delta II crystallin mutant with bound argininosuccinate.
**Authors:** Vallée F, Turner MA, Lindley PL, Howell PL
**Journal:** Biochemistry (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi982149h](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi982149h)

## Content

1. Biochemistry. 1999 Feb 23;38(8):2425-34. doi: 10.1021/bi982149h.

Crystal structure of an inactive duck delta II crystallin mutant with bound
argininosuccinate.

Vallée F(1), Turner MA, Lindley PL, Howell PL.

Author information:
(1)Structural Biology and Biochemistry, Research Institute, Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Delta-crystallin, the major soluble protein component of avian and reptilian eye
lenses, is highly homologous to the urea cycle enzyme, argininosuccinate lyase
(ASL). In duck lenses, there are two highly homologous delta crystallins, delta
I and delta II, that are 94% identical in amino acid sequence. While delta II
crystallin has been shown to exhibit ASL activity in vitro, delta I is
enzymatically inactive. The X-ray structure of a His to Asn mutant of duck delta
II crystallin (H162N) with bound argininosuccinate has been determined to 2.3 A
resolution using the molecular replacement technique. The overall fold of the
protein is similar to other members of the superfamily to which this protein
belongs, with the active site located in a cleft formed by three different
monomers in the tetramer. The active site of the H162N mutant structure reveals
that the side chain of Glu 296 has a different orientation relative to the
homologous residue in the H91N mutant structure [Abu-Abed et al. (1997)
Biochemistry 36, 14012-14022]. This shift results in the loss of the hydrogen
bond between His 162 and Glu 296 seen in the H91N and turkey delta I crystallin
structures; this H-bond is believed to be crucial for the catalytic mechanism of
ASL/delta II crystallin. Argininosuccinate was found to be bound to residues in
each of the three monomers that form the active site. The fumarate moiety is
oriented toward active site residues His 162 and Glu 296 and other residues that
are part of two of the three highly conserved regions of amino acid sequence in
the superfamily, while the arginine moiety of the substrate is oriented toward
residues which belong to either domain 1 or domain 2. The analysis of the
structure reveals that significant conformational changes occur on substrate
binding. The comparison of this structure with the inactive turkey delta I
crystallin reveals that the conformation of domain 1 is crucial for substrate
affinity and that the delta I protein is almost certainly inactive because it
can no longer bind the substrate.

DOI: 10.1021/bi982149h
PMID: 10029536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
