---
reference_id: "PMID:16222716"
title: "Tbx3, the ulnar-mammary syndrome gene, and Tbx2 interact in mammary gland development through a p19Arf/p53-independent pathway."
authors:
- Jerome-Majewska LA
- Jenkins GP
- Ernstoff E
- Zindy F
- Sherr CJ
- Papaioannou VE
journal: Dev Dyn
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1002/dvdy.20575
keywords:
- Animals
- "Crosses, Genetic"
- DNA Primers
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- Genotype
- Histological Techniques
- In Situ Hybridization
- "Mammary Glands, Animal/embryology, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Inbred ICR"
- "Morphogenesis/genetics, physiology"
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Signal Transduction/genetics, physiology"
- T-Box Domain Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tbx3, the ulnar-mammary syndrome gene, and Tbx2 interact in mammary gland development through a p19Arf/p53-independent pathway.
**Authors:** Jerome-Majewska LA, Jenkins GP, Ernstoff E, Zindy F, Sherr CJ, Papaioannou VE
**Journal:** Dev Dyn (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/dvdy.20575](https://doi.org/10.1002/dvdy.20575)

## Content

1. Dev Dyn. 2005 Dec;234(4):922-33. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.20575.

Tbx3, the ulnar-mammary syndrome gene, and Tbx2 interact in mammary gland 
development through a p19Arf/p53-independent pathway.

Jerome-Majewska LA(1), Jenkins GP, Ernstoff E, Zindy F, Sherr CJ, Papaioannou 
VE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The closely related T-box genes Tbx2 and Tbx3 are both expressed in the 
developing mammary glands of mouse embryos and both have been implicated in 
mammary carcinogenesis. Tbx3 is essential for induction of the mammary placodes 
in mice. In humans, mutations in TBX3 are responsible for ulnar-mammary 
syndrome. Here, we show a haploinsufficiency effect of Tbx3 on maintenance of 
the mammary placodes and on the extent of branching of the ductal tree in mice. 
Loss or heterozygosity for Tbx2, on the other hand, has no effect on either 
induction or maintenance of the placodes, although a small effect was seen on 
branching morphogenesis in adult heterozygotes. However, the deficiency in 
maintenance of the mammary placodes in Tbx2, Tbx3 double heterozygous mice is 
more marked than in Tbx3 single heterozygotes, indicating a genetic interaction 
between the two genes. In spite of a large body of evidence implicating these 
genes in cell cycle control through the p19(Arf)/p53 pathways, we find no 
evidence for involvement of these pathways either in embryonic lethality of 
homozygous mutants or in the mammary gland phenotype of Tbx3 heterozygous mice.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/dvdy.20575
PMID: 16222716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]