---
reference_id: "PMID:40555839"
title: Houge-Janssens syndrome.
authors:
- Houge GD
- Houge SD
- Hsieh TC
- Verbinnen I
- Janssens V
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41431-025-01901-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Houge-Janssens syndrome.
**Authors:** Houge GD, Houge SD, Hsieh TC, Verbinnen I, Janssens V
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41431-025-01901-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-025-01901-1)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2025 Oct;33(10):1228-1239. doi: 10.1038/s41431-025-01901-1. 
Epub 2025 Jun 24.

Houge-Janssens syndrome.

Houge GD(1), Houge SD(2), Hsieh TC(3), Verbinnen I(4)(5), Janssens V(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, 
Norway. gunnar.houge@helse-bergen.no.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, 
Norway.
(3)Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, University Hospital 
Bonn, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(4)Laboratory of Protein Phosphorylation & Proteomics, Department of Cellular & 
Molecular Medicine, xc Leuven, Belgium.
(5)KU Leuven Institute for Rare Diseases (Leuven IRD), Leuven, Belgium.
(6)Laboratory of Protein Phosphorylation & Proteomics, Department of Cellular & 
Molecular Medicine, xc Leuven, Belgium. veerle.janssens@kuleuven.be.
(7)KU Leuven Institute for Rare Diseases (Leuven IRD), Leuven, Belgium. 
veerle.janssens@kuleuven.be.

Houge-Janssens syndrome (HJS) is caused by protein phosphatase type 2A (PP2A) 
dysfunction. The core features are neurodevelopmental delay, especially 
concerning language, prolonged hypotonia, high risk of seizures, and behavior 
problems. PP2A oppose the activity of serine/threonine protein kinases, 
including growth promoting kinases of the PIK3CA/AKT/mTOR and RAS/MAPK pathways. 
Decreased PP2A activity can thus be growth promoting, as evidenced by recurrent 
pathogenic de novo missense variants in several PP2A subunits, some of which are 
associated with macrocephaly if congenital, or cancer if somatic. The current 
review gives an overview of both the clinical spectrum and known or potential 
pathogenic mechanisms in Houge-Janssens syndrome. For the latter, a basic 
insight in PP2A-mediated serine/threonine dephosphorylation is needed, although 
many fundamental questions regarding PP2A substrate specificity and activity 
determinants remain currently insufficiently resolved to provide a fully 
satisfactory molecular explanation of the effect of some mutations. So far, 
dominant pathogenic variants in at least two B subunits (PPP2R5D in HJS type 1 
and PPP2R5C in HJS type 4), the major scaffolding subunit (PPP2R1A in HJS type 
2) and the major catalytic subunit (PPP2CA in HJS type 3) can cause 
Houge-Janssens syndrome. The main aim is to explain why and how the different 
Houge-Janssens syndrome subtypes biochemically and clinically overlap, providing 
a framework for understanding new variants and new subtypes that will be found 
in the future. Hypothetically, small molecules that alleviate substrate blockade 
by affected B subunits or correct misfolding of affected A subunit, could 
represent treatment options, but these remain to be found.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to European Society of Human 
Genetics.

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-025-01901-1
PMCID: PMC12479836
PMID: 40555839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests.