---
reference_id: "PMID:28419241"
title: Central Hypothyroidism Due to a TRHR Mutation Causing Impaired Ligand Affinity and Transactivation of Gq.
authors:
- García M
- González de Buitrago J
- Jiménez-Rosés M
- Pardo L
- Hinkle PM
- Moreno JC
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-3977
keywords:
- Child
- Computer Simulation
- "Congenital Hypothyroidism/diagnosis, genetics"
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits, Gq-G11/genetics"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- Rare Diseases
- "Receptors, Thyrotropin-Releasing Hormone/genetics"
- Thyroid Function Tests
- Thyrotropin/metabolism
- Transcriptional Activation/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Central Hypothyroidism Due to a TRHR Mutation Causing Impaired Ligand Affinity and Transactivation of Gq.
**Authors:** García M, González de Buitrago J, Jiménez-Rosés M, Pardo L, Hinkle PM, Moreno JC
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2016-3977](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2016-3977)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2017 Jul 1;102(7):2433-2442. doi:
10.1210/jc.2016-3977.

Central Hypothyroidism Due to a TRHR Mutation Causing Impaired Ligand Affinity 
and Transactivation of Gq.

García M(1), González de Buitrago J(2), Jiménez-Rosés M(3), Pardo L(3), Hinkle 
PM(4), Moreno JC(1).

Author information:
(1)Thyroid Molecular Laboratory, Institute for Medical and Molecular Genetics, 
La Paz University Hospital, Autonomous University of Madrid, 28046 Madrid, 
Spain.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, San Pedro de Alcántara Hospital, 10003 Cáceres, 
Spain.
(3)Computational Medicine Laboratory, Biostatistics Unit, Autonomous University 
of Barcelona, 08193 Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, University of Rochester Medical 
Center, Rochester, New York 14642.

CONTEXT: Central congenital hypothyroidism (CCH) is an underdiagnosed disorder 
characterized by deficient production and bioactivity of thyroid-stimulating 
hormone (TSH) leading to low thyroid hormone synthesis. Thyrotropin-releasing 
hormone (TRH) receptor (TRHR) defects are rare recessive disorders usually 
associated with incidentally identified CCH and short stature in childhood.
OBJECTIVES: Clinical and genetic characterization of a consanguineous family of 
Roma origin with central hypothyroidism and identification of underlying 
molecular mechanisms.
DESIGN: All family members were phenotyped with thyroid hormone profiles, 
pituitary magnetic resonance imaging, TRH tests, and dynamic tests for other 
pituitary hormones. Candidate TRH, TRHR, TSHB, and IGSF1 genes were screened for 
mutations. A mutant TRHR was characterized in vitro and by molecular modeling.
RESULTS: A homozygous missense mutation in TRHR (c.392T > C; p.I131T) was 
identified in an 8-year-old boy with moderate hypothyroidism (TSH: 2.61 mIU/L, 
Normal: 0.27 to 4.2; free thyroxine: 9.52 pmol/L, Normal: 10.9 to 25.7) who was 
overweight (body mass index: 20.4 kg/m2, p91) but had normal stature (122 cm; 
-0.58 standard deviation). His mother, two brothers, and grandmother were 
heterozygous for the mutation with isolated hyperthyrotropinemia (TSH: 4.3 to 8 
mIU/L). The I131T mutation, in TRHR intracellular loop 2, decreases TRH affinity 
and increases the half-maximal effective concentration for signaling. Modeling 
of TRHR-Gq complexes predicts that the mutation disrupts the interaction between 
receptor and a hydrophobic pocket formed by Gq.
CONCLUSIONS: A unique missense TRHR defect identified in a consanguineous family 
is associated with central hypothyroidism in homozygotes and 
hyperthyrotropinemia in heterozygotes, suggesting compensatory elevation of TSH 
with reduced biopotency. The I131T mutation decreases TRH binding and TRHR-Gq 
coupling and signaling.

Copyright © 2017 Endocrine Society

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2016-3977
PMCID: PMC5505191
PMID: 28419241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]