---
reference_id: "PMID:28035072"
title: ΔNp73 overexpression promotes resistance to apoptosis but does not cooperate with PML/RARA in the induction of an APL-leukemic phenotype.
authors:
- Lucena-Araujo AR
- Coelho-Silva JL
- Pereira-Martins DA
- Thomé C
- Scheucher PS
- Lange AP
- Paiva HH
- Hemmelgarn BT
- Morais-Sobral MC
- Azevedo EA
- Franca-Neto PL
- Franca RF
- Silva CL
- Krause A
- Rego EM
journal: Oncotarget
year: '2017'
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.14295
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antimetabolites, Antineoplastic/pharmacology"
- Apoptosis/drug effects
- Bone Marrow Transplantation
- "Cathepsin G/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Proliferation
- Cell Self Renewal
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Cytarabine/pharmacology
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Leukemic"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Leukemia/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Mice, Inbred NOD"
- "Mice, SCID"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Neoplastic Stem Cells/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
- Phenotype
- "Promyelocytic Leukemia Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- "Retinoic Acid Receptor alpha/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- Time Factors
- Transfection
- "Tumor Protein p73/genetics, metabolism"
- Up-Regulation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ΔNp73 overexpression promotes resistance to apoptosis but does not cooperate with PML/RARA in the induction of an APL-leukemic phenotype.
**Authors:** Lucena-Araujo AR, Coelho-Silva JL, Pereira-Martins DA, Thomé C, Scheucher PS, Lange AP, Paiva HH, Hemmelgarn BT, Morais-Sobral MC, Azevedo EA, Franca-Neto PL, Franca RF, Silva CL, Krause A, Rego EM
**Journal:** Oncotarget (2017)
**DOI:** [10.18632/oncotarget.14295](https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.14295)

## Content

1. Oncotarget. 2017 Jan 31;8(5):8475-8483. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.14295.

ΔNp73 overexpression promotes resistance to apoptosis but does not cooperate
with PML/RARA in the induction of an APL-leukemic phenotype.

Lucena-Araujo AR(1)(2), Coelho-Silva JL(2), Pereira-Martins DA(2), Thomé C(3),
Scheucher PS(1), Lange AP(1), Paiva HH(1), Hemmelgarn BT(4), Morais-Sobral
MC(5), Azevedo EA(6), Franca-Neto PL(2), Franca RF(6), Silva CL(3), Krause A(1),
Rego EM(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Medical School of Ribeirao Preto, Brazil.
(2)Department of Genetics, Federal University of Pernambuco, Recife, Brazil.
(3)Center for Cell Based Therapy, University of Sao Paulo, Ribeirao Preto,
Brazil.
(4)The Ohio State University, Columbus, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Centro de Pesquisas Aggeu
Magalhães, Recife, Brazil.
(6)Department of Virology, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Centro de Pesquisas Aggeu
Magalhães, Recife, Brazil.

Here, we evaluated whether the overexpression of transcriptionally inactive
ΔNp73 cooperates with PML/RARA fusion protein in the induction of an
APL-leukemic phenotype, as well as its role in vitro in proliferation, myeloid
differentiation, and drug-induced apoptosis. Using lentiviral gene transfer, we
showed in vitro that ΔNp73 overexpression resulted in increased proliferation in
murine bone marrow (BM) cells from hCG-PML/RARA transgenic mice and their
wild-type (WT) counterpart, with no accumulation of cells at G2/M or S phases;
instead, ΔNp73-expressing cells had a lower rate of induced apoptosis. Next, we
evaluated the effect of ΔNp73 on stem-cell self-renewal and myeloid
differentiation. Primary BM cells lentivirally infected with human ΔNp73 were
not immortalized in culture and did not present significant changes in the
percentage of CD11b. Finally, we assessed the impact of ΔNp73 on leukemogenesis
or its possible cooperation with PML/RARA fusion protein in the induction of an
APL-leukemic phenotype. After 120 days of follow-up, all transplanted mice were
clinically healthy and, no evidence of leukemia/myelodysplasia was apparent.
Taken together, our data suggest that ΔNp73 had no leukemic transformation
capacity by itself and apparently did not cooperate with the PML/RARA fusion
protein to induce a leukemic phenotype in a murine BM transplantation model. In
addition, the forced expression of ΔNp73 in murine BM progenitors did not alter
the ATRA-induced differentiation rate in vitro or induce aberrant cell
proliferation, but exerted an important role in cell survival, providing
resistance to drug-induced apoptosis.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.14295
PMCID: PMC5352415
PMID: 28035072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors have no
competing financial interests.
