---
reference_id: "PMID:26414986"
title: "Clinical Practice Guideline for the Treatment of Intrinsic Circadian Rhythm Sleep-Wake Disorders: Advanced Sleep-Wake Phase Disorder (ASWPD), Delayed Sleep-Wake Phase Disorder (DSWPD), Non-24-Hour Sleep-Wake Rhythm Disorder (N24SWD), and Irregular Sleep-Wake Rhythm Disorder (ISWRD). An Update for 2015: An American Academy of Sleep Medicine Clinical Practice Guideline."
authors:
- Auger RR
- Burgess HJ
- Emens JS
- Deriy LV
- Thomas SM
- Sharkey KM
journal: J Clin Sleep Med
year: '2015'
doi: 10.5664/jcsm.5100
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Practice Guideline for the Treatment of Intrinsic Circadian Rhythm Sleep-Wake Disorders: Advanced Sleep-Wake Phase Disorder (ASWPD), Delayed Sleep-Wake Phase Disorder (DSWPD), Non-24-Hour Sleep-Wake Rhythm Disorder (N24SWD), and Irregular Sleep-Wake Rhythm Disorder (ISWRD). An Update for 2015: An American Academy of Sleep Medicine Clinical Practice Guideline.
**Authors:** Auger RR, Burgess HJ, Emens JS, Deriy LV, Thomas SM, Sharkey KM
**Journal:** J Clin Sleep Med (2015)
**DOI:** [10.5664/jcsm.5100](https://doi.org/10.5664/jcsm.5100)

## Content

1. J Clin Sleep Med. 2015 Oct 15;11(10):1199-236. doi: 10.5664/jcsm.5100.

Clinical Practice Guideline for the Treatment of Intrinsic Circadian Rhythm 
Sleep-Wake Disorders: Advanced Sleep-Wake Phase Disorder (ASWPD), Delayed 
Sleep-Wake Phase Disorder (DSWPD), Non-24-Hour Sleep-Wake Rhythm Disorder 
(N24SWD), and Irregular Sleep-Wake Rhythm Disorder (ISWRD). An Update for 2015: 
An American Academy of Sleep Medicine Clinical Practice Guideline.

Auger RR(1), Burgess HJ(2), Emens JS(3), Deriy LV(4), Thomas SM(4), Sharkey 
KM(5).

Author information:
(1)Mayo Center for Sleep Medicine, Rochester, MN.
(2)Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL.
(3)Portland VA Medical Center, Portland, OR.
(4)American Academy of Sleep Medicine, Darien, IL.
(5)Brown University, Providence, RI.

A systematic literature review and meta-analyses (where appropriate) were 
performed and the GRADE approach was used to update the previous American 
Academy of Sleep Medicine Practice Parameters on the treatment of intrinsic 
circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders. Available data allowed for positive 
endorsement (at a second-tier degree of confidence) of strategically timed 
melatonin (for the treatment of DSWPD, blind adults with N24SWD, and children/ 
adolescents with ISWRD and comorbid neurological disorders), and light therapy 
with or without accompanying behavioral interventions (adults with ASWPD, 
children/adolescents with DSWPD, and elderly with dementia). Recommendations 
against the use of melatonin and discrete sleep-promoting medications are 
provided for demented elderly patients, at a second- and first-tier degree of 
confidence, respectively. No recommendations were provided for remaining 
treatments/ populations, due to either insufficient or absent data. Areas where 
further research is needed are discussed.

© 2015 American Academy of Sleep Medicine.

DOI: 10.5664/jcsm.5100
PMCID: PMC4582061
PMID: 26414986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]