---
reference_id: "PMID:11993785"
title: Pathology and pathophysiology of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
authors:
- Nagai A
journal: Intern Med
year: '2002'
doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.41.265
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathology and pathophysiology of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
**Authors:** Nagai A
**Journal:** Intern Med (2002)
**DOI:** [10.2169/internalmedicine.41.265](https://doi.org/10.2169/internalmedicine.41.265)

## Content

1. Intern Med. 2002 Apr;41(4):265-9. doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.41.265.

Pathology and pathophysiology of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Nagai A(1).

Author information:
(1)First Department of Medicine, Tokyo Women's Medical University.

A variety of pathological changes have been observed in the central airways, 
peripheral airways and lung parenchyma of patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). The characteristic changes in the central airways 
include inflammatory cellular infiltration into the airway wall and mucous gland 
enlargement. In the peripheral airways, various morphological changes are 
observed, including mucous plugging, epithelial abnormalities, inflammatory 
cellular infiltrates, fibrosis and distortion; these changes lead to airway 
narrowing. In the lung parenchyma, emphysema defined as alveolar destruction and 
airspace enlargement is present. Although the major sites of airflow limitation 
in patients with COPD are most likely the peripheral airways, lesions in both 
the peripheral airways and the lung parenchyma contribute to chronic airflow 
limitations.

DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.41.265
PMID: 11993785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]