---
reference_id: "PMID:36202538"
title: "Cardiac Phenotypes in Secondary Hypertension: JACC State-of-the-Art Review."
authors:
- Januszewicz A
- Mulatero P
- Dobrowolski P
- Monticone S
- Van der Niepen P
- Sarafidis P
- Reincke M
- Rexhaj E
- Eisenhofer G
- Januszewicz M
- Kasiakogias A
- Kreutz R
- Lenders JWM
- Muiesan ML
- Persu A
- Agabiti-Rosei E
- Soria R
- Śpiewak M
- Prejbisz A
- Messerli FH
journal: J Am Coll Cardiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2022.08.714
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac Phenotypes in Secondary Hypertension: JACC State-of-the-Art Review.
**Authors:** Januszewicz A, Mulatero P, Dobrowolski P, Monticone S, Van der Niepen P, Sarafidis P, Reincke M, Rexhaj E, Eisenhofer G, Januszewicz M, Kasiakogias A, Kreutz R, Lenders JWM, Muiesan ML, Persu A, Agabiti-Rosei E, Soria R, Śpiewak M, Prejbisz A, Messerli FH
**Journal:** J Am Coll Cardiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jacc.2022.08.714](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2022.08.714)

## Content

1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2022 Oct 11;80(15):1480-1497. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2022.08.714.

Cardiac Phenotypes in Secondary Hypertension: JACC State-of-the-Art Review.

Januszewicz A(1), Mulatero P(2), Dobrowolski P(3), Monticone S(2), Van der 
Niepen P(4), Sarafidis P(5), Reincke M(6), Rexhaj E(7), Eisenhofer G(8), 
Januszewicz M(9), Kasiakogias A(10), Kreutz R(11), Lenders JWM(12), Muiesan 
ML(13), Persu A(14), Agabiti-Rosei E(15), Soria R(7), Śpiewak M(16), Prejbisz 
A(1), Messerli FH(17).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hypertension, National Institute of Cardiology, Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Division of Internal Medicine and Hypertension, Department of Medical 
Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy.
(3)Department of Hypertension, National Institute of Cardiology, Warsaw, Poland. 
Electronic address: pdobrowolski@ikard.pl.
(4)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel, 
Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium.
(5)Aristotle University, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(6)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Klinikum der Universität München, 
München, Germany.
(7)Department of Cardiology and Biomedical Research, University Hospital Bern, 
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(8)Department of Medicine III, University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technical 
University Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(9)Department of Hypertension, National Institute of Cardiology, Warsaw, Poland; 
II Department of Radiology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(10)First Department of Cardiology, Hippokration Hospital, Medical School, 
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece; Cardiovascular 
Magnetic Resonance Unit, Royal Brompton and Harefield Hospitals, Guy's and St 
Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(11)Charite-Universitatsmedizin Berlin, Humboldt-Universitat zu Berlin, and 
Berlin Institute of Health, Institut fur Klinische Pharmakologie und 
Toxikologie, Berlin, Germany.
(12)Department of Medicine III, University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technical 
University Dresden, Dresden, Germany; Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud 
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(13)Centro per la Prevenzione e Cura dell'ipertensione Arteriosa, Department of 
Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of Brescia and ASST Spedali 
Civili, Brescia, Italy.
(14)Division of Cardiology, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc and Pole of 
Cardiovascular Research, Institut de Recherche Expérimentale et Clinique, 
Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(15)Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of Brescia, 
Brescia, Italy.
(16)Department of Radiology, Magnetic Resonance Unit, National Institute of 
Cardiology, Warsaw, Poland.
(17)Department of Cardiology and Biomedical Research, University Hospital Bern, 
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
dirsecretariat@dbmr.unibe.ch.

Several forms of secondary hypertension carry a high risk of cardiac morbidity 
and mortality. Evaluation of cardiac phenotypes in secondary hypertension 
provides a unique opportunity to study underlying hormonal and biochemical 
mechanisms affecting the heart. We review the characteristics of cardiac 
dysfunction in different forms of secondary hypertension and clarify the 
mechanisms behind the higher prevalence of heart damage in these patients than 
in those with primary hypertension. Attention to the specific 
clinical/biochemical phenotypes of these conditions may assist clinicians to 
screen for and confirm secondary forms of hypertension. Thereby, early signs of 
heart damage can be recognized and monitored, allowing individualized treatment 
to delay or prevent evolution toward more advanced disease.

Copyright © 2022 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacc.2022.08.714
PMID: 36202538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Funding Support and Author Disclosures Drs 
Januszewicz, Dobrowolski, Śpiewak, and Prejbisz are supported by the National 
Science Centre, Poland, grant number: 2019/35/B/NZ5/03424. Dr Reincke is 
supported by grants from the Else Kröner-Fresenius Stiftung (2012_A103 and 
2015_A228) and by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (German Research 
Foundation, Projektnummer: 314061271-TRR 205 and Projektnummer 440885333). All 
other authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to the 
contents of this paper to disclose.