---
reference_id: "PMID:35446195"
title: "Duane Retraction Syndrome: The Role of Botulinum Toxin A Injection in Adults and Its Impact on Quality of Life in an Indian Population."
authors:
- Anand K
- Hariani A
- Kumar P
- Rastogi A
- Dutta P
- Krishnan A
journal: J Pediatr Ophthalmol Strabismus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3928/01913913-20220324-01
keywords:
- Humans
- Adult
- "Botulinum Toxins, Type A"
- Oculomotor Muscles
- Duane Retraction Syndrome/drug therapy
- Quality of Life
- Retrospective Studies
- Strabismus
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Duane Retraction Syndrome: The Role of Botulinum Toxin A Injection in Adults and Its Impact on Quality of Life in an Indian Population.
**Authors:** Anand K, Hariani A, Kumar P, Rastogi A, Dutta P, Krishnan A
**Journal:** J Pediatr Ophthalmol Strabismus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3928/01913913-20220324-01](https://doi.org/10.3928/01913913-20220324-01)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Ophthalmol Strabismus. 2023 Jan-Feb;60(1):46-51. doi: 
10.3928/01913913-20220324-01. Epub 2022 Apr 21.

Duane Retraction Syndrome: The Role of Botulinum Toxin A Injection in Adults and 
Its Impact on Quality of Life in an Indian Population.

Anand K, Hariani A, Kumar P, Rastogi A, Dutta P, Krishnan A.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the role of botulinum toxin A in the treatment of adults 
with Duane retraction syndrome and its impact on quality of life.
METHODS: A total of 25 adults with unilateral Duane retraction syndrome were 
selected for this interventional case series. Botulinum toxin was injected in 
the appropriate horizontal recti. The parameters assessed were ocular deviation 
(▵), overshoots, and abnormal head posture. Patients were followed up at 1 day, 
10 days, and 3 months after the injection. The outcome was categorized on the 
basis of deviation/abnormal head posture/overshoots as: (1) significant 
improvement (< 8 prism diopters [PD]/< 5 degrees/≤ grade 1); (2) partial 
improvement (8 to 20 PD/5 to 15 degrees/≤ grade 2); and (3) no improvement (> 20 
PD/> 15 degrees/≥ grade 3). Patients with partial/significant improvement were 
considered to have a favorable outcome. The impact on quality of life was 
assessed using the Adult Strabismus-20 Questionnaire scores 10 days after 
injection.
RESULTS: There was a significant reduction in ocular deviation in esotropic and 
exotropic Duane retraction syndrome at 10 days (P = .001) and 3 months (P = .04) 
after botulinum toxin injection. The abnormal head posture improved from 11.58 ± 
7.43 to 7.86 ± 6.25 degrees at 10 days. Botulinum toxin had a positive impact on 
the Adult Strabismus-20 Questionnaire scores, which significantly improved (P < 
.05) at 10 days. A favorable outcome was noted in 21 patients at 10 days but 
only 4 patients at 3 months. Three patients developed ptosis and 1 patient with 
orthotropic Duane retraction syndrome developed transient exotropia.
CONCLUSIONS: In adults with Duane retraction syndrome, botulinum toxin can have 
a useful diagnostic role by providing insight to patients and setting realistic 
expectations. It can identify patients likely to benefit from further treatment 
and also has a positive impact on quality of life. [J Pediatr Ophthalmol 
Strabismus. 2023;60(1):46-51.].

DOI: 10.3928/01913913-20220324-01
PMID: 35446195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]