---
reference_id: "PMID:31275973"
title: "Serum Tumour Markers in Testicular Germ Cell Tumours: Frequencies of Elevated Levels and Extents of Marker Elevation Are Significantly Associated with Clinical Parameters and with Response to Treatment."
authors:
- Dieckmann KP
- Simonsen-Richter H
- Kulejewski M
- Anheuser P
- Zecha H
- Isbarn H
- Pichlmeier U
journal: Biomed Res Int
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1155/2019/5030349
keywords:
- Age Factors
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/blood"
- Chorionic Gonadotropin/blood
- Cohort Studies
- Humans
- Male
- Neoplasm Metastasis
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/blood, pathology"
- Neoplasm Staging
- "Neoplasms, Germ Cell and Embryonal/blood, diagnosis, drug therapy, pathology"
- "Seminoma/blood, diagnosis"
- "Testicular Neoplasms/blood, diagnosis, drug therapy, pathology"
- Treatment Outcome
- Tumor Burden
- alpha-Fetoproteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serum Tumour Markers in Testicular Germ Cell Tumours: Frequencies of Elevated Levels and Extents of Marker Elevation Are Significantly Associated with Clinical Parameters and with Response to Treatment.
**Authors:** Dieckmann KP, Simonsen-Richter H, Kulejewski M, Anheuser P, Zecha H, Isbarn H, Pichlmeier U
**Journal:** Biomed Res Int (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2019/5030349](https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/5030349)

## Content

1. Biomed Res Int. 2019 May 28;2019:5030349. doi: 10.1155/2019/5030349.
eCollection  2019.

Serum Tumour Markers in Testicular Germ Cell Tumours: Frequencies of Elevated 
Levels and Extents of Marker Elevation Are Significantly Associated with 
Clinical Parameters and with Response to Treatment.

Dieckmann KP(1)(2), Simonsen-Richter H(2), Kulejewski M(2), Anheuser P(2), Zecha 
H(2), Isbarn H(3), Pichlmeier U(4).

Author information:
(1)Asklepios Klinik Altona, Abteilung für Urologie, Hodentumorzentrum Hamburg, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Albertinen-Krankenhaus Hamburg, Klinik für Urologie, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Universitätsklinikum Eppendorf, Hamburg, Martini Klinik, Hamburg, Germany.
(4)Universitätsklinikum Eppendorf, Hamburg, Zentrum für Experimentelle Medizin, 
Institut für Medizinische Biometrie und Statistik, Hamburg, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Although serum tumor markers beta human chorionic gonadotropin 
(bHCG), alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) are 
well-established tools for the management of testicular germ cell tumours 
(GCTs), there are only few data from contemporary cohorts of primary GCT 
patients regarding these biomarkers. Our aim was to evaluate marker elevations 
in testicular GCTs and to document their associations with various clinical 
characteristics.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 422 consecutive patients with GCTs were 
retrospectively analysed regarding serum levels of bHCG, AFP, and LDH during the 
course of treatment. Additionally, the following characteristics were recorded: 
histology, age, laterality, clinical stage (CS), pT-stage, and tumour size. 
Marker elevations were first tabulated in dichotomized way (elevated: yes/no) in 
various subgroups and second as continuous measured serum values. Descriptive 
statistical methods were employed to look for differences among subgroups and 
for associations of elevations with clinical parameters.
RESULTS: In all GCT patients, the frequencies of elevated levels of bHCG, AFP, 
LDH, and bHCG or AFP were 37.9%, 25.6%, 32.9%, and 47.6%; in pure seminomas 28%, 
2.8%, 29.1%, and 30.3%; and in nonseminoma 53.0%, 60.1%, 38.7%, and 73.8%. 
Significant associations were noted with pT-stages >pT1, clinical stages >CS1, 
tumour size, and younger age. Frequencies of marker elevations dropped 
significantly after treatment, but LDH levels remained elevated in 30.5%-34.1%. 
Relapsing patients (n=27) had elevated levels of bHCG, AFP, and LDH in 25.9%, 
22.2%, and 29.6%, respectively, thirteen of whom with a changed marker pattern.
CONCLUSIONS: The classical GCT-biomarkers correlate with treatment success. 
Clinical utility is limited due to proportions of < 50% of patients with 
elevated levels and the low specificity of LDH. The elevation rates are 
significantly associated with histology, clinical and pT-stages, tumour size, 
and younger age. Individual marker patterns may change upon relapse. Clinically, 
ideal biomarkers are yet to be found.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/5030349
PMCID: PMC6558624
PMID: 31275973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]