---
reference_id: "PMID:29719671"
title: Delineation of the genetic and clinical spectrum of Phelan-McDermid syndrome caused by SHANK3 point mutations.
authors:
- De Rubeis S
- Siper PM
- Durkin A
- Weissman J
- Muratet F
- Halpern D
- Trelles MDP
- Frank Y
- Lozano R
- Wang AT
- Holder JL Jr
- Betancur C
- Buxbaum JD
- Kolevzon A
journal: Mol Autism
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s13229-018-0205-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Delineation of the genetic and clinical spectrum of Phelan-McDermid syndrome caused by SHANK3 point mutations.
**Authors:** De Rubeis S, Siper PM, Durkin A, Weissman J, Muratet F, Halpern D, Trelles MDP, Frank Y, Lozano R, Wang AT, Holder JL Jr, Betancur C, Buxbaum JD, Kolevzon A
**Journal:** Mol Autism (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13229-018-0205-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13229-018-0205-9)

## Content

1. Mol Autism. 2018 Apr 27;9:31. doi: 10.1186/s13229-018-0205-9. eCollection
2018.

Delineation of the genetic and clinical spectrum of Phelan-McDermid syndrome 
caused by SHANK3 point mutations.

De Rubeis S(#)(1)(2), Siper PM(#)(1)(2), Durkin A(1), Weissman J(1), Muratet 
F(1)(2), Halpern D(1)(2), Trelles MDP(1)(2), Frank Y(1)(3), Lozano 
R(1)(2)(4)(5), Wang AT(1)(2), Holder JL Jr(6), Betancur C(7), Buxbaum 
JD(1)(2)(5)(8)(9)(10), Kolevzon A(1)(2)(4)(10).

Author information:
(1)1Seaver Autism Center, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 
10029 USA.
(2)2Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY 10029 USA.
(3)3Department of Neurology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY 10029 USA.
(4)4Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY 10029 USA.
(5)5Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029 USA.
(6)6Division of Neurology and Developmental Neuroscience, Department of 
Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine and Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, 
TX 77030 USA.
(7)Sorbonne Université, INSERM, CNRS, Neuroscience Paris Seine, Institut de 
Biologie Paris Seine, 75005 Paris, France.
(8)8Department of Neuroscience, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY 10029 USA.
(9)9Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY 10029 USA.
(10)10Mindich Child Health and Development Institute, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029 USA.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Phelan-McDermid syndrome (PMS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder 
characterized by psychiatric and neurological features. Most reported cases are 
caused by 22q13.3 deletions, leading to SHANK3 haploinsufficiency, but also 
usually encompassing many other genes. While the number of point mutations 
identified in SHANK3 has increased in recent years due to large-scale sequencing 
studies, systematic studies describing the phenotype of individuals harboring 
such mutations are lacking.
METHODS: We provide detailed clinical and genetic data on 17 individuals 
carrying mutations in SHANK3. We also review 60 previously reported patients 
with pathogenic or likely pathogenic SHANK3 variants, often lacking detailed 
phenotypic information.
RESULTS: SHANK3 mutations in our cohort and in previously reported cases were 
distributed throughout the protein; the majority were truncating and all were 
compatible with de novo inheritance. Despite substantial allelic heterogeneity, 
four variants were recurrent (p.Leu1142Valfs*153, p.Ala1227Glyfs*69, 
p.Arg1255Leufs*25, and c.2265+1G>A), suggesting that these are hotspots for de 
novo mutations. All individuals studied had intellectual disability, and autism 
spectrum disorder was prevalent (73%). Severe speech deficits were common, but 
in contrast to individuals with 22q13.3 deletions, the majority developed single 
words, including 41% with at least phrase speech. Other common findings were 
consistent with reports among individuals with 22q13.3 deletions, including 
hypotonia, motor skill deficits, regression, seizures, brain abnormalities, mild 
dysmorphic features, and feeding and gastrointestinal problems.
CONCLUSIONS: Haploinsufficiency of SHANK3 resulting from point mutations is 
sufficient to cause a broad range of features associated with PMS. Our findings 
expand the molecular and phenotypic spectrum of PMS caused by SHANK3 point 
mutations and suggest that, in general, speech impairment and motor deficits are 
more severe in the case of deletions. In contrast, renal abnormalities 
associated with 22q13.3 deletions do not appear to be related to the loss of 
SHANK3.

DOI: 10.1186/s13229-018-0205-9
PMCID: PMC5921983
PMID: 29719671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The institutional review boards of the Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai and Baylor College of Medicine approved this 
study. Participants were enrolled after written informed consent was obtained 
from parents or legal guardians.Written informed consent for publication was 
obtained from the parents or legal guardians.JDB and Mount Sinai hold a shared 
parent for the use of insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) in Phelan-McDermid 
syndrome. JDB is on the scientific advisory board for Coronis Neuroscience and 
has consulted for the Gerson Lehrman Group. AK is on the advisory board of 
Vencerx Therapeutics and consults for Ovid Therapeutics. The remaining authors 
declare that they have no competing interests.Springer Nature remains neutral 
with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.