---
reference_id: "PMID:26490222"
title: "Arginine:glycine amidinotransferase (AGAT) deficiency: Clinical features and long term outcomes in 16 patients diagnosed worldwide."
authors:
- Stockler-Ipsiroglu S
- Apatean D
- Battini R
- DeBrosse S
- Dessoffy K
- Edvardson S
- Eichler F
- Johnston K
- Koeller DM
- Nouioua S
- Tazir M
- Verma A
- Dowling MD
- Wierenga KJ
- Wierenga AM
- Zhang V
- Wong LJ
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2015.10.003
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Amidinotransferases/chemistry, deficiency, genetics"
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Creatine/deficiency, therapeutic use"
- "Developmental Disabilities/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- Female
- Gene Expression
- "Genes, Recessive"
- "Glycine/analogs & derivatives, blood, deficiency, urine"
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
- Male
- "Models, Molecular"
- "Muscular Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- Mutation
- "Protein Structure, Secondary"
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- "Speech Disorders/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arginine:glycine amidinotransferase (AGAT) deficiency: Clinical features and long term outcomes in 16 patients diagnosed worldwide.
**Authors:** Stockler-Ipsiroglu S, Apatean D, Battini R, DeBrosse S, Dessoffy K, Edvardson S, Eichler F, Johnston K, Koeller DM, Nouioua S, Tazir M, Verma A, Dowling MD, Wierenga KJ, Wierenga AM, Zhang V, Wong LJ
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2015.10.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2015.10.003)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2015 Dec;116(4):252-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2015.10.003. Epub
 2015 Oct 17.

Arginine:glycine amidinotransferase (AGAT) deficiency: Clinical features and
long term outcomes in 16 patients diagnosed worldwide.

Stockler-Ipsiroglu S(1), Apatean D(2), Battini R(3), DeBrosse S(4), Dessoffy
K(4), Edvardson S(5), Eichler F(6), Johnston K(7), Koeller DM(8), Nouioua S(9),
Tazir M(9), Verma A(10), Dowling MD(11), Wierenga KJ(12), Wierenga AM(12), Zhang
V(13), Wong LJ(13).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biochemical Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; Child & Family Research Institute, BC
Children's Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada. Electronic address:
sstockler@cw.bc.ca.
(2)Division of Biochemical Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(3)Department of Developmental Neuroscience, IRCCS Fondazione Stella Maris,
Pisa, Italy.
(4)Center for Medical Genetics, University Hospitals Case Medical Center,
Cleveland, OH, USA.
(5)Pediatric Neurology Unit, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center,
Jerusalem, Israel.
(6)Division of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Genetic Department, The Permanent Medical Group, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(8)Department of Molecular & Medical Genetics, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, OR, USA.
(9)Service de Neurologie and Laboratoire de Neurosciences, CHU Mustapha Bacha,
Université d'Alger, Algeria.
(10)Department of Neurology, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine,
Miami, FL, USA.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine,
Miami, FL, USA.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Oklahoma University Health Sciences Center, OK,
USA.
(13)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA.

BACKGROUND: Arginine:glycine aminotransferase (AGAT) (GATM) deficiency is an
autosomal recessive inborn error of creative synthesis.
OBJECTIVE: We performed an international survey among physicians known to treat
patients with AGAT deficiency, to assess clinical characteristics and long-term
outcomes of this ultra-rare condition.
RESULTS: 16 patients from 8 families of 8 different ethnic backgrounds were
included. 1 patient was asymptomatic when diagnosed at age 3 weeks. 15 patients
diagnosed between 16 months and 25 years of life had intellectual
disability/developmental delay (IDD). 8 patients also had myopathy/proximal
muscle weakness. Common biochemical denominators were low/undetectable
guanidinoacetate (GAA) concentrations in urine and plasma, and low/undetectable
cerebral creatine levels. 3 families had protein truncation/null mutations. The
rest had missense and splice mutations. Treatment with creatine monohydrate
(100-800 mg/kg/day) resulted in almost complete restoration of brain creatine
levels and significant improvement of myopathy. The 2 patients treated since age
4 and 16 months had normal cognitive and behavioral development at age 10 and 11
years. Late treated patients had limited improvement of cognitive functions.
CONCLUSION: AGAT deficiency is a treatable intellectual disability. Early
diagnosis may prevent IDD and myopathy. Patients with unexplained IDD with and
without myopathy should be assessed for AGAT deficiency by determination of
urine/plasma GAA and cerebral creatine levels (via brain MRS), and by GATM gene
sequencing.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2015.10.003
PMID: 26490222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
