---
reference_id: "PMID:40267865"
title: Restoration of blood brain barrier integrity post neurosurgical resection in drug resistant epilepsy.
authors:
- Behan C
- Greene C
- Hanley N
- Salla CV
- Brennan D
- Connolly R
- Sweeney K
- "O'Brien D"
- Farrell M
- Meaney J
- Henshall DC
- Campbell M
- Doherty CP
journal: Epilepsy Behav
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2025.110425
keywords:
- Humans
- "Blood-Brain Barrier/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology, pathology"
- "Drug Resistant Epilepsy/surgery, pathology, diagnostic imaging"
- Male
- Female
- Adult
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Middle Aged
- Young Adult
- "Epilepsy, Temporal Lobe/surgery, pathology"
- Neurosurgical Procedures
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Restoration of blood brain barrier integrity post neurosurgical resection in drug resistant epilepsy.
**Authors:** Behan C, Greene C, Hanley N, Salla CV, Brennan D, Connolly R, Sweeney K, O'Brien D, Farrell M, Meaney J, Henshall DC, Campbell M, Doherty CP
**Journal:** Epilepsy Behav (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yebeh.2025.110425](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yebeh.2025.110425)

## Content

1. Epilepsy Behav. 2025 Jul;168:110425. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2025.110425. Epub
2025  Apr 22.

Restoration of blood brain barrier integrity post neurosurgical resection in
drug resistant epilepsy.

Behan C(1), Greene C(2), Hanley N(3), Salla CV(4), Brennan D(4), Connolly R(4),
Sweeney K(5), O'Brien D(5), Farrell M(6), Meaney J(7), Henshall DC(8), Campbell
M(9), Doherty CP(10).

Author information:
(1)Academic Unit of Neurology, Room 5.41, Biomedical Sciences Institute, Trinity
College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland; Department of Neurology, Health Care Centre,
Hospital 5, St James's Hospital, Dublin 8, Ireland; FutureNeuro Research Ireland
Centre, Academic Unit of Neurology Trinity College, School of Medicine, Dublin
2, Ireland; School of Nursing and Midwifery, RSCI University of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Dublin 2, Ireland.
(2)Smurfit Institute of Genetics, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland;
Department of Physiology and Medical Physics, RCSI University of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Dublin, Ireland; FutureNeuro Research Ireland Centre,
Department or Physiology & Medical Physics, RCSI University of Medicine and
Health Sciences, 123 St Stephen's Green, Dublin 2, Ireland.
(3)Smurfit Institute of Genetics, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland.
(4)Academic Unit of Neurology, Room 5.41, Biomedical Sciences Institute, Trinity
College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland; Department of Neurology, Health Care Centre,
Hospital 5, St James's Hospital, Dublin 8, Ireland.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(6)Department of Neuropathology, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(7)Thomas Mitchell Centre for Advanced Medical Imaging (CAMI), St. James's
Hospital & Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 8, Ireland.
(8)Department of Physiology and Medical Physics, RCSI University of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Dublin, Ireland; FutureNeuro Research Ireland Centre,
Department or Physiology & Medical Physics, RCSI University of Medicine and
Health Sciences, 123 St Stephen's Green, Dublin 2, Ireland.
(9)Smurfit Institute of Genetics, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland;
FutireNeuro Research Ireland Centre, Smurfit Institute of Genetics, School of
Genetics and Microbiology, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland. Electronic
address: matthew.campbell@tcd.ie.
(10)Academic Unit of Neurology, Room 5.41, Biomedical Sciences Institute,
Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland; Department of Neurology, Health Care
Centre, Hospital 5, St James's Hospital, Dublin 8, Ireland; FutureNeuro Research
Ireland Centre, Academic Unit of Neurology Trinity College, School of Medicine,
Dublin 2, Ireland.

Surgery for temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) is a well-recognised therapy for drug
resistant seizures which occur in more than 50 % of patients with TLE.
Blood-brain barrier (BBB) dysfunction is commonly observed in resected brain
tissue from patients with treatment resistant epilepsy however, no studies have
documented the recovery of BBB function following surgery. We firstly
prospectively performed dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging
(DCE-MRI) on seven patients scheduled for temporal lobe resections before and
after resection. DCE-MRI revealed BBB dysfunction in frontal and temporal brain
regions. At 6-24 months post-resection, there was a reduction in the percentage
of brain volume with BBB dysfunction in 5/7 patients. We then retrospectively
characterised resected brain tissue from 6 further TLE cases (total n = 13) by
q-RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry which revealed region-specific changes in
markers of BBB integrity and inflammation with changes in CLDN12 and TJP1/2 in
the hippocampus and CSF1R pathway genes in cortical and hippocampal tissue. BBB
dysfunction is a key component of the molecular disruption caused by seizures
and in longstanding early onset chronic epilepsy that is refractory to
treatment. Here, we demonstrate for the first time the rescue of BBB dysfunction
by controlling seizures after surgery.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2025.110425
PMID: 40267865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
