---
reference_id: "PMID:36969121"
title: Evaluation of swallowing in patients with T3/T4 oral squamous cell carcinoma.
authors:
- Gupta DK
- Singh SK
- Sabarigirish K
- Roy R
- Chugh R
- Goyal S
- Parikh B
- Sukumar Reddy N
journal: Med J Armed Forces India
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.mjafi.2021.10.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of swallowing in patients with T3/T4 oral squamous cell carcinoma.
**Authors:** Gupta DK, Singh SK, Sabarigirish K, Roy R, Chugh R, Goyal S, Parikh B, Sukumar Reddy N
**Journal:** Med J Armed Forces India (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mjafi.2021.10.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mjafi.2021.10.002)

## Content

1. Med J Armed Forces India. 2023 Mar-Apr;79(2):181-188. doi: 
10.1016/j.mjafi.2021.10.002. Epub 2021 Dec 13.

Evaluation of swallowing in patients with T3/T4 oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Gupta DK(1), Singh SK(2), Sabarigirish K(3), Roy R(4), Chugh R(5), Goyal S(6), 
Parikh B(7), Sukumar Reddy N(8).

Author information:
(1)Classified Specialist (ENT & Head Neck Onco), Army Hospital (R&R), Delhi 
Cantt, India.
(2)Commandant, Military Hospital Jhansi, India.
(3)Addl DGAFMS (MR, H & Trg), O/o DGAFMS, New Delhi, India.
(4)Classified Specialist (ENT), Army Hospital (R&R), Delhi Cantt, India.
(5)Commanding Officer, 408 Field Hospital, C/o 56 APO, India.
(6)Classified Specialist (ENT), Command Hospital (Eastern Command), Kolkata, 
India.
(7)Classified Specialist (Anaesthesia), Army Hospital (R&R), Delhi Cantt, India.
(8)Resident (ENT - HNS), Army Hospital (R&R), Delhi Cantt, India.

BACKGROUND: Follow-up of patients treated for head and neck cancer is an 
important part of the overall treatment. Oral cancers are one of the leading 
causes of dysphagia. Swallowing dysfunction occurs owing to the disease itself, 
its predisposing factors, and the treatment. This study aims to evaluate 
swallowing dysfunction in patients with oral cavity cancers.
METHODS: This prospective study was carried out in a tertiary care hospital 
institution. Thirty patients with T3, T4 oral cancers were evaluated using 
institutional dysphagia score and fiber optic endoscopic evaluation of 
swallowing (FEES) (Penetration-Aspiration Scale, Yale Pharyngeal Residue Scale) 
before treatment, after surgery, and after adjuvant therapy.
RESULTS: Advanced-stage tumor, larger resections, and adjuvant therapy are risk 
factors for dysphagia postoperatively. Although the dysphagia score is our 
institutional score, the results are promising, that is, 10 % of patients having 
symptoms at baseline evaluation, which increased to 60% and 70% after 
surgery and adjuvant radiotherapy respectively. Our study findings of the 
Penetration Aspiration Scale are 13% aspiration rate at the baseline evaluation, 
which increased to 57% and 73% after surgery and after adjuvant radiotherapy, 
respectively, and these results are consistent with those of other report 
studies. The Vallecular Residual Scale showed that there was a significant 
association between three different timelines and demonstrated dysphagia among 
study subjects.
CONCLUSION: Subjective and objective assessment of swallowing dysfunction before 
and after the treatment of head and neck cancers is underreported and 
underrecognized. Most of the patients in our study had significant swallowing 
impairment after treatment. FEES is a very effective procedure to diagnose 
dysphagia and will help in incorporating better preventative and rehabilitative 
measures.

© 2021 Director General, Armed Forces Medical Services. Published by Elsevier, a 
division of RELX India Pvt. Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mjafi.2021.10.002
PMCID: PMC10037075
PMID: 36969121

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have none to declare.