---
reference_id: "PMID:37360690"
title: Interferon hyperactivity impairs cardiogenesis in Down syndrome via downregulation of canonical Wnt signaling.
authors:
- Chi C
- Knight WE
- Riching AS
- Zhang Z
- Tatavosian R
- Zhuang Y
- Moldovan R
- Rachubinski AL
- Gao D
- Xu H
- Espinosa JM
- Song K
journal: iScience
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2023.107012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interferon hyperactivity impairs cardiogenesis in Down syndrome via downregulation of canonical Wnt signaling.
**Authors:** Chi C, Knight WE, Riching AS, Zhang Z, Tatavosian R, Zhuang Y, Moldovan R, Rachubinski AL, Gao D, Xu H, Espinosa JM, Song K
**Journal:** iScience (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.isci.2023.107012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2023.107012)

## Content

1. iScience. 2023 Jun 5;26(7):107012. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2023.107012.
eCollection  2023 Jul 21.

Interferon hyperactivity impairs cardiogenesis in Down syndrome via
downregulation of canonical Wnt signaling.

Chi C(1)(2)(3), Knight WE(1)(4), Riching AS(1)(4), Zhang Z(1), Tatavosian
R(2)(5), Zhuang Y(6), Moldovan R(5), Rachubinski AL(2)(6), Gao D(6), Xu H(7),
Espinosa JM(2)(5), Song K(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University of Colorado
Anschutz Medical Campus; Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(2)Linda Crnic Institute for Down Syndrome, University of Colorado Anschutz
Medical Campus; Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(3)Gates Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Biology, University of
Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus; Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(4)Consortium for Fibrosis Research & Translation, University of Colorado
Anschutz Medical Campus; Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(5)Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus;
Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus;
Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(7)Department of Population Health Sciences, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta
University; Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

Congenital heart defects (CHDs) are frequent in children with Down syndrome
(DS), caused by trisomy of chromosome 21. However, the underlying mechanisms are
poorly understood. Here, using a human-induced pluripotent stem cell
(iPSC)-based model and the Dp(16)1Yey/+ (Dp16) mouse model of DS, we identified
downregulation of canonical Wnt signaling downstream of increased dosage of
interferon (IFN) receptors (IFNRs) genes on chromosome 21 as a causative factor
of cardiogenic dysregulation in DS. We differentiated human iPSCs derived from
individuals with DS and CHDs, and healthy euploid controls into cardiac cells.
We observed that T21 upregulates IFN signaling, downregulates the canonical WNT
pathway, and impairs cardiac differentiation. Furthermore, genetic and
pharmacological normalization of IFN signaling restored canonical WNT signaling
and rescued defects in cardiogenesis in DS in vitro and in vivo. Our findings
provide insights into mechanisms underlying abnormal cardiogenesis in DS,
ultimately aiding the development of therapeutic strategies.

© 2023 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2023.107012
PMCID: PMC10285545
PMID: 37360690

Conflict of interest statement: J.M.E. has provided consulting services to Eli
Lilly, Gilead Sciences Inc, and Perha Pharmaceuticals.
