---
reference_id: "PMID:40665347"
title: Assessing inflammatory protein biomarkers in COPD subjects with and without alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.
authors:
- Moll M
- Hobbs BD
- Pratte KA
- Zhang C
- Ghosh AJ
- Bowler RP
- Lomas DA
- Silverman EK
- DeMeo DL
journal: Respir Res
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s12931-025-03320-8
keywords:
- Humans
- "Pulmonary Disease, Chronic Obstructive/blood, diagnosis, genetics, epidemiology"
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/blood, diagnosis, genetics, epidemiology"
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Biomarkers/blood
- Aged
- Inflammation Mediators/blood
- alpha 1-Antitrypsin/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Assessing inflammatory protein biomarkers in COPD subjects with and without alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.
**Authors:** Moll M, Hobbs BD, Pratte KA, Zhang C, Ghosh AJ, Bowler RP, Lomas DA, Silverman EK, DeMeo DL
**Journal:** Respir Res (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12931-025-03320-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12931-025-03320-8)

## Content

1. Respir Res. 2025 Jul 15;26(1):247. doi: 10.1186/s12931-025-03320-8.

Assessing inflammatory protein biomarkers in COPD subjects with and without
alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.

Moll M(1)(2)(3)(4), Hobbs BD(5), Pratte KA(6), Zhang C(1), Ghosh AJ(7), Bowler
RP(8), Lomas DA(9)(10), Silverman EK(1)(2)(4), DeMeo DL(11)(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Channing Division of Network Medicine, Department of Medicine, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, 181 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(3)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep and Allergy. Veterans Affairs
Boston Healthcare System, West Roxbury, MA, 02123, USA.
(4)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(5)Regeneron Pharmaceutical, Tarrytown, NY, USA.
(6)Department of Biostatistics, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, 80206, USA.
(7)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, SUNY Upstate Medical
Center, Syracuse, NY, 13210, USA.
(8)Department of Genomic Medicine, Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine,
Cleveland, OH, 44195, USA.
(9)Division of Medicine, UCL Respiratory, Rayne Institute, University College
London, London, UK.
(10)Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology, Birkbeck College, University
College London, London, UK.
(11)Channing Division of Network Medicine, Department of Medicine, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, 181 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
redld@channing.harvard.edu.
(12)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
redld@channing.harvard.edu.
(13)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA. redld@channing.harvard.edu.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2025 Jan 13:2025.01.11.25320392. doi: 10.1101/2025.01.11.25320392.

RATIONALE: Individuals homozygous for the Alpha-1 Antitrypsin (AAT) Z allele
(Pi*ZZ) exhibit heterogeneity in COPD risk. COPD occurrence in non-smokers with
AAT deficiency (AATD) suggests that inflammatory processes may contribute to
COPD risk independently of smoking. We hypothesized that inflammatory protein
biomarkers in non-AATD COPD are associated with moderate-to-severe COPD in AATD
individuals, after accounting for clinical factors.
METHODS: Participants from the COPDGene (Pi*MM) and AAT Genetic Modifiers Study
(Pi*ZZ) were included. Proteins associated with FEV1/FVC were identified,
adjusting for confounders and familial relatedness. Lung-specific
protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks were constructed. Proteins associated
with AAT augmentation therapy were identified, and drug repurposing analyses
performed. A protein risk score (protRS) was developed in COPDGene and validated
in AAT GMS using AUROC analysis. Machine learning ranked proteomic predictors,
adjusting for age, sex, and smoking history.
RESULTS: Among 4,446 Pi*MM and 352 Pi*ZZ individuals, sixteen blood proteins
were associated with airflow obstruction, fourteen of which were highly
expressed in lung. PPI networks implicated regulation of immune system function,
cytokine and interleukin signaling, and matrix metalloproteinases. Eleven
proteins, including IL4R, were linked to augmentation therapy. Drug repurposing
identified antibiotics, thyroid medications, hormone therapies, and
antihistamines as potential adjunctive AATD treatments. Adding protRS improved
COPD prediction in AAT GMS (AUROC 0.86 vs. 0.80, p = 0.0001). AGER was the
top-ranked protein predictor of COPD.
CONCLUSIONS: Sixteen proteins are associated with COPD and inflammatory
processes that predict airflow obstruction in AATD after accounting for age and
smoking. Immune activation and inflammation are modulators of COPD risk in AATD.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-025-03320-8
PMCID: PMC12265139
PMID: 40665347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to
participate: This study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of
Helsinki. All participants provided written informed consent and the current
study was approved by the Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Board
(2007P000554). Consent for publication: Not applicable. Competing interests: DLD
has received grant support from Bayer. EKS received grant support from Bayer and
Northpond Laboratories. BDH received grant support from Bayer and is currently
employed by Regeneron. MM received consulting fees from Sitka, TheaHealth,
2ndMD, TriNetX, Axon Advisors, Verona Pharma, Dialectica, Sanofi, Genentech.
