---
reference_id: "PMID:28451788"
title: The role of autoantibodies in the pathophysiology of rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Derksen VFAM
- Huizinga TWJ
- van der Woude D
journal: Semin Immunopathol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s00281-017-0627-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of autoantibodies in the pathophysiology of rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Derksen VFAM, Huizinga TWJ, van der Woude D
**Journal:** Semin Immunopathol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00281-017-0627-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00281-017-0627-z)

## Content

1. Semin Immunopathol. 2017 Jun;39(4):437-446. doi: 10.1007/s00281-017-0627-z.
Epub  2017 Apr 27.

The role of autoantibodies in the pathophysiology of rheumatoid arthritis.

Derksen VFAM(1), Huizinga TWJ(2), van der Woude D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Leiden University Medical Center, C1-R-041, 
Albinusdreef 2, PO Box 9600, 2300 RC, Leiden, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, Leiden University Medical Center, C1-R-041, 
Albinusdreef 2, PO Box 9600, 2300 RC, Leiden, the Netherlands. 
T.J.W.Huizinga@lumc.nl.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease characterized by joint 
inflammation. The presence of autoantibodies in the sera of RA patients has 
provided many clues to the underlying disease pathophysiology. Based on the 
presence of several autoantibodies like rheumatoid factor (RF), 
anti-citrullinated protein antibodies (ACPA), anti-carbamylated protein 
antibodies (anti-CarP), and more recently anti-acetylated protein antibodies RA 
can be subdivided into seropositive and seronegative disease. The formation of 
these autoantibodies is associated with both genetic and environmental risk 
factors for RA, like specific human leukocyte antigen (HLA) alleles and smoking. 
Autoantibodies can be detected many years before disease onset in a subset of 
patients, suggesting a sequence of events in which the first autoantibodies 
develop in predisposed hosts, before an inflammatory response ensues leading to 
clinically apparent arthritis. Research on the characteristics and effector 
functions of these autoantibodies might provide more insight in 
pathophysiological processes underlying arthritis in RA. Recent data suggests 
that ACPA might play a role in perpetuating inflammation once it has developed. 
Furthermore, pathophysiological mechanisms have been discovered supporting a 
direct link between the presence of ACPA and both bone erosions and pain in RA 
patients. In conclusion, investigating the possible pathogenic potential of 
autoantibodies might lead to improved understanding of the underlying 
pathophysiological processes in rheumatoid arthritis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00281-017-0627-z
PMCID: PMC5486798
PMID: 28451788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]