---
reference_id: "PMID:11216700"
title: Clinical presentation of rhabdoid tumors of the kidney.
authors:
- Amar AM
- Tomlinson G
- Green DM
- Breslow NE
- de Alarcon PA
journal: J Pediatr Hematol Oncol
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1097/00043426-200102000-00007
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Fever/etiology
- "Hematuria/epidemiology, etiology"
- Humans
- Incidence
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Kidney Neoplasms/complications, diagnosis, epidemiology, pathology"
- Male
- Neoplasm Invasiveness
- Neoplasm Staging
- Retrospective Studies
- "Rhabdoid Tumor/complications, diagnosis, epidemiology, pathology"
- Wilms Tumor/diagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical presentation of rhabdoid tumors of the kidney.
**Authors:** Amar AM, Tomlinson G, Green DM, Breslow NE, de Alarcon PA
**Journal:** J Pediatr Hematol Oncol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00043426-200102000-00007](https://doi.org/10.1097/00043426-200102000-00007)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2001 Feb;23(2):105-8. doi: 
10.1097/00043426-200102000-00007.

Clinical presentation of rhabdoid tumors of the kidney.

Amar AM(1), Tomlinson G, Green DM, Breslow NE, de Alarcon PA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology Oncology, University of Virginia Childrens 
Medical Center, Charlottesville, USA.

PURPOSE: We designed this study to differentiate the clinical presentation, 
particularly the incidence of hematuria, of a rhabdoid tumor of the kidney 
(RTK), a rare but highly malignant tumor, from a Wilms tumor.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We reviewed patient flow charts from the National Wilms 
Tumor Study Group and queried participating hospitals to obtain additional 
information regarding presenting symptoms and laboratory data for fifty 
patients. Patient ages ranged from 2 days to 3.5 years with a mean of 11 months. 
We documented the presence of gross and microscopic hematuria, fever, and 
hypercalcemia.
RESULTS: Whereas 75% of children with rhabdoid tumor of the kidney (RTK) had 
stage III (44%), IV (27%), or V (4%) tumors, 67% of children with Wilms tumors 
had stage I (41%) or II (26%) tumors. Either gross or microscopic hematuria was 
present in 84.4% (27/32) of the patients with RTK. Gross hematuria was present 
in 59% (22/37) of children with RTK compared with 18% previously reported with 
Wilms tumor. Microscopic hematuria was present in 76% (22/29) of children with 
RTK compared with 24% previously reported with Wilms tumor. Fever was found in 
44% (16/36) of children with RTK, compared with 22% of children previously 
reported with Wilms tumor. Hypercalcemia was seen 26% (6/23) of children with 
RTK.
CONCLUSION: Although diagnosis of any renal mass still must be confirmed with 
histopathologic features, a distinct clinical presentation with fever, 
hematuria, a young age, and high-tumor stage at presentation suggests the 
diagnosis of RTK.

DOI: 10.1097/00043426-200102000-00007
PMID: 11216700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]