---
reference_id: "PMID:37187299"
title: Patient-derived extracellular matrix demonstrates role of COL3A1 in blood vessel mechanics.
authors:
- Doherty EL
- Aw WY
- Warren EC
- Hockenberry M
- Whitworth CP
- Krohn G
- Howell S
- Diekman BO
- Legant WR
- Nia HT
- Hickey AJ
- Polacheck WJ
journal: Acta Biomater
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2023.05.015
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Patient-derived extracellular matrix demonstrates role of COL3A1 in blood vessel mechanics.
**Authors:** Doherty EL, Aw WY, Warren EC, Hockenberry M, Whitworth CP, Krohn G, Howell S, Diekman BO, Legant WR, Nia HT, Hickey AJ, Polacheck WJ
**Journal:** Acta Biomater (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.actbio.2023.05.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2023.05.015)

## Content

1. Acta Biomater. 2023 Aug;166:346-359. doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2023.05.015. Epub 
2023 May 13.

Patient-derived extracellular matrix demonstrates role of COL3A1 in blood vessel 
mechanics.

Doherty EL(1), Aw WY(1), Warren EC(2), Hockenberry M(3), Whitworth CP(4), Krohn 
G(2), Howell S(5), Diekman BO(2), Legant WR(6), Nia HT(7), Hickey AJ(5), 
Polacheck WJ(8).

Author information:
(1)Joint Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill and North Carolina State University, Chapel Hill and Raleigh, NC, 
USA; UNC Catalyst for Rare Diseases, Eshelman School of Pharmacy, University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Joint Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill and North Carolina State University, Chapel Hill and Raleigh, NC, 
USA.
(3)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; Department of 
Pharmacology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine, 
Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(4)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of 
Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(5)UNC Catalyst for Rare Diseases, Eshelman School of Pharmacy, University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(6)Joint Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill and North Carolina State University, Chapel Hill and Raleigh, NC, 
USA; Department of Pharmacology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 
School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(7)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA.
(8)Joint Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill and North Carolina State University, Chapel Hill and Raleigh, NC, 
USA; Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; McAllister Heart 
Institute, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. 
Electronic address: polacheck@unc.edu.

Vascular Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (vEDS) is a rare autosomal dominant disease 
caused by mutations in the COL3A1 gene, which renders patients susceptible to 
aneurysm and arterial dissection and rupture. To determine the role of COL3A1 
variants in the biochemical and biophysical properties of human arterial ECM, we 
developed a method for synthesizing ECM directly from vEDS donor fibroblasts. We 
found that the protein content of the ECM generated from vEDS donor fibroblasts 
differed significantly from ECM from healthy donors, including upregulation of 
collagen subtypes and other proteins related to ECM structural integrity. We 
further found that ECM generated from a donor with a glycine substitution 
mutation was characterized by increased glycosaminoglycan content and unique 
viscoelastic mechanical properties, including increased time constant for stress 
relaxation, resulting in a decrease in migratory speed of human aortic 
endothelial cells when seeded on the ECM. Collectively, these results 
demonstrate that vEDS patient-derived fibroblasts harboring COL3A1 mutations 
synthesize ECM that differs in composition, structure, and mechanical properties 
from healthy donors. These results further suggest that ECM mechanical 
properties could serve as a prognostic indicator for patients with vEDS, and the 
insights provided by the approach demonstrate the broader utility of 
cell-derived ECM in disease modeling. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE: The role of 
collagen III ECM mechanics remains unclear, despite reported roles in diseases 
including fibrosis and cancer. Here, we generate fibrous, collagen-rich ECM from 
primary donor cells from patients with vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (vEDS), a 
disease caused by mutations in the gene that encodes collagen III. We observe 
that ECM grown from vEDS patients is characterized by unique mechanical 
signatures, including altered viscoelastic properties. By quantifying the 
structural, biochemical, and mechanical properties of patient-derived ECM, we 
identify potential drug targets for vEDS, while defining a role for collagen III 
in ECM mechanics more broadly. Furthermore, the structure/function relationships 
of collagen III in ECM assembly and mechanics will inform the design of 
substrates for tissue engineering and regenerative medicine.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actbio.2023.05.015
PMCID: PMC10330735
PMID: 37187299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.