---
reference_id: "PMID:32482150"
title: "Position statement: asthma in Latin America. IS short-acting beta-2 agonist helping or compromising asthma management?"
authors:
- Nannini LJ
- Luhning S
- Rojas RA
- Antunez JM
- Miguel Reyes JL
- Cano Salas C
- Stelmach R
journal: J Asthma
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/02770903.2020.1777563
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Position statement: asthma in Latin America. IS short-acting beta-2 agonist helping or compromising asthma management?
**Authors:** Nannini LJ, Luhning S, Rojas RA, Antunez JM, Miguel Reyes JL, Cano Salas C, Stelmach R
**Journal:** J Asthma (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/02770903.2020.1777563](https://doi.org/10.1080/02770903.2020.1777563)

## Content

1. J Asthma. 2021 Aug;58(8):991-994. doi: 10.1080/02770903.2020.1777563. Epub
2020  Jun 22.

Position statement: asthma in Latin America. IS short-acting beta-2 agonist 
helping or compromising asthma management?

Nannini LJ(1), Luhning S(2), Rojas RA(3), Antunez JM(4), Miguel Reyes JL(5), 
Cano Salas C(5), Stelmach R(6).

Author information:
(1)Hospital de G. Baigorria, Universidad Nacional Rosario, Santa Fe, Argentina.
(2)Hospital Nacional de Clínicas, Córdoba, Argentina.
(3)Instituto Investigaciones de Patologías Respiratorias, San Miguel de Tucumán, 
Argentina.
(4)Clínica Alemana, Vitacura, Chile.
(5)Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Ciudad de México, Mexico.
(6)Pulmonary Division-Heart Institute (InCor), Hospital das Clinicas, Faculdade 
de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

In Latin-America, with 603 million inhabitants, the average prevalence of asthma 
is estimated at 17%, but with wide fluctuations, ranging from 5% in some cities 
(Mexico) to 30% in Costa Rica. The risk of severe exacerbations seems to be 
higher in Latin America compared with other regions. A majority of patients uses 
daily quick-relief medication, with the belief that it is the most important 
treatment because of its rapid onset of action; without treating the underlying 
inflammation. Overuse of short-acting beta2 agonists (SABAs) is associated with 
increased risk of asthma deaths in a dose-response manner. Beta2 agonists 
increase the severity of asthma through enhanced bronchial hyperresponsiveness 
and reduced lung function. Also, it has been shown that overreliance on SABA 
delays recognition of a potentially life-threatening asthma attack. We believe 
that overreliance on SABA in asthma is also an important public health issue. 
The fact that SABA use in GINA is not supported by a randomized trial but by an 
anonymous paper; makes us guess that we use SABA just because we are used to do 
so. In 2019 GINA strategy introduces one of the most important changes in the 
management of Asthma in the past 30 years, highlighting anti-inflammatory 
reliever therapy. A combination of low dose ICS/fast action bronchodilator will 
not only treat symptoms, but more importantly the underlying inflammation, 
protecting patients from preventable asthma attacks. After 50 years of a SABA 
centric approach in asthma management, it is time to leave behind a treatment 
based just on the bronchodilation and tackle the inflammation.

DOI: 10.1080/02770903.2020.1777563
PMID: 32482150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]