---
reference_id: "PMID:29325092"
title: Intravenous administration of scAAV9-Hexb normalizes lifespan and prevents pathology in Sandhoff disease mice.
authors:
- Niemir N
- Rouvière L
- Besse A
- Vanier MT
- Dmytrus J
- Marais T
- Astord S
- Puech JP
- Panasyuk G
- Cooper JD
- Barkats M
- Caillaud C
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy012
keywords:
- "Administration, Intravenous"
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- Brain/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- G(M2) Ganglioside/metabolism
- Gangliosides/metabolism
- "Hexosaminidase B/genetics, metabolism, pharmacology"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Sandhoff Disease/drug therapy, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intravenous administration of scAAV9-Hexb normalizes lifespan and prevents pathology in Sandhoff disease mice.
**Authors:** Niemir N, Rouvière L, Besse A, Vanier MT, Dmytrus J, Marais T, Astord S, Puech JP, Panasyuk G, Cooper JD, Barkats M, Caillaud C
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddy012](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddy012)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2018 Mar 15;27(6):954-968. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy012.

Intravenous administration of scAAV9-Hexb normalizes lifespan and prevents
pathology in Sandhoff disease mice.

Niemir N(1)(2), Rouvière L(1)(2), Besse A(3), Vanier MT(4), Dmytrus J(5), Marais
T(3), Astord S(3), Puech JP(6), Panasyuk G(1)(2), Cooper JD(5)(7), Barkats M(3),
Caillaud C(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)INSERM U1151, Institut Necker Enfants Malades, Paris 75014, France.
(2)Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(3)Centre of Research in Myology, Institut de Myologie, Sorbonne Universités,
UPMC University Paris 06, Inserm UMRS974, GH Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris 75013,
France.
(4)INSERM U820, Université de Lyon, Faculté de Médecine Lyon-Est, Lyon 69372,
France.
(5)Department of Basic and Clinical Neuroscience, King's College London,
Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, Maurice Wohl Clinical
Neuroscience Institute, London SE5 9RX, UK.
(6)Service de Biochimie, Métabolomique et Protéomique, Hôpital Universitaire
Necker-Enfants Malades, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris 75015,
France.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Los Angeles Biomedical Research Institute, David
Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, Torrance, CA 90502, USA.

Sandhoff disease (SD) is a rare inherited disorder caused by a deficiency of
β-hexosaminidase activity which is fatal because no effective treatment is
available. A mouse model of Hexb deficiency reproduces the key pathognomonic
features of SD patients with severe ubiquitous lysosomal dysfunction, GM2
accumulation, neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration, culminating in death at 4
months. Here, we show that a single intravenous neonatal administration of a
self-complementary adeno-associated virus 9 vector (scAAV9) expressing the Hexb
cDNA in SD mice is safe and sufficient to prevent disease development.
Importantly, we demonstrate for the first time that this treatment results in a
normal lifespan (over 700 days) and normalizes motor function assessed by a
battery of behavioral tests, with scAAV9-treated SD mice being indistinguishable
from wild-type littermates. Biochemical analyses in multiple tissues showed a
significant increase in hexosaminidase A activity, which reached 10-15% of
normal levels. AAV9 treatment was sufficient to prevent GM2 and GA2 storage
almost completely in the cerebrum (less so in the cerebellum), as well as
thalamic reactive gliosis and thalamocortical neuron loss in treated Hexb-/-
mice. In summary, this study demonstrated a widespread protective effect
throughout the entire CNS after a single intravenous administration of the
scAAV9-Hexb vector to neonatal SD mice.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddy012
PMID: 29325092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
