---
reference_id: "PMID:39058883"
title: "Prenatal detection of distal 18p deletion by chromosomal microarray analysis: Three case reports and literature review."
authors:
- Xu T
- Yue F
- He J
- Zhang H
- Liu R
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000039046
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- Pregnancy
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosome Disorders/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 18/genetics"
- Karyotyping/methods
- Microarray Analysis/methods
- Prenatal Diagnosis/methods
- Karyotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prenatal detection of distal 18p deletion by chromosomal microarray analysis: Three case reports and literature review.
**Authors:** Xu T, Yue F, He J, Zhang H, Liu R
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000039046](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000039046)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2024 Jul 26;103(30):e39046. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000039046.

Prenatal detection of distal 18p deletion by chromosomal microarray analysis: 
Three case reports and literature review.

Xu T(1)(2), Yue F(1)(2), He J(1)(2), Zhang H(1)(2), Liu R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Center for Prenatal Diagnosis, First 
Hospital, Jilin University, Changchun, China.
(2)Jilin Engineering Research Center for Reproductive Medicine and Genetics, 
Jilin University, Changchun, China.

BACKGROUND: Chromosome 18p deletion syndrome is caused by total or partial 
deletion of the short arm of chromosome 18 and associated with cognitive 
impairment, growth retardation and mild facial dysmorphism. However, most 
studies on the genotype-phenotype correlations in the 18p region are diagnosed 
postnatally. Prenatal reports involving 18p deletions are limited.
METHODS: Three pregnant women opted for invasive prenatal testing due to 
noninvasive prenatal testing indicating high risk for chromosome 18 
abnormalities. Karyotypic analysis and chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) 
were performed simultaneously. The pregnancy outcomes for all cases were 
followed up. Meanwhile, we also made a literature review on prenatal phenotypes 
of 18p deletions.
RESULTS: G-banding analysis showed that 2 fetuses presented abnormal karyotypes: 
45,XN,der(18)t(18;21)(p11; q11),-21 (case 2) and 46,XN,18p- (case 3). The 
karyotype of case 1 was normal. Meanwhile, CMA detected 4.37 Mb (case 1), 
7.26 Mb (case 2) and 14.97 Mb (case 3) deletions in chromosome 18p region. All 3 
pregnancies were terminated finally according to genetic counseling based upon 
abnormal CMA results.
CONCLUSION: Prenatal diagnosis of 18p deletion syndrome is full of challenges 
due to the phenotypic diversity, incomplete penetrance and lack of prenatal 
phenotypes. Increased nuchal translucency and holoprosencephaly are common 
prenatal phenotypes of distal 18p deletion. For fetuses carrying 18p deletions 
with atypical sonographic phenotypes, noninvasive prenatal testing could be 
adopted as an effective approach.

Copyright © 2024 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000039046
PMCID: PMC11272248
PMID: 39058883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.