---
reference_id: "PMID:21474172"
title: Post-splenectomy and hyposplenic states.
authors:
- Di Sabatino A
- Carsetti R
- Corazza GR
journal: Lancet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)61493-6
keywords:
- "Anemia, Sickle Cell/complications"
- Antibiotic Prophylaxis
- "Bacterial Infections/immunology, prevention & control"
- "Bacterial Vaccines/administration & dosage"
- Bone Marrow Transplantation
- Celiac Disease/complications
- Disease Susceptibility
- Graft vs Host Disease/etiology
- HIV Infections/complications
- Humans
- "Spleen/abnormalities, immunology"
- Splenectomy/adverse effects
- "Splenic Diseases/complications, diagnosis, immunology"
- "Splenosis/etiology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Post-splenectomy and hyposplenic states.
**Authors:** Di Sabatino A, Carsetti R, Corazza GR
**Journal:** Lancet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(10)61493-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(10)61493-6)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2011 Jul 2;378(9785):86-97. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)61493-6. Epub
2011 Apr 5.

Post-splenectomy and hyposplenic states.

Di Sabatino A(1), Carsetti R, Corazza GR.

Author information:
(1)First Department of Medicine, Fondazione Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a
Carattere Scientifico Policlinico S Matteo, University of Pavia, Italy.

The spleen is crucial in regulating immune homoeostasis through its ability to
link innate and adaptive immunity and in protecting against infections. The
impairment of splenic function is defined as hyposplenism, an acquired disorder
caused by several haematological and immunological diseases. The term asplenia
refers to the absence of the spleen, a condition that is rarely congenital and
mostly post-surgical. Although hyposplenism and asplenia might predispose
individuals to thromboembolic events, in this Review we focus on infectious
complications, which are the most widely recognised consequences of these
states. Because of the high mortality, the fulminant course, and the
refractoriness to common treatment of overwhelming infections caused by
encapsulated bacteria, prevention through vaccination and antibiotic prophylaxis
is the basis of the management of patients who have had splenectomy or have
hyposplenism. In this Review, we critically assess clinical and diagnostic
aspects of splenic dysfunction and highlight new perspectives in the prevention
of overwhelming post-splenectomy infections.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)61493-6
PMID: 21474172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
