---
reference_id: "PMID:39035740"
title: "Primary central nervous system germ cell tumors in Central America and the Caribbean Region: an AHOPCA 20-year experience."
authors:
- Girón AV
- Blanco-Lopez J
- Calderon P
- Jiron R
- Pineda E
- Montero M
- Lizardo Y
- Bartels U
- Osorio DS
journal: Front Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2024.1393454
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary central nervous system germ cell tumors in Central America and the Caribbean Region: an AHOPCA 20-year experience.
**Authors:** Girón AV, Blanco-Lopez J, Calderon P, Jiron R, Pineda E, Montero M, Lizardo Y, Bartels U, Osorio DS
**Journal:** Front Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fonc.2024.1393454](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2024.1393454)

## Content

1. Front Oncol. 2024 Jul 5;14:1393454. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2024.1393454.
eCollection  2024.

Primary central nervous system germ cell tumors in Central America and the 
Caribbean Region: an AHOPCA 20-year experience.

Girón AV(1), Blanco-Lopez J(1), Calderon P(2), Jiron R(2), Pineda E(3), Montero 
M(4), Lizardo Y(5), Bartels U(6), Osorio DS(7).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Oncology, Unidad Nacional de Oncología Pediátrica, Guatemala City, 
Guatemala.
(2)Pediatric Oncology, Hospital Infantil Manuel de Jesús Rivera, Managua, 
Nicaragua.
(3)Pediatric Oncology, Hospital Nacional de Niños Benjamín Bloom, San Salvador, 
El Salvador.
(4)Pediatric Oncology, Hospital Infantil Dr. Robert Reid Cabral, Santo Domingo, 
Dominican Republic.
(5)Hematology/Oncology, Hospital Infantil Regional Universitario Dr. Arturo 
Guillón, Santiago, Dominican Republic.
(6)Department of Haematology/Oncology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
ON, Canada.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX, United States.

BACKGROUND: Primary central nervous system germ cell tumors (GCT) are rare 
neoplasms in pediatrics. Treatment depends on the histological subtype and 
extent of the disease. Overall survival (OS) is above 90% for germinomas and 
70%-80% for nongerminomatous GCT (NGGCT) in high-income countries (HIC) while 
data are usually lacking for patients in Low-Middle Income country (LMIC).
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to describe the experience of treating patients with 
CNS GCT in four of eight countries, members of the Asociación de 
Hemato-Oncología Pediátrica de Centro América (AHOPCA), and determine their 
5-year OS.
DESIGN/METHODS: We conducted a retrospective chart review of patients treated 
for CNS GCT. Epidemiological and clinical characteristics, histology, treatment 
modalities, and outcomes were analyzed.
RESULTS: From 2001 to 2021, 48 patients were included: 22 from Guatemala, 18 
from Nicaragua, three from the Dominican Republic, and five from El Salvador. 
Thirty-one (64.6%) were boys; the median age at diagnosis was 10.2 years (range: 
1 to 17 years). Presenting symptoms were headaches (n = 24, 50%), visual 
disturbances (n = 17, 35.4%), vomiting (n = 12, 25%), nausea (n = 8, 16.7%), and 
diabetes insipidus (n = 7, 14.6%). Two patients with NGGCT presented with 
precocious puberty. Biopsy or tumor resection was performed in 38 cases (79.2%): 
23 (88.4%) germinomas, 11 (78.6%) NGGCT, and four (50%) CNS GCT. Eight patients 
were diagnosed and treated based on CSF tumor marker elevation; four germinomas 
(BHCG 11.32-29.41 mUI/mL) and four NGGCT (BHCG 84.43-201.97 mUI/mL or positive 
AFP > 10 UI/mL). Tumor locations included suprasellar (n = 17, 35.4%), pineal (n 
= 13, 27.1%), thalamus/basal ganglia (n = 5, 10.4%), other (n = 12, 25%), and 
one bifocal. Four (8.3%) had metastatic disease, and six had positive CSF; 
staging data were incomplete in 25 patients (52%). Patients were treated with 
varied chemotherapy and radiotherapy modalities. Nine patients had incomplete 
data regarding treatment. Five-year OS was 65% (68% for germinoma, 50.6% for 
NGGCT, and 85.7% for unclassified GCT).
CONCLUSIONS: Germinoma was the most common histology, and there was a male 
predominance. More than half of patients had incomplete staging data and 
treatment was variable across the region. OS is lower compared to HIC. 
Standardized treatment protocols will aid in adequate staging and treatment 
planning, prevent complications, and improve survival.

Copyright © 2024 Girón, Blanco-Lopez, Calderon, Jiron, Pineda, Montero, Lizardo, 
Bartels and Osorio.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2024.1393454
PMCID: PMC11257868
PMID: 39035740

Conflict of interest statement: DO was employed by the company ICON PLC, a 
clinical research organization. The remaining authors declare that the research 
was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that 
could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.