---
reference_id: "PMID:12824870"
title: Molecular mechanisms of angiogenesis in non-small cell lung cancer, and therapeutics targeting related molecules.
authors:
- Yano S
- Nishioka Y
- Goto H
- Sone S
journal: Cancer Sci
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2003.tb01469.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular mechanisms of angiogenesis in non-small cell lung cancer, and therapeutics targeting related molecules.
**Authors:** Yano S, Nishioka Y, Goto H, Sone S
**Journal:** Cancer Sci (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1349-7006.2003.tb01469.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1349-7006.2003.tb01469.x)

## Content

1. Cancer Sci. 2003 Jun;94(6):479-85. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2003.tb01469.x.

Molecular mechanisms of angiogenesis in non-small cell lung cancer, and 
therapeutics targeting related molecules.

Yano S(1), Nishioka Y, Goto H, Sone S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Therapeutics, University of 
Tokushima School of Medicine, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan. 
ssone@clin.med.tokushima-u.ac.jp

Angiogenesis, neovascularization from pre-existing vasculature, is necessary to 
supply oxygen and nutrition for tumor growth in both primary and distant organs. 
It consists of sprouting and non-sprouting (the enlargement, splitting, and 
fusion of pre-existing vessels) processes, and both can occur concurrently. 
Growth of solid tumors, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), is usually 
dependent on angiogenesis, which is regulated by complex mechanisms involving 
various angiogenesis-related molecules. Vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF), also known as vascular permeability factor (VPF), one of the most potent 
angiogenic molecules, regulates both angiogenesis and vascular permeability, and 
hence promotes tumor progression and development of malignant pleural effusions 
in NSCLC. Signals via epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) promote not only 
the tumor cell cycle, but also the process of angiogenesis. Therefore, these 
molecules are potential targets for anti-tumor vasculature therapy. Many agents 
targeting tumor vasculature have been developed, and several compounds have 
shown anti-tumor potential in preclinical studies. Their efficacy against NSCLC 
is currently being evaluated in clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2003.tb01469.x
PMCID: PMC11160313
PMID: 12824870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]