---
reference_id: "PMID:36223704"
title: Factors correlated with neuropathic pain in patients with neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder.
authors:
- Zhang X
- Pei L
- Xu Y
- Zhang Y
- Lu Z
- Song S
- Tian Y
- Zhao X
- Yin H
- Wang W
- Huang Y
journal: Mult Scler Relat Disord
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2022.104213
keywords:
- Humans
- "Neuromyelitis Optica/complications, epidemiology"
- Quality of Life
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- "Neuralgia/epidemiology, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Factors correlated with neuropathic pain in patients with neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder.
**Authors:** Zhang X, Pei L, Xu Y, Zhang Y, Lu Z, Song S, Tian Y, Zhao X, Yin H, Wang W, Huang Y
**Journal:** Mult Scler Relat Disord (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.msard.2022.104213](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msard.2022.104213)

## Content

1. Mult Scler Relat Disord. 2022 Dec;68:104213. doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2022.104213.
 Epub 2022 Oct 4.

Factors correlated with neuropathic pain in patients with neuromyelitis optica 
spectrum disorder.

Zhang X(1), Pei L(2), Xu Y(3), Zhang Y(4), Lu Z(5), Song S(5), Tian Y(5), Zhao 
X(6), Yin H(7), Wang W(7), Huang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China; 
State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare Diseases (Peking Union Medical 
College Hospital), Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China; 
State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare Diseases (Peking Union Medical 
College Hospital), Beijing, China; Outcomes Research Consortium, Cleveland, 
Ohio, USA. Electronic address: hazelbeijing@vip.163.com.
(3)Department of Neurology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China. 
Electronic address: xuyanpumch@hotmail.com.
(4)Medical Research Center, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(5)Department of Anesthesiology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(6)Department of Psychological Medicine, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 
China.
(7)Department of Neurology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Neuropathic pain in neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD) 
is common but has always been overlooked. This study was conducted to explore 
factors correlated with neuropathic pain in NMOSD and to evaluate associations 
between pain and quality of life.
METHODS: In this cross-sectional study, NMOSD patients were interviewed 
face-to-face. The Brief Pain Inventory, Douleur Neuropathique 4, and Neuropathic 
Pain Symptom Inventory scales were used to evaluate pain. Patients completed the 
Beck Depression Inventory-II and Social Functioning-36 tests to evaluate 
depression and quality of life.
RESULTS: A total of 122 NMOSD patients were enrolled. Eighty-one (66.4%; 95% CI, 
39.9% to 92.9%) had current pain, of which 35 (28.7%; 95% CI, 20.7% to 36.7%) 
had neuropathic pain. Forty-nine (40.2%; 95% CI, 31.5% to 48.9%) patients 
experienced depression, which was moderate to severe in 22 patients. Multinomial 
logistic regression showed that significantly more patients with neuropathic 
pain had depression than those with other pain (OR, 4.15; 95% CI, 1.40 to 12.35; 
P=0.010) or no pain (OR, 5.65; 95% CI, 1.74 to 18.18; P=0.004). Significantly 
more patients with neuropathic pain had initial spinal cord involvement than 
those in the no-pain group (OR, 15.78; 95% CI, 1.37 to 182.15; P=0.027). Quality 
of life was severely affected in NMOSD patients with neuropathic pain. Only 
29.6% were treated with analgesics, and none were prescribed antidepressants.
CONCLUSION: Depression was correlated with neuropathic pain and was often 
overlooked. Initial spinal cord involvement might indicate a higher risk for 
neuropathic pain. Neuropathic pain in NMOSD patients requires scrutiny.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.msard.2022.104213
PMID: 36223704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no conflict of interest.