---
reference_id: "PMID:24722439"
title: Renal-retinal ciliopathy gene Sdccag8 regulates DNA damage response signaling.
authors:
- Airik R
- Slaats GG
- Guo Z
- Weiss AC
- Khan N
- Ghosh A
- Hurd TW
- Bekker-Jensen S
- Schrøder JM
- Elledge SJ
- Andersen JS
- Kispert A
- Castelli M
- Boletta A
- Giles RH
- Hildebrandt F
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2013050565
keywords:
- Animals
- Autoantigens/genetics
- Cell Line
- "Cell Line, Transformed"
- Cilia/pathology
- DNA Damage/physiology
- Embryonic Stem Cells/cytology
- "Fibroblasts/cytology, physiology"
- Green Fluorescent Proteins/genetics
- Kidney/pathology
- "Kidney Diseases, Cystic/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Neoplasm Proteins/genetics
- "Photoreceptor Cells, Vertebrate/pathology"
- S Phase/physiology
- Signal Transduction/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Renal-retinal ciliopathy gene Sdccag8 regulates DNA damage response signaling.
**Authors:** Airik R, Slaats GG, Guo Z, Weiss AC, Khan N, Ghosh A, Hurd TW, Bekker-Jensen S, Schrøder JM, Elledge SJ, Andersen JS, Kispert A, Castelli M, Boletta A, Giles RH, Hildebrandt F
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2013050565](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2013050565)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014 Nov;25(11):2573-83. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2013050565. Epub 
2014 Apr 10.

Renal-retinal ciliopathy gene Sdccag8 regulates DNA damage response signaling.

Airik R(1), Slaats GG(2), Guo Z(3), Weiss AC(4), Khan N(5), Ghosh A(6), Hurd 
TW(7), Bekker-Jensen S(8), Schrøder JM(9), Elledge SJ(3), Andersen JS(9), 
Kispert A(4), Castelli M(10), Boletta A(10), Giles RH(2), Hildebrandt F(11).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts;
(2)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Utrecht, The Netherlands;
(3)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Division of Genetics, Brigham 
and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts;
(4)Institute of Molecular Biology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany;
(5)Kellogg Eye Center, Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, 
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan;
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan;
(7)Medical Research Council Human Genetics Unit, Medical Research Council 
Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Western General Hospital, 
Edinburgh, United Kingdom;
(8)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark;
(9)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern 
Denmark, Odense, Denmark;
(10)Division of Genetics and Cell Biology, Dulbecco Telethon Institute, San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy; and.
(11)Division of Nephrology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; 
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland 
Friedhelm.Hildebrandt@childrens.harvard.edu.

Nephronophthisis-related ciliopathies (NPHP-RCs) are developmental and 
degenerative kidney diseases that are frequently associated with extrarenal 
pathologies such as retinal degeneration, obesity, and intellectual disability. 
We recently identified mutations in a gene encoding the centrosomal protein 
SDCCAG8 as causing NPHP type 10 in humans. To study the role of Sdccag8 in 
disease pathogenesis, we generated a Sdccag8 gene-trap mouse line. Homozygous 
Sdccag8(gt/gt) mice lacked the wild-type Sdccag8 transcript and protein, and 
recapitulated the human phenotypes of NPHP and retinal degeneration. These mice 
exhibited early onset retinal degeneration that was associated with rhodopsin 
mislocalization in the photoreceptors and reduced cone cell numbers, and led to 
progressive loss of vision. By contrast, renal histologic changes occurred 
later, and no global ciliary defects were observed in the kidneys. Instead, 
renal pathology was associated with elevated levels of DNA damage response 
signaling activity. Cell culture studies confirmed the aberrant activation of 
DNA damage response in Sdccag8(gt/gt)-derived cells, characterized by elevated 
levels of γH2AX and phosphorylated ATM and cell cycle profile abnormalities. Our 
analysis of Sdccag8(gt/gt) mice indicates that the pleiotropic phenotypes in 
these mice may arise through multiple tissue-specific disease mechanisms.

Copyright © 2014 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2013050565
PMCID: PMC4214515
PMID: 24722439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]