---
reference_id: "PMID:38973605"
title: A Genome-Wide Association Study Suggests New Susceptibility Loci for Primary Antiphospholipid Syndrome.
authors:
- Casares-Marfil D
- Martínez-Bueno M
- Borghi MO
- Pons-Estel G
- PRECISESADS Clinical Consortium
- Reales G
- Zuo Y
- Espinosa G
- Radstake T
- van den Hoogen LL
- Wallace C
- Guthridge J
- James JA
- Cervera R
- Meroni PL
- Martin J
- Knight JS
- Alarcón-Riquelme ME
- Sawalha AH
journal: Arthritis Rheumatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/art.42947
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Antiphospholipid Syndrome/genetics
- Genetic Loci
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- HLA-DQ beta-Chains/genetics
- HLA-DR alpha-Chains/genetics
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- STAT1 Transcription Factor/genetics
- STAT4 Transcription Factor/genetics
- White People/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Genome-Wide Association Study Suggests New Susceptibility Loci for Primary Antiphospholipid Syndrome.
**Authors:** Casares-Marfil D, Martínez-Bueno M, Borghi MO, Pons-Estel G, PRECISESADS Clinical Consortium, Reales G, Zuo Y, Espinosa G, Radstake T, van den Hoogen LL, Wallace C, Guthridge J, James JA, Cervera R, Meroni PL, Martin J, Knight JS, Alarcón-Riquelme ME, Sawalha AH
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheumatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/art.42947](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.42947)

## Content

1. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2024 Nov;76(11):1623-1634. doi: 10.1002/art.42947. Epub 
2024 Aug 11.

A Genome-Wide Association Study Suggests New Susceptibility Loci for Primary 
Antiphospholipid Syndrome.

Casares-Marfil D(1), Martínez-Bueno M(2), Borghi MO(3), Pons-Estel G(4); 
PRECISESADS Clinical Consortium; Reales G(5), Zuo Y(6), Espinosa G(4), Radstake 
T(7), van den Hoogen LL(8), Wallace C(5), Guthridge J(9), James JA(9), Cervera 
R(4), Meroni PL(10), Martin J(11), Knight JS(6), Alarcón-Riquelme ME(2), Sawalha 
AH(1).

Collaborators: Beretta L, Vigone B, Pers JO, Saraux A, Devauchelle-Pensec V, 
Cornec D, Jousse-Joulin S, Lauwerys B, Ducreux J, Maudoux AL, Vasconcelos C, 
Tavares A, Neves E, Faria R, Brandão M, Campar A, Marinho A, Farinha F, Almeida 
I, Gonzalez-Gay MA, Blanco Alonso R, Corrales Martínez A, Cervera R, 
Rodríguez-Pintó I, Espinosa G, Lories R, De Langhe E, Hunzelmann N, Belz D, 
Witte T, Baerlecken N, Stummvoll G, Zauner M, Lehner M, Collantes E, 
Ortega-Castro R, Aguirre-Zamorano MA, Escudero-Contreras A, Castro-Villegas MC, 
Jiménez Gómez Y, Ortego N, Fernández Roldán MC, Raya E, Jiménez Moleón I, de 
Ramon E, Quintero ID, Meroni PL, Gerosa M, Schioppo T, Artusi C, Chizzolini C, 
Dufour A, Wynar D, Kovács L, Balog A, Deák M, Bocskai M, Dulic S, Kádár G, Hiepe 
F, Gerl V, Thiel S, Rodriguez Maresca M, López-Berrio A, Aguilar-Quesada R, 
Navarro-Linares H, Ioannou Y, Chamberlain C, Marovac J, Alarcón-Riquelme M, 
Gomes Anjos T.

Author information:
(1)University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(2)Centre for Genomics and Oncological Research, Granada, Spain.
(3)University of Milan and IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy.
(4)Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(6)University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
(7)University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(8)Radboudumc and Sint Maartenskliniek, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(9)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City.
(10)IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy.
(11)Institute of Parastitology and Biomedicine López-Neyra, Spanish National 
Research Council, Granada, Spain.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2023 Dec 05:2023.12.05.23299396. doi: 10.1101/2023.12.05.23299396.

OBJECTIVE: Primary antiphospholipid syndrome (PAPS) is a rare autoimmune disease 
characterized by the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies and the occurrence 
of thrombotic events and pregnancy complications. Our study aimed to identify 
novel genetic susceptibility loci associated with PAPS.
METHODS: We performed a genome-wide association study comprising 5,485 
individuals (482 affected individuals) of European ancestry. Significant and 
suggestive independent variants from a meta-analysis of approximately 7 million 
variants were evaluated for functional and biological process enrichment. The 
genetic risk variability for PAPS in different populations was also assessed. 
Hierarchical clustering, Mahalanobis distance, and Dirichlet Process Mixtures 
with uncertainty clustering methods were used to assess genetic similarities 
between PAPS and other immune-mediated diseases.
RESULTS: We revealed genetic associations with PAPS in a regulatory locus within 
the HLA class II region near HLA-DRA and in STAT1-STAT4 with a genome-wide level 
of significance; 34 additional suggestive genetic susceptibility loci for PAPS 
were also identified. The disease risk allele near HLA-DRA is associated with 
overexpression of HLA-DRB6, HLA-DRB9, HLA-DQA2, and HLA-DQB2 in immune cells, 
vascular tissue, and nervous tissue. This association is independent of the 
association between PAPS and HLA-DRB1*1302. Functional analyses highlighted 
immune-related pathways in PAPS-associated loci. The comparison with other 
immune-mediated diseases revealed a close genetic relatedness to neuromyelitis 
optica, systemic sclerosis, and Sjögren syndrome, suggesting co-localized causal 
variations close to STAT1-STAT4, TNPO3, and BLK.
CONCLUSION: This study represents a comprehensive large-scale genetic analysis 
for PAPS and provides new insights into the genetic basis and pathophysiology of 
this rare disease.

© 2024 The Author(s). Arthritis & Rheumatology published by Wiley Periodicals 
LLC on behalf of American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/art.42947
PMCID: PMC11521773
PMID: 38973605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors has any financial conflict 
of interest to disclose. Dr. Chris Wallace is partially funded by GSK and MSD, 
and holds a part time position at GSK. Neither funder had any involvement with 
or influence on this work. Dr. Timothy is an employee and may hold stock/shares 
at AbbVie Inc. AbbVie Inc had no involvement with or influence on this work.