---
reference_id: "PMID:34986351"
title: Ebola virus delta peptide is an enterotoxin.
authors:
- Melnik LI
- Guha S
- Ghimire J
- Smither AR
- Beddingfield BJ
- Hoffmann AR
- Sun L
- Ungerleider NA
- Baddoo MC
- Flemington EK
- Gallaher WR
- Wimley WC
- Garry RF
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.110172
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ebola virus delta peptide is an enterotoxin.
**Authors:** Melnik LI, Guha S, Ghimire J, Smither AR, Beddingfield BJ, Hoffmann AR, Sun L, Ungerleider NA, Baddoo MC, Flemington EK, Gallaher WR, Wimley WC, Garry RF
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2021.110172](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2021.110172)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2022 Jan 4;38(1):110172. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.110172.

Ebola virus delta peptide is an enterotoxin.

Melnik LI(1), Guha S(2), Ghimire J(2), Smither AR(1), Beddingfield BJ(1), 
Hoffmann AR(1), Sun L(2), Ungerleider NA(3), Baddoo MC(3), Flemington EK(3), 
Gallaher WR(4), Wimley WC(5), Garry RF(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tulane University School of 
Medicine, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Tulane University School of 
Medicine, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.
(3)Tulane Cancer Center, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, LSU Health Sciences 
Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA; Mockingbird Nature Research Group, Pearl 
River, LA 70452, USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Tulane University School of 
Medicine, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA. Electronic address: wwimley@tulane.edu.
(6)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tulane University School of 
Medicine, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA; Zalgen Labs, Germantown, MD 20876, USA. 
Electronic address: rfgarry@tulane.edu.

During the 2013-2016 West African (WA) Ebola virus (EBOV) outbreak, severe 
gastrointestinal symptoms were common in patients and associated with poor 
outcome. Delta peptide is a conserved product of post-translational processing 
of the abundant EBOV soluble glycoprotein (sGP). The murine ligated ileal loop 
model was used to demonstrate that delta peptide is a potent enterotoxin. 
Dramatic intestinal fluid accumulation follows injection of biologically 
relevant amounts of delta peptide into ileal loops, along with gross alteration 
of villous architecture and loss of goblet cells. Transcriptomic analyses show 
that delta peptide triggers damage response and cell survival pathways and 
downregulates expression of transporters and exchangers. Induction of diarrhea 
by delta peptide occurs via cellular damage and regulation of genes that encode 
proteins involved in fluid secretion. While distinct differences exist between 
the ileal loop murine model and EBOV infection in humans, these results suggest 
that delta peptide may contribute to EBOV-induced gastrointestinal pathology.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.110172
PMID: 34986351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests Dr. Garry is co-founder 
of Zalgen Labs, a biotechnology company that develops countermeasures for 
emerging viruses.