---
reference_id: "PMID:33588347"
title: Association of variants in MYH7, MYBPC3 and TNNT2 with sudden cardiac death-related risk factors in Brazilian patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Mori AA
- Castro LR
- Bortolin RH
- Bastos GM
- Oliveira VF
- Ferreira GM
- Hirata TDC
- Fajardo CM
- Sampaio MF
- Moreira DAR
- Pachón-Mateos JC
- Correia EB
- Sousa AGMR
- Brión M
- Carracedo A
- Hirata RDC
- Hirata MH
journal: Forensic Sci Int Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.fsigen.2021.102478
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of variants in MYH7, MYBPC3 and TNNT2 with sudden cardiac death-related risk factors in Brazilian patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Mori AA, Castro LR, Bortolin RH, Bastos GM, Oliveira VF, Ferreira GM, Hirata TDC, Fajardo CM, Sampaio MF, Moreira DAR, Pachón-Mateos JC, Correia EB, Sousa AGMR, Brión M, Carracedo A, Hirata RDC, Hirata MH
**Journal:** Forensic Sci Int Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.fsigen.2021.102478](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fsigen.2021.102478)

## Content

1. Forensic Sci Int Genet. 2021 May;52:102478. doi: 10.1016/j.fsigen.2021.102478.
 Epub 2021 Feb 3.

Association of variants in MYH7, MYBPC3 and TNNT2 with sudden cardiac 
death-related risk factors in Brazilian patients with hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy.

Mori AA(1), Castro LR(2), Bortolin RH(1), Bastos GM(3), Oliveira VF(1), Ferreira 
GM(4), Hirata TDC(1), Fajardo CM(1), Sampaio MF(3), Moreira DAR(2), 
Pachón-Mateos JC(2), Correia EB(2), Sousa AGMR(2), Brión M(5), Carracedo A(6), 
Hirata RDC(1), Hirata MH(7).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, 
Brazil.
(2)Institute Dante Pazzanese of Cardiology, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Institute Dante Pazzanese of Cardiology, Sao Paulo, Brazil; Real e Benemerita 
Associação Portuguesa de Beneficiencia, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(4)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, 
Brazil; Institute Dante Pazzanese of Cardiology, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(5)Genetica Cardiovascular, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago de 
Compostela, Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de Santiago de Compostela, 
Santiago de Compostela, A Coruña, Spain; Grupo de Medicina Genômica, Universidad 
de Santiago de Compostela, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de 
Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(6)Grupo de Medicina Genômica, Universidad de Santiago de Compostela, Centro de 
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Santiago de 
Compostela, Spain; Centro Nacional de Genotipado-CeGen-USC-PRB3-ISCIII, Santiago 
de Compostela, Spain.
(7)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, 
Brazil. Electronic address: mhhirata@usp.br.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is characterized by unexplained left 
ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) and is one of the major causes of sudden cardiac 
death (SCD). An exon-targeted gene sequencing strategy was used to investigate 
the association of functional variants in sarcomeric genes (MYBPC3, MYH7 and 
TNNT2) with severe LVH and other SCD-related risk factors in Brazilian HCM 
patients. Clinical data of 55 HCM patients attending a Cardiology Hospital (Sao 
Paulo city, Brazil) were recorded. Severe LVH, aborted SCD, family history of 
SCD, syncope, non-sustained ventricular tachycardia and abnormal blood pressure 
in response to exercise were evaluated as SCD risk factors. Blood samples were 
obtained for genomic DNA extraction and the exons and untranslated regions of 
the MYH7, MYBPC3 and TNNT2 were sequenced using Nextera® and MiSEq® reagents. 
Variants were identified and annotated using in silico tools, and further 
classified as pathogenic or benign according to the American College of Medical 
Genetics and Genomics guidelines. Variants with functional effects were 
identified in MYBPC3 (n = 9), MYH7 (n = 6) and TNNT2 (n = 4). The benign 
variants MYBPC3 p.Val158Met and TNNT2 p.Lys263Arg were associated with severe 
LVH (p < 0.05), and the MYH7 p.Val320Met (pathogenic) was associated with family 
history of SCD (p = 0.037). Increased risk for severe LVH was found in carriers 
of MYBPC3 Met158 (c.472 A allele, OR = 13.5, 95% CI = 1.80-101.12, p = 0.011) or 
combined variants (MYBPC3, MYH7 and TNNT2: OR = 12.39, 95% CI = 2.14-60.39, 
p = 0.004). Carriers of TNNT2 p.Lys263Arg and combined variants had higher 
values of septum thickness than non-carriers (p < 0.05). Molecular modeling 
analysis showed that MYBPC3 158Met reduces the interaction of cardiac 
myosin-binding protein C (cMyBP-C) RASK domain (amino acids 
Arg215-Ala216-Ser217-Lys218) with tropomyosin. In conclusion, the variants 
MYBPC3 p.Val158Met, TNNT2 p.Lys263Arg and MYH7 p.Val320Met individually or 
combined contribute to the risk of sudden cardiac death and other outcomes of 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsigen.2021.102478
PMID: 33588347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]