---
reference_id: "PMID:29275386"
title: "Chickenpox: an ageless disease."
authors:
- Navaratnam AMD
- Ma N
- Farrukh M
- Abdulla A
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2017-222027
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chickenpox: an ageless disease.
**Authors:** Navaratnam AMD, Ma N, Farrukh M, Abdulla A
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2017-222027](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2017-222027)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2017 Dec 22;2017:bcr2017222027. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2017-222027.

Chickenpox: an ageless disease.

Navaratnam AMD(1), Ma N(1), Farrukh M(1), Abdulla A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Princess Royal University Hospital, 
Orpington, UK.

A 97-year-old woman presented with 4-day history of vesicular rash, initially at 
the feet but then spread up to the thighs bilaterally, abdomen and trunk. The 
initial differentials included bullous pemphigus and cellulitis by the emergency 
department. She was then managed as bullous pemphigus by the acute medical team 
and started on high-dose steroids, with no other differentials considered. When 
her care was taken over by the general medical team, varicella zoster virus 
(VZV) infection was suspected. After confirmation by the dermatology team 
regarding the clinical diagnosis and the positive VZV DNA swabs, she was started 
on acyclovir.

© BMJ Publishing Group Ltd (unless otherwise stated in the text of the article) 
2017. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise 
expressly granted.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2017-222027
PMCID: PMC5780607
PMID: 29275386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.