---
reference_id: "PMID:36760167"
title: Genome sequencing identifies complex structural MLH1 variant in unsolved Lynch syndrome.
authors:
- Witt D
- Faust U
- Strobl-Wildemann G
- Sturm M
- Buchert R
- Zuleger T
- Admard J
- Casadei N
- Ossowski S
- Haack TB
- Rieß O
- Schroeder C
journal: Mol Genet Genomic Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.2151
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome sequencing identifies complex structural MLH1 variant in unsolved Lynch syndrome.
**Authors:** Witt D, Faust U, Strobl-Wildemann G, Sturm M, Buchert R, Zuleger T, Admard J, Casadei N, Ossowski S, Haack TB, Rieß O, Schroeder C
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomic Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mgg3.2151](https://doi.org/10.1002/mgg3.2151)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2023 Jun;11(6):e2151. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.2151. Epub 2023
 Feb 9.

Genome sequencing identifies complex structural MLH1 variant in unsolved Lynch 
syndrome.

Witt D(1), Faust U(1), Strobl-Wildemann G(2), Sturm M(1), Buchert R(1), Zuleger 
T(1), Admard J(1), Casadei N(1)(3), Ossowski S(1), Haack TB(1), Rieß O(1), 
Schroeder C(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University Hospital 
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(2)MVZ Humangenetik Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
(3)NGS Competence Center Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Lynch syndrome is one of the most common cancer predisposition 
syndromes. It is caused by inherited changes in the mismatch repair pathway. 
With current diagnostic approaches, a causative genetic variant can be found in 
less than 50% of cases. A correct diagnosis is important for ensuring that an 
appropriate surveillance program is used and that additional high-risk family 
members are identified.
METHODS: We used clinical genome sequencing on DNA from blood and subsequent 
transcriptome sequencing for confirmation. Data were analyzed using the megSAP 
pipeline and classified according to basic criteria in diagnostic laboratories. 
Segregation analyses in family members were conducted via breakpoint PCR.
RESULTS: We present a family with the clinical diagnosis of Lynch syndrome in 
which standard diagnostic tests, such as panel or exome sequencing, were unable 
to detect the underlying genetic variant. Genome sequencing in the index patient 
confirmed the previous diagnostic results and identified an additional complex 
rearrangement with intronic breakpoints involving MLH1 and its neighboring gene 
LRRFIP2. The previously undetected structural variant was classified as 
medically relevant. Segregation analysis in the family identified additional 
at-risk individuals which were offered intensified cancer screening.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS: This case illustrates the advantages of clinical 
genome sequencing in detecting structural variants compared with current 
diagnostic approaches. Although structural variants are rare in Lynch syndrome 
families, they seem to be underreported, in part because of technical 
challenges. Clinical genome sequencing offers a comprehensive genetic 
characterization detecting a wide range of genetic variants.

© 2023 The Authors. Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.2151
PMCID: PMC10265068
PMID: 36760167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There are no competing interests.