---
reference_id: "PMID:38077449"
title: IPSC-Derived Astrocytes to Model Neuroinflammatory and Metabolic Responses in X-linked Adrenoleukodystrophy.
authors:
- Parasar P
- Kaur N
- Singh J
journal: J Biotechnol Biomed
year: '2023'
doi: 10.26502/jbb.2642-91280091
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IPSC-Derived Astrocytes to Model Neuroinflammatory and Metabolic Responses in X-linked Adrenoleukodystrophy.
**Authors:** Parasar P, Kaur N, Singh J
**Journal:** J Biotechnol Biomed (2023)
**DOI:** [10.26502/jbb.2642-91280091](https://doi.org/10.26502/jbb.2642-91280091)

## Content

1. J Biotechnol Biomed. 2023;6(3):281-293. doi: 10.26502/jbb.2642-91280091. Epub 
2023 Aug 4.

IPSC-Derived Astrocytes to Model Neuroinflammatory and Metabolic Responses in 
X-linked Adrenoleukodystrophy.

Parasar P(1), Kaur N(1), Singh J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Henry Ford Health, Detroit, MI, USA.

X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD) is an inherited metabolic disorder caused 
by pathogenic variants in the ABCD1 gene, leading to accumulation of saturated 
very long chain fatty acids (VLCFA) in body fluids and tissues including brain 
and spinal cord. In the absence of a clear genotype-phenotype correlation the 
molecular mechanisms of the fatal cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy (cALD) and the 
milder adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN) phenotypes remain unknown. Given our previous 
evidence of role of astrocytes in the neuroinflammatory response in X-ALD we 
investigated the metabolic and molecular profiles of astrocytes derived from 
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC). The iPSCs were in turn generated from 
skin fibroblasts of healthy controls and patients with AMN or cALD. AMN and cALD 
astrocytes exhibited lack of ABCD1 and accumulation of VLCFA, a biochemical 
hallmark of X-ALD disease. Accumulation of VLCFA was significantly higher in 
cALD astrocytes. Mitochondrial function analysis by Seahorse extracellular flux 
identified increased oxygen consumption and extracellular acidification rates in 
cALD astrocytes, yet the ATP levels were decreased. Molecular signaling 
identified increased phosphorylation of STAT3 in cALD astrocytes, and higher 
proinflammatory cytokine and Toll like receptor (TLR) expression. CRISPR-Cas9 
knock-in of functional ABCD1 gene expression differentially affected the 
expression of key molecular and metabolic targets in AMN and cALD astrocytes. 
AMN and cALD iPSC-derived astrocytes and their isogenic controls demonstrate 
differential aspects of X-ALD metabolic and inflammatory response to ABCD1 
mutation and can be further utilized for exploring the contribution of 
iPSC-derived astrocytes to differential X-ALD disease pathology.

DOI: 10.26502/jbb.2642-91280091
PMCID: PMC10705002
PMID: 38077449

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no competing interests to disclose.