---
reference_id: "PMID:6725560"
title: L-carnitine enhances excretion of propionyl coenzyme A as propionylcarnitine in propionic acidemia.
authors:
- Roe CR
- Millington DS
- Maltby DA
- Bohan TP
- Hoppel CL
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1984'
doi: 10.1172/JCI111387
keywords:
- Acyl Coenzyme A/urine
- Adolescent
- Carboxy-Lyases/deficiency
- "Carnitine/analogs & derivatives, metabolism, urine"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mass Spectrometry/methods
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/metabolism"
- Methylmalonyl-CoA Decarboxylase
- Propionates/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# L-carnitine enhances excretion of propionyl coenzyme A as propionylcarnitine in propionic acidemia.
**Authors:** Roe CR, Millington DS, Maltby DA, Bohan TP, Hoppel CL
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1984)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI111387](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI111387)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 1984 Jun;73(6):1785-8. doi: 10.1172/JCI111387.

L-carnitine enhances excretion of propionyl coenzyme A as propionylcarnitine in
propionic acidemia.

Roe CR, Millington DS, Maltby DA, Bohan TP, Hoppel CL.

Treatment with L-carnitine greatly enhanced the formation and excretion of
short-chain acylcarnitines in three patients with propionic acidemia and in
three normal controls. The use of fast atom bombardment mass spectrometry and
linked scanning at constant magnetic (B) to electric (E) field ratio identified
the acylcarnitine as propionylcarnitine in patients with propionic acidemia. The
normal children excreted mostly acetylcarnitine. Propionic acidemia and other
organic acidurias are characterized by the intramitochondrial accumulation of
short-chain acyl-Coenzyme A (CoA) compounds. The substrate specificity of the
carnitine acetyltransferase enzyme and its steady state nature appears to
facilitate elimination of propionyl groups while restoring the acyl-CoA:free CoA
ratio in the mitochondrion. We suggest that L-carnitine may be a useful
therapeutic approach for elimination of toxic acyl CoA compounds in several of
these disorders.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI111387
PMCID: PMC437091
PMID: 6725560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
