---
reference_id: "PMID:38136934"
title: "The Cardiofaciocutaneous Syndrome: From Genetics to Prognostic-Therapeutic Implications."
authors:
- Scorrano G
- David E
- Calì E
- Chimenz R
- La Bella S
- Di Ludovico A
- Di Rosa G
- Gitto E
- Mankad K
- Nardello R
- Mangano GD
- Leoni C
- Ceravolo G
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/genes14122111
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Cardiofaciocutaneous Syndrome: From Genetics to Prognostic-Therapeutic Implications.
**Authors:** Scorrano G, David E, Calì E, Chimenz R, La Bella S, Di Ludovico A, Di Rosa G, Gitto E, Mankad K, Nardello R, Mangano GD, Leoni C, Ceravolo G
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes14122111](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes14122111)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Nov 22;14(12):2111. doi: 10.3390/genes14122111.

The Cardiofaciocutaneous Syndrome: From Genetics to Prognostic-Therapeutic 
Implications.

Scorrano G(1), David E(2), Calì E(3), Chimenz R(4), La Bella S(1), Di Ludovico 
A(1), Di Rosa G(5), Gitto E(6), Mankad K(7), Nardello R(8), Mangano GD(8), Leoni 
C(9), Ceravolo G(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, "G. D'Annunzio" University of Chieti-Pescara, 66100 
Chieti, Italy.
(2)Department of Translational and Precision Medicine, "Sapienza" University of 
Rome, 00161 Rome, Italy.
(3)UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, University College London, London 
WC1N 3BG, UK.
(4)Pediatric Nephrology and Dialysis Unit, University Hospital "G. Martino", 
98124 Messina, Italy.
(5)Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, Department of Human Pathology in Adult and 
Developmental Age "Gaetano Barresi", University of Messina, 98124 Messina, 
Italy.
(6)Neonatal and Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Department of Human Pathology of 
the Adult and Developmental Age "Gaetano Barresi", University of Messina, 98122 
Messina, Italy.
(7)Department of Radiology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London 
WC1N 3JH, UK.
(8)Department of Health Promotion, Mother and Child Care, Internal Medicine and 
Medical Specialities, "G. D'Alessandro" University of Palermo, 90127 Palermo, 
Italy.
(9)Center for Rare Diseases and Birth Defects, Department of Woman and Child 
Health and Public Health, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, 
00168 Rome, Italy.

Cardiofaciocutaneous (CFC) syndrome is one of the rarest RASopathies 
characterized by multiple congenital ectodermal, cardiac and craniofacial 
abnormalities with a mild to severe ocular, gastrointestinal and neurological 
involvement. It is an autosomal dominant syndrome, with complete penetrance, 
caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants in the genes BRAF, MAP2K1/MEK1, 
MAP2K2/MEK2, KRAS or, rarely, YWHAZ, all part of the RAS-MAPK pathway. This 
pathway is a signal transduction cascade that plays a crucial role in normal 
cellular processes such as cell growth, proliferation, differentiation, 
survival, metabolism and migration. CFC syndrome overlaps with Noonan syndrome, 
Costello syndrome, neurofibromatosis type 1 and Legius syndrome, therefore 
making the diagnosis challenging. Neurological involvement in CFC is more severe 
than in other RASopathies. Phenotypic variability in CFC patients is related to 
the specific gene affected, without a recognized genotype-phenotype correlation 
for distinct pathogenic variants. Currently, there is no specific treatment for 
CFC syndrome. Encouraging zebrafish model system studies suggested that, in the 
future, MEK inhibitors could be a suitable treatment of progressive phenotypes 
of CFC in children. A multidisciplinary care is necessary for appropriate 
medical management.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14122111
PMCID: PMC10742720
PMID: 38136934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.