---
reference_id: "PMID:39648200"
title: Single-cell transcriptomic and neuropathologic analysis reveals dysregulation of the integrated stress response in progressive supranuclear palsy.
authors:
- Whitney K
- Song WM
- Sharma A
- Dangoor DK
- Farrell K
- Krassner MM
- Ressler HW
- Christie TD
- Kandoi S
- Walker RH
- Nirenberg MJ
- Frucht SJ
- Riboldi GM
- Zhang B
- Pereira AC
- Crary JF
journal: Acta Neuropathol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00401-024-02823-w
keywords:
- Humans
- "Supranuclear Palsy, Progressive/pathology, metabolism, genetics"
- Transcriptome
- Single-Cell Analysis
- Male
- Female
- Aged
- "tau Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- Middle Aged
- "Neurons/pathology, metabolism"
- "Brain/pathology, metabolism"
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Eukaryotic Initiation Factor-2/metabolism, genetics"
- "Stress, Physiological/physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single-cell transcriptomic and neuropathologic analysis reveals dysregulation of the integrated stress response in progressive supranuclear palsy.
**Authors:** Whitney K, Song WM, Sharma A, Dangoor DK, Farrell K, Krassner MM, Ressler HW, Christie TD, Kandoi S, Walker RH, Nirenberg MJ, Frucht SJ, Riboldi GM, Zhang B, Pereira AC, Crary JF
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00401-024-02823-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-024-02823-w)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol. 2024 Dec 9;148(1):80. doi: 10.1007/s00401-024-02823-w.

Single-cell transcriptomic and neuropathologic analysis reveals dysregulation of 
the integrated stress response in progressive supranuclear palsy.

Whitney K(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Song WM(6)(7)(8), Sharma A(2)(3)(9), Dangoor 
DK(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Farrell K(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Krassner MM(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Ressler 
HW(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Christie TD(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Kandoi S(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Walker 
RH(9)(10), Nirenberg MJ(9)(10), Frucht SJ(11), Riboldi GM(11), Zhang 
B(12)(13)(14)(15), Pereira AC(16)(17)(18), Crary JF(19)(20)(21)(22)(23)(24).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 10029, USA.
(2)Nash Family Department of Neuroscience, Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 10029, USA.
(3)Ronald M. Loeb Center for Alzheimer's Disease, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 10029, USA.
(4)Neuropathology Brain Bank & Research Core, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, NY, 10029, USA.
(5)Department of Artificial Intelligence & Human Health, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 10029, USA.
(6)Mount Sinai Center for Transformative Disease Modeling, Department of 
Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn Institute for Data Science and Genomic 
Technology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 10029, USA. 
won-min.song@mssm.edu.
(7)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY, 10029, USA. 
won-min.song@mssm.edu.
(8)Icahn Institute for Data Science and Genomic Technology, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY, 10029, USA. 
won-min.song@mssm.edu.
(9)Department of Neurology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 1468 
Madison Avenue, New York, NY, 10029, USA.
(10)Department of Neurology, James J. Peters Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 
Bronx, NY, 10468, USA.
(11)The Marlene and Paolo Fresco Institute for Parkinson's and Movement 
Disorders, Department of Neurology, NYU Langone Health, New York, NY, USA.
(12)Mount Sinai Center for Transformative Disease Modeling, Department of 
Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn Institute for Data Science and Genomic 
Technology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 10029, USA.
(13)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY, 10029, USA.
(14)Icahn Institute for Data Science and Genomic Technology, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY, 10029, USA.
(15)Department of Pharmacological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY, 10029, USA.
(16)Nash Family Department of Neuroscience, Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 10029, USA. 
ana.pereira@mssm.edu.
(17)Ronald M. Loeb Center for Alzheimer's Disease, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 10029, USA. ana.pereira@mssm.edu.
(18)Department of Neurology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 1468 
Madison Avenue, New York, NY, 10029, USA. ana.pereira@mssm.edu.
(19)Department of Pathology, Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 10029, USA. john.crary@mountsinai.org.
(20)Nash Family Department of Neuroscience, Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 10029, USA. 
john.crary@mountsinai.org.
(21)Ronald M. Loeb Center for Alzheimer's Disease, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 10029, USA. john.crary@mountsinai.org.
(22)Neuropathology Brain Bank & Research Core, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, NY, 10029, USA. john.crary@mountsinai.org.
(23)Department of Artificial Intelligence & Human Health, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 10029, USA. john.crary@mountsinai.org.
(24)Department of Neurology, James J. Peters Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 
Bronx, NY, 10468, USA. john.crary@mountsinai.org.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Nov 17:2023.11.17.567587. doi: 10.1101/2023.11.17.567587.

Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is a sporadic neurodegenerative tauopathy 
variably affecting brainstem and cortical structures, and characterized by tau 
inclusions in neurons and glia. The precise mechanism whereby these protein 
aggregates lead to cell death remains unclear. To investigate the contribution 
of these different cellular abnormalities to PSP pathogenesis, we performed 
single-nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA-seq) and analyzed 50,708 high quality 
nuclei targeting the diencephalon, including the subthalamic nucleus and 
adjacent structures, from human post-mortem PSP brains with varying degrees of 
pathology compared to controls. Cell-type-specific differential expression and 
pathway analysis identified both common and discrete changes in numerous 
pathways previously implicated in PSP and other neurodegenerative disorders. 
This included EIF2 signaling, an adaptive pathway activated in response to 
diverse stressors, which was activated in multiple vulnerable cell types and 
validated in independent snRNA-seq and bulk RNA-seq datasets. Using 
immunohistochemistry, we found that activated eIF2α was positively correlated 
with tau pathology burden in vulnerable brain regions. Multiplex 
immunofluorescence localized activated eIF2α positivity to hyperphosphorylated 
tau (p-tau) positive neurons and ALDH1L1-positive astrocytes, supporting the 
increased transcriptomic EIF2 activation observed in these vulnerable cell 
types. In conclusion, these data provide insights into cell-type-specific 
pathological changes in PSP and support the hypothesis that failure of adaptive 
stress pathways play a mechanistic role in the pathogenesis and progression of 
PSP.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-024-02823-w
PMCID: PMC11625691
PMID: 39648200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]