---
reference_id: "PMID:32140986"
title: Locally Advanced, Unresectable Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.
authors:
- Puri S
- Saltos A
- Perez B
- Le X
- Gray JE
journal: Curr Oncol Rep
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s11912-020-0882-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Locally Advanced, Unresectable Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.
**Authors:** Puri S, Saltos A, Perez B, Le X, Gray JE
**Journal:** Curr Oncol Rep (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11912-020-0882-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11912-020-0882-3)

## Content

1. Curr Oncol Rep. 2020 Mar 5;22(4):31. doi: 10.1007/s11912-020-0882-3.

Locally Advanced, Unresectable Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Puri S(1), Saltos A(2), Perez B(2), Le X(3), Gray JE(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, The University of Utah Huntsman Cancer 
Institute, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(2)Department of Thoracic Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research 
Institute, Tampa, FL, USA.
(3)Department of Thoracic and Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of 
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Thoracic Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research 
Institute, Tampa, FL, USA. jhanelle.gray@moffitt.org.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Treatment of locally advanced, unresectable non-small cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC) has recently been revolutionized by the incorporation of 
immunotherapy to standard platinum-based concurrent chemoradiation. This review 
examines the current standard practices and ongoing studies on the management of 
locally advanced, unresectable NSCLC.
RECENT FINDINGS: Concurrent chemoradiation is the cornerstone of treatment of 
unresectable, locally advanced NSCLC. However, chemoradiation can be associated 
with high therapy-related toxicities, and risk of disease relapse remains 
significantly elevated despite treatment with curative intent. Durvalumab, a 
PD-L1 inhibitor, was recently approved as consolidation therapy following 
concurrent chemoradiation; this agent represents a major advancement in 
treatment of unresectable stage III NSCLC. Several clinical trials are currently 
underway to evaluate the benefit of different immunotherapy sequencing and other 
biomarker-driven strategies in this disease setting. Multiple trials are 
presently ongoing to assess novel immunotherapy and targeted therapy strategies 
to improve outcomes and decrease treatment-associated toxicities in patients 
with locally advanced NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1007/s11912-020-0882-3
PMID: 32140986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]