---
reference_id: "PMID:33991148"
title: Clinical and trichoscopic features in various forms of scalp psoriasis.
authors:
- Bruni F
- Alessandrini A
- Starace M
- Orlando G
- Piraccini BM
journal: J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/jdv.17354
keywords:
- "Dermatitis, Seborrheic"
- Humans
- Psoriasis/diagnosis
- Quality of Life
- Scalp
- Scalp Dermatoses/diagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and trichoscopic features in various forms of scalp psoriasis.
**Authors:** Bruni F, Alessandrini A, Starace M, Orlando G, Piraccini BM
**Journal:** J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jdv.17354](https://doi.org/10.1111/jdv.17354)

## Content

1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2021 Sep;35(9):1830-1837. doi:
10.1111/jdv.17354.  Epub 2021 Jun 7.

Clinical and trichoscopic features in various forms of scalp psoriasis.

Bruni F(1), Alessandrini A(1), Starace M(1), Orlando G(2), Piraccini BM(1).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology -IRCCS Policlinico di Sant'Orsola - Department of Experimental, 
Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine (DIMES), Alma Mater Studiorum University of 
Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University of Padua, Padua, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Scalp psoriasis is often undiagnosed or inadequately treated. The 
patient himself underestimates the seriousness of this hair disease and consults 
too late to a dermatologist.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of our study was to create a correlation between the 
clinical patterns and trichoscopy of scalp psoriasis such in a way to help the 
clinician to make the diagnosis and select the appropriate therapy.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We gathered all patients affected of scalp psoriasis 
afferent to Outpatient's hair consultation of the Department of Experimental, 
Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine, University of Bologna, from January 2012 to 
December 2018. All patients were evaluated through clinical, trichoscopic 
examination and a skin biopsy only in doubtful cases. We quantified the severity 
of the disease with several objective and subjective parameters every 4 months, 
up to 1 year. We recorded therapies, outcome data and quality of life.
RESULTS: We collected 156 patients affected by scalp psoriasis, identifying 
seven clinical patterns with specific trichoscopical correlation. In the order 
of frequency, the clinical patterns were as follows: plaque psoriasis (with a 
prevalence of erythema, silver-white scales and twisted red loops vessels and 
red dots); thin scales (with silvery-white scales, simple red lines and signet 
red ring vessels); sebopsoriasis (with greasy scales, erythema with red dots, 
globules and twisted and bushy red loops at high magnification); psoriatic cap 
(with silver-white scales, erythema and polymorphic vascular pattern); 
pityriasis amiantacea (with yellowish adherent scales, erythema and simple red 
loops capillaries); cicatricial psoriatic alopecia (with erythema associated 
with yellowish, silver-white scales with twisted and bushy red loops 
capillaries) and pustular psoriasis (with 'flower shape' pustular lesions, 
erythema simple red loops capillaries).
CONCLUSIONS: The description of different clinical patterns of scalp psoriasis 
and its trichoscopical correlations may help the clinician to make the diagnosis 
also in atypical presentations and to prescribe an adequate therapeutic regimen.

© 2021 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

DOI: 10.1111/jdv.17354
PMID: 33991148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]