---
reference_id: "PMID:20661588"
title: "Brachyphalangy, polydactyly and tibial aplasia/hypoplasia syndrome (OMIM 609945): case report and review of the literature."
authors:
- Shafeghati Y
- Kahrizi K
- Najmabadi H
- Kuss AW
- Ropers HH
- Tzschach A
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1007/s00431-010-1267-7
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Consanguinity
- "Craniofacial Abnormalities/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- "Foot Deformities, Congenital/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Infant
- Parents
- "Polydactyly/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Syndrome
- "Tibia/abnormalities, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brachyphalangy, polydactyly and tibial aplasia/hypoplasia syndrome (OMIM 609945): case report and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Shafeghati Y, Kahrizi K, Najmabadi H, Kuss AW, Ropers HH, Tzschach A
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00431-010-1267-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00431-010-1267-7)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 2010 Dec;169(12):1535-9. doi: 10.1007/s00431-010-1267-7. Epub 
2010 Jul 27.

Brachyphalangy, polydactyly and tibial aplasia/hypoplasia syndrome (OMIM 
609945): case report and review of the literature.

Shafeghati Y(1), Kahrizi K, Najmabadi H, Kuss AW, Ropers HH, Tzschach A.

Author information:
(1)Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Brachyphalangy, polydactyly and tibial aplasia/hypoplasia syndrome (OMIM 609945) 
is a rare congenital disorder. Only seven patients have been reported to date, 
and the etiology of this syndrome is unknown. Autosomal dominant inheritance 
with variable expression has been suggested based on the presence of minor 
features in some parents and the fact that neither parental consanguinity nor 
pairs of affected siblings were observed. We report on the first patient with 
this syndrome who was born to consanguineous parents. Neither the mother nor the 
father, who were first cousins, had clinical features suggestive of a 
manifestation of brachyphalangy, polydactyly and tibial aplasia/hypoplasia 
syndrome. The patient had no siblings, and the family history was unremarkable. 
Clinical problems included brachydactyly of hands and feet, splaying of fingers 
and toes, preaxial polydactyly of feet, bilateral tibial aplasia, shortened 
radius and ulna, and characteristic facial dysmorphic signs. The detailed 
description of this patient adds to our knowledge of the clinical manifestations 
of brachyphalangy, polydactyly and tibial aplasia/hypoplasia syndrome and will 
eventually also contribute to the elucidation of the underlying gene defects.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-010-1267-7
PMID: 20661588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]