---
reference_id: "PMID:31237209"
title: "Protease Inhibitors for the Treatment of HIV/AIDS: Recent Advances and Future Challenges."
authors:
- Voshavar C
journal: Curr Top Med Chem
year: '2019'
doi: 10.2174/1568026619666190619115243
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Protease Inhibitors for the Treatment of HIV/AIDS: Recent Advances and Future Challenges.
**Authors:** Voshavar C
**Journal:** Curr Top Med Chem (2019)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1568026619666190619115243](https://doi.org/10.2174/1568026619666190619115243)

## Content

1. Curr Top Med Chem. 2019;19(18):1571-1598. doi: 
10.2174/1568026619666190619115243.

Protease Inhibitors for the Treatment of HIV/AIDS: Recent Advances and Future 
Challenges.

Voshavar C(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Florida A&M University, 
Tallahassee, FL 32307, United States.

Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (AIDS) is a chronic disease characterized by 
multiple life-threatening illnesses caused by a retro-virus, Human 
Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV). HIV infection slowly destroys the immune system 
and increases the risk of various other infections and diseases. Although, there 
is no immediate cure for HIV infection/AIDS, several drugs targeting various 
cruxes of HIV infection are used to slow down the progress of the disease and to 
boost the immune system. One of the key therapeutic strategies is Highly Active 
Antiretroviral Therapy (HAART) or ' AIDS cocktail' in a general sense, which is 
a customized combination of anti-retroviral drugs designed to combat the HIV 
infection. Since HAART's inception in 1995, this treatment was found to be 
effective in improving the life expectancy of HIV patients over two decades. 
Among various classes of HAART treatment regimen, Protease Inhibitors (PIs) are 
known to be widely used as a major component and found to be effective in 
treating HIV infection/AIDS. For the past several years, a variety of protease 
inhibitors have been reported. This review outlines the drug design strategies 
of PIs, chemical and pharmacological characteristics of some mechanism-based 
inhibitors, summarizes the recent developments in small molecule based drug 
discovery with HIV protease as a drug target. Further discussed are the 
pharmacology, PI drug resistance on HIV PR, adverse effects of HIV PIs and 
challenges/impediments in the successful application of HIV PIs as an important 
class of drugs in HAART regimen for the effective treatment of AIDS.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1568026619666190619115243
PMID: 31237209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]