---
reference_id: "PMID:11241532"
title: Prenatal diagnosis and genetic analysis of type I and type II thanatophoric dysplasia.
authors:
- Chen CP
- Chern SR
- Shih JC
- Wang W
- Yeh LF
- Chang TY
- Tzen CY
journal: Prenat Diagn
year: '2001'
doi: "10.1002/1097-0223(200102)21:2<89::aid-pd21>3.0.co;2-9"
keywords:
- Adult
- DNA Restriction Enzymes/metabolism
- Female
- Gestational Age
- Humans
- Mutation
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Pregnancy
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases
- Radiography
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3"
- "Receptors, Fibroblast Growth Factor/genetics"
- "Thanatophoric Dysplasia/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prenatal diagnosis and genetic analysis of type I and type II thanatophoric dysplasia.
**Authors:** Chen CP, Chern SR, Shih JC, Wang W, Yeh LF, Chang TY, Tzen CY
**Journal:** Prenat Diagn (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1002/1097-0223(200102)21:2<89::aid-pd21>3.0.co;2-9](https://doi.org/10.1002/1097-0223(200102)21:2<89::aid-pd21>3.0.co;2-9)

## Content

1. Prenat Diagn. 2001 Feb;21(2):89-95. doi:
10.1002/1097-0223(200102)21:2<89::aid-pd21>3.0.co;2-9.

Prenatal diagnosis and genetic analysis of type I and type II thanatophoric
dysplasia.

Chen CP(1), Chern SR, Shih JC, Wang W, Yeh LF, Chang TY, Tzen CY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan, ROC. cpc_mmh@yahoo.com

Thanatophoric dysplasia (TD) is one of the most common neonatal lethal skeletal
dysplasias. Prenatal sonographic and molecular genetic diagnoses of three cases
of TD type I (TD1) and one case of TD type II (TD2) are presented here. Two
fetuses of TD1 were characterized by polyhydramnios, macrocephaly, short limbs,
a narrow thoracic cage and curved short femora, but without a cloverleaf skull
at 27 and 31 weeks' gestation, respectively. The third fetus with TD1 was,
however, not associated with macrocephaly, polyhydramnios, chest narrowing and
severe femoral bowing on prenatal ultrasound at 18 weeks' gestation. The TD2
fetus was characterized by polyhydramnios, short limbs, a narrow thoracic cage,
straight short femora, hydrocephalus and a cloverleaf skull at 24 weeks'
gestation. Three-dimensional ultrasound was able to enhance the visualization of
thickened, redundant skin folds and craniofacial and limb deformities associated
with TD. Molecular analysis of the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3)
gene by restriction enzyme digestion analysis and direct sequencing using
cultured amniotic fluid cells or cord blood cells revealed a missense mutation
of 742C-->T (Arg248Cys) in all cases with TD1 and a missense mutation of
1948A-->G (Lys650Glu) in the case with TD2. The present report shows that
adjunctive applications of molecular genetic analysis of the FGFR3 gene and
three-dimensional ultrasound are useful for prenatal diagnosis of TD.

Copyright 2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/1097-0223(200102)21:2<89::aid-pd21>3.0.co;2-9
PMID: 11241532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
