---
reference_id: "PMID:37351604"
title: Mutation ∆K281 in MAPT causes Pick's disease.
authors:
- Schweighauser M
- Garringer HJ
- Klingstedt T
- Nilsson KPR
- Masuda-Suzukake M
- Murrell JR
- Risacher SL
- Vidal R
- Scheres SHW
- Goedert M
- Ghetti B
- Newell KL
journal: Acta Neuropathol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00401-023-02598-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation ∆K281 in MAPT causes Pick's disease.
**Authors:** Schweighauser M, Garringer HJ, Klingstedt T, Nilsson KPR, Masuda-Suzukake M, Murrell JR, Risacher SL, Vidal R, Scheres SHW, Goedert M, Ghetti B, Newell KL
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00401-023-02598-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-023-02598-6)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol. 2023 Aug;146(2):211-226. doi: 10.1007/s00401-023-02598-6.
Epub  2023 Jun 23.

Mutation ∆K281 in MAPT causes Pick's disease.

Schweighauser M(1), Garringer HJ(2), Klingstedt T(1)(3), Nilsson KPR(3), 
Masuda-Suzukake M(1)(4), Murrell JR(2)(5), Risacher SL(6), Vidal R(2), Scheres 
SHW(7), Goedert M(8), Ghetti B(9), Newell KL(10).

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(3)Department of Physics, Chemistry and Biology, Lingköping University, 
Lingköping, Sweden.
(4)Department of Brain and Neuroscience, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital of the 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(7)Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK. 
scheres@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk.
(8)Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK. 
mg@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk.
(9)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. bghetti@iupui.edu.
(10)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. klnewell@iu.edu.

Two siblings with deletion mutation ∆K281 in MAPT developed frontotemporal 
dementia. At autopsy, numerous inclusions of hyperphosphorylated 3R Tau were 
present in neurons and glial cells of neocortex and some subcortical regions, 
including hippocampus, caudate/putamen and globus pallidus. The inclusions were 
argyrophilic with Bodian silver, but not with Gallyas-Braak silver. They were 
not labelled by an antibody specific for tau phosphorylated at S262 and/or S356. 
The inclusions were stained by luminescent conjugated oligothiophene HS-84, but 
not by bTVBT4. Electron cryo-microscopy revealed that the core of tau filaments 
was made of residues K254-F378 of 3R Tau and was indistinguishable from that of 
Pick's disease. We conclude that MAPT mutation ∆K281 causes Pick's disease.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-023-02598-6
PMCID: PMC10329087
PMID: 37351604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.