---
reference_id: "PMID:29105594"
title: Tolvaptan in Later-Stage Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease.
authors:
- Torres VE
- Chapman AB
- Devuyst O
- Gansevoort RT
- Perrone RD
- Koch G
- Ouyang J
- McQuade RD
- Blais JD
- Czerwiec FS
- Sergeyeva O
- REPRISE Trial Investigators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1710030
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tolvaptan in Later-Stage Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease.
**Authors:** Torres VE, Chapman AB, Devuyst O, Gansevoort RT, Perrone RD, Koch G, Ouyang J, McQuade RD, Blais JD, Czerwiec FS, Sergeyeva O, REPRISE Trial Investigators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1710030](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1710030)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2017 Nov 16;377(20):1930-1942. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1710030. Epub 
2017 Nov 4.

Tolvaptan in Later-Stage Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease.

Torres VE(1), Chapman AB(1), Devuyst O(1), Gansevoort RT(1), Perrone RD(1), Koch 
G(1), Ouyang J(1), McQuade RD(1), Blais JD(1), Czerwiec FS(1), Sergeyeva O(1); 
REPRISE Trial Investigators.

Collaborators: Cowley B, Goldstein S, Chertow G, Wei L, Alpers DH, Freston J, 
Lewis JH, Hunt CM, De La Fuente J, Vallejos A, Beresan HM, Diaz HC, Wasserman A, 
Martin RS, Rial M, Cusumano AM, Novoa PA, Mele P, Raffaele P, Fraser I, Rangan 
G, Mathew M, Cooper B, Faull R, Holt S, Snelling P, Jardine M, Thomas M, Packham 
D, Vilayur E, Johnson D, Van Der Niepen P, Peeters P, Bammens B, Warling X, Van 
Vlem B, Doubel P, Hellemans R, Bichet D, Pei Y, Chow S, McMahon A, Murphy S, 
McFarlane P, Ting R, Tesar V, Ryba M, Peskova M, Oplustilova A, Dusilova Sulkova 
S, Tocik J, Suchanova J, Viklicky O, Rehorova J, Valkovsky I, Dieperink H, Birn 
H, Bech J, Christensen J, Zaoui P, Pouteil-Noble C, Combe C, Kessler M, LeMeur 
Y, Mariat C, Chauveau D, Laville M, Rieu P, Fauvel JP, Dellanna F, Gross P, 
Renders L, Budde K, Sommerer C, Strutz F, Hugo C, Guberina H, Leidig M, Csiky B, 
Haris A, Ondrik Z, Kukuy O, Ben-Dov I, Yagil Y, Schwartz D, van Dijk D, Kristal 
B, Capasso G, Capelli G, Cerutti R, Esposito C, Frascà G, Gesualdo L, Mancini E, 
Manunta P, Pontoriero G, Scolari F, Drenth J, Apeland T, Marti HP, Stenehjem A, 
Klatko W, Klinger M, Ksiazek A, Malecki R, Nowicki M, Sulowicz W, Bako G, Achim 
C, Dragulete R, Marasaev V, Nagibovich O, Rossovskaya M, Esayan A, Rayner B, 
Latiff G, Muranda A, Peces Serrano R, Nieto Iglesias J, Hueso Val M, Praga 
Terente M, Castro Alonso C, Guron G, Melin J, Heimbürger O, Fernström A, 
Hellberg O, Turner N, D’Souza R, Barratt J, Mikhail A, Howse M, Sayer J, Shipley 
T, De Takats D, Bhandari S, Ong A, Hillman K, Vilar E, Wood G, Gale D, Kingswood 
J, Ayub W, Lambie S, Al-Saghir F, Bai L, Price D, Dilley J, Blumenfeld J, Scott 
D, Sothinathan R, Mehta B, Kaveh K, Dahl N, Haastrup A, Kopyt N, Harper K, Ross 
D, El-Shahawy M, Nachman P, Bellovich K, Shirazian S, Bart S, Fadem S, Watnick 
T, Oo T, Rastogi A, Silva A, Sullivan J, Thomas J, Mrug M, Nossuli A, McGreal K, 
Hariachar S, Umanath K, Vernace M, Rosner M, Newman G, Levitski-Heikkila T, 
Smith M, Schmidt R, Reddy B, Linfert D, Roppolo M, Edelstein C, Rahbari Oskoui 
F, Chonchol M, Germain M, Gupta A, Kant K, Goldberg S, Mordujovich J, Moustafa 
M, Lifland H, Cangiano J, Von Visger J, Negrea L, Berg J, Culpepper M, Goral S, 
Radhakrishnan J, Navarro J, Ryu J, Burgner A, Solomon R, Venuto R, Pisoni R, 
Charen E, Chuang P, Mangoo-Karim R, Lioudis M, Cohen R, Park M, DeLong M, 
Siddiqi S, Bodell M, McCune T, Mandayam S, Foringer J, Raina R, Pitone J, 
Quadrini M, Nwakoby I, Vo N, Liss K.

Author information:
(1)From the Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 
(V.E.T.); the Section of Nephrology, University of Chicago, Chicago (A.B.C.); 
the Institute of Physiology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland (O.D.); 
the Division of Nephrology, Université Catholique de Louvain Medical School, 
Brussels (O.D.); the Division of Nephrology, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands (R.T.G.); the Division of Nephrology, 
Department of Medicine, Tufts Medical Center, Boston (R.D.P.); the Department of 
Biostatistics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill (G.K.); 
and Otsuka Pharmaceutical Development and Commercialization, Rockville, MD 
(J.O., R.D.M., J.D.B., F.S.C., O.S.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2017 Nov 16;377(20):1988-1989. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1714276.
    Kidney Int. 2018 Feb;93(2):292-295. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2017.12.002.
    N Engl J Med. 2018 Feb 01;378(5):488. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1716478.
    N Engl J Med. 2018 Feb 01;378(5):488-9. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1716478.
    Clin Nephrol. 2020 Jun;93(6):307-309. doi: 10.5414/CN109927Letter.

BACKGROUND: In a previous trial involving patients with early autosomal dominant 
polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD; estimated creatinine clearance, ≥60 ml per 
minute), the vasopressin V2-receptor antagonist tolvaptan slowed the growth in 
total kidney volume and the decline in the estimated glomerular filtration rate 
(GFR) but also caused more elevations in aminotransferase and bilirubin levels. 
The efficacy and safety of tolvaptan in patients with later-stage ADPKD are 
unknown.
METHODS: We conducted a phase 3, randomized withdrawal, multicenter, 
placebo-controlled, double-blind trial. After an 8-week prerandomization period 
that included sequential placebo and tolvaptan run-in phases, during which each 
patient's ability to take tolvaptan without dose-limiting side effects was 
assessed, 1370 patients with ADPKD who were either 18 to 55 years of age with an 
estimated GFR of 25 to 65 ml per minute per 1.73 m2 of body-surface area or 56 
to 65 years of age with an estimated GFR of 25 to 44 ml per minute per 1.73 m2 
were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive tolvaptan or placebo for 12 
months. The primary end point was the change in the estimated GFR from baseline 
to follow-up, with adjustment for the exact duration that each patient 
participated (interpolated to 1 year). Safety assessments were conducted 
monthly.
RESULTS: The change from baseline in the estimated GFR was -2.34 ml per minute 
per 1.73 m2 (95% confidence interval [CI], -2.81 to -1.87) in the tolvaptan 
group, as compared with -3.61 ml per minute per 1.73 m2 (95% CI, -4.08 to -3.14) 
in the placebo group (difference, 1.27 ml per minute per 1.73 m2; 95% CI, 0.86 
to 1.68; P<0.001). Elevations in the alanine aminotransferase level (to >3 times 
the upper limit of the normal range) occurred in 38 of 681 patients (5.6%) in 
the tolvaptan group and in 8 of 685 (1.2%) in the placebo group. Elevations in 
the aminotransferase level were reversible after stopping tolvaptan. No 
elevations in the bilirubin level of more than twice the upper limit of the 
normal range were detected.
CONCLUSIONS: Tolvaptan resulted in a slower decline than placebo in the 
estimated GFR over a 1-year period in patients with later-stage ADPKD. (Funded 
by Otsuka Pharmaceuticals and Otsuka Pharmaceutical Development and 
Commercialization; REPRISE ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02160145 .).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1710030
PMID: 29105594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]