---
reference_id: "PMID:18366449"
title: Causes of the first AIDS-defining illness and subsequent survival before and after the advent of combined antiretroviral therapy.
authors:
- Grabar S
- Lanoy E
- Allavena C
- Mary-Krause M
- Bentata M
- Fischer P
- Mahamat A
- Rabaud C
- Costagliola D
- Clinical Epidemiology Group of the French Hospital Database on HIV
journal: HIV Med
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1293.2008.00554.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Causes of the first AIDS-defining illness and subsequent survival before and after the advent of combined antiretroviral therapy.
**Authors:** Grabar S, Lanoy E, Allavena C, Mary-Krause M, Bentata M, Fischer P, Mahamat A, Rabaud C, Costagliola D, Clinical Epidemiology Group of the French Hospital Database on HIV
**Journal:** HIV Med (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1468-1293.2008.00554.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-1293.2008.00554.x)

## Content

1. HIV Med. 2008 Apr;9(4):246-56. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1293.2008.00554.x.

Causes of the first AIDS-defining illness and subsequent survival before and 
after the advent of combined antiretroviral therapy.

Grabar S(1), Lanoy E, Allavena C, Mary-Krause M, Bentata M, Fischer P, Mahamat 
A, Rabaud C, Costagliola D; Clinical Epidemiology Group of the French Hospital 
Database on HIV.

Collaborators: Abgrall S, Barin F, Bentata M, Billaud E, Boué F, Burty C, Cabié 
A, Costagliola D, Cotte L, De Truchis P, Duval X, Duvivier C, Enel P, 
Fredouille-Heripret L, Gasnault J, Gaud C, Gilquin J, Grabar S, Katlama C, 
Khuong MA, Lang JM, Lascaux AS, Launay O, Mahamat A, Mary-Krause M, Matheron S, 
Meynard JL, Pavie J, Pialoux G, Pilorgé F, Poizot-Martin I, Pradier C, Reynes J, 
Rouveix E, Simon A, Tattevin P, Tissot-Dupont H, Viard JP, Viget N, 
Pariente-Khayat A, Salomon V, Jacquemet N, Rivet A, Abgrall S, Costagliola D, 
Grabar S, Guiguet M, Kousignian I, Lanoy E, Lièvre L, Mary-Krause M, Potard V, 
Selinger-Leneman H, Bouvet E, Crickx B, Ecobichon JL, Leport C, Matheron S, 
Picard-Dahan C, Yeni P, Tisne-Dessus D, Weiss L, Salmon D, Sicard D, Auperin I, 
Gilquin J, Roudière L, Viard JP, Boué F, Fior R, Delfraissy JF, Goujard C, Jung 
C, Lesprit P, Desplanque N, Meynard JL, Meyohas MC, Picard O, Cadranel J, Mayaud 
C, Pialoux G, Bricaire F, Herson S, Katlama C, Simon A, Clauvel JP, Decazes JM, 
Gerard L, Molina JM, Diemer M, Sellier P, Berthé H, Dupont C, Chandemerle C, 
Mortier E, de Truchis P, Bentata M, Honoré P, Jeantils V, Tassi S, Mechali D, 
Taverne B, Gourdon F, Laurichesse H, Fresard A, Lucht F, Eglinger P, Faller JP, 
Bazin C, Verdon R, Boibieux A, Peyramond D, Livrozet JM, Touraine JL, Cotte L, 
Trepo C, Ravaux I, Tissot-Dupont H, Delmont JP, Moreau J, Gastaut JA, 
Poizot-Martin I, Retornaz F, Soubeyrand J, Allegre T, Blanc PA, Galinier A, Ruiz 
JM, Lepeu G, Granet-Brunello P, Esterni JP, Pelissier L, Cohen-Valensi R, Nezri 
M, Chadapaud S, Laffeuillade A, Reynes J, May T, Rabaud C, Billaud E, Raffi F, 
Pugliese P, Pradier C, Arvieux C, Michelet C, Borsa-Lebas F, Caron F, Fraisse P, 
Lang JM, Rey D, Arlet-Suau E, Cuzin L, Massip P, Legrand MF, Yasdanpanah Y, 
Pradinaud R, Sobesky M, Gaud C, Contant M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health, Cochin Hospital, Paris, France. 
sophie.grabar@univ-paris5.fr

OBJECTIVES: To analyse the impact of combined antiretroviral treatment (cART) on 
survival with AIDS, according to the nature of the first AIDS-defining clinical 
illness (ADI); to examine trends in AIDS-defining causes (ADC) and 
non-AIDS-defining causes (non-ADC) of death.
METHODS: From the French Hospital Database on HIV, we studied trends in the 
nature of the first ADI and subsequent survival in France during three calendar 
periods: the pre-cART period (1993-1995; 8027 patients), the early cART period 
(1998-2000; 3504 patients) and the late cART period (2001-2003; 2936 patients).
RESULTS: The three most frequent initial ADIs were Pneumocystis carinii 
(jirovecii) pneumonia (PCP) (15.6%), oesophageal candidiasis (14.3%) and 
Kaposi's sarcoma (13.9%) in the pre-cART period. In the late cART period, the 
most frequent ADIs were tuberculosis (22.7%), PCP (19.1%) and oesophageal 
candidiasis (16.2%). The risk of death after a first ADI fell significantly 
after the arrival of cART. Lower declines were observed for progressive 
multifocal leukoencephalopathy, lymphoma and Mycobacterium avium complex 
infection. After an ADI, the 3-year risk of death from an ADC fell fivefold 
between the pre-cART and late cART periods (39%vs. 8%), and fell twofold for 
non-ADCs (17%vs. 9%).
CONCLUSIONS: The relative frequencies of initial ADI have changed since the 
advent of cART. Tuberculosis is now the most frequent initial ADI in France; 
this is probably the result of the increasing proportion of migrants from 
sub-Saharan Africa. After a first ADI, cART has a major impact on ADCs and a 
smaller impact on deaths from other causes. The risk of death from AIDS and from 
other causes is now similar.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-1293.2008.00554.x
PMID: 18366449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]