---
reference_id: "PMID:26820108"
title: Strømme Syndrome Is a Ciliary Disorder Caused by Mutations in CENPF.
authors:
- Filges I
- Bruder E
- Brandal K
- Meier S
- Undlien DE
- Waage TR
- Hoesli I
- Schubach M
- de Beer T
- Sheng Y
- Hoeller S
- Schulzke S
- Røsby O
- Miny P
- Tercanli S
- Oppedal T
- Meyer P
- Selmer KK
- Strømme P
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/humu.22960
keywords:
- Adult
- "Chromosomal Proteins, Non-Histone/genetics"
- "Ciliopathies/diagnosis, genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Eye Abnormalities/diagnosis, genetics"
- Facies
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genetic Association Studies
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Intestinal Atresia/diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- "Microcephaly/diagnosis, genetics"
- Microfilament Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Siblings
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Strømme Syndrome Is a Ciliary Disorder Caused by Mutations in CENPF.
**Authors:** Filges I, Bruder E, Brandal K, Meier S, Undlien DE, Waage TR, Hoesli I, Schubach M, de Beer T, Sheng Y, Hoeller S, Schulzke S, Røsby O, Miny P, Tercanli S, Oppedal T, Meyer P, Selmer KK, Strømme P
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.22960](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.22960)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2016 Apr;37(4):359-63. doi: 10.1002/humu.22960. Epub 2016 Feb 9.

Strømme Syndrome Is a Ciliary Disorder Caused by Mutations in CENPF.

Filges I(1), Bruder E(2), Brandal K(3), Meier S(1), Undlien DE(3), Waage TR(4),
Hoesli I(5), Schubach M(6), de Beer T(7), Sheng Y(3), Hoeller S(2), Schulzke
S(8), Røsby O(3), Miny P(1), Tercanli S(9), Oppedal T(10), Meyer P(2), Selmer
KK(3), Strømme P(11).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Pathology, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital and University of
Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(4)Section of Paediatric Neurohabilitation, Department of Clinical Neurosciences
for Children, Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(6)Institute for Medical and Human Genetics, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Berlin, Germany.
(7)Biozentrum and Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, University of Basel, Basel,
Switzerland.
(8)Neonatology, University Children's Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(9)Centre for Prenatal Ultrasound, Basel, Switzerland.
(10)Department of Ophthalmology, Section for Pediatric Ophthalmology, Oslo
University Hospital, Ullevål, Oslo, Norway.
(11)Section for Clinical Neurosciences, Department of Pediatrics, Oslo
University Hospital and University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

Erratum in
    Hum Mutat. 2016 Jul;37(7):711. doi: 10.1002/humu.22997.

Strømme syndrome was first described by Strømme et al. (1993) in siblings
presenting with "apple peel" type intestinal atresia, ocular anomalies and
microcephaly. The etiology remains unknown to date. We describe the long-term
clinical follow-up data for the original pair of siblings as well as two
previously unreported siblings with a severe phenotype overlapping that of the
Strømme syndrome including fetal autopsy results. Using family-based whole-exome
sequencing, we identified truncating mutations in the centrosome gene CENPF in
the two nonconsanguineous Caucasian sibling pairs. Compound heterozygous
inheritance was confirmed in both families. Recently, mutations in this gene
were shown to cause a fetal lethal phenotype, the phenotype and functional data
being compatible with a human ciliopathy [Waters et al., 2015]. We show for the
first time that Strømme syndrome is an autosomal-recessive disease caused by
mutations in CENPF that can result in a wide phenotypic spectrum.

© 2016 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22960
PMID: 26820108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
