---
reference_id: "PMID:39644049"
title: "Diagnosis and management of hereditary hemochromatosis: lifestyle modification, phlebotomy, and blood donation."
authors:
- Girelli D
- Marchi G
- Busti F
journal: Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1182/hematology.2024000568
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hemochromatosis/therapy, diagnosis, genetics, blood"
- Phlebotomy
- Blood Donors
- Female
- Life Style
- Male
- Hemochromatosis Protein/genetics
- Iron/blood
- Blood Donation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and management of hereditary hemochromatosis: lifestyle modification, phlebotomy, and blood donation.
**Authors:** Girelli D, Marchi G, Busti F
**Journal:** Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1182/hematology.2024000568](https://doi.org/10.1182/hematology.2024000568)

## Content

1. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2024 Dec 6;2024(1):434-442. doi: 
10.1182/hematology.2024000568.

Diagnosis and management of hereditary hemochromatosis: lifestyle modification, 
phlebotomy, and blood donation.

Girelli D(1), Marchi G(1), Busti F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Verona and EuroBloodNet Referral Center 
for Iron Disorders, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Integrata Verona, Verona, 
Italy.

The term hemochromatosis refers to a group of genetic disorders characterized by 
hepcidin insufficiency in the context of normal erythropoiesis, iron 
hyperabsorption, and expansion of the plasma iron pool with increased 
transferrin saturation, the diagnostic hallmark of the disease. This results in 
the formation of toxic non-transferrin-bound iron, which ultimately accumulates 
in multiple organs, including the liver, heart, endocrine glands, and joints. 
The most common form is HFE-hemochromatosis (HFE-H) due to p.Cys282Tyr (C282Y) 
homozygosity, present in nearly 1 in 200 people of Northern European descent but 
characterized by low penetrance, particularly in females. Genetic and lifestyle 
cofactors (especially alcohol and dysmetabolic features) significantly modulate 
clinical expression so that HFE-H can be considered a multifactorial disease. 
Nowadays, HFE-H is mostly diagnosed before organ damage and is easily treated by 
phlebotomy, with an excellent prognosis. After iron depletion, maintenance 
phlebotomy can be usefully transformed into a blood donation program. Lifestyle 
changes are important for management. Non-HFE-H, much rarer but highly 
penetrant, may lead to early and severe heart, liver, and endocrine 
complications. Managing severe hemochromatosis requires a comprehensive approach 
optimally provided by consultation with specialized centers. In clinical 
practice, a proper diagnostic approach is paramount for patients referred for 
hyperferritinemia, a frequent finding that reflects hemochromatosis only in a 
minority of cases.

Copyright © 2024 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/hematology.2024000568
PMCID: PMC11665571
PMID: 39644049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Domenico Girelli: no competing financial 
interests to declare. Giacomo Marchi: no competing financial interests to 
declare. Fabiana Busti: no competing financial interests to declare.