---
reference_id: "PMID:23791108"
title: "Gain-of-function mutations in RIT1 cause Noonan syndrome, a RAS/MAPK pathway syndrome."
authors:
- Aoki Y
- Niihori T
- Banjo T
- Okamoto N
- Mizuno S
- Kurosawa K
- Ogata T
- Takada F
- Yano M
- Ando T
- Hoshika T
- Barnett C
- Ohashi H
- Kawame H
- Hasegawa T
- Okutani T
- Nagashima T
- Hasegawa S
- Funayama R
- Nagashima T
- Nakayama K
- Inoue S
- Watanabe Y
- Ogura T
- Matsubara Y
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.05.021
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gain-of-function mutations in RIT1 cause Noonan syndrome, a RAS/MAPK pathway syndrome.
**Authors:** Aoki Y, Niihori T, Banjo T, Okamoto N, Mizuno S, Kurosawa K, Ogata T, Takada F, Yano M, Ando T, Hoshika T, Barnett C, Ohashi H, Kawame H, Hasegawa T, Okutani T, Nagashima T, Hasegawa S, Funayama R, Nagashima T, Nakayama K, Inoue S, Watanabe Y, Ogura T, Matsubara Y
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.05.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.05.021)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Jul 11;93(1):173-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.05.021.
Epub  2013 Jun 20.

Gain-of-function mutations in RIT1 cause Noonan syndrome, a RAS/MAPK pathway 
syndrome.

Aoki Y(1), Niihori T, Banjo T, Okamoto N, Mizuno S, Kurosawa K, Ogata T, Takada 
F, Yano M, Ando T, Hoshika T, Barnett C, Ohashi H, Kawame H, Hasegawa T, Okutani 
T, Nagashima T, Hasegawa S, Funayama R, Nagashima T, Nakayama K, Inoue S, 
Watanabe Y, Ogura T, Matsubara Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai 
980-8574, Japan. aokiy@med.tohoku.ac.jp

RAS GTPases mediate a wide variety of cellular functions, including cell 
proliferation, survival, and differentiation. Recent studies have revealed that 
germline mutations and mosaicism for classical RAS mutations, including those in 
HRAS, KRAS, and NRAS, cause a wide spectrum of genetic disorders. These include 
Noonan syndrome and related disorders (RAS/mitogen-activated protein kinase 
[RAS/MAPK] pathway syndromes, or RASopathies), nevus sebaceous, and 
Schimmelpenning syndrome. In the present study, we identified a total of nine 
missense, nonsynonymous mutations in RIT1, encoding a member of the RAS 
subfamily, in 17 of 180 individuals (9%) with Noonan syndrome or a related 
condition but with no detectable mutations in known Noonan-related genes. 
Clinical manifestations in the RIT1-mutation-positive individuals are consistent 
with those of Noonan syndrome, which is characterized by distinctive facial 
features, short stature, and congenital heart defects. Seventy percent of 
mutation-positive individuals presented with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; this 
frequency is high relative to the overall 20% incidence in individuals with 
Noonan syndrome. Luciferase assays in NIH 3T3 cells showed that five RIT1 
alterations identified in children with Noonan syndrome enhanced ELK1 
transactivation. The introduction of mRNAs of mutant RIT1 into 1-cell-stage 
zebrafish embryos was found to result in a significant increase of embryos with 
craniofacial abnormalities, incomplete looping, a hypoplastic chamber in the 
heart, and an elongated yolk sac. These results demonstrate that 
gain-of-function mutations in RIT1 cause Noonan syndrome and show a similar 
biological effect to mutations in other RASopathy-related genes.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.05.021
PMCID: PMC3710767
PMID: 23791108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]