---
reference_id: "PMID:20149899"
title: Current remedies for vitiligo.
authors:
- Abu Tahir M
- Pramod K
- Ansari SH
- Ali J
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2010.02.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current remedies for vitiligo.
**Authors:** Abu Tahir M, Pramod K, Ansari SH, Ali J
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2010.02.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2010.02.013)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2010 May;9(7):516-20. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2010.02.013. Epub 
2010 Feb 8.

Current remedies for vitiligo.

Abu Tahir M(1), Pramod K, Ansari SH, Ali J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, Jamia Hamdard, Hamdard Nagar, New Delhi, India.

Vitiligo is a disorder with complex causes and is a type of autoimmune disease 
in which the immune system targets the body's own pigment cells and tissues. Our 
aim is to present an overall view of the current remedies widely adopted for the 
treatment of vitiligo. Medical treatments target the immune system, and try to 
reverse the destruction. The goal is to restore the skin's color by restoring 
healthy melanocytes to the affected area. Apart from melanocytes, vitiligo 
autoantigens appear also on other cells. Even though antibodies to pigment cells 
are not an agent of vitiligo, the most valuable contribution is that 
anti-melanocyte antibody reactivity can help in identifying relevant antigens. T 
cells from vitiligo skin are highly reactive towards melanoma cells and serve as 
an effective source to treat melanoma and stays as a solution for vitiligo. 
There have been many treatments to cure vitiligo such as use of steroid creams, 
PUVA (psoralen and ultraviolet A light), narrow band UVB (ultraviolet B), 
various surgical techniques, vitamin D analogues and pseudocatalase. These 
treatments are subjected for undesired side effects whereas some herbal and 
natural treatments act against the immune system with no side effects.

2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2010.02.013
PMID: 20149899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]