---
reference_id: "PMID:39282548"
title: "Clostridioides difficile infection: an update."
authors:
- Salvati F
- Catania F
- Murri R
- Fantoni M
- Torti C
journal: Infez Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.53854/liim-3203-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clostridioides difficile infection: an update.
**Authors:** Salvati F, Catania F, Murri R, Fantoni M, Torti C
**Journal:** Infez Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.53854/liim-3203-3](https://doi.org/10.53854/liim-3203-3)

## Content

1. Infez Med. 2024 Sep 1;32(3):280-291. doi: 10.53854/liim-3203-3. eCollection 
2024.

Clostridioides difficile infection: an update.

Salvati F(1), Catania F(1), Murri R(1)(2), Fantoni M(1)(2), Torti C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Sicurezza e Bioetica, Sezione di Malattie Infettive, 
Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy.
(2)Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e Chirurgiche, Fondazione Policlinico 
Universitario A Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy.

Clostridioides difficile (C. difficile) is a Gram-positive, spore-forming 
anaerobic bacterium emerged as a leading cause of diarrhea globally. CDI's 
(Clostridioides difficile infection) impact on healthcare systems is concerning 
due to high treatment cost and increased hospitalisation time. The incidence of 
CDI has been influenced by hypervirulent strains such as the 027 ribotype, 
responsible for significant outbreaks in North America and Europe. CDI's 
epidemiology has evolved, showing increased community-acquired cases alongside 
traditional hospital-acquired infections. Mortality rates remain high, with 
recurrent infections further elevating the risk. Transmission of C. difficile 
primarily occurs via spores, which survive in healthcare settings and play a 
pivotal role in transmission. Not only health workers, but also the food chain 
could have a significant impact on the transmission of infection, although no 
confirmed foodborne cases have been documented. Pathogenicity of C. difficile 
involves spore germination and toxin production. Toxins A and B can cause 
cellular damage and inflammatory responses in the host, leading to colitis. 
Clinical picture can range from mild diarrhea to fulminant colitis with toxic 
megacolon, and bowel perforation. Risk factors for CDI include antibiotic 
exposure, advanced age, hospitalization, and use of proton pump inhibitors. 
Patients who experience abdominal surgery or patients with inflammatory bowel 
disease (IBD) are particularly susceptible due to their compromised gut 
microbiota. Management of CDI has evolved, with fidaxomicin emerging as a 
superior treatment option over vancomycin for initial and recurrent infections 
due to its reduction of recurrence rate. Faecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) 
is effective for recurrent CDI, restoring gut eubiosis. Bezlotoxumab, a 
monoclonal antibody against C. difficile toxin B, has shown promise in reducing 
recurrence rates. Severe cases of CDI may require surgical intervention, 
particularly in instances of toxic megacolon or bowel perforation. In 
conclusion, CDI remains a significant clinical entity. Further research are 
needed to improve patients' outcome and reduce the burden on healthcare systems.

DOI: 10.53854/liim-3203-3
PMCID: PMC11392548
PMID: 39282548