---
reference_id: "PMID:31203225"
title: "Rituximab Therapy for Systemic Rheumatoid Vasculitis: Indications, Outcomes, and Adverse Events."
authors:
- Coffey CM
- Richter MD
- Crowson CS
- Koster MJ
- Warrington KJ
- Ytterberg SR
- Makol A
journal: J Rheumatol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3899/jrheum.181397
keywords:
- "Arthritis, Rheumatoid/drug therapy"
- Female
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Rheumatoid Vasculitis/drug therapy
- Rituximab/adverse effects
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rituximab Therapy for Systemic Rheumatoid Vasculitis: Indications, Outcomes, and Adverse Events.
**Authors:** Coffey CM, Richter MD, Crowson CS, Koster MJ, Warrington KJ, Ytterberg SR, Makol A
**Journal:** J Rheumatol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3899/jrheum.181397](https://doi.org/10.3899/jrheum.181397)

## Content

1. J Rheumatol. 2020 Apr;47(4):518-523. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.181397. Epub 2019 Jun
 15.

Rituximab Therapy for Systemic Rheumatoid Vasculitis: Indications, Outcomes, and 
Adverse Events.

Coffey CM(1)(2), Richter MD(1)(2), Crowson CS(1)(2), Koster MJ(1)(2), Warrington 
KJ(1)(2), Ytterberg SR(1)(2), Makol A(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)From the Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, and 
Department of Health Sciences Research, College of Medicine and Science, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(2)C.M. Coffey, MD, Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine and 
Science, Mayo Clinic; M.D. Richter, MD, Department of Internal Medicine, College 
of Medicine and Science, Mayo Clinic; C.S. Crowson, PhD, Division of 
Rheumatology, and Department of Health Sciences Research, College of Medicine 
and Science, Mayo Clinic; M.J. Koster, MD, Division of Rheumatology, College of 
Medicine and Science, Mayo Clinic; K.J. Warrington, MD, Division of 
Rheumatology, College of Medicine and Science, Mayo Clinic; S.R. Ytterberg, MD, 
Division of Rheumatology, College of Medicine and Science, Mayo Clinic; A. 
Makol, MD, Division of Rheumatology, College of Medicine and Science, Mayo 
Clinic.
(3)From the Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, and 
Department of Health Sciences Research, College of Medicine and Science, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA. makol.ashima@mayo.edu.
(4)C.M. Coffey, MD, Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine and 
Science, Mayo Clinic; M.D. Richter, MD, Department of Internal Medicine, College 
of Medicine and Science, Mayo Clinic; C.S. Crowson, PhD, Division of 
Rheumatology, and Department of Health Sciences Research, College of Medicine 
and Science, Mayo Clinic; M.J. Koster, MD, Division of Rheumatology, College of 
Medicine and Science, Mayo Clinic; K.J. Warrington, MD, Division of 
Rheumatology, College of Medicine and Science, Mayo Clinic; S.R. Ytterberg, MD, 
Division of Rheumatology, College of Medicine and Science, Mayo Clinic; A. 
Makol, MD, Division of Rheumatology, College of Medicine and Science, Mayo 
Clinic. makol.ashima@mayo.edu.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize the indication, outcomes, and adverse effects of 
rituximab (RTX) treatment in a large single-center cohort of patients with 
systemic rheumatoid vasculitis (RV).
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed the medical charts of 17 patients treated 
with RTX for systemic RV from 2000 to 2017. Clinical characteristics, outcomes, 
and adverse effects were analyzed.
RESULTS: At RV diagnosis, mean age was 59 years, 59% were female, 94% were 
white, and 82% had positive rheumatoid factor. At the time of initiating RTX, 
median Birmingham Vasculitis Activity Score for rheumatoid arthritis was 4.0 
(interquartile range 2.0-7.5). RV presented in the skin in 8 patients (47%), as 
mononeuritis multiplex in 2 (12%), inflammatory ocular disease in 2 (12%), and 
affected multiple organ systems in 5 (29%). RTX was used for induction therapy 
in 8 patients (47%), relapsing RV in 4 (24%), second-line therapy in 2 (12%), 
and salvage therapy or in combination with another agent in 3 (18%). At 3 
months, 2 (13%) of 15 patients with available followup information achieved 
complete remission (CR), and 10 (67%) achieved partial response (PR). At 6 
months, 6 patients (40%) achieved CR, 8 (53%) achieved PR, and one had no 
response. At 12 months, 8 of 13 patients with available records (62%) had CR and 
5 patients (38%) had PR.
CONCLUSION: Systemic RV is difficult to treat effectively. CR of RV was achieved 
in 62% and PR in 38% of patients within 12 months of RTX use. Further evidence 
is needed to inform treatment for patients with RV.

DOI: 10.3899/jrheum.181397
PMID: 31203225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]