---
reference_id: "PMID:33306806"
title: "Poncet's Disease: A Case Report."
authors:
- Verma H
- Rajvanshi N
- Rathaur VK
- Pathania M
- Bhat NK
journal: J Trop Pediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/tropej/fmaa116
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Poncet's Disease: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Verma H, Rajvanshi N, Rathaur VK, Pathania M, Bhat NK
**Journal:** J Trop Pediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/tropej/fmaa116](https://doi.org/10.1093/tropej/fmaa116)

## Content

1. J Trop Pediatr. 2021 Jan 29;67(1):fmaa116. doi: 10.1093/tropej/fmaa116.

Poncet's Disease: A Case Report.

Verma H(1), Rajvanshi N(1), Rathaur VK(1), Pathania M(2), Bhat NK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Rishikesh, 
Uttarakhand 249203, India.
(2)Department of Medicine, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Rishikesh, 
Uttarakhand 249203, India.

Tuberculosis (TB) is an infectious disease caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
(MTB). It spreads from one person to the another through the air while coughing, 
spitting, speaking or sneezing. TB most commonly affects lungs but it can affect 
any organ system. Diagnosis of TB is made on the basis of microbiological 
evidence of MTB on microscopic examination, cultures and chest X-rays. Poncet's 
disease is a separate entity in which joints are involved in the form of joint 
pain and swelling without any microbiological evidence of MTB. It usually occurs 
in the background setting of pulmonary TB. This case focuses on importance of 
considering Poncet's disease in the differential diagnosis of paediatric 
polyarticular arthritis in TB endemic regions or if there is a history 
suggestive of TB exposure and infection.

© The Author(s) [2020]. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights 
reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/tropej/fmaa116
PMID: 33306806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]