---
reference_id: "PMID:26182300"
title: "Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer Syndrome: CDH1 Mutations and Beyond."
authors:
- Hansford S
- Kaurah P
- Li-Chang H
- Woo M
- Senz J
- Pinheiro H
- Schrader KA
- Schaeffer DF
- Shumansky K
- Zogopoulos G
- Santos TA
- Claro I
- Carvalho J
- Nielsen C
- Padilla S
- Lum A
- Talhouk A
- Baker-Lange K
- Richardson S
- Lewis I
- Lindor NM
- Pennell E
- MacMillan A
- Fernandez B
- Keller G
- Lynch H
- Shah SP
- Guilford P
- Gallinger S
- Corso G
- Roviello F
- Caldas C
- Oliveira C
- Pharoah PD
- Huntsman DG
journal: JAMA Oncol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2014.168
keywords:
- Adult
- Age Distribution
- Age Factors
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Antigens, CD"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- "Breast Neoplasms/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Cadherins/genetics
- Canada/epidemiology
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Europe/epidemiology
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Heredity
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Pedigree
- Penetrance
- Phenotype
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
- Sex Distribution
- Sex Factors
- "Stomach Neoplasms/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer Syndrome: CDH1 Mutations and Beyond.
**Authors:** Hansford S, Kaurah P, Li-Chang H, Woo M, Senz J, Pinheiro H, Schrader KA, Schaeffer DF, Shumansky K, Zogopoulos G, Santos TA, Claro I, Carvalho J, Nielsen C, Padilla S, Lum A, Talhouk A, Baker-Lange K, Richardson S, Lewis I, Lindor NM, Pennell E, MacMillan A, Fernandez B, Keller G, Lynch H, Shah SP, Guilford P, Gallinger S, Corso G, Roviello F, Caldas C, Oliveira C, Pharoah PD, Huntsman DG
**Journal:** JAMA Oncol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaoncol.2014.168](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaoncol.2014.168)

## Content

1. JAMA Oncol. 2015 Apr;1(1):23-32. doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2014.168.

Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer Syndrome: CDH1 Mutations and Beyond.

Hansford S(1), Kaurah P(2), Li-Chang H(1), Woo M(1), Senz J(1), Pinheiro H(3), 
Schrader KA(4), Schaeffer DF(5), Shumansky K(6), Zogopoulos G(7), Santos TA(8), 
Claro I(9), Carvalho J(3), Nielsen C(10), Padilla S(11), Lum A(11), Talhouk 
A(1), Baker-Lange K(12), Richardson S(13), Lewis I(14), Lindor NM(15), Pennell 
E(16), MacMillan A(14), Fernandez B(14), Keller G(17), Lynch H(18), Shah SP(6), 
Guilford P(19), Gallinger S(20), Corso G(21), Roviello F(22), Caldas C(13), 
Oliveira C(23), Pharoah PD(24), Huntsman DG(25).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Translational and Applied Genomics, British Columbia Cancer 
Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada2Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
British Columbia, Canada5Hereditary Cancer Program, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, 
British Columbia, Canada.
(3)Expression Regulation in Cancer Group, IPATIMUP-Institute of Molecular 
Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(4)Hereditary Cancer Program, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, 
Canada.
(5)Division of Anatomical Pathology, Vancouver General Hospital, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(6)Department of Molecular Oncology, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada.
(7)The Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada9Rosalind and Morris Goodman Cancer Research Centre, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada.
(8)Human Reproduction Service, University Hospitals of Coimbra, Coimbra, 
Portugal11Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
(9)Instituto Português de Oncologia de Lisboa Francisco Gentil E.P.E., Lisbon 
Portugal.
(10)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada7Department of Molecular Oncology, 
BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(11)Centre for Translational and Applied Genomics, British Columbia Cancer 
Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(12)Frauenshuh Cancer Center, Park Nicollet Clinic, St Louis Park, Minnesota.
(13)Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, Cambridge, England.
(14)Provincial Medical Genetics Program, St John's, Newfoundland, Canada.
(15)Department of Health Science Research, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, Arizona.
(16)Cancer Care Program, Dr. H. Bliss Murphy Cancer Centre Eastern Health, St 
John's, Newfoundland, Canada.
(17)Institute of Pathology, Technische Universität München, München, Germany.
(18)Creighton's Hereditary Cancer Center, Omaha, Nebraska.
(19)Cancer Genetics Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry, University of Otago, 
Dunedin, New Zealand.
(20)Division of General Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada22Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai 
Hospital Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(21)Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, Milano, 
Italy24Department of Medical Surgical Sciences and Neurosciences, Section of 
General Surgery and Surgical Oncology, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.
(22)Department of Medical Surgical Sciences and Neurosciences, Section of 
General Surgery and Surgical Oncology, University of Siena, Siena, 
Italy25Istituto Toscano Tumori (ITT), University Hospital of Siena, Siena, 
Italy.
(23)Expression Regulation in Cancer Group, IPATIMUP-Institute of Molecular 
Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal26Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(24)Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Strangeway's Research 
Laboratory, Wort's Causeway, Cambridge, England28Department of Public Health and 
Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Strangeway's Research Laboratory, Wort's 
Causeway, Cambridge, En.
(25)Centre for Translational and Applied Genomics, British Columbia Cancer 
Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada2Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada7Department of Molecular.

Erratum in
    JAMA Oncol. 2015 Apr;1(1):110. doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2015.0410.

Comment in
    JAMA Oncol. 2015 Apr;1(1):16-8. doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2014.187.

IMPORTANCE: E-cadherin (CDH1) is a cancer predisposition gene mutated in 
families meeting clinically defined hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC). 
Reliable estimates of cancer risk and spectrum in germline mutation carriers are 
essential for management. For families without CDH1 mutations, genetic-based 
risk stratification has not been possible, resulting in limited clinical 
options.
OBJECTIVES: To derive accurate estimates of gastric and breast cancer risks in 
CDH1 mutation carriers and determine if germline mutations in other genes are 
associated with HDGC.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Testing for CDH1 germline mutations was 
performed on 183 index cases meeting clinical criteria for HDGC. Penetrance was 
derived from 75 mutation-positive families from within this and other cohorts, 
comprising 3858 probands (353 with gastric cancer and 89 with breast cancer). 
Germline DNA from 144 HDGC probands lacking CDH1 mutations was screened using 
multiplexed targeted sequencing for 55 cancer-associated genes.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Accurate estimates of gastric and breast cancer 
risks in CDH1 mutation carriers and the relative contribution of other cancer 
predisposition genes in familial gastric cancers.
RESULTS: Thirty-one distinct pathogenic CDH1 mutations (14 novel) were 
identified in 34 of 183 index cases (19%). By the age of 80 years, the 
cumulative incidence of gastric cancer was 70% (95% CI, 59%-80%) for males and 
56% (95% CI, 44%-69%) for females, and the risk of breast cancer for females was 
42% (95% CI, 23%-68%). In CDH1 mutation-negative index cases, candidate 
mutations were identified in 16 of 144 probands (11%), including mutations 
within genes of high and moderate penetrance: CTNNA1, BRCA2, STK11, SDHB, PRSS1, 
ATM, MSR1, and PALB2.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This is the largest reported series of CDH1 mutation 
carriers, providing more precise estimates of age-associated risks of gastric 
and breast cancer that will improve counseling of unaffected carriers. In HDGC 
families lacking CDH1 mutations, testing of CTNNA1 and other tumor suppressor 
genes should be considered. Clinically defined HDGC families can harbor 
mutations in genes (ie, BRCA2) with different clinical ramifications from CDH1. 
Therefore, we propose that HDGC syndrome may be best defined by mutations in 
CDH1 and closely related genes, rather than through clinical criteria that 
capture families with heterogeneous susceptibility profiles.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2014.168
PMID: 26182300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]