---
reference_id: "PMID:37607539"
title: GLA-modified RNA treatment lowers GB3 levels in iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes from Fabry-affected individuals.
authors:
- Ter Huurne M
- Parker BL
- Liu NQ
- Qian EL
- Vivien C
- Karavendzas K
- Mills RJ
- Saville JT
- Abu-Bonsrah D
- Wise AF
- Hudson JE
- Talbot AS
- Finn PF
- Martini PGV
- Fuller M
- Ricardo SD
- Watt KI
- Nicholls KM
- Porrello ER
- Elliott DA
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.07.013
keywords:
- Humans
- "Myocytes, Cardiac"
- RNA
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells
- "Fabry Disease/genetics, therapy"
- "RNA, Messenger"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GLA-modified RNA treatment lowers GB3 levels in iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes from Fabry-affected individuals.
**Authors:** Ter Huurne M, Parker BL, Liu NQ, Qian EL, Vivien C, Karavendzas K, Mills RJ, Saville JT, Abu-Bonsrah D, Wise AF, Hudson JE, Talbot AS, Finn PF, Martini PGV, Fuller M, Ricardo SD, Watt KI, Nicholls KM, Porrello ER, Elliott DA
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.07.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.07.013)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2023 Sep 7;110(9):1600-1605. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.07.013.
Epub 2023 Aug 21.

GLA-modified RNA treatment lowers GB3 levels in iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes from
Fabry-affected individuals.

Ter Huurne M(1), Parker BL(2), Liu NQ(3), Qian EL(4), Vivien C(4), Karavendzas
K(4), Mills RJ(5), Saville JT(6), Abu-Bonsrah D(4), Wise AF(7), Hudson JE(8),
Talbot AS(9), Finn PF(10), Martini PGV(10), Fuller M(6), Ricardo SD(7), Watt
KI(11), Nicholls KM(7), Porrello ER(12), Elliott DA(13).

Author information:
(1)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, The Royal Children's Hospital,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia; The Novo Nordisk Foundation Centre for Stem Cell
Medicine (reNEW), Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, VIC,
Australia; Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC,
Australia.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
VIC, Australia; Centre for Muscle Research, University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
VIC, Australia.
(3)Department of Hematology, Erasmus Medical Center (MC) Cancer Institute,
Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(4)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, The Royal Children's Hospital,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(5)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, The Royal Children's Hospital,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia; The Novo Nordisk Foundation Centre for Stem Cell
Medicine (reNEW), Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, VIC,
Australia; QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD 4006,
Australia; School of Biomedical Sciences, Queensland University of Technology,
Brisbane, QLD 4000, Australia.
(6)Genetics and Molecular Pathology, SA Pathology at Women's and Children's
Hospital and Adelaide Medical School, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA,
Australia.
(7)Department of Pharmacology, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash
University, Clayton, VIC, Australia.
(8)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD 4006, Australia.
(9)Department of Nephrology, The Royal Melbourne Hospital and Department of
Medicine (RMH), University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(10)Rare Diseases Research, Moderna Inc., 200 Technology Sq., Cambridge, MA,
USA.
(11)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, The Royal Children's Hospital,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia; The Novo Nordisk Foundation Centre for Stem Cell
Medicine (reNEW), Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, VIC,
Australia; Department of Anatomy and Physiology, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(12)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, The Royal Children's Hospital,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia; The Novo Nordisk Foundation Centre for Stem Cell
Medicine (reNEW), Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, VIC,
Australia; Department of Anatomy and Physiology, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia; Melbourne Centre for Cardiovascular Genomics and
Regenerative Medicine, The Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, VIC, Australia;
Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
Electronic address: enzo.porrello@mcri.edu.au.
(13)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, The Royal Children's Hospital,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia; The Novo Nordisk Foundation Centre for Stem Cell
Medicine (reNEW), Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, VIC,
Australia; Melbourne Centre for Cardiovascular Genomics and Regenerative
Medicine, The Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, VIC, Australia; Department
of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia; Australian
Regenerative Medicine Institute (ARMI), Monash University, Clayton, VIC,
Australia. Electronic address: david.elliott@mcri.edu.au.

Recent studies in non-human model systems have shown therapeutic potential of
nucleoside-modified messenger RNA (modRNA) treatments for lysosomal storage
diseases. Here, we assessed the efficacy of a modRNA treatment to restore the
expression of the galactosidase alpha (GLA), which codes for α-Galactosidase A
(α-GAL) enzyme, in a human cardiac model generated from induced pluripotent stem
cells (iPSCs) derived from two individuals with Fabry disease. Consistent with
the clinical phenotype, cardiomyocytes from iPSCs derived from Fabry-affected
individuals showed accumulation of the glycosphingolipid Globotriaosylceramide
(GB3), which is an α-galactosidase substrate. Furthermore, the Fabry
cardiomyocytes displayed significant upregulation of lysosomal-associated
proteins. Upon GLA modRNA treatment, a subset of lysosomal proteins were
partially restored to wild-type levels, implying the rescue of the molecular
phenotype associated with the Fabry genotype. Importantly, a significant
reduction of GB3 levels was observed in GLA modRNA-treated cardiomyocytes,
demonstrating that α-GAL enzymatic activity was restored. Together, our results
validate the utility of iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes from affected individuals as
a model to study disease processes in Fabry disease and the therapeutic
potential of GLA modRNA treatment to reduce GB3 accumulation in the heart.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.07.013
PMCID: PMC10502840
PMID: 37607539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests R.J.M., J.E.H., and
E.R.P. are co-founders, scientific advisors, and hold equity in Dynomics, a
biotechnology company focused on the development of heart failure therapeutics.
P.F. and P.G.V.M. are employees of and hold equity in Moderna.
