---
reference_id: "PMID:38038136"
title: Activation of the pentose phosphate pathway in macrophages is crucial for granuloma formation in sarcoidosis.
authors:
- Nakamizo S
- Sugiura Y
- Ishida Y
- Ueki Y
- Yonekura S
- Tanizaki H
- Date H
- Yoshizawa A
- Murata T
- Minatoya K
- Katagiri M
- Nomura S
- Komuro I
- Ogawa S
- Nakajima S
- Kambe N
- Egawa G
- Kabashima K
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1172/JCI171088
keywords:
- Humans
- Animals
- Mice
- Pentose Phosphate Pathway
- "Sarcoidosis/diagnosis, etiology, pathology"
- Granuloma
- Macrophages/pathology
- Glucocorticoids
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Activation of the pentose phosphate pathway in macrophages is crucial for granuloma formation in sarcoidosis.
**Authors:** Nakamizo S, Sugiura Y, Ishida Y, Ueki Y, Yonekura S, Tanizaki H, Date H, Yoshizawa A, Murata T, Minatoya K, Katagiri M, Nomura S, Komuro I, Ogawa S, Nakajima S, Kambe N, Egawa G, Kabashima K
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI171088](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI171088)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2023 Dec 1;133(23):e171088. doi: 10.1172/JCI171088.

Activation of the pentose phosphate pathway in macrophages is crucial for
granuloma formation in sarcoidosis.

Nakamizo S(1)(2), Sugiura Y(3), Ishida Y(1), Ueki Y(4), Yonekura S(1), Tanizaki
H(4), Date H(5), Yoshizawa A(6), Murata T(7), Minatoya K(8), Katagiri M(9),
Nomura S(9)(10), Komuro I(10)(11), Ogawa S(12)(13), Nakajima S(1)(14), Kambe
N(1), Egawa G(1), Kabashima K(1)(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology.
(2)Alliance Laboratory for Advanced Medical Research, and.
(3)Center for Cancer Immunotherapy and Immunobiology, Kyoto University Graduate
School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Kansai Medical University, Osaka, Japan.
(5)Department of Thoracic Surgery and.
(6)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Kyoto University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(7)Department of Dermatology, Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya, Japan.
(8)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Kyoto University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(9)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine and.
(10)Department of Frontier Cardiovascular Science, Graduate School of Medicine,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo.
(11)International University of Health and Welfare, Tokyo, Japan.
(12)Department of Pathology and Tumor Biology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(13)Institute for the Advanced Study of Human Biology (WPI-ASHBi), Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan.
(14)Department of Drug Discovery for Inflammatory Skin Diseases, Kyoto
University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(15)Skin Research Institute of Singapore (SRIS) and A*STAR Skin Research Labs
(A*SRL), Agency for Science, Technology, and Research (A*STAR), Singapore.

Sarcoidosis is a disease of unknown etiology in which granulomas form throughout
the body and is typically treated with glucocorticoids, but there are no
approved steroid-sparing alternatives. Here, we investigated the mechanism of
granuloma formation using single-cell RNA-Seq in sarcoidosis patients. We
observed that the percentages of triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells
2-positive (TREM2-positive) macrophages expressing angiotensin-converting enzyme
(ACE) and lysozyme, diagnostic makers of sarcoidosis, were increased in
cutaneous sarcoidosis granulomas. Macrophages in the sarcoidosis lesion were
hypermetabolic, especially in the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP). Expression of
the PPP enzymes, such as fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase 1 (FBP1), was elevated in
both systemic granuloma lesions and serum of sarcoidosis patients. Granuloma
formation was attenuated by the PPP inhibitors in in vitro giant cell and in
vivo murine granuloma models. These results suggest that the PPP may be a
promising target for developing therapeutics for sarcoidosis.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI171088
PMCID: PMC10688990
PMID: 38038136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared
that no conflict of interest exists.
