---
reference_id: "PMID:24030948"
title: "Genotype-phenotype correlations in hyperekplexia: apnoeas, learning difficulties and speech delay."
authors:
- Thomas RH
- Chung SK
- Wood SE
- Cushion TD
- Drew CJ
- Hammond CL
- Vanbellinghen JF
- Mullins JG
- Rees MI
journal: Brain
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awt207
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Epilepsy/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Language Development Disorders/genetics
- Learning/physiology
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Receptors, Glycine/genetics"
- "Reflex, Abnormal/genetics"
- Retrospective Studies
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotype-phenotype correlations in hyperekplexia: apnoeas, learning difficulties and speech delay.
**Authors:** Thomas RH, Chung SK, Wood SE, Cushion TD, Drew CJ, Hammond CL, Vanbellinghen JF, Mullins JG, Rees MI
**Journal:** Brain (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awt207](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awt207)

## Content

1. Brain. 2013 Oct;136(Pt 10):3085-95. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt207. Epub 2013 Sep
11.

Genotype-phenotype correlations in hyperekplexia: apnoeas, learning difficulties
and speech delay.

Thomas RH(1), Chung SK, Wood SE, Cushion TD, Drew CJ, Hammond CL, Vanbellinghen
JF, Mullins JG, Rees MI.

Author information:
(1)1 Institute of Life Science, College of Medicine, Swansea University, SA2
8PP, UK.

Congenital hyperekplexia is a rare, potentially treatable neuromotor disorder.
Three major genes of effect are known, and all three affect glycinergic
neurotransmission. Two genes encode for subunits of the postsynaptic inhibitory
glycine receptor, GLRA1 encoding the α1 subunit and GLRB encoding the β subunit.
The third, SLC6A5, encodes the cognate presynaptic glycine transporter 2.
Ninety-seven individuals had a clinical diagnosis of hyperekplexia confirmed by
genetic testing: 61 cases had mutations in GLRA1, 24 cases in SLC6A5 and 12 in
GLRB. Detailed retrospective clinical analysis ascertained that all
gene-positive cases present in the neonatal period (occasionally prenatally) and
that clonazepam is the treatment of choice (95% found it to be efficacious). We
confirm that hyperekplexia is predominantly a recessive condition but dominant
cases are seen (16%). We found no genetic evidence for 'major' or 'minor' forms
of hyperekplexia on a population basis. Thirty-five gene-negative cases were
studied for comparison, their cardinal feature was presentation after the first
month of life (P < 0.001). In addition to the characteristic 'stiffness,
startles and stumbles' of hyperekplexia, apnoea attacks (50 of 89) and delayed
development (47 of 92) were frequently reported. Patients with SLC6A5 mutations
were significantly more likely to have had recurrent infantile apnoeas (RR1.9; P
< 0.005) than those with GLRA1 mutations. Patients with GLRB and SLC6A5
mutations were more likely to have developmental delay (RR1.5 P < 0.01; RR1.9 P
< 0.03) than those with GLRA1 mutations; 92% of GLRB cases reported a mild to
severe delay in speech acquisition. Molecular modelling of pathogenic mutations
demonstrates specific patterns of protein disruption that can be used to predict
phenotype severity. The developmental delay in hyperekplexia, and speech
acquisition in particular, may represent failure of developmental neural
networks or subtle neurogenic migration defects in the absence of presynaptic
glycine release. We recommend early genetic testing for symptomatic neonates and
possibly preconception counselling for those at risk for GLRB and SLC6A5
mutations, because of the more challenging phenotype.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awt207
PMID: 24030948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
