---
reference_id: "PMID:19091043"
title: "Plasmodium vivax: who cares?"
authors:
- Galinski MR
- Barnwell JW
journal: Malar J
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-7-S1-S9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Plasmodium vivax: who cares?
**Authors:** Galinski MR, Barnwell JW
**Journal:** Malar J (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1475-2875-7-S1-S9](https://doi.org/10.1186/1475-2875-7-S1-S9)

## Content

1. Malar J. 2008 Dec 11;7 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):S9. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-7-S1-S9.

Plasmodium vivax: who cares?

Galinski MR(1), Barnwell JW.

Author information:
(1)Emory Vaccine Center and Yerkes National Primate Research Center, Division of 
Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, Emory 
University, Atlanta, GA, USA. mary.galinski@emory.edu

More attention is being focused on malaria today than any time since the world's 
last efforts to achieve eradication over 40 years ago. The global community is 
now discussing strategies aimed at dramatically reducing malarial disease burden 
and the eventual eradication of all types of malaria, everywhere. As a 
consequence, Plasmodium vivax, which has long been neglected and mistakenly 
considered inconsequential, is now entering into the strategic debates taking 
place on malaria epidemiology and control, drug resistance, pathogenesis and 
vaccines. Thus, contrary to the past, the malaria research community is becoming 
more aware and concerned about the widespread spectrum of illness and death 
caused by up to a couple of hundred million cases of vivax malaria each year. 
This review brings these issues to light and provides an overview of P. vivax 
vaccine development, then and now. Progress had been slow, given inherent 
research challenges and minimal support in the past, but prospects are looking 
better for making headway in the next few years. P. vivax, known to invade the 
youngest red blood cells, the reticulocytes, presents a strong challenge towards 
developing a reliable long-term culture system to facilitate needed research. 
The P. vivax genome was published recently, and vivax researchers now need to 
coordinate efforts to discover new vaccine candidates, establish new vaccine 
approaches, capitalize on non-human primate models for testing, and investigate 
the unique biological features of P. vivax, including the elusive P. vivax 
hypnozoites. Comparative studies on both P. falciparum and P. vivax in many 
areas of research will be essential to eradicate malaria. And to this end, the 
education and training of future generations of dedicated "malariologists" to 
advance our knowledge, understanding and the development of new interventions 
against each of the malaria species infecting humans also will be essential.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-7-S1-S9
PMCID: PMC2604873
PMID: 19091043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]