---
reference_id: "PMID:10666902"
title: "[Apert syndrome: clinico-epidemiological analysis of a series of consecutive cases in Spain]."
authors:
- Arroyo Carrera I
- Martínez-Frías ML
- Marco Pérez JJ
- Paisán Grisolía L
- Cárdenes Rodríguez A
- Nieto Conde C
- Félix Rodríguez V
- Egüés Jimeno JJ
- Morales Fernández MC
- Gómez-Ullate Vergara J
- Pardo Romero M
- Peñas Valiente A
- Oliván del Cacho MJ
- Lara Palma A
journal: An Esp Pediatr
year: '1999'
keywords:
- "Acrocephalosyndactylia/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Female
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Phenotype
- Spain
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Apert syndrome: clinico-epidemiological analysis of a series of consecutive cases in Spain].
**Authors:** Arroyo Carrera I, Martínez-Frías ML, Marco Pérez JJ, Paisán Grisolía L, Cárdenes Rodríguez A, Nieto Conde C, Félix Rodríguez V, Egüés Jimeno JJ, Morales Fernández MC, Gómez-Ullate Vergara J, Pardo Romero M, Peñas Valiente A, Oliván del Cacho MJ, Lara Palma A
**Journal:** An Esp Pediatr (1999)

## Content

1. An Esp Pediatr. 1999 Dec;51(6):667-72.

[Apert syndrome: clinico-epidemiological analysis of a series of consecutive 
cases in Spain].

[Article in Spanish]

Arroyo Carrera I(1), Martínez-Frías ML, Marco Pérez JJ, Paisán Grisolía L, 
Cárdenes Rodríguez A, Nieto Conde C, Félix Rodríguez V, Egüés Jimeno JJ, Morales 
Fernández MC, Gómez-Ullate Vergara J, Pardo Romero M, Peñas Valiente A, Oliván 
del Cacho MJ, Lara Palma A.

Author information:
(1)Sección de Neonatología, Hospital San Pedro de Alcántara, Cáceres.

OBJECTIVE: Apert syndrome is one of the five craniosynostosis syndromes caused 
by allelic mutations of the fibroblast growth-factor receptor 2 (FGFR2). It is 
characterized by symmetrical cutaneous and bony syndactyly of the hands and feet 
and a variety of pleiotrophic features of the skeleton, central nervous system, 
skin and internal organs.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We show the clinical and epidemiological characteristics 
of the 17 cases of Apert syndrome identified in a consecutive series of 26,956 
malformed liveborn infants detected among 1,502,639 livebirths surveyed by the 
Spanish Collaborative Study of Congenital Malformations (CEMC) between April 
1976 and March 1998.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: The estimated frequency of Apert syndrome in Spain is 
0.11 per 10,000 liveborn infants. All of the cases were sporadic and were 
associated with an increased paternal age. The clinical manifestations of our 
cases are concordant with the variable expression of the syndrome, with the 
cardinal features of acrocephaly secondary to craniosynostosis and syndactyly of 
hands and feet present in all cases, and other anomalies, including 
cardiovascular (23.5%), cleft palate (23.5%), urinary (5.9%) and central nervous 
system (5.9%), in some of the patients.

PMID: 10666902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]