---
reference_id: "PMID:40149702"
title: "Hashimoto's Encephalopathy: Clinical Features, Therapeutic Strategies, and Rehabilitation Approaches."
authors:
- Manocchio N
- Magro VM
- Massaro L
- Sorbino A
- Ljoka C
- Foti C
journal: Biomedicines
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/biomedicines13030726
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hashimoto's Encephalopathy: Clinical Features, Therapeutic Strategies, and Rehabilitation Approaches.
**Authors:** Manocchio N, Magro VM, Massaro L, Sorbino A, Ljoka C, Foti C
**Journal:** Biomedicines (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biomedicines13030726](https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines13030726)

## Content

1. Biomedicines. 2025 Mar 17;13(3):726. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines13030726.

Hashimoto's Encephalopathy: Clinical Features, Therapeutic Strategies, and 
Rehabilitation Approaches.

Manocchio N(1), Magro VM(1), Massaro L(1), Sorbino A(1), Ljoka C(1), Foti C(1).

Author information:
(1)Physical and Rehabilitation Medicine, Tor Vergata University, 00133 Rome, 
Italy.

Hashimoto's encephalopathy (HE), also known as steroid-responsive encephalopathy 
associated with autoimmune thyroiditis (SREAT), is an autoimmune disorder with 
heterogeneous presentation that poses diagnostic challenges. This review 
synthesizes the current literature to clarify the clinical, laboratory, and 
radiological features of SREAT/HE, including the diagnostic utility of thyroid 
peroxidase (TPO) antibodies, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) abnormalities, and 
neuroimaging findings. Cognitive impairment and behavioral changes are common in 
HE, but specific manifestations vary widely, which can lead to misdiagnosis. 
While elevated TPO antibodies are frequently observed, a direct causal 
relationship with HE is unlikely, and their presence may indicate a general 
state of autoimmunity. Corticosteroids remain the cornerstone of treatment, 
although responses vary, and alternative immunosuppressive agents or intravenous 
immunoglobulin may be needed in some cases. Evidence regarding rehabilitation 
for people affected by HE is limited, but neurorehabilitation strategies adapted 
from other neurological conditions, including cognitive re-education (CR), 
physical therapy, and psychosocial support, may be beneficial. Further research 
is needed to elucidate the underlying mechanisms of SREAT, refine the diagnostic 
criteria, and develop more targeted and effective therapies, including 
rehabilitation strategies, for this debilitating neurological disorder.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines13030726
PMCID: PMC11940270
PMID: 40149702

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.