---
reference_id: "PMID:33390147"
title: The Interplay of Disease Modifying Anti Rheumatic Drugs and Tuberculin Skin Test.
authors:
- Abdullah Z
- Kumar A
- Khan MA
- Kumar U
- Vyas S
- Vishwakarma VK
- Ranjan P
- Biswas A
- Wig N
journal: Curr Rev Clin Exp Pharmacol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.2174/1574884715999201231201538
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Interplay of Disease Modifying Anti Rheumatic Drugs and Tuberculin Skin Test.
**Authors:** Abdullah Z, Kumar A, Khan MA, Kumar U, Vyas S, Vishwakarma VK, Ranjan P, Biswas A, Wig N
**Journal:** Curr Rev Clin Exp Pharmacol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1574884715999201231201538](https://doi.org/10.2174/1574884715999201231201538)

## Content

1. Curr Rev Clin Exp Pharmacol. 2021;16(4):350-356. doi: 
10.2174/1574884715999201231201538.

The Interplay of Disease Modifying Anti Rheumatic Drugs and Tuberculin Skin 
Test.

Abdullah Z(1), Kumar A(1), Khan MA(2), Kumar U(3), Vyas S(4), Vishwakarma VK(5), 
Ranjan P(1), Biswas A(1), Wig N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New 
Delhi-110029, India.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), 
New Delhi-110029, India.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), 
New Delhi-110029, India.
(4)Department of Radiodiagnosis, All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
(AIIMS), New Delhi-110029, India.
(5)Department of Pharmacology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), 
New Delhi-110029, India.

OBJECTIVE: The study was conducted to determine whether synthetic 
Disease-Modifying Anti Rheumatic Drugs (DMARDs) suppress the latency of 
Tuberculosis (TB) infection in Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) patients along with 
other variables.
METHODS: This was done through Tuberculin Skin Test (TST) using purified protein 
derivative (PPD) in a cohort of RA patients. The TST was taken positive when 
induration post-PPD injection was ≥ 5mm and negative or anergic when it was < 
5mm. We included 100 patients (N = 100).
RESULTS: The prevalence of positive TST was 36%, while 64% presented a negative 
result. Negative TST was significantly associated with steroid usage (39.4%, 95% 
CI: 28.4%-51.4%). Anergic (TST negative) and non-anergic (TST positive) patients 
were separated into groups, and a new analysis was conducted with elaboration on 
DMARDs used.
CONCLUSION: The use of steroids was associated with TST negativity, The same is 
not true with use of methotrexate or other DMARDs. Thus TST should be 
interpreted with caution, especially before starting biologicals.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1574884715999201231201538
PMID: 33390147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]