---
reference_id: "PMID:36979325"
title: "Current Advances in Papillary Craniopharyngioma: State-Of-The-Art Therapies and Overview of the Literature."
authors:
- Jannelli G
- Calvanese F
- Paun L
- Raverot G
- Jouanneau E
journal: Brain Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/brainsci13030515
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current Advances in Papillary Craniopharyngioma: State-Of-The-Art Therapies and Overview of the Literature.
**Authors:** Jannelli G, Calvanese F, Paun L, Raverot G, Jouanneau E
**Journal:** Brain Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/brainsci13030515](https://doi.org/10.3390/brainsci13030515)

## Content

1. Brain Sci. 2023 Mar 20;13(3):515. doi: 10.3390/brainsci13030515.

Current Advances in Papillary Craniopharyngioma: State-Of-The-Art Therapies and 
Overview of the Literature.

Jannelli G(#)(1)(2), Calvanese F(#)(1)(3), Paun L(2)(4), Raverot G(5)(6), 
Jouanneau E(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Skull Base and Pituitary Unit, Department of Neurosurgery B, Neurological 
Hospital Pierre Wertheimer, Bron, 69677 Lyon, France.
(2)Neurosurgical Unit, Faculty of Medicine, Geneva University Hospitals, 
University of Geneva, 1205 Geneva, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki 
University, Meilahden tornisairaala, Haartmaninkatu 4 Rakennus 1, 00290 
Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, GHU-Paris Psychiatrie et Neurosciences, Hôpital 
Sainte Anne, 1 Rue Cabanis, CEDEX 14, 75014 Paris, France.
(5)Department of Endocrinology, Neurological Hospital Pierre Wertheimer, 
University Hospital of Lyon, 69500 Lyon, France.
(6)Inserm U1052, CNRS UMR5286, Cancer Research Center of Lyon, University Claude 
Bernard Lyon 1, 69000 Lyon, France.
(#)Contributed equally

Craniopharyngiomas are commonly classified as low-grade tumors, although they 
may harbor a malignant behavior due to their high rate of recurrence and 
long-term morbidity. Craniopharyngiomas are classically distinguished into two 
histological types (adamantinomatous and papillary), which have been recently 
considered by the WHO classification of CNS tumors as two independent entities, 
due to different epidemiological, radiological, histopathological, and genetic 
patterns. With regard to papillary craniopharyngioma, a BRAF V600 mutation is 
detected in 95% of cases. This genetic feature is opening new frontiers in the 
treatment of these tumors using an adjuvant or, in selected cases, a 
neo-adjuvant approach. In this article, we present an overview of the more 
recent literature, focusing on the specificities and the role of oncological 
treatment in the management of papillary craniopharyngiomas. Based on our 
research and experience, we strongly suggest a multimodal approach combining 
clinical, endocrinological, radiological, histological, and oncological findings 
in both preoperative workup and postoperative follow up to define a roadmap 
integrating every aspect of this challenging condition.

DOI: 10.3390/brainsci13030515
PMCID: PMC10046497
PMID: 36979325

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.