---
reference_id: "PMID:38641129"
title: Rhinitis Phenotypes Based on Multimorbidities.
authors:
- Cruz ÁA
- Bousquet J
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaip.2024.04.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rhinitis Phenotypes Based on Multimorbidities.
**Authors:** Cruz ÁA, Bousquet J
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaip.2024.04.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaip.2024.04.013)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2024 Jun;12(6):1487-1489. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2024.04.013. Epub 2024 Apr 17.

Rhinitis Phenotypes Based on Multimorbidities.

Cruz ÁA(1), Bousquet J(2).

Author information:
(1)Federal University of Bahia, Bahia, Brazil; Fundação ProAR, Salvador, Bahia, 
Brazil; ARIA Initiative, Montpellier, France. Electronic address: 
cruz.proar@gmail.com.
(2)ARIA Initiative, Montpellier, France; University Hospital Montpellier, 
Montpellier, France.

Chronic allergic and nonallergic rhinitis are common phenotypes of a highly 
prevalent disorder of the upper airways, often associated with asthma.1 Clinical 
data, epidemiologic studies, and mHealth-based and genomic approaches indicate 
the existence of 2 distinct diseases: rhinitis alone and rhinitis + asthma, 
which may be allergic or less often nonallergic. Both disease phenotypes need to 
be further characterized, because allergic conjunctivitis, food allergy, and 
atopic dermatitis, often present in patients with allergic rhinitis, may be 
considered as independent multimorbidities. Thus, the concept "multimorbid 
allergic disease" is more appropriate than "one-airway-one-disease." In a 
meta-analysis, atopic dermatitis was strongly associated with allergic and 
nonallergic rhinitis, but not with rhinitis and asthma.2 Asthma alone may also 
be associated with non-type 2 mechanisms.3 The distinction between rhinitis 
alone and rhinitis and asthma was found in all the 12 countries studied using an 
mHealth app (MASK-air) in Europe and Latin America. These data indicate that the 
distinction between the 2 diseases is independent of allergen exposure.4.

Copyright © 2024 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2024.04.013
PMID: 38641129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]