---
reference_id: "PMID:37383134"
title: "Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease: A comprehensive review."
authors:
- Mahajan VK
- Sharma V
- Sharma N
- Rani R
journal: World J Clin Cases
year: '2023'
doi: 10.12998/wjcc.v11.i16.3664
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease: A comprehensive review.
**Authors:** Mahajan VK, Sharma V, Sharma N, Rani R
**Journal:** World J Clin Cases (2023)
**DOI:** [10.12998/wjcc.v11.i16.3664](https://doi.org/10.12998/wjcc.v11.i16.3664)

## Content

1. World J Clin Cases. 2023 Jun 6;11(16):3664-3679. doi: 
10.12998/wjcc.v11.i16.3664.

Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease: A comprehensive review.

Mahajan VK(1), Sharma V(2), Sharma N(2), Rani R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Leprosy, Dr. Radhakrishnan 
Government Medical College, Hamirpur 177001, Himachal Pradesh, India. 
vkm1@rediffmail.com.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Leprosy, Dr. Radhakrishnan 
Government Medical College, Hamirpur 177001, Himachal Pradesh, India.

Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease, a rare form of necrotizing lymphadenitis, is an 
uncommon, benign, self-limiting disorder of obscure etiology. It affects mostly 
young adults of both genders. Clinically, it presents with fever and 
lymphadenopathy of a firm to rubbery consistency frequently involving cervical 
lymph nodes while weight loss, splenomegaly, leucopenia, and elevated 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate feature in severely affected patients. Cutaneous 
involvement occurs in about 30%-40% of cases as facial erythema and nonspecific 
erythematous papules, plaques, acneiform or morbilliform lesions of great 
histologic heterogeneity. Both Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease and systemic lupus 
erythematosus share an obscure and complex relationship as systemic lupus 
erythematosus may occasionally precede, develop subsequently, or sometimes be 
associated concurrently with Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease. It is often mistaken for 
non-Hodgkin lymphoma while lupus lymphadenitis, cat-scratch disease, Sweet's 
syndrome, Still's disease, drug eruptions, infectious mononucleosis, and viral 
or tubercular lymphadenitis are other common differentials. Fine needle 
aspiration cytology mostly has features of nonspecific reactive lymphadenitis 
and immunohistochemistry studies usually show variable features of uncertain 
diagnostic value. Since its diagnosis is exclusively from histopathology, it 
needs to be evaluated more carefully; an early lymph node biopsy will obviate 
the need for unnecessary investigations and therapeutic trials. Its treatment 
with systemic corticosteroids, hydroxychloroquine, or antimicrobial agents 
mostly remains empirical. The article reviews clinicoepidemiological, 
diagnostic, and management aspects of KFD from the perspective of practicing 
clinicians.

©The Author(s) 2023. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.12998/wjcc.v11.i16.3664
PMCID: PMC10294163
PMID: 37383134

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All the authors 
report no relevant conflicts of interest for this article.