---
reference_id: "PMID:33930582"
title: "TBX3 and TBX5 duplication: A family with an atypical overlapping Holt-Oram/ulnar-mammary syndrome phenotype."
authors:
- Cenni C
- Andres S
- Hempel M
- Strom TM
- Thomas E
- Davies A
- Timoney N
- Frigiola A
- Logan M
- Holder-Espinasse M
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2021.104213
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- "Breast Diseases/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Gene Duplication
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/complications, genetics, pathology"
- "Heart Septal Defects, Atrial/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- "Lower Extremity Deformities, Congenital/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- T-Box Domain Proteins/genetics
- "Ulna/abnormalities, pathology"
- "Upper Extremity Deformities, Congenital/complications, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TBX3 and TBX5 duplication: A family with an atypical overlapping Holt-Oram/ulnar-mammary syndrome phenotype.
**Authors:** Cenni C, Andres S, Hempel M, Strom TM, Thomas E, Davies A, Timoney N, Frigiola A, Logan M, Holder-Espinasse M
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2021.104213](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2021.104213)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2021 Jul;64(7):104213. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2021.104213. Epub 
2021 Apr 27.

TBX3 and TBX5 duplication: A family with an atypical overlapping 
Holt-Oram/ulnar-mammary syndrome phenotype.

Cenni C(1), Andres S(2), Hempel M(3), Strom TM(2), Thomas E(4), Davies A(5), 
Timoney N(6), Frigiola A(7), Logan M(8), Holder-Espinasse M(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Guy's Hospital, London, UK.
(2)Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universitat Munchen, Munich, Germany.
(3)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(4)Genomics England, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK; Genomic 
Medicine, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, UK.
(5)Genetics Laboratories. Guy's Hospital, London, UK.
(6)Department of Plastic Surgery, St Thomas Hospital, London, UK.
(7)Department of Cardiology, St Thomas Hospital, London, UK.
(8)Randall Centre for Cell and Molecular Biophysics, King's College London, 
Guy's Campus, London, UK.
(9)Department of Clinical Genetics, Guy's Hospital, London, UK. Electronic 
address: muriel.holder@gstt.nhs.uk.

Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is a rare, autosomal dominant heart-hand syndrome 
caused by mutations in the TBX5 gene. A wide spectrum of TBX5 mutations have 
been reported previously, most resulting in a null allele leading to 
haploinsufficiency. TBX5 gene duplications have been previously reported in 
association with typical and atypical HOS phenotypes. Ulnar-Mammary syndrome 
(UMS) is a distinct rare, autosomal dominant condition caused by mutations in 
the TBX3 gene. TBX5 and TBX3 are physically linked in cis on human chromosome 12 
and contiguous chromosome 12q24 deletions comprising both TBX5 and TBX3 genes 
have been previously reported but to our knowledge, duplications have never been 
described. We report on a large German family with at least 17 affected 
individuals over 6 generations bearing a duplication at 12q24.21 identified on 
array-CGH comprising both TBX5 and TBX3 genes. Affected patients are presenting 
with HOS and UMS symptoms, consisting of variable limb anomalies involving the 
radial and the ulnar rays and cardiac findings such as congenital heart defects, 
persistent arterial duct or aortic stenosis, and non-classical symptoms, such as 
supernumerary nipples and cardiomyopathy. Fluorescence in situ hybridisation 
confirmed a tandem duplication at the 12q24.21 locus. This is the first report 
of a contiguous TBX3/TBX5 duplication associated with HOS/UMS phenotype.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2021.104213
PMID: 33930582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]