---
reference_id: "PMID:26729443"
title: MET Exon 14 Mutations in Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer Are Associated With Advanced Age and Stage-Dependent MET Genomic Amplification and c-Met Overexpression.
authors:
- Awad MM
- Oxnard GR
- Jackman DM
- Savukoski DO
- Hall D
- Shivdasani P
- Heng JC
- Dahlberg SE
- Jänne PA
- Verma S
- Christensen J
- Hammerman PS
- Sholl LM
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2015.63.4600
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MET Exon 14 Mutations in Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer Are Associated With Advanced Age and Stage-Dependent MET Genomic Amplification and c-Met Overexpression.
**Authors:** Awad MM, Oxnard GR, Jackman DM, Savukoski DO, Hall D, Shivdasani P, Heng JC, Dahlberg SE, Jänne PA, Verma S, Christensen J, Hammerman PS, Sholl LM
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2015.63.4600](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2015.63.4600)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2016 Mar 1;34(7):721-30. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2015.63.4600. Epub
2016  Jan 4.

MET Exon 14 Mutations in Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer Are Associated With Advanced 
Age and Stage-Dependent MET Genomic Amplification and c-Met Overexpression.

Awad MM(1), Oxnard GR(2), Jackman DM(2), Savukoski DO(2), Hall D(2), Shivdasani 
P(2), Heng JC(2), Dahlberg SE(2), Jänne PA(2), Verma S(2), Christensen J(2), 
Hammerman PS(2), Sholl LM(2).

Author information:
(1)Mark M. Awad, Geoffrey R. Oxnard, David M. Jackman, Jennifer C. Heng, Suzanne 
E. Dahlberg, Pasi A. Jänne, and Peter S. Hammerman, Dana-Farber Cancer 
Institute; Mark M. Awad, Geoffrey R. Oxnard, David M. Jackman, Daniel O. 
Savukoski, Dimity Hall, Priyanka Shivdasani, Pasi A. Jänne, Peter S. Hammerman, 
and Lynette M. Sholl, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA; Suman Verma, ResearchDX, Irvine; and James Christensen, Mirati 
Therapeutics, San Diego, CA. mark_awad@dfci.harvard.edu.
(2)Mark M. Awad, Geoffrey R. Oxnard, David M. Jackman, Jennifer C. Heng, Suzanne 
E. Dahlberg, Pasi A. Jänne, and Peter S. Hammerman, Dana-Farber Cancer 
Institute; Mark M. Awad, Geoffrey R. Oxnard, David M. Jackman, Daniel O. 
Savukoski, Dimity Hall, Priyanka Shivdasani, Pasi A. Jänne, Peter S. Hammerman, 
and Lynette M. Sholl, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA; Suman Verma, ResearchDX, Irvine; and James Christensen, Mirati 
Therapeutics, San Diego, CA.

PURPOSE: Non-small-cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) harboring mutations in MET exon 14 
and its flanking introns may respond to c-Met inhibitors. We sought to describe 
the clinical, pathologic, and genomic characteristics of patients with cancer 
with MET exon 14 mutations.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We interrogated next-generation sequencing results from 
6,376 cancers to identify those harboring MET exon 14 mutations. Clinical 
characteristics of MET exon 14 mutated NSCLCs were compared with those of NSCLCs 
with activating mutations in KRAS and EGFR. Co-occurring genomic mutations and 
copy number alterations were identified. c-Met immunohistochemistry and 
real-time polymerase chain reaction to detect exon 14 skipping were performed 
where sufficient tissue was available.
RESULTS: MET exon 14 mutations were identified in 28 of 933 nonsquamous NSCLCs 
(3.0%) and were not seen in other cancer types in this study. Patients with MET 
exon 14-mutated NSCLC were significantly older (median age, 72.5 years) than 
patients with EGFR-mutant (median age, 61 years; P < .001) or KRAS-mutant NSCLC 
(median age, 65 years; P < .001). Among patients with MET exon 14 mutations, 68% 
were women, and 36% were never-smokers. Stage IV MET exon 14-mutated NSCLCs were 
significantly more likely to have concurrent MET genomic amplification (mean 
ratio of MET to chromosome 7, 4.3) and strong c-Met immunohistochemical 
expression (mean H score, 253) than stage IA to IIIB MET exon 14-mutated NSCLCs 
(mean ratio of MET to chromosome 7, 1.4; P = .007; mean H score, 155; P = .002) 
and stage IV MET exon 14-wild-type NSCLCs (mean ratio of MET to chromosome 7, 
1.2; P < .001; mean H score, 142; P < .001). A patient whose lung cancer 
harbored a MET exon 14 mutation with concurrent genomic amplification of the 
mutated MET allele experienced a major partial response to the c-Met inhibitor 
crizotinib.
CONCLUSION: MET exon 14 mutations represent a clinically unique molecular 
subtype of NSCLC. Prospective clinical trials with c-Met inhibitors will be 
necessary to validate MET exon 14 mutations as an important therapeutic target 
in NSCLC.

© 2016 by American Society of Clinical Oncology.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2015.63.4600
PMID: 26729443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]