---
reference_id: "PMID:15677370"
title: High-dose intravenous immunoglobulin downregulates the activated levels of inflammatory indices except erythrocyte sedimentation rate in acute stage of Kawasaki Disease.
authors:
- Lee KY
- Lee HS
- Hong JH
- Han JW
- Lee JS
- Whang KT
journal: J Trop Pediatr
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1093/tropej/fmh087
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High-dose intravenous immunoglobulin downregulates the activated levels of inflammatory indices except erythrocyte sedimentation rate in acute stage of Kawasaki Disease.
**Authors:** Lee KY, Lee HS, Hong JH, Han JW, Lee JS, Whang KT
**Journal:** J Trop Pediatr (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1093/tropej/fmh087](https://doi.org/10.1093/tropej/fmh087)

## Content

1. J Trop Pediatr. 2005 Apr;51(2):98-101. doi: 10.1093/tropej/fmh087. Epub 2005
Jan  26.

High-dose intravenous immunoglobulin downregulates the activated levels of 
inflammatory indices except erythrocyte sedimentation rate in acute stage of 
Kawasaki Disease.

Lee KY(1), Lee HS, Hong JH, Han JW, Lee JS, Whang KT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of 
Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea. leekyungyil@catholic.ac.kr

We evaluated the effects of high-dose intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) 
administration on various protein parameters, including inflammatory profiles, 
in children with Kawasaki disease (KD). Sixty-three children with KD were 
treated with IVIG at 2 g/kg over 12 h. Serial examinations of laboratory indices 
were performed three times: before IVIG treatment, 24 h after IVIG treatment, 
and 7 days after IVIG treatment. The white blood cell and neutrophil counts 
showed significant decreases 24 h and 7 days after IVIG administration. The 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) increased significantly 24 h after IVIG, 
and the elevated level was sustained for 7 days. The levels of hemoglobin, 
albumin and inflammation-associated proteins, including C-reactive protein, 
decreased 24 h after IVIG treatment. Inflammation-associated proteins, except 
transferrin, decreased further to near normal levels after 7 days. On the other 
hand, IgM and IgA were not affected after 24 h, rather increased significantly 
after 7 days. High-dose IVIG causes immediate changes in the levels of various 
proteins, except IgA and IgM, and downregulates the activated levels of 
inflammatory indices, except ESR, in the acute stage of KD.

DOI: 10.1093/tropej/fmh087
PMID: 15677370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]