---
reference_id: "PMID:30199753"
title: "Description and initial characterization of metatranscriptomic nidovirus-like genomes from the proposed new family Abyssoviridae, and from a sister group to the Coronavirinae, the proposed genus Alphaletovirus."
authors:
- Bukhari K
- Mulley G
- Gulyaeva AA
- Zhao L
- Shu G
- Jiang J
- Neuman BW
journal: Virology
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2018.08.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Description and initial characterization of metatranscriptomic nidovirus-like genomes from the proposed new family Abyssoviridae, and from a sister group to the Coronavirinae, the proposed genus Alphaletovirus.
**Authors:** Bukhari K, Mulley G, Gulyaeva AA, Zhao L, Shu G, Jiang J, Neuman BW
**Journal:** Virology (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.virol.2018.08.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.virol.2018.08.010)

## Content

1. Virology. 2018 Nov;524:160-171. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2018.08.010. Epub 2018
Sep  7.

Description and initial characterization of metatranscriptomic nidovirus-like 
genomes from the proposed new family Abyssoviridae, and from a sister group to 
the Coronavirinae, the proposed genus Alphaletovirus.

Bukhari K(1), Mulley G(1), Gulyaeva AA(2), Zhao L(3), Shu G(3), Jiang J(3), 
Neuman BW(4).

Author information:
(1)University of Reading, Reading, UK.
(2)Dept. Medical Microbiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the 
Netherlands.
(3)Chengdu Institute of Biology, Chinese Academy of Science, Chengdu, China.
(4)Texas A&M University-Texarkana, 7101 University Ave, Texarkana, TX 75503, 
United States. Electronic address: bneuman@tamut.edu.

Transcriptomics has the potential to discover new RNA virus genomes by 
sequencing total intracellular RNA pools. In this study, we have searched 
publicly available transcriptomes for sequences similar to viruses of the 
Nidovirales order. We report two potential nidovirus genomes, a highly divergent 
35.9 kb likely complete genome from the California sea hare Aplysia californica, 
which we assign to a nidovirus named Aplysia abyssovirus 1 (AAbV), and a 
coronavirus-like 22.3 kb partial genome from the ornamented pygmy frog Microhyla 
fissipes, which we assign to a nidovirus named Microhyla alphaletovirus 1 
(MLeV). AAbV was shown to encode a functional main proteinase, and a 
translational readthrough signal. Phylogenetic analysis suggested that AAbV 
represents a new family, proposed here as Abyssoviridae. MLeV represents a 
sister group to the other known coronaviruses. The importance of MLeV and AAbV 
for understanding nidovirus evolution, and the origin of terrestrial nidoviruses 
are discussed.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2018.08.010
PMCID: PMC7112036
PMID: 30199753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]