---
reference_id: "PMID:31996241"
title: "Molecular basis of Leigh syndrome: a current look."
authors:
- Schubert Baldo M
- Vilarinho L
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-020-1297-9
keywords:
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- "Leigh Disease/diagnostic imaging, metabolism"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Models, Biological"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular basis of Leigh syndrome: a current look.
**Authors:** Schubert Baldo M, Vilarinho L
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-020-1297-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-020-1297-9)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2020 Jan 29;15(1):31. doi: 10.1186/s13023-020-1297-9.

Molecular basis of Leigh syndrome: a current look.

Schubert Baldo M(1), Vilarinho L(2).

Author information:
(1)Newborn screening, metabolism and genetics unit - human genetics department, 
Instituto Nacional de Saúde Doutor Ricardo Jorge (INSA), Porto, Portugal. 
manuela.baldo@insa.min-saude.pt.
(2)Newborn screening, metabolism and genetics unit - human genetics department, 
Instituto Nacional de Saúde Doutor Ricardo Jorge (INSA), Porto, Portugal.

Erratum in
    Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2020 Mar 25;15(1):77. doi: 10.1186/s13023-020-1351-7.

Leigh Syndrome (OMIM 256000) is a heterogeneous neurologic disorder due to 
damage in mitochondrial energy production that usually starts in early 
childhood. The first description given by Leigh pointed out neurological 
symptoms in children under 2 years and premature death. Following cases brought 
some hypothesis to explain the cause due to similarity to other neurological 
diseases and led to further investigation for metabolic diseases. Biochemical 
evaluation and specific metabolic profile suggested impairment in energy 
production (OXPHOS) in mitochondria. As direct approach to involved tissues is 
not always possible or safe, molecular analysis is a great cost-effective option 
and, besides biochemical results, is required to confirm the underlying cause of 
this syndrome face to clinical suspicion. The Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) 
advance represented a breakthrough in molecular biology allowing simultaneous 
gene analysis giving short-time results and increasing the variants underlying 
this syndrome, counting over 75 monogenic causes related so far. NGS provided 
confirmation of emerging cases and brought up diagnosis in atypical 
presentations as late-onset cases, which turned Leigh into a heterogeneous 
syndrome with variable outcomes. This review highlights clinical presentation in 
both classic and atypical phenotypes, the investigation pathway throughout 
confirmation emphasizing the underlying genetic heterogeneity and increasing 
number of genes assigned to this syndrome as well as available treatment.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-020-1297-9
PMCID: PMC6990539
PMID: 31996241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.