---
reference_id: "PMID:37280710"
title: "Spinal Muscular Atrophy with Progressive Myoclonic Epilepsy (SMA-PME): three new cases and review of the mutational spectrum."
authors:
- Najafi A
- Tasharrofi B
- Zandsalimi F
- Rasulinezhad M
- Ghahvechi Akbari M
- Zamani G
- Ashrafi MR
- Heidari M
journal: Ital J Pediatr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13052-023-01474-z
keywords:
- Distal Myopathies
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Mutation
- "Myoclonic Epilepsies, Progressive/genetics"
- Humans
- Myoclonus/congenital
- "Muscular Atrophy, Spinal/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinal Muscular Atrophy with Progressive Myoclonic Epilepsy (SMA-PME): three new cases and review of the mutational spectrum.
**Authors:** Najafi A, Tasharrofi B, Zandsalimi F, Rasulinezhad M, Ghahvechi Akbari M, Zamani G, Ashrafi MR, Heidari M
**Journal:** Ital J Pediatr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13052-023-01474-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13052-023-01474-z)

## Content

1. Ital J Pediatr. 2023 Jun 6;49(1):64. doi: 10.1186/s13052-023-01474-z.

Spinal Muscular Atrophy with Progressive Myoclonic Epilepsy (SMA-PME): three new 
cases and review of the mutational spectrum.

Najafi A(#)(1), Tasharrofi B(#)(1), Zandsalimi F(2), Rasulinezhad M(3), 
Ghahvechi Akbari M(4), Zamani G(5), Ashrafi MR(6), Heidari M(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, School of Advanced Technologies in 
Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Pediatric Neurology Department, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Iran.
(4)Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Department, Children's Medical Center, 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Neurology, Children's Medical 
Center, Pediatrics Center of Excellence, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Neurology, Children's Medical 
Center, Pediatrics Center of Excellence, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran. ashrafim@tums.ac.ir.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Neurology, Children's Medical 
Center, Pediatrics Center of Excellence, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran. mortezah93@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) could be classified as 5q and non-5q, 
based on the chromosomal location of causative genes. A rare form of non-5q SMA 
is an autosomal-recessive condition called spinal muscular atrophy with 
progressive myoclonic epilepsy (SMA-PME), phenotypically characterized by 
myoclonic and generalized seizures with progressive neurological deterioration. 
SMA-PME is a clinically heterogeneous disorder that arises from biallelic 
pathogenic variants in ASAH1 gene.
METHODS: Following clinical and primary laboratory assessments, whole-exome 
sequencing was performed to detect the disease-causing variants in three cases 
of SMA-PME from different families. Also, Multiplex ligation-dependent probe 
amplification (MLPA) was employed for determining the copy numbers of SMN1 and 
SMN2 genes to rule out 5q SMA.
RESULTS: Exome sequencing revealed two different homozygous missense mutations 
(c.109 C > A [p.Pro37Thr] or c.125 C > T [p.Thr42Met]) in exon 2 of the ASAH1 
gene in the affected members of the families. Sanger sequencing of the other 
family members showed the expected heterozygous carriers. In addition, no 
clinically relevant variant was identified in patients by MLPA.
CONCLUSION: This study describes two different ASAH1 mutations and the clinical 
picture of 3 SMA-PME patients. In addition, previously reported mutations have 
been reviewed. This study could help to fortify the database of this rare 
disease with more clinical and genomic data.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13052-023-01474-z
PMCID: PMC10246360
PMID: 37280710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.