---
reference_id: "PMID:17521958"
title: "Synthesis and characterization of some pyrimidine, purine, amino acid and mixed ligand complexes."
authors:
- Masoud MS
- Amira MF
- Ramadan AM
- El-Ashry GM
journal: Spectrochim Acta A Mol Biomol Spectrosc
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.saa.2007.03.039
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Synthesis and characterization of some pyrimidine, purine, amino acid and mixed ligand complexes.
**Authors:** Masoud MS, Amira MF, Ramadan AM, El-Ashry GM
**Journal:** Spectrochim Acta A Mol Biomol Spectrosc (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.saa.2007.03.039](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.saa.2007.03.039)

## Content

1. Spectrochim Acta A Mol Biomol Spectrosc. 2008 Jan;69(1):230-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.saa.2007.03.039. Epub 2007 Mar 31.

Synthesis and characterization of some pyrimidine, purine, amino acid and mixed 
ligand complexes.

Masoud MS(1), Amira MF, Ramadan AM, El-Ashry GM.

Author information:
(1)Chemistry Department, Faculty of Science, Alexandria University, Egypt. 
drmsmasoud@yahoo.com

Mn(II), Fe(III), Co(II), Ni(II), Cu(II), Zn(II) and Cd(II) complexes of 
barbital, thiouracil, adenine, amino acids (methionine, lysine and alanine) and 
some mixed ligands were prepared and characterized by elemental analyses, IR, 
electronic spectra, magnetic susceptibility and ESR spectra. Coordination of the 
metallic centre to the oxygen and nitrogen atoms of barbital, thiouracil, amino 
acids and coordinate to amino group and nitrogen atom of adenine occurred. 
Electronic spectra and magnetic susceptibility measurements were utilized to 
infer the structure of the complexes which are octahedral for Mn(II), Fe(III), 
Co(II), Ni(II) and Cd(II) and tetrahedral for Mn(II), Cu(II), Zn(II) complexes. 
ESR spectra were observed for copper complexes with a d(x2)-(y2) ground state 
with small g(||) values indicating strong interaction between the ligands and 
their metal ions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.saa.2007.03.039
PMID: 17521958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]