---
reference_id: "PMID:21408083"
title: "Trouble with bleeding: risk factors for acute hepatitis C among HIV-positive gay men from Germany--a case-control study."
authors:
- Schmidt AJ
- Rockstroh JK
- Vogel M
- An der Heiden M
- Baillot A
- Krznaric I
- Radun D
journal: PLoS One
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017781
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Adult
- Aged
- Case-Control Studies
- Condoms
- Cross Infection/complications
- Demography
- Germany/epidemiology
- HIV Seropositivity/complications
- "Health Knowledge, Attitudes, Practice"
- Hemorrhage/complications
- "Hepatitis C/complications, epidemiology"
- "Homosexuality, Male/statistics & numerical data"
- Humans
- Logistic Models
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Multivariate Analysis
- Risk Factors
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Trouble with bleeding: risk factors for acute hepatitis C among HIV-positive gay men from Germany--a case-control study.
**Authors:** Schmidt AJ, Rockstroh JK, Vogel M, An der Heiden M, Baillot A, Krznaric I, Radun D
**Journal:** PLoS One (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0017781](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0017781)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 8;6(3):e17781. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017781.

Trouble with bleeding: risk factors for acute hepatitis C among HIV-positive gay
men from Germany--a case-control study.

Schmidt AJ(1), Rockstroh JK, Vogel M, An der Heiden M, Baillot A, Krznaric I,
Radun D.

Author information:
(1)Department for Infectious Diseases Epidemiology, Robert Koch Institute,
Berlin, Germany. a.j.schmidt@rki.de

OBJECTIVES: To identify risk factors for hepatitis C among HIV-positive men who
have sex with men (MSM), focusing on potential sexual, nosocomial, and other
non-sexual determinants.
BACKGROUND: Outbreaks of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infections among HIV-positive
MSM have been reported by clinicians in post-industrialized countries since
2000. The sexual acquisition of HCV by gay men who are HIV positive is not,
however, fully understood.
METHODS: Between 2006 and 2008, a case-control study was embedded into a
behavioural survey of MSM in Germany. Cases were HIV-positive and acutely
HCV-co-infected, with no history of injection drug use. HIV-positive MSM without
known HCV infection, matched for age group, served as controls. The
HCV-serostatus of controls was assessed by serological testing of dried blood
specimens. Univariable and multivariable regression analyses were used to
identify factors independently associated with HCV-co-infection.
RESULTS: 34 cases and 67 controls were included. Sex-associated rectal bleeding,
receptive fisting and snorting cocaine/amphetamines, combined with group sex,
were independently associated with case status. Among cases, surgical
interventions overlapped with sex-associated rectal bleeding.
CONCLUSIONS: Sexual practices leading to rectal bleeding, and snorting drugs in
settings of increased HCV-prevalence are risk factors for acute hepatitis C. We
suggest that sharing snorting equipment as well as sharing sexual partners might
be modes of sexual transmission. Condoms and gloves may not provide adequate
protection if they are contaminated with blood. Public health interventions for
HIV-positive gay men should address the role of blood in sexual risk behaviour.
Further research is needed into the interplay of proctosurgery and
sex-associated rectal bleeding.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017781
PMCID: PMC3050932
PMID: 21408083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist, neither financial nor non-financial. Neither
the German MOH, nor any pharmaceutical company had a role in study design, data
collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
The lecture fees and congress travel grants as disclosed by M.V. and J.K.R. have
no connection to this case-control-study on sexual, nosocomial, and other
non-sexual determinants. This does not alter the authors' adherence to all the
PLoS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.
