---
reference_id: "PMID:35406803"
title: Microglial Endocannabinoid Signalling in AD.
authors:
- Scipioni L
- Ciaramellano F
- Carnicelli V
- Leuti A
- Lizzi AR
- De Dominicis N
- Oddi S
- Maccarrone M
journal: Cells
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/cells11071237
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Microglial Endocannabinoid Signalling in AD.
**Authors:** Scipioni L, Ciaramellano F, Carnicelli V, Leuti A, Lizzi AR, De Dominicis N, Oddi S, Maccarrone M
**Journal:** Cells (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells11071237](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells11071237)

## Content

1. Cells. 2022 Apr 6;11(7):1237. doi: 10.3390/cells11071237.

Microglial Endocannabinoid Signalling in AD.

Scipioni L(1)(2), Ciaramellano F(2)(3), Carnicelli V(1), Leuti A(2)(4), Lizzi 
AR(1), De Dominicis N(1)(4), Oddi S(2)(3), Maccarrone M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnological and Applied Clinical Sciences, University of 
L'Aquila, Via Vetoio Snc, 67100 L'Aquila, Italy.
(2)European Center for Brain Research/IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, Via del 
Fosso di Fiorano 64, 00143 Rome, Italy.
(3)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Teramo, Via R. Balzarini 1, 
64100 Teramo, Italy.
(4)Department of Medicine, Campus Bio-Medico University of Rome, Via Alvaro del 
Portillo 21, 00128 Rome, Italy.

Chronic inflammation in Alzheimer's disease (AD) has been recently identified as 
a major contributor to disease pathogenesis. Once activated, microglial cells, 
which are brain-resident immune cells, exert several key actions, including 
phagocytosis, chemotaxis, and the release of pro- or anti-inflammatory 
mediators, which could have opposite effects on brain homeostasis, depending on 
the stage of disease and the particular phenotype of microglial cells. The 
endocannabinoids (eCBs) are pleiotropic bioactive lipids increasingly recognized 
for their essential roles in regulating microglial activity both under normal 
and AD-driven pathological conditions. Here, we review the current literature 
regarding the involvement of this signalling system in modulating microglial 
phenotypes and activity in the context of homeostasis and AD-related 
neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.3390/cells11071237
PMCID: PMC8997504
PMID: 35406803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.