---
reference_id: "PMID:32678001"
title: Presence of autoantibodies in "seronegative" rheumatoid arthritis associates with classical risk factors and high disease activity.
authors:
- Reed E
- Hedström AK
- Hansson M
- Mathsson-Alm L
- Brynedal B
- Saevarsdottir S
- Cornillet M
- Jakobsson PJ
- Holmdahl R
- Skriner K
- Serre G
- Alfredsson L
- Rönnelid J
- Lundberg K
journal: Arthritis Res Ther
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1186/s13075-020-02191-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Presence of autoantibodies in "seronegative" rheumatoid arthritis associates with classical risk factors and high disease activity.
**Authors:** Reed E, Hedström AK, Hansson M, Mathsson-Alm L, Brynedal B, Saevarsdottir S, Cornillet M, Jakobsson PJ, Holmdahl R, Skriner K, Serre G, Alfredsson L, Rönnelid J, Lundberg K
**Journal:** Arthritis Res Ther (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13075-020-02191-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13075-020-02191-2)

## Content

1. Arthritis Res Ther. 2020 Jul 16;22(1):170. doi: 10.1186/s13075-020-02191-2.

Presence of autoantibodies in "seronegative" rheumatoid arthritis associates 
with classical risk factors and high disease activity.

Reed E(1), Hedström AK(2)(3), Hansson M(1), Mathsson-Alm L(4)(5), Brynedal B(2), 
Saevarsdottir S(1)(6)(7), Cornillet M(8), Jakobsson PJ(1), Holmdahl R(9), 
Skriner K(10), Serre G(8), Alfredsson L(2)(3)(11), Rönnelid J(5), Lundberg 
K(12).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska 
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, CMM L8:04, 171 76, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(2)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(3)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(4)Thermo Fisher Scientific, Uppsala, Sweden.
(5)Department of Immunology Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden.
(6)Division of Clinical Epidemiology, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)Faculty of Medicine, School of Health Sciences, University of Iceland, 
Reykjavik, Iceland.
(8)Unité Différenciation Epithéliale et Autoimmunité Rhumatoïde, Université de 
Toulouse-INSERM UMR 1056, Toulouse, France.
(9)Section for Medical Inflammation Research, Department of Medical Biochemistry 
and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(10)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Charité University, 
Berlin, Germany.
(11)Centre for Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Region Stockholm, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(12)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska 
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, CMM L8:04, 171 76, Stockholm, 
Sweden. Karin.Lundberg@ki.se.

BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is classified as seropositive or 
seronegative, depending on the presence/absence of rheumatoid factor (RF), 
primarily IgM RF, and/or anti-citrullinated protein antibodies (ACPA), commonly 
detected using anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (CCP) assays. Known risk 
factors associate with the more severe seropositive form of RA; less is known 
about seronegative RA. Here, we examine risk factors and clinical phenotypes in 
relation to presence of autoantibodies in the RA subset that is traditionally 
defined as seronegative.
METHODS: Anti-CCP2 IgG, 19 ACPA fine-specificities, IgM/IgG/IgA RF, 
anti-carbamylated-protein (CarP) antibodies, and 17 other autoantibodies, were 
analysed in 2755 RA patients and 370 controls. Antibody prevalence, levels, and 
co-occurrence were examined, and associations with risk factors and disease 
activity during 5 years were investigated for different antibody-defined RA 
subsets.
RESULTS: Autoantibodies were detected in a substantial proportion of the 
traditionally defined seronegative RA subset, with ACPA fine-specificities found 
in 30%, IgA/IgG RF in 9.4%, and anti-CarP antibodies in 16%, with a 9.6% 
co-occurrence of at least two types of RA-associated autoantibodies. HLA-DRB1 
shared epitope (SE) associated with the presence of ACPA in anti-CCP2-negative 
RA; in anti-CCP2-positive RA, the SE association was defined by six ACPA 
fine-specificities with high co-occurrence. Smoking associated with RF, but not 
with ACPA, in anti-CCP2-negative RA. Presence of ACPA and RF, but not anti-CarP 
antibodies, in conventionally defined "seronegative" RA, associated with worse 
clinical outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: "Seronegative" RA is not truly a seronegative disease subset. 
Additional screening for ACPA fine-specificities and IgA/IgG RF defines a group 
of patients that resembles seropositive patients with respect to risk factors 
and clinical picture and may contribute to earlier diagnosis for a subset of 
anti-CCP2-/IgM RF- patients with a high need for active treatment.

DOI: 10.1186/s13075-020-02191-2
PMCID: PMC7364538
PMID: 32678001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no 
conflicting financial interest and have not received funding from commercial 
sources in the context of this study. Karolinska Institutet has been a partner 
with Thermo Fisher Scientific within the Innovative Medicines Initiative BTCure, 
a public–private partnership between the EU and the European Federation of 
Pharmaceutical Industries (www.BTcure.eu). Thermo Fisher Scientific has 
contributed to this consortium with in-kind contributions for the development of 
the microarray multiplex assay used in the current study. LMA is employed by 
Thermo Fischer Scientific. JR is a member of the Thermo Fisher Scientific 
advisory board. RH is a co-inventor of the patent US Patent 7 148 020, 
protecting the use of the CitC1 and C1 peptides. KS is co-inventor of patents US 
13/141,960 and EP 09799354.7, describing the diagnostic use of the hnRNP-A3 
peptide epitopes. GS is co-inventor of several international patents about ACPA 
antigens held by BioMérieux Cy and licenced to Eurodiagnostica Cy and 
Axis-Shield Cy, for commercialization of the CCP2 assays; according to French 
laws, part of the royalties is paid to the Toulouse III University and the 
University Hospital of Toulouse. KL is co-inventor of the patent US12/524,465, 
describing the diagnostic use of the CEP-1 epitope.