---
reference_id: "PMID:34665389"
title: Hyperammonemia in Inherited Metabolic Diseases.
authors:
- Ribas GS
- Lopes FF
- Deon M
- Vargas CR
journal: Cell Mol Neurobiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s10571-021-01156-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hyperammonemia in Inherited Metabolic Diseases.
**Authors:** Ribas GS, Lopes FF, Deon M, Vargas CR
**Journal:** Cell Mol Neurobiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10571-021-01156-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10571-021-01156-6)

## Content

1. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2022 Nov;42(8):2593-2610. doi: 10.1007/s10571-021-01156-6.
 Epub 2021 Oct 19.

Hyperammonemia in Inherited Metabolic Diseases.

Ribas GS(1)(2), Lopes FF(3), Deon M(3), Vargas CR(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Análises Clínicas, Faculdade de Farmácia, Universidade 
Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. 
grazielaribas@yahoo.com.br.
(2)Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital de Clíınicas de Porto Alegre, Ramiro 
Barcelos, 2350, Porto Alegre, RS, CEP 90035-003, Brazil. 
grazielaribas@yahoo.com.br.
(3)Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital de Clíınicas de Porto Alegre, Ramiro 
Barcelos, 2350, Porto Alegre, RS, CEP 90035-003, Brazil.
(4)Departamento de Análises Clínicas, Faculdade de Farmácia, Universidade 
Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. crvargas@hcpa.edu.br.
(5)Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital de Clíınicas de Porto Alegre, Ramiro 
Barcelos, 2350, Porto Alegre, RS, CEP 90035-003, Brazil. crvargas@hcpa.edu.br.

Ammonia is a neurotoxic compound which is detoxified through liver enzymes from 
urea cycle. Several inherited or acquired conditions can elevate ammonia 
concentrations in blood, causing severe damage to the central nervous system due 
to the toxic effects exerted by ammonia on the astrocytes. Therefore, 
hyperammonemic patients present potentially life-threatening neuropsychiatric 
symptoms, whose severity is related with the hyperammonemia magnitude and 
duration, as well as the brain maturation stage. Inherited metabolic diseases 
caused by enzymatic defects that compromise directly or indirectly the urea 
cycle activity are the main cause of hyperammonemia in the neonatal period. 
These diseases are mainly represented by the congenital defects of urea cycle, 
classical organic acidurias, and the defects of mitochondrial fatty acids 
oxidation, with hyperammonemia being more severe and frequent in the first two 
groups mentioned. An effective and rapid treatment of hyperammonemia is crucial 
to prevent irreversible neurological damage and it depends on the understanding 
of the pathophysiology of the diseases, as well as of the available therapeutic 
approaches. In this review, the mechanisms underlying the hyperammonemia and 
neurological dysfunction in urea cycle disorders, organic acidurias, and fatty 
acids oxidation defects, as well as the therapeutic strategies for the ammonia 
control will be discussed.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10571-021-01156-6
PMCID: PMC11421644
PMID: 34665389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no conflicts of 
interest.