---
reference_id: "PMID:19468298"
title: Transcriptional dysregulation in NIPBL and cohesin mutant human cells.
authors:
- Liu J
- Zhang Z
- Bando M
- Itoh T
- Deardorff MA
- Clark D
- Kaur M
- Tandy S
- Kondoh T
- Rappaport E
- Spinner NB
- Vega H
- Jackson LG
- Shirahige K
- Krantz ID
journal: PLoS Biol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000119
keywords:
- Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics
- Chondroitin Sulfate Proteoglycans/genetics
- Chromatin Immunoprecipitation
- "Chromosomal Proteins, Non-Histone/genetics"
- "Databases, Genetic"
- De Lange Syndrome/genetics
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic/genetics"
- Proteins/genetics
- Structural Maintenance of Chromosome Protein 1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcriptional dysregulation in NIPBL and cohesin mutant human cells.
**Authors:** Liu J, Zhang Z, Bando M, Itoh T, Deardorff MA, Clark D, Kaur M, Tandy S, Kondoh T, Rappaport E, Spinner NB, Vega H, Jackson LG, Shirahige K, Krantz ID
**Journal:** PLoS Biol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pbio.1000119](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1000119)

## Content

1. PLoS Biol. 2009 May 5;7(5):e1000119. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000119. Epub
2009 May 26.

Transcriptional dysregulation in NIPBL and cohesin mutant human cells.

Liu J(1), Zhang Z, Bando M, Itoh T, Deardorff MA, Clark D, Kaur M, Tandy S,
Kondoh T, Rappaport E, Spinner NB, Vega H, Jackson LG, Shirahige K, Krantz ID.

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Abramson Research Institute, The Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Cohesin regulates sister chromatid cohesion during the mitotic cell cycle with
Nipped-B-Like (NIPBL) facilitating its loading and unloading. In addition to
this canonical role, cohesin has also been demonstrated to play a critical role
in regulation of gene expression in nondividing cells. Heterozygous mutations in
the cohesin regulator NIPBL or cohesin structural components SMC1A and SMC3
result in the multisystem developmental disorder Cornelia de Lange Syndrome
(CdLS). Genome-wide assessment of transcription in 16 mutant cell lines from
severely affected CdLS probands has identified a unique profile of dysregulated
gene expression that was validated in an additional 101 samples and correlates
with phenotypic severity. This profile could serve as a diagnostic and
classification tool. Cohesin binding analysis demonstrates a preference for
intergenic regions suggesting a cis-regulatory function mimicking that of a
boundary/insulator interacting protein. However, the binding sites are enriched
within the promoter regions of the dysregulated genes and are significantly
decreased in CdLS proband, indicating an alternative role of cohesin as a
transcription factor.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000119
PMCID: PMC2680332
PMID: 19468298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
