---
reference_id: "PMID:24290361"
title: A novel ALK rearrangement in an inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor in a neonate.
authors:
- Owusu-Brackett N
- Johnson R
- Schindel DT
- Koduru P
- Cope-Yokoyama S
journal: Cancer Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2013.10.002
keywords:
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase
- Chromosome Banding
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 2/genetics"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Gene Rearrangement
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Karyotype
- Neck/diagnostic imaging
- "Neoplasms, Muscle Tissue/diagnosis, genetics, surgery"
- Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- "Translocation, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel ALK rearrangement in an inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor in a neonate.
**Authors:** Owusu-Brackett N, Johnson R, Schindel DT, Koduru P, Cope-Yokoyama S
**Journal:** Cancer Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cancergen.2013.10.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cancergen.2013.10.002)

## Content

1. Cancer Genet. 2013 Sep-Oct;206(9-10):353-6. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergen.2013.10.002. Epub 2013 Oct 11.

A novel ALK rearrangement in an inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor in a neonate.

Owusu-Brackett N(1), Johnson R, Schindel DT, Koduru P, Cope-Yokoyama S.

Author information:
(1)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.

Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumors (IMTs) are uncommon lesions primarily
affecting children and young adults. They have rarely been described in infants,
with a very small number described in neonates. Structural rearrangements in the
anaplastic large-cell lymphoma kinase gene (ALK) has contributed to our
categorizing this lesion as a neoplasm. In addition, rearrangements of the ALK
gene have been implicated in the pathogenicity of many other hematolymphoid and
non-hematolymphoid tumors, typically involving 2p23 with different partners or
with pericentric inversion. We report a previously undescribed cryptic deletion
and intrachromosomal-insertional translocation of the 3'-region of the ALK gene
from 2p23 to the 2q33-q35 in an IMT of a newborn patient with an apparently
normal G-band karyotype of the tumor.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2013.10.002
PMID: 24290361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
