---
reference_id: "PMID:34133943"
title: Sneezing reflex is mediated by a peptidergic pathway from nose to brainstem.
authors:
- Li F
- Jiang H
- Shen X
- Yang W
- Guo C
- Wang Z
- Xiao M
- Cui L
- Luo W
- Kim BS
- Chen Z
- Huang AJW
- Liu Q
journal: Cell
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2021.05.017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sneezing reflex is mediated by a peptidergic pathway from nose to brainstem.
**Authors:** Li F, Jiang H, Shen X, Yang W, Guo C, Wang Z, Xiao M, Cui L, Luo W, Kim BS, Chen Z, Huang AJW, Liu Q
**Journal:** Cell (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2021.05.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2021.05.017)

## Content

1. Cell. 2021 Jul 8;184(14):3762-3773.e10. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2021.05.017. Epub 
2021 Jun 15.

Sneezing reflex is mediated by a peptidergic pathway from nose to brainstem.

Li F(1), Jiang H(1), Shen X(1), Yang W(1), Guo C(1), Wang Z(1), Xiao M(1), Cui 
L(2), Luo W(2), Kim BS(3), Chen Z(4), Huang AJW(5), Liu Q(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Center for the Study of Itch and Sensory 
Disorders, and Washington University Pain Center, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, Center for the Study of Itch and Sensory 
Disorders, and Washington University Pain Center, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Division of Dermatology, Department of 
Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology, Center for the Study of Itch and Sensory 
Disorders, and Washington University Pain Center, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Division of Dermatology, Department of 
Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; 
Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO 63110, USA; Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology & Visual Sciences, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(6)Department of Anesthesiology, Center for the Study of Itch and Sensory 
Disorders, and Washington University Pain Center, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Division of Dermatology, Department of 
Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; 
Department of Ophthalmology & Visual Sciences, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Department of Neuroscience, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. Electronic address: 
qinliu@wustl.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2021 Aug;22(8):455. doi: 10.1038/s41583-021-00491-3.

Sneezing is a vital respiratory reflex frequently associated with allergic 
rhinitis and viral respiratory infections. However, its neural circuit remains 
largely unknown. A sneeze-evoking region was discovered in both cat and human 
brainstems, corresponding anatomically to the central recipient zone of nasal 
sensory neurons. Therefore, we hypothesized that a neuronal population 
postsynaptic to nasal sensory neurons mediates sneezing in this region. By 
screening major presynaptic neurotransmitters/neuropeptides released by nasal 
sensory neurons, we found that neuromedin B (NMB) peptide is essential for 
signaling sneezing. Ablation of NMB-sensitive postsynaptic neurons in the 
sneeze-evoking region or deficiency in NMB receptor abolished the sneezing 
reflex. Remarkably, NMB-sensitive neurons further project to the caudal ventral 
respiratory group (cVRG). Chemical activation of NMB-sensitive neurons elicits 
action potentials in cVRG neurons and leads to sneezing behavior. Our study 
delineates a peptidergic pathway mediating sneezing, providing molecular 
insights into the sneezing reflex arc.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2021.05.017
PMCID: PMC8396370
PMID: 34133943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests. B.S.K. has noncompeting financial interests unrelated to 
this work and has served as a consultant for AbbVie, ABRAX Japan, Almirall, Cara 
Therapeutics, Maruho, Menlo Therapeutics, Pfizer, and Third Rock Ventures. He 
has participated on the advisory board for Almirall, Boehringer Ingelheim, Cara 
Therapeutics, Kiniksa Pharmaceuticals, Menlo Therapeutics, Regeneron 
Pharmaceuticals, Sanofi Genzyme, and Trevi Therapeutics. He is also founder, 
chief scientific officer, and stockholder of Nuogen Pharma and stockholder of 
Locus Biosciences.