---
reference_id: "PMID:23551494"
title: Brain malformation with loss of normal FGFR3 expression in thanatophoric dysplasia type I.
authors:
- Itoh K
- Pooh R
- Kanemura Y
- Yamasaki M
- Fushiki S
journal: Neuropathology
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1111/neup.12036
keywords:
- Brain/abnormalities
- Female
- Fetus
- Humans
- Pregnancy
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3/deficiency, genetics"
- Stillbirth
- "Thanatophoric Dysplasia/genetics, pathology"
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brain malformation with loss of normal FGFR3 expression in thanatophoric dysplasia type I.
**Authors:** Itoh K, Pooh R, Kanemura Y, Yamasaki M, Fushiki S
**Journal:** Neuropathology (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/neup.12036](https://doi.org/10.1111/neup.12036)

## Content

1. Neuropathology. 2013 Dec;33(6):663-6. doi: 10.1111/neup.12036. Epub 2013 Apr
1.

Brain malformation with loss of normal FGFR3 expression in thanatophoric 
dysplasia type I.

Itoh K(1), Pooh R, Kanemura Y, Yamasaki M, Fushiki S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology & Applied Neurobiology, Kyoto Prefectural University 
of Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyoto, Japan.

Thanatophoric dysplasia is a lethal form of chondrodysplastic dwarfism in which 
the cerebral cortex displays a unique and complex malformation. We report a 
female case of thanatophoric dysplasia type I (TD1) with FGFR3 mutation. In this 
case, fetal ultrasonography at the 18th week of gestation led to a prenatal 
diagnosis of TD1 with characteristic bone features. The subject was stillborn at 
the 21st week of gestation, showing marked shortening of the long bones, small 
thorax and curved short femurs, but without a cloverleaf skull. The temporal 
lobe was enlarged and hyperconvoluted, appearing as broad gyri and deep sulci, 
which were composed of focal polymicrogyria-like shallow sulci and heterotopic 
neuroblastic nests in the intermediate zone and marginal zone. Abundant 
precursor cells, immunoreactive for nestin and Ki-67 were observed with 
scattered mitoses in the thickened inner intermediate and subventricular zones 
of the temporal and occipital lobes. The cytoarchitecture from the entorhinal 
cortex to Ammon's horn was disorganized with leptomeningeal glioneuronal 
heterotopia, immunoreactive for doublecortin and nestin. The expression of FGFR3 
was virtually not discernible in the temporal and occipital lobes or in the 
hippocampus. Genetic analysis revealed a point mutation at C8526T (R248C) in the 
exon 7 of FGFR3. This is the first report that demonstrates that overproduction 
of intermediate progenitor cells might be induced by FGFR3 mutation in a human 
TD1 case.

© 2013 Japanese Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/neup.12036
PMID: 23551494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]