---
reference_id: "PMID:37516008"
title: Pan-tumor survey of RET fusions as detected by next-generation RNA sequencing identified RET fusion positive colorectal carcinoma as a unique molecular subset.
authors:
- Nagasaka M
- Brazel D
- Baca Y
- Xiu J
- Al-Hallak MN
- Kim C
- Nieva J
- Swensen JJ
- Spetzler D
- Korn WM
- Socinski MA
- Raez LE
- Halmos B
- Ou SI
journal: Transl Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.tranon.2023.101744
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pan-tumor survey of RET fusions as detected by next-generation RNA sequencing identified RET fusion positive colorectal carcinoma as a unique molecular subset.
**Authors:** Nagasaka M, Brazel D, Baca Y, Xiu J, Al-Hallak MN, Kim C, Nieva J, Swensen JJ, Spetzler D, Korn WM, Socinski MA, Raez LE, Halmos B, Ou SI
**Journal:** Transl Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tranon.2023.101744](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tranon.2023.101744)

## Content

1. Transl Oncol. 2023 Oct;36:101744. doi: 10.1016/j.tranon.2023.101744. Epub 2023
 Jul 27.

Pan-tumor survey of RET fusions as detected by next-generation RNA sequencing
identified RET fusion positive colorectal carcinoma as a unique molecular
subset.

Nagasaka M(1), Brazel D(2), Baca Y(3), Xiu J(3), Al-Hallak MN(4), Kim C(5),
Nieva J(6), Swensen JJ(3), Spetzler D(3), Korn WM(7), Socinski MA(8), Raez
LE(9), Halmos B(10), Ou SI(11).

Author information:
(1)University of California Irvine School of Medicine, Orange, CA, USA; Chao
Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, Orange, CA, USA; Division of Neurology,
Department of Internal Medicine, St. Marianna University School of Medicine,
Kawasaki, Kanagawa, Japan. Electronic address: nagasakm@hs.uci.edu.
(2)University of California Irvine School of Medicine, Orange, CA, USA.
(3)Caris Life Sciences, Phoenix, AZ, USA.
(4)Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, MI, USA.
(5)Georgetown Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University School
of Medicine, Washington, DC, USA.
(6)USC Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Southern California
Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(7)University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(8)Advent Health Cancer Institute, Orlando, FL, USA.
(9)Memorial Healthcare System, Pembroke Pines, FL, USA.
(10)Montefiore Health System, New York, NY, USA.
(11)University of California Irvine School of Medicine, Orange, CA, USA; Chao
Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, Orange, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: RET fusions are driver alterations in cancer and are most commonly
found in non-small cell lung cancer and well-differentiated thyroid cancer.
However, RET fusion have been reported in other solid tumors.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A retrospective analysis of RET+ solid malignancies
identified by targeted RNA sequencing and whole transcriptome sequencing of
clinical tumor samples performed at Caris Life Science (Phoenix, AZ).
RESULTS: As of March 22, 2022, a total of 378 RET+ solid malignancies were
identified in 15 different tumor types and carcinoma of unknown primary (CUP)
that underwent next-generation RNA sequencing. RET+ NSCLC and RET+ thyroid
cancer constituted 66.9% and 11.1% of the RET+ solid malignancies, respectively.
RET+ colorectal adenocarcinoma and RET+ breast adenocarcinoma constituted 10.1%
and 2.6%, respectively. The estimated frequency of RET fusions within specific
tumor types were NSCLC 0.7%, thyroid cancer 3.1%, colorectal cancer 0.2% and
breast cancer 0.1%. KIF5B (46.8%) was the most common fusion partner followed by
CCDC6 (28.3%) and NCOA4 (13.8%) in RET+ solid tumors. KIF5B-RET was the dominant
fusion variant in RET+ NSCLC, NCOA4-RET was the dominant variant in RET+
colorectal carcinoma, and CCDC6-RET was the dominant variant in thyroid cancer.
The most common single gene alterations in RET+ tumors were TP53 (34.8%), RASA1
(14.3%) and ARIAD1A (11.6%). RET+ CRC had a high median TMB of 20.0 and were
commonly MSI-H.
CONCLUSIONS: RET fusions were identified in multiple tumor types. With a higher
median TMB and commonly MSI-H, RET fusion positive CRC may be a unique molecular
subset of CRC.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tranon.2023.101744
PMCID: PMC10410168
PMID: 37516008

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest There was no
funding allocated for this research and there are no direct conflicts of
interest. Potential COI from all authors are listed below. MN is on the advisory
board for AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, Takeda, Novartis, EMD Serono, Janssen,
Pfizer, Eli Lilly and Company, Bayer and Genentech; consultant for Caris Life
Sciences (virtual tumor board); speaker for Blueprint Medicines, Janssen, Mirati
and Takeda; and reports travel support from AnHeart Therapeutics.  DB has no
disclosures. YB, JX, JJS and DS are employees and shareholders of Caris Life
Sciences. MNA discloses the following: Speaker Bureau: IPSEN, AstraZeneca,
Guardant Health. External advisory board: CTI-Facts (CRO company). CK served as
a consultant for Novartis, Janssen, Astrazeneca, Sanofi, PierianDx, Diffuse
pharmaceuticals, Mirati, Jazz Pharmaceuticals, and Arcus Biosciences, and
received research funding (to institution) from AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers
Squibb, Novartis, Genentech, Janssen, Regeneron, Debiopharm, Karyopharm, and
Blueprint Medicines. JN discloses the following: Consulting: Aadi Biosciences,
Astra Zeneca, Bristol Myers Squibb, Fujirebio, G1 Therapeutics, Genentech,
Mindmed, Naveris, Takeda, Western Oncolytics., Research Support: Genentech,
Merck, Intellectual Property: Cansera and Ownership Interests: Cansera, Epic
Sciences, Indee Bio, Quantgene. WMK has stock ownership of Caris Life Sciences.
MS has received honoraria from AstraZeneca, Bayer, Roche, Celgene, BMS,
Genentech, Novartis and Lilly. MS is a consultant for Genentech and Novartis and
has received research support from AstraZeneca, Roche and Takeda. LER has
received research support from BMS, Astra-Zeneca, Roche, Pfizer, Merck, Velos,
Guardant Health, Natera, Genentech, Bio Alta. BH has grants or contracts from
Boehringer Ingelheim, Astra Zeneca, Merck, BMS, Advaxis, Amgen, AbbVie, Daiichi,
Pfizer, GSK, Beigene, Janssen, has received consulting fees from Veracyte and
has been on monitoring or advisory boards for Astra Zeneca, Boehringer
Ingelheim, Apollomics, Janssen, Takeda, Merck, BMS, Genentech, Pfizer,
Eli-Lilly, TPT, Arcus and Merus. SHIO has stock ownership and was on the
scientific advisory board of Turning Point Therapeutics Inc (until Feb 28,
2019), is a member of the SAB of Elevation Oncology, and has received speaker
honorarium from Merck, Roche/Genentech, Astra Zeneca, Takeda/ARIAD and Pfizer;
has received advisory fees from Roche/Genentech, Astra Zeneca, Takeda/ARIAD,
Pfizer, Foundation Medicine Inc, Spectrum, Daiichi Sankyo, Jassen/JNJ, and
X-Covery.
