---
reference_id: "PMID:38299175"
title: A novel variant of IGSF1 in siblings with congenital central hypothyroidism whose diagnosis was prompted by school health checkups.
authors:
- Yamamura Y
- Fukami M
- Matsuyama M
- Sawada H
journal: Clin Pediatr Endocrinol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1297/cpe.2023-0046
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel variant of IGSF1 in siblings with congenital central hypothyroidism whose diagnosis was prompted by school health checkups.
**Authors:** Yamamura Y, Fukami M, Matsuyama M, Sawada H
**Journal:** Clin Pediatr Endocrinol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1297/cpe.2023-0046](https://doi.org/10.1297/cpe.2023-0046)

## Content

1. Clin Pediatr Endocrinol. 2024;33(1):17-22. doi: 10.1297/cpe.2023-0046. Epub
2023  Nov 3.

A novel variant of IGSF1 in siblings with congenital central hypothyroidism 
whose diagnosis was prompted by school health checkups.

Yamamura Y(1), Fukami M(2), Matsuyama M(3), Sawada H(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Miyazaki Prefectural Miyazaki Hospital, Miyazaki, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, National Research Institute for Child 
Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Division of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Miyazaki, 
Miyazaki, Japan.
(4)Department of Fundamental Nursing, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Miyazaki, Miyazaki, Japan.

Following the partial revision of the enforcement regulations of the School 
Health and Safety Act, school health checkups incorporated growth evaluation of 
schoolchildren in April 2016 using growth charts. We report cases of congenital 
central hypothyroidism (C-CH) in siblings with a novel nonsense variant in the 
immunoglobulin superfamily member 1 gene (IGSF1); their diagnoses were prompted 
by school health checkups. School checkups revealed that the older brother was 
overweight and had a reduced growth rate at the age of 11 yr, whereas the 
younger brother was overweight and had short stature at the age of 8 yr. They 
were diagnosed with C-CH because of normal thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) 
levels despite a low free thyroxine level and low TSH response in the 
thyrotropin-releasing hormone stress test. Only the older brother had prolactin 
deficiency and testicular growth without elevated testosterone levels. The 
siblings harbored a novel nonsense variant in exon 16 of IGSF1 (NM_001555.5: 
c.3056G>A: p.Trp1019Ter) and were diagnosed with IGSF1 deficiency. In Japan, 
C-CH may be overlooked because TSH-based newborn screening alone is usually 
performed for patients with congenital hypothyroidism. The implementation of 
growth monitoring using growth charts in school health checkups may prompt new 
C-CH diagnoses.

2024©The Japanese Society for Pediatric Endocrinology.

DOI: 10.1297/cpe.2023-0046
PMCID: PMC10825655
PMID: 38299175

Conflict of interest statement: This study was supported by grants from the 
National Center for Child Health and Development (2022-A1) and the Takeda 
Foundation.