---
reference_id: "PMID:33485408"
title: "Delusions beyond beliefs: a critical overview of diagnostic, aetiological, and therapeutic schizophrenia research from a clinical-phenomenological perspective."
authors:
- Feyaerts J
- Henriksen MG
- Vanheule S
- Myin-Germeys I
- Sass LA
journal: Lancet Psychiatry
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/S2215-0366(20)30460-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Delusions beyond beliefs: a critical overview of diagnostic, aetiological, and therapeutic schizophrenia research from a clinical-phenomenological perspective.
**Authors:** Feyaerts J, Henriksen MG, Vanheule S, Myin-Germeys I, Sass LA
**Journal:** Lancet Psychiatry (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2215-0366(20)30460-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(20)30460-0)

## Content

1. Lancet Psychiatry. 2021 Mar;8(3):237-249. doi: 10.1016/S2215-0366(20)30460-0. 
Epub 2021 Jan 21.

Delusions beyond beliefs: a critical overview of diagnostic, aetiological, and 
therapeutic schizophrenia research from a clinical-phenomenological perspective.

Feyaerts J(1), Henriksen MG(2), Vanheule S(3), Myin-Germeys I(4), Sass LA(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychoanalysis and Clinical Consulting, Ghent University, 
Ghent, Belgium; Center for Contextual Psychiatry, Department of Neuroscience, KU 
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Electronic address: jasper.feyaerts@ugent.be.
(2)Center for Subjectivity Research, Faculty of Humanities, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; Mental Health Center Amager, Copenhagen, 
Denmark; Mental Health Center Glostrup, Brøndbyvester, Denmark.
(3)Department of Psychoanalysis and Clinical Consulting, Ghent University, 
Ghent, Belgium.
(4)Center for Contextual Psychiatry, Department of Neuroscience, KU Leuven, 
Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Department of Clinical Psychology, Graduate School of Applied and 
Professional Psychology, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, USA.

Comment in
    Lancet Psychiatry. 2021 Mar;8(3):169. doi: 10.1016/S2215-0366(21)00033-X.
    Lancet Psychiatry. 2021 Apr;8(4):272-273. doi: 
10.1016/S2215-0366(21)00027-4.
    Lancet Psychiatry. 2021 Apr;8(4):273-274. doi: 
10.1016/S2215-0366(21)00044-4.

Delusions are commonly conceived as false beliefs that are held with certainty 
and which cannot be corrected. This conception of delusion has been influential 
throughout the history of psychiatry and continues to inform how delusions are 
approached in clinical practice and in contemporary schizophrenia research. It 
is reflected in the full psychosis continuum model, guides psychological and 
neurocognitive accounts of the formation and maintenance of delusions, and it 
substantially determines how delusions are approached in cognitive-behavioural 
treatment. In this Review, we draw on a clinical-phenomenological framework to 
offer an alternative account of delusion that incorporates the experiential 
dimension of delusion, emphasising how specific alterations to 
self-consciousness and reality experience underlie delusions that are considered 
characteristic of schizophrenia. Against that backdrop, we critically reconsider 
the current research areas, highlighting empirical and conceptual issues in 
contemporary delusion research, which appear to largely derive from an 
insufficient consideration of the experiential dimension of delusions. Finally, 
we suggest how the alternative phenomenological approach towards delusion could 
offer new ways to advance current research and clinical practice.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2215-0366(20)30460-0
PMID: 33485408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]