---
reference_id: "PMID:12215968"
title: "GRACILE syndrome, a lethal metabolic disorder with iron overload, is caused by a point mutation in BCS1L."
authors:
- Visapää I
- Fellman V
- Vesa J
- Dasvarma A
- Hutton JL
- Kumar V
- Payne GS
- Makarow M
- Van Coster R
- Taylor RW
- Turnbull DM
- Suomalainen A
- Peltonen L
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1086/342773
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GRACILE syndrome, a lethal metabolic disorder with iron overload, is caused by a point mutation in BCS1L.
**Authors:** Visapää I, Fellman V, Vesa J, Dasvarma A, Hutton JL, Kumar V, Payne GS, Makarow M, Van Coster R, Taylor RW, Turnbull DM, Suomalainen A, Peltonen L
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1086/342773](https://doi.org/10.1086/342773)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2002 Oct;71(4):863-76. doi: 10.1086/342773. Epub 2002 Sep 5.

GRACILE syndrome, a lethal metabolic disorder with iron overload, is caused by a 
point mutation in BCS1L.

Visapää I(1), Fellman V, Vesa J, Dasvarma A, Hutton JL, Kumar V, Payne GS, 
Makarow M, Van Coster R, Taylor RW, Turnbull DM, Suomalainen A, Peltonen L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of California Los Angeles School of 
Medicine, USA.

GRACILE (growth retardation, aminoaciduria, cholestasis, iron overload, 
lactacidosis, and early death) syndrome is a recessively inherited lethal 
disease characterized by fetal growth retardation, lactic acidosis, 
aminoaciduria, cholestasis, and abnormalities in iron metabolism. We previously 
localized the causative gene to a 1.5-cM region on chromosome 2q33-37. In the 
present study, we report the molecular defect causing this metabolic disorder, 
by identifying a homozygous missense mutation that results in an S78G amino acid 
change in the BCS1L gene in Finnish patients with GRACILE syndrome, as well as 
five different mutations in three British infants. BCS1L, a mitochondrial 
inner-membrane protein, is a chaperone necessary for the assembly of 
mitochondrial respiratory chain complex III. Pulse-chase experiments performed 
in COS-1 cells indicated that the S78G amino acid change results in instability 
of the polypeptide, and yeast complementation studies revealed a functional 
defect in the mutated BCS1L protein. Four different mutations in the BCS1L gene 
have been reported elsewhere, in Turkish patients with a distinctly different 
phenotype. Interestingly, the British and Turkish patients had complex III 
deficiency, whereas in the Finnish patients with GRACILE syndrome complex III 
activity was within the normal range, implying that BCS1L has another cellular 
function that is uncharacterized but essential and is putatively involved in 
iron metabolism.

DOI: 10.1086/342773
PMCID: PMC378542
PMID: 12215968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]