---
reference_id: "PMID:9735376"
title: "ATM: from gene to function."
authors:
- Rotman G
- Shiloh Y
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/7.10.1555
keywords:
- Animals
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/genetics, physiopathology"
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins
- Catalytic Domain/genetics
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- DNA-Binding Proteins
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- "Genes, Tumor Suppressor"
- Genotype
- Growth Disorders/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Meiosis/genetics
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation
- "Neoplasms, Experimental/etiology"
- Nerve Degeneration/genetics
- Phenotype
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases
- "Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- Radiation Tolerance/genetics
- Tumor Suppressor Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ATM: from gene to function.
**Authors:** Rotman G, Shiloh Y
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/7.10.1555](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/7.10.1555)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 1998;7(10):1555-63. doi: 10.1093/hmg/7.10.1555.

ATM: from gene to function.

Rotman G(1), Shiloh Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Sackler School of
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv 69978, Israel. grotman@ccsg.tau.ac.il

The identification of ATM , the gene responsible for the pleiotropic recessive
disease ataxia telangiectasia, has initiated extensive research to determine the
functions of its multifaceted protein product. The ATM protein belongs to a
family of protein kinases that share similarities at their C-terminal region
with the catalytic domain of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases. Studies with ataxia
telangiectasia (A-T) cells and Atm-deficient mice have shown that ATM is a key
regulator of multiple signaling cascades which respond to DNA strand breaks
induced by damaging agents or by normal processes, such as meiotic or V(D)J
recombination. These responses involve the activation of cell cycle checkpoints,
DNA repair and apoptosis. Other roles outside the cell nucleus might be carried
out by the cytoplasmic fraction of ATM. In addition, ATM appears to function as
a 'caretaker', suppressing tumorigenesis in specific T cell lineages.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/7.10.1555
PMID: 9735376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
