---
reference_id: "PMID:23643538"
title: "SNARE proteins synaptobrevin, SNAP-25, and syntaxin are involved in rapid and slow endocytosis at synapses."
authors:
- Xu J
- Luo F
- Zhang Z
- Xue L
- Wu XS
- Chiang HC
- Shin W
- Wu LG
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.03.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SNARE proteins synaptobrevin, SNAP-25, and syntaxin are involved in rapid and slow endocytosis at synapses.
**Authors:** Xu J, Luo F, Zhang Z, Xue L, Wu XS, Chiang HC, Shin W, Wu LG
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2013.03.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2013.03.010)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2013 May 30;3(5):1414-21. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.03.010. Epub
2013  May 2.

SNARE proteins synaptobrevin, SNAP-25, and syntaxin are involved in rapid and 
slow endocytosis at synapses.

Xu J(1), Luo F, Zhang Z, Xue L, Wu XS, Chiang HC, Shin W, Wu LG.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, 35 Convent Drive, 
Building 35, Room 2B-1012, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Rapid endocytosis, which takes only a few seconds, is widely observed in 
secretory cells. Although it is more efficient in recycling vesicles than in 
slow clathrin-mediated endocytosis, its underlying mechanism, thought to be 
clathrin independent, is largely unclear. Here, we report that cleavage of three 
SNARE proteins essential for exocytosis, including synaptobrevin, SNAP-25, and 
syntaxin, inhibited rapid endocytosis at the calyx of Held nerve terminal, 
suggesting the involvement of the three SNARE proteins in rapid endocytosis. 
These SNARE proteins were also involved in slow endocytosis. In addition, 
SNAP-25 and syntaxin facilitated vesicle mobilization to the readily releasable 
pool, most likely via their roles in endocytosis and/or exocytosis. We conclude 
that both rapid and slow endocytosis share the involvement of SNARE proteins. 
The dual role of three SNARE proteins in exo- and endocytosis suggests that 
SNARE proteins may be molecular substrates contributing to the 
exocytosis-endocytosis coupling, which maintains exocytosis in secretory cells.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.03.010
PMCID: PMC3672373
PMID: 23643538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]