---
reference_id: "PMID:38253683"
title: Dysregulated immune and metabolic pathways are associated with poor survival in adult acute myeloid leukemia with CEBPA bZIP in-frame mutations.
authors:
- Tien FM
- Yao CY
- Tsai XC
- Lo MY
- Chen CY
- Lee WH
- Lin CC
- Kuo YY
- Peng YL
- Tseng MH
- Wu YS
- Liu MC
- Lin LI
- Chuang MK
- Ko BS
- Yao M
- Tang JL
- Chou WC
- Hou HA
- Tien HF
journal: Blood Cancer J
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41408-023-00975-8
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute/genetics, therapy"
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Mutation
- Progression-Free Survival
- Metabolic Networks and Pathways
- CCAAT-Enhancer-Binding Proteins/genetics
- NADPH Dehydrogenase
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dysregulated immune and metabolic pathways are associated with poor survival in adult acute myeloid leukemia with CEBPA bZIP in-frame mutations.
**Authors:** Tien FM, Yao CY, Tsai XC, Lo MY, Chen CY, Lee WH, Lin CC, Kuo YY, Peng YL, Tseng MH, Wu YS, Liu MC, Lin LI, Chuang MK, Ko BS, Yao M, Tang JL, Chou WC, Hou HA, Tien HF
**Journal:** Blood Cancer J (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41408-023-00975-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41408-023-00975-8)

## Content

1. Blood Cancer J. 2024 Jan 23;14(1):15. doi: 10.1038/s41408-023-00975-8.

Dysregulated immune and metabolic pathways are associated with poor survival in 
adult acute myeloid leukemia with CEBPA bZIP in-frame mutations.

Tien FM(1)(2), Yao CY(1)(2)(3), Tsai XC(1), Lo MY(2)(4), Chen CY(1), Lee 
WH(2)(5), Lin CC(1)(3), Kuo YY(6), Peng YL(1), Tseng MH(6), Wu YS(7), Liu MC(8), 
Lin LI(9), Chuang MK(1)(3), Ko BS(1)(10), Yao M(1), Tang JL(1)(6)(10), Chou 
WC(1)(3), Hou HA(11), Tien HF(1)(12).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan 
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan 
University Hospital Yunlin Branch, Yunlin, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, 
Hsin-Chu Branch, Hsin-Chu, Taiwan.
(6)Tai-Chen Cell Therapy Center, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Nursing, National Taiwan University Cancer Center, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(8)Department of Pathology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences and Medical Biotechnology, College 
of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(10)Department of Hematological Oncology, National Taiwan University Cancer 
Center, Taipei, Taiwan.
(11)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan 
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. hsinanhou@ntu.edu.tw.
(12)Department of Internal Medicine, Far-Eastern Memorial Hospital, New Taipei 
City, Taiwan.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with CEBPA bZIP in-frame mutations (CEBPAbZIP-inf) 
is classified within the favorable-risk group by the 2022 European LeukemiaNet 
(ELN-2022). However, heterogeneous clinical outcomes are still observed in these 
patients. In this study, we aimed to investigate the mutation profiles and 
transcriptomic patterns associated with poor outcomes in patients with 
CEBPAbZIP-inf. One hundred and thirteen CEBPAbZIP-inf patients were identified 
in a cohort of 887 AML patients homogeneously treated with intensive 
chemotherapy. Concurrent WT1 or DNMT3A mutations significantly predicted worse 
survival in AML patients with CEBPAbZIP-inf. RNA-sequencing analysis revealed an 
enrichment of interferon (IFN) signaling and metabolic pathways in those with a 
shorter event-free survival (EFS). CEBPAbZIP-inf patients with a shorter EFS had 
higher expression of IFN-stimulated genes (IRF2, IRF5, OAS2, and IFI35). Genes 
in mitochondrial complexes I (NDUFA12 and NDUFB6) and V (ATP5PB and ATP5IF1) 
were overexpressed and were associated with poorer survival, and the results 
were independently validated in the TARGET AML cohort. In conclusion, concurrent 
WT1 or DNMT3A mutations and a dysregulated immune and metabolic state were 
correlated with poor survival in patients with CEBPAbZIP-inf, and upfront 
allogeneic transplantation may be indicated for better long-term disease 
control.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41408-023-00975-8
PMCID: PMC10803338
PMID: 38253683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.