---
reference_id: "PMID:16252232"
title: Mutations in TCF8 cause posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy and ectopic expression of COL4A3 by corneal endothelial cells.
authors:
- Krafchak CM
- Pawar H
- Moroi SE
- Sugar A
- Lichter PR
- Mackey DA
- Mian S
- Nairus T
- Elner V
- Schteingart MT
- Downs CA
- Kijek TG
- Johnson JM
- Trager EH
- Rozsa FW
- Mandal MN
- Epstein MP
- Vollrath D
- Ayyagari R
- Boehnke M
- Richards JE
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1086/497348
keywords:
- Autoantigens/metabolism
- "Collagen Type IV/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Corneal Dystrophies, Hereditary/genetics"
- "DNA/chemistry, genetics"
- "Endothelium, Corneal/metabolism, pathology"
- Haplotypes
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Zinc Finger E-box-Binding Homeobox 1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in TCF8 cause posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy and ectopic expression of COL4A3 by corneal endothelial cells.
**Authors:** Krafchak CM, Pawar H, Moroi SE, Sugar A, Lichter PR, Mackey DA, Mian S, Nairus T, Elner V, Schteingart MT, Downs CA, Kijek TG, Johnson JM, Trager EH, Rozsa FW, Mandal MN, Epstein MP, Vollrath D, Ayyagari R, Boehnke M, Richards JE
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1086/497348](https://doi.org/10.1086/497348)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Nov;77(5):694-708. doi: 10.1086/497348. Epub 2005 Sep 14.

Mutations in TCF8 cause posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy and ectopic 
expression of COL4A3 by corneal endothelial cells.

Krafchak CM(1), Pawar H, Moroi SE, Sugar A, Lichter PR, Mackey DA, Mian S, 
Nairus T, Elner V, Schteingart MT, Downs CA, Kijek TG, Johnson JM, Trager EH, 
Rozsa FW, Mandal MN, Epstein MP, Vollrath D, Ayyagari R, Boehnke M, Richards JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, W. K. Kellogg Eye Center, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48105, USA.

Posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy (PPCD, also known as PPMD) is a rare 
disease involving metaplasia and overgrowth of corneal endothelial cells. In 
patients with PPCD, these cells manifest in an epithelial morphology and gene 
expression pattern, produce an aberrant basement membrane, and, sometimes, 
spread over the iris and nearby structures in a way that increases the risk for 
glaucoma. We previously mapped PPCD to a region (PPCD3) on chromosome 10 
containing the gene that encodes the two-handed zinc-finger homeodomain 
transcription factor TCF8. Here, we report a heterozygous frameshift mutation in 
TCF8 that segregates with PPCD in the family used to map PPCD3 and four 
different heterozygous nonsense and frameshift mutations in TCF8 in four other 
PPCD probands. Family reports of inguinal hernia, hydrocele, and possible bone 
anomalies in affected individuals suggest that individuals with TCF8 mutations 
should be examined for nonocular anomalies. We detect transcripts of all three 
identified PPCD genes (VSX1, COL8A2, and TCF8) in the cornea. We show presence 
of a complex (core plus secondary) binding site for TCF8 in the promoter of 
Alport syndrome gene COL4A3, which encodes collagen type IV alpha 3, and we 
present immunohistochemical evidence of ectopic expression of COL4A3 in corneal 
endothelium of the proband of the original PPCD3 family. Identification of TCF8 
as the PPCD3 gene provides a valuable tool for the study of critical gene 
regulation events in PPCD pathology and suggests a possible role for TCF8 
mutations in altered structure and function of cells lining body cavities other 
than the anterior chamber of the eye. Thus, this study has identified TCF8 as 
the gene responsible for approximately half of the cases of PPCD, has implicated 
TCF8 mutations in developmental abnormalities outside the eye, and has presented 
the TCF8 regulatory target, COL4A3, as a key, shared molecular component of two 
different diseases, PPCD and Alport syndrome.

DOI: 10.1086/497348
PMCID: PMC1271382
PMID: 16252232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]