---
reference_id: "PMID:39343470"
title: Autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic rickets type 2 due to ENPP1 deficiency (ARHR2).
authors:
- Edouard T
- Linglart A
journal: Arch Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/S0929-693X(24)00154-4
keywords:
- Humans
- "Familial Hypophosphatemic Rickets/blood, diagnosis, genetics"
- Fibroblast Growth Factor-23/blood
- Phenotype
- Phosphoric Diester Hydrolases/genetics
- Pyrophosphatases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic rickets type 2 due to ENPP1 deficiency (ARHR2).
**Authors:** Edouard T, Linglart A
**Journal:** Arch Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0929-693X(24)00154-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0929-693X(24)00154-4)

## Content

1. Arch Pediatr. 2024 Sep;31(4S1):4S27-4S32. doi: 10.1016/S0929-693X(24)00154-4.

Autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic rickets type 2 due to ENPP1 deficiency
(ARHR2).

Edouard T(1), Linglart A(2).

Author information:
(1)Endocrine, Bone Diseases and Genetics Unit, Reference Centre for Rare
Diseases of Calcium and Phosphate Metabolism, OSCAR Network, ERN BOND,
Children's Hospital, Toulouse University Hospital; RESTORE, INSERM U1301, Paul
Sabatier University; Toulouse, France. Electronic address:
edouard.t@chu-toulouse.fr.
(2)AP-HP, Paris Saclay University, INSERM; Centre de Référence des Maladies
Rares du Calcium et du Phosphore, Service d'Endocrinologie et diabète de
l'enfant, Filières Santé Maladies Rares OSCAR, ERN endoRARE et BOND, Hôpital
Bicêtre Paris-Saclay; U1185 physiologie et physiopathologie endocrinienne; Le
Kremlin Bicêtre, France.

Autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic rickets type 2 (ARHR2; MIM #613312) is a
very rare disorder caused by biallelic loss-of-function mutations in the ENPP1
(ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase 1) gene. ENPP1 deficiency
encompasses a spectrum of phenotypes that includes, in addition to ARHR2,
generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI), ossification of the
posterior longitudinal ligament (OPLL), and pseudoxanthoma elasticum. ARHR2 can
be found in GACI survivors, but it may also be the first manifestation of ENPP1
deficiency. Although the precise mechanisms are not fully elucidated, patients
with GACI and ARHR2 have elevated serum FGF23 levels, leading to renal phosphate
wasting and hypophosphatemia. As a result, the clinical and radiological
phenotype of ARHR2 patients is very similar to that of patients affected with
other forms of hypophosphatemic rickets, such as X-linked hypophosphatemia.
Patients show signs of rickets (abnormal mineralization of growth plates in
children) and osteomalacia (abnormal bone mineralization in children and adults)
of varying severity. Clinical manifestations specific to ENPP1 loss-of-function
mutations and common to GACI, such as ectopic calcifications (valvular,
arterial, or periarticular), deafness, OPLL, and PXE, may also be found. Genetic
confirmation of the disease is important so as to ensure that patients receive
the appropriate treatment or have the opportunity to participate in clinical
trials to evaluate the safety and efficacy of novel and promising recombinant
enzyme therapies.

Copyright © 2024 French Society of Pediatrics. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.
All rights reserved. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0929-693X(24)00154-4
PMID: 39343470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest T. Edouard
declares competing interest for invitations to congresses as a speaker by
Novonordisk, Biomarinand KyowaKirin; for invitations to congresses as a
participant (expenses paid) by Merck-Serono; for his involvement in clinical
trials (as principal investigator, coordinator, or principal experimenter) for
Novonordisk and Biomarin; in clinical trials (as co-investigator, non-principal
experimenter, or collaborator) for QED therapeutics; for receiving compensation
for advisory consultancies from Novonordisk and Biomarin. A. Linglart declares
competing interest for occasional advisory consultancy by Novonordisk, Merck,
bridgebio and Alexion; invitations to congresses as a speaker by Novonordisk,
Alexion and Kyowa Kirin; for her involvement in clinical trials (as principal
investigator, coordinator, or principal experimenter) for Novonordisk,
Recordati, Inozyme and Kyowa Kirin. This article is part of a supplement
entitled Mineral metabolism disorders: what if it was ENPP1 deficiency?
published with institutional support from Inozyme.
