---
reference_id: "PMID:38728359"
title: "Epidemiological observations and management challenges in extrapedal mycetoma: A three-decade review of 420 cases."
authors:
- Alhaj AAM
- Ahmed ES
- Hassan A
- Fahal AH
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0011841
keywords:
- Humans
- "Mycetoma/drug therapy, microbiology, epidemiology"
- Male
- Female
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Adolescent
- Child
- Young Adult
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- "Child, Preschool"
- Aged
- Infant
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Antifungal Agents/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiological observations and management challenges in extrapedal mycetoma: A three-decade review of 420 cases.
**Authors:** Alhaj AAM, Ahmed ES, Hassan A, Fahal AH
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0011841](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0011841)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2024 May 10;18(5):e0011841. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0011841. eCollection 2024 May.

Epidemiological observations and management challenges in extrapedal mycetoma: A
three-decade review of 420 cases.

Alhaj AAM(1), Ahmed ES(1), Hassan A(1), Fahal AH(1).

Author information:
(1)The Mycetoma Research Center, University of Khartoum, Khartoum, Sudan.

Mycetoma is a serious, destructive, disfiguring chronic granulomatous
inflammatory disease affecting the subcutaneous tissues that spread to involve
the skin, deep tissues and bone. The disease predominately affects the limbs,
and extrapedal mycetoma is rarely reported. The reported extrapedal ones are
characterised by high morbidity and mortality. This communication reports on 420
patients with extrapedal mycetoma seen and managed at the Mycetoma Research
Centre (MRC), University of Khartoum, between January 1991 and December 2021. In
this descriptive, cross-sectional, hospital-based study, the electronic records
of all mycetoma-confirmed patients seen during the study period were carefully
and meticulously reviewed. The confirmed patients with extrapedal mycetoma were
included in this study. The study included 420 patients with extrapedal
mycetoma, 298 (70.7%) had eumycetoma, and 122 (29.3%) had actinomycetoma. There
were 343 male patients (81.7%) and 77 (18.3%) females, with a male-to-female
ratio of 4:1. Their ages ranged between 1.5 and 95 years, with a median of 28
years. Most of the patients were students and farmers. The majority of patients
were from El Gezira, North Kordofan, and the White Nile States. Mycetoma was
painful in 21%, and a family history of mycetoma was recorded in 11.5% of
patients. The buttocks (37.9%) and head and neck (16.9%) were affected most.
Less frequently affected sites were the trunk and back (12%) each, abdominal and
chest walls (4.5%) each and loin (1%). The prominent clinical presentation
findings were multiple sinuses discharging grains (55%), massive swellings
(46%), and lymphadenopathy (11.5%). Less commonly observed clinical findings
were local hyperhidrosis (5.3%) and dilated tortuous veins close to mycetoma
lesions (0.5%). The study showed that 204 patients (48.6%) had clinical
improvement in terms of decreased lesion size and healing of sinuses following
medical therapy. Sixty-six patients (15.7%) had no noticeable improvement. The
lesion continued progressing despite treatment in 44 patients (10.5%). In the
study, 118 patients were on regular follow-up, and in this group, a cure was
documented in 25 patients (21.1%) with eumycetoma and 23 (19.4%) with
actinomycetoma. Post-operative recurrence among eumycetoma patients was 40%,
with a 1% mortality rate. The treatment outcome was unsatisfactory,
characterised by a low cure rate, high recurrence (40%) and follow-up dropout
(57%) rates. This emphasises the importance of early case detection and
management, objective health education programmes and thorough patient
counselling to urge people to seek treatment early and reduce dropouts.

Copyright: © 2024 Alhaj et al. This is an open access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0011841
PMCID: PMC11111073
PMID: 38728359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
