---
reference_id: "PMID:38215285"
title: Psychiatric complications in Graves' disease.
authors:
- Holmberg M
- Malmgren H
- Berglund PF
- Johansson B
- Nyström HF
journal: Eur Thyroid J
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1530/ETJ-23-0247
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Psychiatric complications in Graves' disease.
**Authors:** Holmberg M, Malmgren H, Berglund PF, Johansson B, Nyström HF
**Journal:** Eur Thyroid J (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1530/ETJ-23-0247](https://doi.org/10.1530/ETJ-23-0247)

## Content

1. Eur Thyroid J. 2024 Feb 1;13(1):e230247. doi: 10.1530/ETJ-23-0247. Print 2024 
Feb 1.

Psychiatric complications in Graves' disease.

Holmberg M(1)(2)(3), Malmgren H(4), Berglund PF(5), Johansson B(4), Nyström 
HF(3)(4)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)ANOVA, Karolinska University Hospital, Norra Stationsgatan 69, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(2)Institute of Medicine, Huddinge, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Wallenberg's Centre of Molecular and Translational Medicine, Region Västra 
Götaland, Sweden.
(4)Institute of Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, 
Göteborg, Sweden.
(5)Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, Department of Clinical 
Neuroscience, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Göteborg, Sweden.
(6)Department of Endocrinology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Göteborg, 
Sweden.
(7)Gothenburg Centre for Person Centred-Care (GPCC), Göteborg, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Mood disorders are common in Graves' disease despite treatment. The 
pathogenic mechanisms involved are unknown and so is whether previous 
psychiatric disease influences these symptoms.
METHODS: This is a longitudinal study conducted in Sweden on 65 women with newly 
diagnosed Graves' disease and 65 matched controls. Participants were examined 
during hyperthyroidism and after 15 months of treatment. Examinations included 
blood sampling, and psychiatric testing with the Comprehensive 
Psychopathological Rating Scale for Affective Syndromes and the Structured 
Clinical Interview for DSM-IV - Axis I Disorders. We also performed two analyses 
of a national population-based registry to determine previous psychiatric 
diagnoses and previous prescriptions of psychoactive drugs in (i) all patients 
we asked to participate and (ii) all Swedish women given a diagnosis of 
hyperthyroidism during 2013-2018, comparing them to matched controls.
RESULTS: There was no increased previous psychiatric comorbidity in Graves' 
patients compared to controls. There was no higher prevalence of psychiatric 
diagnoses and prescriptions of psychoactive drugs between (i) included GD 
patients compared to those who declined participation and (ii) women with a 
hyperthyroidism diagnosis in 5 years prior to their diagnosis, compared to 
matched controls. Depression scores and anxiety scores were higher in patients 
compared to controls both during hyperthyroidism (depression (median (IQR): 7.5 
(5.0-9.5) vs 1.0 (0.5-2.5) P < 0.001), anxiety: 7.7 (5.0-11) vs 2.5 (1.0-4.0) P 
< 0.001) and after treatment (depression: 2.5 (1.5-5.0) vs 1.5 (0.5-3.5) P < 
0.05), anxiety: 4.0 (2.5-7.5) vs 3.0 (1.5-5.0) P < 0.05). Patients with a 
previous psychiatric condition, mild eye symptoms, and a younger age had more 
anxiety at 15 months compared to patients without these symptoms and a higher 
age (all p<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Graves' disease affects patients' mood despite treatment. A previous 
psychiatric condition, mild eye symptoms, and a younger age increase the 
vulnerability for long-lasting symptoms and require specific attention.

DOI: 10.1530/ETJ-23-0247
PMCID: PMC10895301
PMID: 38215285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: HFN has received lecturing fees from Siemens 
Inc, Astra Zeneca, and Bristol Mayer Squibb, IBSA and is head of an advisory 
board for Oripharm. All other authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest that could be perceived as prejudicing the impartiality of the study 
reported.