---
reference_id: "PMID:38454488"
title: Clinical features and genetic spectrum of a multicenter Chinese cohort with myotonic dystrophy type 1.
authors:
- Zhong H
- Zeng L
- Yu X
- Ke Q
- Dong J
- Chen Y
- Luo L
- Chang X
- Guo J
- Wang Y
- Xiong H
- Liu R
- Liu C
- Wu J
- Lin J
- Xi J
- Zhu W
- Tan S
- Liu F
- Lu J
- Zhao C
- Luo S
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03114-z
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Disorders of Excessive Somnolence/diagnosis
- Fatigue
- Myotonia
- "Myotonic Dystrophy/genetics, diagnosis"
- Retrospective Studies
- Child
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Aged
- Multicenter Studies as Topic
- Cohort Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical features and genetic spectrum of a multicenter Chinese cohort with myotonic dystrophy type 1.
**Authors:** Zhong H, Zeng L, Yu X, Ke Q, Dong J, Chen Y, Luo L, Chang X, Guo J, Wang Y, Xiong H, Liu R, Liu C, Wu J, Lin J, Xi J, Zhu W, Tan S, Liu F, Lu J, Zhao C, Luo S
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-024-03114-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-024-03114-z)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 Mar 7;19(1):103. doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03114-z.

Clinical features and genetic spectrum of a multicenter Chinese cohort with
myotonic dystrophy type 1.

Zhong H(#)(1), Zeng L(#)(2), Yu X(3), Ke Q(4), Dong J(5), Chen Y(6), Luo L(7),
Chang X(8), Guo J(8), Wang Y(9), Xiong H(10), Liu R(11), Liu C(12), Wu J(13),
Lin J(1), Xi J(1), Zhu W(1), Tan S(2), Liu F(14), Lu J(1), Zhao C(15), Luo
S(16).

Author information:
(1)Huashan Rare Disease Center and Department of Neurology, Huashan Hospital,
National Center for Neurological Disorders, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital, University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Sichuan, China.
(3)Department of Neurology and Neuroscience Center, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Jilin University, Jilin, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University
School of Medicine, Zhejiang, China.
(5)Department of Neurology, Zhongshan Hospital Fudan University, Shanghai,
China.
(6)Department of Neurology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(7)Department of Neurology, Wuhan No.1 Hospital, Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Hubei, China.
(8)Department of Neurology, The First Hospital of Shanxi Medical University,
Shanxi, China.
(9)Department of Neurology, Zhejiang Provincial People's Hospital, Hangzhou
Medical College, Zhejiang, China.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China.
(11)Department of Neurology, Shaoxing Second Hospital, Zhejiang, China.
(12)Department of Neurology, Yancheng First People's Hospital, Jiangsu, China.
(13)Department of Neurology, Chenzhou First People's Hospital, Hunan, China.
(14)Department of Neurology, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Shangdong,
China.
(15)Huashan Rare Disease Center and Department of Neurology, Huashan Hospital,
National Center for Neurological Disorders, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
zhao_chongbo@fudan.edu.cn.
(16)Huashan Rare Disease Center and Department of Neurology, Huashan Hospital,
National Center for Neurological Disorders, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
luosushan@fudan.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: As the most common subtype of adult muscular dystrophy worldwide,
large cohort reports on myotonic dystrophy type I (DM1) in China are still
lacking. This study aims to analyze the genetic and clinical characteristics of
Chinese Han DM1 patients.
METHODS: Based on the multicenter collaborating effort of the Pan-Yangtze River
Delta Alliance for Neuromuscular Disorders, patients with suspected clinical
diagnoses of DM1 were genetically confirmed from January 2020 to April 2023.
Peak CTG repeats in the DMPK gene were analyzed using triplet repeat-primed PCR
(TP-PCR) and flanking PCR. Time-to-event analysis of onset age in females and
males was performed. Additionally, detailed clinical features and longitudinal
changes from the disease onset in 64 DM1 patients were retrospectively collected
and analyzed. The Epworth Sleepiness Scale and Fatigue Severity Scale were used
to quantify the severity of daytime sleepiness and fatigue.
RESULTS: Among the 211 genetically confirmed DM1 patients, the mean age at
diagnosis was 40.9 ± 12.2 (range: 12-74) with a male-to-female ratio of 124:87.
The average size of CTG repeats was 511.3 (range: 92-1945). Among the DM1
patients with comprehensive clinical data (n = 64, mean age 41.0 ± 12.0), the
age at onset was significantly earlier in males than in females (4.8 years
earlier, p = 0.026). Muscle weakness (92.2%), myotonia (85.9%), and fatigue
(73.4%) were the most prevalent clinical features. The predominant involved
muscles at onset are hands (weakness or myotonia) (52.6%) and legs (walking
disability) (42.1%). Of them, 70.3% of patients had daytime sleepiness, 14.1%
had cataract surgery, 7.8% used wheelchairs, 4.7% required ventilatory support,
and 1.6% required gastric tubes. Regarding the comorbidities, 4.7% of patients
had tumors, 17.2% had diabetes, 23.4% had dyspnea, 28.1% had intermittent
insomnia, 43.8% experienced dysphagia, and 25% exhibited cognitive impairment.
Chinese patients exhibited smaller size of CTG repeats (468 ± 139) than those
reported in Italy (613 ± 623), the US (629 ± 386), and Japan (625 [302, 1047]),
and milder phenotypes with less multisystem involvement.
CONCLUSION: The Chinese Han DM1 patients presented milder phenotypes compared to
their Caucasian and Japanese counterparts. A male predominance and an early age
of onset were identified in male Chinese Han DM1 patients.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-024-03114-z
PMCID: PMC10918885
PMID: 38454488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
