---
reference_id: "PMID:36212619"
title: De Novo Heterozygous Mutation in FGFR2 Causing Type II Pfeiffer Syndrome.
authors:
- Mosalli R
- Fatma A
- Almatrafi MA
- Mazroua M
- Paes B
journal: Case Rep Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1155/2022/4791082
content_type: abstract_only
---

# De Novo Heterozygous Mutation in FGFR2 Causing Type II Pfeiffer Syndrome.
**Authors:** Mosalli R, Fatma A, Almatrafi MA, Mazroua M, Paes B
**Journal:** Case Rep Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2022/4791082](https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/4791082)

## Content

1. Case Rep Genet. 2022 Jun 28;2022:4791082. doi: 10.1155/2022/4791082.
eCollection  2022.

De Novo Heterozygous Mutation in FGFR2 Causing Type II Pfeiffer Syndrome.

Mosalli R(1)(2), Fatma A(3), Almatrafi MA(1), Mazroua M(2), Paes B(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Umm Al Qura University, Makkah, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, International Medical Center, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Women's Health Center, International Medical Center, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Pediatrics (Neonatal Division), McMaster University Medical 
Center, Hamilton, ON, Canada.

Pfeiffer syndrome (PS) is an autosomal dominant disorder with three subtypes 
stemming from heterozygous mutations in the fibroblast growth factors FGFR1 and 
FGFR2. The subtypes overlap with heterogeneous clinical manifestations and 
variable prognosis dependent on neurological and respiratory compromise that 
impact short- and long-term outcomes and survival. We present a male, term 
infant with type II PS that was diagnostically suspected antenatally based on 
three-dimensional ultrasonographic findings that were confirmed postnatally by 
craniofacial tomography and magnetic resonance imaging. A new generation 
sequencing panel identified a unique de novo FGFR2, c.335 A > G p. Tyr112Cys 
variant, the first of its kind, and features that closely aligned with subtype 
II PS. Initial molecular results categorized the mutation as nonpathogenic, but 
it was later reclassified as pathogenic. Antenatal, multidisciplinary parental 
counseling about the tentative diagnosis and prognosis facilitated postnatal 
decisions that culminated in an informed choice for palliative care and early 
demise.

Copyright © 2022 Rafat Mosalli et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/4791082
PMCID: PMC9537020
PMID: 36212619

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest to disclose.