---
reference_id: "PMID:25430799"
title: Genetic features of Lynch syndrome in the Israeli population.
authors:
- Goldberg Y
- Barnes-Kedar I
- Lerer I
- Halpern N
- Plesser M
- Hubert A
- Kadouri L
- Goldshmidt H
- Solar I
- Strul H
- Rosner G
- Baris HN
- Peretz T
- Levi Z
- Kariv R
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/cge.12530
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic features of Lynch syndrome in the Israeli population.
**Authors:** Goldberg Y, Barnes-Kedar I, Lerer I, Halpern N, Plesser M, Hubert A, Kadouri L, Goldshmidt H, Solar I, Strul H, Rosner G, Baris HN, Peretz T, Levi Z, Kariv R
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.12530](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.12530)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2015 Jun;87(6):549-53. doi: 10.1111/cge.12530. Epub 2014 Nov 28.

Genetic features of Lynch syndrome in the Israeli population.

Goldberg Y(1), Barnes-Kedar I, Lerer I, Halpern N, Plesser M, Hubert A, Kadouri 
L, Goldshmidt H, Solar I, Strul H, Rosner G, Baris HN, Peretz T, Levi Z, Kariv 
R.

Author information:
(1)Sharett Institute of Oncology, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, 
Jerusalem, Israel.

Diagnosis of Lynch syndrome (LS) may be complex. Knowledge of mutation spectrum 
and founder mutations in specific populations facilitates the diagnostic 
process. Aim of the study is to describe genetic features of LS in the Israeli 
population and report novel and founder mutations. Patients were studied at 
high-risk clinics. Diagnostics followed a multi-step process, including tumor 
testing, gene analysis and testing for founder mutations. LS was defined by 
positive mutation testing. We diagnosed LS in 242 subjects from 113 families 
coming from different ethnicities. We identified 54 different mutations; 13 of 
them are novel. Sixty-seven (59%) families had mutations in MSH2, 20 (18%) in 
MSH6, 19 (17%) in MLH1 and 7 (6%) in PMS2; 27% of the MSH2 mutations were large 
deletions. Seven founder mutations were detected in 61/113 (54%) families. 
Constitutional mismatch repair deficiency (CMMR-D) was identified in five 
families. Gene distribution in the Israeli population is unique, with relatively 
high incidence of mutations in MSH2 and MSH6. The mutation spectrum is wide; 
however, 54% of cases are caused by one of seven founder mutations. CMMR-D 
occurs in the context of founder mutations and consanguinity. These features 
should guide the diagnostic process, risk estimation, and genetic counseling.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.12530
PMID: 25430799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]