---
reference_id: "PMID:20301339"
title: Spastic Paraplegia 4.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Parodi L
- Rydning SL
- Tallaksen C
- Durr A
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spastic Paraplegia 4.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Parodi L, Rydning SL, Tallaksen C, Durr A

## Content

1. Spastic Paraplegia 4.

Parodi L(1), Rydning SL(2), Tallaksen C(3), Durr A(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2003 Apr 17 [updated 2019 Jun 13].

Author information:
(1)Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Epinière, Institut National de la Santé 
et de la Recherche Médicale, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 
Assistance Publique – Hôpitaux de Paris, Sorbonne Université – Pitié-Salpêtrière 
University Hospital, Paris, France
(2)Department of Neurology, Oslo University Hospital;, Institute of Clinical 
Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
(3)Department of Neurology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Spastic paraplegia 4 (SPG4; also known as SPAST-HSP) 
is characterized by insidiously progressive bilateral lower-limb gait 
spasticity. More than 50% of affected individuals have some weakness in the legs 
and impaired vibration sense at the ankles. Sphincter disturbances are very 
common. Onset is insidious, mostly in young adulthood, although symptoms may 
start as early as age one year and as late as age 76 years. Intrafamilial 
variation is considerable.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SPAST-HSP is established in a proband with 
characteristic clinical features and a heterozygous pathogenic variant in SPAST 
identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Antispastic drugs for leg spasticity; 
anticholinergic antispasmodic drugs for urinary urgency; regular physiotherapy 
to stretch spastic muscles and prevent contractures. Consideration of botulinum 
toxin and intrathecal baclofen when oral drugs are ineffective and spasticity is 
severe and disabling. Urodynamic evaluation in order to initiate treatment when 
sphincter disturbances become a problem. Surveillance: Evaluation every 6-12 
months to update medications and physical rehabilitation.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SPAST-HSP is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner with 
age-related, nearly complete penetrance and is characterized by significant 
intrafamilial clinical variability. Most individuals diagnosed with SPAST-HSP 
have an affected parent. The proportion of cases caused by a de novo pathogenic 
variant is low. Each child of an individual with SPAST-HSP has a 50% chance of 
inheriting the pathogenic variant. Prenatal testing and preimplantation genetic 
testing are possible if a pathogenic SPAST variant has been identified in an 
affected family member. Because of variable clinical expression, results of 
prenatal testing cannot be used to predict whether an individual will develop 
SPAST-HSP and, if so, what the age of onset, clinical course, and degree of 
disability will be.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301339