---
reference_id: "PMID:26099922"
title: Halofuginone inhibits phosphorylation of SMAD-2 reducing angiogenesis and leukemia burden in an acute promyelocytic leukemia mouse model.
authors:
- Assis PA
- De Figueiredo-Pontes LL
- Lima AS
- Leão V
- Cândido LA
- Pintão CT
- Garcia AB
- Saggioro FP
- Panepucci RA
- Chahud F
- Nagler A
- Falcão RP
- Rego EM
journal: J Exp Clin Cancer Res
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1186/s13046-015-0181-2
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- Immunophenotyping
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred NOD"
- "Mice, SCID"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Neovascularization, Pathologic"
- Phosphorylation
- Piperidines/metabolism
- Quinazolinones/metabolism
- "Smad2 Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Halofuginone inhibits phosphorylation of SMAD-2 reducing angiogenesis and leukemia burden in an acute promyelocytic leukemia mouse model.
**Authors:** Assis PA, De Figueiredo-Pontes LL, Lima AS, Leão V, Cândido LA, Pintão CT, Garcia AB, Saggioro FP, Panepucci RA, Chahud F, Nagler A, Falcão RP, Rego EM
**Journal:** J Exp Clin Cancer Res (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13046-015-0181-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13046-015-0181-2)

## Content

1. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Jun 23;34(1):65. doi: 10.1186/s13046-015-0181-2.

Halofuginone inhibits phosphorylation of SMAD-2 reducing angiogenesis and
leukemia burden in an acute promyelocytic leukemia mouse model.

Assis PA(1), De Figueiredo-Pontes LL(2), Lima AS(3), Leão V(4), Cândido LA(5),
Pintão CT(6), Garcia AB(7), Saggioro FP(8), Panepucci RA(9), Chahud F(8), Nagler
A(10), Falcão RP(11), Rego EM(12).

Author information:
(1)Hematology and Oncology Divisions of the Department of Internal Medicine,
Medical School of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP,
14049900, Brazil. patricia_aas@yahoo.com.br.
(2)Hematology and Oncology Divisions of the Department of Internal Medicine,
Medical School of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP,
14049900, Brazil. lorenafigdo@yahoo.com.br.
(3)Hematology and Oncology Divisions of the Department of Internal Medicine,
Medical School of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP,
14049900, Brazil. asglima@hotmail.com.
(4)Hematology and Oncology Divisions of the Department of Internal Medicine,
Medical School of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP,
14049900, Brazil. vitor.leao.vleao@gmail.com.
(5)Hematology and Oncology Divisions of the Department of Internal Medicine,
Medical School of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP,
14049900, Brazil. larissa_candidoa@usp.br.
(6)Hematology and Oncology Divisions of the Department of Internal Medicine,
Medical School of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP,
14049900, Brazil. cpintao@hotmail.com.
(7)Hematology and Oncology Divisions of the Department of Internal Medicine,
Medical School of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP,
14049900, Brazil. aglairbg@hotmail.com.
(8)Pathology Department, Medical School of Ribeirão Preto, University of São
Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, 14049900, Brazil. fchahud@fmrp.usp.br.
(9)Hematology and Oncology Divisions of the Department of Internal Medicine,
Medical School of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP,
14049900, Brazil. panepucci@hemocentro.fmrp.usp.br.
(10)Hematology Division and Cord Blood Bank, Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Tel
Aviv University, Tel Hashomer, 6997801, Israel.
arnon.nagler@sheba.health.gov.il.
(11)Hematology and Oncology Divisions of the Department of Internal Medicine,
Medical School of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP,
14049900, Brazil. rpfalcao@fmrp.usp.br.
(12)Hematology and Oncology Divisions of the Department of Internal Medicine,
Medical School of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP,
14049900, Brazil. emrego@hcrp.fmrp.usp.br.

BACKGROUND: Halofuginone (HF) is a low-molecular-weight alkaloid that has been
demonstrated to interfere with Metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) and Tumor Growth
Factor-β (TGF-β) function and, to present antiangiogenic, antiproliferative and
proapoptotic properties in several solid tumor models. Based on the fact that
high levels of Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) and increased
angiogenesis have been described in acute myeloid leukemia and associated with
disease progression, we studied the in vivo effects of HF using an Acute
Promyelocytic Leukemia (APL) mouse model.
METHODS: NOD/SCID mice were transplanted with leukemic cells from hCG-PML/RARA
transgenic mice (TM) and treated with HF 150 μg/kg/day for 21 days. The leukemic
infiltration and the percentage of VEGF+ cells were evaluated by morphology and
flow cytometry. The effect of HF on the gene expression of several pro- and
antiangiogenic factors, phosphorylation of SMAD2 and VEGF secretion was assessed
in vitro using NB4 and HUVEC cells.
RESULTS: HF treatment resulted in hematological remission with decreased
accumulation of immature cell and lower amounts of VEGF in BM of leukemic mice.
In vitro, HF modulated gene expression of several pro- and antiangiogenic
factors, reduced VEGF secretion and phosphorylation of SMAD2, blocking
TGF-β-signaling.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, our results demonstrate that HF inhibits SMAD2
signaling and reduces leukemia growth and angiogenesis.

DOI: 10.1186/s13046-015-0181-2
PMCID: PMC4486128
PMID: 26099922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
