---
reference_id: "PMID:28413019"
title: "Germline Mutations in CDH23, Encoding Cadherin-Related 23, Are Associated with Both Familial and Sporadic Pituitary Adenomas."
authors:
- Zhang Q
- Peng C
- Song J
- Zhang Y
- Chen J
- Song Z
- Shou X
- Ma Z
- Peng H
- Jian X
- He W
- Ye Z
- Li Z
- Wang Y
- Ye H
- Zhang Z
- Shen M
- Tang F
- Chen H
- Shi Z
- Chen C
- Chen Z
- Shen Y
- Wang Y
- Lu S
- Zhang J
- Li Y
- Li S
- Mao Y
- Zhou L
- Yan H
- Shi Y
- Huang C
- Zhao Y
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.03.011
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Cadherin Related Proteins
- Cadherins/genetics
- Case-Control Studies
- Cell Adhesion
- Genomics
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Pituitary Neoplasms/genetics
- Protein Conformation
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Germline Mutations in CDH23, Encoding Cadherin-Related 23, Are Associated with Both Familial and Sporadic Pituitary Adenomas.
**Authors:** Zhang Q, Peng C, Song J, Zhang Y, Chen J, Song Z, Shou X, Ma Z, Peng H, Jian X, He W, Ye Z, Li Z, Wang Y, Ye H, Zhang Z, Shen M, Tang F, Chen H, Shi Z, Chen C, Chen Z, Shen Y, Wang Y, Lu S, Zhang J, Li Y, Li S, Mao Y, Zhou L, Yan H, Shi Y, Huang C, Zhao Y
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.03.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.03.011)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2017 May 4;100(5):817-823. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.03.011.
Epub  2017 Apr 13.

Germline Mutations in CDH23, Encoding Cadherin-Related 23, Are Associated with
Both Familial and Sporadic Pituitary Adenomas.

Zhang Q(1), Peng C(2), Song J(1), Zhang Y(1), Chen J(3), Song Z(4), Shou X(1),
Ma Z(1), Peng H(2), Jian X(4), He W(1), Ye Z(1), Li Z(4), Wang Y(1), Ye H(5),
Zhang Z(5), Shen M(1), Tang F(6), Chen H(6), Shi Z(1), Chen C(1), Chen Z(1),
Shen Y(1), Wang Y(1), Lu S(7), Zhang J(7), Li Y(5), Li S(1), Mao Y(8), Zhou
L(1), Yan H(9), Shi Y(10), Huang C(11), Zhao Y(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Huashan Hospital, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan
University, Shanghai 200040, China; Shanghai Pituitary Tumor Center, Shanghai
200040, China.
(2)Shanghai Institute of Immunology, Key Laboratory of Cell Differentiation and
Apoptosis of Chinese Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School
of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.
(3)Bio-X Institutes, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for the Genetics of
Developmental and Neuropsychiatric Disorders, Institute of Social Cognitive and
Behavioral Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China;
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Psychotic Disorders, Shanghai Mental Health Center,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200030, China.
(4)Bio-X Institutes, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for the Genetics of
Developmental and Neuropsychiatric Disorders, Institute of Social Cognitive and
Behavioral Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China.
(5)Shanghai Pituitary Tumor Center, Shanghai 200040, China; Department of
Endocrinology, Huashan Hospital, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University,
Shanghai 200040, China.
(6)Shanghai Pituitary Tumor Center, Shanghai 200040, China; Department of
Pathology, Huashan Hospital, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University,
Shanghai 200040, China.
(7)Department of Pathophysiology, Key Laboratory of Cell Differentiation and
Apoptosis of Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.
(8)Department of Neurosurgery, Huashan Hospital, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan
University, Shanghai 200040, China; Shanghai Pituitary Tumor Center, Shanghai
200040, China; State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, Shanghai Medical
College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200040, China; Institute of Neurosurgery,
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200040, China.
(9)Department of Pathology, Preston Robert Tisch Brain Tumor Center, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.
(10)Bio-X Institutes, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for the Genetics of
Developmental and Neuropsychiatric Disorders, Institute of Social Cognitive and
Behavioral Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China;
Institute of Neuropsychiatric Science and Systems Biological Medicine, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China; Department of Psychiatry, First
Teaching Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, Xinjiang 830054,
China; Biomedical Sciences Institute of Qingdao University, Qingdao Branch of
SJTU Bio-X Institutes and the Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University,
Qingdao, Shandong 266003, China.
(11)Shanghai Institute of Immunology, Key Laboratory of Cell Differentiation and
Apoptosis of Chinese Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School
of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China. Electronic address: huangcx@shsmu.edu.cn.
(12)Department of Neurosurgery, Huashan Hospital, Shanghai Medical College,
Fudan University, Shanghai 200040, China; Shanghai Pituitary Tumor Center,
Shanghai 200040, China; State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, Shanghai
Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200040, China; Institute of
Neurosurgery, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200040,
China. Electronic address: zhaoyaohs@vip.sina.com.

Pituitary adenoma (PA) is one of the most common intracranial neoplasms. Several
genetic predisposing factors for PA have been identified, but they account for a
small portion of cases. In this study, we sought to identify the PA genetic risk
factors by focusing on causative mutations for PAs. Among the 4 affected and 17
asymptomatic members from one family with familial PA, whole-exome sequencing
identified cosegregation of the PA phenotype with the heterozygous missense
mutation c.4136G>T (p.Arg1379Leu) in cadherin-related 23 (CDH23). This mutation
causes an amino acid substitution in the calcium-binding motif of the
extracellular cadherin (EC) domains of CDH23 and is predicted to impair
cell-cell adhesion. Genomic screening in a total of 12 families with familial PA
(20 individuals), 125 individuals with sporadic PA, and 260 control individuals
showed that 33% of the families with familial PA (4/12) and 12% of individuals
with sporadic PA (15/125) harbored functional CDH23 variants. In contrast, 0.8%
of the healthy control individuals (2/260) carried functional CDH23 variants.
Gene-based analysis also revealed a significant association between CDH23
genotype and PA (p = 5.54 × 10-7). Moreover, PA individuals who did not harbor
functional CDH23 variants displayed tumors that were larger in size (p = 0.005)
and more invasive (p < 0.001). Therefore, mutations in CDH23 are linked with
familial and sporadic PA and could play important roles in the pathogenesis of
PA.

Copyright © 2017 American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.03.011
PMCID: PMC5420349
PMID: 28413019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
