---
reference_id: "PMID:36474487"
title: A Case Report of Glomus Tympanicum Complicated With Facial Nerve Palsy.
authors:
- Dimakis C
- Beka D
- Papageorgiou E
- Tsetsos N
- Poutoglidis A
- Gortsali A
- Nomikos A
- Karatzias G
journal: Iran J Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.22038/IJORL.2022.64737.3217
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Case Report of Glomus Tympanicum Complicated With Facial Nerve Palsy.
**Authors:** Dimakis C, Beka D, Papageorgiou E, Tsetsos N, Poutoglidis A, Gortsali A, Nomikos A, Karatzias G
**Journal:** Iran J Otorhinolaryngol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.22038/IJORL.2022.64737.3217](https://doi.org/10.22038/IJORL.2022.64737.3217)

## Content

1. Iran J Otorhinolaryngol. 2022 Nov;34(125):327-331. doi: 
10.22038/IJORL.2022.64737.3217.

A Case Report of Glomus Tympanicum Complicated With Facial Nerve Palsy.

Dimakis C(1), Beka D(1), Papageorgiou E(1), Tsetsos N(2), Poutoglidis A(2), 
Gortsali A(1), Nomikos A(3), Karatzias G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, General Hospital 
Asklip ι eio Voula, Athens, Greece.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, G.Papanikolaou 
General Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(3)Department of Pathology, General Hospital Asklip ι eio Voula, Athens, Greece.

INTRODUCTION: Generally, glomus tumors are considered tumors of the autonomic 
system arising from chromaffin cells of the parasympathetic paraganglia of the 
skull base and neck. Glomus tympanicum is the most common primary tumor of the 
middle ear cavity and it arises from the paraganglia of the middle ear.
CASE REPORT: We present a case of glomus tympanicum presented in a 70-year-old 
woman, complicated with facial nerve palsy which at first sight was misdiagnosed 
as cholesteatoma. Patient presented in our clinic because of otorrhea, pulsatile 
tinnitus and hearing loss in the right ear. However, facial nerve function was 
good in the first examination (40 days before the surgery). Eventually, she 
treated successfully with a canal wall down mastoidectomy. Technique had been 
chosen because of the mass size and the involvement of external auditory canal, 
after a discussion with the patient.
CONCLUSIONS: Although histologically benign, glomus tympanicum is slow growing 
and destructs adjacent tissues potentially. The two most common complaints are 
hearing loss (conductive) and pulsatile tinnitus. These neoplasms are more 
common in women and they can be diagnosed by CT or MRI scan. It is of high 
importance physicians suspect a glomus tumor when patient 's clinical findings 
are hearing loss and pulsatile tinnitus and use an intravascular agent in 
imaging so that the differential diagnosis will be supported.

DOI: 10.22038/IJORL.2022.64737.3217
PMCID: PMC9709390
PMID: 36474487