---
reference_id: "PMID:19197337"
title: "Mucolipidosis II and III alpha/beta: mutation analysis of 40 Japanese patients showed genotype-phenotype correlation."
authors:
- Otomo T
- Muramatsu T
- Yorifuji T
- Okuyama T
- Nakabayashi H
- Fukao T
- Ohura T
- Yoshino M
- Tanaka A
- Okamoto N
- Inui K
- Ozono K
- Sakai N
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1038/jhg.2009.3
keywords:
- Asian People/genetics
- Base Sequence
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Exons/genetics
- Gene Duplication
- Genotype
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mucolipidoses/enzymology, genetics"
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide/genetics"
- Transferases (Other Substituted Phosphate Groups)/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mucolipidosis II and III alpha/beta: mutation analysis of 40 Japanese patients showed genotype-phenotype correlation.
**Authors:** Otomo T, Muramatsu T, Yorifuji T, Okuyama T, Nakabayashi H, Fukao T, Ohura T, Yoshino M, Tanaka A, Okamoto N, Inui K, Ozono K, Sakai N
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/jhg.2009.3](https://doi.org/10.1038/jhg.2009.3)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2009 Mar;54(3):145-51. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2009.3. Epub 2009 Feb 6.

Mucolipidosis II and III alpha/beta: mutation analysis of 40 Japanese patients
showed genotype-phenotype correlation.

Otomo T(1), Muramatsu T, Yorifuji T, Okuyama T, Nakabayashi H, Fukao T, Ohura T,
Yoshino M, Tanaka A, Okamoto N, Inui K, Ozono K, Sakai N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine,
Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Mucolipidosis (ML) II alpha/beta and III alpha/beta are autosomal recessive
diseases caused by a deficiency of alpha and/or beta subunits of the enzyme
N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphotransferase, which is encoded by the GNPTAB gene.
We analyzed the GNPTAB gene in 25 ML II and 15 ML III Japanese patients. In most
ML II patients, the clinical conditions 'stand alone', 'walk without support'
and 'speak single words' were impaired; however, the frequency of 'heart
murmur', 'inguinal hernia' and 'hepatomegaly and/or splenomegaly' did not differ
between ML II and III patients. We detected mutations in GNPTAB in 73 of 80
alleles. Fourteen new mutations were c.914_915insA, c.2089_2090insC, c.2427delC,
c.2544delA, c.2693delA, c.3310delG, c.3388_3389insC+c.3392C>T, c.3428_3429insA,
c.3741_3744delAGAA, p.R334L, p.F374L, p.H956Y, p.N1153S and duplication of exon
2. Previously reported mutations were p.Q104X, p.W894X, p.R1189X and c.2715+1G>A
causing skipping of exon 13. Homozygotes or compound heterozygotes of nonsense
and frameshift mutations contributed to the severe phenotype. p.F374L, p.N1153S
and splicing mutations contributed to the attenuated phenotype, although coupled
with nonsense mutation. These results show the effective molecular diagnosis of
ML II and III and also provide phenotypic prediction. This is the first and
comprehensive report of molecular analysis for ML patients of Japanese origin.

DOI: 10.1038/jhg.2009.3
PMID: 19197337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
