---
reference_id: "PMID:39540993"
title: A prospective analysis of clinical and parasitological outcomes after treatment or a wait-and-see approach of Dientamoeba fragilis infection in an adult general practice population.
authors:
- Hazenberg HMJL
- Mank TG
- Band C
- Euser SM
- van Soest EJ
journal: Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s10096-024-04989-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A prospective analysis of clinical and parasitological outcomes after treatment or a wait-and-see approach of Dientamoeba fragilis infection in an adult general practice population.
**Authors:** Hazenberg HMJL, Mank TG, Band C, Euser SM, van Soest EJ
**Journal:** Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10096-024-04989-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10096-024-04989-3)

## Content

1. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2025 Jan;44(1):143-150. doi: 
10.1007/s10096-024-04989-3. Epub 2024 Nov 14.

A prospective analysis of clinical and parasitological outcomes after treatment 
or a wait-and-see approach of Dientamoeba fragilis infection in an adult general 
practice population.

Hazenberg HMJL(1), Mank TG(2), Band C(1), Euser SM(3), van Soest EJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Spaarne Gasthuis Hoofddorp, 
Hoofddorp, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Regional Public Health Laboratory Kennemerland, 
Boerhaavelaan 26, Haarlem, 2035 RC, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Regional Public Health Laboratory Kennemerland, 
Boerhaavelaan 26, Haarlem, 2035 RC, The Netherlands. 
s.euser@streeklabhaarlem.nl.

PURPOSE: Dientamoeba fragilis is a protozoan frequently encountered in stool 
samples globally. It is debated whether Dientamoeba fragilis carries pathogenic 
capacities. This study prospectively analyses clinical and parasitological 
outcomes after treatment or a wait-and-see approach of Dientamoeba fragilis 
infection in a general practice adult population.
METHODS: In this prospective observational cohort study 113 adult patients with 
a positive Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) test result for D. fragilis (T0) in a 
primary care setting, were followed-up longitudinally with a control PCR-test 
and microscopic stool examination at 30 days (T1) and 90 days (T2) after 
inclusion. Standardized patient-reported questionnaires including treatment 
details and the adjusted Irritable Bowel Syndrome-Severity Score (IBS-SS) were 
retrieved at T0, T1 and T2.
RESULTS: Parasitology and questionnaires were retrieved from 87 participants at 
T0 and T1, and 74 at T2. Treated patients(n = 64) more often tested PCR negative 
at T1 (64.1% vs. 16.4%, p < 0.001) and T2 (67.3% vs. 5.3%, p < 0.001) compared 
to untreated patients. No difference in decline in IBS-SS was seen comparing the 
treatment and non-treatment groups at T1 (p = 0.403) or T2 (p = 1.00).
CONCLUSION: A short and long term increased parasitological clearance is shown 
with treatment of clioquinol or metronidazole compared with no treatment. A 
clear and significant correlation between parasitological cure and decline of 
clinical complaints as reported by the participants could not be established.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10096-024-04989-3
PMID: 39540993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors 
declare no competing interests.