---
reference_id: "PMID:29505590"
title: "Varicella zoster virus transmission dynamics in Vojvodina, Serbia."
authors:
- Medić S
- Katsilieris M
- Lozanov-Crvenković Z
- Siettos CI
- Petrović V
- Milošević V
- Brkić S
- Andrews N
- Ubavić M
- Anastassopoulou C
journal: PLoS One
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0193838
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Varicella zoster virus transmission dynamics in Vojvodina, Serbia.
**Authors:** Medić S, Katsilieris M, Lozanov-Crvenković Z, Siettos CI, Petrović V, Milošević V, Brkić S, Andrews N, Ubavić M, Anastassopoulou C
**Journal:** PLoS One (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0193838](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0193838)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2018 Mar 5;13(3):e0193838. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0193838. 
eCollection 2018.

Varicella zoster virus transmission dynamics in Vojvodina, Serbia.

Medić S(1)(2), Katsilieris M(3), Lozanov-Crvenković Z(4), Siettos CI(3), 
Petrović V(1)(2), Milošević V(1)(2), Brkić S(2)(5), Andrews N(6), Ubavić M(7), 
Anastassopoulou C(8).

Author information:
(1)Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Institute of Public Health of 
Vojvodina, Novi Sad, Serbia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Novi Sad, Novi Sad, Serbia.
(3)School of Applied Mathematics and Physical Sciences, National Tehnical 
University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(4)Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Faculty of Science, 
University of Novi Sad, Novi Sad, Serbia.
(5)Clinic for Infectious Diseases, Clinical Center of Vojvodina, Novi Sad, 
Serbia.
(6)Statistics, Modelling, and Economics Department, National Infections 
Services, Public Health England, London, United Kingdom.
(7)Medlab, Health Institution, Novi Sad, Serbia.
(8)Division of Genetics, Cell and Developmental Biology, Department of Biology, 
University of Patras, Patras, Greece.

This study aimed at establishing baseline key epidemiological parameters for 
varicella zoster virus (VZV) infection in Vojvodina, Serbia, with the ultimate 
goal to quantify the VZV transmission potential in the population. 
Seroprevalence data generated during the first large cross-sectional VZV 
serosurvey were modelled, using a two-tiered modelling approach to calculate 
age-specific forces of infection (FOI), the basic reproduction number (R0) and 
herd immunity threshold (H). Seroprevalence and modelling data were compared 
with corresponding pre-vaccination epidemiological parameters from 11 countries 
participating in the European Sero-Epidemiology Network 2 (ESEN2) project. 
Serbia fits into the general dynamic VZV transmission patterns in Europe in the 
pre-vaccine era, with estimated R0 = 4.12, (95% CI: 2.69-7.07) and H = 0.76 (95% 
CI: 0.63-0.86). The highest VZV transmission occurs among preschool children, as 
evidenced by the estimation of the highest FOI (0.22, 95% CI: 0.11-0.34) in the 
0.5-4 age group, with a peak FOI of 0.25 at 2.23 years. Seroprevalence was 
consistently lower in 5-14 year-olds, resulting in considerable shares of 
VZV-susceptible adolescents (7.3%), and young adults (6%), resembling the 
situation in a minority of European countries. The obtained key epidemiological 
parameters showed most intense VZV transmission in preschool children aged <4 
years, justifying the consideration of universal childhood immunization in the 
future. National immunization strategy should consider programs for VZV 
serologic screening and immunization of susceptible groups, including 
adolescents and women of reproductive age. This work is an important milestone 
towards the evaluation of varicella immunization policy options in Serbia.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0193838
PMCID: PMC5837184
PMID: 29505590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.