---
reference_id: "PMID:39372603"
title: "Osteoclast indices in osteogenesis imperfecta: systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Aksornthong S
- Patel P
- Komarova SV
journal: JBMR Plus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/jbmrpl/ziae112
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteoclast indices in osteogenesis imperfecta: systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Aksornthong S, Patel P, Komarova SV
**Journal:** JBMR Plus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jbmrpl/ziae112](https://doi.org/10.1093/jbmrpl/ziae112)

## Content

1. JBMR Plus. 2024 Aug 21;8(11):ziae112. doi: 10.1093/jbmrpl/ziae112. eCollection
 2024 Nov.

Osteoclast indices in osteogenesis imperfecta: systematic review and 
meta-analysis.

Aksornthong S(1)(2), Patel P(2)(3), Komarova SV(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Surgery, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3G 
1A4, Canada.
(2)Shriners Hospital for Children-Canada, Montreal, Quebec H4A 0A9, Canada.
(3)Faculty of Dental Medicine and Oral Health Sciences, McGill University, 
Montreal, Quebec H3A 1G1, Canada.
(4)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 1H9, Canada.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a rare bone fragility disorder caused by 
mutations in genes encoding collagen type I or that affect its processing. 
Alterations in osteoclasts were suggested to contribute to OI pathophysiology. 
We aimed to systematically identify studies reporting measures of osteoclast 
formation and function in patients and mouse models of OI, to quantify 
OI-induced changes. The systematic search of Medline, Ovid, and Web of Science 
identified 798 unique studies. After screening, we included 23 studies for 
meta-analysis, reporting osteoclast parameters in 310 patients with OI of 9 
different types and 16 studies reporting osteoclast parameters in 406 animals of 
11 different OI mouse models. The standardized mean difference with 95% 
confidence interval (CI) was used as the effect size, and random-effects 
meta-analysis was performed. In patients with OI, collagen degradation markers 
were significantly higher compared with age-matched controls, with an effect 
size of 1.23 (CI: 0.36, 2.10]. Collagen degradation markers were the most 
elevated in the 3- to 7-year-old age group and in patients with more severe 
forms of OI. Bone histomorphometry demonstrated the trends for higher osteoclast 
numbers (1.16; CI: -0.22, 2.55) and osteoclast surface (0.43; CI: -0.63, 1.49), 
and significantly higher eroded surface (3.24; CI: 0.51, 5.96) compared with 
age-matched controls. In OI mice, meta-analysis demonstrated significant 
increases in collagen degradation markers (1.59; CI: 1.07, 2.11), in osteoclast 
numbers (0.94; CI: 0.50, 1.39), osteoclast surface (0.73; CI: 0.22, 1.23), and 
eroded surface (1.31; CI: 0.54, 2.08). The largest differences were in OI mice 
with the mutations in Col1a1 and Col1a2 genes. There were no differences between 
males and females in clinical or animal studies. Quantitative estimates of 
changes in osteoclast indices and their variance for patients with OI are 
important for planning future studies. We confirmed that similar changes are 
observed in mice with OI, supporting their translational utility.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1093/jbmrpl/ziae112
PMCID: PMC11450326
PMID: 39372603

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.