---
reference_id: "PMID:35312978"
title: "Update from the 5th Edition of the World Health Organization Classification of Head and Neck Tumors: Odontogenic and Maxillofacial Bone Tumours."
authors:
- Vered M
- Wright JM
journal: Head Neck Pathol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s12105-021-01404-7
keywords:
- Bone Neoplasms/pathology
- DNA-Binding Proteins
- Head and Neck Neoplasms
- Humans
- Odontogenic Cysts/pathology
- Odontogenic Tumors/pathology
- Transcription Factors
- World Health Organization
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update from the 5th Edition of the World Health Organization Classification of Head and Neck Tumors: Odontogenic and Maxillofacial Bone Tumours.
**Authors:** Vered M, Wright JM
**Journal:** Head Neck Pathol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12105-021-01404-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12105-021-01404-7)

## Content

1. Head Neck Pathol. 2022 Mar;16(1):63-75. doi: 10.1007/s12105-021-01404-7. Epub 
2022 Mar 21.

Update from the 5th Edition of the World Health Organization Classification of 
Head and Neck Tumors: Odontogenic and Maxillofacial Bone Tumours.

Vered M(1)(2), Wright JM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, Oral Medicine and Maxillofacial Imaging, School 
of Dental Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv-Yafo, Israel. 
mvered@tauex.tau.ac.il.
(2)Institute of Pathology, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Ramat Gan, 
Israel. mvered@tauex.tau.ac.il.
(3)Department of Diagnostic Sciences, School of Dentistry, Texas A&M University, 
Dallas, TX, USA.

The 5th edition of the World Health Organization (WHO) Classification of Head 
and Neck Tumours (2022) comes out only five years after the previous edition, 
however it presents important updates that run in parallel with the rapid 
progression involving the increasingly sophisticated molecular investigation and 
its interpretation, some of which already have therapy-related impact. This 
manuscript provides an overview of the leading changes introduced in the 
classification of Odontogenic and Maxillofacial Bone Tumours that encompasses 
cysts of the jaws, odontogenic tumours, giant cell lesions and bone cysts, and 
bone and cartilage tumours. This is the first edition that Essential and 
Desirable Diagnostic Features were added for each entity, so that the most 
important clinical, microscopic and/or radiologic features were encapsulated and 
briefly highlighted. Surgical ciliated cyst was added to the group of 
odontogenic cysts, adenoid ameloblastoma was a newly recognized benign 
epithelial odontogenic tumour, and segmental odontomaxillary dysplasia was 
introduced in the group of fibro-osseous tumours and dysplasia. In addition, 
rhabdomyosarcoma with TFCP2 rearrangement, was introduced into the group of 
malignant jawbone tumours. The unique genetic aberrations distinguish it from 
other types of rhabdomyosarcomas. On the other hand, melanotic neuroectodermal 
tumour of infancy and osteoid osteoma were deleted from the benign bone and 
cartilageneous tumours, as was the hematolymphoid tumour of solitary 
plasmacytoma of bone. We systematically reviewed each entity in this chapter and 
provided important updated findings for selected topics that can further aid in 
the diagnostic process for challenging cases, broaden insights on the logic of 
the present classification, and finally, emphasize the potential that some of 
the molecular results may have in the near future to set new treatment 
approaches.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12105-021-01404-7
PMCID: PMC9019005
PMID: 35312978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: (Include appropriate disclosures) – Authors have 
no conflicts of interests to disclose.