---
reference_id: "PMID:31498378"
title: "Scientific Advances in and Clinical Approaches to Small-Fiber Polyneuropathy: A Review."
authors:
- Oaklander AL
- Nolano M
journal: JAMA Neurol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2019.2917
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Scientific Advances in and Clinical Approaches to Small-Fiber Polyneuropathy: A Review.
**Authors:** Oaklander AL, Nolano M
**Journal:** JAMA Neurol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaneurol.2019.2917](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2019.2917)

## Content

1. JAMA Neurol. 2019 Oct 1;76(10):1240-1251. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2019.2917.

Scientific Advances in and Clinical Approaches to Small-Fiber Polyneuropathy: A 
Review.

Oaklander AL(1)(2), Nolano M(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston.
(2)Department of Pathology (Neuropathology), Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, Reproductive Sciences and Odontostomatology, 
University "Federico II" of Naples, Naples, Italy.
(4)Skin Biopsy Laboratory, Department of Neurology, IRCCS, Istituti Clinici 
Scientifici Maugeri, SpA SB, Telese Terme, Italy.

Erratum in
    JAMA Neurol. 2019 Dec 1;76(12):1520. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2019.3877.

IMPORTANCE: Small-fiber polyneuropathy involves preferential damage to the 
thinly myelinated A-delta fibers, unmyelinated C sensory fibers, or autonomic or 
trophic fibers. Although this condition is common, most patients still remain 
undiagnosed and untreated because of lagging medical and public awareness of 
research advances. Chronic bilateral neuropathic pain, fatigue, and nausea are 
cardinal symptoms that can cause disability and dependence, including pain 
medication dependence.
OBSERVATIONS: Biomarker confirmation is recommended, given the nonspecificity of 
symptoms. The standard test involves measuring epidermal neurite density within 
a 3-mm protein gene product 9.5 (PGP9.5)-immunolabeled lower-leg skin biopsy. 
Biopsies and autonomic function testing confirm that small-fiber neuropathy not 
uncommonly affects otherwise healthy children and young adults, in whom it is 
often associated with inflammation or dysimmunity. A recent meta-analysis 
concluded that small-fiber neuropathy underlies 49% of illnesses labeled as 
fibromyalgia. Initially, patients with idiopathic small-fiber disorders should 
be screened by medical history and blood tests for potentially treatable causes, 
which are identifiable in one-third to one-half of patients. Then, secondary 
genetic testing is particularly important for familial and childhood cases. 
Treatable genetic causes include Fabry disease, transthyretin and primary 
systemic amyloidosis, hereditary sensory autonomic neuropathy-1, and ion-channel 
mutations. Immunohistopathologic evidence suggests that small-fiber dysfunction 
and denervation, especially of blood vessels, contributes to diverse symptoms, 
including postexertional malaise, postural orthostatic tachycardia, and 
functional gastrointestinal distress. Preliminary evidence implicates acute or 
chronic autoreactivity in some cases, particularly in female patients and 
otherwise healthy children and young adults. Different temporal patterns akin to 
Guillain-Barré syndrome and chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy 
have been described; here, corticosteroids and immunoglobulins, which are often 
efficacious for inflammatory neuropathic conditions, are increasingly 
considered.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Because small fibers normally grow throughout life, 
improving contributory conditions may permit regrowth, slow progression, and 
prevent permanent damage. The prognosis is often hopeful for improving quality 
of life and sometimes for abatement or resolution, particularly in the young and 
otherwise healthy individuals. Examples include diabetic, infectious, toxic, 
genetic, and inflammatory causes. The current standard of care requires prompt 
diagnosis and treatment, particularly in children and young adults, to restore 
life trajectory. Consensus diagnostic and tracking metrics should be established 
to facilitate treatment trials.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2019.2917
PMCID: PMC10021074
PMID: 31498378

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.