---
reference_id: "PMID:18658082"
title: "Severe methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) deficiency: a case report of nonclassical homocystinuria."
authors:
- Bishop L
- Kanoff R
- Charnas L
- Krenzel C
- Berry SA
- Schimmenti LA
journal: J Child Neurol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1177/0883073808315410
keywords:
- Child
- "Developmental Disabilities/blood, complications, enzymology"
- Female
- Homocysteine/blood
- "Homocystinuria/blood, complications, diagnosis, enzymology"
- Humans
- Methionine/blood
- Methylenetetrahydrofolate Reductase (NADPH2)/deficiency
- Severity of Illness Index
- Vitamin B 12
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Severe methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) deficiency: a case report of nonclassical homocystinuria.
**Authors:** Bishop L, Kanoff R, Charnas L, Krenzel C, Berry SA, Schimmenti LA
**Journal:** J Child Neurol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0883073808315410](https://doi.org/10.1177/0883073808315410)

## Content

1. J Child Neurol. 2008 Jul;23(7):823-8. doi: 10.1177/0883073808315410.

Severe methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) deficiency: a case report of
nonclassical homocystinuria.

Bishop L(1), Kanoff R, Charnas L, Krenzel C, Berry SA, Schimmenti LA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455,
USA. bisho089@umn.edu

Severe methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase deficiency is an autosomal recessive
metabolic disorder of folate metabolism causing elevated plasma homocysteine
levels and homocystinuria (MIM 236250). A developmentally delayed 10-year-old
girl presented with symptoms of progressive ataxia, dysarthria, tremor, mental
status changes, and white-matter changes on magnetic resonance imaging. These
changes occurred during a 3- to 4-month time period, with an acceleration of
symptoms during 2 to 3 weeks. The patient was found to have extremely high serum
homocysteine and low-normal serum methionine. She received treatment with
vitamin B12, folate, betaine, multivitamins, and aspirin, with subsequent
improvement of her symptoms and reduction in her serum homocysteine level. This
case emphasizes the need to include homocystinuria in the differential diagnosis
of children with acute/subacute neurological changes, particularly in the
context of developmental delay.

DOI: 10.1177/0883073808315410
PMID: 18658082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
