---
reference_id: "PMID:23562982"
title: Genetic analysis of auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder in the Korean population.
authors:
- Bae SH
- Baek JI
- Lee JD
- Song MH
- Kwon TJ
- Oh SK
- Jeong JY
- Choi JY
- Lee KY
- Kim UK
journal: Gene
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.02.057
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/genetics"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Asian People/genetics
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Exons
- Female
- Formins
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genotype
- Hearing Disorders/genetics
- "Hearing Loss, Central/genetics"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Pedigree
- Republic of Korea
- Gasdermins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic analysis of auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder in the Korean population.
**Authors:** Bae SH, Baek JI, Lee JD, Song MH, Kwon TJ, Oh SK, Jeong JY, Choi JY, Lee KY, Kim UK
**Journal:** Gene (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gene.2013.02.057](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gene.2013.02.057)

## Content

1. Gene. 2013 Jun 10;522(1):65-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.02.057. Epub 2013 Apr
4.

Genetic analysis of auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder in the Korean 
population.

Bae SH(1), Baek JI, Lee JD, Song MH, Kwon TJ, Oh SK, Jeong JY, Choi JY, Lee KY, 
Kim UK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Kyungpook National 
University, Daegu, South Korea.

Auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder (ANSD) is caused by dys-synchronous 
auditory neural response as a result of impairment of the functions of the 
auditory nerve or inner hair cells, or synapses between inner hair cells and the 
auditory nerve. To identify a causative gene causing ANSD in the Korean 
population, we conducted gene screening of the OTOF, DIAPH3, and PJVK genes in 
19 unrelated Korean patients with ANSD. A novel nonsense mutation (p.Y1064X) and 
a known pathogenic mutation (p.R1939Q) of the OTOF gene were identified in a 
patient as compound heterozygote. Pedigree analysis for these mutations showed 
co-segregation of mutation genotype and the disease in the family, and it 
supported that the p.Y1064X might be a novel genetic cause of autosomal 
recessive ANSD. A novel missense variant p.K1017R (c.3050A>G) in the DIAPH3 gene 
was also identified in the heterozygous state. In contrast, no mutation was 
detected in the PJVK gene. These results indicate that no major causative gene 
has been reported to date in the Korean population and that pathogenic mutations 
in undiscovered candidate genes may have an effect on ANSD.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.02.057
PMID: 23562982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]