---
reference_id: "PMID:38749872"
title: Insight into the early pathogenesis and therapeutic strategies of spinocerebellar ataxia type 3/machado-joseph disease from mouse models.
authors:
- Wang Y
- Zhai Y
- Wang J
journal: Parkinsonism Relat Disord
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2024.106991
keywords:
- "Machado-Joseph Disease/therapy, physiopathology"
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Mice
- Humans
- Ataxin-3/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Insight into the early pathogenesis and therapeutic strategies of spinocerebellar ataxia type 3/machado-joseph disease from mouse models.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Zhai Y, Wang J
**Journal:** Parkinsonism Relat Disord (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.parkreldis.2024.106991](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parkreldis.2024.106991)

## Content

1. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2024 Sep;126:106991. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2024.106991. Epub 2024 May 3.

Insight into the early pathogenesis and therapeutic strategies of 
spinocerebellar ataxia type 3/machado-joseph disease from mouse models.

Wang Y(1), Zhai Y(1), Wang J(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Medical and Life Sciences, Chengdu University of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(2)Department of Rehabilitation, Traditional Chinese Hospital Medicine of Qing 
Yang District of Chengdu, Sichuan, China. Electronic address: 
wj178196877@126.com.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (SCA3), also known as Machado-Joseph disease 
(MJD), is the most common subtype of hereditary ataxia (HA), which is 
characterized by motor deficits and a lack of effective treatments, and imposes 
a huge physical, mental, and financial burden on patients and their families. 
Therefore, it is important to study the early pathogenesis of spinal cerebellar 
ataxia type 3 based on a mouse model for subsequent preventive treatment and 
seeking new therapeutic targets.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2024.106991
PMID: 38749872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or 
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.