---
reference_id: "PMID:31367340"
title: "Eosinophilic disorders: evaluation of current classification and diagnostic criteria, proposal of a practical diagnostic algorithm."
authors:
- Leru PM
journal: Clin Transl Allergy
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13601-019-0277-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Eosinophilic disorders: evaluation of current classification and diagnostic criteria, proposal of a practical diagnostic algorithm.
**Authors:** Leru PM
**Journal:** Clin Transl Allergy (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13601-019-0277-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13601-019-0277-4)

## Content

1. Clin Transl Allergy. 2019 Jul 25;9:36. doi: 10.1186/s13601-019-0277-4. 
eCollection 2019.

Eosinophilic disorders: evaluation of current classification and diagnostic 
criteria, proposal of a practical diagnostic algorithm.

Leru PM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)1Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
(2)2Internal Medicine Department, Colentina Clinical Hospital, Sos. Stefan cel 
Mare, No. 19-21, District 2, 020125 Bucharest, Romania.

Eosinophilic disorders represent a group of pathologic conditions with highly 
heterogeneous pathophysiology and clinical presentation and variable prognosis, 
ranging from asymptomatic or mild, to severe and complex cases, with fatal 
outcome. Interest in this group of disorders has increased during the last two 
decades, with consistent progress made regarding understanding of molecular 
mechanisms, refining of diagnostic criteria, classification and evaluation of 
therapeutic options. There are still many gaps and difficulties in evaluating 
eosinophilic syndromes and diseases in medical practice. The disease prognosis 
depends mainly on the cause and mechanism of eosinophilia, on severity of organ 
dysfunction and on accurate diagnosis and response to treatment. Besides primary 
hypereosinophilic syndromes and secondary (reactive) eosinophilias, many 
associated or idiopathic forms have been described, making this topic a complex 
and difficult medical entity. An important aim of the experts in the field is to 
agree upon a more clear and practically useful classification, a better 
characterization of various phenotypes and endotypes of eosinophilic diseases 
and to identify novel biomarkers and more effective therapies. The aim of this 
paper is to review recent data from the literature regarding definition, 
classification and diagnosis criteria of eosinophilic diseases and to propose a 
revised and updated diagnostic algorithm useful in clinical practice.

DOI: 10.1186/s13601-019-0277-4
PMCID: PMC6657042
PMID: 31367340

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe author declares no 
conflict of interest in relation with this manuscript.