---
reference_id: "PMID:31203799"
title: "Comprehensive in silico Study of GLUT10: Prediction of Possible Substrate Binding Sites and Interacting Molecules."
authors:
- Hosen MJ
- Hasan M
- Chakraborty S
- Abir RA
- Zubaer A
- Coucke P
journal: Curr Pharm Biotechnol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.2174/1389201020666190613152030
keywords:
- Arteries/abnormalities
- Binding Sites
- Biological Transport
- "Crystallography, X-Ray"
- "Databases, Factual"
- "Glucose Transport Proteins, Facilitative/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Joint Instability/genetics
- Metabolomics
- Molecular Docking Simulation
- Muscles/enzymology
- Mutation
- "Skin Diseases, Genetic/genetics"
- Substrate Specificity
- Vascular Malformations/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comprehensive in silico Study of GLUT10: Prediction of Possible Substrate Binding Sites and Interacting Molecules.
**Authors:** Hosen MJ, Hasan M, Chakraborty S, Abir RA, Zubaer A, Coucke P
**Journal:** Curr Pharm Biotechnol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1389201020666190613152030](https://doi.org/10.2174/1389201020666190613152030)

## Content

1. Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2020;21(2):117-130. doi:
10.2174/1389201020666190613152030.

Comprehensive in silico Study of GLUT10: Prediction of Possible Substrate
Binding Sites and Interacting Molecules.

Hosen MJ(1), Hasan M(1)(2)(3), Chakraborty S(1)(3), Abir RA(1)(3), Zubaer
A(3)(4), Coucke P(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Shahjalal University of
Science and Technology, Sylhet-3114, Bangladesh.
(2)Department of Pharmaceuticals and Industrial Biotechnology, Sylhet
Agricultural University, Sylhet- 3100, Bangladesh.
(3)CANSi Research Institute, Bioinformatics Laboratory, Sylhet, Bangladesh.
(4)Department of Microbiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
(5)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Corneel Heymanslaan
10, Ghent 9000, Belgium.

OBJECTIVES: The Arterial Tortuosity Syndrome (ATS) is an autosomal recessive
connective tissue disorder, mainly characterized by tortuosity and stenosis of
the arteries with a propensity towards aneurysm formation and dissection. It is
caused by mutations in the SLC2A10 gene that encodes the facilitative glucose
transporter GLUT10. The molecules transported by and interacting with GLUT10
have still not been unambiguously identified. Hence, the study attempts to
identify both the substrate binding site of GLUT10 and the molecules interacting
with this site.
METHODS: As High-resolution X-ray crystallographic structure of GLUT10 was not
available, 3D homology model of GLUT10 in open conformation was constructed.
Further, molecular docking and bioinformatics investigation were employed.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Blind docking of nine reported potential in vitro
substrates with this 3D homology model revealed that substrate binding site is
possibly made with PRO531, GLU507, GLU437, TRP432, ALA506, LEU519, LEU505,
LEU433, GLN525, GLN510, LYS372, LYS373, SER520, SER124, SER533, SER504, SER436
amino acid residues. Virtual screening of all metabolites from the Human Serum
Metabolome Database and muscle metabolites from Human Metabolite Database (HMDB)
against the GLUT10 revealed possible substrates and interacting molecules for
GLUT10, which were found to be involved directly or partially in ATS progression
or different arterial disorders. Reported mutation screening revealed that a
highly emergent point mutation (c. 1309G>A, p. Glu437Lys) is located in the
predicted substrate binding site region.
CONCLUSION: Virtual screening expands the possibility to explore more compounds
that can interact with GLUT10 and may aid in understanding the mechanisms
leading to ATS.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1389201020666190613152030
PMID: 31203799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
