---
reference_id: "PMID:30819278"
title: "Pathophysiology of atopic dermatitis: Clinical implications."
authors:
- Kim J
- Kim BE
- Leung DYM
journal: Allergy Asthma Proc
year: '2019'
doi: 10.2500/aap.2019.40.4202
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology of atopic dermatitis: Clinical implications.
**Authors:** Kim J, Kim BE, Leung DYM
**Journal:** Allergy Asthma Proc (2019)
**DOI:** [10.2500/aap.2019.40.4202](https://doi.org/10.2500/aap.2019.40.4202)

## Content

1. Allergy Asthma Proc. 2019 Mar 1;40(2):84-92. doi: 10.2500/aap.2019.40.4202.

Pathophysiology of atopic dermatitis: Clinical implications.

Kim J(1), Kim BE(2), Leung DYM(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Pediatrics, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan 
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, National Jewish Health, Denver, Colorado.

Atopic dermatitis (AD) is the most common chronic inflammatory skin disease. 
Genetic predisposition, epidermal barrier disruption, and dysregulation of the 
immune system are some of the critical components of AD. An impaired skin 
barrier may be the initial step in the development of the atopic march as well 
as AD, which leads to further skin inflammation and allergic sensitization. Type 
2 cytokines as well as interleukin 17 and interleukin 22 contribute to skin 
barrier dysfunction and the development of AD. New insights into the 
pathophysiology of AD have focused on epidermal lipid profiles, neuroimmune 
interactions, and microbial dysbiosis. Newer therapeutic strategies focus on 
improving skin barrier function and targeting polarized immune pathways found in 
AD. Further understanding of AD pathophysiology will allow us to achieve a more 
precision medicine approach to the prevention and the treatment of AD.

DOI: 10.2500/aap.2019.40.4202
PMCID: PMC6399565
PMID: 30819278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: D.Y.M. Leung has consulted for Regeneron, 
Sanofi, Novartis and Genzyme. The remaining authors have no conflicts of 
interest to declare pertaining to this article