---
reference_id: "PMID:41109780"
title: Spatial profiling of giant cell arteritis tissues reveals immune heterogeneity and potential predictors of glucocorticoid response.
authors:
- Ansalone C
- McAllister S
- Pickerill ES
- Zhang L
- Gemperline DC
- Peacock A
- Gupta I
- Mcgovern D
- Kellior V
- Qian E
- Tulunay Virlan A
- Vieri ML
- Leslie H
- Doncheva Y
- Kennedy Dietrich C
- Wright S
- Cauchi P
- Beckman T
- Hutton L
- Cole J
- Jamieson NB
- Wulur IH
- Nirula A
- McInnes IB
- Benschop RJ
- Goodyear CS
- Basu N
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1016/j.ard.2025.09.009
keywords:
- Humans
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/drug therapy, immunology, genetics, pathology"
- Glucocorticoids/therapeutic use
- Female
- Male
- Aged
- Remission Induction
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Plasma Cells/immunology
- Macrophages/immunology
- Middle Aged
- "Temporal Arteries/immunology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spatial profiling of giant cell arteritis tissues reveals immune heterogeneity and potential predictors of glucocorticoid response.
**Authors:** Ansalone C, McAllister S, Pickerill ES, Zhang L, Gemperline DC, Peacock A, Gupta I, Mcgovern D, Kellior V, Qian E, Tulunay Virlan A, Vieri ML, Leslie H, Doncheva Y, Kennedy Dietrich C, Wright S, Cauchi P, Beckman T, Hutton L, Cole J, Jamieson NB, Wulur IH, Nirula A, McInnes IB, Benschop RJ, Goodyear CS, Basu N
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ard.2025.09.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ard.2025.09.009)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2026 Mar;85(3):534-546. doi: 10.1016/j.ard.2025.09.009. Epub
2025  Oct 18.

Spatial profiling of giant cell arteritis tissues reveals immune heterogeneity 
and potential predictors of glucocorticoid response.

Ansalone C(1), McAllister S(2), Pickerill ES(3), Zhang L(3), Gemperline DC(3), 
Peacock A(2), Gupta I(2), Mcgovern D(4), Kellior V(2), Qian E(2), Tulunay Virlan 
A(2), Vieri ML(2), Leslie H(5), Doncheva Y(5), Kennedy Dietrich C(5), Wright 
S(4), Cauchi P(4), Beckman T(4), Hutton L(4), Cole J(2), Jamieson NB(5), Wulur 
IH(3), Nirula A(6), McInnes IB(2), Benschop RJ(3), Goodyear CS(2), Basu N(7).

Author information:
(1)School of Infection and Immunity, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK. 
Electronic address: Cecilia.ansalone@glasgow.ac.uk.
(2)School of Infection and Immunity, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(3)Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(4)NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, Glasgow, UK.
(5)School of Cancer Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(6)Lilly Biotechnology Center, San Diego, CA, USA.
(7)School of Infection and Immunity, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK. 
Electronic address: neil.basu@glasgow.ac.uk.

OBJECTIVES: Giant cell arteritis (GCA) is an immune-mediated vasculitis of 
large- and medium-sized arteries that can lead to systemic symptoms and 
irreversible vision loss. Glucocorticoids (GCs) remain the primary treatment but 
fail to induce sustained remission (SR) in approximately half of patients, 
resulting in disease relapses and significant treatment-related toxicity. We 
aimed to identify tissue-based markers at disease onset capable of 
distinguishing patients who later achieve SR from those who do not 
(non-remission [NR]) under GC monotherapy.
METHODS: Using spatial biology techniques, we performed a comprehensive analysis 
of GCA-affected arterial tissues obtained at disease onset, correlating 
molecular profiles with clinical trajectory. We compared gene expression and 
immune cell populations between SR and NR groups, corroborated key findings by 
immunohistochemistry, and evaluated the diagnostic performance of identified 
biomarkers.
RESULTS: Patients with NR exhibited an upregulation of extracellular matrix 
remodelling (ECM) and T cell activation pathways, reflecting persistent 
inflammation and fibrotic-like responses. By contrast, SR cases were 
distinguished by an enrichment of immunoglobulin G-producing plasma cells in the 
adventitia, which correlated with increased macrophage infiltration in the 
intima. Quantitative analyses suggested that combining plasma cell and 
macrophage markers could accurately predict GC responsiveness.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings reveal an immunopathologic signature in GCA at 
diagnosis, characterised by plasma cell-rich infiltrates associated with 
favourable outcomes, and ECM- and T cell-associated inflammation enriched in 
GC-refractory cases. These insights could foster a precision medicine approach 
to GCA management, enabling patient stratification for GC-sparing therapies and 
optimising patient outcomes.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ard.2025.09.009
PMID: 41109780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests ESP, LZ, DCG, IHW, AN, and 
RJB reports financial support was provided by Eli Lilly and Company. ESP, LZ, 
DCG, IHW, AN, and RJB reports a relationship with Eli Lilly and Company that 
includes: employment and equity or stocks. CSG reports a relationship with Eli 
Lilly and Company that includes: funding grants. CSG reports a relationship with 
AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP, Galvani, MedAnnex, and Bristol-Myers Squibb 
(BMS) that includes: consulting or advisory and funding grants. NB reports a 
relationship with Eli Lilly and Company that includes: consulting or advisory 
and funding grants. NB reports a relationship with Galapagos that includes: 
consulting or advisory. NB reports a relationship with AbbVie Inc that includes: 
speaking and lecture fees. NJ reports a relationship with NanoString 
Technologies Inc that includes: speaking and lecture fees. IM reports a 
relationship with AbbVie, AstraZeneca, Absci, Amgen, BMS, Boehringer, Causeway 
Therapeutics, Cabaletta, Compugen, Dextera, Eli Lilly, Gilead, Janssen, Montai, 
Moonlake, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, Recludix, Sanofi, and UCB that includes: 
consulting or advisory, funding grants, and speaking and lecture fees. IM 
reports a relationship with Cabaletta, Compugen, Causeway Therapeutics, and 
Dextera that includes: equity or stocks. If there are other authors, they 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.