---
reference_id: "PMID:35662478"
title: EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines on haemochromatosis.
authors:
- European Association for the Study of the Liver
journal: J Hepatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2022.03.033
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines on haemochromatosis.
**Authors:** European Association for the Study of the Liver
**Journal:** J Hepatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jhep.2022.03.033](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2022.03.033)

## Content

1. J Hepatol. 2022 Aug;77(2):479-502. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2022.03.033. Epub 2022 
Jun 1.

EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines on haemochromatosis.

European Association for the Study of the Liver.

Collaborators: Zoller H, Schaefer B, Vanclooster A, Griffiths B, Bardou-Jacquet 
E, Corradini E, Porto G, Ryan J, Cornberg M.

Erratum in
    J Hepatol. 2023 Nov;79(5):1341. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2023.09.002.

Haemochromatosis is characterised by elevated transferrin saturation (TSAT) and 
progressive iron loading that mainly affects the liver. Early diagnosis and 
treatment by phlebotomy can prevent cirrhosis, hepatocellular carcinoma, 
diabetes, arthropathy and other complications. In patients homozygous for 
p.Cys282Tyr in HFE, provisional iron overload based on serum iron parameters 
(TSAT >45% and ferritin >200 μg/L in females and TSAT >50% and ferritin >300 
μg/L in males and postmenopausal women) is sufficient to diagnose 
haemochromatosis. In patients with high TSAT and elevated ferritin but other HFE 
genotypes, diagnosis requires the presence of hepatic iron overload on MRI or 
liver biopsy. The stage of liver fibrosis and other end-organ damage should be 
carefully assessed at diagnosis because they determine disease management. 
Patients with advanced fibrosis should be included in a screening programme for 
hepatocellular carcinoma. Treatment targets for phlebotomy are ferritin <50 μg/L 
during the induction phase and <100 μg/L during the maintenance phase.

Copyright © 2022 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2022.03.033
PMID: 35662478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest Please refer to the 
accompanying EASL disclosure forms for details.