---
reference_id: "PMID:40436118"
title: Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome.
authors:
- Walsh PR
- Kavanagh D
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2025.05.010
keywords:
- Humans
- Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome/immunology
- Thrombotic Microangiopathies/immunology
- Animals
- Complement C5/immunology
- Complement Membrane Attack Complex/immunology
- Complement Activation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome.
**Authors:** Walsh PR, Kavanagh D
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2025.05.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2025.05.010)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2025 Aug;156(2):224-236. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2025.05.010. Epub 2025 May 26.

Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome.

Walsh PR(1), Kavanagh D(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Complement Therapeutics Research Group, Translational and Clinical 
Research Institute, Newcastle University, and the National Renal Complement 
Therapeutics Centre, Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle upon Tyne, United 
Kingdom.
(2)From the Complement Therapeutics Research Group, Translational and Clinical 
Research Institute, Newcastle University, and the National Renal Complement 
Therapeutics Centre, Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle upon Tyne, United 
Kingdom. Electronic address: david.kavanagh@ncl.ac.uk.

Hemolytic uremic syndromes are a heterogeneous group of conditions with 
differing underlying pathophysiology. These all result in pathologic features of 
thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA), which cause endothelial damage and organ 
injury. TMAs manifest with a microangiopathic hemolytic anaemia, 
thrombocytopenia, and commonly acute kidney injury. The past two decades have 
revealed many of the immunologic, metabolic, ribosomal, cell-signaling, and 
clotting pathways responsible for disease. The understanding of the role of the 
membrane attack complex in some TMAs has led to the introduction of 
pharmacologic inhibition of complement C5, which greatly improved prognosis. 
This review summarizes the current understanding of the pathogenesis of 
complement-dependent and non-complement-dependent TMAs.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2025.05.010
PMID: 40436118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]