---
reference_id: "PMID:30623979"
title: Variants of the ectodysplasin A1 receptor gene underlying homozygous cases of autosomal recessive hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia.
authors:
- Wohlfart S
- Schneider H
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/cge.13503
keywords:
- Adult
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia, Hypohidrotic, Autosomal Recessive/diagnosis, genetics"
- Edar Receptor/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Radiography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variants of the ectodysplasin A1 receptor gene underlying homozygous cases of autosomal recessive hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia.
**Authors:** Wohlfart S, Schneider H
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.13503](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.13503)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2019 Mar;95(3):427-432. doi: 10.1111/cge.13503.

Variants of the ectodysplasin A1 receptor gene underlying homozygous cases of 
autosomal recessive hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia.

Wohlfart S(1), Schneider H(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Ectodermal Dysplasias and Department of Pediatrics, University 
Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.

Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED) is a rare genetic condition resulting 
from defective development of ectodermal derivatives, such as hair, teeth, and 
sweat glands. Autosomal recessive (AR) forms of HED may be caused by pathogenic 
variants of the ectodysplasin A1 receptor (EDAR) gene that encodes a receptor 
involved in the NF-κB signaling pathway. Here, we describe three cases of AR-HED 
in families of Turkish, Austrian, and German-American origin (with or without 
known consanguinity). In these cases, two out-of-frame deletions and a 
pathogenic missense variant of EDAR were found to be disease-causing due to 
reduced availability of the respective messenger RNA or impaired interaction of 
the encoded protein with its binding partner leading to diminished signal 
transduction. The same missense variant, c.1258C>T (p.Arg420Trp), has actually 
been reported to be restricted to the Icelandic population and to be associated 
with non-syndromic tooth agenesis but not HED. As our patient has no known 
relationship to Icelandic individuals and displays a rather severe HED 
phenotype, we suggest that EDAR-Arg420Trp is a more widespread variant, possibly 
with variable clinical expressivity.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.13503
PMID: 30623979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]