---
reference_id: "PMID:27477828"
title: "Unravelling 5-oxoprolinuria (pyroglutamic aciduria) due to bi-allelic OPLAH mutations: 20 new mutations in 14 families."
authors:
- Sass JO
- Gemperle-Britschgi C
- Tarailo-Graovac M
- Patel N
- Walter M
- Jordanova A
- Alfadhel M
- Barić I
- Çoker M
- Damli-Huber A
- Faqeih EA
- García Segarra N
- Geraghty MT
- Jåtun BM
- Kalkan Uçar S
- Kriewitz M
- Rauchenzauner M
- Bilić K
- Tournev I
- Till C
- Sayson B
- Beumer D
- Ye CX
- Zhang LH
- Vallance H
- Alkuraya FS
- van Karnebeek CD
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.07.008
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Alleles
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/enzymology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Glutathione/metabolism
- "Glutathione Synthase/deficiency, genetics"
- Heterozygote
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mutation
- "Pyroglutamate Hydrolase/deficiency, genetics"
- Pyrrolidonecarboxylic Acid/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unravelling 5-oxoprolinuria (pyroglutamic aciduria) due to bi-allelic OPLAH mutations: 20 new mutations in 14 families.
**Authors:** Sass JO, Gemperle-Britschgi C, Tarailo-Graovac M, Patel N, Walter M, Jordanova A, Alfadhel M, Barić I, Çoker M, Damli-Huber A, Faqeih EA, García Segarra N, Geraghty MT, Jåtun BM, Kalkan Uçar S, Kriewitz M, Rauchenzauner M, Bilić K, Tournev I, Till C, Sayson B, Beumer D, Ye CX, Zhang LH, Vallance H, Alkuraya FS, van Karnebeek CD
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.07.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.07.008)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2016 Sep;119(1-2):44-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.07.008.
Epub  2016 Jul 22.

Unravelling 5-oxoprolinuria (pyroglutamic aciduria) due to bi-allelic OPLAH
mutations: 20 new mutations in 14 families.

Sass JO(1), Gemperle-Britschgi C(2), Tarailo-Graovac M(3), Patel N(4), Walter
M(5), Jordanova A(6), Alfadhel M(7), Barić I(8), Çoker M(9), Damli-Huber A(10),
Faqeih EA(11), García Segarra N(12), Geraghty MT(13), Jåtun BM(14), Kalkan Uçar
S(9), Kriewitz M(15), Rauchenzauner M(16), Bilić K(17), Tournev I(18), Till
C(19), Sayson B(20), Beumer D(20), Ye CX(5), Zhang LH(21), Vallance H(22),
Alkuraya FS(4), van Karnebeek CD(21).

Author information:
(1)Bioanalytics & Biochemistry, Department of Natural Sciences, Bonn-Rhein-Sieg
University of Applied Sciences, Rheinbach, Germany; Clinical Chemistry &
Biochemistry, Children's Research Center, University Children's Hospital,
Zürich, Switzerland; Laboratory of Clinical Biochemistry and Metabolism,
University Children's Hospital, Freiburg, Germany. Electronic address:
joern.oliver.sass@h-brs.de.
(2)Clinical Chemistry & Biochemistry, Children's Research Center, University
Children's Hospital, Zürich, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
BC, Canada; Centre for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics, Vancouver, BC,
Canada.
(4)Developmental Genetics Unit, Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist
Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Laboratory of Clinical Biochemistry and Metabolism, University Children's
Hospital, Freiburg, Germany.
(6)Molecular Neurogenomics Group, VIB Department of Molecular Genetics,
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium; Molecular Medicine Center, Department
of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria.
(7)Genetics Division, Department of Pediatrics, King Saud bin Abdulaziz
University for Health Sciences King Abdulaziz Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Center Zagreb, University of
Zagreb, School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia.
(9)Metabolism Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Ege University Medical Faculty,
Izmir, Turkey.
(10)kbo-Kinderzentrum München, München, Germany.
(11)Children's Hospital, King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(12)Center for Molecular Diseases (CMM), Department of Pediatrics, Centre
hospitalier universitaire vaudois (CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland.
(13)Metabolic Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Eastern
Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(14)Barneavdelinga, Ålesund sjukehus, Ålesund, Norway.
(15)Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Verbundkrankenhaus Bernkastel/Wittlich, Wittlich,
Germany.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, Hospital Ostallgäu-Kaufbeuren, Kaufbeuren,
Germany.
(17)Clinical Institute of Laboratory Diagnostics, University Hospital Center
Zagreb, Croatia.
(18)Department of Neurology, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria; Department of
Cognitive Science and Psychology, New Bulgarian University, Sofia, Bulgaria.
(19)Bioanalytics & Biochemistry, Department of Natural Sciences, Bonn-Rhein-Sieg
University of Applied Sciences, Rheinbach, Germany.
(20)Department of Pediatrics, BC Children's Hospital, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(21)Centre for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics, Vancouver, BC, Canada;
Department of Pediatrics, BC Children's Hospital, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; Child and Family Research Institute, Vancouver,
BC, Canada.
(22)Child and Family Research Institute, Vancouver, BC, Canada; Department of
Pathology, Laboratory Medicine, BC Children's and Women's Hospital, University
of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

Primary 5-oxoprolinuria (pyroglutamic aciduria) is caused by a genetic defect in
the γ-glutamyl cycle, affecting either glutathione synthetase or 5-oxoprolinase.
While several dozens of patients with glutathione synthetase deficiency have
been reported, with hemolytic anemia representing the clinical key feature,
5-oxoprolinase deficiency due to OPLAH mutations is less frequent and so far has
not attracted much attention. This has prompted us to investigate the clinical
phenotype as well as the underlying genotype in patients from 14 families of
various ethnic backgrounds who underwent diagnostic mutation analysis following
the detection of 5-oxoprolinuria. In all patients with 5-oxoprolinuria studied,
bi-allelic mutations in OPLAH were indicated. An autosomal recessive mode of
inheritance for 5-oxoprolinase deficiency is further supported by the
identification of a single mutation in all 9/14 parent sample sets investigated
(except for the father of one patient whose result suggests homozygosity), and
the absence of 5-oxoprolinuria in all tested heterozygotes. It is remarkable,
that all 20 mutations identified were novel and private to the respective
families. Clinical features were highly variable and in several sib pairs, did
not segregate with 5-oxoprolinuria. Although a pathogenic role of 5-oxoprolinase
deficiency remains possible, this is not supported by our findings. Additional
patient ascertainment and long-term follow-up is needed to establish the benign
nature of this inborn error of metabolism. It is important that all symptomatic
patients with persistently elevated levels of 5-oxoproline and no obvious
explanation are investigated for the genetic etiology.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.07.008
PMID: 27477828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
