---
reference_id: "PMID:20732351"
title: Prevalence of G6PD deficiency in a large cohort of HIV-infected patients.
authors:
- Serpa JA
- Villarreal-Williams E
- Giordano TP
journal: J Infect
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2010.08.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of G6PD deficiency in a large cohort of HIV-infected patients.
**Authors:** Serpa JA, Villarreal-Williams E, Giordano TP
**Journal:** J Infect (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jinf.2010.08.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinf.2010.08.003)

## Content

1. J Infect. 2010 Nov;61(5):399-402. doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2010.08.003. Epub 2010
Aug  21.

Prevalence of G6PD deficiency in a large cohort of HIV-infected patients.

Serpa JA(1), Villarreal-Williams E, Giordano TP.

Author information:
(1)Section of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Baylor College of 
Medicine and Thomas Street Health Center, Harris County Hospital District, 
Houston, TX 77030, United States. jaserpaa@bcm.edu

BACKGROUND: Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is the most 
common human enzyme defect. Screening for this condition in HIV-infected 
patients from susceptible ethnic groups is recommended based on expert opinion. 
Here we determined the prevalence of G6PD deficiency and the occurrence of 
G6PD-related hemolytic events in a large cohort of patients.
METHODS: We identified all HIV-infected adults who presented as new patients at 
a single urban HIV clinic between 02/01/2007 and 01/31/2009. Demographic and 
laboratory data including G6PD results were collected. In addition, outpatient 
and inpatient medical records of G6PD deficient patients were reviewed for 
episodes of hemolytic anemia.
RESULTS: A total of 1172 patients were identified and G6PD testing was performed 
in 1110 (94.7%). Overall, 75 (6.8%) subjects had G6PD deficiency. Rates were 
higher among African Americans (68/699; 9.7%) and Hispanics (5/253; 2.0%). Only 
one non-Hispanic White subject had G6PD deficiency (1/153; 0.7%). At baseline, 
hemoglobin concentrations were similar among subjects with or without G6PD 
deficiency. Among patients with G6PD deficiency, 40 (53.3%) were prescribed 
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole or dapsone. During follow-up, five (6.7%) of these 
patients developed acute hemolytic anemia.
DISCUSSION: These results provide strong clinical evidence for recommending G6PD 
testing in HIV-infected subjects from susceptible ethnic backgrounds.

Copyright © 2010 The British Infection Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinf.2010.08.003
PMID: 20732351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]