---
reference_id: "PMID:36820155"
title: "Investigation of serum calcium and vitamin D levels in superior semicircular canal dehiscence syndrome: A case control study."
authors:
- Tikka T
- Mohd Slim MA
- Ton T
- Sheldon A
- Clark LJ
- Kontorinis G
journal: J Otol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.joto.2022.12.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Investigation of serum calcium and vitamin D levels in superior semicircular canal dehiscence syndrome: A case control study.
**Authors:** Tikka T, Mohd Slim MA, Ton T, Sheldon A, Clark LJ, Kontorinis G
**Journal:** J Otol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.joto.2022.12.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joto.2022.12.005)

## Content

1. J Otol. 2023 Jan;18(1):49-54. doi: 10.1016/j.joto.2022.12.005. Epub 2022 Dec
26.

Investigation of serum calcium and vitamin D levels in superior semicircular 
canal dehiscence syndrome: A case control study.

Tikka T(1), Mohd Slim MA(1), Ton T(1), Sheldon A(1), Clark LJ(1), Kontorinis 
G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ear, Nose and Throat Surgery, Queen Elizabeth University 
Hospital, 345 Govan Rd, Glasgow, G51 4TF, United Kingdom.

OBJECTIVE: It remains unknown whether calcium metabolism has any effect on the 
clinical presentation of superior semicircular canal dehiscence (SSCD). Our aim 
was to analyse the adjusted calcium and vitamin D levels in SSCD patients 
compared to a control group.
METHODS: This was a prospective case-control study performed in a tertiary 
referral center, university teaching hospital in the UK. It included all new 
patients with SSCD seen in a dedicated skull base clinic over a 5-year period 
(2015-2019) compared to a gender and age matched control group. The main outcome 
of the study was adjusted calcium and Vitamin D levels between the two groups.
RESULTS: A total of 31 SSCD patients were recruited with a matched number of 
control patients. The mean Vitamin D level on the SSCD group was 44.8 nmoL/l 
(SD: 20.8) compared to 47.5 nmoL/l (SD: 27.4) on the control group (p = 0.702). 
Mean Adjusted calcium level was 2.34 mmoL/l (SD: 0.7) for SSCD compared to 
2.41 mmoL/l (SD: 0.11) for controls (p = 0.01), being within normal limits for 
both the SSCD and the control group.
CONCLUSION: Our study did not identify a link between Vitamin D levels and 
presence of SSCD. Normal adjusted calcium values were found in both groups. 
Despite that a statistically significant lower calcium level was found in the 
SSCD group which could indicate that suboptimal levels of calcium may affect the 
micro-environment of the otic capsule at the SSC region.

© [copyright 2022] PLA General Hospital Department of Otolaryngology Head and 
Neck Surgery. Production and hosting by Elsevier (Singapore) Pte Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.joto.2022.12.005
PMCID: PMC9937815
PMID: 36820155

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.