---
reference_id: "PMID:27529121"
title: Pulmonary Fibrosis in Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome.
authors:
- Vicary GW
- Vergne Y
- Santiago-Cornier A
- Young LR
- Roman J
journal: Ann Am Thorac Soc
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201603-186FR
keywords:
- Animals
- Biomarkers
- Disease Progression
- "Hermanski-Pudlak Syndrome/complications, ethnology"
- Hispanic or Latino
- Humans
- Indoles/therapeutic use
- Lung Transplantation
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mice
- Mutation
- Puerto Rico/ethnology
- Pulmonary Fibrosis/therapy
- Pyridones/therapeutic use
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pulmonary Fibrosis in Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome.
**Authors:** Vicary GW, Vergne Y, Santiago-Cornier A, Young LR, Roman J
**Journal:** Ann Am Thorac Soc (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1513/AnnalsATS.201603-186FR](https://doi.org/10.1513/AnnalsATS.201603-186FR)

## Content

1. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2016 Oct;13(10):1839-1846. doi: 
10.1513/AnnalsATS.201603-186FR.

Pulmonary Fibrosis in Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome.

Vicary GW(1), Vergne Y(2), Santiago-Cornier A(2), Young LR(3), Roman J(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)1 Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Disorders Medicine, 
Department of Medicine, and Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, 
University of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, Kentucky.
(2)2 Department of Public Health, Ponce Health Sciences University, Ponce, 
Puerto Rico.
(3)3 Division of Allergy, Immunology, and Pulmonary Medicine, Department of 
Pediatrics, and Division of Allergy, Pulmonary, and Critical Care Medicine, 
Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, 
Tennessee; and.
(4)4 Louisville Robley Rex Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Louisville, 
Kentucky.

Erratum in
    Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2017 Jan;14(1):152. doi: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.141erratum.

Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome (HPS) is a rare autosomal recessive genetic disorder 
characterized by oculocutaneous albinism and a bleeding diathesis due to 
platelet dysfunction. More than 50% of cases worldwide are diagnosed on the 
Caribbean island of Puerto Rico. Genetic testing plays a growing role in 
diagnosis; however, not all patients with HPS have identified genetic mutations. 
In Puerto Rico, patients with HPS are often identified shortly after birth by 
their albinism, although the degree of hypopigmentation is highly variable. Ten 
subtypes have been described. Patients with HPS-1, HPS-2, and HPS-4 tend to 
develop pulmonary fibrosis in Puerto Rico; 100% of patients with HPS-1 develop 
HPS-PF. HPS-PF and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis are considered similar entities 
(albeit with distinct causes) because both can show similar histological disease 
patterns. However, in contrast to idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, HPS-PF 
manifests much earlier, often at 30-40 years of age. The progression of HPS-PF 
is characterized by the development of dyspnea and increasingly debilitating 
hypoxemia. No therapeutic interventions are currently approved by the U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration for the treatment of HPS and HPS-PF. However, the 
approval of two new antifibrotic drugs, pirfenidone and nintedanib, has prompted 
new interest in identifying drugs capable of reversing or halting the 
progression of HPS-PF. Thus, lung transplantation remains the only potentially 
life-prolonging treatment. At present, two clinical trials are recruiting 
patients with HPS-PF to identify biomarkers for disease progression. Advances in 
the diagnosis and management of these patients will require the establishment of 
multidisciplinary centers of excellence staffed by experts in this disease.

DOI: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201603-186FR
PMCID: PMC5466158
PMID: 27529121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]