---
reference_id: "PMID:30707186"
title: Early-onset Alzheimer Disease and Its Variants.
authors:
- Mendez MF
journal: Continuum (Minneap Minn)
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1212/CON.0000000000000687
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early-onset Alzheimer Disease and Its Variants.
**Authors:** Mendez MF
**Journal:** Continuum (Minneap Minn) (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1212/CON.0000000000000687](https://doi.org/10.1212/CON.0000000000000687)

## Content

1. Continuum (Minneap Minn). 2019 Feb;25(1):34-51. doi: 
10.1212/CON.0000000000000687.

Early-onset Alzheimer Disease and Its Variants.

Mendez MF.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Early-onset Alzheimer disease (AD) is defined as having an 
age of onset younger than 65 years. While early-onset AD is often overshadowed 
by the more common late-onset AD, recognition of the differences between early- 
and late-onset AD is important for clinicians.
RECENT FINDINGS: Early-onset AD comprises about 5% to 6% of cases of AD and 
includes a substantial percentage of phenotypic variants that differ from the 
usual amnestic presentation of typical AD. Characteristics of early-onset AD in 
comparison to late-onset AD include a larger genetic predisposition (familial 
mutations and summed polygenic risk), more aggressive course, more frequent 
delay in diagnosis, higher prevalence of traumatic brain injury, less memory 
impairment and greater involvement of other cognitive domains on presentation, 
and greater psychosocial difficulties. Neuroimaging features of early-onset AD 
in comparison to late-onset AD include greater frequency of hippocampal sparing 
and posterior neocortical atrophy, increased tau burden, and greater connectomic 
changes affecting frontoparietal networks rather than the default mode network.
SUMMARY: Early-onset AD differs substantially from late-onset AD, with different 
phenotypic presentations, greater genetic predisposition, and differences in 
neuropathologic burden and topography. Early-onset AD more often presents with 
nonamnestic phenotypic variants that spare the hippocampi and with greater tau 
burden in posterior neocortices. The early-onset AD phenotypic variants involve 
different neural networks than typical AD. The management of early-onset AD is 
similar to that of late-onset AD but with special emphasis on targeting specific 
cognitive areas and more age-appropriate psychosocial support and education.

DOI: 10.1212/CON.0000000000000687
PMCID: PMC6538053
PMID: 30707186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]