---
reference_id: "PMID:20077426"
title: A non-enzymatic function of 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 10 is required for mitochondrial integrity and cell survival.
authors:
- Rauschenberger K
- Schöler K
- Sass JO
- Sauer S
- Djuric Z
- Rumig C
- Wolf NI
- Okun JG
- Kölker S
- Schwarz H
- Fischer C
- Grziwa B
- Runz H
- Nümann A
- Shafqat N
- Kavanagh KL
- Hämmerling G
- Wanders RJ
- Shield JP
- Wendel U
- Stern D
- Nawroth P
- Hoffmann GF
- Bartram CR
- Arnold B
- Bierhaus A
- Oppermann U
- Steinbeisser H
- Zschocke J
journal: EMBO Mol Med
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1002/emmm.200900055
keywords:
- "3-Hydroxyacyl CoA Dehydrogenases/deficiency, metabolism"
- Animals
- Apoptosis
- Cell Survival
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Fibroblasts/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- Gene Deletion
- Genetic Complementation Test
- Humans
- "Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenases/deficiency, metabolism"
- Infant
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mitochondria/physiology, ultrastructure"
- "Models, Molecular"
- Neurons/physiology
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- Xenopus
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A non-enzymatic function of 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 10 is required for mitochondrial integrity and cell survival.
**Authors:** Rauschenberger K, Schöler K, Sass JO, Sauer S, Djuric Z, Rumig C, Wolf NI, Okun JG, Kölker S, Schwarz H, Fischer C, Grziwa B, Runz H, Nümann A, Shafqat N, Kavanagh KL, Hämmerling G, Wanders RJ, Shield JP, Wendel U, Stern D, Nawroth P, Hoffmann GF, Bartram CR, Arnold B, Bierhaus A, Oppermann U, Steinbeisser H, Zschocke J
**Journal:** EMBO Mol Med (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/emmm.200900055](https://doi.org/10.1002/emmm.200900055)

## Content

1. EMBO Mol Med. 2010 Feb;2(2):51-62. doi: 10.1002/emmm.200900055.

A non-enzymatic function of 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 10 is 
required for mitochondrial integrity and cell survival.

Rauschenberger K(1), Schöler K, Sass JO, Sauer S, Djuric Z, Rumig C, Wolf NI, 
Okun JG, Kölker S, Schwarz H, Fischer C, Grziwa B, Runz H, Nümann A, Shafqat N, 
Kavanagh KL, Hämmerling G, Wanders RJ, Shield JP, Wendel U, Stern D, Nawroth P, 
Hoffmann GF, Bartram CR, Arnold B, Bierhaus A, Oppermann U, Steinbeisser H, 
Zschocke J.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany.

Deficiency of the mitochondrial enzyme 2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA 
dehydrogenase involved in isoleucine metabolism causes an organic aciduria with 
atypical neurodegenerative course. The disease-causing gene is HSD17B10 and 
encodes 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 10 (HSD10), a protein also 
implicated in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. Here we show that 
clinical symptoms in patients are not correlated with residual enzymatic 
activity of mutated HSD10. Loss-of-function and rescue experiments in Xenopus 
embryos and cells derived from conditional Hsd17b10(-/-) mice demonstrate that a 
property of HSD10 independent of its enzymatic activity is essential for 
structural and functional integrity of mitochondria. Impairment of this function 
in neural cells causes apoptotic cell death whilst the enzymatic activity of 
HSD10 is not required for cell survival. This finding indicates that the 
symptoms in patients with mutations in the HSD17B10 gene are unrelated to 
accumulation of toxic metabolites in the isoleucine pathway and, rather, related 
to defects in general mitochondrial function. Therefore alternative therapeutic 
approaches to an isoleucine-restricted diet are required.

DOI: 10.1002/emmm.200900055
PMCID: PMC3377269
PMID: 20077426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]