---
reference_id: "PMID:34197697"
title: Assessment of the global circulation and endemicity of dengue.
authors:
- Long H
- Zhang C
- Chen C
- Tang J
- Zhang B
- Wang Y
- Pang J
- Su W
- Li K
- Di B
- Chen YQ
- Shu Y
- Du X
journal: Transbound Emerg Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/tbed.14211
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Assessment of the global circulation and endemicity of dengue.
**Authors:** Long H, Zhang C, Chen C, Tang J, Zhang B, Wang Y, Pang J, Su W, Li K, Di B, Chen YQ, Shu Y, Du X
**Journal:** Transbound Emerg Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/tbed.14211](https://doi.org/10.1111/tbed.14211)

## Content

1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2022 Jul;69(4):2148-2155. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14211. Epub 
2021 Jul 10.

Assessment of the global circulation and endemicity of dengue.

Long H(1), Zhang C(1), Chen C(1), Tang J(1), Zhang B(1), Wang Y(1), Pang J(2), 
Su W(3), Li K(3), Di B(3), Chen YQ(1), Shu Y(1)(4), Du X(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health (Shenzhen), Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Guangzhou Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Control, Ministry of Education, Sun 
Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.

Dengue is a significant public health issue, affecting hundreds of millions of 
people worldwide. As it is spreading from tropical and subtropical zones, some 
regions previously recognised as non-endemic are at risk of becoming endemic. 
However, the global circulation of dengue is not fully understood and 
quantitative measurements of endemicity levels are lacking, posing an obstacle 
in the precise control of dengue spread. In this study, a sequence-based 
pipeline was designed based on random sampling to study the transmission of 
dengue. The limited intercontinental transmission was identified, while regional 
circulation of dengue was quantified in terms of importation, local circulation 
and exportation. Additionally, hypo- and hyper-endemic regions were identified 
using a new metric, with the former characterised by low local circulation and 
increased importation, whereas the latter by high local circulation and reduced 
importation. In this study, the global circulation pattern of dengue was 
examined and a sequence-based endemicity measurement was proposed, which will be 
helpful for future surveillance and targeted control of dengue.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14211
PMID: 34197697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]