---
reference_id: "PMID:9108896"
title: Donepezil.
authors:
- Bryson HM
- Benfield P
journal: Drugs Aging
year: '1997'
doi: 10.2165/00002512-199710030-00007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Donepezil.
**Authors:** Bryson HM, Benfield P
**Journal:** Drugs Aging (1997)
**DOI:** [10.2165/00002512-199710030-00007](https://doi.org/10.2165/00002512-199710030-00007)

## Content

1. Drugs Aging. 1997 Mar;10(3):234-9; discussion 240-1. doi: 
10.2165/00002512-199710030-00007.

Donepezil.

Bryson HM(1), Benfield P.

Author information:
(1)Adis International Limited, Auckland, New Zealand. demail@adis.co.nz

Donepezil is a specific and potent acetylcholinesterase inhibitor according to 
in vitro data. It displays primarily noncompetitive inhibitory activity. In 
vivo, donepezil inhibited acetylcholinesterase activity in human erythrocytes 
and increased extracellular acetylcholine levels in the cerebral cortex and 
hippocampus of the rat. Donepezil demonstrated efficacy in tests of reference 
memory in animals, but had less consistent activity in tests of working memory. 
Donepezil 5 or 10 mg/day was associated with significant improvements in 
cognitive function [assessed by the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment 
Scale-cognitive subscale (ADAS-cog)] after 14 and 30 weeks and patient global 
function (Clinician's Interview-based Impression of Change incorporating 
caregiver input score) after 30 weeks, compared with placebo, in patients with 
mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease. After 2 years, donepezil 5 or 10 mg/day 
was associated with an ADAS-cog score approximately 4 points better than would 
be expected in untreated patients with mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease. The 
most common adverse events reported in association with donepezil 5 mg/day were 
gastrointestinal events (nausea/vomiting, diarrhoea, gastric upset and 
constipation) and dizziness. No hepatotoxicity was reported after 12 weeks' 
treatment.

DOI: 10.2165/00002512-199710030-00007
PMID: 9108896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]