---
reference_id: "PMID:34287228"
title: Development of Second-Tier Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry Analysis for Expanded Newborn Screening in Japan.
authors:
- Shigematsu Y
- Yuasa M
- Ishige N
- Nakajima H
- Tajima G
journal: Int J Neonatal Screen
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/ijns7030044
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Development of Second-Tier Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry Analysis for Expanded Newborn Screening in Japan.
**Authors:** Shigematsu Y, Yuasa M, Ishige N, Nakajima H, Tajima G
**Journal:** Int J Neonatal Screen (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijns7030044](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijns7030044)

## Content

1. Int J Neonatal Screen. 2021 Jul 14;7(3):44. doi: 10.3390/ijns7030044.

Development of Second-Tier Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry
Analysis for Expanded Newborn Screening in Japan.

Shigematsu Y(1)(2), Yuasa M(1), Ishige N(3), Nakajima H(4), Tajima G(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Fukui,
Fukui 910-1193, Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Uji-Tokushukai Medical Center, Uji 611-0041, Japan.
(3)Division of Newborn Screening, Tokyo Health Service Association, Tokyo
162-8402, Japan.
(4)Division of Neonatal Screening, Research Institute, National Center for Child
Health and Development, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan.

To minimize false-positive cases in newborn screening by tandem mass
spectrometry in Japan, practical second-tier liquid chromatography-tandem mass
spectrometry analyses have been developed using a multimode ODS column with a
single set of mobile phases and different gradient elution programs specific to
the analysis of acylcarnitines, acylglycines, amino acids, and organic acids.
Most analyses were performed using underivatized samples, except for analysis of
methylcitric acid, and careful conditioning of the column was necessary for
analyses of organic acids. Our second-tier tests enabled us to measure many
metabolites useful for detection of target disorders, including allo-isoleucine,
homocysteine, methylmalonic acid, and methylcitric acid. We found that
accumulation of 3-hydroxyglutaric acid was specific to glutaric acidemia type I
and that the ratio of 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid to 3-hydroxyisovalerylcarnitine
was useful to detect newborns of mothers with 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase
deficiency. Data from the analysis of short-chain acylcarnitine and acylglycine
were useful for differential diagnosis in cases positive for C5-OH-acylcarnitine
or C5-acylcarnitine.

DOI: 10.3390/ijns7030044
PMCID: PMC8293176
PMID: 34287228

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
