---
reference_id: "PMID:15325838"
title: Pathophysiology of airflow limitation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
authors:
- Hogg JC
journal: Lancet
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(04)16900-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology of airflow limitation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
**Authors:** Hogg JC
**Journal:** Lancet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(04)16900-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(04)16900-6)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2004 Aug 21-27;364(9435):709-21. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(04)16900-6.

Pathophysiology of airflow limitation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Hogg JC(1).

Author information:
(1)James Hogg iCAPTURE Centre for Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Research, 
University of British Columbia and St Paul's Hospital, Room 166-1081, Burrard 
Street, Vancouver, BC V6Z 1Y6, Canada. j.bekhof@isala.nl

The airflow limitation that defines chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
is the result of a prolonged time constant for lung emptying, caused by 
increased resistance of the small conducting airways and increased compliance of 
the lung as a result of emphysematous destruction. These lesions are associated 
with a chronic innate and adaptive inflammatory immune response of the host to a 
lifetime exposure to inhaled toxic gases and particles. Processes contributing 
to obstruction in the small conducting airways include disruption of the 
epithelial barrier, interference with mucociliary clearance apparatus that 
results in accumulation of inflammatory mucous exudates in the small airway 
lumen, infiltration of the airway walls by inflammatory cells, and deposition of 
connective tissue in the airway wall. This remodelling and repair thickens the 
airway walls, reduces lumen calibre, and restricts the normal increase in 
calibre produced by lung inflation. Emphysematous lung destruction is associated 
with an infiltration of the same type of inflammatory cells found in the 
airways. The centrilobular pattern of emphysematous destruction is most closely 
associated with cigarette smoking, and although it is initially focused on 
respiratory bronchioles, separate lesions coalesce to destroy large volumes of 
lung tissue. The panacinar pattern of emphysema is characterised by a more even 
involvement of the acinus and is associated with alpha1 antitrypsin deficiency. 
The technology needed to diagnose and quantitate the individual small airway and 
emphysema phenotypes present in people with COPD is being developed, and should 
prove helpful in the assessment of therapeutic interventions designed to modify 
the progress of either phenotype.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(04)16900-6
PMID: 15325838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]