---
reference_id: "PMID:17594715"
title: Spectrum of ALMS1 variants and evaluation of genotype-phenotype correlations in Alström syndrome.
authors:
- Marshall JD
- Hinman EG
- Collin GB
- Beck S
- Cerqueira R
- Maffei P
- Milan G
- Zhang W
- Wilson DI
- Hearn T
- Tavares P
- Vettor R
- Veronese C
- Martin M
- So WV
- Nishina PM
- Naggert JK
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1002/humu.20577
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Base Sequence
- Cohort Studies
- DNA Primers
- Exons
- Female
- Genotype
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spectrum of ALMS1 variants and evaluation of genotype-phenotype correlations in Alström syndrome.
**Authors:** Marshall JD, Hinman EG, Collin GB, Beck S, Cerqueira R, Maffei P, Milan G, Zhang W, Wilson DI, Hearn T, Tavares P, Vettor R, Veronese C, Martin M, So WV, Nishina PM, Naggert JK
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.20577](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.20577)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2007 Nov;28(11):1114-23. doi: 10.1002/humu.20577.

Spectrum of ALMS1 variants and evaluation of genotype-phenotype correlations in
Alström syndrome.

Marshall JD(1), Hinman EG, Collin GB, Beck S, Cerqueira R, Maffei P, Milan G,
Zhang W, Wilson DI, Hearn T, Tavares P, Vettor R, Veronese C, Martin M, So WV,
Nishina PM, Naggert JK.

Author information:
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine 04609, USA.

Alström syndrome is a monogenic recessive disorder featuring an array of
clinical manifestations, with systemic fibrosis and multiple organ involvement,
including retinal degeneration, hearing loss, childhood obesity, diabetes
mellitus, dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), urological dysfunction, and pulmonary,
hepatic, and renal failure. We evaluated a large cohort of patients with Alström
syndrome for mutations in the ALMS1 gene. In total, 79 disease-causing variants
were identified, of which 55 are novel mutations. The variants are primarily
clustered in exons 8, 10, and 16, although we also identified novel mutations in
exons 12 and 18. Most alleles were identified only once (45/79), but several
were found recurrently. Founder effects are likely in families of English and
Turkish descent. We also identified 66 SNPs and assessed the functional
significance of these variants based on the conserved identity of the protein
and the severity of the resulting amino acid substitution. A genotype-phenotype
association study examining 18 phenotypic parameters in a subset of 58 patients
found suggestive associations between disease-causing variants in exon 16 and
the onset of retinal degeneration before the age of 1 year (P = 0.02), the
occurrence of urological dysfunction (P = 0.02), of DCM (P = 0.03), and of
diabetes (P = 0.03). A significant association was found between alterations in
exon 8 and absent, mild, or delayed renal disease (P = 0.0007). This data may
have implications for the understanding of the molecular mechanisms of ALMS1 and
provides the basis for further investigation of how alternative splicing of
ALMS1 contributes to the severity of the disease.

2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20577
PMID: 17594715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
