---
reference_id: "PMID:33278326"
title: Effect of Crohn's Disease on Villous Length and CYP3A4 Expression in the Pediatric Small Intestine.
authors:
- Vyhlidal CA
- Chapron BD
- Ahmed A
- Singh V
- Casini R
- Shakhnovich V
journal: Clin Transl Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/cts.12938
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of Crohn's Disease on Villous Length and CYP3A4 Expression in the Pediatric Small Intestine.
**Authors:** Vyhlidal CA, Chapron BD, Ahmed A, Singh V, Casini R, Shakhnovich V
**Journal:** Clin Transl Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cts.12938](https://doi.org/10.1111/cts.12938)

## Content

1. Clin Transl Sci. 2021 Mar;14(2):729-736. doi: 10.1111/cts.12938. Epub 2020 Dec
 16.

Effect of Crohn's Disease on Villous Length and CYP3A4 Expression in the 
Pediatric Small Intestine.

Vyhlidal CA(1)(2), Chapron BD(1), Ahmed A(2)(3), Singh V(4), Casini R(5), 
Shakhnovich V(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutic Innovation, 
Children's Mercy Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Missouri - Kansas City School of 
Medicine, Kansas City, Missouri, USA.
(3)Division of Pathology, Children's Mercy Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri, 
USA.
(4)Division of Pathology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(5)NorthShore University Health System, Skokie, Illinois, USA.
(6)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Children's 
Mercy Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri, USA.

Changes in absorptive capacity and first-pass metabolism in the small intestine 
affect oral drug bioavailability. Characterization of such changes as a 
consequence of inflammation is important for developing physiologically-based 
pharmacokinetic (PBPK) models for inflammatory bowel disease. We sought to 
elucidate the impact of small intestinal Crohn's disease (CD) on villous length 
and CYP3A4 expression in children. Freshly frozen duodenal and terminal ileum 
(TI) biopsies from 107 children (1-19 years) with and without CD were evaluated 
for active inflammation. Villous length and CYP3A4 mRNA/protein expression were 
compared among regions of active and inactive inflammation in CD and controls. A 
twofold reduction in villous length was observed in inflamed duodena and ilia of 
children with CD, but in the absence of regional inflammation, villi in CD were 
comparable in length to controls. Expression of CYP3A4 mRNA correlated 
significantly with villous length in the TI (P = 0.0003), with a trend observed 
in the duodenum that did not reach statistical significance. In the presence of 
active inflammation, a significant decrease in CYP3A protein expression was 
confirmed in the duodenum, where protein expression also correlated 
significantly with villous length across diagnoses (P < 0.0001). Our findings 
suggest that previous observations of decreased CYP3A4 expression and function 
in inflamed intestine may not be due solely to downregulation by inflammatory 
cytokines, but also to villous blunting and subsequent loss of surface area for 
protein expression. This information is relevant for PBPK model development and 
could aid with dose adjustment decisions for oral CYP3A4 substrates administered 
during CD flare (e.g., budesonide).

© 2020 The Authors. Clinical and Translational Science published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of the American Society for Clinical Pharmacology and 
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1111/cts.12938
PMCID: PMC7993283
PMID: 33278326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declared no competing interests for 
this work.