---
reference_id: "PMID:31552550"
title: "Epidemiology of paraneoplastic neurological syndromes: a population-based study."
authors:
- Vogrig A
- Gigli GL
- Segatti S
- Corazza E
- Marini A
- Bernardini A
- Valent F
- Fabris M
- Curcio F
- Brigo F
- Iacono D
- Passadore P
- Rana M
- Honnorat J
- Valente M
journal: J Neurol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-019-09544-1
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Encephalomyelitis/epidemiology, immunology"
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- Italy/epidemiology
- "Limbic Encephalitis/epidemiology, immunology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasms/epidemiology
- "Paraneoplastic Cerebellar Degeneration/epidemiology, immunology"
- "Paraneoplastic Syndromes, Nervous System/epidemiology, immunology"
- Prevalence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of paraneoplastic neurological syndromes: a population-based study.
**Authors:** Vogrig A, Gigli GL, Segatti S, Corazza E, Marini A, Bernardini A, Valent F, Fabris M, Curcio F, Brigo F, Iacono D, Passadore P, Rana M, Honnorat J, Valente M
**Journal:** J Neurol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-019-09544-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-019-09544-1)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2020 Jan;267(1):26-35. doi: 10.1007/s00415-019-09544-1. Epub 2019
Sep  24.

Epidemiology of paraneoplastic neurological syndromes: a population-based study.

Vogrig A(1)(2)(3)(4), Gigli GL(5)(6)(7), Segatti S(6), Corazza E(6), Marini 
A(6), Bernardini A(6), Valent F(8), Fabris M(9), Curcio F(6)(9), Brigo 
F(10)(11), Iacono D(12), Passadore P(13), Rana M(14), Honnorat J(15)(16)(17), 
Valente M(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Neurology Unit, Santa Maria della Misericordia University Hospital, 
Piazzale Santa Maria della Misericordia, 15, 33010, Udine, Italy. 
alberto.vogrig@gmail.com.
(2)French Reference Center of Paraneoplastic Neurological Syndrome, Hospices 
Civils de Lyon, Hôpital Neurologique, Lyon, France. alberto.vogrig@gmail.com.
(3)SynatAc Team, NeuroMyoGene Institute, INSERM U1217/CNRS UMR5310, Lyon, 
France. alberto.vogrig@gmail.com.
(4)University Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Université de Lyon, Lyon, France. 
alberto.vogrig@gmail.com.
(5)Clinical Neurology Unit, Santa Maria della Misericordia University Hospital, 
Piazzale Santa Maria della Misericordia, 15, 33010, Udine, Italy.
(6)Department of Medicine (DAME), University of Udine Medical School, Udine, 
Italy.
(7)Department of Mathematics, Informatics and Physics (DMIF), University of 
Udine, Udine, Italy.
(8)Institute of Hygiene and Clinical Epidemiology, Santa Maria della 
Misericordia University Hospital, Udine, Italy.
(9)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Institute of Clinical Pathology, Santa 
Maria della Misericordia University Hospital, Udine, Italy.
(10)Department of Neuroscience, Biomedicine and Movement Sciences, University of 
Verona, Verona, Italy.
(11)Department of Neurology, Hospital Franz Tappeiner, Merano, Italy.
(12)Department of Oncology, Santa Maria della Misericordia University Hospital, 
Udine, Italy.
(13)Neurology Unit, Hospital of Pordenone, Pordenone, Italy.
(14)Neurology Unit, Hospital of Gorizia, Gorizia, Italy.
(15)French Reference Center of Paraneoplastic Neurological Syndrome, Hospices 
Civils de Lyon, Hôpital Neurologique, Lyon, France.
(16)SynatAc Team, NeuroMyoGene Institute, INSERM U1217/CNRS UMR5310, Lyon, 
France.
(17)University Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Université de Lyon, Lyon, France.

BACKGROUND: The epidemiology of paraneoplastic neurological syndromes (PNS) 
remains to be defined. We present here the first population-based incidence 
study and report the clinical spectrum and antibody profile of PNS in a large 
area in Northeastern Italy.
METHODS: We performed a 9-year (2009-2017) population-based epidemiological 
study of PNS in the provinces of Udine, Pordenone and Gorizia, in the 
Friuli-Venezia Giulia region (983,190 people as of January 1, 2017). PNS 
diagnosis and subgroups were defined by the 2004 diagnostic criteria. Age- and 
sex-adjusted incidence rates were calculated.
RESULTS: We identified 89 patients with a diagnosis of definite PNS. Median age 
was 68 years (range 26-90), 52% were female. The incidence of PNS was 
0.89/100,000 person-years. PNS incidence rates increased over time from 
0.62/100,000 person-years (2009-2011), 0.81/100,000 person-years (2012-2014) to 
1.22/100,000 person-years (2015-2017). The prevalence of PNS was 4.37 per 
100,000. Most common PNS were limbic encephalitis (31%), cerebellar degeneration 
(28%) and encephalomyelitis (20%). Among antibody (Ab)-positive cases, most 
frequent specificities included: Yo (30%), Hu (26%), and Ma2 (22%), while the 
most frequent associated tumors were lung (17%) and breast cancer (16%), 
followed by lymphoma (12%). PNS developed in 1 in every 334 cancers in our 
region. Statistically significant associations were observed between cancer type 
and Ab-specificity (P < 0.001), and between neurological syndrome and 
Ab-specificity (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: This first population-based study found an incidence of PNS that 
approximates 1/100,000 person-years and a prevalence of 4/100,000. Moreover, the 
incidence of PNS is increasing over time, probably due to increased awareness 
and improved detection techniques.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-019-09544-1
PMID: 31552550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]