---
reference_id: "PMID:39127957"
title: "Inherited phosphate and pyrophosphate disorders: New insights and novel therapies changing the oral health landscape."
authors:
- Foster BL
- Boyce AM
- Millán JL
- Kramer K
- Ferreira CR
- Somerman MJ
- Wright JT
journal: J Am Dent Assoc
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.adaj.2024.05.016
keywords:
- Humans
- Diphosphates/metabolism
- Oral Health
- "Phosphates/metabolism, therapeutic use"
- Hypophosphatasia/therapy
- "Familial Hypophosphatemic Rickets/therapy, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inherited phosphate and pyrophosphate disorders: New insights and novel therapies changing the oral health landscape.
**Authors:** Foster BL, Boyce AM, Millán JL, Kramer K, Ferreira CR, Somerman MJ, Wright JT
**Journal:** J Am Dent Assoc (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.adaj.2024.05.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adaj.2024.05.016)

## Content

1. J Am Dent Assoc. 2024 Nov;155(11):912-925. doi: 10.1016/j.adaj.2024.05.016.
Epub  2024 Aug 10.

Inherited phosphate and pyrophosphate disorders: New insights and novel
therapies changing the oral health landscape.

Foster BL, Boyce AM, Millán JL, Kramer K, Ferreira CR, Somerman MJ, Wright JT.

BACKGROUND: Mineral metabolism is critical for proper development of hard
tissues of the skeleton and dentition. The dentoalveolar complex includes the
following 4 mineralized tissues: enamel, dentin, cementum, and alveolar bone.
Developmental processes of these tissues are affected by inherited disorders
that disrupt phosphate and pyrophosphate homeostasis, although manifestations
are distinct from those in the skeleton.
TYPES OF STUDIES REVIEWED: The authors discuss original data from experiments
and comparative analyses and review articles describing effects of inherited
phosphate and pyrophosphate disorders on dental tissues. A particular emphasis
is placed on how new therapeutic approaches for these conditions may affect oral
health and dental treatments of affected patients.
RESULTS: Disorders of phosphate and pyrophosphate metabolism can lead to reduced
mineralization (hypomineralization) or inappropriate (ectopic) calcification of
soft tissues. Disruptions in phosphate levels in X-linked hypophosphatemia and
hyperphosphatemic familial tumoral calcinosis and disruptions in pyrophosphate
levels in hypophosphatasia and generalized arterial calcification of infancy
contribute to dental mineralization defects. Traditionally, there have been few
options to ameliorate dental health problems arising from these conditions. New
antibody and enzyme replacement therapies bring possibilities to improve oral
health in affected patients.
PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS: Research over the past 2 decades has exponentially
expanded the understanding of mineral metabolism, and has led to novel
treatments for mineralization disorders. Newly implemented and emerging
therapeutic strategies affect the dentoalveolar complex and interact with
aspects of oral health care that must be considered for dental treatment,
clinical trial design, and coordination of multidisciplinary care teams.

Copyright © 2024 American Dental Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.adaj.2024.05.016
PMCID: PMC11540754
PMID: 39127957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures None of the authors reported any
disclosures.
