---
reference_id: "PMID:41366465"
title: "Efficacy of pharmacological and non-pharmacological interventions for the treatment of anorexia nervosa in adolescents and adults (EfaNosa): protocol for a network meta-analysis."
authors:
- Halter F
- Zeeck A
- Hartmann A
- Fleischhaker C
- Haack-Dees B
- Brockmeyer T
- Cuntz U
- Ehrlich S
- Monteleone AM
- Solmi M
- Stadelmaier J
- Kiesswetter E
- Petropoulou M
- Janka H
- Metzendorf MI
- Meerpohl JJ
- Schwingshackl L
- Kunzler AM
journal: Syst Rev
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s13643-025-02999-6
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- Anorexia Nervosa/therapy
- Antidepressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
- Network Meta-Analysis as Topic
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Research Design
- Systematic Reviews as Topic
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of pharmacological and non-pharmacological interventions for the treatment of anorexia nervosa in adolescents and adults (EfaNosa): protocol for a network meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Halter F, Zeeck A, Hartmann A, Fleischhaker C, Haack-Dees B, Brockmeyer T, Cuntz U, Ehrlich S, Monteleone AM, Solmi M, Stadelmaier J, Kiesswetter E, Petropoulou M, Janka H, Metzendorf MI, Meerpohl JJ, Schwingshackl L, Kunzler AM
**Journal:** Syst Rev (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13643-025-02999-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13643-025-02999-6)

## Content

1. Syst Rev. 2025 Dec 9;14(1):245. doi: 10.1186/s13643-025-02999-6.

Efficacy of pharmacological and non-pharmacological interventions for the
treatment of anorexia nervosa in adolescents and adults (EfaNosa): protocol for
a network meta-analysis.

Halter F(1)(2), Zeeck A(3), Hartmann A(3), Fleischhaker C(4), Haack-Dees B(4),
Brockmeyer T(5), Cuntz U(6), Ehrlich S(7)(8), Monteleone AM(9), Solmi
M(10)(11)(12)(13)(14), Stadelmaier J(1), Kiesswetter E(1), Petropoulou M(15),
Janka H(16), Metzendorf MI(16), Meerpohl JJ(1)(2), Schwingshackl L(17), Kunzler
AM(1)(18).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Evidence in Medicine, Medical Center - University of Freiburg /
Medical Faculty - University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Cochrane Germany, Cochrane Germany Foundation, Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Department for Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, Medical
Center-University of Freiburg, Medical Faculty - University of Freiburg,
Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychotherapy, and
Psychosomatics, Medical Center-University of Freiburg, Medical Faculty -
University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(5)Clinical Psychology and Translational Psychotherapy, Department of
Psychologys, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(6)Schön Klinik Roseneck, Prien, Germany.
(7)Division of Psychological and Social Medicine and Developmental
Neurosciences, Faculty of Medicine, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden,
Germany.
(8)Eating Disorder Research and Treatment Center,Department of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, Technische Universität Dresden,
Dresden, Germany.
(9)Department of Psychiatry, University of Campania L. Vanvitelli, Naples,
Italy.
(10)Department of Psychiatry, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(11)Department of Mental Health, The Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(12)Ottawa Hospital Research Institute (OHRI), Clinical Epidemiology Program,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(13)School of Epidemiology and Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(14)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Charité Universitätsmedizin,
Berlin, Germany.
(15)Institute of Medical Biometry and Statistics, Medical Center - University of
Freiburg, Medical Faculty - University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(16)Institute of General Practice (ifam), Medical Faculty of the Heinrich -
Heine - University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(17)Institute for Evidence in Medicine, Medical Center - University of Freiburg
/ Medical Faculty - University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
lukas.schwingshackl@uniklinik-freiburg.de.
(18)Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy for Children and Adolescents,
Institute for Psychology, Technische Universität Braunschweig, Braunschweig,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Anorexia nervosa (AN) is a severe eating disorder. With a lifetime
prevalence of 1.4% in women and 0.2% in men, an increasing incidence and the
highest mortality rate of all mental disorders, it is recognized as a major
public health threat. Although the number of available treatments is increasing
worldwide, the comparative efficacy and safety of different treatment options
have not been investigated systematically. In this systematic review with
network meta-analysis (NMA), we aim to assess the efficacy and safety of
pharmacological and non-pharmacological interventions in adolescents and adults
with AN.
METHODS: We will consider randomized controlled trials investigating
pharmacological (e.g., antidepressants) and non-pharmacological (e.g., cognitive
behavioral therapy) interventions compared to each other and to relevant control
groups (e.g., no treatment, treatment as usual, waiting list) in adolescents
(≥ 10 years) and/or adults (≥ 18 years) with AN. Eligible outcomes will include
physiological (e.g., body weight) and psychological (e.g., depressive symptoms)
outcomes prioritized by various interest-holders, including patients and
healthcare professionals. Six electronic databases will be searched (Ovid
MEDLINE, Scopus, WHO Global Index Medicus, Cochrane Central Register of
Controlled Trials, Science Citation Index Expanded [Web of Science], Ovid APA
PsycINFO). We will additionally search for grey literature and unpublished
trials in further sources. Study selection, data extraction and the risk of bias
assessment (Cochrane RoB 2 tool), will be performed independently by two
reviewers. We will synthesize the data using a random-effects network
meta-analysis and component network meta-analysis, if appropriate. We will
assess inconsistency using a random-effects design-by-treatment interaction
model. As effect measures, the risk ratio will be used for dichotomous outcomes,
while the (standardized) mean difference will be utilized for continuous
outcomes. Subgroup analyses, sensitivity analyses, and an assessment of
publication bias are planned. The certainty of evidence derived from NMA will be
assessed using the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and
Evaluation (GRADE) approach.
DISCUSSION: Our NMA will provide important findings on the efficacy and safety
of (non-)pharmacological interventions, offering valuable insights to inform
clinical guidelines for the treatment of AN. The findings will inform various
interest-holders including patients, their families, and clinical
decision-makers.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: PROSPERO 2025 CRD420250654515.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13643-025-02999-6
PMCID: PMC12687480
PMID: 41366465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to
participate: Not applicable. Consent for publication: Not applicable. Competing
interests: FH, AZ, AH, CF, BHD, TB, UC, SE, AMM, JS, EK, MP, HJ, MIM, JJM, LS,
and AMK declare that they have no competing interests. MS received honoraria/has
been a consultant for Angelini, AbbVie, Boehringer Ingelheim, Lundbeck, Otsuka.
