---
reference_id: "PMID:36512513"
title: Spin-Enhanced Lateral Flow Immunoassay for High-Sensitivity Detection of Nonstructural Protein NS1 Serotypes of the Dengue Virus.
authors:
- Le TN
- Hsiao WW
- Cheng YY
- Lee CC
- Huynh TT
- Pham DM
- Chen M
- Jen MW
- Chang HC
- Chiang WH
journal: Anal Chem
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.2c03521
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spin-Enhanced Lateral Flow Immunoassay for High-Sensitivity Detection of Nonstructural Protein NS1 Serotypes of the Dengue Virus.
**Authors:** Le TN, Hsiao WW, Cheng YY, Lee CC, Huynh TT, Pham DM, Chen M, Jen MW, Chang HC, Chiang WH
**Journal:** Anal Chem (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acs.analchem.2c03521](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.2c03521)

## Content

1. Anal Chem. 2022 Dec 27;94(51):17819-17826. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.2c03521. 
Epub 2022 Dec 13.

Spin-Enhanced Lateral Flow Immunoassay for High-Sensitivity Detection of 
Nonstructural Protein NS1 Serotypes of the Dengue Virus.

Le TN(1)(2), Hsiao WW(1), Cheng YY(1), Lee CC(3)(4), Huynh TT(5), Pham DM(6), 
Chen M(2)(7), Jen MW(2)(8), Chang HC(1)(2), Chiang WH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, National Taiwan University of Science and 
Technology, Taipei 106, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Atomic and Molecular Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 10617, 
Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei 10617, Taiwan.
(4)The Ph.D. Program for Translational Medicine, College of Medical Science and 
Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan.
(5)School of Applied Chemistry, Tra Vinh University, Tra Vinh 87110, Viet Nam.
(6)Institute of Biotechnology, Vietnam Academy of Science and Technology, 
18-Hoang Quoc Viet, Cau Giay, Hanoi 10000, Vietnam.
(7)College of Letter and Science, the University of California, Berkeley, 
California 94720, U.S.A.
(8)College of Education and Human Ecology, the Ohio State University, Columbus, 
Ohio 43210, U.S.A.

Dengue fever is a global mosquito-borne viral infectious disease that has, in 
recent years, rapidly spread to almost all regions of the world. Lack of 
vaccination and directed treatment makes detection at the infection's early 
stages extremely important for disease prevention and clinical care. In this 
paper, we developed a rapid and highly sensitive dengue detection tool using a 
novel platform of diagnosis, called spin-enhanced lateral flow immunoassay 
(SELFIA) with a fluorescent nanodiamond (FND) as a reporter. Taking advantage of 
the unique magneto-optical properties of negatively charged nitrogen-vacancy 
centers in the FND, the SELFIA platform utilizes alternating electromagnetic 
fields to modulate signals from FND's fluorescence to provide sensitive and 
specific results. With sandwich SELFIA, we could efficiently detect all four 
dengue non-structural protein (NS1) serotypes (DV1, DV2, DV3, and DV4). The 
lowest detection concentration of the dengue NS1 antigens varied from 0.1 to 1.3 
ng/mL, which is among the lowest limits of detection to date. The FND-based 
SELFIA technique is up to 500 and 5000 times more sensitive than carbon black 
and conventional gold nanoparticles, respectively. By using different anti-NS1 
antibodies, we could differentiate the NS1 antigen serotypes contained in the 
tested samples via three simultaneous assays. Proposed SELFIA allows for both 
qualitative and quantitative differentiation between different NS1 protein 
serotypes, which will assist in the development of a highly sensitive and 
specific detection platform for dengue screening that has the potential to 
detect the disease at its early stages, especially in high-risk and 
limited-resource areas.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.2c03521
PMID: 36512513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]