---
reference_id: "PMID:11673586"
title: Homozygosity (E140K) in SCO2 causes delayed infantile onset of cardiomyopathy and neuropathy.
authors:
- Jaksch M
- Horvath R
- Horn N
- Auer DP
- Macmillan C
- Peters J
- Gerbitz KD
- Kraegeloh-Mann I
- Muntau A
- Karcagi V
- Kalmanchey R
- Lochmuller H
- Shoubridge EA
- Freisinger P
journal: Neurology
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1212/wnl.57.8.1440
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- "Brain Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- "Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic/genetics, pathology"
- Carrier Proteins
- Female
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- "Leigh Disease/genetics, pathology"
- Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
- Mitochondrial Proteins
- Molecular Chaperones
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Myocardium/pathology
- Proteins/genetics
- Protons
- Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homozygosity (E140K) in SCO2 causes delayed infantile onset of cardiomyopathy and neuropathy.
**Authors:** Jaksch M, Horvath R, Horn N, Auer DP, Macmillan C, Peters J, Gerbitz KD, Kraegeloh-Mann I, Muntau A, Karcagi V, Kalmanchey R, Lochmuller H, Shoubridge EA, Freisinger P
**Journal:** Neurology (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1212/wnl.57.8.1440](https://doi.org/10.1212/wnl.57.8.1440)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2001 Oct 23;57(8):1440-6. doi: 10.1212/wnl.57.8.1440.

Homozygosity (E140K) in SCO2 causes delayed infantile onset of cardiomyopathy 
and neuropathy.

Jaksch M(1), Horvath R, Horn N, Auer DP, Macmillan C, Peters J, Gerbitz KD, 
Kraegeloh-Mann I, Muntau A, Karcagi V, Kalmanchey R, Lochmuller H, Shoubridge 
EA, Freisinger P.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Disease Centre Munich, Germany. Michaela.Jaksch@lrz.uni-muenchen.de

OBJECTIVE: To report three unrelated infants with a distinctive phenotype of 
Leigh-like syndrome, neurogenic muscular atrophy, and hypertrophic obstructive 
cardiomyopathy. The patients all had a homozygous missense mutation in SCO2.
BACKGROUND: SCO2 encodes a mitochondrial inner membrane protein, thought to 
function as a copper transporter to cytochrome c oxidase (COX), the terminal 
enzyme of the respiratory chain. Mutations in SCO2 have been described in 
patients with severe COX deficiency and early onset fatal infantile hypertrophic 
cardioencephalomyopathy. All patients so far reported are compound heterozygotes 
for a missense mutation (E140K) near the predicted CxxxC metal binding motif; 
however, recent functional studies of the homologous mutation in yeast failed to 
demonstrate an effect on respiration.
METHODS: Here we present clinical, biochemical, morphologic, functional, MRI, 
and MRS data in two infants, and a short report in an additional patient, all 
carrying a homozygous G1541A transition (E140K).
RESULTS: The disease onset and symptoms differed significantly from those in 
compound heterozygotes. MRI and muscle morphology demonstrated an age-dependent 
progression of disease with predominant involvement of white matter, late 
appearance of basal ganglia lesions, and neurogenic muscular atrophy in addition 
to the relatively late onset of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The copper uptake 
of cultured fibroblasts was significantly increased.
CONCLUSIONS: The clinical spectrum of SCO2 deficiency includes the delayed 
development of hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy and severe neurogenic 
muscular atrophy. There is increased copper uptake in patients' fibroblasts 
indicating that the G1541A mutation effects cellular copper metabolism.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.57.8.1440
PMID: 11673586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]