---
reference_id: "PMID:34715013"
title: Structural basis of polyamine transport by human ATP13A2 (PARK9).
authors:
- Sim SI
- von Bülow S
- Hummer G
- Park E
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2021.08.017
keywords:
- Animals
- Biological Transport
- Catalysis
- Cryoelectron Microscopy
- Cytosol/metabolism
- Humans
- Lipids/chemistry
- Lysosomes/chemistry
- Molecular Dynamics Simulation
- Parkinson Disease/metabolism
- Phosphorylation
- Polyamines/chemistry
- Protein Conformation
- Protein Domains
- Proton-Translocating ATPases/chemistry
- Saccharomyces cerevisiae/metabolism
- Spodoptera
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Structural basis of polyamine transport by human ATP13A2 (PARK9).
**Authors:** Sim SI, von Bülow S, Hummer G, Park E
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2021.08.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2021.08.017)

## Content

1. Mol Cell. 2021 Nov 18;81(22):4635-4649.e8. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2021.08.017. 
Epub 2021 Oct 28.

Structural basis of polyamine transport by human ATP13A2 (PARK9).

Sim SI(1), von Bülow S(2), Hummer G(3), Park E(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
(2)Department of Theoretical Biophysics, Max Planck Institute of Biophysics, 
60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(3)Department of Theoretical Biophysics, Max Planck Institute of Biophysics, 
60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany; Institute for Biophysics, Goethe University 
Frankfurt, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(4)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA; California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, 
University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. Electronic address: 
eunyong_park@berkeley.edu.

Polyamines are small, organic polycations that are ubiquitous and essential to 
all forms of life. Currently, how polyamines are transported across membranes is 
not understood. Recent studies have suggested that ATP13A2 and its close 
homologs, collectively known as P5B-ATPases, are polyamine transporters at 
endo-/lysosomes. Loss-of-function mutations of ATP13A2 in humans cause 
hereditary early-onset Parkinson's disease. To understand the polyamine 
transport mechanism of ATP13A2, we determined high-resolution cryoelectron 
microscopy (cryo-EM) structures of human ATP13A2 in five distinct conformational 
intermediates, which together, represent a near-complete transport cycle of 
ATP13A2. The structural basis of the polyamine specificity was revealed by an 
endogenous polyamine molecule bound to a narrow, elongated cavity within the 
transmembrane domain. The structures show an atypical transport path for a 
water-soluble substrate, in which polyamines may exit within the cytosolic 
leaflet of the membrane. Our study provides important mechanistic insights into 
polyamine transport and a framework to understand the functions and mechanisms 
of P5B-ATPases.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2021.08.017
PMCID: PMC8604775
PMID: 34715013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests E.P. is a consultant to 
EndLyz Therapeutics. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.