---
reference_id: "PMID:35945664"
title: The histological spectrum of ARB-induced gastritis.
authors:
- Storozuk T
- Brown I
- Lagana S
- Westerhoff M
- Setia N
- Hart J
- Alpert L
journal: Histopathology
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/his.14766
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The histological spectrum of ARB-induced gastritis.
**Authors:** Storozuk T, Brown I, Lagana S, Westerhoff M, Setia N, Hart J, Alpert L
**Journal:** Histopathology (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/his.14766](https://doi.org/10.1111/his.14766)

## Content

1. Histopathology. 2022 Nov;81(5):653-660. doi: 10.1111/his.14766. Epub 2022 Aug 
23.

The histological spectrum of ARB-induced gastritis.

Storozuk T(1), Brown I(2), Lagana S(3), Westerhoff M(4), Setia N(1), Hart J(1), 
Alpert L(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Envoi Pathology, Kelvin Grove, QLD, Australia.
(3)Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(4)University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

AIMS: Olmesartan, an angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) used for hypertension 
management, is known to cause a sprue-like enteropathy in a subset of patients. 
Rare cases of gastritis occurring with ARB use have also been reported, but the 
histological features of ARB-induced gastritis and the response to drug 
cessation have not been examined in a dedicated case-series.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Cases of suspected ARB-induced gastritis were identified 
from the pathology archives of four institutions. Haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) 
slides from gastric biopsies were reviewed. Fifteen patients (14 female, one 
male) were identified. The most common presenting symptoms were diarrhoea (10) 
and weight loss (six). Gastric biopsies commonly showed a full-thickness active 
chronic gastritis with surface epithelial injury involving the antrum and body. 
Glandular atrophy, intra-epithelial lymphocytosis and/or subepithelial collagen 
thickening were also present in some cases. Duodenal involvement, including 
villous atrophy, intra-epithelial lymphocytosis and/or collagenous sprue, was 
identified in 11 of 13 cases with concurrent duodenal biopsies. Following drug 
cessation, symptomatic improvement occurred in all 11 cases for which follow-up 
data were available. Histological resolution occurred in five of eight cases 
with follow-up gastric biopsies, with improvement seen in the remaining three 
biopsies.
CONCLUSION: ARB-induced gastritis typically presents as active chronic 
gastritis, frequently with associated surface epithelial injury. Glandular 
atrophy, intra-epithelial lymphocytosis and/or subepithelial collagen thickening 
may also be present. These gastric changes can be seen without associated 
duodenal injury in rare cases, and they should alert the pathologist to the 
possibility of ARB-induced injury. Drug cessation results in marked symptomatic 
and histological improvement.

© 2022 The Authors. Histopathology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/his.14766
PMCID: PMC9804261
PMID: 35945664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S. L. was previously involved in litigation 
involving olmesartan, and is currently involved in litigation involving 
valsartan. The other authors of this study have indicated that they have no 
conflicts of interest that relate to the content of this study.