---
reference_id: "PMID:38282244"
title: "Exposome and basal cell carcinoma: a multicenter case-control study."
authors:
- Navarro-Bielsa A
- Gracia-Cazaña T
- Almagro M
- De-la-Fuente-Meira S
- Florez Á
- Yélamos O
- Montero-Vilchez T
- González-Cruz C
- Diago A
- Abadías-Granado I
- Fuentelsaz V
- Colmenero M
- Bañuls J
- Arias-Santiago S
- Buendía-Eisman A
- Almenara-Blasco M
- Gil-Pallares P
- Gilaberte Y
journal: Int J Dermatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/ijd.17026
keywords:
- Humans
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/epidemiology, etiology, prevention & control"
- "Skin Neoplasms/epidemiology, etiology, prevention & control"
- Case-Control Studies
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Spain/epidemiology
- Aged
- Prospective Studies
- Sunlight/adverse effects
- Ultraviolet Rays/adverse effects
- Risk Factors
- Exposome
- Life Style
- "Sunscreening Agents/administration & dosage"
- "Diet/adverse effects, statistics & numerical data"
- Adult
- Occupational Exposure/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exposome and basal cell carcinoma: a multicenter case-control study.
**Authors:** Navarro-Bielsa A, Gracia-Cazaña T, Almagro M, De-la-Fuente-Meira S, Florez Á, Yélamos O, Montero-Vilchez T, González-Cruz C, Diago A, Abadías-Granado I, Fuentelsaz V, Colmenero M, Bañuls J, Arias-Santiago S, Buendía-Eisman A, Almenara-Blasco M, Gil-Pallares P, Gilaberte Y
**Journal:** Int J Dermatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ijd.17026](https://doi.org/10.1111/ijd.17026)

## Content

1. Int J Dermatol. 2024 Jul;63(7):907-915. doi: 10.1111/ijd.17026. Epub 2024 Jan
28.

Exposome and basal cell carcinoma: a multicenter case-control study.

Navarro-Bielsa A(1), Gracia-Cazaña T(1), Almagro M(2), De-la-Fuente-Meira S(3),
Florez Á(4), Yélamos O(5), Montero-Vilchez T(6), González-Cruz C(7), Diago A(1),
Abadías-Granado I(8), Fuentelsaz V(9), Colmenero M(10), Bañuls J(11),
Arias-Santiago S(6), Buendía-Eisman A(12), Almenara-Blasco M(1), Gil-Pallares
P(13), Gilaberte Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, IIS Aragón,
Universidad de Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario A Coruña,
Coruña, Spain.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Hospital Clínico Lozano Blesa, Zaragoza, Spain.
(4)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital of Pontevedra, Pontevedra,
Spain.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, IIB SANT
PAU, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves,
Instituto de investigación IBS, Granada, Spain.
(7)Department of Dermatology, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona,
Spain.
(8)Department of Dermatology, Hospital de Barbastro, Huesca, Spain.
(9)Department of Dermatology, Hospital Royo Villanova, Zaragoza, Spain.
(10)Department of Dermatology, Hospital Costa del Sol, Marbella, Spain.
(11)Department of Dermatology, Hospital General Universitario de Alicante,
ISABIAL, Alicante, Spain.
(12)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Granada, Granada, Spain.
(13)Department of Dermatology, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Ferrol,
Universidad de Santiago de Compostela, A Coruña, Spain.

BACKGROUND: While ultraviolet radiation (UVR) present in sunlight is recognized
as the main etiological agent of skin cancer, the most frequent form of which is
basal cell carcinoma (BCC), other exposome factors like pollution, diet, and
lifestyle may also contribute. This study aimed to investigate the association
of BCC and exposome-related factors in the Spanish population.
METHODS: BCC cases (n = 119) and controls (n = 127) with no history of skin
cancer were recruited between April 2020 and August 2022 by 13 dermatologists
throughout Spain in this prospective multicenter case-control study.
RESULTS: The BCC group had a higher proportion of outdoor workers, more years of
UVR exposure, and a greater consumption of drugs (statins, ASA,
hydrochlorothiazide, ACE inhibitors and omeprazole), P < 0.05. Avoidance of sun
exposure was the most used photoprotection measure in both groups. The use of
hats or caps was higher in the BCC group (P = 0.01). The solar protection factor
(SPF) used 15 years previously was higher in the control group (P = 0.04). The
control group had a higher daily screen time (P < 0.001), and practiced more
relaxation activities (P = 0.03). Higher linolenic acid intake and lower coffee
consumption were the only dietary variables associated with BCC (P < 0.05).
Statistical significance for all the aforementioned variables was maintained in
the multivariate analysis (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The study found a significant association between BCC and multiple
exposome-related factors in addition to chronic sun exposure in the Spanish
population. Primary prevention strategies should target specific populations,
such as outdoor workers, promoting sun-safe behaviors and stress-reducing
activities, and also adequate skin photoprotection in patients on certain
medications associated with increased BCC risk.

© 2024 The Authors. International Journal of Dermatology published by Wiley
Periodicals LLC on behalf of the International Society of Dermatology.

DOI: 10.1111/ijd.17026
PMID: 38282244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
