---
reference_id: "PMID:30523712"
title: "Fixed Duration of Venetoclax-Rituximab in Relapsed/Refractory Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia Eradicates Minimal Residual Disease and Prolongs Survival: Post-Treatment Follow-Up of the MURANO Phase III Study."
authors:
- Kater AP
- Seymour JF
- Hillmen P
- Eichhorst B
- Langerak AW
- Owen C
- Verdugo M
- Wu J
- Punnoose EA
- Jiang Y
- Wang J
- Boyer M
- Humphrey K
- Mobasher M
- Kipps TJ
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.18.01580
keywords:
- Aged
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Bendamustine Hydrochloride/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Bridged Bicyclo Compounds, Heterocyclic/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Drug Administration Schedule
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm"
- Female
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Lymphocytic, Chronic, B-Cell/drug therapy, mortality, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasm, Residual"
- Progression-Free Survival
- Recurrence
- "Rituximab/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Sulfonamides/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fixed Duration of Venetoclax-Rituximab in Relapsed/Refractory Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia Eradicates Minimal Residual Disease and Prolongs Survival: Post-Treatment Follow-Up of the MURANO Phase III Study.
**Authors:** Kater AP, Seymour JF, Hillmen P, Eichhorst B, Langerak AW, Owen C, Verdugo M, Wu J, Punnoose EA, Jiang Y, Wang J, Boyer M, Humphrey K, Mobasher M, Kipps TJ
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.18.01580](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.18.01580)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2019 Feb 1;37(4):269-277. doi: 10.1200/JCO.18.01580. Epub 2018
Dec  3.

Fixed Duration of Venetoclax-Rituximab in Relapsed/Refractory Chronic 
Lymphocytic Leukemia Eradicates Minimal Residual Disease and Prolongs Survival: 
Post-Treatment Follow-Up of the MURANO Phase III Study.

Kater AP(1), Seymour JF(2), Hillmen P(3), Eichhorst B(4), Langerak AW(5), Owen 
C(6), Verdugo M(7), Wu J(8), Punnoose EA(8), Jiang Y(8), Wang J(8), Boyer M(9), 
Humphrey K(9), Mobasher M(8), Kipps TJ(10).

Author information:
(1)1 Amsterdam Universitair Medische Centra, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 
the Netherlands.
(2)2 Royal Melbourne Hospital and University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia.
(3)3 St James's University Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom.
(4)4 University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(5)5 Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(6)6 University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(7)7 AbbVie, North Chicago, IL.
(8)8 Genentech, South San Francisco, CA.
(9)9 Roche Products Limited, Welwyn Garden City, United Kingdom.
(10)10 University of California School of Medicine, San Diego, CA.

PURPOSE: The MURANO study demonstrated significant progression-free survival 
(PFS) benefit for fixed-duration venetoclax-rituximab compared with 
bendamustine-rituximab in relapsed/refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia. With 
all patients off treatment, we report minimal residual disease (MRD) kinetics 
and updated outcomes.
METHODS: Patients were randomly assigned to 2 years of venetoclax plus rituximab 
during the first six cycles, or six cycles of bendamustine-rituximab. Primary 
end point was PFS. Safety and peripheral blood (PB) MRD status-at cycle 4, 2 to 
3 months after end of combination therapy (EOCT), and every 3 to 6 months 
thereafter-were secondary end points.
RESULTS: Of 194 patients, 174 (90%) completed the venetoclax-rituximab phase and 
130 (67%) completed 2 years of venetoclax. With a median follow-up of 36 months, 
PFS and overall survival remain superior to bendamustine-rituximab (hazard 
ratio, 0.16 [95% CI, 0.12 to 0.23]; and hazard ratio, 0.50 [95% CI, 0.30 to 
0.85], respectively). Patients who received venetoclax-rituximab achieved a 
higher rate of PB undetectable MRD (uMRD; less than 10-4) at EOCT (62% v 13%) 
with superiority sustained through month 24 (end of therapy). Overall, uMRD 
status at EOCT predicted longer PFS. Among those with detectable MRD, low-level 
MRD (10-4 to less than 10-2) predicted improved PFS compared with high-level MRD 
(10-2 or greater). At a median of 9.9 months (range, 1.4 to 22.5 months) after 
completing fixed-duration venetoclax-rituximab, overall only 12% (16 of 130) of 
patients developed disease progression (11 high-level MRD, three low-level MRD). 
At the end of therapy, 70% and 98% of patients with uMRD remained in uMRD and 
without disease progression, respectively.
CONCLUSION: With all patients having finished treatment, continued benefit was 
observed for venetoclax-rituximab compared with bendamustine-rituximab. uMRD 
rates were durable and predicted longer PFS, which establishes the impact of PB 
MRD on the benefit of fixed-duration, venetoclax-containing treatment. Low 
conversion to detectable MRD and sustained PFS after completion of 2 years of 
venetoclax-rituximab demonstrate the feasibility of this regimen.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.18.01580
PMID: 30523712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]