---
reference_id: "PMID:3748797"
title: "Hereditary elliptocytosis: clinical, morphological and biochemical studies of 38 cases."
authors:
- Dhermy D
- Garbarz M
- Lecomte MC
- Féo C
- Bournier O
- Chaveroche I
- Gautero H
- Galand C
- Boivin P
journal: Nouv Rev Fr Hematol (1978)
year: '1986'
keywords:
- Black People
- "Electrophoresis, Polyacrylamide Gel"
- "Elliptocytosis, Hereditary/blood"
- Erythrocyte Membrane/analysis
- Erythrocytes/cytology
- Female
- France
- Glycoproteins/blood
- Humans
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/blood
- Peptide Fragments/analysis
- Spectrin/metabolism
- Trypsin
- White People
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary elliptocytosis: clinical, morphological and biochemical studies of 38 cases.
**Authors:** Dhermy D, Garbarz M, Lecomte MC, Féo C, Bournier O, Chaveroche I, Gautero H, Galand C, Boivin P
**Journal:** Nouv Rev Fr Hematol (1978) (1986)

## Content

1. Nouv Rev Fr Hematol (1978). 1986;28(3):129-40.

Hereditary elliptocytosis: clinical, morphological and biochemical studies of 38
cases.

Dhermy D, Garbarz M, Lecomte MC, Féo C, Bournier O, Chaveroche I, Gautero H,
Galand C, Boivin P.

We report clinical, morphological and biochemical studies performed on 38 cases
of hereditary elliptocytosis (HE). The major determinant of membrane shape and
stability is a proteinaceous meshwork named membrane skeleton, composed mainly
of spectrin, actin, protein 4.1 and ankyrin. Spectrin is a heterodimer composed
of two chains alpha and beta. Two spectrin dimers associate head to head to form
a tetramer. Spectrin tetramers are cross-linked by actin and protein 4.1 to form
the skeletal meshwork. We observed two types of membrane defects in the 38
patients studied: 24 patients (13 kindreds) exhibited spectrin self-association
defect (type I HE) and 14 patients (6 kindreds) displayed deficiency in protein
4.1. A mutation in the spectrin chain was mostly found in the cases of type I
HE. These mutations were depicted on tryptic digest patterns of spectrin. Three
pathological variants were thus identified and characterized by the appearance
of an abnormal peptide, with a molecular weight of either 74,000 or 65,000, or
46,000 daltons. In one family, the spectrin self-association defect was related
to a shortened spectrin beta chain. Deficiency in protein 4.1 was found in 14
patients by means of polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of red cell membranes.
In 12 heterozygous cases of HE, the decrease in the amount of protein band 4.1
was between 40% and 50%. In 2 homozygous HE cases, protein band 4.1 was totally
absent. Immunoelectrotransfer blots of red cell membrane proteins using a
monoclonal antibody against protein 4.1 allowed characterization of additional
bands in two families. In some cases variations in the amount of glycophorin C
were noticed. Comparative studies of the two types of membrane abnormalities in
HE clearly showed the absence of correlation between clinical, morphological
phenotypes, and specific molecular etiology. However, all HE patients with
protein 4.1 deficiency were caucasian and most of the type I HE were of black
extraction. A study of red cell deformability using an ektacytometer revealed
that the cell deformability under isotonic conditions was decreased in all HE
patients. When the deformability was studied as a function of the osmolality of
the suspending medium, the curve obtained had a trapezoid shape. This typical
profile appeared to be constant in type I HE. We showed that the molecular
abnormalities of the spectrin alpha chain, found in most type I HE correlated
well with the functional spectrin defect.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 3748797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
