---
reference_id: "PMID:23707655"
title: Cardiac anomalies in individuals with the 18q deletion syndrome; report of a child with Ebstein anomaly and review of the literature.
authors:
- van Trier DC
- Feenstra I
- Bot P
- de Leeuw N
- Draaisma JM
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2013.05.002
keywords:
- Chromosome Banding
- Chromosome Deletion
- Chromosome Disorders/diagnosis
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 18"
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- "Ebstein Anomaly/diagnosis, genetics"
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac anomalies in individuals with the 18q deletion syndrome; report of a child with Ebstein anomaly and review of the literature.
**Authors:** van Trier DC, Feenstra I, Bot P, de Leeuw N, Draaisma JM
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2013.05.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2013.05.002)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2013 Aug;56(8):426-31. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2013.05.002. Epub 
2013 May 22.

Cardiac anomalies in individuals with the 18q deletion syndrome; report of a 
child with Ebstein anomaly and review of the literature.

van Trier DC(1), Feenstra I, Bot P, de Leeuw N, Draaisma JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.

Individuals with the 18q deletion syndrome are presented with various clinical 
characteristics, including cardiac anomalies in 24-36% of the reported cases. 
Nonetheless, genotype-phenotype correlations for cardiac anomalies in the 18q 
deletion syndrome have rarely been reported. We report on two girls with a 
terminal 18q deletion, one in whom an Ebstein anomaly and Wolff-Parkinson-White 
syndrome were detected and the other with multiple valve stenosis and a 
ventricular septal defect. The genotype and cardiac abnormalities of these girls 
and 17 other individuals with a de novo 18qter deletion reported in the 
literature are reviewed. All 19 individuals shared a small overlapping deletion 
region between 18q22.3q23. The most common cardiac defects detected were 
pulmonary valve anomalies and atrial septal defects. Ebstein anomaly, a rare 
cardiac malformation, was diagnosed in two individuals. Additional molecularly 
based genotype-phenotype studies are needed in order to pinpoint candidate genes 
within this region that contribute to normal cardiac development. A careful 
cardiac evaluation consisting of physical examination, ECG and ultrasound 
examination should be performed in all individuals diagnosed with the 18q 
deletion syndrome.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2013.05.002
PMID: 23707655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]