---
reference_id: "PMID:21154482"
title: "Rett syndrome: revised diagnostic criteria and nomenclature."
authors:
- Neul JL
- Kaufmann WE
- Glaze DG
- Christodoulou J
- Clarke AJ
- Bahi-Buisson N
- Leonard H
- Bailey ME
- Schanen NC
- Zappella M
- Renieri A
- Huppke P
- Percy AK
- RettSearch Consortium
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1002/ana.22124
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rett syndrome: revised diagnostic criteria and nomenclature.
**Authors:** Neul JL, Kaufmann WE, Glaze DG, Christodoulou J, Clarke AJ, Bahi-Buisson N, Leonard H, Bailey ME, Schanen NC, Zappella M, Renieri A, Huppke P, Percy AK, RettSearch Consortium
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.22124](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.22124)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2010 Dec;68(6):944-50. doi: 10.1002/ana.22124.

Rett syndrome: revised diagnostic criteria and nomenclature.

Neul JL(1), Kaufmann WE, Glaze DG, Christodoulou J, Clarke AJ, Bahi-Buisson N, 
Leonard H, Bailey ME, Schanen NC, Zappella M, Renieri A, Huppke P, Percy AK; 
RettSearch Consortium.

Collaborators: Kaufmann W, Neul J, Glaze D, Christodoulou J, Leonard H, Villard 
L, Schanen C, Anderson A, Bailey ME, Bahi-Buisson N, Bebbington A, Beisang A, 
Ben-Zeev B, Clarke A, Downs J, Djukic A, Einspieler C, Ellaway C, Humphreys P, 
Huppke P, Johnston M, Jones M, Kerr A, Khwaja O, Lane J, Mancini J, Mari F, 
Motil K, Nomura Y, Percy A, Pineda M, Renieri A, Riikonen R, Skinner S, Zapella 
M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. 
jneul@bcm.tmc.edu

OBJECTIVE: Rett syndrome (RTT) is a severe neurodevelopmental disease that 
affects approximately 1 in 10,000 live female births and is often caused by 
mutations in Methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2). Despite distinct clinical 
features, the accumulation of clinical and molecular information in recent years 
has generated considerable confusion regarding the diagnosis of RTT. The purpose 
of this work was to revise and clarify 2002 consensus criteria for the diagnosis 
of RTT in anticipation of treatment trials.
METHOD: RettSearch members, representing the majority of the international 
clinical RTT specialists, participated in an iterative process to come to a 
consensus on a revised and simplified clinical diagnostic criteria for RTT.
RESULTS: The clinical criteria required for the diagnosis of classic and 
atypical RTT were clarified and simplified. Guidelines for the diagnosis and 
molecular evaluation of specific variant forms of RTT were developed.
INTERPRETATION: These revised criteria provide clarity regarding the key 
features required for the diagnosis of RTT and reinforce the concept that RTT is 
a clinical diagnosis based on distinct clinical criteria, independent of 
molecular findings. We recommend that these criteria and guidelines be utilized 
in any proposed clinical research.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.22124
PMCID: PMC3058521
PMID: 21154482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest None of the authors has 
conflicts of interest.