---
reference_id: "PMID:36826837"
title: "Diagnosis of TBC1D32-associated conditions: Expanding the phenotypic spectrum of a complex ciliopathy."
authors:
- Harris SC
- Chong K
- Chitayat D
- Gilmore KL
- Jorge AAL
- Freire BL
- Lerario A
- Shannon P
- Cope H
- Gallentine WB
- Le Guyader G
- Bilan F
- Létard P
- Davis EE
- Vora NL
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63150
keywords:
- Pregnancy
- Female
- Humans
- Child
- Phenotype
- "Ciliopathies/diagnosis, genetics"
- Pedigree
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis of TBC1D32-associated conditions: Expanding the phenotypic spectrum of a complex ciliopathy.
**Authors:** Harris SC, Chong K, Chitayat D, Gilmore KL, Jorge AAL, Freire BL, Lerario A, Shannon P, Cope H, Gallentine WB, Le Guyader G, Bilan F, Létard P, Davis EE, Vora NL
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.63150](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.63150)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2023 May;191(5):1282-1292. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63150. Epub 
2023 Feb 24.

Diagnosis of TBC1D32-associated conditions: Expanding the phenotypic spectrum of 
a complex ciliopathy.

Harris SC(1), Chong K(2), Chitayat D(2), Gilmore KL(3), Jorge AAL(4), Freire 
BL(5), Lerario A(6), Shannon P(7), Cope H(8), Gallentine WB(9), Le Guyader 
G(10), Bilan F(10)(11), Létard P(10), Davis EE(12)(13)(14), Vora NL(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Prisma Health, University of South 
Carolina Greenville, Greenville, South Carolina, USA.
(2)The Prenatal Diagnosis and Medical Genetics Program, Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(3)Division of Maternal Fetal Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, 
USA.
(4)Unidade de Endocrinologia Genética (LIM25) e Laboratório de Endocrinologia 
Celular e Molecular, Hospital das Clinicas HCFMUSP, Faculdade de Medicina, 
Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(5)Unidade de Endocrinologia do Desenvolvimento, Laboratorio de Hormonios e 
Genetica Molecular (LIM42), Hospital das Clinicas HCFMUSP, Faculdade de 
Medicina, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology and 
Diabetes, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(7)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(8)Center for Human Disease Modeling, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, 
USA.
(9)Department of Neurology and Pediatrics, Stanford University, Lucile Packard 
Children's Hospital, Palo Alto, California, USA.
(10)Service de génétique clinique, CHU de Poitiers, Poitiers, France.
(11)Laboratoire de Neurosciences Expérimentales et Cliniques, INSERM U1084, 
Université de Poitiers, Poitiers, France.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern 
University, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(13)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(14)Stanley Manne Children's Research Institute, Ann & Robert H. Lurie 
Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Exome sequencing is a powerful tool in prenatal and postnatal genetics and can 
help identify novel candidate genes critical to human development. We describe 
seven unpublished probands with rare likely pathogenic variants or variants of 
uncertain significance that segregate with recessive disease in TBC1D32, 
including four fetal probands in three unrelated pedigrees and three pediatric 
probands in unrelated pedigrees. We also report clinical comparisons with seven 
previously published patients. Index probands were identified through an ongoing 
prenatal exome sequencing study and through an online data sharing platform 
(Gene Matcher™). A literature review was also completed. TBC1D32 is involved in 
the development and function of cilia and is expressed in the developing 
hypothalamus and pituitary gland. We provide additional data to expand the 
phenotype correlated with TBC1D32 variants, including a severe prenatal 
phenotype associated with life-limiting congenital anomalies.

© 2023 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63150
PMCID: PMC10204718
PMID: 36826837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]