---
reference_id: "PMID:37516009"
title: Clinical Findings and Genetic Analysis of Nine Mexican Families with Bartter Syndrome.
authors:
- Hernández NEG
- Pérez LIE
- Aguilera D
- Camargo-Muñiz MD
- Espinosa CFC
- Jaramillo MCR
- Salvador C
- González ZL
- Hureaux M
- Vargas-Poussou R
journal: Arch Med Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2023.102859
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Pregnancy
- Bartter Syndrome/genetics
- Homozygote
- Sequence Deletion
- Heterozygote
- Mutation
- "Antigens, Neoplasm"
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
- Chloride Channels/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Findings and Genetic Analysis of Nine Mexican Families with Bartter Syndrome.
**Authors:** Hernández NEG, Pérez LIE, Aguilera D, Camargo-Muñiz MD, Espinosa CFC, Jaramillo MCR, Salvador C, González ZL, Hureaux M, Vargas-Poussou R
**Journal:** Arch Med Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.arcmed.2023.102859](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arcmed.2023.102859)

## Content

1. Arch Med Res. 2023 Sep;54(6):102859. doi: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2023.102859. Epub 
2023 Jul 27.

Clinical Findings and Genetic Analysis of Nine Mexican Families with Bartter 
Syndrome.

Hernández NEG(1), Pérez LIE(2), Aguilera D(1), Camargo-Muñiz MD(3), Espinosa 
CFC(4), Jaramillo MCR(5), Salvador C(6), González ZL(6), Hureaux M(7), 
Vargas-Poussou R(7).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Nephrology Service, General Hospital of the National Medical 
Center, La Raza, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, Mexico City, Mexico.
(2)Department of Physiology of the School of Medicine, Universidad Nacional 
Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico. Electronic address: laurae@unam.mx.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Northeast National Medical Center, High Specialty 
Medical Unit No. 25, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, Monterrey, N.L., 
Mexico.
(4)General Hospital No. 33, Bahía de Banderas, Nayarit, Mexico.
(5)Pediatrics Service, Hospital General León y Colegio de Pediatras, Guanajuato, 
Mexico.
(6)Department of Physiology of the School of Medicine, Universidad Nacional 
Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico.
(7)Department of Genetics, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Bartter's syndrome (BS) is a group of salt-wasting tubulopathies 
characterized by hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, hypercalciuria, secondary 
hyperaldosteronism, and low or normal blood pressure. Loss-of-function variants 
in genes encoding for five proteins expressed in the thick ascending limb of 
Henle in the nephron, produced different genetic types of BS.
AIM: Clinical and genetic analysis of families with Antenatal Bartter syndrome 
(ABS) and with Classic Bartter syndrome (CBS).
METHODS: Nine patients from unrelated non-consanguineous Mexican families were 
studied. Massive parallel sequencing of a gene panel or whole-exome sequencing 
was used to identify the causative gene.
RESULTS: Proband 1 was homozygous for the pathogenic variant p.Arg302Gln in the 
SLC12A1 gene encoding for the sodium-potassium-chloride NKCC2 cotransporter. 
Proband 3 was homozygous for the nonsense variant p.Cys308* in the KCNJ1 gene 
encoding for the ROMK potassium channel. Probands 7, 8, and 9 showed variants in 
the CLCKNB gene encoding the chloride channel ClC-Kb: proband 7 was compound 
heterozygous for the deletion of the entire gene and the missense change 
p.Arg438Cys; proband 8 presented a homozygous deletion of the whole gene and 
proband 9 was homozygous for the nonsense mutation p.Arg595*. A heterozygous 
variant of unknown significance was detected in the SLC12A1 gene in proband 2, 
and no variants were found in SLC12A1, KCNJ1, BSND, CLCNKA, CLCNKB, and MAGED2 
genes in probands 4, 5, and 6.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic analysis identified loss-of-function variants in the 
SLC12A1, KCNJ1, and CLCNKB genes in four patients with ABS and in the CLCNKB 
gene in two patients with CBS.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2023.102859
PMID: 37516009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest We declare that there was 
no financial support or relationship that may pose a conflict of interest.