---
reference_id: "PMID:32631481"
title: Poorly differentiated SMARCB1/INI1-negative chordomas.
authors:
- Zhao J
- Feng J
- Chen L
- Ma Y
- Ding D
- Wang H
journal: Clin Neuropathol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.5414/NP301277
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Brain Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chordoma/diagnosis, genetics"
- Female
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- SMARCB1 Protein/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Poorly differentiated SMARCB1/INI1-negative chordomas.
**Authors:** Zhao J, Feng J, Chen L, Ma Y, Ding D, Wang H
**Journal:** Clin Neuropathol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.5414/NP301277](https://doi.org/10.5414/NP301277)

## Content

1. Clin Neuropathol. 2021 Jan-Feb;40(1):36-45. doi: 10.5414/NP301277.

Poorly differentiated SMARCB1/INI1-negative chordomas.

Zhao J, Feng J, Chen L, Ma Y, Ding D, Wang H.

AIMS: To analyze the clinicopathological characteristics of poorly 
differentiated chordomas (PDCs) with SMARCB1/INI1 loss in children.
MATERIALS: Four cases of PDCs were included in the study.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was performed with respect to brachyury, Glut-1, 
keratin 18, keratin 19, INI1, vimentin, S-100, CK, EMA, GFAP, etc. Fluorescence 
in situ hybridization (FISH) was performed for SMARCB1/INI1 from 3 patients.
RESULTS: Histologically, contrary to typical histologic features for 
conventional chordomas, 4 tumors were composed of ovoid or atypical fusiform 
cells. Sporadic physaliphorous cells were evident. Tumor cells had large 
vacuoles in the cytoplasm that were even remarkable on the imprint cytology 
slide. By immunohistochemistry, each case revealed loss of SMARCB1/INI1 
expression and nuclear expression of brachyury. Glut-1, keratin 18, keratin 19, 
CK, EMA, and vimentin were positive in these PDCs. Except for 1 patient who had 
not yet completed FISH, the other 3 cases demonstrated the loss of SMARCB1/INI1 
gene by fluorescence in situ hybridization.
CONCLUSION: Poorly differentiated SMARCB1/INI1-negative chordoma is a unique 
subset of chordoma representing a clinically, histopathologically, and 
molecularly distinct entity with rapid progression and poor prognosis which 
should not be confused with conventional chordomas. Sporadic physaliphorous 
cells (tumor cells with large vacuoles in the cytoplasm) provided important 
diagnostic clues of PDCs. Combination use of characteristic markers of notochord 
cells (brachyury, Glut-1, keratin 18, and keratin 19) along with INI1 were 
effective diagnostic tools.

DOI: 10.5414/NP301277
PMID: 32631481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]