---
reference_id: PMID:28678775
title: "Cryo-EM structures of tau filaments from Alzheimer's disease."
authors:
- Fitzpatrick AWP
- Falcon B
- He S
- Murzin AG
- Murshudov G
- Garringer HJ
- Crowther RA
- Ghetti B
- Goedert M
- Scheres SHW
journal: Nature
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/nature23002
keywords:
- Aged
- "Alzheimer Disease/metabolism, pathology"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Amyloid/chemistry, ultrastructure"
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- Cryoelectron Microscopy
- Female
- Humans
- "Protein Aggregation, Pathological"
- "tau Proteins/chemistry, ultrastructure"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cryo-EM structures of tau filaments from Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Fitzpatrick AWP, Falcon B, He S, Murzin AG, Murshudov G, Garringer HJ, Crowther RA, Ghetti B, Goedert M, Scheres SHW
**Journal:** Nature (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature23002](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature23002)

## Content

1. Nature. 2017 Jul 13;547(7662):185-190. doi: 10.1038/nature23002. Epub 2017 Jul
 5.

Cryo-EM structures of tau filaments from Alzheimer's disease.

Fitzpatrick AWP(1), Falcon B(1), He S(1), Murzin AG(1), Murshudov G(1), 
Garringer HJ(2), Crowther RA(1), Ghetti B(2), Goedert M(1), Scheres SHW(1).

Author information:
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge, CB2 
0QH, UK.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2017 Jul 13;547(7662):170-171. doi: 10.1038/nature23094.
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2017 Sep;13(9):513. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2017.107.

Alzheimer's disease is the most common neurodegenerative disease, and there are 
no mechanism-based therapies. The disease is defined by the presence of abundant 
neurofibrillary lesions and neuritic plaques in the cerebral cortex. 
Neurofibrillary lesions comprise paired helical and straight tau filaments, 
whereas tau filaments with different morphologies characterize other 
neurodegenerative diseases. No high-resolution structures of tau filaments are 
available. Here we present cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) maps at 3.4-3.5 Å 
resolution and corresponding atomic models of paired helical and straight 
filaments from the brain of an individual with Alzheimer's disease. Filament 
cores are made of two identical protofilaments comprising residues 306-378 of 
tau protein, which adopt a combined cross-β/β-helix structure and define the 
seed for tau aggregation. Paired helical and straight filaments differ in their 
inter-protofilament packing, showing that they are ultrastructural polymorphs. 
These findings demonstrate that cryo-EM allows atomic characterization of 
amyloid filaments from patient-derived material, and pave the way for 
investigation of a range of neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1038/nature23002
PMCID: PMC5552202
PMID: 28678775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.