---
reference_id: "PMID:34874751"
title: "Small Cell Undifferentiated Histology Does Not Adversely Affect Outcome in Hepatoblastoma: A Report From the Children's Oncology Group (COG) AHEP0731 Study Committee."
authors:
- Trobaugh-Lotrario A
- Katzenstein HM
- Ranganathan S
- Lopez-Terrada D
- Krailo MD
- Piao J
- Chung N
- Randazzo J
- Malogolowkin MH
- Furman WL
- McCarville EB
- Towbin AJ
- Tiao GM
- Dunn SP
- Langham MR
- McGahren ED
- Feusner J
- Rodriguez-Galindo C
- Meyers RL
- "O'Neill AF"
- Finegold MJ
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.21.00803
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- Cell Differentiation
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Hepatectomy
- "Hepatoblastoma/mortality, pathology, therapy"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Liver Neoplasms/mortality, pathology, therapy"
- Liver Transplantation
- Male
- Neoplasm Staging
- Progression-Free Survival
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Small Cell Undifferentiated Histology Does Not Adversely Affect Outcome in Hepatoblastoma: A Report From the Children's Oncology Group (COG) AHEP0731 Study Committee.
**Authors:** Trobaugh-Lotrario A, Katzenstein HM, Ranganathan S, Lopez-Terrada D, Krailo MD, Piao J, Chung N, Randazzo J, Malogolowkin MH, Furman WL, McCarville EB, Towbin AJ, Tiao GM, Dunn SP, Langham MR, McGahren ED, Feusner J, Rodriguez-Galindo C, Meyers RL, O'Neill AF, Finegold MJ
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.21.00803](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.21.00803)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2022 Feb 10;40(5):459-467. doi: 10.1200/JCO.21.00803. Epub 2021 
Dec 7.

Small Cell Undifferentiated Histology Does Not Adversely Affect Outcome in 
Hepatoblastoma: A Report From the Children's Oncology Group (COG) AHEP0731 Study 
Committee.

Trobaugh-Lotrario A(1), Katzenstein HM(2), Ranganathan S(3), Lopez-Terrada D(4), 
Krailo MD(5), Piao J(6), Chung N(6), Randazzo J(6), Malogolowkin MH(7), Furman 
WL(8), McCarville EB(8), Towbin AJ(3), Tiao GM(3), Dunn SP(9), Langham MR(8), 
McGahren ED(10), Feusner J(11), Rodriguez-Galindo C(8), Meyers RL(12), O'Neill 
AF(13), Finegold MJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Sacred Heart Children's Hospital, Spokane, WA.
(2)Nemours Children's Specialty Care and Wolfson Children's Hospital, 
Jacksonville, FL.
(3)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH.
(4)Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX.
(5)University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA.
(6)Children's Oncology Group, Monrovia, CA.
(7)University of California at Davis Comprehensive Cancer Center, Sacramento, 
CA.
(8)University of Tennessee Health Science Center and St Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, TN.
(9)AI duPont Hospital for Children and Thomas Jefferson University, 
Philadelphia, PA.
(10)University of Virginia Children's Hospital and University of Virginia, 
Charlottesville, VA.
(11)Benioff Children's Hospital, Oakland, CA.
(12)Primary Children's Medical Center, Salt Lake City, UT.
(13)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, and Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA.

PURPOSE: Small cell undifferentiated (SCU) histology in hepatoblastoma (HB) 
tumors has historically been associated with a poor prognosis. Tumors from 
patients enrolled on Children's Oncology Group (COG) study AHEP0731 underwent 
institutional and central pathologic review for identification of SCU histology.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients with SCU histology identified at the local 
treating institution who had otherwise low-risk tumors were upstaged to the 
intermediate-risk treatment stratum, whereas those only identified by 
retrospective central review were treated per the local institution as low-risk. 
Patients with otherwise intermediate- or high-risk tumors remained in that 
treatment stratum, respectively. Central review was to be performed for all 
tissue samples obtained at any time point. Treatment was per local review, 
whereas analysis of outcome was based on central review.
RESULTS: Thirty-five patients had some elements (1%-25%) of SCU identified on 
central review of diagnostic specimens. All but two patient tissue sample 
retained nuclear INI1 expression. The presence of SCU histology did not 
correlate with age, alpha-fetoprotein level at diagnosis, or sex. The presence 
of SCU did not affect event-free survival (EFS). EFS at 5 years for patients 
with low-risk, intermediate-risk, and high-risk with SCU HB was 86% (95% CI, 33 
to 98), 81% (95% CI, 57 to 92), and 29% (95% CI, 4 to 61), respectively, 
compared with EFS at 5 years for patients without SCU enrolled with low-risk, 
intermediate-risk, and high-risk of 87% (95% CI, 72 to 95), 88% (95% CI, 79 to 
94), and 55% (95% CI, 32 to 74; P = .17), respectively.
CONCLUSION: The presence of SCU histology in HB does not appear to adversely 
affect outcome. Future studies should be able to treat patients with SCU HB 
according to risk stratification without regard to the presence of SCU 
histology.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.21.00803
PMCID: PMC8824398
PMID: 34874751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Howard M. KatzensteinEmployment: EMD Serono Mark 
D. KrailoConsulting or Advisory Role: Merck Sharp & DohmeTravel, Accommodations, 
Expenses: Merck Sharp & Dohme Alexander J. TowbinConsulting or Advisory Role: 
Applied RadiologyResearch Funding: GuerbetPatents, Royalties, Other Intellectual 
Property: ElsevierOpen Payments Link: 
https://openpaymentsdata.cms.gov/physician/148955 Allison F. O'NeillConsulting 
or Advisory Role: CorMedixNo other potential conflicts of interest were 
reported.