---
reference_id: "PMID:41549418"
title: Treatment Failure and Post-Artesunate Delayed Haemolysis in a Returned Traveller From Uganda With Partially Drug-Resistant Severe Plasmodium falciparum Malaria.
authors:
- Travis J
- McCarthy K
- Chapman P
- Huang L
- Tan A
- Cheng Q
- Barber BE
journal: Med J Aust
year: '2026'
doi: 10.5694/mja2.70136
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment Failure and Post-Artesunate Delayed Haemolysis in a Returned Traveller From Uganda With Partially Drug-Resistant Severe Plasmodium falciparum Malaria.
**Authors:** Travis J, McCarthy K, Chapman P, Huang L, Tan A, Cheng Q, Barber BE
**Journal:** Med J Aust (2026)
**DOI:** [10.5694/mja2.70136](https://doi.org/10.5694/mja2.70136)

## Content

1. Med J Aust. 2026 Jan;224(1):e70136. doi: 10.5694/mja2.70136.

Treatment Failure and Post-Artesunate Delayed Haemolysis in a Returned Traveller 
From Uganda With Partially Drug-Resistant Severe Plasmodium falciparum Malaria.

Travis J(1), McCarthy K(2), Chapman P(2), Huang L(2), Tan A(1), Cheng Q(1)(3), 
Barber BE(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)QIMR Berghofer, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(2)Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(3)Australian Defence Force Malaria and Infectious Disease Institute, Brisbane, 
Queensland, Australia.

A man aged in his 40s, recently returned from Uganda, was hospitalised with 
Plasmodium falciparum malaria, with hyperparasitaemia of ~1.5 × 106 parasites/μL 
(26%). He received intravenous artesunate followed by artemether-lumefantrine. 
However, parasite clearance was delayed, and despite a negative blood film 
following treatment, the patient was readmitted 3 weeks later with recurrent 
parasitaemia. Further testing for drug-resistant phenotypes and genotypes 
demonstrated reduced susceptibility to lumefantrine, an A675V mutation in the 
pfk13 gene and increased ring-stage survival, consistent with partial 
artemisinin resistance. The case highlights the high risk of P. falciparum 
treatment failure in patients with hyperparasitaemia and partial drug 
resistance.

© 2026 The Author(s). Medical Journal of Australia published by John Wiley & 
Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of AMPCo Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.5694/mja2.70136
PMCID: PMC12813300
PMID: 41549418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Not commissioned, externally peer reviewed. The 
authors declare no conflicts of interest.