---
reference_id: "PMID:34737089"
title: Clinical features of Danon disease and insights gained from LAMP-2 deficiency models.
authors:
- Zhai Y
- Miao J
- Peng Y
- Wang Y
- Dong J
- Zhao X
journal: Trends Cardiovasc Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.tcm.2021.10.012
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type IIb/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- "Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic"
- Autophagy/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical features of Danon disease and insights gained from LAMP-2 deficiency models.
**Authors:** Zhai Y, Miao J, Peng Y, Wang Y, Dong J, Zhao X
**Journal:** Trends Cardiovasc Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tcm.2021.10.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcm.2021.10.012)

## Content

1. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2023 Feb;33(2):81-89. doi: 10.1016/j.tcm.2021.10.012.
Epub 2021 Nov 2.

Clinical features of Danon disease and insights gained from LAMP-2 deficiency
models.

Zhai Y(1), Miao J(2), Peng Y(1), Wang Y(3), Dong J(4), Zhao X(5).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cardiovascular Diseases, Henan Key Laboratory of Hereditary
Cardiovascular Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, P.R. China.
(2)Academy of Medical Sciences, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, P.R.
China;Department of Science and Technology, Henan University of Chinese
Medicine, Zhengzhou, Henan, P.R. China; Sino-British Research Center for
Molecular Oncology, National Center for the International Research in Cell and
Gene Therapy, School of Basic Sciences, Academy of Medical Sciences, Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, Henan, P. R. China.
(3)Sino-British Research Center for Molecular Oncology, National Center for the
International Research in Cell and Gene Therapy, School of Basic Sciences,
Academy of Medical Sciences, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, P. R.
China; Centre for Molecular Oncology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary
University of London, London, UK.
(4)Centre for Cardiovascular Diseases, Henan Key Laboratory of Hereditary
Cardiovascular Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, P.R. China; Beijing Anzhen Hospital, Capital
Medical University, Beijing, China. Electronic address: jzdong@zzu.edu.cn.
(5)Centre for Cardiovascular Diseases, Henan Key Laboratory of Hereditary
Cardiovascular Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, P.R. China. Electronic address:
fcczhaoxy8@zzu.edu.cn.

Comment in
    Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2023 Feb;33(2):90-91. doi: 10.1016/j.tcm.2021.11.007.

Danon disease (DD) is an X-linked multisystem disorder with clinical features
characterized by the triad of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, skeletal muscle
weakness, and mental retardation. Cardiac involvement can be fatal in the
absence of an effective treatment option such as heart transplantation.
Molecular studies have proved that LAMP-2 protein deficiency, mainly LAMP-2B
isoform, resulting from LAMP2 gene mutation, is the culprit for DD. Autophagy
impairment due to LAMP-2 deficiency mediated the accumulation of abnormal
autophagic vacuoles in cells. While it is not ideal for mimicking DD phenotypes
in humans, the emergence of LAMP-2-deficient animal models and induced
pluripotent stem cells from DD patients provided powerful tools for exploring DD
mechanism. In both in vitro and in vivo studies, much evidence has demonstrated
that mitochondria dysfunction and fragmentation can result in DD pathology.
Fundamental research contributes to the therapeutic transformation. By targeting
the molecular core, several potential therapies have demonstrated promising
results in partial phenotypes improvement. Among them, gene therapies anticipate
inaugurate a class of symptom control and prevention drugs as their in vivo
effects are promising, and one clinical trial is currently underway.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tcm.2021.10.012
PMID: 34737089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
