---
reference_id: "PMID:28475260"
title: A focus on reward in anorexia nervosa through the lens of the activity-based anorexia rodent model.
authors:
- Foldi CJ
- Milton LK
- Oldfield BJ
journal: J Neuroendocrinol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/jne.12479
keywords:
- Animals
- Anorexia Nervosa/physiopathology
- Brain/physiopathology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Dopamine/physiology
- Humans
- Mice
- Neurosecretory Systems/physiopathology
- Rats
- Reward
- Serotonin/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A focus on reward in anorexia nervosa through the lens of the activity-based anorexia rodent model.
**Authors:** Foldi CJ, Milton LK, Oldfield BJ
**Journal:** J Neuroendocrinol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jne.12479](https://doi.org/10.1111/jne.12479)

## Content

1. J Neuroendocrinol. 2017 Oct;29(10). doi: 10.1111/jne.12479.

A focus on reward in anorexia nervosa through the lens of the activity-based
anorexia rodent model.

Foldi CJ(1), Milton LK(1), Oldfield BJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia.

Patients suffering anorexia nervosa (AN) become anhedonic, unable or unwilling
to derive normal pleasures and tend to avoid rewarding outcomes, most profoundly
in food intake. The activity-based anorexia model recapitulates many of the
pathophysiological and behavioural hallmarks of the human condition, including a
reduction in food intake, excessive exercise, dramatic weight loss, loss of
reproductive cycles, hypothermia and anhedonia, and therefore it allows
investigation into the underlying neurobiology of anorexia nervosa. The use of
this model has directed attention to disruptions in central reward
neurocircuitry, which may contribute to disease susceptibility. The purpose of
this review is to demonstrate the utility of this unique model to provide
insight into the mechanisms of reward relevant to feeding and weight loss, which
may ultimately help to unravel the neurobiology of anorexia nervosa and, in a
broader sense, the foundation of reward-based feeding.

© 2017 British Society for Neuroendocrinology.

DOI: 10.1111/jne.12479
PMID: 28475260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
