---
reference_id: "PMID:33550793"
title: "Exertional dyspnea and hemoptysis in an adolescent: is it tuberculosis only?"
authors:
- Goel N
- Goyal N
- Kumar R
journal: Monaldi Arch Chest Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.4081/monaldi.2021.1613
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exertional dyspnea and hemoptysis in an adolescent: is it tuberculosis only?
**Authors:** Goel N, Goyal N, Kumar R
**Journal:** Monaldi Arch Chest Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.4081/monaldi.2021.1613](https://doi.org/10.4081/monaldi.2021.1613)

## Content

1. Monaldi Arch Chest Dis. 2021 Feb 2;91(1). doi: 10.4081/monaldi.2021.1613.

Exertional dyspnea and hemoptysis in an adolescent: is it tuberculosis only?

Goel N(1), Goyal N(2), Kumar R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Vallabhbhai Patel Chest Institute, 
University of New Delhi. drnitingoel@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Vallabhbhai Patel Chest Institute, 
University of New Delhi. niteshgoyalucms@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Vallabhbhai Patel Chest Institute, 
University of New Delhi. rajkumarvpci@gmail.com.

Unilateral pulmonary artery atresia (UPAA), commonly detected in childhood, can 
occasionally present in adulthood with typical symptoms of recurrent pulmonary 
infections, dyspnoea on exertion and hemoptysis. An 18-year-old girl presented 
with complaints of cough, dyspnea on exertion and hemoptysis. Chest radiograph 
revealed dilated pulmonary trunk, signs of left sided volume loss and cavitating 
lesion in left lower zone. Pulmonary CT angiography found left pulmonary artery 
atresia. Endobronchial lung biopsy revealed granulomatous inflammation. 
Diagnosis of left sided UPAA with pulmonary tuberculosis was established. She 
responded well to the anti-tubercular therapy. This case highlights the 
importance of awareness about UPAA as a possible differential for exertional 
dyspnea, recurrent chest infections, hemoptysis and pulmonary hypertension in 
adults.

DOI: 10.4081/monaldi.2021.1613
PMID: 33550793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]