---
reference_id: "PMID:36241815"
title: "Monkeypox: what do dental professionals need to know?"
authors:
- Zemouri C
- Beltrán EO
- Holliday R
- Jakubovics NS
- Allison JR
journal: Br Dent J
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41415-022-5079-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monkeypox: what do dental professionals need to know?
**Authors:** Zemouri C, Beltrán EO, Holliday R, Jakubovics NS, Allison JR
**Journal:** Br Dent J (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41415-022-5079-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41415-022-5079-8)

## Content

1. Br Dent J. 2022 Oct;233(7):569-574. doi: 10.1038/s41415-022-5079-8. Epub 2022 
Oct 14.

Monkeypox: what do dental professionals need to know?

Zemouri C(1), Beltrán EO(2), Holliday R(3), Jakubovics NS(4), Allison JR(5).

Author information:
(1)Zemouri Public Health Research and Consultancy, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)UNICA - Caries Research Unit, Research Department, Universidad El Bosque, 
Bogotá, Colombia.
(3)School of Dental Sciences, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK; Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(4)School of Dental Sciences, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(5)School of Dental Sciences, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK; Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. James.allison@newcastle.ac.uk.

Infection control is critical for the safe delivery of dental care. Infection 
control practices must be responsive to emerging and re-emerging infectious 
diseases and outbreaks, as was clearly seen during the peak of the COVID-19 
pandemic. An emerging global outbreak of the monkeypox virus has again raised 
potential challenges for infection control in dentistry. Monkeypox is an 
infectious disease, characterised by a rash affecting the skin and soft tissues, 
including the oral cavity. Previously, cases were mostly seen following contact 
with infected animals in Central and West Africa, with limited human-to-human 
transmission within and outside of these areas. However, since May 2022, 
sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred globally. Monkeypox can be 
transmitted via close contact with an infected person, contaminated objects and 
surfaces, or by droplets and possibly aerosols, which is therefore of potential 
importance to dental settings. This article discusses the relevance of monkeypox 
to dental professionals, the typical presentation of the disease, its potential 
impact on infection prevention and control practices and the delivery of dental 
services. The current monkeypox outbreak highlights the need for a more 
sustained programme of research into dental infection control that can provide a 
solid evidence base to underpin preparedness planning for future outbreaks and 
pandemics.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to the British Dental 
Association.

DOI: 10.1038/s41415-022-5079-8
PMCID: PMC9568425
PMID: 36241815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest.