---
reference_id: "PMID:19136028"
title: "A pragmatic approach to biochemical systems theory applied to an alpha-synuclein-based model of Parkinson's disease."
authors:
- Sass MB
- Lorenz AN
- Green RL
- Coleman RA
journal: J Neurosci Methods
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2008.12.014
keywords:
- Amyloid/metabolism
- Antiparkinson Agents/therapeutic use
- Computer Simulation
- "Dopamine/analogs & derivatives, metabolism"
- Gene Expression
- Humans
- Levodopa/therapeutic use
- "Lewy Bodies/drug effects, physiology"
- Lysosomes/physiology
- "Models, Neurological"
- Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Neurotoxins/metabolism
- "Parkinson Disease/drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Proteasome Endopeptidase Complex/metabolism
- Reactive Oxygen Species/metabolism
- Systems Theory
- Ubiquitin/metabolism
- alpha-Synuclein/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A pragmatic approach to biochemical systems theory applied to an alpha-synuclein-based model of Parkinson's disease.
**Authors:** Sass MB, Lorenz AN, Green RL, Coleman RA
**Journal:** J Neurosci Methods (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jneumeth.2008.12.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2008.12.014)

## Content

1. J Neurosci Methods. 2009 Apr 15;178(2):366-77. doi:
10.1016/j.jneumeth.2008.12.014. Epub 2008 Dec 24.

A pragmatic approach to biochemical systems theory applied to an
alpha-synuclein-based model of Parkinson's disease.

Sass MB(1), Lorenz AN, Green RL, Coleman RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Integrated Science Center, The College of William
and Mary, Williamsburg, VA 23187, USA.

This paper presents a detailed systems model of Parkinson's disease (PD),
developed utilizing a pragmatic application of biochemical systems theory (BST)
intended to assist experimentalists in the study of system behavior. This
approach utilizes relative values as a reasonable initial estimate for BST and
provides a theoretical means of applying numerical solutions to qualitative and
semi-quantitative understandings of cellular pathways and mechanisms. The
approach allows for the simulation of human disease through its ability to
organize and integrate existing information about metabolic pathways without
having a full quantitative description of those pathways, so that hypotheses
about individual processes may be tested in a systems environment. Incorporating
this method, the PD model describes alpha-synuclein aggregation as mediated by
dopamine metabolism, the ubiquitin-proteasome system, and lysosomal degradation,
allowing for the examination of dynamic pathway interactions and the evaluation
of possible toxic mechanisms in the aggregation process. Four system
perturbations: elevated alpha-synuclein aggregation, impaired dopamine
packaging, increased neurotoxins, and alpha-synuclein overexpression, were
analyzed for correlation to qualitative PD system hypotheses present in the
literature, with the model demonstrating a high level of agreement with these
hypotheses. Additionally, various PD treatment methods, including levadopa and
monoamine oxidase inhibition (MAOI) therapy, were applied to the disease models
to examine their effects on the system. Future additions and refinements to the
model may further the understanding of the emergent behaviors of the disease,
helping in the identification of system sensitivities and possible therapeutic
targets.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2008.12.014
PMID: 19136028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
