---
reference_id: "PMID:18929906"
title: "Pompe's disease."
authors:
- van der Ploeg AT
- Reuser AJ
journal: Lancet
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61555-X
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- Disease Progression
- Genotype
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type II/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Prognosis
- Recombinant Proteins/therapeutic use
- Treatment Outcome
- alpha-Glucosidases/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pompe's disease.
**Authors:** van der Ploeg AT, Reuser AJ
**Journal:** Lancet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61555-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61555-X)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2008 Oct 11;372(9646):1342-53. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61555-X.

Pompe's disease.

van der Ploeg AT(1), Reuser AJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Division of Metabolic Diseases and Genetics,
Erasmus MC, Sophia Children's Hospital, University Medical Centre, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands. a.vanderploeg@erasmusmc.nl

Pompe's disease, glycogen-storage disease type II, and acid maltase deficiency
are alternative names for the same metabolic disorder. It is a pan-ethnic
autosomal recessive trait characterised by acid alpha-glucosidase deficiency
leading to lysosomal glycogen storage. Pompe's disease is also regarded as a
muscular disorder, but the generalised storage of glycogen causes more than
mobility and respiratory problems. The clinical spectrum is continuous and
broad. First symptoms can present in infants, children, and adults. Cardiac
hypertrophy is a key feature of classic infantile Pompe's disease. For a long
time, there was no means to stop disease progression, but the approval of enzyme
replacement therapy has substantially changed the prospects for patients. With
this new development, the disease is now among the small but increasing number
of lysosomal storage disorders, for which treatment has become a reality. This
review is meant to raise general awareness, to present and discuss the latest
insights in disease pathophysiology, and to draw attention to new developments
about diagnosis and care. We also discuss the developments that led to the
approval of enzyme replacement therapy with recombinant human alpha-glucosidase
from Chinese hamster ovary cells (alglucosidase alfa) by the US Food and Drug
Administration and European Medicines Agency in 2006, and review clinical
practice.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61555-X
PMID: 18929906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
