---
reference_id: "PMID:31414054"
title: "Towards Clinical Trials in Fuchs Endothelial Corneal Dystrophy: Classification and Outcome Measures-The Bowman Club Lecture 2019."
authors:
- Patel SV
journal: BMJ Open Ophthalmol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1136/bmjophth-2019-000321
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Towards Clinical Trials in Fuchs Endothelial Corneal Dystrophy: Classification and Outcome Measures-The Bowman Club Lecture 2019.
**Authors:** Patel SV
**Journal:** BMJ Open Ophthalmol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bmjophth-2019-000321](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjophth-2019-000321)

## Content

1. BMJ Open Ophthalmol. 2019 Jul 11;4(1):e000321. doi:
10.1136/bmjophth-2019-000321. eCollection 2019.

Towards Clinical Trials in Fuchs Endothelial Corneal Dystrophy: Classification
and Outcome Measures-The Bowman Club Lecture 2019.

Patel SV(1).

Author information:
(1)Ophthalmology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

The surgical treatment of Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) has
advanced dramatically over the last two decades. Penetrating keratoplasty has
been superseded by various iterations of endothelial keratoplasty, and
currently, surgical removal of host Descemet membrane without keratoplasty is
being investigated. These surgical advances have been accompanied by significant
improvement of our understanding of the underlying disease mechanisms, not least
the discovery that FECD in western populations is predominantly an intronic
trinucleotide repeat expansion disorder in the transcription factor 4 gene that
results in RNA toxicity and mis-splicing. Understanding the disease mechanisms
augurs well for developing targeted molecular medical therapies, which will
require careful clinical investigation through trials to prove their efficacy
and safety. As the field advances towards clinical trials, investigators should
carefully define the disease state being treated and consider the options for
outcome measures relevant to the type of intervention. FECD, and the outcomes of
interventions to treat the disease, can be measured in terms of corneal
morphology, corneal function and clinical impact. Standardising the approach for
defining FECD and careful thought about the outcomes of intervention that are
reported will help make the results of future trials for FECD applicable in
clinical practice.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjophth-2019-000321
PMCID: PMC6668606
PMID: 31414054

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.
