---
reference_id: "PMID:21477661"
title: Retinal dystrophy in Bardet-Biedl syndrome and related syndromic ciliopathies.
authors:
- Mockel A
- Perdomo Y
- Stutzmann F
- Letsch J
- Marion V
- Dollfus H
journal: Prog Retin Eye Res
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2011.03.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retinal dystrophy in Bardet-Biedl syndrome and related syndromic ciliopathies.
**Authors:** Mockel A, Perdomo Y, Stutzmann F, Letsch J, Marion V, Dollfus H
**Journal:** Prog Retin Eye Res (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.preteyeres.2011.03.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.preteyeres.2011.03.001)

## Content

1. Prog Retin Eye Res. 2011 Jul;30(4):258-74. doi: 
10.1016/j.preteyeres.2011.03.001. Epub 2011 Apr 5.

Retinal dystrophy in Bardet-Biedl syndrome and related syndromic ciliopathies.

Mockel A(1), Perdomo Y, Stutzmann F, Letsch J, Marion V, Dollfus H.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de physiopathologie des syndromes rares et héréditaires, 
Strasbourg, France.

Primary cilia are almost ubiquitously expressed in eukaryotic cells where they 
function as sensors relaying information either from the extracellular 
environment or between two compartments of the same cell, such as in the 
photoreceptor cell. In ciliopathies, a continuously growing class of genetic 
disorders related to ciliary defects, the modified primary cilium of the 
photoreceptor, also known as the connecting cilium, is frequently defective. 
Ciliary dysfunction involves disturbances in the trafficking and docking of 
specific proteins involved in its biogenesis or maintenance. The main 
well-conserved ciliary process, intraflagellar transport (IFT), is a complex 
process carried out by multimeric ciliary particles and molecular motors of 
major importance in the photoreceptor cell. It is defective in a growing number 
of ciliopathies leading to retinal degeneration. Retinitis pigmentosa related to 
ciliary dysfunction can be an isolated feature or a part of a syndrome such as 
Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS). Research on ciliopathies and BBS has led to the 
discovery of several major cellular processes carried out by the primary cilium 
structure and has highlighted their genetic heterogeneity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2011.03.001
PMID: 21477661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]