---
reference_id: "PMID:36030879"
title: "Health and economic gain attributable to the introduction of the World Health Organization's drinking water standard on arsenic level in Hungary: A nationwide retrospective study on cancer occurrence and ischemic heart disease mortality."
authors:
- Pál L
- Jenei T
- McKee M
- Kovács N
- Vargha M
- Bufa-Dőrr Z
- Muhollari T
- Bujdosó MO
- Sándor J
- Szűcs S
journal: Sci Total Environ
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.158305
keywords:
- Humans
- Arsenic/analysis
- Drinking Water
- Retrospective Studies
- Hungary/epidemiology
- "Water Pollutants, Chemical/analysis"
- Urinary Bladder Neoplasms
- Myocardial Ischemia/epidemiology
- World Health Organization
- Environmental Exposure
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Health and economic gain attributable to the introduction of the World Health Organization's drinking water standard on arsenic level in Hungary: A nationwide retrospective study on cancer occurrence and ischemic heart disease mortality.
**Authors:** Pál L, Jenei T, McKee M, Kovács N, Vargha M, Bufa-Dőrr Z, Muhollari T, Bujdosó MO, Sándor J, Szűcs S
**Journal:** Sci Total Environ (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.158305](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.158305)

## Content

1. Sci Total Environ. 2022 Dec 10;851(Pt 2):158305. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.158305. Epub 2022 Aug 27.

Health and economic gain attributable to the introduction of the World Health
Organization's drinking water standard on arsenic level in Hungary: A nationwide
retrospective study on cancer occurrence and ischemic heart disease mortality.

Pál L(1), Jenei T(2), McKee M(3), Kovács N(4), Vargha M(5), Bufa-Dőrr Z(6),
Muhollari T(7), Bujdosó MO(8), Sándor J(9), Szűcs S(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health and Epidemiology, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. Electronic address: pal.laszlo@med.unideb.hu.
(2)Department of Public Health and Epidemiology, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. Electronic address: jenei.tibor@med.unideb.hu.
(3)Department of Health Services Research and Policy, London School of Hygiene
and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
martin.mckee@lshtm.ac.uk.
(4)Department of Public Health and Epidemiology, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. Electronic address: kovacs.nora@med.unideb.hu.
(5)National Public Health Centre, Public Health Laboratory Department, Budapest,
Hungary. Electronic address: vargha.marta@nnk.gov.hu.
(6)National Public Health Centre, Public Health Laboratory Department, Budapest,
Hungary. Electronic address: dorr.zsuzsanna@nnk.gov.hu.
(7)Department of Public Health and Epidemiology, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. Electronic address:
muhollari.teuta@med.unideb.hu.
(8)Department of Public Health and Epidemiology, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. Electronic address:
bujdoso.orsolya@med.unideb.hu.
(9)Department of Public Health and Epidemiology, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. Electronic address: sandor.janos@med.unideb.hu.
(10)Department of Public Health and Epidemiology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. Electronic address:
szucs.sandor@med.unideb.hu.

The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that 140 million individuals are
at risk from consumption of drinking water containing arsenic at concentrations
above the WHO guideline value of 10 μg/l. Arsenic mitigation is considered to be
the most effective way to prevent arsenic related diseases. After joining the
European Union, Hungary implemented a Drinking Water Quality Improvement
Programme (DWQIP) to reduce levels of arsenic in drinking water below the WHO
guideline value. But what impact did this have on health? We estimated the
change in lifetime excess skin, lung, and bladder cancer risks and mortality
from ischaemic heart disease (IHD) associated with chronic arsenic intake among
those exposed before (2004-2007) and after (2014-2017) the implementation of
DWQIP. A population-based risk assessment approach was used to assess lifetime
excess cancer risk applying two scenarios for lung and bladder cancers. The
economic benefits of the DWQIP were estimated by the combination of cost of
illness and value per statistical life methods. Compared to the period before
the DWQIP, its implementation was associated with a significant reduction in
arsenic in drinking water [median: 3.0 μg/l interquartile range (IQR): 1.5-12.0
μg/l to median: 2.15 μg/l IQR: 1.0-5.79 μg/l]. The two scenarios were estimated
to be associated with 225.2 and 35.9 fewer cancer cases each year. The number of
annually prevented IHD deaths was estimated to be 88.9. It was estimated that
the benefits of the DWQIP will outweigh its costs. We conclude that reducing
arsenic levels in drinking water to 10.0 μg/l resulted in significant health and
economic benefits. Our study goes beyond the existing research, offering both
new insights into the impact of arsenic mitigation and providing a
methodological template for similar studies in the many parts of the world that
have yet to reduce arsenic exposure.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.158305
PMID: 36030879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
