---
reference_id: "PMID:20301700"
title: Carnitine Palmitoyltransferase 1A Deficiency.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Lee K
- Pritchard A
- Ahmad A
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Carnitine Palmitoyltransferase 1A Deficiency.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Lee K, Pritchard A, Ahmad A

## Content

1. Carnitine Palmitoyltransferase 1A Deficiency.

Lee K(1), Pritchard A(1), Ahmad A(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2005 Jul 27 [updated 2025 Feb 20].

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Genetics, Metabolism, and Genomic Medicine, University 
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1A (CPT1A) deficiency 
is a disorder of long-chain fatty acid oxidation. Clinical manifestations 
usually occur in an individual with a concurrent febrile or gastrointestinal 
illness when energy demands are increased; onset of manifestations are usually 
rapid. The recognized presentations are: (1) out-of-range newborn screen 
(individual may be without features or with hepatic encephalopathy, hypoketotic 
hypoglycemia, and sudden onset of liver failure) and (2) later-onset 
manifestations (in the absence of newborn screening), including hepatic 
encephalopathy, hypoglycemia, absent or low levels of ketones, and elevated 
serum concentrations of liver transaminases, ammonia, and creatine kinase. 
Between episodes of hepatic encephalopathy, individuals appear developmentally 
and cognitively normal unless previous metabolic decompensation has resulted in 
neurologic damage. Acute fatty liver of pregnancy, in which the fetus has 
biallelic pathogenic variants in CPT1A, has been rarely associated with CPT1A 
deficiency.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of CPT1A deficiency is established in a proband 
with biallelic pathogenic variants in CPT1A identified by molecular genetic 
testing. Diminished carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1 (CPT1) enzyme activity on 
cultured skin fibroblasts when molecular genetic testing is not definitive may 
be an available option in some countries. Residual enzyme activity is 1%-5% in 
most individuals with CPT1A deficiency.
MANAGEMENT: Prevention of primary manifestations: To prevent hypoglycemia, 
infants should eat frequently during the day, and cornstarch feedings may be 
considered continuously at night (typically after age one year); in older 
individuals fasting should not last more than 12 hours during illness, surgery, 
or medical procedures; adults need a high-carbohydrate, low-fat diet to provide 
a constant supply of carbohydrate energy and medium-chain triglycerides (MCT) to 
provide approximately one third of total calories. Prevention of hypoglycemia 
reduces the risk for related neurologic damage. Targeted therapies: Triheptanoin 
(an odd-carbon triglyceride) or MCT oil. Supportive care: Acute treatment 
includes prompt treatment of hypoglycemia with intravenous fluid containing 10% 
dextrose; the dextrose infusion should be maintained past the time that the 
blood glucose concentration has normalized to replete hepatic glycogen stores. 
Increase frequency of feeding and provide one third of total calories as 
triheptanoin or MCT oil. Liver enzymes and functional liver tests; consider 
plasma creatine kinase and urine myoglobin; consider brief hospitalization in 
those fasting longer than 12 hours. Long-term treatment includes 
high-carbohydrate diet low in long-chain fat and frequent feeding supplemented 
with triheptanoin or MCT oil. Consider orthotic liver transplantation in those 
with liver failure; educate parents on factors that increase risk of metabolic 
decompensation; consultation with physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech 
and language pathology, and developmental pediatrician as needed. Surveillance: 
Assess growth, feeding, and adherence to diet at each visit; plasma carnitine 
panel, acylcarnitine profile, essential fatty acids, vitamins A, D, and E, 
complete blood count, comprehensive metabolic panel, and creatine kinase at each 
visit or as needed; liver enzymes and liver function testing as clinically 
indicated; BUN, serum creatinine, and urinalysis as clinically indicated; assess 
for gastrointestinal side effects of triheptanoin or MCT oil at each visit; 
assess developmental and educational progress at each visit throughout childhood 
and adolescence; provide updated emergency management letter at each visit. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Prolonged fasting; potentially hepatotoxic agents 
such as valproate and salicylate; viral or bacterial infections; avoid 
overfeeding in individuals without acute illness. Evaluation of relatives at 
risk: Regardless of age, each sib of a proband should be evaluated for CPT1A 
deficiency, preferably by molecular genetic testing (if both pathogenic variants 
have been identified in the proband); enzyme analysis in cultured skin 
fibroblasts may be an option in some individuals. Pregnancy management: Pregnant 
women heterozygous for a known CPT1A pathogenic variant should be monitored for 
development of acute fatty liver of pregnancy.
GENETIC COUNSELING: CPT1A deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive 
manner. When both parents are carriers of a CPT1A pathogenic variant, each sib 
of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, a 
50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being 
unaffected and not a carrier. When one parent is a carrier and the other parent 
has two CPT1A pathogenic variants, each sib of an affected individual has at 
conception a 50% chance of being affected and a 50% chance of being an 
asymptomatic carrier. Heterozygotes (carriers) are asymptomatic, although 
heterozygous pregnant women may be at risk of developing acute fatty liver of 
pregnancy if the fetus has two pathogenic CPT1A alleles. Carrier testing for 
at-risk family members and prenatal testing for pregnancies at increased risk 
are possible if the CPT1A pathogenic variants in the family are known.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301700