---
reference_id: "PMID:33640881"
title: "Evaluating the association between brain atrophy, hypometabolism, and cognitive decline in Alzheimer's disease: a PET/MRI study."
authors:
- Chen Y
- Wang J
- Cui C
- Su Y
- Jing D
- Wu L
- Liang P
- Liang Z
journal: Aging (Albany NY)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.18632/aging.202580
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluating the association between brain atrophy, hypometabolism, and cognitive decline in Alzheimer's disease: a PET/MRI study.
**Authors:** Chen Y, Wang J, Cui C, Su Y, Jing D, Wu L, Liang P, Liang Z
**Journal:** Aging (Albany NY) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.18632/aging.202580](https://doi.org/10.18632/aging.202580)

## Content

1. Aging (Albany NY). 2021 Feb 26;13(5):7228-7246. doi: 10.18632/aging.202580.
Epub  2021 Feb 26.

Evaluating the association between brain atrophy, hypometabolism, and cognitive 
decline in Alzheimer's disease: a PET/MRI study.

Chen Y(1), Wang J(2)(3)(4), Cui C(1), Su Y(1), Jing D(5), Wu L(5), Liang 
P(3)(4), Liang Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Psychology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
(3)School of Psychology, Capital Normal University, Beijing, China.
(4)Beijing Key Laboratory of Learning and Cognition, Beijing, China.
(5)Department of Neurology, Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, China.

Glucose metabolism reduction and brain volume losses are widely reported in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). Considering that neuroimaging changes in the 
hippocampus and default mode network (DMN) are promising important candidate 
biomarkers and have been included in the research criteria for the diagnosis of 
AD, it is hypothesized that atrophy and metabolic changes of the abovementioned 
regions could be evaluated concurrently to fully explore the neural mechanisms 
underlying cognitive impairment in AD. Twenty-three AD patients and Twenty-four 
age-, sex- and education level-matched normal controls underwent a clinical 
interview, a detailed neuropsychological assessment and a simultaneous 
18F-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomography (18F-FDG 
PET)/high-resolution T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan on a 
hybrid GE SIGNA PET/MR scanner. Brain volume and glucose metabolism were 
examined in patients and controls to reveal group differences. Multiple linear 
regression models were employed to explore the relationship between multiple 
imaging features and cognitive performance in AD. The AD group had significantly 
reduced volume in the hippocampus and DMN regions (P < 0.001) relative to that 
of normal controls determined by using ROI analysis. Compared to normal 
controls, significantly decreased metabolism in the DMN (P < 0.001) was also 
found in AD patients, which still survived after controlling for gray matter 
atrophy (P < 0.001). These findings from ROI analysis were further confirmed by 
whole-brain confirmatory analysis (P < 0.001, FWE-corrected). Finally, multiple 
linear regression results showed that impairment of multiple cognitive tasks was 
significantly correlated with the combination of DMN hypometabolism and atrophy 
in the hippocampus and DMN regions. This study demonstrated that combining 
functional and structural features can better explain the cognitive decline of 
AD patients than unimodal FDG or brain volume changes alone. These findings may 
have important implications for understanding the neural mechanisms of cognitive 
decline in AD.

DOI: 10.18632/aging.202580
PMCID: PMC7993730
PMID: 33640881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: The authors declare no 
conflicts of financial interest.