---
reference_id: "PMID:12439158"
title: "Obstructive congenital epulis: prenatal diagnosis and perinatal management."
authors:
- Kumar P
- Kim HH
- Zahtz GD
- Valderrama E
- Steele AM
journal: Laryngoscope
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1097/00005537-200211000-00005
keywords:
- Adult
- Airway Obstruction/etiology
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- "Fetal Diseases/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Gingival Neoplasms/complications, congenital, diagnostic imaging, pathology, surgery"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Patient Care Team
- Pregnancy
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Obstructive congenital epulis: prenatal diagnosis and perinatal management.
**Authors:** Kumar P, Kim HH, Zahtz GD, Valderrama E, Steele AM
**Journal:** Laryngoscope (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00005537-200211000-00005](https://doi.org/10.1097/00005537-200211000-00005)

## Content

1. Laryngoscope. 2002 Nov;112(11):1935-9. doi: 10.1097/00005537-200211000-00005.

Obstructive congenital epulis: prenatal diagnosis and perinatal management.

Kumar P(1), Kim HH, Zahtz GD, Valderrama E, Steele AM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neonatal-Perinatal Medicine, Schneider Children's Hospital, Long 
Island Jewish Medical Center, The University Hospital and Long Island Campus for 
the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New Hyde Park, New York 11040, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To describe a multidisciplinary approach for delivery room management 
of congenital epulis.
STUDY DESIGN: Case reports.
METHODS: Reporting of two cases of congenital epulis and review of the 
literature.
RESULTS: Antepartum ultrasonography demonstrated massive intraoral masses in two 
fetuses whereby concerns regarding the patency of the airway at birth 
necessitated development of a multidisciplinary team of maternal-fetal medicine, 
neonatal-perinatal medicine, anesthesiology, and otolaryngology. Surgical 
excision was performed before delivery in one infant and after complete delivery 
in the other without a need for endotracheal intubation and general anesthesia. 
Feeding was started early, and both infants were discharged after brief hospital 
stays. Pathological findings were consistent with congenital epulis. 
Differential diagnosis and options for surgical intervention are discussed, 
including ex utero intrapartum treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: A multidisciplinary approach to antenatally identified congenital 
intraoral masses facilitates care at birth. Surgical treatment in this milieu 
may be simple and complete at the time of delivery.

DOI: 10.1097/00005537-200211000-00005
PMID: 12439158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]