---
reference_id: "PMID:38016518"
title: Evaluating the clinical validity of genes related to hemostasis and thrombosis using the Clinical Genome Resource gene curation framework.
authors:
- Ross JE
- Mohan S
- Zhang J
- Sullivan MJ
- Bury L
- Lee K
- Futchi I
- Frantz A
- McDougal D
- Perez Botero J
- Cattaneo M
- Cooper N
- Downes K
- Gresele P
- Keenan C
- Lee AI
- Megy K
- Morange PE
- Morgan NV
- Schulze H
- Zimowski K
- Freson K
- Lambert MP
journal: J Thromb Haemost
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jtha.2023.11.011
keywords:
- Humans
- Genetic Testing/methods
- Blood Platelet Disorders/genetics
- Hemostasis/genetics
- "Thrombosis/diagnosis, genetics"
- Genetic Variation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluating the clinical validity of genes related to hemostasis and thrombosis using the Clinical Genome Resource gene curation framework.
**Authors:** Ross JE, Mohan S, Zhang J, Sullivan MJ, Bury L, Lee K, Futchi I, Frantz A, McDougal D, Perez Botero J, Cattaneo M, Cooper N, Downes K, Gresele P, Keenan C, Lee AI, Megy K, Morange PE, Morgan NV, Schulze H, Zimowski K, Freson K, Lambert MP
**Journal:** J Thromb Haemost (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jtha.2023.11.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtha.2023.11.011)

## Content

1. J Thromb Haemost. 2024 Mar;22(3):645-665. doi: 10.1016/j.jtha.2023.11.011.
Epub  2023 Nov 26.

Evaluating the clinical validity of genes related to hemostasis and thrombosis
using the Clinical Genome Resource gene curation framework.

Ross JE(1), Mohan S(1), Zhang J(2), Sullivan MJ(3), Bury L(4), Lee K(1), Futchi
I(1), Frantz A(1), McDougal D(1), Perez Botero J(5), Cattaneo M(6), Cooper N(7),
Downes K(8), Gresele P(4), Keenan C(9), Lee AI(10), Megy K(8), Morange PE(11),
Morgan NV(12), Schulze H(13), Zimowski K(14), Freson K(15), Lambert MP(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(2)KingMed Diagnostics, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(3)Versiti Blood Center of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Section of Internal and Cardiovascular Medicine,
University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(5)Versiti Blood Center of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA; Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA.
(6)Dipartimento di Scienze della Salute, Università degli Studi di Milano,
Milan, Italy.
(7)Centre for Haematology, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(8)Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(9)Haemostasis Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, National Coagulation Centre, St
James's Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(10)Section of Hematology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(11)INSERM, INRAE, C2VN, Aix Marseille University, Marseille, France; Hematology
Laboratory, La Timone Hospital, APHM, Marseille, France.
(12)Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences, College of Medical and Dental
Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(13)Institute of Experimental Biomedicine, Julius-Maximilians-University
Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany.
(14)Aflac Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Emory University/Children's
Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(15)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, Center for Molecular and Vascular
Biology, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Electronic address:
kathleen.freson@kuleuven.be.
(16)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
Electronic address: LAMBERTM@chop.edu.

BACKGROUND: Inherited bleeding, thrombotic, and platelet disorders (BTPDs) are a
heterogeneous set of diseases, many of which are very rare globally. Over the
past 5 decades, the genetic basis of some of these disorders has been
identified, and recently, high-throughput sequencing has become the primary
means of identifying disease-causing genetic variants.
OBJECTIVES: Knowledge of the clinical validity of a gene-disease relationship is
essential to provide an accurate diagnosis based on results of diagnostic gene
panel tests and inform the construction of such panels. The Scientific and
Standardization Committee for Genetics in Thrombosis and Hemostasis undertook a
curation process for selecting 96 TIER1 genes for BTPDs. The purpose of the
process was to evaluate the evidence supporting each gene-disease relationship
and provide an expert-reviewed classification for the clinical validity of genes
associated with BTPDs.
METHODS: The Clinical Genome Resource (ClinGen) Hemostasis/Thrombosis Gene
Curation Expert Panel assessed the strength of evidence for TIER1 genes using
the semiquantitative ClinGen gene-disease clinical validity framework. ClinGen
Lumping and Splitting guidelines were used to determine the appropriate disease
entity or entities for each gene, and 101 gene-disease relationships were
identified for curation.
RESULTS: The final outcome included 68 Definitive (67%), 26 Moderate (26%), and
7 Limited (7%) classifications. The summary of each curation is available on the
ClinGen website.
CONCLUSION: Expert-reviewed assignment of gene-disease relationships by the
ClinGen Hemostasis/Thrombosis Gene Curation Expert Panel facilitates accurate
molecular diagnoses of BTPDs by clinicians and diagnostic laboratories. These
curation efforts can allow genetic testing to focus on genes with a validated
role in disease.

Copyright © 2023 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtha.2023.11.011
PMCID: PMC10922649
PMID: 38016518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interests The following
authors are employee, trainee, or consultant for a commercial laboratory
offering genetic testing related to disorders of hemostasis/thrombosis: L.B.,
K.F., P.G., C.K., J.P.B., M.S., and J.Z. The following authors have made
substantial contributions to the literature on gene-disease relationships
relevant to this work: L.B., K.D., K.F., P.G., C.K., M.L., K.M., P.M., N.M.,
J.P.B., N.S., and K.Z. Additionally, K.F. chairs the Scientific and
Standardization Committee for Genetics in Thrombosis and Hemostasis of the
International Society on Thrombosis and Hemostasis. The other authors declare no
conflicts of interest.
