---
reference_id: "PMID:39426251"
title: Assessment of genes involved in lysosomal diseases using the ClinGen clinical validity framework.
authors:
- Groopman E
- Mohan S
- Waddell A
- Wilke M
- Fernandez R
- Weaver M
- Chen H
- Liu H
- Bali D
- Baudet H
- Clarke L
- Hung C
- Mao R
- Pinto E Vairo F
- Racacho L
- Yuzyuk T
- Craigen WJ
- Goldstein J
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108593
keywords:
- Humans
- "Lysosomal Storage Diseases/genetics, diagnosis"
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Genomics/methods
- "Lysosomes/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Assessment of genes involved in lysosomal diseases using the ClinGen clinical validity framework.
**Authors:** Groopman E, Mohan S, Waddell A, Wilke M, Fernandez R, Weaver M, Chen H, Liu H, Bali D, Baudet H, Clarke L, Hung C, Mao R, Pinto E Vairo F, Racacho L, Yuzyuk T, Craigen WJ, Goldstein J
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108593](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108593)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2024 Nov;143(3):108593. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108593.
Epub  2024 Oct 12.

Assessment of genes involved in lysosomal diseases using the ClinGen clinical 
validity framework.

Groopman E(1), Mohan S(2), Waddell A(2), Wilke M(3), Fernandez R(4), Weaver 
M(4), Chen H(5), Liu H(6), Bali D(7), Baudet H(2), Clarke L(8), Hung C(9), Mao 
R(10), Pinto E Vairo F(3), Racacho L(11), Yuzyuk T(10), Craigen WJ(12), 
Goldstein J(13).

Author information:
(1)Children's National Hospital, Washington, DC, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, NC, USA.
(3)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(4)American College of Genetics and Genomics, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(5)PreventionGenetics/Exact Sciences, Marshfield, WI, USA.
(6)Revvity, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(7)Duke University Health System, Durham, NC, USA.
(8)University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(9)Invitae, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(10)ARUP, Salt Lake City, UT, USA; University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(11)Alberta Precision Laboratories, Alberta, Canada.
(12)Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(13)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, NC, USA. Electronic address: jennifer.goldstein@unc.edu.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2024 Oct 20:2024.08.09.24311755. doi: 10.1101/2024.08.09.24311755.

Lysosomal diseases (LDs) are a heterogeneous group of rare genetic disorders 
that result in impaired lysosomal function, leading to progressive multiorgan 
system dysfunction. Accurate diagnosis is paramount to initiating targeted 
therapies early in the disease process in addition to providing prognostic 
information and appropriate support for families. In recent years, genomic 
sequencing technologies have become the first-line approach in the diagnosis of 
LDs. Understanding the clinical validity of the role of a gene in a disease is 
critical for the development of genomic technologies, such as which genes to 
include on next generation sequencing panels, and the interpretation of results 
from exome and genome sequencing. To this aim, the ClinGen Lysosomal Diseases 
Gene Curation Expert Panel utilized a semi-quantitative framework incorporating 
genetic and experimental evidence to assess the clinical validity of the 56 
LD-associated genes on the Lysosomal Disease Network's list. Here, we describe 
the results, and the key themes and challenges encountered.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108593
PMCID: PMC11560485
PMID: 39426251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest D.B., H.C., 
C.H., R.M., and T.Y., are employed by laboratories offering fee-for-service 
testing related to the work of the ClinGen Lysosomal Diseases Gene Curation 
Expert Panel. L.C. is a paid consultant with Genzyme/Sanofi related to the MPS I 
(IDUA) registry. C.H. is involved in research on NPC1. There are no other 
financial disclosures.