---
reference_id: "PMID:33805950"
title: Kabuki Syndrome-Clinical Review with Molecular Aspects.
authors:
- Boniel S
- Szymańska K
- Śmigiel R
- Szczałuba K
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/genes12040468
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- "Face/abnormalities, pathology"
- "Hematologic Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Histone Demethylases/genetics
- Humans
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Proteins/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Vestibular Diseases/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kabuki Syndrome-Clinical Review with Molecular Aspects.
**Authors:** Boniel S, Szymańska K, Śmigiel R, Szczałuba K
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes12040468](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes12040468)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Mar 25;12(4):468. doi: 10.3390/genes12040468.

Kabuki Syndrome-Clinical Review with Molecular Aspects.

Boniel S(1), Szymańska K(2), Śmigiel R(3), Szczałuba K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University, Pawinskiego 3c, 02-106 
Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Mossakowski Medical Research Center, Department of Experimental and Clinical 
Neuropathology, Polish Academy of Sciences, 02-106 Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, Division of Propaedeutic of Paediatrics and Rare 
Disorders, Medical University, 51-618 Wroclaw, Poland.

Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a rare developmental disorder principally comprised of 
developmental delay, hypotonia and a clearly defined dysmorphism: elongation of 
the structures surrounding the eyes, a shortened and depressed nose, thinning of 
the upper lip and thickening of the lower lip, large and prominent ears, 
hypertrichosis and scoliosis. Other characteristics include poor physical 
growth, cardiac, gastrointestinal and renal anomalies as well as variable 
behavioral issues, including autistic features. De novo or inherited 
pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants in the KMT2D gene are the most common 
cause of KS and account for up to 75% of patients. Variants in KDM6A cause up to 
5% of cases (X-linked dominant inheritance), while the etiology of about 20% of 
cases remains unknown. Current KS diagnostic criteria include hypotonia during 
infancy, developmental delay and/or intellectual disability, typical dysmorphism 
and confirmed pathogenic/likely pathogenic variant in KMT2D or KDM6A. Care for 
KS patients includes the control of physical and psychomotor development during 
childhood, rehabilitation and multi-specialist care. This paper reviews the 
current clinical knowledge, provides molecular and scientific links and sheds 
light on the treatment of Kabuki syndrome individuals.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12040468
PMCID: PMC8064399
PMID: 33805950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.