---
reference_id: "PMID:16304440"
title: Genes and related proteins involved in amelogenesis imperfecta.
authors:
- Stephanopoulos G
- Garefalaki ME
- Lyroudia K
journal: J Dent Res
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1177/154405910508401206
keywords:
- Amelogenesis Imperfecta/genetics
- Amelogenin
- Dental Enamel Proteins/genetics
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Kallikreins/genetics
- Matrix Metalloproteinase 20
- Matrix Metalloproteinases/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genes and related proteins involved in amelogenesis imperfecta.
**Authors:** Stephanopoulos G, Garefalaki ME, Lyroudia K
**Journal:** J Dent Res (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1177/154405910508401206](https://doi.org/10.1177/154405910508401206)

## Content

1. J Dent Res. 2005 Dec;84(12):1117-26. doi: 10.1177/154405910508401206.

Genes and related proteins involved in amelogenesis imperfecta.

Stephanopoulos G(1), Garefalaki ME, Lyroudia K.

Author information:
(1)Diploma in Dental Science, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece.

Dental enamel formation is a remarkable example of a biomineralization process. 
The exact mechanisms involved in this process remain partly obscure. Some of the 
genes encoding specific enamel proteins have been indicated as candidate genes 
for amelogenesis imperfecta. Mutational analyses within studied families have 
supported this hypothesis. Mutations in the amelogenin gene (AMELX) cause 
X-linked amelogenesis imperfecta, while mutations in the enamelin gene (ENAM) 
cause autosomal-inherited forms of amelogenesis imperfecta. Recent reports 
involve kallikrein-4 (KLK4), MMP-20, and DLX3 genes in the etiologies of some 
cases. This paper focuses mainly on the candidate genes involved in amelogenesis 
imperfecta and the proteins derived from them, and reviews current knowledge on 
their structure, localization within the tissue, and correlation with the 
various types of this disorder.

DOI: 10.1177/154405910508401206
PMID: 16304440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]