---
reference_id: "PMID:39250501"
title: Central role for cholangiocyte pathobiology in cholestatic liver diseases.
authors:
- Jalan-Sakrikar N
- Guicciardi ME
- "O'Hara SP"
- Azad A
- LaRusso NF
- Gores GJ
- Huebert RC
journal: Hepatology
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1097/HEP.0000000000001093
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Central role for cholangiocyte pathobiology in cholestatic liver diseases.
**Authors:** Jalan-Sakrikar N, Guicciardi ME, O'Hara SP, Azad A, LaRusso NF, Gores GJ, Huebert RC
**Journal:** Hepatology (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1097/HEP.0000000000001093](https://doi.org/10.1097/HEP.0000000000001093)

## Content

1. Hepatology. 2025 Oct 1;82(4):834-854. doi: 10.1097/HEP.0000000000001093. Epub 
2024 Sep 9.

Central role for cholangiocyte pathobiology in cholestatic liver diseases.

Jalan-Sakrikar N(1)(2)(3), Guicciardi ME(1), O'Hara SP(1), Azad A(1)(3), LaRusso 
NF(1)(3), Gores GJ(1)(3), Huebert RC(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo 
College of Medicine and Science, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(2)Gastroenterology Research Unit, Department of Medicine, Mayo College of 
Medicine and Science, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic Center for Cell Signaling in 
Gastroenterology, Mayo College of Medicine and Science, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota, USA.

Cholangiopathies comprise a spectrum of chronic intrahepatic and extrahepatic 
biliary tract disorders culminating in progressive cholestatic liver injury, 
fibrosis, and often cirrhosis and its sequela. Treatment for these diseases is 
limited, and collectively, they are one of the therapeutic "black boxes" in 
clinical hepatology. The etiopathogenesis of the cholangiopathies likely 
includes disease-specific mediators but also common cellular and molecular 
events driving disease progression (eg, cholestatic fibrogenesis, inflammation, 
and duct damage). The common pathways involve cholangiocytes, the epithelial 
cells lining the intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts, which are central to 
the pathogenesis of these disorders. Current information suggests that 
cholangiocytes function as a signaling "hub" in biliary tract-associated injury. 
Herein, we review the pivotal role of cholangiocytes in cholestatic 
fibrogenesis, focusing on the crosstalk between cholangiocytes and portal 
fibroblasts and HSCs. The proclivity of these cells to undergo a 
senescence-associated secretory phenotype, which is proinflammatory and 
profibrogenic, and the intrinsic intracellular activation pathways resulting in 
the secretion of cytokines and chemokines are reviewed. The crosstalk between 
cholangiocytes and cells of the innate (neutrophils and macrophages) and 
adaptive (T cells and B cells) immune systems is also examined in detail. The 
information will help consolidate information on this topic and guide further 
research and potential therapeutic strategies for these diseases.

Copyright © 2024 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1097/HEP.0000000000001093
PMCID: PMC11890218
PMID: 39250501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no 
conflicts to report.