---
reference_id: "PMID:38500436"
title: Ecoepidemiology of Ancylostoma spp. in Urban-Marginal and Rural Sectors of the Ecuadorian Coast and Prevalence of Cutaneous Larvae Migrans.
authors:
- Coello Peralta RD
- Pazmiño Gómez BJ
- Salazar Mazamba ML
- Parra-Guayasamin SG
- Vinueza Sierra RL
- Rodas Pazmiño JP
- Rodas Neira EI
- Gómez Landires EA
- Ramallo G
journal: Med Sci Monit
year: '2024'
doi: 10.12659/MSM.943931
keywords:
- Humans
- Animals
- Dogs
- Ancylostoma
- "Larva Migrans/epidemiology, parasitology"
- Ecuador/epidemiology
- Prevalence
- Larva
- Feces
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ecoepidemiology of Ancylostoma spp. in Urban-Marginal and Rural Sectors of the Ecuadorian Coast and Prevalence of Cutaneous Larvae Migrans.
**Authors:** Coello Peralta RD, Pazmiño Gómez BJ, Salazar Mazamba ML, Parra-Guayasamin SG, Vinueza Sierra RL, Rodas Pazmiño JP, Rodas Neira EI, Gómez Landires EA, Ramallo G
**Journal:** Med Sci Monit (2024)
**DOI:** [10.12659/MSM.943931](https://doi.org/10.12659/MSM.943931)

## Content

1. Med Sci Monit. 2024 Mar 8;30:e943931. doi: 10.12659/MSM.943931.

Ecoepidemiology of Ancylostoma spp. in Urban-Marginal and Rural Sectors of the 
Ecuadorian Coast and Prevalence of Cutaneous Larvae Migrans.

Coello Peralta RD(1), Pazmiño Gómez BJ(2), Salazar Mazamba ML(1), 
Parra-Guayasamin SG(1), Vinueza Sierra RL(3), Rodas Pazmiño JP(4), Rodas Neira 
EI(4), Gómez Landires EA(5), Ramallo G(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine and Zootechnics, 
Universidad de Guayaquil, Chile y Av. Olmedo, Guayaquil, Ecuador.
(2)Faculty of Health and Social Services, Universidad Estatal de Milagro 
(UNEMI), Milagro, Ecuador.
(3)Escuela de Medicina Veterinaria, Universidad San Francisco de Quito (USFQ), 
Quito, Ecuador.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Clinical and Microbiological Laboratory Pazmiño, 
Milagro, Ecuador.
(5)Faculty of Medical Sciences, Universidad Católica de Santiago de Guayaquil, 
Guayaquil, Ecuador.
(6)Instituto de Invertebrados, Fundación Miguel Lillo, San Miguel de Tucumán, 
Argentina.

BACKGROUND Ancylostoma spp., including A. duodenale, A. braziliense, A. caninum, 
and A. ceylanicum, are hookworms that are transmitted from infected soil and by 
contact with domestic animals and rodent hosts, and can cause systemic disease 
and cutaneous larva migrans. The objective of this study was to describe the 
ecoepidemiology of Ancylostoma caninum and Ancylostoma spp. in urban-marginal 
sectors and in rural sectors located in Ecuador. MATERIAL AND METHODS Through 
addressed sampling, a total of 498 domestic dogs and 40 synanthropic rodents 
were analyzed via the following coproparasitic methods: direct, flotation, 
sedimentation with centrifugation using saline (egg identification), modified 
Baermann (larval identification), and morphometric methods (confirmation). A 
total of 236 people were surveyed, and a clinical analysis was performed via 
physical examination. The environmental variables were obtained through reports 
from the INAMHI of Ecuador and the use of online environmental programs. Through 
surveys, data related to social determinants were obtained. Epidemiological 
indicators (prevalence, morbidity, and mortality) were obtained through 
microbial analysis and surveys. RESULTS A total of 250 domestic dogs were 
diagnosed with Ancylostoma caninum (50, 20%), and 41 were diagnosed with 
Ancylostoma spp. (8.23%). One synanthropic rodent (2.5%) was positive for A. 
caninum. In the clinical analysis, 3 patients were identified as positive 
(1.27%) for cutaneous larva migrans (CLM). Likewise, environmental variables and 
social determinants influence the transmission, prevalence, and nature of 
parasitism by hookworm. CONCLUSIONS People, domestic dogs, and rodents were 
infected with these parasites. Consequently, there is a risk of ancylostomiasis 
and cutaneous larvae migrans spreading.

DOI: 10.12659/MSM.943931
PMCID: PMC10929298
PMID: 38500436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None declared