---
reference_id: "PMID:23918391"
title: R-loop formation at Snord116 mediates topotecan inhibition of Ube3a-antisense and allele-specific chromatin decondensation.
authors:
- Powell WT
- Coulson RL
- Gonzales ML
- Crary FK
- Wong SS
- Adams S
- Ach RA
- Tsang P
- Yamada NA
- Yasui DH
- Chédin F
- LaSalle JM
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1305426110
keywords:
- Angelman Syndrome/genetics
- Animals
- Chromatin/drug effects
- Chromatin Immunoprecipitation
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 15/genetics"
- Gene Expression Regulation/genetics
- Gene Silencing
- Genetic Loci/genetics
- Genomic Imprinting/genetics
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Immunoblotting
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Locus Control Region/genetics
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Neurons/metabolism
- Prader-Willi Syndrome/genetics
- "RNA, Antisense/genetics, metabolism"
- "RNA, Small Nucleolar/chemistry, genetics"
- Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Statistics, Nonparametric"
- Topotecan/pharmacology
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics
- snRNP Core Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# R-loop formation at Snord116 mediates topotecan inhibition of Ube3a-antisense and allele-specific chromatin decondensation.
**Authors:** Powell WT, Coulson RL, Gonzales ML, Crary FK, Wong SS, Adams S, Ach RA, Tsang P, Yamada NA, Yasui DH, Chédin F, LaSalle JM
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1305426110](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1305426110)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Aug 20;110(34):13938-43. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1305426110. Epub 2013 Aug 5.

R-loop formation at Snord116 mediates topotecan inhibition of Ube3a-antisense
and allele-specific chromatin decondensation.

Powell WT(1), Coulson RL, Gonzales ML, Crary FK, Wong SS, Adams S, Ach RA, Tsang
P, Yamada NA, Yasui DH, Chédin F, LaSalle JM.

Author information:
(1)Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Genome Center, Medical Investigation of
Neurodevelopmental Disorders Institute, and Department of Molecular and Cellular
Biology, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) and Angelman syndrome (AS) are oppositely imprinted
autism-spectrum disorders with known genetic bases, but complex epigenetic
mechanisms underlie their pathogenesis. The PWS/AS locus on 15q11-q13 is
regulated by an imprinting control region that is maternally methylated and
silenced. The PWS imprinting control region is the promoter for a one megabase
paternal transcript encoding the ubiquitous protein-coding Snrpn gene and
multiple neuron-specific noncoding RNAs, including the PWS-related Snord116
repetitive locus of small nucleolar RNAs and host genes, and the antisense
transcript to AS-causing ubiquitin ligase encoding Ube3a (Ube3a-ATS).
Neuron-specific transcriptional progression through Ube3a-ATS correlates with
paternal Ube3a silencing and chromatin decondensation. Interestingly,
topoisomerase inhibitors, including topotecan, were recently identified in an
unbiased drug screen for compounds that could reverse the silent paternal allele
of Ube3a in neurons, but the mechanism of topotecan action on the PWS/AS locus
is unknown. Here, we demonstrate that topotecan treatment stabilizes the
formation of RNA:DNA hybrids (R loops) at G-skewed repeat elements within
paternal Snord116, corresponding to increased chromatin decondensation and
inhibition of Ube3a-ATS expression. Neural precursor cells from paternal
Snord116 deletion mice exhibit increased Ube3a-ATS levels in differentiated
neurons and show a reduced effect of topotecan compared with wild-type neurons.
These results demonstrate that the AS candidate drug topotecan acts
predominantly through stabilizing R loops and chromatin decondensation at the
paternally expressed PWS Snord116 locus. Our study holds promise for targeted
therapies to the Snord116 locus for both AS and PWS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1305426110
PMCID: PMC3752217
PMID: 23918391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: R.A.A., P.T., and N.A.Y. are employees of
Agilent, Inc.
