---
reference_id: "PMID:10321942"
title: "Bacteriologic and immunologic aspects of gram-negative folliculitis: a study of 46 patients."
authors:
- Neubert U
- Jansen T
- Plewig G
journal: Int J Dermatol
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-4362.1999.00688.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bacteriologic and immunologic aspects of gram-negative folliculitis: a study of 46 patients.
**Authors:** Neubert U, Jansen T, Plewig G
**Journal:** Int J Dermatol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-4362.1999.00688.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-4362.1999.00688.x)

## Content

1. Int J Dermatol. 1999 Apr;38(4):270-4. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-4362.1999.00688.x.

Bacteriologic and immunologic aspects of gram-negative folliculitis: a study of 
46 patients.

Neubert U(1), Jansen T, Plewig G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Gram-negative folliculitis is an infection with gram-negative rods 
that most often occurs as a complication of prolonged broad-spectrum antibiotic 
therapy in patients suffering from acne and rosacea.
METHODS: The bacteriologic and immunologic findings are reported in 46 patients, 
39 men and 7 women, aged 16-79 (median, 28) years, with gram-negative 
folliculitis. Hypersensitivity reactions to various microbial recall antigens as 
well as granulocyte functions were evaluated. Quantitative measurements of serum 
levels of immunoglobulin M, G, A, and E, total complement activity, complement 
factors C3 and C4, and alpha-1-antitrypsin were performed.
RESULTS: The gram-negative organisms most frequently cultivated from nares, 
facial skin, and pustules were Klebsiella spp., Escherichia coli, Enterobacter 
spp., and Proteus spp. In all patients, deviations of one or more immune 
parameters were detected, including lowered serum concentrations of 
immunoglobulin M and alpha-1-antitrypsin, and elevated levels of immunoglobulin 
E. The humoral and cellular parameters were not influenced by isotretinoin 
therapy of gram-negative folliculitis.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that gram-negative folliculitis is not only 
a complication of long-lasting antibiotic treatment of acne and rosacea, but 
might be an entity of its own. Immunologic factors may play a critical role in 
the pathogenesis of gram-negative folliculitis.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-4362.1999.00688.x
PMID: 10321942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]