---
reference_id: "PMID:40078706"
title: How a patient-led advocacy organization supports the road to diagnosis and treatment of creatine transporter deficiency.
authors:
- Wallis H
- Iyer S
- Reinhardt EK
journal: Front Neurosci
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2025.1548182
content_type: abstract_only
---

# How a patient-led advocacy organization supports the road to diagnosis and treatment of creatine transporter deficiency.
**Authors:** Wallis H, Iyer S, Reinhardt EK
**Journal:** Front Neurosci (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnins.2025.1548182](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2025.1548182)

## Content

1. Front Neurosci. 2025 Feb 25;19:1548182. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2025.1548182.
eCollection 2025.

How a patient-led advocacy organization supports the road to diagnosis and
treatment of creatine transporter deficiency.

Wallis H(#)(1), Iyer S(#)(1), Reinhardt EK(1).

Author information:
(1)Association for Creatine Deficiencies, Carlsbad, CA, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

The current era of drug development has evolved significantly. Patient advocacy
organizations are moving beyond simply supporting community members and are
taking the reins to improve the speed of diagnoses, initiate therapeutic
discoveries, and lay the groundwork to ensure successful clinical trials. The
Association for Creatine Deficiencies (ACD) is an international parent-led
patient advocacy organization focused on the three ultra-rare neurodevelopmental
monogenic disorders resulting in Cerebral Creatine Deficiency Syndromes (CCDS).
These include X-linked creatine transporter deficiency (CTD), guanidinoacetate
methyltransferase (GAMT) deficiency, and l-arginine:glycine amidinotransferase
(AGAT) deficiency. While each is rare in its own right, the unified CCDS
community is effectively advancing the field of CCDS with each disorder
benefiting from progress made in the other two disease areas. ACD collaborators
include caregivers, academic researchers, clinicians, industry partners, and
policymakers. Since its founding in 2012, the organization has evolved and
achieved significant milestones. These include advancements in disease
diagnosis, investments in various therapeutic modalities, creation of a
collaborative research community, a unified patient community contributing
essential patient data, and repositories of patient-derived specimens. The
initiatives of ACD are intended to create the earliest diagnosis possible
through newborn screening, to have an effective treatment, and to make disease
management strategies available to all members of the CCDS community, including
those diagnosed at later stages and experiencing greater effects of the
diseases.

Copyright © 2025 Wallis, Iyer and Reinhardt.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2025.1548182
PMCID: PMC11897708
PMID: 40078706

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
