---
reference_id: PMID:30065258
title: "Inflammageing: chronic inflammation in ageing, cardiovascular disease, and frailty."
authors:
- Ferrucci L
- Fabbri E
journal: Nat Rev Cardiol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/s41569-018-0064-2
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Aging
- Animals
- Cardiovascular Diseases
- Chronic Disease
- Frail Elderly
- Frailty
- Humans
- Inflammation
- Mice
- Middle Aged
content_type: full_text_xml
full_text_attempted: true
full_text_provider: pmc
oa_status: green
---

# Inflammageing: chronic inflammation in ageing, cardiovascular disease, and frailty.
**Authors:** Ferrucci L, Fabbri E
**Journal:** Nat Rev Cardiol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41569-018-0064-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41569-018-0064-2)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2018 Sep;15(9):505-522. doi: 10.1038/s41569-018-0064-2.

Inflammageing: chronic inflammation in ageing, cardiovascular disease, 
and frailty.

Ferrucci L(1), Fabbri E(2).

Author information:
(1)Translational Gerontology Branch, National Institute on Aging, NIH, 
Baltimore, MD, USA. ferruccilu@mail.nih.gov.
(2)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Bologna, Bologna, 
Italy.

Most older individuals develop inflammageing, a condition characterized by 
elevated levels of blood inflammatory markers that carries high susceptibility 
to chronic morbidity, disability, frailty, and premature death. Potential 
mechanisms of inflammageing include genetic susceptibility, central obesity, 
increased gut permeability, changes to microbiota composition, cellular 
senescence, NLRP3 inflammasome activation, oxidative stress caused by 
dysfunctional mitochondria, immune cell dysregulation, and chronic infections. 
Inflammageing is a risk factor for cardiovascular diseases (CVDs), and clinical 
trials suggest that this association is causal. Inflammageing is also a risk 
factor for chronic kidney disease, diabetes mellitus, cancer, depression, 
dementia, and sarcopenia, but whether modulating inflammation beneficially 
affects the clinical course of non-CVD health problems is controversial. This 
uncertainty is an important issue to address because older patients with CVD are 
often affected by multimorbidity and frailty - which affect clinical 
manifestations, prognosis, and response to treatment - and are associated with 
inflammation by mechanisms similar to those in CVD. The hypothesis that 
inflammation affects CVD, multimorbidity, and frailty by inhibiting growth 
factors, increasing catabolism, and interfering with homeostatic signalling is 
supported by mechanistic studies but requires confirmation in humans. Whether 
early modulation of inflammageing prevents or delays the onset of cardiovascular 
frailty should be tested in clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1038/s41569-018-0064-2
PMCID: PMC6146930
PMID: 30065258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.

With the extension of life expectancy and the rising percentage of older individuals in the general population, understanding why ageing results in progressively higher susceptibility to chronic morbidity, disability, and frailty has become a public health priority1. An interesting hypothesis stems from the observation that older organisms tend to develop a pro-inflammatory status that is characterized by high levels of pro-inflammatory markers in cells and tissues, a condition often named inflammageing, a term first coined in 2000 by Claudio Franceschi2. Strong evidence indicates that inflammageing is a risk factor for cardiovascular disease (CVD), in addition to many age-associated chronic diseases and other adverse health outcomes. Whether inflammageing contributes causally to CVD and other comorbid conditions or is instead a noncausal marker of some other underlying mechanisms is still debated. Other than calorie restriction and physical activity, treatment options for inflammageing rely on small molecules or antibodies that interfere with inflammatory mediators or their biological targets rather than targeting the underlying causes, resulting in highly heterogeneous efficacy.

In this Review, we summarize the current understanding of inflammageing. We explore risk factors and speculate on potential causes, and we look at possible roles of inflammageing in CVD and other conditions that are highly prevalent and often coexist with CVDs in older individuals. We report on findings from intervention studies aimed at modulating inflammation in different diseases, and in particular whether these interventions prevent or attenuate the clinical course of CVD. We continue by examining the role of inflammation in conditions that are typical of ageing and often comorbid with CVD, such as multimorbidity, sarcopenia, and frailty. Finally, we identify gaps in our knowledge and suggest priorities for future research.

Ageing is associated with immune dysregulation, of which the most evident characteristics are high blood levels of pro-inflammatory immunogenic stimulations3,4. The pro-inflammatory state is characterized by high circulating levels of pro-inflammatory markers, including IL-1, IL-1 receptor antagonist protein (IL-1RN), IL-6, IL-8, IL-13, IL-18, C-reactive protein (CRP), IFNα and IFNβ, transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ), tumour necrosis factor (TNF) and its soluble receptors (TNF receptor superfamily members 1A and 1B), and serum amyloid A. At this time, a comprehensive list of pro-inflammatory markers that are associated with ageing has not been compiled owing to the difficulty of applying high-sensitivity discovery proteomics in plasma and serum. High levels of age-associated pro-inflammatory markers are detected in the majority of older individuals, even in the absence of risk factors and clinically active diseases3,5–7. Despite its fundamental physiological role as a defence mechanism against infections or extraneous molecules, when inflammation becomes sustained and prolonged it becomes detrimental to health. According to the antagonistic pleiotropy theory of ageing, inflammation might have been evolutionarily selected because of beneficial effects early in life and in adulthood, although it becomes detrimental in old age when the effect of natural selection is no longer active8. Epidemiological studies have found that inflammageing is a risk factor for CVD, cancer, chronic kidney disease, dementia, and depression as well for global indicators of poor health status, such as multimorbidity, mobility disability and disability in activities of daily living, sarcopenia, frailty, and premature death9–19. On the basis of these findings, many researchers have proposed that inflammageing is a marker of accelerated ageing and should be considered to be one of the pillars of the biology of ageing20. The root causes of inflammageing are poorly understood, as are the mechanisms that connect inflammageing with CVD and with many other health outcomes. A critical question is whether inflammation directly causes the associated pathology or is instead a biomarker for the rate of biological ageing. The answer to this question might depend on the age of the patients and whether we consider CVD by itself or CVD in the context of associated multimorbidity, impairments, and disabilities.

Studies in large populations have identified a multitude of genetic variants that affect blood levels of inflammatory mediators21. We focus on associations that have been confirmed by multiple studies and are functionally relevant21–25. Examining common variants of the IL1RN gene revealed that the rs4251961 minor allele is associated with a lowered serum level of IL-1RN and that the rs579543 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) is also independently associated with IL-1RN levels, whereas the IL1RN 1018 haplotype correlates with higher concentrations of IL-1β and IFNγ22. These findings have been confirmed in three independent cohorts26, and further research has demonstrated that these factors affect the pathophysiology of human infections27 and the risk of developing insulin resistance28 and knee osteoarthritis29.

A SNP in the promoter region of IL6 at position−174G > C magnifies IL-6 production in response to inflammatory stimuli, but this SNP has been associated inconsistently with baseline IL-6 levels. Carriers of the−174G > C mutation have an increased risk of developing various major diseases, including Alzheimer disease30, CVD31, non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus32, bone fragility33, and systemic-onset juvenile chronic arthritis34. A genome-wide association study comparing >2,000 Chinese centenarians to middle-aged controls found that the SNP rs2069837 in IL6 was significantly associated with extreme longevity, confirming the role of IL-6 in conditioning morbidity and mortality, especially in old age35. Confirming the role of IL-6 in health, in a large Mendelian randomization analysis, the IL6R SNP rs7529229, marking a non-synonymous IL6R variant (rs8192284; p.Asp358Ala), was associated with increased circulating IL-6 levels24. Variants in the IL6R gene have been found to be associated with increased risk of coronary artery disease24, rheumatoid arthritis, atrial fibrillation, and abdominal aortic aneurysm, and with increased susceptibility to asthma, type 1 diabetes, and depression36,37. Multiple SNPs in the CRP gene are associated with higher CRP levels and increased risk of myocardial infarction and CVD-related death38.

These data indicate that genetic variability affects the plasma levels of several inflammatory markers and, through this mechanism, increases the risk of many apparently uncorrelated diseases. Therefore, the cumulative effect of these genetic polymorphisms might be a risk factor for multimorbidity and frailty, although this hypothesis has never been fully tested. A gene-expression study conducted on whole-blood RNA samples from a large population cohort in Europe and the USA revealed that immune response and inflammation were the most highly upregulated pathways in association with ageing39. A few gene transcripts mediate the age–IL-6 association, among which the largest affected transcript, SLC4A10 mRNA (encoding the sodium-driven chloride bicarbonate exchanger), explains as much as 19% of this association40. Interestingly, this study did not detect an age-related increase in IL6 mRNA transcript levels, suggesting that the overproduction of circulating proteins occurs in peripheral tissues rather than in blood cells.

Accumulating evidence shows that cellular changes that contribute to inflammageing are mediated by microRNAs (miRNAs), which are non-coding, single-stranded RNAs spanning 17–25 nucleotides that generally modulate protein-expression programmes by interacting with mRNAs that share partial complementarity, thereby reducing mRNA stability and/or translation41. Studies have shown age-related differences in the abundance of specific miRNAs in circulating cells, plasma, and whole blood from older compared with younger individuals42–48. Findings from these studies are inconsistent, possibly owing to differences in sample size, age composition, and health status of the examined individuals, and because miRNA detection methods vary widely in specificity, accuracy, and sensitivity. In addition, given that miRNAs mostly function as intra-cellular modulators of mRNAs, their concentration in whole blood might be a poor indicator of their physiological effects. Nonetheless, miR-25–3p, miR-92a-3p, miR-93–5p, miR-101–3p, miR-106b-5p, miR-142–5p, miR-151a-3p, and miR-181a-5p tend to be under-represented, whereas miR-21–5p and miR-126–3p are over-represented at older ages47,49,50. Age-related changes in miRNAs have been suggested to contribute to inflammageing. For example, miR-126–3p inhibits endothelial inflammation, and low levels of miR-126–3p were found in patients with CVD and diabetes50, whereas miR-21–5p levels are correlated negatively with CRP and fibrinogen levels, and miR-21–5p levels are higher in patients with CVD than in age-matched controls44. Other miRNAs, such as miR-146 and miR-155, might also have a role in inflammageing by affecting cellular senescence or modulating immune responses, although these activities might not be reflected by changes in miRNA concentration or these miRNAs might be detected only in exosomes or other structures carrying miRNAs51. Overall, the contribution of miRNAs to inflammageing is an active area of investigation with high translational potential.

Epidemiological studies provide some information about the origin of inflammageing. Obesity — particularly central obesity — is strongly associated with a pro-inflammatory state52–54. Adipocytes in abdominal, intramuscular, liver, and pericardial fat can produce pro-inflammatory and chemotactic compounds, such as IL-6, IL-1β, TNF, and C-C motif chemokine 2 (CCL2), as well as hormones that modulate inflammation, such as adiponectin and leptin54. The visceral fat tissue of obese individuals is infiltrated by T lymphocytes, macrophages, and monocytes. T lym-phocytes secrete IFNγ, which stimulates the production of several chemokines from adipocytes, including CCL2, CCL5, C-X-C motif chemokine 9 (CXCL9), and CXCL10, which further amplify tissue T cell migration. The number of B lymphocytes and macrophages in visceral adipose tissue from obese individuals is also increased and is correlated with BMI55. Studies with animal models suggest that a specific subset of B cells expressing the TNF ligand superfamily member 9 and producing TNF, IFNγ, and granzyme B is increased in the peritoneal cavity during ageing56. Cytokines released by B cells contribute to the phenotypic switch of adipocytes in the visceral cavity, causing them to release adipokines, other pro-inflammatory markers, and cell debris52. Activated monocytes that give rise to M1 and M2 macrophages produce even more inflammatory compounds that probably appear in the circulation57. Weight loss through reduced dietary intake and possibly bariatric surgery is associated with reductions in primary pro-inflammatory markers, in part owing to normalized expression of inflammation-related genes in white adipose tissue and to downregulation of the NLRP3 inflammasome58–61. In addition, calorie restriction in humans is associated with a substantial reduction in pro-inflammatory markers in the blood62. Weight loss combined with exercise improves functional status and reduces some of the features of frailty in obese older individuals, improves the cardiovascular risk profile, and reduces the risk of CVD, although whether these beneficial effects are caused by reduced inflammation remains unclear63–65.

A new hypothesis on the origin of inflammation highlights changes that occur in the gut microbiota with ageing as well as age- associated changes in gut permeability. Despite large variability in the gut microbiota found in different populations, geographic regions, and settings, evidence suggests that ageing is associated with a reduction in beneficial commensal microorganisms — such as Coprococcus, Faecalibacterium, and Lactobacillus — as well as a decrease in the Firmicutes: Bacteroidetes ratio66–68. The disappearance of these microorganisms is important because they normally counteract the expansion of pathogenic microbial communities, while also maintaining intestinal barrier integrity by fermenting starches and dietary fibres and producing mucus and lipid metabolites, such as short-chain fatty acids (primarily acetate, propionate, and butyrate)66–68. As beneficial intestinal bacteria decrease in abundance with ageing, other bacteria increase in relative abundance, including symbiotic bacteria that can become pathogenic under inflamed conditions, often termed pathobionts69. This category of microorganisms is enriched in the gut of older adults and is primarily dominated by facultative anaerobes — such as Fusobacterium and Staphylococcus — a state that has been associated with increased levels of inflammatory cytokines in plasma8,70.

Increased gut dysbiosis has been postulated to increase mucosal barrier permeability, thereby allowing bacteria and their products — including pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs), and microbial-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs)— into the circulatory system. Together, these factors contribute to a chronic pro-inflammatory state71. This theory is supported by studies in animal models, but no definitive evidence exists of increased gut permeability and leakage of pro-inflammatory products in older individuals who are free from overt inflammatory disease72. Dysbiosis seems to be more severe in conditions in which prevalence increases with ageing, such as obesity and type 2 diabetes73. Of note, changes in gut microbiota composition have been shown to be associated with increased frailty74–76, which could be owing to gut dysbiosis-induced inflammation. Centenarians, who can be considered extreme examples of healthy ageing, have an enrichment of Akkermansia, Bifidobacterium, and Christensenellaceae in their intestinal flora67, which promote positive immune function, have anti-inflammatory activity, diminish the effects of obesity, and contribute to metabolic homeostasis77–79.

Consistent with the notion that changes in the gut microbiota composition can affect healthy ageing, calorie restriction — the most powerful strategy to increase longevity in animal models — causes changes in microbiota composition, decreases inflammation, and improves gut barrier integrity80. A healthy intestinal tract flora can theoretically be promoted by the administration of probiotics, prebiotics, or a combination of the two81–83. Some studies have shown that this strategy can reduce systemic inflammation and progression of central obesity, but more research in this area is needed to substantiate this initial evidence and to assess whether the reduction of inflammation owing to microbiota changes has beneficial effects on health84,85.

A number of biological mechanisms that have been identified as hallmarks or pillars of biological ageing might account for inflammageing86,87. Paramount among them is the accumulation of senescent cells in multiple tissues. Cellular senescence is generally considered to be a pre-encoded cancer suppressor mechanism characterized by cell cycle arrest, loss of proliferation capacity, global cell enlargement, characteristic misshaped nuclei, presence of chromatin foci with persistent DNA damage response, increased nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) signalling, and resistance to apoptosis88,89. Senescent cells are recognized by specific markers, including cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A (commonly known as p16INK4A) and increased lysosome β-galactosidase activity, although these markers are neither fully sensitive nor specific and, despite intense research, no gold-standard biomarker of cellular senescence has been established90. Jeck and colleagues hypothesized that genetic variants associated with general susceptibility to multiple diseases are enriched in specific areas of the genome. Interestingly, SNPs located near regulators of senescence and inflammation are particularly associated with diseases of ageing, such as cancer, CVD, and type 2 diabetes, and the strongest association was found with a variant in the CDKN2A gene, which encodes the p16INK4A protein that is over-expressed in many forms of senescence. These findings were replicated in a meta-analysis that included 410 genome-wide association studies91,92. In addition, the variant rs2811712 that is close to the CDKN2A gene was associated with poor physical function in two different cohorts93. Therefore, senescence seems to be associated with ageing, inflammation, CVD, and impaired physical function in older individuals, making cell senescence a strong candidate as a mechanism for inflammageing.

Cell senescence can be triggered by many stimuli, including critical telomere shortening, persistent DNA damage, oncogene activation or inactivation, epigenetic alterations, mitochondrial dysfunction, and exposure to DAMPs that are released by stressed cells, with some evidence that the phenotypic manifestations induced by different triggers are heterogeneous88,89. At the core of the replication arrest is increasing levels of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors that block the phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma-associated protein and initiate cell cycle arrest. In adulthood, activation of retinoblastoma-associated protein can occur either through the cellular tumour antigen p53 that activates cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1 (commonly known as p21), or directly through the activation of p16INK4A. Theories suggest that senescence is not an acute switch but instead evolves in stages, from a temporary or reversible status to a chronic irreversible condition94.

Relevant to inflammageing, senescent cells acquire a senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) that involves the secretion of a wide range of soluble molecules. The list of these molecules is not comprehensive, and the molecules can vary on the basis of cell type and triggering factors but usually include interleukins (IL-1α, IL-1β, and IL-6), chemokines (IL-8 and growth-regulated-α protein), growth factors (fibroblast growth factor 2 and hepatocyte growth factor), metalloproteinases (interstitial collagenase (also known as MMP1), stromelysin 1 (also known as MMP3), and collagenase 3 (also known as MMP13)), and other insoluble proteins and extracellular matrix components95. These secretory molecules mainly function in a paracrine fashion and can facilitate the development of cellular senescence in neighbouring cells, but some of the soluble mediators are released into the circulation and are likely to contribute to inflammageing96.

Studies have shown that senescent cells accumulate exponentially with ageing in different organs and tissues, both in model organisms and in humans97–100. In humans, the accumulation of senescent markers has been demonstrated in the skin, T lymphocytes, atherosclerotic lesions, insulin-producing β cells, kidney, endothelium, visceral fat, joint cartilage, cardiac muscle, liver, and many others tissues98,101–107. Some tissues are likely to have a greater propensity to developing cellular senescence than others, but research in this area is scarce. Of note, senescent T cell accumulation has been demonstrated in patients with chronic infections such as Cytomegalovirus (CMV) or human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, which might explain why patients with CMV or HIV infection have chronically elevated levels of pro-inflammatory markers and reduced vaccine efficacy108–110. In mice, the clearance of p16INK4A-positive cells extends lifespan and slows the emergence of ageing phenotypes and age-related functional deterioration of organs and tissues111,112. The extent to which the burden of senescent-cell accumulation in humans is associated with inflammageing and organ damage, and whether a plasma protein signature can be developed that correlates with cell senescence burden, are important areas of investigation.

Despite the apparent stability of the human body, a massive turnover of molecules, microorganelles, cells, and cellular components occurs constantly throughout life. A complex and well-regulated molecular machinery constantly surveys cellular components and handles the repair or elimination of biological debris as well as broken or misplaced fragments. Within cells, worn-out macromolecules and organelles are physiologically recycled by proteasome degradation or autophagy. Extracellular debris is recognized by the immune system through different receptors, including pattern recognition receptors, and is then degraded by engulfment in phagocytic vesicles113. Under pathological conditions, molecules are released by stressed cells undergoing necrosis (such as during ischaemia– reperfusion or severe infection). These molecules, called DAMPs, include reactive oxygen species (ROS) from damaged and unrecycled mitochondria, extra-cellular nucleotides such as ATP, oxidized cardiolipin, free nuclear and mitochondrial DNA fragments or histones, high-mobility group protein B1, oxidized LDL, amyloid-β, islet amyloid polypeptide, and particulates such as monosodium urate and cholesterol crystals, in addition to many others114. If notpromptly removed, these molecules accumulate and possibly contribute to inflammageing115,116. Accordingly, inflammageing is proposed to originate from an imbalance between the production and disposal of cellular debris, misfolded proteins, and/or misplaced self-molecules that develops with age8. For example, accumulation of DAMPs is sensed by the NLRP3 inflammasome and causes NLRP3 oligomerization, resulting in caspase 1-dependent secretion of the inflammatory cytokines IL-1β and IL-18. In humans, IL-18 blood levels increase with ageing, and strong evidence from mouse studies indicates that blockade of the NLRP3 inflammasome extends healthspan, attenuating multiple age-related degenerative changes that have been linked to inflammageing, including insulin resistance, thymic involution, T cell senescence, and bone loss as well as physical and cognitive function decline114,117,118. Of note, ROS produced by dysfunctional mitochondria can also trigger an inflammatory response by activating the NF-κB signalling pathway119.

Studies conducted in isolated immune cells, mostly lymphocytes, suggest that an intrinsic defect in immune cells also contributes to inflammageing. For example, gene-expression studies show that CD4+ lymphocytes from older individuals have higher intrinsic activation of the NF-κB pathways than those from younger individuals120. After stimulation with anti-CD3, the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines in vitro is lower in cells from older individuals than in cells from younger individuals120, a phenomenon that might be related to altered metabolic activity121. However, because these studies have been performed only in small populations, their relevance to inflammageing is unknown.

Subclinical and clinically evident chronic infections can chronically stimulate immune function and result in changes in levels of inflammatory markers that are indistinguishable from those of the inflammageing signature. Particularly relevant for inflammageing are human CMV and HIV infections. Human CMV infection is herpesvirus present in a latent state in more than half of the adult population122, where intermittent transcription episodes cause antigen reactivation throughout the life course. This situation might explain why the human CMV-specific memory T cells can comprise up to 50% of the total memory T cell compartment in older individuals123,124 and leads to the hypothesis that persistent human CMV infection has a role in immunosenescence and inflammageing. However, evidence to support this hypothesis remains controversial109. Some studies have found that human CMV infection in older individuals is associated with increased cardiovascular and all-cause mortality, negative immune risk profile, inflammageing, and lower antibody responses to influenza125–129. However, evidence that the association between CMV infection and CVD and mortality is mediated by inflammageing is scant at best109,130. The theoretical CMV-associated impaired capacity to control heterologous infections in old age and the association with high circulating levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines have also been challenged109. Ultimately, whether human CMV infections cause accelerated immune senescence is controversial.

In the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), patients with HIV infection have a life expectancy that is, on average, only slightly lower than in the general population. However, this therapy does not protect patients from the persistent immune activation, chronic inflammation, and excess risk of developing CVD and frailty131–135. Chronic inflammation in HIV is mediated by depletion of memory CD41+ T cells, resulting in increased permeability in the gut epithelium and translocation of microbial products into the circulation, which causes inflammation136. Patients with HIV are also affected by antiretroviral-associated lipodystrophy and visceral obesity that can further contribute to inflammation and cause insulin resistance137.

Finally, chronic infections, such as oral infection, asymptomatic chronic infection in the urinary and biliary tracts, and hidden intestinal infections, are associated with the release of PAMPs into the circulation, which elicits a persistent inflammatory state. Treatment of these infections can reduce inflammageing and potentially has many long-term beneficial effects beyond immediate local resolution of symptoms.

As explained above, the possible causes of inflammageing are numerous and very heterogeneous (Fig. 1). These different mechanisms are likely to be additive and interconnected, acting in different combinations and with different relevance in selected individuals. Therefore, effectively reducing inflammation without weakening the surveillance and defensive functions of the immune system requires individualized approaches as well as an accurate diagnosis of the underlying causes of inflammation.

Although strong epidemiological evidence indicates that inflammation is a powerful risk factor for CVD, non-cardiovascular comorbidities and conditions that are often associated with CVD, as well as with frailty, disability, and mortality in older individuals, and the mechanisms that underlie these associations have only just begun to be elucidated. Controversy exists on whether high levels of pro-inflammatory compounds in the circulation and tissues causally contribute to associated pathological conditions or whether inflammation is a reactive marker of underlying pathology. These two mechanisms are not mutually exclusive; for example, early damage that occurs during vascular endothelial cell inflammation participates in the pathogenesis of atherosclerotic plaques, whereas atherosclerosis itself produces antigens that trigger and sustain an inflammatory response, and senescent cells are found often in large quantities in atherosclerotic plaques. Therefore, multiple mechanisms amplify the role of inflammation in atherogenesis.

In this section of the Review, we summarize available evidence to suggest that chronic inflammation is both a risk factor and a pathogenic mechanism in CVD. Moreover, because inflammation also contributes to the pathogenesis of other chronic non-CVDs — such as anaemia, cancer, type 2 diabetes, dementia, osteoporosis, sarcopenia, chronic kidney disease, and depression — CVDs in old age often develop in the context of multimorbidity and frailty3,10,138–143 (Fig. 2). Epidemiological studies have produced insufficient evidence to demonstrate whether inflammation occurs in response to underlying disease pathologies or whether inflammation itself contributes to disease initiation and progression. To address this issue, we combine observational evidence with results from randomized, controlled trials (RCTs) that tested the efficacy of anti-inflammatory drugs in preventing or controlling CVD clinical manifestations (Table 1).

Atherosclerosis originates from damaged endothelium that allows the accumulation of cholesterol-containing LDL particles in the arterial wall that tend to be oxidized, which triggers an inflammatory response that fails to resolve144. Activation of both innate and adaptive immunity actively contributes to the initiation and progression of atherogenesis, from early endothelial dysfunction to the development of acute thrombotic complications triggered by plaque rupture or erosion 9,145–149. Monocytes that migrate into the intima of the arterial wall differentiate into macrophages and then transform into foam cells in the lipid necrotic core of the atheroma147,149. Cholesterol crystals and other DAMPs present in the atherosclerotic lesion activate the inflammasomes within macrophages, leading to the release of IL-1β, IL-18, and other pro-inflammatory cytokines150 that are chemotactic for other inflammatory cells, including T cells and B cells, which are major drivers ofatherosclerosis151. Late atherosclerosis is characterized by massive cell apoptosis and accumulation of cells with senescent features, which support a pro-inflammatory status and lead to the formation of a necrotic core that ultimately causes fragility and rupture of the plaque, formation of a thrombus, and acute vascular occlusion.

Cells in advanced atherosclerotic plaques often show markers of senescence, such as p16INK4A and tumour suppressor ARF (commonly known as p14ARF in humans and p19ARF in mice), and express a SASP that further fuels inflammation while producing metalloproteinases that degrade the extracellular matrix, further destabilizing the atherosclerotic plaque152. In turn, the degradation of the extracellular matrix induces the proliferation and phenotypic shift of vascular smooth muscle cells that migrate from the medial layer and, by synthesizing new extracellular matrix, build a fibrous cap that stabilizes atherosclerotic lesions. However, in an inflammatory environment, vascular smooth muscle cells undergo extensive DNA damage and excessive telomere shortening, develop markers of senescence, and might undergo loss of proliferative capacity or even apoptosis153. In addition, the production of metalloproteinases from senescent cells can further weaken the fibrous cap. Therefore, major mechanisms of plaque stabilization are impaired, and additional antigens might be uncovered that further amplify the inflammatory response154. Preclinical studies have shown that activated subtypes of T and B lymphocytes in plaques contribute to plaque instability, leading to an increase in the risk of cardiovascular disease155. miRNAs have emerged as important regulators of cellular adhesion, proliferation, lipid homeostasis, and inflammatory cytokine synthesis, potentially affecting the balance between atherosclerotic plaque progression and regression, although their mechanism of action and relationship with inflammageing is not fully clarified156.

Although the detailed mechanisms that affect the genesis and progression of atherosclerosis are far from being fully understood, evidence is accumulating that inflammation is a major contributor, acting through multiple mechanisms, including a vicious cycle that accelerates clinical progression. Consistent with this view, longitudinal studies demonstrate that high blood levels of pro-inflammatory markers, including high-sensitivity CRP assay and IL-6, predict the risk of cardiovascular disease in both middle-aged and older adults, independent of other CVD risk factors157–160. Moreover, statin therapy with rosuvastatin reduces the incidence of major cardiovascular events in healthy individuals who are free from hyperlipidaemia but who have elevated high-sensitivity CRP levels147,161. Although studies in endothelial cells suggest that CRP directly contributes to CVD by increasing oxidative stress162, other mechanistic studies and Mendelian randomization analyses in large populations suggest that CRP is a predictive biomarker that is not causally related to atherothrombosis163,164. By contrast, IL-6 and IL-1 contribute to atherosclerosis and should be considered to be therapeutic targets158,163. Mendelian randomization studies have shown that polymorphisms that affect IL-6 signalling are associated with lower life-time risk of cardiovascular disease23,24. In the MEASURE trial165, the IL-6 receptor blocker tocilizumab increased the concentration of HDL particles in patients with rheumatoid arthritis compared with placebo, despite an increase multicentre ENTRACTE trial166 compared the cardiovascular safety profile of tocilizumab to that of the TNF inhibitor etanercept in >3,000 patients with moderate-to-severe rheumatoid arthritis, but the final results are not yet published.

In addition, because IL-1β production is a secondary effect of NLRP3 inflammasome activation, which is induced by cholesterol crystals and other DAMPs, the IL-1β signalling pathway has been suggested to be a promising target for atherothrombosis protection. New compounds that interfere with IL-1 and IL-6 signalling are under investigation163,167. The CANTOS trial168 has revealed that anti-inflammatory therapy with canakinumab, a human monoclonal anti-IL-1β antibody, significantly reduced recurrent cardiovascular events in >10,000 stable patients who had residual inflammation after myocardial infarction, independent of lowered lipid levels169. The ongoing CIRT trial170 is testing the hypothesis that low-dose methotrexate, a drug that suppresses IL-1β production by mononuclear cells in addition to other functions171, reduces major vascular events in patients with previous myocardial infarction and either type 2 diabetes or metabolic syndrome. In a small pilot study (the LoDoCo trial)172, anti-inflammatory treatment with colchicine seemed to be effective for secondary prevention of CVD. Larger RCTs, such as the ongoing LoDoCo2 trial and COLCOT trials173, are needed to confirm these findings.

The focus of this Review is on inflammageing conceptualized as a shared risk factor and pathophysiological mechanism between CVD and frailty. However, it is important to note that inflammation is associated with the risk and clinical evolution of non-CVD related disease and accelerated decline of physical function. This concept is clearly exemplified by the close connection between inflammation, CVD, and type 2 diabetes. Type 2 diabetes is a strong risk factor for CVD, and both CVD mortality and the effect of diabetes on the risk of CVD increase sharply with older age and frailty status174–176. Strong evidence indicates that insulin resistance and lipotoxicity cause the production of inflammatory mediators that cause neutrophil infiltration, macrophage proliferation, and smooth muscle and endothelial cell activation, which accelerate atherogenesis177. Excessive oxidative stress causes endothelial dysfunction that enables permeation, trapping, and physicochemical modification of circulating lipoprotein particles in the subendothelial space178. Telomeres are, on average, shorter and the number of cells positive for senescence biomarkers is higher in arteries from patients with diabetes than in individuals without diabetes, and this finding might be one of the mechanisms for the increased inflammation and accelerated atherosclerosis in diabetes179,180. Overproduction of angiotensin II amplifies chronic inflammation and can cause mitochondrial dysfunction181. At the same time, inflammation is a risk factor for the development of diabetes and its complications, and these associations are not accounted for by body composition parameters138.

Of note, a causal role of inflammation in CVD pathogenesis is also suggested by clinical trials that used an anti-inflammatory intervention as treatment for overt, noncardiovascular inflammatory diseases. For example, treatment with TNF inhibitors in rheumatoid arthritis, an overt inflammatory disease, is associated with a decreased risk of cardiovascular events182–187. Treatment with TNF inhibitors in psoriasis is also associated with decreased incidence of major adverse cardiac events186,188,189. However, anti-inflammatory treatment does not always yield beneficial effects. For example, in patients with congestive heart failure, the levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, especially TNF, IL-6, and IL-1, are markedly elevated, and the TNF level is a negative prognostic factor190–192. However, clinical trials with the TNF inhibitor etanercept yielded no beneficial reductions in mortality or hospitalization due to congestive heart failure193, whereas high doses of infliximab, a TNF antagonist, did not improve and even worsened moderate-to-severe congestive heart failure194.

The important role of inflammation in CVD, in particular in atherosclerosis, together with the observation that the pro-inflammatory state typical of ageing is a strong risk factor for many age-related chronic diseases, explains why CVD in older individuals often precedes, follows, or develops in the context of multimorbidity and frailty. Patients with CVD tend to have greater multimorbidity than individuals who are free from CVD195. Diseases most often associated with multimorbidity are diabetes, chronic kidney disease, anaemia, chronic pulmonary disease, depression, and dementia, which all involve inflammageing as an important risk factor3,138,139,142,143,196. The presence of comorbid diseases is well established to affect both the response to treatment and the prognosis for hard clinical outcomes, such as cardiovascular and all-cause mortality, as well as hospitalization and health-care utilization197. However, limited data are available on whether CVD comorbidities affect non-traditional outcomes that are still very important for geriatric patients, such as symptom burden, functional capacity, and self-rated health197. Whether these important, non-traditional out-comes respond to anti-inflammatory treatment is also unknown because this information is not commonly collected in most RCTs.

The resulting syndromes present clinical challenges whose complexity is often ignored in clinical practice guidelines for single diseases, which are based on randomized clinical trials in which patients with multimorbidity are under-represented, including most of the trials cited above that targeted inflammation195. The degree of clinical complexity is even higher when the comorbid medical condition is frailty. Age-associated frailty is a medical syndrome characterized by morphological and physiological changes across multiple systems and organs, resulting in a progressive loss of internal homeostasis, reduced physiological reserves, loss of function, reduced resilience, and increased vulnerability to internal and external stresses198,199. We address the general pathophysiology of frailty later in this Review. Here, we limit the discussion to the effect of frailty that emerges in patients with CVD. The prevalence of frailty in older individuals with CVD rises progressively from subclinical CVD, to heart failure, to overt acute syndromes, to cardiac surgery when, depending on the procedure, the rate of frailty can be >60%200. Strong evidence from multiple, large, observational studies indicates that the presence of CVD is a risk factor for frailty and that patients with frailty are more likely to develop CVD than those who are not frail201–203. This observation is not surprising because inflammation, insulin resistance, and coagulation problems have been identified as cardinal factors in the pathophysiology of frailty204–207. Therefore, CVD and frailty can be viewed as diseases arising from similar causal mechanisms, mutually accelerating their clinical course by vicious cycles that amplify inflammation, insulin resistance, and other still-unknown mechanisms, thereby synergistically contributing to adverse health outcomes. In accordance with this theory, independent of age and other risk factors, frailty in patients with CVD is associated with a twofold increase in the risk of death208.

We have previously proposed that a pro-inflammatory state might be caused by most of the described putative biological mechanisms of ageing, such as telomere shortening, cell senescence, mitochondrial dysfunction, altered nutrient sensing, and epigenetic alterations1. Therefore, the coexistence of CVD, diabetes, and frailty might be just one example of a general phenomenon that involves multiple diseases, as exemplified by the following observations. Low-grade chronic inflammation is a primary contributor to the onset and progression of chronic kidney disease11,142,209,210. Inflammation is a causal factor for cancer initiation, promotion, malignancy, and metastatic dissemination211,212. Depression is characterized by increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and acute phase proteins in both peripheral blood and cerebrospinal fluid213,214. Inflammatory diseases and high levels of pro-inflammatory biomarkers in the blood increase the risk of depression143,215–217. Inflammation has a central role in age-related neuro-degeneration and in neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer disease218. These studies support the hypothesis that neuroinflammatory changes are important pathological components of Alzheimer disease and other neurodegenerative diseases, highlighting the potential clinical importance of cytokines in neurogenesis. Interestingly, most genetic variants associated with late-onset Alzheimer disease are within immunity-related genes219.

The collective evidence suggests that chronic inflammation is a risk factor across multiple diseases, some of which are traditionally viewed as pathophysiologically unrelated, such as CVD157,159,160,220, diabetes138,180,221, chronic kidney disease11,142,209, cancer211,212,222, depression13,143,217, and dementia12,139,223. In addition, higher levels of inflammatory markers in blood are associated with a greater loss of muscle mass and strength, accelerated loss of mobility, lower-extremity performance and physical activity, and depression in older individuals224–228, all of which are essential elements for defining frailty on the basis of the criteria most often used in the literature229. From this perspective, inflammageing could act as a focal point for ageing mechanisms that are associated with increased susceptibility to stressors and impaired functional reserves. Consistent with this observation, both higher baseline levels and increasing accumulation rates of IL-6 predict accelerated longitudinal accumulation of multiple chronic diseases in older individuals14. In addition, inflammation contributes to accelerated ageing in individuals with multimorbidity230, and partially mediates the association between multimorbidity and functional limitations and disability231. Not surprisingly, most patients with frailty have chronic inflammation, especially those who are affected by sarcopenia, which is defined as a reduction in muscle strength and mass that is abnormally severe for an individual’s age207,232,233.

A variety of hypotheses have been proposed to explain the link between inflammation and sarcopenia and frailty; interestingly, some of these mechanisms are shared with the pathogenesis of CVD. Inflammation is associated with reduced synthesis and activity of insulin-like growth factor I (IGF1), a growth factor that is essential for muscle regeneration and maintenance of muscle integrity and that is protective against plaque instability in atherosclerosis158,234. In vitro studies have shown that IL-1α, IL-6, and TNF inhibit IGF1-mediated anabolism and that IL-6 reduces the production of IGF1 and IGF-binding protein 3 (reF.235). In observational studies, high levels of IL-6 and low levels of IGF1 synergistically correlate with lower muscle strength and power, effectively predicting progressive disability and death236,237. Inflammation impairs endothelial reactivity and muscle perfusion, interfering with the uptake of long branched-chain amino acids that are essential for muscle energetics and protein anabolism238–240. Dysfunctional mitochondria that are not recycled owing to defective mitophagy produce ROS that stimulate the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and catabolism via increased NF-κB-dependent protein ubiquitylation and proteasome degradation241. Senescent cells that produce inflammatory mediators might also have a role in the pathogenesis of sarcopenia. One study quantified senescent p16INK4A-expressing cells in thigh intramuscular adipose tissue from older women, revealing that senescent cell burden was associated with grip strength, walking speed, and self-perceived mobility242. Moreover, inflammation impairs satellite cell regenerative function243–245. Of note, the emergence of senescence traits in vascular smooth muscle cells has been implicated in the initiation and progression of CVD, specifically atherosclerosis246, again suggesting that atherosclerosis and the resulting CVD is a syndrome of accelerated ageing.

Both aerobic and resistance exercise — as well as dietary supplementation of amino acids or protein, vitamin D, and polyunsaturated fatty acids — have been associated with protection against age-associated sarcopenia, possibly because of their antiinflammatory and antioxidative properties141. In observational studies, adherence to the Mediterranean diet was the only behavioural factor consistently associated with a lower risk of frailty, which might be a result of the anti-inflammatory properties inherent to the diet247,248. Underlying the relationship between CVD and frailty, the Mediterranean diet is also one of the few behavioural interventions that, in both observational studies and clinical trials, was associated with lower cardiovascular morbidity and mortality249,250. Aspirin, a potent anti-inflammatory molecule, is effective in the treatment of acute myocardial infarction and in secondary prevention of CVD, and some evidence indicates that aspirin might be effective in primary prevention of myocardial infarction, at least in high-risk groups251,252. Interestingly, chronic use of NSAIDs is associated with a lower risk of sarcopenia in community-dwelling individuals aged ≥80 years253.

Metformin, an antidiabetic drug that counteracts inflammation and insulin resistance, has been suggested to prevent frailty and attenuate its progression. In a large, observational study conducted in US veterans with type 2 diabetes and stratified according to baseline risk, treatment with metformin reduced the risk of multiple age-related diseases, including CVDs, cancer, depression, and frailty-related diseases254. An RCT conducted in Indonesia revealed that metformin improves gait speed, but not handgrip strength, in nondiabetic, pre-frail, older individuals255. A trial is currently ongoing at the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, TX, USA, aimed at examining whether metformin prevents frailty development in older individuals with impaired glucose tolerance256.

The evidence reported above suggests that CVD, multimorbidity, frailty, and perhaps other chronic diseases have inflammageing as a common root cause. Unfortunately, although strong evidence shows that targeting inflammation can reduce the risk of CVD, no definitive evidence exists that reducing inflammation can prevent or modify the progression of multimorbidity with frailty or sarcopenia. In part, this situation is because of the lack of adequately sized RCTs to test this hypothesis and because RCTs that have tested the effectiveness of anti-inflammatory treatments for cardiovascular prevention did not collect data on multimorbidity, frailty, or disability. These issues should be considered a priority in setting the future research agenda. The ENRGISE trial257 is an ongoing, multicentre, double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized pilot study, enrolling older men and women (aged ≥70 years) who have high levels of IL-6 and impaired physical function, to test whether losartan, omega-3 fish oil, or a combination of the two reduce plasma IL-6 levels compared with placebo. Interestingly, results from the CRATUS trial258,259 demonstrated that administration of allogeneic human mesenchymal stem cells improves measures of lower-extremity performance and reduces inflammatory biomarkers in age-related frailty. By contrast, despite their anti-inflammatory effects, statin use in the Women’s Health Initiative survey had no significant effect on the risk of frailty260.

Many interventions that increase longevity in animal models cause a reduction in inflammatory markers. For example, calorie restriction is the most powerful life-extension intervention in most animal models and is associated with reduced inflammatory biomarkers261,262. Mechanisms by which calorie restriction reduces chronic inflammation include diminished ROS production and consequent downregulation of NF-κB-induced transcription of pro-inflammatory genes in multiple tissues263. Of note, dietary restriction significantly reduces the risk of CVD in humans, and in animal models, dietary restriction is associated with numerous beneficial changes in arterial walls264.

Rapamycin, a specific inhibitor of mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) signalling with many effects, including anti-inflammatory activity265, has an important role in longevity regulation266 in both animals and humans267, and improves survival and healthspan in animal models268–272. Aspirin improves lifespan in mice273, whereas metformin, which is known to have direct anti-inflammatory effects beyond its canonical glucose-lowering activity274, improves lifespan and healthspan in animal models275. A meta-analysis revealed that metformin reduces all-cause mortality and diseases associated with ageing independent of diabetic control in humans276. The TAME trial277 is designed to examine the effect of metformin on delaying the onset of age-related conditions and diseases and its potential use in expanding human health span. Finally, the clearance of senescent cells by either genetic engineering or the administration of senolytic drugs has been associated with reduced circulating levels of pro-inflammatory markers, increased lifespan, and delayed frailty-related phenotypes in mice111,112. Clinical trials are needed to test the efficacy of these potential treatments in humans278. These examples suggest that interventions that target some of the fundamental mechanisms of ageing affect the general susceptibility to CVD, as well as other age-related diseases, and prevent frailty and disability in older individuals.

Over the past 3 decades, a wealth of evidence has been gathered that suggests that chronic inflammation is one of these mechanisms. Although this Review on the connection between inflammageing, CVD, and frailty is far from comprehensive, the role of chronic inflammation in health and functional deterioration with ageing is clearly emerging. Of course, conceptual problems remain. Throughout this Review, we have focused on inflammation as posing a threat to human health over the course of ageing. However, inflammation has been evolutionarily selected as a fundamental defensive mechanism that protects organisms from microbial invasion, ensures the integrity of a self-recognized inventory of proteins and other macromolecules, prevents cancer by recognizing and removing cells that present tumour antigens, and has an important role in tissue repair. The benefits of inflammation overcome the risks associated with autoimmune disease and inflammageing. As such, inflammation has a positive influence on health when activated transiently — that is, when inflammation deploys quickly and fully armed in response to an adequate stimulation, successfully eliminates the challenge, and recedes quickly to a baseline resting state. When inflammation becomes chronic, however, problems arise and deleterious effects emerge, as first described by Rudolph Virchow (1821–1902)279. Chronic inflammatory diseases, such as certain chronic infections, cancer, congestive heart failure, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and HIV, cause syndromes that share many characteristics with accelerated ageing and frailty, including sarcopenia, weight loss, and loss of energy coupled with fatigability. Therefore, chronically elevated levels of circulating pro-inflammatory markers observed with ageing are unsurprisingly also associated with similar signs and symptoms to those of chronic disease, although the age-related symptoms develop progressively and over a longer time frame.

The mechanisms for these actions are not fully understood, but a comprehensive analysis of the literature reveals that inflammation is often associated with a catabolic state (Fig. 3). As described previously in this Review, inflammation is associated with anabolic resistance in muscle, which is caused partly by inhibition of the perfusion adjustment to anabolic stimuli and partly by inhibition of IGF1 production and signalling236–240. Chronic inflammation causes anaemia via direct inhibition of iron absorption and recycling as well as interference with erythropoietin production and signalling3,280. Evidence indicates that inflammation causes insulin resistance. In particular, TNF receptor superfamily member 1A and Toll-like receptor 4 block insulin signalling through Janus kinase activation, which causes serine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate 1 and 2, contributing to insulin resistance281–283. Conversely, evidence also indicates that insulin resistance promotes the accumulation of M1 macrophages and fosters inflammation in adipose tissue through the production of CCL2 (reF.284). Pro-inflammatory cytokines — including IL-1β, IL-6, IL-11, IL-15, IL-17, and TNF — stimulate bone resorption and almost certainly contribute to osteoporosis285. For example, bone resorption is increased in patients with inflammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis286. Studies in cultured cells show that IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF induce mitochondrial dysfunction with reduced ATP synthesis-driven respiration, reduction of the NAD+:NADH ratio, and reduced mRNA levels of PPARGC1A (encoding peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ co-activator 1α; PGC1α), suggesting that mitochondrial biogenesis is impaired287. Studies conducted both in vitro and in animal models suggest that inflammation in general, and IL-1β and IFNα in particular, inhibit neurogenesis and reduce the magnitude of neurogenesis that is normally induced by exercise288,289. These data delineate an overall mechanism by which inflammageing affects multiple physiological systems and phenotypes. During an infection that unleashes an inflammatory response, the physiological and metabolic state of the organism is focused on defence, and all other anabolic activities are paused, including nondefensive functions of the immune system, such as surveillance of damage and continuous repair in tissue, which mostly rely on growth factors. If this condition is temporary, turnover and repair of macromolecules, organelles, and cells can be delayed, avoiding irreversible damage. However, in older individuals, inflammation remains chronically activated, either because of continued stress from the inflammation source or because of a primary immune dysregulation. In the absence of macromolecular and organellar recycling, the accumulation of damage can reach a critical threshold, thereby causing severe functional consequences that become difficult or impossible to reverse, conferring the clinical syndrome of frailty.

On the basis of the data and the hypotheses presented in this Review, modulating inflammageing is a promising strategy not only to prevent CVD but also to slow the decline of health that occurs with ageing. Modulating inflammation is likely to be most effective at the early stage of health decline, at a time when the compensatory capacity of the organism is not completely exhausted and might still counteract physiological and functional declines. New pharmacological treatments that selectively affect some of the signalling pathways that regulate inflammation are needed to balance the relationship between risks and benefits. Early treatments will require early diagnosis and availability of a signature biomarker profile that allows for a differential diagnosis between true inflammageing and chronic inflammation sustained by the persistence of an infectious or toxic cause. Ultimately, RCTs are needed to test the hypothesis that modulating inflammation prevents the development of CVD as well as multimorbidity, disability, and frailty.