---
reference_id: "PMID:29976176"
title: "Generalized arterial calcification of infancy with a novel ENPP1 mutation: a case report."
authors:
- Brunod I
- Tosello B
- Hassid S
- Gire C
- Thomachot L
- Panuel M
journal: BMC Pediatr
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s12887-018-1198-4
keywords:
- Consanguinity
- Diphosphonates/therapeutic use
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mutation
- Pamidronate/therapeutic use
- Phosphoric Diester Hydrolases/genetics
- Pyrophosphatases/genetics
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- "Vascular Calcification/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Generalized arterial calcification of infancy with a novel ENPP1 mutation: a case report.
**Authors:** Brunod I, Tosello B, Hassid S, Gire C, Thomachot L, Panuel M
**Journal:** BMC Pediatr (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12887-018-1198-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12887-018-1198-4)

## Content

1. BMC Pediatr. 2018 Jul 5;18(1):217. doi: 10.1186/s12887-018-1198-4.

Generalized arterial calcification of infancy with a novel ENPP1 mutation: a
case report.

Brunod I(1), Tosello B(2)(3), Hassid S(1), Gire C(4), Thomachot L(1), Panuel
M(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric and Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Hôpital Nord, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille, Chemin des Bourrely, 13015, Marseille, France.
(2)Department of Neonatology, Hôpital Nord, Assistance Publique des Hôpitaux de
Marseille (APHM), Chemin des Bourrely, 13015, Marseille, France.
barthelemy.tosello@ap-hm.fr.
(3)Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, EFS, ADES, Marseille, France.
barthelemy.tosello@ap-hm.fr.
(4)Department of Neonatology, Hôpital Nord, Assistance Publique des Hôpitaux de
Marseille (APHM), Chemin des Bourrely, 13015, Marseille, France.
(5)Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, EFS, ADES, Marseille, France.
(6)Department of Medical Imaging, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille,
Hôpital Nord, Chemin des Bourrely, 13015, Marseille, France.

BACKGROUND: Generalized Arterial Calcification of Infancy (GACI) is a heritable
ectopic mineralization disorder resulting in diffuse arterial calcifications
and/or stenosis, mostly caused by mutations in the ENPP1 gene. Here we present a
case report of GACI in a male infant with a new familial mutation of the ENPP1
gene and the clinical outcome after biphosphonates therapy.
CASE PRESENTATION: The clinical presentation was characterized by a severe
early-onset of hypertension refractory to multiple therapy. To investigate this
atypical hypertension, a renal Doppler ultra-sonography was performed and
diffuse echo-bright arteries were detected; then a low-dose whole-body computed
tomography demonstrated extensive arterial calcifications, suggesting GACI. A
novel homozygous mutation c.784A > G (p.Ser262Gly) was detected in the ENPP1
gene. The infant was administered four courses of bisphosphonates: arterial
calcifications were found to decrease but severe refractory hypertension was
persistent. Although GACI can be a rapidly fatal illness and frequently results
in death in infancy, the patient was 24 months of age at the time of writing
this report.
CONCLUSIONS: Three points of interest: the first one is to remind clinicians of
this rare and atypical etiology in neonates with severe hypertension and in
fetuses with cardiomyopathy and non-immune hydrops fetalis. The second point is
the identification of a novel mutation in the ENPP1 gene associated with a
clinical presentation of GACI. The third point is the fairly favourable outcome
of our patient after bisphosphonates therapy, with calcifications regression but
not hypertension.

DOI: 10.1186/s12887-018-1198-4
PMCID: PMC6034340
PMID: 29976176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: This
report was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Aix-Marseille University.
Written informed consent was given by the caregiver of the child for his
clinical records to be used in this case report. The parents provided written
informed consent to undergo genetic testing. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: This
report was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Aix-Marseille University.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s parents for publication
of this case report and any accompanying images. COMPETING INTERESTS: The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE:
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
