---
reference_id: "PMID:38077366"
title: "Validation of elevated levels of interleukin-8 in the cerebrospinal fluid, and discovery of new biomarkers in patients with GBS and CIDP using a proximity extension assay."
authors:
- Kmezic I
- Gustafsson R
- Fink K
- Svenningsson A
- Samuelsson K
- Ingre C
- Olsson T
- Hansson M
- Kockum I
- Adzemovic MZ
- Press R
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1241199
keywords:
- Humans
- Biomarkers
- Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
- "Guillain-Barre Syndrome/diagnosis, cerebrospinal fluid"
- Interleukin-8
- Polyneuropathies
- "Polyradiculoneuropathy, Chronic Inflammatory Demyelinating/diagnosis, cerebrospinal fluid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Validation of elevated levels of interleukin-8 in the cerebrospinal fluid, and discovery of new biomarkers in patients with GBS and CIDP using a proximity extension assay.
**Authors:** Kmezic I, Gustafsson R, Fink K, Svenningsson A, Samuelsson K, Ingre C, Olsson T, Hansson M, Kockum I, Adzemovic MZ, Press R
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2023.1241199](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1241199)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2023 Nov 23;14:1241199. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1241199. 
eCollection 2023.

Validation of elevated levels of interleukin-8 in the cerebrospinal fluid, and 
discovery of new biomarkers in patients with GBS and CIDP using a proximity 
extension assay.

Kmezic I(1)(2), Gustafsson R(2), Fink K(1)(2), Svenningsson A(3), Samuelsson 
K(1)(2), Ingre C(1)(2), Olsson T(2), Hansson M(4)(5), Kockum I(2), Adzemovic 
MZ(2)(6), Press R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(3)Department of Clinical Sciences, Karolinska Institutet Danderyd Hospital, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine H5, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(6)Centre for Neurology, Academic Specialist Centre, Stockholm Health Services, 
Stockholm, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Biomarkers for diagnosis of inflammatory neuropathies, assessment of 
prognosis, and treatment response are lacking.
METHODS: CSF and EDTA plasma from patients with Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS), 
chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP), healthy controls (HC) 
and disease controls were analyzed with Olink multiplex proximity extension 
assay (PEA) from two independent cohorts. Levels of interleukin-8 (IL8) were 
further analyzed with ELISA in patients with GBS, CIDP, paraproteinemia-related 
demyelinating polyneuropathy (PDN), multifocal motor neuropathy (MMN), HC and 
disease controls. ROC analysis was performed. Outcome was measured with the 
GBS-disability score (GBS-ds) or Inflammatory Neuropathy Cause and Treatment 
(INCAT) score.
RESULTS: In CSF, multiplex PEA analysis revealed up-regulation of IL8 in GBS 
compared to CIDP and HC respectively, and CIDP compared to HC. In addition, 
levels of IL2RA were upregulated in GBS compared to both HC and CIDP, SELE in 
GBS compared to HC, and ITGAM, IL6, and NRP1 in GBS compared to CIDP. In plasma, 
levels of MMP3, THBD and ITGAM were upregulated in CIDP compared to HC. 
Validation of multiplex IL8 results using ELISA, revealed increased levels of 
IL8 in CSF in patients with GBS and CIDP versus HC and non-inflammatory 
polyneuropathies (NIP) respectively, as well as in PDN versus NIP and HC. Levels 
of IL8 in CSF correlated with impairment in the acute phase of GBS as well as 
outcome at 6-months follow up.
CONCLUSION: IL8 in CSF is validated as a diagnostic biomarker in GBS and CIDP, 
and a prognostic biomarker in GBS. Multiplex PEA hereby identifies several 
potential biomarkers in GBS and CIDP.

Copyright © 2023 Kmezic, Gustafsson, Fink, Svenningsson, Samuelsson, Ingre, 
Olsson, Hansson, Kockum, Adzemovic and Press.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1241199
PMCID: PMC10702497
PMID: 38077366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: IKm has served as a consultant for CSL Behring 
and Takeda Pharma. CI has served as a consultant for Cytokinetics and Pfizer and 
is a DMC member for Appelis Pharmaceutical. The remaining authors declare that 
the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.