---
reference_id: "PMID:40812004"
title: "Clinical Characterization of a Multicenter International Cohort of Patients With Aicardi-Goutières Syndrome Homozygous for the RNASEH2B:p.Ala177Thr Variant: Early Clinical Markers of Disease Severity."
authors:
- Varesio C
- Politano D
- Adang L
- Ballante E
- Battini R
- Bertini E
- Borgatti R
- De Giorgis V
- Del Boca A
- Dragoni F
- Fazzi E
- Galli J
- Garau J
- Gavazzi F
- Gardani A
- La Piana R
- Moroni I
- Nicita F
- Pichiecchio A
- Pini A
- Ricci F
- Sartori S
- Tonduti D
- Vanderver A
- Orcesi S
journal: Pediatr Neurol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2025.07.011
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- "Autoimmune Diseases of the Nervous System/genetics, physiopathology, diagnosis"
- "Nervous System Malformations/genetics, physiopathology, diagnosis"
- Female
- Retrospective Studies
- "Child, Preschool"
- Child
- Infant
- Severity of Illness Index
- Homozygote
- Ribonuclease H/genetics
- Adolescent
- "Infant, Newborn"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Characterization of a Multicenter International Cohort of Patients With Aicardi-Goutières Syndrome Homozygous for the RNASEH2B:p.Ala177Thr Variant: Early Clinical Markers of Disease Severity.
**Authors:** Varesio C, Politano D, Adang L, Ballante E, Battini R, Bertini E, Borgatti R, De Giorgis V, Del Boca A, Dragoni F, Fazzi E, Galli J, Garau J, Gavazzi F, Gardani A, La Piana R, Moroni I, Nicita F, Pichiecchio A, Pini A, Ricci F, Sartori S, Tonduti D, Vanderver A, Orcesi S
**Journal:** Pediatr Neurol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2025.07.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2025.07.011)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neurol. 2025 Oct;171:92-99. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2025.07.011.
Epub 2025 Jul 25.

Clinical Characterization of a Multicenter International Cohort of Patients With
Aicardi-Goutières Syndrome Homozygous for the RNASEH2B:p.Ala177Thr Variant:
Early Clinical Markers of Disease Severity.

Varesio C(1), Politano D(2), Adang L(3), Ballante E(4), Battini R(5), Bertini
E(6), Borgatti R(1), De Giorgis V(1), Del Boca A(1), Dragoni F(7), Fazzi E(8),
Galli J(8), Garau J(7), Gavazzi F(3), Gardani A(9), La Piana R(10), Moroni
I(11), Nicita F(6), Pichiecchio A(12), Pini A(13), Ricci F(14), Sartori S(15),
Tonduti D(16), Vanderver A(3), Orcesi S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, University of Pavia, Pavia,
Italy; Department of Child Neurology and Psychiatry, IRCCS Mondino Foundation,
Pavia, Italy.
(2)Department of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, University of Pavia, Pavia,
Italy; Department of Child Neurology and Psychiatry, IRCCS Mondino Foundation,
Pavia, Italy. Electronic address: davide.politano01@universitadipavia.it.
(3)Division of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.
(4)Biodata Science Center, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy; Department of
Political and Social Sciences, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(5)Department of Developmental Neuroscience, IRCCS Stella Maris Foundation,
Pisa, Italy; Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of
Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(6)Unit of Muscular and Neurodegenerative Diseases, Translational Pediatrics and
Clinical Genetics, IRCCS Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(7)Neurogenetics Research Centre, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
(8)Unit of Child Neurology and Psychiatry, ASST Spedali Civili of Brescia,
Brescia, Italy; Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of
Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(9)Department of Child Neurology and Psychiatry, IRCCS Mondino Foundation,
Pavia, Italy.
(10)Department of Neurology & Neurosurgery, Montreal Neurological Institute,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department of Diagnostic Radiology,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(11)Child Neurology Unit, Department of Pediatric Neuroscience, Fondazione IRCCS
Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy.
(12)Department of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, University of Pavia, Pavia,
Italy; Department of Neuroradiology, Advanced Imaging and Radiomics Center,
IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
(13)Neuromuscular Pediatric Unit, IRCCS Istituto Delle Scienze Neurologiche di
Bologna-UOC Neuropsichiatria Dell'Età Pediatrica, Bologna, Italy.
(14)Unit of Child Neurology and Psychiatry, University Hospital Città Della
Salute e Della Scienza, Turin, Italy.
(15)Paediatric Neurology and Neurophysiology Unit, Department of Women's and
Children's Health, University of Padua, Padua, Italy.
(16)Unit of Pediatric Neurology, C.O.A.L.A (Center for Diagnosis and Treatment
of Leukodystrophies), V. Buzzi Children's Hospital, Milan, Italy; Department of
Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (AGS) is a rare monogenic leukodystrophy
belonging to type I interferonopathies caused by alterations in one of nine
genes. Among them, homozygous RNASEH2B:c.529G>A(p.Ala177Thr) is the most common
variant worldwide and associated to AGS2. This variant typically leads to severe
phenotypes, but individuals with later onset or milder clinical manifestations
have been described, with recent finding of asymptomatic homozygous individuals.
However, the cause for this intragenotypic clinical variability is unclear, as
well as developmental trajectories and early prognostic factors. Our study
objective is the description of phenotypic variability in patients with AGS2 and
the identification of early clinical markers of prognosis.
METHODS: A multicenter international retrospective natural history study was
carried out by recruiting patients with AGS homozygous for p.Ala177Thr variant.
Patients were categorized into three groups based on the clinical severity
through the composite functional severity score, although comparison was made
with the more recently introduced AGS severity score. Disease onset was divided
into neonatal, infantile, and later onset. Demographic, clinical, and laboratory
data were collected and compared between these groups.
RESULTS: Irritability at onset correlates significantly to the three functional
categories. Early age at onset and presence of extrapyramidal signs correlate to
functional outcomes when comparing mild with severe patients. Furthermore,
retrospective application of AGS severity score correlated well with the
commonly used composite functional severity score.
CONCLUSION: The authors observed irritability, early onset, and extrapyramidal
signs not to be exclusive to the severe group, hence the need for creation of a
composite predictive biomarker for prognosis accuracy.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2025.07.011
PMID: 40812004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Vanderver,
Gavazzi, and Adang have licensed the AGS scale and received funding for AGS
research from Biogen, Eli Lilly, and Boehringer Ingelheim without any personal
compensation. Del Boca, Politano, Galli, Fazzi, Tonduti, and Orcesi participate
in a clinical trial by Transposon Therapeutics, Inc for patients with AGS
without any personal compensation. Borgatti, Orcesi, and Battini report
financial support was provided by Ministry of Health. Adang, Gavazzi, Vanderver,
Del Boca, Politano, Garau, Dragoni, Galli, Fazzi, and Orcesi report financial
support was provided by National Institutes of Health. Vanderver, Adang, and
Gavazzi report relationships with Biogen, Eli Lilly, and Boehringer Ingelheim
that include funding grants. Del Boca, Politano, Galli, Fazzi, Tonduti, and
Orcesi report a relationship with Transposon Therapeutics, Inc that includes
funding grants. The remaining authors declare that there are no conflicts of
interests regarding the publication of this article.
