---
reference_id: "PMID:31264434"
title: Evolving Role of Genomics in Genitourinary Neoplasms.
authors:
- Devitt ME
- Dreicer R
journal: Acta Med Acad
year: '2019'
doi: 10.5644/ama2006-124.243
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evolving Role of Genomics in Genitourinary Neoplasms.
**Authors:** Devitt ME, Dreicer R
**Journal:** Acta Med Acad (2019)
**DOI:** [10.5644/ama2006-124.243](https://doi.org/10.5644/ama2006-124.243)

## Content

1. Acta Med Acad. 2019 Apr;48(1):68-77. doi: 10.5644/ama2006-124.243.

Evolving Role of Genomics in Genitourinary Neoplasms.

Devitt ME(1), Dreicer R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of 
Virginia School of Medicine. michaeldevitt@virginia.edu.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of 
Virginia School of Medicine.

The aim of this article is to review the current role of genomic testing in the 
risk, prognosis, and treatment of genitourinary malignancies. The authors 
selected guidelines, publications, and abstracts relevant to the current and 
emerging role of genomics in genitourinary cancers. The risk of developing 
genitourinary cancer can be stratified based on genomic data. Prostate cancer 
has the strongest degree of heritability, with BRCA1/2 and HOXB13 mutations 
playing a role in familial disease. Genomic data is on the verge of informing 
treatment decisions across genitourinary cancers. mCRPC has diverse genomic 
alterations that represent potential therapeutic targets, including alterations 
in the AR pathway, DNA damage and repair pathways, cell cycle pathways, PI3K 
pathway, and Wnt signaling. Genomic alterations in clear cell renal cell 
carcinoma can inform prognosis and mutations in mTOR pathways predict response 
to mTOR inhibitors. Urothelial carcinoma can be classified into different 
subtypes based on gene expression profiling, which provides prognostic 
information and predicts response to chemotherapy and immunotherapy. Specific 
mutations have been identified that predict response to therapy including ERCC2 
mutations and cisplatin, DNA damage and repair mutations and checkpoint 
inhibitors, and FGFR3 mutations and FGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as 
erdafitinib. CONCLUSION: Genitourinary malignancies have not felt the impact of 
genomic data as greatly as other cancer types. The majority of benefit lies in 
identifying patients at high risk of genitourinary cancer. Fortunately, 
breakthroughs are on the horizon that will result in a greater incorporation of 
genomic information into treatment decisions for patients with genitourinary 
cancer.

Copyright © 2019 by Academy of Sciences and Arts of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

DOI: 10.5644/ama2006-124.243
PMID: 31264434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]