---
reference_id: "PMID:39649700"
title: "Visualization of argininosuccinate synthetase by in silico analysis: novel insights into citrullinemia type I disorders."
authors:
- Gu X
- Mo W
- Zhuang G
- Shi C
- Wei T
- Zhang J
- Tu C
- Cai Y
- Liao B
- Hao H
journal: Front Mol Biosci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2024.1482773
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Visualization of argininosuccinate synthetase by in silico analysis: novel insights into citrullinemia type I disorders.
**Authors:** Gu X, Mo W, Zhuang G, Shi C, Wei T, Zhang J, Tu C, Cai Y, Liao B, Hao H
**Journal:** Front Mol Biosci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmolb.2024.1482773](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmolb.2024.1482773)

## Content

1. Front Mol Biosci. 2024 Nov 22;11:1482773. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2024.1482773. 
eCollection 2024.

Visualization of argininosuccinate synthetase by in silico analysis: novel 
insights into citrullinemia type I disorders.

Gu X(#)(1)(2), Mo W(#)(3), Zhuang G(#)(4), Shi C(2)(5), Wei T(6), Zhang J(6), Tu 
C(3), Cai Y(1)(2), Liao B(3), Hao H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neonatology, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun-Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Biomedical Innovation Center, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Neonatology, Foshan Fosun Chancheng Hospital, Foshan, China.
(4)Department of Neonatology, The Maternal and Child Health Care Hospital of 
Huadu, Guangzhou, China.
(5)Inborn Errors of Metabolism Laboratory, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital, 
Sun-Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(6)Guangdong Shaohe Biotechnology Co., LTD., Guangzhou, China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Citrullinemia type I disorders (CTLN1) is a genetic metabolic 
disease caused by argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS1) gene mutation. To date, 
the human genome mutation database has documented over 100 variants of the ASS1 
gene. This study reported a novel deletion-insertion variant of ASS1 gene and 
employed various prediction tools to determine its pathogenicity.
METHODS: We reported a case of early-onset CTLN1. Whole exome sequencing was 
conducted to identify genetic mutations. We employed various structure 
prediction tools to generate accurate 3D models and utilized computational 
biology tools to elucidate the disparities between the wild-type and mutant 
proteins.
RESULTS: The patient was characterized by severe clinical manifestations, 
including poor responsiveness, lethargy, convulsions, and cardiac arrest. 
Notably, the patient exhibited significantly elevated blood ammonia levels (655 
μmol/L; normal reference: 10-30 μmol/L) and increased citrulline concentrations 
(936 μmol/L; normal reference: 5-25 μmol/L). Whole exome sequencing revealed a 
in-frame deletion-insertion mutation c.1128_1134delinsG in the ASS1 gene of 
unknown significance, which has not been previously reported. Our finding 
indicated that the C- terminal helix domain of the mutant protein structure, 
which was an important structure for ASS1 protein to form protein tetramers, was 
indeed more unstable than that of the wild-type protein structure.
CONCLUSION: Through conducting an in silico analysis on this unique in-frame 
deletion-insertion variant of ASS1, our aim was to enhance understanding 
regarding its structure-function relationship as well as unraveling the 
molecular mechanism underlying CTLN1.

Copyright © 2024 Gu, Mo, Zhuang, Shi, Wei, Zhang, Tu, Cai, Liao and Hao.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2024.1482773
PMCID: PMC11621003
PMID: 39649700

Conflict of interest statement: Authors TW and JZ were employed by Guangdong 
Shaohe Biotechnology Co., LTD. The remaining authors declare that the research 
was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that 
could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.