---
reference_id: "PMID:17853611"
title: Population dynamics.
authors:
- Juliano SA
journal: J Am Mosq Control Assoc
year: '2007'
doi: "10.2987/8756-971X(2007)23[265:PD]2.0.CO;2"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Population dynamics.
**Authors:** Juliano SA
**Journal:** J Am Mosq Control Assoc (2007)
**DOI:** [10.2987/8756-971X(2007)23[265:PD]2.0.CO;2](https://doi.org/10.2987/8756-971X(2007)23[265:PD]2.0.CO;2)

## Content

1. J Am Mosq Control Assoc. 2007;23(2 Suppl):265-75. doi: 
10.2987/8756-971X(2007)23[265:PD]2.0.CO;2.

Population dynamics.

Juliano SA(1).

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Biological Sciences, Behavior, Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics 
Group, Illinois State University, Normal, IL 61790-4120, USA.

This chapter reviews aspects of population dynamics that may be conceptually 
important for biological control of mosquitoes. Density dependent population 
regulation among immature stages has important implications for biological 
control of mosquito populations, primarily because it can lead to compensatory 
or overcompensatory mortality due to additions of a biological control agent. 
This can result in control efforts leading to no change in the target 
population, or actual increases in the target population, respectively. Density 
dependent effects, and compensatory or overcompensatory mortality, appear to be 
most common in mosquitoes from container or highly ephemeral habitats. In 
permanent ground water habitats generalist predators appear to limit mosquito 
populations and so render mortality additive. Thus, biological control in 
permanent ground water habitats seems to have the highest likelihood of 
producing a satisfactory result. A central premise of classical biological 
control is that pest populations are reduced by enemies to stable equilibrium 
levels that are both below the pre-control equilibrium level, and well below the 
level producing detrimental effects. This premise results in predictions that 
successful biological control is likely to involve specialist enemies (usually 
parasitoids), with short generation times relative to the victim, high rates of 
successful search, rapid rates of increase, and needing only a few victims to 
complete their life cycle. These predictions largely fail for mosquito systems, 
in which successful biological control seems to be associated with generalist 
enemies that can kill a large portion of the target population, often causing 
local extinction, and can persist in the absence of the target organism. 
Biological control of mosquitoes appears to be inherently unstable, thus 
contrasting sharply with classical biological control. This review suggests a 
need for better data on density dependent regulation of mosquito populations.

DOI: 10.2987/8756-971X(2007)23[265:PD]2.0.CO;2
PMCID: PMC2442569
PMID: 17853611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]