---
reference_id: "PMID:40209138"
title: Comparative Genomic Characterization of Small Cell Carcinoma of the Bladder Compared With Urothelial Carcinoma and Small Cell Lung Carcinoma.
authors:
- Jaime-Casas S
- Chawla NS
- Salgia NJ
- Mercier B
- Govindarajan A
- Li X
- Castro DV
- Ebrahimi H
- Barragan-Carrillo R
- Zang PD
- LeVee A
- Zugman M
- Dizman N
- Hsu J
- Meza L
- Zengin Z
- Chehrazi-Raffle A
- Dorff T
- Pal SK
- Tripathi A
journal: JCO Precis Oncol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1200/PO-24-00947
keywords:
- Humans
- "Small Cell Lung Carcinoma/genetics, pathology"
- "Urinary Bladder Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Female
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Aged
- Middle Aged
- "Carcinoma, Small Cell/genetics, pathology"
- Genomics
- "Carcinoma, Transitional Cell/genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- "Aged, 80 and over"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparative Genomic Characterization of Small Cell Carcinoma of the Bladder Compared With Urothelial Carcinoma and Small Cell Lung Carcinoma.
**Authors:** Jaime-Casas S, Chawla NS, Salgia NJ, Mercier B, Govindarajan A, Li X, Castro DV, Ebrahimi H, Barragan-Carrillo R, Zang PD, LeVee A, Zugman M, Dizman N, Hsu J, Meza L, Zengin Z, Chehrazi-Raffle A, Dorff T, Pal SK, Tripathi A
**Journal:** JCO Precis Oncol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1200/PO-24-00947](https://doi.org/10.1200/PO-24-00947)

## Content

1. JCO Precis Oncol. 2025 Apr;9:e2400947. doi: 10.1200/PO-24-00947. Epub 2025 Apr
 10.

Comparative Genomic Characterization of Small Cell Carcinoma of the Bladder 
Compared With Urothelial Carcinoma and Small Cell Lung Carcinoma.

Jaime-Casas S(1), Chawla NS(1), Salgia NJ(2), Mercier B(1), Govindarajan A(3), 
Li X(1), Castro DV(1), Ebrahimi H(1), Barragan-Carrillo R(1), Zang PD(1), LeVee 
A(1), Zugman M(1), Dizman N(4), Hsu J(1), Meza L(5), Zengin Z(5), 
Chehrazi-Raffle A(1), Dorff T(1), Pal SK(1), Tripathi A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology & Experimental Therapeutics, City of Hope 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Duarte, CA.
(2)Department of Immunology, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center, Buffalo, 
NY.
(3)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York 
City, NY.
(4)M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT.

PURPOSE: Small cell bladder cancer (SCBC) is a rare histologic variant of 
bladder cancer with an aggressive disease course and poor outcomes. Given its 
uncommon nature, there is a paucity of high-quality data characterizing genomic 
drivers of this disease, and most patients are treated with approaches mirroring 
small cell lung cancer (SCLC). Leveraging the Tempus Lens deidentified 
clinically annotated genomic data set, we sought to evaluate the mutational 
landscape of SCBC relative to urothelial carcinoma (UC) and SCLC.
METHODS: Somatic pathogenic genomic alterations in patients with SCBC, UC, and 
SCLC of any stage who underwent blood- or tissue-based genomic profiling through 
the Tempus assay were cataloged. Baseline clinical and demographic features were 
compared across histologic groups. Alterations were collated and summarized 
using descriptive statistics. Pairwise comparisons were performed to assess 
differences in mutation frequency across pathologic cohorts.
RESULTS: In total, 149 SCBC, 4,350 UC, and 1,697 SCLC patients were included in 
the study. The most common genomic alterations in SCBC were in TP53 (87%), TERT 
(75%), and RB1 (70%). Among SCBC patients with TP53 mutations, RB1 comutations 
were observed in 77% of patients. Compared with UC, SCBC patients were 
significantly enriched for TP53, RB1, KMT2D, and KDM6A mutations. Compared with 
SCLC, SCBC patients were enriched for TERT, ARID1A, and CREBBP mutations, among 
others (P < .05). Multiple clinically targetable mutations were observed in 
SCBC, including PIK3CA (19%), ERBB2/3 (13%), and ALK (10%). Limitations of this 
study include its retrospective nature.
CONCLUSION: This study represents one of the most extensive efforts to 
characterize SCBC to date, providing a novel understanding of the genomic 
alterations underlying the disease and revealing actionable mutations that could 
serve as potential targets for improved clinical outcomes.

DOI: 10.1200/PO-24-00947
PMID: 40209138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]