---
reference_id: "PMID:35322292"
title: "Photophobia in headache disorders: characteristics and potential mechanisms."
authors:
- Wang Y
- Wang S
- Qiu T
- Xiao Z
journal: J Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-022-11080-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Photophobia in headache disorders: characteristics and potential mechanisms.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Wang S, Qiu T, Xiao Z
**Journal:** J Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-022-11080-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-022-11080-4)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2022 Aug;269(8):4055-4067. doi: 10.1007/s00415-022-11080-4. Epub
2022  Mar 23.

Photophobia in headache disorders: characteristics and potential mechanisms.

Wang Y(1), Wang S(2), Qiu T(1), Xiao Z(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430060, 
Hubei, China.
(2)Department of Emergency, Rizhao People's Hospital, Rizhao, 276800, Shandong, 
China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430060, 
Hubei, China. zmxiao@whu.edu.cn.

Photophobia is present in multiple types of headache disorders. The coexistence 
of photophobia and headache suggested the potential reciprocal interactions 
between visual and pain pathways. In this review, we summarized the photophobic 
characteristics in different types of headache disorders in the context of the 
three diagnostic categories of headache disorders: (1) primary headaches: 
migraine, tension-type headache, and trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias; (2) 
secondary headaches: headaches attributed to traumatic brain injury, meningitis, 
non-traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage and disorder of the eyes; (3) painful 
cranial neuropathies: trigeminal neuralgia and painful optic neuritis. We then 
discussed potential mechanisms for the coexistence of photophobia and headache. 
In conclusion, the characteristics of photophobia are different among these 
headache disorders. The coexistence of photophobia and headache is associated 
with the interactions between visual and pain pathway at retina, midbrain, 
thalamus, hypothalamus and visual cortex. The communication between these 
pathways may depend on calcitonin gene-related peptide and pituitary 
cyclase-activating polypeptide transmission. Moreover, cortical spreading 
depression, an upstream trigger of headache, also plays an important role in 
photophobia by increased nociceptive input to the thalamus.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-022-11080-4
PMID: 35322292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]