---
reference_id: "PMID:17215403"
title: Altered axonal mitochondrial transport in the pathogenesis of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease from mitofusin 2 mutations.
authors:
- Baloh RH
- Schmidt RE
- Pestronk A
- Milbrandt J
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4798-06.2007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Altered axonal mitochondrial transport in the pathogenesis of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease from mitofusin 2 mutations.
**Authors:** Baloh RH, Schmidt RE, Pestronk A, Milbrandt J
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4798-06.2007](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4798-06.2007)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2007 Jan 10;27(2):422-30. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4798-06.2007.

Altered axonal mitochondrial transport in the pathogenesis of 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease from mitofusin 2 mutations.

Baloh RH(1), Schmidt RE, Pestronk A, Milbrandt J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri 63110, USA. balohb@neuro.wustl.edu

Mutations in the mitochondrial fusion protein mitofusin 2 (MFN2) are the most 
commonly identified cause of Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 2 (CMT2), a dominantly 
inherited disease characterized by degeneration of peripheral sensory and motor 
axons. However, the mechanism by which mutations in this ubiquitously expressed 
mitochondrial fusion protein lead to neuropathy has not yet been elucidated. To 
explore how MFN2 mutations lead to degeneration of peripheral axons, we 
expressed neuropathy-associated forms of MFN2 in cultured dorsal root ganglion 
neurons, cells preferentially affected in CMT2. Disease-associated MFN2 mutant 
proteins induced abnormal clustering of small fragmented mitochondria in both 
neuronal cell bodies and proximal axons. Interestingly, transport of 
mitochondria in axons was significantly impaired in neurons expressing 
disease-mutated forms of MFN2. The diminished axonal mitochondrial transport was 
not attributable to diminished ATP levels in the neurons, and oxidative 
respiration was normal in mutant MFN2-expressing cells. Additionally, 
mitochondrial oxidative enzyme activity was normal in muscle mitochondria from a 
CMT2 patient with an MFN2 mutation, further supporting that abnormal 
mitochondrial transport in neurons is independent from an energy production 
defect. This abnormal mitochondrial trafficking provides a likely explanation 
for the selective susceptibility of the longest peripheral axons to MFN2 
mutations, in which proper localization of mitochondria is critical for axonal 
and synaptic function.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4798-06.2007
PMCID: PMC6672077
PMID: 17215403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]