---
reference_id: "PMID:11218669"
title: Histopathology of skin lesions in chronic arsenic toxicity--grading of changes and study of proliferative markers.
authors:
- Paul PC
- Chattopadhyay A
- Dutta SK
- Mazumder DN
- Santra A
journal: Indian J Pathol Microbiol
year: '2000'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Histopathology of skin lesions in chronic arsenic toxicity--grading of changes and study of proliferative markers.
**Authors:** Paul PC, Chattopadhyay A, Dutta SK, Mazumder DN, Santra A
**Journal:** Indian J Pathol Microbiol (2000)

## Content

1. Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2000 Jul;43(3):257-64.

Histopathology of skin lesions in chronic arsenic toxicity--grading of changes 
and study of proliferative markers.

Paul PC(1), Chattopadhyay A, Dutta SK, Mazumder DN, Santra A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University College of Medicine and IPGMER, Calcutta.

Chronic arsenic toxicity (CAT) manifests predominantly as cutaneous lesions in 
the form of melanosis, keratosis and neoplastic changes. We have studied skin 
biopsies from 42 patients of CAT. Histological study of H/E stained sections 
showed--hyperkeratosis in 13, parakeratosis in 13, acanthosis in 12, 
papillomatosis in 24, elongation of reteridges in 21, increased basal 
pigmentation in 27 and dysplastic changes in 8 cases. Squamous cell carcinoma 
was present in 2, basisquamous in 1 and basal cell carcinoma in 1 case. Changes 
of skin lesions after drug DMSA and DMPS therapy compared to placebo were 
studied. The result was inconclusive. Proliferative activity of skin lesions in 
CAT were studied by AgNOR stain to assess the biological behaviour of the 
lesions. AgNOR score showed--normal control 1.08, benign changes (e.g. 
Hyperkeratosis, parakeratosis, acanthosis, papillomatosis etc.) without 
dysplasia--1.35, mild to moderate dysplasia--1.735, severe dysplasia--3.0 and 
carcinoma--3.56. Thus, AgNOR score gives some idea on the biological behaviour 
of CAT lesions. It is suggested that AgNOR staining should be done regularly 
along with H&E staining for proper assessment of the cases.

PMID: 11218669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]