---
reference_id: "PMID:37626723"
title: Genetic Therapy Approaches for Ornithine Transcarbamylase Deficiency.
authors:
- Seker Yilmaz B
- Gissen P
journal: Biomedicines
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/biomedicines11082227
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic Therapy Approaches for Ornithine Transcarbamylase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Seker Yilmaz B, Gissen P
**Journal:** Biomedicines (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biomedicines11082227](https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines11082227)

## Content

1. Biomedicines. 2023 Aug 8;11(8):2227. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines11082227.

Genetic Therapy Approaches for Ornithine Transcarbamylase Deficiency.

Seker Yilmaz B(1), Gissen P(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Genomic Medicine Department, Great Ormond Street Institute of 
Child Health, University College London, London WC1N 1EH, UK.
(2)National Institute of Health Research Great Ormond Street Biomedical Research 
Centre, London WC1N 1EH, UK.
(3)Metabolic Medicine Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS 
Foundation Trust, London WC1N 3JH, UK.

Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency (OTCD) is the most common urea cycle 
disorder with high unmet needs, as current dietary and medical treatments may 
not be sufficient to prevent hyperammonemic episodes, which can cause death or 
neurological sequelae. To date, liver transplantation is the only curative 
choice but is not widely available due to donor shortage, the need for life-long 
immunosuppression and technical challenges. A field of research that has shown a 
great deal of promise recently is gene therapy, and OTCD has been an essential 
candidate for different gene therapy modalities, including AAV gene addition, 
mRNA therapy and genome editing. This review will first summarise the main steps 
towards clinical translation, highlighting the benefits and challenges of each 
gene therapy approach, then focus on current clinical trials and finally outline 
future directions for the development of gene therapy for OTCD.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines11082227
PMCID: PMC10452060
PMID: 37626723

Conflict of interest statement: P.G. is an academic co-founder of Bloomsbury 
Genetic Therapies, a UCL spinout developing a gene programme in OTC deficiency.