---
reference_id: "PMID:12406664"
title: Weight loss in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Mechanisms and implications.
authors:
- Agust AG
- Gari PG
- Sauleda J
- Busquets X
journal: Pulm Pharmacol Ther
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1006/pupt.2002.0385
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Weight loss in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Mechanisms and implications.
**Authors:** Agust AG, Gari PG, Sauleda J, Busquets X
**Journal:** Pulm Pharmacol Ther (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1006/pupt.2002.0385](https://doi.org/10.1006/pupt.2002.0385)

## Content

1. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2002;15(5):425-32. doi: 10.1006/pupt.2002.0385.

Weight loss in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Mechanisms and 
implications.

Agust AG(1), Gari PG, Sauleda J, Busquets X.

Author information:
(1)Servei de Pneumologia, Hospital Universitari Son Dureta, Palma de Mallorca, 
Spain. aagusti@hsd.es

Weight loss occurs frequently in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). Although the precise cellular mechanisms underlying weight loss 
in COPD are unclear, this is a clinically relevant phenomenon because it 
contributes to limit the exercise capacity of these patients and, therefore, it 
jeopardizes their quality of life. More importantly, it is a negative prognostic 
factor that is independent of the degree of lung function impairment present. 
Thus, weight loss in COPD constitutes a new therapeutic target. This article 
reviews the mechanisms and potential consequences of weight loss in COPD and 
highlights areas that needed future research. It is hoped that a better 
understanding of its pathogenesis may eventually contribute to the development 
of new therapeutic strategies that contribute to improve the well-being and/or 
long-term prognosis of patients suffering from this devastating disease and, 
potentially, from others characterized also by unexplained weight loss.

DOI: 10.1006/pupt.2002.0385
PMID: 12406664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]