---
reference_id: "PMID:7490345"
title: "Benign melanocytic lesions: risk markers or precursors of cutaneous melanoma?"
authors:
- Skender-Kalnenas TM
- English DR
- Heenan PJ
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1016/0190-9622(95)90294-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Benign melanocytic lesions: risk markers or precursors of cutaneous melanoma?
**Authors:** Skender-Kalnenas TM, English DR, Heenan PJ
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0190-9622(95)90294-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/0190-9622(95)90294-5)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1995 Dec;33(6):1000-7. doi: 10.1016/0190-9622(95)90294-5.

Benign melanocytic lesions: risk markers or precursors of cutaneous melanoma?

Skender-Kalnenas TM(1), English DR, Heenan PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, Nedlands, Western 
Australia.

Comment in
    J Am Acad Dermatol. 1996 Dec;35(6):1017-8. doi: 
10.1016/s0190-9622(96)90143-7.
    J Am Acad Dermatol. 1996 Dec;35(6):1018-9. doi: 
10.1016/s0190-9622(96)90145-0.

BACKGROUND: The role of benign melanocytic lesions as precursors and not only as 
risk markers for the development of cutaneous melanoma is controversial.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of the study was to assess the frequency of the 
histologic association of benign melanocytic lesions with cutaneous melanoma of 
a maximum thickness of 1.00 mm. The possibility that the spatial association of 
benign lesions with melanoma may be coincidental was also investigated.
METHODS: The study subjects representing 289 cases of cutaneous melanoma of 
maximum thickness 1.00 mm (or less) were examined histologically for the 
presence of an associated benign melanocytic lesion(s), including lentiginous 
melanocytic proliferation; junctional, compound, or intradermal nevus; 
dysplastic nevus; and congenital nevus contiguous with or adjacent to the 
melanoma. The effects of age, tumor thickness, level of invasion, histologic 
type, and anatomic site on the association of benign melanocytic lesions with 
melanoma were assessed. In the control subjects 40 basal cell carcinomas and 38 
compound nevi (not dysplastic) randomly chosen and matched for age (+/- 1 year) 
and site (head/neck, trunk, upper and lower limbs) with a melanoma case were 
examined to assess the proportion of these cases associated with benign lesions 
compared with the matched melanoma cases.
RESULTS: A nevus was associated with melanoma in 51% of cases (n = 147). Of 
these, 82 (56%) were dysplastic nevi, 61 (41%) were common acquired nevi, and 4 
(3%) were congenital nevi. Lentiginous melanocytic proliferation was present in 
the epidermis adjacent to 219 melanomas (75%) and in 44% of these cases (n = 97) 
a coexisting nevus was also present.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study lend further support to the concept of 
common acquired nevi and dysplastic nevi as precursors of cutaneous melanoma. In 
addition, lesions diagnosed clinically as simple lentigo and solar lentigo may 
be important as potential precursors of melanoma, particularly in the elderly.

DOI: 10.1016/0190-9622(95)90294-5
PMID: 7490345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]