---
reference_id: "PMID:29726628"
title: Silent sinus syndrome without opacification of ipsilateral maxillary sinus.
authors:
- Lee DS
- Murr AH
- Kersten RC
- Pletcher SD
journal: Laryngoscope
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/lary.27108
keywords:
- Adult
- "Enophthalmos/diagnostic imaging, etiology"
- "Eye Diseases/diagnostic imaging, etiology"
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Maxillary Sinus/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Middle Aged
- "Orbit/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Paranasal Sinus Diseases/complications, diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Pituitary Gland/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Syndrome
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- "Turbinates/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Silent sinus syndrome without opacification of ipsilateral maxillary sinus.
**Authors:** Lee DS, Murr AH, Kersten RC, Pletcher SD
**Journal:** Laryngoscope (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/lary.27108](https://doi.org/10.1002/lary.27108)

## Content

1. Laryngoscope. 2018 Sep;128(9):2004-2007. doi: 10.1002/lary.27108. Epub 2018
May  4.

Silent sinus syndrome without opacification of ipsilateral maxillary sinus.

Lee DS(1), Murr AH(2), Kersten RC(3), Pletcher SD(2).

Author information:
(1)University of California San Francisco School of Medicine, University of 
California San Francisco School of Medicine, San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of California 
San Francisco School of Medicine, San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology-Ocular Plastics and Reconstructive Surgery, 
University of California San Francisco School of Medicine, San Francisco, 
California, U.S.A.

Silent sinus syndrome (SSS) is a rare disease characterized by spontaneous 
enophthalmos and hypoglobus secondary to collapse of the orbital floor in 
patients with asymptomatic maxillary sinusitis. Radiographic findings include 
ipsilateral maxillary sinus opacification, lateralization of the uncinate and 
middle turbinate, and infundibular occlusion. We present a case series of three 
patients with clinical and radiographic evidence of SSS but without maxillary 
sinus opacification. Although uncommon, an aerated maxillary sinus in patients 
with unexplained enophthalmos, hypoglobus, and maxillary atelectasis should not 
exclude the diagnosis of SSS. Laryngoscope, 128:2004-2007, 2018.

© 2018 The American Laryngological, Rhinological and Otological Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.27108
PMID: 29726628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]