---
reference_id: "PMID:32880084"
title: "Brief Report: Delayed Diagnosis of Treatable Inborn Errors of Metabolism in Children with Autism and Other Neurodevelopmental Disorders."
authors:
- Márquez-Caraveo ME
- Ibarra-González I
- Rodríguez-Valentín R
- Ramírez-García MÁ
- Pérez-Barrón V
- Lazcano-Ponce E
- Vela-Amieva M
journal: J Autism Dev Disord
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s10803-020-04682-2
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Autism Spectrum Disorder/complications
- Child
- "Delayed Diagnosis/statistics & numerical data"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, epidemiology, psychology"
- Mexico/epidemiology
- Neurodevelopmental Disorders/complications
- Tandem Mass Spectrometry/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brief Report: Delayed Diagnosis of Treatable Inborn Errors of Metabolism in Children with Autism and Other Neurodevelopmental Disorders.
**Authors:** Márquez-Caraveo ME, Ibarra-González I, Rodríguez-Valentín R, Ramírez-García MÁ, Pérez-Barrón V, Lazcano-Ponce E, Vela-Amieva M
**Journal:** J Autism Dev Disord (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10803-020-04682-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-020-04682-2)

## Content

1. J Autism Dev Disord. 2021 Jun;51(6):2124-2131. doi:
10.1007/s10803-020-04682-2.

Brief Report: Delayed Diagnosis of Treatable Inborn Errors of Metabolism in
Children with Autism and Other Neurodevelopmental Disorders.

Márquez-Caraveo ME(#)(1), Ibarra-González I(#)(2), Rodríguez-Valentín R(3),
Ramírez-García MÁ(1)(4), Pérez-Barrón V(1), Lazcano-Ponce E(3), Vela-Amieva
M(5).

Author information:
(1)Hospital Psiquiátrico Infantil "Dr. Juan N. Navarro", Secretaría de Salud,
San Buenaventura 86, Col. Belisario Domínguez, CP 14080, Mexico, Mexico.
(2)Unidad de Genética de la Nutrición, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas,
UNAM- Instituto Nacional de Pediatría, Av. IMAN 1, Col. Insurgentes-Cuicuilco,
Coyoacán, CP 04530, Mexico, Mexico.
(3)Centro de Investigación en Salud Poblacional, Instituto Nacional de Salud
Pública, Universidad 655, Col. Santa María Ahuacatitlán, Cerrada los Pinos y
Caminera, CP 62100, Cuernavaca Morelos, Mexico.
(4)Departamento de Genética, Instituto Nacional de Neurología y Neurocirugía,
Secretaría de Salud, Av. Insurgentes Sur 3877, Col. La Fama, CP 14269, Mexico,
Mexico.
(5)Laboratorio de Errores Innatos del Metabolismo y Tamiz, Instituto Nacional de
Pediatría, Secretaría de Salud, Av. IMAN #1, piso 9, Col. Insurgentes-Cuicuilco,
Coyoacán, CP 04530, Mexico, Mexico. dravelaamieva@yahoo.com.
(#)Contributed equally

The objective of our study was to evaluate the frequency of treatable inborn
errors of metabolism (IEM) in a clinical sample of Mexican children and
adolescents with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD). Amino acids and
acylcarnitines in blood samples of 51 unrelated children and adolescents were
analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry to detect treatable IEM of small molecules.
One patient with isovaleric acidemia and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and
another with beta-ketothiolase deficiency and ASD/intellectual
disability/attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) were diagnosed,
indicating an IEM frequency of 3.9% (1:26 subjects). The high frequency of
treatable IEM indicates the need to perform a minimum metabolic screening as
part of the diagnostic approach for patient with NDD, particularly when newborn
screening programs are limited to a few disorders.

DOI: 10.1007/s10803-020-04682-2
PMID: 32880084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
