---
reference_id: "PMID:25770637"
title: Raynaud syndrome.
authors:
- Valdovinos ST
- Landry GJ
journal: Tech Vasc Interv Radiol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1053/j.tvir.2014.11.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Raynaud syndrome.
**Authors:** Valdovinos ST, Landry GJ
**Journal:** Tech Vasc Interv Radiol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.tvir.2014.11.004](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.tvir.2014.11.004)

## Content

1. Tech Vasc Interv Radiol. 2014 Dec;17(4):241-6. doi:
10.1053/j.tvir.2014.11.004.  Epub 2014 Nov 13.

Raynaud syndrome.

Valdovinos ST(1), Landry GJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Knight Cardiovascular Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, 
Portland, OR.
(2)Knight Cardiovascular Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, 
Portland, OR. Electronic address: landryg@ohsu.edu.

Raynaud syndrome (RS) was first described by the French physician Maurice 
Raynaud in 1862 with the characteristic tricolor change featuring pallor 
(ischemic phase), cyanosis (deoxygenation phase), and erythema (reperfusion 
phase) induced by cold or stress. Although the underlying pathophysiological 
mechanism is unclear, alterations in activity of the peripheral adrenoceptor 
have been implicated, specifically an enhanced smooth muscle contraction due to 
overexpression or hyperactivity of postsynaptic alpha 2 receptors. There are 2 
ways that RS can appear clinically; isolated, formerly referred as Raynaud 
disease or now primary RS and in association with other conditions, usually 
connective tissue disorders (eg, Sjögren syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus, 
scleroderma, and rheumatoid arthritis), frequently called Raynaud phenomenon or 
secondary RS. The estimated prevalence in the general population is 3%-5%, with 
a higher prevalence in women than in men. The diagnosis is mainly clinical, 
based on patient descriptions of skin changes. Upper extremity pulse-volume 
recording is used to rule out proximal arterial obstruction. The differentiation 
between a vasospastic vs and obstructive mechanism is made using digital 
pressures and photoplethysmography, where an obstructive mechanism has decreased 
pressures and blunted waveforms. Cold challenge testing, such as ice water 
immersion with temperature recovery, is highly sensitive but lack specificity. 
Serologic screening (antinuclear antibody and rheumatoid factor) is advocated to 
rule out associated connective tissue disorders. Most patients with RS can be 
managed conservatively, with avoidance of cold exposure or hand warming. For 
those in whom conservative management is inadequate, a number of pharmacologic 
and surgical therapies have been used. Owing to lack of complete understanding 
of the underlying pathophysiology, targeted therapy has not been possible; 
rather, therapy has been focused on the use of general vasodilation strategies. 
In this review, the diagnosis, natural history, and current medical and invasive 
therapy are summarized.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1053/j.tvir.2014.11.004
PMID: 25770637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]