---
reference_id: "PMID:15602716"
title: "Pediatric inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor: anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) expression and prognosis."
authors:
- Chun YS
- Wang L
- Nascimento AG
- Moir CR
- Rodeberg DA
journal: Pediatr Blood Cancer
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1002/pbc.20294
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Granuloma, Plasma Cell/diagnosis, mortality, surgery"
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Infant
- Male
- Prognosis
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/analysis
- Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases
- Retrospective Studies
- Survival Rate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor: anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) expression and prognosis.
**Authors:** Chun YS, Wang L, Nascimento AG, Moir CR, Rodeberg DA
**Journal:** Pediatr Blood Cancer (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pbc.20294](https://doi.org/10.1002/pbc.20294)

## Content

1. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2005 Nov;45(6):796-801. doi: 10.1002/pbc.20294.

Pediatric inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor: anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) 
expression and prognosis.

Chun YS(1), Wang L, Nascimento AG, Moir CR, Rodeberg DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: Pediatric inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor (IMT) is rare, with 
unpredictable clinical behavior. Recently, it has been associated with 
anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) expression.
METHODS: Patients under age 16, treated for IMT between 1976 and 2000 were 
reviewed. Mean follow-up was 8 years (range 1 month-22 years).
RESULTS: Eight children had IMT, with a mean age of 6 years (range, 11 months-14 
years) and female to male ratio of 3:1. Tumor location was lung (four patients), 
abdomen (two patients), lung and abdomen (one patient), and abdomen, head, and 
neck (one patient). Presenting symptoms included anemia (seven patients), fever 
(six patients), and dyspnea (four patients). Laboratory results included 
thrombocytosis (six patients), hypergammaglobulinemia (four patients), elevated 
sedimentation rate (four patients), and leukocytosis (three patients). 
Immunohistochemistry revealed ALK expression in four of eight tumors. Four 
children had complete resection and are alive. Two of these children had 
ALK-positive tumors. Four patients had incomplete resection, and two had 
recurrences treated successfully with resection and radiotherapy; the other two 
died of disease. For the incomplete resection patients, those that were 
ALK-positive lived, and those that were ALK-negative did not.
CONCLUSIONS: Eight children were treated for IMT over a 15-year period. ALK 
expression was found in half the tumors. Prognosis was improved with ALK 
expression and complete surgical resection.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/pbc.20294
PMID: 15602716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]