---
reference_id: "PMID:26507665"
title: North Carolina Macular Dystrophy Is Caused by Dysregulation of the Retinal Transcription Factor PRDM13.
authors:
- Small KW
- DeLuca AP
- Whitmore SS
- Rosenberg T
- Silva-Garcia R
- Udar N
- Puech B
- Garcia CA
- Rice TA
- Fishman GA
- Héon E
- Folk JC
- Streb LM
- Haas CM
- Wiley LA
- Scheetz TE
- Fingert JH
- Mullins RF
- Tucker BA
- Stone EM
journal: Ophthalmology
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2015.10.006
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 6/genetics"
- "Corneal Dystrophies, Hereditary/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- "Eye Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Family
- Female
- Fluorescein Angiography
- Fundus Oculi
- Genetic Linkage
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Male
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- RNA/genetics
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# North Carolina Macular Dystrophy Is Caused by Dysregulation of the Retinal Transcription Factor PRDM13.
**Authors:** Small KW, DeLuca AP, Whitmore SS, Rosenberg T, Silva-Garcia R, Udar N, Puech B, Garcia CA, Rice TA, Fishman GA, Héon E, Folk JC, Streb LM, Haas CM, Wiley LA, Scheetz TE, Fingert JH, Mullins RF, Tucker BA, Stone EM
**Journal:** Ophthalmology (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ophtha.2015.10.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ophtha.2015.10.006)

## Content

1. Ophthalmology. 2016 Jan;123(1):9-18. doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2015.10.006. Epub 
2015 Oct 24.

North Carolina Macular Dystrophy Is Caused by Dysregulation of the Retinal 
Transcription Factor PRDM13.

Small KW(1), DeLuca AP(2), Whitmore SS(2), Rosenberg T(3), Silva-Garcia R(1), 
Udar N(1), Puech B(4), Garcia CA(5), Rice TA(6), Fishman GA(7), Héon E(8), Folk 
JC(2), Streb LM(2), Haas CM(2), Wiley LA(2), Scheetz TE(2), Fingert JH(2), 
Mullins RF(2), Tucker BA(2), Stone EM(9).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Insight Research Foundation, Glendale, California.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Stephen A. Wynn Institute 
for Vision Research, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa.
(3)National Eye Clinic, Kennedy Center, Glostrup, Denmark, and Institute of 
Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Service d'Exploration de la vision et Neuro-ophtalmologie CHRU, Lille, 
France.
(5)University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, Texas.
(6)Byers Eye Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, 
California.
(7)The Pangere Center for Inherited Retinal Diseases, The Chicago Lighthouse for 
People Who Are Blind or Visually Impaired, Chicago, Illinois.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, Programme of Genetics and 
Genomic Medicine, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(9)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Stephen A. Wynn Institute 
for Vision Research, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa. Electronic address: 
edwin-stone@uiowa.edu.

Comment in
    Ophthalmology. 2016 Jan;123(1):2-4. doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2015.11.015.

PURPOSE: To identify specific mutations causing North Carolina macular dystrophy 
(NCMD).
DESIGN: Whole-genome sequencing coupled with reverse transcription polymerase 
chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis of gene expression in human retinal cells.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 141 members of 12 families with NCMD and 261 unrelated 
control individuals.
METHODS: Genome sequencing was performed on 8 affected individuals from 3 
families affected with chromosome 6-linked NCMD (MCDR1) and 2 individuals 
affected with chromosome 5-linked NCMD (MCDR3). Variants observed in the MCDR1 
locus with frequencies <1% in published databases were confirmed using Sanger 
sequencing. Confirmed variants absent from all published databases were sought 
in 8 additional MCDR1 families and 261 controls. The RT-PCR analysis of selected 
genes was performed in stem cell-derived human retinal cells.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Co-segregation of rare genetic variants with disease 
phenotype.
RESULTS: Five sequenced individuals with MCDR1-linked NCMD shared a haplotype of 
14 rare variants spanning 1 Mb of the disease-causing allele. One of these 
variants (V1) was absent from all published databases and all 261 controls, but 
was found in 5 additional NCMD kindreds. This variant lies in a DNase 1 
hypersensitivity site (DHS) upstream of both the PRDM13 and CCNC genes. Sanger 
sequencing of 1 kb centered on V1 was performed in the remaining 4 NCMD 
probands, and 2 additional novel single nucleotide variants (V2 in 3 families 
and V3 in 1 family) were identified in the DHS within 134 bp of the location of 
V1. A complete duplication of the PRDM13 gene was also discovered in a single 
family (V4). The RT-PCR analysis of PRDM13 expression in developing retinal 
cells revealed marked developmental regulation. Next-generation sequencing of 2 
individuals with MCDR3-linked NCMD revealed a 900-kb duplication that included 
the entire IRX1 gene (V5). The 5 mutations V1 to V5 segregated perfectly in the 
102 affected and 39 unaffected members of the 12 NCMD families.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified 5 rare mutations, each capable of arresting human 
macular development. Four of these strongly implicate the involvement of PRDM13 
in macular development, whereas the pathophysiologic mechanism of the fifth 
remains unknown but may involve the developmental dysregulation of IRX1.

Copyright © 2016 American Academy of Ophthalmology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2015.10.006
PMCID: PMC4695238
PMID: 26507665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no proprietary/financial 
interests to disclose.