---
reference_id: "PMID:17405745"
title: Anaemia and abdominal pain due to occupational lead poisoning.
authors:
- Fonte R
- Agosti A
- Scafa F
- Candura SM
journal: Haematologica
year: '2007'
doi: 10.3324/haematol.10951
keywords:
- Abdominal Pain/chemically induced
- Anemia/chemically induced
- Conservation of Natural Resources
- Humans
- "Lead/blood, urine"
- "Lead Poisoning/blood, complications, diagnosis, urine"
- Male
- Medical History Taking
- Metallurgy
- Middle Aged
- "Occupational Diseases/blood, complications, diagnosis, urine"
- Peripheral Nervous System Diseases/chemically induced
- Porphobilinogen Synthase/blood
- Porphyrins/urine
- Protoporphyrins/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anaemia and abdominal pain due to occupational lead poisoning.
**Authors:** Fonte R, Agosti A, Scafa F, Candura SM
**Journal:** Haematologica (2007)
**DOI:** [10.3324/haematol.10951](https://doi.org/10.3324/haematol.10951)

## Content

1. Haematologica. 2007 Feb;92(2):e13-4. doi: 10.3324/haematol.10951.

Anaemia and abdominal pain due to occupational lead poisoning.

Fonte R(1), Agosti A, Scafa F, Candura SM.

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine and Endocrinology Unit, Salvatore Maugeri Foundation, Work 
and Rehabilitation, IRCCS, Scientific Institute of Pavia, Italy.

We describe a 47-year-old patient with chronic anaemia with basophilic stippling 
of erythrocytes, recurrent abdominal colics, discoloration of gums, sensitive 
polyneuropathy to the four limbs, hyperuricaemia, hepatosteatosis with raised 
transaminases, and a long ignored history of lead exposure in a battery 
recycling plant. The diagnosis of poisoning was confirmed by high lead levels in 
the blood and urine, decreased erythrocyte delta-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase 
(ALA-D), raised erythrocyte zinc protoporphyrin (ZP), and elevated urinary 
excretion of porphyrins. Chelation with EDTA resulted in increased urinary lead 
excretion, gradual improvement of the clinical picture, and progressive 
normalization of lead biomarkers. The case highlights the importance of 
occupational anamnesis for the diagnosis of lead poisoning, an uncommon 
condition which may mimic a variety of internal and surgical diseases. Since 
antiquity, lead has been extensively mined, produced, and utilized in a variety 
of industrial settings, such as metallurgy, construction, production of 
plastics, ceramics, paints and pigments. Lead and its compounds are systemic 
toxicants, and a wide range of adverse health effects (including haematological, 
gastrointestinal, neuropsychiatric, cardiovascular, renal, endocrine, and 
reproductive disorders) has been observed in exposed workers. The general 
population (particularly children) may also be exposed to toxic lead levels due 
to air, soil, food and water contamination. Thanks to the improvement of 
workplace hygienic conditions, the pathological picture of occupational lead 
poisoning (plumbism, saturnism) has gradually become less serious, at least in 
the most industrialized countries, and has progressively changed into aspecific, 
subclinical manifestations. We describe here an unusual case (nowadays) of 
anaemia and recurrent abdominal pain due to lead poisoning from battery 
recycling.

DOI: 10.3324/haematol.10951
PMID: 17405745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]