---
reference_id: "PMID:36815016"
title: A novel loss-of-function mutation in NRAP is associated with left ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Zhang Z
- Xu K
- Ji L
- Zhang H
- Yin J
- Zhou M
- Wang C
- Yang S
journal: Front Cardiovasc Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2023.1097957
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel loss-of-function mutation in NRAP is associated with left ventricular non-compaction cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Zhang Z, Xu K, Ji L, Zhang H, Yin J, Zhou M, Wang C, Yang S
**Journal:** Front Cardiovasc Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcvm.2023.1097957](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2023.1097957)

## Content

1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2023 Feb 6;10:1097957. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2023.1097957. 
eCollection 2023.

A novel loss-of-function mutation in NRAP is associated with left ventricular 
non-compaction cardiomyopathy.

Zhang Z(1), Xu K(1), Ji L(1), Zhang H(1), Yin J(1), Zhou M(1), Wang C(2), Yang 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, China.
(2)Nanjing Key Laboratory of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, China.

BACKGROUND: The nebulin-related-anchoring protein (NRAP) gene encodes 
actin-associated ankyrin. Few studies reported the association of the NRAP gene 
with cardiomyopathy. Thus, the genetic role of this gene in cardiomyopathy 
remains to be investigated.
METHODS: The clinical data of the rare case of left ventricular non-compaction 
(LVNC) were collected and analyzed. Whole-exome sequencing (WES) was performed 
on related family members. Western blot was used to detect the effect of 
mutation on the NRAP protein expression. The effect of the c.259delC variant on 
myocardial development was further evaluated in a zebrafish model.
RESULTS: A novel homozygous frameshift mutation c.259delC of NRAP was found in 
the proband with LVNC. It was found that c.259delC decreased the expression of 
NRAP by Western blot. In the zebrafish model, the heart development was affected 
while knocking out the NRAP gene, which showed pericardial edema. The 
pathological manifestations were uneven hypertrophy, disordered arrangement of 
cardiomyocytes, enlarged intercellular space, and loose muscle fibers. 
RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) showed that the expression of genes related to heart 
development decreased significantly, and the NRAP gene mutation could 
participate in biological processes (BPs) such as myocardial contraction, cell 
adhesion, myosin coarse filament assembly of striated muscle, myosin complex 
composition, and muscle α-actin binding.
CONCLUSION: We identified a rare case of LVNC associated with a novel homozygous 
NRAP frameshift variant. This study further strengthened the evidence linking 
mutations in the NRAP gene with LVNC, providing a new clue for further study of 
LVNC. NRAP may be one of the pathogenic genes of cardiomyopathy.

Copyright © 2023 Zhang, Xu, Ji, Zhang, Yin, Zhou, Wang and Yang.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2023.1097957
PMCID: PMC9940605
PMID: 36815016

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.