---
reference_id: "PMID:9789865"
title: Exercise and the Marfan syndrome.
authors:
- Braverman AC
journal: Med Sci Sports Exerc
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1097/00005768-199810001-00007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exercise and the Marfan syndrome.
**Authors:** Braverman AC
**Journal:** Med Sci Sports Exerc (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00005768-199810001-00007](https://doi.org/10.1097/00005768-199810001-00007)

## Content

1. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1998 Oct;30(10 Suppl):S387-95. doi: 
10.1097/00005768-199810001-00007.

Exercise and the Marfan syndrome.

Braverman AC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO, USA. Abraverm@imgate.wustl.edu

The Marfan syndrome is a heritable disorder of connective tissue affecting 
approximately one in 5000 to one in 10,000 individuals. The manifestations of 
the Marfan syndrome primarily involve the cardiovascular, musculoskeletal, and 
ocular systems. Aortic dilatation and dissection are the major causes of 
morbidity and mortality in the Marfan syndrome. The person with Marfan syndrome 
is often tall and agile and may unknowingly participate in certain physical 
activities and sports, putting himself or herself at risk for aortic dissection 
and sudden death. With appropriate diagnosis and treatment, the person with the 
Marfan syndrome can expect to live a long life. This article will review the 
diagnosis, genetics, clinical manifestations, and medical and surgical 
management of the Marfan syndrome. Guidelines for physical activity and exercise 
for the person with Marfan syndrome will be presented.

DOI: 10.1097/00005768-199810001-00007
PMID: 9789865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]