---
reference_id: "PMID:31941795"
title: Randomized controlled trial of N-acetylcysteine therapy for RYR1-related myopathies.
authors:
- Todd JJ
- Lawal TA
- Witherspoon JW
- Chrismer IC
- Razaqyar MS
- Punjabi M
- Elliott JS
- Tounkara F
- Kuo A
- Shelton MO
- Allen C
- Cosgrove MM
- Linton M
- Michael D
- Jain MS
- Waite M
- Drinkard B
- Wakim PG
- Dowling JJ
- Bönnemann CG
- Emile-Backer M
- Meilleur KG
journal: Neurology
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000008872
keywords:
- Acetylcysteine/therapeutic use
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Dinoprost/analogs & derivatives, urine"
- Female
- Free Radical Scavengers/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Muscular Diseases/drug therapy, genetics, urine"
- Oxidative Stress/drug effects
- Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/genetics
- Treatment Outcome
- Walk Test
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Randomized controlled trial of N-acetylcysteine therapy for RYR1-related myopathies.
**Authors:** Todd JJ, Lawal TA, Witherspoon JW, Chrismer IC, Razaqyar MS, Punjabi M, Elliott JS, Tounkara F, Kuo A, Shelton MO, Allen C, Cosgrove MM, Linton M, Michael D, Jain MS, Waite M, Drinkard B, Wakim PG, Dowling JJ, Bönnemann CG, Emile-Backer M, Meilleur KG
**Journal:** Neurology (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000008872](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000008872)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2020 Mar 31;94(13):e1434-e1444. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000008872.
Epub 2020 Jan 15.

Randomized controlled trial of N-acetylcysteine therapy for RYR1-related
myopathies.

Todd JJ(1), Lawal TA(1), Witherspoon JW(1), Chrismer IC(1), Razaqyar MS(1),
Punjabi M(1), Elliott JS(1), Tounkara F(1), Kuo A(1), Shelton MO(1), Allen C(1),
Cosgrove MM(1), Linton M(1), Michael D(1), Jain MS(1), Waite M(1), Drinkard
B(1), Wakim PG(1), Dowling JJ(1), Bönnemann CG(1), Emile-Backer M(1), Meilleur
KG(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Neuromuscular Symptoms Unit, National Institute of Nursing Research
(J.J.T., T.A.L., J.W.W., I.C.C., M.S.R., M.P., J.S.E., F.T., A.K., M.O.S., C.A.,
M.M.C., M.L., M.E.-B., K.G.M.), Mark O. Hatfield Clinical Research Center,
Rehabilitation Medicine Department (M.S.J., M.W., B.D.), and Neurogenetics
Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (C.G.B.), NIH,
Bethesda, MD; Hyperion Biotechnology Inc. (D.M.), San Antonio, TX; Biostatistics
and Clinical Epidemiology Service (P.G.W.), NIH Clinical Center, Bethesda, MD;
Division of Neurology and Program for Genetics and Genome Biology (J.J.D.) and
Departments of Paediatrics and Molecular Genetics (J.J.D.), Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Canada.
(2)From the Neuromuscular Symptoms Unit, National Institute of Nursing Research
(J.J.T., T.A.L., J.W.W., I.C.C., M.S.R., M.P., J.S.E., F.T., A.K., M.O.S., C.A.,
M.M.C., M.L., M.E.-B., K.G.M.), Mark O. Hatfield Clinical Research Center,
Rehabilitation Medicine Department (M.S.J., M.W., B.D.), and Neurogenetics
Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (C.G.B.), NIH,
Bethesda, MD; Hyperion Biotechnology Inc. (D.M.), San Antonio, TX; Biostatistics
and Clinical Epidemiology Service (P.G.W.), NIH Clinical Center, Bethesda, MD;
Division of Neurology and Program for Genetics and Genome Biology (J.J.D.) and
Departments of Paediatrics and Molecular Genetics (J.J.D.), Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Canada. meilleurk@mail.nih.gov.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the efficacy of N-acetylcysteine (NAC) for decreasing
elevated oxidative stress and increasing physical endurance in individuals with
ryanodine receptor 1-related myopathies (RYR1-RM).
METHODS: In this 6-month natural history assessment (n = 37) followed by a
randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial, 33 eligible participants
were block-randomized (1:1) to receive NAC (n = 16) or placebo (n = 17), orally
for 6 months (adult dose 2,700 mg/d; pediatric dose 30 mg/kg/d). The primary
endpoint was urine 15-F2t isoprostane concentration and the clinically
meaningful co-primary endpoint was 6-minute walk test (6MWT) distance.
RESULTS: When compared to the general population, participants had elevated
baseline 15-F2t isoprostane concentrations and most had a decreased 6MWT
distance (mean ± SD 3.2 ± 1.5 vs 1.1 ± 1.7 ng/mg creatinine and 468 ± 134 vs 600
± 58 m, respectively, both p < 0.001). 15-F2t isoprostane concentration and 6MWT
distance did not change over the 6-month natural history assessment (p = 0.98
and p = 0.61, respectively). NAC treatment did not improve 15-F2t isoprostane
concentration (least squares means difference 0.1 [95% confidence interval [CI]
-1.4 to 1.6] ng/mg creatinine, p = 0.88) or 6MWT distance (least squares means
difference 24 [95% CI -5.5 to 53.4] m, p = 0.11). NAC was safe and
well-tolerated at the doses administered in this study.
CONCLUSION: In ambulatory RYR1-RM-affected individuals, we observed stable
disease course, and corroborated preclinical reports of elevated oxidative
stress and decreased physical endurance. NAC treatment did not decrease elevated
oxidative stress, as measured by 15-F2t isoprostane.
CLASSIFICATION OF EVIDENCE: This study provides Class I evidence that, for
people with RYR1-RM, treatment with oral NAC does not decrease oxidative stress
as measured by 15-F2t isoprostane.
CLINICALTRIALSGOV IDENTIFIER: NCT02362425.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000008872
PMCID: PMC7274912
PMID: 31941795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
