---
reference_id: "PMID:39745413"
title: Increasing rates of erm(B) and erm(N) in human Campylobacter coli and Campylobacter jejuni erythromycin-resistant isolates between 2018 and 2023 in France.
authors:
- Jehanne Q
- Bénéjat L
- Ducournau A
- Aptel J
- Pivard M
- Gillet L
- Jauvain M
- Lehours P
journal: Antimicrob Agents Chemother
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1128/aac.01668-24
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increasing rates of erm(B) and erm(N) in human Campylobacter coli and Campylobacter jejuni erythromycin-resistant isolates between 2018 and 2023 in France.
**Authors:** Jehanne Q, Bénéjat L, Ducournau A, Aptel J, Pivard M, Gillet L, Jauvain M, Lehours P
**Journal:** Antimicrob Agents Chemother (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1128/aac.01668-24](https://doi.org/10.1128/aac.01668-24)

## Content

1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2025 Feb 13;69(2):e0166824. doi: 
10.1128/aac.01668-24. Epub 2024 Dec 31.

Increasing rates of erm(B) and erm(N) in human Campylobacter coli and 
Campylobacter jejuni erythromycin-resistant isolates between 2018 and 2023 in 
France.

Jehanne Q(1), Bénéjat L(1), Ducournau A(1), Aptel J(1), Pivard M(1), Gillet 
L(1), Jauvain M(1)(2), Lehours P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)National Reference Centre for Campylobacters & Helicobacters, Bordeaux, 
France.
(2)University of Bordeaux, Inserm, UMR 1312, BRIC, BoRdeaux Institute of 
onCology, Bordeaux, Nouvelle-Aquitaine, France.

Macrolides are the first-line compounds used for the treatment of 
campylobacteriosis. Macrolide resistance remains low in France, with mutations 
in 23S rDNA being the main associated resistance mechanism. However, two 
erythromycin methyltransferases have also been identified: erm(B), which is 
mainly described in animal reservoirs, and erm(N), which is strictly described 
in humans. In France, between 2018 and 2023, erythromycin-resistant 
Campylobacter species strains were systematically sequenced and analyzed via an 
in-house bioinformatics pipeline, leading to the identification of the 
resistomes, MLST and cgMLST, as well as the characterization of the source of 
contamination. In this study, the genomes of 280 erythromycin-resistant strains 
were sequenced over a 6-year period. The identification of 
erythromycin-associated resistance markers revealed a predominance of 23S rDNA 
mutations, in 90% of cases, but also erm-type methyltransferases in 10% of 
cases: 75% for erm(N) and 25% for erm(B). Over this period, an important 
increase in the rate of erm-positive isolates was observed: 2% in 2018 compared 
with 13% in 2023, with 10% for erm(N) and 3% for erm(B). erm(N) has been found 
exclusively within a CRISPR-Cas9 operon, whereas erm(B) has been found within 
diverse types of resistance genomic islands. Each erm(N)- or erm(B)-positive 
isolate had at least two other resistance markers (mostly ciprofloxacin, 
tetracycline, or ampicillin) and often carried aminoglycoside-associated 
resistance genes. The majority of the erm-positive isolates were obtained from 
chicken. The increasing rates of erm-positive and multiresistant isolates make 
the monitoring of erythromycin-resistant Campylobacter strains, specifically 
within the chicken meat production, a topic of serious importance.

DOI: 10.1128/aac.01668-24
PMCID: PMC11823653
PMID: 39745413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.