---
reference_id: "PMID:8528245"
title: "Gitelman's variant of Bartter's syndrome, inherited hypokalaemic alkalosis, is caused by mutations in the thiazide-sensitive Na-Cl cotransporter."
authors:
- Simon DB
- Nelson-Williams C
- Bia MJ
- Ellison D
- Karet FE
- Molina AM
- Vaara I
- Iwata F
- Cushner HM
- Koolen M
- Gainza FJ
- Gitleman HJ
- Lifton RP
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1038/ng0196-24
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Bartter Syndrome/genetics
- Base Sequence
- Biological Transport
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- Chlorides/metabolism
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 16"
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- DNA Primers/chemistry
- Dinucleotide Repeats
- Female
- Flounder
- Genetic Linkage
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Pedigree
- Point Mutation
- "Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational"
- Rats
- "Receptors, Drug/genetics"
- Sequence Alignment
- Sodium/metabolism
- Sodium Chloride Symporters
- "Solute Carrier Family 12, Member 3"
- Symporters
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gitelman's variant of Bartter's syndrome, inherited hypokalaemic alkalosis, is caused by mutations in the thiazide-sensitive Na-Cl cotransporter.
**Authors:** Simon DB, Nelson-Williams C, Bia MJ, Ellison D, Karet FE, Molina AM, Vaara I, Iwata F, Cushner HM, Koolen M, Gainza FJ, Gitleman HJ, Lifton RP
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0196-24](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0196-24)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1996 Jan;12(1):24-30. doi: 10.1038/ng0196-24.

Gitelman's variant of Bartter's syndrome, inherited hypokalaemic alkalosis, is
caused by mutations in the thiazide-sensitive Na-Cl cotransporter.

Simon DB(1), Nelson-Williams C, Bia MJ, Ellison D, Karet FE, Molina AM, Vaara I,
Iwata F, Cushner HM, Koolen M, Gainza FJ, Gitleman HJ, Lifton RP.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Genetics, Boyer Center for
Molecular Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.

Maintenance of fluid and electrolyte homeostasis is critical for normal
neuromuscular function. Bartter's syndrome is an autosomal recessive disease
characterized by diverse abnormalities in electrolyte homeostasis including
hypokalaemic metabolic alkalosis; Gitelman's syndrome represents the predominant
subset of Bartter's patients having hypomagnesemia and hypocalciuria. We now
demonstrate complete linkage of Gitelman's syndrome to the locus encoding the
renal thiazide-sensitive Na-Cl cotransporter, and identify a wide variety of
non-conservative mutations, consistent with loss of function alleles, in
affected subjects. These findings demonstrate the molecular basis of Gitelman's
syndrome. We speculate that these mutant alleles lead to reduced sodium chloride
reabsorption in the more common heterozygotes, potentially protecting against
development of hypertension.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0196-24
PMID: 8528245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
