---
reference_id: "PMID:24511403"
title: "Cernunnos/XLF Deficiency: A Syndromic Primary Immunodeficiency."
authors:
- Cipe FE
- Aydogmus C
- Babayigit Hocaoglu A
- Kilic M
- Kaya GD
- Yilmaz Gulec E
journal: Case Rep Pediatr
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1155/2014/614238
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cernunnos/XLF Deficiency: A Syndromic Primary Immunodeficiency.
**Authors:** Cipe FE, Aydogmus C, Babayigit Hocaoglu A, Kilic M, Kaya GD, Yilmaz Gulec E
**Journal:** Case Rep Pediatr (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2014/614238](https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/614238)

## Content

1. Case Rep Pediatr. 2014;2014:614238. doi: 10.1155/2014/614238. Epub 2014 Jan 8.

Cernunnos/XLF Deficiency: A Syndromic Primary Immunodeficiency.

Cipe FE(1), Aydogmus C(1), Babayigit Hocaoglu A(1), Kilic M(1), Kaya GD(1), 
Yilmaz Gulec E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Allergy-Immunology, Kanuni Sultan Suleyman Research 
and Training Hospital, 34303 Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Genetics, Kanuni Sultan Suleyman Research and Training 
Hospital, 34303 Istanbul, Turkey.

Artemis, DNA ligase IV, DNA protein kinase catalytic subunit, and Cernunnos/XLF 
genes in nonhomologous end joining pathways of DNA repair mechanisms have been 
identified as responsible for radiosensitive SCID. Here, we present a 3-year-old 
girl patient with severe growth retardation, bird-like face, recurrent perianal 
abscess, pancytopenia, and polydactyly. Firstly, she was thought as Fanconi 
anemia and spontaneous DNA breaks were seen on chromosomal analysis. After that 
DEB test was found to be normal and Fanconi anemia was excluded. Because of that 
she had low IgG and IgA levels, normal IgM level, and absence of B cells in 
peripheral blood; she was considered as primary immunodeficiency, Nijmegen 
breakage syndrome. A mutation in NBS1 gene was not found; then Cernunnos/XLF 
deficiency was investigated due to clinical similarities with previously 
reported cases. Homozygous mutation in Cernunnos/XLF gene (NHEJ1) was 
identified. She is now on regular IVIG prophylaxis and has no new infection. 
Fully matched donor screening is in progress for bone marrow transplantation 
which is curative treatment of the disease. In conclusion, the patients with 
microcephaly, bird-like face, and severe growth retardation should be evaluated 
for hypogammaglobulinemia and primary immunodeficiency diseases.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/614238
PMCID: PMC3910469
PMID: 24511403