---
reference_id: "PMID:33369218"
title: "Functional characterization of ATF1, GREM2 AND WNT10B variants associated with tooth agenesis."
authors:
- Williams M
- Zeng Y
- Chiquet B
- Jacob H
- Kurtis Kasper F
- Harrington DA
- English J
- Akyalcin S
- Letra A
journal: Orthod Craniofac Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/ocr.12462
keywords:
- Anodontia/genetics
- Cytokines
- Humans
- Mutation/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins
- Tooth
- Wnt Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Functional characterization of ATF1, GREM2 AND WNT10B variants associated with tooth agenesis.
**Authors:** Williams M, Zeng Y, Chiquet B, Jacob H, Kurtis Kasper F, Harrington DA, English J, Akyalcin S, Letra A
**Journal:** Orthod Craniofac Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ocr.12462](https://doi.org/10.1111/ocr.12462)

## Content

1. Orthod Craniofac Res. 2021 Nov;24(4):486-493. doi: 10.1111/ocr.12462. Epub
2021  Jan 7.

Functional characterization of ATF1, GREM2 AND WNT10B variants associated with 
tooth agenesis.

Williams M(1), Zeng Y(2)(3), Chiquet B(3)(4)(5), Jacob H(1), Kurtis Kasper 
F(1)(3), Harrington DA(2)(3), English J(1), Akyalcin S(6), Letra A(2)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthodontics, University of Texas Health Science Center School 
of Dentistry, Houston, TX, USA.
(2)Department of Diagnostic and Biomedical Sciences, University of Texas Health 
Science Center School of Dentistry, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Center for Craniofacial Research, University of Texas Health Science Center 
School of Dentistry, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, University of Texas Health Science Center 
School of Dentistry, Houston, TX, USA.
(5)Pediatric Research Center, University of Texas Health Science Center McGovern 
Medical School, Houston, TX, USA.
(6)Department of Orthodontics, Tufts University School of Dental Medicine, 
Boston, MA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the functional effects of ATF1, WNT10B and GREM2 gene 
variants identified in individuals with tooth agenesis (TA).
SETTINGS AND SAMPLE POPULATION: Stem cells from human exfoliated deciduous teeth 
(SHED) were used as an in vitro model system to test the effect of TA-associated 
variants.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Plasmid constructs containing reference and mutant 
alleles for ATF1 rs11169552, WNT10B rs833843 and GREM2 rs1414655 variants were 
transfected into SHED for functional characterization of variants. 
Allele-specific changes in gene transcription activity, protein expression, cell 
migration and proliferation, and expression of additional tooth development 
genes (MSX1, PAX9 and AXIN2) were evaluated. Data analyses were performed using 
Student's t-test. P-values ≤ .05 were considered statistically significant.
RESULTS: Mutant variants resulted in significantly decreased transcriptional 
activity of respective genes (P < 0.05), although no changes in protein 
localization were noted. Expression of MSX1 was significantly decreased in ATF1- 
and GREM2-mutant cells, whereas PAX9 or AXIN2 mRNA expression was not 
significantly altered. Mutant WNT10B had no significant effect on the expression 
of additional TA genes. ATF1- and GREM2-mutant cells presented increased cell 
migration. Cell proliferation was also affected with all three mutant alleles.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that ATF1, WNT10B and GREM2 mutant alleles 
have modulatory effects on gene/protein function that may contribute to TA.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ocr.12462
PMID: 33369218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]