---
reference_id: "PMID:11287367"
title: "Semantic dementia: relevance to connectionist models of long-term memory."
authors:
- Murre JM
- Graham KS
- Hodges JR
journal: Brain
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1093/brain/124.4.647
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Semantic dementia: relevance to connectionist models of long-term memory.
**Authors:** Murre JM, Graham KS, Hodges JR
**Journal:** Brain (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/124.4.647](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/124.4.647)

## Content

1. Brain. 2001 Apr;124(Pt 4):647-75. doi: 10.1093/brain/124.4.647.

Semantic dementia: relevance to connectionist models of long-term memory.

Murre JM(1), Graham KS, Hodges JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Semantic dementia is a recently documented syndrome associated with 
non-Alzheimer degenerative pathology of the polar and inferolateral temporal 
neocortex, with relative sparing (at least in the early stages) of the 
hippocampal complex. Patients typically show a progressive deterioration in 
their semantic knowledge about people, objects, facts and the meanings of words. 
Yet, at least clinically, they seem to possess relatively preserved day-to-day 
(episodic) memory. Neuropsychological investigations of semantic dementia 
provide, therefore, a unique opportunity to investigate the organization of 
human long-term memory and, more specifically, to determine the relationship 
between semantic memory and other cognitive systems, such as episodic memory. In 
this review, we summarize recent empirical findings from patients with semantic 
dementia and discuss whether the neuropsychological phenomena of the disease are 
consistent with current cognitive and computational models of human long-term 
memory and amnesia. Six specific issues are addressed: (i) the relative 
preservation of category-level (superordinate) compared with fine-graded 
(subordinate) semantic knowledge as the disease progresses; (ii) the better 
recall of recent autobiographical and semantic memories compared with those in 
the distant past; (iii) the preservation of new learning, as measured by 
recognition memory, early in the disease; (iv) the interaction between 
autobiographical experience and semantic knowledge in the current, but not the 
distant, time-period; (v) increased long-term forgetting of newly learned 
material; and (vi) impaired implicit memory. It is concluded that recent 
findings from semantic dementia offer strong support for the view that memory 
consolidation in humans is dependent upon interactions between the hippocampal 
complex and neocortex. Furthermore, these investigations have provided 
computational modellers of human memory with a novel set of neuropsychological 
data to be simulated and tested.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/124.4.647
PMID: 11287367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]