---
reference_id: "PMID:19802582"
title: "Vector dynamics and transmission of dengue virus: implications for dengue surveillance and prevention strategies: vector dynamics and dengue prevention."
authors:
- Scott TW
- Morrison AC
journal: Curr Top Microbiol Immunol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-02215-9_9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vector dynamics and transmission of dengue virus: implications for dengue surveillance and prevention strategies: vector dynamics and dengue prevention.
**Authors:** Scott TW, Morrison AC
**Journal:** Curr Top Microbiol Immunol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-642-02215-9_9](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-02215-9_9)

## Content

1. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2010;338:115-28. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-02215-9_9.

Vector dynamics and transmission of dengue virus: implications for dengue 
surveillance and prevention strategies: vector dynamics and dengue prevention.

Scott TW(1), Morrison AC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Entomology, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA. 
twscott@ucdavis.edu

Accounting for variation in mosquito vector populations will improve dengue 
surveillance and prevention. Because Aedes aegypti, the principle dengue virus 
(DENV) vector, transmit the virus with remarkable efficiency, entomological 
thresholds are especially low. Assessing risk of human infection based on 
immature mosquito indices has proven difficult. Greater emphasis should be 
placed on relative abundance of adult vectors in relation to human 
serotype-specific herd immunity, introduction of unique viruses, mosquito-human 
contact and weather. The most appropriate spatial scale for assessing 
entomological risk is the individual household. The scale for measuring DENV 
transmission risk has yet to be determined but is clearly larger than the 
household and likely to exceed several city blocks. Because households are 
expected to be a primary site for human DENV infection, intradomicile vector 
control strategies should be a priority, especially when the force of 
transmission is high. The most effective intervention strategy will combine 
vector control with vaccine delivery for rapid and sustained disease prevention.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-02215-9_9
PMID: 19802582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]