---
reference_id: "PMID:17921179"
title: Recessive Twinkle mutations in early onset encephalopathy with mtDNA depletion.
authors:
- Hakonen AH
- Isohanni P
- Paetau A
- Herva R
- Suomalainen A
- Lönnqvist T
journal: Brain
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awm242
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- "Brain/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- "Brain Diseases/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Caenorhabditis elegans
- DNA Helicases/genetics
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/analysis, genetics"
- Drosophila melanogaster/genetics
- Fatal Outcome
- Gene Deletion
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- "Liver/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- "Liver Diseases/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Mitochondrial Proteins
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Muscles/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- Mutation
- Sequence Alignment
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recessive Twinkle mutations in early onset encephalopathy with mtDNA depletion.
**Authors:** Hakonen AH, Isohanni P, Paetau A, Herva R, Suomalainen A, Lönnqvist T
**Journal:** Brain (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awm242](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awm242)

## Content

1. Brain. 2007 Nov;130(Pt 11):3032-40. doi: 10.1093/brain/awm242. Epub 2007 Oct
5.

Recessive Twinkle mutations in early onset encephalopathy with mtDNA depletion.

Hakonen AH(1), Isohanni P, Paetau A, Herva R, Suomalainen A, Lönnqvist T.

Author information:
(1)Research Program of Molecular Neurology, Biomedicum-Helsinki, University of 
Helsinki, Finland.

Twinkle is a mitochondrial replicative helicase, the mutations of which have 
been associated with autosomal dominant progressive external ophthalmoplegia 
(adPEO), and recessively inherited infantile onset spinocerebellar ataxia 
(IOSCA). We report here a new phenotype in two siblings with compound 
heterozygous Twinkle mutations (A318T and Y508C), characterized by severe early 
onset encephalopathy and signs of liver involvement. The clinical manifestations 
included hypotonia, athetosis, sensory neuropathy, ataxia, hearing deficit, 
ophthalmoplegia, intractable epilepsy and elevation of serum transaminases. The 
liver showed mtDNA depletion, whereas the muscle mtDNA was only slightly 
affected. Alpers-Huttenlocher syndrome has previously been associated with 
mutations of polymerase gamma, a replicative polymerase of mtDNA. We show here 
that recessive mutations of the close functional partner of the polymerase, the 
Twinkle helicase, can also manifest as early encephalopathy with liver 
involvement, a phenotype reminiscent of Alpers syndrome, and are a new genetic 
cause underlying tissue-specific mtDNA depletion.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awm242
PMID: 17921179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]