---
reference_id: "PMID:30205418"
title: IgG4-Related Sclerosing Cholangitis and Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis.
authors:
- Tanaka A
journal: Gut Liver
year: '2019'
doi: 10.5009/gnl18085
keywords:
- "Cholangitis, Sclerosing/diagnosis, immunology"
- "Cholestasis/diagnosis, etiology"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulin G4-Related Disease/complications, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IgG4-Related Sclerosing Cholangitis and Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis.
**Authors:** Tanaka A
**Journal:** Gut Liver (2019)
**DOI:** [10.5009/gnl18085](https://doi.org/10.5009/gnl18085)

## Content

1. Gut Liver. 2019 May 15;13(3):300-307. doi: 10.5009/gnl18085.

IgG4-Related Sclerosing Cholangitis and Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis.

Tanaka A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Teikyo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Sclerosing cholangitis (SC) is defined as a condition with progressive stenosis 
and destruction of the bile ducts due to diffuse inflammation and fibrosis and 
currently includes three categories: primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC), 
secondary cholangitis, and IgG4-related sclerosing cholangitis (IgG4-SC). SC 
categories share similar clinical features, such as cholestasis. Patients with 
SC present with cholestatic symptoms, including jaundice and pruritus, and blood 
tests reveal elevation of cholestatic enzymes. Cholangiography, endoscopic or 
magnetic, is inevitably required for making a diagnosis. Although the 
presentation of IgG4-SC and PSC are similar, the comorbidities, treatment 
response, and outcomes differ significantly, and therefore, it is strongly 
advisable to be familiar with these two diseases to make a correct diagnosis. 
Differentiation of cholangiocarcinoma from IgG4-SC and PSC is also extremely 
important. In this review, the clinical characteristics, comorbidities, 
treatment and outcomes of IgG4-SC and PSC will be outlined based on experience 
mainly from Japan.

DOI: 10.5009/gnl18085
PMCID: PMC6529173
PMID: 30205418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST No potential conflict of 
interest relevant to this article was reported.