---
reference_id: "PMID:32194077"
title: "Familial cortical myoclonic tremor with epilepsy: TTTCA/TTTTA repeat expansions and expanding phenotype in two Chinese families."
authors:
- Zhang Y
- Xiong W
- Lu L
- Zhou D
journal: Brain Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2020.146796
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Asian People/genetics
- Child
- China
- DNA Repeat Expansion/genetics
- "Epilepsies, Myoclonic/genetics, metabolism"
- Epilepsy/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Introns/genetics
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Tremor/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial cortical myoclonic tremor with epilepsy: TTTCA/TTTTA repeat expansions and expanding phenotype in two Chinese families.
**Authors:** Zhang Y, Xiong W, Lu L, Zhou D
**Journal:** Brain Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.brainres.2020.146796](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2020.146796)

## Content

1. Brain Res. 2020 Jun 15;1737:146796. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2020.146796. Epub 
2020 Mar 17.

Familial cortical myoclonic tremor with epilepsy: TTTCA/TTTTA repeat expansions 
and expanding phenotype in two Chinese families.

Zhang Y(1), Xiong W(1), Lu L(1), Zhou D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610041, Sichuan, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu 
610041, Sichuan, China. Electronic address: zhoudong66@yahoo.de.

Recently, expanded intronic TTTCA and TTTTA repeat in SAMD12 were identified in 
families with familial cortical myoclonic tremor with epilepsy (FCMTE). We 
conducted to this study to clarify the genetic etiology and to describe the 
clinical, neurophysiologic, and imaging features in two unrelated Chinese 
families with FCMTE. In this study, we performed the RP-PCR and long-range PCR 
analysis to examine and verifyTTTCA and TTTTA expansions in five affected 
members whose severities of cortical tremor, neuropsychology and MRI were also 
evaluated. Reliable clinical information was collected from another two affected 
members. Our results revealed that expansions of intronic TTTCA and TTTTA 
repeats in SAMD12 were both identified in all five affected subjects. All seven 
affected living patients had cortical tremor with a median age at onset of 
16.4 years (range, 10-22 years). Convulsions occurred in 5 of 7 with a median 
age at onset of 32.4 years (range, 10-42 years). Among five patients evaluated 
for cortical tremor severity and psychiatric comorbidity, two patients had 
severe cortical tremor, anxiety and depression. Abnormal brain MRI findings 
including the possible existence of demyelination, severe atrophy of the 
cerebral hemisphere and abnormal bilateral symmetrical signals in the globus 
pallidus were observed in three patients, respectively. These results further 
expanded the known genotype in two Chinese families affected with FCMTE. Border 
clinical spectrum needs to be confirmed in future studies from additional FCMTE 
families genetically diagnosed.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2020.146796
PMID: 32194077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.