---
reference_id: "PMID:38372904"
title: Imaging as an early biomarker to predict sensitivity to everolimus for progressive NF2-related vestibular schwannoma.
authors:
- Nghiemphu PL
- Vitte J
- Dombi E
- Nguyen T
- Wagle N
- Ishiyama A
- Sepahdari AR
- Cachia D
- Widemann BC
- Brackmann DE
- Doherty JK
- Kalamarides M
- Giovannini M
journal: J Neurooncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s11060-024-04596-4
keywords:
- Humans
- Biomarkers
- Everolimus
- "Neurofibromatosis 2/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy, complications"
- "Neuroma, Acoustic/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy, etiology"
- Quality of Life
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Imaging as an early biomarker to predict sensitivity to everolimus for progressive NF2-related vestibular schwannoma.
**Authors:** Nghiemphu PL, Vitte J, Dombi E, Nguyen T, Wagle N, Ishiyama A, Sepahdari AR, Cachia D, Widemann BC, Brackmann DE, Doherty JK, Kalamarides M, Giovannini M
**Journal:** J Neurooncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11060-024-04596-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11060-024-04596-4)

## Content

1. J Neurooncol. 2024 Apr;167(2):339-348. doi: 10.1007/s11060-024-04596-4. Epub 
2024 Feb 19.

Imaging as an early biomarker to predict sensitivity to everolimus for 
progressive NF2-related vestibular schwannoma.

Nghiemphu PL(1), Vitte J(2), Dombi E(3), Nguyen T(1)(4), Wagle N(5)(6), Ishiyama 
A(2), Sepahdari AR(7)(8), Cachia D(9)(10), Widemann BC(3), Brackmann DE(11), 
Doherty JK(12)(13), Kalamarides M(14), Giovannini M(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, UCLA Neuro‑Oncology Program, David Geffen School of 
Medicine and Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center (JCCC), University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine and 
Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center (JCCC), University of California, Los 
Angeles, 675 Charles E Young Dr. S, MRL 2240, Los Angeles, CA, 90095-7286, USA.
(3)Pediatric Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology, Stem 
Cell Transplant and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, 
USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, Division of Medical Oncology, Norris Cancer Center, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Translational Neurosciences, Saint John's Cancer Institute at 
Providence Saint John's Health Center, Santa Monica, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Radiology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(8)Diagnostic Neuroradiology, Scripps Clinic Medical Group, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(9)Department of Neurosurgery, Division of Neuro-oncology, Medical University of 
South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.
(10)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of 
Massachusetts, Worcester, MA, USA.
(11)Department of Otolaryngology and Neurotology, House Clinic and Research 
Institute, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(12)Center for Neural Tumor Research, House Research Institute, Los Angeles, CA, 
USA.
(13)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(14)Department of Neurosurgery, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, APHP, Sorbonne 
Université, Paris, France.
(15)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine and 
Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center (JCCC), University of California, Los 
Angeles, 675 Charles E Young Dr. S, MRL 2240, Los Angeles, CA, 90095-7286, USA. 
mgiovannini@mednet.ucla.edu.

PURPOSE: NF2-related schwannomatosis (NF2) is characterized by bilateral 
vestibular schwannomas (VS) often causing hearing and neurologic deficits, with 
currently no FDA-approved drug treatment. Pre-clinical studies highlighted the 
potential of mTORC1 inhibition in delaying schwannoma progression. We conducted 
a prospective open-label, phase II study of everolimus for progressive VS in NF2 
patients and investigated imaging as a potential biomarker predicting effects on 
growth trajectory.
METHODS: The trial enrolled 12 NF2 patients with progressive VS. Participants 
received oral everolimus daily for 52 weeks. Brain imaging was obtained 
quarterly. As primary endpoint, radiographic response (RR) was defined as ≥ 20% 
decrease in target VS volume. Secondary endpoints included other tumors RR, 
hearing outcomes, drug safety and quality of life (QOL).
RESULTS: Eight participants completed the trial and four discontinued the drug 
early due to significant volumetric VS progression. After 52 weeks of treatment, 
the median annual VS growth rate decreased from 77.2% at baseline to 29.4%. 
There was no VS RR and 3 of 8 (37.5%) participants had stable disease. Decreased 
or unchanged VS volume after 3 months of treatment was predictive of 
stabilization at 12 months. Seven of eight participants had stable hearing 
during treatment except one with a decline in word recognition score. Ten of 
twelve participants reported only minimal changes to their QOL scores.
CONCLUSIONS: Volumetric imaging at 3 months can serve as an early biomarker to 
predict long-term sensitivity to everolimus treatment. Everolimus may represent 
a safe treatment option to decrease the growth of NF2-related VS in patients who 
have stable hearing and neurological condition. TRN: NCT01345136 (April 29, 
2011).

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11060-024-04596-4
PMCID: PMC11023969
PMID: 38372904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.G., P.L.N. and M.K. report grant support from 
Novartis. All other authors reported no conflict.