---
reference_id: "PMID:29382506"
title: "Klinefelter syndrome: more than hypogonadism."
authors:
- Kanakis GA
- Nieschlag E
journal: Metabolism
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2017.09.017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Klinefelter syndrome: more than hypogonadism.
**Authors:** Kanakis GA, Nieschlag E
**Journal:** Metabolism (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.metabol.2017.09.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.metabol.2017.09.017)

## Content

1. Metabolism. 2018 Sep;86:135-144. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2017.09.017. Epub 2018
 Jan 31.

Klinefelter syndrome: more than hypogonadism.

Kanakis GA(1), Nieschlag E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Athens Naval & VA Hospital, Athens, Greece. 
Electronic address: geokan@endo.gr.
(2)University Hospital of Muenster, Center of Reproductive Medicine and 
Andrology, Domagkstraße 11, D-48149, Muenster, Germany.

Klinefelter syndrome (KS) is the most frequent chromosome disorder in males 
(1:650 newborn males), defined by 47,XXY karyotype. The classical phenotype is 
that of a tall male with relatively long legs, small, firm testes and 
gynecomastia. Azoospermia and infertility are almost inevitably present, but may 
be overcome by TESE and ICSI. Nevertheless, a broad spectrum of phenotypes has 
been described and more than 70% of the actually existing KS men may remain 
undiagnosed throughout their lifespan. Accordingly, hypogonadism is usually not 
evident until early adulthood and progresses with ageing. KS patients present a 
series of comorbidities that increase morbidity and mortality by 40%. Such 
disturbances are the impaired metabolic profile (obesity, dyslipidemia, insulin 
resistance) and a tendency to thrombosis, which all favor cardiovascular 
disease. They also present susceptibility for specific neoplasias (breast 
cancer, extragonadal germ cell tumors), autoimmune diseases as well as 
osteoporosis and bone fractures. Moreover, KS has been associated with verbal 
processing and attention deficits as well as social skill impairments, leading 
KS individuals to academic and professional achievements inferior to those of 
their peers of comparable socio-economic status. Nevertheless, the majority fall 
within the average range regarding their intellectual abilities and adaptive 
functioning. Testosterone replacement therapy (TRT) is the mainstay of treatment 
in hypogonadal KS patients; however, randomized trials are needed to determine 
optimal therapeutic regimens and follow-up schedules.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.metabol.2017.09.017
PMID: 29382506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]