---
reference_id: "PMID:31755042"
title: Molecular Mechanisms and Future Therapeutics for Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 31 (SCA31).
authors:
- Ishikawa K
- Nagai Y
journal: Neurotherapeutics
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s13311-019-00804-6
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Forecasting
- Humans
- Microsatellite Repeats/physiology
- Mutation/physiology
- "Purkinje Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, metabolism, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Mechanisms and Future Therapeutics for Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 31 (SCA31).
**Authors:** Ishikawa K, Nagai Y
**Journal:** Neurotherapeutics (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13311-019-00804-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13311-019-00804-6)

## Content

1. Neurotherapeutics. 2019 Oct;16(4):1106-1114. doi: 10.1007/s13311-019-00804-6.

Molecular Mechanisms and Future Therapeutics for Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 31
(SCA31).

Ishikawa K(1)(2), Nagai Y(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurological Science, Graduate School of Medical
and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.
pico.nuro@tmd.ac.jp.
(2)The Center for Personalized Medicine for Healthy Aging, Tokyo Medical and
Dental University, Tokyo, Japan. pico.nuro@tmd.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Neurotherapeutics, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, Osaka, Japan.
(4)Department of Degenerative Neurological Diseases, National Institute of
Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, Japan.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 31 (SCA31) is one of the autosomal-dominant
neurodegenerative disorders that shows progressive cerebellar ataxia as a
cardinal symptom. This disease is caused by a 2.5- to 3.8-kb-long complex
pentanucleotide repeat containing (TGGAA)n, (TAGAA)n, (TAAAA)n, and
(TAAAATAGAA)n in an intron of the gene called BEAN1 (brain expressed, associated
with Nedd4). By comparing various pentanucleotide repeats in this particular
locus among control Japanese and Caucasian populations, it was found that
(TGGAA)n was the only sequence segregating with SCA31, strongly suggesting the
pathogenicity of (TGGAA)n. The complex repeat also lies in an intron of another
gene, TK2 (thymidine kinase 2), which is transcribed in the opposite direction,
indicating that the complex repeat is bi-directionally transcribed as noncoding
repeats. In SCA31 human brains, (UGGAA)n, the BEAN1 transcript of SCA31 mutation
was found to form abnormal RNA structures called RNA foci in cerebellar Purkinje
cell nuclei. Subsequent RNA pulldown analysis disclosed that (UGGAA)n binds to
RNA-binding proteins TDP-43, FUS, and hnRNP A2/B1. In fact, TDP-43 was found to
co-localize with RNA foci in human SCA31 Purkinje cells. To dissect the
pathogenesis of (UGGAA)n in SCA31, we generated transgenic fly models of SCA31
by overexpressing SCA31 complex pentanucleotide repeats in Drosophila. We found
that the toxicity of (UGGAA)n is length- and expression level-dependent, and it
was dampened by co-expressing TDP-43, FUS, and hnRNP A2/B1. Further
investigation revealed that TDP-43 ameliorates (UGGAA)n toxicity by directly
fixing the abnormal structure of (UGGAA)n. This led us to propose that TDP-43
acts as an RNA chaperone against toxic (UGGAA)n. Further research on the role of
RNA-binding proteins as RNA chaperones may provide a novel therapeutic strategy
for SCA31.

DOI: 10.1007/s13311-019-00804-6
PMCID: PMC6985187
PMID: 31755042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
