---
reference_id: "PMID:32117019"
title: Beneficial Effects of Ketogenic Diet on Phosphofructokinase Deficiency (Glycogen Storage Disease Type VII).
authors:
- Similä ME
- Auranen M
- Piirilä PL
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2020.00057
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Beneficial Effects of Ketogenic Diet on Phosphofructokinase Deficiency (Glycogen Storage Disease Type VII).
**Authors:** Similä ME, Auranen M, Piirilä PL
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2020.00057](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2020.00057)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2020 Feb 4;11:57. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2020.00057. eCollection
2020.

Beneficial Effects of Ketogenic Diet on Phosphofructokinase Deficiency (Glycogen
Storage Disease Type VII).

Similä ME(1), Auranen M(2), Piirilä PL(3).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Nutrition Unit, Internal Medicine and Rehabilitation, Helsinki
University Hospital, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Clinical Neurosciences, Neurology, Helsinki University Hospital, University
of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Unit of Clinical Physiology, HUS Medical Imaging Center, Helsinki University
Hospital, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Background: A deficiency of muscle phosphofructokinase (PFKM) causes a rare
metabolic muscle disease, the Tarui disease (Glycogen storage disease type VII,
GSD VII) characterized by exercise intolerance with myalgia due to an inability
to use glucose as an energy resource. No medical treatment for GSD VII currently
exists. The aim of this study was to determine whether a dietary intervention
with excessive fat intake would benefit GSD VII. Patient and Methods: A
ketogenic diet (KD) intervention implemented as a modified Atkins diet was
established for one patient with PFKM deficiency, with a low late lactate
response and very high ammonia levels associated with exercise. We recorded the
KD intervention for a total of 5 years with clinical and physiotherapeutic
evaluations and regular laboratory parameters. Cardiopulmonary exercise testing,
including breath gas analysis and venous lactate and ammonia measurements, was
performed before KD and at 3, 8 months and 5 years after initiation of KD.
Results: During the 5 years on KD, the patient's muscle symptoms had alleviated
and exercise tolerance had improved. In exercise testing, venous ammonia had
normalized, the lactate profile remained similar, but oxygen uptake and
mechanical efficiency had increased and parameters showing ventilation had
improved. Conclusions: This study is the first to show a long-term effect of KD
in GSD VII with an alleviation of muscle symptoms, beneficial effects on
breathing, and improvement in exercise performance and oxygen uptake. Based on
these findings, KD can be recommended under medical and nutritional supervision
for selected patients with GSD VII, although further research of this rare
disease is warranted.

Copyright © 2020 Similä, Auranen and Piirilä.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2020.00057
PMCID: PMC7010930
PMID: 32117019
