---
reference_id: "PMID:33252133"
title: Cholera Presenting With Hyperkalemia, Rhabdomyolysis, and Acute Renal Failure.
authors:
- Grubb SM
- Riddle M
journal: Mil Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/milmed/usaa530
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cholera Presenting With Hyperkalemia, Rhabdomyolysis, and Acute Renal Failure.
**Authors:** Grubb SM, Riddle M
**Journal:** Mil Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/milmed/usaa530](https://doi.org/10.1093/milmed/usaa530)

## Content

1. Mil Med. 2021 Nov 2;186(11-12):e1246-e1249. doi: 10.1093/milmed/usaa530.

Cholera Presenting With Hyperkalemia, Rhabdomyolysis, and Acute Renal Failure.

Grubb SM(1), Riddle M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, San Antonio Military Medical Center, Fort 
Sam Houston, TX 78234, USA.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, Carl R. Darnall Army Medical Center, Fort 
Hood, TX 78628, USA.

Cholera is a well known cause of significant disease, particularly in 
resource-poor nations, but it is very rare in developed countries. The morbidity 
and mortality of cholera is resultant from large-volume diarrhea, hypovolemia, 
and electrolyte derangement. In the following case, a 60-year-old man with no 
recent travel history presented to the emergency department with muscle 
cramping, abdominal pain, and gastrointestinal distress. It was later confirmed 
that he was suffering from cholera. On presentation, he was hyperkalemic with 
ECG changes and soon went into a hypovolemic shock. After a complicated hospital 
course, he fortunately made a complete recovery. This case demonstrates that 
common complaints may result in uncommon diagnoses. It is important to pay 
attention to the clinical situation and intervene accordingly.

© The Association of Military Surgeons of the United States 2021. All rights 
reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/milmed/usaa530
PMID: 33252133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]