---
reference_id: "PMID:19678971"
title: "El Tor cholera with severe disease: a new threat to Asia and beyond."
authors:
- Siddique AK
- Nair GB
- Alam M
- Sack DA
- Huq A
- Nizam A
- Longini IM Jr
- Qadri F
- Faruque SM
- Colwell RR
- Ahmed S
- Iqbal A
- Bhuiyan NA
- Sack RB
journal: Epidemiol Infect
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1017/S0950268809990550
content_type: abstract_only
---

# El Tor cholera with severe disease: a new threat to Asia and beyond.
**Authors:** Siddique AK, Nair GB, Alam M, Sack DA, Huq A, Nizam A, Longini IM Jr, Qadri F, Faruque SM, Colwell RR, Ahmed S, Iqbal A, Bhuiyan NA, Sack RB
**Journal:** Epidemiol Infect (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S0950268809990550](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0950268809990550)

## Content

1. Epidemiol Infect. 2010 Mar;138(3):347-52. doi: 10.1017/S0950268809990550. Epub
 2009 Aug 14.

El Tor cholera with severe disease: a new threat to Asia and beyond.

Siddique AK(1), Nair GB, Alam M, Sack DA, Huq A, Nizam A, Longini IM Jr, Qadri 
F, Faruque SM, Colwell RR, Ahmed S, Iqbal A, Bhuiyan NA, Sack RB.

Author information:
(1)Public Health Sciences Division (PHSD), International Centre for Diarrhoeal 
Disease Research, Dhaka, Bangladesh. siddique@icddrb.org

During epidemics of cholera in two rural sites (Bakerganj and Mathbaria), a much 
higher proportion of patients came for treatment with severe dehydration than 
was seen in previous years. V. cholerae O1 isolated from these patients was 
found to be El Tor in its phenotype, but its cholera toxin (CT) was determined 
to be that of classical biotype. Whether the observed higher proportion of 
severe dehydration produced by the El Tor biotype was due to a shift from El Tor 
to classical CT or due to other factors is not clear. However, if cholera due to 
strains with increased severity spread to other areas where treatment facilities 
are limited, there are likely to be many more cholera deaths.

DOI: 10.1017/S0950268809990550
PMID: 19678971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]