---
reference_id: "PMID:31640619"
title: Epidemiological profile of meningitis in Iran before pentavalent vaccine introduction.
authors:
- Berangi Z
- Karami M
- Mohammadi Y
- Nazarzadeh M
- Zahraei SM
- Javidrad H
- Heidari S
journal: BMC Pediatr
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s12887-019-1741-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiological profile of meningitis in Iran before pentavalent vaccine introduction.
**Authors:** Berangi Z, Karami M, Mohammadi Y, Nazarzadeh M, Zahraei SM, Javidrad H, Heidari S
**Journal:** BMC Pediatr (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12887-019-1741-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12887-019-1741-y)

## Content

1. BMC Pediatr. 2019 Oct 22;19(1):370. doi: 10.1186/s12887-019-1741-y.

Epidemiological profile of meningitis in Iran before pentavalent vaccine 
introduction.

Berangi Z(1), Karami M(2)(3), Mohammadi Y(4), Nazarzadeh M(5), Zahraei SM(6), 
Javidrad H(6), Heidari S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Hamadan University of 
Medical Sciences, Hamadan, 65178-3-8736, Iran.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Hamadan University of 
Medical Sciences, Hamadan, 65178-3-8736, Iran. man.karami@yahoo.com.
(3)Research Center for Health Sciences, Hamadan University of Medical Sciences, 
Hamadan, Iran. man.karami@yahoo.com.
(4)Social Determinants of Health Research Center, Hamadan University of Medical 
Sciences, Hamadan, Iran.
(5)George Institute for Global Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(6)Center for Communicable Diseases Control, Ministry of Health & Medical 
Education, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: No reliable and comprehensive study has been published on the 
incidence and epidemiological profile of meningitis in Iran from 2008 to 2014, 
before pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV) and pentavalent vaccine (DTPw-Hep 
B-Hib (PRP-T) vaccine (pentavac) (adsorbed)) introduction. The present study 
aimed to portray the epidemiological profile of meningitis in Iran from 2008 to 
2014.
METHODS: Data on meningitis cases aged from 1 day to 110 years were extracted 
from national notifiable diseases surveillance system from March 2008 to 
December 2014 in Iran. A total number of 48,006 cases of suspected meningitis 
were identified and 1468 cases of which met the criteria for diagnosis-confirmed 
meningitis. Of 1468 cases, 1352 patients were included in the study.
RESULTS: The great number of cases reported from urban areas. Moreover, males 
were more predominant than females (58.51% vs. 33.81%) in total. The estimated 
annual incidence rate of meningitis varied from 0.28/100000 in 2008 to 
0.09/100000 in 2014. Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae and 
Neisseria meningitidis were the most leading pathogens causing bacterial 
meningitis, accounted for 266(23.44%), 145(12.78%), 95(8.37%) of cases, 
respectively. Each of the three bacterial species showed a descending trend. The 
majority of infected subjects are children under five years.
CONCLUSIONS: Unlike the decreasing trend of meningitis and high percentage of 
cultures with negative results, according to World Health Organization 
recommendation PCV introduction into routine immunization is evident. 
Implementing an enhanced surveillance system to provide high quality data on 
epidemiological profile of meningitis in Iran is necessary.

DOI: 10.1186/s12887-019-1741-y
PMCID: PMC6806508
PMID: 31640619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declares that they have no competing 
interests