---
reference_id: "PMID:33654238"
title: "Characterisation of hypertensive heart disease: pathological insights from a sudden cardiac death cohort to inform clinical practice."
authors:
- Westaby JD
- Miles C
- Chis Ster I
- Cooper STE
- Antonios TF
- Meijles D
- Behr ER
- Sheppard MN
journal: J Hum Hypertens
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41371-021-00507-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterisation of hypertensive heart disease: pathological insights from a sudden cardiac death cohort to inform clinical practice.
**Authors:** Westaby JD, Miles C, Chis Ster I, Cooper STE, Antonios TF, Meijles D, Behr ER, Sheppard MN
**Journal:** J Hum Hypertens (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41371-021-00507-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41371-021-00507-6)

## Content

1. J Hum Hypertens. 2022 Mar;36(3):246-253. doi: 10.1038/s41371-021-00507-6. Epub
 2021 Mar 2.

Characterisation of hypertensive heart disease: pathological insights from a 
sudden cardiac death cohort to inform clinical practice.

Westaby JD(1), Miles C(2), Chis Ster I(3), Cooper STE(2), Antonios TF(2), 
Meijles D(2), Behr ER(2), Sheppard MN(2).

Author information:
(1)Cardiology Clinical Academic Group, Molecular and Clinical Sciences Research 
Institute, St George's University of London, London, SW17 0RE, UK. 
jwestaby@sgul.ac.uk.
(2)Cardiology Clinical Academic Group, Molecular and Clinical Sciences Research 
Institute, St George's University of London, London, SW17 0RE, UK.
(3)Infection and Immunity Research Institute, St George's University of London, 
London, SW17 0RE, UK.

Hypertensive heart disease refers to changes in the myocardium that result from 
hypertension. The relationship between hypertensive heart disease and sudden 
cardiac death is well established, but there are few pathological studies. We 
examined the clinical and pathological features of hypertensive heart disease in 
sudden cardiac death victims from a national cardiovascular pathology registry. 
We investigated 5239 cases of sudden cardiac death between 1994 and 2018. Hearts 
were examined by two expert cardiac pathologists. Diagnostic criteria included 
history of hypertension, increased heart weight and left ventricular wall 
thickness in the absence of other causes. Collagen was quantified using 
picrosirius red staining and imaging software. Of 75 sudden cardiac death cases 
due to hypertensive heart disease (age at death: 54 ± 16 years; 56% males), 56 
(75%) reported no prior cardiac symptoms. Thirty-four (45%) recorded a BMI ≥ 30. 
Only two (2.7%) had hypertensive heart disease diagnosed antemortem. Four (5%) 
were diagnosed clinically with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, but lacked myocyte 
disarray at autopsy. All hearts showed concentric left ventricular hypertrophy 
and myocyte hypertrophy. Fibrosis was identified microscopically in 59 cases 
(81%). The posterior left ventricular wall showed the greatest increase in the 
percentage of collagen in hypertensive diseased hearts compared to controls 
(25.2% vs 17.9%, p = 0.034). Most sudden deaths due to hypertensive heart 
disease occur without prior cardiac symptoms; thus, clinical risk stratification 
is challenging. Hypertensive heart disease can be misdiagnosed in life as 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy which has major implications for relatives. 
Pathologists require a history of hypertension and histology for a definitive 
diagnosis of hypertensive heart disease.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited part 
of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1038/s41371-021-00507-6
PMID: 33654238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]