---
reference_id: "PMID:30161219"
title: New cases of Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase deficiency in Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension.
authors:
- Kurdyukov S
- Eccles CA
- Desai AA
- Gonzalez-Garay M
- Yuan JX
- Garcia JGN
- Rafikova O
- Rafikov R
journal: PLoS One
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0203493
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New cases of Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase deficiency in Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension.
**Authors:** Kurdyukov S, Eccles CA, Desai AA, Gonzalez-Garay M, Yuan JX, Garcia JGN, Rafikova O, Rafikov R
**Journal:** PLoS One (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0203493](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0203493)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2018 Aug 30;13(8):e0203493. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0203493. 
eCollection 2018.

New cases of Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase deficiency in Pulmonary Arterial 
Hypertension.

Kurdyukov S(1), Eccles CA(1), Desai AA(2), Gonzalez-Garay M(3), Yuan JX(3), 
Garcia JGN(4), Rafikova O(1), Rafikov R(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, The 
University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, United States of America.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, The 
University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, United States of America.
(3)Division of Translational and Regenerative Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
College of Medicine, The University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, United States 
of America.
(4)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine; Department of Medicine, 
College of Medicine, The University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, United States 
of America.

Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension (PAH) is a fatal disorder with limited treatment 
options and reduced life expectancy after diagnosis. Complex genetic backgrounds 
in PAH complicates identification of causative mutations that is essential for 
an understanding of the disease diagnostics and etiology especially for 
idiopathic PAH (iPAH). Hemolysis has been implicated as contributing to the 
pathobiology of PAH. Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase (G6PD) expression and 
activity define erythrocyte's antioxidant capacity, and its decrease contributes 
to erythrocyte fragility. As G6PD deficiency was previously reported in a 
limited number of PAH cases, we tested whether iPAH patients exhibit underlying 
G6PD alterations in erythrocytes. A cohort of 22 PAH patients and 8 non-PAH 
patients were recruited for this study. DNA isolated from Peripheral Blood 
Mononuclear Cells (PBMC) was used for detection of mutations in the coding 
region of the G6PD gene. RNA isolated from PBMC was used for determination of 
G6PD mRNA expression level. G6PD activity was measured in Red Blood Cell (RBC) 
pellets. Three patients had missense mutations in G6PD (Val291Met, Asn126Asp, 
Asp194Glu), however, only one mutation (Val291Met) results in a severe G6PD 
deficiency. A single patient with mutation (Asn126Asp) showed a 21% decrease in 
G6PD activity, two subjects showed G6PD deficiency without mutations, and one 
patient had a decreased level of G6PD mRNA and reduced enzyme levels. This study 
demonstrates that a moderate decrease in G6PD activity is associated with PAH. 
Screening for G6PD activity and mutations in the G6PD gene may provide early 
detection of individuals predisposed to PAH.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0203493
PMCID: PMC6117081
PMID: 30161219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.