---
reference_id: "PMID:22698282"
title: FGF9 and FGF20 maintain the stemness of nephron progenitors in mice and man.
authors:
- Barak H
- Huh SH
- Chen S
- Jeanpierre C
- Martinovic J
- Parisot M
- Bole-Feysot C
- Nitschké P
- Salomon R
- Antignac C
- Ornitz DM
- Kopan R
journal: Dev Cell
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.04.018
keywords:
- Animals
- Bone Morphogenetic Protein 7/physiology
- Cell Differentiation
- Congenital Abnormalities/genetics
- Female
- Fibroblast Growth Factor 9/physiology
- "Fibroblast Growth Factors/genetics, physiology"
- Humans
- "Kidney/abnormalities, growth & development"
- "Kidney Diseases/congenital, genetics"
- Male
- Mesenchymal Stem Cells/physiology
- Mice
- Mutation
- "Nephrons/growth & development"
- Organ Culture Techniques
- Stem Cell Niche/physiology
- Wnt Signaling Pathway
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FGF9 and FGF20 maintain the stemness of nephron progenitors in mice and man.
**Authors:** Barak H, Huh SH, Chen S, Jeanpierre C, Martinovic J, Parisot M, Bole-Feysot C, Nitschké P, Salomon R, Antignac C, Ornitz DM, Kopan R
**Journal:** Dev Cell (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.devcel.2012.04.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2012.04.018)

## Content

1. Dev Cell. 2012 Jun 12;22(6):1191-207. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.04.018.

FGF9 and FGF20 maintain the stemness of nephron progenitors in mice and man.

Barak H(1), Huh SH, Chen S, Jeanpierre C, Martinovic J, Parisot M, Bole-Feysot 
C, Nitschké P, Salomon R, Antignac C, Ornitz DM, Kopan R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, 660 South Euclid Avenue, Campus Box 8103, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2012 Jun 12;22(6):1125-6. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.05.016.

The identity of niche signals necessary to maintain embryonic nephron 
progenitors is unclear. Here we provide evidence that Fgf20 and Fgf9, expressed 
in the niche, and Fgf9, secreted from the adjacent ureteric bud, are necessary 
and sufficient to maintain progenitor stemness. Reduction in the level of these 
redundant ligands in the mouse led to premature progenitor differentiation 
within the niche. Loss of FGF20 in humans, or of both ligands in mice, resulted 
in kidney agenesis. Sufficiency was shown in vitro where Fgf20 or Fgf9 (alone or 
together with Bmp7) maintained isolated metanephric mesenchyme or sorted nephron 
progenitors that remained competent to differentiate in response to Wnt signals 
after 5 or 2 days in culture, respectively. These findings identify a 
long-sought-after critical component of the nephron stem cell niche and hold 
promise for long-term culture and utilization of these progenitors in vitro.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.04.018
PMCID: PMC3376351
PMID: 22698282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]