---
reference_id: "PMID:36849760"
title: "Long-term safety and efficacy of velmanase alfa treatment in children under 6 years of age with alpha-mannosidosis: A phase 2, open label, multicenter study."
authors:
- Guffon N
- Konstantopoulou V
- Hennermann JB
- Muschol N
- Bruno I
- Tummolo A
- Ceravolo F
- Zardi G
- Ballabeni A
- Lund A
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12602
keywords:
- Male
- Adult
- Adolescent
- Humans
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- alpha-Mannosidosis
- Quality of Life
- alpha-Mannosidase/adverse effects
- Lysosomes
- Antibodies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term safety and efficacy of velmanase alfa treatment in children under 6 years of age with alpha-mannosidosis: A phase 2, open label, multicenter study.
**Authors:** Guffon N, Konstantopoulou V, Hennermann JB, Muschol N, Bruno I, Tummolo A, Ceravolo F, Zardi G, Ballabeni A, Lund A
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12602](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12602)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2023 Jul;46(4):705-719. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12602. Epub
2023  Mar 13.

Long-term safety and efficacy of velmanase alfa treatment in children under
6 years of age with alpha-mannosidosis: A phase 2, open label, multicenter
study.

Guffon N(1), Konstantopoulou V(2), Hennermann JB(3), Muschol N(4), Bruno I(5),
Tummolo A(6), Ceravolo F(7), Zardi G(8), Ballabeni A(7), Lund A(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Reference Centre of Inherited Metabolic Diseases, CERLYMM, HCL, Lyon, France.
(2)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Medical University of
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Center for Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Villa Metabolica, University
Medical Center Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, International Center for Lysosomal Disorders
(ICLD), University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(5)Institute for Maternal and Child Health-IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy.
(6)Department of Metabolic Diseases and Clinical Genetics, Bari, Italy.
(7)Chiesi Farmaceutici, Parma, Italy.
(8)CROS NT S.r.l, Verona, Italy.
(9)Centre for Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Department of Paediatrics and
Adolescent Medicine and Department of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen University
Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(10)Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Alpha-mannosidosis (AM) is a rare, autosomal recessive, lysosomal storage
disorder caused by alpha-mannosidase deficiency that leads to the accumulation
of mannose-rich oligosaccharides. AM symptoms and severity vary among
individuals; consequently, AM is often not diagnosed until late childhood.
Velmanase alfa (VA), a recombinant human lysosomal alpha-mannosidase product, is
the first enzyme replacement therapy indicated to treat non-neurological
symptoms of AM in Europe. Previous studies suggested that early VA treatment in
children may produce greater clinical benefit over the disease course than
starting treatment in adolescents or adults; however, long-term studies in
children are limited, and very few studies include children under 6 years of
age. The present phase 2, multicenter, open-label study evaluated the safety and
efficacy of long-term VA treatment in children under 6 years of age with AM.
Five children (three males) received VA weekly for ≥24 months, and all children
completed the study. Four children experienced adverse drug reactions (16
events) and two experienced infusion-related reactions (12 events). Most (99.5%)
adverse events were mild or moderate, and none caused study discontinuation.
Four children developed antidrug antibodies (three were neutralizing). After VA
treatment, all children improved in one or more efficacy assessments of serum
oligosaccharide concentrations (decreases), hearing, immunological profile, and
quality of life, suggesting a beneficial effect of early treatment. Although the
small study size limits conclusions, these results suggest that long-term VA
treatment has an acceptable safety profile, is well tolerated, and may provide
potential benefits to patients with AM under 6 years of age.

© 2023 The Authors. Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12602
PMID: 36849760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
