---
reference_id: "PMID:35911678"
title: Gastric Th17 Cells Specific for H(+)/K(+)-ATPase and Serum IL-17 Signature in Gastric Autoimmunity.
authors:
- Della Bella C
- Antico A
- Panozzo MP
- Capitani N
- Petrone L
- Benagiano M
- "D'Elios S"
- Sparano C
- Azzurri A
- Pratesi S
- Cianchi F
- Ortiz-Princz D
- Bergman M
- Bizzaro N
- "D'Elios MM"
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.952674
keywords:
- Adenosine Triphosphatases
- Autoimmunity/immunology
- Cytokines
- Gastric Mucosa
- "Gastritis/diagnosis, immunology"
- H(+)-K(+)-Exchanging ATPase
- Humans
- Interleukin-17
- Th17 Cells
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gastric Th17 Cells Specific for H(+)/K(+)-ATPase and Serum IL-17 Signature in Gastric Autoimmunity.
**Authors:** Della Bella C, Antico A, Panozzo MP, Capitani N, Petrone L, Benagiano M, D'Elios S, Sparano C, Azzurri A, Pratesi S, Cianchi F, Ortiz-Princz D, Bergman M, Bizzaro N, D'Elios MM
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2022.952674](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.952674)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2022 Jul 11;13:952674. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.952674. 
eCollection 2022.

Gastric Th17 Cells Specific for H(+)/K(+)-ATPase and Serum IL-17 Signature in 
Gastric Autoimmunity.

Della Bella C(1), Antico A(2), Panozzo MP(2), Capitani N(3), Petrone L(4), 
Benagiano M(1), D'Elios S(5), Sparano C(4), Azzurri A(6), Pratesi S(1), Cianchi 
F(1), Ortiz-Princz D(7), Bergman M(8), Bizzaro N(9)(10), D'Elios MM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence, 
Florence, Italy.
(2)Laboratory of Clinical Pathology, ULSS7 Pedemontana, Hospital Alto Vicentino, 
Santorso, Italy.
(3)Department of Life Sciences, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.
(4)Endocrinology Unit, Careggi Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(5)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa, 
Italy.
(6)Laboratory of Clinical Pathology, Toscana Centro Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(7)Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, Autonomous Service Institute of 
Biomedicine "Dr. Jacinto Convit", Caracas, Venezuela.
(8)Molecular Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(9)Laboratory of Clinical Pathology, San Antonio Hospital, Tolmezzo, Italy.
(10)Laboratory of Clinical Pathology, Azienda Sanitaria Universitaria Integrata, 
Udine, Italy.

Human gastric autoimmunity [autoimmune gastritis (AIG)] is characterized by 
inflammation of the gastric mucosa and parietal cell loss. The gastric parietal 
cell proton pump H+/K+-adenosine triphosphatase (H+/K+-ATPase) is the major 
autoantigen in AIG. Our work aimed to investigate the gastric 
H+/K+-ATPase-specific T helper 17 (Th17) responses in AIG and serum interleukin 
(IL)-17 cytokine subfamily in AIG patients, in healthy subjects [healthy 
controls (HCs)], and in patients with iron deficiency anemia (IDA) without AIG. 
We analyzed the activation of gastric lamina propria mononuclear cells (LPMCs) 
by H+/K+-ATPase and the IL-17A and IL-17F cytokine production in eight patients 
with AIG and four HCs. Furthermore, we compared serum levels of IL-17A, IL-17F, 
IL-21, IL-17E, IL-22, and IL-23 in 43 AIG patients, in 47 HCs, and in 20 IDA 
patients without AIG. Gastric LPMCs from all AIG patients, but not those from 
HCs, were activated by H+/K+-ATPase and were able to proliferate and produce 
high levels of IL-17A and IL-17F. AIG patients have significantly higher serum 
IL-17A, IL-17F, IL-21, and IL-17E (393.3 ± 410.02 pg/ml, 394.0 ± 378.03 pg/ml, 
300.46 ± 303.45 pg/ml, 34.92 ± 32.56 pg/ml, respectively) than those in HCs 
(222.99 ± 361.24 pg/ml, 217.49 ± 312.1 pg/ml, 147.43 ± 259.17 pg/ml, 8.69 ± 8.98 
pg/ml, respectively) and those in IDA patients without AIG (58.06 ± 107.49 
pg/ml, 74.26 ± 178.50 pg/ml, 96.86 ± 177.46 pg/ml, 10.64 ± 17.70 pg/ml, 
respectively). Altogether, our results indicate that IL-17A and IL-17F are 
produced in vivo in the stomach of AIG patients following activation with 
H+/K+-ATPase and that serum IL-17A, IL-17F, IL-21, and IL-17E levels are 
significantly elevated in AIG patients but not in patients without AIG. These 
data suggest a Th17 signature in AIG and that IL-17A, IL-17F, IL-21, and IL-17E 
may represent a relevant tool for AIG management.

Copyright © 2022 Della Bella, Antico, Panozzo, Capitani, Petrone, Benagiano, 
D’Elios, Sparano, Azzurri, Pratesi, Cianchi, Ortiz-Princz, Bergman, Bizzaro and 
D’Elios.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.952674
PMCID: PMC9328118
PMID: 35911678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.