---
reference_id: "PMID:38297356"
title: "Cronkhite‒Canada syndrome as inflammatory hamartomatous polyposis: new evidence from whole transcriptome sequencing of colonic polyps."
authors:
- Liu S
- Zhi Y
- Zhang R
- You Y
- You W
- Xu Q
- Li J
- Li J
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03038-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cronkhite‒Canada syndrome as inflammatory hamartomatous polyposis: new evidence from whole transcriptome sequencing of colonic polyps.
**Authors:** Liu S, Zhi Y, Zhang R, You Y, You W, Xu Q, Li J, Li J
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-024-03038-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-024-03038-8)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 Feb 1;19(1):35. doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03038-8.

Cronkhite‒Canada syndrome as inflammatory hamartomatous polyposis: new evidence 
from whole transcriptome sequencing of colonic polyps.

Liu S(#)(1), Zhi Y(#)(2), Zhang R(3), You Y(4), You W(5), Xu Q(2), Li J(2), Li 
J(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Allergy, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union 
Medical College Hospital, 100730, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking 
Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing, 100730, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking 
Union Medical College Hospital, 100730, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Pathology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union 
Medical College Hospital, 100730, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, 210029, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking 
Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing, 100730, People's Republic of China. 
liji0235@pumch.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Cronkhite-Canada syndrome (CCS) is a rare, nonhereditary disease 
characterized by diffuse gastrointestinal polyposis and ectodermal 
abnormalities. Although it has been proposed to be a chronic inflammatory 
condition, direct evidence of its pathogenesis is lacking. This study aims to 
investigate the pathophysiology of CCS by analyzing transcriptomic changes in 
the colonic microenvironment.
METHODS: Next-generation sequencing-based genome-wide transcriptional profiling 
was performed on colonic hamartomatous polyps from four CCS patients and normal 
colonic mucosa from four healthy volunteers. Analyses of differential expression 
and multiple enrichment analyses were conducted from the molecular level to the 
cellular level. Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) was carried out to validate 
the sequencing accuracy in samples from six CCS patients and six healthy 
volunteers.
RESULTS: A total of 543 differentially expressed genes were identified, 
including an abundance of CC- and CXC-chemokines. Innate immune response-related 
pathways and processes, such as leukocyte chemotaxis, cytokine production, 
IL-17, TNF, IL-1 and NF-kB signaling pathways, were prominently enhanced in CCS 
colonic polyps. Upregulation of wound healing, epithelial-mesenchymal 
transition, Wnt, and PI3K-Akt signaling pathways were also observed. Enrichment 
analyses at different levels identified extracellular structure disorganization, 
dysfunction of the gut mucosal barrier, and increased angiogenesis. Validation 
by qRT-PCR confirmed increased expression of the LCN2, IL1B, CXCL1, and CXCL3 
genes in CCS colonic polyps.
CONCLUSIONS: This case-control whole transcriptome analysis of active CCS 
colonic hamartomatous polyps revealed intricate molecular pathways, emphasizing 
the role of the innate immune response, extracellular matrix disorganization, 
inflammatory cell infiltration, increased angiogenesis, and potential epithelial 
to mesenchymal transition. These findings supports CCS as a chronic inflammatory 
condition and sheds light on potential therapeutic targets, paving the way for 
more effective and personalized management of CCS in the future.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-024-03038-8
PMCID: PMC10832113
PMID: 38297356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interest to disclose.