---
reference_id: "PMID:10641134"
title: "Hepatic fibrogenesis using chronic arsenic ingestion: studies in a murine model."
authors:
- Sarin SK
- Sharma G
- Banerjee S
- Kathayat R
- Malhotra V
journal: Indian J Exp Biol
year: '1999'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatic fibrogenesis using chronic arsenic ingestion: studies in a murine model.
**Authors:** Sarin SK, Sharma G, Banerjee S, Kathayat R, Malhotra V
**Journal:** Indian J Exp Biol (1999)

## Content

1. Indian J Exp Biol. 1999 Feb;37(2):147-51.

Hepatic fibrogenesis using chronic arsenic ingestion: studies in a murine model.

Sarin SK(1), Sharma G, Banerjee S, Kathayat R, Malhotra V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Pathology, G B Pant Hospital, New Delhi, 
India. ssarin@giasdla.vsnl.net.in

Chronic oral arsenic (As) ingestion has been alleged to cause hepatic fibrosis, 
non-cirrhotic portal fibrosis and cirrhosis of the liver. The present study was 
aimed to investigate if hepatic fibrogenesis and non-cirrhotic portal fibrosis 
(NCPF) is caused by arsenic. A significant increase in the hepatic protein and 
collagen was seen compared with controls; hepatic 4-hydroxyproline levels, 
indicative of fibrogenesis, were increased 4-14 folds with different dosages of 
arsenic compared to the controls. Hepatocellular necrosis and inflammation were 
negligible to mild in all the groups. None of the animals developed significant 
splenomegaly or features of non-cirrhotic portal hypertension. The results 
suggest that (i) prolonged oral arsenic ingestion in mice leads to significant 
hepatic fibrogenesis and collagen synthesis with minimal hepato-cellular injury; 
(ii) arsenic ingestion alone is unlikely to cause non-cirrhotic portal fibrosis 
or cirrhosis of liver. This murine model of arsenic feeding could be used for 
the evaluation of new antifibrotic agents for the liver.

PMID: 10641134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]