---
reference_id: "PMID:37288707"
title: Clinical features and underlying mechanisms of KAT6B disease in a Chinese boy.
authors:
- Sun X
- Luo X
- Lin L
- Wang S
- Wang C
- Yuan F
- Lan X
- Yan J
- Chen Y
journal: Mol Genet Genomic Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.2202
keywords:
- Male
- Child
- Humans
- "Child, Preschool"
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Mutation
- East Asian People
- Phenotype
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics"
- Histone Acetyltransferases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical features and underlying mechanisms of KAT6B disease in a Chinese boy.
**Authors:** Sun X, Luo X, Lin L, Wang S, Wang C, Yuan F, Lan X, Yan J, Chen Y
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomic Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mgg3.2202](https://doi.org/10.1002/mgg3.2202)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2023 Sep;11(9):e2202. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.2202. Epub 2023
 Jun 8.

Clinical features and underlying mechanisms of KAT6B disease in a Chinese boy.

Sun X(1), Luo X(1), Lin L(1), Wang S(1), Wang C(1), Yuan F(1), Lan X(2), Yan 
J(2), Chen Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Shanghai Children's Hospital, School of medicine, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Embryo and Reproduction Engineering, Key 
Laboratory of Embryo Molecular Biology of National Health Commission, Shanghai 
Institute of Medical Genetics, Shanghai Chlidren's Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Shanghai JiaoTong University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Lysine acetyltransferase 6B (KAT6B) encodes a highly conserved 
histone acetyltransferase that regulates the expression of multiple genes and is 
essential for human growth and development.
METHODS: We identified a novel frameshift variant c.3185del (p.leu1062Argfs*52) 
in a 5-year-old Chinese boy and further analyzed KAT6B expression and its 
interacting complexes and downstream products using real-time quantitative 
polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). Furthermore, we assessed its three-dimensional 
protein structure and compared the variant with other reported KAT6B variants.
RESULTS: The deletion changed the leucine at position 1062 into an arginine, 
resulting in translation termination after base 3340, which may have affected 
protein stability and protein-protein interactions. KAT6B mRNA expression levels 
in this case were substantially different from those of the parents and controls 
in the same age range. There were also significant differences in mRNA 
expression levels among affected children's parents. RUNX2 and NR5A1, downstream 
products of the gene, affect the corresponding clinical symptoms. The mRNA 
expression levels of the two in children were lower than those of their parents 
and controls in the same age range.
CONCLUSION: This deletion in KAT6B may affect protein function and cause 
corresponding clinical symptoms through interactions with key complexes and 
downstream products.

© 2023 The Authors. Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.2202
PMCID: PMC10496035
PMID: 37288707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.