---
reference_id: "PMID:26154150"
title: Nontraumatic spinal cord ischaemic syndrome.
authors:
- Rigney L
- Cappelen-Smith C
- Sebire D
- Beran RG
- Cordato D
journal: J Clin Neurosci
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2015.03.037
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aortic Diseases/complications, physiopathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prognosis
- Severity of Illness Index
- "Spinal Cord Ischemia/etiology, physiopathology"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nontraumatic spinal cord ischaemic syndrome.
**Authors:** Rigney L, Cappelen-Smith C, Sebire D, Beran RG, Cordato D
**Journal:** J Clin Neurosci (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jocn.2015.03.037](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocn.2015.03.037)

## Content

1. J Clin Neurosci. 2015 Oct;22(10):1544-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2015.03.037. Epub
 2015 Jul 4.

Nontraumatic spinal cord ischaemic syndrome.

Rigney L(1), Cappelen-Smith C(1), Sebire D(1), Beran RG(2), Cordato D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurophysiology, Liverpool Hospital, Locked Bag 7103,
Liverpool, NSW 1871, Australia; South Western Sydney Clinical School, University
of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(2)Department of Neurophysiology, Liverpool Hospital, Locked Bag 7103,
Liverpool, NSW 1871, Australia; South Western Sydney Clinical School, University
of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia; Griffith University, Southport, QLD,
Australia.
(3)Department of Neurophysiology, Liverpool Hospital, Locked Bag 7103,
Liverpool, NSW 1871, Australia; South Western Sydney Clinical School, University
of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia. Electronic address:
dennis.cordato@sswahs.nsw.gov.au.

This study presents the clinical features and functional outcomes of eight
consecutive patients who were admitted to our institution between 2012 and 2014
with nontraumatic spinal cord infarction (SCI), a rare and devastating
condition. We also present a literature review of aetiologies and prognostic
factors relevant to our case series. The mean age of our cohort was 64 years and
five patients were female. Aortic disease was causative in three, including one
patient with biopsy confirmed giant cell arteritis. Fibrocartilaginous embolism
was a possible aetiology in two others, anterior spinal artery aneurysm in one,
and the cause was undetermined in two patients. American Spinal Injury
Association impairment scale (ASIA) scores at nadir (time of maximum severity of
signs) were B in three, C in three and D in two patients (all were wheelchair
dependent). At last follow-up, ASIA scores were C in one, D in five and E in one
patient. One patient died, two remained wheelchair dependent, four required a
walking aid or frame and one was mobilising independently. A literature review
of 11 patient series of nontraumatic SCI found that prognosis is primarily
determined by the severity of motor or sensory involvement, in particular,
initial and nadir ASIA A/B scores which strongly correlate with poor outcome. In
the majority of series, 40-60% of patients had initial ASIA A/B scores with a
similar proportion remaining wheelchair dependent on follow-up. Most patients in
our cohort had nadir ASIA C/D scores, which may explain their better outcomes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2015.03.037
PMID: 26154150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
