---
reference_id: "PMID:29926944"
title: "Periodontal health and gingival diseases and conditions on an intact and a reduced periodontium: Consensus report of workgroup 1 of the 2017 World Workshop on the Classification of Periodontal and Peri-Implant Diseases and Conditions."
authors:
- Chapple ILC
- Mealey BL
- Van Dyke TE
- Bartold PM
- Dommisch H
- Eickholz P
- Geisinger ML
- Genco RJ
- Glogauer M
- Goldstein M
- Griffin TJ
- Holmstrup P
- Johnson GK
- Kapila Y
- Lang NP
- Meyle J
- Murakami S
- Plemons J
- Romito GA
- Shapira L
- Tatakis DN
- Teughels W
- Trombelli L
- Walter C
- Wimmer G
- Xenoudi P
- Yoshie H
journal: J Periodontol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/JPER.17-0719
keywords:
- Gingivitis
- Humans
- Peri-Implantitis
- Periodontitis
- Periodontium
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Periodontal health and gingival diseases and conditions on an intact and a reduced periodontium: Consensus report of workgroup 1 of the 2017 World Workshop on the Classification of Periodontal and Peri-Implant Diseases and Conditions.
**Authors:** Chapple ILC, Mealey BL, Van Dyke TE, Bartold PM, Dommisch H, Eickholz P, Geisinger ML, Genco RJ, Glogauer M, Goldstein M, Griffin TJ, Holmstrup P, Johnson GK, Kapila Y, Lang NP, Meyle J, Murakami S, Plemons J, Romito GA, Shapira L, Tatakis DN, Teughels W, Trombelli L, Walter C, Wimmer G, Xenoudi P, Yoshie H
**Journal:** J Periodontol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/JPER.17-0719](https://doi.org/10.1002/JPER.17-0719)

## Content

1. J Periodontol. 2018 Jun;89 Suppl 1:S74-S84. doi: 10.1002/JPER.17-0719.

Periodontal health and gingival diseases and conditions on an intact and a 
reduced periodontium: Consensus report of workgroup 1 of the 2017 World Workshop 
on the Classification of Periodontal and Peri-Implant Diseases and Conditions.

Chapple ILC(1), Mealey BL(2), Van Dyke TE(3), Bartold PM(4), Dommisch H(5), 
Eickholz P(6), Geisinger ML(7), Genco RJ(8), Glogauer M(9), Goldstein M(10), 
Griffin TJ(11), Holmstrup P(12), Johnson GK(13), Kapila Y(14), Lang NP(15), 
Meyle J(16), Murakami S(17), Plemons J(18), Romito GA(19), Shapira L(10), 
Tatakis DN(20), Teughels W(21), Trombelli L(22), Walter C(23), Wimmer G(24), 
Xenoudi P(25), Yoshie H(26).

Author information:
(1)Periodontal Research Group, Institute of Clinical Sciences, College of 
Medical & Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, UK.
(2)University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, USA.
(3)The Forsyth Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)School of Dentistry, University of Adelaide, Australia.
(5)Department of Periodontology and Synoptic Dentistry, Charité - 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany.
(6)Department of Periodontology, Center for Oral Medicine, Johann Wolfgang 
Goethe-University Frankfurt, Germany.
(7)Department of Periodontology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, USA.
(8)Department of Oral Biology, SUNY at Buffalo, NY, USA.
(9)Faculty of Dentistry, University of Toronto, Canada.
(10)Department of Periodontology, Faculty of Dental Medicine, Hebrew 
University-Hadassah Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(11)Periodontal Department, Tufts University School of Dental Medicine, Boston, 
MA, USA.
(12)Periodontology, Section 1, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Denmark.
(13)Department of Periodontology, University of Iowa College of Dentistry, Iowa 
City, IA, USA.
(14)Orofacial Sciences, University of California San Francisco, USA.
(15)Department of Periodontology, University of Bern, Switzerland.
(16)Department of Periodontology, University of Giessen, Germany.
(17)Department of Periodontology, Graduate School of Dentistry, Osaka 
University, Japan.
(18)Department of Periodontics, Texas A&M College of Dentistry, Dallas, TX, USA.
(19)Division of Periodontology, Department of Stomatology, Dental School, 
University of São Paulo, Brazil.
(20)Division of Periodontology, College of Dentistry, Ohio State University, 
Columbus, OH, USA.
(21)Department of Oral Health Sciences, Periodontology, KU Leuven & Dentistry, 
University Hospitals Leuven, Belgium.
(22)Research Center for the Study of Periodontal and Peri-Implant Diseases, 
University of Ferrara, Italy.
(23)Department of Periodontology, Endodontology & Cariology, University Centre 
for Dental Medicine, University of Basel School of Dentistry, Switzerland.
(24)Department of Prosthodontics, School of Dentistry, Medical University Graz, 
Austria.
(25)Orofacial Sciences, School of Dentistry, University of California San 
Francisco, USA.
(26)Division of Periodontology, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical 
and Dental Sciences, Japan.

Periodontal health is defined by absence of clinically detectable inflammation. 
There is a biological level of immune surveillance that is consistent with 
clinical gingival health and homeostasis. Clinical gingival health may be found 
in a periodontium that is intact, i.e. without clinical attachment loss or bone 
loss, and on a reduced periodontium in either a non-periodontitis patient (e.g. 
in patients with some form of gingival recession or following crown lengthening 
surgery) or in a patient with a history of periodontitis who is currently 
periodontally stable. Clinical gingival health can be restored following 
treatment of gingivitis and periodontitis. However, the treated and stable 
periodontitis patient with current gingival health remains at increased risk of 
recurrent periodontitis, and accordingly, must be closely monitored. Two broad 
categories of gingival diseases include non-dental plaque biofilm-induced 
gingival diseases and dental plaque-induced gingivitis. Non-dental plaque 
biofilm-induced gingival diseases include a variety of conditions that are not 
caused by plaque and usually do not resolve following plaque removal. Such 
lesions may be manifestations of a systemic condition or may be localized to the 
oral cavity. Dental plaque-induced gingivitis has a variety of clinical signs 
and symptoms, and both local predisposing factors and systemic modifying factors 
can affect its extent, severity, and progression. Dental plaque-induced 
gingivitis may arise on an intact periodontium or on a reduced periodontium in 
either a non-periodontitis patient or in a currently stable "periodontitis 
patient" i.e. successfully treated, in whom clinical inflammation has been 
eliminated (or substantially reduced). A periodontitis patient with gingival 
inflammation remains a periodontitis patient (Figure 1), and comprehensive risk 
assessment and management are imperative to ensure early prevention and/or 
treatment of recurrent/progressive periodontitis. Precision dental medicine 
defines a patient-centered approach to care, and therefore, creates differences 
in the way in which a "case" of gingival health or gingivitis is defined for 
clinical practice as opposed to epidemiologically in population prevalence 
surveys. Thus, case definitions of gingival health and gingivitis are presented 
for both purposes. While gingival health and gingivitis have many clinical 
features, case definitions are primarily predicated on presence or absence of 
bleeding on probing. Here we classify gingival health and gingival 
diseases/conditions, along with a summary table of diagnostic features for 
defining health and gingivitis in various clinical situations.

© 2018 American Academy of Periodontology and European Federation of 
Periodontology.

DOI: 10.1002/JPER.17-0719
PMID: 29926944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]