---
reference_id: "PMID:11062152"
title: Galectin-3 mediates genistein-induced G(2)/M arrest and inhibits apoptosis.
authors:
- Lin HM
- Moon BK
- Yu F
- Kim HR
journal: Carcinogenesis
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1093/carcin/21.11.1941
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Galectin-3 mediates genistein-induced G(2)/M arrest and inhibits apoptosis.
**Authors:** Lin HM, Moon BK, Yu F, Kim HR
**Journal:** Carcinogenesis (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1093/carcin/21.11.1941](https://doi.org/10.1093/carcin/21.11.1941)

## Content

1. Carcinogenesis. 2000 Nov;21(11):1941-5. doi: 10.1093/carcin/21.11.1941.

Galectin-3 mediates genistein-induced G(2)/M arrest and inhibits apoptosis.

Lin HM(1), Moon BK, Yu F, Kim HR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Breast Cancer Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos 
Cancer Institute, Wayne State University, School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, 
USA.

Many recent studies have focused on potential chemopreventive activities of 
dietary genistein, a natural isoflavonoid compound found in soy products. 
Genistein has been implicated in anticancer activities, including 
differentiation, apoptosis, inhibition of cell growth and inhibition of 
angiogenesis. In previous studies, genistein was shown to induce apoptosis and 
cell cycle arrest at G(2)/M in several cancer cell lines in vitro, which is 
associated with induction of p21(WAF1/CIP1), a universal inhibitor of 
cyclin-dependent kinases. At present, the molecular basis for diverse 
genistein-mediated cellular responses is largely unknown. In the present study, 
we investigated whether galectin-3, an anti-apoptotic gene product, regulates 
genistein-mediated cellular responses. We show that genistein effectively 
induces apoptosis without detectable cell cycle arrest in BT549, a human breast 
epithelial cell line which does not express galectin-3 at a detectable level. In 
galectin-3 transfected BT549 cells, genistein induced cell cycle arrest at the 
G(2)/M phase without apoptosis induction. Interestingly, genistein induces 
p21(WAF1/CIP1) expression in galectin-3-expressing BT549 cells, but not in 
control BT549 cells undergoing apoptosis. Collectively, the results of the 
present study suggest that galectin-3, at least in part, is a critical 
determinant for genistein-mediated cell cycle arrest and apoptosis, and 
genistein induction of p21(WAF1/CIP1) is associated with cell cycle arrest, but 
not required for apoptosis induction.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/21.11.1941
PMID: 11062152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]