---
reference_id: "PMID:41557046"
title: "Fetal thoracoamniotic shunting for severe macrocystic congenital pulmonary airway malformation with the Somatex(®) intrauterine shunt: intrauterine course and postnatal outcome."
authors:
- Oelgeschläger C
- Weber EC
- Gottschalk I
- Jimenez-Cruz J
- Geipel A
- Strizek B
- Kohaut J
- Dübbers M
- Oetzmann von Sochaczewski C
- Heydweiller A
- Berg C
journal: Arch Gynecol Obstet
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1007/s00404-025-08247-5
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Pregnancy
- Retrospective Studies
- "Cystic Adenomatoid Malformation of Lung, Congenital/surgery"
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Adult
- Gestational Age
- Fetal Therapies/methods
- Treatment Outcome
- Pregnancy Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fetal thoracoamniotic shunting for severe macrocystic congenital pulmonary airway malformation with the Somatex(®) intrauterine shunt: intrauterine course and postnatal outcome.
**Authors:** Oelgeschläger C, Weber EC, Gottschalk I, Jimenez-Cruz J, Geipel A, Strizek B, Kohaut J, Dübbers M, Oetzmann von Sochaczewski C, Heydweiller A, Berg C
**Journal:** Arch Gynecol Obstet (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00404-025-08247-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00404-025-08247-5)

## Content

1. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2026 Jan 20;313(1):53. doi: 10.1007/s00404-025-08247-5.

Fetal thoracoamniotic shunting for severe macrocystic congenital pulmonary 
airway malformation with the Somatex(®) intrauterine shunt: intrauterine course 
and postnatal outcome.

Oelgeschläger C(1), Weber EC(2), Gottschalk I(2), Jimenez-Cruz J(3), Geipel 
A(3), Strizek B(3), Kohaut J(4), Dübbers M(4), Oetzmann von Sochaczewski C(5), 
Heydweiller A(5), Berg C(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Prenatal Medicine, Gynecological Ultrasound and Fetal Surgery, 
Department of Obstetrics, University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, 
Kerpener Strasse 34, 50931, Cologne, Germany. carla.oelgeschlaeger@uk-koeln.de.
(2)Division of Prenatal Medicine, Gynecological Ultrasound and Fetal Surgery, 
Department of Obstetrics, University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, 
Kerpener Strasse 34, 50931, Cologne, Germany.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Prenatal Medicine, University Hospital Bonn, 
Bonn, Germany.
(4)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital 
Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(5)Sektion Kinderchirugie der Chirugischen Klinik, Universitätsklinikum Bonn, 
Bonn, Germany.

PURPOSE: Thoracoamniotic shunting (TAS) in fetuses with macrocystic congenital 
pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM) is mostly performed with pigtail shunts 
like the rocket shunt or the Harrison fetal bladder stent. The aim of this study 
was to assess the prenatal course, perinatal outcome and complications of TAS 
for severe macrocystic CPAM using the Somatex® intrauterine shunt.
METHODS: This was a two center (Cologne/Bonn) observational retrospective study 
of fetuses that underwent TAS using the Somatex® intrauterine shunt for severe 
macrocystic CPAM with and without hydrops between 2016-2024. Outcome parameters 
were perinatal survival, complications, gestational age at delivery and 
visibility of the shunt outside the skin after birth.
RESULTS: During the study period, 25 fetuses were treated with the Somatex® 
shunt (13 = Cologne, 12 = Bonn), including 24 singletons and one fetus of a 
monochorionic-diamniotic twin pregnancy Mean gestational age at intervention was 
24.7 weeks (range 19-30). The mean diameter of the dominant cyst within the 
lesion was 34 mm (range 18-55). Fetal hydrops prior to TAS (ascites and fetal 
scalp oedema) was present in 36% (9/25). Dislocation in the further course of 
pregnancy occurred in 8% (2/25) with the need for reintervention in two cases. 
Resolution of hydrops and regression of the lesion occurred in 96% (24/25). Mean 
gestational age at delivery was 38.3 weeks (range 26-41), the preterm birth 
rate < 37 weeks was 20% (5/25), 12% (3/25) were due to PPROM. Live birth rate 
was 100% and 92% (23/25) of neonates survived the neonatal period. Of the 12 
liveborns delivered at the two study centers, in one case the shunt (8.3%) was 
dislocated in the amniotic cavity, 5 (41.7%) had a visible shunt outside the 
skin, whereas in the other 6 (50.0%) cases the shunt was covered with skin at 
birth.
CONCLUSIONS: TAS in macrocystic CPAM with the Somatex® shunt has a high 
technical success rate leading to high neonatal survival rates even in cases 
associated with hydrops. The intrauterine course and neonatal outcome are 
comparable to TAS for fetal macrocystic CPAM using other types of shunts. 
Therefore, the choice of the shunt in macrocystic CPAM can be made freely at the 
discretion of the physician in charge, the availability of devices and economic 
factors. Due to the short length of 25 mm and its straight design, the outer end 
of the Somatex® shunt is covered by skin at birth in up to 50% of cases, which 
may complicate its removal.

© 2026. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00404-025-08247-5
PMCID: PMC12819567
PMID: 41557046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: The authors 
declare they have no conflict of interest. Ethical approval: Not applicable.