---
reference_id: "PMID:39761938"
title: "Efficacy and safety of PARP inhibitors in prostate cancer: An umbrella review of systematic reviews and meta-analyses."
authors:
- Tzang CC
- Wu HW
- Luo CA
- Li YT
- Kang YF
- Hsieh CM
- Lee CY
- Hsu TC
- Tzang BS
journal: Crit Rev Oncol Hematol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2024.104609
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- BRCA1 Protein/genetics
- BRCA2 Protein/genetics
- Meta-Analysis as Topic
- "Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitors/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- "Prostatic Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, mortality"
- Systematic Reviews as Topic
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of PARP inhibitors in prostate cancer: An umbrella review of systematic reviews and meta-analyses.
**Authors:** Tzang CC, Wu HW, Luo CA, Li YT, Kang YF, Hsieh CM, Lee CY, Hsu TC, Tzang BS
**Journal:** Crit Rev Oncol Hematol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.critrevonc.2024.104609](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.critrevonc.2024.104609)

## Content

1. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2025 Mar;207:104609. doi: 
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2024.104609. Epub 2025 Jan 4.

Efficacy and safety of PARP inhibitors in prostate cancer: An umbrella review of 
systematic reviews and meta-analyses.

Tzang CC(1), Wu HW(1), Luo CA(1), Li YT(1), Kang YF(1), Hsieh CM(1), Lee CY(1), 
Hsu TC(2), Tzang BS(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei 
100, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung 402, Taiwan; 
Department of Clinical Laboratory, Chung Shan Medical University 
Hospital, Taichung 402, Taiwan; Immunology Research Center, Chung Shan Medical 
University, Taichung 402, Taiwan. Electronic address: htc@csmu.edu.tw.
(3)Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung 402, Taiwan; 
Department of Clinical Laboratory, Chung Shan Medical University 
Hospital, Taichung 402, Taiwan; Immunology Research Center, Chung Shan Medical 
University, Taichung 402, Taiwan; Department of Biochemistry, School of 
Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung 402, Taiwan. Electronic 
address: bstzang@csmu.edu.tw.

Prostate cancer is a significant cause of cancer-related deaths in men. Poly 
(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors (PARPi) have been shown to improve 
progression-free survival, especially in patients with BRCA1/2 mutations and 
deficiencies in homologous recombination repair (HRR). We conducted systematic 
reviews and meta-analyses and found that PARPi, combined with androgen receptor 
inhibitors, significantly improved overall survival (OS) and progression-free 
survival (PFS) in BRCA1/2-mutant and HRR-deficient patients. PARPi therapies 
increased the incidence of adverse events (AEs), including fatigue, nausea, 
anemia, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia. Among different PARP inhibitors, 
Olaparib, Talazoparib, and Rucaparib demonstrated the strongest efficacy in 
improving OS and PFS but were also linked to higher rates of AEs. Combination 
therapies with PARPi and hormonal treatments proved more effective than 
monotherapy, especially in genetically targeted subgroups like BRCA1/2-mutant 
patients. This umbrella review demonstrates that PARPi treatment significantly 
improves clinical outcomes, particularly in BRCA1/2-mutant and HRR-deficient 
mCRPC patients.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2024.104609
PMID: 39761938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.