---
reference_id: "PMID:35373285"
title: Reassessing the Value of CSF Protein and Glucose Measurement in Pediatric Infectious Meningitis.
authors:
- McLaughlin WN
- Lamb M
- Gaensbauer J
journal: Hosp Pediatr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1542/hpeds.2021-006435
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reassessing the Value of CSF Protein and Glucose Measurement in Pediatric Infectious Meningitis.
**Authors:** McLaughlin WN, Lamb M, Gaensbauer J
**Journal:** Hosp Pediatr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1542/hpeds.2021-006435](https://doi.org/10.1542/hpeds.2021-006435)

## Content

1. Hosp Pediatr. 2022 May 1;12(5):481-490. doi: 10.1542/hpeds.2021-006435.

Reassessing the Value of CSF Protein and Glucose Measurement in Pediatric 
Infectious Meningitis.

McLaughlin WN(1), Lamb M(2), Gaensbauer J(3).

Author information:
(1)aDepartment of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, 
Colorado.
(2)bColorado School of Public Health, Center for Global Health, Aurora, 
Colorado.
(3)cMayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.

OBJECTIVES: Infectious meningitis (IM) in US children is increasingly rare and 
new rapid multiplex PCR-based testing is increasingly available. We evaluated 
the added value of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein and glucose tests to 
predict IM when compared with information provided by CSF white blood cell count 
(WBC) and multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed CSF results from October 2015 to August 
2017 in patients 0 to 18 years at a US children's hospital. Noninfectious 
evaluations were excluded. Test characteristics were calculated for CSF WBC, 
protein, and glucose in isolation and in parallel for prediction of 
microbiologically confirmed IM. Chart review was performed to identify 
consideration of protein and glucose in medical decision-making (MDM).
RESULTS: We identified 735 patients including 446 <2 months; 45 (6.1%) had 
microbiologically-confirmed IM, including 23 (5.2%) age <2 months. Multiplex PCR 
and/or CSF WBC identified all IM patients. When added to CSF WBC, measurement of 
glucose made no contribution to sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive 
value (PPV) or negative predictive value (NPV), and protein had no impact on 
sensitivity and decreased the specificity, PPV, and NPV compared with CSF WBC 
alone. Abnormal protein was documented in MDM in 6 (0.8%) patients, all of whom 
had elevated WBC counts also cited. Glucose was not mentioned in MDM.
CONCLUSIONS: Multiplex PCR testing and WBC may be sufficient to predict 
meningitis in children in low incidence settings. Protein and glucose did not 
contribute significant additional information. More intentional use of protein 
and glucose testing in patients with suspected IM may achieve higher value care.

Copyright © 2022 by the American Academy of Pediatrics.

DOI: 10.1542/hpeds.2021-006435
PMID: 35373285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]