---
reference_id: "PMID:30180972"
title: Graves' disease in children.
authors:
- Léger J
- Oliver I
- Rodrigue D
- Lambert AS
- Coutant R
journal: Ann Endocrinol (Paris)
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.ando.2018.08.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Graves' disease in children.
**Authors:** Léger J, Oliver I, Rodrigue D, Lambert AS, Coutant R
**Journal:** Ann Endocrinol (Paris) (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ando.2018.08.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ando.2018.08.001)

## Content

1. Ann Endocrinol (Paris). 2018 Dec;79(6):647-655. doi:
10.1016/j.ando.2018.08.001.  Epub 2018 Aug 16.

Graves' disease in children.

Léger J(1), Oliver I(2), Rodrigue D(3), Lambert AS(3), Coutant R(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetology and Reference Center 
for rare Diseases of Growth and Development, CHU Robert-Debre, 75019 Paris, 
France.
(2)Endocrine, Bone Diseases, Genetics, Obesity, and Gynecology Unit, Children's 
Hospital, University Hospital, 31000 Toulouse, France.
(3)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, CHU Bicêtre, 94275 Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, 
France.
(4)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetology and Reference Center 
for Rare Diseases of Thyroid and Hormone Receptivity, University hospital of 
Angers, 4, rue Larrey, 49933 Angers cedex 9, France. Electronic address: 
recoutant@chu-angers.fr.

R1 The diagnosis of Graves' disease in children is based on detecting a 
suppression of serum TSH concentrations and the presence of anti-TSH receptor 
antibodies. 1/+++. R2 Thyroid ultrasound is unnecessary for diagnosis, but can 
be useful for assessing the size and homogeneity of the goiter. 2/+. R3. Thyroid 
scintigraphy is not required for the diagnosis of Graves' disease. 1/+++. R4. 
The measurement of T4L and T3L levels is not necessary for the diagnosis of 
Graves' disease in children but can be useful for the management and assessment 
of prognosis. 1/++. R5. In the absence of TSH receptor autoantibodies, the 
possibility of genetically inherited hyperthyroidism must be considered. 1/++. 
R6. Drug therapy is the primary line of treatment for children and consists of 
imidazole, carbimazole or thiamazole, with an initial dosage of 0.4 to 
0.8mg/kg/day (0.3 to 0.6mg/kg/day for thiamazole) depending on the initial 
severity, up to maximum of 30mg. 1/++. R7. Propylthiouracil is contraindicated 
for children with Grave's disease. 1/+++. R8. Before starting treatment, it may 
be useful to perform a CBC in order to assess the degree of neutropenia caused 
by hyperthyroidism. It is not necessary to perform systematic CBCs during 
follow-up. 2/+. R9. An emergency CBC should be performed if symptoms include 
fever or angina. If neutrophil counts are <1000/mm3, synthetic antithyroid 
therapy should be discontinued or decreased and may be permanently 
contraindicated in severe (<500) and persistent neutropenia. Otherwise treatment 
may be resumed. 1/++. R10. Transaminases levels should be measured before 
initiating treatment. Systematic monitoring of liver function is not 
consensually validated. 2/+. R11. In cases of jaundice, digestive disorders or 
pruritus, measuring liver enzymes (AST, ALT), total and conjugated bilirubin and 
alkaline phosphatases is indicated. 1/++. R12. Patients and parents should be 
informed of the possible side effects of antithyroid agents. 1/+. R13. 
Therapeutic education of parents and children is important in ensuring the best 
possible treatment compliance. 2/++. R14. Given the specificities involved in 
the treatment of Graves' disease in children, medical care should be provided by 
a specialist accustomed to treating endocrinopathies in pediatric patients. 2/+. 
R15. Depending on patient age, the severity of the disease at diagnosis and the 
persistence of anti-TSH receptor antibodies, the initial course of treatment 
must take place over an extended period of 3 to 6 years. R16.The anticipated 
success rates of medical treatment (50% of patients in remission following 
several years of treatment) should be explained to the family and the child. The 
possibility that radical treatment may be required in case of failure or 
intolerance of medical treatment should also be discussed. 1/++. R17.In females 
with Graves' disease, it is important to explain that they must undergo an 
assessment by an endocrinologist before planning future pregnancies, from the 
start of pregnancy and during the course of pregnancy. This is true in all 
female patients, even those in remission after medical treatment, or those who 
have undergone radical treatment. R18.Indications for a radical treatment can 
arise in cases of: 1/+: contraindication to antithyroid agents; poorly 
controlled hyperthyroidism due to lack of compliance; relapse despite prolonged 
medical treatment; a request made by the family and child for personal reasons. 
R19.Surgery is the radical method of treatment used in children under 5 years of 
age, or in cases of very large, nodular, or compressive goiters. 2/++. R20. The 
surgeon's experience in dealing with thyroidectomies in children is likely to be 
the most significant determining factor in limiting the morbidity of the 
procedure (alongside any collaboration between a pediatric surgeon and an adult 
surgeon). 1/++. R21 When radical treatment is indicated, I-131 treatment may be 
discussed after 5 years (but more often after puberty), if the goiter is not too 
large. Experience from monitoring Graves' disease in North American children is 
reassuring. 1/++.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ando.2018.08.001
PMID: 30180972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]