---
reference_id: "PMID:39862870"
title: Hidradenitis suppurativa.
authors:
- Sabat R
- Alavi A
- Wolk K
- Wortsman X
- McGrath B
- Garg A
- Szepietowski JC
journal: Lancet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(24)02475-9
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hidradenitis Suppurativa/diagnosis, drug therapy, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hidradenitis suppurativa.
**Authors:** Sabat R, Alavi A, Wolk K, Wortsman X, McGrath B, Garg A, Szepietowski JC
**Journal:** Lancet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(24)02475-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(24)02475-9)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2025 Feb 1;405(10476):420-438. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(24)02475-9.
Epub  2025 Jan 22.

Hidradenitis suppurativa.

Sabat R(1), Alavi A(2), Wolk K(3), Wortsman X(4), McGrath B(5), Garg A(6),
Szepietowski JC(7).

Author information:
(1)Psoriasis Research and Treatment Center, Department of Dermatology,
Venereology and Allergology and Institute of Medical Immunology, Charité -
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin and
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany. Electronic address:
robert.sabat@charite.de.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(3)Psoriasis Research and Treatment Center, Department of Dermatology,
Venereology and Allergology and Institute of Medical Immunology, Charité -
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin and
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany; Interdisciplinary Group of
Molecular Immunopathology, Dermatology/Medical Immunology, Charité -
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin and
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad de Chile,
Santiago, Chile.
(5)HS Ireland, Hidradenitis Suppurativa Association, County Clare, Munster,
Ireland.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Northwell, New Hyde Park, New York, USA.
(7)Faculty of Medicine, Wroclaw University of Science and Technology, Wrocław,
Poland.

Hidradenitis suppurativa is a chronic inflammatory disease characterised by
painful, deep-seated nodules, abscesses, and draining tunnels in the skin of
axillary, inguinal, genitoanal, or inframammary areas. In recent years, the body
of knowledge in hidradenitis suppurativa has advanced greatly. This disorder
typically starts in the second or third decade of life. The average worldwide
prevalence is 1% but varies geographically. Hidradenitis suppurativa has a
profound negative effect on patients' quality of life and on the gross value
added to society. Comorbidities (eg, metabolic syndrome, inflammatory arthritis,
and inflammatory bowel disease) frequently accompany skin alterations, because
of systemic inflammation. Pathogenesis of hidradenitis suppurativa is complex
and includes innate immune mechanisms (eg, macrophages, neutrophils, IL-1β,
tumour necrosis factor [TNF], and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor), T-cell
mechanisms (eg, IL-17 and IFN-γ), and B-cell mechanisms (eg, associated with
dermal tertiary lymphatic structures and autoantibodies). Chronic inflammation
leads to irreversible skin damage with tunnel formation and morbid scarring.
Current treatment includes drug therapy (for the initial, purely inflammatory
phase), combined drug and surgical therapy (for the destructive phase), or
surgery alone (for the burnout phase). The first systemic therapies approved for
hidradenitis suppurativa targeting TNF (adalimumab) and IL-17 (secukinumab and
bimekizumab) have expanded drug therapy options for moderate-to-severe disease,
which were previously mainly restricted to oral antibiotics. Moreover, there is
a robust pipeline of immunomodulatory drugs in various stages of development for
hidradenitis suppurativa. Aims of management should include early intervention
to prevent irreversible skin damage, adequate control of symptoms including
pain, and mitigation of extra-cutaneous comorbidities, all requiring early
diagnosis and an interdisciplinary, holistic and personalised approach.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open
Access article under the CC BY 4.0 license. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(24)02475-9
PMID: 39862870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests RS received research
grants or clinical trial contracts from AbbVie, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma,
Celgene/Amgen, Celgene/Bristol Myers Squibb, Charité Research Organization, CSL
Behring, ICON, IQVIA RDS, Incyte, Janssen-Cilag/Janssen Research & Development,
MoonLake Immunotherapeutics, Novartis, Parexel, Rheinischen
Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn, Sanofi Aventis, TFS, and UCB Biopharma paid
to their institution; honoraria for lectures, consulting, or participation in
advisory boards from AbbVie, Almirall Hermal, Amgen, Bayer Schering Pharma,
Bruno Bloch Stiftung, Janssen-Cilag/Janssen Research & Development, Novartis,
UCB Biopharma, Universitätsmedizin Greifswald, and Wundnetz Berlin-Brandenburg;
and is a member of the International Psoriasis Council (unpaid) and speaker of
psoriasis group of the German Consortium for Dermatological Research (unpaid).
AA received a National Institutes of Health grant on severe drug reactions paid
to their institution; honoraria for consulting or participation in advisory
boards from AbbVie, Almirall Hermal, Boehringer Ingelheim, Incyte, InflaRx, Leo,
Novartis, Sanofi, and UCB Biopharma; was Principal Investigator in clinical
trials for Boehringer Ingelheim and Processa Pharmaceuticals and paid to their
institution; and was a board member of the Hidradenitis Suppurativa Foundation.
KW reports research grants from Celgene/Amgen, Bristol Myers Squibb, Charité
Research Organization, Janssen-Cilag, Novartis, Sanofi Aventis, and TFS Trial
Form Support paid to their institution; honoraria for lectures, consulting, or
participation in advisory boards from Janssen-Cilag, Novartis, Sanofi Aventis,
and University Hospital Magdeburg; support for attending meetings from the
European HS foundation (EHSF) and the Symposium on Hidradenitis Suppurativa
Advances (SHSA); is recipient of a poster prize awarded from the EHSF at its
annual symposium; and is speaker for the HS group of the German Consortium for
Dermatological Research (unpaid). XW received royalties from Springer Books;
medical writing support from Novartis Pharmaceutical; honoraria for lectures
from Novartis and UCB Biopharma; and is a member of the editorial board of the
Journal of Ultrasound in Medicine, the Journal of the American Academy of
Dermatology International, and Skin Research and Technology (unpaid). BM
received honoraria for consulting from Incyte; honoraria for consulting,
participation in steering committees or advisory boards, speaking engagements,
and educational events from Novartis and UCB Biopharma; support for attending
meetings from Novartis and UCB Biopharma; and is a board member of the advocacy
group HS Ireland (unpaid). AG received research grants from AbbVie, UCB
Biopharma, and the CHORD COUSIN Collaboration; honoraria for consulting or
participation in advisory boards from AbbVie, Boehringer Ingelheim, Incyte,
Insmed, Novartis, Pfizer, Sonoma Biotherapeutics, Sun Pharma, UCB Biopharma,
Union Therapeutics, and Zura Bio; honoraria for participation on data a safety
monitoring board from Sanofi; is co-copyright holder of the HS-IGA and HiSQOL
instruments (paid to institution); and a member of the editorial board of the
Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology (unpaid). JCS received honoraria
for consulting or lectures from AbbVie, Almirall Hermal, Boehringer Ingelheim,
Eli Lilly, Galderma, Janssen, LEO Pharma, Novartis, Pierre Fabre, Pfizer,
Sandoz, Sanofi Genzyme, Teva, Trevi Therapeutics, and UCB Biopharma; support for
attending meetings from Sanofi Genzyme, LEO Pharma, Novartis, and UCB Biopharma;
honoraria as an investigator from AbbVie, Aceleryn, Almirall Hermal, Amgen,
AnaptysBio, Argenx, Aslan, Boehringer Ingelheim, Biocom, Bio Thera, Bristol
Myers Squibb, Celtrion, CuraTeQ Biologics, DICE Therapeutics, Eli Lilly, Helm
AG, Galapagos, Galderma, Janssen, Incyte, InflaRX, Kliniksa, Kymab Limited, LEO
Pharma, Medimmune, Menlo Therapeutics, Merck, Moonlake, Novartis, Pierre Fabre,
Pfizer, Regereron Pharmaceuticals, Takeda, Teva, Trevi Therapeutics, UCB
Biopharm, Uni Therapeutics, and Ventyx Bioscence; and is President of the Polish
Dermatological Society (unpaid). None of these parties or funders had any
influence in any part of the preparation of this Seminar.
