---
reference_id: "PMID:16828409"
title: Addison's disease.
authors:
- Nieman LK
- Chanco Turner ML
journal: Clin Dermatol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.clindermatol.2006.04.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Addison's disease.
**Authors:** Nieman LK, Chanco Turner ML
**Journal:** Clin Dermatol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clindermatol.2006.04.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clindermatol.2006.04.006)

## Content

1. Clin Dermatol. 2006 Jul-Aug;24(4):276-80. doi: 
10.1016/j.clindermatol.2006.04.006.

Addison's disease.

Nieman LK(1), Chanco Turner ML.

Author information:
(1)Reproductive and Biology Medicine Branch, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. 
niemanl@nih.gov

Addison's disease, or primary adrenal insufficiency, results in glucocorticoid 
and mineralocorticoid deficiency. Orthostatic hypotension, fever, and 
hypoglycemia characterize acute adrenal crisis, whereas chronic primary adrenal 
insufficiency presents with a more insidious history of malaise, anorexia, 
diarrhea, weight loss, joint, and back pain. The cutaneous manifestations 
include darkening of the skin especially in sun-exposed areas and 
hyperpigmentation of the palmar creases, frictional surfaces, vermilion border, 
recent scars, genital skin, and oral mucosa. Measurement of basal plasma 
cortisol is an insensitive screening test. Synthetic adrenocorticotropin 1-24 at 
a dose of 250 microg works well as a dynamic test. Elevated plasma levels of 
adrenocorticotropin and renin confirm the diagnosis. Treatment involves 
replacement of the deficient hormones.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clindermatol.2006.04.006
PMID: 16828409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]