---
reference_id: "PMID:30032785"
title: "Peeling Skin Disorders: A Paradigm for Skin Desquamation."
authors:
- Has C
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jid.2018.05.020
keywords:
- "Dermatitis, Exfoliative"
- Epidermis
- Filaggrin Proteins
- Glycoproteins/genetics
- Humans
- Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Mutation
- "Skin Diseases, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peeling Skin Disorders: A Paradigm for Skin Desquamation.
**Authors:** Has C
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jid.2018.05.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jid.2018.05.020)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 2018 Aug;138(8):1689-1691. doi: 10.1016/j.jid.2018.05.020.

Peeling Skin Disorders: A Paradigm for Skin Desquamation.

Has C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Medical Center, University of Freiburg, Faculty of 
Medicine, Freiburg, Germany. Electronic address: 
cristina.has@uniklinik-freiburg.de.

Comment on
    J Invest Dermatol. 2018 Aug;138(8):1881-1884. doi: 
10.1016/j.jid.2018.01.038.

Epidermal desquamation is the highly regulated process of invisible shedding of 
corneocytes from the outermost layers of the stratum corneum. This occurs 
through the interplay between proteases and their inhibitors that control the 
degradation of corneodesmosomes. Skin peeling refers to exaggerated visible 
superficial desquamation and can occur in inherited and acquired conditions. The 
illumination of the molecular basis of genetic disorders with skin peeling sheds 
light on the biological mechanisms of epidermal desquamation and skin barrier 
homeostasis. Proteins that are mutated in peeling skin disorders are components 
of corneodesmosomes (CDSN, DSG1) or protease inhibitors (LEKTI, CSTA, CAST, or 
SERPIN8). FLG2 emerged as a new player that regulates epidermal desquamation, as 
demonstrated by the phenotype observed in patients reported by 2 independent 
groups.

Copyright © 2018 The Author. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jid.2018.05.020
PMID: 30032785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]