---
reference_id: "PMID:39075566"
title: "Blood-brain barrier alterations and their impact on Parkinson's disease pathogenesis and therapy."
authors:
- Lau K
- Kotzur R
- Richter F
journal: Transl Neurodegener
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s40035-024-00430-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Blood-brain barrier alterations and their impact on Parkinson's disease pathogenesis and therapy.
**Authors:** Lau K, Kotzur R, Richter F
**Journal:** Transl Neurodegener (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40035-024-00430-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40035-024-00430-z)

## Content

1. Transl Neurodegener. 2024 Jul 29;13(1):37. doi: 10.1186/s40035-024-00430-z.

Blood-brain barrier alterations and their impact on Parkinson's disease 
pathogenesis and therapy.

Lau K(1)(2), Kotzur R(1), Richter F(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Pharmacy, University of Veterinary 
Medicine Hannover, Foundation, Bünteweg 17, 30559, Hannover, Germany.
(2)Center for Systems Neuroscience, Hannover, Germany.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Pharmacy, University of Veterinary 
Medicine Hannover, Foundation, Bünteweg 17, 30559, Hannover, Germany. 
franziska.richter@tiho-hannover.de.
(4)Center for Systems Neuroscience, Hannover, Germany. 
franziska.richter@tiho-hannover.de.

There is increasing evidence for blood-brain barrier (BBB) alterations in 
Parkinson's disease (PD), the second most common neurodegenerative disorder with 
rapidly rising prevalence. Altered tight junction and transporter protein 
levels, accumulation of α-synuclein and increase in inflammatory processes lead 
to extravasation of blood molecules and vessel degeneration. This could result 
in a self-perpetuating pathophysiology of inflammation and BBB alteration, which 
contribute to neurodegeneration. Toxin exposure or α-synuclein over-expression 
in animal models has been shown to initiate similar pathologies, providing a 
platform to study underlying mechanisms and therapeutic interventions. Here we 
provide a comprehensive review of the current knowledge on BBB alterations in PD 
patients and how rodent models that replicate some of these changes can be used 
to study disease mechanisms. Specific challenges in assessing the BBB in 
patients and in healthy controls are discussed. Finally, a potential role of BBB 
alterations in disease pathogenesis and possible implications for therapy are 
explored. The interference of BBB alterations with current and novel therapeutic 
strategies requires more attention. Brain region-specific BBB alterations could 
also open up novel opportunities to target specifically vulnerable neuronal 
subpopulations.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40035-024-00430-z
PMCID: PMC11285262
PMID: 39075566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.