---
reference_id: "PMID:40270454"
title: "Endocrinopathies in children with inborn errors of immunity: a single-center experience."
authors:
- Buyukyilmaz G
- Toksoy Adiguzel K
- Kocaay P
- Boyraz M
- Metin A
journal: J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1515/jpem-2024-0593
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- Child
- "Endocrine System Diseases/etiology, epidemiology, pathology"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Adolescent
- Infant
- Follow-Up Studies
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endocrinopathies in children with inborn errors of immunity: a single-center experience.
**Authors:** Buyukyilmaz G, Toksoy Adiguzel K, Kocaay P, Boyraz M, Metin A
**Journal:** J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1515/jpem-2024-0593](https://doi.org/10.1515/jpem-2024-0593)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2025 Apr 25;38(7):735-742. doi:
10.1515/jpem-2024-0593. Print 2025 Jul 28.

Endocrinopathies in children with inborn errors of immunity: a single-center
experience.

Buyukyilmaz G(1), Toksoy Adiguzel K(1)(2), Kocaay P(1), Boyraz M(3), Metin A(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, 639944 Ankara Bilkent City Hospital ,
Ankara, Türkiye.
(2)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Dr. Burhan Nalbantoğlu State Hospital,
Nicosia, Northern Cyprus.
(3)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University
Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Türkiye.
(4)Department of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, University of Health
Sciences, Ankara Bilkent City Hospital, Ankara, Türkiye.

OBJECTIVES: Inborn errors of immunity (IEI) are a diverse group of genetically
inherited disorders. We aimed to summarize and discuss endocrinopathies in
children with IEI.
METHODS: This study included 84 IEI patients evaluated between September 2019
and September 2023.
RESULTS: We found that 15.6 % of the 32 patients with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome
had permanent hypoparathyroidism. Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism was identified
in one of four female patients with ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) and in all four
females with severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) due to HAX1 deficiency.
Additionally, hypergonadotropic hypogonadism was observed in one of nine males
with common variable immunodeficiency (CVID). Among the CVID patients, one
presented with autoimmune thyroiditis (AIT), type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM),
hypoparathyroidism, and primary adrenal insufficiency. Of the 307 patients
followed for selective IgA deficiency (sIgAD), 26 also received care in
pediatric endocrinology. Among the sIgAD cases, 3.2 % had AIT and 4.5 % had
T1DM. A patient with a STAT1 gain-of-function (GOF) variant was diagnosed with
T1DM, AIT, and growth hormone deficiency, while a patient with a novel STAT3-GOF
variant developed neonatal DM and interstitial lung disease. When the whole
group was evaluated, thyroid disease was the most common endocrinopathy
affecting 30.9 % of individuals, followed by DM, which was observed in 20.2 %
of cases.
CONCLUSIONS: We have determined that AIT and T1DM were the most prevalent
endocrine disorders in IEI patients. Pubertal development and gonadal functions
should be monitored in the children with IEI. Early diagnosis and individualized
treatment of endocrinopathies are crucial for a better quality of life and
reduction of IEI-related complications.

© 2025 Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin/Boston.

DOI: 10.1515/jpem-2024-0593
PMID: 40270454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
