---
reference_id: "PMID:35805149"
title: Gene Therapy in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.
authors:
- Fang T
- Je G
- Pacut P
- Keyhanian K
- Gao J
- Ghasemi M
journal: Cells
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/cells11132066
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gene Therapy in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.
**Authors:** Fang T, Je G, Pacut P, Keyhanian K, Gao J, Ghasemi M
**Journal:** Cells (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells11132066](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells11132066)

## Content

1. Cells. 2022 Jun 29;11(13):2066. doi: 10.3390/cells11132066.

Gene Therapy in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.

Fang T(1), Je G(1), Pacut P(1), Keyhanian K(1), Gao J(1), Ghasemi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Massachusetts Chan Medical School, 
Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

Since the discovery of Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) gene mutation, in 1993, 
as the first genetic abnormality in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), over 50 
genes have been identified as either cause or modifier in ALS and 
ALS/frontotemporal dementia (FTD) spectrum disease. Mutations in C9orf72, SOD1, 
TAR DNA binding protein 43 (TARDBP), and fused in sarcoma (FUS) genes are the 
four most common ones. During the last three decades, tremendous effort has been 
made worldwide to reveal biological pathways underlying the pathogenesis of 
these gene mutations in ALS/FTD. Accordingly, targeting etiologic genes (i.e., 
gene therapies) to suppress their toxic effects have been investigated widely. 
It includes four major strategies: (i) removal or inhibition of abnormal 
transcribed RNA using microRNA or antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs), (ii) 
degradation of abnormal mRNA using RNA interference (RNAi), (iii) decrease or 
inhibition of mutant proteins (e.g., using antibodies against misfolded 
proteins), and (iv) DNA genome editing with methods such as clustered regularly 
interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/CRISPR-associated protein 
(CRISPR/Cas). The promising results of these studies have led to the application 
of some of these strategies into ALS clinical trials, especially for C9orf72 and 
SOD1. In this paper, we will overview advances in gene therapy in ALS/FTD, 
focusing on C9orf72, SOD1, TARDBP, and FUS genes.

DOI: 10.3390/cells11132066
PMCID: PMC9265980
PMID: 35805149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.