---
reference_id: "PMID:15578582"
title: Hand involvement in Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia.
authors:
- Elliott AM
- Field FM
- Rimoin DL
- Lachman RS
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30433
keywords:
- Collagen Type X/genetics
- Female
- "Fingers/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- Hand/diagnostic imaging
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/diagnostic imaging"
- Humans
- Los Angeles
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics, pathology"
- Radiography
- "Registries/statistics & numerical data"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hand involvement in Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia.
**Authors:** Elliott AM, Field FM, Rimoin DL, Lachman RS
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.30433](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.30433)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Jan 15;132A(2):191-3. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30433.

Hand involvement in Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia.

Elliott AM(1), Field FM, Rimoin DL, Lachman RS.

Author information:
(1)International Skeletal Dysplasia Registry, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los
Angeles, CA, USA. amelliot@mts.net

Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia (Schmid MCD, MIM 156500) is caused by
mutations in the COL10A1 gene and is clinically characterized by short stature,
bowed legs, and a waddling gait. Radiographic findings include anterior cupping,
sclerosis and splaying of the ribs, diffuse metaphyseal flaring, and
irregularity that is most pronounced at the knees, coxa vara, and femoral
bowing. We reviewed the radiographs of Schmid MCD patients at the International
Skeletal Dysplasia Registry in Los Angeles for evidence of hand involvement. We
found hand involvement in 47% (7/15) of cases included in our analysis. These
changes were subtle and consisted of shortening of the tubular bones and
metaphyseal cupping of the proximal phalanges and metacarpals. Mild hand
involvement is a common feature of Schmid MCD.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30433
PMID: 15578582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
