---
reference_id: "PMID:33159679"
title: "Hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism in a patient with transaldolase deficiency: novel mutation in the pentose phosphate pathway."
authors:
- Lafcı NG
- Colak FK
- Sahin G
- Sakar M
- Çetinkaya S
- Savas-Erdeve S
journal: Hormones (Athens)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s42000-020-00252-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism in a patient with transaldolase deficiency: novel mutation in the pentose phosphate pathway.
**Authors:** Lafcı NG, Colak FK, Sahin G, Sakar M, Çetinkaya S, Savas-Erdeve S
**Journal:** Hormones (Athens) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s42000-020-00252-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s42000-020-00252-4)

## Content

1. Hormones (Athens). 2021 Sep;20(3):581-585. doi: 10.1007/s42000-020-00252-4.
Epub  2020 Nov 7.

Hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism in a patient with transaldolase deficiency: 
novel mutation in the pentose phosphate pathway.

Lafcı NG(1), Colak FK(2), Sahin G(3), Sakar M(4), Çetinkaya S(4), Savas-Erdeve 
S(4).

Author information:
(1)Dr. Sami Ulus Obstetrics and Gynecology, Children Health and Disease Training 
and Research Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey. 
nazguleray@hotmail.com.
(2)Dr. Sami Ulus Obstetrics and Gynecology, Children Health and Disease Training 
and Research Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Dr. Sami Ulus Obstetrics and Gynecology, Children Health and Disease Training 
and Research Hospital, Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and 
Nutrition, Ankara, Turkey.
(4)Dr. Sami Ulus Obstetrics and Gynecology, Children Health and Disease Training 
and Research Hospital, Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Ankara, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Transaldolase (TALDO) deficiency (OMIM #606003) is a rare autosomal 
recessive multi-systemic disorder of carbohydrate metabolism. It has a vast 
phenotypic spectrum ranging from neonatal liver failure to slowly progressive 
liver cirrhosis and is characterized by intrauterine growth restriction, 
hepatosplenomegaly, bicytopenia, nephrolithiasis, and congenital heart disease.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We report a patient with a late-onset form of TALDO 
deficiency characterized by hypergonadotropic hypogonadism and slightly elevated 
levels of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP). A novel TALDO1 mutation was detected through 
the application of reverse genetics with the use of clinical exome sequencing 
(CES).
CONCLUSION: This report provides further evidence that reverse genetics is a 
useful approach in patients who do not manifest the hallmark features of known 
and recognizable syndromes. TALDO deficiency should be considered in the 
differential diagnosis of unexplained elevated AFP levels and hypergonadotropic 
hypogonadism with microlithiasis.

© 2020. Hellenic Endocrine Society.

DOI: 10.1007/s42000-020-00252-4
PMID: 33159679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]