---
reference_id: "PMID:38248465"
title: "Lysosomal Dysfunction: Connecting the Dots in the Landscape of Human Diseases."
authors:
- Uribe-Carretero E
- Rey V
- Fuentes JM
- Tamargo-Gómez I
journal: Biology (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/biology13010034
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lysosomal Dysfunction: Connecting the Dots in the Landscape of Human Diseases.
**Authors:** Uribe-Carretero E, Rey V, Fuentes JM, Tamargo-Gómez I
**Journal:** Biology (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biology13010034](https://doi.org/10.3390/biology13010034)

## Content

1. Biology (Basel). 2024 Jan 7;13(1):34. doi: 10.3390/biology13010034.

Lysosomal Dysfunction: Connecting the Dots in the Landscape of Human Diseases.

Uribe-Carretero E(1)(2)(3), Rey V(4), Fuentes JM(1)(2)(3), Tamargo-Gómez I(4).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular y Genética, Facultad de 
Enfermería y Terapia Ocupacional, Universidad de Extremadura, 10003 Caceres, 
Spain.
(2)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red en Enfermedades Neurodegenerativa, 
Instituto de Salud Carlos III (CIBER-CIBERNED-ISCIII), 28029 Madrid, Spain.
(3)Instituto Universitario de Investigación Biosanitaria de Extremadura (INUBE), 
10003 Caceres, Spain.
(4)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Principado de Asturias (ISPA), 33011 
Oviedo, Spain.

Lysosomes are the main organelles responsible for the degradation of 
macromolecules in eukaryotic cells. Beyond their fundamental role in 
degradation, lysosomes are involved in different physiological processes such as 
autophagy, nutrient sensing, and intracellular signaling. In some circumstances, 
lysosomal abnormalities underlie several human pathologies with different 
etiologies known as known as lysosomal storage disorders (LSDs). These disorders 
can result from deficiencies in primary lysosomal enzymes, dysfunction of 
lysosomal enzyme activators, alterations in modifiers that impact lysosomal 
function, or changes in membrane-associated proteins, among other factors. The 
clinical phenotype observed in affected patients hinges on the type and location 
of the accumulating substrate, influenced by genetic mutations and residual 
enzyme activity. In this context, the scientific community is dedicated to 
exploring potential therapeutic approaches, striving not only to extend lifespan 
but also to enhance the overall quality of life for individuals afflicted with 
LSDs. This review provides insights into lysosomal dysfunction from a molecular 
perspective, particularly in the context of human diseases, and highlights 
recent advancements and breakthroughs in this field.

DOI: 10.3390/biology13010034
PMCID: PMC10813815
PMID: 38248465

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.