---
reference_id: "PMID:18053482"
title: "[Polymyositis-dermatomyositis: incidence in Spain (1997-2004)]."
authors:
- Vargas-Leguás H
- "Selva-O'Callaghan A"
- Campins-Martí M
- Hermosilla Pérez E
- Grau-Junyent JM
- Martínez Gómez X
- Vaqué Rafart J
journal: Med Clin (Barc)
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1157/13113285
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Dermatomyositis/epidemiology
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Polymyositis/epidemiology
- Spain/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Polymyositis-dermatomyositis: incidence in Spain (1997-2004)].
**Authors:** Vargas-Leguás H, Selva-O'Callaghan A, Campins-Martí M, Hermosilla Pérez E, Grau-Junyent JM, Martínez Gómez X, Vaqué Rafart J
**Journal:** Med Clin (Barc) (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1157/13113285](https://doi.org/10.1157/13113285)

## Content

1. Med Clin (Barc). 2007 Nov 24;129(19):721-4. doi: 10.1157/13113285.

[Polymyositis-dermatomyositis: incidence in Spain (1997-2004)].

[Article in Spanish]

Vargas-Leguás H(1), Selva-O'Callaghan A, Campins-Martí M, Hermosilla Pérez E, 
Grau-Junyent JM, Martínez Gómez X, Vaqué Rafart J.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Medicina Preventiva y Epidemiología, Hospital General Vall 
d'Hebron, Departamento de Medicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Epidemiologic studies of polymyositis-dermatomyositis 
incidence in Spain are lacking. The aim of the study was to determine the 
incidence rates of dermatomyositis-polymyositis and their distribution in our 
country.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: Observational and descriptive study. Data was obtained from 
hospital discharge code (CMBD) during the period 1997-2004. Sex, region and age 
were analysed. Raw and standardized incidence rates for each region studied were 
calculated as new cases/million population/year with 95% confidence interval 
(CI). Trend odds ratio (OR) was calculated by means of a logistic regression.
RESULTS: Global incidence rate in polymyositis-dermatomyositis was 8.9 new 
cases/million population/year (CI 95%, 8.6-9.2); 3.9 (CI 95%, 3.7-4.1) for 
polymyositis and 4.9 (CI 95%, 4.7-5.2) for dermatomyositis. Rate differences 
between both diseases reached statistical significance (p < 0.001). Annual 
incidence rate decreased significantly across the period studied in both 
diseases with a trend OR of 0.95 (CI 95%, 0.93-0.97; p < 0.001) in 
dermatomyositis and 0.96 (CI 95%, 0.93-0.97; p < 0.001) in polymyositis. Both 
diseases were significantly more frequent in females (p < 0.001). The incidence 
rates for each region varies between 2.2 and 10.6 cases/million population/year 
in polymyositis and between 2.9 and 8.6 cases/million population/year in 
dermatomyositis.
CONCLUSIONS: Incidence of dermatomyositis-polymyositis in Spain is similar to 
other countries. Decreased incidence observed across the period and the higher 
incidence of dermatomyositis could be explained because of a better diagnosis of 
these entities.

DOI: 10.1157/13113285
PMID: 18053482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]