---
reference_id: "PMID:16143688"
title: Important cutaneous manifestations of inflammatory bowel disease.
authors:
- Trost LB
- McDonnell JK
journal: Postgrad Med J
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1136/pgmj.2004.031633
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Important cutaneous manifestations of inflammatory bowel disease.
**Authors:** Trost LB, McDonnell JK
**Journal:** Postgrad Med J (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1136/pgmj.2004.031633](https://doi.org/10.1136/pgmj.2004.031633)

## Content

1. Postgrad Med J. 2005 Sep;81(959):580-5. doi: 10.1136/pgmj.2004.031633.

Important cutaneous manifestations of inflammatory bowel disease.

Trost LB(1), McDonnell JK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, A61, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, 9500 Euclid 
Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA. TrostL@ccf.org

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) has many extraintestinal manifestations. 
Cutaneous manifestations are usually related to the activity of the bowel 
disease but may have an independent course. Anyone presenting with IBD should be 
examined for cutaneous manifestations. Pyoderma gangrenosum is a severe painful 
ulcerating disease that requires moist wound management and, in the absence of 
secondary infection, systemic corticosteroids, cyclosporine, or both. Infliximab 
may also be used. Erythema nodosum is a common cause of tender red nodules of 
the shins. Management includes leg elevation, NSAIDs, and potassium iodide. Oral 
manifestations of IBD include aphthous stomatitis, mucosal nodularity 
(cobblestoning), and pyostomatitis vegetans. Treatment should be directed both 
at the cutaneous lesions and at the underlying systemic condition.

DOI: 10.1136/pgmj.2004.031633
PMCID: PMC1743347
PMID: 16143688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]