---
reference_id: "PMID:31000707"
title: Oesophageal atresia.
authors:
- van Lennep M
- Singendonk MMJ
- "Dall'Oglio L"
- Gottrand F
- Krishnan U
- Terheggen-Lagro SWJ
- Omari TI
- Benninga MA
- van Wijk MP
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-019-0077-0
keywords:
- Comorbidity
- Congenital Abnormalities
- "Esophageal Atresia/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Esophagoscopy/methods
- Gastroesophageal Reflux/etiology
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Mass Screening/methods
- Tracheoesophageal Fistula/genetics
- Ultrasonography/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oesophageal atresia.
**Authors:** van Lennep M, Singendonk MMJ, Dall'Oglio L, Gottrand F, Krishnan U, Terheggen-Lagro SWJ, Omari TI, Benninga MA, van Wijk MP
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-019-0077-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-019-0077-0)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2019 Apr 18;5(1):26. doi: 10.1038/s41572-019-0077-0.

Oesophageal atresia.

van Lennep M(1), Singendonk MMJ(1), Dall'Oglio L(2), Gottrand F(3), Krishnan
U(4)(5), Terheggen-Lagro SWJ(6), Omari TI(7)(8), Benninga MA(9), van Wijk
MP(1)(10).

Author information:
(1)Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Pediatric
Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Digestive Endoscopy and Surgery Unit, Bambino Gesu Children's Hospital-IRCCS,
Rome, Italy.
(3)CHU Lille, University Lille, National Reference Center for Congenital
Malformation of the Esophagus, Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology
Hepatology and Nutrition, Lille, France.
(4)Department of Paediatric Gastroenterology, Sydney Children's Hospital,
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(5)Discipline of Paediatrics, School of Women's and Children's Health,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(6)Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Pediatric
Pulmonology, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)College of Medicine and Public Health, Flinders University, Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia.
(8)Center for Neuroscience, Flinders University, Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia.
(9)Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Pediatric
Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
m.a.benninga@amc.uva.nl.
(10)Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit, Pediatric
Gastroenterology, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Erratum in
    Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2024 Mar 22;10(1):24. doi: 10.1038/s41572-024-00513-1.

Oesophageal atresia (EA) is a congenital abnormality of the oesophagus that is
caused by incomplete embryonic compartmentalization of the foregut. EA commonly
occurs with a tracheo-oesophageal fistula (TEF). Associated birth defects or
anomalies, such as VACTERL association, trisomy 18 or 21 and CHARGE syndrome,
occur in the majority of patients born with EA. Although several studies have
revealed signalling pathways and genes potentially involved in the development
of EA, our understanding of the pathophysiology of EA lags behind the
improvements in surgical and clinical care of patients born with this anomaly.
EA is treated surgically to restore the oesophageal interruption and, if
present, ligate and divide the TEF. Survival is now ~90% in those born with EA
with severe associated anomalies and even higher in those born with EA alone.
Despite these achievements, long-term gastrointestinal and respiratory
complications and comorbidities in patients born with EA are common and lead to
decreased quality of life. Oesophageal motility disorders are probably
ubiquitous in patients after undergoing EA repair and often underlie these
complications and comorbidities. The implementation of several new diagnostic
and screening tools in clinical care, including high-resolution impedance
manometry, pH-multichannel intraluminal impedance testing and disease-specific
quality of life questionnaires now provide better insight into these problems
and may contribute to better long-term outcomes in the future.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-019-0077-0
PMID: 31000707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
