---
reference_id: "PMID:36303102"
title: Early Treatment with Metformin Improves Neurological Outcomes in Lafora Disease.
authors:
- Burgos DF
- Machío-Castello M
- Iglesias-Cabeza N
- Giráldez BG
- González-Fernández J
- Sánchez-Martín G
- Sánchez MP
- Serratosa JM
journal: Neurotherapeutics
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s13311-022-01304-w
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- "Lafora Disease/drug therapy, genetics"
- Metformin/therapeutic use
- Gliosis
- Follow-Up Studies
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics
- "Myoclonic Epilepsies, Progressive"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early Treatment with Metformin Improves Neurological Outcomes in Lafora Disease.
**Authors:** Burgos DF, Machío-Castello M, Iglesias-Cabeza N, Giráldez BG, González-Fernández J, Sánchez-Martín G, Sánchez MP, Serratosa JM
**Journal:** Neurotherapeutics (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13311-022-01304-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13311-022-01304-w)

## Content

1. Neurotherapeutics. 2023 Jan;20(1):230-244. doi: 10.1007/s13311-022-01304-w.
Epub  2022 Oct 27.

Early Treatment with Metformin Improves Neurological Outcomes in Lafora Disease.

Burgos DF(1)(2)(3), Machío-Castello M(1)(2), Iglesias-Cabeza N(1)(2), Giráldez
BG(1)(2), González-Fernández J(1)(2)(4), Sánchez-Martín G(1)(2), Sánchez
MP(1)(2), Serratosa JM(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurology, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria-Fundación
Jiménez Díaz, Autónoma de Madrid University (IIS-FJD, UAM), Av. Reyes Católicos,
2, 28040, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER),
28029, Madrid, Spain.
(3)PhD Program in Neuroscience, Autonoma de Madrid University-Cajal Institute,
28029, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Department of Parasitology, School of Pharmacy, Complutense de Madrid
University, 28040, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Laboratory of Neurology, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria-Fundación
Jiménez Díaz, Autónoma de Madrid University (IIS-FJD, UAM), Av. Reyes Católicos,
2, 28040, Madrid, Spain. joseserratosa@me.com.
(6)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER),
28029, Madrid, Spain. joseserratosa@me.com.

Lafora disease is a fatal form of progressive myoclonic epilepsy caused by
mutations in the EPM2A or NHLRC1/EPM2B genes that usually appears during
adolescence. The Epm2a-/- and Epm2b-/- knock-out mouse models of the disease
develop behavioral and neurological alterations similar to those observed in
patients. The aim of this work is to analyze whether early treatment with
metformin (from conception to adulthood) ameliorates the formation of Lafora
bodies and improves the behavioral and neurological outcomes observed with late
treatment (during 2 months at 10 months of age). We also evaluated the benefits
of metformin in patients with Lafora disease. To assess neurological
improvements due to metformin administration in the two mouse models, we
evaluated the effects on pentylenetetrazol sensitivity, posturing, motor
coordination and activity, and memory. We also analyzed the effects on Lafora
bodies, neurodegeneration, and astrogliosis. Furthermore, we conducted a
follow-up study of an initial cohort of 18 patients with Lafora disease, 8
treated with metformin and 10 untreated. Our results indicate that early
metformin was more effective than late metformin in Lafora disease mouse models
improving neurological alterations of both models such as neuronal
hyperexcitability, motor and memory alterations, neurodegeneration, and
astrogliosis and decreasing the formation of Lafora bodies. Moreover, patients
receiving metformin had a slower progression of the disease. Overall, early
treatment improves the outcome seen with late metformin treatment in the two
knock-out mouse models of Lafora disease. Metformin-treated patients exhibited
an ameliorated course of the disease with slower deterioration of their daily
living activities.

© 2022. The American Society for Experimental Neurotherapeutics, Inc.

DOI: 10.1007/s13311-022-01304-w
PMCID: PMC10119355
PMID: 36303102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
declare that are relevant to the content of this article. We confirm that we
have read the Journal’s position on issues involved in ethical publication and
state that this report is consistent with those guidelines.
