---
reference_id: "PMID:35996824"
title: Conservative Iron Chelation for Neuroferritinopathy.
authors:
- Marchand F
- Moreau C
- Kuchcinski G
- Huin V
- Defebvre L
- Devos D
journal: Mov Disord
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/mds.29145
keywords:
- Deferiprone/therapeutic use
- Disease Progression
- Humans
- Iron Chelating Agents/therapeutic use
- Iron Metabolism Disorders
- Neuroaxonal Dystrophies
- Neurodegenerative Diseases/drug therapy
- Pyridones/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Conservative Iron Chelation for Neuroferritinopathy.
**Authors:** Marchand F, Moreau C, Kuchcinski G, Huin V, Defebvre L, Devos D
**Journal:** Mov Disord (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.29145](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.29145)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 2022 Sep;37(9):1948-1952. doi: 10.1002/mds.29145. Epub 2022 Aug
22.

Conservative Iron Chelation for Neuroferritinopathy.

Marchand F(1)(2), Moreau C(1)(2), Kuchcinski G(3), Huin V(2)(4), Defebvre 
L(1)(2), Devos D(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Neurogenetic Center, Univ. Lille, CHU Lille, Lille 
Neurosciences and Cognition Inserm UMR-S-U1172, Lille, France.
(2)Univ. Lille, Inserm, CHU Lille, U1172 - LilNCog - Lille Neurosciences and 
Cognition, Lille, France.
(3)Department of Neuroradiology, CHU Lille, Lille, France.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology, CHU Lille, Lille, France.
(5)Department of Medical Pharmacology, CHU Lille, Lille, France.

BACKGROUND: Neuroferritinopathy is a rare inherited neurodegenerative disease 
with brain iron accumulation characterized by brain iron overload resulting in 
progressive movement disorders. No treatment is currently available.
OBJECTIVE: We assessed conservative iron chelation with deferiprone at 
30 mg/kg/day on the disease progression with controlled periods of 
discontinuation.
METHODS: Four patients with confirmed molecular diagnosis of neuroferritinopathy 
were given deferiprone at different stages of disease progression and with 
clinical and biological monitoring to control benefit and risk.
RESULTS: The four patients showed slight to high improvement. In one case, we 
managed to stabilize disease progression for more than 11 years. In another 
case, we were able to reverse symptoms after a few months of treatment. The 
earliest the treatment was started, the most efficient it was on disease 
progression.
CONCLUSIONS: Conservative iron chelation should be further assessed in 
neuroferritinopathy. © 2022 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder 
Society.

© 2022 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.29145
PMCID: PMC10360136
PMID: 35996824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]