---
reference_id: "PMID:7909656"
title: Takayasu arteritis.
authors:
- Kerr GS
- Hallahan CW
- Giordano J
- Leavitt RY
- Fauci AS
- Rottem M
- Hoffman GS
journal: Ann Intern Med
year: '1994'
doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-120-11-199406010-00004
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Angiography
- Child
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- HLA Antigens
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Pregnancy
- "Pregnancy Complications, Cardiovascular/diagnosis, therapy"
- Prospective Studies
- Statistics as Topic
- "Takayasu Arteritis/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, immunology, therapy"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Takayasu arteritis.
**Authors:** Kerr GS, Hallahan CW, Giordano J, Leavitt RY, Fauci AS, Rottem M, Hoffman GS
**Journal:** Ann Intern Med (1994)
**DOI:** [10.7326/0003-4819-120-11-199406010-00004](https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-120-11-199406010-00004)

## Content

1. Ann Intern Med. 1994 Jun 1;120(11):919-29. doi: 
10.7326/0003-4819-120-11-199406010-00004.

Takayasu arteritis.

Kerr GS(1), Hallahan CW, Giordano J, Leavitt RY, Fauci AS, Rottem M, Hoffman GS.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Immunoregulation, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate prospectively the clinical features, angiographic 
findings, and response to treatment of patients with Takayasu arteritis.
DESIGN: 60 patients with Takayasu arteritis were studied at the National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases between 1970 and 1990 and were 
followed for 6 months to 20 years (median follow-up, 5.3 years).
MEASUREMENTS: Data on clinical features, angiographic and laboratory findings, 
disease course, and response to therapy were all recorded and stored in a 
computer-based retrieval system.
SETTING: The Warren Magnuson Clinical Center of the National Institutes of 
Health.
RESULTS: In our series of patients, Takayasu arteritis was more common in Asian 
persons compared with persons from other racial groups. Females (97%) were most 
frequently affected. The median age at disease onset was 25 years. Juveniles had 
a delay in diagnosis that was about four times that of adults. The clinical 
presentation ranged from asymptomatic to catastrophic with stroke. The most 
common clinical finding was a bruit. Hypertension was most often associated with 
renal artery stenosis. Only 33% of all patients had systemic symptoms on 
presentation. Sixty-eight percent of patients had extensive vascular disease; 
stenotic lesions were 3.6-fold more common than were aneurysms (98% compared 
with 27%). The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was not a consistently reliable 
surrogate marker of disease activity. Surgical bypass biopsy specimens from 
clinically inactive patients showed histologically active disease in 44% of 
patients. Although clinically significant palliation usually occurred after 
angioplasty or bypass of severely stenotic vessels, restenosis was common. 
Medical therapy was required for 80% of patients, whereas 20% had monophasic 
self-limiting disease. Immunosuppressive treatment with glucocorticoids alone or 
in combination with a cytotoxic agent failed to induce remission in one fourth 
of patients; about half of those who achieved remission later relapsed.
CONCLUSIONS: In North America, Takayasu arteritis is a rare disease. It is 
heterogeneous in presentation, progression, and response to therapy. Current 
laboratory markers of disease activity are insufficiently reliable to guide 
management. Most patients require repeated and, at times, prolonged courses of 
therapy. Although mortality was low, substantial morbidity occurred in most 
patients.

DOI: 10.7326/0003-4819-120-11-199406010-00004
PMID: 7909656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]