---
reference_id: "PMID:25442861"
title: Analysis of clinical outcomes in pediatric bacterial meningitis focusing on patients without cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis.
authors:
- Lin WL
- Chi H
- Huang FY
- Huang DT
- Chiu NC
journal: J Microbiol Immunol Infect
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.jmii.2014.08.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of clinical outcomes in pediatric bacterial meningitis focusing on patients without cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis.
**Authors:** Lin WL, Chi H, Huang FY, Huang DT, Chiu NC
**Journal:** J Microbiol Immunol Infect (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmii.2014.08.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmii.2014.08.013)

## Content

1. J Microbiol Immunol Infect. 2016 Oct;49(5):723-728. doi: 
10.1016/j.jmii.2014.08.013. Epub 2014 Nov 1.

Analysis of clinical outcomes in pediatric bacterial meningitis focusing on 
patients without cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis.

Lin WL(1), Chi H(2), Huang FY(1), Huang DT(3), Chiu NC(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; Mackay 
Junior College of Medicine, Nursing and Management, Taipei, Taiwan; Graduate 
Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Taiwan University College of Medicine, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; Graduate 
Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Taiwan University College of Medicine, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; Mackay 
Junior College of Medicine, Nursing and Management, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic 
address: ncc88@mmh.org.tw.

BACKGROUND: Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cell count and biochemical examinations 
and cultures form the basis for the diagnosis of bacterial meningitis. However, 
some patients do not have typical findings and are at a higher risk of being 
missed or having delayed treatment. To better understand the correlation between 
CSF results and outcomes, we evaluated CSF data focusing on the patients with 
atypical findings.
METHODS: This study enrolled CSF culture-proven bacterial meningitis patients 
aged from 1 month to 18 years in a medical center. The patients were divided 
into "normal" and "abnormal" groups for each laboratory result and in 
combination. The correlations between the laboratory results and the outcomes 
were analyzed.
RESULTS: A total of 175 children with confirmed bacterial meningitis were 
enrolled. In CSF examinations, 16.2% of patients had normal white blood cell 
counts, 29.5% had normal glucose levels, 24.5% had normal protein levels, 10.2% 
had normal results in two items, and 8.6% had normal results in all three items. 
In logistic regression analysis, a normal CSF leukocyte count and increased CSF 
protein level were related to poor outcomes. Patients with meningitis caused by 
Streptococcus pneumoniae and hyponatremia were at a higher risk of mortality and 
the development of sequelae.
CONCLUSIONS: In children with bacterial meningitis, nontypical CSF findings and, 
in particular, normal CSF leukocyte count and increased protein level may 
indicate a worse prognosis.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmii.2014.08.013
PMID: 25442861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]