---
reference_id: "PMID:35656327"
title: New Insights on the Regulatory Gene Network Disturbed in Central Areolar Choroidal Dystrophy-Beyond Classical Gene Candidates.
authors:
- Kazmierczak de Camargo JP
- Prezia GNB
- Shiokawa N
- Sato MT
- Rosati R
- Beate Winter Boldt A
journal: Front Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.886461
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New Insights on the Regulatory Gene Network Disturbed in Central Areolar Choroidal Dystrophy-Beyond Classical Gene Candidates.
**Authors:** Kazmierczak de Camargo JP, Prezia GNB, Shiokawa N, Sato MT, Rosati R, Beate Winter Boldt A
**Journal:** Front Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2022.886461](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2022.886461)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2022 May 17;13:886461. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.886461.
eCollection  2022.

New Insights on the Regulatory Gene Network Disturbed in Central Areolar 
Choroidal Dystrophy-Beyond Classical Gene Candidates.

Kazmierczak de Camargo JP(1), Prezia GNB(2), Shiokawa N(3), Sato MT(3)(4), 
Rosati R(2), Beate Winter Boldt A(1).

Author information:
(1)Post-Graduation Program in Genetics, Department of Genetics, Federal 
University of Paraná, Curitiba, Brazil.
(2)Post-Graduation Program in Biotechnology Applied to Child and Adolescent 
Health, Faculdades Pequeno Príncipe and Pelé Pequeno Príncipe Research 
Institute, Curitiba, Brazil.
(3)Retina and Vitreo Consulting Eye Clinic, Curitiba, Brazil.
(4)Department of Ophthalmol/Otorhinolaryngology, Federal University of Paraná, 
Curitiba, Brazil.

Central areolar choroidal dystrophy (CACD) is a rare hereditary disease that 
mainly affects the macula, resulting in progressive and usually profound visual 
loss. Being part of congenital retinal dystrophies, it may have an autosomal 
dominant or recessive inheritance and, until now, has no effective treatment. 
Given the shortage of genotypic information about the disease, this work 
systematically reviews the literature for CACD-causing genes. Three independent 
researchers selected 33 articles after carefully searching and filtering the 
Scielo, Pubmed, Lilacs, Web of Science, Scopus, and Embase databases. Mutations 
of six genes (PRPH2, GUCA1A, GUCY2D, CDHR1, ABCA4, and TTLL5) are implicated in 
the monogenic dominant inheritance of CACD. They are functionally related to 
photoreceptors (either in the phototransduction process, as in the case of 
GUCY2D, or the recovery of retinal photodegradation in photoreceptors for 
GUCA1A, or the formation and maintenance of specific structures within 
photoreceptors for PRPH2). The identified genetic variants do not explain all 
observed clinical features, calling for further whole-genome and functional 
studies for this disease. A network analysis with the CACD-related genes 
identified in the systematic review resulted in the identification of another 20 
genes that may influence CACD onset and symptoms. Furthermore, an enrichment 
analysis allowed the identification of 13 transcription factors and 4 long 
noncoding RNAs interacting with the products of the previously mentioned genes. 
If mutated or dysregulated, they may be directly involved in CACD development 
and related disorders. More than half of the genes identified by bioinformatic 
tools do not appear in commercial gene panels, calling for more studies about 
their role in the maintenance of the retina and phototransduction process, as 
well as for a timely update of these gene panels.

Copyright © 2022 Kazmierczak de Camargo, Prezia, Shiokawa, Sato, Rosati and 
Beate Winter Boldt.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.886461
PMCID: PMC9152281
PMID: 35656327

Conflict of interest statement: Authors NS and MTS are employed by Retina and 
Vitreo Consulting Eye Clinic, Curitiba, Brazil. The remaining authors declare 
that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.