---
reference_id: "PMID:23299280"
title: Frequency of epidermal growth factor receptor mutations in Bangladeshi patients with adenocarcinoma of the lung.
authors:
- Rahman S
- Kondo N
- Yoneda K
- Takuwa T
- Hashimoto M
- Orui H
- Okumura Y
- Tanaka F
- Kumamoto K
- Mostafa MG
- Chowdhury GM
- Haque A
- Hasegawa S
journal: Int J Clin Oncol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s10147-012-0515-4
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Adenocarcinoma of Lung
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Bangladesh
- "Biopsy, Fine-Needle"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- ErbB Receptors/genetics
- Ethnicity
- Female
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Staging
- Smoking
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frequency of epidermal growth factor receptor mutations in Bangladeshi patients with adenocarcinoma of the lung.
**Authors:** Rahman S, Kondo N, Yoneda K, Takuwa T, Hashimoto M, Orui H, Okumura Y, Tanaka F, Kumamoto K, Mostafa MG, Chowdhury GM, Haque A, Hasegawa S
**Journal:** Int J Clin Oncol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10147-012-0515-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10147-012-0515-4)

## Content

1. Int J Clin Oncol. 2014 Feb;19(1):45-9. doi: 10.1007/s10147-012-0515-4. Epub
2013  Jan 9.

Frequency of epidermal growth factor receptor mutations in Bangladeshi patients
with adenocarcinoma of the lung.

Rahman S(1), Kondo N, Yoneda K, Takuwa T, Hashimoto M, Orui H, Okumura Y, Tanaka
F, Kumamoto K, Mostafa MG, Chowdhury GM, Haque A, Hasegawa S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Hyogo College of Medicine, 1-1 Mukogawa-cho,
Nishinomiya, Hyogo, 663-8501, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Worldwide studies on lung adenocarcinoma have demonstrated a genetic
divergence of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) pathway according to
ethnicity, such as higher frequency of activated EGFR mutations among East Asian
patients. However, such information is still lacking in some developing
countries.
METHODS: We investigated the frequency of EGFR mutations among Bangladeshi
patients with adenocarcinoma of the lung. Fine-needle aspiration tissue samples
were collected from 61 Bangladeshi patients. Polymerase chain
reaction-single-strand conformation polymorphism was performed on extracted DNA
for mutational analysis of EGFR exons 19 and 21.
RESULTS: EGFR mutations were found in 14 of 61 (23.0 %) Bangladeshi patients.
There was no significant difference in EGFR mutation rate with regard to
patient's age, sex, smoking history, clinical stage of lung cancer, subtypes of
adenocarcinoma, and tumor differentiation.
CONCLUSION: The present study revealed that the EGFR mutation rate in
Bangladeshi patients with adenocarcinoma of the lung was higher than in
African-American, Arabian, and white Caucasian patients, and was lower than in
East Asia.

DOI: 10.1007/s10147-012-0515-4
PMID: 23299280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
