---
reference_id: "PMID:34694575"
title: Epidemiology and clinical manifestations of cardiac amyloidosis.
authors:
- Bajwa F
- O'Connor R
- Ananthasubramaniam K
journal: Heart Fail Rev
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s10741-021-10162-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology and clinical manifestations of cardiac amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Bajwa F, O'Connor R, Ananthasubramaniam K
**Journal:** Heart Fail Rev (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10741-021-10162-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10741-021-10162-1)

## Content

1. Heart Fail Rev. 2022 Sep;27(5):1471-1484. doi: 10.1007/s10741-021-10162-1.
Epub  2021 Oct 25.

Epidemiology and clinical manifestations of cardiac amyloidosis.

Bajwa F(1), O'Connor R(1), Ananthasubramaniam K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, 
NY, USA.
(2)Henry Ford West Bloomfield Hospital, Heart and Vascular Institute, West 
Bloomfield, MI, 48322, USA. kananth1@hfhs.org.

Cardiac amyloidosis, once considered a rare disease, has garnered significant 
attention over the last few years due to three key reasons: first, increased 
recognition of this disease in conjunction with various common cardiac 
conditions such as heart failure with preserved ejection fraction and aortic 
stenosis; second, due to the advent of promising new therapies for light chain 
disease (AL), transthyretin (ATTR) cardiomyopathy, and amyloid neuropathy; 
finally, the advancements in cardiac imaging including echocardiography, 
magnetic resonance imaging, and nuclear cardiac scintigraphy aid in non-biopsy 
diagnosis of ATTR cardiac amyloidosis. The hereditary forms of ATTR have further 
come into importance with the availability of genetic testing and increased 
prevalence of certain mutations in African Americans. Recognition of non-cardiac 
clues to this disease has gained importance and reiterates that high clinical 
suspicion, detailed patient history, and examination with appropriate use of 
imaging are vital to confirm the diagnosis.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10741-021-10162-1
PMID: 34694575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]