---
reference_id: "PMID:25060129"
title: Differential diagnosis between left ventricular hypertrophy and cardiomyopathy in childhood.
authors:
- Östman-Smith I
journal: J Electrocardiol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.jelectrocard.2014.07.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differential diagnosis between left ventricular hypertrophy and cardiomyopathy in childhood.
**Authors:** Östman-Smith I
**Journal:** J Electrocardiol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jelectrocard.2014.07.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jelectrocard.2014.07.002)

## Content

1. J Electrocardiol. 2014 Sep-Oct;47(5):661-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.jelectrocard.2014.07.002. Epub 2014 Jul 3.

Differential diagnosis between left ventricular hypertrophy and cardiomyopathy 
in childhood.

Östman-Smith I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska 
Academy, Gothenburg University, Gothenburg, Sweden. Electronic address: 
ingegerd.ostman-smith@pediat.gu.se.

The sensitivity and specificity of the electrocardiogram for the diagnosis of 
left ventricular hypertrophy of different etiologies are described. The 
sensitivity of the electrocardiogram for detecting left ventricular pressure 
overload is substantially lower (<35%) than the sensitivity for detecting 
evidence of a cardiomyopathy (55% to around 87%). Attention is drawn to the 
finding that in many differing etiologies of left ventricular hypertrophy 
ST-T-wave changes commonly referred to as "strain"-pattern are a harbinger of an 
increased risk of malignant cardiac arrhythmias and sudden death. In the most 
common pediatric cause of sudden death, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, a described 
ECG risk score, which scores both voltage and repolarization abnormalities, is 
the most powerful predictor hitherto described for predicting the risk of sudden 
death in this diagnosis. A point score over 5 points gives a relative risk for 
sudden death of 24.3 with a sensitivity of 96% and a specificity of 78% in 
childhood.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jelectrocard.2014.07.002
PMID: 25060129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]