---
reference_id: "PMID:38151964"
title: "Glucagon-like peptide-1 analogues in monogenic syndromic obesity: Real-world data from a large cohort of Alström syndrome patients."
authors:
- Ali S
- Baig S
- Wanninayake S
- da Silva Xavier G
- Dawson C
- Paisey R
- Geberhiwot T
journal: Diabetes Obes Metab
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/dom.15398
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Young Adult
- Glucagon-Like Peptide 1/agonists
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/drug therapy"
- Glycated Hemoglobin
- "Alstrom Syndrome/complications, drug therapy, genetics"
- Liraglutide/therapeutic use
- Peptides/therapeutic use
- Blood Glucose/metabolism
- Venoms/therapeutic use
- Hypoglycemic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Obesity/complications, drug therapy, genetics"
- Weight Loss
- Cholesterol
- Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 Receptor Agonists
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glucagon-like peptide-1 analogues in monogenic syndromic obesity: Real-world data from a large cohort of Alström syndrome patients.
**Authors:** Ali S, Baig S, Wanninayake S, da Silva Xavier G, Dawson C, Paisey R, Geberhiwot T
**Journal:** Diabetes Obes Metab (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/dom.15398](https://doi.org/10.1111/dom.15398)

## Content

1. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2024 Mar;26(3):989-996. doi: 10.1111/dom.15398. Epub 2023
 Dec 27.

Glucagon-like peptide-1 analogues in monogenic syndromic obesity: Real-world
data from a large cohort of Alström syndrome patients.

Ali S(1)(2), Baig S(1)(2), Wanninayake S(1), da Silva Xavier G(2), Dawson C(1),
Paisey R(3), Geberhiwot T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK.
(2)Institute of Metabolism and Systems Research, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, UK.
(3)Torbay and South Devon NHS Foundation Trust, Torquay, Torbay, UK.

AIM: To examine the real-world efficacy of glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor
agonists (GLP-1 RAs) in monogenic obesity in patients with Alström syndrome
(ALMS).
METHODS: We screened 72 UK adult patients with ALMS and offered treatment to 34
patients meeting one of the following criteria: body mass index of 25 kg/m2 or
higher, insulin resistance, suboptimal glycaemic control on antihyperglycaemic
medications or non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.
RESULTS: In total, 30 patients, with a mean age of 31 ± 11 years and a male
to-female ratio of 2:1, completed 6 months of treatment with GLP-1 RAs either in
the form of semaglutide or exenatide. On average, treatment with GLP-1 RAs
reduced body weight by 5.4 ± 1.7 (95% confidence interval [CI] 3.6-7) kg and
HbA1c by 12 ± 3.3 (95% CI 8.7-15.3) mmol/mol, equating to 6% weight loss
(P < .01) and 1.1% absolute reduction in HbA1c (P < .01). Significant
improvements were also observed in serum total cholesterol, triglycerides,
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol and
alanine aminotransferase. The improvement of metabolic variables in our cohort
of monogenic syndromic obesity was comparable with data for polygenic obesity,
irrespective of weight loss.
CONCLUSIONS: Data from our centre highlight the non-inferiority of GLP-1 RAs in
monogenic syndromic obesity to the available GLP-1 RA-use data in polygenic
obesity, therefore, these agents can be considered as a treatment option in
patients with ALMS, as well as other forms of monogenic obesity.

© 2023 The Authors. Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism published by John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/dom.15398
PMID: 38151964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
