---
reference_id: "PMID:34895487"
title: "Axicabtagene ciloleucel in relapsed or refractory indolent non-Hodgkin lymphoma (ZUMA-5): a single-arm, multicentre, phase 2 trial."
authors:
- Jacobson CA
- Chavez JC
- Sehgal AR
- William BM
- Munoz J
- Salles G
- Munshi PN
- Casulo C
- Maloney DG
- de Vos S
- Reshef R
- Leslie LA
- Yakoub-Agha I
- Oluwole OO
- Fung HCH
- Rosenblatt J
- Rossi JM
- Goyal L
- Plaks V
- Yang Y
- Vezan R
- Avanzi MP
- Neelapu SS
journal: Lancet Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(21)00591-X
keywords:
- Aged
- "Biological Products/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Female
- Humans
- "Immunotherapy, Adoptive"
- "Lymphoma, Non-Hodgkin/drug therapy"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Recurrence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Axicabtagene ciloleucel in relapsed or refractory indolent non-Hodgkin lymphoma (ZUMA-5): a single-arm, multicentre, phase 2 trial.
**Authors:** Jacobson CA, Chavez JC, Sehgal AR, William BM, Munoz J, Salles G, Munshi PN, Casulo C, Maloney DG, de Vos S, Reshef R, Leslie LA, Yakoub-Agha I, Oluwole OO, Fung HCH, Rosenblatt J, Rossi JM, Goyal L, Plaks V, Yang Y, Vezan R, Avanzi MP, Neelapu SS
**Journal:** Lancet Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1470-2045(21)00591-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(21)00591-X)

## Content

1. Lancet Oncol. 2022 Jan;23(1):91-103. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(21)00591-X. Epub
2021 Dec 8.

Axicabtagene ciloleucel in relapsed or refractory indolent non-Hodgkin lymphoma
(ZUMA-5): a single-arm, multicentre, phase 2 trial.

Jacobson CA(1), Chavez JC(2), Sehgal AR(3), William BM(4), Munoz J(5), Salles
G(6), Munshi PN(7), Casulo C(8), Maloney DG(9), de Vos S(10), Reshef R(11),
Leslie LA(12), Yakoub-Agha I(13), Oluwole OO(14), Fung HCH(15), Rosenblatt
J(16), Rossi JM(17), Goyal L(17), Plaks V(17), Yang Y(17), Vezan R(17), Avanzi
MP(17), Neelapu SS(18).

Author information:
(1)Department of medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
USA. Electronic address: caron_jacobson@dfci.harvard.edu.
(2)University of South Florida H Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, FL, USA.
(3)UPMC Hillman Cancer Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(4)The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH, USA.
(5)Banner MD Anderson Cancer Center, Gilbert, AZ, USA.
(6)Department of Hematology and Medicine, Centre Hopitalier Lyon-Sud, University
of Lyon, Pierre-Bénite, France.
(7)Georgetown Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Washington, DC, USA.
(8)University of Rochester Medical Center, James P Wilmot Cancer Center,
Rochester, NY, USA.
(9)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
WA, USA.
(10)Ronald Reagan University of California Los Angeles Medical Center, Los
Angeles, CA, USA.
(11)Columbia University Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center, New York,
NY, USA.
(12)John Theurer Cancer Center, Hackensack, NJ, USA.
(13)Centre Hospitalier Régional Universitaire de Lille, INSERM U1286, Lille,
France.
(14)Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(15)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(16)University of Miami Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Miami, FL, USA.
(17)Kite Pharma, Santa Monica, CA, USA.
(18)Department of Lymphoma and Myeloma, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2022 Jan;23(1):6-8. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(21)00648-3.
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2022 Mar;19(3):150. doi: 10.1038/s41571-021-00596-9.

BACKGROUND: Most patients with advanced-stage indolent non-Hodgkin lymphoma have
multiple relapses. We assessed axicabtagene ciloleucel autologous anti-CD19
chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy in relapsed or refractory
indolent non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
METHODS: ZUMA-5 is a single-arm, multicentre, phase 2 trial being conducted at
15 medical cancer centres in the USA and two medical cancer centres in France.
Patients were eligible if they were aged 18 years or older, with histologically
confirmed indolent non-Hodgkin lymphoma (follicular lymphoma or marginal zone
lymphoma), had relapsed or refractory disease, previously had two or more lines
of therapy (including an anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody with an alkylating
agent), and an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance score of 0 or 1.
Patients underwent leukapheresis and received conditioning chemotherapy
(cyclophosphamide at 500 mg/m2 per day and fludarabine at 30 mg/m2 per day on
days -5, -4, and -3) followed by a single infusion of axicabtagene ciloleucel
(2 × 106 CAR T cells per kg) on day 0. The primary endpoint was overall response
rate (complete response and partial response) assessed by an independent review
committee per Lugano classification. The primary activity analysis was done
after at least 80 treated patients with follicular lymphoma had been followed up
for at least 12 months after the first response assessment at week 4 after
infusion. The primary analyses were done in the per-protocol population (ie,
eligible patients with follicular lymphoma who had 12 months of follow-up after
the first response assessment and eligible patients with marginal zone lymphoma
who had at least 4 weeks of follow-up after infusion of axicabtagene
ciloleucel). Safety analyses were done in patients who received an infusion of
axicabtagene ciloleucel. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov,
NCT03105336, and is closed to accrual.
FINDINGS: Between June 20, 2017, and July 16, 2020, 153 patients were enrolled
and underwent leukapheresis, and axicabtagene ciloleucel was successfully
manufactured for all enrolled patients. As of data cutoff (Sept 14, 2020), 148
patients had received an infusion of axicabtagene ciloleucel (124 [84%] who had
follicular lymphoma and 24 [16%] who had marginal zone lymphoma). The median
follow-up for the primary analysis was 17·5 months (IQR 14·1-22·6). Among
patients who were eligible for the primary analysis (n=104, of whom 84 had
follicular lymphoma and 20 had marginal zone lymphoma), 96 (92%; 95% CI 85-97)
had an overall response and 77 (74%) had a complete response. The most common
grade 3 or worse adverse events were cytopenias (104 [70%] of 148 patients) and
infections (26 [18%]). Grade 3 or worse cytokine release syndrome occurred in
ten (7%) patients and grade 3 or 4 neurological events occurred in 28 (19%)
patients. Serious adverse events (any grade) occurred in 74 (50%) patients.
Deaths due to adverse events occurred in four (3%) patients, one of which was
deemed to be treatment-related (multisystem organ failure).
INTERPRETATION: Axicabtagene ciloleucel showed high rates of durable responses
and had a manageable safety profile in patients with relapsed or refractory
indolent non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
FUNDING: Kite, a Gilead Company.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(21)00591-X
PMID: 34895487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests CAJ has received
support for the present manuscript from Kite, a Gilead Company; has received
consulting fees from Novartis, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Precision Biosciences,
Nkarta, Bluebird Bio, AbbVie, Lonza, and Ipsen; and has received payment or
honoraria from Novartis, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Bluebird Bio, and Epizyme. JCC
reports consulting fees from Novartis Kite, a Gilead Company, AbbVie, Janssen,
ADC Therapeutics, and Karyoplasm, and payment or honoraria from Morphosys,
BeiGene, Epizyme, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and AstraZeneca. ARS reports support to
their institution from Kite, a Gilead Company for the present manuscript and
clinical trial support from Bristol-Myers Squibb. BMW reports consulting fees
for an advisory board from Bristol-Myers Squibb. JM has received consulting fees
from AbbVie, Bayer, Kite, a Gilead Company, Pfizer, Janssen, Bristol-Myers
Squibb, Kyowa, Alexion, Fosunkite, Innovent, SeaGen, Debiopharm, Karyopharm,
Genmab, ADC Therapeutics, Epizyme, BeiGene, and Servier; honoraria from Targeted
Oncology, OncView, Curio Sciences, Kyowa, Physicians' Education Resource, and
SeaGen; honoraria for speaker's bureaus from Kite, a Gilead Company, Kyowa,
Bayer, Janssen, SeaGen, Acrotech/Aurobindo, BeiGene, Verastem, AstraZeneca,
Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Genentech/Roche; and research funding from Bayer,
Kite, a Gilead Company, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Merck, Portola, Incyte, Genentech,
Pharmacyclics, SeaGen, Janssen, and Millennium. GS reports support from Kite, a
Gilead Company for the present manuscript; consulting fees from Bristol-Myers
Squibb, Incyte, Ipsen, Janssen, Kite, a Gilead Company, Loxo, Lilly, Milteniy,
Morphosys, Novartis, and Rapt; payment or honoraria from AbbVie, Amgen, Bayer,
Epizyme, Regeneron, Roche, Morphosys, Kite, a Gilead Company, and Novartis; and
participation on a data safety monitoring board or advisory board at AbbVie,
Beigene, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Debiopharm, Epizyme, Genentech/Roche, Genmab,
Incyte, Kite, a Gilead Company, Milteniy, Morphosys, Takeda, and Velosbio. PNM
reports payment or honoraria for a speaker's bureau from Kite, a Gilead Company
and Incyte, and stock or stock options from Amgen. CC reports research funding
from Veristem, Gilead, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Genentech. DGM reports research
funding from Bristol-Myers Squib and Kite, a Gilead Company; rights to royalties
from Fred Hutch for patents licensed to Bristol-Myers Squibb; honoraria for
advisory boards from Amgen, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Genentech, Gilead Sciences,
Incyte, Janssen, Kite, a Gilead Company, Legend Biotech, MorphoSys, Mustang Bio,
Novartis, Pharmacyclics, and Umoja; has participated on a data safety monitoring
board or steering committee for Bioline RX, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Genentech;
has held a leadership role at Bristol-Myers Squibb and Genentech; and has had
honoraria and stock options from A2 Biotherapeutics and Navan Technologies, Inc.
SdV has participated on an advisory board with BeiGene. RR reports support from
Gilead for the present manuscript; consulting fees from Gilead, Novartis,
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Synthekine, TScan, Regeneron, and Atara; payment for
expert testimony for Bayer; travel and meeting support from Gilead; and
participation on a data safety monitoring board or advisory board at the
University of Pennsylvania. LAL has received consulting fees from AbbVie,
AstraZeneca, Merck, TG Therapeutics, Janssen, Epizyme, Kite, a Gilead Company,
and Bristol-Myers Squibb; has received payment or honoraria for speaker's
bureaus from Kite, a Gilead Company, Beigene, Janssen, AstraZeneca, SeaGen, TG
therapeutics, Epizyme, Karyopharm; has participated on advisory boards with TG
therapeutics, AbbVie, Janssen, AstraZeneca, SeaGen, ADC Therapeutics; and has a
leadership role at the Leukemia/lymphoma Society and the Lymphoma Research
Foundation. IY-A has received consulting fees from Kite, a Gilead Company and
Novartis; payment or honoraria from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Janssen, and Kite, a
Gilead Company; and meeting and travel support from Kite, a Gilead Company. OOO
reports consulting fees from Kite, a Gilead Company, Pfizer, Novartis, and
Janssen, and honoraria from Kite, a Gilead Company. HCHF has received consulting
fees from Pfizer, Genzyme, BeiGene, Jazz pharmaceuticals, and Alexion, and has
received payment or honoraria for speaker's bureaus and lectures from
Bristol-Myers Squibb, AstraZeneca, Janssen, karyopharm, Kite, a Gilead Company,
Takeda, Amgen, AbbVie, and Genentech. JR reports support for the current
manuscript from Kite, a Gilead Company; grants from Synergys and Biograph55;
planned patents with Synergys; leadership at the American Association for Cancer
Research, American Society of Hematology, and the American Society of Clinical
Oncology, and stock options with ISK. JMR reports employment with Kite, a Gilead
Company and equity ownership in Kite, a Gilead Company in support of the present
manuscript. LG and RV report employment with and equity ownership with Kite, a
Gilead Company. VP reports travel and meeting support from Kite, a Gilead
Company and equity ownership in Gilead. MPA reports employment with Kite, a
Gilead Company and equity ownership in Gilead. SSN reports support from Kite, a
Gilead Company for the present manuscript; grants or contracts from Kite, a
Gilead Company, Merck, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Cellectis, Poseida, Karus,
AstraZeneca, Allogene, Unum Therapeutics, Precision Biosciences, and Adicet Bio;
royalties from Takeda; consulting fees from Kite, a Gilead Company, Merck,
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Novartis, Unum Therapeutics, Pfizer, Precision
Biosciences, Cell Medica/Kuur, Allogene, Incyte, Legend Biotech, Adicet Bio,
Calibr, and Bluebird Bio; payment or honoraria from Medscape, Aptitude Health,
Bio Ascend, and MJH Life Sciences; and patents pending related to cell therapy.
YY declares no competing interests.
