---
reference_id: "PMID:12136236"
title: SLEB3 in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is strongly related to SLE families ascertained through neuropsychiatric manifestations.
authors:
- Nath SK
- Kelly JA
- Reid J
- Lam T
- Gray-McGuire C
- Namjou B
- Aston CE
- Harley JB
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-002-0743-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SLEB3 in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is strongly related to SLE families ascertained through neuropsychiatric manifestations.
**Authors:** Nath SK, Kelly JA, Reid J, Lam T, Gray-McGuire C, Namjou B, Aston CE, Harley JB
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-002-0743-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-002-0743-1)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2002 Jul;111(1):54-8. doi: 10.1007/s00439-002-0743-1. Epub 2002 Jun
 14.

SLEB3 in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is strongly related to SLE families 
ascertained through neuropsychiatric manifestations.

Nath SK(1), Kelly JA, Reid J, Lam T, Gray-McGuire C, Namjou B, Aston CE, Harley 
JB.

Author information:
(1)Genetic Epidemiology Unit, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma 
City, USA. swapan-nath@omrf.ouhsc.edu

Seizures and psychosis are neuropsychiatric (NP) manifestations of a large 
number of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patients. Since NP manifestations 
were part of the SLE phenotype for some, but not all SLE affecteds, we 
hypothesized that those SLE patient families with NP manifestations might be 
more genetically homogeneous at loci important to NP-related SLE, and hence have 
increased power to detect linkage. We identified 23 families of 
European-American (EA) origin and 20 families of African-American (AA) origin, 
in which at least one SLE patient in each family was diagnosed with the presence 
of NP manifestations. A total of 318 microsatellite markers at an average marker 
density of 11 cM were genotyped. Uncertainty of the genetic model led us to 
perform the initial genome scan by a multipoint non-parametric allele sharing 
linkage method. Once the evidence of linkage was suggestive, we then performed 
parametric model-based linkage by maximizing the relevant parameters to define a 
parsimonious genetic model. We found the maximum multipoint parametric LOD score 
was 5.19 and the non-parametric linkage score (Zlr) was 3.12 ( P=9x10(-4)) for 
EA NP pedigrees at 4p16, previously identified as SLEB3. The segregation 
behavior of this linked locus suggests a dominant mode of inheritance with an 
almost 100% homogeneous genetic effect in these pedigrees. The results 
demonstrated a significant increase of LOD score to detect SLEB3 when the 
families were further ascertained through NP, compared with the analysis of all 
EA SLE families together.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-002-0743-1
PMID: 12136236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]