---
reference_id: "PMID:35842919"
title: "Timing of referral to evaluate for epilepsy surgery: Expert Consensus Recommendations from the Surgical Therapies Commission of the International League Against Epilepsy."
authors:
- Jehi L
- Jette N
- Kwon CS
- Josephson CB
- Burneo JG
- Cendes F
- Sperling MR
- Baxendale S
- Busch RM
- Triki CC
- Cross JH
- Ekstein D
- Englot DJ
- Luan G
- Palmini A
- Rios L
- Wang X
- Roessler K
- Rydenhag B
- Ramantani G
- Schuele S
- Wilmshurst JM
- Wilson S
- Wiebe S
journal: Epilepsia
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/epi.17350
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- Drug Resistant Epilepsy/psychology
- "Epilepsy/diagnosis, drug therapy, surgery"
- Humans
- Referral and Consultation
- Seizures/diagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Timing of referral to evaluate for epilepsy surgery: Expert Consensus Recommendations from the Surgical Therapies Commission of the International League Against Epilepsy.
**Authors:** Jehi L, Jette N, Kwon CS, Josephson CB, Burneo JG, Cendes F, Sperling MR, Baxendale S, Busch RM, Triki CC, Cross JH, Ekstein D, Englot DJ, Luan G, Palmini A, Rios L, Wang X, Roessler K, Rydenhag B, Ramantani G, Schuele S, Wilmshurst JM, Wilson S, Wiebe S
**Journal:** Epilepsia (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/epi.17350](https://doi.org/10.1111/epi.17350)

## Content

1. Epilepsia. 2022 Oct;63(10):2491-2506. doi: 10.1111/epi.17350. Epub 2022 Jul
17.

Timing of referral to evaluate for epilepsy surgery: Expert Consensus
Recommendations from the Surgical Therapies Commission of the International
League Against Epilepsy.

Jehi L(1), Jette N(2), Kwon CS(3), Josephson CB(4), Burneo JG(5), Cendes F(6),
Sperling MR(7), Baxendale S(8), Busch RM(1), Triki CC(9), Cross JH(10), Ekstein
D(11), Englot DJ(12), Luan G(13)(14)(15), Palmini A(16), Rios L(17), Wang
X(13)(14)(15), Roessler K(18), Rydenhag B(19), Ramantani G(20), Schuele S(21),
Wilmshurst JM(22)(23), Wilson S(24), Wiebe S(4).

Author information:
(1)Epilepsy Center, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology and Department of Population Health, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(3)Departments of Neurology, Epidemiology, Neurosurgery and the Gertrude H.
Sergievsky Center, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA.
(4)Departments of Clinical Neurosciences and Community Health Sciences,
University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(5)Department of Clinical Neurological Sciences and NeuroEpidemiology Unit,
Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, Western University, London, Ontario,
Canada.
(6)Department of Neurology, University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil.
(7)Department of Neurology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA.
(8)Department of Clinical and Experimental Epilepsy, University College London
Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London, UK.
(9)Department of Child Neurology, Hedi Chaker Hospital, LR19ES15 Sfax
University, Sfax, Tunisia.
(10)UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, UK.
(11)Department of Neurology, Agnes Ginges Center for Human Neurogenetics,
Hadassah Medical Organization, Jerusalem, Israel.
(12)Department of Neurosurgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee, USA.
(13)Department of Neurosurgery, Comprehensive Epilepsy Center, Beijing Institute
for Brain Disorders, Sanbo Brain Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing,
China.
(14)Beijing Key Laboratory of Epilepsy, Beijing, China.
(15)Epilepsy Institution, Beijing, China.
(16)Neurosciences and Surgical Departments, School of Medicine, Pontifícia
Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul (PUCRS), Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(17)Clínica Integral de Epilepsia, Campus Clínico Facultad de Medicina
Universidad Finis Terrae, Santiago, Chile.
(18)Department of Neurosurgery, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(19)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of Neuroscience and
Physiology, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(20)Department of Neuropediatrics, and University Children's Hospital Zurich,
Switzerland, University of Zurich, Switzerland.
(21)Department of Neurology, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(22)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Red Cross War Memorial Children's
Hospital, Cape Town, South Africa.
(23)Institute of Neurosciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South
Africa.
(24)Melbourne School of Psychological Sciences, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Australia.

Epilepsy surgery is the treatment of choice for patients with drug-resistant
seizures. A timely evaluation for surgical candidacy can be life-saving for
patients who are identified as appropriate surgical candidates, and may also
enhance the care of nonsurgical candidates through improvement in diagnosis,
optimization of therapy, and treatment of comorbidities. Yet, referral for
surgical evaluations is often delayed while palliative options are pursued, with
significant adverse consequences due to increased morbidity and mortality
associated with intractable epilepsy. The Surgical Therapies Commission of the
International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) sought to address these clinical
gaps and clarify when to initiate a surgical evaluation. We conducted a Delphi
consensus process with 61 epileptologists, epilepsy neurosurgeons, neurologists,
neuropsychiatrists, and neuropsychologists with a median of 22 years in
practice, from 28 countries in all six ILAE world regions. After three rounds of
Delphi surveys, evaluating 51 unique scenarios, we reached the following Expert
Consensus Recommendations: (1) Referral for a surgical evaluation should be
offered to every patient with drug-resistant epilepsy (up to 70 years of age),
as soon as drug resistance is ascertained, regardless of epilepsy duration, sex,
socioeconomic status, seizure type, epilepsy type (including epileptic
encephalopathies), localization, and comorbidities (including severe psychiatric
comorbidity like psychogenic nonepileptic seizures [PNES] or substance abuse) if
patients are cooperative with management; (2) A surgical referral should be
considered for older patients with drug-resistant epilepsy who have no surgical
contraindication, and for patients (adults and children) who are seizure-free on
1-2 antiseizure medications (ASMs) but have a brain lesion in noneloquent
cortex; and (3) referral for surgery should not be offered to patients with
active substance abuse who are noncooperative with management. We present the
Delphi consensus results leading up to these Expert Consensus Recommendations
and discuss the data supporting our conclusions. High level evidence will be
required to permit creation of clinical practice guidelines.

© 2022 International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1111/epi.17350
PMCID: PMC9562030
PMID: 35842919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The remaining authors have no conflicts to
declare.
