---
reference_id: "PMID:38271552"
title: 1726 nm Lasers for the Treatment of Acne Vulgaris.
authors:
- Bittar J
- Hooper P
- Dover JS
journal: Skin Therapy Lett
year: '2024'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 1726 nm Lasers for the Treatment of Acne Vulgaris.
**Authors:** Bittar J, Hooper P, Dover JS
**Journal:** Skin Therapy Lett (2024)

## Content

1. Skin Therapy Lett. 2024 Jan;29(1):5-7.

1726 nm Lasers for the Treatment of Acne Vulgaris.

Bittar J(1), Hooper P(2), Dover JS(3).

Author information:
(1)Rush University Medical Center, Department of Dermatology, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)SkinCare Physicians, Chestnut Hill, MA, USA.
(3)Yale University School of Medicine, Department of Dermatology, New Haven, CT, 
USA.

The treatment of acne vulgaris traditionally consists of a combination of 
topical and oral medications. The use of lasers to treat this condition has been 
an area of increasing research, and several types have previously been used in 
the treatment of acne. New 1726 nm lasers specifically target the sebaceous 
gland, which is known to be pivotal in acne pathophysiology. This laser 
wavelength demonstrates substantial potential as a safe and effective 
therapeutic option for moderate to severe acne without the risks of systemic 
therapy. This paper reviews the 1726 nm lasers for acne vulgaris.

PMID: 38271552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: Julie Bittar and Perry 
Hooper have no conflicts to disclose. Jeffrey Dover has received funding for 
research and consulting from Cutera Inc.