---
reference_id: "PMID:28410705"
title: Patients' perception towards directly observed treatment - A qualitative study from Kollam district, Kerala, southern India.
authors:
- Rakesh PS
- Balakrishnan S
- Krishnaveni V
- Narayanan V
- Pillai S
- Thomas SM
journal: Indian J Tuberc
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijtb.2016.11.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Patients' perception towards directly observed treatment - A qualitative study from Kollam district, Kerala, southern India.
**Authors:** Rakesh PS, Balakrishnan S, Krishnaveni V, Narayanan V, Pillai S, Thomas SM
**Journal:** Indian J Tuberc (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijtb.2016.11.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijtb.2016.11.007)

## Content

1. Indian J Tuberc. 2017 Apr;64(2):93-98. doi: 10.1016/j.ijtb.2016.11.007. Epub 
2016 Dec 16.

Patients' perception towards directly observed treatment - A qualitative study 
from Kollam district, Kerala, southern India.

Rakesh PS(1), Balakrishnan S(2), Krishnaveni V(3), Narayanan V(4), Pillai S(4), 
Thomas SM(4).

Author information:
(1)Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences, Amrita Viswavidhyapeetham, Kochi, 
India. Electronic address: rakeshrenjini@gmail.com.
(2)WHO RNTCP Tecnical Assistance Project, State TB Cell, Kerala, India.
(3)District TB Centre, Kollam, Kerala, India.
(4)Travancore Medical College, Kollam, India.

BACKGROUND: The Direct Observation of Treatment (DOT) is an important component 
of the country's TB Control strategy. Standards of TB care in India and the End 
TB strategy emphasised the importance of a patient-centered approach to foster 
adherence. A qualitative study was conducted to explore the perception of people 
with Tuberculosis in Kerala regarding DOT, mechanisms to make the treatment of 
TB more patients centered and to identify the preferable mechanisms to ensure 
adherence.
METHODS: Six focus group discussions were conducted - two among people with TB 
from rural area, two among people with TB in urban area, one among multipurpose 
health workers of rural area and one among key field staff of TB control in 
urban area.
RESULTS: Patients who were on a strict DOT were unhappy about the issues of 
confidentiality, patient inconvenience and provider centered approach. A 
flexible, patient centered approach were a family member can act as the DOT 
provider with guidance from a trained health worker was evolved as the most 
acceptable and comfortable mode of treatment to majority of the TB patients. 
They felt that a strict external monitor as a DOT provider was not a necessity 
in majority of the cases. Only practical way to effectively incorporate ICT in 
monitoring patient compliance in current scenario was identified as daily phone 
call reminders. Patients also expressed their concerns in keeping the medicines 
for entire duration at home.
CONCLUSION: A flexible patient wise individualized system based on patient's 
behavior, literacy and awareness along with attitude of family members is needed 
to ensure adherence to anti TB drugs.

Copyright © 2016 Tuberculosis Association of India. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijtb.2016.11.007
PMID: 28410705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]