---
reference_id: "PMID:41440809"
title: "Incidence of Organic Acid Disorders in 13 Million Chinese Newborns: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Huang S
- Yao Q
- Kong F
- Wu M
- Qiu X
- Zhao P
- Zeng Y
- Luo J
- Xu L
- Zhou J
journal: Int J Neonatal Screen
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/ijns11040113
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence of Organic Acid Disorders in 13 Million Chinese Newborns: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Huang S, Yao Q, Kong F, Wu M, Qiu X, Zhao P, Zeng Y, Luo J, Xu L, Zhou J
**Journal:** Int J Neonatal Screen (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijns11040113](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijns11040113)

## Content

1. Int J Neonatal Screen. 2025 Dec 13;11(4):113. doi: 10.3390/ijns11040113.

Incidence of Organic Acid Disorders in 13 Million Chinese Newborns: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis.

Huang S(1)(2), Yao Q(1)(3), Kong F(1)(2), Wu M(1)(2), Qiu X(1), Zhao P(1), Zeng
Y(1), Luo J(1), Xu L(1), Zhou J(1).

Author information:
(1)Fujian Maternity and Child Hospital College of Clinical Medicine for
Obstetrics & Gynecology and Pediatrics, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou
350001, China.
(2)Department of Preventive Medicine, School of Public Health, Fujian Medical
University, Fuzhou 350122, China.
(3)School of Medical Technology and Engineering, Fujian Medical University,
Fuzhou 350122, China.

Organic acid disorders (OADs) are inherited metabolic defects in the enzymes and
cofactors involved in metabolic pathways. This systematic review and
meta-analysis investigated the incidence and regional differences in OADs
between the northern and southern regions of China. Searches of the PubMed,
Embase, Web of Science, and Chinese databases (CNKI, Veipu, and Wanfang)
revealed 1784 studies indexed between January 2002 and December 2024. After
quality assessment and data extraction, the meta-analysis was conducted on OAD
screening data from 57 studies involving 13,314,056 newborns and 1501 OAD cases
in China. The seven most prevalent OADs were methylmalonic acidemia (MMA),
3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency, glutaric acidemia type I,
isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, isovaleric acidemia,
2-methylbutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (2-MBD), and propionic acidemia.
The meta-analysis revealed an OAD prevalence of 112.38 (95% confidence interval
106.70-118.07) per 1,000,000 newborns. The incidence of OADs and MMA was
significantly higher in northern China than in southern China, whereas the
incidence of 2-MBD was significantly lower in northern China than in southern
China (p < 0.0001). Additionally, the ratio of MMA combined with homocystinuria
to MMA was higher in northern China than in southern China (p < 0.05). These
results provide valuable epidemiological insights and guidance for newborn
screening for OADs in China.

DOI: 10.3390/ijns11040113
PMCID: PMC12734155
PMID: 41440809

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
