---
reference_id: "PMID:33234067"
title: Signalling through cerebral cavernous malformation protein networks.
authors:
- Su VL
- Calderwood DA
journal: Open Biol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1098/rsob.200263
keywords:
- Animals
- Biomarkers
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Disease Management
- Disease Susceptibility
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Hemangioma, Cavernous, Central Nervous System/diagnosis, etiology, metabolism, therapy"
- Humans
- Intracellular Space
- Mutation
- Protein Binding
- Protein Interaction Domains and Motifs
- Protein Interaction Mapping
- Protein Interaction Maps
- Protein Transport
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Signalling through cerebral cavernous malformation protein networks.
**Authors:** Su VL, Calderwood DA
**Journal:** Open Biol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1098/rsob.200263](https://doi.org/10.1098/rsob.200263)

## Content

1. Open Biol. 2020 Nov;10(11):200263. doi: 10.1098/rsob.200263. Epub 2020 Nov 25.

Signalling through cerebral cavernous malformation protein networks.

Su VL(1), Calderwood DA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medicine, PO Box
208066, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Yale University School of Medicine, PO Box
208066, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Cerebral cavernous malformations (CCMs) are neurovascular abnormalities
characterized by thin, leaky blood vessels resulting in lesions that predispose
to haemorrhages, stroke, epilepsy and focal neurological deficits. CCMs arise
due to loss-of-function mutations in genes encoding one of three CCM complex
proteins, KRIT1, CCM2 or CCM3. These widely expressed, multi-functional adaptor
proteins can assemble into a CCM protein complex and (either alone or in
complex) modulate signalling pathways that influence cell adhesion, cell
contractility, cytoskeletal reorganization and gene expression. Recent advances,
including analysis of the structures and interactions of CCM proteins, have
allowed substantial progress towards understanding the molecular bases for CCM
protein function and how their disruption leads to disease. Here, we review
current knowledge of CCM protein signalling with a focus on three pathways which
have generated the most interest-the RhoA-ROCK, MEKK3-MEK5-ERK5-KLF2/4 and cell
junctional signalling pathways-but also consider ICAP1-β1 integrin and cdc42
signalling. We discuss emerging links between these pathways and the processes
that drive disease pathology and highlight important open questions-key among
them is the role of subcellular localization in the control of CCM protein
activity.

DOI: 10.1098/rsob.200263
PMCID: PMC7729028
PMID: 33234067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We declare we have no competing interests.
