---
reference_id: "PMID:37692275"
title: "Lipomas: genetic basis of common skin lesions and their occurrence in rare diseases."
authors:
- Marzyńska D
- Żaba R
- Lacka K
journal: Postepy Dermatol Alergol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.5114/ada.2023.129529
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lipomas: genetic basis of common skin lesions and their occurrence in rare diseases.
**Authors:** Marzyńska D, Żaba R, Lacka K
**Journal:** Postepy Dermatol Alergol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.5114/ada.2023.129529](https://doi.org/10.5114/ada.2023.129529)

## Content

1. Postepy Dermatol Alergol. 2023 Aug;40(4):481-486. doi:
10.5114/ada.2023.129529.  Epub 2023 Jul 15.

Lipomas: genetic basis of common skin lesions and their occurrence in rare 
diseases.

Marzyńska D(1), Żaba R(2), Lacka K(3).

Author information:
(1)Student's Scientific Circle at the Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism 
and Internal Diseases, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Poznan University of Medical 
Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Internal Diseases, Poznan 
University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.

Lipomas are usually sporadic, asymptomatic lesions, and their clinical and 
histologic presentation does not pose diagnostic difficulties. In ambiguous 
cases, however, knowledge of genetics is necessary. HMGA2 expression in adipose 
cells enables the differentiation of normal adipose tissue from lipoma and 
liposarcoma. Moreover, lipomas can be associated with genetic diseases, such as 
multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1, neurofibromatosis type 1, Wilson's disease, 
or mitochondrial diseases. Lipomas can run in families (familial multiple 
lipomatosis) or be a part of genetic syndromes such as PTEN hamartoma tumor 
syndrome, Proteus syndrome, and Pai syndrome. This study aims to present the 
genetic basis of lipomas and diseases in which these lesions occur in the 
clinical picture.

Copyright: © 2023 Termedia Sp. z o. o.

DOI: 10.5114/ada.2023.129529
PMCID: PMC10485760
PMID: 37692275

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.