---
reference_id: "PMID:28331068"
title: "Mutations in EFL1, an SBDS partner, are associated with infantile pancytopenia, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency and skeletal anomalies in aShwachman-Diamond like syndrome."
authors:
- Stepensky P
- Chacón-Flores M
- Kim KH
- Abuzaitoun O
- Bautista-Santos A
- Simanovsky N
- Siliqi D
- Altamura D
- Méndez-Godoy A
- Gijsbers A
- Naser Eddin A
- Dor T
- Charrow J
- Sánchez-Puig N
- Elpeleg O
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2016-104366
keywords:
- "Bone Marrow Diseases/complications, enzymology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Bone and Bones/abnormalities
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency/complications, enzymology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Female
- "GTP Phosphohydrolases/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Genetic Variation
- Humans
- Infant
- "Lipomatosis/complications, enzymology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Male
- Mutation
- "Pancytopenia/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- Peptide Elongation Factors
- Protein Folding
- "Ribonucleoprotein, U5 Small Nuclear"
- "Ribosome Subunits, Large, Eukaryotic/metabolism"
- Saccharomyces cerevisiae/genetics
- Shwachman-Diamond Syndrome
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in EFL1, an SBDS partner, are associated with infantile pancytopenia, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency and skeletal anomalies in aShwachman-Diamond like syndrome.
**Authors:** Stepensky P, Chacón-Flores M, Kim KH, Abuzaitoun O, Bautista-Santos A, Simanovsky N, Siliqi D, Altamura D, Méndez-Godoy A, Gijsbers A, Naser Eddin A, Dor T, Charrow J, Sánchez-Puig N, Elpeleg O
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2016-104366](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2016-104366)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2017 Aug;54(8):558-566. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2016-104366. Epub
2017 Mar 22.

Mutations in EFL1, an SBDS partner, are associated with infantile pancytopenia,
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency and skeletal anomalies in aShwachman-Diamond
like syndrome.

Stepensky P(1), Chacón-Flores M(2), Kim KH(3)(4), Abuzaitoun O(5),
Bautista-Santos A(2), Simanovsky N(6), Siliqi D(7), Altamura D(7), Méndez-Godoy
A(2), Gijsbers A(2), Naser Eddin A(1), Dor T(8), Charrow J(3)(4), Sánchez-Puig
N(2), Elpeleg O(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Bone Marrow Transplantation,
Hadassah, Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(2)Departamento de Química de Biomacromoléculas, Instituto de Química,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad de México, México.
(3)Division of Genetics, Birth Defects and Metabolism, Ann & Robert H. Lurie
Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern
University, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(5)Nablus Speciality Hospital, Palestinian Authority, Nablus, Palestine.
(6)Department of Medical Imaging, Hadassah, Hebrew University Medical Center,
Jerusalem, Israel.
(7)Istituto di Cristallografia, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Bari, Italy.
(8)Pediatric Neurology Unit, Hadassah, Hebrew University Medical Center,
Jerusalem, Israel.
(9)Monique and Jacques Roboh Department of Genetic Research, Hadassah, Hebrew
University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.

BACKGROUND: For the final step of the maturation of the ribosome, the nascent
40S and 60S subunits are exported from the nucleus to the cell cytoplasm. To
prevent premature association of these ribosomal subunits, eukaryotic initiation
factor 6 (eIF6) binds the 60S subunit within the nucleus. Its release in the
cytoplasm requires the interaction of EFL1 and SDBS proteins. In
Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (SDS), a defective SDBS protein prevents eIF6
eviction, inhibiting its recycle to the nucleus and subsequent formation of the
active 80S ribosome.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to identify the molecular basis of an SDS-like
disease, manifested by pancytopenia, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency and
skeletal abnormalities in six patients from three unrelated families.
METHODS: Whole exome analysis was used for mutation identification. Fluorescence
microscopy studies assessed the localisation of Tif6-GFP, the yeast eIF6
homologue, in yeast WT and mutant cells. Human and yeast EFL1 proteins, WT and
mutants, were expressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae BCY123 strain, and circular
dichroism and small-angle X-ray scattering were used to assess the folding and
flexibility of these proteins. Green malachite colorimetric assay was performed
to determine the GTPase activity of WT and Efl1 mutants.
RESULTS: Four patients were homozygous for p.R1095Q variant and two patients
were homozygous for p.M882K variant in EFL1. Residue R1095 and M882 are
conserved across species. Neither the GTPase activity of the mutant proteins nor
its activation by the SDBD protein or the 60S ribosomal subunit were affected.
Complementation of efl1Δ yeast cells with the EFL1 mutants rescued the slow
growth phenotype. Nonetheless, Tif6-GFP was relocalised to the cytoplasm in
mutant yeast cells in contrast to its nuclear localisation in WT cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in EFL1 clinically manifest as SDS-like phenotype.
Similar to the molecular pathology of SDS, mutant EFL1 proteins do not promote
the release of cytoplasmic Tif6 from the 60S subunit, likely preventing the
formation of mature ribosomes.

© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of
the article) 2017. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless
otherwise expressly granted.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2016-104366
PMID: 28331068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.
