---
reference_id: "PMID:22929031"
title: Maternal ABCA1 genotype is associated with severity of Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome and with viability of patients homozygous for null mutations.
authors:
- Lanthaler B
- Steichen-Gersdorf E
- Kollerits B
- Zschocke J
- Witsch-Baumgartner M
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.169
keywords:
- ATP Binding Cassette Transporter 1
- ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics
- Apolipoproteins E/genetics
- Cholesterol/blood
- Cholesterol Ester Transfer Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Fetal Death/genetics
- Gene Frequency
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Methylenetetrahydrofolate Reductase (NADPH2)/genetics
- Mothers
- Mutation
- Oxidoreductases Acting on CH-CH Group Donors/genetics
- Phosphatidylcholine-Sterol O-Acyltransferase/genetics
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome/etiology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Maternal ABCA1 genotype is associated with severity of Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome and with viability of patients homozygous for null mutations.
**Authors:** Lanthaler B, Steichen-Gersdorf E, Kollerits B, Zschocke J, Witsch-Baumgartner M
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2012.169](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2012.169)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2013 Mar;21(3):286-93. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.169. Epub 2012
Aug 29.

Maternal ABCA1 genotype is associated with severity of Smith-Lemli-Opitz
syndrome and with viability of patients homozygous for null mutations.

Lanthaler B(1), Steichen-Gersdorf E, Kollerits B, Zschocke J, Witsch-Baumgartner
M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.

The Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS [MIM 270400]) is an autosomal recessive
malformation syndrome that shows a great variability with regard to severity.
SLOS is caused by mutations in the Δ7sterol-reductase gene (DHCR7), which
disrupt cholesterol biosynthesis. Phenotypic variability of the disease is
already known to be associated with maternal apolipoprotein E (ApoE) genotype.
The aim of this study was to detect additional modifiers of the SLOS phenotype.
We examined the association of SLOS severity with variants in the genes for
ApoC-III, lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase, cholesteryl-ester transfer
protein, ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1), and methylene
tetrahydrofolate reductase. Our study group included 59 SLOS patients, their
mothers, and 49 of their fathers. In addition, we investigated whether ApoE and
ABCA1 genotypes are associated with the viability of severe SLOS cases (n=21)
caused by two null mutations in the DHCR7 gene. Maternal ABCA1 genotypes show a
highly significant correlation with clinical severity in SLOS patients
(P=0.007). The rare maternal p.1587Lys allele in the ABCA1 gene was associated
with milder phenotypes. ANOVA analysis demonstrated an association of maternal
ABCA1 genotypes with severity scores (logarithmised) of SLOS patients of
P=0.004. Maternal ABCA1 explains 15.4% (R²) of severity of SLOS patients. There
was no association between maternal ApoE genotype and survival of the SLOS fetus
carrying two null mutations. Regarding ABCA1 p.Arg1587Lys in mothers of latter
SLOS cases, a significant deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) was
observed (P=0.005). ABCA1 is an additional genetic modifier in SLOS. Modifying
placental cholesterol transfer pathways may be an approach for prenatal therapy
of SLOS.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.169
PMCID: PMC3573202
PMID: 22929031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
