---
reference_id: "PMID:20301714"
title: Nonsyndromic Disorders of Testicular Development Overview.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Mohnach L
- Fechner PY
- Keegan CE
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nonsyndromic Disorders of Testicular Development Overview.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Mohnach L, Fechner PY, Keegan CE

## Content

1. Nonsyndromic Disorders of Testicular Development Overview.

Mohnach L(1), Fechner PY(2), Keegan CE(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2008 May 21 [updated 2022 Aug 18].

Author information:
(1)University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
(2)University of Washington, Seattle, Washington

The purpose of this overview is to: 1.. To describe the clinical characteristics 
of nonsyndromic disorders of testicular development; 2.. To review the genetic 
causes of nonsyndromic disorders of testicular development and conditions that 
may be in the differential diagnosis; 3.. To provide an evaluation strategy to 
identify the genetic cause of nonsyndromic disorders of testicular development 
(when possible); 4.. To inform management regarding sex of rearing, 
medical/surgical intervention (when appropriate), hormone therapy, and 
psychosocial aspects of care; 5.. To inform genetic risk assessment in family 
members of a proband.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301714