---
reference_id: "PMID:26966089"
title: Revised classification of histiocytoses and neoplasms of the macrophage-dendritic cell lineages.
authors:
- Emile JF
- Abla O
- Fraitag S
- Horne A
- Haroche J
- Donadieu J
- Requena-Caballero L
- Jordan MB
- Abdel-Wahab O
- Allen CE
- Charlotte F
- Diamond EL
- Egeler RM
- Fischer A
- Herrera JG
- Henter JI
- Janku F
- Merad M
- Picarsic J
- Rodriguez-Galindo C
- Rollins BJ
- Tazi A
- Vassallo R
- Weiss LM
- Histiocyte Society
journal: Blood
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2016-01-690636
keywords:
- Adult
- "Dendritic Cells/classification, pathology"
- Female
- "Histiocytic Disorders, Malignant/classification, pathology"
- "Histiocytosis, Langerhans-Cell/classification, pathology"
- "Histiocytosis, Non-Langerhans-Cell/classification, pathology"
- Humans
- "Macrophages/classification, pathology"
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Revised classification of histiocytoses and neoplasms of the macrophage-dendritic cell lineages.
**Authors:** Emile JF, Abla O, Fraitag S, Horne A, Haroche J, Donadieu J, Requena-Caballero L, Jordan MB, Abdel-Wahab O, Allen CE, Charlotte F, Diamond EL, Egeler RM, Fischer A, Herrera JG, Henter JI, Janku F, Merad M, Picarsic J, Rodriguez-Galindo C, Rollins BJ, Tazi A, Vassallo R, Weiss LM, Histiocyte Society
**Journal:** Blood (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2016-01-690636](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2016-01-690636)

## Content

1. Blood. 2016 Jun 2;127(22):2672-81. doi: 10.1182/blood-2016-01-690636. Epub
2016  Mar 10.

Revised classification of histiocytoses and neoplasms of the 
macrophage-dendritic cell lineages.

Emile JF(1), Abla O(2), Fraitag S(3), Horne A(4), Haroche J(5), Donadieu J(6), 
Requena-Caballero L(7), Jordan MB(8), Abdel-Wahab O(9), Allen CE(10), Charlotte 
F(11), Diamond EL(12), Egeler RM(2), Fischer A(13), Herrera JG(14), Henter 
JI(15), Janku F(16), Merad M(17), Picarsic J(18), Rodriguez-Galindo C(19), 
Rollins BJ(20), Tazi A(21), Vassallo R(22), Weiss LM(23); Histiocyte Society.

Author information:
(1)Research Unit EA4340, Versailles University, Paris-Saclay University, 
Boulogne, France; Pathology Department, Ambroise Paré Hospital, Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Boulogne, France;
(2)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, The Hospital for 
Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada;
(3)Pathology Department, Necker Hospital, Paris, France;
(4)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet, 
Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden;
(5)Department of Internal Medicine and French Reference Center for Rare 
Auto-immune and Systemic Diseases, Institut E3M, AP-HP, Pitié-Salpêtrière 
Hospital, Paris, France; Université Pierre et Marie Curie University Paris 6, 
Paris, France;
(6)Research Unit EA4340, Versailles University, Paris-Saclay University, 
Boulogne, France; Pediatric Hematology, Trousseau Hospital, APHP, Paris, France;
(7)Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Universidad Autónoma, Madrid, Spain;
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center and 
the University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH;
(9)Leukemia Service, Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan 
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY;
(10)Feigin Center, Texas Children's Cancer Center, Houston, TX;
(11)Université Pierre et Marie Curie University Paris 6, Paris, France; 
Pathology Department, Pitié-Salpétrière Hospital, Paris, France;
(12)Department of Neurology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY;
(13)Necker Enfants Malades Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France; Institut Imagine, 
Sorbonne Paris Cité, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France;
(14)Division of Clínical Immunology, Hospital General Universitario and Health 
Research Institute "Gregorio Marañón," Madrid, Spain;
(15)Childhood Cancer Research Unit, Department of Women's and Children's Health, 
Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden;
(16)Department of Investigational Cancer Therapeutics (Phase I Clinical Trials 
Program), The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX;
(17)Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY;
(18)Pathology Department, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, 
Pittsburgh, PA;
(19)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA;
(20)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA; 
Department of Medicine, Brigham & Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA;
(21)Division of Pulmonary, Saint Louis Hospital, Paris, France;
(22)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Mayo Clinic College of 
Medicine, Rochester, MN; and.
(23)Clarient Pathology Services, Aliso Viejo, CA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2016 Jun 2;127(22):2655-6. doi: 10.1182/blood-2016-03-706267.

The histiocytoses are rare disorders characterized by the accumulation of 
macrophage, dendritic cell, or monocyte-derived cells in various tissues and 
organs of children and adults. More than 100 different subtypes have been 
described, with a wide range of clinical manifestations, presentations, and 
histologies. Since the first classification in 1987, a number of new findings 
regarding the cellular origins, molecular pathology, and clinical features of 
histiocytic disorders have been identified. We propose herein a revision of the 
classification of histiocytoses based on histology, phenotype, molecular 
alterations, and clinical and imaging characteristics. This revised 
classification system consists of 5 groups of diseases: (1) Langerhans-related, 
(2) cutaneous and mucocutaneous, and (3) malignant histiocytoses as well as (4) 
Rosai-Dorfman disease and (5) hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis and macrophage 
activation syndrome. Herein, we provide guidelines and recommendations for 
diagnoses of these disorders.

© 2016 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2016-01-690636
PMCID: PMC5161007
PMID: 26966089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]