---
reference_id: "PMID:35851619"
title: An update on ophthalmological perspectives in oculodermal melanocytosis (Nevus of Ota).
authors:
- Abdolrahimzadeh S
- Pugi DM
- Manni P
- Iodice CM
- Di Tizio F
- Persechino F
- Scuderi G
journal: Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00417-022-05743-1
keywords:
- Humans
- "Nevus of Ota/diagnosis, pathology"
- "Melanoma/diagnosis, pathology"
- Choroid Neoplasms/diagnosis
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence/methods"
- Skin Neoplasms/pathology
- Glaucoma
- Uveal Melanoma
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An update on ophthalmological perspectives in oculodermal melanocytosis (Nevus of Ota).
**Authors:** Abdolrahimzadeh S, Pugi DM, Manni P, Iodice CM, Di Tizio F, Persechino F, Scuderi G
**Journal:** Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00417-022-05743-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00417-022-05743-1)

## Content

1. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2023 Feb;261(2):291-301. doi: 
10.1007/s00417-022-05743-1. Epub 2022 Jul 19.

An update on ophthalmological perspectives in oculodermal melanocytosis (Nevus 
of Ota).

Abdolrahimzadeh S(#)(1)(2), Pugi DM(#)(3), Manni P(3), Iodice CM(4), Di Tizio 
F(5), Persechino F(6), Scuderi G(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Ophthalmology Unit, Mental Health, Neurosciences, and Sense Organs (NESMOS) 
Department, Faculty of Medicine and Psychology, University of Rome Sapienza, 
Rome, Italy. solmaz.abdolrahimzadeh@uniroma1.it.
(2)St. Andrea Hospital, Via di Grottarossa 1035/1039, 00189, Rome, Italy. 
solmaz.abdolrahimzadeh@uniroma1.it.
(3)Ophthalmology Unit, Mental Health, Neurosciences, and Sense Organs (NESMOS) 
Department, Faculty of Medicine and Psychology, University of Rome Sapienza, 
Rome, Italy.
(4)Multidisciplinary Department of Medical Surgical and Dental Sciences, Eye 
Clinic, University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Naples, Italy.
(5)St. Andrea Hospital, Via di Grottarossa 1035/1039, 00189, Rome, Italy.
(6)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, 
Rome, Italy.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: To provide a review of the literature on oculodermal melanocytosis 
(ODM) with a focus on the diagnostic and therapeutic implications of multimodal 
imaging techniques in the management of ophthalmic complications.
METHODS: The authors carried out a literature search on PubMed, Medline, and 
Scopus of English language articles published on ODM through August 2021. This 
review presents traditional and novel diagnostic methods in the diagnosis and 
follow-up of patients with particular emphasis on addressing the role of imaging 
in the management of the ophthalmic complications of the condition towards 
improving current practice patterns.
RESULTS: ODM is a rare, prevalently unilateral, congenital condition that 
presents with brown or blue/gray flat asymptomatic lesions of the skin, mucosae, 
episclera/sclera, and uvea localized within the territory of distribution of the 
ophthalmic and mandibular branches of the trigeminal nerve. Glaucoma and 
predisposition to uveal melanoma are the main ophthalmic complications. 
Diagnosis and management are through comprehensive opthalmological examination 
and traditional imaging methods such as ultrasonography and 
fluorescein/indocyanine green angiography as pigmentation of the fundus can 
conceal subtle retinal and choroidal alterations. Anterior segment optical 
coherence tomography and ultrasound biomicroscopy are used to evaluate the 
anterior segment and the ciliary body in the presence of glaucoma or melanoma of 
the anterior uveal tract. Fundus autofluorescence and retinal pigment epithelium 
(RPE) alterations are of aid in the differential diagnosis between choroidal 
nevi and melanoma. Enhanced depth imaging spectral domain optical coherence 
tomography offers outstanding in vivo evaluation of the dimensions and details 
of tumors or nevi and surrounding choroidal tissues and small choroidal 
melanomas may show distortions of the retinal and sub-retinal profile, presence 
of intra and sub-retinal fluid, abnormalities of the RPE, and compression of the 
choriocapillaris.
CONCLUSIONS: Novel multimodal imaging techniques are significant in the 
diagnosis and management of the ophthalmic complications of ODM. Fundus 
autofluorescence and enhanced depth spectral domain optical coherence tomography 
have adjunctive value in the detection of early-stage melanoma and differential 
diagnosis between nevi and melanoma. Awareness of current and emerging imaging 
techniques can propagate improved standardized definition and assessment of the 
complications of ODM.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00417-022-05743-1
PMCID: PMC9837000
PMID: 35851619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.