---
reference_id: "PMID:40432440"
title: Autoimmune Antibodies in Orthostatic Intolerance Syndromes.
authors:
- Lukáčová M
- Mitro P
- Lazúrová Z
- Hijová E
- Bertková I
- Valová K
journal: Physiol Res
year: '2025'
doi: 10.33549/physiolres.935504
keywords:
- Humans
- Autoantibodies/blood
- Female
- Male
- Adult
- "Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome/immunology, blood, diagnosis"
- "Orthostatic Intolerance/blood, immunology, diagnosis"
- Young Adult
- Middle Aged
- "Syncope, Vasovagal/immunology, blood, diagnosis"
- "Receptor, Angiotensin, Type 1/immunology"
- Autoimmunity
- Biomarkers/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmune Antibodies in Orthostatic Intolerance Syndromes.
**Authors:** Lukáčová M, Mitro P, Lazúrová Z, Hijová E, Bertková I, Valová K
**Journal:** Physiol Res (2025)
**DOI:** [10.33549/physiolres.935504](https://doi.org/10.33549/physiolres.935504)

## Content

1. Physiol Res. 2025 Apr 30;74(2):255-262. doi: 10.33549/physiolres.935504.

Autoimmune Antibodies in Orthostatic Intolerance Syndromes.

Lukáčová M(1), Mitro P, Lazúrová Z, Hijová E, Bertková I, Valová K.

Author information:
(1)1st Department of Cardiology, VUSCH, P. J. Safarik University, Kosice,
Slovakia. peter.mitro@upjs.sk.

Orthostatic intolerance (OI) is defined as the development of characteristic
symptoms while standing, which significantly improve by recumbency. The most
common forms are vasovagal syncope (VVS), orthostatic hypotension, and postural
orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS). Lately, there has been a growing body
of evidence that autoimmunity may play a role in the pathophysiology of
orthostatic intolerance syndromes. The aim was to compare the presence and
levels of autoimmune autoantibodies in patients with POTS, VVS syncope, and the
control group. Altogether, 61 patients with symptoms of orthostatic intolerance
were evaluated in this study - 19 POTS patients and 42 VVS patients. The control
group contained 22 patients with no signs of orthostatic intolerance. We
evaluated levels of autoantibodies against three subtypes of G-protein coupled
adrenergic receptor (alpha-1 and beta-1,2 adrenergic receptors), type 4 of
muscarinic acetylcholine receptor, and angiotensin II type 1 receptor. We
compared the levels between the three patient groups. Significantly higher
levels of angiotensin II type 1 receptor (AT1R) autoantibodies were found in the
POTS group compared with controls (0.67± 0.35 ng/ml vs. 0.38±0.32 ng/ml,
p=0.008). There was no significant difference in AT1R antibodies between the VVS
and control groups (0.46±0.34 ng/ml vs 0.38±0.32 ng/ml, p= 0.38). Autoantibody
concentration against ADRA1, ADRB1, ADRB2, and M4R were not significantly
different between the groups. Autoimmune mechanisms may lead to abnormal
regulation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and may contribute to the
pathophysiology of POTS.

DOI: 10.33549/physiolres.935504
PMCID: PMC12148095
PMID: 40432440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: There is no conflict of
interest.
