---
reference_id: "PMID:29522513"
title: "Fosmetpantotenate (RE-024), a phosphopantothenate replacement therapy for pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration: Mechanism of action and efficacy in nonclinical models."
authors:
- Elbaum D
- Beconi MG
- Monteagudo E
- Di Marco A
- Quinton MS
- Lyons KA
- Vaino A
- Harper S
journal: PLoS One
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0192028
keywords:
- Animals
- "Blood-Brain Barrier/drug effects, metabolism"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Coenzyme A/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- Macaca fascicularis
- Male
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Neurons/drug effects, metabolism"
- "Pantothenate Kinase-Associated Neurodegeneration/drug therapy, metabolism"
- "Pantothenic Acid/analogs & derivatives, pharmacokinetics, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Phosphotransferases (Alcohol Group Acceptor)/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Prodrugs/pharmacokinetics, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- RNA Interference
- "Rats, Sprague-Dawley"
- Species Specificity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fosmetpantotenate (RE-024), a phosphopantothenate replacement therapy for pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration: Mechanism of action and efficacy in nonclinical models.
**Authors:** Elbaum D, Beconi MG, Monteagudo E, Di Marco A, Quinton MS, Lyons KA, Vaino A, Harper S
**Journal:** PLoS One (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0192028](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0192028)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2018 Mar 9;13(3):e0192028. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0192028. 
eCollection 2018.

Fosmetpantotenate (RE-024), a phosphopantothenate replacement therapy for 
pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration: Mechanism of action and 
efficacy in nonclinical models.

Elbaum D(1), Beconi MG(1), Monteagudo E(2), Di Marco A(3), Quinton MS(1), Lyons 
KA(4), Vaino A(1), Harper S(5).

Author information:
(1)Research and Development, Retrophin Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts, United 
States of America.
(2)Preclinical Research, IRBM Science Park SpA, Pomezia, Rome, Italy.
(3)In-vitro Pharmacology, IRBM Science Park SpA, Pomezia, Rome, Italy.
(4)Independent consultant, Holland, New York, United States of America.
(5)Medicinal Chemistry, IRBM Science Park SpA, Pomezia, Rome, Italy.

In cells, phosphorylation of pantothenic acid to generate phosphopantothenic 
acid by the pantothenate kinase enzymes is the first step in coenzyme A 
synthesis. Pantothenate kinase 2, the isoform localized in neuronal cell 
mitochondria, is dysfunctional in patients with pantothenate kinase-associated 
neurodegeneration. Fosmetpantotenate is a phosphopantothenic acid prodrug in 
clinical development for treatment of pantothenate kinase-associated 
neurodegeneration, which aims to replenish phosphopantothenic acid in patients. 
Fosmetpantotenate restored coenzyme A in short-hairpin RNA pantothenate kinase 2 
gene-silenced neuroblastoma cells and was permeable in a blood-brain barrier 
model. The rate of fosmetpantotenate metabolism in blood is species-dependent. 
Following up to 700 mg/kg orally, blood exposure to fosmetpantotenate was 
negligible in rat and mouse, but measurable in monkey. Consistent with the 
difference in whole blood half-life, fosmetpantotenate dosed orally was found in 
the brains of the monkey (striatal dialysate) but was absent in mice. Following 
administration of isotopically labeled-fosmetpantotenate to mice, ~40% of liver 
coenzyme A (after 500 mg/kg orally) and ~50% of brain coenzyme A (after 125 μg 
intrastriatally) originated from isotopically labeled-fosmetpantotenate. 
Additionally, 10-day dosing of isotopically labeled-fosmetpantotenate, 12.5 μg, 
intracerebroventricularly in mice led to ~30% of brain coenzyme A containing the 
stable isotopic labels. This work supports the hypothesis that fosmetpantotenate 
acts to replace reduced phosphopantothenic acid in pantothenate kinase 
2-deficient tissues.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0192028
PMCID: PMC5844530
PMID: 29522513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Daniel Elbaum is an 
employee of Retrophin, Inc. Maria Beconi, Maria Quinton, and Andrew Vaino were 
employees of Retrophin, Inc. during their work on this project. Edith 
Monteagudo, Annalise Di Marco, and Steven Harper are employees of IRBM working 
under contract to Retrophin, Inc. Kathryn Lyons is an independent consultant 
working under contract to Retrophin, Inc. The authors who are current and former 
Retrophin employees may have an equity or other financial interest in Retrophin. 
Patent US 9,629,862 (Vaino et al. Pantothenate derivatives for the treatment of 
neurologic disorders). This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on 
sharing data and materials.