---
reference_id: "PMID:22364326"
title: Vigabatrin monotherapy for infantile spasms.
authors:
- Gaily E
journal: Expert Rev Neurother
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1586/ern.12.3
keywords:
- "Anticonvulsants/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Brain/drug effects, pathology"
- Diffusion Tensor Imaging
- Humans
- Infant
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- "Spasms, Infantile/drug therapy, pathology"
- "Vigabatrin/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vigabatrin monotherapy for infantile spasms.
**Authors:** Gaily E
**Journal:** Expert Rev Neurother (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1586/ern.12.3](https://doi.org/10.1586/ern.12.3)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Neurother. 2012 Mar;12(3):275-86. doi: 10.1586/ern.12.3.

Vigabatrin monotherapy for infantile spasms.

Gaily E(1).

Author information:
(1)Helsinki University Central Hospital, Department of Pediatric Neurology, PO
Box 280, 00029 HUS, Helsinki, Finland. eija.gaily@hus.fi

Infantile spasms syndrome (IS) (also known as West syndrome) is an epileptic
encephalopathy with a heterogeneous etiology. One of the most common specific
causes is tuberous sclerosis, diagnosed in almost 10% of the affected infants.
Adrenocorticotropic hormone or steroids have been the preferred treatments for
IS for several decades. Clinical studies have shown that vigabatrin is superior
to placebo in decreasing the frequency of infantile spasms. In tuberous
sclerosis, vigabatrin may be considered the first-line treatment for IS. The
mode of action is increasing concentrations of the inhibitory neurotransmitter
GABA in the brain. The use of vigabatrin is limited by a serious adverse effect,
permanent visual field constriction, which may affect 6-7% of exposed infants.
Treatment choices are based on balancing the potential adverse effects against
the risk of catastrophic cognitive and behavioral outcomes caused by
uncontrolled spasms.

DOI: 10.1586/ern.12.3
PMID: 22364326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
