---
reference_id: "PMID:32976638"
title: "Angelman syndrome and melatonin: What can they teach us about sleep regulation."
authors:
- Buonfiglio D
- Hummer DL
- Armstrong A
- Christopher Ehlen J
- DeBruyne JP
journal: J Pineal Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/jpi.12697
keywords:
- "Angelman Syndrome/blood, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Animals
- Circadian Rhythm
- Humans
- "Melatonin/blood, therapeutic use"
- Pineal Gland/metabolism
- "Sleep Wake Disorders/blood, drug therapy, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Angelman syndrome and melatonin: What can they teach us about sleep regulation.
**Authors:** Buonfiglio D, Hummer DL, Armstrong A, Christopher Ehlen J, DeBruyne JP
**Journal:** J Pineal Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jpi.12697](https://doi.org/10.1111/jpi.12697)

## Content

1. J Pineal Res. 2020 Nov;69(4):e12697. doi: 10.1111/jpi.12697. Epub 2020 Oct 11.

Angelman syndrome and melatonin: What can they teach us about sleep regulation.

Buonfiglio D(1), Hummer DL(2), Armstrong A(1), Christopher Ehlen J(3), DeBruyne
JP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Morehouse School of Medicine,
Atlanta, GA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Morehouse College, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(3)Department of Neurobiology, Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.

In 1965, Dr Harry Angelman reported a neurodevelopmental disorder affecting
three unrelated children who had similar symptoms: brachycephaly, mental
retardation, ataxia, seizures, protruding tongues, and remarkable paroxysms of
laughter. Over the past 50 years, the disorder became Angelman's namesake and
symptomology was expanded to include hyper-activity, stereotypies, and severe
sleep disturbances. The sleep disorders in many Angelman syndrome (AS) patients
are broadly characterized by difficulty falling and staying asleep at night.
Some of these patients sleep less than 4 hours a night and, in most cases, do
not make up this lost sleep during the day-leading to the speculation that AS
patients may "need" less sleep. Most AS patients also have severely reduced
levels of melatonin, a hormone produced by the pineal gland exclusively at
night. This nightly pattern of melatonin production is thought to help
synchronize internal circadian rhythms and promote nighttime sleep in humans and
other diurnal species. It has been proposed that reduced melatonin levels
contribute to the sleep problems in AS patients. Indeed, emerging evidence
suggests melatonin replacement therapy can improve sleep in many AS patients.
However, AS mice show sleep problems that are arguably similar to those in
humans despite being on genetic backgrounds that do not make melatonin. This
suggests the hypothesis that the change in nighttime melatonin may be a
secondary factor rather than the root cause of the sleeping disorder. The goals
of this review article are to revisit the sleep and melatonin findings in both
AS patients and animal models of AS and discuss what AS may tell us about the
underlying mechanisms of, and interplay between, melatonin and sleep.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jpi.12697
PMCID: PMC7577950
PMID: 32976638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
