---
reference_id: "PMID:31939530"
title: "Fabry disease: genetics, pathology, and treatment."
authors:
- Bernardes TP
- Foresto RD
- Kirsztajn GM
journal: Rev Assoc Med Bras (1992)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1590/1806-9282.66.S1.10
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fabry disease: genetics, pathology, and treatment.
**Authors:** Bernardes TP, Foresto RD, Kirsztajn GM
**Journal:** Rev Assoc Med Bras (1992) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1590/1806-9282.66.S1.10](https://doi.org/10.1590/1806-9282.66.S1.10)

## Content

1. Rev Assoc Med Bras (1992). 2020 Jan 13;66Suppl 1(Suppl 1):s10-s16. doi: 
10.1590/1806-9282.66.S1.10.

Fabry disease: genetics, pathology, and treatment.

Bernardes TP(1), Foresto RD(2), Kirsztajn GM(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Medicina Nefrologia da Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São 
Paulo, SP, Brasil.
(2)Hospital do Rim, São Paulo, SP, Brasil.

Fabry disease (FD) is a recessive monogenic inheritance disease linked to 
chromosome X, secondary to mutations in the GLA gene. Its prevalence is 
estimated between 1:8,454 and 1:117,000 among males and is probably 
underdiagnosed. Mutations in the GLA gene lead to the progressive accumulation 
of globotriaosylceramide (Gb3). Gb3 accumulates in lysosomes of different types 
of cells of the heart, kidneys, skin, eyes, central nervous system, and 
gastrointestinal system, and may lead to different clinical scenarios. The onset 
of symptoms occurs during childhood, with acroparesthesia, heat intolerance, and 
gastrointestinal symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and 
neuropathic pain. Subsequently, symptoms related to progressive impairment 
appear, such as angiokeratomas, cornea verticillata, left ventricular 
hypertrophy, myocardial fibrosis, proteinuria, and renal insufficiency. The 
latter being the main cause of death in FD. The gold standard for diagnosis is 
the genetic analysis in search of mutation, in addition to family history. In 
homozygous patients, the enzyme activity can also be used. Once the diagnosis is 
confirmed, the patient and their family should receive genetic counseling. The 
treatment, in turn, currently focuses mainly on replacing the enzyme that is 
absent or deficient by means of enzyme replacement therapy, with the purpose of 
avoiding or removing deposits of Gb3. Chaperones can also be used for the 
treatment of some cases. It is considered that the specific treatment should be 
initiated as soon as a diagnosis is obtained, which can change the prognosis of 
the disease.

DOI: 10.1590/1806-9282.66.S1.10
PMID: 31939530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]