---
reference_id: PMID:12820975
title: Basal transcription defect discriminates between xeroderma pigmentosum and trichothiodystrophy in XPD patients.
authors:
- Dubaele S
- Proietti De Santis L
- Bienstock RJ
- Keriel A
- Stefanini M
- Van Houten B
- Egly JM
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00182-5
keywords:
- "Adenosine Triphosphatases/genetics, metabolism"
- Amino Acid Motifs
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "DNA Helicases/genetics, metabolism"
- DNA Repair/genetics
- DNA-Binding Proteins
- "Fibroblasts/cytology, metabolism"
- Hair Diseases/genetics
- HeLa Cells
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Insecta
- "Models, Molecular"
- Point Mutation
- Proteins/genetics
- Recombinant Proteins/metabolism
- "Transcription Factors/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Transcription, Genetic"
- Transcriptional Activation
- Xeroderma Pigmentosum/genetics
- Xeroderma Pigmentosum Group D Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Basal transcription defect discriminates between xeroderma pigmentosum and trichothiodystrophy in XPD patients.
**Authors:** Dubaele S, Proietti De Santis L, Bienstock RJ, Keriel A, Stefanini M, Van Houten B, Egly JM
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00182-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00182-5)

## Content

1. Mol Cell. 2003 Jun;11(6):1635-46. doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00182-5.

Basal transcription defect discriminates between xeroderma pigmentosum and 
trichothiodystrophy in XPD patients.

Dubaele S(1), Proietti De Santis L, Bienstock RJ, Keriel A, Stefanini M, Van 
Houten B, Egly JM.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, BP 10142, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, C.U. Strasbourg, France.

Mutations in the XPD gene result in xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) and 
trichothiodystrophy (TTD), the phenotypes of which are often intricate. To 
understand the genotype/phenotype relationship, we engineered recombinant TFIIHs 
in which XPD subunits carry amino acid changes found in XPD patients. We 
demonstrate that all the XPD mutations are detrimental for XPD helicase 
activity, thus explaining the NER defect. We also show that TFIIH from TTD 
patients, but not from XP patients, exhibits a significant in vitro basal 
transcription defect in addition to a reduced intracellular concentration. 
Moreover, when XPD mutations prevent interaction with the p44 subunit of TFIIH, 
transactivation directed by certain nuclear receptors is inhibited, regardless 
of TTD versus XP phenotype, thus explaining the overlapping symptoms. The 
implications of these mutations are discussed using a structural model of the 
XPD protein. Our study provides explanations for the nature and the severity of 
the various clinical features.

DOI: 10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00182-5
PMID: 12820975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]