---
reference_id: "PMID:27231050"
title: "Gut microbiota, metabolites and host immunity."
authors:
- Rooks MG
- Garrett WS
journal: Nat Rev Immunol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/nri.2016.42
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gut microbiota, metabolites and host immunity.
**Authors:** Rooks MG, Garrett WS
**Journal:** Nat Rev Immunol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nri.2016.42](https://doi.org/10.1038/nri.2016.42)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Immunol. 2016 May 27;16(6):341-52. doi: 10.1038/nri.2016.42.

Gut microbiota, metabolites and host immunity.

Rooks MG(1), Garrett WS(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
(2)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
(3)Broad Institute of Harvard and Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.
(4)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

The microbiota - the collection of microorganisms that live within and on all 
mammals - provides crucial signals for the development and function of the 
immune system. Increased availability of technologies that profile microbial 
communities is facilitating the entry of many immunologists into the evolving 
field of host-microbiota studies. The microbial communities, their metabolites 
and components are not only necessary for immune homeostasis, they also 
influence the susceptibility of the host to many immune-mediated diseases and 
disorders. In this Review, we discuss technological and computational approaches 
for investigating the microbiome, as well as recent advances in our 
understanding of host immunity and microbial mutualism with a focus on specific 
microbial metabolites, bacterial components and the immune system.

DOI: 10.1038/nri.2016.42
PMCID: PMC5541232
PMID: 27231050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests statement The authors 
declare no competing interests.