---
reference_id: "PMID:7579347"
title: The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome and X-linked congenital thrombocytopenia are caused by mutations of the same gene.
authors:
- Zhu Q
- Zhang M
- Blaese RM
- Derry JM
- Junker A
- Francke U
- Chen SH
- Ochs HD
journal: Blood
year: '1995'
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- Blood Platelets/ultrastructure
- Cell Line
- Cell Size
- DNA Fingerprinting
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "DNA, Complementary/genetics"
- Exons/genetics
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Proteins/genetics
- Sequence Alignment
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- "Sequence Homology, Nucleic Acid"
- "Thrombocytopenia/congenital, genetics"
- Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome/genetics
- Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome Protein
- X Chromosome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome and X-linked congenital thrombocytopenia are caused by mutations of the same gene.
**Authors:** Zhu Q, Zhang M, Blaese RM, Derry JM, Junker A, Francke U, Chen SH, Ochs HD
**Journal:** Blood (1995)

## Content

1. Blood. 1995 Nov 15;86(10):3797-804.

The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome and X-linked congenital thrombocytopenia are caused
by mutations of the same gene.

Zhu Q(1), Zhang M, Blaese RM, Derry JM, Junker A, Francke U, Chen SH, Ochs HD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle 98195, USA.

The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) is an X-linked recessive disorder
characterized by thrombocytopenia, small platelets, eczema, recurrent
infections, and immunodeficiency. Besides the classic WAS phenotype, there is a
group of patients with congenital X-linked thrombocytopenia (XLT) who have small
platelets but only transient eczema, if any, and minimal immune deficiency.
Because the gene responsible for WAS has been sequenced, it was possible to
correlate the WAS phenotypes with WAS gene mutations. Using a fingerprinting
screening technique, we determined the approximate location of the mutation in
13 unrelated WAS patients with mild to severe clinical symptoms. Direct sequence
analysis of cDNA and genomic DNA obtained from patient-derived cell lines showed
12 unique mutations distributed throughout the WAS gene, including insertions,
deletions, and point mutations resulting in amino acid substitutions,
termination, exon skipping, or splicing defects. Of 4 unrelated patients with
the XLT phenotype, 3 had missense mutations affecting exon 2 and 1 had a
splice-site mutation affecting exon 9. Patients with classic WAS had more
complex mutations, resulting in termination codons, frameshift, and early
termination. These findings provide direct evidence that XLT and WAS are caused
by mutations of the same gene and suggest that severe clinical phenotypes are
associated with complex mutations.

PMID: 7579347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
