---
reference_id: "PMID:36288618"
title: PSMA-PET Detection of Unusual Metastases in Castrate-Sensitive Prostate Carcinoma.
authors:
- Harris N
- Tan MY
- Ng M
- Blakey D
- Guerrieri M
- Joon DL
- Lau E
- Foroudi F
- Armstrong A
- Chao M
journal: Clin Nucl Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/RLU.0000000000004469
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- Positron Emission Tomography Computed Tomography/methods
- Prostate/pathology
- "Prostatic Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Positron-Emission Tomography
- Carcinoma
- Gallium Radioisotopes
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PSMA-PET Detection of Unusual Metastases in Castrate-Sensitive Prostate Carcinoma.
**Authors:** Harris N, Tan MY, Ng M, Blakey D, Guerrieri M, Joon DL, Lau E, Foroudi F, Armstrong A, Chao M
**Journal:** Clin Nucl Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/RLU.0000000000004469](https://doi.org/10.1097/RLU.0000000000004469)

## Content

1. Clin Nucl Med. 2023 Jan 1;48(1):85-89. doi: 10.1097/RLU.0000000000004469. Epub
 2022 Oct 26.

PSMA-PET Detection of Unusual Metastases in Castrate-Sensitive Prostate 
Carcinoma.

Harris N(1), Tan MY(1), Ng M(2), Blakey D(2), Guerrieri M(2), Joon DL(1), Lau 
E(1), Foroudi F(1), Armstrong A(1), Chao M.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Radiation Oncology, Olivia Newton-John Cancer Wellness 
and Research Centre, Heidelberg.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, GenesisCare, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia.

Prostate cancer (PCa) is a multifaceted, heterogeneous disease (with 7 molecular 
subtypes), which can metastasize to common sites, such as bone, lymph nodes, 
liver, and lungs. However, with PSMA PET imaging, rare sites of metastasis are 
increasingly discovered. We report 5 cases of unusual metastases in patients 
with castrate-sensitive PCa: solitary right inguinal nodal metastasis, solitary 
abdominal wall metastasis, penile shaft metastases, solitary perineum 
metastasis, and pleural metastases. These cases further support the use of 
PSMA-PET imaging in PCa monitoring, with the ability to detect solitary, small 
volume, and rare sites of metastases, which may not be apparent on conventional 
imaging.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/RLU.0000000000004469
PMCID: PMC9762707
PMID: 36288618 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest and sources of funding: 
none declared.