---
reference_id: "PMID:24933445"
title: Pathogenicity and treatment of Bartonella infections.
authors:
- Angelakis E
- Raoult D
journal: Int J Antimicrob Agents
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2014.04.006
keywords:
- "Angiomatosis, Bacillary/drug therapy, microbiology, pathology"
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- "Bacteremia/drug therapy, microbiology, pathology"
- "Bartonella/drug effects, growth & development, pathogenicity"
- "Bartonella Infections/drug therapy, microbiology, pathology"
- Chloramphenicol/therapeutic use
- Doxycycline/therapeutic use
- Drug Administration Schedule
- "Endocarditis/drug therapy, microbiology, pathology"
- Gentamicins/therapeutic use
- Humans
- "Lymphatic Diseases/drug therapy, microbiology, pathology"
- Rifampin/therapeutic use
- Streptomycin/therapeutic use
- Treatment Outcome
- Virulence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenicity and treatment of Bartonella infections.
**Authors:** Angelakis E, Raoult D
**Journal:** Int J Antimicrob Agents (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2014.04.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2014.04.006)

## Content

1. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2014 Jul;44(1):16-25. doi:
10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2014.04.006. Epub 2014 May 9.

Pathogenicity and treatment of Bartonella infections.

Angelakis E(1), Raoult D(2).

Author information:
(1)URMITE UMR 6236, CNRS-IRD, Faculté de Médecine Aix Marseille Universite, 27
Bd. Jean Moulin, 13385 Marseille cedex 05, France.
(2)URMITE UMR 6236, CNRS-IRD, Faculté de Médecine Aix Marseille Universite, 27
Bd. Jean Moulin, 13385 Marseille cedex 05, France. Electronic address:
Didier.raoult@gmail.com.

Bartonella spp. are responsible for emerging and re-emerging diseases around the
world. The majority of human infections are caused by Bartonella henselae,
Bartonella quintana and Bartonella bacilliformis, although other Bartonella spp.
have also been associated with clinical manifestations in humans. The severity
of Bartonella infection correlates with the patient's immune status. Clinical
manifestations can range from benign and self-limited to severe and
life-threatening disease. Clinical conditions associated with Bartonella spp.
include local lymphadenopathy, bacteraemia, endocarditis, and tissue
colonisation resulting in bacillary angiomatosis and peliosis hepatis. Without
treatment, Bartonella infection can cause high mortality. To date, no single
treatment is effective for all Bartonella-associated diseases. In the absence of
systematic reviews, treatment decisions for Bartonella infections are based on
case reports that test a limited number of patients. Antibiotics do not
significantly affect the cure rate in patients with Bartonella lymphadenopathy.
Patients with Bartonella spp. bacteraemia should be treated with gentamicin and
doxycycline, but chloramphenicol has been proposed for the treatment of B.
bacilliformis bacteraemia. Gentamicin in combination with doxycycline is
considered the best treatment regimen for endocarditis, and erythromycin is the
first-line antibiotic therapy for the treatment of angioproliferative lesions.
Rifampicin or streptomycin can be used to treat verruga peruana. In this review,
we present recent data and recommendations related to the treatment of
Bartonella infections based on the pathogenicity of Bartonella spp.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. and the International Society of Chemotherapy.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2014.04.006
PMID: 24933445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
