---
reference_id: "PMID:33841303"
title: "Perampanel Improves Cortical Myoclonus and Disability in Progressive Myoclonic Epilepsies: A Case Series and a Systematic Review of the Literature."
authors:
- Assenza G
- Nocerino C
- Tombini M
- Di Gennaro G
- "D'Aniello A"
- Verrotti A
- Marrelli A
- Ricci L
- Lanzone J
- Di Lazzaro V
- Bilo L
- Coppola A
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2021.630366
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Perampanel Improves Cortical Myoclonus and Disability in Progressive Myoclonic Epilepsies: A Case Series and a Systematic Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Assenza G, Nocerino C, Tombini M, Di Gennaro G, D'Aniello A, Verrotti A, Marrelli A, Ricci L, Lanzone J, Di Lazzaro V, Bilo L, Coppola A
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2021.630366](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2021.630366)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2021 Mar 24;12:630366. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2021.630366.
eCollection  2021.

Perampanel Improves Cortical Myoclonus and Disability in Progressive Myoclonic 
Epilepsies: A Case Series and a Systematic Review of the Literature.

Assenza G(1), Nocerino C(2), Tombini M(1), Di Gennaro G(3), D'Aniello A(3), 
Verrotti A(4), Marrelli A(5), Ricci L(1), Lanzone J(1), Di Lazzaro V(1), Bilo 
L(2), Coppola A(2).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Neurology, Neurophysiology and Neurobiology, Department of Medicine, 
Università Campus Bio-Medico di Roma, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, Reproductive Sciences and Odontostomatology, 
University Federico II of Naples, Naples, Italy.
(3)Epilepsy Surgery Center, IRCCS NEUROMED, Pozzilli, Italy.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(5)Clinical Neurophysiology Unit -Epilepsy Center, San Salvatore Hospital, 
L'Aquila, Italy.

Introduction: Progressive myoclonic epilepsies (PMEs) are a heterogenous group 
of genetic diseases presenting with epilepsy, cognitive impairment, and severe 
action myoclonus, which can severely affect daily life activities and 
independent walking ability. Perampanel is a recent commercially available 
antiseizure medication with high efficacy against generalized seizures. Some 
reports supported the role of perampanel in ameliorating action myoclonus in 
PMEs. Here, we aimed to describe a case series and provide a systematic 
literature review on perampanel effects on PMEs. Methods: We report the 
perampanel effectiveness on myoclonus, daily life activities, and seizures on an 
original Italian multicenter case series of 11 individuals with PMEs. Then, 
using the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses 
(PRISMA) guidelines, we performed a systematic review on perampanel effect on 
myoclonus and disability in PMEs. We searched PubMed, Scopus, and Google Scholar 
articles on perampanel and PMEs up to June 2020. No prospective trials were 
found. We reviewed 11 case series manuscripts reporting 104 cases of different 
PMEs. Results: Here, we are reporting the effectiveness of perampanel in five 
individuals affected by Unverricht-Lundborg disease, three by Lafora disease, 
two by sialidosis, and one by an undetermined PME. Nine out of 11 individuals 
improved their disability related to the action myoclonus (two with Lafora 
disease did not). Among the 104 persons with PMEs collected by the systematic 
review, we found that more than half of the patients receiving perampanel 
exhibited an amelioration of action myoclonus and, consequently, of their 
independence in daily life activities. The Unverricht-Lundborg disease seemed to 
show the best clinical response to perampanel, in comparison with the other more 
severe PMEs. A significant seizure reduction was achieved by almost all persons 
with active epilepsy. Only 11% of PME patients dropped out due to inefficacy. 
Conclusions: Perampanel demonstrated a beneficial effect with regard to action 
myoclonus, disability, and seizures and was well-tolerated in people with PMEs, 
independently from their genetic diagnosis. Given the limited scientific 
evidence, broader prospective trials should be encouraged.

Copyright © 2021 Assenza, Nocerino, Tombini, Di Gennaro, D'Aniello, Verrotti, 
Marrelli, Ricci, Lanzone, Di Lazzaro, Bilo and Coppola.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2021.630366
PMCID: PMC8024635
PMID: 33841303

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.