---
reference_id: "PMID:36896570"
title: "Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency: current therapy and emerging targets."
authors:
- McElvaney OF
- Fraughen DD
- McElvaney OJ
- Carroll TP
- McElvaney NG
journal: Expert Rev Respir Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1080/17476348.2023.2174973
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency: current therapy and emerging targets.
**Authors:** McElvaney OF, Fraughen DD, McElvaney OJ, Carroll TP, McElvaney NG
**Journal:** Expert Rev Respir Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1080/17476348.2023.2174973](https://doi.org/10.1080/17476348.2023.2174973)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2023 Mar;17(3):191-202. doi: 
10.1080/17476348.2023.2174973. Epub 2023 Mar 15.

Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency: current therapy and emerging targets.

McElvaney OF(1)(2), Fraughen DD(1)(2), McElvaney OJ(1)(2), Carroll TP(1)(2)(3), 
McElvaney NG(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Irish Centre for Genetic Lung Disease, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, 
Dublin, Ireland.
(2)Department of Medicine, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(3)Alpha-1 Foundation Ireland, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, 
Ireland.

INTRODUCTION: Alpha1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD), a common hereditary disorder 
affecting mainly lungs, liver and skin has been the focus of some of the most 
exciting therapeutic approaches in medicine in the past 5 years. In this review, 
we discuss the therapies presently available for the different manifestations of 
AATD and new therapies in the pipeline.
AREAS COVERED: We review therapeutic options for the individual lung, liver and 
skin manifestations of AATD along with approaches which aim to treat all three. 
Along with this renewed interest in treating AATD come challenges. How is AAT 
best delivered to the lung? What is the desired level of AAT in the circulation 
and lungs which therapeutics should aim to provide? Will treating the liver 
disease increase the potential for lung disease? Are there treatments to target 
the underlying genetic defect with the potential to prevent all aspects of 
AATDrelated disease?
EXPERT OPINION: With a relatively small population able to participate in 
clinical studies, increased awareness and diagnosis of AATD is urgently needed. 
Better, more sensitive clinical parameters will assist in the generation of 
acceptable and robust evidence of therapeutic effect for current and emerging 
treatments.

DOI: 10.1080/17476348.2023.2174973
PMID: 36896570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]