---
reference_id: "PMID:22323514"
title: "Cobblestone lissencephaly: neuropathological subtypes and correlations with genes of dystroglycanopathies."
authors:
- Devisme L
- Bouchet C
- Gonzalès M
- Alanio E
- Bazin A
- Bessières B
- Bigi N
- Blanchet P
- Bonneau D
- Bonnières M
- Bucourt M
- Carles D
- Clarisse B
- Delahaye S
- Fallet-Bianco C
- Figarella-Branger D
- Gaillard D
- Gasser B
- Delezoide AL
- Guimiot F
- Joubert M
- Laurent N
- Laquerrière A
- Liprandi A
- Loget P
- Marcorelles P
- Martinovic J
- Menez F
- Patrier S
- Pelluard F
- Perez MJ
- Rouleau C
- Triau S
- Attié-Bitach T
- Vuillaumier-Barrot S
- Seta N
- Encha-Razavi F
journal: Brain
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awr357
keywords:
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- "Cobblestone Lissencephaly/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Dystroglycans/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Fetus
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Mannosyltransferases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "N-Acetylglucosaminyltransferases/genetics, metabolism"
- Pentosyltransferases
- "Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cobblestone lissencephaly: neuropathological subtypes and correlations with genes of dystroglycanopathies.
**Authors:** Devisme L, Bouchet C, Gonzalès M, Alanio E, Bazin A, Bessières B, Bigi N, Blanchet P, Bonneau D, Bonnières M, Bucourt M, Carles D, Clarisse B, Delahaye S, Fallet-Bianco C, Figarella-Branger D, Gaillard D, Gasser B, Delezoide AL, Guimiot F, Joubert M, Laurent N, Laquerrière A, Liprandi A, Loget P, Marcorelles P, Martinovic J, Menez F, Patrier S, Pelluard F, Perez MJ, Rouleau C, Triau S, Attié-Bitach T, Vuillaumier-Barrot S, Seta N, Encha-Razavi F
**Journal:** Brain (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awr357](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awr357)

## Content

1. Brain. 2012 Feb;135(Pt 2):469-82. doi: 10.1093/brain/awr357. Epub 2012 Feb 9.

Cobblestone lissencephaly: neuropathological subtypes and correlations with 
genes of dystroglycanopathies.

Devisme L(1), Bouchet C, Gonzalès M, Alanio E, Bazin A, Bessières B, Bigi N, 
Blanchet P, Bonneau D, Bonnières M, Bucourt M, Carles D, Clarisse B, Delahaye S, 
Fallet-Bianco C, Figarella-Branger D, Gaillard D, Gasser B, Delezoide AL, 
Guimiot F, Joubert M, Laurent N, Laquerrière A, Liprandi A, Loget P, Marcorelles 
P, Martinovic J, Menez F, Patrier S, Pelluard F, Perez MJ, Rouleau C, Triau S, 
Attié-Bitach T, Vuillaumier-Barrot S, Seta N, Encha-Razavi F.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Pathologie, Centre de Biologie-Pathologie, CHU Lille, 
33.3.20446983, France.

Cobblestone lissencephaly represents a peculiar brain malformation with 
characteristic radiological anomalies, defined as cortical dysplasia combined 
with dysmyelination, dysplastic cerebellum with cysts and brainstem hypoplasia. 
Cortical dysplasia results from neuroglial overmigration into the arachnoid 
space, forming an extracortical layer, responsible for agyria and/or 
'cobblestone' brain surface and ventricular enlargement. The underlying 
mechanism is a disruption of the glia limitans, the outermost layer of the 
brain. Cobblestone lissencephaly is pathognomonic of a continuum of autosomal 
recessive diseases with cerebral, ocular and muscular deficits, Walker-Warburg 
syndrome, muscle-eye-brain and Fukuyama muscular dystrophy. Mutations in POMT1, 
POMT2, POMGNT1, LARGE, FKTN and FKRP genes attributed these diseases to 
α-dystroglycanopathies. However, studies have not been able to identify causal 
mutations in the majority of patients and to establish a clear 
phenotype/genotype correlation. Therefore, we decided to perform a detailed 
neuropathological survey and molecular screenings in 65 foetal cases selected on 
the basis of histopathological criteria. After sequencing the six genes of 
α-dystroglycanopathies, a causal mutation was observed in 66% of cases. On the 
basis of a ratio of severity, three subtypes clearly emerged. The most severe, 
which we called cobblestone lissencephaly A, was linked to mutations in POMT1 
(34%), POMT2 (8%) and FKRP (1.5%). The least severe, cobblestone lissencephaly 
C, was linked to POMGNT1 mutations (18%). An intermediary type, cobblestone 
lissencephaly B, was linked to LARGE mutations (4.5%) identified for the first 
time in foetuses. We conclude that cobblestone lissencephaly encompasses three 
distinct subtypes of cortical malformations with different degrees of neuroglial 
ectopia into the arachnoid space and cortical plate disorganization regardless 
of gestational age. In the cerebellum, histopathological changes support the 
novel hypothesis that abnormal lamination arises from a deficiency in granule 
cells. Our studies demonstrate the positive impact of histoneuropathology on the 
identification of α-dystroglycanopathies found in 66% of cases, while with 
neuroimaging criteria and biological values, mutations are found in 32-50% of 
patients. Interestingly, our morphological classification was central in the 
orientation of genetic screening of POMT1, POMT2, POMGNT1, LARGE and FKRP. 
Despite intensive research, one-third of our cases remained unexplained; 
suggesting that other genes and/or pathways may be involved. This material 
offers a rich resource for studies on the affected neurodevelopmental processes 
of cobblestone lissencephaly and on the identification of other responsible 
gene(s)/pathway(s).

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awr357
PMID: 22323514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]