---
reference_id: "PMID:26861193"
title: Fatal pulmonary Kaposi sarcoma in an HIV seronegative AIDS patient.
authors:
- Zhang H
- Wang HL
- Zhong DR
- Liu Y
- Li NN
- Zhang W
- Xiao Y
- Li TS
journal: Clin Respir J
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/crj.12463
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fatal pulmonary Kaposi sarcoma in an HIV seronegative AIDS patient.
**Authors:** Zhang H, Wang HL, Zhong DR, Liu Y, Li NN, Zhang W, Xiao Y, Li TS
**Journal:** Clin Respir J (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/crj.12463](https://doi.org/10.1111/crj.12463)

## Content

1. Clin Respir J. 2017 Nov;11(6):1040-1044. doi: 10.1111/crj.12463. Epub 2016 Mar
 2.

Fatal pulmonary Kaposi sarcoma in an HIV seronegative AIDS patient.

Zhang H(1), Wang HL(2), Zhong DR(3), Liu Y(4), Li NN(4), Zhang W(5), Xiao Y(1), 
Li TS(2).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Respiratory Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, 
Peking Union Medical College, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, 
100730, China.
(2)Infectious Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Peking Union 
Medical College, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, 100730, China.
(3)Pathology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Peking Union Medical 
College, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, 100730, China.
(4)Internal Medicine, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Peking Union 
Medical College, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, 100730, China.
(5)Hematology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Peking Union Medical 
College, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, 100730, China.

INTRODUCTION: Although HIV antibody tests have been widely accepted in clinical 
diagnosis of HIV infection, they may not be sufficient to diagnose all subjects 
with HIV infection. Except negative result of antibody test in the well-known" 
acute window phase", in rare cases, patients do not develop HIV antibodies 
despite demonstrable infection. Primary pulmonary Kaposi sarcoma (KS) without 
mucocutaneous involvement accounts for only 0-15% of all AIDS-related KS. KS is 
rare among Chinese subjects, especially in persons of Han descent.
METHODS: A case of seronegative AIDS with primary pulmonary Kaposi sarcoma (KS) 
was reported. It's a 46-year-old Chinese man presented with sore throat, 
hemoptysis, fever, dyspnea and multiple lung nodules. The lung lesions grew over 
a 5-month period so as the symptoms worsened. The possibility of AIDS was 
discounted by his physicians because of the repeatedly negative HIV antibodies 
tests despite the ELISA tests or Western blot tests. Histopathologic diagnosis 
of fine needle lung biopsy in local hospital was undetermined. After admission, 
HIV infection was eventually confirmed by plasma HIV RNA testing. 
Histopathologic diagnosis of Lung Kaposi sarcoma was made through repeated fine 
needle aspiration biopsy as well as the review of former one. Multiple 
antibiotics and chemotherapy were administrated with no clinical effect due to 
advanced stage and the patient passed away soon after diagnosis.
RESULTS: This is the first case of seronegative HIV-1 infection with 
presentation of primary pulmonary KS.
CONCLUSION: This case underscores the importance of plasma RNA test in 
conjunction with HIV antibody test for some rare patients with HIV infection who 
present with severe immunodeficiency and opportunistic infections or malignancy.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.12463
PMID: 26861193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]