---
reference_id: "PMID:21388952"
title: Loss of p53 and acquisition of angiogenic microRNA profile are insufficient to facilitate progression of bladder urothelial carcinoma in situ to invasive carcinoma.
authors:
- Ayala de la Peña F
- Kanasaki K
- Kanasaki M
- Tangirala N
- Maeda G
- Kalluri R
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.198069
keywords:
- Animals
- "Carcinoma in Situ/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic/genetics"
- Humans
- "Hypoxia-Inducible Factor 1, alpha Subunit/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "MicroRNAs/genetics, metabolism"
- Neoplasm Invasiveness
- "Neoplasms, Experimental/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Neovascularization, Pathologic/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "RNA, Neoplasm/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- "Thrombospondin 1/genetics, metabolism"
- "Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics, metabolism"
- "Urinary Bladder Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of p53 and acquisition of angiogenic microRNA profile are insufficient to facilitate progression of bladder urothelial carcinoma in situ to invasive carcinoma.
**Authors:** Ayala de la Peña F, Kanasaki K, Kanasaki M, Tangirala N, Maeda G, Kalluri R
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.198069](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.198069)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 10;286(23):20778-87. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.198069. Epub
2011 Mar 9.

Loss of p53 and acquisition of angiogenic microRNA profile are insufficient to
facilitate progression of bladder urothelial carcinoma in situ to invasive
carcinoma.

Ayala de la Peña F(1), Kanasaki K, Kanasaki M, Tangirala N, Maeda G, Kalluri R.

Author information:
(1)0Division of Matrix Biology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Activation of oncogenes or inactivation of tumor suppressors in urothelium is
considered critical for development of urothelial cancer. Here we report cloning
of the urothelium-specific promoter uroplakin-II (UPK II) and generation of
transgenic mice in which expression of SV40 large T antigen is driven by UPK II
promoter. Inactivation of tumor suppressor p53 and pRb in urothelium by SV40 T
antigen resulted in urothelial carcinoma, resembling human high-grade carcinoma
in situ. Specific deletion of p53 in urothelial cells using the newly generated
UPK II-Cre mice results in normal bladders without any evidence of cancer. The
high-grade carcinoma in situ in the UPK II-SV40 mice is associated with
significant activation of angiogenic signals consisting of hypoxia-inducible
factor-1α (HIF-1α) and VEGF and a down-regulation of thrombospondin-1.
Interestingly, such pro-angiogenic activity was not associated with progression
to invasive cancer. Analysis of bladder-associated microRNAs in carcinoma in
situ lesions reveals a pro-angiogenic profile, with specific overexpression of
miR-18a and miR-19a and down-regulation of miR-107. A group of microRNAs (miRs)
identified as associated with invasive human urothelial cancer remained
unchanged in this mouse model. Collectively, our results support the notion that
activation of angiogenesis and loss of p53 are not sufficient for progression to
invasive cancer. Our studies identify a new mouse model for bladder cancer that
can be used to study factors that determine progression to an invasive phenotype
of bladder cancer.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.198069
PMCID: PMC3121487
PMID: 21388952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
