---
reference_id: "PMID:17091796"
title: "[KCNQ 1 (KvLQT1) missense mutation causing congenital long QT syndrome (Jervell-Lange-Nielsen) in a Mexican family]."
authors:
- Márquez MF
- Ramos-Kuri M
- Hernández-Pacheco G
- Estrada J
- Fabregat JR
- Pérez-Vielma N
- Gómez-Flores J
- González-Hermosillo A
- Cárdenas M
- Vargas-Alarcón G
journal: Arch Cardiol Mex
year: '2006'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Jervell-Lange Nielsen Syndrome/genetics
- KCNQ1 Potassium Channel/genetics
- Male
- Mexico
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [KCNQ 1 (KvLQT1) missense mutation causing congenital long QT syndrome (Jervell-Lange-Nielsen) in a Mexican family].
**Authors:** Márquez MF, Ramos-Kuri M, Hernández-Pacheco G, Estrada J, Fabregat JR, Pérez-Vielma N, Gómez-Flores J, González-Hermosillo A, Cárdenas M, Vargas-Alarcón G
**Journal:** Arch Cardiol Mex (2006)

## Content

1. Arch Cardiol Mex. 2006 Jul-Sep;76(3):257-62.

[KCNQ 1 (KvLQT1) missense mutation causing congenital long QT syndrome
(Jervell-Lange-Nielsen) in a Mexican family].

[Article in Spanish]

Márquez MF(1), Ramos-Kuri M, Hernández-Pacheco G, Estrada J, Fabregat JR,
Pérez-Vielma N, Gómez-Flores J, González-Hermosillo A, Cárdenas M,
Vargas-Alarcón G.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Electrocardiología, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología Ignacio
Chávez, Tlalpan, México.

BACKGROUND: Long QT syndromes (LQTS) are inherited cardiac disorders caused by
mutations in the genes that encode sodium or potassium transmembrane ion channel
proteins. More than 200 mutations, in at least six genes, have been found in
these patients. The Jervell and Lange-Nielsen (JLN) syndrome is the recessive
form of the disease and is associated with deafness. Few families with JLN
syndrome and genetic studies are reported in the literature.
METHODS: The KCNQ1 (KvLQT1) gene in a Mexican family with Jervell-Lange-Nielsen
long QT syndrome was analyzed using an automated sequence method.
RESULTS: A missense mutation was found in the three affected individuals. This
mutation is associated with complete loss of channel function. Correlation with
the phenotype showed a prolonged QTc interval and deafness in the two siblings
homozygous to the mutation. The mother, who was heterozygous for the mutation,
also had prolonged QTc interval without deafness. The father and younger brother
had normal QTc intervals. The mutation was not found in 50 healthy controls
studied.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe for the first time a mutation in the KCNQ1 gene in a
Mexican family with JLN long QT syndrome. This mutation produces an amino acid
change (Gly-Arg) at protein level at the 168 residue. This mutation has been
previously reported in Caucasian families with LQTS.

PMID: 17091796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
