---
reference_id: "PMID:40273170"
title: Delayed sleep-wake phase disorder.
authors:
- Barnes KA
journal: JAAPA
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1097/01.JAA.0000000000000096
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Delayed sleep-wake phase disorder.
**Authors:** Barnes KA
**Journal:** JAAPA (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.JAA.0000000000000096](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.JAA.0000000000000096)

## Content

1. JAAPA. 2025 May 1;38(5):e7-e11. doi: 10.1097/01.JAA.0000000000000096. Epub
2025  Apr 24.

Delayed sleep-wake phase disorder.

Barnes KA(1).

Author information:
(1)Keith A. Barnes practices urgent care at CareNow-Viscount in El Paso, Tex. 
and sleep medicine at Biorhythms by Dr. Omavi, also in El Paso, Tex. The author 
has disclosed no potential conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise.

One of seven circadian rhythm disorders, delayed sleep-wake phase disorder 
(DSWPD) commonly occurs in adolescents and young adults. The disorder is 
frequently confused with insomnia and can be a presenting complaint, as the 
individual is often stressed about being unable to fall asleep at the desired 
time. The underlying disruption occurs due to a shift between when the 
individual wants to sleep and when the individual can. Unlike patients with 
insomnia, patients with DSWPD can achieve sleep easily at later times, leading 
to later wake-up times. The inability to adapt to the societal norm in terms of 
the standard school, work, or social schedule leads to stressors, further 
complicating the disorder. Sleep questionnaires, sleep diaries, and actigraphy 
have improved identification of individuals with delayed sleep. Treatment of 
DSWPD involves the use of scheduled melatonin, scheduled sleep-wake times, and 
bright light therapy. If identified early, the disorder can be successfully 
managed.

Copyright © 2025 American Academy of Physician Associates.

DOI: 10.1097/01.JAA.0000000000000096
PMID: 40273170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]