---
reference_id: "PMID:37847066"
title: Dermoscopy as a diagnostic aid in pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta.
authors:
- Peñuelas Leal R
- Labrandero Hoyos C
- Grau Echevarría A
- Blaya Imbernon D
- Finello M
- Magdaleno Tapial J
- Alegre De Miguel V
journal: Clin Exp Dermatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/ced/llad350
keywords:
- Infant
- Humans
- "Pityriasis Lichenoides/diagnosis, pathology"
- Dermoscopy
- Skin/pathology
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dermoscopy as a diagnostic aid in pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta.
**Authors:** Peñuelas Leal R, Labrandero Hoyos C, Grau Echevarría A, Blaya Imbernon D, Finello M, Magdaleno Tapial J, Alegre De Miguel V
**Journal:** Clin Exp Dermatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ced/llad350](https://doi.org/10.1093/ced/llad350)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2024 Jan 25;49(2):149-154. doi: 10.1093/ced/llad350.

Dermoscopy as a diagnostic aid in pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta.

Peñuelas Leal R(1), Labrandero Hoyos C(1), Grau Echevarría A(1), Blaya Imbernon
D(1), Finello M(1), Magdaleno Tapial J(1), Alegre De Miguel V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Consorci Hospital General Universitari de
Valencia, Valencia, Spain.

Diagnosis of pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta (PLEVA) is based on
the characteristic pattern of lesions in different stages of development,
ranging from erythematous maculopapules to papules with a crusted and/or
necrotic centre. However, it may raise the differential diagnosis with other
entities. It is therefore not uncommon to have to perform skin biopsies to reach
a diagnosis, including in infants. In this study, we report the cases of three
patients with PLEVA, highlighting the correlations between the clinical,
dermoscopic and histological features. Observation of the dermatoscopic findings
described, such as punctate or glomerular vessels and erythematous globules
surrounding a homogeneous orange or crusty central area, may allow for a rapid
diagnosis, avoiding the need for invasive techniques.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of British
Association of Dermatologists. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ced/llad350
PMID: 37847066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors declare no
conflicts of interest.
