---
reference_id: "PMID:35313898"
title: "A brief history of MECP2 duplication syndrome: 20-years of clinical understanding."
authors:
- Ta D
- Downs J
- Baynam G
- Wilson A
- Richmond P
- Leonard H
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02278-w
keywords:
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Male
- "X-Linked Intellectual Disability/genetics, metabolism"
- "Methyl-CpG-Binding Protein 2/genetics, metabolism"
- Rett Syndrome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A brief history of MECP2 duplication syndrome: 20-years of clinical understanding.
**Authors:** Ta D, Downs J, Baynam G, Wilson A, Richmond P, Leonard H
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-022-02278-w](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-022-02278-w)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2022 Mar 21;17(1):131. doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02278-w.

A brief history of MECP2 duplication syndrome: 20-years of clinical 
understanding.

Ta D(1), Downs J(2)(3), Baynam G(2)(4)(5), Wilson A(2)(6), Richmond P(2)(6)(7), 
Leonard H(2).

Author information:
(1)Telethon Kids Institute, University of Western Australia, Perth, WA, 
Australia. daniel.ta@telethonkids.org.au.
(2)Telethon Kids Institute, University of Western Australia, Perth, WA, 
Australia.
(3)Curtin School of Allied Health, Curtin University, Perth, WA, Australia.
(4)WA Department of Health, Genetic Services of Western Australia, Subiaco, WA, 
6008, Australia.
(5)Western Australian Register of Developmental Anomalies, King Edward Memorial 
Hospital, PO Box 134, Subiaco, WA, 6904, Australia.
(6)Northern Entrance, Perth Children's Hospital, 15 Hospital Ave, Nedlands, WA, 
6009, Australia.
(7)Discipline of Paediatrics, School of Medicine, University of Western 
Australia, Perth, WA, 6009, Australia.

MECP2 duplication syndrome (MDS) is a rare, X-linked, neurodevelopmental 
disorder caused by a duplication of the methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2) 
gene-a gene in which loss-of-function mutations lead to Rett syndrome (RTT). MDS 
has an estimated live birth prevalence in males of 1/150,000. The key features 
of MDS include intellectual disability, developmental delay, hypotonia, 
seizures, recurrent respiratory infections, gastrointestinal problems, 
behavioural features of autism and dysmorphic features-although these 
comorbidities are not yet understood with sufficient granularity. This review 
has covered the past two decades of MDS case studies and series since the 
discovery of the disorder in 1999. After comprehensively reviewing the reported 
characteristics, this review has identified areas of limited knowledge that we 
recommend may be addressed by better phenotyping this disorder through an 
international data collection. This endeavour would also serve to delineate the 
clinical overlap between MDS and RTT.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-022-02278-w
PMCID: PMC8939085
PMID: 35313898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: HL and JD report fees from AveXis, Anavex, 
Newron and GW outside the submitted work and with all renumeration paid to their 
Institution. We do not have any competing interests relating to the submitted 
work.