---
reference_id: "PMID:24521780"
title: Human Rab7 mutation mimics features of Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 2B in Drosophila.
authors:
- Janssens K
- Goethals S
- Atkinson D
- Ermanoska B
- Fransen E
- Jordanova A
- Auer-Grumbach M
- Asselbergh B
- Timmerman V
journal: Neurobiol Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2014.01.021
keywords:
- Animals
- "Animals, Genetically Modified"
- "Behavior, Animal/physiology"
- Cell Differentiation
- "Cell Line, Transformed"
- "Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease/genetics, physiopathology"
- Dendrites/pathology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Drosophila
- Drosophila Proteins/genetics
- "Green Fluorescent Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Laminopathies
- Larva
- Male
- Motor Activity/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Neuroblastoma/pathology
- Sensory Receptor Cells/pathology
- "Transduction, Genetic"
- rab GTP-Binding Proteins/genetics
- rab7 GTP-Binding Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human Rab7 mutation mimics features of Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 2B in Drosophila.
**Authors:** Janssens K, Goethals S, Atkinson D, Ermanoska B, Fransen E, Jordanova A, Auer-Grumbach M, Asselbergh B, Timmerman V
**Journal:** Neurobiol Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nbd.2014.01.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2014.01.021)

## Content

1. Neurobiol Dis. 2014 May;65:211-9. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2014.01.021. Epub 2014
Feb  9.

Human Rab7 mutation mimics features of Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 2B in 
Drosophila.

Janssens K(1), Goethals S(2), Atkinson D(2), Ermanoska B(2), Fransen E(3), 
Jordanova A(2), Auer-Grumbach M(4), Asselbergh B(2), Timmerman V(5).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Genetics Department, VIB, University of Antwerp, B-2610 Antwerpen, 
Belgium; Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, B-2610 
Antwerpen, Belgium.
(2)Molecular Genetics Department, VIB, University of Antwerp, B-2610 Antwerpen, 
Belgium; Neurogenetics Laboratory, Institute Born Bunge, University of Antwerp, 
B-2610 Antwerpen, Belgium.
(3)StatUa Center for Statistics, University of Antwerp, B-2000 Antwerpen, 
Belgium.
(4)Department of Orthopaedics, Medical University Vienna, A-1090 Vienna, 
Austria.
(5)Molecular Genetics Department, VIB, University of Antwerp, B-2610 Antwerpen, 
Belgium; Neurogenetics Laboratory, Institute Born Bunge, University of Antwerp, 
B-2610 Antwerpen, Belgium. Electronic address: 
vincent.timmerman@molgen.vib-ua.be.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2B (CMT2B) is an inherited axonal peripheral 
neuropathy. It is characterised by prominent sensory loss, often complicated by 
severe ulcero-mutilations of toes or feet, and variable motor involvement. 
Missense mutations in RAB7A, the gene encoding the small GTPase Rab7, cause 
CMT2B and increase Rab7 activity. Rab7 is ubiquitously expressed and is involved 
in degradation through the lysosomal pathway. In the neurons, Rab7 plays a role 
in the long-range retrograde transport of signalling endosomes in the axons. 
Here we developed the first animal model of CMT2B, modelling one of the 
mutations (L129F) in Drosophila melanogaster. Behavioural assays show that this 
model recapitulates several hallmarks of the human disease. Upon expression of 
mutant Rab7 in the sensory neurons, larvae present with a reduction of 
temperature and pain perception. Furthermore, the larvae exhibit a crawling 
defect when the mutant protein is expressed in the motor neurons. Analysis of 
axonal transport of Rab7 positive vesicles in sensory neurons of Drosophila 
larvae and in neurites of mammalian neuroblastoma cells demonstrates that mutant 
vesicles pause less than their wild-type counterparts. This latter finding 
indicates that alterations in vesicle transport might contribute to the 
pathomechanism of CMT2B.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2014.01.021
PMID: 24521780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]