---
reference_id: "PMID:25443342"
title: Innate and adaptive immune responses in HCV infections.
authors:
- Heim MH
- Thimme R
journal: J Hepatol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2014.06.035
keywords:
- "Adaptive Immunity/drug effects, physiology"
- Animals
- "Antiviral Agents/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Viral/drug effects, physiology"
- "Hepacivirus/drug effects, genetics"
- "Hepatitis C/drug therapy, immunology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Immunity, Innate/drug effects, physiology"
- "Interferons/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Mice
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Innate and adaptive immune responses in HCV infections.
**Authors:** Heim MH, Thimme R
**Journal:** J Hepatol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jhep.2014.06.035](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2014.06.035)

## Content

1. J Hepatol. 2014 Nov;61(1 Suppl):S14-25. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2014.06.035. Epub
2014 Nov 3.

Innate and adaptive immune responses in HCV infections.

Heim MH(1), Thimme R(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital Basel,
Petersgraben 4, 4031 Basel, Switzerland; Department of Biomedicine, University
of Basel, Hebelstrasse 20, 4031 Basel, Switzerland. Electronic address:
markus.heim@unibas.ch.
(2)Department of Medicine, Clinic for Gastroenterology, Hepatology,
Endocrinology, Infectious Diseases, University Hospital Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany. Electronic address: robert.thimme@uniklinik-freiburg.de.

Hepatitis C virus has been identified a quarter of a decade ago as a leading
cause of chronic viral hepatitis that can lead to cirrhosis and hepatocellular
carcinoma. Only a minority of patients can clear the virus spontaneously during
acute infection. Elimination of HCV during acute infection correlates with a
rapid induction of innate, especially interferon (IFN) induced genes, and a
delayed induction of adaptive immune responses. However, the majority of
patients is unable to clear the virus and develops viral persistence in face of
an ongoing innate and adaptive immune response. The virus has developed several
strategies to escape these immune responses. For example, to escape innate
immunity, the HCV NS3/4A protease can efficiently cleave and inactivate two
important signalling molecules in the sensory pathways that react to HCV
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) to induce IFNs, i.e., the
mitochondrial anti-viral signalling protein (MAVS) and the Toll-IL-1
receptor-domain-containing adaptor-inducing IFN-β (TRIF). Despite these escape
mechanisms, IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) are induced in a large proportion of
patients with chronic infection. Of note, chronically HCV infected patients with
constitutive IFN-stimulated gene (ISG) expression have a poor response to
treatment with pegylated IFN-α (PegIFN-α) and ribavirin. The mechanisms that
protect HCV from IFN-mediated innate immune reactions are not entirely
understood, but might involve blockade of ISG protein translation at the
ribosome, localization of viral replication to cell compartments that are not
accessible to anti-viral IFN-stimulated effector systems, or direct antagonism
of effector systems by viral proteins. Escape from adaptive immune responses can
be achieved by emergence of viral escape mutations that avoid recognition by
antibodies and T cells. In addition, chronic infection is characterized by the
presence of functionally and phenotypically altered NK and T cell responses that
are unable to clear the virus but most likely contribute to the ongoing liver
disease. In this review, we will summarize current knowledge about the role of
innate and adaptive immune responses in determining the outcome of HCV
infection.

Copyright © 2014 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2014.06.035
PMID: 25443342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
