---
reference_id: "PMID:28259864"
title: "[An attempt to identify 22q11.2 microdeletions in samples of the Hungarian schizophrenia DNA bank by multiplex ligation-based probe amplification (MLPA): literature review, methodology and results]."
authors:
- Klein I
- Szocs K
- Vincze K
- Benkovits J
- Somogyi S
- Herman L
- Rethelyi JM
journal: Neuropsychopharmacol Hung
year: '2016'
keywords:
- Biological Specimen Banks
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 22"
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- DiGeorge Syndrome
- Humans
- Hungary
- Schizophrenia/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [An attempt to identify 22q11.2 microdeletions in samples of the Hungarian schizophrenia DNA bank by multiplex ligation-based probe amplification (MLPA): literature review, methodology and results].
**Authors:** Klein I, Szocs K, Vincze K, Benkovits J, Somogyi S, Herman L, Rethelyi JM
**Journal:** Neuropsychopharmacol Hung (2016)

## Content

1. Neuropsychopharmacol Hung. 2016 Dec;18(4):209-218.

[An attempt to identify 22q11.2 microdeletions in samples of the Hungarian
schizophrenia DNA bank by multiplex ligation-based probe amplification (MLPA):
literature review, methodology and results].

[Article in Hungarian]

Klein I(1), Szocs K, Vincze K, Benkovits J, Somogyi S, Herman L, Rethelyi JM.

Author information:
(1)MTA-SE NAP-B, Molecular Psychiatry and in vitro Disease Modelling Research
Group, Budapest, Hungary. rethelyi.janos@med.semmelweis-univ.hu.

Schizophrenia is a severe debilitating psychiatric disorder, with a typical
onset in adolescence or early adulthood. This condition is characterized by
heterogeneous symptoms (hallucinations, delusions, disorganized behaviour,
affective flattening, and social isolation) and a life-time prevalence of
0.5-1.2%. In spite of the efforts to uncover the etiology of the disorder, its
pathogenesis and neurobiological background are poorly understood. Given the
high heritability in schizophrenia, genetic research remains an important area
of focus. Besides the common variations of low penetrance - single nucleotid
polymorphisms (SNPs) -, rare variants, mainly copy number variations (CNVs) play
a role in the genetic architecture of the disorder. The most frequent CNV
associated with schizophrenia is the hemizygous deletion of the 22q11.2 region.
According to previous research this genetic variant occurs in 1% of the patients
and conversely, 25% of the carriers of the 22q11.2 microdeletion will develop
schizophrenia. The 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22Q11DS, velocardiofacial (VCFS)
syndrome, DiGeorge-syndrome) is usually a childhood diagnosis. Its prevalence is
1:2000-4000 considering all births. Patients can demonstrate heart developmental
disorders, craniofacial (elongated face, hypertelorism), immunological
(thymus-hypoplasia), endocrinological (hypocalcaemia) abnormalities, and
neurodevelopmental alterations, but only a proportion will have these
abnormalities due to incomplete penetrance. The variable symptoms complicate the
recognition of the syndrome in the day to day medical practice. 25% of the known
22Q11DS patients develop schizophrenia but the risk of neuropsychiatric
problems, like autism, ADHD and childhood conduct disorder is also increased,
while early onset Parkinson's disease in also more frequent in adults. The
schizophrenia phenotype is not distinguishable at the moment in patients with or
without the 22q11 deletion. But emerging evidence suggests that early onset
Parkinson's disease is more frequent in 22Q11DS and the effects of clozapine
treatment could be different in schizophrenia with 22Q11DS. The question arises
what is the incidence rate of the 22q11.2 microdeletion among our Hungarian DNA
samples with schizophrenia. To answer the question, we utilized a new method
used in routine genetic diagnostics, multiplex ligation-based probe
amplification (MLPA). Although we genotyped the DNA of 315 Hungarian
schizophrenia patients, we found no 22Q11DS in this cohort. The findings are
discussed in terms of basic research and their translation into everyday
clinical practice.

PMID: 28259864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
