---
reference_id: "PMID:24446115"
title: "[Neurobiology of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder]."
authors:
- Wankerl B
- Hauser J
- Makulska-Gertruda E
- Reißmann A
- Sontag TA
- Tucha O
- Lange KW
journal: Fortschr Neurol Psychiatr
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1355710
keywords:
- Animals
- "Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/genetics, physiopathology, psychology, therapy"
- "Biofeedback, Psychology"
- Biogenic Monoamines/physiology
- Brain Chemistry/physiology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Dopamine/physiology
- Electroencephalography
- Gene-Environment Interaction
- Humans
- Neurobiology
- Neurotransmitter Agents/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Neurobiology of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder].
**Authors:** Wankerl B, Hauser J, Makulska-Gertruda E, Reißmann A, Sontag TA, Tucha O, Lange KW
**Journal:** Fortschr Neurol Psychiatr (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0033-1355710](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0033-1355710)

## Content

1. Fortschr Neurol Psychiatr. 2014 Jan;82(1):9-29. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1355710.
Epub 2014 Jan 20.

[Neurobiology of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder].

[Article in German]

Wankerl B(1), Hauser J(1), Makulska-Gertruda E(1), Reißmann A(1), Sontag TA(1),
Tucha O(2), Lange KW(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Experimentelle Psychologie, Universität Regensburg.
(2)Institut für Klinische und Entwicklungsneuropsychologie, Universität
Groningen, Niederlande.

The origin of ADHD is multifactorial and both the aetiology and pathophysiology
of ADHD are as yet incompletely understood. The monoamine deficit hypothesis of
ADHD postulates a dysbalance in the interaction of the neurotransmitters
dopamine, noradrenaline and serotonin. Pathophysiological mechanisms involved in
ADHD include alterations in fronto-striatal circuits. The currently proposed
animal models of ADHD are heterogeneous with regard to their pathophysiological
alterations and their ability to mimic behavioural symptoms and to predict
response to medication. Some evidence points to a genetic basis for ADHD which
is likely to involve many genes of small individual effects. In summary,
specific neurobiological substrates of ADHD are unknown and multiple genetic and
environmental factors appear to act together to create a spectrum of
neurobiological liability.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0033-1355710
PMID: 24446115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
