---
reference_id: "PMID:34888241"
title: "Defining the Spectrum, Treatment and Outcome of Patients With Genetically Confirmed Gorlin Syndrome From the HIT-MED Cohort."
authors:
- Kloth K
- Obrecht D
- Sturm D
- Pietsch T
- Warmuth-Metz M
- Bison B
- Mynarek M
- Rutkowski S
journal: Front Oncol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.756025
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defining the Spectrum, Treatment and Outcome of Patients With Genetically Confirmed Gorlin Syndrome From the HIT-MED Cohort.
**Authors:** Kloth K, Obrecht D, Sturm D, Pietsch T, Warmuth-Metz M, Bison B, Mynarek M, Rutkowski S
**Journal:** Front Oncol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fonc.2021.756025](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2021.756025)

## Content

1. Front Oncol. 2021 Nov 23;11:756025. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.756025. eCollection
 2021.

Defining the Spectrum, Treatment and Outcome of Patients With Genetically
Confirmed Gorlin Syndrome From the HIT-MED Cohort.

Kloth K(1), Obrecht D(1), Sturm D(2)(3)(4), Pietsch T(5), Warmuth-Metz M(6),
Bison B(7), Mynarek M(1), Rutkowski S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Hopp Children's Cancer Center (KiTZ) Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Division of Pediatric Glioma Research, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology, and Immunology, Heidelberg
University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)Department of Neuropathology, Deutsche Gesellschaft für Neuropathologie und
Neuroanatomie (DGNN) Brain Tumor Reference Center, Bonn, Germany.
(6)Institute of Diagnostic and Interventional Neuroradiology, University
Hospital Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany.
(7)Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Neuroradiology, University
Hospital Augsburg, Augsburg, Germany.

Gorlin syndrome is a genetic condition associated with the occurrence of SHH
activated medulloblastoma, basal cell carcinoma, macrocephaly and other
congenital anomalies. It is caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants in PTCH1
or SUFU. In this study we included 16 patients from the HIT2000, HIT2000interim,
I-HIT-MED, observation registry and older registries such as HIT-SKK87,
HIT-SKK92 (1987 - 2020) with genetically confirmed Gorlin syndrome, harboring 10
PTCH1 and 6 SUFU mutations. Nine patients presented with desmoplastic
medulloblastomas (DMB), 6 with medulloblastomas with extensive nodularity (MBEN)
and one patient with classic medulloblastoma (CMB); all tumors affected the
cerebellum, vermis or the fourth ventricle. SHH activation was present in all
investigated tumors (14/16); DNA methylation analysis (when available)
classified 3 tumors as iSHH-I and 4 tumors as iSHH-II. Age at diagnosis ranged
from 0.65 to 3.41 years. All but one patient received chemotherapy according to
the HIT-SKK protocol. Ten patients were in complete remission after completion
of primary therapy; four subsequently presented with PD. No patient received
radiotherapy during initial treatment. Five patients acquired additional
neoplasms, namely basal cell carcinomas, odontogenic tumors, ovarian fibromas
and meningioma. Developmental delay was documented in 5/16 patients. Overall
survival (OS) and progression-free survival (PFS) between patients with PTCH1 or
SUFU mutations did not differ statistically (10y-OS 90% vs. 100%, p=0.414;
5y-PFS 88.9% ± 10.5% vs. 41.7% ± 22.2%, p=0.139). Comparing the Gorlin patients
to all young, SHH activated MBs in the registries (10y-OS 93.3% ± 6.4% vs. 92.5%
± 3.3%, p=0.738; 10y-PFS 64.9%+-16.7% vs. 83.8%+-4.5%, p=0.228) as well as
comparing Gorlin M0 SKK-treated patients to all young, SHH activated, M0,
SKK-treated MBs in the HIT-MED database did not reveal significantly different
clinical outcomes (10y-OS 88.9% ± 10.5% vs. 88% ± 4%, p=0.812; 5y-PFS 87.5% ±
11.7% vs. 77.7% ± 5.1%, p=0.746). Gorlin syndrome should be considered in young
children with SHH activated medulloblastoma, especially DMB and MBEN but cannot
be ruled out for CMB. Survival did not differ to patients with SHH-activated
medulloblastoma with unknown germline status or between PTCH1 and SUFU mutated
patients. Additional neoplasms, especially basal cell carcinomas, need to be
expected and screened for. Genetic counselling should be provided for families
with young medulloblastoma patients with SHH activation.

Copyright © 2021 Kloth, Obrecht, Sturm, Pietsch, Warmuth-Metz, Bison, Mynarek
and Rutkowski.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.756025
PMCID: PMC8649840
PMID: 34888241

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
