---
reference_id: "PMID:38183975"
title: Updates in the Management of Paraneoplastic Syndrome.
authors:
- Verma N
- Jaffer MH
- Kolli AS
- Mokhtari S
journal: Semin Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1055/s-0043-1777353
keywords:
- Humans
- "Paraneoplastic Syndromes, Nervous System/diagnosis, therapy"
- Autoantibodies
- "Paraneoplastic Syndromes/diagnosis, therapy"
- Neurons/pathology
- "Neoplasms/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Updates in the Management of Paraneoplastic Syndrome.
**Authors:** Verma N, Jaffer MH, Kolli AS, Mokhtari S
**Journal:** Semin Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0043-1777353](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0043-1777353)

## Content

1. Semin Neurol. 2024 Feb;44(1):36-46. doi: 10.1055/s-0043-1777353. Epub 2024 Jan
 6.

Updates in the Management of Paraneoplastic Syndrome.

Verma N(1), Jaffer MH(2), Kolli AS(3), Mokhtari S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, Florida.
(2)Department of Neuro-Oncology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, Florida.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida.

Paraneoplastic neurological syndromes (PNS) are defined as remote neurologic 
immune-mediated effects triggered by underlying systemic tumors. While 
recognizing specific syndromes can aid early cancer detection, overutilization 
of paraneoplastic assays in the absence of a classic syndrome can precipitate 
overdiagnosis and overtreatment. PNS involve autoantibodies targeting 
intracellular or extracellular antigens, with variable immunotherapy responses 
based on antigen type. Diagnosing PNS is challenging, requiring exclusion of 
other differential diagnoses. New diagnostic criteria classify PNS into 
high-risk and intermediate-risk phenotypes based on clinical phenotype, neuronal 
antibodies, and cancer presence. Patients with cell surface antibodies respond 
better to immunotherapies compared to those with intracellular antigen targets. 
Understanding PNS syndromes, serological markers, and oncological features 
guides management, which facilitates initiation of immunosuppression for PNS 
alongside treatment of the underlying neoplasm, thereby improving neurologic and 
oncologic outcomes. Initial treatments often include intravenous 
methylprednisolone, plasma exchange, or intravenous immunoglobulins. Second-line 
immunosuppressants like rituximab or cyclophosphamide may be necessary if 
initial treatments fail. Specific therapies vary based on antibody target. Here, 
we summarize the current approach to the investigation, diagnosis, and treatment 
of patients with suspected PNS.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0043-1777353
PMID: 38183975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.