---
reference_id: "PMID:35952926"
title: Newborn screening and genetic features of patients with hyperphenylalaninemia in a southern Chinese population.
authors:
- Lin Y
- Lin W
- Su R
- Zheng Z
- Fu Q
- Wang G
journal: Clin Chim Acta
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2022.08.009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Newborn screening and genetic features of patients with hyperphenylalaninemia in a southern Chinese population.
**Authors:** Lin Y, Lin W, Su R, Zheng Z, Fu Q, Wang G
**Journal:** Clin Chim Acta (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cca.2022.08.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cca.2022.08.009)

## Content

1. Clin Chim Acta. 2022 Oct 1;535:13-18. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2022.08.009. Epub
2022  Aug 8.

Newborn screening and genetic features of patients with hyperphenylalaninemia in 
a southern Chinese population.

Lin Y(1), Lin W(1), Su R(1), Zheng Z(1), Fu Q(2), Wang G(3).

Author information:
(1)Center of Neonatal Disease Screening, Quanzhou Maternity and Children's 
Hospital, 700 Fengze Street, Quanzhou, Fujian Province 362000, China.
(2)Center of Neonatal Disease Screening, Quanzhou Maternity and Children's 
Hospital, 700 Fengze Street, Quanzhou, Fujian Province 362000, China. Electronic 
address: wrightlym@sina.com.
(3)Department of Surgery, Quanzhou Maternity and Children's Hospital, 700 Fengze 
Street, Quanzhou, Fujian Province 362000, China. Electronic address: 
wanggaoxiong2013@163.com.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) is the most common congenital 
amino acid metabolism-related defect, but its incidence differs substantially 
between northern and southern China. We aimed to elucidate the incidence, 
proportion, and genetic features of HPA in a southern Chinese population.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We analyzed the HPA screening results for 580,460 
newborns from 2014 to 2021.
RESULTS: Of the 296 newborns who tested HPA positive, 56 were diagnosed with 
HPA, including 47 with phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency and nine with 
tetrahydrobiopterin deficiency (BH4D). HPA incidence was estimated to be 
1:10,365 newborns. All patients had elevated Phe and Phe/Tyr levels. 
Thirty-three PAH variants and five PTS variants were detected in HPA patients; 
80.6 % PAH variants and 100 % PTS variants were classified as pathogenic or 
likely pathogenic. In silico tools predicted the remaining variants to be 
damaging. PAH variants clustered in exons 3, 5, 7, 11, and 12 and PTS variants 
clustered in exons 2 and 5. The most common PAH variants were c.158G > A 
(p.R53H, 22.3 %) and c.721C > T (p.R241C, 14.9 %). The most common PTS variants 
were c.155A > G (p.N52S, 50.0 %) and c.259C > T (p.P87S, 33.3 %).
CONCLUSION: Newborn screening is an effective method for early detection of HPA, 
but differential diagnosis of BH4D is necessary.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2022.08.009
PMID: 35952926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.