---
reference_id: "PMID:29277510"
title: HLA-DQA1 and APOL1 as Risk Loci for Childhood-Onset Steroid-Sensitive and Steroid-Resistant Nephrotic Syndrome.
authors:
- Adeyemo A
- Esezobor C
- Solarin A
- Abeyagunawardena A
- Kari JA
- El Desoky S
- Greenbaum LA
- Kamel M
- Kallash M
- Silva C
- Young A
- Hunley TE
- de Jesus-Gonzalez N
- Srivastava T
- Gbadegesin R
journal: Am J Kidney Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2017.10.013
keywords:
- Black or African American/genetics
- Age Distribution
- Age of Onset
- Alleles
- Apolipoprotein L1/genetics
- Case-Control Studies
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/epidemiology
- Genetic Variation
- HLA-DQ alpha-Chains/genetics
- Humans
- Incidence
- Infant
- Male
- "Nephrotic Syndrome/drug therapy, epidemiology, genetics"
- Prognosis
- Risk Assessment
- Sex Distribution
- "Steroids/administration & dosage"
- United States/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HLA-DQA1 and APOL1 as Risk Loci for Childhood-Onset Steroid-Sensitive and Steroid-Resistant Nephrotic Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adeyemo A, Esezobor C, Solarin A, Abeyagunawardena A, Kari JA, El Desoky S, Greenbaum LA, Kamel M, Kallash M, Silva C, Young A, Hunley TE, de Jesus-Gonzalez N, Srivastava T, Gbadegesin R
**Journal:** Am J Kidney Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.ajkd.2017.10.013](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.ajkd.2017.10.013)

## Content

1. Am J Kidney Dis. 2018 Mar;71(3):399-406. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2017.10.013. Epub
 2017 Dec 23.

HLA-DQA1 and APOL1 as Risk Loci for Childhood-Onset Steroid-Sensitive and 
Steroid-Resistant Nephrotic Syndrome.

Adeyemo A(1), Esezobor C(2), Solarin A(3), Abeyagunawardena A(4), Kari JA(5), El 
Desoky S(5), Greenbaum LA(6), Kamel M(6), Kallash M(7), Silva C(8), Young A(9), 
Hunley TE(10), de Jesus-Gonzalez N(11), Srivastava T(12), Gbadegesin R(13).

Author information:
(1)Center for Research on Genomics and Global Health, National Human Genome 
Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD. Electronic 
address: adeyemoa@mail.nih.gov.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Lagos University Teaching Hospital (LUTH), Lagos, 
Nigeria.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Lagos State University Teaching Hospital (LASUTH), 
Lagos, Nigeria.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Peradeniya, Sri Lanka.
(5)Pediatric Nephrology Center of Excellence, Department of Pediatrics, King 
Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(6)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Emory University School of Medicine and 
Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, GA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, State University of New York, Buffalo, NY.
(8)Division of Nephrology, Connecticut Children's Hospital, Hartford, CT.
(9)Division of Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, and Duke Molecular 
Physiology Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC.
(10)Division of Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, TN.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, University of Puerto Rico, Medical Sciences 
Campus, San Juan, Puerto Rico.
(12)Department of Nephrology, Children Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO.
(13)Division of Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, and Duke Molecular 
Physiology Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC. Electronic 
address: rasheed.gbadegesin@duke.edu.

BACKGROUND: Few data exist for the genetic variants underlying the risk for 
steroid-sensitive nephrotic syndrome (SSNS) in children. The objectives of this 
study were to evaluate HLA-DQA1 and APOL1 variants as risk factors for SSNS in 
African American children and use classic HLA antigen types and amino acid 
inference to refine the HLA-DQA1 association.
STUDY DESIGN: Case-control study.
SETTING & PARTICIPANTS: African American children with SSNS or steroid-resistant 
nephrotic syndrome (SRNS) were enrolled from Duke University and centers 
participating in the Midwest Pediatric Nephrology Consortium.
FACTOR: Genetic variants in HLA-DQA1 (C34Y [rs1129740]; F41S [rs1071630]) and 
APOL1 high-risk alleles.
OUTCOMES: SSNS and SRNS.
MEASUREMENTS: Direct sequencing for the HLA-DQA1 and APOL1 variants in 115 
African American children (65 with SSNS and 50 with SRNS). Imputation of classic 
HLA alleles and amino acids was done in 363 South Asian children.
RESULTS: The 2 HLA-DQA1 variants were significantly associated with SSNS in 
African American children (C34Y: P=5.7 × 10-11; OR, 3.53; 95% CI, 2.33-5.42; 
F41S: P=1.2 × 10-13; OR, 4.08; 95% CI, 2.70-6.28), but not with SRNS (C34Y: 
P=0.6; F41S: P=0.2). APOL1 high-risk variants were not associated with SSNS 
(P=0.5) but showed significant associations with SRNS (P=1.04 × 10-7; OR, 4.17; 
95% CI, 2.23-7.64). HLA-DQA1*0201, HLA-DQB1*0201, and HLA-DRB1*0701 were the 
classic HLA alleles with the most significant associations with SSNS risk. The 
most significantly associated amino acid positions were HLA-DQα1 56 and 76 (both 
P=2.8 × 10-7). Conditional analysis revealed that these variants most likely 
account for the observed association.
LIMITATIONS: Modest sample size and limited statistical power to detect small to 
moderate effect sizes. Children studied may not be representative of all African 
American children in the United States.
CONCLUSIONS: HLA-DQA1 is a risk locus for SSNS, but not SRNS, in African 
American children, consistent with its role in SSNS risk in children of 
European, Asian, and African ancestries. There is little evidence of a 
significant role for the APOL1 high-risk alleles in childhood SSNS in African 
American children. Refinement of the HLA-DQA1 association identified the 
critical classic HLA antigen types and amino acids of the HLA-DQ α1 molecule.

Copyright © 2017 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2017.10.013
PMCID: PMC5828864
PMID: 29277510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Financial Disclosure: The authors declare that 
they have no other relevant financial interests.