---
reference_id: "PMID:32797291"
title: Osteogenesis imperfecta-pathophysiology and therapeutic options.
authors:
- Etich J
- Leßmeier L
- Rehberg M
- Sill H
- Zaucke F
- Netzer C
- Semler O
journal: Mol Cell Pediatr
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1186/s40348-020-00101-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteogenesis imperfecta-pathophysiology and therapeutic options.
**Authors:** Etich J, Leßmeier L, Rehberg M, Sill H, Zaucke F, Netzer C, Semler O
**Journal:** Mol Cell Pediatr (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40348-020-00101-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40348-020-00101-9)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Pediatr. 2020 Aug 14;7(1):9. doi: 10.1186/s40348-020-00101-9.

Osteogenesis imperfecta-pathophysiology and therapeutic options.

Etich J(1), Leßmeier L(2), Rehberg M(3), Sill H(3), Zaucke F(1), Netzer C(2)(4), 
Semler O(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Dr. Rolf M. Schwiete Research Unit for Osteoarthritis, Orthopedic University 
Hospital Friedrichsheim gGmbH, Frankfurt/Main, Germany.
(2)University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, 
Institute of Human Genetics, Cologne, Germany.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital 
Cologne, University of Cologne, Kerpener Straße 62, Cologne, Germany.
(4)Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Center for rare 
diseases, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital 
Cologne, University of Cologne, Kerpener Straße 62, Cologne, Germany. 
joerg.semler@uk-koeln.de.
(6)Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Center for rare 
diseases, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. joerg.semler@uk-koeln.de.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a rare congenital disease with a wide spectrum 
of severity characterized by skeletal deformity and increased bone fragility as 
well as additional, variable extraskeletal symptoms. Here, we present an 
overview of the genetic heterogeneity and pathophysiological background of OI as 
well as OI-related bone fragility disorders and highlight current therapeutic 
options.The most common form of OI is caused by mutations in the two collagen 
type I genes. Stop mutations usually lead to reduced collagen amount resulting 
in a mild phenotype, while missense mutations mainly provoke structural 
alterations in the collagen protein and entail a more severe phenotype. Numerous 
other causal genes have been identified during the last decade that are involved 
in collagen biosynthesis, modification and secretion, the differentiation and 
function of osteoblasts, and the maintenance of bone homeostasis.Management of 
patients with OI involves medical treatment by bisphosphonates as the most 
promising therapy to inhibit bone resorption and thereby facilitate bone 
formation. Surgical treatment ensures pain reduction and healing without an 
increase of deformities. Timely remobilization and regular strengthening of the 
muscles by physiotherapy are crucial to improve mobility, prevent muscle wasting 
and avoid bone resorption caused by immobilization. Identification of the 
pathomechanism for SERPINF1 mutations led to the development of a tailored 
mechanism-based therapy using denosumab, and unraveling further pathomechanisms 
will likely open new avenues for innovative treatment approaches.

DOI: 10.1186/s40348-020-00101-9
PMCID: PMC7427672
PMID: 32797291

Conflict of interest statement: All authors state that no conflict of interests 
exists.