---
reference_id: "PMID:33218883"
title: "Acute flaccid myelitis outbreak through 2016-2018: A multicenter experience from Turkey."
authors:
- Ünver O
- Türkdoğan D
- Güler S
- Kipoğlu O
- Güngör M
- Paketçi C
- Çarman KB
- Öztürk G
- Genç HM
- Özkan M
- Dündar NO
- Işık U
- Karatoprak E
- Kılıç B
- Özkale M
- Bayram E
- Yarar C
- Sözen HG
- Sağer G
- Güneş AS
- Kahraman Koytak P
- Karadağ Saygı E
- Ekinci G
- Saltık S
- Çalışkan M
- Kara B
- Yiş U
- Aydınlı N
journal: Eur J Paediatr Neurol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2020.10.011
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Central Nervous System Viral Diseases/diagnosis, epidemiology, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Disease Outbreaks
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Myelitis/diagnosis, epidemiology, pathology"
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/diagnosis, epidemiology, pathology"
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- Turkey/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute flaccid myelitis outbreak through 2016-2018: A multicenter experience from Turkey.
**Authors:** Ünver O, Türkdoğan D, Güler S, Kipoğlu O, Güngör M, Paketçi C, Çarman KB, Öztürk G, Genç HM, Özkan M, Dündar NO, Işık U, Karatoprak E, Kılıç B, Özkale M, Bayram E, Yarar C, Sözen HG, Sağer G, Güneş AS, Kahraman Koytak P, Karadağ Saygı E, Ekinci G, Saltık S, Çalışkan M, Kara B, Yiş U, Aydınlı N
**Journal:** Eur J Paediatr Neurol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejpn.2020.10.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpn.2020.10.011)

## Content

1. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2021 Jan;30:113-120. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2020.10.011.
Epub 2020 Nov 4.

Acute flaccid myelitis outbreak through 2016-2018: A multicenter experience from
Turkey.

Ünver O(1), Türkdoğan D(2), Güler S(3), Kipoğlu O(4), Güngör M(5), Paketçi C(6),
Çarman KB(7), Öztürk G(2), Genç HM(8), Özkan M(9), Dündar NO(10), Işık U(11),
Karatoprak E(12), Kılıç B(13), Özkale M(14), Bayram E(6), Yarar C(7), Sözen
HG(8), Sağer G(2), Güneş AS(5), Kahraman Koytak P(15), Karadağ Saygı E(16),
Ekinci G(17), Saltık S(3), Çalışkan M(18), Kara B(5), Yiş U(6), Aydınlı N(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Marmara University
School of Medicine, İstanbul, Turkey. Electronic address: olcaymd@hotmail.com.
(2)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Marmara University
School of Medicine, İstanbul, Turkey.
(3)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, İstanbul
University Cerrahpaşa School of Medicine, İstanbul, Turkey.
(4)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, İstanbul
University Faculty of Medicine, İstanbul, Turkey.
(5)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Kocaeli University
School of Medicine, Kocaeli, Turkey.
(6)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Dokuz Eylül
University Medical Faculty, İzmir, Turkey.
(7)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Eskişehir
Osmangazi University Medical Faculty, Eskişehir, Turkey.
(8)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Ümraniye Training
and Research Hospital, İstanbul, Turkey.
(9)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Bahçeşehir
University Medical Faculty, İstanbul, Turkey.
(10)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir Katip
Çelebi University Medical Faculty, İzmir, Turkey.
(11)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Acıbadem
University School of Medicine, İstanbul, Turkey.
(12)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Medeniyet
University School of Medicine, İstanbul, Turkey.
(13)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Medipol
University School of Medicine, İstanbul, Turkey.
(14)Division of Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Başkent
University School of Medicine, Adana, Turkey.
(15)Department of Neurology, Marmara University School of Medicine, İstanbul,
Turkey.
(16)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Marmara University
School of Medicine, İstanbul, Turkey.
(17)Department of Radiology, Yeditepe University School of Medicine, İstanbul,
Turkey.
(18)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, İstanbul
University Faculty of Medicine, İstanbul, Turkey; İstanbul University Institute
of Child Health, İstanbul, Turkey.

AIM: We aim to describe the demographic characteristics, etiology,
neurophysiology, imaging findings, treatment, prognosis, and prognostic factors
of acute flaccid myelitis.
METHODS: The clinical data, laboratory test and, magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) results of pediatric patients diagnosed with acute flaccid myelitis
according to the Centers for Disease Control criteria between August 1, 2016,
and December 31, 2018, from 13 centers in Turkey were reviewed.
RESULTS: Of the 34 cases identified, 31 were confirmed (91.2%). Eighteen
patients (55.9%) were boys. The median patient age was 4 years (interquartile
range 2.5-6.9 years). Most of the patients were admitted in 2018 (n = 27). A
preceding history of a febrile illness was reported in all patients, with a
median of 4 days (interquartile range 3-7 days) before symptom onset. Thirty-one
patients had T2 hyperintensity on spinal MRI, and 18 patients had cerebrospinal
fluid pleocytosis. The most common infectious agents were entero/rhinoviruses
(n = 5) in respiratory specimens. All patients except one received immunotherapy
either alone or in combination. Among 27 patients with follow-up data 24 had
persistent weakness. Involvement of four limbs together with an abnormal brain
MRI at onset were associated with a poor prognosis.
CONCLUSION: The number of patients with acute flaccid myelitis increased since
2012, spiking with every 2-year interval, largely in the pediatric population.
The median age decreases with every outbreak. Clinicians should be aware of the
clinical picture for early collection of specimens and early start of
rehabilitation programs. Further studies are needed to better characterize the
etiology, pathogenesis, risk factors, and treatment of this rare condition.

Copyright © 2020 European Paediatric Neurology Society. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2020.10.011
PMID: 33218883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.
