---
reference_id: PMID:37158694
title: Molecular insights of KMT2D and clinical aspects of Kabuki syndrome type 1.
authors:
- Golden CS
- Williams S
- Serrano MA
journal: Birth Defects Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/bdr2.2183
keywords:
- Face/abnormalities
- Histone Methyltransferases
- Mutation
- Humans
- Methyltransferases
- DNA-Binding Proteins
- Neoplasm Proteins
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- Hematologic Diseases
- Vestibular Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular insights of KMT2D and clinical aspects of Kabuki syndrome type 1.
**Authors:** Golden CS, Williams S, Serrano MA
**Journal:** Birth Defects Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/bdr2.2183](https://doi.org/10.1002/bdr2.2183)

## Content

1. Birth Defects Res. 2023 Nov 15;115(19):1809-1824. doi: 10.1002/bdr2.2183. Epub
 2023 May 9.

Molecular insights of KMT2D and clinical aspects of Kabuki syndrome type 1.

Golden CS(1), Williams S(1), Serrano MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Regenerative Medicine, Section of Vascular Biology, Department of 
Medicine, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

BACKGROUND: Kabuki syndrome type 1 (KS1), a rare multisystem congenital 
disorder, presents with characteristic facial features, intellectual disability, 
persistent fetal fingertip pads, skeletal abnormalities, and postnatal growth 
delays. KS1 results from pathogenic variants in the KMT2D gene, which encodes a 
histone methyltransferase protein involved in chromatin remodeling, promoter and 
enhancer regulation, and scaffold formation during early development. KMT2D also 
mediates cell signaling pathways, responding to external stimuli and organizing 
effector protein assembly. Research on KMT2D's molecular mechanisms in KS1 has 
primarily focused on its histone methyltransferase activity, leaving a gap in 
understanding the methyltransferase-independent roles in KS1 clinical 
manifestations.
METHODS: This scoping review examines KMT2D's role in gene expression regulation 
across various species, cell types, and contexts. We analyzed human pathogenic 
KMT2D variants using publicly available databases and compared them to research 
organism models of KS1. We also conducted a systematic search of healthcare and 
governmental databases for clinical trials, studies, and therapeutic approaches.
RESULTS: Our review highlights KMT2D's critical roles beyond methyltransferase 
activity in diverse cellular contexts and conditions. We identified six distinct 
groups of KMT2D as a cell signaling mediator, including evidence of 
methyltransferase-dependent and -independent activity. A comprehensive search of 
the literature, clinical databases, and public registries emphasizes the need 
for basic research on KMT2D's functional complexity and longitudinal studies of 
KS1 patients to establish objective outcome measurements for therapeutic 
development.
CONCLUSION: We discuss how KMT2D's role in translating external cellular 
communication can partly explain the clinical heterogeneity observed in KS1 
patients. Additionally, we summarize the current molecular diagnostic approaches 
and clinical trials targeting KS1. This review is a resource for patient 
advocacy groups, researchers, and physicians to support KS1 diagnosis and 
therapeutic development.

© 2023 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/bdr2.2183
PMCID: PMC10845236
PMID: 37158694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.