---
reference_id: "PMID:38563533"
title: Outcomes after newborn screening for propionic and methylmalonic acidemia and homocystinurias.
authors:
- Reischl-Hajiabadi AT
- Schnabel E
- Gleich F
- Mengler K
- Lindner M
- Burgard P
- Posset R
- Lommer-Steinhoff S
- Grünert SC
- Thimm E
- Freisinger P
- Hennermann JB
- Krämer J
- Gramer G
- Lenz D
- Christ S
- Hörster F
- Hoffmann GF
- Garbade SF
- Kölker S
- Mütze U
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12731
keywords:
- Humans
- Neonatal Screening/methods
- Homocystinuria/diagnosis
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis"
- Propionic Acidemia/diagnosis
- Female
- Male
- Germany
- Infant
- Pilot Projects
- "Child, Preschool"
- Vitamin B 12/blood
- Child
- "Methylenetetrahydrofolate Reductase (NADPH2)/deficiency, genetics"
- Muscle Spasticity
- Psychotic Disorders
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcomes after newborn screening for propionic and methylmalonic acidemia and homocystinurias.
**Authors:** Reischl-Hajiabadi AT, Schnabel E, Gleich F, Mengler K, Lindner M, Burgard P, Posset R, Lommer-Steinhoff S, Grünert SC, Thimm E, Freisinger P, Hennermann JB, Krämer J, Gramer G, Lenz D, Christ S, Hörster F, Hoffmann GF, Garbade SF, Kölker S, Mütze U
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12731](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12731)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2024 Jul;47(4):674-689. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12731. Epub
2024  Apr 2.

Outcomes after newborn screening for propionic and methylmalonic acidemia and 
homocystinurias.

Reischl-Hajiabadi AT(1), Schnabel E(1), Gleich F(1), Mengler K(1), Lindner M(2), 
Burgard P(1), Posset R(1), Lommer-Steinhoff S(1), Grünert SC(3), Thimm E(4), 
Freisinger P(5), Hennermann JB(6), Krämer J(7), Gramer G(1)(8), Lenz D(1), 
Christ S(1), Hörster F(1), Hoffmann GF(1), Garbade SF(1), Kölker S(1), Mütze 
U(1).

Author information:
(1)Heidelberg University, Medical Faculty of Heidelberg, Center for Child and 
Adolescent Medicine, Division of Child Neurology and Metabolic Medicine, 
Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)University Children's Hospital, Frankfurt, Germany.
(3)Department of General Pediatrics, Adolescent Medicine and Neonatology, 
Medical Center, University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Department of General Pediatrics, Neonatology, and Pediatric Cardiology, 
University Children's Hospital, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, 
Düsseldorf, Germany.
(5)Children's Hospital Reutlingen, Klinikum am Steinenberg Reutlingen, 
Reutlingen, Germany.
(6)Villa Metabolica, Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, University 
Medical Center Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
(7)Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Medical School, Ulm 
University, Ulm, Germany.
(8)Department for Inborn Metabolic Diseases, University Children's Hospital, 
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.

The current German newborn screening (NBS) panel includes 13 inherited metabolic 
diseases (IMDs). In addition, a NBS pilot study in Southwest Germany identifies 
individuals with propionic acidemia (PA), methylmalonic acidemia (MMA), combined 
and isolated remethylation disorders (e.g., cobalamin [cbl] C and 
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase [MTHFR] deficiency), cystathionine 
β-synthase (CBS) deficiency, and neonatal cbl deficiency through one 
multiple-tier algorithm. The long-term health benefits of screened individuals 
are evaluated in a multicenter observational study. Twenty seven screened 
individuals with IMDs (PA [N = 13], MMA [N = 6], cblC deficiency [N = 5], MTHFR 
deficiency [N = 2] and CBS deficiency [N = 1]), and 42 with neonatal cbl 
deficiency were followed for a median of 3.6 years. Seventeen screened IMD 
patients (63%) experienced at least one metabolic decompensation, 14 of them 
neonatally and six even before the NBS report (PA, cbl-nonresponsive MMA). Three 
PA patients died despite NBS and immediate treatment. Fifteen individuals (79%) 
with PA or MMA and all with cblC deficiency developed permanent, mostly 
neurological symptoms, while individuals with MTHFR, CBS, and neonatal cbl 
deficiency had a favorable clinical outcome. Utilizing a combined multiple-tier 
algorithm, we demonstrate that NBS and specialized metabolic care result in 
substantial benefits for individuals with MTHFR deficiency, CBS deficiency, 
neonatal cbl deficiency, and to some extent, cbl-responsive MMA and cblC 
deficiency. However, its advantage is less evident for individuals with PA and 
cbl-nonresponsive MMA. SYNOPSIS: Early detection through newborn screening and 
subsequent specialized metabolic care improve clinical outcomes and survival in 
individuals with MTHFR deficiency and cystathionine-β-synthase deficiency, and 
to some extent in cobalamin-responsive methylmalonic acidemia (MMA) and cblC 
deficiency while the benefit for individuals with propionic acidemia and 
cobalamin-nonresponsive MMA is less evident due to the high (neonatal) 
decompensation rate, mortality, and long-term complications.

© 2024 The Authors. Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12731
PMID: 38563533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]