---
reference_id: "PMID:36678214"
title: "Favism: Clinical Features at Different Ages."
authors:
- Beretta A
- Manuelli M
- Cena H
journal: Nutrients
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/nu15020343
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Favism: Clinical Features at Different Ages.
**Authors:** Beretta A, Manuelli M, Cena H
**Journal:** Nutrients (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/nu15020343](https://doi.org/10.3390/nu15020343)

## Content

1. Nutrients. 2023 Jan 10;15(2):343. doi: 10.3390/nu15020343.

Favism: Clinical Features at Different Ages.

Beretta A(1), Manuelli M(2), Cena H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Dietetics and Clinical Nutrition, Department of Public Health, 
Experimental and Forensic Medicine, University of Pavia, Via Bassi 21, 27100 
Pavia, Italy.
(2)Clinical Nutrition and Dietetics Service, Unit of Internal Medicine and 
Endocrinology, Istituti Clinici Scientifici Maugeri IRCCS, 27100 Pavia, Italy.

Favism is a hemolytic disease due to the ingestion of fava beans in individuals 
with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency. There is wide inter- 
and intra-individual variability in the development of hemolytic crisis, and 
several factors influence it: quantity, quality, ripeness of fava beans, and age 
of onset. In this narrative review of case reports and case series, we reported 
the predisposing factors and clinical features for four different age groups 
classified as follows: pregnant women and infants (i.e., exclusively breastfed 
children); children, from weaned to 11 years; preadolescents and adolescents, 
from 11 to 18 years; and adults (18 years and older). Some symptoms developed 
only in specific age groups: death in infants; visual impairment in children; 
systolic murmur in infants, children, and adolescents; and renal failure in 
adults. In youngest children or pregnant women the severity is the highest. Some 
other symptoms were present in all: jaundice, increased bilirubin, splenomegaly, 
hepatomegaly, discolored urine, tachycardia, pallor, abdominal pain, malaise, 
vomit, nausea, and dizziness. Laboratory findings are characterized by anemia, 
reticulocytosis, elevated bilirubin level, and sometimes urinary urobilinogen 
and methemoglobinemia. In most cases the symptomatology is self-limited and does 
not release sequelae, but hospitalization and transfusion are often required.

DOI: 10.3390/nu15020343
PMCID: PMC9864644
PMID: 36678214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.