---
reference_id: "PMID:33627146"
title: "Chronic inflammation of middle ear cholesteatoma promotes its recurrence via a paracrine mechanism."
journal: Cell Commun Signal
year: "2021"
doi: 10.1186/s12964-020-00690-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic inflammation of middle ear cholesteatoma promotes its recurrence via a paracrine mechanism.

## Content

BACKGROUND: Cholesteatoma disease is an expanding lesion in the middle ear.
Hearing loss and facial paralysis alongside with other intracranial
complications are found. No pharmaceutical treatment is available today and
recurrence after surgical extraction occurs. We investigated possible TLR4-based
mechanisms promoting recurrence and explore possible treatments strategies.
METHODS: We isolated fibroblasts and epidermal stem cells from cholesteatoma
tissue and healthy auditory canal skin. Subsequently, their expression under
standard culture conditions and after stimulation with LPS was investigated by
RT-qPCR. Cell metabolism and proliferation were analysed upon LPS treatment,
with and without TLR4 antagonist. An indirect co-culture of fibroblasts and
epidermal stem cells isolated from cholesteatoma tissue was utilized to monitor
epidermal differentiation upon LPS treatment by RT-qPCR and immunocytochemistry.
RESULTS: Under standard culture conditions, we detected a tissue-independent
higher expression of IL-1β and IL-8 in stem cells, an upregulation of KGF and
IGF-2 in both cell types derived from cholesteatoma and higher expression of
TLR4 in stem cells derived from cholesteatoma tissue. Upon LPS challenge, we
could detect a significantly higher expression of IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-6 and IL-8 in
stem cells and of TNF-a, GM-CSF and CXCL-5 in stem cells and fibroblasts derived
from cholesteatoma. The expression of the growth factors KGF, EGF, EREG, IGF-2
and HGF was significantly higher in fibroblasts, particularly when derived from
cholesteatoma. Upon treatment with LPS the metabolism was elevated in stem cells
and fibroblasts, proliferation was only enhanced in fibroblasts derived from
cholesteatoma. This could be reversed by the treatment with a TLR4 antagonist.
The cholesteatoma fibroblasts could be triggered by LPS to promote the
epidermal differentiation of the stem cells, while no LPS treatment or LPS
treatment without the presence of fibroblasts did not result in such a
differentiation. CONCLUSION: We propose that cholesteatoma recurrence is based
on TLR4 signalling imprinted in the cholesteatoma cells. It induces excessive
inflammation of stem cells and fibroblasts, proliferation of perimatrix
fibroblasts and the generation of epidermal cells from stem cells thru
paracrine signalling by fibroblasts. Treatment of the operation site with a TLR4
antagonist might reduce the chance of cholesteatoma recurrence.
