---
reference_id: "PMID:35129589"
title: "RPE65-Associated Retinopathies in the Italian Population: A Longitudinal Natural History Study."
authors:
- Testa F
- Murro V
- Signorini S
- Colombo L
- Iarossi G
- Parmeggiani F
- Falsini B
- Salvetti AP
- Brunetti-Pierri R
- Aprile G
- Bertone C
- Suppiej A
- Romano F
- Karali M
- Donati S
- Melillo P
- Sodi A
- Quaranta L
- Rossetti L
- Buzzonetti L
- Chizzolini M
- Rizzo S
- Staurenghi G
- Banfi S
- Azzolini C
- Simonelli F
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1167/iovs.63.2.13
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Electroretinography
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genotype
- Humans
- Incidence
- Italy/epidemiology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Retinal Dystrophies/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Visual Acuity
- Visual Fields
- Young Adult
- "cis-trans-Isomerases/genetics, metabolism"
- Retinoid Isomerohydrolase
content_type: abstract_only
---

# RPE65-Associated Retinopathies in the Italian Population: A Longitudinal Natural History Study.
**Authors:** Testa F, Murro V, Signorini S, Colombo L, Iarossi G, Parmeggiani F, Falsini B, Salvetti AP, Brunetti-Pierri R, Aprile G, Bertone C, Suppiej A, Romano F, Karali M, Donati S, Melillo P, Sodi A, Quaranta L, Rossetti L, Buzzonetti L, Chizzolini M, Rizzo S, Staurenghi G, Banfi S, Azzolini C, Simonelli F
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1167/iovs.63.2.13](https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.63.2.13)

## Content

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2022 Feb 1;63(2):13. doi: 10.1167/iovs.63.2.13.

RPE65-Associated Retinopathies in the Italian Population: A Longitudinal Natural 
History Study.

Testa F(1), Murro V(2), Signorini S(3), Colombo L(4), Iarossi G(5), Parmeggiani 
F(6)(7), Falsini B(8), Salvetti AP(9), Brunetti-Pierri R(1), Aprile G(3), 
Bertone C(10), Suppiej A(11), Romano F(9), Karali M(1)(12), Donati S(13), 
Melillo P(1), Sodi A(2), Quaranta L(10), Rossetti L(4), Buzzonetti L(5), 
Chizzolini M(7), Rizzo S(8), Staurenghi G(9), Banfi S(12)(14), Azzolini C(13), 
Simonelli F(1).

Author information:
(1)Eye Clinic, Multidisciplinary Department of Medical, Surgical and Dental 
Sciences, University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Naples, Italy.
(2)Eye Clinic, Neuromuscolar and Sense Organs Department, Careggi University 
Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(3)Developmental Neuro-ophthalmology Unit, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, 
Italy.
(4)Eye Clinic, ASST Santi Paolo e Carlo Hospital, University of Milan, Milan, 
Italy.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Bambino Gesù IRCCS Children's Hospital, Rome, 
Italy.
(6)Department of Translational Medicine and for Romagna, University of Ferrara, 
Ferrara, Italy.
(7)ERN-EYE Network-Center for Retinitis Pigmentosa of Veneto Region, 
Camposampiero Hospital, Padova, Italy.
(8)Institute of Ophthalmology, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, 
Italy.
(9)Eye Clinic, Department of Biomedical and Clinical Science, Luigi Sacco 
Hospital, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(10)Department of Surgical and Clinical, Diagnostic and Pediatric Sciences, 
Section of Ophthalmology, University of Pavia, IRCCS Fondazione Policlinico San 
Matteo, Pavia, Italy.
(11)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(12)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, Italy.
(13)Unit of Ophthalmology, Azienda Socio-Sanitaria Territoriale (ASST) Dei Sette 
Laghi, Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Insubria, Varese, 
Italy.
(14)Medical Genetics, Department of Precision Medicine, University of Campania 
Luigi Vanvitelli, Naples, Italy.

PURPOSE: To investigate the course of inherited retinal degenerations (IRD) due 
to mutations in the RPE65 gene.
METHODS: This longitudinal multicentric retrospective chart-review study was 
designed to collect best corrected visual acuity (BCVA), Goldman visual field, 
optical coherence tomography (OCT), and electroretinography (ERG) measurements. 
The data, including imaging, were collected using an electronic clinical 
research form and were reviewed at a single center to improve consistency.
RESULTS: From an overall cohort of 60 Italian patients with RPE65-associated 
IRD, 43 patients (mean age, 27.8 ± 19.7 years) were included and showed a mean 
BCVA of 2.0 ± 1.0 logMAR. Time-to-event analysis revealed a median age of 33.8 
years and 41.4 years to reach low vision and blindness based on BCVA, 
respectively. ERG (available for 34 patients) showed undetectable responses in 
most patients (26; 76.5%). OCT (available for 31 patients) revealed epiretinal 
membranes in five patients (16.1%). Central foveal thickness significantly 
decreased with age at a mean annual rate of -0.6%/y (P = 0.044). We identified 
43 different variants in the RPE65 gene in the entire cohort. Nine variants were 
novel. Finally, to assess genotype-phenotype correlations, patients were 
stratified according to the number of RPE65 loss-of-function (LoF) alleles. 
Patients without LoF variants showed significantly (P < 0.05) better BCVA 
compared to patients with one or two LoF alleles.
CONCLUSIONS: We described the natural course of RPE65-associated IRD in an 
Italian cohort showing for the first time a specific genotype-phenotype 
association. Our findings can contribute to a better management of 
RPE65-associated IRD patients.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.63.2.13
PMCID: PMC8822366
PMID: 35129589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: F. Testa, None; V. Murro, None; S. 
Signorini, None; L. Colombo, None; G. Iarossi, None; F. Parmeggiani, None; B. 
Falsini, None; A.P. Salvetti, None; R. Brunetti-Pierri, None; G. Aprile, None; 
C. Bertone, None; A. Suppiej, None; F. Romano, None; M. Karali, None; S. Donati, 
None; P. Melillo, None; A. Sodi, None; L. Quaranta, None; L. Rossetti, None; L. 
Buzzonetti, None; M. Chizzolini, None; S. Rizzo, None; G. Staurenghi, None; S. 
Banfi, None; C. Azzolini, None; F. Simonelli, None