---
reference_id: "PMID:39142493"
title: Effect of DNA methylation at the CTLA4 gene on the clinical status of autoimmune thyroid diseases.
authors:
- Ohtani H
- Inoue N
- Iwatani Y
- Takeno Y
- Arakawa Y
- Hidaka Y
- Watanabe M
journal: Clin Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2024.110338
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of DNA methylation at the CTLA4 gene on the clinical status of autoimmune thyroid diseases.
**Authors:** Ohtani H, Inoue N, Iwatani Y, Takeno Y, Arakawa Y, Hidaka Y, Watanabe M
**Journal:** Clin Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clim.2024.110338](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clim.2024.110338)

## Content

1. Clin Immunol. 2024 Oct;267:110338. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2024.110338. Epub 2024 
Aug 13.

Effect of DNA methylation at the CTLA4 gene on the clinical status of autoimmune 
thyroid diseases.

Ohtani H(1), Inoue N(2), Iwatani Y(1), Takeno Y(1), Arakawa Y(1), Hidaka Y(3), 
Watanabe M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory and Biomedical Sciences, Osaka University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Yamadaoka 1-7 Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory and Biomedical Sciences, Osaka University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Yamadaoka 1-7 Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan; 
Laboratory for Clinical Investigation, Osaka University Hospital, Yamadaoka 
2-15, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
(3)Laboratory for Clinical Investigation, Osaka University Hospital, Yamadaoka 
2-15, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
(4)Department of Clinical Laboratory and Biomedical Sciences, Osaka University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Yamadaoka 1-7 Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. 
Electronic address: nabe@sahs.med.osaka-u.ac.jp.

The pathogenesis and manifestation of autoimmune thyroid diseases (AITDs), 
Graves' disease (GD), and Hashimoto's disease (HD) are associated with T cell 
activation. Cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (CTLA-4) plays a crucial 
role in the regulation of T cell activation. DNA methylation levels of eight CpG 
sites in the CTLA4 gene and expression levels of soluble CTLA-4 were examined. 
Methylation levels of +22 CpG and CT60 CpG-SNPs in patients with GD and HD with 
the CT60 GG genotype were lower than those in control subjects. Methylation 
levels of the-15 CpG sites were lower in patients with intractable GD than those 
in GD patients in remission. These results suggest that demethylation of +22 CpG 
and CT60 CpG-SNPs may be associated with susceptibility to GD and HD in subjects 
with the CTLA4 CT60 GG genotype, and that demethylation of -15 CpG may be 
associated with the intractability of GD.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clim.2024.110338
PMID: 39142493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no conflict of interest.