---
reference_id: "PMID:39810285"
title: Exon location of glycine substitutions impacts kidney survival in autosomal dominant Alport syndrome.
authors:
- Pagniez MS
- Fages V
- Gatinois C
- Larrue R
- Pottier N
- Laboux T
- Lenain R
- Grunewald O
- Robert T
- Rigothier C
- Mesnard L
- Glowacki F
journal: Nephrol Dial Transplant
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfaf011
keywords:
- Humans
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/genetics, mortality, pathology, complications"
- Collagen Type IV/genetics
- Male
- Female
- Adult
- Retrospective Studies
- Middle Aged
- Glomerular Filtration Rate
- Exons/genetics
- Follow-Up Studies
- Glycine/genetics
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/etiology, mortality, genetics, pathology"
- Prognosis
- Autoantigens/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Survival Rate
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exon location of glycine substitutions impacts kidney survival in autosomal dominant Alport syndrome.
**Authors:** Pagniez MS, Fages V, Gatinois C, Larrue R, Pottier N, Laboux T, Lenain R, Grunewald O, Robert T, Rigothier C, Mesnard L, Glowacki F
**Journal:** Nephrol Dial Transplant (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ndt/gfaf011](https://doi.org/10.1093/ndt/gfaf011)

## Content

1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2025 Aug 1;40(8):1522-1530. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfaf011.

Exon location of glycine substitutions impacts kidney survival in autosomal
dominant Alport syndrome.

Pagniez MS(1), Fages V(1), Gatinois C(2), Larrue R(3), Pottier N(3), Laboux
T(1), Lenain R(1), Grunewald O(3), Robert T(4), Rigothier C(2), Mesnard L(5),
Glowacki F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Kidney Transplantation and Dialysis, CHU Lille,
University of Lille, Lille, France.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Transplantation, Dialysis and Apheresis, CHU
Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
(3)University of Lille, CNRS, Inserm, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
UMR9020-U1277 - CANTHER - Cancer Heterogeneity, Plasticity and Resistance to
Therapies, Toxicology and Genetic Diseases Department, CHU Lille, Lille, France.
(4)Department of Nephrology and Kidney Transplantation, Conception Hospital,
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille, Marseille, France.
(5)Service de Soins Intensifs Néphrologiques et Rein Aigu, French Intensive
Renal Network, Tenon Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris,
France.

BACKGROUND: Unlike X-linked or autosomal recessive Alport syndrome, no clear
genotype/phenotype correlation has yet been demonstrated in patients carrying a
single variant of COL4A3 or COL4A4.
METHODS: We carried out a multicentre retrospective study to assess the risk
factors involved in renal survival in patients presenting a single pathogenic
variant on COL4A3 or COL4A4.
RESULTS: A total of 97 patients presenting a single pathogenic variant of COL4A3
or COL4A4 were included. The prevalence of end-stage kidney disease (ESKD)
during follow-up was 28.7% [median age 47.5 years (interquartile range
39.1-55.8). A total of 23 patients carried a 'severe' mutation (frameshift, stop
gain, extensive deletion, impacting splicing) and 60 patients presented a
glycine substitution in a collagenous domain. In patients with glycine missense
variants, the location of the mutation in the distal exons was associated with
worse renal survival with a more pronounced decline in the estimated glomerular
filtration rate compared with variants in proximal exons. Conversely, the
presence of a severe mutation did not impact renal survival.
CONCLUSION: Our results confirm that autosomal dominant Alport syndrome (ADAS)
can lead to ESKD. We demonstrated that a glycine substitution involving the
distal exons had a negative impact on renal survival in ADAS patients, probably
due to a trimerization defect. This could help improve personalized follow-up in
ADAS patients with glycine substitution and could be integrated into a future
prognostic score to accurately predict renal outcomes.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the ERA.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfaf011
PMID: 39810285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
