---
reference_id: PMID:35079775
title: Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 Vaccination Boosts Neutralizing Activity Against Seasonal Human Coronaviruses.
authors:
- Lawrenz J
- Xie Q
- Zech F
- Weil T
- Seidel A
- Krnavek D
- van der Hoek L
- Münch J
- Müller JA
- Kirchhoff F
journal: Clin Infect Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/cid/ciac057
keywords:
- BNT162 Vaccine
- "COVID-19/prevention & control"
- COVID-19 Vaccines
- ChAdOx1 nCoV-19
- "Coronavirus 229E, Human"
- "Coronavirus NL63, Human"
- "Coronavirus OC43, Human"
- Humans
- SARS-CoV-2
- Seasons
- Vaccination
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 Vaccination Boosts Neutralizing Activity Against Seasonal Human Coronaviruses.
**Authors:** Lawrenz J, Xie Q, Zech F, Weil T, Seidel A, Krnavek D, van der Hoek L, Münch J, Müller JA, Kirchhoff F
**Journal:** Clin Infect Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cid/ciac057](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciac057)

## Content

1. Clin Infect Dis. 2022 Aug 24;75(1):e653-e661. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciac057.

Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 Vaccination Boosts Neutralizing 
Activity Against Seasonal Human Coronaviruses.

Lawrenz J(1), Xie Q(1), Zech F(1), Weil T(1), Seidel A(1), Krnavek D(1), van der 
Hoek L(2), Münch J(1), Müller JA(1), Kirchhoff F(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Virology, Ulm University Medical Center, Ulm, Germany.
(2)Laboratory of Experimental Virology, Department of Medical Microbiology, 
Amsterdam UMC, Location AMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Most of the millions of people that are vaccinated against severe 
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the causative agent of 
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), have previously been infected by related 
circulating human coronaviruses (hCoVs) causing common colds and will experience 
further encounters with these viruses in the future. Whether COVID-19 
vaccinations impact neutralization of seasonal coronaviruses is largely unknown.
METHODS: We analyzed the capacity of sera derived from 24 individuals before and 
after heterologous ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 BNT162b2 prime-boost vaccination to 
neutralize genuine OC43, NL63, and 229E hCoVs, as well as viral pseudoparticles 
carrying the SARS-CoV-1, SARS-CoV-2, Middle East Respiratory Syndrome 
(MERS)-CoV, and hCoV-OC43, hCoV-NL63, and hCoV-229E spike proteins. Genuine 
hCoVs or spike containing pseudovirions were incubated with different 
concentrations of sera and neutralization efficiencies were determined by 
measuring viral RNA yields, intracellular viral nucleocapsid expression, or 
reporter gene expression in Huh-7 cells.
RESULTS: All individuals showed strong preexisting immunity against hCoV-OC43. 
Neutralization of hCoV-NL63 was more variable and all sera showed only modest 
inhibitory activity against genuine hCoV-229E. SARS-CoV-2 vaccination resulted 
in efficient cross-neutralization of SARS-CoV-1 but not of MERS-CoV. On average, 
vaccination significantly increased the neutralizing activity against genuine 
hCoV-OC43, hCoV-NL63, and hCoV-229E.
CONCLUSIONS: Heterologous COVID-19 vaccination may confer some cross-protection 
against endemic seasonal coronaviruses.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious 
Diseases Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciac057
PMCID: PMC8807272
PMID: 35079775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]