---
reference_id: "PMID:28034829"
title: "BAP1 Is Altered by Copy Number Loss, Mutation, and/or Loss of Protein Expression in More Than 70% of Malignant Peritoneal Mesotheliomas."
authors:
- Leblay N
- Leprêtre F
- Le Stang N
- Gautier-Stein A
- Villeneuve L
- Isaac S
- Maillet D
- Galateau-Sallé F
- Villenet C
- Sebda S
- Goracci A
- Byrnes G
- McKay JD
- Figeac M
- Glehen O
- Gilly FN
- Foll M
- Fernandez-Cuesta L
- Brevet M
journal: J Thorac Oncol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jtho.2016.12.019
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics, metabolism"
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- "Mesothelioma/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Mesothelioma, Malignant"
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Staging
- "Peritoneal Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Pleural Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Prognosis
- Survival Rate
- "Tumor Suppressor Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Ubiquitin Thiolesterase/genetics, metabolism"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BAP1 Is Altered by Copy Number Loss, Mutation, and/or Loss of Protein Expression in More Than 70% of Malignant Peritoneal Mesotheliomas.
**Authors:** Leblay N, Leprêtre F, Le Stang N, Gautier-Stein A, Villeneuve L, Isaac S, Maillet D, Galateau-Sallé F, Villenet C, Sebda S, Goracci A, Byrnes G, McKay JD, Figeac M, Glehen O, Gilly FN, Foll M, Fernandez-Cuesta L, Brevet M
**Journal:** J Thorac Oncol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jtho.2016.12.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtho.2016.12.019)

## Content

1. J Thorac Oncol. 2017 Apr;12(4):724-733. doi: 10.1016/j.jtho.2016.12.019. Epub
2016 Dec 27.

BAP1 Is Altered by Copy Number Loss, Mutation, and/or Loss of Protein Expression
in More Than 70% of Malignant Peritoneal Mesotheliomas.

Leblay N(1), Leprêtre F(2), Le Stang N(3), Gautier-Stein A(4), Villeneuve L(5),
Isaac S(6), Maillet D(7), Galateau-Sallé F(3), Villenet C(2), Sebda S(2),
Goracci A(8), Byrnes G(1), McKay JD(1), Figeac M(9), Glehen O(10), Gilly FN(10),
Foll M(1), Fernandez-Cuesta L(11), Brevet M(6).

Author information:
(1)International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France.
(2)Structural and Functional Genomics Core Facility, University of Lille, Lille,
France.
(3)Department of Biopathology, Cancer Center Lyon Leon Berard, Lyon, France;
National Cancer Institute, Research Unit 1086, Caen, France.
(4)National Cancer Institute, Research Unit 1213, Lyon, France.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, Research Team 3738, Lyon1 University, Oullins, France;
French National Network for the Treatment of Rare Peritoneal Surface
Malignancies, University Hospital of Lyon and Lyon1 University, Lyon, France;
University Hospital of Lyon, Lyon, France.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, Research Team 3738, Lyon1 University, Oullins, France;
French National Network for the Treatment of Rare Peritoneal Surface
Malignancies, University Hospital of Lyon and Lyon1 University, Lyon, France;
Department of Pathology, University Hospital of Lyon and Lyon1 University, Lyon,
France.
(7)Department of Oncology, University Hospital of Lyon and Lyon1 University,
Lyon, France.
(8)Department of Radiology, University Hospital of Lyon and Lyon1 University,
Lyon, France.
(9)Structural and Functional Genomics Core Facility, University of Lille, Lille,
France; Sequencing Platform, Research Cancer Institute, Lille, France.
(10)Faculty of Medicine, Research Team 3738, Lyon1 University, Oullins, France;
French National Network for the Treatment of Rare Peritoneal Surface
Malignancies, University Hospital of Lyon and Lyon1 University, Lyon, France;
Department of Surgery, University Hospital of Lyon and Lyon1 University, Lyon,
France.
(11)International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France. Electronic
address: fernandezcuestal@iarc.fr.

INTRODUCTION: Malignant mesothelioma is a deadly disease that is strongly
associated with asbestos exposure. Peritoneal mesotheliomas account for 10% of
all the cases. BRCA1 associated protein 1 (BAP1) is a deubiquitinating hydrolase
that plays a key role in various cellular processes. Germline and somatic
inactivation of BRCA1 associated protein 1 gene (BAP1) is frequent in pleural
mesothelioma; however, little is known about its status in peritoneal
mesothelioma.
METHODS: Taking advantage of the extensive French National Network for the
Diagnosis of Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma and Rare Peritoneal Tumors and the
French National Network for the Treatment of Rare Peritoneal Surface
Malignancies, we collected biological material and clinical and epidemiological
data for 46 patients with peritoneal mesothelioma. The status of BAP1 was
evaluated at the mutational and protein expression levels and combined with our
previous data on copy number alterations assessed in the same samples.
RESULTS: We detected mutations in 32% of the malignant peritoneal mesotheliomas
analyzed. In addition, we have previously reported that copy number losses
occurred in 42% of the samples included in this series. Overall, 73% of the
malignant peritoneal mesotheliomas analyzed carried at least one inactivated
BAP1 allele, but only 57% had a complete loss of its protein nuclear expression.
Better overall survival was observed for patients with BAP1 mutations (p =
0.04), protein expression loss (p = 0.016), or at least one of these alterations
(p = 0.007) independently of tumor histological subtype, age, and sex.
CONCLUSIONS: As in pleural mesothelioma, inactivation of BAP1 is frequent in
peritoneal mesotheliomas. We found that BAP1 protein nuclear expression is a
good prognostic factor and a more reliable marker for the complete loss of BAP1
activity than mutation or copy number loss.

Copyright © 2017 International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtho.2016.12.019
PMID: 28034829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
