---
reference_id: "PMID:31397881"
title: Serum complexes between C1INH and C1INH autoantibodies for the diagnosis of acquired angioedema.
authors:
- López-Lera A
- Garrido S
- Nozal P
- Skatum L
- Bygum A
- Caballero T
- López Trascasa M
journal: Clin Exp Immunol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/cei.13361
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Angioedema/blood, diagnosis, immunology"
- "Angioedemas, Hereditary/blood, diagnosis, immunology"
- "Autoantibodies/blood, immunology, metabolism"
- Cohort Studies
- "Complement C1 Inhibitor Protein/genetics, immunology, metabolism"
- "Complement C1q/immunology, metabolism"
- Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
- Europe
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Multiprotein Complexes/blood, immunology, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Sensitivity and Specificity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serum complexes between C1INH and C1INH autoantibodies for the diagnosis of acquired angioedema.
**Authors:** López-Lera A, Garrido S, Nozal P, Skatum L, Bygum A, Caballero T, López Trascasa M
**Journal:** Clin Exp Immunol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cei.13361](https://doi.org/10.1111/cei.13361)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2019 Dec;198(3):341-350. doi: 10.1111/cei.13361. Epub 2019
Sep  17.

Serum complexes between C1INH and C1INH autoantibodies for the diagnosis of 
acquired angioedema.

López-Lera A(1)(2), Garrido S(2)(3), Nozal P(2)(3), Skatum L(4), Bygum A(5), 
Caballero T(1)(2)(6), López Trascasa M(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Hospital La Paz (IdiPaz), Madrid, 
Spain.
(2)Centre for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER) U-754, 
Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Immunology Unit, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Clinical Immunology and Transfusion Medicine, Office for Medical Services, 
Lund, Sweden.
(5)National HAE Centre, Odense University Hospital, Denmark.
(6)Department of Allergy, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain.
(7)Departamento de Medicina, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

Acquired angioedema due to C1-inhibitor (C1INH) deficiency (AAE) is caused by 
secondary C1INH deficiency leading to bradykinin-mediated angioedema episodes. 
AAE typically presents in adulthood and is associated with B cell 
lymphoproliferation. Anti-C1INH autoantibodies (antiC1INHAbs) are detectable in 
a subset of AAE cases and considered a hallmark of the disease. When free 
antiC1INHAbs and malignant tumors are not detectable, diagnosis relies on the 
finding of low C1INH levels and/or function, lack of family history and SERPING1 
mutations, age at onset and low or undetectable C1q levels, none of which is 
specific for AAE. We tested the diagnostic value of a novel enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for the detection of circulating complexes between 
C1INH and antiC1INHAbs (C1INH-antiC1INHAb) in the serum of 20 European AAE 
patients characterized on the basis of their complement levels and function. 
Free antiC1INHAbs were detected in nine of 20 patients [six of immunoglobulin 
(Ig)G class, two of IgM class and one simultaneously presenting IgG and IgM 
classes], whereas C1INH-antiC1INHAb complexes were found in 18 of 20 of the AAE 
cases, regardless of the presence or absence of detectable free anti-C1INHAbs. 
Of note, nine of 20 patients showed negative free antiC1INHabs, but positive 
C1INH-antiC1INHAb complexes in their first measurement. In the cohort presented, 
IgM-class C1INH-antiC1INHAb are specifically and strongly associated with low 
C1q serum levels. Detection of C1INH-antiC1-INHAbs provides an added value for 
AAE diagnosis, especially in those cases in whom no free anti-C1INH antibodies 
are detected. The link between IgM-class C1INH-antiC1INHAb complexes and C1q 
consumption could have further implications for the development of autoimmune 
manifestations in AAE.

© 2019 British Society for Immunology.

DOI: 10.1111/cei.13361
PMCID: PMC6857074
PMID: 31397881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A. L.‐L. has received educational and advisory 
fees from Shire. A. B. has been involved in research, clinical studies and 
educational activities with the following companies: Biocryst, CSL Behring, 
Shire and Viropharma. T. C. has received speaker fees from CSL‐Behring, Novartis 
and Shire, consultancy fees from BioCryst, CSL‐Behring, Novartis and Shire, 
sponsorship for educational purposes from CSL Behring, Novartis and Shire, and 
has participated in clinical trials‐registries for CSL‐Behring, Novartis, 
Pharming and Shire. The remaining authors state no conflicts of interest.