---
reference_id: "PMID:39891767"
title: "Serum neurofilament light chain but not serum glial fibrillary acidic protein is a marker of early Huntington's disease."
authors:
- Heim B
- Mandler E
- Peball M
- Carbone F
- Schwarzová K
- Demjaha R
- Tafrali C
- Buchmann A
- Khalil M
- Djamshidian A
- Seppi K
journal: J Neurol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-025-12901-y
keywords:
- Humans
- "Huntington Disease/blood, genetics, diagnosis"
- Neurofilament Proteins/blood
- Female
- Male
- Adult
- Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein/blood
- Middle Aged
- Biomarkers/blood
- Disease Progression
- Severity of Illness Index
- ROC Curve
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serum neurofilament light chain but not serum glial fibrillary acidic protein is a marker of early Huntington's disease.
**Authors:** Heim B, Mandler E, Peball M, Carbone F, Schwarzová K, Demjaha R, Tafrali C, Buchmann A, Khalil M, Djamshidian A, Seppi K
**Journal:** J Neurol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-025-12901-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-025-12901-y)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2025 Feb 1;272(2):174. doi: 10.1007/s00415-025-12901-y.

Serum neurofilament light chain but not serum glial fibrillary acidic protein is 
a marker of early Huntington's disease.

Heim B(1), Mandler E(2), Peball M(2), Carbone F(2), Schwarzová K(2), Demjaha 
R(3), Tafrali C(3), Buchmann A(3), Khalil M(3), Djamshidian A(2), Seppi K(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. 
Beatrice.heim@i-med.ac.at.
(2)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(3)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
(4)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. 
klaus.seppi@i-med.ac.at.
(5)Department of Neurology, Hospital Kufstein, Kufstein, Austria. 
klaus.seppi@i-med.ac.at.

BACKGROUND: Huntington's disease (HD) is caused by CAG trinucleotide expansion 
on chromosome 4, leading to mutant Huntingtin production. Premanifest carriers 
show no obvious clinical signs, and early symptoms progress slowly. Fluid 
biomarkers like neurofilament light (NfL) and glial fibrillary acidic protein 
(GFAP), measurable in cerebrospinal fluid and serum (sNfL, sGFAP), offer 
potential predicting HD progression.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the role of sGFAP and sNfL and clinical biomarkers in 
different disease stages and correlate with disease progression.
METHODS: HD mutation carriers were categorized into clinical stages according to 
their motor symptoms and functional capacities. The Unified HD Rating Scale, 
cognitive assessments and olfactory tests were used to characterize the patients 
clinically. Furthermore, sNfL and sGFAP levels were assessed.
RESULTS: We consecutively included 44 HD mutation carriers (13 premanifest HD 
(preHD), 18 in early (early HD) and 13 in advanced (advanced HD) disease stages) 
and 19 healthy controls (HC). Advanced HD patients performed worse on all 
clinical tasks and had higher sGFAP and sNfL levels compared to other groups 
(all p values < 0.05). We did not find difference in sGFAP levels between the 
preHD, early HD and HC group  (all p values > 0.05). In contrast, sNfL levels 
differed significantly between preHD and early HD, and HC (all p values < 0.05). 
ROC curve analysis revealed that the AUC of sGFAP (0.970) exhibited superior 
discriminatory accuracy compared to sNfL (0.791) levels in separating advanced 
from early HD patients. By contrast, ROC curve analysis revealed that the AUC of 
sNFL (0.988) exhibited superior discriminatory accuracy compared to sGFAP 
(0.609) levels in separating all HD mutation carriers from HC.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study indicates that sNfL can detect changes in very early and 
premanifest HD stages, whereas sGFAP showed differences in more advanced stages 
only.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-025-12901-y
PMCID: PMC11787204
PMID: 39891767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: The authors 
have no conflict of interests to report. Ethical approval: The study protocol 
was approved by the local ethics committees. All participants gave written 
informed consent prior to their participation. The interviews and examinations 
were carried out in accordance with the principles expressed in the Declaration 
of Helsinki. On behalf of all co-authors, the first and corresponding author 
confirm that all authors have read the Journal’s position on issues involved in 
ethical publication and affirm that this work is consistent with those 
guidelines.