---
reference_id: "PMID:32048003"
title: The pathology of central nervous system inflammatory demyelinating disease accompanying myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein autoantibody.
authors:
- Höftberger R
- Guo Y
- Flanagan EP
- Lopez-Chiriboga AS
- Endmayr V
- Hochmeister S
- Joldic D
- Pittock SJ
- Tillema JM
- Gorman M
- Lassmann H
- Lucchinetti CF
journal: Acta Neuropathol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s00401-020-02132-y
keywords:
- Aged
- Astrocytes/pathology
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- Central Nervous System Diseases/pathology
- Female
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin G/immunology
- Middle Aged
- "Myelin-Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein/immunology, metabolism"
- "Neuromyelitis Optica/immunology, pathology"
- Oligodendroglia/pathology
- White Matter/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The pathology of central nervous system inflammatory demyelinating disease accompanying myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein autoantibody.
**Authors:** Höftberger R, Guo Y, Flanagan EP, Lopez-Chiriboga AS, Endmayr V, Hochmeister S, Joldic D, Pittock SJ, Tillema JM, Gorman M, Lassmann H, Lucchinetti CF
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00401-020-02132-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-020-02132-y)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol. 2020 May;139(5):875-892. doi: 10.1007/s00401-020-02132-y.
Epub  2020 Feb 11.

The pathology of central nervous system inflammatory demyelinating disease
accompanying myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein autoantibody.

Höftberger R(1), Guo Y(2), Flanagan EP(2)(3), Lopez-Chiriboga AS(2), Endmayr
V(1), Hochmeister S(4), Joldic D(5), Pittock SJ(2)(3), Tillema JM(2), Gorman
M(6), Lassmann H(7), Lucchinetti CF(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuropathology and Neurochemistry, Department of Neurology,
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,
USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Medical University Graz, Graz, Austria.
(5)Department of Neurology, Krankenanstalt Rudolfstiftung, Vienna, Austria.
(6)Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Center for Brain Research, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
hans.lassmann@meduniwien.ac.at.
(8)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
clucchinetti@mayo.edu.

We sought to define the pathological features of myelin oligodendrocyte
glycoprotein (MOG) antibody associated disorders (MOGAD) in an archival
autopsy/biopsy cohort. We histopathologically analyzed 2 autopsies and 22 brain
biopsies from patients with CNS inflammatory demyelinating diseases seropositive
for MOG-antibody by live-cell-based-assay with full length MOG in its
conformational form. MOGAD autopsies (ages 52 and 67) demonstrate the full
spectrum of histopathological features observed within the 22 brain
biopsies (median age, 10 years; range, 1-66; 56% female). Clinical, radiologic,
and laboratory characteristics and course (78% relapsing) are consistent with
MOGAD. MOGAD pathology is dominated by coexistence of both perivenous and
confluent white matter demyelination, with an over-representation of
intracortical demyelinated lesions compared to typical MS. Radially expanding
confluent slowly expanding smoldering lesions in the white matter as seen in MS,
are not present. A CD4+ T-cell dominated inflammatory reaction with granulocytic
infiltration predominates. Complement deposition is present in all active white
matter lesions, but a preferential loss of MOG is not observed. AQP4 is
preserved, with absence of dystrophic astrocytes, and variable oligodendrocyte
and axonal destruction. MOGAD is pathologically distinguished from AQP4-IgG
seropositive NMOSD, but shares some overlapping features with both MS and ADEM,
suggesting a transitional pathology. Complement deposition in the absence of
selective MOG protein loss suggest humoral mechanisms are involved, however
argue against endocytic internalization of the MOG antigen. Parallels with
MOG-EAE suggest MOG may be an amplification factor that augments CNS
demyelination, possibly via complement mediated destruction of myelin or ADCC
phagocytosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-020-02132-y
PMCID: PMC7181560
PMID: 32048003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No authors had conflicts of interests relevant
to this study.
