---
reference_id: "PMID:18412279"
title: A novel mutation in NFKBIA/IKBA results in a degradation-resistant N-truncated protein and is associated with ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency.
authors:
- Lopez-Granados E
- Keenan JE
- Kinney MC
- Leo H
- Jain N
- Ma CA
- Quinones R
- Gelfand EW
- Jain A
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1002/humu.20740
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics
- Humans
- "I-kappa B Kinase/chemistry, genetics"
- I-kappa B Proteins/genetics
- Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/genetics
- Infant
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- NF-KappaB Inhibitor alpha
- NF-kappa B/immunology
- Protein Biosynthesis
- T-Lymphocytes/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel mutation in NFKBIA/IKBA results in a degradation-resistant N-truncated protein and is associated with ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency.
**Authors:** Lopez-Granados E, Keenan JE, Kinney MC, Leo H, Jain N, Ma CA, Quinones R, Gelfand EW, Jain A
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.20740](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.20740)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2008 Jun;29(6):861-8. doi: 10.1002/humu.20740.

A novel mutation in NFKBIA/IKBA results in a degradation-resistant N-truncated 
protein and is associated with ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency.

Lopez-Granados E(1), Keenan JE, Kinney MC, Leo H, Jain N, Ma CA, Quinones R, 
Gelfand EW, Jain A.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Host Defenses, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, Maryland 20892, 
USA.

Alterations in nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) essential modulator (NEMO; 
HUGO-approved symbol IKBKG) underlie most cases of ectodermal dysplasia with 
immune deficiency (EDI), a human disorder characterized by anhidrosis with 
diminished immunity. EDI has also been associated with a single heterozygous 
mutation at position Ser32 of the NF-kappaB inhibitor IkappaBalpha, one of two 
phosphorylation sites that are essential for targeting IkappaBalpha for 
proteasomal degradation and hence for activation of NF-kappaB. We report a novel 
heterozygous nonsense mutation in the IKBA (HUGO-approved symbol, NFKBIA) gene 
of a 1-year-old male child with EDI that introduces a premature termination 
codon at position Glu14. An in-frame methionine downstream of the nonsense 
mutation allows for reinitiation of translation. The resulting N-terminally 
truncated protein lacks both serine phosphorylation sites and inhibits NF-kappaB 
signaling by functioning as a dominant negative on NF-kappaB activity in 
lymphocytes and monocytes. These findings support the scanning model for 
translation initiation in eukaryotes and confirm the critical role of the 
NF-kappaB in the human immune response.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20740
PMCID: PMC3179847
PMID: 18412279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]