---
reference_id: "PMID:40470849"
title: High Genetic Diagnostic Yield for Patients with Rare Movement Disorders at a Single-Center Neurogenetics Clinic.
authors:
- Penn D
- Amir Y
- David GB
- Kurolap A
- Barel D
- Hamiel U
- Bach M
- Elhanan E
- Barkan T
- Marom D
- Mory A
- Simantov N
- Eshed GM
- Faust-Socher A
- Livneh V
- Thaler A
- Omer N
- Shiner T
- Giladi N
- Gurevich T
- Feldman HB
- Alcalay RN
- Yaron Y
- Ponger P
journal: Mov Disord Clin Pract
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/mdc3.70145
keywords:
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Child
- Aged
- Male
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Female
- "Child, Preschool"
- Retrospective Studies
- Young Adult
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Movement Disorders/genetics, diagnosis"
- Genetic Testing
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- "Cerebellar Ataxia/genetics, diagnosis"
- "Rare Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Spastic Paraplegia, Hereditary/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High Genetic Diagnostic Yield for Patients with Rare Movement Disorders at a Single-Center Neurogenetics Clinic.
**Authors:** Penn D, Amir Y, David GB, Kurolap A, Barel D, Hamiel U, Bach M, Elhanan E, Barkan T, Marom D, Mory A, Simantov N, Eshed GM, Faust-Socher A, Livneh V, Thaler A, Omer N, Shiner T, Giladi N, Gurevich T, Feldman HB, Alcalay RN, Yaron Y, Ponger P
**Journal:** Mov Disord Clin Pract (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mdc3.70145](https://doi.org/10.1002/mdc3.70145)

## Content

1. Mov Disord Clin Pract. 2025 Nov;12(11):1811-1820. doi: 10.1002/mdc3.70145.
Epub  2025 Jun 5.

High Genetic Diagnostic Yield for Patients with Rare Movement Disorders at a
Single-Center Neurogenetics Clinic.

Penn D(1)(2), Amir Y(2)(3), David GB(4), Kurolap A(2)(3), Barel D(2)(3), Hamiel
U(2)(3), Bach M(2)(3), Elhanan E(3), Barkan T(2)(3), Marom D(2)(3), Mory A(3),
Simantov N(1)(2), Eshed GM(1)(2), Faust-Socher A(1)(2), Livneh V(1)(2), Thaler
A(1)(2)(5), Omer N(1)(2)(5), Shiner T(1)(2)(5), Giladi N(1)(2)(5), Gurevich
T(1)(2)(5), Feldman HB(2)(3), Alcalay RN(1)(2)(5)(6), Yaron Y(2)(3), Ponger
P(1)(2)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Neurological institute, Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)Faculty of Medical & Health Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)Genetics Institute and Genomics Center, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel
Aviv, Israel.
(4)Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, University of
Haifa, Haifa, Israel.
(5)Sagol School of Neurosciences, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
(6)Department of Neurology, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York,
USA.

BACKGROUND: As advanced molecular testing is incorporated into routine clinical
practice, accessibility and yield remain limited.
OBJECTIVES: We propose a simplified and effective workup strategy to maximize
diagnostic yield based on presented diagnostic yield of rare movement disorders
at a tertiary Neurogenetics Clinic.
METHODS: Retrospective analysis (2019-2023) of 190 patients aged 2-87 years,
diagnosed with cerebellar ataxia (CA, n = 91), hereditary spastic paraparesis
(HSP, n = 51), or dystonia and paroxysmal dyskinesia movement disorders (DPD,
n = 48). Workup included next-generation sequencing (NGS) and repeat expansion
testing. Undiagnosed cases underwent exome or genome sequencing (ES/GS).
RESULTS: Among 190 patients, 38 had a prior genetic diagnosis, and 106 were
undiagnosed patients who pursued workup; 43 of 106 (41%) cases were genetically
diagnosed: 25 of 43(58%) by NGS, 13 of 43 (30%) by repeat expansion analysis,
and 5 of 43(12%) by sequencing for founder mutation or target gene. Diagnostic
rate in the newly diagnosed CA subgroup reached 52%, 30% in HSP and 32% in DPD.
In the overall cohort, the diagnostic yield of NGS panels was 31% and 33% for
ES. Diagnostic yield was significantly higher (P-value<0.05) among patients with
early-onset disease or isolated phenotypes.
CONCLUSIONS: We report a high diagnostic yield (41%) compared to reported
literature (20%-30%), especially in patients with early-onset disease. ES,
compared to panel testing, was of greater contribution to diagnosis of complex
phenotypes. Our findings argue for early referral to genetic workup, suggesting
that tailored workup based on phenotype complexity and age of onset can reduce
auxiliary testing. Further cost-benefit analysis is required to lower expenses
and ensure timely diagnosis.

© 2025 The Author(s). Movement Disorders Clinical Practice published by Wiley
Periodicals LLC on behalf of International Parkinson and Movement Disorder
Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mdc3.70145
PMCID: PMC12625155
PMID: 40470849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Ethical Compliance Statement: The study was
approved by the TASMC institutional review board IRB (0586‐20‐TLV). Informed
patient consent was not necessary for this work. We confirm that we, the authors
of the study, have read the journal's position on issues involved in ethical
publication and affirm that this work is consistent with those guidelines.
Funding Sources and Conflict of Interest: No specific funding was received for
this work. The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest relevant
to this work. Financial Disclosures for the Previous 12 Months: D.P., Y.A.,
Y.Y., N.G., N.S., A.K., A.M., D.M., D.B., U.H., M.B., E.E., G.B., V.L., A.F.S.,
N.O., and T.B. report no disclosures; P.P. has received grant funding from the
Israel Ministry of Health; T.S. reports support from The Michael J. Fox
Foundation (MJFF) and has served on advisory boards and received speaker fees
from Eisai, Biogen, and Eli Lilly; A.T. received research funds from MJFF,
honoraria from AbbVie, and consultation fees from Capsida; G.M.E.'s fellowship
training is supported by the Silverstein Foundation for Parkinson's with GBA and
received consultation fees from Bionaut Labs; R.N.A.'s research is funded by the
MJFF, the Silverstein Foundation, and the Parkinson's Foundation. R.N.A.
received consultation fees from Biogen, Biohaven, Capsida, Gain Therapeutics,
Genzyme/Sanofi, Janssen, Servier, SK Biopharmaceuticals, Takeda, and Vanqua Bio.
H.B.F. received the following grants from Helmsley Charitable Trust, Parasol
Foundation, Wolfson Foundation, Alrov Fund, and reagents from Illumina to
support a collaboration project; T.G. receives consultancy fees and advisory
board's participation from AbbVie, Neuroderm, and Tradis Gat; speaker fee from
Medison; travel support for her and her team from Alphamedix, AbbVie, and
Medison; and grants from International Parkinson Disease and Movement Disorders
Society and Parkinson's Foundation.
