---
reference_id: "PMID:38487736"
title: "Molecular confirmation of alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency in liver transplant setting: A province-wide experience."
authors:
- Bukhari H
- Mattman A
- Ritchie G
- Burns L
- Yoshida E
- Schaeffer D
- Yang HM
journal: Hepatol Forum
year: '2024'
doi: 10.14744/hf.2022.2022.0032
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular confirmation of alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency in liver transplant setting: A province-wide experience.
**Authors:** Bukhari H, Mattman A, Ritchie G, Burns L, Yoshida E, Schaeffer D, Yang HM
**Journal:** Hepatol Forum (2024)
**DOI:** [10.14744/hf.2022.2022.0032](https://doi.org/10.14744/hf.2022.2022.0032)

## Content

1. Hepatol Forum. 2023 Dec 7;5(2):68-72. doi: 10.14744/hf.2022.2022.0032. 
eCollection 2024.

Molecular confirmation of alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency in liver transplant 
setting: A province-wide experience.

Bukhari H(1), Mattman A(2), Ritchie G(2), Burns L(2), Yoshida E(3), Schaeffer 
D(1), Yang HM(2).

Author information:
(1)King Abdulaziz University Hospital, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi 
Arabia.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Providence Health Care, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Vancouver General 
Hospital, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Patients suspected of Alpha 1-Antitrypsin (A1AT) abnormality 
based on low serum concentration are routinely confirmed through polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) testing of peripheral blood. Genotyping formalin-fixed 
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue is a novel approach that could aid in detecting 
variant A1AT. We performed qPCR on FFPE liver explants with Periodic Acid Schiff 
after Diastase (PASD)- and A1AT-positive globules to confirm and estimate the 
frequency of A1AT deficiency in transplant cases.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Eighteen (12.68%) of 142 patients with end-stage liver 
disease showed PASD/A1AT positive globules. FFPE of the explants was tested 
through qPCR to detect S and Z alleles. A second age- and sex-matched control 
group consisting of five liver transplant patients with negative globules was 
included in the study.
RESULTS: qPCR assay was successful with all the samples meeting QC parameters. 
All patients included in the study elucidated Z allele variants; 2 homozygous 
(11.1%) and 16 heterozygous (88.9%). The control group demonstrated normal 
wild-type MM allele.
CONCLUSION: Screening for A1AT deficiency using serum levels is not sufficiently 
sensitive to detect deficiency, especially in carriers. If A1AT testing was not 
performed preoperatively and the risk is high based on the PASD/A1AT-positive 
globules in the explants, then molecular testing of FFPE tissue can be a viable 
method for confirming the diagnosis.

© Copyright 2024 by Hepatology Forum.

DOI: 10.14744/hf.2022.2022.0032
PMCID: PMC10936117
PMID: 38487736

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to 
declare.