---
reference_id: "PMID:34738808"
title: City-Scale Meta-Analysis of Indoor Airborne Microbiota Reveals that Taxonomic and Functional Compositions Vary with Building Types.
authors:
- Zhou Y
- Leung MHY
- Tong X
- Lee JYY
- Lee PKH
journal: Environ Sci Technol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1021/acs.est.1c03941
content_type: abstract_only
---

# City-Scale Meta-Analysis of Indoor Airborne Microbiota Reveals that Taxonomic and Functional Compositions Vary with Building Types.
**Authors:** Zhou Y, Leung MHY, Tong X, Lee JYY, Lee PKH
**Journal:** Environ Sci Technol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acs.est.1c03941](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.1c03941)

## Content

1. Environ Sci Technol. 2021 Nov 16;55(22):15051-15062. doi: 
10.1021/acs.est.1c03941. Epub 2021 Nov 5.

City-Scale Meta-Analysis of Indoor Airborne Microbiota Reveals that Taxonomic 
and Functional Compositions Vary with Building Types.

Zhou Y(1), Leung MHY(1), Tong X(1), Lee JYY(1), Lee PKH(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Energy and Environment, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 
SAR, China.
(2)School of Energy and Environment and State Key Laboratory of Marine 
Pollution, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.

Currently, there is a lack of understanding on the variations of the indoor 
airborne microbiotas of different building types within a city, and how 
operational taxonomic unit (OTU)- and amplicon sequence variant (ASV)-based 
analyses of the 16S rRNA gene sequences affect interpretation of the indoor 
airborne microbiota results. Therefore, in this study, the indoor airborne 
bacterial microbiotas between commercial buildings, residences, and subways 
within the same city were compared using both OTU- and ASV-based analytic 
methods. Our findings suggested that indoor airborne bacterial microbiota 
compositions were significantly different between building types regardless of 
the bioinformatics method used. The processes of ecological drift and random 
dispersal consistently played significant roles in the assembly of the indoor 
microbiota across building types. Abundant taxa tended to be more centralized in 
the correlation network of each building type, highlighting their importance. 
Taxonomic changes between the microbiotas of different building types were also 
linked to changes in their inferred metabolic function capabilities. Overall, 
the results imply that customized strategies are necessary to manage indoor 
airborne bacterial microbiotas for each building type or even within each 
specific building.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.est.1c03941
PMID: 34738808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]