---
reference_id: "PMID:37533946"
title: Limb salvage of an infant with infantile fibrosarcoma using TRK inhibitor larotrectinib.
authors:
- Sahni S
- Rastogi S
- Yadav R
- Barwad A
journal: Ecancermedicalscience
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3332/ecancer.2023.1575
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Limb salvage of an infant with infantile fibrosarcoma using TRK inhibitor larotrectinib.
**Authors:** Sahni S, Rastogi S, Yadav R, Barwad A
**Journal:** Ecancermedicalscience (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3332/ecancer.2023.1575](https://doi.org/10.3332/ecancer.2023.1575)

## Content

1. Ecancermedicalscience. 2023 Jul 19;17:1575. doi: 10.3332/ecancer.2023.1575.
eCollection 2023.

Limb salvage of an infant with infantile fibrosarcoma using TRK inhibitor
larotrectinib.

Sahni S(1), Rastogi S(2), Yadav R(3), Barwad A(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi
110029, India.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi 110029, India.
(3)Department of Radio-diagnosis and Interventional Radiology, All India
Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi 110029, India.
(4)Department of Pathology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi
110029, India.

Infantile fibrosarcoma (IFS) is an extremely rare locally aggressive soft tissue
tumour of childhood. Primary therapy involves complete surgical resection with
or without chemotherapy. However complete surgical resection might not be
feasible in all cases and so requires other modalities for further management.
We report the case of a male infant from Bangladesh with a locally advanced IFS
of the leg which was partially resected. The patient received adjuvant
chemotherapy which was complicated by the development of chemotherapy-related
veno-occlusive disease and had to be discontinued. Thereafter he was referred to
our dedicated sarcoma oncology clinic in India for further management. The
parents of the child refused amputation of the limb. The tumour tested positive
for NTRK3-ETV6 gene fusion and after discussion in multidisciplinary clinic,
targeted therapy using oral NTRK inhibitor larotrectinib was started. The
patient had complete response at the end of 8 months of treatment with
larotrectinib. This is the first report from the Indian subcontinent and we
encourage that these children should be referred to specialist clinics for
appropriate multidisciplinary management for best outcomes.

© the authors; licensee ecancermedicalscience.

DOI: 10.3332/ecancer.2023.1575
PMCID: PMC10393313
PMID: 37533946

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts of interest.