---
reference_id: "PMID:2550525"
title: Antiretroviral therapy.
authors:
- Thiers BH
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '1989'
doi: 10.1016/s0190-9622(89)70206-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antiretroviral therapy.
**Authors:** Thiers BH
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0190-9622(89)70206-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0190-9622(89)70206-1)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1989 Sep;21(3 Pt 1):443-54. doi: 
10.1016/s0190-9622(89)70206-1.

Antiretroviral therapy.

Thiers BH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston 
29425-2215.

Research into the biology of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1), the 
causative agent of the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, has yielded valuable 
information about the replicative cycle of the virus. The steps involved are (1) 
attachment of the virus to a receptor protein on the surface of the target cell, 
(2) entry of the virus into the cell, (3) replication of the viral genome 
through a DNA intermediary, (4) entry of proviral DNA into the nucleus of the 
host cell, (5) integration of proviral DNA into the host cell genome, (6) 
transcription of proviral DNA to viral genomic and messenger RNA, (7) 
translation of viral messenger RNA to viral proteins, and (8) assembly of viral 
components into new virions that are released by budding from the host cell 
membrane. Each step in the HIV-1 replicative cycle offers a potential target for 
antiviral chemotherapy. Although many drugs have been developed, none appears 
singularly effective against all stages of HIV-1 infection. Many obstacles 
remain in the quest for an effective vaccine against HIV-1.

DOI: 10.1016/s0190-9622(89)70206-1
PMID: 2550525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]