---
reference_id: "PMID:11681494"
title: Autoimmune aspects of vitiligo.
authors:
- Kemp EH
- Waterman EA
- Weetman AP
journal: Autoimmunity
year: '2001'
doi: 10.3109/08916930108994127
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmune aspects of vitiligo.
**Authors:** Kemp EH, Waterman EA, Weetman AP
**Journal:** Autoimmunity (2001)
**DOI:** [10.3109/08916930108994127](https://doi.org/10.3109/08916930108994127)

## Content

1. Autoimmunity. 2001;34(1):65-77. doi: 10.3109/08916930108994127.

Autoimmune aspects of vitiligo.

Kemp EH(1), Waterman EA, Weetman AP.

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Sciences, Northern General Hospital, University of 
Sheffield, UK. e.h.kemp@sheffield.ac.uk

Vitiligo is a depigmenting disorder characterised by the loss of melanocytes 
from the cutaneous epidermis. Although the exact cause of the condition remains 
to be established, an autoimmune aetiology has been suggested and several 
observations support this theory. These will be the topic of discussion in this 
review. In brief, the disease is frequently associated with other disorders 
which have an autoimmune origin such as autoimmune thyroiditis and 
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Furthermore, circulating antibodies and T 
lymphocytes which react against melanocyte antigens are present in the sera of a 
significant proportion of vitiligo patients compared with healthy individuals. 
Immunosuppressive therapies which are reasonably effective in treating the 
condition, well-studied animal models of the disease as well as the association 
of vitiligo with MHC antigens, all add credence to the hypothesis that immune 
mechanisms play a role in the development of vitiligo.

DOI: 10.3109/08916930108994127
PMID: 11681494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]