---
reference_id: "PMID:17941915"
title: Atopic features of cough variant asthma and classic asthma with wheezing.
authors:
- Takemura M
- Niimi A
- Matsumoto H
- Ueda T
- Yamaguchi M
- Matsuoka H
- Jinnai M
- Chin K
- Mishima M
journal: Clin Exp Allergy
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2007.02848.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atopic features of cough variant asthma and classic asthma with wheezing.
**Authors:** Takemura M, Niimi A, Matsumoto H, Ueda T, Yamaguchi M, Matsuoka H, Jinnai M, Chin K, Mishima M
**Journal:** Clin Exp Allergy (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2222.2007.02848.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2222.2007.02848.x)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Allergy. 2007 Dec;37(12):1833-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2222.2007.02848.x.  Epub 2007 Oct 16.

Atopic features of cough variant asthma and classic asthma with wheezing.

Takemura M(1), Niimi A, Matsumoto H, Ueda T, Yamaguchi M, Matsuoka H, Jinnai M, 
Chin K, Mishima M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Cough variant asthma is a phenotype of asthma solely presenting with 
coughing. It involves airway inflammation and remodelling as does classic asthma 
with wheezing, and a subset of patients may progress to classic asthma. The 
atopic features of cough variant asthma remain unclear.
OBJECTIVE: To compare atopic features between patients with cough variant asthma 
and those with classic asthma, and to examine the possible correlation of these 
features with the future development of wheezing in the former group.
METHODS: Total and specific IgE levels of seven common aeroallergens [house dust 
mite (HDM), Gramineae/Japanese cedar/weed pollens, moulds, cat/dog dander] were 
examined in 74 cough variant asthma patients and in 115 classic asthma patients 
of varying severity. Forty of the former patients were prospectively observed 
for 2 years to determine whether cough variant asthma progressed to classic 
asthma despite inhaled corticosteroid treatment.
RESULTS: Patients with classic asthma had higher total IgE (P<0.0001), larger 
numbers of sensitized allergens (P=0.03), and higher rates of sensitization to 
dog dander (24% vs. 3%, P<0.0001), HDM (46% vs. 28%, P=0.02), and moulds (17% 
vs. 7%, P=0.047) than did patients with cough variant asthma. Wheezing developed 
in six (15%) patients with cough variant asthma, who were sensitized to larger 
numbers of allergens (P=0.02) and had higher rates of sensitization to HDM 
(P=0.01) and dog dander (P=0.02) than the 34 patients in whom wheezing did not 
develop. Among the patients with classic asthma, total and specific IgE 
variables were similar in the subgroup with mild disease (n=60) and the subgroup 
with moderate-to-severe disease (n=55), as reported previously.
CONCLUSIONS: Atopy may be related to the development of wheezing in patients 
with cough variant asthma. To prevent the progression of cough variant asthma to 
classic asthma, avoidance of relevant allergens may be essential.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2007.02848.x
PMID: 17941915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]