---
reference_id: "PMID:31725549"
title: Daily Dengue Severity Score to Assess Severe Manifestations.
authors:
- Tangnararatchakit K
- Chuansumrit A
- Watcharakuldilok P
- Apiwattanakul N
- Lertbunrian R
- Keatkla J
- Yoksan S
journal: Pediatr Infect Dis J
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1097/INF.0000000000002533
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Daily Dengue Severity Score to Assess Severe Manifestations.
**Authors:** Tangnararatchakit K, Chuansumrit A, Watcharakuldilok P, Apiwattanakul N, Lertbunrian R, Keatkla J, Yoksan S
**Journal:** Pediatr Infect Dis J (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1097/INF.0000000000002533](https://doi.org/10.1097/INF.0000000000002533)

## Content

1. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2020 Mar;39(3):184-187. doi:
10.1097/INF.0000000000002533.

Daily Dengue Severity Score to Assess Severe Manifestations.

Tangnararatchakit K(1), Chuansumrit A(1), Watcharakuldilok P(2), Apiwattanakul 
N(1), Lertbunrian R(1), Keatkla J(3), Yoksan S(4).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Pediatrics, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Buriram Hospital, Buriram, Thailand.
(3)Pathology, Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, 
Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)Center for Vaccine Development, Institute of Molecular Biosciences, Mahidol 
University, Nakhon Pathom, Thailand.

Comment in
    Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2020 Mar;39(3):e28. doi: 10.1097/INF.0000000000002561.

BACKGROUND: The study aimed to develop dengue severity score to assess severe 
manifestations among hospitalized patients with dengue infection.
METHOD: Children and adolescents with serologically confirmed dengue infection 
admitted at Ramathibodi Hospital from 2004 to 2018 and treated by an expert 
multidisciplinary team were recruited. Medical records were retrospectively 
reviewed and 14 items, related to clinical parameters and managements during 
hospitalization, were obtained daily as dengue severity score.
RESULTS: A total of 191 patients with a mean age of 10.7 years from 2004 to 2013 
were recruited. They were classified as dengue fever (35), dengue hemorrhagic 
fever (DHF) I (53), II (50), III (37) and IV (16). The analysis of 593 daily 
records revealed the range of daily severity score among patients with DHF 
grades III (10-20) and IV (31-47) were significantly higher than those of other 
groups (dengue fever, 5-13; DHF I, 2-10; DHF II, 6-11) with P-values of 0.0001. 
Using a validity test, a total daily score of ≥12 was an assessment tool for 
dengue shock syndrome with sensitivity, 86% and specificity, 84%. An additional 
51 hospitalized patients with DHF grades II, III and IV with similar ages from 
2014 to 2018 were recruited. The number of patients with severe manifestations, 
having daily score of ≥12, was significantly higher than those without severe 
manifestations starting from Day -3 to Day +1 of illness.
CONCLUSIONS: Daily dengue severity score of ≥12 was an accurate assessment tool 
for severe manifestations.

DOI: 10.1097/INF.0000000000002533
PMID: 31725549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]