---
reference_id: "PMID:22232752"
title: Multiscale physiology-based modeling of mineral bone disorder in patients with impaired kidney function.
authors:
- Riggs MM
- Peterson MC
- Gastonguay MR
journal: J Clin Pharmacol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1177/0091270011412967
keywords:
- Bone Density
- "Bone Diseases/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Bone Remodeling
- Calcium/metabolism
- Glomerular Filtration Rate
- Humans
- "Hyperparathyroidism, Secondary/metabolism"
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Models, Biological"
- Phosphates/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiscale physiology-based modeling of mineral bone disorder in patients with impaired kidney function.
**Authors:** Riggs MM, Peterson MC, Gastonguay MR
**Journal:** J Clin Pharmacol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0091270011412967](https://doi.org/10.1177/0091270011412967)

## Content

1. J Clin Pharmacol. 2012 Jan;52(1 Suppl):45S-53S. doi: 10.1177/0091270011412967.

Multiscale physiology-based modeling of mineral bone disorder in patients with
impaired kidney function.

Riggs MM(1), Peterson MC, Gastonguay MR.

Author information:
(1)Metrum Research Group LLC, Tariffville, Tariffville, CT 06081, USA.
mattr@metrumrg.com

A physiologically based, multiscale model of calcium homeostasis and bone
remodeling was used to describe the impact of progressive loss of kidney
function over a typical 10-year course of chronic kidney disease (CKD),
including the evolution of secondary hyperparathyroidism (HPT) caused by
diminished renal phosphate clearance and increased plasma phosphate. An
important sequela of HPT is marked elevations in bone resorption and loss of
bone mineral density (BMD). Clinically, this CKD-related disease state is
described as mineral bone disorder, or CKD-MBD. A multiscale physiologic model
previously had been shown to describe CKD-MBD-related clinical changes in
phosphate, parathyroid hormone (PTH), and calcitriol. The authors have extended
the model to link bone remodeling markers with BMD elimination (0.000145 h(-1))
and formation rates. The composite model predicted lumbar spine BMD losses,
relative to baseline, at months 28 (glomerular filtration rate = 58 mL/min), 50
(39 mL/min), and 120 (16 mL/min) of approximately -0.98%, -3.0%, and -6.5%,
respectively, compared to the observed BMD values in corresponding renal
function groups, scaled to a 100-mL/min baseline, of -0.5%, -4.0%, and -8.1%,
respectively. In addition, simulated interventions with a hypothetical
calcimimetic agent and calcitriol are provided to show the utility of this model
as a platform for evaluating therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1177/0091270011412967
PMID: 22232752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
