---
reference_id: "PMID:37440045"
title: The Role of Peripherin-2/ROM1 Complexes in Photoreceptor Outer Segment Disc Morphogenesis.
authors:
- Lewis TR
- Al-Ubaidi MR
- Naash MI
- Arshavsky VY
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-27681-1_40
keywords:
- Humans
- Peripherins/genetics
- Tetraspanins/genetics
- Retinal Degeneration/genetics
- Mutation
- Morphogenesis
- Eye Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Role of Peripherin-2/ROM1 Complexes in Photoreceptor Outer Segment Disc Morphogenesis.
**Authors:** Lewis TR, Al-Ubaidi MR, Naash MI, Arshavsky VY
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-031-27681-1_40](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-27681-1_40)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2023;1415:277-281. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-27681-1_40.

The Role of Peripherin-2/ROM1 Complexes in Photoreceptor Outer Segment Disc
Morphogenesis.

Lewis TR(1), Al-Ubaidi MR(2)(3), Naash MI(2)(3), Arshavsky VY(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
tylor.lewis@duke.edu.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Engineering, University of
Houston, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)College of Optometry, University of Houston, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(5)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, NC, USA.

The light-sensitive outer segment organelle of photoreceptor cells contains a
stack of hundreds of flat, disc-shaped membranes called discs. The rims of these
discs contain a photoreceptor-specific tetraspanin protein peripherin-2 (also
known as rds or PRPH2). Mutations in the PRPH2 gene lead to a wide variety of
inherited retinal degenerations in humans. The vast majority of these mutations
occur within a large, intradiscal loop of peripherin-2, known as the D2 loop.
The D2 loop mediates well-established intermolecular interactions of
peripherin-2 molecules among themselves and a homologous protein ROM1. These
interactions lead to the formation of large, highly ordered oligomers. In this
chapter, we discuss the supramolecular organization of peripherin-2/ROM1
complexes and their contribution to the process of outer segment disc
morphogenesis and enclosure.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-27681-1_40
PMID: 37440045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
