---
reference_id: "PMID:23190330"
title: "Hearing loss and PRPS1 mutations: Wide spectrum of phenotypes and potential therapy."
authors:
- Liu XZ
- Xie D
- Yuan HJ
- de Brouwer AP
- Christodoulou J
- Yan D
journal: Int J Audiol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.3109/14992027.2012.736032
keywords:
- Dietary Supplements
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Hearing/genetics
- "Hearing Loss/diagnosis, drug therapy, enzymology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Heredity
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Ribose-Phosphate Pyrophosphokinase/genetics
- S-Adenosylmethionine/therapeutic use
- Severity of Illness Index
- Sex Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hearing loss and PRPS1 mutations: Wide spectrum of phenotypes and potential therapy.
**Authors:** Liu XZ, Xie D, Yuan HJ, de Brouwer AP, Christodoulou J, Yan D
**Journal:** Int J Audiol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.3109/14992027.2012.736032](https://doi.org/10.3109/14992027.2012.736032)

## Content

1. Int J Audiol. 2013 Jan;52(1):23-8. doi: 10.3109/14992027.2012.736032. Epub
2012  Nov 28.

Hearing loss and PRPS1 mutations: Wide spectrum of phenotypes and potential 
therapy.

Liu XZ(1), Xie D, Yuan HJ, de Brouwer AP, Christodoulou J, Yan D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, 
Miami, Florida 33136, USA. xliu@med.Miami.edu

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this review was to evaluate the current literature on 
phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase 1 (PRPS1)-related diseases and their 
consequences on hearing function.
DESIGN: A literature search of peer-reviewed, published journal articles was 
conducted in online bibliographic databases.
STUDY SAMPLE: Three databases for medical research were included in this review.
RESULTS: Mutations in PRPS1 are associated with a spectrum of non-syndromic to 
syndromic hearing loss. Hearing loss in male patients with PRPS1 mutations is 
bilateral, moderate to profound, and can be prelingual or postlingual, 
progressive or non-progressive. Audiogram shapes associated with PRPS1 deafness 
are usually residual and flat. Female carriers can have unilateral or bilateral 
hearing impairment. Gain of function mutations in PRPS1 cause a superactivity of 
the PRS-I protein whereas the loss-of-function mutations result in X-linked 
nonsyndromic sensorineural deafness type 2 (DFN2), or in syndromic deafness 
including Arts syndrome and X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease-5 (CMTX5).
CONCLUSIONS: Lower residual activity in PRS-I leads to a more severe clinical 
manifestation. Clinical and molecular findings suggest that the four PRPS1 
disorders discovered to date belong to the same disease spectrum. Dietary 
supplementation with S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) appeared to alleviate the 
symptoms of Arts syndrome patients, suggesting that SAM could compensate for 
PRS-I deficiency.

DOI: 10.3109/14992027.2012.736032
PMCID: PMC4511087
PMID: 23190330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interest: The authors report no 
conflict of interest. The authors alone are responsible for the content and 
writing of the paper.