---
reference_id: "PMID:24411733"
title: "Histidine decarboxylase deficiency causes tourette syndrome: parallel findings in humans and mice."
authors:
- Baldan LC
- Williams KA
- Gallezot JD
- Pogorelov V
- Rapanelli M
- Crowley M
- Anderson GM
- Loring E
- Gorczyca R
- Billingslea E
- Wasylink S
- Panza KE
- Ercan-Sencicek AG
- Krusong K
- Leventhal BL
- Ohtsu H
- Bloch MH
- Hughes ZA
- Krystal JH
- Mayes L
- de Araujo I
- Ding YS
- State MW
- Pittenger C
journal: Neuron
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.10.052
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Amphetamine
- Animals
- "Brain/diagnostic imaging, enzymology, pathology"
- Child
- Dopamine Agonists/therapeutic use
- Dopamine Antagonists/pharmacokinetics
- Exploratory Behavior/physiology
- Female
- "Histidine Decarboxylase/deficiency, genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- Maze Learning/physiology
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Middle Aged
- Mutation/genetics
- Oxazines
- Raclopride/pharmacokinetics
- Radionuclide Imaging
- "Stereotyped Behavior/drug effects, physiology"
- Time Factors
- "Tourette Syndrome/diagnostic imaging, enzymology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Tryptophan/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Histidine decarboxylase deficiency causes tourette syndrome: parallel findings in humans and mice.
**Authors:** Baldan LC, Williams KA, Gallezot JD, Pogorelov V, Rapanelli M, Crowley M, Anderson GM, Loring E, Gorczyca R, Billingslea E, Wasylink S, Panza KE, Ercan-Sencicek AG, Krusong K, Leventhal BL, Ohtsu H, Bloch MH, Hughes ZA, Krystal JH, Mayes L, de Araujo I, Ding YS, State MW, Pittenger C
**Journal:** Neuron (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2013.10.052](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2013.10.052)

## Content

1. Neuron. 2014 Jan 8;81(1):77-90. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.10.052.

Histidine decarboxylase deficiency causes tourette syndrome: parallel findings
in humans and mice.

Baldan LC(1), Williams KA(#)(1)(2), Gallezot JD(#)(3), Pogorelov V(#)(1),
Rapanelli M(1), Crowley M(2), Anderson GM(2)(4), Loring E(2)(5)(6), Gorczyca
R(7), Billingslea E(1), Wasylink S(1), Panza KE(2), Ercan-Sencicek AG(2)(5),
Krusong K(1)(8), Leventhal BL(9)(10), Ohtsu H(11), Bloch MH(1)(2), Hughes ZA(7),
Krystal JH(1), Mayes L(1)(2)(12)(13), de Araujo I(1)(14), Ding YS(3), State
MW(1)(2)(5)(6), Pittenger C(1)(2)(13)(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine.
(2)Department of Child Study Center, Yale University School of Medicine.
(3)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine.
(5)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine.
(6)Department of Program on Neurogenetics, Yale University School of Medicine.
(7)Neuroscience Research Unit, Pfizer, Inc., Cambridge, MA.
(8)Dept. of Biochem., Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn Univ., Bangkok,
Thailand.
(9)Nathan S. Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research.
(10)New York University Dept of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry.
(11)Tohoku University, Graduate School of Engineering, Sendai, Japan.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine.
(13)Department of Psychology, Yale University School of Medicine.
(14)John B. Pierce Laboratory, New Haven, CT.
(15)Integrated Neuroscience Research Program; New Haven, CT 06520.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Neuron. 2014 Jun 4;82(5):1186-7.

Tourette syndrome (TS) is characterized by tics, sensorimotor gating
deficiencies, and abnormalities of cortico-basal ganglia circuits. A mutation in
histidine decarboxylase (Hdc), the key enzyme for the biosynthesis of histamine
(HA), has been implicated as a rare genetic cause. Hdc knockout mice exhibited
potentiated tic-like stereotypies, recapitulating core phenomenology of TS;
these were mitigated by the dopamine (DA) D2 antagonist haloperidol, a proven
pharmacotherapy, and by HA infusion into the brain. Prepulse inhibition was
impaired in both mice and humans carrying Hdc mutations. HA infusion reduced
striatal DA levels; in Hdc knockout mice, striatal DA was increased and the
DA-regulated immediate early gene Fos was upregulated. DA D2/D3 receptor binding
was altered both in mice and in humans carrying the Hdc mutation. These data
confirm histidine decarboxylase deficiency as a rare cause of TS and identify
HA-DA interactions in the basal ganglia as an important locus of pathology.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.10.052
PMCID: PMC3894588
PMID: 24411733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
