---
reference_id: "PMID:20142857"
title: "Radial neuropathy due to occupational lead exposure: Phenotypic and electrophysiological characteristics of five patients."
authors:
- Shobha N
- Taly AB
- Sinha S
- Venkatesh T
journal: Ann Indian Acad Neurol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.4103/0972-2327.53080
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Radial neuropathy due to occupational lead exposure: Phenotypic and electrophysiological characteristics of five patients.
**Authors:** Shobha N, Taly AB, Sinha S, Venkatesh T
**Journal:** Ann Indian Acad Neurol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.4103/0972-2327.53080](https://doi.org/10.4103/0972-2327.53080)

## Content

1. Ann Indian Acad Neurol. 2009 Apr;12(2):111-5. doi: 10.4103/0972-2327.53080.

Radial neuropathy due to occupational lead exposure: Phenotypic and 
electrophysiological characteristics of five patients.

Shobha N(1), Taly AB, Sinha S, Venkatesh T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, National Institute of Mental Health and 
Neurosciences (NIMHANS), India.

Lead is a ubiquitous and versatile metal that has been used by mankind for many 
years. It is a toxic heavy metal that ranks as one of the most important 
environmental poisons in the world. Research conducted in recent years has 
increased public health concern about the toxicity of lead at low doses and has 
supported a reappraisal of the levels of lead exposure that may be safely 
tolerated in the workplace. Neuropathy is one complication of lead poisoning. 
The aim of this study is to describe the phenotypic and electrophysiological 
profile in five male patients working in a battery factory who developed radial 
nerve neuropathy due to lead exposure. All patients had elevated blood lead 
levels that were in the toxic range. The concerned regulatory bodies should make 
it mandatory for workers to undergo regular health checkups to detect signs of 
lead poisoning and must ensure that workers are aware about the ill effects of 
exposure to this metal. Chelation therapy removes lead from the blood and soft 
tissues and chronic lead exposure often requires repeated courses of treatment.

DOI: 10.4103/0972-2327.53080
PMCID: PMC2812735
PMID: 20142857

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: Nil