---
reference_id: "PMID:16403820"
title: "Clinical review: Type 1 diabetes-associated autoimmunity: natural history, genetic associations, and screening."
authors:
- Barker JM
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2005-1679
keywords:
- "Adrenal Gland Diseases/complications, genetics, immunology"
- Animals
- "Autoimmune Diseases/complications, epidemiology, genetics, immunology"
- "Celiac Disease/complications, genetics, immunology"
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 1/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, immunology"
- Genetic Testing
- Humans
- Risk Factors
- "Thyroiditis, Autoimmune/complications, genetics, immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical review: Type 1 diabetes-associated autoimmunity: natural history, genetic associations, and screening.
**Authors:** Barker JM
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2005-1679](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2005-1679)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Apr;91(4):1210-7. doi: 10.1210/jc.2005-1679.
Epub  2006 Jan 10.

Clinical review: Type 1 diabetes-associated autoimmunity: natural history, 
genetic associations, and screening.

Barker JM(1).

Author information:
(1)The Barbara Davis Center for Childhood Diabetes, University of Colorado at 
Denver Health Sciences Center, P.O. Box 6511 A-140, Aurora, CO 80010, USA. 
jennifer.barker@uchsc.edu

CONTEXT: Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is associated with autoimmune thyroid disease 
(AIT), celiac disease (CD), Addison's disease (AD), and other autoimmune 
diseases. These diseases can occur together in defined syndromes with distinct 
pathophysiology and characteristics: autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome I, 
autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome II, and the immunodysregulation 
polyendocrinopathy enteropathy X-linked syndrome.
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION: Review of the medical literature was performed with 
particular attention to the natural history, genetic factors, and syndromes 
associated with T1D, AIT, CD, and AD.
EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS: Genetic risk for these diseases overlaps and includes genes 
within the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) such as the human leukocyte 
antigens (HLA) DR and DQ alleles and the MHC I-related gene A (MIC-A). Other 
genes outside of the MHC have been associated with these autoimmune diseases, 
including the gene encoding the lymphoid tyrosine phosphatase (PTPN22) and the 
cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen-4 (CTLA-4) gene.
CONCLUSION: Genetic risk for T1D overlaps with AIT, CD, and AD. Disease risk is 
associated with organ-specific autoantibodies, which can be used to screen 
subjects with T1D.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2005-1679
PMID: 16403820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]