---
reference_id: "PMID:38928282"
title: "Biotin Homeostasis and Human Disorders: Recent Findings and Perspectives."
authors:
- Karachaliou CE
- Livaniou E
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25126578
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biotin Homeostasis and Human Disorders: Recent Findings and Perspectives.
**Authors:** Karachaliou CE, Livaniou E
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25126578](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25126578)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Jun 14;25(12):6578. doi: 10.3390/ijms25126578.

Biotin Homeostasis and Human Disorders: Recent Findings and Perspectives.

Karachaliou CE(1), Livaniou E(1).

Author information:
(1)Immunopeptide Chemistry Lab, Institute of Nuclear & Radiological Sciences & 
Technology, Energy & Safety, National Centre for Scientific Research 
"Demokritos", P.O. Box 60037, 153 10 Agia Paraskevi, Greece.

Biotin (vitamin B7, or vitamin H) is a water-soluble B-vitamin that functions as 
a cofactor for carboxylases, i.e., enzymes involved in the cellular metabolism 
of fatty acids and amino acids and in gluconeogenesis; moreover, as reported, 
biotin may be involved in gene regulation. Biotin is not synthesized by human 
cells, but it is found in food and is also produced by intestinal bacteria. 
Biotin status/homeostasis in human individuals depends on several factors, 
including efficiency/deficiency of the enzymes involved in biotin recycling 
within the human organism (biotinidase, holocarboxylase synthetase), and/or 
effectiveness of intestinal uptake, which is mainly accomplished through the 
sodium-dependent multivitamin transporter. In the last years, administration of 
biotin at high/"pharmacological" doses has been proposed to treat specific 
defects/deficiencies and human disorders, exhibiting mainly neurological and/or 
dermatological symptoms and including biotinidase deficiency, holocarboxylase 
synthetase deficiency, and biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease. On 
the other hand, according to warnings of the Food and Drug Administration, USA, 
high biotin levels can affect clinical biotin-(strept)avidin assays and thus 
lead to false results during quantification of critical biomarkers. In this 
review article, recent findings/advancements that may offer new insight in the 
abovementioned research fields concerning biotin will be presented and briefly 
discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25126578
PMCID: PMC11203980
PMID: 38928282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.