---
reference_id: "PMID:23832138"
title: "Urofacial syndrome: a genetic and congenital disease of aberrant urinary bladder innervation."
authors:
- Woolf AS
- Stuart HM
- Roberts NA
- McKenzie EA
- Hilton EN
- Newman WG
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s00467-013-2552-2
keywords:
- Facies
- Humans
- "Urinary Bladder/abnormalities, innervation"
- "Urologic Diseases/congenital, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Urofacial syndrome: a genetic and congenital disease of aberrant urinary bladder innervation.
**Authors:** Woolf AS, Stuart HM, Roberts NA, McKenzie EA, Hilton EN, Newman WG
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00467-013-2552-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00467-013-2552-2)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2014 Apr;29(4):513-8. doi: 10.1007/s00467-013-2552-2. Epub
2013  Jul 9.

Urofacial syndrome: a genetic and congenital disease of aberrant urinary bladder 
innervation.

Woolf AS(1), Stuart HM, Roberts NA, McKenzie EA, Hilton EN, Newman WG.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Development, Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, 
Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, University of Manchester, Michael 
Smith Building, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT, UK, 
adrian.woolf@manchester.ac.uk.

The urofacial, or Ochoa, syndrome is characterised by congenital urinary bladder 
dysfunction together with an abnormal grimace upon smiling, laughing and crying. 
It can present as fetal megacystis. Postnatal features include urinary 
incontinence and incomplete bladder emptying due to simultaneous detrusor muscle 
and bladder outlet contractions. Vesicoureteric reflux is often present, and the 
condition can be complicated by urosepsis and end-stage renal disease. The 
syndrome has long been postulated to have neural basis, and it can be familial 
when it is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Most individuals with 
urofacial syndrome genetically studied to date carry biallelic, postulated 
functionally null mutations of HPSE2 or, less commonly, of LRIG2. Little is 
known about the biology of the respective encoded proteins, heparanase 2 and 
leucine-rich repeats and immunoglobulin-like domains 2. Nevertheless, the 
observations that heparanase 2 can bind heparan sulphate proteolgycans and 
inhibit heparanase 1 enzymatic activity and that LRIG2 can modulate receptor 
tyrosine kinase growth factor signalling each point to biological roles relevant 
to tissue differentiation. Moreover, both heparanase 2 and LRIG2 proteins are 
detected in autonomic nerves growing into fetal bladders. The collective 
evidence is consistent with the hypothesis that urofacial syndrome genes code 
for proteins which work in a common pathway to facilitate neural growth into, 
and/or function within, the bladder. This molecular pathway may also have 
relevance to our understanding of the pathogenesis of other lower tract 
diseases, including Hinman-Allen syndrome, or non-neurogenic neurogenic bladder, 
and of the subset of individuals who have primary vesicoureteric reflux 
accompanied by bladder dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-013-2552-2
PMID: 23832138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]