---
reference_id: "PMID:18381781"
title: Early-onset osteoarthritis due to otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia in a family with a novel splicing mutation of the COL11A2 gene.
authors:
- Avcin T
- Makitie O
- Susic M
- Miller S
- Thorne C
- Tenenbaum J
- Laxer RM
- Cole WG
journal: J Rheumatol
year: '2008'
keywords:
- Adult
- Alleles
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- Child
- "Collagen Type XI/analysis, genetics"
- DNA/genetics
- "Epiphyses/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- "Osteoarthritis/diagnosis, etiology"
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/complications, genetics"
- Pedigree
- Radiography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early-onset osteoarthritis due to otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia in a family with a novel splicing mutation of the COL11A2 gene.
**Authors:** Avcin T, Makitie O, Susic M, Miller S, Thorne C, Tenenbaum J, Laxer RM, Cole WG
**Journal:** J Rheumatol (2008)

## Content

1. J Rheumatol. 2008 May;35(5):920-6. Epub 2008 Mar 15.

Early-onset osteoarthritis due to otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia in a
family with a novel splicing mutation of the COL11A2 gene.

Avcin T(1), Makitie O, Susic M, Miller S, Thorne C, Tenenbaum J, Laxer RM, Cole
WG.

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate an approach to the clinical, radiographic, and molecular
diagnosis of an underlying skeletal dysplasia in adults presenting with
early-onset polyarticular osteoarthritis (OA).
METHODS: We identified a family with 2 adults with polyarticular OA and a child
with generalized arthralgia. General, musculoskeletal, ocular, and auditory
evaluations were undertaken. Investigations included radiographs of symptomatic
joints, analysis of serum inflammatory markers and joint fluid, and mutational
analyses of the COL11A2 gene.
RESULTS: The 3 affected individuals had normal stature, mild mid-face
hypoplasia, and hearing impairment, but normal eyes. Radiographs of the affected
adults showed severe polyarticular OA but did not reveal diagnostic evidence of
an underlying skeletal dysplasia. However, the child's radiographs showed
enlarged epiphyses with an advanced bone age. The combination of skeletal,
facial, and auditory features together with the absence of ocular features
indicated that they had otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia, also known as
Stickler syndrome type III. The diagnosis was confirmed by identifying a
mutation in the COL11A2 gene that encodes the pre-pro-alpha2(XI) chain of type
XI collagen that is involved in type II collagen fibrillogenesis.
CONCLUSION: Early-onset polyarticular OA may occur in adults without a known or
obvious underlying skeletal dysplasia. This study provides an approach to the
diagnosis of an underlying skeletal dysplasia in such individuals.

PMID: 18381781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
