---
reference_id: "PMID:20500603"
title: Pathological airway remodelling in inflammation.
authors:
- Westergren-Thorsson G
- Larsen K
- Nihlberg K
- Andersson-Sjöland A
- Hallgren O
- Marko-Varga G
- Bjermer L
journal: Clin Respir J
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1111/j.1752-699X.2010.00190.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathological airway remodelling in inflammation.
**Authors:** Westergren-Thorsson G, Larsen K, Nihlberg K, Andersson-Sjöland A, Hallgren O, Marko-Varga G, Bjermer L
**Journal:** Clin Respir J (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1752-699X.2010.00190.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1752-699X.2010.00190.x)

## Content

1. Clin Respir J. 2010 May;4 Suppl 1:1-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1752-699X.2010.00190.x.

Pathological airway remodelling in inflammation.

Westergren-Thorsson G(1), Larsen K, Nihlberg K, Andersson-Sjöland A, Hallgren O, 
Marko-Varga G, Bjermer L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund University BMC D12, Lund, 
Sweden. gunilla.westergren-thorsson@med.lu.se

INTRODUCTION: Airway remodelling refers to a wide pattern of pathophysiological 
mechanisms involving smooth muscle cell hyperplasia, increase of activated 
fibroblasts and myofibroblasts with deposition of extracellular matrix. In 
asthma, it includes alterations of the epithelial cell layer with goblet cell 
hyperplasia, thickening of basement membranes, peri-bronchial and 
peri-bronchoalveolar fibrosis. Moreover, airway remodelling occurs not only in 
asthma but also in several pulmonary disorders such as chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and systemic sclerosis. Asthma 
treatment with inhaled corticosteroids does not fully prevent airway remodelling 
and thus have restricted influence on the natural course of the disease.
OBJECTIVES: This review highlights the role of different fibroblast phenotypes 
and potential origins of these cells in airway remodelling.
RESULTS: During inflammatory conditions, such as asthma, fibroblasts can 
differentiate into an active, more contractile phenotype termed myofibroblast, 
with expression of stress fibres and alpha-smooth muscle actin. The origin of 
myofibroblasts has lately been debated, and three sources have been identified: 
recruitment and differentiation of resident tissue fibroblasts; fibrocytes - 
circulating progenitor cells; and epithelial-mesenchymal transition.
CONCLUSION: It is clear that airway mesenchymal cells, including 
fibroblasts/myofibroblasts, are more dynamic in terms of differentiation and 
origin than has previously been recognised. Considering that these cells are key 
players in the remodelling process, it is of utmost importance to characterise 
specific markers for the various fibroblast phenotypes and to explore factors 
that drive the differentiation to develop future diagnostic and therapeutic 
tools for asthma patients.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1752-699X.2010.00190.x
PMID: 20500603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]