---
reference_id: "PMID:38715655"
title: Perisylvian and Hippocampal Anomalies in Individuals With Pathogenic GRIN2A Variants.
authors:
- Thompson-Lake DGY
- Liegeois FJ
- Braden RO
- Jackson GD
- Turner SJ
- Morison L
- Hildebrand M
- Scheffer IE
- Morgan AT
journal: Neurol Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200129
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Perisylvian and Hippocampal Anomalies in Individuals With Pathogenic GRIN2A Variants.
**Authors:** Thompson-Lake DGY, Liegeois FJ, Braden RO, Jackson GD, Turner SJ, Morison L, Hildebrand M, Scheffer IE, Morgan AT
**Journal:** Neurol Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1212/NXG.0000000000200129](https://doi.org/10.1212/NXG.0000000000200129)

## Content

1. Neurol Genet. 2024 Feb 26;10(2):e200129. doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200129. 
eCollection 2024 Apr.

Perisylvian and Hippocampal Anomalies in Individuals With Pathogenic GRIN2A 
Variants.

Thompson-Lake DGY(1), Liegeois FJ(1), Braden RO(1), Jackson GD(1), Turner SJ(1), 
Morison L(1), Hildebrand M(1), Scheffer IE(1), Morgan AT(1).

Author information:
(1)From the WVU Department of Neuroscience (D.G.Y.T.-L.), West Virginia 
University School of Medicine, Rockefeller Neuroscience Institute, Morgantown, 
WV; UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Heath (D.G.Y.T.-L., F.J.L.), 
London, UK; Speech and Language (R.O.B., L.M., M.H., A.T.M.), Murdoch Children's 
Research Institute; Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health (G.D.J., 
I.E.S.), Parkville; Department of Community and Clinical Health (S.J.T.), La 
Trobe University, Bundoora; Department of Medicine (M.H.), University of 
Melbourne; Department of Paediatrics (R.O.B., I.E.S.), University of Melbourne, 
Royal Children's Hospital Parkville; Department of Audiology and Speech 
Pathology (I.E.S., A.T.M.), University of Melbourne, Parkville; and Department 
of Medicine (I.E.S.), University of Melbourne, Austin Hospital, Heidelberg, 
Australia.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Pathogenic variants in GRIN2A are associated with a 
spectrum of epilepsy-aphasia syndromes (EASs). Seizures as well as speech and 
language disorders occur frequently but vary widely in severity, both between 
individuals and across the life span. The link between this phenotypic spectrum 
and brain characteristics is unknown. Specifically, altered brain networks at 
the root of speech and language deficits remain to be identified. Patients with 
pathogenic variants in GRIN2A offer an opportunity to interrogate the impact of 
glutamate receptor dysfunction on brain development.
METHODS: We characterized brain anomalies in individuals with pathogenic GRIN2A 
variants and EASs, hypothesizing alterations in perisylvian speech-language 
regions and the striatum. We compared structural MRI data from 10 individuals (3 
children and 7 adults, 3 female) with pathogenic GRIN2A variants with data from 
age-matched controls (N = 51 and N = 203 in a secondary analysis). We examined 
cortical thickness and volume in 4 a priori hypothesized speech and language 
regions (inferior frontal, precentral, supramarginal, and superior temporal) and 
across the whole brain. Subcortical structures (hippocampus, basal ganglia, 
thalamus) and the corpus callosum were also compared.
RESULTS: Individuals with pathogenic GRIN2A variants showed increased thickness 
and volume in the posterior part of Broca's area (inferior frontal gyrus, pars 
opercularis). For thickness, the effects were bilateral but more pronounced in 
the left (large effect size, η2 = 0.37) than the right (η2 = 0.12) hemisphere. 
Both volume and thickness were also higher in the bilateral superior temporal 
region while the supramarginal region showed increased thickness only. 
Whole-brain analyses confirmed left-sided thickness increases in Broca's area, 
with additional increases in the occipital and superior frontal cortices 
bilaterally. Hippocampal volume was reduced in the left hemisphere. There were 
no age-dependent effects or corpus callosum group differences.
DISCUSSION: Anomalies in perisylvian regions, with largest differences in 
Broca's area, suggest an altered development of classical speech-language 
networks in GRIN2A-related EAS. Left hippocampal reduction suggests a role for 
this structure in early speech and language development and is consistent with 
GRIN2A gene expression in that region. Overall, elucidating the neural 
correlates of EAS provides insights into the impact of GRIN2A dysfunction, 
opening avenues for targeted intervention in developmental syndromes with 
compromised speech-language development.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200129
PMCID: PMC11073892
PMID: 38715655

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no relevant disclosures. Go 
to Neurology.org/NG for full disclosures.