---
reference_id: "PMID:22960126"
title: Effect of heterozygous beta thalassemia on the phosphorylative response to Plasmodium falciparum infection.
authors:
- Pantaleo A
- Ferru E
- Carta F
- Valente E
- Pippia P
- Turrini F
journal: J Proteomics
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2012.08.018
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of heterozygous beta thalassemia on the phosphorylative response to Plasmodium falciparum infection.
**Authors:** Pantaleo A, Ferru E, Carta F, Valente E, Pippia P, Turrini F
**Journal:** J Proteomics (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jprot.2012.08.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jprot.2012.08.018)

## Content

1. J Proteomics. 2012 Dec 5;76 Spec No.:251-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2012.08.018. 
Epub 2012 Sep 1.

Effect of heterozygous beta thalassemia on the phosphorylative response to 
Plasmodium falciparum infection.

Pantaleo A(1), Ferru E, Carta F, Valente E, Pippia P, Turrini F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Scienze Biomediche, University of Sassari, 07100, Italy.

Malaria parasites interact with the host cell membrane inserting new proteins 
and inducing oxidative and phosphorylative changes of erythrocyte proteins. In 
the present report we monitored the time dependent oxidative and phosphorylative 
modifications induced by parasites in heterozygous beta thalassemia (Het-βThal). 
Het-βThal causes mild anemia and is known to determine a pro-oxidant milieu and 
a protective effect against severe malaria. In malaria cultures Het-βThal has 
been reported to induce accumulation of hemoglobin denaturation products. At 
early parasite development stages (rings), tyrosine hyper-phosphorylation of 
band 3 was the most notable modification, and at later development stages 
(trophozoites), additional membrane proteins displayed significant 
hyper-phosphorylation of their serine and tyrosine residues (adducins, ankyrin, 
catalase). Het-βThal also caused membrane destabilization. Free radical 
scavengers effectively inhibited the phosphorylative response and membrane 
destabilization. Kinase inhibitors exerted similar effects suggesting a causal 
relationship between oxidative stress, membrane protein hyper-phosphorylation 
and increased membrane damage exacerbated by Het-βThal. In conclusion, different 
lines of evidence suggest that Het-βThal enhances the redox stress caused by 
malaria parasites inducing its protective effect destabilizing the host cell 
membrane. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Integrated omics.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2012.08.018
PMID: 22960126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]