---
reference_id: "PMID:31996461"
title: Activation of Dendritic Cells Alters the Mechanism of MHC Class II Antigen Presentation to CD4 T Cells.
authors:
- Cho KJ
- Ishido S
- Eisenlohr LC
- Roche PA
journal: J Immunol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1901234
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Activation of Dendritic Cells Alters the Mechanism of MHC Class II Antigen Presentation to CD4 T Cells.
**Authors:** Cho KJ, Ishido S, Eisenlohr LC, Roche PA
**Journal:** J Immunol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.1901234](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.1901234)

## Content

1. J Immunol. 2020 Mar 15;204(6):1621-1629. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1901234. Epub 
2020 Jan 29.

Activation of Dendritic Cells Alters the Mechanism of MHC Class II Antigen 
Presentation to CD4 T Cells.

Cho KJ(1), Ishido S(2), Eisenlohr LC(3)(4), Roche PA(5).

Author information:
(1)Experimental Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya, 663-8501 
Japan.
(3)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Research Institute, Philadelphia, PA 
19104; and.
(4)Perelman School of Medicine at The University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
PA 19104.
(5)Experimental Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892; paul.roche@nih.gov.

Both immature and mature dendritic cells (DCs) can process and present foreign 
Ags to CD4 T cells; however, the mechanism by which MHC class II (MHC-II) in 
mature DCs acquires antigenic peptides remains unknown. To address this, we have 
studied Ag processing and presentation of two distinct CD4 T cell epitopes of 
the influenza virus hemagglutinin coat protein by both immature and mature mouse 
DCs. We find that immature DCs almost exclusively use newly synthesized MHC-II 
targeted to DM+ late endosomes for presentation to influenza virus-specific CD4 
T cells. By contrast, mature DCs exclusively use recycling MHC-II that traffics 
to both early and late endosomes for antigenic peptide binding. Rab11a knockdown 
partially inhibits recycling of MHC-II in mature DCs and selectively inhibits 
presentation of an influenza virus hemagglutinin CD4 T cell epitope generated in 
early endosomes. These studies highlight a "division of labor" in MHC-II peptide 
binding, in which immature DCs preferentially present Ags acquired in Rab11a- 
DM+ late endosomes, whereas mature DCs use recycling MHC-II to present antigenic 
peptides acquired in both Rab11a+ early endosomes and Rab11a- endosomes for CD4 
T cell activation.

Copyright © 2020 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1901234
PMCID: PMC7065958
PMID: 31996461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]