---
reference_id: "PMID:31627272"
title: Programmed Death Ligand 1 Indicates Pre-Existing Adaptive Immune Response by Tumor-Infiltrating CD8(+) T Cells in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.
authors:
- Li YM
- Yu JM
- Liu ZY
- Yang HJ
- Tang J
- Chen ZN
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3390/ijms20205138
keywords:
- Adaptive Immunity
- Aged
- "B7-H1 Antigen/genetics, metabolism"
- "CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes/immunology, metabolism"
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/immunology, metabolism"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Female
- Humans
- Interferon-gamma/physiology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Multivariate Analysis
- Proportional Hazards Models
- Regression Analysis
- Signal Transduction
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Programmed Death Ligand 1 Indicates Pre-Existing Adaptive Immune Response by Tumor-Infiltrating CD8(+) T Cells in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.
**Authors:** Li YM, Yu JM, Liu ZY, Yang HJ, Tang J, Chen ZN
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms20205138](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms20205138)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Oct 17;20(20):5138. doi: 10.3390/ijms20205138.

Programmed Death Ligand 1 Indicates Pre-Existing Adaptive Immune Response by 
Tumor-Infiltrating CD8(+) T Cells in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Li YM(1)(2), Yu JM(3)(4), Liu ZY(5)(6), Yang HJ(7)(8), Tang J(9)(10), Chen 
ZN(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)National Translational Science Center for Molecular Medicine, Xi'an 710032, 
China. sydlym@163.com.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, School of Basic Medicine, Fourth Military Medical 
University, Xi'an 710032, China. sydlym@163.com.
(3)National Translational Science Center for Molecular Medicine, Xi'an 710032, 
China. yujingmin1226@163.com.
(4)Department of Cell Biology, School of Basic Medicine, Fourth Military Medical 
University, Xi'an 710032, China. yujingmin1226@163.com.
(5)National Translational Science Center for Molecular Medicine, Xi'an 710032, 
China. qqqzhenyu20052008@163.com.
(6)Department of Cell Biology, School of Basic Medicine, Fourth Military Medical 
University, Xi'an 710032, China. qqqzhenyu20052008@163.com.
(7)National Translational Science Center for Molecular Medicine, Xi'an 710032, 
China. yhjjqq.love@163.com.
(8)Department of Cell Biology, School of Basic Medicine, Fourth Military Medical 
University, Xi'an 710032, China. yhjjqq.love@163.com.
(9)National Translational Science Center for Molecular Medicine, Xi'an 710032, 
China. tangjuan1@fmmu.edu.cn.
(10)Department of Cell Biology, School of Basic Medicine, Fourth Military 
Medical University, Xi'an 710032, China. tangjuan1@fmmu.edu.cn.
(11)National Translational Science Center for Molecular Medicine, Xi'an 710032, 
China. znchen@fmmu.edu.cn.
(12)Department of Cell Biology, School of Basic Medicine, Fourth Military 
Medical University, Xi'an 710032, China. znchen@fmmu.edu.cn.

Aberrant expression of programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) on tumor cells impedes 
antitumor immunity and instigates immune evasion. The remarkable efficacy of 
immune checkpoint blockade has been confirmed in various solid tumors. However, 
the correlation between PD-L1 expression and host immunological landscape 
remains of considerable controversy in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In 
the present study, PD-L1 expression and CD8+ tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL) 
infiltration levels were determined by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in tumor 
sections of 138 NSCLC patients. The expression level of PD-L1 was positively 
correlated with the abundance of CD8 + TILs (p < 0.0001). Furthermore, no 
constitutive expression of PD-L1 was observed in the majority of six NSCLC cell 
lines detected by Western blot; but exposure to interferon-γ (IFN-γ), a primary 
cytokine secreted by activated CD8+ T cells, prominently increased PD-L1 
expression. Notably, a significantly positive association was determined within 
PD-L1, CD8 and IFN-γ gene expression by qRT-PCR, which was corroborated by 
RNA-sequencing from TCGA lung cancer dataset. These findings demonstrate that 
PD-L1 expression indicates an adaptive immune resistance mechanism adopted by 
tumor cells in the aversion of immunogenic destruction by CD8+ TILs. Both higher 
expression of PD-L1 and infiltration of CD8+ TILs were correlated with superior 
prognosis (p = 0.044 for PD-L1; p = 0.002 for CD8). Moreover, Cox multivariate 
regression analysis showed that the combination of PD-L1 and CD8 were 
independent prognostic factors, which was more accurate in prediction of 
prognosis in NSCLC than individually. Finally, we found that IFN-γ induced the 
upregulation of PD-L1 in NSCLC cells, mainly through the JAK/STAT1 signaling 
pathway. In conclusion, PD-L1 expression is mainly induced by activated CD8+ 
TILs via IFN-γ in the immune milieu and indicates pre-existing adaptive immune 
response in NSCLC.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20205138
PMCID: PMC6829548
PMID: 31627272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.