---
reference_id: "PMID:22513822"
title: Online feedback-controlled renal constant infusion clearances in rats.
authors:
- Schock-Kusch D
- Shulhevich Y
- Xie Q
- Hesser J
- Stsepankou D
- Neudecker S
- Friedemann J
- Koenig S
- Heinrich R
- Hoecklin F
- Pill J
- Gretz N
journal: Kidney Int
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1038/ki.2012.117
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Online feedback-controlled renal constant infusion clearances in rats.
**Authors:** Schock-Kusch D, Shulhevich Y, Xie Q, Hesser J, Stsepankou D, Neudecker S, Friedemann J, Koenig S, Heinrich R, Hoecklin F, Pill J, Gretz N
**Journal:** Kidney Int (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ki.2012.117](https://doi.org/10.1038/ki.2012.117)

## Content

1. Kidney Int. 2012 Aug;82(3):314-20. doi: 10.1038/ki.2012.117. Epub 2012 Apr 18.

Online feedback-controlled renal constant infusion clearances in rats.

Schock-Kusch D(1), Shulhevich Y, Xie Q, Hesser J, Stsepankou D, Neudecker S, 
Friedemann J, Koenig S, Heinrich R, Hoecklin F, Pill J, Gretz N.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Centre, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, 
Mannheim, Germany.

Constant infusion clearance techniques using exogenous renal markers are 
considered the gold standard for assessing the glomerular filtration rate. Here 
we describe a constant infusion clearance method in rats allowing the real-time 
monitoring of steady-state conditions using an automated closed-loop approach 
based on the transcutaneous measurement of the renal marker FITC-sinistrin. In 
order to optimize parameters to reach steady-state conditions as fast as 
possible, a Matlab-based simulation tool was established. Based on this, a 
real-time feedback-regulated approach for constant infusion clearance monitoring 
was developed. This was validated by determining hourly FITC-sinistrin plasma 
concentrations and the glomerular filtration rate in healthy and unilaterally 
nephrectomized rats. The transcutaneously assessed FITC-sinistrin fluorescence 
signal was found to reflect the plasma concentration. Our method allows the 
precise determination of the onset of steady-state marker concentration. 
Moreover, the steady state can be monitored and controlled in real time for 
several hours. This procedure is simple to perform since no urine samples and 
only one blood sample are required. Thus, we developed a real-time 
feedback-based system for optimal regulation and monitoring of a constant 
infusion clearance technique.

DOI: 10.1038/ki.2012.117
PMID: 22513822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]