---
reference_id: "PMID:31326255"
title: Cholera in selected countries in Asia.
authors:
- Lopez AL
- Dutta S
- Qadri F
- Sovann L
- Pandey BD
- Bin Hamzah WM
- Memon I
- Iamsirithaworn S
- Dang DA
- Chowdhury F
- Heng S
- Kanungo S
- Mogasale V
- Sultan A
- Ylade M
journal: Vaccine
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.07.035
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cholera in selected countries in Asia.
**Authors:** Lopez AL, Dutta S, Qadri F, Sovann L, Pandey BD, Bin Hamzah WM, Memon I, Iamsirithaworn S, Dang DA, Chowdhury F, Heng S, Kanungo S, Mogasale V, Sultan A, Ylade M
**Journal:** Vaccine (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.07.035](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.07.035)

## Content

1. Vaccine. 2020 Feb 29;38 Suppl 1:A18-A24. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.07.035. 
Epub 2019 Jul 17.

Cholera in selected countries in Asia.

Lopez AL(1), Dutta S(2), Qadri F(3), Sovann L(4), Pandey BD(5), Bin Hamzah 
WM(6), Memon I(7), Iamsirithaworn S(8), Dang DA(9), Chowdhury F(3), Heng S(4), 
Kanungo S(2), Mogasale V(10), Sultan A(11), Ylade M(12).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Child Health and Human Development, University of the 
Philippines Manila-National Institutes of Health, Philippines. Electronic 
address: allopez2@up.edu.ph.
(2)Indian Council of Medical Research, National Institute of Cholera and Enteric 
Diseases, India.
(3)International Center for Diarrheal Disease Research, Bangladesh.
(4)Ministry of Health, Cambodia.
(5)Department of Health Services, Ministry of Health, Nepal.
(6)Ministry of Health, Malaysia.
(7)Sir Syed College of Medical Science, Pakistan.
(8)Department of Disease Control, Thailand Ministry of Public Health-U.S. CDC 
Collaboration, Thailand.
(9)National Institute of Hygiene and Epidemiology, Viet Nam.
(10)International Vaccine Institute, Republic of Korea.
(11)Midcity Hospital, Pakistan.
(12)Institute of Child Health and Human Development, University of the 
Philippines Manila-National Institutes of Health, Philippines.

INTRODUCTION: Although the current pandemic of cholera originated in Asia, 
reports of cholera cases and outbreaks in the region are sparse. To provide a 
sub-regional assessment of cholera in South and Southeast Asia, we collated 
published and unpublished data from existing surveillance systems from 
Bangladesh, Cambodia, India, Malaysia, Nepal, Pakistan, Philippines, Thailand 
and Vietnam.
METHODS: Data from existing country surveillance systems on diarrhea, acute 
watery diarrhea, suspected cholera and/or confirmed cholera in nine selected 
Asian countries (Bangladesh, Cambodia, India, Malaysia, Nepal, Pakistan, 
Philippines, Thailand and Vietnam) from 2011 to 2015 (or 2016, when available) 
were collated. We reviewed annual cholera reports from WHO and searched PubMed 
and/or ProMED to complement data, where information is not completely available.
RESULTS: From 2011 to 2016, confirmed cholera cases were identified in at least 
one year of the 5- or 6-year period in the countries included. Surveillance for 
cholera exists in most countries, but cases are not always reported. India 
reported the most number of confirmed cases with a mean of 5964 cases annually. 
The mean number of cases per year in the Philippines, Pakistan, Bangladesh, 
Malaysia, Nepal and Thailand were 760, 592, 285, 264, 148 and 88, respectively. 
Cambodia and Vietnam reported 51 and 3 confirmed cholera cases in 2011, with no 
subsequent reported cases.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: We present consolidated results of available 
surveillance in nine Asian countries and supplemented these with publication 
searches. There is paucity of readily accessible data on cholera in these 
countries. We highlight the continuing existence of the disease even in areas 
with improved sanitation and access to safe drinking water. Continued vigilance 
and improved surveillance in countries should be strongly encouraged.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.07.035
PMID: 31326255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest We declare 
that we have no conflicts of interest.