---
reference_id: "PMID:36409683"
title: "Antimicrobial resistance in shigellosis: A surveillance study among urban and rural children over 20 years in Bangladesh."
authors:
- Nuzhat S
- Das R
- Das S
- Islam SB
- Palit P
- Haque MA
- Chakraborty S
- Khan SH
- Ahmed D
- Alam B
- Ahmed T
- Chisti MJ
- Faruque ASG
journal: PLoS One
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0277574
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antimicrobial resistance in shigellosis: A surveillance study among urban and rural children over 20 years in Bangladesh.
**Authors:** Nuzhat S, Das R, Das S, Islam SB, Palit P, Haque MA, Chakraborty S, Khan SH, Ahmed D, Alam B, Ahmed T, Chisti MJ, Faruque ASG
**Journal:** PLoS One (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0277574](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277574)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2022 Nov 21;17(11):e0277574. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0277574. 
eCollection 2022.

Antimicrobial resistance in shigellosis: A surveillance study among urban and 
rural children over 20 years in Bangladesh.

Nuzhat S(1), Das R(1), Das S(1), Islam SB(1), Palit P(1), Haque MA(1), 
Chakraborty S(2), Khan SH(1), Ahmed D(3), Alam B(1), Ahmed T(1), Chisti MJ(1), 
Faruque ASG(1).

Author information:
(1)Nutrition and Clinical Services Division, International Centre for Diarrhoeal 
Disease Research, Bangladesh (icddr,b), Mohakhali, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(2)Department of International Health, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public 
Health, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(3)Laboratory Sciences and Services Division, International Centre for 
Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh (icddr,b), Mohakhali, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

Antimicrobial resistance against shigellosis is increasingly alarming. However, 
evidence-based knowledge gaps regarding the changing trends of shigellosis in 
Bangladesh exist due to the scarcity of longitudinal data on antimicrobial 
resistance. Our study evaluated the last 20 years antimicrobial resistance 
patterns against shigellosis among under-5 children in the urban and rural sites 
of Bangladesh. Data were extracted from the Diarrheal Disease Surveillance 
System (DDSS) of Dhaka Hospital (urban site) and Matlab Hospital (rural site) of 
the International Centre for Diarrheal Disease Research, Bangladesh (icddr,b) 
between January 2001 and December 2020. We studied culture-confirmed shigellosis 
cases from urban Dhaka Hospital (n = 883) and rural Matlab Hospital (n = 1263). 
Since 2001, a declining percentage of shigellosis in children observed in urban 
and rural sites. Moreover, higher isolation rates of Shigella were found in the 
rural site [1263/15684 (8.1%)] compared to the urban site [883/26804 (3.3%)] in 
the last 20 years. In both areas, S. flexneri was the predominant species. The 
upward trend of S. sonnei in both the study sites was statistically significant 
after adjusting for age and sex. WHO-recommended 1st line antibiotic 
ciprofloxacin resistance gradually reached more than 70% in both the urban and 
rural site by 2020. In multiple logistic regression after adjusting for age and 
sex, ciprofloxacin, azithromycin, mecillinam, ceftriaxone, and multidrug 
resistance (resistance to any two of these four drugs) among under-5 children 
were found to be increasing significantly (p<0.01) in the last 20 years in both 
sites. The study results underscore the importance of therapeutic interventions 
for shigellosis by appropriate drugs based on their current antibiogram for 
under-5 children. These observations may help policymakers in formulating better 
case management strategies for shigellosis.

Copyright: © 2022 Nuzhat et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0277574
PMCID: PMC9678309
PMID: 36409683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.