---
reference_id: "PMID:21134390"
title: Oxidative stress and hepatic stellate cell activation are key events in arsenic induced liver fibrosis in mice.
authors:
- Ghatak S
- Biswas A
- Dhali GK
- Chowdhury A
- Boyer JL
- Santra A
journal: Toxicol Appl Pharmacol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2010.11.016
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oxidative stress and hepatic stellate cell activation are key events in arsenic induced liver fibrosis in mice.
**Authors:** Ghatak S, Biswas A, Dhali GK, Chowdhury A, Boyer JL, Santra A
**Journal:** Toxicol Appl Pharmacol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.taap.2010.11.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.taap.2010.11.016)

## Content

1. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2011 Feb 15;251(1):59-69. doi: 
10.1016/j.taap.2010.11.016. Epub 2010 Dec 4.

Oxidative stress and hepatic stellate cell activation are key events in arsenic 
induced liver fibrosis in mice.

Ghatak S(1), Biswas A, Dhali GK, Chowdhury A, Boyer JL, Santra A.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Liver Research, School of Digestive & Liver Diseases, Institute of 
Post Graduate Medical Education & Research, Kolkata, India.

Arsenic is an environmental toxicant and carcinogen. Exposure to arsenic is 
associated with development of liver fibrosis and portal hypertension through 
ill defined mechanisms. We evaluated hepatic fibrogenesis after long term 
arsenic exposure in a murine model. BALB/c mice were exposed to arsenic by daily 
gavages of 6 μg/gm body weight for 1 year and were evaluated for markers of 
hepatic oxidative stress and fibrosis, as well as pro-inflammatory, 
pro-apoptotic and pro-fibrogenic factors at 9 and 12 months. Hepatic NADPH 
oxidase activity progressively increased in arsenic exposure with concomitant 
development of hepatic oxidative stress. Hepatic steatosis with occasional 
collection of mononuclear inflammatory cells and mild portal fibrosis were the 
predominant liver lesion observed after 9 months of arsenic exposure, while at 
12 months, the changes included mild hepatic steatosis, inflammation, necrosis 
and significant fibrosis in periportal areas. The pathologic changes in the 
liver were associated with markers of hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) activation, 
matrix reorganization and fibrosis including α-smooth muscle actin, transforming 
growth factor-β1, PDGF-Rβ, pro-inflammatory cytokines and enhanced expression of 
tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 and pro(α) collagen type I. Moreover, 
pro-apoptotic protein Bax was dominantly expressed and Bcl-2 was down-regulated 
along with increased number of TUNEL positive hepatocytes in liver of arsenic 
exposed mice. Furthermore, HSCs activation due to increased hepatic oxidative 
stress observed after in vivo arsenic exposure was recapitulated in co-culture 
model of isolated HSCs and hepatocytes exposed to arsenic. These findings have 
implications not only for the understanding of the pathology of arsenic related 
liver fibrosis but also for the design of preventive strategies in chronic 
arsenicosis.

© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2010.11.016
PMCID: PMC3745774
PMID: 21134390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: The authors have nothing to 
disclose financially and there is no conflict of interest.