---
reference_id: "PMID:24859987"
title: Peripheral changes in endometriosis-associated pain.
authors:
- Morotti M
- Vincent K
- Brawn J
- Zondervan KT
- Becker CM
journal: Hum Reprod Update
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/humupd/dmu021
keywords:
- Ascitic Fluid/physiology
- "Endometriosis/complications, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Endometrium/blood supply, innervation"
- Female
- Humans
- "Neovascularization, Pathologic/complications, pathology, physiopathology"
- Nerve Fibers/pathology
- Neurogenesis/physiology
- "Pain/etiology, pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peripheral changes in endometriosis-associated pain.
**Authors:** Morotti M, Vincent K, Brawn J, Zondervan KT, Becker CM
**Journal:** Hum Reprod Update (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/humupd/dmu021](https://doi.org/10.1093/humupd/dmu021)

## Content

1. Hum Reprod Update. 2014 Sep-Oct;20(5):717-36. doi: 10.1093/humupd/dmu021. Epub
 2014 May 23.

Peripheral changes in endometriosis-associated pain.

Morotti M(1), Vincent K(2), Brawn J(3), Zondervan KT(4), Becker CM(2).

Author information:
(1)Nuffield Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Oxford,
Women's Centre, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK Department of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Genoa, Genoa 16100, Italy
matteo.morotti@obs-gyn.ox.ac.uk.
(2)Nuffield Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Oxford,
Women's Centre, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK.
(3)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK.
(4)Nuffield Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Oxford,
Women's Centre, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK Wellcome Trust
Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.

BACKGROUND: Pain remains the cardinal symptom of endometriosis. However, to
date, the underlying mechanisms are still only poorly understood. Increasing
evidence points towards a close interaction between peripheral nerves, the
peritoneal environment and the central nervous system in pain generation and
processing. Recently, studies demonstrating nerve fibres and neurotrophic and
angiogenic factors in endometriotic lesions and their vicinity have led to
increased interest in peripheral changes in endometriosis-associated pain. This
review focuses on the origin and function of these nerves and factors as well as
possible peripheral mechanisms that may contribute to the generation and
modulation of pain in women with endometriosis.
METHODS: We conducted a systematic search using several databases (PubMed,
MEDLINE, EMBASE and CINAHL) of publications from January 1977 to October 2013 to
evaluate the possible roles of the peripheral nervous system in endometriosis
pathophysiology and how it can contribute to endometriosis-associated pain.
RESULTS: Endometriotic lesions and peritoneal fluid from women with
endometriosis had pronounced neuroangiogenic properties with increased
expression of new nerve fibres, a shift in the distribution of sensory and
autonomic fibres in some locations, and up-regulation of several neurotrophins.
In women suffering from deep infiltrating endometriosis and bowel endometriosis,
in which the anatomical distribution of lesions is generally more closely
related to pelvic pain symptoms, endometriotic lesions and surrounding tissues
present higher nerve fibre densities compared with peritoneal lesions and
endometriomas. More data are needed to fully confirm a direct correlation
between fibre density in these locations and the amount of perceived pain. A
better correlation between the presence of nerve fibres and pain symptoms seems
to exist for eutopic endometrium. However, this appears not to be exclusive to
endometriosis. No correlation between elevated neurotrophin levels and pain
severity appears to exist, suggesting the involvement of other mediators in the
modulation of pain.
CONCLUSIONS: The increased expression of neurotrophic factors and nerve fibres
in endometriotic lesions, eutopic endometrium and the peritoneum imply a role of
such peripheral changes in the pathogenesis of endometriosis-associated pain.
However, a clear link between these findings and pain in patients with
endometriosis has so far not been demonstrated.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/humupd/dmu021
PMCID: PMC4337970
PMID: 24859987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
