---
reference_id: "PMID:35294546"
title: Three-Year Follow-Up and Response-Survival Relationship of Nivolumab in Previously Treated Patients with Advanced Esophageal Squamous Cell Carcinoma (ATTRACTION-3).
authors:
- Okada M
- Kato K
- Cho BC
- Takahashi M
- Lin CY
- Chin K
- Kadowaki S
- Ahn MJ
- Hamamoto Y
- Doki Y
- Yen CC
- Kubota Y
- Kim SB
- Hsu CH
- Holtved E
- Xynos I
- Matsumura Y
- Takazawa A
- Kitagawa Y
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-21-0985
keywords:
- Esophageal Neoplasms/drug therapy
- Esophageal Squamous Cell Carcinoma/drug therapy
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- "Nivolumab/administration & dosage"
- Programmed Cell Death 1 Receptor/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Three-Year Follow-Up and Response-Survival Relationship of Nivolumab in Previously Treated Patients with Advanced Esophageal Squamous Cell Carcinoma (ATTRACTION-3).
**Authors:** Okada M, Kato K, Cho BC, Takahashi M, Lin CY, Chin K, Kadowaki S, Ahn MJ, Hamamoto Y, Doki Y, Yen CC, Kubota Y, Kim SB, Hsu CH, Holtved E, Xynos I, Matsumura Y, Takazawa A, Kitagawa Y
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-21-0985](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-21-0985)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2022 Aug 2;28(15):3277-3286. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-21-0985.

Three-Year Follow-Up and Response-Survival Relationship of Nivolumab in
Previously Treated Patients with Advanced Esophageal Squamous Cell Carcinoma
(ATTRACTION-3).

Okada M(1), Kato K(2), Cho BC(3), Takahashi M(4), Lin CY(5), Chin K(6), Kadowaki
S(7), Ahn MJ(8), Hamamoto Y(9), Doki Y(10), Yen CC(11), Kubota Y(12), Kim
SB(13), Hsu CH(14), Holtved E(15), Xynos I(16), Matsumura Y(17), Takazawa A(18),
Kitagawa Y(19).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and
Medicine, Graduate School of Biomedical and Health Sciences, Hiroshima
University, Hiroshima, Japan.
(2)Department of Head and Neck Medical Oncology, National Cancer Center
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Division of Medical Oncology, Yonsei Cancer Center, Yonsei University College
of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Tohoku University Hospital, Sendai, Japan.
(5)Department of Hematology and Oncology, China Medical University Hospital and
School of Pharmacy, China Medical University, Taichung City, Taiwan.
(6)Gastroenterological Chemotherapy Department, Cancer Institute Hospital of
Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Department of Clinical Oncology, Aichi Cancer Center Hospital, Nagoya, Japan.
(8)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan
University School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine, Keio Cancer Center, School of Medicine, Keio
University, Tokyo, Japan.
(10)Department of Surgery, Osaka University Hospital, Osaka, Japan.
(11)Division of Clinical Research, Department of Medical Research and Division
of Medical Oncology, Center for Immuno-oncology, Department of Oncology, Taipei
Veterans General Hospital and National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University School of
Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(12)Department of Oncology, Showa University Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(13)Department of Oncology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(14)Department of Oncology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(15)Department of Clinical Oncology, Odense University Hospital, Odense,
Denmark.
(16)Oncology Clinical Development, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Princeton, New Jersey.
(17)Oncology Clinical Development, Ono Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan.
(18)Data Science, Ono Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan.
(19)Department of Surgery, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2022 Aug 2;28(15):3173-3175. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-22-0932.

PURPOSE: Limited long-term data are available on immune checkpoint inhibitor use
in patients with advanced esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). We report
3-year follow-up data from our study of nivolumab versus chemotherapy
(paclitaxel or docetaxel) in patients with previously treated ESCC.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: ATTRACTION-3 was a randomized, multicenter, open-label,
phase III trial. Overall survival (OS), time from randomization to death from
any cause, was the primary endpoint. An exploratory subanalysis assessed OS
according to the best overall response (BOR) with and without landmark at 4
months.
RESULTS: Of the enrolled patients, 210 received nivolumab and 209 received
chemotherapy. With a minimum follow-up of 36.0 months, OS was longer in the
nivolumab versus the chemotherapy group (median, 10.9 vs. 8.5 months; HR, 0.79;
P = 0.0264), with 3-year OS rates of 15.3% and 8.7%, respectively. The median OS
was longer with nivolumab versus chemotherapy irrespective of the BOR (complete
response/partial response: 19.9 vs. 15.4 months; stable disease: 17.4 vs. 8.8
months; and progressive disease: 7.6 vs. 4.2 months). Grade 3 or higher
treatment-related adverse events were reported in 40 patients (19.1%) in the
nivolumab group and 133 patients (63.9%) in the chemotherapy group.
CONCLUSIONS: Nivolumab as second-line therapy demonstrated clinically meaningful
long-term improvement in OS compared with chemotherapy in previously treated
patients with advanced ESCC. The OS was consistently improved in the nivolumab
group compared with the chemotherapy group regardless of BOR. Nivolumab was well
tolerated over the 3-year follow-up. See related commentary by Yoon et al., p.
3173.

©2022 The Authors; Published by the American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-21-0985
PMCID: PMC9662935
PMID: 35294546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
