---
reference_id: "PMID:26184788"
title: High mutation rate of NPHP3 in 18 Chinese infantile nephronophthisis patients.
authors:
- Sun L
- Tong H
- Wang H
- Yue Z
- Liu T
- Lin H
- Li J
- Wang C
journal: Nephrology (Carlton)
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1111/nep.12563
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High mutation rate of NPHP3 in 18 Chinese infantile nephronophthisis patients.
**Authors:** Sun L, Tong H, Wang H, Yue Z, Liu T, Lin H, Li J, Wang C
**Journal:** Nephrology (Carlton) (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/nep.12563](https://doi.org/10.1111/nep.12563)

## Content

1. Nephrology (Carlton). 2016 Mar;21(3):209-16. doi: 10.1111/nep.12563.

High mutation rate of NPHP3 in 18 Chinese infantile nephronophthisis patients.

Sun L(1), Tong H(1)(2), Wang H(3), Yue Z(1), Liu T(1), Lin H(1), Li J(4), Wang 
C(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Kidney Diseases Center, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Organ Transplantation, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun 
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, PLA, Fuzhou General Hospital of Nanjing Command, 
Fuzhou, China.

AIM: The present study was designed to explore mutations of NPHP2 and NPHP3 and 
clinical features in 18 Chinese infantile nephronophthisis (NPHP) patients.
METHODS: Patients were subjected to screen for mutations in both NPHP2 and 
NPHP3, and clinical data were collected.
RESULTS: Eighteen patients from 17 families were included in this study. Eight 
of 17 (47.1%) patients detected were identified to have mutations in NPHP3, but 
none had a mutation in NPHP2. Of the patients with NPHP3 mutations, four had 
compound heterozygous mutations, and the other four harboured single 
heterozygous mutations. Ten of the NPHP3 mutations were novel. Low molecular 
weight proteinuria was observed in all 16 detected patients. Renal histology 
were available in seven children, five patients showed infantile type NPHP 
features, and the other two patients from the same family showed juvenile type 
NPHP features. Liver involvement was observed in all patients with NPHP3 
mutations and congenital heart disease in two patients harbouring NPHP3 mutation 
of c.2369 T > C (p.L790P).
CONCLUSIONS: In this group of infantile NPHP patients, mutations of NPHP3 were 
prevalent, whereas mutation of NPHP2 was absent. Genotype to phenotype 
correlations were observed in patients with NPHP3 mutations and all patients 
with NPHP3 mutations showed renal-hepatic phenotype.

© 2015 Asian Pacific Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1111/nep.12563
PMID: 26184788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]