---
reference_id: "PMID:33807969"
title: "Sitosterolemia: Twenty Years of Discovery of the Function of ABCG5ABCG8."
authors:
- Williams K
- Segard A
- Graf GA
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/ijms22052641
keywords:
- "ATP Binding Cassette Transporter, Subfamily G, Member 5/genetics, history, metabolism"
- "ATP Binding Cassette Transporter, Subfamily G, Member 8/genetics, history, metabolism"
- Animals
- Cholesterol/metabolism
- "Enterocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- "Hepatocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- "History, 21st Century"
- Humans
- "Hypercholesterolemia/genetics, history, metabolism, pathology"
- "Intestinal Diseases/genetics, history, metabolism, pathology"
- "Lipid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics, history, metabolism, pathology"
- "Lipoproteins/genetics, history, metabolism"
- Mutation
- "Phytosterols/adverse effects, genetics, history, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sitosterolemia: Twenty Years of Discovery of the Function of ABCG5ABCG8.
**Authors:** Williams K, Segard A, Graf GA
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms22052641](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22052641)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Mar 5;22(5):2641. doi: 10.3390/ijms22052641.

Sitosterolemia: Twenty Years of Discovery of the Function of ABCG5ABCG8.

Williams K(1), Segard A(1), Graf GA(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of
Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536, USA.
(2)Saha Cardiovascular Research Center, Lexington, KY 40536, USA.
(3)Barnstable Brown Diabetes and Obesity Center, Lexington, KY 40536, USA.

Sitosterolemia is a lipid disorder characterized by the accumulation of dietary
xenosterols in plasma and tissues caused by mutations in either ABCG5 or ABCG8.
ABCG5 ABCG8 encodes a pair of ABC half transporters that form a heterodimer
(G5G8), which then traffics to the surface of hepatocytes and enterocytes and
promotes the secretion of cholesterol and xenosterols into the bile and the
intestinal lumen. We review the literature from the initial description of the
disease, the discovery of its genetic basis, current therapy, and what has been
learned from animal, cellular, and molecular investigations of the transporter
in the twenty years since its discovery. The genomic era has revealed that there
are far more carriers of loss of function mutations and likely pathogenic
variants of ABCG5 ABCG8 than previously thought. The impact of these variants on
G5G8 structure and activity are largely unknown. We propose a classification
system for ABCG5 ABCG8 mutants based on previously published systems for
diseases caused by defects in ABC transporters. This system establishes a
framework for the comprehensive analysis of disease-associated variants and
their impact on G5G8 structure-function.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22052641
PMCID: PMC7961684
PMID: 33807969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
