---
reference_id: "PMID:35294812"
title: Inhibition of Prekallikrein for Hereditary Angioedema.
authors:
- Fijen LM
- Riedl MA
- Bordone L
- Bernstein JA
- Raasch J
- Tachdjian R
- Craig T
- Lumry WR
- Manning ME
- Alexander VJ
- Newman KB
- Revenko A
- Baker BF
- Nanavati C
- MacLeod AR
- Schneider E
- Cohn DM
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2109329
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Angioedemas, Hereditary/drug therapy"
- Disease-Free Survival
- Drug Administration Schedule
- "Oligonucleotides, Antisense/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Patient Acuity
- "Prekallikrein/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- Quality of Life
- "RNA, Messenger/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Oligonucleotides
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inhibition of Prekallikrein for Hereditary Angioedema.
**Authors:** Fijen LM, Riedl MA, Bordone L, Bernstein JA, Raasch J, Tachdjian R, Craig T, Lumry WR, Manning ME, Alexander VJ, Newman KB, Revenko A, Baker BF, Nanavati C, MacLeod AR, Schneider E, Cohn DM
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2109329](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2109329)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2022 Mar 17;386(11):1026-1033. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2109329.

Inhibition of Prekallikrein for Hereditary Angioedema.

Fijen LM(1), Riedl MA(1), Bordone L(1), Bernstein JA(1), Raasch J(1), Tachdjian 
R(1), Craig T(1), Lumry WR(1), Manning ME(1), Alexander VJ(1), Newman KB(1), 
Revenko A(1), Baker BF(1), Nanavati C(1), MacLeod AR(1), Schneider E(1), Cohn 
DM(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Vascular Medicine, Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, 
Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam (L.M.F., D.M.C.); the Division 
of Rheumatology, Allergy, and Immunology, University of California, San Diego, 
La Jolla (M.A.R.), Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Carlsbad (L.B., V.J.A., K.B.N., A.R., 
B.F.B., C.N., A.R.M., E.S.), and the Division of Allergy, Immunology, and 
Rheumatology, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles (R.T.) - all in 
California; the Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Immunology-Allergy 
Section and the Bernstein Clinical Research Center, University of Cincinnati 
College of Medicine, Cincinnati (J.A.B.); the Midwest Immunology Clinic, 
Plymouth, MN (J.R.); the Department of Medicine and Pediatrics, Penn State 
Health Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology, Hershey, PA (T.C.); Asthma and Allergy 
Research Associates, Dallas (W.R.L.); and Medical Research of Arizona, 
Scottsdale (M.E.M.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2022 Mar 17;386(11):1083-1085. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe2201729.

BACKGROUND: Hereditary angioedema is characterized by recurrent and 
unpredictable swellings that are disabling and potentially fatal. Selective 
inhibition of plasma prekallikrein production by antisense oligonucleotide 
treatment (donidalorsen) may reduce the frequency of attacks and the burden of 
disease.
METHODS: In this phase 2 trial, we randomly assigned, in a 2:1 ratio, patients 
with hereditary angioedema with C1 inhibitor deficiency to receive four 
subcutaneous doses of either donidalorsen (80 mg) or placebo, with one dose 
administered every 4 weeks. The primary end point was the time-normalized number 
of investigator-confirmed angioedema attacks per month (attack rate) between 
week 1 (baseline) and week 17. Secondary end points included quality of life, as 
measured with the Angioedema Quality of Life Questionnaire (scores range from 0 
to 100, with higher scores indicating worse quality of life), and safety.
RESULTS: A total of 20 patients were enrolled, of whom 14 were randomly assigned 
to receive donidalorsen and 6 to receive placebo. The mean monthly rate of 
investigator-confirmed angioedema attacks was 0.23 (95% confidence interval 
[CI], 0.08 to 0.39) among patients receiving donidalorsen and 2.21 (95% CI, 0.58 
to 3.85) among patients receiving placebo (mean difference, -90%; 95% CI, -96 to 
-76; P<0.001). The mean change from baseline to week 17 in the Angioedema 
Quality of Life Questionnaire score was -26.8 points in the donidalorsen group 
and -6.2 points in the placebo group (mean difference, -20.7 points; 95% CI, 
-32.7 to -8.7). The incidence of mild-to-moderate adverse events was 71% among 
patients receiving donidalorsen and 83% among those receiving placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with hereditary angioedema, donidalorsen treatment 
resulted in a significantly lower rate of angioedema attacks than placebo in 
this small, phase 2 trial. (Funded by Ionis Pharmaceuticals; ISIS 721744-CS2 
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT04030598.).

Copyright © 2022 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2109329
PMID: 35294812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]