---
reference_id: "PMID:21199320"
title: A meta-analysis of pain response in the treatment of fibromyalgia.
authors:
- Roskell NS
- Beard SM
- Zhao Y
- Le TK
journal: Pain Pract
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1533-2500.2010.00441.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A meta-analysis of pain response in the treatment of fibromyalgia.
**Authors:** Roskell NS, Beard SM, Zhao Y, Le TK
**Journal:** Pain Pract (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1533-2500.2010.00441.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1533-2500.2010.00441.x)

## Content

1. Pain Pract. 2011 Nov-Dec;11(6):516-27. doi: 10.1111/j.1533-2500.2010.00441.x. 
Epub 2010 Dec 28.

A meta-analysis of pain response in the treatment of fibromyalgia.

Roskell NS(1), Beard SM, Zhao Y, Le TK.

Author information:
(1)Statistics, RTI Health Solutions, Manchester, U.K. nroskell@rti.org

OBJECTIVE: This meta-analysis compared efficacy (pain response) of drugs that 
are licensed or commonly used in the treatment of fibromyalgia. A meta-analysis 
of safety measured via discontinuation because of adverse events was also 
performed.
METHODS: We conducted a meta-analysis of 21 clinical trials to estimate 
treatment differences vs. placebo, separately, for duloxetine, fluoxetine, 
gabapentin, milnacipran, pramipexole, pregabalin, either of two tricyclic 
antidepressants, and tramadol plus paracetamol. Indirect treatment comparisons 
using mixed treatment comparisons methodology were conducted for all pairwise 
comparisons. Pain response was analyzed as improvement of at least 30%, and 
separately of 50%, from baseline.
RESULTS: When compared with placebo, statistically significant pain responses 
(improvement of 30% and 50%) were observed for patients treated with duloxetine, 
milnacipran 200 mg/day, pregabalin 300 or 450 mg/day, and tramadol plus 
paracetamol. Treatment with fluoxetine, gabapentin, or milnacipran 100 mg/day 
resulted in significant findings for the 30% improvement in pain response. The 
meta-analysis showed a statistically increased risk of discontinuation because 
of adverse events for milnacipran 100 and 200 mg/day (both P < 0.001), and 
pregabalin 300 and 450 mg/day (P = 0.009 and P < 0.001, respectively). All other 
treatments, except fluoxetine, showed numerically increased risk over placebo 
for discontinuation because of adverse events. In the indirect comparisons, no 
pairwise comparison of active treatments reached statistical significance for 
either pain response end point.
CONCLUSION: All eight active treatments displayed evidence suggesting 
improvement over placebo in the treatment of pain in patients suffering from 
fibromyalgia. Indirect comparison of active treatments found no strong 
differences.

© 2011 RTI Health Solutions. Pain Practice © 2011 World Institute of Pain.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1533-2500.2010.00441.x
PMID: 21199320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]