---
reference_id: "PMID:3124348"
title: An immunohistochemical and electron microscopic study of extra-renal basement membranes in dogs with Samoyed hereditary glomerulopathy.
authors:
- Thorner PS
- Jansen B
- Baumal R
- Harrison RV
- Mount RJ
- Valli VE
- Spicer PM
- Marrano PM
journal: Virchows Arch A Pathol Anat Histopathol
year: '1988'
doi: 10.1007/BF00737153
keywords:
- Animals
- Anti-Glomerular Basement Membrane Disease/immunology
- Autoantigens/analysis
- Basement Membrane/immunology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Dogs
- "Ear, Inner/ultrastructure"
- Female
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- Genetic Carrier Screening
- Humans
- "Kidney Glomerulus/pathology, ultrastructure"
- "Lens, Crystalline/ultrastructure"
- Male
- "Microscopy, Electron"
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/pathology"
- Organ Specificity
- Reference Values
- Retina/ultrastructure
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An immunohistochemical and electron microscopic study of extra-renal basement membranes in dogs with Samoyed hereditary glomerulopathy.
**Authors:** Thorner PS, Jansen B, Baumal R, Harrison RV, Mount RJ, Valli VE, Spicer PM, Marrano PM
**Journal:** Virchows Arch A Pathol Anat Histopathol (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF00737153](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00737153)

## Content

1. Virchows Arch A Pathol Anat Histopathol. 1988;412(3):281-90. doi:
10.1007/BF00737153.

An immunohistochemical and electron microscopic study of extra-renal basement
membranes in dogs with Samoyed hereditary glomerulopathy.

Thorner PS(1), Jansen B, Baumal R, Harrison RV, Mount RJ, Valli VE, Spicer PM,
Marrano PM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

Samoyed hereditary glomerulopathy (SHG) in dogs has been employed as a model for
human hereditary nephritis (HN), since affected dogs and patients show splitting
of glomerular capillary basement membranes by electron microscopy (EM) and
absent staining of glomerular capillaries for Goodpasture antigen (GPA) by
immunofluorescence (IF). EM and IF were used to examine basement membranes (BM)
in skin, lung, choroid plexus, lens, retina, and inner ear in SHG. By EM, BM in
these tissues appeared similar in affected male, carrier female, and unaffected
dogs. By IF, GPA could be detected only in lens capsule, internal limiting
membrane of retina and basilar membrane of inner ear of unaffected and carrier
female dogs, but not in affected male dogs. However, eye abnormalities and
hearing loss were not present in any dogs, in contrast to their frequent
occurrence in human HN. Our findings on extra-renal BM in SHG suggest that GPA
is not required to maintain normal vision or hearing in affected male dogs and
permit a greater understanding of the pathogenesis of human HN.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00737153
PMID: 3124348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
