---
reference_id: "PMID:16860627"
title: Clinical and diagnostic significance of preoperative computed tomography findings of ascites in patients with advanced gastric cancer.
authors:
- Yajima K
- Kanda T
- Ohashi M
- Wakai T
- Nakagawa S
- Sasamoto R
- Hatakeyama K
journal: Am J Surg
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.amjsurg.2006.05.007
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma/complications, secondary, surgery"
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Ascites/diagnostic imaging, etiology, mortality"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Japan/epidemiology
- Laparotomy
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Staging
- "Peritoneal Neoplasms/complications, secondary, surgery"
- Preoperative Care/methods
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- "Stomach Neoplasms/complications, diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Survival Rate
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and diagnostic significance of preoperative computed tomography findings of ascites in patients with advanced gastric cancer.
**Authors:** Yajima K, Kanda T, Ohashi M, Wakai T, Nakagawa S, Sasamoto R, Hatakeyama K
**Journal:** Am J Surg (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amjsurg.2006.05.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjsurg.2006.05.007)

## Content

1. Am J Surg. 2006 Aug;192(2):185-90. doi: 10.1016/j.amjsurg.2006.05.007.

Clinical and diagnostic significance of preoperative computed tomography
findings of ascites in patients with advanced gastric cancer.

Yajima K(1), Kanda T, Ohashi M, Wakai T, Nakagawa S, Sasamoto R, Hatakeyama K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Digestive and General Surgery, Niigata University Graduate School
of Medical and Dental Sciences, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The relationship between ascites, as detected by preoperative
computed tomography (CT), and peritoneal metastasis of gastric cancer requires
clarification because of its likely significance for clinical outcome.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis of 293 patients with advanced gastric cancer
investigated the association between preoperative CT findings of ascites and
surgical findings of peritoneal washing cytology and peritoneal metastasis.
RESULTS: Forty-five of 293 patients (15%) presented with ascites on preoperative
CT. Positive ascites on CT predicted the presence of free tumor cells with 40%
sensitivity and 97% specificity, and peritoneal metastasis with 51% sensitivity
and 97% specificity. Ascites on CT was an independent prognostic factor by
univariate (P < .001) and multivariate (relative risk, 2.03; 95% confidence
interval, 1.39-2.96; P < .001) analyses. The median survival time was 6.0 months
in patients with positive ascites on CT.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of ascites on CT suggests the presence of peritoneal
metastasis and indicates a poor prognosis. The presence of peritoneal metastasis
should be confirmed by diagnostic laparoscopy in gastric cancer patients with
ascites.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjsurg.2006.05.007
PMID: 16860627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
