---
reference_id: "PMID:37715354"
title: "Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy caused by Fabry disease: implications for surgical myectomy."
authors:
- Frustaci A
- Borghetti V
- Pentiricci S
- Verardo R
- Scialla R
- Russo MA
journal: ESC Heart Fail
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ehf2.14427
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy caused by Fabry disease: implications for surgical myectomy.
**Authors:** Frustaci A, Borghetti V, Pentiricci S, Verardo R, Scialla R, Russo MA
**Journal:** ESC Heart Fail (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ehf2.14427](https://doi.org/10.1002/ehf2.14427)

## Content

1. ESC Heart Fail. 2023 Dec;10(6):3710-3713. doi: 10.1002/ehf2.14427. Epub 2023
Sep  15.

Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy caused by Fabry disease: implications 
for surgical myectomy.

Frustaci A(1), Borghetti V(2), Pentiricci S(3), Verardo R(4), Scialla R(4), 
Russo MA(5).

Author information:
(1)IRCCS San Raffaele Rome, Rome, Italy.
(2)Cardiac Surgery Complex Structure of the "S. Maria" Hospital of Terni, Terni, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Cardiovascular, Hospital Papa Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, Italy.
(4)Cellular and Molecular Cardiology Lab, IRCCS L. Spallanzani, Rome, Italy.
(5)MEBIC Consortium, San Raffaele Open University and (6) IRCCS San Raffaele 
Pisana, Rome, Italy.

Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy can be the phenotype of storage 
disorders as Fabry disease cardiomyopathy. In this instance, its recognition 
through GLA gene analysis and preventive administration of enzyme replacement 
therapy may reduce heart failure risk of surgical septal myectomy (SSM). A 
59-year-old man was referred for SSM as dyspnoea and low threshold muscle 
fatigue associated to severe left ventricular outflow obstruction (gradient of 
100 mmHg) due to both interventricular septal hypertrophy and mitral leaflet 
systolic anterior motion were not controlled by metoprolol 100 mg bid. 
Electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm and a complete left bundle branch block. 
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging showed a preserved left ventricular (LV) 
contractility (ejection fraction 70%) but failed to reveal reduced T1 mapping 
and fibrosis of postero-lateral LV wall suggesting Fabry disease cardiomyopathy. 
Cardiac catheterization and coronary angiography documented increased LV 
end-diastolic pressure but normal coronary arteries. SSM was followed by acute 
renal and heart failure with left ventricular ejection fraction declining to 
35%. Histology of SSM showed regularly arranged severely enlarged cardiomyocytes 
containing extensive vacuoles that were intensely positive to immunofluorescence 
with anti-Gb3 antibodies and appeared at electron microscopy to consist of 
myelin bodies suggesting the diagnosis of FD. This entity was confirmed by low 
blood levels of alpha-galactosidase A (0.8 nmol/mL/h; NV > 1), high values of 
Lyso-Gb3 (5.85 nmol/L; NV < 2.3), and the presence of the pathogenic mutation 
c.644A>G in the exon 5 of GLA gene. This study emphasizes the importance of a 
genetic screening for FD before SSM be considered for hypertrophic obstructive 
cardiomyopathy.

© 2023 The Authors. ESC Heart Failure published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on 
behalf of European Society of Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1002/ehf2.14427
PMCID: PMC10682850
PMID: 37715354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.