---
reference_id: "PMID:32124549"
title: "Do children and adolescents with completely resected alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma require adjuvant radiation? A report from the Children's Oncology Group."
authors:
- Aye JM
- Chi YY
- Tian J
- Rudzinski ER
- Binitie OT
- Dasgupta R
- Wolden SL
- Hawkins DS
- Gupta AA
journal: Pediatr Blood Cancer
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/pbc.28243
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Chemoradiotherapy, Adjuvant"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma, Alveolar/mortality, therapy"
- Survival Rate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Do children and adolescents with completely resected alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma require adjuvant radiation? A report from the Children's Oncology Group.
**Authors:** Aye JM, Chi YY, Tian J, Rudzinski ER, Binitie OT, Dasgupta R, Wolden SL, Hawkins DS, Gupta AA
**Journal:** Pediatr Blood Cancer (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pbc.28243](https://doi.org/10.1002/pbc.28243)

## Content

1. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2020 May;67(5):e28243. doi: 10.1002/pbc.28243. Epub 2020
 Mar 2.

Do children and adolescents with completely resected alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma 
require adjuvant radiation? A report from the Children's Oncology Group.

Aye JM(1), Chi YY(2), Tian J(2), Rudzinski ER(3), Binitie OT(4), Dasgupta R(5), 
Wolden SL(6), Hawkins DS(7), Gupta AA(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's of Alabama, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, College of Public Health and Health Professions 
College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida.
(3)Department of Pathology, Seattle Children's Hospital, University of 
Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(4)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins All Children's Hospital, St. Petersburg, 
Florida.
(5)Department of Pediatric General and Thoracic Surgery, Cincinnati Children's 
Medical Center, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(6)Department of Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, New York.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Seattle Children's Hospital, University of 
Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The role of adjuvant radiotherapy (RT) remains unclear in patients 
with localized, completely resected (group I) alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma (ARMS).
PROCEDURE: Patients with group I ARMS enrolled on any one of three prior 
Children's Oncology Group (COG) clinical trials (D9602, D9803, or ARST0531) were 
analyzed. All patients received systemic chemotherapy and 36 Gy adjuvant RT (if 
given) to the primary site at week 12 or week 4 for D9602/D9803 and ARST0531, 
respectively.
RESULTS: Thirty-six patients with group I ARMS were treated on D9602 (n = 6), 
D9803 (n = 17), or ARST0531 (n = 13), of whom 24 (67%) were male. The median age 
was 4.1 years (range, 0.8-45.8). Twenty (56%) patients had an unfavorable 
primary site, and 10 (28%) had tumors > 5 cm. FOXO1-fusion status was negative, 
positive, and unknown in 10 (28%), 15 (42%), and 11 (30%) tumors, respectively. 
Twenty-two (61%) patients received RT. Overall, the four-year event-free 
survival (EFS) and overall survival (OS) were 70.8% and 88.3%, respectively. 
Patients with FOXO1 positivity who received RT had superior EFS compared with 
those who did not (77.8% vs 16.7%; P = 0.03). Among 10 patients who were FOXO1 
negative, the outcome was similar with or without RT.
CONCLUSIONS: Although limited by a small sample size, data from this study 
support the routine use of adjuvant RT in patients with FOXO1-positive disease 
even after complete resection. Additionally, omitting adjuvant RT is rational 
for patients with FOXO1-negative ARMS and will be prospectively investigated in 
the current COG trial ARST1431.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/pbc.28243
PMCID: PMC7325864
PMID: 32124549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.