---
reference_id: "PMID:38539895"
title: "Light Pollution and Oxidative Stress: Effects on Retina and Human Health."
authors:
- Salceda R
journal: Antioxidants (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/antiox13030362
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Light Pollution and Oxidative Stress: Effects on Retina and Human Health.
**Authors:** Salceda R
**Journal:** Antioxidants (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/antiox13030362](https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox13030362)

## Content

1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2024 Mar 18;13(3):362. doi: 10.3390/antiox13030362.

Light Pollution and Oxidative Stress: Effects on Retina and Human Health.

Salceda R(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Fisiología Celular, Departamento de Neurodesarrollo y 
Fisiología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, C.P. 04510, Mexico City 
70-253, Mexico.

Visible light refers to the frequencies within the electromagnetic spectrum that 
humans can see, encompassing radiation with wavelengths falling between 380 nm 
to 760 nm. The energy of a single photon increases with its frequency. In the 
retina, photoreceptor cells contain light-sensitive pigments that absorb light 
and convert it into electrical stimuli through a process known as 
phototransduction. However, since the absorption spectrum of photoreceptors 
closely aligns with blue light (ranging from 400 to 500 nm), exposure to high 
light intensities or continuous illumination can result in oxidative stress 
within these cells, leading to a loss of their functionality. Apart from 
photoreceptor cells, the retina also houses photosensitive ganglion cells, known 
as intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells (ipRGCs). These cells 
relay information to the suprachiasmatic nucleus in the brain, playing a crucial 
role in modulating melatonin secretion, which in turn helps in synchronizing the 
body's circadian rhythms and responses to seasonal changes. Both, ipRGCs and 
skin possess a peak sensitivity to blue wavelengths, rendering them particularly 
susceptible to the effects of excessive blue light exposure. This study delves 
into the consequences of excessive illumination and/or prolonged exposure to 
blue light on retinal function and explores its implications for human health.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox13030362
PMCID: PMC10968061
PMID: 38539895

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.