---
reference_id: "PMID:18480098"
title: "Schizophrenia: a concise overview of incidence, prevalence, and mortality."
authors:
- McGrath J
- Saha S
- Chant D
- Welham J
journal: Epidemiol Rev
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1093/epirev/mxn001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Schizophrenia: a concise overview of incidence, prevalence, and mortality.
**Authors:** McGrath J, Saha S, Chant D, Welham J
**Journal:** Epidemiol Rev (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1093/epirev/mxn001](https://doi.org/10.1093/epirev/mxn001)

## Content

1. Epidemiol Rev. 2008;30:67-76. doi: 10.1093/epirev/mxn001. Epub 2008 May 14.

Schizophrenia: a concise overview of incidence, prevalence, and mortality.

McGrath J(1), Saha S, Chant D, Welham J.

Author information:
(1)Queensland Centre for Mental Health Research, The Park Centre for Mental 
Health, Wacol, Queensland 4076, Australia. john_mcgrath@qcmhr.uq.edu.au

Recent systematic reviews have encouraged the psychiatric research community to 
reevaluate the contours of schizophrenia epidemiology. This paper provides a 
concise overview of three related systematic reviews on the incidence, 
prevalence, and mortality associated with schizophrenia. The reviews shared key 
methodological features regarding search strategies, analysis of the 
distribution of the frequency estimates, and exploration of the influence of key 
variables (sex, migrant status, urbanicity, secular trend, economic status, and 
latitude). Contrary to previous interpretations, the incidence of schizophrenia 
shows prominent variation between sites. The median incidence of schizophrenia 
was 15.2/100,000 persons, and the central 80% of estimates varied over a 
fivefold range (7.7-43.0/100,000). The rate ratio for males:females was 1.4:1. 
Prevalence estimates also show prominent variation. The median lifetime morbid 
risk for schizophrenia was 7.2/1,000 persons. On the basis of the standardized 
mortality ratio, people with schizophrenia have a two- to threefold increased 
risk of dying (median standardized mortality ratio = 2.6 for all-cause 
mortality), and this differential gap in mortality has increased over recent 
decades. Compared with native-born individuals, migrants have an increased 
incidence and prevalence of schizophrenia. Exposures related to urbanicity, 
economic status, and latitude are also associated with various frequency 
measures. In conclusion, the epidemiology of schizophrenia is characterized by 
prominent variability and gradients that can help guide future research.

DOI: 10.1093/epirev/mxn001
PMID: 18480098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]