---
reference_id: "PMID:24154489"
title: Characterization of vemurafenib phototoxicity in a mouse model.
authors:
- Boudon SM
- Plappert-Helbig U
- Odermatt A
- Bauer D
journal: Toxicol Sci
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kft237
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antineoplastic Agents/chemistry, pharmacokinetics, radiation effects, toxicity"
- "Dermatitis, Phototoxic/etiology, pathology"
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- "Edema/chemically induced, pathology"
- "Erythema/chemically induced, pathology"
- Female
- "Indoles/chemistry, pharmacokinetics, radiation effects, toxicity"
- Local Lymph Node Assay
- Maximum Tolerated Dose
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
- NIH 3T3 Cells
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/chemistry, pharmacokinetics, radiation effects, toxicity"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- "Skin/drug effects, pathology, radiation effects"
- "Sulfonamides/chemistry, pharmacokinetics, radiation effects, toxicity"
- Time Factors
- Ultraviolet Rays/adverse effects
- Vemurafenib
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of vemurafenib phototoxicity in a mouse model.
**Authors:** Boudon SM, Plappert-Helbig U, Odermatt A, Bauer D
**Journal:** Toxicol Sci (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/toxsci/kft237](https://doi.org/10.1093/toxsci/kft237)

## Content

1. Toxicol Sci. 2014 Jan;137(1):259-67. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kft237. Epub 2013 Oct
 23.

Characterization of vemurafenib phototoxicity in a mouse model.

Boudon SM(1), Plappert-Helbig U, Odermatt A, Bauer D.

Author information:
(1)* Preclinical Safety, Novartis Institutes of BioMedical Research, 4002 Basel,
Switzerland.

Vemurafenib is a first-in-class, small molecule B-Raf kinase inhibitor for the
treatment of patients with unresectable or metastatic melanoma carrying the
BRAFV600E mutation, commercially available since 2011. A general phototoxic
potential was identified early during development; however, based on results of
an animal study in hairless rats, it was concluded that there would exist no
relevant risk for humans. Surprisingly, signs of clinical photosensitivity were
reported in many patients during clinical development. Therefore, it became a
fundamental question to understand this discrepancy. An established mouse model
(oral UV-Local Lymph Node Assay, UV-LLNA) for the assessment of in vivo
photosafety was used to investigate the impact of formulations, dose levels,
duration of treatment, and timing of irradiation. Moreover, a basic
pharmacokinetic profile was established within the same mouse strain. We were
able to demonstrate dose- and time-dependent phototoxicity of vemurafenib using
commercially available tablets (stabilized amorphous material). The lowest
phototoxic dose was 350 mg/kg administrated for 3 consecutive days followed by
exposure to UV-visible irradiation at a UVA-normalized dose of 10 J/cm². In
comparison, pure vemurafenib, which easily forms crystalline variants and is
known to have poor bioavailability, was tested at 350 mg/kg, and no signs of
phototoxicity could be seen. The most apparent difference between the early
study in hairless rats and this study in mice was the spectral range of the
irradiation light source (350-400 nm vs 320-700 nm). Because vemurafenib does
not absorb sufficiently light above 350 nm, this difference can easily explain
the negative earlier study result in hairless rats.

DOI: 10.1093/toxsci/kft237
PMID: 24154489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
