---
reference_id: "PMID:38361672"
title: Alcohol Use Unmasking Heterozygous Hereditary Hemochromatosis.
authors:
- Sozen S
- Shah A
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.52364
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alcohol Use Unmasking Heterozygous Hereditary Hemochromatosis.
**Authors:** Sozen S, Shah A
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.52364](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.52364)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Jan 16;16(1):e52364. doi: 10.7759/cureus.52364. eCollection 2024 
Jan.

Alcohol Use Unmasking Heterozygous Hereditary Hemochromatosis.

Sozen S(1)(2), Shah A(3).

Author information:
(1)Medicine, University of Vermont, Burlington, USA.
(2)Primary Care, Danbury Hospital, Danbury, USA.
(3)Internal Medicine, Nuvance Health, Brookfield, USA.

Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized 
by excess iron absorption in the body following a mutation in the HFE gene. 
Though prolonged iron deposition has been shown to cause clinical symptoms such 
as hyperpigmentation, arthralgias, and liver damage, many individuals remain 
asymptomatic and exhibit no signs of iron overload. Here, we present a case 
where a 34-year-old with a history of severe alcohol use disorder presented with 
high iron, ferritin and transferrin saturation levels indicative of iron 
overload. Further testing for HFE gene mutations revealed simple heterozygote 
C282Y status, confirming the diagnosis of hereditary hemochromatosis. Simple 
heterozygotes, however, typically do not present with any symptoms of iron 
overload. This patient was counseled on lifestyle modifications which included 
abstaining from alcohol and reducing iron and vitamin C intake. As a result, his 
iron panel parameters improved. Thus, our case highlights that excessive alcohol 
consumption can exacerbate hereditary hemochromatosis and risk for overload even 
among heterozygotes.

Copyright © 2024, Sozen et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.52364
PMCID: PMC10868447
PMID: 38361672

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.