---
reference_id: "PMID:30352532"
title: "Autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy: an update on diagnosis and treatment."
authors:
- Nakane S
- Mukaino A
- Higuchi O
- Watari M
- Maeda Y
- Yamakawa M
- Nakahara K
- Takamatsu K
- Matsuo H
- Ando Y
journal: Expert Rev Neurother
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1080/14737175.2018.1540304
keywords:
- 3-Iodobenzylguanidine
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- Autoantibodies/blood
- "Autoimmune Diseases of the Nervous System/diagnosis, immunology, therapy"
- "Ganglia, Autonomic/immunology"
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulins, Intravenous/therapeutic use"
- Myocardial Perfusion Imaging
- Plasma Exchange
- Radiopharmaceuticals
- "Receptors, Nicotinic/immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy: an update on diagnosis and treatment.
**Authors:** Nakane S, Mukaino A, Higuchi O, Watari M, Maeda Y, Yamakawa M, Nakahara K, Takamatsu K, Matsuo H, Ando Y
**Journal:** Expert Rev Neurother (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14737175.2018.1540304](https://doi.org/10.1080/14737175.2018.1540304)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Neurother. 2018 Dec;18(12):953-965. doi: 
10.1080/14737175.2018.1540304. Epub 2018 Nov 1.

Autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy: an update on diagnosis and treatment.

Nakane S(1)(2), Mukaino A(1)(2), Higuchi O(3), Watari M(1), Maeda Y(3), Yamakawa 
M(1), Nakahara K(1), Takamatsu K(1), Matsuo H(3), Ando Y(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences , Kumamoto 
University , Kumamoto , Japan.
(2)b Department of Molecular Neurology and Therapeutics , Kumamoto University 
Hospital , Kumamoto , Japan.
(3)c Department of Neurology and Clinical Research , Nagasaki Kawatana Medical 
Center , Nagasaki , Japan.

Autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy (AAG) is an acquired immune-mediated 
disorder that leads to autonomic failure. The disorder is associated with 
autoantibodies to the ganglionic nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (gAChR). We 
subsequently reported that AAG is associated with an overrepresentation of 
psychiatric symptoms, sensory disturbance, autoimmune diseases, and endocrine 
disorders. Area covered: The aim of this review was to describe AAG and 
highlight its pivotal pathophysiological aspects, clinical features, laboratory 
examinations, and therapeutic options. Expert commentary: AAG is a complex 
neuroimmunological disease, these days considered as an autonomic failure with 
extra-autonomic manifestations (and various limited forms). Further 
comprehension of the pathophysiology of this disease is required, especially the 
mechanisms of the extra-autonomic manifestations should be elucidated. There is 
the possibility that the co-presence of antibodies that were directed against 
the other subunits in both the central and peripheral nAChRs in the serum of the 
AAG patients. Some patients improve with immunotherapies such as IVIg and/or 
corticosteroid and/or plasma exchange. 123I-MIBG myocardial scintigraphy may be 
a useful tool to monitor the therapeutic effects of immunotherapies.

DOI: 10.1080/14737175.2018.1540304
PMID: 30352532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]