---
reference_id: "PMID:17067502"
title: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in athletes.
authors:
- Schroeder EL
- Lavallee ME
journal: Curr Sports Med Rep
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1097/01.csmr.0000306439.59477.83
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in athletes.
**Authors:** Schroeder EL, Lavallee ME
**Journal:** Curr Sports Med Rep (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.csmr.0000306439.59477.83](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.csmr.0000306439.59477.83)

## Content

1. Curr Sports Med Rep. 2006 Dec;5(6):327-34. doi: 
10.1097/01.csmr.0000306439.59477.83.

Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in athletes.

Schroeder EL(1), Lavallee ME.

Author information:
(1)Memorial Sports Medicine Institute, 111 West Jefferson Boulevard, Suite 100, 
South Bend, IN 46601, USA.

Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) should be considered in the evaluation of the 
hypermobile athlete. EDS is a group of inheritable connective tissue disorders 
affecting collagen and is characterized by articular hypermobility, skin 
extensibility, and tissue fragility. The most common findings in the active 
athlete are joint pain or instability, tissue fragility, or joint dislocations. 
Other common findings include "cigarette paper" scarring over bony prominences, 
pes planus, mitral valve prolapse, hyperelastic thin skin, and internal organ 
involvement. The vascular type has an increased risk of sudden death secondary 
to catastrophic events such as aortic or visceral rupture. Although there are 
some genetic laboratory tests currently available, a careful history and 
physical examination are most helpful in diagnosing athletes with this disorder. 
Previous classification systems were confusing, but the 1997 revised nosology 
simplified the classification of EDS into six types (three major, three minor). 
Preparticipation cardiothoracic and orthopedic screening is highly recommended 
for athletes with EDS, and appropriate cardiovascular, orthopedic, 
gastrointestinal, neurologic, and dermatologic management can often allow 
patients with EDS to remain active.

DOI: 10.1097/01.csmr.0000306439.59477.83
PMID: 17067502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]