---
reference_id: "PMID:8723084"
title: "Kniest dysplasia: radiologic, histopathological, and scanning electronmicroscopic findings."
authors:
- Gilbert-Barnes E
- Langer LO Jr
- Opitz JM
- Laxova R
- Sotelo-Arila C
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '1996'
doi: "10.1002/(SICI)1096-8628(19960503)63:1<34::AID-AJMG9>3.0.CO;2-S"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kniest dysplasia: radiologic, histopathological, and scanning electronmicroscopic findings.
**Authors:** Gilbert-Barnes E, Langer LO Jr, Opitz JM, Laxova R, Sotelo-Arila C
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1002/(SICI)1096-8628(19960503)63:1<34::AID-AJMG9>3.0.CO;2-S](https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1096-8628(19960503)63:1<34::AID-AJMG9>3.0.CO;2-S)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 1996 May 3;63(1):34-45. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1096-8628(19960503)63:1<34::AID-AJMG9>3.0.CO;2-S.

Kniest dysplasia: radiologic, histopathological, and scanning 
electronmicroscopic findings.

Gilbert-Barnes E(1), Langer LO Jr, Opitz JM, Laxova R, Sotelo-Arila C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of South Florida, Tampa, USA.

We describe severe neonatal Kniest dysplasia. Radiological findings in a severe 
case include short bowed tubular bones with exaggerated metaphyseal flare, 
moderate platyspondyly with vertical clefts of the vertebral bodies, and 
characteristically shaped iliac bones. Pathologic findings included a 
disorganized physeal growth plate, soft crumbly cartilage with a "Swiss-cheese" 
appearance, and diastase resistant intracytoplasmic inclusions in the resting 
chondrocytes. Transmission electronmicroscopy showed dilated cisternae of rough 
endoplasmic reticulum with finely granular material of accumulated protein. 
Scanning electronmicroscopy documented striking fragmentation and disintegration 
of collagen fibrils resulting in a web-like pattern and large open cyst-like 
spaces, and deficiency and disorganization of the collagen fibrils.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1096-8628(19960503)63:1<34::AID-AJMG9>3.0.CO;2-S
PMID: 8723084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]