---
reference_id: "PMID:22657098"
title: "Granulomatous cheilitis: a report of 6 cases and a review of the literature."
authors:
- Martínez Martínez ML
- Azaña-Defez JM
- Pérez-García LJ
- López-Villaescusa MT
- Rodríguez Vázquez M
- Faura Berruga C
journal: Actas Dermosifiliogr
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ad.2012.02.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Granulomatous cheilitis: a report of 6 cases and a review of the literature.
**Authors:** Martínez Martínez ML, Azaña-Defez JM, Pérez-García LJ, López-Villaescusa MT, Rodríguez Vázquez M, Faura Berruga C
**Journal:** Actas Dermosifiliogr (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ad.2012.02.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ad.2012.02.005)

## Content

1. Actas Dermosifiliogr. 2012 Oct;103(8):718-24. doi: 10.1016/j.ad.2012.02.005. 
Epub 2012 May 30.

Granulomatous cheilitis: a report of 6 cases and a review of the literature.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Martínez Martínez ML(1), Azaña-Defez JM, Pérez-García LJ, López-Villaescusa MT, 
Rodríguez Vázquez M, Faura Berruga C.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Dermatología, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Albacete, 
Albacete, España. mlmartinezm@sescam.jccm.es

Comment in
    Actas Dermosifiliogr. 2013 May;104(4):360. doi: 
10.1016/j.adengl.2012.12.001.
    Actas Dermosifiliogr. 2013 May;104(4):361. doi: 
10.1016/j.adengl.2012.12.002.

INTRODUCTION: Granulomatous cheilitis (Miescher cheilitis), a condition 
characterized by recurrent swelling of the lips, is the most common 
monosymptomatic form of the Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome. The aim of this study 
was to study the characteristics of patients diagnosed with granulomatous 
cheilitis at the dermatology department of our hospital over a period of 17 
years.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We performed a descriptive study of patients diagnosed 
with granulomatous cheilitis at our hospital between January 1993 and January 
2010.
RESULTS: The condition was diagnosed in 6 patients (4 women and 2 men), with a 
mean age of 49 years at the time of diagnosis. All the patients had recurrent 
swelling of the upper lip and 2 also had swelling in other parts of the face. 
The mean time from the onset of symptoms to the initial visit was approximately 
16 months. There were no cases of facial palsy, and just 1 patient had a 
fissured tongue. None of the patients developed Crohn disease or any other 
granulomatous disorders during follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: Granulomatous cheilitis is a rare disease. None of the patients in 
our series had gastrointestinal or neurologic symptoms. Accordingly, we believe 
that granulomatous cheilitis is an independent orofacial granulomatous disease 
which most often presents without accompanying signs or symptoms.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier España, S.L. y AEDV. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ad.2012.02.005
PMID: 22657098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]