---
reference_id: "PMID:35524799"
title: "Intrinsic differences in rod and cone membrane composition: implications for cone degeneration."
authors:
- Verra DM
- Spinnhirny P
- Sandu C
- Grégoire S
- Acar N
- Berdeaux O
- Brétillon L
- Sparrow JR
- Hicks D
journal: Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00417-022-05684-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intrinsic differences in rod and cone membrane composition: implications for cone degeneration.
**Authors:** Verra DM, Spinnhirny P, Sandu C, Grégoire S, Acar N, Berdeaux O, Brétillon L, Sparrow JR, Hicks D
**Journal:** Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00417-022-05684-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00417-022-05684-9)

## Content

1. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2022 Oct;260(10):3131-3148. doi: 
10.1007/s00417-022-05684-9. Epub 2022 May 7.

Intrinsic differences in rod and cone membrane composition: implications for 
cone degeneration.

Verra DM(#)(1), Spinnhirny P(#)(1), Sandu C(1), Grégoire S(2)(3)(4), Acar 
N(2)(3)(4), Berdeaux O(2)(3)(4), Brétillon L(2)(3)(4), Sparrow JR(5), Hicks 
D(6).

Author information:
(1)Département de Neurobiologie des Rythmes, Institut des Neurosciences 
Cellulaires et Intégratives, CNRS UPR 3212, 8 Allée Général Rouvillois, 67000, 
Strasbourg Cedex, France.
(2)UMR 1324 Centre des Sciences du Goût et de l'Alimentation, Eye and Nutrition 
Research Group, INRA, Dijon, France.
(3)UMR 6265 Centre des Sciences du Goût et de l'Alimentation, CNRS, Dijon, 
France.
(4)Centre des Sciences du Goût et de l'Alimentation, Université de Bourgogne, 
Dijon, France.
(5)Departments of Ophthalmology, and Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia 
University Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.
(6)Département de Neurobiologie des Rythmes, Institut des Neurosciences 
Cellulaires et Intégratives, CNRS UPR 3212, 8 Allée Général Rouvillois, 67000, 
Strasbourg Cedex, France. photoreceptor67@hotmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: In many retinal pathological conditions, rod and cone degeneration 
differs. For example, the early-onset maculopathy Stargardts disease type 1 
(STGD1) is typified by loss of cones while rods are often less affected. We 
wanted to examine whether there exist intrinsic membrane differences between 
rods and cones that might explain such features.
METHODS: Abca4 mRNA and protein levels were quantified in rod- and cone-enriched 
samples from wild-type and Nrl-/- mice retinas; rod- and cone-enriched outer 
segments (ROS and COS respectively) were prepared from pig retinas, and total 
lipids were analyzed by flame ionization, chromatography, and tandem mass 
spectrometry. Immunohistochemical staining of cone-rich rodent Arvicanthis 
ansorgei retinas was conducted, and ultra-high performance liquid chromatography 
of lipid species in porcine ROS and COS was performed.
RESULTS: Abca4 mRNA and Abca4 protein content was significantly higher (50-300%) 
in cone compared to rod-enriched samples. ROS and COS displayed dramatic 
differences in several lipids, including very long chain poly-unsaturated fatty 
acids (VLC-PUFAs), especially docosahexaenoic acid (DHA, 22:6n-3): ROS 20.6% 
DHA, COS 3.3% (p < 0.001). VLC-PUFAs (> 50 total carbons) were virtually absent 
from COS. COS were impoverished (> 6× less) in phosphatidylethanolamine compared 
to ROS. ELOVL4 ("ELOngation of Very Long chain fatty acids 4") antibody labelled 
Arvicanthis cones only very weakly compared to rods. Finally, there were large 
amounts (905 a.u.) of the bisretinoid A2PE in ROS, whereas it was much lower 
(121 a.u., ~ 7.5-fold less) in COS fractions. In contrast, COS contained 
fivefold higher amounts of all-trans-retinal dimer (115 a.u. compared to 22 a.u. 
in rods).
CONCLUSIONS: Compared to rods, cones expressed higher levels of Abca4 mRNA and 
Abca4 protein, were highly impoverished in PUFA (especially DHA) and 
phosphatidylethanolamine, and contained significant amounts of all-trans-retinal 
dimer. Based on these and other data, we propose that in contrast to rods, cones 
are preferentially vulnerable to stress and may die through direct cellular 
toxicity in pathologies such as STGD1.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00417-022-05684-9
PMCID: PMC9724003
PMID: 35524799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Conflict of interest The authors 
declare no competing interests.