---
reference_id: "PMID:22960754"
title: "Assistive hearing technologies among students with hearing impairment: factors that promote satisfaction."
authors:
- Rekkedal AM
journal: J Deaf Stud Deaf Educ
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/deafed/ens023
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Assistive hearing technologies among students with hearing impairment: factors that promote satisfaction.
**Authors:** Rekkedal AM
**Journal:** J Deaf Stud Deaf Educ (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/deafed/ens023](https://doi.org/10.1093/deafed/ens023)

## Content

1. J Deaf Stud Deaf Educ. 2012 Fall;17(4):499-517. doi: 10.1093/deafed/ens023.
Epub  2012 Sep 8.

Assistive hearing technologies among students with hearing impairment: factors 
that promote satisfaction.

Rekkedal AM(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Social Work and Health Science, Norwegian University of 
Technology, NO-7491 Trondheim, Norway. ann.m.rekkedal@svt.ntnu.no

Hearing technology can play an essential part in the education of deaf and 
hard-of-hearing children in inclusive schools. Few studies have examined these 
children's experiences with this technology. This article explores factors 
pertaining to children's use of and attitudes toward hearing technologies, such 
as hearing aids, cochlear implants, teacher-worn microphones, and student-worn 
microphones. The study included 153 deaf and hard-of-hearing students. All 
students communicated orally and were in inclusive schools from grades 5-10. The 
results suggest that males view hearing technology more positively than do 
females. Having severe hearing loss also promoted positive attitudes toward 
hearing aids and cochlear implants, but not toward microphones. The students 
with positive self-descriptions tended to be more satisfied with hearing aids or 
cochlear implants than the students with negative self-descriptions. The main 
factors promoting the use of hearing aids were severe hearing loss, positive 
attitudes toward hearing aids, and the sound quality of hearing aids.

DOI: 10.1093/deafed/ens023
PMID: 22960754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]