---
reference_id: "PMID:27855617"
title: "Eryptosis: Ally or Enemy."
authors:
- Briglia M
- Rossi MA
- Faggio C
journal: Curr Med Chem
year: '2017'
doi: 10.2174/0929867324666161118142425
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Eryptosis: Ally or Enemy.
**Authors:** Briglia M, Rossi MA, Faggio C
**Journal:** Curr Med Chem (2017)
**DOI:** [10.2174/0929867324666161118142425](https://doi.org/10.2174/0929867324666161118142425)

## Content

1. Curr Med Chem. 2017;24(9):937-942. doi: 10.2174/0929867324666161118142425.

Eryptosis: Ally or Enemy.

Briglia M(1), Rossi MA(1), Faggio C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical, Biological, Pharmaceutical and Environmental 
Sciences, University of Messina, Viale Ferdinando Stagno d`Alcontres, 31, 98166 
S.Agata-Messina, Italy.
(2)Department of Chemical, Biological, Pharmaceutical and Environmental 
Sciences, University of Messina, Viale Ferdinando Stagno d`Alcontres 31, 98166 
S.Agata-Messina, Italy.

Prior to senescence, erythrocytes may experience injury, which compromises their 
integrity and thus triggers suicidal erythrocyte death or eryptosis. This 
mechanism is characterised by cell shrinkage, cell membrane blebbing, and cell 
membrane phospholipid scrambling after phosphatidylserine exposure on the cell 
surface that is identified by macrophages, which engulf and degrade the 
eryptotic cells. The term eryptosis also includes typical mechanisms, which 
contribute to the triggering of this process, such as oxidative stress, Ca2+ 
entry with an increase in cytosolic Ca2+ activity ([Ca ]i) and the activation of 
p38 kinase, which is a kinase expressed in human erythrocytes and activated 
after hyperosmotic shock. Enhanced eryptosis has been observed in several 
clinical conditions such as diabetes, renal insufficiency, haemolytic uremic 
syndrome, sepsis, mycoplasma infection, malaria, iron deficiency, sickle cell 
anaemia, beta-thalassemia, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase-(G6PD) deficiency, 
hereditary spherocytosis, paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria, Wilson's 
disease, myelodysplastic syndrome, and phosphate depletion. Therefore, eryptosis 
may be considered as a useful mechanism of removal of defective erythrocytes to 
prevent haemolysis. Moreover, the clearance of infected erythrocytes in diseases 
such as malaria may counteract parasitemia. Indeed it is known that sickle-cell 
trait, beta-thalassemia trait, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD)- 
deficiency and iron deficiency confer some protection against a severe course of 
malaria. Importantly, strategies to control Plasmodium infection by inducing 
eryptosis are not expected to generate resistance of the pathogen, as the 
proteins involved in suicidal death of the host cell are not encoded by the 
pathogen and thus cannot be modified by mutations of its genes. However, 
excessive eryptosis could compromise microcirculation and lead to anemia.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/0929867324666161118142425
PMID: 27855617