---
reference_id: "PMID:33306870"
title: Defective INPP5E distribution in NPHP1-related Senior-Loken syndrome.
authors:
- Ning K
- Song E
- Sendayen BE
- Prosseda PP
- Chang KC
- Ghaffarieh A
- Alvarado JA
- Wang B
- Haider KM
- Berbari NF
- Hu Y
- Sun Y
journal: Mol Genet Genomic Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.1566
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defective INPP5E distribution in NPHP1-related Senior-Loken syndrome.
**Authors:** Ning K, Song E, Sendayen BE, Prosseda PP, Chang KC, Ghaffarieh A, Alvarado JA, Wang B, Haider KM, Berbari NF, Hu Y, Sun Y
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomic Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mgg3.1566](https://doi.org/10.1002/mgg3.1566)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2021 Jan;9(1):e1566. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.1566. Epub 2020 
Dec 11.

Defective INPP5E distribution in NPHP1-related Senior-Loken syndrome.

Ning K(1), Song E(1), Sendayen BE(1), Prosseda PP(1), Chang KC(1), Ghaffarieh 
A(2), Alvarado JA(1), Wang B(1), Haider KM(3), Berbari NF(4), Hu Y(1), Sun 
Y(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA, USA.
(2)Mass Eye and Ear Infirmary, Harvard School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(4)Department of Biology, Indiana University Purdue University in Indianapolis, 
Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(5)Palo Alto Veterans Administration Palo Alto, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Senior-Loken syndrome is a rare genetic disorder that presents with 
nephronophthisis and retinal degeneration, leading to end-stage renal disease 
and progressive blindness. The most frequent cause of juvenile nephronophthisis 
is a mutation in the nephronophthisis type 1 (NPHP1) gene. NPHP1 encodes the 
protein nephrocystin-1, which functions at the transition zone (TZ) of primary 
cilia.
METHODS: We report a 9-year-old Senior-Loken syndrome boy with NPHP1 deletion, 
who presents with bilateral vision decrease and cystic renal disease. Renal 
function deteriorated to require bilateral nephrectomy and renal transplant. We 
performed immunohistochemistry, H&E staining, and electron microscopy on the 
renal sample to determine the subcellular distribution of ciliary proteins in 
the absence of NPHP1.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry and electron microscopy of the resected kidney 
showed disorganized cystic structures with loss of cilia in renal tubules. 
Phosphoinositides have been recently recognized as critical components of the 
ciliary membrane and immunostaining of kidney sections for phosphoinositide 
5-phosphatase, INPP5E, showed loss of staining compared to healthy control. 
Ophthalmic examination showed decreased electroretinogram consistent with early 
retinal degeneration.
CONCLUSION: The decreased expression of INPP5E specifically in the primary 
cilium, coupled with disorganized cilia morphology, suggests a novel role of 
NPHP1 that it is involved in regulating ciliary phosphoinositide composition in 
the ciliary membrane of renal tubular cells.

© 2020 The Authors. Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.1566
PMCID: PMC7963418
PMID: 33306870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no financial/non‐financial 
competing interest.