---
reference_id: "PMID:37701260"
title: Recurrent Intraventricular Haemorrhage in Cerebral Proliferative Angiopathy - A Case Report and Review of the Literature.
authors:
- Gerstl JVE
- Bernstock JD
- Kappel AD
- Torio EF
- Du R
journal: Neurohospitalist
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1177/19418744231180046
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recurrent Intraventricular Haemorrhage in Cerebral Proliferative Angiopathy - A Case Report and Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Gerstl JVE, Bernstock JD, Kappel AD, Torio EF, Du R
**Journal:** Neurohospitalist (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1177/19418744231180046](https://doi.org/10.1177/19418744231180046)

## Content

1. Neurohospitalist. 2023 Oct;13(4):345-350. doi: 10.1177/19418744231180046. Epub
 2023 May 29.

Recurrent Intraventricular Haemorrhage in Cerebral Proliferative Angiopathy - A 
Case Report and Review of the Literature.

Gerstl JVE(1), Bernstock JD(1), Kappel AD(1), Torio EF(1), Du R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.

Cerebral proliferative angiopathy (CPA) is an entity distinct from that of 
classical arteriovenous malformations. As such, few reports have considered the 
long-term follow-up of patients with hemorrhage in CPA. Accordingly, herein the 
authors present a case of recurrent hemorrhage in CPA with 32 years of follow-up 
and in so doing summarize the literature of hemorrhagic cases in CPA. A 
19-year-old presented with focal awareness seizures and diagnostic work-up 
revealed a left hemispheric vascular lesion. The patient presented again with 
intracranial hemorrhage at ages 28, 43 and 51. Angioarchitectural workup 
revealed intermingled brain parenchyma between vascular spaces, absence of 
dominant feeders and a clear nidus consistent with CPA. The size and diffuse 
nature of the lesion deemed it inoperable. Given our case and review of the 
literature it is apparent that CPA has a high risk of re-hemorrhage in the rare 
event that hemorrhage does occur.

© The Author(s) 2023.

DOI: 10.1177/19418744231180046
PMCID: PMC10494813
PMID: 37701260

Conflict of interest statement: J.D.B. has an equity position in Treovir LLC and 
is a member of the POCKiT Diagnostics, NeuroX1 and Centile Bio Boards of 
Scientific Advisors. J.V.E.G., A. D. K., E.F.T. and R.D. report no conflicts.