---
reference_id: "PMID:33517396"
title: Molecular basis of ciliary defects caused by compound heterozygous IFT144/WDR19 mutations found in cranioectodermal dysplasia.
authors:
- Ishida Y
- Kobayashi T
- Chiba S
- Katoh Y
- Nakayama K
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddab034
keywords:
- "Bone and Bones/abnormalities, metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Cilia/metabolism, pathology"
- "Ciliopathies/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- "Craniosynostoses/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Cytoskeletal Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- "Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- "Mutation, Missense"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular basis of ciliary defects caused by compound heterozygous IFT144/WDR19 mutations found in cranioectodermal dysplasia.
**Authors:** Ishida Y, Kobayashi T, Chiba S, Katoh Y, Nakayama K
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddab034](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddab034)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2021 Apr 26;30(3-4):213-225. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddab034.

Molecular basis of ciliary defects caused by compound heterozygous IFT144/WDR19 
mutations found in cranioectodermal dysplasia.

Ishida Y(1), Kobayashi T(1), Chiba S(2), Katoh Y(1), Nakayama K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.
(2)Department of Genetic Disease Research, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 
City University, Abeno-ku, Osaka 545-8585, Japan.

Primary cilia contain specific proteins to achieve their functions as cellular 
antennae. Ciliary protein trafficking is mediated by the intraflagellar 
transport (IFT) machinery containing the IFT-A and IFT-B complexes. Mutations in 
genes encoding the IFT-A subunits (IFT43, IFT121/WDR35, IFT122, IFT139/TTC21B, 
IFT140 and IFT144/WDR19) often result in skeletal ciliopathies, including 
cranioectodermal dysplasia (CED). We here characterized the molecular and 
cellular defects of CED caused by compound heterozygous mutations in IFT144 [the 
missense variant IFT144(L710S) and the nonsense variant IFT144(R1103*)]. These 
two variants were distinct with regard to their interactions with other IFT-A 
subunits and with the IFT-B complex. When exogenously expressed in 
IFT144-knockout (KO) cells, IFT144(L710S) as well as IFT144(WT) rescued both 
moderately compromised ciliogenesis and the abnormal localization of ciliary 
proteins. As the homozygous IFT144(L710S) mutation was found to cause autosomal 
recessive retinitis pigmentosa, IFT144(L710S) is likely to be hypomorphic at the 
cellular level. In striking contrast, the exogenous expression of IFT144(R1103*) 
in IFT144-KO cells exacerbated the ciliogenesis defects. The expression of 
IFT144(R1103*) together with IFT144(WT) restored the abnormal phenotypes of 
IFT144-KO cells. However, the coexpression of IFT144(R1103*) with the 
hypomorphic IFT144(L710S) variant in IFT144-KO cells, which mimics the genotype 
of compound heterozygous CED patients, resulted in severe ciliogenesis defects. 
Taken together, these observations demonstrate that compound heterozygous 
mutations in IFT144 cause severe ciliary defects via a complicated mechanism, 
where one allele can cause severe ciliary defects when combined with a 
hypomorphic allele.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddab034
PMID: 33517396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]