---
reference_id: "PMID:23159534"
title: Polyglandular autoimmune syndrome type II.
authors:
- Kahaly GJ
journal: Presse Med
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2012.09.011
keywords:
- Adult
- Animals
- "Autoimmunity/genetics, physiology"
- Humans
- "Immunogenetic Phenomena/genetics, physiology"
- "Polyendocrinopathies, Autoimmune/classification, epidemiology, genetics, therapy"
- Prevalence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Polyglandular autoimmune syndrome type II.
**Authors:** Kahaly GJ
**Journal:** Presse Med (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lpm.2012.09.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lpm.2012.09.011)

## Content

1. Presse Med. 2012 Dec;41(12 P 2):e663-70. doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2012.09.011. Epub 
2012 Nov 16.

Polyglandular autoimmune syndrome type II.

Kahaly GJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Gutenberg University Medical Center, Department of Medicine I, 55101 Mainz, 
Germany. gkahaly@uni-mainz.de

The polyglandular autoimmune syndromes (PAS) comprise a wide spectrum of 
autoimmune disorders. There exist a juvenile (PAS I) and an adult type (PAS II). 
The nature of PAS has been based on the presence of lymphocyte infiltration in 
the affected gland, organ-specific antibodies in the serum, cellular immune 
defects and an association with the human leucocyte antigen (HLA) DR/DQ genes or 
immune response genes. Autoantibodies to the various endocrine and non-endocrine 
tissues not only offer a diagnostic clue to the autoimmune nature of diseases 
but also can be used to identify asymptomatic individuals who are at risk of 
developing other component diseases of the syndrome. Although target tissues or 
glands differ, several common threads link the diseases of PAS. A defect resides 
in one of the genes of the HLA locus which, in concert with other gene(s), 
results in susceptibility. Genetic susceptibility is necessary but not 
sufficient to produce the disorder. This is illustrated by the lack of 100% 
concordance of disease in identical twins. Genetic testing may identify patients 
with PAS I, but not those with PAS II. For PAS II, susceptibility genes are 
known which increase the risk for developing autoimmune disorders, but must not 
be causative. These are certain HLA genes, the cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 
(CTLA-4) gene, and the protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor type 22 
(PTPN22) genes on chromosomes 6, 2, and 1, respectively. When the genetic 
defects and environmental influences of organ-specific autoimmunity are better 
understood, it may be possible to devise specific replacement or corrective 
therapies. Given the similar features of many of the organ-specific autoimmune 
disorders, it is likely that if immunotherapeutic modalities are successful in 
one disease, they may be of benefit in related disorders.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lpm.2012.09.011
PMID: 23159534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]