---
reference_id: "PMID:26488620"
title: "Cholera Transmission in Ouest Department of Haiti: Dynamic Modeling and the Future of the Epidemic."
authors:
- Kirpich A
- Weppelmann TA
- Yang Y
- Ali A
- Morris JG Jr
- Longini IM
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004153
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cholera Transmission in Ouest Department of Haiti: Dynamic Modeling and the Future of the Epidemic.
**Authors:** Kirpich A, Weppelmann TA, Yang Y, Ali A, Morris JG Jr, Longini IM
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0004153](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0004153)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2015 Oct 21;9(10):e0004153. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0004153. eCollection 2015.

Cholera Transmission in Ouest Department of Haiti: Dynamic Modeling and the 
Future of the Epidemic.

Kirpich A(1), Weppelmann TA(2), Yang Y(1), Ali A(2), Morris JG Jr(3), Longini 
IM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics, College of Public Health and Health Professions 
and College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United 
States of America; Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, Florida, United States of America.
(2)Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, 
United States of America; Department of Environmental and Global Health, College 
of Public Health and Health Professions, University of Florida, Gainesville, 
Florida, United States of America.
(3)Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, 
United States of America; Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, 
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2016 Jan 06;10(1):e0004377. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0004377.

In the current study, a comprehensive, data driven, mathematical model for 
cholera transmission in Haiti is presented. Along with the inclusion of short 
cycle human-to-human transmission and long cycle human-to-environment and 
environment-to-human transmission, this novel dynamic model incorporates both 
the reported cholera incidence and remote sensing data from the Ouest Department 
of Haiti between 2010 to 2014. The model has separate compartments for 
infectious individuals that include different levels of infectivity to reflect 
the distribution of symptomatic and asymptomatic cases in the population. The 
environmental compartment, which serves as a source of exposure to toxigenic V. 
cholerae, is also modeled separately based on the biology of causative 
bacterium, the shedding of V. cholerae O1 by humans into the environment, as 
well as the effects of precipitation and water temperature on the concentration 
and survival of V. cholerae in aquatic reservoirs. Although the number of 
reported cholera cases has declined compared to the initial outbreak in 2010, 
the increase in the number of susceptible population members and the presence of 
toxigenic V. cholerae in the environment estimated by the model indicate that 
without further improvements to drinking water and sanitation infrastructures, 
intermittent cholera outbreaks are likely to continue in Haiti.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004153
PMCID: PMC4619523
PMID: 26488620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.