---
reference_id: "PMID:39139457"
title: "Non-ceruloplasmin copper and urinary copper in clinically stable Wilson disease: Alignment with recommended targets."
authors:
- Ott P
- Sandahl T
- Ala A
- Cassiman D
- Couchonnal-Bedoya E
- Cury RG
- Czlonkowska A
- Denk G
- "D'Inca R"
- de Assis Aquino Gondim F
- Moore J
- Poujois A
- Twardowschy CA
- Weiss KH
- Zuin M
- Kamlin COF
- Schilsky ML
journal: JHEP Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jhepr.2024.101115
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Non-ceruloplasmin copper and urinary copper in clinically stable Wilson disease: Alignment with recommended targets.
**Authors:** Ott P, Sandahl T, Ala A, Cassiman D, Couchonnal-Bedoya E, Cury RG, Czlonkowska A, Denk G, D'Inca R, de Assis Aquino Gondim F, Moore J, Poujois A, Twardowschy CA, Weiss KH, Zuin M, Kamlin COF, Schilsky ML
**Journal:** JHEP Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jhepr.2024.101115](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhepr.2024.101115)

## Content

1. JHEP Rep. 2024 May 6;6(8):101115. doi: 10.1016/j.jhepr.2024.101115.
eCollection  2024 Aug.

Non-ceruloplasmin copper and urinary copper in clinically stable Wilson disease:
Alignment with recommended targets.

Ott P(1), Sandahl T(1), Ala A(2), Cassiman D(3), Couchonnal-Bedoya E(4), Cury
RG(5), Czlonkowska A(6), Denk G(7), D'Inca R(8), de Assis Aquino Gondim F(9),
Moore J(10), Poujois A(11), Twardowschy CA(12), Weiss KH(13), Zuin M(14), Kamlin
COF(15), Schilsky ML(16).

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Hepatology and Gastroenterology, Aarhus University Hospital,8200
Aarhus C, Denmark.
(2)Institute of Liver Studies King's College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust,
London, UK.
(3)University Hospitals, Leuven - Department of Gastroenterology-Hepatology and
Dept. of Chronic Diseases and Metabolism, Herestraat 49, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.
(4)Hospices Civils de Lyon- Hôpital Femme Mère Enfant - Hépatologie,
Gastroentérologie et Nutrition pédiatrique, Centre de Référence de la maladie de
Wilson, 59 boulevard Pinel, 69677 BRON, France.
(5)Hospital das Clínicas da Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo,
R. Dr. Eneas de Carvalho Aguiar, 255- Cerqueira César, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(6)2 Depatment of Neurology, Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, 02 957
Warsaw, Poland.
(7)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik II/Transplantation Center, LMU Klinikum,
LMU Munich, Germany.
(8)Department of Surgical, Oncological and Gastroenterological Sciences,
University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(9)Nucleo de Pesquisa e Desenvolvimento de Medicamentos - Universidade Federal
do Ceará - Rodolfo Teófilo R. Coronel Nunes de Melo 1000, Fortaleza CE60430-275,
Brazil.
(10)Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust Merville Building, LS9 7TF Leeds, UK.
(11)Département de Neurologie, Centre de Reference de la Maladie de Wilson,
Hopital Fondation Adolphe de Rothschild, Paris, France.
(12)Hospital Nossa Senhora das Graças (HNSG), R. Alcides Munhoz, 433,
Curitiba-PR 80810, Brazil.
(13)Salem Medical Center, Dept. Of Internal Medicine, Zeppelinstr. 11-33,
Heidelberg 69121, Germany.
(14)U.O. Medicina Generale Epatologia e Gastroenterologia Medica ASST Santi
Paolo e Carlo. Via A. Di Rudinì, 8, Milano, Italy.
(15)Orphalan, 226 Boulevard Voltaire, Paris 75011, France.
(16)Departments of Medicine and Surgery, Sections of Digestive Diseases and
Transplant and Immunology, Yale School of Medicine, 333 Cedar St, LMP 1080, New
Haven - Connecticut 06510, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Wilson disease (WD) is caused by accumulation of copper
primarily in the liver and brain. During maintenance therapy of WD with
D-penicillamine, current guidelines recommend on-treatment ranges of urinary
copper excretion (UCE) of 200-500 μg/24 h and serum non-ceruloplasmin-bound
copper (NCC) of 50-150 μg/L. We compared NCC (measured by two novel assays) and
UCE from patients with clinically stable WD on D-penicillamine therapy with
these recommendations.
METHODS: This is a secondary analysis of data from the Chelate trial
(NCT03539952) that enrolled physician-selected patients with clinically stable
WD on D-penicillamine maintenance therapy (at an unaltered dose for at least 4
months). We analyzed laboratory samples from the first screening visit, prior to
interventions. NCC was measured by either protein speciation (NCC-Sp) using
anion exchange high-performance liquid chromatography protein speciation
followed by copper determination with inductively coupled plasma mass
spectroscopy or as exchangeable copper (NCC-Ex). NCC-Sp was also analyzed in
healthy controls (n = 75).
RESULTS: In 76 patients with WD with 21.3±14.3 average treatment-years, NCC-Sp
(mean±SD: 56.6±26.2 μg/L) and NCC-Ex (mean±SD: 57.9±24.7 μg/L) were within the
50-150 μg/L target in 61% and 54% of patients, respectively. In addition, 36%
and 31%, respectively, were even below the normal ranges (NCC-Sp: 46-213 μg/L,
NCC-Ex: 41-71 μg/L). NCC-Ex positively correlated with NCC-Sp (r2 = 0.66, p
<0.001) but with systematic deviation. UCE was outside the 200-500 μg/24 h
target range in 58%. Only 14/69 (20%) fulfilled both the NCC-Sp and UCE targets.
Clinical or biochemical signs of copper deficiency were not detected.
CONCLUSION: Clinically stable patients with WD on maintenance D-penicillamine
therapy frequently have lower NCC-Sp or higher UCE than current recommendations
without signs of overtreatment. Further studies are warranted to identify
appropriate target ranges of NCC-Sp, NCC-Ex and UCE in treated WD.
IMPACT AND IMPLICATIONS: Chelator treatment of patients with Wilson disease (WD)
is currently guided by measurements of non-ceruloplasmin-bound copper (NCC) and
24 h urinary copper excretion (UCE) but validation is limited. In 76 adults with
≈21 years history of treated WD and clinically stable disease on D-penicillamine
therapy, NCC was commonly found to be below normal values and recommended target
ranges whether measured by protein speciation (NCC-Sp) or as exchangeable copper
(NCC-Ex), while UCE values were above the recommended target range in 49%.
Common wisdom would suggest overtreatment in these cases, but no clinical or
biochemical signs of copper deficiency were observed. Exploratory analysis of
liver enzymes suggested that NCC below levels seen in controls may be
beneficial, while the relation to UCE was less clear. The data calls for
critical re-evaluation of target ranges for treatment of WD, specific for drug
and laboratory methodology.
CLINICAL TRIAL NUMBER: (NCT03539952).

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhepr.2024.101115
PMCID: PMC11321293
PMID: 39139457
