---
reference_id: "PMID:37354322"
title: Cell-specific MAPT gene expression is preserved in neuronal and glial tau cytopathologies in progressive supranuclear palsy.
authors:
- Forrest SL
- Lee S
- Nassir N
- Martinez-Valbuena I
- Sackmann V
- Li J
- Ahmed A
- Tartaglia MC
- Ittner LM
- Lang AE
- Uddin M
- Kovacs GG
journal: Acta Neuropathol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00401-023-02604-x
keywords:
- Humans
- Gene Expression
- Neuroglia/pathology
- Neurons/pathology
- "Supranuclear Palsy, Progressive/pathology"
- "tau Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cell-specific MAPT gene expression is preserved in neuronal and glial tau cytopathologies in progressive supranuclear palsy.
**Authors:** Forrest SL, Lee S, Nassir N, Martinez-Valbuena I, Sackmann V, Li J, Ahmed A, Tartaglia MC, Ittner LM, Lang AE, Uddin M, Kovacs GG
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00401-023-02604-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-023-02604-x)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol. 2023 Sep;146(3):395-414. doi: 10.1007/s00401-023-02604-x.
Epub  2023 Jun 24.

Cell-specific MAPT gene expression is preserved in neuronal and glial tau 
cytopathologies in progressive supranuclear palsy.

Forrest SL(1)(2)(3), Lee S(1), Nassir N(4), Martinez-Valbuena I(1), Sackmann 
V(1), Li J(1), Ahmed A(4), Tartaglia MC(1)(5), Ittner LM(2), Lang AE(6), Uddin 
M(4)(7), Kovacs GG(8)(9)(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Disease (CRND), University of 
Toronto, Krembil Discovery Tower, 60 Leonard Ave, Toronto, ON, M5T 0S8, Canada.
(2)Dementia Research Centre, Macquarie Medical School, Faculty of Medicine, 
Health and Human Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia.
(3)Laboratory Medicine Program and Krembil Brain Institute, University Health 
Network, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)College of Medicine, Mohammed Bin Rashid University of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Dubai, UAE.
(5)University Health Network Memory Clinic, Krembil Brain Institute, Toronto, 
ON, Canada.
(6)Edmond J. Safra Program in Parkinson's Disease, Rossy PSP Centre and the 
Morton and Gloria Shulman Movement Disorders Clinic, Toronto Western Hospital, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(7)Cellular Intelligence (Ci) Lab, GenomeArc Inc., Toronto, ON, Canada.
(8)Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Disease (CRND), University of 
Toronto, Krembil Discovery Tower, 60 Leonard Ave, Toronto, ON, M5T 0S8, Canada. 
gabor.kovacs@uhnresearch.ca.
(9)Dementia Research Centre, Macquarie Medical School, Faculty of Medicine, 
Health and Human Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia. 
gabor.kovacs@uhnresearch.ca.
(10)Laboratory Medicine Program and Krembil Brain Institute, University Health 
Network, Toronto, ON, Canada. gabor.kovacs@uhnresearch.ca.
(11)Edmond J. Safra Program in Parkinson's Disease, Rossy PSP Centre and the 
Morton and Gloria Shulman Movement Disorders Clinic, Toronto Western Hospital, 
Toronto, ON, Canada. gabor.kovacs@uhnresearch.ca.
(12)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology and Department of 
Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 
gabor.kovacs@uhnresearch.ca.

Microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) aggregates in neurons, astrocytes and 
oligodendrocytes in a number of neurodegenerative diseases, including 
progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP). Tau is a target of therapy and the 
strategy includes either the elimination of pathological tau aggregates or 
reducing MAPT expression, and thus the amount of tau protein made to prevent its 
aggregation. Disease-associated tau affects brain regions in a sequential manner 
that includes cell-to-cell spreading. Involvement of glial cells that show tau 
aggregates is interpreted as glial cells taking up misfolded tau assuming that 
glial cells do not express enough MAPT. Although studies have evaluated MAPT 
expression in human brain tissue homogenates, it is not clear whether MAPT 
expression is compromised in cells accumulating pathological tau. To address 
these perplexing aspects of disease pathogenesis, this study used RNAscope 
combined with immunofluorescence (AT8), and single-nuclear(sn) RNAseq to 
systematically map and quantify MAPT expression dynamics across different cell 
types and brain regions in controls (n = 3) and evaluated whether tau 
cytopathology affects MAPT expression in PSP (n = 3). MAPT transcripts were 
detected in neurons, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes, and varied between brain 
regions and within each cell type, and were preserved in all cell types with tau 
aggregates in PSP. These results propose a complex scenario in all cell types, 
where, in addition to the ingested misfolded tau, the preserved cellular MAPT 
expression provides a pool for local protein production that can (1) be 
phosphorylated and aggregated, or (2) feed the seeding of ingested misfolded tau 
by providing physiological tau, both accentuating the pathological process. 
Since tau cytopathology does not compromise MAPT gene expression in PSP, a 
complete loss of tau protein expression as an early pathogenic component is less 
likely. These observations provide rationale for a dual approach to therapy by 
decreasing cellular MAPT expression and targeting removal of misfolded tau.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-023-02604-x
PMCID: PMC10412651
PMID: 37354322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AEL has served as an advisor for AbbVie, 
AFFiRis, Alector, Amylyx, Aprinoia, Biogen, BioAdvance, BlueRock, Biovie, BMS, 
CoA Therapeutics, Denali, Janssen, Jazz, Lilly, Novartis, Paladin, Pharma 2B, 
PsychoGenetics, Retrophin, Roche, Sun Pharma, and UCB; received honoraria from 
Sun Pharma, AbbVie and Sunovion; received grants from Brain Canada, Canadian 
Institutes of Health Research, Edmond J Safra Philanthropic Foundation, Michael 
J. Fox Foundation, the Ontario Brain Institute, Parkinson Foundation, Parkinson 
Canada, and W. Garfield Weston Foundation; is serving as an expert witness in 
litigation related to paraquat and Parkinson’s disease, received publishing 
royalties from Elsevier, Saunders, Wiley-Blackwell, Johns Hopkins Press, and 
Cambridge University Press. GGK is member of the Acta Neuropathologica Editorial 
Board but was not involved in the editorial handling of this article. GGK has 
served as an advisor for Biogen; received royalty for 5G4 synuclein antibody and 
publishing royalties from Wiley, Cambridge University Press and Elsevier, 
received grants from Edmond J Safra Philanthropic Foundation, Rossy Foundation, 
Michael J. Fox Foundation, Parkinson Canada, Canada, Canada Foundation for 
Innovation, MSA Coalition, and National Institutes of Health (NIH). SLF, SL, NN, 
IMV, VS, JL, AA, MCT, LI, MU have no declarations of interest.