---
reference_id: "PMID:16651305"
title: Controlled clinical trial of dichloroacetate for treatment of congenital lactic acidosis in children.
authors:
- Stacpoole PW
- Kerr DS
- Barnes C
- Bunch ST
- Carney PR
- Fennell EM
- Felitsyn NM
- Gilmore RL
- Greer M
- Henderson GN
- Hutson AD
- Neiberger RE
- "O'Brien RG"
- Perkins LA
- Quisling RG
- Shroads AL
- Shuster JJ
- Silverstein JH
- Theriaque DW
- Valenstein E
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1542/peds.2005-1226
keywords:
- "Acidosis, Lactic/congenital, drug therapy, metabolism"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Dichloroacetic Acid/adverse effects, pharmacokinetics, therapeutic use"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Lactates/metabolism
- Male
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/drug therapy, metabolism"
- Neurologic Examination
- Neuropsychological Tests
- "Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex Deficiency Disease/drug therapy, metabolism"
- Quality of Life
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Controlled clinical trial of dichloroacetate for treatment of congenital lactic acidosis in children.
**Authors:** Stacpoole PW, Kerr DS, Barnes C, Bunch ST, Carney PR, Fennell EM, Felitsyn NM, Gilmore RL, Greer M, Henderson GN, Hutson AD, Neiberger RE, O'Brien RG, Perkins LA, Quisling RG, Shroads AL, Shuster JJ, Silverstein JH, Theriaque DW, Valenstein E
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.2005-1226](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2005-1226)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2006 May;117(5):1519-31. doi: 10.1542/peds.2005-1226.

Controlled clinical trial of dichloroacetate for treatment of congenital lactic
acidosis in children.

Stacpoole PW(1), Kerr DS, Barnes C, Bunch ST, Carney PR, Fennell EM, Felitsyn
NM, Gilmore RL, Greer M, Henderson GN, Hutson AD, Neiberger RE, O'Brien RG,
Perkins LA, Quisling RG, Shroads AL, Shuster JJ, Silverstein JH, Theriaque DW,
Valenstein E.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, University
of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA. stacpool@gcrc.ufl.edu

OBJECTIVE: Open-label studies indicate that oral dichloroacetate (DCA) may be
effective in treating patients with congenital lactic acidosis. We tested this
hypothesis by conducting the first double-blind, randomized, control trial of
DCA in this disease.
METHODS: Forty-three patients who ranged in age from 0.9 to 19 years were
enrolled. All patients had persistent or intermittent hyperlactatemia, and most
had severe psychomotor delay. Eleven patients had pyruvate dehydrogenase
deficiency, 25 patients had 1 or more defects in enzymes of the respiratory
chain, and 7 patients had a mutation in mitochondrial DNA. Patients were
preconditioned on placebo for 6 months and then were randomly assigned to
receive an additional 6 months of placebo or DCA, at a dose of 12.5 mg/kg every
12 hours. The primary outcome results were (1) a Global Assessment of Treatment
Efficacy, which incorporated tests of neuromuscular and behavioral function and
quality of life; (2) linear growth; (3) blood lactate concentration in the
fasted state and after a carbohydrate meal; (4) frequency and severity of
intercurrent illnesses and hospitalizations; and (5) safety, including tests of
liver and peripheral nerve function.
OUTCOME: There were no significant differences in Global Assessment of Treatment
Efficacy scores, linear growth, or the frequency or severity of intercurrent
illnesses. DCA significantly decreased the rise in blood lactate caused by
carbohydrate feeding. Chronic DCA administration was associated with a fall in
plasma clearance of the drug and with a rise in the urinary excretion of the
tyrosine catabolite maleylacetone and the heme precursor delta-aminolevulinate.
CONCLUSIONS: In this highly heterogeneous population of children with congenital
lactic acidosis, oral DCA for 6 months was well tolerated and blunted the
postprandial increase in circulating lactate. However, it did not improve
neurologic or other measures of clinical outcome.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2005-1226
PMID: 16651305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
