---
reference_id: "PMID:37808519"
title: Impaired cAMP processivity by phosphodiesterase-protein kinase A complexes in acrodysostosis.
authors:
- Venkatakrishnan V
- Ghode A
- Tulsian NK
- Anand GS
journal: Front Mol Biosci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2023.1202268
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impaired cAMP processivity by phosphodiesterase-protein kinase A complexes in acrodysostosis.
**Authors:** Venkatakrishnan V, Ghode A, Tulsian NK, Anand GS
**Journal:** Front Mol Biosci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmolb.2023.1202268](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmolb.2023.1202268)

## Content

1. Front Mol Biosci. 2023 Sep 21;10:1202268. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2023.1202268. 
eCollection 2023.

Impaired cAMP processivity by phosphodiesterase-protein kinase A complexes in 
acrodysostosis.

Venkatakrishnan V(#)(1), Ghode A(#)(2), Tulsian NK(2), Anand GS(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, 
United States.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore, Singapore.
(3)The Huck Institutes of the life sciences, Pennsylvania State University, 
University Park, PA, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

Acrodysostosis represents a group of rare genetic disorders characterized by 
defective skeletal development and is often accompanied by intellectual 
disabilities. Mutations in the 3'5'cyclic AMP (cAMP)-dependent protein kinase 
(PKA) type I regulatory subunit isoform α (RIα) and phosphodiesterase (PDE) 
PDE4D have both been implicated in impaired PKA regulation in acrodysostosis. 
How mutations on PDEs and RIα interfere with the regulation of cAMP-PKA 
signaling is not understood. cAMP-PKA signaling can be described in two phases. 
In the activation phase, cAMP binding to RIα dissociates the free C-subunit 
(Catalytic subunit). PDEs hydrolyze cAMP bound to RIα, priming the cAMP-free RIα 
for reassociation with the C-subunit, thereby completing one PKA activation 
cycle. Signal termination is thus critical for resetting PKA to its basal state 
and promoting adaptation to hormonal hyperstimulation. This proceeds through 
formation of a transient signal termination RIα: PDE complex that facilitates 
cAMP channeling from the cAMP-binding domain of RIα to the catalytic site of 
PDE. Signal termination of cAMP-PKA proceeds in three steps: Step 1) Channeling: 
translocation of cAMP from the CNB of RIα to the PDE catalytic site for 
hydrolysis. Step 2) Processivity: binding of free cAMP from the cytosol at both 
CNBs of RIα. Step 3) Product (5'AMP) release from the PDE hydrolysis site 
through competitive displacement by a new molecule of cAMP that triggers 
subsequent activation cycles of PKA. We have identified the molecular basis for 
two acrodysostosis mutants, PDE (PDE8 T690P) and RIα (T207A), that both 
allosterically impair cAMP-PKA signal termination. A combination of amide 
hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDXMS) and fluorescence 
polarization (FP) reveals that PDE8 T690P and RIα T207A both blocked processive 
hydrolysis of cAMP by interfering with competitive displacement of product 5'AMP 
release from the nucleotide channel at the end of each round of cAMP hydrolysis. 
While T690P blocked product 5'AMP release from the PDE, T207A greatly slowed the 
release of the substrate from RIα. These results highlight the role of 
processivity in cAMP hydrolysis by RIα: PDE termination complexes for adaptation 
to cAMP from GPCR hyperstimulation. Impairment of the signal termination process 
provides an alternate molecular basis for acrodysostosis.

Copyright © 2023 Venkatakrishnan, Ghode, Tulsian and Anand.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2023.1202268
PMCID: PMC10552185
PMID: 37808519

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.