---
reference_id: "PMID:37681230"
title: Clinicopathologic study of stage I adenosquamous carcinoma of the lung.
authors:
- Handa Y
- Ikeda T
- Hanaki H
- Miyata Y
- Mukaida H
- Okada M
journal: Jpn J Clin Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/jjco/hyad122
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinicopathologic study of stage I adenosquamous carcinoma of the lung.
**Authors:** Handa Y, Ikeda T, Hanaki H, Miyata Y, Mukaida H, Okada M
**Journal:** Jpn J Clin Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jjco/hyad122](https://doi.org/10.1093/jjco/hyad122)

## Content

1. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2023 Dec 7;53(12):1201-1207. doi: 10.1093/jjco/hyad122.

Clinicopathologic study of stage I adenosquamous carcinoma of the lung.

Handa Y(1), Ikeda T(2), Hanaki H(2), Miyata Y(1), Mukaida H(2), Okada M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima.
(2)Department of Surgery, Hiroshima City Asa Citizen Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Adenosquamous carcinoma of the lung is a characteristic tumor that 
has both adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma components. Adenosquamous 
carcinoma is reported to have an aggressive clinical course, but its 
clinicopathological features and prognosis are unclear in the early stage.
METHODS: Patients who underwent surgical resection for pathological stage I 
non-small cell lung cancer between April 2009 and December 2014 were 
retrospectively reviewed. Preoperative and postoperative data, histologic 
characteristics and outcomes of patients with adenosquamous carcinoma (n = 40) 
were compared to adenocarcinoma (n = 598) and squamous cell carcinoma (n = 131) 
patients. Factors affecting prognosis, particularly on recurrence, were assessed 
via Cox regression analyses.
RESULTS: Patients with adenosquamous carcinoma had a worse prognosis than did 
patients with adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma in terms of 5 year 
overall (66.7%) and recurrence-free survival rates (44.9%), as well as a 
significantly higher recurrence rate (13/40 patients, 32.5%). Multivariable Cox 
regression analysis for recurrence-free survival rates revealed that the 
histology of adenosquamous carcinoma was an independent factor for recurrence 
(hazard ratio: 2.473, 95% confidence interval: 1.328-3.367; P = 0.0004). High 
serum carcinoembryonic antigen levels (hazard ratio: 5.962) and vascular 
invasion (hazard ratio: 4.899) were identified as risk factors for recurrence, 
and patients with adenosquamous carcinoma tended to have distant relapses, such 
as in the brain.
CONCLUSIONS: Early-stage adenosquamous carcinoma of the lung is a histological 
type associated with severe prognosis and postoperative recurrence, often in 
distant sites, in approximately one-third of cases. High serum carcinoembryonic 
antigen levels and vascular invasion might be risk factors of recurrence.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permission@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jjco/hyad122
PMID: 37681230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]