---
reference_id: "PMID:32894534"
title: Audiological evaluation of patients with cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD).
authors:
- Hojan-Jezierska D
- Urbaniak-Olejnik M
- Turska-Malińska R
- Matthews-Kozanecka M
- Loba W
- Komar D
- Stieler O
- Majewska A
journal: Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci
year: '2020'
doi: 10.26355/eurrev_202008_22624
keywords:
- Acoustic Impedance Tests
- Acoustic Stimulation
- Adolescent
- "Audiometry, Pure-Tone"
- Auditory Threshold
- Child
- Cleidocranial Dysplasia/diagnosis
- Female
- Humans
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Audiological evaluation of patients with cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD).
**Authors:** Hojan-Jezierska D, Urbaniak-Olejnik M, Turska-Malińska R, Matthews-Kozanecka M, Loba W, Komar D, Stieler O, Majewska A
**Journal:** Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci (2020)
**DOI:** [10.26355/eurrev_202008_22624](https://doi.org/10.26355/eurrev_202008_22624)

## Content

1. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2020 Aug;24(16):8281-8287. doi: 
10.26355/eurrev_202008_22624.

Audiological evaluation of patients with cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD).

Hojan-Jezierska D(1), Urbaniak-Olejnik M, Turska-Malińska R, Matthews-Kozanecka 
M, Loba W, Komar D, Stieler O, Majewska A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hearing Healthcare Profession, Chair of Biophysics, Poznan 
University of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland. amajewska@ump.edu.pl.

OBJECTIVE: The description of clinical manifestation of hearing problems in 
cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD) remains limited and incomplete, since CCD 
constitutes a rare congenital disorder. The study aims to provide a complex 
panel analysis of the auditory system in patients suffering from the disease.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The study group consisted of 4 children with CCD (aged: 
12-15), who underwent orthodontic treatment. A full panel analysis of their 
auditory systems was performed, including high-frequency audiometry and a new 
method of middle ear assessment - WBT (Wideband Tympanometry).
RESULTS: A slight conductive hearing loss was diagnosed in 3 out of 4 patients. 
While high frequency audiometry has shown a deterioration of hearing in 3 
patients, in one case, the obtained thresholds were within the normal range. A 
decrease of absorbance in low frequencies has been observed in one or both ears. 
Only one patient has had a shift of maximum absorbance towards high frequencies 
in the left ear.
CONCLUSIONS: The presented manuscript is the first with a complete evaluation of 
the auditory system comprising 4 cases of children in a similar age group. All 
of the examined patients presented an air-bone gap indicating conductive 
disorders.

DOI: 10.26355/eurrev_202008_22624
PMID: 32894534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]