---
reference_id: "PMID:28570009"
title: "Mucinous cystic neoplasms of the liver and pancreas: relationship between KRAS driver mutations and disease progression."
authors:
- Fujikura K
- Akita M
- Abe-Suzuki S
- Itoh T
- Zen Y
journal: Histopathology
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/his.13271
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mucinous cystic neoplasms of the liver and pancreas: relationship between KRAS driver mutations and disease progression.
**Authors:** Fujikura K, Akita M, Abe-Suzuki S, Itoh T, Zen Y
**Journal:** Histopathology (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/his.13271](https://doi.org/10.1111/his.13271)

## Content

1. Histopathology. 2017 Oct;71(4):591-600. doi: 10.1111/his.13271. Epub 2017 Aug
2.

Mucinous cystic neoplasms of the liver and pancreas: relationship between KRAS 
driver mutations and disease progression.

Fujikura K(1), Akita M(1), Abe-Suzuki S(1), Itoh T(1), Zen Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Kobe University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

AIMS: To compare the oncogenic mutation status among mucinous cystic neoplasms 
(MCNs) of different histological grades and between liver and pancreatic MCNs.
METHODS AND RESULTS: KRAS, GNAS, RNF43 and PIK3CA were sequenced in 25 surgical 
cases of hepatopancreatic MCN. Molecular features were correlated with 
clinicopathological and immunohistochemical findings. KRAS mutations were 
identified in five cases (20%), whereas GNAS, RNF43 and PIK3CA were wild-type in 
all cases. KRAS mutations were uncommon in cases of low-grade dysplasia (1/20, 
5%), whereas KRAS was mutated in all cases of higher grades, except for one 
liver MCN with intermediate-grade dysplasia (4/5, 80%; P = 0.002). This genetic 
alteration was slightly more frequent in the pancreas than in the liver [4/17 
(24%) versus 1/8 (13%), P = not significant]. KRAS-mutated MCNs more commonly 
had a multilocular cystic appearance (P = 0.040) and expression of mucin (MUC) 1 
(P = 0.040), MUC2 (P = 0.016) and MUC5AC (P = 0.015) than KRAS-wild-type 
tumours. In cases of KRAS-mutated MCNs with intermediate-grade or high-grade 
dysplasia, identical mutations were also detected in areas of adjacent low-grade 
dysplasia.
CONCLUSIONS: KRAS mutations appear to be major driver genetic alterations in 
both liver and pancreatic MCNs. As identical KRAS mutations were present in 
low-grade and higher-grade areas in individual cases, KRAS mutations occurring 
in low-grade MCNs may lead to tumour progression. Thus, preoperative KRAS 
testing may contribute to estimations of malignant potential. The lower 
incidence of KRAS mutations in liver MCNs may also explain why the risk of 
malignant transformation in liver MCNs is lower than that in pancreatic MCNs.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/his.13271
PMID: 28570009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]