---
reference_id: "PMID:35395060"
title: Development of mAb-based polyglutamine-dependent and polyglutamine length-independent huntingtin quantification assays with cross-site validation.
authors:
- Fischer DF
- Dijkstra S
- Lo K
- Suijker J
- Correia ACP
- Naud P
- Poirier M
- Tessari MA
- Boogaard I
- Flynn G
- Visser M
- Lamers MBAC
- McAllister G
- Munoz-Sanjuan I
- Macdonald D
journal: PLoS One
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0266812
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Development of mAb-based polyglutamine-dependent and polyglutamine length-independent huntingtin quantification assays with cross-site validation.
**Authors:** Fischer DF, Dijkstra S, Lo K, Suijker J, Correia ACP, Naud P, Poirier M, Tessari MA, Boogaard I, Flynn G, Visser M, Lamers MBAC, McAllister G, Munoz-Sanjuan I, Macdonald D
**Journal:** PLoS One (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0266812](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0266812)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2022 Apr 8;17(4):e0266812. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0266812. 
eCollection 2022.

Development of mAb-based polyglutamine-dependent and polyglutamine 
length-independent huntingtin quantification assays with cross-site validation.

Fischer DF(1), Dijkstra S(2), Lo K(2), Suijker J(2), Correia ACP(2), Naud P(3), 
Poirier M(3), Tessari MA(4), Boogaard I(2), Flynn G(2), Visser M(2), Lamers 
MBAC(1), McAllister G(1)(5), Munoz-Sanjuan I(5), Macdonald D(5).

Author information:
(1)Charles River, Chesterford Research Park, Saffron Walden, United Kingdom.
(2)Charles River, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(3)Charles River, Shrewsbury, MA, United States of America.
(4)Galapagos, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(5)CHDI Management/CHDI Foundation, Los Angeles, CA, United States of America.

Huntington's disease (HD) is caused by an expansion of the CAG trinucleotide 
repeat domain in the huntingtin gene that results in expression of a mutant 
huntingtin protein (mHTT) containing an expanded polyglutamine tract in the 
amino terminus. A number of therapeutic approaches that aim to reduce mHTT 
expression either locally in the CNS or systemically are in clinical 
development. We have previously described sensitive and selective assays that 
measure human HTT proteins either in a polyglutamine-independent (detecting both 
mutant expanded and non-expanded proteins) or in a polyglutamine 
length-dependent manner (detecting the disease-causing polyglutamine repeats) on 
the electrochemiluminescence Meso Scale Discovery detection platform. These 
original assays relied upon polyclonal antibodies. To ensure an accessible and 
sustainable resource for the HD field, we developed similar assays employing 
monoclonal antibodies. We demonstrate that these assays have equivalent 
sensitivity compared to our previous assays through the evaluation of cellular 
and animal model systems, as well as HD patient biosamples. We also demonstrate 
cross-site validation of these assays, allowing direct comparison of studies 
performed in geographically distinct laboratories.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0266812
PMCID: PMC8992994
PMID: 35395060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.