---
reference_id: "PMID:34854940"
title: Assessing the Association of Kawasaki Disease Symptoms and Echocardiographic Findings.
authors:
- Nabavizadeh SH
- Mehdizadegan N
- Moeini M
- Alyasin S
- Esmaeilzadeh H
- Askarisarvestani A
journal: Pediatr Cardiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00246-021-02792-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Assessing the Association of Kawasaki Disease Symptoms and Echocardiographic Findings.
**Authors:** Nabavizadeh SH, Mehdizadegan N, Moeini M, Alyasin S, Esmaeilzadeh H, Askarisarvestani A
**Journal:** Pediatr Cardiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00246-021-02792-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00246-021-02792-x)

## Content

1. Pediatr Cardiol. 2022 Apr;43(4):816-820. doi: 10.1007/s00246-021-02792-x. Epub
 2021 Dec 2.

Assessing the Association of Kawasaki Disease Symptoms and Echocardiographic 
Findings.

Nabavizadeh SH(1), Mehdizadegan N(2), Moeini M(3), Alyasin S(1), Esmaeilzadeh 
H(1)(4), Askarisarvestani A(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Allergy Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(2)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, School of 
Medicine, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Shiraz University of Medical 
Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(4)Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, School 
of Medicine, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(5)Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, School 
of Medicine, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran. 
askariaida@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Namazee Hospital, School of Medicine, Shiraz 
University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran. askariaida@gmail.com.

Kawasaki disease is an acute systemic vasculitis which can cause cardiac 
involvement among other symptoms. In this study we aimed to assess the 
relationship between the echocardiographic findings of Kawasaki disease with the 
clinical and paraclinical findings of the patients. In this cross-sectional 
study, the symptoms of 307 Kawasaki patients were registered and the association 
of the symptoms with paraclinical findings and echocardiographic studies was 
assessed. 190 (61.9%) of the patients were male and 117 (38.1%) were female. 193 
patients (62.9%) did not have any abnormalities in their echocardiography, while 
others showed coronary artery aneurysms, perivascular brightness, coronary 
artery dilatation, and trivial Mitral Regurgitation in their echocardiography. A 
significant inverse relationship was seen with echocardiographic findings and 
age. Thrombocytosis, conjunctivitis, and oral and/or pharyngeal erythema and/or 
strawberry tongue were associated with higher rates of echocardiographic 
abnormalities. Echocardiographic abnormalities are associated with younger age, 
higher platelets, and the existence of conjunctivitis and oral and/or pharyngeal 
erythema and/or strawberry tongue.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00246-021-02792-x
PMID: 34854940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]