---
reference_id: "PMID:31249310"
title: Conduct disorder.
authors:
- Fairchild G
- Hawes DJ
- Frick PJ
- Copeland WE
- Odgers CL
- Franke B
- Freitag CM
- De Brito SA
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-019-0095-y
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Comorbidity
- "Conduct Disorder/diagnosis, drug therapy, therapy"
- Female
- Functional Neuroimaging/methods
- "Genetic Diseases, Inborn/epidemiology"
- Humans
- Male
- Mass Screening/methods
- Mental Disorders
- Prevalence
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Conduct disorder.
**Authors:** Fairchild G, Hawes DJ, Frick PJ, Copeland WE, Odgers CL, Franke B, Freitag CM, De Brito SA
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-019-0095-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-019-0095-y)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2019 Jun 27;5(1):43. doi: 10.1038/s41572-019-0095-y.

Conduct disorder.

Fairchild G(1), Hawes DJ(2), Frick PJ(3), Copeland WE(4), Odgers CL(5), Franke
B(6), Freitag CM(7), De Brito SA(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Bath, Bath, UK.
g.fairchild@bath.ac.uk.
(2)School of Psychology, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia.
(3)Department of Psychology, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA, USA
and Institute for Learning Science and Teacher Education, Australian Catholic
University, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, USA.
(5)Department of Psychological Science, School of Social Ecology, University of
California, Irvine, CA, USA.
(6)Departments of Human Genetics and Psychiatry, Radboud University Medical
Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(7)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and
Psychotherapy, University Hospital Frankfurt, Goethe University, Frankfurt am
Main, Germany.
(8)School of Psychology and Centre for Human Brain Health, University of
Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.

Conduct disorder (CD) is a common and highly impairing psychiatric disorder that
usually emerges in childhood or adolescence and is characterized by severe
antisocial and aggressive behaviour. It frequently co-occurs with
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and often leads to antisocial
personality disorder in adulthood. CD affects ~3% of school-aged children and is
twice as prevalent in males than in females. This disorder can be subtyped
according to age at onset (childhood-onset versus adolescent-onset) and the
presence or absence of callous-unemotional traits (deficits in empathy and
guilt). The aetiology of CD is complex, with contributions of both genetic and
environmental risk factors and different forms of interplay among the two
(gene-environment interaction and correlation). In addition, CD is associated
with neurocognitive impairments; smaller grey matter volume in limbic regions
such as the amygdala, insula and orbitofrontal cortex, and functional
abnormalities in overlapping brain circuits responsible for emotion processing,
emotion regulation and reinforcement-based decision-making have been reported.
Lower hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and autonomic reactivity to stress has
also been reported. Management of CD primarily involves parent-based or
family-based psychosocial interventions, although stimulants and atypical
antipsychotics are sometimes used, especially in individuals with comorbid ADHD.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-019-0095-y
PMID: 31249310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
