---
reference_id: "PMID:18715292"
title: Folliculitis decalvans.
authors:
- Otberg N
- Kang H
- Alzolibani AA
- Shapiro J
journal: Dermatol Ther
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1111/j.1529-8019.2008.00204.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Folliculitis decalvans.
**Authors:** Otberg N, Kang H, Alzolibani AA, Shapiro J
**Journal:** Dermatol Ther (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1529-8019.2008.00204.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1529-8019.2008.00204.x)

## Content

1. Dermatol Ther. 2008 Jul-Aug;21(4):238-44. doi:
10.1111/j.1529-8019.2008.00204.x.

Folliculitis decalvans.

Otberg N(1), Kang H, Alzolibani AA, Shapiro J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Skin Science, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. ninaotberg@gmx.com

Folliculitis decalvans is a rare inflammatory scalp disorder. The present paper 
gives a practical approach to diagnosis and patient management and reviews 
possible pathogenetic factors and treatment options. Folliculitis decalvans is 
classified as primary neutrophilic cicatricial alopecia and predominantly occurs 
in middle-aged adults. Staphylococcus aureus and a deficient host immune 
response seem to play an important role in the development of this disfiguring 
scalp disease. Lesions occur mainly in the vertex and occipital area. 
Clinically, the lesions present with follicular pustules, lack of ostia, diffuse 
and perifollicular erythema, follicular tufting, and, oftentimes, hemorrhagic 
crusts and erosions. Histology displays a mainly neutrophilic inflammatory 
infiltrate in early lesions and additionally lymphocytes and plasma cells in 
advanced lesions. Treatment is focused on the eradication of S. aureus 
anti-inflammatory agents.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1529-8019.2008.00204.x
PMID: 18715292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]