---
reference_id: "PMID:15689448"
title: "Automated genomic sequence analysis of the three collagen VI genes: applications to Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy and Bethlem myopathy."
authors:
- Lampe AK
- Dunn DM
- von Niederhausern AC
- Hamil C
- Aoyagi A
- Laval SH
- Marie SK
- Chu ML
- Swoboda K
- Muntoni F
- Bonnemann CG
- Flanigan KM
- Bushby KM
- Weiss RB
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2004.023754
keywords:
- Collagen Type VI/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Genomics/methods
- Humans
- Muscular Diseases/genetics
- "Muscular Dystrophies/congenital, genetics"
- Mutation
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Automated genomic sequence analysis of the three collagen VI genes: applications to Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy and Bethlem myopathy.
**Authors:** Lampe AK, Dunn DM, von Niederhausern AC, Hamil C, Aoyagi A, Laval SH, Marie SK, Chu ML, Swoboda K, Muntoni F, Bonnemann CG, Flanigan KM, Bushby KM, Weiss RB
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2004.023754](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2004.023754)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2005 Feb;42(2):108-20. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2004.023754.

Automated genomic sequence analysis of the three collagen VI genes: applications
to Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy and Bethlem myopathy.

Lampe AK(1), Dunn DM, von Niederhausern AC, Hamil C, Aoyagi A, Laval SH, Marie
SK, Chu ML, Swoboda K, Muntoni F, Bonnemann CG, Flanigan KM, Bushby KM, Weiss
RB.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, Newcastle
upon Tyne, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Mutations in the genes encoding collagen VI (COL6A1, COL6A2, and
COL6A3) cause Bethlem myopathy (BM) and Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy
(UCMD). BM is a relatively mild dominantly inherited disorder with proximal
weakness and distal joint contractures. UCMD is an autosomal recessive condition
causing severe muscle weakness with proximal joint contractures and distal
hyperlaxity.
METHODS: We developed a method for rapid direct sequence analysis of all 107
coding exons of the COL6 genes using single condition amplification/internal
primer (SCAIP) sequencing. We have sequenced all three COL6 genes from genomic
DNA in 79 patients with UCMD or BM.
RESULTS: We found putative mutations in one of the COL6 genes in 62% of
patients. This more than doubles the number of identified COL6 mutations. Most
of these changes are consistent with straightforward autosomal dominant or
recessive inheritance. However, some patients showed changes in more than one of
the COL6 genes, and our results suggest that some UCMD patients may have
dominantly acting mutations rather than recessive disease.
DISCUSSION: Our findings may explain some or all of the cases of UCMD that are
unlinked to the COL6 loci under a recessive model. The large number of single
nucleotide polymorphisms which we generated in the course of this work may be of
importance in determining the major phenotypic variability seen in this group of
disorders.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2004.023754
PMCID: PMC1736000
PMID: 15689448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
