---
reference_id: "PMID:31330791"
title: Pathological Mechanisms Underlying Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome.
authors:
- Missailidis D
- Annesley SJ
- Fisher PR
journal: Diagnostics (Basel)
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3390/diagnostics9030080
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathological Mechanisms Underlying Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome.
**Authors:** Missailidis D, Annesley SJ, Fisher PR
**Journal:** Diagnostics (Basel) (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3390/diagnostics9030080](https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics9030080)

## Content

1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2019 Jul 20;9(3):80. doi: 10.3390/diagnostics9030080.

Pathological Mechanisms Underlying Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue 
Syndrome.

Missailidis D(1), Annesley SJ(1), Fisher PR(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology Anatomy and Microbiology, La Trobe University, VIC 
3086, Australia.
(2)Department of Physiology Anatomy and Microbiology, La Trobe University, VIC 
3086, Australia. P.Fisher@latrobe.edu.au.

The underlying molecular basis of myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome (ME/CFS) is not well understood. Characterized by chronic, unexplained 
fatigue, a disabling payback following exertion ("post-exertional malaise"), and 
variably presenting multi-system symptoms, ME/CFS is a complex disease, which 
demands a concerted biomedical investigation from disparate fields of expertise. 
ME/CFS research and patient treatment have been challenged by the lack of 
diagnostic biomarkers and finding these is a prominent direction of current 
work. Despite these challenges, modern research demonstrates a tangible 
biomedical basis for the disorder across many body systems. This evidence is 
mostly comprised of disturbances to immunological and inflammatory pathways, 
autonomic and neurological dysfunction, abnormalities in muscle and 
mitochondrial function, shifts in metabolism, and gut physiology or gut 
microbiota disturbances. It is possible that these threads are together 
entangled as parts of an underlying molecular pathology reflecting a 
far-reaching homeostatic shift. Due to the variability of non-overlapping 
symptom presentation or precipitating events, such as infection or other bodily 
stresses, the initiation of body-wide pathological cascades with similar 
outcomes stemming from different causes may be implicated in the condition. 
Patient stratification to account for this heterogeneity is therefore one 
important consideration during exploration of potential diagnostic developments.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics9030080
PMCID: PMC6787592
PMID: 31330791

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.