---
reference_id: "PMID:21333111"
title: "Implementation of liquid culture for tuberculosis diagnosis in a remote setting: lessons learned."
authors:
- Hepple P
- Novoa-Cain J
- Cheruiyot C
- Richter E
- Ritmeijer K
journal: Int J Tuberc Lung Dis
year: '2011'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Implementation of liquid culture for tuberculosis diagnosis in a remote setting: lessons learned.
**Authors:** Hepple P, Novoa-Cain J, Cheruiyot C, Richter E, Ritmeijer K
**Journal:** Int J Tuberc Lung Dis (2011)

## Content

1. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2011 Mar;15(3):405-7.

Implementation of liquid culture for tuberculosis diagnosis in a remote setting: 
lessons learned.

Hepple P(1), Novoa-Cain J, Cheruiyot C, Richter E, Ritmeijer K.

Author information:
(1)Médecins Sans Frontières, Manson Unit, London, UK. 
Pamela.hepple@london.msf.org

Although sputum smear microscopy is the primary method for tuberculosis (TB) 
diagnosis in low-resource settings, it has low sensitivity. The World Health 
Organization recommends the use of liquid culture techniques for TB diagnosis 
and drug susceptibility testing in low- and middle-income countries. An 
evaluation of samples from southern Sudan found that culture was able to detect 
cases of active pulmonary TB and extra-pulmonary TB missed by conventional smear 
microscopy. However, the long delays involved in obtaining culture results meant 
that they were usually not clinically useful, and high rates of non-tuberculous 
mycobacteria isolation made interpretation of results difficult. Improvements in 
diagnostic capacity and rapid speciation facilities, either on-site or through a 
local reference laboratory, are crucial.

PMID: 21333111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]