---
reference_id: "PMID:20453662"
title: "Bacterial meningitis in cirrhotic patients: case series and description of the prognostic role of acute renal failure."
authors:
- Barahona-Garrido J
- Hernández-Calleros J
- Téllez-Avila FI
- Chávez-Tapia NC
- Remes-Troche JM
- Torre A
journal: J Clin Gastroenterol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1097/MCG.0b013e3181d88d53
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bacterial meningitis in cirrhotic patients: case series and description of the prognostic role of acute renal failure.
**Authors:** Barahona-Garrido J, Hernández-Calleros J, Téllez-Avila FI, Chávez-Tapia NC, Remes-Troche JM, Torre A
**Journal:** J Clin Gastroenterol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MCG.0b013e3181d88d53](https://doi.org/10.1097/MCG.0b013e3181d88d53)

## Content

1. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2010 Oct;44(9):e218-23. doi:
10.1097/MCG.0b013e3181d88d53.

Bacterial meningitis in cirrhotic patients: case series and description of the 
prognostic role of acute renal failure.

Barahona-Garrido J(1), Hernández-Calleros J, Téllez-Avila FI, Chávez-Tapia NC, 
Remes-Troche JM, Torre A.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Enfermedades Digestivas y Nutricionales, Hospital General San 
Juan de Dios, Guatemala City, Guatemala.

AIM: To analyze the mortality risk factors in cirrhotic patients with bacterial 
meningitis (BM).
BACKGROUND: Cirrhotic patients are susceptible to infections. Despite its high 
mortality rate, BM has not been extensively studied in this group of patients.
STUDY: BM patients diagnosed with cirrhosis, between 1987 and 2008, were 
studied. BM was defined as the presence of signs or symptoms of meningitis and a 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leukocyte count >100/mm3 or the presence of bacteria 
in CSF.
RESULTS: We identified 4955 infections among 7591 cirrhotic patients; 12 (0.2%) 
had BM. The mean age at diagnosis was 60±16 years. Abnormal mental status (83%), 
fever (67%), and neck stiffness (67%) were the most frequent clinical 
presentations. The sensitivity of CSF culture was 75% (Streptococcus pneumoniae, 
2; Staphylococcus aureus, 2; Listeria monocytogenes, 1; Group B Streptococcus, 
1; Streptococcus agalactiae, 1; Streptococcus bovis, 1; and Escherichia coli, 
1), and its correlation with blood culture was 78%. Five patients died. On 
admission, the serum creatinine level was 1.63±0.93 mg/dL. A serum creatinine 
level ≥1.3 mg/dL was associated with increased mortality (P=0.028). The model 
for end-stage liver disease score, gastrointestinal bleeding, bilirubin level 
>3.5 mg/dL, hepatic encephalopathy, diabetes mellitus, and results of cytology 
and biochemistry tests of CSF were not associated with mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: BM in cirrhotic patients is associated with a high mortality rate. 
The clinical and microbiologic features of BM in cirrhotic patients differ from 
those in the general population. A serum creatinine level ≥1.3 mg/dL on 
admission is associated with a higher risk of mortality.

DOI: 10.1097/MCG.0b013e3181d88d53
PMID: 20453662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]