---
reference_id: "PMID:11955539"
title: Association between c135G/A genotype and RET proto-oncogene germline mutations and phenotype of Hirschsprung's disease.
authors:
- Fitze G
- Cramer J
- Ziegler A
- Schierz M
- Schreiber M
- Kuhlisch E
- Roesner D
- Schackert HK
journal: Lancet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(02)08218-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association between c135G/A genotype and RET proto-oncogene germline mutations and phenotype of Hirschsprung's disease.
**Authors:** Fitze G, Cramer J, Ziegler A, Schierz M, Schreiber M, Kuhlisch E, Roesner D, Schackert HK
**Journal:** Lancet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(02)08218-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(02)08218-1)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2002 Apr 6;359(9313):1200-5. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(02)08218-1.

Association between c135G/A genotype and RET proto-oncogene germline mutations 
and phenotype of Hirschsprung's disease.

Fitze G(1), Cramer J, Ziegler A, Schierz M, Schreiber M, Kuhlisch E, Roesner D, 
Schackert HK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, University of Technology Dresden, 
Fetscherstrasse 74, D-01307 Dresden, Germany. Guido.Fitze@mailbox.tu-dresden.de

Comment in
    Lancet. 2002 Apr 6;359(9313):1169-70. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(02)08249-1.

BACKGROUND: Several genes, including the major susceptibility gene RET, have 
roles in development of Hirschsprung's disease. Results of genetic-linkage 
analysis of patients with familial disease with both long-segment and 
short-segment phenotypes have shown close linkage with the RET locus. We aimed 
to investigate whether both RET mutations and polymorphisms contribute to 
phenotype of Hirschsprung's disease.
METHODS: We looked at the coding region of all 21 exons of the RET 
proto-oncogene, including the flanking intronic sequences, by direct DNA 
sequencing in 76 caucasians from Germany with Hirschsprung's disease.
FINDINGS: 20 different mutations were detected in 18 patients. Mutations were 
under-represented in patients with a homozygous RET c135A/A genotype in 
association with short-segment phenotype. Short-segment phenotype also arose if 
the RET mutation was on the c135A allele; conversely, a RET germline mutation on 
the c135G allele resulted in long-segment phenotype, particularly in 
heterozygous c135G/A patients.
INTERPRETATION: These observations lend support to the idea that both RET 
alleles have a role in pathogenesis of Hirschsprung's disease, in a 
dose-dependent fashion. We also showed that the c135G/A polymorphism modifies 
the phenotype by a within-gene interaction between the c135A variant and a 
mutation.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(02)08218-1
PMID: 11955539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]