---
reference_id: "PMID:31209143"
title: The Role of Memory CD8(+) T Cells in Vitiligo.
authors:
- Riding RL
- Harris JE
journal: J Immunol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1900027
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Role of Memory CD8(+) T Cells in Vitiligo.
**Authors:** Riding RL, Harris JE
**Journal:** J Immunol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.1900027](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.1900027)

## Content

1. J Immunol. 2019 Jul 1;203(1):11-19. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1900027.

The Role of Memory CD8(+) T Cells in Vitiligo.

Riding RL(1), Harris JE(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA 01605.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA 01605 john.harris@umassmed.edu.

Vitiligo is an autoimmune skin disease mediated by autoreactive CD8+ T cells 
that destroy the pigment-producing cells of the epidermis, melanocytes, leading 
to areas of depigmentation. Patients with vitiligo require lifelong treatment to 
regain and maintain their pigment. Clinical observations uncovered the 
importance of autoimmune memory in vitiligo because cessation of treatment 
frequently led to relapse of disease at the site of previous lesions. A subset 
of memory T cells known as CD8+ resident memory T cells (TRM) are long-lived, 
nonmigratory memory cells that persist in most nonlymphoid tissues, including 
the skin. Recent reports describe the presence of CD8+ TRM in lesional vitiligo 
patient skin and suggest their role as active players in disease maintenance. In 
this review, we will discuss the role of skin CD8+ TRM in maintaining disease in 
vitiligo and the opportunity to target this population to induce a long-lasting 
reversal of disease.

Copyright © 2019 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1900027
PMCID: PMC6709670
PMID: 31209143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]