---
reference_id: "PMID:26635999"
title: New therapeutic targets in rare genetic skeletal diseases.
authors:
- Briggs MD
- Bell PA
- Wright MJ
- Pirog KA
journal: Expert Opin Orphan Drugs
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1517/21678707.2015.1083853
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New therapeutic targets in rare genetic skeletal diseases.
**Authors:** Briggs MD, Bell PA, Wright MJ, Pirog KA
**Journal:** Expert Opin Orphan Drugs (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1517/21678707.2015.1083853](https://doi.org/10.1517/21678707.2015.1083853)

## Content

1. Expert Opin Orphan Drugs. 2015 Oct 3;3(10):1137-1154. doi: 
10.1517/21678707.2015.1083853. Epub 2015 Sep 24.

New therapeutic targets in rare genetic skeletal diseases.

Briggs MD(1), Bell PA(2), Wright MJ(2), Pirog KA(2).

Author information:
(1)Newcastle University, Institute of Genetic Medicine, International Centre for 
Life , Central Parkway, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, NE1 3BZ, UK.
(2)Newcastle University, Institute of Genetic Medicine, International Centre for 
Life , Newcastle-upon-Tyne, NE1 3BZ, UK.

Introduction: Genetic skeletal diseases (GSDs) are a diverse and complex group 
of rare genetic conditions that affect the development and homeostasis of the 
skeleton. Although individually rare, as a group of related diseases, GSDs have 
an overall prevalence of at least 1 per 4,000 children. There are currently very 
few specific therapeutic interventions to prevent, halt or modify skeletal 
disease progression and therefore the generation of new and effective treatments 
requires novel and innovative research that can identify tractable therapeutic 
targets and biomarkers of these diseases. Areas covered: Remarkable progress has 
been made in identifying the genetic basis of the majority of GSDs and in 
developing relevant model systems that have delivered new knowledge on disease 
mechanisms and are now starting to identify novel therapeutic targets. This 
review will provide an overview of disease mechanisms that are shared amongst 
groups of different GSDs and describe potential therapeutic approaches that are 
under investigation. Expert opinion: The extensive clinical variability and 
genetic heterogeneity of GSDs renders this broad group of rare diseases a bench 
to bedside challenge. However, the evolving hypothesis that clinically different 
diseases might share common disease mechanisms is a powerful concept that will 
generate critical mass for the identification and validation of novel 
therapeutic targets and biomarkers.

DOI: 10.1517/21678707.2015.1083853
PMCID: PMC4643203
PMID: 26635999