---
reference_id: "PMID:34105166"
title: Management of children with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency presenting with acute haemolytic crisis during the SARs-COV-2 pandemic.
authors:
- Elalfy M
- Adly A
- Eltonbary K
- Elghamry I
- Elalfy O
- Maebid M
- Elsayh K
- Elsayed HN
- El Ekiaby M
journal: Vox Sang
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/vox.13123
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of children with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency presenting with acute haemolytic crisis during the SARs-COV-2 pandemic.
**Authors:** Elalfy M, Adly A, Eltonbary K, Elghamry I, Elalfy O, Maebid M, Elsayh K, Elsayed HN, El Ekiaby M
**Journal:** Vox Sang (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/vox.13123](https://doi.org/10.1111/vox.13123)

## Content

1. Vox Sang. 2022 Jan;117(1):80-86. doi: 10.1111/vox.13123. Epub 2021 Jun 8.

Management of children with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency 
presenting with acute haemolytic crisis during the SARs-COV-2 pandemic.

Elalfy M(1), Adly A(1), Eltonbary K(1), Elghamry I(1), Elalfy O(2), Maebid M(3), 
Elsayh K(4), Elsayed HN(5), El Ekiaby M(6).

Author information:
(1)Paediatrics Department, Faculty of Medicine, Ain Shams University, Cairo, 
Egypt.
(2)Complementary Medicine Department, National Research Center, Giza, Egypt.
(3)Paediatrics Department, Faculty of Medicine, Beni-Suef University, Beni Suef, 
Egypt.
(4)Paediatrics Department, Faculty of Medicine, Assuit University, Assiut, 
Egypt.
(5)Ain Shams University Hospitals Blood Bank, Cairo, Egypt.
(6)Shabrawishy Blood Bank, Giza, Egypt.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Shortage of blood during the severe acute respiratory 
syndrome-COV-2 (SARs-COV-2) pandemic impacted transfusion practice. The primary 
aim of the study is to assess management of acute haemolytic crisis (AHC) in 
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase(G6PD)- deficient children during SARs-COV-2 
pandemic, and then to assess blood donation situation and the role of 
telemedicine in management.
METHODS: Assessment of G6PD-deficient children attending the Emergency 
Department (ER) with AHC from 1 March 2020 for 5 months in comparison to same 
period in the previous 2 years, in three paediatric haematology centres. AHC 
cases presenting with infection were tested for SARs-COV-2 using RT-PCR. 
Children with Hb (50-65 g/L) and who were not transfused, were followed up using 
telemedicine with Hb re-checked in 24 h.
RESULTS: A 45% drop in ER visits due to G6PD deficiency-related AHC during 
SARs-COV-2 pandemic in comparison to the previous 2 years was observed. 10% of 
patients presented with fever and all tested negative for COVID-19 by RT-PCR. 
33% of patients had Hb < 50 g/L and were all transfused. 50% had Hb between 50 
and 65 g/L, half of them (n = 49) did not receive transfusion and only two 
patients (4%) required transfusion upon follow up. A restrictive transfusion 
strategy was adopted and one of the reasons was a 39% drop in blood donation in 
participating centres.
CONCLUSION: Fewer G6PD-deficient children with AHC visited the ER during 
SARs-COV-2 and most tolerated lower Hb levels. Telemedicine was an efficient 
tool to support their families. A restrictive transfusion strategy was clear in 
this study.

© 2021 International Society of Blood Transfusion.

DOI: 10.1111/vox.13123
PMCID: PMC8242654
PMID: 34105166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.