---
reference_id: "PMID:37965976"
title: "The role of liver transplantation in COACH syndrome (Joubert syndrome with congenital hepatic fibrosis): A review of the literature."
authors:
- Chen L
- Uchida H
- Komine R
- Kodama T
- Nakao T
- Okada N
- Yanagi Y
- Shimizu S
- Abbas S
- Fukuda A
- Sakamoto S
- Kasahara M
journal: Pediatr Transplant
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/petr.14640
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of liver transplantation in COACH syndrome (Joubert syndrome with congenital hepatic fibrosis): A review of the literature.
**Authors:** Chen L, Uchida H, Komine R, Kodama T, Nakao T, Okada N, Yanagi Y, Shimizu S, Abbas S, Fukuda A, Sakamoto S, Kasahara M
**Journal:** Pediatr Transplant (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/petr.14640](https://doi.org/10.1111/petr.14640)

## Content

1. Pediatr Transplant. 2024 Feb;28(1):e14640. doi: 10.1111/petr.14640. Epub 2023 
Nov 15.

The role of liver transplantation in COACH syndrome (Joubert syndrome with 
congenital hepatic fibrosis): A review of the literature.

Chen L(1)(2), Uchida H(1), Komine R(1), Kodama T(1), Nakao T(1), Okada N(1), 
Yanagi Y(1), Shimizu S(1), Abbas S(1)(3), Fukuda A(1), Sakamoto S(1), Kasahara 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Organ Transplantation Center, National Center for Child Health and 
Development, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of General Surgery, Hunan Children's Hospital, Changsha, China.
(3)Organ Transplantation and HPB Department, Pir Abdul Qadir Shah Jeelani 
institute of Medical Sciences, Gambat, Pakistan.

BACKGROUND: COACH syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive genetic disease 
characterized by liver fibrosis, which leads to severe complications related to 
portal hypertension. However, only a few patients with COACH syndrome undergoing 
liver transplantation (LT) have been reported.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We herein report the outcomes of four children who 
underwent LT for COACH syndrome at our institute and review three previously 
reported cases to elucidate the role of LT in COACH syndrome.
RESULTS: All four patients in our institute were female, and three received 
living donors LT. All patients were diagnosed with COACH syndrome by genetic 
testing. LT was performed in these patients at 3, 7, 9, and 14 years old. The 
indication for LT was varices related to portal hypertension in all patients. 
One showed an intrapulmonary shunt. Blood tests revealed renal impairment due to 
nephronophthisis in three patients, and one developed renal insufficiency after 
LT. The liver function was maintained in all patients. A literature review 
revealed detailed information for three more patients. The indication for LT in 
these three cases was portal hypertension, such as bleeding from esophageal 
varices. One patient had chronic renal failure on hemodialysis at LT and 
underwent combined liver and kidney transplantation. Of these three previous 
patients, one died from hepatic failure due to de novo HCV infection 3 years 
after LT.
CONCLUSIONS: LT should be considered an effective treatment for COACH syndrome 
in patients with severe portal hypertension. However, a detailed follow-up of 
the renal function is necessary.

© 2023 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/petr.14640
PMID: 37965976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]