---
reference_id: "PMID:36982440"
title: Models of Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia for Gene Therapies Testing.
authors:
- Glazova O
- Bastrich A
- Deviatkin A
- Onyanov N
- Kaziakhmedova S
- Shevkova L
- Sakr N
- Petrova D
- Vorontsova MV
- Volchkov P
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms24065365
keywords:
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Humans
- "Adrenal Hyperplasia, Congenital/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Adrenal Glands
- Mutation
- Incidence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Models of Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia for Gene Therapies Testing.
**Authors:** Glazova O, Bastrich A, Deviatkin A, Onyanov N, Kaziakhmedova S, Shevkova L, Sakr N, Petrova D, Vorontsova MV, Volchkov P
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms24065365](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24065365)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Mar 10;24(6):5365. doi: 10.3390/ijms24065365.

Models of Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia for Gene Therapies Testing.

Glazova O(1)(2), Bastrich A(1), Deviatkin A(1)(2), Onyanov N(2), Kaziakhmedova 
S(2), Shevkova L(1)(2), Sakr N(1)(2), Petrova D(1), Vorontsova MV(1)(2), 
Volchkov P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Gene Editing Laboratory, Endocrinology Research Centre, 117292 Moscow, 
Russia.
(2)Genome Engineering Laboratory, Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, 
141700 Dolgoprudniy, Russia.

The adrenal glands are important endocrine organs that play a major role in the 
stress response. Some adrenal glands abnormalities are treated with hormone 
replacement therapy, which does not address physiological requirements. Modern 
technologies make it possible to develop gene therapy drugs that can completely 
cure diseases caused by mutations in specific genes. Congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia (CAH) is an example of such a potentially treatable monogenic 
disease. CAH is an autosomal recessive inherited disease with an overall 
incidence of 1:9500-1:20,000 newborns. To date, there are several promising 
drugs for CAH gene therapy. At the same time, it remains unclear how new 
approaches can be tested, as there are no models for this disease. The present 
review focuses on modern models for inherited adrenal gland insufficiency and 
their detailed characterization. In addition, the advantages and disadvantages 
of various pathological models are discussed, and ways of further development 
are suggested.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24065365
PMCID: PMC10049562
PMID: 36982440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.