---
reference_id: "PMID:30486687"
title: Origin of sporadic late-onset hereditary ATTR Val30Met amyloidosis in Japan.
authors:
- Ueda M
- Yamashita T
- Misumi Y
- Masuda T
- Ando Y
journal: Amyloid
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1080/13506129.2018.1531842
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Origin of sporadic late-onset hereditary ATTR Val30Met amyloidosis in Japan.
**Authors:** Ueda M, Yamashita T, Misumi Y, Masuda T, Ando Y
**Journal:** Amyloid (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1080/13506129.2018.1531842](https://doi.org/10.1080/13506129.2018.1531842)

## Content

1. Amyloid. 2018 Sep;25(3):143-147. doi: 10.1080/13506129.2018.1531842.

Origin of sporadic late-onset hereditary ATTR Val30Met amyloidosis in Japan.

Ueda M(1), Yamashita T(1), Misumi Y(1), Masuda T(1), Ando Y(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences , Kumamoto 
University , Kumamoto , Japan.

Hereditary transthyretin (ATTRm) amyloidosis, formerly known as familial amyloid 
polyneuropathy, is a major type of hereditary systemic amyloidosis, in which the 
disease is caused by mutant transthyretin (TTR). Although more than 140 
different point mutations have been identified in the TTR gene, ATTRm 
amyloidosis patients with the TTR Val30Met mutation are most frequently found 
worldwide. Interestingly, the onset age of the ATTR Val30Met amyloidosis is 
highly varied among countries and regions. The reason for these differences in 
onset age and penetrance remains to be elucidated. We recently performed an 
epidemiological study to analyze the clinical and genetic characteristics of 
ATTRm amyloidosis patients in Japan. Our results led us to the following 
questions: Why did most of the non-endemic patients with the same TTR Val30Met 
mutation not have a family history of the disease, a typical autosomal dominant 
hereditary disorder? Why does ATTR Val30Met amyloidosis alone demonstrate foci 
of occurrence? Why is only this type of ATTRm amyloidosis nationally and 
globally distributed? In this mini-review, we discuss these unanswered questions 
based on recent genetic epidemiological studies on ATTR Val30Met amyloidosis.

DOI: 10.1080/13506129.2018.1531842
PMID: 30486687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]