---
reference_id: "PMID:35314548"
title: Systemic Abscopal Effect of Low-dose Radiotherapy (2 Gy ×2) against Palatine Tonsil Follicular Lymphoma.
authors:
- Togitani K
- Asagiri T
- Iguchi M
- Igawa T
- Yoshino T
- Kojima K
journal: Intern Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.8968-21
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systemic Abscopal Effect of Low-dose Radiotherapy (2 Gy ×2) against Palatine Tonsil Follicular Lymphoma.
**Authors:** Togitani K, Asagiri T, Iguchi M, Igawa T, Yoshino T, Kojima K
**Journal:** Intern Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.2169/internalmedicine.8968-21](https://doi.org/10.2169/internalmedicine.8968-21)

## Content

1. Intern Med. 2022 Oct 15;61(20):3107-3110. doi:
10.2169/internalmedicine.8968-21.  Epub 2022 Mar 19.

Systemic Abscopal Effect of Low-dose Radiotherapy (2 Gy ×2) against Palatine 
Tonsil Follicular Lymphoma.

Togitani K(1), Asagiri T(2), Iguchi M(3), Igawa T(4), Yoshino T(4), Kojima K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Kochi Medical School, Kochi University, Japan.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Kochi Medical School Hospital, Kochi 
University, Japan.
(3)Department of Pathology, Kochi Medical School, Kochi University, Japan.
(4)Department of Pathology, Okayama University Graduate School, Japan.

A 52-year-old man presented with palatine tonsillar swelling caused by 
follicular lymphoma. His tumor burden was low, but exacerbation of snoring and 
dysphagia was observed. Considering the first wave of coronavirus disease 2019 
(COVID-19) pandemic, he received palliative 4-Gy irradiation to the tonsils in 2 
fractions, which induced partial regression of tonsillar swellings and 
eradication of the circulating lymphoma cells. We suggest that low-dose 
radiotherapy triggered an abscopal effect of lymphoma, which allowed the patient 
time to receive COVID-19 vaccination before starting immunosuppressive 
chemo-immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.8968-21
PMCID: PMC9646336
PMID: 35314548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Author's disclosure of potential Conflicts of 
Interest (COI). Kensuke Kojima: Research funding, Eisai, Daiichi-Sankyo, 
Kyowa-Kirin, Otsuka Pharmaceutical and Asahi Kasei; Honoraria, Janssen 
Pharmaceutical, AstraZeneca and AbbVie.