---
reference_id: "PMID:26506731"
title: HEMOSTATIC STUDIES IN DENGUE PATIENTS.
authors:
- Sosothikul D
- Thisyakorn U
- Thisyakorn C
journal: Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health
year: '2015'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HEMOSTATIC STUDIES IN DENGUE PATIENTS.
**Authors:** Sosothikul D, Thisyakorn U, Thisyakorn C
**Journal:** Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health (2015)

## Content

1. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health. 2015;46 Suppl 1:43-5.

HEMOSTATIC STUDIES IN DENGUE PATIENTS.

Sosothikul D, Thisyakorn U, Thisyakorn C.

The pathogenesis of hematologic changes in dengue patients is not clearly 
understood. Consistent hematological findings include vasculopathy, 
thrombocytopenia, and coagulopathy. There are evidences suggesting that dengue 
virus causes pathophysiological changes that involve all of the consistent 
hematologic findings resulting in vasculopathy, reduction in platelet number as 
well as platelet dysfunction, and reduction of several coagulation factors. 
Laboratory evidences of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) are also 
demonstrated in all degrees of severity in dengue patients. Only in severe 
dengue cases is profound DIC aggravated, leading to uncontrolled bleeding and 
death. A study to determine the extent of the activation of endothelial cells 
and the hemostatic system in correlation with clinical severity and also to 
detect the best prognostic factor for severe dengue showed plasma von Willebrand 
factor antigen (VWF:Ag) to be the best indicator of progression to severe 
dengue.

PMID: 26506731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]