---
reference_id: "PMID:29489036"
title: "Hereditary palmoplantar keratodermas. Part I. Non-syndromic palmoplantar keratodermas: classification, clinical and genetic features."
authors:
- Guerra L
- Castori M
- Didona B
- Castiglia D
- Zambruno G
journal: J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/jdv.14902
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Vesicular Transport/genetics"
- "Antigens, Ly/genetics"
- Apoptosis Regulatory Proteins
- Aquaporin 5/genetics
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- Collagen/genetics
- Connexin 43/genetics
- Desmoglein 1/genetics
- Desmoplakins/genetics
- "Genes, pX/genetics"
- Glycoproteins/genetics
- Humans
- Keratins/genetics
- "Keratoderma, Palmoplantar/classification, genetics, pathology"
- Metalloendopeptidases/genetics
- Phenotype
- Serpins/genetics
- TRPV Cation Channels/genetics
- Tumor Suppressor Proteins/genetics
- Urokinase-Type Plasminogen Activator/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary palmoplantar keratodermas. Part I. Non-syndromic palmoplantar keratodermas: classification, clinical and genetic features.
**Authors:** Guerra L, Castori M, Didona B, Castiglia D, Zambruno G
**Journal:** J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jdv.14902](https://doi.org/10.1111/jdv.14902)

## Content

1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2018 May;32(5):704-719. doi: 10.1111/jdv.14902. 
Epub 2018 Mar 24.

Hereditary palmoplantar keratodermas. Part I. Non-syndromic palmoplantar 
keratodermas: classification, clinical and genetic features.

Guerra L(1), Castori M(2), Didona B(3), Castiglia D(1), Zambruno G(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cell Biology, Istituto Dermopatico 
dell'Immacolata-IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(2)Division of Medical Genetics, Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza-IRCCS, San 
Giovanni Rotondo, Foggia, Italy.
(3)Rare Skin Disease Center, Istituto Dermopatico dell'Immacolata-IRCCS, Rome, 
Italy.
(4)Genetic and Rare Diseases Research Area and Dermatology Unit, Bambino Gesù 
Children's Hospital-IRCCS, Rome, Italy.

The term palmoplantar keratoderma (PPK) indicates any form of persistent 
thickening of the epidermis of palms and soles and includes genetic as well as 
acquired conditions. We review the nosology of hereditary PPKs that comprise an 
increasing number of entities with different prognoses, and a multitude of 
associated cutaneous and extracutaneous features. On the basis of the phenotypic 
consequences of the underlying genetic defect, hereditary PPKs may be divided 
into the following: (i) non-syndromic, isolated PPKs, which are characterized by 
a unique or predominant palmoplantar involvement; (ii) non-syndromic PPKs with 
additional distinctive cutaneous and adnexal manifestations, here named complex 
PPKs; (iii) syndromic PPKs, in which PPK is associated with specific 
extracutaneous manifestations. To date, the diagnosis of the different 
hereditary PPKs is based mainly on clinical history and features combined with 
histopathological findings. In recent years, the exponentially increasing use of 
next-generation sequencing technologies has led to the identification of several 
novel disease genes, and thus substantially contributed to elucidate the 
molecular basis of such a heterogeneous group of disorders. Here, we focus on 
hereditary non-syndromic isolated and complex PPKs. Syndromic PPKs are reviewed 
in the second part of this 2-part article, where other well-defined genetic 
diseases, which may present PPK among their phenotypic manifestations, are also 
listed and diagnostic and therapeutic approaches for PPKs are summarized.

© 2018 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

DOI: 10.1111/jdv.14902
PMID: 29489036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]