---
reference_id: "PMID:34507344"
title: "Meckel's Masquerade: Penetrating the Disguise."
authors:
- Callanan DL
- O'Brien MM
journal: Pediatr Emerg Care
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1097/PEC.0000000000002537
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Meckel's Masquerade: Penetrating the Disguise.
**Authors:** Callanan DL, O'Brien MM
**Journal:** Pediatr Emerg Care (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PEC.0000000000002537](https://doi.org/10.1097/PEC.0000000000002537)

## Content

1. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2021 Oct 1;37(10):e669-e671. doi: 
10.1097/PEC.0000000000002537.

Meckel's Masquerade: Penetrating the Disguise.

Callanan DL(1), O'Brien MM.

Author information:
(1)From the Division of Emergency Medicine, Children's Hospital of San Antonio, 
Baylor College of Medicine, San Antonio, TX.

Children with abdominal pain are frequently seen in emergency departments. 
Physicians and parents worry about appendicitis; physicians are also concerned 
about intussusception and bowel obstruction in patients with previous surgical 
procedures. Sometimes the patient is ill, and the diagnosis is elusive. In a 
6-month period at our pediatric emergency department with an annual census of 
57,400 patients, we cared for 4 patients who presented with abdominal pain due 
to complications of Meckel's diverticulum. None presented with painless rectal 
bleeding, the complication of which physicians are most aware. We are reporting 
these patients to raise awareness of Meckel's diverticulum as a cause of acute 
abdomen in children. Meckel's diverticulum may masquerade as appendicitis, an 
abdominal mass, intussusception, or a complication of severe constipation.

Copyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/PEC.0000000000002537
PMID: 34507344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The authors declare no conflict of 
interest.