---
reference_id: "PMID:39188719"
title: Contemporary review of IgA nephropathy.
authors:
- Filippone EJ
- Gulati R
- Farber JL
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1436923
keywords:
- Humans
- "Glomerulonephritis, IGA/therapy, immunology, diagnosis, etiology"
- Immunosuppression Therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Contemporary review of IgA nephropathy.
**Authors:** Filippone EJ, Gulati R, Farber JL
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2024.1436923](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2024.1436923)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2024 Aug 12;15:1436923. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1436923.
eCollection 2024.

Contemporary review of IgA nephropathy.

Filippone EJ(1), Gulati R(1), Farber JL(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Sidney Kimmel Medical College
at Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
(2)Department of Pathology, Sidney Kimmel Medical College at Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA, United States.

IgA nephropathy (IgAN) is considered the most common primary glomerulonephritis
worldwide with a predilection for Asian-Pacific populations and relative rarity
in those of African descent. Perhaps 20%-50% of patients progress to kidney
failure. The pathogenesis is incompletely understood. Mesangial deposition of
immune complexes containing galactose-deficient IgA1 complexed with anti-glycan
IgG or IgA antibodies results in mesangial cell activation and proliferation,
inflammatory cell recruitment, complement activation, and podocyte damage.
Diagnosis requires a biopsy interpreted by the Oxford criteria. Additional
pathologic features include podocytopathy, thrombotic microangiopathy, and C4d
staining. Biomarkers predicting adverse outcomes include proteinuria, reduced
GFR, hypertension, and pathology. Acceptable surrogate endpoints for therapeutic
trials include ongoing proteinuria and rate of eGFR decline. The significance of
persisting hematuria remains uncertain. The mainstay of therapy is supportive,
consisting of lifestyle modifications, renin-angiotensin inhibition (if
hypertensive or proteinuric), sodium-glucose-transporter 2 inhibition (if GFR
reduced or proteinuric), and endothelin-receptor antagonism (if proteinuric).
Immunosuppression should be considered for those at high risk after maximal
supportive care. Corticosteroids are controversial with the most positive
results observed in Chinese. They carry a high risk of serious side effects.
Similarly, mycophenolate may be most effective in Chinese. Other
immunosuppressants are of uncertain benefit. Tonsillectomy appears efficacious
in Japanese. Active areas of investigation include B-cell inhibition with agents
targeting the survival factors BAFF and APRIL and complement inhibition with
agents targeting the alternate pathway (Factors B and D), the lectin pathway
(MASP-2), and the common pathway (C3 and C5). Hopefully soon, the who and the
how of immunosuppression will be clarified, and kidney failure can be
forestalled.

Copyright © 2024 Filippone, Gulati and Farber.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1436923
PMCID: PMC11345586
PMID: 39188719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: EF is in the Speaker Bureau for Boehringer
Ingelheim and Lilly. RG is in the Speaker Bureau for Travere and Astra Zeneca.
The remaining author declares that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conflict of interest.
