---
reference_id: PMID:26190298
title: Mechanisms of echinocandin antifungal drug resistance.
authors:
- Perlin DS
journal: Ann N Y Acad Sci
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/nyas.12831
keywords:
- Antifungal Agents/therapeutic use
- "Candida albicans/drug effects, enzymology, metabolism"
- "Candida glabrata/drug effects, enzymology, metabolism"
- "Candidiasis/drug therapy, microbiology"
- "Drug Resistance, Fungal"
- Echinocandins/therapeutic use
- "Glucosyltransferases/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Humans
- Species Specificity
- beta-Glucans/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms of echinocandin antifungal drug resistance.
**Authors:** Perlin DS
**Journal:** Ann N Y Acad Sci (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/nyas.12831](https://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.12831)

## Content

1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2015 Sep;1354(1):1-11. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12831. Epub 2015
Jul  17.

Mechanisms of echinocandin antifungal drug resistance.

Perlin DS(1).

Author information:
(1)New Jersey Medical School, Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences, Public 
Health Research Institute, Newark, New Jersey.

Fungal infections due to Candida and Aspergillus species cause extensive 
morbidity and mortality, especially among immunosuppressed patients, and 
antifungal therapy is critical to patient management. Yet only a few drug 
classes are available to treat invasive fungal diseases, and this problem is 
compounded by the emergence of antifungal resistance. Echinocandin drugs are the 
preferred choice to treat candidiasis. They are the first cell wall-active 
agents and target the fungal-specific enzyme glucan synthase, which catalyzes 
the biosynthesis of β-1,3-glucan, a key cell wall polymer. Therapeutic failures 
occur rarely among common Candida species, with the exception of Candida 
glabrata, which is frequently multidrug resistant. Echinocandin resistance in 
susceptible species is always acquired during therapy. The mechanism of 
resistance involves amino acid changes in hot-spot regions of Fks subunits of 
glucan synthase, which decrease the sensitivity of the enzyme to drug. Cellular 
stress response pathways lead to drug adaptation, which promotes the formation 
of resistant fks strains. Clinical factors promoting echinocandin resistance 
include empiric therapy, prophylaxis, gastrointestinal reservoirs, and 
intra-abdominal infections. A better understanding of the 
echinocandin-resistance mechanism, along with cellular and clinical factors 
promoting resistance, will facilitate more effective strategies to overcome and 
prevent echinocandin resistance.

© 2015 New York Academy of Sciences.

DOI: 10.1111/nyas.12831
PMCID: PMC4626328
PMID: 26190298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]