---
reference_id: "PMID:41529704"
title: "Topics in Lung Disease: Obesity-Hypoventilation Syndrome."
authors:
- Aluko O
- Kaysin A
- Swami S
- Bultman DS
journal: FP Essent
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Topics in Lung Disease: Obesity-Hypoventilation Syndrome.
**Authors:** Aluko O, Kaysin A, Swami S, Bultman DS
**Journal:** FP Essent (2025)

## Content

1. FP Essent. 2025 Dec;559:24-30.

Topics in Lung Disease: Obesity-Hypoventilation Syndrome.

Aluko O(1), Kaysin A(2), Swami S(1), Bultman DS(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Maryland (UM) Capital Region Health Family Medicine Residency 
Program in Largo.
(2)University of Maryland (UM) Capital Region Health Family Medicine Residency 
Program in Largo, MD.

Obesity-hypoventilation syndrome is characterized by daytime hypercapnia 
(arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide of 45 mm Hg or more) in a patient 
with a body mass index of 30 kg/m2 or more, in the absence of alternative causes 
of hypoventilation. It should be suspected in patients with obesity who have 
daytime somnolence, dyspnea, fatigue, snoring, apnea, and sleep-related and 
daytime hypoxemia. The diagnosis is confirmed with overnight polysomnography. 
Additional tests such as measurement of arterial blood gases, serum bicarbonate, 
and arterial oxygen saturation can further support the diagnosis. Patients with 
obesity-hypoventilation syndrome have higher rates of intensive care unit 
admission and health risks; therefore, early diagnosis and specialist referral 
are crucial to reduce morbidity and mortality. Management includes weight loss 
(eg, through a comprehensive weight loss pro-gram or bariatric surgery) and 
positive airway pressure therapy (eg, continuous or bilevel positive airway 
pressure) to address hypercapnia and concurrent sleep-disordered breathing, if 
present.

Written permission from the American Academy of Family Physicians is required 
for reproduction of this material in whole or in part in any form or medium.

PMID: 41529704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]