---
reference_id: "PMID:25382447"
title: Neuropsychological profile of a male psychiatric patient with a Morgagni-Stewart-Morel syndrome.
authors:
- Hansen A
- Engelhardt L
- Pleschutznig W
- Dammann G
- Vietze S
journal: Acta Neuropsychiatr
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1017/neu.2014.32
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuropsychological profile of a male psychiatric patient with a Morgagni-Stewart-Morel syndrome.
**Authors:** Hansen A, Engelhardt L, Pleschutznig W, Dammann G, Vietze S
**Journal:** Acta Neuropsychiatr (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1017/neu.2014.32](https://doi.org/10.1017/neu.2014.32)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropsychiatr. 2015 Feb;27(1):60-4. doi: 10.1017/neu.2014.32. Epub 2014 
Nov 10.

Neuropsychological profile of a male psychiatric patient with a 
Morgagni-Stewart-Morel syndrome.

Hansen A(1), Engelhardt L(1), Pleschutznig W(1), Dammann G(1), Vietze S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry,Psychiatrische Dienste Thurgau,Switzerland.

In 1765 Giovanni Morgagni described a syndrome consisting of hyperostosis 
frontalis interna (HFI), obesity and hirsutism. In 1928 Stewart and in 1930 
Morel added neuropsychiatric symptoms, e.g. depression and dementia, which led 
to the definition of the Morgagni-Stewart-Morel Syndrome (MSM). Although mostly 
women were characterized in literature no gender specifity is demanded. This 
case report presents the rare case of a 66 year old male psychiatric patient 
with Morgagni-Stewart-Morel Syndrome. The patient complained of loss of 
concentration and difficulties with activities of daily living. Admission 
diagnosis was an opioid misuse on the basis of a chronic pain syndrome. In this 
case report we are describing clinical features, the patient history and 
technical (MRI) and neuropsychological tests. Although severe psychiatric 
symptoms and neuropsychological deficits are commonly seen in these patients, 
our patient showed only mild symptoms. This case reports shows the possibility 
of a male patient with MSM. If MSM is a separate entity or just an epiphenomena 
of hormone dysregulation should be investigated in further studies.

DOI: 10.1017/neu.2014.32
PMID: 25382447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]