---
reference_id: "PMID:32037107"
title: Allergic Endotypes and Phenotypes of Asthma.
authors:
- Akar-Ghibril N
- Casale T
- Custovic A
- Phipatanakul W
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaip.2019.11.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Allergic Endotypes and Phenotypes of Asthma.
**Authors:** Akar-Ghibril N, Casale T, Custovic A, Phipatanakul W
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaip.2019.11.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaip.2019.11.008)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2020 Feb;8(2):429-440. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2019.11.008.

Allergic Endotypes and Phenotypes of Asthma.

Akar-Ghibril N(1), Casale T(2), Custovic A(3), Phipatanakul W(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Allergy/Immunology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Mass.
(2)Division of Allergy and Immunology, University of South Florida Health 
Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, Fla.
(3)Respiratory Division, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College 
London, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Division of Pediatric Allergy/Immunology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Mass. Electronic address: 
wanda.phipatanakul@childrens.harvard.edu.

Erratum in
    J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2020 May;8(5):1779. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2020.02.026.

Allergic asthma is defined as asthma associated with sensitization to 
aeroallergens, which leads to asthma symptoms and airway inflammation. Allergic 
asthma is the most common asthma phenotype. The onset of allergic asthma is most 
often in childhood and is usually accompanied by other comorbidities including 
atopic dermatitis and allergic rhinitis. It is often persistent although there 
is a wide variation in disease severity. It is a TH2-driven process. Biomarkers 
have been identified to distinguish patients with allergic asthma, particularly 
serum IgE levels, tests to indicate sensitization to aeroallergens such as 
specific IgE or skin prick test positivity, blood and sputum eosinophil levels, 
fraction of exhaled nitric oxide, and periostin. Treatments for allergic asthma 
include environmental control measures, allergen immunotherapy, and 
glucocorticoids. Biologics, targeting the TH2 pathway, have been shown to be 
effective in the treatment of allergic asthma.

Copyright © 2019 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2019.11.008
PMCID: PMC7569362
PMID: 32037107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: N. Akar-Ghibril declares 
no relevant conflicts of interest. T. Casale is a consultant for Genentech, 
Novartis, Sanofi, Regeneron, and GlaxoSmithKline; is a speaker for Genentech; 
and has been an investigator on grants to his institution from Genentech, 
Novartis Sanofi, and Regeneron. A. Custovic reports personal fees from Novartis, 
Regeneron/Sanofi, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, and 
Philips, outside the submitted work. W. Phipatanakul is a consultant/speaker for 
Regeneron, Sanofi, Teva, GlaxoSmithKline, Genentech, and Novartis; and has 
received funding or grant support to her institution from the National 
Institutes of Health, Novartis, Genentech, Regeneron, Sanofi, Thermo Fisher, 
Monaghen, Lincoln Diagnostics, and Alk Abello.