---
reference_id: PMID:39042459
title: Transcriptional analysis of primary ciliary dyskinesia airway cells reveals a dedicated cilia glutathione pathway.
authors:
- Koenitzer JR
- Gupta DK
- Twan WK
- Xu H
- Hadas N
- Hawkins FJ
- Beermann ML
- Penny GM
- Wamsley NT
- Berical A
- Major MB
- Dutcher SK
- Brody SL
- Horani A
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.180198
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cilia/metabolism, pathology, genetics"
- Glutathione/metabolism
- Female
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism
- Epithelial Cells/metabolism
- "Glutathione Transferase/metabolism, genetics"
- Proteomics
- "Kartagener Syndrome/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Ciliary Motility Disorders/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Reactive Oxygen Species/metabolism
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Gene Expression Profiling
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcriptional analysis of primary ciliary dyskinesia airway cells reveals a dedicated cilia glutathione pathway.
**Authors:** Koenitzer JR, Gupta DK, Twan WK, Xu H, Hadas N, Hawkins FJ, Beermann ML, Penny GM, Wamsley NT, Berical A, Major MB, Dutcher SK, Brody SL, Horani A
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.180198](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.180198)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2024 Jul 23;9(17):e180198. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.180198.

Transcriptional analysis of primary ciliary dyskinesia airway cells reveals a 
dedicated cilia glutathione pathway.

Koenitzer JR(1), Gupta DK(2), Twan WK(2), Xu H(2), Hadas N(2), Hawkins FJ(3)(4), 
Beermann ML(3), Penny GM(5), Wamsley NT(6), Berical A(3)(4), Major MB(6), 
Dutcher SK(5)(6), Brody SL(1), Horani A(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, Missouri, USA.
(3)Center for Regenerative Medicine and.
(4)The Pulmonary Center, Department of Medicine, Boston University and Boston 
Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Department of Genetics and.
(6)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.

Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a genetic condition that results in 
dysmotile cilia. The repercussions of cilia dysmotility and gene variants on the 
multiciliated cell remain poorly understood. We used single-cell RNA-Seq, 
proteomics, and advanced microscopy to compare primary culture epithelial cells 
from patients with PCD, their heterozygous mothers, and healthy individuals, and 
we induced pluripotent stem cells (iPScs) generated from a patient with PCD. 
Transcriptomic analysis revealed unique signatures in PCD airway cells compared 
with their mothers' cells and the cells of healthy individuals. Gene expression 
in heterozygous mothers' cells diverged from both control and PCD cells, marked 
by increased inflammatory and cellular stress signatures. Primary and 
iPS-derived PCD multiciliated cells had increased expression of 
glutathione-S-transferases GSTA2 and GSTA1, as well as NRF2 target genes, 
accompanied by elevated levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Immunogold 
labeling in human cilia and proteomic analysis of the ciliated organism 
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii demonstrated that GSTA2 localizes to motile cilia. 
Loss of human GSTA2 and C. reinhardtii GSTA resulted in slowed cilia motility, 
pointing to local cilia regulatory roles. Our findings identify cellular 
responses unique to PCD variants and independent of environmental stress and 
uncover a dedicated ciliary GSTA2 pathway essential for normal motility that may 
be a therapeutic target.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.180198
PMCID: PMC11385084
PMID: 39042459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.