---
reference_id: "PMID:10929364"
title: "Schmid type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia: a spondylometaphyseal dysplasia identical to the \"Japanese\" type."
authors:
- Savarirayan R
- Cormier-Daire V
- Lachman RS
- Rimoin DL
journal: Pediatr Radiol
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1007/s002470000181
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Radiography
- Registries
- "Spinal Diseases/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Schmid type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia: a spondylometaphyseal dysplasia identical to the "Japanese" type.
**Authors:** Savarirayan R, Cormier-Daire V, Lachman RS, Rimoin DL
**Journal:** Pediatr Radiol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s002470000181](https://doi.org/10.1007/s002470000181)

## Content

1. Pediatr Radiol. 2000 Jul;30(7):460-3. doi: 10.1007/s002470000181.

Schmid type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia: a spondylometaphyseal dysplasia 
identical to the "Japanese" type.

Savarirayan R(1), Cormier-Daire V, Lachman RS, Rimoin DL.

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Birth Defects Center, Steven Spielberg Pediatrics Research 
Center, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, USA.

BACKGROUND: Schmid-type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia (Schmid MCD) is an 
autosomal dominant chondrodysplasia resulting from various mutations in the 
COL10A1 gene. This disorder has been well delineated at a clinical level and has 
been classified radiographically as a pure metaphyseal chondrodysplasia. A 
missense mutation in the COL10A1 gene has also been shown to cause a rare 
spondylo-metaphyseal chondrodysplasia (SMD) named the "Japanese" type which, 
apart from exhibiting a mild spinal phenotype, shares striking clinical and 
radiographic similarities to Schmid MCD.
OBJECTIVE: The clinical, radiographic and molecular similarities between Schmid 
MCD and Japanese SMD led to the hypothesis that these conditions could be 
identical type X collagenopathies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We analyzed 33 cases of typical Schmid MCD from the 
International Skeletal Dysplasia Registry, looking specifically for any 
radiographic evidence of spinal involvement.
RESULTS: We found that in 9.1% (3/33) of cases reviewed there was definite 
radiographic evidence of spinal involvement comprising mild platyspondyly, 
vertebral body abnormalities, and end-plate irregularity.
CONCLUSION: These data indicate that spinal changes are an uncommon but variable 
component of Schmid MCD and that this condition and "Japanese" SMD are identical 
collagen type X disorders. Furthermore, the fact that the specific mutation 
reported in the family with Japanese type SMD, resulting in the substitution of 
a glutamic acid residue for a glycine at codon 595 (G595 E), has also been 
reported in a patient with Schmid MCD strongly supports this conclusion.

DOI: 10.1007/s002470000181
PMID: 10929364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]