---
reference_id: "PMID:37276800"
title: "Cerebral atrophy as a cause of aphasia: From Pick to the modern era."
authors:
- Roelofs A
journal: Cortex
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2023.05.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebral atrophy as a cause of aphasia: From Pick to the modern era.
**Authors:** Roelofs A
**Journal:** Cortex (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cortex.2023.05.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2023.05.004)

## Content

1. Cortex. 2023 Aug;165:101-118. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2023.05.004. Epub 2023 May
 16.

Cerebral atrophy as a cause of aphasia: From Pick to the modern era.

Roelofs A(1).

Author information:
(1)Donders Centre for Cognition, Radboud University, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. 
Electronic address: Ardi.Roelofs@donders.ru.nl.

In his epoch-making monograph, Wernicke (1874) claimed that atrophy of the brain 
cannot cause aphasia. Refuting this claim, Pick (1892, 1898, 1901, 1904a) 
documented in increasing detail several cases of aphasia with circumscribed 
atrophy of the left temporal lobe, frontal lobe, or both, which persuaded 
Wernicke (1906). To explain why the atrophy is circumscribed and leads to focal 
symptoms, Pick (1908a) advanced a functional network account. Behavioral, 
neuroanatomical, and histopathological studies by Dejerine and Sérieux, Fischer, 
Alzheimer, Altman, Gans, Onari and Spatz, and Stertz further illuminated the 
clinical syndromes, the exact spatial distributions of the atrophy, the 
underlying disease, and its laminar specificity. Unaware of these seminal 
studies, research from the 1970s until now has independently rediscovered all 
key findings, and also supports Pick's forgotten functional account of the 
distribution of atrophy and the focal symptoms. His frontal and temporal forms 
of aphasia foreshadowed what are now called the nonfluent/agrammatic and 
semantic variants of primary progressive aphasia. Moreover, aphasic symptoms may 
occur with frontal degeneration (what used to be called "Pick's disease") that 
yields personality changes and behavioral disturbances, now called the 
behavioral variant of frontotemporal dementia.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cortex.2023.05.004
PMID: 37276800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]