---
reference_id: "PMID:22363829"
title: "Fatal dengue hemorrhagic fever in adults: emphasizing the evolutionary pre-fatal clinical and laboratory manifestations."
authors:
- Lee IK
- Liu JW
- Yang KD
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001532
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fatal dengue hemorrhagic fever in adults: emphasizing the evolutionary pre-fatal clinical and laboratory manifestations.
**Authors:** Lee IK, Liu JW, Yang KD
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0001532](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0001532)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2012;6(2):e1532. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001532. Epub 
2012 Feb 21.

Fatal dengue hemorrhagic fever in adults: emphasizing the evolutionary pre-fatal 
clinical and laboratory manifestations.

Lee IK(1), Liu JW, Yang KD.

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung 
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: A better description of the clinical and laboratory manifestations 
of fatal patients with dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) is important in alerting 
clinicians of severe dengue and improving management.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Of 309 adults with DHF, 10 fatal patients and 299 
survivors (controls) were retrospectively analyzed. Regarding causes of 
fatality, massive gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding was found in 4 patients, dengue 
shock syndrome (DSS) alone in 2; DSS/subarachnoid hemorrhage, Klebsiella 
pneumoniae meningitis/bacteremia, ventilator associated pneumonia, and massive 
GI bleeding/Enterococcus faecalis bacteremia each in one. Fatal patients were 
found to have significantly higher frequencies of early altered consciousness 
(≤24 h after hospitalization), hypothermia, GI bleeding/massive GI bleeding, 
DSS, concurrent bacteremia with/without shock, pulmonary edema, renal/hepatic 
failure, and subarachnoid hemorrhage. Among those experienced early altered 
consciousness, massive GI bleeding alone/with uremia/with E. faecalis 
bacteremia, and K. pneumoniae meningitis/bacteremia were each found in one 
patient. Significantly higher proportion of bandemia from initial (arrival) 
laboratory data in fatal patients as compared to controls, and higher proportion 
of pre-fatal leukocytosis and lower pre-fatal platelet count as compared to 
initial laboratory data of fatal patients were found. Massive GI bleeding 
(33.3%) and bacteremia (25%) were the major causes of pre-fatal leukocytosis in 
the deceased patients; 33.3% of the patients with pre-fatal profound 
thrombocytopenia (<20,000/µL), and 50% of the patients with pre-fatal 
prothrombin time (PT) prolongation experienced massive GI bleeding.
CONCLUSIONS: Our report highlights causes of fatality other than DSS in patients 
with severe dengue, and suggested hypothermia, leukocytosis and bandemia may be 
warning signs of severe dengue. Clinicians should be alert to the potential 
development of massive GI bleeding, particularly in patients with early altered 
consciousness, profound thrombocytopenia, prolonged PT and/or leukocytosis. 
Antibiotic(s) should be empirically used for patients at risk for bacteremia 
until it is proven otherwise, especially in those with early altered 
consciousness and leukocytosis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001532
PMCID: PMC3283557
PMID: 22363829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.