---
reference_id: "PMID:38993719"
title: A case of long-term survival of SADDAN treated with growth hormone for marked short stature.
authors:
- Kanno J
- Katata Y
- Kawashima S
- Shima H
- Sogi C
- Umeki I
- Suzuki D
- Tomita H
- Kamimura M
- Saito-Hakoda A
- Fujiwara I
- Hanita T
- Kikuchi A
journal: Clin Pediatr Endocrinol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1297/cpe.2023-0068
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case of long-term survival of SADDAN treated with growth hormone for marked short stature.
**Authors:** Kanno J, Katata Y, Kawashima S, Shima H, Sogi C, Umeki I, Suzuki D, Tomita H, Kamimura M, Saito-Hakoda A, Fujiwara I, Hanita T, Kikuchi A
**Journal:** Clin Pediatr Endocrinol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1297/cpe.2023-0068](https://doi.org/10.1297/cpe.2023-0068)

## Content

1. Clin Pediatr Endocrinol. 2024;33(3):144-150. doi: 10.1297/cpe.2023-0068. Epub 
2024 Mar 10.

A case of long-term survival of SADDAN treated with growth hormone for marked 
short stature.

Kanno J(1), Katata Y(1)(2), Kawashima S(1), Shima H(1), Sogi C(1)(3), Umeki 
I(1)(4), Suzuki D(1), Tomita H(5), Kamimura M(1)(6), Saito-Hakoda A(1)(7), 
Fujiwara I(1)(8), Hanita T(1), Kikuchi A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tohoku University Hospital, Sendai, Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Miyagi Children's Hospital, Sendai, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, JCHO Sendai Hospital, Sendai, Japan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Iwate Prefectural Central Hospital, Morioka, Japan.
(5)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Tohoku University Hospital, Sendai, 
Japan.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, National Hospital Organisation Sendai Medical 
Center, Sendai, Japan.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, JR Sendai Hospital, Sendai, Japan.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Sendai City Hospital, Sendai, Japan.

Severe achondroplasia with developmental delay and acanthosis nigricans (SADDAN) 
is a bone dysplasia caused by a pathogenic variant of fibroblast growth factor 
receptor 3 (FGFR3). Pathogenic variants in FGFR3 also cause thanatophoric 
dysplasia (TD) and achondroplasia. Although the findings of SADDAN and TD during 
the fetal and neonatal periods are similar, they differ in their long-term 
prognoses. We conducted FGFR3 analysis in one male patient because of the 
difficulty in differentiating SADDAN from TD during the neonatal period. We 
found that the patient had a pathogenic variant, p. Lys650Met, which was similar 
to that previously reported in patients with SADDAN. Reports on long-term 
survival in patient with SADDAN are scarce, and there have been no reports of 
treatment with GH. We administered GH therapy for a markedly short stature. 
After treatment, his height increased by 4 cm each year for 4 years, the 
frequency of hospitalizations due to respiratory failure decreased, and the 
health improved. FGFR3 analysis is useful for diagnosing SADDAN during the early 
neonatal period. GH therapy may have contributed to the patient's long-term 
survival.

2024©The Japanese Society for Pediatric Endocrinology.

DOI: 10.1297/cpe.2023-0068
PMCID: PMC11234192
PMID: 38993719

Conflict of interest statement: Ikuma Fujiwara received a research grant for a 
clinical trial from Pfizer, and the other authors have no conflicts of interest 
to declare.