---
reference_id: "PMID:33146050"
title: Multifaceted impulsivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder with hoarding symptoms.
authors:
- Tumkaya S
- Yucens B
- Mart M
- Tezcan D
- Kashyap H
journal: Nord J Psychiatry
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/08039488.2020.1838605
keywords:
- Humans
- "Compulsive Behavior/complications, diagnosis"
- Impulsive Behavior
- Obsessive Behavior
- "Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder/complications, diagnosis"
- Psychiatric Status Rating Scales
- Hoarding Disorder
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multifaceted impulsivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder with hoarding symptoms.
**Authors:** Tumkaya S, Yucens B, Mart M, Tezcan D, Kashyap H
**Journal:** Nord J Psychiatry (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/08039488.2020.1838605](https://doi.org/10.1080/08039488.2020.1838605)

## Content

1. Nord J Psychiatry. 2021 Apr;75(3):207-213. doi: 10.1080/08039488.2020.1838605.
 Epub 2020 Nov 4.

Multifaceted impulsivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder with hoarding 
symptoms.

Tumkaya S(1), Yucens B(1), Mart M(2), Tezcan D(3), Kashyap H(4).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, Pamukkale University, Denizli, 
Turkey.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Adıyaman University, Adıyaman, Turkey.
(3)Bolu İzzet Baysal Psychiatry Hospital, Bolu, Turkey.
(4)Department of Clinical Psychology, National Institute of Mental Health and 
Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS), Bengaluru, India.

OBJECTIVE: Hoarding is common in obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), and OCD 
with hoarding may have poorer prognostic features than OCD without hoarding. The 
aim of this study was to investigate the relationship between multifaceted 
impulsivity and hoarding symptoms in individuals with OCD. This relationship is 
important to be able to understand the psychopathological mechanisms of hoarding 
symptoms in OCD patients.
METHODS: The study included 136 individuals with OCD classified as OCD with high 
hoarding symptoms (OCDwHH, n = 41) and OCD with low/none hoarding symptoms 
(OCDwLH, n = 95), together with 94 healthy control subjects. All the 
participants completed the Hoarding Rating Scale-Interview, Barratt 
Impulsiveness Scale-11, Yale-Brown Obsessions and Compulsions Scale, Hamilton 
Depression Rating Scale, and Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale.
RESULTS: The OCDwHH group had more severe anxiety (p = 0.016) and attentional 
impulsivity (p = 0.002) than OCDwLH. Attentional impulsivity scores were 
positively correlated with hoarding symptom scores (p < 0.001). Both attentional 
and motor impulsivity scores were positively correlated with anxiety levels 
(p = 0.037, p = 0.045, respectively). In partial correlation analysis, motor 
impulsivity was positively correlated with the severity of hoarding symptoms 
controlling for anxiety severity (p = 0.045). In hierarchical linear regression 
analysis, only attentional impulsivity predicted the severity of hoarding 
symptoms independently of anxiety, severity of obsessive-compulsive symptoms and 
motor impulsivity (β = 0.268, Adjusted R2 = 0.114, p = 0.006).
CONCLUSION: Attentional impulsivity is associated with hoarding symptoms in OCD. 
Future studies that reveal this relationship may contribute to treatment 
modalities for the OCD patients with hoarding symptoms.

DOI: 10.1080/08039488.2020.1838605
PMID: 33146050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]