---
reference_id: PMID:22122481
title: "Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis: new insights from OMICS studies."
authors:
- Martel C
- Esposti DD
- Bouchet A
- Brenner C
- Lemoine A
journal: Curr Pharm Biotechnol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.2174/138920112799857558
keywords:
- Animals
- "Fatty Liver/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis: new insights from OMICS studies.
**Authors:** Martel C, Esposti DD, Bouchet A, Brenner C, Lemoine A
**Journal:** Curr Pharm Biotechnol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.2174/138920112799857558](https://doi.org/10.2174/138920112799857558)

## Content

1. Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2012 Apr;13(5):726-35. doi: 10.2174/138920112799857558.

Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis: new insights from OMICS studies.

Martel C(1), Esposti DD, Bouchet A, Brenner C, Lemoine A.

Author information:
(1)Universite Paris-Sud, Institut Andre Lwoff, PRES Universud-Paris, Villejuif, 
France

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most common liver pathology 
characterized by fat accumulation in a context of metabolic syndrome or insulin 
resistance. It can be associated with obesity, diabetes, hyperinsulinemia, 
dyslipidemia as well as hypertension. NAFLD consists of a large spectrum of 
hepatic lesions including benign steatosis, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis 
(NASH), cirrhosis or hepatocellular carcinoma. Upon chronic stress, NASH would 
occur via at least "two-hits" process involving modulation of a high number of 
genes and proteins. Firstly, the accumulation of fat, either due to the 
increased inflow of free fatty acids or de novo lipogenesis, leads to steatosis. 
Secondly, when adaptive mechanisms for stress tolerance are overwhelmed, 
lipotoxicity and chronic inflammation trigger major hepatic damages, mainly via 
oxidative and inflammatory stress, lipid peroxidation and cell death. As a 
consequence, all these processes concur to favor steatohepatitis, fibrosis and 
cancer. Recently, the elucidation of physiopathological signaling cascades 
controlling NAFLD and NASH benefited from large-scale studies, namely the omics, 
such as transcriptomics, genomics, proteomics, and lipidomics. The advent of 
lipidomics would allow shedding light upon the respective roles of triglyceride 
and fatty acid metabolites in the lipotoxic liver injury hypothesis for the 
pathogenesis of NASH. In this review, the contribution of the omics to the 
understanding of the molecular basis of NASH is discussed that could offer 
perspectives for novel biomarkers discovery.

DOI: 10.2174/138920112799857558
PMID: 22122481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]