---
reference_id: "PMID:37392600"
title: The usefulness of hematological parameters and cerebrospinal fluid indexes in the differential diagnosis of acute bacterial from viral meningitis.
authors:
- Kazancioglu S
- Bastug A
- Ozbay BO
- Tezcan H
- Buyuktarakci C
- Akbay A
- Bodur H
journal: Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2023.116005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The usefulness of hematological parameters and cerebrospinal fluid indexes in the differential diagnosis of acute bacterial from viral meningitis.
**Authors:** Kazancioglu S, Bastug A, Ozbay BO, Tezcan H, Buyuktarakci C, Akbay A, Bodur H
**Journal:** Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2023.116005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2023.116005)

## Content

1. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis. 2023 Sep;107(1):116005. doi: 
10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2023.116005. Epub 2023 Jun 11.

The usefulness of hematological parameters and cerebrospinal fluid indexes in 
the differential diagnosis of acute bacterial from viral meningitis.

Kazancioglu S(1), Bastug A(2), Ozbay BO(3), Tezcan H(3), Buyuktarakci C(3), 
Akbay A(3), Bodur H(2).

Author information:
(1)Ministry of Health Ankara City Hospital, Department of Infectious Diseases 
and Clinical Microbiology, Ankara, Turkey. Electronic address: 
sumeyye_yildiz@hotmail.com.
(2)Health Science University Turkey, Ankara City Hospital, Department of 
Infectious Diseases and Clinical Microbiology, Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Ministry of Health Ankara City Hospital, Department of Infectious Diseases 
and Clinical Microbiology, Ankara, Turkey.

Central nervous system (CNS) infection is a medical emergency with an important 
cause of mortality worldwide. The 79 patients with confirmed acute CNS infection 
(48 bacterial and 31 viral meningitis) were evaluated. Bacterial meningitis 
score, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)/serum glucose ratio, and CSF/serum albumin 
ratio had the highest area under the curves (0.873, 0.843, 0.810, respectively) 
for discriminating bacterial meningitis. Neutrophil-to-lymphocyte (NLR), 
platelet-to-lymphocyte ratio (PLR) and CSF lactate dehydrogenase have a good 
ability for the differential diagnosis of bacterial meningitis. CSF/serum 
glucose ratio, NLR (with a cut-off value> 8.87), large unstained cell, total 
protein, albumin, and procalcitonin levels were found to be predictors for 
mortality. NLR can be used as a biomarker to differentiate bacterial meningitis 
from viral meningitis and to predict the prognosis of CNS infection. CSF/serum 
albumin ratio and CSF lactate dehydrogenase can be used to predict bacterial 
meningitis as well as CSF/serum glucose ratio.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2023.116005
PMID: 37392600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare no conflicts of interest.