---
reference_id: "PMID:30477030"
title: "Adenosine Kinase Deficiency: Report and Review."
authors:
- Alhusani A
- Obaid A
- Blom HJ
- Wedell A
- Alfadhel M
journal: Neuropediatrics
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1055/s-0038-1676053
keywords:
- Adenosine Kinase/deficiency
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Developmental Disabilities/diagnostic imaging, enzymology"
- Female
- Humans
- "Muscle Hypotonia/diagnostic imaging, enzymology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adenosine Kinase Deficiency: Report and Review.
**Authors:** Alhusani A, Obaid A, Blom HJ, Wedell A, Alfadhel M
**Journal:** Neuropediatrics (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0038-1676053](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0038-1676053)

## Content

1. Neuropediatrics. 2019 Feb;50(1):46-50. doi: 10.1055/s-0038-1676053. Epub 2018 
Nov 26.

Adenosine Kinase Deficiency: Report and Review.

Alhusani A(1), Obaid A(1), Blom HJ(2), Wedell A(3)(4)(5)(6), Alfadhel M(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, King Abdullah International 
Medical Research Centre, King Saud bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, 
King Abdulaziz Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(3)Division of Metabolic Diseases, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska 
Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Science for Life Laboratory, 
Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Centre for Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Karolinska University Hospital, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Max Planck Institute Biology of Ageing, Karolinska Institute Laboratory, 
Stockholm, Sweden.

Adenosine kinase (ADK) deficiency (OMIM [online mendelian inheritance in man]: 
614300) is an autosomal recessive disorder of adenosine and methionine 
metabolism, with a unique clinical phenotype, mainly involving the central 
nervous system and dysmorphic features. Patients usually present early in life 
with sepsis-like symptoms, respiratory difficulties, and neonatal jaundice. 
Subsequently, patients demonstrate hypotonia and global developmental delay. 
Biochemically, methionine is elevated with normal homocysteine levels and the 
diagnosis is confirmed through molecular analysis of the ADK gene. There is no 
curative treatment; however, a methionine-restricted diet has been tried with 
variable outcomes. Herein, we report a 4-year-old Saudi female with global 
developmental delay, hypotonia, and dysmorphic features. Interestingly, she has 
a tall stature, developmental dysplasia of the hip, optic nerve gliosis, and 
tigroid fundus. We found a mutation not reported previously and we compared the 
current case with previously reported cases. We alert clinicians to consider ADK 
deficiency in any neonate presenting with global developmental delay, hypotonia, 
dysmorphic features, and high methionine levels.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0038-1676053
PMID: 30477030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Written consent was obtained from the parents.