---
reference_id: "PMID:37574021"
title: "Mitral annular calcification in obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: Incidence, risk factors, and prognostic value after myectomy."
authors:
- Wu Z
- Nie C
- Zhu C
- Meng Y
- Yang Q
- Lu T
- Lu Z
- Liu X
- Wang S
journal: Int J Cardiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2023.131266
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitral annular calcification in obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: Incidence, risk factors, and prognostic value after myectomy.
**Authors:** Wu Z, Nie C, Zhu C, Meng Y, Yang Q, Lu T, Lu Z, Liu X, Wang S
**Journal:** Int J Cardiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijcard.2023.131266](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcard.2023.131266)

## Content

1. Int J Cardiol. 2023 Nov 15;391:131266. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2023.131266. Epub
 2023 Aug 11.

Mitral annular calcification in obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: 
Incidence, risk factors, and prognostic value after myectomy.

Wu Z(1), Nie C(2), Zhu C(2), Meng Y(3), Yang Q(3), Lu T(2), Lu Z(2), Liu X(2), 
Wang S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Fuwai Hospital, National Center for 
Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union 
Medical College, Beijing, China. Electronic address: wuzining66@sina.com.
(2)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Fuwai Hospital, National Center for 
Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union 
Medical College, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Adult Intensive Care Unit, Fuwai Hospital, National Center for 
Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union 
Medical College, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Fuwai Hospital, National Center for 
Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union 
Medical College, Beijing, China. Electronic address: wsymd@sina.com.

BACKGROUND: Mitral annular calcification (MAC) is a risk factor for cardiac 
surgery, but there is limited study on the prognosis value and the impact for 
valve function of MAC based on computed tomography (CT) diagnosis after myectomy 
for hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (OHCM).
METHODS: Consecutive OHCM patients underwent septal myectomy were compared 
according to the existence of MAC and its severity in preoperative CT scans. The 
survival data were evaluated and compared by Kaplan Meier analysis and log rank 
test. Cox regression analysis was used to evaluate the impact of MAC on endpoint 
events.
RESULTS: From the entire cohort of 1035 patients, 10.8% had MAC. In multivariate 
regression, female (OR = 2.23), age (OR = 1.07), aortic annular calcification 
(OR = 2.52), aortic calcification (OR = 2.56), systolic anterior motion of the 
mitral valve (SAM) (OR = 0.42), mitral valve thickening (OR = 2.13), and 
tricuspid regurgitation (OR = 3.12) were independent predictors of MAC. 
All-cause mortality (3.57% vs. 1.08%, p = 0.031), major adverse cardiovascular 
and cerebrovascular events (MACCE) (23.32% vs. 13.65%, p = 0.014), recurrent 
MR > 2+ (8.04% vs. 2.49%, p = 0.001) and NYHA III-IV (11.61% vs. 5.53%, 
p = 0.012) were more frequent in OHCM patients with MAC after myectomy. MAC was 
discovered to be an independent predictor of postoperative recurrent MR > 2+ 
after other risk factors were taken into account (HR 2.47, 95% CI 1.08-5.67, 
p = 0.0329). Moderate-to-severe MAC was an independent risk factor (HR 2.03, 95% 
CI 1.09-3.75, p = 0.0244) for long-term major adverse cardiovascular and 
cerebrovascular events (MACCE).
CONCLUSION: MAC was detected in one-tenth of OHCM patients in preoperative CT 
scanning and is mainly associated with aging and atherosclerosis. OHCM patients 
with MAC had a worse prognosis and more recurrent mitral valve regurgitation 
than those without MAC after septal myectomy.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2023.131266
PMID: 37574021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None.