---
reference_id: "PMID:40848267"
title: "Genetic Landscape of a Cohort of Children With Varicella Zoster Virus Encephalitis, Cerebellitis, and Stroke."
authors:
- Winzig F
- De Keukeleere K
- Bartholomeus E
- Deconinck N
- Barrea C
- Matthijs I
- Jansen AC
- Verhelst H
- Dielman C
- Kuznetsova M
- Ha M
- Suls A
- van der Sluis RM
- Ogunjimi B
- Mogensen TH
journal: J Infect Dis
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiaf448
keywords:
- Humans
- "Encephalitis, Varicella Zoster/genetics, virology, immunology"
- Child
- Male
- Female
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Herpesvirus 3, Human"
- "Stroke/genetics, virology"
- Cohort Studies
- Infant
- "Cerebellar Diseases/genetics, virology"
- Exome Sequencing
- Adolescent
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic Landscape of a Cohort of Children With Varicella Zoster Virus Encephalitis, Cerebellitis, and Stroke.
**Authors:** Winzig F, De Keukeleere K, Bartholomeus E, Deconinck N, Barrea C, Matthijs I, Jansen AC, Verhelst H, Dielman C, Kuznetsova M, Ha M, Suls A, van der Sluis RM, Ogunjimi B, Mogensen TH
**Journal:** J Infect Dis (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1093/infdis/jiaf448](https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiaf448)

## Content

1. J Infect Dis. 2026 Mar 17;233(3):510-520. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiaf448.

Genetic Landscape of a Cohort of Children With Varicella Zoster Virus 
Encephalitis, Cerebellitis, and Stroke.

Winzig F(1)(2), De Keukeleere K(1)(2), Bartholomeus E(3)(4)(5), Deconinck 
N(6)(7)(8), Barrea C(9), Matthijs I(10), Jansen AC(11)(12), Verhelst H(13)(14), 
Dielman C(15), Kuznetsova M(3)(4)(5), Ha M(3)(4)(5), Suls A(16), van der Sluis 
RM(1)(2), Ogunjimi B(3)(4)(5)(15)(17)(18), Mogensen TH(1)(2)(19).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(2)Center for Immunology for Viral Infections, Aarhus University, Aarhus, 
Denmark.
(3)Antwerp Center for Translational Immunology and Virology, Vaccine and 
Infectious Disease Institute, University of Antwerp, Wilrijk, Belgium.
(4)Center for Health Economics Research and Modelling Infectious Diseases, 
Vaccine and Infectious Disease Institute, University of Antwerp, Wilrijk, 
Belgium.
(5)Antwerp Unit for Data Analysis and Computation in Immunology and Sequencing, 
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(6)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Hôpital Universitaire de Bruxelles, 
Brussels, Belgium.
(7)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants Reine 
Fabiola, Brussels, Belgium.
(8)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, 
Belgium.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital of Liège, Liège, Belgium.
(10)Department of Paediatrics, AZ Delta, Roeselare, Belgium.
(11)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Antwerp 
University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium.
(12)Translational Neurosciences, University of Antwerp, Wilrijk, Belgium.
(13)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Ghent University 
Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(14)Department of Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(15)Department of Paediatrics, Ziekenhuis Aan de Stroom, Antwerp, Belgium.
(16)Center of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(17)Department of Paediatrics, Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel, Brussels, 
Belgium.
(18)Department of Pediatrics, Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium.
(19)Department of Infectious Diseases, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, 
Denmark.

Varicella zoster virus (VZV) is a neurotropic member of the Herpesviridae family 
that causes varicella in primary infection and zoster during reactivation but in 
rare cases can lead to severe neurological complications, such as encephalitis. 
To identify inborn errors of immunity and unravel pathways involved in VZV 
central nervous system (CNS) immune responses and pathogenesis, we performed 
whole exome sequencing on a cohort of 38 children with neurological 
manifestations, including VZV encephalitis, cerebellitis, or stroke. We 
identified a total of 46 rare potentially pathogenic variants predicted to be 
deleterious, including variants in innate antiviral immunity, inflammation, cell 
stress responses, and autophagy. Collectively, these findings represent a 
knowledge base for further functional studies, provide new insights into the 
genetic landscape of VZV CNS infections, and highlight potential genetic defects 
that may compromise host defense, enabling new avenues for diagnosis and 
personalized treatment strategies for VZV CNS infections.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of 
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For commercial 
re-use, please contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for 
reprints. All other permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service 
via the Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information 
please contact journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiaf448
PMID: 40848267 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential conflicts of interest. All authors: No 
reported conflicts. All authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of 
Potential Conflicts of Interest. Conflicts that the editors consider relevant to 
the content of the manuscript have been disclosed.