---
reference_id: "PMID:25905388"
title: Hypoparathyroidism and Pseudohypoparathyroidism.
authors:
- Feingold KR
- Adler RA
- Ahmed SF
- Anawalt B
- Blackman MR
- Chrousos G
- Corpas E
- de Herder WW
- Dhatariya K
- Dungan K
- Hamilton E
- Hofland J
- Jan de Beur S
- Kalra S
- Kaltsas G
- Kapoor N
- Kim M
- Koch C
- Kopp P
- Korbonits M
- Kovacs CS
- Kuohung W
- Laferrère B
- Levy M
- McGee EA
- McLachlan R
- Muzumdar R
- Purnell J
- Rey R
- Sahay R
- Shah AS
- Sperling MA
- Stratakis CA
- Trence DL
- Wilson DP
- Bastepe M
- Gensure RC
year: '2000'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypoparathyroidism and Pseudohypoparathyroidism.
**Authors:** Feingold KR, Adler RA, Ahmed SF, Anawalt B, Blackman MR, Chrousos G, Corpas E, de Herder WW, Dhatariya K, Dungan K, Hamilton E, Hofland J, Jan de Beur S, Kalra S, Kaltsas G, Kapoor N, Kim M, Koch C, Kopp P, Korbonits M, Kovacs CS, Kuohung W, Laferrère B, Levy M, McGee EA, McLachlan R, Muzumdar R, Purnell J, Rey R, Sahay R, Shah AS, Sperling MA, Stratakis CA, Trence DL, Wilson DP, Bastepe M, Gensure RC

## Content

1. Hypoparathyroidism and Pseudohypoparathyroidism.

Bastepe M(1), Gensure RC(2).

In: Feingold KR(3), Adler RA(4), Ahmed SF(5), Anawalt B(6), Blackman MR(7), 
Chrousos G(8), Corpas E(9), de Herder WW(10), Dhatariya K(11), Dungan K(12), 
Hamilton E(13), Hofland J(14), Jan de Beur S(15), Kalra S(16), Kaltsas G(17), 
Kapoor N(18), Kim M(19), Koch C(20), Kopp P(21), Korbonits M(22), Kovacs CS(23), 
Kuohung W(24), Laferrère B(25), Levy M(26), McGee EA(27), McLachlan R(28), 
Muzumdar R(29), Purnell J(30), Rey R(31), Sahay R(32), Shah AS(33), Sperling 
MA(34), Stratakis CA(35), Trence DL(36), Wilson DP(37), editors. Endotext 
[Internet]. South Dartmouth (MA): MDText.com, Inc.; 2000–.
2024 May 8.

Author information:
(1)Associate Professor, Harvard Medical School, Endocrine Unit, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, MA. USA
(2)Associate Professor, Geisel School of Medicine, Dartmouth College, Hanover, 
NH. USA
(3)Professor of Medicine Emeritus, University of California, San Francisco, CA
(4)Chief of Endocrinology and Metabolism at the Richmond Veterans Affairs 
Medical Center and Professor of Internal Medicine at Virginia Commonwealth 
University.
(5)Developmental Endocrinology Research Group, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, 
UK
(6)Chief of Medicine at the University of Washington Medical Center and 
Professor and Vice Chair of the Department of Medicine, University of Washington
(7)Sr. Physician Scientist, Washington DC VA Medical Center; Professor of 
Medicine & Rehabilitation Medicine, Georgetown University; Clinical Professor of 
Medicine, Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, George Washington University; and 
Professor of Medicine (Part-time), Johns Hopkins University
(8)Professor of Pediatrics and Endocrinology, Division of Endocrinology, 
Metabolism and Diabetes, First Department of Pediatrics, National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens Medical School, "Aghia Sophia" Children's 
Hospital, Athens, Greece
(9)M.D. Ph.D in Gerontology. Honorary Professor of Medicine, Universidad de 
Alcalá, Madrid. Consultant in Endocrinology, Hospital HLA Guadalajara (Spain).
(10)Professor of Endocrine Oncology, Erasmus MC and Erasmus MC Cancer Center, 
Rotterdam, the Netherlands
(11)Consultant in Diabetes, Endocrinology and General Medicine, Norfolk and 
Norwich University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust and University of East Anglia, 
Norwich, UK.
(12)Professor of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, 
Ohio State University
(13)Consultant Endocrinologist at Fiona Stanley (FSH) and Fremantle Hospitals 
(FH) in Perth, Western Australia
(14)Consultant Endocrinologist, Erasmus MC and Erasmus MC Cancer Center, 
Rotterdam, the Netherlands
(15)Professor of Endocrinology and Chief of the Division of Endocrinology and 
Metabolism at the University of Virginia School of Medicine.
(16)Consultant Endocrinologist, Department of Endocrinology, Bharti Hospital, 
Karnal, India
(17)Professor of General Medicine-Endocrinology, 1st Department of Propaedeutic 
Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece
(18)Professor of Endocrinology, Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and 
Metabolism, Christian Medical College & Hospital, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India, 
Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry 
and Health Science, The University of Melbourne, Australia.
(19)Clinical Director of the Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and 
Hypertension at Brigham and Women’s Hospital and an Assistant Professor of 
Medicine at Harvard Medical School. 18. Professor, Division of Endocrinology, 
Diabetes, Metabolism, Department of Medicine, The University of Tennessee Health 
Science Center, Memphis, TN, and University of Florida, Jacksonville, FL.
(20)Professor, The University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, 
Tennessee
(21)Professor of Medicine and Chief of the Division of Endocrinology, 
Diabetology and Metabolism, University of Lausanne, Switzerland
(22)Professor of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Centre Lead for Endocrinology and 
Deputy Institute Director, William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and the 
London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, 
London, England
(23)University Research Professor and Professor of Medicine (Endocrinology and 
Metabolism), Obstetrics & Gynecology, and BioMedical Sciences, at Memorial 
University of Newfoundland in St. John’s, Newfoundland, Canada.
(24)Director of the Division of Reproductive Endocrinology at Boston Medical 
Center and an Associate Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology at the Boston 
University School of Medicine
(25)Professor of Medicine, New York Nutrition Obesity Research Center, Division 
of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Columbia University Irving Medical 
Center, New York, NY, USA.
(26)Consultant endocrinologist at University Hospitals of Leicester and Honorary 
Associate Professor at Leicester University
(27)Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology at the University of Vermont and 
Director of the Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility. 
Burlington, Vermont
(28)Director of Clinical Research, Hudson Institute of Medical Research; 
Consultant Endocrinologist, Monash Medical Centre, Melbourne, Australia
(29)Allan L. Drash Endowed Chair, Chief, Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes, 
UPMC Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh, Professor of Pediatrics and Cell 
Biology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA
(30)Professor of Medicine, Knight Cardiovascular Institute and the Division of 
Endocrinology, and Associate Director, Bob and Charlee Moore Institute for 
Nutrition and Wellness, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR
(31)Centro de Investigaciones Endocrinológicas “Dr. César Bergadá” (CEDIE), 
CONICET-FEI-División de Endocrinología, Hospital de Niños Ricardo Gutiérrez, 
Gallo 1330, C1425EFD Buenos Aires; and Departamento de Histología, Biología 
Celular, Embriología y Genética, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Buenos 
Aires, C1121ABG Buenos Aires, Argentina
(32)Professor and Head of Department of Endocrinology, Osmania Medical College 
and Osmania General Hospital, Hyderabad, India.
(33)Professor of Pediatrics, The University of Cincinnati, Department of 
Pediatrics and Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Division of 
Endocrinology, Cincinnati, OH, USA
(34)Professorial Lecturer, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY. Emeritus Professor and 
Chair, Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh.
(35)CSO, ELPEN, Inc. & Director, Research Institute, Athens, Greece & Senior 
Investigator, Human Genetics & Precision Medicine, FORTH (ITE), Heraklion, 
Greece. Emeritus Scientific Director & Senior Investigator, NICHD, NIH, 
Bethesda, MD, USA
(36)Professor of Medicine, Emeritus, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
(37)Endowed Chair, Cardiovascular Health and Risk Prevention, Pediatric 
Endocrinology and Diabetes, Cook Children's Medical Center, Fort Worth, TX

In primary hypoparathyroidism with hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia, deficient 
parathyroid hormone (PTH) secretion most commonly occurs from surgical excision 
of, or damage to, the parathyroid glands. The term idiopathic hypoparathyroidism 
describes isolated cases when a cause is not obvious, and there is no family 
history. However, hypoparathyroidism is also a feature common to a variety of 
hereditable syndromes that may present de novo. Familial isolated 
hypoparathyroidism may show autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, or X-linked 
inheritance. Genes involved include PTH, SOX3, CASR, GNA11 and GCM2. Parathyroid 
hypoplasia is a frequent feature of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome with involvement 
of the TBX1 gene. The Hypoparathyroidism, Nerve Deafness, and Renal Dysplasia 
syndrome is due to haploinsufficiency of the GATA3 gene. Antibodies against 
parathyroid tissue are found in isolated hypoparathyroidism or combined with 
other endocrine deficiencies. Antibodies against the CASR occur in type 1 
autoimmune polyglandular syndrome, due to mutations of the AIRE gene, or in 
acquired hypoparathyroidism. Disorders characterized by end-organ resistance to 
PTH are described collectively by the term pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP), and 
PHP1A and PHP1B are caused by maternally-inherited changes at the imprinted GNAS 
complex gene that encodes the Gsα protein. Deleterious mutations of the PTH1R 
gene show resistance to PTH and PTHrP and present as Blomstrand lethal 
chondrodysplasia, Eiken syndrome, endochondromatosis, and primary failure of 
tooth eruption. Calcium and vitamin D are the standard therapy for the 
management of hypoparathyroidism, with hormone replacement [recombinant human 
PTH(1-84)] therapy recently becoming an option. Calcilytics, PTH analogs, and 
orally active small molecule PTH1R agonists may, in the future, join the 
treatment armamentarium. For complete coverage of all related areas of 
Endocrinology, please visit our on-line FREE web-text, WWW.ENDOTEXT.ORG.

Copyright © 2000-2026, MDText.com, Inc.

PMID: 25905388