---
reference_id: "PMID:38676907"
title: Changing etiological spectrum of acute liver failure.
authors:
- Seth S
- Maharshi S
- Sharma KK
- Pokharna R
- Nijhawan S
- Sharma SS
journal: Indian J Gastroenterol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s12664-024-01578-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Changing etiological spectrum of acute liver failure.
**Authors:** Seth S, Maharshi S, Sharma KK, Pokharna R, Nijhawan S, Sharma SS
**Journal:** Indian J Gastroenterol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12664-024-01578-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12664-024-01578-2)

## Content

1. Indian J Gastroenterol. 2024 Apr;43(2):452-458. doi:
10.1007/s12664-024-01578-2.  Epub 2024 Apr 27.

Changing etiological spectrum of acute liver failure.

Seth S(1), Maharshi S(2), Sharma KK(1), Pokharna R(1), Nijhawan S(1), Sharma 
SS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, SMS Medical College and Hospitals, Room No. 
218, Superspeciality Block, Jaipur, 302 004, India.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, SMS Medical College and Hospitals, Room No. 
218, Superspeciality Block, Jaipur, 302 004, India. sudhir.maharshi@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Acute liver failure (ALF) is an uncommon but 
potentially dramatic syndrome characterized by massive hepatic necrosis and has 
a very high mortality rate of 50% to 75% without liver transplantation. This 
study is aimed at analyzing the etiological spectrum of ALF patients and compare 
these with ALF mimics such as malaria, dengue fever and other tropical 
infectious diseases.
METHODS: The study population included patients who presented with ALF and ALF 
mimics in a tertiary care center over two years. We retrospectively analyzed the 
patient case files and a comparison was made concerning the baseline demographic 
details, clinical profile, laboratory values and outcomes.
RESULTS: Sixty-three patients were assessed, with 32 in ALF and 31 in ALF mimics 
group. The most common cause for ALF was hepatitis A virus (25%), followed by 
hepatitis B virus (18.7%), drug-induced liver injury (12.7%), autoimmune 
hepatitis (12.5%), hepatitis E virus (9.3%) and Wilson's disease (6.25%). In the 
ALF mimics group, malaria (58.06%) was the most common cause, followed by dengue 
fever (16.1%), leptospirosis (12.9%) and scrub typhus (12.9%). Patients in the 
ALF mimics group had significantly higher incidence of fever (p = 0.001), 
hepatosplenomegaly (p = 0.01), anemia (p = 0.02) and shorter jaundice to 
encephalopathy duration (p = 0.032) as compared to the ALF group, while higher 
transaminase levels (p = 0.03), bilirubin (p = 0.01), prothrombin time 
(p = 0.01), serum ammonia (p = 0.02) and mortality (p = 0.02) were observed in 
ALF patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The most common cause for ALF was hepatitis A virus, followed by 
hepatitis B virus, while in ALF mimics it was malaria followed by dengue fever, 
in our study. Patients of ALF mimics can have similar presentation, but a high 
index of suspicion and awareness is required to identify the common infectious 
ALF mimics for early diagnosis.

© 2024. Indian Society of Gastroenterology.

DOI: 10.1007/s12664-024-01578-2
PMID: 38676907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]