---
reference_id: "PMID:12858176"
title: Mutations in the genes encoding 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 and hexose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase interact to cause cortisone reductase deficiency.
authors:
- Draper N
- Walker EA
- Bujalska IJ
- Tomlinson JW
- Chalder SM
- Arlt W
- Lavery GG
- Bedendo O
- Ray DW
- Laing I
- Malunowicz E
- White PC
- Hewison M
- Mason PJ
- Connell JM
- Shackleton CH
- Stewart PM
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1038/ng1214
keywords:
- 11-beta-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase Type 2
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- "Carbohydrate Dehydrogenases/genetics, metabolism"
- Case-Control Studies
- Cell Line
- Cortisone Reductase/deficiency
- "DNA, Complementary/genetics"
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
- Exons
- Female
- Humans
- "Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenases/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- NADP/metabolism
- Oxidation-Reduction
- Phenotype
- "Polycystic Ovary Syndrome/etiology, genetics, metabolism"
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, metabolism"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Transfection
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the genes encoding 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 and hexose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase interact to cause cortisone reductase deficiency.
**Authors:** Draper N, Walker EA, Bujalska IJ, Tomlinson JW, Chalder SM, Arlt W, Lavery GG, Bedendo O, Ray DW, Laing I, Malunowicz E, White PC, Hewison M, Mason PJ, Connell JM, Shackleton CH, Stewart PM
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1214](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1214)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2003 Aug;34(4):434-9. doi: 10.1038/ng1214.

Mutations in the genes encoding 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 and
hexose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase interact to cause cortisone reductase
deficiency.

Draper N(1), Walker EA, Bujalska IJ, Tomlinson JW, Chalder SM, Arlt W, Lavery
GG, Bedendo O, Ray DW, Laing I, Malunowicz E, White PC, Hewison M, Mason PJ,
Connell JM, Shackleton CH, Stewart PM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Sciences, University of Birmingham, Queen Elizabeth
Hospital, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TH, UK.

In cortisone reductase deficiency (CRD), activation of cortisone to cortisol
does not occur, resulting in adrenocorticotropin-mediated androgen excess and a
phenotype resembling polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS; refs. 1,2). This suggests
a defect in the gene HSD11B1 encoding 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1
(11beta-HSD1), a primary regulator of tissue-specific glucocorticoid
bioavailability. We identified intronic mutations in HSD11B1 that resulted in
reduced gene transcription in three individuals with CRD. In vivo, 11beta-HSD1
catalyzes the reduction of cortisone to cortisol whereas purified enzyme acts as
a dehydrogenase converting cortisol to cortisone. Oxo-reductase activity can be
regained using a NADPH-regeneration system and the cytosolic enzyme
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. But the catalytic domain of 11beta-HSD1 faces
into the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER; ref. 6). We hypothesized that
endolumenal hexose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (H6PDH) regenerates NADPH in the
ER, thereby influencing directionality of 11beta-HSD1 activity. Mutations in
exon 5 of H6PD in individuals with CRD attenuated or abolished H6PDH activity.
These individuals have mutations in both HSD11B1 and H6PD in a triallelic
digenic model of inheritance, resulting in low 11beta-HSD1 expression and ER
NADPH generation with loss of 11beta-HSD1 oxo-reductase activity. CRD defines a
new ER-specific redox potential and establishes H6PDH as a potential factor in
the pathogenesis of PCOS.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1214
PMID: 12858176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
