---
reference_id: "PMID:34124309"
title: Activity-based Anorexia for Modeling Vulnerability and Resilience in Mice.
authors:
- Beeler JA
- Burghardt NS
journal: Bio Protoc
year: '2021'
doi: 10.21769/BioProtoc.4009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Activity-based Anorexia for Modeling Vulnerability and Resilience in Mice.
**Authors:** Beeler JA, Burghardt NS
**Journal:** Bio Protoc (2021)
**DOI:** [10.21769/BioProtoc.4009](https://doi.org/10.21769/BioProtoc.4009)

## Content

1. Bio Protoc. 2021 May 5;11(9):e4009. doi: 10.21769/BioProtoc.4009. eCollection
2021 May 5.

Activity-based Anorexia for Modeling Vulnerability and Resilience in Mice.

Beeler JA(1)(2)(3), Burghardt NS(4)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Queens College, CUNY, Flushing, NY, USA.
(2)Psychology Program, The Graduate Center, CUNY, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Biology Program, The Graduate Center, CUNY, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, Hunter College, CUNY, New York, NY, USA.

Activity-based anorexia (ABA) is a widely used rodent model of anorexia nervosa.
It involves combining limited access to food with unlimited access to a running
wheel, leading to a paradoxical decrease in food intake, hyperactivity, and
life-threatening weight loss. Although initially characterized in rats, ABA has
been tested in mice with results that vary based on strain, sex, age, the amount
of time food is available, and the number of days of food restriction. Here, we
present our ABA protocol for modeling both vulnerability and resilience to diet
and exercise in C57BL/6 female mice. While vulnerable mice exhibit the expected
increase in running, reduction in food intake, and excessive weight loss,
resilient mice exhibit an adaptive increase in food intake, decrease in total
wheel running, and weight stabilization. In contrast to previous ABA studies in
which resilience is defined by the relative rate of weight loss, our protocol
leads to a resilient phenotype that more closely resembles the maintenance of a
stable bodyweight exhibited by most humans who diet and exercise without
developing anorexia nervosa. This protocol will be useful for future studies
aimed at identifying the physiological and neural adaptations underlying both
resilience and vulnerability to this eating disorder.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors; exclusive licensee Bio-protocol LLC.

DOI: 10.21769/BioProtoc.4009
PMCID: PMC8161139
PMID: 34124309

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors have no financial
or non-financial competing interests to report.
