---
reference_id: "PMID:36136119"
title: "Brain imaging findings in Liberfarb syndrome: hypomyelination and optic nerve and cerebellar atrophy."
authors:
- Pinto E
- Pinto C
- Ramos C
- Alves JE
journal: Pediatr Radiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00247-022-05503-7
keywords:
- Humans
- Cerebellar Diseases/pathology
- Optic Nerve
- Intellectual Disability/pathology
- Atrophy/pathology
- Neuroimaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brain imaging findings in Liberfarb syndrome: hypomyelination and optic nerve and cerebellar atrophy.
**Authors:** Pinto E, Pinto C, Ramos C, Alves JE
**Journal:** Pediatr Radiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00247-022-05503-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00247-022-05503-7)

## Content

1. Pediatr Radiol. 2023 Mar;53(3):561-563. doi: 10.1007/s00247-022-05503-7. Epub 
2022 Sep 22.

Brain imaging findings in Liberfarb syndrome: hypomyelination and optic nerve 
and cerebellar atrophy.

Pinto E(1)(2), Pinto C(3), Ramos C(3), Alves JE(3).

Author information:
(1)Neuroradiology Department, Centro Hospitalar Universitário Do Porto, Porto, 
Portugal. eduardapinto92@gmail.com.
(2)Rua do Cruzeiro, n. 340, 4650-069, Airães, Felgueiras, Portugal. 
eduardapinto92@gmail.com.
(3)Neuroradiology Department, Centro Hospitalar Universitário Do Porto, Porto, 
Portugal.

Liberfarb syndrome is an extremely rare mitochondrial multisystem disorder, 
recently described and characterized by early-onset retinal degeneration and 
sensorineural hearing loss, spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia, joint laxity, 
short stature, microcephaly, developmental delay and intellectual disability, 
but clinical variability has been observed. We report a case that presented to 
the hospital with a flare-up of the disease. We describe the brain magnetic 
resonance imaging findings, which are still not well characterized, to raise 
awareness of this diagnosis.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00247-022-05503-7
PMID: 36136119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]