---
reference_id: "PMID:11138001"
title: "Disruption of a new forkhead/winged-helix protein, scurfin, results in the fatal lymphoproliferative disorder of the scurfy mouse."
authors:
- Brunkow ME
- Jeffery EW
- Hjerrild KA
- Paeper B
- Clark LB
- Yasayko SA
- Wilkinson JE
- Galas D
- Ziegler SF
- Ramsdell F
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1038/83784
keywords:
- Amino Acid Motifs
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- Conserved Sequence
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Forkhead Transcription Factors
- Gene Expression Profiling
- "Genes, Essential/genetics"
- "Genes, Recessive/genetics"
- Genetic Complementation Test
- Humans
- "Lymph Nodes/immunology, pathology"
- Lymphocyte Count
- "Lymphoproliferative Disorders/genetics, immunology, pathology"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- Physical Chromosome Mapping
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- "RNA, Messenger/analysis, genetics"
- Sequence Alignment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disruption of a new forkhead/winged-helix protein, scurfin, results in the fatal lymphoproliferative disorder of the scurfy mouse.
**Authors:** Brunkow ME, Jeffery EW, Hjerrild KA, Paeper B, Clark LB, Yasayko SA, Wilkinson JE, Galas D, Ziegler SF, Ramsdell F
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/83784](https://doi.org/10.1038/83784)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2001 Jan;27(1):68-73. doi: 10.1038/83784.

Disruption of a new forkhead/winged-helix protein, scurfin, results in the fatal 
lymphoproliferative disorder of the scurfy mouse.

Brunkow ME(1), Jeffery EW, Hjerrild KA, Paeper B, Clark LB, Yasayko SA, 
Wilkinson JE, Galas D, Ziegler SF, Ramsdell F.

Author information:
(1)Celltech Chiroscience, Inc., Bothell, Washington, USA. 
marybrunkow@chiroscience.com

Scurfy (sf) is an X-linked recessive mouse mutant resulting in lethality in 
hemizygous males 16-25 days after birth, and is characterized by 
overproliferation of CD4+CD8- T lymphocytes, extensive multiorgan infiltration 
and elevation of numerous cytokines. Similar to animals that lack expression of 
either Ctla-4 or Tgf-beta, the pathology observed in sf mice seems to result 
from an inability to properly regulate CD4+CD8- T-cell activity. Here we 
identify the gene defective in sf mice by combining high-resolution genetic and 
physical mapping with large-scale sequence analysis. The protein encoded by this 
gene (designated Foxp3) is a new member of the forkhead/winged-helix family of 
transcriptional regulators and is highly conserved in humans. In sf mice, a 
frameshift mutation results in a product lacking the forkhead domain. Genetic 
complementation demonstrates that the protein product of Foxp3, scurfin, is 
essential for normal immune homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1038/83784
PMID: 11138001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]