---
reference_id: "PMID:27751442"
title: "Therapeutic strategies for the treatment of tauopathies: Hopes and challenges."
authors:
- Khanna MR
- Kovalevich J
- Lee VM
- Trojanowski JQ
- Brunden KR
journal: Alzheimers Dement
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2016.06.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapeutic strategies for the treatment of tauopathies: Hopes and challenges.
**Authors:** Khanna MR, Kovalevich J, Lee VM, Trojanowski JQ, Brunden KR
**Journal:** Alzheimers Dement (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jalz.2016.06.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jalz.2016.06.006)

## Content

1. Alzheimers Dement. 2016 Oct;12(10):1051-1065. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2016.06.006.

Therapeutic strategies for the treatment of tauopathies: Hopes and challenges.

Khanna MR(1), Kovalevich J(1), Lee VM(1), Trojanowski JQ(1), Brunden KR(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Center for Neurodegenerative 
Disease Research, Institute on Aging, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Center for Neurodegenerative 
Disease Research, Institute on Aging, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA. Electronic address: kbrunden@upenn.edu.

A group of neurodegenerative diseases referred to as tauopathies are 
characterized by the presence of brain cells harboring inclusions of 
pathological species of the tau protein. These disorders include Alzheimer's 
disease and frontotemporal lobar degeneration due to tau pathology, including 
progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration, and Pick's disease. 
Tau is normally a microtubule (MT)-associated protein that appears to play an 
important role in ensuring proper axonal transport, but in tauopathies tau 
becomes hyperphosphorylated and disengages from MTs, with consequent misfolding 
and deposition into inclusions that mainly affect neurons but also glia. A body 
of experimental evidence suggests that the development of tau inclusions leads 
to the neurodegeneration observed in tauopathies, and there is a growing 
interest in developing tau-directed therapeutic agents. The following review 
provides a summary of strategies under investigation for the potential treatment 
of tauopathies, highlighting both the promises and challenges associated with 
these various therapeutic approaches.

Copyright © 2016 The Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2016.06.006
PMCID: PMC5116305
PMID: 27751442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]