---
reference_id: "PMID:27419809"
title: "Phenotype, cancer risk, and surveillance in Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome depending on molecular genetic subgroups."
authors:
- Maas SM
- Vansenne F
- Kadouch DJ
- Ibrahim A
- Bliek J
- Hopman S
- Mannens MM
- Merks JH
- Maher ER
- Hennekam RC
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37801
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Child
- Cohort Studies
- DNA Methylation
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genomic Imprinting
- "Hepatoblastoma/epidemiology, etiology"
- Humans
- Insulin-Like Growth Factor II/genetics
- Male
- Minisatellite Repeats
- "Neoplasms/epidemiology, etiology"
- Phenotype
- Population Surveillance
- "Potassium Channels, Voltage-Gated/genetics"
- "RNA, Long Noncoding/genetics"
- Risk
- "Wilms Tumor/epidemiology, etiology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotype, cancer risk, and surveillance in Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome depending on molecular genetic subgroups.
**Authors:** Maas SM, Vansenne F, Kadouch DJ, Ibrahim A, Bliek J, Hopman S, Mannens MM, Merks JH, Maher ER, Hennekam RC
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.37801](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.37801)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2016 Sep;170(9):2248-60. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37801. Epub
2016  Jul 15.

Phenotype, cancer risk, and surveillance in Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome 
depending on molecular genetic subgroups.

Maas SM(1)(2), Vansenne F(3), Kadouch DJ(4), Ibrahim A(5)(6), Bliek J(7), Hopman 
S(8), Mannens MM(7), Merks JH(1), Maher ER(5), Hennekam RC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Clinical Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, 
Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Plastic Surgery, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge and NHR Cambridge 
Biomedical Research Centre, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Clinical Genetics, University of Dundee, Ninewells Hospital and 
Medical School, Dundee, United Kingdom.
(7)Department of Clinical Genetics, DNA-Diagnostics Laboratory, Academic Medical 
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Genetics, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Patients with Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) have an increased risk to 
develop cancer in childhood, especially Wilms tumor and hepatoblastoma. The risk 
varies depending on the cause of BWS. We obtained clinical and molecular data in 
our cohort of children with BWS, including tumor occurrences, and correlated 
phenotype and genotype. We obtained similar data from larger cohorts reported in 
the literature. Phenotype, genotype and tumor occurrence were available in 229 
of our own patients. Minor differences in phenotype existed depending on 
genotype/epigenotype, similar to earlier studies. By adding patients from the 
literature, we obtained data on genotype and tumor occurrence of in total 1,971 
BWS patients. Tumor risks were highest in the IC1 (H19/IGF2:IG-DMR) 
hypermethylation subgroup (28%) and pUPD subgroup (16%) and were lower in the 
KCNQ1OT1:TSS-DMR (IC2) subgroup (2.6%), CDKN1C (6.9%) subgroup, and the group in 
whom no molecular defect was detectable (6.7%). Wilms tumors (median age 24 
months) were frequent in the IC1 (24%) and pUPD (7.9%) subgroups. Hepatoblastoma 
occurred mostly in the pUPD (3.5%) and IC2 (0.7%) subgroups, never in the IC1 
and CDKN1C subgroups, and always before 30 months of age. In the CDKN1C subgroup 
2.8% of patients developed neuroblastoma. We conclude tumor risks in BWS differ 
markedly depending on molecular background. We propose a differentiated 
surveillance protocol, based on tumor risks in the various molecular subgroups 
causing BWS. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37801
PMID: 27419809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]