---
reference_id: "PMID:37741465"
title: "Therapeutic implications of impaired nuclear receptor function and dysregulated metabolism in Wilson's disease."
authors:
- Wooton-Kee CR
journal: Pharmacol Ther
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2023.108529
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapeutic implications of impaired nuclear receptor function and dysregulated metabolism in Wilson's disease.
**Authors:** Wooton-Kee CR
**Journal:** Pharmacol Ther (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pharmthera.2023.108529](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pharmthera.2023.108529)

## Content

1. Pharmacol Ther. 2023 Nov;251:108529. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2023.108529.
Epub  2023 Sep 22.

Therapeutic implications of impaired nuclear receptor function and dysregulated 
metabolism in Wilson's disease.

Wooton-Kee CR(1).

Author information:
(1)Baylor College of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics-Nutrition, Children's 
Nutrition Research Center, Houston, TX, United States of America. Electronic 
address: wootenke@bcm.edu.

Copper is an essential trace element that is required for the activity of many 
enzymes and cellular processes, including energy homeostasis and 
neurotransmitter biosynthesis; however, excess copper accumulation results in 
significant cellular toxicity. The liver is the major organ for maintaining 
copper homeostasis. Inactivating mutations of the copper-transporting P-type 
ATPase, ATP7B, result in Wilson's disease, an autosomal recessive disorder that 
requires life-long medicinal therapy or liver transplantation. Current treatment 
protocols are limited to either sequestration of copper via chelation or 
reduction of copper absorption in the gut (zinc therapy). The goal of these 
strategies is to reduce free copper, redox stress, and cellular toxicity. 
Several lines of evidence in Wilson's disease animal models and patients have 
revealed altered hepatic metabolism and impaired hepatic nuclear receptor 
activity. Nuclear receptors are transcription factors that coordinate hepatic 
metabolism in normal and diseased livers, and several hepatic nuclear receptors 
have decreased activity in Wilson's disease and Atp7b-/- models. In this review, 
we summarize the basic physiology that underlies Wilson's disease pathology, 
Wilson's disease animal models, and the possibility of targeting nuclear 
receptor activity in Wilson's disease patients.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2023.108529
PMCID: PMC10841433
PMID: 37741465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.