---
reference_id: "PMID:38352271"
title: Whole-body galactose oxidation as a robust functional assay to assess the efficacy of gene-based therapies in a mouse model of Galactosemia.
authors:
- Balakrishnan B
- Yan X
- McCue MD
- Bellagamba O
- Guo A
- Winkler F
- Thall J
- Crawford L
- Dimen R
- Chen S
- McEnaney S
- Wu Y
- Zimmer M
- Sarkis J
- Martini PGV
- Finn PF
- Lai K
journal: Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.omtm.2024.101191
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whole-body galactose oxidation as a robust functional assay to assess the efficacy of gene-based therapies in a mouse model of Galactosemia.
**Authors:** Balakrishnan B, Yan X, McCue MD, Bellagamba O, Guo A, Winkler F, Thall J, Crawford L, Dimen R, Chen S, McEnaney S, Wu Y, Zimmer M, Sarkis J, Martini PGV, Finn PF, Lai K
**Journal:** Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.omtm.2024.101191](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omtm.2024.101191)

## Content

1. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2024 Jan 17;32(1):101191. doi: 
10.1016/j.omtm.2024.101191. eCollection 2024 Mar 14.

Whole-body galactose oxidation as a robust functional assay to assess the 
efficacy of gene-based therapies in a mouse model of Galactosemia.

Balakrishnan B(1), Yan X(2), McCue MD(3), Bellagamba O(1), Guo A(1), Winkler 
F(2), Thall J(2), Crawford L(2), Dimen R(2), Chen S(2), McEnaney S(2), Wu Y(2), 
Zimmer M(2), Sarkis J(2), Martini PGV(2), Finn PF(2), Lai K(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah 
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84108, USA.
(2)Moderna, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
(3)Sable Systems International, North Las Vegas, NV 89032, USA.

Despite the implementation of lifesaving newborn screening programs and a 
galactose-restricted diet, many patients with classic galactosemia develop 
long-term debilitating neurological deficits and primary ovarian insufficiency. 
Previously, we showed that the administration of human GALT mRNA predominantly 
expressed in the GalT gene-trapped mouse liver augmented the expression of 
hepatic GALT activity, which decreased not only galactose-1 phosphate (gal-1P) 
in the liver but also peripheral tissues. Since each peripheral tissue requires 
distinct methods to examine the biomarker and/or GALT effect, this highlights 
the necessity for alternative strategies to evaluate the overall impact of 
therapies. In this study, we established that whole-body galactose oxidation 
(WBGO) as a robust, noninvasive, and specific method to assess the in vivo 
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic parameters of two experimental gene-based 
therapies that aimed to restore GALT activity in a mouse model of galactosemia. 
Although our results illustrated the long-lasting efficacy of AAVrh10-mediated 
GALT gene transfer, we found that GALT mRNA therapy that targets the liver 
predominantly is sufficient to sustain WBGO. The latter could have important 
implications in the design of novel targeted therapy to ensure optimal efficacy 
and safety.

© 2024 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtm.2024.101191
PMCID: PMC10863324
PMID: 38352271

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following competing 
interests: X.Y., F.W., J.T., L.C., R.D., S.C., S.M., Y.W., M.Z., J.S., P.G.V.M., 
and P.F.F. are employees of Moderna and hold equities from the company.