---
reference_id: "PMID:33209717"
title: Germline predisposition to genitourinary rhabdomyosarcoma.
authors:
- Schneider KW
- Cost NG
- Schultz KAP
- Svihovec S
- Suttman A
journal: Transl Androl Urol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.21037/tau-20-76
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Germline predisposition to genitourinary rhabdomyosarcoma.
**Authors:** Schneider KW, Cost NG, Schultz KAP, Svihovec S, Suttman A
**Journal:** Transl Androl Urol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.21037/tau-20-76](https://doi.org/10.21037/tau-20-76)

## Content

1. Transl Androl Urol. 2020 Oct;9(5):2430-2440. doi: 10.21037/tau-20-76.

Germline predisposition to genitourinary rhabdomyosarcoma.

Schneider KW(1), Cost NG(2), Schultz KAP(3), Svihovec S(4), Suttman A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Hematology, Oncology and Bone Marrow
Transplantation, University of Colorado, Anschutz Medical Campus, Children's
Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA.
(2)Department of Surgery, Division of Urology, University of Colorado, Anschutz
Medical Campus, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA.
(3)International Pleuropulmonary Blastoma (PPB)/DICER1 Registry, Cancer and
Blood Disorders Program, Children's Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics, University of Colorado,
Anschutz Medical Campus, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA.

Multiple genetic conditions predispose to the development of rhabdomyosarcoma.
Much of the literature on rhabdomyosarcoma in genetic syndromes does not
sub-divide the location or the pathology of the sarcomas. Therefore, there are
limited data on genitourinary specific associations with certain genetic
syndromes. We summarize, here, the primary differential considerations for
rhabdomyosarcoma of the genitourinary system. Primary considerations include
DICER1 pathogenic variation, Li-Fraumeni syndrome, constitutional mismatch
repair deficiency, mosaic variegated aneuploidy, neurofibromatosis type 1,
Noonan syndrome, other RASopathies, Costello syndrome, and Beckwith-Wiedemann
syndrome. Some conditions may present with specific pathological, clinical
and/or family history features, but for others, the genitourinary tumor may be
the only presenting sign at the time of diagnosis. Genetic evaluation with
counseling and/or testing may help identify an underlying tumor predisposition.
This manuscript serves as an introduction to germline considerations for
children with genitourinary rhabdomyosarcoma.

2020 Translational Andrology and Urology. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tau-20-76
PMCID: PMC7658107
PMID: 33209717

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at
http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/tau-20-76). The series “Pediatric Urologic
Malignancies” was commissioned by the editorial office without any funding or
sponsorship. NGC served as the unpaid Guest Editor of the series. Dr. Schultz
reports grants from Pine Tree Apple Classic Fund, Children's Minnesota and Rein
in Sarcoma, during the conduct of the study. The authors have no other conflicts
of interest to declare.
