---
reference_id: "PMID:8614918"
title: "Recurrent spontaneous arterial dissections: risk in familial versus nonfamilial disease."
authors:
- Schievink WI
- Mokri B
- Piepgras DG
- Kuiper JD
journal: Stroke
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1161/01.str.27.4.622
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aortic Dissection/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, genetics"
- Cerebral Angiography
- Family
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- "Intracranial Aneurysm/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, genetics"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Recurrence
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recurrent spontaneous arterial dissections: risk in familial versus nonfamilial disease.
**Authors:** Schievink WI, Mokri B, Piepgras DG, Kuiper JD
**Journal:** Stroke (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.str.27.4.622](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.str.27.4.622)

## Content

1. Stroke. 1996 Apr;27(4):622-4. doi: 10.1161/01.str.27.4.622.

Recurrent spontaneous arterial dissections: risk in familial versus nonfamilial
disease.

Schievink WI(1), Mokri B, Piepgras DG, Kuiper JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurologic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Among patients with spontaneous cervical artery
dissections, the risk of recurrent arterial dissection is relatively low at 1%
per year, but this risk may be higher for patients with a family history of
arterial dissections. We compared the risk of a recurrent arterial dissection in
patients with familial versus non familial disease.
METHODS: Long-term follow-up was established in 200 patients (104 women and 96
men with a mean age of 44.9 years) with spontaneous cervical artery dissections
evaluated at a single institution between 1970 and 1990.
RESULTS: Among the 200 patients, 10 (5%) were identified who had a family
history of spontaneous arterial dissections. In a multivariate analysis, family
history was the only significant variable associated with the risk of recurrent
dissection (X2=15.51; P=.0001). A recurrent arterial dissection was identified
in 5 (50%) of the 10 patients with familial disease compared with 11 (5.8%) of
the 190 patients with nonfamilial disease, with an estimated relative risk of
6.3 (95% confidence interval, 2.2 to 18.3; P=.0007).
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with spontaneous cervical artery dissections, a
family history of arterial dissection is an important risk factor for the
development of a recurrent arterial dissection.

DOI: 10.1161/01.str.27.4.622
PMID: 8614918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
