---
reference_id: "PMID:18808061"
title: Neuropathology of chronic GM2 gangliosidosis due to hexosaminidase A deficiency.
authors:
- Kornfeld M
journal: Clin Neuropathol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.5414/npp27302
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuropathology of chronic GM2 gangliosidosis due to hexosaminidase A deficiency.
**Authors:** Kornfeld M
**Journal:** Clin Neuropathol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.5414/npp27302](https://doi.org/10.5414/npp27302)

## Content

1. Clin Neuropathol. 2008 Sep-Oct;27(5):302-8. doi: 10.5414/npp27302.

Neuropathology of chronic GM2 gangliosidosis due to hexosaminidase A deficiency.

Kornfeld M(1).

Author information:
(1)Pathology Department, School of Medicine, University of New Mexico, 
Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA. MKornfeld@salud.unm.edu

Autopsy studies of late-onset GM2 gangliosidosis are sparse and only one adult 
case is on record. The case of partial Hex A deficiency presented here started 
in childhood as spinal muscular atrophy which progressed slowly over 4 decades. 
Cognitive function remained intact throughout the entire course, but during the 
last few years of life allodynia supervened. The patient died at 44 years of 
age. In good correlation with clinical observations the autopsy findings showed 
the most severe accumulation of lipid and consequent regressive change in the 
anterior horns of the spinal cord. Extensive but less severe storage was found 
in other spinal cord neurons, brain stem and selected basal ganglia. Cerebral 
cortex was virtually spared by storage but was the site of excessive formation 
of lipofuscin which was also present in many other neurons in the CNS. Marked 
storage and ganglionic loss was also found in the dorsal root ganglia, and the 
fasciculus gracilis was severely depleted of myelinated fibers. Electron 
microscopy showed accumulated gangliosides almost exclusively in the form of 
single and coalescing zebra bodies. In conclusion, the pathology in this case of 
chronic GM2 gangliosidosis, though in part conforming with previous 
observations, differed in several aspects. First, the cerebral cortex was--with 
only a few exceptions--free of ganglioside storage. Also spared was the 
cerebellum. In addition, homogeneous accumulation of zebra bodies contrasted 
with heterogeneity of neuronal inclusions found in other chronic cases. Finally, 
the involvement of sensory neurons was prominent and potentially related to 
allodynia. Molecular study of HEXA gene in this patient showed an TATC1278/? 
genotype.

DOI: 10.5414/npp27302
PMID: 18808061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]