---
reference_id: "PMID:37841428"
title: Biological insights into the role of TET2 in T cell lymphomas.
authors:
- Carty SA
journal: Front Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1199108
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biological insights into the role of TET2 in T cell lymphomas.
**Authors:** Carty SA
**Journal:** Front Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fonc.2023.1199108](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2023.1199108)

## Content

1. Front Oncol. 2023 Sep 29;13:1199108. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1199108.
eCollection  2023.

Biological insights into the role of TET2 in T cell lymphomas.

Carty SA(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States.

Peripheral T cell lymphomas (PTCL) are a heterogenous group of mature T cell
lymphomas with an overall poor prognosis. Understanding the molecular
heterogeneity in PTCL subtypes may lead to improved understanding of the
underlying biological mechanisms driving these diseases. Mutations in the
epigenetic regulator TET2 are among the most frequent mutations identified in
PTCL, with the highest frequency in angioimmunoblastic T cell lymphomas and
other nodal T follicular helper (TFH) lymphomas. This review dissects the role
of TET2 in nodal TFH cell lymphomas with a focus on emerging biological insights
into the molecular mechanism promoting lymphomagenesis and the potential for
epigenetic therapies to improve clinical outcomes.

Copyright © 2023 Carty.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1199108
PMCID: PMC10570544
PMID: 37841428

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declares that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
