---
reference_id: "PMID:30543921"
title: Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) in the vanguard therapy of Systemic Sclerosis.
authors:
- Gomes JP
- Santos L
- Shoenfeld Y
journal: Clin Immunol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2018.12.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) in the vanguard therapy of Systemic Sclerosis.
**Authors:** Gomes JP, Santos L, Shoenfeld Y
**Journal:** Clin Immunol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clim.2018.12.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clim.2018.12.006)

## Content

1. Clin Immunol. 2019 Feb;199:25-28. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2018.12.006. Epub 2018
Dec  10.

Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) in the vanguard therapy of Systemic Sclerosis.

Gomes JP(1), Santos L(2), Shoenfeld Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Zabludowicz Center for Autoimmune Disease, Sheba Medical Center, Tel 
Hashomer, Israel; Department A of Internal Medicine, Hospital and University 
Centre of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal; Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Coimbra, Portugal. Electronic address: jpcxl@hotmail.com.
(2)Department A of Internal Medicine, Hospital and University Centre of Coimbra, 
Coimbra, Portugal; Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Portugal. 
Electronic address: lelitasantos@netcabo.pt.
(3)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Israel; Zabludowicz Center 
for Autoimmune Disease, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel. Electronic 
address: shoenfel@post.tau.ac.il.

Systemic Sclerosis (SSc) is a rare autoimmune disease that is characterized by a 
progressive skin fibrosis, an obliteration of the microvasculature and an 
exaggerated extracellular matrix deposition, which lead to a multisystemic 
dysfunction. Various pathogenetic mechanisms were described. The lack of a 
successful therapy make SSc a disease with a poor prognosis. The intravenous 
immunoglobulin (IVIG) has been used for a long time in different autoimmune 
diseases, and firstly used in SSc patients in 2000. IVIG has multiple 
non-specific mechanisms of action and, beyond an impressive improvement in 
muscle symptoms, a French nationwide cohort demonstrated that IVIG ameliorates 
the skin disease and systemic inflammation, and helps the daily dose 
corticosteroid's tapering at the end of the treatment. The benefits on 
gastrointestinal symptoms of IVIG was reported by a recent English article, in 
which the patients consistently reported a decrease in the gastro-esophageal 
reflux disease symptoms and their frequencies. The impact on the lung 
involvement still remains unclear. One of the advantages of IVIG is its safe 
profile. Few adverse effects were reported and most of them are mild, and can be 
managed and usually they do not relapse. Harmful effects were described, but 
they can be avoid with cautious and judicious use of this therapy.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clim.2018.12.006
PMID: 30543921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]