---
reference_id: "PMID:19224950"
title: Protein misfolding is the molecular mechanism underlying MCADD identified in newborn screening.
authors:
- Maier EM
- Gersting SW
- Kemter KF
- Jank JM
- Reindl M
- Messing DD
- Truger MS
- Sommerhoff CP
- Muntau AC
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp079
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Protein misfolding is the molecular mechanism underlying MCADD identified in newborn screening.
**Authors:** Maier EM, Gersting SW, Kemter KF, Jank JM, Reindl M, Messing DD, Truger MS, Sommerhoff CP, Muntau AC
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddp079](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddp079)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 May 1;18(9):1612-23. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp079. Epub 2009
Feb  18.

Protein misfolding is the molecular mechanism underlying MCADD identified in 
newborn screening.

Maier EM(1), Gersting SW, Kemter KF, Jank JM, Reindl M, Messing DD, Truger MS, 
Sommerhoff CP, Muntau AC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pediatrics, Children's Research Center, Dr. von 
Hauner Children's Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany.

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2009 Aug;76(2):146-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2009.01247_1.x.

Newborn screening (NBS) for medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency 
(MCADD) revealed a higher birth prevalence and genotypic variability than 
previously estimated, including numerous novel missense mutations in the ACADM 
gene. On average, these mutations are associated with milder biochemical 
phenotypes raising the question about their pathogenic relevance. In this study, 
we analyzed the impact of 10 ACADM mutations identified in NBS (A27V, Y42H, 
Y133H, R181C, R223G, D241G, K304E, R309K, I331T and R388S) on conformation, 
stability and enzyme kinetics of the corresponding proteins. Partial to total 
rescue of aggregation by co-overexpression of GroESL indicated protein 
misfolding. This was confirmed by accelerated thermal unfolding in all variants, 
as well as decreased proteolytic stability and accelerated thermal inactivation 
in most variants. Catalytic function varied from high residual activity to 
markedly decreased activity or substrate affinity. Mutations mapping to the 
beta-domain of the protein predisposed to severe destabilization. In silico 
structural analyses of the affected amino acid residues revealed involvement in 
functionally relevant networks. Taken together, our results substantiate the 
hypothesis of protein misfolding with loss-of-function being the common 
molecular basis in MCADD. Moreover, considerable structural alterations in all 
analyzed variants do not support the view that novel mutations found in NBS bear 
a lower risk of metabolic decompensation than that associated with mutations 
detected in clinically ascertained patients. Finally, the detailed insight into 
how ACADM missense mutations induce loss of MCAD function may provide guidance 
for risk assessment and counseling of patients, and in future may assist 
delineation of novel pharmacological strategies.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddp079
PMCID: PMC2667288
PMID: 19224950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]