---
reference_id: "PMID:39545486"
title: "Topical application of the Hedgehog inhibitor patidegib in patients with Gorlin syndrome: a phase II trial."
authors:
- Lear JT
- Harwood CA
- Hasan Z
- Kentley J
- Thomson J
- Khoo A
- Alderman A
- DeSouza M
- Epstein EH Jr
- Kochendoerfer GG
- Tang JY
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljae444
keywords:
- Humans
- Basal Cell Nevus Syndrome/drug therapy
- "Hedgehog Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Male
- Female
- Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy
- Middle Aged
- Double-Blind Method
- Adult
- Treatment Outcome
- Aged
- "Antineoplastic Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Administration, Cutaneous"
- "Administration, Topical"
- Gels
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Topical application of the Hedgehog inhibitor patidegib in patients with Gorlin syndrome: a phase II trial.
**Authors:** Lear JT, Harwood CA, Hasan Z, Kentley J, Thomson J, Khoo A, Alderman A, DeSouza M, Epstein EH Jr, Kochendoerfer GG, Tang JY
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bjd/ljae444](https://doi.org/10.1093/bjd/ljae444)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2025 Mar 18;192(4):611-617. doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljae444.

Topical application of the Hedgehog inhibitor patidegib in patients with Gorlin 
syndrome: a phase II trial.

Lear JT(1)(2), Harwood CA(3), Hasan Z(3), Kentley J(3), Thomson J(3), Khoo 
A(1)(2), Alderman A(4), DeSouza M(4), Epstein EH Jr(4), Kochendoerfer GG(4), 
Tang JY(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Manchester Royal Infirmary, Manchester, UK.
(2)Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, University of Manchester, 
Manchester, UK.
(3)Royal London Hospital, Barts Health NHS Trust/Queen Mary University of 
London, London, UK.
(4)PellePharm, Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
CA, USA.

Comment in
    Br J Dermatol. 2025 Mar 18;192(4):565. doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljae515.

BACKGROUND: Patients with Gorlin (basal cell naevus) syndrome (GS) have numerous 
phenotypic abnormalities due to overactivity of the hedgehog (HH) signalling 
pathway, most commonly caused by a heritable mutation in PTCH1, which encodes a 
major inhibitor of this pathway. Oral HH inhibitors (HHi) can reverse some of 
the manifestations, most prominent of which is the development of numerous 
cutaneous basal cell carcinomas (BCCs). In order to improve the benefit-risk 
ratio, we developed a gel containing a small cyclopamine-derived molecule that 
can be applied topically in expectation that this mode of delivery can reduce 
the burden of BCCs without producing the systemic adverse effects that cause 
patients to stop oral HHi treatment.
OBJECTIVES: To determine whether or not patidegib topical gel 2% or 4% can 
accumulate in high enough concentrations to have local anti-BCC efficacy but not 
so high that systemic drug levels produce the adverse effects typical of oral 
HHi treatment.
METHODS: We conducted a small randomized double-blinded phase IIA trial at two 
sites in the UK, to assess the clinical and molecular efficacy and adverse 
effects of 6 months of twice-daily application of patidegib topical gel to the 
entire face, as well as to treatment-targeted surgically eligible BCCs at other 
anatomical sites.
RESULTS: Post hoc analyses suggested that patidegib topical gel reduced the 
number of new, surgically eligible BCCs and the level of HH signalling, with 
minimal adverse effects.
CONCLUSIONS: Patidegib topical gel warrants further clinical development.

Plain Language Summary: Gorlin syndrome is a rare genetic condition where people 
develop a type of skin cancer called ‘basal cell carcinoma’ (or ‘BCC’ for 
short), as well as other symptoms. People with Gorlin syndrome have mutations in 
a key regulator of what is known as ‘the Hedgehog signalling pathway’. This can 
lead to BCC. A drug called ‘patidegib’ inhibits this pathway. Patidegib taken 
orally has been shown to reduce the size of BCC tumours. In this clinical trial, 
patidegib was provided as a gel to be applied on the face of people with Gorlin 
syndrome. We did this to see whether the gel could reduce the number of new skin 
tumours. We aimed to find out whether applying the gel twice a day could prevent 
new BCC tumours on the face without causing high levels of the drug in the 
patient’s blood. High levels of patidegib in the blood could lead to side 
effects like muscle cramps and hair loss. We found that by applying patidegib as 
a gel, concentrations of the drug in patients’ blood were very low. Patients had 
minimal or no major side effects. The findings from this study suggest that 
patidegib gel applied to the skin could reduce the number of new BCC tumours. 
More studies with more patients are needed to better assess patidegib gel in 
treating and preventing BCC tumours in people with Gorlin syndrome.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of British 
Association of Dermatologists. All rights reserved. For commercial re-use, 
please contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for 
reprints. All other permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service 
via the Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information 
please contact journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bjd/ljae444
PMID: 39545486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: A.A. and G.G.K. were 
full-time employees of PellePharm with stock options; G.G.K. is a consultant for 
Sol-Gel Technologies. E.H.E. and J.Y.T. were co-founders, board members and 
stockholders of PellePharm, and now are consultants for Sol-Gel Technologies. 
The remaining authors declare no conflicts of interest.