---
reference_id: "PMID:30954906"
title: "Choosing wisely first line immunotherapy in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC): what to add and what to leave out."
authors:
- Proto C
- Ferrara R
- Signorelli D
- Lo Russo G
- Galli G
- Imbimbo M
- Prelaj A
- Zilembo N
- Ganzinelli M
- Pallavicini LM
- De Simone I
- Colombo MP
- Sica A
- Torri V
- Garassino MC
journal: Cancer Treat Rev
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2019.03.004
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/therapeutic use"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/therapeutic use"
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- B7-H1 Antigen/metabolism
- Bevacizumab/therapeutic use
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/immunology, metabolism, therapy"
- Humans
- Immunologic Factors/metabolism
- Immunotherapy/methods
- "Lung Neoplasms/immunology, metabolism, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Choosing wisely first line immunotherapy in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC): what to add and what to leave out.
**Authors:** Proto C, Ferrara R, Signorelli D, Lo Russo G, Galli G, Imbimbo M, Prelaj A, Zilembo N, Ganzinelli M, Pallavicini LM, De Simone I, Colombo MP, Sica A, Torri V, Garassino MC
**Journal:** Cancer Treat Rev (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ctrv.2019.03.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ctrv.2019.03.004)

## Content

1. Cancer Treat Rev. 2019 May;75:39-51. doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2019.03.004. Epub
2019  Mar 28.

Choosing wisely first line immunotherapy in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC):
what to add and what to leave out.

Proto C(1), Ferrara R(2), Signorelli D(1), Lo Russo G(1), Galli G(1), Imbimbo
M(1), Prelaj A(1), Zilembo N(1), Ganzinelli M(1), Pallavicini LM(1), De Simone
I(3), Colombo MP(4), Sica A(5), Torri V(3), Garassino MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Oncology Department, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori,
Milan, Italy.
(2)Medical Oncology Department, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori,
Milan, Italy. Electronic address: roberto.ferrara@istitutotumori.mi.it.
(3)Methodology of Clinical Research Laboratory, Oncology Department, IRCCS Mario
Negri Institute for Pharmacologic Research, Milan, Italy.
(4)Department of Research, Molecular Immunology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto
Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy.
(5)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Eastern Piedmont, A.
Avogadro, Novara, Italy; Department of Inflammation and Immunology, Humanitas
Clinical and Research Center, Rozzano, Milan, Italy.

Immunotherapy has dramatically changed the therapeutic scenario in treatment
naïve advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). While single agent
pembrolizumab has become the standard therapy in patients with PD-L1 expression
on tumor cells ≥ 50%, the combination of pembrolizumab or atezolizumab and
platinum-based chemotherapy has emerged as an effective first line treatment
regardless of PD-L1 expression both in squamous and non-squamous NSCLC without
oncogenic drivers. Furthermore, double immune checkpoint inhibition has shown
promising results in treatment naïve patients with high tumor mutational burden
(TMB). Of note, the presence of both negative PD-L1 expression and low TMB may
identify a subgroup of patients who has little benefit from immunotherapy
combinations and for whom the best treatment option may still be platinum-based
chemotherapy. To date, first-line single agent immune checkpoint blockade has
demonstrated limited activity in EGFR mutated NSCLC and the combination of
immunotherapy and targeted agents has raised safety concerns in both EGFR and
ALK positive NSCLC patients. Finally, in EGFR mutated or ALK rearranged NSCLC,
atezolizumab in combination with platinum-based chemotherapy and bevacizumab is
emerging as a potential treatment option upon progression to first line tyrosine
kinase inhibitors.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2019.03.004
PMID: 30954906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
