---
reference_id: "PMID:30285720"
title: Novel mutations in TPM2 and PIEZO2 are responsible for distal arthrogryposis (DA) 2B and mild DA in two Chinese families.
authors:
- Li S
- You Y
- Gao J
- Mao B
- Cao Y
- Zhao X
- Zhang X
journal: BMC Med Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s12881-018-0692-8
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Arthrogryposis/diagnosis, ethnology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Asian People
- Child
- Chromosome Mapping
- Family
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Linkage
- Genetic Loci
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Ion Channels/chemistry, genetics"
- Male
- Microsatellite Repeats
- Middle Aged
- "Models, Molecular"
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Severity of Illness Index
- "Tropomyosin/chemistry, genetics"
- Troponin I/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel mutations in TPM2 and PIEZO2 are responsible for distal arthrogryposis (DA) 2B and mild DA in two Chinese families.
**Authors:** Li S, You Y, Gao J, Mao B, Cao Y, Zhao X, Zhang X
**Journal:** BMC Med Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12881-018-0692-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12881-018-0692-8)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genet. 2018 Oct 3;19(1):179. doi: 10.1186/s12881-018-0692-8.

Novel mutations in TPM2 and PIEZO2 are responsible for distal arthrogryposis 
(DA) 2B and mild DA in two Chinese families.

Li S(1), You Y(1), Gao J(2), Mao B(1), Cao Y(1), Zhao X(3), Zhang X(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences & School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical 
College, 5 Dong Dan San Tiao, Dong Cheng District, Beijing, 100005, China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Peking Union Medical College 
Hospital, Beijing, 100730, China.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences & School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical 
College, 5 Dong Dan San Tiao, Dong Cheng District, Beijing, 100005, China. 
xiulizhao@ibms.pumc.edu.cn.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences & School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical 
College, 5 Dong Dan San Tiao, Dong Cheng District, Beijing, 100005, China. 
xuezhang@pumc.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Distal arthrogryposis (DA) is a group of clinically and genetically 
heterogeneous disorders that involve multiple congenital limb contractures and 
comprise at least 10 clinical subtypes. Here, we describe our findings in two 
Chinese families: Family 1 with DA2B (MIM 601680) and Family 2 with mild DA.
METHODS: To map the disease locus, two-point linkage analysis was performed with 
microsatellite markers closed to TPM2, TNNI2/TNNT3 and TNNC2. In Family 1, a 
positive LOD (logarithm of odds) score was only obtained at the microsatellite 
marker close to TPM2 and mutation screening was performed using direct 
sequencing of TPM2 in the proband. In Family 2, for the LOD score that did not 
favor linkage to any markers, whole-exome sequencing (WES) was performed on the 
proband. PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) and bioinformatics 
analysis were then applied to identify the pathogenic mutations in two families. 
In order to correlate genotype with phenotype in DA, retrospective analyses of 
phenotypic features according to the TPM2 and PIEZO2 mutation spectrums were 
carried out.
RESULTS: A heterozygous missense mutation c.308A > G (p.Q103R) in TPM2 in Family 
1, and a novel variation c.8153G > A (p.R2718Q) in PIEZO2 in Family 2 were 
identified. Each of the two novel variants was co-segregated with the DA 
manifestations in the corresponding family. Bioinformatics analysis from several 
tools supported the pathogenicity of the mutations. Furthermore, our study 
suggests that there is no relation between the types or locations of TPM2 
mutations and the clinical characteristics, and that different inheritance modes 
and mutation types concerning PIEZO2 cause distinct clinical manifestations.
CONCLUSIONS: We report two novel mutations within TPM2 and PIEZO2 responsible 
for DA2B and mild DA in two Chinese families, respectively. Our study expands 
the spectrum of causal mutations in the TPM2 and PIEZO2 genes.

DOI: 10.1186/s12881-018-0692-8
PMCID: PMC6171138
PMID: 30285720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: This 
study was approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of the Institute of 
Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China 
(015–2015). Written informed consent was obtained from the patients or their 
relatives before they participated in this study. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: 
Written consent was obtained from the patients or their relatives for the 
publication of this study, including the medical data in Table 1 and the images 
in Fig. 2. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.