---
reference_id: "PMID:14679177"
title: Chronic inflammation in fat plays a crucial role in the development of obesity-related insulin resistance.
authors:
- Xu H
- Barnes GT
- Yang Q
- Tan G
- Yang D
- Chou CJ
- Sole J
- Nichols A
- Ross JS
- Tartaglia LA
- Chen H
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1172/JCI19451
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic inflammation in fat plays a crucial role in the development of obesity-related insulin resistance.
**Authors:** Xu H, Barnes GT, Yang Q, Tan G, Yang D, Chou CJ, Sole J, Nichols A, Ross JS, Tartaglia LA, Chen H
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI19451](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI19451)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2003 Dec;112(12):1821-30. doi: 10.1172/JCI19451.

Chronic inflammation in fat plays a crucial role in the development of 
obesity-related insulin resistance.

Xu H(1), Barnes GT, Yang Q, Tan G, Yang D, Chou CJ, Sole J, Nichols A, Ross JS, 
Tartaglia LA, Chen H.

Author information:
(1)Millennium Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2003 Dec;112(12):1785-8. doi: 10.1172/JCI20514.

Insulin resistance arises from the inability of insulin to act normally in 
regulating nutrient metabolism in peripheral tissues. Increasing evidence from 
human population studies and animal research has established correlative as well 
as causative links between chronic inflammation and insulin resistance. However, 
the underlying molecular pathways are largely unknown. In this report, we show 
that many inflammation and macrophage-specific genes are dramatically 
upregulated in white adipose tissue (WAT) in mouse models of genetic and 
high-fat diet-induced obesity (DIO). The upregulation is progressively increased 
in WAT of mice with DIO and precedes a dramatic increase in circulating-insulin 
level. Upon treatment with rosiglitazone, an insulin-sensitizing drug, these 
macrophage-originated genes are downregulated. Histologically, there is evidence 
of significant infiltration of macrophages, but not neutrophils and lymphocytes, 
into WAT of obese mice, with signs of adipocyte lipolysis and formation of 
multinucleate giant cells. These data suggest that macrophages in WAT play an 
active role in morbid obesity and that macrophage-related inflammatory 
activities may contribute to the pathogenesis of obesity-induced insulin 
resistance. We propose that obesity-related insulin resistance is, at least in 
part, a chronic inflammatory disease initiated in adipose tissue.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI19451
PMCID: PMC296998
PMID: 14679177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]