---
reference_id: "PMID:21062102"
title: Therapeutic considerations for severe nodular acne.
authors:
- Newman MD
- Bowe WP
- Heughebaert C
- Shalita AR
journal: Am J Clin Dermatol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.2165/11532280-000000000-00000
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapeutic considerations for severe nodular acne.
**Authors:** Newman MD, Bowe WP, Heughebaert C, Shalita AR
**Journal:** Am J Clin Dermatol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.2165/11532280-000000000-00000](https://doi.org/10.2165/11532280-000000000-00000)

## Content

1. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2011 Feb 1;12(1):7-14. doi: 
10.2165/11532280-000000000-00000.

Therapeutic considerations for severe nodular acne.

Newman MD(1), Bowe WP, Heughebaert C, Shalita AR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, New York Presbyterian-Weill Cornell Medical 
Center, New York, USA.

Severe nodular acne, defined as grade 4 or 5 acne on the Investigator's Static 
Global Assessment scale, is a skin condition characterized by intense erythema, 
inflammation, nodules, cysts, and scarring. Both the well known risk of physical 
scarring and the more recent recognition that acne can be a chronic, 
psychologically distressing disease with significant adverse effects on a 
patient's quality of life, have prompted earlier, more aggressive treatment with 
more effective medications, in the hope of preventing progression to more 
severe, nodular forms of the disease. Oral antibacterials, primarily 
tetracyclines, have long been the first-line therapy for severe nodular acne, 
which frequently remained refractory to therapy. However, concerns of 
antibacterial adverse effects, patient adherence, and antimicrobial resistance 
prompted the search for alternate therapies and combinations thereof in order to 
target the multifactorial pathogenesis of the disease. Isotretinoin, an oral 
retinoid introduced in 1982, has since become the gold standard therapy in 
severe acne and has revolutionized its treatment. Several adjunctive agents 
exist. Oral antibacterials are indicated as an alternative for patients with 
severe acne who cannot tolerate oral retinoids, or for whom a contraindication 
exists. In order to prevent bacterial resistance, antibacterials should always 
be used in combination with benzoyl peroxide, a nonantibiotic antimicrobial 
agent with anti-inflammatory activity. Topical retinoids are often added to this 
regimen. In women, hormonal agents, which include oral contraceptives, 
spironolactone, and oral corticosteroids, and, in Europe, cyproterone acetate, 
may be used as monotherapy or concomitantly with isotretinoin. For rapid 
treatment of inflammatory nodules, intralesional corticosteroids are effective. 
These treatment modalities have been studied, refined, and combined in novel 
ways in order to target the multifactorial pathogenesis of the disease, and in 
this article we review each of their roles.

DOI: 10.2165/11532280-000000000-00000
PMID: 21062102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]