---
reference_id: "PMID:8990709"
title: Congenital atrophic plaque.
authors:
- Mihara I
- Minesaki Y
journal: J Dermatol
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1111/j.1346-8138.1996.tb02709.x
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Age of Onset
- "Atrophy/congenital, diagnosis, pathology"
- Back
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- "Nevus, Pigmented/congenital, diagnosis, pathology"
- "Skin Neoplasms/congenital, diagnosis, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital atrophic plaque.
**Authors:** Mihara I, Minesaki Y
**Journal:** J Dermatol (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1346-8138.1996.tb02709.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1346-8138.1996.tb02709.x)

## Content

1. J Dermatol. 1996 Nov;23(11):832-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1346-8138.1996.tb02709.x.

Congenital atrophic plaque.

Mihara I(1), Minesaki Y.

Author information:
(1)Mihara Clinic of Dermatology, Tsuruoka City, Japan.

The patient is a 13-year-old female who had had a patchy lesion on her back 
since birth which increased in size proportional to her age. When she visited 
our hospital at the age of 13, the lesion was a 30 x 43 mm, slightly depressed, 
well defined, irregularly shaped, atrophic plaque. Differential clinical 
diagnoses at that time included macular atrophy, congenital melanocytic nevus, 
and mastocytosis. Histopathologically, the lesion was characterized by patchy 
and scattered infiltrates of oval to spindle cells throughout the dermis 
extending into the subcutaneous fat tissue. Nerve fibers were found in each of 
the infiltrates. The tumor cells had oval nuclei with relatively abundant 
cytoplasm and were similar to nevus cells. They were negative for markers such 
as S-100 protein, neuron specific enolase, epithelial membrane antigen, HMB-45, 
Leu 7, Desmin, and alpha smooth muscle actin. However, the histopathological 
findings suggest that the lesion is a melanocytic or neurogenic tumor, possibly 
a congenital melanocytic nevus or a cellular neurothekoma, though a definite 
diagnosis could not be made.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1346-8138.1996.tb02709.x
PMID: 8990709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]