---
reference_id: "PMID:32520831"
title: "Pediatric Wilson Disease Presenting as Acute Liver Failure: An Individual Patient Data Meta-analysis."
authors:
- Vandriel SM
- Ayoub MD
- Ricciuto A
- Hansen BE
- Ling SC
- Ng VL
- Roberts EA
- Kamath BM
journal: J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1097/MPG.0000000000002777
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Female
- Hepatic Encephalopathy
- "Hepatolenticular Degeneration/complications, diagnosis"
- Humans
- "Liver Failure, Acute/diagnosis, etiology"
- Liver Transplantation
- Prospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric Wilson Disease Presenting as Acute Liver Failure: An Individual Patient Data Meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Vandriel SM, Ayoub MD, Ricciuto A, Hansen BE, Ling SC, Ng VL, Roberts EA, Kamath BM
**Journal:** J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MPG.0000000000002777](https://doi.org/10.1097/MPG.0000000000002777)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2020 Sep;71(3):e90-e96. doi:
10.1097/MPG.0000000000002777.

Pediatric Wilson Disease Presenting as Acute Liver Failure: An Individual
Patient Data Meta-analysis.

Vandriel SM(1), Ayoub MD(1)(2), Ricciuto A(1), Hansen BE(3), Ling SC(1)(2), Ng
VL(1), Roberts EA(1), Kamath BM(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Hospital for Sick
Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Rabigh, King Abdulaziz
University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Institute of Health Policy, Management and Evaluation, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

OBJECTIVES: Wilson disease (WD) presenting as acute liver failure (ALF) is rare
and typically fatal without liver transplantation (LT). Its rarity has hindered
comprehensive studies. We undertook an individual patient data meta-analysis to
characterize a cohort of pediatric patients presenting with ALF whose final
diagnosis was WD to examine outcomes and identify predictors of poor outcomes.
METHODS: Database searches were conducted in PubMed, ScienceDirect, and Google
Scholar, restricted to English-language articles published between January 1984
and May 2018. Articles were excluded if pediatric (<18 years old) data were not
extractable or if LT was not readily available at reporting institutions.
Extracted data included clinical and biochemical characteristics, genotype,
treatment, and outcome.
RESULTS: Data were available on 249 subjects from 52 articles, plus 7 additional
subjects identified from our institution's WD database (N = 256). Females
represented 69% (n = 170/245). Median age at presentation was 13.4 years
(n = 204, range 4.0-17.9). Of the total 256 subjects, 87% underwent LT, 11%
achieved spontaneous recovery and 2% died before LT. International normalized
ratio >2.0 at presentation was a predictor of LT/death (odds ratio 7.6, 95%
confidence interval 1.5-28), with a trend observed for hepatic encephalopathy
(HE) (odds ratio 4.18, 95% confidence interval 0.99-18). Arithmetic diagnostic
scores proved inferior in the pediatric age-bracket compared to adults.
CONCLUSIONS: This large international pediatric cohort has permitted an
individual patient data analysis of WD presenting as ALF. Notably, 11% of
subjects achieved spontaneous survival; the rest required LT. Coagulopathy
(international normalized ratio >2:0) and HE at presentation heralded poor
outcomes. Further prospective studies may identify additional early predictors
of outcomes.

DOI: 10.1097/MPG.0000000000002777
PMID: 32520831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
