---
reference_id: "PMID:14993910"
title: Bardet-Biedl syndrome 1 genotype and obesity in the Newfoundland population.
authors:
- Fan Y
- Rahman P
- Peddle L
- Hefferton D
- Gladney N
- Moore SJ
- Green JS
- Parfrey PS
- Davidson WS
journal: Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1038/sj.ijo.0802601
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bardet-Biedl syndrome 1 genotype and obesity in the Newfoundland population.
**Authors:** Fan Y, Rahman P, Peddle L, Hefferton D, Gladney N, Moore SJ, Green JS, Parfrey PS, Davidson WS
**Journal:** Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.ijo.0802601](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ijo.0802601)

## Content

1. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2004 May;28(5):680-4. doi: 
10.1038/sj.ijo.0802601.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome 1 genotype and obesity in the Newfoundland population.

Fan Y(1), Rahman P, Peddle L, Hefferton D, Gladney N, Moore SJ, Green JS, 
Parfrey PS, Davidson WS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University, 
Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Obesity is one of the primary clinical features of 
Bardet-Biedl Syndrome (BBS), a genetically heterogeneous disorder that is 
usually inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. It has been suggested that 
heterozygous carriers of BBS are predisposed to obesity. We set out to identify 
the common mutation in BBS1 families from southwest Newfoundland and to examine 
the relationship between this mutation and obesity in the general population.
METHODS AND SUBJECTS: We genotyped BBS1 families from Newfoundland to determine 
the nature of the mutation causing BBS in this population. We then screened 200 
obese individuals (average body mass index (BMI)=37.9 kg/m2; average waist to 
hip ratio=0.935; average waist=113.8 cm) and 200 ethnically matched, unrelated, 
controls (average BMI=25.0 kg/m2; average waist to hip ratio=0.896; average 
waist=86.9 cm) from the same geographic region for the presence of this 
mutation.
RESULTS: All affected members of the six Newfoundland BBS1 families were 
homozygous for the most common BBS1 mutation (M390R). This mutation was found in 
the heterozygous state in three of the 200 obese individuals and also in three 
of the 200 matched controls.
CONCLUSIONS: The high frequency of BBS1 in Newfoundland appears to be the result 
of a founder event. Our data do not support the hypothesis that the M390R BBS1 
mutation plays a significant role in the frequency of obesity in the general 
public in Newfoundland.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.ijo.0802601
PMID: 14993910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]