---
reference_id: "PMID:33467654"
title: "TRPing to the Point of Clarity: Understanding the Function of the Complex TRPV4 Ion Channel."
authors:
- Toft-Bertelsen TL
- MacAulay N
journal: Cells
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/cells10010165
keywords:
- Animals
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/metabolism"
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- Ligands
- Lipids
- Mice
- Mutation
- Phosphorylation
- Protein Interaction Mapping
- Protein Isoforms
- TRPV Cation Channels/metabolism
- Temperature
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TRPing to the Point of Clarity: Understanding the Function of the Complex TRPV4 Ion Channel.
**Authors:** Toft-Bertelsen TL, MacAulay N
**Journal:** Cells (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells10010165](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells10010165)

## Content

1. Cells. 2021 Jan 15;10(1):165. doi: 10.3390/cells10010165.

TRPing to the Point of Clarity: Understanding the Function of the Complex TRPV4 
Ion Channel.

Toft-Bertelsen TL(1), MacAulay N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, 2200 
Copenhagen N, Denmark.

The transient receptor potential vanilloid 4 channel (TRPV4) belongs to the 
mammalian TRP superfamily of cation channels. TRPV4 is ubiquitously expressed, 
activated by a disparate array of stimuli, interacts with a multitude of 
proteins, and is modulated by a range of post-translational modifications, the 
majority of which we are only just beginning to understand. Not surprisingly, a 
great number of physiological roles have emerged for TRPV4, as have various 
disease states that are attributable to the absence, or abnormal functioning, of 
this ion channel. This review will highlight structural features of TRPV4, 
endogenous and exogenous activators of the channel, and discuss the reported 
roles of TRPV4 in health and disease.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10010165
PMCID: PMC7830798
PMID: 33467654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article.