---
reference_id: "PMID:30893774"
title: "Ebola Virus Entry: From Molecular Characterization to Drug Discovery."
authors:
- Salata C
- Calistri A
- Alvisi G
- Celestino M
- Parolin C
- Palù G
journal: Viruses
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3390/v11030274
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ebola Virus Entry: From Molecular Characterization to Drug Discovery.
**Authors:** Salata C, Calistri A, Alvisi G, Celestino M, Parolin C, Palù G
**Journal:** Viruses (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3390/v11030274](https://doi.org/10.3390/v11030274)

## Content

1. Viruses. 2019 Mar 19;11(3):274. doi: 10.3390/v11030274.

Ebola Virus Entry: From Molecular Characterization to Drug Discovery.

Salata C(1), Calistri A(2), Alvisi G(3), Celestino M(4), Parolin C(5), Palù 
G(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Padova, IT-35121 Padova, 
Italy. cristiano.salata@unipd.it.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Padova, IT-35121 Padova, 
Italy. arianna.calistri@unipd.it.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Padova, IT-35121 Padova, 
Italy. gualtiero.alvisi@unipd.it.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Padova, IT-35121 Padova, 
Italy. michele.celestino.uni@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Padova, IT-35121 Padova, 
Italy. cristina.parolin@unipd.it.
(6)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Padova, IT-35121 Padova, 
Italy. giorgio.palu@unipd.it.

Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) is one of the most lethal transmissible infections, 
characterized by a high fatality rate, and caused by a member of the Filoviridae 
family. The recent large outbreak of EVD in Western Africa (2013⁻2016) 
highlighted the worldwide threat represented by the disease and its impact on 
global public health and the economy. The development of highly needed 
anti-Ebola virus antivirals has been so far hampered by the shortage of tools to 
study their life cycle in vitro, allowing to screen for potential active 
compounds outside a biosafety level-4 (BSL-4) containment. Importantly, the 
development of surrogate models to study Ebola virus entry in a BSL-2 setting, 
such as viral pseudotypes and Ebola virus-like particles, tremendously boosted 
both our knowledge of the viral life cycle and the identification of promising 
antiviral compounds interfering with viral entry. In this context, the 
combination of such surrogate systems with large-scale small molecule compounds 
and haploid genetic screenings, as well as rational drug design and drug 
repurposing approaches will prove priceless in our quest for the development of 
a treatment for EVD.

DOI: 10.3390/v11030274
PMCID: PMC6466262
PMID: 30893774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.