---
reference_id: "PMID:37474264"
title: "Glutaric Aciduria Type 1: Comparison between Diffusional Kurtosis Imaging and Conventional MR Imaging."
authors:
- Bian B
- Liu Z
- Feng D
- Li W
- Wang L
- Li Y
- Li D
journal: AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A7928
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glutaric Aciduria Type 1: Comparison between Diffusional Kurtosis Imaging and Conventional MR Imaging.
**Authors:** Bian B, Liu Z, Feng D, Li W, Wang L, Li Y, Li D
**Journal:** AJNR Am J Neuroradiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3174/ajnr.A7928](https://doi.org/10.3174/ajnr.A7928)

## Content

1. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2023 Aug;44(8):967-973. doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A7928. Epub 
2023 Jul 20.

Glutaric Aciduria Type 1: Comparison between Diffusional Kurtosis Imaging and 
Conventional MR Imaging.

Bian B(1), Liu Z(1), Feng D(2), Li W(3), Wang L(3), Li Y(4), Li D(5).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Radiology (B.B., Z.L., D.L.).
(2)Outpatient Pediatrics (D.F.).
(3)State Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Reproductive Biology (W.L., L.W.), 
Chinese Academy of Sciences and University, Beijing, China.
(4)Gene Therapy Laboratory (Y.L.), The First Hospital of Jilin University, 
Changchun, Jilin, China.
(5)From the Departments of Radiology (B.B., Z.L., D.L.) li_d@jlu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Routine MR imaging has limited use in evaluating the 
severity of glutaric aciduria type 1. To better understand the mechanisms of 
brain injury in glutaric aciduria type 1, we explored the value of diffusional 
kurtosis imaging in detecting microstructural injury of the gray and white 
matter.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This study included 17 patients with glutaric aciduria 
type 1 and 17 healthy controls who underwent conventional MR imaging and 
diffusional kurtosis imaging. The diffusional kurtosis imaging metrics of the 
gray and white matter were measured. Then, the MR imaging scores and diffusional 
kurtosis imaging metrics of all ROIs were further correlated with the morbidity 
scores and Barry-Albright dystonia scores.
RESULTS: The MR imaging scores showed no significant relation to the morbidity 
and Barry-Albright dystonia scores. Compared with healthy controls, patients 
with glutaric aciduria type 1 showed higher kurtosis values in the basal 
ganglia, corona radiata, centrum semiovale, and temporal lobe (P < .05). The DTI 
metrics of the basal ganglia were higher than those of healthy controls 
(P < .05). The fractional anisotropy value of the temporal lobe and the mean 
diffusivity values of basal ganglia in glutaric aciduria type 1 were lower than 
those in the control group (P < .05). The diffusional kurtosis imaging metrics 
of the temporal lobe and basal ganglia were significantly correlated with the 
Barry-Albright dystonia scores. The mean kurtosis values of the anterior and 
posterior putamen and Barry-Albright dystonia scores were most relevant (r = 
0.721, 0.730, respectively). The mean kurtosis values of the basal ganglia had 
the best diagnostic efficiency with area under the curve values of 0.837 for the 
temporal lobe, and the mean diffusivity values of the basal ganglia in glutaric 
aciduria type 1 were lower than those in the control group (P < .05). The 
diffusional kurtosis imaging metrics of the temporal lobe and basal ganglia were 
significantly correlated with the Barry-Albright dystonia scores. The mean 
kurtosis values of the anterior and posterior putamen and Barry-Albright 
dystonia scores were most relevant (r = 0.721, 0.730, respectively). The mean 
kurtosis values of the basal ganglia had the best diagnostic efficiency with 
area under the curve values of 0.837.
CONCLUSIONS: Diffusional kurtosis imaging provides more comprehensive 
quantitative information regarding the gray and white matter micropathologic 
damage in glutaric aciduria type 1 than routine MR imaging scores.

© 2023 by American Journal of Neuroradiology.

DOI: 10.3174/ajnr.A7928
PMCID: PMC10411849
PMID: 37474264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]