---
reference_id: "PMID:24698483"
title: Human schistosomiasis.
authors:
- Colley DG
- Bustinduy AL
- Secor WE
- King CH
journal: Lancet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(13)61949-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human schistosomiasis.
**Authors:** Colley DG, Bustinduy AL, Secor WE, King CH
**Journal:** Lancet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(13)61949-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(13)61949-2)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2014 Jun 28;383(9936):2253-64. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(13)61949-2.
Epub  2014 Apr 1.

Human schistosomiasis.

Colley DG(1), Bustinduy AL(2), Secor WE(3), King CH(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Tropical and Emerging Global Disease & Department of Microbiology, 
University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA. Electronic address: dcolley@uga.edu.
(2)Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Department of Parasitology, Liverpool, 
UK.
(3)Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global Health, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(4)Center for Global Health and Diseases, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, OH, USA.

Human schistosomiasis--or bilharzia--is a parasitic disease caused by trematode 
flukes of the genus Schistosoma. By conservative estimates, at least 230 million 
people worldwide are infected with Schistosoma spp. Adult schistosome worms 
colonise human blood vessels for years, successfully evading the immune system 
while excreting hundreds to thousands of eggs daily, which must either leave the 
body in excreta or become trapped in nearby tissues. Trapped eggs induce a 
distinct immune-mediated granulomatous response that causes local and systemic 
pathological effects ranging from anaemia, growth stunting, impaired cognition, 
and decreased physical fitness, to organ-specific effects such as severe 
hepatosplenism, periportal fibrosis with portal hypertension, and urogenital 
inflammation and scarring. At present, preventive public health measures in 
endemic regions consist of treatment once every 1 or 2 years with the 
isoquinolinone drug, praziquantel, to suppress morbidity. In some locations, 
elimination of transmission is now the goal; however, more sensitive diagnostics 
are needed in both the field and clinics, and integrated environmental and 
health-care management will be needed to ensure elimination.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(13)61949-2
PMCID: PMC4672382
PMID: 24698483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]