---
reference_id: "PMID:38776952"
title: Functional validation of EIF2AK4 (GCN2) missense variants associated with pulmonary arterial hypertension.
authors:
- Emanuelli G
- Zhu J
- Li W
- Morrell NW
- Marciniak SJ
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddae082
keywords:
- Humans
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension/genetics
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Hypertension, Pulmonary/genetics"
- Computational Biology/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Functional validation of EIF2AK4 (GCN2) missense variants associated with pulmonary arterial hypertension.
**Authors:** Emanuelli G, Zhu J, Li W, Morrell NW, Marciniak SJ
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddae082](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddae082)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2024 Aug 18;33(17):1495-1505. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddae082.

Functional validation of EIF2AK4 (GCN2) missense variants associated with 
pulmonary arterial hypertension.

Emanuelli G(1), Zhu J(1), Li W(2)(3), Morrell NW(2)(3)(4), Marciniak 
SJ(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research (CIMR), University of Cambridge, 
Keith Peters Building, Biomedical Campus, Hills Rd, Cambridge CB2 0XY, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Victor Phillip Dahdaleh Heart and Lung Research Institute, University of 
Cambridge, Papworth Road, Trumpington, Cambridge CB2 0BB, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital (Box 
157), Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, United Kingdom.
(4)Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Papworth Rd, Trumpington, 
Cambridge CB2 0AY, United Kingdom.

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a disorder with a large genetic 
component. Biallelic mutations of EIF2AK4, which encodes the kinase GCN2, are 
causal in two ultra-rare subtypes of PAH, pulmonary veno-occlusive disease and 
pulmonary capillary haemangiomatosis. EIF2AK4 variants of unknown significance 
have also been identified in patients with classical PAH, though their 
relationship to disease remains unclear. To provide patients with diagnostic 
information and enable family testing, the functional consequences of such rare 
variants must be determined, but existing computational methods are imperfect. 
We applied a suite of bioinformatic and experimental approaches to sixteen 
EIF2AK4 variants that had been identified in patients. By experimentally testing 
the functional integrity of the integrated stress response (ISR) downstream of 
GCN2, we determined that existing computational tools have insufficient 
sensitivity to reliably predict impaired kinase function. We determined 
experimentally that several EIF2AK4 variants identified in patients with 
classical PAH had preserved function and are therefore likely to be 
non-pathogenic. The dysfunctional variants of GCN2 that we identified could be 
subclassified into three groups: misfolded, kinase-dead, and hypomorphic. 
Intriguingly, members of the hypomorphic group were amenable to paradoxical 
activation by a type-1½ GCN2 kinase inhibitor. This experiment approach may aid 
in the clinical stratification of EIF2AK4 variants and potentially identify 
hypomorophic alleles receptive to pharmacological activation.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddae082
PMCID: PMC11336063
PMID: 38776952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]