---
reference_id: "PMID:38776957"
title: Single nuclei RNA-seq reveals a medium spiny neuron glutamate excitotoxicity signature prior to the onset of neuronal death in an ovine Huntington's disease model.
authors:
- Jiang A
- You L
- Handley RR
- Hawkins V
- Reid SJ
- Jacobsen JC
- Patassini S
- Rudiger SR
- Mclaughlan CJ
- Kelly JM
- Verma PJ
- Bawden CS
- Gusella JF
- MacDonald ME
- Waldvogel HJ
- Faull RLM
- Lehnert K
- Snell RG
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddae087
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single nuclei RNA-seq reveals a medium spiny neuron glutamate excitotoxicity signature prior to the onset of neuronal death in an ovine Huntington's disease model.
**Authors:** Jiang A, You L, Handley RR, Hawkins V, Reid SJ, Jacobsen JC, Patassini S, Rudiger SR, Mclaughlan CJ, Kelly JM, Verma PJ, Bawden CS, Gusella JF, MacDonald ME, Waldvogel HJ, Faull RLM, Lehnert K, Snell RG
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddae087](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddae087)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2024 Aug 18;33(17):1524-1539. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddae087.

Single nuclei RNA-seq reveals a medium spiny neuron glutamate excitotoxicity 
signature prior to the onset of neuronal death in an ovine Huntington's disease 
model.

Jiang A(1), You L(2)(3), Handley RR(1), Hawkins V(1), Reid SJ(1), Jacobsen 
JC(1), Patassini S(1), Rudiger SR(4), Mclaughlan CJ(4), Kelly JM(4), Verma 
PJ(5), Bawden CS(4), Gusella JF(6)(7), MacDonald ME(6)(8), Waldvogel HJ(9), 
Faull RLM(9), Lehnert K(1), Snell RG(1).

Author information:
(1)Applied Translational Genetics Group, Centre for Brain Research, School of 
Biological Sciences, The University of Auckland, 3 Symonds Street, Auckland 
1010, New Zealand.
(2)Department of Human Anatomy & Histoembryology, School of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Fudan University, 131 Dong'an Road, Shanghai 200032, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Medical Imaging Computing and Computer Assisted 
Intervention of Shanghai, 130 Dong'an Road, Shanghai 200032, China.
(4)Molecular Biology and Reproductive Technology Laboratories, South Australian 
Research and Development Institute, 129 Holland Road, Adelaide, SA 5350, 
Australia.
(5)Aquatic and Livestock Sciences, South Australian Research and Development 
Institute, 129 Holland Road, Adelaide, SA 5350, Australia.
(6)Molecular Neurogenetics Unit, Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, 185 Cambridge Street, Boston, MA 02114, United States.
(7)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 25 Shattuck Street, Boston, 
MA 02115, United States.
(8)Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, 25 Shattuck Street, Boston, 
MA 02115, United States.
(9)Department of Anatomy and Medical Imaging, Centre for Brain Research, Faculty 
of Medical and Health Science, The University of Auckland, 85 Park Road, 
Auckland 1023, New Zealand.

Huntington's disease (HD) is a neurodegenerative genetic disorder caused by an 
expansion in the CAG repeat tract of the huntingtin (HTT) gene resulting in 
behavioural, cognitive, and motor defects. Current knowledge of disease 
pathogenesis remains incomplete, and no disease course-modifying interventions 
are in clinical use. We have previously reported the development and 
characterisation of the OVT73 transgenic sheep model of HD. The 73 polyglutamine 
repeat is somatically stable and therefore likely captures a prodromal phase of 
the disease with an absence of motor symptomatology even at 5-years of age and 
no detectable striatal cell loss. To better understand the disease-initiating 
events we have undertaken a single nuclei transcriptome study of the striatum of 
an extensively studied cohort of 5-year-old OVT73 HD sheep and age matched 
wild-type controls. We have identified transcriptional upregulation of genes 
encoding N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA), 
α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) and kainate 
receptors in medium spiny neurons, the cell type preferentially lost early in 
HD. Further, we observed an upregulation of astrocytic glutamate uptake 
transporters and medium spiny neuron GABAA receptors, which may maintain 
glutamate homeostasis. Taken together, these observations support the glutamate 
excitotoxicity hypothesis as an early neurodegeneration cascade-initiating 
process but the threshold of toxicity may be regulated by several protective 
mechanisms. Addressing this biochemical defect early may prevent neuronal loss 
and avoid the more complex secondary consequences precipitated by cell death.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddae087
PMCID: PMC11336116
PMID: 38776957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J.F.G. was a founder and scientific advisory 
board member with a financial interest in Triplet Therapeutics Inc. His 
NIH-funded project is using genetic and genomic approaches to uncover other 
genes that significantly influence when diagnosable symptoms emerge and how 
rapidly they worsen in Huntington’s disease. The company was developing new 
therapeutic approaches to address triplet repeat disorders such Huntington’s 
disease, myotonic dystrophy and spinocerebellar ataxias. His interests were 
reviewed and are managed by Massachusetts General Hospital and Mass General 
Brigham in accordance with their conflict of interest policies. J.F.G. has also 
been a consultant for Wave Life Sciences USA Inc., Biogen Inc. and Pfizer Inc. 
All other authors have declared that they have no competing interests.