---
reference_id: "PMID:38067144"
title: Sertoli Cell-Specific Activation of Transforming Growth Factor Beta Receptor 1 Leads to Testicular Granulosa Cell Tumor Formation.
authors:
- Fang X
- Nie L
- Putluri S
- Ni N
- Bartholin L
- Li Q
journal: Cells
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cells12232717
keywords:
- Male
- "Neoplasms, Germ Cell and Embryonal"
- Anti-Mullerian Hormone/metabolism
- Testicular Neoplasms/metabolism
- Transforming Growth Factor beta/metabolism
- Female
- Humans
- Mice
- "Receptors, Transforming Growth Factor beta/metabolism"
- "Granulosa Cell Tumor/metabolism, pathology"
- "Receptor, Transforming Growth Factor-beta Type I/metabolism"
- Sertoli Cells/metabolism
- Ovarian Neoplasms/pathology
- Animals
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sertoli Cell-Specific Activation of Transforming Growth Factor Beta Receptor 1 Leads to Testicular Granulosa Cell Tumor Formation.
**Authors:** Fang X, Nie L, Putluri S, Ni N, Bartholin L, Li Q
**Journal:** Cells (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells12232717](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells12232717)

## Content

1. Cells. 2023 Nov 27;12(23):2717. doi: 10.3390/cells12232717.

Sertoli Cell-Specific Activation of Transforming Growth Factor Beta Receptor 1 
Leads to Testicular Granulosa Cell Tumor Formation.

Fang X(1), Nie L(1), Putluri S(1), Ni N(1), Bartholin L(2)(3), Li Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Integrative Biosciences, Texas A&M University, 
College Station, TX 77843, USA.
(2)INSERM U1052, CNRS UMR5286, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Lyon, 
Université Lyon 1, F-69000 Lyon, France.
(3)Centre Léon Bérard, F-69008 Lyon, France.

The transforming growth factor β (TGFβ) superfamily, consisting of protein 
ligands, receptors, and intracellular SMAD transducers, regulates fundamental 
biological processes and cancer development. Our previous study has shown that 
sustained activation of TGFβ receptor 1 (TGFBR1) driven by anti-Mullerian 
hormone receptor type 2 (Amhr2)-Cre in the mouse testis induces the formation of 
testicular granulosa cell tumors (TGCTs). As Amhr2-Cre is expressed in both 
Sertoli cells and Leydig cells, it remains unclear whether the activation of 
TGFBR1 in Sertoli cells alone is sufficient to induce TGCT formation. Therefore, 
the objective of this study was to determine whether Sertoli cell-activation of 
TGFBR1 drives oncogenesis in the testis. Our hypothesis was that overactivation 
of TGFBR1 in Sertoli cells would promote their transdifferentiation into 
granulosa-like cells and the formation of TGCTs. To test this hypothesis, we 
generated mice harboring constitutive activation of TGFBR1 in Sertoli cells 
using anti-Mullerian hormone (Amh)-Cre. Disorganized seminiferous tubules and 
tumor nodules were found in TGFBR1CA; Amh-Cre mice. A histological analysis 
showed that Sertoli cell-specific activation of TGFBR1 led to the development of 
neoplasms resembling granulosa cell tumors, which derailed spermatogenesis. 
Moreover, TGCTs expressed granulosa cell markers including FOXL2, FOXO1, and 
INHA. Using a dual fluorescence reporter line, the membrane-targeted tdTomato 
(mT)/membrane-targeted EGFP (mG) mouse, we provided evidence that Sertoli cells 
transdifferentiated toward a granulosa cell fate during tumorigenesis. Thus, our 
findings indicate that Sertoli cell-specific activation of TGFBR1 leads to the 
formation of TGCTs, supporting a key contribution of Sertoli cell reprogramming 
to the development of this testicular malignancy in our model.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12232717
PMCID: PMC10706251
PMID: 38067144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.