---
reference_id: "PMID:30664779"
title: Small-molecule targeting of brachyury transcription factor addiction in chordoma.
authors:
- Sharifnia T
- Wawer MJ
- Chen T
- Huang QY
- Weir BA
- Sizemore A
- Lawlor MA
- Goodale A
- Cowley GS
- Vazquez F
- Ott CJ
- Francis JM
- Sassi S
- Cogswell P
- Sheppard HE
- Zhang T
- Gray NS
- Clarke PA
- Blagg J
- Workman P
- Sommer J
- Hornicek F
- Root DE
- Hahn WC
- Bradner JE
- Wong KK
- Clemons PA
- Lin CY
- Kotz JD
- Schreiber SL
journal: Nat Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41591-018-0312-3
keywords:
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- "Chordoma/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Cyclin-Dependent Kinases/metabolism
- Down-Regulation/drug effects
- Fetal Proteins/metabolism
- "Genes, Essential"
- Humans
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology
- Small Molecule Libraries/pharmacology
- T-Box Domain Proteins/metabolism
- Transcription Factors/metabolism
- Brachyury Protein
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Small-molecule targeting of brachyury transcription factor addiction in chordoma.
**Authors:** Sharifnia T, Wawer MJ, Chen T, Huang QY, Weir BA, Sizemore A, Lawlor MA, Goodale A, Cowley GS, Vazquez F, Ott CJ, Francis JM, Sassi S, Cogswell P, Sheppard HE, Zhang T, Gray NS, Clarke PA, Blagg J, Workman P, Sommer J, Hornicek F, Root DE, Hahn WC, Bradner JE, Wong KK, Clemons PA, Lin CY, Kotz JD, Schreiber SL
**Journal:** Nat Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41591-018-0312-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-018-0312-3)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2019 Feb;25(2):292-300. doi: 10.1038/s41591-018-0312-3. Epub 2019 Jan
 21.

Small-molecule targeting of brachyury transcription factor addiction in 
chordoma.

Sharifnia T(1), Wawer MJ(2), Chen T(3), Huang QY(3)(4), Weir BA(2)(5), Sizemore 
A(2)(6), Lawlor MA(7)(8), Goodale A(2), Cowley GS(2)(9), Vazquez F(2), Ott 
CJ(7)(8), Francis JM(2)(10), Sassi S(11)(12), Cogswell P(13), Sheppard HE(14), 
Zhang T(7), Gray NS(7), Clarke PA(15), Blagg J(15), Workman P(15), Sommer J(13), 
Hornicek F(11)(16), Root DE(2), Hahn WC(2)(7), Bradner JE(7)(17), Wong KK(3), 
Clemons PA(2), Lin CY(18), Kotz JD(19)(20), Schreiber SL(21)(22)(23).

Author information:
(1)Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. 
tanaz@broadinstitute.org.
(2)Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(5)Janssen R&D, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(6)University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(7)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.
(8)Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA, USA.
(9)Janssen R&D, Spring House, PA, USA.
(10)Gritstone Oncology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(11)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(12)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(13)Chordoma Foundation, Durham, NC, USA.
(14)Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(15)Cancer Research UK Cancer Therapeutics Unit, The Institute of Cancer 
Research, London, UK.
(16)UCLA Medical Center, Santa Monica, CA, USA.
(17)Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(18)Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. Charles.Y.Lin@bcm.edu.
(19)Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. jkotz@jnanatx.com.
(20)Jnana Therapeutics, Boston, MA, USA. jkotz@jnanatx.com.
(21)Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. 
stuart_schreiber@harvard.edu.
(22)Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. stuart_schreiber@harvard.edu.
(23)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD, USA. 
stuart_schreiber@harvard.edu.

Chordoma is a primary bone cancer with no approved therapy1. The identification 
of therapeutic targets in this disease has been challenging due to the 
infrequent occurrence of clinically actionable somatic mutations in chordoma 
tumors2,3. Here we describe the discovery of therapeutically targetable chordoma 
dependencies via genome-scale CRISPR-Cas9 screening and focused small-molecule 
sensitivity profiling. These systematic approaches reveal that the developmental 
transcription factor T (brachyury; TBXT) is the top selectively essential gene 
in chordoma, and that transcriptional cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitors 
targeting CDK7/12/13 and CDK9 potently suppress chordoma cell proliferation. In 
other cancer types, transcriptional CDK inhibitors have been observed to 
downregulate highly expressed, enhancer-associated oncogenic transcription 
factors4,5. In chordoma, we find that T is associated with a 1.5-Mb region 
containing 'super-enhancers' and is the most highly expressed 
super-enhancer-associated transcription factor. Notably, transcriptional CDK 
inhibition leads to preferential and concentration-dependent downregulation of 
cellular brachyury protein levels in all models tested. In vivo, 
CDK7/12/13-inhibitor treatment substantially reduces tumor growth. Together, 
these data demonstrate small-molecule targeting of brachyury transcription 
factor addiction in chordoma, identify a mechanism of T gene regulation that 
underlies this therapeutic strategy, and provide a blueprint for applying 
systematic genetic and chemical screening approaches to discover vulnerabilities 
in genomically quiet cancers.

DOI: 10.1038/s41591-018-0312-3
PMCID: PMC6633917
PMID: 30664779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING INTERESTS T.S. is a consultant for 
Jnana Therapeutics. N.S.G. is equity holder and scientific advisor for Syros, 
Gatekeeper, Soltego, C4, Petra and Aduro companies. Syros has licensed 
intellectual property from Dana-Farber Cancer Institute covering THZ1. P.A. 
Clarke, J.B., and P.W. are current employees of The Institute of Cancer 
Research, which has a Rewards to Inventors scheme and has a commercial interest 
in the development of inhibitors of the WNT pathway, CDK8/19 and other CDKs, 
with intellectual property licensed to Merck and Cyclacel Pharmaceuticals. PW is 
a consultant for Astex Pharmaceuticals, CV6 Therapeutics, Nextechinvest, 
Nuevolution and Storm Therapeutics and holds equity in Chroma Therapeutics, 
Nextech and Storm. D.E.R. receives research funding from members of the 
Functional Genomics Consortium (Abbvie, Jannsen, Merck, Vir), and is a director 
of Addgene, Inc. W.C.H. is a consultant for Thermo Fisher, Paraxel, AjuIB, MPM 
Capital and KSQ Therapeutics, is a founder of KSQ Therapeutics and receives 
research support from Deerfield. J.E.B. is now an executive and shareholder of 
Novartis AG, and has been a founder and shareholder of SHAPE (acquired by 
Medivir), Acetylon (acquired by Celgene), Tensha (acquired by Roche), Syros, 
Regency and C4 Therapeutics. K.K.W. is a founder and equity holder of G1 
Therapeutics and he has consulting/sponsored research agreements with 
AstraZeneca, Janssen, Pfizer, Array, Novartis, Merck, Takeda, Ono, Targimmune 
and BMS. C.Y.L. is a consultant for Jnana Therapeutics and is a shareholder of 
and inventor of intellectual property licensed to Syros Pharmaceuticals. J.D.K. 
is a founder, executive, and shareholder of Jnana Therapeutics. S.L.S. is a 
member of the Board of Directors of the Genomics Institute of the Novartis 
Research Foundation (“GNF”); a shareholder and member of the Board of Directors 
of Jnana Therapeutics; a shareholder of Forma Therapeutics; a shareholder of and 
adviser to Decibel Therapeutics; an adviser to Eisai, Inc., the Ono Pharma 
Foundation, and F-Prime Capital Partners; and a Novartis Faculty Scholar. All 
other authors declare no competing interests.

Chordoma is a primary bone cancer with no approved therapy1. The identification of therapeutic targets in
this disease has been challenging due to the infrequent occurrence of clinically
actionable somatic mutations in chordoma tumors2,3. Here we describe the
discovery of therapeutically targetable chordoma dependencies via genome-scale
CRISPR-Cas9 screening and focused small-molecule sensitivity profiling. These systematic
approaches reveal that the developmental transcription factor T
(brachyury; TBXT) is the top selectively essential gene in chordoma,
and that transcriptional cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitors targeting CDK7/12/13
and CDK9 potently suppress chordoma cell proliferation. In other cancer types,
transcriptional CDK inhibitors have been observed to downregulate highly expressed,
enhancer-associated oncogenic transcription factors (TFs)4,5. In
chordoma, we find that T is associated with a 1.5-Mb region containing
“super-enhancers” and is the most highly expressed
super-enhancer-associated TF. Notably, transcriptional CDK inhibition leads to
preferential and concentration-dependent downregulation of cellular brachyury protein
levels in all models tested. In vivo, CDK7/12/13-inhibitor treatment
substantially reduces tumor growth. Together, these data demonstrate small-molecule
targeting of brachyury TF addiction in chordoma, identify a mechanism of
T gene regulation that underlies this therapeutic strategy, and
provide a blueprint for applying systematic genetic and chemical screening approaches to
discover vulnerabilities in genomically quiet cancers.

Chordoma is a primary bone cancer that typically occurs in the skull-base, mobile
spine, and sacrum6. Chordoma often
manifests as a slow-growing but locally invasive malignancy, with a tendency to recur
despite surgical and/or radiation therapy1,7. There are no approved
targeted therapies, conventional cytotoxic chemotherapies, or immunotherapies for
chordoma1. The lack of systemic
treatment options, and an inadequate understanding of chordoma biology to guide the
development of new therapies, contributes to poor prognoses for patients with advanced
disease7.

Chordoma is hypothesized to originate from embryonic notochordal
remnants8. Both cell types
share high expression of the T-box-family TF brachyury (gene symbol: T;
TBXT)9, an
essential regulator of notochord development10 whose overexpression is characteristic of chordoma9. Beyond being a chordoma biomarker,
brachyury appears to be critical for disease pathogenesis: germline T
duplication confers susceptibility to familial chordoma11, a single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in
T is associated with chordoma12, some sporadic chordomas harbor somatic copy-number gains of
T3,13, and T silencing inhibits
growth of chordoma models13–15. Furthermore, brachyury is primarily
expressed in the embryo and is absent from the majority of normal adult tissue9,10,16. These findings
suggest that brachyury may act as an aberrantly activated developmental TF that is
oncogenic and essential in a lineage-specific manner, akin to canonical
“lineage-survival” oncogenes (e.g., MITF in
melanoma)17.

Importantly, however, the full range of tumor dependencies in chordoma is not
known. Few genes are recurrently mutated—and only at a modest frequency—in
sporadic chordomas2,3; and nearly half of sporadic cases have no known
driver mutation3. Furthermore, no
systematic functional genomics studies have been conducted in chordoma models. Thus, it
remains unclear if brachyury represents the central tumor dependency of chordoma, or
whether there are critical dependencies left to be uncovered, and, if the former,
whether brachyury overexpression can be targeted therapeutically. Like other TFs,
brachyury is not readily inhibited pharmacologically18, and no small-molecule inhibitor of brachyury has been
identified. It is also not known what underlies brachyury dysregulation in the majority
of chordoma tumors, and whether any potential mediators of overexpression are
therapeutically targetable. Somatic alterations in T occur in a
minority of sporadic chordomas3 and
cannot explain the nearly universal occurrence of brachyury expression. Therefore, a
deeper understanding of essential genes in chordoma, including potential regulators of
brachyury expression, is imperative for nominating candidate therapeutic targets.

Recent advances in systematic CRISPR-Cas9 screening and small-molecule
sensitivity profiling approaches have enabled identification of tumor dependencies in
multiple cancer types19. We integrated
these complementary approaches to identify key tumor dependencies and candidate
therapeutic targets in chordoma.

To identify genes essential for chordoma cell viability, we performed
genome-scale pooled CRISPR-Cas9 loss-of-function screens in two chordoma cell lines
(UM-Chor1, MUG-Chor1). We introduced a library of >74,000 single-guide RNAs
(sgRNAs) targeting ~18,560 genes (Methods) into
stably Cas9-expressing cells via lentiviral transduction, and after 21 days,
quantified sgRNAs from the genomic DNA of surviving cells. Depleted sgRNAs,
representing candidate essential genes, were identified by comparing these sgRNA
abundances to those of the screening library. We ranked all sgRNAs by how much they
reduced viability in chordoma cells relative to 125 non-chordoma cancer cell lines
screened using the same sgRNA library (Broad Institute Project Achilles; https://depmap.org/portal/achilles/)20,, thus removing
commonly essential genes to identify dependencies selective for chordoma.

The top three selectively lethal sgRNAs, out of ~70,000 sgRNAs analyzed, all
targeted the T gene (Fig. 1a).
We confirmed that three of four T-targeted sgRNAs screened were
lethal to both chordoma cell lines, but not to 125 non-chordoma cancer cell lines
(Fig. 1b and Supplementary Table 1). Targeting
T in chordoma cells induced a similar degree of viability
reduction as targeting commonly essential ribosomal subunit genes
RPL23, RPS11, and RPS19
(Fig. 1b, Extended Data Fig. 1, and Supplementary Table 1), indicating that
chordoma cells are both exquisitely and selectively sensitive to loss of brachyury
expression.

We validated the screening results with two sgRNAs targeting independent
sequences of T in three chordoma cell lines (UM-Chor1, MUG-Chor1,
U-CH2) (Fig. 1c). The observed reduction in
chordoma cell proliferation induced by sgRNA-mediated brachyury repression was
consistent with previously reported effects of shRNA-mediated gene silencing of
T in other chordoma cell lines13,14.

SgRNA-mediated T repression in UM-Chor1 cells led to
downregulation of canonical notochord markers (SOX9,
COL2A1, ACAN) (Fig. 1d), consistent with brachyury’s known role in notochord
development21.
Additionally, genes associated with the G2/M checkpoint and E2F targets were
enriched among downregulated genes (Fig. 1e),
suggestive of cell cycle arrest in sg-T-expressing cells. These
data implicate T as an essential gene and regulator of notochord
cell identity in chordoma.

In parallel to the genetic screens, we tested 459 small molecules for their
ability to reduce proliferation or survival in four chordoma cell lines. Compounds
were selected to collectively target many distinct nodes in cell circuitry, and
included FDA-approved drugs, preclinical agents, and small-molecule probes (Supplementary Table 2). A
largely overlapping small-molecule library was previously tested in ~800
non-chordoma cancer cell lines22,
and we used these data to identify and prioritize compounds with antiproliferative
effects selective for chordoma when possible (Fig.
2a; Methods).

Our analysis identified 28 potent antiproliferative compounds, including
several inhibitors of either CDK7,12,13; CDK9; or EGFR/ERBB2 proteins (Fig. 2a and Supplementary Table 2). As CDK7 and
CDK9 have related roles in regulating transcription23, we hypothesized that these inhibitor
classes could have similar mechanistic effects.

The sensitivity of chordoma cells to compounds targeting CDK7/12/13
(THZ1)4; CDK12/13
(THZ531)24; CDK9 (NVP-2,
AT7519, dinaciclib, alvocidib)23,25; and EGFR and/or ERBB2 (erlotinib,
neratinib, canertinib, lapatinib, afatinib)26 was validated using multipoint concentration-response
assays (Fig. 2b, Extended Data Fig. 2a, and Supplementary Table 3). Transcriptional
CDK inhibitors including THZ1, dinaciclib, and alvocidib exhibit antiproliferative
effects across a diversity of cancer cell lines4 (Extended Data Fig.
2b). Consistent with small-molecule sensitivity findings, sgRNAs targeting
CDK7, CDK13, and CDK9, but not those targeting CDK12, were lethal to chordoma cells
(Fig. 2c and Supplementary Table 1). SgRNAs
targeting EGFR and ERBB2 were lethal to 2/2 and 1/2 chordoma cell lines,
respectively (Fig. 2c and Supplementary Table 1). EGFR-inhibitor
sensitivity in chordoma has been described previously27; thus, we focused on transcriptional CDK
inhibitors, which are newly identified antiproliferative agents in chordoma.

We confirmed on-target activity of the CDK7/12/13 inhibitor THZ1 by
detecting reduced phosphorylation, particularly at serine 2, of the C-terminal
domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II (POLR2A) (Fig.
2d). Beyond having antiproliferative effects, THZ1 treatment induced
apoptosis in chordoma cells, as measured by increased caspase-3/7 activity (Fig. 2e). We did not observe comparable
sensitivity of chordoma cells to inhibitors of CDK proteins not implicated in direct
phosphorylation of the POLR2A CTD, including CDK4/6 inhibitors (palbociclib/PD
0332991, LEE011)28; and CDK8/19
inhibitors (CCT251545, BRD6989)29,30 (Extended Data Fig. 3a and Supplementary Table 3). On-target
activity was confirmed for a select number of CDK inhibitors tested (Extended Data Fig. 3b). Together, these data implicate
inhibitors of CDK7/12/13 and CDK9 as potent antiproliferative agents in
chordoma.

Transcriptional CDK inhibitors are under clinical investigation
(NCT03134638) owing to their ability to downregulate
preferentially oncogenic TFs in multiple cancer types5. Components of the transcriptional apparatus,
including CDK7, can densely occupy super-enhancers—large clustered enhancers
that drive genes required for tumor identity—often rendering the expression
of super-enhancer-driven genes especially vulnerable to transcriptional
inhibitors4,5,31,32. To investigate whether similar
mechanisms connect the essentiality of T to the antiproliferative
effects of transcriptional CDK inhibitors, we tested whether T is
super-enhancer-associated in chordoma.

We mapped the enhancer landscape in five chordoma cell lines using chromatin
immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) to detect histone H3 lysine 27 acetylation
(H3K27ac), a chromatin modification associated with active enhancers32. We identified large enhancers
overlapping and adjacent to the T locus in all five models (Fig. 3a, Extended
Data Fig. 4, and Supplementary Table 4). T enhancers showed evidence of
brachyury binding, as measured by brachyury ChIP-seq (using a published
dataset33) (Fig. 3a), and potentially other TFs as suggested by an
assay for transposase-accessible chromatin using sequencing (ATAC-seq) (Fig. 3a), which measures chromatin accessibility
and TF occupancy34. In contrast,
super-enhancers and brachyury binding were not detected at the housekeeping TF
MAX locus, despite the presence of other TF binding sites as
inferred by ATAC-seq signal (Fig 3b and Supplementary Table 4).

All chordoma cell lines had high T (brachyury) expression,
especially compared to non-super-enhancer-associated genes, such as
MAX (Fig. 3b–c and Extended Data
Fig. 5a); in contrast, T (brachyury) was not widely
expressed in non-chordoma cancer cell lines (Extended
Data Fig. 5a–b). Furthermore,
T expression was highest among all super-enhancer-associated
TFs in chordoma (Fig. 3d and Extended Data Fig. 5c), and when ranked against all other
enhancers, the T-associated super-enhancer was among the largest in
the chordoma genome (Fig 3e, Supplementary Table 5, and Extended Data Fig. 4). JHC7 cells had a large
focal amplification at the T locus that encompassed adjacent
T enhancers, as well as a 1.5-Mb upstream region with broad
H3K27ac occupancy (Fig. 3f and Extended Data Fig. 5d).

T-associated super-enhancers were similarly observed in
patient-derived chordoma tumors (Supplementary Table 6), as detected by enhancer rank averaged across
eight tumors (Fig. 3g and Supplementary Table 7) and in
individual tumors (Fig. 3h, Extended Data Fig. 6, and Supplementary Table 4). Brachyury
expression was confirmed for the subset of tumors tested (Extended Data Fig. 7). By enhancer ranking (Extended Data Fig. 6), 4/8 tumors had
T-adjacent super-enhancers, 7/8 had T-adjacent
enhancers ranking in the top 10% of all enhancers, and 8/8 were hyper-acetylated in
the 1.5-Mb region found in JHC7 cells (Fig.
3i). In contrast, matched normal adjacent tissue lacked H3K27ac occupancy
within this 1.5-Mb tumor hyper-acetylated region (Fig.
3i).

Enhancer patterns across tumors and cell lines showed grouping by in
vivo or ex vivo state (Fig. 3j), similar to other cancer types35. Nonetheless, in both tumors and cell lines,
super-enhancers associated with genes known to be highly expressed in chordoma:
components of the extracellular matrix or its interactors (e.g., integrin subunit
alpha 3, tensin 3, fibronectin 1, caveolin 1/2), mediators of de-differentiation
(HoxA), and EGFR36–38. Thus, as in other cancers,
super-enhancers associate with genes that define chordoma identity31,32, and regulation of T by super-enhancers is
a dominant feature of the chordoma gene-regulatory landscape.

The essentiality of T, together with its association with
super-enhancers, led us to test whether the antiproliferative effects of
transcriptional CDK inhibitors are mediated by preferential loss of brachyury
expression.

We found that THZ1 treatment reduced cellular brachyury protein levels in
MUG-Chor1 and UM-Chor1 cells in a concentration- and time-dependent manner (Fig 4a and Extended Data Figure 8a). In contrast, brachyury protein expression was
unchanged following treatment with compounds that are cytotoxic to chordoma cells
but are not transcriptional CDK inhibitors (Supplementary Table 2), including
inhibitors of EGFR (erlotinib), Src (dasatinib), and the BET bromodomain (JQ1)
(Fig. 4a). Downregulation of brachyury
expression was also observed following treatment with CDK9 inhibitors (NVP-2,
dinaciclib, alvocidib), but not with the CDK4/6 inhibitor palbociclib, across
multiple chordoma models (Fig. 4b).

THZ1 treatment also substantially reduced mRNA expression of
T, especially compared to MAX or the
housekeeping gene CFL1 (Extended
Data Fig. 8b). For comparison, we tested actinomycin D, a transcriptional
inhibitor not thought to act through CDK inhibition39, and similarly observed mRNA downregulation
of T, but not MAX or CFL1 (Extended Data Fig. 8b). However, compared to
THZ1, actinomycin D induced higher cytotoxicity at concentrations leading to
substantial T-mRNA downregulation (Extended Data Fig. 8b–c and
Supplementary Table 3),
suggesting that THZ1 and actinomycin D could differ in how selectively they induce
T downregulation.

We confirmed this difference using transcriptome-wide gene-expression
profiling of THZ1- and actinomycin D-treated cells (Fig. 4c). Only THZ1 treatment led to preferential downregulation of
T expression (Fig. 4c),
indicating that super-enhancer-driven T transcription is
particularly vulnerable to CDK7/12/13 inhibition.

Furthermore, we tested whether THZ1’s antiproliferative effects are
mediated by loss of super-enhancer-driven brachyury expression. To dissociate
T from its endogenous regulatory elements, we transduced
UM-Chor1 cells with an ORF encoding T under the control of an
exogenous promoter. Unlike endogenous brachyury protein, ectopic brachyury
expression levels were not greatly reduced with THZ1 treatment (Fig. 4d). Moreover, ectopic brachyury expression was
sufficient to partially rescue loss of viability induced by 500 nM THZ1 treatment
(Fig. 4e). Thus, downregulation of
brachyury via its endogenous regulatory elements directly contributes to the
antiproliferative effects of THZ1.

Besides T, only four genes were identified to be both
super-enhancer-associated and essential in UM-Chor1 and MUG-Chor1 cells:
SOX9, SAE1, TPX2, and
ATP6V1B2 (Fig. 4f). These
genes appear to be under direct and/or indirect transcriptional control by
brachyury: sgRNA-mediated T repression significantly reduced
expression levels of all four genes (Fig. 4f,
Supplementary Table 8,
and Extended Data Fig. 9); and brachyury bound
genomic regions corresponding to two of them (SAE1 and
ATP6V1B2; Fig. 4f and
Supplementary Table
8).

These data support a model whereby T (brachyury) is
expressed at high levels by a super-enhancer, is auto-regulated, and through direct
binding to other super-enhancers and/or indirect mechanisms, can regulate other
essential, super-enhancer-associated genes (Fig.
4g). As transcriptional CDKs including CDK7 and CDK9 are localized at
enhancers4,31, these data implicate transcriptional CDK
inhibition in both upstream and downstream targeting of T
(brachyury) gene control.

Finally, THZ1 efficacy was tested in vivo. A xenograft
mouse model was generated with the human chordoma cell line CH2240.
Ex vivo, CH22 cells were sensitive to transcriptional CDK
inhibitors (Extended Data Fig. 10a), and
compound treatment induced downregulation of brachyury expression (Extended Data Fig. 10b). Mice were treated with 40 mg/kg
THZ1 BID, on a pulse-dosing schedule (Fig. 4h).
This dose was reasonably well tolerated (Extended
Data Fig. 10c), and was empirically determined to downregulate brachyury
expression in target engagement studies of mouse tumors (Extended Data Fig. 10d), although we note that detection
of brachyury downregulation varied across experiments and mice (Extended Data Fig. 10e).

THZ1 treatment led to a significant tumor-suppressive effect (p = 1.1
× 10−5; Fig. 4i and
Supplementary Table 9).
These data provide evidence for the in vivo efficacy of THZ1 for
the treatment of chordoma.

In conclusion, these findings nominate transcriptional CDK inhibition as a
therapeutic strategy to target brachyury-driven transcriptional addiction in
chordoma. Our results indicate that T (brachyury), a
transcriptional regulator of notochord development, might drive chordoma
tumorigenesis when dysregulated or persistently expressed. Thus, T
resembles other “lineage-survival” oncogenes (e.g.,
MITF in melanoma), which arise from dysregulated expression of
master genes that mediate normal lineage development17. More generally, these findings provide
evidence for “transcriptional addiction” in chordoma, a state of
exquisite dependence on specific regulators of gene expression5. As transcriptional dependencies are not
typically discovered by tumor genome sequencing, these findings underscore the value
of functional screening approaches, such as CRISPR-Cas9 and small-molecule
sensitivity screening, to identify key vulnerabilities that may not manifest as
mutations in the tumor genome.

TFs including brachyury are challenging to target directly with candidate
drugs. Transcriptional CDK inhibition provides a therapeutic opportunity to
downregulate preferentially T (brachyury). The recent entrance of
next-generation transcriptional CDK inhibitors into the clinic may provide a
much-needed therapeutic option for chordoma patients with refractory disease.

UM-Chor1, MUG-Chor1, U-CH1, U-CH2, and JHC7 chordoma cell lines were
obtained from the Chordoma Foundation. CH22 cells were obtained from the
Chordoma Foundation and Massachusetts General Hospital and have been described
previously40. UM-Chor1
cells were maintained in IMDM/RPMI (4:1) media + 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS)
and 1X non-essential amino acids. MUG-Chor1, U-CH1, and U-CH2 cell lines were
maintained in IMDM/RPMI (4:1) media + 10% FBS. JHC7 cells were maintained in
DMEM/F12 (1:1) + 10% FBS. CH22 cells were maintained in RPMI media + 10% FBS.
All chordoma cell lines were maintained on collagen I-coated plates. SW 1353 and
CAL-78 chondrosarcoma cell lines were obtained from the Broad Institute Cancer
Cell Line Encyclopedia project41. SW 1353 cells were maintained in DMEM/F12 (1:1) + 10% FBS
media. CAL-78 cells were maintained in RPMI media + 20% FBS.

Cas9-expressing UM-Chor1 and MUG-Chor1 cells were generated as follows:
each parental cell line was incubated with lentivirus corresponding to the
pLX_311-Cas9 plasmid (Addgene plasmid #96924), encoding the Cas9 protein, in the
presence of 4 μg/mL polybrene, dispensed in 12-well plates (1.5 ×
106 cells/well), and spin-infected at 2,000 rpm for 2 h at
30°C. After spin-infection, 2 mL of standard growth media was added to
each well, and cells were incubated at 37°C overnight. The following day,
for each cell line, cells were trypsinized and expanded in selective media
containing blasticidin (2–3 µg/mL for UM-Chor1 and 2 µg/mL
for MUG-Chor1). Following selection for infected cells, Cas9 activity was
confirmed in each transduced cell line using a previously described
Cas9-activity assay42.

Screening was performed using a genome-scale library of 74,687 unique
sgRNAs targeting ~18,560 genes (typically 4 sgRNAs per gene) and 1,000
non-targeting control sgRNAs (Broad Institute Avana sgRNA library)20. UM-Chor1-Cas9 and
MUG-Chor1-Cas9 cells were each incubated with lentivirus corresponding to the
pooled CRISPR library in the presence of 4 μg/mL polybrene, dispensed in
12-well plates (21 plates with 1.5 × 106 cells/well for
UM-Chor1 and 15 plates with 3 × 106 cells/well for MUG-Chor1),
and spin-infected at 2,000 rpm for 2 h at 30°C. Lentivirus was titered in
each cell line to achieve a low MOI (<1), and infections were performed
with a sufficient a number of cells to achieve a representation of >800
cells per sgRNA per replicate after selection for infected cells. After
spin-infection, 2 mL of standard growth media was added to each well, and cells
were incubated at 37°C overnight. The following day, for each cell line,
cells were trypsinized, divided into three replicates, and expanded in selective
media containing puromycin (3 µg/mL for UM-Chor1 and 6 µg/mL for
MUG-Chor1) and blasticidin (3 µg/mL for UM-Chor1 and 2 µg/mL for
MUG-Chor1). Cells were grown in culture for 21 d post-infection, with carryover
of >40 × 106 cells at each passage. Cells were grown in
selective media until 7 d (UM-Chor1) or 8 d (MUG-Chor1) post-infection, after
which they were grown in standard growth media. At 21 d post-infection, cells
were collected and stored at −20°C in PBS until genomic DNA
isolation steps.

Genomic DNA was purified from cell pellets using the NucleoSpin Blood XL
Kit (Macherey-Nagel). The sgRNA sequence was PCR-amplified with sufficient gDNA
to maintain representation and then quantified using massively parallel
sequencing43,44. For each cell line, primary screening
was performed once with three replicates.

Cell lines with poor Cas9 activity (<50%) were excluded from
screening. Quality-control measures were used to remove cell line replicate
sample data where (1) the single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotype
fingerprint failed to match the reference cell line as previously
described43; (2) the
reproducibility between replicates was less than 70%; (3) the strictly
standardized mean difference (SSMD) using positive (proteasome, ribosome, and
spliceosome components) and non-targeting controls of fold-change data was poor
(>−0.75); and (4) principal component analysis showed a replicate
or cell line to be a global outlier of the dataset.

Data were processed in a reproducible GenePattern pipeline containing
individual modules, all available from GParc (gparc.org).
Normalized read counts per million were calculated and compared to the abundance
of the initial DNA plasmid pool to calculate a log2 fold change per
sgRNA after removing sgRNAs with low abundance in the initial plasmid pool (GP
modules: FilterLowPert, PertFoldChange)43. The data were batch corrected using the ComBat
algorithm to account for a known reagent change during screening
(PertBatchCor)45. The
median of non-targeting controls (n = 1,000) in the Avana library was subtracted
from each sgRNA to generate a sgRNA-level score (“sgRNA-dependency
score”) and plots (NormToNegCntrls, collapseReps). Guides that targeted
more than one perfect match location were removed and normalization across cell
lines was performed using LOWESS to enable cross-cell-line comparisons
(gctRowKeep, NormLines). STARS analysis was performed on LOWESS-normalized
sgRNA-level data. The comparison of chordoma and non-chordoma lines was
performed using PARIS43 on
LOWESS-normalized sgRNA-level data. The rescaled normalized mutual information
(RNMI) score from PARIS was used to rank chordoma selectively essential
sgRNAs.

The Mann-Whitney test reported in Fig.
2c was performed in MATLAB (MathWorks, Inc.).

UM-Chor1, MUG-Chor1, and U-CH2 cells were each incubated with lentivirus
corresponding to the pXPR_001 plasmid, encoding either sg-T #1,
sg-T #2, or sg-EGFP (sequences below), in
the presence of 4 μg/mL polybrene, dispensed in 12-well plates (1.5
× 106 cells/well for UM-Chor1 and MUG-Chor1, 1.2 ×
106 cells/well for U-CH2), and spin-infected at 2,000 rpm for 2 h
at 30°C. After spin-infection, 2 mL of standard growth media was added to
each well, and cells were incubated at 37°C overnight. The following day,
for each cell line, cells were trypsinized and expanded in selective media
containing puromycin (2 µg/mL for UM-Chor1, 1–2 µg/mL for
MUG-Chor1, 3 µg/mL for U-CH2). Following selection for infected cells,
cells were seeded in 24-well plates in selective media (30,000 cells/well for
UM-Chor1 and U-CH2 and 40,000 cells/well for MUG-Chor1, with three replicates
per timepoint), and counted at indicated intervals over a 25 d period. In
parallel, selected cells were harvested (at least 9 d post-transduction) for
immunoblotting to confirm sgRNA-mediated protein reduction. Proliferation
experiments were performed twice for UM-Chor1 and U-CH2 with minor modifications
between experiments and once for MUG-Chor1, with three replicates per
experiment. Immunoblots were performed once. Statistical analysis was performed
with GraphPad Prism v7.

The T-targeting sgRNAs used for low-throughput
experiments were cloned in the pXPR_001 lentiviral vector, which encodes the
Cas9 protein46. Spacer
sequences for T-targeting sgRNAs were as follows:
sg-T #1, CCCTGAGACCCAGTTCATAG; sg-T #2,
TGGCTGGTGATCATGCGCTG. The pXPR_001 plasmid encoding sg-EGFP was
provided by the laboratory of Feng Zhang (Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA) and
has been described previously (“EGFP sgRNA 6”)46. Lentivirus was produced by transfection
of 293T packaging cells with three plasmids [pXPR_001-sgRNA, Δ8.9
(gag, pol), and VSV-G]; and the FuGene6
transfection reagent (Roche). Virus-containing supernatant was harvested 3 d
post-transfection.

Chemical sensitivity tests similar to those reported in the Cancer
Therapeutics Response Portal (CTRP: www.broadinstitute.org/ctrp/) were performed using 459 small
molecules chosen collectively to target a diverse set of nodes in cell
circuitry, and with a high degree of overlap to published informer sets (Supplementary Table
2)22, including
428 compounds published in CTRP. UM-Chor1, MUG-Chor1, U-CH1, and JHC7 cells were
each seeded overnight in 384-well BioCoat Collagen I (Corning) microtiter plates
at a density of 1200, 1800, 2000, and 1600 cells per well, respectively. The
following day, compound or DMSO was added to wells (1:400 dilution) using a
CyBio pinning instrument. Each compound was tested using 8 concentrations in
duplicate. Cells were incubated at 37°C, and cell viability was assayed 6
d after the addition of compound or DMSO using the CellTiter-Glo reagent
(Promega). For each cell line, primary screening was performed once with two
replicates.

Computational analyses and visualizations were performed in Microsoft
Excel Professional Plus 2013, GraphPad Prism (v6 or v7), Pipeline Pilot (version
8.5) (Accelrys, Inc.), or MATLAB 8.4 (2014b) or MATLAB 9.4 (2018a) (MathWorks,
Inc.), as described in the following specific Methods sections.

The response of each chordoma cell line to a tested compound was
quantified as follows: log-transformed duplicate data were averaged during
normalization of luminescence values to vehicle (DMSO) treatment47, and at each compound
concentration, an average percent-viability (PV) score was calculated. PV
response-point measurements were computed across all cell lines, compounds, and
concentrations. Curves were fit with nonlinear sigmoid functions, and the
area-under-curve (AUC) for each CCL-compound pair was calculated by numerically
integrating under the 8-point concentration-response curve essentially as
described previously22. In our
analysis, we differed from the published procedure in (1) the number of
concentrations tested; (2) the use of fixed concentration limits of integration
for AUCs across all compounds; (3) standardization of AUC values on the range
from 1 (DMSO or no effect) to 0 (complete killing throughout the concentration
range of integration); cf.
https://github.com/remontoire-pac/ctrp-reference/tree/master/auc.
Data pre-processing from instrument files through DMSO normalization was
performed in Pipeline Pilot, and curve-fitting, numerical integration, and
subsequent analysis steps were performed in MATLAB.

To identify candidate antiproliferative small molecules in chordoma, a
threshold was applied to include only potent compounds (average AUC across four
chordoma cell lines < 0.8). Next, to assess whether a compound had
selectively cytotoxic effects in chordoma lines relative to other cell lines
tested in CTRP, we computed the median AUC for 4 chordoma lines and z-scored
this median with respect to the mean and standard deviation of all other cell
lines tested with that compound. We applied this selectivity analysis to filter
out potent compounds whose cytotoxic effects were non-selective for chordoma
cell lines (z-score < −1), when those data were available. We note
that some compounds were only tested in the chordoma lines, and therefore data
about their performance across CTRP lines were not available; in such cases, we
did not apply any additional filtering step beyond the initial potency filter.
Twenty-eight compounds passed these criteria, and 431 compounds were filtered
out. Compounds targeting proteins of interest (CDK 7,12,13,9 and EGFR/ERBB2)
were carried forward for secondary screening.

UM-Chor1, MUG-Chor1, U-CH1, JHC7, and CH22 cells were each seeded
overnight in 384-well BioCoat Collagen I (Corning) microtiter plates at a
density of 1200, 1800, 2000, 1600, and 1200 cells per well, respectively. The
following day, compound or DMSO was added to wells using an HP D300 digital
dispenser instrument. Each compound was tested using 9 concentrations, in
quadruplicate (four wells treated in parallel). Cell viability was assayed 6 d
after compound addition with the CellTiter-Glo reagent (Promega). Luminescence
values were treated as with the primary screening data (vide
supra). Data pre-processing from instrument files through DMSO
normalization was performed in Pipeline Pilot for UM-Chor1, MUG-Chor1, U-CH1,
JHC7, or Microsoft Excel for CH22; and curve-fitting, numerical integration, and
subsequent analysis steps were performed in MATLAB. Experiments depicted in
Fig. 2b, Extended Data Fig. 2a, and Extended
Data Fig. 3a were performed at least twice in each cell line (except
afatinib treatment in JHC7 cells, which was performed once); experiments
depicted in Extended Data Fig. 8c were
performed at least three times in UM-Chor1 cells and once for all other cell
lines. Experiments depicted in Extended Fig.
10a were performed once. For experiments performed multiple times,
compound addition was performed using either a digital dispenser instrument, as
described above, or a Cybio pinning instrument.

Small molecules used for low-throughput ex vivo
experiments were obtained from the following sources: THZ1, THZ531, and NVP-2
were provided by the laboratory of Nathanael Gray (Dana-Farber Cancer Institute;
Boston, MA); JQ1 was provided by the laboratory of James Bradner (Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute; Boston, MA); CCT251545 was provided by Paul Clarke and Aurelie
Mallinger (The Institute of Cancer Research; London, UK); alvocidib, AT7519,
dinaciclib, LEE011, and palbociclib were purchased from Selleck Chemicals;
erlotinib and dasatinib were purchased from LC Laboratories; actinomycin D was
purchased from Gibco; neratinib, canertinib, lapatinib, and afatinib were
obtained from Broad Institute Compound Management and were originally purchased
from Selleck Chemicals; BRD6989 was obtained from Broad Institute Compound
Management and was originally purchased from Vitas-M Laboratory (cat#
STL241555). Small molecules used for high-throughput screening were obtained
from Broad Institute Compound Management (Broad Institute Compound IDs reported
in Supplementary Table
2). THZ1 Hydrochloride used for in vivo studies was
purchased from MedChemExpress.

For RNA-sequencing experiments with sgRNA-treated cells: UM-Chor1 cells
were incubated with lentivirus corresponding to the pXPR_001 plasmid, encoding
either sg-T #1, sg-T #2, or
sg-EGFP in the presence of 4 μg/mL polybrene,
dispensed in 12-well plates (1.3 × 106 cells/well), and
spin-infected at 2,000 rpm for 2 h at 30°C. After spin-infection, 2 mL of
standard growth media was added to each well, and cells were incubated at
37°C overnight. The following day, cells were trypsinized and expanded in
selective media containing puromycin (2 µg/mL). Following selection for
infected cells, selective media was replaced with standard growth media, and
cells were harvested 2 d later. Cell pellets were used for RNA extraction using
an RNeasy Kit (Qiagen). Sequencing libraries were prepared using the NEBNext
Ultra Directional RNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina (New England BioLabs), and
libraries were sequenced using the Illumina HiSeq 2500 instrument (rapid-run
mode) with paired-end 100 bp reads. Sequencing was performed once with two
biological replicates for each condition.

For RNA-sequencing experiments with compound-treated cells: UM-Chor1
cells were seeded overnight in 6 cm collagen I-coated dishes at a density of
750,000 cells per dish. The following day, media was replaced with standard
growth media containing compound at the final concentration or DMSO. Compound-
and DMSO-treated cells were harvested 4 h after compound or DMSO addition. Cell
pellets were used for RNA extraction using an RNeasy Kit (Qiagen). Sequencing
libraries were prepared using the TruSeq Stranded mRNA Library Prep Kit
(Illumina), and libraries were sequenced using the Illumina NextSeq 500
instrument with single-end, 75 bp reads. Sequencing was performed once with two
biological replicates for each condition.

For all RNA-seq experiments, raw reads were processed with Trim Galore!
(version 0.4.1) (Babraham Bioinformatics; https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/trim_galore)
to remove adapter sequences and aligned with STAR (version 2.4.2)48 to the human genome (GRCh38,
primary assembly) using the GENCODE annotation (version 23). Differential
expression analysis was performed in R (version 3.2.1) (http://www.R-project.org/) using the DESeq2
package (version 1.10.0)49.

Gene set enrichment analysis was performed with GSEA2 (version 2.2.0)
and gene sets from MSigDB (version 5.0)50,51. We used the
“preranked” algorithm to analyze gene lists ranked by the negative
decadic logarithm of adjusted p-values obtained from the differential-expression
analysis with DESeq2. To separate up- and down-regulated genes, we artificially
assigned a negative sign to values for downregulated genes (thus using the
decadic logarithm of adjusted p-values). We used the options –nperm 1000,
-set_max 1500, and –set_min 5.

Whole-exome sequencing data for all chordoma cell lines were obtained
from the Chordoma Foundation (available at www.cavatica.org) and processed according to the GATK Best
Practices52. Briefly,
starting with reads in an unaligned BAM file, we marked sequencing adapters with
Picard (version 1.999) MarkIlluminaAdapters, aligned reads to the human genome
(hg19) with BWA (version 0.7.12)53, and marked duplicates with Picard MarkDuplicates (Broad
Institute Picard; https://github.com/broadinstitute/picard). We then used the
GATK3 toolkit (version 2.2) to perform Indel Realignment and Base Recalibration
(Broad Institute GATK; software.broadinstitute.org/gatk)54. Somatic copy number variations were
determined using the GATK4 toolkit (Broad Institute GATK; https://gatkforums.broadinstitute.org/gatk/discussion/9143/how-to-call-somatic-copy-number-variants-using-gatk4-cnv).

UM-Chor1 cells were seeded overnight in 6-well collagen I-coated
dishes at a density of 275,000 cells per well. The following day, media was
replaced with standard growth media containing compound at the final
concentration or DMSO. Compound- and DMSO-treated cells were harvested 4, 8,
and 12 h after compound or DMSO addition, and cell pellets were used for RNA
extraction using an RNeasy Kit (Qiagen). Three biological replicates were
generated per condition. Total RNA was reverse transcribed to cDNA using the
High-Capacity RNA-to-cDNA Kit (Applied Biosystems). cDNA was used for qPCR
using the Taqman Gene Expression Master Mix and Taqman Gene Expression
probes (Applied Biosystems). For each cDNA sample, four technical replicate
reactions were performed using probes for the gene of interest, and, in
parallel, for the GAPDH reference gene. The Taqman probes
used in the study were as follows: T, hs00610080_m1;
MAX, hs00811069_g1; CFL1,
hs02621564_g1; GAPDH, hs02758991_g1. Amplification was
performed using the QuantStudio 6 Flex instrument (Applied Biosystems). The
experiment was performed twice with variations in cell seeding density and
replicate numbers, with similar conclusions.

UM-Chor1 cells were transduced with sgRNAs targeting
T and EGFP and subjected to RNA
extraction as described in the RNA sequencing methods section. Total RNA was
used for cDNA synthesis and qPCR, with four technical replicates per qPCR
reaction condition, as described above. The Taqman probes used in the study
were as follows: T, hs00610080_m1; GAPDH,
hs02758991_g1; ATP6V1B2, hs00156037_m1;
SAE1, hs00271440_m1; SOX9,
hs00165814_m1; TPX2, hs00201616_m1. The experiment was
performed once with two biological replicates for each sgRNA.

RT-qPCR data were analyzed according to the instrument
manufacturer’s instructions for relative quantity (RQ) calculations
using the ΔΔCT method. For each sample, cycle
threshold (CT) values were averaged across technical replicates.
ΔCT values were then calculated by subtracting the
average reference-gene (GAPDH) CT values from average target-gene
CT values, for each biological replicate. We applied a
one-sided Welch’s t-test comparing ΔCT values for
treatment and reference samples to determine significant differences.
Log2-fold-changes were calculated as
ΔΔCT values by subtracting
ΔCT values for the reference samples from
ΔCT values for the treated samples. All calculations
were done in R (version 3.4.4).

UM-Chor1 cells were seeded overnight in 384-well BioCoat Collagen I
(Corning) microtiter plates at a density of 1200 cells per well. The following
day, THZ1 or DMSO was added to wells using a HP D300 digital dispenser
instrument. Cells were incubated at 37°C, and caspase-3/7 activity and
cell viability were assayed in parallel 24 h and 48 h after the addition of
compound or DMSO using the Caspase-Glo 3/7 and CellTiter-Glo reagents,
respectively (Promega). Four replicate wells were treated per condition.
Luminescence values corresponding to compound-treated cells were normalized to
those of DMSO-treated cells to calculate relative caspase-3/7 activity or
relative cell viability. The experiment was performed twice.

For Fig. 4a: MUG-Chor1 and UM-Chor1
cells were seeded overnight in 6 cm collagen I-coated dishes at a density of
750,000 cells per dish. The following day, media was replaced with standard
growth media containing compound at the final concentration or DMSO. Cells were
harvested 48 h after compound or DMSO addition and cell pellets were used for
immunoblot analysis. The experiment was performed four times for UM-Chor1 with
variations in compound concentration and incubation times, with similar
conclusions, and once for MUG-Chor1.

For Fig. 4b and Extended Data Fig. 10b: MUG-Chor1, UM-Chor1, U-CH1,
JHC7, and CH22 cells were each seeded overnight in 6 cm collagen I-coated dishes
at a density of 750,000 cells per dish. The following day, media was replaced
with standard growth media containing compound at the final concentration or
DMSO. Cells were harvested 48 h after compound or DMSO addition, and cell
pellets were used for immunoblot analysis. The experiment was performed two
times for MUG-Chor1, UM-Chor1, and U-CH1, with variations in compound
concentration and incubation times, with similar conclusions, and once for JHC7
and CH22.

For Extended Data Fig. 8a:
UM-Chor1 cells were seeded overnight in 6 cm collagen I-coated dishes at a
density of 750,000 cells per dish. The following day, media was replaced with
standard growth media containing compound at the final concentration or DMSO.
Cells were harvested 12 h, 24 h, 36 h, and 48 h after compound or DMSO addition
and cell pellets were used for immunoblot analysis. The experiment was performed
once.

For Fig. 2d and Extended Data Fig. 3b: UM-Chor1 cells were seeded
overnight in 6 cm collagen I-coated dishes at a density of 750,000 cells per
dish. The following day, media was replaced with standard growth media
containing compound at the final concentration or DMSO. Cells were harvested 24
h after compound or DMSO addition, and cell pellets were used for immunoblot
analysis. The experiment was performed 2 times for THZ1, with minor variations
in compound concentrations, with similar conclusions, and CCT251545; and once
for other compounds.

For Extended Data Fig. 9b,
UM-Chor1 cells were transduced with sgRNAs targeting T and
EGFP and used for immunoblotting as described in the
methods section describing validation of CRISPR-Cas9 screens. Transductions were
performed once; immunoblots were performed twice.

Cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 2.5 mM
EDTA pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 0.25% IGEPAL CA-630) containing
protease inhibitors (Roche) and Phosphatase Inhibitor Mixtures I and II
(Calbiochem). Lysates were incubated on ice for >2 min, then centrifuged
for 2 min at 15,700 x g. Supernatants were quantified using a BCA Protein Assay
Kit (Pierce), normalized, reduced, and denatured. Protein samples were then
resolved using Tris-Glycine gels (Novex), and resolved protein was transferred
to iBlot Transfer Stack nitrocellulose membranes (Novex). Membranes were probed
with primary antibodies at 4°C overnight. The antibodies against
brachyury (clone N-19, #sc-17743; 1:1,000) and CDK7 (clone C-4, #sc-7344,
1:1,000) were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Antibodies against
cofilin (clone D3F9, #5175; 1:10,000), total Rb (clone 4H1, #9309; 1:2,000),
phospho-Rb S807/S811 (clone D20B12, #8516; 1:1,000), phospho-Rb S780 (clone
D59B7, #8180; 1:1,000), SOX9 (clone D8G8H, #82630, 1:1,000), total STAT1 (clone
9H2, #9176; 1:1,000), and phospho-STAT1 S727 (clone D3B7, #8826; 1:1,000) were
purchased from Cell Signaling Technology. Antibodies against phospho-POLR2A Ser2
(clone 3E1, #04–1571-I; 1: 1,000), phospho-POLR2A Ser5 (clone 3E8,
#04–1572-I; 1:1,000), and phospho-POLR2A Ser7 (clone 4E12,
#04–1570-I; 1:1,000) were purchased from Millipore. The antibody against
total POLR2A (#A300–653A; 1:400) was purchased from Bethyl Laboratories.
The antibody against the V5 tag (#46–0705, 1:5,000) was purchased from
Invitrogen. Membranes were incubated with IRDye secondary antibodies (1:10,000;
LI-COR Biosciences) and detected with the Odyssey Imaging System (LI-COR
Biosciences). Immunoblots were quantified by densitometry, typically using the
predominant band species, with ImageJ software (NIH). Quantification results
appear in Supplementary Table
10.

Patient-derived tumor and normal adjacent tissue specimens from
Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) were obtained from the clinical archives of
Dr. Francis Hornicek (Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts General
Hospital). Institutional review board (IRB) approval was obtained to study these
tumor samples via Dana-Farber/Harvard Cancer Center protocol number
03–344. Patients were consented according to protocol. Following
resection, tissue was flash frozen and stored at −80°C until later
use.

Patient-derived tumor specimens from the Chordoma Foundation (CF)
Biobank were collected under the CF’s IRB-approved protocol QR26112/1.
Patients gave their written informed consent for scientific study of their tumor
cells. Following resection, tissue was flash frozen and stored in liquid
nitrogen or −80°C until later use for ChIP-seq.
Immunohistochemistry was performed as described below.

Studies were in compliance with all relevant ethical regulations.

Staining was performed by the Histology Core Facility at Ohio State
University. Slides were cut from FFPE blocks of patient tissue and were heated
at 75°C for 15 min, then dewaxed in xylene and graded alcohols as
follows: xylene, 5 min (2X); 100% ethanol, 5 min (2X); 95% ethanol, 2 min; 70%
ethanol, 2 min; 50% ethanol, 2 min; distilled water, 2 min. Antigen retrieval
was performed by steaming in citric acid pH 6 (10 mM) for 15 min. Slides were
cooled for 15 min, then washed with water for 5 min. Slides were blocked with
hydrogen peroxide 3% for 15 min at RT then washed with water for 5 min, followed
by a quick PBS wash. Slides were incubated with blocking buffer for 30 min at RT
(Dako, #X0909), followed by incubation with the brachyury antibody (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, #sc-17743, 1:150) overnight at 4°C. Slides were washed
with PBS 3 X 5 min, then incubated with secondary antibody (Cell IDx, #GH-015)
for 1h at 37°C. Slides were washed with PBS 3 X 5 min. Stains were
developed using DAB, then washed with PBS 3 X 5 min. Counterstaining was
performed with hematoxylin. Tissue sections were dehydrated with graded alcohols
as follows: 50% ethanol, 2 min; 70% ethanol, 2 min; 95% ethanol, 2 min; 100%
ethanol, 2 min (2X); xylene, 5 min (2X). Slides were mounted using Cytoseal
(Richard-Allan Scientific).

Images were converted to high-resolution digital images using Leica
ScanScope XT. Images were visualized for figures using Aperio ImageScope
software.

approximately 100 mg of flash-frozen tissue was minced into
1–2 mm pieces and incubated in 1% formaldehyde for 15 minutes,
followed by quenching with glycine (125 mM final concentration). Fixed
tissue pieces were homogenized with a Tissue Tearor rotor stator homogenizer
(Biospec) set to 30,000 RPM for 60 seconds. Homogenate was washed with
ice-cold PBS containing 1X HALT protease inhibitor. Homogenized pellets were
then resuspended in cytosolic lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 140 mM NaCl,
1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 0.5% IGEPAL, 0.25% Triton X-100, 1X HALT protease
inhibitor) and the protocol was continued as described below.

Chordoma cell lines were grown in 175 cm collagen I-coated plates (3
plates per cell line) and cross-linked by adding 1/10 of the cell culture
volume of 11% formaldehyde solution (1M HEPES-KOH pH 7.5, 0.5 M EDTA pH 8.0,
0.5 M EGTA pH 8.0, 5 M NaCl, 37% formaldehyde) for 10 minutes, followed by
quenching (125 mM glycine). Cells were washed in PBS and harvested by cell
scraper in PBS. Cells were centrifuged at 1,350 X g for 5 min at 4°C,
washed with PBS, and centrifuged again at 1,350 X g for 5 min at 4°C.
Cell pellets were flash frozen and stored at −80°C until
further processing.

samples were subsequently rotated end-over-end for 10 minutes at
4º C in cytosolic lysis buffer and then collected by spinning at
1,350 x g for 5 minutes. Samples were resuspended in nuclear lysis buffer
(10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5mM EGTA, 1X HALT protease
inhibitor) and rotated end-over-end for 10 minutes at 4º C and spun
at 1,350 x g for 5 minutes. Samples were resuspended in 1 mL sonication
buffer ( 0.1% Na-Deoxycholate, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 140 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1
mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100, 1X HALT protease inhibitor) with SDS added to a
final concentration of 0.5%. Chromatin was sheared by sonication using a
Bioruptor water bath sonicator (Diagenode) for 25 cycles. Samples were
clarified by centrifuging 10 minutes at 20,000 x g at 4º C. A 50 uL
aliquot of supernatant was set aside as non-IP input control. The remaining
sheared chromatin was diluted 1:5 in sonication buffer and each sample was
incubated overnight at 4º C with 100 uL of Protein G Dynabeads (Life
Technologies) bound with 10 µg of anti-H3K27ac antibody (abcam,
#ab4729). Beads were washed while rotating end-over-end at 4º C with
the following buffers: twice in sonication buffer, once in sonication buffer
with NaCl added to a final concentration of 500 mM, once in LiCl wash buffer
(20 mM Tris pH 8, 1 mM EDTA, 250 mM LiCl, 0.5% IGEPAL, 0.5%
Na-Deoxycholate), and once in TE-NaCl buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 50 mM
NaCl). Chromatin was eluted by resuspending beads in 200 uL elution buffer
(50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 10 mM EDTA, 1% SDS) and heating for 15 minutes at
65º C. Beads were pelleted by centrifuging at 20,000 G for 30 seconds
and supernatant was collected. Elution buffer (150 uL) was also added to
input chromatin samples. Samples were incubated at 65º C overnight to
reverse crosslinks. Samples were then incubated with RNAse A (Thermo
Scientific) for 2 hours at 37º C, followed by incubation with
Proteinase K (Ambion) for 30 minutes at 55º C. DNA isolation was
performed via phenol-chloroform extraction and concentrated by ethanol
precipitation. Sequencing libraries were generated with the Thruplex DNAseq
Single Index Kit (Rubicon) and sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq 500 with
single-end, 75 bp reads. ChIP-seq was performed once for each sample.

For each cell line (MUG-Chor1 and U-CH2), 50,000 cells were lysed for 10
minutes at 4°C in lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM
MgCl2, 0.1% IGEPAL CA-360). After lysis, the pellets were subject
to a transposition reaction (37°C, 60 minutes) using the 2X TD buffer and
transposase enzyme (Illumina Nextera DNA preparation kit, FC-121–1030).
The transposition mixture was purified using a Qiagen MinElute PCR purification
kit. Library amplification was performed using custom Nextera primers and the
number of total cycles determined by running a SYBR-dye based qPCR reaction and
calculating the cycle number that corresponds to ¼ the maximum. Amplified
libraries were purified using a Qiagen PCR purification kit and sequenced with
paired-end 100 bp reads on an Illumina HiSeq 2000. ATAC-seq was performed once
for each cell line, with two biological replicates for U-CH2 and one replicate
for MUG-Chor1.

All coordinates and gene annotations in this study were based on
human reference genome assembly hg19, GRCh37 (ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/assembly/2758/) and RefSeq genes.

All datasets were aligned using Bowtie2 (version 2.2.1) to build
version NCBI37/HG1955. Alignments were performed using all
default parameters except for –N 1.

We calculated the normalized read density of a ChIP-seq dataset in
any genomic region using the Bamliquidator (version 1.0) read density
calculator (https://github.com/BradnerLab/pipeline/wiki/bamliquidator).
Briefly, ChIP-seq reads aligning to the region were extended to 200 bp and
the density of reads per base pair (bp) was calculated. The density of reads
in each region was normalized to the total number of million mapped reads
producing read density in units of reads per million mapped reads per bp
(rpm/bp).

To compactly display ChIP-seq signal from multiple cell line or
patient-derived chordoma samples at individual genomic loci samples, we
developed a simple meta representation as previously described35. For all samples within a
group, ChIP-seq signal is smoothed using a simple spline function and
plotted as a translucent shape in units of rpm per bp. Darker regions
indicate regions with signal in more samples. An opaque line is plotted and
gives the average signal across all samples in a group.

We used the MACS version 1.4.2 (model-based analysis of ChIP-seq)
peak finding algorithm to identify regions of ChIP-seq enrichment over
background56. A
p-value threshold of enrichment of 1e-9 was used for all datasets.

Across chordoma cell lines, active genes were defined as those with
an enriched H3K27ac region in at least one cell line in the +/− 1kb
region flanking the transcription start site (TSS).

H3K27ac super-enhancers (SEs) and typical enhancers (TEs) in
individual chordoma samples were mapped using the ROSE2 software package
described previously57 and
available at https://github.com/BradnerLab/pipeline - ROSE2_main.py. For
each dataset, a stitching parameter was determined that consolidated
proximal peaks while optimizing the enriched fraction of stitched peaks.
Peaks contained within the +/− 2.5 kb flanking the transcription
start site of genes were excluded (-t 2500 parameter). To assign enhancers
to the T or MAX genes, a 100 kb proximity
window was used (Extended Data Figs. 4
and 6).

H3K27ac super-enhancers (SEs) and typical enhancers (TEs) composite
landscapes in either chordoma cell lines or patient-derived samples were
mapped using the ROSE2 software package described previously57 and available at https://github.com/BradnerLab/pipeline -
ROSE2_META.py. Briefly, for a given cohort of samples (e.g. cell lines), the
union of all discrete H3K27ac enriched regions was determined. For each
cohort of samples, a stitching parameter was determined that consolidated
proximal peaks while optimizing the enriched fraction of stitched peaks. The
average background subtracted signal for each sample across a cohort was
averaged and used to rank enhancers. To assign enhancers to all genes, a 50
kb proximity window was used. Across chordoma cell lines, we identify a
total of 1,199 SEs (Fig. 3e and Supplementary Table
5). Across patient-derived chordoma samples, we identified 1,490 SEs
(Fig. 3g and Supplementary Table 7).
Locations, ranks, proximal and overlapping genes for composite chordoma cell
line and patient-derived sample SEs are provided in Supplementary Tables 5 and
7.

Cell line expression data were provided by the Chordoma Foundation
(available at www.cavatica.org). Briefly, reads were aligned with STAR
aligner and quantified with Sailfish to produce expression measurements in
units of transcripts per million (tpm). We selected all genes that were (1)
associated with SEs in chordoma cell lines, (2) expressed (>1 tpm in
at least 1 sample), and (3) annotated as transcription factors in UniProt,
resulting in 115 genes. Gene-expression levels for the top 30 SE-associated
TFs, ranked by mean expression, are shown in Fig. 3d; levels for all 115 genes are shown in Extended Data Fig. 5c.

To cluster ChIP-seq samples by similarity of H3K27ac enhancer
profiles, we first defined the union of all enhancer regions present in any
individual chordoma sample. ChIP-seq signal was calculated at all regions,
background subtracted, and then median normalized. Samples were then
clustered using hierarchical clustering of cross sample Pearson correlation
(Fig. 3j).

All paired-end datasets were aligned using Bowtie2 (version 2.2.1) to
build version NCBI37/HG19 with the following parameters: -k 1. Aligned bams were
filtered and sorted using samtools (0.1.19) by removing chrM and duplicate
reads, and filtering against the ENCODE blacklist (https://sites.google.com/site/anshulkundaje/projects/blacklists).
Peaks were called using MACS version 1.4.2 with a p-value cutoff of 1e-9.

For cell viability experiments, UM-Chor1 cells were seeded overnight in
384-well BioCoat Collagen I (Corning) microtiter plates at a density of 1000
cells per well. The following day, cells were incubated with lentivirus
corresponding to the pLX-Blast-V5 expression vector58 encoding either the
LACZ or T (p.Gly177Asp variant)12 ORF in the presence of 4
μg/mL polybrene, spin-infected at 1,126 × g for 30 min at 30
°C, then incubated at 37 °C for an additional 4.5 – 5.5 h
before replacing media with standard growth media. Three days post-infection,
cells were treated with 500 nM THZ1 (12 replicate wells treated in parallel) or
DMSO (8 replicate wells treated in parallel) using a using an HP D300 digital
dispenser instrument. Cell viability was assayed 6 d after the addition of
THZ1/DMSO using the CellTiter-Glo reagent (Promega). Infection efficiency was
assayed in a parallel experiment by adding 3 μg/mL blasticidin to
infected wells one day post-infection. The experiment was performed three times.
Statistical analysis was performed with GraphPad Prism v7.

For the immunoblot experiment depicted in Fig. 4d, UM-Chor1 cells were seeded overnight in 6-well collagen
I-coated plates at a density of 300,000 cells per well. The following day, cells
were treated with lentivirus corresponding to the pLX-Blast-V5 expression vector
encoding either the LACZ or T (p.Gly177Asp
variant) ORF in the presence of 8 μg/mL polybrene, and incubated at 37
°C for ~19–20 h before replacing media with standard growth media.
The following day, media was replaced with selective media containing
blasticidin (4 μg/mL). Following selection for infected cells (at least 7
d later), media was replaced with standard growth media containing compound at
the final concentration or DMSO. Cells were harvested 48 h after compound or
DMSO addition, and cell pellets were used for immunoblot analysis. The
experiment was performed twice.

STARS, an algorithm designed to rank genes in genetic perturbation
screens (https://portals.broadinstitute.org/gpp/public/software/stars ),
was used to identify significantly essential genes in each chordoma line
screened. sgRNAs were ranked by the sgRNA-dependency score in each line, then
STARS was run at a 5% threshold to ensure that at least 2 independent sgRNAs
scored for each gene in the top 5% of all sgRNAs screened. Genes scored as
essential in each line, if they passed these criteria. For Fig. 4f, those genes scoring in each chordoma cell
line were then intersected with the list of expressed, super-enhancer-associated
genes in the same cell line. Gene-expression levels in each cell line were
assessed using RNA-sequencing data, which was obtained from the Chordoma
Foundation (available at www.cavatica.org), and processed as described in the
RNA-sequencing analysis methods. H3K27ac super-enhancers (SEs) in individual
chordoma cell lines were mapped as described in the ChIP-seq data analysis
methods section, except that we used a (higher confidence) 50 kb proximity
window to assign enhancers to genes. For a gene to be considered downregulated
by sg-T #1 and sg-T #2 in Fig. 4f, the relative gene expression (as measured by
RNA-sequencing) of cells transduced with sg-T versus a
non-targeting control must have had a log2-fold change < 0 and
an adjusted p-value < 0.01. Brachyury ChIP-seq analysis was performed as
described in the associated methods section.

We obtained FASTQ files for a previously reported brachyury ChIP-seq
experiment33. We
aligned ChIP-seq reads to the human reference genome (hg19) using Bowtie 2
(version 2.2.1)55 and
converted the aligned BAM files to BED files using BEDtools (version
2.26.0)59. Peaks were
then called with MACS (version 1.4.2)56 and annotated with nearby genes using HOMER (version
4.9.1) (http://homer.ucsd.edu/homer/)60. To be demarcated with a cross
in Fig. 4f, a gene must have been associated with a peak passing the
significance threshold (p < 0.05) in all three ChIP-seq replicates.

All breeding, mouse husbandry, and in vivo experiments
were performed with the approval of the NYU Langone Medical Center (NY, NY)
Animal Care and Use Committee.

SCID Hairless Outbred (SHO), all female, 6–8 week-old mice were
purchased from Charles River Laboratories International Inc. (#474). CH22 cells
were cultured in RPMI media + 10% FBS on collagen I-coated 175 cm2
flasks (Corning). Cells were resuspended in serum-free medium mixed with an
equal amount of Matrigel (Corning, #354234). For the study depicted in Fig. 4h–i and Extended Data Fig. 10e
(bottom panel): mice were injected with 8 million cells per shot and 2 locations
per mouse in the flanks. The mice were randomly grouped. Each cohort included 10
mice. Treatment was started when the mean tumor size per group reached
approximately 500 mm3. Three mice of each group were taken out on Day
3 for target engagement analysis. One mouse in the vehicle group did not have
tumor engrafted and was therefore excluded from the study. Tumor sizes were
monitored weekly, and volumes were calculated with the following formula:
(mm3) = length × width × width × 0.5.

THZ1 was dissolved in DMSO:5% dextrose (1:10) and dosed as 40 mg/kg
twice daily via the intraperitoneal route. Vehicle-group mice received DMSO:5%
dextrose (1:10) via the same route. The dosing schedule for the first week was
continuous dosing for the first three days; for subsequent weeks, animals were
dosed three times a week, on alternating days, as depicted in Fig. 4h. Statistical analysis was performed with
GraphPad Prism v7. The efficacy study was performed once.

For the experiments depicted in Extended
Data Fig. 10d and Extended Data Fig.
10e (top panel), injections and compound treatment were performed in
a similar fashion as the target engagement study described above, except that
the experiment depicted in Extended Data Fig.
10d was performed for 5 d and had an additional treatment arm of 20
mg/kg THZ1 twice daily. Each of the three target engagement studies reported was
performed once.

For immunoblotting of tumor tissue, tumor fragments were homogenized in
lysis buffer (recipe described in the immunoblotting methods section) using the
Precellys Evolution (Bertin Technologies) instrument (3 × 7500 rpm for 20
s, pausing for 15 s between rounds). Homogenized lysates were centrifuged for 2
min at 15,700 x g. Supernatants were quantified and used for immunoblotting as
described in the immunoblotting methods section. Immunoblots were performed
once.

Studies were in compliance with all relevant ethical regulations.

Computational code used for ChIP-seq analysis can be found at github.com/linlabcode/chordoma_code. Code for
CRISPR-Cas9 screening analysis is available on GParc (www.gparc.org). Code for small-molecule sensitivity profiling
analysis; and DNA and RNA sequencing analysis are available upon reasonable
request.

CRISPR-Cas9 screening data for two chordoma cell lines (pertains to
Figs. 1, 2, 4, and Extended Data Fig. 1) are available at Figshare (DOI:
10.6084/m9.figshare.7302515). CRISPR-Cas9 screening data for all other cancer
cell lines (pertains to Figs. 1, 2, 4,
and Extended Data Fig. 1) were generated as
part of Project Achilles (Broad Institute Project Achilles; https://depmap.org/portal/achilles/). All
RNA-sequencing data (pertains to Figs. 1
and 4) are available at Gene Expression
Omnibus (GEO) (accession number: GSE121846). Small-molecule sensitivity data
generated using non-chordoma cell lines and used for comparative analyses
(pertains to Fig. 2) are available at the
National Cancer Institute’s CTD2 Data Portal (https://ocg.cancer.gov/programs/ctd2/data-portal) and the CTRP
(www.broadinstitute.org/ctrp/). The analysis of new
small-molecule primary screening data generated using chordoma cell lines
(pertains to Fig. 2) was performed as
described previously22, except
as noted in the Methods, and the resulting AUC values are provided in Supplementary Table 2.
Raw plate-reader data files and accompanying Pipeline Pilot and MATLAB scripts
for small-molecule primary screening and low-throughput compound sensitivity
analysis (pertains to Fig. 2, Extended Data Figs. 2a, 3a, 8c, and
10a) are available upon reasonable
request. Chromatin profiling data (pertains to Figs. 3, 4, and Extended Data Figs. 4 and 6) are available at GEO (accession number:
GSE109794).

Viability after sgRNA treatment (represented by sgRNA-dependency
scores; see Methods) corresponding to
each of the primary screening sgRNAs targeting either RPS11
or RPS19 across 127 cancer cell lines (CCLs), including 2
chordoma CCLs (blue circles). For a given sgRNA, the median sgRNA-dependency
score across 127 cell lines is indicated (gray line). Lower values indicate
greater sgRNA depletion and thus essentiality of the target gene (shaded
region).

a) Validation of primary screening hit compounds
targeting EGFR and/or ERBB2. Four chordoma cell lines were treated with
indicated concentrations of candidate antiproliferative compounds and
assayed for cell viability after 6 d with CellTiter-Glo. Response data are
represented by a fitted curve to the mean fractional viability at each
concentration relative to vehicle-treated cells; error bars represent the
SEM (n = 4 biological samples measured in parallel). b)
Dinaciclib and alvocidib have antiproliferative effects across a wide range
of cancer cell lines. Area-under-curve (AUC) values corresponding to cell
lines in CTRP treated with either dinaciclib or alvocidib. Each point
represents a cancer cell line in CTRP treated with the indicated compound.
Boxplots depict the inner quartiles (boxes) and median value (horizontal
line) with whiskers representing 1.5 × the interquartile range of 445
(dinaciclib-treated) or 440 (alvocidib-treated) cell lines. AUCs were
computed as described in the Methods and at https://github.com/remontoire-pac/ctrp-reference/tree/master/auc.

a) Response of chordoma cells to compounds targeting
CDK4/6 and CDK8/19 proteins. Four chordoma cell lines were treated with
indicated concentrations of compounds and assayed for cell viability after 6
d with CellTiter-Glo. Response data are represented by a fitted curve to the
mean fractional viability at each concentration relative to vehicle-treated
cells; error bars represent the SEM (n = 4 biological samples measured in
parallel). b) Immunoblot analysis of UM-Chor1 cells treated
with indicated concentrations of inhibitors or DMSO for 24 h. The experiment
was performed twice for CCT251545 (one representative experiment displayed)
and once for other compounds.

a) Enhancers in 5 chordoma cell lines ranked by H3K27ac
signal in each sample. Enhancers proximal (within 100 kb) to the
T gene start site are annotated, as described in the
figure. Super-enhancers (SEs) were determined by the inflection point of the
plot. b) Table showing the ranks of top
T-associated enhancers in each chordoma sample.

a) Immunoblot analysis of chordoma and chondrosarcoma
cell lines. Chordoma cell lines selectively express high levels of the
brachyury protein. The experiment was performed once. b)
Expression of T and MAX, as measured by
RNA-sequencing, across 935 non-chordoma cancer cell lines derived from
diverse tumor types. Data were generated as part of the Broad Institute
Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (quantified data obtained from: https://ocg.cancer.gov/ctd2-data-project/translational-genomics-research-institute-quantified-cancer-cell-line-encyclopedia).
Boxplots depict the inner quartiles (boxes) and median value (horizontal
line) with whiskers representing 1.5 × the interquartile range. c)
Gene expression levels of 115 super-enhancer (SE)-associated transcription
factors in 5 chordoma cell lines (points), ranked by mean expression
(horizontal ticks). d) T is amplified in the JHC7 chordoma
cell line. Genomic copy-number alterations, inferred from whole-exome
sequencing data, in five chordoma cell lines. A region of 2.06 Mb around the
T locus on chromosome 6 shows 26-fold amplification in
JHC7. This finding is consistent with the 2.6-Mb amplicon inferred from
ChIP-seq whole-cell extract.

a) Enhancers in chordoma tumors ranked by H3K27ac
signal in each sample. Super-enhancers (SEs, red) and typical enhancers
(black) proximal (within 100 kb) to the T gene start site
are annotated. SEs were determined by the inflection point of the plot.
b) Table showing the ranks of top
T-associated SEs or typical enhancers in each chordoma
sample.

Immunohistochemical staining of patient-derived chordoma tumors for
brachyury expression. H&E, hematoxylin and eosin. The experiment was
performed once.

a) Immunoblot analysis of UM-Chor1 cells treated with
indicated concentrations of THZ1 or DMSO for 12, 24, 36, or 48 h. The
experiment was performed once. b) UM-Chor1 cells were treated
with indicated concentrations of compound or DMSO for 4, 8, or 12 h and
subjected to RT-qPCR. Data are expressed as the log2 fold-change
of transcript levels relative to vehicle-treated cells, normalized to
GAPDH levels, and represent the mean ± SD (n = 3
biological samples measured in parallel). Results of statistical analyses of
RT-qPCR data, derived from a one-sided Welch’s t-test, are reported
in Supplementary Table
9. c) Response of chordoma cells to treatment with
actinomycin D. Four chordoma cell lines were treated with indicated
concentrations of compound and assayed for cell viability after 6 d with
CellTiter-Glo. Response data are represented by a fitted curve to the mean
fractional viability at each concentration relative to vehicle-treated
cells; error bars represent the SEM (n = 4 biological samples measured in
parallel).

a) UM-Chor1 cells were transduced with sgRNAs
targeting T or a non-targeting sgRNA control and subjected
to RT-qPCR. Data are expressed as the fold-change of transcript levels
relative to sgRNA control-treated cells, normalized to
GAPDH levels, and represent the mean (n = 2 biological
samples measured in parallel, represented by black points). * p <
0.05; ** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001; p-values were derived from a
one-sided Welch’s t-test. Exact p-values and effects sizes are
reported in Supplementary
Table 9. b) Immunoblot analysis of UM-Chor1 cells
transduced with sgRNAs targeting T or a non-targeting sgRNA
control. SgRNA treatment was performed once and immunoblotting was performed
twice (one representative experiment displayed).

a) CH22 chordoma cells were treated with indicated
concentrations of transcriptional CDK inhibitors and assayed for cell
viability after 6 d with CellTiter-Glo. Response data are represented by a
fitted curve to the mean fractional viability at each concentration relative
to vehicle-treated cells; error bars represent the SEM (n = 4 biological
samples measured in parallel). b) Immunoblot analysis of CH22
cells treated with indicated concentrations of inhibitors targeting CDK4/6
(palbociclib), CDK7/12/13 (THZ1), or CDK9 (dinaciclib, NVP-2, alvocidib) or
DMSO for 48 h. The experiment was performed once. c) Weight
change of mice treated with THZ1 or vehicle for the study depicted in Fig. 4h–i. d) THZ1
can downregulate brachyury expression in vivo. Immunoblot
analysis of CH22 xenograft tumors following treatment with indicated doses
of THZ1 or vehicle twice daily for 5 d. The experiment was performed once.
e) Immunoblot analysis of CH22 xenograft tumors following
treatment with THZ1 or vehicle twice daily for 3 d. Top and bottom panels
represent two independent studies (bottom panel corresponds to the study
depicted in Fig. 4h–i).