---
reference_id: "PMID:17671096"
title: Peroxisomal proliferator-activated receptor-alpha protects renal tubular cells from doxorubicin-induced apoptosis.
authors:
- Lin H
- Hou CC
- Cheng CF
- Chiu TH
- Hsu YH
- Sue YM
- Chen TH
- Hou HH
- Chao YC
- Cheng TH
- Chen CH
journal: Mol Pharmacol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1124/mol.107.037523
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peroxisomal proliferator-activated receptor-alpha protects renal tubular cells from doxorubicin-induced apoptosis.
**Authors:** Lin H, Hou CC, Cheng CF, Chiu TH, Hsu YH, Sue YM, Chen TH, Hou HH, Chao YC, Cheng TH, Chen CH
**Journal:** Mol Pharmacol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1124/mol.107.037523](https://doi.org/10.1124/mol.107.037523)

## Content

1. Mol Pharmacol. 2007 Nov;72(5):1238-45. doi: 10.1124/mol.107.037523. Epub 2007 
Aug 1.

Peroxisomal proliferator-activated receptor-alpha protects renal tubular cells 
from doxorubicin-induced apoptosis.

Lin H(1), Hou CC, Cheng CF, Chiu TH, Hsu YH, Sue YM, Chen TH, Hou HH, Chao YC, 
Cheng TH, Chen CH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Taipei Medical University-Wan Fang Hospital, 
No 111, Sing-Lung Road, Sec. 3, Wen-Shan District, Taipei City 116, Taiwan.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-alpha (PPAR-alpha) is a transcription 
factor and has been reported to inhibit cisplatin-mediated proximal tubule cell 
death. In addition, doxorubicin (Adriamycin)-induced nephrosis in rats is a 
commonly used experimental model for pharmacological studies of human chronic 
renal diseases. In this study, we investigated the protective effect of 
PPAR-alpha on doxorubicin-induced apoptosis and its detailed mechanism in 
NRK-52E cells and animal models. The mRNA level of PPAR-alpha was found to be 
reduced by doxorubicin treatment in NRK-52E cells. PPAR-alpha overexpression in 
NRK-52E cells significantly inhibited doxorubicin-induced apoptosis and the 
quantity of cleaved caspase-3. Endogenous prostacyclin (PGI(2)) augmentation, 
which has been reported to protect NRK-52E cells from doxorubicin-induced 
apoptosis, induced the translocation and activation of PPAR-alpha. The 
transformation of PPAR-alpha short interfering RNA was applied to silence the 
PPAR-alpha gene, which abolished the protective effect of PGI(2) augmentation in 
doxorubicin-treated cells. To confirm the protective role of PPAR-alpha in vivo, 
PPAR-alpha activator docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) was administered to 
doxorubicin-treated mice, and it has been shown to significantly reduce the 
doxorubicin-induced apoptotic cells in renal cortex. However, this protective 
effect of DHA did not exist in PPAR-alpha-deficient mice. In NRK-52E cells, the 
overexpression of PPAR-alpha elevated the activity of catalase and superoxide 
dismutase and inhibited doxorubicin-induced reactive oxygen species (ROS). 
PPAR-alpha overexpression also inhibited the doxorubicin-induced activity of 
nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB), which was associated with the interaction 
between PPAR-alpha and NF-kappaB p65 subunit as revealed in immunoprecipitation 
assays. Therefore, PPAR-alpha is capable of inhibiting doxorubicin-induced ROS 
and NF-kappaB activity and protecting NRK-52E cells from doxorubicin-induced 
apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.107.037523
PMID: 17671096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]