---
reference_id: "PMID:26984378"
title: "XGFR*, a novel affinity-matured bispecific antibody targeting IGF-1R and EGFR with combined signaling inhibition and enhanced immune activation for the treatment of pancreatic cancer."
authors:
- Schanzer JM
- Wartha K
- Moessner E
- Hosse RJ
- Moser S
- Croasdale R
- Trochanowska H
- Shao C
- Wang P
- Shi L
- Weinzierl T
- Rieder N
- Bacac M
- Ries CH
- Kettenberger H
- Schlothauer T
- Friess T
- Umana P
- Klein C
journal: MAbs
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1080/19420862.2016.1160989
content_type: abstract_only
---

# XGFR*, a novel affinity-matured bispecific antibody targeting IGF-1R and EGFR with combined signaling inhibition and enhanced immune activation for the treatment of pancreatic cancer.
**Authors:** Schanzer JM, Wartha K, Moessner E, Hosse RJ, Moser S, Croasdale R, Trochanowska H, Shao C, Wang P, Shi L, Weinzierl T, Rieder N, Bacac M, Ries CH, Kettenberger H, Schlothauer T, Friess T, Umana P, Klein C
**Journal:** MAbs (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1080/19420862.2016.1160989](https://doi.org/10.1080/19420862.2016.1160989)

## Content

1. MAbs. 2016 May-Jun;8(4):811-27. doi: 10.1080/19420862.2016.1160989. Epub 2016 
Mar 16.

XGFR*, a novel affinity-matured bispecific antibody targeting IGF-1R and EGFR 
with combined signaling inhibition and enhanced immune activation for the 
treatment of pancreatic cancer.

Schanzer JM(1), Wartha K(1), Moessner E(2), Hosse RJ(2), Moser S(2), Croasdale 
R(1), Trochanowska H(2), Shao C(3), Wang P(3), Shi L(3), Weinzierl T(2), Rieder 
N(1), Bacac M(2), Ries CH(1), Kettenberger H(1), Schlothauer T(1), Friess T(1), 
Umana P(2), Klein C(2).

Author information:
(1)a Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Roche Innovation Center Munich 
, Nonnenwald, Penzberg , Germany.
(2)b Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Roche Innovation Center Zurich 
, Wagistrasse, Schlieren , Switzerland.
(3)c Pharma Research and Early Development, Roche Innovation Center Shanghai , 
Cai Lun Road, Shanghai , China.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and the insulin-like growth factor-1 
receptor (IGF-1R) play critical roles in tumor growth, providing a strong 
rationale for the combined inhibition of IGF-1R and EGFR signaling in cancer 
therapy. We describe the design, affinity maturation, in vitro and in vivo 
characterization of the bispecific anti-IGF-1R/EGFR antibody XGFR*. XGFR* is 
based on the bispecific IgG antibody XGFR, which enabled heterodimerization of 
an IGF-1R binding scFab heavy chain with an EGFR-binding light and heavy chain 
by the "knobs-into-holes" technology. XGFR* is optimized for monovalent binding 
of human EGFR and IGF-1R with increased binding affinity for IGF-1R due to 
affinity maturation and highly improved protein stability to oxidative and 
thermal stress. It bears an afucosylated Fc-portion for optimal induction of 
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC). Stable Chinese hamster 
ovary cell clones with production yields of 2-3 g/L were generated, allowing for 
large scale production of the bispecific antibody. XGFR* potently inhibits EGFR- 
and IGF-1R-dependent receptor phosphorylation, reduces tumor cell proliferation 
in cells with heterogeneous levels of IGF-1R and EGFR receptor expression and 
induces strong ADCC in vitro. A comparison of pancreatic and colorectal cancer 
lines demonstrated superior responsiveness to XGFR*-mediated signaling and tumor 
growth inhibition in pancreatic cancers that frequently show a high degree of 
IGF-1R/EGFR co-expression. XGFR* showed potent anti-tumoral efficacy in the 
orthotopic MiaPaCa-2 pancreatic xenograft model, resulting in nearly complete 
tumor growth inhibition with significant number of tumor remissions. In summary, 
the bispecific anti-IGF-1R/EGFR antibody XGFR* combines potent signaling and 
tumor growth inhibition with enhanced ADCC induction and represents a clinical 
development candidate for the treatment of pancreatic cancer.

DOI: 10.1080/19420862.2016.1160989
PMCID: PMC4966845
PMID: 26984378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]