---
reference_id: "PMID:35967915"
title: An Overview of the Diagnosis and Management of Seborrheic Dermatitis.
authors:
- "Dall'Oglio F"
- Nasca MR
- Gerbino C
- Micali G
journal: Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.2147/CCID.S284671
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An Overview of the Diagnosis and Management of Seborrheic Dermatitis.
**Authors:** Dall'Oglio F, Nasca MR, Gerbino C, Micali G
**Journal:** Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.2147/CCID.S284671](https://doi.org/10.2147/CCID.S284671)

## Content

1. Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol. 2022 Aug 6;15:1537-1548. doi: 
10.2147/CCID.S284671. eCollection 2022.

An Overview of the Diagnosis and Management of Seborrheic Dermatitis.

Dall'Oglio F(1), Nasca MR(1), Gerbino C(1), Micali G(1).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology Clinic, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.

Seborrheic dermatitis (SD) is a common chronic inflammatory skin disorder that 
mostly affects young adults in areas rich in sebaceous glands (scalp, face, and 
trunk). In adolescents and adults, SD clinical presentation may range from mild 
patches to diffuse scalp scaling. In infants, it mainly occurs on the scalp as 
yellowish, scaly patches ("cradle cap"). In adults, several environmental 
triggers are likely to promote SD development, along with fungal colonization by 
Malassezia spp., sebaceous gland activity, as well as immunosuppression, 
endocrine, neurogenic and iatrogenic factors. In children, early occurrence in 
the first trimester suggests the role of excessive sebaceous gland activity from 
maternal hormones, along with cutaneous microbiome alterations. The diagnosis of 
SD is usually clinical, and specific laboratory and/or instrumental 
investigations are seldom required. Treatment is aimed at modulating sebum 
production, reducing skin colonization by Malassezia spp., and controlling 
inflammation. In adults, mild-to-moderate scalp SD forms can be managed with 
topical antifungals (ketoconazole, ciclopirox, miconazole) or antiinflammatory 
(mild-to-moderate potency corticosteroids) or keratolytic/humectant (propylene 
glycol) agents. Recommended topical therapeutic options for mild-to-moderate 
facial or body areas SD include topical ketoconazole, ciclopirox, clotrimazole, 
mild-to-moderate potency corticosteroids, lithium succinate/gluconate, and 
topical calcineurin inihibitors (off-label use). In severe and/or resistant 
cases, the use of systemic antifungal drugs (terbinafine, itraconazole), as well 
as UVB phototherapy, may be considered. In children, scant scientific evidence 
supports the effectiveness and safety of topical drugs, and "cradle cap" is 
usually successfully managed with baby shampoos enriched with emollient agents 
and vegetable oils. Alternatively, similarly to adult scalp SD, medical device 
shampoos with antiinflammatory and antifungal properties, containing piroctone 
olamine, bisabolol, alyglicera, telmesteine, may be used. Beyond pharmacological 
treatments, an appropriate cosmetic approach, if correctly prescribed, may 
improve therapeutic outcomes.

© 2022 Dall’Oglio et al.

DOI: 10.2147/CCID.S284671
PMCID: PMC9365318
PMID: 35967915

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.