---
reference_id: "PMID:39730871"
title: Identification of shared genetic etiology of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases through common cardiometabolic risk factors.
authors:
- Ding K
- Qin X
- Wang H
- Wang K
- Kang X
- Yu Y
- Liu Y
- Gong H
- Wu T
- Chen D
- Hu Y
- Wang T
- Wu Y
journal: Commun Biol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s42003-024-07417-6
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cerebrovascular Disorders/genetics, etiology"
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/genetics, etiology"
- Cardiometabolic Risk Factors
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Carotid Intima-Media Thickness
- Genetic Pleiotropy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of shared genetic etiology of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases through common cardiometabolic risk factors.
**Authors:** Ding K, Qin X, Wang H, Wang K, Kang X, Yu Y, Liu Y, Gong H, Wu T, Chen D, Hu Y, Wang T, Wu Y
**Journal:** Commun Biol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s42003-024-07417-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-07417-6)

## Content

1. Commun Biol. 2024 Dec 27;7(1):1703. doi: 10.1038/s42003-024-07417-6.

Identification of shared genetic etiology of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular 
diseases through common cardiometabolic risk factors.

Ding K(1), Qin X(2), Wang H(1), Wang K(1), Kang X(3)(4), Yu Y(5), Liu Y(1), Gong 
H(6), Wu T(1), Chen D(1), Hu Y(1), Wang T(7), Wu Y(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Peking 
University; Key Laboratory of Epidemiology of Major Diseases (Peking 
University), Ministry of Education, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Peking 
University; Key Laboratory of Epidemiology of Major Diseases (Peking 
University), Ministry of Education, Beijing, China. xueyingqin@bjmu.edu.cn.
(3)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital & Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, Peking University People's Hospital, Beijing, China.
(6)Fangshan District Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, China.
(7)Department of Epidemiology and Population Health, Yeshiva University Albert 
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.
(8)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Peking 
University; Key Laboratory of Epidemiology of Major Diseases (Peking 
University), Ministry of Education, Beijing, China. qywu118@163.com.

Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) and cerebrovascular diseases (CeVDs) are closely 
related vascular diseases, sharing common cardiometabolic risk factors (RFs). 
Although pleiotropic genetic variants of these two diseases have been reported, 
their underlying pathological mechanisms are still unclear. Leveraging GWAS 
summary data and using genetic correlation, pleiotropic variants identification, 
and colocalization analyses, we identified 11 colocalized loci for CVDs-CeVDs-BP 
(blood pressure), CVDs-CeVDs-LIP (lipid traits), and CVDs-CeVDs-cIMT (carotid 
intima-media thickness) triplets. No shared causal loci were found for 
CVDs-CeVDs-T2D (type 2 diabetes) or CVDs-CeVDs-BMI (body mass index) triplets. 
The 11 loci were mapped to 12 genes, namely CASZ1, CDKN1A, TWIST1, CDKN2B, ABO, 
SWAP70, SH2B3, LRCH1, FES, GOSR2, RPRML, and LDLR, where both GOSR2 and RPRML 
were mapped to one locus. They were enriched in pathways related to cellular 
response to external stimulus and regulation of the phosphate metabolic process 
and were highly expressed in endothelial cells, epithelial cells, and smooth 
muscle cells. Multi-omics analysis revealed methylation of two genes (CASZ1 and 
LRCH1) may play a causal role in the genetic pleiotropy. Notably, these 
pleiotropic loci are highly enriched in the targets of antihypertensive drugs, 
which further emphasizes the role of the blood pressure regulation pathway in 
the shared etiology of CVDs and CeVDs.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s42003-024-07417-6
PMCID: PMC11680921
PMID: 39730871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests.