---
reference_id: "PMID:32407763"
title: "Serum angiotensin converting enzyme, Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and high sensitive-C reactive protein levels in diagnosis of cardiac sarcoidosis- where do we stand?"
authors:
- Bera D
- Shanthi Naidu K
- Kaur Saggu D
- Yalagudri S
- Kishor Kadel J
- Sarkar R
- Narasimhan C
journal: Indian Pacing Electrophysiol J
year: "2020"
doi: 10.1016/j.ipej.2020.05.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serum angiotensin converting enzyme, Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and high sensitive-C reactive protein levels in diagnosis of cardiac sarcoidosis- where do we stand?
**Authors:** Bera D, Shanthi Naidu K, Kaur Saggu D, Yalagudri S, Kishor Kadel J, Sarkar R, Narasimhan C
**Journal:** Indian Pacing Electrophysiol J (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ipej.2020.05.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipej.2020.05.002)

## Content

1. Indian Pacing Electrophysiol J. 2020 Sep-Oct;20(5):184-188. doi:
10.1016/j.ipej.2020.05.002.

Serum angiotensin converting enzyme, Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and high
sensitive-C reactive protein levels in diagnosis of cardiac sarcoidosis- where
do we stand?

Bera D(1), Shanthi Naidu K(2), Kaur Saggu D(1), Yalagudri S(1), Kishor Kadel
J(3), Sarkar R(1), Narasimhan C(4).

BACKGROUND: Cardiac sarcoidosis (CS) is increasingly being recognized in the
last two decades. The diagnosis of CS depends on clustering of multiple
symptoms, investigations and demonstration of a non-caseating granuloma on
histopathology. Serum Angiotensin Converting Enzyme (SACE) level, one of the
serological markers, is often elevated in systemic sarcoidosis. However, the
yield of SACE level among patients with isolated or predominant CS is unclear.
We conducted a retrospective study to assess the prevalence of elevated SACE
level among patients with proven CS.
RESULTS: Among 143 GM cases, 45 CS were analyzed. Mean age:42 +/- 11 years
(Range 22-63 years, 19 females). With our laboratory reference of SACE (Normal
range: 20-70 U/L), 3 out of 45 (6.7%) patients of CS had elevated SACE. In a
comparative analysis we found, Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR) and High
sensitive-C Reactive Protein (Hs-CRP) are much more sensitive, although not
specific for CS. Patients with pulmonary involvement more often had elevated
SACE level.
CONCLUSION: Serum ACE is elevated only in approximately 6.7% of patients with
biopsy proven CS. Hence, it is insensitive serological tool for diagnosis of CS
even in the active phase of the disease. In contrast, ESR and Hs-CRP emerges to
be more sensitive markers of active CS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ipej.2020.05.002
PMCID: PMC7517545
PMID: 32407763
