---
reference_id: "PMID:32130212"
title: Severe dengue categories as research endpoints-Results from a prospective observational study in hospitalised dengue patients.
authors:
- Rosenberger KD
- Alexander N
- Martinez E
- Lum LCS
- Dempfle CE
- Junghanss T
- Wills B
- Jaenisch T
- DENCO Clinical Study Group
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0008076
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Severe dengue categories as research endpoints-Results from a prospective observational study in hospitalised dengue patients.
**Authors:** Rosenberger KD, Alexander N, Martinez E, Lum LCS, Dempfle CE, Junghanss T, Wills B, Jaenisch T, DENCO Clinical Study Group
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0008076](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008076)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2020 Mar 4;14(3):e0008076. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0008076. eCollection 2020 Mar.

Severe dengue categories as research endpoints-Results from a prospective 
observational study in hospitalised dengue patients.

Rosenberger KD(1), Alexander N(2), Martinez E(3), Lum LCS(4), Dempfle CE(5), 
Junghanss T(1), Wills B(6)(7), Jaenisch T(1); DENCO Clinical Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Section Clinical Tropical Medicine, Department for Infectious Diseases, 
Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, London School of Tropical 
Medicine and Hygiene, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Pedro Kouri Institute for Tropical Medicine, Havana, Cuba.
(4)Department of Paediatrics, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(5)IMD Coagulation Center Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany.
(6)Oxford University Clinical Research Unit, Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Ho 
Chi Minh City, Vietnam.
(7)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of 
Clinical Medicine, Oxford University, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Severe dengue was perceived as one clinical disease entity until the WHO 2009 
classification stratified it into severe vascular leakage, severe bleeding, and 
severe organ dysfunction. The objectives of this study were to investigate the 
potential use of severe dengue categories as endpoints for intervention 
research. 271 patients with severe dengue among 1734 confirmed dengue patients 
were followed prospectively in this hospital-based observational study in Latin 
America and Asia. We compared the distribution of severe dengue categories 
according to gender and age (below/above 15y), and determined the relative 
frequency and the overlap of severe dengue categories in the same patients. In a 
next step, we extended the analysis to candidate moderate severity categories, 
based on recently suggested definitions which were adapted for our purposes. 
Severe vascular leakage occurred in 244 (90%), severe bleeding in 39 (14%), and 
severe organ dysfunction in 28 (10%) of 271 severe dengue patients. A higher 
frequency of severe leakage was seen in children or adolescents (<15y) compared 
to adults. More than 80% of the severe leakage cases, and 30-50% of the cases 
with severe bleeding or severe organ dysfunction, were defined as severe on the 
basis of that feature alone. In 136 out of 213 patients with severe leakage 
alone, neither moderate bleeding manifestation nor hepatic involvement was 
recorded. On the other hand, moderate leakage manifestations were detected in 4 
out of 12 cases that were classified as severe based on bleeding alone. A major 
proportion of severe dengue patients exhibited clinical manifestations of severe 
vascular leakage only, which may constitute a useful endpoint for intervention 
research or pathophysiology studies. Severe bleeding and severe organ 
manifestation were recorded less frequently and exhibited a higher degree of 
overlap with severe leakage. Severe bleeding without leakage may be associated 
with individual predisposition or the presence of comorbidities. More detailed 
assessments are needed to explore this hypothesis. Candidate moderate disease 
endpoints were investigated and need to be further validated.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0008076
PMCID: PMC7055818
PMID: 32130212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal's policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: Dr. Wills reports 
personal fees from Takeda Vaccines Inc, outside the submitted work, for her work 
as a member of the Data Monitoring Committee for their dengue vaccine trials. 
None of the other authors had anything to disclose.