---
reference_id: "PMID:38785980"
title: Failure of Autophagy in Pompe Disease.
authors:
- Do H
- Meena NK
- Raben N
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/biom14050573
keywords:
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type II/pathology, metabolism"
- Autophagy
- Humans
- Animals
- Glycogen/metabolism
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- alpha-Glucosidases/metabolism
- "Muscle, Skeletal/pathology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Failure of Autophagy in Pompe Disease.
**Authors:** Do H, Meena NK, Raben N
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom14050573](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom14050573)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2024 May 13;14(5):573. doi: 10.3390/biom14050573.

Failure of Autophagy in Pompe Disease.

Do H(1), Meena NK(1), Raben N(1).

Author information:
(1)M6P Therapeutics, 20 S. Sarah Street, St. Louis, MO 63108, USA.

Autophagy is an evolutionarily conserved lysosome-dependent degradation of
cytoplasmic constituents. The system operates as a critical cellular
pro-survival mechanism in response to nutrient deprivation and a variety of
stress conditions. On top of that, autophagy is involved in maintaining cellular
homeostasis through selective elimination of worn-out or damaged proteins and
organelles. The autophagic pathway is largely responsible for the delivery of
cytosolic glycogen to the lysosome where it is degraded to glucose via acid
α-glucosidase. Although the physiological role of lysosomal glycogenolysis is
not fully understood, its significance is highlighted by the manifestations of
Pompe disease, which is caused by a deficiency of this lysosomal enzyme. Pompe
disease is a severe lysosomal glycogen storage disorder that affects skeletal
and cardiac muscles most. In this review, we discuss the basics of autophagy and
describe its involvement in the pathogenesis of muscle damage in Pompe disease.
Finally, we outline how autophagic pathology in the diseased muscles can be used
as a tool to fast track the efficacy of therapeutic interventions.

DOI: 10.3390/biom14050573
PMCID: PMC11118179
PMID: 38785980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors are employees of M6P Therapeutics.
