---
reference_id: "PMID:22199394"
title: "Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome: new perspectives."
authors:
- Chang TC
- Summers CG
- Schimmenti LA
- Grajewski AL
journal: Br J Ophthalmol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1136/bjophthalmol-2011-300801
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome: new perspectives.
**Authors:** Chang TC, Summers CG, Schimmenti LA, Grajewski AL
**Journal:** Br J Ophthalmol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bjophthalmol-2011-300801](https://doi.org/10.1136/bjophthalmol-2011-300801)

## Content

1. Br J Ophthalmol. 2012 Mar;96(3):318-22. doi: 10.1136/bjophthalmol-2011-300801.
 Epub 2011 Dec 23.

Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome: new perspectives.

Chang TC(1), Summers CG, Schimmenti LA, Grajewski AL.

Author information:
(1)Vanderbilt Eye Institute, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
Tennessee, 37203, USA. tachenchang@hotmail.com

Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome is a genetic disease affecting multiple organ systems. 
In the eye, this condition manifests with varying degrees of anterior segment 
dysgenesis and carries a high risk of glaucoma. Other associated systemic issues 
include cardiovascular outflow tract malformations, craniofacial abnormalities 
and pituitary abnormalities, which can result in severe endocrinological 
sequelae. Recent advances in molecular genetics have identified two major genes, 
PITX2 and FOXC1, demonstrating a wide spectrum of mutations, which aids in the 
molecular diagnosis of the disease, although evidence exists to implicate other 
loci in this condition. The management of individuals affected by 
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome requires a multidisciplinary approach and would include 
dedicated surveillance and management of glaucoma, sensorineural hearing loss, 
and cardiac, endocrinological, craniofacial and orthopaedic abnormalities.

DOI: 10.1136/bjophthalmol-2011-300801
PMID: 22199394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]