---
reference_id: "PMID:24123988"
title: "Understanding the basis of auriculocondylar syndrome: Insights from human, mouse and zebrafish genetic studies."
authors:
- Clouthier DE
- Passos-Bueno MR
- Tavares AL
- Lyonnet S
- Amiel J
- Gordon CT
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31376
keywords:
- Animals
- Body Patterning/genetics
- "Branchial Region/growth & development, physiopathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Ear/abnormalities, physiopathology"
- "Ear Diseases/genetics, physiopathology"
- Face/pathology
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Humans
- "Mandible/growth & development, pathology"
- Maxillofacial Development/genetics
- Mice
- "Neural Crest/growth & development, pathology"
- Signal Transduction
- Zebrafish
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Understanding the basis of auriculocondylar syndrome: Insights from human, mouse and zebrafish genetic studies.
**Authors:** Clouthier DE, Passos-Bueno MR, Tavares AL, Lyonnet S, Amiel J, Gordon CT
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.31376](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.31376)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2013 Nov;163C(4):306-17. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.c.31376. Epub 2013 Oct 4.

Understanding the basis of auriculocondylar syndrome: Insights from human, mouse 
and zebrafish genetic studies.

Clouthier DE, Passos-Bueno MR, Tavares AL, Lyonnet S, Amiel J, Gordon CT.

Among human birth defect syndromes, malformations affecting the face are perhaps 
the most striking due to cultural and psychological expectations of facial 
shape. One such syndrome is auriculocondylar syndrome (ACS), in which patients 
present with defects in ear and mandible development. Affected structures arise 
from cranial neural crest cells, a population of cells in the embryo that reside 
in the pharyngeal arches and give rise to most of the bone, cartilage and 
connective tissue of the face. Recent studies have found that most cases of ACS 
arise from defects in signaling molecules associated with the endothelin 
signaling pathway. Disruption of this signaling pathway in both mouse and 
zebrafish results in loss of identity of neural crest cells of the mandibular 
portion of the first pharyngeal arch and the subsequent repatterning of these 
cells, leading to homeosis of lower jaw structures into more maxillary-like 
structures. These findings illustrate the importance of endothelin signaling in 
normal human craniofacial development and illustrate how clinical and basic 
science approaches can coalesce to improve our understanding of the genetic 
basis of human birth defect syndromes. Further, understanding the genetic basis 
for ACS that lies outside of known endothelin signaling components may help 
elucidate unknown aspects critical to the establishment of neural crest cell 
patterning during facial morphogenesis.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31376
PMCID: PMC4038158
PMID: 24123988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to 
declare.