---
reference_id: "PMID:19141781"
title: Meta-analysis of risk reduction estimates associated with risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy in BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation carriers.
authors:
- Rebbeck TR
- Kauff ND
- Domchek SM
journal: J Natl Cancer Inst
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1093/jnci/djn442
keywords:
- "Breast Neoplasms/genetics, prevention & control"
- Case-Control Studies
- Cohort Studies
- Fallopian Tubes/surgery
- Female
- "Genes, BRCA1"
- "Genes, BRCA2"
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Odds Ratio
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/genetics, prevention & control"
- Ovariectomy
- Primary Prevention/methods
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
- Risk Reduction Behavior
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Meta-analysis of risk reduction estimates associated with risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy in BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation carriers.
**Authors:** Rebbeck TR, Kauff ND, Domchek SM
**Journal:** J Natl Cancer Inst (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jnci/djn442](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djn442)

## Content

1. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2009 Jan 21;101(2):80-7. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djn442. Epub
2009  Jan 13.

Meta-analysis of risk reduction estimates associated with risk-reducing
salpingo-oophorectomy in BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation carriers.

Rebbeck TR(1), Kauff ND, Domchek SM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6021, USA.
rebbeck@mail.med.upenn.edu

Comment in
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2009 Jan 21;101(2):70-1. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djn476.

BACKGROUND: Risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy (RRSO) is widely used by
carriers of BRCA1 or BRCA2 (BRCA1/2) mutations to reduce their risks of breast
and ovarian cancer. To guide women and their clinicians in optimizing cancer
prevention strategies, we summarized the magnitude of the risk reductions in
women with BRCA1/2 mutations who have undergone RRSO compared with those who
have not.
METHODS: All reports of RRSO and breast and/or ovarian or fallopian tube cancer
in BRCA1/2 mutation carriers published between 1999 and 2007 were obtained from
a PubMed search. Hazard ratio (HR) estimates were identified directly from the
original articles. Pooled results were computed from nonoverlapping studies by
fixed-effects meta-analysis.
RESULTS: Ten studies investigated breast or gynecologic cancer outcomes in
BRCA1/2 mutation carriers who had undergone RRSO. Breast cancer outcomes were
investigated in three nonoverlapping studies of BRCA1/2 mutation carriers, four
of BRCA1 mutation carriers, and three of BRCA2 mutation carriers. Gynecologic
cancer outcomes were investigated in three nonoverlapping studies of BRCA1/2
mutation carriers and one of BRCA1 mutation carriers. RRSO was associated with a
statistically significant reduction in risk of breast cancer in BRCA1/2 mutation
carriers (HR = 0.49; 95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.37 to 0.65). Similar risk
reductions were observed in BRCA1 mutation carriers (HR = 0.47; 95% CI = 0.35 to
0.64) and in BRCA2 mutation carriers (HR = 0.47; 95% CI = 0.26 to 0.84). RRSO
was also associated with a statistically significant reduction in the risk of
BRCA1/2-associated ovarian or fallopian tube cancer (HR = 0.21; 95% CI = 0.12 to
0.39). Data were insufficient to obtain separate estimates for ovarian or
fallopian tube cancer risk reduction with RRSO in BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation
carriers.
CONCLUSION: The summary estimates presented here indicate that RRSO is strongly
associated with reductions in the risk of breast, ovarian, and fallopian tube
cancers and should provide guidance to women in planning cancer risk reduction
strategies.

DOI: 10.1093/jnci/djn442
PMCID: PMC2639318
PMID: 19141781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
