---
reference_id: "PMID:35280304"
title: "Up-Regulated Expression of Interferon-Gamma, Interleukin-6 and Tumor Necrosis Factor-Alpha in the Endolymphatic Sac of Meniere's Disease Suggesting the Local Inflammatory Response Underlies the Mechanism of This Disease."
authors:
- Huang C
- Wang Q
- Pan X
- Li W
- Liu W
- Jiang W
- Huang L
- Peng A
- Zhang Z
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.781031
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Up-Regulated Expression of Interferon-Gamma, Interleukin-6 and Tumor Necrosis Factor-Alpha in the Endolymphatic Sac of Meniere's Disease Suggesting the Local Inflammatory Response Underlies the Mechanism of This Disease.
**Authors:** Huang C, Wang Q, Pan X, Li W, Liu W, Jiang W, Huang L, Peng A, Zhang Z
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2022.781031](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2022.781031)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2022 Feb 23;13:781031. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.781031.
eCollection  2022.

Up-Regulated Expression of Interferon-Gamma, Interleukin-6 and Tumor Necrosis 
Factor-Alpha in the Endolymphatic Sac of Meniere's Disease Suggesting the Local 
Inflammatory Response Underlies the Mechanism of This Disease.

Huang C(1), Wang Q(1), Pan X(1), Li W(1), Liu W(1), Jiang W(2), Huang L(1), Peng 
A(1), Zhang Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, The Second Xiangya 
Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, China.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, 
Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Immune mediated inflammatory changes affecting the endolymphatic sac 
(ES) may underlie the pathology of Meniere's disease (MD). The aim of the 
present study was to explore the differentially expressed cytokines in ES 
luminal fluid (ELF) of patients with MD, and the correlation between the 
expression of cytokines in the ELF with that in the serum was determined by 
quantitatively analyzing the cytokines in human ELF and serum.
METHODS: Human ELF, serum and ES tissues were collected from patients with 
unilateral MD and patients with acoustic neuroma (AN) during surgery. The Simoa 
Cytokine 6-Plex Panel kit was used to analyze the levels of cytokines in the ELF 
and blood samples of the patients. Immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence 
were subsequently used to validate the relative expression levels of the 
cytokines in MD.
RESULTS: Significant differences were identified in the expression levels of 
interferon-γ (IFN-γ) (P < 0.001), interleukin (IL)-6 (P = 0.008) and tumor 
necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) (P = 0.036) in the luminal fluid of the ES comparing 
between the MD and AN groups. By contrast, the levels of IFN-γ, IL-10, IL-12p70, 
IL-17A, IL-6 and TNF-α in the serum of the MD group were not significantly 
different from those of either the AN group or healthy control subjects. In 
addition, no significant correlations in the expression levels of cytokines 
compared between the ELF and serum were found for the patients in either the MD 
or the AN group. Finally, the detection of positive expression of TNF-α, IL-6 
and IFN-γ in the epithelial cells of the majority of ES specimens from patients 
with MD confirmed the up-regulated expression of these cytokines in the ES of 
patients with MD.
CONCLUSIONS: The identification of up-regulated expression levels of TNF-α, IL-6 
and IFN-γ in the ELF in the present study has provided direct evidence for an 
increased immunologic activity in the microenvironment of the ES in patients 
with unilateral MD, may suggest the local inflammatory response underlies the 
mechanism of this disease.

Copyright © 2022 Huang, Wang, Pan, Li, Liu, Jiang, Huang, Peng and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2022.781031
PMCID: PMC8904419
PMID: 35280304

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.