---
reference_id: "PMID:29445841"
title: Folding and assembly defects of pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency-related variants in the E1α subunit of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex.
authors:
- Drakulic S
- Rai J
- Petersen SV
- Golas MM
- Sander B
journal: Cell Mol Life Sci
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s00018-018-2775-2
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Amino Acid Substitution
- "Green Fluorescent Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Microscopy, Confocal"
- Protein Folding
- "Pyruvate Dehydrogenase (Lipoamide)/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex Deficiency Disease/genetics, metabolism"
- "Saccharomyces cerevisiae/genetics, metabolism"
- "Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Folding and assembly defects of pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency-related variants in the E1α subunit of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex.
**Authors:** Drakulic S, Rai J, Petersen SV, Golas MM, Sander B
**Journal:** Cell Mol Life Sci (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00018-018-2775-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-018-2775-2)

## Content

1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2018 Aug;75(16):3009-3026. doi: 10.1007/s00018-018-2775-2.
Epub 2018 Feb 14.

Folding and assembly defects of pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency-related
variants in the E1α subunit of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex.

Drakulic S(1), Rai J(2), Petersen SV(1), Golas MM(3)(4), Sander B(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, 8000, Aarhus C, Denmark.
(2)Centre for Stochastic Geometry and Advanced Bioimaging, Aarhus University,
8000, Aarhus C, Denmark.
(3)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, 8000, Aarhus C, Denmark.
mgolas@biomed.au.dk.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, 30625 Hannover,
Germany. mgolas@biomed.au.dk.
(5)Centre for Stochastic Geometry and Advanced Bioimaging, Aarhus University,
8000, Aarhus C, Denmark. bsander@csgb.dk.
(6)Institute of Pathology, Hannover Medical School, 30625 Hannover, Germany.
bsander@csgb.dk.

The pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC) bridges glycolysis and the citric acid
cycle. In human, PDC deficiency leads to severe neurodevelopmental delay and
progressive neurodegeneration. The majority of cases are caused by variants in
the gene encoding the PDC subunit E1α. The molecular effects of the variants,
however, remain poorly understood. Using yeast as a eukaryotic model system, we
have studied the substitutions A189V, M230V, and R322C in yeast E1α
(corresponding to the pathogenic variants A169V, M210V, and R302C in human E1α)
and evaluated how substitutions of single amino acid residues within different
functional E1α regions affect PDC structure and activity. The E1α A189V
substitution located in the heterodimer interface showed a more compact
conformation with significant underrepresentation of E1 in PDC and impaired
overall PDC activity. The E1α M230V substitution located in the tetramer and
heterodimer interface showed a relatively more open conformation and was
particularly affected by low thiamin pyrophosphate concentrations. The E1α R322C
substitution located in the phosphorylation loop of E1α resulted in PDC lacking
E3 subunits and abolished overall functional activity. Furthermore, we show for
the E1α variant A189V that variant E1α accumulates in the Hsp60 chaperonin, but
can be released upon ATP supplementation. Our studies suggest that pathogenic
E1α variants may be associated with structural changes of PDC and impaired
folding of E1α.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-018-2775-2
PMCID: PMC11105750
PMID: 29445841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
