---
reference_id: "PMID:21564177"
title: Erythrokeratoderma variabilis caused by a recessive mutation in GJB3.
authors:
- Fuchs-Telem D
- Pessach Y
- Mevorah B
- Shirazi I
- Sarig O
- Sprecher E
journal: Clin Exp Dermatol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2230.2010.03986.x
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Connexins/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis/methods
- "Erythrokeratodermia Variabilis/genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Israel
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Erythrokeratoderma variabilis caused by a recessive mutation in GJB3.
**Authors:** Fuchs-Telem D, Pessach Y, Mevorah B, Shirazi I, Sarig O, Sprecher E
**Journal:** Clin Exp Dermatol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2230.2010.03986.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2230.2010.03986.x)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2011 Jun;36(4):406-11. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2230.2010.03986.x.

Erythrokeratoderma variabilis caused by a recessive mutation in GJB3.

Fuchs-Telem D(1), Pessach Y, Mevorah B, Shirazi I, Sarig O, Sprecher E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, 
Israel.

BACKGROUND: Erythrokeratoderma variabilis (EKV) is a rare disorder of 
cornification usually associated with dominant mutations in the genes GJB3 and 
GJB4, which code for connexin (Cx)31 and Cx30.3, respectively, and contribute to 
the formation of functional gap junctions in the epidermis.
AIM: To identify the molecular basis of recessive EKV in a consanguineous family 
of Middle Eastern origin.
METHODS: Direct sequencing and site-directed mutagenesis was used to search for 
the disease-causing mutation and identify its molecular consequences.
RESULTS: A novel missense mutation (c.G88A) was found in the human GJB3 gene, 
resulting in substitution of the amino acid isoleucine for valine at position 30 
(p.V30I). Under in vitro conditions, p.V30I prevents Cx31 reaching the cell 
membrane and taking part in gap-junction formation.
CONCLUSIONS: Autosomal recessive inheritance should be considered when providing 
genetic counselling to consanguineous families at risk for EKV.

© The Author(s). CED © 2011 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2230.2010.03986.x
PMID: 21564177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]