---
reference_id: "PMID:38293020"
title: TKI Type Switching Overcomes ROS1 L2086F in ROS1 Fusion-Positive Cancers.
authors:
- Thawani R
- Repetto M
- Keddy C
- Nicholson K
- Jones K
- Nusser K
- Beach CZ
- Harada G
- Drilon A
- Davare MA
journal: bioRxiv
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1101/2024.01.16.575901
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TKI Type Switching Overcomes ROS1 L2086F in ROS1 Fusion-Positive Cancers.
**Authors:** Thawani R, Repetto M, Keddy C, Nicholson K, Jones K, Nusser K, Beach CZ, Harada G, Drilon A, Davare MA
**Journal:** bioRxiv (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1101/2024.01.16.575901](https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.16.575901)

## Content

1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Jan 19:2024.01.16.575901. doi:
10.1101/2024.01.16.575901.

TKI Type Switching Overcomes ROS1 L2086F in ROS1 Fusion-Positive Cancers.

Thawani R, Repetto M, Keddy C, Nicholson K, Jones K, Nusser K, Beach CZ, Harada
G, Drilon A, Davare MA.

Update in
    NPJ Precis Oncol. 2024 Aug 8;8(1):175. doi: 10.1038/s41698-024-00663-1.

PURPOSE: Despite the robust efficacy of ROS1 tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs)
in ROS1-positive non-small cell lung cancer, TKI resistance continues to hamper
durability of the therapeutic response. The resistance liabilities of
next-generation ROS1 TKI are sparsely characterized.
DESIGN: We compared the activity of type I TKIs (crizotinib, entrectinib,
taletrectinib, lorlatinib, and repotrectinib) to the type II TKIs (cabozantinib
and merestinib), and to the type I FLT3 inhibitor, gilteritinib, in CD74-ROS1
wildtype and F2004C, L2026M, G2032R, or L2086 mutant Ba/F3 cells. The findings
from the Ba/F3 cell model were confirmed using NIH3T3 colony formation assays
and in vivo tumor growth. CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing was used to generate isogenic
wildtype and L2086F mutant TPM3-ROS1 expressing patient-derived cell lines.
These lines were used to further evaluate TKI activity using cell viability and
immunoblotting methods. Molecular modeling studies enabled the characterization
of structural determinants of TKI sensitivity in wildtype and mutant ROS1 kinase
domains. We also report clinical cases of ROS1 TKI resistance that were treated
with cabozantinib.
RESULTS: ROS1 L2086F mutant kinase is resistant to type I TKI including
crizotinib, entrectinib, lorlatinib, repotrectinib, taletrectinib, while the
type II TKI cabozantinib and merestinib retain activity. Additionally, we found
that gilteritinib, a type I FLT3 inhibitor, inhibited wildtype and L2086F mutant
ROS1, however ROS1 G2032R solvent front mutation imposed resistance. The
specific binding poses adopted by cabozantinib in the DFG-out kinase
conformation and gilteritinib in the DFG-in kinase, provide rationale for their
activity in the ROS1 mutants. Clinical cases demonstrated response to
cabozantinib in tumors developing TKI resistance due to the ROS1 L2086F
mutation.
CONCLUSION: Cabozantinib and gilteritinib effectively inhibit ROS1 L2086F.
Clinical activity of cabozantinib is confirmed in patients with TKI-resistant,
ROS1 L2086F mutant NSCLC. Gilteritinib may offer an alternative with distinct
off-target toxicities, however further studies are required. Since cabozantinib
and gilteritinib are multi-kinase inhibitors, there is a persistent unmet need
for more selective and better-tolerated TKI to overcome ROS1 L2086F
kinase-intrinsic resistance.
TRANSLATIONAL RELEVANCE: ROS1 L2086F is an emerging recurrent resistance
mutation to type I ROS1 TKIs, including later generation TKIs. Here, we show
corroborating preclinical and clinical evidence for the activity of the
quinolone-based type II TKI, cabozantinib, in ROS1 L2086F resistance setting. In
addition, we show activity of the pyrazine carboxamide-based type I TKI,
gilteritinib, in ROS1 L2086F resistance, suggesting that gilteritinib could be
another option for ROS1 L2086F TKI-resistant patients. This study represents the
first comprehensive report of ROS1 L2086F in the context of later-generation
TKIs, including the macrocyclic inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.01.16.575901
PMCID: PMC10827145
PMID: 38293020
