---
reference_id: "PMID:31710779"
title: "Kosaki overgrowth syndrome: A newly identified entity caused by pathogenic variants in platelet-derived growth factor receptor-beta."
authors:
- Takenouchi T
- Okuno H
- Kosaki K
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31755
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Growth Disorders/diagnostic imaging, genetics, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Male
- Musculoskeletal Abnormalities/genetics
- Psychomotor Performance
- "Receptor, Platelet-Derived Growth Factor beta/genetics"
- Syndrome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kosaki overgrowth syndrome: A newly identified entity caused by pathogenic variants in platelet-derived growth factor receptor-beta.
**Authors:** Takenouchi T, Okuno H, Kosaki K
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.31755](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.31755)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2019 Dec;181(4):650-657. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.c.31755. Epub 2019 Nov 11.

Kosaki overgrowth syndrome: A newly identified entity caused by pathogenic
variants in platelet-derived growth factor receptor-beta.

Takenouchi T(1), Okuno H(2), Kosaki K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Physiology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Center for Medical Genetics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan.

Specific classes of de novo heterozygous gain-of-function pathogenic variants of
the PDGFRB (platelet-derived growth factor receptor-beta) cause a distinctive
overgrowth syndrome, named the Kosaki overgrowth syndrome (KOGS) (OMIM #616592).
Until now, six patients with this condition have been reported in the
literature. In addition to skeletal overgrowth, these patients exhibit
hyperelastic, translucent, and fragile skin, scoliosis, progressive loss of
subcutaneous adipose tissue, skull deformity, infantile myofibromas,
neuropsychiatric symptoms, and arachnoid cysts in the posterior fossa and
periventricular white matter signal abnormalities on neuroimaging. This
constellation of phenotypes clearly distinguishes KOGS from other PDGFRB-related
disorders, including idiopathic basal ganglia calcification, infantile
myofibroma, and Penttinen-type premature aging syndrome. From a molecular
standpoint, PDGFRB is a dimeric receptor tyrosine kinase that plays critical
roles in cell growth and tumorigenesis. The two known types of pathogenic
variants (p.(Pro584Arg) and p.(Trp566Arg)) of the PDGFRB that cause KOGS are
exclusively located in the juxtaglomerular domain that regulates
autoactivation/inhibition of PDGFRB. In-vitro evidence suggests that
p.(Pro584Arg) represents a gain-of-function pathogenic variant. Inhibition of
PDGFRB activity using multi-kinase inhibitors appears to be a potentially
promising therapeutic approach. Investigation of the molecular mechanisms
underlying the pathogenesis of this disease using induced pluripotent stem cells
is under way. Presence of skeletal overgrowth, distinctive facial features,
characteristic hyperelastic and fragile skin, and cerebral white matter lesions
with neuropsychiatric symptoms should prompt genetic analysis of the PDGFRB.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31755
PMID: 31710779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
