---
reference_id: "PMID:19029983"
title: Granulysin is a key mediator for disseminated keratinocyte death in Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis.
authors:
- Chung WH
- Hung SI
- Yang JY
- Su SC
- Huang SP
- Wei CY
- Chin SW
- Chiou CC
- Chu SC
- Ho HC
- Yang CH
- Lu CF
- Wu JY
- Liao YD
- Chen YT
journal: Nat Med
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1038/nm.1884
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antigens, Differentiation, T-Lymphocyte/genetics, metabolism"
- Biopsy
- "Blister/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Epidermal Cells
- Epidermis/metabolism
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Humans
- "Keratinocytes/cytology, metabolism"
- "Killer Cells, Natural/metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Nude"
- Molecular Weight
- Necrosis
- "Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/genetics, metabolism, pathology, surgery"
- "T-Lymphocytes, Cytotoxic/metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Granulysin is a key mediator for disseminated keratinocyte death in Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis.
**Authors:** Chung WH, Hung SI, Yang JY, Su SC, Huang SP, Wei CY, Chin SW, Chiou CC, Chu SC, Ho HC, Yang CH, Lu CF, Wu JY, Liao YD, Chen YT
**Journal:** Nat Med (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nm.1884](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.1884)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2008 Dec;14(12):1343-50. doi: 10.1038/nm.1884. Epub 2008 Nov 23.

Granulysin is a key mediator for disseminated keratinocyte death in 
Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis.

Chung WH, Hung SI, Yang JY, Su SC, Huang SP, Wei CY, Chin SW, Chiou CC, Chu SC, 
Ho HC, Yang CH, Lu CF, Wu JY, Liao YD, Chen YT.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2008 Dec;14(12):1311-3. doi: 10.1038/nm1208-1311.

Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) are 
life-threatening adverse drug reactions characterized by massive epidermal 
necrosis, in which the specific danger signals involved remain unclear. Here we 
show that blister cells from skin lesions of SJS-TEN primarily consist of 
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) and natural killer (NK) cells, and both blister 
fluids and cells were cytotoxic. Gene expression profiling identified granulysin 
as the most highly expressed cytotoxic molecule, confirmed by quantitative PCR 
and immunohistochemistry. Granulysin concentrations in the blister fluids were 
two to four orders of magnitude higher than perforin, granzyme B or soluble Fas 
ligand concentrations, and depleting granulysin reduced the cytotoxicity. 
Granulysin in the blister fluids was a 15-kDa secretory form, and injection of 
it into mouse skin resulted in features mimicking SJS-TEN. Our findings 
demonstrate that secretory granulysin is a key molecule responsible for the 
disseminated keratinocyte death in SJS-TEN and highlight a mechanism for CTL- or 
NK cell--mediated cytotoxicity that does not require direct cellular contact.

DOI: 10.1038/nm.1884
PMID: 19029983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]