---
reference_id: "PMID:32409712"
title: "Resistance to targeted therapies as a multifactorial, gradual adaptation to inhibitor specific selective pressures."
authors:
- Vander Velde R
- Yoon N
- Marusyk V
- Durmaz A
- Dhawan A
- Miroshnychenko D
- Lozano-Peral D
- Desai B
- Balynska O
- Poleszhuk J
- Kenian L
- Teng M
- Abazeed M
- Mian O
- Tan AC
- Haura E
- Scott J
- Marusyk A
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-16212-w
keywords:
- "Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- Animals
- "Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/drug effects, genetics"
- "Epigenesis, Genetic/drug effects"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic/drug effects"
- Humans
- "Lapatinib/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Mice
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide/drug effects"
- RNA-Seq
- Single-Cell Analysis
- Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Resistance to targeted therapies as a multifactorial, gradual adaptation to inhibitor specific selective pressures.
**Authors:** Vander Velde R, Yoon N, Marusyk V, Durmaz A, Dhawan A, Miroshnychenko D, Lozano-Peral D, Desai B, Balynska O, Poleszhuk J, Kenian L, Teng M, Abazeed M, Mian O, Tan AC, Haura E, Scott J, Marusyk A
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-020-16212-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-16212-w)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2020 May 14;11(1):2393. doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-16212-w.

Resistance to targeted therapies as a multifactorial, gradual adaptation to
inhibitor specific selective pressures.

Vander Velde R(1)(2), Yoon N(3), Marusyk V(1), Durmaz A(3)(4), Dhawan A(3),
Miroshnychenko D(1), Lozano-Peral D(1)(5), Desai B(1)(6), Balynska O(1),
Poleszhuk J(7), Kenian L(8), Teng M(9), Abazeed M(3), Mian O(3), Tan AC(9),
Haura E(10), Scott J(11)(12), Marusyk A(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Physiology, H Lee Moffitt Cancer Centre and Research
Institute, Tampa, FL, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL,
USA.
(3)Department of Translational Hematology and Oncology Research, Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(4)Systems Biology and Bioinformatics, Case Western Reserve University School of
Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(5)Supercomputer and Bioinnovation Center, University of Málaga, Málaga, Spain.
(6)University of South Florida Cancer Biology PhD Program, Tampa, FL, USA.
(7)Nalecz Institute of Biocybernetics and Biomedical Engineering, Polish Academy
of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.
(8)Department of Pathology, H Lee Moffitt Cancer Centre and Research Institute,
Tampa, FL, USA.
(9)Department of Biostatistic and Bioinformatics, H Lee Moffitt Cancer Centre
and Research Institute, Tampa, FL, USA.
(10)Department of Thoracic Oncology, H Lee Moffitt Cancer Centre and Research
Institute, Tampa, FL, USA.
(11)Department of Translational Hematology and Oncology Research, Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA. scottj10@ccf.org.
(12)Systems Biology and Bioinformatics, Case Western Reserve University School
of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA. scottj10@ccf.org.
(13)Department of Cancer Physiology, H Lee Moffitt Cancer Centre and Research
Institute, Tampa, FL, USA. Andriy.Marusyk@moffitt.org.
(14)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL,
USA. Andriy.Marusyk@moffitt.org.

Despite high initial efficacy, targeted therapies eventually fail in advanced
cancers, as tumors develop resistance and relapse. In contrast to the
substantial body of research on the molecular mechanisms of resistance,
understanding of how resistance evolves remains limited. Using an experimental
model of ALK positive NSCLC, we explored the evolution of resistance to
different clinical ALK inhibitors. We found that resistance can originate from
heterogeneous, weakly resistant subpopulations with variable sensitivity to
different ALK inhibitors. Instead of the commonly assumed stochastic single hit
(epi) mutational transition, or drug-induced reprogramming, we found evidence
for a hybrid scenario involving the gradual, multifactorial adaptation to the
inhibitors through acquisition of multiple cooperating genetic and epigenetic
adaptive changes. Additionally, we found that during this adaptation tumor cells
might present unique, temporally restricted collateral sensitivities, absent in
therapy naïve or fully resistant cells, suggesting the potential for new
therapeutic interventions, directed against evolving resistance.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-020-16212-w
PMCID: PMC7224215
PMID: 32409712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
