---
reference_id: "PMID:33179600"
title: "Primary hyperammonaemia: Current diagnostic and therapeutic strategies."
authors:
- Häberle J
journal: J Mother Child
year: '2020'
doi: 10.34763/jmotherandchild.20202402si.2015.000006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary hyperammonaemia: Current diagnostic and therapeutic strategies.
**Authors:** Häberle J
**Journal:** J Mother Child (2020)
**DOI:** [10.34763/jmotherandchild.20202402si.2015.000006](https://doi.org/10.34763/jmotherandchild.20202402si.2015.000006)

## Content

1. J Mother Child. 2020 Oct 2;24(2):32-38. doi: 
10.34763/jmotherandchild.20202402si.2015.000006.

Primary hyperammonaemia: Current diagnostic and therapeutic strategies.

Häberle J(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Metabolism and Children's Research Center, University Children's 
Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Primary hyperammonaemia is a term to describe an elevation of ammonia in blood 
or plasma due to a defect within the urea cycle, which is the pathway 
responsible for ammonia detoxification and arginine biosynthesis. Urea cycle 
disorders (UCDs) are rare diseases caused by genetic defects affecting any of 
the six enzymes or two transporters that are directly involved in the urea cycle 
function.The clinical situation is variable and largely depends on the time of 
onset. Newborns who are often affected by hyper-ammonaemic encephalopathy carry 
a potential risk of severe brain damage, which may lead to death. Outside the 
neonatal period, symptoms are very unspecific but most often neurological (with 
wide variability), psychiatric and/or gastrointestinal. Early identification of 
patients is extremely important to start effective treatment modalities 
immediately. The acute management includes detoxification of ammonia, which 
often requires extracorporeal means such as haemodialysis, and the use of 
intravenous drugs that work as nitrogen scavengers. Long-term management of 
patients with UCDs consists of a low-protein diet, which needs to be balanced 
and supplemented to avoid deficiencies of essential amino acids, trace elements 
or vitamins and the use of nitrogen scavengers.The reader will find here a brief 
overview describing the most relevant aspects of the clinical management of UCDs 
in an attempt to raise awareness for this important group of rare diseases.

DOI: 10.34763/jmotherandchild.20202402si.2015.000006
PMCID: PMC8518097
PMID: 33179600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest None.