---
reference_id: "PMID:37975615"
title: Exploring genetic associations between vitiligo and mental disorders using Mendelian randomization.
authors:
- Wang Y
- Yao T
- Lin Y
- Ye L
- Li S
- Gao Y
- Wu J
journal: Exp Dermatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/exd.14979
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exploring genetic associations between vitiligo and mental disorders using Mendelian randomization.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Yao T, Lin Y, Ye L, Li S, Gao Y, Wu J
**Journal:** Exp Dermatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/exd.14979](https://doi.org/10.1111/exd.14979)

## Content

1. Exp Dermatol. 2024 Jan;33(1):e14979. doi: 10.1111/exd.14979. Epub 2023 Nov 17.

Exploring genetic associations between vitiligo and mental disorders using 
Mendelian randomization.

Wang Y(1), Yao T(2), Lin Y(2), Ye L(1), Li S(1), Gao Y(1), Wu J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, The Second Affiliated Hospital and Yuying 
Children's Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, The Second Affiliated Hospital and Yuying 
Children's Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, China.

Although a large number of existing studies have confirmed that people with 
vitiligo are prone to mental disorders, these observational studies may be 
subject to confounding factors and reverse causality, so the true causal 
relationship is inconclusive. We conducted a bidirectional Mendelian 
randomization (MR) analysis to assess the causality between vitiligo and mental 
disorders, namely depression, anxiety, insomnia, schizophrenia, bipolar 
disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and attention-deficit 
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Summary statistics from large available 
genome-wide association study (GWAS) datasets for generalized vitiligo 
(n = 44 266), depression (n = 173 005), anxiety (n = 17 310), insomnia 
(n = 386 988), schizophrenia (n = 130 644), bipolar disorder (n = 413 466), OCD 
(n = 9725) and ADHD (n = 225 534) were utilized. Inverse-variance weighted 
(IVW), MR-Egger and weighted median were employed to estimate causal effects. 
Sensitivity analysis and MR Pleiotropy Residual Sum and Outliers (MR PRESSO) 
were conducted to assess heterogeneity and pleiotropy, ensuring the robustness 
of the results. Additionally, we corrected for estimating bias that might be 
brought on by sample overlap using MRlap. In our findings, none of the rigorous 
bidirectional MR analyses uncovered a significant causal association. Even after 
applying the MRlap correction, the effect sizes remained statistically 
nonsignificant, thereby reinforcing the conclusions drawn via IVW. In summary, 
our genetic-level investigation did not reveal a causal link between generalized 
vitiligo and mental disorders.

© 2023 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/exd.14979
PMID: 37975615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]