---
reference_id: "PMID:35588602"
title: "Exploring the pathophysiologic basis of constrictive pericarditis of Kohlmeier Degos disease: A case series and review of the literature."
authors:
- Magro C
- Shapiro L
journal: Ann Diagn Pathol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2022.151943
keywords:
- Adult
- Fibrosis
- Humans
- Interferon Type I
- Male
- Malignant Atrophic Papulosis/complications
- Middle Aged
- "Pericarditis, Constrictive/complications"
- Skin Diseases
- Thrombosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exploring the pathophysiologic basis of constrictive pericarditis of Kohlmeier Degos disease: A case series and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Magro C, Shapiro L
**Journal:** Ann Diagn Pathol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2022.151943](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2022.151943)

## Content

1. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2022 Aug;59:151943. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2022.151943. 
Epub 2022 Mar 28.

Exploring the pathophysiologic basis of constrictive pericarditis of Kohlmeier 
Degos disease: A case series and review of the literature.

Magro C(1), Shapiro L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New 
York, NY, United States of America. Electronic address: cym2003@med.cornell.edu.
(2)Department of Medicine, Albany Medical Center, Albany, NY, United States of 
America.

Kohlmeier-Degos Disease is a unique thrombotic microvascular and arteriopathic 
vasculopathy that is highly selective in the organs it targets. It invariably 
involves the skin and can be a purely cutaneous process. It affects both the 
microvasculature and the arterial system ranging from a thrombogenic 
microangiopathy to a fibrointimal obliterative arteriopathy with an accompanying 
background of extravascular fibrosis. A potentially lethal complication of 
Kohlmeier-Degos disease is constrictive pericarditis and pleuritis. We present 
three male patients, ages 26 years, 46 years and 58 years of age with 
established cutaneous and gastrointestinal Kohlmeier-Degos disease who developed 
progressive pericarditis which in two necessitated a pericardiectomy. There are 
6 other reported cases, 5 in men, with restrictive symptoms developing on 
average 6 years following the onset of skin disease and all with 
gastrointestinal involvement. Half of the patients died within one year 
following the diagnosis of cardiopulmonary restrictive disease. The restrictive 
symptoms developed within 12 months, 2 years and 11 years following the initial 
skin presentation. In one patient this complication developed despite receiving 
eculizumab, indicative that this extravascular fibrosing reaction was not 
complement mediated as opposed to the thrombotic microvascular component of the 
disease which is C5b-9 mediated. Two of the three patients had evidence of right 
ventricular dysfunction. Two of our patients died within 1 year of developing 
constrictive pericarditis due to progressive cardiopulmonary failure. A 
profibrogenic process resembling scleroderma was seen given the degree of smooth 
muscle actin staining along with a mirror image reduction in CD34 expression 
within the fibrotic pleura and pericardium. There was significant upregulation 
in type I interferon signaling in cases tested as revealed by the degree of 
staining for MXA, the surrogate type I interferon marker. We propose that 
excessive type I interferon signaling results in the influx of monocyte derived 
dendritic cells with subsequent transdifferentiation into potent collagen 
producing myofibroblasts. We believe that targeting and suppressing type I 
interferon signaling should be a cornerstone of early therapy in patients with 
Kohlmeier- Degos disease to prevent pleural and pericardial fibrosis.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2022.151943
PMID: 35588602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]