---
reference_id: "PMID:23219767"
title: Correct laboratory approach to APS diagnosis and monitoring.
authors:
- Pengo V
- Banzato A
- Denas G
- Jose SP
- Bison E
- Hoxha A
- Ruffatti A
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2012.11.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Correct laboratory approach to APS diagnosis and monitoring.
**Authors:** Pengo V, Banzato A, Denas G, Jose SP, Bison E, Hoxha A, Ruffatti A
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2012.11.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2012.11.008)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2013 Jun;12(8):832-4. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2012.11.008. Epub 
2012 Dec 3.

Correct laboratory approach to APS diagnosis and monitoring.

Pengo V(1), Banzato A, Denas G, Jose SP, Bison E, Hoxha A, Ruffatti A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiac, Thoracic and Vascular Sciences, University of Padova 
Medical School, Padova, Italy. vittorio.pengo@unipd.it

Triple positivity (positive Lupus Anticoagulant, anticardiolipin and anti 
β2-glycoptrotein I antibodies) identifies the pathogenic autoantibody (anti 
Domain I of β2-glycoptroteinI) that is present in patients with definite 
Antiphospholipid Syndrome (APS). This is supported by the fact that aβ2GPI 
antibodies obtained by affinity purification in these patients possess LA 
activity. Moreover, patients and carriers of this profile carry a much higher 
risk of thrombosis and pregnancy loss than APS patients with positivity for only 
one of the tests. Thus, very different risk categories exist among patients with 
APS as well as among carriers of aPL. Clinical studies and interventional trials 
should first take these high risk subjects into consideration.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2012.11.008
PMID: 23219767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]