---
reference_id: "PMID:34848247"
title: Review of rodent models of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
authors:
- Regan SL
- Williams MT
- Vorhees CV
journal: Neurosci Biobehav Rev
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.11.041
keywords:
- Animals
- Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Mice
- Rats
- "Rats, Inbred SHR"
- Rodentia
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Review of rodent models of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
**Authors:** Regan SL, Williams MT, Vorhees CV
**Journal:** Neurosci Biobehav Rev (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.11.041](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.11.041)

## Content

1. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2022 Jan;132:621-637. doi:
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.11.041. Epub 2021 Nov 27.

Review of rodent models of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.

Regan SL(1), Williams MT(2), Vorhees CV(3).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of Cincinnati, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Division of Neurology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH, 45229, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Division of Neurology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH, 45229, USA. Electronic address: charles.vorhees@cchmc.org.

Comment in
    Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2022 Jun;137:104641. doi:
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2022.104641.

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a polygenic
neurodevelopmental disorder that affects 8-12 % of children and >4 % of adults.
Environmental factors are believed to interact with genetic predispositions to
increase susceptibility to ADHD. No existing rodent model captures all aspects
of ADHD, but several show promise. The main genetic models are the spontaneous
hypertensive rat, dopamine transporter knock-out (KO) mice, dopamine receptor
subtype KO mice, Snap-25 KO mice, guanylyl cyclase-c KO mice, and latrophilin-3
KO mice and rats. Environmental factors thought to contribute to ADHD include
ethanol, nicotine, PCBs, lead (Pb), ionizing irradiation, 6-hydroxydopamine,
neonatal hypoxia, some pesticides, and organic pollutants. Model validation
criteria are outlined, and current genetic models evaluated against these
criteria. Future research should explore induced multiple gene KOs given that
ADHD is polygenic and epigenetic contributions. Furthermore, genetic models
should be combined with environmental agents to test for interactions.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.11.041
PMCID: PMC8816876
PMID: 34848247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
