---
reference_id: "PMID:22670617"
title: "Dandruff/seborrhoeic dermatitis is characterized by an inflammatory genomic signature and possible immune dysfunction: transcriptional analysis of the condition and treatment effects of zinc pyrithione."
authors:
- Mills KJ
- Hu P
- Henry J
- Tamura M
- Tiesman JP
- Xu J
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2012.10863.x
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Dermatitis, Seborrheic/drug therapy, genetics, immunology"
- Down-Regulation
- "Genes, MHC Class II/genetics, immunology"
- Genomics/methods
- "Hair Preparations/administration & dosage"
- Humans
- "Keratolytic Agents/administration & dosage"
- Lipid Metabolism/genetics
- Male
- Microarray Analysis/methods
- Middle Aged
- "Organometallic Compounds/administration & dosage"
- "Pyridines/administration & dosage"
- "Scalp Dermatoses/drug therapy, genetics, immunology"
- "Transcription, Genetic/drug effects"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dandruff/seborrhoeic dermatitis is characterized by an inflammatory genomic signature and possible immune dysfunction: transcriptional analysis of the condition and treatment effects of zinc pyrithione.
**Authors:** Mills KJ, Hu P, Henry J, Tamura M, Tiesman JP, Xu J
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2133.2012.10863.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2133.2012.10863.x)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2012 Jun;166 Suppl 2:33-40. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2133.2012.10863.x.

Dandruff/seborrhoeic dermatitis is characterized by an inflammatory genomic 
signature and possible immune dysfunction: transcriptional analysis of the 
condition and treatment effects of zinc pyrithione.

Mills KJ(1), Hu P, Henry J, Tamura M, Tiesman JP, Xu J.

Author information:
(1)The Procter and Gamble Company, Miami Valley Innovation Center, 11810 East 
Miami River Road, Cincinnati, OH 45252, USA. mills.kj@pg.com

BACKGROUND: Dandruff/seborrhoeic dermatitis is a common scalp condition that is 
characterized by flakes, pruritus and sometimes mild erythema. These symptoms 
reflect tissue level events that are poorly understood at the molecular level.
OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this work was: (i) to compare gene expression 
profiles in subjects with dandruff vs. those of subjects without dandruff to 
determine the key physiological disruptions manifest in the condition; and (ii) 
to determine the effect on this profile of treatment with a shampoo containing 
potentiated zinc pyrithione (ZPT).
METHODS: In study 1, scalp biopsies were taken from 16 normal subjects and from 
involved and uninvolved sites in 15 subjects with dandruff. In study 2, 30 
subjects with dandruff were treated for 3 weeks with a commercial ZPT shampoo (n 
= 15) or a vehicle (n = 15), and scalp lesional biopsies were collected at 
baseline and end of study for transcriptomic analysis. RNA was extracted from 
all biopsies and Affymetrix gene chips were used to analyse transcriptomic 
profiles, followed by bioinformatic analysis.
RESULTS: Analysis of study 1 biopsies revealed more than 7000 individual probes 
differentially regulated in dandruff lesional skin relative to normal. Enriched 
Gene Ontology categories included: lipid metabolism, immune response, response 
to stimulus, apoptosis, cell proliferation, and epidermal development. The most 
striking feature of lesional skin relative to normal was the reciprocal 
expression of induced inflammatory genes and repressed lipid metabolism genes. 
Induced inflammatory genes were also enriched in dandruff uninvolved skin, 
suggesting the existence of predisposing factors associated with inflammation. 
Many genes increased in lesional skin were increased at the level of protein in 
stratum corneum samples (e.g. IL-1RA, S100A8, S100A9, S100A11, IL-8). Under 
conditions known to improve overall scalp condition, the ZPT shampoo treatment 
in study 2 produced a transcriptomic profile resembling that of normal scalp 
skin.
CONCLUSIONS: These data provide novel insights into the nature of dandruff and 
the therapeutic action of potentiated ZPT-containing shampoo, and provide a 
basis to explore many new mechanistic questions related to these topics.

© 2012 The Authors. BJD © 2012 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2012.10863.x
PMID: 22670617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]