---
reference_id: "PMID:30281617"
title: Neurodevelopmental disorder-associated ZBTB20 gene variants affect dendritic and synaptic structure.
authors:
- Jones KA
- Luo Y
- Dukes-Rimsky L
- Srivastava DP
- Koul-Tewari R
- Russell TA
- Shapiro LP
- Srivastava AK
- Penzes P
journal: PLoS One
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0203760
keywords:
- Animals
- "Autistic Disorder/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Dendrites/genetics, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- "Hippocampus/metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, physiopathology"
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- "Neurodevelopmental Disorders/genetics, physiopathology"
- Protein Isoforms/genetics
- "Pyramidal Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Rats
- "Synapses/genetics, pathology"
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurodevelopmental disorder-associated ZBTB20 gene variants affect dendritic and synaptic structure.
**Authors:** Jones KA, Luo Y, Dukes-Rimsky L, Srivastava DP, Koul-Tewari R, Russell TA, Shapiro LP, Srivastava AK, Penzes P
**Journal:** PLoS One (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0203760](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0203760)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2018 Oct 3;13(10):e0203760. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0203760. 
eCollection 2018.

Neurodevelopmental disorder-associated ZBTB20 gene variants affect dendritic and 
synaptic structure.

Jones KA(1), Luo Y(2), Dukes-Rimsky L(2), Srivastava DP(1), Koul-Tewari R(2)(3), 
Russell TA(1), Shapiro LP(1), Srivastava AK(2)(3), Penzes P(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.
(2)J.C. Self Research Institute of Human Genetics, Greenwood Genetic Center, 
Greenwood, South Carolina, United States of America.
(3)Department of Genetics and Biochemistry, Clemson University, Clemson, South 
Carolina, United States of America.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Northwestern University 
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

Dendritic spine morphology and dendritic arborization are key determinants of 
neuronal connectivity and play critical roles in learning, memory and behavior 
function. Recently, defects of ZBTB20, a BTB and zinc finger domain containing 
transcriptional repressor, have been implicated in a wide range of 
neurodevelopmental disorders, including intellectual disability and autism. Here 
we show distinct effects of expression of two major isoforms, long and short, of 
ZBTB20, and its neurodevelopmental disorder-linked variants, on dendritic 
architecture of cultured rat cortical pyramidal neurons. The N-terminal of 
ZBTB20 showed a role in regulating dendritic spine morphology. Two ZBTB20 single 
nucleotide variants, located at the N-terminal and central regions of the 
protein and potentially conferring autism risk, altered dendritic spine 
morphology. In contrast, a single nucleotide variant identified in patients with 
intellectual disability and located at the C-terminus of ZBTB20 affected 
dendritic arborization and dendritic length but had no effect on dendritic spine 
morphology. Furthermore, truncation of the extreme C-terminus of ZBTB20 caused 
spine and dendritic morphological changes that were similar but distinct from 
those caused by the C-terminal variant. Taken together, our study suggests 
ZBTB20's role in dendritic and synaptic structure and provide possible 
mechanisms of its effect in neurodevelopmental disorders.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0203760
PMCID: PMC6169859
PMID: 30281617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.