---
reference_id: "PMID:33878338"
title: A pre-specified analysis of the DAPA-CKD trial demonstrates the effects of dapagliflozin on major adverse kidney events in patients with IgA nephropathy.
authors:
- Wheeler DC
- Toto RD
- Stefánsson BV
- Jongs N
- Chertow GM
- Greene T
- Hou FF
- McMurray JJV
- Pecoits-Filho R
- Correa-Rotter R
- Rossing P
- Sjöström CD
- Umanath K
- Langkilde AM
- Heerspink HJL
- DAPA-CKD Trial Committees and Investigators
journal: Kidney Int
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2021.03.033
keywords:
- Benzhydryl Compounds
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2"
- Glomerular Filtration Rate
- "Glomerulonephritis, IGA/drug therapy"
- Glucosides
- Humans
- Kidney
- Middle Aged
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Sodium-Glucose Transporter 2 Inhibitors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A pre-specified analysis of the DAPA-CKD trial demonstrates the effects of dapagliflozin on major adverse kidney events in patients with IgA nephropathy.
**Authors:** Wheeler DC, Toto RD, Stefánsson BV, Jongs N, Chertow GM, Greene T, Hou FF, McMurray JJV, Pecoits-Filho R, Correa-Rotter R, Rossing P, Sjöström CD, Umanath K, Langkilde AM, Heerspink HJL, DAPA-CKD Trial Committees and Investigators
**Journal:** Kidney Int (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.kint.2021.03.033](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.kint.2021.03.033)

## Content

1. Kidney Int. 2021 Jul;100(1):215-224. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2021.03.033. Epub
2021  Apr 18.

A pre-specified analysis of the DAPA-CKD trial demonstrates the effects of 
dapagliflozin on major adverse kidney events in patients with IgA nephropathy.

Wheeler DC(1), Toto RD(2), Stefánsson BV(3), Jongs N(4), Chertow GM(5), Greene 
T(6), Hou FF(7), McMurray JJV(8), Pecoits-Filho R(9), Correa-Rotter R(10), 
Rossing P(11), Sjöström CD(3), Umanath K(12), Langkilde AM(3), Heerspink HJL(4); 
DAPA-CKD Trial Committees and Investigators.

Author information:
(1)Department of Renal Medicine, University College London, London, UK; The 
George Institute for Global Health, Sydney, Australia. Electronic address: 
d.wheeler@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, 
Texas, USA.
(3)Late-Stage Development, Cardiovascular, Renal and Metabolism, 
Biopharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)Department Clinical Pharmacy and Pharmacology, University of Groningen, 
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
California, USA; Department of Epidemiology and Population Health, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA.
(6)Study Design and Biostatistics Center, University of Utah Health Sciences, 
Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(7)Division of Nephrology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, 
National Clinical Research Center for Kidney Disease, Guangzhou, China.
(8)Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow, UK.
(9)Arbor Research Collaborative for Health, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA; School of 
Medicine, Pontifical Catholic University of Paraná, Curitiba, Paraná, Brazil.
(10)National Medical Science and Nutrition Institute Salvador Zubirán, Mexico 
City, Mexico.
(11)Steno Diabetes Center Copenhagen, Gentofte, Denmark; Department of Clinical 
Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(12)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, 
Michigan, USA; Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Wayne State University, 
Detroit, Michigan, USA.

Comment in
    Kidney Int. 2021 Jul;100(1):24-26. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2021.04.002.

Immunoglobulin A (IgA) nephropathy is a common form of glomerulonephritis, which 
despite use of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone-system blockers and 
immunosuppressants, often progresses to kidney failure. In the Dapagliflozin and 
Prevention of Adverse Outcomes in Chronic Kidney Disease trial, dapagliflozin 
reduced the risk of kidney failure and prolonged survival in participants with 
chronic kidney disease with and without type 2 diabetes, including those with 
IgA nephropathy. Participants with estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) 
25-75 mL/min/1.73m2 and urinary albumin-to-creatinine ratio 200-5000 mg/g 
(22.6-565 mg/mol) were randomized to dapagliflozin 10mg or placebo, as adjunct 
to standard care. The primary composite endpoint was a sustained decline in eGFR 
of 50% or more, end-stage kidney disease, or death from a kidney disease-related 
or cardiovascular cause. Of 270 participants with IgA nephropathy (254 [94%] 
confirmed by previous biopsy), 137 were randomized to dapagliflozin and 133 to 
placebo, and followed for median 2.1 years. Overall, mean age was 51.2 years; 
mean eGFR, 43.8 mL/min/1.73m2; and median urinary albumin-to-creatinine ratio, 
900 mg/g. The primary outcome occurred in six (4%) participants on dapagliflozin 
and 20 (15%) on placebo (hazard ratio, 0.29; 95% confidence interval, 0.12, 
0.73). Mean rates of eGFR decline with dapagliflozin and placebo were -3.5 
and -4.7 mL/min/1.73m2/year, respectively. Dapagliflozin reduced the urinary 
albumin-to-creatinine ratio by 26% relative to placebo. Adverse events leading 
to study drug discontinuation were similar with dapagliflozin and placebo. There 
were fewer serious adverse events with dapagliflozin, and no new safety findings 
in this population. Thus, in participants with IgA nephropathy, dapagliflozin 
reduced the risk of chronic kidney disease progression with a favorable safety 
profile.

Copyright © 2021 International Society of Nephrology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.kint.2021.03.033
PMID: 33878338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]