---
reference_id: "PMID:31279808"
title: "Dermatomyositis: Clinical features and pathogenesis."
authors:
- DeWane ME
- Waldman R
- Lu J
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2019.06.1309
keywords:
- Adult
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- "Autoantigens/genetics, immunology"
- Biopsy
- Child
- "Dermatomyositis/complications, epidemiology, genetics, immunology"
- Humans
- "Lung Diseases, Interstitial/genetics, immunology"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/immunology, pathology"
- "Neoplasms/genetics, immunology"
- Risk Factors
- "Skin/immunology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dermatomyositis: Clinical features and pathogenesis.
**Authors:** DeWane ME, Waldman R, Lu J
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaad.2019.06.1309](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2019.06.1309)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2020 Feb;82(2):267-281. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2019.06.1309. 
Epub 2019 Jul 4.

Dermatomyositis: Clinical features and pathogenesis.

DeWane ME(1), Waldman R(2), Lu J(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Connecticut School of Medicine, Farmington, Connecticut.
(2)University of Connecticut Department of Dermatology, Farmington, Connecticut.
(3)University of Connecticut Department of Dermatology, Farmington, Connecticut. 
Electronic address: jlu@uchc.edu.

Comment in
    J Am Acad Dermatol. 2020 Jul;83(1):e21-e22. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2020.02.083.
    J Am Acad Dermatol. 2020 Jul;83(1):e23. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2020.03.038.

Dermatomyositis (DM) is an idiopathic inflammatory myopathy that is clinically 
heterogeneous and that can be difficult to diagnose. Cutaneous manifestations 
sometimes vary and may or may not parallel myositis and systemic involvement in 
time course or severity. Recent developments in our understanding of 
myositis-specific antibodies have the potential to change the diagnostic 
landscape of DM for dermatologists. Although phenotypic overlap exists, 
anti-Mi2, -MDA5, -NXP2, -TIF1, and -SAE antibodies may be correlated with 
distinct DM subtypes in terms of cutaneous manifestations, systemic involvement, 
and malignancy risk. This review highlights new findings on the DM-specific 
myositis-specific antibodies and their clinical associations in both adults and 
children.

Copyright © 2019 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2019.06.1309
PMID: 31279808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]