---
reference_id: "PMID:28658627"
title: TSPAN12 Is a Norrin Co-receptor that Amplifies Frizzled4 Ligand Selectivity and Signaling.
authors:
- Lai MB
- Zhang C
- Shi J
- Johnson V
- Khandan L
- McVey J
- Klymkowsky MW
- Chen Z
- Junge HJ
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.06.004
keywords:
- "Eye Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Frizzled Receptors/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- Tetraspanins/metabolism
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# TSPAN12 Is a Norrin Co-receptor that Amplifies Frizzled4 Ligand Selectivity and Signaling.
**Authors:** Lai MB, Zhang C, Shi J, Johnson V, Khandan L, McVey J, Klymkowsky MW, Chen Z, Junge HJ
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2017.06.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.06.004)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2017 Jun 27;19(13):2809-2822. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.06.004.

TSPAN12 Is a Norrin Co-receptor that Amplifies Frizzled4 Ligand Selectivity and 
Signaling.

Lai MB(1), Zhang C(1), Shi J(1), Johnson V(1), Khandan L(1), McVey J(1), 
Klymkowsky MW(1), Chen Z(1), Junge HJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of 
Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of 
Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA. Electronic address: harald.junge@colorado.edu.

Accessory proteins in Frizzled (FZD) receptor complexes are thought to determine 
ligand selectivity and signaling amplitude. Genetic evidence indicates that 
specific combinations of accessory proteins and ligands mediate vascular 
β-catenin signaling in different CNS structures. In the retina, the tetraspanin 
TSPAN12 and the ligand norrin (NDP) mediate angiogenesis, and both genes are 
linked to familial exudative vitreoretinopathy (FEVR), yet the molecular 
function of TSPAN12 remains poorly understood. Here, we report that TSPAN12 is 
an essential component of the NDP receptor complex and interacts with FZD4 and 
NDP via its extracellular loops, consistent with an action as co-receptor that 
enhances FZD4 ligand selectivity for NDP. FEVR-linked mutations in TSPAN12 
prevent the incorporation of TSPAN12 into the NDP receptor complex. In vitro and 
in Xenopus embryos, TSPAN12 alleviates defects of FZD4 M105V, a mutation that 
destabilizes the NDP/FZD4 interaction. This study sheds light on the poorly 
understood function of accessory proteins in FZD signaling.

Copyright © 2017 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.06.004
PMCID: PMC5533581
PMID: 28658627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.

A multitude of metazoan developmental processes are controlled by wnt/β-catenin signaling, a central signaling pathway that is perturbed in human diseases, including cancer, bone disease, and vascular disease (Clevers and Nusse, 2012). Canonical β-catenin signaling is mediated by a diverse group of ligands, receptors, co-receptors, and accessory co-activators. Core components of receptor complexes are frizzled receptors and low-density lipoprotein receptor-like protein 5/6 (LRP5 or LRP6) co-receptors, which inactivate the β-catenin destruction complex in order to regulate transcription (MacDonald and He, 2012). The combinatorial assembly of receptor complexes from multiple additional families of membrane proteins is thought to provide ligand selectivity and contribute to context-specific signaling outcomes (van Amerongen and Nusse, 2009). Despite their important roles, the function of accessory proteins in determining ligand-receptor selectivity and the mechanisms of receptor complex assembly are poorly understood (Schulte, 2015).

The critical in vivo role of distinct ligands and specific accessory membrane proteins in β-catenin signaling is particularly evident in CNS blood vessel development and blood-CNS barrier formation, processes that require canonical β-catenin signaling in endothelial cells (Liebner et al., 2008; Wang et al., 2012; Ye et al., 2009; Zhou et al., 2014). While WNT7A/B have critical roles in neural tube angiogenesis (Stenman et al., 2008), retinal signaling is mediated by the ligand NDP (norrie disease protein, also referred to as norrin). The cysteine-knot protein NDP acts through only one of the 10 human FZD receptors, FZD4 (Smallwood et al., 2007). Unlike canonical WNT/FZD signaling, NDP/FZD4 signaling requires an additional membrane protein, the tetraspanin TSPAN12. Gene disruptions of Tspan12 (Junge et al., 2009), Ndp (Luhmann et al., 2005), Fzd4 (Xu et al., 2004; Ye et al., 2009), and Lrp5 (Xia et al., 2008) all result in similar ocular phenotypes in mice, characterized by defects in intraretinal capillary development and dysregulation of the blood-retina barrier. NDP has been studied in several disease models for its vascular and neuroprotective roles (Chen et al., 2015; Ohlmann and Tamm, 2012)

Genetic experiments indicate that specific combinations of ligands and accessory proteins are predominantly required in some CNS structures. This is best illustrated by comparing the postnatal retina and the midgestation neural tube, each at time points of active angiogenesis and barriergenesis. NDP and TSPAN12 (Junge et al., 2009; Luhmann et al., 2005) have essential functions in the retina (i.e., functions not masked by redundancy), whereas WNT7A/B and the co-activator GPR124 carry out important functions in the neural tube (Posokhova et al., 2015; Stenman et al., 2008; Zhou and Nathans, 2014). Because TSPAN12 enhances NDP- but not WNT7A/B-induced signaling (Junge et al., 2009), whereas GPR124 enhances WNT7A/B- but not NDP-signaling (Posokhova et al., 2015; Zhou and Nathans, 2014), the accessory proteins are candidates for mediating ligand selectivity of receptor complexes containing FZD. However, biochemical evidence for this concept is largely lacking. TSPAN12 (tetraspanin family) and GPR124 (adhesion GPCR family) have distinct structures and characteristics, e.g., GPR124 appears to function together with another membrane molecule, RECK (Ulrich et al., 2016; Vanhollebeke et al., 2015). Available crystal structures of NDP in complex with the extracellular domain of FZD4 show that a NDP head-to-tail dimer contacts two FZD4 molecules (Chang et al., 2015; Shen et al., 2015). The residues in the interaction interface are well defined and overlap with disease associated mutations in NDP and FZD4. FZD4 residues that contact NDP are in part conserved in other FZDs (especially in FZD9 and FZD10) but no FZD other than FZD4 harbors all residues that interact with NDP. Accessory proteins may enhance ligand selectivity but how they assemble into receptor complexes and if they contribute to ligand binding is not known.

The 33 human tetraspanin family members function in diverse biological processes and are implicated in several human diseases. TSPAN12, for example, is implicated in cancer (Knoblich et al., 2014; Otomo et al., 2014). Despite the interest in this protein family, the molecular basis of tetraspanin activity remains incompletely understood (Charrin et al., 2014).

Impaired NDP/FZD4 signaling in humans causes the retinal vascular disease FEVR. Mouse genetic and human genetic studies (Junge et al., 2009; Nikopoulos et al., 2010a; Poulter et al., 2010) revealed the critical function of TSPAN12 in NDP/FZD4 signaling and FEVR, which is characterized by an avascular peripheral retina and other anomalies that may cause blindness (Gilmour, 2015; Kashani et al., 2014a). FEVR can be caused by mutations in NDP, FZD4, LRP5, TSPAN12, and ZNF408 – a zinc finger protein recently implicated in vascular biology (Collin et al., 2013; Nikopoulos et al., 2010b). TSPAN12 mutations have been predominantly reported in autosomal dominant FEVR (Kashani et al., 2014b; Kondo et al., 2011; Nikopoulos et al., 2010a; Poulter et al., 2010; Yang et al., 2011 Xu 14) but also in homozygous patients with an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern (Gal et al., 2014; Poulter et al., 2012; Savarese et al., 2014).

Here, we focus on the role of TSPAN12 in mediating ligand selectivity in FZD4 signaling. Our data support a model in which TSPAN12 functions in the NDP receptor complex as a co-receptor for NDP, facilitates selective ligand recognition, and enhances NDP/FZD4 signaling strength to a level that is required for normal retinal angiogenesis and blood-retina barrier function. We confirm the link between TSPAN12 and FEVR by showing that FEVR-linked TSPAN12 mutations fail to incorporate into the NDP-receptor complex.

We introduced 10 previously identified FEVR-linked missense mutations (Kondo et al., 2011; Nikopoulos et al., 2010a; Poulter et al., 2010; Poulter et al., 2012; Yang et al., 2011) individually into HA-TSPAN12 (Figure 1A and Supplemental Figure S1). When we compared the TOPFlash reporter activity (Veeman et al., 2003) of 293T cells transfected with FZD4, LRP5, and wild type TSPAN12 vs. mutated TSPAN12, we found that the ability of TSPAN12 to enhance NDP/FZD4 signaling was impaired to various degrees by the FEVR-linked mutations. C105R, M210R, L223P, A237P, and L245P strongly impaired TSPAN12 activity; T49M, L101H, and Y138C mildly impaired TSPAN12 activity; and G188R and L201F were functionally similarly to wild type in TOPFlash assays (Figure 1B). To further assess functional impairment of TSPAN12 mutations, we employed a NDP C95R rescue assay (Junge et al., 2009). As expected, cells stimulated with co-transfected NDP C95R showed only marginal reporter activity, but overexpression of TSPAN12 resulted in substantial rescue of NDP C95R–associated signaling defects (Figure 1C). This assay revealed defects of G188R and L201F mutations that were not apparent with stimulation by wild type NDP (Figure 1B).

When we induced signaling with WNT7B or WNT3A, we observed no TSPAN12-mediated signaling enhancement or detrimental effect of TSPAN12 missense mutations, indicating that sufficient FZD4 reached the cell surface when TSPAN12 with missense mutations was co-expressed (Figure 1D and E). These results are consistent with a ligand-specific role of TSPAN12 in FZD4 signaling. The strong reduction of NDP induced signaling by the C105R, M210R, L223P, A237P, and L245P mutations confirms the positive role of TSPAN12 in NDP/FZD4 signaling and validates a causal link between TSPAN12 mutations and FEVR.

NDP is a high-affinity ligand for FZD4, and can be used to isolate FZD4 and associated proteins from the plasma membrane (Junge et al., 2009; Xu et al., 2004). To determine if FEVR-linked TSPAN12 mutations affect the association of TSPAN12 with the NDP receptor complex, we transfected 293T cells with FZD4 and TSPAN12 (wild type or mutated), incubated live cells with cold FLAG-AP-NDP conditioned medium (i.e., an alkaline phosphatase fusion protein), and then isolated NDP and associated plasma membrane proteins. As expected, FZD4 and TSPAN12 co-immunoprecipitated with NDP; however, several of the mutant TSPAN12 proteins exhibited poor association with the NDP receptor complex and reduced expression levels (Figure 2A and C). The binding defects were more severe than expression defects and for most mutations, correlated well with the extent of functional defects observed in TOPFlash assays. The five mutations that caused the strongest signaling defects in TOPFlash assays (C105R, M210R, L223P, A237P, and L245P) also exhibited very poor association with NDP and FZD4. Some discrepancies between signaling and binding defects were observed for the G188R mutation, a possible explanation for this difference is the presence of detergent in the biochemical assay, which may exacerbate binding defects.

To determine if mutant TSPAN12 proteins traffic to the plasma membrane, we performed surface biotinylation experiments using live 293T cells transfected with HA-TSPAN12 constructs. C105R, L223P, A237P, and L245P strongly impaired surface localization (Figure 2B and D). Together, these results indicate that plasma membrane localization of TSPAN12 and association with the NDP receptor complex are required for its function in NDP/FZD4 signaling.

In the previously decribed experiments, we consistently observed that TSPAN12 Y138C overexpression caused a reduction in the amount of FZD4 that is immunoprecipitated with NDP (Figure 2A). Cell surface biotinylation experiments revealed that both FZD4 and FZD5 localization at the plasma membrane was reduced in the presence of TSPAN12 Y138C compared to wild type TSPAN12 (Supplemental Figure S2). Next, we analyzed the co-dependence of FZD4 and TSPAN12 in trafficking. Wild type TSPAN12 (compared to TSPAN11) did not promote FZD4 transport to the cell surface, but rather, it slowed its transport (Figure 2E). Conversely, we found that FZD4 (compared to FZD5) strongly promoted TSPAN12 trafficking to the cell surface (Figure 2E and F, see also Figure 5B). To rule out that the difference was caused by inhibitory effects of FZD5, we utilized ER-resident FZD4 variants FZD4 fs501×533 and FZD4 G488D (Kaykas et al., 2004; Milhem et al., 2014), which strongly impaired transport of co-transfected TSPAN12 to the plasma membrane. In contrast, control tetraspanin TSPAN11, which was detected in two major bands, was transported to the surface to a similar degree in the presence of FZD4, FZD4 G488D, or FZD5. Only FZD4 fs501×533 impaired surface localization of both TSPAN12 and TSPAN11, suggesting non-specific defects in FZD4 fs501×533 expressing cells. The findings imply that the NDP receptor complex is at least partially assembled in the absence of NDP during intracellular trafficking and that TSPAN12 transport to the plasma membrane is strongly promoted by FZD4.

To test if the interaction of TSPAN12 and FZD4 is functionally required, we screened for useful tools using a chimera approach. We chose TSPAN11 as a donor tetraspanin because it has the same number of cysteine residues (six) in the large extracellular loop (LEL; Supplemental Figure S3) and because NDP/FZD4 signaling output is inert to the presence of TSPAN11 (see Figure 3B). We created a series of chimeras in which the N-terminus (TSPAN1211-NT), C-terminus (TSPAN1211-CT), the individual transmembrane segments (TSPAN1211-TM1, etc.), and the small and large extracellular loop (TSPAN1211-SEL, TSPAN1211-LEL) of TSPAN12 were replaced by corresponding TSPAN11 sequences (Figure 3A). Of this set of chimeras, we sought to identify those that display functional impairment but intact cell surface localization. TOPFlash assays revealed that the intracellular N-terminus of TSPAN12 is not required for function, and replacing the intracellular C-terminus caused only a partial reduction in signaling. The chimeras harboring the SEL and the LEL of TSPAN11 as well as several chimeras with exchanged transmembrane segments (TM2, TM3, TM4) lost the ability to enhance NDP/FZD4 signaling (Figure 3B). None of the chimeras affected WNT7B–induced FZD4 signaling, indicating that sufficient FZD4 reached the cell surface in the presence of chimera co-expression (Figure 3C).

We performed cell surface biotinylation experiments to test if chimeras were functionally impaired due to altered cell surface expression (Figure 3D) and selected TSPAN1211-LEL, which was efficiently transported to the surface, for further analysis. Immunoblots for cell surface TSPAN11 showed a band at ≈ 16 kDa and a smear above 30 kDa due to a modification, which we identified as N-glycosylation during the course of this study (Figure 4D). This modification site was carried over to the TSPAN1211-LEL chimera. The finding that the TSPAN1211-LEL chimera localizes to the plasma membrane at high levels, but does not enhance NDP/FZD4 signaling, suggests that essential protein-protein interactions are disrupted.

NDP co-immunoprecipitation experiments showed that TSPAN12, TSPAN1211-NT, and TSPAN1211-CT were incorporated into the NDP receptor complex, whereas TSPAN1211-LEL failed to associate with the complex (Figure 4A). To test if TSPAN1211-LEL /FZD4 interactions are disrupted during intracellular transport, we assayed FZD4-dependent trafficking of TSPAN12 to the plasma membrane (Figure 4B). While wild type TSPAN12, TSPAN1211-NT and, to a lesser degree, TSPAN1211-CT chimeras showed increased transport to the cell surface in the presence of FZD4 as expected (see also Figure 2E), surface expression of the TSPAN1211-LEL chimera was not increased by FZD4 co-expression. Next, we used an anti-V5 antibody to label V5-FZD4 on the plasma membrane of live cells, and isolated FZD4 plus associated proteins from the cell surface. While TSPAN12, TSPAN1211-NT, and TSPAN1211-CT co-immunoprecipitated with FZD4 as expected, TSPAN1211-LEL did not interact with FZD4 (Figure 4C). FZD4-association of the negative control TSPAN12 A237P, which resides mostly in intracellular compartments (Figure 2B), was hardly detectable. To rule out that post-translational modification of the TSPAN11 large extracellular loop prevented FZD4 binding to TSPAN1211-LEL, we mutated two predicted N-glycosylation sites in TSPAN11, i.e., N127 and N159, and found that both were post-translational modification sites. When N-glycosylation of TSPAN1211-LEL N127S, N159S was prevented, the chimera was still unable to bind FZD4 (Figure 4D). Next, we determined if the extracellular regions of TSPAN12 were sufficient to mediate FZD4 binding. TSPAN1112-SEL, LEL (i.e., the TSPAN11 tetraspanin scaffold with both extracellular loops of TSPAN12, Figure 4E) was sufficient to mediate FZD4 binding (Figure 4F). This interaction did not require endogenous LRP5 or 6 (Figure 4G), which were deleted using CRISPR/Cas9 (Supplemental Figure S4). These observations support a model in which TSPAN12 is anchored to the Norrin receptor complex via its LEL.

TSPAN12 functions in the NDP receptor complex and enhances FZD4 signaling in a ligand-specific manner. These findings raise the possibility that TSPAN12 is a co-receptor that binds NDP. To test if TSPAN12 interacts with NDP, we performed NDP co-immunoprecipiations of TSPAN12 in the absence of FZD4. Cell surface binding of NDP in the absence of FZD4 was reduced (Figure 5A, top right panel), and remaining cell surface binding was in part mediated by unknown proteins expressed in 293T cells. Because it was not possible to clearly differentiate the contribution of TSPAN12 to cell surface binding in the presence of other NDP-binding proteins, we used immunoprecipitation experiments and appropriate negative controls to test for NDP binding to TSPAN12. Cell surface bound NDP co-precipitated TSPAN12, whereas negative controls TSPAN1211-LEL and TSPAN12 A237P were clearly excluded from the immunoprecipiate (Figure 5A). The absence of TSPAN1211-LEL in the co-immunoprecipiatte was not due to N-glycosylation of the LEL, as TSPAN1211-LEL N127S, N159S also did not interact with NDP (Figure 5B). To further test the specificity of the NDP/TSPAN12 interaction, we used NDP C55R, a mutant with signaling defects that are only minimally rescued by TSPAN12 co-expression (Figure 5C). Whereas wild type NDP co-precipitated TSPAN12 in the absence of FZD4, no interaction between NDP C55R and TSPAN12 was detected (Figure 5D). Due to difficulties expressing TSPAN12 extracellular regions without a tetraspanin transmembrane scaffold, we were unable to test if the interaction of NDP and TSPAN12 is direct. Thus, we employed CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene targeting to remove FZD4, or LRP5 and LRP6, from 293T cells, which were processed through a single cell stage (Supplemental Figures 4 and 5). TSPAN12 interacted with NDP in the absence of endogenous FZD4 or endogenous LRP5/6. The extracellular regions of TSPAN12 in TSPAN1112-SEL, LEL (i.e., the TSPAN11 tetraspanin scaffold with both extracellular loops of TSPAN12, see Figure 4E) were sufficient to mediate the interaction with NDP, albeit at reduced levels (Figure 5E and F). These observations are consistent with a model in which TSPAN12 extracellular loops are contact points for both the FZD4 receptor and the NDP ligand.

To test the functional significance of the interaction of NDP and TSPAN12, we employed mutations in FZD4 and NDP that each weaken the interaction of the receptor with the ligand. FZD4 M105V showed significantly reduced signaling induced by either NDP or, to a lesser degree, WNT7B. Co-expression of TSPAN12 largely rescued the signaling defects when signaling was induced by NDP, however, had no effect on the signaling defects in WNT7B/FZD4 M105V signaling (Supplemental Figure S6). Restoring impaired NDP/FZD4 M105V signaling required the LEL of TSPAN12 as TSPAN1211-LEL was not able to rescue signaling (Figure 6A). We confirmed previous results (Qin et al., 2008) showing that FZD4 M105V – which is in the NDP/FZD4 binding interface (Chang et al., 2015; Shen et al., 2015) – weakens the interaction with NDP and found that the binding defect is more readily revealed with more stringent washing, indicating that the mutation impairs the stability of NDP/FZD4 complexes. When we isolated NDP and associated plasma membrane proteins, we found that NDP was initially retained on the cell surface of FZD4 or FZD4 M105V expressing cells so that it could subsequently be immunoprecipitated (Figure 6B, top right panel). However, NDP/FZD4 M105V failed to form a stable enough complex in the detergent extract, therefore, FZD4 M105V could not be detected in the co-precipitate. The stability of NDP/FZD4 complexes was greatly increased in the presence of wild type TSPAN12, whereas TSPAN1211-LEL, TSPAN12 A237P, and TSPAN12 M210R failed to restore NDP/FZD4 M105V binding. In support of these data, we found that HeLa cells expressing WT FZD4 M105V showed few proximity ligation amplification products (PLAPs) after incubation with NDP, while co-expression of WT TSPAN12 rescued FZD4/NDP complex formation (Figure 6C and D).

Impaired NDP binding as a mechanism of the FZD4 M105V signaling defect was further supported by experiments in which signaling was induced in a ligand-independent manner using a forced interaction approach. Tandem DmrA domains (engineered variants of the FKBP domain of FKBP12) were fused to the C-terminus of FZD4, tandem DmrC domains (FRB domains of FRAP) were fused to the C-terminus of LRP5, and the interaction was induced by A/C heterodimerizer (a derivative of rapamycin) in TOPFlash assays. Induction of the interaction resulted in NDP-independent stimulation of signaling and this signaling component was not affected by the M105V mutation. The NDP-independent component of signaling induced by forced FZD4 and LRP5 heterodimerization was not enhanced by TSPAN12 (Supplemental Figure S7).

To further test the role of TSPAN12 in stabilizing NDP/FZD4 complexes, we analyzed NDP R41E binding to FZD4, a mutation that substantially weakens the interaction of NDP and FZD4 (Smallwood et al., 2007). In addition, the crystal structures highlight that R41 contacts FZD4 (Chang et al., 2015; Shen et al., 2015). TOPFlash assays showed that NDP R41E displayed a strong signaling defect, which was partially rescued by co-expression of TSPAN12 (Figure 6E). Immunoprecipitations of plasma membrane-bound NDP indicated that NDP R41E was retained at the cell surface at reduced levels (Figure 6F, top right panel) and that NDP R41E was unable to co-precipiate FZD4. However, co-expression of TSPAN12 restored the NDP R41E/FZD4 interaction. Proximity ligation assays confirmed that TSPAN12 promotes NDP R41E binding to FZD4 on the cell surface of HeLa cells (Figure 6G and H). We also observed that TSPAN12 promotes binding of wild type NDP to FZD4 (Figure 4A and Figure 6F). This function was most clearly revealed when the negative control was TSPAN11-LEL (see in discussion about the difference of GFP vs. TSPAN11-LEL co-transfection and effects on FZD4 expression levels).

Activation of β-catenin signaling in vertebrate embryos results in anterior-posterior axis duplication (Funayama et al., 1995; Kelly et al., 1995; Kuhl and Pandur, 2008). We found that injection of FZD4 RNA into ventral cells of 4-cell stage Xenopus embryos was not sufficient to induce axis phenotypes, however, co-injection of FZD4 and NDP RNAs resulted in axis duplication (revealed by in-situ hybridization for sox3) in 31 % of embryos. The incidence of this phenotype was clearly increased by co-injection of TSPAN12 mRNA (49 % incidence of axis duplication). NDP and FZD4 M105V were poor mediators of axis duplication (7 % incidence), but co-injection of TSPAN12 strongly increased the incidence of axis duplication in FZD4 M105V and NDP expressing embryos to 19 % (Figure 7). These in vivo findings are in good agreement with the observation that TSPAN12 restores binding and signaling of NDP and FZD4 M105V. The observation that NDP and FZD4 induce a duplicate axis in frog embryos further adds to the evidence that NDP is a canonical ligand (Zhou et al., 2014).

Taken together, we observed that TSPAN12 interacts with NDP in the absence of endogenous FZD4 or LRP5/6, and that TSPAN12 restores NDP/FZD4 binding when the interaction is perturbed by mutations in either NDP or FZD4. In accordance with these findings, TSPAN12 also restores the signaling defects of the same mutations. Based on these data, we propose a new model in which TSPAN12 acts a NDP-co-receptor that enhances FZD4 ligand selectivity and amplifies signaling.

In order to understand ligand selectivity, biased signaling outcomes, and modulation of signaling kinetics/amplitude in a variety of signaling systems, it is critical to unravel the function of accessory proteins. NDP and WNT receptor complexes appear to employ distinct accessory proteins to enhance signaling strength and increase ligand selectivity. In vivo, accessory proteins are indispensable for CNS angiogenesis and blood-CNS barrier formation in a brain region-specific manner. Our study provides insight into the assembly of the NDP receptor complex, the critical role of the accessory protein TSPAN12 in enhancing ligand selectivity and signaling amplitude of FZD4, and the defects of FEVR-linked TSPAN12 mutations in human disease.

Previous studies have identified FEVR-linked mutations in TSPAN12 and excluded the presence of these mutations in ethnically matched control individuals. Our analysis shows that several of these mutations indeed impair NDP/FZD4 signaling, thus confirming the link between TSPAN12, FEVR, and NDP/FZD4 signaling. We observed that TSPAN12 mutant proteins (especially C105R, L223P, A237P, and L245P) are not efficiently transported to the plasma membrane. This finding suggests a disease mechanism involving reduced rates of transport and/or folding, possibly due to the effects of proline substitutions on the alpha helix secondary structure in TM segment 4 (L223P, A237P, L245P). Similarly, a positive charge introduced by the C105R substitution could disrupt the conformation of TM segment 3. These findings suggest that additional alleles, whose protein products modulate folding and membrane protein transport in endothelial cells, could be among the unknown modifiers of expressivity of FEVR-linked TSPAN12 mutations.

The mutual interactions of NDP receptor complex components in mediating cell surface trafficking have previously not been studied. We observed that TSPAN12 transport to the plasma membrane is strongly increased by FZD4 (Figure 2E and Figure 4B). We further characterized two FZD4 mutations that were previously reported to reduce FZD4 transport to the cell surface: FZD4 fs501×533 (Kaykas et al., 2004) and FZD4 G488D (Milhem et al., 2014), the latter specifically and severely reduces TSPAN12 transport to the plasma membrane. Our finding that FZD4 strongly promotes TSPAN12 trafficking implies that the NDP receptor complex is at least partially assembled during intracellular transport in the absence of NDP and that individual receptor complex components can strongly effect cell surface localization of other components.

To test if TSPAN12 functions in the NDP receptor complex, we utilized TSPAN12 chimeras carrying individual sequence segments of TSPAN11. This analysis yielded several insights: i) the intracellular domains of TSPAN12 are not predominantly important for function, ii) the large extracellular loop of TSPAN12 is required for association with the NDP receptor complex via FZD4, and iii) TSPAN12 incorporation into the NDP receptor complex is required for TSPAN12 function. In light of a recent study reporting that TSPAN3 modulates NOGO-A/S1PR2 GPCR signaling (Thiede-Stan et al., 2015), it appears that tetraspanin activity and GPCR receptor signaling intersect in multiple biological contexts.

Current models of TSPAN12 function posit that TSPAN12 promotes FZD4 self-interactions (Junge et al., 2009) or FZD4/LRP5 hetero-interactions (Knoblich et al., 2014) to enhance β-catenin signaling. Alternatively, TSPAN12 may function as an allosteric modulator of FZD4 to increase signaling. These models are not mutually exclusive and all are consistent with the requirement of TSPAN12 in retinal angiogenesis and the enhancement of signaling in cell based assays. However, they provide little insight into the ligand-specific functions of TSPAN12 that are evident in cell based assays and are supported by overlapping tspan12−/− and ndp−/− mouse mutant retinal phenotypes (Junge et al., 2009). With improved biochemical assays, we now show that TSPAN12 interacts with NDP in the absence of endogenous FZD4. A chimera composed of the TSPAN11 tetraspanin scaffold and the TSPAN12 extracellular loops is sufficient to bind both NDP and FZD4 (Figure 5). The function of TSPAN12 in modulating ligand binding to the receptor complex is particularly evident when the interaction of NDP and FZD4 is destabilized by the M105V mutation in the extracellular domain of FZD4, or the R41E mutation in NDP. In each case, NDP/FZD4 complexes are severely perturbed and, consequently, signaling is strongly impaired, but co-expression of TSPAN12 stabilizes NDP/FZD4 complexes and significantly restores signaling (Figure 6). TSPAN12 also increases the co-precipitation of wildtype FZD4 with NDP (Figure 4A and Figure 6F). We found that this effect is most clearly revealed when TSPAN1211-LEL is used as a negative control, because co-transfection of TSPAN11, GFP, or empty vector each result in increased FZD4 expression compared to co-transfection of TSPAN12. TSPAN12 expression and transport is relatively inefficient, and when TSPAN12 binds to FZD4, the expression and transport of FZD4 are reduced (Figure 2E). Conversely, FZD4 expression and transport are highly efficient, and TSPAN12 transport to the cell surface is increased in complex with FZD4. The negative effect of TSPAN12 on FZD4 expression and transport tends to mask the positive effect of TSPAN12 in stabilizing the NDP/FZD4 interaction (Figure 6F).

We propose a model in which TSPAN12 serves as a co-receptor that promotes ligand selectivity of FZD4, stabilizes NDP/FZD4 complexes, and enhances signaling to physiologically required levels. The requirement for TSPAN12 may be explained by the finding that NDP appears to bind only one site of FZD4 (site 2), whereas WNTs bind FZD via their lipid moiety also at site 1 (Chang et al., 2015; Janda et al., 2012; Shen et al., 2015). Our model is based on the following data i) phenotypic overlap of tspan12−/− and ndp−/− mice (in the retinal vasculature), absence of phenotypic overlap of tspan12−/− and wnt7a; wnt7b double mutant mice (in the neural tube vasculature) (Junge et al., 2009), ii) ligand-specifc functions of TSPAN12 in cell based assays, iii) function of TSPAN12 requires incorporation into the NDP receptor complex, iv) TSPAN12-mediated restoration of binding and signaling defects caused by mutations in the NDP/FZD4 binding interface (FZD4 M105V and NDP R41E), and v) TSPAN12/NDP binding in the absence of endogenous FZD4 or LRP5/6, this interaction is mediated by the extracellular loops of TSPAN12. Possible roles of TSPAN12 transmembrane domains include providing a scaffold that aids function of the extracellular loops, undergoing conformational changes upon ligand binding, contacting FZD4 for allosteric modulation, or engaging in tetraspanin-tetraspanin interactions for cell membrane compartmentalization. When the NDP co-receptors TSPAN12 and LRP5 are compared, the evidence highlights a role for TSPAN12 in modulating ligand binding and ligand selectivity. Consistent with this view, the extracellular loops of TSPAN12 are functionally important. The predominant function of LRP5 in NDP signaling may be to engage the signal transduction machinery, this view is consistent with the intracellular protein interactions of LRP5 (Mao et al., 2001), as well as the finding that forcing the interaction of LRP5 and FZD4 using the FKBP system induces ligand-independent signaling (Supplemental Figure S7). A limitation of our study is the inability to express extracellular portions of TSPAN12 without membrane domains, preventing us to formally test if TSPAN12/NDP binding is direct. However, the finding that endogenous FZD4 or LRP5/6 in 293T cells are not required for this interaction, is in agreement with our model.

Because canonical β-catenin signaling is required for angiogenesis and blood-CNS-barrier function in several CNS tissues, therapeutic intervention may allow the modulation of barrier properties for the purpose of drug delivery, or treatment of ocular diseases. TSPAN12 appears to function predominantly in the retina, whereas, FZD4 has broader functions both inside and outside the CNS, e.g., vital functions in the esophagus (Wang et al., 2001). Given the relatively tissue-specific but essential role of TSPAN12 in retinal angiogenesis, targeting this molecule may allow for inhibition of retinal neovascular diseases without broader CNS effects.

The generation of plasmid constructs by standard molecular biology techniques is described in the supplement.

293T cells were cultured in high glucose DMEM with 10% FBS at 37 °C in the presence of 5% CO2. For maintenance, cells were split 1:6 at near confluence using 0.05% Trypsin-EDTA.

A detailed experimental procedure is described in the supplement. In brief, 293T cells were transiently transfected with receptor complex components, firefly-, and renilla-luciferase constructs. Cells were stimulated with recombinant NDP (R+D Systems) or by co-transfection of NDP or WNT plasmids. Dual-Glo luciferase assays (Promega) were performed. Data were analyzed by calculating the ratio of firefly/renilla luciferase signals and normalizing the data to the data point shown on the left of each bar graph.

A detailed experimental procedure is described in the supplement. In brief, 293T cells were transiently transfected with FLAG-AP-NDP expression vector. The pH of conditioned medium was adjusted using 1M HEPES pH 8.0.

A detailed experimental procedure is described in the supplement. In brief, intact 293T cells on ice were incubated with cold FLAG-AP-NDP conditioned medium, or V5-antibody (AbD Serotec) in cold medium, washed, and lysed. FLAG-AP-NDP or V5-antibody bound to the receptor complex at the cell surface was isolated using anti-FLAG beads (Sigma) or ProteinA/G beads (Pierce), respectively. Samples were analysed by immunoblot.

A detailed experimental procedure is described in the supplement. In brief, intact 293T cells were placed on ice, washed with cold PBS pH 8.0, and biotinylated with EZlink-Sulfo-NHS-SS-biotin (Pierce). Excess reagent was removed, cells were lysed (yielding “input” fraction), and biotinylated cell surface proteins were isolated using High Capacity Neutravidin Agarose slurry (Pierce), yielding the fraction “surface biotinylation”. Fractions were analysed by immunoblot.

A detailed experimental procedure is described in the supplement. In brief, transfected HeLa cells were fixed and incubated with FLAG-AP-NDP conditioned medium, washed, and fixed again. Cells were labeled with mouse anti-V5-Alexa 488 antibody (AbD Serotec) and rabbit anti-FLAG antibody (Sigma) in full medium. After washing, cells were incubated with anti mouse and anti rabbit PLA probes, i.e., secondary antibodies coupled to proprietary DNA oligonucleotides (Olink). DNA components of complementary PLA probes, if in sufficient proximity, were ligated. Fluorescent signal was generated using provided polymerase and substrate solutions according to manufacturers instructions.

293T cells were transfected with plasmids encoding Cas9 and sgRNAs (deposited by Dr. Feng Zhang: Addgene #42230, co-transfected with GFP, or #62988, selected with puromycin). Individual colonies derived from single cells were picked and expanded. 293T cell clones were screened by genomic PCR. PCR products were analyzed after blunt ligation into pJet2.1 by sequencing 10 individual bacterial clones. Clones were identified as positive if targeted alleles were null alleles and if a maximum of two types of targeted alleles was found, as expected from a single cell derived 293T cell clone. sgRNA sequences are shown in the supplemental Figures.

X. laevis embryos were manipulated following standard procedures. Capped mRNAs were transcribed using mMessage mMachine kits (Ambion) following the manual. At the four-cell stage, 150 pg of each RNA were injected at two ventral blastomeres. As an injection tracer, we routinely included RNAs (100 pgs/embryo) encoding green fluorescent protein (GFP) and embryos were examined at stage 10–11 by fluorescent microscopy to confirm the accuracy of injection. For whole mount in-situ hybridization studies, embryos were harvested at stage 18. Digoxigenin-UTP-labeled antisense probes were prepared using Riboprobe combination system (Promega) following the instructions; specific probes for sox3 RNAs were used.

Firefly and renilla luciferase activities were quantified as integrated luminescence output over 1 second. The ratio of firefly and renilla luciferase generated luminescence was calculated. Averages of these ratios were calculated from triplicates. Immunoblot band intensities were quantified using the integrated density function of ImageJ from three independent experiments. Groups were compared using a two-tailed, unpaired Student’s t test in Microsoft Excel. p values < 0.05 were considered significant.