---
reference_id: "PMID:37599395"
title: Reduction in (99m)Tc-DPD myocardial uptake with therapy of ATTR cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Rettl R
- Calabretta R
- Duca F
- Binder C
- Kronberger C
- Willixhofer R
- Poledniczek M
- Donà C
- Nitsche C
- Beitzke D
- Loewe C
- Auer-Grumbach M
- Bonderman D
- Kastl S
- Hengstenberg C
- Badr Eslam R
- Kastner J
- Bergler-Klein J
- Hacker M
- Kammerlander A
journal: Amyloid
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/13506129.2023.2247136
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reduction in (99m)Tc-DPD myocardial uptake with therapy of ATTR cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Rettl R, Calabretta R, Duca F, Binder C, Kronberger C, Willixhofer R, Poledniczek M, Donà C, Nitsche C, Beitzke D, Loewe C, Auer-Grumbach M, Bonderman D, Kastl S, Hengstenberg C, Badr Eslam R, Kastner J, Bergler-Klein J, Hacker M, Kammerlander A
**Journal:** Amyloid (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/13506129.2023.2247136](https://doi.org/10.1080/13506129.2023.2247136)

## Content

1. Amyloid. 2024 Mar;31(1):42-51. doi: 10.1080/13506129.2023.2247136. Epub 2023
Aug  20.

Reduction in (99m)Tc-DPD myocardial uptake with therapy of ATTR cardiomyopathy.

Rettl R(1), Calabretta R(2), Duca F(1), Binder C(1), Kronberger C(1), 
Willixhofer R(1), Poledniczek M(1), Donà C(1), Nitsche C(1), Beitzke D(3), Loewe 
C(3), Auer-Grumbach M(4), Bonderman D(5), Kastl S(1), Hengstenberg C(1), Badr 
Eslam R(1), Kastner J(1), Bergler-Klein J(1), Hacker M(2), Kammerlander A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine II, Medical 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Division of Nuclear Medicine, Department of Biomedical Imaging and 
Image-guided Therapy, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Division of Cardiovascular and Interventional Radiology, Department of 
Biomedical Imaging and Image-guided Therapy, Medical University of Vienna, 
Vienna, Austria.
(4)Department of Orthopaedics and Trauma Surgery, Medical University of Vienna, 
Vienna, Austria.
(5)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine V, Favoriten Clinic, 
Vienna, Austria.

Aims: Novel ribonucleic acid interference (RNAi) therapeutics such as patisiran 
and inotersen have been shown to benefit neurologic disease course and quality 
of life in patients with hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis (ATTRv). We aimed 
to determine the impact of RNAi therapeutics on myocardial amyloid load using 
quantitative single photon emission computed tomography/computed tomography 
(SPECT/CT) imaging in patients with ATTRv-related cardiomyopathy (ATTRv-CM). We 
furthermore compared them with wild-type ATTR-CM (ATTRwt-CM) patients treated 
with tafamidis.Methods and results: ATTRv-CM patients underwent 
[99mTc]-radiolabeled diphosphono-1,2-propanodicarboxylic acid (99mTc-DPD) 
scintigraphy and quantitative SPECT/CT imaging before and after 12 months (IQR: 
11.0-12.0) of treatment with RNAi therapeutics (patisiran: n = 5, inotersen: 
n = 4). RNAi treatment significantly reduced quantitative myocardial uptake as 
measured by standardised uptake value (SUV) retention index (baseline: 5.09 g/mL 
vs. follow-up: 3.19 g/mL, p = .028) in ATTRv-CM patients without significant 
improvement in cardiac function. Tafamidis treatment resulted in a significant 
reduction in SUV retention index (4.96 g/mL vs. 3.27 g/mL, p < .001) in 
ATTRwt-CM patients (historical control cohort: n = 40) at follow-up [9.0 months 
(IQR: 7.0-10.0)] without beneficial impact on cardiac function.Conclusions: RNAi 
therapeutics significantly reduce quantitative myocardial uptake in ATTRv-CM 
patients, comparable to tafamidis treatment in ATTRwt-CM patients, without 
impact on cardiac function. Serial 99mTc-DPD SPECT/CT imaging may be a valuable 
tool to quantify and monitor response to disease-specific therapies in both 
ATTRv-CM and ATTRwt-CM.

DOI: 10.1080/13506129.2023.2247136
PMID: 37599395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]