---
reference_id: "PMID:32435802"
title: "Antimicrobial Treatment of Human Plague: A Systematic Review of the Literature on Individual Cases, 1937-2019."
authors:
- Nelson CA
- Fleck-Derderian S
- Cooley KM
- Meaney-Delman D
- Becksted HA
- Russell Z
- Renaud B
- Bertherat E
- Mead PS
journal: Clin Infect Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/cid/ciz1226
keywords:
- Africa
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- Asia
- Child
- Humans
- Male
- "Plague/drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Yersinia pestis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antimicrobial Treatment of Human Plague: A Systematic Review of the Literature on Individual Cases, 1937-2019.
**Authors:** Nelson CA, Fleck-Derderian S, Cooley KM, Meaney-Delman D, Becksted HA, Russell Z, Renaud B, Bertherat E, Mead PS
**Journal:** Clin Infect Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cid/ciz1226](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciz1226)

## Content

1. Clin Infect Dis. 2020 May 21;70(70 Suppl 1):S3-S10. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciz1226.

Antimicrobial Treatment of Human Plague: A Systematic Review of the Literature
on Individual Cases, 1937-2019.

Nelson CA(1), Fleck-Derderian S(1)(2), Cooley KM(3), Meaney-Delman D(4),
Becksted HA(1)(2), Russell Z(2)(5), Renaud B(6), Bertherat E(7), Mead PS(1).

Author information:
(1)Bacterial Diseases Branch, Division of Vector-Borne Diseases, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA.
(2)Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention Fellowship Program, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, USA.
(3)Synergy America, Contracting Agency for Bacterial Diseases Branch, Division
of Vector-Borne Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Fort
Collins, Colorado, USA.
(4)Infant Outcomes Monitoring, Research and Prevention Branch, Division of Birth
Defects and Infant Disorders, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(5)Emergency Preparedness and Response Branch, Division of Preparedness and
Emerging Infections, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta,
Georgia, USA.
(6)Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France.
(7)World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Yersinia pestis remains endemic in Africa, Asia, and the Americas
and is a known bioterrorism agent. Treatment with aminoglycosides such as
streptomycin or gentamicin is effective when initiated early in illness but can
have serious side effects. Alternatives such as fluoroquinolones, tetracyclines,
and sulfonamides are potentially safer but lack robust human data on efficacy.
METHODS: We searched PubMed Central, Medline, Embase, and other databases for
articles in any language with terms related to plague and antimicrobials.
Articles that contained case-level information on antimicrobial treatment and
patient outcome were included. We abstracted information related to patient
demographics, clinical features, treatment, and fatality.
RESULTS: Among 5837 articles screened, we found 762 published cases of treated
plague reported from 1937 to 2019. Fifty-nine percent were male; median age was
22 years (range, 8 days-80 years). The case fatality rate was 20% overall. Most
patients had primary bubonic (63%), pneumonic (21%), or septicemic (5%) plague,
with associated case fatality rates of 17%, 27%, and 38%, respectively. Among
those treated with an aminoglycoside (n = 407 [53%]), the case fatality rate was
13%. Among those treated with a sulfonamide (n = 322 [42%]), tetracycline (n =
171 [22%]), or fluoroquinolone (n = 61 [8%]), fatality was 23%, 10%, and 12%,
respectively. Case fatality rate did not substantially differ between patients
treated with 1 vs 2 classes of antimicrobials considered to be effective for
plague.
CONCLUSIONS: In addition to aminoglycosides, other classes of antimicrobials
including tetracyclines, fluoroquinolones, and sulfonamides are effective for
plague treatment, although publication bias and low numbers in certain treatment
groups may limit interpretation.

Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious Diseases Society of
America 2020.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciz1226
PMID: 32435802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
