---
reference_id: "PMID:35205294"
title: SPECC1L Mutations Are Not Common in Sporadic Cases of Opitz G/BBB Syndrome.
authors:
- Migliore C
- Vendramin A
- McKee S
- Prontera P
- Faravelli F
- Sachdev R
- Dias P
- Mascaro M
- Licastro D
- Meroni G
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/genes13020252
keywords:
- Esophagus/abnormalities
- Female
- Humans
- "Hypertelorism/genetics, pathology"
- "Hypospadias/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SPECC1L Mutations Are Not Common in Sporadic Cases of Opitz G/BBB Syndrome.
**Authors:** Migliore C, Vendramin A, McKee S, Prontera P, Faravelli F, Sachdev R, Dias P, Mascaro M, Licastro D, Meroni G
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes13020252](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes13020252)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2022 Jan 28;13(2):252. doi: 10.3390/genes13020252.

SPECC1L Mutations Are Not Common in Sporadic Cases of Opitz G/BBB Syndrome.

Migliore C(1), Vendramin A(2), McKee S(3), Prontera P(4), Faravelli F(5), 
Sachdev R(6), Dias P(7), Mascaro M(1), Licastro D(8), Meroni G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, University of Trieste, 34127 Trieste, Italy.
(2)Genomic and Bioinformatic Lab., Cluster in Biomedicine, S.c.r.l., 34149 
Trieste, Italy.
(3)Northern Ireland Regional Genetics Service, Belfast City Hospital, Belfast 
BT9 7AB, UK.
(4)Medical Genetics Unit, University and Hospital of Perugia, 06129 Perugia, 
Italy.
(5)The North East Thames Regional Genetics Service, Great Ormond Street 
Hospital, London WC1N 3JH, UK.
(6)St George and Sydney Children's Hospital, Randwick, Sydney, NSW 2031, 
Australia.
(7)Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro Universitário 
Hospitalar Lisboa Norte, 1649-028 Lisbon, Portugal.
(8)Area Science Park, 34149 Trieste, Italy.

Opitz G/BBB syndrome (OS) is a rare genetic developmental condition 
characterized by congenital defects along the midline of the body. The main 
clinical signs are represented by hypertelorism, laryngo-tracheo-esophageal 
defects and hypospadias. The X-linked form of the disease is associated with 
mutations in the MID1 gene located in Xp22 whereas mutations in the SPECC1L gene 
in 22q11 have been linked to few cases of the autosomal dominant form of this 
disorder, as well as to other genetic syndromes. In this study, we have 
undertaken a mutation screening of the SPECC1L gene in samples of sporadic OS 
cases in which mutations in the MID1 gene were excluded. The heterozygous 
missense variants identified are already reported in variant databases raising 
the issue of their pathogenetic meaning. Recently, it was reported that some 
clinical manifestations peculiar to OS signs are not observed in patients 
carrying mutations in the SPECC1L gene, leading to the proposal of the 
designation of 'SPECC1L syndrome' to refer to this disorder. Our study confirms 
that patients with diagnosis of OS, mainly characterized by the presence of 
hypospadias and laryngo-tracheo-esophageal defects, do not carry pathogenic 
SPECC1L mutations. In addition, SPECC1L syndrome-associated mutations are 
clustered in two specific domains of the protein, whereas the missense variants 
detected in our work lies elsewhere and the impact of these variants in the 
function of this protein is difficult to ascertain with the current knowledge 
and will require further investigations. Nonetheless, our study provides further 
insight into the SPECC1L syndrome classification.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13020252
PMCID: PMC8871657
PMID: 35205294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.