---
reference_id: "PMID:31578311"
title: Phase 1/2a clinical trial of gene-corrected autologous cell therapy for recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa.
authors:
- Eichstadt S
- Barriga M
- Ponakala A
- Teng C
- Nguyen NT
- Siprashvili Z
- Nazaroff J
- Gorell ES
- Chiou AS
- Taylor L
- Khuu P
- Keene DR
- Rieger K
- Khosla RK
- Furukawa LK
- Lorenz HP
- Marinkovich MP
- Tang JY
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.130554
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Biopsy
- Cell- and Tissue-Based Therapy
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Collagen Type VII/genetics
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa Dystrophica/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Female
- Genetic Therapy/methods
- Humans
- Keratinocytes
- Male
- Mutation
- Skin/pathology
- Wound Healing
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phase 1/2a clinical trial of gene-corrected autologous cell therapy for recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa.
**Authors:** Eichstadt S, Barriga M, Ponakala A, Teng C, Nguyen NT, Siprashvili Z, Nazaroff J, Gorell ES, Chiou AS, Taylor L, Khuu P, Keene DR, Rieger K, Khosla RK, Furukawa LK, Lorenz HP, Marinkovich MP, Tang JY
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.130554](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.130554)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2019 Oct 3;4(19):e130554. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.130554.

Phase 1/2a clinical trial of gene-corrected autologous cell therapy for 
recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa.

Eichstadt S(1), Barriga M(1), Ponakala A(1), Teng C(1), Nguyen NT(2), 
Siprashvili Z(1), Nazaroff J(1), Gorell ES(1), Chiou AS(1), Taylor L(3), Khuu 
P(3), Keene DR(4), Rieger K(1), Khosla RK(1), Furukawa LK(3), Lorenz HP(3), 
Marinkovich MP(1)(5), Tang JY(1).

Author information:
(1)Stanford University School of Medicine, Department of Dermatology, Redwood 
City, California, USA.
(2)Abeona Therapeutics, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(3)Lucile Packard Children's Hospital, Stanford Children's Health, Stanford, 
California, USA.
(4)Shriners Hospital for Children, Portland, Oregon, USA.
(5)Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Palo Alto, California, USA.

BACKGROUNDRecessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB) patients have 
mutations in the COL7A1 gene and thus lack functional type VII collagen (C7) 
protein; they have marked skin fragility and blistering. This single-center 
phase 1/2a open-label study evaluated the long-term efficacy, safety, and 
patient-reported outcomes in RDEB patients treated with gene-corrected 
autologous cell therapy.METHODSAutologous keratinocytes were isolated from 
participant skin biopsies. Epidermal sheets were prepared from cells transduced 
with a retrovirus carrying the full-length human COL7A1 gene. These 
gene-corrected autologous epidermal sheets measured 5 × 7 cm (35 cm2) and were 
transplanted onto 6 wound sites in each of 7 adult participants (n = 42 sites 
total) from 2013 to 2017. Participants were followed for 2 to 5 years.RESULTSNo 
participants experienced any serious related adverse events. Wound healing of 
50% or greater by Investigator Global Assessment was present in 95% (36 of 38) 
of treated wounds versus 0% (0 of 6) of untreated control wounds at 6 months (P 
< 0.0001). At year 1, 68% (26 of 38) of treated wounds had 50% or greater 
healing compared with 17% (1 of 6) of control wounds (P = 0.025). At year 2, 71% 
(27 of 38) of treated wounds had 50% or greater healing compared with 17% (1 of 
6) of control wounds (P = 0.019).CONCLUSIONC7 expression persisted up to 2 years 
after treatment in 2 participants. Treated wounds with 50% or greater healing 
demonstrated improvement in patient-reported pain, itch, and wound durability. 
This study provides additional data to support the clinically meaningful benefit 
of treating chronic RDEB wounds with ex vivo, C7 gene-corrected autologous cell 
therapy. This approach was safe and promoted wound healing that was associated 
with improved patient-reported outcomes.TRIAL REGISTRATIONClinicaltrials.gov 
identifier: NCT01263379.FUNDINGEpidermolysis Bullosa Research Partnership, 
Epidermolysis Bullosa Medical Research Foundation, NIH R01 AR055914, Office of 
Research and Development at the Palo Alto Veteran's Affairs Medical Center, and 
the Dermatology Foundation.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.130554
PMCID: PMC6795403
PMID: 31578311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.