---
reference_id: "PMID:29530533"
title: "Fabry disease revisited: Management and treatment recommendations for adult patients."
authors:
- Ortiz A
- Germain DP
- Desnick RJ
- Politei J
- Mauer M
- Burlina A
- Eng C
- Hopkin RJ
- Laney D
- Linhart A
- Waldek S
- Wallace E
- Weidemann F
- Wilcox WR
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.02.014
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fabry disease revisited: Management and treatment recommendations for adult patients.
**Authors:** Ortiz A, Germain DP, Desnick RJ, Politei J, Mauer M, Burlina A, Eng C, Hopkin RJ, Laney D, Linhart A, Waldek S, Wallace E, Weidemann F, Wilcox WR
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.02.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.02.014)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2018 Apr;123(4):416-427. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.02.014.
Epub  2018 Feb 28.

Fabry disease revisited: Management and treatment recommendations for adult 
patients.

Ortiz A(1), Germain DP(2), Desnick RJ(3), Politei J(4), Mauer M(5), Burlina 
A(6), Eng C(7), Hopkin RJ(8), Laney D(9), Linhart A(10), Waldek S(11), Wallace 
E(12), Weidemann F(13), Wilcox WR(9).

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Dialisis, IIS-Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, School of Medicine, UAM, 
IRSIN and REDINREN, Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: aortiz@fjd.es.
(2)French Referral Center for Fabry disease, Division of Medical Genetics and 
INSERM U1179, University of Versailles, Paris-Saclay University, Montigny, 
France.
(3)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Fundacion Para el Estudio de Enfermedades 
Neurometabolicas (FESEN), Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(5)Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 
MN, USA.
(6)Neurological Unit, St Bassiano Hospital, Bassano del Grappa, Italy.
(7)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(8)Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
and Department of Pediatrics University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(9)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Human Genetics, Emory University 
School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(10)2nd Department of Internal - Cardiovascular Medicine, First Medical Faculty, 
Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.
(11)School of Pharmacy, University of Sunderland, Sunderland, UK.
(12)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(13)Department of Internal Medicine, Katharinen-Hospital Unna, Unna, Germany.

Fabry disease is an X-linked lysosomal storage disorder caused by mutations in 
the GLA gene leading to deficient α-galactosidase A activity, glycosphingolipid 
accumulation, and life-threatening complications. Phenotypes vary from the 
"classic" phenotype, with pediatric onset and multi-organ involvement, to 
later-onset, a predominantly cardiac phenotype. Manifestations are diverse in 
female patients in part due to variations in residual enzyme activity and X 
chromosome inactivation patterns. Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) and 
adjunctive treatments can provide significant clinical benefit. However, much of 
the current literature reports outcomes after late initiation of ERT, once 
substantial organ damage has already occurred. Updated monitoring and treatment 
guidelines for pediatric patients with Fabry disease have recently been 
published. Expert physician panels were convened to develop updated, specific 
guidelines for adult patients. Management of adult patients depends on 1) a 
personalized approach to care, reflecting the natural history of the specific 
disease phenotype; 2) comprehensive evaluation of disease involvement prior to 
ERT initiation; 3) early ERT initiation; 4) thorough routine monitoring for 
evidence of organ involvement in non-classic asymptomatic patients and response 
to therapy in treated patients; 5) use of adjuvant treatments for specific 
disease manifestations; and 6) management by an experienced multidisciplinary 
team.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.02.014
PMID: 29530533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]