---
reference_id: "PMID:37920823"
title: "Progressive insights into fibrosarcoma diagnosis and treatment: leveraging fusion genes for advancements."
authors:
- Tang X
- Hu X
- Wen Y
- Min L
journal: Front Cell Dev Biol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2023.1284428
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Progressive insights into fibrosarcoma diagnosis and treatment: leveraging fusion genes for advancements.
**Authors:** Tang X, Hu X, Wen Y, Min L
**Journal:** Front Cell Dev Biol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcell.2023.1284428](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcell.2023.1284428)

## Content

1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2023 Oct 18;11:1284428. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2023.1284428.
eCollection 2023.

Progressive insights into fibrosarcoma diagnosis and treatment: leveraging
fusion genes for advancements.

Tang X(#)(1)(2), Hu X(#)(1)(2), Wen Y(3), Min L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery and Orthopedic Research Institute, West
China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(2)Model Worker and Craftsman Talent Innovation Workshop of Sichuan Province,
Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(3)Department of Orthopedics, Zigong Fourth People's Hospital, Zigong, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Fibrosarcoma, originating from fibroblast cells, represents a malignant neoplasm
that can manifest across all genders and age groups. Fusion genes are notably
prevalent within the landscape of human cancers, particularly within the
subtypes of fibrosarcoma, where they exert substantial driving forces in
tumorigenesis. Many fusion genes underlie the pathogenic mechanisms triggering
the onset of this disease. Moreover, a close association emerges between the
spectrum of fusion gene types and the phenotypic expression of fibrosarcoma,
endowing fusion genes not only as promising diagnostic indicators for
fibrosarcoma but also as pivotal foundations for its subcategorization.
Concurrently, an increasing number of chimeric proteins encoded by fusion genes
have been substantiated as specific targets for treating fibrosarcoma,
consequently significantly enhancing patient prognoses. This review
comprehensively delineates the mechanisms behind fusion gene formation in
fibrosarcoma, the lineage of fusion genes, methodologies employed in detecting
fusion genes within fibrosarcoma, and the prospects of targeted therapeutic
interventions driven by fusion genes within the fibrosarcoma domain.

Copyright © 2023 Tang, Hu, Wen and Min.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2023.1284428
PMCID: PMC10618559
PMID: 37920823

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.