---
reference_id: "PMID:37007097"
title: Association of smoking and ALK tyrosine-kinase inhibitors on overall survival in treatment-naïve ALK-positive advanced lung adenocarcinoma.
authors:
- Zheng ZR
- Ku HY
- Chen KC
- Chiang CJ
- Wang CL
- Chen CY
- Tsai CM
- Huang MS
- Yu CJ
- Chen JS
- Chou TY
- Lee WC
- Wang CC
- Liu TW
- Hsia JY
- Chang GC
journal: Front Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1063695
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of smoking and ALK tyrosine-kinase inhibitors on overall survival in treatment-naïve ALK-positive advanced lung adenocarcinoma.
**Authors:** Zheng ZR, Ku HY, Chen KC, Chiang CJ, Wang CL, Chen CY, Tsai CM, Huang MS, Yu CJ, Chen JS, Chou TY, Lee WC, Wang CC, Liu TW, Hsia JY, Chang GC
**Journal:** Front Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fonc.2023.1063695](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2023.1063695)

## Content

1. Front Oncol. 2023 Mar 17;13:1063695. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1063695.
eCollection  2023.

Association of smoking and ALK tyrosine-kinase inhibitors on overall survival in
treatment-naïve ALK-positive advanced lung adenocarcinoma.

Zheng ZR(1)(2)(3), Ku HY(4), Chen KC(2)(3), Chiang CJ(5)(6), Wang CL(7)(8), Chen
CY(1)(9), Tsai CM(10), Huang MS(11)(12)(13), Yu CJ(14)(15)(16), Chen
JS(15)(17)(18), Chou TY(19)(20), Lee WC(5)(6), Wang CC(21), Liu TW(4), Hsia
JY(3)(9), Chang GC(1)(2)(3)(22).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(2)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Chung Shan
Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
(3)School of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(4)National Institute of Cancer Research, National Health Research Institutes,
Tainan, Miaoli, Taiwan.
(5)Institute of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, College of Public Health,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Taiwan Cancer Registry, Taipei, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Thoracic Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan,
Taiwan.
(8)College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(9)Division of Thoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Chung Shan Medical
University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
(10)Department of Oncology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(11)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, E-Da Cancer
Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(12)Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(13)School of Medicine, I-Shou University and Kaohsiung Medical University,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(14)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan.
(15)College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(16)National Taiwan University Hospital Hsinchu Branch, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(17)Department of Surgical Oncology, National Taiwan University Cancer Center,
Taipei, Taiwan.
(18)Division of Thoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, National Taiwan
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(19)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, School of Medicine, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(20)Department of Pathology, Taipei Medical University Hospital, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(21)Department of Radiation Oncology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital-LinKou,
Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(22)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung,
Taiwan.

INTRODUCTION: Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) fusion mutation is more common in
younger and never-smoking lung cancer patients. The association of smoking and
ALK-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) on overall survival (OS) of
treatment-naïve ALK-positive advanced lung adenocarcinoma remains unclear in
real-world.
METHODS: This retrospective study evaluated all 33170 lung adenocarcinoma
patients registered in the National Taiwan Cancer Registry from 2017 to 2019, of
whom 9575 advanced stage patients had ALK mutation data.
RESULTS: Among the 9575 patients, 650 (6.8%) patients had ALK mutation with the
median follow-up survival time 30.97 months (median age, 62 years; 125 [19.2%]
were aged ≥75 years; 357 (54.9%) females; 179 (27.5) smokers, 461 (70.9%)
never-smokers, 10 (1.5%) with unknown smoking status; and 544 (83.7%) with
first-line ALK-TKI treatment). Overall, of 535 patients with known smoking
status who received first-line ALK-TKI treatment, never-smokers and smokers had
a median OS of 40.7 months (95% confidence interval (CI), 33.1-47.2 months) and
23.5 months (95% CI, 11.5-35.5 months) (P=0.015), respectively. Among
never-smokers, those who received first-line ALK-TKI treatment had a median OS
of 40.7 months (95% CI, 22.7-57.8 months), while those ALK-TKI not as first-line
treatment had a median OS of 31.7 months (95% CI, 15.2-42.8 months) (P=0.23). In
smokers, the median OS for these patients was 23.5 months (95% CI, 11.5-35.5
months) and 15.6 months (95% CI, 10.2-21.1 months) (P=0.026), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: For patients with treatment-naïve advanced lung
adenocarcinoma, the ALK test should be performed irrespective of smoking status
and age. Smokers had shorter median OS than never-smokers among
treatment-naïve-ALK-positive patients with first-line ALK-TKI treatment.
Furthermore, smokers not receiving first-line ALK-TKI treatment had inferior OS.
Further investigations for the first-line treatment of ALK-positive smoking
advanced lung adenocarcinoma patients are needed.

Copyright © 2023 Zheng, Ku, Chen, Chiang, Wang, Chen, Tsai, Huang, Yu, Chen,
Chou, Lee, Wang, Liu, Hsia and Chang.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1063695
PMCID: PMC10064125
PMID: 37007097

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
