---
reference_id: "PMID:37725790"
title: Treatment Outcomes for Juvenile Open Angle Glaucoma in Thailand.
authors:
- Seresirikachorn K
- Thiamthat W
- Annopawong K
- Wanichwecharungruang B
- Friedman DS
- Vu DM
journal: J Glaucoma
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/IJG.0000000000002309
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- "Child, Preschool"
- Child
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Adult
- Female
- "Glaucoma, Open-Angle/diagnosis, epidemiology, surgery"
- Intraocular Pressure
- Retrospective Studies
- Thailand/epidemiology
- Follow-Up Studies
- Glaucoma/surgery
- Treatment Outcome
- Trabeculectomy
- Mitomycin/therapeutic use
- Cornea
- Myopia/surgery
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment Outcomes for Juvenile Open Angle Glaucoma in Thailand.
**Authors:** Seresirikachorn K, Thiamthat W, Annopawong K, Wanichwecharungruang B, Friedman DS, Vu DM
**Journal:** J Glaucoma (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/IJG.0000000000002309](https://doi.org/10.1097/IJG.0000000000002309)

## Content

1. J Glaucoma. 2023 Nov 1;32(11):976-982. doi: 10.1097/IJG.0000000000002309. Epub
 2023 Sep 12.

Treatment Outcomes for Juvenile Open Angle Glaucoma in Thailand.

Seresirikachorn K(1)(2), Thiamthat W(1)(2), Annopawong K(1), 
Wanichwecharungruang B(1), Friedman DS(3), Vu DM(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, College of Medicine, Rangsit University, 
Rajavithi Hospital.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Queen Sirikit National Institute of Child 
Health, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Harvard Medical 
School.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA.

PRÉCIS: Juvenile open angle glaucoma (JOAG) patients with thick central corneas 
and negative family history were more likely to undergo surgery, mainly 
trabeculectomy with half requiring additional surgery within 10 years.
PURPOSE: To assess the characteristics and treatment outcomes of patients with 
JOAG in Thailand.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This retrospective, multicenter study included all 
patients diagnosed with JOAG over 12 years from 2 tertiary hospitals in Bangkok, 
Thailand.
RESULTS: A total of 200 eyes from 104 patients were included in this study. The 
mean age of onset was 24.0±10.1 years (range: 5-40 y), with male predominance 
(60.5%). Over 90% of patients had bilateral JOAG and 25% had a positive family 
history. Negative family history (adjusted odds ratio=4.59, P =0.02) and thick 
central corneal thickness were surgical predictors (every 10 µm adjusted odds 
ratio=1.29, P =0.01). Over 70% of cases needed glaucoma surgery. Trabeculectomy 
with Mitomycin-C was performed on 131 eyes (65.5%) with a cumulative probability 
of complete success of 71.0%, 57.8%, 39.2%, and 26.9% and qualified success of 
86.3%, 73.6%, 64.8%, and 45.7% at 1, 3, 5, and 10 years, respectively. The mean 
follow-up after surgery was 94.9 ± 69.8 months (range: 13-153 mo). There were no 
serious postoperative complications. Myopia and the number of baseline glaucoma 
medications were significantly associated with surgical failure.
CONCLUSIONS: Trabeculectomy with mitomycin C was the most common primary surgery 
performed in Thai patients with JOAG, and successfully reduced intraocular 
pressure without significant complications. Patients with thicker corneas were 
more likely to undergo surgery. By 10 years, half of the patients required 
additional surgery and risk factors for failure included myopia and the number 
of medications.

Copyright © 2023 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/IJG.0000000000002309
PMID: 37725790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The authors declare no conflict of 
interest.