---
reference_id: "PMID:35860112"
title: "Joubert syndrome a rare entity and role of radiology: A case report."
authors:
- Ullah I
- Khan KS
- Afridi RU
- Shirazi F
- Naz I
- Ambreen A
- Singh M
- Asghar MS
journal: Ann Med Surg (Lond)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.amsu.2022.104113
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Joubert syndrome a rare entity and role of radiology: A case report.
**Authors:** Ullah I, Khan KS, Afridi RU, Shirazi F, Naz I, Ambreen A, Singh M, Asghar MS
**Journal:** Ann Med Surg (Lond) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amsu.2022.104113](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amsu.2022.104113)

## Content

1. Ann Med Surg (Lond). 2022 Jun 30;79:104113. doi: 10.1016/j.amsu.2022.104113. 
eCollection 2022 Jul.

Joubert syndrome a rare entity and role of radiology: A case report.

Ullah I(1)(2), Khan KS(3), Afridi RU(1)(2), Shirazi F(1)(2), Naz I(1)(2), 
Ambreen A(1)(2), Singh M(3), Asghar MS(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Naseer Teaching Hospital, Peshawar, Pakistan.
(2)Kabir Medical College, Gandhara University, Peshawar, Pakistan.
(3)Liaquat National Hospital and Medical College, Karachi, Pakistan.
(4)Dow University of Health Sciences, Karachi, Pakistan.

INTRODUCTION AND IMPORTANCE: Joubert syndrome (JS) is defined by the 
characteristic set of cerebellum and midbrain abnormalities that communally 
result in the indicative "molar tooth sign" on the axial MRI report. The 
incidence of estimated to be from 1:80,000 to 1:100,000.
CASE PRESENTATION: Clinical features can be noticed shortly after birth that 
includes hypotonia episodic tachypnea and apnea that may be followed by 
developmental delays and speech apraxia. Polydactyly, cleft lip or palate, 
tongue abnormalities, hypotonia, encephalocele, meningocele, hydrocephalus, 
kidney problems, pituitary abnormality, and autistic-like behavior are the other 
deformities that can be seen with JS. Seizures may also occur. Motor disability 
and mental health range from mild to severe forms.
CLINICAL DISCUSSION: Treatment for JS is symptomatic and supportive. The 
prognosis depends on cerebellar vermis development.
CONCLUSION: JS can be missed if special attention were not given to radiological 
findings.

© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amsu.2022.104113
PMCID: PMC9289497
PMID: 35860112

Conflict of interest statement: None.