---
reference_id: "PMID:30897356"
title: "Circuit Mechanisms of Parkinson's Disease."
authors:
- McGregor MM
- Nelson AB
journal: Neuron
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2019.03.004
keywords:
- Basal Ganglia/physiopathology
- Brain/physiopathology
- Cerebral Cortex/physiopathology
- Humans
- Neural Pathways/physiopathology
- Parkinson Disease/physiopathology
- Thalamus/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Circuit Mechanisms of Parkinson's Disease.
**Authors:** McGregor MM, Nelson AB
**Journal:** Neuron (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2019.03.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2019.03.004)

## Content

1. Neuron. 2019 Mar 20;101(6):1042-1056. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2019.03.004.

Circuit Mechanisms of Parkinson's Disease.

McGregor MM(1), Nelson AB(2).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Graduate Program, UCSF, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA; Department 
of Neurology, UCSF, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.
(2)Neuroscience Graduate Program, UCSF, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA; Department 
of Neurology, UCSF, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA; Weill Institute for 
Neurosciences, UCSF, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA; Kavli Institute for 
Fundamental Neuroscience, UCSF, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. Electronic 
address: alexandra.nelson@ucsf.edu.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a complex, multi-system neurodegenerative disorder. 
The second most common neurodegenerative disorder after Alzheimer's disease, it 
affects approximately 1% of adults over age 60. Diagnosis follows the 
development of one or more of the core motor features of the disease, including 
tremor, slowing of movement (bradykinesia), and rigidity. However, there are 
numerous other motor and nonmotor disease manifestations. Many PD symptoms 
result directly from neurodegeneration; others are driven by aberrant activity 
patterns in surviving neurons. This latter phenomenon, PD circuit dysfunction, 
is an area of intense study, as it likely underlies our ability to treat many 
disease symptoms in the face of (currently) irreversible neurodegeneration. This 
Review will discuss key clinical features of PD and their basis in neural 
circuit dysfunction. We will first review important disease symptoms and some of 
the responsible neuropathology. We will then describe the basal 
ganglia-thalamocortical circuit, the major locus of PD-related circuit 
dysfunction, and some of the models that have influenced its study. We will 
review PD-related changes in network activity, subdividing findings into those 
that touch on the rate, rhythm, or synchronization of neurons. Finally, we 
suggest some critical remaining questions for the field and areas for new 
developments.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2019.03.004
PMID: 30897356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]