---
reference_id: "PMID:33579866"
title: What is the Pathogenic CAG Expansion Length in Huntington's Disease?
authors:
- Donaldson J
- Powell S
- Rickards N
- Holmans P
- Jones L
journal: J Huntingtons Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3233/JHD-200445
content_type: abstract_only
---

# What is the Pathogenic CAG Expansion Length in Huntington's Disease?
**Authors:** Donaldson J, Powell S, Rickards N, Holmans P, Jones L
**Journal:** J Huntingtons Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JHD-200445](https://doi.org/10.3233/JHD-200445)

## Content

1. J Huntingtons Dis. 2021;10(1):175-202. doi: 10.3233/JHD-200445.

What is the Pathogenic CAG Expansion Length in Huntington's Disease?

Donaldson J(1), Powell S(1), Rickards N(1), Holmans P(1), Jones L(1).

Author information:
(1)MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, School of Medicine, 
Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.

Huntington's disease (HD) (OMIM 143100) is caused by an expanded CAG repeat 
tract in the HTT gene. The inherited CAG length is known to expand further in 
somatic and germline cells in HD subjects. Age at onset of the disease is 
inversely correlated with the inherited CAG length, but is further modulated by 
a series of genetic modifiers which are most likely to act on the CAG repeat in 
HTT that permit it to further expand. Longer repeats are more prone to 
expansions, and this expansion is age dependent and tissue-specific. Given that 
the inherited tract expands through life and most subjects develop disease in 
mid-life, this implies that in cells that degenerate, the CAG length is likely 
to be longer than the inherited length. These findings suggest two thresholds- 
the inherited CAG length which permits further expansion, and the intracellular 
pathogenic threshold, above which cells become dysfunctional and die. This 
two-step mechanism has been previously proposed and modelled mathematically to 
give an intracellular pathogenic threshold at a tract length of 115 CAG (95% 
confidence intervals 70- 165 CAG). Empirically, the intracellular pathogenic 
threshold is difficult to determine. Clues from studies of people and models of 
HD, and from other diseases caused by expanded repeat tracts, place this 
threshold between 60- 100 CAG, most likely towards the upper part of that range. 
We assess this evidence and discuss how the intracellular pathogenic threshold 
in manifest disease might be better determined. Knowing the cellular pathogenic 
threshold would be informative for both understanding the mechanism in HD and 
deploying treatments.

DOI: 10.3233/JHD-200445
PMCID: PMC7990448
PMID: 33579866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: LJ is a member of the Scientific Advisory Boards 
of LoQus23 Therapeutics and Triplet Therapeutics. JD, SP, NR and PH have no 
conflicts of interest.