---
reference_id: "PMID:39513655"
title: Obtaining 20 μm Spatial Resolution with a 2940 nm Laser by IR-MALDESI Mass Spectrometry Imaging.
authors:
- Eisenberg SM
- Joignant AN
- Knizner KT
- Manni JG
- Muddiman DC
journal: J Am Soc Mass Spectrom
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1021/jasms.4c00276
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Obtaining 20 μm Spatial Resolution with a 2940 nm Laser by IR-MALDESI Mass Spectrometry Imaging.
**Authors:** Eisenberg SM, Joignant AN, Knizner KT, Manni JG, Muddiman DC
**Journal:** J Am Soc Mass Spectrom (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1021/jasms.4c00276](https://doi.org/10.1021/jasms.4c00276)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom. 2024 Dec 4;35(12):2942-2949. doi:
10.1021/jasms.4c00276.  Epub 2024 Nov 8.

Obtaining 20 μm Spatial Resolution with a 2940 nm Laser by IR-MALDESI Mass 
Spectrometry Imaging.

Eisenberg SM(1), Joignant AN(1), Knizner KT(1), Manni JG(2), Muddiman DC(1).

Author information:
(1)FTMS Laboratory for Human Health Research, Department of Chemistry, North 
Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695, United States.
(2)JGM Associates, Inc., Burlington, Massachusetts 01803, United States.

High spatial resolution is a key parameter in mass spectrometry imaging (MSI), 
enabling a greater understanding of system biology and cellular processes. Using 
a novel IR laser with good Gaussian beam quality (M2 = 4) coupled with spatial 
filtering and a reflective objective, 20 μm spatial resolution was obtained by 
IR-MALDESI. The optical train was optimized on burn paper before demonstrating 
feasibility for imaging of liver tissue. Finally, a mouse brain was analyzed 
using nested regions of interest at 20 and 140 μm spatial resolution, detecting 
neurotransmitters and lipids with high spatial resolution on the corpus callosum 
and surrounding brain tissue.

DOI: 10.1021/jasms.4c00276
PMID: 39513655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]