---
reference_id: "PMID:29070486"
title: The functions of PEX genes in peroxisome biogenesis and pathogenicity in phytopathogenic fungi.
authors:
- Gao FY
- Li L
- Wang JY
- Wang YL
- Sun GC
journal: Yi Chuan
year: '2017'
doi: 10.16288/j.yczz.17-079
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The functions of PEX genes in peroxisome biogenesis and pathogenicity in phytopathogenic fungi.
**Authors:** Gao FY, Li L, Wang JY, Wang YL, Sun GC
**Journal:** Yi Chuan (2017)
**DOI:** [10.16288/j.yczz.17-079](https://doi.org/10.16288/j.yczz.17-079)

## Content

1. Yi Chuan. 2017 Oct 20;39(10):908-917. doi: 10.16288/j.yczz.17-079.

The functions of PEX genes in peroxisome biogenesis and pathogenicity in 
phytopathogenic fungi.

Gao FY(1), Li L(2), Wang JY(3), Wang YL(3), Sun GC(3).

Author information:
(1)1. School of Chemistry and Life Science Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua 
321004, China; 2. State Key Laboratory Breeding Base for Zhejiang Sustainable 
Pest and Disease Control, Institute of Plant Protection Microbiology, Zhejiang 
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou 310021, China.
(2)1. State Key Laboratory Breeding Base for Zhejiang Sustainable Pest and 
Disease Control, Institute of Plant Protection Microbiology, Zhejiang Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou 310021, China; 2. School of Agricultural and 
Food Sciences, Zhejiang Agriculture and Forest University, Lin'.
(3)State Key Laboratory Breeding Base for Zhejiang Sustainable Pest and Disease 
Control, Institute of Plant Protection Microbiology, Zhejiang Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou 310021, China.

Peroxisomes are cellular organelles present ubiquitously in eukaryotic cells and 
are involved in β-oxidation, glyoxylate cycle and a variety of biochemical 
metabolisms. Recently peroxisomes have been demonstrated to play vital roles in 
the host infection processes by plant fungal pathogens. The biogenesis of 
peroxisomes requires a category of proteins named peroxins, which are encoded by 
the PEX genes. So far, more than 10 PEX genes were isolated in phytopathogenic 
fungi, and significant research efforts are focused on the mechanism of 
peroxisome formation and the roles of peroxisome in the development and 
pathogenicity of fungal pathogens. In this review, we summarize the latest 
advances in peroxisome biogenesis and functions in pathogenic fungi, including 
the roles of PEXs in life cycle of peroxisome, peroxisome related metabolisms, 
and fungal development, infection and pathogenicity, in order to provide 
references for future studies in plant pathogenic fungi and the control of 
disease.

DOI: 10.16288/j.yczz.17-079
PMID: 29070486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]