---
reference_id: "PMID:31630581"
title: "First trimester ultrasound features of X-linked Opitz syndrome and early molecular diagnosis: case report and review of the literature."
authors:
- Sarno L
- Maruotti GM
- Izzo A
- Mazzaccara C
- Carbone L
- Esposito G
- Di Cresce M
- Saccone G
- Sirico A
- Genesio R
- Mollo N
- Martinelli P
- Conti A
- Zullo F
- Frisso G
journal: J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/14767058.2019.1677594
keywords:
- Cleft Lip
- Cleft Palate
- Esophagus/abnormalities
- Female
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked"
- Humans
- Hypertelorism
- Hypospadias
- Pregnancy
- "Pregnancy Trimester, First"
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# First trimester ultrasound features of X-linked Opitz syndrome and early molecular diagnosis: case report and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Sarno L, Maruotti GM, Izzo A, Mazzaccara C, Carbone L, Esposito G, Di Cresce M, Saccone G, Sirico A, Genesio R, Mollo N, Martinelli P, Conti A, Zullo F, Frisso G
**Journal:** J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14767058.2019.1677594](https://doi.org/10.1080/14767058.2019.1677594)

## Content

1. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2021 Sep;34(18):3089-3093. doi: 
10.1080/14767058.2019.1677594. Epub 2019 Oct 21.

First trimester ultrasound features of X-linked Opitz syndrome and early 
molecular diagnosis: case report and review of the literature.

Sarno L(1), Maruotti GM(1), Izzo A(2), Mazzaccara C(2)(3), Carbone L(1), 
Esposito G(1), Di Cresce M(1), Saccone G(1), Sirico A(1), Genesio R(1), Mollo 
N(2), Martinelli P(1), Conti A(2), Zullo F(1), Frisso G(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Reproductive Sciences and Dentistry, University 
Federico II, Naples, Italy.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnologies, University 
Federico II, Naples, Italy.
(3)CEINGE, Advanced Biotechnologies, Naples, Italy.

X-linked Opitz G/BBB syndrome (XLOS) is a multiple congenital disorder inherited 
in an X-linked manner. XLOS may be suspected, in prenatal age, on the basis of 
sonographic findings in the second and/or third trimester of gestation. 
Pathogenetic variants in MID1 gene have been reported in individuals with XLOS. 
Prenatal genetic testing is offered for pregnancies at risk, in which the 
mutation in the family has been identified. To date no cases of prenatal 
diagnosis, based on first-trimester ultrasound data, have been reported. We 
present a case of a fetus at 12 gestational weeks with ultrasound multiple 
anomalies, including increased nuchal translucency, heart defects, cleft lip and 
palate, enlarged fourth ventricle absence of ductus venosus and family hystory 
of XLOS. The genetic prenatal test detected the c(0).1286-1G > T mutation of 
MID1 gene. Data about prenatal ultrasonographic findings consistent with XLOS 
are limited to second and third trimester. This is the first case reporting 
ultrasound detectable midline defects suggestive of XLOS as early as the first 
trimester of gestation. This case also suggests that when multiple anomalies are 
detected in a fetus with normal chromosomal structure, the possibility of a 
monogenic disorder must be considered.

DOI: 10.1080/14767058.2019.1677594
PMID: 31630581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]