---
reference_id: "PMID:36534940"
title: Molecular heterogeneity of pediatric choroid plexus carcinomas determines the distinctions in clinical course and prognosis.
authors:
- Zaytseva M
- Valiakhmetova A
- Yasko L
- Samarin A
- Papusha L
- Shekhtman A
- Usman N
- Voronin K
- Karachunskiy A
- Novichkova G
- Druy A
journal: Neuro Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noac274
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- "Choroid Plexus Neoplasms/genetics, diagnosis, pathology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Choroid Plexus/pathology
- Prognosis
- Chromosome Aberrations
- Carcinoma/genetics
- Disease Progression
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular heterogeneity of pediatric choroid plexus carcinomas determines the distinctions in clinical course and prognosis.
**Authors:** Zaytseva M, Valiakhmetova A, Yasko L, Samarin A, Papusha L, Shekhtman A, Usman N, Voronin K, Karachunskiy A, Novichkova G, Druy A
**Journal:** Neuro Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/neuonc/noac274](https://doi.org/10.1093/neuonc/noac274)

## Content

1. Neuro Oncol. 2023 Jun 2;25(6):1132-1145. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noac274.

Molecular heterogeneity of pediatric choroid plexus carcinomas determines the
distinctions in clinical course and prognosis.

Zaytseva M(1), Valiakhmetova A(1), Yasko L(1), Samarin A(1), Papusha L(1),
Shekhtman A(1), Usman N(1), Voronin K(1), Karachunskiy A(1), Novichkova G(1),
Druy A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Dmitry Rogachev National Medical Research Center of Pediatric Hematology,
Oncology and Immunology, Moscow, Russia.
(2)Research Institute of Medical Cell Technologies, Yekaterinburg, Russia.

BACKGROUND: Choroid plexus carcinomas (CPCs) are rare aggressive pediatric
tumors of the brain with no treatment standards. Genetic profiling of CPCs is
often confined to possible association with Li-Fraumeni syndrome, though only
about a half of CPCs develop from syndromic predispositions. Whole-chromosome
gains and losses typical of CPCs reflect genomic instability of these tumors,
but only partially explain the aggressive clinical course.
METHODS: This retrospective study enrolled 25 pediatric patients with CPC,
receiving treatment between January 2009 and June 2022. Molecular-genetic
testing was performed for 20 cases with available tumor tissue and encompassed
mutational status, chromosomal aberrations, and gene expression profiles. We
analyzed several factors presumably influencing the outcomes, including
molecular profiles and clinical parameters. The median follow-up constituted 5.2
years (absolute range 2.8-12.6 years).
RESULTS: All studied CPCs had smooth mutational profiles with the only recurrent
event being TP53 variants, either germline or somatic, encountered in 13 cases.
Unbalanced whole-chromosome aberrations,  notably multiple monosomies, were
highly typical. In 7 tumors, chromosome losses were combined with complex
genomic rearrangements: segmental gains and losses or signs of chromothripsis.
This phenomenon was associated with extremely low 5-year survival: 20.0 ± 17.9%
vs 85.7 ± 13.2%; P = .009. Transcriptomically, the cohort split into 2 polar
clusters Ped_CPC1 and Ped_CPC2 differing by survival: 31.3 ± 17.8% vs 100%; P =
.012.
CONCLUSION: CPCs split into at least 2 molecular subtypes distinguished both
genomically and transcriptomically. Clusterization of the tumors into Ped_CPC1
and Ped_CPC2 significantly correlates with survival. The distinction may prove
relevant in clinical trials for dedicated and patient-oriented optimization of
clinical protocols for these rare tumors.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Neuro-Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/neuonc/noac274
PMCID: PMC10237428
PMID: 36534940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
