---
reference_id: "PMID:35187608"
title: "Canavan's spongiform leukodystrophy (Aspartoacylase deficiency) with emphasis on sonographic features in infancy: description of a case report and review of the literature."
authors:
- Rossler L
- Lemburg S
- Weitkämper A
- Thiels C
- Hoffjan S
- Nguyen HP
- Lücke T
- Heyer CM
journal: J Ultrasound
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s40477-022-00667-2
keywords:
- Humans
- Infant
- "Canavan Disease/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Ultrasonography
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Bone Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Canavan's spongiform leukodystrophy (Aspartoacylase deficiency) with emphasis on sonographic features in infancy: description of a case report and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Rossler L, Lemburg S, Weitkämper A, Thiels C, Hoffjan S, Nguyen HP, Lücke T, Heyer CM
**Journal:** J Ultrasound (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40477-022-00667-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40477-022-00667-2)

## Content

1. J Ultrasound. 2023 Dec;26(4):757-764. doi: 10.1007/s40477-022-00667-2. Epub
2022  Feb 20.

Canavan's spongiform leukodystrophy (Aspartoacylase deficiency) with emphasis on
sonographic features in infancy: description of a case report and review of the
literature.

Rossler L(1)(2), Lemburg S(3)(4), Weitkämper A(3), Thiels C(3), Hoffjan S(5),
Nguyen HP(5), Lücke T(3), Heyer CM(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin der Ruhr-Universität Bochum,
Katholisches Klinikum Bochum, St. Josef-Hospital, Alexandrinenstr. 5, 44791,
Bochum, Germany. leon.rossler@klinikum-bochum.de.
(2)Institut für Kinderradiologie, St. Josef-Hospital, Gudrunstr. 56, 44791,
Bochum, Germany. leon.rossler@klinikum-bochum.de.
(3)Klinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin der Ruhr-Universität Bochum,
Katholisches Klinikum Bochum, St. Josef-Hospital, Alexandrinenstr. 5, 44791,
Bochum, Germany.
(4)Institut für Kinderradiologie, St. Josef-Hospital, Gudrunstr. 56, 44791,
Bochum, Germany.
(5)Zentrum für Humangenetik der Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Universitätsstr. 150,
44801, Bochum, Germany.

Canavan disease (CD; MIM 271,900) or spongy degeneration of the central nervous
system (CNS) is a lethal, rare autosomal recessive leukodystrophy, first
described in 1931 (Canavan in Arch Neurol Psychiatry 25: 299-308, 1931). The
clinical presentation includes severe neurologic impairment and macrocephaly
with onset of symptoms at the age of 3-5 months. Biochemical and genetic
fundamentals of the disease are elucidated. Imaging diagnosis is principally
based on MRI with important role of MR spectroscopy. We report the cerebral
sonographic findings in a severely affected infant with CD: Diffuse
hyperechogenicity and small multicystic changes of white matter as well as an
inverted pattern of echogenicity between cortical gray and subcortical white
matter. These findings are compared to to the few cases found in literature and
to normal ultrasound examples. Finally, ultrasound and MRI imaging findings are
correlated.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s40477-022-00667-2
PMCID: PMC10632335
PMID: 35187608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There is no conflict of interest.
