---
reference_id: "PMID:35740247"
title: Gut Microbiota and Associated Mucosal Immune Response in Eosinophilic Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis (EGPA).
authors:
- Niccolai E
- Bettiol A
- Baldi S
- Silvestri E
- Di Gloria L
- Bello F
- Nannini G
- Ricci F
- Nicastro M
- Ramazzotti M
- Vaglio A
- Bartolucci G
- Emmi G
- Amedei A
- Prisco D
journal: Biomedicines
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/biomedicines10061227
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gut Microbiota and Associated Mucosal Immune Response in Eosinophilic Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis (EGPA).
**Authors:** Niccolai E, Bettiol A, Baldi S, Silvestri E, Di Gloria L, Bello F, Nannini G, Ricci F, Nicastro M, Ramazzotti M, Vaglio A, Bartolucci G, Emmi G, Amedei A, Prisco D
**Journal:** Biomedicines (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biomedicines10061227](https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines10061227)

## Content

1. Biomedicines. 2022 May 24;10(6):1227. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines10061227.

Gut Microbiota and Associated Mucosal Immune Response in Eosinophilic 
Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis (EGPA).

Niccolai E(1), Bettiol A(1), Baldi S(1), Silvestri E(1)(2), Di Gloria L(3), 
Bello F(1)(2), Nannini G(1), Ricci F(4), Nicastro M(5), Ramazzotti M(3), Vaglio 
A(3)(6), Bartolucci G(7), Emmi G(1)(2), Amedei A(1)(2), Prisco D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence, 
50134 Florence, Italy.
(2)Internal Interdisciplinary Medicine Unit, Careggi University Hospital, 50134 
Florence, Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical, Experimental and Clinical Sciences "Mario Serio" 
University of Florence, 50134 Florence, Italy.
(4)Core Research Laboratory, Institute for Cancer Research and Prevention 
(ISPRO), 50139 Florence, Italy.
(5)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma and Unit of 
Occupational Medicine and Industrial Toxicology, University Hospital of Parma, 
43121 Parma, Italy.
(6)Nephrology Unit, Meyer Children's Hospital, 50139 Florence, Italy.
(7)Department of Neurosciences, Psychology, Drug Research and Child Health 
Section of Pharmaceutical and Nutraceutical Sciences, University of Florence, 
50139 Florence, Italy.

Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA) is an anti-neutrophil 
cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitis. A genome-wide association 
study showed a correlation between ANCA-negative EGPA and variants of genes 
encoding proteins with intestinal barrier functions, suggesting that 
modifications of the mucosal layer and consequent gut dysbiosis might be 
involved in EGPA pathogenesis. Here, we characterized the gut microbiota (GM) 
composition and the intestinal immune response in a cohort of EGPA patients. 
Faeces from 29 patients and 9 unrelated healthy cohabitants were collected, and 
GM and derived metabolites' composition were compared. Seven intestinal biopsies 
from EGPA patients with gastrointestinal manifestations were analysed to assess 
the T-cell distribution and its correlation with GM and EGPA clinical and 
laboratory features. No significant differences in GM composition, nor in the 
total amount of faecal metabolites, emerged between patients and controls. 
Nevertheless, differences in bacterial taxa abundances and compositional 
GM-derived metabolites profile were observed. Notably, an enrichment of 
potential pathobionts (Enterobacteriacee and Streptococcaceae) was found in 
EGPA, particularly in patients with active disease, while lower levels were 
found in patients on immunosuppression, compared with non-immunosuppressed ones. 
Significantly lower amounts of hexanoic acid were found in patients, compared to 
controls. The analysis of the immune response in the gut mucosa revealed a high 
frequency of IFN-γ/IL-17-producing T lymphocytes, and a positive correlation 
between EGPA disease activity and intestinal T-cell levels. Our data suggest 
that an enrichment in potential intestinal pathobionts might drive an imbalanced 
inflammatory response in EGPA.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines10061227
PMCID: PMC9219964
PMID: 35740247

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.