---
reference_id: "PMID:10417687"
title: "Proliferative activity and tumor angiogenesis is closely correlated to stromal cellularity of fibroadenoma: proposal fibroadenoma, cellular variant."
authors:
- Hasebe T
- Imoto S
- Sasaki S
- Tsubono Y
- Mukai K
journal: Pathol Int
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1046/j.1440-1827.1999.00892.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Proliferative activity and tumor angiogenesis is closely correlated to stromal cellularity of fibroadenoma: proposal fibroadenoma, cellular variant.
**Authors:** Hasebe T, Imoto S, Sasaki S, Tsubono Y, Mukai K
**Journal:** Pathol Int (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1440-1827.1999.00892.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1440-1827.1999.00892.x)

## Content

1. Pathol Int. 1999 May;49(5):435-43. doi: 10.1046/j.1440-1827.1999.00892.x.

Proliferative activity and tumor angiogenesis is closely correlated to stromal 
cellularity of fibroadenoma: proposal fibroadenoma, cellular variant.

Hasebe T(1), Imoto S, Sasaki S, Tsubono Y, Mukai K.

Author information:
(1)Pathology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute East, Chiba, 
Kashiwa, Japan. thasebe@ncc.go.jp

Fibroadenoma (FA) is the most common benign tumor of the breast in adult women. 
Some FA have a highly cellular stroma, making it difficult to differentiate from 
phyllodes tumors (PT). Forty-three FA were grouped into: (i) 27 conventional 
type (FACT) median stromal cellularity (SC) of highest cellular area (HCA), < or 
= 125 cells/1 high-power field (HPF); and (ii) 16 cellular variant (FACV) median 
SC of HCA, > 125 cells/1 HPF. These were studied for the proliferative activity 
of their stromal cells. Expression of c-fos, p53, basic fibroblast growth factor 
(bFGF), fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR), and vascular endothelial 
growth factor (VEGF) in the stromal cells were examined in the FA and 12 PT to 
determine whether it is possible to separate FACV from FACT. The proliferative 
activity of stromal cells was evaluated by the labeling index (LI) of 
proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). Conventional type fibroadenoma 
stromal cells had the lowest frequency of c-fos, p53, bFGF, FGFR and VEGF 
protein expression; PT stromal cells had the highest frequency of expression; 
and FACV stromal cells had an intermediate frequency of expression. Multivariate 
analysis demonstrated that bFGF and FGFR expression are significantly correlated 
with SC of FA. Separation of FACV from FACT by SC seems appropriate in revealing 
the phenotypic and biological differences of FA. The SC of FA seems to be 
regulated by bFGF and FGFR expression.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1440-1827.1999.00892.x
PMID: 10417687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]