---
reference_id: "PMID:36158964"
title: "Case report: A novel PPP3CA truncating mutation within the regulatory domain causes severe developmental and epileptic encephalopathy in a Chinese patient."
authors:
- Li J
- Cao J
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.889167
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report: A novel PPP3CA truncating mutation within the regulatory domain causes severe developmental and epileptic encephalopathy in a Chinese patient.
**Authors:** Li J, Cao J
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2022.889167](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2022.889167)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2022 Sep 7;13:889167. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.889167.
eCollection  2022.

Case report: A novel PPP3CA truncating mutation within the regulatory domain 
causes severe developmental and epileptic encephalopathy in a Chinese patient.

Li J(1)(2), Cao J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical General Ward, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of 
Child Development and Disorders, National Clinical Research Center for Child 
Health and Disorders, China International Science and Technology Cooperation 
Base of Child Development and Critical Disorders, Chongqing, China.
(2)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing, China.

INTRODUCTION: Developmental and epileptic encephalopathy 91 (DEE91; OMIM#617711) 
is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder caused by heterozygous PPP3CA variants. 
To the best of our knowledge, only a few DEE91 cases have been reported.
RESULTS: This study reports a boy who experienced recurrent afebrile convulsions 
and spasms at the age of 2 months. After being given multiple antiepileptic 
treatments with levetiracetam, adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), prednisone, 
topiramate, and clonazepam, his seizures were not completely relieved. At the 
age of 4 months, the patient exhibited delayed neuromotor development and 
difficulty in feeding; at the age of 6 months, he was diagnosed with 
developmental regression with recurrent spasms and myoclonic seizures that could 
respond to vigabatrin. At the age of 1 year and 4 months, the patient showed 
profound global developmental delay (GDD) with intermittent absence seizures. 
Whole-exome sequencing (WES) identified a novel loss-of-function variant 
c.1258_1259insAGTG (p. Val420Glufs*32) in PPP3CA.
CONCLUSION: This finding expands the genetic spectrum of the PPP3CA gene and 
reinforces the theory that DEE91-associated truncating variants cluster within a 
26-amino acid region in the regulatory domain (RD) of PPP3CA.

Copyright © 2022 Li and Cao.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2022.889167
PMCID: PMC9491239
PMID: 36158964

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.