---
reference_id: "PMID:40082982"
title: A real-world study of the efficacy of second-line treatment of unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma with esophagogastric varices after progression on first-line lenvatinib combined with PD-1 inhibitor.
authors:
- Li S
- Wen Q
- Huang W
- Qiu Z
- Feng L
- Yi F
journal: World J Surg Oncol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s12957-025-03742-0
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/drug therapy, pathology, complications"
- "Liver Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology, complications"
- Male
- "Phenylurea Compounds/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- "Quinolines/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- Aged
- "Esophageal and Gastric Varices/etiology, pathology, drug therapy"
- Survival Rate
- Disease Progression
- "Programmed Cell Death 1 Receptor/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Follow-Up Studies
- Retrospective Studies
- Adult
- Prognosis
- Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A real-world study of the efficacy of second-line treatment of unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma with esophagogastric varices after progression on first-line lenvatinib combined with PD-1 inhibitor.
**Authors:** Li S, Wen Q, Huang W, Qiu Z, Feng L, Yi F
**Journal:** World J Surg Oncol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12957-025-03742-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12957-025-03742-0)

## Content

1. World J Surg Oncol. 2025 Mar 13;23(1):83. doi: 10.1186/s12957-025-03742-0.

A real-world study of the efficacy of second-line treatment of unresectable
hepatocellular carcinoma with esophagogastric varices after progression on
first-line lenvatinib combined with PD-1 inhibitor.

Li S(#)(1)(2), Wen Q(#)(1)(2), Huang W(#)(1)(2), Qiu Z(1), Feng L(3), Yi F(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University,
Minde Road 1, Nanchang, 330006, P. R. China.
(2)Jiangxi Medical College of Nanchang University, Nanchang, 330006, P. R.
China.
(3)Department of Oncology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University,
Minde Road 1, Nanchang, 330006, P. R. China. longfengefy@163.com.
(4)Department of Oncology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University,
Minde Road 1, Nanchang, 330006, P. R. China. ivandoctor@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: The incidence and mortality of hepatocellular carcinoma are still high
according to National Cancer Center of China. Atezolizumab plus bevacizumab has
become one of the standard regimens for the first-line treatment of unresectable
hepatocellular carcinoma. However, some patients still use lenvatinib in
combination with immunotherapy instead of a standard "atezolizumab-bevacizumab"
regimen as a lower risk of bleeding in patients with esophagogastric varices.
However, there is no evidence for second-line therapy after progression on
lenvatinib combined with PD-1 inhibitor in unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma
till now. Herein, we aim to investigate second-line treatment among these
patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Thirty-three patients with unresectable hepatocellular
carcinoma with esophagogastric varices were admitted to the Second Affiliated
Hospital of Nanchang University from January 2019 to December 2023. They were
treated with lenvatinib in combination with PD-1 inhibitor as first line. The
efficacy was conducted according to the RECIST1.1 criteria. The endpoints
included objective response rate (ORR), disease control rate (DCR), median
overall survival (OS), and median progression free survival (PFS).
RESULTS: We identified a total of 225 patients with unresectable hepatocellular
carcinoma with esophagogastric varices who received first-line lenvatinib in
combination with PD-1 inhibitor, of whom 33 (14.7%) received second-line
therapy. 21 patients (63.6%) were treated with regorafenib combined with PD-1
inhibitor, 6 patients (18.2%) with apatinib plus PD-1 inhibitor, 4 patients
(12.1%) with bevacizumab plus PD-1 inhibitor, and the remaining 2 patients with
regorafenib or sorafenib as monotherapy, respectively. Of the 33 patients, 2
(6.1%) were evaluated as partial response (PR), 16 (48.5%) had stable disease
(SD), and 15 (45.4%) experienced progression (PD). The ORR was 6.1%, and the DCR
was 54.6%. Median PFS was 4.5 months, median OS was 7.2 months, and the 12-month
OS rate was 27.3%. Overall survival follow-up was done in 37 patients without
second line treatment whose baseline levels were matched with those of the
treatment group. The OS was 7.2 months in second line treatment group versus 3.0
months in control group (p = 0.04). As for different treatments in a second
line, The ORR of regorafenib in combination with PD-1 inhibitor was 9.5%, the
DCR was 47.6%, the median PFS was 4.2 months, and the median OS was 5.9 months.
None of the patients treated with apatinib plus PD-1 inhibitor got PR, the DCR
was 83.3%, the median PFS was 8.7 months, and the median OS was 9.1 months. None
of the patients treated with bevacizumab plus PD-1 inhibitor got PR, the DCR was
25.0%, the median PFS was 2.2 months, and the median OS was 6.0 months.
CONCLUSION: The second-line treatment of unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma
with esophagogastric varices after progression on first-line lenvatinib combined
with PD-1 inhibitor is effective. Regorafenib or apatinib combined with PD-1
inhibitor might be the preferred options.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12957-025-03742-0
PMCID: PMC11905572
PMID: 40082982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval: This study was
approved by the Ethics Committee of the Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang
University. Written informed consent was obtained from individual or guardian
participants. Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
