---
reference_id: "PMID:37768732"
title: TBC1D32 variants disrupt retinal ciliogenesis and cause retinitis pigmentosa.
authors:
- Bocquet B
- Borday C
- Erkilic N
- Mamaeva D
- Donval A
- Masson C
- Parain K
- Kaminska K
- Quinodoz M
- Perea-Romero I
- Garcia-Garcia G
- Jimenez-Medina C
- Boukhaddaoui H
- Coget A
- Leboucq N
- Calzetti G
- Gandolfi S
- Percesepe A
- Barili V
- Uliana V
- Delsante M
- Bozzetti F
- Scholl HP
- Corton M
- Ayuso C
- Millan JM
- Rivolta C
- Meunier I
- Perron M
- Kalatzis V
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.169426
keywords:
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells
- Retina
- Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics
- Retinal Degeneration/genetics
- Retinal Pigment Epithelium
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TBC1D32 variants disrupt retinal ciliogenesis and cause retinitis pigmentosa.
**Authors:** Bocquet B, Borday C, Erkilic N, Mamaeva D, Donval A, Masson C, Parain K, Kaminska K, Quinodoz M, Perea-Romero I, Garcia-Garcia G, Jimenez-Medina C, Boukhaddaoui H, Coget A, Leboucq N, Calzetti G, Gandolfi S, Percesepe A, Barili V, Uliana V, Delsante M, Bozzetti F, Scholl HP, Corton M, Ayuso C, Millan JM, Rivolta C, Meunier I, Perron M, Kalatzis V
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.169426](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.169426)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2023 Nov 8;8(21):e169426. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.169426.

TBC1D32 variants disrupt retinal ciliogenesis and cause retinitis pigmentosa.

Bocquet B(1)(2), Borday C(3), Erkilic N(1)(2), Mamaeva D(1), Donval A(3), Masson 
C(3), Parain K(3), Kaminska K(4)(5), Quinodoz M(4)(5)(6), Perea-Romero I(7)(8), 
Garcia-Garcia G(8)(9)(10), Jimenez-Medina C(1), Boukhaddaoui H(1), Coget 
A(11)(12), Leboucq N(11), Calzetti G(4)(5)(13), Gandolfi S(13), Percesepe A(13), 
Barili V(13), Uliana V(14), Delsante M(15), Bozzetti F(16), Scholl HP(4)(5), 
Corton M(7)(8), Ayuso C(7)(8), Millan JM(8)(9)(10), Rivolta C(4)(5)(6), Meunier 
I(1)(2), Perron M(3), Kalatzis V(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Neurosciences of Montpellier (INM), University of Montpellier, 
Inserm, Montpellier, France.
(2)National Reference Centre for Inherited Sensory Diseases, University of 
Montpellier, CHU, Montpellier, France.
(3)Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Institut des Neurosciences Paris-Saclay, 
Saclay, France.
(4)Institute of Molecular and Clinical Ophthalmology Basel (IOB), Basel, 
Switzerland.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Genetics and Genome Biology, University of Leicester, 
Leicester, United Kingdom.
(7)Department of Genetics, Health Research Institute-Fundación Jiménez Díaz 
University Hospital, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (IIS-FJD, UAM), Madrid, 
Spain.
(8)Center for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Instituto 
de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(9)Molecular, Cellular and Genomics Biomedicine Research Group, Instituto de 
Investigación Sanitaria La Fe (IIS La Fe), Valencia, Spain.
(10)Joint Unit of Rare Diseases, IIS La Fe-Centro de Investigación Príncipe 
Felipe, Valencia, Spain.
(11)Department of Neuroradiology and.
(12)Institute for Human Functional Imaging (I2FH), University of Montpellier, 
CHU, Montpellier, France.
(13)Department of Medicine and Surgery.
(14)Department of Medical Genetics.
(15)Department of Nephrology, and.
(16)Neuroradiology Unit, Diagnostic Department, University Hospital of Parma, 
Parma, Italy.

Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is the most common inherited retinal disease (IRD) and 
is characterized by photoreceptor degeneration and progressive vision loss. We 
report 4 patients presenting with RP from 3 unrelated families with variants in 
TBC1D32, which to date has never been associated with an IRD. To validate 
TBC1D32 as a putative RP causative gene, we combined Xenopus in vivo approaches 
and human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived (iPSC-derived) retinal models. 
Our data showed that TBC1D32 was expressed during retinal development and that 
it played an important role in retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) differentiation. 
Furthermore, we identified a role for TBC1D32 in ciliogenesis of the RPE. We 
demonstrated elongated ciliary defects that resulted in disrupted apical tight 
junctions, loss of functionality (delayed retinoid cycling and altered secretion 
balance), and the onset of an epithelial-mesenchymal transition-like phenotype. 
Last, our results suggested photoreceptor differentiation defects, including 
connecting cilium anomalies, that resulted in impaired trafficking to the outer 
segment in cones and rods in TBC1D32 iPSC-derived retinal organoids. Overall, 
our data highlight a critical role for TBC1D32 in the retina and demonstrate 
that TBC1D32 mutations lead to RP. We thus identify TBC1D32 as an IRD-causative 
gene.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.169426
PMCID: PMC10721274
PMID: 37768732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]