---
reference_id: "PMID:25855048"
title: MED12 somatic mutations in fibroadenomas and phyllodes tumours of the breast.
authors:
- Piscuoglio S
- Murray M
- Fusco N
- Marchiò C
- Loo FL
- Martelotto LG
- Schultheis AM
- Akram M
- Weigelt B
- Brogi E
- Reis-Filho JS
journal: Histopathology
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/his.12712
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MED12 somatic mutations in fibroadenomas and phyllodes tumours of the breast.
**Authors:** Piscuoglio S, Murray M, Fusco N, Marchiò C, Loo FL, Martelotto LG, Schultheis AM, Akram M, Weigelt B, Brogi E, Reis-Filho JS
**Journal:** Histopathology (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/his.12712](https://doi.org/10.1111/his.12712)

## Content

1. Histopathology. 2015 Nov;67(5):719-29. doi: 10.1111/his.12712. Epub 2015 May
24.

MED12 somatic mutations in fibroadenomas and phyllodes tumours of the breast.

Piscuoglio S(1), Murray M(1), Fusco N(1)(2), Marchiò C(1)(3), Loo FL(1), 
Martelotto LG(1), Schultheis AM(1), Akram M(1), Weigelt B(1), Brogi E(1), 
Reis-Filho JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY, USA.
(2)School of Pathology, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy.

AIMS: Somatic mutations in exon 2 of the mediator complex subunit 12 (MED12) 
gene have been identified in 60% of breast fibroadenomas (FAs). The aim of this 
study was to define whether phyllodes tumours (PTs) would harbour MED12 somatic 
mutations in a way akin to FAs.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A collection of 73 fibroepithelial tumours (including 26 
FAs, 25 benign PTs, nine borderline PTs and 13 malignant PTs) from 64 patients 
was retrieved from the authors' institution. Sections from formalin-fixed 
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) blocks were microdissected to ensure an enrichment in 
neoplastic stromal elements of >70%. DNA samples extracted from tumour and 
matched normal tissues were subjected to Sanger sequencing of exon 2 of the 
MED12 gene. MED12 exon 2 somatic mutations, including 28 somatic single 
nucleotide variants and 19 insertions and deletions, were found in 65%, 88%, 78% 
and 8% of FAs, benign PTs, borderline PTs and malignant PTs, respectively. 
Malignant PTs harboured MED12 exon 2 somatic mutations significantly less 
frequently than FAs, benign and borderline PTs.
CONCLUSIONS: Although MED12 exon 2 somatic mutations probably constitute the 
driver genetic event of most FAs, benign and borderline PTs, our results suggest 
that the majority of malignant PTs may be driven by other genetic/epigenetic 
alterations.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/his.12712
PMCID: PMC4996373
PMID: 25855048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare