---
reference_id: "PMID:37107710"
title: "FDXR-Associated Oculopathy: Congenital Amaurosis and Early-Onset Severe Retinal Dystrophy as Common Presenting Features in a Chinese Population."
authors:
- Yi S
- Zheng Y
- Yi Z
- Wang Y
- Jiang Y
- Ouyang J
- Li S
- Xiao X
- Sun W
- Wang P
- Zhang Q
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/genes14040952
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- Humans
- Blindness
- East Asian People
- Eye Abnormalities
- "Eye Diseases, Hereditary/genetics"
- "Retinal Dystrophies/genetics, diagnosis"
- Vision Disorders/genetics
- Infant
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FDXR-Associated Oculopathy: Congenital Amaurosis and Early-Onset Severe Retinal Dystrophy as Common Presenting Features in a Chinese Population.
**Authors:** Yi S, Zheng Y, Yi Z, Wang Y, Jiang Y, Ouyang J, Li S, Xiao X, Sun W, Wang P, Zhang Q
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes14040952](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes14040952)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Apr 21;14(4):952. doi: 10.3390/genes14040952.

FDXR-Associated Oculopathy: Congenital Amaurosis and Early-Onset Severe Retinal 
Dystrophy as Common Presenting Features in a Chinese Population.

Yi S(1), Zheng Y(1), Yi Z(1), Wang Y(1), Jiang Y(1), Ouyang J(1), Li S(1), Xiao 
X(1), Sun W(1), Wang P(1), Zhang Q(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun 
Yat-sen University, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology and 
Visual Science, 54 Xianlie Road, Guangzhou 510060, China.

Variants in FDXR reportedly cause autosomal recessive auditory neuropathy and 
optic atrophy, expanding to retinal dystrophy. This study aimed to further 
clarify associated phenotypes. FDXR variants were selected from our in-house 
whole-exome sequencing dataset of 6397 families with different eye conditions. 
The clinical data of the identified patients were summarized. Biallelic 
pathogenic or likely pathogenic FDXR variants were identified in 11 unrelated 
patients, including 14 missense variants of which 10 were novel. Fundus 
observation showed complete optic disc pallor, silver wiring or severe 
attenuation of retinal vessels, and varying degrees of generalized retinal 
degeneration. Before the detection of FDXR variants, four patients were 
clinically diagnosed as congenital amaurosis due to the presence of nystagmus a 
few months after birth, while seven were diagnosed as early-onset severe retinal 
dystrophy due to the presence of nyctalopia and/or poor vision in early 
childhood. Biallelic FDXR variants are a frequent cause of congenital or 
early-onset severe retinal dystrophy, especially for patients with severe optic 
atrophy and retinal dystrophy in early childhood.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14040952
PMCID: PMC10137360
PMID: 37107710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.