---
reference_id: "PMID:19615093"
title: "Epidemiology of malaria in an area prepared for clinical trials in Korogwe, north-eastern Tanzania."
authors:
- Mmbando BP
- Segeja MD
- Msangeni HA
- Sembuche SH
- Ishengoma DS
- Seth MD
- Francis F
- Rutta AS
- Kamugisha ML
- Lemnge MM
journal: Malar J
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-8-165
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of malaria in an area prepared for clinical trials in Korogwe, north-eastern Tanzania.
**Authors:** Mmbando BP, Segeja MD, Msangeni HA, Sembuche SH, Ishengoma DS, Seth MD, Francis F, Rutta AS, Kamugisha ML, Lemnge MM
**Journal:** Malar J (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1475-2875-8-165](https://doi.org/10.1186/1475-2875-8-165)

## Content

1. Malar J. 2009 Jul 18;8:165. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-8-165.

Epidemiology of malaria in an area prepared for clinical trials in Korogwe, 
north-eastern Tanzania.

Mmbando BP(1), Segeja MD, Msangeni HA, Sembuche SH, Ishengoma DS, Seth MD, 
Francis F, Rutta AS, Kamugisha ML, Lemnge MM.

Author information:
(1)National Institute for Medical Research, Tanga Medical Research Centre, 
Tanga, Tanzania. bmmbando@tanga.mimcom.net

BACKGROUND: Site preparation is a pre-requesite in conducting malaria vaccines 
trials. This study was conducted in 12 villages to determine malariometric 
indices and associated risk factors, during long and short rainy seasons, in an 
area with varying malaria transmission intensities in Korogwe district, 
Tanzania. Four villages had passive case detection (PCD) of fever system using 
village health workers.
METHODS: Four malariometric cross-sectional surveys were conducted between 
November 2005 and May 2007 among individuals aged 0-19 years, living in lowland 
urban, lowland rural and highland strata. A total of 10,766 blood samples were 
collected for malaria parasite diagnosis and anaemia estimation. Blood smears 
were stained with Giemsa while haemoglobin level was measured by HaemoCue. 
Socio-economic data were collected between Jan-Apr 2006.
RESULTS: Adjusting for the effect of age, the risk of Plasmodium falciparum 
parasitaemia was significantly lower in both lowland urban, (OR = 0.26; 95%CI: 
0.23-0.29, p < 0.001) and highlands, (OR = 0.21; 95%CI: 0.17-0.25, p < 0.001) 
compared to lowland rural. Individuals aged 6-9 years in the lowland rural and 
4-19 years in both lowland urban and highlands had the highest parasite 
prevalence, whilst children below five years in all strata had the highest 
parasite density. Prevalence of splenomegaly and gametocyte were also lower in 
both lowland urban and highlands than in lowland rural. Anaemia (Hb <11 g/dl) 
prevalence was lowest in the lowland urban. Availability of PCD and higher 
socio-economic status (SES) were associated with reduced malaria and anaemia 
prevalence.
CONCLUSION: Higher SES and use of bed nets in the lowland urban could be the 
important factors for low malaria infections in this stratum. Results obtained 
here were used together with those from PCD and DSS in selecting a village for 
Phase 1b MSP3 vaccine trial, which was conducted in the study area in year 2008.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-8-165
PMCID: PMC2720983
PMID: 19615093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]