---
reference_id: "PMID:31343665"
title: "Five-Year Survival and Correlates Among Patients With Advanced Melanoma, Renal Cell Carcinoma, or Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Treated With Nivolumab."
authors:
- Topalian SL
- Hodi FS
- Brahmer JR
- Gettinger SN
- Smith DC
- McDermott DF
- Powderly JD
- Sosman JA
- Atkins MB
- Leming PD
- Spigel DR
- Antonia SJ
- Drilon A
- Wolchok JD
- Carvajal RD
- McHenry MB
- Hosein F
- Harbison CT
- Grosso JF
- Sznol M
journal: JAMA Oncol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2019.2187
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Five-Year Survival and Correlates Among Patients With Advanced Melanoma, Renal Cell Carcinoma, or Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Treated With Nivolumab.
**Authors:** Topalian SL, Hodi FS, Brahmer JR, Gettinger SN, Smith DC, McDermott DF, Powderly JD, Sosman JA, Atkins MB, Leming PD, Spigel DR, Antonia SJ, Drilon A, Wolchok JD, Carvajal RD, McHenry MB, Hosein F, Harbison CT, Grosso JF, Sznol M
**Journal:** JAMA Oncol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaoncol.2019.2187](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaoncol.2019.2187)

## Content

1. JAMA Oncol. 2019 Oct 1;5(10):1411-1420. doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2019.2187.

Five-Year Survival and Correlates Among Patients With Advanced Melanoma, Renal 
Cell Carcinoma, or Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Treated With Nivolumab.

Topalian SL(1), Hodi FS(2), Brahmer JR(3), Gettinger SN(4), Smith DC(5), 
McDermott DF(6), Powderly JD(7), Sosman JA(8)(9), Atkins MB(6)(10), Leming 
PD(11), Spigel DR(12), Antonia SJ(13), Drilon A(14), Wolchok JD(14), Carvajal 
RD(14)(15), McHenry MB(16), Hosein F(16), Harbison CT(16), Grosso JF(16), Sznol 
M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns 
Hopkins Bloomberg-Kimmel Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, Baltimore, 
Maryland.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(3)Department of Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns 
Hopkins Bloomberg-Kimmel Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, Baltimore, 
Maryland.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine (Section of Medical Oncology), Yale Cancer 
Center, New Haven, Connecticut.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
(6)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 
Dana-Farber/Harvard Cancer Center, Boston, Massachusetts.
(7)Carolina BioOncology Institute, Huntersville, North Carolina.
(8)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
Tennessee.
(9)now with the Department of Medicine (Hematology and Oncology), Northwestern 
University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois.
(10)now with the Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, District of Columbia.
(11)The Christ Hospital Cancer Center, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(12)Sarah Cannon Research Institute/Tennessee Oncology, PLLC, Nashville, 
Tennessee.
(13)Department of Thoracic Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research 
Institute, Tampa, Florida.
(14)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Hospital, Weill 
Cornell Medical College, New York, New York.
(15)now with the Department of Medicine, Columbia University Irving Medical 
Center, New York, New York.
(16)Bristol-Myers Squibb, Princeton, New Jersey.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2019.2186.

IMPORTANCE: Nivolumab, a monoclonal antibody that inhibits programmed cell death 
1, is approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for treating advanced 
melanoma, renal cell carcinoma (RCC), non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and 
other malignancies. Data on long-term survival among patients receiving 
nivolumab are limited.
OBJECTIVES: To analyze long-term overall survival (OS) among patients receiving 
nivolumab and identify clinical and laboratory measures associated with tumor 
regression and OS.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This was a secondary analysis of the phase 1 
CA209-003 trial (with expansion cohorts), which was conducted at 13 US medical 
centers and included 270 patients with advanced melanoma, RCC, or NSCLC who 
received nivolumab and were enrolled between October 30, 2008, and December 28, 
2011. The analyses were either specified in the original protocol or included in 
subsequent protocol amendments that were implemented between 2008 and 2012. 
Statistical analysis was performed from October 30, 2008, to November 11, 2016.
INTERVENTION: In the CA209-003 trial, patients received nivolumab (0.1-10.0 
mg/kg) every 2 weeks in 8-week cycles for up to 96 weeks, unless they developed 
progressive disease, achieved a complete response, experienced unacceptable 
toxic effects, or withdrew consent.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Safety and activity of nivolumab; OS was a post hoc 
end point with a minimum follow-up of 58.3 months.
RESULTS: Of 270 patients included in this analysis, 107 (39.6%) had melanoma (72 
[67.3%] male; median age, 61 [range, 29-85] years), 34 (12.6%) had RCC (26 
[76.5%] male; median age, 58 [range, 35-74] years), and 129 (47.8%) had NSCLC 
(79 [61.2%] male; median age, 65 [range, 38-85] years). Overall survival curves 
showed estimated 5-year rates of 34.2% among patients with melanoma, 27.7% among 
patients with RCC, and 15.6% among patients with NSCLC. In a multivariable 
analysis, the presence of liver (odds ratio [OR], 0.31; 95% CI, 0.12-0.83; 
P = .02) or bone metastases (OR, 0.31; 95% CI, 0.10-0.93; P = .04) was 
independently associated with reduced likelihood of survival at 5 years, whereas 
an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of 0 (OR, 2.74; 95% CI, 
1.43-5.27; P = .003) was independently associated with an increased likelihood 
of 5-year survival. Overall survival was significantly longer among patients 
with treatment-related AEs of any grade (median, 19.8 months; 95% CI, 13.8-26.9 
months) or grade 3 or more (median, 20.3 months; 95% CI, 12.5-44.9 months) 
compared with those without treatment-related AEs (median, 5.8 months; 95% CI, 
4.6-7.8 months) (P < .001 for both comparisons based on hazard ratios).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Nivolumab treatment was associated with long-term 
survival in a subset of heavily pretreated patients with advanced melanoma, RCC, 
or NSCLC. Characterizing factors associated with long-term survival may inform 
treatment approaches and strategies for future clinical trial development.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT00730639.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2019.2187
PMCID: PMC6659167
PMID: 31343665

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Topalian 
reported receiving grants from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Compugen, and Potenza 
Therapeutics during the conduct of the study; receiving travel reimbursements 
from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Dragonfly Therapeutics, Five Prime Therapeutics, and 
Merck; receiving consulting fees from AbbVie, Amgen, Avidity NanoMedicines, 
Bayer, Camden Nexus, DNAtrix, Dragonfly Therapeutics, Dynavax Technologies, 
Ervaxx, Five Prime Therapeutics, FLX Bio, ImaginAb, Immunomic Therapeutics, 
Janssen Pharmaceuticals, MedImmune/AstraZeneca, Merck, Pfizer, Rock Springs 
Capital, and WindMIL outside the submitted work; receiving stock or stock 
options from Aduro, Dragonfly Therapeutics, Ervaxx, Five Prime Therapeutics, FLX 
Bio, Jounce Therapeutics, Potenza Therapeutics, Tizona LLC, and WindMIL; having 
intellectual property licensed through her institution to Bristol-Myers Squibb, 
Aduro, Immunomic Therapeutics, NexImmune, and WindMIL; and having patents 
pending for cancer therapy via a combination of epigenetic modulation and immune 
modulation, checkpoint blockade and microsatellite instability, and biomarkers 
useful for determining response to PD-1 blockade therapy. Dr Hodi reported 
receiving other support from Bristol-Myers Squibb to his institution during the 
conduct of the study; receiving grants from Bristol-Myers Squibb and Novartis; 
receiving personal fees from Aduro, Apricity, Bayer, Bristol-Myers Squibb, 
Compass Therapeutics, EMD Serono, Genentech/Roche, Merck, Novartis, Partners 
Therapeutics, Pionyr, Pfizer, Rheos, Sanofi, Surface, Takeda, Torque, and 
Verastem outside the submitted work; and having a patent to Methods for Treating 
MIA-related Disorders (#20100111973) pending and royalties paid, a patent to 
Tumor Antigens and Uses Thereof (#7250291) issued, a patent to Compositions and 
Methods for Identification, Assessment, Prevention, and Treatment of Melanoma 
Using PD-L1 Isoforms (#20160340407) pending, patents to Therapeutic Peptides 
(#20160046716, #20240004112, #20170022275, and #20170008962) pending, a patent 
to Therapeutic Peptides issued, and a patent to Methods of Using Pembrolizumab 
and Trebananib pending. Dr Brahmer reported receiving grants and having an 
uncompensated advisory committee/consulting agreement with Bristol-Myers Squibb 
during conduct of the study; personal fees from Amgen, AstraZeneca/MedImmune, 
Celgene, Genentech, Janssen Oncology, Eli Lilly, Merck, and Syndax outside the 
submitted work; serving on the advisory council from Amgen; consulting agreement 
from Celgene, Eli Lilly, and Merck; serving on the advisory board from 
AstraZeneca, Genentech, Janssen Oncology, Merck, and Syndax; and receiving grant 
support from AstraZeneca/MedImmune and Merck. Dr Gettinger reported receiving 
other support from Bristol-Myers Squibb outside the submitted work. Dr Smith 
reported receiving grant support from Bristol-Myers Squibb (Medarex) during the 
conduct of the study and from Astellas, Bayer, Celgene, Incyte, Eli Lilly, ESSA, 
F. Hoffmann-LaRoche AG, Genentech, Incyte, MedImmune, Medivation (Pfizer), 
Merck, Millennium, Novartis, OncoMed, and Seattle Genetics outside the submitted 
work. Dr McDermott reported receiving grant support and personal fees from 
Bristol-Myers Squibb during the conduct of the study and receiving honoraria for 
consulting from Array BioPharm, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eisai, Exelixis, Genentech 
BioOncology, Jounce Therapeutics, Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, and Prometheus 
outside the submitted work. Dr Powderly reported other support from 
Bristol-Myers Squibb during the conduct of the study; receiving other support 
from Alkermes, Arcus, AstraZeneca/MedImmune, Corvus, Curis, EMD Serono, FLX Bio, 
Genentech, InCyte, MacroGenics, Merck, Tempest, and Top Alliance BioSciences 
outside the submitted work; and having a patent pending and reported being 
founder and owner of Carolina BioOncology Institute, PLLC, an independent Phase 
I Cancer Research Clinic and BioCytics Inc, a Human Applications laboratory 
developing cellular immunotherapies (both companies collaborate with multiple 
potential biopharma and biotech partners to develop future cellular 
immunotherapies). Dr Sosman reported receiving personal fees from Bristol-Myers 
Squibb, Curis, and Genentech outside the submitted work. Dr Atkins reported 
receiving research support (to the institution) from Bristol-Myers Squibb, 
Merck, Pfizer and Genentech; serving as a consultant or advisor at Bristol-Myers 
Squibb, Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, Genentech/Roche, Exelixis, Eisai, Aveo, Array, 
Arrowhead, AstraZeneca, Ideera, Aduro, ImmunoCore, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Iovance, Newlink, Surface, Alexion, Acceleron, Lynx, Cota, Amgen, Galactone, 
Werewolf, Fathom, Pneuma, and Leads; and having stock options in Werewolf and 
Pyxis Oncology outside the submitted work. Dr Leming reported receiving 
consulting fees from Bristol-Myers Squibb for participation in an unrelated 
consensus panel. Dr Spigel reported receiving grants and other support from 
Bristol-Myers Squibb during the conduct of the study; having a leadership role 
at Centennial Medical Center; serving as a consultant or advisor at AbbVie, 
Amgen, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Celgene, Evelo, Foundation Medicine, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Genentech/Roche, Illumina, Eli Lilly, Merck, Moderna 
Therapeutics, Nektar, Novartis, Pfizer, PharmaMar, Precision Oncology, Takeda, 
and TRM Oncology; receiving research funding (payments to institution) from 
AbbVie, Acerta Pharma, Aeglea Biotherapeutics, Amgen, ARMO Biosciences, 
Astellas, Boehringer Ingelheim, Celgene, Celldex, Clovis Oncology, Daiichi 
Sankyo, EMD Serono, Foundation Medicine, G1 Therapeutics, Genentech/Roche, 
Novartis, GlaxoSmithKline, GRAIL, Ipsen, Eli Lilly, Millennium, Nektar, Neon 
Therapeutics, Oncogenex, Pfizer, Takeda, Tesaro, Transgene, and UT Southwestern; 
and receiving reimbursement for accommodations, expenses and travel from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Celgene, EMD Serono, Genentech, Genzyme, 
Intuitive Surgical, Eli Lilly, Merck, Pfizer, Purdue Pharma, Spectrum 
Pharmaceuticals, and Sysmex. Dr Antonia reported receiving grants and personal 
fees from Bristol-Myers Squibb during the conduct of the study; receiving grants 
from AstraZeneca; receiving personal fees from Amgen, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
CBMG, Celsius, FLX Bio, Genentech, MedImmune, Memgen, Merck, Multivir, and Venn 
outside the submitted work; and holding a patent to p53-DC vaccine issues and 
license and a patent to oncolytic virus pending. Dr Drilon reported receiving 
personal fees from Ariad, AstraZeneca, Bayer, BeiGene, BergenBio, Blueprint 
Medicines, Exelixis, Genentech, Helsinn, Hengrui, Ignyta, Loxo, Millenium, MORE 
Health, Pfizer, Roche, Takeda, TP Therapeutics, Tyra, and Verastem during the 
conduct of the study; receiving other support from GlaxoSmithKline, Taiho, and 
Teva outside the submitted work; receiving royalties from Wolters Kluwer for 
Pocket Medicine; receiving research funding from Foundation Medicine; receiving 
food and beverage from Merck and Puma; and receiving continuing medical 
education honoraria from Medscape, OncLive, PeerVoice, Physicians Education 
Resources, Targeted Oncology, and Research to Practice all outside the submitted 
work. Dr Wolchok reported receiving grants and personal fees from Bristol-Myers 
Squibb during the conduct of the study; receiving grants from Bristol-Myers 
Squibb, MedImmune, and Genentech; receiving personal fees from Adaptive Biotech, 
Advaxis, Amgen, Apricity, Array BioPharma, Ascentage Pharma, Astellas, Bayer, 
BeiGene, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Celgene, Chugai, Elucida, Eli Lilly, Esanex, F 
Star, Genentech, Imvaq, Janssen, Kleo Pharma, Linneaus, MedImmune, Merck, Neon 
Therapuetics, Ono, Polaris Pharma, Polynoma, Psioxus, Puretech, Recepta, Trieza, 
Sellas Life Sciences, Serametrix, Surface Oncology, and Syndax outside the 
submitted work; and owning equity in Potenza Therapeutics, Tizona 
Pharmaceuticals, Adaptive Biotechnologies, Elucida, Imvaq, BeiGene, Trieza, and 
Linneaus. Dr Carvajal reported receiving grants and personal fees from 
Bristol-Myers Squibb during the conduct of the study; receiving grants from 
Amgen, Astellis, AstraZeneca, Aura Biosciences, Bayer, Bellicum, Corvus, Incyte, 
Eli Lilly, Macrogenics, Merck, Mirati, Novartis, Roche/Genentech, Pfizer, and 
Plexxikon outside the submitted work; and receiving personal fees from Aura 
Biosciences, Chimeron, Incyte, Merck, PureTech, Regenix, Sanofi Genzyme, and 
Sorrento Therapeutics outside the submitted work. Drs McHenry, Harbison, and 
Hosein reported stock ownership and employment by Bristol-Myers Squibb. Dr 
Grosso reported employment by Bristol-Myers Squibb. Dr Sznol reported receiving 
other support from Bristol-Myers Squibb during the conduct of the study; 
receiving other support from Amphivena, Adaptive Biotechnologies, Intensity, 
Actym, Nextcure, and Torque; and receiving consulting fees from Bristol-Myers 
Squibb, Roche/Genentech, AstraZeneca/Medimmune, Pfizer, Novartis, Kyowa-Kirin, 
Seattle Genetics, Nektar, Pierre-Fabre, Eli Lilly, Merck US, Teravance, 
Biodesix, Vaccinex, Janssen, Modulate Therapeutics, Baxalta-Shire, Incyte, 
Newlink Genetics, Iovance, Agonox, Arbutus, Celldex, Inovio, Gritstone, 
Molecular Partners, Innate Pharma, AbbVie, Immunocore, Genmab, Almac, Hinge, 
Allakos, Anaeropharma, Array, GI Innovation, Genocea, Chugai-Roche, Symphogen, 
Adaptimmune, Omniox, Lycera, and Pieris outside the submitted work. No other 
disclosures were reported.