---
reference_id: "PMID:2430432"
title: Epidemiology and early diagnosis of primary liver cancer in China.
authors:
- Yen FS
- Shen KN
journal: Adv Cancer Res
year: '1986'
keywords:
- Aflatoxins/adverse effects
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology"
- Carrier State/immunology
- China
- Clinical Enzyme Tests
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Food Contamination/adverse effects
- "Hepatitis B/complications, immunology"
- Hepatitis B Surface Antigens/analysis
- Humans
- "Liver Neoplasms/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology"
- Male
- Space-Time Clustering
- Water Pollution/adverse effects
- alpha-Fetoproteins/analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology and early diagnosis of primary liver cancer in China.
**Authors:** Yen FS, Shen KN
**Journal:** Adv Cancer Res (1986)

## Content

1. Adv Cancer Res. 1986;47:297-329.

Epidemiology and early diagnosis of primary liver cancer in China.

Yen FS, Shen KN.

Epidemiological studies in different areas in China have revealed several
outstanding risk factors of PLC, i.e., HBV infection, pollution of drinking
water, contamination of food by AFB1 and/or nitrosamines, and family
predisposition. Accordingly, a program of HBV vaccination, improved supply of
drinking water, better preservation and storage of food, and possibly
chemoprevention for high-risk populations should be effective preventive
measures. Studies have shown that frequent AFP screening in high-risk
populations is highly recommended to detect early cases of PLC. According to
research in Qidong, careful follow-up of the dynamic changes of AFP in
individuals with persistent low levels of positive AFP is important for
distinguishing other conditions from true PLC. Newer means for the localization
of small-size PLC (under 5 cm), such as type B ultrasonography, nuclide
scanning, computerized tomography, and hepatoangiography, represent remarkable
progress in improving markedly the success of surgery and hence the survival
rate of PLC patients. The advances in knowledge of PLC have been encouraging.
Although much work remains to be done on the etiological agents and the
mechanism of oncogenesis, it is time that larger scale control measures be put
into effect in high-incidence areas to discover if one of the most common
cancers in the world can be controlled.

PMID: 2430432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
