---
reference_id: "PMID:24239951"
title: "Duplication of the 15q11-q13 region: clinical and genetic study of 30 new cases."
authors:
- Al Ageeli E
- Drunat S
- Delanoë C
- Perrin L
- Baumann C
- Capri Y
- Fabre-Teste J
- Aboura A
- Dupont C
- Auvin S
- El Khattabi L
- Chantereau D
- Moncla A
- Tabet AC
- Verloes A
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2013.10.008
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Aberrations
- Chromosome Duplication
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 15/genetics"
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- Infant
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Duplication of the 15q11-q13 region: clinical and genetic study of 30 new cases.
**Authors:** Al Ageeli E, Drunat S, Delanoë C, Perrin L, Baumann C, Capri Y, Fabre-Teste J, Aboura A, Dupont C, Auvin S, El Khattabi L, Chantereau D, Moncla A, Tabet AC, Verloes A
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2013.10.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2013.10.008)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2014 Jan;57(1):5-14. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2013.10.008. Epub
2013  Nov 12.

Duplication of the 15q11-q13 region: clinical and genetic study of 30 new cases.

Al Ageeli E(1), Drunat S(2), Delanoë C(3), Perrin L(2), Baumann C(2), Capri 
Y(2), Fabre-Teste J(2), Aboura A(2), Dupont C(2), Auvin S(4), El Khattabi L(2), 
Chantereau D(2), Moncla A(5), Tabet AC(2), Verloes A(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, APHP -- Robert Debré University Hospital, and 
Paris VII Denis Diderot University, Paris, France; Jazan University, Faculty of 
Medicine, Jazan, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, APHP -- Robert Debré University Hospital, and 
Paris VII Denis Diderot University, Paris, France.
(3)Department of Physiology, AP-HP, Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, France.
(4)Department of Child Neurology, AP-HP, Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, France.
(5)Medical Genetic Department, La Timone Hospital, Marseille, France.
(6)Department of Medical Genetics, APHP -- Robert Debré University Hospital, and 
Paris VII Denis Diderot University, Paris, France; INSERM UMR676 "PROTECT", 
Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, France. Electronic address: 
alain.verloes@rdb.aphp.fr.

BACKGROUND: 15q11-q13 region is an area of well-known susceptibility to genomic 
rearrangements, in which several breakpoints have been identified (BP1-BP5). 
Duplication of this region is observed in two instances: presence of a 
supernumerary marker chromosome (SMC) derived of chromosome 15, or interstitial 
tandem duplication. Duplications are clinically characterized by a variable 
phenotype that includes central hypotonia, developmental delay, speech delay, 
seizure, minor dysmorphic features and autism.
METHODS: Retrospective clinical and molecular study of 30 unrelated patients who 
were identified among the patients seen at the genetic clinics of Robert DEBRE 
hospital with microduplication of the 15q11-q13 region.
RESULTS: Fifteen patients presented with a supernumerary marker derived from 
chromosome 15. In fourteen cases the SMC was of large size, encompassing the 
Prader-Willi/Angelman critical region. All but one was maternal in origin. One 
patient had a PWS-like phenotype in absence of maternal UPD. In one case, the 
marker had a smaller size and contained only the BP1-BP2 region. Fifteen 
patients presented with interstitial duplication. Four cases were inherited from 
phenotypically normal parents (3 maternal and 1 paternal). Phenotypic features 
were somewhat variable and 57% presented with autism. Twelve patients showed 
cerebral anomalies and 18 patients had an abnormal EEG with a typical, 
recognizable pattern of excessive diffuse rapid spikes in the waking record, 
similar to the pattern observed after benzodiazepine exposure. Duplication of 
paternally expressed genes MKRN3, MAGEL2 and NDN in two autistic patients 
without extra material of a neighboring region enhances their likelihood to be 
genes related to autism.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2013.10.008
PMID: 24239951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]