---
reference_id: "PMID:39650996"
title: "Marchiafava-Bignami Disease: A Case Report of a Reversible Cause of Dementia."
authors:
- Conceição P
- Lopes T
- Abreu V
- Reinas A
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.73146
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Marchiafava-Bignami Disease: A Case Report of a Reversible Cause of Dementia.
**Authors:** Conceição P, Lopes T, Abreu V, Reinas A
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.73146](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.73146)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Nov 6;16(11):e73146. doi: 10.7759/cureus.73146. eCollection 2024 
Nov.

Marchiafava-Bignami Disease: A Case Report of a Reversible Cause of Dementia.

Conceição P(1), Lopes T(1), Abreu V(2), Reinas A(1).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Centro Hospitalar Universitário de Santo António, Porto, 
PRT.
(2)Neuroradiology, Centro Hospitalar Universitário de Santo António, Porto, PRT.

Marchiafava-Bignami disease (MBD) is a rare neurological disorder predominantly 
associated with chronic alcohol use, characterized by demyelination and necrosis 
of the corpus callosum. The condition often presents with cognitive dysfunction, 
motor deficits, and altered consciousness, which can range from mild confusion 
to severe stupor. Early recognition and treatment are crucial for improving 
outcomes. We report a case of MDB that was diagnosed in a 43-year-old woman with 
a history of chronic alcohol use and a 15-day history of progressive 
neurological symptoms, including impaired speech, confusion, and inability to 
walk independently. Brain MRI findings were consistent with MBD, showing acute 
demyelination of the anterior corpus callosum. The patient was treated with 
high-dose intravenous thiamine and B vitamins, resulting in a gradual and 
significant improvement. After one month, she regained coherent speech and the 
ability to walk independently.

Copyright © 2024, Conceição et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.73146
PMCID: PMC11624036
PMID: 39650996

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent for treatment and open 
access publication was obtained or waived by all participants in this study. 
Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all 
authors declare the following: Payment/services info: All authors have declared 
that no financial support was received from any organization for the submitted 
work. Financial relationships: All authors have declared that they have no 
financial relationships at present or within the previous three years with any 
organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work. Other 
relationships: All authors have declared that there are no other relationships 
or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.