---
reference_id: "PMID:20664180"
title: Evaluation of parathyroid gland function using sodium bicarbonate infusion test for 22q11.2 deletion syndrome.
authors:
- Nagasaki K
- Iwasaki Y
- Ogawa Y
- Kikuchi T
- Uchiyama M
journal: Horm Res Paediatr
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1159/000315904
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of parathyroid gland function using sodium bicarbonate infusion test for 22q11.2 deletion syndrome.
**Authors:** Nagasaki K, Iwasaki Y, Ogawa Y, Kikuchi T, Uchiyama M
**Journal:** Horm Res Paediatr (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000315904](https://doi.org/10.1159/000315904)

## Content

1. Horm Res Paediatr. 2011;75(1):14-8. doi: 10.1159/000315904. Epub 2010 Jul 21.

Evaluation of parathyroid gland function using sodium bicarbonate infusion test 
for 22q11.2 deletion syndrome.

Nagasaki K(1), Iwasaki Y, Ogawa Y, Kikuchi T, Uchiyama M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatrics, Department of Homeostatic Regulation and Development, 
Niigata University Graduate School of Medicine and Dental Sciences, Niigata, 
Japan. nagasaki@med.niigata-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND/AIMS: 22q11.2 Deletion syndrome is a congenital malformation syndrome 
with hypoparathyroidism. The spectrum of parathyroid gland dysfunction ranges 
from severe neonatal hypocalcemia to subclinical hypoparathyroidism. The 
parathyroid hormone (PTH) secretory reserve is reduced in a significant number 
of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome patients with normocalcemia. The aim of this study 
was to investigate hypoparathyroid function using the bicarbonate infusion test 
for 22q11.2 deletion syndrome with normocalcemia.
METHODS: sodium bicarbonate solution [7% (w/v); 40 ml/m(2) body surface area] 
was infused for 2 min, and blood samples for the determination of plasma ionized 
calcium and plasma intact PTH were serially obtained. The test was conducted on 
five 22q11.2 deletion syndrome patients with normocalcemia.
RESULTS: two patients presented increments of intact PTH levels (peak value - 
basal value) of 70 pg/ml or higher during the test, whereas the remaining 3 
showed PTH level increments of <30 pg/ml. The former 2 patients were diagnosed 
as having normal parathyroid gland function, and the latter 3 patients as having 
subclinical hypoparathyroidism.
CONCLUSION: the bicarbonate infusion test may be a valuable method for the 
evaluation of residual parathyroid gland function in patients with 22q11.2 
deletion syndrome. Screening of subclinical hypoparathyroidism should be 
considered in the regular follow-up of patients with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome, 
even in cases with normocalcemia.

2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000315904
PMID: 20664180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]