---
reference_id: "PMID:10392592"
title: Kawasaki disease.
authors:
- Taubert KA
- Shulman ST
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '1999'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kawasaki disease.
**Authors:** Taubert KA, Shulman ST
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (1999)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 1999 Jun;59(11):3093-102, 3107-8.

Kawasaki disease.

Taubert KA(1), Shulman ST.

Author information:
(1)University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, USA.

Kawasaki disease is a leading cause of acquired heart disease among children in 
the United States and other developed countries. Most children who contract this 
illness are less than two years old, and 80 percent of affected children are 
younger than five years of age. A generalized vasculitis of unknown etiology, 
Kawasaki disease can cause coronary artery abnormalities, including coronary 
aneurysms. From 20 to 25 percent of untreated children develop coronary artery 
abnormalities, which may resolve or persist. These abnormalities are of 
particular concern because they can lead to thrombosis, evolve into segmental 
stenosis or, rarely, rupture. The principal cause of death from Kawasaki disease 
is myocardial infarction. The cause of the disease remains unknown, but 
epidemiologic investigations and the clinical presentation suggest a microbial 
agent. Diagnostic criteria, including fever and other principal features, have 
been established. In the acute phase of the disease, treatment with 
acetylsalicylic acid and intravenously administered immunoglobulin is directed 
at reducing inflammation of the coronary arteries and myocardium. Early 
recognition and treatment of Kawasaki disease can reduce the development of 
potentially life-threatening coronary artery abnormalities.

PMID: 10392592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]