---
reference_id: "PMID:15607555"
title: A novel therapeutic strategy for Ehlers-Danlos syndrome based on nutritional supplements.
authors:
- Mantle D
- Wilkins RM
- Preedy V
journal: Med Hypotheses
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2004.07.023
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel therapeutic strategy for Ehlers-Danlos syndrome based on nutritional supplements.
**Authors:** Mantle D, Wilkins RM, Preedy V
**Journal:** Med Hypotheses (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mehy.2004.07.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mehy.2004.07.023)

## Content

1. Med Hypotheses. 2005;64(2):279-83. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2004.07.023.

A novel therapeutic strategy for Ehlers-Danlos syndrome based on nutritional 
supplements.

Mantle D(1), Wilkins RM, Preedy V.

Author information:
(1)Pharma Nord (UK), Telford Court, Morpeth, Northumberland NE61 2DB, UK. 
pharma.nord4@btconnect.com

Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is a rare disorder, comprising a group of related 
inherited disorders of connective tissue, resulting from underlying 
abnormalities in the synthesis and metabolism of collagen. This proposal is 
specifically concerned with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome classic type (formerly Types 
I-III), which is characterized by joint hypermobility and susceptibility to 
injury/arthritis, skin and vascular problems (including easy bruising, bleeding, 
varicose veins and poor tissue healing), cardiac mitral valve prolapse, 
musculo-skeletal problems (myopathy, myalgia, spinal scoliosis, osteoporosis), 
and susceptibility to periodontitis. No treatment is currently available for 
this disorder. The novel aspect of this proposal is based on: (i) increasing 
scientific evidence that nutrition may be a major factor in the pathogenesis of 
many disorders once thought to result from defective genes alone; (ii) the 
recognition that many of the symptoms associated with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome are 
also characteristic of nutritional deficiencies; (iii) the synergistic action 
within the body of appropriate combinations of nutritional supplements in 
promoting normal tissue function. We therefore hypothesize that the symptoms 
associated with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome may be successfully alleviated using a 
specific (and potentially synergistic) combination of nutritional supplements, 
comprising calcium, carnitine, coenzyme Q(10), glucosamine, magnesium, methyl 
sulphonyl methane, pycnogenol, silica, vitamin C, and vitamin K, at dosages 
which have previously been demonstrated to be effective against the above 
symptoms in other disorders.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2004.07.023
PMID: 15607555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]