---
reference_id: "PMID:35269750"
title: "Understanding the Molecular Mechanisms of Succinic Semialdehyde Dehydrogenase Deficiency (SSADHD): Towards the Development of SSADH-Targeted Medicine."
authors:
- Lee HHC
- McGinty GE
- Pearl PL
- Rotenberg A
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms23052606
keywords:
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/metabolism"
- Animals
- Child
- Developmental Disabilities/genetics
- Humans
- Mice
- "Succinate-Semialdehyde Dehydrogenase/deficiency, metabolism"
- gamma-Aminobutyric Acid/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Understanding the Molecular Mechanisms of Succinic Semialdehyde Dehydrogenase Deficiency (SSADHD): Towards the Development of SSADH-Targeted Medicine.
**Authors:** Lee HHC, McGinty GE, Pearl PL, Rotenberg A
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms23052606](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23052606)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Feb 26;23(5):2606. doi: 10.3390/ijms23052606.

Understanding the Molecular Mechanisms of Succinic Semialdehyde Dehydrogenase
Deficiency (SSADHD): Towards the Development of SSADH-Targeted Medicine.

Lee HHC(1)(2), McGinty GE(1), Pearl PL(3), Rotenberg A(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)F.M. Kirby Neurobiology Center, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.
(2)Rosamund Stone Zander Translational Neuroscience Center, Boston Children's
Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Division of Epilepsy & Clinical Neurophysiology, Department of Neurology,
Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency (SSADHD) is a rare genetic
disorder caused by inefficient metabolic breakdown of the major inhibitory
neurotransmitter, γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA). Pathologic brain accumulation of
GABA and γ-hydroxybutyrate (GHB), a neuroactive by-product of GABA catabolism,
leads to a multitude of molecular abnormalities beginning in early life,
culminating in multifaceted clinical presentations including delayed psychomotor
development, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and ataxia. Paradoxically, over
half of patients with SSADHD also develop epilepsy and face a significant risk
of sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP). Here, we review some of the
relevant molecular mechanisms through which impaired synaptic inhibition,
astrocytic malfunctions and myelin defects might contribute to the complex
SSADHD phenotype. We also discuss the gaps in knowledge that need to be
addressed for the implementation of successful gene and enzyme replacement
SSADHD therapies. We conclude with a description of a novel SSADHD mouse model
that enables 'on-demand' SSADH restoration, allowing proof-of-concept studies to
fine-tune SSADH restoration in preparation for eventual human trials.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23052606
PMCID: PMC8910003
PMID: 35269750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
