---
reference_id: "PMID:22847316"
title: 1,5-Anhydroglucitol in diabetes mellitus.
authors:
- Kim WJ
- Park CY
journal: Endocrine
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s12020-012-9760-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 1,5-Anhydroglucitol in diabetes mellitus.
**Authors:** Kim WJ, Park CY
**Journal:** Endocrine (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12020-012-9760-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12020-012-9760-6)

## Content

1. Endocrine. 2013 Feb;43(1):33-40. doi: 10.1007/s12020-012-9760-6. Epub 2012 Jul
 31.

1,5-Anhydroglucitol in diabetes mellitus.

Kim WJ(1), Park CY.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Gangneung Asan Hospital, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Gangneung, 
Korea.

The measure of glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) concentration is the gold standard of 
glycemic control index in diabetes management and is well known as a marker for 
diabetes complications. However, HbA1c level neither accurately reflect glucose 
fluctuations, nor does it provide a clear indication of glycemic control in 
recent days or weeks. HbA1c concentration measurement can be confounded in 
patients with anemia, hemoglobinopathy, liver disease, or renal impairment. 
1,5-Anhydroglucitol (1,5-AG) structurally resembles glucose. It can be 
influenced by diet or medication, gender and race, especially severe renal 
disease and various pathological conditions. Most notably, 1,5-AG level is 
reflective of short-term glucose status, postprandial hyperglycemia, and 
glycemic variability which are not captured by HbA1c assay. 1,5-AG may suggest 
an alternative index of subtypes of diabetes and a warning sign of diabetes 
complications. This review provides an overview of our current understanding of 
the role of 1,5-AG marker in diabetes. However, further investigations on the 
associations between this glycemic marker and diabetes complications are needed.

DOI: 10.1007/s12020-012-9760-6
PMID: 22847316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]