---
reference_id: "PMID:11953730"
title: "Inborn errors of metabolism in the Italian pediatric population: a national retrospective survey."
authors:
- Dionisi-Vici C
- Rizzo C
- Burlina AB
- Caruso U
- Sabetta G
- Uziel G
- Abeni D
journal: J Pediatr
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1067/mpd.2002.122394
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Italy/epidemiology
- Male
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/epidemiology"
- Population Surveillance
- Prospective Studies
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inborn errors of metabolism in the Italian pediatric population: a national retrospective survey.
**Authors:** Dionisi-Vici C, Rizzo C, Burlina AB, Caruso U, Sabetta G, Uziel G, Abeni D
**Journal:** J Pediatr (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1067/mpd.2002.122394](https://doi.org/10.1067/mpd.2002.122394)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 2002 Mar;140(3):321-7. doi: 10.1067/mpd.2002.122394.

Inborn errors of metabolism in the Italian pediatric population: a national 
retrospective survey.

Dionisi-Vici C(1), Rizzo C, Burlina AB, Caruso U, Sabetta G, Uziel G, Abeni D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Metabolism, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital-Scientific 
Institute (IRCCS), Rome, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: To estimate at the national level the overall and disease-specific 
incidence of inborn errors of metabolism not mass screened at birth.
STUDY DESIGN: Prospective nonconcurrent study (1985-1997) on patients 0 to 17 
years of age, diagnosed in 23 Italian pediatric reference centers.
RESULTS: Cases (n = 1935) were recruited representing an incidence of 1:3707 
live births for approximately 200 diseases. In the last 5 years the incidence 
was 1:2758, reflecting improved diagnostic facilities, better coverage, 
increased medical awareness, and newly discovered diseases. In this period, the 
most frequent classes of diseases were lysosomal storage disease, 1:8275; 
disorders of carbohydrate metabolism, 1:19,532; organic acidopathies, 1:21,422; 
and primary lactic acidemias, 1:27,106. The most frequent individual diseases 
were Gaucher type I, 1:40,247; glycogenosis type 1a, 1:57,746; methylmalonic 
acidurias, 1:61,775; and ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, 1:69,904. The 
incidence of diseases potentially identifiable with the use of a new neonatal 
mass screening technique is 1:6200. Of surviving patients, 11% reached adulthood 
by the end of the study.
CONCLUSIONS: Inborn errors of metabolism constitute a highly heterogeneous 
category of rare diseases, representing a relevant cause of morbidity and 
mortality in childhood. This study quantifies the minimum size of the disease 
burden, providing useful tools for public health and health policy planning.

DOI: 10.1067/mpd.2002.122394
PMID: 11953730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]