---
reference_id: "PMID:27602665"
title: Adalimumab in Patients with Active Noninfectious Uveitis.
authors:
- Jaffe GJ
- Dick AD
- Brézin AP
- Nguyen QD
- Thorne JE
- Kestelyn P
- Barisani-Asenbauer T
- Franco P
- Heiligenhaus A
- Scales D
- Chu DS
- Camez A
- Kwatra NV
- Song AP
- Kron M
- Tari S
- Suhler EB
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1509852
keywords:
- "Adalimumab/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Female
- Humans
- Intention to Treat Analysis
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Treatment Failure
- Uveitis/drug therapy
- "Vision Disorders/prevention & control"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adalimumab in Patients with Active Noninfectious Uveitis.
**Authors:** Jaffe GJ, Dick AD, Brézin AP, Nguyen QD, Thorne JE, Kestelyn P, Barisani-Asenbauer T, Franco P, Heiligenhaus A, Scales D, Chu DS, Camez A, Kwatra NV, Song AP, Kron M, Tari S, Suhler EB
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1509852](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1509852)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2016 Sep 8;375(10):932-43. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1509852.

Adalimumab in Patients with Active Noninfectious Uveitis.

Jaffe GJ(1), Dick AD(1), Brézin AP(1), Nguyen QD(1), Thorne JE(1), Kestelyn 
P(1), Barisani-Asenbauer T(1), Franco P(1), Heiligenhaus A(1), Scales D(1), Chu 
DS(1), Camez A(1), Kwatra NV(1), Song AP(1), Kron M(1), Tari S(1), Suhler EB(1).

Author information:
(1)From Duke University, Durham, NC (G.J.J.); University of Bristol, Bristol Eye 
Hospital, Bristol, and National Institute for Health Research Biomedical 
Research Centre at Moorfields Eye Hospital and University College London 
Institute of Ophthalmology, London - both in the United Kingdom (A.D.D.); 
Université Paris Descartes, Hôpital Cochin, Paris (A.P.B.); Truhlsen Eye 
Institute, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha (Q.D.N.); Johns Hopkins 
Medical Institute, Baltimore (J.E.T.); Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium 
(P.K.); Laura Bassi Center of Expertise Ocuvac, Medical University of Vienna, 
Vienna (T.B.-A.); Organización Médica de Investigación, Buenos Aires (P.F.); the 
Department of Ophthalmology, St. Franziskus-Hospital Münster, Münster (A.H.), 
University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen (A.H.), and AbbVie Deutschland, Ludwigshafen 
(A.C., M.K.) - all in Germany; University of Texas Health Science Center, San 
Antonio (D.S.); Metropolitan Eye Research and Surgery Institute, Palisades Park, 
NJ (D.S.C.); AbbVie, North Chicago, IL (N.V.K., A.P.S., S.T.); and Casey Eye 
Institute, Oregon Health and Science University, and VA Portland Health Care 
System (E.B.S.) - both in Portland.

BACKGROUND: Patients with noninfectious uveitis are at risk for long-term 
complications of uncontrolled inflammation, as well as for the adverse effects 
of long-term glucocorticoid therapy. We conducted a trial to assess the efficacy 
and safety of adalimumab as a glucocorticoid-sparing agent for the treatment of 
noninfectious uveitis.
METHODS: This multinational phase 3 trial involved adults who had active 
noninfectious intermediate uveitis, posterior uveitis, or panuveitis despite 
having received prednisone treatment for 2 or more weeks. Investigators and 
patients were unaware of the study-group assignments. Patients were randomly 
assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive adalimumab (a loading dose of 80 mg followed 
by a dose of 40 mg every 2 weeks) or matched placebo. All patients received a 
mandatory prednisone burst followed by tapering of prednisone over the course of 
15 weeks. The primary efficacy end point was the time to treatment failure 
occurring at or after week 6. Treatment failure was a multicomponent outcome 
that was based on assessment of new inflammatory lesions, best corrected visual 
acuity, anterior chamber cell grade, and vitreous haze grade. Nine ranked 
secondary efficacy end points were assessed, and adverse events were reported.
RESULTS: The median time to treatment failure was 24 weeks in the adalimumab 
group and 13 weeks in the placebo group. Among the 217 patients in the 
intention-to-treat population, those receiving adalimumab were less likely than 
those in the placebo group to have treatment failure (hazard ratio, 0.50; 95% 
confidence interval, 0.36 to 0.70; P<0.001). Outcomes with regard to three 
secondary end points (change in anterior chamber cell grade, change in vitreous 
haze grade, and change in best corrected visual acuity) were significantly 
better in the adalimumab group than in the placebo group. Adverse events and 
serious adverse events were reported more frequently among patients who received 
adalimumab (1052.4 vs. 971.7 adverse events and 28.8 vs. 13.6 serious adverse 
events per 100 person-years).
CONCLUSIONS: In our trial, adalimumab was found to be associated with a lower 
risk of uveitic flare or visual impairment and with more adverse events and 
serious adverse events than was placebo. (Funded by AbbVie; VISUAL I 
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01138657 .).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1509852
PMID: 27602665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]