---
reference_id: "PMID:27708066"
title: "Long-term renal outcome in children with OCRL mutations: retrospective analysis of a large international cohort."
authors:
- Zaniew M
- Bökenkamp A
- Kolbuc M
- La Scola C
- Baronio F
- Niemirska A
- Szczepanska M
- Bürger J
- La Manna A
- Miklaszewska M
- Rogowska-Kalisz A
- Gellermann J
- Zampetoglou A
- Wasilewska A
- Roszak M
- Moczko J
- Krzemien A
- Runowski D
- Siten G
- Zaluska-Lesniewska I
- Fonduli P
- Zurrida F
- Paglialonga F
- Gucev Z
- Paripovic D
- Rus R
- Said-Conti V
- Sartz L
- Chung WY
- Park SJ
- Lee JW
- Park YH
- Ahn YH
- Sikora P
- Stefanidis CJ
- Tasic V
- Konrad M
- Anglani F
- Addis M
- Cheong HI
- Ludwig M
- Bockenhauer D
journal: Nephrol Dial Transplant
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfw350
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Genotype
- Glomerular Filtration Rate
- Humans
- "Hypercalciuria/epidemiology, genetics"
- Male
- Mutation
- "Nephrocalcinosis/epidemiology, genetics"
- Phenotype
- Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases/genetics
- "Proteinuria/epidemiology, genetics"
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/genetics, physiopathology, therapy"
- Retrospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term renal outcome in children with OCRL mutations: retrospective analysis of a large international cohort.
**Authors:** Zaniew M, Bökenkamp A, Kolbuc M, La Scola C, Baronio F, Niemirska A, Szczepanska M, Bürger J, La Manna A, Miklaszewska M, Rogowska-Kalisz A, Gellermann J, Zampetoglou A, Wasilewska A, Roszak M, Moczko J, Krzemien A, Runowski D, Siten G, Zaluska-Lesniewska I, Fonduli P, Zurrida F, Paglialonga F, Gucev Z, Paripovic D, Rus R, Said-Conti V, Sartz L, Chung WY, Park SJ, Lee JW, Park YH, Ahn YH, Sikora P, Stefanidis CJ, Tasic V, Konrad M, Anglani F, Addis M, Cheong HI, Ludwig M, Bockenhauer D
**Journal:** Nephrol Dial Transplant (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ndt/gfw350](https://doi.org/10.1093/ndt/gfw350)

## Content

1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2018 Jan 1;33(1):85-94. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfw350.

Long-term renal outcome in children with OCRL mutations: retrospective analysis
of a large international cohort.

Zaniew M(1)(2), Bökenkamp A(3), Kolbuc M(1), La Scola C(4), Baronio F(5),
Niemirska A(6), Szczepanska M(7), Bürger J(8), La Manna A(9), Miklaszewska
M(10), Rogowska-Kalisz A(11), Gellermann J(12), Zampetoglou A(13), Wasilewska
A(14), Roszak M(15), Moczko J(15), Krzemien A(16), Runowski D(6), Siten G(17),
Zaluska-Lesniewska I(18), Fonduli P(19), Zurrida F(19), Paglialonga F(20), Gucev
Z(21), Paripovic D(22), Rus R(23), Said-Conti V(24), Sartz L(25), Chung WY(26),
Park SJ(27), Lee JW(28), Park YH(29), Ahn YH(30), Sikora P(2)(31), Stefanidis
CJ(13), Tasic V(21), Konrad M(8), Anglani F(32), Addis M(33), Cheong HI(34),
Ludwig M(35), Bockenhauer D(36).

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital, Poznan, Poland.
(2)Polish Registry of Inherited Tubulopathies (POLtube), Polish Society of
Pediatric Nephrology, Poland.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, VU Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Nephrology and Dialysis Unit, Department of Woman, Child and Urological
Diseases, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria 'Sant'Orsola-Malpighi', Bologna,
Italy.
(5)Endocrinology Unit, Department of Woman, Child and Urological Diseases,
Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria 'Sant'Orsola-Malpighi', Bologna, Italy.
(6)Department of Nephrology, Kidney Transplantation and Hypertension, The
Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
(7)Chair and Clinical Department of Pediatrics, SMDZ in Zabrze, SUM in Katowice,
Katowice, Poland.
(8)Department of General Pediatrics, University Children's Hospital, Münster,
Germany.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, II University of Naples, Naples, Italy.
(10)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Collegium Medicum of the Jagiellonian
University, Cracow, Poland.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Immunology and Nephrology, Polish Mothers Memorial
Hospital Research Institute, Lódz, Poland.
(12)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Charité Children's Hospital, Berlin, Germany.
(13)Pediatric Nephrology, 'A. and P. Kyriakou' Children's Hospital, Athens,
Greece.
(14)Department of Pediatrics and Nephrology, Medical University of Bialystok,
Bialystok, Poland.
(15)Department of Computer Science and Statistics, Poznan University of Medical
Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
(16)Department of Nephrology, Children's Hospital, Katowice, Poland.
(17)Dialysis Center, District Hospital, Rzeszów, Poland.
(18)Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Gdansk, Nephrology and
Hypertension, Gdansk, Poland.
(19)Pediatric Nephrology, Hospital G.Brotzu, Cagliari, Italy.
(20)Pediatric Nephrology and Dialysis Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale
Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(21)University Children's Hospital, Medical Faculty Skopje, Skopje, Macedonia.
(22)Nephrology Department, University Children's Hospital, Belgrade, Serbia.
(23)Division of Nephrology, University Children's Hospital, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(24)Mater Dei Hospital, Msida, Malta.
(25)Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Skåne University Hospital,
Lund, Sweden.
(26)Department of Pediatrics, Inje University Busan Paik Hospital, Busan, Korea.
(27)Department of Pediatrics, Ajou University Daewoo Hospital, Geoje, Korea.
(28)Department of Pediatrics, Ehwa University Mokdong Hospital, Seoul, Korea.
(29)Department of Pediatrics, Yeungnam University College of Medicine, Daegu,
Korea.
(30)Department of Pediatrics, Hallym University Kangnam Sacred Heart Hospital,
Seoul, Korea.
(31)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin,
Poland.
(32)Laboratory of Histomorphology and Molecular Biology of the Kidney,
Department of Medicine, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(33)Department of Public Health, Clinical and Molecular Medicine, University of
Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.
(34)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University Children's Hospital,
Seoul, Korea.
(35)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, University of
Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(36)University College London, Institute of Child Health and Great Ormond Street
Hospital for Children, National Health Service Trust, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Lowe syndrome (LS) and Dent-2 disease (DD2) are disorders associated
with mutations in the OCRL gene and characterized by progressive chronic kidney
disease (CKD). Here, we aimed to investigate the long-term renal outcome and
identify potential determinants of CKD and its progression in children with
these tubulopathies.
METHODS: Retrospective analyses were conducted of clinical and genetic data in a
cohort of 106 boys (LS: 88 and DD2: 18). For genotype-phenotype analysis, we
grouped mutations according to their type and localization. To investigate
progression of CKD we used survival analysis by Kaplan-Meier method using stage
3 CKD as the end-point.
RESULTS: Median estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was lower in the LS
group compared with DD2 (58.8 versus 87.4 mL/min/1.73 m2, P < 0.01). CKD stage
II-V was found in 82% of patients, of these 58% and 28% had moderate-to-severe
CKD in LS and DD2, respectively. Three patients (3%), all with LS, developed
stage 5 of CKD. Survival analysis showed that LS was also associated with a
faster CKD progression than DD2 (P < 0.01). On multivariate analysis, eGFR was
dependent only on age (b = -0.46, P < 0.001). Localization, but not type of
mutations, tended to correlate with eGFR. There was also no significant
association between presence of nephrocalcinosis, hypercalciuria, proteinuria
and number of adverse clinical events and CKD.
CONCLUSIONS: CKD is commonly found in children with OCRL mutations. CKD
progression was strongly related to the underlying diagnosis but did not
associate with clinical parameters, such as nephrocalcinosis or proteinuria.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of ERA-EDTA.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfw350
PMID: 27708066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
