---
reference_id: PMID:27310658
title: Conventional treatment regimens for ulcerative colitis alleviate fatigue - an observational cohort study.
authors:
- Grimstad T
- Norheim KB
- Kvaløy JT
- Isaksen K
- Leitao K
- Carlsen A
- Karlsen LN
- Aabakken L
- Omdal R
journal: Scand J Gastroenterol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1080/00365521.2016.1195869
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- Adult
- Aged
- Biomarkers/analysis
- C-Reactive Protein/analysis
- Cohort Studies
- "Colitis, Ulcerative/complications, drug therapy"
- Colonoscopy
- Fatigue/epidemiology
- Feces/chemistry
- Female
- Hemoglobins/analysis
- Humans
- Leukocyte L1 Antigen Complex/analysis
- Male
- "Mesalamine/administration & dosage"
- Middle Aged
- Norway
- Regression Analysis
- Severity of Illness Index
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Conventional treatment regimens for ulcerative colitis alleviate fatigue - an observational cohort study.
**Authors:** Grimstad T, Norheim KB, Kvaløy JT, Isaksen K, Leitao K, Carlsen A, Karlsen LN, Aabakken L, Omdal R
**Journal:** Scand J Gastroenterol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00365521.2016.1195869](https://doi.org/10.1080/00365521.2016.1195869)

## Content

1. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2016 Oct;51(10):1213-9. doi:
10.1080/00365521.2016.1195869. Epub 2016 Jun 16.

Conventional treatment regimens for ulcerative colitis alleviate fatigue - an
observational cohort study.

Grimstad T(1), Norheim KB(1), Kvaløy JT(2)(3), Isaksen K(1), Leitao K(1),
Carlsen A(1), Karlsen LN(1), Aabakken L(4), Omdal R(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Internal Medicine , Stavanger University Hospital , Stavanger
, Norway ;
(2)b Department of Mathematics and Natural Science , University of Stavanger ,
Stavanger , Norway ;
(3)c Research Department , Stavanger University Hospital , Stavanger , Norway ;
(4)d Department of Medical Gastroenterology , Rikshospitalet University Hospital
, Oslo , Norway ;
(5)e Department of Clinical Science , University of Bergen , Bergen , Norway.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to investigate the course of fatigue in a
conventional inflammatory bowel disease treatment setting.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Eighty-two patients with newly diagnosed ulcerative
colitis were included in an observational cohort study and received conventional
non-biological drug treatment for 3 months. Colonoscopy was performed at
diagnosis and after 3 months, disease activity was assessed by Mayo score and
measurements of serum C-reactive protein (CRP) and fecal calprotectin levels.
Fatigue was evaluated using the fatigue visual analog scale (fVAS). Mood was
assessed with the hospital anxiety and depression scale (HADS). Associations
between fVAS scores and time; age; CRP, fecal calprotectin, hemoglobin, and
ferritin levels; and Mayo scores, Mayo endoscopic scores, and HADS depression
subscale (HADS-D) scores were explored.
RESULTS: Median fVAS scores decreased, as did Mayo scores and CRP and fecal
calprotectin concentrations. HADS-D scores remained unchanged, whereas
hemoglobin levels increased after 3 months. Increased fVAS scores were
associated with higher ferritin, Mayo and HADS-D scores. There were no
associations between fVAS scores and CRP, fecal calprotectin, or Mayo endoscopic
scores. Colonic disease distribution did not influence fatigue significantly.
CONCLUSIONS: Disease activity and fatigue improved after 3 months of
conventional ulcerative colitis treatment. Over time, more severe fatigue was
associated with more ulcerative colitis symptoms, but not with objective disease
activity markers or colonic disease distribution. A clinical setting of standard
treatment regimens and medical attention may alleviate fatigue in IBD patients.

DOI: 10.1080/00365521.2016.1195869
PMID: 27310658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
