---
reference_id: "PMID:15372591"
title: "Movement Disorder Society Task Force report on the Hoehn and Yahr staging scale: status and recommendations."
authors:
- Goetz CG
- Poewe W
- Rascol O
- Sampaio C
- Stebbins GT
- Counsell C
- Giladi N
- Holloway RG
- Moore CG
- Wenning GK
- Yahr MD
- Seidl L
- "Movement Disorder Society Task Force on Rating Scales for Parkinson's Disease"
journal: Mov Disord
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1002/mds.20213
keywords:
- Feasibility Studies
- Health Status
- "History, 20th Century"
- Movement Disorders/diagnosis
- Parkinson Disease/diagnosis
- Reproducibility of Results
- Surveys and Questionnaires
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Movement Disorder Society Task Force report on the Hoehn and Yahr staging scale: status and recommendations.
**Authors:** Goetz CG, Poewe W, Rascol O, Sampaio C, Stebbins GT, Counsell C, Giladi N, Holloway RG, Moore CG, Wenning GK, Yahr MD, Seidl L, Movement Disorder Society Task Force on Rating Scales for Parkinson's Disease
**Journal:** Mov Disord (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.20213](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.20213)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 2004 Sep;19(9):1020-8. doi: 10.1002/mds.20213.

Movement Disorder Society Task Force report on the Hoehn and Yahr staging scale: 
status and recommendations.

Goetz CG(1), Poewe W, Rascol O, Sampaio C, Stebbins GT, Counsell C, Giladi N, 
Holloway RG, Moore CG, Wenning GK, Yahr MD, Seidl L; Movement Disorder Society 
Task Force on Rating Scales for Parkinson's Disease.

Author information:
(1)Rush University Medical Center, 1725 W. Harrison Street, Chicago, IL 60612, 
USA. cgoetz@rush.edu

The Movement Disorder Society Task Force for Rating Scales for Parkinson's 
disease (PD) prepared a critique of the Hoehn and Yahr scale (HY). Strengths of 
the HY scale include its wide utilization and acceptance. Progressively higher 
stages correlate with neuroimaging studies of dopaminergic loss, and high 
correlations exist between the HY scale and some standardized scales of motor 
impairment, disability, and quality of life. Weaknesses include the scale's 
mixing of impairment and disability and its non-linearity. Because the HY scale 
is weighted heavily toward postural instability as the primary index of disease 
severity, it does not capture completely impairments or disability from other 
motor features of PD and gives no information on nonmotor problems. Direct 
clinimetric testing of the HY scale has been very limited, but the scale 
fulfills at least some criteria for reliability and validity, especially for the 
midranges of the scale (Stages 2-4). Although a "modified HY scale" that 
includes 0.5 increments has been adopted widely, no clinimetric data are 
available on this adaptation. The Task Force recommends that: (1) the HY scale 
be used in its original form for demographic presentation of patient groups; (2) 
when the HY scale is used for group description, medians and ranges should be 
reported and analysis of changes should use nonparametric methods; (3) in 
research settings, the HY scale is useful primarily for defining 
inclusion/exclusion criteria; (4) to retain simplicity, clinicians should "rate 
what you see" and therefore incorporate comorbidities when assigning a HY stage; 
and (5) because of the wide usage of the modified HY scale with 0.5 increments, 
this adaptation warrants clinimetric testing. Without such testing, however, the 
original five-point scales should be maintained.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.20213
PMID: 15372591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]