---
reference_id: "PMID:36031446"
title: "Survival outcomes associated with Lynch syndrome colorectal cancer and metachronous rate after subtotal/total versus segmental colectomy: Meta-analysis."
authors:
- Toh JWT
- Hui N
- Collins G
- Phan K
journal: Surgery
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.surg.2022.06.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Survival outcomes associated with Lynch syndrome colorectal cancer and metachronous rate after subtotal/total versus segmental colectomy: Meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Toh JWT, Hui N, Collins G, Phan K
**Journal:** Surgery (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.surg.2022.06.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.surg.2022.06.013)

## Content

1. Surgery. 2022 Nov;172(5):1315-1322. doi: 10.1016/j.surg.2022.06.013. Epub 2022
 Aug 26.

Survival outcomes associated with Lynch syndrome colorectal cancer and 
metachronous rate after subtotal/total versus segmental colectomy: 
Meta-analysis.

Toh JWT(1), Hui N(2), Collins G(3), Phan K(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Colorectal Surgery, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia; Faculty of Medicine and Health, Westmead Clinical School, University 
of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; South Western Sydney Clinical School, 
University of New South Wales, Australia. Electronic address: 
James.Toh@health.nsw.gov.au.
(2)Coffs Harbour Health Campus, Coffs Harbour, New South Wales, Australia.
(3)Faculty of Medicine and Health, Westmead Clinical School, University of 
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(4)South Western Sydney Clinical School, University of New South Wales, 
Australia.

BACKGROUND: Lynch syndrome is associated with the most common form of heritable 
bowel cancer. There remains limited level 1 evidence on survival outcomes and 
rate of metachronous tumor associated with Lynch syndrome colorectal cancer.
METHODS: A systematic literature search of original studies was performed on 
Ovid searching MEDLINE, Embase, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 
American College of Physicians ACP Journal Club, Database of Abstracts of 
Reviews of Effects DARE, and Clinical Trials databases from inception of 
database to February 2021. The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews 
and Meta-Analyses reporting guideline was followed. The data were pooled using a 
random-effects model. All of the P values were 2-tailed, and statistical 
analysis was performed using RevMan v. 5.3 Cochrane Collaboration.
RESULTS: From 1,942 studies, 15 studies met the inclusion criteria and were 
included for qualitative and quantitative synthesis. The five-year overall 
survival was 89.5% (82.0-94.1%), P < .01; I2 = 89%. The ten-year overall 
survival was 80.5% (68.7-88.6%), P < .01; I2 = 81%. The fifteen-year overall 
survival was 70% (33.7%-91.5%), P < .01; I2 = 93%. Univariate meta-regression 
analysis showed no statistically significant difference in 5-year overall 
survival by sex, age, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, nor tumor location (right versus left 
colon). The metachronous tumor rate was 12% to 33% with a follow-up period of up 
to 15 years, significantly lower in patients who underwent subtotal/total 
colectomy (0-6%).
CONCLUSION: The overall survival of patients with colorectal cancer with Lynch 
syndrome was approximately 90% at 5 years, 80% at 10 years, and 70% at 15 years. 
The metachronous tumor rate was approximately 10% to 30% at up to 15 years, 
significantly improved by subtotal/total colectomy.

Crown Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.surg.2022.06.013
PMID: 36031446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]