---
reference_id: "PMID:40225079"
title: "Labyrinthitis ossificans with fluctuating symptoms lasting for more than 10 years: a case report and literature review."
authors:
- Wang J
- Li W
- Hu Y
- Lu W
- Yu X
- Li X
- Zhang D
- Wang H
journal: Transl Pediatr
year: '2025'
doi: 10.21037/tp-2025-128
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Labyrinthitis ossificans with fluctuating symptoms lasting for more than 10 years: a case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Wang J, Li W, Hu Y, Lu W, Yu X, Li X, Zhang D, Wang H
**Journal:** Transl Pediatr (2025)
**DOI:** [10.21037/tp-2025-128](https://doi.org/10.21037/tp-2025-128)

## Content

1. Transl Pediatr. 2025 Mar 31;14(3):507-515. doi: 10.21037/tp-2025-128. Epub
2025  Mar 26.

Labyrinthitis ossificans with fluctuating symptoms lasting for more than 10 
years: a case report and literature review.

Wang J(#)(1)(2)(3), Li W(#)(1)(2)(3), Hu Y(1)(2)(3), Lu W(1)(2)(3), Yu 
X(1)(2)(3), Li X(1)(2)(3), Zhang D(1)(2)(3), Wang H(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Shandong Provincial ENT 
Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, China.
(2)Shandong Provincial Vertigo Dizziness Medical Center, Jinan, China.
(3)Shandong Medical Health Key Laboratory of Vertigo & Vestibular Medicine, 
Jinan, China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Labyrinthitis ossificans (LO) is the end stage of labyrinthitis. 
Existing case reports primarily center around hearing loss and overlook a 
crucial aspect that patients with LO frequently experience balance problems, 
while our study fills this gap. We report a rare case of bilateral labyrinthitis 
secondary to meningitis with recurrent fluctuations in cochlear and vestibular 
symptoms over more than a decade, and incomplete ossification of the labyrinth.
CASE DESCRIPTION: An 8-month-old female patient was diagnosed with meningitis, 
and later experienced developmental delays and hearing issues. By 4-5 years, she 
had complete sensorineural hearing loss in the left ear. At 13 years, she 
started to experience problems in the right ear, such as hearing decline and 
aural fullness. Computed tomography and gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance 
imaging showed specific inner ear changes, and a decline in vestibular function. 
During the treatment course, the patient initially demonstrated an improvement 
in right - ear hearing. Nevertheless, her auditory function subsequently 
deteriorated, ultimately underwent cochlear implantation surgery. Fortunately, 
following the comprehensive treatment regimen, the patient's balance function 
recovered, and symptoms of dizziness ceased to recur.
CONCLUSIONS: This patient suffered from a rare form of labyrinthitis with 
fluctuating cochlear and vestibular symptoms over an extended course of illness. 
Despite the temporary effectiveness of corticosteroid treatment during the 
process, cochlear implantation was ultimately required. During the treatment, we 
paid special attention to the patient's vestibular function and observed a 
significant decline in bilateral vestibular function. Based on the examination 
results, we have provided more comprehensive treatment and lifestyle 
recommendations to better ensure her safety during activities.

Copyright © 2025 AME Publishing Company. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tp-2025-128
PMCID: PMC11983006
PMID: 40225079

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
https://tp.amegroups.com/article/view/10.21037/tp-2025-128/coif). All authors 
report that this study was funded by National Natural Science Foundation of 
China (Nos. 82101225 and 82471175), Traditional Chinese Medicine Science and 
Technology Project of Shandong Province (No. M20243002), China Postdoctoral 
Science Foundation (No. 2024M761821), and the Natural Science Foundation of 
Shandong Province (No. ZR2024MH027). The authors have no other conflicts of 
interest to declare.