---
reference_id: "PMID:7919348"
title: Detection of minimal residual disease in acute myelomonocytic leukemia with abnormal marrow eosinophils by nested polymerase chain reaction with allele specific amplification.
authors:
- Hébert J
- Cayuela JM
- Daniel MT
- Berger R
- Sigaux F
journal: Blood
year: '1994'
keywords:
- Alleles
- Base Sequence
- Chromosome Inversion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 16"
- DNA Primers/chemistry
- Eosinophils
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Myelomonocytic, Acute/diagnosis, pathology"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Myosins/genetics
- "Neoplasm, Residual/diagnosis"
- Polymerase Chain Reaction/methods
- "RNA, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Recombinant Fusion Proteins/genetics
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Detection of minimal residual disease in acute myelomonocytic leukemia with abnormal marrow eosinophils by nested polymerase chain reaction with allele specific amplification.
**Authors:** Hébert J, Cayuela JM, Daniel MT, Berger R, Sigaux F
**Journal:** Blood (1994)

## Content

1. Blood. 1994 Oct 1;84(7):2291-6.

Detection of minimal residual disease in acute myelomonocytic leukemia with 
abnormal marrow eosinophils by nested polymerase chain reaction with allele 
specific amplification.

Hébert J(1), Cayuela JM, Daniel MT, Berger R, Sigaux F.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire d'Hématologie Moléculaire, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Paris, France.

Acute myelomonocytic leukemia with bone marrow eosinophilia (AML-M4Eo in the 
French-American-British FAB] classification) is frequently associated with 
pericentric inversion of chromosome 16, inv(16)(p13q22). Recently, the molecular 
cloning of teh breakpoints has led to the identification of the two fused genes, 
CBFB on 16q and MYH11 on 16p. We have analyzed 24 patients with AML-M4Eo at 
diagnosis and 47 patients with AML of other FAB subtypes, by a 
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay for the 
CBFB/MYH11 fusion mRNAs. Three types of fusion mRNAs were detected in 22 samples 
of AML-M4Eo (type A, n = 20; type C, n = 1; and type D, n = 1). Among these 22 
positive samples, inv(16) was found in the 20 cytogenetically studied cases. No 
fusion transcript was detected in two patients with AML-M4Eo and in patients 
with other types of AML. These results confirm that CBFB/MYH11 transcripts (with 
a predominant type A form) are present in most cases of inv(16) AML. Moreover, 
detection of the hybrid transcript is closely associated with the finding of 
abnormal bone marrow (BM) eosinophils in AML-M4Eo as it is not found in other, 
FAB subtypes of AML, including AML-M4. To assess the presence of type A 
CBFB/MYH11 fusion transcripts in five AML-M4Eo patients in remission, we 
designed a sensitive assay combining nested PCR and allele-specific 
amplification (NPASA). Residual leukemia cells were detected in four patients 
who were in remission from 4 to 22 months, but not in one patient in long-term 
remission (5 years). The clinical relevance of persistent CBFB/MYH11 fusion 
transcripts in remission remains to be established by studying a large 
prospective series of patients. NPASA provides a useful and sensitive tool for 
the detection of minimal residual disease in inv(16) AML and, potentially, in 
other leukemias associated with translocations that result in a predominant 
fusion transcript.

PMID: 7919348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]