---
reference_id: "PMID:23408600"
title: "Safe, accurate, prenatal diagnosis of thanatophoric dysplasia using ultrasound and free fetal DNA."
authors:
- Chitty LS
- Khalil A
- Barrett AN
- Pajkrt E
- Griffin DR
- Cole TJ
journal: Prenat Diagn
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1002/pd.4066
keywords:
- Adult
- "DNA/analysis, blood, metabolism"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Femur/embryology
- "Fetus/embryology, metabolism"
- Gestational Age
- Growth Charts
- Humans
- Pregnancy
- "Prenatal Diagnosis/adverse effects, methods"
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3/genetics"
- Retrospective Studies
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- "Thanatophoric Dysplasia/blood, diagnosis, diagnostic imaging"
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Safe, accurate, prenatal diagnosis of thanatophoric dysplasia using ultrasound and free fetal DNA.
**Authors:** Chitty LS, Khalil A, Barrett AN, Pajkrt E, Griffin DR, Cole TJ
**Journal:** Prenat Diagn (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pd.4066](https://doi.org/10.1002/pd.4066)

## Content

1. Prenat Diagn. 2013 May;33(5):416-23. doi: 10.1002/pd.4066. Epub 2013 Feb 14.

Safe, accurate, prenatal diagnosis of thanatophoric dysplasia using ultrasound 
and free fetal DNA.

Chitty LS(1), Khalil A, Barrett AN, Pajkrt E, Griffin DR, Cole TJ.

Author information:
(1)Clinical and Molecular Genetics Unit, UCL Institute of Child Health, 
University College London, UK. l.chitty@ucl.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: To improve the prenatal diagnosis of thanatophoric dysplasia by 
defining the change in fetal size across gestation and the frequency of 
sonographic features, and developing non-invasive molecular genetic diagnosis 
based on cell-free fetal DNA (cffDNA) in maternal plasma.
METHODS: Fetuses with a confirmed diagnosis of thanatophoric dysplasia were 
ascertained, records reviewed, sonographic features and measurements determined. 
Charts of fetal size were then constructed using the LMS (lambda-mu-sigma) 
method and compared with charts used in normal pregnancies and those complicated 
by achondroplasia. Cases in this cohort referred to our Regional Genetics 
Laboratory for molecular diagnosis using cffDNA were identified and results 
reviewed.
RESULTS: Forty-two cases were scanned in our units. Commonly reported 
sonographic features were very short and sometimes bowed femora, frontal 
bossing, cloverleaf skull, short fingers, a small chest and polyhydramnios. Limb 
shortening was obvious from as early as 13 weeks' gestation, with minimal growth 
after 20 weeks. Analysis of cffDNA in three of these pregnancies confirmed the 
presence of the c.742C>CT (p.Arg248Cys) or the c.1948A>AG (p.Lys650Glu) mutation 
in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 gene.
CONCLUSION: These data should improve the accuracy of the sonographic diagnosis 
of thanatophoric dysplasia and have implications for reliable and safe targeted 
molecular confirmation using cffDNA.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pd.4066
PMCID: PMC4166694
PMID: 23408600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]