---
reference_id: "PMID:22719002"
title: "Prognostic, clinical and demographic features in SCN1A mutation-positive Dravet syndrome."
authors:
- Brunklaus A
- Ellis R
- Reavey E
- Forbes GH
- Zuberi SM
journal: Brain
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/brain/aws151
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- "Epilepsies, Myoclonic/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Female
- Forecasting
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- NAV1.1 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- Sodium Channels/genetics
- Syndrome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prognostic, clinical and demographic features in SCN1A mutation-positive Dravet syndrome.
**Authors:** Brunklaus A, Ellis R, Reavey E, Forbes GH, Zuberi SM
**Journal:** Brain (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/aws151](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/aws151)

## Content

1. Brain. 2012 Aug;135(Pt 8):2329-36. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws151. Epub 2012 Jun
19.

Prognostic, clinical and demographic features in SCN1A mutation-positive Dravet
syndrome.

Brunklaus A(1), Ellis R, Reavey E, Forbes GH, Zuberi SM.

Author information:
(1)The Paediatric Neurosciences Research Group, Royal Hospital for Sick
Children, Yorkhill, Dalnair Street, Glasgow G3 8SJ, UK.

Comment in
    Brain. 2012 Aug;135(Pt 8):2309-11. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws198.

Dravet syndrome is a severe infantile onset epileptic encephalopathy associated
with mutations in the sodium channel alpha 1 subunit gene SCN1A. To date no
large studies have systematically examined the prognostic, clinical and
demographic features of the disease. We prospectively collected data on a UK
cohort of individuals with Dravet syndrome during a 5-year study period and
analysed demographic information based on UK population and birth figures. From
structured referral data we examined a range of clinical characteristics
including epilepsy phenotype, seizure precipitants, electroencephalography data,
imaging studies, mutation class and response to medication. Predictors of
developmental outcome were determined by logistic regression. We identified 241
cases with SCN1A mutation-positive Dravet syndrome, 207 of which were UK-based.
The incidence of mutation-positive Dravet syndrome is at least 1:40 900 UK
births. Clinical features predicting a worse developmental outcome included
status epilepticus (odds ratio = 3.1; confidence interval = 1.5-6.3; P = 0.003),
interictal electroencephalography abnormalities in the first year of life (odds
ratio = 5.7; confidence interval = 1.9-16.8; P = 0.002) and motor disorder (odds
ratio = 3.3; confidence interval = 1.7-6.4; P < 0.001). No significant effect
was seen for seizure precipitants, magnetic resonance imaging abnormalities or
mutation class (truncating versus missense). Abnormal magnetic resonance imaging
was documented in 11% of cases, principally with findings of non-specific brain
atrophy or hippocampal changes. Sodium valproate, benzodiazepines and topiramate
were reported as being the most helpful medications at the time of referral.
Aggravation of seizures was reported for carbamazepine and lamotrigine. The
identification of factors influencing prognosis both aids counselling and
encourages early, syndrome-specific therapy. Prevention of status epilepticus
with regular medication and emergency protocols is important and may influence
developmental outcome.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/aws151
PMID: 22719002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
