---
reference_id: "PMID:17504518"
title: Central core disease.
authors:
- Jungbluth H
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-25
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Central core disease.
**Authors:** Jungbluth H
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-2-25](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-2-25)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2007 May 15;2:25. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-25.

Central core disease.

Jungbluth H(1).

Author information:
(1)Evelina Children's Hospital, Department of Paediatric Neurology, St. Thomas' 
Hospital, London, UK. Heinz.Jungbluth@gstt.nhs.uk

Central core disease (CCD) is an inherited neuromuscular disorder characterised 
by central cores on muscle biopsy and clinical features of a congenital 
myopathy. Prevalence is unknown but the condition is probably more common than 
other congenital myopathies. CCD typically presents in infancy with hypotonia 
and motor developmental delay and is characterized by predominantly proximal 
weakness pronounced in the hip girdle; orthopaedic complications are common and 
malignant hyperthermia susceptibility (MHS) is a frequent complication. CCD and 
MHS are allelic conditions both due to (predominantly dominant) mutations in the 
skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene, encoding the principal skeletal 
muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium release channel (RyR1). Altered 
excitability and/or changes in calcium homeostasis within muscle cells due to 
mutation-induced conformational changes of the RyR protein are considered the 
main pathogenetic mechanism(s). The diagnosis of CCD is based on the presence of 
suggestive clinical features and central cores on muscle biopsy; muscle MRI may 
show a characteristic pattern of selective muscle involvement and aid the 
diagnosis in cases with equivocal histopathological findings. Mutational 
analysis of the RYR1 gene may provide genetic confirmation of the diagnosis. 
Management is mainly supportive and has to anticipate susceptibility to 
potentially life-threatening reactions to general anaesthesia. Further 
evaluation of the underlying molecular mechanisms may provide the basis for 
future rational pharmacological treatment. In the majority of patients, weakness 
is static or only slowly progressive, with a favourable long-term outcome.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-25
PMCID: PMC1887524
PMID: 17504518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]