---
reference_id: "PMID:20301481"
title: Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Lucky AW
- Pope E
- Crawford S
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Lucky AW, Pope E, Crawford S

## Content

1. Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa.

Lucky AW(1), Pope E(2), Crawford S(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2006 Aug 21 [updated 2025 Aug 7].

Author information:
(1)Emeritus Professor of Dermatology and Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's 
Epidermolysis Bullosa Center, Cincinnati Children's Hospital, Cincinnati, Ohio
(2)Division of Pediatric Dermatology, Hospital for Sick Children;, Temerty 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
(3)Genetic Counselor, Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital, Cincinnati, Ohio

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (DEB) is 
characterized by skin fragility manifested by blistering and erosions with 
minimal trauma. Many individuals also have dystrophic or absent nails. DEB is 
divided into two major types depending on inheritance pattern: recessive 
dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB) and dominant dystrophic epidermolysis 
bullosa (DDEB). Clinical findings in severe RDEB include skin fragility 
manifested by blistering and erosions with minimal trauma that heals with milia 
and scarring. Blistering and erosions affecting the whole body may be present in 
the neonatal period. Oral involvement may lead to mouth blistering, fusion of 
the tongue to the floor of the mouth, and progressive diminution of the size of 
the oral cavity and mouth opening. Esophageal erosions can lead to webs and 
strictures that can cause severe dysphagia. Malnutrition with vitamin and 
mineral deficiency may lead to growth deficiency in young children. Corneal 
erosions can lead to scarring and loss of vision. Blistering of the hands and 
feet followed by scarring results in contractures and pseudosyndactyly. The 
lifetime risk of aggressive squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is greater than 90%. 
In contrast, the blistering in intermediate RDEB may be localized to hands, 
feet, knees, and elbows with or without involvement of flexural areas and the 
trunk, and without severe scarring. In DDEB, blistering is often mild and 
limited to hands, feet, knees, and elbows, but nonetheless heals with scarring. 
Dystrophic nails, especially toenails, are common and may be the only 
manifestation of DDEB.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of DEB is established in a proband with 
characteristic clinical findings and biallelic COL7A1 pathogenic variants (for 
RDEB) or a heterozygous pathogenic variant in COL7A1 (for DDEB) identified by 
molecular genetic testing. Skin biopsy using transmission electron microscopy 
and/or immunofluorescent antibody/antigen mapping can be considered in those 
with inconclusive molecular genetic testing or if genetic mutation analysis is 
not available.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapies: Beremagene geperpavec-svdt topical therapy in 
those with molecularly confirmed DEB (must be applied by a health care 
provider); prademagene zamikeracel autologous gene-corrected keratinocyte grafts 
(one-time surgical application per lesion; must be performed through a 
Zevanskyn™ Qualified Treatment Center); birch triterpenes / birch bark extract 
topical therapy. Supportive care: Minimize new blisters with education of 
caretakers, wrapping and padding extremities, and soft and loose-fitting 
clothing; vaginal delivery is the preferred method, but in certain 
circumstances, cesarian delivery may be recommended to prevent trauma of an 
affected fetus; encourage play that reduces risk of skin trauma; dressing and 
padding to protect bone prominences; new blisters should be lanced, drained, and 
in most cases dressed with nonadherent dressings, covered with padding for 
stability and protection, and secured with an elastic mesh-like wrap for 
integrity (e.g., burn net). Antibiotics and antiseptics for wound infection; 
appropriate footwear and physical therapy to preserve ambulation; topical, oral, 
and psychological therapies for pain and itch; specialized treatment of SCC; 
good dental care; dilation of esophageal strictures and webs to improve 
swallowing; management of constipation. Fluid and electrolyte management as 
needed; nutritional support including feeding gastrostomy tube, vitamin A, zinc, 
selenium, and carnitine supplementation. Anemia is treated with iron supplements 
and transfusions as needed. Eye lubricants and protective contact lenses may 
prevent corneal abrasions. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors for 
cardiomyopathy; treatment of urologic and kidney manifestations per urologist 
and nephrologist. Occupational and physical therapy may help prevent hand and 
other joint contractures. Surgical release of fingers often needs to be 
repeated. Calcium and vitamin D supplementation and bisphosphonates as needed 
for osteoporosis. Estrogen replacement as needed for delayed puberty; 
suppression of menses can prevent exacerbation of anemia; psychosocial support. 
Surveillance: Thorough skin examination at each visit and as recommended by 
dermatologist; evaluation of crusted, non-healing, and painful lesions as well 
as those with exuberant scar tissue at least annually beginning at age ten 
years; biopsies of suspicious lesions for evidence of SCC. Assess oral mucosa, 
feeding, esophageal involvement, gastrointestinal manifestations, growth, 
nutrition, hand function, footwear, mobility, and family needs at each visit. 
Serum vitamin A, selenium, carnitine, zinc, 25-hydroxyvitamin D3, complete blood 
count, iron studies, and urinalysis every six to 12 months; ophthalmology 
examinations as needed; annual echocardiogram to identify dilated cardiomyopathy 
starting at age two years; annual spine radiographs and DXA scan to assess for 
osteoporosis starting at age six years or earlier in those with unexplained pain 
and/or fractures; evaluation of pubertal status at each visit beginning at age 
ten to 12 years. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Nasogastric tubes are 
discouraged because of oral and esophageal fragility; poorly fitting or 
coarse-textured clothing and footwear; activities/bandages that traumatize the 
skin. Evaluation of relatives at risk: Molecular genetic testing of at-risk 
relatives should be offered to permit early diagnosis and treatment in order to 
identify those who would benefit from management of trauma to the skin.
GENETIC COUNSELING: DEB is inherited in either an autosomal dominant (DDEB) or 
autosomal recessive (RDEB) manner. Some COL7A1 pathogenic variants are 
associated with both DDEB and RDEB. Molecular characterization of the COL7A1 
pathogenic variants is the only accurate method to determine mode of inheritance 
and recurrence risk; phenotype severity and skin biopsy findings alone are not 
sufficient. DDEB: About 70% of individuals diagnosed with DDEB are reported to 
have an affected parent. If a parent of a proband with DDEB is affected and/or 
is known to be heterozygous for the COL7A1 pathogenic variant, the risk to the 
sibs is 50%. Each child of an individual with DDEB has a 50% chance of 
inheriting the pathogenic variant. Intrafamilial clinical variability and 
reduced penetrance have been observed among heterozygous family members. RDEB: 
If both parents are known to be heterozygous for a COL7A1 pathogenic variant, 
each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being 
affected, a 50% chance of being heterozygous, and a 25% chance of inheriting 
neither of the familial pathogenic variants. Heterozygous sibs of a proband with 
RDEB are typically asymptomatic, although some pathogenic variants are 
associated with both DDEB and RDEB. Once the COL7A1 pathogenic variant(s) have 
been identified in an affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation 
genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301481