---
reference_id: "PMID:37074727"
title: A Phase II Redifferentiation Trial with Dabrafenib-Trametinib and 131I in Metastatic Radioactive Iodine Refractory BRAF p.V600E-Mutated Differentiated Thyroid Cancer.
authors:
- Leboulleux S
- Do Cao C
- Zerdoud S
- Attard M
- Bournaud C
- Lacroix L
- Benisvy D
- Taïeb D
- Bardet S
- Terroir-Cassou-Mounat M
- Anizan N
- Bouvier-Morel E
- Lamartina L
- Lion G
- Betrian S
- Sajous C
- Schiazza A
- Garcia ME
- Ciappuccini R
- Schlumberger M
- Al Ghuzlan A
- Godbert Y
- Borget I
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-23-0046
keywords:
- Humans
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- Iodine Radioisotopes/adverse effects
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Thyrotropin Alfa
- Prospective Studies
- Pyridones/adverse effects
- Pyrimidinones
- Oximes/adverse effects
- Adenocarcinoma/etiology
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/adverse effects
- Mutation
- Imidazoles
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Phase II Redifferentiation Trial with Dabrafenib-Trametinib and 131I in Metastatic Radioactive Iodine Refractory BRAF p.V600E-Mutated Differentiated Thyroid Cancer.
**Authors:** Leboulleux S, Do Cao C, Zerdoud S, Attard M, Bournaud C, Lacroix L, Benisvy D, Taïeb D, Bardet S, Terroir-Cassou-Mounat M, Anizan N, Bouvier-Morel E, Lamartina L, Lion G, Betrian S, Sajous C, Schiazza A, Garcia ME, Ciappuccini R, Schlumberger M, Al Ghuzlan A, Godbert Y, Borget I
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-23-0046](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-23-0046)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2023 Jul 5;29(13):2401-2409. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-23-0046.

A Phase II Redifferentiation Trial with Dabrafenib-Trametinib and 131I in
Metastatic Radioactive Iodine Refractory BRAF p.V600E-Mutated Differentiated
Thyroid Cancer.

Leboulleux S(1)(2), Do Cao C(3), Zerdoud S(4), Attard M(5), Bournaud C(6),
Lacroix L(7)(8), Benisvy D(9), Taïeb D(10), Bardet S(11), Terroir-Cassou-Mounat
M(1)(4), Anizan N(1)(12), Bouvier-Morel E(13), Lamartina L(1), Lion G(14),
Betrian S(15), Sajous C(16), Schiazza A(9), Garcia ME(10), Ciappuccini R(11),
Schlumberger M(1), Al Ghuzlan A(7), Godbert Y(17), Borget I(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrine Oncology and Nuclear Medicine, Gustave Roussy and
University Paris Saclay, Villejuif, France.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes, Nutrition and Therapeutic Education,
Hôpitaux Universitaires de Genève, Geneva, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, CHRU, Hôpital Claude Huriez, Lille, France.
(4)Department of Nuclear Medicine UICT Oncopole, CLCC Institut Claudius Regaud,
Toulouse, France.
(5)Department of Imaging, Gustave Roussy and University Paris Saclay, Villejuif,
France.
(6)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France.
(7)Department of Medical Biology and Pathology, Gustave Roussy and University
Paris Saclay, Villejuif, France.
(8)AMMICa UAR3655/US23, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.
(9)Department of Nuclear Medicine, CLCC Antoine Lacassagne, Nice, France.
(10)Department of Nuclear Medicine, CHU de La Timone, Marseille, France.
(11)Department of Nuclear Medicine and Thyroid Unit, CLCC François Baclesse,
Caen, France.
(12)Department of Physics, Gustave Roussy and University Paris Saclay,
Villejuif, France.
(13)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Gustave Roussy and University
Paris Saclay, Villejuif, France.
(14)Department of Nuclear Medicine, CHRU, Hôpital Claude Huriez, Lille, France.
(15)Department of Oncology, CLCC Institut Claudius Regaud, Toulouse, France.
(16)Department of Oncology, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France.
(17)Department of Oncology and Department of Nuclear Medicine, CLCC Institut
Bergonié, Bordeaux, France.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of dabrafenib-trametinib-131I for
the treatment of radioactive iodine refractory metastatic differentiated thyroid
cancer (DTC) with a BRAF p.V600E mutation.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A prospective phase II trial including patients with
RECIST progression within 18 months and no lesion > 3 cm. Following a baseline
recombinant human (rh)TSH-stimulated diagnostic whole-body scan (dc1-WBS),
dabrafenib and trametinib were given for 42 days. A second rhTSH-stimulated dc
WBS (dc2-WBS) was done at day 28 and 131I (5.5 GBq-150 mCi after rhTSH) was
administered at day 35. Primary endpoint was the 6-month RECIST objective
response rate. In case of partial response (PR) at 6 or 12 months, a second
treatment course could be given. Among 24 enrolled patients, 21 were evaluable
at 6 months.
RESULTS: Abnormal 131I uptake was present on 5%, 65%, and 95% of the dc1-WBS,
dc2-WBS, and post-therapy scans, respectively. At 6 months, PR was achieved in
38%, stable disease in 52%, and progressive disease (PD) in 10%. Ten patients
received a second treatment course: one complete response and 6 PRs were
observed at 6 months. The median progression-free survival (PFS) was not
reached. The 12- and 24-month PFS were 82% and 68%, respectively. One death due
to PD occurred at 24 months. Adverse events (AE) occurred in 96% of the
patients, with 10 grade 3-4 AEs in 7 patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Dabrafenib-trametinib is effective in BRAF p.V600E-mutated DTC
patients for restoring 131I uptake with PR observed 6 months after 131I
administration in 38% of the patients.

©2023 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-23-0046
PMID: 37074727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
