---
reference_id: "PMID:40568562"
title: "Clinical and radiographical analysis of percutaneous kyphoplasty with multi-point cement anchoring technique for preventing bone cement displacement in Kümmell's disease of stage I and II."
authors:
- Wu H
- Dai X
- Liu H
- Yang X
- Liu S
- Xu S
- Chi H
- Chen Y
- Wang S
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2025.1538337
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and radiographical analysis of percutaneous kyphoplasty with multi-point cement anchoring technique for preventing bone cement displacement in Kümmell's disease of stage I and II.
**Authors:** Wu H, Dai X, Liu H, Yang X, Liu S, Xu S, Chi H, Chen Y, Wang S
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2025.1538337](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2025.1538337)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2025 Jun 11;16:1538337. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2025.1538337. eCollection 2025.

Clinical and radiographical analysis of percutaneous kyphoplasty with 
multi-point cement anchoring technique for preventing bone cement displacement 
in Kümmell's disease of stage I and II.

Wu H(#)(1), Dai X(#)(1), Liu H(1), Yang X(1), Liu S(1), Xu S(1), Chi H(2), Chen 
Y(3), Wang S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedics, The Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Medical 
University, Luzhou, China.
(2)Clinical Medical College, Southwest Medical University, Luzhou, China.
(3)School of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Nursing 
& Health Sciences, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The present study introduced a novel technique called percutaneous 
kyphoplasty with multi-point cement anchoring technique (A-PKP) to prevent bone 
cement displacement in patients with stage I and II Kümmell's disease (KD).
METHODS: A total of 82 patients with stage I and II KD were treated with PKP in 
our hospital from April 2020 to October 2022. The patients were divided into two 
groups: A-PKP group (N=39) where the Kirschner needle was used for the 
multi-point cement anchoring technique, and conventional transverse 
process-pedicle percutaneous kyphoplasty group (T-PKP group; N=43) where the 
Kirschner needle was not used. The operation time, volume of cement, VAS score, 
ODI score, cement distribution pattern and score, bone cement leakage, adjacent 
vertebra fracture, and bone cement displacement were compared between the two 
groups. A logistic regression model was used to evaluate the association between 
outcome variables and adjacent vertebral fractures, as well as to identify 
potential protective and risk factors following kyphoplasty.
RESULTS: All patients in both groups were operated successfully, with no serious 
complications reported. Compared with T-PKP patients, A-PKP patients had longer 
operation time (39.7 ± 4.86 min vs. 34.5 ± 3.18 min, P < 0.05), greater volume 
of cement (5.1 ± 0.41 ml vs. 4.3 ± 0.27 ml, P < 0.05), greater improvement in 
Visual Analog Scale (2.0 ± 0.48, 1.92 ± 0.72 vs. 3.0 ± 0.10, 3.1 ± 0.62, P < 
0.05) and Oswestry Disability Index scores (17.9 ± 2.38, 14.8 ± 2.02 vs. 20.2 ± 
3.31, 17.2 ± 2.55, P < 0.05) during follow-ups, more spongy cement configuration 
with higher distribution scores (10.0 ± 1.17 vs. 7.74 ± 1.08, P < 0.05), lower 
incidence of bone cement leakage (20.5% vs. 27.9%, P > 0.05), and lower rate of 
adjacent vertebra fractures (5.1% vs. 18.6%, P < 0.05) and bone cement 
displacement (2.5% vs. 20.9%, P < 0.05). The logistic regression results reveal 
that bone cement distribution score (OR= 0.355, 95% CI 0.171-0.734, P=0.005) 
acts as protective factor of adjacent vertebral fractures following kyphoplasty.
CONCLUSION: The A-PKP technique appears to be a safer and more effective 
alternative for patients with stage I and II KD. It effectively alleviates pain, 
enhances cement diffusion, and minimizes the risk of bone cement displacement 
compared with the T-PKP.

Copyright © 2025 Wu, Dai, Liu, Yang, Liu, Xu, Chi, Chen and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2025.1538337
PMCID: PMC12187816
PMID: 40568562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.