---
reference_id: "PMID:36964767"
title: "Expert opinion about laser and intense pulsed light (IPL)-induced leukoderma or vitiligo: a cross-sectional survey study."
authors:
- Post NF
- Van Broekhoven NX
- Lommerts A
- Bae JM
- Bekkenk MW
- de Castro CCS
- Eleftheriadou V
- Esmat S
- Ezzedine K
- van Geel N
- Hamzavi I
- Leone G
- Pandya AG
- Passeron T
- Rodrigues MA
- Seneschal J
- "Th'ng S"
- Wolkerstorfer A
journal: Arch Dermatol Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00403-023-02611-8
keywords:
- Humans
- Vitiligo/pathology
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- "Hypopigmentation/epidemiology, etiology, therapy"
- Lasers
- Treatment Outcome
- "Intense Pulsed Light Therapy/adverse effects, methods"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expert opinion about laser and intense pulsed light (IPL)-induced leukoderma or vitiligo: a cross-sectional survey study.
**Authors:** Post NF, Van Broekhoven NX, Lommerts A, Bae JM, Bekkenk MW, de Castro CCS, Eleftheriadou V, Esmat S, Ezzedine K, van Geel N, Hamzavi I, Leone G, Pandya AG, Passeron T, Rodrigues MA, Seneschal J, Th'ng S, Wolkerstorfer A
**Journal:** Arch Dermatol Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00403-023-02611-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00403-023-02611-8)

## Content

1. Arch Dermatol Res. 2023 Oct;315(8):2289-2294. doi: 10.1007/s00403-023-02611-8.
 Epub 2023 Mar 25.

Expert opinion about laser and intense pulsed light (IPL)-induced leukoderma or 
vitiligo: a cross-sectional survey study.

Post NF(1), Van Broekhoven NX(2), Lommerts A(2), Bae JM(3), Bekkenk MW(2), de 
Castro CCS(4), Eleftheriadou V(5), Esmat S(6), Ezzedine K(7), van Geel N(8), 
Hamzavi I(9), Leone G(10), Pandya AG(11), Passeron T(12), Rodrigues MA(13), 
Seneschal J(14), Th'ng S(15), Wolkerstorfer A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Meibergdreef 
9, 1105 AZ, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. n.f.post@amsterdamumc.nl.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Meibergdreef 
9, 1105 AZ, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Dermatology, St. Vincent's Hospital, Seoul, South Korea.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Pontifical Catholic University of Paraná, 
Curitiba, Brazil.
(5)Department of Dermatology, The Royal Wolverhampton NHS Trust, Wolverhampton, 
UK.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Cairo University, Giza, Egypt.
(7)Department of Dermatology, Université Paris-Est Créteil Val de 
Marne-Université Paris, Paris, France.
(8)Department of Dermatology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(9)Department of Dermatology, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI, USA.
(10)Dermatology Department, Israelite Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(11)Department of Dermatology, Palo Alto Foundation Medical Group, Sunnyvale, 
CA, USA.
(12)Department of Dermatology and INSERM U1065, University Hospital of Nice, 
Nice, France.
(13)Chroma Dermatology, Pigment and Skin of Colour Centre, Victoria, Australia.
(14)Department of Dermatology and Pediatric Dermatology, University Hospital, 
Bordeaux, France.
(15)Department of Dermatology, Skin Research Institute of Singapore, Singapore, 
Singapore.

Vitiligo patients may desire laser hair removal, skin rejuvenation, vascular 
treatments, and other laser or intense pulsed light (IPL) assisted treatments. 
However, there is a risk of inducing new depigmented patches (Koebner 
phenomenon). In absence of guidelines on the safe use of laser or IPL in 
vitiligo patients, dermatologists tend to be reluctant to administer these 
treatments. The aim of this survey study was to provide an estimation of the 
occurrence and related risk factors of laser/IPL-induced leukoderma or vitiligo. 
A cross-sectional survey study was performed among 15 vitiligo experts from 11 
countries, with 14 questions about affected patients, involved laser/IPL 
treatments and the physicians' approach. In a total of 11,300 vitiligo patients, 
laser/IPL-induced leukoderma or vitiligo was reported in 30 patients (0.27%). Of 
these, 12 (40%) patients had a medical history of vitiligo and seven (58%) of 
these patients had stable (> 12 months) vitiligo before the treatment. Most 
frequently reported were hair removal procedures and localization of the face 
and legs. Side effects like blistering, crusting, and erosions occurred in 56.7% 
of the cases. These vitiligo experts based their advice on the risk of the laser 
treatment on stability of the vitiligo (43%) and activity signs (50%), and 50% 
discuss the risks before starting a laser treatment. Relevant activity signs are 
the Koebner phenomenon (57.1%), confetti-like lesions (57.1%) and hypochromic 
borders (50%). Laser-induced leukoderma or vitiligo is an uncommon phenomenon. 
Remarkably, a minority had a medical history of vitiligo of which 58% were 
stable. Consequently, most cases could not have been prevented by not treating 
vitiligo patients. However, a majority had laser/IPL-induced skin damage. 
Therefore, caution is advised with aggressive settings and test-spots prior to 
the treatment are recommended. This study showed significant variation in the 
current recommendations and approach of vitiligo experts regarding 
laser/IPL-induced leukoderma or vitiligo.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00403-023-02611-8
PMCID: PMC10462531
PMID: 36964767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.