---
reference_id: "PMID:36456361"
title: "The diagnosis of severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID): The Primary Immune Deficiency Treatment Consortium (PIDTC) 2022 Definitions."
authors:
- Dvorak CC
- Haddad E
- Heimall J
- Dunn E
- Buckley RH
- Kohn DB
- Cowan MJ
- Pai SY
- Griffith LM
- Cuvelier GDE
- Eissa H
- Shah AJ
- "O'Reilly RJ"
- Pulsipher MA
- Wright NAM
- Abraham RS
- Satter LF
- Notarangelo LD
- Puck JM
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2022.10.022
keywords:
- Humans
- "Severe Combined Immunodeficiency/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/therapy
- CD4-Positive T-Lymphocytes
- Thymus Gland
- "Receptors, Antigen, T-Cell/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The diagnosis of severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID): The Primary Immune Deficiency Treatment Consortium (PIDTC) 2022 Definitions.
**Authors:** Dvorak CC, Haddad E, Heimall J, Dunn E, Buckley RH, Kohn DB, Cowan MJ, Pai SY, Griffith LM, Cuvelier GDE, Eissa H, Shah AJ, O'Reilly RJ, Pulsipher MA, Wright NAM, Abraham RS, Satter LF, Notarangelo LD, Puck JM
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2022.10.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2022.10.022)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2023 Feb;151(2):539-546. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2022.10.022. Epub 2022 Nov 28.

The diagnosis of severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID): The Primary Immune 
Deficiency Treatment Consortium (PIDTC) 2022 Definitions.

Dvorak CC(1), Haddad E(2), Heimall J(3), Dunn E(4), Buckley RH(5), Kohn DB(6), 
Cowan MJ(4), Pai SY(7), Griffith LM(8), Cuvelier GDE(9), Eissa H(10), Shah 
AJ(11), O'Reilly RJ(12), Pulsipher MA(13), Wright NAM(14), Abraham RS(15), 
Satter LF(16), Notarangelo LD(8), Puck JM(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Allergy, Immunology, and Bone Marrow Transplantation, 
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, Calif. Electronic 
address: christopher.dvorak@ucsf.edu.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Montreal, CHU Sainte-Justine, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of 
Pennsylvania, and Division of Allergy and Immunology, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pa.
(4)Division of Pediatric Allergy, Immunology, and Bone Marrow Transplantation, 
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, Calif.
(5)Division of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, 
Durham, NC.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Immunology & Molecular Genetics, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, Calif; Department of Pediatrics, 
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, Calif.
(7)Immune Deficiency Cellular Therapy Program, Center for Cancer Research, 
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Md.
(8)Division of Allergy Immunology and Transplantation, National Institute of 
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Md.
(9)Manitoba Blood and Marrow Transplant Program, CancerCare Manitoba, University 
of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
(10)Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology-BMT, University of Colorado, 
Aurora, Colo.
(11)Division of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology, Stem Cell Transplantation and 
Regenerative Medicine, Stanford School of Medicine, Palo Alto, Calif.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Stem Cell Transplantation and Cellular Therapies 
Service, Memorial Sloan Kettering, New York, NY.
(13)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Intermountain Primary 
Childrens Hospital, Huntsman Cancer Institute at the University of Utah, Salt 
Lake City, Utah.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, Alberta Children's Hospital, University of 
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(15)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Nationwide Children's 
Hospital and The Ohio State University College of Medicine, Columbus, Ohio.
(16)Pediatric Immunology Allergy and Retrovirology, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Tex.

Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) results from defects in the 
differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells into mature T lymphocytes, with 
additional lymphoid lineages affected in particular genotypes. In 2014, the 
Primary Immune Deficiency Treatment Consortium published criteria for diagnosing 
SCID, which are now revised to incorporate contemporary approaches. Patients 
with typical SCID must have less than 0.05 × 109 autologous T cells/L on 
repetitive testing, with either pathogenic variant(s) in a SCID-associated gene, 
very low/undetectable T-cell receptor excision circles or less than 20% of CD4 T 
cells expressing naive markers, and/or transplacental maternally engrafted T 
cells. Patients with less profoundly impaired autologous T-cell differentiation 
are designated as having leaky/atypical SCID, with 2 or more of these: low 
T-cell numbers, oligoclonal T cells, low T-cell receptor excision circles, and 
less than 20% of CD4 T cells expressing naive markers. These patients must also 
have either pathogenic variant(s) in a SCID-associated gene or reduced T-cell 
proliferation to certain mitogens. Omenn syndrome requires a generalized 
erythematous rash, absent transplacentally acquired maternal engraftment, and 2 
or more of these: eosinophilia, elevated IgE, lymphadenopathy, 
hepatosplenomegaly. Thymic stromal defects and other causes of secondary T-cell 
deficiency are excluded from the definition of SCID. Application of these 
revised Primary Immune Deficiency Treatment Consortium 2022 Definitions permits 
precise categorization of patients with T-cell defects but does not imply a 
preferred treatment strategy.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2022.10.022
PMCID: PMC9905311
PMID: 36456361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]