---
reference_id: "PMID:40503961"
title: "POLARIS: encorafenib plus binimetinib for people with BRAF V600-mutant melanoma with brain metastasis."
authors:
- Menzies AM
- Davies MA
journal: Future Oncol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1080/14796694.2025.2514426
keywords:
- Humans
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- "Brain Neoplasms/secondary, drug therapy, genetics, mortality"
- "Melanoma/drug therapy, genetics, pathology, mortality"
- "Carbamates/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Sulfonamides/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Benzimidazoles/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use, adverse effects, administration & dosage"
- Middle Aged
- Female
- Male
- Mutation
- Aged
- Adult
- Treatment Outcome
- "Skin Neoplasms/pathology, drug therapy, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# POLARIS: encorafenib plus binimetinib for people with BRAF V600-mutant melanoma with brain metastasis.
**Authors:** Menzies AM, Davies MA
**Journal:** Future Oncol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14796694.2025.2514426](https://doi.org/10.1080/14796694.2025.2514426)

## Content

1. Future Oncol. 2025 Jul;21(16):1961-1963. doi: 10.1080/14796694.2025.2514426.
Epub 2025 Jun 12.

POLARIS: encorafenib plus binimetinib for people with BRAF V600-mutant melanoma
with brain metastasis.

Menzies AM(1), Davies MA(2).

Author information:
(1)Melanoma Institute Australia, The University of Sydney, and Royal North Shore
and Mater Hospitals, Sydney, Australia.
(2)Department of Melanoma Medical Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

POLARIS was a study to evaluate different doses of encorafenib plus binimetinib
for people with BRAF V600-mutant melanoma with brain metastasis. The first part,
known as the safety lead-in, looked at a high dose of encorafenib (300 mg twice
daily) combined with standard binimetinib (45 mg twice daily); in the phase 2
part, patients were given the standard dose of encorafenib (450 mg once daily)
plus binimetinib. In the safety lead-in, many patients were unable to tolerate
the high dose of encorafenib plus binimetinib. Despite recruitment challenges in
POLARIS, in the 13 enrolled patients with unresectable metastatic BRAF
V600-mutant melanoma with brain metastases, treatment with encorafenib plus
binimetinib demonstrated intracranial activity, with a brain metastasis response
rate of over 60%.

DOI: 10.1080/14796694.2025.2514426
PMCID: PMC12266674
PMID: 40503961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.M.M.: Reports personal fees from Bristol Myers
Squibb, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Novartis, Roche, Pierre Fabre, and QBiotics.
M.A.D.: Reports being a consultant to Roche/Genentech, Array, Pfizer, Novartis,
Bristol Myers Squibb, GlaxoSmithKline, Sanofi-Aventis, Vaccinex, Apexigen,
Eisai, Iovance, Merck, and ABM Therapeutics; and serving as the PI of research
grants to MD Anderson by Roche/Genentech, GlaxoSmithKline, Sanofi-Aventis,
Merck, Myriad, Oncothyreon, Pfizer, ABM Therapeutics, and LEAD Pharma. The
authors have no other relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any
organization or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict with
the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript apart from those
disclosed.
