---
reference_id: "PMID:23790512"
title: "Modern radiation therapy for Hodgkin lymphoma: field and dose guidelines from the international lymphoma radiation oncology group (ILROG)."
authors:
- Specht L
- Yahalom J
- Illidge T
- Berthelsen AK
- Constine LS
- Eich HT
- Girinsky T
- Hoppe RT
- Mauch P
- Mikhaeel NG
- Ng A
- ILROG
journal: Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2013.05.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modern radiation therapy for Hodgkin lymphoma: field and dose guidelines from the international lymphoma radiation oncology group (ILROG).
**Authors:** Specht L, Yahalom J, Illidge T, Berthelsen AK, Constine LS, Eich HT, Girinsky T, Hoppe RT, Mauch P, Mikhaeel NG, Ng A, ILROG
**Journal:** Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijrobp.2013.05.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrobp.2013.05.005)

## Content

1. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2014 Jul 15;89(4):854-62. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2013.05.005. Epub 2013 Jun 18.

Modern radiation therapy for Hodgkin lymphoma: field and dose guidelines from 
the international lymphoma radiation oncology group (ILROG).

Specht L(1), Yahalom J(2), Illidge T(3), Berthelsen AK(4), Constine LS(5), Eich 
HT(6), Girinsky T(7), Hoppe RT(8), Mauch P(9), Mikhaeel NG(10), Ng A(9); ILROG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology and Hematology, Rigshospitalet, University of 
Copenhagen, Denmark. Electronic address: lena.specht@regionh.dk.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, New York.
(3)Institute of Cancer Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester Academic 
Health Sciences Centre, Christie Hospital NHS Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology and PET Centre, Rigshospitalet, University 
of Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Department of Radiation Oncology and Pediatrics, James P. Wilmot Cancer 
Center, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York.
(6)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Münster, Germany.
(7)Department of Radiation Oncology, Institut Gustave-Roussy, Villejuif, France.
(8)Department of Radiation Oncology, Stanford University, Stanford, California.
(9)Department of Radiation Oncology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard University, Boston, Massachusetts.
(10)Department of Clinical Oncology and Radiotherapy, Guy's & St Thomas' NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2020 May 1;107(1):21-22. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2019.09.025.

Radiation therapy (RT) is the most effective single modality for local control 
of Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) and an important component of therapy for many 
patients. These guidelines have been developed to address the use of RT in HL in 
the modern era of combined modality treatment. The role of reduced volumes and 
doses is addressed, integrating modern imaging with 3-dimensional (3D) planning 
and advanced techniques of treatment delivery. The previously applied extended 
field (EF) and original involved field (IF) techniques, which treated larger 
volumes based on nodal stations, have now been replaced by the use of limited 
volumes, based solely on detectable nodal (and extranodal extension) involvement 
at presentation, using contrast-enhanced computed tomography, positron emission 
tomography/computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, or a combination of 
these techniques. The International Commission on Radiation Units and 
Measurements concepts of gross tumor volume, clinical target volume, internal 
target volume, and planning target volume are used for defining the targeted 
volumes. Newer treatment techniques, including intensity modulated radiation 
therapy, breath-hold, image guided radiation therapy, and 4-dimensional imaging, 
should be implemented when their use is expected to decrease significantly the 
risk for normal tissue damage while still achieving the primary goal of local 
tumor control. The highly conformal involved node radiation therapy (INRT), 
recently introduced for patients for whom optimal imaging is available, is 
explained. A new concept, involved site radiation therapy (ISRT), is introduced 
as the standard conformal therapy for the scenario, commonly encountered, 
wherein optimal imaging is not available. There is increasing evidence that RT 
doses used in the past are higher than necessary for disease control in this era 
of combined modality therapy. The use of INRT and of lower doses in early-stage 
HL is supported by available data. Although the use of ISRT has not yet been 
validated in a formal study, it is more conservative than INRT, accounting for 
suboptimal information and appropriately designed for safe local disease 
control. The goal of modern smaller field radiation therapy is to reduce both 
treatment volume and treatment dose while maintaining efficacy and minimizing 
acute and late sequelae. This review is a consensus of the International 
Lymphoma Radiation Oncology Group (ILROG) Steering Committee regarding the 
modern approach to RT in the treatment of HL, outlining a new concept of ISRT in 
which reduced treatment volumes are planned for the effective control of 
involved sites of HL. Nodal and extranodal non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHL) are 
covered separately by ILROG guidelines.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2013.05.005
PMID: 23790512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]