---
reference_id: "PMID:26269396"
title: "EDA-ID and IP, two faces of the same coin: how the same IKBKG/NEMO mutation affecting the NF-κB pathway can cause immunodeficiency and/or inflammation."
authors:
- Fusco F
- Pescatore A
- Conte MI
- Mirabelli P
- Paciolla M
- Esposito E
- Lioi MB
- Ursini MV
journal: Int Rev Immunol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.3109/08830185.2015.1055331
keywords:
- Animals
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/diagnosis, etiology, metabolism"
- Genetic Association Studies
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/diagnosis, etiology, metabolism"
- Genetic Loci
- Genotype
- Humans
- "I-kappa B Kinase/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/diagnosis, etiology, metabolism"
- "Incontinentia Pigmenti/diagnosis, etiology, metabolism"
- "Inflammation/genetics, immunology, metabolism"
- Mutation
- NF-kappa B/metabolism
- Phenotype
- Primary Immunodeficiency Diseases
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EDA-ID and IP, two faces of the same coin: how the same IKBKG/NEMO mutation affecting the NF-κB pathway can cause immunodeficiency and/or inflammation.
**Authors:** Fusco F, Pescatore A, Conte MI, Mirabelli P, Paciolla M, Esposito E, Lioi MB, Ursini MV
**Journal:** Int Rev Immunol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.3109/08830185.2015.1055331](https://doi.org/10.3109/08830185.2015.1055331)

## Content

1. Int Rev Immunol. 2015;34(6):445-59. doi: 10.3109/08830185.2015.1055331. Epub 
2015 Aug 13.

EDA-ID and IP, two faces of the same coin: how the same IKBKG/NEMO mutation 
affecting the NF-κB pathway can cause immunodeficiency and/or inflammation.

Fusco F(1), Pescatore A(1), Conte MI(1), Mirabelli P(2), Paciolla M(1)(3), 
Esposito E(1), Lioi MB(3), Ursini MV(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)a Institute of Genetics and Biophysics 'Adriano Buzzati-Traverso' , IGB-CNR, 
Naples , Italy.
(2)b Fondazione SDN IRCCS , Naples , Italy.
(3)c University of Basilicata , Potenza , Italy.

Anhidrotic Ectodermal Dysplasia with ImmunoDeficiency (EDA-ID, OMIM 300291) and 
Incontinentia Pigmenti (IP, OMIM 308300) are two rare diseases, caused by 
mutations of the IKBKG/NEMO gene. The protein NEMO/IKKγ is essential for the 
NF-κB activation pathway, involved in a variety of physiological and cellular 
processes, such as immunity, inflammation, cell proliferation, and survival. A 
wide spectrum of IKBKG/NEMO mutations have been identified so far, and, on the 
basis of their effect on NF-κB activation, they are considered hypomorphic or 
amorphic (loss of function) mutations. IKBKG/NEMO hypomorphic mutations, 
reducing but not abolishing NF-κB activation, have been identified in EDA-ID and 
IP patients. Instead, the amorphic mutations, abolishing NF-κB activation by 
complete IKBKG/NEMO gene silencing, cause only IP. Here, we present an overview 
of IKBKG/NEMO mutations in EDA-ID and IP patients and describe similarities and 
differences between the clinical/immunophenotypic and genetic aspects, 
highlighting any T and B lymphocyte defect, and paying particular attention to 
the cellular and molecular defects that underlie the pathogenesis of both 
diseases.

DOI: 10.3109/08830185.2015.1055331
PMID: 26269396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]