---
reference_id: "PMID:36134835"
title: "ICD indication in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: which algorithm to use?"
authors:
- Santos-Veloso MAO
- Chaves ÂVF
- Calado EB
- Markman M
- Bezerra LS
- Lima SG
- Markman Filho B
- Oliveira DC
journal: Rev Assoc Med Bras (1992)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1590/1806-9282.20220199
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ICD indication in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: which algorithm to use?
**Authors:** Santos-Veloso MAO, Chaves ÂVF, Calado EB, Markman M, Bezerra LS, Lima SG, Markman Filho B, Oliveira DC
**Journal:** Rev Assoc Med Bras (1992) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1590/1806-9282.20220199](https://doi.org/10.1590/1806-9282.20220199)

## Content

1. Rev Assoc Med Bras (1992). 2022 Aug;68(8):1059-1063. doi: 
10.1590/1806-9282.20220199.

ICD indication in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: which algorithm to use?

Santos-Veloso MAO(1)(2), Chaves ÂVF(1)(2)(3), Calado EB(4), Markman M(5), 
Bezerra LS(1)(2), Lima SG(2)(4), Markman Filho B(4), Oliveira DC(1).

Author information:
(1)Universidade Federal de Pernambuco, Programa de Pós-Graduação em Inovação 
Terapêutica - Recife (PE), Brazil.
(2)Centro Universitário Mauricio de Nassau, Faculdade de Medicina - Recife (PE), 
Brazil.
(3)Centro de Referência em Doenças Raras - Recife (PE), Brazil.
(4)Hospital das Clínicas, Serviço de Cardiologia - Recife (PE), Brazil.
(5)Hospital Agamenon Magalhães, Serviço de Cardiologia - Recife (PE), Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to evaluate the agreement in the indication of 
implantable cardioverter-defibrillators in patients with Hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy, as per the 2014 European Society of Cardiology and 2020 American 
Heart Association recommendations, and evaluate fragmented QRS as a predictor of 
cardiovascular outcome.
METHODS: Retrospective cohort with 81 patients was evaluated between 2019 and 
2021. Patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy ≥16 years old were included. 
Exclusion criteria include secondary myocardiopathy and follow-up <1 year. Kappa 
coefficient was used to determine the agreement. Survival and incidence curves 
were determined by Kaplan-Meier method. A p<0.05 was considered significant.
RESULTS: The fragmented QRS was identified in 44.4% of patients. There were no 
differences between patients with and without fragmented QRS regarding clinical 
parameters, echocardiography, fibrosis, and sudden cardiac death risk. During 
follow-up of 4.8±3.4 years, there was no sudden cardiac death, but 20.6% 
patients with implantable cardioverter-defibrillator had at least one 
appropriate shock. Three of the seven appropriate shocks occurred in European 
Society of Cardiology low- to moderate-risk patients. Three shocks occurred in 
moderate-risk patients and four in American Heart Association high-risk 
patients. Overall recommendations agreement was 64% with a kappa of 0.270 
(p=0.007). C-statistic showed no differences regarding the incidence of 
appropriate shock (p=0.644).
CONCLUSION: sudden cardiac death risk stratification algorithms present 
discrepancies in implantable cardioverter-defibrillator indication, both with 
low accuracy.

DOI: 10.1590/1806-9282.20220199
PMCID: PMC9574997
PMID: 36134835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: the authors declare there 
is no conflicts of interest.