---
reference_id: "PMID:26754537"
title: "Antenatal and postnatal radiologic diagnosis of holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency: a systematic review."
authors:
- Bandaralage SP
- Farnaghi S
- Dulhunty JM
- Kothari A
journal: Pediatr Radiol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s00247-015-3492-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antenatal and postnatal radiologic diagnosis of holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Bandaralage SP, Farnaghi S, Dulhunty JM, Kothari A
**Journal:** Pediatr Radiol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00247-015-3492-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00247-015-3492-8)

## Content

1. Pediatr Radiol. 2016 Mar;46(3):357-64. doi: 10.1007/s00247-015-3492-8. Epub
2016  Jan 11.

Antenatal and postnatal radiologic diagnosis of holocarboxylase synthetase 
deficiency: a systematic review.

Bandaralage SP(1)(2), Farnaghi S(3), Dulhunty JM(4)(5), Kothari A(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Gold Coast Hospital and Health Service, Southport, Queensland, 4215, 
Australia.
(2)School of Medicine, Griffith University, Southport, Queensland, 4215, 
Australia.
(3)Caboolture Hospital, Caboolture, Queensland, 4510, Australia.
(4)Redcliffe Hospital, Redcliffe, Queensland, 4020, Australia.
(5)School of Medicine, The University of Queensland, Herston, Queensland, 4006, 
Australia.
(6)Redcliffe Hospital, Redcliffe, Queensland, 4020, Australia. 
alka.kothari@uq.edu.au.
(7)School of Medicine, The University of Queensland, Herston, Queensland, 4006, 
Australia. alka.kothari@uq.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency results in impaired activation 
of enzymes implicated in glucose, fatty acid and amino acid metabolism. 
Antenatal imaging and postnatal imaging are useful in making the diagnosis. 
Untreated holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency is fatal, while antenatal and 
postnatal biotin supplementation is associated with good clinical outcomes. 
Although biochemical assays are required for definitive diagnosis, certain 
radiologic features assist in the diagnosis of holocarboxylase synthetase 
deficiency.
OBJECTIVE: To review evidence regarding radiologic diagnostic features of 
holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency in the antenatal and postnatal period.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A systematic review of all published cases of 
holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency identified by a search of Pubmed, Scopus 
and Web of Science.
RESULTS: A total of 75 patients with holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency were 
identified from the systematic review, which screened 687 manuscripts. Most 
patients with imaging (19/22, 86%) had abnormal findings, the most common being 
subependymal cysts, ventriculomegaly and intraventricular hemorrhage.
CONCLUSION: Although the radiologic features of subependymal cysts, 
ventriculomegaly, intraventricular hemorrhage and intrauterine growth 
restriction may be found in the setting of other pathologies, these findings 
should prompt consideration of holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency in at-risk 
children.

DOI: 10.1007/s00247-015-3492-8
PMID: 26754537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]