---
reference_id: "PMID:33385262"
title: "Bile Acid Synthesis Disorders in Japan: Long-Term Outcome and Chenodeoxycholic Acid Treatment."
authors:
- Kimura A
- Mizuochi T
- Takei H
- Ohtake A
- Mori J
- Shinoda K
- Hashimoto T
- Kasahara M
- Togawa T
- Murai T
- Iida T
- Nittono H
journal: Dig Dis Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s10620-020-06722-4
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Adrenal Hyperplasia, Congenital/drug therapy, genetics"
- Adult
- Bile Acids and Salts/biosynthesis
- Chenodeoxycholic Acid/therapeutic use
- Child
- "Cytochrome P450 Family 7/genetics, metabolism"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Enzymologic/drug effects"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Japan
- Mutation
- Oxidoreductases/genetics
- "Steroid Hydroxylases/genetics, metabolism"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bile Acid Synthesis Disorders in Japan: Long-Term Outcome and Chenodeoxycholic Acid Treatment.
**Authors:** Kimura A, Mizuochi T, Takei H, Ohtake A, Mori J, Shinoda K, Hashimoto T, Kasahara M, Togawa T, Murai T, Iida T, Nittono H
**Journal:** Dig Dis Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10620-020-06722-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10620-020-06722-4)

## Content

1. Dig Dis Sci. 2021 Nov;66(11):3885-3892. doi: 10.1007/s10620-020-06722-4. Epub 
2021 Jan 1.

Bile Acid Synthesis Disorders in Japan: Long-Term Outcome and Chenodeoxycholic 
Acid Treatment.

Kimura A(#)(1)(2), Mizuochi T(#)(3), Takei H(4), Ohtake A(5), Mori J(6), Shinoda 
K(7), Hashimoto T(8), Kasahara M(9), Togawa T(10), Murai T(11), Iida T(12), 
Nittono H(#)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Kurume University School of 
Medicine, 67 Asahi-machi, Kurume, 830-0011, Japan.
(2)Kumamoto-Ashikita Medical Center for the Severely Disabled, Kumamoto, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Kurume University School of 
Medicine, 67 Asahi-machi, Kurume, 830-0011, Japan. 
mizuochi_tatsuki@kurume-u.ac.jp.
(4)Junshin Clinic Bile Acid Institute, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics and Clinical Genomics, Faculty of Medicine, Saitama 
Medical University, Saitama, Japan.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, 
Japan.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Gifu Municipal Hospital, Gifu, Japan.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Toho University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(9)Organ Transplantation Center, National Center for Child Health and 
Development, Tokyo, Japan.
(10)Department of Pediatrics and Neonatology, Nagoya City University Graduate 
School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan.
(11)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Health Sciences University of Hokkaido, 
Hokkaido, Japan.
(12)Department of Chemistry, College of Humanities and Science, Nihon 
University, Tokyo, Japan.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Dig Dis Sci. 2021 Nov;66(11):3668-3671. doi: 10.1007/s10620-021-06840-7.

BACKGROUND: We encountered 7 Japanese patients with bile acid synthesis 
disorders (BASD) including 3β-hydroxy-Δ5-C27-steroid dehydrogenase/isomerase 
(3β-HSD) deficiency (n = 3), Δ4-3-oxosteroid 5β-reductase (5β-reductase) 
deficiency (n = 3), and oxysterol 7α-hydroxylase deficiency (n = 1) over 
21 years between 1996 and 2017.
AIM: We aimed to clarify long-term outcome in the 7 patients with BASD as well 
as long-term efficacy of chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) treatment in the 5 
patients with 3β-HSD deficiency or 5β-reductase deficiency.
METHODS: Diagnoses were made from bile acid and genetic analyses. Bile acid 
analysis in serum and urine was performed using gas chromatography-mass 
spectrometry. Clinical and laboratory findings and bile acid profiles at 
diagnosis and most recent visit were retrospectively obtained from medical 
records. Long-term outcome included follow-up duration, treatments, growth, 
education/employment, complications of treatment, and other problems.
RESULTS: Medians with ranges of current patient ages and duration of CDCA 
treatment are 10 years (8 to 43) and 10 years (8 to 21), respectively. All 7 
patients, who had homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the HSD3B7, 
SRD5B1, or CYP7B1 gene, are currently in good health without liver dysfunction. 
In the 5 patients with CDCA treatment, hepatic function gradually improved 
following initiation. No adverse effects were noted.
CONCLUSIONS: We concluded that CDCA treatment is effective in 3β-HSD deficiency 
and 5β-reductase deficiency, as cholic acid has been in other countries. BASD 
carry a good prognosis following early diagnosis and initiation of long-term 
CDCA treatment.

© 2021. Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10620-020-06722-4
PMID: 33385262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]