---
reference_id: "PMID:33190156"
title: Clinico-epidemiologic characteristics of the 2019 dengue outbreak in Bangladesh.
authors:
- Hasan MJ
- Tabassum T
- Sharif M
- Khan MAS
- Bipasha AR
- Basher A
- Islam MR
- Amin MR
- Gozal D
journal: Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/trstmh/traa126
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinico-epidemiologic characteristics of the 2019 dengue outbreak in Bangladesh.
**Authors:** Hasan MJ, Tabassum T, Sharif M, Khan MAS, Bipasha AR, Basher A, Islam MR, Amin MR, Gozal D
**Journal:** Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/trstmh/traa126](https://doi.org/10.1093/trstmh/traa126)

## Content

1. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2021 Jul 1;115(7):733-740. doi: 
10.1093/trstmh/traa126.

Clinico-epidemiologic characteristics of the 2019 dengue outbreak in Bangladesh.

Hasan MJ(1), Tabassum T(1), Sharif M(2), Khan MAS(1), Bipasha AR(1), Basher 
A(3), Islam MR(4), Amin MR(2), Gozal D(5).

Author information:
(1)Pi Research Consultancy Center, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(2)Department of Medicine, Dhaka Medical College, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(3)Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical University.
(4)Department of Medicine, Shaheed Suhrawardy Medical College.
(5)Department of Child Health, MU Women's and Children's Hospital University of 
Missouri School of Medicine, Columbia, MO, USA.

BACKGROUND: Dengue fever shows a broad range of clinical presentations 
worldwide. Here we report on our clinical findings during the 2019 dengue 
outbreak in one of the largest tertiary care hospitals in Dhaka, the capital of 
Bangladesh.
METHODS: A total of 747 suspected dengue cases (553 confirmed and 194 probable) 
were interviewed with a pro forma case record form. Statistical analyses were 
conducted using SPSS 20.0. Ethical clearance was obtained from the Dhaka Medical 
College.
RESULTS: The mean age of the dengue cases was 27 y and approximately two-thirds 
were male. Positive tests for NS1 and anti-dengue immunoglobulin M antibody were 
present in 91.9% and 59.4% of the cases, respectively. Thrombocytopenia was 
present in 69% of cases and fever was present in 99.1% of cases. 
Gastrointestinal (GI) features, including anorexia and/or vomiting (69.4%), 
abdominal pain (39.8%) and diarrhoea (25.6%), were more prevalent than typical 
rash and pain symptoms. Hypotension was present in approximately one-quarter of 
patients (25.4%). Probable and confirmed dengue cases have shown similar 
clinical characteristics and laboratory findings.
CONCLUSIONS: The 2019 outbreak of dengue fever in Bangladesh was characterized 
by increased presentation with GI features. Recognition of this trend would 
permit early diagnosis and proper management of patients.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Royal 
Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.

DOI: 10.1093/trstmh/traa126
PMID: 33190156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]