---
reference_id: "PMID:32466852"
title: "Alteration of CD226/TIGIT immune checkpoint on T cells in the pathogenesis of primary Sjögren's syndrome."
authors:
- Deng C
- Chen Y
- Li W
- Peng L
- Luo X
- Peng Y
- Zhao L
- Wu Q
- Zhang W
- Zhang X
- Fei Y
journal: J Autoimmun
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2020.102485
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Antigens, Differentiation, T-Lymphocyte/immunology, metabolism"
- "CD4-Positive T-Lymphocytes/immunology, metabolism"
- Case-Control Studies
- Female
- Healthy Volunteers
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Receptors, Immunologic/immunology, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/immunology
- "Sjogren's Syndrome/blood, immunology"
- Up-Regulation/immunology
- Young Adult
- T Lineage-Specific Activation Antigen 1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alteration of CD226/TIGIT immune checkpoint on T cells in the pathogenesis of primary Sjögren's syndrome.
**Authors:** Deng C, Chen Y, Li W, Peng L, Luo X, Peng Y, Zhao L, Wu Q, Zhang W, Zhang X, Fei Y
**Journal:** J Autoimmun (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaut.2020.102485](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaut.2020.102485)

## Content

1. J Autoimmun. 2020 Sep;113:102485. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2020.102485. Epub 2020
May  25.

Alteration of CD226/TIGIT immune checkpoint on T cells in the pathogenesis of
primary Sjögren's syndrome.

Deng C(1), Chen Y(1), Li W(2), Peng L(1), Luo X(1), Peng Y(1), Zhao L(1), Wu
Q(1), Zhang W(1), Zhang X(1), Fei Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology Center, Peking Union
Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Science & Peking Union
Medical College, National Clinical Research Center for Dermatologic and
Immunologic Diseases (NCRC-DID), Beijing, 100730, China.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, 100029,
China.
(3)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology Center, Peking Union
Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Science & Peking Union
Medical College, National Clinical Research Center for Dermatologic and
Immunologic Diseases (NCRC-DID), Beijing, 100730, China. Electronic address:
feiyunyun2013@hotmail.com.

OBJECTIVES: Hyperactivity of T lymphocytes might play an important role in the
pathogenesis of primary Sjögren's syndrome (pSS). CD226/T cell immunoglobulin
and ITIM domain (TIGIT) pathway is a newly identified immune checkpoint involved
in the pathogenesis of cancer and rheumatic diseases. However, its role in the
pathophysiology of pSS is obscure. Hence, this study aimed to explore the
potential role of CD226/TIGIT expression on T cells in the pathogenesis of pSS.
METHODS: In patients with pSS, other rheumatic disease controls (DCs), and
healthy controls (HCs), the expression of CD226 and TIGIT on T cells along with
their activity following stimulation were detected by flow cytometry. The
correlations between the expression of CD226 and TIGIT on T cells and clinical
data were analyzed.
RESULTS: The frequencies of CD226/TIGIT expressing CD4+ and CD8+ T cells were
significantly higher in patients with pSS than in HCs and DCs. Among them, the
TIGIT/CD226 expressing CD4+ T cells closely correlated with pSS disease
activity: the percentages of CD4+CD226+ and CD4+TIGIT+ T cells were
significantly higher in the active pSS than the inactive pSS. The proportion of
CD4+TIGIT+ T cells positively correlated with the erythrocyte sedimentation
rate. Further in vitro analysis revealed that CD4+CD226+ T cells exerted
superior effector function than the CD226- counterparts in both pSS and HCs.
TIGIT was preferably expressed on activated cells, and the activity of
CD4+TIGIT+ T cells was comparable with CD4+TIGIT- T cells in HCs. However, in
pSS, CD4+TIGIT+ T cells showed enhanced activity than the CD4+ TIGIT- T cells.
CONCLUSION: CD226/TIGIT checkpoint molecules were over-expressed on T cells in
pSS. Proportional and functional alteration of CD226/TIGIT expressing CD4+ T
cells may be involved in the pathogenesis of pSS, and be a potential novel
therapeutic target for the disease.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaut.2020.102485
PMID: 32466852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
