---
reference_id: PMID:25279494
title: Inherited epidermolysis bullosa.
authors:
- El Hachem M
- Giancristoforo S
- Diociaiuti A
journal: G Ital Dermatol Venereol
year: '2014'
keywords:
- Child
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa/classification, diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inherited epidermolysis bullosa.
**Authors:** El Hachem M, Giancristoforo S, Diociaiuti A
**Journal:** G Ital Dermatol Venereol (2014)

## Content

1. G Ital Dermatol Venereol. 2014 Dec;149(6):651-62. Epub 2014 Oct 3.

Inherited epidermolysis bullosa.

El Hachem M(1), Giancristoforo S, Diociaiuti A.

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Dermatology Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, 
Italy - andrea.doiciaiuti@opbg.net.

Inherited epidermolysis bullosa (EB) refers to a clinically and genetically 
heterogeneous group of rare disorders characterized by fragility of the skin and 
mucous membranes. Despite the preclinical development of different molecular and 
cell-based treatment strategies, no cure is still available for EB. Therefore it 
is important to establish the management of EB patient since neonatal age in 
order to ensure an early diagnosis and contribute to prevent complications and 
to improve quality of life. A review of literature was performed underlining the 
specific attention to coordinated multidisciplinary approach. The major topics 
treated comprise the multidisciplinary approach to EB patients, global skin care 
including wound care, management of itching and pain, and early diagnosis of 
squamous cell carcinoma. The rarity of EB and the variable involvement of 
several organs and systems challenge the appropriate treatment of these 
patients. The care of EB requires a coordinated multidisciplinary approach. The 
team should be specifically trained and a regular follow-up is required to 
prevent cutaneous and systemic complications. A well-organized and structured 
continuity of care is important in EB like in all chronic and rare diseases. The 
management of EB patients is very important because a specific attention to the 
fragile skin is required in order to reduce pain, risk of trauma, ulceration and 
infection. The center of expertise stays as the main structure offering 
specialized care to EB patients and also helps patients and their families to 
understand and deal with the disease and to ensure an adequate liaison with the 
community healthcare system.

PMID: 25279494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]