---
reference_id: "PMID:24284224"
title: "[Pregnant rate and pregnancy-relating factors of patients with early endometrial carcinoma and severe atypical hyperplasia of endometrium after fertility-preserving treatment by progestin]."
authors:
- Cao DY
- Yu M
- Yang JX
- Shen K
- Huang HF
- Cheng NH
- Sun ZY
- Deng CY
- Yu Q
- He FF
journal: Zhonghua Fu Chan Ke Za Zhi
year: '2013'
keywords:
- Adult
- "Antineoplastic Agents, Hormonal/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Endometrial Hyperplasia/drug therapy, pathology"
- "Endometrial Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology"
- "Endometrium/drug effects, pathology"
- Female
- Fertility Preservation
- Humans
- "Infertility, Female/epidemiology, therapy"
- "Medroxyprogesterone/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Megestrol Acetate/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Pregnancy
- Pregnancy Outcome
- Pregnancy Rate
- "Progestins/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Reproductive Techniques, Assisted"
- Retrospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Pregnant rate and pregnancy-relating factors of patients with early endometrial carcinoma and severe atypical hyperplasia of endometrium after fertility-preserving treatment by progestin].
**Authors:** Cao DY, Yu M, Yang JX, Shen K, Huang HF, Cheng NH, Sun ZY, Deng CY, Yu Q, He FF
**Journal:** Zhonghua Fu Chan Ke Za Zhi (2013)

## Content

1. Zhonghua Fu Chan Ke Za Zhi. 2013 Jul;48(7):519-22.

[Pregnant rate and pregnancy-relating factors of patients with early endometrial
carcinoma and severe atypical hyperplasia of endometrium after
fertility-preserving treatment by progestin].

[Article in Chinese]

Cao DY(1), Yu M, Yang JX, Shen K, Huang HF, Cheng NH, Sun ZY, Deng CY, Yu Q, He
FF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Peking Union Medical College
Hospital, Peking Union Medical College, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Beijing 100730, China.

OBJECTIVE: To summarize the pregnant rate of patients with early endometrial
carcinoma and severe atypical hyperplasia after fertility-preserving treatment
and analyze their pregnancy-relating factors.
METHODS: Endometrial curettage was used to evaluate the therapy response of
endometrium after every 3 months of administration of high-dose progestin as
fertility-sparing treatment for 51 patients with stage I endometrial carcinoma
or severe endometrial atypical hyperplasia from Jun. 1996 to Jan. 2010.
Individualized maintained treatment was given to patients after achieving
complete remission of the endometrium. Pregnant results and pregnancy-relating
factors were analyzed retrospectively.
RESULTS: The median age of all the 51 patients was 29 years old. Forty-five
(88%, 45/51) achieved complete response. Of the 34 cases who desired to conceive
after complete response, 16 of them had 22 pregnancies, the pregnant rate was
47% (16/34); and 12 women obtained healthy live birth baby, the fertility rate
was 35% (12/34). The pregnant rate of patients at age >35 or ≤ 35 was 0/2 and
50% (16/32) respectively (P > 0.05). The pregnant rate of patients with or
without infertility was 40% (8/20) and 8/14, with endometrial cancer or severe
atypical hyperplasia was 40% (10/25) and 6/9, respectively (all P > 0.05). The
pregnant rate of patients who received in vitro fertilization-embryo transfer,
ovulation promotion, or no treatment was 7/7, 6/16 and 3/11 respectively (P <
0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Fertility-preserving treatment for early endometrial cancer and
severe atypical hyperplasia with high-dose progestin could achieve higher
response rate. Assisted reproductive technologies could significantly increase
the chance of conception.

PMID: 24284224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
