---
reference_id: "PMID:40715894"
title: "Susac Syndrome: A Systematic Review and Survival Analysis."
authors:
- Pace GM
- Canali L
- Villari D
- Spriano G
- Mercante G
- Mosnier I
- Bernardeschi D
- Colombo G
- Di Bari M
journal: Clin Rev Allergy Immunol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s12016-025-09087-6
keywords:
- Humans
- "Susac Syndrome/mortality, diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Adult
- Male
- Female
- Survival Analysis
- Young Adult
- Adolescent
- Middle Aged
- Child
- Aged
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Susac Syndrome: A Systematic Review and Survival Analysis.
**Authors:** Pace GM, Canali L, Villari D, Spriano G, Mercante G, Mosnier I, Bernardeschi D, Colombo G, Di Bari M
**Journal:** Clin Rev Allergy Immunol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12016-025-09087-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12016-025-09087-6)

## Content

1. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2025 Jul 26;68(1):73. doi:
10.1007/s12016-025-09087-6.

Susac Syndrome: A Systematic Review and Survival Analysis.

Pace GM(1)(2), Canali L(3)(4)(5), Villari D(1)(2), Spriano G(1)(2), Mercante
G(1)(2), Mosnier I(6)(7), Bernardeschi D(6), Colombo G(8), Di Bari M(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Pieve Emanuele,
Milan, Italy.
(2)Otorhinolaryngology Unit, IRCCS Humanitas Clinical and Research Center,
Rozzano, Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Pieve Emanuele,
Milan, Italy. lucacanali96@gmail.com.
(4)Otorhinolaryngology Unit, IRCCS Humanitas Clinical and Research Center,
Rozzano, Milan, Italy. lucacanali96@gmail.com.
(5)Service d'Oto-Rhino-Laryngologie, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, AP-HP, Sorbonne
Université, Paris, France. lucacanali96@gmail.com.
(6)Service d'Oto-Rhino-Laryngologie, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, AP-HP, Sorbonne
Université, Paris, France.
(7)Unité Fonctionnelle Implants Auditifs, ORL, GH Pitié-Salpêtrière, AP-HP
Sorbonne Université, Paris, France.
(8)Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Department, Ospedale Nuovo di Legnano,
ASST Ovest Milanese, Legnano, MI, Italy.

The aim of this study is to analyze data from all cases of Susac syndrome that
have been published in the literature. This study was conducted in conformity
with the PRISMA statement. A systematic review and survival analysis was
performed for overall survival (OS) and progression-free survival (PFS). A total
of 435 patients (males: 32.6%, n = 142), derived from 176 studies, were included
in the analysis. The median age at diagnosis was 35 years (n = 433/435; range
7-69). Neurological symptoms were the most frequent (87.4%, n = 380/435). Among
audio-vestibular symptoms (84.3%, n = 365/433), hearing loss was the most common
manifestation (87.9%, n = 327/372). Branch retinal artery occlusions (BRAOs)
were observed in 91.6% of patients (n = 261/285), while ophthalmological
symptoms were reported in 78.9% (n = 288/365). The complete triad at onset was
present in only 20.1% (n = 61/304) of cases. Complete recovery without sequelae
was achieved in 59.5% (n = 44/74) of patients which reported neurological
involvement, 39.7% (n = 27/68) of those with ophthalmological symptoms, and
17.7% (n = 11/62) of those with audio-vestibular symptoms. Partial recovery was
observed in 36.5% (n = 27/74), 50.0% (n = 34/68), and 38.7% (n = 24/62) of
patients, respectively. In a subgroup of 123 patients with available follow-up
data (median duration: 12 months), 82.1% (n = 101) remained stable with
controlled disease, 12.2% (n = 15) experienced a relapse, and 5.7% (n = 7) died.
OS at 1 and 3 years was 94% (95% CI 88-97%). PFS was 89% at 1 year (95% CI:
80-94%) and 83% at 3 years (95% CI: 69-91%). Susac syndrome presents a
significant clinical challenge. While presentations and outcomes are very
heterogeneous, mortality is uncommon. The potential for relapse and long-term
sequelae highlights the need for greater awareness and deeper understanding of
the disease.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12016-025-09087-6
PMID: 40715894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors
declare no competing interests.
