---
reference_id: "PMID:30046879"
title: Secondary dementia due to Lyme neuroborreliosis.
authors:
- Kristoferitsch W
- Aboulenein-Djamshidian F
- Jecel J
- Rauschka H
- Rainer M
- Stanek G
- Fischer P
journal: Wien Klin Wochenschr
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s00508-018-1361-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Secondary dementia due to Lyme neuroborreliosis.
**Authors:** Kristoferitsch W, Aboulenein-Djamshidian F, Jecel J, Rauschka H, Rainer M, Stanek G, Fischer P
**Journal:** Wien Klin Wochenschr (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00508-018-1361-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00508-018-1361-9)

## Content

1. Wien Klin Wochenschr. 2018 Aug;130(15-16):468-478. doi: 
10.1007/s00508-018-1361-9. Epub 2018 Jul 25.

Secondary dementia due to Lyme neuroborreliosis.

Kristoferitsch W(1), Aboulenein-Djamshidian F(2)(3), Jecel J(4), Rauschka 
H(2)(3), Rainer M(5)(6), Stanek G(7), Fischer P(5).

Author information:
(1)Karl Landsteiner Institute for Neuroimmunological and Neurodegenerative 
Disorders, SMZ-Ost-Donauspital, Langobardenstr. 122, 1190, Vienna, Austria. 
wolfgang.kristoferitsch@meduniwien.ac.at.
(2)Karl Landsteiner Institute for Neuroimmunological and Neurodegenerative 
Disorders, SMZ-Ost-Donauspital, Langobardenstr. 122, 1190, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Neurological Department, SMZ-Ost-Donauspital, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Neurological Department 2, NKH Rosenhügel, Vienna, Austria.
(5)Psychiatric Department, SMZ-Ost-Donauspital, Vienna, Austria.
(6)Karl Landsteiner Institute for Memory- and Alzheimer Research, 
SMZ-Ost-Donauspital, Vienna, Austria.
(7)Institute for Hygiene and Applied Immunology, Medical University of Vienna, 
Vienna, Austria.

Dementia-like syndromes are rare manifestations of Lyme neuroborreliosis. The 
clinical patterns are summarized using our own cases and case reports from the 
literature, which were diagnosed as definite Lyme neuroborreliosis according to 
the European guidelines. The cases disclose signs of subcortical dementia that 
occur more rapidly than in patients suffering from primary dementia. Gait 
disturbances early in the disease course is another frequently observed 
characteristic feature. The response to 2-4 weeks of antibiotic treatment with 
ceftriaxone was excellent. There were no indications for a prolonged antibiotic 
treatment. It is essential to be aware of this manifestation of Lyme 
neuroborreliosis, because early antibiotic treatment will prevent permanent 
sequelae that may occur throughout the further course of the untreated disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s00508-018-1361-9
PMCID: PMC6096534
PMID: 30046879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: W. Kristoferitsch and G. Stanek are unpaid 
steering committee members of the ESCMID Study Group for Lyme Borreliosis 
(ESGBOR). F. Aboulenein-Djamshidian, J. Jecel, H. Rauschka, M. Rainer and 
P. Fischer declare that they have no competing interests.