---
reference_id: "PMID:10976985"
title: "Type V osteogenesis imperfecta: a new form of brittle bone disease."
authors:
- Glorieux FH
- Rauch F
- Plotkin H
- Ward L
- Travers R
- Roughley P
- Lalic L
- Glorieux DF
- Fassier F
- Bishop NJ
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1359/jbmr.2000.15.9.1650
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Alkaline Phosphatase/blood
- Biomarkers
- Birth Weight
- Body Weight
- Bone Density
- "Bone and Bones/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Fibroblasts
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Humans
- Hyperplasia/pathology
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Karyotyping
- Male
- Mutation
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/classification, diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- Radiography
- Terminology as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type V osteogenesis imperfecta: a new form of brittle bone disease.
**Authors:** Glorieux FH, Rauch F, Plotkin H, Ward L, Travers R, Roughley P, Lalic L, Glorieux DF, Fassier F, Bishop NJ
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1359/jbmr.2000.15.9.1650](https://doi.org/10.1359/jbmr.2000.15.9.1650)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2000 Sep;15(9):1650-8. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.2000.15.9.1650.

Type V osteogenesis imperfecta: a new form of brittle bone disease.

Glorieux FH(1), Rauch F, Plotkin H, Ward L, Travers R, Roughley P, Lalic L, 
Glorieux DF, Fassier F, Bishop NJ.

Author information:
(1)Genetics Unit, Shriners Hospital, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is commonly subdivided into four clinical types. 
Among these, OI type IV clearly represents a heterogeneous group of disorders. 
Here we describe 7 OI patients (3 girls), who would typically be classified as 
having OI type IV but who can be distinguished from other type IV patients. We 
propose to call this disease entity OI type V. These children had a history of 
moderate to severe increased fragility of long bones and vertebral bodies. Four 
patients had experienced at least one episode of hyperplastic callus formation. 
The family history was positive for OI in 3 patients, with an autosomal dominant 
pattern of inheritance. All type V patients had limitations in the range of 
pronation/supination in one or both forearms, associated with a radiologically 
apparent calcification of the interosseous membrane. Three patients had anterior 
dislocation of the radial head. A radiodense metaphyseal band immediately 
adjacent to the growth plate was a constant feature in growing patients. Lumbar 
spine bone mineral density was low and similar to age-matched patients with OI 
type IV. None of the type V patients presented blue sclerae or dentinogenesis 
imperfecta, but ligamentous laxity was similar to that in patients with OI type 
IV. Levels of biochemical markers of bone metabolism generally were within the 
reference range, but serum alkaline phosphatase and urinary collagen type I 
N-telopeptide excretion increased markedly during periods of active hyperplastic 
callus formation. Qualitative histology of iliac biopsy specimens showed that 
lamellae were arranged in an irregular fashion or had a meshlike appearance. 
Quantitative histomorphometry revealed decreased amounts of cortical and 
cancellous bone, like in OI type IV. However, in contrast to OI type IV, 
parameters that reflect remodeling activation on cancellous bone were mostly 
normal in OI type V, while parameters reflecting bone formation processes in 
individual remodeling sites were clearly decreased. Mutation screening of the 
coding regions and exon/intron boundaries of both collagen type I genes did not 
reveal any mutations affecting glycine codons or splice sites. In conclusion, OI 
type V is a new form of autosomal dominant OI, which does not appear to be 
associated with collagen type I mutations. The genetic defect underlying this 
disease remains to be elucidated.

DOI: 10.1359/jbmr.2000.15.9.1650
PMID: 10976985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]