---
reference_id: "PMID:26476479"
title: "Cutaneous manifestations in patients with mastocytosis: Consensus report of the European Competence Network on Mastocytosis; the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology; and the European Academy of Allergology and Clinical Immunology."
authors:
- Hartmann K
- Escribano L
- Grattan C
- Brockow K
- Carter MC
- Alvarez-Twose I
- Matito A
- Broesby-Olsen S
- Siebenhaar F
- Lange M
- Niedoszytko M
- Castells M
- Oude Elberink JNG
- Bonadonna P
- Zanotti R
- Hornick JL
- Torrelo A
- Grabbe J
- Rabenhorst A
- Nedoszytko B
- Butterfield JH
- Gotlib J
- Reiter A
- Radia D
- Hermine O
- Sotlar K
- George TI
- Kristensen TK
- Kluin-Nelemans HC
- Yavuz S
- Hägglund H
- Sperr WR
- Schwartz LB
- Triggiani M
- Maurer M
- Nilsson G
- Horny HP
- Arock M
- Orfao A
- Metcalfe DD
- Akin C
- Valent P
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2015.08.034
keywords:
- Allergy and Immunology
- Humans
- "Mastocytosis, Cutaneous/classification, diagnosis, immunology"
- "Societies, Medical"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cutaneous manifestations in patients with mastocytosis: Consensus report of the European Competence Network on Mastocytosis; the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology; and the European Academy of Allergology and Clinical Immunology.
**Authors:** Hartmann K, Escribano L, Grattan C, Brockow K, Carter MC, Alvarez-Twose I, Matito A, Broesby-Olsen S, Siebenhaar F, Lange M, Niedoszytko M, Castells M, Oude Elberink JNG, Bonadonna P, Zanotti R, Hornick JL, Torrelo A, Grabbe J, Rabenhorst A, Nedoszytko B, Butterfield JH, Gotlib J, Reiter A, Radia D, Hermine O, Sotlar K, George TI, Kristensen TK, Kluin-Nelemans HC, Yavuz S, Hägglund H, Sperr WR, Schwartz LB, Triggiani M, Maurer M, Nilsson G, Horny HP, Arock M, Orfao A, Metcalfe DD, Akin C, Valent P
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2015.08.034](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2015.08.034)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2016 Jan;137(1):35-45. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2015.08.034.  Epub 2015 Oct 21.

Cutaneous manifestations in patients with mastocytosis: Consensus report of the 
European Competence Network on Mastocytosis; the American Academy of Allergy, 
Asthma & Immunology; and the European Academy of Allergology and Clinical 
Immunology.

Hartmann K(1), Escribano L(2), Grattan C(3), Brockow K(4), Carter MC(5), 
Alvarez-Twose I(6), Matito A(6), Broesby-Olsen S(7), Siebenhaar F(8), Lange 
M(9), Niedoszytko M(10), Castells M(11), Oude Elberink JNG(12), Bonadonna P(13), 
Zanotti R(14), Hornick JL(15), Torrelo A(16), Grabbe J(17), Rabenhorst A(18), 
Nedoszytko B(9), Butterfield JH(19), Gotlib J(20), Reiter A(21), Radia D(22), 
Hermine O(23), Sotlar K(24), George TI(25), Kristensen TK(26), Kluin-Nelemans 
HC(27), Yavuz S(28), Hägglund H(29), Sperr WR(30), Schwartz LB(31), Triggiani 
M(32), Maurer M(8), Nilsson G(33), Horny HP(24), Arock M(34), Orfao A(2), 
Metcalfe DD(5), Akin C(11), Valent P(30).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany; 
Department of Dermatology, University of Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany. Electronic 
address: karin.hartmann@uksh.de.
(2)Servicio Central de Citometria (NUCLEUS), Centro de Investigacion del Cancer 
(IBMCC; CSIC/USAL) and Department of Medicine and IBSAL, University of 
Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.
(3)Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital, Norwich, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Dermatology and Allergy Biederstein, Technical University of 
Munich, Munich, Germany.
(5)Laboratory of Allergic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Md.
(6)Instituto de Estudios de Mastocitosis de Castilla La Mancha (CLMast), 
Hospital Virgen del Valle, Toledo, Spain.
(7)Department of Dermatology and Allergy Centre, Odense University Hospital, 
Odense, Denmark.
(8)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Interdisciplinary Mastocytosis Center 
Charité, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(9)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, Medical University of 
Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland.
(10)Department of Allergology, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland.
(11)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology, and Allergy, Harvard Medical School, 
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Mass.
(12)Department of Allergology, Groningen Research Institute for Asthma and COPD, 
University Medical Center of Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The 
Netherlands.
(13)Allergy Unit, Verona University Hospital, Verona, Italy.
(14)Section of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Verona University Hospital, 
Verona, Italy.
(15)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Mass.
(16)Department of Dermatology, Hospital del Nino Jesus, Madrid, Spain.
(17)Department of Dermatology, Cantonal Hospital Aarau, Aarau, Switzerland.
(18)Department of Dermatology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(19)Division of Allergic Diseases, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minn.
(20)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Stanford, Calif.
(21)III. Medizinische Klinik, Universitätsmedizin Mannheim, Universität 
Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany.
(22)Department of Haematology, Guys and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, Guys 
Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
(23)Department of Hematology, National Reference Center of Mastocytosis, INSERM 
U1163, CNRS ERL8564, Imagine Institute, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne, 
Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(24)Institute of Pathology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany.
(25)Department of Pathology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM.
(26)Department of Pathology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark.
(27)Department of Hematology, University Hospital Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(28)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology, University of 
Istanbul, Istanbul, Turkey.
(29)Hematology Center Karolinska, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(30)Department of Internal Medicine I, Division of Hematology & Hemostaseology, 
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(31)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Allergy & 
Immunology, Richmond, Va.
(32)Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of Salerno, Salerno, 
Italy.
(33)Clinical Immunology and Allergy, Department of Medicine, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(34)Molecular Oncology and Pharmacology, LBPA CNRS UMR8113, Ecole Normale 
Supérieure de Cachan, Cachan, France.

Cutaneous lesions in patients with mastocytosis are highly heterogeneous and 
encompass localized and disseminated forms. Although a classification and 
criteria for cutaneous mastocytosis (CM) have been proposed, there remains a 
need to better define subforms of cutaneous manifestations in patients with 
mastocytosis. To address this unmet need, an international task force involving 
experts from different organizations (including the European Competence Network 
on Mastocytosis; the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology; and the 
European Academy of Allergology and Clinical Immunology) met several times 
between 2010 and 2014 to discuss the classification and criteria for diagnosis 
of cutaneous manifestations in patients with mastocytosis. This article provides 
the major outcomes of these meetings and a proposal for a revised definition and 
criteria. In particular, we recommend that the typical maculopapular cutaneous 
lesions (urticaria pigmentosa) should be subdivided into 2 variants, namely a 
monomorphic variant with small maculopapular lesions, which is typically seen in 
adult patients, and a polymorphic variant with larger lesions of variable size 
and shape, which is typically seen in pediatric patients. Clinical observations 
suggest that the monomorphic variant, if it develops in children, often persists 
into adulthood, whereas the polymorphic variant may resolve around puberty. This 
delineation might have important prognostic implications, and its implementation 
in diagnostic algorithms and future mastocytosis classifications is recommended. 
Refinements are also suggested for the diagnostic criteria of CM, removal of 
telangiectasia macularis eruptiva perstans from the current classification of 
CM, and removal of the adjunct solitary from the term solitary mastocytoma.

Copyright © 2015 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2015.08.034
PMID: 26476479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]