---
reference_id: "PMID:36839582"
title: Inborn Errors of Immunity Predisposing to Herpes Simplex Virus Infections of the Central Nervous System.
authors:
- Skouboe MK
- Werner M
- Mogensen TH
journal: Pathogens
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/pathogens12020310
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inborn Errors of Immunity Predisposing to Herpes Simplex Virus Infections of the Central Nervous System.
**Authors:** Skouboe MK, Werner M, Mogensen TH
**Journal:** Pathogens (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/pathogens12020310](https://doi.org/10.3390/pathogens12020310)

## Content

1. Pathogens. 2023 Feb 13;12(2):310. doi: 10.3390/pathogens12020310.

Inborn Errors of Immunity Predisposing to Herpes Simplex Virus Infections of the 
Central Nervous System.

Skouboe MK(1)(2), Werner M(1)(2), Mogensen TH(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Aarhus University Hospital, 8000 Aarhus, 
Denmark.
(2)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, 8000 Aarhus, Denmark.

Herpesvirus infections can lead to a number of severe clinical manifestations, 
particularly when involving the central nervous system (CNS), causing 
encephalitis and meningitis. However, understanding of the host factors 
conferring increased susceptibility to these diseases and their complications 
remains incomplete. Previous studies have uncovered defects in the innate 
Toll-like receptor 3 pathway and production of type I interferon (IFN-I) in 
children and adults that predispose them to herpes simplex encephalitis. More 
recently, there is accumulating evidence for an important role of 
IFN-independent cell-autonomous intrinsic mechanisms, including small nucleolar 
RNAs, RNA lariat metabolism, and autophagy, in restricting herpesvirus 
replication and conferring protection against CNS infection. The present review 
first describes clinical manifestations of HSV infection with a focus on 
neurological complications and then summarizes the host-pathogen interactions 
and innate immune pathways responsible for sensing herpesviruses and triggering 
antiviral responses and immunity. Next, we review the current landscape of 
inborn errors of immunity and the underlying genetic defects and disturbances of 
cellular immune pathways that confer increased susceptibility to HSV infection 
in CNS. Ultimately, we discuss some of the present outstanding unanswered 
questions relating to inborn errors of immunity and HSV CNS infection together 
with some perspectives and future directions for research in the pathogenesis of 
these severe diseases in humans.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens12020310
PMCID: PMC9961685
PMID: 36839582

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.