---
reference_id: "PMID:36173306"
title: "SCAFE: a software suite for analysis of transcribed cis-regulatory elements in single cells."
authors:
- Moody J
- Kouno T
- Chang JC
- Ando Y
- Carninci P
- Shin JW
- Hon CC
journal: Bioinformatics
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btac644
keywords:
- Software
- "Regulatory Sequences, Nucleic Acid"
- Workflow
- Transcription Initiation Site
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SCAFE: a software suite for analysis of transcribed cis-regulatory elements in single cells.
**Authors:** Moody J, Kouno T, Chang JC, Ando Y, Carninci P, Shin JW, Hon CC
**Journal:** Bioinformatics (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bioinformatics/btac644](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btac644)

## Content

1. Bioinformatics. 2022 Nov 15;38(22):5126-5128. doi: 
10.1093/bioinformatics/btac644.

SCAFE: a software suite for analysis of transcribed cis-regulatory elements in 
single cells.

Moody J(1), Kouno T(1), Chang JC(1), Ando Y(1), Carninci P(1)(2), Shin JW(1)(3), 
Hon CC(1).

Author information:
(1)RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama City, Kanagawa 
230-0045, Japan.
(2)Human Technopole, Milan 20157, Italy.
(3)Genome Institute of Singapore, A*STAR Singapore, 60 Biopolis Street, Genome, 
#02-01, Singapore.

MOTIVATION: Cell type-specific activities of cis-regulatory elements (CRE) are 
central to understanding gene regulation and disease predisposition. Single-cell 
RNA 5'end sequencing (sc-end5-seq) captures the transcription start sites (TSS) 
which can be used as a proxy to measure the activity of transcribed CREs 
(tCREs). However, a substantial fraction of TSS identified from sc-end5-seq data 
may not be genuine due to various artifacts, hindering the use of sc-end5-seq 
for de novo discovery of tCREs.
RESULTS: We developed SCAFE-Single-Cell Analysis of Five-prime Ends-a software 
suite that processes sc-end5-seq data to de novo identify TSS clusters based on 
multiple logistic regression. It annotates tCREs based on the identified TSS 
clusters and generates a tCRE-by-cell count matrix for downstream analyses. The 
software suite consists of a set of flexible tools that could either be run 
independently or as pre-configured workflows.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: SCAFE is implemented in Perl and R. The source 
code and documentation are freely available for download under the MIT License 
from https://github.com/chung-lab/SCAFE. Docker images are available from 
https://hub.docker.com/r/cchon/scafe. The submitted software version and test 
data are archived at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7023163 and 
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7024060, respectively.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics 
online.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btac644
PMCID: PMC9665856
PMID: 36173306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]