---
reference_id: "PMID:20636380"
title: A critical update on the immunopathogenesis of Stiff Person Syndrome.
authors:
- Alexopoulos H
- Dalakas MC
journal: Eur J Clin Invest
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2362.2010.02340.x
keywords:
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- Biomarkers
- Female
- Glutamate Decarboxylase/immunology
- Humans
- Male
- Severity of Illness Index
- "Stiff-Person Syndrome/immunology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A critical update on the immunopathogenesis of Stiff Person Syndrome.
**Authors:** Alexopoulos H, Dalakas MC
**Journal:** Eur J Clin Invest (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2362.2010.02340.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2362.2010.02340.x)

## Content

1. Eur J Clin Invest. 2010 Nov;40(11):1018-25. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2362.2010.02340.x. Epub 2010 Aug 19.

A critical update on the immunopathogenesis of Stiff Person Syndrome.

Alexopoulos H(1), Dalakas MC.

Author information:
(1)Neuroimmunology Unit, Department of Pathophysiology, Faculty of Medicine,
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.

BACKGROUND: Stiff Person Syndrome (SPS) is a relatively rare but often
overlooked autoimmune neurological disorder that targets antigens within the
brain's inhibitory pathways resulting in incapacitating stiffness and spasms
that impact on the patients' quality of life. Although a number of
immunomodulating therapies significantly improve the patients' symptoms, the
exact pathogenic mechanisms remain unclear.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The current literature on SPS was reviewed and combined
with the authors' experience with many patients and various laboratory studies.
The majority of the patients have high-titre anti-GAD (Glutamic Acid
Decarboxylase) antibodies in the sera and CSF suggesting dysfunction of the
GABAergic neurotransmission. These antibodies are excellent disease markers but
their pathogenic role remains uncertain.
CONCLUSIONS: This review provides a critical assessment on the immunobiology of
SPS, describes the identification of anti-GABARAP antibodies as a new antigenic
target in the GABAergic synapse and identifies the areas for future research.

© 2010 The Authors. European Journal of Clinical Investigation © 2010 Stichting
European Society for Clinical Investigation Journal Foundation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2362.2010.02340.x
PMID: 20636380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
