---
reference_id: "PMID:20301419"
title: Ataxia with Vitamin E Deficiency.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Schuelke M
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ataxia with Vitamin E Deficiency.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Schuelke M

## Content

1. Ataxia with Vitamin E Deficiency.

Schuelke M(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2005 May 20 [updated 2023 Mar 16].

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropediatrics, Charité & NeuroCure Clinical Research Center, 
Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Untreated ataxia with vitamin E deficiency (AVED) 
generally manifests between ages five and 15 years. The first manifestations 
include progressive ataxia, clumsiness of the hands, loss of proprioception, and 
areflexia. Other features often observed are dysdiadochokinesia, dysarthria, 
positive Romberg sign, head titubation, decreased visual acuity, and positive 
Babinski sign. Although age of onset and disease course are more uniform within 
a given family, disease manifestations and their severity can vary even among 
sibs. When lifelong high-dose vitamin E supplementation is initiated in 
presymptomatic individuals, manifestations of AVED do not develop.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of AVED is established in a proband with 
suggestive findings and biallelic pathogenic variants in TTPA identified by 
molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapy: Lifelong targeted therapy with high-dose oral 
vitamin E supplementation (that brings plasma vitamin E concentrations into the 
high-normal range) initiated in presymptomatic individuals (e.g., younger sibs 
of an index case) prevents the manifestations of AVED. Vitamin E supplementation 
early in the disease course of a symptomatic individual may to some extent 
reverse ataxia and mental deterioration. Supportive care: Supportive care for 
those with ataxia and related findings is the same multidisciplinary care for 
individuals with ataxia of other causes. Surveillance: Monitor plasma vitamin E 
concentration in treated individuals – particularly children – every six months. 
For symptomatic individuals, regular evaluations to monitor the individual's 
response to supportive care and to identify emergence of new manifestations. 
Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status 
of all sibs of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible 
those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment. Timely treatment 
with vitamin E supplementation may completely avert the clinical manifestations 
of the disease.
GENETIC COUNSELING: AVED is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If both 
parents are known to be heterozygous for a TTPA pathogenic variant, each sib of 
an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% 
chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of inheriting neither 
of the familial pathogenic variants. Once the TTPA pathogenic variants have been 
identified in an affected family member, carrier detection for at-risk family 
members, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk, and preimplantation 
genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301419