---
reference_id: "PMID:10483019"
title: "Relapsing catastrophic antiphospholipid antibody syndrome: a mimic for thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura?"
authors:
- Cerveny KC
- Sawitzke AD
journal: Lupus
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1177/096120339900800613
keywords:
- Aged
- "Antiphospholipid Syndrome/diagnosis, immunology, physiopathology"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- "Purpura, Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic/diagnosis, immunology, physiopathology"
- Recurrence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relapsing catastrophic antiphospholipid antibody syndrome: a mimic for thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura?
**Authors:** Cerveny KC, Sawitzke AD
**Journal:** Lupus (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1177/096120339900800613](https://doi.org/10.1177/096120339900800613)

## Content

1. Lupus. 1999;8(6):477-81. doi: 10.1177/096120339900800613.

Relapsing catastrophic antiphospholipid antibody syndrome: a mimic for 
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura?

Cerveny KC(1), Sawitzke AD.

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, USA.

The catastrophic antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (CAPS) is an uncommon 
disorder characterized by widespread micro- and macrovascular changes due to 
intravascular thrombosis. This complication of the antiphospholipid antibody 
syndrome is often fatal and recurrences are very rare. The differential 
diagnosis of CAPS includes thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) and this 
distinction may be difficult, but essential, for appropriate therapy. 
Plasmapheresis is effective in both conditions, but anticoagulation, a mainstay 
in the treatment of CAPS, could be disastrous in TTP. We present the case of an 
elderly woman who survived two episodes of CAPS four years apart and whose 
clinical findings were also suggestive of TTP. The characteristics of TTP and 
CAPS are compared and the importance of accurate diagnosis is emphasized.

DOI: 10.1177/096120339900800613
PMID: 10483019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]