---
reference_id: "PMID:36748043"
title: copa-1 mutants experience heightened endoplasmic reticulum stress sensitivity in a C. elegans COPA Syndrome model.
authors:
- Larkin KA
- Zafra I
- Golden A
journal: MicroPubl Biol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.17912/micropub.biology.000696
content_type: abstract_only
---

# copa-1 mutants experience heightened endoplasmic reticulum stress sensitivity in a C. elegans COPA Syndrome model.
**Authors:** Larkin KA, Zafra I, Golden A
**Journal:** MicroPubl Biol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.17912/micropub.biology.000696](https://doi.org/10.17912/micropub.biology.000696)

## Content

1. MicroPubl Biol. 2023 Jan 20;2023:10.17912/micropub.biology.000696. doi: 
10.17912/micropub.biology.000696. eCollection 2023.

copa-1 mutants experience heightened endoplasmic reticulum stress sensitivity in 
a C. elegans COPA Syndrome model.

Larkin KA(1), Zafra I(1), Golden A(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Biochemistry, National Institute of Diabetes and 
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

COPA Syndrome is a rare, autosomal dominant autoimmune/autoinflammatory disease 
caused by mutations in COPA , which codes for the alpha subunit of the Coat 
Protein Complex I (COPI). COPI coated vesicles move proteins in retrograde from 
the Golgi Apparatus to the Endoplasmic Reticulum. At the cellular level, COPA 
mutations cause ER stress, though the downstream genetic mechanisms of COPA 
Syndrome remain undefined. Here, we model COPA Syndrome in Caenorhabditis 
elegans , using CRISPR/Cas9 to generate patient alleles in copa-1 , the C. 
elegans COPA ortholog. The two alleles made thus far are superficially wild type 
under normal growth conditions. However, these animals demonstrate an increased 
ER stress sensitivity.

Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.

DOI: 10.17912/micropub.biology.000696
PMCID: PMC9898814
PMID: 36748043