---
reference_id: "PMID:37059438"
title: "Clinical management and diagnosis of CLN2 disease: consensus of the Brazilian experts group."
authors:
- Sampaio LPB
- Manreza MLG
- Pessoa A
- Gurgel-Giannetti J
- Coan AC
- Júnior HVL
- Embiruçu EK
- Henriques-Souza AMM
- Kok F
journal: Arq Neuropsiquiatr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1055/s-0043-1761434
keywords:
- Humans
- Tripeptidyl-Peptidase 1
- Brazil
- "Neuronal Ceroid-Lipofuscinoses/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Quality of Life
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical management and diagnosis of CLN2 disease: consensus of the Brazilian experts group.
**Authors:** Sampaio LPB, Manreza MLG, Pessoa A, Gurgel-Giannetti J, Coan AC, Júnior HVL, Embiruçu EK, Henriques-Souza AMM, Kok F
**Journal:** Arq Neuropsiquiatr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0043-1761434](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0043-1761434)

## Content

1. Arq Neuropsiquiatr. 2023 Mar;81(3):284-295. doi: 10.1055/s-0043-1761434. Epub
2023 Apr 14.

Clinical management and diagnosis of CLN2 disease: consensus of the Brazilian
experts group.

Sampaio LPB(1), Manreza MLG(1), Pessoa A(2), Gurgel-Giannetti J(3), Coan AC(4),
Júnior HVL(5), Embiruçu EK(6), Henriques-Souza AMM(7), Kok F(1).

Author information:
(1)Universidade de São Paulo, Faculdade de Medicina, Hospital das Clínicas, São
Paulo SP, Brazil.
(2)Universidade Estadual do Ceará, Hospital Infantil Albert Sabin, Fortaleza CE,
Brazil.
(3)Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Faculdade de Medicina, Hospital das
Clínicas, Belo Horizonte MG, Brazil.
(4)Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas, Campinas
SP, Brazil.
(5)Instituto de Neurologia de Goiânia, Goiânia GO, Brazil.
(6)Universidade do Estado da Bahia, Hospital Universitário Professor Edgard
Santos, Salvador BA, Brazil.
(7)Instituto de Medicina Integral Professor Fernando Figueira, Recife PE,
Brazil.

Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis type 2 (CLN2) is a rare neurodegenerative genetic
disease that affects children in early life. Its classic form is rapidly
progressive, leading to death within the first 10 years. The urge for earlier
diagnosis increases with the availability of enzyme replacement therapy. A panel
of nine Brazilian child neurologists combined their expertise in CLN2 with
evidence from the medical literature to establish a consensus to manage this
disease in Brazil. They voted 92 questions including diagnosis, clinical
manifestations, and treatment of the disease, considering the access to
healthcare in this country. Clinicians should suspect CLN2 disease in any child,
from 2 to 4 years old, with language delay and epilepsy. Even though the classic
form is the most prevalent, atypical cases with different phenotypes can be
found. Electroencephalogram, magnetic resonance imaging, molecular and
biochemical testing are the main tools to investigate and confirm the diagnosis.
However, we have limited access to molecular testing in Brazil, and rely on the
support from the pharmaceutical industry. The management of CLN2 should involve
a multidisciplinary team and focus on the quality of life of patients and on
family support. Enzyme replacement therapy with Cerliponase α is an innovative
treatment approved in Brazil since 2018; it delays functional decline and
provides quality of life. Given the difficulties for the diagnosis and treatment
of rare diseases in our public health system, the early diagnosis of CLN2 needs
improvement as enzyme replacement therapy is available and modifies the
prognosis of patients.

Publisher: Lipofuscinose ceróide neuronal (CLN2) é uma doença genética
neurodegenerativa rara que afeta crianças nos primeiros anos de vida. A sua
forma clássica é rapidamente progressiva, levando à morte nos primeiros 10 anos.
A necessidade de um diagnóstico precoce aumenta com a disponibilidade do
tratamento de terapia enzimática. Um painel de nove neurologistas infantis
brasileiros combinou sua experiência em CLN2 com evidências da literatura médica
para estabelecer um consenso no manejo desta doença no Brasil. Eles votaram 92
questões abordando diagnóstico, manifestações clínicas e tratamento,
considerando o acesso à saúde no Brasil. Deve-se suspeitar de CLN2 em qualquer
criança de 2 a 4 anos de idade que apresente atraso de linguagem e epilepsia.
Apesar da forma clássica ser a mais prevalente, podem ser encontrados casos
atípicos com diferentes fenótipos. Eletroencefalograma, ressonância magnética,
testes moleculares e bioquímicos são as principais ferramentas para investigar e
confirmar o diagnóstico. No entanto, o acesso aos testes moleculares é limitado
no Brasil, necessitando contar com o apoio da indústria farmacêutica. O manejo
da CLN2 deve envolver uma equipe multidisciplinar e focar na qualidade de vida
dos pacientes e no apoio familiar. A terapia de reposição enzimática com
Cerliponase alfa é um tratamento inovador aprovado no Brasil desde 2018; ele
retarda o declínio funcional e proporciona qualidade de vida. Diante das
dificuldades para o diagnóstico e tratamento de doenças raras em nosso sistema
público de saúde, o diagnóstico precoce de CLN2 precisa de melhorias pois a
terapia de reposição enzimática está disponível e modifica o prognóstico dos
pacientes.

Academia Brasileira de Neurologia. This is an open access article published by
Thieme under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License, permitting copying and reproduction so long as the original work is
given appropriate credit (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

DOI: 10.1055/s-0043-1761434
PMCID: PMC10104757
PMID: 37059438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AP: has received speaker honorarium and is a
consultant at BioMarin; EKE: has received speaker honorarium from BioMarin and
Janssen; FK: has received financial support from PTC Pharmaceuticals,
Actelion-Janssen, and BioMarin for medical education programs. He is the medical
director of Mendelics Analyze Genomics. All other authors declare no conflicts
of interest.
