---
reference_id: "PMID:9453343"
title: Intracranial aneurysm and hemorrhagic stroke in glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism.
authors:
- Litchfield WR
- Anderson BF
- Weiss RJ
- Lifton RP
- Dluhy RG
journal: Hypertension
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1161/01.hyp.31.1.445
keywords:
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- "Cerebral Hemorrhage/complications, epidemiology, mortality"
- Female
- Glucocorticoids/therapeutic use
- Humans
- "Hyperaldosteronism/complications, drug therapy"
- "Intracranial Aneurysm/complications, epidemiology, mortality"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Registries
- Retrospective Studies
- Survival Rate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intracranial aneurysm and hemorrhagic stroke in glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism.
**Authors:** Litchfield WR, Anderson BF, Weiss RJ, Lifton RP, Dluhy RG
**Journal:** Hypertension (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.hyp.31.1.445](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.hyp.31.1.445)

## Content

1. Hypertension. 1998 Jan;31(1 Pt 2):445-50. doi: 10.1161/01.hyp.31.1.445.

Intracranial aneurysm and hemorrhagic stroke in glucocorticoid-remediable 
aldosteronism.

Litchfield WR(1), Anderson BF, Weiss RJ, Lifton RP, Dluhy RG.

Author information:
(1)Endocrine-Hypertension Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

There are anecdotal reports of early cerebrovascular complications occurring in 
patients with glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism (GRA). The issue has never 
been systematically evaluated. In this study, we retrospectively reviewed the 
International Registry for GRA to see if there was an association between 
cerebrovascular complications and GRA. We searched the records of 376 patients 
from 27 genetically proven GRA pedigrees for premature death or cerebrovascular 
complications. Each case was subsequently verified through the referring 
physician, or autopsy reports. The number of complications occurring in patients 
with proven GRA were compared to GRA negative subjects from the same pedigrees. 
There were 18 cerebrovascular events in 15 patients with proven GRA (n=167) and 
none in the GRA negative group (n=194; P<.001). There were an additional 15 
events in 15 subjects that were suspected of having GRA based on clinical 
history. Seventy percent of events were hemorrhagic strokes; the overall case 
fatality rate was 61%. The mean (+/- SD) age at the time of the initial event 
was 31.7+/-11.3 years. In total, 48% of all GRA pedigrees and 18% of all GRA 
patients had cerebrovascular complications, which is similar to the frequency of 
aneurysm in adult polycystic kidney disease. GRA is associated with high 
morbidity and mortality from early onset of hemorrhagic stroke and ruptured 
intracranial aneurysms. Screening for intracranial aneurysm with magnetic 
resonance angiography is advised for patients with genetically proven GRA.

DOI: 10.1161/01.hyp.31.1.445
PMID: 9453343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]