---
reference_id: "PMID:39479502"
title: "Mutant ATRX: pathogenesis of ATRX syndrome and cancer."
authors:
- Yuan K
- Tang Y
- Ding Z
- Peng L
- Zeng J
- Wu H
- Yi Q
journal: Front Mol Biosci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2024.1434398
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutant ATRX: pathogenesis of ATRX syndrome and cancer.
**Authors:** Yuan K, Tang Y, Ding Z, Peng L, Zeng J, Wu H, Yi Q
**Journal:** Front Mol Biosci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmolb.2024.1434398](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmolb.2024.1434398)

## Content

1. Front Mol Biosci. 2024 Oct 16;11:1434398. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2024.1434398. 
eCollection 2024.

Mutant ATRX: pathogenesis of ATRX syndrome and cancer.

Yuan K(#)(1), Tang Y(#)(1), Ding Z(1), Peng L(1), Zeng J(1), Wu H(1), Yi Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Model Animals and Stem Cell Biology, Hunan Normal 
University School of Medicine, Changsha, Hunan, China.
(#)Contributed equally

The transcriptional regulator ATRX, a genetic factor, is associated with a range 
of disabilities, including intellectual, hematopoietic, skeletal, facial, and 
urogenital disabilities. ATRX mutations substantially contribute to the 
pathogenesis of ATRX syndrome and are frequently detected in gliomas and many 
other cancers. These mutations disrupt the organization, subcellular 
localization, and transcriptional activity of ATRX, leading to chromosomal 
instability and affecting interactions with key regulatory proteins such as 
DAXX, EZH2, and TERRA. ATRX also functions as a transcriptional regulator 
involved in the pathogenesis of neuronal disorders and various diseases. In 
conclusion, ATRX is a central protein whose abnormalities lead to multiple 
diseases.

Copyright © 2024 Yuan, Tang, Ding, Peng, Zeng, Wu and Yi.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2024.1434398
PMCID: PMC11521912
PMID: 39479502

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.