---
reference_id: "PMID:35884622"
title: Behavioral Symptomatology in the Premenstruum.
authors:
- Dang N
- Khalil D
- Sun J
- Naveed A
- Soumare F
- Nusslock R
- Hamidovic A
journal: Brain Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/brainsci12070814
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Behavioral Symptomatology in the Premenstruum.
**Authors:** Dang N, Khalil D, Sun J, Naveed A, Soumare F, Nusslock R, Hamidovic A
**Journal:** Brain Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/brainsci12070814](https://doi.org/10.3390/brainsci12070814)

## Content

1. Brain Sci. 2022 Jun 22;12(7):814. doi: 10.3390/brainsci12070814.

Behavioral Symptomatology in the Premenstruum.

Dang N(1), Khalil D(2), Sun J(1), Naveed A(3), Soumare F(3), Nusslock R(4), 
Hamidovic A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 
60612, USA.
(2)Department of Public Health, Benedictine University, Lisle, IL 60532, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, 
USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Sleep and eating behaviors are disturbed during the premenstrual 
phase of the menstrual cycle in a significant number of reproductive-age women. 
Despite their impact on the development and control of chronic health 
conditions, these behaviors are poorly understood. In the present study, we 
sought to identify affective and psychological factors which associate with 
premenstrual changes in sleeping and eating behaviors and assess how they impact 
functionality.
METHODS: Fifty-seven women provided daily ratings of premenstrual symptomatology 
and functionality across two-three menstrual cycles (156 cycles total). For each 
participant and symptom, we subtracted the mean day +5 to +10 ("post-menstruum") 
ratings from mean day -6 to -1 ("pre-menstruum") ratings and divided this value 
by participant- and symptom-specific variance. We completed the statistical 
analysis using multivariate linear regression.
RESULTS: Low interest was associated with a premenstrual increase in insomnia (p 
≤ 0.05) and appetite/eating (p ≤ 0.05). Furthermore, insomnia was associated 
with occupational (p ≤ 0.001), recreational (p ≤ 0.001), and relational (p ≤ 
0.01) impairment.
CONCLUSIONS: Results of the present analysis highlight the importance of apathy 
(i.e., low interest) on the expression of behavioral symptomatology, as well as 
premenstrual insomnia on impairment. These findings can inform treatment 
approaches, thereby improving care for patients suffering from premenstrual 
symptomatology linked to chronic disease conditions.

DOI: 10.3390/brainsci12070814
PMCID: PMC9312467
PMID: 35884622

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.