---
reference_id: "PMID:34573903"
title: An Atypical Case of Head Tremor and Extensive White Matter in an Adult Female Caused by 3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA Lyase Deficiency.
authors:
- Boutouchent N
- Bourilhon J
- Sudrié-Arnaud B
- Bonnevalle A
- Guyant-Maréchal L
- Acquaviva C
- Dujardin-Ippolito L
- Bekri S
- Dabaj I
- Tebani A
journal: Diagnostics (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/diagnostics11091561
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An Atypical Case of Head Tremor and Extensive White Matter in an Adult Female Caused by 3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA Lyase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Boutouchent N, Bourilhon J, Sudrié-Arnaud B, Bonnevalle A, Guyant-Maréchal L, Acquaviva C, Dujardin-Ippolito L, Bekri S, Dabaj I, Tebani A
**Journal:** Diagnostics (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/diagnostics11091561](https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics11091561)

## Content

1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2021 Aug 28;11(9):1561. doi: 10.3390/diagnostics11091561.

An Atypical Case of Head Tremor and Extensive White Matter in an Adult Female
Caused by 3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA Lyase Deficiency.

Boutouchent N(1), Bourilhon J(2)(3), Sudrié-Arnaud B(1), Bonnevalle A(2),
Guyant-Maréchal L(3), Acquaviva C(4), Dujardin-Ippolito L(1), Bekri S(1), Dabaj
I(5), Tebani A(1).

Author information:
(1)Normandie University, UNIROUEN, INSERM U1245, CHU Rouen, Department of
Metabolic Biochemistry, 76000 Rouen, France.
(2)Rouen University Hospital, CHU de Rouen, Department of Neurology, 76000
Rouen, France.
(3)Department of Neurophysiology, Rouen University Hospital, 76000 Rouen,
France.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inborn Errors of
Metabolism, Center of Biology and Pathology Est, CHU Lyon, 69310 Bron, France.
(5)Normandie University, UNIROUEN, INSERM U1245, CHU Rouen, Department of
Neonatal Pediatrics, Intensive Care and Neuropediatrics, 76000 Rouen, France.

3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) Lyase deficiency (HMGLD) (OMIM 246450)
is an autosomal recessive genetic disorder caused by homozygous or compound
heterozygous variants in the HMGCL gene located on 1p36.11. Clinically, this
disorder is characterized by a life-threatening metabolic intoxication with a
presentation including severe hypoglycemia without ketosis, metabolic acidosis,
hyper-ammoniemia, hepatomegaly and a coma. HMGLD clinical onset is within the
first few months of life after a symptomatic free period. In nonacute periods,
the treatment is based on a protein- and fat-restricted diet. L-carnitine
supplementation is recommended. A late onset presentation has been described in
very few cases, and only two adult cases have been reported. The present work
aims to describe an incidental discovery of an HMGLD case in a 54-year-old
patient and reports a comprehensive review of clinical and biological features
in adult patients to raise awareness about the late-onset presentation of this
disease.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics11091561
PMCID: PMC8469356
PMID: 34573903

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
