---
reference_id: "PMID:33563454"
title: Chronic Cough With Non-Resolving Mass-like Consolidation.
authors:
- Hui SLY
- Haja Mohideen SM
- Cheng XM
- Chew SY
journal: Chest
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2020.08.2106
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic Cough With Non-Resolving Mass-like Consolidation.
**Authors:** Hui SLY, Haja Mohideen SM, Cheng XM, Chew SY
**Journal:** Chest (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.chest.2020.08.2106](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chest.2020.08.2106)

## Content

1. Chest. 2021 Feb;159(2):e119-e126. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2020.08.2106.

Chronic Cough With Non-Resolving Mass-like Consolidation.

Hui SLY(1), Haja Mohideen SM(2), Cheng XM(3), Chew SY(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Changi General 
Hospital, Singapore. Electronic address: sandrahuiliyan@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Singapore.
(3)Department of Anatomical Pathology, Singapore.
(4)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Singapore General 
Hospital, Singapore.

A 72-year-old Chinese man presented with a 5-month history of chronic dry cough, 
weight loss, and progressive dyspnea. There was no associated hemoptysis, 
hoarseness, epistaxis, or fever on systemic review. He was a nonsmoker and had 
no family history of malignancy. He was treated for pulmonary TB 40 years ago. A 
chest radiograph (Fig 1) showed mass-like consolidation in the right midzone 
with loss of the right hilar border, a small right pleural effusion, and 
bi-apical scarring. On physical examination, he was afebrile and normotensive, 
and he had pulse oxygen saturation of 97%. Examination of the chest was 
remarkable only for reduced breath sounds over the right chest. He did not have 
digital clubbing, distended neck veins, or cervical lymphadenopathy.

Copyright © 2020 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2020.08.2106
PMID: 33563454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]