---
reference_id: "PMID:36346134"
title: Anti-pan-neurofascin antibodies induce subclass-related complement activation and nodo-paranodal damage.
authors:
- Appeltshauser L
- Junghof H
- Messinger J
- Linke J
- Haarmann A
- Ayzenberg I
- Baka P
- Dorst J
- Fisse AL
- Grüter T
- Hauschildt V
- Jörk A
- Leypoldt F
- Mäurer M
- Meinl E
- Michels S
- Motte J
- Pitarokoili K
- Stettner M
- Villmann C
- Weihrauch M
- Welte GS
- Zerr I
- Heinze KG
- Sommer C
- Doppler K
journal: Brain
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awac418
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anti-pan-neurofascin antibodies induce subclass-related complement activation and nodo-paranodal damage.
**Authors:** Appeltshauser L, Junghof H, Messinger J, Linke J, Haarmann A, Ayzenberg I, Baka P, Dorst J, Fisse AL, Grüter T, Hauschildt V, Jörk A, Leypoldt F, Mäurer M, Meinl E, Michels S, Motte J, Pitarokoili K, Stettner M, Villmann C, Weihrauch M, Welte GS, Zerr I, Heinze KG, Sommer C, Doppler K
**Journal:** Brain (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awac418](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awac418)

## Content

1. Brain. 2023 May 2;146(5):1932-1949. doi: 10.1093/brain/awac418.

Anti-pan-neurofascin antibodies induce subclass-related complement activation 
and nodo-paranodal damage.

Appeltshauser L(1), Junghof H(1), Messinger J(1), Linke J(1)(2), Haarmann A(1), 
Ayzenberg I(3)(4), Baka P(5), Dorst J(6), Fisse AL(3), Grüter T(3), Hauschildt 
V(7), Jörk A(8), Leypoldt F(9)(10), Mäurer M(11), Meinl E(12), Michels S(6), 
Motte J(3), Pitarokoili K(3), Stettner M(13), Villmann C(14), Weihrauch M(15), 
Welte GS(16), Zerr I(7)(17), Heinze KG(2), Sommer C(1), Doppler K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospital of Würzburg, 97080 Würzburg, 
Germany.
(2)Rudolf Virchow Center, Center for Integrative and Translational Bioimaging, 
Julius Maximilian University of Würzburg, 97080 Würzburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurology, St. Josef Hospital Bochum, Ruhr University of 
Bochum, 44791 Bochum, Germany.
(4)Department of Neurology, I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, 
119146 Moscow, Russia.
(5)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg 
University, 55131 Mainz, Germany.
(6)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Ulm, 89081 Ulm, Germany.
(7)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Göttingen, 37075 
Göttingen, Germany.
(8)Hans Berger Department of Neurology, Jena University Hospital, 07747 Jena, 
Germany.
(9)Neuroimmunology Section, Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital 
Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel/Lübeck, Germany.
(10)Department of Neurology, Kiel University, 24105 Kiel, Germany.
(11)Department of Neurology, Klinikum Würzburg Mitte gGmbH, Standort 
Juliusspital, 97070 Würzburg, Germany.
(12)Institute of Clinical Neuroimmunology, Biomedical Center and University 
Hospital, Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich, 82152 Planegg, Germany.
(13)Department of Neurology, University Hospital of Essen, 45147 Essen, Germany.
(14)Institute for Clinical Neurobiology, University Hospital Würzburg, 97080 
Würzburg, Germany.
(15)Department of Neurology, Bundeswehrkrankenhaus Ulm, 89081 Ulm, Germany.
(16)Department of Neurology, KRH Klinikum Nordstadt, 30167 Hannover, Germany.
(17)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, 37075 Göttingen, Germany.

Autoimmune neuropathy associated with antibodies against pan-neurofascin is a 
new subtype of nodo-paranodopathy. It is relevant because it is associated with 
high morbidity and mortality. Affected patients often require intensive care 
unit treatment for several months, and data on the reversibility and long-term 
prognosis are limited. The pathogenicity including IgG subclass-associated 
mechanisms has not been unravelled, nor directly compared to 
anti-neurofascin-155 IgG4-related pathology. Understanding the underlying 
pathology might have a direct impact on treatment of these severely affected 
patients. By a multicentre combined prospective and retrospective approach, we 
provide clinical data of a large cohort of patients with 
anti-neurofascin-associated neuropathy (n = 18) including longitudinal titre and 
neurofilament light chain assessment via Ella® and relate clinical data to in 
vitro pathogenicity studies of anti-neurofascin antibodies. We assessed antibody 
binding characteristics and the pathogenic effects of anti-pan-neurofascin 
versus neurofascin-155 antibodies on living myelinating dorsal root ganglia 
co-cultures. Additionally, we analysed the IgG subclass profile and the 
complement binding capacity and effector functions considering the effects of 
intravenous immunoglobulin preparations via enzyme-linked immunosorbent and 
cell-based assays. In contrast to chronic neurofascin-155 IgG4-associated 
neuropathy, anti-pan-neurofascin-associated disease presented with a high 
morbidity and mortality, but as a monophasic and potentially reversible 
disorder. During follow-up, antibodies were no longer detectable in 8 of 11 
patients. Anti-pan-neurofascin had direct access to the nodes of Ranvier in 
myelinating cultures titre-dependently, most probably inducing this severe 
phenotype. Antibody preincubation led to impaired paranode formation, 
destruction of paranodal architecture and alterations on paranodal myelin and 
sensory neurons in the cultures, with more severe effects than neurofascin-155 
antibodies. Besides IgG4, subclass IgG3 was detected and associated with 
complement binding and cytotoxic effects in vitro. As a possible correlate of 
axonal damage in vivo, we detected highly increased serum neurofilament light 
chain levels (sNF-L), correlating to serum C3a. Still, sNF-L was not identified 
as a marker for poor prognosis, but rather as an intra- and interindividual 
marker for acuteness, severity and course, with a strong decrease during 
recovery. Our data provide evidence that anti-pan-neurofascin antibodies 
directly attack the node and induce severe and acute, but potentially 
reversible, nodo-paranodal pathology, possibly involving complement-mediated 
mechanisms. Screening for autoantibodies thus is crucial to identify this subset 
of patients who benefit from early antibody-depleting therapy. Titre and sNF-L 
might serve as valuable follow-up parameters. The prospect of a favourable 
outcome has high relevance for physicians, patients and relatives during months 
of critical care.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awac418
PMCID: PMC10151189
PMID: 36346134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: L.A., F.L., C.S. and K.D. work for an academic 
institution offering commercial antibody diagnostics. I.A. has received travel 
grants from Biogen Idec and Guthy-Jackson Charitable Foundation, served on 
scientific advisory boards for Roche, Alexion, Merck and received research 
support from Diamed, none related to this manuscript. A.L.F. received research 
funding from Georgius Agricola Stiftung Ruhr, Ruhr University Bochum 
(FoRUM-program) and GBS CIDP Foundation International. She owns shares of 
Fresenius SE & Co., Gilead Sciences, Medtronic PLC and Novartis AG. F.L. serves 
or has served on advisory boards for Biogen, Roche and Alexion and received 
speaker honoraria from Roche, Biogen, Grifols, Alexion, Desitin and Novartis. He 
serves as editorial board member for Neurology N2. J.M. received travel grants 
from Biogen idec. His research is funded by Klaus Tschira Foundation, Hertie 
Foundation, Novartis, Biogen and Ruhr-University, Bochum (FoRUM-Program), none 
related to this work. K.P. received travel grants and speaker honoraria from 
Biogen Idec and Bayer Schering, Novartis, Celgene and Grifols and has 
participated in advisory board meeting for Celgene, none related to this 
manuscript. C.S. has served on scientific advisory boards for Akcea, Algiax, Air 
Liquide, Bayer, Grifols, Ipsen, LFB, Immunic, Merz, Pfizer, Roche and Takeda. 
She received speaker honoraria from Akcea, Alnylam Amicus, Grifols, Pfizer and 
Teva. She serves or has served as a journal editor, associate editor or 
editorial advisory board member for the European Journal of Neurology, PLoS One 
and PAIN Reports. The other authors report no competing interests.