---
reference_id: "PMID:8325289"
title: Acute adrenal insufficiency.
authors:
- Werbel SS
- Ober KP
journal: Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute adrenal insufficiency.
**Authors:** Werbel SS, Ober KP
**Journal:** Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am (1993)

## Content

1. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 1993 Jun;22(2):303-28.

Acute adrenal insufficiency.

Werbel SS(1), Ober KP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Bowman Gray School of Medicine, Wake Forest 
University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina.

Acute adrenal insufficiency is a rare disorder associated with high morbidity 
and mortality if allowed to progress unrecognized. A constellation of 
nonspecific symptoms including weakness, easy fatigue, nausea, anorexia, and 
weight loss are typical features of adrenal insufficiency. The index of 
suspicion should be particularly high if the patient has hyperpigmentation; 
hyponatremia and/or hyperkalemia; a history of autoimmune disease 
(hypothyroidism, diabetes) or recent prior use of exogenous steroids or if the 
patient is on anticoagulant therapy. Any decline in clinical status 
(hypotension, fever, decreasing mental status), especially in the setting of an 
acute intercurrent illness, should be treated aggressively, even before 
laboratory confirmation of the diagnosis. Diagnostic testing is fairly 
straightforward and readily available. The development of purified synthetic 
corticosteroid preparations has provided a safe and effective means of 
replacement. Early awareness, recognition, and intervention remain significant 
steps in altering the course of acute adrenal insufficiency.

PMID: 8325289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]