---
reference_id: "PMID:3536081"
title: "Cancer procoagulant in human tumor cells: evidence from melanoma patients."
authors:
- Donati MB
- Gambacorti-Passerini C
- Casali B
- Falanga A
- Vannotti P
- Fossati G
- Semeraro N
- Gordon SG
journal: Cancer Res
year: '1986'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cancer procoagulant in human tumor cells: evidence from melanoma patients.
**Authors:** Donati MB, Gambacorti-Passerini C, Casali B, Falanga A, Vannotti P, Fossati G, Semeraro N, Gordon SG
**Journal:** Cancer Res (1986)

## Content

1. Cancer Res. 1986 Dec;46(12 Pt 1):6471-4.

Cancer procoagulant in human tumor cells: evidence from melanoma patients.

Donati MB, Gambacorti-Passerini C, Casali B, Falanga A, Vannotti P, Fossati G, 
Semeraro N, Gordon SG.

It has repeatedly been proposed that fibrin plays a role in tumor growth and 
metastasis. Among tumor cell products or activities which may promote clot 
formation, cancer procoagulant (CP), a direct activator of coagulation factor X, 
has been suggested to be selectively associated with the malignant phenotype. We 
report here the enzymatic and immunological identification of this cysteine 
proteinase procoagulant in extracts and cells from human melanoma. CP activity 
was independent of both the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways of blood 
coagulation, using factor IX and factor VII deficient plasmas, and was inhibited 
by the cysteine proteinase inhibitors iodoacetamide and HgCl2. CP activity was 
detectable in extracts and cell suspensions from all 32 patients studied and was 
higher in extracts from metastases (14.8 +/- 3.9 units/mg protein) than from the 
primary tumors (3.7 +/- 1.0 units/mg protein). CP activity was not affected by 
an anti-apoprotein III antibody or by concanavalin A, a known inhibitor of 
thromboplastin. In contrast, no CP activity or antigen was detected in extracts 
from six benign melanocytic lesions. The procoagulant activity was dependent on 
factor VII and was inhibited by anti-apoprotein III antibody and by concanavalin 
A, properties that suggest that the procoagulant was tissue thromboplastin. 
These data indicate that CP can be expressed by human tumor cells and that, 
among melanotic lesions, its presence is associated with the malignant phenotype 
and its activity is particularly high in metastatic cells.

PMID: 3536081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]