---
reference_id: "PMID:37495957"
title: Optogenetic cortical spreading depolarization induces headache-related behaviour and neuroinflammatory responses some prolonged in familial hemiplegic migraine type 1 mice.
authors:
- Dehghani A
- Schenke M
- van Heiningen SH
- Karatas H
- Tolner EA
- van den Maagdenberg AMJM
journal: J Headache Pain
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s10194-023-01628-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Optogenetic cortical spreading depolarization induces headache-related behaviour and neuroinflammatory responses some prolonged in familial hemiplegic migraine type 1 mice.
**Authors:** Dehghani A, Schenke M, van Heiningen SH, Karatas H, Tolner EA, van den Maagdenberg AMJM
**Journal:** J Headache Pain (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s10194-023-01628-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s10194-023-01628-8)

## Content

1. J Headache Pain. 2023 Jul 26;24(1):96. doi: 10.1186/s10194-023-01628-8.

Optogenetic cortical spreading depolarization induces headache-related behaviour 
and neuroinflammatory responses some prolonged in familial hemiplegic migraine 
type 1 mice.

Dehghani A(1)(2), Schenke M(3), van Heiningen SH(3), Karatas H(4), Tolner 
EA(#)(3)(5), van den Maagdenberg AMJM(#)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, RC, 
2300, The Netherlands. adehghan@bidmc.harvard.edu.
(2)Department of Anesthesia and Critical Care and Pain Medicine, Harvard Medical 
School, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA. 
adehghan@bidmc.harvard.edu.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, RC, 
2300, The Netherlands.
(4)Institute of Neurological Sciences and Psychiatry, Hacettepe University, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(5)Department of Neurology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, RC, 2300, 
The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, RC, 
2300, The Netherlands. A.M.J.M.van_den_Maagdenberg@lumc.nl.
(7)Department of Neurology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, RC, 2300, 
The Netherlands. A.M.J.M.van_den_Maagdenberg@lumc.nl.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Cortical spreading depolarization (CSD), the neurophysiological 
correlate of the migraine aura, can activate trigeminal pain pathways, but the 
neurobiological mechanisms and behavioural consequences remain unclear. Here we 
investigated effects of optogenetically-induced CSDs on headache-related 
behaviour and neuroinflammatory responses in transgenic mice carrying a familial 
hemiplegic migraine type 1 (FHM1) mutation.
METHODS: CSD events (3 in total) were evoked in a minimally invasive manner by 
optogenetic stimulation through the intact skull in freely behaving wildtype 
(WT) and FHM1 mutant mice. Related behaviours were analysed using mouse grimace 
scale (MGS) scoring, head grooming, and nest building behaviour. 
Neuroinflammatory changes were investigated by assessing HMGB1 release with 
immunohistochemistry and by pre-treating mice with a selective Pannexin-1 
channel inhibitor.
RESULTS: In both WT and FHM1 mutant mice, CSDs induced headache-related 
behaviour, as evidenced by increased MGS scores and the occurrence of 
oculotemporal strokes, at 30 min. Mice of both genotypes also showed decreased 
nest building behaviour after CSD. Whereas in WT mice MGS scores had normalized 
at 24 h after CSD, in FHM1 mutant mice scores were normalized only at 48 h. Of 
note, oculotemporal stroke behaviour already normalized 5 h after CSD, whereas 
nest building behaviour remained impaired at 72 h; no genotype differences were 
observed for either readout. Nuclear HMGB1 release in the cortex of FHM1 mutant 
mice, at 30 min after CSD, was increased bilaterally in both WT and FHM1 mutant 
mice, albeit that contralateral release was more pronounced in the mutant mice. 
Only in FHM1 mutant mice, contralateral release remained higher at 24 h after 
CSD, but at 48 h had returned to abnormal, elevated, baseline values, when 
compared to WT mice. Blocking Panx1 channels by TAT-Panx308 inhibited 
CSD-induced headache related behaviour and HMGB1 release.
CONCLUSIONS: CSDs, induced in a minimally invasive manner by optogenetics, 
investigated in freely behaving mice, cause various migraine relevant 
behavioural and neuroinflammatory phenotypes that are more pronounced and 
longer-lasting in FHM1 mutant compared to WT mice. Prevention of CSD-related 
neuroinflammatory changes may have therapeutic potential in the treatment of 
migraine.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s10194-023-01628-8
PMCID: PMC10373261
PMID: 37495957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AMJMvdM has served as a consultant for AbbVie. 
AMJMvdM and EAT have received research support from Schedule 1 Therapeutics and 
Praxis Precision Medicine but neiter company was involved in the study. All 
other authors report no competing interests.