---
reference_id: "PMID:36857009"
title: Long-term cardiometabolic morbidity in young adults with classic 21-hydroxylase deficiency congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
authors:
- Righi B
- Ali SR
- Bryce J
- Tomlinson JW
- Bonfig W
- Baronio F
- Costa EC
- Guaragna-Filho G
- "T'Sjoen G"
- Cools M
- Markosyan R
- Bachega TASS
- Miranda MC
- Iotova V
- Falhammar H
- Ceccato F
- Stancampiano MR
- Russo G
- Daniel E
- Auchus RJ
- Ross RJ
- Ahmed SF
journal: Endocrine
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s12020-023-03330-w
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Young Adult
- Adult
- Male
- "Adrenal Hyperplasia, Congenital/complications, epidemiology, diagnosis"
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2"
- Obesity/epidemiology
- Hypertension/epidemiology
- Prevalence
- Hyperinsulinism
- Cardiovascular Diseases
- "Osteoporosis/epidemiology, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term cardiometabolic morbidity in young adults with classic 21-hydroxylase deficiency congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
**Authors:** Righi B, Ali SR, Bryce J, Tomlinson JW, Bonfig W, Baronio F, Costa EC, Guaragna-Filho G, T'Sjoen G, Cools M, Markosyan R, Bachega TASS, Miranda MC, Iotova V, Falhammar H, Ceccato F, Stancampiano MR, Russo G, Daniel E, Auchus RJ, Ross RJ, Ahmed SF
**Journal:** Endocrine (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12020-023-03330-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12020-023-03330-w)

## Content

1. Endocrine. 2023 Jun;80(3):630-638. doi: 10.1007/s12020-023-03330-w. Epub 2023 
Mar 1.

Long-term cardiometabolic morbidity in young adults with classic 21-hydroxylase 
deficiency congenital adrenal hyperplasia.

Righi B(1)(2), Ali SR(3)(4), Bryce J(4), Tomlinson JW(5), Bonfig W(6)(7), 
Baronio F(8), Costa EC(9), Guaragna-Filho G(10), T'Sjoen G(11), Cools M(12), 
Markosyan R(13), Bachega TASS(14), Miranda MC(14), Iotova V(15), Falhammar 
H(16)(17), Ceccato F(18), Stancampiano MR(19), Russo G(19), Daniel E(20), Auchus 
RJ(21), Ross RJ(20), Ahmed SF(3).

Author information:
(1)Developmental Endocrinology Research Group, University of Glasgow, Royal 
Hospital For Sick Children, Glasgow, UK. beatrice.righi2406@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Mother and Child, Azienda USL-IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, Reggio 
Emilia, Italy. beatrice.righi2406@gmail.com.
(3)Developmental Endocrinology Research Group, University of Glasgow, Royal 
Hospital For Sick Children, Glasgow, UK.
(4)Office for Rare Conditions, Royal Hospital for Children & Queen Elizabeth 
University Hospital, Glasgow, UK.
(5)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology & Metabolism, NIHR Oxford 
Biomedical Research Centre, Churchill Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK.
(6)Department of Paediatrics, Technical University München, Munich, Germany.
(7)Department of Paediatrics, Klinikum Wels-Grieskirchen, Wels, Austria.
(8)Pediatric Unit, Department Hospital of Woman And Child, IRCSS 
S.Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, Bologna, Italy.
(9)Pediatric Surgery Service, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Porto 
Alegre, Brazil.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Universidade Federal do Rio 
Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(11)Department of Endocrinology - Center for Sexology and Gender, Ghent 
University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(12)Department of Internal Medicine and Paediatrics, Ghent University and 
Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, 
Belgium.
(13)Endocrinology, Yerevan State Medical University Endocrinology Clinic, 
Yerevan, Armenia.
(14)Unidade de Endocrinologia do Desenvolvimento, Laboratório de Hormônios e 
Genética Molecular/LIM42, Disciplina de Endocrinologia, Hospital Das Clinicas, 
Faculdade De Medicina, Universidade de Sao Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(15)UMHAT Sveta Marina, Medical University of Varna, Varna, Bulgaria.
(16)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(17)Department of Endocrinology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(18)Endocrinology Unit, Department of Medicine DIMED, University-Hospital of 
Padua, Padua, Italy.
(19)Department of Pediatrics, Endocrine Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific 
Institute, Endo-ERN Center for Rare Endocrine Conditions, Milan, Italy.
(20)Department of Oncology and Metabolism, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, 
UK.
(21)Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology and Diabetes, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

PURPOSE: To study the current practice for assessing comorbidity in adults with 
21-hydroxylase CAH and to assess the prevalence of comorbidity in these adults.
METHODS: A structured questionnaire was sent to 46 expert centres managing 
adults with CAH. Information collected included current therapy and surveillance 
practice with a particular focus on osteoporosis/osteopaenia, hyperlipidaemia, 
type 2 diabetes/hyperinsulinaemia, hypertension, CV disease, obesity.
RESULTS: Of the 31 (67%) centres from 15 countries that completed the survey, 30 
(97%) screened for hypertension by measuring blood pressure, 30 (97%) screened 
for obesity, 26 (84%) screened for abnormal glucose homoeostasis mainly by using 
Hb1Ac (73%), 25 (81%) screened for osteoporosis mainly by DXA (92%), 20 (65%) 
screened for hyperlipidaemia and 6 (19%) screened for additional CV disease. Of 
the 31 centres, 13 provided further information on the six co-morbidities in 244 
patients with a median age of 33 yrs (range 19, 94). Of these, 126 (52%) were 
females and 174 (71%) received fludrocortisone in addition to glucocorticoids. 
Of the 244 adults, 73 (30%) were treated for at least one comorbidity and 15 
(21%) for more than 2 co-morbidities. Of 73, the patients who were treated for 
osteoporosis/osteopaenia, hyperlipidaemia, type 2 diabetes/hyperinsulinaemia, 
hypertension, CV disease, obesity were 43 (59%), 17 (23%), 16 (22%), 10 (14%), 8 
(11), 3 (4%) respectively.
CONCLUSION: Cardiometabolic and bone morbidities are not uncommon in adults with 
CAH. There is a need to standardise the screening for these morbidities from 
early adulthood and to explore optimal therapy through routine collection of 
standardised data.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12020-023-03330-w
PMCID: PMC10199864
PMID: 36857009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.