---
reference_id: "PMID:25427047"
title: Muir-Torre syndrome.
authors:
- Bhaijee F
- Brown AS
journal: Arch Pathol Lab Med
year: '2014'
doi: 10.5858/arpa.2013-0301-RS
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Muir-Torre syndrome.
**Authors:** Bhaijee F, Brown AS
**Journal:** Arch Pathol Lab Med (2014)
**DOI:** [10.5858/arpa.2013-0301-RS](https://doi.org/10.5858/arpa.2013-0301-RS)

## Content

1. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2014 Dec;138(12):1685-9. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2013-0301-RS.

Muir-Torre syndrome.

Bhaijee F(1), Brown AS.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Pathology, University of Mississippi Medical Center, 
Jackson.

Muir-Torre syndrome (MTS) is a rare autosomal-dominant genodermatosis 
characterized by sebaceous neoplasms and one or more visceral malignancies. 
Sebaceous tumors include sebaceous adenoma and carcinoma, which may be solitary 
or multiple. Visceral malignancies most often arise in the colorectum and 
endometrium. Because a subset of patients with phenotypic MTS will have germline 
mutations in the DNA mismatch repair genes hMSH2 and hMLH1, MTS is considered a 
phenotypic subtype of Lynch syndrome (also known as hereditary nonpolyposis 
colorectal cancer syndrome), in which inherited defects in DNA mismatch repair 
genes result in microsatellite instability. Pathologists have an important role 
in the early detection and initial diagnosis of MTS: identification of at-risk 
individuals allows appropriate screening and surveillance for visceral 
malignancies, thereby reducing morbidity and mortality. Herein, we describe the 
clinicopathologic features of MTS.

DOI: 10.5858/arpa.2013-0301-RS
PMID: 25427047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]