---
reference_id: "PMID:35079820"
title: "Allograft dysfunction after lung transplantation for COPA syndrome: A case report and literature review."
authors:
- Matsubayashi T
- Yamamoto M
- Takayama S
- Otsuki Y
- Yamadori I
- Honda Y
- Izawa K
- Nishikomori R
- Oto T
journal: Mod Rheumatol Case Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/mrcr/rxac004
keywords:
- Allografts
- Humans
- Lung/pathology
- "Lung Diseases, Interstitial/diagnosis, etiology, surgery"
- Lung Transplantation/adverse effects
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Allograft dysfunction after lung transplantation for COPA syndrome: A case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Matsubayashi T, Yamamoto M, Takayama S, Otsuki Y, Yamadori I, Honda Y, Izawa K, Nishikomori R, Oto T
**Journal:** Mod Rheumatol Case Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/mrcr/rxac004](https://doi.org/10.1093/mrcr/rxac004)

## Content

1. Mod Rheumatol Case Rep. 2022 Jun 24;6(2):314-318. doi: 10.1093/mrcr/rxac004.

Allograft dysfunction after lung transplantation for COPA syndrome: A case 
report and literature review.

Matsubayashi T(1), Yamamoto M(1), Takayama S(1), Otsuki Y(2), Yamadori I(3), 
Honda Y(4), Izawa K(4), Nishikomori R(5), Oto T(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Seirei Hamamatsu General Hospital, Shizuoka, Japan.
(2)Department of Pathology, Seirei Hamamatsu General Hospital, Shizuoka, Japan.
(3)Department of Pathology, Fukuyama Medical Association Health Support Center, 
Hiroshima, Japan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto, Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Kurume University School of 
Medicine, Fukuoka, Japan.
(6)Department of Thoracic Surgery, HGH, Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar.

Coatomer subunit alpha (COPA) syndrome is an autoinflammatory disease with 
autoimmune and autoinflammatory manifestations affecting lungs, joints, and 
kidneys. COPA syndrome is caused by heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in 
COPA gene, encoding α subunit of coatmer protein complex I (COP-I) coated 
vesicles. Mutant COPA induces constitutive activation of stimulator of 
interferon genes, leading to systemic inflammation and elevated type I 
interferon response. We have previously reported a Japanese family of COPA 
syndrome with a novel V242G mutation. Two out of four patients required lung 
transplantation due to intractable interstitial lung disease and respiratory 
failure. Both of them deceased after lung transplantation, one due to sepsis and 
the other due to allograft dysfunction possibly caused by the reccurent 
interstitial lung disease. The literature review indentified unfavorable outcome 
of the solid organ transplant in COPA syndrome and its related disease, however, 
precise clinico-pathological description of these cases has been scarce. Here, 
we report in detail the clinical course of our cases to clarify the 
pathophysiology of allograft dysfunction in COPA syndrome and propose potential 
therapeutic approaches to improve post-transplant graft survival.

© Japan College of Rheumatology 2022. Published by Oxford University Press. All 
rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/mrcr/rxac004
PMID: 35079820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]