---
reference_id: "PMID:36766569"
title: "Tips and Tricks for Early Diagnosis of Cervico-Vaginal Involvement from Extramammary Paget's Disease of the Vulva: A Referral Center Experience."
authors:
- Iacobone AD
- Guerrieri ME
- Preti EP
- Spolti N
- Radici G
- Peveri G
- Bagnardi V
- Tosti G
- Maggioni A
- Bottari F
- Scacchi C
- Ghioni M
journal: Diagnostics (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/diagnostics13030464
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tips and Tricks for Early Diagnosis of Cervico-Vaginal Involvement from Extramammary Paget's Disease of the Vulva: A Referral Center Experience.
**Authors:** Iacobone AD, Guerrieri ME, Preti EP, Spolti N, Radici G, Peveri G, Bagnardi V, Tosti G, Maggioni A, Bottari F, Scacchi C, Ghioni M
**Journal:** Diagnostics (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/diagnostics13030464](https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics13030464)

## Content

1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2023 Jan 27;13(3):464. doi: 10.3390/diagnostics13030464.

Tips and Tricks for Early Diagnosis of Cervico-Vaginal Involvement from 
Extramammary Paget's Disease of the Vulva: A Referral Center Experience.

Iacobone AD(1)(2), Guerrieri ME(1), Preti EP(1), Spolti N(1), Radici G(1), 
Peveri G(3)(4), Bagnardi V(5), Tosti G(6), Maggioni A(7), Bottari F(2)(8), 
Scacchi C(9), Ghioni M(10).

Author information:
(1)Preventive Gynecology Unit, European Institute of Oncology IRCCS, 20141 
Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sassari, 07100 Sassari, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan, 
20122 Milan, Italy.
(4)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, 
17177 Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Statistics and Quantitative Methods, University of 
Milan-Bicocca, 20126 Milan, Italy.
(6)Dermato-Oncology Unit, European Institute of Oncology IRCCS, 20141 Milan, 
Italy.
(7)Department of Gynecology, European Institute of Oncology IRCCS, 20141 Milan, 
Italy.
(8)Division of Laboratory Medicine, European Institute of Oncology IRCCS, 20141 
Milan, Italy.
(9)Division of Diagnostic Cytology, European Institute of Oncology IRCCS, 20141 
Milan, Italy.
(10)Division of Pathology, European Institute of Oncology IRCCS, 20141 Milan, 
Italy.

Cervico-vaginal (CV) localization of extra-mammary Paget's disease (EMPD) of the 
vulva is extremely rare. In order to investigate the incidence risk and the 
pathognomonic clinical and pathological features of this condition, a 
retrospective analysis was conducted including 94 women treated for vulvar EMPD 
at the European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy, from October 1997 to May 
2020. Overall nine patients developed CV involvement from EMPD, with a 
cumulative incidence of 2.5% (95% CI: 0.5-8.0%) at 5 years, 6.5% (95% CI: 
1.9-15.1%) at 10 years and 14.0% (95% CI: 4.8-27.8%) at 15 years, respectively. 
All cases except one were firstly detected by abnormal glandular cytology. None 
reported vaginal bleeding or other suspicious symptoms. The colposcopic findings 
were heterogeneous and could sometimes be misdiagnosed. Cervical and/or vaginal 
biopsies were always performed for histopathological diagnosis by identification 
of Paget cells in the epithelium or stroma. Most patients developed invasive 
EMPD (5/9) of the cervix and/or vagina and underwent hysterectomy with partial 
or total colpectomy. CV involvement from EMPD should not be underestimated in 
women with a long-standing history of vulvar Paget's disease. Liquid-based 
cytology with immunocytochemistry represents a valuable tool for early diagnosis 
and should be routinely performed during the required lifelong follow-up.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics13030464
PMCID: PMC9914356
PMID: 36766569

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
None of the authors received financial support or funding for this work.