---
reference_id: "PMID:25655445"
title: "Frontal eye field involvement in sustaining visual attention: evidence from transcranial magnetic stimulation."
authors:
- Esterman M
- Liu G
- Okabe H
- Reagan A
- Thai M
- DeGutis J
journal: Neuroimage
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.01.044
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Attention/physiology
- Executive Function/physiology
- Female
- Frontal Lobe/physiology
- Humans
- Male
- Psychomotor Performance/physiology
- Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation/methods
- Visual Perception/physiology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frontal eye field involvement in sustaining visual attention: evidence from transcranial magnetic stimulation.
**Authors:** Esterman M, Liu G, Okabe H, Reagan A, Thai M, DeGutis J
**Journal:** Neuroimage (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.01.044](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.01.044)

## Content

1. Neuroimage. 2015 May 1;111:542-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.01.044. Epub
2015 Feb 3.

Frontal eye field involvement in sustaining visual attention: evidence from
transcranial magnetic stimulation.

Esterman M(1), Liu G(2), Okabe H(2), Reagan A(2), Thai M(2), DeGutis J(3).

Author information:
(1)Boston Attention and Learning Laboratory & Neuroimaging Research for Veterans
Center (NeRVe), Veterans Administration, Boston Healthcare System, Boston, MA
02130, USA; Department of Psychiatry, Boston University School of Medicine,
Boston, MA 02118, USA. Electronic address: esterman@bu.edu.
(2)Boston Attention and Learning Laboratory & Neuroimaging Research for Veterans
Center (NeRVe), Veterans Administration, Boston Healthcare System, Boston, MA
02130, USA.
(3)Boston Attention and Learning Laboratory & Neuroimaging Research for Veterans
Center (NeRVe), Veterans Administration, Boston Healthcare System, Boston, MA
02130, USA; Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.

The frontal eye field (FEF), particularly the right FEF, is broadly implicated
in top-down control of transient acts of attention, but less is known about its
involvement in sustained attention. Although neuroimaging studies of sustained
attention tasks commonly find FEF activation, it is unclear how this region
contributes to moment-to-moment fluctuations in sustained performance. We sought
to determine if the FEF plays a critical role in sustained attention, and if
that role differs between periods of worse performance (out-of-the-zone) and
periods of better performance (in-the-zone). We used offline 1 Hz repetitive
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) to temporarily attenuate either right or
left FEF excitability while participants performed a go/no-go sustained
attention task (the gradual onset continuous performance task). The results
demonstrate that following TMS to the right FEF, sustained attention during
in-the-zone periods significantly worsened both in terms of lower accuracy and
increased reaction time variability. In contrast, applying TMS to the left FEF
did not significantly affect accuracy or variability. These results demonstrate
that the right FEF plays a crucial role in supporting optimal sustained
attention.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.01.044
PMID: 25655445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
