---
reference_id: "PMID:36169917"
title: Advances in Topical Treatments of Cutaneous Malignancies.
authors:
- Algarin YA
- Jambusaria-Pahlajani A
- Ruiz E
- Patel VA
journal: Am J Clin Dermatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s40257-022-00731-x
keywords:
- Humans
- Skin Neoplasms/pathology
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Photosensitizing Agents
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/drug therapy"
- Quality of Life
- Photochemotherapy
- Basal Cell Carcinoma/pathology
- Imiquimod/therapeutic use
- Fluorouracil/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Advances in Topical Treatments of Cutaneous Malignancies.
**Authors:** Algarin YA, Jambusaria-Pahlajani A, Ruiz E, Patel VA
**Journal:** Am J Clin Dermatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40257-022-00731-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40257-022-00731-x)

## Content

1. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2023 Jan;24(1):69-80. doi: 10.1007/s40257-022-00731-x.
Epub  2022 Sep 28.

Advances in Topical Treatments of Cutaneous Malignancies.

Algarin YA(1), Jambusaria-Pahlajani A(2), Ruiz E(3), Patel VA(4).

Author information:
(1)Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, VA, USA.
(2)Department of Dermatology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX,
USA.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Dermatology, The George Washington School of Medicine and
Health Sciences, 2150 Pennsylvania Avenue 2B, NW, Washington, DC, 20037, USA.
vapatel@mfa.gwu.edu.

Surgical excision has been the preferred treatment for cutaneous malignancies,
but can be affected by various considerations. Noninvasive, self-administered
topical treatments represent an alternative option. The aim of this review was
to evaluate and summarize evidence-based recommendations for topical treatments
of basal cell carcinoma (BCC), cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (CSCC), in situ
melanoma (MIS), and extramammary Paget's disease (EMPD). Studies were reviewed
on PubMed. Included studies were summarized, assessed for biases, and assigned
a level of evidence to develop treatment recommendations. For the treatment of
superficial BCC, complete clearance rates ranged from 90 to 93% for 5%
5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and 71 to 76% for imiquimod (IMQ). For the treatment of
nodular BCC, clearance rates for photodynamic therapy (PDT) were 91% at 3
months, with a sustained lesion clearance response rate of 76% after 5 years of
follow-up. Clearance rates were 53 to 76% with IMQ. For squamous cell carcinoma
in situ, clearance rates ranged from 52 to 98% for PDT, 67 to 92% for 5-FU, and
75 to 93% for IMQ. For MIS, clearance rates ranged from 53 to 92% for IMQ. For
EMPD, 54% of 110 patients in cohort studies and case series had a clinical
complete response with IMQ. While surgical intervention remains the standard of
care for skin cancer, non-invasive, self-administered topical treatments are
highly desirable alternative options. Ultimately, the patient and provider
should find a treatment modality that aligns with the patient's expectations and
maintenance of quality of life.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40257-022-00731-x
PMID: 36169917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
