---
reference_id: "PMID:15093889"
title: "Short QT syndrome: pharmacological treatment."
authors:
- Gaita F
- Giustetto C
- Bianchi F
- Schimpf R
- Haissaguerre M
- Calò L
- Brugada R
- Antzelevitch C
- Borggrefe M
- Wolpert C
journal: J Am Coll Cardiol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2004.02.034
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Anti-Arrhythmia Agents/therapeutic use
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- Child
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac/etiology"
- "Defibrillators, Implantable"
- Electrocardiography
- Female
- Flecainide/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Male
- "Quinidine/analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use"
- Sotalol/therapeutic use
- Syndrome
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Short QT syndrome: pharmacological treatment.
**Authors:** Gaita F, Giustetto C, Bianchi F, Schimpf R, Haissaguerre M, Calò L, Brugada R, Antzelevitch C, Borggrefe M, Wolpert C
**Journal:** J Am Coll Cardiol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jacc.2004.02.034](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2004.02.034)

## Content

1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004 Apr 21;43(8):1494-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2004.02.034.

Short QT syndrome: pharmacological treatment.

Gaita F(1), Giustetto C, Bianchi F, Schimpf R, Haissaguerre M, Calò L, Brugada
R, Antzelevitch C, Borggrefe M, Wolpert C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Ospedale Civile di Asti, Asti, Italy.
gaitaf@libero.it

OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of various
antiarrhythmic drugs at prolonging the QT interval into the normal range and
preventing ventricular arrhythmias in patients with short QT syndrome.
BACKGROUND: Short QT syndrome is a recently described genetic disease
characterized by short QT interval, high risk of sudden death, atrial
fibrillation, and short refractory periods.
METHODS: Six patients with short QT syndrome, five of whom had received an
implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) and one child, were tested with
different antiarrhythmic drugs, including flecainide, sotalol, ibutilide, and
hydroquinidine, to determine whether they could prolong the QT interval into the
normal range and thus prevent symptoms and arrhythmia recurrences.
RESULTS: Class IC and III antiarrhythmic drugs did not produce a significant QT
interval prolongation. Only hydroquinidine administration caused a QT
prolongation, which increased from 263 +/- 12 ms to 362 +/- 25 ms (calculated QT
from 290 +/- 13 ms to 405 +/- 26 ms). Ventricular programmed stimulation showed
prolongation of ventricular effective refractory period to > or =200 ms, and
ventricular fibrillation was no longer induced.
CONCLUSIONS: The ability of quinidine to prolong the QT interval has the
potential to be an effective therapy for short QT patients. This is particularly
important because these patients are at risk of sudden death from birth, and ICD
implant is not feasible in very young children.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacc.2004.02.034
PMID: 15093889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
