---
reference_id: "PMID:39190906"
title: "Patterns of the Health and Economic Burden of 33 Rare Diseases in China: Nationwide Web-Based Study."
authors:
- Yu J
- Chen S
- Zhang H
- Zhang S
- Dong D
journal: JMIR Public Health Surveill
year: '2024'
doi: 10.2196/57353
keywords:
- Humans
- China/epidemiology
- "Rare Diseases/epidemiology, economics"
- Male
- Adult
- Female
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Middle Aged
- Cost of Illness
- Adolescent
- Child
- Internet
- "Child, Preschool"
- Young Adult
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- Aged
- Infant
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Patterns of the Health and Economic Burden of 33 Rare Diseases in China: Nationwide Web-Based Study.
**Authors:** Yu J, Chen S, Zhang H, Zhang S, Dong D
**Journal:** JMIR Public Health Surveill (2024)
**DOI:** [10.2196/57353](https://doi.org/10.2196/57353)

## Content

1. JMIR Public Health Surveill. 2024 Aug 27;10:e57353. doi: 10.2196/57353.

Patterns of the Health and Economic Burden of 33 Rare Diseases in China:
Nationwide Web-Based Study.

Yu J(1), Chen S(2), Zhang H(3)(4), Zhang S(#)(5), Dong D(#)(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Jockey Club School of Public Health and Primary Care, The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Sha Tin, China (Hong Kong).
(2)International Centre for Evidence in Disability, Faculty of Epidemiology and
Population Health, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, United
Kingdom.
(3)Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen,
China.
(4)Clinical Big Data Research Center, The Seventh Affiliated Hospital, Sun
Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of
Medical Science, Beijing, China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Rare diseases (RDs) affect millions of individuals collectively
worldwide, contributing to significant burdens on patients and families in
various aspects. However, there is a lack of evidence on the underlying patterns
of burdens among diverse RDs for informing targeted social and health policies
to address the unmet needs of this vulnerable population.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to examine the underlying patterns of the health and
economic burden of 33 different RDs in China and identify the potential
determinants.
METHODS: A nationwide internet-based cross-sectional survey was conducted in
China between 2019 and 2020. Physical and mental health burden was measured by
health-related quality of life. Economic burden was evaluated based on the
proportions of direct medical, direct nonmedical, and indirect costs relative to
household income. We used cluster analysis to identify patterns of health and
economic burdens and conducted multinomial logistic regression to explore
potential predictors of cluster membership.
RESULTS: The study included 8454 adults and 8491 children affected by 33 RDs.
The following 3 clusters were identified: "extremely high burden" (representing
92/8454, 1.1% and 19/8491, 0.2% of adult and pediatric patients, respectively),
"overall high burden" (5933/8454, 70.2% and 4864/8491, 57.3%, respectively), and
"overall low burden" (2429/8454, 28.7% and 3608/8491, 42.5%, respectively).
Wilson disease, Marfan syndrome, and Langerhans cell histiocytosis more likely
resulted in an "extremely high burden" than others. Poverty was significantly
associated with being in this extremely high burden group. Diseases causing
neuromuscular symptoms and requiring long-term treatment (eg, amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis, spinocerebellar ataxia, and Dravet syndrome) were prevalent
in the "overall high burden" group. Key predictors of this group included older
age, lower socioeconomic status, diagnostic delay, and comorbidity.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides novel and valuable evidence on the burden of
RDs in developing regions like China. The findings reveal significant
disparities in the impact of RDs, emphasizing the need for targeted health care
interventions and policies.

©Jiazhou Yu, Shanquan Chen, Huanyu Zhang, Shuyang Zhang, Dong Dong. Originally
published in JMIR Public Health and Surveillance
(https://publichealth.jmir.org), 27.08.2024.

DOI: 10.2196/57353
PMCID: PMC11387910
PMID: 39190906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.
