---
reference_id: "PMID:20301380"
title: NF2-Related Schwannomatosis.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Evans DG
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NF2-Related Schwannomatosis.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Evans DG

## Content

1. NF2-Related Schwannomatosis.

Evans DG(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
1998 Oct 14 [updated 2023 Apr 20].

Author information:
(1)Director, Neurofibromatosis Clinic, Manchester University Hospitals;, 
Foundation NHS Trust Regional Genetic Service, St Mary's Hospital, Manchester, 
United Kingdom

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: NF2-related schwannomatosis (NF2) is characterized by 
bilateral vestibular schwannomas with associated symptoms of tinnitus, hearing 
loss, and balance dysfunction. The average age of onset is 18 to 24 years. 
Almost all affected individuals develop bilateral vestibular schwannomas by age 
30 years. Affected individuals may also develop schwannomas of other cranial and 
peripheral nerves, meningiomas, ependymomas, and (very rarely) low-grade 
astrocytomas. Because NF2 is considered an adult-onset disease, it may be 
underrecognized in children, in whom skin tumors and ocular findings (retinal 
hamartoma, thickened optic nerves, cortical wedge cataracts, third cranial nerve 
palsy) may be the first manifestations. Mononeuropathy that occurs in childhood 
is an increasingly recognized finding; it frequently presents as a persistent 
facial palsy or hand/foot drop.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of NF2 is established in a proband with 
bilateral vestibular schwannomas, an identical NF2 pathogenic variant identified 
in two or more anatomically distinct NF2-related tumors, or a combination of 
clinical and molecular criteria that fulfill the consensus diagnostic criteria.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapy: The VEGF antibody bevacizumab for rapidly growing 
vestibular schwannomas; bevacizumab has also shown some clinical benefit in some 
individuals with ependymoma. Supportive care: Treatment of vestibular schwannoma 
is primarily surgical; stereotactic radiosurgery, most commonly with the gamma 
knife, may be an alternative to surgery. Individuals with vestibular tumors need 
to be aware of insidious problems with balance and underwater disorientation, 
which can result in drowning. Cervical spine MRI prior to cranial surgery; 
lumbosacral MRI prior to regional analgesia. Treatment for hearing loss includes 
referral to an audiologist, lipreading and sign language instruction, and 
possibly hearing aids and/or cochlear or brain stem implants. Surgical treatment 
for infantile cataracts and patching as needed. Management through 
rehabilitation medicine, physical therapy, and/or occupational therapy should be 
considered for hand or foot drop due to mono- or polyneuropathy. Surgical 
removal as needed for cutaneous schwannomas that are causing disfigurement 
and/or pain. Surveillance: For affected or at-risk individuals, annual 
neurologic examination by a provider with experience in NF2; annual brain MRI 
beginning at approximately age ten to 12 years and continuing until at least the 
fourth decade of life; annual hearing evaluation, including BAER testing; annual 
complete ophthalmology examination. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Radiation 
therapy of NF2-associated tumors, especially in childhood, when malignancy risks 
are likely to be substantially higher. Evaluation of relatives at risk: Early 
identification of relatives who inherited the family-specific NF2 pathogenic 
variant allows for appropriate surveillance, resulting in earlier detection and 
treatment of disease manifestations.
GENETIC COUNSELING: NF2 is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. 
Approximately 50% of individuals diagnosed with NF2 have an affected parent. 
Approximately 50% of individuals diagnosed with NF2 have the disorder as the 
result of a de novo NF2 pathogenic variant. As many as 25% to 50% of individuals 
with a de novo NF2 pathogenic variant have somatic mosaicism for the variant. 
The possibility that a parent has NF2 can be excluded if the proband is shown to 
be mosaic. Each child of an individual with NF2 has up to a 50% chance of 
inheriting the pathogenic variant: offspring of an individual with a germline 
pathogenic variant have a 50% chance of inheriting the variant, while offspring 
of an individual who has mosaic NF2 may have a less than 50% risk of inheriting 
the variant. Once the NF2 pathogenic variant has been identified in the family, 
prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301380