---
reference_id: PMID:24434360
title: "Hashimoto thyroiditis: clinical and diagnostic criteria."
authors:
- Caturegli P
- De Remigis A
- Rose NR
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2014.01.007
keywords:
- Animals
- Antibodies/immunology
- Fibrosis
- "Hashimoto Disease/diagnosis, epidemiology, immunology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Thyroglobulin/immunology
- Thyroid Gland/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hashimoto thyroiditis: clinical and diagnostic criteria.
**Authors:** Caturegli P, De Remigis A, Rose NR
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2014.01.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2014.01.007)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2014 Apr-May;13(4-5):391-7. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2014.01.007. 
Epub 2014 Jan 13.

Hashimoto thyroiditis: clinical and diagnostic criteria.

Caturegli P(1), De Remigis A(2), Rose NR(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, United States; Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and 
Immunology, The Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, 
United States. Electronic address: pcat@jhmi.edu.
(2)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, United States.
(3)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, United States; Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and 
Immunology, The Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, 
United States.

Hashimoto thyroiditis (HT), now considered the most common autoimmune disease, 
was described over a century ago as a pronounced lymphoid goiter affecting 
predominantly women. In addition to this classic form, several other 
clinico-pathologic entities are now included under the term HT: fibrous variant, 
IgG4-related variant, juvenile form, Hashitoxicosis, and painless thyroiditis 
(sporadic or post-partum). All forms are characterized pathologically by the 
infiltration of hematopoietic mononuclear cells, mainly lymphocytes, in the 
interstitium among the thyroid follicles, although specific features can be 
recognized in each variant. Thyroid cells undergo atrophy or transform into a 
bolder type of follicular cell rich in mitochondria called Hürthle cell. Most HT 
forms ultimately evolve into hypothyroidism, although at presentation patients 
can be euthyroid or even hyperthyroid. The diagnosis of HT relies on the 
demonstration of circulating antibodies to thyroid antigens (mainly 
thyroperoxidase and thyroglobulin) and reduced echogenicity on thyroid sonogram 
in a patient with proper clinical features. The treatment remains symptomatic 
and based on the administration of synthetic thyroid hormones to correct the 
hypothyroidism as needed. Surgery is performed when the goiter is large enough 
to cause significant compression of the surrounding cervical structures, or when 
some areas of the thyroid gland mimic the features of a nodule whose cytology 
cannot be ascertained as benign. HT remains a complex and ever expanding disease 
of unknown pathogenesis that awaits prevention or novel forms of treatment.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2014.01.007
PMID: 24434360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]