---
reference_id: "PMID:36646679"
title: Single-cell RNA-seq integrated with multi-omics reveals SERPINE2 as a target for metastasis in advanced renal cell carcinoma.
authors:
- Chen WJ
- Dong KQ
- Pan XW
- Gan SS
- Xu D
- Chen JX
- Chen WJ
- Li WY
- Wang YQ
- Zhou W
- Rini B
- Cui XG
journal: Cell Death Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41419-023-05566-w
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Renal Cell/metabolism"
- Serpin E2/genetics
- Multiomics
- Single-Cell Gene Expression Analysis
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Kidney Neoplasms/metabolism
- Cell Proliferation/genetics
- RNA
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Cell Movement
- Tumor Microenvironment/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single-cell RNA-seq integrated with multi-omics reveals SERPINE2 as a target for metastasis in advanced renal cell carcinoma.
**Authors:** Chen WJ, Dong KQ, Pan XW, Gan SS, Xu D, Chen JX, Chen WJ, Li WY, Wang YQ, Zhou W, Rini B, Cui XG
**Journal:** Cell Death Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41419-023-05566-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41419-023-05566-w)

## Content

1. Cell Death Dis. 2023 Jan 16;14(1):30. doi: 10.1038/s41419-023-05566-w.

Single-cell RNA-seq integrated with multi-omics reveals SERPINE2 as a target for
metastasis in advanced renal cell carcinoma.

Chen WJ(#)(1)(2), Dong KQ(#)(3), Pan XW(#)(1), Gan SS(#)(2), Xu D(2), Chen
JX(2), Chen WJ(2), Li WY(1), Wang YQ(1), Zhou W(4), Rini B(5), Cui XG(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Xinhua Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong
University, 1665 Kongjiang Road, Shanghai, 200092, China.
(2)Department of Urology, Third Affiliated Hospital of the Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai, 201805, China.
(3)Department of Urology, General Hospital of Central Theater Command of PLA,
Wuhan, 430070, China.
(4)Department of Urology, Xinhua Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong
University, 1665 Kongjiang Road, Shanghai, 200092, China. brilliant212@163.com.
(5)Division of Hematology Oncology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, TN, USA. brian.rini@vumc.org.
(6)Department of Urology, Xinhua Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong
University, 1665 Kongjiang Road, Shanghai, 200092, China.
cuixingang@xinhuamed.com.cn.
(7)Department of Urology, Third Affiliated Hospital of the Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai, 201805, China. cuixingang@xinhuamed.com.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Cell Death Dis. 2026 Mar 24;17(1):277. doi: 10.1038/s41419-026-08472-z.

Tumor growth, metastasis and therapeutic response are believed to be regulated
by the tumor and its microenvironment (TME) in advanced renal cell carcinoma
(RCC). However, the mechanisms underlying genomic, transcriptomic and epigenetic
alternations in RCC progression have not been completely defined. In this study,
single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) data were obtained from eight tissue
samples of RCC patients, including two matched pairs of primary and metastatic
sites (lymph nodes), along with Hi-C, transposable accessible chromatin by
high-throughput (ATAC-seq) and RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) between RCC (Caki-1) and
human renal tubular epithelial cell line (HK-2). The identified target was
verified in clinical tissue samples (microarray of 407 RCC patients, TMA-30 and
TMA-2020), whose function was further validated by in vitro and in vivo
experiments through knockdown or overexpression. We profiled transcriptomes of
30514 malignant cells, and 14762 non-malignant cells. Comprehensive multi-omics
analysis revealed that malignant cells and TME played a key role in RCC. The
expression programs of stromal cells and immune cells were consistent among the
samples, whereas malignant cells expressed distinct programs associated with
hypoxia, cell cycle, epithelial differentiation, and two different metastasis
patterns. Comparison of the hierarchical structure showed that SERPINE2 was
related to these NNMF expression programs, and at the same time targeted the
switched compartment. SERPINE2 was highly expressed in RCC tissues and lowly
expressed in para-tumor tissues or HK-2 cell line. SERPINE2 knockdown markedly
suppressed RCC cell growth and invasion, while SERPINE2 overexpression
dramatically promoted RCC cell metastasis both in vitro and in vivo. In
addition, SERPINE2 could activate the epithelial-mesenchymal transition pathway.
The above findings demonstrated that the role of distinct expression patterns of
malignant cells and TME played a distinct role in RCC progression. SERPINE2 was
identified as a potential therapeutic target for inhibiting metastasis in
advanced RCC.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-023-05566-w
PMCID: PMC9842647
PMID: 36646679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
