---
reference_id: "PMID:36451640"
title: "Kikuchi-Fujimoto Disease: A Rare Cause of Pyrexia of Unknown Origin and Cervical Lymphadenopathy."
authors:
- Fadul A
- Subahi EA
- Ali EA
- Awadalkareem H
- Mohamed G
- Elawad M
- Sharaf Eldean M
- Albozom A
journal: Cureus
year: '2022'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.30823
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kikuchi-Fujimoto Disease: A Rare Cause of Pyrexia of Unknown Origin and Cervical Lymphadenopathy.
**Authors:** Fadul A, Subahi EA, Ali EA, Awadalkareem H, Mohamed G, Elawad M, Sharaf Eldean M, Albozom A
**Journal:** Cureus (2022)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.30823](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.30823)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2022 Oct 29;14(10):e30823. doi: 10.7759/cureus.30823. eCollection 2022
 Oct.

Kikuchi-Fujimoto Disease: A Rare Cause of Pyrexia of Unknown Origin and Cervical 
Lymphadenopathy.

Fadul A(1), Subahi EA(1), Ali EA(2), Awadalkareem H(3), Mohamed G(1), Elawad 
M(4), Sharaf Eldean M(5), Albozom A(1).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, QAT.
(2)Internal Medicine, One Brooklyn Health/Interfaith Medical Center, Brooklyn, 
USA.
(3)Pediatrics, Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, QAT.
(4)Radiology, Hamad General Hospital, Doha, QAT.
(5)Histopathology, Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, QAT.

Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease (KFD) is a benign disorder characterized by regional 
cervical lymphadenopathy with tenderness. Associated symptoms of KFD include 
low-grade fever, night sweats, weight loss, nausea, and sore throat. The disease 
is a sporadic disease known to have a worldwide distribution with a higher 
prevalence among Asian communities. Although the clinical and histopathological 
features point to a viral etiology, this hypothesis has not been proven yet. 
Generally, the diagnosis is made based on a lymph node excisional biopsy. Its 
recognition is crucial mainly because this disease can be mistaken for other 
disorders, including systemic lupus erythematosus or malignant lymphoma. 
Supportive treatment includes antipyretics, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs, and corticosteroids. Spontaneous recovery occurs within a few weeks. 
Patients should be followed up for years to survey because there is a 
possibility of developing systemic lupus erythematosus. In this article, we 
report the case of a patient who presented with a fever of unknown origin and 
lymphadenopathy, treated with multiple antibiotic courses with no improvement. 
Workup including computed tomography of the neck with contrast and lymph node 
biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of KFD. His condition improved after 
administering analgesics and multivitamins, and he was advised to rest at home.

Copyright © 2022, Fadul et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.30823
PMCID: PMC9703205
PMID: 36451640

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.