---
reference_id: "PMID:38077397"
title: The transcriptomics profiling of blood CD4 and CD8 T-cells in narcolepsy type I.
authors:
- Khajavi L
- Nguyen XH
- Queriault C
- Chabod M
- Barateau L
- Dauvilliers Y
- Zytnicki M
- Liblau R
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1249405
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The transcriptomics profiling of blood CD4 and CD8 T-cells in narcolepsy type I.
**Authors:** Khajavi L, Nguyen XH, Queriault C, Chabod M, Barateau L, Dauvilliers Y, Zytnicki M, Liblau R
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2023.1249405](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1249405)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2023 Nov 23;14:1249405. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1249405. 
eCollection 2023.

The transcriptomics profiling of blood CD4 and CD8 T-cells in narcolepsy type I.

Khajavi L(1)(2), Nguyen XH(1)(3), Queriault C(1), Chabod M(1), Barateau L(4)(5), 
Dauvilliers Y(4)(5), Zytnicki M(2), Liblau R(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Toulouse Institute for Infectious and Inflammatory Diseases (Infinity), 
University of Toulouse, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), 
L'Institut National de la Sante et de la Recherche Medicale (INSERM), Universite 
Paul-Sabatier de Toulouse (UPS), Toulouse, France.
(2)Applied Mathematics and Informatics Unit of Toulouse (MIAT), Institut 
National de Recherche pour l'Agriculture, l'Alimentation et l'Environnement 
(INRAE), Toulouse, France.
(3)Vinmec Institute of Applied Science and Regenerative Medicine, Vinmec 
Healthcare System and College of Health Sciences, VinUniveristy, Hanoi, Vietnam.
(4)National Reference Center for Orphan Diseases, Narcolepsy, Idiopathic 
Hypersomnia and Kleine-Levin Syndrome, Department of Neurology, Gui-de-Chauliac 
Hospital, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) de Montpellier, Montpellier, 
France.
(5)Institute for Neurosciences of Montpellier (INM), University Montpellier, 
Montpellier, France.
(6)Department of Immunology, Toulouse University Hospital, Toulouse, France.

BACKGROUND: Narcolepsy Type I (NT1) is a rare, life-long sleep disorder arising 
as a consequence of the extensive destruction of orexin-producing hypothalamic 
neurons. The mechanisms involved in the destruction of orexin neurons are not 
yet elucidated but the association of narcolepsy with environmental triggers and 
genetic susceptibility (strong association with the HLA, TCRs and other 
immunologically-relevant loci) implicates an immuno-pathological process. 
Several studies in animal models and on human samples have suggested that 
T-cells are the main pathogenic culprits.
METHODS: RNA sequencing was performed on four CD4 and CD8 T-cell subsets (naive, 
effector, effector memory and central memory) sorted by flow cytometry from 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of NT1 patients and HLA-matched 
healthy donors as well as (age- and sex-) matched individuals suffering from 
other sleep disorders (OSD). The RNAseq analysis was conducted by comparing the 
transcriptome of NT1 patients to that of healthy donors and other sleep disorder 
patients (collectively referred to as the non-narcolepsy controls) in order to 
identify NT1-specific genes and pathways.
RESULTS: We determined NT1-specific differentially expressed genes, several of 
which are involved in tubulin arrangement found in CD4 (TBCB, CCT5, EML4, TPGS1, 
TPGS2) and CD8 (TTLL7) T cell subsets, which play a role in the immune synapse 
formation and TCR signaling. Furthermore, we identified genes (GZMB, LTB in CD4 
T-cells and NLRP3, TRADD, IL6, CXCR1, FOXO3, FOXP3 in CD8 T-cells) and pathways 
involved in various aspects of inflammation and inflammatory response. More 
specifically, the inflammatory profile was identified in the "naive" subset of 
CD4 and CD8 T-cell.
CONCLUSION: We identified NT1-specific differentially expressed genes, providing 
a cell-type and subset specific catalog describing their functions in T-cells as 
well as their potential involvement in NT1. Several genes and pathways 
identified are involved in the formation of the immune synapse and TCR 
activation as well as inflammation and the inflammatory response. An 
inflammatory transcriptomic profile was detected in both "naive" CD4 and CD8 
T-cell subsets suggesting their possible involvement in the development or 
progression of the narcoleptic process.

Copyright © 2023 Khajavi, Nguyen, Queriault, Chabod, Barateau, Dauvilliers, 
Zytnicki and Liblau.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1249405
PMCID: PMC10702585
PMID: 38077397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.