---
reference_id: "PMID:38087210"
title: "Healthcare providers' knowledge and clinical practice surrounding shigellosis - DocStyles Survey, 2020."
authors:
- Haston JC
- Ford L
- Vanden Esschert KL
- Plumb ID
- Logan N
- Francois Watkins LK
- Garcia-Williams AG
journal: BMC Prim Care
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12875-023-02213-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Healthcare providers' knowledge and clinical practice surrounding shigellosis - DocStyles Survey, 2020.
**Authors:** Haston JC, Ford L, Vanden Esschert KL, Plumb ID, Logan N, Francois Watkins LK, Garcia-Williams AG
**Journal:** BMC Prim Care (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12875-023-02213-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12875-023-02213-3)

## Content

1. BMC Prim Care. 2023 Dec 13;24(1):267. doi: 10.1186/s12875-023-02213-3.

Healthcare providers' knowledge and clinical practice surrounding shigellosis - 
DocStyles Survey, 2020.

Haston JC(#)(1)(2), Ford L(#)(3)(4), Vanden Esschert KL(4), Plumb ID(4), Logan 
N(4), Francois Watkins LK(4), Garcia-Williams AG(4).

Author information:
(1)Epidemic Intelligence Service Program, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA. Qdx2@cdc.gov.
(2)Division of Foodborne, Waterborne, and Environmental Diseases, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA. Qdx2@cdc.gov.
(3)Epidemic Intelligence Service Program, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(4)Division of Foodborne, Waterborne, and Environmental Diseases, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Shigellosis is an acute diarrheal disease transmitted through 
contaminated food, water, objects, poor hand hygiene, or sexual activity. 
Healthcare providers (HCP) may not be aware of the multiple routes of Shigella 
transmission, populations at increased risk, or importance of antibiotic 
susceptibility testing (AST). This study assessed HCP knowledge and clinical 
practices regarding shigellosis and antibiotic resistance.
METHODS: Porter Novelli Public Services administered a web-based survey (Fall 
DocStyles 2020) to HCP in the United States. Pediatricians, primary care 
physicians, nurse practitioners, and physician assistants completed questions 
about knowledge and clinical practice of acute diarrhea and shigellosis.
RESULTS: Of 2196 HCP contacted, 1503 responded (68% response rate). Most 
identified contaminated food (85%) and water (79%) as routes of Shigella 
transmission; fewer recognized person-to-person contact (40%) and sexual 
activity (18%). Men who have sex with men (MSM) were identified as being at risk 
for shigellosis by 35% of respondents. Most reported counseling patients to wash 
hands (86%) and avoid food preparation (77%) when ill with shigellosis; 29% 
reported recommending avoiding sex. Many HCP reported treating shigellosis 
empirically with ciprofloxacin (62%) and azithromycin (32%), and 29% reported 
using AST to guide treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified several gaps in shigellosis knowledge among HCP 
including MSM as a risk group, person-to-person transmission, and appropriate 
antibiotic use. Improving HCP education could prevent the spread of shigellosis, 
including drug-resistant infections, among vulnerable populations.

© 2023. This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the 
US; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1186/s12875-023-02213-3
PMCID: PMC10717126
PMID: 38087210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors whose names are listed on this 
manuscript certify that they have no affiliations with any organization with a 
direct or indirect financial interest in the subject matter discussed in the 
manuscript.