---
reference_id: "PMID:37513612"
title: "The Effects of Selenium Supplementation in the Treatment of Autoimmune Thyroiditis: An Overview of Systematic Reviews."
authors:
- Wang YS
- Liang SS
- Ren JJ
- Wang ZY
- Deng XX
- Liu WD
- Yan YL
- Song GH
- Li XX
journal: Nutrients
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/nu15143194
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Effects of Selenium Supplementation in the Treatment of Autoimmune Thyroiditis: An Overview of Systematic Reviews.
**Authors:** Wang YS, Liang SS, Ren JJ, Wang ZY, Deng XX, Liu WD, Yan YL, Song GH, Li XX
**Journal:** Nutrients (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/nu15143194](https://doi.org/10.3390/nu15143194)

## Content

1. Nutrients. 2023 Jul 19;15(14):3194. doi: 10.3390/nu15143194.

The Effects of Selenium Supplementation in the Treatment of Autoimmune 
Thyroiditis: An Overview of Systematic Reviews.

Wang YS(1)(2), Liang SS(1)(2), Ren JJ(1)(2), Wang ZY(1)(2), Deng XX(1)(2), Liu 
WD(1)(2), Yan YL(1)(2), Song GH(3), Li XX(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Evidence-Based Social Science Research Center/Health Technology Assessment 
Center, School of Public Health, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Evidence Based Medicine and Knowledge Translation of Gansu 
Province, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, China.
(3)Gansu Healthcare Security Administration, Lanzhou 730000, China.

OBJECTIVE: The available evidence on selenium supplementation in the treatment 
of autoimmune thyroiditis (AIT) was inconclusive. This research serves to assess 
the effects of selenium supplementation in the treatment of AIT.
METHODS: Online databases including PubMed, Web of Science, Embase, and the 
Cochrane Library were searched from inception to 10 June 2022. The AMSTAR-2 tool 
was used to assess the methodological quality of included studies. The 
information on the randomized controlled trials of the included studies was 
extracted and synthesized. The GRADE system was used to assess the certainty of 
evidence.
RESULTS: A total of 6 systematic reviews with 75 RCTs were included. Only one 
study was rated as high quality. The meta-analysis showed that in the 
levothyroxine (LT4)-treated population, thyroid peroxidase antibody (TPO-Ab) 
levels decreased significantly in the selenium group at 3 months (SMD = -0.53, 
95% CI: [-0.89, -0.17], p < 0.05, very low certainty) and 6 months (SMD = -1.95, 
95% CI: [-3.17, -0.74], p < 0.05, very low certainty) and that thyroglobulin 
antibody (Tg-Ab) levels were not decreased. In the non-LT4-treated population, 
TPO-Ab levels decreased significantly in the selenium group at 3 and 6 months 
and did not decrease at 12 months. Tg-Ab levels decreased significantly in the 
selenium group at 3 and 6 months and did not decrease at 12 months. The adverse 
effects reported in the selenium group were not significantly different from 
those in the control group, and the certainty of evidence was low.
CONCLUSION: Although selenium supplementation might reduce TPO-Ab levels at 3 
and 6 months and Tg-Ab levels at 3 and 6 months in the non-LT4-treated 
population, this was based on a low certainty of evidence.

DOI: 10.3390/nu15143194
PMCID: PMC10386011
PMID: 37513612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.