---
reference_id: "PMID:38658430"
title: Molecular Aspects of Mucoepidermoid Carcinoma and Adenoid Cystic Carcinoma of the Salivary Gland.
authors:
- Costa RF
- de Oliveira CA
- Gomes ÁNM
- Lourenço SV
- Coutinho-Camillo CM
journal: Head Neck Pathol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s12105-024-01629-2
keywords:
- "Carcinoma, Mucoepidermoid/pathology, diagnosis"
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Adenoid Cystic/pathology, diagnosis"
- "Salivary Gland Neoplasms/pathology, diagnosis"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Aspects of Mucoepidermoid Carcinoma and Adenoid Cystic Carcinoma of the Salivary Gland.
**Authors:** Costa RF, de Oliveira CA, Gomes ÁNM, Lourenço SV, Coutinho-Camillo CM
**Journal:** Head Neck Pathol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12105-024-01629-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12105-024-01629-2)

## Content

1. Head Neck Pathol. 2024 Apr 24;18(1):34. doi: 10.1007/s12105-024-01629-2.

Molecular Aspects of Mucoepidermoid Carcinoma and Adenoid Cystic Carcinoma of 
the Salivary Gland.

Costa RF(1), de Oliveira CA(1), Gomes ÁNM(1), Lourenço SV(2), Coutinho-Camillo 
CM(3).

Author information:
(1)International Research Center, A.C.Camargo Cancer Center, Rua Taguá, 440 - 
Primeiro andar, São Paulo, 01508-010, Brazil.
(2)Department of General Pathology, Dental School, University of São Paulo, São 
Paulo, Brazil.
(3)International Research Center, A.C.Camargo Cancer Center, Rua Taguá, 440 - 
Primeiro andar, São Paulo, 01508-010, Brazil. ccamillo@accamargo.org.br.

BACKGROUND: Salivary gland tumors (SGTs) are rare and highly heterogeneous 
lesions, making diagnosis a challenging activity. In addition, the small number 
of studies and samples evaluated difficults the determination of prognosis and 
diagnosis. Despite the solid advances achieved by research, there is still an 
intense need to investigate biomarkers for diagnosis, prognosis and that explain 
the evolution and progression of SGTs.
METHODS: We performed a comprehensive literature review of the molecular 
alterations focusing on the most frequent malignant SGTs: mucoepidermoid 
carcinoma and adenoid cystic carcinoma.
RESULTS: Due to the importance of biomarkers in the tumorigenenic process, this 
review aimed to address the mechanisms involved and to describe molecular and 
biomarker pathways to better understand some aspects of the pathophysiology of 
salivary gland tumorigenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: Molecular analysis is essential not only to improve the diagnosis 
and prognosis of the tumors but also to identify novel driver pathways in the 
precision medicine scenario.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12105-024-01629-2
PMCID: PMC11043314
PMID: 38658430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.