---
reference_id: "PMID:26262932"
title: CHD2 mutations are a rare cause of generalized epilepsy with myoclonic-atonic seizures.
authors:
- Trivisano M
- Striano P
- Sartorelli J
- Giordano L
- Traverso M
- Accorsi P
- Cappelletti S
- Claps DJ
- Vigevano F
- Zara F
- Specchio N
journal: Epilepsy Behav
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2015.06.029
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CHD2 mutations are a rare cause of generalized epilepsy with myoclonic-atonic seizures.
**Authors:** Trivisano M, Striano P, Sartorelli J, Giordano L, Traverso M, Accorsi P, Cappelletti S, Claps DJ, Vigevano F, Zara F, Specchio N
**Journal:** Epilepsy Behav (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yebeh.2015.06.029](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yebeh.2015.06.029)

## Content

1. Epilepsy Behav. 2015 Oct;51:53-6. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2015.06.029. Epub 2015 
Aug 7.

CHD2 mutations are a rare cause of generalized epilepsy with myoclonic-atonic 
seizures.

Trivisano M(1), Striano P(2), Sartorelli J(2), Giordano L(3), Traverso M(4), 
Accorsi P(3), Cappelletti S(1), Claps DJ(1), Vigevano F(1), Zara F(4), Specchio 
N(5).

Author information:
(1)Neurology Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(2)Pediatric Neurology and Muscular Diseases Unit, Department of Neurosciences, 
Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal and Child Health, University 
of Genoa, "G. Gaslini" Institute, Genova, Italy.
(3)Department of Child and Adolescent Neuropsychiatry, Spedali Civili, Brescia, 
Italy.
(4)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, Department of Neurosciences, "G. Gaslini" 
Institute, Genova, Italy.
(5)Neurology Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy. 
Electronic address: nicola.specchio@opbg.net.

Chromodomain helicase DNA-binding protein 2 (CHD2) gene mutations have been 
reported in patients with myoclonic-atonic epilepsy (MAE), as well as in 
patients with Lennox-Gastaut, Dravet, and Jeavons syndromes and other epileptic 
encephalopathies featuring generalized epilepsy and intellectual disability. The 
aim of this study was to assess the impact of CHD2 mutations in a series of 
patients with MAE. Twenty patients affected by MAE were included in the study. 
We analyzed antecedents, age at onset, seizure semiology and frequency, EEG, 
treatment, and neuropsychological outcome. We sequenced the CHD2 gene with 
Sanger technology. We identified a CHD2 frameshift mutation in one patient 
(c.4256del19). He was a 17-year-old boy with no familial history for epilepsy 
and normal development before epilepsy onset. Epilepsy onset was at 3years and 
5months: he presented with myoclonic-atonic seizures, head drops, myoclonic 
jerks, and absences. Interictal EEGs revealed slow background activity 
associated with generalized epileptiform abnormalities and photoparoxysmal 
response. His seizures were highly responsive to valproic acid, and an attempt 
to withdraw it led to seizure recurrence. Neuropsychological evaluation revealed 
moderate intellectual disability. Chromodomain-helicase-DNA-binding protein 2 is 
not the major gene associated with MAE. Conversely, CHD2 could be responsible 
for a proper phenotype characterized by infantile-onset generalized epilepsy, 
intellectual disability, and photosensitivity, which might overlap with MAE, 
Lennox-Gastaut, Dravet, and Jeavons syndromes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2015.06.029
PMID: 26262932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]