---
reference_id: "PMID:35018708"
title: "Clinical and molecular characterization of five new individuals with WAC-related intellectual disability: Evidence of pathogenicity for a novel splicing variant."
authors:
- Morales JA
- Valenzuela I
- Cuscó I
- Cogné B
- Isidor B
- Matalon DR
- Gomez-Ospina N
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62648
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/genetics"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Autism Spectrum Disorder/diagnosis, genetics"
- Child
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- Neurodevelopmental Disorders
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and molecular characterization of five new individuals with WAC-related intellectual disability: Evidence of pathogenicity for a novel splicing variant.
**Authors:** Morales JA, Valenzuela I, Cuscó I, Cogné B, Isidor B, Matalon DR, Gomez-Ospina N
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.62648](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.62648)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2022 May;188(5):1396-1406. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62648. Epub 
2022 Jan 12.

Clinical and molecular characterization of five new individuals with WAC-related 
intellectual disability: Evidence of pathogenicity for a novel splicing variant.

Morales JA(1), Valenzuela I(2)(3), Cuscó I(2)(3), Cogné B(4)(5), Isidor B(4)(5), 
Matalon DR(1), Gomez-Ospina N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Medical Genetics Division, Stanford University, 
Stanford, California, USA.
(2)Department of Clinical and Molecular Genetics, University Hospital Vall 
d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Medicine Genetics Group, Valle Hebron Research Institute, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Nantes, Nantes, France.
(5)Université de Nantes, CNRS, INSERM, l'institut du thorax, Nantes, France.

WAC-related intellectual disability (ID) is a rare genetic condition 
characterized by a spectrum of neurodevelopmental disorders of varying severity, 
including global developmental delay (GDD), ID, and autism spectrum disorder. 
Here, we describe five affected individuals, age range 9-20 years, and provide 
proof of pathogenicity of a novel splicing variant. All individuals presented 
with GDD, some degree of ID, and variable dysmorphism. Except for feeding 
difficulties, all patients were healthy without major congenital malformations 
or medical comorbidities. All individuals were heterozygous for de novo, 
previously unreported, loss of function variants in WAC. Three unrelated 
patients from different ethnic backgrounds shared the intronic variant 
c.381+4_381+7delAGTA, which was predicted to alter splicing and was initially 
classified as a variant of uncertain significance. Reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis from one patient's cells 
confirmed aberrant splicing of the WAC transcript resulting in premature 
termination and a truncated protein p.(Gly92Alafs*2). These functional studies 
and the identification of several nonrelated individuals provide sufficient 
evidence to classify this variant as pathogenic. The clinical description of 
these five individuals and the three novel variants expand the genotypic and 
phenotypic spectrum of this ultrarare disease.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62648
PMID: 35018708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]