---
reference_id: "PMID:9010458"
title: Sporadic and Thorotrast-induced angiosarcomas of the liver manifest frequent and multiple point mutations in K-ras-2.
authors:
- Przygodzki RM
- Finkelstein SD
- Keohavong P
- Zhu D
- Bakker A
- Swalsky PA
- Soini Y
- Ishak KG
- Bennett WP
journal: Lab Invest
year: '1997'
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Carcinogens
- Female
- "Genes, ras"
- "Hemangiosarcoma/etiology, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- "Liver Neoplasms/etiology, genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasms, Radiation-Induced/etiology, genetics"
- Occupational Exposure
- Point Mutation
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Thorium Dioxide
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sporadic and Thorotrast-induced angiosarcomas of the liver manifest frequent and multiple point mutations in K-ras-2.
**Authors:** Przygodzki RM, Finkelstein SD, Keohavong P, Zhu D, Bakker A, Swalsky PA, Soini Y, Ishak KG, Bennett WP
**Journal:** Lab Invest (1997)

## Content

1. Lab Invest. 1997 Jan;76(1):153-9.

Sporadic and Thorotrast-induced angiosarcomas of the liver manifest frequent and
multiple point mutations in K-ras-2.

Przygodzki RM(1), Finkelstein SD, Keohavong P, Zhu D, Bakker A, Swalsky PA,
Soini Y, Ishak KG, Bennett WP.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Hepatic angiosarcoma (HA) is an uncommon neoplasm associated with known
etiologic factors in 25% to 42% of cases. It is, however, one of the most common
sarcomas found in the liver. The aim of this study was to find was to find
mutations in the K-ras-2 oncogene in sporadic and Thorotrast (TT)-induced HA.
Point mutations in K-ras-2 were sought in archival, formalin-fixed tissue blocks
from 24 patients with angiosarcoma. Of these, 19 cases were sporadic and 5 were
TT-induced. Mutational analysis was performed by topographic microdissection
with PCR amplification followed by genotyping. Specific mutations were
determined by two independent methods: (a) direct sequencing of the PCR product
confirmed by rePCR and by using a different sequencing primer, and (b) PCR-based
selective enrichment of mutant DNA by endonuclease digestion followed by
heteroduplex DNA analysis using denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Eleven
K-ras-2 point mutations were detected in 7 of 24 (29%) tumors, including 5 of 19
(26%) sporadic HA and 2 of 5 (40%) TT-induced HA. There were seven G:C > A:T and
four G:C > T:A mutations. All seven mutated tumors contained a codon
12-aspartate amino acid substitution. In addition, a second codon 12-cysteine
mutant cell population was present in one of two codon 12-aspartate mutated
TT-induced HA and in three of five codon 12-aspartate sporadic tumors. Of these
four tumors, three contained both aspartate and cysteine mutations and were
composed of multiple nodules; the fourth was a single mass. Seventeen tumors had
multiple nodules; whereas 5 had a K-ras-2 mutation, 12 were wild-type. The
molecular pathology of both sporadic and TT-induced HA is characterized by a
high rate of K-ras-2 mutations characteristic of oxidative damage (ie, G:C > A:T
and G:C > T:A mutations) resulting in two mutated population sets: codon 12 GGT
> GAT and GGT > TGT (glycine to aspartic acid and cysteine). This is, to date,
the first study to characterize the K-ras-2 gene mutations within human sporadic
and TT-induced HA by direct sequence analysis and denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis. These data further support the hypothesis linking
adduct-forming vinyl chloride exposure to HA containing a much higher frequency
of K-ras-2 mutations and a mutational spectrum characteristic of chloroethylene
oxide, a carcinogenic metabolite of vinyl chloride.

PMID: 9010458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
