---
reference_id: "PMID:29185933"
title: Severe riboflavin deficiency induces alterations in the hepatic proteome of starter Pekin ducks.
authors:
- Tang J
- Hegeman MA
- Hu J
- Xie M
- Shi W
- Jiang Y
- de Boer V
- Guo Y
- Hou S
- Keijer J
journal: Br J Nutr
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1017/S0007114517002641
keywords:
- Alanine Transaminase/blood
- Animals
- Aspartate Aminotransferases/blood
- Blood Glucose/metabolism
- Diet
- Ducks/blood
- "Electron Transport Chain Complex Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Lipid Metabolism
- Liver/metabolism
- Male
- "Mitochondria, Liver/metabolism"
- "Proteome/genetics, metabolism"
- Riboflavin/blood
- Riboflavin Deficiency/blood
- Serum Albumin/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Severe riboflavin deficiency induces alterations in the hepatic proteome of starter Pekin ducks.
**Authors:** Tang J, Hegeman MA, Hu J, Xie M, Shi W, Jiang Y, de Boer V, Guo Y, Hou S, Keijer J
**Journal:** Br J Nutr (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S0007114517002641](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0007114517002641)

## Content

1. Br J Nutr. 2017 Nov;118(9):641-650. doi: 10.1017/S0007114517002641.

Severe riboflavin deficiency induces alterations in the hepatic proteome of
starter Pekin ducks.

Tang J(1), Hegeman MA(2), Hu J(1), Xie M(1), Shi W(1), Jiang Y(1), de Boer V(2),
Guo Y(3), Hou S(1), Keijer J(2).

Author information:
(1)1Institute of Animal Sciences,Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences,Beijing100193,People's Republic of China.
(2)3Human and Animal Physiology,Wageningen University,6700 AH Wageningen,the
Netherlands.
(3)2College of Animal Science and Technology,China Agricultural
University,Beijing 100193,People's Republic of China.

Suboptimal vitamin B2 status is encountered globally. Riboflavin deficiency
depresses growth and results in a fatty liver. The underlying mechanisms remain
to be established and an overview of molecular alterations is lacking. We
investigated hepatic proteome changes induced by riboflavin deficiency to
explain its effects on growth and hepatic lipid metabolism. In all, 360 1-d-old
Pekin ducks were divided into three groups of 120 birds each, with twelve
replicates and ten birds per replicate. For 21 d, the ducks were fed ad libitum
a control diet (CAL), a riboflavin-deficient diet (RD) or were pair-fed with the
control diet to the mean daily intake of the RD group (CPF). When comparing RD
with CAL and CPF, growth depression, liver enlargement, liver lipid accumulation
and enhanced liver SFA (C6 : 0, C12 : 0, C16 : 0, C18 : 0) were observed. In RD,
thirty-two proteins were enhanced and thirty-one diminished (>1·5-fold) compared
with CAL and CPF. Selected proteins were confirmed by Western blotting. The
diminished proteins are mainly involved in fatty acid β-oxidation and the
mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC), whereas the enhanced proteins are
mainly involved in TAG and cholesterol biosynthesis. RD causes liver lipid
accumulation and growth depression probably by impairing fatty acid β-oxidation
and ETC. These findings contribute to our understanding of the mechanisms of
liver lipid metabolic disorders due to RD.

DOI: 10.1017/S0007114517002641
PMID: 29185933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
