---
reference_id: "PMID:34785041"
title: Low physical activity is associated with two hypokinetic motor abnormalities in psychosis.
authors:
- Walther S
- Vladimirova I
- Alexaki D
- Schäppi L
- Damme KSF
- Mittal VA
- Shankman SA
- Stegmayer K
journal: J Psychiatr Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2021.11.014
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Low physical activity is associated with two hypokinetic motor abnormalities in psychosis.
**Authors:** Walther S, Vladimirova I, Alexaki D, Schäppi L, Damme KSF, Mittal VA, Shankman SA, Stegmayer K
**Journal:** J Psychiatr Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpsychires.2021.11.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychires.2021.11.014)

## Content

1. J Psychiatr Res. 2022 Feb;146:258-263. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2021.11.014. 
Epub 2021 Nov 8.

Low physical activity is associated with two hypokinetic motor abnormalities in 
psychosis.

Walther S(1), Vladimirova I(2), Alexaki D(2), Schäppi L(2), Damme KSF(3), Mittal 
VA(4), Shankman SA(4), Stegmayer K(2).

Author information:
(1)Translational Research Center, University Hospital of Psychiatry and 
Psychotherapy, University of Bern, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
Sebastian.walther@upd.unibe.ch.
(2)Translational Research Center, University Hospital of Psychiatry and 
Psychotherapy, University of Bern, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Psychology, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA; 
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Northwestern University, 
Chicago, IL, USA.

Individuals with schizophrenia engage in more sedentary behavior than healthy 
controls, which is thought to contribute to multiple health adversities. Age, 
medication side effects and environment are critical determinants of physical 
activity in psychosis. While motor abnormalities are frequently observed in 
psychosis, their association with low physical activity has received little 
interest. Here, we aimed to explore the association of actigraphy as an 
objective measure of physical activity with clinician assessed hypokinetic 
movement disorders such as parkinsonism and catatonia. Furthermore, we studied 
whether patients with current catatonia would differ on motor rating scales and 
actigraphy from patients without catatonia. In 52 patients with schizophrenia 
spectrum disorders, we cross-sectionally assessed physical activity using wrist 
actigraphy and ratings of catatonia, parkinsonism, and negative syndrome. The 
sample was enriched with subjects with severe psychomotor slowing. Lower 
activity levels correlated with increased age and severity of catatonia and 
parkinsonism. The 22 patients with catatonia had lower activity as well as 
higher scores on parkinsonism, involuntary movements, and negative symptoms 
compared to the 30 patients without catatonia. Collectively, these results 
suggest that various hypokinetic motor abnormalities are linked to lower 
physical activity. Therefore, future research should determine the direction of 
the associations between hypokinetic motor abnormalities and physical activity 
using longitudinal assessments and interventional trials.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2021.11.014
PMCID: PMC8792361
PMID: 34785041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Dr. Walther 
received honoraria from Janssen, Lundbeck, Mepha, Neurolite, and Sunovion. Dr. 
Stegmayer received honoraria from Lundbeck and Sunovion Pharmaceuticals. All 
other authors report no competing interests.