---
reference_id: "PMID:37434911"
title: "Ludwig's Angina and Treatment Considerations in the COVID-19 Pandemic."
authors:
- Niu K
- Tohidi H
- Khan H
- Kitsis P
journal: HCA Healthc J Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.36518/2689-0216.1456
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ludwig's Angina and Treatment Considerations in the COVID-19 Pandemic.
**Authors:** Niu K, Tohidi H, Khan H, Kitsis P
**Journal:** HCA Healthc J Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.36518/2689-0216.1456](https://doi.org/10.36518/2689-0216.1456)

## Content

1. HCA Healthc J Med. 2023 Jun 28;4(3):249-251. doi: 10.36518/2689-0216.1456. 
eCollection 2023.

Ludwig's Angina and Treatment Considerations in the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Niu K(1)(2), Tohidi H(1)(2), Khan H(1)(2), Kitsis P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)HCA Florida Blake Hospital, Bradenton, FL.
(2)University of South Florida Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, FL.

INTRODUCTION: Ludwig's angina is a type of severe cellulitis that spreads 
rapidly and carries a significant risk of airway compromise. Previous 
complications with COVID-19 are poorly described within the literature.
CASE PRESENTATION: This case report describes the complication of COVID-19 
infection with suspected Ludwig's angina 2 days after admission, resulting in 
awake fibroscopic endotracheal intubation. Emergent treatment and establishing a 
secure airway are paramount in these cases. We discuss the role of antibiotics 
and adjunct treatment in these cases of potential airway compromise.
CONCLUSION: Limited data demonstrate simultaneous infection of COVID-19 with 
these types of submandibular soft tissue infections in the literature. Previous 
explorations into this subject are limited, as COVID-19 is a relatively new 
condition with its own treatment guidelines. We discuss specifically the role of 
corticosteroid use and surgical intervention in these cases. We wish to 
highlight awareness and treatment considerations for COVID-19 patients with 
superimposed Ludwig's angina.

© 2023 HCA Physician Services, Inc. d/b/a Emerald Medical Education.

DOI: 10.36518/2689-0216.1456
PMCID: PMC10332378
PMID: 37434911

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest.