---
reference_id: "PMID:39860504"
title: "Gastrointestinal Disease in Common Variable Immunodeficiency Disorder (CVID): Histological Patterns, Diagnostic Clues and Pitfalls for the Pathologist and Gastroenterologist."
authors:
- Velthof L
- Geldof J
- Truyens M
- Van Dorpe J
- Ferdinande L
- De Vriendt C
- Kerre T
- Haerynck F
- Lobatón T
- Hoorens A
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/jcm14020497
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gastrointestinal Disease in Common Variable Immunodeficiency Disorder (CVID): Histological Patterns, Diagnostic Clues and Pitfalls for the Pathologist and Gastroenterologist.
**Authors:** Velthof L, Geldof J, Truyens M, Van Dorpe J, Ferdinande L, De Vriendt C, Kerre T, Haerynck F, Lobatón T, Hoorens A
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm14020497](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm14020497)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2025 Jan 14;14(2):497. doi: 10.3390/jcm14020497.

Gastrointestinal Disease in Common Variable Immunodeficiency Disorder (CVID): 
Histological Patterns, Diagnostic Clues and Pitfalls for the Pathologist and 
Gastroenterologist.

Velthof L(1), Geldof J(2), Truyens M(2)(3), Van Dorpe J(1)(4), Ferdinande 
L(1)(4), De Vriendt C(5), Kerre T(5), Haerynck F(6), Lobatón T(2), Hoorens A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent University, 9000 
Ghent, Belgium.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Ghent University Hospital, 
Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.
(3)IBD Research Unit, Department of Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, Ghent 
University Hospital, Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.
(4)Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, 
Belgium.
(5)Department of Hematology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent University, 9000 
Ghent, Belgium.
(6)PID Research Laboratory, Department of Pediatric Immunology and Pulmonology, 
Centre for Primary Immunodeficiency Ghent (CPIG), Jeffrey Modell Diagnosis and 
Research Centre, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, 
Belgium.

Background/Objectives: Gastrointestinal diseases are a major cause of morbidity 
in common variable immunodeficiency disorder (CVID), clinically often mimicking 
other conditions including celiac disease and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). 
Hence, diagnosis of CVID remains challenging. This study aims to raise awareness 
and highlight histopathological clues for CVID in intestinal biopsies, 
emphasizing diagnostic pitfalls for the pathologist/gastroenterologist. Methods: 
We reviewed 63 (18 duodenal, 23 ileal, 22 colonic) biopsies and case histories 
from seven CVID patients, obtained over a 31-year period, with attention to 
active inflammation, intraepithelial lymphocytes, plasma cells, lymphoid 
hyperplasia, crypt/villous architecture, subepithelial collagen, apoptosis, 
granulomas, and infections. Clinical information of 41 pathology requests was 
reviewed. Results: Gastrointestinal symptoms were variable. Histological 
features included IBD-like (3/7), celiac disease-like (2/7), graft-versus-host 
disease (GVHD)-like (2/7), lymphocytic sprue/colitis-like (3/7), collagenous 
colitis-like (2/7), and acute colitis-like (4/7) patterns, often overlapping 
(2/7) and/or changing over time (3/7). Lymphoid hyperplasia was seen in 3/7 
patients; 1/7 had giardiasis; and 5/7 had few plasma cells, usually only in part 
of the gut (3/5). Clinical information of 12/41 (29%) pathology requests 
mentioned known/suspected CVID, despite being known in 33/41 (80%). Conclusions: 
Clinical/histological features of CVID in the gut are diverse, often mimicking 
IBD, microscopic colitis, celiac disease and/or GVHD, hence the importance of 
adequate clinical information. Some histological features are atypical of these 
established entities and may indicate CVID, as may overlapping/changing 
histological patterns and/or few plasma cells in part of the gut. Awareness of 
the heterogenous clinical presentation and histopathological indicators of CVID 
may improve diagnosis.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm14020497
PMCID: PMC11765826
PMID: 39860504

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.