---
reference_id: "PMID:32065978"
title: Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma in the organ transplant recipient.
authors:
- Bibee K
- Swartz A
- Sridharan S
- Kurten CHL
- Wessel CB
- Skinner H
- Zandberg DP
journal: Oral Oncol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2019.104562
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma in the organ transplant recipient.
**Authors:** Bibee K, Swartz A, Sridharan S, Kurten CHL, Wessel CB, Skinner H, Zandberg DP
**Journal:** Oral Oncol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.oraloncology.2019.104562](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oraloncology.2019.104562)

## Content

1. Oral Oncol. 2020 Apr;103:104562. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2019.104562. Epub
 2020 Feb 14.

Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma in the organ transplant recipient.

Bibee K(1), Swartz A(2), Sridharan S(3), Kurten CHL(4), Wessel CB(5), Skinner 
H(6), Zandberg DP(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Pittsburgh, 3708 Fifth Ave #5, 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA; Hillman Cancer Center, University of Pittsburgh 
Medical Center, 5115 Centre Ave, Pittsburgh, PA 15232, USA. Electronic address: 
kbibee1@jhmi.edu.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, 3550 Terrace St, 
Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Pittsburgh, 203 Lothrop Street, 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.
(4)Hillman Cancer Center, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, 5115 Centre 
Ave, Pittsburgh, PA 15232, USA; Department of Otorhinolaryngology, University 
Hospital Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, Hufelandstrabe 55, 45147 Essen, 
Germany.
(5)Health Sciences Library, University of Pittsburgh, 200 Scaife Hall, 3550 
Terrace St, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.
(6)Hillman Cancer Center, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, 5115 Centre 
Ave, Pittsburgh, PA 15232, USA; Department of Radiation Oncology, University of 
Pittsburgh, 5115 Centre Ave, Pittsburgh, PA 15232, USA.
(7)Hillman Cancer Center, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, 5115 Centre 
Ave, Pittsburgh, PA 15232, USA; Department of Medicine, University of 
Pittsburgh, 3550 Terrace St, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

One in twenty solid organ transplant recipients (SOTRs) will develop a highly 
morbid or fatal cutaneous carcinoma after transplantation. The majority of these 
cases develop on the head and neck and may require intervention on the part of 
dermatology, dermatologic surgery, otolaryngology, transplant medicine, 
radiation oncology, and medical oncology. In this review, we discuss the problem 
of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) in SOTRs as well as the prognostic 
factors and management strategies to care for this population.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2019.104562
PMCID: PMC7217490
PMID: 32065978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.