---
reference_id: "PMID:39640265"
title: "Case report: Fecal microbiota transplant for Clostridium difficile infection in a pregnant patient with acute severe ulcerative colitis."
authors:
- Wang H
- Deng F
- Luo M
- Wang X
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1417003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report: Fecal microbiota transplant for Clostridium difficile infection in a pregnant patient with acute severe ulcerative colitis.
**Authors:** Wang H, Deng F, Luo M, Wang X
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2024.1417003](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2024.1417003)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2024 Nov 21;15:1417003. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1417003. 
eCollection 2024.

Case report: Fecal microbiota transplant for Clostridium difficile infection in 
a pregnant patient with acute severe ulcerative colitis.

Wang H(1)(2), Deng F(1)(2), Luo M(1)(2), Wang X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, Hunan, China.
(2)Research Center of Digestive Disease, Central South University, Changsha, 
Hunan, China.

Ulcerative colitis (UC) is a chronic colonic mucosal inflammation characterized 
by reduced gut microbial diversity. Patients with UC at pregnancy are prone to 
suffer from severe disease progression due to the changes of hormone and immune 
regulation. Fecal microbiota transplant (FMT) is a promising therapy for UC and 
recurrent Clostridium difficile infection (CDI). However, acute severe 
ulcerative colitis (ASUC) treatment especially in patients at pregnancy is 
clinically challenging. Herein, we report a 34-year-old pregnant woman who 
manifested with numerous bloody stools and markedly elevated serological 
inflammatory indicators and was diagnosed with ASUC and concurrent CDI. The use 
of intravenous injection steroids and anti-TNF-α therapy failed to improve her 
condition. Frozen encapsulated FMT therapy was finally performed to this patient 
with clearly improved symptoms and indications of safe delivery without UC 
flares or complications, and markedly increased diversity of the gut microbiota 
was also shown in this patient after FMT. This report firstly describes FMT as a 
safe salvage therapy for a pregnant patient with CDI and ASUC refractory to 
intravenous steroids and anti-TNF therapy.

Copyright © 2024 Wang, Deng, Luo and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1417003
PMCID: PMC11619044
PMID: 39640265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.