---
reference_id: "PMID:1525797"
title: "Migraine with aura and migraine without aura: an epidemiological study."
authors:
- Rasmussen BK
- Olesen J
journal: Cephalalgia
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1046/j.1468-2982.1992.1204221.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Migraine with aura and migraine without aura: an epidemiological study.
**Authors:** Rasmussen BK, Olesen J
**Journal:** Cephalalgia (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1468-2982.1992.1204221.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1468-2982.1992.1204221.x)

## Content

1. Cephalalgia. 1992 Aug;12(4):221-8; discussion 186. doi: 
10.1046/j.1468-2982.1992.1204221.x.

Migraine with aura and migraine without aura: an epidemiological study.

Rasmussen BK(1), Olesen J.

Author information:
(1)Glostrup Population Studies, Department of Internal Medicine C, Glostrup 
Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

In a cross-sectional study of headache disorders in a representative general 
population of 1,000 persons the epidemiology of migraine with aura (MA) and 
migraine without aura (MO) was analysed in relation to sex and age distribution, 
symptomatology and precipitants. The headache disorders were classified on the 
basis of a clinical interview as well as a physical and a neurological 
examination using the operational diagnostic criteria of the International 
Headache Society (IHS). Lifetime prevalence of MA was 5%, male:female ratio 1:2. 
Lifetime prevalence of MO was 8%, M:F ratio 1:7. Women, but not men, were 
significantly more likely to have MO than MA. Neither MA nor MO showed 
correlation to age in the studied age interval (25-64 years). Premonitory 
symptoms occurred in 16% of subjects with MA and in 12% with MO. One or more 
precipitating factor was present in 61% with MA and in 90% with MO. In both MA 
and MO the most conspicuous precipitating factor was stress and mental tension. 
Visual disturbances were the most common aura phenomenon occurring in 90% of 
subjects with MA. Aura symptoms of sensory, motor or speech disturbances rarely 
occurred without coexisting visual disturbances. The pain phase of MA fulfilled 
the criteria for MO of the IHS. Headache was, however, less severe and shorter 
lasting in MA than in MO. Onset at menarche, menstrual precipitation, menstrual 
problems, influence of pregnancy and use of oral contraceptives all showed some 
relationship with the presence of MO and less with MA. The present findings 
suggest that MA and MO share the pain phase.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1046/j.1468-2982.1992.1204221.x
PMID: 1525797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]