---
reference_id: "PMID:20810466"
title: "Maternal alcohol consumption, alcohol metabolism genes, and the risk of oral clefts: a population-based case-control study in Norway, 1996-2001."
authors:
- Boyles AL
- DeRoo LA
- Lie RT
- Taylor JA
- Jugessur A
- Murray JC
- Wilcox AJ
journal: Am J Epidemiol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1093/aje/kwq226
keywords:
- Adult
- Alcohol Dehydrogenase/genetics
- "Alcohol Drinking/genetics, metabolism"
- Case-Control Studies
- "Cleft Palate/chemically induced, genetics"
- "Ethanol/metabolism, toxicity"
- Female
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Norway/epidemiology
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Pregnancy
- "Pregnancy Trimester, First"
- Prenatal Exposure Delayed Effects/genetics
- Socioeconomic Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Maternal alcohol consumption, alcohol metabolism genes, and the risk of oral clefts: a population-based case-control study in Norway, 1996-2001.
**Authors:** Boyles AL, DeRoo LA, Lie RT, Taylor JA, Jugessur A, Murray JC, Wilcox AJ
**Journal:** Am J Epidemiol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/aje/kwq226](https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwq226)

## Content

1. Am J Epidemiol. 2010 Oct 15;172(8):924-31. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwq226. Epub 2010 
Sep 1.

Maternal alcohol consumption, alcohol metabolism genes, and the risk of oral 
clefts: a population-based case-control study in Norway, 1996-2001.

Boyles AL(1), DeRoo LA, Lie RT, Taylor JA, Jugessur A, Murray JC, Wilcox AJ.

Author information:
(1)Epidemiology Branch, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 
Durham, North Carolina 27709, USA. boylesa@niehs.nih.gov

Heavy maternal alcohol consumption during early pregnancy increases the risk of 
oral clefts, but little is known about how genetic variation in alcohol 
metabolism affects this association. Variants in the alcohol dehydrogenase 1C 
(ADH1C) gene may modify the association between alcohol and clefts. In a 
population-based case-control study carried out in Norway (1996-2001), the 
authors examined the association between maternal alcohol consumption and risk 
of oral clefts according to mother and infant ADH1C haplotypes encoding fast or 
slow alcohol-metabolizing phenotypes. Subjects were 483 infants with oral cleft 
malformations and 503 control infants and their mothers, randomly selected from 
all other livebirths taking place during the same period. Mothers who consumed 5 
or more alcoholic drinks per sitting during the first trimester of pregnancy had 
an elevated risk of oral cleft in their offspring (odds ratio (OR) = 2.6, 95% 
confidence interval (CI): 1.4, 4.7). This increased risk was evident only in 
mothers or children who carried the ADH1C haplotype associated with reduced 
alcohol metabolism (OR= 3.0, 95% CI: 1.4, 6.8). There was no evidence of 
alcohol-related risk when both mother and infant carried only the 
rapid-metabolism ADH1C variant (OR = 0.9, 95% CI: 0.2, 4.1). The teratogenic 
effect of alcohol may depend on the genetic capacity of the mother and fetus to 
metabolize alcohol.

DOI: 10.1093/aje/kwq226
PMCID: PMC2984244
PMID: 20810466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]