---
reference_id: "PMID:2650022"
title: Mechanisms of lead and cadmium nephrotoxicity.
authors:
- Goyer RA
journal: Toxicol Lett
year: '1989'
doi: 10.1016/0378-4274(89)90124-0
keywords:
- Acute Kidney Injury/chemically induced
- "Cadmium/metabolism, toxicity"
- Humans
- "Kidney Tubular Necrosis, Acute/chemically induced, metabolism"
- "Kidney Tubules, Proximal/drug effects, metabolism, ultrastructure"
- "Lead/metabolism, toxicity"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms of lead and cadmium nephrotoxicity.
**Authors:** Goyer RA
**Journal:** Toxicol Lett (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0378-4274(89)90124-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/0378-4274(89)90124-0)

## Content

1. Toxicol Lett. 1989 Mar;46(1-3):153-62. doi: 10.1016/0378-4274(89)90124-0.

Mechanisms of lead and cadmium nephrotoxicity.

Goyer RA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada.

Exposure to lead results in accumulation in proximal renal tubular lining cells 
in the form of morphologically discernible inclusion bodies which are 
lead-protein complexes. Acute nephrotoxicity consists of proximal tubular 
dysfunction and can be reversed by treatment with chelating agents. Chronic lead 
nephrotoxicity consists of interstitial fibrosis and progressive nephron loss, 
azotaemia and renal failure. Potential complications of lead nephropathy include 
gout and hypertension. Cadmium accumulates in renal tubular lining cells bound 
to metallothionein, a small protein containing 30% cystine. Metallothionein 
protects against nephrotoxicity by binding cadmium in a nontoxic form. Renal 
tubular dysfunction and chronic interstitial fibrosis occur when cadmium levels 
in the renal cortex exceed the critical concentration of about 200 micrograms/g. 
Recommendations are made for specific research needs.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-4274(89)90124-0
PMID: 2650022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]