---
reference_id: "PMID:37691603"
title: The involvement of the adrenergic system in feeding and eating disorders. A systematic review.
authors:
- Pruccoli J
- Parmeggiani A
- Cordelli DM
- Lanari M
journal: World J Biol Psychiatry
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/15622975.2023.2245458
keywords:
- Humans
- Rats
- Animals
- Anorexia
- Feeding and Eating Disorders/etiology
- Anorexia Nervosa
- Catecholamines
- Epinephrine
- Adrenergic Agents/pharmacology
- "Bulimia Nervosa/diagnosis, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The involvement of the adrenergic system in feeding and eating disorders. A systematic review.
**Authors:** Pruccoli J, Parmeggiani A, Cordelli DM, Lanari M
**Journal:** World J Biol Psychiatry (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15622975.2023.2245458](https://doi.org/10.1080/15622975.2023.2245458)

## Content

1. World J Biol Psychiatry. 2024 Jan-Feb;25(1):1-15. doi:
10.1080/15622975.2023.2245458. Epub 2023 Sep 11.

The involvement of the adrenergic system in feeding and eating disorders. A
systematic review.

Pruccoli J(1)(2), Parmeggiani A(1)(2), Cordelli DM(1)(2), Lanari M(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna, Centro Regionale per i
Disturbi della Nutrizione e dell'Alimentazione in età evolutiva, U.O.
Neuropsichiatria dell'età pediatrica, Bologna, Italy.
(2)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Alma Mater Studiorum, University
of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(3)IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(4)Pediatric Emergency Unit, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Alma
Mater Studiorum, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Adrenergic dysregulation has been proposed as a possible underlying
mechanism in feeding and eating disorders (FED). This review aims to synthesise
the current evidence on the role of adrenergic dysregulation in the pathogenesis
and management of FED.
METHODS: A systematic review was conducted in MEDLINE, Cochrane Library, and
Clinicaltrials.gov. The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) was adopted. Preclinical, clinical, and pharmacological
studies assessing the adrenergic system in FED were included.
RESULTS: Thirty-one out of 1415 recognised studies were included. Preclinically,
studies on adrenaline's anorectic impact, receptor subtypes, and effects on
hepatic function in rats show that catecholamine anorexia is primarily
alpha-adrenergic, whereas beta-adrenergic anorexia can be obtained only after
puberty, implying an impact of sexual hormones. Clinically, catecholamine levels
may be higher in FED patients than in healthy controls (HC). Individuals with
anorexia nervosa (AN) may show higher epinephrine-induced platelet aggregability
response than HC. Pharmacological trials suggest that the alpha-2-adrenergic
medication clonidine may not lower AN symptoms, but agents regulating the
adrenaline-noradrenaline neurotransmission (bupropion, reboxetine, duloxetine,
sibutramine) have been found to improve binge eating symptoms.
CONCLUSION: Adrenergic dysregulation may be involved in the pathophysiology of
FED. More research is needed to comprehend underlying mechanisms and treatment
implications.

DOI: 10.1080/15622975.2023.2245458
PMID: 37691603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
