---
reference_id: "PMID:36681142"
title: "Arsenic metabolism, N6AMT1 and AS3MT single nucleotide polymorphisms, and their interaction on gestational diabetes mellitus in Chinese pregnant women."
authors:
- Liang X
- Guo G
- Wang Y
- Wang M
- Chen X
- Zhang J
- Li S
- Liu L
- Huang Q
- Cui B
- Zhang M
- Sun G
- Tang N
- Zhang X
- Zhang Q
journal: Environ Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2023.115331
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Pregnancy
- Arsenic/metabolism
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Diabetes, Gestational/genetics"
- Pregnant People
- "Methyltransferases/genetics, metabolism"
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- East Asian People
- Cacodylic Acid
- "Site-Specific DNA-Methyltransferase (Adenine-Specific)/genetics, metabolism"
- Arsenicals
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arsenic metabolism, N6AMT1 and AS3MT single nucleotide polymorphisms, and their interaction on gestational diabetes mellitus in Chinese pregnant women.
**Authors:** Liang X, Guo G, Wang Y, Wang M, Chen X, Zhang J, Li S, Liu L, Huang Q, Cui B, Zhang M, Sun G, Tang N, Zhang X, Zhang Q
**Journal:** Environ Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.envres.2023.115331](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2023.115331)

## Content

1. Environ Res. 2023 Mar 15;221:115331. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2023.115331. Epub
2023 Jan 19.

Arsenic metabolism, N6AMT1 and AS3MT single nucleotide polymorphisms, and their
interaction on gestational diabetes mellitus in Chinese pregnant women.

Liang X(1), Guo G(2), Wang Y(2), Wang M(3), Chen X(2), Zhang J(2), Li S(4), Liu
L(5), Huang Q(6), Cui B(7), Zhang M(8), Sun G(9), Tang N(2), Zhang X(3), Zhang
Q(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Occupational and Environmental Health, School of Public Health,
Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, 300070, China; Department of Nutrition and
Food Science, School of Public Health, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin,
300070, China; Tianjin Key Laboratory of Environment, Nutrition and Public
Health, School of Public Health, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, 300070,
China.
(2)Department of Occupational and Environmental Health, School of Public Health,
Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, 300070, China; Tianjin Key Laboratory of
Environment, Nutrition and Public Health, School of Public Health, Tianjin
Medical University, Tianjin, 300070, China.
(3)Department of Nutrition and Food Science, School of Public Health, Tianjin
Medical University, Tianjin, 300070, China; Tianjin Key Laboratory of
Environment, Nutrition and Public Health, School of Public Health, Tianjin
Medical University, Tianjin, 300070, China.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, Tianjin Xiqing Hospital, Tianjin, 300380, China.
(5)School of Public Health, Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan, 030001 China.
(6)Key Laboratory of Urban Environment and Health, Institute of Urban
Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xiamen, 361021, China.
(7)Institute of Environmental and Operational Medicine, Academy of Military
Medical Sciences, Tianjin, 300050, China.
(8)Shenzhen Prevention and Treatment Center for Occupational Diseases, Shenzhen,
518020, China.
(9)Key Laboratory of Arsenic-related Biological Effects and Prevention and
Treatment in Liaoning Province, School of Public Health, China Medical
University, Shenyang, 110122, China.
(10)Department of Occupational and Environmental Health, School of Public
Health, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, 300070, China; Tianjin Key
Laboratory of Environment, Nutrition and Public Health, School of Public Health,
Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, 300070, China. Electronic address:
qiangzhang@tmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in N6AMT1 and AS3MT are
associated with arsenic (As) metabolism, and efficient As methylation capacity
has been associated with diabetes. However, little is known about the gene-As
interaction on gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM).
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to explore the individual and combined effects of
N6AMT1 and AS3MT SNPs with As metabolism on GDM.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was performed among 385 Chinese pregnant women
(86 GDM and 299 Non-GDM). Four SNPs in N6AMT1 (rs1997605 and rs1003671) and
AS3MT (rs1046778 and rs11191453) were genotyped. Urinary inorganic arsenic
(iAs), monomethylarsonic acid (MMA), and dimethylarsinic acid (DMA) were
determined, and the percentages of As species (iAs%, MMA%, and DMA%) were
calculated to assess the efficiency of As metabolism.
RESULTS: Pregnant women with N6AMT1 rs1997605 AA genotype had lower iAs% (B:
2.11; 95% CI: 4.08, -0.13) and MMA% (B: 0.21; 95% CI: 0.39, -0.04) than pregnant
women with GG genotype. The AS3MT rs1046778 and rs11191453 C alleles were
negatively associated with iAs% and MMA% but positively associated with DMA%.
Higher urinary MMA% was significantly associated with a lower risk of GDM (OR:
0.54; 95% CI: 0.30, 0.97). The A allele in N6AMT1 rs1997605 (OR: 0.46; 95% CI:
0.26, 0.79) was associated with a decreased risk of GDM. The additive
interactions between N6AMT1 rs1997605 GG genotypes and lower iAs% (AP: 0.50; 95%
CI: 0.01, 0.99) or higher DMA% (AP: 0.52; 95% CI: 0.04, 0.99) were statistically
significant. Similar additive interactions were also found between N6AMT1
rs1003671 GG genotypes and lower iAs% or higher DMA%.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic variants in N6AMT1 and efficient As metabolism (indicated
by lower iAs% and higher DMA%) can interact to influence GDM occurrence
synergistically in Chinese pregnant women.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envres.2023.115331
PMID: 36681142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
