---
reference_id: "PMID:31149903"
title: Update on the genetics of the epilepsy-aphasia spectrum and role of GRIN2A mutations.
authors:
- Lesca G
- Møller RS
- Rudolf G
- Hirsch E
- Hjalgrim H
- Szepetowski P
journal: Epileptic Disord
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1684/epd.2019.1056
keywords:
- Aphasia/genetics
- Child
- Electroencephalography/methods
- "Epilepsy, Rolandic/genetics"
- Humans
- "Landau-Kleffner Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- "Receptors, N-Methyl-D-Aspartate/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update on the genetics of the epilepsy-aphasia spectrum and role of GRIN2A mutations.
**Authors:** Lesca G, Møller RS, Rudolf G, Hirsch E, Hjalgrim H, Szepetowski P
**Journal:** Epileptic Disord (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1684/epd.2019.1056](https://doi.org/10.1684/epd.2019.1056)

## Content

1. Epileptic Disord. 2019 Jun 1;21(S1):41-47. doi: 10.1684/epd.2019.1056.

Update on the genetics of the epilepsy-aphasia spectrum and role of GRIN2A 
mutations.

Lesca G(1), Møller RS(2), Rudolf G(3), Hirsch E(4), Hjalgrim H(2), Szepetowski 
P(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University Hospitals of Lyon, Member of the European 
Reference Network EpiCARE Lyon, France, Claude Bernard Lyon I University, Lyon, 
France, Centre de Recherche en Neurosciences de Lyon, CNRS UMR5292, INSERM 
U1028, Lyon, France.
(2)Danish Epilepsy Centre, Dianalund, Denmark, Institute for Regional Health 
Services, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
(3)Fédération de Médecine Translationnelle (FMTS), Strasbourg, France, IGBMC, 
CNRS UMR7104, INSERM U964, Strasbourg University, France.
(4)Fédération de Médecine Translationnelle (FMTS), Strasbourg, France, INSERM 
UMR_SU1119, Strasbourg, France.
(5)Aix-Marseille University, INSERM UMR1249, INMED, Marseille, France.

Formerly idiopathic, focal epilepsies (IFE) are self-limiting, "age-related" 
diseases that mainly occur during critical developmental periods. Childhood 
epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes, or Rolandic epilepsy (RE), is the most 
frequent form of IFE. Together with the Landau-Kleffner syndrome and the 
epileptic Encephalopathy related to Status Epilepticus during slow Sleep 
syndrome (ESES), RE is part of a single and continuous spectrum of childhood 
epilepsies and epileptic encephalopathies with acquired cognitive, behavioral 
and speech and/or language impairment, known as the epilepsy-aphasia spectrum 
(EAS). The pathophysiology has long been attributed to an elusive and complex 
interplay between brain development and maturation processes on the one hand, 
and susceptibility genes on the other hand. Studies based on the variable 
combination of molecular cytogenetics, Sanger and next-generation sequencing 
tools, and functional assays have led to the identification and validation of 
genetic mutations in the GRIN2A gene that can directly cause various types of 
EAS disorders. The recent identification of GRIN2A defects in EAS represents a 
first and major break-through in our understanding of the underlying 
pathophysiological mechanisms. In this review, we describe the current knowledge 
on the genetic architecture of IFE.

DOI: 10.1684/epd.2019.1056
PMID: 31149903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]