---
reference_id: "PMID:38851712"
title: "The efficacy and safety of PARP inhibitors in mCRPC with HRR mutation in second-line treatment: a systematic review and bayesian network meta-analysis."
authors:
- Zhu Q
- Chen J
- Liu H
- Zhao J
- Xu C
- Sun G
- Zeng H
journal: BMC Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12885-024-12388-2
keywords:
- Humans
- "Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitors/therapeutic use, adverse effects, administration & dosage"
- Bayes Theorem
- "Prostatic Neoplasms, Castration-Resistant/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- Male
- "Phthalazines/therapeutic use, adverse effects, administration & dosage"
- "Piperazines/therapeutic use, adverse effects, administration & dosage"
- BRCA2 Protein/genetics
- Recombinational DNA Repair/genetics
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Progression-Free Survival
- "Indoles/therapeutic use, adverse effects, administration & dosage"
- BRCA1 Protein/genetics
- Treatment Outcome
- Quinazolines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The efficacy and safety of PARP inhibitors in mCRPC with HRR mutation in second-line treatment: a systematic review and bayesian network meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Zhu Q, Chen J, Liu H, Zhao J, Xu C, Sun G, Zeng H
**Journal:** BMC Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12885-024-12388-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12885-024-12388-2)

## Content

1. BMC Cancer. 2024 Jun 8;24(1):706. doi: 10.1186/s12885-024-12388-2.

The efficacy and safety of PARP inhibitors in mCRPC with HRR mutation in
second-line treatment: a systematic review and bayesian network meta-analysis.

Zhu Q(#)(1), Chen J(#)(1), Liu H(#)(1), Zhao J(1), Xu C(1), Sun G(2), Zeng H(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Institute of Urology, West China Hospital of Sichuan
University, No. 37, Guoxue Alley, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610041, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Urology, Institute of Urology, West China Hospital of Sichuan
University, No. 37, Guoxue Alley, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610041, P.R. China.
sungx077@126.com.
(3)Department of Urology, Institute of Urology, West China Hospital of Sichuan
University, No. 37, Guoxue Alley, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610041, P.R. China.
zengh@scu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Poly (ADP- ribose) polymerase inhibitors (PARPi) has been
increasingly adopted for metastatic castration-resistance prostate cancer
(mCRPC) patients with homologous recombination repair deficiency (HRD). However,
it is unclear which PARPi is optimal in mCRPC patients with HRD in 2nd -line
setting.
METHOD: We conducted a systematic review of trials regarding PARPi- based
therapies on mCRPC in 2nd -line setting and performed a Bayesian network
meta-analysis (NMA). Radiographic progression-free survival (rPFS) was assessed
as primary outcome. PSA response and adverse events (AEs) were evaluated as
secondary outcomes. Subgroup analyses were performed according to specific
genetic mutation.
RESULTS: Four RCTs comprised of 1024 patients (763 harbored homologous
recombination repair (HRR) mutations) were identified for quantitative analysis.
Regarding rPFS, olaparib monotherapy, rucaparib and cediranib plus olaparib
showed significant improvement compared with ARAT. Olaparib plus cediranib had
the highest surface under cumulative ranking curve (SUCRA) scores (87.5%) for
rPFS, followed by rucaparib, olaparib and olaparib plus abiraterone acetate
prednisone. For patients with BRCA 1/2 mutations, olaparib associated with the
highest probability (98.1%) of improved rPFS. For patients with BRCA-2
mutations, olaparib and olaparib plus cediranib had similar efficacy. However,
neither olaparib nor rucaparib showed significant superior effectiveness to
androgen receptor-axis-targeted therapy (ARAT) in patients with ATM mutations.
For safety, olaparib showed significantly lower ≥ 3 AE rate compared with
cediranib plus olaparib (RR: 0.72, 95% CI: 0.51, 0.97), while olaparib plus
cediranib was associated with the highest risk of all-grade AE.
CONCLUSION: PARPi-based therapy showed considerable efficacy for mCRPC patients
with HRD in 2nd -line setting. However, patients should be treated accordingly
based on their genetic background as well as the efficacy and safety of the
selected regimen.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: CRD42023454079.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-024-12388-2
PMCID: PMC11162002
PMID: 38851712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
