---
reference_id: "PMID:41291966"
title: Recurrent genetic alterations in epigenetically defined pineoblastoma subtypes.
authors:
- Goschzik T
- Yuan M
- Pfaff E
- Müller MEB
- Mynarek M
- Dörner E
- Jones DTW
- Pfister SM
- Rutkowski S
- Pietsch T
journal: Acta Neuropathol Commun
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s40478-025-02140-7
keywords:
- Humans
- "Pinealoma/genetics, classification, pathology"
- Female
- Male
- "Brain Neoplasms/genetics, classification, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Pineal Gland/pathology
- Adult
- Ribonuclease III/genetics
- Adolescent
- "Epigenesis, Genetic/genetics"
- MicroRNAs/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Young Adult
- Middle Aged
- Infant
- DEAD-box RNA Helicases/genetics
- DNA Methylation
- Otx Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recurrent genetic alterations in epigenetically defined pineoblastoma subtypes.
**Authors:** Goschzik T, Yuan M, Pfaff E, Müller MEB, Mynarek M, Dörner E, Jones DTW, Pfister SM, Rutkowski S, Pietsch T
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol Commun (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40478-025-02140-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40478-025-02140-7)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2025 Nov 25;13(1):241. doi:
10.1186/s40478-025-02140-7.

Recurrent genetic alterations in epigenetically defined pineoblastoma subtypes.

Goschzik T(1), Yuan M(2), Pfaff E(3)(4)(5)(6), Müller MEB(1), Mynarek M(2)(7),
Dörner E(1), Jones DTW(4)(8)(9), Pfister SM(4)(6)(8)(10), Rutkowski S(2),
Pietsch T(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology, University of Bonn Medical Center,
Venusberg-Campus 1, 53127, Bonn, Germany.
(2)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, University Clinics
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Division of Pediatric Glioma Research, Hopp Children's Cancer Center
Heidelberg (KiTZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), NCT Heidelberg, a Partnership
Between DKFZ and Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(6)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology, Immunology and Pulmonology,
Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(7)Mildred Scheel Cancer Career Center HaTriCS4, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(8)Hopp Children's Cancer Center Heidelberg (KiTZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(9)Division of Pediatric Glioma Research (B360), German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(10)Division of Pediatric Neurooncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany.
(11)Department of Neuropathology, University of Bonn Medical Center,
Venusberg-Campus 1, 53127, Bonn, Germany. torsten.pietsch@ukbonn.de.
(12)DGNN Brain Tumor Reference Center, University of Bonn Medical Center, Bonn,
Germany. torsten.pietsch@ukbonn.de.

Previous studies have revealed four distinct epigenetic consensus pineoblastoma
(PB) subtypes. The aim of this study was to confirm and further extend their
respective genetic underpinnings. Cytogenetics of 83 PB were analyzed by
high-resolution genome-wide molecular inversion probe analysis and methylation
profiling. Seventy-nine cases were screened for mutations by next-generation DNA
panel sequencing and for 25 samples mRNA expression was analyzed using
NanoString. Additionally, 24 further pineal parenchymal tumors were analyzed.
Clinical data of 63 patients was available. Our cohort consisted of
48 PB-miRNA1, 19 PB-miRNA2, 8 PB-MYC/FOXR2, and 8 PB-RB1 cases. PB-miRNA subtype
tumors had characteristic alterations in microRNA-processing genes; DICER1
mutations (n = 19/64) and homozygous deletions of the DROSHA locus (n = 18/67)
were most abundant, followed by DROSHA mutations (n = 12/64). Most frequent
cytogenetic aberrations in PB-miRNA cases were chromosome 7 gains (n = 31/67)
and chromosome 14 losses (n = 26/67, including 5 cases with copy-neutral LOH).
The latter were significantly associated with DICER1 mutations (p < 0.001). OTX2
gain represented the most frequent alteration that occurred in 37/83 PB of all
subtypes. In the PB-miRNA subtypes we identified cases with polyploid
cytogenetics (n = 16/67). In contrast to previous publications, we did not find
a difference in survival for the PB-miRNA subtypes, whereas PB-MYC/FOXR2 and
PB-RB1 in infants showed a worse outcome. Epigenetically defined PB subtypes are
characterized by distinct genetic events. Frequent gains of the oncogene OTX2
indicate a role in the pathogenesis of PB independent of its subtype.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-025-02140-7
PMCID: PMC12648887
PMID: 41291966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: The authors
declare no competing interests. Ethics approval: Informed consent had been given
by the patients or their legal representatives.
