---
reference_id: "PMID:33083874"
title: Nervous system involvement in Pfeiffer syndrome.
authors:
- Mavridis IN
- Rodrigues D
journal: Childs Nerv Syst
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00381-020-04934-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nervous system involvement in Pfeiffer syndrome.
**Authors:** Mavridis IN, Rodrigues D
**Journal:** Childs Nerv Syst (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00381-020-04934-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00381-020-04934-7)

## Content

1. Childs Nerv Syst. 2021 Feb;37(2):367-374. doi: 10.1007/s00381-020-04934-7.
Epub  2020 Oct 20.

Nervous system involvement in Pfeiffer syndrome.

Mavridis IN(1), Rodrigues D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Birmingham Children's Hospital, Birmingham, West 
Midlands, UK. inmavridis@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Birmingham Children's Hospital, Birmingham, West 
Midlands, UK.

Pfeiffer syndrome (PS) is a rare autosomal dominant craniofacial disorder 
characterized by primary craniosynostosis, midface hypoplasia, and extremities' 
abnormalities including syndactyly. The purpose of this article was to review 
the current knowledge regarding how PS affects the nervous system. 
Methodologically, we conducted a systematic review of the existing literature 
concerning involvement of the nervous system in PS. Multiple-suture synostosis 
is common, and it is the premature fusion and abnormal growth of the facial 
skeleton's bones that cause the characteristic facial features of these 
patients. Brain abnormalities in PS can be primary or secondary. Primary 
anomalies are specific developmental brain defects including disorders of the 
white matter. Secondary anomalies are the result of skull deformity and include 
intracranial hypertension, hydrocephalus, and Chiari type I malformation. Spinal 
anomalies in PS patients include fusion of vertebrae, "butterfly" vertebra, and 
sacrococcygeal extension. Different features have been observed in different 
types of this syndrome. Cloverleaf skull deformity characterizes PS type II. The 
main neurological abnormalities are mental retardation, learning difficulties, 
and seizures. The tricky neurological examination in severely affected patients 
makes difficult the early diagnosis of neurological and neurosurgical 
complications. Prenatal diagnosis of PS is possible either molecularly or by 
sonography, and the differential diagnosis includes other craniosynostosis 
syndromes. Knowing how PS affects the nervous system is important, not only for 
understanding its pathogenesis and determining its prognosis but also for the 
guidance of decision-making in the various critical steps of its management. The 
latter necessitates an experienced multidisciplinary team.

DOI: 10.1007/s00381-020-04934-7
PMID: 33083874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]