---
reference_id: "PMID:39304719"
title: Biallelic TXNDC15 variants associated with Joubert syndrome-related molar tooth sign and forebrain malformation.
authors:
- Kuroda Y
- Ikegawa T
- Kato A
- Aida N
- Naruto T
- Kurosawa K
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s10038-024-01290-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biallelic TXNDC15 variants associated with Joubert syndrome-related molar tooth sign and forebrain malformation.
**Authors:** Kuroda Y, Ikegawa T, Kato A, Aida N, Naruto T, Kurosawa K
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s10038-024-01290-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s10038-024-01290-1)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2025 Jan;70(1):59-62. doi: 10.1038/s10038-024-01290-1. Epub 2024 
Sep 20.

Biallelic TXNDC15 variants associated with Joubert syndrome-related molar tooth 
sign and forebrain malformation.

Kuroda Y(1), Ikegawa T(2), Kato A(3)(4), Aida N(3)(4), Naruto T(5), Kurosawa 
K(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Kanagawa Children's Medical Center, Yokohama, 
Japan. ykodama-hok@umin.ac.jp.
(2)Division of Neurology, Kanagawa Children's Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan.
(3)Division of Radiology, Kanagawa Children's Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan.
(4)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Yokohama City University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.
(5)Clinical Research Institute, Kanagawa Children's Medical Center, Yokohama, 
Japan.
(6)Division of Medical Genetics, Kanagawa Children's Medical Center, Yokohama, 
Japan. kurosawa-k@ncchd.go.jp.

TXNDC15 encodes thioredoxin domain-containing protein 15, a protein disulfide 
isomerase that plays a role in ciliogenesis. Biallelic TXNDC15 variants have 
been reported in six individuals of Meckel syndrome (MKS) with perinatal lethal 
phenotypes, but have not been reported in patients with Joubert syndrome (JS). 
Here, we describe a 1-year-old female patient with compound heterozygous TXNDC15 
variants demonstrating cerebellar vermis hypoplasia with the molar tooth sign, 
mild holoprosencephaly, and cortical abnormalities. She had severe developmental 
delay and epilepsy. Her clinical features were similar to those of JS, but 
distinctive forebrain abnormalities were also noted including mild 
holoprosencephaly and cortical abnormalities, which have been reported in a 
severe form of ciliopathy. Biallelic TXNDC15 variants manifest as overlapping 
phenotypes of JS and MKS, including the molar tooth sign, cortical dysgenesis, 
and mild holoprosencephaly. This report supports the hypothesis that JS and MKS 
are spectrum ciliopathy disorders with overlapping causative genes and 
hypomorphic TXNDC15 variants might contribute to JS.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to The Japan Society of Human 
Genetics.

DOI: 10.1038/s10038-024-01290-1
PMID: 39304719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests. Ethical approval: The patient and family members were 
enrolled in an institutional review board-approved study with informed consent 
at Kanagawa Children’s Medical Center. Written informed consent for the 
publication of images was obtained.