---
reference_id: "PMID:32340490"
title: "Oculocerebrorenal syndrome of Lowe: Survey of ophthalmic presentations and management."
authors:
- Ma X
- Ning K
- Jabbehdari S
- Prosseda PP
- Hu Y
- Shue A
- Lambert SR
- Sun Y
journal: Eur J Ophthalmol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1177/1120672120920544
keywords:
- "Cataract/congenital, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Cataract Extraction
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Corneal Diseases/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Eye Diseases/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Female
- "Glaucoma/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Nystagmus, Pathologic/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Oculocerebrorenal Syndrome/epidemiology, genetics"
- Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases/genetics
- Prevalence
- Retrospective Studies
- "Strabismus/diagnosis, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oculocerebrorenal syndrome of Lowe: Survey of ophthalmic presentations and management.
**Authors:** Ma X, Ning K, Jabbehdari S, Prosseda PP, Hu Y, Shue A, Lambert SR, Sun Y
**Journal:** Eur J Ophthalmol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1120672120920544](https://doi.org/10.1177/1120672120920544)

## Content

1. Eur J Ophthalmol. 2020 Sep;30(5):966-973. doi: 10.1177/1120672120920544. Epub
2020 Apr 27.

Oculocerebrorenal syndrome of Lowe: Survey of ophthalmic presentations and
management.

Ma X(1), Ning K(2), Jabbehdari S(3), Prosseda PP(2), Hu Y(2), Shue A(2), Lambert
SR(2), Sun Y(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Xiamen Changgung Hospital, Xiamen, China.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, School of Medicine, Stanford University, Palo
Alto, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(4)Palo Alto Veterans Administration, Palo Alto, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Lowe syndrome is a rare X-linked disease that is characterized by
renal dysfunction, developmental delays, congenital cataracts and glaucoma.
Mutations in the oculocerebral renal syndrome of Lowe (OCRL) gene are found in
Lowe syndrome patients. Although loss of vision is a major concern for families
and physicians who take care of Lowe syndrome children, definitive cause of
visual loss is still unclear. Children usually present with bilateral dense
cataracts at birth and glaucoma, which occurs in more than half of cases, either
concurrently or following cataract surgery.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A retrospective review was conducted on the prevalence
and characteristics of ocular findings among families of patients with Lowe
syndrome with 137 uniquely affected individuals.
RESULTS: Of 137 patients, all had bilateral congenital cataracts. Nystagmus was
reported in 69.3% of cases, glaucoma in 54.7%, strabismus in 35.0%, and corneal
scar in 18.2% of patients. Glaucoma was reported as the most common cause of
blindness (46%) followed by corneal scars (41%). Glaucoma occurred in 54.7% of
patients and affected both eyes in the majority of cases. Of these patients, 55%
underwent surgery for glaucoma, while the remaining patients used medications to
control their eye pressure. Timolol and latanoprost were the most commonly used
medications. Although trabeculectomy and goniotomy are commonly used for
pressure management, aqueous tube shunts had the best outcomes.
CONCLUSION: Ocular manifestations in individuals with Lowe syndrome and carriers
with OCRL mutation are reported which may help familiarize clinicians with the
ocular manifestations and management of a rare and complex syndrome.

DOI: 10.1177/1120672120920544
PMCID: PMC8177091
PMID: 32340490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests The
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
