---
reference_id: "PMID:31410848"
title: Differentiation syndrome in acute promyelocytic leukaemia.
authors:
- Stahl M
- Tallman MS
journal: Br J Haematol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/bjh.16151
keywords:
- "Acute Kidney Injury/chemically induced, diagnostic imaging, drug therapy"
- "Arsenic Trioxide/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Cell Differentiation
- Humans
- "Hypotension/chemically induced, diagnostic imaging, drug therapy"
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy, metabolism"
- "Pulmonary Edema/chemically induced, diagnostic imaging, drug therapy"
- Steroids/therapeutic use
- Syndrome
- "Tretinoin/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differentiation syndrome in acute promyelocytic leukaemia.
**Authors:** Stahl M, Tallman MS
**Journal:** Br J Haematol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bjh.16151](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjh.16151)

## Content

1. Br J Haematol. 2019 Oct;187(2):157-162. doi: 10.1111/bjh.16151. Epub 2019 Aug
13.

Differentiation syndrome in acute promyelocytic leukaemia.

Stahl M(1)(2), Tallman MS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Leukemia Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA.

Acute promyelocytic leukaemia differentiation syndrome (APL DS) is seen when
patients with APL are treated with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and/or arsenic
trioxide (ATO). Presenting symptoms are varied but frequently include dyspnoea,
unexplained fever, weight gain >5 kg, unexplained hypotension, acute renal
failure and a chest radiograph demonstrating pulmonary infiltrates or pleural or
pericardial effusion. Immediate treatment with steroids at the first clinical
suspicion is recommended and ATRA/ATO should be stopped in severe cases or if
there is no response to treatment. The utility of steroid prophylaxis in order
to prevent APL DS is less certain. Here we provide a detailed review of the
pathogenesis, clinical signs and symptoms as well as management and prophylaxis
strategies of APL DS.

© 2019 British Society for Haematology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/bjh.16151
PMID: 31410848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
