---
reference_id: "PMID:20411413"
title: "HIV risk behaviors: risky sexual activities and needle use among adolescents in substance abuse treatment."
authors:
- Chan YF
- Passetti LL
- Garner BR
- Lloyd JJ
- Dennis ML
journal: AIDS Behav
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s10461-010-9702-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HIV risk behaviors: risky sexual activities and needle use among adolescents in substance abuse treatment.
**Authors:** Chan YF, Passetti LL, Garner BR, Lloyd JJ, Dennis ML
**Journal:** AIDS Behav (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10461-010-9702-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10461-010-9702-3)

## Content

1. AIDS Behav. 2011 Jan;15(1):114-24. doi: 10.1007/s10461-010-9702-3.

HIV risk behaviors: risky sexual activities and needle use among adolescents in 
substance abuse treatment.

Chan YF(1), Passetti LL, Garner BR, Lloyd JJ, Dennis ML.

Author information:
(1)Lighthouse Institute, Chestnut Health Systems, 448 Wylie Drive, Normal, IL 
61761, USA. ychan@chestnut.org

This study estimated prevalence of HIV risk behaviors and its association with 
substance use and mental health problems among adolescents in treatment. A 
pooled dataset of 9,519 adolescents admitted to substance abuse treatment 
programs between 2002 and 2006 was analyzed. HIV risk behaviors, substance use, 
and mental health problems were assessed at treatment intake. Sixty percent of 
adolescents were engaged in at least one sexual or needle use risk behavior in 
the year prior to entering treatment. Sex with multiple partners, sex under the 
influence of alcohol or drugs, and unprotected sex were the most prevalent HIV 
risk behaviors. Several gender differences were found for specific types of 
sexual and needle use behaviors. Adolescents with substance dependence or other 
comorbid mental health problems were at increased odds for HIV risk. Findings 
suggest treatment programs may benefit adolescents better by screening them 
consistently for HIV risk behaviors and incorporating tailored interventions.

DOI: 10.1007/s10461-010-9702-3
PMID: 20411413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]