---
reference_id: "PMID:12075673"
title: "Residential radon exposure and lung cancer: risk in nonsmokers."
authors:
- Neuberger JS
- Gesell TF
journal: Health Phys
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1097/00004032-200207000-00001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Residential radon exposure and lung cancer: risk in nonsmokers.
**Authors:** Neuberger JS, Gesell TF
**Journal:** Health Phys (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00004032-200207000-00001](https://doi.org/10.1097/00004032-200207000-00001)

## Content

1. Health Phys. 2002 Jul;83(1):1-18. doi: 10.1097/00004032-200207000-00001.

Residential radon exposure and lung cancer: risk in nonsmokers.

Neuberger JS(1), Gesell TF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, University of Kansas School of Medicine, 
Kansas City 66160-7313, USA. jneuberg@kumc.edu

Lung cancer is a disease that is almost entirely caused by smoking; hence, it is 
almost totally preventable. Yet there are a small percentage of cases, perhaps 
as many as 5 to 15%, where there are other causes. Risk factors identified for 
this other group include passive smoking, occupational exposure to certain 
chemicals and ionizing radiation, diet, and family history of cancer. In the 
United States cigarette smoking is on the decline among adults, occupational 
exposures are being reduced, and people are being made more aware of appropriate 
diets. These changes are gradually resulting in a reduced risk for this disease. 
Lung cancer in the U.S. may, therefore, eventually become largely a disease of 
the past. It remains important, however, to continue to study the cause(s) of 
lung cancer in non-smokers, particularly never smokers. Because of our interest 
in the effects of residential radon exposure on the development of lung cancer 
in non-smokers, we conducted a critical review of the scientific literature to 
evaluate this issue in detail. Strict criteria were utilized in selecting 
studies, which included being published in a peer reviewed journal, including 
non-smokers in the studied populations, having at least 100 cases, and being of 
case-control design. A total of 12 individual studies were found that met the 
criteria, with 10 providing some information on non-smokers. Most of these 
studies did not find any significant association between radon and lung cancer 
in non-smokers. Furthermore, data were not presented in sufficient detail for 
non-smokers in a number of studies. Based on the most recent findings, there is 
some evidence that radon may contribute to lung cancer risk in current smokers 
in high residential radon environments. The situation regarding the risk of lung 
cancer from radon in non-smokers (ex and never) is unclear, possibly because of 
both the relatively limited sample size of non-smokers and methodological 
limitations in most of the individual studies. A summary of these studies is 
provided concerning the state of knowledge of the lung cancer risk from radon, 
methodological problems with the residential studies, the need for the provision 
of additional data on non-smokers from researchers, and recommendations for 
future research in non-smokers.

DOI: 10.1097/00004032-200207000-00001
PMID: 12075673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]