---
reference_id: "PMID:32725128"
title: Mutations in COPA lead to abnormal trafficking of STING to the Golgi and interferon signaling.
authors:
- Lepelley A
- Martin-Niclós MJ
- Le Bihan M
- Marsh JA
- Uggenti C
- Rice GI
- Bondet V
- Duffy D
- Hertzog J
- Rehwinkel J
- Amselem S
- Boulisfane-El Khalifi S
- Brennan M
- Carter E
- Chatenoud L
- Chhun S
- "Coulomb l'Hermine A"
- Depp M
- Legendre M
- Mackenzie KJ
- Marey J
- McDougall C
- McKenzie KJ
- Molina TJ
- Neven B
- Seabra L
- Thumerelle C
- Wislez M
- Nathan N
- Manel N
- Crow YJ
- Frémond ML
journal: J Exp Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1084/jem.20200600
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Coatomer Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
- Female
- Gene Knockout Techniques
- Golgi Apparatus/metabolism
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Interferon Type I/metabolism
- Male
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Middle Aged
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Protein Transport/genetics
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- THP-1 Cells
- Transfection
- Young Adult
- STING Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in COPA lead to abnormal trafficking of STING to the Golgi and interferon signaling.
**Authors:** Lepelley A, Martin-Niclós MJ, Le Bihan M, Marsh JA, Uggenti C, Rice GI, Bondet V, Duffy D, Hertzog J, Rehwinkel J, Amselem S, Boulisfane-El Khalifi S, Brennan M, Carter E, Chatenoud L, Chhun S, Coulomb l'Hermine A, Depp M, Legendre M, Mackenzie KJ, Marey J, McDougall C, McKenzie KJ, Molina TJ, Neven B, Seabra L, Thumerelle C, Wislez M, Nathan N, Manel N, Crow YJ, Frémond ML
**Journal:** J Exp Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1084/jem.20200600](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20200600)

## Content

1. J Exp Med. 2020 Nov 2;217(11):e20200600. doi: 10.1084/jem.20200600.

Mutations in COPA lead to abnormal trafficking of STING to the Golgi and
interferon signaling.

Lepelley A(1), Martin-Niclós MJ(1), Le Bihan M(2), Marsh JA(3), Uggenti C(4),
Rice GI(5), Bondet V(6)(7), Duffy D(6)(7), Hertzog J(8), Rehwinkel J(8), Amselem
S(9)(10), Boulisfane-El Khalifi S(11), Brennan M(12), Carter E(4), Chatenoud
L(13)(14)(15), Chhun S(13)(14)(15), Coulomb l'Hermine A(16), Depp M(4), Legendre
M(9)(10), Mackenzie KJ(3), Marey J(17), McDougall C(18), McKenzie KJ(19), Molina
TJ(13)(20), Neven B(13)(21)(22), Seabra L(1), Thumerelle C(23), Wislez
M(17)(24), Nathan N(9)(25), Manel N(2), Crow YJ(1)(4), Frémond ML(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurogenetics and Neuroinflammation, Imagine Institute, Paris,
France.
(2)Immunity and Cancer Department, Institut Curie, Paris-Sciences-et-Lettres
Research University, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale
U932, Paris, France.
(3)Medical Research Council Human Genetics Unit, Medical Research Council
Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, The University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, UK.
(4)Centre for Genomic and Experimental Medicine, Medical Research Council
Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, The University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, UK.
(5)Division of Evolution and Genomic Sciences, School of Biological Sciences,
Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester
Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, UK.
(6)Immunobiology of Dendritic Cells, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(7)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U1223, Paris,
France.
(8)Medical Research Council Human Immunology Unit, Medical Research Council
Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Radcliffe Department of Medicine,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(9)Sorbonne Université, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale/UMRS_933, Trousseau University Hospital, Paris, France.
(10)Genetics Department, Trousseau University Hospital, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France.
(11)Emergency, Infectious Disease and Pediatric Rheumatology Department, Centre
Hospitalier Régional Universitaire Lille, University of Lille, Lille, France.
(12)Department of Paediatric Rheumatology, Royal Hospital for Sick Children,
Edinburgh, UK.
(13)Paris Descartes University, Université de Paris, Sorbonne-Paris-Cité, Paris,
France.
(14)Laboratory of Immunology, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Centre-Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(15)Institut Necker-Enfants Malades, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique UMR8253, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale
UMR1151, Team Immunoregulation and Immunopathology, Paris, France.
(16)Pathology Department, Trousseau University Hospital, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France.
(17)Pneumology Department, Cochin Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de
Paris, Centre-Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(18)Department of Paediatric Respiratory Medicine, Royal Hospital for Sick
Children, Edinburgh, UK.
(19)Paediatric Pathology Department, Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
UK.
(20)Pathology Department, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Centre-Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(21)Pediatric Hematology-Immunology and Rheumatology Department, Hôpital
Necker-Enfants Malades, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Centre-Université
de Paris, Paris, France.
(22)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale UMR 1163,
Laboratory of Immunogenetics of Paediatric Autoimmunity, Imagine Institute,
Paris, France.
(23)Pediatric Pneumology Department, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Centre
Hospitalier Régional Universitaire Lille, Lille, France.
(24)Cordeliers Research Center, Université Paris Descartes, Université de Paris,
UMRS1138 Inflammation, Complement and Cancer Team, Paris, France.
(25)Pediatric Pulmonology Department and Reference Center for Rare Lung Disease
RespiRare, Trousseau University Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris,
Sorbonne Université, Paris, France.

Comment in
    J Exp Med. 2020 Nov 2;217(11):e20201517. doi: 10.1084/jem.20201517.

Heterozygous missense mutations in coatomer protein subunit α, COPA, cause a
syndrome overlapping clinically with type I IFN-mediated disease due to
gain-of-function in STING, a key adaptor of IFN signaling. Recently, increased
levels of IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) were described in COPA syndrome. However,
the link between COPA mutations and IFN signaling is unknown. We observed
elevated levels of ISGs and IFN-α in blood of symptomatic COPA patients. In
vitro, both overexpression of mutant COPA and silencing of COPA induced
STING-dependent IFN signaling. We detected an interaction between COPA and
STING, and mutant COPA was associated with an accumulation of ER-resident STING
at the Golgi. Given the known role of the coatomer protein complex I, we
speculate that loss of COPA function leads to enhanced type I IFN signaling due
to a failure of Golgi-to-ER STING retrieval. These data highlight the importance
of the ER-Golgi axis in the control of autoinflammation and inform therapeutic
strategies in COPA syndrome.

© 2020 Lepelley et al.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20200600
PMCID: PMC7596811
PMID: 32725128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: M. Wislez reported personal fees
from Boeringher Ingelheim, Roche, MSD, BMS, Astra Zeneca, and Amgen outside the
submitted work. Y.J. Crow reported "other" from Biogen outside the submitted
work. No other disclosures were reported.
