---
reference_id: "PMID:40246933"
title: Polycythaemia vera.
authors:
- Harrison CN
- Barbui T
- Bose P
- Kiladjian JJ
- Mascarenhas J
- McMullin MF
- Mesa R
- Vannucchi AM
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-025-00608-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Polycythaemia vera.
**Authors:** Harrison CN, Barbui T, Bose P, Kiladjian JJ, Mascarenhas J, McMullin MF, Mesa R, Vannucchi AM
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-025-00608-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-025-00608-3)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2025 Apr 17;11(1):26. doi: 10.1038/s41572-025-00608-3.

Polycythaemia vera.

Harrison CN(1), Barbui T(2), Bose P(3), Kiladjian JJ(4), Mascarenhas J(5), 
McMullin MF(6), Mesa R(7), Vannucchi AM(8).

Author information:
(1)Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK. 
Claire.Harrison@gstt.nhs.uk.
(2)Research Foundation, Papa Giovanni XXIII Hospital, Bergamo, Italy.
(3)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)AP-HP, Hopital Saint-Louis, Centre d'Investigations Cliniques CIC 1427, 
Université Paris Cité, Inserm, Paris, France.
(5)Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, USA.
(6)Queen's University, Belfast, UK.
(7)Atrium Health Wake Forest Baptist Comprehensive Cancer Center, Winston-Salem, 
NC, USA.
(8)Center Research and Innovation Myeloproliferative Neoplasms, University of 
Florence and AOU Careggi, Florence, Italy.

Polycythaemia vera (PV) is a haematological malignancy in the myeloproliferative 
neoplasm family. PV is typically characterized by erythrocytosis and often 
leukocytosis and thrombocytosis1. Clinical features include reduced life 
expectancy due to hazards of thrombosis (often in atypical sites), haemorrhage 
and transformation to myelofibrosis and less frequently to a form of acute 
myeloid leukaemia called blast phase. Almost two decades ago, the JAK2V617F 
mutation in exon 14 of JAK2 was described, and is known to be present in more 
than 95% of patients with PV. Testing for the JAK2V617F mutation is used in the 
diagnosis of PV, and the quantity of the mutation (that is, the variant allele 
frequency) is linked to prognosis and the risk of complications. As such, 
reduction of JAK2V617F variant allele frequency is currently being evaluated as 
a treatment target. Recommendations for PV treatment include control of vascular 
risk factors, therapeutic phlebotomy and low-dose aspirin in all patients. 
Currently, patients at higher risk of thrombosis (aged over 60 years and/or with 
a history of thrombosis) are offered cytoreductive agents. Hydroxyurea or 
interferons remain the preferred first-line cytoreductive agents, with the JAK1 
and JAK2 inhibitor, ruxolitinib, currently approved for the treatment of 
patients who are resistant to, or intolerant of, hydroxyurea. Future 
recommendations might be to treat the majority of patients with these agents as 
long-term benefits of treatment begin to emerge.

© 2025. Crown.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-025-00608-3
PMID: 40246933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: C.N.H. discloses research 
support from Celgene (BMS), Constellation, GSK and Novartis; and 
honoraria/consulting fees from Abbvie, AOP, BMS, CTI, IMAGO, Incyte, Novartis, 
Galacteo, Geron, GSK, Janssen, Keros, MSD, SOBI and Morphosys. T.B. discloses 
research support ftom GSK and AOP; and honoraria/consulting fees from AOP, 
Italfarmaco, Ionis and Novartis. P.B. discloses research support from Incyte, 
BMS, CTI, Morphosys, Sumitomo, Karyopharm, Kartos, Telios, Ionis, Disc, Ajax, 
Geron, Janssen, Blueprint and Cogent; and honoraria/consulting fees from Incyte, 
BMS, CTI, GSK, Abbvie, Morphosys, Sumitomo, Karyopharm, Ionis, Disc, Geron, 
Keros, Pharma Essentia, Jubilant, Morphic, Novartis, Blueprint, Ono, Raythera 
and Cogent. J.-J.K. discloses honoraria/consulting fees from Novartis, GSK, 
Abbvie, BMS, Incyte, AOP Health and PharmaEssentia. J.M. discloses research 
funding from Incyte, Novartis, BMS, CTI/SOBI, Abbvie, Geron, Kartos, Karyopharm 
AJAX, Italfarmaco Spa, Disc and PharmaEssentia; and consulting fees from Incyte, 
Novartis, BMS, Geron, Karyopharm, Kartos, GSK, PharmaEssentia, Italfarmaco Spa, 
Abbvie, Roche, Merck, Pfizer, Galecto, MorphoSys, Disc, Keros and Sumitomo. 
M.F.M. discloses research support from BMS and AOP; and honorarium/consulting 
fees from Novartis, GSK, Incyte, BMS and AOP. R.M. discloses research support 
from Abbvie, Blueprint, BMS, CTI, Genentech, Incyte, Morphosys and Sierra; and 
honoraria/consulting fees from Abbvie, Blueprint, BMS, CTI, Genentech, Geron, 
GSK, Incyte, Novartis, Sierra, Sierra Oncology and Telios. A.M.V. discloses 
honoraria/consulting fees from Incyte, Novartis, AOP, Italfarmaco, BMS, GSK, 
Abbvie, Blueprint and Ionis Disc.