---
reference_id: "PMID:38778404"
title: "Progressive Supranuclear palsy (PSP) disease progression, management, and healthcare resource utilization: a retrospective observational study in the US and Canada."
authors:
- Nysetvold E
- Lopez LN
- Cogell AN
- Fryk H
- Pace ND
- Taylor SS
- Rhoden J
- Nichols CA
- Pillas D
- Klein A
- Gasalla T
- Scowcroft A
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03168-z
keywords:
- Humans
- "Supranuclear Palsy, Progressive/therapy"
- Retrospective Studies
- Female
- Male
- Aged
- Disease Progression
- Canada
- Middle Aged
- United States
- "Patient Acceptance of Health Care/statistics & numerical data"
- "Aged, 80 and over"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Progressive Supranuclear palsy (PSP) disease progression, management, and healthcare resource utilization: a retrospective observational study in the US and Canada.
**Authors:** Nysetvold E, Lopez LN, Cogell AN, Fryk H, Pace ND, Taylor SS, Rhoden J, Nichols CA, Pillas D, Klein A, Gasalla T, Scowcroft A
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-024-03168-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-024-03168-z)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 May 23;19(1):215. doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03168-z.

Progressive Supranuclear palsy (PSP) disease progression, management, and 
healthcare resource utilization: a retrospective observational study in the US 
and Canada.

Nysetvold E(1), Lopez LN(1), Cogell AN(2), Fryk H(3), Pace ND(1), Taylor SS(1), 
Rhoden J(1)(4), Nichols CA(1), Pillas D(3), Klein A(3), Gasalla T(3), Scowcroft 
A(3).

Author information:
(1)AllStripes Research, San Francisco, California, USA.
(2)AllStripes Research, San Francisco, California, USA. Ashley.cogell@gmail.com.
(3)UCB Pharma, Brussels, Belgium.
(4)Gillings School of Global Public Health, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

BACKGROUND: Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is a rare neurodegenerative 
brain disease with rapid progression and currently limited treatment options. A 
comprehensive understanding of disease progression, management, and healthcare 
resource utilization is limited, and further research is challenging due to the 
small population of patients. To address these challenges in conducting PSP 
research, individuals with PSP were recruited using a multichannel approach 
tailored specifically to the PSP community. We performed a retrospective 
observational study using data abstracted from participant medical records 
collected from multiple patient care centers.
RESULTS: Seventy-two individuals with PSP were eligible for inclusion. On 
average, 144 medical documents per participant were collected from an average of 
2.9 healthcare centers per participant, with a mean study period of 7.9 years. 
Among participants with a date of symptom onset documented in the medical 
records, the median time for the onset of the first fall was 2.0 years (IQR 3.2) 
before diagnosis, the median onset of unsteady gait or gait impairment was 
1.2 years (IQR 1.8) before diagnosis, and the median onset of mobility problems 
was 0.8 years (IQR 1.8) before diagnosis. The most widely utilized healthcare 
resources, with at least 85% of participants using each of these resources at 
some point during the disease course, were medications (100%), imaging (99%), 
assistive devices (90%), supportive care (86%), and surgeries and procedures 
(85%).
CONCLUSIONS: This retrospective study adds to the current understanding of PSP 
symptoms, comorbidities, and healthcare resource utilization (HRU) across the 
disease journey. By involving individuals with PSP and their caregivers or 
legally authorized representatives in the research process, this study was 
unique in its approach to participant recruitment and enabled individuals to 
participate in research without the need for travel. We collected medical 
documents from multiple healthcare centers, allowing for broad data collection 
covering the entire disease journey. This approach to the collection of 
real-world data may be used to generate valuable insights into many aspects of 
disease progression and management in PSP and many other rare diseases.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-024-03168-z
PMCID: PMC11112758
PMID: 38778404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: EN, LNL, NDP, SST, ANC, JR, and CAN were 
employees of AllStripes Research at the time this work was performed. EN, LNL, 
NDP, SST, ANC, and CAN own or have the option to own equity in AllStripes 
Research. DP, AK, TG, HF, and AS were employees of UCB Pharma at the time this 
work was performed and may hold/have access to stock options in UCB Pharma.