---
reference_id: "PMID:38497971"
title: Magnetic Resonance Imaging Characteristics of LGI1-Antibody and CASPR2-Antibody Encephalitis.
authors:
- Kelly MJ
- Grant E
- Murchison AG
- Binks S
- Ramanathan S
- Michael S
- Handel AE
- Handunnetthi L
- Uy CE
- Soltys JN
- Dubey D
- Day GS
- Lopez-Chiriboga AS
- Flanagan EP
- Sheerin F
- Irani SR
journal: JAMA Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2024.0126
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Aged
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/immunology
- Middle Aged
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- "Encephalitis/diagnostic imaging, immunology, pathology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/immunology
- Membrane Proteins/immunology
- Adult
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Creutzfeldt-Jakob Syndrome/diagnostic imaging, immunology, pathology"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Brain/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Hashimoto Disease/diagnostic imaging, immunology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Magnetic Resonance Imaging Characteristics of LGI1-Antibody and CASPR2-Antibody Encephalitis.
**Authors:** Kelly MJ, Grant E, Murchison AG, Binks S, Ramanathan S, Michael S, Handel AE, Handunnetthi L, Uy CE, Soltys JN, Dubey D, Day GS, Lopez-Chiriboga AS, Flanagan EP, Sheerin F, Irani SR
**Journal:** JAMA Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaneurol.2024.0126](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2024.0126)

## Content

1. JAMA Neurol. 2024 May 1;81(5):525-533. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2024.0126.

Magnetic Resonance Imaging Characteristics of LGI1-Antibody and CASPR2-Antibody 
Encephalitis.

Kelly MJ(1)(2)(3), Grant E(2), Murchison AG(4), Binks S(1)(2), Ramanathan 
S(1)(5)(6), Michael S(1)(2)(7), Handel AE(1)(2), Handunnetthi L(1)(2), Uy 
CE(1)(2)(8), Soltys JN(9), Dubey D(10), Day GS(9)(11), Lopez-Chiriboga AS(9), 
Flanagan EP(10), Sheerin F(4), Irani SR(1)(2)(9)(11).

Author information:
(1)Oxford Autoimmune Neurology Group, Nuffield Department of Clinical 
Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Neurology, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford University 
Hospitals, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Physiology, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, 
Ireland.
(4)Department of Radiology, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, 
Oxford, United Kingdom.
(5)Translational Neuroimmunology Group, Sydney Medical School and Brain and Mind 
Centre, Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(6)Department of Neurology, Concord Hospital, Sydney, Australia.
(7)Department of Neurology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, United 
Kingdom.
(8)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(9)Department of Neurosciences, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida.
(10)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(11)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida.

IMPORTANCE: Rapid and accurate diagnosis of autoimmune encephalitis encourages 
prompt initiation of immunotherapy toward improved patient outcomes. However, 
clinical features alone may not sufficiently narrow the differential diagnosis, 
and awaiting autoantibody results can delay immunotherapy.
OBJECTIVE: To identify simple magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) characteristics 
that accurately distinguish 2 common forms of autoimmune encephalitis, LGI1- and 
CASPR2-antibody encephalitis (LGI1/CASPR2-Ab-E), from 2 major differential 
diagnoses, viral encephalitis (VE) and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD).
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This cross-sectional study involved a 
retrospective, blinded analysis of the first available brain MRIs (taken 
2000-2022) from 192 patients at Oxford University Hospitals in the UK and Mayo 
Clinic in the US. These patients had LGI1/CASPR2-Ab-E, VE, or CJD as evaluated 
by 2 neuroradiologists (discovery cohort; n = 87); findings were validated in an 
independent cohort by 3 neurologists (n = 105). Groups were statistically 
compared with contingency tables. Data were analyzed in 2023.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: MRI findings including T2 or fluid-attenuated 
inversion recovery (FLAIR) hyperintensities, swelling or volume loss, presence 
of gadolinium contrast enhancement, and diffusion-weighted imaging changes. 
Correlations with clinical features.
RESULTS: Among 192 participants with MRIs reviewed, 71 were female (37%) and 121 
were male (63%); the median age was 66 years (range, 19-92 years). By comparison 
with VE and CJD, in LGI1/CASPR2-Ab-E, T2 and/or FLAIR hyperintensities were less 
likely to extend outside the temporal lobe (3/42 patients [7%] vs 17/18 patients 
[94%] with VE; P < .001, and 3/4 patients [75%] with CJD; P = .005), less 
frequently exhibited swelling (12/55 [22%] with LGI1/CASPR2-Ab-E vs 13/22 [59%] 
with VE; P = .003), and showed no diffusion restriction (0 patients vs 16/22 
[73%] with VE and 8/10 [80%] with CJD; both P < .001) and rare contrast 
enhancement (1/20 [5%] vs 7/17 [41%] with VE; P = .01). These findings were 
validated in an independent cohort and generated an area under the curve of 
0.97, sensitivity of 90%, and specificity of 95% among cases with T2/FLAIR 
hyperintensity in the hippocampus and/or amygdala.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this study, T2 and/or FLAIR hyperintensities 
confined to the temporal lobes, without diffusion restriction or contrast 
enhancement, robustly distinguished LGI1/CASPR2-Ab-E from key differential 
diagnoses. These observations should assist clinical decision-making toward 
expediting immunotherapy. Their generalizability to other forms of autoimmune 
encephalitis and VE should be examined in future studies.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2024.0126
PMCID: PMC10949153
PMID: 38497971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Kelly 
reported grants from Wellcome Trust via the Irish Clinical Academic Training 
(ICAT) Programme during the conduct of the study. Dr Binks reported funding from 
a National Institute for Health Research Clinical Lectureship during the conduct 
of the study; travel expenses from ECTRIMS outside the submitted work; and 
having had a patent for PCT/GB2019/051257 pending, “Diagnostic Strategy to 
improve specificity of CASPR2 antibody detection.” Dr Ramanathan reported grants 
from the National Health and Medical Research Council, Royal Australasian 
College of Physicians Research Establishment Fellowship, Brain Foundation, and 
University of Sydney; speaker honoraria from Biogen, Novartis, Alexion, and 
Limbic Neurology; and consultant fees from UCB for serving on a steering 
committee of a phase 3 trial outside the submitted work. Dr Handel reported 
grants from the Medical Research Council (MRC) and UCB-Pharma during the conduct 
of the study. Dr Dubey reported grants and/or consulting fees from UCB, Arialys, 
DOD, and David J. Tomassoni ALS Research outside the submitted work and having 
had patents pending for LUZP4-IgG, cavin-4-IgG, and SKOR2 IgG as markers of 
neurological autoimmunity and patents licensed for KLHL11 IgG. Dr Day reported 
grants from the National Institutes of Health (NIH/NIA) (K23AG064029) during the 
conduct of the study and in-kind support from Amgen Pharmaceuticals for a 
clinical trial in anti-NMDAR encephalitis (ExTINGUISH) and personal income 
related to consulting for Arialys Pharmaceuticals regarding development of a 
clinical trial for the treatment of autoimmune encephalitis. Dr Flanagan 
reported research support from UCB; serving on advisory boards for Alexion, 
Roche, and Horizon Therapeutics; royalties from UpToDate outside the submitted 
work; and having had a patent for Dach1-IgG pending (Mayo Clinic) as a marker of 
neurologic autoimmunity. Dr Irani reported grants from Wellcome and UK Research 
and Innovation/MRC during the conduct of the study; personal fees from UCB, 
MedImmun, Roche, Janssen, Cerebral Therapeutics, and ADC Therapeutics; grants 
from Brain, CSL Behring, and Ono Pharma outside the submitted work; and having 
had a patent for WO/2010/046716 with royalties paid from Euroimmun, a patent for 
WO2019211633 issued, and a patent for WO202189788A1 pending. No other 
disclosures were reported.