---
reference_id: "PMID:36555205"
title: "Celiac Disease and Neurological Manifestations: From Gluten to Neuroinflammation."
authors:
- Giuffrè M
- Gazzin S
- Zoratti C
- Llido JP
- Lanza G
- Tiribelli C
- Moretti R
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms232415564
keywords:
- Humans
- Glutens/adverse effects
- Celiac Disease
- Neuroinflammatory Diseases
- Quality of Life
- Antigen-Antibody Complex
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Celiac Disease and Neurological Manifestations: From Gluten to Neuroinflammation.
**Authors:** Giuffrè M, Gazzin S, Zoratti C, Llido JP, Lanza G, Tiribelli C, Moretti R
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms232415564](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms232415564)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Dec 8;23(24):15564. doi: 10.3390/ijms232415564.

Celiac Disease and Neurological Manifestations: From Gluten to 
Neuroinflammation.

Giuffrè M(1), Gazzin S(2), Zoratti C(1), Llido JP(2)(3)(4), Lanza G(5)(6), 
Tiribelli C(2), Moretti R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical, Surgical and Health Sciences, University of Trieste, 
34149 Trieste, Italy.
(2)The Liver-Brain Unit "Rita Moretti", Italian Liver Foundation, 34149 Trieste, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Life Sciences, University of Trieste, 34128 Trieste, Italy.
(4)Philippine Council for Healthcare Research and Development, Department of 
Science and Technology, Bicutan Taguig City 1631, Philippines.
(5)Department of Surgery and Medical-Surgical Specialties, University of 
Catania, 95123 Catania, Italy.
(6)Clinical Neurophysiology Research Unit, Oasi Research Institute-IRCCS, 94018 
Troina, Italy.

Celiac disease (CD) is a complex multi-organ disease with a high prevalence of 
extra-intestinal involvement, including neurological and psychiatric 
manifestations, such as cerebellar ataxia, peripheral neuropathy, epilepsy, 
headache, cognitive impairment, and depression. However, the mechanisms behind 
the neurological involvement in CD remain controversial. Recent evidence shows 
these can be related to gluten-mediated pathogenesis, including antibody 
cross-reaction, deposition of immune-complex, direct neurotoxicity, and in 
severe cases, vitamins or nutrients deficiency. Here, we have summarized new 
evidence related to gut microbiota and the so-called "gut-liver-brain axis" 
involved in CD-related neurological manifestations. Additionally, there has yet 
to be an agreement on whether serological or neurophysiological findings can 
effectively early diagnose and properly monitor CD-associated neurological 
involvement; notably, most of them can revert to normal with a rigorous 
gluten-free diet. Moving from a molecular level to a symptom-based approach, 
clinical, serological, and neurophysiology data might help to disentangle the 
many-faceted interactions between the gut and brain in CD. Eventually, the 
identification of multimodal biomarkers might help diagnose, monitor, and 
improve the quality of life of patients with "neuroCD".

DOI: 10.3390/ijms232415564
PMCID: PMC9779232
PMID: 36555205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.