---
reference_id: "PMID:37620067"
title: Tropical spastic paraparesis.
authors:
- Román GC
journal: Handb Clin Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-323-98817-9.00026-0
keywords:
- Humans
- "Paraparesis, Tropical Spastic"
- Ataxia
- Cartilage Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tropical spastic paraparesis.
**Authors:** Román GC
**Journal:** Handb Clin Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/B978-0-323-98817-9.00026-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-98817-9.00026-0)

## Content

1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2023;196:149-156. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-323-98817-9.00026-0.

Tropical spastic paraparesis.

Román GC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Methodist Neurological Institute, Weill Cornell 
Medical College, Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, TX, United States. 
Electronic address: gcroman@houstonmethodist.org.

A large number of causative agents can result in spinal cord disorders in the 
tropics including etiologies similar to those of temperate regions such as 
trauma, spinal bone and disc lesions, tumors, epidural abscess, and congenital 
malformations. Yet infectious and nutritional disorders differ in their higher 
prevalence in tropical regions including Pott's disease; brucellosis; 
neuroborreliosis; various parasitic diseases such as schistosomiasis, 
neurocysticercosis, and eosinophilic meningitis. Notably, the retrovirus HTLV-1 
is the causeof tropical spastic paraparesis/paraplegia or TSP. Nutritional 
causes of TSP include vitamin B and folate deficiencies, while endemic clusters 
of konzo and tropical ataxic myeloneuropathy occur in Africa, along with 
malnutrition and excessive consumption of cyanide-containing bitter cassava. 
Other toxic etiologies of TSP include lathyrism and fluorosis. Nutritional forms 
of myelopathy are associated often with optic and sensory neuropathy, hence the 
name tropical myeloneuropathies. Acute transverse myelopathy, seen in 
association with vaccination, infections, and fibrocartilaginous embolism of the 
nucleus pulposus, can be ubiquitous. Multiple sclerosis and optic myelopathy 
occur in the tropics but with lesser prevalence than in temperate regions. The 
advent of modern imaging in the tropics, including computed tomography and 
magnetic resonance imaging, has allowed better diagnosis and treatment of these 
conditions that are a frequent cause of death and disability. This chapter 
provides an overview of TSP emphasizing the most common causes with clues to 
diagnosis and effective therapy.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-323-98817-9.00026-0
PMID: 37620067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]