---
reference_id: "PMID:41146582"
title: "Management of Folliculitis Decalvans: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Sideris E
- Xie D
- du Plessis J
- de Zwaan S
journal: Australas J Dermatol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/ajd.14603
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of Folliculitis Decalvans: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Sideris E, Xie D, du Plessis J, de Zwaan S
**Journal:** Australas J Dermatol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ajd.14603](https://doi.org/10.1111/ajd.14603)

## Content

1. Australas J Dermatol. 2025 Dec;66(8):448-461. doi: 10.1111/ajd.14603. Epub
2025  Oct 28.

Management of Folliculitis Decalvans: A Systematic Review.

Sideris E(1), Xie D(1), du Plessis J(2), de Zwaan S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)John Hunter Hospital Dermatology, Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia.
(2)Lotus Dermatology, Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia.

Folliculitis decalvans (FD) and Tufted Hair Folliculitis (THF) present with 
recurrent episodes of follicular inflammation, pustules and crusting, 
predominantly of the scalp, leading to scarring alopecia. With no specific or 
optimal treatment available, FD/THF is difficult to treat and significantly 
impacts patients' quality of life. As new treatments have been reported for 
FD/THF management in recent years, we conducted a systematic review aiming to 
identify the types of treatments used in FD/THF, their effect, duration of 
effect (DoE), impact on patients' quality of life and any adverse effects 
impacting treatment. Registered with PROSPERO (CRD42023459898), we used PRISMA 
and SWiM guidelines, and Joanna Briggs Institute Critical Appraisal tools. We 
found 113 articles involving 728 patients, reporting on 2041 treatment episodes 
for 246 different treatments. Reported treatment effects were assessed, and 
descriptive statistics were used to calculate the median DoE for each. A mean 
age of 38.3 years with predominantly male (3.3:1) and Fitzpatrick I-IV skin type 
(85.2%) was noted. Reported treatments included systemic and topical 
antibiotics, corticosteroids, retinoids and ciclosporin, as well as biologic 
agents, photodynamic therapy, laser therapies, topical calcineurin inhibitors, 
radiation therapy, surgical procedures, platelet-rich-plasma injections, 
botulinum toxin A injections, Manuka honey and Ayurvedic treatments with leech 
therapy. Although limitations exist due to GRADE level of evidence being low to 
very low, our findings suggest systemic antibiotic monotherapy may not be as 
beneficial as previously reported. Combination therapy with systemic 
antibiotics, topical, local and/or other systemic agents may provide the best 
outcome and longest DoE for FD/THF patients, with a greater role for biologic 
agents and laser therapy in their management.

© 2025 The Australasian College of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/ajd.14603
PMID: 41146582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]