---
reference_id: "PMID:38785542"
title: "Role of NR5A1 Gene Mutations in Disorders of Sex Development: Molecular and Clinical Features."
authors:
- Luppino G
- Wasniewska M
- Coco R
- Pepe G
- Morabito LA
- Li Pomi A
- Corica D
- Aversa T
journal: Curr Issues Mol Biol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cimb46050274
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of NR5A1 Gene Mutations in Disorders of Sex Development: Molecular and Clinical Features.
**Authors:** Luppino G, Wasniewska M, Coco R, Pepe G, Morabito LA, Li Pomi A, Corica D, Aversa T
**Journal:** Curr Issues Mol Biol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cimb46050274](https://doi.org/10.3390/cimb46050274)

## Content

1. Curr Issues Mol Biol. 2024 May 9;46(5):4519-4532. doi: 10.3390/cimb46050274.

Role of NR5A1 Gene Mutations in Disorders of Sex Development: Molecular and 
Clinical Features.

Luppino G(1), Wasniewska M(1)(2), Coco R(1), Pepe G(1)(2), Morabito LA(2), Li 
Pomi A(1), Corica D(1)(2), Aversa T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Pathology of Adulthood and Childhood, University of 
Messina, Via Consolare Valeria 1, 98125 Messina, Italy.
(2)Pediatric Unit, AOU Policlinico G. Martino, Via Consolare Valeria 1, 98125 
Messina, Italy.

Disorders/differences of sex development (DSDs) are defined as broad, 
heterogenous groups of congenital conditions characterized by atypical 
development of genetic, gonadal, or phenotypic sex accompanied by abnormal 
development of internal and/or external genitalia. NR5A1 gene mutation is one of 
the principal genetic alterations implicated in causing DSD. This review 
outlines the role of NR5A1 gene during the process of gonadal development in 
humans, provides an overview of the molecular and functional characteristics of 
NR5A1 gene, and discusses potential clinical phenotypes and additional organ 
diseases due to NR5A1 mutations. NR5A1 mutations were analyzed in patients with 
46,XY DSD and 46,XX DSD both during the neonatal and pubertal periods. Loss of 
function of the NR5A1 gene causes several different phenotypes, including some 
associated with disease in additional organs. Clinical phenotypes may vary, even 
among patients carrying the same NR5A1 variant, indicating that there is no 
specific genotype-phenotype correlation. Genetic tests are crucial diagnostic 
tools that should be used early in the diagnostic pathway, as early as the 
neonatal period, when gonadal dysgenesis is the main manifestation of NR5A1 
mutation. NR5A1 gene mutations could be mainly associated with amenorrhea, 
ovarian failure, hypogonadism, and infertility during puberty. Fertility 
preservation techniques should be considered as early as possible.

DOI: 10.3390/cimb46050274
PMCID: PMC11119465
PMID: 38785542

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.