---
reference_id: "PMID:38409439"
title: Interferons are key cytokines acting on pancreatic islets in type 1 diabetes.
authors:
- Coomans de Brachène A
- Alvelos MI
- Szymczak F
- Zimath PL
- Castela A
- Marmontel de Souza B
- Roca Rivada A
- Marín-Cañas S
- Yi X
- Op de Beeck A
- Morgan NG
- Sonntag S
- Jawurek S
- Title AC
- Yesildag B
- Pattou F
- Kerr-Conte J
- Montanya E
- Nacher M
- Marselli L
- Marchetti P
- Richardson SJ
- Eizirik DL
journal: Diabetologia
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00125-024-06106-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interferons are key cytokines acting on pancreatic islets in type 1 diabetes.
**Authors:** Coomans de Brachène A, Alvelos MI, Szymczak F, Zimath PL, Castela A, Marmontel de Souza B, Roca Rivada A, Marín-Cañas S, Yi X, Op de Beeck A, Morgan NG, Sonntag S, Jawurek S, Title AC, Yesildag B, Pattou F, Kerr-Conte J, Montanya E, Nacher M, Marselli L, Marchetti P, Richardson SJ, Eizirik DL
**Journal:** Diabetologia (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00125-024-06106-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-024-06106-7)

## Content

1. Diabetologia. 2024 May;67(5):908-927. doi: 10.1007/s00125-024-06106-7. Epub
2024  Feb 26.

Interferons are key cytokines acting on pancreatic islets in type 1 diabetes.

Coomans de Brachène A(#)(1), Alvelos MI(#)(2), Szymczak F(#)(2), Zimath PL(2), 
Castela A(2), Marmontel de Souza B(2), Roca Rivada A(2), Marín-Cañas S(2), Yi 
X(2), Op de Beeck A(2), Morgan NG(3), Sonntag S(4)(5), Jawurek S(4), Title 
AC(4), Yesildag B(4), Pattou F(6), Kerr-Conte J(6), Montanya E(7), Nacher M(7), 
Marselli L(8), Marchetti P(8), Richardson SJ(3), Eizirik DL(9).

Author information:
(1)ULB Center for Diabetes Research, Medical Faculty, Université Libre de 
Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium. alexandra.coomans.de.brachene@ulb.be.
(2)ULB Center for Diabetes Research, Medical Faculty, Université Libre de 
Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Islet Biology Exeter (IBEx), Exeter Centre of Excellence for Diabetes 
Research (EXCEED), Department of Clinical and Biomedical Sciences, University of 
Exeter Medical School, Exeter, UK.
(4)InSphero AG, Schlieren, Switzerland.
(5)University of Applied Sciences and Arts Northwestern Switzerland, Basel, 
Switzerland.
(6)European Genomic Institute for Diabetes, UMR 1190 Translational Research for 
Diabetes, Inserm, CHU Lille, University of Lille, Lille, France.
(7)Hospital Universitari Bellvitge, Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute 
(IDIBELL), Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red Diabetes y Enfermedades 
Metabólicas Asociadas (CIBERDEM) and University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa, 
Italy.
(9)ULB Center for Diabetes Research, Medical Faculty, Université Libre de 
Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium. decio.laks.eizirik@ulb.be.
(#)Contributed equally

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The proinflammatory cytokines IFN-α, IFN-γ, IL-1β and TNF-α may 
contribute to innate and adaptive immune responses during insulitis in type 1 
diabetes and therefore represent attractive therapeutic targets to protect beta 
cells. However, the specific role of each of these cytokines individually on 
pancreatic beta cells remains unknown.
METHODS: We used deep RNA-seq analysis, followed by extensive confirmation 
experiments based on reverse transcription-quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR), western 
blot, histology and use of siRNAs, to characterise the response of human 
pancreatic beta cells to each cytokine individually and compared the signatures 
obtained with those present in islets of individuals affected by type 1 
diabetes.
RESULTS: IFN-α and IFN-γ had a greater impact on the beta cell transcriptome 
when compared with IL-1β and TNF-α. The IFN-induced gene signatures have a 
strong correlation with those observed in beta cells from individuals with type 
1 diabetes, and the level of expression of specific IFN-stimulated genes is 
positively correlated with proteins present in islets of these individuals, 
regulating beta cell responses to 'danger signals' such as viral infections. 
Zinc finger NFX1-type containing 1 (ZNFX1), a double-stranded RNA sensor, was 
identified as highly induced by IFNs and shown to play a key role in the 
antiviral response in beta cells.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: These data suggest that IFN-α and IFN-γ are key 
cytokines at the islet level in human type 1 diabetes, contributing to the 
triggering and amplification of autoimmunity.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00125-024-06106-7
PMID: 38409439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]