---
reference_id: "PMID:37119510"
title: Endoscopic and chemopreventive management of familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome.
authors:
- Stone JK
- Mehta NA
- Singh H
- El-Matary W
- Bernstein CN
journal: Fam Cancer
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10689-023-00334-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endoscopic and chemopreventive management of familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome.
**Authors:** Stone JK, Mehta NA, Singh H, El-Matary W, Bernstein CN
**Journal:** Fam Cancer (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10689-023-00334-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10689-023-00334-3)

## Content

1. Fam Cancer. 2023 Oct;22(4):413-422. doi: 10.1007/s10689-023-00334-3. Epub 2023
 Apr 29.

Endoscopic and chemopreventive management of familial adenomatous polyposis 
syndrome.

Stone JK(1), Mehta NA(2), Singh H(3)(4), El-Matary W(5), Bernstein CN(3).

Author information:
(1)Section of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Max Rady College of 
Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada. 
james.stone@umanitoba.ca.
(2)Center for Interventional and Therapeutic Endoscopy, Digestive Diseases and 
Nutrition, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Section of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Max Rady College of 
Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
(4)Research Institute, CancerCare Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
(5)Section of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Department of Pediatrics, Max Rady 
College of Medicine, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.

Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant syndrome 
predisposing affected individuals to gastrointestinal (GI) cancers through a 
high burden of polyposis. Colorectal cancer rates reach 100% by the age of 45, 
making early colectomy a mainstay of treatment. While most patients undergo 
colectomy at an early age, ongoing screening and surveillance of the upper 
gastrointestinal tract and rectal pouch must continue throughout adulthood. 
Endoscopic therapy of gastric, duodenal, ampullary and rectal pouch polyps is 
critical to reduce morbidity and cancer related mortality. Management of these 
lesions is not uniform, and is dependent on their location, size, histology, and 
risk of malignant potential. Medical therapies targeting pathways that reduce 
the malignant progression of pre-cancerous lesions have been studied for many 
years. While studies on the use of aspirin and non-steroidal anti-inflammatories 
(NSAIDs) in chemoprevention have shown encouraging results in Lynch syndrome and 
primary colorectal cancer, the potential benefits of these medications have not 
been duplicated in FAP cohorts. While data remains limited on chemoprevention in 
FAP, a number of randomized trials are currently underway examining targeted 
therapies with the potential to slow the progression of the disease. This review 
aims to provide an in-depth review of the literature on current endoscopic 
options and chemopreventive therapies targeting FAP. While the endoscopic 
management has robust data for its use, chemoprevention in FAP is still in its 
infancy. The complementary use of chemopreventive agents and endoscopic therapy 
for FAP patients is quickly becoming a growing and exciting area of research.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V.

DOI: 10.1007/s10689-023-00334-3
PMID: 37119510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]