---
reference_id: "PMID:39267806"
title: "Mobitz type II second-degree atrioventricular block: a commonly overdiagnosed and misinterpreted arrhythmia."
authors:
- Barold SS
- Herweg B
journal: Front Cardiovasc Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2024.1450705
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mobitz type II second-degree atrioventricular block: a commonly overdiagnosed and misinterpreted arrhythmia.
**Authors:** Barold SS, Herweg B
**Journal:** Front Cardiovasc Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcvm.2024.1450705](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2024.1450705)

## Content

1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2024 Aug 29;11:1450705. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2024.1450705. 
eCollection 2024.

Mobitz type II second-degree atrioventricular block: a commonly overdiagnosed 
and misinterpreted arrhythmia.

Barold SS(1), Herweg B(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Rochester University School of Medicine 
and Dentistry, Rochester, NY, United States.
(2)Department of Medicine, Morsani College of Medicine, University of South 
Florida, Tampa, FL, United States.

Mobitz type II second-degree atrioventricular block (AVB) is an 
electrocardiographic pattern that describes what appears to be an all-or-none 
conduction without visible changes in the AV conduction time or PR intervals 
before and after a single non-conducted P wave. An unchanged PR interval after 
the block is a sine qua non of Mobitz type II block. A 2:1 AVB cannot be 
classified in terms of type I or type II AVB. The diagnosis of Mobitz type II 
block AVB requires a stable sinus rate, which is an important criterion because 
a vagal surge (generally benign) can cause simultaneous sinus slowing and AV 
nodal block, which can resemble Mobitz type II AVB. Atypical forms of Wenckebach 
AVB may be misinterpreted as Mobitz type II AVB when a series of PR intervals 
are constant before the block. Concealed His bundle or ventricular extrasystoles 
may mimic both Wenckebach and/or type II AVB (pseudo-AVB). Correctly identified 
Mobitz type II AVB is invariably at the level of the His-Purkinje system and is 
an indication for a pacemaker.

© 2024 Barold and Herweg.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2024.1450705
PMCID: PMC11390567
PMID: 39267806

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.