---
reference_id: "PMID:15817400"
title: "Cutaneous lesions: benign and malignant."
authors:
- Padgett JK
journal: Facial Plast Surg Clin North Am
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/j.fsc.2004.11.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cutaneous lesions: benign and malignant.
**Authors:** Padgett JK
**Journal:** Facial Plast Surg Clin North Am (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.fsc.2004.11.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fsc.2004.11.006)

## Content

1. Facial Plast Surg Clin North Am. 2005 May;13(2):195-202, v. doi: 
10.1016/j.fsc.2004.11.006.

Cutaneous lesions: benign and malignant.

Padgett JK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Virginia, Primary Care Center, Third 
Floor, Lee Street, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA. jak7t@hotmail.com

This article reviews the clinical characteristics, histology, biologic behavior, 
and recommended treatment for several benign and malignant lesions that may 
arise on the head and neck. Nevus sebaceus and congenital melanocytic nevus are 
two benign lesions that can present at a size of several centimeters. Surgical 
excision may be considered for cosmetic purposes and to reduce the small risk 
for the development of malignancy within each lesion. Basal and squamous cell 
carcinoma, lentigo maligna and lentigo maligna melanoma, dermatofibrosarcoma 
protuberans, and Merkel cell carcinoma are malignant lesions for which surgical 
excision is the recommended treatment. Local flap reconstruction may be used to 
address the surgical defects resulting from excision of these benign and 
malignant conditions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsc.2004.11.006
PMID: 15817400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]