---
reference_id: "PMID:24075385"
title: "Rapid detection of K650E mutation in FGFR3 using uncultured amniocytes in a pregnancy affected with fetal cloverleaf skull, occipital pseudoencephalocele, ventriculomegaly, straight short femurs, and thanatophoric dysplasia type II."
authors:
- Chen CP
- Chang TY
- Lin MH
- Chern SR
- Su JW
- Wang W
journal: Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.tjog.2013.05.003
keywords:
- Adult
- Amnion/cytology
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Encephalocele/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Female
- "Femur/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- Humans
- "Hydrocephalus/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- "Occipital Bone/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- Point Mutation
- Pregnancy
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3/genetics"
- "Skull/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- "Thanatophoric Dysplasia/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Ultrasonography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rapid detection of K650E mutation in FGFR3 using uncultured amniocytes in a pregnancy affected with fetal cloverleaf skull, occipital pseudoencephalocele, ventriculomegaly, straight short femurs, and thanatophoric dysplasia type II.
**Authors:** Chen CP, Chang TY, Lin MH, Chern SR, Su JW, Wang W
**Journal:** Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tjog.2013.05.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tjog.2013.05.003)

## Content

1. Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol. 2013 Sep;52(3):420-5. doi:
10.1016/j.tjog.2013.05.003.

Rapid detection of K650E mutation in FGFR3 using uncultured amniocytes in a
pregnancy affected with fetal cloverleaf skull, occipital pseudoencephalocele,
ventriculomegaly, straight short femurs, and thanatophoric dysplasia type II.

Chen CP(1), Chang TY, Lin MH, Chern SR, Su JW, Wang W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan; Department of Medical Research, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan; Department of Medicine, Mackay Medical College, New Taipei City, Taiwan;
Department of Biotechnology, Asia University, Taichung, Taiwan; School of
Chinese Medicine, College of Chinese Medicine, China Medical University,
Taichung, Taiwan; Institute of Clinical and Community Health Nursing, National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic
address: cpc_mmh@yahoo.com.

OBJECTIVE: To present the ultrasound and molecular genetic diagnosis of
thanatophoric dysplasia type II (TD2).
CASE REPORT: A 35-year-old, primigravid woman was referred to our institution
for genetic counseling and amniocentesis at 19 weeks of gestation because of
advanced maternal age and sonographic abnormalities in the fetus. The prenatal
ultrasound showed short straight femurs, prominent forehead, narrow chest, skin
edema, short limbs, and cloverleaf skull consistent with the diagnosis of TD2.
Amniocentesis revealed a karyotype of 46,XX. DNA testing for the FGFR3 gene
using uncultured amniocytes revealed a heterozygous c.1948A>G, AAG>GAG
transversion leading to a p.Lys650Glu(K650E) mutation in the FGFR3 gene. A
prenatal ultrasound at 21 weeks of gestation showed ventriculomegaly, cloverleaf
skull, straight femurs, micromelia, narrow chest, and pseudoencephalocele with a
bulging occipital bone mimicking encephalocele. The pregnancy was subsequently
terminated, and a 480-g malformed fetus was delivered with macrocephaly,
depressed nasal bridge, short upturned nasal tip, hypoplastic midface, frontal
bossing, short digits, trident-shaped hands, short limbs, cloverleaf skull,
narrow chest, brachydactyly, nuchal edema, and bulging occipital bone.
CONCLUSION: A prenatal diagnosis of cloverleaf skull, short limbs, straight
femurs, and occipital pseudoencephalocele should include a differential
diagnosis of TD2. A molecular analysis of FGFR3 using uncultured amniocytes is
useful for the rapid confirmation of TD2 at prenatal diagnosis.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tjog.2013.05.003
PMID: 24075385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
