---
reference_id: "PMID:9287230"
title: "Mutation of RFXAP, a regulator of MHC class II genes, in primary MHC class II deficiency."
authors:
- Villard J
- Lisowska-Grospierre B
- van den Elsen P
- Fischer A
- Reith W
- Mach B
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1056/NEJM199709113371104
keywords:
- Cell Line
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- "Genes, MHC Class II/genetics"
- Histocompatibility Antigens Class II/genetics
- Humans
- "Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Nuclear Proteins
- Regulatory Factor X Transcription Factors
- Trans-Activators/genetics
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- Transfection
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation of RFXAP, a regulator of MHC class II genes, in primary MHC class II deficiency.
**Authors:** Villard J, Lisowska-Grospierre B, van den Elsen P, Fischer A, Reith W, Mach B
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJM199709113371104](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJM199709113371104)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 1997 Sep 11;337(11):748-53. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199709113371104.

Mutation of RFXAP, a regulator of MHC class II genes, in primary MHC class II
deficiency.

Villard J(1), Lisowska-Grospierre B, van den Elsen P, Fischer A, Reith W, Mach
B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Microbiology, University of Geneva Medical School,
Switzerland.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 1997 Sep 11;337(11):781-3. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199709113371110.

BACKGROUND: Major-histocompatibility-complex (MHC) class II deficiency is an
autosomal recessive primary immunodeficiency disease in which MHC class II
molecules are absent. It is a genetically heterogeneous disease of gene
regulation resulting from defects in several transactivating genes that regulate
the expression of MHC class II genes. The mutations responsible for MHC class II
deficiency are classified according to complementation group (a group in which
the phenotype remains uncorrected in pairwise fusions of cells). There are three
known complementation groups (A, B, and C).
METHODS: To elucidate the genetic defect in patients with MHC class II
deficiency that was not classified genetically, we performed direct
complementation assays with the three genes known to regulate the expression of
MHC class II genes, CIITA, RFX5, and RFXAP, and the relevant mutations were
identified in each patient.
RESULTS: Mutations in the RFXAP gene were found in three patients from unrelated
families, and the resulting defect was classified as belonging to a novel
complementation group (D). Transfection with the wild-type RFXAP gene restored
the expression of MHC class II molecules in the patients' cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in a novel MHC class II transactivating factor, RFXAP,
can cause MHC class II deficiency. These mutations abolish the expression of MHC
class II genes and lead to the same clinical picture of immunodeficiency as in
patients with mutations in the other two MHC class II regulatory genes.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJM199709113371104
PMID: 9287230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
