---
reference_id: "PMID:37309831"
title: "Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children: Two Years' Worth of Learning."
authors:
- Alexander SM
- Lykes JB
- Nassef C
- Whitham JKE
- Ho JG
- Donell BB
journal: Clin Pediatr (Phila)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1177/00099228231180411
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children: Two Years' Worth of Learning.
**Authors:** Alexander SM, Lykes JB, Nassef C, Whitham JKE, Ho JG, Donell BB
**Journal:** Clin Pediatr (Phila) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1177/00099228231180411](https://doi.org/10.1177/00099228231180411)

## Content

1. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2024 Jan;63(1):40-46. doi: 10.1177/00099228231180411.
Epub  2023 Jun 13.

Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children: Two Years' Worth of Learning.

Alexander SM(1)(2)(3), Lykes JB(1)(3), Nassef C(1)(3), Whitham JKE(4), Ho JG(4), 
Donell BB(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Critical Care and Hospital 
Medicine, WakeMed Children's Hospital, Raleigh, NC, USA.
(2)Department of Health Sciences, Division of Radiologic Science, School of 
Medicine, The University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, The University of North Carolina School of 
Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Cardiology, WakeMed 
Children's Hospital, Raleigh, NC, USA.

Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) is a life-threatening 
sequela of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Limited data are available regarding 
risk-stratification or long-term outcomes in MIS-C. This study sought to 
determine associations between serologic markers and severity of illness and 
understand long-term cardiac outcomes. This series includes 46 cases (mean age 
8.1 years; 63.0% male) of MIS-C. Pearson's chi-squared analysis showed an 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) greater than 30 mm/h and 50 mm/h were 
disproportionately associated with pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) 
admission (χ2 = 4.44, P = .04) and use of vasopressors (χ2 = 6.06, P = .01), 
respectively. Ferritin less than 175.6 ng/mL was associated with use of 
vasopressors (χ2 = 5.28, P = .02). There was a negative correlation between ESR 
and ejection fraction (EF) (r = -0.39, P = .009). Most patients with abnormal 
echocardiograms had resolution of abnormalities within 30 days. Therefore, 
inflammatory markers may be helpful in predicting which patients may require 
specific interventions or experience cardiac dysfunction, but MIS-C does not 
appear to be associated with complications at 1 year.

DOI: 10.1177/00099228231180411
PMCID: PMC10696906
PMID: 37309831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting InterestsThe 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.