---
reference_id: "PMID:38050190"
title: Targeting polycomb repressor complex 2-mediated bivalent promoter epigenetic silencing of secreted frizzled-related protein 1 inhibits cholangiocarcinoma progression.
authors:
- Wu G
- Wang Q
- Wang D
- Xiong F
- Liu W
- Chen J
- Wang B
- Huang W
- Wang X
- Chen Y
journal: Clin Transl Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ctm2.1502
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- Humans
- Histones/metabolism
- Secreted Frizzled-Related Proteins
- Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 Protein/genetics
- "Epigenesis, Genetic/genetics"
- "Cholangiocarcinoma/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- "Bile Duct Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- "Bile Ducts, Intrahepatic/metabolism, pathology"
- "RNA, Messenger"
- DNA
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeting polycomb repressor complex 2-mediated bivalent promoter epigenetic silencing of secreted frizzled-related protein 1 inhibits cholangiocarcinoma progression.
**Authors:** Wu G, Wang Q, Wang D, Xiong F, Liu W, Chen J, Wang B, Huang W, Wang X, Chen Y
**Journal:** Clin Transl Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ctm2.1502](https://doi.org/10.1002/ctm2.1502)

## Content

1. Clin Transl Med. 2023 Dec;13(12):e1502. doi: 10.1002/ctm2.1502.

Targeting polycomb repressor complex 2-mediated bivalent promoter epigenetic 
silencing of secreted frizzled-related protein 1 inhibits cholangiocarcinoma 
progression.

Wu G(1), Wang Q(1), Wang D(1), Xiong F(1), Liu W(1), Chen J(1), Wang B(1), Huang 
W(2), Wang X(3), Chen Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biliary-Pancreatic Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical 
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, P. R. China.
(2)Department of Emergency, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, P. R. China.
(3)Departement of Pediatric Surgery, Wuhan Children's Hospital, Tongji Medical 
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, P. R. China.

BACKGROUND: Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) refers to a collection of malignancies that 
are associated with a dismal prognosis. Currently, surgical resection is the 
only way to cure patients with CCA. Available systemic therapy is limited to 
gemcitabine plus cisplatin; however, this treatment is palliative in nature. 
Therefore, there is still a need to explore new effective therapeutic targets to 
intervene against CCA.
METHODS: We analyzed the expression of EZH2 and the prognosis of patients in 
CCA. The proliferation, migration and invasion of CCA cells after gene knockdown 
and overexpression were examined and validated by a xenograft model and a 
primary CCA mouse model with corresponding gene intervention. Targeting DNA 
methylation, and RNA-sequencing-based transcriptomic analysis in EZH2 and SUZ12 
knockout CCA cells was performed. Bisulfite sequencing polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR), chromatin immunoprecipitation-quantitative PCR (ChIP-qPCR) and 
reverse-ChIP assays were performed for research purposes.
RESULTS: Increased expression of EZH2 in CCA exhibited a significantly poorer 
prognosis. DNA hypomethylation of the promoter and increased mRNA levels of 
secreted frizzled-related protein 1 (SFRP1) were observed in CCA cells following 
the inhibition of polycomb repressor complex 2 (PRC2), which was achieved 
through a knockout of EZH2, SUZ12 and EED, respectively, or treatment with 
GSK126 and GSK343. Targeting the SFRP1 promoter DNA hypermethylation with 
dCas9-DNMT3a decreased the mRNA level of SFRP1. The expression of SFRP1 is 
regulated by both H3K27me3 and DNA methylation and H3K27me3 plays a crucial role 
in promoting SFRP1 promotor DNA methylation. GSK343 is a small molecule 
inhibitor that targets the catalytic activity of EZH2. It effectively inhibits 
the progression and development of subcutaneous xenografts and primary CCA mouse 
models.
CONCLUSION: Overall, our data strongly suggested that targeting PRC2 promotes 
the expression of SFRP1, thereby inhibiting the progression of CCA.
KEY POINTS/HEADLIGHTS: Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) exhibits elevated expression of 
EZH2, SUZ12 and EED, resulting in increased levels of H3K27me3. Targeting 
polycomb repressor complex 2 (PRC2) leads to the removal of H3K27me3 from the 
secreted frizzled-related protein 1 (SFRP1) promoter and DNA hypomethylation, 
thereby activating the transcription of SFRP1. Inhibiting PRC2, including the 
use of EZH2 inhibitors, holds promise as a potential strategy for developing 
anti-cancer drugs for CCA.

© 2023 The Authors. Clinical and Translational Medicine published by John Wiley 
& Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Shanghai Institute of Clinical 
Bioinformatics.

DOI: 10.1002/ctm2.1502
PMCID: PMC10696163
PMID: 38050190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.