---
reference_id: "PMID:26456109"
title: Bone metabolism and renal stone risk during International Space Station missions.
authors:
- Smith SM
- Heer M
- Shackelford LC
- Sibonga JD
- Spatz J
- Pietrzyk RA
- Hudson EK
- Zwart SR
journal: Bone
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2015.10.002
keywords:
- Adult
- Alendronate/pharmacology
- Astronauts
- "Biomarkers/blood, urine"
- Bone Density
- Bone Density Conservation Agents/pharmacology
- "Bone Resorption/etiology, metabolism, prevention & control"
- Bone and Bones/metabolism
- Exercise/physiology
- Female
- Humans
- "Kidney Calculi/etiology, metabolism"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Risk Factors
- Space Flight
- Spacecraft
- Weightlessness/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bone metabolism and renal stone risk during International Space Station missions.
**Authors:** Smith SM, Heer M, Shackelford LC, Sibonga JD, Spatz J, Pietrzyk RA, Hudson EK, Zwart SR
**Journal:** Bone (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bone.2015.10.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2015.10.002)

## Content

1. Bone. 2015 Dec;81:712-720. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2015.10.002. Epub 2015 Oct 8.

Bone metabolism and renal stone risk during International Space Station 
missions.

Smith SM(1), Heer M(2), Shackelford LC(3), Sibonga JD(3), Spatz J(4), Pietrzyk 
RA(5), Hudson EK(6), Zwart SR(7).

Author information:
(1)Human Health and Performance Directorate, NASA Lyndon B. Johnson Space 
Center, Houston, TX, USA. Electronic address: scott.m.smith@nasa.gov.
(2)Department of Nutrition and Food Science, Nutritional Physiology, University 
of Bonn, Germany.
(3)Human Health and Performance Directorate, NASA Lyndon B. Johnson Space 
Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Institute for Medical Engineering 
and Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(5)Wyle Science Technology and Engineering Group, Houston, TX, USA.
(6)JES Tech, Houston, TX, USA.
(7)Division of Space Life Sciences, Universities Space Research Association, 
Houston, TX, USA.

Bone loss and renal stone risk are longstanding concerns for astronauts. Bone 
resorption brought on by spaceflight elevates urinary calcium and the risk of 
renal stone formation. Loss of bone calcium leads to concerns about fracture 
risk and increased long-term risk of osteoporosis. Bone metabolism involves many 
factors and is interconnected with muscle metabolism and diet. We report here 
bone biochemistry and renal stone risk data from astronauts on 4- to 6-month 
International Space Station missions. All had access to a type of resistive 
exercise countermeasure hardware, either the Advanced Resistance Exercise Device 
(ARED) or the Interim Resistance Exercise Device (iRED). A subset of the ARED 
group also tested the bisphosphonate alendronate as a potential anti-resorptive 
countermeasure (Bis+ARED). While some of the basic bone marker data have been 
published, we provide here a more comprehensive evaluation of bone biochemistry 
with a larger group of astronauts. Regardless of exercise, the risk of renal 
stone formation increased during spaceflight. A key factor in this increase was 
urine volume, which was lower during flight in all groups at all time points. 
Thus, the easiest way to mitigate renal stone risk is to increase fluid 
consumption. ARED use increased bone formation without changing bone resorption, 
and mitigated a drop in parathyroid hormone in iRED astronauts. Sclerostin, an 
osteocyte-derived negative regulator of bone formation, increased 10-15% in both 
groups of astronauts who used the ARED (p<0.06). IGF-1, which regulates bone 
growth and formation, increased during flight in all 3 groups (p<0.001). Our 
results are consistent with the growing body of literature showing that the 
hyper-resorptive state of bone that is brought on by spaceflight can be 
countered pharmacologically or mitigated through an exercise-induced increase in 
bone formation, with nutritional support. Key questions remain about the effect 
of exercise-induced alterations in bone metabolism on bone strength and fracture 
risk.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2015.10.002
PMID: 26456109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]