---
reference_id: "PMID:38795716"
title: "Efficacy and safety of bimekizumab in patients with moderate-to-severe hidradenitis suppurativa (BE HEARD I and BE HEARD II): two 48-week, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre phase 3 trials."
authors:
- Kimball AB
- Jemec GBE
- Sayed CJ
- Kirby JS
- Prens E
- Ingram JR
- Garg A
- Gottlieb AB
- Szepietowski JC
- Bechara FG
- Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ
- Fujita H
- Rolleri R
- Joshi P
- Dokhe P
- Muller E
- Peterson L
- Madden C
- Bari M
- Zouboulis CC
journal: Lancet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(24)00101-6
keywords:
- Humans
- Hidradenitis Suppurativa/drug therapy
- Double-Blind Method
- Male
- Female
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Treatment Outcome
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Severity of Illness Index
- "Interleukin-17/antagonists & inhibitors"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of bimekizumab in patients with moderate-to-severe hidradenitis suppurativa (BE HEARD I and BE HEARD II): two 48-week, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre phase 3 trials.
**Authors:** Kimball AB, Jemec GBE, Sayed CJ, Kirby JS, Prens E, Ingram JR, Garg A, Gottlieb AB, Szepietowski JC, Bechara FG, Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ, Fujita H, Rolleri R, Joshi P, Dokhe P, Muller E, Peterson L, Madden C, Bari M, Zouboulis CC
**Journal:** Lancet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(24)00101-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(24)00101-6)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2024 Jun 8;403(10443):2504-2519. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(24)00101-6. 
Epub 2024 May 22.

Efficacy and safety of bimekizumab in patients with moderate-to-severe 
hidradenitis suppurativa (BE HEARD I and BE HEARD II): two 48-week, randomised, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre phase 3 trials.

Kimball AB(1), Jemec GBE(2), Sayed CJ(3), Kirby JS(4), Prens E(5), Ingram JR(6), 
Garg A(7), Gottlieb AB(8), Szepietowski JC(9), Bechara FG(10), 
Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ(11), Fujita H(12), Rolleri R(13), Joshi P(14), Dokhe 
P(14), Muller E(14), Peterson L(13), Madden C(13), Bari M(14), Zouboulis CC(15).

Author information:
(1)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 
USA. Electronic address: clears@bidmc.harvard.edu.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Zealand University Hospital, Roskilde, Denmark; 
Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Science, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; European Hidradenitis Suppurativa 
Foundation, Dessau, Germany.
(3)Department of Dermatology, University of North Carolina School of Medicine, 
Chapel Hill, NC, USA; European Hidradenitis Suppurativa Foundation, Dessau, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Penn State University, Hershey, PA, USA.
(5)European Hidradenitis Suppurativa Foundation, Dessau, Germany; Department of 
Dermatology, Erasmus University Medical Centre Rotterdam, Rotterdam, 
Netherlands.
(6)European Hidradenitis Suppurativa Foundation, Dessau, Germany; Department of 
Dermatology and Academic Wound Healing, Division of Infection and Immunity, 
Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.
(7)Northwell Health, New Hyde Park, NY, USA.
(8)Department of Dermatology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, USA.
(9)European Hidradenitis Suppurativa Foundation, Dessau, Germany; Department of 
Dermatology, Venereology, and Allergology, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, 
Poland.
(10)European Hidradenitis Suppurativa Foundation, Dessau, Germany; Department of 
Dermatology, Venereology, and Allergology, St Josef-Hospital, Ruhr-University, 
Bochum, Germany.
(11)European Hidradenitis Suppurativa Foundation, Dessau, Germany; Fourth 
Department of Internal Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 
Medical School, Athens, Greece.
(12)Division of Cutaneous Science, Department of Dermatology, Nihon University 
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(13)UCB Pharma, Morrisville, NC, USA.
(14)UCB Pharma, Slough, UK.
(15)European Hidradenitis Suppurativa Foundation, Dessau, Germany; Departments 
of Dermatology, Venereology, Allergology, and Immunology, Staedtisches Klinikum 
Dessau, Brandenburg Medical School Theodor Fontane and Faculty of Health 
Sciences Brandenburg, Dessau, Germany.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2024 Jun 8;403(10443):2457-2459. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(24)00591-9.

BACKGROUND: Patients with hidradenitis suppurativa have substantial unmet 
clinical needs and scarce therapeutic options. We aimed to assess the efficacy 
and safety of bimekizumab, a monoclonal IgG1 antibody that selectively inhibits 
interleukin (IL)-17F and IL-17A, in patients with moderate-to-severe 
hidradenitis suppurativa.
METHODS: BE HEARD I and II were two identically designed, 48-week randomised, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre phase 3 trials. Patients aged 18 
years or older with moderate-to-severe hidradenitis suppurativa were randomly 
assigned 2:2:2:1 using interactive response technology (stratified by worst 
Hurley Stage at baseline and baseline systemic antibiotic use) to receive 
subcutaneous bimekizumab 320 mg every 2 weeks; bimekizumab 320 mg every 2 weeks 
to week 16, then every 4 weeks to week 48; bimekizumab 320 mg every 4 weeks to 
week 48; or placebo to week 16, then bimekizumab 320 mg every 2 weeks. The 
primary outcome was an hidradenitis suppurativa clinical response of at least 
50%, defined as a reduction in total abscess and inflammatory nodule count of at 
least 50% from baseline with no increase from baseline in abscess or draining 
tunnel count (HiSCR50) at week 16. Efficacy analyses included all randomly 
assigned study patients (intention-to-treat population). Safety analyses 
included all patients who received at least one full or partial dose of study 
treatment in the safety set, and of bimekizumab in the active-medication set. 
These trials are registered at ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT04242446 and NCT04242498, 
and both are completed.
FINDINGS: Patients for BE HEARD I were recruited from Feb 19, 2020, to Oct 27, 
2021, and 505 patients were enrolled and randomly assigned. Patients for BE 
HEARD II were recruited from March 2, 2020, to July 28, 2021, and 509 patients 
were enrolled and randomly assigned. The primary outcome at week 16 was met in 
the group who received bimekizumab every 2 weeks using modified non-responder 
imputation; higher responder rates were observed with bimekizumab versus placebo 
in both trials: 138 (48%) of 289 patients versus 21 (29%) of 72 patients in BE 
HEARD I (odds ratio [OR] 2·23 [97·5% CI 1·16-4·31]; p=0·0060) and 151 (52%) of 
291 patients versus 24 (32%) of 74 patients in BE HEARD II (2·29 [1·22-4·29]; 
p=0·0032). In BE HEARD II, HiSCR50 was also met in the group who were 
administered bimekizumab every 4 weeks (77 [54%] of 144 vs 24 [32%] of 74 with 
placebo; 2·42 [1·22-4·80]; p=0·0038). Responses were maintained or increased to 
week 48. Serious treatment-emergent adverse events were reported in 40 (8%) 
patients in BE HEARD I and in 24 (5%) patients in BE HEARD II treated with 
bimekizumab over 48 weeks. The most frequently reported treatment-emergent 
adverse events to week 48 were hidradenitis in both trials, in addition to 
coronavirus infection and diarrhoea in BE HEARD I, and oral candidiasis and 
headache in BE HEARD II. One death was reported across the two trials, and was 
due to congestive heart failure in a patient with substantial cardiovascular 
history treated with bimekizumab every 2 weeks in BE HEARD I (considered 
unrelated to bimekizumab treatment by the investigator). No new safety signals 
were observed.
INTERPRETATION: Bimekizumab was well tolerated by patients with hidradenitis 
suppurativa and produced rapid and deep clinically meaningful responses that 
were maintained up to 48 weeks. Data from these two trials support the use of 
bimekizumab for the treatment of patients with moderate-to-severe hidradenitis 
suppurativa.
FUNDING: UCB Pharma.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved, including those for text and 
data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(24)00101-6
PMID: 38795716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests ABK reports grants paid 
to the institution from AbbVie, Admirx, Anapyts Bio, Aristea, Bristol Myers 
Squibb, Eli Lilly and Company, Incyte, Janssen, MoonLake Immunotherapeutics, 
Novartis, Pfizer, Prometheus, Sonoma Bio, and UCB Pharma; consulting fees from 
AbbVie, Alumis, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly and Company, Janssen, 
MoonLake Immunotherapeutics, Novartis, Pfizer, Priovant, Sonoma Bio, Sanofi, 
Target RWE, UCB Pharma, Union, and Ventyx; and serves on the board of directors 
of Almirall. GBEJ reports honoraria for participation on advisory boards from 
AbbVie, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chemocentryx, Incyte, Janssen-Cilag, LEO Pharma, 
Novartis, and UCB Pharma; and acted as an investigator for AbbVie, CJSL, 
InflaRx, Janssen-Cilag, LEO Pharma, Novartis, Regeneron, Sanofi, and UCB Pharma. 
CJS acted as an investigator for AbbVie, Chemocentryx, GSK, Incyte, InflaRx, 
Novartis, and UCB Pharma; reports consultancy fees from AbbVie, Alumis, InflaRx, 
Incyte, Logical Images, Sonoma Biotherapeutics, and UCB Pharma; and acted as a 
speaker for AbbVie and Novartis. JSK reports personal fees from AbbVie, 
ChemoCentryx, CJSL Behring, DermTech, Incyte, Insmed, Janssen, MoonLake, 
Novartis, and UCB Pharma; personal fees and grants from Incyte; is a 
co-copyright holder of HiSQOL; has been a consultant for and received honoraria 
from AbbVie, Alumis, DermTech, Incyte, Insmed, Janssen, MoonLake 
Immunotherapeutics, Novartis, and UCB Pharma; and has been a speaker for AbbVie, 
Janssen, Novartis, and UCB Pharma. EP has been a consultant, advisory board 
member, speaker for, and received honoraria from Almirall, Janssen-Cilag, GSK, 
MoonLake Immunotherapeutics, Novartis, and UCB Pharma; and his department 
received investigator-initiated grant support from AbbVie, Celgene, CHDR, 
Citryll, Kymera, Janssen-Cilag, and UCB Pharma. JRI receives a stipend as 
Editor‑in‑Chief of the British Journal of Dermatology and an authorship 
honorarium from UpToDate; has been a consultant for AbbVie, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, ChemoCentryx, Citryll, MoonLake Immunotherapeutics, Novartis, UCB 
Pharma, and Union Therapeutics, and has served on advisory boards for Insmed, 
Kymera Therapeutics, and Viela Bio; is a co‑copyright holder of the Hidradenitis 
Suppurativa Quality of Life score (HiSQOL) and hidradenitis 
suppurativa-Investigator Global Assessment; and his department receives income 
from copyright of the Dermatology Life Quality Instrument and related 
instruments. AG has been a consultant and receives honoraria from AbbVie, 
Aclaris Therapeutics, AnaptysBio, Aristea Therapeutics, Bristol Myers Squibb, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Incyte, Insmed, Janssen, Novartis, Pfizer, Sonoma 
Biotherapeutics, UCB Pharma, Union Therapeutics, Ventyx Biosciences, and Viela 
Biosciences; has received research grants from AbbVie, C3, National Psoriasis 
Foundation, and UCB Pharma; and is a co-copyright holder of HiSQOL and 
hidradenitis suppurativa-IGA. ABG reports honoraria as an advisory board member 
and consultant for Amgen, Almirall, AnaptysBio, Avotres Therapeutics, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Bristol Myers Squibb, Dice Therapeutics, Eli Lilly and Company, 
Janssen, Novartis, Sanofi, UCB Pharma, and Xbiotech; and research or educational 
grants from AnaptysBio, Bristol Myers Squibb, MoonLake Immunotherapeutics, 
Novartis, and UCB Pharma (all paid to Mount Sinai School of Medicine). JCJS has 
acted as a consultant and advisory board member of AbbVie, LEO Pharma, Novartis, 
Pierre Fabre, Sanofi Genzyme, and Trevi Therapeutics; acted as a speaker for 
AbbVie, Almirall, Eli Lilly and Company, LEO Pharma, Novartis, Pfizer, 
Pierre-Fabre, Sanofi, and UCB Pharma; and has acted as an investigator for 
AbbVie, Amgen, Bristol Myers Squibb, Galapagos, Galderma, Incyte, InflaRX, 
Janssen, Kliniksa, Kymab Limited, Menlo Therapeutics, Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, 
Regereron Pharmaceuticals, Trevi Therapeutics, and UCB Pharma. FGB reports 
honoraria for participation in advisory boards, in clinical trials, and as a 
speaker from AbbVie, AbbVie Deutschland, Boehringer Ingelheim, Celltrion, Dr. 
Wolff, Incyte, Janssen, Mölnlycke, MoonLake Immunotherapeutics, Novartis, and 
UCB Pharma. EJG-B reports honoraria from Abbott Products Operations, bioMérieux, 
Brahms, GSK, InflaRX, Sobi and XBiotech; independent educational grants from 
Abbott Products Operations, AxisShield, bioMérieux, InflaRx, Johnson & Johnson, 
MSD, Novartis, Sobi, and XBiotech; and funding from the Horizon2020 Marie 
Skłodowska-Curie International Training Network the European Sepsis Academy 
(granted to the National and Kapodistrian University of Athens), the Horizon 
2020 European Grants ImmunoSep and RISCinCOVID (granted to the Hellenic 
Institute for the Study of Sepsis) and the Horizon Health grant EPIC-CROWN-2 
(granted to the Hellenic Institute for the Study of Sepsis). HF reports 
honoraria or fees for serving on advisory boards, as a speaker, and as a 
consultant; and grants as an investigator from AbbVie, Amgen, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Bristol Myers Squibb, Daiichi Sankyo, Eisai, Eli Lilly and Company, 
Janssen, Japan Blood Products Organization, JMEC, Kaken Pharmaceutical, Kyowa 
Kirin, LEO Pharma, Maruho, Mitsubishi Tanabe, Nihon Pharmaceutical, Novartis, 
Otsuka Pharmaceutical, Sanofi, Sato Pharmaceutical, Sun Pharma, Taiho 
Pharmaceutical, Torii Pharmaceutical, UCB Pharma, and Ushio. RR, PJ, PD, EM, and 
LP are employees and shareholders of UCB Pharma. CM is a former employee and 
shareholder of UCB Pharma. MB is an employee of UCB Pharma. CCZ reports grants 
paid to the institution from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, GSK, InflaRx, 
Novartis, Relaxera, and UCB Pharma for participation as a clinical and research 
investigator; consultant honoraria from AccureAcne, Almirall, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Incyte, InflaRx, Janssen, L'Oréal, Luvos, NAOS-BIODERMA, Novartis, 
PPM, Sanofi, UCB Pharma, and Viatris; lecture fees from Almirall, Biogen, 
Novartis, Sobi, and UCB Pharma; and is the president of the European 
Hidradenitis Suppurativa Foundation, coordinator of the ALLOCATE Skin group of 
the European Reference Network for rare skin diseases, and chair of the Acne, 
Rosacea and Hidradenitis Suppurativa Task Force group of the European Academy of 
Dermatology and Venereology (EADV); is the editor of the EADV News; and 
co-copyright holder of the International Hidradenitis Suppurativa Severity Score 
System on behalf of the European Hidradenitis Supurativa Foundation.