---
reference_id: "PMID:36048560"
title: Melanin accumulation in dermal stem cells deteriorates their exosome-mediated skin basement membrane construction in solar lentigo.
authors:
- Miyachi K
- Yamada T
- Sanada A
- Inoue Y
- Hasebe Y
- Arima M
- Iwata Y
- Hasegawa S
- Sugiura K
- Akamatsu H
journal: Exp Dermatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/exd.14667
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Melanin accumulation in dermal stem cells deteriorates their exosome-mediated skin basement membrane construction in solar lentigo.
**Authors:** Miyachi K, Yamada T, Sanada A, Inoue Y, Hasebe Y, Arima M, Iwata Y, Hasegawa S, Sugiura K, Akamatsu H
**Journal:** Exp Dermatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/exd.14667](https://doi.org/10.1111/exd.14667)

## Content

1. Exp Dermatol. 2022 Dec;31(12):1881-1890. doi: 10.1111/exd.14667. Epub 2022 Sep
 1.

Melanin accumulation in dermal stem cells deteriorates their exosome-mediated 
skin basement membrane construction in solar lentigo.

Miyachi K(1), Yamada T(1)(2)(3), Sanada A(1), Inoue Y(1)(4), Hasebe Y(1)(4), 
Arima M(3), Iwata Y(3), Hasegawa S(1)(3)(4), Sugiura K(3), Akamatsu H(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Laboratories, Nippon MENARD Cosmetic Co., Ltd., Nagoya, Aichi, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Applied Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Fujita Health 
University School of Medicine, Toyoake, Aichi, Japan.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Fujita Health University School of Medicine, 
Toyoake, Aichi, Japan.
(4)Nagoya University-MENARD Collaborative Research Chair, Nagoya University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan.

Solar lentigo (SL) is a hyperpigmented macule that occurs in sun-exposed areas 
and is characterized by the accumulation of melanin pigment in the epidermis. On 
the contrary, melanin-incorporated macrophages have also been identified in the 
dermis, which is thought to be caused by melanin transfer due to disruption of 
the basement membrane, but the detailed mechanism remains unclear. In this 
study, we analysed SL lesions by pathological methods and examined the mechanism 
of melanin accumulation in the dermis using cultured skin models in vitro. 
First, we observed a significant decrease in type IV collagen (COL4), a major 
component of the basement membrane, in SL lesions. The basement membrane is 
known to be formed by the interaction of keratinocytes and dermal cells. 
Therefore, we constructed skin models containing fibroblasts or dermal stem 
cells and examined their effects on basement membrane formation. The results 
showed a markedly enhanced production of COL4 mediated by dermal stem 
cell-derived exosomes. The analysis of melanin localization in the SL dermis 
revealed that CD163-positive macrophages and CD271-positive dermal stem cells 
both took up melanin pigment. Exosomes of dermal stem cells incorporating 
melanosomes were less effective in promoting COL4 expression. These findings 
suggest that while the promotion of COL4 production in keratinocytes by dermal 
stem cell-derived exosomes is important for maintaining basement membrane 
homeostasis, this mechanism is disrupted in SL lesions, leading to chronic 
melanin accumulation in the dermis.

© 2022 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/exd.14667
PMID: 36048560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]