---
reference_id: "PMID:38376641"
title: A case series of successfully managing exomphalos major with awake graduated compression dressing and early enteral feeding.
authors:
- Widatella H
- Abd Elwahab S
- Penny Z
- Paran ST
journal: Ir J Med Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s11845-024-03630-8
keywords:
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Compression Bandages
- COVID-19
- Enteral Nutrition/methods
- "Hernia, Umbilical/surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case series of successfully managing exomphalos major with awake graduated compression dressing and early enteral feeding.
**Authors:** Widatella H, Abd Elwahab S, Penny Z, Paran ST
**Journal:** Ir J Med Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11845-024-03630-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11845-024-03630-8)

## Content

1. Ir J Med Sci. 2024 Jun;193(3):1453-1459. doi: 10.1007/s11845-024-03630-8. Epub
 2024 Feb 20.

A case series of successfully managing exomphalos major with awake graduated 
compression dressing and early enteral feeding.

Widatella H(1), Abd Elwahab S(1), Penny Z(2), Paran ST(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Paediatric Surgery, Children's Health Ireland at 
Crumlin, Dublin 12, Ireland.
(2)Department of General Paediatric Surgery, Children's Health Ireland at 
Crumlin, Dublin 12, Ireland. zpenny2@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: Exomphalos anomaly is defined as the herniation of abdominal 
viscera into the base of the umbilical cord, with only a membranous sac covering 
these contents. It has an incidence of approximately 1 in 4000-6000 births. 
Management of exomphalos major (EM) remains controversial and limited, with very 
few studies to guide decision-making.
METHOD: This is a case series of four neonates with EM treated at a tertiary 
paediatric referral centre between 2018 and 2021 with a gradual compression 
dressing technique.
RESULTS: Four neonates were diagnosed with EM. The average gestational age was 
38 + 5 (range 38 + 2 - 39 + 2), and the average birth weight was 3.1 kg (range 
2.56 - 3.49 kg). The defect size ranged between 5 and 7 cm. All patients were 
commenced on gradual compression dressing between days 1 and 3 of life. 
Dressings were applied at the bedside in the general neonatal ward. The average 
time taken to reach full feeds was 1 week; only one patient required parenteral 
nutrition. Three underwent surgical repair at two and 16 weeks of age; one had 
delayed repair at the age of 1 year because of the COVID-19 pandemic. None 
required patch repair. None required prolonged ventilation after repair.
CONCLUSION: This case series describes a successful compression dressing 
technique that reduces sac content without the need for general anaesthetic or 
respiratory compromise, whereby simultaneous enteral feeding is tolerated.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11845-024-03630-8
PMCID: PMC11128403
PMID: 38376641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.