---
reference_id: "PMID:38177503"
title: Structural insights into respiratory complex I deficiency and assembly from the mitochondrial disease-related ndufs4(-/-) mouse.
authors:
- Yin Z
- Agip AA
- Bridges HR
- Hirst J
journal: EMBO J
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s44318-023-00001-4
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- "Electron Transport Complex I/genetics, metabolism"
- Leigh Disease/genetics
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- Mitochondrial Diseases/genetics
- NAD/metabolism
- "NADH Dehydrogenase/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Structural insights into respiratory complex I deficiency and assembly from the mitochondrial disease-related ndufs4(-/-) mouse.
**Authors:** Yin Z, Agip AA, Bridges HR, Hirst J
**Journal:** EMBO J (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s44318-023-00001-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s44318-023-00001-4)

## Content

1. EMBO J. 2024 Jan;43(2):225-249. doi: 10.1038/s44318-023-00001-4. Epub 2024 Jan
 2.

Structural insights into respiratory complex I deficiency and assembly from the 
mitochondrial disease-related ndufs4(-/-) mouse.

Yin Z(1)(2), Agip AA(1)(3), Bridges HR(4)(5), Hirst J(6).

Author information:
(1)The Medical Research Council Mitochondrial Biology Unit, University of 
Cambridge, Keith Peters Building, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, UK.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, 
Cambridge, CB2 1GA, UK.
(3)Max-Planck-Institute of Biophysics, Frankfurt, 60438, Germany.
(4)The Medical Research Council Mitochondrial Biology Unit, University of 
Cambridge, Keith Peters Building, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, UK. 
hbridges@structura.bio.
(5)Structura Biotechnology Inc., Toronto, Canada. hbridges@structura.bio.
(6)The Medical Research Council Mitochondrial Biology Unit, University of 
Cambridge, Keith Peters Building, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, UK. 
jh480@cam.ac.uk.

Respiratory complex I (NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase) is essential for cellular 
energy production and NAD+ homeostasis. Complex I mutations cause neuromuscular, 
mitochondrial diseases, such as Leigh Syndrome, but their molecular-level 
consequences remain poorly understood. Here, we use a popular complex I-linked 
mitochondrial disease model, the ndufs4-/- mouse, to define the structural, 
biochemical, and functional consequences of the absence of subunit NDUFS4. 
Cryo-EM analyses of the complex I from ndufs4-/- mouse hearts revealed a loose 
association of the NADH-dehydrogenase module, and discrete classes containing 
either assembly factor NDUFAF2 or subunit NDUFS6. Subunit NDUFA12, which 
replaces its paralogue NDUFAF2 in mature complex I, is absent from all classes, 
compounding the deletion of NDUFS4 and preventing maturation of an NDUFS4-free 
enzyme. We propose that NDUFAF2 recruits the NADH-dehydrogenase module during 
assembly of the complex. Taken together, the findings provide new 
molecular-level understanding of the ndufs4-/- mouse model and complex I-linked 
mitochondrial disease.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s44318-023-00001-4
PMCID: PMC10897435
PMID: 38177503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.