---
reference_id: "PMID:33268600"
title: Exosomes in Hepatitis B Virus Transmission and Related Immune Response.
authors:
- Wang J
- Cao D
- Yang J
journal: Tohoku J Exp Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1620/tjem.252.309
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exosomes in Hepatitis B Virus Transmission and Related Immune Response.
**Authors:** Wang J, Cao D, Yang J
**Journal:** Tohoku J Exp Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1620/tjem.252.309](https://doi.org/10.1620/tjem.252.309)

## Content

1. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2020 Dec;252(4):309-320. doi: 10.1620/tjem.252.309.

Exosomes in Hepatitis B Virus Transmission and Related Immune Response.

Wang J(1), Cao D(1), Yang J(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, 
National Clinical Research Center for Infectious Diseases, Collaborative 
Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, The First 
Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine.

The chronicity of Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection relates to both viral 
factors and host factors. HBV could result in persistent infection and even 
serious liver disease, including chronic hepatitis B (CHB), cirrhosis and 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Although the HBV vaccine can effectively prevent 
HBV infection, chronic HBV infection still endangers human health and results in 
a large social burden. Moreover, the mechanisms underlying the HBV-mediated 
imbalance of the immune response and persistent infection are not fully 
understood. Exosomes are extracellular vesicles (EVs) 40-160 nm in size that are 
released from many cells and transfer specific functional RNAs, proteins, lipids 
and viral components from donor to recipient cells. These exosome nanovesicles 
are associated with various biological processes, such as cellular homeostasis, 
immune response and cancer progression. Besides, previous studies on exosomes 
have shown that they take part in viral pathogenicity due to the similarity in 
structure and function between exosomes and enveloped viruses. Moreover, exosome 
as a novel immunomodulatory carrier plays a significant role in viral 
immunology. In this review, we focus on the latest progress in understanding the 
role of exosomes in HBV transmission as well as their vital roles in immune 
regulation during HBV infection. Furthermore, we discuss the potential clinical 
applications of exosomes in hepatitis B infection, including the use of exosomes 
in the auxiliary diagnosis and treatment of hepatitis B.

DOI: 10.1620/tjem.252.309
PMID: 33268600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]