---
reference_id: "PMID:32205033"
title: "Why patients with familial hypercholesterolemia are at high cardiovascular risk? Beyond LDL-C levels."
authors:
- Bianconi V
- Banach M
- Pirro M
- International Lipid Expert Panel (ILEP)
journal: Trends Cardiovasc Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.tcm.2020.03.004
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Biomarkers/blood
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/diagnosis, etiology"
- "Cholesterol, LDL/blood"
- Decision Support Techniques
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Heart Disease Risk Factors
- Humans
- "Hyperlipoproteinemia Type II/blood, complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Prognosis
- Risk Assessment
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Why patients with familial hypercholesterolemia are at high cardiovascular risk? Beyond LDL-C levels.
**Authors:** Bianconi V, Banach M, Pirro M, International Lipid Expert Panel (ILEP)
**Journal:** Trends Cardiovasc Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tcm.2020.03.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcm.2020.03.004)

## Content

1. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2021 May;31(4):205-215. doi: 10.1016/j.tcm.2020.03.004.
 Epub 2020 Mar 12.

Why patients with familial hypercholesterolemia are at high cardiovascular risk? 
Beyond LDL-C levels.

Bianconi V(1), Banach M(2), Pirro M(3); International Lipid Expert Panel (ILEP).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Perugia, 
Hospital "Santa Maria della Misericordia", Piazzale Menghini, 1, 06129 Perugia, 
Italy.
(2)Department of Hypertension, Chair of Nephrology and Hypertension, WAM 
University Hospital in Lodz, Medical University of Lodz, Zeromskiego 113, 90-549 
Lodz, Poland; Polish Mother's Memorial Hospital Research Institute (PMMHRI), 
Lodz, Poland. Electronic address: maciejbanach@aol.co.uk.
(3)Unit of Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Perugia, 
Hospital "Santa Maria della Misericordia", Piazzale Menghini, 1, 06129 Perugia, 
Italy. Electronic address: matteo.pirro@unipg.it.

Comment in
    Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2021 May;31(4):216-217. doi: 
10.1016/j.tcm.2020.04.001.

Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a common genetic cause of elevated 
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) due to defective clearance of 
circulating LDL particles. All FH patients are at high risk for premature 
cardiovascular disease (CVD) events due to their genetically determined lifelong 
exposure to high LDL-C levels. However, different rates of CVD events have been 
reported in FH patients, even among those with the same genetic mutations and 
comparable LDL-C levels. Hence, additional CVD risk modifiers, beyond LDL-C, may 
contribute to increase CVD risk in the FH population. In this review, we discuss 
the overall CVD risk burden of the FH population. Additionally, we revise the 
prognostic impact of several traditional and emerging predictors of CVD risk and 
we provide an overview of the role of specific tools to stratify CVD risk in FH 
patients in order to ensure them a more personalized treatment approach.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tcm.2020.03.004
PMID: 32205033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]