---
reference_id: "PMID:23499048"
title: KDOQI US commentary on the 2012 KDIGO clinical practice guideline for acute kidney injury.
authors:
- Palevsky PM
- Liu KD
- Brophy PD
- Chawla LS
- Parikh CR
- Thakar CV
- Tolwani AJ
- Waikar SS
- Weisbord SD
journal: Am J Kidney Dis
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2013.02.349
keywords:
- Acute Kidney Injury/therapy
- "Critical Care/methods, standards"
- Humans
- "Nephrology/methods, standards"
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
- "Quality Assurance, Health Care"
- United States
content_type: abstract_only
---

# KDOQI US commentary on the 2012 KDIGO clinical practice guideline for acute kidney injury.
**Authors:** Palevsky PM, Liu KD, Brophy PD, Chawla LS, Parikh CR, Thakar CV, Tolwani AJ, Waikar SS, Weisbord SD
**Journal:** Am J Kidney Dis (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.ajkd.2013.02.349](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.ajkd.2013.02.349)

## Content

1. Am J Kidney Dis. 2013 May;61(5):649-72. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2013.02.349. Epub 
2013 Mar 15.

KDOQI US commentary on the 2012 KDIGO clinical practice guideline for acute 
kidney injury.

Palevsky PM(1), Liu KD, Brophy PD, Chawla LS, Parikh CR, Thakar CV, Tolwani AJ, 
Waikar SS, Weisbord SD.

Author information:
(1)Renal Section, VA Pittsburgh Healthcare System, Pittsburgh, PA 14240, USA. 
palevsky@pitt.edu

Comment in
    Am J Kidney Dis. 2013 May;61(5):686-8. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2013.03.003.

In response to the recently released 2012 KDIGO (Kidney Disease: Improving 
Global Outcomes) clinical practice guideline for acute kidney injury (AKI), the 
National Kidney Foundation organized a group of US experts in adult and 
pediatric AKI and critical care nephrology to review the recommendations and 
comment on their relevancy in the context of current US clinical practice and 
concerns. The first portion of the KDIGO guideline attempts to harmonize earlier 
consensus definitions and staging criteria for AKI. While the expert panel 
thought that the KDIGO definition and staging criteria are appropriate for 
defining the epidemiology of AKI and in the design of clinical trials, the panel 
concluded that there is insufficient evidence to support their widespread 
application to clinical care in the United States. The panel generally concurred 
with the remainder of the KDIGO guidelines that are focused on the prevention 
and pharmacologic and dialytic management of AKI, although noting the dearth of 
clinical trial evidence to provide strong evidence-based recommendations and the 
continued absence of effective therapies beyond hemodynamic optimization and 
avoidance of nephrotoxins for the prevention and treatment of AKI.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2013.02.349
PMID: 23499048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]