---
reference_id: "PMID:35159128"
title: Lung Inflammation in STING-Associated Vasculopathy with Onset in Infancy (SAVI).
authors:
- David C
- Frémond ML
journal: Cells
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/cells11030318
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Inflammation/genetics
- Interferon Type I/metabolism
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- Nucleic Acids
- Pneumonia/complications
- Vascular Diseases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lung Inflammation in STING-Associated Vasculopathy with Onset in Infancy (SAVI).
**Authors:** David C, Frémond ML
**Journal:** Cells (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells11030318](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells11030318)

## Content

1. Cells. 2022 Jan 18;11(3):318. doi: 10.3390/cells11030318.

Lung Inflammation in STING-Associated Vasculopathy with Onset in Infancy (SAVI).

David C(1), Frémond ML(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Université de Paris, Imagine Institute, Laboratory of Neurogenetics and
Neuroinflammation, 24 Boulevard du Montparnasse, 75015 Paris, France.
(2)Paediatric Immunology-Hematology and Rheumatology Department, Hôpital
Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP.Centre-Université de Paris, 24 Boulevard du
Montparnasse, 75015 Paris, France.

STING-associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy (SAVI) is a type I
interferonopathy caused by gain-of-function mutations in STING1 encoding
stimulator of interferon genes (STING) protein. SAVI is characterized by severe
inflammatory lung disease, a feature not observed in previously described type I
interferonopathies i.e., Mendelian autoinflammatory disorders defined by
constitutive activation of the type I interferon (IFN) pathway. Molecular
defects in nucleic acid metabolism or sensing are central to the pathophysiology
of these diseases, with such defects occurring at any step of the tightly
regulated pathway of type I IFN production and signaling (e.g., exonuclease loss
of function, RNA-DNA hybrid accumulation, constitutive activation of adaptor
proteins such as STING). Among over 30 genotypes, SAVI and COPA syndrome, whose
pathophysiology was recently linked to a constitutive activation of STING
signaling, are the only type I interferonopathies presenting with predominant
lung involvement. Lung disease is the leading cause of morbidity and mortality
in these two disorders which do not respond to conventional immunosuppressive
therapies and only partially to JAK1/2 inhibitors. In human silicosis,
STING-dependent sensing of self-DNA following cell death triggered by silica
exposure has been found to drive lung inflammation in mice and human models.
These recent findings support a key role for STING and nucleic acid sensing in
the homeostasis of intrinsic pulmonary inflammation. However, mechanisms by
which monogenic defects in the STING pathway lead to pulmonary damages are not
yet fully elucidated, and an improved understanding of such mechanisms is
fundamental to improved future patient management. Here, we review the recent
insights into the pathophysiology of SAVI and outline our current understanding
of self-nucleic acid-mediated lung inflammation in humans.

DOI: 10.3390/cells11030318
PMCID: PMC8834229
PMID: 35159128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
