---
reference_id: "PMID:34245476"
title: Is targeted UVB as effective as excimer light phototherapy in treatment of vitiligo?
authors:
- Tabassum H
- Majid I
- Imran S
journal: Dermatol Ther
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/dth.15058
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Is targeted UVB as effective as excimer light phototherapy in treatment of vitiligo?
**Authors:** Tabassum H, Majid I, Imran S
**Journal:** Dermatol Ther (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/dth.15058](https://doi.org/10.1111/dth.15058)

## Content

1. Dermatol Ther. 2021 Sep;34(5):e15058. doi: 10.1111/dth.15058. Epub 2021 Jul
14.

Is targeted UVB as effective as excimer light phototherapy in treatment of 
vitiligo?

Tabassum H(1), Majid I(2), Imran S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College (JNMC), Aligarh 
Muslim University (AMU), Aligarh, India.
(2)Dermatology, Venereology & Leprosy, CUTIS Institute of Dermatology, Srinagar, 
India.
(3)Dermatology, CUTIS Institute of Dermatology, Srinagar, India.

Excimer light (EL) and targeted UVB (TUVB) devices have been used successfully 
in repigmenting vitiligo. To compare the repigmenting efficacy and safety of EL 
with TUVB device in vitiligo. The study was conducted retrospectively on 
patients of vitiligo who had received either EL (Group A) or TUVB (Group B) from 
year 2015 to 2020. Data pertaining to 40 such age and sex matched patients from 
each group was retrieved with almost similar sites of involvement. Only patients 
whose phototherapy sessions had been given twice weekly for minimum of 30 
sessions or until 90%-100% repigmentation were included in the study. The study 
was retrospective in nature and the principles outlined in the Declaration of 
Helsinki were followed during the study. The primary endpoint compared between 
the two groups was the extent of repigmentation achieved on different sites of 
body and adverse effects from treatment. Secondary endpoints compared included 
total number of doses, cumulative dose needed for complete repigmentation and 
number of doses needed for onset of repigmentation. There were 82.6% responders 
in Group A and 76.3% in Group B who had achieved at least 50% repigmentation. 
Excellent response (75%-100% repigmentation) was achieved in 68.1% lesions in 
Group A and 46.4% lesions in Group B. Patients in Group A needed less number of 
doses (13.75 vs. 19.37) and less cumulative dose (6.14 vs. 7.69 J/cm2 ) to 
achieve complete or near complete repigmentation. Adverse effects were 
negligible in both groups. Targeted phototherapy with EL demonstrated better 
repigmenting efficacy than TUVB in vitiligo.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/dth.15058
PMID: 34245476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]