---
reference_id: "PMID:35394968"
title: Electrographic Features of Epilepsy With Eyelid Myoclonia With Photoparoxysmal Responses.
authors:
- Zawar I
- Shreshtha B
- Benech D
- Burgess RC
- Bulacio J
- Knight EMP
journal: J Clin Neurophysiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/WNP.0000000000000942
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Electrographic Features of Epilepsy With Eyelid Myoclonia With Photoparoxysmal Responses.
**Authors:** Zawar I, Shreshtha B, Benech D, Burgess RC, Bulacio J, Knight EMP
**Journal:** J Clin Neurophysiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/WNP.0000000000000942](https://doi.org/10.1097/WNP.0000000000000942)

## Content

1. J Clin Neurophysiol. 2024 Jan 1;41(1):83-92. doi:
10.1097/WNP.0000000000000942.  Epub 2022 Apr 8.

Electrographic Features of Epilepsy With Eyelid Myoclonia With Photoparoxysmal 
Responses.

Zawar I(1)(2), Shreshtha B(1), Benech D(1), Burgess RC(1), Bulacio J(1), Knight 
EMP(1).

Author information:
(1)Epilepsy Center, Neurological Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, 
U.S.A.; and.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Virginia School of Medicine, Virginia, 
U.S.A.

PURPOSE: Epilepsy with eyelid myoclonia (EMA) is characterized by eyelid 
myoclonia, eyelid closure sensitivity, and photosensitivity. EEG may manifest 
with frontal-predominant (FPEDs) or occipital-predominant epileptiform 
discharges (OPEDs). Data on clinical and electrographic features of these two 
subtypes are lacking. The purpose of our research was to look at baseline 
electroclinical features of EMA subtypes and to study electrographic findings of 
patients with EMA during intermittent photic stimulation (IPS).
METHODS: We retrospectively identified all patients who had photoparoxysmal 
responses on EEGs performed at Cleveland clinic between January 01, 2012, and 
December 31, 2019. Patients who met diagnostic criteria for EMA were studied 
further.
RESULTS: Of the 249 patients with photoparoxysmal responses, 70 (28.1%) had EMA 
(62 [88.6%] female; the mean age of epilepsy onset: 7.0 ± 7.9 years). Patients 
with EMA had either FPEDs or OPEDs. Eleven patients with EMA (15.7%) had 
seizures (4 absence, 5 myoclonic and 2 bilateral tonic-clonic) during IPS. 
Patients with OPEDs were more likely to have drug-resistant epilepsy; occipital 
focal IEDs and other focal IEDs (other than frontal/occipital) on baseline EEG; 
and generalized IEDs with occipital predominance, generalized IEDs with no 
predominance, or focal IEDs during IPS. Predictors of seizure occurrence during 
photic stimulation included the presence of focal occipital IEDs on baseline 
EEG, generalized IEDs with frontal predominance during IPS, and photoparoxysmal 
response outlasting the stimulus.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides evidence that EMA has two distinct subtypes, 
which differ in clinical characteristics, baseline EEG, and EEG during photic 
stimulation. We highlight diagnostic and prognostic implications of these 
findings. Our study also details EEG characteristics of patients with EMA during 
IPS.

Copyright © 2022 by the American Clinical Neurophysiology Society.

DOI: 10.1097/WNP.0000000000000942
PMID: 35394968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no funding or conflicts of 
interest to disclose.