---
reference_id: "PMID:20301297"
title: IPEX Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Tan QKG
- Louie RJ
- Sleasman JW
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IPEX Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Tan QKG, Louie RJ, Sleasman JW

## Content

1. IPEX Syndrome.

Tan QKG(1), Louie RJ(2), Sleasman JW(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2004 Oct 19 [updated 2024 Feb 1].

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota
(2)Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, South Carolina
(3)Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: IPEX (immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, 
enteropathy, X-linked) syndrome is characterized by systemic autoimmunity, 
typically beginning in the first year of life, which includes the triad of 
enteropathy (manifesting as malabsorption and watery diarrhea), endocrinopathy 
(most commonly type 1 insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus), and eczematous 
dermatitis. In addition to these manifestations, many children have other 
autoimmune phenomena including cytopenias, autoimmune hepatitis, nephropathy, 
lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, alopecia, arthritis, and interstitial lung 
disease related to immune dysregulation. Fetal presentation of IPEX syndrome 
includes hydrops, echogenic bowel, skin desquamation, intrauterine growth 
deficiency, and fetal akinesia. Without aggressive immunosuppression or 
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT), the majority of affected males 
will die within the first one to two years of life from metabolic derangements, 
severe malabsorption, or sepsis. Individuals with a milder phenotype have 
survived into the second or third decade of life, but this is uncommon.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis is established in a male proband with typical 
clinical findings, absent regulatory T cells (Treg) in blood or tissues, 
decreased numbers of FOXP3-expressing T cells in peripheral blood determined by 
flow cytometry (although FOXP3 levels in Treg can be normal in some 
individuals), and a hemizygous pathogenic variant in FOXP3 identified by 
molecular genetic testing. Heterozygous females have not been reported to have 
clinical findings typical of IPEX syndrome.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapies: HSCT offers the only potential cure for IPEX 
syndrome. T cell-directed immune suppression can include either an mTOR 
inhibitor (sirolimus) or calcineurin inhibitor (cyclosporin A or tacrolimus), 
alone or in combination with corticosteroids. Supportive care: Total parenteral 
nutrition (TPN) with fluids and electrolyte support is needed until intestinal 
function can be established with immune suppression. Treatment of type 1 
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus with insulin and carbohydrate management is 
standard, as is management of autoimmune thyroid disease. Skin conditions are 
managed with topical therapies, which can include steroids, tacrolimus, and 
emollients. Autoimmune neutropenia has been successfully treated with 
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor; pemphigus nodularis has been treated with 
rituximab (anti-CD20), and rituximab has been used for other 
autoantibody-mediated disease. Prophylactic antibiotic therapy may be required 
for autoimmune neutropenia or recurrent infections with central venous access 
and TPN. Aggressive management of dermatitis with topical steroids and 
anti-inflammatory agents as needed to prevent cutaneous infections. 
Surveillance: Monitor growth, nutritional intake, and stooling patterns at each 
visit; glucose tolerance test, hemoglobin A1c, and thyroid function tests every 
three to six months; skin exam at each visit; complete blood count, blood urea 
nitrogen, creatinine, urinalysis, and serum aspartate transaminase and alanine 
transaminase every three to six months. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Withhold 
immunizations until after HSCT, if possible. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It 
is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of at-risk males either prenatally 
or immediately after birth to enable early diagnosis and HSCT and/or immune 
suppression treatment in affected males before significant organ damage occurs.
GENETIC COUNSELING: IPEX syndrome is inherited in an X-linked manner. The risk 
to sibs of the proband depends on the genetic status of the mother. If the 
mother of the proband has a FOXP3 pathogenic variant, the chance of transmitting 
the pathogenic variant in each pregnancy is 50%. Males who inherit the 
pathogenic variant will be affected; females who inherit the pathogenic variant 
will be heterozygous (to date, IPEX syndrome has not been reported in females 
who are heterozygous for a FOXP3 pathogenic variant). Affected males transmit 
the pathogenic variant to all of their daughters and none of their sons. Once 
the FOXP3 pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, 
identification of female heterozygotes and prenatal/preimplantation genetic 
testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301297