---
reference_id: "PMID:37033550"
title: An Atypical Case of Lyme Disease Presenting With Lyme Carditis.
authors:
- Najam US
- Sheikh A
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.35907
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An Atypical Case of Lyme Disease Presenting With Lyme Carditis.
**Authors:** Najam US, Sheikh A
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.35907](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.35907)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Mar 8;15(3):e35907. doi: 10.7759/cureus.35907. eCollection 2023 
Mar.

An Atypical Case of Lyme Disease Presenting With Lyme Carditis.

Najam US(1), Sheikh A(2).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, University at Buffalo Jacobs School of Medicine and 
Biomedical Sciences, Buffalo, USA.
(2)Internal Medicine, Arnot Ogden Medical Center, Elmira, USA.

Lyme carditis is a rare but serious manifestation of Lyme disease presenting in 
the early disseminated stage of the disease often after a diagnosis has already 
been discovered. The classic case of Lyme disease presents a patient who had 
been participating in outdoor activities in a Lyme-endemic region and was found 
to have a tick bite. These patients often present in the early localized stage, 
within the first 1-2 weeks with the well-recognized erythema-migrans rash or 
with generalized flu-like symptoms. Here we describe a case of a 70-year-old 
male who presented to the hospital without any typical Lyme disease prodrome but 
instead with generalized symptoms of progressive orthopnea and dyspnea on 
exertion. His original diagnoses were not of infectious origin however after 
incidentally being found to have a second degree, Mobitz type 1 atrioventricular 
(AV) block; Lyme tests were ordered, and a diagnosis was confirmed. This 
incidence shows the importance of having a Lyme disease diagnosis when 
regionally appropriate for patients who may present with no other signs or 
symptoms other than an AV block. As in this case, after a diagnosis has been 
made the management becomes the treatment of the infection rather than the 
treatment of the symptoms themselves.

Copyright © 2023, Najam et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.35907
PMCID: PMC10081685
PMID: 37033550

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.