---
reference_id: "PMID:21211617"
title: NEK1 mutations cause short-rib polydactyly syndrome type majewski.
authors:
- Thiel C
- Kessler K
- Giessl A
- Dimmler A
- Shalev SA
- von der Haar S
- Zenker M
- Zahnleiter D
- Stöss H
- Beinder E
- Abou Jamra R
- Ekici AB
- Schröder-Kress N
- Aigner T
- Kirchner T
- Reis A
- Brandstätter JH
- Rauch A
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.12.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NEK1 mutations cause short-rib polydactyly syndrome type majewski.
**Authors:** Thiel C, Kessler K, Giessl A, Dimmler A, Shalev SA, von der Haar S, Zenker M, Zahnleiter D, Stöss H, Beinder E, Abou Jamra R, Ekici AB, Schröder-Kress N, Aigner T, Kirchner T, Reis A, Brandstätter JH, Rauch A
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.12.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.12.004)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Jan 7;88(1):106-14. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.12.004.

NEK1 mutations cause short-rib polydactyly syndrome type majewski.

Thiel C(1), Kessler K, Giessl A, Dimmler A, Shalev SA, von der Haar S, Zenker M, 
Zahnleiter D, Stöss H, Beinder E, Abou Jamra R, Ekici AB, Schröder-Kress N, 
Aigner T, Kirchner T, Reis A, Brandstätter JH, Rauch A.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Erlangen, 
Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany. 
christian.thiel@uk-erlangen.de

Defects of ciliogenesis have been implicated in a wide range of human phenotypes 
and play a crucial role in signal transduction and cell-cycle coordination. We 
used homozygosity mapping in two families with autosomal-recessive short-rib 
polydactyly syndrome Majewski type to identify mutations in NEK1 as an 
underlying cause of this lethal osteochondrodysplasia. NEK1 encodes a 
serine/threonine kinase with proposed function in DNA double-strand repair, 
neuronal development, and coordination of cell-cycle-associated ciliogenesis. We 
found that absence of functional full-length NEK1 severely reduces cilia number 
and alters ciliar morphology in vivo. We further substantiate a proposed digenic 
diallelic inheritance of ciliopathies by the identification of heterozygous 
mutations in NEK1 and DYNC2H1 in an additional family. Notably, these findings 
not only increase the broad spectrum of ciliar disorders, but suggest a 
correlation between the degree of defective microtubule or centriole elongation 
and organization and the severity of the resulting phenotype.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.12.004
PMCID: PMC3014367
PMID: 21211617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]