---
reference_id: "PMID:35595417"
title: Diet in the Pathogenesis and Management of Crohn's Disease.
authors:
- Gu P
- Feagins LA
journal: Gastroenterol Clin North Am
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.gtc.2021.12.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diet in the Pathogenesis and Management of Crohn's Disease.
**Authors:** Gu P, Feagins LA
**Journal:** Gastroenterol Clin North Am (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gtc.2021.12.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gtc.2021.12.008)

## Content

1. Gastroenterol Clin North Am. 2022 Jun;51(2):319-335. doi: 
10.1016/j.gtc.2021.12.008. Epub 2022 Apr 22.

Diet in the Pathogenesis and Management of Crohn's Disease.

Gu P(1), Feagins LA(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Digestive and Liver Diseases, UT Southwestern Medical Center, 
5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Center for Inflammatory Bowel Diseases, University of 
Texas at Austin, Dell Medical School, Health Discovery Building, Z0900 1601 
Trinity Street, Building B, Austin, TX 78712, USA. Electronic address: 
Linda.Feagins@austin.utexas.edu.

Crohn's disease (CD) is chronic immune-related disease of the gastrointestinal 
tract hypothesized to be caused by an interplay of genetic predisposition and 
environmental exposures. With the global incidence increasing, more patients are 
exploring dietary exposures to explain and treat CD. However, most patients 
report minimal nutritional education from their provider, and providers report 
few nutritional resources to help them educate patients. This highlights the 
previous deficit of literature describing the role and influence of diet in CD. 
To address this need, this article reviews available literature on the possible 
roles of diet in the pathogenesis, exacerbation, and treatment of CD.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gtc.2021.12.008
PMID: 35595417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]