---
reference_id: "PMID:21902652"
title: "Molecular genetics and mechanisms of disease in distal hereditary motor neuropathies: insights directing future genetic studies."
authors:
- Drew AP
- Blair IP
- Nicholson GA
journal: Curr Mol Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.2174/156652411797536714
keywords:
- Animals
- Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease/genetics
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Heat-Shock Proteins/genetics
- Hereditary Sensory and Motor Neuropathy/genetics
- Humans
- "Models, Genetic"
- "Muscular Atrophy, Spinal/genetics"
- Mutation
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular genetics and mechanisms of disease in distal hereditary motor neuropathies: insights directing future genetic studies.
**Authors:** Drew AP, Blair IP, Nicholson GA
**Journal:** Curr Mol Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.2174/156652411797536714](https://doi.org/10.2174/156652411797536714)

## Content

1. Curr Mol Med. 2011 Nov;11(8):650-65. doi: 10.2174/156652411797536714.

Molecular genetics and mechanisms of disease in distal hereditary motor 
neuropathies: insights directing future genetic studies.

Drew AP(1), Blair IP, Nicholson GA.

Author information:
(1)University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

The distal hereditary motor neuropathies (dHMNs) are a clinically and 
genetically heterogeneous group of disorders that primarily affect motor 
neurons, without significant sensory involvement. New dHMN genes continue to be 
identified. There are now 11 causative genes described for dHMN, and an 
additional five genetic loci with unidentified genes. This genetic heterogeneity 
has further delineated the classification of dHMN, which was previously 
classified according to mode of inheritance, age at onset, and additional 
complicating features. Some overlap between phenotypically distinct forms of 
dHMN is also apparent. The mutated genes identified to-date in dHMN include 
HSPB1, HSPB8, HSPB3, DCTN1, GARS, PLEKHG5, BSCL2, SETX, IGHMBP2, ATP7A and 
TRPV4. The pathogenesis of mutations remains to be fully elucidated, however 
common pathogenic mechanisms are emerging. These include disruption of axonal 
transport, RNA processing defects, protein aggregation and inclusion body 
formation, disrupted calcium channel activity, and loss of neuroprotective 
signalling. Some of these dHMN genes are also mutated in Charcot-Marie-Tooth 
(CMT) disease and spinal muscular atrophy (SMA). This review examines the 
growing number of identified dHMN genes, discusses recent insights into the 
functions of these genes and possible pathogenic mechanisms, and looks at the 
increasing overlap between dHMN and the other neuropathies CMT2 and SMA.

DOI: 10.2174/156652411797536714
PMID: 21902652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]