---
reference_id: "PMID:36656970"
title: Immunology of Giant Cell Arteritis.
authors:
- Weyand CM
- Goronzy JJ
journal: Circ Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.122.322128
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunology of Giant Cell Arteritis.
**Authors:** Weyand CM, Goronzy JJ
**Journal:** Circ Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.122.322128](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.122.322128)

## Content

1. Circ Res. 2023 Jan 20;132(2):238-250. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.122.322128. Epub
 2023 Jan 19.

Immunology of Giant Cell Arteritis.

Weyand CM(1)(2)(3)(4), Goronzy JJ(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (C.M.W., J.J.G.), Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine, 
Rochester, MN.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine (C.M.W.), Mayo Clinic Alix School of 
Medicine, Rochester, MN.
(3)Department of Immunology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science 
(C.M.W., J.J.G.).
(4)Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, CA (C.M.W., 
J.J.G.).

Giant cell arteritis is an autoimmune disease of medium and large arteries, 
characterized by granulomatous inflammation of the three-layered vessel wall 
that results in vaso-occlusion, wall dissection, and aneurysm formation. The 
immunopathogenesis of giant cell arteritis is an accumulative process in which a 
prolonged asymptomatic period is followed by uncontrolled innate immunity, a 
breakdown in self-tolerance, the transition of autoimmunity from the periphery 
into the vessel wall and, eventually, the progressive evolution of vessel wall 
inflammation. Each of the steps in pathogenesis corresponds to specific 
immuno-phenotypes that provide mechanistic insights into how the immune system 
attacks and damages blood vessels. Clinically evident disease begins with 
inappropriate activation of myeloid cells triggering the release of hepatic 
acute phase proteins and inducing extravascular manifestations, such as muscle 
pains and stiffness diagnosed as polymyalgia rheumatica. Loss of self-tolerance 
in the adaptive immune system is linked to aberrant signaling in the NOTCH 
pathway, leading to expansion of NOTCH1+CD4+ T cells and the functional decline 
of NOTCH4+ T regulatory cells (Checkpoint 1). A defect in the endothelial cell 
barrier of adventitial vasa vasorum networks marks Checkpoint 2; the invasion of 
monocytes, macrophages and T cells into the arterial wall. Due to the failure of 
the immuno-inhibitory PD-1 (programmed cell death protein 1)/PD-L1 (programmed 
cell death ligand 1) pathway, wall-infiltrating immune cells arrive in a 
permissive tissues microenvironment, where multiple T cell effector lineages 
thrive, shift toward high glycolytic activity, and support the development of 
tissue-damaging macrophages, including multinucleated giant cells (Checkpoint 
3). Eventually, the vascular lesions are occupied by self-renewing T cells that 
provide autonomy to the disease process and limit the therapeutic effectiveness 
of currently used immunosuppressants. The multi-step process deviating 
protective to pathogenic immunity offers an array of interception points that 
provide opportunities for the prevention and therapeutic management of this 
devastating autoimmune disease.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.122.322128
PMCID: PMC9870348
PMID: 36656970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures The authors declare that no conflict 
of interest exists.