---
reference_id: "PMID:33107323"
title: "Hypogonadism: Is It Always Hypogonadotropic in an Adolescent With a Cleft Palate? A Surprising Case of Klinefelter Syndrome."
authors:
- Özcabı B
- Vatansever M
- Güven A
journal: Cleft Palate Craniofac J
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1177/1055665620967601
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypogonadism: Is It Always Hypogonadotropic in an Adolescent With a Cleft Palate? A Surprising Case of Klinefelter Syndrome.
**Authors:** Özcabı B, Vatansever M, Güven A
**Journal:** Cleft Palate Craniofac J (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1055665620967601](https://doi.org/10.1177/1055665620967601)

## Content

1. Cleft Palate Craniofac J. 2021 Jun;58(6):787-790. doi:
10.1177/1055665620967601.  Epub 2020 Oct 27.

Hypogonadism: Is It Always Hypogonadotropic in an Adolescent With a Cleft 
Palate? A Surprising Case of Klinefelter Syndrome.

Özcabı B(1)(2), Vatansever M(1), Güven A(1).

Author information:
(1)HSU, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, 
147023Zeynep Kamil Women and Children's Diseases Training and Research Hospital, 
Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Yeni Yuzyil Medical School, Istanbul, Turkey.

Pituitary hormone deficiencies may occur in children with midline defects; in 
these cases, hypogonadism is usually hypogonadotropic. Herein, we report a boy 
at the age of 13.8 years with mild mental retardation, previously operated for 
complete cleft palate (isolated) and presented with hypoglycemia due to isolated 
secondary adrenal insufficiency, who further had a decrease in testicular size 
with increased follicle-stimulating hormone level (hypergonadotropic 
hypogonadism) and diagnosed with Klinefelter syndrome. Klinefelter syndrome in 
childhood is rarely diagnosed and cases are observed in a wide spectrum. 
Although some regional duplications of the X chromosome also show midline 
defects such as spina bifida-neural tube defects, mental retardation, 
hypopituitarism (mostly growth hormone deficiency); coexistence of Klinefelter 
syndrome and isolated secondary adrenal deficiency/midline defect in our case 
may also be coincidental. However, to our knowledge, this is the first case in 
literature with this association in a patient with a 47, XXY karyotype.

DOI: 10.1177/1055665620967601
PMID: 33107323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]