---
reference_id: "PMID:17143285"
title: Germline gain-of-function mutations in SOS1 cause Noonan syndrome.
authors:
- Roberts AE
- Araki T
- Swanson KD
- Montgomery KT
- Schiripo TA
- Joshi VA
- Li L
- Yassin Y
- Tamburino AM
- Neel BG
- Kucherlapati RS
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1038/ng1926
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Germline gain-of-function mutations in SOS1 cause Noonan syndrome.
**Authors:** Roberts AE, Araki T, Swanson KD, Montgomery KT, Schiripo TA, Joshi VA, Li L, Yassin Y, Tamburino AM, Neel BG, Kucherlapati RS
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1926](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1926)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2007 Jan;39(1):70-4. doi: 10.1038/ng1926. Epub 2006 Dec 3.

Germline gain-of-function mutations in SOS1 cause Noonan syndrome.

Roberts AE(1), Araki T, Swanson KD, Montgomery KT, Schiripo TA, Joshi VA, Li L, 
Yassin Y, Tamburino AM, Neel BG, Kucherlapati RS.

Author information:
(1)Harvard Partners Center for Genetics and Genomics and Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2007 Jan;39(1):8-9. doi: 10.1038/ng0107-8.

Noonan syndrome, the most common single-gene cause of congenital heart disease, 
is characterized by short stature, characteristic facies, learning problems and 
leukemia predisposition. Gain-of-function mutations in PTPN11, encoding the 
tyrosine phosphatase SHP2, cause approximately 50% of Noonan syndrome cases. 
SHP2 is required for RAS-ERK MAP kinase (MAPK) cascade activation, and Noonan 
syndrome mutants enhance ERK activation ex vivo and in mice. KRAS mutations 
account for <5% of cases of Noonan syndrome, but the gene(s) responsible for the 
remainder are unknown. We identified missense mutations in SOS1, which encodes 
an essential RAS guanine nucleotide-exchange factor (RAS-GEF), in approximately 
20% of cases of Noonan syndrome without PTPN11 mutation. The prevalence of 
specific cardiac defects differs in SOS1 mutation-associated Noonan syndrome. 
Noonan syndrome-associated SOS1 mutations are hypermorphs encoding products that 
enhance RAS and ERK activation. Our results identify SOS1 mutants as a major 
cause of Noonan syndrome, representing the first example of activating GEF 
mutations associated with human disease and providing new insights into RAS-GEF 
regulation.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1926
PMID: 17143285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]