---
reference_id: "PMID:38294108"
title: "Systematic Review: Clinical Features, Antimicrobial Treatment, and Outcomes of Human Tularemia, 1993-2023."
authors:
- Nelson CA
- Winberg J
- Bostic TD
- Davis KM
- Fleck-Derderian S
journal: Clin Infect Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/cid/ciad736
keywords:
- Humans
- "Tularemia/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Francisella tularensis
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- Ciprofloxacin/therapeutic use
- Aminoglycosides/therapeutic use
- Tetracyclines/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systematic Review: Clinical Features, Antimicrobial Treatment, and Outcomes of Human Tularemia, 1993-2023.
**Authors:** Nelson CA, Winberg J, Bostic TD, Davis KM, Fleck-Derderian S
**Journal:** Clin Infect Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cid/ciad736](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciad736)

## Content

1. Clin Infect Dis. 2024 Jan 31;78(Suppl 1):S15-S28. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciad736.

Systematic Review: Clinical Features, Antimicrobial Treatment, and Outcomes of 
Human Tularemia, 1993-2023.

Nelson CA(1), Winberg J(2), Bostic TD(1)(3), Davis KM(4), Fleck-Derderian S(1).

Author information:
(1)Bacterial Diseases Branch, Division of Vector-Borne Diseases, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA.
(2)Alaka`ina Foundation, Contracting Agency for Division of Vector-Borne 
Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Fort Collins, Colorado, 
USA.
(3)Oak Ridge Institute of Science and Education, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention Fellowship Program, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, USA.
(4)Gilstrap Obstetrics and Gynecology Fellow, CDC Foundation, Atlanta, Georgia, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: Francisella tularensis, the causative agent of tularemia, is endemic 
throughout the Northern Hemisphere and requires as few as 10 organisms to cause 
disease, making this potential bioterrorism agent one of the most infectious 
bacterial pathogens known. Aminoglycosides, tetracyclines, and, more recently, 
fluoroquinolones are used for treatment of tularemia; however, data on the 
relative effectiveness of these and other antimicrobial classes are limited.
METHODS: Nine databases, including Medline, Global Health, and Embase, were 
systematically searched for articles containing terms related to tularemia. 
Articles with case-level data on tularemia diagnosis, antimicrobial treatment, 
and patient outcome were included. Patient demographics, clinical findings, 
antimicrobial administration, and outcome (eg, intubation, fatality) were 
abstracted using a standardized form.
RESULTS: Of the 8878 publications identified and screened, 410 articles 
describing 870 cases from 1993 to 2023 met inclusion criteria. Cases were 
reported from 35 countries; more than half were from the United States, Turkey, 
or Spain. The most common clinical forms were ulceroglandular, oropharyngeal, 
glandular, and pneumonic disease. Among patients treated with aminoglycosides (n 
= 452 [52%]), fluoroquinolones (n = 339 [39%]), or tetracyclines (n = 419 
[48%]), the fatality rate was 0.7%, 0.9%, and 1.2%, respectively. Patients with 
pneumonic disease who received ciprofloxacin had no fatalities and the lowest 
rates of thoracentesis/pleural effusion drainage and intubation compared to 
those who received aminoglycosides and tetracyclines.
CONCLUSIONS: Aminoglycosides, fluoroquinolones, and tetracyclines are effective 
antimicrobials for treatment of tularemia, regardless of clinical manifestation. 
For pneumonic disease specifically, ciprofloxacin may have slight advantages 
compared to other antimicrobials.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Infectious Diseases Society of 
America 2024.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciad736
PMID: 38294108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential conflicts of interest. The authors: No 
reported conflicts of interest. All authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for 
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest.