---
reference_id: "PMID:10980888"
title: Percutaneous transluminal septal myocardial ablation.
authors:
- Rubin DN
- Tuzcu EM
- Lever HM
journal: Curr Cardiol Rep
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1007/s11886-000-0014-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Percutaneous transluminal septal myocardial ablation.
**Authors:** Rubin DN, Tuzcu EM, Lever HM
**Journal:** Curr Cardiol Rep (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11886-000-0014-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11886-000-0014-5)

## Content

1. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2000 Mar;2(2):160-5. doi: 10.1007/s11886-000-0014-5.

Percutaneous transluminal septal myocardial ablation.

Rubin DN(1), Tuzcu EM, Lever HM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Desk F-15, The Cleveland Clinic Foundation, 9500 
Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Percutaneous transluminal septal myocardial ablation (PTSMA) is a new, 
investigational, catheter-based treatment for severely symptomatic, medically 
refractory hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy. A balloon catheter is used 
to cannulate and isolate the first or second septal perforator coronary artery. 
Following balloon inflation and intracoronary myocardial contrast 
echocardiography, ethyl alcohol is injected through the catheter lumen to cause 
proximal interventricular septum infarction and relief of outflow tract 
obstruction with improved patient symptoms. Septal scarring and thinning with 
reductions in the outflow tract gradients ensues over the following 6 to 12 
weeks. Most patients have symptomatic improvement, at least moderate reductions 
in outflow tract gradients, and possibly improvement in exercise capacity. The 
most common procedural complication is the development of high-grade 
atrioventricular block necessitating implantation of a permanent pacemaker in 
25% of patients. Compared with surgical myectomy, PTSMA has the advantage of 
being minimally invasive, easily repeated, and with relatively low major 
morbidity/mortality risk for patients with comorbid conditions. The findings 
from recently initiated international registries will be helpful in assessing 
the overall success and complication rates with PTSMA.

DOI: 10.1007/s11886-000-0014-5
PMID: 10980888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]