---
reference_id: "PMID:34661367"
title: Phase-separated foci of EML4-ALK facilitate signalling and depend upon an active kinase conformation.
authors:
- Sampson J
- Richards MW
- Choi J
- Fry AM
- Bayliss R
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.15252/embr.202153693
keywords:
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/genetics
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung"
- Humans
- Lung Neoplasms/genetics
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics, metabolism"
- Protein Conformation
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phase-separated foci of EML4-ALK facilitate signalling and depend upon an active kinase conformation.
**Authors:** Sampson J, Richards MW, Choi J, Fry AM, Bayliss R
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.15252/embr.202153693](https://doi.org/10.15252/embr.202153693)

## Content

1. EMBO Rep. 2021 Dec 6;22(12):e53693. doi: 10.15252/embr.202153693. Epub 2021
Oct  18.

Phase-separated foci of EML4-ALK facilitate signalling and depend upon an active
kinase conformation.

Sampson J(1), Richards MW(1), Choi J(2), Fry AM(3), Bayliss R(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Astbury Centre for Structural
Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds,
UK.
(2)Department of Pathology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Leicester, Leicester,
UK.

Variants of the oncogenic EML4-ALK fusion protein contain a similar region of
ALK encompassing the kinase domain, but different portions of EML4. Here, we
show that EML4-ALK V1 and V3 proteins form cytoplasmic foci that contain
components of the MAPK, PLCγ and PI3K signalling pathways. The ALK inhibitors
ceritinib and lorlatinib dissolve these foci and EML4-ALK V3 but not V1 protein
re-localises to microtubules, an effect recapitulated in a catalytically
inactive EML4-ALK mutant. Mutations that promote a constitutively active ALK
stabilise the cytoplasmic foci even in the presence of these inhibitors. In
contrast, the inhibitor alectinib increases foci formation of both wild-type and
catalytically inactive EML4-ALK V3 proteins, but not a Lys-Glu salt bridge
mutant. We propose that EML4-ALK foci formation occurs as a result of transient
association of stable EML4-ALK trimers mediated through an active conformation
of the ALK kinase domain. Our results demonstrate the formation of EML4-ALK
cytoplasmic foci that orchestrate oncogenic signalling and reveal that their
assembly depends upon the conformational state of the catalytic domain and can
be differentially modulated by structurally divergent ALK inhibitors.

© 2021 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/embr.202153693
PMCID: PMC8647013
PMID: 34661367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest.
