---
reference_id: "PMID:40791837"
title: Rhinophyma Treatment with Blue Laser.
authors:
- Miranda E
- Villarreal IM
- Arenas O
- Plaza G
journal: Iran J Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.22038/ijorl.2025.83754.3818
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rhinophyma Treatment with Blue Laser.
**Authors:** Miranda E, Villarreal IM, Arenas O, Plaza G
**Journal:** Iran J Otorhinolaryngol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.22038/ijorl.2025.83754.3818](https://doi.org/10.22038/ijorl.2025.83754.3818)

## Content

1. Iran J Otorhinolaryngol. 2025;37(4):227-231. doi: 
10.22038/ijorl.2025.83754.3818.

Rhinophyma Treatment with Blue Laser.

Miranda E(1), Villarreal IM(1)(2), Arenas O(1)(3), Plaza G(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, 
Hospital Universitario de Fuenlabrada, Universidad Rey Juan Carlos. Madrid, 
Spain.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, 
Hospital Universitario Nstra Sra del Rosario, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, 
Hospital Universitario Sanitas La Zarzuela. Madrid, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: Rhinophyma is a chronic skin pathology that mainly affects the 
nose. It is featured by thickening of the skin and soft tissue of the nose. 
Treatment options include topical medication, systemic drugs, electrocautery, 
cryosurgery, laser therapy, dermabrasion, and in some cases, surgical procedures 
like rhinoplasty. The aim of this report is to demonstrate the usefulness of the 
blue laser and its efficacy in the treatment of rhinophyma.
CASE REPORT: We report two cases of patients diagnosed with rhinophyma who 
underwent blue laser treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of blue laser to treat rhinophyma has shown to be an 
effective and safe procedure with very promising results.

©2025 Mashhad University of Medical Sciences.

DOI: 10.22038/ijorl.2025.83754.3818
PMCID: PMC12335665
PMID: 40791837

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no potential conflicts of 
interest, authorship, and/or publication of this article.