---
reference_id: "PMID:10206194"
title: "Hyperthyroidism: multiple possibilities in the female patient."
authors:
- Daniels GH
journal: Int J Fertil Womens Med
year: '1999'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hyperthyroidism: multiple possibilities in the female patient.
**Authors:** Daniels GH
**Journal:** Int J Fertil Womens Med (1999)

## Content

1. Int J Fertil Womens Med. 1999 Jan-Feb;44(1):6-11.

Hyperthyroidism: multiple possibilities in the female patient.

Daniels GH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston 02114, USA.

Hyperthyroidism is a clinical syndrome characterized by an excess of thyroid 
hormone, and its clinical consequences. A suppressed serum TSH concentration is 
the earliest biochemical manifestation of hyperthyroidism. Subclinical 
hyperthyroidism, characterized by suppressed serum TSH concentration alone, has 
important clinical consequences. These include bone loss in postmenopausal women 
and atrial fibrillation. A twenty-four hour radioiodine uptake and radionuclide 
scan are indispensable in the differential diagnosis of hyperthyroidism. Graves' 
Disease, an autoimmune disorder, demonstrates a strong female prevalence; the 
twenty-four hour radioiodine uptake is normal or elevated. Therapeutic options, 
including anti-thyroid drugs, radioactive iodine (131I) and surgery are utilized 
in all age groups. These include use in women during the reproductive years. 
Toxic nodular goiter and "hot" nodules are less common forms of hyperthyroidism; 
these too have normal or elevated radioiodine uptake, with characteristic 
radionuclide scans. Hyperthyroidism with a near-zero radioiodine uptake also has 
important clinical implications. Factitious (exogenous) hyperthyroidism is 
characterized by a low serum thyroglobulin concentration. Treatment consists of 
decreasing the dosage of, or withdrawing, thyroid hormone. Painful subacute 
thyroiditis, a post-vital syndrome, causes spontaneously resolving 
hyperthyroidism, which is often followed by hypothyroidism. The most common 
cause of hyperthyroidism with a low radioiodine uptake is painless, lymphocytic 
subacute thyroiditis. Here too, hyperthyroidism spontaneously resolves and often 
passes through a hypothyroid phase. This phase often requires therapy, and 
permanent mild or severe hypothyroidism may result.

PMID: 10206194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]