---
reference_id: "PMID:34870344"
title: "A Machine-Learning Derived Huntington's Disease Progression Model: Insights for Clinical Trial Design."
authors:
- Mohan A
- Sun Z
- Ghosh S
- Li Y
- Sathe S
- Hu J
- Sampaio C
journal: Mov Disord
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/mds.28866
keywords:
- Bayes Theorem
- Clinical Trials as Topic
- Disease Progression
- Humans
- Huntington Disease
- Longitudinal Studies
- Machine Learning
- Middle Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Machine-Learning Derived Huntington's Disease Progression Model: Insights for Clinical Trial Design.
**Authors:** Mohan A, Sun Z, Ghosh S, Li Y, Sathe S, Hu J, Sampaio C
**Journal:** Mov Disord (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.28866](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.28866)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 2022 Mar;37(3):553-562. doi: 10.1002/mds.28866. Epub 2021 Dec 6.

A Machine-Learning Derived Huntington's Disease Progression Model: Insights for 
Clinical Trial Design.

Mohan A(1), Sun Z(2), Ghosh S(2), Li Y(2), Sathe S(1), Hu J(2), Sampaio C.

Author information:
(1)Center for Computational Health, CHDI Management/CHDI Foundation, Yorktown 
Heights, New York, USA.
(2)IBM Research, Princeton, New Jersey, USA.

Erratum in
    Mov Disord. 2022 Dec;37(12):2468. doi: 10.1002/mds.29259.

Comment in
    Mov Disord. 2022 Mar;37(3):441-443. doi: 10.1002/mds.28943.

BACKGROUND: Applying machine-learning algorithms to large datasets such as those 
available in Huntington's disease offers the opportunity to discover hidden 
patterns, often not discernible to clinical observation.
OBJECTIVES: To develop and validate a model of Huntington's disease progression 
using probabilistic machine learning methods.
METHODS: Longitudinal data encompassing 2079 assessment measures from four 
observational studies (PREDICT-HD, REGISTRY, TRACK-HD, and Enroll-HD) were 
integrated and machine-learning methods (Bayesian latent-variable analysis and 
continuous-time hidden Markov models) were applied to develop a probabilistic 
model of disease progression. The model was validated using a separate Enroll-HD 
dataset and compared with existing clinical reference assessments (Unified 
Huntington's Disease Rating Scale [UHDRS] diagnostic confidence level, total 
functional capacity, and total motor scores) and CAG-age product.
RESULTS: Nine disease states were discovered based on 44 motor, cognitive, and 
functional measures, which correlated with reference assessments. The validation 
set included 3158 participants (mean age, 48.4 years) of whom 61.5% had manifest 
disease. Analysis of transition times showed that "early-disease" states 1 and 
2, which occur before motor diagnosis, lasted ~16 years. Increasing numbers of 
participants had motor onset during "transition" states 3 to 5, which 
collectively lasted ~10 years, and the "late-disease" states 6 to 9 also lasted 
~10 years. The annual probability of conversion from one of the nine identified 
disease states to the next ranged from 5% to 27%.
CONCLUSIONS: The natural history of Huntington's disease can be described by 
nine disease states of increasing severity. The ability to derive 
characteristics of disease states and probabilities for progression through 
these states will improve trial design and participant selection. © 2021 
International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

© 2021 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.28866
PMID: 34870344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]