---
reference_id: "PMID:33417206"
title: Peroxisome Biogenesis Disorders.
authors:
- Honsho M
- Okumoto K
- Tamura S
- Fujiki Y
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-60204-8_4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peroxisome Biogenesis Disorders.
**Authors:** Honsho M, Okumoto K, Tamura S, Fujiki Y
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-030-60204-8_4](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-60204-8_4)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2020;1299:45-54. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-60204-8_4.

Peroxisome Biogenesis Disorders.

Honsho M(1), Okumoto K(2), Tamura S(3), Fujiki Y(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Rheological Functions of Food, Fukuoka, Japan.
(2)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Kyushu University Graduate 
School, Fukuoka, Japan.
(3)Faculty of Arts and Science, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(4)Institute of Rheological Functions of Food, Fukuoka, Japan. 
yfujiki@kyudai.jp.
(5)Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. 
yfujiki@kyudai.jp.

Peroxisomes are presented in all eukaryotic cells and play essential roles in 
many of lipid metabolic pathways, including β-oxidation of fatty acids and 
synthesis of ether-linked glycerophospholipids, such as plasmalogens. Impaired 
peroxisome biogenesis, including defects of membrane assembly, import of 
peroxisomal matrix proteins, and division of peroxisome, causes peroxisome 
biogenesis disorders (PBDs). Fourteen complementation groups of PBDs are found, 
and their complementing genes termed PEXs are isolated. Several new mutations in 
peroxins from patients with mild PBD phenotype or patients with phenotypes 
unrelated to the commonly observed impairments of PBD patients are found by 
next-generation sequencing. Exploring a dysfunctional step(s) caused by the 
mutation is important for unveiling the pathogenesis of novel mutation by means 
of cellular and biochemical analyses.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-60204-8_4
PMID: 33417206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]