---
reference_id: "PMID:38414785"
title: "Whipple's disease of the respiratory system: A case report."
authors:
- Deng Y
- Zhang H
- Lu J
- Zhou Z
- Zhang T
- Cui X
journal: Exp Ther Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3892/etm.2024.12421
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whipple's disease of the respiratory system: A case report.
**Authors:** Deng Y, Zhang H, Lu J, Zhou Z, Zhang T, Cui X
**Journal:** Exp Ther Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3892/etm.2024.12421](https://doi.org/10.3892/etm.2024.12421)

## Content

1. Exp Ther Med. 2024 Feb 7;27(4):133. doi: 10.3892/etm.2024.12421. eCollection 
2024 Apr.

Whipple's disease of the respiratory system: A case report.

Deng Y(1), Zhang H(1), Lu J(1), Zhou Z(2), Zhang T(2), Cui X(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The Fifth People's 
Hospital of Chongqing, Chongqing 400062, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The Second Affiliated 
Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400010, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, People's Hospital of Shizhu Tujia 
Autonomous County, Chongqing 409199, P.R. China.

Whipple's disease (WD) is a multiple-system chronic disease caused by Tropheryma 
whipplei (T. whipplei) infection. The present study describes 3 cases of WD with 
clinical manifestations of cough, chest pain, headache, dyspnea, sputum, joint 
pain, abdominal pain, diarrhea and weight loss. Chest computed tomography (CT) 
showed signs of plaques, nodules and pleural thickening; and bronchoscopic 
alveolar lavage fluid metagenomic-sequencing indicated that it was T. whipplei. 
One patient was treated with meropenem as the starting regimen and two patients 
were treated with ceftriaxone as the starting regimen. Furthermore, two patients 
were provided with a maintenance regimen of cotrimoxazole and one was given a 
maintenance regimen of minocycline, which was combined with meropenem and 
ceftriaxone in order to improve their cough, chest pain, headache and dyspnea 
symptoms. To the best of our knowledge, there are few reports on WD of the 
respiratory system caused by T. whipplei, and differential diagnosis is the key 
to clinical diagnosis. When WD of the respiratory system is difficult to 
diagnose, metagenomic second-generation sequencing (mNGS) may be a better 
choice, which can achieve early diagnosis and early treatment. However, its 
clinical value is still limited; therefore, more research needs to be conducted 
in the future.

Copyright: © Deng et al.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2024.12421
PMCID: PMC10895612
PMID: 38414785

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.