---
reference_id: "PMID:37226227"
title: "Biomarkers for myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS): a systematic review."
authors:
- Maksoud R
- Magawa C
- Eaton-Fitch N
- Thapaliya K
- Marshall-Gradisnik S
journal: BMC Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12916-023-02893-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biomarkers for myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS): a systematic review.
**Authors:** Maksoud R, Magawa C, Eaton-Fitch N, Thapaliya K, Marshall-Gradisnik S
**Journal:** BMC Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12916-023-02893-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-023-02893-9)

## Content

1. BMC Med. 2023 May 24;21(1):189. doi: 10.1186/s12916-023-02893-9.

Biomarkers for myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS): a 
systematic review.

Maksoud R(1)(2)(3), Magawa C(4)(5)(6), Eaton-Fitch N(4)(5), Thapaliya K(4)(5), 
Marshall-Gradisnik S(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)National Centre for Neuroimmunology and Emerging Diseases (NCNED), Menzies 
Health Institute Queensland, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Australia. 
r.maksoud@griffith.edu.au.
(2)Consortium Health International for Myalgic Encephalomyelitis, Griffith 
University, Gold Coast, Australia. r.maksoud@griffith.edu.au.
(3)School of Pharmacy and Medical Science, Griffith University, Gold Coast, 
Australia. r.maksoud@griffith.edu.au.
(4)National Centre for Neuroimmunology and Emerging Diseases (NCNED), Menzies 
Health Institute Queensland, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Australia.
(5)Consortium Health International for Myalgic Encephalomyelitis, Griffith 
University, Gold Coast, Australia.
(6)School of Pharmacy and Medical Science, Griffith University, Gold Coast, 
Australia.

BACKGROUND: Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) is a 
multifaceted condition that affects most body systems. There is currently no 
known diagnostic biomarker; instead, diagnosis is dependent on application of 
symptom-based case criteria following exclusion of any other potential medical 
conditions. While there are some studies that report potential biomarkers for 
ME/CFS, their efficacy has not been validated. The aim of this systematic review 
is to collate and appraise literature pertaining to a potential biomarker(s) 
which may effectively differentiate ME/CFS patients from healthy controls.
METHODS: This systematic review was conducted according to the Preferred 
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses and Cochrane review 
guidelines. PubMed, Embase and Scopus were systematically searched for articles 
containing "biomarker" and "ME/CFS" keywords in the abstract or title and if 
they included the following criteria: (1) were observational studies published 
between December 1994 and April 2022; (2) involved adult human participants; (3) 
full text is available in English (4) original research; (5) diagnosis of ME/CFS 
patients made according to the Fukuda criteria (1994), Canadian Consensus 
Criteria (2003), International Consensus Criteria (2011) or Institute of 
Medicine Criteria (2015); (6) study investigated potential biomarkers of ME/CFS 
compared to healthy controls. Quality and Bias were assessed using the Joanna 
Briggs Institute Critical Appraisal Checklist for Case Control Studies.
RESULTS: A total of 101 publications were included in this systematic review. 
Potential biomarkers ranged from genetic/epigenetic (19.8%), immunological 
(29.7%), metabolomics/mitochondrial/microbiome (14.85%), 
endovascular/circulatory (17.82%), neurological (7.92%), ion channel (8.91%) and 
physical dysfunction biomarkers (8.91%). Most of the potential biomarkers 
reported were blood-based (79.2%). Use of lymphocytes as a model to investigate 
ME/CFS pathology was prominent among immune-based biomarkers. Most biomarkers 
had secondary (43.56%) or tertiary (54.47%) selectivity, which is the ability 
for the biomarker to identify a disease-causing agent, and a moderate (59.40%) 
to complex (39.60%) ease-of-detection, including the requirement of specialised 
equipment.
CONCLUSIONS: All potential ME/CFS biomarkers differed in efficiency, quality, 
and translatability as a diagnostic marker. Reproducibility of findings between 
the included publications were limited, however, several studies validated the 
involvement of immune dysfunction in the pathology of ME/CFS and the use of 
lymphocytes as a model to investigate the pathomechanism of illness. The 
heterogeneity shown across many of the included studies highlights the need for 
multidisciplinary research and uniform protocols in ME/CFS biomarker research.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12916-023-02893-9
PMCID: PMC10206551
PMID: 37226227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as potential conflicts of interest. The authors disclose Patent 
Cooperation Treaty application number WO2016176726A1 and Australian provisional 
application 2022902253.