---
reference_id: PMID:38388492
title: "Rare variants in alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency: a systematic literature review."
authors:
- Ferrarotti I
- Wencker M
- Chorostowska-Wynimko J
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03069-1
keywords:
- Humans
- alpha 1-Antitrypsin/genetics
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/genetics, complications"
- Germany
- Italy
- Lung
- Spain
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rare variants in alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency: a systematic literature review.
**Authors:** Ferrarotti I, Wencker M, Chorostowska-Wynimko J
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-024-03069-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-024-03069-1)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 Feb 22;19(1):82. doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03069-1.

Rare variants in alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency: a systematic literature review.

Ferrarotti I(1), Wencker M(2), Chorostowska-Wynimko J(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Diagnosis of Inherited Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency, Department 
of Internal Medicine and Therapeutics, Pneumology Unit, University of Pavia, 
Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy. 
I.Ferrarotti@smatteo.pv.it.
(2)conresp, Loerzweiler, Germany.
(3)Department of Genetics and Clinical Immunology, National Institute of 
Tuberculosis and Lung Diseases, Warsaw, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Alpha 1 Antitrypsin Deficiency (AATD) is a largely underrecognized 
genetic condition characterized by low Alpha 1 Antitrypsin (AAT) serum levels, 
resulting from variations in SERPINA1. Many individuals affected by AATD are 
thought to be undiagnosed, leading to poor patient outcomes. The Z (c.1096G > A; 
p.Glu366Lys) and S (c.863A > T; p.Glu288Val) deficiency variants are the most 
frequently found variants in AATD, with the Z variant present in most 
individuals diagnosed with AATD. However, there are many other less frequent 
variants known to contribute to lung and/or liver disease in AATD. To identify 
the most common rare variants associated with AATD, we conducted a systematic 
literature review with the aim of assessing AATD variation patterns across the 
world.
METHODS: A systematic literature search was performed to identify published 
studies reporting AATD/SERPINA1 variants. Study eligibility was assessed for the 
potential to contain relevant information, with quality assessment and data 
extraction performed on studies meeting all eligibility criteria. AATD variants 
were grouped by variant type and linked to the geographical region identified 
from the reporting article.
RESULTS: Of the 4945 articles identified by the search string, 864 contained 
useful information for this study. Most articles came from the United States, 
followed by the United Kingdom, Germany, Spain, and Italy. Collectively, the 
articles identified a total of 7631 rare variants and 216 types of rare variant 
across 80 counties. The F (c.739C > T; p.Arg247Cys) variant was identified 1,281 
times and was the most reported known rare variant worldwide, followed by the I 
(c.187C > T; p.Arg63Cys) variant. Worldwide, there were 1492 Null/rare variants 
that were unidentified at the time of source article publication and 75 rare 
novel variants reported only once.
CONCLUSION: AATD goes far beyond the Z and S variants, suggesting there may be 
widespread underdiagnosis of patients with the condition. Each geographical 
region has its own distinctive variety of AATD variants and, therefore, 
comprehensive testing is needed to fully understand the true number and type of 
variants that exist. Comprehensive testing is also needed to ensure accurate 
diagnosis, optimize treatment strategies, and improve outcomes for patients with 
AATD.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-024-03069-1
PMCID: PMC10885523
PMID: 38388492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: IF reports personal fees from Grifols and grants 
from CSL Behring, outside the submitted work. M.W. reports personal fees for 
consultancy from CSL Behring. JC-W reports grants, personal fees, non-financial 
support from Grifols, Boehringer Ingelheim, and CSL Behring, personal fees, 
non-financial support from Novartis, and personal fees from GSK, outside the 
submitted work.