---
reference_id: "PMID:29410318"
title: "Diacerein orphan drug development for epidermolysis bullosa simplex: A phase 2/3 randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trial."
authors:
- Wally V
- Hovnanian A
- Ly J
- Buckova H
- Brunner V
- Lettner T
- Ablinger M
- Felder TK
- Hofbauer P
- Wolkersdorfer M
- Lagler FB
- Hitzl W
- Laimer M
- Kitzmüller S
- Diem A
- Bauer JW
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2018.01.019
keywords:
- "Administration, Topical"
- Anthraquinones/therapeutic use
- Anti-Inflammatory Agents
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Double-Blind Method
- Drug Administration Schedule
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Male
- Orphan Drug Production
- Patient Compliance
- Risk Assessment
- Severity of Illness Index
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diacerein orphan drug development for epidermolysis bullosa simplex: A phase 2/3 randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trial.
**Authors:** Wally V, Hovnanian A, Ly J, Buckova H, Brunner V, Lettner T, Ablinger M, Felder TK, Hofbauer P, Wolkersdorfer M, Lagler FB, Hitzl W, Laimer M, Kitzmüller S, Diem A, Bauer JW
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaad.2018.01.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2018.01.019)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2018 May;78(5):892-901.e7. doi:
10.1016/j.jaad.2018.01.019.  Epub 2018 Feb 2.

Diacerein orphan drug development for epidermolysis bullosa simplex: A phase 2/3 
randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trial.

Wally V(1), Hovnanian A(2), Ly J(2), Buckova H(3), Brunner V(4), Lettner T(4), 
Ablinger M(4), Felder TK(5), Hofbauer P(6), Wolkersdorfer M(6), Lagler FB(7), 
Hitzl W(8), Laimer M(9), Kitzmüller S(4), Diem A(4), Bauer JW(9).

Author information:
(1)EB House Austria, Research Program for Molecular Therapy of Genodermatoses, 
Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Salzburg, Paracelsus Medical 
University, Salzburg, Austria. Electronic address: v.wally@salk.at.
(2)INSERM UMR 1163, Laboratory of Genetic Skin Diseases, Imagine Institute, 
Paris, France; University Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France; 
Department of Genetics, Necker Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France.
(3)Department of Pediatric Dermatology, Children's Hospital, Brno, Czech 
Republic.
(4)EB House Austria, Research Program for Molecular Therapy of Genodermatoses, 
Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Salzburg, Paracelsus Medical 
University, Salzburg, Austria.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, 
Austria.
(6)Landesapotheke Salzburg, Department of Production, Hospital Pharmacy, 
Salzburg, Austria.
(7)Institute for Inborn Errors of Metabolism, Paracelsus Medical University, 
Salzburg, Austria; Department of Pediatrics, Paracelsus Medical University, 
Salzburg, Austria.
(8)Research Office Biostatistics, Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, 
Austria.
(9)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Salzburg, Paracelsus Medical 
University, Salzburg, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBS) is a rare genetic, blistering 
skin disease for which there is no cure. Treatments that address the 
pathophysiology of EBS are needed.
OBJECTIVE: Compare the impact of 1% diacerein cream with placebo in reducing the 
number of blisters in EBS.
METHODS: In a randomized, placebo-controlled, phase 2/3 trial we used a 1% 
diacerein topical formulation to treat defined skin areas in 17 patients. In a 
2-period crossover trial, patients were randomized to either placebo or 
diacerein for a 4-week treatment and a 3-month follow-up in period 1. After a 
washout, patients were crossed over during period 2. The prespecified primary 
end point was the proportion of patients with a reduction of number of blisters 
by more than 40% from baseline in selected areas over the treatment episode.
RESULTS: Of the patients receiving diacerein, 86% in episode 1 and 37.5% in 
episode 2 met the primary end point (vs 14% and 17% with placebo, respectively). 
This effect was still significant after the follow-up. Changes in absolute 
blister numbers were significant for the diacerein group only. No adverse 
effects were observed.
LIMITATIONS: Low patient numbers and no invasive data acquisition because of 
clinical burden in children.
CONCLUSION: This trial provides evidence of the impact of 1% diacerein cream in 
the treatment of EBS.

Copyright © 2018 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2018.01.019
PMID: 29410318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]