---
reference_id: "PMID:22513047"
title: Empty nose syndrome.
authors:
- Coste A
- Dessi P
- Serrano E
journal: Eur Ann Otorhinolaryngol Head Neck Dis
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.anorl.2012.02.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Empty nose syndrome.
**Authors:** Coste A, Dessi P, Serrano E
**Journal:** Eur Ann Otorhinolaryngol Head Neck Dis (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.anorl.2012.02.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anorl.2012.02.001)

## Content

1. Eur Ann Otorhinolaryngol Head Neck Dis. 2012 Apr;129(2):93-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.anorl.2012.02.001. Epub 2012 Apr 16.

Empty nose syndrome.

Coste A(1), Dessi P, Serrano E.

Author information:
(1)Service d'ORL et chirurgie cervicofaciale, centre hospitalier intercommunal, 
40 avenue de Verdun, Créteil cedex, France. andre.coste@chicreteil.fr

Empty nose syndrome (ENS) is a clinical entity without consensual definition; it 
is a rare complication of nose or sinus surgery, and of inferior turbinectomy in 
particular. Physiopathology remains unclear, but probably involves disorder 
caused by excessive nasal permeability affecting neurosensitive receptors and 
inhaled air humidification and conditioning functions. Neuropsychological 
involvement is suspected. Symptomatology is variable and changeable, the most 
common sign being paradoxical nasal obstruction. Diagnosis is founded on: (1) a 
range of symptoms that need to be precisely collated; (2) broad post-surgical 
nasal permeability. Management is problematic, deploying the full range of 
simple nasal cavity hygiene and humidification techniques, with surgery reserved 
for the most severe cases; whatever the technique, surgery aims at partial 
filling of the nasal airway. Prevention is the most important strategy, and 
seeks (1) to check, before any surgery is envisaged, the reality of nasal 
dyspermeability resistant to medical treatment; and (2) to prefer the most 
conservative surgical techniques.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anorl.2012.02.001
PMID: 22513047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]