---
reference_id: "PMID:8660047"
title: Hirschprung's disease.
authors:
- Sullivan PB
journal: Arch Dis Child
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1136/adc.74.1.5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hirschprung's disease.
**Authors:** Sullivan PB
**Journal:** Arch Dis Child (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1136/adc.74.1.5](https://doi.org/10.1136/adc.74.1.5)

## Content

1. Arch Dis Child. 1996 Jan;74(1):5-7. doi: 10.1136/adc.74.1.5.

Hirschprung's disease.

Sullivan PB(1).

Author information:
(1)University Department of Paediatrics, Oxford Radcliffe Hospital.

Current evidence on the pathogenesis of Hirschprung's disease, then, favours the 
'abnormal microenvironment' hypothesis wherein the developing and migrating 
normal neural crest cells confront a segmentally abnormal and hostile 
microenvironment in the colon. This hypothesis would account both for the 
congenital absence of ganglion cells in the wall of colon and also for the range 
of enteric neuronal abnormalities encountered including neuronal dysplasia, 
hypoganglionosis, and zonal aganglionosis. The abnormal constitution of the 
mesenchymal and basement membrane extracellular matrix in the affected segment 
of colon is presumably genetically determined and further understanding of the 
pathogenesis of this disorder will emerge as molecular geneticists characterise 
the specific genes and gene products associated with Hirschprung's disease. 
Advances in this field should permit gene probes to be developed to facilitate 
prenatal and postnatal diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1136/adc.74.1.5
PMCID: PMC1511606
PMID: 8660047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]