---
reference_id: "PMID:38475910"
title: "COLQ-Congenital myasthenic syndrome in an Iranian cohort: the clinical and genetics spectrum."
authors:
- Hesami O
- Ramezani M
- Ghasemi A
- Fatehi F
- Okhovat AA
- Ziaadini B
- Kariminejad A
- Nafissi S
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03116-x
keywords:
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Humans
- "Myasthenic Syndromes, Congenital/genetics"
- "Acetylcholinesterase/genetics, therapeutic use"
- Iran
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- Muscle Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- Ophthalmoplegia
- "Collagen/genetics, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# COLQ-Congenital myasthenic syndrome in an Iranian cohort: the clinical and genetics spectrum.
**Authors:** Hesami O, Ramezani M, Ghasemi A, Fatehi F, Okhovat AA, Ziaadini B, Kariminejad A, Nafissi S
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-024-03116-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-024-03116-x)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 Mar 12;19(1):113. doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03116-x.

COLQ-Congenital myasthenic syndrome in an Iranian cohort: the clinical and 
genetics spectrum.

Hesami O(#)(1)(2), Ramezani M(#)(1)(3), Ghasemi A(1), Fatehi F(1)(3), Okhovat 
AA(1)(3), Ziaadini B(4), Kariminejad A(5), Nafissi S(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Neuromuscular Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Iran.
(2)Neurology Department, Imam Hossein Hospital, Shahid Beheshti University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Neurology Department, Shariati Hospital, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Neurology Research Center, Kerman University of Medical Sciences, Kerman, 
Iran.
(5)Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Neuromuscular Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Iran. nafisi@sina.tums.ac.ir.
(7)Neurology Department, Shariati Hospital, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. nafisi@sina.tums.ac.ir.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Congenital myasthenic syndrome (CMS) is a group of neuromuscular 
disorders caused by abnormal signal transmission at the motor endplate. 
Mutations in the collagen-like tail subunit gene (COLQ) of acetylcholinesterase 
are responsible for recessive forms of synaptic congenital myasthenic syndromes 
with end plate acetylcholinesterase deficiency. Clinical presentation includes 
ptosis, ophthalmoparesis, and progressive weakness with onset at birth or early 
infancy.
METHODS: We followed 26 patients with COLQ-CMS over a mean period of 9 years 
(ranging from 3 to 213 months) and reported their clinical features, 
electrophysiologic findings, genetic characteristics, and therapeutic 
management.
RESULTS: In our population, the onset of symptoms ranged from birth to 15 years. 
Delayed developmental motor milestones were detected in 13 patients (∼ 52%), and 
the most common presenting signs were ptosis, ophthalmoparesis, and limb 
weakness. Sluggish pupils were seen in 8 (∼ 30%) patients. All patients who 
underwent electrophysiologic study showed a significant decremental response 
(> 10%) following low-frequency repetitive nerve stimulation. Moreover, double 
compound muscle action potential was evident in 18 patients (∼ 75%). We detected 
14 variants (eight novel variants), including six missense, three frameshift, 
three nonsense, one synonymous and one copy number variation (CNV), in the COLQ 
gene. There was no benefit from esterase inhibitor treatment, while treatment 
with ephedrine and salbutamol was objectively efficient in all cases.
CONCLUSION: Despite the rarity of the disease, our findings provide valuable 
information for understanding the clinical and electrophysiological features as 
well as the genetic characterization and response to the treatment of COLQ-CMS.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-024-03116-x
PMCID: PMC10935773
PMID: 38475910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.