---
reference_id: "PMID:37286128"
title: Roles of malate and aspartate in gluconeogenesis in various physiological and pathological states.
authors:
- Holeček M
journal: Metabolism
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2023.155614
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Roles of malate and aspartate in gluconeogenesis in various physiological and pathological states.
**Authors:** Holeček M
**Journal:** Metabolism (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.metabol.2023.155614](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.metabol.2023.155614)

## Content

1. Metabolism. 2023 Aug;145:155614. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2023.155614. Epub 2023
 Jun 5.

Roles of malate and aspartate in gluconeogenesis in various physiological and 
pathological states.

Holeček M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Charles University, Faculty of Medicine in Hradec 
Králové, Czech Republic. Electronic address: holecek@lfhk.cuni.cz.

Gluconeogenesis, a pathway for glucose synthesis from non-carbohydrate 
substances, begins with the synthesis of oxaloacetate (OA) from pyruvate and 
intermediates of citric acid cycle in hepatocyte mitochondria. The traditional 
view is that OA does not cross the mitochondrial membrane and must be shuttled 
to the cytosol, where most enzymes involved in gluconeogenesis are 
compartmentalized, in the form of malate. Thus, the possibility of transporting 
OA in the form of aspartate has been ignored. In the article is shown that 
malate supply to the cytosol increases only when fatty acid oxidation in the 
liver is activated, such as during starvation or untreated diabetes. 
Alternatively, aspartate synthesized from OA by mitochondrial aspartate 
aminotransferase (AST) is transported to the cytosol in exchange for glutamate 
via the aspartate-glutamate carrier 2 (AGC2). If the main substrate for 
gluconeogenesis is an amino acid, aspartate is converted to OA via urea cycle, 
therefore, ammonia detoxification and gluconeogenesis are simultaneously 
activated. If the main substrate is lactate, OA is synthesized by cytosolic AST, 
glutamate is transported to the mitochondria through AGC2, and nitrogen is not 
lost. It is concluded that, compared to malate, aspartate is a more suitable 
form of OA transport from the mitochondria for gluconeogenesis.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.metabol.2023.155614
PMID: 37286128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The author has 
not relevant conflict of interest to disclose.