---
reference_id: "PMID:36484066"
title: "An infant with Joubert syndrome: A case report."
authors:
- Tabassum S
- Naeem A
- Ahmad RU
- Naeem F
- Afzal F
journal: Radiol Case Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.radcr.2022.11.024
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An infant with Joubert syndrome: A case report.
**Authors:** Tabassum S, Naeem A, Ahmad RU, Naeem F, Afzal F
**Journal:** Radiol Case Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.radcr.2022.11.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radcr.2022.11.024)

## Content

1. Radiol Case Rep. 2022 Dec 5;18(2):661-664. doi: 10.1016/j.radcr.2022.11.024. 
eCollection 2023 Feb.

An infant with Joubert syndrome: A case report.

Tabassum S(1), Naeem A(1), Ahmad RU(1), Naeem F(1), Afzal F(1).

Author information:
(1)King Edward Medical University, Nila Gumbad Chawk, Lahore, Punjab, 54000, 
Pakistan.

Joubert syndrome is a rare neurological and developmental malfunction 
represented by decreased muscle tone, ataxia, and delayed developmental 
milestones. Joubert syndrome-related disorders, besides central nervous system, 
can involve other systems and thus can lead to multi-organ malfunction. We 
report a case of pure Joubert syndrome who presented with developmental delay, 
decreased muscle tone, and ataxia. Identification of molar tooth sign on 
magnetic resonance imaging studies assisted to make a definitive diagnosis. 
Detailed examination revealed no other significant findings of any organ of the 
body. Patient was managed conservatively with symptomatic treatment. Although 
these types of cases are rarely encountered, they can lead to multiple organ 
disabilities. Therefore, clinicians should always keep this diagnosis in mind 
whenever an infant presents with the aforementioned neurodevelopmental symptoms.

© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of University of 
Washington.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radcr.2022.11.024
PMCID: PMC9723647
PMID: 36484066