---
reference_id: "PMID:28748506"
title: "Impact of Awareness Programs on Cholera Dynamics: Two Modeling Approaches."
authors:
- Yang C
- Wang X
- Gao D
- Wang J
journal: Bull Math Biol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s11538-017-0322-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of Awareness Programs on Cholera Dynamics: Two Modeling Approaches.
**Authors:** Yang C, Wang X, Gao D, Wang J
**Journal:** Bull Math Biol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11538-017-0322-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11538-017-0322-1)

## Content

1. Bull Math Biol. 2017 Sep;79(9):2109-2131. doi: 10.1007/s11538-017-0322-1. Epub
 2017 Jul 26.

Impact of Awareness Programs on Cholera Dynamics: Two Modeling Approaches.

Yang C(1), Wang X(2), Gao D(3), Wang J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics, University of Tennessee at Chattanooga, 
Chattanooga, TN, 37403, USA.
(2)Department of Mathematics, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, 99164, 
USA.
(3)Mathematics and Science College, Shanghai Normal University, Shanghai, 
200234, China. dzgao@shnu.edu.cn.

We propose two differential equation-based models to investigate the impact of 
awareness programs on cholera dynamics. The first model represents the disease 
transmission rates as decreasing functions of the number of awareness programs, 
whereas the second model divides the susceptible individuals into two distinct 
classes depending on their awareness/unawareness of the risk of infection. We 
study the essential dynamical properties of each model, using both analytical 
and numerical approaches. We find that the two models, though closely related, 
exhibit significantly different dynamical behaviors. Namely, the first model 
follows regular threshold dynamics while rich dynamical behaviors such as 
backward bifurcation may arise from the second one. Our results highlight the 
importance of validating key modeling assumptions in the development and 
selection of mathematical models toward practical application.

DOI: 10.1007/s11538-017-0322-1
PMID: 28748506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]