---
reference_id: "PMID:16785556"
title: A mechanism for neurodegeneration induced by group B streptococci through activation of the TLR2/MyD88 pathway in microglia.
authors:
- Lehnardt S
- Henneke P
- Lien E
- Kasper DL
- Volpe JJ
- Bechmann I
- Nitsch R
- Weber JR
- Golenbock DT
- Vartanian T
journal: J Immunol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.177.1.583
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A mechanism for neurodegeneration induced by group B streptococci through activation of the TLR2/MyD88 pathway in microglia.
**Authors:** Lehnardt S, Henneke P, Lien E, Kasper DL, Volpe JJ, Bechmann I, Nitsch R, Weber JR, Golenbock DT, Vartanian T
**Journal:** J Immunol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.177.1.583](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.177.1.583)

## Content

1. J Immunol. 2006 Jul 1;177(1):583-92. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.177.1.583.

A mechanism for neurodegeneration induced by group B streptococci through 
activation of the TLR2/MyD88 pathway in microglia.

Lehnardt S(1), Henneke P, Lien E, Kasper DL, Volpe JJ, Bechmann I, Nitsch R, 
Weber JR, Golenbock DT, Vartanian T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Group B Streptococcus (GBS) is a major cause of bacterial meningitis and 
neurological morbidity in newborn infants. The cellular and molecular mechanisms 
by which this common organism causes CNS injury are unknown. We show that both 
heat-inactivated whole GBS and a secreted proteinaceous factor from GBS (GBS-F) 
induce neuronal apoptosis via the activation of murine microglia through a 
TLR2-dependent and MyD88-dependent pathway in vitro. Microglia, astrocytes, and 
oligodendrocytes, but not neurons, express TLR2. GBS as well as GBS-F induce the 
synthesis of NO in microglia derived from wild-type but not TLR2(-/-) or 
MyD88(-/-) mice. Neuronal death in neuronal cultures complemented with wild-type 
microglia is NO-dependent. We show for the first time a TLR-mediated mechanism 
of neuronal injury induced by a clinically relevant bacterium. This study 
demonstrates a causal molecular relationship between infection with GBS, 
activation of the innate immune system in the CNS through TLR2, and 
neurodegeneration. We suggest that this process contributes substantially to the 
serious morbidity associated with neonatal GBS meningitis and may provide a 
potential therapeutic target.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.177.1.583
PMID: 16785556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]