---
reference_id: "PMID:38212351"
title: Homozygous substitution of threonine 191 by proline in polymerase η causes Xeroderma pigmentosum variant.
authors:
- Ricciardiello R
- Forleo G
- Cipolla L
- van Winckel G
- Marconi C
- Nouspikel T
- Halazonetis TD
- Zgheib O
- Sabbioneda S
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-51120-1
keywords:
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- DNA Damage
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Proline/genetics
- Pyrimidine Dimers
- Ultraviolet Rays
- "Xeroderma Pigmentosum/genetics, pathology"
- Female
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homozygous substitution of threonine 191 by proline in polymerase η causes Xeroderma pigmentosum variant.
**Authors:** Ricciardiello R, Forleo G, Cipolla L, van Winckel G, Marconi C, Nouspikel T, Halazonetis TD, Zgheib O, Sabbioneda S
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-023-51120-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-51120-1)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Jan 11;14(1):1117. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-51120-1.

Homozygous substitution of threonine 191 by proline in polymerase η causes 
Xeroderma pigmentosum variant.

Ricciardiello R(1)(2), Forleo G(1), Cipolla L(1), van Winckel G(3), Marconi 
C(3), Nouspikel T(3), Halazonetis TD(4), Zgheib O(5), Sabbioneda S(6).

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Genetica Molecolare "Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza", CNR, Pavia, 
Italy.
(2)Dipartimento di Biologia e Biotecnologie 'Lazzaro Spallanzani', Università 
degli Studi di Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(3)Division of Medical Genetics, Diagnostics Department, Geneva University 
Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Geneva, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(5)Division of Medical Genetics, Diagnostics Department, Geneva University 
Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland. omar.zgheib@hcuge.ch.
(6)Istituto di Genetica Molecolare "Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza", CNR, Pavia, 
Italy. simone.sabbioneda@igm.cnr.it.

DNA polymerase eta (Polη) is the only translesion synthesis polymerase capable 
of error-free bypass of UV-induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers. A deficiency 
in Polη function is associated with the human disease Xeroderma pigmentosum 
variant (XPV). We hereby report the case of a 60-year-old woman known for XPV 
and carrying a Polη Thr191Pro variant in homozygosity. We further characterize 
the variant in vitro and in vivo, providing molecular evidence that the 
substitution abrogates polymerase activity and results in UV sensitivity through 
deficient damage bypass. This is the first functional molecular characterization 
of a missense variant of Polη, whose reported pathogenic variants have thus far 
been loss of function truncation or frameshift mutations. Our work allows the 
upgrading of Polη Thr191Pro from 'variant of uncertain significance' to 'likely 
pathogenic mutant', bearing direct impact on molecular diagnosis and genetic 
counseling. Furthermore, we have established a robust experimental approach that 
will allow a precise molecular analysis of further missense mutations possibly 
linked to XPV. Finally, it provides insight into critical Polη residues that may 
be targeted to develop small molecule inhibitors for cancer therapeutics.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-51120-1
PMCID: PMC10784498
PMID: 38212351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.