---
reference_id: "PMID:25575298"
title: The role of cilia in the pathogenesis of cystic kidney disease.
authors:
- Dell KM
journal: Curr Opin Pediatr
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1097/MOP.0000000000000187
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of cilia in the pathogenesis of cystic kidney disease.
**Authors:** Dell KM
**Journal:** Curr Opin Pediatr (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MOP.0000000000000187](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOP.0000000000000187)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2015 Apr;27(2):212-8. doi: 10.1097/MOP.0000000000000187.

The role of cilia in the pathogenesis of cystic kidney disease.

Dell KM(1).

Author information:
(1)Cleveland Clinic Children's, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Primary (immotile) cilia are specialized organelles present 
on most cell types. Almost all of proteins associated with a broad spectrum of 
human cystic kidney diseases have been localized to the region in or around the 
cilia. Abnormal cilia structure and function have both been reported in animal 
models and human cystic kidneys. The goal of this review is to discuss current 
understanding of the mechanisms by which abnormal genes/proteins and cilia 
interact to potentially influence renal cystogenesis.
RECENT FINDINGS: Novel direct recording of cilia calcium levels/channel activity 
suggests that cilia form a calcium-mediated signaling microenvironment separate 
from the cytoplasm, which could provide a mechanism for cilia-specific 
downstream signaling. Genetic-based studies confirm that cilia are not required 
for cystogenesis, but modulate cystic kidney disease severity through a novel, 
undefined mechanism. Mechanisms by which both cilia-associated and 
noncilia-associated proteins can alter cilia structure/function have also been 
identified.
SUMMARY: Considerable progress has been made in defining the mechanisms by which 
abnormal genes and proteins affect cilia structure and function. However, the 
exact mechanisms by which these interactions cause renal cyst formation and 
progression of cystic kidney disease are still unknown.

DOI: 10.1097/MOP.0000000000000187
PMCID: PMC4512651
PMID: 25575298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None