---
reference_id: "PMID:39809723"
title: Rhabdomyosarcoma Surgical Update.
authors:
- Rogers T
- Schmidt A
- Buchanan AF
- Scharschmidt T
- Dasgupta R
- Onwuka EA
- Rodeberg DA
journal: Pediatr Blood Cancer
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/pbc.31496
keywords:
- Humans
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma/surgery, pathology"
- Prognosis
- Child
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rhabdomyosarcoma Surgical Update.
**Authors:** Rogers T, Schmidt A, Buchanan AF, Scharschmidt T, Dasgupta R, Onwuka EA, Rodeberg DA
**Journal:** Pediatr Blood Cancer (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pbc.31496](https://doi.org/10.1002/pbc.31496)

## Content

1. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2025 Apr;72 Suppl 2:e31496. doi: 10.1002/pbc.31496. Epub
 2025 Jan 14.

Rhabdomyosarcoma Surgical Update.

Rogers T(1), Schmidt A(2), Buchanan AF(3), Scharschmidt T(4), Dasgupta R(5), 
Onwuka EA(6), Rodeberg DA(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, University Hospitals Bristol and Weston NHS 
Foundation Trust, Bristol, UK.
(2)Department of Pediatric Surgery and Pediatric Urology, University Children's 
Hospital, University of Tüebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.
(3)Division of Pediatric Urology, Kentucky Children's Hospital, University of 
Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA.
(4)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, 
Ohio, USA.
(5)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Cincinnati Children's Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(6)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Texas Children's Hospital, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(7)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Kentucky Children's Hospital, University of 
Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA.

Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) tumors arise from mesenchymal tissue and represent half 
of pediatric sarcomas, which in turn make up 7% of pediatric tumors. Advances in 
local control therapy of RMS have improved outcomes after surgical resection of 
the primary tumor, either before or after induction chemotherapy, even in the 
setting of metastatic disease. The utilization of diagnostic core needle and 
sentinel node biopsy techniques for lymph node staging are becoming more widely 
used. Over the past several years, refinement of prognostic factors with 
adoption of fusion status instead of histology, and optimized risk 
stratification schemas have been developed to assure appropriate therapy. There 
have been efforts between North American and European surgical oncology 
cooperative groups to standardize the care we provide, and yet there are still 
some philosophical differences to overcome.

© 2025 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/pbc.31496
PMID: 39809723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]