---
reference_id: "PMID:32516788"
title: Contemporary Outcomes of Patients with Isolated Bilateral Renal Agenesis with and without Fetal Intervention.
authors:
- Riddle S
- Habli M
- Tabbah S
- Lim FY
- Minges M
- Kingma P
- Polzin W
journal: Fetal Diagn Ther
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1159/000507700
keywords:
- Adult
- Congenital Abnormalities/therapy
- "Delivery, Obstetric"
- Female
- Fetal Therapies/methods
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Kidney/abnormalities
- "Kidney Diseases/congenital, therapy"
- Male
- Pregnancy
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Contemporary Outcomes of Patients with Isolated Bilateral Renal Agenesis with and without Fetal Intervention.
**Authors:** Riddle S, Habli M, Tabbah S, Lim FY, Minges M, Kingma P, Polzin W
**Journal:** Fetal Diagn Ther (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000507700](https://doi.org/10.1159/000507700)

## Content

1. Fetal Diagn Ther. 2020;47(9):675-681. doi: 10.1159/000507700. Epub 2020 Jun 9.

Contemporary Outcomes of Patients with Isolated Bilateral Renal Agenesis with 
and without Fetal Intervention.

Riddle S(1)(2)(3), Habli M(4)(5), Tabbah S(4)(6), Lim FY(4)(7), Minges M(4), 
Kingma P(4)(8)(9), Polzin W(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Cincinnati Fetal Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA, stefanie.riddle@cchmc.org.
(2)Division of Neonatology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital, Cincinnati, Ohio, 
USA, stefanie.riddle@cchmc.org.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, University of Cincinnati, 
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA, stefanie.riddle@cchmc.org.
(4)Cincinnati Fetal Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(5)Good Samaritan Hospital, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Cincinnati College of 
Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(7)Division of Pediatric General and Thoracic Surgery, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(8)Division of Neonatology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital, Cincinnati, Ohio, 
USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, University of Cincinnati, 
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

Comment in
    Fetal Diagn Ther. 2020;47(10):785-786. doi: 10.1159/000509749.

INTRODUCTION: Bilateral renal agenesis (BRA) is a lethal diagnosis, specifically 
meaning that natural survival beyond birth is not expected secondary to 
pulmonary hypoplasia. Limited contemporary data are available about intervention 
and the impact of restoring amniotic fluid volume in relation to the risk for 
lethal pulmonary hypoplasia and other factors that might influence survival in 
cases of fetal BRA.
OBJECTIVE: We report the largest series of patients undergoing fetal 
intervention and postnatal care for BRA at a single comprehensive fetal center.
METHODS: All patients with fetal BRA were reviewed from January 2004 to November 
2017. Maternal and neonatal data were collected in an institutional review 
board-approved retrospective review.
RESULTS: From 2014 to 2017, 20 singleton pregnancies with isolated fetal BRA 
were evaluated and 14 had amnioinfusion. Eight had serial infusions. Of those, 
there were 6 neonatal deaths. There were 2 neonatal survivors beyond 30 days; 
however, both died of sepsis on dialysis. One of these survivors received 
amnioinfusions by percutaneous approach and one via amnioport. There were no 
survivors to transplantation.
CONCLUSION: Fetal intervention via amnioinfusion may promote pulmonary 
survivorship after birth, but postnatal survival remains poor. Future studies 
must place an emphasis on standardizing the postnatal approach to this patient 
population.

© 2020 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000507700
PMID: 32516788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]