---
reference_id: "PMID:36940965"
title: "The characteristics of Grave's disease in children and adolescent patients in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah: A retrospective chart review."
authors:
- Alradadi RS
- Omar NA
- Alhusayni RA
- Almokhtar AM
- Muhawish SF
- Altaleb MM
- Tawfiq SA
- Alraddadi RM
- Almalki RQ
journal: Saudi Med J
year: '2023'
doi: 10.15537/smj.2023.44.3.20220501
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The characteristics of Grave's disease in children and adolescent patients in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah: A retrospective chart review.
**Authors:** Alradadi RS, Omar NA, Alhusayni RA, Almokhtar AM, Muhawish SF, Altaleb MM, Tawfiq SA, Alraddadi RM, Almalki RQ
**Journal:** Saudi Med J (2023)
**DOI:** [10.15537/smj.2023.44.3.20220501](https://doi.org/10.15537/smj.2023.44.3.20220501)

## Content

1. Saudi Med J. 2023 Mar;44(3):284-288. doi: 10.15537/smj.2023.44.3.20220501.
Epub  2023 Mar 20.

The characteristics of Grave's disease in children and adolescent patients in 
Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah: A retrospective chart review.

Alradadi RS(1), Omar NA(1), Alhusayni RA(1), Almokhtar AM(1), Muhawish SF(1), 
Altaleb MM(1), Tawfiq SA(1), Alraddadi RM(1), Almalki RQ(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Taibah University, Al-Medinah 
Al-Munawarah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

OBJECTIVES: To determine the characteristics of Graves' disease in children and 
adolescents in Medina, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and compare them to those 
observed in other countries.
METHODS: This is a retrospective chart review of children and adolescents 
diagnosed with Graves' disease between January 2010 and May 2021.
RESULTS: Fifty-eight patients aged 12.02 ± 4.85 years were identified, of which 
44 (75.9%) were females. Exophthalmos (63.8%), neck swelling (60.3%), 
palpitations (46.6%), and tremors (29.3%) were the most common manifestations. 
Vitiligo (1.72%) and alopecia (1.72%) were the only autoimmune diseases observed 
in our patients. The median (IQR) value was 0.01 (0.36) (ulU/mL) for 
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) and 24.89 (29.50) (pmol/L) for FT4. In terms 
of treatment modalities, 55 (94.8%) received antithyroid medication, 6 (10.3%) 
underwent thyroidectomy and one patient (1.72%) was treated with radioactive 
iodine.
CONCLUSION: In general, Graves' disease is more common in females. Neck 
swelling, palpitation, and tremors were the main manifestations. Compared with 
other countries, there was a higher frequency of exophthalmos and a lower 
frequency of associated autoimmune conditions. The primary treatment was 
antithyroid drugs; thyroidectomy and radioactive iodine were used less 
frequently.

Copyright: © Saudi Medical Journal.

DOI: 10.15537/smj.2023.44.3.20220501
PMCID: PMC10043888
PMID: 36940965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]