---
reference_id: "PMID:37379870"
title: "Cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis: \"classic\" knowledge and recent acquisitions."
authors:
- Piacentini C
- Argento O
- Nocentini U
journal: Arq Neuropsiquiatr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1055/s-0043-1763485
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis: "classic" knowledge and recent acquisitions.
**Authors:** Piacentini C, Argento O, Nocentini U
**Journal:** Arq Neuropsiquiatr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0043-1763485](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0043-1763485)

## Content

1. Arq Neuropsiquiatr. 2023 Jun;81(6):585-596. doi: 10.1055/s-0043-1763485. Epub 
2023 Jun 28.

Cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis: "classic" knowledge and recent 
acquisitions.

Piacentini C(1), Argento O(1), Nocentini U(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Hospitalization and Care of a Scientific Character "Santa Lucia" 
Foundation, Behavioral Neuropsychology, Rome, Italy.
(2)University of Rome "Tor Vergata", Department of Clinical Sciences and 
Translational Medicine, Rome, Italy.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a central nervous system (CNS) disease characterized 
by inflammation, axonal demyelination, and neurodegeneration, which can have a 
strong impact on all aspects of the life of the patient. Multiple sclerosis 
causes motor, sensory, cerebellar, and autonomic dysfunctions, as well as 
cognitive and psychoemotional impairment. The most frequently compromised 
cognitive domains are complex attention/information processing, memory, 
executive and visuospatial functions. Recently, alterations have also been 
evidenced in complex cognitive functions, such as social cognition, moral 
judgment, and decision-making. Cognitive impairment is characterized by high 
variability and can affect work skills, social interactions, coping strategies 
and more generally the quality of life of patients and their families. With the 
use of sensitive and easy-to-administer test batteries, an increasingly accurate 
and early diagnosis is feasible: this allows to determine the effectiveness of 
possible preventive measures, to predict the future progression of the disease 
and to improve the quality of life of patients. There is currently limited 
evidence regarding the efficacy, on cognitive impairment, of disease-modifying 
therapies. The most promising approach, which has received strong empirical 
support, is cognitive rehabilitation.

Publisher: A esclerose múltipla (EM) é uma doença do sistema nervoso central 
(SNC) caracterizada por inflamação, desmielinização axonal e neurodegeneração, 
que pode ter um forte impacto em todos os aspectos da vida dos pacientes. A EM 
causa disfunções motoras, sensoriais, cerebelares, autonômicas, comprometimento 
cognitivo e déficits psicoemocionais. Os domínios cognitivos mais frequentemente 
comprometidos são a atenção complexa/processamento da informação, memória, 
funções executivas e habilidades visuais-espaciais. Recentemente, também foram 
evidenciadas alterações em funções cognitivas complexas, como cognição social, 
julgamento moral e tomada de decisão. O comprometimento cognitivo é 
caracterizado por alta variabilidade e pode afetar as habilidades laborais, as 
interações sociais, as estratégias de enfrentamento e, de forma mais geral, a 
qualidade de vida dos pacientes e de seus familiares. Com o uso de baterias de 
testes sensíveis e fáceis de administrar, é viável um diagnóstico cada vez mais 
preciso e precoce: isso permite determinar a eficácia de possíveis medidas 
preventivas, prever a progressão futura da doença e melhorar a qualidade de vida 
dos pacientes. Atualmente, há evidências limitadas sobre a eficácia, no 
comprometimento cognitivo, de terapias modificadoras da doença. A abordagem mais 
promissora, que tem recebido forte apoio empírico, é a reabilitação cognitiva.

The Author(s). This is an open access article published by Thieme under the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, permitting 
copying and reproduction so long as the original work is given appropriate 
credit (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

DOI: 10.1055/s-0043-1763485
PMCID: PMC10658666
PMID: 37379870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to 
declare.