---
reference_id: "PMID:31338675"
title: "Acute flaccid myelitis and enterovirus D68: lessons from the past and present."
authors:
- Helfferich J
- Knoester M
- Van Leer-Buter CC
- Neuteboom RF
- Meiners LC
- Niesters HG
- Brouwer OF
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s00431-019-03435-3
keywords:
- "Central Nervous System Viral Diseases/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy, virology"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Enterovirus D, Human"
- "Enterovirus Infections/complications, diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Global Health
- "Guillain-Barre Syndrome/diagnosis, virology"
- Humans
- "Myelitis/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy, virology"
- "Myelitis, Transverse/diagnosis, virology"
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy, virology"
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute flaccid myelitis and enterovirus D68: lessons from the past and present.
**Authors:** Helfferich J, Knoester M, Van Leer-Buter CC, Neuteboom RF, Meiners LC, Niesters HG, Brouwer OF
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00431-019-03435-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00431-019-03435-3)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 2019 Sep;178(9):1305-1315. doi: 10.1007/s00431-019-03435-3.
Epub  2019 Jul 23.

Acute flaccid myelitis and enterovirus D68: lessons from the past and present.

Helfferich J(1), Knoester M(2), Van Leer-Buter CC(2), Neuteboom RF(3), Meiners
LC(4), Niesters HG(2), Brouwer OF(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, PO Box 30001, 9700 RB, Groningen, The Netherlands.
j.helfferich@umcg.nl.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infection Prevention, Division of
Clinical Virology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Erasmus Medical Center, Erasmus
University, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Radiology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, PO Box 30001, 9700 RB, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Acute flaccid myelitis is characterized by the combination of acute flaccid
paralysis and a spinal cord lesion largely restricted to the gray matter on
magnetic resonance imaging. The term acute flaccid myelitis was introduced in
2014 after the upsurge of pediatric cases in the USA with enterovirus D68
infection. Since then, an increasing number of cases have been reported
worldwide. Whereas the terminology is new, the clinical syndrome has been
recognized in the past in association with several other neurotropic viruses
such as poliovirus.Conclusion: This review presents the current knowledge on
acute flaccid myelitis with respect to the clinical presentation and its
differential diagnosis with Guillain-Barré syndrome and acute transverse
myelitis. We also discuss the association with enterovirus D68 and the presumed
pathophysiological mechanism of this infection causing anterior horn cell
damage. Sharing clinical knowledge and insights from basic research is needed to
make progress in diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of this new polio-like
disease. What is Known: • Acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) is a polio-like condition
characterized by rapid progressive asymmetric weakness, together with specific
findings on MRI • AFM has been related to different viral agents, but recent
outbreaks are predominantly associated with enterovirus D68. What is New: •
Improving knowledge on AFM must increase early recognition and adequate
diagnostic procedures by clinicians. • The increasing incidence of AFM urges
cooperation between pediatricians, neurologists, and microbiologists for the
development of treatment and preventive options.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-019-03435-3
PMCID: PMC6694036
PMID: 31338675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest.
