---
reference_id: "PMID:15575796"
title: Exercise and multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- White LJ
- Dressendorfer RH
journal: Sports Med
year: '2004'
doi: 10.2165/00007256-200434150-00005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exercise and multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** White LJ, Dressendorfer RH
**Journal:** Sports Med (2004)
**DOI:** [10.2165/00007256-200434150-00005](https://doi.org/10.2165/00007256-200434150-00005)

## Content

1. Sports Med. 2004;34(15):1077-100. doi: 10.2165/00007256-200434150-00005.

Exercise and multiple sclerosis.

White LJ(1), Dressendorfer RH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Physiology and Kinesiology, Center for Exercise 
Science, Applied Human Physiology Laboratory, University of Florida, 27 FLG, PO 
Box 118206, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA. lwhite@hhp.ufl.edu

The pathophysiology of multiple sclerosis (MS) is characterised by fatigue, 
motor weakness, spasticity, poor balance, heat sensitivity and mental 
depression. Also, MS symptoms may lead to physical inactivity associated with 
the development of secondary diseases. Persons with MS are thus challenged by 
their disability when attempting to pursue an active lifestyle compatible with 
health-related fitness. Although exercise prescription is gaining favour as a 
therapeutic strategy to minimise the loss of functional capacity in chronic 
diseases, it remains under-utilised as an intervention strategy in the MS 
population. However, a growing number of studies indicate that exercise in 
patients with mild-to-moderate MS provides similar fitness and psychological 
benefits as it does in healthy controls. We reviewed numerous studies describing 
the responses of selected MS patients to acute and chronic exercise compared 
with healthy controls. All training studies reported positive outcomes that 
outweighed potential adverse effects of the exercise intervention. Based on our 
review, this article highlights the role of exercise prescription in the 
multidisciplinary approach to MS disease management for improving and 
maintaining functional capacity. Despite the often unpredictable clinical course 
of MS, exercise programmes designed to increase cardiorespiratory fitness, 
muscle strength and mobility provide benefits that enhance lifestyle activity 
and quality of life while reducing risk of secondary disorders. Recommendations 
for the evaluation of cardiorespiratory fitness, muscle performance and 
flexibility are presented as well as basic guidelines for individualised 
exercise testing and training in MS. Special considerations for exercise, 
including medical management concerns, programme modifications and supervision, 
in the MS population are discussed.

DOI: 10.2165/00007256-200434150-00005
PMID: 15575796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]