---
reference_id: "PMID:26962088"
title: Multicenter Evaluation of Clinical Diagnostic Methods for Detection and Isolation of Campylobacter spp. from Stool.
authors:
- Fitzgerald C
- Patrick M
- Gonzalez A
- Akin J
- Polage CR
- Wymore K
- Gillim-Ross L
- Xavier K
- Sadlowski J
- Monahan J
- Hurd S
- Dahlberg S
- Jerris R
- Watson R
- Santovenia M
- Mitchell D
- Harrison C
- "Tobin-D'Angelo M"
- DeMartino M
- Pentella M
- Razeq J
- Leonard C
- Jung C
- Achong-Bowe R
- Evans Y
- Jain D
- Juni B
- Leano F
- Robinson T
- Smith K
- Gittelman RM
- Garrigan C
- Nachamkin I
journal: J Clin Microbiol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1128/JCM.01925-15
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multicenter Evaluation of Clinical Diagnostic Methods for Detection and Isolation of Campylobacter spp. from Stool.
**Authors:** Fitzgerald C, Patrick M, Gonzalez A, Akin J, Polage CR, Wymore K, Gillim-Ross L, Xavier K, Sadlowski J, Monahan J, Hurd S, Dahlberg S, Jerris R, Watson R, Santovenia M, Mitchell D, Harrison C, Tobin-D'Angelo M, DeMartino M, Pentella M, Razeq J, Leonard C, Jung C, Achong-Bowe R, Evans Y, Jain D, Juni B, Leano F, Robinson T, Smith K, Gittelman RM, Garrigan C, Nachamkin I
**Journal:** J Clin Microbiol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JCM.01925-15](https://doi.org/10.1128/JCM.01925-15)

## Content

1. J Clin Microbiol. 2016 May;54(5):1209-15. doi: 10.1128/JCM.01925-15. Epub 2016
 Mar 9.

Multicenter Evaluation of Clinical Diagnostic Methods for Detection and 
Isolation of Campylobacter spp. from Stool.

Fitzgerald C(1), Patrick M(2), Gonzalez A(3), Akin J(3), Polage CR(4), Wymore 
K(5), Gillim-Ross L(6), Xavier K(6), Sadlowski J(6), Monahan J(7), Hurd S(8), 
Dahlberg S(9), Jerris R(10), Watson R(10), Santovenia M(2), Mitchell D(2), 
Harrison C(2), Tobin-D'Angelo M(11), DeMartino M(12), Pentella M(12), Razeq 
J(13), Leonard C(13), Jung C(13), Achong-Bowe R(13), Evans Y(13), Jain D(13), 
Juni B(14), Leano F(14), Robinson T(14), Smith K(14), Gittelman RM(15), Garrigan 
C(15), Nachamkin I(15).

Author information:
(1)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA 
chf3@cdc.gov.
(2)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(3)Sacramento County Public Health Laboratory, Sacramento, California, USA.
(4)University of California Davis School of Medicine, Sacramento, California, 
USA.
(5)California Emerging Infections Program, Oakland, California, USA.
(6)Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, Denver, Colorado, USA.
(7)Exempla St. Joseph Hospital, Denver, Colorado, USA.
(8)Connecticut Emerging Infections Program, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(9)Yale-New Haven Hospital, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(10)Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(11)Georgia Department of Public Health, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(12)State Hygienic Laboratory at the University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
(13)Maryland Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(14)Minnesota Department of Health, St. Paul, Minnesota, USA.
(15)Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Microbiol. 2016 May;54(5):1186-8. doi: 10.1128/JCM.03221-15.

The use of culture-independent diagnostic tests (CIDTs), such as stool antigen 
tests, as standalone tests for the detection of Campylobacter in stool is 
increasing. We conducted a prospective, multicenter study to evaluate the 
performance of stool antigen CIDTs compared to culture and PCR for Campylobacter 
detection. Between July and October 2010, we tested 2,767 stool specimens from 
patients with gastrointestinal illness with the following methods: four types of 
Campylobacter selective media, four commercial stool antigen assays, and a 
commercial PCR assay. Illnesses from which specimens were positive by one or 
more culture media or at least one CIDT and PCR were designated "cases." A total 
of 95 specimens (3.4%) met the case definition. The stool antigen CIDTs ranged 
from 79.6% to 87.6% in sensitivity, 95.9 to 99.5% in specificity, and 41.3 to 
84.3% in positive predictive value. Culture alone detected 80/89 (89.9% 
sensitivity) Campylobacter jejuni/Campylobacter coli-positive cases. Of the 209 
noncases that were positive by at least one CIDT, only one (0.48%) was positive 
by all four stool antigen tests, and 73% were positive by just one stool antigen 
test. The questionable relevance of unconfirmed positive stool antigen CIDT 
results was supported by the finding that noncases were less likely than cases 
to have gastrointestinal symptoms. Thus, while the tests were convenient to use, 
the sensitivity, specificity, and positive predictive value of Campylobacter 
stool antigen tests were highly variable. Given the relatively low incidence of 
Campylobacter disease and the generally poor diagnostic test characteristics, 
this study calls into question the use of commercially available stool antigen 
CIDTs as standalone tests for direct detection of Campylobacter in stool.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.01925-15
PMCID: PMC4844741
PMID: 26962088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]