---
reference_id: PMID:27704617
title: "Netazepide, a gastrin/cholecystokinin-2 receptor antagonist, can eradicate gastric neuroendocrine tumours in patients with autoimmune chronic atrophic gastritis."
authors:
- Boyce M
- Moore AR
- Sagatun L
- Parsons BN
- Varro A
- Campbell F
- Fossmark R
- Waldum HL
- Pritchard DM
journal: Br J Clin Pharmacol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/bcp.13146
keywords:
- "Achlorhydria/complications, drug therapy, metabolism"
- Aged
- "Autoimmune Diseases/blood, complications, drug therapy"
- "Benzodiazepinones/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Chromogranin A/biosynthesis, blood"
- Gastrins/blood
- "Gastritis, Atrophic/blood, complications, drug therapy"
- Histidine Decarboxylase/biosynthesis
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- "Neuroendocrine Tumors/blood, complications, drug therapy, metabolism"
- "Phenylurea Compounds/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Netazepide, a gastrin/cholecystokinin-2 receptor antagonist, can eradicate gastric neuroendocrine tumours in patients with autoimmune chronic atrophic gastritis.
**Authors:** Boyce M, Moore AR, Sagatun L, Parsons BN, Varro A, Campbell F, Fossmark R, Waldum HL, Pritchard DM
**Journal:** Br J Clin Pharmacol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bcp.13146](https://doi.org/10.1111/bcp.13146)

## Content

1. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2017 Mar;83(3):466-475. doi: 10.1111/bcp.13146. Epub 2016
 Nov 21.

Netazepide, a gastrin/cholecystokinin-2 receptor antagonist, can eradicate 
gastric neuroendocrine tumours in patients with autoimmune chronic atrophic 
gastritis.

Boyce M(1), Moore AR(2), Sagatun L(3), Parsons BN(2), Varro A(2), Campbell F(4), 
Fossmark R(3), Waldum HL(3), Pritchard DM(2).

Author information:
(1)Hammersmith Medicines Research, Cumberland Avenue, London, NW10 7EW, UK.
(2)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Institute of Translational 
Medicine, University of Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool, L69 3GE, UK.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, St. Olav's Hospital, and the 
Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of 
Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.
(4)Department of Pathology, Royal Liverpool and Broadgreen University Hospitals 
NHS Trust, Liverpool, L7 8XP, UK.

AIMS: Netazepide, a gastrin/cholecystokinin 2 receptor antagonist, once daily 
for 12 weeks reduced the number of tumours and size of the largest one in 16 
patients with autoimmune chronic atrophic gastritis (CAG), achlorhydria, 
hypergastrinaemia and multiple gastric neuroendocrine tumours (type 1 gastric 
NETs), and normalized circulating chromogranin A (CgA) produced by 
enterochromaffin-like cells, the source of the tumours. The aim was to assess 
whether longer-term netazepide treatment can eradicate type 1 gastric NETs.
METHODS: After a mean 14 months off netazepide, 13 of the 16 patients took it 
for another 52 weeks. Assessments were: gastroscopy; gene-transcript expression 
in corpus biopsies using quantitative polymerase chain reaction; blood CgA and 
gastrin concentrations; and safety assessments.
RESULTS: While off-treatment, the number of tumours, the size of the largest 
one, and CgA all increased again. Netazepide for 52 weeks: cleared all tumours 
in 5 patients; cleared all but one tumour in one patient; reduced the number of 
tumours and size of the largest one in the other patients; normalized CgA in all 
patients; and reduced mRNA abundances of CgA and histidine decarboxylase in 
biopsies. Gastrin did not increase further, confirming that the patients had 
achlorhydria. Netazepide was safe and well tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: A gastrin/cholecystokinin 2 receptor antagonist is a potential 
medical and targeted treatment for type 1 gastric NETs, and an alternative to 
regular gastroscopy or surgery. Treatment should be continuous because the 
tumours will regrow if it is stopped. Progress can be monitored by CgA in blood 
or biomarkers in mucosal biopsies.

© 2016 The British Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bcp.13146
PMCID: PMC5306499
PMID: 27704617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]