---
reference_id: "PMID:27798104"
title: UV-B-induced cutaneous inflammation and prospects for antioxidant treatment in Kindler syndrome.
authors:
- Maier K
- He Y
- Wölfle U
- Esser PR
- Brummer T
- Schempp C
- Bruckner-Tuderman L
- Has C
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddw350
keywords:
- "Antioxidants/administration & dosage"
- "Apoptosis/drug effects, radiation effects"
- "Blister/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Gene Expression Regulation/drug effects, radiation effects"
- Humans
- "Inflammation/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Interleukin-1beta/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Interleukin-6/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Keratinocytes/drug effects, pathology, radiation effects"
- "Luteolin/administration & dosage"
- "Membrane Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Neoplasm Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Periodontal Diseases/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Photosensitivity Disorders/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Skin/drug effects, pathology, radiation effects"
- "Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Ultraviolet Rays/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# UV-B-induced cutaneous inflammation and prospects for antioxidant treatment in Kindler syndrome.
**Authors:** Maier K, He Y, Wölfle U, Esser PR, Brummer T, Schempp C, Bruckner-Tuderman L, Has C
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddw350](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddw350)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Dec 15;25(24):5339-5352. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddw350.

UV-B-induced cutaneous inflammation and prospects for antioxidant treatment in
Kindler syndrome.

Maier K(1), He Y(1), Wölfle U(1), Esser PR(1), Brummer T(2)(3), Schempp C(1),
Bruckner-Tuderman L(1)(3), Has C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Medical Center - University of Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany.
(2)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research.
(3)Centre for Biological Signalling Studies BIOSS, University of Freiburg,
Freiburg, Germany.

Kindler syndrome (KS), a rare, autosomal recessive disorder comprises mechanical
skin fragility and photosensitivity, which manifest early in life. The
progression of the disorder is irreversible and results in tissue damage in form
of cutaneous and mucosal atrophy and scarring and epithelial cancers. Here, we
unravel molecular mechanisms of increased UV-B sensitivity of keratinocytes
derived from KS patients. We show that the pro-inflammatory cytokines, IL-1ß,
IL-6 and TNF-α, are upregulated in KS skin and in UV-B irradiated KS
keratinocytes. These cytokines are dependent on p38 activation, which is
increased in the absence of kindlin-1 and induced by higher ROS levels. Other
dysregulated cytokines and growth factors were identified in this study and
might be involved in paracrine interactions contributing to KS pathology. We
show a direct relationship between kindlin-1 abundance and UV-B induced
apoptosis in keratinocytes, whereas kindlin-2 overexpression has no compensatory
effect. Importantly, low levels of kindlin-1 are sufficient to relieve or rescue
this feature. Reduction of pro-inflammatory cytokines and of UV-B induced
apoptosis is a valid therapeutic goal to influence long term complications of
KS. Here, we demonstrate that antioxidants and the plant flavonoid luteolin
represent feasible topical therapeutic approaches decreasing UV-B induced
apoptosis in two-dimensional and organotypic KS cultures. We provide evidence
for potential new therapeutic approaches to mitigate the progressive course of
KS, for which no cure is available to date. Furthermore, we established
organotypic KS models, a valuable in vitro tool for research with a morphology
similar to the skin of patients in situ.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddw350
PMID: 27798104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
