---
reference_id: "PMID:33113778"
title: "Irritability, Poor Feeding and Respiratory Alkalosis in Newborns: Think about Metabolic Emergencies. A Brief Summary of Hyperammonemia Management."
authors:
- Del Re S
- Empain A
- Vicinanza A
- Balasel O
- Johansson AB
- Stalens JP
- De Laet C
journal: Pediatr Rep
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3390/pediatric12030019
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Irritability, Poor Feeding and Respiratory Alkalosis in Newborns: Think about Metabolic Emergencies. A Brief Summary of Hyperammonemia Management.
**Authors:** Del Re S, Empain A, Vicinanza A, Balasel O, Johansson AB, Stalens JP, De Laet C
**Journal:** Pediatr Rep (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3390/pediatric12030019](https://doi.org/10.3390/pediatric12030019)

## Content

1. Pediatr Rep. 2020 Oct 25;12(3):77-85. doi: 10.3390/pediatric12030019.

Irritability, Poor Feeding and Respiratory Alkalosis in Newborns: Think about
Metabolic Emergencies. A Brief Summary of Hyperammonemia Management.

Del Re S(1), Empain A(2), Vicinanza A(3), Balasel O(1), Johansson AB(1), Stalens
JP(4), De Laet C(2).

Author information:
(1)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants Reine
Fabiola, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 1020 Brussels, Belgium.
(2)Department of Nutrition and Metabolism, Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants
Reine Fabiola, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 1020 Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants Reine
Fabiola, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 1020 Brussels, Belgium.
(4)Neonatal Non-Intensive Care Unit, Centre Hospitalier de Wallonie Picarde
(Site Union), 7500 Tournai, Belgium.

The urea cycle is a series of metabolic reactions that convert ammonia into urea
in order to eliminate it from the body. Urea cycle disorders are characterized
by hyperammonemia, which can cause irreversible damages in central nervous
system. We report a series of three newborns presenting irritability, poor
feeding and tachypnea. Their first gas analysis revealed respiratory alkalosis.
Hyperammonemia was confirmed, and three different enzymatic blocks in the urea
cycle were diagnosed. Immediate treatment consisted in the removal of ammonia by
reduction of the catabolic state, dietary adjustments, use of nitrogen
scavenging agents and ultimately hemodiafiltration. Hyperammonemia is a medical
emergency whose treatment should not be delayed. This report aims to highlight
the importance of suspecting urea cycle disorders in newborns with aspecific
signs of hyperammonemia and respiratory alkalosis, and to sum up the broad lines
of hyperammonemia management.

DOI: 10.3390/pediatric12030019
PMCID: PMC7717652
PMID: 33113778

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no competing interests to
declare.
