---
reference_id: "PMID:33095470"
title: T-cell infiltration profile in musculoskeletal tumors.
authors:
- Nakajima K
- Raz A
journal: J Orthop Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/jor.24890
keywords:
- CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes/physiology
- Humans
- "Neoplasms, Connective Tissue/immunology"
- Rhabdomyosarcoma/immunology
- T-Lymphocytes/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# T-cell infiltration profile in musculoskeletal tumors.
**Authors:** Nakajima K, Raz A
**Journal:** J Orthop Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jor.24890](https://doi.org/10.1002/jor.24890)

## Content

1. J Orthop Res. 2021 Mar;39(3):536-542. doi: 10.1002/jor.24890. Epub 2020 Oct
30.

T-cell infiltration profile in musculoskeletal tumors.

Nakajima K(1)(2), Raz A(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Translational Research, Exploratory Oncology Research & Clinical
Trial Center, National Cancer Center, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Division of Veterinary Oncology and Surgery, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Imabari Campus, Okayama University of Science, Imabari, Ehime, Japan.
(3)Department of Oncology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, Michigan, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, Michigan, USA.

Immunotherapy of musculoskeletal tumors remains clinically challenging and
requires the development of gene-engineered/adoptive exogenous immune cells or
the identification of new molecular target(s) that can be therapeutically
exploited to improve patient outcome. Recently, endogenous B-cell infiltration
into tumor microenvironments appears to be an essential promising prognostic
factor controlling tumor progression in musculoskeletal malignancy. Here, we
explored the level of T-cell infiltration by analyzing expression profiles of
CD3E, CD4, and CD8A in 1366 patients and 23 histological types. The data
revealed that CD3E and CD8A expressions were predominantly inhibited in bone
tumors when compared with normal bone. CD4 expression was upregulated in limited
types of tumors, including chondrosarcoma and giant cell tumor of bone, whereas
other tumors demonstrated relatively lower expressions. Similarly, regarding
soft tissue sarcoma, the expression of T-cell-related molecules was largely
inhibited. Only in patients with rhabdomyosarcoma, CD3E and CD8A expressions
were significantly upregulated, showing the nature of immune-active tumor. To
visualize the immunological microenvironment of rhabdomyosarcoma, we have
developed a novel software aimed at analyzing numerous cell-to-cell and
ligand-to-receptor interactions, that is, Environmentome. It has led to the
identification of molecular interactions between CD8+ T cell and
rhabdomyosarcoma via Galectin3-LAG3 binding, which is a novel immune
checkpoint recently identified. In conclusion, musculoskeletal tumors may be
defined as immune-quiescent tumors, whereby targeting Galectin-3 and/or
immune-infiltrative agents could be crucial in these immunologically noninflamed
musculoskeletal tumors, accelerating immunotherapeutic response.

© 2020 Orthopaedic Research Society. Published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jor.24890
PMID: 33095470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
