---
reference_id: "PMID:34790633"
title: Autoimmune Polyendocrinopathy-Candidiasis-Ectodermal Dystrophy.
authors:
- Ferré EMN
- Schmitt MM
- Lionakis MS
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2021.723532
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmune Polyendocrinopathy-Candidiasis-Ectodermal Dystrophy.
**Authors:** Ferré EMN, Schmitt MM, Lionakis MS
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2021.723532](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2021.723532)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2021 Nov 1;9:723532. doi: 10.3389/fped.2021.723532. eCollection
 2021.

Autoimmune Polyendocrinopathy-Candidiasis-Ectodermal Dystrophy.

Ferré EMN(1), Schmitt MM(1), Lionakis MS(1).

Author information:
(1)Fungal Pathogenesis Section, Laboratory of Clinical Immunology and 
Microbiology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), 
National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, United States.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED), also 
known as autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type-1 (APS-1), is a rare monogenic 
autoimmune disease caused by loss-of-function mutations in the autoimmune 
regulator (AIRE) gene. AIRE deficiency impairs immune tolerance in the thymus 
and results in the peripheral escape of self-reactive T lymphocytes and the 
generation of several cytokine- and tissue antigen-targeted autoantibodies. 
APECED features a classic triad of characteristic clinical manifestations 
consisting of chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (CMC), hypoparathyroidism, and 
primary adrenal insufficiency (Addison's disease). In addition, APECED patients 
develop several non-endocrine autoimmune manifestations with variable 
frequencies, whose recognition by pediatricians should facilitate an earlier 
diagnosis and allow for the prompt implementation of targeted screening, 
preventive, and therapeutic strategies. This review summarizes our current 
understanding of the genetic, immunological, clinical, diagnostic, and treatment 
features of APECED.

Copyright © 2021 Ferré, Schmitt and Lionakis.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2021.723532
PMCID: PMC8591095
PMID: 34790633

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.