---
reference_id: "PMID:12676769"
title: Development of cystic fibrosis and noncystic fibrosis airway cell lines.
authors:
- Zabner J
- Karp P
- Seiler M
- Phillips SL
- Mitchell CJ
- Saavedra M
- Welsh M
- Klingelhutz AJ
journal: Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1152/ajplung.00355.2002
keywords:
- Adenoviridae/genetics
- Cell Culture Techniques/methods
- "Cell Line, Transformed"
- Cell Polarity
- Chlorides/metabolism
- "Cystic Fibrosis/metabolism, pathology"
- Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance Regulator/metabolism
- "Epithelial Cells/cytology, metabolism"
- Fibrosis
- Genetic Vectors
- Humans
- Lipopolysaccharides/pharmacology
- NF-kappa B/metabolism
- Papillomaviridae/genetics
- Phenotype
- Respiratory Mucosa/cytology
- Retroviridae/genetics
- Sodium/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Development of cystic fibrosis and noncystic fibrosis airway cell lines.
**Authors:** Zabner J, Karp P, Seiler M, Phillips SL, Mitchell CJ, Saavedra M, Welsh M, Klingelhutz AJ
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajplung.00355.2002](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajplung.00355.2002)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2003 May;284(5):L844-54. doi: 
10.1152/ajplung.00355.2002. Epub 2003 Jan 10.

Development of cystic fibrosis and noncystic fibrosis airway cell lines.

Zabner J(1), Karp P, Seiler M, Phillips SL, Mitchell CJ, Saavedra M, Welsh M, 
Klingelhutz AJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, 
USA. joseph-zabner@uiowa.edu

In this study, we utilized the reverse transcriptase component of telomerase, 
hTERT, and human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV-16) E6 and E7 genes to transform 
normal and cystic fibrosis (CF) human airway epithelial (HAE) cells. One cell 
line, designated NuLi-1 (normal lung, University of Iowa), was derived from HAE 
of normal genotype; three cell lines, designated CuFi (cystic fibrosis, 
University of Iowa)-1, CuFi-3, and CuFi-4, were derived from HAE of various CF 
genotypes. When grown at the air-liquid interface, the cell lines were capable 
of forming polarized differentiated epithelia that exhibited transepithelial 
resistance and maintained the ion channel physiology expected for the genotypes. 
The CF transmembrane conductance regulator defect in the CuFi cell lines could 
be corrected by infecting from the basolateral surface using adenoviral vectors. 
Using nuclear factor-kappaB promoter reporter constructs, we also demonstrated 
that the NuLi and CuFi cell lines retained nuclear factor-kappaB responses to 
lipopolysaccharide. These cell lines should therefore be useful as models for 
studying ion physiology, therapeutic intervention for CF, and innate immunity.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00355.2002
PMID: 12676769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]