---
reference_id: "PMID:38132825"
title: A False-Negative Newborn Screen for Tyrosinemia Type 1-Need for Re-Evaluation of Newborn Screening with Succinylacetone.
authors:
- Dijkstra AM
- Evers-van Vliet K
- Heiner-Fokkema MR
- Bodewes FAJA
- Bos DK
- Zsiros J
- van Aerde KJ
- Koop K
- van Spronsen FJ
- Lubout CMA
journal: Int J Neonatal Screen
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijns9040066
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A False-Negative Newborn Screen for Tyrosinemia Type 1-Need for Re-Evaluation of Newborn Screening with Succinylacetone.
**Authors:** Dijkstra AM, Evers-van Vliet K, Heiner-Fokkema MR, Bodewes FAJA, Bos DK, Zsiros J, van Aerde KJ, Koop K, van Spronsen FJ, Lubout CMA
**Journal:** Int J Neonatal Screen (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijns9040066](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijns9040066)

## Content

1. Int J Neonatal Screen. 2023 Dec 4;9(4):66. doi: 10.3390/ijns9040066.

A False-Negative Newborn Screen for Tyrosinemia Type 1-Need for Re-Evaluation of 
Newborn Screening with Succinylacetone.

Dijkstra AM(1), Evers-van Vliet K(1), Heiner-Fokkema MR(2), Bodewes FAJA(3), Bos 
DK(4), Zsiros J(5), van Aerde KJ(6), Koop K(7), van Spronsen FJ(1), Lubout 
CMA(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Metabolic Diseases, Beatrix Children's Hospital, University of 
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, 9700 RB Groningen, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, Department of Laboratory Medicine, 
University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, 9700 RB Groningen, 
The Netherlands.
(3)Section of Pediatric Gastroeneterology and Hepatology, Beatrix Children's 
Hospital, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, 9700 RB 
Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center 
Groningen, 9700 RB Groningen, The Netherlands.
(5)Princess Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, 3584 CX Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(6)Department of Pediatric Infectious Disease and Immunology, Amalia's Children 
Hospital, Radboud University Medical Center, 6525 GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(7)Section Metabolic Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, University Medical 
Center Utrecht, 3584 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Undiagnosed and untreated tyrosinemia type 1 (TT1) individuals carry a 
significant risk for developing liver fibrosis, cirrhosis and hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC). Elevated succinylacetone (SA) is pathognomonic for TT1 and 
therefore often used as marker for TT1 newborn screening (NBS). While SA was 
long considered to be elevated in every TT1 patient, here we present a recent 
false-negative SA TT1 screen. A nine-year-old boy presented with HCC in a 
cirrhotic liver. Additional tests for the underlying cause unexpectedly revealed 
TT1. Nine years prior, the patient was screened for TT1 via SA NBS with a 
negative result: SA 1.08 µmol/L, NBS cut-off 1.20 µmol/L. To our knowledge, this 
report is the first to describe a false-negative result from the TT1 NBS using 
SA. False-negative TT1 NBS results may be caused by milder TT1 variants with 
lower SA excretion. Such patients are more likely to be missed in NBS programs 
and can be asymptomatic for years. Based on our case, we advise TT1 to be 
considered in patients with otherwise unexplained liver pathology, including 
fibrosis, cirrhosis and HCC, despite a previous negative TT1 NBS status. 
Moreover, because the NBS SA concentration of this patient fell below the Dutch 
cut-off value (1.20 µmol/L at that time), as well as below the range of cut-off 
values used in other countries (1.29-10 µmol/L), it is likely that 
false-negative screening results for TT1 may also be occurring internationally. 
This underscores the need to re-evaluate TT1 SA NBS programs.

DOI: 10.3390/ijns9040066
PMCID: PMC10744279
PMID: 38132825

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.