---
reference_id: "PMID:21856244"
title: "Psychosocial assessment of nursing home residents via MDS 3.0: recommendations for social service training, staffing, and roles in interdisciplinary care."
authors:
- Simons K
- Connolly RP
- Bonifas R
- Allen PD
- Bailey K
- Downes D
- Galambos C
journal: J Am Med Dir Assoc
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.jamda.2011.07.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Psychosocial assessment of nursing home residents via MDS 3.0: recommendations for social service training, staffing, and roles in interdisciplinary care.
**Authors:** Simons K, Connolly RP, Bonifas R, Allen PD, Bailey K, Downes D, Galambos C
**Journal:** J Am Med Dir Assoc (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jamda.2011.07.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jamda.2011.07.005)

## Content

1. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2012 Feb;13(2):190.e9-190.e15. doi: 
10.1016/j.jamda.2011.07.005.

Psychosocial assessment of nursing home residents via MDS 3.0: recommendations 
for social service training, staffing, and roles in interdisciplinary care.

Simons K(1), Connolly RP, Bonifas R, Allen PD, Bailey K, Downes D, Galambos C.

Author information:
(1)Baycrest, Kunin Lunenfeld Applied and Evaluative Research Unit, University of 
Toronto, Factor Inwentash Faculty of Social Work, Toronto, Canada. 
ksimons@klaru-baycrest.on.ca

The Minimum Data Set 3.0 has introduced a higher set of expectations for 
assessment of residents' psychosocial needs, including new interviewing 
requirements, new measures of depression and resident choice, and new discharge 
screening procedures. Social service staff are primary providers of psychosocial 
assessment and care in nursing homes; yet, research demonstrates that many do 
not possess the minimum qualifications, as specified in federal regulations, to 
effectively provide these services given the clinical complexity of this client 
population. Likewise, social service caseloads generally exceed manageable 
levels. This article addresses the need for enhanced training and support of 
social service and interdisciplinary staff in long term care facilities in light 
of the new Minimum Data Set 3.0 assessment procedures as well as new survey and 
certification guidelines emphasizing quality of life. A set of recommendations 
will be made with regard to training, appropriate role functions within the 
context of interdisciplinary care, and needs for more realistic staffing ratios.

Copyright © 2012 American Medical Directors Association, Inc. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jamda.2011.07.005
PMID: 21856244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]