---
reference_id: "PMID:36928037"
title: Bilateral Intraorbital Opticmeningoceles in Joubert Syndrome.
authors:
- Cruz AAV
- Feltrini T
- Chahud F
- Messias K
journal: Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/IOP.0000000000002253
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bilateral Intraorbital Opticmeningoceles in Joubert Syndrome.
**Authors:** Cruz AAV, Feltrini T, Chahud F, Messias K
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/IOP.0000000000002253](https://doi.org/10.1097/IOP.0000000000002253)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg. 2023 May-Jun 01;39(3):e71-e72. doi: 
10.1097/IOP.0000000000002253. Epub 2023 Mar 16.

Bilateral Intraorbital Opticmeningoceles in Joubert Syndrome.

Cruz AAV(1), Feltrini T(1), Chahud F(2), Messias K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology.
(2)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, University of 
São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

Congenital opticmeningoceles was the term coined to describe large pseudocystic 
lesions of the intraorbital segment of the optic nerve. This extremely rare 
congenital anomaly was reported unilaterally only in nonsyndromic patients with 
fully developed eyes. The authors describe here a 10-month-old girl with a 
previous diagnosis of Joubert syndrome who presented with the same type of optic 
nerve malformation in OU. Molecular genetic analysis disclosed a pathogenic 
variant of the TMEM67 gene which is associated with various types of 
ciliopathies.

Copyright © 2023 The American Society of Ophthalmic Plastic and Reconstructive 
Surgery, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/IOP.0000000000002253
PMID: 36928037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no financial or conflicts of 
interest to disclose.