---
reference_id: PMID:35279931
title: "Influence of RETN, IL-1, and IL-6 gene polymorphisms on the risk of acne vulgaris in the Chinese population."
authors:
- Chen X
- Min S
- Chen C
- Lin X
- Wang D
- Jiang G
journal: J Cosmet Dermatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/jocd.14911
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Influence of RETN, IL-1, and IL-6 gene polymorphisms on the risk of acne vulgaris in the Chinese population.
**Authors:** Chen X, Min S, Chen C, Lin X, Wang D, Jiang G
**Journal:** J Cosmet Dermatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jocd.14911](https://doi.org/10.1111/jocd.14911)

## Content

1. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2022 Oct;21(10):4965-4973. doi: 10.1111/jocd.14911. Epub
2022  Mar 21.

Influence of RETN, IL-1, and IL-6 gene polymorphisms on the risk of acne 
vulgaris in the Chinese population.

Chen X(1)(2), Min S(1), Chen C(3), Lin X(1), Wang D(1), Jiang G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical University, 
Xuzhou, China.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Huzhou First People's Hospital, Huzhou, China.
(3)Department of Tumor Biological Treatment, The Third Affiliated Hospital of 
Soochow University, Changzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Acne vulgaris is a highly prevalent skin disorder that involves 
pilosebaceous units and may have adverse psychological effects on patients. The 
occurrence of acne is multifactorial and closely related to the interplay of 
environmental and genetic factors.
AIM: To investigate the possible association between RETN-420C>G, IL6-572G>C, 
and IL1A-889C>T polymorphism and acne vulgaris in the Chinese population.
METHODS: In this case-control study, genotyping was conducted in 306 patients 
with acne and 306 healthy controls by using polymerase chain reaction and 
snapshot technique.
RESULTS: There is a strong correlation between RETN-420 and IL6-572 
polymorphisms and acne susceptibility; the RETN-420G and IL6-572C alleles 
increase the risk of acne development. We also found that IL6-572G>C gene 
polymorphism is significantly associated with family history of acne and acne 
severity. In contrast to previous studies, we found no significant difference in 
the IL1A-889C>T polymorphism between healthy controls and acne patients in our 
population.
CONCLUSION: Our findings provide the first evidence that RETN-420 and IL6-572 
gene polymorphisms contribute to the pathogenesis of acne in the Chinese 
population.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/jocd.14911
PMID: 35279931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]