---
reference_id: "PMID:16497722"
title: SRPX2 mutations in disorders of language cortex and cognition.
authors:
- Roll P
- Rudolf G
- Pereira S
- Royer B
- Scheffer IE
- Massacrier A
- Valenti MP
- Roeckel-Trevisiol N
- Jamali S
- Beclin C
- Seegmuller C
- Metz-Lutz MN
- Lemainque A
- Delepine M
- Caloustian C
- de Saint Martin A
- Bruneau N
- Depétris D
- Mattéi MG
- Flori E
- Robaglia-Schlupp A
- Lévy N
- Neubauer BA
- Ravid R
- Marescaux C
- Berkovic SF
- Hirsch E
- Lathrop M
- Cau P
- Szepetowski P
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddl035
keywords:
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Apraxias/genetics, metabolism"
- Base Sequence
- CHO Cells
- Cerebral Cortex/metabolism
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cognition
- Cricetinae
- "Epilepsy, Rolandic/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Genetic Linkage
- Genetic Testing
- Glycosylation
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Intellectual Disability/metabolism
- "Language Disorders/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Male
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Proteins
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Transfection
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SRPX2 mutations in disorders of language cortex and cognition.
**Authors:** Roll P, Rudolf G, Pereira S, Royer B, Scheffer IE, Massacrier A, Valenti MP, Roeckel-Trevisiol N, Jamali S, Beclin C, Seegmuller C, Metz-Lutz MN, Lemainque A, Delepine M, Caloustian C, de Saint Martin A, Bruneau N, Depétris D, Mattéi MG, Flori E, Robaglia-Schlupp A, Lévy N, Neubauer BA, Ravid R, Marescaux C, Berkovic SF, Hirsch E, Lathrop M, Cau P, Szepetowski P
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddl035](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddl035)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 Apr 1;15(7):1195-207. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddl035. Epub 2006
Feb  23.

SRPX2 mutations in disorders of language cortex and cognition.

Roll P(1), Rudolf G, Pereira S, Royer B, Scheffer IE, Massacrier A, Valenti MP,
Roeckel-Trevisiol N, Jamali S, Beclin C, Seegmuller C, Metz-Lutz MN, Lemainque
A, Delepine M, Caloustian C, de Saint Martin A, Bruneau N, Depétris D, Mattéi
MG, Flori E, Robaglia-Schlupp A, Lévy N, Neubauer BA, Ravid R, Marescaux C,
Berkovic SF, Hirsch E, Lathrop M, Cau P, Szepetowski P.

Author information:
(1)INSERM UMR491, Université de la Méditerranée, 13385 Marseille, France.

The rolandic and sylvian fissures divide the human cerebral hemispheres and the
adjacent areas participate in speech processing. The relationship of rolandic
(sylvian) seizure disorders with speech and cognitive impairments is well known,
albeit poorly understood. We have identified the Xq22 gene SRPX2 as being
responsible for rolandic seizures (RSs) associated with oral and speech
dyspraxia and mental retardation (MR). SRPX2 is a secreted sushi-repeat
containing protein expressed in neurons of the human adult brain, including the
rolandic area. The disease-causing mutation (N327S) resulted in
gain-of-glycosylation of the secreted mutant protein. A second mutation (Y72S)
was identified within the first sushi domain of SRPX2 in a male with RSs and
bilateral perisylvian polymicrogyria and his female relatives with mild MR or
unaffected carrier status. In cultured cells, both mutations were associated
with altered patterns of intracellular processing, suggesting protein
misfolding. In the murine brain, Srpx2 protein expression appeared in neurons at
birth. The involvement of SRPX2 in these disorders suggests an important role
for SRPX2 in the perisylvian region critical for language and cognitive
development.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddl035
PMID: 16497722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
