---
reference_id: "PMID:29406447"
title: "Bartholin Gland Carcinoma: Clinicopathologic Features, Including p16 Expression and Clinical Outcome."
authors:
- Nazeran T
- Cheng AS
- Karnezis AN
- Tinker AV
- Gilks CB
journal: Int J Gynecol Pathol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1097/PGP.0000000000000489
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma/pathology, virology"
- Adult
- Aged
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/pathology, virology"
- Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor p16/metabolism
- Female
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- "Papillomaviridae/isolation & purification"
- "Papillomavirus Infections/pathology, virology"
- "Vulvar Neoplasms/pathology, virology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bartholin Gland Carcinoma: Clinicopathologic Features, Including p16 Expression and Clinical Outcome.
**Authors:** Nazeran T, Cheng AS, Karnezis AN, Tinker AV, Gilks CB
**Journal:** Int J Gynecol Pathol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PGP.0000000000000489](https://doi.org/10.1097/PGP.0000000000000489)

## Content

1. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2019 Mar;38(2):189-195. doi:
10.1097/PGP.0000000000000489.

Bartholin Gland Carcinoma: Clinicopathologic Features, Including p16 Expression 
and Clinical Outcome.

Nazeran T(1), Cheng AS, Karnezis AN, Tinker AV, Gilks CB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine (T.N., A.S.C., A.N.K., 
C.B.G.) Genetic Pathology Evaluation Centre (A.S.C.), University of British 
Columbia Division of Anatomical Pathology, Vancouver General Hospital (T.N., 
A.N.K., C.B.G.) Division of Medical Oncology, British Columbia Cancer Agency 
(A.T.), Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Bartholin gland carcinomas are rare forms of vulvar malignancy and it is unclear 
what proportion is associated with high-risk human papilloma virus (HPV) 
infection. Our hospital archives were searched for all cases of Bartholin gland 
carcinoma from 1984 to 2017 (n=16). We excluded 3 adenoid cystic carcinomas, 
which were the subject of a previous study, leaving 13 cases. We reviewed all 
slides and performed immunostains for p16 as a surrogate biomarker for high-risk 
HPV. There were 12 squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs), including 1 SCC with 
transitional-like morphology and 1 papillary SCC, and 1 adenocarcinoma. All SCCs 
showed diffuse and intense p16 expression consistent with the presence of HPV. 
The single case of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma showed patchy staining. 
Patient age ranged from 38 to 72 yr (mean, 58.3 yr). Most tumors were low stage. 
All patients were treated with radical vulvectomy and inguinofemoral 
lymphadenectomy. Mean clinical follow-up was 53.7 mo (range, 3-181 mo), 9 
patients were free of disease (75%), recurrence occurred in 3 cases, with death 
due to disease in 2 of the patients with recurrence, including the single 
patient with adenocarcinoma. All SCC of Bartholin gland expressed p16 diffusely 
and intensely regardless of histologic features and grade. Our results support 
the etiologic role of HPV in the pathogenesis of SCC of Bartholin gland. In this 
small study we observed SCC as the predominant histotype, and most tumors 
presented at early stage and were associated with relatively favorable outcomes.

DOI: 10.1097/PGP.0000000000000489
PMID: 29406447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]