---
reference_id: "PMID:39320341"
title: Update on Surveillance for Wilms Tumor and Hepatoblastoma in Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome and Other Predisposition Syndromes.
authors:
- Kalish JM
- Becktell KD
- Bougeard G
- Brodeur GM
- Diller LR
- Doria AS
- Hansford JR
- Klein SD
- Kohlmann WK
- Kratz CP
- MacFarland SP
- Pajtler KW
- Rednam SP
- Schienda J
- States LJ
- Villani A
- Weksberg R
- Zelley K
- Tomlinson GE
- Brzezinski JJ
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-2100
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hepatoblastoma/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology, genetics"
- "Wilms Tumor/genetics, epidemiology, diagnosis, etiology"
- "Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome/genetics, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Liver Neoplasms/diagnosis, etiology, epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Kidney Neoplasms/diagnosis, etiology, genetics, epidemiology"
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
- Australia/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update on Surveillance for Wilms Tumor and Hepatoblastoma in Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome and Other Predisposition Syndromes.
**Authors:** Kalish JM, Becktell KD, Bougeard G, Brodeur GM, Diller LR, Doria AS, Hansford JR, Klein SD, Kohlmann WK, Kratz CP, MacFarland SP, Pajtler KW, Rednam SP, Schienda J, States LJ, Villani A, Weksberg R, Zelley K, Tomlinson GE, Brzezinski JJ
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-2100](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-2100)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2024 Dec 2;30(23):5260-5269. doi: 
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-2100.

Update on Surveillance for Wilms Tumor and Hepatoblastoma in Beckwith-Wiedemann 
Syndrome and Other Predisposition Syndromes.

Kalish JM(1)(2)(3)(4), Becktell KD(5), Bougeard G(6), Brodeur GM(3)(4)(7), 
Diller LR(8), Doria AS(9), Hansford JR(10), Klein SD(1), Kohlmann WK(11), Kratz 
CP(12), MacFarland SP(3)(4)(7), Pajtler KW(13)(14)(15)(16), Rednam SP(17), 
Schienda J(8), States LJ(3)(18), Villani A(19), Weksberg R(20), Zelley K(4)(7), 
Tomlinson GE(21), Brzezinski JJ(20).

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics and the Center for Childhood Cancer Research, 
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(2)Department of Genetics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(4)Center for Childhood Cancer Research, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
(6)Department of Genetics, University Rouen Normandie, Inserm U1245, Normandie 
University, CHU Rouen, Rouen, France.
(7)Division of Oncology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania.
(8)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and 
Blood Disorders Center, Boston, Massachusetts.
(9)Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(10)Michael Rice Centre for Hematology and Oncology, Women's and Children's 
Hospital, South Australia Health and Medical Research Institute, South Australia 
ImmunoGENomics Cancer Institute, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South 
Australia, Australia.
(11)VA Medical Center, National TeleOncology, Clinical Cancer Genetics Service, 
Durham VA, University of Utah Huntsman Cancer Institute, Salt Lake City, Utah.
(12)Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany.
(13)Hopp Children's Cancer Center (KiTZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(14)Heidelberg Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Oncology, 
Hematology, and Immunology, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg University 
Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(15)Division of Pediatric Neurooncology, German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), German 
Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(16)National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), NCT Heidelberg, a partnership 
between DKFZ and Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(17)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor 
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.
(18)Department of Radiology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and Perelman 
School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania.
(19)Division of Paediatric Haematology and Oncology, Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(20)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(21)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Greehey 
Children's Cancer Research Institute, University of Texas Health Science Center 
at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas.

Wilms tumors are commonly associated with predisposition syndromes, many but not 
all of which include overgrowth. Several of these syndromes also include a risk 
of other embryonal malignancies-particularly hepatoblastoma. Guidelines for 
surveillance in this population were published in 2017, and recently, members of 
the American Association for Cancer Research Pediatric Cancer Working Group met 
to update those guidelines with a review of more recently published evidence and 
risk estimates. This perspective serves to update pediatric oncologists, 
geneticists, radiologists, counselors, and other health care professionals on 
revised diagnostic criteria; review previously published surveillance 
guidelines; and harmonize updated surveillance recommendations in the North 
American and Australian contexts for patients with overgrowth syndromes and 
other syndromes associated with Wilms tumor predisposition.

©2024 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-2100
PMCID: PMC11611621
PMID: 39320341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare no 
conflict of interest