---
reference_id: "PMID:27905021"
title: "Netherton Syndrome: A Genotype-Phenotype Review."
authors:
- Sarri CA
- Roussaki-Schulze A
- Vasilopoulos Y
- Zafiriou E
- Patsatsi A
- Stamatis C
- Gidarokosta P
- Sotiriadis D
- Sarafidou T
- Mamuris Z
journal: Mol Diagn Ther
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s40291-016-0243-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Netherton Syndrome: A Genotype-Phenotype Review.
**Authors:** Sarri CA, Roussaki-Schulze A, Vasilopoulos Y, Zafiriou E, Patsatsi A, Stamatis C, Gidarokosta P, Sotiriadis D, Sarafidou T, Mamuris Z
**Journal:** Mol Diagn Ther (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40291-016-0243-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40291-016-0243-y)

## Content

1. Mol Diagn Ther. 2017 Apr;21(2):137-152. doi: 10.1007/s40291-016-0243-y.

Netherton Syndrome: A Genotype-Phenotype Review.

Sarri CA(1), Roussaki-Schulze A(2), Vasilopoulos Y(1), Zafiriou E(2), Patsatsi 
A(3), Stamatis C(1), Gidarokosta P(2), Sotiriadis D(3), Sarafidou T(1), Mamuris 
Z(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, Comparative and Evolutionary Biology, Department of 
Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of Thessaly, Ploutonos 26 and Aiolou, 
41221, Larissa, Greece.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University General Hospital Larissa, University of 
Thessaly, Larissa, Greece.
(3)Second Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine, Aristotle University, 
Papageorgiou Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(4)Laboratory of Genetics, Comparative and Evolutionary Biology, Department of 
Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of Thessaly, Ploutonos 26 and Aiolou, 
41221, Larissa, Greece. zmamur@bio.uth.gr.

Netherton syndrome (OMIM #256500) is a rare but severe autosomal recessive form 
of ichthyosis that affects the skin, hair, and immune system. The identification 
of SPINK5, which encodes for the serine protease inhibitor LEKTI, as the gene 
responsible for Netherton syndrome, enabled the search for causative mutations 
in Netherton syndrome patients and families. However, information regarding 
these mutations and their association with the pathological Netherton syndrome 
phenotype is scarce. Herein, we provide an up-to-date overview of 80 different 
mutations in exonic as well as intronic regions that have been currently 
identified in 172 homozygous or compound heterozygous patients from 144 
families. Genotypes with mutations located more upstream in LEKTI correlate with 
more severe phenotypes compared with similar mutations located towards the 3' 
region. Furthermore, splicing mutations and post-transcriptional mechanism 
of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay affect LEKTI expression in variable ways. 
Genotype-phenotype correlations form the basis of prenatal diagnosis in families 
with a history of Netherton syndrome and when consanguinity is implied.

DOI: 10.1007/s40291-016-0243-y
PMID: 27905021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]