---
reference_id: "PMID:14550881"
title: HLA class II alleles and genetic predisposition to the antiphospholipid syndrome.
authors:
- Domenico Sebastiani G
- Minisola G
- Galeazzi M
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/s1568-9972(03)00068-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HLA class II alleles and genetic predisposition to the antiphospholipid syndrome.
**Authors:** Domenico Sebastiani G, Minisola G, Galeazzi M
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1568-9972(03)00068-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1568-9972(03)00068-5)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2003 Oct;2(6):387-94. doi: 10.1016/s1568-9972(03)00068-5.

HLA class II alleles and genetic predisposition to the antiphospholipid 
syndrome.

Domenico Sebastiani G(1), Minisola G, Galeazzi M.

Author information:
(1)Unità Operativa Complessa di Reumatologia, Azienda Ospedaliera San 
Camillo--Forlanini, Circonvallazione Gianicolense n. 87, 00152 Rome, Italy. 
gsebastiani@scamilloforlanini.rm.it

The antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is an autoimmune disease characterized by 
the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL). Its etiology is linked to 
genetic predisposition, which is accounted for, at least in part, by genes of 
major histocompatibility complex (HLA system). The association of APS with human 
leukocyte antigen (HLA) alleles is a consequence of the association of aPL with 
HLA alleles. Some HLA alleles carry the risk to produce aPL, and this is 
independent of the clinical context. In fact, we find the same associations 
between HLA and aPL in primary APS and in APS secondary to systemic lupus 
erythematosus (SLE). The association of HLA-DR4, -DR7, -DRw53 and -DQB1*0302 
with aCL that has been demonstrated in primary APS can also be found in SLE, a 
disease with a completely different pattern of HLA allele association (DR2, DR3, 
DRw52). In addition, the various aPL (anticardiolipin antibodies, lupus 
anticoagulant, anti-beta2GPI antibodies, antiphosphatidylserine/prothrombin 
antibodies) show similar HLA association, again independent of the clinical 
context (primary APS or SLE), and across various ethnic groups.

DOI: 10.1016/s1568-9972(03)00068-5
PMID: 14550881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]