---
reference_id: "PMID:38449873"
title: "Causal relationship between gut microbiota and risk of gastroesophageal reflux disease: a genetic correlation and bidirectional Mendelian randomization study."
authors:
- Wang K
- Wang S
- Chen Y
- Lu X
- Wang D
- Zhang Y
- Pan W
- Zhou C
- Zou D
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1327503
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Causal relationship between gut microbiota and risk of gastroesophageal reflux disease: a genetic correlation and bidirectional Mendelian randomization study.
**Authors:** Wang K, Wang S, Chen Y, Lu X, Wang D, Zhang Y, Pan W, Zhou C, Zou D
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2024.1327503](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2024.1327503)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2024 Feb 21;15:1327503. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1327503. 
eCollection 2024.

Causal relationship between gut microbiota and risk of gastroesophageal reflux 
disease: a genetic correlation and bidirectional Mendelian randomization study.

Wang K(#)(1)(2), Wang S(#)(3), Chen Y(#)(4), Lu X(#)(1), Wang D(1), Zhang Y(1), 
Pan W(4), Zhou C(1), Zou D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Ruijin Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, The First People's Hospital of Yunnan 
Province, The Affiliated Hospital of Kunming University of Science and 
Technology, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, First Affiliated Hospital of 
Stantou University Medical College, Stantou, China.
(4)The First Clinical Medical College, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, Gansu, 
China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Numerous observational studies have identified a linkage between the 
gut microbiota and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). However, a clear 
causative association between the gut microbiota and GERD has yet to be 
definitively ascertained, given the presence of confounding variables.
METHODS: The genome-wide association study (GWAS) pertaining to the microbiome, 
conducted by the MiBioGen consortium and comprising 18,340 samples from 24 
population-based cohorts, served as the exposure dataset. Summary-level data for 
GERD were obtained from a recent publicly available genome-wide association 
involving 78 707 GERD cases and 288 734 controls of European descent. The 
inverse variance-weighted (IVW) method was performed as a primary analysis, the 
other four methods were used as supporting analyses. Furthermore, sensitivity 
analyses encompassing Cochran's Q statistics, MR-Egger intercept, MR-PRESSO 
global test, and leave-one-out methodology were carried out to identify 
potential heterogeneity and horizontal pleiotropy. Ultimately, a reverse MR 
assessment was conducted to investigate the potential for reverse causation.
RESULTS: The IVW method's findings suggested protective roles against GERD for 
the Family Clostridiales Vadin BB60 group (P = 0.027), Genus Lachnospiraceae 
UCG004 (P = 0.026), Genus Methanobrevibacter (P = 0.026), and Phylum 
Actinobacteria (P = 0.019). In contrast, Class Mollicutes (P = 0.037), Genus 
Anaerostipes (P = 0.049), and Phylum Tenericutes (P = 0.024) emerged as 
potential GERD risk factors. In assessing reverse causation with GERD as the 
exposure and gut microbiota as the outcome, the findings indicate that GERD 
leads to dysbiosis in 13 distinct gut microbiota classes. The MR results' 
reliability was confirmed by thorough assessments of heterogeneity and 
pleiotropy.
CONCLUSIONS: For the first time, the MR analysis indicates a genetic link 
between gut microbiota abundance changes and GERD risk. This not only 
substantiates the potential of intestinal microecological therapy for GERD, but 
also establishes a basis for advanced research into the role of intestinal 
microbiota in the etiology of GERD.

Copyright © 2024 Wang, Wang, Chen, Lu, Wang, Zhang, Pan, Zhou and Zou.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1327503
PMCID: PMC10914956
PMID: 38449873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.