---
reference_id: "PMID:33609792"
title: "Rheumatoid arthritis: Extra-articular manifestations and comorbidities."
authors:
- Figus FA
- Piga M
- Azzolin I
- McConnell R
- Iagnocco A
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2021.102776
keywords:
- Antirheumatic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Arthritis, Rheumatoid/complications, drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Comorbidity
- Humans
- "Inflammation/drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rheumatoid arthritis: Extra-articular manifestations and comorbidities.
**Authors:** Figus FA, Piga M, Azzolin I, McConnell R, Iagnocco A
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2021.102776](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2021.102776)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2021 Apr;20(4):102776. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2021.102776. Epub 
2021 Feb 17.

Rheumatoid arthritis: Extra-articular manifestations and comorbidities.

Figus FA(1), Piga M(2), Azzolin I(1), McConnell R(3), Iagnocco A(4).

Author information:
(1)Academic Rheumatology Centre, MFRU and Dipartimento Scienze Cliniche e 
Biologiche, Università degli Studi di Torino, Torino, Italy.
(2)Rheumatology Unit, University Clinic and AOU of Cagliari, Monserrato, Italy.
(3)Neurosciences Center, Bronson Health Group, Kalamazoo, MI, USA.
(4)Academic Rheumatology Centre, MFRU and Dipartimento Scienze Cliniche e 
Biologiche, Università degli Studi di Torino, Torino, Italy. Electronic address: 
annamaria.iagnocco1@gmail.com.

Although synovitis is the pathological hallmark of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), 
many extra-articular manifestations (EMs) and comorbidities likely occur due to 
the complex, chronic, inflammatory, and autoimmune features of RA. 
Cardiovascular (CV) disease is the most common cause of death in patients with 
RA. Compared to the general population, patients with RA have twice the risk of 
myocardial infarction and up to 50% increased CV mortality risk. Severe and 
prolonged disease activity, genetics, and inflammation (e.g. CRP, ACPA, 
cytokines, matrix-degrading enzymes) play important roles in CV disease and 
atheroscleroticdamage. The second major cause of death in patients with RA is 
respiratory disease, which occurs in 30-40% of patients. RA may affect the lung 
interstitium, airways, and pleurae, while pulmonary vascular involvement is less 
frequent. Central and peripheral nervous system involvement is usually due to 
small vessel vasculitis, joint damage, or drug toxicity. There is also evidence 
that microvascular cerebral damage caused by systemic inflammation is associated 
with the development of Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia. Some 
observational studies have hinted how Disease Modified Anti-Rheumatic Drugs and 
biologics could reduce the incidence of dementia. Primary gastrointestinal and 
renal involvements are rare and often relate to drug therapy. To minimize 
morbidity and mortality, physicians must manage RA disease activity 
(treat-to-target) and monitor risk factors and concomitant conditions (e.g. 
smoking cessation; weight regulation; monitoring blood pressure, lipids, thyroid 
hormone, folic acid and homocysteine; screening for depression, anxiety, 
atlantoaxial instability, and atherosclerosis). This article aims to provide an 
overview of the most prevalent and important EMs and comorbidities associated 
with RA.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2021.102776
PMID: 33609792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]