---
reference_id: "PMID:9590995"
title: "Irritant contact dermatitis. Clues to causes, clinical characteristics, and control."
authors:
- Denig NI
- Hoke AW
- Maibach HI
journal: Postgrad Med
year: '1998'
doi: 10.3810/pgm.1998.05.486
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- "Administration, Topical"
- Anti-Inflammatory Agents/therapeutic use
- Chronic Disease
- "Dermatitis, Irritant/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- Hydrocortisone
- Incidence
- Occlusive Dressings
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Irritant contact dermatitis. Clues to causes, clinical characteristics, and control.
**Authors:** Denig NI, Hoke AW, Maibach HI
**Journal:** Postgrad Med (1998)
**DOI:** [10.3810/pgm.1998.05.486](https://doi.org/10.3810/pgm.1998.05.486)

## Content

1. Postgrad Med. 1998 May;103(5):199-200, 207-8, 212-3. doi: 
10.3810/pgm.1998.05.486.

Irritant contact dermatitis. Clues to causes, clinical characteristics, and 
control.

Denig NI(1), Hoke AW, Maibach HI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine, San 
Francisco, CA 94143-0989, USA.

Skin irritation can cause poorly defined nonimmunologic cutaneous changes that 
may cause diagnostic confusion. Clinical signs include vesicles, papules, 
bullae, erythema, edema, scaling, and lichenification. In some patients, this 
condition, termed irritant contact dermatitis, is indistinguishable from 
endogenous, dyshidrotic, nummular, and atopic dermatitis. Irritant contact 
dermatitis has only a few typical characteristics. The diagnosis is generally 
based on clinical appearance, history and, when indicated, diagnostic patch 
testing to rule out an allergic component. Elimination of the offending agent 
and protection from further exposure are important in both diagnosis and 
management. The dermatitis usually heals once the irritant is eliminated, and 
reexposure should be minimized for weeks to months, if not permanently.

DOI: 10.3810/pgm.1998.05.486
PMID: 9590995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]