---
reference_id: "PMID:27245600"
title: Renal transplantation in Bardet-Biedl Syndrome.
authors:
- Haws RM
- Joshi A
- Shah SA
- Alkandari O
- Turman MA
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s00467-016-3415-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Renal transplantation in Bardet-Biedl Syndrome.
**Authors:** Haws RM, Joshi A, Shah SA, Alkandari O, Turman MA
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00467-016-3415-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00467-016-3415-4)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2016 Nov;31(11):2153-61. doi: 10.1007/s00467-016-3415-4. Epub
 2016 Jun 1.

Renal transplantation in Bardet-Biedl Syndrome.

Haws RM(1), Joshi A(2), Shah SA(3), Alkandari O(4), Turman MA(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Marshfield Clinic, 1000 N Oak Ave, Marshfield, WI, 
54449, USA. haws.robert@marshfieldclinic.org.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Marshfield Clinic, 1000 N Oak Ave, Marshfield, WI, 
54449, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Mubarak Al-Kabeer Hospital & Hamid Al-Essa 
Transplant Center, Safat, Kuwait.
(5)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences 
Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA.

BACKGROUND: Renal anomalies are common in patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome 
(BBS), a renal cystic ciliopathy with multi-systemic features. Renal 
transplantation is indicated in cases of end-stage renal disease (ESRD), but 
transplant centers may be hesitant to perform the necessary transplant in light 
of the multitude of metabolic comorbidities these patients often face with the 
potential to complicate outcomes.
METHODS: Data from the Clinical Registry Investigating BBS (CRIBBS) were used to 
investigate renal transplant outcomes in the largest BBS cohort described to 
date.
RESULTS: Of the 206 patients enrolled in the CRIBBS, 21 children (10.2 %; 16 
girls, 5 boys; median age 8.4 years) had been diagnosed with ESRD. Renal 
transplantation was performed in 18 of these individuals between 1982 and 2015, 
including repeat transplantation in some cases, for a total of 22 kidneys. 
Overall graft survival was 81.6 % at 1 year post-transplantation, 75.7 % at 
5 years, 59 % at 10 years, and 49.2 % at 25 years. Patient survival was 94.4 % 
at 1 year post-transplantation, 87.2 % at 8 years, and 79.3 % at 25 years.
CONCLUSIONS: At a median follow-up time of 97 months, relatively few 
complications of renal transplantation were reported in the patients of this 
study. However, body mass index was significantly elevated in transplanted 
individuals compared to non-transplanted individuals participating in CRIBBS at 
the most recent follow-up. Although the frequency of obesity and other 
manifestations of the metabolic syndrome warrant meticulous management in this 
high-risk population, favorable long-term outcomes suggest that renal 
transplantation is a viable option for patients with BBS and ESRD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-016-3415-4
PMID: 27245600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]