---
reference_id: "PMID:27129690"
title: Significant improvement in Fabry disease podocytopathy after 3 years of treatment with agalsidase beta.
authors:
- Ito S
- Ogura M
- Kamei K
- Matsuoka K
- Warnock DG
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s00467-016-3387-4
keywords:
- Child
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy/methods
- "Fabry Disease/complications, drug therapy"
- Humans
- Isoenzymes/therapeutic use
- "Kidney Diseases/etiology, pathology"
- Male
- Podocytes/pathology
- alpha-Galactosidase/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Significant improvement in Fabry disease podocytopathy after 3 years of treatment with agalsidase beta.
**Authors:** Ito S, Ogura M, Kamei K, Matsuoka K, Warnock DG
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00467-016-3387-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00467-016-3387-4)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2016 Aug;31(8):1369-73. doi: 10.1007/s00467-016-3387-4. Epub
2016 Apr 29.

Significant improvement in Fabry disease podocytopathy after 3 years of
treatment with agalsidase beta.

Ito S(1)(2), Ogura M(3), Kamei K(3), Matsuoka K(4), Warnock DG(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama City
University, 3-9 Fuku-ura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, 236-0004, Japan.
itoshu@yokohama-cu.ac.jp.
(2)Division of Pediatric Nephrology and Rheumatology, National Center for Child
Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan. itoshu@yokohama-cu.ac.jp.
(3)Division of Pediatric Nephrology and Rheumatology, National Center for Child
Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Division of Pathology, National Center for Child Health and Development,
Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Fabry disease is an X-linked lysosomal disorder caused by decreased
activity of α-galactosidase A (GLA). Consequent accumulation of
globotriaosylceramide (GL-3) in lysosomes results in damage to a variety of
organs, including the kidneys. Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) is an effective
treatment, but whether it should be started before organ damage is evident is a
matter of debate.
CASE DIAGNOSIS/TREATMENT: A 10-year-old boy who complained of severe sole pain
for 3 years had been misdiagnosed with juvenile idiopathic arthritis. Further
investigations revealed decreased GLA activity and a M1T mutation in the GLA
gene causing protein truncation, suggestive of Fabry disease. Despite normal
renal function and urinalysis, renal biopsy showed abnormal structure, with
marked accumulation of GL-3 in podocytes, partial effacement of foot processes
and irregularly reduced expression of nephrin in the slit diaphragm. After
1 year of ERT with 1 mg/kg agalsidase beta once every 2 weeks, his pain had
resolved with ERT combined with carbamazepine and pregabalin. After 3 years of
the ERT, repeat biopsy showed little renal GL-3 deposition, resolution of foot
process effacement, and a dramatic improvement in nephrin expression.
CONCLUSIONS: There may be a window of opportunity in which pain and renal injury
can be addressed in the early stages of Fabry disease. Early initiation of ERT
should therefore be considered for children with Fabry disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-016-3387-4
PMID: 27129690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
