---
reference_id: "PMID:26564076"
title: PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome.
authors:
- Mester J
- Charis E
journal: Handb Clin Neurol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-62702-5.00009-3
keywords:
- Germ-Line Mutation/genetics
- "Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple/genetics"
- Humans
- Mutation/genetics
- PTEN Phosphohydrolase/genetics
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome.
**Authors:** Mester J, Charis E
**Journal:** Handb Clin Neurol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/B978-0-444-62702-5.00009-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-62702-5.00009-3)

## Content

1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2015;132:129-37. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-62702-5.00009-3.

PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome.

Mester J(1), Charis E(2).

Author information:
(1)Genomic Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(2)Genomic Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA. Electronic
address: engc@ccf.org.

PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS) is the molecular diagnostic term describing
patients with Cowden syndrome, Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome, and other
clinical presentations with germline mutation of the PTEN tumor suppressor gene.
PHTS confers increased risks for specific malignancies, most notably breast,
thyroid, renal, and endometrial cancers. Benign tumors are common, affecting a
variety of tissues, and can range from subtle skin papules requiring no
treatment to devastating vascular anomalies. There is also a broad range of
neurodevelopmental effects, with some patients having no challenges and others
with severe autism spectrum disorder and mental retardation. While most cases
are inherited in a family for generations, following an autosomal dominant
pattern, at least 10% and perhaps as many as 44% of cases are due to a new (de
novo) mutation. Clinical presentations can vary dramatically from patient to
patient, even among those in the same family. Features of this condition that
may assist in diagnosis prior to cancer development can be subtle and difficult
to recognize. This chapter will help the reader identify which patients should
be referred for genetics evaluation and how to manage patients diagnosed with
this rare condition.

© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-444-62702-5.00009-3
PMID: 26564076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
