---
reference_id: "PMID:9618168"
title: Mutation in the RIEG1 gene in patients with iridogoniodysgenesis syndrome.
authors:
- Kulak SC
- Kozlowski K
- Semina EV
- Pearce WG
- Walter MA
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/7.7.1113
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation in the RIEG1 gene in patients with iridogoniodysgenesis syndrome.
**Authors:** Kulak SC, Kozlowski K, Semina EV, Pearce WG, Walter MA
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/7.7.1113](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/7.7.1113)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 1998 Jul;7(7):1113-7. doi: 10.1093/hmg/7.7.1113.

Mutation in the RIEG1 gene in patients with iridogoniodysgenesis syndrome.

Kulak SC(1), Kozlowski K, Semina EV, Pearce WG, Walter MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 
2S2, Canada.

Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS) and iridogoniodysgenesis syndrome (IGDS) are 
clinically related autosomal dominant disorders which affect the anterior 
segment of the eye as well as non-ocular structures. ARS patients present with 
iris hypoplasia, a prominent Schwalbe line, adhesions between the iris stroma 
and the iridocorneal angle and increased intraocular pressure. IGDS is 
characterized by iris hypoplasia, goniodysgenesis and increased intraocular 
pressure. Each syndrome also presents with non-ocular features including 
maxillary hypoplasia, micro and anodontia, redundant periumbilical skin, 
hypospadius (in males), and each has been genetically linked to chromosome 4q25. 
RIEG1 , the gene responsible for the 4q25 ARS phenotype, recently has been 
cloned. RIEG1 encodes a novel member of the bicoid class of homeobox proteins 
known to be active as transcription factors. Mutational analysis has previously 
detected several mutations in this gene in ARS individuals. We have now detected 
a mutation in RIEG1 which segregates with the disease phenotype in a family with 
IGDS. This mutation is a G-->A transition altering an arginine residue to a 
histidine in a highly conserved location in the second helix of the homeobox of 
RIEG1. This mutation indicates that IGDS and ARS are allelic variants of the 
same disorder. This wide variability in clinical consequences of mutations at 
the RIEG1 4q25 locus implicates the RIEG gene broadly in ocular and craniofacial 
disorders.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/7.7.1113
PMID: 9618168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]