---
reference_id: "PMID:31102120"
title: Assessment of the cytotoxic effects of aporphine prototypes on head and neck cancer cells.
authors:
- Rodrigues-Junior DM
- de Almeida Pontes NM
- de Albuquerque GE
- Carlin V
- Perecim GP
- Raminelli C
- Vettore AL
journal: Invest New Drugs
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s10637-019-00784-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Assessment of the cytotoxic effects of aporphine prototypes on head and neck cancer cells.
**Authors:** Rodrigues-Junior DM, de Almeida Pontes NM, de Albuquerque GE, Carlin V, Perecim GP, Raminelli C, Vettore AL
**Journal:** Invest New Drugs (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10637-019-00784-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10637-019-00784-6)

## Content

1. Invest New Drugs. 2020 Feb;38(1):70-78. doi: 10.1007/s10637-019-00784-6. Epub 
2019 May 17.

Assessment of the cytotoxic effects of aporphine prototypes on head and neck 
cancer cells.

Rodrigues-Junior DM(1)(2), de Almeida Pontes NM(2), de Albuquerque GE(1)(2), 
Carlin V(2), Perecim GP(3), Raminelli C(3), Vettore AL(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Ciências Biológicas, Campus Diadema, Universidade Federal de 
São Paulo, Diadema, Brazil.
(2)Laboratório de Biologia Molecular do Câncer, Universidade Federal de São 
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Química, Campus Diadema, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, 
Diadema, Brazil.
(4)Departamento de Ciências Biológicas, Campus Diadema, Universidade Federal de 
São Paulo, Diadema, Brazil. andre.vettore@gmail.com.
(5)Laboratório de Biologia Molecular do Câncer, Universidade Federal de São 
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. andre.vettore@gmail.com.

Purpose Among alkaloids, abundant secondary metabolites in plants, aporphines 
constitute a class of compounds with interesting biological activities, 
including anticancer effects. The present study evaluated the anticancer 
activities of 14 substances, including four aporphine derivatives acquired 
through the biomonitoring of (±)-apomorphine hydrochloride total synthesis from 
2-phenethylamine and 3,4-dimethoxybenzaldehyde against head and neck squamous 
cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Methods The cytotoxic effects of compounds against a 
panel of HNSCC cell lines were determined by PrestoBlue cell viability assay, 
while the genotoxicity of substances was evaluated by micronucleus test. Cell 
death was detected by flow cytometry (Annexin V/7AAD) and western blot analysis 
was used to detect the presence of cleaved Caspase-3 molecules. Results The 
aporphine and isoquinoline derivatives APO, C1, and A5 significantly reduced 
HNSCC cell viability and promoted DNA damages in these cells. Further, by 
activating the Caspase-3 pathway, these substances were able to induce 
apoptosis. Conclusion Our results revealed that APO, C1, and A5 exhibit 
cytotoxic effects in HNSCC cells. The mechanisms of action appear to be partly 
via the generation of DNA damages and apoptosis induction through Caspase-3 
pathway activation. This study provides preclinical data that suggest a 
potential therapeutic role for APO, C1, and A5 against head and neck cancer 
cells.

DOI: 10.1007/s10637-019-00784-6
PMID: 31102120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]