---
reference_id: "PMID:21183315"
title: "Juvenile temporal vasculitis: a rare case in a middle-aged woman."
authors:
- Durant C
- Connault J
- Graveleau J
- Toquet C
- Brisseau JM
- Hamidou M
journal: Ann Vasc Surg
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.avsg.2010.10.006
keywords:
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Biopsy
- Female
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/complications, diagnosis, surgery"
- Headache/etiology
- Humans
- "Temporal Arteries/diagnostic imaging, pathology, surgery"
- Treatment Outcome
- "Ultrasonography, Doppler"
- Vascular Surgical Procedures
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Juvenile temporal vasculitis: a rare case in a middle-aged woman.
**Authors:** Durant C, Connault J, Graveleau J, Toquet C, Brisseau JM, Hamidou M
**Journal:** Ann Vasc Surg (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.avsg.2010.10.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.avsg.2010.10.006)

## Content

1. Ann Vasc Surg. 2011 Apr;25(3):384.e5-7. doi: 10.1016/j.avsg.2010.10.006. Epub
2010 Dec 23.

Juvenile temporal vasculitis: a rare case in a middle-aged woman.

Durant C(1), Connault J, Graveleau J, Toquet C, Brisseau JM, Hamidou M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medecine, CHU Hôtel Dieu, Nantes, France.
cecile.durant@sls.aphp.fr

BACKGROUND: Classic giant cell arteritis affects older adults who are aged >50
years. Temporal arteritis is uncommon in young adults but juvenile temporal
vasculitis (JTV) is the most frequent form found in young people. Clinical
presentation is usually poor, with localized temporal inflammatory changes
without consistent systemic manifestations. Generally, the patients have a
benign clinical course, without ophthalmic or ischemic manifestations. In these
rare JTVs, excision of the involved section of temporal artery is often curative
and corticosteroid therapy is not required.
METHOD: The present study reports a case of JTV in a middle-aged woman.
RESULTS: A 44-year-old woman complained of violent temporal headache, with a
slight inflammatory syndrome. She had no vascular systemic manifestation and no
cause of secondary vasculitis. Doppler ultrasonography suggested a localized
inflammatory arteritis. Temporal biopsy was performed. Histologic findings were
compatible with JTV (nongranulomatous panarteritis with mononuclear cells and
eosinophils). All the symptoms disappeared after excision. One year later, she
remains well and reports neither systemic manifestation nor recurrence.
CONCLUSION: Vasculitis of the temporal arteries in young people is uncommon and
JTV is rare in middle-aged people. It is necessary to search for systemic or
secondary vasculitis. In contrast to giant cell arteritis, steroids are not
required.

Copyright © 2011 Annals of Vascular Surgery Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2010.10.006
PMID: 21183315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]