---
reference_id: "PMID:37436152"
title: Type 3 Laryngeal Clefts Presenting with Upper Airway Obstruction without Aspiration.
authors:
- Weitzman RE
- Shah HP
- Modi VK
- Maurrasse SE
journal: Laryngoscope
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/lary.30849
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type 3 Laryngeal Clefts Presenting with Upper Airway Obstruction without Aspiration.
**Authors:** Weitzman RE, Shah HP, Modi VK, Maurrasse SE
**Journal:** Laryngoscope (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/lary.30849](https://doi.org/10.1002/lary.30849)

## Content

1. Laryngoscope. 2024 Feb;134(2):977-980. doi: 10.1002/lary.30849. Epub 2023 Jul 
12.

Type 3 Laryngeal Clefts Presenting with Upper Airway Obstruction without 
Aspiration.

Weitzman RE(1), Shah HP(2), Modi VK(1), Maurrasse SE(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Otolaryngology, Department of Otolaryngology-Head & 
Neck Surgery, New York Presbyterian Hospital, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York 
City, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Surgery, Section of Pediatric Otolaryngology-Head & Neck 
Surgery, Yale School of Medicine, Yale New Haven Children's Hospital, New Haven, 
Connecticut, USA.

Traditionally, otolaryngologists are taught that the defining clinical feature 
of a laryngeal cleft is aspiration. However, in a small subset of patients-even 
those with extensive clefts-the sole presenting feature may be airway 
obstruction. Here, we report two cases of type III laryngeal clefts that 
presented with upper airway obstruction without aspiration. The first patient 
was a 6-month-old male with history of tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) who 
presented with noisy breathing, initially thought to be related to 
tracheomalacia. Polysomnogram (PSG) demonstrated moderate OSA and modified 
barium swallow (MBS) was negative for aspiration. In-office laryngoscopy was 
notable for a mismatch of tissue in the interarytenoid region. A type III 
laryngeal cleft was identified on bronchoscopy, and airway symptoms resolved 
after endoscopic repair. The second patient was a 4-year-old male with a 
diagnosis of asthma who presented with progressive exercise-induced stridor and 
airway obstruction. In-office flexible laryngoscopy revealed redundant tissue in 
the posterior glottis and MBS was negative for aspiration. He was found to have 
a type III laryngeal cleft on bronchoscopy and his stridor and upper airway 
obstruction resolved after endoscopic repair. While aspiration is the most 
common presenting symptom of a laryngeal cleft, it is important to consider that 
patients can have a cleft in the absence of dysphagia. Laryngeal cleft should be 
included in the differential diagnosis for patients with obstructive symptoms 
not explained by other etiologies and in those with suspicious features on 
flexible laryngoscopy. Laryngeal cleft repair is recommended to restore normal 
anatomy and relieve obstructive symptoms. Laryngoscope, 134:977-980, 2024.

© 2023 The American Laryngological, Rhinological and Otological Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.30849
PMID: 37436152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]