---
reference_id: "PMID:15353290"
title: Synovial activation in rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Ospelt C
- Neidhart M
- Gay RE
- Gay S
journal: Front Biosci
year: '2004'
doi: 10.2741/1399
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Synovial activation in rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Ospelt C, Neidhart M, Gay RE, Gay S
**Journal:** Front Biosci (2004)
**DOI:** [10.2741/1399](https://doi.org/10.2741/1399)

## Content

1. Front Biosci. 2004 Sep 1;9:2323-34. doi: 10.2741/1399.

Synovial activation in rheumatoid arthritis.

Ospelt C(1), Neidhart M, Gay RE, Gay S.

Author information:
(1)Center of Experimental Rheumatology, University Hospital, Gloriastrasse 25, 
CH-8091 Zurich, Switzerland. Caroline.Ospelt@usz.ch

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic inflammatory disease with progressive 
articular damage. Activated cells of the synovium produce pro-inflammatory and 
matrix-degrading effector molecules, which maintain the inflammation and lead to 
the destruction of the involved joints. In addition to macrophages and T- and 
B-cells, fibroblast-like synoviocytes must be considered key cells in driving 
the pathological processes. They can be distinguished by their 
transformed-appearing phenotype and their invasion into adjacent cartilage and 
bone. Synovial activation is driven by pro-inflammatory cytokines as well as 
cytokine independent pathways including endogenous retroviral elements and 
Toll-like receptors (TLR). These pathways are connected by a complex network of 
autocrine and paracrine acting factors. Another feature of RA synovium is 
hyperplasia of the lining layer, which results from increased proliferation and 
decreased apoptosis of synovial fibroblasts. Thanks to new techniques in basic 
research, novel insights into the cellular and molecular mechanisms of the 
pathogenesis of RA were gained and led to the development of new, specific 
therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.2741/1399
PMID: 15353290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]