---
reference_id: "PMID:26118977"
title: "EFTUD2 deficiency in vertebrates: Identification of a novel human mutation and generation of a zebrafish model."
authors:
- Deml B
- Reis LM
- Muheisen S
- Bick D
- Semina EV
journal: Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/bdra.23397
keywords:
- Animals
- "Child, Preschool"
- Exome
- Eye Abnormalities/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- "Models, Animal"
- Mutation
- Peptide Elongation Factors/genetics
- "Ribonucleoprotein, U5 Small Nuclear/genetics"
- Zebrafish
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EFTUD2 deficiency in vertebrates: Identification of a novel human mutation and generation of a zebrafish model.
**Authors:** Deml B, Reis LM, Muheisen S, Bick D, Semina EV
**Journal:** Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/bdra.23397](https://doi.org/10.1002/bdra.23397)

## Content

1. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2015 Jul;103(7):630-40. doi: 
10.1002/bdra.23397. Epub 2015 Jun 27.

EFTUD2 deficiency in vertebrates: Identification of a novel human mutation and 
generation of a zebrafish model.

Deml B(1)(2), Reis LM(1), Muheisen S(1), Bick D(1), Semina EV(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Children's Research Institute at the Medical 
College of Wisconsin and Children's Hospital of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical College of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.

BACKGROUND: Congenital microphthalmia and coloboma are severe developmental 
defects that are frequently associated with additional systemic anomalies and 
display a high level of genetic heterogeneity.
METHODS: To identify the pathogenic variant in a patient with microphthalmia, 
coloboma, retinal dystrophy, microcephaly, and other features, whole exome 
sequencing analysis of the patient and parental samples was undertaken. To 
further explore the identified variant/gene, expression and functional studies 
in zebrafish were performed.
RESULTS: Whole exome sequencing revealed a de novo variant, c.473_474delGA, 
p.(Arg158Lysfs*4), in EFTUD2 which encodes a component of the spliceosome 
complex. Dominant mutations in EFTUD2 cause Mandibulofacial Dysostosis, 
Guion-Almeida type, which does not involve microphthalmia, coloboma, or retinal 
dystrophy; analysis of genes known to cause these ocular phenotypes identified 
several variants of unknown significance but no causal alleles in the affected 
patient. Zebrafish eftud2 demonstrated high sequence conservation with the human 
gene and broad embryonic expression. TALEN-mediated disruption was employed to 
generate a c.378_385 del, p.(Ser127Aspfs*23) truncation mutation in eftud2. 
Homozygous mutants displayed a reduced head size, small eye, curved body, and 
early embryonic lethality. Apoptosis assays demonstrated a striking increase in 
terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate nick 
end-labeling (TUNEL)-positive cells in the developing brain, eye, spinal cord, 
and other tissues starting at 30 hours postfertilization.
CONCLUSION: This study reports a novel mutation in EFTUD2 in a Mandibulofacial 
Dysostosis, Guion-Almeida type patient with unusual ocular features and the 
generation of a first animal model of eftud2 deficiency. The severe embryonic 
phenotype observed in eftud2 mutants indicates an important conserved role 
during development of diverse tissues in vertebrates.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bdra.23397
PMCID: PMC4487781
PMID: 26118977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.