---
reference_id: "PMID:36672825"
title: "Dental Anomalies in Ciliopathies: Lessons from Patients with BBS2, BBS7, and EVC2 Mutations."
authors:
- Kantaputra P
- Dejkhamron P
- Sittiwangkul R
- Katanyuwong K
- Ngamphiw C
- Sonsuwan N
- Intachai W
- Tongsima S
- Beales PL
- Buranaphatthana W
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/genes14010084
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dental Anomalies in Ciliopathies: Lessons from Patients with BBS2, BBS7, and EVC2 Mutations.
**Authors:** Kantaputra P, Dejkhamron P, Sittiwangkul R, Katanyuwong K, Ngamphiw C, Sonsuwan N, Intachai W, Tongsima S, Beales PL, Buranaphatthana W
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes14010084](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes14010084)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2022 Dec 27;14(1):84. doi: 10.3390/genes14010084.

Dental Anomalies in Ciliopathies: Lessons from Patients with BBS2, BBS7, and 
EVC2 Mutations.

Kantaputra P(1)(2)(3), Dejkhamron P(4), Sittiwangkul R(5), Katanyuwong K(6), 
Ngamphiw C(7), Sonsuwan N(8), Intachai W(3), Tongsima S(7), Beales PL(9), 
Buranaphatthana W(10).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Dentistry, Department of Orthodontics and Pediatric 
Dentistry, Faculty of Dentistry, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai 50200, 
Thailand.
(2)Dentaland Clinic, Chiang Mai 50200, Thailand.
(3)Center of Excellence in Medical Genetics Research, Faculty of Dentistry, 
Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai 50200, Thailand.
(4)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of 
Medicine, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai 50200, Thailand.
(5)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of 
Medicine, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai 50200, Thailand.
(6)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of 
Medicine, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai 50200, Thailand.
(7)National Biobank of Thailand, National Science and Technology Development 
Agency, Pathum Thani 12120, Thailand.
(8)Department of Otolaryngology, Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai University, 
Chiang Mai 50200, Thailand.
(9)Genetics and Genomic Medicine Program, UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of 
Child Health, University College London, London WC1N 1EH, UK.
(10)Department of Oral Biology and Diagnostic Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, 
Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai 50200, Thailand.

Objective: To investigate dental anomalies and the molecular etiology of a 
patient with Ellis−van Creveld syndrome and two patients with Bardet−Biedl 
syndrome, two examples of ciliopathies. Patients and Methods: Clinical 
examination, radiographic evaluation, whole exome sequencing, and Sanger direct 
sequencing were performed. Results: Patient 1 had Ellis−van Creveld syndrome 
with delayed dental development or tooth agenesis, and multiple frenula, the 
feature found only in patients with mutations in ciliary genes. A novel 
homozygous mutation in EVC2 (c.703G>C; p.Ala235Pro) was identified. Patient 2 
had Bardet−Biedl syndrome with a homozygous frameshift mutation (c.389_390delAC; 
p.Asn130ThrfsTer4) in BBS7. Patient 3 had Bardet−Biedl syndrome and carried a 
heterozygous mutation (c.389_390delAC; p.Asn130ThrfsTer4) in BBS7 and a 
homozygous mutation in BBS2 (c.209G>A; p.Ser70Asn). Her clinical findings 
included global developmental delay, disproportionate short stature, myopia, 
retinitis pigmentosa, obesity, pyometra with vaginal atresia, bilateral 
hydronephrosis with ureteropelvic junction obstruction, bilateral genu valgus, 
post-axial polydactyly feet, and small and thin fingernails and toenails, tooth 
agenesis, microdontia, taurodontism, and impaired dentin formation. Conclusions: 
EVC2, BBS2, and BBS7 mutations found in our patients were implicated in 
malformation syndromes with dental anomalies including tooth agenesis, 
microdontia, taurodontism, and impaired dentin formation.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14010084
PMCID: PMC9858533
PMID: 36672825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.