---
reference_id: "PMID:34560710"
title: "Vascular Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome: Pathological Variants, Recent Discoveries, and Theoretical Approaches."
authors:
- Assavarittirong C
- Au TY
- Nguyen PV
- Mostowska A
journal: Cardiol Rev
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1097/CRD.0000000000000419
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vascular Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome: Pathological Variants, Recent Discoveries, and Theoretical Approaches.
**Authors:** Assavarittirong C, Au TY, Nguyen PV, Mostowska A
**Journal:** Cardiol Rev (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1097/CRD.0000000000000419](https://doi.org/10.1097/CRD.0000000000000419)

## Content

1. Cardiol Rev. 2022 Nov-Dec 01;30(6):308-313. doi: 10.1097/CRD.0000000000000419.
 Epub 2021 Sep 15.

Vascular Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome: Pathological Variants, Recent Discoveries, and 
Theoretical Approaches.

Assavarittirong C(1), Au TY(1), Nguyen PV(2), Mostowska A(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Poznan University 
of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
(2)Department of Medical Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland.

Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (vEDS) is a rare autosomal dominant genetic 
disorder. It is the most fatal among all types of EDS. In addition to typical 
EDS characteristics, vEDS patients are at risk of blood vessel rupture due to 
possession of pathogenic variants of the COL3A1 gene, which encodes type III 
collagen. Type III collagen is a major component of humans' vascular walls. The 
management of this disease is possible; however, there is no cure as of present. 
Recently, discoveries with potential impact on the management of vEDS have been 
elucidated. Mice with vEDS traits treated with a beta-blocker celiprolol showed 
significant improvements in their thoracic aorta biomechanical strength. 
Moreover, it has been demonstrated that the specifically designed small 
interference RNAs (siRNA) can effectively silence the pathogenic variant allele. 
To enhance the normal allele expression, an intracellularly expressed lysyl 
oxidase is shown to regulate the transcription rate of the COL3A1 promoter. 
Similarly, an embryonic homeobox transcription factor Nanog upregulates the 
wild-type COL3A1 expression through activation of the transforming growth 
factor-beta pathway, which increases type III collagen synthesis. Despite 
numerous advancements, more studies are to be performed to incorporate these 
discoveries into clinical settings, and eventually, more personalized treatments 
can be created.

Copyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/CRD.0000000000000419
PMID: 34560710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The authors declare no conflict of 
interest.