---
reference_id: "PMID:37369340"
title: Spatial enrichment of the type 1 interferon signature in the brain of a neuropsychiatric lupus murine model.
authors:
- Aw E
- Zhang Y
- Yalcin E
- Herrmann U
- Lin SL
- Langston K
- Castrillon C
- Ma M
- Moffitt JR
- Carroll MC
journal: Brain Behav Immun
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2023.06.021
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Child
- Animals
- Mice
- "Lupus Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/complications, diagnosis, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/complications"
- Brain/metabolism
- Interferon-alpha/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spatial enrichment of the type 1 interferon signature in the brain of a neuropsychiatric lupus murine model.
**Authors:** Aw E, Zhang Y, Yalcin E, Herrmann U, Lin SL, Langston K, Castrillon C, Ma M, Moffitt JR, Carroll MC
**Journal:** Brain Behav Immun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbi.2023.06.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2023.06.021)

## Content

1. Brain Behav Immun. 2023 Nov;114:511-522. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2023.06.021. Epub
2023 Jun 25.

Spatial enrichment of the type 1 interferon signature in the brain of a
neuropsychiatric lupus murine model.

Aw E(1), Zhang Y(2), Yalcin E(2), Herrmann U(2), Lin SL(1), Langston K(3),
Castrillon C(2), Ma M(2), Moffitt JR(4), Carroll MC(5).

Author information:
(1)Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States; Division of Medical Sciences,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.
(2)Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.
(3)Department of Immunology, Harvard Medical School and Evergrande Center for
Immunologic Diseases, Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States. Electronic address:
michael.carroll@childrens.harvard.edu.

Erratum in
    Brain Behav Immun. 2024 Feb;116:419. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2023.11.024.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Sep 06:2023.04.21.537814. doi: 10.1101/2023.04.21.537814.

Among systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patients, neuropsychiatric symptoms are
highly prevalent, being observed in up to 80% of adult and 95% of pediatric
patients. Type 1 interferons, particularly interferon alpha (IFNα), have been
implicated in the pathogenesis of SLE and its associated neuropsychiatric
symptoms (NPSLE). However, it remains unclear how type 1 interferon signaling in
the central nervous system (CNS) might result in neuropsychiatric sequelae. In
this study, we validate an NPSLE mouse model and find an elevated peripheral
type 1 interferon signature alongside clinically relevant NPSLE symptoms such as
anxiety and fatigue. Unbiased single-nucleus sequencing of the hindbrain and
hippocampus revealed that interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) were among the most
highly upregulated genes in both regions and that gene pathways involved in
cellular interaction and neuronal development were generally repressed among
astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and neurons. Using image-based spatial
transcriptomics, we found that the type 1 interferon signature is enriched as
spatially distinct patches within the brain parenchyma of these mice. Our
results suggest that type 1 interferon in the CNS may play an important
mechanistic role in mediating NPSLE behavioral phenotypes by repressing general
cellular communication pathways, and that type 1 interferon signaling modulators
are a potential therapeutic option for NPSLE.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbi.2023.06.021
PMCID: PMC10918751
PMID: 37369340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
