---
reference_id: "PMID:30712438"
title: "Silent sinus syndrome: combined sinus surgery and orbital reconstruction - report of 15 cases."
authors:
- Clarós P
- Sobolewska AZ
- Cardesa A
- Lopez-Fortuny M
- Claros A
journal: Acta Otolaryngol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1080/00016489.2018.1542161
keywords:
- Adult
- "Enophthalmos/etiology, surgery"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Natural Orifice Endoscopic Surgery
- Orbit/surgery
- "Paranasal Sinus Diseases/complications, surgery"
- Prosthesis Implantation
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Silent sinus syndrome: combined sinus surgery and orbital reconstruction - report of 15 cases.
**Authors:** Clarós P, Sobolewska AZ, Cardesa A, Lopez-Fortuny M, Claros A
**Journal:** Acta Otolaryngol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00016489.2018.1542161](https://doi.org/10.1080/00016489.2018.1542161)

## Content

1. Acta Otolaryngol. 2019 Jan;139(1):64-69. doi: 10.1080/00016489.2018.1542161. 
Epub 2019 Feb 3.

Silent sinus syndrome: combined sinus surgery and orbital reconstruction - 
report of 15 cases.

Clarós P(1), Sobolewska AZ(1)(2), Cardesa A(3), Lopez-Fortuny M(4), Claros A(5).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Otolaryngology - Orbital Surgery, Clinica Clarós , Barcelona 
, Spain.
(2)b Department of Otolaryngology , Stefan Żeromski Hospital , Cracow , Poland.
(3)c Department of Pathology , University of Barcelona , Barcelona , Spain.
(4)d Department of Oculoplasty , Barraquer Clinic , Barcelona , Spain.
(5)e Department of ENT , Clarós Clinic , Barcelona , Spain.

BACKGROUND: Silent sinus syndrome (SSS) is defined as spontaneous, painless 
enophthalmos, hypoglobus with orbital floor resorption and maxillary sinus 
collapse on the ipsilateral side. Different methods of orbital floor 
reconstruction have been proposed.
AIMS/OBJECTIVES: The purpose was to analyse the results of combined endoscopic 
sinus surgery (ESS) and reconstruction using orbital floor implant of 15 
patients with SSS and to present recent histological findings.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Retrospective case review of 15 patients with SSS treated 
in clinic between 2007 and 2017.
RESULTS: Eleven women and four men presented with unilateral, spontaneous 
enophthalmos. Averaged duration of enophthalmos was 10.7 months. On affected 
side, mean enophthalmos was 2.6 mm and hypoglobus 2.7 mm. Computed tomography 
imaging (CT) imaging showed maxillary sinus opacification on the affected side 
in every case, and the orbital floor was displaced downwards in all cases. In 
total, 13 patients underwent simultaneous ESS and rebuilding of orbital floor 
with a titanium implant. Statistical analysis confirmed significant differences 
for pre- and postoperative measure of enophthalmos and hypoglobus.
CONCLUSION AND SIGNIFICANCE: Implementation of titanium implants is the reliable 
method of reconstruction that allows good aesthetic result, shorter time of 
procedure with an excellent long-term outcome and satisfactory patient's 
tolerance.

DOI: 10.1080/00016489.2018.1542161
PMID: 30712438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]