---
reference_id: "PMID:39913280"
title: "Newborn screening for central congenital hypothyroidism: past, present and future."
authors:
- Garrelfs MR
- Mooij CF
- Boelen A
- van Trotsenburg ASP
- Zwaveling-Soonawala N
journal: Eur Thyroid J
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1530/ETJ-24-0329
keywords:
- Humans
- "Congenital Hypothyroidism/diagnosis, blood"
- "Neonatal Screening/methods, trends"
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Thyrotropin/blood
- Thyroxine/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Newborn screening for central congenital hypothyroidism: past, present and future.
**Authors:** Garrelfs MR, Mooij CF, Boelen A, van Trotsenburg ASP, Zwaveling-Soonawala N
**Journal:** Eur Thyroid J (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1530/ETJ-24-0329](https://doi.org/10.1530/ETJ-24-0329)

## Content

1. Eur Thyroid J. 2025 Feb 19;14(1):e240329. doi: 10.1530/ETJ-24-0329. Print 2025
 Feb 1.

Newborn screening for central congenital hypothyroidism: past, present and 
future.

Garrelfs MR(1)(2), Mooij CF(1)(2), Boelen A(2)(3), van Trotsenburg ASP(1)(2), 
Zwaveling-Soonawala N(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam 
University Medical Centers, University of Amsterdam and Vrije Universiteit, 
European Reference Network on Rare Endocrine Conditions (Endo-ERN), Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(2)Amsterdam Gastroenterology Endocrinology Metabolism, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Endocrine Laboratory, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Amsterdam UMC, 
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Congenital hypothyroidism (CH) is defined as thyroid hormone deficiency at birth 
and constitutes one of the most common causes of preventable intellectual 
disability worldwide. Central CH is caused by insufficient pituitary or 
hypothalamic control of thyroid function, biochemically characterized by a low 
serum free thyroxine (fT4), in combination with a low, normal or mildly elevated 
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). Central CH is less common than primary CH and 
is part of multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies (MPHD) in most of the cases. 
MPHD at birth, also known as 'congenital hypopituitarism', is a potentially 
life-threatening condition due to the possible co-occurrence of 
adrenocorticotropin hormone and growth hormone deficiency that can result in 
severe hypoglycemia and adrenal crisis. To date, central CH is the only 
pituitary hormone deficiency suitable for newborn screening (NBS), providing an 
opportunity for early detection of MPHD. Even though the first NBS programs 
utilized T4-based methods that were able to identify central CH, most countries 
have since transitioned to TSH-based approaches due to the high rate of false 
positives associated with T4-based strategies. Now, 50 years after the 
introduction of NBS for CH, only a few countries around the world have a 
screening program capable of detecting central CH. In this paper, we review the 
past, present and future of NBS for central CH. We will outline the importance 
of early detection of central CH and discuss the challenges and opportunities of 
screening for this condition.

DOI: 10.1530/ETJ-24-0329
PMCID: PMC11883867
PMID: 39913280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest that could be perceived as prejudicing the impartiality of the work.