---
reference_id: "PMID:15662685"
title: A novel L1CAM mutation with L1 spectrum disorders.
authors:
- Silan F
- Ozdemir I
- Lissens W
journal: Prenat Diagn
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1002/pd.978
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- Adult
- Child
- "Chromosomes, Human, X"
- Female
- Gestational Age
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Hydrocephalus/genetics, pathology"
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mutation
- Neural Cell Adhesion Molecule L1/genetics
- Pedigree
- Pregnancy
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel L1CAM mutation with L1 spectrum disorders.
**Authors:** Silan F, Ozdemir I, Lissens W
**Journal:** Prenat Diagn (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pd.978](https://doi.org/10.1002/pd.978)

## Content

1. Prenat Diagn. 2005 Jan;25(1):57-9. doi: 10.1002/pd.978.

A novel L1CAM mutation with L1 spectrum disorders.

Silan F(1), Ozdemir I, Lissens W.

Author information:
(1)Medical Biology and Genetic Department, Abant Izzet Baysal University, Duzce 
School of Medicine, Duzce, Turkey. fsilan@yahoo.com

X-linked hydrocephalus, HSAS (hydrocephalus due to stenosis of aqueduct of 
Sylvius), MASA (mental retardation, aphasia, shuffling gait, and adducted 
thumbs), and CRASH (corpus callosum hypoplasia, retardation, adducted thumbs, 
spastic paraplegia, and hydrocephalus) syndromes are allelic disorders. X-linked 
hydrocephalus and associated phenotypes are due to mutations in the L1CAM gene, 
which has been identified as a coding neural cell adhesion molecule. We report 
two cases of L1 spectrum disorders within the same family. The first case was 
diagnosed by ultrasonographic examination prenatally and the second case was 
diagnosed postnatally. Both patients and their mothers carry a novel mutation of 
the L1CAM gene. In this family, nine X-linked hydrocephalus and five female 
carriers were found in three generations, and molecular genetic analysis was 
performed to detect the asymptomatic carriers.

Copyright (c) 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pd.978
PMID: 15662685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]