---
reference_id: "PMID:37658177"
title: "Peripheral Nervous, Hepatic, and Gastrointestinal Endpoints for AL Amyloidosis Clinical Trials: Report from the Amyloidosis Forum Multi-organ System Working Group."
authors:
- Mauermann ML
- Clarke JO
- Litchy WJ
- Obici L
- Lousada I
- Gertz MA
- Amyloidosis Forum Working Group Participants
journal: Adv Ther
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s12325-023-02637-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peripheral Nervous, Hepatic, and Gastrointestinal Endpoints for AL Amyloidosis Clinical Trials: Report from the Amyloidosis Forum Multi-organ System Working Group.
**Authors:** Mauermann ML, Clarke JO, Litchy WJ, Obici L, Lousada I, Gertz MA, Amyloidosis Forum Working Group Participants
**Journal:** Adv Ther (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12325-023-02637-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12325-023-02637-4)

## Content

1. Adv Ther. 2023 Nov;40(11):4695-4710. doi: 10.1007/s12325-023-02637-4. Epub
2023  Sep 2.

Peripheral Nervous, Hepatic, and Gastrointestinal Endpoints for AL Amyloidosis 
Clinical Trials: Report from the Amyloidosis Forum Multi-organ System Working 
Group.

Mauermann ML(1), Clarke JO(2), Litchy WJ(1), Obici L(3), Lousada I(4), Gertz 
MA(1); Amyloidosis Forum Working Group Participants.

Collaborators: Barbachano Y, Blank M, Campbell M, Faller D, Hsu K, Jawidzik L, 
Koontz K, Kowalik M, Kovacs S, Signorovitch J.

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, USA.
(2)Stanford University, Stanford, USA.
(3)University of Pavia, IRCCS University Hospital Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, 
Italy.
(4)Amyloidosis Research Consortium, 320 Nevada Street, Suite 210, Newton, MA, 
02460, USA. ILousada@arci.org.

Systemic immunoglobulin light chain (AL) amyloidosis is a heterogeneous rare 
disease driven by a destructive monoclonal gammopathy and typified by misfolded 
immunoglobulin light and/or heavy chains which aggregate and deposit in organs 
as insoluble amyloid fibrils. Disease heterogeneity is driven by the degree of 
multi-systemic involvement; cardiac, renal, neurological, and gastrointestinal 
(GI) systems are affected to varying degrees in different patients. While 
prognosis is primarily driven by hematologic response to treatment and outcomes 
associated with cardiac events and overall survival, the involvement of the 
peripheral nervous, hepatic, and GI systems can also have a significant impact 
on patients. The Amyloidosis Forum ( https://amyloidosisforum.org ) is a 
public-private partnership between the nonprofit Amyloidosis Research Consortium 
( www.arci.org ) and the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Center for Drug 
Evaluation and Research formed to advance drug development for the treatment of 
systemic amyloid disorders. A series of virtual workshops focused on the 
development of novel, patient-relevant endpoint components and analytical 
strategies for clinical trials in AL amyloidosis. This review summarizes the 
proceedings and recommendations of the Multi-Systemic Working Group which 
identified, reviewed, and prioritized endpoints relevant to the impacts of AL 
amyloidosis on the peripheral nervous, hepatic, and GI systems. The Working 
Group comprised amyloidosis experts, patient representatives, statisticians, and 
representatives from the FDA, Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory 
Agency (MHRA), and pharmaceutical companies. Prioritized neuropathy/autonomic 
endpoints included a modified form of the Neuropathy Impairment Score (NIS + 7) 
and the Composite Autonomic Symptom Score (COMPASS-31), respectively. Alkaline 
phosphatase was identified as the most relevant indicator of liver involvement 
and disease progression. Following extensive review of potential GI endpoints, 
the Working Group identified multiple exploratory endpoints. These recommended 
components will be further explored through evaluation of clinical trial 
datasets and possible integration into composite endpoint analysis.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-023-02637-4
PMCID: PMC10567953
PMID: 37658177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Michelle Mauermann: Research funding from IONIS, 
Alnylam, EIDOS, Editorial board of Mayo Clinic Proceedings, Book royalties from 
Oxford Publishing. John O. Clarke: Consultant with Alnylam, Pfizer. William 
Litchy: Contracts with IONIS, Alnylam, EIDOS. Laura Obici: Speaker fees from 
Alnylam, SOBI, Pfizer and Akcea. Isabelle Lousada: None. Morie Gertz: DSMB: 
AbbVie, Celgene, Advisory Board: Ionis, Consulting: Akcea, Alnylm, Prothena, 
Honoraria and consulting, i3Health educational materials, Honoraria: Research to 
Practice, Ambry Genetics, Amgen, Janssen, Celgene, Karyopharm, Pfizer (to 
institution), Sanofi, Stock Options: Aurora Bio.