---
reference_id: "PMID:11982642"
title: "Treatment of arsenical keratosis and Bowen's disease with acitretin."
authors:
- Yerebakan O
- Ermis O
- Yilmaz E
- Basaran E
journal: Int J Dermatol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-4362.2002.01372.x
keywords:
- Acitretin/therapeutic use
- Aged
- Arsenicals/adverse effects
- "Bowen's Disease/chemically induced, drug therapy, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Keratolytic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Keratosis/chemically induced, drug therapy, pathology"
- Male
- "Skin Neoplasms/chemically induced, drug therapy, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of arsenical keratosis and Bowen's disease with acitretin.
**Authors:** Yerebakan O, Ermis O, Yilmaz E, Basaran E
**Journal:** Int J Dermatol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-4362.2002.01372.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-4362.2002.01372.x)

## Content

1. Int J Dermatol. 2002 Feb;41(2):84-7. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-4362.2002.01372.x.

Treatment of arsenical keratosis and Bowen's disease with acitretin.

Yerebakan O(1), Ermis O, Yilmaz E, Basaran E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Akdeniz University School of Medicine, Antalya,
Turkey. yerebaka@med.akdeniz.edu.tr

BACKGROUND: Long-term exposure to arsenic is associated with the development of
arsenical keratosis, Bowen's disease, squamous cell carcinoma, and basal cell
carcinoma. The efficacy of acitretin therapy was examined in two patients with
cutaneous arsenical neoplasms.
METHODS: Lipid profile, hematological and liver function tests were performed
regularly during the therapy at monthly intervals.
RESULTS: After the third month of treatment, improvement of lesions of arsenical
keratosis and Bowen's disease were observed in both patients. For the first
patient who received 1 mg/kg daily acitretin for 10 months nearly total clearing
was obtained at the end of therapy. The second patient discontinued the
treatment after a period of 5 months because of symptomatic side-effects. During
therapy no new lesions and no laboratory side-effects were observed in either
patient.
CONCLUSIONS: Although these results need to be confirmed by larger, long-term
trials, it appears that acitretin is effective in the treatment of Bowen's
disease related with arsenic, as well as arsenical keratosis.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-4362.2002.01372.x
PMID: 11982642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
