---
reference_id: "PMID:19726771"
title: "Injectable collagenase clostridium histolyticum for Dupuytren's contracture."
authors:
- Hurst LC
- Badalamente MA
- Hentz VR
- Hotchkiss RN
- Kaplan FT
- Meals RA
- Smith TM
- Rodzvilla J
- CORD I Study Group
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0810866
keywords:
- Hathewaya histolytica/enzymology
- Double-Blind Method
- "Dupuytren Contracture/drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Female
- Humans
- "Injections, Intralesional"
- Male
- "Microbial Collagenase/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Middle Aged
- "Range of Motion, Articular"
- Tendon Injuries/etiology
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Injectable collagenase clostridium histolyticum for Dupuytren's contracture.
**Authors:** Hurst LC, Badalamente MA, Hentz VR, Hotchkiss RN, Kaplan FT, Meals RA, Smith TM, Rodzvilla J, CORD I Study Group
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa0810866](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa0810866)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2009 Sep 3;361(10):968-79. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0810866.

Injectable collagenase clostridium histolyticum for Dupuytren's contracture.

Hurst LC(1), Badalamente MA, Hentz VR, Hotchkiss RN, Kaplan FT, Meals RA, Smith 
TM, Rodzvilla J; CORD I Study Group.

Collaborators: Akelman E, Bear B, Belsky MR, Blazar P, Britton EN, Costas B, 
Frazier JL, Hentz V, Hotchkiss RN, Hurst LC, Badalamente MA, Kaplan FT, Lubahn 
J, McPherson S, Meals R, Peimer CA, Roeshot D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, SUNY at Stony Brook, Health Science Center, Level 
18, Rm. 020, Stony Brook, NY 11794-8181, USA. lhurst@notes.cc.sunysb.edu

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2009 Dec 24;361(26):2578-9; author reply 2579-80. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMc0909497.
    N Engl J Med. 2009 Dec 24;361(26):2579; author reply 2579-80.

BACKGROUND: Dupuytren's disease limits hand function, diminishes the quality of 
life, and may ultimately disable the hand. Surgery followed by hand therapy is 
standard treatment, but it is associated with serious potential complications. 
Injection of collagenase clostridium histolyticum, an office-based, nonsurgical 
option, may reduce joint contractures caused by Dupuytren's disease.
METHODS: We enrolled 308 patients with joint contractures of 20 degrees or more 
in this prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter 
trial. The primary metacarpophalangeal or proximal interphalangeal joints of 
these patients were randomly assigned to receive up to three injections of 
collagenase clostridium histolyticum (at a dose of 0.58 mg per injection) or 
placebo in the contracted collagen cord at 30-day intervals. One day after 
injection, the joints were manipulated. The primary end point was a reduction in 
contracture to 0 to 5 degrees of full extension 30 days after the last 
injection. Twenty-six secondary end points were evaluated, and data on adverse 
events were collected.
RESULTS: Collagenase treatment significantly improved outcomes. More cords that 
were injected with collagenase than cords injected with placebo met the primary 
end point (64.0% vs. 6.8%, P < 0.001), as well as all secondary end points (P < 
or = 0.002). Overall, the range of motion in the joints was significantly 
improved after injection with collagenase as compared with placebo (from 43.9 to 
80.7 degrees vs. from 45.3 to 49.5 degrees, P < 0.001). The most commonly 
reported adverse events were localized swelling, pain, bruising, pruritus, and 
transient regional lymph-node enlargement and tenderness. Three 
treatment-related serious adverse events were reported: two tendon ruptures and 
one case of complex regional pain syndrome. No significant changes in flexion or 
grip strength, no systemic allergic reactions, and no nerve injuries were 
observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Collagenase clostridium histolyticum significantly reduced 
contractures and improved the range of motion in joints affected by advanced 
Dupuytren's disease. (ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00528606.)

2009 Massachusetts Medical Society

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa0810866
PMID: 19726771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]