---
reference_id: "PMID:6441143"
title: "Urinary excretion of l-carnitine and acylcarnitines by patients with disorders of organic acid metabolism: evidence for secondary insufficiency of l-carnitine."
authors:
- Chalmers RA
- Roe CR
- Stacey TE
- Hoppel CL
journal: Pediatr Res
year: '1984'
doi: 10.1203/00006450-198412000-00021
keywords:
- Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenases/metabolism
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/urine"
- "Amino Acids, Branched-Chain/metabolism"
- "Carnitine/analogs & derivatives, urine"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Hemiterpenes
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Lysine/metabolism
- Male
- Methylmalonic Acid/urine
- Middle Aged
- Pentanoic Acids/blood
- Propionates/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Urinary excretion of l-carnitine and acylcarnitines by patients with disorders of organic acid metabolism: evidence for secondary insufficiency of l-carnitine.
**Authors:** Chalmers RA, Roe CR, Stacey TE, Hoppel CL
**Journal:** Pediatr Res (1984)
**DOI:** [10.1203/00006450-198412000-00021](https://doi.org/10.1203/00006450-198412000-00021)

## Content

1. Pediatr Res. 1984 Dec;18(12):1325-8. doi: 10.1203/00006450-198412000-00021.

Urinary excretion of l-carnitine and acylcarnitines by patients with disorders
of organic acid metabolism: evidence for secondary insufficiency of l-carnitine.

Chalmers RA, Roe CR, Stacey TE, Hoppel CL.

Concentrations of l-carnitine and acylcarnitines have been determined in urine
from patients with disorders of organic acid metabolism associated with an
intramitochondrial accumulation of acyl-CoA intermediates. These included
propionic acidemia, methylmalonic aciduria, isovaleric acidemia,
multicarboxylase deficiency, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaric aciduria,
methylacetoacetyl-CoA thiolase deficiency, and various dicarboxylic acidurias
including glutaric aciduria, medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, and
multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency. In all cases, concentrations of
acylcarnitines were greatly increased above normal with free carnitine
concentrations ranging from undetectable to supranormal values. The ratios of
acylcarnitine/carnitine were elevated above the normal value of 2.0 +/- 1.1.
l-Carnitine was given to three of these patients; in each case, concentrations
of plasma and urine carnitines increased accompanied by a marked increase in
concentrations of short-chain acylcarnitines. These acylcarnitines have been
examined using fast atom bombardment mass spectrometry in some of these diseases
and have been shown to be propionylcarnitine in methylmalonic aciduria and
propionic acidemia, isovalerylcarnitine in isovaleric acidemia, and
hexanoylcarnitine and octanoylcarnitine in medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase
deficiency. The excretion of these acylcarnitines is compatible with the known
accumulation of the corresponding acyl-CoA esters in these diseases. In this
group of disorders, the increased acylcarnitine/carnitine ratio in urine and
plasma indicates an imbalance of mitochondrial mass action homeostasis and,
hence, of acyl-CoA/CoA ratios. Despite naturally occurring attempts to increase
endogeneous l-carnitine biosynthesis, there is insufficient carnitine available
to restore the mass action ratio as demonstrated by the further increase in
acylcarnitine excretion when patients were given oral l-carnitine.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1203/00006450-198412000-00021
PMID: 6441143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
