---
reference_id: "PMID:26156512"
title: "Aerobic training and postexercise protein in facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy: RCT study."
authors:
- Andersen G
- Prahm KP
- Dahlqvist JR
- Citirak G
- Vissing J
journal: Neurology
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001808
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Dietary Proteins/administration & dosage"
- Dietary Supplements
- Double-Blind Method
- Exercise/physiology
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Facioscapulohumeral/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
- Physical Fitness/physiology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aerobic training and postexercise protein in facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy: RCT study.
**Authors:** Andersen G, Prahm KP, Dahlqvist JR, Citirak G, Vissing J
**Journal:** Neurology (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000001808](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000001808)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2015 Aug 4;85(5):396-403. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001808. Epub
2015 Jul 8.

Aerobic training and postexercise protein in facioscapulohumeral muscular
dystrophy: RCT study.

Andersen G(1), Prahm KP(2), Dahlqvist JR(2), Citirak G(2), Vissing J(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Copenhagen Neuromuscular Center, Department of Neurology,
Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Denmark. grete.andersen@regionh.dk.
(2)From the Copenhagen Neuromuscular Center, Department of Neurology,
Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2015 Aug 4;85(5):392-3. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001810.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of regular aerobic training and
postexercise protein-carbohydrate supplementation in patients with
facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD).
METHODS: In this randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled parallel study, we
randomized untrained men (n = 21) and women (n = 20) with FSHD (age 19-65 years)
to 2 training groups-training with protein supplement (n = 18) and training with
placebo supplement (n = 13)-and a nonintervention control group (n = 10). We
assessed fitness, walking speed, muscle strength, questionnaires, and daily
activity levels before and after 12 weeks of interventions. Training involved 36
sessions of 30-minute cycle-ergometer training. After each session, patients
drank either a protein-carbohydrate or placebo beverage.
RESULTS: In the trained participants, fitness, workload, and walking speed
improved (10% [confidence interval (CI) 4%-15%], 18% [CI 10%-26%], 7% [CI
4%-11%], respectively, p < 0.001, number needed to treat = 2.1). Self-assessed
physical capacity and health (Short Form-36) also improved. Muscle strength and
daily activity levels did not change with training. Protein-carbohydrate
supplementation did not result in further improvements in any tests compared to
training alone.
CONCLUSIONS: This randomized, controlled study showed that regular endurance
training improves fitness, walking speed, and self-assessed health in patients
with FSHD without causing muscle damage. Postexercise protein-carbohydrate
supplementation does not add any further improvement to training effects alone.
CLASSIFICATION OF EVIDENCE: This study provides Class II evidence that regular
aerobic training with or without postexercise protein-carbohydrate
supplementation improves fitness and workload in patients with FSHD.

© 2015 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001808
PMID: 26156512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
