---
reference_id: "PMID:38485768"
title: "Enhancer-MDLF: a novel deep learning framework for identifying cell-specific enhancers."
authors:
- Zhang Y
- Zhang P
- Wu H
journal: Brief Bioinform
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/bib/bbae083
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Enhancer-MDLF: a novel deep learning framework for identifying cell-specific enhancers.
**Authors:** Zhang Y, Zhang P, Wu H
**Journal:** Brief Bioinform (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bib/bbae083](https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbae083)

## Content

1. Brief Bioinform. 2024 Jan 22;25(2):bbae083. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbae083.

Enhancer-MDLF: a novel deep learning framework for identifying cell-specific 
enhancers.

Zhang Y(1), Zhang P(2), Wu H(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Software, Shandong University, Jinan, 250100, Shandong, China.
(2)College of Information Engineering, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
712100, Shaanxi, China.

Enhancers, noncoding DNA fragments, play a pivotal role in gene regulation, 
facilitating gene transcription. Identifying enhancers is crucial for 
understanding genomic regulatory mechanisms, pinpointing key elements and 
investigating networks governing gene expression and disease-related mechanisms. 
Existing enhancer identification methods exhibit limitations, prompting the 
development of our novel multi-input deep learning framework, termed 
Enhancer-MDLF. Experimental results illustrate that Enhancer-MDLF outperforms 
the previous method, Enhancer-IF, across eight distinct human cell lines and 
exhibits superior performance on generic enhancer datasets and enhancer-promoter 
datasets, affirming the robustness of Enhancer-MDLF. Additionally, we introduce 
transfer learning to provide an effective and potential solution to address the 
prediction challenges posed by enhancer specificity. Furthermore, we utilize 
model interpretation to identify transcription factor binding site motifs that 
may be associated with enhancer regions, with important implications for 
facilitating the study of enhancer regulatory mechanisms. The source code is 
openly accessible at https://github.com/HaoWuLab-Bioinformatics/Enhancer-MDLF.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbae083
PMCID: PMC10938904
PMID: 38485768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]