---
reference_id: "PMID:36935711"
title: "The burden of hepatitis C virus in the world, China, India, and the United States from 1990 to 2019."
authors:
- Yang J
- Qi JL
- Wang XX
- Li XH
- Jin R
- Liu BY
- Liu HX
- Rao HY
journal: Front Public Health
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2023.1041201
keywords:
- Humans
- United States/epidemiology
- Hepacivirus
- Quality-Adjusted Life Years
- Hepatitis C/epidemiology
- India/epidemiology
- China/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The burden of hepatitis C virus in the world, China, India, and the United States from 1990 to 2019.
**Authors:** Yang J, Qi JL, Wang XX, Li XH, Jin R, Liu BY, Liu HX, Rao HY
**Journal:** Front Public Health (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fpubh.2023.1041201](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2023.1041201)

## Content

1. Front Public Health. 2023 Mar 2;11:1041201. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2023.1041201. 
eCollection 2023.

The burden of hepatitis C virus in the world, China, India, and the United 
States from 1990 to 2019.

Yang J(1), Qi JL(2), Wang XX(1), Li XH(1), Jin R(1), Liu BY(1), Liu HX(3), Rao 
HY(1).

Author information:
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory of Hepatitis C and Immunotherapy for Liver Diseases, 
Peking University Hepatology Institute, Peking University People's Hospital, 
Beijing, China.
(2)National Center for Chronic and Non-communicable Disease Control and 
Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Peking University 
People's Hospital, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Hepatitis C virus infection can lead to an enormous health 
burden worldwide. Investigating the changes in HCV-related burden between 
different countries could provide inferences for disease management. Hence, we 
aim to explore the temporal tendency of the disease burden associated with HCV 
infection in China, India, the United States, and the world.
METHODS: Detailed data on the total burden of disease related to HCV infection 
were collected from the Global Burden of Disease (GBD) 2019 database. Joinpoint 
regression models were used to simulate the optimal joinpoints of annual percent 
changes (APCs). Further analysis of the age composition of each index over time 
and the relationship between ASRs and the socio-demographic Index (SDI) were 
explored. Finally, three factors (population growth, population aging, and 
age-specific changes) were deconstructed for the changes in the number of 
incidences, deaths, and DALYs.
RESULTS: It was estimated that 6.2 million new HCV infections, 0.54 million 
HCV-related deaths, and 15.3 million DALYs worldwide in 2019, with an increase 
of 25.4, 59.1, and 43.6%, respectively, from 1990, are mainly due to population 
growth and aging. China experienced a sharp drop in age-standardized rates in 
2019, the United States showed an upward trend, and India exhibited a 
fluctuating tendency in the burden of disease. The incidence was increasing in 
all locations recently.
CONCLUSION: HCV remains a global health concern despite tremendous progress 
being made. The disease burden in China improved significantly, while the burden 
in the United States was deteriorating, with new infections increasing recently, 
suggesting more targeted interventions to be established to realize the 2030 
elimination goals.

Copyright © 2023 Yang, Qi, Wang, Li, Jin, Liu, Liu and Rao.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2023.1041201
PMCID: PMC10018168
PMID: 36935711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.