---
reference_id: "PMID:21255870"
title: Clinical and histologic features of incontinentia pigmenti in adults with nuclear factor-κB essential modulator gene mutations.
authors:
- Hadj-Rabia S
- Rimella A
- Smahi A
- Fraitag S
- Hamel-Teillac D
- Bonnefont JP
- de Prost Y
- Bodemer C
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2010.01.045
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Biopsy
- Female
- Humans
- I-kappa B Kinase/genetics
- "Incontinentia Pigmenti/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Skin/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and histologic features of incontinentia pigmenti in adults with nuclear factor-κB essential modulator gene mutations.
**Authors:** Hadj-Rabia S, Rimella A, Smahi A, Fraitag S, Hamel-Teillac D, Bonnefont JP, de Prost Y, Bodemer C
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaad.2010.01.045](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2010.01.045)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2011 Mar;64(3):508-15. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2010.01.045.
Epub  2011 Jan 20.

Clinical and histologic features of incontinentia pigmenti in adults with 
nuclear factor-κB essential modulator gene mutations.

Hadj-Rabia S(1), Rimella A, Smahi A, Fraitag S, Hamel-Teillac D, Bonnefont JP, 
de Prost Y, Bodemer C.

Author information:
(1)Centre National de Référence des Maladies Génétiques à Expression Cutanée and 
the Department of Dermatology, Unité de Formation et de Recherche Necker-Enfants 
Malades Hospital, Université Paris V, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Incontinentia pigmenti (IP) is a multisystem disorder, in which 
cutaneous symptoms can be accompanied by dental, ocular, and central nervous 
system defects. In adults, the clinical diagnosis of IP is based principally on 
the late onset of stage 4 lesions and their association with dental, nail, 
ocular, or central nervous system anomalies. Nevertheless, these lesions are 
often unrecognized.
OBJECTIVES: Our aim was assessment of IP manifestations in adults to clarify 
diagnostic criteria for mild forms of the disease, to help physicians detect 
adult IP in the presence of subtle lesions and avoid misdiagnosis.
METHOD: We conducted clinical and histologic examination of 25 adults with IP 
and nuclear factor-κB essential modulator gene rearrangement or mutations.
RESULTS: Linear atrophic, hypopigmented, and hairless lesions (stage 4) are 
constant in adults. Apoptotic keratinocytes in the epidermis or dermis and 
atrophic hair follicles, with absence of arrector pili muscles, are frequently 
observed. In contrast, nipple anomalies are rare.
LIMITATIONS: We were unable to determine the age of the onset of IP stage 4 
lesions.
CONCLUSION: Skin manifestations are constant in adult patients with IP. 
Histology is characteristic and could be considered as a minor diagnostic 
criterion of IP. Nipple anomalies also may be considered as a minor criterion. 
Detection of such subtle manifestations can evoke IP in patients with repeated 
miscarriages or unexplained neurologic manifestations.

Copyright © 2010 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. Published by Mosby, Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2010.01.045
PMID: 21255870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]