---
reference_id: "PMID:12648223"
title: "Genetic heterogeneity in erythrokeratodermia variabilis: novel mutations in the connexin gene GJB4 (Cx30.3) and genotype-phenotype correlations."
authors:
- Richard G
- Brown N
- Rouan F
- Van der Schroeff JG
- Bijlsma E
- Eichenfield LF
- Sybert VP
- Greer KE
- Hogan P
- Campanelli C
- Compton JG
- Bale SJ
- DiGiovanna JJ
- Uitto J
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1046/j.1523-1747.2003.12080.x
keywords:
- Connexins/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Family Health
- Female
- Gene Expression
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Hyperkeratosis, Epidermolytic/genetics"
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic heterogeneity in erythrokeratodermia variabilis: novel mutations in the connexin gene GJB4 (Cx30.3) and genotype-phenotype correlations.
**Authors:** Richard G, Brown N, Rouan F, Van der Schroeff JG, Bijlsma E, Eichenfield LF, Sybert VP, Greer KE, Hogan P, Campanelli C, Compton JG, Bale SJ, DiGiovanna JJ, Uitto J
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1523-1747.2003.12080.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1523-1747.2003.12080.x)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 2003 Apr;120(4):601-9. doi:
10.1046/j.1523-1747.2003.12080.x.

Genetic heterogeneity in erythrokeratodermia variabilis: novel mutations in the 
connexin gene GJB4 (Cx30.3) and genotype-phenotype correlations.

Richard G(1), Brown N, Rouan F, Van der Schroeff JG, Bijlsma E, Eichenfield LF, 
Sybert VP, Greer KE, Hogan P, Campanelli C, Compton JG, Bale SJ, DiGiovanna JJ, 
Uitto J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Jefferson Medical College, 
and Jefferson Institute of Molecular Medicine, Thomas Jefferson University, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA. Gabriele.Richard@mail.tju.edu

Erythrokeratodermia variabilis is an autosomal dominant genodermatosis 
characterized by persistent plaque-like or generalized hyperkeratosis and 
transient red patches of variable size, shape, and location. The disorder maps 
to a cluster of connexin genes on chromosome 1p34-p35.1 and, in a subset of 
families, results from mutations in the gene GJB3 encoding the gap junction 
protein connexin-31 (Cx31). A recent report suggested the involvement of another 
connexin gene (GJB4) in the etiology of erythrokeratodermia variabilis. In this 
study, we sequenced the coding region of GJB4 in 13 unrelated 
erythrokeratodermia variabilis families without detectable mutations in GJB3. 
Mutation analysis revealed six distinct missense mutations in five families and 
a sporadic case of erythrokeratodermia variabilis, all of which were not found 
in controls. Mutation G12D, identified in an extended Dutch family, lies in the 
predicted amino-terminus and may interfere with the flexibility of this domain, 
connexin selectivity, or gating polarity of gap junction channels. Other 
mutations (R22H, T85P, F137L, F189Y) were located in the transmembrane domains 
of Cx30.3, and are predicted to hinder regulation of voltage gating or alter the 
kinetics of channel closure. Affected individuals of two unrelated families 
harbored point mutations leading to amino acid substitution F137L, which was 
also reported in GJB3, yet the extent and severity of hyperkeratosis was milder 
compared to the corresponding mutation in GJB3. Two mutations (T85P, F137L) were 
associated with the occurrence of rapidly changing erythematous patches with 
prominent, circinate, or gyrate borders in affected children but not in adults, 
supporting the notion that this feature is specific to Cx30.3 defects. 
Nevertheless, we observed highly variable intrafamilial phenotypes, suggesting 
the strong influence of modifying genetic and epigenetic factors. In addition to 
pathogenic mutations, we identified several missense mutations and a 4 bp 
deletion within the GJB4 coding region, which might represent either 
inconsequential polymorphisms or recessive mutations. In conclusion, our results 
demonstrate genetic heterogeneity in erythrokeratodermia variabilis, and 
emphasize that intercellular communication mediated by both Cx31 and Cx30.3 is 
crucial for epidermal differentiation.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1523-1747.2003.12080.x
PMID: 12648223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]