---
reference_id: "PMID:38585550"
title: Delayed Bone Age in a Child with a Novel Loss-of-Function Variant in SETBP1 Gene Sheds Light on the Potential Role of SETBP1 Protein in Skeletal Development.
authors:
- Miolo G
- Colavito D
- Della Puppa L
- Corona G
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1159/000535057
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Delayed Bone Age in a Child with a Novel Loss-of-Function Variant in SETBP1 Gene Sheds Light on the Potential Role of SETBP1 Protein in Skeletal Development.
**Authors:** Miolo G, Colavito D, Della Puppa L, Corona G
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000535057](https://doi.org/10.1159/000535057)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2024 Mar;15(2):167-174. doi: 10.1159/000535057. Epub 2023 Dec
12.

Delayed Bone Age in a Child with a Novel Loss-of-Function Variant in SETBP1 Gene 
Sheds Light on the Potential Role of SETBP1 Protein in Skeletal Development.

Miolo G(1)(2), Colavito D(3), Della Puppa L(4), Corona G(5).

Author information:
(1)Medical Oncology and Cancer Prevention Unit, Centro di Riferimento Oncologico 
di Aviano (CRO), IRCCS, Aviano, Italy.
(2)Department of Medical Laboratory, Genetics Section, Pordenone Hospital, 
Pordenone, Italy.
(3)Research & Innovation (R&I Genetics) Srl, Padua, Italy.
(4)Oncogenetics and Functional Oncogenomics Unit, Centro di Riferimento 
Oncologico di Aviano (CRO), IRCCS, Aviano, Italy.
(5)Immunopathology and Cancer Biomarkers Unit, Centro di Riferimento Oncologico 
di Aviano (CRO), IRCCS, Aviano, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: SETBP1 gene variants that decrease or eliminate protein activity 
have been associated with phenotypes characterized by speech apraxia and 
intellectual disabilities. This condition, distinctly separated from 
Schinzel-Giedion syndrome, is referred to as autosomal dominant mental 
retardation 29 (ADR29).
CASE PRESENTATION: In this report, we present the case of a 6-year-old male 
patient exhibiting fine and global motor skill impairments along with expressive 
language delay. The patient carried a novel germline, heterozygous, de novo 
nonsense variant in the SETBP1 gene, specifically the c.532C>T variant, which 
prematurely terminates protein translation at amino acid 178, p.(Gln178*), and 
removes more than 10% of the reference protein isoform consisting of 1,596 amino 
acids. According to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) 
guidelines, this variant has been classified as pathogenic.
CONCLUSION: Given the limited number of ADR29 cases reported to date, it is 
critical to focus attention on the phenotypic features of each new individual 
and seek out previously undocumented defects. The clinical findings found in our 
patient align with current knowledge on the correlation between the genotypes 
characterized by loss-of-function variants in SETBP1 gene and a particular 
neurological phenotype. Furthermore, the presence of a severely delayed bone age 
in this patient, which we report for the first time, could indicate a possible 
indirect but significant contribution of the SETBP1 protein in bone development 
and maturation processes. This finding highlights the need for further 
investigation into the potential effects of SETBP1 gene variants on bone health 
and the possible involvement of the SETBP1 protein in skeletal growth and 
development.

© 2023 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000535057
PMCID: PMC10996347
PMID: 38585550

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.