---
reference_id: "PMID:11443543"
title: "The tumor-necrosis-factor receptor-associated periodic syndrome: new mutations in TNFRSF1A, ancestral origins, genotype-phenotype studies, and evidence for further genetic heterogeneity of periodic fevers."
authors:
- Aksentijevich I
- Galon J
- Soares M
- Mansfield E
- Hull K
- Oh HH
- Goldbach-Mansky R
- Dean J
- Athreya B
- Reginato AJ
- Henrickson M
- Pons-Estel B
- "O'Shea JJ"
- Kastner DL
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1086/321976
keywords:
- Alternative Splicing/genetics
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Amyloidosis/genetics
- "Antigens, CD/chemistry, genetics"
- Base Sequence
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Ethnicity/genetics
- Exons/genetics
- Familial Mediterranean Fever/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Haplotypes/genetics
- Humans
- Introns/genetics
- Male
- Microsatellite Repeats/genetics
- "Models, Molecular"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- Penetrance
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide/genetics"
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- "Receptors, Tumor Necrosis Factor/chemistry, genetics"
- "Receptors, Tumor Necrosis Factor, Type I"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The tumor-necrosis-factor receptor-associated periodic syndrome: new mutations in TNFRSF1A, ancestral origins, genotype-phenotype studies, and evidence for further genetic heterogeneity of periodic fevers.
**Authors:** Aksentijevich I, Galon J, Soares M, Mansfield E, Hull K, Oh HH, Goldbach-Mansky R, Dean J, Athreya B, Reginato AJ, Henrickson M, Pons-Estel B, O'Shea JJ, Kastner DL
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1086/321976](https://doi.org/10.1086/321976)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 Aug;69(2):301-14. doi: 10.1086/321976. Epub 2001 Jul 6.

The tumor-necrosis-factor receptor-associated periodic syndrome: new mutations 
in TNFRSF1A, ancestral origins, genotype-phenotype studies, and evidence for 
further genetic heterogeneity of periodic fevers.

Aksentijevich I(1), Galon J, Soares M, Mansfield E, Hull K, Oh HH, 
Goldbach-Mansky R, Dean J, Athreya B, Reginato AJ, Henrickson M, Pons-Estel B, 
O'Shea JJ, Kastner DL.

Author information:
(1)Section of Genetics, Arthritis and Rheumatism Branch, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. aksentii@exchange.nih.gov

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet 2001 Nov;69(5):1160.

Mutations in the extracellular domain of the 55-kD tumor-necrosis factor (TNF) 
receptor (TNFRSF1A), a key regulator of inflammation, define a periodic-fever 
syndrome, TRAPS (TNF receptor-associated periodic syndrome [MIM 142680]), which 
is characterized by attacks of fever, sterile peritonitis, arthralgia, myalgia, 
skin rash, and/or conjunctivitis; some patients also develop systemic 
amyloidosis. Elsewhere we have described six disease-associated TNFRSF1A 
mutations, five of which disrupt extracellular cysteines involved in disulfide 
bonds; four other mutations have subsequently been reported. Among 150 
additional patients with unexplained periodic fevers, we have identified four 
novel TNFRSF1A mutations (H22Y, C33G, S86P, and c.193-14 G-->A), one mutation 
(C30S) described by another group, and two substitutions (P46L and R92Q) present 
in approximately 1% of control chromosomes. The increased frequency of P46L and 
R92Q among patients with periodic fever, as well as functional studies of 
TNFRSF1A, argue that these are low-penetrance mutations rather than benign 
polymorphisms. The c.193-14 G-->A mutation creates a splice-acceptor site 
upstream of exon 3, resulting in a transcript encoding four additional 
extracellular amino acids. T50M and c.193-14 G-->A occur at CpG hotspots, and 
haplotype analysis is consistent with recurrent mutations at these sites. In 
contrast, although R92Q also arises at a CpG motif, we identified a common 
founder chromosome in unrelated individuals with this substitution. 
Genotype-phenotype studies identified, as carriers of cysteine mutations, 13 of 
14 patients with TRAPS and amyloidosis and indicated a lower penetrance of TRAPS 
symptoms in individuals with noncysteine mutations. In two families with 
dominantly inherited disease and in 90 sporadic cases that presented with a 
compatible clinical history, we have not identified any TNFRSF1A mutation, 
despite comprehensive genomic sequencing of all of the exons, therefore 
suggesting further genetic heterogeneity of the periodic-fever syndromes.

DOI: 10.1086/321976
PMCID: PMC1235304
PMID: 11443543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]