---
reference_id: "PMID:27256512"
title: "Arts syndrome with a novel missense mutation in the PRPS1 gene: A case report."
authors:
- Maruyama K
- Ogaya S
- Kurahashi N
- Umemura A
- Yamada K
- Hashiguchi A
- Takashima H
- Torres RJ
- Aso K
journal: Brain Dev
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2016.05.003
keywords:
- "Ataxia/diagnostic imaging, genetics, physiopathology, therapy"
- Brain/diagnostic imaging
- "Deaf-Blind Disorders/diagnostic imaging, genetics, physiopathology, therapy"
- Family
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/diagnostic imaging, genetics, physiopathology, therapy"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Neural Conduction/genetics
- Pedigree
- Ribose-Phosphate Pyrophosphokinase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arts syndrome with a novel missense mutation in the PRPS1 gene: A case report.
**Authors:** Maruyama K, Ogaya S, Kurahashi N, Umemura A, Yamada K, Hashiguchi A, Takashima H, Torres RJ, Aso K
**Journal:** Brain Dev (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.braindev.2016.05.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.braindev.2016.05.003)

## Content

1. Brain Dev. 2016 Nov;38(10):954-958. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2016.05.003. Epub
2016 May 30.

Arts syndrome with a novel missense mutation in the PRPS1 gene: A case report.

Maruyama K(1), Ogaya S(2), Kurahashi N(2), Umemura A(2), Yamada K(2), Hashiguchi
A(3), Takashima H(3), Torres RJ(4), Aso K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Aichi Prefectural Colony Central Hospital,
Kasugai, Japan. Electronic address: maruyama@aichi-colony.jp.
(2)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Aichi Prefectural Colony Central Hospital,
Kasugai, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology and Geriatrics, Kagoshima University Graduate School
of Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima, Japan.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, La Paz University Hospital, IdiPaz, Madrid,
Spain; Center for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER),
ISCIII, Spain.

Arts syndrome is characterized by early-onset hypotonia, ataxia, intellectual
disability, sensorineural hearing impairment, progressive optic atrophy, and a
tendency to develop infections. Arts syndrome is an X-linked disorder caused by
a loss-of-function mutation in the PRPS1 gene, which encodes
phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase 1. Only three families have been
reported. Here, we report another family with Arts syndrome. The initial
symptoms of the 1-year-old proband were hypotonia and ataxia, worsening
recurrent infection-triggered muscle weakness, motor and intellectual
developmental delay, and hearing loss. Both central nervous system involvement
and peripheral neuropathy were demonstrated. His three maternal uncles had died
before the age of 3years. A genetic analysis of PRPS1 revealed a novel missense
mutation, c.367C>G (p.His123Asp). PRPS enzymatic activity was markedly reduced
in the patient. His mother was supposed to be an asymptomatic carrier. Arts
syndrome should be included in the differential diagnosis of infantile hypotonia
and weakness aggravated by recurrent infection with a family history of X-linked
inheritance.

Copyright © 2016 The Japanese Society of Child Neurology. Published by Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.braindev.2016.05.003
PMID: 27256512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
