---
reference_id: "PMID:39379371"
title: Multiomic single-cell sequencing defines tissue-specific responses in Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis.
authors:
- Gibson A
- Ram R
- Gangula R
- Li Y
- Mukherjee E
- Palubinsky AM
- Campbell CN
- Thorne M
- Konvinse KC
- Choshi P
- Deshpande P
- Pedretti S
- Fear MW
- Wood FM
- "O'Neil RT"
- Wanjalla CN
- Kalams SA
- Gaudieri S
- Lehloenya RJ
- Bailin SS
- Chopra A
- Trubiano JA
- AUS-SCAR Consortium
- Peter JG
- AFRiSCAR Consortium
- Mallal SA
- Phillips EJ
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-52990-3
keywords:
- Humans
- "Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/immunology, genetics"
- Single-Cell Analysis/methods
- "Keratinocytes/immunology, metabolism"
- CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes/immunology
- "Receptors, Antigen, T-Cell/immunology, metabolism, genetics"
- "Skin/immunology, pathology"
- "T-Lymphocytes, Cytotoxic/immunology"
- "Granzymes/metabolism, genetics"
- Transcriptome
- Male
- "Perforin/metabolism, genetics"
- Female
- "Histocompatibility Antigens Class I/genetics, immunology, metabolism"
- "Antigens, Differentiation, T-Lymphocyte/genetics, metabolism, immunology"
- "Macrophages/immunology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiomic single-cell sequencing defines tissue-specific responses in Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis.
**Authors:** Gibson A, Ram R, Gangula R, Li Y, Mukherjee E, Palubinsky AM, Campbell CN, Thorne M, Konvinse KC, Choshi P, Deshpande P, Pedretti S, Fear MW, Wood FM, O'Neil RT, Wanjalla CN, Kalams SA, Gaudieri S, Lehloenya RJ, Bailin SS, Chopra A, Trubiano JA, AUS-SCAR Consortium, Peter JG, AFRiSCAR Consortium, Mallal SA, Phillips EJ
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-024-52990-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-52990-3)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2024 Oct 8;15(1):8722. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-52990-3.

Multiomic single-cell sequencing defines tissue-specific responses in 
Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis.

Gibson A(1), Ram R(1), Gangula R(2), Li Y(1), Mukherjee E(2), Palubinsky AM(2), 
Campbell CN(2), Thorne M(1), Konvinse KC(2), Choshi P(3), Deshpande P(1), 
Pedretti S(4), Fear MW(5), Wood FM(5)(6), O'Neil RT(7), Wanjalla CN(2), Kalams 
SA(2), Gaudieri S(1)(2)(8), Lehloenya RJ(9), Bailin SS(2), Chopra A(1)(2), 
Trubiano JA(10)(11); AUS-SCAR Consortium; Peter JG(3)(4); AFRiSCAR Consortium; 
Mallal SA(1)(2), Phillips EJ(12)(13).

Collaborators: Trubiano J.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Murdoch University, Perth, 
Australia.
(2)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Centre, Nashville, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Groote Schuur Hospital, Cape Town, South Africa.
(4)Allergy and Immunology Unit, University of Cape Town Lung Institute, Cape 
Town, South Africa.
(5)School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Western Australia, Perth, 
Australia.
(6)Burn Service of Western Australia, Fiona Stanley Hospital, Perth, Australia.
(7)Ralph H Johnson VA Medical Center, Medical University of South Carolina, 
Charleston, USA.
(8)School of Human Sciences, The University of Western Australia, Perth, 
Australia.
(9)Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(10)The Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, University of 
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(11)Centre for Antibiotic Allergy and Research, Austin Health, Melbourne, 
Australia.
(12)Institute for Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Murdoch University, Perth, 
Australia. elizabeth.j.phillips@vumc.org.
(13)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Centre, Nashville, 
USA. elizabeth.j.phillips@vumc.org.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 Feb 18:2023.11.26.568771. doi: 10.1101/2023.11.26.568771.

Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis (SJS/TEN) is a rare but 
life-threatening cutaneous drug reaction mediated by human leukocyte antigen 
(HLA) class I-restricted CD8+ T cells. For unbiased assessment of cellular 
immunopathogenesis, here we perform single-cell (sc) transcriptome, surface 
proteome, and T cell receptor (TCR) sequencing on unaffected skin, affected 
skin, and blister fluid from 15 SJS/TEN patients. From 109,888 cells, we 
identify 15 scRNA-defined subsets. Keratinocytes express markers indicating HLA 
class I-restricted antigen presentation and appear to trigger the proliferation 
of and killing by cytotoxic CD8+ tissue-resident T cells that express 
granulysin, granzyme B, perforin, LAG3, CD27, and LINC01871, and signal through 
the PKM, MIF, TGFβ, and JAK-STAT pathways. In affected tissue, cytotoxic CD8+ T 
cells express private expanded and unexpanded TCRαβ that are absent or 
unexpanded in unaffected skin, and mixed populations of macrophages and 
fibroblasts express pro-inflammatory markers or those favoring repair. This data 
identifies putative cytotoxic TCRs and therapeutic targets.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-52990-3
PMCID: PMC11461852
PMID: 39379371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: E.J.P. receives royalties and consulting fees 
from UpToDate (where she is a Drug Allergy Section Editor) and has 
received consulting fees from Janssen, Vertex, Verve, Servier, Rapt  and 
Esperion; she is co-director of IIID Pty Ltd, which holds a patent for 
HLA-B*57:01 testing for abacavir hypersensitivity, and she has a patent pending 
for detection of HLA-A*32:01 in connection with diagnosing drug reaction with 
eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (for these patents she does not receive any 
financial remuneration and neither are related to the submitted work). All other 
authors declare no competing interests.