---
reference_id: "PMID:33970586"
title: "Diabetes: Type 1 Diabetes."
authors:
- Pasarica M
- St Onge E
- Lee E
journal: FP Essent
year: '2021'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diabetes: Type 1 Diabetes.
**Authors:** Pasarica M, St Onge E, Lee E
**Journal:** FP Essent (2021)

## Content

1. FP Essent. 2021 May;504:11-15.

Diabetes: Type 1 Diabetes.

Pasarica M(1), St Onge E(2), Lee E(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Central Florida College of Medicine, 6850 Lake Nona Blvd, 
Orlando, FL 32827.
(2)University of Florida College of Pharmacy Department of Pharmacotherapy and 
Translational Research, 1225 Center Drive, Gainesville, FL 32610.
(3)University of Texas at Austin Dell Medical School Department of Population 
Health, 1601 Trinity St. Bldg. B Stop Z0500, Austin, TX 78712.

Type 1 diabetes is defined as a state of hyperglycemia due to insulin deficiency 
caused by autoimmune pancreatic beta-cell destruction. The risk among 
individuals in the general population has been estimated at 0.5%. A family 
history of diabetes and a personal history of conditions associated with type 1 
diabetes (ie, autoimmune diseases) increase the risk. Currently, the American 
Diabetes Association (ADA) recommends screening asymptomatic patients for type 1 
diabetes autoimmune markers in the context of clinical research trials. All 
patients with diabetes should be referred to a diabetes self-management 
education program and for medical nutrition therapy. Medical nutrition therapy 
has been shown to lower the A1c by up to 1.9% in patients with type 1 diabetes. 
The mainstay of management is a regimen of multiple daily injections of insulin 
or continuous subcutaneous insulin delivered via an insulin pump. For most 
patients, a regimen consisting of 50% of the total daily dose prescribed as 
basal insulin and 50% prescribed as bolus insulin is used. Currently, 
pramlintide is the only Food Drug Administration (FDA)-approved adjunct to 
insulin therapy for patients with type 1 diabetes. Patients with type 1 diabetes 
should be screened regularly for hypertension and other associated conditions 
and complications.

Written permission from the American Academy of Family Physicians is required 
for reproduction of this material in whole or in part in any form or medium.

PMID: 33970586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]