---
reference_id: "PMID:37554250"
title: "CALFAN (Low γ-Glutamyl Transpeptidase (GGT) Cholestasis, Acute Liver Failure, and Neurodegeneration) Syndrome: A Case Report with 3-Year Follow-Up after Liver Transplantation in Early Adulthood."
authors:
- Youssef M
- Mascia KL
- McGuire B
- Patel CR
- Al Diffalha S
- Dhall D
- Lee G
journal: Case Reports Hepatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1155/2023/3010131
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CALFAN (Low γ-Glutamyl Transpeptidase (GGT) Cholestasis, Acute Liver Failure, and Neurodegeneration) Syndrome: A Case Report with 3-Year Follow-Up after Liver Transplantation in Early Adulthood.
**Authors:** Youssef M, Mascia KL, McGuire B, Patel CR, Al Diffalha S, Dhall D, Lee G
**Journal:** Case Reports Hepatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2023/3010131](https://doi.org/10.1155/2023/3010131)

## Content

1. Case Reports Hepatol. 2023 Jul 31;2023:3010131. doi: 10.1155/2023/3010131. 
eCollection 2023.

CALFAN (Low γ-Glutamyl Transpeptidase (GGT) Cholestasis, Acute Liver Failure, 
and Neurodegeneration) Syndrome: A Case Report with 3-Year Follow-Up after Liver 
Transplantation in Early Adulthood.

Youssef M(1), Mascia KL(2), McGuire B(3), Patel CR(1), Al Diffalha S(1), Dhall 
D(1), Lee G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Alabama at Birmingham Heersink 
School of Medicine, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, The University of Alabama at Birmingham Heersink 
School of Medicine, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, The University of Alabama at Birmingham 
Heersink School of Medicine, Birmingham, AL, USA.

CALFAN syndrome is an extremely rare disease consisting of recurrent pediatric 
acute liver failure (PALF), neurodegenerative diseases, and skeletal 
abnormalities associated with SCYL1 gene mutation. To date, three of 18 patients 
reported underwent liver transplantation in infancy and early childhood 
(7-23 months). Here, we report a case of CALFAN syndrome with infantile onset, 
recurrent jaundice/PALF requiring liver transplantation in early adulthood. At 
the most recent follow-up, 3 years after transplantation, the patient is doing 
well.

Copyright © 2023 Mariam Youssef et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2023/3010131
PMCID: PMC10406563
PMID: 37554250

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest related to the submission.