---
reference_id: "PMID:26712670"
title: Haematological and biochemical markers as predictors of dengue infection.
authors:
- Rashmi MV
- Hamsaveena
journal: Malays J Pathol
year: '2015'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Haematological and biochemical markers as predictors of dengue infection.
**Authors:** Rashmi MV, Hamsaveena
**Journal:** Malays J Pathol (2015)

## Content

1. Malays J Pathol. 2015 Dec;37(3):247-51.

Haematological and biochemical markers as predictors of dengue infection.

Rashmi MV(1), Hamsaveena.

Author information:
(1)Sri Siddhartha Medical College, Department of Pathology, Tumkur-572104, 
India. rashmiarava@yahoo.com.

Dengue is a viral infection which has become a serious problem in recent years. 
It is a major cause of mortality and morbidity. The present study is a 
prospective, hospital-based, observational study done from August 2014 to 
October 2014. The objective of our study was to consider whether dengue 
infection can be suspected based on haematological and biochemical findings. The 
study included 100 patients positive for dengue infection. Complete hemogram, 
transaminases for liver injury, blood urea and serum creatinine levels for renal 
assessment were performed for these patients. The most common haematological 
findings were thrombocytopenia, leucopenia, an increase in the mixed cell 
fraction of the leucocytes and the presence of reactive lymphocytes. Biochemical 
parameters like the aminotranferases, blood urea and serum creatinine levels 
were significantly raised. Hence, a platelet count of <100,000 cells/µl, 
leucopenia of <4000 cells/µl and aspartate aminotransferase levels of >82.2 U/L 
can be considered as predictors of dengue infection.

PMID: 26712670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]