---
reference_id: "PMID:34557911"
title: Evaluation of gene validity for CPVT and short QT syndrome in sudden arrhythmic death.
authors:
- Walsh R
- Adler A
- Amin AS
- Abiusi E
- Care M
- Bikker H
- Amenta S
- Feilotter H
- Nannenberg EA
- Mazzarotto F
- Trevisan V
- Garcia J
- Hershberger RE
- Perez MV
- Sturm AC
- Ware JS
- Zareba W
- Novelli V
- Wilde AAM
- Gollob MH
journal: Eur Heart J
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehab687
keywords:
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac"
- Calmodulin
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac/etiology"
- Humans
- KCNQ1 Potassium Channel/genetics
- Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/genetics
- "Tachycardia, Ventricular/diagnosis"
- Polymorphic Catecholaminergic Ventricular Tachycardia
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of gene validity for CPVT and short QT syndrome in sudden arrhythmic death.
**Authors:** Walsh R, Adler A, Amin AS, Abiusi E, Care M, Bikker H, Amenta S, Feilotter H, Nannenberg EA, Mazzarotto F, Trevisan V, Garcia J, Hershberger RE, Perez MV, Sturm AC, Ware JS, Zareba W, Novelli V, Wilde AAM, Gollob MH
**Journal:** Eur Heart J (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/eurheartj/ehab687](https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehab687)

## Content

1. Eur Heart J. 2022 Apr 14;43(15):1500-1510. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehab687.

Evaluation of gene validity for CPVT and short QT syndrome in sudden arrhythmic
death.

Walsh R(1), Adler A(2), Amin AS(1), Abiusi E(3), Care M(4)(5), Bikker H(6),
Amenta S(3), Feilotter H(7), Nannenberg EA(6), Mazzarotto F(8)(9)(10), Trevisan
V(3), Garcia J(11), Hershberger RE(12)(13), Perez MV(14), Sturm AC(15), Ware
JS(9)(10)(16), Zareba W(17), Novelli V(3), Wilde AAM(1), Gollob MH(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Cardiology, Amsterdam Cardiovascular
Sciences, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Heart Center, Meibergdreef 9,
1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Peter Munk Cardiac Centre,
University Health Network, University of Toronto, 585 University Avenue,
Toronto, ON M5G 2N2, Canada.
(3)Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS and Istituto di
Medicina Genomica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, L.go F. Vito 1, Rome
00168, Italy.
(4)Division of Cardiology, Toronto General Hospital, The Toronto General
Hospital Research Institute, University Health Network, University of Toronto,
200 Elizabeth St, Toronto, ON M5G 2C4, Canada.
(5)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, 1 King's College
Cir, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, Canada.
(6)Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam,
Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam 1105 AZ, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Queen's University, 88 Stuart
Street, Kingston, ON K7L 3N6, Canada.
(8)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence,
Viale Pieraccini 6, Florence 50139, Italy.
(9)Faculty of Medicine, National Heart & Lung Institute, Imperial College
London, Dovehouse St, London SW3 6LY, UK.
(10)Cardiovascular Research Centre, Royal Brompton & Harefield Hospitals, Sydney
St, London SW3 6NP, UK.
(11)Invitae Corp., 1400 16th St, San Francisco, CA 94103, USA.
(12)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Internal Medicine, The Davis Heart
and Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center,
473 W 12th Ave, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(13)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, The
Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University Wexner
Medical Center, 473 W 12th Ave, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(14)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Stanford
University, 300 Pasteur Dr, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(15)Geisinger Genomic Medicine Institute, 100 N Academy Ave, Danville, PA 17822,
USA.
(16)Cardiovascular Genomics and Precision Medicine, MRC London Institute of
Medical Sciences, Imperial College London, Du Cane Rd, London W12 0NN, UK.
(17)Cardiology Unit of the Department of Medicine, University of Rochester
Medical Center, 601 Elmwood Ave, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Comment in
    Eur Heart J. 2022 Apr 14;43(15):1511-1513. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehab794.

AIMS: Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) and short QT
syndrome (SQTS) are inherited arrhythmogenic disorders that can cause sudden
death. Numerous genes have been reported to cause these conditions, but evidence
supporting these gene-disease relationships varies considerably. To ensure
appropriate utilization of genetic information for CPVT and SQTS patients, we
applied an evidence-based reappraisal of previously reported genes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Three teams independently curated all published evidence
for 11 CPVT and 9 SQTS implicated genes using the ClinGen gene curation
framework. The results were reviewed by a Channelopathy Expert Panel who
provided the final classifications. Seven genes had definitive to moderate
evidence for disease causation in CPVT, with either autosomal dominant (RYR2,
CALM1, CALM2, CALM3) or autosomal recessive (CASQ2, TRDN, TECRL) inheritance.
Three of the four disputed genes for CPVT (KCNJ2, PKP2, SCN5A) were deemed by
the Expert Panel to be reported for phenotypes that were not representative of
CPVT, while reported variants in a fourth gene (ANK2) were too common in the
population to be disease-causing. For SQTS, only one gene (KCNH2) was classified
as definitive, with three others (KCNQ1, KCNJ2, SLC4A3) having strong to
moderate evidence. The majority of genetic evidence for SQTS genes was derived
from very few variants (five in KCNJ2, two in KCNH2, one in KCNQ1/SLC4A3).
CONCLUSIONS: Seven CPVT and four SQTS genes have valid evidence for disease
causation and should be included in genetic testing panels. Additional genes
associated with conditions that may mimic clinical features of CPVT/SQTS have
potential utility for differential diagnosis.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
European Society of Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehab687
PMCID: PMC9009401
PMID: 34557911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
