---
reference_id: "PMID:26750748"
title: "Peroxisome biogenesis disorders in the Zellweger spectrum: An overview of current diagnosis, clinical manifestations, and treatment guidelines."
authors:
- Braverman NE
- Raymond GV
- Rizzo WB
- Moser AB
- Wilkinson ME
- Stone EM
- Steinberg SJ
- Wangler MF
- Rush ET
- Hacia JG
- Bose M
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2015.12.009
keywords:
- Adult
- Genetic Testing
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/etiology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- PHEX Phosphate Regulating Neutral Endopeptidase/genetics
- "Peroxisomal Disorders/diagnosis, therapy"
- Peroxisomes/genetics
- Phenotype
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
- Precision Medicine
- "Retinal Dystrophies/etiology, physiopathology"
- "Zellweger Syndrome/diagnosis, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peroxisome biogenesis disorders in the Zellweger spectrum: An overview of current diagnosis, clinical manifestations, and treatment guidelines.
**Authors:** Braverman NE, Raymond GV, Rizzo WB, Moser AB, Wilkinson ME, Stone EM, Steinberg SJ, Wangler MF, Rush ET, Hacia JG, Bose M
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2015.12.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2015.12.009)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2016 Mar;117(3):313-21. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2015.12.009.
Epub  2015 Dec 23.

Peroxisome biogenesis disorders in the Zellweger spectrum: An overview of
current diagnosis, clinical manifestations, and treatment guidelines.

Braverman NE(1), Raymond GV(2), Rizzo WB(3), Moser AB(4), Wilkinson ME(5), Stone
EM(6), Steinberg SJ(7), Wangler MF(8), Rush ET(9), Hacia JG(10), Bose M(11).

Author information:
(1)McGill University Health Centre, 1001 Décarie Blvd Block E, EM02230,
Montreal, QC H4A3J1, Canada. Electronic address: nancy.braverman@mcgill.ca.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Minnesota, 516 Delaware Street SE,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA,. Electronic address: gvraymon@umn.edu.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 985456
Nebraska Medical Center - MMI 3062, Omaha, NE 68198-5456, USA. Electronic
address: wrizzo@umnc.edu.
(4)Hugo W. Moser Research Institute at Kennedy Krieger, 707 N. Broadway,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. Electronic address: mosera@kennedykrieger.org.
(5)Carver College of Medicine, Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences,
University of Iowa, Stephen A. Wynn Institute for Vision Research, 200 Hawkins
Drive, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. Electronic address: mark-wilkinson@uiowa.edu.
(6)Carver College of Medicine, Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences,
University of Iowa, Stephen A. Wynn Institute for Vision Research, 200 Hawkins
Drive, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. Electronic address: edwin-stone@uiowa.edu.
(7)Institute of Genetic Medicine and Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, CMSC1004B, 600 N Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD
21287, USA. Electronic address: ssteinb8@jhmi.edu.
(8)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Duncan Neurological Research Institute, DNRI-1050, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
Electronic address: michael.wangler@bcm.edu.
(9)Munroe-Meyer Institute for Genetics and Rehabilitation, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, 985440 Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA.
Electronic address: erush@unmc.edu.
(10)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern
California, 1975 Zonal Ave, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. Electronic address:
hacia@usc.edu.
(11)Global Foundation for Peroxisomal Disorders, 5147 S. Harvard Avenue, Suite
181, Tulsa, OK 74135, USA. Electronic address: mousumi@thegfpd.org.

Peroxisome biogenesis disorders in the Zellweger spectrum (PBD-ZSD) are a
heterogeneous group of genetic disorders caused by mutations in PEX genes
responsible for normal peroxisome assembly and functions. As a result of
impaired peroxisomal activities, individuals with PBD-ZSD can manifest a complex
spectrum of clinical phenotypes that typically result in shortened life spans.
The extreme variability in disease manifestation ranging from onset of profound
neurologic symptoms in newborns to progressive degenerative disease in adults
presents practical challenges in disease diagnosis and medical management.
Recent advances in biochemical methods for newborn screening and genetic testing
have provided unprecedented opportunities for identifying patients at the
earliest possible time and defining the molecular bases for their diseases.
Here, we provide an overview of current clinical approaches for the diagnosis of
PBD-ZSD and provide broad guidelines for the treatment of disease in its wide
variety of forms. Although we anticipate future progress in the development of
more effective targeted interventions, the current guidelines are meant to
provide a starting point for the management of these complex conditions in the
context of personalized health care.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2015.12.009
PMCID: PMC5214431
PMID: 26750748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
