---
reference_id: "PMID:18413395"
title: "DPA-714, a new translocator protein-specific ligand: synthesis, radiofluorination, and pharmacologic characterization."
authors:
- James ML
- Fulton RR
- Vercoullie J
- Henderson DJ
- Garreau L
- Chalon S
- Dolle F
- Costa B
- Guilloteau D
- Kassiou M
journal: J Nucl Med
year: '2008'
doi: 10.2967/jnumed.107.046151
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DPA-714, a new translocator protein-specific ligand: synthesis, radiofluorination, and pharmacologic characterization.
**Authors:** James ML, Fulton RR, Vercoullie J, Henderson DJ, Garreau L, Chalon S, Dolle F, Costa B, Guilloteau D, Kassiou M
**Journal:** J Nucl Med (2008)
**DOI:** [10.2967/jnumed.107.046151](https://doi.org/10.2967/jnumed.107.046151)

## Content

1. J Nucl Med. 2008 May;49(5):814-22. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.107.046151. Epub 2008
Apr  15.

DPA-714, a new translocator protein-specific ligand: synthesis, 
radiofluorination, and pharmacologic characterization.

James ML(1), Fulton RR, Vercoullie J, Henderson DJ, Garreau L, Chalon S, Dolle 
F, Costa B, Guilloteau D, Kassiou M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia.

Erratum in
    J Nucl Med. 2008 Jul;49(7):1096. Selleri, Silvia [corrected to Costa, 
Barbara].

The translocator protein (18 kDa) (TSPO), formerly known as the peripheral 
benzodiazepine receptor, is dramatically upregulated under pathologic 
conditions. Activated microglia are the main cell type expressing the TSPO at 
sites of central nervous system pathology. Radioligands for the TSPO can 
therefore measure active disease in the brain. This article details the 
synthesis, radiofluorination, and pharmacologic evaluation of a new 
TSPO-specific pyrazolopyrimidine, DPA-714.
METHODS: The affinity of DPA-714 for the TSPO was measured in rat kidney 
membranes with (3)H-PK11195. The in vitro functional activity of DPA-714 was 
measured in a steroidogenic assay in which the ability of DPA-714 to increase 
pregnenolone synthesis was measured with rat C6 glioma cells. The 
radiofluorination of DPA-714 was achieved by nucleophilic (18)F-fluoride 
displacement of the tosylate precursor. (18)F-DPA-714 was assessed in rats 
harboring unilateral quinolinic acid (QA) lesions. In addition, pretreatment 
experiments were performed with PK11195 (5 mg/kg), DPA-714 (1 mg/kg), and 
DPA-713 (1 mg/kg). The in vivo binding and biodistribution of (18)F-DPA-714 were 
determined in a baboon with PET. Experiments involving presaturation with 
PK11195 (1.5 mg/kg) and displacement with DPA-714 (1 mg/kg) were conducted to 
evaluate the specificity of radioligand binding.
RESULTS: In vitro binding studies revealed that DPA-714 displayed a high 
affinity for the TSPO (dissociation constant, 7.0 nM). DPA-714 stimulated 
pregnenolone synthesis at levels 80% above the baseline. (18)F-DPA-714 was 
prepared at a 16% radiochemical yield and a specific activity of 270 GBq/mumol. 
In rats harboring unilateral QA lesions, an 8-fold-higher level of uptake of 
(18)F-DPA-714 was observed in the ipsilateral striatum than in the contralateral 
striatum. Uptake in the ipsilateral striatum was shown to be selective because 
it was inhibited to the level in the contralateral striatum in the presence of 
PK11195, nonlabeled DPA-714, or DPA-713. PET studies demonstrated rapid 
penetration and good retention of (18)F-DPA-714 in the baboon brain. 
Pretreatment with PK11195 effectively inhibited the uptake of (18)F-DPA-714 in 
the whole brain, indicating its selective binding to the TSPO. The injection of 
nonlabeled DPA-714 20 min after the injection of (18)F-DPA-714 resulted in 
radioligand washout, demonstrating the reversibility of (18)F-DPA-714 binding.
CONCLUSION: (18)F-DPA-714 is a specific radioligand for the TSPO, displaying 
promising in vivo properties and thus warranting further investigation.

DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.107.046151
PMID: 18413395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]