---
reference_id: "PMID:20847697"
title: Clinical and genetic aspects of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, classic type.
authors:
- Malfait F
- Wenstrup RJ
- De Paepe A
journal: Genet Med
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3181eed412
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and genetic aspects of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, classic type.
**Authors:** Malfait F, Wenstrup RJ, De Paepe A
**Journal:** Genet Med (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1097/GIM.0b013e3181eed412](https://doi.org/10.1097/GIM.0b013e3181eed412)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2010 Oct;12(10):597-605. doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3181eed412.

Clinical and genetic aspects of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, classic type.

Malfait F(1), Wenstrup RJ, De Paepe A.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

Comment in
    Genet Med. 2011 Jan;13(1):77; author reply 77-8. doi: 
10.1097/gim.0b013e318207bf77.

Classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is a heritable connective tissue disorder 
characterized by skin hyperextensibility, fragile and soft skin, delayed wound 
healing with formation of atrophic scars, easy bruising, and generalized joint 
hypermobility. It comprises Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type I and Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome type II, but it is now apparent that these form a continuum of clinical 
findings and differ only in phenotypic severity. It is currently estimated that 
approximately 50% of patients with a clinical diagnosis of classic Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome harbor mutations in the COL5A1 and the COL5A2 gene, encoding the α1 and 
the α2-chain of type V collagen, respectively. However, because no prospective 
molecular studies of COL5A1 and COL5A2 have been performed in a clinically 
well-defined patient group, this number may underestimate the real proportion of 
patients with classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome harboring a mutation in one of 
these genes. In the majority of patients with molecularly characterized classic 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, the disease is caused by a mutation leading to a 
nonfunctional COL5A1 allele and resulting in haploinsufficiency of type V 
collagen. A smaller proportion of patients harbor a structural mutation in 
COL5A1 or COL5A2, causing the production of a functionally defective type V 
collagen protein. Most mutations identified so far result in a reduced amount of 
type V collagen in the connective tissues available for collagen 
fibrillogenesis. Inter- and intrafamilial phenotypic variability is observed, 
but no genotype-phenotype correlations have been observed. No treatment for the 
underlying defect is presently available for Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. However, a 
series of preventive guidelines are applicable.

DOI: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3181eed412
PMID: 20847697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]