---
reference_id: "PMID:8533800"
title: "Mutations in PAX3 that cause Waardenburg syndrome type I: ten new mutations and review of the literature."
authors:
- Baldwin CT
- Hoth CF
- Macina RA
- Milunsky A
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320580205
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Electrophoresis/methods
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Neural Tube Defects/genetics
- PAX3 Transcription Factor
- Paired Box Transcription Factors
- Transcription Factors
- Waardenburg Syndrome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in PAX3 that cause Waardenburg syndrome type I: ten new mutations and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Baldwin CT, Hoth CF, Macina RA, Milunsky A
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.1320580205](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.1320580205)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 1995 Aug 28;58(2):115-22. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320580205.

Mutations in PAX3 that cause Waardenburg syndrome type I: ten new mutations and
review of the literature.

Baldwin CT(1), Hoth CF, Macina RA, Milunsky A.

Author information:
(1)Center for Human Genetics, Boston University School of Medicine,
Massachusetts 02118, USA.

Waardenburg syndrome (WS) is an autosomal-dominant disorder characterized by
sensorineural hearing loss, dystopia canthorum, and pigmentary disturbances, and
it represents the most common form of inherited deafness in infants. WS type I
is characterized by the presence of dystopia canthorum, while individuals with
WS type II have normally-located canthi. WS type III is similar to WS type I but
is also characterized by musculoskeletal abnormalities. Defects in the PAX3
gene, a transcription factor expressed during embryonic development, have been
shown to cause WS types I and III in several families. In contrast, mutations in
PAX3 do not cause WS type II, and linkage of the disease to other chromosomal
regions has been demonstrated. We describe 10 additional mutations in the PAX3
gene in families with WS type I. Eight of these mutations are in the region of
PAX3, where only one mutation has been previously described. These mutations,
together with those previously reported, cover essentially the entire PAX3 gene
and represent a wide spectrum of mutations that can cause WS type I. Thus far,
all but one of the mutations are private; only one mutation has been reported in
two apparently unrelated families. Our analysis thus far demonstrates little
correlation between genotype and phenotype; deletions of the entire PAX3 gene
result in phenotypes indistinguishable from those associated with single-base
substitutions in the paired domain or homeodomain of PAX3. Moreover, two similar
mutations in close proximity can result in significantly different phenotypes,
WS type I in one family and WS type III in another.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.1320580205
PMID: 8533800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
