---
reference_id: "PMID:10745044"
title: Report of five novel and one recurrent COL2A1 mutations with analysis of genotype-phenotype correlation in patients with a lethal type II collagen disorder.
authors:
- Mortier GR
- Weis M
- Nuytinck L
- King LM
- Wilkin DJ
- De Paepe A
- Lachman RS
- Rimoin DL
- Eyre DR
- Cohn DH
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.37.4.263
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Report of five novel and one recurrent COL2A1 mutations with analysis of genotype-phenotype correlation in patients with a lethal type II collagen disorder.
**Authors:** Mortier GR, Weis M, Nuytinck L, King LM, Wilkin DJ, De Paepe A, Lachman RS, Rimoin DL, Eyre DR, Cohn DH
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.37.4.263](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.37.4.263)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2000 Apr;37(4):263-71. doi: 10.1136/jmg.37.4.263.

Report of five novel and one recurrent COL2A1 mutations with analysis of 
genotype-phenotype correlation in patients with a lethal type II collagen 
disorder.

Mortier GR(1), Weis M, Nuytinck L, King LM, Wilkin DJ, De Paepe A, Lachman RS, 
Rimoin DL, Eyre DR, Cohn DH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Gent, De Pintelaan 
185, B-9000 Gent, Belgium.

Achondrogenesis II-hypochondrogenesis and severe spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia 
congenita (SEDC) are lethal forms of dwarfism caused by dominant mutations in 
the type II collagen gene (COL2A1). To identify the underlying defect in seven 
cases with this group of conditions, we used the combined strategy of cartilage 
protein analysis and COL2A1 mutation analysis. Overmodified type II collagen and 
the presence of type I collagen was found in the cartilage matrix of all seven 
cases. Five patients were heterozygous for a nucleotide change that predicted a 
glycine substitution in the triple helical domain (G313S, G517V, G571A, G910C, 
G943S). In all five cases, analysis of cartilage type II collagen suggested 
incorporation of the abnormal alpha1(II) chain in the extracellular collagen 
trimers. The G943S mutation has been reported previously in another unrelated 
patient with a strikingly similar phenotype, illustrating the possible specific 
effect of the mutation. The radiographically less severely affected patient was 
heterozygous for a 4 bp deletion in the splice donor site of intron 35, likely 
to result in aberrant splicing. One case was shown to be heterozygous for a 
single nucleotide change predicted to result in a T1191N substitution in the 
carboxy-propeptide of the proalpha1(II) collagen chain. Study of the clinical, 
radiographic, and morphological features of the seven cases supports evidence 
for a phenotypic continuum between achondrogenesis II-hypochondrogenesis and 
lethal SEDC and suggests a relationship between the amount of type I collagen in 
the cartilage and the severity of the phenotype.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.37.4.263
PMCID: PMC1734564
PMID: 10745044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]