---
reference_id: "PMID:24156691"
title: "NOTES for surgical treatment of long-segment hirschsprung's disease: report of three cases."
authors:
- Li N
- Zhang W
- Yu D
- Sun X
- Wei M
- Weng Y
- Feng J
journal: J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1089/lap.2013.0180
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NOTES for surgical treatment of long-segment hirschsprung's disease: report of three cases.
**Authors:** Li N, Zhang W, Yu D, Sun X, Wei M, Weng Y, Feng J
**Journal:** J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1089/lap.2013.0180](https://doi.org/10.1089/lap.2013.0180)

## Content

1. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2013 Dec;23(12):1020-3. doi: 
10.1089/lap.2013.0180. Epub 2013 Oct 24.

NOTES for surgical treatment of long-segment hirschsprung's disease: report of 
three cases.

Li N(1), Zhang W, Yu D, Sun X, Wei M, Weng Y, Feng J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology , Wuhan, Hubei, China .

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the feasibility of natural 
orifice translumenal endoscopic surgery (NOTES(®); American Society for 
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy [Oak Brook, IL] and Society of American 
Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons [Los Angeles, CA]) for the surgical 
management of long-segment Hirschsprung's disease.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Three children with long-segment Hirschsprung's disease 
were enrolled in this study. In all three cases the transition zone was proximal 
to the splenic flexure, with too long a segment of distal aganglionic colon to 
perform an isolated transanal pull-through. Our procedure was as follows. A 
rectal mucosectomy was performed starting 0.5 cm proximal to the dentate line 
and extending proximally to the level of the intraperitoneal rectum. Three 
cannulas were inserted through the muscular sleeve into the abdominal cavity. 
The mesocolon, lateral peritoneum, and greater omentum were ligated and divided 
in order to mobilize the colon. After mobilization, the aganglionic distal bowel 
segment was pulled through the anus and resected. Finally the colo-anal 
anastomosis was created.
RESULTS: All three operations were successfully performed without intraoperative 
complications. No additional ports or conversion to an open procedure was 
required. The operative times were 242, 195, and 174 minutes, respectively. All 
three children were discharged without complication with follow-up for at least 
1 year. One year after the procedure the 3 patients were stooling one to three 
times per day, with no fecal soiling or constipation.
CONCLUSIONS: This NOTES procedure may be a safe and feasible option for the 
surgical treatment of long-segment Hirschsprung's disease.

DOI: 10.1089/lap.2013.0180
PMID: 24156691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]