---
reference_id: "PMID:25282520"
title: "Inhibition of PCSK9 with evolocumab in homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia (TESLA Part B): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial."
authors:
- Raal FJ
- Honarpour N
- Blom DJ
- Hovingh GK
- Xu F
- Scott R
- Wasserman SM
- Stein EA
- TESLA Investigators
journal: Lancet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61374-X
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inhibition of PCSK9 with evolocumab in homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia (TESLA Part B): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.
**Authors:** Raal FJ, Honarpour N, Blom DJ, Hovingh GK, Xu F, Scott R, Wasserman SM, Stein EA, TESLA Investigators
**Journal:** Lancet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61374-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61374-X)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2015 Jan 24;385(9965):341-50. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61374-X. Epub
 2014 Oct 1.

Inhibition of PCSK9 with evolocumab in homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia 
(TESLA Part B): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.

Raal FJ(1), Honarpour N(2), Blom DJ(3), Hovingh GK(4), Xu F(2), Scott R(2), 
Wasserman SM(2), Stein EA(5); TESLA Investigators.

Collaborators: Descamps O, Gaudet D, Blaha V, Soska V, Zemek S, Bruckert E, 
Farnier M, Sampietro T, Jambart S, Abi-Fadel M, Hovingh GK, Blom D, Raal F, 
Fuentes Jimenez F, Karlezi RA, Vidal Pardo JI, Ginsberg H, Stein E, Turner T, 
Hennekens CH, Andreotti F, Baigent C, Brown WV, Davis B, Wiviott SD.

Author information:
(1)Carbohydrate and Lipid Metabolism Research Unit, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
University of Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(2)Amgen Inc, One Amgen Center Drive, Thousand Oaks, CA, USA.
(3)Division of Lipidology, Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town, UCT 
Faculty Health Sciences, Cape Town, South Africa.
(4)Vascular Medicine, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(5)Metabolic and Atherosclerosis Research Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA. 
Electronic address: esteinmrl@aol.com.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2015 Jan 24;385(9965):307-10. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61702-5.
    Nat Rev Cardiol. 2014 Dec;11(12):687. doi: 10.1038/nrcardio.2014.169.

BACKGROUND: Homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia is a rare, serious 
disorder caused by very low or absent plasma clearance of LDL, substantially 
raised LDL cholesterol, and accelerated development of cardiovascular disease. 
Conventional lipid-lowering treatments are modestly effective. Evolocumab, a 
monoclonal antibody to proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9), 
reduced LDL cholesterol by 16% in a pilot study. We now report results with 
evolocumab in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial.
METHODS: This randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial was 
undertaken at 17 sites in ten countries in North America, Europe, the Middle 
East, and South Africa. 50 eligible patients (aged ≥12 years) with homozygous 
familial hypercholesterolaemia, on stable lipid-regulating therapy for at least 
4 weeks, and not receiving lipoprotein apheresis, were randomly allocated by a 
computer-generated randomisation sequence in a 2:1 ratio to receive subcutaneous 
evolocumab 420 mg or placebo every 4 weeks for 12 weeks. Randomisation was 
stratified by LDL cholesterol at screening (<11 mmol/L or ≥11 mmol/L) and 
implemented by a computerised interactive voice-response system. Patients, study 
personnel, and the funder were masked to treatment and to the efficacy results 
by the central laboratory not returning LDL cholesterol or any lipid results to 
the clinical sites after the baseline visit. The primary endpoint was percentage 
change in ultracentrifugation LDL cholesterol from baseline at week 12 compared 
with placebo, analysed by intention-to-treat. This trial is registered with 
ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01588496.
FINDINGS: Of the 50 eligible patients randomly assigned to the two treatment 
groups, 49 actually received the study drug and completed the study (16 in the 
placebo group and 33 in the evolocumab group). Compared with placebo, evolocumab 
significantly reduced ultracentrifugation LDL cholesterol at 12 weeks by 30·9% 
(95% CI -43·9% to -18·0%; p<0·0001). Treatment-emergent adverse events occurred 
in ten (63%) of 16 patients in the placebo group and 12 (36%) of 33 in the 
evolocumab group. No serious clinical or laboratory adverse events occurred, and 
no anti-evolocumab antibody development was detected during the study.
INTERPRETATION: In patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia 
receiving stable background lipid-lowering treatment and not on apheresis, 
evolocumab 420 mg administered every 4 weeks was well tolerated and 
significantly reduced LDL cholesterol compared with placebo.
FUNDING: Amgen Inc.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61374-X
PMID: 25282520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]