---
reference_id: "PMID:31924231"
title: Immunological features of patients affected by Barraquer-Simons syndrome.
authors:
- Corvillo F
- Ceccarini G
- Nozal P
- Magno S
- Pelosini C
- Garrido S
- López-Lera A
- Moraru M
- Vilches C
- Fornaciari S
- Gabbriellini S
- Santini F
- Araújo-Vilar D
- López-Trascasa M
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-019-1292-1
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Autoimmunity/physiology
- Child
- Complement C3/metabolism
- Complement C3 Nephritic Factor/metabolism
- Complement C4/metabolism
- Complement Factor B/metabolism
- Female
- Humans
- "Lipodystrophy/immunology, metabolism"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Properdin/metabolism
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunological features of patients affected by Barraquer-Simons syndrome.
**Authors:** Corvillo F, Ceccarini G, Nozal P, Magno S, Pelosini C, Garrido S, López-Lera A, Moraru M, Vilches C, Fornaciari S, Gabbriellini S, Santini F, Araújo-Vilar D, López-Trascasa M
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-019-1292-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-019-1292-1)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2020 Jan 10;15(1):9. doi: 10.1186/s13023-019-1292-1.

Immunological features of patients affected by Barraquer-Simons syndrome.

Corvillo F(1)(2), Ceccarini G(3), Nozal P(4)(5)(6), Magno S(3), Pelosini C(3), 
Garrido S(4)(5)(6), López-Lera A(4)(5), Moraru M(7), Vilches C(7), Fornaciari 
S(8), Gabbriellini S(8), Santini F(3), Araújo-Vilar D(9), López-Trascasa 
M(4)(10).

Author information:
(1)Complement Research Group, Hospital La Paz Institute for Health Research 
(IdiPAZ), La Paz University Hospital, Paseo de la Castellana, 261, 28046, 
Madrid, Spain. fcorvillo@yahoo.es.
(2)Center for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER U754), 
Madrid, Spain. fcorvillo@yahoo.es.
(3)Obesity and Lipodystrophy Centre at the Endocrinology Unit, University 
Hospital of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(4)Complement Research Group, Hospital La Paz Institute for Health Research 
(IdiPAZ), La Paz University Hospital, Paseo de la Castellana, 261, 28046, 
Madrid, Spain.
(5)Center for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER U754), 
Madrid, Spain.
(6)Unit of Immunology, La Paz University Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
(7)Immunogenetics and Histocompatibility, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria 
Puerta de Hierro, Madrid, Spain.
(8)Immunogenetics laboratory, University Hospital of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(9)Thyroid and Metabolic Diseases Unit (U.E.T.eM.), Centro Singular de 
Investigación en Medicina Molecular e Enfermidades Crónicas (CIMUS-IDIS), School 
of Medicine, Universidad de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, 
Spain.
(10)Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

Erratum in
    Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2020 Mar 30;15(1):79. doi: 10.1186/s13023-020-1350-8.

BACKGROUND: C3 hypocomplementemia and the presence of C3 nephritic factor 
(C3NeF), an autoantibody causing complement system over-activation, are common 
features among most patients affected by Barraquer-Simons syndrome (BSS), an 
acquired form of partial lipodystrophy. Moreover, BSS is frequently associated 
with autoimmune diseases. However, the relationship between complement system 
dysregulation and BSS remains to be fully elucidated. The aim of this study was 
to provide a comprehensive immunological analysis of the complement system 
status, autoantibody signatures and HLA profile in BSS. Thirteen subjects with 
BSS were recruited for the study. The circulating levels of complement 
components, C3, C4, Factor B (FB) and Properdin (P), as well as an extended 
autoantibody profile including autoantibodies targeting complement components 
and regulators were assessed in serum. Additionally, HLA genotyping was carried 
out using DNA extracted from peripheral blood mononuclear cells.
RESULTS: C3, C4 and FB levels were significantly reduced in patients with BSS as 
compared with healthy subjects. C3NeF was the most frequently found autoantibody 
(69.2% of cases), followed by anti-C3 (38.5%), and anti-P and anti-FB (30.8% 
each). Clinical data showed high prevalence of autoimmune diseases (38.5%), the 
majority of patients (61.5%) being positive for at least one of the 
autoantibodies tested. The HLA allele DRB1*11 was present in 54% of BSS 
patients, and the majority of them (31%) were positive for *11:03 (vs 1.3% in 
the general population).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results confirmed the association between BSS, autoimmunity and 
C3 hypocomplementemia. Moreover, the finding of autoantibodies targeting 
complement system proteins points to complement dysregulation as a central 
pathological event in the development of BSS.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-019-1292-1
PMCID: PMC6954565
PMID: 31924231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.