---
reference_id: "PMID:35868681"
title: Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency Liver Disease.
authors:
- Suri A
- Patel D
- Teckman JH
journal: Clin Liver Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.cld.2022.03.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency Liver Disease.
**Authors:** Suri A, Patel D, Teckman JH
**Journal:** Clin Liver Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cld.2022.03.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cld.2022.03.004)

## Content

1. Clin Liver Dis. 2022 Aug;26(3):391-402. doi: 10.1016/j.cld.2022.03.004. Epub 
2022 Jun 25.

Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency Liver Disease.

Suri A(1), Patel D(2), Teckman JH(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Gastroenetrology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Department 
of Pediatrics, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, SSM Health Cardinal 
Glennon Children's Hospital, 1465 S Grand Boulevard, St. Louis, MO 63104, USA. 
Electronic address: anandini.suri@gmail.com.
(2)Division of Pediatric Gastroenetrology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Department 
of Pediatrics, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, SSM Health Cardinal 
Glennon Children's Hospital, 1465 S Grand Boulevard, St. Louis, MO 63104, USA.

Liver disease in homozygous ZZ alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) deficiency occurs due 
to the accumulation of large quantities of AAT mutant Z protein polymers in the 
liver. The mutant Z protein folds improperly during biogenesis and is retained 
within the hepatocytes rather than appropriately secreted. These intracellular 
polymers trigger an injury cascade, which leads to liver injury. However, the 
clinical liver disease is highly variable and not all patients with this same 
homozygous ZZ genotype develop liver disease. Evidence suggests that genetic 
determinants of intracellular protein processing, among other unidentified 
genetic and environmental factors, likely play a role in liver disease 
susceptibility. Advancements made in development of new treatment strategies 
using siRNA technology, and other novel approaches, are promising, and multiple 
human liver disease trials are underway.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cld.2022.03.004
PMID: 35868681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]