---
reference_id: "PMID:11258423"
title: Molecular genetics of the Bare lymphocyte syndrome.
authors:
- Masternak K
- Muhlethaler-Mottet A
- Villard J
- Peretti M
- Reith W
journal: Rev Immunogenet
year: '2000'
keywords:
- Animals
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- "Genes, MHC Class II/genetics"
- Histocompatibility Antigens Class II/genetics
- Humans
- Mice
- Molecular Biology
- Regulatory Factor X Transcription Factors
- Severe Combined Immunodeficiency/genetics
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular genetics of the Bare lymphocyte syndrome.
**Authors:** Masternak K, Muhlethaler-Mottet A, Villard J, Peretti M, Reith W
**Journal:** Rev Immunogenet (2000)

## Content

1. Rev Immunogenet. 2000;2(2):267-82.

Molecular genetics of the Bare lymphocyte syndrome.

Masternak K(1), Muhlethaler-Mottet A, Villard J, Peretti M, Reith W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Microbiology, University of Geneva Medical School,
Switzerland.

Major Histocompatibility Complex class II (MHC-II) molecules play a pivotal role
in the adaptive immune system because they direct the development, activation
and homeostasis of CD4+ T helper cells. Hereditary defects leading to the
absence of MHC-II expression result in a severe autosomal recessive
immunodeficiency disease called the Bare Lymphocyte Syndrome (BLS), also
referred to as MHC-II deficiency. The genetic lesions responsible for BLS do not
lie within the MHC-II locus itself, but reside instead in genes encoding
transcription factors controlling MHC-II expression. Mutations in four different
MHC-II regulatory genes are known to lead to BLS. These genes encode CIITA,
RFXANK, RFX5 and RFXAP. CIITA (Class II Transactivator) is a transcriptional
coactivator that functions as a master control factor dictating the cell type
specificity, induction and level of MHC-II expression. RFXANK, RFX5 and RFXAP
are the three subunits of RFX (regulatory factor X), a DNA-binding complex that
binds to a conserved cis-acting sequence, the X box, present in the promoters of
all MHC-II genes. Elucidation of the molecular defects underlying BLS has led to
major advances in our understanding of the mechanisms regulating expression of
MHC-II genes.

PMID: 11258423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
