---
reference_id: "PMID:38102324"
title: "Surgical Management and Long-Term Outcomes of BIA-ALCL: A Multidisciplinary Approach."
authors:
- Vorstenbosch J
- Ghione P
- Plitas G
- Horwitz S
- Kim M
- Cordeiro P
- Nelson J
- McCarthy C
journal: Ann Surg Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1245/s10434-023-14636-4
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- Breast Implants/adverse effects
- Retrospective Studies
- "Lymphoma, Large-Cell, Anaplastic/etiology"
- Seroma/etiology
- Breast Implantation/adverse effects
- Breast Neoplasms/surgery
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surgical Management and Long-Term Outcomes of BIA-ALCL: A Multidisciplinary Approach.
**Authors:** Vorstenbosch J, Ghione P, Plitas G, Horwitz S, Kim M, Cordeiro P, Nelson J, McCarthy C
**Journal:** Ann Surg Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1245/s10434-023-14636-4](https://doi.org/10.1245/s10434-023-14636-4)

## Content

1. Ann Surg Oncol. 2024 Mar;31(3):2032-2040. doi: 10.1245/s10434-023-14636-4.
Epub  2023 Dec 15.

Surgical Management and Long-Term Outcomes of BIA-ALCL: A Multidisciplinary
Approach.

Vorstenbosch J(#)(1), Ghione P(#)(2), Plitas G(3), Horwitz S(4), Kim M(5),
Cordeiro P(5), Nelson J(5), McCarthy C(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Plastic Surgery, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(2)Lymphoma Section, Department of Medicine, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer
Centre, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(3)Breast Surgical Service, Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Hematology and Oncology Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, USA.
(5)Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery Service, Department of Surgery, Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
(6)Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery Service, Department of Surgery, Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA. McCarthc@mskcc.org.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Breast implant-associated anaplastic large cell lymphoma (BIA-ALCL)
is a subtype of ALCL that arises as a seroma or a mass in the capsule
surrounding textured breast implants. However, collections of cases usually come
from large groups of institutions or countries, with different approaches
regarding surgery and treatment. Here we describe a cohort of 18 cases
undergoing implant removal and capsulectomy followed at Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center (MSKCC).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed all the cases of women with
breast implants undergoing implant removal and capsulectomy for BIA-ALCL at
MSKCC from January 2011 to June 2020.
RESULTS: Median age at diagnosis was 57 (range 35-77) years following a median
implant exposure of 11 (range 7-33) years. All known implants were macrotextured
with the proprietary Biocell macrotexturing pattern from salt-loss technique. A
total of 16 patients (89%) had implants placed for breast cancer reconstruction.
Patients presented with clinically evident effusion in 78% of cases and a mass
in 17% of cases, and 83% of patients presented with stage 1 BIA-ALCL. Patients
were followed for a median of 43.4 months (SD 45 months) after diagnosis. There
were no cases of recurrent ALCL. All patients remain disease free and no
patients died of ALCL.
CONCLUSIONS: In this cohort of patients with BIA-ALCL surgically treated and
followed at a single institution, we confirm the importance of adequate surgery
(bilateral implant removal and complete capsulectomy) in patients presenting
with seroma-confined disease. This dataset reinforces high rates of
progression-free and overall survival when diagnosis is identified and treatment
performed in those with limited-stage disease.

© 2023. Society of Surgical Oncology.

DOI: 10.1245/s10434-023-14636-4
PMID: 38102324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
