---
reference_id: "PMID:39597062"
title: Hyperornithinemia-Hyperammonemia-Homocitrullinuria Syndrome in Vietnamese Patients.
authors:
- Nguyen KN
- Tran VK
- Nguyen NL
- Can TBN
- Dang TKG
- Nguyen TH
- Do TTM
- Phuong LT
- Tran TH
- Ta TV
- Tu NH
- Vu CD
journal: Medicina (Kaunas)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/medicina60111877
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hyperammonemia/genetics, diagnosis"
- Male
- "Urea Cycle Disorders, Inborn/diagnosis, complications, genetics"
- Female
- "Child, Preschool"
- Infant
- Vietnam/epidemiology
- Retrospective Studies
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Prospective Studies
- "Citrulline/blood, analogs & derivatives"
- "Ornithine/blood, deficiency"
- Mitochondrial Membrane Transport Proteins/genetics
- Southeast Asian People
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hyperornithinemia-Hyperammonemia-Homocitrullinuria Syndrome in Vietnamese Patients.
**Authors:** Nguyen KN, Tran VK, Nguyen NL, Can TBN, Dang TKG, Nguyen TH, Do TTM, Phuong LT, Tran TH, Ta TV, Tu NH, Vu CD
**Journal:** Medicina (Kaunas) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/medicina60111877](https://doi.org/10.3390/medicina60111877)

## Content

1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2024 Nov 16;60(11):1877. doi: 10.3390/medicina60111877.

Hyperornithinemia-Hyperammonemia-Homocitrullinuria Syndrome in Vietnamese
Patients.

Nguyen KN(1)(2), Tran VK(3), Nguyen NL(3), Can TBN(1), Dang TKG(1), Nguyen
TH(1), Do TTM(1), Phuong LT(3), Tran TH(4), Ta TV(4), Tu NH(5), Vu CD(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center of Endocrinology, Metabolism, Genetic/Genomics and Molecular Therapy,
Vietnam National Children's Hospital, 18/879 La Thanh, Dong Da, Hanoi 11512,
Vietnam.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, Hanoi Medical University, 1st Ton That Tung
Street, Hanoi 11521, Vietnam.
(3)Center for Gene and Protein Research, Hanoi Medical University, 1st Ton That
Tung Street, Hanoi 11521, Vietnam.
(4)Biochemistry Department, Hanoi Medical University, 1st Ton That Tung Street,
Hanoi 11521, Vietnam.
(5)Hanoi Medical Univerity Hospital, Hanoi Medical University, 1st Ton That Tung
Street, Hanoi 11521, Vietnam.

Background and Objectives: Hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria
syndrome (HHH; OMIM 238970) is one of the rare urea cycle disorders. Ornithine
carrier 1 deficiency causes HHH syndrome, characterized by failure of
mitochondrial ornithine uptake, hyperammonemia, and accumulation of ornithine
and lysine in the cytoplasm. The initial presentation and time of diagnosis in
HHH highly varies. Genetic analysis is critical for diagnosis. Materials and
Methods: This study encompassed retrospective and prospective analyses of four
unrelated Vietnamese children diagnosed with HHH syndrome. Results: The age of
diagnosis ranged from 10 days to 46 months. All four cases demonstrated
hyperornithinemia and prolonged prothrombin time. Three out of four cases
presented with hyperammonemia, elevated transaminases, and uraciluria. No
homocitrulline was detected in the urine. Only one case depicted oroticaciduria.
Genetic analyses revealed three pathogenic variants in the SLC25A15 gene, with
the c.535C>T (p.Arg179*) variant common in Vietnamese patients. The c.562_564del
(p.Phe188del) and c.408del (p.Met137Cysfs*10) variants were detected in one
case. The latter variant has yet to be reported in the literature on HHH
patients. After intervention with a protein-restricted diet, ammonia-reducing
therapy, and L-carnitine supplementation, hyperammonemia was not observed, and
liver enzyme levels returned to normal. Conclusions: Our results highlighted the
clinical and biochemical heterogeneity of HHH syndrome and posed that HHH
syndrome should be considered when individuals have hyperammonemia, elevated
transaminase, and decreased prothrombin time.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina60111877
PMCID: PMC11596723
PMID: 39597062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
