---
reference_id: "PMID:32682334"
title: Hair follicle immune privilege and its collapse in alopecia areata.
authors:
- Bertolini M
- McElwee K
- Gilhar A
- Bulfone-Paus S
- Paus R
journal: Exp Dermatol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/exd.14155
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hair follicle immune privilege and its collapse in alopecia areata.
**Authors:** Bertolini M, McElwee K, Gilhar A, Bulfone-Paus S, Paus R
**Journal:** Exp Dermatol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/exd.14155](https://doi.org/10.1111/exd.14155)

## Content

1. Exp Dermatol. 2020 Aug;29(8):703-725. doi: 10.1111/exd.14155.

Hair follicle immune privilege and its collapse in alopecia areata.

Bertolini M(1), McElwee K(1)(2)(3), Gilhar A(4), Bulfone-Paus S(1)(5), Paus 
R(1)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Monasterium Laboratory, Münster, Germany.
(2)Centre for Skin Sciences, University of Bradford, Bradford, UK.
(3)Department of Dermatology and Skin Science, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(4)Laboratory for Skin Research, Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel 
Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.
(5)Centre for Dermatology Research, University of Manchester and NIHR Manchester 
Biomedical Research Centre, Manchester, UK.
(6)Dr. Philip Frost Department of Dermatology & Cutaneous Surgery, University of 
Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.

Anagen stage hair follicles (HFs) exhibit "immune privilege (IP)" from the level 
of the bulge downwards to the bulb. Both passive and active IP mechanisms 
protect HFs from physiologically undesired immune responses and limit immune 
surveillance. IP is relative, not absolute, and is primarily based on absent, or 
greatly reduced, intra-follicular antigen presentation via MHC class I and II 
molecules, along with prominent expression of "no danger" signals like CD200 and 
the creation of an immunoinhibitory signalling milieu generated by the secretory 
activities of HFs. Perifollicular mast cells, Tregs and other immunocytes may 
also contribute to HF IP maintenance in healthy human skin. Collapse of anagen 
hair bulb IP is an essential prerequisite for the development of alopecia areata 
(AA). In AA, lesional HFs are rapidly infiltrated by NKG2D + T cells and natural 
killer (NK) cells, while perifollicular mast cells acquire a profoundly 
pro-inflammatory phenotype and interact with autoreactive CD8+ T cells. Using 
animal models, significant functional evidence has accumulated that demonstrates 
the dominance of the immune system in AA pathogenesis. Purified CD8+T-cell and 
NK cell populations alone, which secrete fγ, suffice to induce the AA phenotype, 
while CD4+T-cells aggravate it, and Tregs and iNKT cells may provide relative 
protection against AA development. While IP collapse may be induced by exogenous 
agents, inherent IP deficiencies might confer increased susceptibility to AA for 
some individuals. Thus, a key goal for effective AA management is the 
re-establishment of a functional HF IP, which will also provide superior 
protection from disease relapse.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/exd.14155
PMID: 32682334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]