---
reference_id: "PMID:9922375"
title: Structure and function of the CFTR chloride channel.
authors:
- Sheppard DN
- Welsh MJ
journal: Physiol Rev
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1152/physrev.1999.79.1.S23
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Structure and function of the CFTR chloride channel.
**Authors:** Sheppard DN, Welsh MJ
**Journal:** Physiol Rev (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1152/physrev.1999.79.1.S23](https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.1999.79.1.S23)

## Content

1. Physiol Rev. 1999 Jan;79(1 Suppl):S23-45. doi: 10.1152/physrev.1999.79.1.S23.

Structure and function of the CFTR chloride channel.

Sheppard DN(1), Welsh MJ.

Author information:
(1)Human Genetics Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Edinburgh, 
Molecular Medicine Centre, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

Structure and Function of the CFTR Chloride Channel. Physiol. Rev. 79, Suppl.: 
S23-S45, 1999. - The cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) 
is a unique member of the ABC transporter family that forms a novel Cl- channel. 
It is located predominantly in the apical membrane of epithelia where it 
mediates transepithelial salt and liquid movement. Dysfunction of CFTR causes 
the genetic disease cystic fibrosis. The CFTR is composed of five domains: two 
membrane-spanning domains (MSDs), two nucleotide-binding domains (NBDs), and a 
regulatory (R) domain. Here we review the structure and function of this unique 
channel, with a focus on how the various domains contribute to channel function. 
The MSDs form the channel pore, phosphorylation of the R domain determines 
channel activity, and ATP hydrolysis by the NBDs controls channel gating. 
Current knowledge of CFTR structure and function may help us understand better 
its mechanism of action, its role in electrolyte transport, its dysfunction in 
cystic fibrosis, and its relationship to other ABC transporters.

DOI: 10.1152/physrev.1999.79.1.S23
PMID: 9922375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]