---
reference_id: "PMID:39360991"
title: Epidemiology of Intermediate Uveitis.
authors:
- Besagar S
- de-la-Torre A
- Thorne J
- Biswas J
- Agrawal R
- Suhler EB
- Kempen JH
- Gangaputra S
journal: Ocul Immunol Inflamm
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1080/09273948.2024.2408411
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of Intermediate Uveitis.
**Authors:** Besagar S, de-la-Torre A, Thorne J, Biswas J, Agrawal R, Suhler EB, Kempen JH, Gangaputra S
**Journal:** Ocul Immunol Inflamm (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1080/09273948.2024.2408411](https://doi.org/10.1080/09273948.2024.2408411)

## Content

1. Ocul Immunol Inflamm. 2025 May;33(4):503-511. doi: 
10.1080/09273948.2024.2408411. Epub 2024 Oct 3.

Epidemiology of Intermediate Uveitis.

Besagar S(1), de-la-Torre A(2), Thorne J(3)(4), Biswas J(5), Agrawal 
R(6)(7)(8)(9), Suhler EB(10)(11)(12), Kempen JH(13)(14)(15)(16)(17), Gangaputra 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)Vanderbilt Eye Institute, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
Tennessee, USA.
(2)Neuroscience Research Group (NEUROS), Neurovitae Center for Neuroscience, 
Institute of Translational Medicine (IMT), School of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Universidad del Rosario, Bogotá, Colombia.
(3)Wilmer Eye Institute, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(4)The Department of Epidemiology, The Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public 
Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(5)Uveitis & Ocular Pathology Department, Sankara Nethralaya, Chennai, India.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, National Healthcare Group Eye institute, Tan 
Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore.
(7)Department of Ophthalmology, LKC School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological 
University, Singapore.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology, Duke NUS Medical School, Singapore.
(9)Department of Ocular Infections and Antimicrobials, Ocular Infections and 
AntiMicrobials, Singapore Eye Research Institute, Singapore.
(10)Department of Ophthalmology, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, 
Oregon, USA.
(11)Portland Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Portland, Oregon, USA.
(12)Oregon Health and Science University - Portland State University School of 
Public Health, Portland, Oregon, USA.
(13)Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.
(14)Department of Ophthalmology and Schepens Eye Research Institute, 
Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(15)Department of Ophthalmology, Addis Ababa University School of Medicine, 
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
(16)MCM Eye Unit, MyungSung Christian Medical Center (MCM) Comprehensive 
Specialized Hospital and MyungSung Medical College, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
(17)Department of Global Health and Social Medicine, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Intermediate uveitis is defined as inflammation of the vitreous and pars 
planitis. Etiology can be infectious, associated with a systemic disease, 
neoplastic or idiopathic. Pars planitis is the term used for idiopathic 
intermediate uveitis that presents with snowballs and snowbanks. While 
relatively rare, intermediate uveitis is present globally and typically affects 
adult females. Awareness of the presentation and a dilated fundus examination in 
patients presenting with floaters is essential to the diagnosis. PCR testing has 
enhanced the ability to diagnose infectious and neoplastic conditions that 
masquerade as intermediate uveitis. A structured review of systems and focused 
imaging, and laboratory testing will assist with early diagnosis and initiation 
of treatment.

DOI: 10.1080/09273948.2024.2408411
PMID: 39360991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]