---
reference_id: "PMID:34918480"
title: A proposed strategy for anticoagulation therapy in noncompaction cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Chimenti C
- Lavalle C
- Magnocavallo M
- Alfarano M
- Mariani MV
- Bernardini F
- Della Rocca DG
- Galardo G
- Severino P
- Di Lullo L
- Miraldi F
- Fedele F
- Frustaci A
journal: ESC Heart Fail
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/ehf2.13694
keywords:
- Adult
- Anticoagulants/therapeutic use
- Atrial Fibrillation/complications
- Cardiomyopathies
- Heart
- "Heart Defects, Congenital"
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A proposed strategy for anticoagulation therapy in noncompaction cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Chimenti C, Lavalle C, Magnocavallo M, Alfarano M, Mariani MV, Bernardini F, Della Rocca DG, Galardo G, Severino P, Di Lullo L, Miraldi F, Fedele F, Frustaci A
**Journal:** ESC Heart Fail (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ehf2.13694](https://doi.org/10.1002/ehf2.13694)

## Content

1. ESC Heart Fail. 2022 Feb;9(1):241-250. doi: 10.1002/ehf2.13694. Epub 2021 Dec 
16.

A proposed strategy for anticoagulation therapy in noncompaction cardiomyopathy.

Chimenti C(1)(2), Lavalle C(1), Magnocavallo M(1), Alfarano M(1), Mariani MV(1), 
Bernardini F(1), Della Rocca DG(3), Galardo G(4), Severino P(1), Di Lullo L(5), 
Miraldi F(1), Fedele F(1), Frustaci A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical, Internal, Anesthesiologist and Cardiovascular 
Sciences, Sapienza University of Rome, Viale del Policlinico 155, Rome, 00161, 
Italy.
(2)Cellular and Molecular Cardiology Lab, IRCCS L. Spallanzani, Rome, Italy.
(3)Texas Cardiac Arrhythmia Institute, St. David's Medical Center, Austin, TX, 
USA.
(4)Medical Emergency Unit, Sapienza University of Rome, Policlinico Umberto I, 
Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Nephrology and Dialysis, Parodi-Delfino Hospital, Colleferro, 
Italy.

Noncompaction cardiomyopathy (NCCM) is a rare condition characterized by 
prominent trabeculae, deep intertrabecular recesses, and a left ventricular 
myocardium with a two-layered structure, characterized by a spongy endocardial 
layer and a thinner and compacted epicardial one. NCCM can be isolated or 
associated with other congenital heart diseases and complex syndromes involving 
neuromuscular disorders and facial dysmorphisms. To date, more than 40 genes 
coding for sarcomeric, cytoskeletal, ion channels, and desmosomal proteins have 
been identified. Clinical presentation is also highly variable, ranging from no 
symptoms to end-stage heart failure (HF), lethal arrhythmias, sudden cardiac 
death, or thromboembolic events. In particular, the prevalence of 
thromboembolism in NCCM patients appears to be higher than that of a similar, 
age-matched population without NCCM. Thromboembolism has a multifactorial 
aetiology, which is linked to genetic, as well as traditional cardiovascular 
risk factors. In previous studies, atrial fibrillation (AF) was observed in 
approximately 25-30% of adult NCCM patients and embolism had a cardiac source in 
~63-69% of cases; therefore, AF represents a strong predictor of adverse events, 
especially if associated to HF and neuromuscular disorders. Left ventricular 
dysfunction is another risk factor for thromboembolism, as a result of blood 
stagnation and local myocardial injury. Moreover, it is not completely clarified 
if the presence of deep intertrabecular recesses causing stagnant blood flow can 
constitute per se a thrombogenic substrate even in absence of ventricular 
dysfunction. For the clinical management of NCCM patients, an appropriate 
stratification of the thromboembolic risk is of utmost importance for a timely 
initiation of anticoagulant therapy. The aim of the present study is to review 
the available literature on NCCM with particular attention on thromboembolic 
risk stratification and prevention and the current evidence for oral 
anticoagulation therapy. The use of direct oral anticoagulants vs. vitamin K 
antagonists is also discussed with important implications for patient treatment 
and prognosis.

© 2021 The Authors. ESC Heart Failure published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on 
behalf of European Society of Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1002/ehf2.13694
PMCID: PMC8788052
PMID: 34918480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Nothing to disclose.