---
reference_id: "PMID:19933170"
title: "Drosophila models of peroxisomal biogenesis disorder: peroxins are required for spermatogenesis and very-long-chain fatty acid metabolism."
authors:
- Chen H
- Liu Z
- Huang X
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp518
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Drosophila models of peroxisomal biogenesis disorder: peroxins are required for spermatogenesis and very-long-chain fatty acid metabolism.
**Authors:** Chen H, Liu Z, Huang X
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddp518](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddp518)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Feb 1;19(3):494-505. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp518. Epub 2009
Nov  17.

Drosophila models of peroxisomal biogenesis disorder: peroxins are required for 
spermatogenesis and very-long-chain fatty acid metabolism.

Chen H(1), Liu Z, Huang X.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics and 
Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Peroxisomes are vital eukaryotic organelles that participate in lipid 
metabolism, in particular the metabolism of very-long-chain fatty acids (VLCFA). 
The biogenesis of peroxisomes is regulated by a set of peroxin proteins (PEX). 
In humans, mutations affecting peroxin protein production or function result in 
devastating diseases classified as peroxisome biogenesis disorders (PBD). The 
way in which peroxisomal dysfunction leads to the pathophysiological 
consequences of PBD is not well understood. Here we report that Drosophila pex 
mutants faithfully recapitulate several key features of human PBD, including 
impaired peroxisomal protein import, elevated VLCFA levels and growth 
retardation. Moreover, disruption of pex function results in spermatogenesis 
defects, including spermatocyte cytokinesis failure in Drosophila. Importantly, 
increased VLCFA levels enhance these spermatogenesis defects whereas reduced 
VLCFA levels alleviate them. Thus, regulation of proper VLCFA levels by pex 
genes is crucial for spermatogenesis. Together our study reveals an 
indispensable function of pex genes during spermatogenesis and provides a 
causative link between the phenotypic severity of pex mutants and VLCFA levels.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddp518
PMID: 19933170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]