---
reference_id: "PMID:28132835"
title: Recent Zika Virus Isolates Induce Premature Differentiation of Neural Progenitors in Human Brain Organoids.
authors:
- Gabriel E
- Ramani A
- Karow U
- Gottardo M
- Natarajan K
- Gooi LM
- Goranci-Buzhala G
- Krut O
- Peters F
- Nikolic M
- Kuivanen S
- Korhonen E
- Smura T
- Vapalahti O
- Papantonis A
- Schmidt-Chanasit J
- Riparbelli M
- Callaini G
- Krönke M
- Utermöhlen O
- Gopalakrishnan J
journal: Cell Stem Cell
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2016.12.005
keywords:
- Brain/pathology
- Cell Differentiation
- Centrosome/metabolism
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/cytology
- Mitosis
- "Neural Stem Cells/pathology, ultrastructure, virology"
- Organoids/pathology
- "Zika Virus/isolation & purification, physiology, ultrastructure"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent Zika Virus Isolates Induce Premature Differentiation of Neural Progenitors in Human Brain Organoids.
**Authors:** Gabriel E, Ramani A, Karow U, Gottardo M, Natarajan K, Gooi LM, Goranci-Buzhala G, Krut O, Peters F, Nikolic M, Kuivanen S, Korhonen E, Smura T, Vapalahti O, Papantonis A, Schmidt-Chanasit J, Riparbelli M, Callaini G, Krönke M, Utermöhlen O, Gopalakrishnan J
**Journal:** Cell Stem Cell (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.stem.2016.12.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2016.12.005)

## Content

1. Cell Stem Cell. 2017 Mar 2;20(3):397-406.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2016.12.005.
Epub 2017 Jan 26.

Recent Zika Virus Isolates Induce Premature Differentiation of Neural
Progenitors in Human Brain Organoids.

Gabriel E(1), Ramani A(1), Karow U(2), Gottardo M(3), Natarajan K(1), Gooi
LM(1), Goranci-Buzhala G(1), Krut O(2), Peters F(4), Nikolic M(5), Kuivanen
S(6), Korhonen E(6), Smura T(6), Vapalahti O(7), Papantonis A(5),
Schmidt-Chanasit J(8), Riparbelli M(3), Callaini G(3), Krönke M(9), Utermöhlen
O(10), Gopalakrishnan J(11).

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine and Institute of Biochemistry I of the
University of Cologne, Cologne 50931, Germany.
(2)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Immunology, and Hygiene, University of
Cologne, Cologne 50935, Germany.
(3)Department of Life Sciences, University of Siena, Siena 53100, Italy.
(4)Department of Dermatology, University of Cologne, Cologne 50931, Germany.
(5)Center for Molecular Medicine of the University of Cologne, Cologne 50931,
Germany.
(6)Department of Virology, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki 00029,
Finland.
(7)Department of Virology, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki 00029,
Finland; Department of Veterinary Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki
00029, Finland.
(8)Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, Hamburg 20359, Germany;
German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Bonn-Cologne, Cologne 50935,
Germany.
(9)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Immunology, and Hygiene, University of
Cologne, Cologne 50935, Germany; Center for Molecular Medicine of the University
of Cologne, Cologne 50931, Germany; German Center for Infection Research (DZIF),
Bonn-Cologne, Cologne 50935, Germany; CECAD, Cologne, Germany.
(10)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Immunology, and Hygiene, University of
Cologne, Cologne 50935, Germany; Center for Molecular Medicine of the University
of Cologne, Cologne 50931, Germany.
(11)Center for Molecular Medicine and Institute of Biochemistry I of the
University of Cologne, Cologne 50931, Germany. Electronic address:
jay.gopalakrishnan@uni-koeln.de.

The recent Zika virus (ZIKV) epidemic is associated with microcephaly in
newborns. Although the connection between ZIKV and neurodevelopmental defects is
widely recognized, the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. Here we show
that two recently isolated strains of ZIKV, an American strain from an infected
fetal brain (FB-GWUH-2016) and a closely-related Asian strain (H/PF/2013),
productively infect human iPSC-derived brain organoids. Both of these strains
readily target to and replicate in proliferating ventricular zone (VZ) apical
progenitors. The main phenotypic effect was premature differentiation of neural
progenitors associated with centrosome perturbation, even during early stages of
infection, leading to progenitor depletion, disruption of the VZ, impaired
neurogenesis, and cortical thinning. The infection pattern and cellular outcome
differ from those seen with the extensively passaged ZIKV strain MR766. The
structural changes we see after infection with these more recently isolated
viral strains closely resemble those seen in ZIKV-associated microcephaly.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.stem.2016.12.005
PMID: 28132835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
