---
reference_id: "PMID:12773293"
title: "Epilepsy and hypothalamic hamartoma: look at the hand Pallister-Hall syndrome."
authors:
- Kremer S
- Minotti L
- Thiriaux A
- Grand S
- Satre V
- Le Bas JF
- Kahane P
journal: Epileptic Disord
year: '2003'
keywords:
- Adult
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 7/genetics"
- "Epilepsy/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Female
- Hamartoma/physiopathology
- Humans
- "Hypothalamic Diseases/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/complications, diagnostic imaging"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Pedigree
- Radiography
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epilepsy and hypothalamic hamartoma: look at the hand Pallister-Hall syndrome.
**Authors:** Kremer S, Minotti L, Thiriaux A, Grand S, Satre V, Le Bas JF, Kahane P
**Journal:** Epileptic Disord (2003)

## Content

1. Epileptic Disord. 2003 Mar;5(1):27-30.

Epilepsy and hypothalamic hamartoma: look at the hand Pallister-Hall syndrome.

Kremer S(1), Minotti L, Thiriaux A, Grand S, Satre V, Le Bas JF, Kahane P.

Author information:
(1)Magnetic Resonance Imaging Unit, Michallon University Hospital, Grenoble, 
France.

We report the case of a 29-year-old patient, who suffered from drug resistant 
laughing seizures since childhood. The clinical examination was normal, except 
for sequelae of hand and feet surgery during infancy for post-axial polydactyly. 
Cerebral MRI showed a hypothalamic hamartoma. The association of complex limb 
abnormalities with hypothalamic hamartoma lead to the diagnosis of 
Pallister-Hall syndrome. This syndrome is related to a mutation of gene GLI3, 
located on chromosome 7p13, and its inheritance is autosomal dominant. In the 
case of laughing seizures, a cerebral MRI should be performed to look for a 
hypothalamic hamartoma. The observation of such lesions indicates the necessity 
of standard radiographies of the hands and feet, to search for associated 
abnormalities. These findings might help to recognize a Pallister-Hall syndrome, 
thus allowing genetic counseling.

PMID: 12773293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]