---
reference_id: "PMID:22609003"
title: Tobacco and other environmental risk factors in rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Ruiz-Esquide V
- Sanmartí R
journal: Reumatol Clin
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.reuma.2012.02.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tobacco and other environmental risk factors in rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Ruiz-Esquide V, Sanmartí R
**Journal:** Reumatol Clin (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.reuma.2012.02.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.reuma.2012.02.011)

## Content

1. Reumatol Clin. 2012 Nov-Dec;8(6):342-50. doi: 10.1016/j.reuma.2012.02.011.
Epub  2012 May 17.

Tobacco and other environmental risk factors in rheumatoid arthritis.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Ruiz-Esquide V(1), Sanmartí R.

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Artritis, Servicio de Reumatologia, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, España. vruizesquide@yahoo.com

Many environmental factors have been associated with an increased risk of 
developing Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA), but so far smoking is the only 
environmental risk factor that has been extensively studied and widely accepted. 
Smoking is associated with an increased risk of developing seropositive RA (RF 
and/or ACPA). Recent studies show that tobacco smoking can influence disease 
phenotype, with the development of more aggressive disease and greater joint 
damage; but other studies show contradictory results. Recent data suggests that 
response to antirheumatic therapy in RA is worse in smokers. In this article we 
review different environmental factors that have been associated with an 
increased risk of developing RA, with a special interest in tobacco smoking.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier España, S.L. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.reuma.2012.02.011
PMID: 22609003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]