---
reference_id: "PMID:32603654"
title: Molecular Pathways of Colon Inflammation Induced by Cancer Immunotherapy.
authors:
- Luoma AM
- Suo S
- Williams HL
- Sharova T
- Sullivan K
- Manos M
- Bowling P
- Hodi FS
- Rahma O
- Sullivan RJ
- Boland GM
- Nowak JA
- Dougan SK
- Dougan M
- Yuan GC
- Wucherpfennig KW
journal: Cell
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.06.001
keywords:
- "CD4-Positive T-Lymphocytes/cytology, metabolism, pathology"
- "CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes/cytology, metabolism, pathology"
- "CTLA-4 Antigen/immunology, metabolism"
- Chemokines/metabolism
- "Colitis/drug therapy, genetics, immunology, metabolism"
- Cytokines/metabolism
- Flow Cytometry
- "Gene Expression Regulation/genetics, immunology"
- Humans
- Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors/adverse effects
- Immunotherapy/adverse effects
- "Inflammation/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- "Melanoma/genetics, immunology, metabolism"
- Multigene Family
- "Myeloid Cells/cytology, metabolism"
- RNA-Seq
- "Receptors, Antigen, T-Cell/genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptors, CXCR3/genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptors, CXCR6/genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptors, Chemokine/genetics, metabolism"
- Single-Cell Analysis
- "T-Lymphocytes, Regulatory/cytology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Pathways of Colon Inflammation Induced by Cancer Immunotherapy.
**Authors:** Luoma AM, Suo S, Williams HL, Sharova T, Sullivan K, Manos M, Bowling P, Hodi FS, Rahma O, Sullivan RJ, Boland GM, Nowak JA, Dougan SK, Dougan M, Yuan GC, Wucherpfennig KW
**Journal:** Cell (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2020.06.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.06.001)

## Content

1. Cell. 2020 Aug 6;182(3):655-671.e22. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.06.001. Epub
2020  Jun 29.

Molecular Pathways of Colon Inflammation Induced by Cancer Immunotherapy.

Luoma AM(1), Suo S(2), Williams HL(3), Sharova T(4), Sullivan K(5), Manos M(6),
Bowling P(6), Hodi FS(6), Rahma O(7), Sullivan RJ(8), Boland GM(4), Nowak JA(9),
Dougan SK(1), Dougan M(10), Yuan GC(2), Wucherpfennig KW(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and Virology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA 02215, USA; Department of Immunology, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA 02115, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Boston, MA
02215, USA.
(4)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA 02114, USA; Department of Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA
02114, USA.
(5)Division of Gastroenterology and Department of Medicine, Massachusetts
General Hospital, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(6)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Boston, MA
02215, USA; Center for Immuno-oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(7)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Boston, MA
02215, USA; Brigham and Women's Hospital and Dana-Farber/Harvard Cancer Center,
Boston, MA, USA.
(8)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA, USA.
(9)Department of Pathology, Brigham & Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(10)Division of Gastroenterology and Department of Medicine, Massachusetts
General Hospital, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA. Electronic
address: mldougan@partners.org.
(11)Department of Cancer Immunology and Virology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA 02215, USA; Department of Immunology, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA 02115, USA; Department of Neurology, Brigham & Women's Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address:
kai_wucherpfennig@dfci.harvard.edu.

Checkpoint blockade with antibodies specific for the PD-1 and CTLA-4 inhibitory
receptors can induce durable responses in a wide range of human cancers.
However, the immunological mechanisms responsible for severe inflammatory side
effects remain poorly understood. Here we report a comprehensive single-cell
analysis of immune cell populations in colitis, a common and severe side effect
of checkpoint blockade. We observed a striking accumulation of CD8 T cells with
highly cytotoxic and proliferative states and no evidence of regulatory T cell
depletion. T cell receptor (TCR) sequence analysis demonstrated that a
substantial fraction of colitis-associated CD8 T cells originated from
tissue-resident populations, explaining the frequently early onset of colitis
symptoms following treatment initiation. Our analysis also identified cytokines,
chemokines, and surface receptors that could serve as therapeutic targets for
colitis and potentially other inflammatory side effects of checkpoint blockade.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.06.001
PMCID: PMC7415717
PMID: 32603654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests K.W.W. serves on the
scientific advisory board of TCR2 Therapeutics, T-Scan Therapeutics, and
Nextechinvest and receives sponsored research funding from Novartis. He is a
scientific co-founder of Immunitas Therapeutics. M.D. receives research funding
from Novartis and is on the Scientific Advisory Board for Neoleukin
Therapeutics. S.K.D. receives research funding from Novartis, Bristol-Myers
Squibb, and Eli Lilly. F.S.H. receives research funding from Bristol-Myers
Squibb and Novartis; he also consults for Merck, EMD Serono, Novartis, Takeda,
Genentech/Roche, Compass Therapeutics, Apricity, Aduro, Sanofi, Pionyr, 7 Hills
Pharma, Verastem, Torque, Rheos Kairos, Psioxus Therapeutics, Amgen, and Pieris
Pharmaceutical. O.R. receives research support from Merck and is a speaker for
activities supported by educational grants from BMS and Merck. He is a
consultant for Merck, Celgene, Five Prime, GSK, GFK, Bayer, Roche/Genentech,
Puretech, Imvax, and Sobi. In addition, he has patent “Methods of using
pembrolizumab and trebananib” pending. J.A.N. has a provisional patent
application for spatial quantification of immune cell infiltration in the tumor
microenvironment. R.J.S. has received research funding from Merck and Amgen.
