---
reference_id: "PMID:36792346"
title: "Pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus: risks, mechanisms and therapeutic targets."
authors:
- Crow MK
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/ard-2022-223741
keywords:
- Humans
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/drug therapy, genetics"
- Autoantibodies
- Interferon Type I/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus: risks, mechanisms and therapeutic targets.
**Authors:** Crow MK
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/ard-2022-223741](https://doi.org/10.1136/ard-2022-223741)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2023 Aug;82(8):999-1014. doi: 10.1136/ard-2022-223741. Epub
2023  Feb 15.

Pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus: risks, mechanisms and therapeutic
targets.

Crow MK(1).

Author information:
(1)Mary Kirkland Center for Lupus Research, Hospital for Special Surgery, New
York, New York, USA crowm@hss.edu.

Research elucidating the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) has
defined two critical families of mediators, type I interferon (IFN-I) and
autoantibodies targeting nucleic acids and nucleic acid-binding proteins, as
fundamental contributors to the disease. On the fertile background of
significant genetic risk, a triggering stimulus, perhaps microbial, induces
IFN-I, autoantibody production or most likely both. When innate and adaptive
immune system cells are engaged and collaborate in the autoimmune response,
clinical SLE can develop. This review describes recent data from genetic
analyses of patients with SLE, along with current studies of innate and adaptive
immune function that contribute to sustained IFN-I pathway activation, immune
activation and autoantibody production, generation of inflammatory mediators and
tissue damage. The goal of these studies is to understand disease mechanisms,
identify therapeutic targets and stimulate development of therapeutics that can
achieve improved outcomes for patients.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. No commercial re-use. See rights and
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/ard-2022-223741
PMID: 36792346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: MKC is an associate editor
of Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases. She has consulting relationships with AMPEL
BioSolutions, Astra Zeneca, Bristol Myers Squibb, Glaxo Smith Kline and Lilly,
and holds a research grant from Gilead Sciences.
