---
reference_id: "PMID:33369099"
title: Cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome caused by the homozygous pathogenic variant Gly47Arg in ERCC2.
authors:
- Reunert J
- van den Heuvel A
- Rust S
- Marquardt T
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62048
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Cockayne Syndrome/genetics
- Consanguinity
- Cryptorchidism/genetics
- Cytomegalovirus Infections/complications
- Developmental Disabilities/genetics
- Disease Susceptibility
- Fatal Outcome
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Liver Cirrhosis/genetics
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Point Mutation
- Psychomotor Disorders/genetics
- Syndrome
- "Xeroderma Pigmentosum Group D Protein/deficiency, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome caused by the homozygous pathogenic variant Gly47Arg in ERCC2.
**Authors:** Reunert J, van den Heuvel A, Rust S, Marquardt T
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.62048](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.62048)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2021 Mar;185(3):930-936. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62048. Epub
2020  Dec 27.

Cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome caused by the homozygous pathogenic 
variant Gly47Arg in ERCC2.

Reunert J(1), van den Heuvel A(1), Rust S(1), Marquardt T(1).

Author information:
(1)Universitätsklinikum Münster, Klinik für Kinder und Jugendmedizin, Münster, 
Germany.

DNA damage repair is a pivotal mechanism in life. The nucleotide excision repair 
pathway protects the cells against DNA damage and involves XPD, an ATP dependent 
helicase that is part of the multisubunit protein complex TFIIH. XPD is encoded 
by the excision repair cross-complementation group 2 gene (ERCC2). Only three 
patients with cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome (COFS), caused by mutations 
in ERCC2, have been published so far. This report describes a boy with the 
homozygous amino acid change p.Gly47Arg in XPD. He presented with profound 
microcephaly, psychomotor retardation, failure to thrive, cutaneous 
photosensitivity, a bilateral hearing deficit and optic atrophy, 
thrombocytopenia, and recurrent episodes of pneumonia. We report the first 
homozygous occurrence of the pathogenic variant Gly47Arg in the ERCC2 gene. 
Occurring homozygous, this variant was associated with COFS syndrome, leading to 
early death of the patient at the age of 21 months.

© 2020 The Authors. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62048
PMID: 33369099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]