---
reference_id: "PMID:32433447"
title: "Classic Hodgkin Lymphoma: A Nonclassic Presentation."
authors:
- Mattes M
- Steele A
- Chung J
- Alvarez E
journal: J Pediatr Hematol Oncol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1097/MPH.0000000000001825
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Classic Hodgkin Lymphoma: A Nonclassic Presentation.
**Authors:** Mattes M, Steele A, Chung J, Alvarez E
**Journal:** J Pediatr Hematol Oncol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MPH.0000000000001825](https://doi.org/10.1097/MPH.0000000000001825)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2021 Apr 1;43(3):114-115. doi: 
10.1097/MPH.0000000000001825.

Classic Hodgkin Lymphoma: A Nonclassic Presentation.

Mattes M(1), Steele A(2), Chung J(3), Alvarez E(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California Davis Medical Center.
(2)University of California Davis Medical Center.
(3)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, University of California Davis 
Medical Center, Sacramento, CA.

Hodgkin lymphoma classically presents as lymphadenopathy with contiguous spread 
with or without associated B symptoms including night sweats, weight loss, and 
fever. With timely diagnosis and treatment, this is a potentially curable 
disease. This report describes a unique case of Hodgkin lymphoma that presented 
with localized back pain without overt evidence of lymph node involvement. This 
nonclassic presentation offers a diagnostic challenge that emphasizes the 
importance of keeping a broad differential in an adolescent or young adult 
patient with lytic bone lesions.

Copyright © 2020 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MPH.0000000000001825
PMID: 32433447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.