---
reference_id: "PMID:28166253"
title: "Effects of a very high saturated fat diet on LDL particles in adults with atherogenic dyslipidemia: A randomized controlled trial."
authors:
- Chiu S
- Williams PT
- Krauss RM
journal: PLoS One
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0170664
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of a very high saturated fat diet on LDL particles in adults with atherogenic dyslipidemia: A randomized controlled trial.
**Authors:** Chiu S, Williams PT, Krauss RM
**Journal:** PLoS One (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0170664](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0170664)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2017 Feb 6;12(2):e0170664. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0170664. 
eCollection 2017.

Effects of a very high saturated fat diet on LDL particles in adults with 
atherogenic dyslipidemia: A randomized controlled trial.

Chiu S(1), Williams PT(1), Krauss RM(1).

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute, Oakland, California, United 
States of America.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have shown that increases in LDL-cholesterol 
resulting from substitution of dietary saturated fat for carbohydrate or 
unsaturated fat are due primarily to increases in large cholesterol-enriched 
LDL, with minimal changes in small, dense LDL particles and apolipoprotein B. 
However, individuals can differ by their LDL particle distribution, and it is 
possible that this may influence LDL subclass response.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to test whether the reported effects 
of saturated fat apply to individuals with atherogenic dyslipidemia as 
characterized by a preponderance of small LDL particles (LDL phenotype B).
METHODS: Fifty-three phenotype B men and postmenopausal women consumed a 
baseline diet (55%E carbohydrate, 15%E protein, 30%E fat, 8%E saturated fat) for 
3 weeks, after which they were randomized to either a moderate carbohydrate, 
very high saturated fat diet (HSF; 39%E carbohydrate, 25%E protein, 36%E fat, 
18%E saturated fat) or low saturated fat diet (LSF; 37%E carbohydrate, 25%E 
protein, 37%E fat, 9%E saturated fat) for 3 weeks.
RESULTS: Compared to the LSF diet, consumption of the HSF diet resulted in 
significantly greater increases from baseline (% change; 95% CI) in plasma 
concentrations of apolipoprotein B (HSF vs. LSF: 9.5; 3.6 to 15.7 vs. -6.8; 
-11.7 to -1.76; p = 0.0003) and medium (8.8; -1.3 to 20.0 vs. -7.3; -15.7 to 
2.0; p = 0.03), small (6.1; -10.3 to 25.6 vs. -20.8; -32.8 to -6.7; p = 0.02), 
and total LDL (3.6; -3.2 to 11.0 vs. -7.9; -13.9 to -1.5; p = 0.03) particles, 
with no differences in change of large and very small LDL concentrations. As 
expected, total-cholesterol (11.0; 6.5 to 15.7 vs. -5.7; -9.4 to -1.8; p<0.0001) 
and LDL-cholesterol (16.7; 7.9 to 26.2 vs. -8.7; -15.4 to -1.4; p = 0.0001) also 
increased with increased saturated fat intake.
CONCLUSIONS: Because medium and small LDL particles are more highly associated 
with cardiovascular disease than are larger LDL, the present results suggest 
that very high saturated fat intake may increase cardiovascular disease risk in 
phenotype B individuals. This trial was registered at clinicaltrials.gov 
(NCT00895141).
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinicaltrials.gov NCT00895141.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0170664
PMCID: PMC5293238
PMID: 28166253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: This study was funded by a commercial source, 
Dairy Management Inc.; however we declare that no competing interests exist, 
except that Dr. Krauss has also received research grant support from the Almond 
Board of California. This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on 
sharing data and materials.