---
reference_id: "PMID:30626509"
title: Special Considerations and Assessment in Patients with Multiple Sclerosis.
authors:
- Maitin IB
- Cruz E
journal: Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.pmr.2018.03.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Special Considerations and Assessment in Patients with Multiple Sclerosis.
**Authors:** Maitin IB, Cruz E
**Journal:** Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pmr.2018.03.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmr.2018.03.003)

## Content

1. Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am. 2018 Aug;29(3):473-481. doi: 
10.1016/j.pmr.2018.03.003. Epub 2018 May 8.

Special Considerations and Assessment in Patients with Multiple Sclerosis.

Maitin IB(1), Cruz E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Lewis Katz School of 
Medicine, Temple University, 3401 North Broad Street, Philadelphia, PA 19140, 
USA. Electronic address: Ian.Maitin@tuhs.temple.edu.
(2)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Lewis Katz School of 
Medicine, Temple University, 3401 North Broad Street, Philadelphia, PA 19140, 
USA.

Multiple sclerosis is a progressive autoimmune neurologic disorder that may 
affect any region of the central nervous system. Spasticity in patients with 
multiple sclerosis can be debilitating and detrimental to the function and 
quality of life of patients. Treatment options include oral medications, 
chemodenervation, physical therapy, and modalities. Cannabinoids in the form of 
a delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol/cannabidiol oro-mucosal spray has been shown to 
be effective in addressing spasticity in multiple sclerosis. Successful 
treatment of spasticity will be integrated, multimodal, and individualized.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pmr.2018.03.003
PMID: 30626509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]