---
reference_id: "PMID:38452174"
title: Differentially disrupted spinal cord and muscle energy metabolism in spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy.
authors:
- DeBartolo D
- Arnold FJ
- Liu Y
- Molotsky E
- Tang HY
- Merry DE
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.178048
keywords:
- Mice
- Animals
- "Bulbo-Spinal Atrophy, X-Linked/genetics, metabolism"
- NAD/metabolism
- Proteomics
- Muscles/metabolism
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Energy Metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differentially disrupted spinal cord and muscle energy metabolism in spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy.
**Authors:** DeBartolo D, Arnold FJ, Liu Y, Molotsky E, Tang HY, Merry DE
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.178048](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.178048)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2024 Mar 5;9(7):e178048. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.178048.

Differentially disrupted spinal cord and muscle energy metabolism in spinal and 
bulbar muscular atrophy.

DeBartolo D(1), Arnold FJ(1), Liu Y(1), Molotsky E(1), Tang HY(2), Merry DE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Sidney Kimmel Medical 
College, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Proteomics and Metabolomics Shared Resource, Molecular and Cellular 
Oncogenesis Program, The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Prior studies showed that polyglutamine-expanded androgen receptor (AR) is 
aberrantly acetylated and that deacetylation of the mutant AR by overexpression 
of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide-dependent (NAD+-dependent) sirtuin 1 is 
protective in cell models of spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA). Based on 
these observations and reduced NAD+ in muscles of SBMA mouse models, we tested 
the therapeutic potential of NAD+ restoration in vivo by treating 
postsymptomatic transgenic SBMA mice with the NAD+ precursor nicotinamide 
riboside (NR). NR supplementation failed to alter disease progression and had no 
effect on increasing NAD+ or ATP content in muscle, despite producing a modest 
increase of NAD+ in the spinal cords of SBMA mice. Metabolomic and proteomic 
profiles of SBMA quadriceps muscles indicated alterations in several important 
energy-related pathways that use NAD+, in addition to the NAD+ salvage pathway, 
which is critical for NAD+ regeneration for use in cellular energy production. 
We also observed decreased mRNA levels of nicotinamide riboside kinase 2 
(Nmrk2), which encodes a key kinase responsible for NR phosphorylation, allowing 
its use by the NAD+ salvage pathway. Together, these data suggest a model in 
which NAD+ levels are significantly decreased in muscles of an SBMA mouse model 
and intransigent to NR supplementation because of decreased levels of Nmrk2.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.178048
PMCID: PMC11128210
PMID: 38452174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]