---
reference_id: "PMID:32881470"
title: CHD4 Neurodevelopmental Disorder.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Weiss K
- Lachlan K
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CHD4 Neurodevelopmental Disorder.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Weiss K, Lachlan K

## Content

1. CHD4 Neurodevelopmental Disorder.

Weiss K(1), Lachlan K(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2020 Sep 3.

Author information:
(1)Genetics Institute Rambam Health Care Center; Ruth and Bruce Rappaport 
Faculty of Medicine Technion-Israel Institute of Technology Haifa, Israel
(2)Wessex Clinical Genetics Service University Hospital Southampton NHS Trust; 
Department of Human Genetics and Genomic Medicine Southampton University 
Southampton, United Kingdom

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: CHD4 neurodevelopmental disorder (CHD4-NDD) is 
associated with developmental delay, speech delay, and usually mild-to-moderate 
intellectual disability. Variability between individuals with CHD4-NDD is 
significant, and a few have normal intelligence. Other manifestations can 
include brain anomalies, heart defects, and skeletal abnormalities; less common 
features are hypogonadism in males, hearing impairment, and ophthalmic 
abnormalities. Most affected individuals have mild nonspecific dysmorphic facial 
features with or without macrocephaly.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of CHD4-NDD is established in a proband with 
suggestive findings and a heterozygous pathogenic variant in CHD4 identified by 
molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Developmental delay / intellectual 
disability, cervical spine instability and risk of spinal cord compression, 
refractive errors and strabismus, hearing impairment, congenital heart defects, 
behavioral issues, growth delay, hypogonadism in males, and renal anomalies are 
managed per standard care. Surveillance: Follow up of the common manifestations 
at each clinic visit. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Activities that involve 
rapid neck motion and/or possible trauma to the head and neck region (e.g., 
contact sports or thrill rides at amusement parks) because of the possible 
increased risk for cervical spine instability and spinal cord compression.
GENETIC COUNSELING: CHD4-NDD is an autosomal dominant disorder typically caused 
by a de novo pathogenic variant. If the CHD4 pathogenic variant identified in 
the proband is not identified in either parent, the risk to sibs is low (~1%) 
but greater than that of the general population because of the possibility of 
parental germline mosaicism. Once the CHD4 pathogenic variant has been 
identified in an affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic 
testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 32881470