---
reference_id: "PMID:27489925"
title: Woodhouse-Sakati Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Bohlega SA
- Abusrair A
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Woodhouse-Sakati Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Bohlega SA, Abusrair A

## Content

1. Woodhouse-Sakati Syndrome.

Bohlega SA(1), Abusrair A(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2016 Aug 4 [updated 2021 Jul 8].

Author information:
(1)Professor and Consultant, Department of Neurosciences King Faisal Specialist 
Hospital and Research Center Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
(2)Neurologist, Department of Neurosciences King Faisal Specialist Hospital and 
Research Center Riyadh, Saudi Arabia

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Virtually all individuals with Woodhouse-Sakati 
syndrome (WSS) have the endocrine findings of hypogonadism (evident at puberty) 
and progressive childhood-onset hair thinning that often progresses to alopecia 
totalis in adulthood. More than half of individuals have the neurologic findings 
of progressive extrapyramidal movements (dystonic spasms with dystonic posturing 
with dysarthria and dysphagia), moderate bilateral postlingual sensorineural 
hearing loss, and mild intellectual disability. To date, more than 40 families 
(including 33 with a molecularly confirmed diagnosis) with a total of 88 
affected individuals have been reported in the literature.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of WSS is established in a proband with 
suggestive clinical, neuroimaging, and neurophysiologic findings by 
identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in DCAF17 on molecular genetic 
testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment is symptomatic and should be 
managed by a multidisciplinary team. Hypogonadism requires hormone replacement 
therapy to induce secondary sex characteristics and promote bone health at the 
usual age of puberty. Alopecia is treated symptomatically for cosmetic reasons 
only. Treatment for dystonia is routine; oral medications are tried first and 
followed in some instances by botulinum toxin injection and/or deep-brain 
stimulation. Dysarthria often benefits from consultation with a speech 
therapist. Those with dysphagia often require measures to reduce oral 
secretions, use of thickened liquids and pureed foods to avoid aspiration, and 
eventually a gastrostomy to help maintain caloric intake. Standard treatment for 
diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, hearing loss, and intellectual disability. 
Surveillance: Monitoring for endocrine abnormalities is recommended at the 
following ages: hypogonadism beginning at age 12-14 years; diabetes mellitus and 
hypothyroidism beginning at age 20 years; serum IGF-1 every three to five years 
following diagnosis; annual neurologic assessment for dystonia; speech and 
language assessment for dysarthria and dysphagia as needed; annual developmental 
assessment throughout childhood; annual audiology evaluation. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Persons with dystonia should avoid situations in 
which the risk of falling is increased. Evaluation of relatives at risk: 
Molecular genetic testing for the DCAF17 pathogenic variants identified in the 
proband is appropriate for evaluation of apparently asymptomatic older and 
younger sibs to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from early 
identification and treatment of potential complications.
GENETIC COUNSELING: WSS is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. At 
conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being 
affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of 
being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the pathogenic DCAF17 variants have 
been identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk 
relatives, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk, and 
preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 27489925