---
reference_id: "PMID:17546031"
title: "Deficiency of PORCN, a regulator of Wnt signaling, is associated with focal dermal hypoplasia."
authors:
- Grzeschik KH
- Bornholdt D
- Oeffner F
- König A
- del Carmen Boente M
- Enders H
- Fritz B
- Hertl M
- Grasshoff U
- Höfling K
- Oji V
- Paradisi M
- Schuchardt C
- Szalai Z
- Tadini G
- Traupe H
- Happle R
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1038/ng2052
keywords:
- Acyltransferases
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Female
- "Focal Dermal Hypoplasia/enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Male
- "Membrane Proteins/deficiency, genetics"
- Middle Aged
- Pedigree
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- "Wnt Proteins/metabolism, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deficiency of PORCN, a regulator of Wnt signaling, is associated with focal dermal hypoplasia.
**Authors:** Grzeschik KH, Bornholdt D, Oeffner F, König A, del Carmen Boente M, Enders H, Fritz B, Hertl M, Grasshoff U, Höfling K, Oji V, Paradisi M, Schuchardt C, Szalai Z, Tadini G, Traupe H, Happle R
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng2052](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng2052)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2007 Jul;39(7):833-5. doi: 10.1038/ng2052. Epub 2007 Jun 3.

Deficiency of PORCN, a regulator of Wnt signaling, is associated with focal 
dermal hypoplasia.

Grzeschik KH(1), Bornholdt D, Oeffner F, König A, del Carmen Boente M, Enders H, 
Fritz B, Hertl M, Grasshoff U, Höfling K, Oji V, Paradisi M, Schuchardt C, 
Szalai Z, Tadini G, Traupe H, Happle R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Marburg, Bahnhofstr. 7, 35033 
Marburg, Germany. grzeschi@staff.uni-marburg.de

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2007 Jul;39(7):820-1. doi: 10.1038/ng0707-820.

Focal dermal hypoplasia (FDH) is an X-linked dominant multisystem birth defect 
affecting tissues of ectodermal and mesodermal origin. Using a stepwise approach 
of (i) genetic mapping of FDH, (ii) high-resolution comparative genome 
hybridization to seek deletions in candidate chromosome areas and (iii) point 
mutation analysis in candidate genes, we identified PORCN, encoding a putative 
O-acyltransferase and potentially crucial for cellular export of Wnt signaling 
proteins, as the gene mutated in FDH. The findings implicate FDH as a 
developmental disorder caused by a deficiency in PORCN.

DOI: 10.1038/ng2052
PMID: 17546031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]