---
reference_id: "PMID:36052111"
title: "Hereditary fructose intolerance: A comprehensive review."
authors:
- Singh SK
- Sarma MS
journal: World J Clin Pediatr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.5409/wjcp.v11.i4.321
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary fructose intolerance: A comprehensive review.
**Authors:** Singh SK, Sarma MS
**Journal:** World J Clin Pediatr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.5409/wjcp.v11.i4.321](https://doi.org/10.5409/wjcp.v11.i4.321)

## Content

1. World J Clin Pediatr. 2022 Jul 9;11(4):321-329. doi: 10.5409/wjcp.v11.i4.321.
eCollection 2022 Jul 9.

Hereditary fructose intolerance: A comprehensive review.

Singh SK(1), Sarma MS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Sri Aurobindo Medical College and PGI, Indore
453555, Madhya Pradesh, India.
(2)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate
Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow 226014, India. moinaksen@yahoo.com.

Hereditary fructose intolerance (HFI) is a rare autosomal recessive inherited
disorder that occurs due to the mutation of enzyme aldolase B located on
chromosome 9q22.3. A fructose load leads to the rapid accumulation of fructose
1-phosphate and manifests with its downstream effects. Most commonly children
are affected with gastrointestinal symptoms, feeding issues, aversion to sweets
and hypoglycemia. Liver manifestations include an asymptomatic increase of
transaminases, steatohepatitis and rarely liver failure. Renal involvement
usually occurs in the form of proximal renal tubular acidosis and may lead to
chronic renal insufficiency. For confirmation, a genetic test is favored over
the measurement of aldolase B activity in the liver biopsy specimen. The crux of
HFI management lies in the absolute avoidance of foods containing fructose,
sucrose, and sorbitol (FSS). There are many dilemmas regarding tolerance,
dietary restriction and occurrence of steatohepatitis. Patients with HFI who
adhere strictly to FSS free diet have an excellent prognosis with a normal
lifespan. This review attempts to increase awareness and provide a comprehensive
review of this rare but treatable disorder.

©The Author(s) 2022. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.5409/wjcp.v11.i4.321
PMCID: PMC9331401
PMID: 36052111

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All the authors
declare that they have no conflict of interest.
