---
reference_id: "PMID:31533758"
title: Ocular manifestations in Gorlin-Goltz syndrome.
authors:
- Moramarco A
- Himmelblau E
- Miraglia E
- Mallone F
- Roberti V
- Franzone F
- Iacovino C
- Giustini S
- Lambiase A
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-019-1190-6
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Basal Cell Nevus Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/genetics, pathology"
- "Cataract/genetics, pathology"
- "Coloboma/genetics, pathology"
- "Eye Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- "Hypertelorism/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Patched-1 Receptor/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ocular manifestations in Gorlin-Goltz syndrome.
**Authors:** Moramarco A, Himmelblau E, Miraglia E, Mallone F, Roberti V, Franzone F, Iacovino C, Giustini S, Lambiase A
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-019-1190-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-019-1190-6)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2019 Sep 18;14(1):218. doi: 10.1186/s13023-019-1190-6.

Ocular manifestations in Gorlin-Goltz syndrome.

Moramarco A(1), Himmelblau E(2), Miraglia E(3), Mallone F(4), Roberti V(3), 
Franzone F(4), Iacovino C(3), Giustini S(3), Lambiase A(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Sense Organs, Faculty of Medicine and Odontology, Sapienza 
University of Rome, Rome, Italy. antonietta.moramarco@uniroma1.it.
(2)Department of Sense Organs, Faculty of Medicine and Odontology, Sapienza 
University of Rome, Rome, Italy. himmelblau50@hotmail.com.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties, Unit of Dermatology, 
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Sense Organs, Faculty of Medicine and Odontology, Sapienza 
University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Gorlin-Goltz syndrome, also known as nevoid basal cell carcinoma 
syndrome, is a rare genetic disorder that is transmitted in an autosomal 
dominant manner with complete penetrance and variable expressivity. It is caused 
in 85% of the cases with a known etiology by pathogenic variants in the PTCH1 
gene, and is characterized by a wide range of developmental abnormalities and a 
predisposition to multiple neoplasms. The manifestations are multiple and 
systemic and consist of basal cell carcinomas in various regions, odontogenic 
keratocistic tumors and skeletal anomalies, to name the most frequent. Despite 
the scarce medical literature on the topic, ocular involvement in this syndrome 
is frequent and at the level of various ocular structures. Our study focuses on 
the visual apparatus and its annexes in subjects with this syndrome, in order to 
better understand how this syndrome affects the ocular system, and to evaluate 
with greater accuracy and precision the nature of these manifestations in this 
group of patients.
RESULTS: Our study confirms the presence of the commonly cited ocular findings 
in the general literature regarding the syndrome [hypertelorism (45.5%), 
congenital cataract (18%), nystagmus (9%), colobomas (9%)] and highlights 
strabismus (63% of the patients), epiretinal membranes (36%) and myelinated 
optic nerve fiber layers (36%) as the most frequent ophthalmological findings in 
this group of patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of characteristic and frequent ocular signs in the 
Gorlin- Goltz syndrome could help with the diagnostic process in subjects 
suspected of having the syndrome who do not yet have a diagnosis. The 
ophthalmologist has a role as part of a multidisciplinary team in managing these 
patients. The ophthalmological follow-up that these patients require, can allow, 
if necessary, a timely therapy that could improve the visual prognosis of such 
patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-019-1190-6
PMCID: PMC6749644
PMID: 31533758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.