---
reference_id: "PMID:32096036"
title: "Tau Interacting Proteins: Gaining Insight into the Roles of Tau in Health and Disease."
authors:
- Stancu IC
- Ferraiolo M
- Terwel D
- Dewachter I
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/978-981-32-9358-8_13
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tau Interacting Proteins: Gaining Insight into the Roles of Tau in Health and Disease.
**Authors:** Stancu IC, Ferraiolo M, Terwel D, Dewachter I
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-981-32-9358-8_13](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-32-9358-8_13)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2019;1184:145-166. doi: 10.1007/978-981-32-9358-8_13.

Tau Interacting Proteins: Gaining Insight into the Roles of Tau in Health and 
Disease.

Stancu IC(1), Ferraiolo M(2), Terwel D(1), Dewachter I(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)BIOMED, Alzheimer Research Group, Hasselt University, Hasselt, Belgium.
(2)Institute of Neuroscience, Catholic University of Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(3)BIOMED, Alzheimer Research Group, Hasselt University, Hasselt, Belgium. 
ilse.dewachter@uhasselt.be.
(4)Institute of Neuroscience, Catholic University of Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. 
ilse.dewachter@uhasselt.be.

Tau is most intensely studied in relation to its executive role in Tauopathies, 
a family of neurodegenerative disorders characterized by the accumulation of Tau 
aggregates [15, 21, 38, 75, 89, 111, 121, 135, 175, 176, 192]. Tau aggregation 
in the different Tauopathies differs in the affected cell type, the structure of 
aggregates and Tau isoform composition. However, in all Tauopathies, 
accumulation of pathological Tau in well-characterized and well-defined brain 
regions, correlates strongly with symptoms associated with the dysfunction of 
this brain region. Hence, symptoms of neurodegenerative Tauopathies can range 
from motoric to cognitive and behavioral symptoms, even extending to 
deterioration of vital functions when the disease progresses, or combinations of 
different symptoms governed by the affected brain regions. The most common 
Tauopathies are corticobasal degeneration (CBD), Pick's disease, progressive 
supranuclear palsy (PSP) and frontotemporal dementias with parkinsonism linked 
to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17). However a growing number of diseases are 
characterized by Tau aggregation amounting to a large family of more than 20 
disorders [176]. Most Tauopathies are sporadic, and are hence linked to a 
combination of environmental and genetic risk factors. However, mutations in 
MAPT have been identified which are autosomal dominantly linked to Tauopathies, 
including FTDP, PSP and CBD [94, 163, 185] (Alzforum, 
https://www.alzforum.org/mutations/mapt ). More than 80 mutations have been 
identified in MAPT, both in intronic and exonic regions of the human MAPT. These 
mutations can be classified as missense mutations or splicing mutations. Most 
missense mutations cluster in or near the microtubule binding site of Tau, while 
most splicing mutations affect the splicing of exon 10 (encoding the R2 domain), 
and hence affect the 3R/4R ratio. While Alzheimer's disease (AD), is the most 
prevalent Tauopathy, no mutations in MAPT associated with AD have been 
identified. Brains of AD patients are pathologically characterized by the 
combined presence of amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles [171]. Familial 
forms of AD, termed early onset familial AD (EOFAD) with clinical mutations in 
APP or PS1/2, have an early onset, and are invariably characterized by the 
combined presence of amyloid and Tau pathology [24, 80, 170]. These EOFAD cases, 
identify a causal link between APP/PS1 misprocessing and the development of Tau 
pathology and neurodegeneration [80, 170]. Furthermore, combined genetic, 
pathological, biomarker and in vivo modelling data, indicate that amyloid 
pathology precedes Tau pathology, and support a role for Aβ as initiator and Tau 
as executor in the pathogenetic process of AD [80, 96, 97]. Hence, AD is often 
considered as a secondary Tauopathy (similar as for Down syndrome patients), in 
contrast to the primary Tauopathies described above. Tau aggregates in 
Tauopathies vary with respect to the ratio of different Tau isoforms (3R/4R), to 
the cell types displaying Tau aggregation and the structure of the aggregates. 
However, in all Tauopathies a strong correlation between progressive development 
of pathological Tau accumulation and the loss of the respective brain functions 
is observed.

DOI: 10.1007/978-981-32-9358-8_13
PMID: 32096036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]