---
reference_id: "PMID:38321374"
title: Construction and evaluation of immune-related diagnostic model in patients with heart failure caused by idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Xu S
- Wu Z
- Chen H
journal: BMC Cardiovasc Disord
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12872-023-03666-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Construction and evaluation of immune-related diagnostic model in patients with heart failure caused by idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Xu S, Wu Z, Chen H
**Journal:** BMC Cardiovasc Disord (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12872-023-03666-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12872-023-03666-1)

## Content

1. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2024 Feb 6;24(1):92. doi: 10.1186/s12872-023-03666-1.

Construction and evaluation of immune-related diagnostic model in patients with 
heart failure caused by idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy.

Xu S(#)(1)(2), Wu Z(#)(3), Chen H(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, The Central Hospital of Wuhan, Tong Ji Medical 
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430014, China.
(2)Key Laboratory for Molecular Diagnosis of Hubei Province, The Central 
Hospital of Wuhan, Tong Ji Medica College, Huazhong University of Science and 
Technology, Wuhan, 430014, China.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Xiangyang No.1 People's Hospital, Hubei University 
of Medicine, Xiangyang, Hubei, China.
(4)Emergency Center, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430071, 
Hubei, China. chenhaihua@whu.edu.cn.
(5)Hubei Clinical Research Center for Emergency and Resuscitation, Zhongnan 
Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430071, Hubei, China. 
chenhaihua@whu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of the study was to construct the potential diagnostic 
model of immune-related genes during the development of heart failure caused by 
idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy.
METHOD: GSE5406 and GSE57338 were downloaded from the GEO website ( 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/ ). CIBERSORT was used for the evaluation of 
immune infiltration in idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) of GSE5406. 
Differently expressed genes were calculated by the limma R package and 
visualized by the volcano plot. The immune-related genes were downloaded from 
Immport, TISIDB, and InnateDB. Then the immune-related differential genes 
(IRDGs) were acquired from the intersection. Protein-protein interaction network 
(PPI) and Cytoscape were used to visualize the hub genes. Three machine learning 
methods such as random forest, logical regression, and elastic network 
regression model were adopted to construct the prediction model. The diagnostic 
value was also validated in GSE57338.
RESULTS: Our study demonstrated the obvious different ratio of T cell CD4 memory 
activated, T cell regulatory Tregs, and neutrophils between DCM and control 
donors. As many as 2139 differential genes and 274 immune-related different 
genes were identified. These genes were mainly enriched in lipid and 
atherosclerosis, human cytomegalovirus infection, and cytokine-cytokine receptor 
interaction. At the same time, as many as fifteen hub genes were identified as 
the IRDGs (IFITM3, IFITM2, IFITM1, IFIT3, IFIT1, HLA-A, HLA-B, HLA-C, ADAR, 
STAT1, SAMHD1, RSAD2, MX1, ISG20, IRF2). Moreover, we also discovered that the 
elastic network and logistic regression models had a higher diagnostic value 
than that of random forest models based on these hub genes.
CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrated the pivotal role of immune function during 
the development of heart failure caused by DCM. This study may offer new 
opportunities for the detection and intervention of immune-related DCM.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12872-023-03666-1
PMCID: PMC10845749
PMID: 38321374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.