---
reference_id: "PMID:38636927"
title: Leukocyte Ig-like receptor B4 (Lilrb4a) alleviates cardiac dysfunction and isoproterenol-induced arrhythmogenic remodeling associated with cardiac fibrosis and inflammation.
authors:
- Fu H
- Kong B
- Shuai W
- Zhu J
- Wang X
- Tang Y
- Huang H
- Huang C
journal: Heart Rhythm
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2024.04.062
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Leukocyte Ig-like receptor B4 (Lilrb4a) alleviates cardiac dysfunction and isoproterenol-induced arrhythmogenic remodeling associated with cardiac fibrosis and inflammation.
**Authors:** Fu H, Kong B, Shuai W, Zhu J, Wang X, Tang Y, Huang H, Huang C
**Journal:** Heart Rhythm (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hrthm.2024.04.062](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hrthm.2024.04.062)

## Content

1. Heart Rhythm. 2024 Oct;21(10):1998-2009. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2024.04.062.
Epub  2024 Apr 16.

Leukocyte Ig-like receptor B4 (Lilrb4a) alleviates cardiac dysfunction and 
isoproterenol-induced arrhythmogenic remodeling associated with cardiac fibrosis 
and inflammation.

Fu H(1), Kong B(1), Shuai W(1), Zhu J(1), Wang X(1), Tang Y(1), Huang H(1), 
Huang C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China; 
Cardiovascular Research Institute, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China; Hubei Key 
Laboratory of Cardiology, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China; 
Cardiovascular Research Institute, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China; Hubei Key 
Laboratory of Cardiology, Wuhan, China. Electronic address: 
huangcongxin@vip.163.com.

BACKGROUND: Heart failure is usually accompanied by activation of the 
sympathetic nerve, and excessive activation of the sympathetic nerve promotes 
cardiac remodeling and cardiac dysfunction. In the isoproterenol (ISO)-induced 
animal model, it is often accompanied by myocardial hypertrophy, fibrosis, and 
inflammation. Leukocyte immunoglobulin-like receptor B4a (Lilrb4a), an 
immunosuppressive regulatory receptor, plays a vital role in cardiovascular 
disease. However, the effect of Lilrb4a on ventricular arrhythmia in an 
ISO-induced mouse model remains unclear.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to explore the role and molecular 
mechanism of Lilrb4a in ISO-induced arrhythmogenic remodeling.
METHODS: Lilrb4a knockout mice and Lilrb4a overexpression mice were infused with 
ISO (15 mg/kg per 24 hours, 4 weeks). Echocardiography and histology evaluations 
of myocardial hypertrophy and cardiac structural remodeling were conducted. 
Surface electrocardiography and electrophysiologic examination were used to 
evaluate cardiac electrical remodeling and susceptibility to ventricular 
arrhythmias. Quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction 
analysis and Western blotting were used to detect the expression levels of ion 
channel proteins and signal pathway proteins.
RESULTS: The results discovered that ISO induced cardiac hypertrophy, fibrosis, 
and inflammation and led to electrical remodeling and the occurrence of 
ventricular arrhythmias. Lilrb4a alleviated cardiac structural and electrical 
remodeling and protected against the occurrence of ventricular arrhythmias in 
ISO-induced mice by gain-of-function or loss-of-function approaches. The 
mechanism is that Lilrb4a inhibited NF-κB signaling and MAPK signaling 
activation mediated by transforming growth factor kinase 1.
CONCLUSION: Lilrb4a alleviates cardiac dysfunction and ISO-induced 
arrhythmogenic remodeling associated with cardiac fibrosis and inflammation 
through the regulation of NF-κB signaling and MAPK signaling activation.

Copyright © 2024 Heart Rhythm Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2024.04.062
PMID: 38636927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures The authors have no conflicts of 
interest to disclose.