---
reference_id: "PMID:32917212"
title: A case of Myhre syndrome mimicking juvenile scleroderma.
authors:
- Jensen B
- James R
- Hong Y
- Omoyinmi E
- Pilkington C
- Sebire NJ
- Howell KJ
- Brogan PA
- Eleftheriou D
journal: Pediatr Rheumatol Online J
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1186/s12969-020-00466-1
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Cryptorchidism/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Facies
- Female
- "Growth Disorders/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Microscopic Angioscopy
- "Scleroderma, Localized/diagnosis"
- "Scleroderma, Systemic/diagnosis"
- Skin/pathology
- Smad4 Protein/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case of Myhre syndrome mimicking juvenile scleroderma.
**Authors:** Jensen B, James R, Hong Y, Omoyinmi E, Pilkington C, Sebire NJ, Howell KJ, Brogan PA, Eleftheriou D
**Journal:** Pediatr Rheumatol Online J (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12969-020-00466-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12969-020-00466-1)

## Content

1. Pediatr Rheumatol Online J. 2020 Sep 11;18(1):72. doi: 
10.1186/s12969-020-00466-1.

A case of Myhre syndrome mimicking juvenile scleroderma.

Jensen B(1), James R(2), Hong Y(3), Omoyinmi E(3), Pilkington C(4), Sebire 
NJ(5), Howell KJ(6), Brogan PA(3)(4), Eleftheriou D(3)(4)(7).

Author information:
(1)Infection, Immunity and Inflammation Research and Teaching Department, UCL 
Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street, London, WC1N 
1EH, UK. barbara.jensen@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Paediatric Rheumatology Department, Queensland Children's Hospital, Brisbane, 
Australia.
(3)Infection, Immunity and Inflammation Research and Teaching Department, UCL 
Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street, London, WC1N 
1EH, UK.
(4)Paediatric Rheumatology Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children 
NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(5)Histopathology Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(6)Microvascular Diagnostics, UCL Institute of Immunity and Transplantation, 
Royal Free Hospital, London, UK.
(7)Centre for Adolescent Rheumatology Versus Arthritis at UCL, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Myhre syndrome is a genetic disorder caused by gain of function 
mutations in the SMAD Family Member 4 (SMAD4) gene, resulting in progressive, 
proliferative skin and organ fibrosis. Skin thickening and joint contractures 
are often the main presenting features of the disease and may be mistaken for 
juvenile scleroderma.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report a case of a 13 year-old female presenting with 
widespread skin thickening and joint contractures from infancy. She was 
diagnosed with diffuse cutaneous systemic sclerosis, and treatment with 
corticosteroids and subcutaneous methotrexate recommended. There was however 
disease progression prompting genetic testing. This identified a rare 
heterozygous pathogenic variant c.1499 T > C (p.Ile500Thr) in the SMAD4 gene, 
suggesting a diagnosis of Myhre syndrome. Securing a molecular diagnosis in this 
case allowed the cessation of immunosuppression, thus reducing the burden of 
unnecessary and potentially harmful treatment, and allowing genetic counselling.
CONCLUSION: Myhre Syndrome is a rare genetic mimic of scleroderma that should be 
considered alongside several other monogenic diseases presenting with 
pathological fibrosis from early in life. We highlight this case to provide an 
overview of these genetic mimics of scleroderma, and highlight the molecular 
pathways that can lead to pathological fibrosis. This may provide clues to the 
pathogenesis of sporadic juvenile scleroderma, and could suggest novel 
therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.1186/s12969-020-00466-1
PMCID: PMC7488857
PMID: 32917212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.