---
reference_id: "PMID:37770335"
title: "Detection and subtyping of hepatic echinococcosis from plain CT images with deep learning: a retrospective, multicentre study."
authors:
- Wang Z
- Bian H
- Li J
- Xu J
- Fan H
- Wu X
- Cao Y
- Guo B
- Xu X
- Wang H
- Zhang L
- Zhou H
- Fan J
- Ren Y
- Geng Y
- Feng X
- Li L
- Wei L
- Zhang X
journal: Lancet Digit Health
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/S2589-7500(23)00136-X
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Detection and subtyping of hepatic echinococcosis from plain CT images with deep learning: a retrospective, multicentre study.
**Authors:** Wang Z, Bian H, Li J, Xu J, Fan H, Wu X, Cao Y, Guo B, Xu X, Wang H, Zhang L, Zhou H, Fan J, Ren Y, Geng Y, Feng X, Li L, Wei L, Zhang X
**Journal:** Lancet Digit Health (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2589-7500(23)00136-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2589-7500(23)00136-X)

## Content

1. Lancet Digit Health. 2023 Nov;5(11):e754-e762. doi: 
10.1016/S2589-7500(23)00136-X. Epub 2023 Sep 26.

Detection and subtyping of hepatic echinococcosis from plain CT images with deep 
learning: a retrospective, multicentre study.

Wang Z(1), Bian H(2), Li J(2), Xu J(3), Fan H(4), Wu X(2), Cao Y(5), Guo B(6), 
Xu X(4), Wang H(4), Zhang L(4), Zhou H(4), Fan J(7), Ren Y(8), Geng Y(8), Feng 
X(9), Li L(10), Wei L(2), Zhang X(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China; 
Department of Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery, Qinghai University Affiliated 
Hospital, Xining, China.
(2)Department of Automation, MOE Key Lab of Bioinformatics and Beijing National 
Research Center for Information Science & Technology (BNRIST), Tsinghua 
University, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Medicine, Qinghai University, Xining, China.
(4)Department of Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery, Qinghai University Affiliated 
Hospital, Xining, China.
(5)Department of Radiology, Qinghai University Affiliated Hospital, Xining, 
China.
(6)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Qinghai University Affiliated Hospital, 
Xining, China.
(7)Department of Radiology, Zhenping People's Hospital, Nanyang, China.
(8)Department of Radiology, Nanyang Central Hospital, Nanyang, China.
(9)Hepato-pancreato-biliary Center, Beijing Tsinghua Changgung Hospital, 
Beijing, China.
(10)National Engineering Research Center of Neuromodulation, School of Aerospace 
Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
(11)Department of Automation, MOE Key Lab of Bioinformatics and Beijing National 
Research Center for Information Science & Technology (BNRIST), Tsinghua 
University, Beijing, China; School of Medicine and School of Life Sciences, 
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Electronic address: 
zhangxg@tsinghua.edu.cn.

Comment in
    Lancet Digit Health. 2023 Nov;5(11):e750-e751. doi: 
10.1016/S2589-7500(23)00183-8.

BACKGROUND: Hepatic echinococcosis is a severe endemic disease in some 
underdeveloped rural areas worldwide. Qualified physicians are in short supply 
in such areas, resulting in low rates of accurate diagnosis of this condition. 
In this study, we aimed to develop and evaluate an artificial intelligence (AI) 
system for automated detection and subtyping of hepatic echinococcosis using 
plain CT images with the goal of providing interpretable assistance to 
radiologists and clinicians.
METHODS: We developed EDAM, an echinococcosis diagnostic AI system, to provide 
accurate and generalisable CT analysis for distinguishing hepatic echinococcosis 
from hepatic cysts and normal controls (no liver lesions), as well as subtyping 
hepatic echinococcosis as alveolar or cystic echinococcosis. EDAM includes a 
slice-level prediction model for lesion classification and segmentation and a 
patient-level diagnostic model for patient classification. We collected a plain 
CT database (n=700: 395 cystic echinococcosis, 122 alveolar echinococcosis, 130 
hepatic cysts, and 53 normal controls) for developing EDAM, and two additional 
independent cohorts (n=156) for external validation of its performance and 
generalisation ability. We compared the performance of EDAM with 52 experienced 
radiologists in diagnosing and subtyping hepatic echinococcosis.
FINDINGS: EDAM showed reliable performance in patient-level diagnosis on both 
the internal testing data (overall area under the receiver operating 
characteristic curve [AUC]: 0·974 [95% CI 0·936-0·994]; accuracy: 0·952 
[0·939-0·965] for cystic echinococcosis, 0·981 [0·973-0·989] for alveolar 
echinococcosis; sensitivity: 0·966 [0·951-0·979] for cystic echinococcosis, 
0·944 [0·908-0·970] for alveolar echinococcosis) and the external testing set 
(overall AUC: 0·953 [95% CI 0·840-0·973]; accuracy: 0·929 [0·915-0·947] for 
cystic echinococcosis, 0·936 [0·919-0·950] for alveolar echinococcosis; 
sensitivity: 0·913 [0·879-0·944] for cystic echinococcosis, 0·868 [0·841-0·897] 
for alveolar echinococcosis). The sensitivity of EDAM was robust across images 
from different CT manufacturers. EDAM outperformed most of the enrolled 
radiologists in detecting both alveolar echinococcosis and cystic 
echinococcosis.
INTERPRETATION: EDAM is a clinically applicable AI system that can provide 
patient-level diagnoses with interpretable results. The accuracy and 
generalisation ability of EDAM demonstrates its potential for clinical use, 
especially in underdeveloped areas.
FUNDING: Project of Qinghai Provincial Department of Science and Technology of 
China, National Natural Science Foundation of China, and Tsinghua-Fuzhou 
Institute of Data Technology Project.
TRANSLATION: For the Chinese translation of the abstract see Supplementary 
Materials section.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open 
Access article under the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2589-7500(23)00136-X
PMID: 37770335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests We declare no competing 
interests.