---
reference_id: "PMID:30968303"
title: "Primary Coenzyme Q deficiency Due to Novel ADCK3 Variants, Studies in Fibroblasts and Review of Literature."
authors:
- Shalata A
- Edery M
- Habib C
- Genizi J
- Mahroum M
- Khalaily L
- Assaf N
- Segal I
- Abed El Rahim H
- Shapira H
- Urian D
- Tzur S
- Douiev L
- Saada A
journal: Neurochem Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s11064-019-02786-5
keywords:
- Ataxia/genetics
- Cerebellar Ataxia/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mitochondria/genetics
- Mitochondrial Diseases/genetics
- Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics
- Muscle Weakness/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- "Ubiquinone/analogs & derivatives, deficiency, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary Coenzyme Q deficiency Due to Novel ADCK3 Variants, Studies in Fibroblasts and Review of Literature.
**Authors:** Shalata A, Edery M, Habib C, Genizi J, Mahroum M, Khalaily L, Assaf N, Segal I, Abed El Rahim H, Shapira H, Urian D, Tzur S, Douiev L, Saada A
**Journal:** Neurochem Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11064-019-02786-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11064-019-02786-5)

## Content

1. Neurochem Res. 2019 Oct;44(10):2372-2384. doi: 10.1007/s11064-019-02786-5.
Epub  2019 Apr 9.

Primary Coenzyme Q deficiency Due to Novel ADCK3 Variants, Studies in
Fibroblasts and Review of Literature.

Shalata A(1)(2)(3), Edery M(4), Habib C(5)(6), Genizi J(6)(7)(8), Mahroum
M(5)(9), Khalaily L(5), Assaf N(6)(7)(8), Segal I(6)(7), Abed El Rahim
H(10)(11), Shapira H(5), Urian D(10), Tzur S(12)(13), Douiev L(4)(14), Saada
A(15)(16).

Author information:
(1)Simon Winter Institute for Human Genetics, Bnai Zion Medical Center, P.O.B.
4940, 31048, Haifa, Israel. adel.shalata@b-zion.org.il.
(2)Clalit Health Care-Haifa and West Galilee District, Haifa, Israel.
adel.shalata@b-zion.org.il.
(3)Ginatuna Association, Sakhnin, Israel. adel.shalata@b-zion.org.il.
(4)Department of Genetic and Metabolic Diseases, Monique and Jacques Roboh
Department of Genetic Research, Hadassah Medical Center, 9112001, Jerusalem,
Israel.
(5)Simon Winter Institute for Human Genetics, Bnai Zion Medical Center, P.O.B.
4940, 31048, Haifa, Israel.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Bnai Zion Medical Center, Haifa, Israel.
(7)Pediatric Neurology Unit, Bnai Zion Medical Center, Haifa, Israel.
(8)Bruce and Ruth Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel.
(9)Ginatuna Association, Sakhnin, Israel.
(10)Child Development Center, Clalit Health Care, Carmiel, Israel.
(11)Neurology Department, Schneider Children Hospital, Petah Tikva, Israel.
(12)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Rappaport Faculty of Medicine and Research
Institute, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.
(13)Genomic Research Department, Emedgene Technologies, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(14)Faculty of Medicine, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.
(15)Department of Genetic and Metabolic Diseases, Monique and Jacques Roboh
Department of Genetic Research, Hadassah Medical Center, 9112001, Jerusalem,
Israel. annsr@hadassah.org.il.
(16)Faculty of Medicine, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.
annsr@hadassah.org.il.

Primary deficiency of coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10 ubiquinone), is classified as a
mitochondrial respiratory chain disorder with phenotypic variability. The
clinical manifestation may involve one or multiple tissue with variable severity
and presentation may range from infancy to late onset. ADCK3 gene mutations are
responsible for the most frequent form of hereditary CoQ10 deficiency (Q10
deficiency-4 OMIM #612016) which is mainly associated with autosomal recessive
spinocerebellar ataxia (ARCA2, SCAR9). Here we provide the clinical, biochemical
and genetic investigation for unrelated three nuclear families presenting an
autosomal form of Spino-Cerebellar Ataxia due to novel mutations in the ADCK3
gene. Using next generation sequence technology we identified a homozygous
Gln343Ter mutation in one family with severe, early onset of the disease and
compound heterozygous mutations of Gln343Ter and Ser608Phe in two other families
with variable manifestations. Biochemical investigation in fibroblasts showed
decreased activity of the CoQ dependent mitochondrial respiratory chain enzyme
succinate cytochrome c reductase (complex II + III). Exogenous CoQ slightly
improved enzymatic activity, ATP production and decreased oxygen free radicals
in some of the patient's cells. Our results are presented in comparison to
previously reported mutations and expanding the clinical, molecular and
biochemical spectrum of ADCK3 related CoQ10 deficiencies.

DOI: 10.1007/s11064-019-02786-5
PMID: 30968303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
