---
reference_id: "PMID:37435837"
title: "Double Vertebrae Kümmell Disease: Five Cases Report and Literature Review."
authors:
- Chen H
- Shi G
- Chen M
- Wang R
journal: Orthop Surg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/os.13799
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Double Vertebrae Kümmell Disease: Five Cases Report and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Chen H, Shi G, Chen M, Wang R
**Journal:** Orthop Surg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/os.13799](https://doi.org/10.1111/os.13799)

## Content

1. Orthop Surg. 2023 Sep;15(9):2454-2463. doi: 10.1111/os.13799. Epub 2023 Jul
12.

Double Vertebrae Kümmell Disease: Five Cases Report and Literature Review.

Chen H(1), Shi G(1), Chen M(1), Wang R(2).

Author information:
(1)Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(2)Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, China.

Kümmell disease (KD) is a complication of osteoporotic vertebral compression 
fractures. There is a lot of literature on KD, but the reported cases are all 
single vertebrae. This study reports five double vertebrae KD cases (10 levels) 
and discusses the possible underlying mechanisms with a literature review. One 
hundred and thirty vertebrae KD were diagnosed from 2074 osteoporotic vertebral 
compression fractures patients treated in our hospital between 2015 and 2019. 
These vertebrae KD were divided into two groups, one-level vertebrae KD 
(n = 125) and double-level KD (n = 5). The diagnosis of KD is mainly based on 
the signs of intravertebral vacuum cleft on X-ray or CT scan. Double vertebrae 
KD cases were classified by using the KD staging system. The analysis was 
performed on KD to compare age, gender, femoral neck bone mineral density of 
femoral neck (BMD), vertebrae distribution, Cobb angle, and visual analog scale 
(VAS) between one-level KD and double-level by t-tests, Welch's t-test, or 
hypothesis testing. The mean age of the participants in the one-level KD group 
was 78.69 years, while the mean age in the double-level KD group was 82.4 years. 
The difference was statistically significant (t = 3.66, p = 0.0004). There were 
89 females and 36 males in the one-level KD group, while the double-level KD 
group had five females and no males. The femoral neck BMD was significantly 
different between the two groups, with the one-level KD group having a mean BMD 
of -2.75 and the double-level KD group having a mean BMD of -4.2 (t = 2.99, 
p= 0.0061). The vertebrae distribution was different between the groups, with 
the one-level KD group having vertebrae from T7 to L4 and the double-level KD 
group having vertebrae from T11 to L1. The Cobb angle was also significantly 
different between the groups, with the one-level KD group having a mean angle of 
20.58 and the double-level KD group having a mean angle of 31.54 (t = 6.22, 
p = 0.0001). Finally, the VAS scores were similar between the two groups, with 
the one-level KD group having a mean score of 8.63 and the double-level KD group 
having a mean score of 8.8 (t = 1.35, p = 0.1790). It is concluded that double 
vertebrae Kümmell disease has special clinical significance due to its potential 
to cause greater spinal instability and deformity, increased risk of 
neurological symptoms, more complex surgical management, and greater risk of 
complications.

© 2023 The Authors. Orthopaedic Surgery published by Tianjin Hospital and John 
Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/os.13799
PMCID: PMC10475666
PMID: 37435837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest regarding the publication of this paper.