---
reference_id: "PMID:38092513"
title: The immunobiology of herpes simplex virus encephalitis and post-viral autoimmunity.
authors:
- Cleaver J
- Jeffery K
- Klenerman P
- Lim M
- Handunnetthi L
- Irani SR
- Handel A
journal: Brain
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awad419
keywords:
- Humans
- Autoimmunity
- Neurodegenerative Diseases
- Brain Ischemia
- Stroke
- "Encephalitis, Herpes Simplex/drug therapy, pathology"
- Autoantibodies
- Simplexvirus
- Autoimmune Diseases of the Nervous System
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The immunobiology of herpes simplex virus encephalitis and post-viral autoimmunity.
**Authors:** Cleaver J, Jeffery K, Klenerman P, Lim M, Handunnetthi L, Irani SR, Handel A
**Journal:** Brain (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awad419](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awad419)

## Content

1. Brain. 2024 Apr 4;147(4):1130-1148. doi: 10.1093/brain/awad419.

The immunobiology of herpes simplex virus encephalitis and post-viral 
autoimmunity.

Cleaver J(1)(2), Jeffery K(3)(4), Klenerman P(5)(6), Lim M(7)(8), Handunnetthi 
L(1)(9), Irani SR(1)(2), Handel A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Oxford Autoimmune Neurology Group, Nuffield Department of Clinical 
Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK.
(2)Department of Neurology, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford University 
Hospitals, Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, 
Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK.
(4)Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK.
(5)Peter Medawar Building for Pathogen Research, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
OX1 3SY, UK.
(6)Translational Gastroenterology Unit, Nuffield Department of Medicine, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK.
(7)Children's Neurosciences, Evelina London Children's Hospital at Guy's and St 
Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, SE1 7EH, UK.
(8)Department Women and Children's Health, School of Life Course Sciences, 
King's College London, London, WC2R 2LS, UK.
(9)Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 7BN, 
UK.

Herpes simplex virus encephalitis (HSE) is the leading cause of non-epidemic 
encephalitis in the developed world and, despite antiviral therapy, mortality 
and morbidity is high. The emergence of post-HSE autoimmune encephalitis reveals 
a new immunological paradigm in autoantibody-mediated disease. A reductionist 
evaluation of the immunobiological mechanisms in HSE is crucial to dissect the 
origins of post-viral autoimmunity and supply rational approaches to the 
selection of immunotherapeutics. Herein, we review the latest evidence behind 
the phenotypic progression and underlying immunobiology of HSE including the 
cytokine/chemokine environment, the role of pathogen-recognition receptors, T- 
and B-cell immunity and relevant inborn errors of immunity. Second, we provide a 
contemporary review of published patients with post-HSE autoimmune encephalitis 
from a combined cohort of 110 patients. Third, we integrate novel mechanisms of 
autoimmunization in deep cervical lymph nodes to explore hypotheses around 
post-HSE autoimmune encephalitis and challenge these against mechanisms of 
molecular mimicry and others. Finally, we explore translational concepts where 
neuroglial surface autoantibodies have been observed with other neuroinfectious 
diseases and those that generate brain damage including traumatic brain injury, 
ischaemic stroke and neurodegenerative disease. Overall, the clinical and 
immunological landscape of HSE is an important and evolving field, from which 
precision immunotherapeutics could soon emerge.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awad419
PMCID: PMC10994539
PMID: 38092513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: P.K. has served on an advisory board for immune 
conditions for UCB, Astra Zeneca, Medimmunebio, Infinitopes and Biomunex. S.R.I. 
has received honoraria and/or research support from UCB, Immunovant, MedImmun, 
Roche, Cerebral therapeutics, CSL Behring, ONO Pharma and ADC therapeutics. 
S.R.I. is a co-applicant and receive royalties on patent application 
WO/2010/046716 entitled ‘Neurological Autoimmune Disorders’. The patent has been 
licensed for the development of assays for LGI1 and other VGKC-complex 
antibodies, and coinventors on ‘A Diagnostic Strategy to improve specificity of 
CASPR2 antibody detection’ reference JA94536P. M.L. receives/has received 
consultation fees from CSL Behring, Novartis, Roche and Octapharma; received 
travel grants from Merck Serono; and received unrestricted educational grants to 
organize meetings by Novartis, Biogen Idec, Merck Serono and Bayer.