---
reference_id: "PMID:29643321"
title: "Clinical and molecular characterization of 5α-reductase type 2 deficiency due to mutations (p.Q6X, p.R246Q) in SRD5A2 gene."
authors:
- Jia W
- Zheng D
- Zhang L
- Li C
- Zhang X
- Wang F
- Guan Q
- Fang L
- Zhao J
- Xu C
journal: Endocr J
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1507/endocrj.EJ17-0542
keywords:
- "3-Oxo-5-alpha-Steroid 4-Dehydrogenase/deficiency, genetics"
- Adolescent
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Disorder of Sex Development, 46,XY/diagnosis, genetics"
- Female
- Humans
- "Hypospadias/diagnosis, genetics"
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Steroid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and molecular characterization of 5α-reductase type 2 deficiency due to mutations (p.Q6X, p.R246Q) in SRD5A2 gene.
**Authors:** Jia W, Zheng D, Zhang L, Li C, Zhang X, Wang F, Guan Q, Fang L, Zhao J, Xu C
**Journal:** Endocr J (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1507/endocrj.EJ17-0542](https://doi.org/10.1507/endocrj.EJ17-0542)

## Content

1. Endocr J. 2018 Jun 27;65(6):645-655. doi: 10.1507/endocrj.EJ17-0542. Epub 2018
 Apr 10.

Clinical and molecular characterization of 5α-reductase type 2 deficiency due to
mutations (p.Q6X, p.R246Q) in SRD5A2 gene.

Jia W(1)(2)(3), Zheng D(1)(2)(3), Zhang L(1)(2)(3), Li C(4), Zhang X(1)(2)(3),
Wang F(4), Guan Q(1)(2)(3), Fang L(1)(2)(3), Zhao J(1)(2)(3), Xu C(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shandong Provincial Hospital
affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, 250021, China.
(2)Institute of Endocrinology, Shandong Academy of Clinical Medicine, Jinan,
Shandong, 250021, China.
(3)Shandong Clinical Medical Center of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Jinan,
Shandong, 250021, China.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shandong Provincial Hospital
Affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, 250021, China.

Early diagnosis and optimal management for steroid 5α-reductase type 2
deficiency (5α-RD2) patients are major challenges for clinicians and mutation
analysis for the 5α-reductase type 2 (SRD5A2) gene is the golden standard for
the diagnosis of the disease. In silico analysis of this enzyme has not been
reported due to the lack of appropriate model. Moreover, the histological and
pathological changes of the gonads are largely unknown. In the present study, a
5α-RD2 patient born with abnormal external genitalia was studied and mutation
analysis for SRD5A2 gene was conducted. Moreover, we constructed the homology
modeling of 5α-reductase using SWISS-MODEL, followed by the molecular docking
study. Furthermore, immunohistochemical staining of Ki67 for the testes tissue
was conducted to investigate the potential pathological characteristics. The
patient had male (46, XY) chromosomes but presented female characteristics, and
the mutation analysis identified a heterozygotes mutation (p.Q6X, p.R246Q) in
SRD5A2 gene. In silico analysis elucidated the potential effect of the mutation
on enzyme activity. Immunohistochemical staining for the excised testes showed
that 30%-50% of the germ cells were Ki67 positive, which indicated the early
neoplastic potential. In conclusion, we analyzed the genotype-phenotype
correlations of 5α-RD2 caused by a heterozygotes mutation (p.Q6X, p.R246Q).
Importantly, we conducted the homology modeling and molecular docking for the
first time, which provided a homology model for further investigations.
Immunohistochemical results suggested gonadectomy or testis descent should be
performed early for 5α-RD2 patient, as delayed treatment would have maintained
the testes in a tumorigenic condition.

DOI: 10.1507/endocrj.EJ17-0542
PMID: 29643321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
