---
reference_id: "PMID:32768552"
title: "Prevalence of Fatigue in Patients With Cancer: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Al Maqbali M
- Al Sinani M
- Al Naamani Z
- Al Badi K
- Tanash MI
journal: J Pain Symptom Manage
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2020.07.037
keywords:
- Fatigue/epidemiology
- Female
- Humans
- Neoplasms/epidemiology
- Prevalence
- Quality of Life
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of Fatigue in Patients With Cancer: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Al Maqbali M, Al Sinani M, Al Naamani Z, Al Badi K, Tanash MI
**Journal:** J Pain Symptom Manage (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2020.07.037](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2020.07.037)

## Content

1. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2021 Jan;61(1):167-189.e14. doi: 
10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2020.07.037. Epub 2020 Aug 5.

Prevalence of Fatigue in Patients With Cancer: A Systematic Review and 
Meta-Analysis.

Al Maqbali M(1), Al Sinani M(2), Al Naamani Z(3), Al Badi K(4), Tanash MI(5).

Author information:
(1)Ministry of Health, Belfast, Antrim, Oman. Electronic address: 
Al_Maqbali-MA@ulster.ac.uk.
(2)Reproductive and Developmental Biology Department of Surgery and Cancer, 
Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(3)School of Nursing and Midwifery, Queen's University Medical Biology Centre, 
Belfast, Northern Ireland.
(4)Al Khawarizmi International College, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
(5)Department of Adult Health Nursing, Faculty of Nursing, The Hashemite 
University, Zarqa, Jordan.

CONTEXT: Fatigue is a particularly common and troubling symptom that has a 
negative impact on quality of life throughout all phases of treatment and stages 
of the illness among patients with cancer.
OBJECTIVES: The objective of this meta-analysis is to examine the present status 
of fatigue prevalence in patients with cancer.
METHODS: The following databases were searched: PubMed, MEDLINE, EMBASE, 
PsycINFO, Cochrane Library, from inception up to February 2020. Prevalence rates 
were pooled with meta-analysis using a random-effects model. Heterogeneity was 
tested using I-squared (I2) statistics.
RESULTS: A total of 129 studies (N = 71,568) published between 1993 and 2020 met 
the inclusion criteria. The overall prevalence of fatigue was 49% (34,947 of 
71,656 participants, 95% CI = 45-53) with significant heterogeneity between 
studies (P < 0.000; τ2 = 0.0000; I2 = 98.88%). Subgroup analyses show that the 
prevalence of fatigue related to type of cancer ranged from 26.2% in patients 
with gynecological cancer to 56.3% in studies that included mixed types of 
cancer. In advanced cancer stage patients, the highest prevalence of fatigue 
(60.6%) was reported. Fatigue prevalence rates were 62% during treatment and 51% 
during mixed treatment status. The prevalence of fatigue decreased from 64% in 
studies published from 1996 to 2000 to 43% in studies published from 2016 to 
2020. Metaregression identified female gender as a significant moderator for 
higher prevalence of fatigue, whereas mean age is not associated with fatigue.
CONCLUSION: This meta-analysis highlights the importance of developing optimal 
monitoring strategies to reduce fatigue and improve the quality of life of 
patients with cancer.

Copyright © 2020 American Academy of Hospice and Palliative Medicine. Published 
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2020.07.037
PMID: 32768552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]