---
reference_id: "PMID:20515348"
title: Hirayama disease.
authors:
- Lin MS
- Kung WM
- Chiu WT
- Lyu RK
- Chen CJ
- Chen TY
journal: J Neurosurg Spine
year: '2010'
doi: 10.3171/2009.12.SPINE09431
keywords:
- Adult
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Motor Activity/physiology
- Neck
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- Sensation/physiology
- "Spinal Cord Diseases/diagnosis, physiopathology, surgery"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hirayama disease.
**Authors:** Lin MS, Kung WM, Chiu WT, Lyu RK, Chen CJ, Chen TY
**Journal:** J Neurosurg Spine (2010)
**DOI:** [10.3171/2009.12.SPINE09431](https://doi.org/10.3171/2009.12.SPINE09431)

## Content

1. J Neurosurg Spine. 2010 Jun;12(6):629-34. doi: 10.3171/2009.12.SPINE09431.

Hirayama disease.

Lin MS(1), Kung WM, Chiu WT, Lyu RK, Chen CJ, Chen TY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Taipei Medical University-Wan Fang Hospital, 
Taipei, Taiwan.

OBJECT: Controversy exists over the choice of surgical candidates and prognosis 
of Hirayama disease. The purpose of this study was to examine the outcomes of 
patients with cervical flexion myelopathy who received surgical treatment.
METHODS: A retrospective study was conducted. From May 2002 through December 
2006, 6 young patients with cervical flexion myelopathy were seen in the 
Department of Neurosurgery at Chang Gung Memorial Hospital. The neurological and 
radiological findings in all 6 patients met the criteria for Hirayama disease. 
All patients had evidence of a tight dural canal or forward migration of the 
posterior wall of the dural canal in dynamic MR imaging studies. Five patients 
were treated with surgical decompressive procedures (4 anterior and 1 posterior) 
and 1 patient received conservative treatment. Duration of follow-up ranged from 
13 months to 4 years.
RESULTS: Motor function improved in 3 of 5 surgically treated patients and 
sensory function improved in 2. Neurological symptoms were unchanged in the 
conservatively treated patient. During follow-up MR imaging in the surgical 
group, anterior effacement during neck flexion was noted in 1 patient treated 
with a posterior approach.
CONCLUSIONS: Hirayama disease is so rare that it is easily misdiagnosed. 
Diagnosis is achieved via clinical presentation, neurophysiological examination, 
and neuroradiological imaging studies (dynamic MR imaging). The anterior 
decompressive approach may be better for patients showing anterior effacement 
and severe cervical kyphosis during neck flexion in MR imaging.

DOI: 10.3171/2009.12.SPINE09431
PMID: 20515348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]