---
reference_id: "PMID:36063190"
title: Imaging of spinal chordoma and benign notochordal cell tumor (BNCT) with radiologic pathologic correlation.
authors:
- Murphey MD
- Minn MJ
- Contreras AL
- Koeller KK
- Shih RY
- Inwards CY
- Yamaguchi T
journal: Skeletal Radiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00256-022-04158-7
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Chordoma/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- Sclerosis
- "Spinal Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Biopsy
- Soft Tissue Neoplasms
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Imaging of spinal chordoma and benign notochordal cell tumor (BNCT) with radiologic pathologic correlation.
**Authors:** Murphey MD, Minn MJ, Contreras AL, Koeller KK, Shih RY, Inwards CY, Yamaguchi T
**Journal:** Skeletal Radiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00256-022-04158-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00256-022-04158-7)

## Content

1. Skeletal Radiol. 2023 Mar;52(3):349-363. doi: 10.1007/s00256-022-04158-7. Epub
 2022 Sep 5.

Imaging of spinal chordoma and benign notochordal cell tumor (BNCT) with 
radiologic pathologic correlation.

Murphey MD(1)(2)(3), Minn MJ(4)(5)(6), Contreras AL(7), Koeller KK(4)(8), Shih 
RY(4)(9)(5), Inwards CY(10), Yamaguchi T(11).

Author information:
(1)Musculoskeletal Imaging and Neuroradiology, ACR Institute for Radiologic 
Pathology (AIRP), 1100 Wayne Avenue, Suite 1020, Silver Spring, MD, 20910, USA. 
mmurphey@acr.org.
(2)Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, 4301 Jones Bridge Road, 
Bethesda, MD, 20814, USA. mmurphey@acr.org.
(3)Department of Radiology, Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, 8901 
Wisconsin Ave., Bethesda, MD, 20889, USA. mmurphey@acr.org.
(4)Musculoskeletal Imaging and Neuroradiology, ACR Institute for Radiologic 
Pathology (AIRP), 1100 Wayne Avenue, Suite 1020, Silver Spring, MD, 20910, USA.
(5)Department of Radiology, Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, 8901 
Wisconsin Ave., Bethesda, MD, 20889, USA.
(6)Department of Radiology, Scripps Green Hospital, 10666 N. Torrey Pines Road, 
La Jolla, CA, 92037, USA.
(7)Joint Pathology Center, 606 Stephen Sitter Avenue, Silver Spring, MD, 
20910-1290, USA.
(8)Department of Radiology, Head and Neck Cancer Center, Mayo Clinic, 200 First 
Street SW, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA.
(9)Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, 4301 Jones Bridge Road, 
Bethesda, MD, 20814, USA.
(10)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First 
Street SW, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA.
(11)Department of Pathology, Nikko Medical Center, Dokkyo Medical University, 
632 Takatoku, Nikko, Tochigi, 321-2593, Japan.

Benign notochordal cell tumor (BNCT) and chordoma are neoplasms of notochordal 
differentiation. BNCT represents notochordal rests, commonly an incidental 
lesion present in the spine in 19% of cadaveric specimens. BNCTs are often 
radiographically occult. CT of BNCT frequently reveals patchy sclerosis between 
areas of maintained underlying trabeculae. BNCT demonstrates marrow replacement 
on T1-weighted MR images with high signal intensity on T2-weighting. BNCTs are 
frequently smaller than 35 mm and lack significant enhancement, bone 
destruction, cortical permeation, or soft tissue components. Biopsy or surgical 
resection of BNCT is usually not warranted, although imaging surveillance may be 
indicated. Chordoma is a rare low-grade locally aggressive malignancy 
representing 1-4% of primary malignant bone tumors. Chordoma is most frequent 
between the ages of 50-60 years with a male predilection. Clinical symptoms, 
while nonspecific and location dependent, include back pain, numbness, 
myelopathy, and bowel/bladder incontinence. Unfortunately, lesions are often 
large at presentation owing to diagnosis delay. Imaging of chordoma shows 
variable mixtures of bone destruction and sclerosis, calcification (50-70% at 
CT) and large soft tissue components. MR imaging of chordoma reveals 
multilobulated areas of marrow replacement on T1-weighting and high signal 
intensity on T2-weighting reflecting the myxoid component within the lesion and 
areas of hemorrhage seen histologically. Treatment of chordoma is primarily 
surgical with prognosis related to resection extent. Unfortunately, complete 
resection is often not possible (21-75%) resulting in high local recurrence 
incidence (19-75%) and a 5-year survival rate of 45-86%. This article reviews 
and illustrates the clinical characteristics, pathologic features, imaging 
appearance spectrum, treatment, and prognosis of BNCT and spinal chordoma.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to International Skeletal Society 
(ISS).

DOI: 10.1007/s00256-022-04158-7
PMID: 36063190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]