---
reference_id: "PMID:39419099"
title: Management of follicular thyroid carcinoma.
authors:
- Yamazaki H
- Sugino K
- Katoh R
- Matsuzu K
- Kitagawa W
- Nagahama M
- Saito A
- Ito K
journal: Eur Thyroid J
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1530/ETJ-24-0146
keywords:
- Humans
- "Adenocarcinoma, Follicular/therapy, pathology, genetics, diagnosis"
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/therapy, pathology, genetics, diagnosis"
- Prognosis
- Iodine Radioisotopes/therapeutic use
- Thyroidectomy
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local"
- Phenylurea Compounds/therapeutic use
- Sorafenib/therapeutic use
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of follicular thyroid carcinoma.
**Authors:** Yamazaki H, Sugino K, Katoh R, Matsuzu K, Kitagawa W, Nagahama M, Saito A, Ito K
**Journal:** Eur Thyroid J (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1530/ETJ-24-0146](https://doi.org/10.1530/ETJ-24-0146)

## Content

1. Eur Thyroid J. 2024 Oct 16;13(5):e240146. doi: 10.1530/ETJ-24-0146. Print 2024
 Oct 1.

Management of follicular thyroid carcinoma.

Yamazaki H(1)(2), Sugino K(2), Katoh R(3), Matsuzu K(2), Kitagawa W(2), Nagahama 
M(2), Saito A(4), Ito K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Breast and Thyroid Surgery, Yokohama City University Medical 
Center, Yokohama City, Kanagawa, Japan.
(2)Department of Surgery, Ito Hospital, Shibuya-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Pathology, Ito Hospital, Shibuya-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Surgery, Yokohama City University School of Medicine, Yokohama 
City, Kanagawa, Japan.

Follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC) is the second most common histological type 
of thyroid carcinoma. This review aims to summarize the available evidence and 
guidelines and provide an updated consensus regarding the management of FTC. The 
cytoarchitectural features of FTC are similar to those of follicular adenoma 
(FA), and it is difficult to preoperatively distinguish between FA and FTC. For 
nodules with Bethesda class III-V cytology, molecular test results (if 
available) should be considered before the operation. However, it should be 
noted that molecular tests are not available in all countries. The goals of 
initial surgical therapy for patients with FTC are to improve overall and 
disease-specific survival, reduce the risk of persistent/recurrent disease and 
associated morbidity, and permit accurate disease staging and risk 
stratification while minimizing treatment-related morbidity and unnecessary 
therapy. Previous studies have reported some prognostic factors such as distant 
metastasis, age, tumor size, vascular invasion, TERT promoter mutation, and 
histological subtype. In particular, the degree of vascular invasion is becoming 
increasingly important. Evaluating these prognostic factors is essential for 
prognostic prediction and precise management of patients with FTC. Recurrence 
and distant metastasis of FTC are treated with radioactive iodine (RAI). 
However, some FTCs become refractory to RAI. Multi-tyrosine kinase inhibitors 
such as sorafenib and lenvatinib are utilized for treating RAI-refractory FTCs. 
In addition, given that renin-angiotensin system (RAS) is the most common driver 
gene for FTC, it is also important to develop RAS inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1530/ETJ-24-0146
PMCID: PMC11558955
PMID: 39419099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest that could be perceived as prejudicing the impartiality of the study 
reported.