---
reference_id: PMID:41396574
title: Clinical practice guidelines for the management of basal cell carcinoma in Gorlin syndrome.
authors:
- Cahn BA
- Zhang R
- Sidwell AM
- Adam CM
- Tiv J
- Murrar R
- Koh J
- Griffin T
- Nadir U
- Yi MD
- Ahmed A
- Ma M
- Koza E
- Haq M
- Shi V
- Bale AE
- Lewin JM
- Christensen SR
- Waldman A
- Harmon CB
- Alt-Holland A
- Arkin LM
- Morrison JC
- Bogart K
- Gregory MD
- Lohman ME
- Rossi A
- Marghoob AA
- Goldberg L
- Jiang SB
- Giordano CN
- Choi JN
- Teng JMC
- Mittal BB
- Vidimos AT
- Leffell DJ
- Xu YG
- Haber R
- Storrs PA
- Tsoukas M
- Samie FH
- Bickers DR
- Nehal KS
- Mosterd K
- Billingsley EM
- Epstein EH Jr
- Elston D
- Gorlin Syndrome Work Group
- Alam M
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2025.10.076
keywords:
- Humans
- "Basal Cell Nevus Syndrome/therapy, complications, psychology"
- "Skin Neoplasms/therapy, etiology, psychology, pathology"
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/therapy, etiology"
- Quality of Life
- Evidence-Based Medicine
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Delphi Technique
- "Decision Making, Shared"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical practice guidelines for the management of basal cell carcinoma in Gorlin syndrome.
**Authors:** Cahn BA, Zhang R, Sidwell AM, Adam CM, Tiv J, Murrar R, Koh J, Griffin T, Nadir U, Yi MD, Ahmed A, Ma M, Koza E, Haq M, Shi V, Bale AE, Lewin JM, Christensen SR, Waldman A, Harmon CB, Alt-Holland A, Arkin LM, Morrison JC, Bogart K, Gregory MD, Lohman ME, Rossi A, Marghoob AA, Goldberg L, Jiang SB, Giordano CN, Choi JN, Teng JMC, Mittal BB, Vidimos AT, Leffell DJ, Xu YG, Haber R, Storrs PA, Tsoukas M, Samie FH, Bickers DR, Nehal KS, Mosterd K, Billingsley EM, Epstein EH Jr, Elston D, Gorlin Syndrome Work Group, Alam M
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaad.2025.10.076](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2025.10.076)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2026 Feb;94(2):485-494. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2025.10.076. 
Epub 2025 Oct 25.

Clinical practice guidelines for the management of basal cell carcinoma in 
Gorlin syndrome.

Cahn BA(1), Zhang R(2), Sidwell AM(3), Adam CM(2), Tiv J(3), Murrar R(4), Koh 
J(2), Griffin T(5), Nadir U(6), Yi MD(7), Ahmed A(7), Ma M(7), Koza E(7), Haq 
M(7), Shi V(7), Bale AE(8), Lewin JM(9), Christensen SR(10), Waldman A(11), 
Harmon CB(12), Alt-Holland A(13), Arkin LM(14), Morrison JC(15), Bogart K(16), 
Gregory MD(17), Lohman ME(18), Rossi A(19), Marghoob AA(19), Goldberg L(20), 
Jiang SB(21), Giordano CN(22), Choi JN(7), Teng JMC(23), Mittal BB(24), Vidimos 
AT(25), Leffell DJ(10), Xu YG(14), Haber R(26), Storrs PA(26), Tsoukas M(26), 
Samie FH(27), Bickers DR(27), Nehal KS(19), Mosterd K(28), Billingsley EM(29), 
Epstein EH Jr(30), Elston D(31); Gorlin Syndrome Work Group; Alam M(32).

Collaborators: Hodge T, Breneiser J, Spiegel BA, Bissell S, Stephenson AG, Daum 
NS, Roth KB, Michalowski M, Shelley C, McGoldrick P, Nadin C, Weiss M, 
Rubenstein R, Kibbi N, Worley B, Chang ALS, Harms KL, Pearlman R, Hirner J, Kim 
J, Schwartz RA, Bailey RK, Freites-Martinez A, Mirza AN, Castner N, Levenson JL, 
Whitson R, Golda N, Akin RS, Lawrence N, Demer A, Scott JF, Beveridge MG, Deng 
L, Sauder MB, Baumann BC, Bermudez R, Gill JG, Lambert WC, Cognetta AB Jr, 
Krakowski AC, Blalock TW, Wasserman DI, Harper C, Dunbar-Jacob J, Patel AB, Chu 
EY, Sarin KY, Tang JY, Ruiz ES, Duffy K, Merritt B, Grushchak S, Behshad R, Lear 
W, Bartus CL, Kheterpal M, Somani AK, Eickstaedt J, Jung J, Smith E, Gold N, 
Walsh M, Subbiah V, Benedetto AV, Bar A, Bordeaux JS, Huang CC, Cohen JV, Yu SS, 
Yusuf MB, Lukens JN, Cartee TV, Fosko SW, Neel VA, Council ML, Shahwan KT, 
Srivastava D, Lauterbach M, Solomon JA, Brown MR, Beek MV, Hanke CW, Lee P, 
Maher IA, Brown TS, Konda S, Khushalani NI, Eisen DB, Carr DR, Saleeby E, 
Maloney M, Brown M, Cohen PR, Gilchrest BA, Miller CJ, Rohrer TE, Carucci JA, 
Swift J, Oro AE, Babakoohi S, Hawryluk EB, Grant-Kels JM, Desciak EB, Landers 
JT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Columbia University, New York, New York; 
Department of Dermatology, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(2)University of Illinois at Chicago College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois.
(3)The University of Illinois College of Medicine at Peoria, Peoria, Illinois.
(4)University of Illinois College of Medicine at Rockford, Rockford, Illinois.
(5)Information Service and Research, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, 
Illinois.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, Michigan.
(7)Department of Dermatology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern 
University, Chicago, Illinois.
(8)Department of Genetics, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut.
(9)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York.
(10)Department of Dermatology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut.
(11)Department of Dermatology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(12)Surgical Dermatology Group, Vestavia Hills, Alabama.
(13)Department of Basic & Clinical Translational Sciences, Tufts University 
School of Dental Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Endodontics, 
Tufts University School of Dental Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts.
(14)Department of Dermatology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and 
Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin.
(15)Division of Hematology/Medical Oncology, Cooper University Health Care and 
Cooper Medical School of Rowan University, Camden, New Jersey.
(16)School of Psychological Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon.
(17)National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland.
(18)Department of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(19)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York.
(20)Department of Dermatology & Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Indiana 
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana.
(21)Department of Dermatology, University of California San Diego Health, San 
Diego, California.
(22)Department of Dermatology, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
Buffalo, New York.
(23)Department of Dermatology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo 
Alto, California.
(24)Department of Radiation Oncology, Northwestern University, Chicago, 
Illinois.
(25)Department of Dermatology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio.
(26)Department of Dermatology, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, 
Illinois.
(27)Department of Dermatology, Columbia University, New York, New York.
(28)Maastricht University Medical Centre+, Maastricht.
(29)Department of Dermatology, Penn State Hershey Medical Center and College of 
Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania.
(30)Orinda, California.
(31)Department of Dermatology & Dermatologic Surgery, The Medical University of 
South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina.
(32)Department of Dermatology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern 
University, Chicago, Illinois. Electronic address: m-alam@northwestern.edu.

BACKGROUND: Gorlin syndrome (GS) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by a 
predisposition to developing numerous basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) throughout 
life. The absence of specific clinical guidelines for managing BCCs in GS has 
resulted in fragmented care and inconsistent treatment approaches.
OBJECTIVE: To develop evidence-based guidelines for managing BCCs in GS, 
addressing both clinical and psychosocial challenges.
METHODS: A multidisciplinary panel employed a modified Grading of 
Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation approach, integrating 
systematic reviews, expert surveys, patient interviews, and Delphi consensus 
rounds to formulate recommendations.
RESULTS: The final guidelines include 47 recommendations spanning topical 
therapies, systemic treatments, surgical interventions, and multimodal 
strategies. Additional recommendations emphasize shared decision-making, 
comprehensive monitoring, and psychosocial support to address the chronic nature 
of BCCs in GS. Specific therapies, including hedgehog inhibitors and field 
treatments, are recommended to reduce surgical fatigue and enhance quality of 
life.
LIMITATIONS: Given the scarcity of GS-specific data, expert consensus informed 
several recommendations, highlighting the need for ongoing research to 
strengthen the evidence base.
CONCLUSION: These guidelines provide a structured framework for improving BCC 
management in GS, thereby enhancing clinical outcomes and patient quality of 
life. This process serves as a model for creating patient-centered guidelines in 
rare conditions with limited evidence.

Copyright © 2025 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2025.10.076
PMID: 41396574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest A. Vidimos is the 
investigator for Merck (2021) and Regeneron (2020). A.A. Bar received honorarium 
(< $5000) related to cemiplimab (2022). A.L. Chang is the investigator and 
advisory board member for Regeneron, Merck, Novartis and is an advisory board 
member for Feldan. A. Cognetta is the speaker for Regeneron/Sanofi (2022). E. 
Billingsley received research funding from Palvella (2022) and Pellepharm 
(2020-2022). E. Ruiz is a consultant and investigator for Regeneron, Merck, 
Genentech and is in the advisory board for Checkpoint Therapeutics. E. Smith has 
educational roles with Gather-Ed and Association for Community Cancer Centers. 
E. Epstein received research support from Pellepharm and Sol-Gel. J.Y. Tang 
received research support from BridgeBio. J. Carucci received research grant 
from Regeneron. K. Duffy is the speaker for Sanofi-Regeneron. L. Council is a 
consultant for AbbVie, Castle Biosciences, and Regeneron. M. Sauder is in the 
Advisory board for Sun Pharma, Merck, and Sanofi. M. Kheterpal is the speaker 
for Sun Pharma and Regeneron. N. Gold received research support from Pfi+zer. R. 
Whitson is an employee of Novartis. S. Fosko is the speaker and investigator for 
Genentech. The other authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.