---
reference_id: "PMID:31613505"
title: Pancreas Imaging.
authors:
- Stevens KJ
- Lisanti C
year: '2026'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pancreas Imaging.
**Authors:** Stevens KJ, Lisanti C

## Content

1. Pancreas Imaging.

Stevens KJ(1), Lisanti C(1).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2026 
Jan–.
2023 Mar 6.

Author information:
(1)Brooke Army Medical Center

The pancreas is an abdominal organ possessing both endocrine and exocrine 
functions. The pancreas produces various hormones that primarily regulate blood 
sugar levels. As an exocrine gland, it secretes pancreatic fluid that contains 
bicarbonate and digestive enzymes. Commonly, a few broad categories of diseases 
affect the pancreas that can be characterized on imaging: pancreatitis, 
pancreatic insufficiency, cystic lesions of the pancreas, and pancreatic tumors. 
Pancreatitis is a generalized inflammation of the pancreas due to the activation 
of digestive enzymes produced by the pancreas while still inside the organ. 
Acutely, this can result from gallstones, alcohol misuse, or 
hypertriglyceridemia. Gallstones are the etiology of the majority of acute 
pancreatitis cases, 40% to 70%, while alcohol misuse accounts for 25% to 35%. 
Pancreatitis typically presents with acute-onset epigastric pain that may 
radiate to the back. Nausea and vomiting frequently accompany abdominal pain. 
The revised Atlanta classification separates acute pancreatitis into 2 subtypes: 
interstitial edematous pancreatitis and necrotizing pancreatitis. The severity 
further classifies acute pancreatitis as mild, moderately severe, or severe, 
based on the absence of organ failure, transient organ failure, or persistent 
organ failure, respectively. The mortality rate from acute pancreatitis is 
approximately 5%, while those with necrotizing pancreatitis see a higher rate at 
17%. Chronic pancreatitis can occur in patients with alcohol use disorder, in 
which scarring of the gland prevents it from functioning properly. Pancreatic 
insufficiency results when the pancreas cannot produce enough digestive enzymes 
to break down food in the digestive tract. This condition is typically a 
deficiency in the exocrine function of the gland that can be caused by a variety 
of disease processes, most commonly cystic fibrosis in children and chronic 
pancreatitis in adults.  Pancreatic exocrine cancer is 1 of the leading causes 
of cancer-related deaths in the United States. It also ranks among the most 
lethal cancers, with a 1-year survival rate of 20% and a 5-year survival rate of 
only 5%. The lethality is mostly due to the insidious onset of the malignancy, 
with symptoms (eg, jaundice, weight loss, and vague subacute epigastric pain) 
not present until late in the course of the illness. See Image. Pancreatic 
Cancer, Courvoisier Sign. Frequently, at the time of diagnosis, the lesion is 
inoperable because it extends into nearby structures. Over one-third of the 
tumors are Stage IV upon identification, and less than 20% of these cancers are 
candidates for surgical resection. The most common malignancy is ductal 
adenocarcinoma involving the exocrine glands; most of these tumors are 
discovered in the head of the pancreas (see Image. Pancreatic Adenocarcinoma, 
Computed Tomography). Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) are malignancies 
that form in the endocrine tissue of the pancreas. Also known as islet cell 
tumors, these are rare tumors occurring in approximately 1 in every 100,000 
people, and only 1% of all pancreatic tumors are NETs. NETs can lead to 
overproduction and secretion of pancreatic hormones, including insulin, gastrin, 
glucagon, and vasoactive intestinal peptide, which can present with specific 
clinical syndromes. See Image. Gastrinoma on Distal Pancreas. Cystic lesions of 
the pancreas are a relatively common incidental finding on body imaging, with 
prevalence in the general population ranging up to 14%. Classification of these 
cysts is crucial as they can either be true cysts, pseudocysts (usually related 
to pancreatitis), or related to benign or malignant neoplasms. Radiological 
imaging has historically helped distinguish the etiology of the cystic lesions 
in 75% to 90% of presentations. True epithelial cysts are rare in the general 
population and are typically associated only with cystic fibrosis, von 
Hippel-Lindau disease, and autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease. 
Pseudocysts, related to pancreatitis or trauma, are the most common cystic 
lesions identified in the pancreas. Approximately 20% to 40% of patients with 
chronic pancreatitis develop pseudocysts, while only 2% to 3% of those with 
acute pancreatitis develop them. Cysts associated with malignancy may rarely 
occur with exocrine tumors, occasionally with endocrine tumors, or in isolation. 
Cystic neoplasms include intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms, mucinous 
cystic neoplasms, and serous cystadenomas.

Copyright © 2026, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 31613505

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Kyle Stevens declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Christopher 
Lisanti declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.