---
reference_id: "PMID:24334604"
title: Recessive and dominant mutations in COL12A1 cause a novel EDS/myopathy overlap syndrome in humans and mice.
authors:
- Zou Y
- Zwolanek D
- Izu Y
- Gandhy S
- Schreiber G
- Brockmann K
- Devoto M
- Tian Z
- Hu Y
- Veit G
- Meier M
- Stetefeld J
- Hicks D
- Straub V
- Voermans NC
- Birk DE
- Barton ER
- Koch M
- Bönnemann CG
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt627
keywords:
- Animals
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Collagen Type VI/genetics, metabolism"
- "Collagen Type XII/genetics, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mice
- "Muscle, Skeletal/pathology"
- "Muscular Diseases/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Mutation/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recessive and dominant mutations in COL12A1 cause a novel EDS/myopathy overlap syndrome in humans and mice.
**Authors:** Zou Y, Zwolanek D, Izu Y, Gandhy S, Schreiber G, Brockmann K, Devoto M, Tian Z, Hu Y, Veit G, Meier M, Stetefeld J, Hicks D, Straub V, Voermans NC, Birk DE, Barton ER, Koch M, Bönnemann CG
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddt627](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddt627)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 May 1;23(9):2339-52. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt627. Epub 2013
Dec  11.

Recessive and dominant mutations in COL12A1 cause a novel EDS/myopathy overlap
syndrome in humans and mice.

Zou Y(1), Zwolanek D, Izu Y, Gandhy S, Schreiber G, Brockmann K, Devoto M, Tian
Z, Hu Y, Veit G, Meier M, Stetefeld J, Hicks D, Straub V, Voermans NC, Birk DE,
Barton ER, Koch M, Bönnemann CG.

Author information:
(1)Neuromuscular and Neurogenetic Disorders of Childhood Section, National
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Collagen VI-related myopathies are disorders of connective tissue presenting
with an overlap phenotype combining clinical involvement from the muscle and
from the connective tissue. Not all patients displaying related overlap
phenotypes between muscle and connective tissue have mutations in collagen VI.
Here, we report a homozygous recessive loss of function mutation and a de novo
dominant mutation in collagen XII (COL12A1) as underlying a novel overlap
syndrome involving muscle and connective tissue. Two siblings homozygous for a
loss of function mutation showed widespread joint hyperlaxity combined with
weakness precluding independent ambulation, while the patient with the de novo
missense mutation was more mildly affected, showing improvement including the
acquisition of walking. A mouse model with inactivation of the Col12a1 gene
showed decreased grip strength, a delay in fiber-type transition and a
deficiency in passive force generation while the muscle seems more resistant to
eccentric contraction induced force drop, indicating a role for a matrix-based
passive force-transducing elastic element in the generation of the weakness.
This new muscle connective tissue overlap syndrome expands on the emerging
importance of the muscle extracellular matrix in the pathogenesis of muscle
disease.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddt627
PMCID: PMC3976332
PMID: 24334604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
