---
reference_id: "PMID:29737569"
title: "Huntington's disease: Current and future therapeutic prospects."
authors:
- Kieburtz K
- Reilmann R
- Olanow CW
journal: Mov Disord
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/mds.27363
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Huntington's disease: Current and future therapeutic prospects.
**Authors:** Kieburtz K, Reilmann R, Olanow CW
**Journal:** Mov Disord (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.27363](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.27363)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 2018 Jul;33(7):1033-1041. doi: 10.1002/mds.27363. Epub 2018 May 8.

Huntington's disease: Current and future therapeutic prospects.

Kieburtz K(1), Reilmann R(2), Olanow CW(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Rochester, USA and Clintrex LLC.
(2)George Huntington Institute, Munster, Germany.
(3)Mount Sinai School of Medicine and Clintrex LLC.

Huntington's disease is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder for which 
therapies are woefully inadequate and do not prevent inevitable progression. 
Currently approved therapies are primarily aimed at treating chorea, but do not 
address the more clinically meaningful motor, behavioral, and cognitive features 
of the disease. However, there are a number of promising new therapies that are 
currently being studied in the laboratory, and in the clinic. This article will 
review the wide variety of therapies currently being tested, the advances in 
clinical trials and end points, and the many potentially relevant new targets. © 
2018 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

© 2018 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.27363
PMID: 29737569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]