---
reference_id: "PMID:37068517"
title: "Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease and Work: The Continuing Narrative."
authors:
- Fishwick D
- Barber C
- Wiggans R
journal: Semin Respir Crit Care Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1055/s-0043-1764408
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease and Work: The Continuing Narrative.
**Authors:** Fishwick D, Barber C, Wiggans R
**Journal:** Semin Respir Crit Care Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0043-1764408](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0043-1764408)

## Content

1. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2023 Jun;44(3):378-384. doi:
10.1055/s-0043-1764408.  Epub 2023 Apr 17.

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease and Work: The Continuing Narrative.

Fishwick D(1)(2), Barber C(3), Wiggans R(4).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Occupational and Environmental Health, Faculty of Biology, 
Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Infection, Immunity and Cardiovascular Disease, University of 
Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust, Sheffield, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, North Manchester General Hospital and the 
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.

It has long been recognized that harmful inhaled workplace exposures can 
contribute to the development of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). 
This article, intended for the clinician, summarizes some of this evidence and 
some areas of controversy. Current estimates based on pooled epidemiological 
analyses of population-based studies identify that approximately 14% of the 
burden of COPD (and 13% of the burden of chronic bronchitis) is attributable to 
such exposures. In addition to these approaches, various studies implicate 
specific exposures as contributing. Certain of these relating to cadmium, coal, 
and respirable crystalline silica are discussed in more detail. Despite this 
amassed evidence to date supporting associations between COPD and workplace 
exposures, there have been surprisingly few studies that have attempted to 
assess the attribution by experts of an occupational cause in cases of COPD. One 
study, using hypothetical cases of COPD, noted that while expert physicians were 
willing to make such an occupational link, this was only likely in cases with 
light smoking histories and a priori defined heavy occupational exposures. 
Relatively recent data relating to computed tomography (CT) scan appearances may 
give the clinician a further guide. Several studies from populations have now 
linked potentially harmful occupational exposures specifically with the presence 
of emphysema on CT scanning. It will be of interest to see if this finding, 
along with other clinical attributes of cases such as smoking and family 
histories, exclusion of asthma, genetic data, and the nature of workplace 
exposures, will increase the future diagnosis by clinicians of occupational 
COPD. In the interim, while better diagnostic approaches are developed, we 
suggest that consideration of an occupational cause is an important part of the 
clinical investigation of cases of COPD. Finally, we suggest that evidence-based 
workplace preventive strategies for occupational COPD should be informed by 
knowledge of which exposures are most important to reduce, and whether and when 
intervention to reduce exposure at an individual worker level is warranted.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0043-1764408
PMID: 37068517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.