---
reference_id: "PMID:22277943"
title: "Defining keratin protein function in skin epithelia: epidermolysis bullosa simplex and its aftermath."
authors:
- Coulombe PA
- Lee CH
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1038/jid.2011.450
keywords:
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Intermediate Filaments/genetics, physiology"
- "Keratin-14/genetics, physiology"
- "Keratin-5/genetics, physiology"
- Skin/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defining keratin protein function in skin epithelia: epidermolysis bullosa simplex and its aftermath.
**Authors:** Coulombe PA, Lee CH
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/jid.2011.450](https://doi.org/10.1038/jid.2011.450)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 2012 Mar;132(3 Pt 2):763-75. doi: 10.1038/jid.2011.450.
Epub  2012 Jan 26.

Defining keratin protein function in skin epithelia: epidermolysis bullosa 
simplex and its aftermath.

Coulombe PA(1), Lee CH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bloomberg School of Public 
Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA. 
pcoulomb@jhsph.edu

Epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBS) is a rare genetic condition typified by 
superficial bullous lesions following incident frictional trauma to the skin. 
Most cases of EBS are due to dominantly acting mutations in keratin 14 (K14) or 
K5, the type I and II intermediate filament (IF) proteins that copolymerize to 
form a pancytoplasmic network of 10 nm filaments in basal keratinocytes of 
epidermis and related epithelia. Defects in K5-K14 filament network architecture 
cause basal keratinocytes to become fragile, and account for their rupture upon 
exposure to mechanical trauma. The discovery of the etiology and pathophysiology 
of EBS was intimately linked to the quest for an understanding of the properties 
and function of keratin filaments in skin epithelia. Since then, continued 
cross-fertilization between basic science efforts and clinical endeavors has 
highlighted several additional functional roles for keratin proteins in the 
skin, suggested new avenues for effective therapies for keratin-based diseases, 
and expanded our understanding of the remarkable properties of the skin as an 
organ system.

DOI: 10.1038/jid.2011.450
PMCID: PMC3279600
PMID: 22277943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: The authors 
declare no conflict of interest.