---
reference_id: "PMID:37668348"
title: "RISING STARS: Role of MED12 mutation in the pathogenesis of uterine fibroids."
authors:
- Ishikawa H
- Kobayashi T
- Kaneko M
- Saito Y
- Shozu M
- Koga K
journal: J Mol Endocrinol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1530/JME-23-0039
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- "Uterine Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Quality of Life
- "Mediator Complex/genetics, metabolism"
- "Leiomyoma/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Transcription Factors/metabolism
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# RISING STARS: Role of MED12 mutation in the pathogenesis of uterine fibroids.
**Authors:** Ishikawa H, Kobayashi T, Kaneko M, Saito Y, Shozu M, Koga K
**Journal:** J Mol Endocrinol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1530/JME-23-0039](https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-23-0039)

## Content

1. J Mol Endocrinol. 2023 Sep 29;71(4):e230039. doi: 10.1530/JME-23-0039. Print 
2023 Nov 1.

RISING STARS: Role of MED12 mutation in the pathogenesis of uterine fibroids.

Ishikawa H(1), Kobayashi T(1)(2)(3), Kaneko M(1), Saito Y(1), Shozu M(2), Koga 
K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba 
University, Chiba, Japan.
(2)Evolution and Reproductive Medicine, Medical Mycology Research Center, Chiba 
University, Chiba, Japan.
(3)Fujita Medical Innovation Center Tokyo, Reproduction Center, Tokyo, Japan.

Uterine fibroids (UFs) are benign tumors arising from the uterus, characterized 
by accumulation of abundant extracellular matrix (ECM) and sex steroid-dependent 
growth. Women with symptomatic UFs have reduced quality of life and decreased 
labor productivity. Among the driver gene mutations identified in UFs, mutations 
in MED12, a component of the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) Mediator module, are 
the most common and observed in 50-80% of UFs. They are gain-of-function 
mutations and are more frequently observed in Black women and commonly observed 
even in small UFs. MED12 mutation-positive UFs (MED12-UFs) often develop 
multiple rather than solitary and have distinct gene expression profiles, DNA 
methylomes, transcriptomes, and proteomes. Gene expressions related to ECM 
organization and collagen-rich ECM components are upregulated, and impaired 
Mediator kinase activity and dysregulation of Wnt/β-catenin signaling are 
identified in MED12-UFs. Clinically, the UF shrinking effect of 
gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists and ulipristal acetate is dependent on 
the MED12 mutation status. Understanding of characteristics of MED12-UFs and 
functions of MED12 mutations for UF tumorigenesis may elucidate the 
pathophysiology of UFs, leading to the development of new therapeutic options in 
women with symptomatic UFs.

DOI: 10.1530/JME-23-0039
PMID: 37668348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]