---
reference_id: "PMID:34301922"
title: Identification of 22 susceptibility loci associated with testicular germ cell tumors.
authors:
- Pluta J
- Pyle LC
- Nead KT
- Wilf R
- Li M
- Mitra N
- Weathers B
- "D'Andrea K"
- Almstrup K
- Anson-Cartwright L
- Benitez J
- Brown CD
- Chanock S
- Chen C
- Cortessis VK
- Ferlin A
- Foresta C
- Gamulin M
- Gietema JA
- Grasso C
- Greene MH
- Grotmol T
- Hamilton RJ
- Haugen TB
- Hauser R
- Hildebrandt MAT
- Johnson ME
- Karlsson R
- Kiemeney LA
- Lessel D
- Lothe RA
- Loud JT
- Loveday C
- Martin-Gimeno P
- Meijer C
- Nsengimana J
- Quinn DI
- Rafnar T
- Ramdas S
- Richiardi L
- Skotheim RI
- Stefansson K
- Turnbull C
- Vaughn DJ
- Wiklund F
- Wu X
- Yang D
- Zheng T
- Wells AD
- Grant SFA
- Rajpert-De Meyts E
- Schwartz SM
- Bishop DT
- McGlynn KA
- Kanetsky PA
- Nathanson KL
- Testicular Cancer Consortium
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-24334-y
keywords:
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Chromosome Mapping
- Gene Regulatory Networks/genetics
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Genome-Wide Association Study/methods
- Genotype
- Humans
- Linkage Disequilibrium
- Male
- Meta-Analysis as Topic
- "Neoplasms, Germ Cell and Embryonal/genetics, metabolism"
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Protein Interaction Maps/genetics
- "Testicular Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of 22 susceptibility loci associated with testicular germ cell tumors.
**Authors:** Pluta J, Pyle LC, Nead KT, Wilf R, Li M, Mitra N, Weathers B, D'Andrea K, Almstrup K, Anson-Cartwright L, Benitez J, Brown CD, Chanock S, Chen C, Cortessis VK, Ferlin A, Foresta C, Gamulin M, Gietema JA, Grasso C, Greene MH, Grotmol T, Hamilton RJ, Haugen TB, Hauser R, Hildebrandt MAT, Johnson ME, Karlsson R, Kiemeney LA, Lessel D, Lothe RA, Loud JT, Loveday C, Martin-Gimeno P, Meijer C, Nsengimana J, Quinn DI, Rafnar T, Ramdas S, Richiardi L, Skotheim RI, Stefansson K, Turnbull C, Vaughn DJ, Wiklund F, Wu X, Yang D, Zheng T, Wells AD, Grant SFA, Rajpert-De Meyts E, Schwartz SM, Bishop DT, McGlynn KA, Kanetsky PA, Nathanson KL, Testicular Cancer Consortium
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-021-24334-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24334-y)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2021 Jul 23;12(1):4487. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-24334-y.

Identification of 22 susceptibility loci associated with testicular germ cell 
tumors.

Pluta J(1), Pyle LC(2), Nead KT(3), Wilf R(1), Li M(4), Mitra N(4), Weathers 
B(1), D'Andrea K(1), Almstrup K(5), Anson-Cartwright L(6), Benitez J(7), Brown 
CD(8), Chanock S(9), Chen C(10), Cortessis VK(11), Ferlin A(12), Foresta C(13), 
Gamulin M(14), Gietema JA(15), Grasso C(16), Greene MH(9), Grotmol T(17), 
Hamilton RJ(6), Haugen TB(18), Hauser R(19), Hildebrandt MAT(20), Johnson 
ME(2)(21), Karlsson R(22), Kiemeney LA(23), Lessel D(24), Lothe RA(25)(26), Loud 
JT(9), Loveday C(27), Martin-Gimeno P(7), Meijer C(15), Nsengimana J(28), Quinn 
DI(29), Rafnar T(30), Ramdas S(8), Richiardi L(16), Skotheim RI(25)(31), 
Stefansson K(30), Turnbull C(26)(32), Vaughn DJ(33)(34), Wiklund F(22), Wu 
X(35), Yang D(1), Zheng T(36), Wells AD(21)(37), Grant SFA(2)(8)(21), Rajpert-De 
Meyts E(5), Schwartz SM(10), Bishop DT(38), McGlynn KA(9), Kanetsky PA(39), 
Nathanson KL(40)(41); Testicular Cancer Consortium.

Collaborators: Kubisch C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Translational Medicine and Human Genetics, Department of 
Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA.
(2)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Informatics, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Department of Growth and Reproduction, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(6)Department of Surgery (Urology), University of Toronto and The Princess 
Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(7)Human Genetics Group, Spanish National Cancer Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain.
(8)Department of Genetics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(9)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, Clinical Genetics Branch, 
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(10)Program in Epidemiology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center; Department 
of Epidemiology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(11)Departments of Preventive Medicine and Obstetrics and Gynecology, Keck 
School of Medicine at the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 
USA.
(12)Unit of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Clinical and 
Experimental Sciences, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(13)Unit of Andrology and Reproductive Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(14)Department of Oncology, Division of Medical Oncology, University Hospital 
Centre Zagreb, University of Zagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia.
(15)Department of Medical Oncology, University Medical Center Groningen, 
University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.
(16)Cancer Epidemiology Unit, Department of Medical Sciences, University of 
Turin and CPO-Piemonte, Turin, Italy.
(17)Department of Research, Cancer Registry of Norway, Oslo, Norway.
(18)Faculty of Health Sciences, OsloMet-Oslo Metropolitan University, Oslo, 
Norway.
(19)Department of Environmental Health, Department of Epidemiology, Harvard T.H. 
Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.
(20)Department of Epidemiology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(21)Center for Spatial and Functional Genomics, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(22)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(23)Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
(24)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(25)Department of Molecular Oncology, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo 
University Hospital-Radiumhospitalet, Oslo, Norway.
(26)Institute for Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, 
Oslo, Norway.
(27)Division of Genetics & Epidemiology, The Institute of Cancer Research, 
London, UK.
(28)Biostatistics Research Group, Population Health Sciences Institute, Faculty 
of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle, UK.
(29)Division of Oncology, Keck School of Medicine at the University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(30)deCODE Genetics/Amgen, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(31)Department of Informatics, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, 
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(32)William Harvey Research Institute, Queen Mary University, London, UK.
(33)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Perelman School 
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(34)Abramson Cancer Center, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(35)School of Public Health, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, China.
(36)Department of Epidemiology, Brown School of Public Health, Brown University, 
Providence, RI, USA.
(37)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(38)Department of Haematology and Immunology, Leeds Institute of Medical 
Research at St James's, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
(39)Department of Cancer Epidemiology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research 
Institute, Tampa, FL, USA.
(40)Division of Translational Medicine and Human Genetics, Department of 
Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA. knathans@upenn.edu.
(41)Abramson Cancer Center, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. knathans@upenn.edu.

Testicular germ cell tumors (TGCT) are the most common tumor in young white men 
and have a high heritability. In this study, the international Testicular Cancer 
Consortium assemble 10,156 and 179,683 men with and without TGCT, respectively, 
for a genome-wide association study. This meta-analysis identifies 22 TGCT 
susceptibility loci, bringing the total to 78, which account for 44% of disease 
heritability. Men with a polygenic risk score (PRS) in the 95th percentile have 
a 6.8-fold increased risk of TGCT compared to men with median scores. Among men 
with independent TGCT risk factors such as cryptorchidism, the PRS may guide 
screening decisions with the goal of reducing treatment-related complications 
causing long-term morbidity in survivors. These findings emphasize the 
interconnected nature of two known pathways that promote TGCT susceptibility: 
male germ cell development within its somatic niche and regulation of 
chromosomal division and structure, and implicate an additional biological 
pathway, mRNA translation.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-021-24334-y
PMCID: PMC8302763
PMID: 34301922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: T.R. and K.S. are employees of deCODE 
genetics/Amgen. The other authors report no competing interests.