---
reference_id: "PMID:35615063"
title: Molecular Mechanisms in the Genesis of Seizures and Epilepsy Associated With Viral Infection.
authors:
- Löscher W
- Howe CL
journal: Front Mol Neurosci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2022.870868
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Mechanisms in the Genesis of Seizures and Epilepsy Associated With Viral Infection.
**Authors:** Löscher W, Howe CL
**Journal:** Front Mol Neurosci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnmol.2022.870868](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnmol.2022.870868)

## Content

1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2022 May 9;15:870868. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2022.870868. 
eCollection 2022.

Molecular Mechanisms in the Genesis of Seizures and Epilepsy Associated With 
Viral Infection.

Löscher W(1)(2), Howe CL(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Pharmacy, University of Veterinary 
Medicine, Hannover, Germany.
(2)Center for Systems Neuroscience, Hannover, Germany.
(3)Division of Experimental Neurology, Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN, United States.
(4)Center for Multiple Sclerosis and Autoimmune Neurology, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN, United States.

Seizures are a common presenting symptom during viral infections of the central 
nervous system (CNS) and can occur during the initial phase of infection 
("early" or acute symptomatic seizures), after recovery ("late" or spontaneous 
seizures, indicating the development of acquired epilepsy), or both. The 
development of acute and delayed seizures may have shared as well as unique 
pathogenic mechanisms and prognostic implications. Based on an extensive review 
of the literature, we present an overview of viruses that are associated with 
early and late seizures in humans. We then describe potential pathophysiologic 
mechanisms underlying ictogenesis and epileptogenesis, including routes of 
neuroinvasion, viral control and clearance, systemic inflammation, alterations 
of the blood-brain barrier, neuroinflammation, and inflammation-induced 
molecular reorganization of synapses and neural circuits. We provide clinical 
and animal model findings to highlight commonalities and differences in these 
processes across various neurotropic or neuropathogenic viruses, including 
herpesviruses, SARS-CoV-2, flaviviruses, and picornaviruses. In addition, we 
extensively review the literature regarding Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis 
virus (TMEV). This picornavirus, although not pathogenic for humans, is possibly 
the best-characterized model for understanding the molecular mechanisms that 
drive seizures, epilepsy, and hippocampal damage during viral infection. An 
enhanced understanding of these mechanisms derived from the TMEV model may lead 
to novel therapeutic interventions that interfere with ictogenesis and 
epileptogenesis, even within non-infectious contexts.

Copyright © 2022 Löscher and Howe.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2022.870868
PMCID: PMC9125338
PMID: 35615063

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.