---
reference_id: "PMID:1788358"
title: Exercise-induced asthma, anaphylaxis, and urticaria.
authors:
- Kobayashi RH
- Mellion MB
journal: Prim Care
year: '1991'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exercise-induced asthma, anaphylaxis, and urticaria.
**Authors:** Kobayashi RH, Mellion MB
**Journal:** Prim Care (1991)

## Content

1. Prim Care. 1991 Dec;18(4):809-31.

Exercise-induced asthma, anaphylaxis, and urticaria.

Kobayashi RH(1), Mellion MB.

Author information:
(1)UCLA School of Medicine.

Exercise-induced asthma is a common but frequently undiagnosed problem. The 
patient may not wheeze, but rather have shortness of breath, chest tightening, 
and coughing. The coach and the physician must be particularly alert to the 
signs and symptoms of exercise-induced asthma to recognize this syndrome. Proper 
conditioning, warming up, inducing refractoriness, participating in sports less 
likely to provoke exercise-induced asthma, and the aggressive use of appropriate 
medications allow patients to enjoy sports and compete effectively. A rare but 
potentially fatal syndrome is exercise-induced anaphylaxis. Accurate diagnosis 
and differentiation from other exertion-related syndromes are critical, and 
appropriate precautions are necessary. A third clinical entity, exercise-induced 
cholinergic urticaria, although not life-threatening, can be quite annoying. 
Aggravating factors, such as increased heat, compound the problems. In summary, 
exercise-induced allergic phenomena are common and should be recognized by the 
practicing physician.

PMID: 1788358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]