---
reference_id: "PMID:36657988"
title: "Child Neurology: Infantile Biotin Thiamine Responsive Basal Ganglia Disease: Case Report and Brief Review."
authors:
- Maney K
- Pizoli C
- Russ JB
journal: Neurology
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000206832
keywords:
- Infant
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- Child
- Biotin
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Mutation
- Membrane Transport Proteins/genetics
- Basal Ganglia Diseases/genetics
- Thiamine
- Vitamins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Child Neurology: Infantile Biotin Thiamine Responsive Basal Ganglia Disease: Case Report and Brief Review.
**Authors:** Maney K, Pizoli C, Russ JB
**Journal:** Neurology (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000206832](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000206832)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2023 Apr 25;100(17):836-839. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000206832.
Epub  2023 Jan 19.

Child Neurology: Infantile Biotin Thiamine Responsive Basal Ganglia Disease:
Case Report and Brief Review.

Maney K(1), Pizoli C(1), Russ JB(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Child Neurology Residency Program (K.M.), Department of Pediatrics,
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC; and Department of Pediatrics (C.P.,
J.B.R.), Division of Pediatric Neurology, Duke University School of Medicine,
Durham, NC.
(2)From the Child Neurology Residency Program (K.M.), Department of Pediatrics,
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC; and Department of Pediatrics (C.P.,
J.B.R.), Division of Pediatric Neurology, Duke University School of Medicine,
Durham, NC. jeffrey.russ@duke.edu.

Biotin thiamine responsive basal ganglia disease (BTRBGD) is an inherited
autosomal recessive disorder that results from the inability of thiamine to
cross the blood-brain barrier. It is considered a treatable condition if vitamin
supplementation, most commonly with thiamine and biotin, is initiated early.
BTRBGD can present as an infantile form, classical childhood form, or adult
Wernicke-like encephalopathy. The infantile form is often the most severe and
portends a worse prognosis with high mortality despite vitamin supplementation.
We present a two-month-old who presented with irritability, opisthotonos, and
abnormal eye movements who was found to have compound heterozygous variants in
the SLC19A3 gene inherited in trans, including one known pathogenic intronic
variant and a novel variant presumed to be pathogenic. She was therefore
diagnosed with infantile BTRBGD. In this report, we discuss the differential for
infantile BTRBGD, the clinical and radiologic features of BTRBGD, and describe a
rapid, positive response to early vitamin supplementation in an infant with a
likely pathogenic novel variant in SLC19A3.

© 2023 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000206832
PMCID: PMC10136005
PMID: 36657988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no disclosures relevant to
the manuscript. Go to Neurology.org/N for full disclosures.
