---
reference_id: "PMID:35679445"
title: SLC25A24 Fontaine Progeroid Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Velasco D
- Olney AH
- Starr L
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SLC25A24 Fontaine Progeroid Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Velasco D, Olney AH, Starr L

## Content

1. SLC25A24 Fontaine Progeroid Syndrome.

Velasco D(1), Olney AH(2), Starr L(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2022 Jun 9.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Geneticist and Assistant Professor, Pediatrics and Munroe-Meyer
Institute for Genetics & Rehabilitation, University of Nebraska Medical Center,
Omaha, Nebraska
(2)Clinical Geneticist and Professor, Pediatrics and Munroe-Meyer Institute for
Genetics & Rehabilitation, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
Nebraska
(3)Clinical Geneticist and Associate Professor, Pediatrics and Munroe-Meyer
Institute for Genetics & Rehabilitation, University of Nebraska Medical Center,
Omaha, Nebraska

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: SLC25A24 Fontaine progeroid syndrome is a multisystem
connective tissue disorder characterized by poor growth, abnormal skeletal
features, and distinctive craniofacial features with sagging, thin skin, and
decreased subcutaneous fat suggesting an aged appearance that is most pronounced
in infancy and improves with time. Characteristic radiographic features include
turribrachycephaly with widely open anterior fontanelle, craniosynostosis, and
anomalies of the terminal phalanges. Cardiovascular, genitourinary, ocular, and
gastrointestinal abnormalities may also occur. To date, 13 individuals with a
molecularly confirmed diagnosis of SLC25A24 Fontaine progeroid syndrome have
been described.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SLC25A24 Fontaine progeroid syndrome is
established in a proband with suggestive findings and a heterozygous pathogenic
variant in SLC25A24 identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Management, which is largely
symptomatic, may be performed by specialists in multiple disciplines, including
a craniofacial clinic (involving plastic surgery, neurosurgery, and
otolaryngology), cardiology, pulmonology, gastroenterology, and clinical
genetics. Some students may benefit from an individualized education plan
through their school. Surveillance: Routine evaluation to assess development of
new manifestations and response to ongoing management. Agents/circumstances to
avoid: Contact sports and isometric exercise may need to be restricted if
cranial anomalies and/or aortic dilatation are present.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SLC25A24 Fontaine progeroid syndrome is an autosomal
dominant disorder typically caused by a de novo pathogenic variant. Risk to
future pregnancies is presumed to be low as the proband most likely has a de
novo SLC25A24 pathogenic variant. However, given a recurrence risk (~1%) to sibs
based on the theoretic possibility of parental germline mosaicism, prenatal and
preimplantation genetic testing may be considered.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 35679445
