---
reference_id: "PMID:10922034"
title: Molecular and cell biology aspects of plague.
authors:
- Cornelis GR
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.97.16.8778
keywords:
- Animals
- Bacterial Proteins/physiology
- Plasmids
- Virulence
- "Yersinia pestis/genetics, pathogenicity"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular and cell biology aspects of plague.
**Authors:** Cornelis GR
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.97.16.8778](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.97.16.8778)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Aug 1;97(16):8778-83. doi:
10.1073/pnas.97.16.8778.

Molecular and cell biology aspects of plague.

Cornelis GR(1).

Author information:
(1)Microbial Pathogenesis Unit, Christian de Duve Institute of Cellular
Pathology, and Faculté de Médecine, Université Catholique de Louvain, Avenue
Hippocrate, 74, UCL 74.49, B-1200 Brussels, Belgium. cornelis@mipa.ucl.ac.be

A 70-kb virulence plasmid (sometimes called pYV) enables Yersinia spp. to
survive and multiply in the lymphoid tissues of their host. It encodes the Yop
virulon, a system consisting of secreted proteins called Yops and their
dedicated type III secretion apparatus called Ysc. The Ysc apparatus forms a
channel composed of 29 proteins. Of these, 10 have counterparts in almost every
type III system. Secretion of some Yops requires the assistance, in the
bacterial cytosol, of small individual chaperones called the Syc proteins. These
chaperones act as bodyguards or secretion pilots for their partner Yop. Yop
proteins fall into two categories. Some are intracellular effectors, whereas the
others are "translocators" needed to deliver the effectors across the eukaryotic
plasma membrane, into eukaryotic cells. The translocators (YopB, YopD, LcrV)
form a pore of 16-23 A in the eukaryotic cell plasma membrane. The effector Yops
are YopE, YopH, YpkA/YopO, YopP/YopJ, YopM, and YopT. YopH is a powerful
phosphotyrosine phosphatase playing an antiphagocytic role by dephosphorylating
several focal adhesion proteins. YopE and YopT contribute to antiphagocytic
effects by inactivating GTPases controlling cytoskeleton dynamics. YopP/YopJ
plays an anti-inflammatory role by preventing the activation of the
transcription factor NF-kappaB. It also induces rapid apoptosis of macrophages.
Less is known about the role of the phosphoserine kinase YopO/YpkA and YopM.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.97.16.8778
PMCID: PMC34011
PMID: 10922034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
