---
reference_id: "PMID:15758010"
title: MGMT gene silencing and benefit from temozolomide in glioblastoma.
authors:
- Hegi ME
- Diserens AC
- Gorlia T
- Hamou MF
- de Tribolet N
- Weller M
- Kros JM
- Hainfellner JA
- Mason W
- Mariani L
- Bromberg JE
- Hau P
- Mirimanoff RO
- Cairncross JG
- Janzer RC
- Stupp R
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa043331
keywords:
- "Antineoplastic Agents, Alkylating/therapeutic use"
- "Brain Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, mortality, radiotherapy"
- "Chemotherapy, Adjuvant"
- DNA Methylation
- "Dacarbazine/analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use"
- Disease-Free Survival
- Gene Silencing
- "Glioblastoma/drug therapy, genetics, mortality, radiotherapy"
- Humans
- O(6)-Methylguanine-DNA Methyltransferase/genetics
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Survival Analysis
- Temozolomide
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MGMT gene silencing and benefit from temozolomide in glioblastoma.
**Authors:** Hegi ME, Diserens AC, Gorlia T, Hamou MF, de Tribolet N, Weller M, Kros JM, Hainfellner JA, Mason W, Mariani L, Bromberg JE, Hau P, Mirimanoff RO, Cairncross JG, Janzer RC, Stupp R
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa043331](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa043331)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2005 Mar 10;352(10):997-1003. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa043331.

MGMT gene silencing and benefit from temozolomide in glioblastoma.

Hegi ME(1), Diserens AC, Gorlia T, Hamou MF, de Tribolet N, Weller M, Kros JM, 
Hainfellner JA, Mason W, Mariani L, Bromberg JE, Hau P, Mirimanoff RO, 
Cairncross JG, Janzer RC, Stupp R.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Biology and Genetics, Department of Neurosurgery, 
University Hospital Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. monika.hegi@chuv.hospvd.ch

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2005 Mar 10;352(10):1036-8. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe058010.
    N Engl J Med. 2005 Jun 2;352(22):2350-3; author reply 2350-3.
    N Engl J Med. 2005 Jun 2;352(22):2350-3; author reply 2350-3.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic silencing of the MGMT (O6-methylguanine-DNA 
methyltransferase) DNA-repair gene by promoter methylation compromises DNA 
repair and has been associated with longer survival in patients with 
glioblastoma who receive alkylating agents.
METHODS: We tested the relationship between MGMT silencing in the tumor and the 
survival of patients who were enrolled in a randomized trial comparing 
radiotherapy alone with radiotherapy combined with concomitant and adjuvant 
treatment with temozolomide. The methylation status of the MGMT promoter was 
determined by methylation-specific polymerase-chain-reaction analysis.
RESULTS: The MGMT promoter was methylated in 45 percent of 206 assessable cases. 
Irrespective of treatment, MGMT promoter methylation was an independent 
favorable prognostic factor (P<0.001 by the log-rank test; hazard ratio, 0.45; 
95 percent confidence interval, 0.32 to 0.61). Among patients whose tumor 
contained a methylated MGMT promoter, a survival benefit was observed in 
patients treated with temozolomide and radiotherapy; their median survival was 
21.7 months (95 percent confidence interval, 17.4 to 30.4), as compared with 
15.3 months (95 percent confidence interval, 13.0 to 20.9) among those who were 
assigned to only radiotherapy (P=0.007 by the log-rank test). In the absence of 
methylation of the MGMT promoter, there was a smaller and statistically 
insignificant difference in survival between the treatment groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with glioblastoma containing a methylated MGMT promoter 
benefited from temozolomide, whereas those who did not have a methylated MGMT 
promoter did not have such a benefit.

Copyright 2005 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa043331
PMID: 15758010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]