---
reference_id: "PMID:35244537"
title: Detection of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors in patients with neurofibromatosis using aneuploidy and mutation identification in plasma.
authors:
- Mattox AK
- Douville C
- Silliman N
- Ptak J
- Dobbyn L
- Schaefer J
- Popoli M
- Blair C
- Judge K
- Pollard K
- Pratilas C
- Blakeley J
- Rodriguez F
- Papadopoulos N
- Belzberg A
- Bettegowda C
journal: Elife
year: '2022'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.74238
keywords:
- Aneuploidy
- "Genes, Neurofibromatosis 1"
- Humans
- Mutation
- Nerve Sheath Neoplasms/genetics
- Neurofibroma/genetics
- "Neurofibroma, Plexiform/genetics"
- Neurofibromatosis 1/genetics
- Neurofibrosarcoma/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Detection of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors in patients with neurofibromatosis using aneuploidy and mutation identification in plasma.
**Authors:** Mattox AK, Douville C, Silliman N, Ptak J, Dobbyn L, Schaefer J, Popoli M, Blair C, Judge K, Pollard K, Pratilas C, Blakeley J, Rodriguez F, Papadopoulos N, Belzberg A, Bettegowda C
**Journal:** Elife (2022)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.74238](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.74238)

## Content

1. Elife. 2022 Mar 4;11:e74238. doi: 10.7554/eLife.74238.

Detection of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors in patients with
neurofibromatosis using aneuploidy and mutation identification in plasma.

Mattox AK(#)(1), Douville C(#)(1), Silliman N(1), Ptak J(1), Dobbyn L(1),
Schaefer J(1), Popoli M(1), Blair C(1), Judge K(1), Pollard K(2)(3), Pratilas
C(2), Blakeley J(4), Rodriguez F(5), Papadopoulos N(1)(3)(5), Belzberg A(6),
Bettegowda C(1)(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Center for Cancer Genetics and Therapeutics, Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, United States.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, United States.
(3)Department of Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, United States.
(4)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, MD
School of Medicine, Baltimore, United States.
(5)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, United States.
(6)Department of Neurosurgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNST) are the deadliest cancer that
arises in individuals diagnosed with neurofibromatosis and account for nearly 5%
of the 15,000 soft tissue sarcomas diagnosed in the United States each year.
Comprised of neoplastic Schwann cells, primary risk factors for developing MPNST
include existing plexiform neurofibromas (PN), prior radiotherapy treatment, and
expansive germline mutations involving the entire NF1 gene and surrounding
genes. PN develop in nearly 30-50% of patients with neurofibromatosis type 1
(NF1) and most often grow rapidly in the first decade of life. One of the most
important aspects of clinical care for NF1 patients is monitoring PN for signs
of malignant transformation to MPNST that occurs in 10-15% of patients. We
perform aneuploidy analysis on ctDNA from 883 ostensibly healthy individuals and
28 patients with neurofibromas, including 7 patients with benign neurofibroma, 9
patients with PN and 12 patients with MPNST. Overall sensitivity for detecting
MPNST using genome wide aneuploidy scoring was 33%, and analysis of
sub-chromosomal copy number alterations (CNAs) improved sensitivity to 50% while
retaining a high specificity of 97%. In addition, we performed mutation analysis
on plasma cfDNA for a subset of patients and identified mutations in NF1, NF2,
RB1, TP53BP2, and GOLGA2. Given the high throughput and relatively low
sequencing coverage required by our assay, liquid biopsy represents a promising
technology to identify incipient MPNST.

© 2022, Mattox et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.74238
PMCID: PMC9094745
PMID: 35244537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AM, NS, JP, LD, JS, MP, CB, KJ, KP, JB, FR, AB
No competing interests declared, CD is a consultant to Exact Sciences and is
compensated with income and equity, CP is a paid consultant for Roche/ Genentech
and Day One Therapeutics; and receives research funding from Kura Oncology and
Novartis Institute of Biomedical Research, all for work that is outside the
scope of the submitted manuscript, NP is a founder of Thrive Earlier Detection,
an Exact Sciences Company. Is a consultant to Thrive Earlier Detection. Holds
equity in Exact Sciences. Is a founder of and holds equity in Personal Genome
Diagnostics. Is a consultant to Personal Genome Diagnostics. Is a founder and
holds equity in ManaTbio. Is a founder, holds equity, and serves on the board of
directors of Haystack, Inc. Holds equity in and is a consultant to CAGE Pharma.
Owns equity in Neophore and is a consultant to Neophore. The companies named
above as well as other companies have licensed previously described technologies
related to the work described in this paper from Johns Hopkins University. Is an
inventor on some of these technologies. Licenses to these technologies are or
will be associated with equity or royalty payments to the inventors as well as
to Johns Hopkins University. The terms of all of these arrangements are being
managed by Johns Hopkins University in accordance with its conflict-of-interest
policies, CB is a consultant for Depuy-Synthes, Galectin Therapeutics and
Bionaut Labs
