---
reference_id: "PMID:38256547"
title: "Retrograde Cricopharyngeal Dysfunction: A Review."
authors:
- Miller ME
- Lina I
- Akst LM
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/jcm13020413
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retrograde Cricopharyngeal Dysfunction: A Review.
**Authors:** Miller ME, Lina I, Akst LM
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm13020413](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm13020413)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2024 Jan 11;13(2):413. doi: 10.3390/jcm13020413.

Retrograde Cricopharyngeal Dysfunction: A Review.

Miller ME(1), Lina I(1), Akst LM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins School of 
Medicine, 601 N Caroline Street, 6th Floor, Suite 6251, Baltimore, MD 21287, 
USA.

Retrograde cricopharyngeal dysfunction (RCPD), also referred to as retrograde 
cricopharyngeus dysfunction, is a condition characterized by the inability to 
burp. The pathophysiology of this condition is thought to result from failure of 
cricopharyngeal sphincter relaxation during periods of esophageal distension, 
which leads to patients' bothersome symptoms. RCPD negatively impacts patients' 
quality of life and is associated with bloating, gurgling, avoidance of 
carbonation, self-imposed dietary and lifestyle changes designed to minimize 
discomfort, and flatulence. Complaints often start during adolescence, and many 
patients search for a diagnosis for years before obtaining treatment. A recent 
increase in awareness through patient-led social media discussion boards 
describing the 'no burp' syndrome is leading to an increasing incidence of 
presentations, often with patients making a self-diagnosis. The increased 
incidence of RCPD is fueling a larger case series investigating treatment 
options and outcomes. In this review, we discuss what is known about the 
pathophysiology of this condition, the otolaryngologic perspective on diagnosis 
and treatment, the patients' lived experience of this condition, and the 
influence of social media on RCPD.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm13020413
PMCID: PMC10817096
PMID: 38256547

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.