---
reference_id: "PMID:12627231"
title: Mutant dynactin in motor neuron disease.
authors:
- Puls I
- Jonnakuty C
- LaMonte BH
- Holzbaur EL
- Tokito M
- Mann E
- Floeter MK
- Bidus K
- Drayna D
- Oh SJ
- Brown RH Jr
- Ludlow CL
- Fischbeck KH
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1038/ng1123
keywords:
- Amino Acid Motifs
- Animals
- Biological Transport
- Centromere/metabolism
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 2"
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- Drosophila
- Dynactin Complex
- Genetic Linkage
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Microtubule-Associated Proteins/genetics
- Microtubules/metabolism
- "Models, Genetic"
- "Models, Molecular"
- Motor Neuron Disease/genetics
- Mutation
- Protein Binding
- "Protein Structure, Secondary"
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- Protein Transport
- "Recombination, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutant dynactin in motor neuron disease.
**Authors:** Puls I, Jonnakuty C, LaMonte BH, Holzbaur EL, Tokito M, Mann E, Floeter MK, Bidus K, Drayna D, Oh SJ, Brown RH Jr, Ludlow CL, Fischbeck KH
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1123](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1123)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2003 Apr;33(4):455-6. doi: 10.1038/ng1123. Epub 2003 Mar 10.

Mutant dynactin in motor neuron disease.

Puls I(1), Jonnakuty C, LaMonte BH, Holzbaur EL, Tokito M, Mann E, Floeter MK, 
Bidus K, Drayna D, Oh SJ, Brown RH Jr, Ludlow CL, Fischbeck KH.

Author information:
(1)Neurogenetics Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. 
pulsi@ninds.nih.gov

Impaired axonal transport in motor neurons has been proposed as a mechanism for 
neuronal degeneration in motor neuron disease. Here we show linkage of a lower 
motor neuron disease to a region of 4 Mb at chromosome 2p13. Mutation analysis 
of a gene in this interval that encodes the largest subunit of the axonal 
transport protein dynactin showed a single base-pair change resulting in an 
amino-acid substitution that is predicted to distort the folding of dynactin's 
microtubule-binding domain. Binding assays show decreased binding of the mutant 
protein to microtubules. Our results show that dysfunction of dynactin-mediated 
transport can lead to human motor neuron disease.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1123
PMID: 12627231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]