---
reference_id: "PMID:9155679"
title: "Mucopolysaccharidosis type VII associated with hydrops fetalis: histopathological and ultrastructural features with genetic implications."
authors:
- Molyneux AJ
- Blair E
- Coleman N
- Daish P
journal: J Clin Pathol
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1136/jcp.50.3.252
keywords:
- Fatal Outcome
- Humans
- "Hydrops Fetalis/complications, pathology"
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Infant, Premature"
- Male
- "Mucopolysaccharidosis VII/complications, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mucopolysaccharidosis type VII associated with hydrops fetalis: histopathological and ultrastructural features with genetic implications.
**Authors:** Molyneux AJ, Blair E, Coleman N, Daish P
**Journal:** J Clin Pathol (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jcp.50.3.252](https://doi.org/10.1136/jcp.50.3.252)

## Content

1. J Clin Pathol. 1997 Mar;50(3):252-4. doi: 10.1136/jcp.50.3.252.

Mucopolysaccharidosis type VII associated with hydrops fetalis: 
histopathological and ultrastructural features with genetic implications.

Molyneux AJ(1), Blair E, Coleman N, Daish P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular Pathology, Northampton General Hospital NHS Trust.

A case of mucopolysaccharidosis type VII (MPS VII, beta glucuronidase 
deficiency) causing fatal hydrops fetalis in the third trimester is presented. 
The diagnosis was suspected on histopathological examination by the presence of 
foam cells in many of the viscera and foamy change in the placental Hofbauer 
cells. Electron microscopy showed empty cytoplasmic inclusion bodies within 
macrophages and in the Hofbauer cells. Enzyme assay of cultured fibroblasts 
showed markedly deficient beta glucuronidase activity, thus confirming the 
diagnosis. A detailed and thorough histopathological examination of hydrops 
fetalis cases is important to detect subtle features of inherited metabolic 
disorders. Use of a structured necropsy protocol is recommended for cases of 
non-immune hydrops. Electron microscopy is a useful adjunct to light microscopy 
in cases where an inherited metabolic disorder is suspected. Precise necropsy 
diagnosis is important as there are implications for genetic counselling and 
possible prenatal diagnosis in subsequent pregnancies.

DOI: 10.1136/jcp.50.3.252
PMCID: PMC499823
PMID: 9155679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]