---
reference_id: "PMID:10471501"
title: Selective agenesis of the dorsal pancreas in mice lacking homeobox gene Hlxb9.
authors:
- Li H
- Arber S
- Jessell TM
- Edlund H
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1038/12669
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Differentiation
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- "Genes, Homeobox"
- Glucose Transporter Type 2
- "Homeodomain Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Homozygote
- Immunohistochemistry
- In Situ Hybridization
- Mice
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- Monosaccharide Transport Proteins/metabolism
- Notochord/metabolism
- "Pancreas/abnormalities, embryology"
- "Recombination, Genetic"
- Time Factors
- Trans-Activators/genetics
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Selective agenesis of the dorsal pancreas in mice lacking homeobox gene Hlxb9.
**Authors:** Li H, Arber S, Jessell TM, Edlund H
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1038/12669](https://doi.org/10.1038/12669)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1999 Sep;23(1):67-70. doi: 10.1038/12669.

Selective agenesis of the dorsal pancreas in mice lacking homeobox gene Hlxb9.

Li H(1), Arber S, Jessell TM, Edlund H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Umeâ, S-901 87 Umeâ, Sweden.

The initial stages of pancreatic development occur early during mammalian 
embryogenesis, but the genes governing this process remain largely unknown. The 
homeodomain protein Pdx1 is expressed in the developing pancreatic anlagen from 
the approximately 10-somite stage, and mutations in the gene Pdx1 prevent the 
development of the pancreas. The initial stages of pancreatic development, 
however, still occur in Pdx1-deficient mice. Hlxb9 (encoding Hb9; ref. 6) is a 
homeobox gene that in humans has been linked to dominant inherited sacral 
agenesis and we show here that Hb9 is expressed at early stages of mouse 
pancreatic development and later in differentiated beta-cells. Hlxb9 has an 
essential function in the initial stages of pancreatic development. In absence 
of Hlxb9 expression, the dorsal region of the gut epithelium fails to initiate a 
pancreatic differentiation program. In contrast, the ventral pancreatic endoderm 
develops but exhibits a later and more subtle perturbation in beta-cell 
differentiation and in islet cell organization. Thus, dorsally Hlxb9 is required 
for specifying the gut epithelium to a pancreatic fate and ventrally for 
ensuring proper endocrine cell differentiation.

DOI: 10.1038/12669
PMID: 10471501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]