---
reference_id: "PMID:39381601"
title: "Rapid identification of primary atopic disorders (PAD) by a clinical landmark-guided, upfront use of genomic sequencing."
authors:
- Niehues T
- von Hardenberg S
- Velleuer E
journal: Allergol Select
year: '2024'
doi: 10.5414/ALX02520E
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rapid identification of primary atopic disorders (PAD) by a clinical landmark-guided, upfront use of genomic sequencing.
**Authors:** Niehues T, von Hardenberg S, Velleuer E
**Journal:** Allergol Select (2024)
**DOI:** [10.5414/ALX02520E](https://doi.org/10.5414/ALX02520E)

## Content

1. Allergol Select. 2024 Oct 2;8:304-323. doi: 10.5414/ALX02520E. eCollection
2024.

Rapid identification of primary atopic disorders (PAD) by a clinical 
landmark-guided, upfront use of genomic sequencing.

Niehues T(1), von Hardenberg S(2), Velleuer E(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Child and Adolescent Health, Helios Hospital Krefeld, Academic 
Hospital of RWTH Aachen, Krefeld.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, and.
(3)Department of Cytopathology, Institute of Pathology, Heinrich Heine 
University Düsseldorf, Germany.

Primary atopic disorders (PAD) are monogenic disorders caused by pathogenic gene 
variants encoding proteins that are key for the maintenance of a healthy skin 
barrier and a well-functioning immune system. Physicians face the challenge to 
find single, extremely rare PAD patients/families among the millions of 
individuals with common allergic diseases. We describe case scenarios with 
signature PAD. We review the literature and deduct specific clinical red flags 
for PAD detection. They include a positive family history and/or signs of 
pathological susceptibility to infections, immunodysregulation, or syndromic 
disease. Results of conventional laboratory and most immunological lab studies 
are not sufficient to make a definitive diagnosis of PAD. In the past, multistep 
narrowing of differential diagnoses by various immunological and other 
laboratory tests led to testing of single genes or gene panel analyses, which 
was a time-consuming and often unsuccessful approach. The implementation of 
whole-genomic analyses in the routine diagnostics has led to a paradigm shift. 
Upfront genome-wide analysis by whole genome sequencing (WGS) will shorten the 
time to diagnosis, save patients from unnecessary investigations, and reduce 
morbidity and mortality. We propose a rational, clinical landmark-based approach 
for deciding which cases pass the filter for carrying out early WGS. WGS result 
interpretation requires a great deal of caution regarding the causal 
relationship of variants in PAD phenotypes and absence of proof by adequate 
functional tests. In case of negative WGS results, a re-iteration attitude with 
re-analyses of the data (using the latest data base annotation)) may eventually 
lead to PAD diagnosis. PAD, like many other rare genetic diseases, will only be 
successfully managed, if physicians from different clinical specialties and 
geneticists interact regularly in multidisciplinary conferences.

© Dustri-Verlag Dr. K. Feistle.

DOI: 10.5414/ALX02520E
PMCID: PMC11460323
PMID: 39381601

Conflict of interest statement: TN: Non-profit organizations (travel expenses, 
no fees): Jeffrey Modell Foundation (parent organization, donations from the 
industry); info4pi.org; PENTA Global Pediatric Research Network (with donations 
from industry); penta-id.org; JIR Cohort (research network with donations from 
industry); Publishers (royalties): UpToDate, Inc; Springer, Elsevier; Indirect 
interests (membership) Transparency International; Parents’ associations 
(children with cancer Krefeld, children’s cancer clinic Düsseldorf); SvH: None. 
Figure 1.Physiology of the normal skin/mucosa barrier (upper panel) and newborn 
of 37 + 6 weeks gestation with Netherton Syndrome (pathogenic variants in 
SPINK5): Ichthyosiform erythroderma with generalized scaling, severe cutaneous 
inflammation resulting in debilitating pruritus and extremely sensitive skin 
(lower panel, provided by Dr. Arpe, St. Marien Hospital, Düren, Germany). SPINK5 
(serine protease inhibitor Kazal-type 5) encodes the multidomain serine protease 
inhibitor LEKTI (lymphoepithelial Kazal-type-related inhibitor), which controls 
the kallikrein network of the epidermis and regulates desmosome turnover. 
Desmosomes seal the keratinocyte network. Corneodesmosin (CDSN), Desmoglein1 
(DSG1), or Desmoplakin (DSP) are key intercellular adhesion molecules. Filaggrin 
monomers contribute to epidermal water retention through their hygroscopic 
properties. Activation of Dectin 1 or IL17 receptor (IL17R) leads to activation 
of CARD14 and NFκB, important for keratinocyte homeostasis (upper panel from 
left to right).Figure 2A.Physiology of mast cell activation (left panel) and 
clinical images of an 8-year-old girl with PLCγ2-associated antibody deficiency 
and immune dysregulation (right panel; PLCG2 variant c.313G>A p.(Val10Ile), 
Department of Human Genetics, University of Göttingen) and urticaria on the 
right wrist after exposure to cooling (swimming pool) (above) and 
vesiculobullous eruptions on colder areas, knees (below). SCF is the primary 
growth factor for mast cells, KIT, the cognate receptor for SCF. EGF-like 
module-containing mucin-like hormone receptor-like 2 (EMR2) is encoded by 
ADGRE2. Attachment to the membrane is mediated by a noncovalently bound subunit 
of the receptor, which activates EMR2/ADGRE2 in mast cells, when forcefully 
dissociated by physical shearing forces/mechanical stress (vibration), leading 
to degranulation. Phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase Cγ2 (PLCγ2) is 
important for B-cell differentiation and function. In mast cells, PLCγ2 is 
downstream of the IgE receptor and catalyzes the hydrolysis of 
phosphatidylinositol 4, 5-bisphosphate to the secondary messengers inositol 
triphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG). IP3 induces the release of Ca2+ 
from the ER. PLCγ2 can be activated by cold temperature, which leads to 
spontaneous calcium flux and degranulation. Tryptase (TPSAB1) is present in mast 
cell secretory granules. α- and β-tryptases form tetramers stabilized by heparin 
and are released after degranulation, where they contribute to allergic 
inflammation, inducing pruritus (adapted from Carlberg and Velleuer. Molecular 
Immunology: How Science Works, Publisher, Springer International Publishing, 
2022 and [6, 7, 8]).Figure 2B.Physiology of granulocyte NLRP3 inflammasome 
activation (left panel) and a 2-month-old boy with CINCA/NOMID (right panel; GOF 
variant in NLRP3; Institute for Clinical Chemistry, Ludwig Maximilian 
University, Munich, Germany) with continuous fever since birth, urticarial rash 
in changing locations (above), marked eosinophilia (up to 35,000/μL) and fast 
recovery after institution of IL1-blocking treatment (Anakinra) (below). The 
NLRP3 inflammasome is a multiprotein complex composed of NLRP3, adapter protein 
ASC, and protease caspase-1. Upon various stimuli (e.g., microbial ligands, 
crystals) NLRP3 inflammasome activates caspase‐1 to induce the release of 
proinflammatory IL1β (adapted from Carlberg and Velleuer. Molecular Immunology: 
How Science Works, Publisher, Springer International Publishing, 2022). Table 
1.Other primary atopic diseases with disrupted epithelial and/or mucosal skin 
barrier [9, 10, 11]. DiseaseOMIM-PGeneInheritancePhenotypeFilaggrin 
deficiency#146700FLGAD or AR (LOF)– Ichthyosis vulgaris – Early-onset persistent 
atopic eczema – Elevated risk of food allergy and eczema herpeticumSevere 
dermatitis – multiple allergies – metabolic wasting syndrome (SAM)#615508DSG1; 
DSPAD or AR (LOF)– Life-threatening condition, severe dermatitis, multiple 
allergies, metabolic wasting – Hypotrichosis, palmoplantar hyperkeratosis, 
enamel defects, recurrent (skin) infections – In some patients little systemic 
involvement Peeling skin syndrome type B#270300CDSNAR (LOF)– Lifelong patchy 
peeling of the skin with chronic pruritus – Frequent food allergy, recurrent 
skin infections – Usually no failure to thriveCARD14 deficiency#602723CARD14AD 
(LOF)– Severe atopy, severe pyogenic and viral skin and respiratory tract 
infections due to impaired NFkB activation and impaired epidermal secretion of 
antimicrobial peptidesAD = autosomal dominant; AR = autosomal recessive; LOF = 
loss of function. Table 2.Other primary atopic disorders with dysregulated 
granulocyte / mast cell function [8, 13, 14]. 
DiseaseOMIM-PGeneInheritancePhenotypeCryopyrin-associated periodic syndromes 
(CAPS) composed of 1. Muckle-Wells syndrome 2. Familial cold autoinflammatory 
syndrome (FCAS1) 3. Neonatal onset multisystem inflammatory disease (NOMID) or 
chronic infantile neurologic cutaneous and articular syndrome (CINCA)#191900 
#607115 #120100NLRP3AD (GOF)– Maculopapular, non-pruritic and most predominantly 
urticarial rashes – Arthritis, chills, fever and leukocytosis, e.g., after cold 
exposure (FCAS1) – Recurrent fever, musculoskeletal symptoms, abdominal and 
thoracic serositis, headache, ophthalmic and auditory nerve inflammation 
potentially leading to deafness and blindness preventable by IL1-directed 
treatment – Severity of symptoms variable between and within conditions, and not 
indicative of a particular diseaseNLRC4 or NLRP12-associated autoinflammatory 
diseases#616115 #611762NLRC4 NLRP12AD (GOF)Fever, arthritis/arthralgia, rash, 
abdominal pain, diarrhea, myalgia/fatigue and conjunctivitis triggered by cold 
exposureAD = autosomal dominant; GOF = gain of function. Figure 3.Central 
tolerance induction physiology (left panel) and neonate with Omenn syndrome and 
erythroderma (right panel, above) who was successfully treated by cord blood 
transplantation (below); (pictures kindly provided by H. Ott, Hannover, 
published in [16]). The thymic selection of T cells during the first decade of 
life produces millions of antigenically distinct T cells carrying a very diverse 
T-cell receptor (TCR) repertoire prepared to encounter millions of variants of 
microbial and other antigens. Some autoreactive T-cell clones are also 
generated. This selection process is called central tolerance induction. Figure 
4.Physiology of Tregs (regulatory T cells) (left panel) and an infant with IPEX 
syndrome (immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked) 
(right panel, above). The patient presented with severe autoimmune enteropathy 
and growth charts showing failure to thrive, length and weight < 3rd percentile 
(right panel, below). Tregs induce peripheral tolerance, preventing development 
of autoimmune and allergic diseases. Their expression of the high affinity 
trimeric α/β/γ IL2 receptor (IL2R) helps them to selectively bind IL2 and draw 
it away from T effector cells (Teff) expressing only the low moderate affinity 
(β/γ) IL2R. FOXP3 is the lineage defining transcription factor for the 
development of Tregs. High levels of FOXP3 expression are directly linked to the 
suppressive capacity of Tregs. FOXP3 expression leads to the upregulation of the 
high affinity IL2 receptor as well as CTLA-4 on Tregs. CTLA-4 competes with the 
co-stimulatory molecule, CD28, for binding to CD80 and CD86 on antigen 
presenting cells (APCs). This is one other mechanism by which Tregs suppress 
immune responses. IKZF (IKAROS family zinc finger) have been shown to be 
critical for Treg and hematopoietic development. Table 3.Other primary atopic 
diseases Tregopathies [17, 18]. DiseaseOMIM-PGeneInheritancePhenotypeDisorders 
of Treg transcriptional programsIKAROS-associated (IKZF1) disease#616873IKZF1AD 
(GOF or LOF)– Onset > 1 to up to 40 years of age – Many present with atopic 
diseases – Autoimmunity/immune dysregulation can be profound: e.g. autoimmune 
cytopenias (Evans Syndrome), lymphoproliferation, plasma cell expansion (IgG4+), 
type 1 diabetes, thyroiditis alopecia, vitiligo, celiac disease, colitis) – 
Sinopulmonary infections – Expressivity of GOF variants is variable, 
asymptomatic individuals are commonDisorders of IL2 or CTLA4 
signalingInterleukin 2 receptor a (IL2RA (CD25)) or interleukin-2 receptor β 
(IL2RB (CD122))#606367 #618495IL2RA (CD25), IL2RB (CD122)AR (LOF)IPEX-like (see 
above) and SCID-like presentations CTLA4 haploinsufficiency#152700CTLA4AD 
(LOF)Onset throughout childhood and adulthood. – Lymphoproliferation, lymphoma, 
gastric cancer, polyautoimmunity (e.g., autoimmune enteropathies, cytopenias, 
skin disease, interstitial lung disease, and neurologic manifestations). – 
Increased severity of infections (e.g., CMV, EBV). – Often initially diagnosed 
as CVID – Some parents and relatives with pathogenic variants asymptomatic.AD = 
autosomal dominant; AR = autosomal recessive; IPEX = immune dysregulation, 
polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked; SCID = severe combined 
immunodeficieny; CMV = cytomegalovirus; EBV = Ebstein-Barr virus; CVID = common 
variable immunodeficiency. Table 4.Other defects in downstream TCR signalling, 
cytoskeleton activation and immune synapse formation [3, 19, 21, 22]. 
DiseaseOMIMGeneInheritancePhenotypeWiskott-Aldrich syndrome#301000WASXL 
(LOF)Onset: early childhood with the classic triad: – Thrombocytopenia 
(pathognomonic small mean platelet volume (< 5 fL)) – Recurrent severe 
infections (impetigo, cellulitis, skin abscesses, molluscum contagiosum; 
Herpesviruses, including herpes simplex and varicella-zoster virus, Epstein-Barr 
virus) – Eczema, often unresponsive to conventional treatment. – Early death may 
result from bleeding. – Autoimmunity and malignancy more common with increasing 
age. – Milder phenotype: X-linked thrombocytopenia without eczema or 
immunodeficiency.WIP deficiency#614493WIPF1AR (LOF)– WAS-like presentation, but 
very early onset of a severe immunodeficiencyNCKAP1L deficiency (HEM-1 
hematopoietic protein 1)#618982NCKAP1LAR (LOF)– Atopic disease and 
hyperinflammation, chronic hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy – Recurrent fever 
and upper respiratory tract infections, skin rashes, abscesses, ulcers, 
autoimmune manifestations and FTTDOCK8 deficiency#243700DOCK8AR (LOF)– 
Extensive, disfiguring, concurrently occurring cutaneous viral infections, 
particularly HSV, human papillomavirus, molluscum contagiosum and 
varicella-zoster virus. – Invasive infections (wide spectrum of Gram-positive 
and Gram-negative bacteria, viruses and intracellular fungi, e.g., histoplasma 
capsulatum). – Mucocutaneous candidiasis and recurrent gastro-intestinal tract 
infections are common. – Severe and extensive food allergies. – High risk of 
developing malignancies, particularly lymphomas and squamous cell carcinomas. 
CARMIL2 (RLTPR) deficiency#618131CARMIL2AR (LOF)– Onset early infancy; – Atopic 
and seborrheic dermatitis and psoriasis-like rashes. – Viral (EBV, CMV, and 
varicella), bacterial, mycobacterial and fungal infections – Early or very early 
onset inflammatory bowel disease (VEOIBD) – Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy 
syndrome (APS) – Characteristic feature is EBV-associated leiomyoma (<20% of 
cases)STK4 deficiency#614868STK4AR (LOF)– Onset at school age – Infections 
(cutaneous viral infections, recurrent pneumonia, EBV-associated 
lymphoproliferation) – Autoimmune or inflammatory diseases and atopic 
dermatitis/atopyTBX21 deficiency (T-bet, T-box transcription factor 21) 
#619630TBX21AR (LOF)– Mendelian susceptibility to mycobacterial disease (MSMD) – 
Persistent upper airway inflammation Moesin-associated immunodeficiency 
(X-MAID)#300988MSNXLR (LOF) – Skin manifestations, mainly eczema, molluscum 
contagiosum and increased susceptibility to bacterial and viral infections and 
VEOIBDXL = X linked; LOF = loss of function; AD = autosomal dominant; AR = 
autosomal recessive; XLR = X-linked recessive; WAS = Wiscott-Aldrich syndrome; 
FTT = failure to thrive; HSV = Herpes simplex virus; EBV = Ebstein-Barr virus; 
CMV = cytomegalovirus; VEOIBD = very early onset inflammatory bowel disease. 
Figure 5.Physiology of the actin cytoskeleton (left panel) and a 3-year-old boy 
(right panel, above) with ARPC1B (actin related protein 2/3 complex subunit 1B) 
deficiency, presenting with ulcerating severe cutaneous viral infections (left 
shoulder and on the back) and after successful stem cell transplantation at 5 
years of age (right panel, below). Rearrangement of actin cytoskeletons is key 
for immune cell activation, migration and adhesion. Human actin-related protein 
2/3 complex (Arp 2/3) has ARPC1 component isoforms (ARPC1B, expressed in blood 
cells, ARPC1A in non-hematopoietic tissues). WASP (Wiskott Aldrich syndrome 
protein), WIPF1 (WASP interacting protein family member 1), DOCK8 (dedicator of 
cytokinesis 8), and NCKAP1 (Nck-associated protein 1 also called HEM1 
(hematopoietic protein 1)). The RLTPR or CARMIL-2 protein, the TCR, and CD28 
form microclusters that interact with actin and are key for the formation of the 
immunological synapse. Moesin (MSN) links actin filaments to the plasma membrane 
which increases cell rigidity and polarity and STK4 controls the translocation 
of vesicles to the surface and can activate actin (both not shown in 
Figure).Figure 6.Physiology of STAT3 signaling (left panel) and a 7-year-old boy 
with coarse facial features (right panel, above), eczema, cold skin abscesses 
(middle) and delayed dentition at 10 years of age (below, different patient). 
IL6 signals through the IL6RST (signal transducer of IL6 receptor complex), 
composed of glycoprotein 130 (GP130) and the IL6R. Other cytokines of the IL6 
cytokine family utilize GP130 encoded by IL6ST (IL11, OSM, LIF, CNTF, CT-1, 
CLCF1, IL27, IL35, and IL39). IL6 then activates through JAK-STAT signal 
transduction the zinc finger protein 341 (ZNF341) TF, which promotes STAT3 
transcription. IL6 and IL23 activate STAT3, which turns on RORC, encoding RORγt 
the master regulator for a TH1/TH17 T-cell response shift as well as 
chondrogenesis, bone repair, angiogenesis/vascularization (induction of vascular 
endothelial factor 3 (VEGF3)) [23]. The phosphoglucomutase 3 (PGM3) (not shown 
in figure) enzyme catalyzing the isomerization of 
N-acetyl-glucosamine-6-phosphate to N-acetyl-glucosamine-1-phosphate during the 
generation of UDP-N-acetyl-glucosamine UDP-GlcNAc. During glycosylation, sugar 
chains are added to either proteins or lipids, using basic sugar building blocks 
(UDP-GlcNAcs) to make N-glycans, O-glycans, proteoglycans, and 
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored proteins all participating in cell 
signaling. Table 5.PAD due to CBMopathies and cytokine signaling dysfunction [4, 
7, 26]. DiseaseOMIMGeneInheritancePhenotypeCBMopathiesCARD11-associated atopy 
with dominant interference of the NFkB signaling (CADINS)#617638CARD11AD (LOF)– 
Very severe atopic dermatitis (close to 90% of cases) later followed by asthma 
and food allergy. Cutaneous viral and respiratory tract infections, potentially 
severe and causing FTT (e.g., due to diarrhea). Some patients display skeletal 
features as in STAT3 deficiency (broad nose, retained teeth).MALT1 
deficiency#615468MALT1AR (LOF)– Left untreated it is thought to be fatal – 
Recurrent severe bacterial viral and fungal infections of the skin and/or 
respiratory and gastrointestinal tract infections, FTT – Periodontal disease, 
aphthous ulcers, cheileitis and gingivitis.TGFβ pathwayTransforming growth 
factor β receptor 1 and 2 (TGFBR 1 and 2) deficiency (Loeys-Dietz syndrome 1 and 
2 )#609192 #610168TGFBR1, TGFBR2AD (LOF)– IgE-mediated food allergy, EGID, 
allergic asthma, and atopic dermatitis. Additional connective tissue 
abnormalities overlapping with those seen in STAT3 pathway disorders 
(hyperextensible joints, scoliosis, etc.)Erbb2-interacting protein (ERBIN) 
deficiencyNoneERBINAD (LOF)– Significant EGID, connective tissue abnormalities. 
– Enhanced TGF-β pathway activation leading to increased IL4Rα expression and 
enhanced Th2 differentiation and IgE productionJAK1/STAT5b pathwayJAK1 
GOF#618999JAK1AD (GOF)– Severe atopic dermatitis and allergic asthma. Immune 
dysregulation such as autoimmunity (e.g., thyroid disease), poor growth, 
hepatosplenomegaly, eosinophilic enteritis. STAT5B hypereosinophilic 
syndrome#102578STAT5BSomatic (GOF) in multiple hematopoietic lineages– Neonatal 
onset dermatitis, urticarial rash and diarrhea, neonatal hypereosinophilia. – 
Patients with somatic GOF STAT5B variants have presented with leukemia and 
lymphomas.STAT5B deficiency#618985STAT5BAD (dominant negative) and AR (LOF)– 
Recurrent viral infections due to poor IL-2-mediated effector functions and 
chronic pulmonary disease (lymphocytic interstitial pneumonitis). – Extreme 
short stature due to the roles of STAT5b in growth factor signaling 
(Growth-hormone insensitive dwarfism, dysmorphic features). – Atopy, e.g., 
eczema. Prominent autoimmunity similar to IPEX (Modestly reduced Treg number and 
function). The AD form of STAT5B deficiency has growth-failure, eczema, but no 
immunodeficiency.IL4/STAT6 pathwaySTAT6-GOF disease (signal transducer and 
activator of transcription 6)#620532STAT6AD (GOF)– Severe early-onset, 
multi-system allergic disease, e.g. severe and treatment-resistant dermatitis, 
marked eosinophilic gastrointestinal disease. – Skin and respiratory infections 
as well as lymphadenopathy, cobblestone-like appearance of the buccal mucosa, 
polypoid nodules in the intestinal tract, and notably, B-cell lymphomas. – 
Non-immunological features: some resembling AD HIES, some are additional: renal 
fibrosis, short stature and hypotrichosisGOF = gain of function; LOF = loss of 
function; AD = autosomal dominant; AR = autosomal recessive; FTT = failure to 
thrive; EGID = eosinophilic gastrointestinal disease; IPEX = immune 
dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked; HIES = hyper IgE 
syndrome . Table 6.Other primary atopic disorders with STAT3 dysfunction [4, 5, 
6, 7, 24, 25]. DiseaseOMIMGeneInheritancePhenotypeZNF341 
deficiency#618282ZNF341AR (LOF)– Phenocopy of AD-HIES Partial IL6 signal 
transducer (IL6ST) (GP130 deficiency)#619752IL6STAD (LOF)– Demonstrates 
phenotypic overlap with AD HIES but also diarrhea, keratitis, and 
neurodevelopmental delay. Complete IL6 signal transducer (IL6ST) (GP130 
deficiency) #618523IL6STAR (LOF)– Death in utero or in neonatal period in most 
affected individuals. – Stuve-Wiedemann-like syndrome; skeletal dysplasia, 
osteoporosis, lung dysfunction, renal abnormalities, thrombocytopenia, eczema. 
IL6R deficiency#618944IL6RAR (LOF)– Atopic dermatitis, elevated IgE, bacterial 
sinopulmonary infection, and substantial skin and soft tissue infections – often 
due to staphylococcus. No connective tissue abnormalitiesPhosphoglucomutase 3 
deficiency#615816PGM3AR (LOF) hypomorphic– Syndromic immunodeficiency due to 
glycosylation defect. Atopic dermatitis, bronchiectasis, and scoliosis but lack 
of characteristic AD HIES facies, chemotaxis defects, cold abscesses and 
connective tissue disease. – Developmental delay, primary neurocognitive 
deficits, hypomyelination and skeletal dysplasiaAD = autosomal dominant; AR = 
autosomal recessive; HIES = hyper IgE syndrome. Figure 7.A: CBM physiology CBM 
complexes are critical TCR signaling adapters. Antigen receptor stimulation 
leads to phosphorylation of CARD 11. Activated CARD 11 is recruited into the CBM 
complex to the ubiquitin regulatory proteins LUBAC and TRAF6 which ligate unique 
ubiquitin chains to BCL 10/MALT1 (not shown in Figure) and eventually lead to 
the activation of NFkB, JNK and ASCT2 regulating glutamine metabolism and 
activating MTOR. B: JAK1/STAT5/ TGFβ/STAT6 Physiology. TGFβ has roles in immune 
tolerance, cell cycle arrest, and wound healing. TGFβ signals through TGFBR1 and 
2 Receptor. TGFβ increases IL4Rα expression and leads to T helper type 2 (TH2) 
differentiation and IgE production. ERBIN is a negative regulator of 
transforming growth factor (TGF)-signaling through interaction with SMAD 
proteins. STAT3 induces and then forms a complex with ERBIN. STAT5 is activated 
by signaling through receptors for various cytokines including IL2, 
hematopoietic growth factors, as well as growth hormone. STAT5B is an important 
regulator of FOXP3 expression, the essential TF for Tregs. STAT6 signaling 
induces activation of group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s), differentiation of 
TH2 cells from naïve CD4+ T cells and induction of T follicular helper (TFH) 
cells, which are crucial for B-cell affinity maturation and immunoglobulin 
class-switch recombination (CSR) in the germinal center. In non-immune cells, 
IL4/IL13 STAT6 is involved in collagen production of fibroblasts, the 
development of mucus-secreting goblet cells, eosinophil-attracting chemokine 
production from epithelial cells and induction of bronchial smooth muscle 
hyper-responsiveness.Table 7.Screening landmarks F, AD, ID, SY regarding history 
and physical findings. Presence of Red flags in > 2 landmarks will trigger whole 
genome analysis. Abnormal findings in lab investigations are only significant in 
presence of landmarks F, A, ID, SY. Land-markCategoryToolsRed FlagFFamily 
historyDraw a pedigree§, find inheritance pattern; know geographical 
distributions of consanguinity$– Presence of family members with IEI; family 
members fulfill other landmarks (see below)AAtopy disease history Get details: 
onset, extent, course– Onset: at birth/first 1 – 2 months of life – Extent: 
multiple simultaneous atopic manifestations such as severe asthma, 
life-threatening anaphylaxis, allergic rhinoconjunctivitis, multiple food 
allergies, eosinophilic esophagitis and gastroenteritis, protein-losing 
enteropathy – Course: very severe, not responsive to standard therapy 
IDImmunodeficiency, non-atopic past medical historyEvaluate pathological 
susceptibility to infections, signs of immunodysregulation, past medical history 
(ELVIS**, GARFIELD,** see next column)General– Failure to thrive+– Malignancy 
(e.g., lymphomas, leiomyosarcoma) Pathological susceptibility to infections 
(ELVIS)** – Unusual, opportunistic pathogens: e.g. pneumocystis – Localization: 
unusual, e.g., organ abscesses – Course: exceptionally long duration – 
Intensity: exceptionally severe, e.g., admission to intensive care unit. – Sum: 
Too many, e.g., in adults, >3 or in children > 6 infections per year which 
require treatment (including antibiotics) and each lasting more than 4 weeks 
Immunodysregulation (GARFIELD)** – Granuloma – Autoimmune disease – Recurring 
fever and chronic inflammation – Unusual eczema – Lymphoproliferation – Chronic, 
inflammatory bowel Disease SYSyndromic diseaseSkilled examination by experienced 
physician, clinical geneticist; supplementary use of artificial intelligence 
(next generation phenotyping (e.g., GestaltMatcher)++Key clinical findings such 
as hypotrichosis, neurodevelopmental delay, skeletal or connective tissue 
abnormalities (e.g., coarse facies, vascular anomalies, bleeding)! Caveat !: 
Except newborn SCID screening, results of conventional laboratory studies are 
not sufficient to make a definitive diagnosis of PAD. High levels of IgE or 
eosinophilia do occur in many PADs but are also common in non-primary allergic 
diseases. Abnormal findings in laboratory investigation count only as 
significant in the presence of landmarks F, A, ID, SY.LILab investigationsSCID 
newborn screening; full blood count; serum IgG, IgA, IgM, IgE; specific IgE 
panels to common aeroallergens and food allergens; Skin prick tests; urine 
glycans, serum tryptase; N- und O-glycosylation in serum transferrin 
electrophoresis, flow cytometry with immunodeficiency adapted markers; mast cell 
metabolites (e.g., histamine, leukotriens) in urine– Pathological TREC screening 
– Abnormal absolute numbers and relative percentages in full blood count (e.g., 
cytopenia; neutropenia, lymphopenia, thrombocytopenia, anemia) – Low IgG- SD 
age-adjusted; IgA < 5 mg/dL – Very high TH2 biomarkers: severe eosinophilia 
(>5,000 cells/mm3); serum total IgE > 2,000 kUIEI = inborn errors of immunity; 
SCID = severe combined immunodeficiency; PAD = primary atopic disease; TREC = T 
cell receptor excision circle;SD = standard deviation.&Online resources and 
instructions on How to Draw a Pedigree - Iowa Institute of Human Genetics 
(uiowa.edu); (Definition of pedigree - NCI Dictionary of Genetics Terms - NCI 
(cancer.gov); $Consang.net. **acronyms adapted from the German guideline for 
Diagnostics in Primary immunodeficiencies (S. Farmand, manuscript in 
preparation) and [31]; ELVIS = Erreger (pathogens), Lokalisation (localization), 
Verlauf (course), Intensität (intensity), Summe (sum); GARFIELD = Granulome 
(granuloma), Autoimmunität (autoimmunity), Rezidivierendes Fieber (recurrent 
fever), Darmentzündung (chronic inflammatory bowel disease). +Growth hormone 
evaluation and bone age study if there is short stature; delayed bone age and 
growth hormone deficiency may be found. ++www.db.gestatmatcher.org.Figure 
8Rational, clinical landmark-based approach to identify patients/families with 
primary atopic disorders by early, upfront whole genome sequencing. If > 2 red 
flags are fulfilled, genetic analysis is indicated. In the following sections we 
discuss the different methods of genetic analysis and the cornerstones of 
genetic result interpretation in individuals with (suspected) primary atopic 
disorder. Details on red flags are given in Table 7.