---
reference_id: "PMID:36537175"
title: "Thallium poisoning: a case report."
authors:
- Jimenez O
- Cáceres H
- Gimenez L
- Soto L
- Montenegro M
- Rueda JAA
journal: J Yeungnam Med Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.12701/jyms.2022.00647
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thallium poisoning: a case report.
**Authors:** Jimenez O, Cáceres H, Gimenez L, Soto L, Montenegro M, Rueda JAA
**Journal:** J Yeungnam Med Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.12701/jyms.2022.00647](https://doi.org/10.12701/jyms.2022.00647)

## Content

1. J Yeungnam Med Sci. 2023 Jul;40(3):311-314. doi: 10.12701/jyms.2022.00647.
Epub  2022 Dec 15.

Thallium poisoning: a case report.

Jimenez O(1), Cáceres H(2), Gimenez L(1), Soto L(1), Montenegro M(1), Rueda 
JAA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Sanatorio de la Providencia, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Británico de Buenos Aires, Buenos 
Aires, Argentina.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine and Hematology, Hospital Privado Santa Clara 
de Asís-IMAC, Salta, Argentina.

Thallium poisoning is usually accidental. We present a case of a 51-year-old 
woman who was evaluated in June 2018 for myalgia, vertigo, asthenia, and 
abdominal pain. Physical examination revealed temporal-spatial disorientation, 
jaundice, and asterixis. The laboratory reported the following: bilirubin, 10.3 
mg/dL; aspartate transaminase, 78 U/L; alanine transaminase, 194 U/L; albumin, 
2.3 g/dL; prothrombin time, 40%; and platelet count, 60,000/mm3. Serology 
performed for hepatitis A, B, and C; Epstein-Barr virus; cytomegalovirus; and 
human immunodeficiency virus was negative, and a collagenogram was negative. 
Physical reevaluation revealed alopecia on the scalp, armpits, and eyebrows; 
macules on the face; plantar hyperkeratosis; and ulcers on the lower limbs. 
Tests for lead, arsenic, copper, and mercury were carried out, which were 
normal; however, elevated urinary thallium (540 µg/g; range, 0.4-10 µg/g) was 
observed. The patient was treated with ᴅ-penicillamine 1,000 mg/day and 
recovered her urinary thallium levels were within normal range at annual 
follow-up. Thallium poisoning is extremely rare and can be fatal in small doses. 
An adequate clinical approach can facilitate early diagnosis.

DOI: 10.12701/jyms.2022.00647
PMCID: PMC10390273
PMID: 36537175

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest No potential conflict of 
interest relevant to this article was reported.