---
reference_id: "PMID:25118028"
title: "Malan syndrome: Sotos-like overgrowth with de novo NFIX sequence variants and deletions in six new patients and a review of the literature."
authors:
- Klaassens M
- Morrogh D
- Rosser EM
- Jaffer F
- Vreeburg M
- Bok LA
- Segboer T
- van Belzen M
- Quinlivan RM
- Kumar A
- Hurst JA
- Scott RH
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.162
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Facies
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mutation
- NFI Transcription Factors/genetics
- Phenotype
- Sequence Deletion
- "Sotos Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Malan syndrome: Sotos-like overgrowth with de novo NFIX sequence variants and deletions in six new patients and a review of the literature.
**Authors:** Klaassens M, Morrogh D, Rosser EM, Jaffer F, Vreeburg M, Bok LA, Segboer T, van Belzen M, Quinlivan RM, Kumar A, Hurst JA, Scott RH
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2014.162](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2014.162)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 May;23(5):610-5. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.162. Epub 2014
Aug  13.

Malan syndrome: Sotos-like overgrowth with de novo NFIX sequence variants and 
deletions in six new patients and a review of the literature.

Klaassens M(1), Morrogh D(2), Rosser EM(2), Jaffer F(3), Vreeburg M(4), Bok 
LA(5), Segboer T(6), van Belzen M(6), Quinlivan RM(3), Kumar A(2), Hurst JA(2), 
Scott RH(7).

Author information:
(1)1] Department of Paediatrics, Maastricht University Medical Center, 
Maastricht, The Netherlands [2] Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht 
University Medical Center, Maastricht, The Netherlands [3] North East Thames 
Regional Genetics Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Trust, 
London, UK.
(2)North East Thames Regional Genetics Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital for 
Children NHS Trust, London, UK.
(3)MRC Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases, National Hospital for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, London, UK.
(4)Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Center, 
Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, Maxima Medical Centre, Belhaven, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, 
The Netherlands.
(7)1] North East Thames Regional Genetics Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital 
for Children NHS Trust, London, UK [2] Clinical and Molecular Genetics Unit, UCL 
Institute of Child Health, London, UK.

De novo monoallelic variants in NFIX cause two distinct syndromes. Whole gene 
deletions, nonsense variants and missense variants affecting the DNA-binding 
domain have been seen in association with a Sotos-like phenotype that we propose 
is referred to as Malan syndrome. Frameshift and splice-site variants thought to 
avoid nonsense-mediated RNA decay have been seen in Marshall-Smith syndrome. We 
report six additional patients with Malan syndrome and de novo NFIX deletions or 
sequence variants and review the 20 patients now reported. The phenotype is 
characterised by moderate postnatal overgrowth and macrocephaly. Median height 
and head circumference in childhood are 2.0 and 2.3 standard deviations (SD) 
above the mean, respectively. There is overlap of the facial phenotype with 
NSD1-positive Sotos syndrome in some cases including a prominent forehead, high 
anterior hairline, downslanting palpebral fissures and prominent chin. Neonatal 
feeding difficulties and/or hypotonia have been reported in 30% of patients. 
Developmental delay/learning disability have been reported in all cases and are 
typically moderate. Ocular phenotypes are common, including strabismus (65%), 
nystagmus (25% ) and optic disc pallor/hypoplasia (25%). Other recurrent 
features include pectus excavatum (40%) and scoliosis (25%). Eight reported 
patients have a deletion also encompassing CACNA1A, haploinsufficiency of which 
causes episodic ataxia type 2 or familial hemiplegic migraine. One previous case 
had episodic ataxia and one case we report has had cyclical vomiting responsive 
to pizotifen. In individuals with this contiguous gene deletion syndrome, 
awareness of possible later neurological manifestations is important, although 
their penetrance is not yet clear.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.162
PMCID: PMC4402637
PMID: 25118028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]