---
reference_id: "PMID:23844108"
title: Mouse TBX3 mutants suggest novel molecular mechanisms for Ulnar-mammary syndrome.
authors:
- Frank DU
- Emechebe U
- Thomas KR
- Moon AM
journal: PLoS One
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067841
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/embryology, genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Breast Diseases/embryology, genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Genotype
- Heart/embryology
- "Hindlimb/abnormalities, embryology, metabolism"
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, 129 Strain"
- "Mice, Inbred Strains"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation
- "Myocardium/metabolism, pathology"
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "T-Box Domain Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Ulna/abnormalities, embryology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mouse TBX3 mutants suggest novel molecular mechanisms for Ulnar-mammary syndrome.
**Authors:** Frank DU, Emechebe U, Thomas KR, Moon AM
**Journal:** PLoS One (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0067841](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0067841)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 2;8(7):e67841. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067841. Print
2013.

Mouse TBX3 mutants suggest novel molecular mechanisms for Ulnar-mammary 
syndrome.

Frank DU(1), Emechebe U, Thomas KR, Moon AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, United 
States of America.

The transcription factor TBX3 plays critical roles in development and TBX3 
mutations in humans cause Ulnar-mammary syndrome. Efforts to understand how 
altered TBX3 dosage and function disrupt the development of numerous structures 
have been hampered by embryonic lethality of mice bearing presumed null alleles. 
We generated a novel conditional null allele of Tbx3: after Cre-mediated 
recombination, no mRNA or protein is detectable. In contrast, a putative null 
allele in which exons 1-3 are deleted produces a truncated protein that is 
abnormally located in the cytoplasm. Heterozygotes and homozygotes for this 
allele have different phenotypes than their counterparts bearing a true null 
allele. Our observations with these alleles in mice, and the different types of 
TBX3 mutations observed in human ulnar-mammary syndrome, suggest that not all 
mutations observed in humans generate functionally null alleles. The possibility 
that mechanisms in addition to TBX3 haploinsufficiency may cause UMS or other 
malformations merits investigation in the human UMS population.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067841
PMCID: PMC3699485
PMID: 23844108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.