---
reference_id: "PMID:29869130"
title: "Therapeutic Approach to Hypertensive Emergencies: Hemorrhagic Stroke."
authors:
- Salvetti M
- Paini A
- Bertacchini F
- Aggiusti C
- Stassaldi D
- Verzeri L
- Saccà G
- Muiesan ML
journal: High Blood Press Cardiovasc Prev
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s40292-018-0262-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapeutic Approach to Hypertensive Emergencies: Hemorrhagic Stroke.
**Authors:** Salvetti M, Paini A, Bertacchini F, Aggiusti C, Stassaldi D, Verzeri L, Saccà G, Muiesan ML
**Journal:** High Blood Press Cardiovasc Prev (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40292-018-0262-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40292-018-0262-3)

## Content

1. High Blood Press Cardiovasc Prev. 2018 Jun;25(2):191-195. doi: 
10.1007/s40292-018-0262-3. Epub 2018 Jun 4.

Therapeutic Approach to Hypertensive Emergencies: Hemorrhagic Stroke.

Salvetti M(1)(2)(3), Paini A(4)(5)(6), Bertacchini F(4)(5)(6), Aggiusti 
C(4)(5)(6), Stassaldi D(4)(5)(6), Verzeri L(4)(5)(6), Saccà G(4)(5)(6), Muiesan 
ML(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of Brescia, 
Brescia, Italy. massimo.salvetti@unibs.it.
(2)2ª Medicina ASST Spedali Civili di Brescia, Piazzale Spedali Civili 1, 25123, 
Brescia, Italy. massimo.salvetti@unibs.it.
(3)Società Italiana dell'Ipertensione Arteriosa, Milano, Italy. 
massimo.salvetti@unibs.it.
(4)Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of Brescia, 
Brescia, Italy.
(5)2ª Medicina ASST Spedali Civili di Brescia, Piazzale Spedali Civili 1, 25123, 
Brescia, Italy.
(6)Società Italiana dell'Ipertensione Arteriosa, Milano, Italy.

Arterial hypertension represents the most important risk factor for ischemic and 
haemorrhagic stroke, and an acute hypertensive response is often observed in 
patients with intracranial haemorrhage (ICH). Available data indicate that the 
vast majority (> 70%) of patient with acute ICH have a systolic BP above 
140 mmHg at the time of presentation in the ED; about 20% have SBP values above 
180 mmHg. Severe BP elevation in the presence of ICH represents a hypertensive 
emergency, and worsening of clinical conditions is not infrequent in the first 
hours after admission; an aggressive early management is therefore required for 
these patients. Despite this, appropriate management of BP in acute ICH is still 
controversial, due to the complex issues involved, and the heterogeneous results 
obtained in clinical trials. This article will review the available evidence 
supporting acute BP reduction in acute ICH.

DOI: 10.1007/s40292-018-0262-3
PMID: 29869130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]