---
reference_id: "PMID:41573183"
title: Evaluating Vascular Hemodynamics in Cerebral Proliferative Angiopathy Using Advanced Arterial Spin Labeling MRI.
authors:
- Duarte Armindo R
- Zhao M
- Alexander S
- Tong E
- Yeom K
- Moseley M
- Vilela P
- Steinberg G
journal: Stroke Vasc Interv Neurol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1161/SVIN.124.001552
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluating Vascular Hemodynamics in Cerebral Proliferative Angiopathy Using Advanced Arterial Spin Labeling MRI.
**Authors:** Duarte Armindo R, Zhao M, Alexander S, Tong E, Yeom K, Moseley M, Vilela P, Steinberg G
**Journal:** Stroke Vasc Interv Neurol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1161/SVIN.124.001552](https://doi.org/10.1161/SVIN.124.001552)

## Content

1. Stroke Vasc Interv Neurol. 2024 Dec 26;5(2):e001552. doi: 
10.1161/SVIN.124.001552. eCollection 2025 Mar.

Evaluating Vascular Hemodynamics in Cerebral Proliferative Angiopathy Using 
Advanced Arterial Spin Labeling MRI.

Duarte Armindo R(1)(2), Zhao M(3), Alexander S(3), Tong E(4), Yeom K(5), Moseley 
M(4), Vilela P(1)(2), Steinberg G(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroradiology Western Lisbon Hospital Center Lisbon Portugal.
(2)Neuroradiology Unit Hospital da Luz Lisboa Lisbon Portugal.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery Stanford University Stanford CA.
(4)Department of Radiology Stanford University Stanford CA.
(5)Department of Radiology Phoenix Children's Hospital Phoenix AZ.

Cerebral proliferative angiopathy (CPA) is a rare vascular disorder that affects 
normal blood circulation in the brain. Although the structural changes in CPA 
can be characterized using standard radiologic modalities, assessing the 
vascular hemodynamics in patients with CPA remains challenging due to inadequate 
imaging technologies. Arterial spin labeling (ASL) is a noninvasive magnetic 
resonance technique that allows quantitative assessments of cerebral blood flow. 
ASL with multiple labeling delays (multidelay ASL) also enables the 
quantification of arterial transit time. Here, we report the first application 
of multidelay ASL in a patient with CPA before and after bypass surgery. Our 
study demonstrated that ASL can be effectively applied to evaluating hemodynamic 
changes in patients with CPA. Our quantitative results indicated that, in 
regions affected by CPA, cerebral blood flow increased by at least 14% and 
arterial transit time decreased by 9.4% after bypass surgery.

© 2024 The Author(s). Stroke: Vascular and Interventional Neurology published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Heart Association; The Society for 
Vascular and Interventional Neurology.

DOI: 10.1161/SVIN.124.001552
PMCID: PMC12671626
PMID: 41573183