---
reference_id: "PMID:27743676"
title: "[Social cognition disorders in Klinefelter syndrome: A specific phenotype? (KS)]."
authors:
- Babinet MN
- Rigard C
- Peyroux É
- Dragomir AR
- Plotton I
- Lejeune H
- Demily C
journal: Encephale
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.encep.2016.04.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Social cognition disorders in Klinefelter syndrome: A specific phenotype? (KS)].
**Authors:** Babinet MN, Rigard C, Peyroux É, Dragomir AR, Plotton I, Lejeune H, Demily C
**Journal:** Encephale (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.encep.2016.04.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.encep.2016.04.010)

## Content

1. Encephale. 2017 Oct;43(5):423-428. doi: 10.1016/j.encep.2016.04.010. Epub 2016
 Oct 13.

[Social cognition disorders in Klinefelter syndrome: A specific phenotype? 
(KS)].

[Article in French]

Babinet MN(1), Rigard C(1), Peyroux É(1), Dragomir AR(2), Plotton I(3), Lejeune 
H(3), Demily C(4).

Author information:
(1)GénoPsy, centre de dépistage et de prises en charge des troubles 
psychiatriques d'origine génétique, centre hospitalier Le-Vinatier, 95, 
boulevard Pinel, 69500 Bron, France; EDR-Psy, UMR 5929, CNRS, université Lyon 1, 
67, boulevard Pinel, 69500 Bron, France.
(2)GénoPsy, centre de dépistage et de prises en charge des troubles 
psychiatriques d'origine génétique, centre hospitalier Le-Vinatier, 95, 
boulevard Pinel, 69500 Bron, France; EDR-Psy, UMR 5929, CNRS, université Lyon 1, 
67, boulevard Pinel, 69500 Bron, France; Service de médecine de la reproduction, 
laboratoire d'hormonologie-endocrinologie moléculaire et maladies rares, hôpital 
Femme-Mère-Enfant, hospices civils de Lyon, université Lyon 1, 3, quai des 
Célestins, 69002 Lyon, France.
(3)Service de médecine de la reproduction, laboratoire 
d'hormonologie-endocrinologie moléculaire et maladies rares, hôpital 
Femme-Mère-Enfant, hospices civils de Lyon, université Lyon 1, 3, quai des 
Célestins, 69002 Lyon, France.
(4)GénoPsy, centre de dépistage et de prises en charge des troubles 
psychiatriques d'origine génétique, centre hospitalier Le-Vinatier, 95, 
boulevard Pinel, 69500 Bron, France; EDR-Psy, UMR 5929, CNRS, université Lyon 1, 
67, boulevard Pinel, 69500 Bron, France. Electronic address: 
caroline.demily@ch-levinatier.fr.

INTRODUCTION: The Klinefelter syndrome (KS) is a genetic condition characterized 
by an X supernumerary sex chromosome in males. The syndrome is frequently 
associated with cognitive impairment. Indeed, the different areas of the 
executive sphere can be affected such as inhibition, cognitive flexibility but 
also attentional and visual-spatial domain. Social cognition disorders, 
predominantly on emotional recognition processes, have also been documented. In 
addition, the syndrome may be associated with psychiatric symptoms.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: Our study aims to characterize of the various components of 
social cognition in the SK: facial emotional recognition, theory of mind and 
attributional style. For this two groups (SK group versus control group) of 
participants (n=16) matched for age and sociocultural level were recruited. 
Participants with intellectual disabilities, psychiatric or neurological 
disorders were excluded. Three social cognition tests were available: the TREF, 
the MASC, the AIHQ. Neurocognitive functions were assessed by the fNart, the 
subtest "logical memory" of the MEM-III, the subtests of the two VOSP battery, 
the d2, the TMT and the Stroop test.
RESULTS: The SK group had specific social cognition disorders in comparison to 
the control group. Two emotions in particular were less well recognized: fear 
and contempt. In addition, the SK group had significantly lower results in 
theory of mind. Regarding the hostile attribution bias, no significant 
difference was found. Finally, the results showed correlations between specific 
attentional disorders and facial emotional recognition.
DISCUSSION-CONCLUSION: Our study emphasizes social cognition disorders in SK. 
These disorders could be considered as a phenotypic trait in the syndrome. The 
interest of better characterizing the cognitive phenotype of genetic disorders 
that can affect the neurodevelopment is to offer specific cognitive remediation 
strategies.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.encep.2016.04.010
PMID: 27743676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]