---
reference_id: "PMID:27625195"
title: "IgG4-related hepatobiliary disease: an overview."
authors:
- Culver EL
- Chapman RW
journal: Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/nrgastro.2016.132
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- "Autoimmune Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- B-Lymphocytes/immunology
- "Biliary Tract Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy, immunology"
- CD4-Positive T-Lymphocytes/immunology
- "Cholangiopancreatography, Endoscopic Retrograde"
- "Cholangitis, Sclerosing/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Forecasting
- "Hepatitis, Autoimmune/diagnosis, drug therapy, immunology"
- Humans
- "Immunity, Innate"
- Immunologic Memory/immunology
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- "Pancreatitis/diagnosis, drug therapy, immunology"
- "Paraproteinemias/diagnosis, drug therapy, immunology"
- Recurrence
- Risk Factors
- Terminology as Topic
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IgG4-related hepatobiliary disease: an overview.
**Authors:** Culver EL, Chapman RW
**Journal:** Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrgastro.2016.132](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrgastro.2016.132)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2016 Oct;13(10):601-12. doi: 
10.1038/nrgastro.2016.132. Epub 2016 Sep 14.

IgG4-related hepatobiliary disease: an overview.

Culver EL(1)(2)(3), Chapman RW(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Translational Gastroenterology Unit, John Radcliffe Hospital, Headley Way, 
Headington, Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK.
(2)Nuffield Department of Medicine, Oxford University, Old Road Campus, 
Headington, Oxford, OX3 7BN, UK.
(3)Liver Transplant Unit, Royal Free Hospital, Pond Street, London, NW3 2QG, UK.

IgG4-related hepatobiliary diseases are part of a multiorgan fibroinflammatory 
condition termed IgG4-related disease, and include IgG4-related sclerosing 
cholangitis (IgG4-SC) and IgG4-related hepatopathy. These diseases can present 
with biliary strictures and/or mass lesions, making them difficult to 
differentiate from primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) or other hepatobiliary 
malignancies. Diagnosis is based on a combination of clinical, biochemical, 
radiological and histological findings. However, a gold standard diagnostic test 
is lacking, warranting the identification of more specific disease markers. 
Novel assays - such as the serum IgG4:IgG1 ratio and IgG4:IgG RNA ratio (which 
distinguish IgG4-SC from PSC with high serum IgG4 levels), and plasmablast 
expansion to recognize IgG4-SC with normal serum IgG4 levels - require further 
validation. Steroids and other immunosuppressive therapies can lead to clinical 
and radiological improvement when given in the inflammatory phase of the 
disease, but evidence for the efficacy of treatment regimens is limited. 
Progressive fibrosclerotic disease, liver cirrhosis and an increased risk of 
malignancy are now recognized outcomes. Insights into the genetic and 
immunological features of the disease have increased over the past decade, with 
an emphasis on HLAs, T cells, circulating memory B cells and plasmablasts, 
chemokine-mediated trafficking, as well as the role of the innate immune system.

DOI: 10.1038/nrgastro.2016.132
PMID: 27625195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]