---
reference_id: "PMID:17480225"
title: Paraneoplastic neurological syndromes.
authors:
- Honnorat J
- Antoine JC
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-22
keywords:
- "Cerebellar Ataxia/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Dermatomyositis/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Encephalomyelitis/diagnosis, therapy"
- Humans
- "Intestinal Pseudo-Obstruction/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Lambert-Eaton Myasthenic Syndrome/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Limbic Encephalitis/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Opsoclonus-Myoclonus Syndrome/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Paraneoplastic Polyneuropathy/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Retinal Diseases/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Sensation Disorders/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Stiff-Person Syndrome/diagnosis, therapy"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Paraneoplastic neurological syndromes.
**Authors:** Honnorat J, Antoine JC
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-2-22](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-2-22)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2007 May 4;2:22. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-22.

Paraneoplastic neurological syndromes.

Honnorat J(1), Antoine JC.

Author information:
(1)Inserm U 842, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Lyon, France. 
jerome.honnorat@chu-lyon.fr

Paraneoplastic neurological syndromes (PNS) can be defined as remote effects of 
cancer that are not caused by the tumor and its metastasis, or by infection, 
ischemia or metabolic disruptions. PNS are rare, affecting less than 1/10,000 
patients with cancer. Only the Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome is relatively 
frequent, occurring in about 1% of patients with small cell lung cancer. PNS can 
affect any part of the central and peripheral nervous system, the neuromuscular 
junction, and muscle. They can be isolated or occur in association. In most 
patients, the neurological disorder develops before the cancer becomes 
clinically overt and the patient is referred to the neurologist who has the 
charge of identifying a neurological disorder as paraneoplastic. PNS are usually 
severely disabling. The most common PNS are Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome 
(LEMS), subacute cerebellar ataxia, limbic encephalitis (LE), 
opsoclonus-myoclonus (OM), retinopathies (cancer-associated retinopathy (CAR) 
and melanoma-associated retinopathy (MAR), Stiff-Person syndrome (SPS), chronic 
gastrointestinal pseudoobstruction (CGP), sensory neuronopathy (SSN), 
encephalomyelitis (EM) and dermatomyositis. PNS are caused by autoimmune 
processes triggered by the cancer and directed against antigens common to both 
the cancer and the nervous system, designated as onconeural antigens. Due to 
their high specificity (> 90%), the best way to diagnose a neurological disorder 
as paraneoplastic is to identify one of the well-characterized anti-onconeural 
protein antibodies in the patient's serum. In addition, as these antibodies are 
associated with a restricted range of cancers, they can guide the search for the 
underlying tumor at a stage when it is frequently not clinically overt. This is 
a critical point as, to date, the best way to stabilize PNS is to treat the 
cancer as soon as possible. Unfortunately, about one-third of patients do not 
have detectable antibodies and 5% to 10% have an atypical antibody that is not 
well-characterized. As PNS are believed to be immune-mediated, suppression of 
the immune response represents another treatment approach.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-22
PMCID: PMC1868710
PMID: 17480225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]