---
reference_id: "PMID:33296141"
title: "The hard numbers of tuberculosis epidemiology in wildlife: A meta-regression and systematic review."
authors:
- Reis AC
- Ramos B
- Pereira AC
- Cunha MV
journal: Transbound Emerg Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/tbed.13948
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The hard numbers of tuberculosis epidemiology in wildlife: A meta-regression and systematic review.
**Authors:** Reis AC, Ramos B, Pereira AC, Cunha MV
**Journal:** Transbound Emerg Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/tbed.13948](https://doi.org/10.1111/tbed.13948)

## Content

1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2021 Nov;68(6):3257-3276. doi: 10.1111/tbed.13948. Epub 
2020 Dec 19.

The hard numbers of tuberculosis epidemiology in wildlife: A meta-regression and 
systematic review.

Reis AC(1)(2), Ramos B(1)(2), Pereira AC(1)(2), Cunha MV(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Ecology, Evolution and Environmental Changes (cE3c), Faculdade de 
Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal.
(2)Biosystems & Integrative Sciences Institute (BioISI), Faculdade de Ciências, 
Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal.

Tuberculosis (TB) is a widespread disease that crosses the human and animal 
health boundaries, with infection being reported in wildlife, from temperate and 
subtropical to arctic regions. Often, TB in wild species is closely associated 
with disease occurrence in livestock but the TB burden in wildlife remains 
poorly quantified on a global level. Through meta-regression and systematic 
review, this study aimed to summarize global information on TB prevalence in 
commonly infected wildlife species and to draw a global picture of the 
scientific knowledge accumulated in wildlife TB. For these purposes, a 
literature search was conducted through the Web of Science and Google Scholar. 
The 223 articles retrieved, concerning a 39-year period, were submitted to 
bibliometric analysis and 54 publications regarding three wildlife hosts 
fulfilled the criteria for meta-regression. Using a random-effects model, the 
worldwide pooled TB prevalence in wild boar is higher than for any other species 
and estimated as 21.98%, peaking in Spain (31.68%), Italy (23.84%) and Hungary 
(18.12%). The pooled prevalence of TB in red deer is estimated at 13.71%, with 
Austria (31.58%), Portugal (27.75%), New Zealand (19.26%) and Spain (12.08%) 
positioning on the top, while for European badger it was computed 11.75%, 
peaking in the UK (16.43%) and Ireland (22.87%). Despite these hard numbers, a 
declining trend in wildlife TB prevalence is apparent over the last decades. The 
overall heterogeneity calculated by multivariable regression ranged from 28.61% 
(wild boar) to 60.92% (red deer), indicating that other unexplored moderators 
could explain disease burden. The systematic review shows that the most prolific 
countries contributing to knowledge related with wildlife TB are settled in 
Europe and Mycobacterium bovis is the most reported pathogen (89.5%). This study 
provides insight into the global epidemiology of wildlife TB, ascertaining 
research gaps that need to be explored and informing how should surveillance be 
refined.

© 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.13948
PMID: 33296141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]