---
reference_id: "PMID:29906080"
title: "Birth Prevalence of Chromosome 22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome: A Systematic Review of Population-Based Studies."
authors:
- Panamonta V
- Wichajarn K
- Chaikitpinyo A
- Panamonta M
- Pradubwong S
- Chowchuen B
journal: J Med Assoc Thai
year: '2016'
keywords:
- "DiGeorge Syndrome/epidemiology, pathology"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Live Birth
- Prevalence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Birth Prevalence of Chromosome 22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome: A Systematic Review of Population-Based Studies.
**Authors:** Panamonta V, Wichajarn K, Chaikitpinyo A, Panamonta M, Pradubwong S, Chowchuen B
**Journal:** J Med Assoc Thai (2016)

## Content

1. J Med Assoc Thai. 2016 Aug;99 Suppl 5:S187-93.

Birth Prevalence of Chromosome 22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome: A Systematic Review of 
Population-Based Studies.

Panamonta V, Wichajarn K, Chaikitpinyo A, Panamonta M, Pradubwong S, Chowchuen 
B.

BACKGROUND: A birth prevalence of chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome among 
population-based reports has been documented to vary, however, a systematic 
assessment is lacking.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the evidence in the literature for the birth prevalence of 
chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: A systematic literature search was conducted through PubMed 
between 1992 and June 2016 using search terms of 22q11.2 deletion OR 22q11 
deletion and prevalence.
RESULTS: Of the six studies reported, there were 156 patients with 22q11.2 
deletion syndrome found in total study populations of 1,111,336 live births. 
According to countries, the birth prevalence of this deletion syndrome (95% 
confidence interval) from United States, Belgium, Sweden, United Kingdom, 
France, and Singapore were 1.68 (1.22-2.26), 1.56 (1.33-1.72), 1.36 (0.91-2.08), 
1.30 (0.45-2.15), 1.03 (0.53-2.23), and 1.02 per 10,000 live births, 
respectively. Estimates of minimum prevalence rates on the basis of the presence 
of this syndrome in cohorts of patients with cardiovascular malformations were 
from one in 4,000 to one in 7,092 live births.
CONCLUSION: This systematic review indicates that the 22q11.2 deletion syndrome 
is rather common. The findings can help physicians, health care planners and 
other health professionals to plan and manage better care of these patients.

PMID: 29906080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]