---
reference_id: "PMID:30150674"
title: Metabolic reprogramming of stromal fibroblasts by melanoma exosome microRNA favours a pre-metastatic microenvironment.
authors:
- Shu S
- Yang Y
- Allen CL
- Maguire O
- Minderman H
- Sen A
- Ciesielski MJ
- Collins KA
- Bush PJ
- Singh P
- Wang X
- Morgan M
- Qu J
- Bankert RB
- Whiteside TL
- Wu Y
- Ernstoff MS
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-31323-7
keywords:
- "Aerobiosis/genetics, physiology"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Cellular Reprogramming/genetics, physiology"
- Exosomes/metabolism
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic/genetics, physiology"
- "Glycolysis/genetics, physiology"
- Humans
- "Melanoma/genetics, metabolism"
- "MicroRNAs/genetics, metabolism"
- "Tumor Microenvironment/genetics, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Metabolic reprogramming of stromal fibroblasts by melanoma exosome microRNA favours a pre-metastatic microenvironment.
**Authors:** Shu S, Yang Y, Allen CL, Maguire O, Minderman H, Sen A, Ciesielski MJ, Collins KA, Bush PJ, Singh P, Wang X, Morgan M, Qu J, Bankert RB, Whiteside TL, Wu Y, Ernstoff MS
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-018-31323-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-31323-7)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2018 Aug 27;8(1):12905. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-31323-7.

Metabolic reprogramming of stromal fibroblasts by melanoma exosome microRNA
favours a pre-metastatic microenvironment.

Shu S(1), Yang Y(2), Allen CL(1), Maguire O(3), Minderman H(3), Sen A(4),
Ciesielski MJ(5), Collins KA(6), Bush PJ(7), Singh P(8), Wang X(9), Morgan
M(10), Qu J(8), Bankert RB(11), Whiteside TL(12), Wu Y(2), Ernstoff MS(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center, Buffalo,
NY, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Jacobs School of Medicine & Biomedical
Sciences, University at Buffalo, The State University of New York, Buffalo, NY,
USA.
(3)Flow and Image Cytometry Shared Resource, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Cell Stress Biology, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Buffalo, NY, USA.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Buffalo, NY, USA.
(6)Immune Analysis Facility, Center for Immunotherapy, Roswell Park
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(7)South Campus Instrumentation Center, University at Buffalo, The State
University of New York, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(8)Genomics Shared Resource, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center, Buffalo,
NY, USA.
(9)New York Center of Excellence in Bioinformatics and Life Sciences, Buffalo,
NY, USA.
(10)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Roswell Park Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(11)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Jacobs School of Medicine &
Biomedical Sciences, University at Buffalo, The State University of New York,
Buffalo, NY, USA.
(12)Department of Pathology, Immunology and Otolaryngology, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine and UPMC Hillman Cancer Center, Pittsburgh, PA,
USA.
(13)Department of Medicine, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center, Buffalo,
NY, USA. Marc.Ernstoff@RoswellPark.org.

Erratum in
    Sci Rep. 2019 Mar 15;9(1):4959. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-37179-1.

Local acidification of stroma is proposed to favour pre-metastatic niche
formation but the mechanism of initiation is unclear. We investigated whether
Human Melanoma-derived exosomes (HMEX) could reprogram human adult dermal
fibroblasts (HADF) and cause extracellular acidification. HMEX were isolated
from supernatants of six melanoma cell lines (3 BRAF V600E mutant cell lines and
3 BRAF wild-type cell lines) using ultracentrifugation or Size Exclusion
Chromatography (SEC). Rapid uptake of exosomes by HADF was demonstrated
following 18 hours co-incubation. Exposure of HDAF to HMEX leads to an increase
in aerobic glycolysis and decrease in oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) in
HADF, consequently increasing extracellular acidification. Using a novel
immuno-biochip, exosomal miR-155 and miR-210 were detected in HMEX. These miRNAs
were present in HMEX from all six melanoma cell lines and were instrumental in
promoting glycolysis and inhibiting OXPHOS in tumour cells. Inhibition of
miR-155 and miR-210 activity by transfection of miRNA inhibitors into HMEX
reversed the exosome-induced metabolic reprogramming of HADF. The data indicate
that melanoma-derived exosomes modulate stromal cell metabolism and may
contribute to the creation of a pre-metastatic niche that promotes the
development of metastasis.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-31323-7
PMCID: PMC6110845
PMID: 30150674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Bankert’s work has been funded by Center for
Protein Therapeutics. S.S., Y.Y., C.A., O.M., H.M., A.S., M.J.C., K.A.C.,
P.J.B., P.S., X.W., M.M., J.Q., T.L.W., Y.W. and M.S.E declare no potential
conflict of interest.
