---
reference_id: "PMID:18067957"
title: Chronic HBV-related liver disease.
authors:
- Rizzetto M
- Ciancio A
journal: Mol Aspects Med
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.mam.2007.09.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic HBV-related liver disease.
**Authors:** Rizzetto M, Ciancio A
**Journal:** Mol Aspects Med (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mam.2007.09.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mam.2007.09.013)

## Content

1. Mol Aspects Med. 2008 Feb-Apr;29(1-2):72-84. doi: 10.1016/j.mam.2007.09.013. 
Epub 2007 Dec 11.

Chronic HBV-related liver disease.

Rizzetto M(1), Ciancio A.

Author information:
(1)Gastrohepatology Department, San Giovanni Battista Hospital, University of 
Turin, Turin, Italy. mrizzetto@molinette.piemonte.it

Thirty years after its discovery, the hepatitis B virus (HBV) still remains a 
major global public health problem. Worldwide, two billion subjects have been 
infected, 300 million have a chronic infection and more than 600,000 die 
annually of HBV-related liver disease or hepatocellular carcinoma; new 
infections occur because of the presence of a large reservoir of chronic 
carriers of the virus. The knowledge of the HBV organization and replication 
cycle and the availability of sensitive HBV-DNA assays have led to remarkable 
progress in our understanding of the natural history of chronic hepatitis B 
infections. Crucial to the prevention of new infections, to the management and 
the monitoring of HBV carriers and to the choice of best treatment strategy, is 
the understanding of the natural dynamism of HBV infection and of the virus-host 
interactions that induce liver damage.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mam.2007.09.013
PMID: 18067957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]