---
reference_id: "PMID:25968119"
title: Striatal neuronal death mediated by astrocytes from the Gcdh-/- mouse model of glutaric acidemia type I.
authors:
- Olivera-Bravo S
- Ribeiro CA
- Isasi E
- Trías E
- Leipnitz G
- Díaz-Amarilla P
- Woontner M
- Beck C
- Goodman SI
- Souza D
- Wajner M
- Barbeito L
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv175
keywords:
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Animals
- "Astrocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- "Brain Diseases, Metabolic/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Cell Survival/genetics
- "Corpus Striatum/metabolism, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Glutaryl-CoA Dehydrogenase/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Striatal neuronal death mediated by astrocytes from the Gcdh-/- mouse model of glutaric acidemia type I.
**Authors:** Olivera-Bravo S, Ribeiro CA, Isasi E, Trías E, Leipnitz G, Díaz-Amarilla P, Woontner M, Beck C, Goodman SI, Souza D, Wajner M, Barbeito L
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddv175](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddv175)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Aug 15;24(16):4504-15. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv175. Epub 2015
May 12.

Striatal neuronal death mediated by astrocytes from the Gcdh-/- mouse model of
glutaric acidemia type I.

Olivera-Bravo S(1), Ribeiro CA(2), Isasi E(1), Trías E(1), Leipnitz G(2),
Díaz-Amarilla P(1), Woontner M(3), Beck C(3), Goodman SI(3), Souza D(2), Wajner
M(4), Barbeito L(5).

Author information:
(1)Neurobiología Celular y Molecular, IIBCE, Montevideo, CIP 11600, Uruguay.
(2)Departamento de Bioquímica, Instituto de Ciências Básicas da Saúde,
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre CEP 900035-003 RS,
Brazil.
(3)School of Medicine, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(4)Departamento de Bioquímica, Instituto de Ciências Básicas da Saúde,
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre CEP 900035-003 RS,
Brazil, Serviço de Genética Médica do Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre,
Porto Alegre CEP 900035-003 RS, Brazil and.
(5)Institut Pasteur Montevideo, Mataojo 2020, Montevideo CIP 11400, Uruguay
barbeito@pasteur.edu.uy.

Glutaric acidemia type I (GA-I) is an inherited neurometabolic childhood
disorder caused by defective activity of glutaryl CoA dehydrogenase (GCDH) which
disturb lysine (Lys) and tryptophan catabolism leading to neurotoxic
accumulation of glutaric acid (GA) and related metabolites. However, it remains
unknown whether GA toxicity is due to direct effects on vulnerable neurons or
mediated by GA-intoxicated astrocytes that fail to support neuron function and
survival. As damaged astrocytes can also contribute to sustain high GA levels,
we explored the ability of Gcdh-/- mouse astrocytes to produce GA and induce
neuronal death when challenged with Lys. Upon Lys treatment, Gcdh-/- astrocytes
synthetized and released GA and 3-hydroxyglutaric acid (3HGA). Lys and GA
treatments also increased oxidative stress and proliferation in Gcdh-/-
astrocytes, both prevented by antioxidants. Pretreatment with Lys also caused
Gcdh-/- astrocytes to induce extensive death of striatal and cortical neurons
when compared with milder effect in WT astrocytes. Antioxidants abrogated the
neuronal death induced by astrocytes exposed to Lys or GA. In contrast, Lys or
GA direct exposure on Gcdh-/- or WT striatal neurons cultured in the absence of
astrocytes was not toxic, indicating that neuronal death is mediated by
astrocytes. In summary, GCDH-defective astrocytes actively contribute to produce
and accumulate GA and 3HGA when Lys catabolism is stressed. In turn, astrocytic
GA production induces a neurotoxic phenotype that kills striatal and cortical
neurons by an oxidative stress-dependent mechanism. Targeting astrocytes in GA-I
may prompt the development of new antioxidant-based therapeutical approaches.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddv175
PMID: 25968119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
