---
reference_id: "PMID:41180768"
title: The neglected epidemic of type 5 diabetes mellitus.
authors:
- Azhar Z
- Sadia Z
- Siddiqui AN
- Yokolo H
journal: Ann Med Surg (Lond)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1097/MS9.0000000000003985
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The neglected epidemic of type 5 diabetes mellitus.
**Authors:** Azhar Z, Sadia Z, Siddiqui AN, Yokolo H
**Journal:** Ann Med Surg (Lond) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MS9.0000000000003985](https://doi.org/10.1097/MS9.0000000000003985)

## Content

1. Ann Med Surg (Lond). 2025 Sep 30;87(11):6957-6958. doi: 
10.1097/MS9.0000000000003985. eCollection 2025 Nov.

The neglected epidemic of type 5 diabetes mellitus.

Azhar Z(1), Sadia Z(1), Siddiqui AN(2), Yokolo H(3).

Author information:
(1)Karachi Metropolitan University, Karachi, Pakistan.
(2)Jinnah Sindh Medical University, Karachi, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Research, Medical Research Circle (MedReC), Goma, DR Congo.

There are several types of diabetes, but type 1 and type 2 often dominate the 
discussion. They overshadow lesser-known types like type 5 diabetes (T5DM). T5DM 
was first identified in 1955 in Jamaica. However, it remained understudied due 
to limited evidence. Recently, in April 2025, the International Diabetes 
Federation brought attention to this condition during the World Diabetes 
Congress. It is estimated to affect 20 to 25 million people, predominantly of 
Asian and African descent. It disproportionately affects malnourished teens in 
low- and middle-income countries and is therefore, also known as 
malnutrition-related diabetes. Despite existing for over 70 years, it remains 
often misunderstood or misdiagnosed. This may lead to inadequate management of 
increased risk of complications. This highlights the need for reliable 
diagnostic criteria and extensive research. Furthermore, we believe addressing 
type 5 diabetes requires a multifaceted, global approach.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MS9.0000000000003985
PMCID: PMC12577909
PMID: 41180768

Conflict of interest statement: Sponsorships or competing interests that may be 
relevant to content are disclosed at the end of this article. The authors 
declare that there is no conflict of interest.