---
reference_id: "PMID:37342500"
title: "ME/CFS and Long COVID share similar symptoms and biological abnormalities: road map to the literature."
authors:
- Komaroff AL
- Lipkin WI
journal: Front Med (Lausanne)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1187163
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ME/CFS and Long COVID share similar symptoms and biological abnormalities: road map to the literature.
**Authors:** Komaroff AL, Lipkin WI
**Journal:** Front Med (Lausanne) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmed.2023.1187163](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2023.1187163)

## Content

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2023 Jun 2;10:1187163. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1187163. 
eCollection 2023.

ME/CFS and Long COVID share similar symptoms and biological abnormalities: road 
map to the literature.

Komaroff AL(1), Lipkin WI(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, United States.
(2)Center for Infection and Immunity, Mailman School of Public Health, Vagelos 
College of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia University, New York, NY, United 
States.

Some patients remain unwell for months after "recovering" from acute COVID-19. 
They develop persistent fatigue, cognitive problems, headaches, disrupted sleep, 
myalgias and arthralgias, post-exertional malaise, orthostatic intolerance and 
other symptoms that greatly interfere with their ability to function and that 
can leave some people housebound and disabled. The illness (Long COVID) is 
similar to myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) as well 
as to persisting illnesses that can follow a wide variety of other infectious 
agents and following major traumatic injury. Together, these illnesses are 
projected to cost the U.S. trillions of dollars. In this review, we first 
compare the symptoms of ME/CFS and Long COVID, noting the considerable 
similarities and the few differences. We then compare in extensive detail the 
underlying pathophysiology of these two conditions, focusing on abnormalities of 
the central and autonomic nervous system, lungs, heart, vasculature, immune 
system, gut microbiome, energy metabolism and redox balance. This comparison 
highlights how strong the evidence is for each abnormality, in each illness, and 
helps to set priorities for future investigation. The review provides a current 
road map to the extensive literature on the underlying biology of both 
illnesses.

Copyright © 2023 Komaroff and Lipkin.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1187163
PMCID: PMC10278546
PMID: 37342500

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.