---
reference_id: "PMID:38249169"
title: Spontaneous Rupture of Splenic Artery Aneurysm.
authors:
- Carvalho M
- Mendes J
- Pereira-Macedo J
- Vinagreiro M
- Lemos R
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.50937
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spontaneous Rupture of Splenic Artery Aneurysm.
**Authors:** Carvalho M, Mendes J, Pereira-Macedo J, Vinagreiro M, Lemos R
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.50937](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.50937)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Dec 22;15(12):e50937. doi: 10.7759/cureus.50937. eCollection 2023
 Dec.

Spontaneous Rupture of Splenic Artery Aneurysm.

Carvalho M(1), Mendes J(1), Pereira-Macedo J(1), Vinagreiro M(1), Lemos R(1).

Author information:
(1)Surgery, Centro Hospitalar do Médio Ave, Santo Tirso, PRT.

Splenic artery aneurysms are rare and usually asymptomatic, with a high risk of 
mortality once they get ruptured. A case report of a spontaneous rupture of a 
splenic artery aneurysm in a 65-year-old female is reported. The patient 
presented in the emergency department with abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting, 
followed by syncope. A contrast-enhanced CT scan was performed and showed a 
splenic artery aneurysm measuring 40 × 35 mm surrounded by a hematoma. The 
patient was submitted to emergency laparotomy with ligation of the splenic 
artery, aneurysm resection, and splenectomy. There were no surgical 
complications, and the patient was discharged home on the fifth postoperative 
day. A rupture of a splenic aneurysm is a rare condition with a high mortality 
rate and should be considered a differential diagnosis in a patient with 
abdominal pain and hemodynamic instability.

Copyright © 2023, Carvalho et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.50937
PMCID: PMC10800027
PMID: 38249169

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.