---
reference_id: "PMID:38365830"
title: "The male-to-female ratio in late-onset multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Ma J
- Zhang H
- Liang F
- Li G
- Pang X
- Zhao R
- Wang J
- Chang X
- Guo J
- Zhang W
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03072-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The male-to-female ratio in late-onset multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Ma J, Zhang H, Liang F, Li G, Pang X, Zhao R, Wang J, Chang X, Guo J, Zhang W
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-024-03072-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-024-03072-6)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 Feb 16;19(1):72. doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03072-6.

The male-to-female ratio in late-onset multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase 
deficiency: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Ma J(#)(1)(2), Zhang H(#)(1)(2), Liang F(#)(1)(2), Li G(1)(2), Pang X(1), Zhao 
R(1), Wang J(1), Chang X(1), Guo J(3), Zhang W(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, First Hospital, Shanxi Medical University, No.85, 
Jiefang South Street, Taiyuan, China.
(2)First Clinical Medical College, Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, First Hospital, Shanxi Medical University, No.85, 
Jiefang South Street, Taiyuan, China. neuroguo@163.com.
(4)Department of Neurology, First Hospital, Shanxi Medical University, No.85, 
Jiefang South Street, Taiyuan, China. zhangvey@126.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Late-onset multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (MADD) is the 
most common lipid storage myopathy. There are sex differences in fat metabolism 
and it is not known whether late-onset MADD affects men and women equally.
METHODS: In this systematic review and meta-analysis, the PubMed, Embase, Web of 
Science, CNKI, CBM, and Wanfang databases were searched until 01/08/2023. 
Studies reporting sex distribution in patients with late-onset MADD were 
included. Two authors independently screened studies for eligibility, extracted 
data, and assessed risk of bias. Pre-specified outcomes of interest were the 
male-to-female ratio (MFR) of patients with late-onset MADD, the differences of 
clinical characteristics between the sexes, and factors influencing the MFR.
RESULTS: Of 3379 identified studies, 34 met inclusion criteria, yielding a total 
of 609 late-onset MADD patients. The overall pooled percentage of males was 58% 
(95% CI, 54-63%) with low heterogeneity across studies (I2 = 2.99%; P = 0.42). 
The mean onset ages, diagnostic delay, serum creatine kinase (CK), and allelic 
frequencies of 3 hotspot variants in ETFDH gene were similar between male and 
female patients (P > 0.05). Meta-regressions revealed that ethnic group was 
associated with the MFR in late-onset MADD, and subgroup meta-analyses 
demonstrated that East-Asian patients had a higher percentage of male, lower CK, 
and higher proportion of hotspot variants in ETFDH gene than non-East-Asian 
patients (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Male patients with late-onset MADD were more common than female 
patients. Ethnicity was proved to be a factor influencing the MFR in late-onset 
MADD. These findings suggest that male sex may be a risk factor for the disease.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-024-03072-6
PMCID: PMC10873946
PMID: 38365830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors have any financial and 
conflict of interest to disclose.