---
reference_id: "PMID:38660671"
title: Two missense STK11 gene variations impaired LKB1/adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase signaling in Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.
authors:
- Liu J
- Zeng SC
- Wang A
- Cheng HY
- Zhang QJ
- Lu GX
journal: World J Gastrointest Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.4251/wjgo.v16.i4.1532
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two missense STK11 gene variations impaired LKB1/adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase signaling in Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.
**Authors:** Liu J, Zeng SC, Wang A, Cheng HY, Zhang QJ, Lu GX
**Journal:** World J Gastrointest Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.4251/wjgo.v16.i4.1532](https://doi.org/10.4251/wjgo.v16.i4.1532)

## Content

1. World J Gastrointest Oncol. 2024 Apr 15;16(4):1532-1546. doi:
10.4251/wjgo.v16.i4.1532.

Two missense STK11 gene variations impaired LKB1/adenosine
monophosphate-activated protein kinase signaling in Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.

Liu J(1)(2), Zeng SC(1)(2), Wang A(1), Cheng HY(1), Zhang QJ(1), Lu GX(3).

Author information:
(1)Hunan Guangxiu Hospital, Hunan Normal University, Changsha 410000, Hunan
Province, China.
(2)Scientific Research Department, Reproductive and Genetic Hospital of
Citic-Xiangya, Changsha 410000, Hunan Province, China.
(3)Hunan Guangxiu Hospital, Hunan Normal University, Changsha 410000, Hunan
Province, China. lugxdirector@aliyun.com.

BACKGROUND: Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is a rare hereditary neoplastic
disorder mainly associated with serine/threonine kinase 11 (STK11/LKB1) gene
mutations. Preimplantation genetic testing can protect a patient's offspring
from mutated genes; however, some variations in this gene have been interpreted
as variants of uncertain significance (VUS), which complicate reproductive
decision-making in genetic counseling.
AIM: To identify the pathogenicity of two missense variants and provide clinical
guidance.
METHODS: Whole exome gene sequencing and Sanger sequencing were performed on the
peripheral blood of patients with PJS treated at the Reproductive and Genetic
Hospital of Citic-Xiangya. Software was employed to predict the protein
structure, conservation, and pathogenicity of the two missense variation sites
in patients with PJS. Additionally, plasmids were constructed and transfected
into HeLa cells to observe cell growth. The differences in signal pathway
expression between the variant group and the wild-type group were compared using
western blot and immunohistochemistry. Statistical analysis was performed using
one-way analysis of variance. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
RESULTS: We identified two missense STK11 gene VUS [c.889A>G (p.Arg297Gly) and
c.733C>T (p.Leu245Phe)] in 9 unrelated PJS families who were seeking
reproductive assistance. The two missense VUS were located in the catalytic
domain of serine/threonine kinase, which is a key structure of the liver kinase
B1 (LKB1) protein. In vitro experiments showed that the phosphorylation levels
of adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) at Thr172 and LKB1 at
Ser428 were significantly higher in transfected variation-type cells than in
wild-type cells. In addition, the two missense STK11 variants promoted the
proliferation of HeLa cells. Subsequent immunohistochemical analysis showed that
phosphorylated-AMPK (Thr172) expression was significantly lower in gastric,
colonic, and uterine polyps from PJS patients with missense variations than in
non-PJS patients. Our findings indicate that these two missense STK11 variants
are likely pathogenic and inactivate the STK11 gene, causing it to lose its
function of regulating downstream phosphorylated-AMPK (Thr172), which may lead
to the development of PJS. The identification of the pathogenic mutations in
these two clinically characterized PJS patients has been helpful in guiding them
toward the most appropriate mode of pregnancy assistance.
CONCLUSION: These two missense variants can be interpreted as likely pathogenic
variants that mediated the onset of PJS in the two patients. These findings not
only offer insights for clinical decision-making, but also serve as a foundation
for further research and reanalysis of missense VUS in rare diseases.

©The Author(s) 2024. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.4251/wjgo.v16.i4.1532
PMCID: PMC11037055
PMID: 38660671

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All authors
declared no conflicts of interest to disclose.
