---
reference_id: "PMID:12004129"
title: Female germ cell aneuploidy and embryo death in mice lacking the meiosis-specific protein SCP3.
authors:
- Yuan L
- Liu JG
- Hoja MR
- Wilbertz J
- Nordqvist K
- Höög C
journal: Science
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1126/science.1070594
keywords:
- Aneuploidy
- Animals
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- Chromosome Segregation
- "Chromosomes/physiology, ultrastructure"
- "Crossing Over, Genetic"
- DNA-Binding Proteins
- Embryo Loss
- Female
- Karyotyping
- Litter Size
- Male
- Maternal Age
- Meiosis
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Mutation
- "Nondisjunction, Genetic"
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- Oocytes/physiology
- Pregnancy
- "Recombination, Genetic"
- "Synaptonemal Complex/physiology, ultrastructure"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Female germ cell aneuploidy and embryo death in mice lacking the meiosis-specific protein SCP3.
**Authors:** Yuan L, Liu JG, Hoja MR, Wilbertz J, Nordqvist K, Höög C
**Journal:** Science (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1070594](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1070594)

## Content

1. Science. 2002 May 10;296(5570):1115-8. doi: 10.1126/science.1070594.

Female germ cell aneuploidy and embryo death in mice lacking the 
meiosis-specific protein SCP3.

Yuan L(1), Liu JG, Hoja MR, Wilbertz J, Nordqvist K, Höög C.

Author information:
(1)Center for Genomics and Bioinformatics and Department of Cell and Molecular 
Biology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

Aneuploidy (trisomy or monosomy) is the leading genetic cause of pregnancy loss 
in humans and results from errors in meiotic chromosome segregation. Here, we 
show that the absence of synaptonemal complex protein 3 (SCP3) promotes 
aneuploidy in murine oocytes by inducing defective meiotic chromosome 
segregation. The abnormal oocyte karyotype is inherited by embryos, which die in 
utero at an early stage of development. In addition, embryo death in 
SCP3-deficient females increases with advancing maternal age. We found that SCP3 
is required for chiasmata formation and for the structural integrity of meiotic 
chromosomes, suggesting that altered chromosomal structure triggers 
nondisjunction. SCP3 is thus linked to inherited aneuploidy in female germ cells 
and provides a model system for studying age-dependent degeneration in oocytes.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1070594
PMID: 12004129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]