---
reference_id: "PMID:37869140"
title: Role of complement in myasthenia gravis.
authors:
- San PP
- Jacob S
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1277596
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of complement in myasthenia gravis.
**Authors:** San PP, Jacob S
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2023.1277596](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2023.1277596)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2023 Oct 5;14:1277596. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1277596. 
eCollection 2023.

Role of complement in myasthenia gravis.

San PP(1), Jacob S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Immunology and Immunotherapy, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Neurology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham, University 
Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom.

Myasthenia gravis is a prototypic neuroimmune disorder with autoantibodies 
targeting the acetylcholine receptor complex at the neuromuscular junction. 
Patients present with mainly ocular muscle weakness and tend to have a 
generalized muscle weakness later in the clinical course. The weakness can be 
severe and fatal when bulbar muscles are heavily involved. Acetylcholine 
receptor antibodies are present in the majority of patients and are of IgG1 and 
IgG3 subtypes which can activate the complement system. The complement 
involvement plays a major role in the neuromuscular junction damage and the 
supporting evidence in the literature is described in this article. Complement 
therapies were initially studied and approved for paroxysmal nocturnal 
hemoglobinuria and in the past decade, those have also been studied in 
myasthenia gravis. The currently available randomized control trial and 
real-world data on the efficacy and safety of the approved and investigational 
complement therapies are summarized in this review.

Copyright © 2023 San and Jacob.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1277596
PMCID: PMC10585143
PMID: 37869140

Conflict of interest statement: PS is currently doing a PhD and Research and 
Clinical Fellowship with the funding from UK myasthenia patient charity, Myaware 
and has received travel grants from MGFA and Myaware. SJ has served as an 
international advisory board member for Alexion, Alnylam, Argenx, Regeneron, 
Immunovant and UCB pharmaceuticals, is currently an expert panel member of 
Myasthenia Gravis consortium for Argenx pharmaceuticals and has received speaker 
fees from Argenx, Eisai, Terumo BCT and UCB pharmaceuticals. SJ is also a board 
member (trustee) of the UK myasthenia patient charity, Myaware.