---
reference_id: "PMID:24388750"
title: Microcephaly-associated protein WDR62 regulates neurogenesis through JNK1 in the developing neocortex.
authors:
- Xu D
- Zhang F
- Wang Y
- Sun Y
- Xu Z
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.12.016
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Humans
- Mice
- Microcephaly/genetics
- Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase 8/metabolism
- Mutation
- "Neocortex/cytology, embryology, metabolism"
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Neural Stem Cells/cytology, metabolism"
- Neurogenesis
- "Neurons/cytology, metabolism"
- Rats
- "Rats, Sprague-Dawley"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Microcephaly-associated protein WDR62 regulates neurogenesis through JNK1 in the developing neocortex.
**Authors:** Xu D, Zhang F, Wang Y, Sun Y, Xu Z
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2013.12.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2013.12.016)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2014 Jan 16;6(1):104-16. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.12.016. Epub
2014  Jan 2.

Microcephaly-associated protein WDR62 regulates neurogenesis through JNK1 in the
developing neocortex.

Xu D(1), Zhang F(1), Wang Y(1), Sun Y(1), Xu Z(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of
Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, West Lincui
Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100101, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of
Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, West Lincui
Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100101, China; Center of Parkinson's Disease,
Beijing Institute for Brain Disorders, Beijing 100101, China. Electronic
address: zhxu@genetics.ac.cn.

Mutations of WD40-repeat protein 62 (WDR62) have been identified recently to
cause human MCPH (autosomal-recessive primary microcephaly), a
neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by decreased brain size. However, the
underlying mechanism is unclear. Here, we investigate the function of WDR62 in
brain development and the pathological role of WDR62 mutations. We find that
WDR62 knockdown leads to premature differentiation of neural progenitor cells
(NPCs). The defect can be rescued by wild-type human WDR62, but not by the five
MCPH-associated WDR62 mutants. We demonstrate that WDR62 acts upstream of JNK
signaling in the control of neurogenesis. Depletion of JNK1 and WDR62 incurs
very similar defects including abnormal spindle formation and mitotic division
of NPCs as well as premature NPC differentiation during cortical development.
Thus, our findings indicate that WDR62 is required for proper neurogenesis via
JNK1 and provide an insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying MCPH
pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.12.016
PMID: 24388750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
