---
reference_id: "PMID:20301531"
title: Nonketotic Hyperglycinemia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Van Hove JLK
- Coughlin C II
- Swanson M
- Hennermann JB
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nonketotic Hyperglycinemia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Van Hove JLK, Coughlin C II, Swanson M, Hennermann JB

## Content

1. Nonketotic Hyperglycinemia.

Van Hove JLK(1), Coughlin C II(1), Swanson M(1), Hennermann JB(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2002 Nov 14 [updated 2019 May 23].

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Clinical Genetics and Metabolism,
University of Colorado School of Medicine, Denver, Colorado
(2)Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, University Medical Center
Mainz, Mainz, Germany

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Nonketotic hyperglycinemia (NKH) is the inborn error
of glycine metabolism defined by deficient activity of the glycine cleavage
enzyme system (GCS), which results in accumulation of large quantities of
glycine in all body tissues including the brain. Based on ultimate outcome NKH
is categorized into severe NKH (no developmental progress and intractable
epilepsy) and attenuated NKH (variable developmental progress and treatable or
no epilepsy). The majority of children with NKH have onset in the neonatal
period manifest as progressive lethargy evolving into profound coma and marked
hypotonia; 85% have severe NKH and 15% attenuated NKH. Those with onset between
two weeks and three months typically present with hypotonia; 50% have severe NKH
and 50% attenuated NKH. Those with onset after age three months have attenuated
NKH. Severe versus attenuated NKH is consistent within families, but the degree
of developmental progress in those with attenuated NKH can vary.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of NKH is established in a proband with
elevated glycine in plasma and CSF, a compatible pattern on brain imaging, and
either biallelic pathogenic variants in one of the genes encoding the protein
subunits of the GCS identified on molecular genetic testing or deficient
activity of the GCS (without deficiency of cofactors such as enzyme-bound
lipoate or pyridoxal phosphate).
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Severe NKH. No treatment is effective
in changing the natural history of developmental delays, spasticity, and
intractable epilepsy, but treatment with benzoate to lower glycine improves
attentiveness and facilitates seizure management. Attenuated NKH. Current
treatment is reduction of plasma concentration of glycine by administration of
sodium benzoate and blockade of overstimulated NMDA receptors. Surveillance: In
the first years of life: routine developmental assessments and neurologic
evaluations. Monitoring for scoliosis and hip dysplasia in severely affected
individuals; gastrointestinal issues; and pulmonary function particularly in
children who develop recurrent respiratory infections. Agents/circumstances to
avoid: Valproate, which raises blood and CSF glycine concentrations and may
increase seizure frequency; vigabatrin, which has resulted in rapid loss of
function when used to treat seizures, particularly in those with attenuated NKH
who have West syndrome.
GENETIC COUNSELING: NKH is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. The
parents of an affected individual are typically heterozygotes (i.e., carriers of
one NKH-related pathogenic variant); however, de novo pathogenic variants occur
in approximately 1% of individuals with NKH. If both parents are heterozygous
for one pathogenic variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception
a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier,
and a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the pathogenic
variants in an NKH-related gene have been identified in an affected family
member, carrier testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal and preimplantation
genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301531
