---
reference_id: "PMID:11371514"
title: "Mutations in the gamma(2) subunit of AMP-activated protein kinase cause familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: evidence for the central role of energy compromise in disease pathogenesis."
authors:
- Blair E
- Redwood C
- Ashrafian H
- Oliveira M
- Broxholme J
- Kerr B
- Salmon A
- Ostman-Smith I
- Watkins H
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/10.11.1215
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic/etiology, genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Electrocardiography
- Exons
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Introns
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Protein Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the gamma(2) subunit of AMP-activated protein kinase cause familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: evidence for the central role of energy compromise in disease pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Blair E, Redwood C, Ashrafian H, Oliveira M, Broxholme J, Kerr B, Salmon A, Ostman-Smith I, Watkins H
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/10.11.1215](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/10.11.1215)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 May 15;10(11):1215-20. doi: 10.1093/hmg/10.11.1215.

Mutations in the gamma(2) subunit of AMP-activated protein kinase cause familial
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: evidence for the central role of energy compromise
in disease pathogenesis.

Blair E(1), Redwood C, Ashrafian H, Oliveira M, Broxholme J, Kerr B, Salmon A,
Ostman-Smith I, Watkins H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine and Wellcome Trust Centre for Human
Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) has been widely studied as a genetic
model of cardiac hypertrophy and sudden cardiac death. HCM has been defined as a
disease of the cardiac sarcomere, but mutations in the known contractile protein
disease genes are not found in up to one-third of cases. Further, no consistent
changes in contractile properties are shared by these mutant proteins, implying
that an abnormality of force generation may not be the underlying mechanism of
disease. Instead, all of the sarcomeric mutations appear to result in
inefficient use of ATP, suggesting that an inability to maintain normal ATP
levels may be the central abnormality. To test this hypothesis we have examined
candidate genes involved in energy homeostasis in the heart. We now describe
mutations in PRKAG2, encoding the gamma(2) subunit of AMP-activated protein
kinase (AMPK), in two families with severe HCM and aberrant conduction from
atria to ventricles in some affected individuals (pre-excitation or
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome). The mutations, one missense and one in-frame
single codon insertion, occur in highly conserved regions. Because AMPK provides
a central sensing mechanism that protects cells from exhaustion of ATP supplies,
we propose that these data substantiate energy compromise as a unifying
pathogenic mechanism in all forms of HCM. This conclusion should radically
redirect thinking about this disorder and also, by establishing energy depletion
as a cause of myocardial dysfunction, should be relevant to the acquired forms
of heart muscle disease that HCM models.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/10.11.1215
PMID: 11371514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
