---
reference_id: "PMID:37153943"
title: "Dermatomyositis: a comprehensive review of clinical manifestations, serological features, and therapeutic approaches."
authors:
- Didona D
- Solimani F
- Caposiena Caro RD
- Sequeira Santos AM
- Hinterseher J
- Kussini J
- Cunha T
- Hertl M
- Didona B
journal: Ital J Dermatol Venerol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.23736/S2784-8671.23.07458-3
keywords:
- Humans
- "Dermatomyositis/therapy, drug therapy"
- Skin
- Skin Diseases
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/therapeutic use"
- Autoantibodies/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dermatomyositis: a comprehensive review of clinical manifestations, serological features, and therapeutic approaches.
**Authors:** Didona D, Solimani F, Caposiena Caro RD, Sequeira Santos AM, Hinterseher J, Kussini J, Cunha T, Hertl M, Didona B
**Journal:** Ital J Dermatol Venerol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.23736/S2784-8671.23.07458-3](https://doi.org/10.23736/S2784-8671.23.07458-3)

## Content

1. Ital J Dermatol Venerol. 2023 Apr;158(2):84-98. doi: 
10.23736/S2784-8671.23.07458-3.

Dermatomyositis: a comprehensive review of clinical manifestations, serological 
features, and therapeutic approaches.

Didona D(1), Solimani F(2)(3), Caposiena Caro RD(4), Sequeira Santos AM(5), 
Hinterseher J(5), Kussini J(5), Cunha T(5), Hertl M(5), Didona B(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Allergology, Philipps University of Marburg, 
Marburg, Germany - dario.didona@uk-gm.de.
(2)Berlin Institute of Health at Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin BIH, 
Biomedical Innovation Academy, BIH Charité Clinician Scientist Program, Berlin, 
Germany.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, 
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Clinic of Dermatology, Maggiore Hospital, University of Trieste, Trieste, 
Italy.
(5)Department of Dermatology and Allergology, Philipps University of Marburg, 
Marburg, Germany.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Istituto Dermopatico dell'Immacolata (IDI)-IRCCS, 
Rome, Italy.

Dermatomyositis (DM) is an autoimmune disorder, which belongs to a group of rare 
autoimmune dermatoses characterized by different skin features and variable 
muscle involvement. We recognize four main variants of DM: classic DM, 
clinically amyopathic DM, paraneoplastic DM, and juvenile DM. Clinically, 
patients show several skin features, but heliotrope rash, and violaceous papules 
located at the interphalangeal or metacarpophalangeal joints (Gottron's papules) 
are the most frequently observed. Together with skin features, patients show 
muscle involvement, most commonly with symmetrical weakness of the proximal 
muscles. DM belongs to the facultative paraneoplastic dermatoses and a wide 
range of solid or hematologic malignancies can be detected in DM patients. 
Serologically, a wide range of autoantibodies can be detected in patients with 
DM. Indeed, distinct serotypes can be related to specific phenotypes with 
specific clinical features, carrying a different risk for systemic involvement 
and for malignancies. Systemic corticosteroids are still considered the 
first-line approach, but several steroid-sparing agents, such as methotrexate, 
azathioprine or mycophenolate mofetil, have been reported as effective in 
treating DM. Furthermore, new class of drugs, such as monoclonal antibodies, 
purified immunoglobulins or Janus kinase inhibitors are becoming more relevant 
in the clinical practice or are currently under investigation. In this work, we 
aim to offer a clinical overview of the diagnostic workout, the characteristics 
of DM variants, the role of autoantibodies in DM, and the management of this 
life-threatening systemic disorder.

DOI: 10.23736/S2784-8671.23.07458-3
PMID: 37153943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]