---
reference_id: "PMID:11604438"
title: "Predictors of incidence and prevalence of green tobacco sickness among Latino farmworkers in North Carolina, USA."
authors:
- Arcury TA
- Quandt SA
- Preisser JS
journal: J Epidemiol Community Health
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1136/jech.55.11.818
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Agricultural Workers' Diseases/epidemiology"
- Alcohol Drinking/epidemiology
- Female
- "Hispanic or Latino/statistics & numerical data"
- Humans
- Incidence
- Logistic Models
- Male
- Nicotine/poisoning
- Nicotinic Agonists/poisoning
- North Carolina/epidemiology
- Poisson Distribution
- Prevalence
- Prospective Studies
- Protective Clothing
- Risk Factors
- Smoking/epidemiology
- "Tobacco, Smokeless"
- Transients and Migrants
- Weather
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predictors of incidence and prevalence of green tobacco sickness among Latino farmworkers in North Carolina, USA.
**Authors:** Arcury TA, Quandt SA, Preisser JS
**Journal:** J Epidemiol Community Health (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jech.55.11.818](https://doi.org/10.1136/jech.55.11.818)

## Content

1. J Epidemiol Community Health. 2001 Nov;55(11):818-24. doi: 
10.1136/jech.55.11.818.

Predictors of incidence and prevalence of green tobacco sickness among Latino 
farmworkers in North Carolina, USA.

Arcury TA(1), Quandt SA, Preisser JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Family and Community Medicine, Wake Forest University School of 
Medicine, Winston-Salem NC 27157-1084, USA. tarcury@wfubmc.edu

STUDY OBJECTIVE: The characteristics of some populations make epidemiological 
measurement extremely difficult. The objective of this study is to identify risk 
factors that explain variation among incidence densities and proportions of one 
occupational illness, green tobacco sickness, within one such special 
population, Latino migrant and seasonal farmworkers in the United States.
DESIGN: Prospective cohort study.
SETTING: 37 farmworker residential sites located in Granville and Wake Counties, 
North Carolina, USA.
PARTICIPANTS: 182 migrant and seasonal farmworkers that included 178 Latino men, 
three Latino women, and one non-Hispanic white man.
MAIN RESULTS: Green tobacco sickness had a prevalence of 0.082, and an incidence 
density of events per 100 days of 1.88 among the farmworkers. Prevalence and 
incidence density increased from early to late agricultural season. Major risk 
factors included lack of work experience, work activities, and working in wet 
clothes. Tobacco use was protective.
CONCLUSION: Green tobacco sickness has a high incidence among migrant and 
seasonal farmworkers. Because workers have little control over most risk 
factors, further research is needed to identify ways to prevent this 
occupational illness.

DOI: 10.1136/jech.55.11.818
PMCID: PMC1763303
PMID: 11604438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]