---
reference_id: "PMID:23857204"
title: The microbiology of postobstructive pneumonia in lung cancer patients.
authors:
- Hsu-Kim C
- Hoag JB
- Cheng GS
- Lund ME
journal: J Bronchology Interv Pulmonol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1097/LBR.0b013e31829ddf01
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The microbiology of postobstructive pneumonia in lung cancer patients.
**Authors:** Hsu-Kim C, Hoag JB, Cheng GS, Lund ME
**Journal:** J Bronchology Interv Pulmonol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1097/LBR.0b013e31829ddf01](https://doi.org/10.1097/LBR.0b013e31829ddf01)

## Content

1. J Bronchology Interv Pulmonol. 2013 Jul;20(3):266-70. doi: 
10.1097/LBR.0b013e31829ddf01.

The microbiology of postobstructive pneumonia in lung cancer patients.

Hsu-Kim C(1), Hoag JB, Cheng GS, Lund ME.

Author information:
(1)Drexel University College of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, 
and Sleep Medicine, Eastern Regional Medical Center, Cancer Treatment Centers of 
America, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Recurrent pneumonias often occur in the setting of an airway obstruction and can 
be the presenting symptom of an undiagnosed malignancy. Little is known 
regarding the microbiology of these pneumonias making antibiotic therapy 
difficult to direct; however, the few studies available show these pneumonias to 
be polymicrobial. Examining the colonization patterns of at-risk populations 
such as patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and using techniques 
such as ultrasound and computed tomography-guided biopsies may help in the 
treatment of these pneumonias. The following review is presented to highlight 
the current medical knowledge as well as suggest areas for future evaluation.

DOI: 10.1097/LBR.0b013e31829ddf01
PMID: 23857204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]