---
reference_id: "PMID:34235109"
title: "Outcomes of Adult Ewing Sarcoma Treated with Multimodality Therapy: A Single-Institute Experience."
authors:
- Chandran R
- Kuruva SP
- Chennamaneni R
- Bala S
- Konatam ML
- Gundeti S
journal: South Asian J Cancer
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1723108
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcomes of Adult Ewing Sarcoma Treated with Multimodality Therapy: A Single-Institute Experience.
**Authors:** Chandran R, Kuruva SP, Chennamaneni R, Bala S, Konatam ML, Gundeti S
**Journal:** South Asian J Cancer (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0041-1723108](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0041-1723108)

## Content

1. South Asian J Cancer. 2020 Oct;9(4):191-194. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1723108. Epub
 2021 Jul 4.

Outcomes of Adult Ewing Sarcoma Treated with Multimodality Therapy: A
Single-Institute Experience.

Chandran R(1), Kuruva SP(1), Chennamaneni R(1), Bala S(1), Konatam ML(1),
Gundeti S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Nizam's Institute of Medical Sciences,
Hyderabad, Telangana, India.

Introduction  Ewing sarcoma (ES) is more common in children and relatively rare
in adults. Adult ES has poor prognosis than children. Treatment approaches for
adults have been extrapolated from pediatric experience. Data on adult ES are
very few because of its rarity in adults. The present study was done to analyze
the clinical profile and outcome of adult ES. Aims  The aim was to study the
clinical and pathological treatment and outcomes in adult ES. Subjects and
Methods  Between 2010 and 2017, a total of 73 ES patients with age more than 18
years were retrospectively analyzed. Survival analysis was done by plotting
Kaplan-Meier curves. Results  A total of 73 patients were diagnosed with ES
during 2010 to 2017. Among them, 43 (58.9%) had localized disease with a median
age of 24.5 years. Males were 44 (60.3%) and females were 29 (39.7). Pain
(75.3%) was the most common symptom at presentation. Nine patients had
incomplete details and were excluded from the analysis. Among 21 (28.8%)
patients, the lung (61.9%) was the most common site of metastasis followed by
the bone, bone marrow, and brain. The median number of chemotherapy cycles in
the localized disease was 14 (range 1-17), and in metastatic disease, it was 4
(range 1-7). Univariate analysis was done with respect to age (< 25 vs. ≥25),
gender, elevated or normal serum lactate dehydrogenase level, tumor size (< 8 cm
versus ≥8 cm), site (axial versus extremity), and neoadjuvant chemotherapy
(NACT) given or not. NACT had a significant impact on overall survival (OS) and
the rest had no effect. At a median follow-up of 40 months, the 3-year OS in
localized disease was 87.4%. In metastatic disease, the median OS was 13 months
with 3-year OS of 26%. Conclusions  Outcomes with multimodality therapy in adult
ES patients with localized disease are comparable to that of a pediatric cohort.
However, metastatic disease has poor survival.

MedIntel Services Pvt Ltd. This is an open access article published by Thieme
under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonDerivative-NonCommercial-License, permitting copying and
reproduction so long as the original work is given appropriate credit. Contents
may not be used for commercial purposes, or adapted, remixed, transformed or
built upon. (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

DOI: 10.1055/s-0041-1723108
PMCID: PMC8255107
PMID: 34235109

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of InterestFinancial Support and
Sponsorship None declared. Nil.
