---
reference_id: "PMID:24893135"
title: "Pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma: an endocrine society clinical practice guideline."
authors:
- Lenders JW
- Duh QY
- Eisenhofer G
- Gimenez-Roqueplo AP
- Grebe SK
- Murad MH
- Naruse M
- Pacak K
- Young WF Jr
- Endocrine Society
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-1498
keywords:
- "Adrenal Gland Neoplasms/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Adrenalectomy/methods
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Consensus
- "Diagnostic Imaging/methods, standards"
- "Diagnostic Techniques, Endocrine/standards"
- Endocrinology/standards
- Evidence-Based Medicine
- Humans
- "Paraganglioma/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- "Perioperative Care/methods, standards"
- "Pheochromocytoma/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Precision Medicine/standards
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma: an endocrine society clinical practice guideline.
**Authors:** Lenders JW, Duh QY, Eisenhofer G, Gimenez-Roqueplo AP, Grebe SK, Murad MH, Naruse M, Pacak K, Young WF Jr, Endocrine Society
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2014-1498](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2014-1498)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Jun;99(6):1915-42. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-1498.

Pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma: an endocrine society clinical practice 
guideline.

Lenders JW(1), Duh QY, Eisenhofer G, Gimenez-Roqueplo AP, Grebe SK, Murad MH, 
Naruse M, Pacak K, Young WF Jr; Endocrine Society.

Author information:
(1)Radboud University Medical Center (J.W.M.L.), 6500 HB Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands; VA Medical Center and University of California, San Francisco 
(Q.-Y.D.), San Francisco, California 94121; University Hospital Dresden (G.E.), 
01307 Dresden, Germany; Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Européen 
Georges Pompidou, Service de Génétique, (A.-P.G.-R.), F-75015 Paris, France; 
Université Paris Descartes (A.-P.G.-R.), F-75006 Paris, France; Mayo Clinic 
(S.K.G.G., M.H.M.), Rochester, Minnesota 55905; National Hospital Organisation 
Kyoto Medical Center (M.N.), Kyoto 612-8555; Japan; Eunice Kennedy Shriver 
National Institute of Child Health & Human Development (K.P.), Bethesda, 
Maryland 20892; and Mayo Clinic (W.F.Y.), Rochester, Minnesota 55905.

Erratum in
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2023 Apr 13;108(5):e200. doi: 
10.1210/clinem/dgad064.

OBJECTIVE: The aim was to formulate clinical practice guidelines for 
pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma (PPGL).
PARTICIPANTS: The Task Force included a chair selected by the Endocrine Society 
Clinical Guidelines Subcommittee (CGS), seven experts in the field, and a 
methodologist. The authors received no corporate funding or remuneration.
EVIDENCE: This evidence-based guideline was developed using the Grading of 
Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) system to 
describe both the strength of recommendations and the quality of evidence. The 
Task Force reviewed primary evidence and commissioned two additional systematic 
reviews.
CONSENSUS PROCESS: One group meeting, several conference calls, and e-mail 
communications enabled consensus. Committees and members of the Endocrine 
Society, European Society of Endocrinology, and Americal Association for 
Clinical Chemistry reviewed drafts of the guidelines.
CONCLUSIONS: The Task Force recommends that initial biochemical testing for 
PPGLs should include measurements of plasma free or urinary fractionated 
metanephrines. Consideration should be given to preanalytical factors leading to 
false-positive or false-negative results. All positive results require 
follow-up. Computed tomography is suggested for initial imaging, but magnetic 
resonance is a better option in patients with metastatic disease or when 
radiation exposure must be limited. (123)I-metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigraphy 
is a useful imaging modality for metastatic PPGLs. We recommend consideration of 
genetic testing in all patients, with testing by accredited laboratories. 
Patients with paraganglioma should be tested for SDHx mutations, and those with 
metastatic disease for SDHB mutations. All patients with functional PPGLs should 
undergo preoperative blockade to prevent perioperative complications. 
Preparation should include a high-sodium diet and fluid intake to prevent 
postoperative hypotension. We recommend minimally invasive adrenalectomy for 
most pheochromocytomas with open resection for most paragangliomas. Partial 
adrenalectomy is an option for selected patients. Lifelong follow-up is 
suggested to detect recurrent or metastatic disease. We suggest personalized 
management with evaluation and treatment by multidisciplinary teams with 
appropriate expertise to ensure favorable outcomes.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2014-1498
PMID: 24893135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]