---
reference_id: "PMID:38182156"
title: "Coffin-Siris Syndrome: Case Series of Three Patients and a Novel ARID2 Variant."
authors:
- Shin D
- Lee YJ
- Jo YH
- Kong J
- Lee YJ
- Nam SO
- Lee BL
- Oh SH
- Kim YM
journal: Ann Clin Lab Sci
year: '2023'
keywords:
- Face/abnormalities
- Facies
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Frameshift Mutation/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital"
- Intellectual Disability
- Micrognathism
- Neck/abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Coffin-Siris Syndrome: Case Series of Three Patients and a Novel ARID2 Variant.
**Authors:** Shin D, Lee YJ, Jo YH, Kong J, Lee YJ, Nam SO, Lee BL, Oh SH, Kim YM
**Journal:** Ann Clin Lab Sci (2023)

## Content

1. Ann Clin Lab Sci. 2023 Nov;53(6):959-963.

Coffin-Siris Syndrome: Case Series of Three Patients and a Novel ARID2 Variant.

Shin D(1), Lee YJ(1), Jo YH(1), Kong J(2), Lee YJ(2), Nam SO(2), Lee BL(3), Oh 
SH(4), Kim YM(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Pusan National University Hospital, Pusan National 
University School of Medicine and Biomedical Research Institute, Busan, Korea.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Pusan National University Children's Hospital, 
Pusan National University School of Medicine and Biomedical Research Institute, 
Yangsan, Korea.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Busan Paik Hospital, Inje University College of 
Medicine, Busan, Korea.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Pusan National University Yangsan 
Hospital, Biomedical Research Institute, School of Medicine, Pusan National 
University, Yangsan, Korea.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Pusan National University Hospital, Pusan National 
University School of Medicine and Biomedical Research Institute, Busan, Korea 
youngmi.kim@pusan.ac.kr.

Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS) is a rare congenital disorder characterized by 
coarse facial features, intellectual disability or developmental delay, and 
aplasia or hypoplasia of the tips of the fifth finger and/or toes. Mutations in 
genes affecting the switch/sucrose non-fermenting ATP-dependent chromatin 
remodeling complex are reported to cause CSS. Here, we describe three CSS 
patients. Two girls aged 3 and 2 years old presented with global developmental 
delay, poor growth, and a dysmorphic face. Whole-exome sequencing (WES) was 
performed and they were diagnosed with CSS due to heterozygous frameshift 
variants (c.3443_3444del, p.Lys1148ArgfsTer9 and c.2869_2890del, 
p.Pro957CysfsTer20) in ARID1B A 2-year-old girl presented with gross motor delay 
and dysmorphic face. She was diagnosed with CSS due to a novel heterozygous 
frameshift variant (c.4942_4943del: p.Gln1648GlyfsTer8) in ARID2.

© 2023 by the Association of Clinical Scientists, Inc.

PMID: 38182156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]