---
reference_id: "PMID:29737001"
title: Clinical and functional characterization of two novel ZBTB20 mutations causing Primrose syndrome.
authors:
- Stellacci E
- Steindl K
- Joset P
- Mercurio L
- Anselmi M
- Cecchetti S
- Gogoll L
- Zweier M
- Hackenberg A
- Bocchinfuso G
- Stella L
- Tartaglia M
- Rauch A
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/humu.23546
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Calcinosis/genetics, physiopathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 3/genetics"
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- "Ear Diseases/genetics, physiopathology"
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, physiopathology"
- Male
- "Muscular Atrophy/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Zinc Fingers/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and functional characterization of two novel ZBTB20 mutations causing Primrose syndrome.
**Authors:** Stellacci E, Steindl K, Joset P, Mercurio L, Anselmi M, Cecchetti S, Gogoll L, Zweier M, Hackenberg A, Bocchinfuso G, Stella L, Tartaglia M, Rauch A
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.23546](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.23546)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2018 Jul;39(7):959-964. doi: 10.1002/humu.23546. Epub 2018 May 17.

Clinical and functional characterization of two novel ZBTB20 mutations causing 
Primrose syndrome.

Stellacci E(1), Steindl K(2), Joset P(2), Mercurio L(1), Anselmi M(3), Cecchetti 
S(4), Gogoll L(2), Zweier M(2), Hackenberg A(5), Bocchinfuso G(3), Stella L(3), 
Tartaglia M(6), Rauch A(2)(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Oncologia e Medicina Molecolare, Istituto Superiore di 
Sanità, Rome, Italy.
(2)Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schlieren-Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(3)Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Chimiche, Università di Roma ''Tor 
Vergata,'' Rome, Italy.
(4)Servizio grandi strumentazioni e core facilities, Istituto Superiore di 
Sanità, Rome, Italy.
(5)Division of Paediatric Neurology, University Children's Hospital Zurich, 
Zürich, Switzerland.
(6)Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino 
Gesù, Rome, Italy.
(7)radiz-Rare Disease Initiative Zürich, Clinical Research Priority Program for 
Rare Diseases University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(8)Neuroscience Center Zurich, University of Zurich and ETH Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(9)Zurich Center for Integrative Human Physiology, University of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.

Primrose syndrome (PS) is a rare disorder characterized by macrocephaly, tall 
stature, intellectual disability, autistic traits, and disturbances of glucose 
metabolism with insulin-resistant diabetes and distal muscle wasting occurring 
in adulthood. The disorder is caused by functional dysregulation of ZBTB20, a 
transcriptional repressor controlling energetic metabolism and developmental 
programs. ZBTB20 maps in a genomic region that is deleted in the 3q13.31 
microdeletion syndrome, which explains the clinical overlap between the two 
disorders. A narrow spectrum of amino acid substitutions in a restricted region 
of ZBTB20 encompassing the first and second zinc-finger motifs have been 
reported thus far. Here, we characterize clinically and functionally the first 
truncating mutation [(c.1024delC; p.(Gln342Serfs*42)] and a missense change 
affecting the third zinc-finger motif of the protein [(c.1931C > T; 
p.(Thr644Ile)]. Our data document that both mutations have dominant negative 
impact on wild-type ZBTB20, providing further evidence of the specific behavior 
of PS-causing mutations on ZBTB20 function.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.23546
PMID: 29737001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]