---
reference_id: "PMID:37020696"
title: A family with brachydactyly mental retardation syndrome with a missense variant in HDAC4.
authors:
- Takeyari S
- Yamamoto K
- Fujiwara M
- Ohata Y
- Kitaoka T
- Kubota T
- Nagata M
- Ishihara Y
- Miyashita Y
- Asano Y
- Ozono K
journal: Clin Pediatr Endocrinol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1297/cpe.2022-0076
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A family with brachydactyly mental retardation syndrome with a missense variant in HDAC4.
**Authors:** Takeyari S, Yamamoto K, Fujiwara M, Ohata Y, Kitaoka T, Kubota T, Nagata M, Ishihara Y, Miyashita Y, Asano Y, Ozono K
**Journal:** Clin Pediatr Endocrinol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1297/cpe.2022-0076](https://doi.org/10.1297/cpe.2022-0076)

## Content

1. Clin Pediatr Endocrinol. 2023;32(2):105-109. doi: 10.1297/cpe.2022-0076. Epub 
2023 Feb 10.

A family with brachydactyly mental retardation syndrome with a missense variant 
in HDAC4.

Takeyari S(1), Yamamoto K(1)(2), Fujiwara M(1)(3), Ohata Y(1), Kitaoka T(1), 
Kubota T(1), Nagata M(4), Ishihara Y(4), Miyashita Y(5), Asano Y(4), Ozono K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Osaka, Japan.
(2)Department of Statistical Genetics, Osaka University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Osaka, Japan.
(3)The 1st. Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Osaka University 
Graduate School of Dentistry, Osaka, Japan.
(4)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Osaka, Japan.
(5)Department of Legal Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Osaka, Japan.

Brachydactyly mental retardation syndrome (BDMR) or chromosome 2q37 deletion 
syndrome is a genetic disorder caused by 2q37 deletion or haploinsufficiency of 
histone deacetylase 4 (HDAC4). The HDAC4 gene is responsible for major BDMR 
phenotypes. The symptoms of BDMR include mild-to-moderate intellectual 
disability, seizures, autism spectrum disorder, short stature, obesity, and 
facial dysmorphism. Here, we report a family (n = 5) with BDMR who had a 
missense variant of HDAC4. Four affected individuals [5-yr-old girl (index 
case); 15- and 3-yr-old siblings; and father] had mild intellectual disability, 
three of the four affected individuals had short stature and mild cardiac 
anomalies, and two of the four affected individuals had hypothyroidism. 
Whole-exome sequencing and analyses of the index case and her family revealed an 
allelic variant in the HDAC4 gene (NM_001378414.1:c.2204G>A:p. Arg735Gln). A 
healthy family member (mother) did not have the missense variant. To our 
knowledge, this is the first report of a missense variation in HDAC4 that is 
associated with BDMR.

2023©The Japanese Society for Pediatric Endocrinology.

DOI: 10.1297/cpe.2022-0076
PMCID: PMC10068624
PMID: 37020696

Conflict of interest statement: The authors do not have any financial interests 
or relationships to disclose.