---
reference_id: "PMID:35655331"
title: The Joubert-Meckel-Nephronophthisis Spectrum of Ciliopathies.
authors:
- Van De Weghe JC
- Gomez A
- Doherty D
journal: Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1146/annurev-genom-121321-093528
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Joubert-Meckel-Nephronophthisis Spectrum of Ciliopathies.
**Authors:** Van De Weghe JC, Gomez A, Doherty D
**Journal:** Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev-genom-121321-093528](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-genom-121321-093528)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet. 2022 Aug 31;23:301-329. doi: 
10.1146/annurev-genom-121321-093528. Epub 2022 Jun 2.

The Joubert-Meckel-Nephronophthisis Spectrum of Ciliopathies.

Van De Weghe JC(1), Gomez A(1)(2), Doherty D(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA; 
email: julievdw@uw.edu.
(2)Molecular Medicine and Mechanisms of Disease Program, Department of 
Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington, USA; email: gomezae@uw.edu.
(3)Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute, 
Seattle, Washington, USA; email: ddoher@uw.edu.

The Joubert syndrome (JS), Meckel syndrome (MKS), and nephronophthisis (NPH) 
ciliopathy spectrum could be the poster child for advances and challenges in 
Mendelian human genetics over the past half century. Progress in understanding 
these conditions illustrates many core concepts of human genetics. The JS 
phenotype alone is caused by pathogenic variants in more than 40 genes; 
remarkably, all of the associated proteins function in and around the primary 
cilium. Primary cilia are near-ubiquitous, microtubule-based organelles that 
play crucial roles in development and homeostasis. Protruding from the cell, 
these cellular antennae sense diverse signals and mediate Hedgehog and other 
critical signaling pathways. Ciliary dysfunction causes many human conditions 
termed ciliopathies, which range from multiple congenital malformations to 
adult-onset single-organ failure. Research on the genetics of the JS-MKS-NPH 
spectrum has spurred extensive functional work exploring the broadly important 
role of primary cilia in health and disease. This functional work promises to 
illuminate the mechanisms underlying JS-MKS-NPH in humans, identify therapeutic 
targets across genetic causes, and generate future precision treatments.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-genom-121321-093528
PMCID: PMC9437135
PMID: 35655331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]