---
reference_id: "PMID:16166640"
title: GATA1-mediated megakaryocyte differentiation and growth control can be uncoupled and mapped to different domains in GATA1.
authors:
- Kuhl C
- Atzberger A
- Iborra F
- Nieswandt B
- Porcher C
- Vyas P
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1128/MCB.25.19.8592-8606.2005
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Antigens, CD/biosynthesis"
- Blood Platelets/metabolism
- "Blotting, Western"
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Line
- Cell Proliferation
- Cell Separation
- Chickens
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- DNA/chemistry
- Flow Cytometry
- "GATA1 Transcription Factor/chemistry, metabolism, physiology"
- Green Fluorescent Proteins/metabolism
- "Megakaryocytes/cytology, metabolism"
- Membrane Glycoproteins/biosynthesis
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Microscopy, Fluorescence"
- "Models, Genetic"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Platelet Membrane Glycoprotein IIb/biosynthesis
- Protein Binding
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- Retroviridae/genetics
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Stem Cells/cytology
- Tetraspanin 29
- Zinc Fingers
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GATA1-mediated megakaryocyte differentiation and growth control can be uncoupled and mapped to different domains in GATA1.
**Authors:** Kuhl C, Atzberger A, Iborra F, Nieswandt B, Porcher C, Vyas P
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.25.19.8592-8606.2005](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.25.19.8592-8606.2005)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Oct;25(19):8592-606. doi:
10.1128/MCB.25.19.8592-8606.2005.

GATA1-mediated megakaryocyte differentiation and growth control can be uncoupled 
and mapped to different domains in GATA1.

Kuhl C(1), Atzberger A, Iborra F, Nieswandt B, Porcher C, Vyas P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, 
University of Oxford and John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DU, United 
Kingdom.

The DNA-binding hemopoietic zinc finger transcription factor GATA1 promotes 
terminal megakaryocyte differentiation and restrains abnormal immature 
megakaryocyte expansion. How GATA1 coordinates these fundamental processes is 
unclear. Previous studies of synthetic and naturally occurring mutant GATA1 
molecules demonstrate that DNA-binding and interaction with the essential GATA1 
cofactor FOG-1 (via the N-terminal finger) are required for gene expression in 
terminally differentiating megakaryocytes and for platelet production. Moreover, 
acquired mutations deleting the N-terminal 84 amino acids are specifically 
detected in megakaryocytic leukemia in human Down syndrome patients. In this 
study, we have systematically dissected GATA1 domains required for platelet 
release and control of megakaryocyte growth by ectopically expressing modified 
GATA1 molecules in primary GATA1-deficient fetal megakaryocyte progenitors. In 
addition to DNA binding, distinct N-terminal regions, including residues in the 
first 84 amino acids, promote platelet release and restrict megakaryocyte 
growth. In contrast, abrogation of GATA1-FOG-1 interaction leads to loss of 
differentiation, but growth of blocked immature megakaryocytes is controlled. 
Thus, distinct GATA1 domains regulate terminal megakaryocyte gene expression 
leading to platelet release and restrain megakaryocyte growth, and these 
processes can be uncoupled.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.25.19.8592-8606.2005
PMCID: PMC1265752
PMID: 16166640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]