---
reference_id: "PMID:31346658"
title: "New insights into the mechanisms of diabetic complications: role of lipids and lipid metabolism."
authors:
- Eid S
- Sas KM
- Abcouwer SF
- Feldman EL
- Gardner TW
- Pennathur S
- Fort PE
journal: Diabetologia
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s00125-019-4959-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New insights into the mechanisms of diabetic complications: role of lipids and lipid metabolism.
**Authors:** Eid S, Sas KM, Abcouwer SF, Feldman EL, Gardner TW, Pennathur S, Fort PE
**Journal:** Diabetologia (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00125-019-4959-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-019-4959-1)

## Content

1. Diabetologia. 2019 Sep;62(9):1539-1549. doi: 10.1007/s00125-019-4959-1. Epub 
2019 Jul 25.

New insights into the mechanisms of diabetic complications: role of lipids and 
lipid metabolism.

Eid S(1), Sas KM(2), Abcouwer SF(3), Feldman EL(1), Gardner TW(3)(4), Pennathur 
S(2)(4), Fort PE(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Michigan 
Kellogg Eye Center, 1000 Wall Street, Ann Arbor, MI, 48105, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Michigan 
Kellogg Eye Center, 1000 Wall Street, Ann Arbor, MI, 48105, USA. 
patricef@med.umich.edu.
(6)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI, USA. patricef@med.umich.edu.

Diabetes adversely affects multiple organs, including the kidney, eye and nerve, 
leading to diabetic kidney disease, diabetic retinopathy and diabetic 
neuropathy, respectively. In both type 1 and type 2 diabetes, tissue damage is 
organ specific and is secondary to a combination of multiple metabolic insults. 
Hyperglycaemia, dyslipidaemia and hypertension combine with the duration and 
type of diabetes to define the distinct pathophysiology underlying diabetic 
kidney disease, diabetic retinopathy and diabetic neuropathy. Only recently have 
the commonalities and differences in the metabolic basis of these 
tissue-specific complications, particularly those involving local and systemic 
lipids, been systematically examined. This review focuses on recent progress 
made using preclinical models and human-based approaches towards understanding 
how bioenergetics and metabolomic profiles contribute to diabetic kidney 
disease, diabetic retinopathy and diabetic neuropathy. This new understanding of 
the biology of complication-prone tissues highlights the need for organ-specific 
interventions in the treatment of diabetic complications.

DOI: 10.1007/s00125-019-4959-1
PMCID: PMC6679814
PMID: 31346658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]