---
reference_id: PMID:37116715
title: "Neurological worsening in Wilson disease - clinical classification and outcome."
authors:
- Mohr I
- Pfeiffenberger J
- Eker E
- Merle U
- Poujois A
- Ala A
- Weiss KH
journal: J Hepatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2023.04.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurological worsening in Wilson disease - clinical classification and outcome.
**Authors:** Mohr I, Pfeiffenberger J, Eker E, Merle U, Poujois A, Ala A, Weiss KH
**Journal:** J Hepatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jhep.2023.04.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2023.04.007)

## Content

1. J Hepatol. 2023 Aug;79(2):321-328. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2023.04.007. Epub 2023 
Apr 26.

Neurological worsening in Wilson disease - clinical classification and outcome.

Mohr I(1), Pfeiffenberger J(1), Eker E(1), Merle U(1), Poujois A(2), Ala A(3), 
Weiss KH(4).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine IV, Department of Gastroenterology, University Hospital 
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Department of Neurology, Rare Disease Reference Centre "Wilson's Disease and 
Other Copper-Related Rare Diseases", Rothschild Foundation Hospital, Paris, 
France.
(3)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Health and 
Medical Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford, UK; Department of 
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Royal Surrey NHS Foundation Trust, Guildford, 
UK; Institute of Liver Studies, King's College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, 
London, UK.
(4)Internal Medicine, Salem Medical Center, Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic 
address: KarlHeinz.Weiss@stadtmission-hd.de.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2023 Dec;79(6):e241-e242. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2023.06.009.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Prevention of neurological worsening (NW) under therapy is an 
unmet need in the management of Wilson disease (WD). In this study, we aimed to 
characterize the occurrence, associated outcomes and potential reversibility of 
NW in WD.
METHODS: From a total cohort of 457 patients with WD, 128 patients with WD and 
neurological features at any time point (all Caucasian, 63 females, median age 
at diagnosis 22 years) were identified by chart review at University Hospital 
Heidelberg and grouped according to initial presentation. The timing and 
occurrence of NW was assessed following a structured clinical examination during 
clinical visits.
RESULTS: Early NW (within the first 3 months of therapy) was observed in 30 out 
of 115 (26.1%) patients with neurological or mixed presentation and never in 
patients with a purely hepatic or asymptomatic presentation (0%). Late NW (after 
>12 months) was seen in a further 23 (20%) with neurological or mixed 
presentation and in 13 out of 294 (4.4%) patients with a hepatic or asymptomatic 
presentation. The median time from start of treatment to late NW was 20 months. 
Only three patients experienced NW between 3 and 12 months. NW was observed with 
D-penicillamine, trientine and zinc therapy and was reversible in 15/30 (50%) 
with early NW and in 29/36 (81%) with late NW.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we identified two peaks in NW: an early (≤3 months) 
treatment-associated peak and a late (>12 months of treatment) 
adherence-associated peak. Early paradoxical NW was attributed to treatment 
initiation and pre-existing neurological damage, and was not observed in those 
with a hepatic or asymptomatic presentation. Late NW is likely to be associated 
with non-adherence.
IMPACT AND IMPLICATIONS: In patients with Wilson disease, defined as an excess 
accumulation of copper which can damage the liver, brain and other vital organs, 
neurological worsening can occur despite chelation therapy. The study identifies 
different patterns of 'early' (<3 months) vs. 'late' (>12 months) neurological 
worsening in relation to initiation of chelation therapy and establishes 
possible causes and the potential for reversibility. These data should be useful 
for counseling patients and for guiding the optimal management of chelation 
therapy.

Copyright © 2023 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2023.04.007
PMID: 37116715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]