---
reference_id: "PMID:29540357"
title: "Pulmonary arterial hypertension: pathogenesis and clinical management."
authors:
- Thenappan T
- Ormiston ML
- Ryan JJ
- Archer SL
journal: BMJ
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1136/bmj.j5492
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hypertension, Pulmonary/diagnosis, etiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Pulmonary Artery/physiopathology
- "Ventricular Function, Right/physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pulmonary arterial hypertension: pathogenesis and clinical management.
**Authors:** Thenappan T, Ormiston ML, Ryan JJ, Archer SL
**Journal:** BMJ (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bmj.j5492](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.j5492)

## Content

1. BMJ. 2018 Mar 14;360:j5492. doi: 10.1136/bmj.j5492.

Pulmonary arterial hypertension: pathogenesis and clinical management.

Thenappan T(1), Ormiston ML(2), Ryan JJ(3), Archer SL(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada
stephen.archer@queensu.ca.

Pulmonary hypertension is defined as a resting mean pulmonary artery pressure of
25 mm Hg or above. This review deals with pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH),
a type of pulmonary hypertension that primarily affects the pulmonary
vasculature. In PAH, the pulmonary vasculature is dynamically obstructed by
vasoconstriction, structurally obstructed by adverse vascular remodeling, and
pathologically non-compliant as a result of vascular fibrosis and stiffening.
Many cell types are abnormal in PAH, including vascular cells (endothelial
cells, smooth muscle cells, and fibroblasts) and inflammatory cells. Progress
has been made in identifying the causes of PAH and approving new drug therapies.
A cancer-like increase in cell proliferation and resistance to apoptosis
reflects acquired abnormalities of mitochondrial metabolism and dynamics.
Mutations in the type II bone morphogenetic protein receptor (BMPR2) gene
dramatically increase the risk of developing heritable PAH. Epigenetic
dysregulation of DNA methylation, histone acetylation, and microRNAs also
contributes to disease pathogenesis. Aberrant bone morphogenetic protein
signaling and epigenetic dysregulation in PAH promote cell proliferation in part
through induction of a Warburg mitochondrial-metabolic state of uncoupled
glycolysis. Complex changes in cytokines (interleukins and tumor necrosis
factor), cellular immunity (T lymphocytes, natural killer cells, macrophages),
and autoantibodies suggest that PAH is, in part, an autoimmune, inflammatory
disease. Obstructive pulmonary vascular remodeling in PAH increases right
ventricular afterload causing right ventricular hypertrophy. In some patients,
maladaptive changes in the right ventricle, including ischemia and fibrosis,
reduce right ventricular function and cause right ventricular failure. Patients
with PAH have dyspnea, reduced exercise capacity, exertional syncope, and
premature death from right ventricular failure. PAH targeted therapies
(prostaglandins, phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors, endothelin receptor
antagonists, and soluble guanylate cyclase stimulators), used alone or in
combination, improve functional capacity and hemodynamics and reduce hospital
admissions. However, these vasodilators do not target key features of PAH
pathogenesis and have not been shown to reduce mortality, which remains about
50% at five years. This review summarizes the epidemiology, pathogenesis,
diagnosis, and treatment of PAH.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.j5492
PMCID: PMC6889979
PMID: 29540357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: We have read and understood
the BMJ policy on declaration of interests and declare the following interests:
TT received a modest honorarium from Gilead and Actelion for participating in an
advisory board.
