---
reference_id: "PMID:26307097"
title: Diagnosis and therapy of antiphospholipid syndrome.
authors:
- Pengo V
- Denas G
- Padayattil SJ
- Zoppellaro G
- Bison E
- Banzato A
- Hoxha A
- Ruffatti A
journal: Pol Arch Med Wewn
year: '2015'
doi: 10.20452/pamw.3051
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and therapy of antiphospholipid syndrome.
**Authors:** Pengo V, Denas G, Padayattil SJ, Zoppellaro G, Bison E, Banzato A, Hoxha A, Ruffatti A
**Journal:** Pol Arch Med Wewn (2015)
**DOI:** [10.20452/pamw.3051](https://doi.org/10.20452/pamw.3051)

## Content

1. Pol Arch Med Wewn. 2015;125(9):672-7. doi: 10.20452/pamw.3051. Epub 2015 Aug
26.

Diagnosis and therapy of antiphospholipid syndrome.

Pengo V, Denas G, Padayattil SJ, Zoppellaro G, Bison E, Banzato A, Hoxha A, 
Ruffatti A.

Comment in
    Pol Arch Med Wewn. 2015;125(10):785.
    Pol Arch Med Wewn. 2015;125(10):785-6.

Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is a clinical condition that has not been well 
defined yet. Although the clinical component is well established, the laboratory 
part is a mood issue. According to current guidelines, 3 tests (lupus 
anticoagulant, anticardiolipin, and anti β2-glycoprotein I antibodies) are 
officially recommended to assess the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies. 
According to test positivity, patients are classified into categories in 
clinical studies. However, it is now clear that classification categories have a 
different impact on the clinical course of APS. Indeed, patients and healthy 
carriers with a full positive antibody profile (triple positivity) are those at 
the highest risk of events. Patients with a single test positivity are those at 
a lower risk. In this review, on the basis of a laboratory profile, we grade the 
diagnosis of APS into definite, probable/possible, and uncertain. We also 
discuss secondary prevention of thrombotic APS, prevention of pregnancy 
morbidity, and treatment of catastrophic APS. Finally, new tools in laboratory 
diagnosis and treatment are highlighted.

DOI: 10.20452/pamw.3051
PMID: 26307097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]