---
reference_id: "PMID:34461264"
title: The cross-hemispheric nigrostriatal pathway prevents the expression of levodopa-induced dyskinesias.
authors:
- Iyer V
- Venkiteswaran K
- Savaliya S
- Lieu CA
- Handly E
- Gilmour TP
- Kunselman AR
- Subramanian T
journal: Neurobiol Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2021.105491
keywords:
- Animals
- Antiparkinson Agents/adverse effects
- Disease Progression
- "Dyskinesia, Drug-Induced/etiology, physiopathology"
- Levodopa/adverse effects
- Medial Forebrain Bundle/physiopathology
- Neostriatum/physiology
- Oxidopamine/toxicity
- "Parkinsonian Disorders/chemically induced, physiopathology"
- Rats
- Substantia Nigra/physiology
- Sympatholytics/toxicity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The cross-hemispheric nigrostriatal pathway prevents the expression of levodopa-induced dyskinesias.
**Authors:** Iyer V, Venkiteswaran K, Savaliya S, Lieu CA, Handly E, Gilmour TP, Kunselman AR, Subramanian T
**Journal:** Neurobiol Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nbd.2021.105491](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2021.105491)

## Content

1. Neurobiol Dis. 2021 Nov;159:105491. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2021.105491. Epub 2021 
Aug 27.

The cross-hemispheric nigrostriatal pathway prevents the expression of 
levodopa-induced dyskinesias.

Iyer V(1), Venkiteswaran K(1), Savaliya S(2), Lieu CA(1), Handly E(1), Gilmour 
TP(3), Kunselman AR(4), Subramanian T(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neural and Behavioral Sciences, The Pennsylvania 
State University College of Medicine, Hershey, PA, United States of America.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, The Pennsylvania State University College of 
Medicine, Hershey, PA, United States of America.
(3)Department of Electrical Engineering, John Brown University, Siloam Springs, 
AR, United States of America.
(4)Department of Public Health Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University 
College of Medicine, Hershey, PA, United States of America.
(5)Department of Neurology and Neural and Behavioral Sciences, The Pennsylvania 
State University College of Medicine, Hershey, PA, United States of America. 
Electronic address: tsubram@yahoo.com.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative movement disorder that is 
routinely treated with levodopa. Unfortunately, long-term dopamine replacement 
therapy using levodopa leads to levodopa-induced dyskinesias (LID), a 
significant and disabling side-effect. Clinical findings indicate that LID 
typically only occurs following the progression of PD motor symptoms from the 
unilateral (Hoehn and Yahr (HY) Stage I) to the bilateral stage (HY Stage II). 
This suggests the presence of some compensatory interhemispheric mechanisms that 
delay the occurrence of LID. We therefore investigated the role of 
interhemispheric connections of the nigrostriatal pathway on LID expression in a 
rat model of PD. The striatum of one hemisphere of rats was first injected with 
a retrograde tracer to label the ipsi- and cross-hemispheric nigrostriatal 
pathways. Rats were then split into groups and unilaterally lesioned in the 
striatum or medial forebrain bundle of the tracer-injected hemisphere to induce 
varying levels of hemiparkinsonism. Finally, rats were treated with levodopa and 
tested for the expression of LID. Distinct subsets emerged from rats that 
underwent the same lesioning paradigm based on LID. Strikingly, non-dyskinetic 
rats had significant sparing of their cross-hemispheric nigrostriatal pathway 
projecting from the unlesioned hemisphere. In contrast, dyskinetic rats only had 
a small proportion of this cross-hemispheric nigrostriatal pathway survive 
lesioning. Crucially, both non-dyskinetic and dyskinetic rats had nearly 
identical levels of ipsi-hemispheric nigrostriatal pathway survival and 
parkinsonian motor deficits. Our data suggest that the survival of the 
cross-hemispheric nigrostriatal pathway plays a crucial role in preventing the 
expression of LID and represents a potentially novel target to halt the 
progression of this devastating side-effect of a common anti-PD therapeutic.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2021.105491
PMCID: PMC8597404
PMID: 34461264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests T.S. is a speaker board 
member and scientific advisory board member at Teva, Acadia, Acorda, Adamas, 
USMedWorlds and Neurocrine. He has received research funding for clinical trials 
in which he served as site PI from Intec, Adamas, Allergan, Pharma 2B and Eli 
Lily. These activities do not represent any competing interests regarding the 
publication of this paper. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.