---
reference_id: "PMID:16034041"
title: "Long-term survival results of a randomized trial comparing gemcitabine plus cisplatin, with methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, plus cisplatin in patients with bladder cancer."
authors:
- von der Maase H
- Sengelov L
- Roberts JT
- Ricci S
- Dogliotti L
- Oliver T
- Moore MJ
- Zimmermann A
- Arning M
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2005.07.757
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term survival results of a randomized trial comparing gemcitabine plus cisplatin, with methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, plus cisplatin in patients with bladder cancer.
**Authors:** von der Maase H, Sengelov L, Roberts JT, Ricci S, Dogliotti L, Oliver T, Moore MJ, Zimmermann A, Arning M
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2005.07.757](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2005.07.757)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2005 Jul 20;23(21):4602-8. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2005.07.757.

Long-term survival results of a randomized trial comparing gemcitabine plus 
cisplatin, with methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, plus cisplatin in 
patients with bladder cancer.

von der Maase H(1), Sengelov L, Roberts JT, Ricci S, Dogliotti L, Oliver T, 
Moore MJ, Zimmermann A, Arning M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Aarhus University Hospital, DK-8000 Aarhus C, 
Denmark. maase@as.aaa.dk

PURPOSE: To compare long-term survival in patients with locally advanced or 
metastatic transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) of the urothelium treated with 
gemcitabine/cisplatin (GC) or methotrexate/vinblastine/doxorubicin/cisplatin 
(MVAC).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Efficacy data from a large randomized phase III study of 
GC versus MVAC were updated. Time-to-event analyses were performed on the 
observed distributions of overall and progression-free survival.
RESULTS: A total of 405 patients were randomly assigned: 203 to the GC arm and 
202 to the MVAC arm. At the time of analysis, 347 patients had died (GC arm, 176 
patients; MVAC arm, 171 patients). Overall survival was similar in both arms 
(hazard ratio [HR], 1.09; 95% CI, 0.88 to 1.34; P = .66) with a median survival 
of 14.0 months for GC and 15.2 months for MVAC. The 5-year overall survival 
rates were 13.0% and 15.3%, respectively (P = .53). The median progression-free 
survival was 7.7 months for GC and 8.3 months for MVAC, with an HR of 1.09. The 
5-year progression-free survival rates were 9.8% and 11.3%, respectively (P = 
.63). Significant prognostic factors favoring overall survival included 
performance score (> 70), TNM staging (M0 v M1), low/normal alkaline phosphatase 
level, number of disease sites (<or= three), and the absence of visceral 
metastases. By adjusting for these prognostic factors, the HR was 0.99 for 
overall survival and 1.01 for progression-free survival. The 5-year overall 
survival rates for patients with and without visceral metastases were 6.8% and 
20.9%, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Long-term overall and progression-free survival after treatment with 
GC or MVAC are similar. These results strengthen the role of GC as a standard of 
care in patients with locally advanced or metastatic TCC.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2005.07.757
PMID: 16034041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]