---
reference_id: "PMID:39951973"
title: Exploring the anti-inflammatory effects of Radix Curcumae essential oil in pulmonary sarcoidosis via the TLR4/MyD88/NF-κB pathway.
authors:
- Mao Z
- Lin X
- Hu Y
- Liu Y
- Yu S
- Zhou T
- Zhang J
- Yang X
- Tian S
- Miao M
journal: Phytomedicine
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2025.156496
keywords:
- Animals
- Toll-Like Receptor 4/metabolism
- Myeloid Differentiation Factor 88/metabolism
- NF-kappa B/metabolism
- "Oils, Volatile/pharmacology, chemistry"
- Anti-Inflammatory Agents/pharmacology
- Mice
- "Sarcoidosis, Pulmonary/drug therapy, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Lung/drug effects
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exploring the anti-inflammatory effects of Radix Curcumae essential oil in pulmonary sarcoidosis via the TLR4/MyD88/NF-κB pathway.
**Authors:** Mao Z, Lin X, Hu Y, Liu Y, Yu S, Zhou T, Zhang J, Yang X, Tian S, Miao M
**Journal:** Phytomedicine (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.phymed.2025.156496](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phymed.2025.156496)

## Content

1. Phytomedicine. 2025 Apr;139:156496. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2025.156496. Epub
2025  Feb 11.

Exploring the anti-inflammatory effects of Radix Curcumae essential oil in
pulmonary sarcoidosis via the TLR4/MyD88/NF-κB pathway.

Mao Z(1), Lin X(1), Hu Y(1), Liu Y(2), Yu S(1), Zhou T(1), Zhang J(1), Yang
X(2), Tian S(3), Miao M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Henan University of Chinese Medicine, No. 156
Jinshui East Road, Zhengzhou, Henan 450046, China; Collaborative Innovation
Center of Research and Development on the Whole Industry Chain of Yu-Yao in
Henan Province, Henan, China.
(2)Collaborative Innovation Center of Research and Development on the Whole
Industry Chain of Yu-Yao in Henan Province, Henan, China; Academy of Chinese
Medicine Science, Henan University of Chinese Medicine, Zhengzhou 450046, China.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Henan University of Chinese Medicine, No. 156
Jinshui East Road, Zhengzhou, Henan 450046, China; Collaborative Innovation
Center of Research and Development on the Whole Industry Chain of Yu-Yao in
Henan Province, Henan, China; Academy of Chinese Medicine Science, Henan
University of Chinese Medicine, Zhengzhou 450046, China. Electronic address:
tianshuo0416@163.com.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Henan University of Chinese Medicine, No. 156
Jinshui East Road, Zhengzhou, Henan 450046, China; Collaborative Innovation
Center of Research and Development on the Whole Industry Chain of Yu-Yao in
Henan Province, Henan, China; Academy of Chinese Medicine Science, Henan
University of Chinese Medicine, Zhengzhou 450046, China. Electronic address:
miaomingsan@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Pulmonary sarcoidosis (PS) is an immune-mediated disorder
characterised by a significant association with various immune cell types
including macrophages, T-helper 1 (TH1) cells, and TH17 cells. Dysregulation of
immune cell differentiation leads to pronounced inflammatory responses in the
pulmonary system, resulting in granuloma formation. Currently, the therapeutic
approach for PS predominantly involves the use of immunosuppressive agents.
However, the considerable adverse effects associated with these treatments
underscore the urgent need to develop novel anti-PS pharmacological
interventions.
PURPOSE: To investigate whether essential oil from Radix Curcumae (RCEO)
improves pulmonary function in PS mice by inhibiting inflammation mediated by
the Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)/myeloid differentiation factor 88
(MyD88)/nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-κB) (TLR4/MyD88/NF-κB) pathway.
METHODS: Bioinformatics and network pharmacology methodologies were used to
predict potential therapeutic targets of RCEO in the context of PS. The primary
components of RCEO were analysed using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. A
murine model of PS was established by induction with Propionibacterium acnes,
and alterations in pulmonary function were evaluated using whole-body
plethysmography. An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was used to measure
changes in inflammatory mediators in the blood and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid.
Additionally, flow cytometry was performed to determine the differentiation of
CD4+ T cells into TH1 and TH17 subsets in the lung tissues of mice in the model
group. Immunofluorescence analysis was used to quantify the differentiation of
macrophages into M1 and M2 phenotypes in the lung tissues. Polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) and western blotting (WB) were used to assess alterations in the
mRNAs expression levels and proteins associated with the TLR4/MyD88/NF-κB
signalling pathway in pulmonary tissues.
RESULTS: Bioinformatics and network pharmacology predictions suggested that the
therapeutic effects of RCEO on PS are linked to the modulation of inflammation
via the TLR4/MyD88/NF-κB pathway. In a murine model of PS, RCEO significantly
reduced pathological alterations in lung tissue and enhanced pulmonary function.
Subsequent experimental analyses revealed that RCEO inhibited the
differentiation of macrophages into M1-type macrophages and reduced the
differentiation of CD4+ T cells into TH1 and TH17 cells, thereby preventing
granuloma formation in the mouse pulmonary tissue. Further PCR and WB analyses
indicated that RCEO modulated immune cell differentiation by inhibiting
inflammation mediated through the TLR4/MyD88/NF-κB signalling pathway.
Immunofluorescence experiments demonstrated that RCEO conferred a protective
effect against PS by attenuating inflammation in macrophages.
CONCLUSION: RCEO inhibited the differentiation of macrophages into M1-type
macrophages and suppressed the differentiation of CD4+T cells into TH1 and TH17
cells by blocking the inflammatory response mediated by the TLR4/MyD88/NF-κB
pathway. This further reduced the formation of granulomas in lung tissue and
improved lung function in PS mice.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phymed.2025.156496
PMID: 39951973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
