---
reference_id: "PMID:36311743"
title: Association of dengue infection with anti-alpha-gal antibodies, IgM, IgG, IgG1, and IgG2.
authors:
- Olajiga OM
- Maldonado-Ruiz LP
- Fatehi S
- Cardenas JC
- Gonzalez MU
- Gutierrez-Silva LY
- Londono-Renteria B
- Park Y
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1021016
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of dengue infection with anti-alpha-gal antibodies, IgM, IgG, IgG1, and IgG2.
**Authors:** Olajiga OM, Maldonado-Ruiz LP, Fatehi S, Cardenas JC, Gonzalez MU, Gutierrez-Silva LY, Londono-Renteria B, Park Y
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2022.1021016](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.1021016)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2022 Oct 14;13:1021016. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1021016. 
eCollection 2022.

Association of dengue infection with anti-alpha-gal antibodies, IgM, IgG, IgG1, 
and IgG2.

Olajiga OM(1), Maldonado-Ruiz LP(1), Fatehi S(1), Cardenas JC(2), Gonzalez 
MU(3), Gutierrez-Silva LY(4), Londono-Renteria B(1)(5), Park Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Entomology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, United 
States.
(2)Laboratorio Clínico, Hospital Local Los Patios, Los Patios, Norte de 
Santander, Colombia.
(3)Laboratorio Clinico, Empresa Social Del Estado Hospital Emiro Quintero 
Cañizares, Ocaña, Norte de Santander, Colombia.
(4)Laboratorio Clínico, Hospital Erasmo Meoz, Cúcuta, Norte de Santander, 
Colombia.
(5)School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, Tulane University, New 
Orleans, LA, United States.

Dengue virus (DENV) transmitted by the Aedes mosquitoes is the etiological agent 
of dengue fever, one of the fastest-growing reemerging mosquito-borne diseases 
on the planet with a 30-fold surge in the last five decades. Interestingly, many 
arthropod-borne pathogens, including DENV type 2, have been reported to contain 
an immunogenic glycan galactose-alpha1,3-galactose (alpha-Gal or aGal). The aGal 
molecule is a common oligosaccharide found in many microorganisms and in most 
mammals, except for humans and the Old-World primates. The loss of aGal in 
humans is considered to be an evolutionary innovation for enabling the 
production of specific antibodies against aGal that could be presented on the 
glycan of pathogens. The objective of this study was to evaluate different 
anti-aGal antibodies (IgM, IgG, IgG1, and IgG2) in people exposed to DENV. We 
observed a significant difference in anti-aGal IgG and IgG1 levels among dengue 
severity classifications. Furthermore, a significant positive correlation was 
observed between the anti-aGal IgG and the number of days with dengue symptoms 
in patients. Additionally, both anti-aGal IgM and IgG levels differ between the 
two geographical locations of patients. While the anti-aGal IgM and IgG2 levels 
were not significantly different according to the dengue severity levels, age 
was negatively correlated with anti-aGal IgM and positively correlated with 
anti-aGal IgG2. Significant involvement of aGal antibodies in Dengue infection 
processes is suggested based on the results. Our results open the need for 
further studies on the exact roles and the mechanisms of the aGal antibodies in 
Dengue infection.

Copyright © 2022 Olajiga, Maldonado-Ruiz, Fatehi, Cardenas, Gonzalez, 
Gutierrez-Silva, Londono-Renteria and Park.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1021016
PMCID: PMC9614307
PMID: 36311743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.