---
reference_id: "PMID:35007790"
title: Hypothalamic expression of huntingtin causes distinct metabolic changes in Huntington's disease mice.
authors:
- Dickson E
- Soylu-Kucharz R
- Petersén Å
- Björkqvist M
journal: Mol Metab
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2022.101439
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypothalamic expression of huntingtin causes distinct metabolic changes in Huntington's disease mice.
**Authors:** Dickson E, Soylu-Kucharz R, Petersén Å, Björkqvist M
**Journal:** Mol Metab (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molmet.2022.101439](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmet.2022.101439)

## Content

1. Mol Metab. 2022 Mar;57:101439. doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2022.101439. Epub 2022
Jan  7.

Hypothalamic expression of huntingtin causes distinct metabolic changes in 
Huntington's disease mice.

Dickson E(1), Soylu-Kucharz R(2), Petersén Å(3), Björkqvist M(2).

Author information:
(1)Brain Disease Biomarker Unit, Wallenberg Neuroscience Center, Department of 
Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, BMC A10, 221 84 Lund, Sweden. 
Electronic address: elna.dickson@med.lu.se.
(2)Brain Disease Biomarker Unit, Wallenberg Neuroscience Center, Department of 
Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, BMC A10, 221 84 Lund, Sweden.
(3)Translational Neuroendocrine Research Unit, Department of Experimental 
Medical Science, Lund University, BMC D11, 221 84 Lund, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: In Huntington's disease (HD), the disease-causing huntingtin (HTT) 
protein is ubiquitously expressed and causes both central and peripheral 
pathology. In clinical HD, a higher body mass index has been associated with 
slower disease progression, indicating the role of metabolic changes in disease 
pathogenesis. Underlying mechanisms of metabolic changes in HD remain poorly 
understood, but recent studies suggest the involvement of hypothalamic 
dysfunction. The present study aimed to investigate whether modulation of 
hypothalamic HTT levels would affect metabolic phenotype and disease features in 
HD using mouse models.
METHODS: We used the R6/2 and BACHD mouse models that express different lengths 
of mutant HTT to develop lean- and obese phenotypes, respectively. We utilized 
adeno-associated viral vectors to overexpress either mutant or wild-type HTT in 
the hypothalamus of R6/2, BACHD, and their wild-type littermates. The metabolic 
phenotype was assessed by body weight measurements over time and body 
composition analysis using dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry at the endpoint. 
R6/2 mice were further characterized using behavioral analyses, including 
rotarod, nesting-, and hindlimb clasping tests during early- and late-time 
points of disease progression. Finally, gene expression analysis was performed 
in R6/2 mice and wild-type littermates in order to assess transcriptional 
changes in the hypothalamus and adipose tissue.
RESULTS: Hypothalamic overexpression of mutant HTT induced significant 
gender-affected body weight gain in all models, including wild-type mice. In 
R6/2 females, early weight gain shifted to weight loss during the corresponding 
late stage of disease despite increased fat accumulation. Body weight changes 
were accompanied by behavioral alterations. During the period of early weight 
gain, R6/2 mice displayed a comparable locomotor capacity to wild-type mice. 
When assessing behavior just prior to weight loss onset in R6/2 mice, decreased 
locomotor performance was observed in R6/2 females with hypothalamic 
overexpression of mutant HTT. Transcriptional downregulation of beta-3 
adrenergic receptor (B3AR), adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL), and peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARγ) in gonadal white adipose tissue 
was accompanied by distinct alterations in hypothalamic gene expression profiles 
in R6/2 females after mutant HTT overexpression. No significant effect on 
metabolic phenotype in R6/2 was seen in response to wild-type HTT 
overexpression.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our findings provide further support for the role 
of HTT in metabolic control via hypothalamic neurocircuits. Understanding the 
specific central neurocircuits and their peripheral link underlying metabolic 
imbalance in HD may open up avenues for novel therapeutic interventions.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier GmbH.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molmet.2022.101439
PMCID: PMC8814380
PMID: 35007790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]