---
reference_id: "PMID:17018277"
title: Transcriptional repression of PGC-1alpha by mutant huntingtin leads to mitochondrial dysfunction and neurodegeneration.
authors:
- Cui L
- Jeong H
- Borovecki F
- Parkhurst CN
- Tanese N
- Krainc D
journal: Cell
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.09.015
keywords:
- Animals
- "Behavior, Animal/physiology"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Corpus Striatum/cytology, metabolism"
- Energy Metabolism
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Gene Expression Regulation
- "Genetic Vectors/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Huntingtin Protein
- "Huntington Disease/metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Lentivirus/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- Nerve Degeneration/metabolism
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Neurons/cytology, physiology"
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis
- Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptor Gamma Coactivator 1-alpha
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- "Trans-Activators/genetics, metabolism"
- Transcription Factors
- "Transcription, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcriptional repression of PGC-1alpha by mutant huntingtin leads to mitochondrial dysfunction and neurodegeneration.
**Authors:** Cui L, Jeong H, Borovecki F, Parkhurst CN, Tanese N, Krainc D
**Journal:** Cell (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2006.09.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2006.09.015)

## Content

1. Cell. 2006 Oct 6;127(1):59-69. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.09.015.

Transcriptional repression of PGC-1alpha by mutant huntingtin leads to
mitochondrial dysfunction and neurodegeneration.

Cui L(1), Jeong H, Borovecki F, Parkhurst CN, Tanese N, Krainc D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, MassGeneral Institute for Neurodegeneration, Charlestown, MA 02129 USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2006 Nov 3;127(3):465-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.10.023.

Huntington's disease (HD) is an inherited neurodegenerative disease caused by a
glutamine repeat expansion in huntingtin protein. Transcriptional deregulation
and altered energy metabolism have been implicated in HD pathogenesis. We report
here that mutant huntingtin causes disruption of mitochondrial function by
inhibiting expression of PGC-1alpha, a transcriptional coactivator that
regulates several metabolic processes, including mitochondrial biogenesis and
respiration. Mutant huntingtin represses PGC-1alpha gene transcription by
associating with the promoter and interfering with the CREB/TAF4-dependent
transcriptional pathway critical for the regulation of PGC-1alpha gene
expression. Crossbreeding of PGC-1alpha knockout (KO) mice with HD knockin (KI)
mice leads to increased neurodegeneration of striatal neurons and motor
abnormalities in the HD mice. Importantly, expression of PGC-1alpha partially
reverses the toxic effects of mutant huntingtin in cultured striatal neurons.
Moreover, lentiviral-mediated delivery of PGC-1alpha in the striatum provides
neuroprotection in the transgenic HD mice. These studies suggest a key role for
PGC-1alpha in the control of energy metabolism in the early stages of HD
pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.09.015
PMID: 17018277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
