---
reference_id: "PMID:39096853"
title: Generation of Marfan syndrome-specific induced pluripotent stem cells harboring FBN1 mutations.
authors:
- Vacante F
- Venkateshappa R
- Htet M
- Yan C
- Wu JC
journal: Stem Cell Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2024.103518
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Generation of Marfan syndrome-specific induced pluripotent stem cells harboring FBN1 mutations.
**Authors:** Vacante F, Venkateshappa R, Htet M, Yan C, Wu JC
**Journal:** Stem Cell Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.scr.2024.103518](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scr.2024.103518)

## Content

1. Stem Cell Res. 2024 Oct;80:103518. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2024.103518. Epub 2024
Jul  29.

Generation of Marfan syndrome-specific induced pluripotent stem cells harboring 
FBN1 mutations.

Vacante F(1), Venkateshappa R(1), Htet M(2), Yan C(3), Wu JC(4).

Author information:
(1)Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA 94305, USA; Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(2)Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(3)Greenstone Biosciences, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.
(4)Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA 94305, USA; Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. Electronic address: 
joewu@stanford.edu.

Marfan syndrome (MFS) is a hereditary condition caused by mutations in the FBN1 
gene. Genetic mutations in the FBN1 locus impact the function of the encoded 
protein, Fibrillin 1, a structural molecule forming microfibrils found in the 
connective tissue. MFS patients develop severe cardiovascular complications 
including thoracic aortic aneurysm and aortic dissection, which predispose them 
to an enhanced risk of premature death. Here, we generated two induced 
pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) lines harboring mutations in the FBN1 gene 
(p.C1942C>A and c.1954 T>C), directly derived from MFS patients. We have shown 
that both iPSC lines displayed expression of pluripotency markers, normal 
karyotype and ability of trilineage differentiation, representing a valuable 
tool for the identification of new therapeutic strategies for intervening in 
this disease.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scr.2024.103518
PMID: 39096853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: The authors declare to not have 
known competing financial interest or personal relationships that could have 
appeared to influence the work performed in this study. JCW is a co-founder and 
scientific advisory board member of Greenstone Biosciences.