---
reference_id: "PMID:38888930"
title: "RNF213 Variants, Vasospastic Angina, and Risk of Fatal Myocardial Infarction."
authors:
- Hikino K
- Koyama S
- Ito K
- Koike Y
- Koido M
- Matsumura T
- Kurosawa R
- Tomizuka K
- Ito S
- Liu X
- Ishikawa Y
- Momozawa Y
- Morisaki T
- Kamatani Y
- Mushiroda T
- Terao C
- Biobank Japan Project
journal: JAMA Cardiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1001/jamacardio.2024.1483
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Aged
- Case-Control Studies
- "Myocardial Infarction/genetics, epidemiology"
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics
- Adenosine Triphosphatases/genetics
- Middle Aged
- Japan/epidemiology
- Coronary Vasospasm/genetics
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Angina Pectoris, Variant/genetics"
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# RNF213 Variants, Vasospastic Angina, and Risk of Fatal Myocardial Infarction.
**Authors:** Hikino K, Koyama S, Ito K, Koike Y, Koido M, Matsumura T, Kurosawa R, Tomizuka K, Ito S, Liu X, Ishikawa Y, Momozawa Y, Morisaki T, Kamatani Y, Mushiroda T, Terao C, Biobank Japan Project
**Journal:** JAMA Cardiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamacardio.2024.1483](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamacardio.2024.1483)

## Content

1. JAMA Cardiol. 2024 Aug 1;9(8):723-731. doi: 10.1001/jamacardio.2024.1483.

RNF213 Variants, Vasospastic Angina, and Risk of Fatal Myocardial Infarction.

Hikino K(1), Koyama S(2), Ito K(2), Koike Y(3)(4), Koido M(3)(5)(6), Matsumura 
T(7), Kurosawa R(2), Tomizuka K(3), Ito S(3)(8), Liu X(3), Ishikawa Y(3), 
Momozawa Y(9), Morisaki T(5), Kamatani Y(3)(6), Mushiroda T(1), Terao 
C(3)(10)(11); Biobank Japan Project.

Collaborators: Yamanashi Y, Furukawa Y, Murakami Y, Muto K, Nagai A, Obara W, 
Yamaji K, Takahashi K, Asai S, Takahashi Y, Suzuki T, Sinozaki N, Yamaguchi H, 
Minami S, Murayama S, Yoshimori K, Nagayama S, Obata D, Higashiyama M, Matsumoto 
A, Koretsune Y.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Pharmacogenomics, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical 
Sciences, Yokohama City, Japan.
(2)Laboratory for Cardiovascular Genomics and Informatics, RIKEN Center for 
Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama City, Japan.
(3)Laboratory for Statistical and Translational Genetics, RIKEN Center for 
Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama City, Japan.
(4)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Hokkaido University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.
(5)Division of Molecular Pathology, Institute of Medical Science, The University 
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Laboratory of Complex Trait Genomics, Department of Computational Biology and 
Medical Sciences, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Division of Human Genetics, Center for Molecular Medicine, Jichi Medical 
University, Shimotsuke, Japan.
(8)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Shimane University Faculty of Medicine, 
Izumo, Japan.
(9)Laboratory for Genotyping Development, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical 
Sciences, Yokohama City, Japan.
(10)Clinical Research Center, Shizuoka General Hospital, Shizuoka, Japan.
(11)Department of Applied Genetics, The School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
University of Shizuoka, Shizuoka, Japan.

IMPORTANCE: Vasospastic angina (VSA) is vasospasm of the coronary artery and is 
particularly prevalent in East Asian populations. However, the specific genetic 
architecture for VSA at genome-wide levels is not fully understood.
OBJECTIVE: To identify genetic factors associated with VSA.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This was a case-control genome-wide 
association study of VSA. Data from Biobank Japan (BBJ; enrolled patients from 
2002-2008 and 2013-2018) were used, and controls without coronary artery disease 
(CAD) were enrolled. Patients from the BBJ were genotyped using arrays or a set 
of arrays. Patients recruited between 2002 and 2005 were classified within the 
first dataset, and those recruited between 2006 and 2008 were classified within 
the second dataset. To replicate the genome-wide association study in the first 
and second datasets, VSA cases and control samples from the latest patients in 
the BBJ recruited between 2013 and 2018 were analyzed in a third dataset.
EXPOSURES: Single-nucleotide variants associated with VSA.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Cases with VSA and controls without CAD.
RESULTS: A total of 5720 cases (mean [SD] age, 67 [10] years; 3672 male [64.2%]) 
and 153 864 controls (mean [SD] age, 62 [15] years; 77 362 male [50.3%]) in 3 
datasets were included in this study. The variants at the RNF213 locus showed 
the strongest association with VSA across the 3 datasets (odds ratio [OR], 2.34; 
95% CI, 1.99-2.74; P = 4.4 × 10-25). Additionally, rs112735431, an 
Asian-specific rare deleterious variant (p.Arg4810Lys) experimentally shown to 
be associated with reduced angiogenesis and a well-known causal risk for 
Moyamoya disease was the most promising candidate for a causal variant 
explaining the association. The effect size of rs112735431 on VSA was distinct 
from that of other CADs. Furthermore, homozygous carriers of rs112735431 showed 
an association with VSA characterized by a large effect estimate (OR, 18.34; 95% 
CI, 5.15-65.22; P = 7.0 × 10-6), deviating from the additive model (OR, 4.35; 
95% CI, 1.18-16.05; P = .03). Stratified analyses revealed that rs112735431 
exhibited a stronger association in males (χ21 = 7.24; P = .007) and a younger 
age group (OR, 3.06; 95% CI, 2.24-4.19), corresponding to the epidemiologic 
features of VSA. In the registry, carriers without CAD of the risk allele 
rs112735431 had a strikingly high mortality rate due to acute myocardial 
infarction during the follow-up period (hazard ratio, 2.71; 95% CI, 1.57-4.65; 
P = 3.3 × 10-4). As previously reported, a possible overlap between VSA and 
Moyamoya disease was not found.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Results of this study suggest that vascular cell 
dysfunction mediated by variants in the RNF213 locus may promote coronary 
vasospasm, and the presence of the risk allele could serve as a predictive 
factor for the prognosis.

DOI: 10.1001/jamacardio.2024.1483
PMCID: PMC11195602
PMID: 38888930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Koido 
reported receiving consulting fees from Takeda Pharmaceutical outside the 
submitted work. Dr Momozawa reported receiving grants from the Japan Agency for 
Medical Research and Development and personal fees from Takeda Pharmaceutical 
and ActMed outside the submitted work. Dr Kamatani reported receiving grants 
from Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development during the conduct of the 
study; honoraria from Astellas and Illumina Japan; and stock options from StaGen 
Co. No other disclosures were reported.