---
reference_id: "PMID:26566368"
title: Rationale and clinical utility of the darunavir-cobicistat combination in the treatment of HIV/AIDS.
authors:
- Putcharoen O
- Do T
- Avihingsanon A
- Ruxrungtham K
journal: Drug Des Devel Ther
year: '2015'
doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S63989
keywords:
- "Cobicistat/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Cytochrome P-450 CYP3A Inhibitors/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Darunavir/adverse effects, pharmacokinetics, therapeutic use"
- Drug Combinations
- Drug Interactions
- Food-Drug Interactions
- "HIV Infections/diagnosis, drug therapy, virology"
- "HIV Protease Inhibitors/adverse effects, pharmacokinetics, therapeutic use"
- Humans
- Risk Factors
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rationale and clinical utility of the darunavir-cobicistat combination in the treatment of HIV/AIDS.
**Authors:** Putcharoen O, Do T, Avihingsanon A, Ruxrungtham K
**Journal:** Drug Des Devel Ther (2015)
**DOI:** [10.2147/DDDT.S63989](https://doi.org/10.2147/DDDT.S63989)

## Content

1. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2015 Oct 23;9:5763-9. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S63989.
eCollection  2015.

Rationale and clinical utility of the darunavir-cobicistat combination in the 
treatment of HIV/AIDS.

Putcharoen O(1), Do T(2), Avihingsanon A(2), Ruxrungtham K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, 
Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)The HIV Netherlands Australia Thailand (HIV-NAT) Research Collaboration, The 
Thai Red Cross AIDS Research Center, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, 
Bangkok, Thailand ; The HIV Netherlands Australia Thailand (HIV-NAT) Research 
Collaboration, The Thai Red Cross AIDS Research Center, Bangkok, Thailand.

This article is to provide an update overview of cobicistat (COBI)-boosted 
darunavir in response to its recent approval by the US Food and Drug 
Administration, and inclusion as an alternative first-line regime in the 2015 
treatment guidelines in the US. COBI is a relatively new non-antiretroviral 
cytochrome P450 3A inhibitor or pharmacoenhancer. The rationale behind COBI 
development was to provide an alternative to ritonavir (RTV) as a protease 
inhibitor pharmacoenhancer, due to associated adverse events with short- and 
long-term RTV use, such as gastrointestinal intolerability, drug-drug 
interactions, insulin resistance, lipodystrophy, and hyperlipidemia. Although in 
vitro studies suggest that COBI may result in a lower incidence of undesired 
drug-drug interactions and lipid-associated disorders than RTV, not all Phase 
III studies have well addressed these issues, and the data are limited. However, 
Phase III studies have demonstrated tolerability, noninferiority, and 
bioequivalence of COBI compared to RTV. Two main advantages of COBI over 
RTV-containing regimes have been noted as follows: 1) COBI has no anti-HIV 
activity; therefore, resistance to COBI as a booster in addition to protease 
inhibitor resistance is of little concern, allowing for COBI-containing regimes 
in future. 2) COBI's solubility and dissolution rate allow for 
co-formulated/fixed-dose combination products. Nonetheless, prior to initiating 
COBI-containing treatment regimens, the following should be considered: 1) COBI 
may increase serum creatinine levels and reduce estimated glomerular filtration 
rate (GFR) without affecting actual GFR; 2) potential drug-drug interaction data 
are insufficient, warranting caution when initiating COBI in conjunction with 
concomitant medication or in individuals with multiple comorbidities; 3) food 
plays a pivotal role in boosting darunavir exposure, warranting caution and 
patient education on the importance of taking COBI-containing regimens with 
appropriate amounts of food; and 4) data on the success of COBI-containing 
regimens in treatment-experienced patients are limited.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S63989
PMCID: PMC4627402
PMID: 26566368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]