---
reference_id: "PMID:25592561"
title: "Outcome of localised blastemal-type Wilms tumour patients treated according to intensified treatment in the SIOP WT 2001 protocol, a report of the SIOP Renal Tumour Study Group (SIOP-RTSG)."
authors:
- van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM
- van Tinteren H
- Bergeron C
- "Coulomb-L'Hermine A"
- de Camargo B
- Leuschner I
- Sandstedt B
- Acha T
- Godzinski J
- Oldenburger F
- Gooskens SL
- de Kraker J
- Vujanic GM
- Pritchard-Jones K
- Graf N
journal: Eur J Cancer
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2014.12.011
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Kidney Neoplasms/drug therapy, mortality, pathology"
- Male
- Neoplasm Staging
- Proportional Hazards Models
- Treatment Outcome
- "Wilms Tumor/drug therapy, mortality, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcome of localised blastemal-type Wilms tumour patients treated according to intensified treatment in the SIOP WT 2001 protocol, a report of the SIOP Renal Tumour Study Group (SIOP-RTSG).
**Authors:** van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM, van Tinteren H, Bergeron C, Coulomb-L'Hermine A, de Camargo B, Leuschner I, Sandstedt B, Acha T, Godzinski J, Oldenburger F, Gooskens SL, de Kraker J, Vujanic GM, Pritchard-Jones K, Graf N
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejca.2014.12.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2014.12.011)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer. 2015 Mar;51(4):498-506. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2014.12.011. Epub
2015  Jan 12.

Outcome of localised blastemal-type Wilms tumour patients treated according to 
intensified treatment in the SIOP WT 2001 protocol, a report of the SIOP Renal 
Tumour Study Group (SIOP-RTSG).

van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM(1), van Tinteren H(2), Bergeron C(3), 
Coulomb-L'Hermine A(4), de Camargo B(5), Leuschner I(6), Sandstedt B(7), Acha 
T(8), Godzinski J(9), Oldenburger F(10), Gooskens SL(11), de Kraker J(12), 
Vujanic GM(13), Pritchard-Jones K(14), Graf N(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Princess Máxima Centre for Paediatric 
Oncology, Utrecht, The Netherlands; Dutch Childhood Oncology Group, The Hague, 
The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
m.m.vandenheuvel-eibrink@prinsesmaximacentrum.nl.
(2)Biometrics Department, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Centre Léon Bérard, Pediatrie, Lyon, France.
(4)Department of Pathology, Hospital d'Enfants Armand Trousseau, Paris, France.
(5)Instituto Nacional do Cancer, Pediatric Hematology Program, Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil.
(6)Kiel Pediatric Tumour Registry, University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(7)Childhood Cancer Research Unit, Astrid Lindgren Children's Hospital, 
Karolinska Institutet Stockholm, Stockholm, Sweden.
(8)Hospital Materno-Infantil "Carlos Haya", Malaga, Spain.
(9)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Marciniak Hospital Wroclaw and Chair of 
Emergency Medicine, Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland.
(10)Department of Radiation Oncology, Emma Children's Hospital, Academic Medical 
Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(11)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Princess Máxima Centre for Paediatric 
Oncology, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(12)Department of Pediatric Oncology-Hematology, Emma Children's Hospital, 
Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(13)Department of Histopathology, School of Medicine Cardiff University, 
Cardiff, United Kingdom.
(14)Institute of Child Health, University College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(15)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, University Hospital for 
Children, Homburg, Germany.

Comment in
    Eur J Cancer. 2015 May;51(8):993-4. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2015.03.005.

Blastemal-type Wilms tumour (BT-WT) has been identified as a high risk 
histological subgroup in WT assessed after pre-nephrectomy chemotherapy in 
trials of the International Society of Paediatric Oncology (SIOP) Renal Tumour 
Study Group. Therefore, in SIOPWT2001, post-operative chemotherapy for BT-WT was 
intensified aiming to improve survival. Survival analysis of all unilateral 
BT-WT patients (SIOPWT2001) (n=238), was compared with historical BT-WT controls 
(SIOP93-01) (n=113). 351/4061 (8.6%) unilateral non-metastatic BT-WT patients 
(SIOP93-01/SIOPWT2001) were studied. Median age at diagnosis was 43 months 
(Inter Quartile Range (IQR) 24-68 months), stages: I (n=140, 40%), II (n=106, 
30%), III (n=105, 30%). BT-WTs were higher staged, showed greater volume 
decrease after pre-operative chemotherapy and were diagnosed at an older median 
age compared to other WT patients. Patient characteristics did not differ 
substantially between SIOP93-01 and SIOPWT2001. Univariate analysis showed a 
5-year event-free survival (EFS) of 80% (95% confidence interval (CI): 75-86%) 
(SIOPWT2001) compared to 67% in SIOP93-01 (95% CI: 59-76%; p=0.006) and overall 
survival (OS) of 88% (95% CI: 83-93%) (SIOPWT2001) compared to 84% (95% CI: 
77-91%; p=0.4) in SIOP93-01. 95% of relapses were distant metastases 
(SIOP93-01/SIOPWT2001). Treatment protocol, age at diagnosis, tumour stage (III 
versus I/II) and volume (at surgery), were prognostic variables for EFS (uni- 
and multivariate Cox regression analysis). Independent prognosticators for OS 
were age at diagnosis, tumour stage and volume (at surgery). The most 
significant survival benefit of intensified treatment, was observed in Stage I 
(EFS 96% in SIOPWT2001 (OS 100%), 71% in SIOP93-01 (OS 90%)). BT-WT derived 
benefits from more intensive chemotherapy as reflected by a reduction in relapse 
risk. However, the benefit of the more intensive chemotherapy to improve OS was 
only observed in stage I BT-WTs, by adding doxorubicin.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2014.12.011
PMID: 25592561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]