---
reference_id: "PMID:34047380"
title: "Line-field optical coherence tomography: in vivo diagnosis of basal cell carcinoma subtypes compared with histopathology."
authors:
- Ruini C
- Schuh S
- Gust C
- Kendziora B
- Frommherz L
- French LE
- Hartmann D
- Welzel J
- Sattler E
journal: Clin Exp Dermatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/ced.14762
keywords:
- Aged
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/classification, diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Dermoscopy
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Prospective Studies
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- "Skin Neoplasms/classification, diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence/methods"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Line-field optical coherence tomography: in vivo diagnosis of basal cell carcinoma subtypes compared with histopathology.
**Authors:** Ruini C, Schuh S, Gust C, Kendziora B, Frommherz L, French LE, Hartmann D, Welzel J, Sattler E
**Journal:** Clin Exp Dermatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ced.14762](https://doi.org/10.1111/ced.14762)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2021 Dec;46(8):1471-1481. doi: 10.1111/ced.14762. Epub 2021
 Sep 24.

Line-field optical coherence tomography: in vivo diagnosis of basal cell
carcinoma subtypes compared with histopathology.

Ruini C(1)(2), Schuh S(3), Gust C(1), Kendziora B(1), Frommherz L(1), French
LE(1)(4), Hartmann D(1), Welzel J(3), Sattler E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, University Hospital, LMU, Munich,
Germany.
(2)PhD School in Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Modena and
Reggio Emilia, Italy.
(3)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, University Hospital, Augsburg,
Germany.
(4)Dr Phillip Frost Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, University
of Miami, Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.

BACKGROUND: Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most common skin cancer in the
general population. Treatments vary from Mohs surgery to topical therapy,
depending on the subtype. Dermoscopy, reflectance confocal microscopy (RCM) and
optical coherence tomography (OCT) have gained a foothold in daily clinical
practice to optimize diagnosis and subtype-oriented treatment. The new technique
of line-field confocal OCT (LC-OCT) allows imaging at high resolution and depth,
but its use has not yet been investigated in larger studies.
AIM: To evaluate the main LC-OCT criteria for the diagnosis and subtyping of BCC
compared with histopathology, OCT and RCM.
METHODS: In total, 52 histopathologically confirmed BCCs were evaluated for
imaging criteria. Their frequency, predictive values and ROC curves were
calculated. A multinominal regression with stepwise variables selection to
distinguish BCC subtypes was performed.
RESULTS: Nodular BCCs were mainly characterized by atypical keratinocytes,
altered dermoepidermal junction (DEJ), tumour nests in the dermis, dark
clefting, prominent vascularization and white hyper-reflective stroma.
Superficial BCCs showed a thickening of the epidermis due to a series of tumour
lobules with clear connection to the DEJ (string of pearls pattern).
Infiltrative BCCs were characterized by elongated hyporeflective tumour strands,
surrounded by bright collagen (shoal of fish pattern). The overall BCC subtype
agreement between LC-OCT and conventional histology was 90.4% (95% CI
79.0-96.8).
CONCLUSION: LC-OCT allows noninvasive, real-time identification of BCCs and
their subtypes in vertical, horizontal and three-dimension mode compared with
histology, RCM and OCT. Further larger studies are needed to better explore the
clinical applications of this promising device.

© 2021 The Authors. Clinical and Experimental Dermatology published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/ced.14762
PMID: 34047380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
