---
reference_id: "PMID:38858365"
title: Identification and characterization of Varicella Zoster Virus circular RNA in lytic infection.
authors:
- Yang S
- Cao D
- Jaijyan DK
- Wang M
- Liu J
- Cruz-Cosme R
- Wu S
- Huang J
- Zeng M
- Liu X
- Sun W
- Xiong D
- Tang Q
- Xiao L
- Zhu H
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-49112-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification and characterization of Varicella Zoster Virus circular RNA in lytic infection.
**Authors:** Yang S, Cao D, Jaijyan DK, Wang M, Liu J, Cruz-Cosme R, Wu S, Huang J, Zeng M, Liu X, Sun W, Xiong D, Tang Q, Xiao L, Zhu H
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-024-49112-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49112-4)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2024 Jun 10;15(1):4932. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-49112-4.

Identification and characterization of Varicella Zoster Virus circular RNA in 
lytic infection.

Yang S(#)(1)(2), Cao D(#)(1), Jaijyan DK(#)(3), Wang M(4), Liu J(5), Cruz-Cosme 
R(6), Wu S(1), Huang J(1), Zeng M(3), Liu X(4), Sun W(1), Xiong D(1), Tang Q(7), 
Xiao L(8), Zhu H(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pain Medicine and Shenzhen Municipal Key Laboratory for Pain 
Medicine, Huazhong University of Science and Technology Union Shenzhen Hospital, 
Shenzhen, China.
(2)Guangdong Key Laboratory for Biomedical Measurements and Ultrasound Imaging, 
National-Regional Key Technology Engineering Laboratory for Medical Ultrasound, 
School of Biomedical Engineering, Shenzhen University Medical School, Shenzhen, 
518060, China.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, New Jersey Medical School, 
Rutgers University, 225 Warren Street, Newark, NJ, 070101, USA.
(4)Institute of Medical Microbiology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 
510632, China.
(5)School of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Minnan Normal University, 
Zhangzhou, 363000, China.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Howard University College of Medicine, 520 W 
Street NW, Washington, DC, 20059, USA.
(7)Department of Microbiology, Howard University College of Medicine, 520 W 
Street NW, Washington, DC, 20059, USA. qiyi.tang@howard.edu.
(8)Department of Pain Medicine and Shenzhen Municipal Key Laboratory for Pain 
Medicine, Huazhong University of Science and Technology Union Shenzhen Hospital, 
Shenzhen, China. nsyyjoe@live.cn.
(9)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, New Jersey Medical School, 
Rutgers University, 225 Warren Street, Newark, NJ, 070101, USA. 
hua.zhu@rutgers.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

This study investigates the role of circular RNAs (circRNAs) in the context of 
Varicella-Zoster Virus (VZV) lytic infection. We employ two sequencing 
technologies, short-read sequencing and long-read sequencing, following RNase R 
treatment on VZV-infected neuroblastoma cells to identify and characterize both 
cellular and viral circRNAs. Our large scanning analysis identifies and 
subsequent experiments confirm 200 VZV circRNAs. Moreover, we discover numerous 
VZV latency-associated transcripts (VLTs)-like circRNAs (circVLTslytic), which 
contain multiple exons and different isoforms within the same back-splicing 
breakpoint. To understand the functional significance of these circVLTslytic, we 
utilize the Bacteria Artificial Chromosome system to disrupt the expression of 
viral circRNAs in genomic DNA location. We reveal that the sequence flanking 
circVLTs' 5' splice donor plays a pivotal role as a cis-acting element in the 
formation of circVLTslytic. The circVLTslytic is dispensable for VZV 
replication, but the mutation downstream of circVLTslytic exon 5 leads to 
increased acyclovir sensitivity in VZV infection models. This suggests that 
circVLTslytic may have a role in modulating the sensitivity to antiviral 
treatment. The findings shed new insight into the regulation of cellular and 
viral transcription during VZV lytic infection, emphasizing the intricate 
interplay between circRNAs and viral processes.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-49112-4
PMCID: PMC11164961
PMID: 38858365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.