---
reference_id: "PMID:11402143"
title: "Frontotemporal dementia (Pick's disease): clinical features and assessment."
authors:
- Hodges JR
journal: Neurology
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1212/wnl.56.suppl_4.s6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frontotemporal dementia (Pick's disease): clinical features and assessment.
**Authors:** Hodges JR
**Journal:** Neurology (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1212/wnl.56.suppl_4.s6](https://doi.org/10.1212/wnl.56.suppl_4.s6)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2001 Jun;56(11 Suppl 4):S6-10. doi: 10.1212/wnl.56.suppl_4.s6.

Frontotemporal dementia (Pick's disease): clinical features and assessment.

Hodges JR(1).

Author information:
(1)University Department of Neurology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, and the MRC Brain 
and Cognitive Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK. john.hodges@mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk

The clinical presentation in frontotemporal dementia (FTD) reflects the 
distribution of the pathologic changes rather than the exact histologic subtype 
of the disease. Three major clinical syndromes can be identified: 1) frontal 
variant FTD (dementia of frontal type) in which changes in social behavior and 
personality predominate, reflecting the orbitobasal frontal lobe focus of the 
pathology. Traditional cognitive tests are insensitive, but more specific 
measures are under development; 2) semantic dementia (progressive fluent 
aphasia) in which there is a breakdown in the conceptual database which 
underlies language production and comprehension, although deficits in nonverbal 
semantic knowledge can also be shown on neuropsychologic testing. Patients with 
semantic dementia have asymmetric anterolateral temporal atrophy with relative 
sparing of the hippocampal formation, which is typically worse on the left side. 
A variant of this syndrome affecting the right temporal lobe presents with 
progressive prosopagnosia; 3) progressive nonfluent aphasia in which the 
phonologic and syntactic components of language are affected in association with 
left peri-Sylvian atrophy. The assessment of patients with potential FTD 
involves a multidisciplinary approach. The development of comprehensive 
caregiver-based neuropsychiatric instruments, neuropsychologic tasks sensitive 
to semantic memory and other key cognitive impairments, and functional 
(hexamethyly-propyleneamine-SPECT) and structural (MRI) brain imaging represent 
significant advances in the field.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.56.suppl_4.s6
PMID: 11402143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]