---
reference_id: "PMID:12354474"
title: "Autoantibodies to inner ear and endothelial antigens in Cogan's syndrome."
authors:
- Lunardi C
- Bason C
- Leandri M
- Navone R
- Lestani M
- Millo E
- Benatti U
- Cilli M
- Beri R
- Corrocher R
- Puccetti A
journal: Lancet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(02)11028-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoantibodies to inner ear and endothelial antigens in Cogan's syndrome.
**Authors:** Lunardi C, Bason C, Leandri M, Navone R, Lestani M, Millo E, Benatti U, Cilli M, Beri R, Corrocher R, Puccetti A
**Journal:** Lancet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(02)11028-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(02)11028-2)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2002 Sep 21;360(9337):915-21. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(02)11028-2.

Autoantibodies to inner ear and endothelial antigens in Cogan's syndrome.

Lunardi C(1), Bason C, Leandri M, Navone R, Lestani M, Millo E, Benatti U, Cilli 
M, Beri R, Corrocher R, Puccetti A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Verona, 
Verona, Italy. claudio.lunardi@univr.it

Comment in
    Lancet. 2003 Feb 8;361(9356):530-1. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(03)12478-6.

BACKGROUND: Cogan's syndrome is a chronic inflammatory disease of unknown 
origin, characterised by sensorineural hearing loss, episcleritis, and 
vasculitis. An autoimmune origin has been suggested but not proven. Our aim was 
to establish whether or not an autoimmune process is the cause of the disease.
METHODS: We used pooled IgG immunoglobulins derived from eight patients with 
Cogan's syndrome to screen a random peptide library to identify disease relevant 
autoantigen peptides. Among the identified peptides, one was recognised by all 
the patients' sera. Antibodies against peptides were affinity purified from 
patients' sera and used to characterise the autoantigen, to stain human cochlea, 
and to transfer the features of Cogan's disease into animals.
FINDINGS: We identified an immunodominant peptide that shows similarity with 
autoantigens such as SSA/Ro and with the reovirus III major core protein lambda 
1. The peptide sequence shows similarity also with the cell-density enhanced 
protein tyrosine phosphatase-1 (DEP-1/CD148), which is expressed on the sensory 
epithelia of the inner ear and on endothelial cells. IgG antibodies against the 
peptide, purified from the patients' sera, recognised autoantigens and 
DEP-1/CD148 protein, bound human cochlea, and inhibited proliferation of cells 
expressing DEP-1/CD148. The same antibodies bound connexin 26, gene mutations of 
which lead to congenital inner-ear deafness. Furthermore, these antibodies were 
able to induce the features of Cogan's disease in mice.
INTERPRETATION: Our results indicate that Cogan's syndrome is an autoimmune 
disease, characterised by the presence of autoantibodies able to induce tissue 
damage on binding of cell-surface molecules present on the sensory epithelia of 
the inner ear and on endothelial cells.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(02)11028-2
PMID: 12354474 [Indexed for MEDLINE]