---
reference_id: PMID:19815305
title: "Porphobilinogen deaminase over-expression in hepatocytes, but not in erythrocytes, prevents accumulation of toxic porphyrin precursors in a mouse model of acute intermittent porphyria."
authors:
- Unzu C
- Sampedro A
- Mauleón I
- Vanrell L
- Dubrot J
- de Salamanca RE
- González-Aseguinolaza G
- Melero I
- Prieto J
- Fontanellas A
journal: J Hepatol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2009.09.003
keywords:
- Aminolevulinic Acid/metabolism
- Animals
- Bone Marrow Transplantation
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Erythrocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- Gene Transfer Techniques
- "Hepatocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- "Hydroxymethylbilane Synthase/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Plasmids
- Porphobilinogen/metabolism
- "Porphyria, Acute Intermittent/metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- Porphyrins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Porphobilinogen deaminase over-expression in hepatocytes, but not in erythrocytes, prevents accumulation of toxic porphyrin precursors in a mouse model of acute intermittent porphyria.
**Authors:** Unzu C, Sampedro A, Mauleón I, Vanrell L, Dubrot J, de Salamanca RE, González-Aseguinolaza G, Melero I, Prieto J, Fontanellas A
**Journal:** J Hepatol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jhep.2009.09.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2009.09.003)

## Content

1. J Hepatol. 2010 Mar;52(3):417-24. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2009.09.003. Epub 2009
Sep  23.

Porphobilinogen deaminase over-expression in hepatocytes, but not in
erythrocytes, prevents accumulation of toxic porphyrin precursors in a mouse
model of acute intermittent porphyria.

Unzu C(1), Sampedro A, Mauleón I, Vanrell L, Dubrot J, de Salamanca RE,
González-Aseguinolaza G, Melero I, Prieto J, Fontanellas A.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gene Therapy and Hepatology, Center for Applied Medical Research,
University of Navarra, Avda. Pio XII 55, Pamplona, Spain.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) is characterized by
hepatic porphobilinogen deaminase (PBGD) deficiency resulting in a marked
overproduction of presumably toxic porphyrin precursors. Our study aimed to
assess the protective effects of bone marrow transplantation or PBGD gene
transfer into the liver against phenotypic manifestations of acute porphyria
attack induced in an AIP murine model.
METHODS: Lethally irradiated AIP mice were intravenously injected with 5x10(6)
nucleated bone marrow cells from wild type or AIP donor mice. To achieve liver
gene transfer, AIP mice received via hydrodynamic injection plasmids expressing
human PBGD or luciferase, driven by a liver-specific promoter.
RESULTS: Erythrocyte PBGD activity increased 2.4-fold in AIP mice receiving bone
marrow cells from normal animals. Nevertheless, phenobarbital administration in
these mice reproduced key features of acute attacks, such as massively increased
urinary porphyrin precursor excretion and decreased motor coordination. Hepatic
PBGD activity increased 2.2-fold after hydrodynamic injection of therapeutic
plasmid. Mice injected with the luciferase control plasmid showed a high
excretion of porphyrin precursors after phenobarbital administration whereas
just a small increase was observed in AIP mice injected with the PBGD plasmid.
Furthermore, motor disturbance was almost completely abolished in AIP mice
treated with the therapeutic plasmid.
CONCLUSIONS: PBGD deficiency in erythroid tissue is not associated with
phenotypic manifestations of acute porphyria. In contrast, PBGD over-expression
in hepatocytes, albeit in a low proportion, reduced precursor accumulation,
which is the hallmark of acute porphyric attacks. Liver-directed gene therapy
might offer an alternative to liver transplantation applicable in patients with
severe and recurrent manifestations.

Copyright (c) 2009 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2009.09.003
PMID: 19815305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
