---
reference_id: "PMID:23620401"
title: Quaternary epitopes of α345(IV) collagen initiate Alport post-transplant anti-GBM nephritis.
authors:
- Olaru F
- Luo W
- Wang XP
- Ge L
- Hertz JM
- Kashtan CE
- Sado Y
- Segal Y
- Hudson BG
- Borza DB
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2012100978
keywords:
- Animals
- Anti-Glomerular Basement Membrane Disease/immunology
- "Autoantigens/chemistry, immunology"
- Basement Membrane/immunology
- Cattle
- "Collagen Type IV/chemistry, immunology"
- Epitope Mapping
- Haplorhini
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulin G/blood, immunology"
- "Isoantibodies/blood, immunology"
- Kidney Glomerulus/immunology
- Kidney Transplantation/immunology
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/immunology, surgery"
- Postoperative Complications/immunology
- Protein Interaction Domains and Motifs/immunology
- "Protein Structure, Quaternary"
- "Transplantation, Homologous"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Quaternary epitopes of α345(IV) collagen initiate Alport post-transplant anti-GBM nephritis.
**Authors:** Olaru F, Luo W, Wang XP, Ge L, Hertz JM, Kashtan CE, Sado Y, Segal Y, Hudson BG, Borza DB
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2012100978](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2012100978)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013 May;24(6):889-95. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2012100978. Epub
2013  Apr 25.

Quaternary epitopes of α345(IV) collagen initiate Alport post-transplant 
anti-GBM nephritis.

Olaru F(1), Luo W, Wang XP, Ge L, Hertz JM, Kashtan CE, Sado Y, Segal Y, Hudson 
BG, Borza DB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, 
TN, USA.

Alport post-transplant nephritis (APTN) is an aggressive form of anti-glomerular 
basement membrane disease that targets the allograft in transplanted patients 
with X-linked Alport syndrome. Alloantibodies develop against the NC1 domain of 
α5(IV) collagen, which occurs in normal kidneys, including renal allografts, 
forming distinct α345(IV) and α1256(IV) networks. Here, we studied the roles of 
these networks as antigens inciting alloimmunity and as targets of nephritogenic 
alloantibodies in APTN. We found that patients with APTN, but not those without 
nephritis, produce two kinds of alloantibodies against allogeneic collagen IV. 
Some alloantibodies targeted alloepitopes within α5NC1 monomers, shared by 
α345NC1 and α1256NC1 hexamers. Other alloantibodies specifically targeted 
alloepitopes that depended on the quaternary structure of α345NC1 hexamers. In 
Col4a5-null mice, immunization with native forms of allogeneic collagen IV 
exclusively elicited antibodies to quaternary α345NC1 alloepitopes, whereas 
alloimmunogens lacking native quaternary structure elicited antibodies to shared 
α5NC1 alloepitopes. These results imply that quaternary epitopes within α345NC1 
hexamers may initiate alloimmune responses after transplant in X-linked Alport 
patients. Thus, α345NC1 hexamers are the culprit alloantigen and primary target 
of all alloantibodies mediating APTN, whereas α1256NC1 hexamers become secondary 
targets of anti-α5NC1 alloantibodies. Reliable detection of alloantibodies by 
immunoassays using α345NC1 hexamers may improve outcomes by facilitating early, 
accurate diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2012100978
PMCID: PMC3665397
PMID: 23620401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]