---
reference_id: "PMID:36833767"
title: "Subtypes of Adult-Onset Asthma at the Time of Diagnosis: A Latent Class Analysis."
authors:
- Mäkikyrö EMS
- Jaakkola MS
- Lajunen TK
- Malmberg LP
- Jaakkola JJK
journal: Int J Environ Res Public Health
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijerph20043072
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Subtypes of Adult-Onset Asthma at the Time of Diagnosis: A Latent Class Analysis.
**Authors:** Mäkikyrö EMS, Jaakkola MS, Lajunen TK, Malmberg LP, Jaakkola JJK
**Journal:** Int J Environ Res Public Health (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijerph20043072](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph20043072)

## Content

1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2023 Feb 9;20(4):3072. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph20043072.

Subtypes of Adult-Onset Asthma at the Time of Diagnosis: A Latent Class 
Analysis.

Mäkikyrö EMS(1)(2)(3), Jaakkola MS(1)(2)(3), Lajunen TK(1)(2)(3), Malmberg 
LP(4), Jaakkola JJK(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Environmental and Respiratory Health Research, Research Unit of 
Population Health, University of Oulu, FI-90014 Oulu, Finland.
(2)Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, FI-90014 Oulu, Finland.
(3)Medical Research Center Oulu, Oulu University Hospital, FI-90220 Oulu, 
Finland.
(4)Skin and Allergy Hospital, Helsinki University Hospital, University of 
Helsinki, FI-00280 Helsinki, Finland.

INTRODUCTION: Only a few previous studies have investigated the subtypes of 
adult-onset asthma. No previous study has assessed whether these subtypes are 
different between men and women, or whether these subtypes have different risk 
factors.
METHODS: We applied latent class analyses to the Finnish Environment and Asthma 
Study population, including 520 new cases of adult-onset asthma. We formed 
subtypes separately between women and men and analyzed the following 
determinants as potential predictors for these subtypes: age, body mass index, 
smoking, and parental asthma.
RESULTS: Among women, the subtypes identified were: 1. Moderate asthma, 2. 
Cough-variant asthma, 3. Eosinophilic asthma, 4. Allergic asthma, and 5. 
Difficult asthma. Among men, the subtypes were: 1. Mild asthma, 2. Moderate 
asthma, 3. Allergic asthma, and 4. Difficult asthma. Three of the subtypes were 
similar among women and men: Moderate, Allergic, and Difficult asthma. In 
addition, women had two distinct subtypes: Cough-variant asthma, and 
Eosinophilic asthma. These subtypes had different risk factor profiles, e.g., 
heredity was important for Eosinophilic and Allergic asthma (RR for Both parents 
having asthma in Eosinophilic 3.55 (1.09 to 11.62)). Furthermore, smoking 
increased the risk of Moderate asthma among women (RR for former smoking 2.21 
(1.19 to 4.11)) and Difficult asthma among men but had little influence on 
Allergic or Cough-variant asthma. Conclusion: This is an original investigation 
of the subtypes of adult-onset asthma identified at the time of diagnosis. These 
subtypes differ between women and men, and these subtypes have different risk 
factor profiles. These findings have both clinical and public health importance 
for the etiology, prognosis, and treatment of adult-onset asthma.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph20043072
PMCID: PMC9958800
PMID: 36833767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.