---
reference_id: "PMID:39670660"
title: "Targeting HIF-2α: the role of belzutifan in clear cell renal carcinoma management."
authors:
- Valdés A
- Pizarro G
- González-Montero J
- Rojas C
- Burotto M
journal: Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1080/17512433.2024.2436433
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Renal Cell/drug therapy, pathology"
- "Basic Helix-Loop-Helix Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- "Kidney Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology"
- "Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology, adverse effects, administration & dosage"
- Animals
- Von Hippel-Lindau Tumor Suppressor Protein/metabolism
- Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A/metabolism
- Progression-Free Survival
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- "Neovascularization, Pathologic/drug therapy"
- Indenes
- Endothelial PAS Domain-Containing Protein 1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeting HIF-2α: the role of belzutifan in clear cell renal carcinoma management.
**Authors:** Valdés A, Pizarro G, González-Montero J, Rojas C, Burotto M
**Journal:** Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1080/17512433.2024.2436433](https://doi.org/10.1080/17512433.2024.2436433)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2025 Jan-Feb;18(1-2):17-27. doi:
10.1080/17512433.2024.2436433. Epub 2024 Dec 13.

Targeting HIF-2α: the role of belzutifan in clear cell renal carcinoma
management.

Valdés A(1)(2), Pizarro G(1)(3), González-Montero J(1), Rojas C(1), Burotto
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Bradford Hill Clinical Research Center,
Santiago, Chile.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Instituto Nacional del Cáncer, Santiago,
Chile.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Hospital Sótero del Río, Santiago, Chile.

INTRODUCTION: Belzutifan is a first-in-class hypoxia-inducible factor-2 alpha
(HIF-2α) inhibitor. It targets the von Hippel-Lindau protein (pVHL)-HIF-vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) pathway, which is crucial in cellular responses
to hypoxia. By inhibiting HIF-2α, belzutifan disrupts the transcription of genes
involved in tumor growth and angiogenesis.
AREAS COVERED: In this review, we describe the pVHL-HIF-VEGF pathway and how it
led to the development of HIF inhibitors, including belzutifan. A search was
conducted for trials involving Belzutifan, including phase I-III trials. We
describe the relevant toxicity, with emphasis on hypoxia and anemia.
EXPERT OPINION: Belzutifan is a relatively safe drug, with manageable adverse
events, including anemia and hypoxia as on-target toxicity. Ongoing trials are
studying its benefit in overall survival for RCC in first-line treatment and its
potential in other malignancies. The LITESPARK-005 trial reported the benefit of
belzutifan in progression-free survival (PFS) compared to everolimus in later
lines of treatment, with improvement in quality-of-life outcomes. Given its
different mechanism of action to currently available treatments, belzutifan is
expected to play a prominent role in the treatment of clear cell renal carcinoma
and other cancers.

DOI: 10.1080/17512433.2024.2436433
PMID: 39670660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
