---
reference_id: "PMID:28552099"
title: "Bacteriology and treatment of infections in the upper and lower airways in patients with primary ciliary dyskinesia: adressing the paranasal sinuses."
authors:
- Alanin MC
journal: Dan Med J
year: '2017'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bacteriology and treatment of infections in the upper and lower airways in patients with primary ciliary dyskinesia: adressing the paranasal sinuses.
**Authors:** Alanin MC
**Journal:** Dan Med J (2017)

## Content

1. Dan Med J. 2017 May;64(5):B5361.

Bacteriology and treatment of infections in the upper and lower airways in 
patients with primary ciliary dyskinesia: adressing the paranasal sinuses.

Alanin MC(1).

Author information:
(1)mikkel.christian.alanin.01@regionh.dk.

The respiratory tract is lined with motile cilia that transport respiratory 
mucus. Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a chronic genetic disease caused by 
mutations in genes responsible for ciliary structure and function. 
Non-functional airway cilia impair the mucociliary clearance (MCC), causing 
mucostasis, lung infections and destruction, chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) and 
hearing impairment. It is of paramount importance to postpone chronic lung 
infection mainly with Gram-negative bacteria (GNB) in patients with an impaired 
MCC. When successful, lung function can be stabilized and quality of life (QoL) 
improved. In this thesis, we evaluated whether PCD patients can benefit from the 
experience we have gained from our operative approach towards the paranasal 
sinuses in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. In CF, it has been established that 
bacterial sinusitis can be a focus for initial lung colonization and chronic 
lung infection. Combined endoscopic sinus surgery (ESS) and adjuvant therapy can 
eradicate sinus bacteria, reduce pulmonary infections and improve quality of 
life (QoL).      Currently, approximately 120 patients are diagnosed with PCD in 
Denmark and all are affiliated with the Danish PCD Centre. Patients included in 
this thesis were recruited from this cohort. In papers (I, IV), we found that 
the most frequent sinus pathogen was P. aeruginosa, which was isolated in 12 out 
of 31 (39%) patients who underwent ESS. In searching for a non-pulmonary 
infectious focus, we observed simultaneous sinus and lung infec-tions with 
identical pathogens in two out of three patients. This supports our hypothesis 
of a bacterial reservoir in the sinuses. Next (II), we examined the bacterial 
flora associated with acute and chronic pulmonary infections in PCD. A high 
prevalence of chronic infections encouraged a search for new treatment regimens, 
including ESS with adjuvant therapy, to impact the course of infection. We 
revealed that P. aeruginosa frequently colonizes the airways in PCD and during 
the 11-year study period a total of 42 out of 107 (39%) patients fulfilled the 
definition of chronic lung infection at some point. Importantly, 10 out of 12 
patients (83%) with chronic lung infection had the same clone type of P. 
aeruginosa for years, as determined by pulsed field gel-electrophoresis (PFGE), 
thus substantiating factual chronic airway infection. Further, we found an 
increase in the prevalence of P. aeruginosa with age and observed a negative 
association between early PCD diagnosis and prevalence of P. aeruginosa. This 
indicates a positive effect of early diagnosis and initiation of therapy. In 
paper (III), we performed whole genome sequencing (WGS) of P. aeruginosa 
isolated from the same 12 patients who were included in the PFGE analysis in 
paper II. By sequencing and phenotypically characterizing multiple isolates from 
the same patients we were able to study the with-in host bacterial evolution for 
the first time in PCD. The analyses provided detailed insight into how P. 
aeruginosa evolves in PCD when they are stressed by the host immune system and 
antibiotics. We verified the persistence of clonal lineages and confirmed that 
different clone types of P. aeruginosa can establish persistent infections in 
PCD patients. Further, we showed that P. aeruginosa acclimatizes grad-ually to 
the PCD airway by accumulating pathoadaptive mutations and phenotypic 
characteristics similar to those of CF. Such information may provide valuable 
clinical information, and as an example we identified mutations in genes 
responsible for the development of antibiotic resistance. Based on our research 
we conclude that P. aeruginosa is a major pathogen in PCD and that future 
research should focus on pre-venting or eradicating these bacteria. Implementing 
ESS with adjuvant therapy to PCD patients (I, IV) significantly ameliorated CRS 
symptoms. Further, postoperatively patients tended to have fewer positive lower 
airway cultures and better lung function; approximately one out of four operated 
patients, in search of an infectious focus, remained free of lung colonization 
with P. aeruginosa during follow-up for at least six months. Based on these 
results, it is tempting to speculate that ESS with adjuvant therapy can 
eradicate sinus bacteria and thereby reduce lung re-colonization from the 
sinuses. However, further evidence is needed to support this hypothesis, 
preferably from a multicentre randomized controlled trial.

Articles published in the Danish Medical Journal are “open access”. This means 
that the articles are distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution Non-commercial License, which permits any non-commercial use, 
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) 
and source are credited.

PMID: 28552099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]