---
reference_id: "PMID:30029859"
title: Intestinal Involvement in Kawasaki Disease.
authors:
- Colomba C
- La Placa S
- Saporito L
- Corsello G
- Ciccia F
- Medaglia A
- Romanin B
- Serra N
- Di Carlo P
- Cascio A
journal: J Pediatr
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2018.06.034
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intestinal Involvement in Kawasaki Disease.
**Authors:** Colomba C, La Placa S, Saporito L, Corsello G, Ciccia F, Medaglia A, Romanin B, Serra N, Di Carlo P, Cascio A
**Journal:** J Pediatr (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpeds.2018.06.034](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2018.06.034)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 2018 Nov;202:186-193. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2018.06.034. Epub 2018
Jul  17.

Intestinal Involvement in Kawasaki Disease.

Colomba C(1), La Placa S(2), Saporito L(2), Corsello G(2), Ciccia F(3), Medaglia 
A(2), Romanin B(2), Serra N(4), Di Carlo P(2), Cascio A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Sciences for Health Promotion and Mother and Child Care, 
University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy. Electronic address: 
claudia.colomba@libero.it.
(2)Department of Sciences for Health Promotion and Mother and Child Care, 
University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(3)Biomedical Department of Internal and Specialist Medicine, University of 
Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Federico II University, Naples, 
Italy.

Comment in
    J Pediatr. 2018 Nov;202:2-3. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2018.09.018.

OBJECTIVES: To describe a case of Kawasaki disease with intestinal involvement 
and to analyze other published reports to define clinical characteristics, 
diagnostic issues, and therapeutic approaches of gastrointestinal involvement in 
Kawasaki disease.
STUDY DESIGN: A computerized search without language restriction was conducted 
using PubMed and SCOPUS. An article was considered eligible for inclusion in the 
systematic review if it reported data on patient(s) with intestinal involvement 
in Kawasaki disease. Our case was also included in the analysis.
RESULTS: Thirty-three articles reporting 48 cases of Kawasaki disease with 
intestinal involvement were considered. Fever, abdominal pain, and vomiting were 
the most frequent symptoms observed and typical Kawasaki disease signs and 
symptoms appeared after intestinal complaints in all cases. Plain radiographs, 
ultrasonography, and computed tomography showed pseudo-obstruction as the most 
frequent sign of gastrointestinal involvement; 25 patients underwent surgery. 
Cardiac involvement was documented in 21 cases. All but three patients received 
medical treatment with immunoglobulin intravenous or aspirin. The outcome was 
good in 28 patients; 7 patients showed persistence of coronary artery 
abnormalities; 1 patient developed cyanosis, and later, left hand and forefoot 
gangrene; 3 patients died.
CONCLUSIONS: The diagnosis and treatment of Kawasaki disease might be delayed if 
intestinal symptoms appear before the characteristic clinical features of 
Kawasaki disease, thus, increasing the risk of cardiac complications. 
Furthermore, patients may undergo unnecessary invasive procedures. Pediatricians 
and pediatric surgeons, therefore, should consider Kawasaki disease among 
diagnoses in children with fever, abdominal symptoms, and radiologic findings of 
pseudo-obstruction.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2018.06.034
PMID: 30029859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]