---
reference_id: "PMID:12378292"
title: Promotion of well-switching to mitigate the current arsenic crisis in Bangladesh.
authors:
- Van Geen A
- Ahsan H
- Horneman AH
- Dhar RK
- Zheng Y
- Hussain I
- Ahmed KM
- Gelman A
- Stute M
- Simpson HJ
- Wallace S
- Small C
- Parvez F
- Slavkovich V
- Loiacono NJ
- Becker M
- Cheng Z
- Momotaj H
- Shahnewaz M
- Seddique AA
- Graziano JH
journal: Bull World Health Organ
year: '2002'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Promotion of well-switching to mitigate the current arsenic crisis in Bangladesh.
**Authors:** Van Geen A, Ahsan H, Horneman AH, Dhar RK, Zheng Y, Hussain I, Ahmed KM, Gelman A, Stute M, Simpson HJ, Wallace S, Small C, Parvez F, Slavkovich V, Loiacono NJ, Becker M, Cheng Z, Momotaj H, Shahnewaz M, Seddique AA, Graziano JH
**Journal:** Bull World Health Organ (2002)

## Content

1. Bull World Health Organ. 2002;80(9):732-7.

Promotion of well-switching to mitigate the current arsenic crisis in 
Bangladesh.

Van Geen A(1), Ahsan H, Horneman AH, Dhar RK, Zheng Y, Hussain I, Ahmed KM, 
Gelman A, Stute M, Simpson HJ, Wallace S, Small C, Parvez F, Slavkovich V, 
Loiacono NJ, Becker M, Cheng Z, Momotaj H, Shahnewaz M, Seddique AA, Graziano 
JH.

Author information:
(1)Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, Columbia University, Palisades, New York 
10964, USA. avangeen@ldeo.columbia.edu

OBJECTIVE: To survey tube wells and households in Araihazar upazila, Bangladesh, 
to set the stage for a long-term epidemiological study of the consequences of 
chronic arsenic exposure.
METHODS: Water samples and household data were collected over a period of 4 
months in 2000 from 4997 contiguous tube wells serving a population of 55000, 
the position of each well being determined to within +/- 30 m using Global 
Positioning System receivers. Arsenic concentrations were determined by 
graphite-furnace atomic-absorption spectrometry. In addition, groundwater 
samples collected every 2 weeks for an entire year from six tube wells were 
analysed for arsenic by high-resolution inductively coupled plasma-mass 
spectrometry.
FINDINGS: Half of the wells surveyed in Araihazar had been installed in the 
previous 5 years; 94% were privately owned. Only about 48% of the surveyed wells 
supplied water with an arsenic content below 50 micro g/l, the current 
Bangladesh standard for drinking-water. Similar to other regions of Bangladesh 
and West Bengal, India, the distribution of arsenic in Araihazar is spatially 
highly variable (range: 5-860 micro g/l) and therefore difficult to predict. 
Because of this variability, however, close to 90% of the inhabitants live 
within 100 m of a safe well. Monitoring of six tube wells currently meeting the 
50 micro g/l standard showed no indication of a seasonal cycle in arsenic 
concentrations coupled to the hydrological cycle. This suggests that 
well-switching is a viable option in Araihazar, at least for the short term.
CONCLUSIONS: Well-switching should be more systematically encouraged in 
Araihazar and many other parts of Bangladesh and West Bengal, India. Social 
barriers to well-switching need to be better understood and, if possible, 
overcome.

PMCID: PMC2567605
PMID: 12378292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]