---
reference_id: "PMID:37612291"
title: Inhibiting WNT secretion reduces high bone mass caused by Sost loss-of-function or gain-of-function mutations in Lrp5.
authors:
- Diegel CR
- Kramer I
- Moes C
- Foxa GE
- McDonald MJ
- Madaj ZB
- Guth S
- Liu J
- Harris JL
- Kneissel M
- Williams BO
journal: Bone Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41413-023-00278-5
keywords:
- Syndactyly
- Low Density Lipoprotein Receptor-Related Protein-5/genetics
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Mutation
- Humans
- Bodily Secretions
- Mice
- Animals
- Hyperostosis/genetics
- Gain of Function Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inhibiting WNT secretion reduces high bone mass caused by Sost loss-of-function or gain-of-function mutations in Lrp5.
**Authors:** Diegel CR, Kramer I, Moes C, Foxa GE, McDonald MJ, Madaj ZB, Guth S, Liu J, Harris JL, Kneissel M, Williams BO
**Journal:** Bone Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41413-023-00278-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41413-023-00278-5)

## Content

1. Bone Res. 2023 Aug 24;11(1):47. doi: 10.1038/s41413-023-00278-5.

Inhibiting WNT secretion reduces high bone mass caused by Sost loss-of-function
or gain-of-function mutations in Lrp5.

Diegel CR(1), Kramer I(2), Moes C(2), Foxa GE(1), McDonald MJ(1), Madaj ZB(3),
Guth S(2), Liu J(4), Harris JL(4), Kneissel M(2), Williams BO(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Van Andel Institute, 333 Bostwick Ave., NE, Grand
Rapids, MI, 49503, USA.
(2)Diseases of Aging and Regenerative Medicine, Novartis Institutes for
Biomedical Research, CH-4002, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Bioinformatics and Biostatistics Core, Van Andel Institute, 333 Bostwick
Ave., NE, Grand Rapids, MI, 49503, USA.
(4)Oncology, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, San Diego, CA, 92121,
USA.
(5)Department of Cell Biology, Van Andel Institute, 333 Bostwick Ave., NE, Grand
Rapids, MI, 49503, USA. bart.williams@vai.org.

Proper regulation of Wnt signaling is critical for normal bone development and
homeostasis. Mutations in several Wnt signaling components, which increase the
activity of the pathway in the skeleton, cause high bone mass in human subjects
and mouse models. Increased bone mass is often accompanied by severe headaches
from increased intracranial pressure, which can lead to fatality and loss of
vision or hearing due to the entrapment of cranial nerves. In addition,
progressive forehead bossing and mandibular overgrowth occur in almost all
subjects. Treatments that would provide symptomatic relief in these subjects are
limited. Porcupine-mediated palmitoylation is necessary for Wnt secretion and
binding to the frizzled receptor. Chemical inhibition of porcupine is a highly
selective method of Wnt signaling inhibition. We treated three different mouse
models of high bone mass caused by aberrant Wnt signaling, including
homozygosity for loss-of-function in Sost, which models sclerosteosis, and two
strains of mice carrying different point mutations in Lrp5 (equivalent to human
G171V and A214V), at 3 months of age with porcupine inhibitors for 5-6 weeks.
Treatment significantly reduced both trabecular and cortical bone mass in all
three models. This demonstrates that porcupine inhibition is potentially
therapeutic for symptomatic relief in subjects who suffer from these disorders
and further establishes that the continued production of Wnts is necessary for
sustaining high bone mass in these models.

© 2023. West China School of Stomatology Sichuan University.

DOI: 10.1038/s41413-023-00278-5
PMCID: PMC10447437
PMID: 37612291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: B.O.W. is a stockholder and member of the
Scientific Advisory Board for Surrozen. The Williams Laboratory has also
received recent support from Janssen Pharmaceuticals for work unrelated to the
studies reported here. C.M., J.L., I.K., M.K. and S.G. are employees and
shareholders of Novartis.
