---
reference_id: "PMID:34558790"
title: "Expanding the phenotypic spectrum of cardiospondylocarpofacial syndrome: From a detailed clinical and radiological observation of a boy with a novel missense variant in MAP3K7."
authors:
- Minatogawa M
- Miyake N
- Tsukahara Y
- Tanabe Y
- Uchiyama T
- Matsumoto N
- Kosho T
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62516
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Carpal Bones
- Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome/diagnosis
- Humans
- MAP Kinase Kinase Kinases/genetics
- Male
- Osteosclerosis
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanding the phenotypic spectrum of cardiospondylocarpofacial syndrome: From a detailed clinical and radiological observation of a boy with a novel missense variant in MAP3K7.
**Authors:** Minatogawa M, Miyake N, Tsukahara Y, Tanabe Y, Uchiyama T, Matsumoto N, Kosho T
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.62516](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.62516)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2022 Jan;188(1):350-356. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62516. Epub
2021  Sep 24.

Expanding the phenotypic spectrum of cardiospondylocarpofacial syndrome: From a 
detailed clinical and radiological observation of a boy with a novel missense 
variant in MAP3K7.

Minatogawa M(1)(2), Miyake N(3)(4), Tsukahara Y(5), Tanabe Y(6), Uchiyama T(6), 
Matsumoto N(3), Kosho T(1)(2)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Shinshu University School of Medicine, 
Matsumoto, Japan.
(2)Center for Medical Genetics, Shinshu University Hospital, Matsumoto, Japan.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, Research Institute, National Center for Global 
Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Radiology, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto, 
Japan.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Kansai Medical University, Hirakata, Japan.
(7)Division of Clinical Sequencing, Shinshu University School of Medicine, 
Matsumoto, Japan.
(8)Research Center for Supports to Advanced Science, Shinshu University, 
Matsumoto, Japan.

Cardiospondylocarpofacial syndrome (CSCF; OMIM#157800) is characterized by 
growth impairment, failure to thrive in infancy, multiple valvular disease, 
carpal and tarsal fusions, vertebral fusions, and joint hypermobility. It is 
caused by pathogenic variants of MAP3K7, which encodes transforming growth 
factor-β activated kinase 1 (TAK1), a member of the mitogen-activated protein 
kinase kinase kinase family (MAPKKK). Only eight individuals with molecularly 
confirmed CSCF have been reported. Here, we report the first Asian CSCF male 
with a novel missense variant of MAP3K7 (NM_145331.3: c.467A > T: p.Asp156Val). 
We compared and reviewed the clinical and molecular findings in previously 
reported CSCF cases and the present case to better delineate the phenotype of 
CSCF. In addition to the main symptoms of CSCF, the present case had a mixed 
phenotype of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) and Noonan syndrome. Taking this case 
together with the previously reported cases, CSCF may overlap with the 
phenotypes of EDS and Noonan syndrome, suggesting that this finding may 
contribute to diagnosing CSCF. Another major achievement of this research is to 
successfully capture the process of carpal fusion in a CSCF case 
radiographically. This work may expand the phenotypic spectrum of CSCF.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62516
PMID: 34558790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]