---
reference_id: "PMID:24385074"
title: "Phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency: diagnosis and management guideline."
authors:
- Vockley J
- Andersson HC
- Antshel KM
- Braverman NE
- Burton BK
- Frazier DM
- Mitchell J
- Smith WE
- Thompson BH
- Berry SA
- American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics Therapeutics Committee
journal: Genet Med
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1038/gim.2013.157
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency: diagnosis and management guideline.
**Authors:** Vockley J, Andersson HC, Antshel KM, Braverman NE, Burton BK, Frazier DM, Mitchell J, Smith WE, Thompson BH, Berry SA, American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics Therapeutics Committee
**Journal:** Genet Med (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/gim.2013.157](https://doi.org/10.1038/gim.2013.157)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2014 Feb;16(2):188-200. doi: 10.1038/gim.2013.157. Epub 2013 Oct
10.

Phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency: diagnosis and management guideline.

Vockley J(1), Andersson HC(2), Antshel KM(3), Braverman NE(4), Burton BK(5), 
Frazier DM(6), Mitchell J(4), Smith WE(7), Thompson BH(8), Berry SA(9); American 
College of Medical Genetics and Genomics Therapeutics Committee.

Author information:
(1)1] Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA [2] Department of Human Genetics, University of 
Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public Health, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Hayward Genetics Center, Tulane University Medical School, New Orleans, 
Louisiana, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York, USA.
(4)Department of Human Genetics and Pediatrics, McGill University, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago, 
Illinois, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of North Carolina, at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Maine Medical Center, Portland, Maine, USA1.
(8)The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics, Bethesda, Maryland, 
USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota Medical School, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.

Erratum in
    Genet Med. 2014 Apr;16(4):356.

Phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency, traditionally known as phenylketonuria, 
results in the accumulation of phenylalanine in the blood of affected 
individuals and was the first inborn error of metabolism to be identified 
through population screening. Early identification and treatment prevent the 
most dramatic clinical sequelae of the disorder, but new neurodevelopmental and 
psychological problems have emerged in individuals treated from birth. The 
additional unanticipated recognition of a toxic effect of elevated maternal 
phenylalanine on fetal development has added to a general call in the field for 
treatment for life. Two major conferences sponsored by the National Institutes 
of Health held >10 years apart reviewed the state of knowledge in the field of 
phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency, but there are no generally accepted 
recommendations for therapy. The purpose of this guideline is to review the 
strength of the medical literature relative to the treatment of phenylalanine 
hydroxylase deficiency and to develop recommendations for diagnosis and therapy 
of this disorder. Evidence review from the original National Institutes of 
Health consensus conference and a recent update by the Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality was used to address key questions in the diagnosis and 
treatment of phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency by a working group established 
by the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics. The group met by phone 
and in person over the course of a year to review these reports, develop 
recommendations, and identify key gaps in our knowledge of this disorder. Above 
all, treatment of phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency must be life long, with a 
goal of maintaining blood phenylalanine in the range of 120-360 µmol/l. 
Treatment has predominantly been dietary manipulation, and use of low protein 
and phenylalanine medical foods is likely to remain a major component of therapy 
for the immediate future. Pharmacotherapy for phenylalanine hydroxylase 
deficiency is in early stages with one approved medication (sapropterin, a 
derivative of the natural cofactor of phenylalanine hydroxylase) and others 
under development. Eventually, treatment of phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency 
will be individualized with multiple medications and alternative medical foods 
available to tailor therapy. The primary goal of therapy should be to lower 
blood phenylalanine, and any interventions, including medications, or 
combination of therapies that help to achieve that goal in an individual, 
without other negative consequences, should be considered appropriate therapy. 
Significant evidence gaps remain in our understanding of the optimum therapies 
for phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency, nonphenylalanine effects of these 
therapies, and long-term sequelae of even well-treated disease in children and 
adults.

DOI: 10.1038/gim.2013.157
PMID: 24385074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]