---
reference_id: "PMID:23621221"
title: Correlation between EGFR mutations and serum tumor markers in lung adenocarcinoma patients.
authors:
- Pan JB
- Hou YH
- Zhang GJ
journal: Asian Pac J Cancer Prev
year: '2013'
doi: 10.7314/apjcp.2013.14.2.695
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Correlation between EGFR mutations and serum tumor markers in lung adenocarcinoma patients.
**Authors:** Pan JB, Hou YH, Zhang GJ
**Journal:** Asian Pac J Cancer Prev (2013)
**DOI:** [10.7314/apjcp.2013.14.2.695](https://doi.org/10.7314/apjcp.2013.14.2.695)

## Content

1. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2013;14(2):695-700. doi: 10.7314/apjcp.2013.14.2.695.

Correlation between EGFR mutations and serum tumor markers in lung 
adenocarcinoma patients.

Pan JB(1), Hou YH, Zhang GJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Henan Provincial People's Hospital, 
Zhengzhou, China. jinbingpan@126.com

BACKGROUND: Mutations affecting the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) are 
good predictors of clinical efficacy of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) in 
patients with non-small cell lung cancer. Serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) 
levels are also regarded as predictive for the efficacy of EGFR-TKI and EGFR 
gene mutations. This study analyzed the association between EGFR gene mutations 
and clinical features, including serum tumor marker levels in lung 
adenocarcinomas patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 70 lung adenocarcinoma patients with complete 
clinical data and pathological specimens were investigated. EGFR gene mutations 
at exons 19 and 21 were assessed. Serum tumor markers were detected by protein 
chip- chemiluminescence at the corresponding time, and correlations were 
analyzed.
RESULTS: Mutations of the EGFR gene were detected in 27 of the 70 patients and 
the serum CEA and CA242 concentrations were found to be significantly associated 
with the incidence of EGFR gene mutations (P<0.05). The AUCs for CEA and CA242 
were 0.724 (95% CI: 0.598~0.850, P<0.05) and 0.769 (95% CI: 0.523~0.800, P<0.05) 
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Serum CEA and CA242 levels are associated with mutations of the 
EGFR gene in patients with lung adenocarcinomas.

DOI: 10.7314/apjcp.2013.14.2.695
PMID: 23621221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]