---
reference_id: "PMID:37186330"
title: Generation and mutational analysis of a transgenic murine model of the human MAF mutation.
authors:
- Fujino M
- Ojima M
- Ishibashi S
- Mizuno S
- Takahashi S
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63220
keywords:
- Humans
- Animals
- Mice
- Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Mutation
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/genetics"
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Syndrome
- Cataract/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Generation and mutational analysis of a transgenic murine model of the human MAF mutation.
**Authors:** Fujino M, Ojima M, Ishibashi S, Mizuno S, Takahashi S
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.63220](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.63220)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2023 Jul;191(7):1878-1888. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63220. Epub 
2023 Apr 26.

Generation and mutational analysis of a transgenic murine model of the human MAF 
mutation.

Fujino M(1)(2), Ojima M(1), Ishibashi S(1)(3), Mizuno S(4), Takahashi 
S(1)(4)(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(2)Human Biology, School of Integrative and Global Majors, University of 
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(3)Medical Sciences, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, University 
of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(4)Laboratory Animal Resource Center, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(5)Life Science Center, Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance (TARA), University of 
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(6)International Institute for Integrative Sleep Medicine (WPI-IIIS), University 
of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(7)Transborder Medical Research Center, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Aymé-Gripp syndrome is an autosomal dominant multisystem disorder. The major 
clinical features of this syndrome include congenital cataracts, sensorineural 
hearing loss, intellectual disability, and a distinctive flat facial appearance. 
MAF has been identified as a causative gene of the syndrome, and heterozygous 
variants owing to impairment in glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3)-mediated MAF 
phosphorylation shows related disorders. However, the underlying mechanisms of 
these types of disorders in affected individuals remain poorly understood. To 
explore the underlying mechanisms and discover new phenotypes, a murine model 
with a Maf mutation on a GSK3 phosphorylation motif, p.Thr58Ile, was generated 
using CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing. This is a homologous mutation to that in human 
patients. Our murine model exhibited similar phenotypes to those in humans, such 
as lens abnormalities, short stature, growth retardation, and abnormal skull 
morphology. The murine model showed decreased brain volume and malocclusion. 
Considering the sequencing and genotyping data, our models were successfully 
generated for the first time (to the best of our knowledge). Therefore, this 
study offers new and unique functional insights into human and murine MAF and 
novel clinical values of MAF pathogenic variants associated with changes in the 
functions of several organs based on a viable murine model.

© 2023 The Authors. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63220
PMID: 37186330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]