---
reference_id: "PMID:27064958"
title: "Pediatric Meckel's Diverticulum: Report of 208 Cases and Review of the Literature."
authors:
- Francis A
- Kantarovich D
- Khoshnam N
- Alazraki AL
- Patel B
- Shehata BM
journal: Fetal Pediatr Pathol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.3109/15513815.2016.1161684
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric Meckel's Diverticulum: Report of 208 Cases and Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Francis A, Kantarovich D, Khoshnam N, Alazraki AL, Patel B, Shehata BM
**Journal:** Fetal Pediatr Pathol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.3109/15513815.2016.1161684](https://doi.org/10.3109/15513815.2016.1161684)

## Content

1. Fetal Pediatr Pathol. 2016;35(3):199-206. doi: 10.3109/15513815.2016.1161684. 
Epub 2016 Apr 11.

Pediatric Meckel's Diverticulum: Report of 208 Cases and Review of the 
Literature.

Francis A(1), Kantarovich D(1), Khoshnam N(1), Alazraki AL(2), Patel B(1), 
Shehata BM(1).

Author information:
(1)a Departments of Pathology.
(2)b Radiology, Emory University School of Medicine , Atlanta , Georgia , USA.

We report a review of 208 cases of Meckel's diverticulum among pediatric 
patients from one single institution. One of the aims of this report is to 
highlight the different diagnostic modalities of Meckel's diverticulum since a 
majority of cases is undiagnosed prior to surgery. Our review shows 58 cases 
containing gastric and/or pancreatic heterotopic tissue, including two unique 
cases. The first case reported is a desmoid tumor arising at the tip of 
diverticulum, a case that, to our knowledge, has not been previously reported. 
The second case involves a female patient appearing with an acute abdomen 
thought to be appendicitis, instead surgery revealed a diverticulum arising from 
the ileum. The cause of acute abdomen was due to gonococcal infection. In 
conclusion, we hope that this large series of Meckel's cases will enrich our 
readers on the differential diagnosis and preoperative diagnostic techniques of 
Meckels' diverticulum.

DOI: 10.3109/15513815.2016.1161684
PMID: 27064958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]