---
reference_id: "PMID:29883837"
title: Characteristics and Outcome of ROS1-Positive Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Patients in Routine Clinical Practice.
authors:
- Park S
- Ahn BC
- Lim SW
- Sun JM
- Kim HR
- Hong MH
- Lee SH
- Ahn JS
- Park K
- Choi Y
- Cho BC
- Ahn MJ
journal: J Thorac Oncol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jtho.2018.05.026
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Retrospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characteristics and Outcome of ROS1-Positive Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Patients in Routine Clinical Practice.
**Authors:** Park S, Ahn BC, Lim SW, Sun JM, Kim HR, Hong MH, Lee SH, Ahn JS, Park K, Choi Y, Cho BC, Ahn MJ
**Journal:** J Thorac Oncol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jtho.2018.05.026](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtho.2018.05.026)

## Content

1. J Thorac Oncol. 2018 Sep;13(9):1373-1382. doi: 10.1016/j.jtho.2018.05.026.
Epub  2018 Jun 5.

Characteristics and Outcome of ROS1-Positive Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Patients
in Routine Clinical Practice.

Park S(1), Ahn BC(2), Lim SW(1), Sun JM(1), Kim HR(2), Hong MH(2), Lee SH(1),
Ahn JS(1), Park K(1), Choi Y(3), Cho BC(2), Ahn MJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Yonsei Cancer Center, Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Pathology and Translational Genomics, Samsung Medical Center,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: silkahn@skku.edu.

INTRODUCTION: ROS1-rearranged NSCLC is classified as a distinct molecular subset
of NSCLC with a therapeutic target. ROS1 rearrangement is most often identified
in never-smokers with adenocarcinoma and EGFR and ALK receptor tyrosine kinase
gene (ALK) wild type. Treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), which
target the ROS1 kinase domain, is considered the standard of care. TKIs have
been shown to have a robust and durable response. However, information regarding
the clinical outcomes of TKI treatment, including brain metastasis, remains
limited.
METHODS: We identified 103 consecutive cases of ROS1-positive NSCLC by using
break-apart fluorescence in situ hybridization (n = 84), next-generation
sequencing (n = 23), or both (n = 3). Information regarding fusion breakpoints
was available for eight patients. Clinical data, including patient
characteristics, incidence of brain metastasis, response to chemotherapy, or to
TKIs, were retrospectively analyzed.
RESULTS: The median patient age was 56 years, and 58.9% of the patients were
female. Most of the patients (75.7%) were never-smokers. Adenocarcinoma was
predominant (98.1%), and two cases with pleomorphic carcinoma were identified.
Sixty percent of patients had an extrathoracic metastatic lesion, and 22% had an
intracranial lesion at the initial presentation or at the time of recurrence.
The median time to development of brain metastases was 12.0 months (range
2.1-84.1). The most common fusion partner was CD74 molecule gene (CD74),
followed by syndecan 4 gene (SDC4), ezrin gene (EZR), tropomyosin 3 gene (TPM3),
TRK-fused gene (TFG), zinc finger CCHC-type containing 8 gene (ZCCHC8),
sacrolemma associated protein gene (SLMAP), and myosin VC gene (MYO5C). All of
these fusion partners preserved the tyrosine kinase domain of ROS1. The median
overall survival time was 52.1 months (95% confidence interval [CI]: 23.6-not
reached). In the 90 patients who were treated with pemetrexed-based
chemotherapy, the overall response rate and progression-free survival time were
53.3% and 8.0 months (95% CI: 6.4-11.7), respectively. The overall response rate
and progression-free survival time were 70.7% and 12.7 months (95% CI:
8.1-21.8), respectively, for the 50 patients treated with TKIs. Brain metastasis
was more often observed during TKI treatment (15.5%) than during
pemetrexed-based chemotherapy (6.7%).
CONCLUSIONS: ROS1-positive NSCLC has distinct clinical characteristics, with an
effective and durable response to both TKIs and pemetrexed-based chemotherapies.
Regardless, given its novel characteristics and distinct clinical responses to
conventional chemotherapies and TKIs, the treatment strategy for ROS1-positive
NSCLC remains to be further developed.

Copyright © 2018 International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtho.2018.05.026
PMID: 29883837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
