---
reference_id: "PMID:26154924"
title: Towards an understanding of kidney diseases associated with WT1 mutations.
authors:
- Dong L
- Pietsch S
- Englert C
journal: Kidney Int
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/ki.2015.198
keywords:
- Animals
- Binding Sites
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- "Kidney/metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Kidney Diseases/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism, physiopathology, therapy"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Prognosis
- Protein Binding
- Risk Factors
- Signal Transduction
- "WT1 Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Towards an understanding of kidney diseases associated with WT1 mutations.
**Authors:** Dong L, Pietsch S, Englert C
**Journal:** Kidney Int (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ki.2015.198](https://doi.org/10.1038/ki.2015.198)

## Content

1. Kidney Int. 2015 Oct;88(4):684-90. doi: 10.1038/ki.2015.198. Epub 2015 Jul 8.

Towards an understanding of kidney diseases associated with WT1 mutations.

Dong L(1), Pietsch S(1), Englert C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Genetics, Leibniz Institute for Age Research, Fritz Lipmann 
Institute, Jena, Germany.
(2)Faculty of Biology and Pharmacy, Friedrich Schiller University of Jena, Jena, 
Germany.

Mutations in Wilms' tumor 1 (WT1) cause a wide spectrum of renal manifestations, 
eventually leading to end-stage kidney failure. Insufficient understanding of 
WT1's molecular functions in kidney development has hampered efficient 
therapeutic applications for WT1-associated diseases. Recently, the generation 
and characterization of mouse models and application of multiple 
state-of-the-art approaches have significantly expanded our understanding of the 
molecular mechanisms of how WT1 mutations lead to kidney failure. Here, we 
discuss the WT1 binding consensus and illustrate the major roles of WT1 in 
different cell populations in kidney biology. WT1 controls metanephric 
mesenchyme (MM) self-renewal and proliferation mainly by regulating FGF and 
BMP-pSMAD signaling pathways as well as Sall1 and Pax2, encoding key 
transcription factors; WT1 drives MM differentiation and mesenchyme-epithelial 
transition by targeting Fgf8 and Wnt4; WT1 defines podocyte identity by 
activation of other podocyte-specific transcription factors, including Mafb, 
Lmx1b, FoxC2, and Tcf21. These factors potentially cooperate with WT1 regulating 
the expression of components and regulators of the cytoskeleton for establishing 
podocyte polarity, slit diaphragm structure, and focal adhesion to the 
glomerular basement membrane. Understanding of WT1's function in kidney biology 
including WT1-regulated pathways will give insights that will eventually help 
therapeutic applications.

DOI: 10.1038/ki.2015.198
PMCID: PMC4687464
PMID: 26154924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]