---
reference_id: "PMID:39202303"
title: Genetic and Phenotypic Spectrum of KMT2D Variants in Taiwanese Case Series of Kabuki Syndrome.
authors:
- Lee CL
- Chuang CK
- Chen MR
- Lin JL
- Chiu HC
- Chang YH
- Tu YR
- Lo YT
- Lin HY
- Lin SP
journal: Diagnostics (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/diagnostics14161815
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic and Phenotypic Spectrum of KMT2D Variants in Taiwanese Case Series of Kabuki Syndrome.
**Authors:** Lee CL, Chuang CK, Chen MR, Lin JL, Chiu HC, Chang YH, Tu YR, Lo YT, Lin HY, Lin SP
**Journal:** Diagnostics (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/diagnostics14161815](https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics14161815)

## Content

1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2024 Aug 20;14(16):1815. doi:
10.3390/diagnostics14161815.

Genetic and Phenotypic Spectrum of KMT2D Variants in Taiwanese Case Series of 
Kabuki Syndrome.

Lee CL(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Chuang CK(6)(7), Chen MR(1), Lin JL(8), Chiu HC(1), Chang 
YH(1)(3), Tu YR(6), Lo YT(3), Lin HY(1)(3)(4)(5)(6)(9), Lin SP(1)(3)(4)(6)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, MacKay Memorial Hospital, Taipei 10449, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming Chiao-Tung University, 
Taipei 112304, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Rare Disease Center, MacKay Memorial Hospital, Taipei 10449, 
Taiwan.
(4)Department of Medicine, Mackay Medical College, New Taipei City 25245, 
Taiwan.
(5)Department of Nursing, Mackay Junior College of Medicine, Nursing and 
Management, Taipei 112021, Taiwan.
(6)Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Medical Research, MacKay 
Memorial Hospital, Taipei 10449, Taiwan.
(7)College of Medicine, Fu-Jen Catholic University, New Taipei City 24205, 
Taiwan.
(8)Division of Endocrine & Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Chang 
Gung Children's Medical Center, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan 33378, 
Taiwan.
(9)Department of Medical Research, China Medical University Hospital, China 
Medical University, Taichung 40402, Taiwan.
(10)Department of Infant and Child Care, National Taipei University of Nursing 
and Health Sciences, Taipei 11219, Taiwan.

Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by distinct facial 
features, intellectual disability, and multiple congenital anomalies. We 
conducted a comprehensive analysis of the genetic and phenotypic spectrum of KS 
in a Taiwanese patient group of 23 patients. KMT2D variants were found in 22 
individuals, with missense (26.1%), nonsense (21.7%), and frameshift (17.4%) 
variants being the most prevalent. One patient had a KMT2D variant of uncertain 
significance. The most common clinical characteristics included distinct facial 
features (100%), intellectual disability (100%), developmental delay (95.7%), 
speech delay (78.3%), hypotonia (69.6%), congenital heart abnormalities (69.6%), 
and recurrent infections (65.2%). Other abnormalities included hearing loss 
(39.1%), seizures (26.1%), cleft palate (26.1%), and renal anomalies (21.7%). 
This study broadens the mutational and phenotypic spectrum of KS in the 
Taiwanese population, highlighting the importance of comprehensive genetic 
testing and multidisciplinary clinical evaluations for diagnosis and treatment.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics14161815
PMCID: PMC11353766
PMID: 39202303

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.