---
reference_id: "PMID:34789173"
title: "Prenatal diagnosis of auriculocondylar syndrome with a novel missense variant of GNAI3: a case report."
authors:
- Liu X
- Sun W
- Wang J
- Chu G
- He R
- Zhang B
- Zhao Y
journal: BMC Pregnancy Childbirth
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1186/s12884-021-04238-x
keywords:
- Adult
- "Ear/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- "Ear Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- Female
- "Fetal Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits, G12-G13/genetics"
- Humans
- Micrognathism/diagnostic imaging
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Phenotype
- Polyhydramnios/diagnostic imaging
- Pregnancy
- Prenatal Diagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prenatal diagnosis of auriculocondylar syndrome with a novel missense variant of GNAI3: a case report.
**Authors:** Liu X, Sun W, Wang J, Chu G, He R, Zhang B, Zhao Y
**Journal:** BMC Pregnancy Childbirth (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12884-021-04238-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12884-021-04238-x)

## Content

1. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2021 Nov 17;21(1):780. doi: 
10.1186/s12884-021-04238-x.

Prenatal diagnosis of auriculocondylar syndrome with a novel missense variant of 
GNAI3: a case report.

Liu X(1), Sun W(2), Wang J(3), Chu G(1), He R(1), Zhang B(1), Zhao Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical 
University, Shenyang, China.
(2)Department of Ultrasonography, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical 
University, Shenyang, China.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical 
University, Shenyang, China.
(4)Department of Clinical Genetics, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical 
University, Shenyang, China. yyzhao@sj-hospital.org.

BACKGROUND: Auriculocondylar syndrome (ACS) is a rare disorder characterized by 
micrognathia, mandibular condyle hypoplasia, and auricular abnormalities. Only 6 
pathogenic variants of GNAI3 have been identified associated with ACS so far. 
Here, we report a case of prenatal genetic diagnosis of ACS carrying a novel 
GNAI3 variant.
CASE PRESENTATION: A woman with 30 weeks of gestation was referred to genetic 
counseling for polyhydramnios and fetal craniofacial anomaly. Severe 
micrognathia and mandibular hypoplasia were identified on ultrasonography. The 
mandibular length was 2.4 cm, which was markedly smaller than the 95th 
percentile. The ears were low-set with no cleft or notching between the lobe and 
helix. The face was round with prominent cheeks. Whole-exome sequencing 
identified a novel de novo missense variant of c.140G > A in the GNAI3 gene. 
This mutation caused an amino acid substitution of p.Ser47Asn in the highly 
conserved G1 motif, which was predicted to impair the guanine nucleotide-binding 
function. All ACS cases with GNAI3 mutations were literature reviewed, revealing 
female-dominated severe cases and right-side-prone deformities.
CONCLUSION: Severe micrognathia and mandibular hypoplasia accompanied by 
polyhydramnios are prenatal indicators of ACS. We expanded the mutation spectrum 
of GNAI3 and summarized clinical features to promote awareness of ACS.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12884-021-04238-x
PMCID: PMC8597305
PMID: 34789173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.