---
reference_id: "PMID:27576954"
title: Phenotypic variability in patients with osteogenesis imperfecta caused by BMP1 mutations.
authors:
- Pollitt RC
- Saraff V
- Dalton A
- Webb EA
- Shaw NJ
- Sobey GJ
- Mughal MZ
- Hobson E
- Ali F
- Bishop NJ
- Arundel P
- Högler W
- Balasubramanian M
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37958
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Bone Density/genetics
- Bone Morphogenetic Protein 1/genetics
- Bone and Bones/physiopathology
- Child
- Collagen Type I/genetics
- "Diphosphonates/administration & dosage"
- Female
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypic variability in patients with osteogenesis imperfecta caused by BMP1 mutations.
**Authors:** Pollitt RC, Saraff V, Dalton A, Webb EA, Shaw NJ, Sobey GJ, Mughal MZ, Hobson E, Ali F, Bishop NJ, Arundel P, Högler W, Balasubramanian M
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.37958](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.37958)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2016 Dec;170(12):3150-3156. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37958. Epub 
2016 Aug 30.

Phenotypic variability in patients with osteogenesis imperfecta caused by BMP1 
mutations.

Pollitt RC(1)(2), Saraff V(3), Dalton A(1), Webb EA(3)(4), Shaw NJ(3)(4), Sobey 
GJ(5), Mughal MZ(6), Hobson E(7), Ali F(8), Bishop NJ(2)(6), Arundel P(9), 
Högler W(3)(4), Balasubramanian M(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Sheffield Diagnostic Genetics Service, Sheffield Children's NHS Foundation 
Trust, Sheffield, UK.
(2)Academic Unit of Child Health, Department of Oncology and Metabolism, 
University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Birmingham Children's Hospital, 
Birmingham, UK.
(4)Institute of Metabolism and Systems Research, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, UK.
(5)National EDS Service, Sheffield Children's NHS Foundation Trust, Sheffield, 
UK.
(6)Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, 
Central Manchester University Hospitals, Manchester, UK.
(7)Department of Clinical Genetics, Chapel Allerton Hospital, Leeds, UK.
(8)Department of Paediatric Orthopaedic Surgery, Royal Manchester Children's 
Hospital, Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, 
Manchester, UK.
(9)Highly Specialised Severe, Complex and Atypical OI Service, Sheffield 
Children's NHS Foundation Trust, Sheffield, UK.
(10)Sheffield Clinical Genetics Service, Sheffield Children's NHS Foundation 
Trust, Sheffield, UK.

Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI) is an inherited bone fragility disorder most 
commonly associated with autosomal dominant mutations in the type I collagen 
genes. Autosomal recessive mutations in a number of genes have also been 
described, including the BMP1 gene that encodes the mammalian Tolloid (mTLD) and 
its shorter isoform bone morphogenic protein-1 (BMP1). To date, less than 20 
individuals with OI have been identified with BMP1 mutations, with skeletal 
phenotypes ranging from mild to severe and progressively deforming. In the 
majority of patients, bone fragility was associated with increased bone mineral 
density (BMD); however, the full range of phenotypes associated with BMP1 
remains unclear. Here, we describe three children with mutations in BMP1 
associated with a highly variable phenotype: a sibship homozygous for the 
c.2188delC mutation that affects only the shorter BMP1 isoform and a further 
patient who is compound heterozygous for a c.1293C>G nonsense mutation and a 
c.1148G>A missense mutation in the CUB1 domain. These individuals had recurrent 
fractures from early childhood, are hypermobile and have no evidence of 
dentinogenesis imperfecta. The homozygous siblings with OI had normal areal BMD 
by dual energy X-ray absorptiometry whereas the third patient presented with a 
high bone mass phenotype. Intravenous bisphosphonate therapy was started in all 
patients, but discontinued in two patients and reduced in another due to 
concerns about increasing bone stiffness leading to chalk-stick fractures. Given 
the association of BMP1-related OI with very high bone material density, 
concerns remain whether anti-resorptive therapy is indicated in this ultra-rare 
form of OI.© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37958
PMID: 27576954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]