---
reference_id: "PMID:33112834"
title: Epigenetic and metabolic reprogramming of SDH-deficient paragangliomas.
authors:
- Moog S
- Lussey-Lepoutre C
- Favier J
journal: Endocr Relat Cancer
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1530/ERC-20-0346
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epigenetic and metabolic reprogramming of SDH-deficient paragangliomas.
**Authors:** Moog S, Lussey-Lepoutre C, Favier J
**Journal:** Endocr Relat Cancer (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1530/ERC-20-0346](https://doi.org/10.1530/ERC-20-0346)

## Content

1. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2020 Dec;27(12):R451-R463. doi: 10.1530/ERC-20-0346.

Epigenetic and metabolic reprogramming of SDH-deficient paragangliomas.

Moog S(1)(2), Lussey-Lepoutre C(1)(3), Favier J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)PARCC, INSERM UMR970, Equipe Labellisée par la Ligue contre le Cancer, Paris, 
France.
(2)Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(3)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Sorbonne University, Pitie-Salpetriere 
Hospital, Paris, France.

Pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas (PPGL) are rare neuroendocrine tumors 
arising from the adrenal medulla or extra-adrenal paraganglia. Around 40% of all 
cases are caused by a germline mutation in a susceptibility gene, half of which 
being found in an SDHx gene (SDHA, SDHB, SDHC, SDHD or SDHAF2). They encode the 
four subunits and assembly factor of succinate dehydrogenase (SDH), a 
mitochondrial enzyme involved both in the tricarboxylic acid cycle and electron 
transport chain. SDHx mutations lead to the accumulation of succinate, which 
acts as an oncometabolite by inhibiting iron(II) and 
alpha-ketoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases thereby regulating the cell's hypoxic 
response and epigenetic processes. Moreover, SDHx mutations induce cell 
metabolic reprogramming and redox imbalance. Major discoveries in PPGL 
pathophysiology have been made since the initial discovery of SDHD gene 
mutations in 2000, improving the understanding of their biology and patient 
management. It indeed provides new opportunities for diagnostic tools and 
innovative therapeutic targets in order to improve the prognosis of patients 
affected by these rare tumors, in particular in the context of metastatic 
diseases associated with SDHB mutations. This review first describes an overview 
of the pathophysiology and then focuses on clinical implications of the 
epigenetic and metabolic reprogramming of SDH-deficient PPGL.

DOI: 10.1530/ERC-20-0346
PMID: 33112834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]