---
reference_id: "PMID:32223016"
title: Yap1 is required for maintenance of adult RPE differentiation.
authors:
- Lu Q
- Scott PA
- Vukmanic EV
- Kaplan HJ
- Dean DC
- Li Q
journal: FASEB J
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1096/fj.201903234R
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- Bestrophins/physiology
- "Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Proliferation
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Retinal Pigment Epithelium/cytology, metabolism"
- Wnt Signaling Pathway
- YAP-Signaling Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Yap1 is required for maintenance of adult RPE differentiation.
**Authors:** Lu Q, Scott PA, Vukmanic EV, Kaplan HJ, Dean DC, Li Q
**Journal:** FASEB J (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.201903234R](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.201903234R)

## Content

1. FASEB J. 2020 May;34(5):6757-6768. doi: 10.1096/fj.201903234R. Epub 2020 Mar
29.

Yap1 is required for maintenance of adult RPE differentiation.

Lu Q(1), Scott PA(1), Vukmanic EV(1), Kaplan HJ(1), Dean DC(1), Li Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Louisville
School of Medicine, Louisville, KY, USA.

Nuclear YAP1 plays a critical role in regulation of stem cell proliferation,
tissue regeneration, and organ size in many types of epithelia. Due to rapid
turnover of most epithelial cell types, the cytoplasmic function of YAP1 in
epithelial cells has not been well studied. The retinal pigment epithelium (RPE)
is a highly polarized epithelial cell type maintained at a senescence state, and
offers an ideal cell model to study the active role of YAP1 in maintenance of
the adult epithelial phenotype. Here, we show that the cytoplasmic function of
YAP1 is essential to maintain adult RPE differentiation. Knockout of Yap1 in the
adult mouse RPE caused cell depolarization and tight junction breakdown, and led
to inhibition of RPE65 expression, diminishment of RPE pigments, and retraction
of microvilli and basal infoldings. These changes in RPE further prompted the
loss of adjacent photoreceptor outer segments and photoreceptor death, which
eventually led to decline of visual function in older mice between 6 and
12 months of age. Furthermore, nuclear β-catenin and its activity were
significantly increased in mutant RPE. These results suggest that YAP1 plays an
important role in active inhibition of Wnt/β-catenin signaling, and is essential
for downregulation of β-catenin nuclear activity and prevention of
dedifferentiation of adult RPE.

© 2020 Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.201903234R
PMCID: PMC7200272
PMID: 32223016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
