---
reference_id: "PMID:28805251"
title: "Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein: Emerging mechanisms in immunity."
authors:
- Rivers E
- Thrasher AJ
journal: Eur J Immunol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/eji.201646715
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Mice
- Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome/immunology
- Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome Protein/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein: Emerging mechanisms in immunity.
**Authors:** Rivers E, Thrasher AJ
**Journal:** Eur J Immunol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/eji.201646715](https://doi.org/10.1002/eji.201646715)

## Content

1. Eur J Immunol. 2017 Nov;47(11):1857-1866. doi: 10.1002/eji.201646715. Epub
2017  Sep 12.

Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein: Emerging mechanisms in immunity.

Rivers E(1), Thrasher AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London.

The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP) participates in innate and adaptive
immunity through regulation of actin cytoskeleton-dependent cellular processes,
including immune synapse formation, cell signaling, migration and cytokine
release. There is also emerging evidence for a direct role in nuclear
transcription programmes uncoupled from actin polymerization. A deeper
understanding of some of the more complex features of Wiskott Aldrich syndrome
(WAS) itself, such as the associated autoimmunity and inflammation, has come
from identification of defects in the number and function of anti-inflammatory
myeloid cells and regulatory T and B cells, as well as defects in positive and
negative B-cell selection. In this review we outline the cellular defects that
have been characterized in both human WAS patients and murine models of the
disease. We will emphasize in particular recent discoveries that provide a
mechanistic insight into disease pathology, including lymphoid and myeloid cell
homeostasis, immune synapse assembly and immune cell signaling.

© 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201646715
PMCID: PMC7612068
PMID: 28805251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare no
financial or commercial conflict of interest.
