---
reference_id: "PMID:32150558"
title: "Transmission center and driving factors of hand, foot, and mouth disease in China: A combined analysis."
authors:
- Hu Y
- Xu L
- Pan H
- Shi X
- Chen Y
- Lynn H
- Mao S
- Zhang H
- Cao H
- Zhang J
- Zhang J
- Xiao S
- Hu J
- Li X
- Yao S
- Zhang Z
- Zhao G
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0008070
keywords:
- Career Mobility
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- China/epidemiology
- "Disease Transmission, Infectious"
- Female
- Geography
- "Hand, Foot and Mouth Disease/epidemiology, transmission"
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Socioeconomic Factors
- Spatio-Temporal Analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transmission center and driving factors of hand, foot, and mouth disease in China: A combined analysis.
**Authors:** Hu Y, Xu L, Pan H, Shi X, Chen Y, Lynn H, Mao S, Zhang H, Cao H, Zhang J, Zhang J, Xiao S, Hu J, Li X, Yao S, Zhang Z, Zhao G
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0008070](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008070)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2020 Mar 9;14(3):e0008070. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0008070. eCollection 2020 Mar.

Transmission center and driving factors of hand, foot, and mouth disease in 
China: A combined analysis.

Hu Y(1)(2)(3), Xu L(4), Pan H(5), Shi X(6), Chen Y(7), Lynn H(1)(2)(3), Mao 
S(5), Zhang H(4), Cao H(4), Zhang J(1)(2)(3), Zhang J(1)(2)(3), Xiao S(1)(2)(3), 
Hu J(1)(2)(3), Li X(8), Yao S(9)(10), Zhang Z(1)(2)(3), Zhao G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Public Health Safety, Ministry of Education, Shanghai, 
China.
(3)Laboratory for Spatial Analysis and Modeling, School of Public Health, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Institute for Infectious Disease Control and Prevention, Qinghai Provincial 
Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Qinghai, China.
(5)Shanghai Municipal Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Shanghai, 
China.
(6)Department of Geography, Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire, United 
States of America.
(7)Department of Epidemiology and Community Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(8)Department of Geography, Shanghai Normal University, Shanghai, China.
(9)Key Laboratory of Geographic Information Science, Ministry of Education, East 
China Normal University, Shanghai, China.
(10)School of Geographic Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai, 
China.

Hand, foot, and mouth disease (HFMD) has become a major public health issue in 
China. The disease incidence varies substantially over time and across space. To 
understand the heterogeneity of HFMD transmission, we compare the spatiotemporal 
dynamics of HFMD in Qinghai and Shanghai by conducting combined analysis of 
epidemiological, wavelet time series, and mathematical methods to county-level 
data from 2009 to 2016. We observe hierarchical epidemic waves in Qinghai, 
emanating from Huangzhong and in Shanghai from Fengxian. Besides population, we 
also find that the traveling waves are significantly associated with 
socio-economic and geographical factors. The population mobility also varies 
between the two regions: long-distance movement in Qinghai and between-neighbor 
commuting in Shanghai. Our findings provide important evidence for 
characterizing the heterogeneity of HFMD transmission and for the design and 
implementation of interventions, such as deploying optimal vaccine and changing 
local driving factors in the transmission center, to prevent or limit disease 
spread in these areas.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0008070
PMCID: PMC7062235
PMID: 32150558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.