---
reference_id: "PMID:23026747"
title: The ciliary Evc/Evc2 complex interacts with Smo and controls Hedgehog pathway activity in chondrocytes by regulating Sufu/Gli3 dissociation and Gli3 trafficking in primary cilia.
authors:
- Caparrós-Martín JA
- Valencia M
- Reytor E
- Pacheco M
- Fernandez M
- Perez-Aytes A
- Gean E
- Lapunzina P
- Peters H
- Goodship JA
- Ruiz-Perez VL
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds409
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The ciliary Evc/Evc2 complex interacts with Smo and controls Hedgehog pathway activity in chondrocytes by regulating Sufu/Gli3 dissociation and Gli3 trafficking in primary cilia.
**Authors:** Caparrós-Martín JA, Valencia M, Reytor E, Pacheco M, Fernandez M, Perez-Aytes A, Gean E, Lapunzina P, Peters H, Goodship JA, Ruiz-Perez VL
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/dds409](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/dds409)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Jan 1;22(1):124-39. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds409. Epub 2012 Oct
 1.

The ciliary Evc/Evc2 complex interacts with Smo and controls Hedgehog pathway 
activity in chondrocytes by regulating Sufu/Gli3 dissociation and Gli3 
trafficking in primary cilia.

Caparrós-Martín JA(1), Valencia M, Reytor E, Pacheco M, Fernandez M, Perez-Aytes 
A, Gean E, Lapunzina P, Peters H, Goodship JA, Ruiz-Perez VL.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas de Madrid, Arturo Duperier 4, Madrid 
28029, Spain.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is involved in patterning and morphogenesis of most 
organs in the developing mammalian embryo. Despite many advances in 
understanding core components of the pathway, little is known about how the 
activity of the Hh pathway is adjusted in organ- and tissue-specific 
developmental processes. Mutations in EVC or EVC2 disrupt Hh signaling in tooth 
and bone development. Using mouse models, we show here that Evc and Evc2 are 
mutually required for localizing to primary cilia and also for maintaining their 
normal protein levels. Consistent with Evc and Evc2 functioning as a complex, 
the skeletal phenotypes in either single or double homozygous mutant mice are 
virtually indistinguishable. Smo translocation to the cilium was normal in 
Evc2-deficient chondrocytes following Hh activation with the Smo-agonist SAG. 
However, Gli3 recruitment to cilia tips was reduced and Sufu/Gli3 dissociation 
was impaired. Interestingly, we found Smo to co-precipitate with Evc/Evc2, 
indicating that in some cells Hh signaling requires direct interaction of Smo 
with the Evc/Evc2 complex. Expression of a dominantly acting Evc2 mutation 
previously identified in Weyer's acrodental dysostosis (Evc2Δ43) caused 
mislocalization of Evc/Evc2Δ43 within the cilium and also reproduced the 
Gli3-related molecular defects observed in Evc2(-/-) chondrocytes. Moreover, Evc 
silencing in Sufu(-/-) cells attenuated the output of the Hh pathway, suggesting 
that Evc/Evc2 also promote Hh signaling in the absence of Sufu. Together our 
data reveal that the Hh pathway involves Evc/Evc2-dependent modulations that are 
necessary for normal endochondral bone formation.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/dds409
PMID: 23026747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]