---
reference_id: "PMID:28126470"
title: "Ataxia-telangiectasia: Immunodeficiency and survival."
authors:
- van Os NJH
- Jansen AFM
- van Deuren M
- Haraldsson A
- van Driel NTM
- Etzioni A
- van der Flier M
- Haaxma CA
- Morio T
- Rawat A
- Schoenaker MHD
- Soresina A
- Taylor AMR
- van de Warrenburg BPC
- Weemaes CMR
- Roeleveld N
- Willemsen MAAP
journal: Clin Immunol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2017.01.009
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Agammaglobulinemia/complications, immunology"
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/complications, genetics, immunology, mortality"
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins/genetics
- Cause of Death
- Child
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Humans
- "Hyper-IgM Immunodeficiency Syndrome/complications, immunology"
- "IgA Deficiency/complications, immunology"
- Immunoglobulin G/immunology
- "Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/complications, immunology"
- Life Expectancy
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Neoplasms/etiology, genetics"
- Odds Ratio
- Phenotype
- Proportional Hazards Models
- Retrospective Studies
- Survival Rate
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ataxia-telangiectasia: Immunodeficiency and survival.
**Authors:** van Os NJH, Jansen AFM, van Deuren M, Haraldsson A, van Driel NTM, Etzioni A, van der Flier M, Haaxma CA, Morio T, Rawat A, Schoenaker MHD, Soresina A, Taylor AMR, van de Warrenburg BPC, Weemaes CMR, Roeleveld N, Willemsen MAAP
**Journal:** Clin Immunol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clim.2017.01.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clim.2017.01.009)

## Content

1. Clin Immunol. 2017 May;178:45-55. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2017.01.009. Epub 2017
Jan  24.

Ataxia-telangiectasia: Immunodeficiency and survival.

van Os NJH(1), Jansen AFM(2), van Deuren M(2), Haraldsson A(3), van Driel
NTM(4), Etzioni A(5), van der Flier M(6), Haaxma CA(4), Morio T(7), Rawat A(8),
Schoenaker MHD(9), Soresina A(10), Taylor AMR(11), van de Warrenburg BPC(12),
Weemaes CMR(13), Roeleveld N(14), Willemsen MAAP(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology - Pediatric Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: nienke.vanos@radboudumc.nl.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life
Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)University of Iceland, Faculty of Medicine, and Children's Hospital Iceland,
Landspitali-University Hospital, Iceland.
(4)Department of Neurology - Pediatric Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pediatrics and the Pediatric Immunology Unit, Ruth Children's
Hospital, Rambam Medical Center, Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa,
Israel.
(6)Department of Pediatrics - Pediatric Infectious Disease and Immunology,
Radboudumc Amalia Children's Hospital, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life
Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Pediatrics and Developmental Biology, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Department of Paediatrics, Advanced Paediatric Centre, Postgraduate Institute
of Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh, India.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Radboudumc Amalia Children's Hospital, Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of
Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(11)School of Cancer Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United
Kingdom.
(12)Department of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, Radboudumc Amalia Children's Hospital, Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Department of Pediatrics -
Pediatric Infectious Disease and Immunology, Radboudumc Amalia Children's
Hospital, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, Radboudumc Amalia Children's Hospital, Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Department for Health
Evidence, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Radboud university medical
center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by
ataxia, telangiectasia, and immunodeficiency. An increased risk of malignancies
and respiratory diseases dramatically reduce life expectancy. To better counsel
families, develop individual follow-up programs, and select patients for
therapeutic trials, more knowledge is needed on factors influencing survival.
This retrospective cohort study of 61 AT patients shows that classical AT
patients had a shorter survival than variant patients (HR 5.9, 95%CI 2.0-17.7),
especially once a malignancy was diagnosed (HR 2.5, 95%CI 1.1-5.5, compared to
classical AT patients without malignancy). Patients with the hyper IgM phenotype
with hypogammaglobulinemia (AT-HIGM) and patients with an IgG2 deficiency showed
decreased survival compared to patients with normal IgG (HR 9.2, 95%CI 3.2-26.5)
and patients with normal IgG2 levels (HR 7.8, 95%CI 1.7-36.2), respectively. If
high risk treatment trials will become available for AT, those patients with
factors indicating the poorest prognosis might be considered for inclusion
first.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clim.2017.01.009
PMID: 28126470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
