---
reference_id: "PMID:2010058"
title: "Mutations in collagen genes: causes of rare and some common diseases in humans."
authors:
- Kuivaniemi H
- Tromp G
- Prockop DJ
journal: FASEB J
year: '1991'
doi: 10.1096/fasebj.5.7.2010058
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in collagen genes: causes of rare and some common diseases in humans.
**Authors:** Kuivaniemi H, Tromp G, Prockop DJ
**Journal:** FASEB J (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fasebj.5.7.2010058](https://doi.org/10.1096/fasebj.5.7.2010058)

## Content

1. FASEB J. 1991 Apr;5(7):2052-60. doi: 10.1096/fasebj.5.7.2010058.

Mutations in collagen genes: causes of rare and some common diseases in humans.

Kuivaniemi H(1), Tromp G, Prockop DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Jefferson Institute of 
Molecular Medicine, Jefferson Medical College, Thomas Jefferson University, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107.

More than 70 mutations in the two structural genes for type I procollagen 
(COL1A1 and COL1A2) have been found in probands with osteogenesis imperfecta, a 
heritable disease of children characterized by fragility of bone and other 
tissues rich in type I collagen. The mutations include deletions, insertions, 
RNA splicing mutations, and single-base substitutions that convert a codon for 
glycine to a codon for an amino acid with a bulkier side chain. With a few 
exceptions, the most severe phenotypes of the disease are explained largely by 
synthesis of structurally defective pro alpha chains of type I procollagen that 
either interfere with the folding of the triple helix or with self-assembly of 
collagen into fibrils. The results emphasize the extent to which the zipperlike 
folding of the collagen triple helix and the self-assembly of collagen fibrils 
depend on the principle of nucleated growth whereby a few subunits form a 
nucleus and the nucleus is then propagated to generate a large structure with a 
precisely defined architecture. The principle of nucleated growth is a highly 
efficient mechanism for the assembly of large structures, but biological systems 
that depend extensively on nucleated growth are highly vulnerable to mutations 
that cause synthesis of structurally abnormal but partially functional subunits. 
Recently, several mutations in three other collagen genes (COL2A1, COL3A1, and 
COL4A5) have been found in probands with genetic diseases involving tissues rich 
in these collagens. Most of the probands have rare genetic diseases but a few 
appear to have phenotypes that are difficult to distinguish from more common 
disorders such as osteoarthritis, osteoporosis, and aortic aneurysms. Therefore, 
the results suggest that mutations in procollagen genes may cause a wide 
spectrum of both rare and common human diseases.

DOI: 10.1096/fasebj.5.7.2010058
PMID: 2010058 [Indexed for MEDLINE]