---
reference_id: "PMID:20110647"
title: "17q21.31 microdeletion syndrome: further expanding the clinical phenotype."
authors:
- Sharkey FH
- Morrison N
- Murray R
- Iremonger J
- Stephen J
- Maher E
- Tolmie J
- Jackson AP
journal: Cytogenet Genome Res
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1159/000279260
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Adolescent
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17"
- Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Learning Disabilities/genetics
- Male
- Muscle Hypotonia/genetics
- Phenotype
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 17q21.31 microdeletion syndrome: further expanding the clinical phenotype.
**Authors:** Sharkey FH, Morrison N, Murray R, Iremonger J, Stephen J, Maher E, Tolmie J, Jackson AP
**Journal:** Cytogenet Genome Res (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000279260](https://doi.org/10.1159/000279260)

## Content

1. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2009;127(1):61-6. doi: 10.1159/000279260. Epub 2010 Jan 
27.

17q21.31 microdeletion syndrome: further expanding the clinical phenotype.

Sharkey FH(1), Morrison N, Murray R, Iremonger J, Stephen J, Maher E, Tolmie J, 
Jackson AP.

Author information:
(1)Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, UK. freddie.sharkey@luht.scot.nhs.uk

Microdeletions of the 17q21.31 region are associated with hypotonia, oromotor 
dyspraxia, an apparently characteristic face, moderate learning disability and 
have an estimated prevalence of approximately 1 in 16,000. Here we report 3 
individuals who extend further the phenotypic spectrum observed with 
microdeletions of the 17q21.31 region. They all have learning disability, 
hypotonia, and craniofacial dysmorphism in keeping with previous reported cases. 
One case has iris-choroid coloboma and partial situs inversus, 2 features that 
are newly recorded phenotype abnormalities. These deletions were detected from a 
cohort of 600 individuals with learning disability and congenital anomalies, 
reflecting that 17q21.31 microdeletions are a common finding in such cases. FISH 
analysis demonstrated that each of the deletions occurred as de novo events. The 
deleted region in our cases encompasses the previously defined critical region 
for 17q21.31, and includes CRHR1 and MAPT, putative candidate genes for the 
17q21.31 phenotype. The 17q21.31 microdeletion phenotype is perhaps more 
variable than previously described despite haploinsufficiency for the same genes 
in many cases.

2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000279260
PMID: 20110647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]