---
reference_id: "PMID:34941014"
title: Thromboelastography profiles in critically ill children with multisystem inflammatory syndrome.
authors:
- Morparia K
- Spinella PC
- McQueen D
- Kalyanaraman M
- Bergel M
- Lin J
- Narang S
- Saini A
journal: Pediatr Blood Cancer
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/pbc.29426
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thromboelastography profiles in critically ill children with multisystem inflammatory syndrome.
**Authors:** Morparia K, Spinella PC, McQueen D, Kalyanaraman M, Bergel M, Lin J, Narang S, Saini A
**Journal:** Pediatr Blood Cancer (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pbc.29426](https://doi.org/10.1002/pbc.29426)

## Content

1. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2022 May;69(5):e29426. doi: 10.1002/pbc.29426. Epub 2021
 Dec 22.

Thromboelastography profiles in critically ill children with multisystem 
inflammatory syndrome.

Morparia K(1), Spinella PC(2), McQueen D(1), Kalyanaraman M(1), Bergel M(1), Lin 
J(2), Narang S(3), Saini A(4).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Critical Care Medicine, Children's Hospital of New Jersey, Newark 
Beth Israel Medical Center, Newark, New Jersey, USA.
(2)Pediatric Critical Care Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Washington School 
of Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis Children's Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri, 
USA.
(3)Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Children's Hospital of New Jersey, Newark 
Beth Israel Medical Center, Newark, New Jersey, USA.
(4)Pediatric Critical Care Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To describe critically ill children's coagulation profile with the 
multisystem inflammatory syndrome (MIS-C) related to coronavirus.
STUDY DESIGN: Single-center, observational study at a tertiary, pediatric 
intensive care unit (PICU) in children aged 1 month to 18 years.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Sixteen children, with a median age of 5.4 years 
(interquartile range [IQR] 2.1, 11.75), 56% female, admission Pediatric Logistic 
Organ Dysfunction-2 (PELOD-2) score of 3.5 (IQR 2, 5), and median PICU length of 
stay 3 days (IQR 1.5, 4), met criteria of MIS-C. All patients received 
acetylsalicylic acid (80-100 mg/kg) and none received anticoagulation. 
Sixty-three percent (10/16) of children had out-of-normal range values on 
thromboelastography (TEG) (44% [7/16] with hypercoagulability and 19% [3/16] 
with hypocoagulability). Of those with hypercoagulability, 19% (3/16) had rapid 
clot formation, and 25% (4/16) had increased clot strength. In 69% (11/16) of 
children, there was impaired fibrinolysis (0% lysis at 30 minutes) on TEG. 
Seventy-five percent (12/16) of children had out-of-normal range value on 
standard coagulation assays (37.5% [6/16] with hypocoagulability and 37.5% 
[6/16] with hypercoagulability). TEG-G (clot strength as measured by TEG) value 
(ρ -.553, p = .033) and platelet count (ρ -.840, p < .0001) were correlated with 
admission PELOD-2 score. TEG-G value (ρ -.506, p = .04) and platelet count (ρ 
-.539, p = .03) were correlated with the duration of intensive care unit stay.
CONCLUSIONS: Coagulation abnormalities are frequent in children with MIS-C. TEG 
parameter and platelet count are correlated with the severity of multiorgan 
dysfunction and the duration of intensive care stay. Multicenter studies are 
needed to confirm the clinical implications of these coagulation abnormalities.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/pbc.29426
PMID: 34941014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]