---
reference_id: "PMID:27709413"
title: Immune Cell Metabolism in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus.
authors:
- Choi SC
- Titov AA
- Sivakumar R
- Li W
- Morel L
journal: Curr Rheumatol Rep
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s11926-016-0615-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immune Cell Metabolism in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus.
**Authors:** Choi SC, Titov AA, Sivakumar R, Li W, Morel L
**Journal:** Curr Rheumatol Rep (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11926-016-0615-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11926-016-0615-7)

## Content

1. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2016 Nov;18(11):66. doi: 10.1007/s11926-016-0615-7.

Immune Cell Metabolism in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus.

Choi SC(1), Titov AA(1), Sivakumar R(1), Li W(1)(2), Morel L(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine, University of 
Florida, Gainesville, FL, 32610-0275, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Gene Engineering and 
Biotechnology, Beijing Key Laboratory, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, 
100875, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine, University of 
Florida, Gainesville, FL, 32610-0275, USA. morel@ufl.edu.

Cellular metabolism represents a newly identified checkpoint of effector 
functions in the immune system. A solid body of work has characterized the 
metabolic requirements of normal T cells during activation and differentiation 
into polarized effector subsets. Similar studies have been initiated to 
characterize the metabolic requirements for B cells and myeloid cells. Only a 
few studies though have characterized the metabolism of immune cells in the 
context of autoimmune diseases. Here, we review what is known on the altered 
metabolic patterns of CD4+ T cells, B cells, and myeloid cells in lupus patients 
and lupus-prone mice and how they contribute to lupus pathogenesis. We also 
discuss how defects in immune metabolism in lupus can be targeted 
therapeutically.

DOI: 10.1007/s11926-016-0615-7
PMID: 27709413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]