---
reference_id: "PMID:39806949"
title: "An Overview of Invasive Ductal Carcinoma (IDC) in Women's Breast Cancer."
authors:
- Gallas AE
- Morenikeji GO
- King RE
- Adegbaju MS
- Ayoola A
- Taiwo G
- Morenikeji OB
journal: Curr Mol Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.2174/0115665240349468241113065031
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An Overview of Invasive Ductal Carcinoma (IDC) in Women's Breast Cancer.
**Authors:** Gallas AE, Morenikeji GO, King RE, Adegbaju MS, Ayoola A, Taiwo G, Morenikeji OB
**Journal:** Curr Mol Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.2174/0115665240349468241113065031](https://doi.org/10.2174/0115665240349468241113065031)

## Content

1. Curr Mol Med. 2025;25(4):361-371. doi: 10.2174/0115665240349468241113065031.

An Overview of Invasive Ductal Carcinoma (IDC) in Women's Breast Cancer.

Gallas AE(1), Morenikeji GO(1), King RE(1), Adegbaju MS(2), Ayoola A(3), Taiwo 
G(4), Morenikeji OB(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biological and Health Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, 300 
Campus Drive, Bradford PA 16701, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Science and Technology, 
Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, Rochester, NY 14302, USA.
(3)Department of Evolutionary Anthropology, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, 
USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Francisco, Oakland, 
California, USA.

Invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) is the most common type of breast cancer, 
primarily affecting women in the United States and across the world. This review 
summarizes key concepts related to IDC causes, treatment approaches, and the 
identification of biological markers for specific prognoses. Furthermore, we 
reviewed many studies, including those involving patients with IDC and ductal 
carcinoma in situ (DCIS) that progressed to IDC. We reported various studies on 
the causes of IDC, including mutations on BRCA1 and BRCA2, different levels of 
expression of specific genes in signaling pathways, menopause status, alcohol 
consumption, aging, and hormone imbalances that cause IDC while p-SMAD4 
expressions, DNA methylation, regulations of hub genes, and underestimation of 
IDC affecting prognoses. Prompt IDC diagnosis and early intervention have been 
reported to demonstrate a greater probability of eradicating IDC and preventing 
further recurrence in the future. It is crucial for physicians and researchers 
to equip patients with the best information possible to proactively manage their 
health, whether it be for IDC prevention or treatment. Overall, our review 
provided a comprehensive understanding of IDC that enables patients to grasp the 
nature of the disease with the hope of mitigating IDC risk, decrease the anxiety 
of a cancer diagnosis, and encourage patients to become more involved in making 
informed decisions for their healthcare.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/0115665240349468241113065031
PMID: 39806949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]