---
reference_id: "PMID:25997753"
title: A second locus for Schneckenbecken dysplasia identified by a mutation in the gene encoding inositol polyphosphate phosphatase-like 1 (INPPL1).
authors:
- Lee H
- Nevarez L
- Lachman RS
- Wilcox WR
- Krakow D
- Cohn DH
- University of Washington Center for Mendelian Genomics
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37173
keywords:
- Exome
- Gene Expression
- Genetic Loci
- Gestational Age
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Hydrops Fetalis/genetics, pathology"
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mutation
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics, pathology"
- "Phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-Trisphosphate 5-Phosphatases"
- Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases/genetics
- Stillbirth
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# A second locus for Schneckenbecken dysplasia identified by a mutation in the gene encoding inositol polyphosphate phosphatase-like 1 (INPPL1).
**Authors:** Lee H, Nevarez L, Lachman RS, Wilcox WR, Krakow D, Cohn DH, University of Washington Center for Mendelian Genomics
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.37173](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.37173)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Oct;167A(10):2470-3. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37173. Epub
2015  May 22.

A second locus for Schneckenbecken dysplasia identified by a mutation in the 
gene encoding inositol polyphosphate phosphatase-like 1 (INPPL1).

Lee H(1), Nevarez L(2), Lachman RS(3), Wilcox WR(4), Krakow D(3)(5)(6)(7), Cohn 
DH(2)(3)(5); University of Washington Center for Mendelian Genomics.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California.
(2)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of 
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California.
(3)International Skeletal Dysplasia Registry, University of California Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, California.
(4)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Human Genetics, Emory University, 
Decatur, Georgia.
(5)Departments of Orthopaedic Surgery, Los Angeles, California.
(6)Human Genetics, Los Angeles, California.
(7)Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
California.

Comment on
    Am J Med Genet A.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37173
PMCID: PMC5036935
PMID: 25997753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Schneckenbecken dysplasia [OMIM 269250] is an autosomal recessive, perinatal lethal
skeletal dysplasia that was first characterized by [Borochowitz et al., 1986], and is phenotypically similar to affected individuals
in a family described by Knowles et al. [1986].
Clinical findings include relative macrocephaly, a very flat midface, cleft palate, a short
neck, a narrow thorax, brachydactyly, and a high incidence of polyhydramnios. The most
characteristic radiographic abnormality, as viewed on an anterior-posterior radiograph, is a
medial projection from the ilia that resembles a snail (thus snail pelvis or Schneckenbecken
in German). Additional findings include handlebar clavicles, a hypoplastic scapula,
generalized platyspondyly with small, rounded vertebral bodies, very short long bones with
relatively widened metaphyses and precociously ossified carpal and tarsal bones [Borochowitz et al., 1986; Nikkels et al., 2001].

Schneckenbecken dysplasia has been classified among the severe spondylodysplastic
disorders that also include the autosomal recessive disorders achondrogenesis type 1A [OMIM
200600], spondylometaphyseal dysplasia, Sedaghatian type [OMIM 250220], and opsismodysplasia
[OMIM 258480] [Warman et al., 2011]. Mutations in
SLC35D1 [OMIM 610804], the gene encoding the Solute Carrier Family 35
UDP-Glucuronic Acid/ UDP-N-Acetylgalactosamine Dual Transporter, Member D1, were found in 2
of 6 cases of Schneckenbecken dysplasia [Hiraoka et al.,
2007]. In a subsequent report SLC35D1 mutations were identified in
another three of five Schneckenbecken dysplasia cases but were absent among 15 cases of
other severe spondylodysplastic skeletal dysplasias [Furuichi
et al., 2009]. Most of the SLC35D1 mutations were predicted to
lead to absence of the protein. SLC35D1 has been localized to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
where it translocates two nucleotide sugars, UDP-glucuronic acid and
UDP-N-acetylgalactosamine, into microsomal membrane vesicles to be used in the synthesis of
chondroitin sulfate [Muraoka et al., 2001]. A mouse
deficient for Slc35d1 showed a phenotype similar to Schneckenbecken
dysplasia and had defective chondroitin sulfate synthesis on the core protein of cartilage
proteoglycans [Hiraoka et al., 2007].

Under an approved human subjects protocol, exome sequence analysis using a
previously described pipeline [Lee et al., 2012] was
carried out in a case of Schneckenbecken dysplasia (International Skeletal Dysplasia
Registry reference number R02–170) in which SLC35D1 was previously
excluded (subject 4 in [Hiraoka et al., 2007]). The
case presented as a 33 week gestation hydropic stillborn. The radiographic findings were
characteristic for Schneckenbecken dysplasia and included midface hypoplasia, handlebar
clavicles, short ribs, hypoplastic vertebrae with rounded anterior ends, short long bones
with widened metaphyseal ends and a snail-like medial projection in the ileum (Fig. 1).

Analysis of the exome identified homozygosity for a variant, c.2415+1G>A in
intron 21 of INPPL1 [OMIM 600829], which encodes Inositol Polyphosphate
Phosphatase-like 1. The mutation predicts skipping of exon 21, which would lead to a
frameshift and a premature termination codon. Recessively inherited mutations in
INPPL1 also produce opsismodysplasia [OMIM 258480], another severe
autosomal recessive spondylodysplastic disorder [Below et
al., 2013; Huber et al., 2013].
Opsismodysplasia is generally non-lethal and is characterized by dysmorphic craniofacial
features, a large anterior fontanelle, short stature and small hands and feet. Radiographic
findings include very delayed bone maturation particularly at the knee, marked shortness of
the metacarpals/ metatarsals and phalanges with metaphyseal cupping and markedly flat
vertebral bodies [Cormier-Daire et al., 2003; Maroteaux et al., 1984]. Some affected individuals have
severe renal phosphate wasting and there are variable degrees of respiratory insufficiency
[Below et al., 2013] which may be secondary to the
skeletal manifestations. A variety of other clinical findings have been described but an
insufficient number of cases have been studied to know whether these are consistently
associated with INPPL1 mutations. The c.2415+1G>A mutation found in
the homozygous state in this case of Schneckenbecken dysplasia was also identified in a
surviving opsismodysplasia case in compound heterozygosity with a frameshift mutation. Thus,
apparent loss of INPPL1 function can produce either the perinatal lethal
Schneckenbecken dysplasia phenotype or non-lethal opsismodysplasia.

Histomorphology on the cartilage growth plate was performed by staining the tissue
with toluidine blue and Goldner’s reagent. The findings included poor hypertrophic
column formation (Fig. 2A) with fibrous septae between
the columns, areas of hypercellularity with decreased extracellular matrix and
hypervascularity (Fig. 2B), chondrocytes with central
round nuclei (Fig. 2C), as well as thickened primary
trabeculae and a fibrous band entering the growth plate from the bone collar (Fig. 2D). With the exception of the dense fibrous band in
the growth plate, these findings have been previously described in Schneckenbecken dysplasia
[Varkey and Jones, 2004], but the gene(s) involved
were unknown. Similar findings were described in the Slc35d1 knockout mice
as well as a Schneckenbecken dysplasia case due to defects in SLC35D1
[Hiraoka et al., 2007]. The histopathology in
opsismodysplasia [Cormier-Daire et al., 2003] is
similar, showing poorly organized growth plates, numerous vascular canals, increased
chondrocyte density, and many round, ballooned chondrocytes and thickened trabeculae in the
mineralized matrix. Thus the growth plate findings, while not necessarily pathognomonic for
either Schneckenbecken dysplasia or opsismodysplasia, do show significant overlap. The only
finding in this case that is distinct is the fibrous band that extends from the bone
collar.

The similarities in the growth plates between this case of Schneckenbecken
dysplasia due to homozygosity for an INPPL1 mutation and those due to
SLC35D1 mutations could suggest possible mechanistic overlap. Defects in
both genes could lead to reduced extracellular matrix synthesis and a hypercellular matrix
containing chondrocytes with central nuclei. In cases due to SLC35D1
mutations, reduced post-translational modification of matrix proteoglycans appears to be the
underlying abnormality. How defects in INPPL1 affect extracellular matrix
production is unknown, but signaling cascades mediated by phosphatidylinositols including
PI(3,4,5)P3 might contribute to matrix production and regulation.

The functional role of INPPL1 in skeletal biology is unknown. The protein is an
inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate 5-phosphatase and through its phosphatase activity converts
phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate (PtdIns(3,4,5)P3) to PtdIns(3,4)P2. PtdIns-(3,4,5)P3
is widely expressed and acts as second messenger that participates in numerous cellular
functions [Riehle et al., 2013]. Mouse models show
that Inppl1 is a negative regular of insulin sensitivity and signaling and
mice deficient for Inppl1 are small and have craniofacial abnormalities
[Sleeman et al., 2005; Dubois et al., 2012], implying a yet uncharacterized effect on
skeletogenesis.

Our findings identify a second locus for Schneckenbecken dysplasia and demonstrate
that the phenotype is part of an INPPL1 allelic spectrum of disease. It
remains to be determined whether the remaining SLC35D1 negative cases harbor mutations in
INPPL1 or whether there is further locus heterogeneity in this
disorder.