---
reference_id: "PMID:30682426"
title: HADHA and HADHB gene associated phenotypes - Identification of rare variants in a patient cohort by Next Generation Sequencing.
authors:
- Diebold I
- Schön U
- Horvath R
- Schwartz O
- Holinski-Feder E
- Kölbel H
- Abicht A
journal: Mol Cell Probes
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.mcp.2019.01.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HADHA and HADHB gene associated phenotypes - Identification of rare variants in a patient cohort by Next Generation Sequencing.
**Authors:** Diebold I, Schön U, Horvath R, Schwartz O, Holinski-Feder E, Kölbel H, Abicht A
**Journal:** Mol Cell Probes (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mcp.2019.01.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcp.2019.01.003)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Probes. 2019 Apr;44:14-20. doi: 10.1016/j.mcp.2019.01.003. Epub 2019 
Jan 22.

HADHA and HADHB gene associated phenotypes - Identification of rare variants in 
a patient cohort by Next Generation Sequencing.

Diebold I(1), Schön U(1), Horvath R(2), Schwartz O(3), Holinski-Feder E(1), 
Kölbel H(4), Abicht A(5).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Center, Munich, Germany.
(2)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Department of Neuropediatrics, University Children's Hospital Muenster, 
Muenster, Germany.
(4)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Developmental Neurology and Social 
Pediatrics, University of Essen, Germany.
(5)Medical Genetics Center, Munich, Germany; Department of Neurology, 
Friedrich-Baur-Institute, Klinikum der Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, 
Germany. Electronic address: angela.abicht@mgz-muenchen.de.

The heterooctameric mitochondrial trifunctional protein (MTP), composed of four 
α- and β-subunits harbours three enzymes that each perform a different function 
in mitochondrial fatty acid β-oxidation. Pathogenic variants in the MTP genes 
(HADHA and HADHB) cause MTP deficiency, a rare autosomal recessive metabolic 
disorder characterized by phenotypic heterogeneity ranging from severe, 
early-onset, cardiac disease to milder, later-onset, myopathy and neuropathy. 
Since metabolic myopathies and neuropathies are a group of rare genetic 
disorders and their associated muscle symptoms may be subtle, the diagnosis is 
often delayed. Here we evaluated data of 161 patients with myopathy and 242 
patients with neuropathy via next generation sequencing (NGS) and report the 
diagnostic yield in three patients of this cohort by the detection of 
disease-causing variants in the HADHA or HADHB gene. The mitigated phenotypes of 
this treatable disease were missed by the newborn screening, highlighting the 
importance of phenotype-based NGS analysis in patients with rare and clinically 
very variable disorders such as MTP deficiency.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcp.2019.01.003
PMID: 30682426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]