---
reference_id: "PMID:26806154"
title: Mutated MCM9 is associated with predisposition to hereditary mixed polyposis and colorectal cancer in addition to primary ovarian failure.
authors:
- Goldberg Y
- Halpern N
- Hubert A
- Adler SN
- Cohen S
- Plesser-Duvdevani M
- Pappo O
- Shaag A
- Meiner V
journal: Cancer Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2015.10.001
keywords:
- "Adenomatous Polyposis Coli/complications, genetics"
- Adult
- Chromosomal Instability
- "Colorectal Neoplasms/complications, genetics"
- Consanguinity
- Female
- Humans
- Minichromosome Maintenance Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Primary Ovarian Insufficiency/complications, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutated MCM9 is associated with predisposition to hereditary mixed polyposis and colorectal cancer in addition to primary ovarian failure.
**Authors:** Goldberg Y, Halpern N, Hubert A, Adler SN, Cohen S, Plesser-Duvdevani M, Pappo O, Shaag A, Meiner V
**Journal:** Cancer Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cancergen.2015.10.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cancergen.2015.10.001)

## Content

1. Cancer Genet. 2015 Dec;208(12):621-4. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2015.10.001.
Epub  2015 Oct 22.

Mutated MCM9 is associated with predisposition to hereditary mixed polyposis and 
colorectal cancer in addition to primary ovarian failure.

Goldberg Y(1), Halpern N(2), Hubert A(2), Adler SN(3), Cohen S(2), 
Plesser-Duvdevani M(4), Pappo O(5), Shaag A(6), Meiner V(6).

Author information:
(1)Sharett Institute of Oncology, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, 
Jerusalem, Israel. Electronic address: yaelg@hadassah.org.il.
(2)Sharett Institute of Oncology, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, 
Jerusalem, Israel.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, 
Israel.
(4)Sharett Institute of Oncology, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, 
Jerusalem, Israel; Department of Genetics and Metabolic Diseases, Hebrew 
University-Hadassah Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(5)Department of Pathology, Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical Center, 
Jerusalem, Israel.
(6)Department of Genetics and Metabolic Diseases, Hebrew University-Hadassah 
Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.

Mutations in MCM9, which encodes DNA helicase, were recently shown to cause a 
clinical phenotype of primary ovarian failure and chromosomal instability. MCM9 
plays an essential role in homologous recombination-mediated double-strand break 
repair. We describe a multiplex family with early colorectal carcinoma and mixed 
polyposis associated with primary hypergonadotropic hypogonadism. A combination 
of whole genome homozygosity mapping as well as exome sequencing and targeted 
gene sequencing identified a homozygous c.672_673delGGinsC mutation that 
predicts a truncated protein, p.Glu225Lysfs*4. Our data expand the phenotypic 
spectrum of MCM9 mutations and suggest a link between MCM9 and inherited 
predisposition to mixed polyposis and early-onset colorectal cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2015.10.001
PMID: 26806154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]