---
reference_id: "PMID:36793812"
title: "Punctate Palmoplantar Keratoderma: A Case Report."
authors:
- Knowles A
- Adams M
- Glass DA 2nd
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.33769
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Punctate Palmoplantar Keratoderma: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Knowles A, Adams M, Glass DA 2nd
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.33769](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.33769)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Jan 14;15(1):e33769. doi: 10.7759/cureus.33769. eCollection 2023 
Jan.

Punctate Palmoplantar Keratoderma: A Case Report.

Knowles A(1), Adams M(1), Glass DA 2nd(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, USA.
(2)Eugene McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, USA.

Palmoplantar keratoderma (PPK) is an umbrella term for a group of heterogeneous 
disorders, acquired or inherited, that are characterized by hyperkeratosis of 
palmar and/or plantar surfaces. Punctate PPK (PPPK) has been shown to have an 
autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. It is linked with two loci on 
chromosomes 8q24.13-8q24.21 and 15q22-15q24. In type 1 PPPK, also known as 
Buschke-Fischer-Brauer disease, loss-of-function mutations in either the AAGAB 
or the COL14A1 genes have been associated with the disorder. We report here the 
clinical and genetic features of a patient with findings most consistent with 
type 1 PPPK.

Copyright © 2023, Knowles et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.33769
PMCID: PMC9924831
PMID: 36793812

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.