---
reference_id: "PMID:38992821"
title: Differences in bile acid profiles between cholestatic diseases - Development of a high throughput assay for dried bloodspots.
authors:
- Ziegler A
- Sæves I
- Almaas R
journal: Clin Chim Acta
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2024.119864
keywords:
- Humans
- "Bile Acids and Salts/blood, metabolism"
- Dried Blood Spot Testing
- "Cholestasis/blood, diagnosis, metabolism"
- Tandem Mass Spectrometry
- "Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid"
- High-Throughput Screening Assays
- Child
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differences in bile acid profiles between cholestatic diseases - Development of a high throughput assay for dried bloodspots.
**Authors:** Ziegler A, Sæves I, Almaas R
**Journal:** Clin Chim Acta (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cca.2024.119864](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cca.2024.119864)

## Content

1. Clin Chim Acta. 2024 Aug 15;562:119864. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2024.119864. Epub
2024 Jul 9.

Differences in bile acid profiles between cholestatic diseases - Development of
a high throughput assay for dried bloodspots.

Ziegler A(1), Sæves I(2), Almaas R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Research, Oslo University Hospital, Sognsvannsveien
20, 0372 Oslo, Norway; Department of Newborn Screening, Oslo University
Hospital, Forskningsveien 2B, 0373 Oslo, Norway; Institute of Clinical Medicine,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. Electronic address:
andzie@ous-hf.no.
(2)Department of Newborn Screening, Oslo University Hospital, Forskningsveien
2B, 0373 Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Pediatric Research, Oslo University Hospital, Sognsvannsveien
20, 0372 Oslo, Norway; Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. Electronic address: runar.almaas@ous-hf.no.

Erratum in
    Clin Chim Acta. 2024 Aug 15;562:119882. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2024.119882.

BACKGROUND: Cholestasis causes accumulation of bile acids (BAs) and changes the
circulating bile acid profile. Quantification of circulating BAs in dried
bloodspots (DBS) may demonstrate obstruction of bile flow and altered bile acid
metabolism in the liver. High sample throughput enables rapid screening of
cholestatic diseases.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Ultra high performance liquid chromatography coupled to
tandem mass spectrometry (UHPLC-MS/MS) was used for optimizing separation and
detection of the primary unconjugated BAs cholic acid (CA) and chenodeoxycholic
acid (CDCA); the secondary unconjugated BAs ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA),
hyodeoxycholic acid (HDCA) and deoxycholic acid (DCA), as well as the glycine-
and taurine-conjugated variants of CA, CDCA, DCA and UDCA. Donor blood was
obtained to prepare DBS calibrators and quality controls for method development
and validation.
RESULTS: We developed a quantitative bile acid assay with a run-time of two
minutes, and one-step sample preparation of 3.2 mm DBS discs. Validation results
demonstrated overall good performance and was considered fit for purpose.
Children with Alagille syndrome, Aagenaes syndrome and alpha-1 antitrypsin
deficiency had increased BAs in DBS from newborn screening samples compared with
age matched controls, and had different bile acids profiles.
CONCLUSION: We propose that our high throughput assay allows bile acid profiling
in DBS that can be a valuable assessment tool for early screening of cholestasis
in children. Assaying BAs in dried bloodspots is key for early detection of
cholestasis, and provides transferability to a newborn screening setting.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2024.119864
PMID: 38992821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
