---
reference_id: "PMID:38159268"
title: Successful antenatal treatment of MAGED2-related Bartter syndrome and review of treatment options and efficacy.
authors:
- Walsh CJ
- Micke K
- Elfman H
- Bock M
- Harper T
- Zaretsky M
- Galan HL
- Behrendt N
- Putra M
journal: Prenat Diagn
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/pd.6508
keywords:
- Pregnancy
- Humans
- Female
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Bartter Syndrome/diagnosis
- "Polyhydramnios/diagnostic imaging, therapy"
- Premature Birth
- Fetal Death
- "Abortion, Spontaneous"
- "Antigens, Neoplasm"
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Successful antenatal treatment of MAGED2-related Bartter syndrome and review of treatment options and efficacy.
**Authors:** Walsh CJ, Micke K, Elfman H, Bock M, Harper T, Zaretsky M, Galan HL, Behrendt N, Putra M
**Journal:** Prenat Diagn (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pd.6508](https://doi.org/10.1002/pd.6508)

## Content

1. Prenat Diagn. 2024 Feb;44(2):172-179. doi: 10.1002/pd.6508. Epub 2023 Dec 30.

Successful antenatal treatment of MAGED2-related Bartter syndrome and review of
treatment options and efficacy.

Walsh CJ(1), Micke K(1)(2)(3), Elfman H(1)(2)(3), Bock M(1)(4), Harper
T(1)(2)(3), Zaretsky M(1)(2)(3), Galan HL(1)(2)(3), Behrendt N(1)(2)(3), Putra
M(1)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)The University of Colorado School of Medicine, Anschutz Medical Campus,
Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(2)Colorado Fetal Care Center, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, Colorado,
USA.
(3)Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Nephrology, Children's Hospital Colorado,
Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Genetics and Metabolism, Children's
Hospital Colorado, Aurora, Colorado, USA.

A new form of transient antenatal Bartter syndrome (aBS) was recently identified
that is associated with the X-linked MAGED2 variant. Case reports demonstrate
that this variant leads to severe polyhydramnios that may result in preterm
birth or pregnancy loss. There is limited but promising evidence that
amnioreductions may improve fetal outcomes in this rare condition. We report a
woman with two affected pregnancies. In the first pregnancy, the patient was
diagnosed with mild-to-moderate polyhydramnios in the second trimester that
ultimately resulted in preterm labor and delivery at 25 weeks with fetal demise.
Whole exome sequencing of the amniotic fluid sample resulted after the pregnancy
loss and revealed a c.1337G>A MAGED2 variant that was considered diagnostically.
The subsequent pregnancy was confirmed by chorionic villi sampling to also be
affected by this variant. The pregnancy was managed with frequent ultrasounds
and three amnioreductions that resulted in spontaneous vaginal delivery at
37 weeks and 6 days of a viable newborn with no evidence of overt electrolyte
abnormalities suggesting complete resolution. A detailed review of the published
cases of MAGED2-related transient aBS is provided. Our review focuses on
individuals who received antenatal treatment. A total of 31 unique cases of
MAGED2-related transient aBS were compiled. Amnioreduction was performed in 23
cases and in 18 cases no amnioreduction was performed. The average gestational
age at delivery was significantly lower in cases without serial amnioreduction
(28.7 vs. 30.71 weeks, p = 0.03). Neonatal mortality was seen in 5/18 cases
without serial amnioreduction, and no mortality was observed in the cases with
serial amnioreduction. In cases of second trimester severe polyhydramnios
without identifiable cause, whole exome sequencing should be considered.
Intensive ultrasound surveillance and serial amnioreduction is recommended for
the management of MAGED2-related transient aBS.

© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pd.6508
PMID: 38159268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
