---
reference_id: "PMID:30810540"
title: ROLE OF GENETIC SUSCEPTIBILITY IN NICOTINE ADDICTION AND CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY DISEASE.
authors:
- Pérez-Rubio G
- Córdoba-Lanús E
- Cupertino P
- Cartujano-Barrera F
- Campos MA
- Falfán-Valencia R
journal: Rev Invest Clin
year: '2019'
doi: 10.24875/RIC.18002617
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ROLE OF GENETIC SUSCEPTIBILITY IN NICOTINE ADDICTION AND CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY DISEASE.
**Authors:** Pérez-Rubio G, Córdoba-Lanús E, Cupertino P, Cartujano-Barrera F, Campos MA, Falfán-Valencia R
**Journal:** Rev Invest Clin (2019)
**DOI:** [10.24875/RIC.18002617](https://doi.org/10.24875/RIC.18002617)

## Content

1. Rev Invest Clin. 2019;71(1):36-54. doi: 10.24875/RIC.18002617.

ROLE OF GENETIC SUSCEPTIBILITY IN NICOTINE ADDICTION AND CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE 
PULMONARY DISEASE.

Pérez-Rubio G(1), Córdoba-Lanús E(2), Cupertino P(3), Cartujano-Barrera F(3), 
Campos MA(4), Falfán-Valencia R(1).

Author information:
(1)HLA Laboratory, Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Respiratorias Ismael Cosío 
Villegas, Mexico City, Mexico.
(2)Research Unit, Hospital Universitario Nª Sª de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de 
Tenerife, Spain.
(3)Department of Cancer Prevention Control, Hackensack University Medical 
Center, Hackensack, New Jersey, USA.
(4)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, University 
of Miami Health System, Miami, FL, USA.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a leading cause of morbidity and 
mortality in developed countries. Although cigarette smoking is the major risk 
factor, only 10-20% of smokers develop COPD. The extent of cigarette smoking 
(pack-years and smoking duration) accounts for only 15% of the variation in lung 
function, indicating that differences in susceptibility to COPD must exist. We 
provide an overview of the complexity of nicotine addiction and COPD, with 
special attention to the involvement of genetic factors. The following aspects 
are discussed in the present article: (1) epidemiology in Mexico and (2) a 
review of the published literature on genetic association studies using the 
National Center for Biotechnology Information database of the United States as a 
search tool. COPD is unique among complex genetic diseases where an 
environmental risk factor is known and the level of exposure can be documented 
with some precision. The high morbidity and mortality associated with COPD and 
its chronic and progressive nature has prompted the use of molecular genetic 
studies to identify susceptibility factors for the disease. Biomedical research 
has a remarkable set of tools to aid in the discovery of genes and 
polymorphisms. We present a review of the most relevant genetic associations in 
nicotine addiction and COPD.

Copyright: © 2019 SecretarÍa de Salud.

DOI: 10.24875/RIC.18002617
PMID: 30810540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]