---
reference_id: "PMID:40317016"
title: "Comprehensive insights into pathogenesis, diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis in adult autoimmune enteropathy."
authors:
- Li M
- Xu T
- Ruan G
- Ou C
- Tan B
- Zhang S
- Li X
- You Y
- Zhou W
- Li J
- Li J
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-03731-2
keywords:
- Humans
- Prognosis
- "Polyendocrinopathies, Autoimmune/diagnosis, therapy, pathology"
- Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comprehensive insights into pathogenesis, diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis in adult autoimmune enteropathy.
**Authors:** Li M, Xu T, Ruan G, Ou C, Tan B, Zhang S, Li X, You Y, Zhou W, Li J, Li J
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-025-03731-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-025-03731-2)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2025 May 2;20(1):208. doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-03731-2.

Comprehensive insights into pathogenesis, diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis in 
adult autoimmune enteropathy.

Li M(#)(1), Xu T(#)(1), Ruan G(1), Ou C(1), Tan B(1), Zhang S(1), Li X(1), You 
Y(2), Zhou W(3), Li J(4), Li J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 
China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100730, 
China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100730, 
China. zweixun@163.com.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 
China. liji0235@pumch.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Autoimmune enteropathy (AIE) constitutes a diverse array of disorders 
characterized by immune dysregulation and gastrointestinal manifestations, 
chiefly chronic diarrhea. Due to the small number of reported cohorts, the 
current knowledge and understanding of adult-onset AIE is rare compared with 
pediatric or syndromic AIE. Pathogenesis might involve genetic predisposition, 
aberrant immune homeostasis, comorbidities of autoimmune diseases and 
environmental trigger. Diagnosis relies on a comprehensive assessment 
encompassing clinical evaluation, laboratory tests, endoscopic findings and 
histopathological features, yet distinguishing AIE from other disorders with 
similar presentations poses diagnostic challenges. Treatment strategies 
predominantly center on immunosuppressive therapies, exhibiting varied efficacy 
among individuals. Supportive treatment and prevention and management of 
complications are also important for prognosis. The prospectives of future 
researches need to explore the genetic and immunological mechanism, the 
diagnostic modalities and the treatment strategies to improve patient outcomes.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-025-03731-2
PMCID: PMC12046689
PMID: 40317016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: Not applicable. Consent for publication: Not applicable. Competing 
interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.