---
reference_id: "PMID:41596571"
title: "Heritability and Transcriptional Impact of JAK3, STAT5A and STAT6 Variants in a Tyrolean Family."
authors:
- Lee HK
- Haikarainen T
- Caf Y
- Furth PA
- Knabl L
- Silvennoinen O
- Hennighausen L
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2026'
doi: 10.3390/ijms27020913
keywords:
- Humans
- "STAT5 Transcription Factor/genetics, chemistry"
- "STAT6 Transcription Factor/genetics, chemistry"
- "Janus Kinase 3/genetics, chemistry"
- Female
- Male
- Pedigree
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Transcriptome
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Tumor Suppressor Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heritability and Transcriptional Impact of JAK3, STAT5A and STAT6 Variants in a Tyrolean Family.
**Authors:** Lee HK, Haikarainen T, Caf Y, Furth PA, Knabl L, Silvennoinen O, Hennighausen L
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2026)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms27020913](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27020913)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2026 Jan 16;27(2):913. doi: 10.3390/ijms27020913.

Heritability and Transcriptional Impact of JAK3, STAT5A and STAT6 Variants in a
Tyrolean Family.

Lee HK(1), Haikarainen T(2)(3), Caf Y(4), Furth PA(1), Knabl L(4), Silvennoinen
O(2)(3)(5), Hennighausen L(1).

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Health Technology, Tampere University, 33100 Tampere,
Finland.
(3)Fimlab Laboratories, 33900 Tampere, Finland.
(4)Y2L2Science GmbH, Hauptplatz 4, 6511 Zams, Austria.
(5)Institute of Biotechnology, Helsinki Institute of Life Science (HiLiFE),
University of Helsinki, 00014 Helsinki, Finland.

The Janus Kinase (JAK) and Signal Transducers and Activators of Transcription
(STAT) pathways regulate a range of biological processes, including immune
response and hematopoiesis. While a major research focus has been on somatic
human mutations in disease, less is known about the heritability of germline
variants and their physiological impact. This study addresses an important issue
in population genetics: the context-dependent effects and incomplete penetrance
of rare genetic variants in immune pathways. Here we identify the rare
JAK3P151R, JAK3R925S, STAT5AV494L, and STAT6Q633H variants in an extended family
spanning three generations, integrate in silico analyses and AlphaFold 3
structural predictions, and investigate the immune transcriptomes in probands
carrying one or more variants. All four variants are inherited through the
germline without any evident clinical or physiological manifestations in the
carriers. As individual variants, not all persons carrying a specific variant
showed the same immune transcriptome. The presence of activated basal
transcriptomes was limited to some, but not all, individuals carrying the above
variants. A next step in understanding the role of germline variants will be to
understand how and why other factors, including both other germline variants and
environmental and developmental factors, influence the likelihood of expression
of an activated basal transcriptome.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms27020913
PMCID: PMC12842485
PMID: 41596571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors Teemu Haikarainen and Olli Silvennoinen
were employed by the company Fimlab Laboratories; Yasemin Caf and Ludwig Knabl
were employed by the company Y2L2Science GmbH. The remaining authors declare
that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
