---
reference_id: "PMID:11181649"
title: The molecular basis of human 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency.
authors:
- Baumgartner MR
- Almashanu S
- Suormala T
- Obie C
- Cole RN
- Packman S
- Baumgartner ER
- Valle D
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1172/JCI11948
keywords:
- Alleles
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Carbon-Carbon Ligases/deficiency, genetics"
- "DNA, Complementary/analysis"
- Genes
- Genetic Complementation Test
- Humans
- Mass Spectrometry
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The molecular basis of human 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency.
**Authors:** Baumgartner MR, Almashanu S, Suormala T, Obie C, Cole RN, Packman S, Baumgartner ER, Valle D
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI11948](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI11948)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2001 Feb;107(4):495-504. doi: 10.1172/JCI11948.

The molecular basis of human 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency.

Baumgartner MR(1), Almashanu S, Suormala T, Obie C, Cole RN, Packman S,
Baumgartner ER, Valle D.

Author information:
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Isolated biotin-resistant 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (MCC) deficiency is
an autosomal recessive disorder of leucine catabolism that appears to be the
most frequent organic aciduria detected in tandem mass spectrometry-based
neonatal screening programs. The phenotype is variable, ranging from neonatal
onset with severe neurological involvement to asymptomatic adults. MCC is a
heteromeric mitochondrial enzyme composed of biotin-containing alpha subunits
and smaller beta subunits. Here, we report cloning of MCCA and MCCB cDNAs and
the organization of their structural genes. We show that a series of 14
MCC-deficient probands defines two complementation groups, CG1 and 2, resulting
from mutations in MCCB and MCCA, respectively. We identify five MCCA and nine
MCCB mutant alleles and show that missense mutations in each result in loss of
function.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI11948
PMCID: PMC199271
PMID: 11181649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
