---
reference_id: "PMID:29292313"
title: Tobacco Control Laws and Pediatric Asthma.
authors:
- Hatoun J
- Davis-Plourde K
- Penti B
- Cabral H
- Kazis L
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1542/peds.2017-1026P
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tobacco Control Laws and Pediatric Asthma.
**Authors:** Hatoun J, Davis-Plourde K, Penti B, Cabral H, Kazis L
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.2017-1026P](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-1026P)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2018 Jan;141(Suppl 1):S130-S136. doi: 10.1542/peds.2017-1026P.

Tobacco Control Laws and Pediatric Asthma.

Hatoun J(1), Davis-Plourde K(2), Penti B(3), Cabral H(2), Kazis L(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of General Pediatrics, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts; jonathan.hatoun@childrens.harvard.edu.
(2)School of Public Health, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts; and.
(3)Department of Family Medicine, Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts.

BACKGROUND: Exposure to environmental tobacco smoke increases pediatric asthma 
severity. Strict, state-level tobacco control reduces smoking. The Child Asthma 
Call-Back Survey (Child ACBS) is a nationally representative survey of the 
guardians of children with asthma. The American Lung Association's annual State 
of Tobacco Control report grades tobacco control laws in each state including a 
tax grade (cigarette excise tax relative to the national mean), and a smoke-free 
air grade (number of locations where smoking is prohibited).
METHODS: We joined Child ACBS data from 2006 to 2010 with corresponding state 
and year tobacco grades. In the primary analysis, we investigated the effect of 
state tax grades on a child's asthma severity by using a logistic regression 
model adjusting for year. A secondary analysis assessed the impact of smoke-free 
air grades on in-home smoking.
RESULTS: Our analysis included 12 860 Child ACBS interviews from 35 states over 
5 years, representing over 24 million individuals. We merged 112 unique State of 
Tobacco Control grades with patient data by state and year. A higher tax grade 
was associated with reduced severity (adjusted odds ratio = 1.40; P = .007, 95% 
confidence interval: 1.10-1.80). A better smoke-free air grade was not 
associated with decreased in-home smoking after adjusting for confounding by 
income and type of residence.
CONCLUSIONS: A stronger tobacco tax is associated with reduced asthma severity. 
Further study is needed to determine the effect of smoke-free air laws on 
in-home environmental. This work supports ongoing efforts to strengthen tobacco 
control through federal and state regulations.

Copyright © 2018 by the American Academy of Pediatrics.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2017-1026P
PMID: 29292313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: POTENTIAL CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The authors have 
indicated they have no potential conflicts of interest to disclose.