---
reference_id: "PMID:36318082"
title: Longitudinal Clinical and Biological Characteristics in Juvenile-Onset Huntington's Disease.
authors:
- Schultz JL
- Langbehn DR
- Al-Kaylani HM
- van der Plas E
- Koscik TR
- Epping EA
- Espe-Pfeifer PB
- Martin EP
- Moser DJ
- Magnotta VA
- Nopoulos PC
journal: Mov Disord
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/mds.29251
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Longitudinal Clinical and Biological Characteristics in Juvenile-Onset Huntington's Disease.
**Authors:** Schultz JL, Langbehn DR, Al-Kaylani HM, van der Plas E, Koscik TR, Epping EA, Espe-Pfeifer PB, Martin EP, Moser DJ, Magnotta VA, Nopoulos PC
**Journal:** Mov Disord (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.29251](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.29251)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 2023 Jan;38(1):113-122. doi: 10.1002/mds.29251. Epub 2022 Nov 1.

Longitudinal Clinical and Biological Characteristics in Juvenile-Onset 
Huntington's Disease.

Schultz JL(1)(2)(3), Langbehn DR(1), Al-Kaylani HM(1), van der Plas E(1), Koscik 
TR(1), Epping EA(1), Espe-Pfeifer PB(1), Martin EP(1), Moser DJ(1), Magnotta 
VA(1)(4), Nopoulos PC(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Carver College of Medicine at the University of 
Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Carver College of Medicine at the University of 
Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
(3)Division of Pharmacy Practice and Sciences, University of Iowa College of 
Pharmacy, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
(4)Department of Radiology, Carver College of Medicine at the University of 
Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Stead Family Children's Hospital at the University 
of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.

BACKGROUND: Juvenile-onset Huntington's disease (JOHD) is a rare form of 
Huntington's disease (HD) characterized by symptom onset before the age of 
21 years. Observational data in this cohort is lacking.
OBJECTIVES: Quantify measures of disease progression for use in clinical trials 
of patients with JOHD.
METHODS: Participants who received a motor diagnosis of HD before the age of 21 
were included in the Kids-JOHD study. The comparator group consisted of children 
and young adults who were at-risk for inheriting the genetic mutation that 
causes HD, but who were found to have a CAG repeat in the non-expanded range 
(gene non-expanded [GNE]).
RESULTS: Data were obtained between March 17, 2006, and February 13, 2020. There 
were 26 JOHD participants and 78 GNE participants who were comparable on age 
(16.03 vs. 14.43, respectively) and sex (53.8% female vs. 57.7% female, 
respectively). The mean annualized decrease in striatal volume in the JOHD group 
was -3.99% compared to -0.06% in the GNE (mean difference [MD], -3.93%; 95% 
confidence intervals [CI], [-4.98 to -2.80], FDR < 0.0001). The mean increase in 
the Unified Huntington's Disease Rating Scale Total Motor Score per year in the 
JOHD group was 7.29 points compared to a mean decrease of -0.21 point in the GNE 
(MD, 7.5; 95% CI, [5.71-9.28], FDR < 0·0001).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate that structural brain imaging and 
clinical measures in JOHD may be potential biomarkers of disease progression for 
use in clinical trials. Collaborative efforts are required to validate these 
results in a larger cohort of patients with JOHD. © 2022 International Parkinson 
and Movement Disorder Society.

© 2022 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.29251
PMCID: PMC9851979
PMID: 36318082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Author Disclosures The authors report no 
potential conflicts of interest related to this work.