---
reference_id: "PMID:39297559"
title: Effects of thyroid hormones in skeletal muscle protein turnover.
authors:
- Nappi A
- Moriello C
- Morgante M
- Fusco F
- Crocetto F
- Miro C
journal: J Basic Clin Physiol Pharmacol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1515/jbcpp-2024-0139
keywords:
- Humans
- Thyroid Hormones/metabolism
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism"
- "Muscle Proteins/metabolism, biosynthesis"
- Animals
- Hyperthyroidism/metabolism
- Muscular Atrophy/metabolism
- Proteolysis
- Hypothyroidism/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of thyroid hormones in skeletal muscle protein turnover.
**Authors:** Nappi A, Moriello C, Morgante M, Fusco F, Crocetto F, Miro C
**Journal:** J Basic Clin Physiol Pharmacol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1515/jbcpp-2024-0139](https://doi.org/10.1515/jbcpp-2024-0139)

## Content

1. J Basic Clin Physiol Pharmacol. 2024 Sep 20;35(4-5):253-264. doi: 
10.1515/jbcpp-2024-0139. eCollection 2024 Jul 1.

Effects of thyroid hormones in skeletal muscle protein turnover.

Nappi A(1), Moriello C(2), Morgante M(3), Fusco F(4), Crocetto F(5), Miro C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, University of Naples "Federico 
II", Naples, Italy.
(2)Department of Advanced Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Naples 
"Luigi Vanvitelli", Naples, Italy.
(3)A.O. of Benevento "San Pio", Benevento, Italy.
(4)Department of Women, Children and General and Specialist Surgery, University 
of Naples "Luigi Vanvitelli", Naples, Italy.
(5)Department of Neurosciences, Reproductive Sciences and Odontostomatology, 
University of Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy.

Thyroid hormones (THs) are critical regulators of muscle metabolism in both 
healthy and unhealthy conditions. Acting concurrently as powerful anabolic and 
catabolic factors, THs are endowed with a vital role in muscle mass maintenance. 
As a result, thyroid dysfunctions are the leading cause of a wide range of 
muscle pathologies, globally identified as myopathies. Whether muscle wasting is 
a common feature in patients with hyperthyroidism and is mainly caused by 
THs-dependent stimulation of muscle proteolysis, also muscle growth is often 
associated with hyperthyroid conditions, linked to THs-dependent stimulation of 
muscle protein synthesis. Noteworthy, also hypothyroid status negatively impacts 
on muscle physiology, causing muscle weakness and fatigue. Most of these 
symptoms are due to altered balance between muscle protein synthesis 
and breakdown. Thus, a comprehensive understanding of THs-dependent skeletal 
muscle protein turnover might facilitate the management of physical discomfort 
or weakness in conditions of thyroid disease. Herein, we describe the molecular 
mechanisms underlying the THs-dependent alteration of skeletal muscle structure 
and function associated with muscle atrophy and hypertrophy, thus providing new 
insights for targeted modulation of skeletal muscle dynamics.

© 2024 the author(s), published by De Gruyter, Berlin/Boston.

DOI: 10.1515/jbcpp-2024-0139
PMID: 39297559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]