---
reference_id: "PMID:29397290"
title: "Complex care of individuals with multiple sulfatase deficiency: Clinical cases and consensus statement."
authors:
- Ahrens-Nicklas R
- Schlotawa L
- Ballabio A
- Brunetti-Pierri N
- De Castro M
- Dierks T
- Eichler F
- Ficicioglu C
- Finglas A
- Gaertner J
- Kirmse B
- Klepper J
- Lee M
- Olsen A
- Parenti G
- Vossough A
- Vanderver A
- Adang LA
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.01.005
keywords:
- "Brain/diagnostic imaging, metabolism, pathology"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Multiple Sulfatase Deficiency Disease/diagnosis, etiology, pathology, therapy"
- Mutation
- Oxidoreductases Acting on Sulfur Group Donors
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational/genetics"
- "Rare Diseases/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- "Sulfatases/deficiency, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Complex care of individuals with multiple sulfatase deficiency: Clinical cases and consensus statement.
**Authors:** Ahrens-Nicklas R, Schlotawa L, Ballabio A, Brunetti-Pierri N, De Castro M, Dierks T, Eichler F, Ficicioglu C, Finglas A, Gaertner J, Kirmse B, Klepper J, Lee M, Olsen A, Parenti G, Vossough A, Vanderver A, Adang LA
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.01.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.01.005)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2018 Mar;123(3):337-346. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.01.005.
Epub  2018 Jan 31.

Complex care of individuals with multiple sulfatase deficiency: Clinical cases
and consensus statement.

Ahrens-Nicklas R(1), Schlotawa L(2), Ballabio A(3), Brunetti-Pierri N(4), De
Castro M(5), Dierks T(6), Eichler F(7), Ficicioglu C(8), Finglas A(9), Gaertner
J(10), Kirmse B(11), Klepper J(12), Lee M(13), Olsen A(14), Parenti G(4),
Vossough A(15), Vanderver A(16), Adang LA(17).

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics and Metabolism, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Electronic address:
ahrensnicklasr@email.chop.edu.
(2)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
UK; Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Medical Center
Göttingen, Germany. Electronic address: lars.schlotawa@med.uni-goettingen.de.
(3)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, Italy.
(4)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, Italy; Department of
Translational Medicine, Federico II University of Naples, Italy.
(5)United States Air Force Medical Genetics Center, 81st Medical Group, Keesler
AFB, MS, USA.
(6)Faculty of Chemistry, Biochemistry I, Bielefeld University, Bielefeld,
Germany.
(7)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(8)Division of Human Genetics and Metabolism, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(9)MSD Action Foundation, Dublin, Ireland.
(10)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Medical Center
Göttingen, Germany.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Genetic and Metabolism, University of Mississippi
Medical Center, USA.
(12)Department of Pediatrics and Neuropediatrics, Children's Hospital, Klinikum
Aschaffenburg-Alzenau, Germany.
(13)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Children's of Mississippi, University of
Mississippi Medical Center, Biloxi, MS, USA.
(14)United MSD Foundation, USA.
(15)Division of Neuroradiology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(16)Division of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA, USA.
(17)Division of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA, USA. Electronic address: adangl@email.chop.edu.

Multiple sulfatase deficiency (MSD) is an ultra-rare neurodegenerative disorder
that results in defective sulfatase post-translational modification. Sulfatases
in the body are activated by a unique protein, formylglycine-generating enzyme
(FGE) that is encoded by SUMF1. When FGE is absent or insufficient, all 17 known
human sulfatases are affected, including the enzymes associated with
metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD), several mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS II, IIIA,
IIID, IVA, VI), chondrodysplasia punctata, and X-linked ichthyosis. As such,
individuals demonstrate a complex and severe clinical phenotype that has not
been fully characterized to date. In this report, we describe two individuals
with distinct clinical presentations of MSD. Also, we detail a comprehensive
systems-based approach to the management of individuals with MSD, from the
initial diagnostic evaluation to unique multisystem issues and potential
management options. As there have been no natural history studies to date, the
recommendations within this report are based on published studies and consensus
opinion and underscore the need for future research on evidence-based outcomes
to improve management of children with MSD.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.01.005
PMCID: PMC6856873
PMID: 29397290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest RA-N, LS, AB, NB-P, MDC,
FE, AF, JG, BK, JK, ML, AO, GP, AVossough, LA: No conflicts to disclose
