---
reference_id: "PMID:21204232"
title: "Thanatophoric dysplasia type II with encephalocele and semilobar holoprosencephaly: Insights into its pathogenesis."
authors:
- Martínez-Frías ML
- Egüés X
- Puras A
- Hualde J
- de Frutos CA
- Bermejo E
- Nieto MA
- Martínez S
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33765
keywords:
- "Encephalocele/genetics, pathology"
- Fatal Outcome
- Female
- "Holoprosencephaly/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Phenotype
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3/genetics"
- "Skull/abnormalities, pathology"
- "Thanatophoric Dysplasia/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thanatophoric dysplasia type II with encephalocele and semilobar holoprosencephaly: Insights into its pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Martínez-Frías ML, Egüés X, Puras A, Hualde J, de Frutos CA, Bermejo E, Nieto MA, Martínez S
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.33765](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.33765)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Jan;155A(1):197-202. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33765.

Thanatophoric dysplasia type II with encephalocele and semilobar 
holoprosencephaly: Insights into its pathogenesis.

Martínez-Frías ML(1), Egüés X, Puras A, Hualde J, de Frutos CA, Bermejo E, Nieto 
MA, Martínez S.

Author information:
(1)ECEMC, Centro de Investigación de Anomalías Congénitas, Instituto de Salud 
Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. mlmartinez.frias@isciii.es

Thanatophoric dysplasia (TD) is a lethal form of short-limb skeletal dysplasia 
that is associated with macrocephaly, and variably cloverleaf skull. Two types 
of TD are clinically recognized, TD1 and TD2, mainly distinguished by their 
radiographic characteristics. The differences between the two are principally 
observed in the femur, which appears curved in TD1, while it remains straight 
but with a proximal medial spike in TD2, and are a less severe overall 
affectation in TD2. Both types of TD are caused by mutations in different 
functional domains of the FGFR3 gene. However, whereas several mutations in the 
different domains of FGFR3 cause TD1, the K650E mutation involving the change of 
a lysine to glutamic acid ("Lys650Glu") has been found in all TD2 cases to date. 
Here we describe a newborn infant with TD2 associated with brain defects that 
have either been infrequently observed (encephalocele) or not hitherto described 
(holoprosencephaly). Based on recent studies, we consider encephaloceles 
described in TD to be pseudoencephaloceles, since they are secondary to the 
intracranial pressure generated by severe hydrocephaly and to severe cranial 
structural anomalies. Finally, to analyze the mechanisms of holoprosencephaly 
observed in the case described here, we include a concise review on the current 
understanding of how FGFs and their receptors are expressed in the rostral 
signaling center (particularly Fgf8). In addition, we evaluated recent 
observations that FGF ligands and receptors (including FGFR3) act in concert to 
organize the whole telencephalon activity, rather than independently patterning 
different areas.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33765
PMID: 21204232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]