---
reference_id: "PMID:34508588"
title: Hyperactive HRAS dysregulates energetic metabolism in fibroblasts from patients with Costello syndrome via enhanced production of reactive oxidizing species.
authors:
- Carpentieri G
- Leoni C
- Pietraforte D
- Cecchetti S
- Iorio E
- Belardo A
- Pietrucci D
- Di Nottia M
- Pajalunga D
- Megiorni F
- Mercurio L
- Tatti M
- Camero S
- Marchese C
- Rizza T
- Tirelli V
- Onesimo R
- Carrozzo R
- Rinalducci S
- Chillemi G
- Zampino G
- Tartaglia M
- Flex E
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddab270
keywords:
- "Costello Syndrome/genetics, metabolism"
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Humans
- Oxidation-Reduction
- "Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)/genetics
- Signal Transduction/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hyperactive HRAS dysregulates energetic metabolism in fibroblasts from patients with Costello syndrome via enhanced production of reactive oxidizing species.
**Authors:** Carpentieri G, Leoni C, Pietraforte D, Cecchetti S, Iorio E, Belardo A, Pietrucci D, Di Nottia M, Pajalunga D, Megiorni F, Mercurio L, Tatti M, Camero S, Marchese C, Rizza T, Tirelli V, Onesimo R, Carrozzo R, Rinalducci S, Chillemi G, Zampino G, Tartaglia M, Flex E
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddab270](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddab270)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2022 Feb 21;31(4):561-575. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddab270.

Hyperactive HRAS dysregulates energetic metabolism in fibroblasts from patients 
with Costello syndrome via enhanced production of reactive oxidizing species.

Carpentieri G(1)(2), Leoni C(3), Pietraforte D(4), Cecchetti S(4), Iorio E(4), 
Belardo A(5), Pietrucci D(6), Di Nottia M(1), Pajalunga D(2), Megiorni F(7), 
Mercurio L(8), Tatti M(2), Camero S(9), Marchese C(7), Rizza T(1), Tirelli V(4), 
Onesimo R(3), Carrozzo R(1), Rinalducci S(5), Chillemi G(6), Zampino G(3), 
Tartaglia M(1), Flex E(2).

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino 
Gesù, IRCCS, Rome 00146, Italy.
(2)Department of Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 
Rome 00161, Italy.
(3)Center for Rare Diseases and Birth Defects, Department of Woman and Child 
Health and Public Health, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli, 
IRCCS, Rome 00168, Italy.
(4)Core Facilities, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome 00161, Italy.
(5)Department of Ecological and Biological Sciences, Università della Tuscia, 
Viterbo 01100, Italy.
(6)Department for Innovation in Biological, Agro-food and Forest Systems, 
Università della Tuscia, Viterbo 01100, Italy.
(7)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome 00161, Italy.
(8)Laboratory of Experimental Immunology and Dermatology Division, IDI-IRCCS, 
Rome 00167, Italy.
(9)Department Maternal Infantile and Urological Sciences, SAPIENZA University, 
Rome 00161, Italy.

Germline-activating mutations in HRAS cause Costello syndrome (CS), a cancer 
prone multisystem disorder characterized by reduced postnatal growth. In CS, 
poor weight gain and growth are not caused by low caloric intake. Here, we show 
that constitutive plasma membrane translocation and activation of the GLUT4 
glucose transporter, via reactive oxygen species-dependent AMP-activated protein 
kinase α and p38 hyperactivation, occurs in primary fibroblasts of CS patients, 
resulting in accelerated glycolysis and increased fatty acid synthesis and 
storage as lipid droplets. An accelerated autophagic flux was also identified as 
contributing to the increased energetic expenditure in CS. Concomitant 
inhibition of p38 and PI3K signaling by wortmannin was able to rescue both the 
dysregulated glucose intake and accelerated autophagic flux. Our findings 
provide a mechanistic link between upregulated HRAS function, defective growth 
and increased resting energetic expenditure in CS, and document that targeting 
p38 and PI3K signaling is able to revert this metabolic dysfunction.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddab270
PMID: 34508588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]