---
reference_id: "PMID:26195047"
title: Relation of quantitative visual and neurologic outcomes to fatigue in multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Chahin S
- Miller D
- Sakai RE
- Wilson JA
- Frohman T
- Markowitz C
- Jacobs D
- Green A
- Calabresi PA
- Frohman EM
- Galetta SL
- Balcer LJ
journal: Mult Scler Relat Disord
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2015.05.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relation of quantitative visual and neurologic outcomes to fatigue in multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Chahin S, Miller D, Sakai RE, Wilson JA, Frohman T, Markowitz C, Jacobs D, Green A, Calabresi PA, Frohman EM, Galetta SL, Balcer LJ
**Journal:** Mult Scler Relat Disord (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.msard.2015.05.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msard.2015.05.005)

## Content

1. Mult Scler Relat Disord. 2015 Jul;4(4):304-10. doi:
10.1016/j.msard.2015.05.005.  Epub 2015 May 21.

Relation of quantitative visual and neurologic outcomes to fatigue in multiple 
sclerosis.

Chahin S(1), Miller D(2), Sakai RE(3), Wilson JA(4), Frohman T(5), Markowitz 
C(6), Jacobs D(7), Green A(8), Calabresi PA(9), Frohman EM(10), Galetta SL(11), 
Balcer LJ(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania, 3400 Spruce St. 3. W. 
Gates, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic address: 
salim.chahin@uphs.upenn.edu.
(2)Department of Neurology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, 1950 E 89th St, 
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. Electronic address: millerd@ccf.org.
(3)University of Vermont College of Medicine, 89 Beaumont Ave, Burlington, VT 
05405, USA. Electronic address: reiko.sakai@med.uvm.edu.
(4)Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania, 3400 Spruce St. 3. W. 
Gates, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic address: 
jawilson@mail.med.upenn.edu.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. Electronic address: 
Teresa.Frohman@UTSouthwestern.edu.
(6)Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania, 3400 Spruce St. 3. W. 
Gates, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic address: 
cmarkowi@mail.med.upenn.edu.
(7)Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania, 3400 Spruce St. 3. W. 
Gates, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic address: 
Dina.Jacobs2@uphs.upenn.edu.
(8)Department of Neurology, University of California at San Francisco, 1500 
Owens St #320, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. Electronic address: 
agreen@ucsf.edu.
(9)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 600 N. Wolfe St, 
Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. Electronic address: pcalabr1@jhmi.edu.
(10)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. Electronic address: 
Elliot.Frohman@UTSouthwestern.edu.
(11)Department of Neurology, New York University School of Medicine, 240 East 
38th Street, 20th Floor, New York, NY 10016, USA. Electronic address: 
Steven.Galetta@nyumc.org.
(12)Departments of Neurology and Population Health, New York University School 
of Medicine, 240 East 38th Street, 20th Floor, New York, NY 10016, USA. 
Electronic address: Laura.Balcer@nyumc.org.

BACKGROUND: The relation of fatigue in multiple sclerosis (MS) to the visual 
system, an emerging structural and functional surrogate in MS, has not been well 
established.
OBJECTIVE: We examined how physical and cognitive fatigue could be associated 
with visual dysfunction and neurologic impairment.
METHODS: At a single time-point, we assessed 143 patients with: Low-contrast 
letter acuity (LCLA) and high-contrast visual acuity (VA) testing, the 25-Item 
National Eye Institute Visual Functioning Questionnaire (NEI-VFQ-25) and 
Neuro-Ophthalmic Supplement, the Modified Fatigue Impact Scale (MFIS), the MS 
Functional Composite (MSFC), and the Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS).
RESULTS: Worse binocular LCLA scores were associated with increased levels of 
total and physical fatigue (p≤0.026). Greater levels of fatigue were also 
associated with reduced vision-specific QOL (p<0.001). Patients with more 
physical, but not cognitive, fatigue had greater levels of impairment by the 
Timed 25-Foot Walk (T25W, r=0.39, p<0.001), 9-Hole Peg Test (9HP r=0.22, 
p=0.011) and EDSS (r=0.45, p<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Reduced vision in MS is highly associated with physical fatigue and 
could be used to capture more global, difficult to describe, symptoms. The 
potential differences in physical vs. cognitive fatigue and their correlates may 
begin to provide insight into their underlying mechanisms.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.msard.2015.05.005
PMID: 26195047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]