---
reference_id: "PMID:38797051"
title: "Diverse immunological dysregulation, chronic inflammation, and impaired erythropoiesis in long COVID patients with chronic fatigue syndrome."
authors:
- Saito S
- Shahbaz S
- Osman M
- Redmond D
- Bozorgmehr N
- Rosychuk RJ
- Lam G
- Sligl W
- Cohen Tervaert JW
- Elahi S
journal: J Autoimmun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2024.103267
keywords:
- Humans
- "Fatigue Syndrome, Chronic/immunology, blood"
- "COVID-19/immunology, blood, complications"
- Female
- Male
- Middle Aged
- SARS-CoV-2/immunology
- Adult
- Erythropoiesis/immunology
- "Galectins/blood, immunology"
- "Cytokines/blood, metabolism"
- Post-Acute COVID-19 Syndrome
- Inflammation/immunology
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/immunology, blood"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diverse immunological dysregulation, chronic inflammation, and impaired erythropoiesis in long COVID patients with chronic fatigue syndrome.
**Authors:** Saito S, Shahbaz S, Osman M, Redmond D, Bozorgmehr N, Rosychuk RJ, Lam G, Sligl W, Cohen Tervaert JW, Elahi S
**Journal:** J Autoimmun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaut.2024.103267](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaut.2024.103267)

## Content

1. J Autoimmun. 2024 Jul;147:103267. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2024.103267. Epub 2024
May  25.

Diverse immunological dysregulation, chronic inflammation, and impaired
erythropoiesis in long COVID patients with chronic fatigue syndrome.

Saito S(1), Shahbaz S(1), Osman M(2), Redmond D(2), Bozorgmehr N(1), Rosychuk
RJ(3), Lam G(4), Sligl W(5), Cohen Tervaert JW(2), Elahi S(6).

Author information:
(1)School of Dentistry, Division of Foundational Sciences, Faculty of Medicine &
Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, T6G 2E1, AB, Canada.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Faculty of Medicine &
Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, T6G 2E1, AB, Canada.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Infectious Disease, Faculty of Medicine
& Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, T6G 2E1, AB, Canada.
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Faculty of Medicine &
Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, T6G 2E1, AB, Canada.
(5)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Faculty of Medicine & Dentistry,
University of Alberta, Edmonton, T6G 2E1, AB, Canada; Department of Medicine,
Division of Infectious Diseases, Faculty of Medicine & Dentistry, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, T6G 2E1, AB, Canada.
(6)School of Dentistry, Division of Foundational Sciences, Faculty of Medicine &
Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, T6G 2E1, AB, Canada; Department of
Oncology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, T6G 2E1, AB, Canada; Faculty of
Medicine & Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, T6G 2E1, AB, Canada; Li
Ka Shing Institute of Virology, Faculty of Medicine & Dentistry, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, T6G 2E1, AB, Canada. Electronic address: elahi@ualberta.ca.

A substantial number of patients recovering from acute SARS-CoV-2 infection
present serious lingering symptoms, often referred to as long COVID (LC).
However, a subset of these patients exhibits the most debilitating symptoms
characterized by ongoing myalgic encephalomyelitis or chronic fatigue syndrome
(ME/CFS). We specifically identified and studied ME/CFS patients from two
independent LC cohorts, at least 12 months post the onset of acute disease, and
compared them to the recovered group (R). ME/CFS patients had relatively
increased neutrophils and monocytes but reduced lymphocytes. Selective T cell
exhaustion with reduced naïve but increased terminal effector T cells was
observed in these patients. LC was associated with elevated levels of plasma
pro-inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, Galectin-9 (Gal-9), and artemin (ARTN).
A defined threshold of Gal-9 and ARTN concentrations had a strong association
with LC. The expansion of immunosuppressive CD71+ erythroid cells (CECs) was
noted. These cells may modulate the immune response and contribute to increased
ARTN concentration, which correlated with pain and cognitive impairment.
Serology revealed an elevation in a variety of autoantibodies in LC.
Intriguingly, we found that the frequency of 2B4+CD160+ and TIM3+CD160+ CD8+ T
cells completely separated LC patients from the R group. Our further analyses
using a multiple regression model revealed that the elevated frequency/levels of
CD4 terminal effector, ARTN, CEC, Gal-9, CD8 terminal effector, and MCP1 but
lower frequency/levels of TGF-β and MAIT cells can distinguish LC from the R
group. Our findings provide a new paradigm in the pathogenesis of ME/CFS to
identify strategies for its prevention and treatment.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaut.2024.103267
PMID: 38797051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare no competing interests.
