---
reference_id: "PMID:22777688"
title: "Parvovirus B19 in pregnancy: possible consequences of vertical transmission."
authors:
- Puccetti C
- Contoli M
- Bonvicini F
- Cervi F
- Simonazzi G
- Gallinella G
- Murano P
- Farina A
- Guerra B
- Zerbini M
- Rizzo N
journal: Prenat Diagn
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/pd.3930
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Parvovirus B19 in pregnancy: possible consequences of vertical transmission.
**Authors:** Puccetti C, Contoli M, Bonvicini F, Cervi F, Simonazzi G, Gallinella G, Murano P, Farina A, Guerra B, Zerbini M, Rizzo N
**Journal:** Prenat Diagn (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pd.3930](https://doi.org/10.1002/pd.3930)

## Content

1. Prenat Diagn. 2012 Sep;32(9):897-902. doi: 10.1002/pd.3930. Epub 2012 Jul 9.

Parvovirus B19 in pregnancy: possible consequences of vertical transmission.

Puccetti C(1), Contoli M, Bonvicini F, Cervi F, Simonazzi G, Gallinella G, 
Murano P, Farina A, Guerra B, Zerbini M, Rizzo N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Prenatal Medicine, 
University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. kiapucce@libero.it

OBJECTIVE: The aim was to determine the outcome of pregnancies complicated by 
maternal Parvovirus B19 (B19) infection.
METHOD: Among 175 pregnant women referred to our clinic because of suspicion of 
a B19 infection, 63 with confirmed laboratory diagnosis of acute/recent B19 
infection were followed up by ultrasound and Doppler measurement of the middle 
cerebral artery peak systolic velocity.
RESULTS: The vertical transmission rate was 31.7% (20/63). Of the 20 infected, 8 
had hydrops, 1 had signs suggestive of meconium peritonitis and 1 had an 
isolated hydrothorax. Three fetuses presenting with hydrops were treated with 
intrauterine blood transfusion. Two of them died while the last showed 
resolution of anemia. Among the five untreated hydropic fetuses, one presented 
with mild signs that resolved spontaneously, two died at 16 and 17 weeks of 
gestation and two had also cardiomegaly and the parents opted for elective 
termination of pregnancy. All the anemic fetuses had middle cerebral artery peak 
systolic velocity values more than 1.8 multiples of the median. No stillbirth 
occurred.
CONCLUSIONS: The outcome of uncomplicated cases with B19 infection is good. In 
the presence of hydrops prognosis was very poor. It seems therefore logical to 
attempt to pick up this ominous signs early.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pd.3930
PMID: 22777688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]