---
reference_id: "PMID:38954275"
title: "The neurocognitive and neuropsychiatric manifestations of Susac syndrome: a brief review of the literature and future directions."
authors:
- Koncz R
- Say MJ
- Gleason A
- Hardy TA
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s10072-024-07672-9
keywords:
- Humans
- "Susac Syndrome/diagnosis, complications"
- "Mental Disorders/etiology, diagnosis"
- "Cognition Disorders/etiology, physiopathology, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The neurocognitive and neuropsychiatric manifestations of Susac syndrome: a brief review of the literature and future directions.
**Authors:** Koncz R, Say MJ, Gleason A, Hardy TA
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10072-024-07672-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-024-07672-9)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2024 Nov;45(11):5181-5187. doi: 10.1007/s10072-024-07672-9. Epub 
2024 Jul 2.

The neurocognitive and neuropsychiatric manifestations of Susac syndrome: a 
brief review of the literature and future directions.

Koncz R(1)(2), Say MJ(3), Gleason A(4)(5)(6), Hardy TA(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)The University of Sydney Specialty of Psychiatry, Concord, NSW, Australia. 
rebecca.koncz1@health.nsw.gov.au.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Concord Repatriation General Hospital, Concord, 
NSW, Australia. rebecca.koncz1@health.nsw.gov.au.
(3)Department of Psychology, Concord Repatriation General Hospital, Concord, 
NSW, Australia.
(4)Department of Consultation-Liaison Psychiatry, Concord Repatriation General 
Hospital, Concord, NSW, Australia.
(5)Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, The University of 
Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(6)Department of Neuroscience, Central Clinical School, Monash University, 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(7)Department of Neurology, Concord Repatriation General Hospital, Concord, NSW, 
Australia.
(8)Brain and Mind Centre, University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW, Australia.

Encephalopathy is part of the clinical triad of Susac syndrome, but a detailed 
understanding of the neurocognitive and neuropsychiatric profile of this 
condition is lacking. Existing literature indicates that cognitive deficits 
range in severity from subtle to profound. Executive function and short-term 
recall are affected frequently. Psychiatric manifestations may be absent or may 
include anxiety, mood disorders or psychosis. If psychiatric phenomena develop 
during the disease course, it can be hard to disentangle whether symptoms 
directly relate to the pathology of Susac syndrome or are secondary to 
treatment-related side effects. In this article, we review what is known about 
the cognitive and psychiatric morbidity of Susac syndrome and identify areas 
where knowledge is deficient. Importantly, we also provide a framework for 
future research, arguing that better phenotyping, understanding of 
pathophysiology, evaluation of treatments on cognitive and psychiatric outcomes, 
and longitudinal data capture are vital to improving patient outcomes.

© 2024. Crown.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-024-07672-9
PMCID: PMC11470906
PMID: 38954275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: RK, MJS and AG have no conflicts of interest to 
declare that are relevant to the content of this article. TAH has received 
funding for research into Susac syndrome from Brain Foundation Australia.