---
reference_id: "PMID:39005974"
title: "The effect of hydrocortisone versus hydrocortisone plus fludrocortisone on duration of shock: A propensity score-weighted analysis."
authors:
- John KE
- Kirkpatrick MM
- Aytoda PH
- Elefritz JL
- Palettas M
- Rosales BN
- Murphy CV
- Doepker BA
journal: Int J Crit Illn Inj Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.4103/ijciis.ijciis_66_23
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The effect of hydrocortisone versus hydrocortisone plus fludrocortisone on duration of shock: A propensity score-weighted analysis.
**Authors:** John KE, Kirkpatrick MM, Aytoda PH, Elefritz JL, Palettas M, Rosales BN, Murphy CV, Doepker BA
**Journal:** Int J Crit Illn Inj Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.4103/ijciis.ijciis_66_23](https://doi.org/10.4103/ijciis.ijciis_66_23)

## Content

1. Int J Crit Illn Inj Sci. 2024 Apr-Jun;14(2):79-85. doi:
10.4103/ijciis.ijciis_66_23. Epub 2024 Jun 21.

The effect of hydrocortisone versus hydrocortisone plus fludrocortisone on
duration of shock: A propensity score-weighted analysis.

John KE(1), Kirkpatrick MM(2), Aytoda PH(2), Elefritz JL(2), Palettas M(3),
Rosales BN(4), Murphy CV(2), Doepker BA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Medical Center, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center,
Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Center for Biostatistics, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(4)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: The 2021 Surviving Sepsis Campaign Guidelines recommend the use of
hydrocortisone in patients who remain hemodynamically unstable despite adequate
fluid resuscitation and vasopressor therapy. Fludrocortisone has been used
concomitantly with hydrocortisone in some studies without a clearly defined role
or known clinical benefit. The purpose of this study was to assess the impact of
fludrocortisone added to hydrocortisone on shock-free days for septic shock.
METHODS: A single-center, retrospective propensity score-weighted study was
conducted to compare hydrocortisone versus hydrocortisone plus fludrocortisone
for septic shock. Adults admitted to the medical intensive care unit (ICU) from
2015 to 2020 were included in the study. All patients received ≥200 mg/day
hydrocortisone for at least 24 h ± fludrocortisone initiated within 72 h of
vasopressors. The primary outcome was shock-free days by day 14. The secondary
outcomes included duration of shock, change in Sequential Organ Failure
Assessment (SOFA) score, hospital and ICU length of stay, and all-cause
inhospital mortality.
RESULTS: A total of 228 patients met inclusion criteria with 212 patients
retained after propensity score weighting. There was no difference between
groups in 14-day shock-free days (6.3 vs. 6.1 days; P = 0.781). Furthermore, no
significant differences were observed for the secondary outcomes of ICU/hospital
length of stay, duration of shock, change in SOFA score, and all-cause
inhospital mortality.
CONCLUSION: The addition of fludrocortisone to hydrocortisone in septic shock
did not increase shock-free days by day 14. These results suggest that the use
of hydrocortisone alone may be an adequate adjunctive therapy in septic shock. A
prospective randomized controlled trial is needed to confirm results.

Copyright: © 2024 International Journal of Critical Illness and Injury Science.

DOI: 10.4103/ijciis.ijciis_66_23
PMCID: PMC11245135
PMID: 39005974

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.
