---
reference_id: "PMID:37607224"
title: SARS-CoV-2 Mac1 is required for IFN antagonism and efficient virus replication in cell culture and in mice.
authors:
- Alhammad YM
- Parthasarathy S
- Ghimire R
- Kerr CM
- "O'Connor JJ"
- Pfannenstiel JJ
- Chanda D
- Miller CA
- Baumlin N
- Salathe M
- Unckless RL
- Zuñiga S
- Enjuanes L
- More S
- Channappanavar R
- Fehr AR
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2302083120
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- SARS-CoV-2/genetics
- COVID-19
- Cell Culture Techniques
- Cell Line
- Antiviral Agents
- Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus/genetics
- Murine hepatitis virus
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SARS-CoV-2 Mac1 is required for IFN antagonism and efficient virus replication in cell culture and in mice.
**Authors:** Alhammad YM, Parthasarathy S, Ghimire R, Kerr CM, O'Connor JJ, Pfannenstiel JJ, Chanda D, Miller CA, Baumlin N, Salathe M, Unckless RL, Zuñiga S, Enjuanes L, More S, Channappanavar R, Fehr AR
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.2302083120](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2302083120)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2023 Aug 29;120(35):e2302083120. doi:
10.1073/pnas.2302083120. Epub 2023 Aug 22.

SARS-CoV-2 Mac1 is required for IFN antagonism and efficient virus replication
in cell culture and in mice.

Alhammad YM(#)(1), Parthasarathy S(#)(1), Ghimire R(#)(2), Kerr CM(1), O'Connor
JJ(1), Pfannenstiel JJ(1), Chanda D(2), Miller CA(2), Baumlin N(3), Salathe
M(3), Unckless RL(1), Zuñiga S(4), Enjuanes L(4), More S(2), Channappanavar
R(2), Fehr AR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS
66047.
(2)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater,
OK 74078.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas
City, KS 66160.
(4)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, National Center of Biotechnology,
Madrid 28049, Spain.
(#)Contributed equally

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Apr 06:2023.04.06.535927. doi: 10.1101/2023.04.06.535927.

Several coronavirus (CoV) encoded proteins are being evaluated as targets for
antiviral therapies for COVID-19. Included in these drug targets is the
conserved macrodomain, or Mac1, an ADP-ribosylhydrolase and ADP-ribose binding
protein encoded as a small domain at the N terminus of nonstructural protein 3.
Utilizing point mutant recombinant viruses, Mac1 was shown to be critical for
both murine hepatitis virus (MHV) and severe acute respiratory syndrome
(SARS)-CoV virulence. However, as a potential drug target, it is imperative to
understand how a complete Mac1 deletion impacts the replication and pathogenesis
of different CoVs. To this end, we created recombinant bacterial artificial
chromosomes (BACs) containing complete Mac1 deletions (ΔMac1) in MHV, MERS-CoV,
and SARS-CoV-2. While we were unable to recover infectious virus from MHV or
MERS-CoV ΔMac1 BACs, SARS-CoV-2 ΔMac1 was readily recovered from BAC
transfection, indicating a stark difference in the requirement for Mac1 between
different CoVs. Furthermore, SARS-CoV-2 ΔMac1 replicated at or near wild-type
levels in multiple cell lines susceptible to infection. However, in a mouse
model of severe infection, ΔMac1 was quickly cleared causing minimal pathology
without any morbidity. ΔMac1 SARS-CoV-2 induced increased levels of interferon
(IFN) and IFN-stimulated gene expression in cell culture and mice, indicating
that Mac1 blocks IFN responses which may contribute to its attenuation. ΔMac1
infection also led to a stark reduction in inflammatory monocytes and
neutrophils. These results demonstrate that Mac1 only minimally impacts
SARS-CoV-2 replication, unlike MHV and MERS-CoV, but is required for SARS-CoV-2
pathogenesis and is a unique antiviral drug target.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2302083120
PMCID: PMC10468617
PMID: 37607224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.R.F. and R.C. were named as inventors on a
patent filed by the University of Kansas.
