---
reference_id: "PMID:36306823"
title: Intracerebroventricular dosing of N-sulfoglucosamine sulfohydrolase in mucopolysaccharidosis IIIA mice reduces markers of brain lysosomal dysfunction.
authors:
- Magat J
- Jones S
- Baridon B
- Agrawal V
- Wong H
- Giaramita A
- Mangini L
- Handyside B
- Vitelli C
- Parker M
- Yeung N
- Zhou Y
- Pungor E
- Slabodkin I
- Gorostiza O
- Aguilera A
- Lo MJ
- Alcozie S
- Christianson TM
- Tiger PMN
- Vincelette J
- Fong S
- Gil G
- Hague C
- Lawrence R
- Wendt DJ
- Lebowitz JH
- Bunting S
- Bullens S
- Crawford BE
- Roy SM
- Woloszynek JC
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102625
keywords:
- Cricetinae
- Animals
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mucopolysaccharidosis III/drug therapy, metabolism"
- CHO Cells
- Pilot Projects
- Cricetulus
- Hydrolases/metabolism
- Brain/metabolism
- Heparan Sulfate/metabolism
- Brain Diseases/metabolism
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intracerebroventricular dosing of N-sulfoglucosamine sulfohydrolase in mucopolysaccharidosis IIIA mice reduces markers of brain lysosomal dysfunction.
**Authors:** Magat J, Jones S, Baridon B, Agrawal V, Wong H, Giaramita A, Mangini L, Handyside B, Vitelli C, Parker M, Yeung N, Zhou Y, Pungor E, Slabodkin I, Gorostiza O, Aguilera A, Lo MJ, Alcozie S, Christianson TM, Tiger PMN, Vincelette J, Fong S, Gil G, Hague C, Lawrence R, Wendt DJ, Lebowitz JH, Bunting S, Bullens S, Crawford BE, Roy SM, Woloszynek JC
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102625](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102625)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2022 Dec;298(12):102625. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102625. Epub
2022  Oct 26.

Intracerebroventricular dosing of N-sulfoglucosamine sulfohydrolase in
mucopolysaccharidosis IIIA mice reduces markers of brain lysosomal dysfunction.

Magat J(1), Jones S(1), Baridon B(1), Agrawal V(1), Wong H(2), Giaramita A(1),
Mangini L(1), Handyside B(1), Vitelli C(1), Parker M(2), Yeung N(2), Zhou Y(2),
Pungor E(2), Slabodkin I(1), Gorostiza O(1), Aguilera A(2), Lo MJ(1), Alcozie
S(1), Christianson TM(1), Tiger PMN(1), Vincelette J(1), Fong S(1), Gil G(2),
Hague C(2), Lawrence R(1), Wendt DJ(1), Lebowitz JH(1), Bunting S(1), Bullens
S(1), Crawford BE(1), Roy SM(2), Woloszynek JC(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Research, BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, Novato, California, USA.
(2)Department of Process Sciences, BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, Novato,
California, USA.
(3)Department of Research, BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, Novato, California, USA.
Electronic address: josh.woloszynek@gmail.com.

Mucopolysaccharidosis type IIIA (MPS IIIA) is a lysosomal storage disorder
caused by N-sulfoglucosamine sulfohydrolase (SGSH) deficiency. SGSH removes the
sulfate from N-sulfoglucosamine residues on the nonreducing end of heparan
sulfate (HS-NRE) within lysosomes. Enzyme deficiency results in accumulation of
partially degraded HS within lysosomes throughout the body, leading to a
progressive severe neurological disease. Enzyme replacement therapy has been
proposed, but further evaluation of the treatment strategy is needed. Here, we
used Chinese hamster ovary cells to produce a highly soluble and fully active
recombinant human sulfamidase (rhSGSH). We discovered that rhSGSH utilizes both
the CI-MPR and LRP1 receptors for uptake into patient fibroblasts. A single
intracerebroventricular (ICV) injection of rhSGSH in MPS IIIA mice resulted in a
tissue half-life of 9 days and widespread distribution throughout the brain.
Following a single ICV dose, both total HS and the MPS IIIA disease-specific
HS-NRE were dramatically reduced, reaching a nadir 2 weeks post dose. The
durability of effect for reduction of both substrate and protein markers of
lysosomal dysfunction and a neuroimmune response lasted through the 56 days
tested. Furthermore, seven weekly 148 μg doses ICV reduced those markers to near
normal and produced a 99.5% reduction in HS-NRE levels. A pilot study utilizing
every other week dosing in two animals supports further evaluation of less
frequent dosing. Finally, our dose-response study also suggests lower doses may
be efficacious. Our findings show that rhSGSH can normalize lysosomal HS storage
and markers of a neuroimmune response when delivered ICV.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102625
PMCID: PMC9694393
PMID: 36306823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors were employees
of BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc at the time of the studies. The authors declare
that they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.
