---
reference_id: "PMID:23391734"
title: STAT2 deficiency and susceptibility to viral illness in humans.
authors:
- Hambleton S
- Goodbourn S
- Young DF
- Dickinson P
- Mohamad SM
- Valappil M
- McGovern N
- Cant AJ
- Hackett SJ
- Ghazal P
- Morgan NV
- Randall RE
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1220098110
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Primers
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Interferon Type I/metabolism
- Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis
- Pedigree
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics"
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- STAT2 Transcription Factor/genetics
- "Virus Diseases/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# STAT2 deficiency and susceptibility to viral illness in humans.
**Authors:** Hambleton S, Goodbourn S, Young DF, Dickinson P, Mohamad SM, Valappil M, McGovern N, Cant AJ, Hackett SJ, Ghazal P, Morgan NV, Randall RE
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1220098110](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1220098110)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Feb 19;110(8):3053-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1220098110. Epub 2013 Feb 7.

STAT2 deficiency and susceptibility to viral illness in humans.

Hambleton S(1), Goodbourn S, Young DF, Dickinson P, Mohamad SM, Valappil M, 
McGovern N, Cant AJ, Hackett SJ, Ghazal P, Morgan NV, Randall RE.

Author information:
(1)Primary Immunodeficiency Group, Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle 
University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, United Kingdom. 
sophie.hambleton@ncl.ac.uk

Severe infectious disease in children may be a manifestation of primary 
immunodeficiency. These genetic disorders represent important experiments of 
nature with the capacity to elucidate nonredundant mechanisms of human immunity. 
We hypothesized that a primary defect of innate antiviral immunity was 
responsible for unusually severe viral illness in two siblings; the proband 
developed disseminated vaccine strain measles following routine immunization, 
whereas an infant brother died after a 2-d febrile illness from an unknown viral 
infection. Patient fibroblasts were indeed abnormally permissive for viral 
replication in vitro, associated with profound failure of type I IFN signaling 
and absence of STAT2 protein. Sequencing of genomic DNA and RNA revealed a 
homozygous mutation in intron 4 of STAT2 that prevented correct splicing in 
patient cells. Subsequently, other family members were identified with the same 
genetic lesion. Despite documented infection by known viral pathogens, some of 
which have been more severe than normal, surviving STAT2-deficient individuals 
have remained generally healthy, with no obvious defects in their adaptive 
immunity or developmental abnormalities. These findings imply that type I IFN 
signaling [through interferon-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3)] is surprisingly 
not essential for host defense against the majority of common childhood viral 
infections.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1220098110
PMCID: PMC3581986
PMID: 23391734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.