---
reference_id: "PMID:29256110"
title: "Serum substance P: an indicator of disease activity and subclinical inflammation in rheumatoid arthritis."
authors:
- Barbosa-Cobos RE
- Lugo-Zamudio G
- Flores-Estrada J
- Becerril-Mendoza LT
- Rodríguez-Henríquez P
- Torres-González R
- Moreno-Eutimio MA
- Ramirez-Bello J
- Moreno J
journal: Clin Rheumatol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s10067-017-3929-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serum substance P: an indicator of disease activity and subclinical inflammation in rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Barbosa-Cobos RE, Lugo-Zamudio G, Flores-Estrada J, Becerril-Mendoza LT, Rodríguez-Henríquez P, Torres-González R, Moreno-Eutimio MA, Ramirez-Bello J, Moreno J
**Journal:** Clin Rheumatol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10067-017-3929-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10067-017-3929-6)

## Content

1. Clin Rheumatol. 2018 Apr;37(4):901-908. doi: 10.1007/s10067-017-3929-6. Epub 
2017 Dec 18.

Serum substance P: an indicator of disease activity and subclinical inflammation 
in rheumatoid arthritis.

Barbosa-Cobos RE(1), Lugo-Zamudio G(2), Flores-Estrada J(3), Becerril-Mendoza 
LT(2), Rodríguez-Henríquez P(4), Torres-González R(5), Moreno-Eutimio MA(3), 
Ramirez-Bello J(3), Moreno J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Juárez de México, Av. Instituto 
Politécnico Nacional 5160, Delegación: Magdalena de las Salinas, 17760, Mexico 
City, Mexico. rebcob@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Juárez de México, Av. Instituto 
Politécnico Nacional 5160, Delegación: Magdalena de las Salinas, 17760, Mexico 
City, Mexico.
(3)Research Unit, Hospital Juárez de México, Mexico City, Mexico.
(4)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Manuel Gea González, Mexico City, 
Mexico.
(5)Hospital de Traumatología y Ortopedia, UMAE 'Magdalena de las Salinas' IMSS, 
Mexico City, Mexico.

Erratum in
    Clin Rheumatol. 2020 Jul;39(7):2245. doi: 10.1007/s10067-020-05103-6.

The aim of the is study is to examine the role of serum substance P (SP) levels 
as a simple biomarker for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) disease activity, its 
correlation with other markers of disease activity, and with selected clinical 
parameters. The study comprised 90 RA patients and 24 healthy controls. RA 
activity was assessed by means of the disease activity 28-C-reactive protein 
(DAS28-CRP) index and ultrasound power Doppler (USPD) by the German ultrasound 
score based on seven joints. SP serum values were obtained by means of an ELISA 
commercial kit. Statistics were achieved by the Student's t test and Spearman 
correlation analysis with Bonferroni correction. As a group, RA patients had 
significantly increased levels of SP compared with healthy controls 
(p < 0.0001). SP levels correlated with DAS28-CRP (r = 0.5050, p < 0.0001), 
number of tender joints (NTJ, r = 0.4668, p < 0.0001), number of swollen joints 
(NSJ, r = 0.4439, p < 0.0001), visual analogue scale (VAS, r = 0.5131, 
p < 0.0001). However, SP did not correlate with CRP levels (r = 0.0468, 
p = 0.6613), nor with the USPD (r = 0.1740, p = 0.1009). Elevated serum SP is a 
common feature of RA patients, which also appears to correlate with clinical 
measurements of disease activity and with subjective clinical data (NTJ and 
VAS). Thus, although SP is higher in RA patients with high disease activity, it 
also detects subtle RA disease activity even in patients in apparent remission, 
which suggests its usefulness for therapeutic decisions.

DOI: 10.1007/s10067-017-3929-6
PMID: 29256110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]