---
reference_id: "PMID:35777446"
title: Longitudinal Nitric Oxide Levels and Infections by Ultrastructure and Genotype in Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia.
authors:
- Pifferi M
- Boner AL
- Gracci S
- Fonnesu R
- Maj D
- Donzelli G
- Michelucci A
- Cangiotti A
- Bertini V
- Valetto A
- Caligo MA
- Miccoli M
- Peroni D
- Bush A
journal: Chest
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2022.06.019
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Longitudinal Nitric Oxide Levels and Infections by Ultrastructure and Genotype in Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia.
**Authors:** Pifferi M, Boner AL, Gracci S, Fonnesu R, Maj D, Donzelli G, Michelucci A, Cangiotti A, Bertini V, Valetto A, Caligo MA, Miccoli M, Peroni D, Bush A
**Journal:** Chest (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.chest.2022.06.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chest.2022.06.019)

## Content

1. Chest. 2022 Dec;162(6):1265-1276. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2022.06.019. Epub 2022 
Jun 28.

Longitudinal Nitric Oxide Levels and Infections by Ultrastructure and Genotype 
in Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia.

Pifferi M(1), Boner AL(2), Gracci S(3), Fonnesu R(3), Maj D(3), Donzelli G(4), 
Michelucci A(5), Cangiotti A(6), Bertini V(7), Valetto A(7), Caligo MA(5), 
Miccoli M(8), Peroni D(3), Bush A(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University Hospital of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. 
Electronic address: m.pifferi@med.unipi.it.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, University Hospital of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, University Hospital of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(4)Department of Health Sciences, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(5)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, University Hospital of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(6)Electron Microscopy Unit, University Hospital of Ancona, Ancona, Italy.
(7)Section of Cytogenetics, University Hospital of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(8)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University Hospital of 
Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(9)Imperial College and Royal Brompton Hospital, London, England.

BACKGROUND: We hypothesized that differences in nasal nitric oxide (nNO) and 
fractional exhaled nitric oxide (Feno) relate to prognosis in primary ciliary 
dyskinesia (PCD).
RESEARCH QUESTION: What is the relationship between baseline values and 
longitudinal evolution of nNO and Feno and ultrastructure, genotype, and 
respiratory infections in PCD?
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: Prospective, longitudinal, single-center study in 
adults and children evaluated biannually for up to 10 years. We compared 
cross-sectional and longitudinal values of nNO and Feno in ultrastructural 
(inner dynein arm [IDA] and microtubular disorganization [MTD]) and genetic 
(CCDC39 and CCDC40) groups known to have worse pulmonary function with patients 
within the ultrastructural and genetic groups with a better prognosis. Linear 
mixed-effects models were used to evaluate longitudinal associations.
RESULTS: One hundred forty-one patients with PCD underwent 1,014 visits. At 
enrollment, no differences were found in children in nNO or Feno between the IDA 
and MTD group and the other ultrastructural groups. In adults, nNO (P = .038) 
and Feno (P = .032) were significantly lower in the IDA and MTD group than in 
all other combined ultrastructural groups. Feno values were significantly lower 
in the CCDC39 and CCDC40 group than in the DNAH5 and DNAH11 combined genotype 
group (P = .033) and in all other genotypes (P = .032). The IDA and MTD group 
showed a significant decline in nNO with age (P < .01) compared with other 
ultrastructural groups who showed stable levels. The CCDC39 and CCDC40 group 
showed the steepest decline in nNO over time (P < .01) compared with all other 
genotypes. A higher nNO was associated with lower likelihood of any positive 
bacterial isolate from the lower respiratory tract (P = .008). Changes in Feno 
over time did not differ between structural groups or genotypes.
INTERPRETATION: Lower nNO in patients with PCD with genetic and ultrastructural 
changes associated with greater lung function decline may be related to worse 
prognosis, but whether a low nNO is causal needs further study. If lower nNO 
directly results in a poorer prognosis, strategies augmenting upper airway 
nitric oxide production may be worth evaluating.

Copyright © 2022 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2022.06.019
PMID: 35777446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]