---
reference_id: "PMID:16485275"
title: Development of a diagnostic system for osteoarthritis using a photoacoustic measurement method.
authors:
- Ishihara M
- Sato M
- Kaneshiro N
- Mitani G
- Sato S
- Mochida J
- Kikuchi M
journal: Lasers Surg Med
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1002/lsm.20285
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Development of a diagnostic system for osteoarthritis using a photoacoustic measurement method.
**Authors:** Ishihara M, Sato M, Kaneshiro N, Mitani G, Sato S, Mochida J, Kikuchi M
**Journal:** Lasers Surg Med (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1002/lsm.20285](https://doi.org/10.1002/lsm.20285)

## Content

1. Lasers Surg Med. 2006 Mar;38(3):249-55. doi: 10.1002/lsm.20285.

Development of a diagnostic system for osteoarthritis using a photoacoustic 
measurement method.

Ishihara M(1), Sato M, Kaneshiro N, Mitani G, Sato S, Mochida J, Kikuchi M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Engineering, National Defense Medical College, 3-2 
Namiki, Tokorozawa, Saitama 359-8513, Japan. kobako@ndmc.ac.jp

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: We demonstrated that photoacoustic measurement 
enables viscoelastic characterization of biological tissue. The purpose of this 
study was to develop a practical photoacoustic measurement system for diagnosis 
of osteoarthritis (OA) by viscoelastic characterization of articular cartilage.
STUDY DESIGN/MATERIALS AND METHODS: The portable system consists of a 
commercially available 3rd harmonic Q-switched Nd:YAG laser as a light source 
and a transducer, which is arranged coaxially with an optical fiber. Cell 
proliferation tests were performed to study the effect of laser irradiation on 
chondrocytes. Photoacoustic measurements were performed using enzymatically 
treated cartilage as a model of OA.
RESULTS: There was no significant damage of chondrocytes caused by laser 
irradiation (100 microJ/mm2, 5 Hz, 30 shots). The change in relaxation times 
measured by the photoacoustic measurement had a positive correlation with time 
of enzymatic treatment, that is, the degree of cartilage degeneration.
CONCLUSIONS: We have developed a noninvasive photoacoustic measurement system 
designed for arthroscopic use and have demonstrated the applicability of this 
system to the diagnosis of OA-like cartilage degeneration.

2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/lsm.20285
PMID: 16485275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]