---
reference_id: "PMID:33124969"
title: Detection of IgM and IgG Antibodies to Human Parvovirus B19 in Sera of Patients with Thymoma-Associated Myasthenia Gravis.
authors:
- Jia X
- Gong L
- Zhang J
- Lin F
- Zhang F
- Dong K
- Wang S
- Lan M
- Huang G
- Zhang W
journal: Viral Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1089/vim.2020.0126
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Detection of IgM and IgG Antibodies to Human Parvovirus B19 in Sera of Patients with Thymoma-Associated Myasthenia Gravis.
**Authors:** Jia X, Gong L, Zhang J, Lin F, Zhang F, Dong K, Wang S, Lan M, Huang G, Zhang W
**Journal:** Viral Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1089/vim.2020.0126](https://doi.org/10.1089/vim.2020.0126)

## Content

1. Viral Immunol. 2021 May;34(4):213-217. doi: 10.1089/vim.2020.0126. Epub 2020
Oct  30.

Detection of IgM and IgG Antibodies to Human Parvovirus B19 in Sera of Patients 
with Thymoma-Associated Myasthenia Gravis.

Jia X(1), Gong L(1), Zhang J(1), Lin F(2), Zhang F(1), Dong K(2), Wang S(1), Lan 
M(1), Huang G(1)(3), Zhang W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Tangdu Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical 
University, Xi'an, China.
(2)Department of Laboratory, Tangdu Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical 
University, Xi'an, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Xijing Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical 
University, Xi'an, China.

Much uncertainty still exists about the viral etiology of myasthenia gravis 
(MG). To address this, we explored the relationship between human parvovirus B19 
(PVB19) infection and MG by investigating the presence of PVB19-specific 
antibodies in serum. A total of 131 patients with MG (including 47 with 
thymoma-associated MG, 14 with hyperplasia-associated MG, and 70 with unknown 
thymic lesions) and 172 healthy volunteers were enrolled in this study. Enzyme 
linked immunosorbent assay was conducted to detect virus-specific antibodies in 
cell-free serum. The data were analyzed using Pearson chi-square (χ2) and 
Fisher's exact tests. In the 131 patients with MG, there was no significant 
difference between male (53.41 ± 14.65 years) and female (50.19 ± 15.28 years) 
groups regarding mean age (p > 0.05). Among all MG subgroups, the largest age 
group comprised participants aged 30-60 years. We found that the frequency of 
detecting immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies against PVB19 VP1 and VP2 was 
significantly higher among patients with MG (68.70%) than in healthy controls 
(41.86%) (p < 0.001). In particular, the positive rate for anti-PVB19 IgG in 
patients with thymoma-associated MG (35/47, 74.47%) was significantly higher 
than that in healthy participants (72/172, 41.86%; p < 0.001). The findings of 
this study indicate that PVB19 infection may play a role in the etiopathogenesis 
of MG, particularly in patients with thymoma-associated MG. The study protocol 
was registered at ClinicalTrials.gov with the identifier ChiCTR-1900023338.

DOI: 10.1089/vim.2020.0126
PMID: 33124969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]