---
reference_id: "PMID:22912401"
title: Axon guidance in the developing ocular motor system and Duane retraction syndrome depends on Semaphorin signaling via alpha2-chimaerin.
authors:
- Ferrario JE
- Baskaran P
- Clark C
- Hendry A
- Lerner O
- Hintze M
- Allen J
- Chilton JK
- Guthrie S
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1116481109
keywords:
- Animals
- Chemokine CXCL12/metabolism
- Chick Embryo
- "Chimerin 1/genetics, metabolism"
- Duane Retraction Syndrome/physiopathology
- Gene Knockdown Techniques
- Growth Cones/physiology
- Hepatocyte Growth Factor/metabolism
- Immunohistochemistry
- In Situ Hybridization
- "Oculomotor Muscles/embryology, innervation"
- RNA Interference
- "Receptors, Cell Surface/genetics"
- Semaphorin-3A/metabolism
- "Signal Transduction/genetics, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Axon guidance in the developing ocular motor system and Duane retraction syndrome depends on Semaphorin signaling via alpha2-chimaerin.
**Authors:** Ferrario JE, Baskaran P, Clark C, Hendry A, Lerner O, Hintze M, Allen J, Chilton JK, Guthrie S
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1116481109](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1116481109)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Sep 4;109(36):14669-74. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1116481109. Epub 2012 Aug 21.

Axon guidance in the developing ocular motor system and Duane retraction 
syndrome depends on Semaphorin signaling via alpha2-chimaerin.

Ferrario JE(1), Baskaran P, Clark C, Hendry A, Lerner O, Hintze M, Allen J, 
Chilton JK, Guthrie S.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's 
College, London SE1 1UL, United Kingdom.

Eye movements depend on correct patterns of connectivity between cranial motor 
axons and the extraocular muscles. Despite the clinical importance of the ocular 
motor system, little is known of the molecular mechanisms underlying its 
development. We have recently shown that mutations in the Chimaerin-1 gene 
encoding the signaling protein α2-chimaerin (α2-chn) perturb axon guidance in 
the ocular motor system and lead to the human eye movement disorder, Duane 
retraction syndrome (DRS). The axon guidance cues that lie upstream of α2-chn 
are unknown; here we identify candidates to be the Semaphorins (Sema) 3A and 3C, 
acting via the PlexinA receptors. Sema3A/C are expressed in and around the 
developing extraocular muscles and cause growth cone collapse of oculomotor 
neurons in vitro. Furthermore, RNAi knockdown of α2-chn or PlexinAs in 
oculomotor neurons abrogates Sema3A/C-dependent growth cone collapse. In vivo 
knockdown of endogenous PlexinAs or α2-chn function results in stereotypical 
oculomotor axon guidance defects, which are reminiscent of DRS, whereas 
expression of α2-chn gain-of-function constructs can rescue PlexinA loss of 
function. These data suggest that α2-chn mediates Sema3-PlexinA repellent 
signaling. We further show that α2-chn is required for oculomotor neurons to 
respond to CXCL12 and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), which are growth promoting 
and chemoattractant during oculomotor axon guidance. α2-chn is therefore a 
potential integrator of different types of guidance information to orchestrate 
ocular motor pathfinding. DRS phenotypes can result from incorrect regulation of 
this signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1116481109
PMCID: PMC3437829
PMID: 22912401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.