---
reference_id: "PMID:18271966"
title: Multiple osteochondromas.
authors:
- Bovée JV
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-3-3
keywords:
- Adult
- Animals
- "Bone Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/genetics, pathology"
- Child
- Chondrosarcoma/pathology
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Exostoses, Multiple Hereditary/diagnosis, genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Female
- Genetic Counseling
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- N-Acetylglucosaminyltransferases/genetics
- Prognosis
- Sex Factors
- Exostosin 2
- Exostosin 1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiple osteochondromas.
**Authors:** Bovée JV
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-3-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-3-3)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2008 Feb 13;3:3. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-3-3.

Multiple osteochondromas.

Bovée JV(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. j.v.m.g.bovee@lumc.nl

Multiple osteochondromas (MO) is characterised by development of two or more
cartilage capped bony outgrowths (osteochondromas) of the long bones. The
prevalence is estimated at 1:50,000, and it seems to be higher in males
(male-to-female ratio 1.5:1). Osteochondromas develop and increase in size in
the first decade of life, ceasing to grow when the growth plates close at
puberty. They are pedunculated or sessile (broad base) and can vary widely in
size. The number of osteochondromas may vary significantly within and between
families, the mean number of locations is 15-18. The majority are asymptomatic
and located in bones that develop from cartilage, especially the long bones of
the extremities, predominantly around the knee. The facial bones are not
affected. Osteochondromas may cause pain, functional problems and deformities,
especially of the forearm, that may be reason for surgical removal. The most
important complication is malignant transformation of osteochondroma towards
secondary peripheral chondrosarcoma, which is estimated to occur in 0.5-5%. MO
is an autosomal dominant disorder and is genetically heterogeneous. In almost
90% of MO patients germline mutations in the tumour suppressor genes EXT1 or
EXT2 are found. The EXT genes encode glycosyltransferases, catalyzing heparan
sulphate polymerization. The diagnosis is based on radiological and clinical
documentation, supplemented with, if available, histological evaluation of
osteochondromas. If the exact mutation is known antenatal diagnosis is
technically possible. MO should be distinguished from metachondromatosis,
dysplasia epiphysealis hemimelica and Ollier disease. Osteochondromas are benign
lesions and do not affect life expectancy. Management includes removal of
osteochondromas when they give complaints. Removed osteochondromas should be
examined for malignant transformation towards secondary peripheral
chondrosarcoma. Patients should be well instructed and regular follow-up for
early detection of malignancy seems justified. For secondary peripheral
chondrosarcoma, en-bloc resection of the lesion and its pseudocapsule with
tumour-free margins, preferably in a bone tumour referral centre, should be
performed.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-3-3
PMCID: PMC2276198
PMID: 18271966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
