---
reference_id: "PMID:38957128"
title: Updates on postinfectious skin rashes in pediatric dermatology.
authors:
- Daniel SS
- Peterman C
- Awasthi S
journal: Curr Opin Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/MOP.0000000000001376
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Updates on postinfectious skin rashes in pediatric dermatology.
**Authors:** Daniel SS, Peterman C, Awasthi S
**Journal:** Curr Opin Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MOP.0000000000001376](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOP.0000000000001376)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2024 Aug 1;36(4):431-435. doi:
10.1097/MOP.0000000000001376.  Epub 2024 Jun 5.

Updates on postinfectious skin rashes in pediatric dermatology.

Daniel SS(1), Peterman C, Awasthi S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Pediatrics, University of California, Davis, 
California, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review provides updates on postinfectious skin rashes in 
the pediatric population from recently published literature.
RECENT FINDINGS: The COVID-19 pandemic and its sequelae remain a focus of 
research on pediatric infectious skin rashes. Multisystem inflammatory syndrome 
in children (MIS-C) and reactive infectious mucocutaneous eruption (RIME) are 
common complications of infection with SARS-COV-2 in the pediatric population. 
Most cases of MIS-C show low mortality and suggest mucocutaneous symptoms do not 
correlate with COVID-19 disease severity. Cases of papular acrodermatitis of 
childhood, also known as Gianotti-Crosti, have also been reported in association 
with SARS-COV-2, and can present similarly in reaction to other viral infection 
like molluscum contagiosum, known as a Gianotti-Crosti syndrome-like reaction 
(GCLR). Other relevant studies on postinfectious skin rashes include updates on 
the management of staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (SSSS), with newer 
evidence advocating for beta-lactam monotherapy without clindamycin and reduced 
ancillary testing. Finally, the emergence of antifungal resistance due to 
Trichophyton indotinae is a growing global health concern emphasizing the need 
for improved antifungal stewardship.
SUMMARY: It is prudent for clinicians to be informed of both common and rare 
diagnoses that have emerged more recently in association with the COVID-19 
pandemic, in addition to other diseases with newer evidence-based 
recommendations to guide management.

Copyright © 2024 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MOP.0000000000001376
PMID: 38957128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]