---
reference_id: "PMID:33500096"
title: Hemochromatosis in Two Female Olive Baboons (Papio anubis).
authors:
- Lamoureux LM
- Coda KA
- Halliday LC
journal: Comp Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.30802/AALAS-CM-20-000070
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hemochromatosis in Two Female Olive Baboons (Papio anubis).
**Authors:** Lamoureux LM, Coda KA, Halliday LC
**Journal:** Comp Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.30802/AALAS-CM-20-000070](https://doi.org/10.30802/AALAS-CM-20-000070)

## Content

1. Comp Med. 2021 Feb 1;71(1):99-105. doi: 10.30802/AALAS-CM-20-000070. Epub 2021
 Jan 26.

Hemochromatosis in Two Female Olive Baboons (Papio anubis).

Lamoureux LM(1), Coda KA(2), Halliday LC(3).

Author information:
(1)Biological Resources Laboratory, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, 
Illinois;, Email: lorissa2@uic.edu.
(2)Research Animal Resources, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
(3)Biological Resources Laboratory, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, 
Illinois.

This report describes hemochromatosis associated with chronic parenteral iron 
dextran administration in 2 female olive baboons (Papio anubis). These baboons 
were enrolled on an experimental protocol that induced and maintained anemia by 
periodic phlebotomy for use in studying potential treatments for sickle cell 
anemia. The 2 baboons both presented with clinical signs consistent with iron 
overload, including decreased appetite, weight loss, elevated liver enzymes, and 
hepatosplenomegaly. Histopathologic findings supported a morphologic diagnosis 
of systemic hemosiderosis, as evidenced by the overwhelming presence of iron in 
the reticuloendothelial system and liver after the application of Prussian blue 
stain. This finding, combined with the clinical presentation, lead to a final 
diagnosis of hemochromatosis. This case report suggests that providing anemic 
patients with chronic parenteral iron supplementation in the absence of iron 
deficiency can result in iatrogenic iron overload and subsequent systemic 
toxicity. Furthermore, these subjects may present with hemochromatosis and its 
associated clinical signs many years after cessation of iron supplementation.

DOI: 10.30802/AALAS-CM-20-000070
PMCID: PMC7898172
PMID: 33500096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]