---
reference_id: "PMID:33094521"
title: 2020 European guideline on the management of syphilis.
authors:
- Janier M
- Unemo M
- Dupin N
- Tiplica GS
- Potočnik M
- Patel R
journal: J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/jdv.16946
keywords:
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- Europe
- "Homosexuality, Male"
- Humans
- Male
- Penicillin G Benzathine
- Sexual and Gender Minorities
- "Syphilis/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Syphilis Serodiagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 2020 European guideline on the management of syphilis.
**Authors:** Janier M, Unemo M, Dupin N, Tiplica GS, Potočnik M, Patel R
**Journal:** J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jdv.16946](https://doi.org/10.1111/jdv.16946)

## Content

1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2021 Mar;35(3):574-588. doi: 10.1111/jdv.16946.
Epub 2020 Oct 22.

2020 European guideline on the management of syphilis.

Janier M(1), Unemo M(2), Dupin N(3), Tiplica GS(4), Potočnik M(5), Patel R(6).

Author information:
(1)STD Clinic, Hôpital Saint-Louis AP-HP and Hôpital Saint-Joseph, Paris,
France.
(2)WHO Collaborating Centre for Gonorrhoea and other Sexually Transmitted
Infections, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Microbiology, Örebro University
Hospital and Örebro University, Örebro, Sweden.
(3)Syphilis National Reference Center, Hôpital Tarnier-Cochin, AP-HP, Paris,
France.
(4)2nd Dermatological Clinic, Carol Davila University, Colentina Clinical
Hospital, Bucharest, Romania.
(5)Department of Dermatovenereology, University Medical Centre Ljubljana,
Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(6)Department of Genitourinary Medicine, the Royal South Hants Hospital,
Southampton, UK.

The 2020 edition of the European guideline on the management of syphilis is an
update of the 2014 edition. Main modifications and updates include: -The ongoing
epidemics of early syphilis in Europe, particularly in men who have sex with men
(MSM) -The development of dual treponemal and non-treponemal point-of-care (POC)
tests -The progress in non-treponemal test (NTT) automatization -The regular
episodic shortage of benzathine penicillin G (BPG) in some European countries
-The exclusion of azithromycin as an alternative treatment at any stage of
syphilis -The pre-exposure or immediate post-exposure prophylaxis with
doxycycline in populations at high risk of acquiring syphilis.

© 2020 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

DOI: 10.1111/jdv.16946
PMID: 33094521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
