---
reference_id: "PMID:9872481"
title: "Cryoglobulinemia in primary Sjögren's syndrome: prevalence and clinical characteristics in a series of 115 patients."
authors:
- Ramos-Casals M
- Cervera R
- Yagüe J
- García-Carrasco M
- Trejo O
- Jiménez S
- Morlà RM
- Font J
- Ingelmo M
journal: Semin Arthritis Rheum
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1016/s0049-0172(98)80037-1
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Antibodies, Antinuclear/blood"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/analysis"
- "Conjunctivitis/epidemiology, immunology"
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- "Cryoglobulinemia/epidemiology, immunology"
- Female
- "Hepatitis C/epidemiology, immunology"
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin G/analysis
- Immunoglobulin M/analysis
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prevalence
- Seroepidemiologic Studies
- "Sjogren's Syndrome/epidemiology, immunology"
- "Vasculitis, Leukocytoclastic, Cutaneous/epidemiology, immunology"
- "Xerostomia/epidemiology, immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cryoglobulinemia in primary Sjögren's syndrome: prevalence and clinical characteristics in a series of 115 patients.
**Authors:** Ramos-Casals M, Cervera R, Yagüe J, García-Carrasco M, Trejo O, Jiménez S, Morlà RM, Font J, Ingelmo M
**Journal:** Semin Arthritis Rheum (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0049-0172(98)80037-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0049-0172(98)80037-1)

## Content

1. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 1998 Dec;28(3):200-5. doi:
10.1016/s0049-0172(98)80037-1.

Cryoglobulinemia in primary Sjögren's syndrome: prevalence and clinical
characteristics in a series of 115 patients.

Ramos-Casals M(1), Cervera R, Yagüe J, García-Carrasco M, Trejo O, Jiménez S,
Morlà RM, Font J, Ingelmo M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i
Sunyer, Hospital Clínic, School of Medicine, University of Barcelona, Catalonia,
Spain.

OBJECTIVES: To determine the prevalence and nature of cryoglobulins in a large
series of patients with primary Sjögren's syndrome (SS) and identify the
clinical and immunologic features related to their presence.
METHODS: In a cross-sectional study, we investigated 115 consecutive patients
(107 women and eight men) with primary SS. All patients fulfilled four or more
of the preliminary diagnostic criteria for SS proposed by the European Community
Study Group in 1993. Serum cryoglobulinemia was measured in all patients. Serum
samples were obtained at 37 degrees C, and cryoglobulinemia was estimated by
centrifugation after incubation at 4 degrees C for 7 days. The type of
cryoglobulinemia was identified by agarose gel electrophoresis and
immunofixation.
RESULTS: Cryoglobulins were detected in the sera of 18 (16%) of our patients
with primary SS; most were IgMkappa monoclonal/IgG polyclonal. When compared
with patients without cryoglobulins, those with cryoglobulins presented a higher
prevalence of leukocytoclastic cutaneous vasculitis (56% v8%, P < .001),
hypocomplementemia (75% v 2%; P < 0.001) and antibodies to hepatitis C virus
(HCV) (47% v8%, P < .001). Liver involvement (clinical signs, biochemical
features, or ultrasound/histological data of liver disease) was present in all
patients (100%) with cryoglobulins and HCV infection but in only 11% of patients
with cryoglobulins without HCV infection (P < .001).
CONCLUSIONS: Leukocytoclastic cutaneous vasculitis, hypocomplementemia, and HCV
infection are associated with the presence of cryoglobulins in the sera of
patients with primary SS. Testing for HCV infection is recommended for patients
with SS and cryoglobulinemia because of its high prevalence and its strong
association with liver disease.

DOI: 10.1016/s0049-0172(98)80037-1
PMID: 9872481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
