---
reference_id: "PMID:16984900"
title: Autoimmunity to GABAA-receptor-associated protein in stiff-person syndrome.
authors:
- Raju R
- Rakocevic G
- Chen Z
- Hoehn G
- Semino-Mora C
- Shi W
- Olsen R
- Dalakas MC
journal: Brain
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awl245
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/immunology"
- Adult
- Aged
- Antibodies/immunology
- Apoptosis Regulatory Proteins
- Autoimmunity/immunology
- Axons/immunology
- Biomarkers/analysis
- "Blotting, Western/methods"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Dendritic Cells/immunology
- Female
- Glutamate Decarboxylase/immunology
- Hippocampus/immunology
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin G/immunology
- Immunohistochemistry/methods
- Immunoprecipitation/methods
- Male
- "Microscopy, Confocal/methods"
- Microtubule-Associated Proteins/immunology
- Middle Aged
- Neurons/immunology
- Proteomics/methods
- "Receptors, GABA-A/immunology"
- "Spectrometry, Mass, Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption-Ionization/methods"
- Stiff-Person Syndrome/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmunity to GABAA-receptor-associated protein in stiff-person syndrome.
**Authors:** Raju R, Rakocevic G, Chen Z, Hoehn G, Semino-Mora C, Shi W, Olsen R, Dalakas MC
**Journal:** Brain (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awl245](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awl245)

## Content

1. Brain. 2006 Dec;129(Pt 12):3270-6. doi: 10.1093/brain/awl245. Epub 2006 Sep
19.

Autoimmunity to GABAA-receptor-associated protein in stiff-person syndrome.

Raju R(1), Rakocevic G, Chen Z, Hoehn G, Semino-Mora C, Shi W, Olsen R, Dalakas
MC.

Author information:
(1)Neuromuscular Diseases Section, National Institute of Neurological Disorders
and Stroke, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

Stiff-person syndrome (SPS) is an autoimmune neurological disorder characterized
by autoantibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD), the enzyme responsible
for the synthesis of inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA. To search for biomarkers
that distinguish SPS from other neurological disorders (OND), we used surface
enhanced laser desorption/ionization-time of flight (SELDI-TOF) mass
spectrometry to obtain proteomic profile of sera from 25 GAD-positive SPS
patients and 25 controls. A significant decrease was found in the level of a
protein corresponding to GABA(A)-receptor-associated protein (GABARAP), which is
responsible for the stability and surface expression of the GABA(A)-receptor. Up
to 70% of the SPS sera examined, compared with 10% of the controls,
immunoprecipitated GABARAP protein. Antibodies raised against GABARAP
immunostained neuronal cell bodies as well as axonal and dendritic processes, as
visualized by confocal microscopy. In vitro experiments demonstrated that the
IgG from GABARAP antibody-positive patients, but not control IgG, significantly
inhibited the surface expression of GABA(A)-receptor. We conclude that GABARAP
is a new autoantigen in SPS. Because the patients' IgG inhibits the expression
of GABA(A)-receptors, the circulating antibodies could impair GABAergic pathways
and play a role in the clinical symptomatology of SPS patients.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awl245
PMID: 16984900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
