---
reference_id: "PMID:37391485"
title: RUNX1 mutations mitigate quiescence to promote transformation of hematopoietic progenitors in Fanconi anemia.
authors:
- Marion W
- Koppe T
- Chen CC
- Wang D
- Frenis K
- Fierstein S
- Sensharma P
- Aumais O
- Peters M
- Ruiz-Torres S
- Chihanga T
- Boettcher S
- Shimamura A
- Bauer DE
- Schlaeger T
- Wells SI
- Ebert BL
- Starczynowski D
- da Rocha EL
- Rowe RG
journal: Leukemia
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41375-023-01945-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# RUNX1 mutations mitigate quiescence to promote transformation of hematopoietic progenitors in Fanconi anemia.
**Authors:** Marion W, Koppe T, Chen CC, Wang D, Frenis K, Fierstein S, Sensharma P, Aumais O, Peters M, Ruiz-Torres S, Chihanga T, Boettcher S, Shimamura A, Bauer DE, Schlaeger T, Wells SI, Ebert BL, Starczynowski D, da Rocha EL, Rowe RG
**Journal:** Leukemia (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41375-023-01945-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41375-023-01945-6)

## Content

1. Leukemia. 2023 Aug;37(8):1698-1708. doi: 10.1038/s41375-023-01945-6. Epub 2023
 Jun 30.

RUNX1 mutations mitigate quiescence to promote transformation of hematopoietic 
progenitors in Fanconi anemia.

Marion W(#)(1)(2), Koppe T(#)(1)(2), Chen CC(3), Wang D(1)(2), Frenis K(1)(2), 
Fierstein S(1)(2), Sensharma P(1)(2), Aumais O(1), Peters M(1), Ruiz-Torres 
S(4), Chihanga T(4), Boettcher S(5)(6), Shimamura A(1)(7), Bauer DE(1)(7), 
Schlaeger T(2), Wells SI(4), Ebert BL(5)(7)(8), Starczynowski D(4)(9), da Rocha 
EL(10), Rowe RG(11)(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(2)Stem Cell Program, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(5)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Department of Medical Oncology and Hematology, University of Zurich and 
University Hospital of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(7)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(8)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA, USA.
(9)University of Cincinnati Cancer Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(10)Federal University of Santa Catarina, Florianopolis, Brazil.
(11)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, 
USA. Grant_rowe@dfci.harvard.edu.
(12)Stem Cell Program, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. 
Grant_rowe@dfci.harvard.edu.
(13)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. Grant_rowe@dfci.harvard.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Many inherited bone marrow failure syndromes (IBMFSs) present a high risk of 
transformation to myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia 
(AML). During transformation of IBMFSs, hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells 
(HSPCs) with poor fitness gain ectopic, dysregulated self-renewal secondary to 
somatic mutations via undefined mechanisms. Here, in the context of the 
prototypical IBMFS Fanconi anemia (FA), we performed multiplexed gene editing of 
mutational hotspots in MDS-associated genes in human induced pluripotent stem 
cells (iPSCs) followed by hematopoietic differentiation. We observed aberrant 
self-renewal and impaired differentiation of HSPCs with enrichment of RUNX1 
insertions and deletions (indels), generating a model of IBMFS-associated MDS. 
We observed that compared to the failure state, FA MDS cells show mutant 
RUNX1-mediated blunting of the G1/S cell cycle checkpoint that is normally 
activated in FA in response to DNA damage. RUNX1 indels also lead to activation 
of innate immune signaling, which stabilizes the homologous recombination (HR) 
effector BRCA1, and this pathway can be targeted to abrogate viability and 
restore sensitivity to genotoxins in FA MDS. Together, these studies develop a 
paradigm for modeling clonal evolution in IBMFSs, provide basic understanding of 
the pathogenesis of MDS, and uncover a therapeutic target in FA-associated MDS.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41375-023-01945-6
PMCID: PMC11009868
PMID: 37391485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: BLE has received research funding from Celgene, 
Deerfield, Novartis, and Calico and consulting fees from GRAIL. He is a member 
of the scientific advisory board and shareholder for Neomorph Therapeutics, 
TenSixteen Bio, Skyhawk Therapeutics, and Exo Therapeutics.