---
reference_id: "PMID:17142829"
title: Clinical features and natural history of neuroferritinopathy caused by the FTL1 460InsA mutation.
authors:
- Chinnery PF
- Crompton DE
- Birchall D
- Jackson MJ
- Coulthard A
- Lombès A
- Quinn N
- Wills A
- Fletcher N
- Mottershead JP
- Cooper P
- Kellett M
- Bates D
- Burn J
journal: Brain
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awl319
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Apoferritins/genetics
- Brain/pathology
- "Chorea/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Dystonia/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Family Health
- Female
- Ferritins/blood
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Movement Disorders/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/pathology"
- Mutation/genetics
- "Parkinson Disease/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Phenotype
- Sex Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical features and natural history of neuroferritinopathy caused by the FTL1 460InsA mutation.
**Authors:** Chinnery PF, Crompton DE, Birchall D, Jackson MJ, Coulthard A, Lombès A, Quinn N, Wills A, Fletcher N, Mottershead JP, Cooper P, Kellett M, Bates D, Burn J
**Journal:** Brain (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awl319](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awl319)

## Content

1. Brain. 2007 Jan;130(Pt 1):110-9. doi: 10.1093/brain/awl319. Epub 2006 Dec 2.

Clinical features and natural history of neuroferritinopathy caused by the FTL1
460InsA mutation.

Chinnery PF(1), Crompton DE, Birchall D, Jackson MJ, Coulthard A, Lombès A,
Quinn N, Wills A, Fletcher N, Mottershead JP, Cooper P, Kellett M, Bates D, Burn
J.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
p.f.chinnery@ncl.ac.uk

Comment in
    Brain. 2009 Jun;132(Pt 6):e109. doi: 10.1093/brain/awn274.

Neuroferritinopathy is a progressive potentially treatable adult-onset movement
disorder caused by mutations in the ferritin light chain gene (FTL1). Features
overlap with common extrapyramidal disorders: idiopathic torsion dystonia,
idiopathic Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease, but the phenotype and
natural history have not been defined. We studied a genetically homogeneous
group of 41 subjects with the 460InsA mutation in FTL1, documenting the
presentation, clinical course, biochemistry and neuroimaging. The mean age of
onset was 39.4 years (SD = 13.3, range 13-63), beginning with chorea in 50%,
focal lower limb dystonia in 42.5% and parkinsonism in 7.5%. The majority
reported a family history of a movement disorder often misdiagnosed as
Huntington's disease. The disease progressed relentlessly, becoming generalized
over a 5-10 year period, eventually leading to aphonia, dysphagia and severe
motor disability with subcortical/frontal cognitive dysfunction as a late
feature. A characteristic action-specific facial dystonia was common (65%), and
in 63% there was asymmetry throughout the disease course. Serum ferritin levels
were low in the majority of males and post-menopausal females, but within normal
limits for pre-menopausal females. MR brain imaging was abnormal on all affected
individuals and one presymptomatic carrier. In conclusion, isolated parkinsonism
is unusual in neuroferritinopathy, and unlike Huntington's disease, cognitive
changes are absent or subtle in the early stages. Depressed serum ferritin is
common and provides a useful screening test in routine practice, and gradient
echo brain MRI will identify all symptomatic cases.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awl319
PMID: 17142829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
