---
reference_id: "PMID:38350705"
title: Bartter syndrome-like phenotype in a patient with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
authors:
- Kumar R
- Shreshta N
- Samdarshi S
- Chauhan P
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2023-257953
keywords:
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Female
- Humans
- "Bartter Syndrome/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Hypokalemia/complications
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/complications, drug therapy"
- Phenotype
- Potassium/metabolism
- Indomethacin/therapeutic use
- Tablets
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bartter syndrome-like phenotype in a patient with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
**Authors:** Kumar R, Shreshta N, Samdarshi S, Chauhan P
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2023-257953](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2023-257953)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2024 Feb 13;17(2):e257953. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2023-257953.

Bartter syndrome-like phenotype in a patient with type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Kumar R(1), Shreshta N(1), Samdarshi S(1), Chauhan P(2).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Armed Forces Medical College, Pune, India.
(2)Internal Medicine, Armed Forces Medical College, Pune, India
pschauhanafmc@gmail.com.

Bartter syndrome (BS) is a rare genetic tubulopathy affecting the loop of Henle
leading to salt wasting. It is commonly seen in utero or in the early neonatal
period. Rare cases of acquired BS are reported in association with infections
like tuberculosis, granulomatous conditions like sarcoidosis, autoimmune
diseases and drugs. The mainstay of management includes potassium, calcium and
magnesium supplementation. We report the case of a woman in her 50s with a
history of type 2 diabetes mellitus for the last 10 years, who presented with
diabetic foot ulcers and generalised weakness with ECG changes suggestive of
hypokalaemia. She had severe hypokalaemia with high urine potassium excretion
and hypochloraemic metabolic alkalosis. She poorly responded to intravenously
administered potassium supplements and had persistent hypokalaemia. On further
evaluation of the persistent hypokalaemia, a diagnosis of idiopathic
Bartter-like phenotype was made. She responded well to tablet indomethacin and
is presently asymptomatic and is being maintained on tablet indomethacin after 6
months of follow-up.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2024. No commercial re-use. See rights and
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2023-257953
PMCID: PMC10868243
PMID: 38350705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.
