---
reference_id: "PMID:36399385"
title: "Cardiac function, structural, and electrical remodeling by microgravity exposure."
authors:
- Sy MR
- Keefe JA
- Sutton JP
- Wehrens XHT
journal: Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00611.2022
keywords:
- Humans
- Weightlessness/adverse effects
- Atrial Remodeling
- Astronauts
- Space Flight
- Bed Rest
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac function, structural, and electrical remodeling by microgravity exposure.
**Authors:** Sy MR, Keefe JA, Sutton JP, Wehrens XHT
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpheart.00611.2022](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00611.2022)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2023 Jan 1;324(1):H1-H13. doi: 
10.1152/ajpheart.00611.2022. Epub 2022 Nov 18.

Cardiac function, structural, and electrical remodeling by microgravity 
exposure.

Sy MR(1)(2), Keefe JA(1)(2), Sutton JP(3)(4), Wehrens XHT(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
Texas.
(2)Department of Integrative Physiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
Texas.
(3)Center for Space Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.
(4)Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.
(5)Department of Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.

Space medicine is key to the human exploration of outer space and pushes the 
boundaries of science, technology, and medicine. Because of harsh environmental 
conditions related to microgravity and other factors and hazards in outer space, 
astronauts and spaceflight participants face unique health and medical 
challenges, including those related to the heart. In this review, we summarize 
the literature regarding the effects of spaceflight on cardiac structure and 
function. We also provide an in-depth review of the literature regarding the 
effects of microgravity on cardiac calcium handling. Our review can inform 
future mechanistic and therapeutic studies and is applicable to other 
physiological states similar to microgravity such as prolonged horizontal bed 
rest and immobilization.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.00611.2022
PMCID: PMC9762974
PMID: 36399385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: X.H.T.W. is a founding partner of Elex Biotech, 
a start-up company that developed drug molecules to target ryanodine receptors 
to treat cardiac arrhythmias. The remaining authors have nothing to disclose.