---
reference_id: "PMID:15880705"
title: Mutations of COL10A1 in Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia.
authors:
- Bateman JF
- Wilson R
- Freddi S
- Lamandé SR
- Savarirayan R
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1002/humu.20183
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations of COL10A1 in Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia.
**Authors:** Bateman JF, Wilson R, Freddi S, Lamandé SR, Savarirayan R
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.20183](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.20183)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2005 Jun;25(6):525-34. doi: 10.1002/humu.20183.

Mutations of COL10A1 in Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia.

Bateman JF(1), Wilson R, Freddi S, Lamandé SR, Savarirayan R.

Author information:
(1)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Department of Paediatrics, University 
of Melbourne, Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia. 
john.bateman@mcri.edu.au

Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia (SMCD) is a dominantly inherited cartilage 
disorder caused by mutations in the gene for the hypertrophic cartilage 
extracellular matrix structural protein, collagen X (COL10A1). Thirty 
heterozygous mutations have been described, about equally divided into two 
mutation types, missense mutations, and mutations that introduce premature 
termination signals. The COL10A1 mutations are clustered (33/36) in the 3' 
region of exon 3, which codes for the C-terminal NC1 trimerization domain. The 
effect of COL10A1 missense mutations have been examined by in vitro expression 
and assembly assays and cell transfection studies, which suggest that a common 
consequence is the disruption of collagen X trimerization and secretion, with 
consequent intracellular degradation. The effect of COL10A1 nonsense mutations 
in cartilage tissue has been examined in two patients, demonstrating that the 
mutant mRNA is completely removed by nonsense mediated mRNA decay. Thus for both 
classes of mutations, functional haploinsufficiency is the most probable cause 
of the clinical phenotype in SMCD.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20183
PMID: 15880705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]