---
reference_id: "PMID:28587477"
title: A review of binimetinib for the treatment of mutant cutaneous melanoma.
authors:
- Koelblinger P
- Dornbierer J
- Dummer R
journal: Future Oncol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.2217/fon-2017-0170
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Benzimidazoles/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor"
- "Clinical Trials, Phase I as Topic"
- "Clinical Trials, Phase II as Topic"
- "Clinical Trials, Phase III as Topic"
- GTP Phosphohydrolases/genetics
- Humans
- MAP Kinase Signaling System/drug effects
- "Melanoma/drug therapy, genetics, mortality, pathology"
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- "Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, mortality, pathology"
- Survival Analysis
- Treatment Outcome
- Cutaneous Malignant Melanoma
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A review of binimetinib for the treatment of mutant cutaneous melanoma.
**Authors:** Koelblinger P, Dornbierer J, Dummer R
**Journal:** Future Oncol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.2217/fon-2017-0170](https://doi.org/10.2217/fon-2017-0170)

## Content

1. Future Oncol. 2017 Aug;13(20):1755-1766. doi: 10.2217/fon-2017-0170. Epub 2017
 Jun 7.

A review of binimetinib for the treatment of mutant cutaneous melanoma.

Koelblinger P(1)(2), Dornbierer J(1), Dummer R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, Austria.

Although significant progress has been made in the treatment of unresectable or
metastatic melanoma, at least half of all advanced melanoma patients eventually
progress and pass away due to their disease. In particular, patients with
NRAS-mutated melanoma still face limited therapeutic options, with immunotherapy
being the current treatment type of choice. Binimetinib is a selective inhibitor
of MEK, a central kinase in the tumor-promoting MAPK pathway. The results of a
recent Phase III trial rendered binimetinib the first targeted therapy agent to
significantly improve progression-free survival in NRAS-mutated melanoma. This
review will summarize the development and clinical data of binimetinib in
melanoma in general and also explore the potential future role of this substance
as single agent or combination therapy.

DOI: 10.2217/fon-2017-0170
PMID: 28587477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
