---
reference_id: "PMID:23531875"
title: Tuberculosis in CBA/J mice.
authors:
- Major S
- Turner J
- Beamer G
journal: Vet Pathol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1177/0300985813482952
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tuberculosis in CBA/J mice.
**Authors:** Major S, Turner J, Beamer G
**Journal:** Vet Pathol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0300985813482952](https://doi.org/10.1177/0300985813482952)

## Content

1. Vet Pathol. 2013 Nov;50(6):1016-21. doi: 10.1177/0300985813482952. Epub 2013
Mar  26.

Tuberculosis in CBA/J mice.

Major S(1), Turner J, Beamer G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Disease and Global Health, Tufts University, 200 
Westboro Rd, Bldg 20, Grafton, MA 01536, USA. Email: gillian.beamer@tufts.edu.

Tuberculosis (TB) develops in 5% to 10% of people infected with Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis (M.tb), but we do not understand how TB develops. CBA/J mice may 
model these events, as sick mice share features with TB patients, including 
weight loss, M.tb growth, extensive granulomatous infiltrates, neutrophils, 
necrosis, and fibrosis. Here, M.tb-infected CBA/J mice were categorized 
clinically: those with no signs or those with 10% weight loss to determine 
whether clinical state was associated with lung lesions. The type and 
distribution of infiltrates (granulomatous with lymphoid aggregates and 
scattered neutrophils) were similar in mice with weight loss and in mice with no 
signs. The amount of infiltration and neutrophil foci were higher in mice with 
weight loss than in mice with no clinical signs. Necrosis and fibrosis were only 
identified in mice that lost weight. Our results suggest that CBA/J mice may be 
useful to determine if and how neutrophils contribute to TB disease progression 
in mouse models.

DOI: 10.1177/0300985813482952
PMID: 23531875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]