---
reference_id: "PMID:38566832"
title: "The Effects of Budesonide Inhalation Treatment on the Expression Levels of Serum IL-6, TGF-β1, and IgE and Pulmonary Function in Patients with Cough Variant Asthma and an Evaluation of Treatment Efficacy."
authors:
- Niu Y
- Cao M
- Li S
- Mo J
- Zhu Z
- Wang H
journal: Int J Gen Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.2147/IJGM.S455872
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Effects of Budesonide Inhalation Treatment on the Expression Levels of Serum IL-6, TGF-β1, and IgE and Pulmonary Function in Patients with Cough Variant Asthma and an Evaluation of Treatment Efficacy.
**Authors:** Niu Y, Cao M, Li S, Mo J, Zhu Z, Wang H
**Journal:** Int J Gen Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.2147/IJGM.S455872](https://doi.org/10.2147/IJGM.S455872)

## Content

1. Int J Gen Med. 2024 Mar 29;17:1253-1261. doi: 10.2147/IJGM.S455872.
eCollection  2024.

The Effects of Budesonide Inhalation Treatment on the Expression Levels of Serum 
IL-6, TGF-β1, and IgE and Pulmonary Function in Patients with Cough Variant 
Asthma and an Evaluation of Treatment Efficacy.

Niu Y(1), Cao M(1), Li S(1), Mo J(2), Zhu Z(1), Wang H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Second Hospital of Jiaxing, Jiaxing, 
Zhejiang, People's Republic of China.
(2)The Key Laboratory, The Second Hospital of Jiaxing, Jiaxing, Zhejiang, 
People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To retrospectively study the effects of budesonide inhalation 
combined with conventional symptomatic treatment on serum inflammatory factor 
expression levels and pulmonary function in patients with cough variant asthma 
(CVA) and to evaluate treatment efficacy.
METHODS: This retrospective cohort study included 200 patients diagnosed with 
CVA at the Second Hospital of Jiaxing between January 2022 and June 2023 and 
given conventional symptomatic treatment plus budesonide inhalation were 
included in this study. Patients were divided into a no remission group, a 
partial remission group and a complete remission group based on treatment 
effect. The expression levels of serum inflammatory factors, cough symptom 
scores, and small airway function indicators in the three groups of patients at 
different time points were compared.
RESULTS: In the three groups of CVA patients, after receiving budesonide 
inhalation combined with conventional symptomatic treatment, the expression 
levels of serum IL-5, IL-6, IL-8, TNF-α, TGF-β1, and IgE and number of 
eosinophils significantly decreased (P <0.05). There were statistically 
significant differences in the IL-6 and TGF-β1 levels among the three groups of 
CVA patients at T1, T2 and T3. There were statistically significant differences 
in IgE levels, number of eosinophils, cough symptom scores, and small airway 
function indicators between T2 and T3 (P<0.05). The 
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve prediction analysis revealed 
significant differences in the expression of IL-6 and TGF-β1 at T1, T2, and T3.
CONCLUSION: Budesonide inhalation combined with conventional symptomatic 
treatment can significantly reduce the levels of serum inflammatory factors in 
patients with CVA to reduce inflammation and the allergic response, thereby 
reducing the cough symptom score, improving pulmonary function, and improving 
therapeutic efficacy. In addition, IL-6 and TGF-β1 can be used as early 
predictors of budesonide inhalation efficacy.

© 2024 Niu et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IJGM.S455872
PMCID: PMC10986411
PMID: 38566832

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.