---
reference_id: "PMID:34011628"
title: Gene therapy restores dopamine transporter expression and ameliorates pathology in iPSC and mouse models of infantile parkinsonism.
authors:
- Ng J
- Barral S
- De La Fuente Barrigon C
- Lignani G
- Erdem FA
- Wallings R
- Privolizzi R
- Rossignoli G
- Alrashidi H
- Heasman S
- Meyer E
- Ngoh A
- Pope S
- Karda R
- Perocheau D
- Baruteau J
- Suff N
- Antinao Diaz J
- Schorge S
- Vowles J
- Marshall LR
- Cowley SA
- Sucic S
- Freissmuth M
- Counsell JR
- Wade-Martins R
- Heales SJR
- Rahim AA
- Bencze M
- Waddington SN
- Kurian MA
journal: Sci Transl Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaw1564
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Dopamine Plasma Membrane Transport Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Genetic Therapy
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism
- Mice
- "Parkinsonian Disorders/genetics, therapy"
- Substantia Nigra/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gene therapy restores dopamine transporter expression and ameliorates pathology in iPSC and mouse models of infantile parkinsonism.
**Authors:** Ng J, Barral S, De La Fuente Barrigon C, Lignani G, Erdem FA, Wallings R, Privolizzi R, Rossignoli G, Alrashidi H, Heasman S, Meyer E, Ngoh A, Pope S, Karda R, Perocheau D, Baruteau J, Suff N, Antinao Diaz J, Schorge S, Vowles J, Marshall LR, Cowley SA, Sucic S, Freissmuth M, Counsell JR, Wade-Martins R, Heales SJR, Rahim AA, Bencze M, Waddington SN, Kurian MA
**Journal:** Sci Transl Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scitranslmed.aaw1564](https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.aaw1564)

## Content

1. Sci Transl Med. 2021 May 19;13(594):eaaw1564. doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.aaw1564.

Gene therapy restores dopamine transporter expression and ameliorates pathology 
in iPSC and mouse models of infantile parkinsonism.

Ng J(1)(2), Barral S(3), De La Fuente Barrigon C(4), Lignani G(5), Erdem 
FA(2)(6), Wallings R(7), Privolizzi R(1)(2), Rossignoli G(2), Alrashidi H(4), 
Heasman S(2), Meyer E(2), Ngoh A(2), Pope S(8), Karda R(1), Perocheau D(1), 
Baruteau J(1)(4), Suff N(1)(9), Antinao Diaz J(1), Schorge S(5)(10), Vowles 
J(11), Marshall LR(12), Cowley SA(11), Sucic S(6), Freissmuth M(6), Counsell 
JR(13), Wade-Martins R(7), Heales SJR(4)(8), Rahim AA(10), Bencze M(13)(14), 
Waddington SN(15)(16), Kurian MA(2)(17).

Author information:
(1)Gene Transfer Technology Group, EGA-Institute for Women's Health, University 
College London, London, WC1E 6HX, UK.
(2)Developmental Neurosciences, Zayed Centre for Research into Rare Disease in 
Children, GOS-Institute of Child Health, University College London, London, WC1N 
1DZ, UK.
(3)Developmental Neurosciences, Zayed Centre for Research into Rare Disease in 
Children, GOS-Institute of Child Health, University College London, London, WC1N 
1DZ, UK. s.waddington@ucl.ac.uk s.barral@ucl.ac.uk.
(4)Genetics and Genomic Medicine, GOS-Institute of Child Health, University 
College London, London, WC1N 1EH, UK.
(5)Clinical and Experimental Epilepsy, Queen Square Institute of Neurology, 
University College London, London, WC1N 3BG, UK.
(6)Institute of Pharmacology and Gaston H. Glock Laboratories for Exploratory 
Drug Research, Centre of Physiology and Pharmacology, Medical University of 
Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
(7)Oxford Parkinson's Disease Centre, Department of Physiology, Anatomy and 
Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 3PT, UK.
(8)Neurometabolic Unit, National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, Queen 
Square, London, WC1N 3BG, UK.
(9)Department of Women and Children's Health, King's College London, London, 
WC2R 2LS, UK.
(10)Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, University College London, London, WC1N 
1AX, UK.
(11)James Martin Stem Cell Facility, Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 3RE, UK.
(12)Infection, Immunity, Inflammation, GOS-Institute of Child Health, University 
College London, London, WC1N 1EH, UK.
(13)Developmental Neurosciences, GOS-Institute of Child Health, University 
College London, London, WC1N 1EH, UK.
(14)University Paris Est Creteil, INSERM, IMRB, 94000 Creteil, France.
(15)Gene Transfer Technology Group, EGA-Institute for Women's Health, University 
College London, London, WC1E 6HX, UK. s.waddington@ucl.ac.uk s.barral@ucl.ac.uk.
(16)Wits/SAMRC Antiviral Gene Therapy Research Unit, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
University of the Witwatersrand, 2193 Johannesburg, South Africa.
(17)Department of Neurology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London, 
WC1N 3JH, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2021 Jul;17(7):394. doi: 10.1038/s41582-021-00522-8.

Most inherited neurodegenerative disorders are incurable, and often only 
palliative treatment is available. Precision medicine has great potential to 
address this unmet clinical need. We explored this paradigm in dopamine 
transporter deficiency syndrome (DTDS), caused by biallelic loss-of-function 
mutations in SLC6A3, encoding the dopamine transporter (DAT). Patients present 
with early infantile hyperkinesia, severe progressive childhood parkinsonism, 
and raised cerebrospinal fluid dopamine metabolites. The absence of effective 
treatments and relentless disease course frequently leads to death in childhood. 
Using patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), we generated a 
midbrain dopaminergic (mDA) neuron model of DTDS that exhibited marked 
impairment of DAT activity, apoptotic neurodegeneration associated with 
TNFα-mediated inflammation, and dopamine toxicity. Partial restoration of DAT 
activity by the pharmacochaperone pifithrin-μ was mutation-specific. In 
contrast, lentiviral gene transfer of wild-type human SLC6A3 complementary DNA 
restored DAT activity and prevented neurodegeneration in all patient-derived mDA 
lines. To progress toward clinical translation, we used the knockout mouse model 
of DTDS that recapitulates human disease, exhibiting parkinsonism features, 
including tremor, bradykinesia, and premature death. Neonatal 
intracerebroventricular injection of human SLC6A3 using an adeno-associated 
virus (AAV) vector provided neuronal expression of human DAT, which ameliorated 
motor phenotype, life span, and neuronal survival in the substantia nigra and 
striatum, although off-target neurotoxic effects were seen at higher dosage. 
These were avoided with stereotactic delivery of AAV2.SLC6A3 gene therapy 
targeted to the midbrain of adult knockout mice, which rescued both motor 
phenotype and neurodegeneration, suggesting that targeted AAV gene therapy might 
be effective for patients with DTDS.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaw1564
PMCID: PMC7612279
PMID: 34011628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: J.N., J.R.C., M.A.K., and 
S.N.W. are co-inventors on patent application titled “Gene therapy for DTDS 
(GB2101958.3). M.A.K. was sponsored by Agilis to attend the AADC Deficiency 
International Advisory Board (AADC-D IAB) on 27 June 2018. S.N.W. has previous 
or existing consultancy agreements with ONO Pharmaceuticals, Synpromics Ltd., 
Reliance Biosciences, Codiak Biosciences, Takeda Pharmaceutical Company, and 
LivaNova Plc. M.A.K. and S.N.W. hold consultancy agreements with Biormarin, and 
S.N.W. and J.N. also have consultancy agreements with Albion Capital. Sponsored 
research agreements with Synpromics/Askbio Europe (S.N.W. and J.N.) and Rocket 
Pharma (R.K., J.N., S.S., and S.N.W.).