---
reference_id: "PMID:35639256"
title: "Disturbance of Mitochondrial Dynamics, Endoplasmic Reticulum-Mitochondria Crosstalk, Redox Homeostasis, and Inflammatory Response in the Brain of Glutaryl-CoA Dehydrogenase-Deficient Mice: Neuroprotective Effects of Bezafibrate."
authors:
- Seminotti B
- Brondani M
- Ribeiro RT
- Leipnitz G
- Wajner M
journal: Mol Neurobiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s12035-022-02887-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disturbance of Mitochondrial Dynamics, Endoplasmic Reticulum-Mitochondria Crosstalk, Redox Homeostasis, and Inflammatory Response in the Brain of Glutaryl-CoA Dehydrogenase-Deficient Mice: Neuroprotective Effects of Bezafibrate.
**Authors:** Seminotti B, Brondani M, Ribeiro RT, Leipnitz G, Wajner M
**Journal:** Mol Neurobiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12035-022-02887-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-022-02887-3)

## Content

1. Mol Neurobiol. 2022 Aug;59(8):4839-4853. doi: 10.1007/s12035-022-02887-3. Epub
 2022 May 31.

Disturbance of Mitochondrial Dynamics, Endoplasmic Reticulum-Mitochondria 
Crosstalk, Redox Homeostasis, and Inflammatory Response in the Brain of 
Glutaryl-CoA Dehydrogenase-Deficient Mice: Neuroprotective Effects of 
Bezafibrate.

Seminotti B(1), Brondani M(1), Ribeiro RT(1), Leipnitz G(1)(2)(3), Wajner 
M(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências Biológicas: Bioquímica, Instituto de 
Ciências Básicas da Saúde, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto 
Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(2)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Fisiologia, Instituto de Ciências Básicas da 
Saúde, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Bioquímica, Instituto de Ciências Básicas da Saúde, 
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Rua Ramiro Barcelos, 2600, Prédio 
21111, Porto Alegre, RS, 90035-003, Brazil.
(4)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências Biológicas: Bioquímica, Instituto de 
Ciências Básicas da Saúde, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto 
Alegre, RS, Brazil. mwajner@ufrgs.br.
(5)Departamento de Bioquímica, Instituto de Ciências Básicas da Saúde, 
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Rua Ramiro Barcelos, 2600, Prédio 
21111, Porto Alegre, RS, 90035-003, Brazil. mwajner@ufrgs.br.
(6)Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Rua Ramiro 
Barcelos, 2350, Porto Alegre, RS, 90035-007, Brazil. mwajner@ufrgs.br.

Patients with glutaric aciduria type 1 (GA1), a neurometabolic disorder caused 
by deficiency of glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase (GCDH) activity, commonly manifest 
acute encephalopathy associated with severe striatum degeneration and 
progressive cortical and striatal injury whose pathogenesis is still poorly 
known. We evaluated redox homeostasis, inflammatory response, mitochondrial 
biogenesis and dynamics, endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-mitochondria crosstalk, and 
ER stress in the brain of GCDH-deficient (Gcdh-/-) and wild-type (Gcdh+/+) mice 
fed a high Lys chow, which better mimics the human neuropathology mainly 
characterized by striatal lesions. Increased lipid peroxidation and altered 
antioxidant defenses, including decreased concentrations of reduced glutathione 
and increased activities of superoxide dismutase, catalase, and glutathione 
transferase, were observed in the striatum and cerebral cortex of Gcdh-/- mice. 
Augmented Iba-1 staining was also found in the dorsal striatum and neocortex, 
whereas the nuclear content of NF-κB was increased, and the cytosolic content of 
IκBα decreased in the striatum of the mutant animals, indicating a 
pro-inflammatory response. Noteworthy, in vivo treatment with the pan-PPAR 
agonist bezafibrate normalized these alterations. It was also observed that the 
ER-mitochondria crosstalk proteins VDAC1 and IP3R were reduced, whereas the ER 
stress protein DDIT3 was augmented in Gcdh-/- striatum, signaling disturbances 
of these processes. Finally, DRP1 content was elevated in the striatum 
of Gcdh-/- mice, indicating activated mitochondrial fission. We presume that 
some of these novel pathomechanisms may be involved in GA1 neuropathology and 
that bezafibrate should be tested as a potential adjuvant therapy for GA1.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-022-02887-3
PMID: 35639256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]