---
reference_id: "PMID:38840219"
title: Effectiveness of janus kinase inhibitors in relapsing giant cell arteritis in real-world clinical practice and review of the literature.
authors:
- Loricera J
- Tofade T
- Prieto-Peña D
- Romero-Yuste S
- de Miguel E
- Riveros-Frutos A
- Ferraz-Amaro I
- Labrador E
- Maiz O
- Becerra E
- Narváez J
- Galíndez-Agirregoikoa E
- González-Fernández I
- Urruticoechea-Arana A
- Ramos-Calvo Á
- López-Gutiérrez F
- Castañeda S
- Unizony S
- Blanco R
journal: Arthritis Res Ther
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13075-024-03314-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effectiveness of janus kinase inhibitors in relapsing giant cell arteritis in real-world clinical practice and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Loricera J, Tofade T, Prieto-Peña D, Romero-Yuste S, de Miguel E, Riveros-Frutos A, Ferraz-Amaro I, Labrador E, Maiz O, Becerra E, Narváez J, Galíndez-Agirregoikoa E, González-Fernández I, Urruticoechea-Arana A, Ramos-Calvo Á, López-Gutiérrez F, Castañeda S, Unizony S, Blanco R
**Journal:** Arthritis Res Ther (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13075-024-03314-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13075-024-03314-9)

## Content

1. Arthritis Res Ther. 2024 Jun 5;26(1):116. doi: 10.1186/s13075-024-03314-9.

Effectiveness of janus kinase inhibitors in relapsing giant cell arteritis in 
real-world clinical practice and review of the literature.

Loricera J(#)(1), Tofade T(#)(2), Prieto-Peña D(1), Romero-Yuste S(3), de Miguel 
E(4), Riveros-Frutos A(5), Ferraz-Amaro I(6), Labrador E(7), Maiz O(8), Becerra 
E(9), Narváez J(10), Galíndez-Agirregoikoa E(11), González-Fernández I(12), 
Urruticoechea-Arana A(13), Ramos-Calvo Á(14), López-Gutiérrez F(1), Castañeda 
S(#)(15), Unizony S(#)(16), Blanco R(#)(17).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, IDIVAL, Immunopathology Group, Hospital 
Universitario Marqués de Valdecilla, Avda. Valdecilla s/n, Santander, ES- 39008, 
Spain.
(2)Neurology Department, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de 
Pontevedra, Pontevedra, Spain.
(4)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Universitario Germans Trias i Pujol, 
Badalona, Spain.
(6)Department of Rheumatology, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Canarias, 
Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain.
(7)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital San Pedro, Logroño, Spain.
(8)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Universitario de Donosti, San Sebastián, 
Spain.
(9)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Universitario de Elda, Alicante, Spain.
(10)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital de Bellvitge, Barcelona, Spain.
(11)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Universitario de Basurto, Bilbao, 
Spain.
(12)Department of Rheumatology, Complejo Asistencial Universitario de León, 
León, Spain.
(13)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Universitario Son Espases, Palma de 
Mallorca, Spain.
(14)Department of Rheumatology, Complejo Hospitalario de Soria, Soria, Spain.
(15)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Universitario La Princesa, 
IIS-Princesa, Madrid, Spain.
(16)Vasculitis and Glomerulonephritis Center, Rheumatology, Immunology and 
Allergy Division, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, 02114, USA. 
sunizony@mgh.harvard.edu.
(17)Department of Rheumatology, IDIVAL, Immunopathology Group, Hospital 
Universitario Marqués de Valdecilla, Avda. Valdecilla s/n, Santander, ES- 39008, 
Spain. rblancovela@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: A substantial proportion of patients with giant cell arteritis (GCA) 
relapse despite standard therapy with glucocorticoids, methotrexate and 
tocilizumab. The Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription 
(JAK/STAT) signalling pathway is involved in the pathogenesis of GCA and JAK 
inhibitors (JAKi) could be a therapeutic alternative. We evaluated the 
effectiveness of JAKi in relapsing GCA patients in a real-world setting and 
reviewed available literature.
METHODS: Retrospective analysis of GCA patients treated with JAKi for relapsing 
disease at thirteen centers in Spain and one center in United States 
(01/2017-12/2022). Outcomes assessed included clinical remission, complete 
remission and safety. Clinical remission was defined as the absence of GCA signs 
and symptoms regardless of the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and 
C-reactive protein (CRP) values. Complete remission was defined as the absence 
of GCA signs and symptoms along with normal ESR and CRP values. A systematic 
literature search for other JAKi-treated GCA cases was conducted.
RESULTS: Thirty-five patients (86% females, mean age 72.3) with relapsing GCA 
received JAKi therapy (baricitinib, n = 15; tofacitinib, n = 10; upadacitinib, 
n = 10). Before JAKi therapy, 22 (63%) patients had received conventional 
synthetic immunosuppressants (e.g., methotrexate), and 30 (86%) biologics (e.g., 
tocilizumab). After a median (IQR) follow-up of 11 (6-15.5) months, 20 (57%) 
patients achieved and maintained clinical remission, 16 (46%) patients achieved 
and maintained complete remission, and 15 (43%) patients discontinued the 
initial JAKi due to relapse (n = 11 [31%]) or serious adverse events (n = 4 
[11%]). A literature search identified another 36 JAKi-treated GCA cases with 
clinical improvement reported for the majority of them.
CONCLUSIONS: This real-world analysis and literature review suggest that JAKi 
could be effective in GCA, including in patients failing established 
glucocorticoid-sparing therapies such as tocilizumab and methotrexate. A phase 
III randomized controlled trial of upadacitinib is currently ongoing 
(ClinicalTrials.gov ID NCT03725202).

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13075-024-03314-9
PMCID: PMC11151571
PMID: 38840219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures that might be interpreted as 
constituting possible conflict(s) of interest for the study: Javier Loricera had 
consultation fees/participation in company-sponsored speaker´s bureau from 
Roche, AbbVie, Galápagos, Novartis, UCB Pharma, MSD, Celgene, Astra Zeneca, and 
Grünenthal and received support for attending meetings and/or travel from 
Janssen, AbbVie, Roche, Novartis, MSD, UCB Pharma, Celgene, Lilly, Pfizer, and 
Galápagos. Diana Prieto-Peña has received payment or honoraria for lectures, 
presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing or educational events from 
UCB Pharma, Novartis, Amgen, Lilly, Sanofi, and Janssen, and received support 
for attending meetings and/or travel from Lilly, Roche, Sanofi, Pfizer and 
Abbvie. Susana Romero-Yuste has received grants/recents supports from Abbvie, 
Lilly, Pfizer, and Galápagos. Eugenio de Miguel Research funding/consulting and 
conferences fees from: Abbvie, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, Janssen, Lilly, MSD, 
BMS, UCB, Grünenthal, and Sanofi, and received support for attending meetings 
and/or travel from Abbvie, Pfizer, Sanofi, and Grünenthal. Iván Ferraz-Amaro 
would like to acknowledge that he has received grants/research supports from 
Abbvie, MSD, Janssen, and Roche, as well as consultation fees from company 
sponsored speakers bureaus associated with Abbvie, Pfizer, Roche, Sanofi, 
Celgene, and MSD, and received support for attending meetings and/or travel from 
Abbvie, MSD, Janssen, Pfizer, Roche, Sanofi, and Celgene. Eva 
Galíndez-Agirregoikoa had consultation fees/participation in company-sponsored 
speaker´s bureau from Lilly, Janssen, Abbvie, and Amgen, and received support 
for attenting meetings and/or travel from Lilly, Abbvie, and Pfizer. Ismael 
González-Fernández had consultation fees/participation in company-sponsored 
speaker´s bureau from Novartis, Janssen, Grunenthal, MSD, and Theramex, and 
received support for attending meetings and/or travel from Janssen, and MSD. Ana 
Urruticoechea-Arana had received research grants, fees for consultancies or 
presentations and participated in medical meetings or courses from Abbvie, 
Galápagos, UCB, Pfizer, MSD, Novartis, GSK, Hanssen, and Amgen, and participated 
on a data safety monitoring board or advisory board GSK. Ángel Ramos-Calvo had 
consultation fees/participation in company-sponsored speaker´s bureau from 
Amgen, UCB, and Galápagos, and received support for attending meetings and/or 
travel from Pfizer. Fernando López-Gutiérrez received support for attending 
meetings and/or travel from Janssen, Abbvie, Roche, Novartis, MSD, UCB Pharma, 
Celgene, Lilly, Pfizer, and Galápagos. Santos Castañeda has received research 
supports from MSD, and Pfizer and had consultation fees/participation in 
company-sponsored speaker’s bureau from BMS, Eli-Lilly, MSD, Roche, and UCB, and 
received support for attending meetings and/or travel from BMS, Lilly, MSD, 
Roche, and UCB. Sebastian Unizony received research support from Genentech, 
participated in an advisory board for Abbvie, and provided consulting for 
Sanofi, Kiniksa, and Janssen.Ricardo Blanco received grants/research support 
from AbbVie, MSD, and Roche, and had consultation fees/participation in a 
company-sponsored speaker’s bureau from AbbVie, Pfizer, Roche, GSK, Lilly, UCB, 
Bristol-Myers, Novartis, Janssen, UCB and MSD, and received support for 
attending meetings and/or travel from AbbVie, Pfizer, Roche, GSK, Lilly, UCB, 
Bristol-Myers, Novartis, Janssen, UCB, and MSD. The following authors did not 
declare financial disclosure: Toluwalase Tofade, Anne Riveros-Frutos, Eztizen 
Labrador, Olga Maiz, Elena Becerra, Javier Narváez. The following authors did 
not declare financial disclosure: Toluwalase Tofade, Anne Riveros-Frutos, 
Eztizen Labrador, Olga Maiz, Elena Becerra, Javier Narváez.