---
reference_id: "PMID:22241090"
title: "Biotinidase deficiency: \"if you have to have an inherited metabolic disease, this is the one to have\"."
authors:
- Wolf B
journal: Genet Med
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1038/gim.2011.6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biotinidase deficiency: "if you have to have an inherited metabolic disease, this is the one to have".
**Authors:** Wolf B
**Journal:** Genet Med (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/gim.2011.6](https://doi.org/10.1038/gim.2011.6)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2012 Jun;14(6):565-75. doi: 10.1038/gim.2011.6. Epub 2012 Jan 5.

Biotinidase deficiency: "if you have to have an inherited metabolic disease, 
this is the one to have".

Wolf B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, Michigan, USA. 
bwolf1@hfhs.org

Biotinidase recycles the vitamin biotin. Biotinidase deficiency is an autosomal 
recessively inherited neurocutaneous disorder. The symptoms of the disorder can 
be successfully treated or prevented by administering pharmacological doses of 
biotin. The biotinidase gene (BTD) has been cloned and sequenced; its genomic 
organization has been determined and more than 150 mutations have been 
identified. The disorder meets the major criteria for newborn screening and is 
being universally adopted in the United States and in many countries around the 
world. Newborn screening will limit our understanding about the natural history 
of the disorder. Regardless, the disorder is an ideal example of an inherited 
metabolic disorder that if untreated can result in major disabilities, but if 
identified early can be readily treated by the oral administration of a vitamin.

DOI: 10.1038/gim.2011.6
PMID: 22241090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]