---
reference_id: "PMID:30685387"
title: Suppressing UPR-dependent overactivation of FGFR3 signaling ameliorates SLC26A2-deficient chondrodysplasias.
authors:
- Zheng C
- Lin X
- Xu X
- Wang C
- Zhou J
- Gao B
- Fan J
- Lu W
- Hu Y
- Jie Q
- Luo Z
- Yang L
journal: EBioMedicine
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2019.01.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Suppressing UPR-dependent overactivation of FGFR3 signaling ameliorates SLC26A2-deficient chondrodysplasias.
**Authors:** Zheng C, Lin X, Xu X, Wang C, Zhou J, Gao B, Fan J, Lu W, Hu Y, Jie Q, Luo Z, Yang L
**Journal:** EBioMedicine (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ebiom.2019.01.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2019.01.010)

## Content

1. EBioMedicine. 2019 Feb;40:695-709. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2019.01.010. Epub 2019
 Jan 23.

Suppressing UPR-dependent overactivation of FGFR3 signaling ameliorates 
SLC26A2-deficient chondrodysplasias.

Zheng C(1), Lin X(1), Xu X(1), Wang C(2), Zhou J(1), Gao B(1), Fan J(1), Lu 
W(1), Hu Y(1), Jie Q(3), Luo Z(4), Yang L(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Orthopedic Surgery, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical 
University, Xi'an, China.
(2)School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(3)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, HongHui Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong 
University, College of Medicine, Xi'an, China.
(4)Institute of Orthopedic Surgery, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical 
University, Xi'an, China; Medical Research Institute, Northwestern Polytechnical 
University, Xi'an, China.
(5)Institute of Orthopedic Surgery, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical 
University, Xi'an, China; Medical Research Institute, Northwestern Polytechnical 
University, Xi'an, China. Electronic address: yangliu@fmmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the SLC26A2 gene cause a spectrum of currently 
incurable human chondrodysplasias. However, genotype-phenotype relationships of 
SLC26A2-deficient chondrodysplasias are still perplexing and thus stunt 
therapeutic development.
METHODS: To investigate the causative role of SLC26A2 deficiency in 
chondrodysplasias and confirm its skeleton-specific pathology, we generated and 
analyzed slc26a2-/- and Col2a1-Cre; slc26a2fl/fl mice. The therapeutic effect of 
NVP-BGJ398, an FGFR inhibitor, was tested with both explant cultures and timed 
pregnant females.
FINDINGS: Two lethal forms of human SLC26A2-related chondrodysplasias, 
achondrogenesis type IB (ACG1B) and atelosteogenesis type II (AO2), are 
phenocopied by slc26a2-/- mice. Unexpectedly, slc26a2-/- chondrocytes are 
defective for collagen secretion, exhibiting intracellular retention and 
compromised extracellular deposition of ColII and ColIX. As a consequence, the 
ATF6 arm of the unfolded protein response (UPR) is preferentially triggered to 
overactivate FGFR3 signaling by inducing excessive FGFR3 in slc26a2-/- 
chondrocytes. Consistently, suppressing FGFR3 signaling by blocking either FGFR3 
or phosphorylation of the downstream effector favors the recovery of slc26a2-/- 
cartilage cultures from impaired growth and unbalanced cell proliferation and 
apoptosis. Moreover, administration of an FGFR inhibitor to pregnant females 
shows therapeutic effects on pathological features in slc26a2-/- newborns. 
Finally, we confirm the skeleton-specific lethality and pathology of global 
SLC26A2 deletion through analyzing the Col2a1-Cre; slc26a2fl/fl mouse line.
INTERPRETATION: Our study unveils a previously unrecognized pathogenic mechanism 
underlying ACG1B and AO2, and supports suppression of FGFR3 signaling as a 
promising therapeutic approach for SLC26A2-related chondrodysplasias. FUND: This 
work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (81871743, 
81730065 and 81772377).

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2019.01.010
PMCID: PMC6413327
PMID: 30685387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]