---
reference_id: PMID:25392022
title: "Isotretinoin exposure during pregnancy: a population-based study in The Netherlands."
authors:
- Zomerdijk IM
- Ruiter R
- Houweling LM
- Herings RM
- Sturkenboom MC
- Straus SM
- Stricker BH
journal: BMJ Open
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2014-005602
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Drug-Induced/etiology"
- Adult
- Dermatologic Agents/adverse effects
- Female
- Fetal Death/etiology
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Isotretinoin/adverse effects
- Netherlands
- Pregnancy
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Isotretinoin exposure during pregnancy: a population-based study in The Netherlands.
**Authors:** Zomerdijk IM, Ruiter R, Houweling LM, Herings RM, Sturkenboom MC, Straus SM, Stricker BH
**Journal:** BMJ Open (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bmjopen-2014-005602](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2014-005602)

## Content

1. BMJ Open. 2014 Nov 12;4(11):e005602. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2014-005602.

Isotretinoin exposure during pregnancy: a population-based study in The 
Netherlands.

Zomerdijk IM(1), Ruiter R(2), Houweling LM(3), Herings RM(3), Sturkenboom MC(4), 
Straus SM(1), Stricker BH(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Informatics, Erasmus University Medical Center, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands Department of pharmacovigilance, Dutch Medicines 
Evaluation Board, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands Department of Internal Medicine, Groene Hart Hospital, Gouda, The 
Netherlands.
(3)PHARMO Institute for Drug Outcomes Research, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Medical Informatics, Erasmus University Medical Center, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands Drug Safety Unit, Inspectorate of Health Care, The Hague, The 
Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To estimate isotretinoin exposure in Dutch pregnant women despite the 
implemented pregnancy prevention programme (PPP) and second, to analyse the 
occurrence of adverse fetal or neonatal outcomes in these isotretinoin exposed 
pregnancies.
DESIGN: Population-based study.
SETTING: The Netherlands.
PARTICIPANTS: A cohort of 203,962 pregnancies with onset between 1 January 1999 
and 1 September 2007 consisting of 208,161 fetuses or neonates.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Isotretinoin exposure in the 30 days before or during 
pregnancy. Proportions of adverse fetal or neonatal outcomes, defined as 
intrauterine deaths ≥16 week of gestation and neonates with major congenital 
anomalies. ORs with 95% CIs adjusted for maternal age were calculated to 
estimate the risk of adverse fetal or neonatal outcome after maternal 
isotretinoin exposure.
RESULTS: 51 pregnancies, 2.5 (95% CI 1.9 to 3.3) per 10,000 pregnancies, were 
exposed to isotretinoin despite the pregnancy prevention programme. Forty-five 
of these pregnancies, 2.2 (95% CI 1.6 to 2.9) per 10,000 pregnancies, were 
exposed to isotretinoin during pregnancy and six additional women became 
pregnant within 30 days after isotretinoin discontinuation. In 60% of 
isotretinoin exposed pregnancies, women started isotretinoin while already 
pregnant. In five out of the 51 isotretinoin exposed pregnancies (53 fetuses), 
9.4% (95% CI 1.3% to 17.6%), had an adverse fetal or neonatal outcome. The OR 
for adverse fetal or neonatal outcomes after isotretinoin exposure in 30 days 
before or during pregnancy was 2.3 (95% CI 0.9 to 5.7) after adjustment for 
maternal age.
CONCLUSIONS: Although a PPP was already implemented in 1988, we showed that 
isotretinoin exposed pregnancies and adverse fetal and neonatal events 
potentially related to the exposure still occur. These findings from the 
Netherlands add to the evidence that there is no full compliance to the 
isotretinoin PPP in many Western countries. Given the limited success of 
iPLEDGE, the question is which further measures are able to improve compliance.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2014-005602
PMCID: PMC4244495
PMID: 25392022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]