---
reference_id: "PMID:8630502"
title: Mutation of the endothelin-3 gene in the Waardenburg-Hirschsprung disease (Shah-Waardenburg syndrome).
authors:
- Edery P
- Attié T
- Amiel J
- Pelet A
- Eng C
- Hofstra RM
- Martelli H
- Bidaud C
- Munnich A
- Lyonnet S
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1038/ng0496-442
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA/genetics
- "Endothelins/genetics, physiology"
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- "Hirschsprung Disease/complications, etiology, genetics"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- "Neural Crest/growth & development"
- Phenotype
- "Waardenburg Syndrome/complications, etiology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation of the endothelin-3 gene in the Waardenburg-Hirschsprung disease (Shah-Waardenburg syndrome).
**Authors:** Edery P, Attié T, Amiel J, Pelet A, Eng C, Hofstra RM, Martelli H, Bidaud C, Munnich A, Lyonnet S
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0496-442](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0496-442)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1996 Apr;12(4):442-4. doi: 10.1038/ng0496-442.

Mutation of the endothelin-3 gene in the Waardenburg-Hirschsprung disease
(Shah-Waardenburg syndrome).

Edery P(1), Attié T, Amiel J, Pelet A, Eng C, Hofstra RM, Martelli H, Bidaud C,
Munnich A, Lyonnet S.

Author information:
(1)Service de Génétique Médicale et Unité de Recherches sur les Handicaps
Génétiques de l'Enfant, Hôpital des Enfants Malades, Paris, France.

Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) and Waardenburg sundrome (WS) are congenital
malformations regarded as neurocristopathies since both disorders involve neural
crest-derived cells. The WS-HSCR association (Shah-Waardenburg syndrome) is a
rare autosomal recessive condition that occasionally has been ascribed to
mutations of the endothelin-receptor B (EDNRB) gene. WS-HSCR mimicks the
megacolon and white coat-spotting observed in Ednrb mouse mutants. Since mouse
mutants for the EDNRB ligand, endothelin-3 (EDN3), displayed a similar
phenotype, the EDN3 gene was regarded as an alternative candidate gene in
WS-HSCR. Here, we report a homozygous substitution/deletion mutation of the EDN3
gene in a WS-HSCR patient. EDN3 thus becomes the third known gene (after RET and
EDNRB) predisposing to HSCR, supporting the view that the endothelin-signaling
pathways play a major role in the development of neural crests.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0496-442
PMID: 8630502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
