---
reference_id: "PMID:40319332"
title: Two novel mutations in TBC1D32 add complexity to the oro-facial-digital syndrome.
authors:
- García-Bohórquez B
- Marín-Reina P
- Aller E
- Barberán-Martínez P
- Armengot M
- Llorens-Salvador R
- Almor-Palacios IC
- Millán JM
- García-García G
journal: Hum Genomics
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s40246-025-00759-0
keywords:
- Humans
- Exome Sequencing
- GTPase-Activating Proteins/genetics
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/genetics"
- Mutation
- "Orofaciodigital Syndromes/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two novel mutations in TBC1D32 add complexity to the oro-facial-digital syndrome.
**Authors:** García-Bohórquez B, Marín-Reina P, Aller E, Barberán-Martínez P, Armengot M, Llorens-Salvador R, Almor-Palacios IC, Millán JM, García-García G
**Journal:** Hum Genomics (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40246-025-00759-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40246-025-00759-0)

## Content

1. Hum Genomics. 2025 May 3;19(1):49. doi: 10.1186/s40246-025-00759-0.

Two novel mutations in TBC1D32 add complexity to the oro-facial-digital 
syndrome.

García-Bohórquez B(1)(2), Marín-Reina P(3), Aller E(1)(2), Barberán-Martínez 
P(1), Armengot M(4), Llorens-Salvador R(5), Almor-Palacios IC(6), Millán 
JM(#)(7)(8), García-García G(#)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Molecular, Cellular and Genomics Biomedicine, Health Research Institute La 
Fe, Valencia, 46026, Spain.
(2)Center for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Instituto 
de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, 28029, Spain.
(3)Division of Neonatology, University and Polytechnic Hospital La Fe, Valencia, 
46026, Spain.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, and Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia Unit, 
University and Polytechnic Hospital La Fe, Valencia, 46026, Spain.
(5)Clinical Imaging Area, University and Polytechnic Hospital La Fe, Valencia, 
46026, Spain.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, University and Polytechnic La Fe Hospital, 
Valencia, 46026, Spain.
(7)Molecular, Cellular and Genomics Biomedicine, Health Research Institute La 
Fe, Valencia, 46026, Spain. jose_millan@iislafe.es.
(8)Center for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Instituto 
de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, 28029, Spain. jose_millan@iislafe.es.
(9)Molecular, Cellular and Genomics Biomedicine, Health Research Institute La 
Fe, Valencia, 46026, Spain. gema_garcia@iislafe.es.
(10)Center for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Instituto 
de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, 28029, Spain. gema_garcia@iislafe.es.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Ciliopathies are characterized by the dysfunction of cilia, being 
inherited retinal dystrophies (IRDs) included in sensory ciliopathies. Besides, 
oro-facial-digital syndrome (OFD) is caused by mutations in ciliary genes, 
leading to dysmorphic features. Mutations in TBC1D32 were associated to retinal 
dystrophy and OFD, defining this form as OFD-IX.
RESULTS: A clinical exome analysis performed on a patient presenting with OFD-IX 
and sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) identified two variants in TBC1D32, one of 
which affects splicing, with its impact validated using a minigene assay.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that SNHL may represent a new clinical 
feature associated with this gene.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40246-025-00759-0
PMCID: PMC12049765
PMID: 40319332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: This study was approved by the Hospital La Fe Ethics Committee, in 
agreement with the Declaration of Helsinki. A clinical questionnaire and an 
informed consent were completed by the patient and relatives. Consent for 
publication: Consent for publication was provided by patient and relatives. 
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.