---
reference_id: "PMID:4507604"
title: "3-hydroxypropionate: significance of -oxidation of propionate in patients with propionic acidemia and methylmalonic acidemia."
authors:
- Ando T
- Rasmussen K
- Nyhan WL
- Hull D
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1972'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.69.10.2807
keywords:
- "Acidosis/blood, urine"
- Carbon Isotopes
- Chromatography
- "Chromatography, Paper"
- Citrates/urine
- Humans
- Hydroxylation
- "Injections, Intravenous"
- Isoleucine/urine
- "Malonates/blood, urine"
- Mass Spectrometry
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/blood, urine"
- Oxidation-Reduction
- "Propionates/administration & dosage, blood, urine"
- Valine/urine
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 3-hydroxypropionate: significance of -oxidation of propionate in patients with propionic acidemia and methylmalonic acidemia.
**Authors:** Ando T, Rasmussen K, Nyhan WL, Hull D
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1972)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.69.10.2807](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.69.10.2807)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1972 Oct;69(10):2807-11. doi:
10.1073/pnas.69.10.2807.

3-hydroxypropionate: significance of -oxidation of propionate in patients with
propionic acidemia and methylmalonic acidemia.

Ando T, Rasmussen K, Nyhan WL, Hull D.

[l-(14)C]Propionate administered intravenously was metabolized to
methylmalonate, to 3-hydroxypropionate, and to methylcitrate in the urine of a
patient with methylmalonic acidemia. L-[U-(14)C]Isoleucine and L-[U-(14)C]valine
were also converted to urinary methylmalonate and to 3-hydroxypropionate in the
patient. Two patients with propionic acidemia due to a defect in propionyl-CoA
carboxylase metabolized [l-(14)C]propionate to uninary methylcitrate and
3-hydroxypropionate. The appearance of radioactive 3-hydroxypropionate in the
urine after the administration of these compounds indicates that beta-oxidation
of propionyl-CoA through acryloyl-CoA was functioning in these patients. The
conversion of valine to 3-hydroxypropionate suggests that valine is oxidized by
way of propionate and propionyl-CoA in man.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.69.10.2807
PMCID: PMC389649
PMID: 4507604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
