---
reference_id: "PMID:33825964"
title: "Tofacitinib as a Steroid-Sparing Therapy in Pulmonary Sarcoidosis, an Open-Label Prospective Proof-of-Concept Study."
authors:
- Friedman MA
- Le B
- Stevens J
- Desmarais J
- Seifer D
- Ogle K
- Choi D
- Harrington CA
- Jackson P
- Rosenbaum JT
journal: Lung
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00408-021-00436-8
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- "Glucocorticoids/administration & dosage"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Pilot Projects
- Piperidines/therapeutic use
- "Prednisone/administration & dosage"
- Proof of Concept Study
- Prospective Studies
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Pyrimidines/therapeutic use
- "Sarcoidosis, Pulmonary/diagnosis, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Spirometry
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tofacitinib as a Steroid-Sparing Therapy in Pulmonary Sarcoidosis, an Open-Label Prospective Proof-of-Concept Study.
**Authors:** Friedman MA, Le B, Stevens J, Desmarais J, Seifer D, Ogle K, Choi D, Harrington CA, Jackson P, Rosenbaum JT
**Journal:** Lung (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00408-021-00436-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00408-021-00436-8)

## Content

1. Lung. 2021 Apr;199(2):147-153. doi: 10.1007/s00408-021-00436-8. Epub 2021 Apr
7.

Tofacitinib as a Steroid-Sparing Therapy in Pulmonary Sarcoidosis, an Open-Label
Prospective Proof-of-Concept Study.

Friedman MA(1), Le B(2), Stevens J(3), Desmarais J(2), Seifer D(2), Ogle K(4),
Choi D(2)(4)(5)(6), Harrington CA(7), Jackson P(8), Rosenbaum JT(2)(4)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Oregon Health & Science University, 3181 SW Sam
Jackson Park Rd. Mail Code OP09, Portland, OR, 97239, USA. friedmam@ohsu.edu.
(2)Department of Medicine, Oregon Health & Science University, 3181 SW Sam
Jackson Park Rd. Mail Code OP09, Portland, OR, 97239, USA.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Tuality Healthcare,
Hillsboro, OR, 97123, USA.
(4)Casey Eye Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, 97239,
USA.
(5)OHSU-PSU School of Public Health, Oregon Health & Science University,
Portland, OR, 97239, USA.
(6)Graduate School of Dentistry, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, South Korea.
(7)Integrated Genomics Laboratory, Oregon Heath & Science University, Portland,
OR, 97239, USA.
(8)Department of Pulmonary Critical Care, Virginia Commonwealth University,
Richmond, VA, 23298, USA.
(9)Devers Eye Institute, Legacy Health Systems, Portland, OR, 97210, USA.

Comment in
    Lung. 2021 Apr;199(2):85-86. doi: 10.1007/s00408-021-00439-5.

This is a prospective, open-label, proof-of-concept study of tofacitinib, a
Janus kinase inhibitor, as a steroid-sparing therapy in corticosteroid-dependent
pulmonary sarcoidosis. Five patients with corticosteroid-dependent pulmonary
sarcoidosis were treated with tofacitinib 5 mg twice daily. The primary endpoint
was a ≥ 50% reduction in corticosteroids at week 16 with no worsening in
pulmonary function or respiratory symptoms. 60% of patients (3/5) met the
primary endpoint. One patient was lost to follow up prior to steroid taper, and
another was withdrawn due to worsening of known neurosarcoidosis. The three
patients who met the primary endpoint each tapered to ≤ 5 mg/day prednisone,
respiratory symptoms improved, and spirometry remained stable. In this
proof-of-concept study, the addition of a JAK-inhibitor allowed 60% of patients
with pulmonary sarcoidosis to successfully taper corticosteroids. JAK-inhibitors
are a promising therapy for pulmonary sarcoidosis, which require further
investigation in randomized trials.Trial Registration clinicaltrials.gov
NCT03793439; registered Jan 4, 2019.

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-021-00436-8
PMCID: PMC8092019
PMID: 33825964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest/Competing interests: JTR
consults for Gilead, Abbvie, UCB, Roche, Santen, Corvus, Celldex, Affibody,
Keyverna, Horizon, and Novartis.
