---
reference_id: "PMID:29526692"
title: Rituximab Maintenance Therapy Reduces Rate of Relapse of Pancreaticobiliary Immunoglobulin G4-related Disease.
authors:
- Majumder S
- Mohapatra S
- Lennon RJ
- Piovezani Ramos G
- Postier N
- Gleeson FC
- Levy MJ
- Pearson RK
- Petersen BT
- Vege SS
- Chari ST
- Topazian MD
- Witzig TE
journal: Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.cgh.2018.02.049
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Biliary Tract Diseases/complications, drug therapy, pathology"
- "Drug-Related Side Effects and Adverse Reactions/epidemiology, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulin G4-Related Disease/drug therapy, pathology"
- "Immunologic Factors/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Maintenance Chemotherapy/adverse effects, methods"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Minnesota
- "Pancreatic Diseases/complications, drug therapy, pathology"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Rituximab/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Secondary Prevention
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rituximab Maintenance Therapy Reduces Rate of Relapse of Pancreaticobiliary Immunoglobulin G4-related Disease.
**Authors:** Majumder S, Mohapatra S, Lennon RJ, Piovezani Ramos G, Postier N, Gleeson FC, Levy MJ, Pearson RK, Petersen BT, Vege SS, Chari ST, Topazian MD, Witzig TE
**Journal:** Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cgh.2018.02.049](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cgh.2018.02.049)

## Content

1. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2018 Dec;16(12):1947-1953. doi: 
10.1016/j.cgh.2018.02.049. Epub 2018 Mar 8.

Rituximab Maintenance Therapy Reduces Rate of Relapse of Pancreaticobiliary 
Immunoglobulin G4-related Disease.

Majumder S(1), Mohapatra S(2), Lennon RJ(3), Piovezani Ramos G(4), Postier N(1), 
Gleeson FC(1), Levy MJ(1), Pearson RK(1), Petersen BT(1), Vege SS(1), Chari 
ST(1), Topazian MD(5), Witzig TE(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Saint Peter's University Hospital, Rutgers 
Robert Wood Johnson School of Medicine, New Brunswick, New Jersey.
(3)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(5)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota. Electronic address: topazian.mark@mayo.edu.
(6)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, Minnesota.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: IgG4-related disease (IgG4-RD), a multi-organ 
fibroinflammatory syndrome, typically responds to steroids. However, some cases 
are steroid resistant, and pancreaticobiliary IgG4-RD commonly relapses after 
steroid withdrawal. Rituximab induces remission of IgG4-RD, but the need for and 
safety of maintenance rituximab treatment are unknown. We compared outcomes of 
patients with pancreaticobiliary IgG4-RD treated with or without maintenance 
rituximab therapy.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective study of patients with pancreaticobiliary 
IgG4-RD treated with rituximab at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, from 
January 2005 through December 2015. The cohort was divided into patients who 
received only rituximab induction therapy (group 1, n = 14) and patients who 
received rituximab induction followed by maintenance therapy (group 2, n = 29). 
We collected data on recurrence of IgG4-RD symptoms and findings, as well as 
information on evaluations, treatment, and adverse events.
RESULTS: Median follow-up times were similar between group 1 (34 mo) and group 2 
(27 mo) (P = .99). Thirty-seven patients (86%) were in steroid-free remission 6 
months after rituximab initiation. A higher proportion of patients in group 1 
had disease relapse (3-year event rate, 45%) than in group 2 (3-year event rate, 
11%) (P = .034). Younger age, higher IgG4 responder index score after induction 
therapy, and increased serum levels of alkaline phosphatase at baseline or after 
rituximab induction were associated with relapse. Infections developed in 6 of 
43 patients, all in group 2 (P = .067 vs group 1); all but 1 occurred during 
maintenance therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: In a retrospective study of patients with pancreaticobiliary 
IgG4-RD, we found rituximab maintenance therapy prolongs remission. Relapses are 
uncommon among patients receiving maintenance therapy, but maintenance therapy 
may increase risk of infection. Patients with factors that predict relapse could 
be candidates for rituximab maintenance therapy.

Copyright © 2018 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cgh.2018.02.049
PMID: 29526692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]