---
reference_id: "PMID:31452023"
title: Diagnosis and treatment of heart failure in hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis.
authors:
- Puig-Carrion GD
- Reyentovich A
- Katz SD
journal: Clin Auton Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s10286-019-00629-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and treatment of heart failure in hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Puig-Carrion GD, Reyentovich A, Katz SD
**Journal:** Clin Auton Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10286-019-00629-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10286-019-00629-5)

## Content

1. Clin Auton Res. 2019 Sep;29(Suppl 1):45-53. doi: 10.1007/s10286-019-00629-5. 
Epub 2019 Aug 26.

Diagnosis and treatment of heart failure in hereditary transthyretin 
amyloidosis.

Puig-Carrion GD(1), Reyentovich A(1), Katz SD(2).

Author information:
(1)Leon H. Charney Division of Cardiology, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York 
University Langone Health, 530 First Avenue, Skirball Suite 9 N, New York, NY, 
10016, USA.
(2)Leon H. Charney Division of Cardiology, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York 
University Langone Health, 530 First Avenue, Skirball Suite 9 N, New York, NY, 
10016, USA. stuart.katz@nyulangone.org.

Amyloidosis describes a family of related disease states associated with the 
extracellular tissue deposition of fibrils composed of low-molecular-weight 
subunits of a variety of proteins circulating as constituents of plasma. 
Depending on the disease subtype, fibrillar deposits in a several organs 
including the heart, kidney, liver, and peripheral nerves cause organ 
dysfunction and associated morbidity and mortality. The most common amyloid 
fibril deposits associated with cardiac manifestations are of monoclonal 
light-chain or transthyretin (ATTR) types. This review will focus on the ATTR 
types of cardiac amyloidosis. ATTR amyloidosis may be associated with abnormal 
metabolism of wild-type transthyretin (previously called senile systemic 
amyloidosis) or with hereditary variants in the transthyretin gene. Cardiac 
amyloidosis is often under-recognized in its early stages, and when a diagnosis 
of cardiac amyloidosis is made, patients are often at the advanced stages of the 
disease. Treatments now available appear to exert their benefit predominantly in 
individuals with the early stages of disease. Increased awareness and early 
diagnosis of cardiac amyloidosis and continued discovery of effective therapies 
will increase opportunities to improve clinical outcomes in this patient 
population.

DOI: 10.1007/s10286-019-00629-5
PMCID: PMC6763576
PMID: 31452023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Puig-Carrion has no financial conflicts of 
interest. Dr. Alex Reyentovich has received research support (Pfizer and Eidos 
Therapeutics) and consulting fees (Pfizer and Alnylam Pharmaceutical). Dr. 
Stuart Katz has received research support from Pfizer and Eidos Therapeutics.