---
reference_id: "PMID:30550198"
title: "[The clinical characteristics of pediatric external auditory canal keratosis obturans]."
authors:
- Yin DP
- Zhu HE
- Ma HM
- Chen PP
- Dou XW
journal: Lin Chuang Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi
year: '2018'
doi: 10.13201/j.issn.1001-1781.2018.19.015
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [The clinical characteristics of pediatric external auditory canal keratosis obturans].
**Authors:** Yin DP, Zhu HE, Ma HM, Chen PP, Dou XW
**Journal:** Lin Chuang Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi (2018)
**DOI:** [10.13201/j.issn.1001-1781.2018.19.015](https://doi.org/10.13201/j.issn.1001-1781.2018.19.015)

## Content

1. Lin Chuang Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2018 Oct 5;32(19):1502-1503. 
doi: 10.13201/j.issn.1001-1781.2018.19.015.

[The clinical characteristics of pediatric external auditory canal keratosis 
obturans].

[Article in Chinese]

Yin DP(1), Zhu HE(1), Ma HM(1), Chen PP(1), Dou XW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Children's Hospital of 
Soochow University, Suzhou, 215003, China.

Objective: To analyze the clinical characteristics of pediatric external 
auditory canalkeratosis obturans(KO). Method: Retrospective analyze the clinical 
data of twenty-three patients were diagnosed with external auditory canal 
cholesteatoma(EACC). Their chief complaint, the course of the disease, clinical 
characteristics,CT manifestations,surgical procedure and prognosis were 
retrospectively analyzed. The clinical characteristics between EACC and KO were 
compared.Result: Twenty cases(22 ears) were eventually diagnosed as KO. Among 
them, 2 cases were bilaterally involved. In the remaining unilateral cases, 
right ear was involved in 11 cases and left ear in 7 cases. All patients 
complained otalgia(100%). Purulent otorrhea was found in 17 ears(77.3%), and 
hearing loss withpurulent otorrhea in 3 ears(13.6%). Otoscopic examination found 
17 ear with granulation(77.3%).CT scan found deformation of the osseous ear 
canal and displacement of the tympanic membrane because of compression in 18 
ears(81.8%), and the bony canal was absorpt because of pression in 7 
cases(38.9%).All patients underwent otoendoscopic operation,and tympanic 
membrane perforation was found in 4 cases.Postoperative pathologic examination 
results were keratin epithelial. Conclusion: EACC is easily confused with KO. KO 
should be considered in the following circumstances: patient who complained of 
ear pain, ear granulation with purulent discharge, or circinate deformation of 
the osseous ear canal and displacement of the tympanic membrane in CT scan.

Copyright© by the Editorial Department of Journal of Clinical 
Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery.

DOI: 10.13201/j.issn.1001-1781.2018.19.015
PMID: 30550198

Conflict of interest statement: The authors of this article and the planning 
committee members and staff have no relevant financial relationships with 
commercial interests to disclose.