---
reference_id: "PMID:35791610"
title: "C12orf57 pathogenic variants: a unique cause of developmental encephalopathy in a south Indian child."
authors:
- Alfiya F
- Jose M
- Chandrasekharan SV
- Sundaram S
- Urulangodi M
- Thomas B
- Radhakrishnan A
- Banerjee M
- Menon RN
journal: J Genet
year: '2022'
keywords:
- Agenesis of Corpus Callosum/genetics
- Brain Diseases
- Child
- Coloboma/genetics
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Seizures/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# C12orf57 pathogenic variants: a unique cause of developmental encephalopathy in a south Indian child.
**Authors:** Alfiya F, Jose M, Chandrasekharan SV, Sundaram S, Urulangodi M, Thomas B, Radhakrishnan A, Banerjee M, Menon RN
**Journal:** J Genet (2022)

## Content

1. J Genet. 2022;101:30.

C12orf57 pathogenic variants: a unique cause of developmental encephalopathy in 
a south Indian child.

Alfiya F(1), Jose M, Chandrasekharan SV, Sundaram S, Urulangodi M, Thomas B, 
Radhakrishnan A, Banerjee M, Menon RN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences 
and Technology (SCTIMST), Thiruvananthapuram 695 011, India. rsnmenon@yahoo.com.

Open reading frame variants which lack stop codons such as C12orf57 variants are 
known to cause Temtamy syndrome, an extremely rare disorder characterized by 
intellectual disability, seizures, facial dysmorphism and agenesis of corpus 
callosum. C12orf57 was initially reported to be required for human corpus 
callosum development. We report the first child who is of Indian origin with 
developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (DEE) with a unique phenotypic 
evolution as focal onset reflex seizures. We performed whole exome sequencing of 
genomic DNA isolated from peripheral blood samples of proband and his parents. 
Two pathogenic compound heterozygous variants, a start loss variant 
(Chr12:7053285:c.1A>G) and a premature stop gain variant 
(Chr12:7053327:c.43C>T), involving the C12orf57 gene were identified in the 
proband. Our case report which details genotyping in this rare syndromic 
developmental encephalopathy, with no prior cases reported from India, expands 
the ethnic spectrum of patients.

PMID: 35791610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]