---
reference_id: "PMID:37626912"
title: Circulated TGF-β1 and VEGF-A as Biomarkers for Fabry Disease-Associated Cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Ivanova MM
- Dao J
- Slayeh OA
- Friedman A
- Goker-Alpan O
journal: Cells
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cells12162102
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- Female
- Transforming Growth Factor beta1
- Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A
- "Fabry Disease/complications, diagnosis"
- Fibroblast Growth Factor 2
- Cardiomyopathies
- "Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic"
- Transforming Growth Factor beta
- Biomarkers
- Hypertrophy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Circulated TGF-β1 and VEGF-A as Biomarkers for Fabry Disease-Associated Cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Ivanova MM, Dao J, Slayeh OA, Friedman A, Goker-Alpan O
**Journal:** Cells (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells12162102](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells12162102)

## Content

1. Cells. 2023 Aug 19;12(16):2102. doi: 10.3390/cells12162102.

Circulated TGF-β1 and VEGF-A as Biomarkers for Fabry Disease-Associated
Cardiomyopathy.

Ivanova MM(1), Dao J(1), Slayeh OA(1), Friedman A(1), Goker-Alpan O(1).

Author information:
(1)Lysosomal & Rare Disorders Research and Treatment Center, 3702 Pender Drive,
Ste 170, Fairfax, VA 22030, USA.

Fabry disease (FD) is a lysosomal disorder caused by α-galactosidase A
deficiency, resulting in the accumulation of globotriaosylceramide (Gb-3) and
its metabolite globotriaosylsphingosine (Lyso-Gb-3). Cardiovascular
complications and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) are the most frequent
manifestations of FD. While an echocardiogram and cardiac MRI are clinical tools
to assess cardiac involvement, hypertrophic pattern variations and fibrosis make
it crucial to identify biomarkers to predict early cardiac outcomes. This study
aims to investigate potential biomarkers associated with HCM in FD: transforming
growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1), TGF-β active form (a-TGF-β), vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF-A), and fibroblast growth factor (FGF2) in 45 patients with
FD, categorized into cohorts based on the HCM severity. TGF-β1, a-TGF-β, FGF2,
and VEGF-A were elevated in FD. While the association of TGF-β1 with HCM was not
gender-related, VEGF was elevated in males with FD and HCM. Female patients with
abnormal electrocardiograms but without overt HCM also have elevated TGF-β1.
Lyso-Gb3 is correlated with TGF-β1, VEGF-A, and a-TGF-β1. Elevation of TGF-β1
provides evidence of the chronic inflammatory state as a cause of myocardial
fibrosis in FD patients; thus, it is a potential marker of early cardiac
fibrosis detected even prior to hypertrophy. TGF-β1 and VEGF biomarkers may be
prognostic indicators of adverse cardiovascular events in FD.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12162102
PMCID: PMC10453505
PMID: 37626912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to
publish the results.
