---
reference_id: "PMID:38638097"
title: "Epidemiology of acute hepatitis C and hepatitis C virus-related cirrhosis in reproductive-age women, 1990-2019: An analysis of the Global Burden of Disease study."
authors:
- Zou Y
- Yue M
- Ye X
- Wang Y
- Ma X
- Zhang A
- Xia X
- Chen H
- Yu R
- Yang S
- Huang P
journal: J Glob Health
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7189/jogh.14.04077
keywords:
- Pregnancy
- Humans
- Female
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Hepacivirus
- Global Burden of Disease
- "Hepatitis C/complications, epidemiology"
- "Liver Cirrhosis/epidemiology, etiology"
- Incidence
- Global Health
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of acute hepatitis C and hepatitis C virus-related cirrhosis in reproductive-age women, 1990-2019: An analysis of the Global Burden of Disease study.
**Authors:** Zou Y, Yue M, Ye X, Wang Y, Ma X, Zhang A, Xia X, Chen H, Yu R, Yang S, Huang P
**Journal:** J Glob Health (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7189/jogh.14.04077](https://doi.org/10.7189/jogh.14.04077)

## Content

1. J Glob Health. 2024 Apr 19;14:04077. doi: 10.7189/jogh.14.04077.

Epidemiology of acute hepatitis C and hepatitis C virus-related cirrhosis in 
reproductive-age women, 1990-2019: An analysis of the Global Burden of Disease 
study.

Zou Y(#)(1), Yue M(#)(2), Ye X(#)(1), Wang Y(3), Ma X(1), Zhang A(4), Xia 
X(4)(5), Chen H(3), Yu R(1), Yang S(6), Huang P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, National Vaccine Innovation Platform, Centre for 
Global Health, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 
China.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing 
Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(3)Department of Infectious Disease, Jurong Hospital Affiliated to Jiangsu 
University, Jurong, China.
(4)Faculty of Life Science and Technology, Kunming University of Science and 
Technology, Kunming, China.
(5)Kunming Medical University, Kunming, China.
(6)Department of Biostatistics, National Vaccine Innovation Platform, Centre for 
Global Health, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 
China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The current study uniquely focuses on the global incidence and 
temporal trends of acute hepatitis C (AHC) and hepatitis C virus (HCV)-related 
cirrhosis among women of reproductive age (15-49 years) from 1990-2019. The risk 
of vertical transmission and adverse perinatal outcomes associated with HCV 
infection underscores the importance of prioritising these women in HCV 
prevention efforts.
METHODS: Leveraging the Global Burden of Disease 2019 data, we calculated 
age-standardised incidence rates (ASIR) and assessed temporal trends via the 
average annual percent change from joinpoint regression. The age-period-cohort 
model was employed to understand further the effects of age, period, and birth 
cohort.
RESULTS: Over the 30 years, global incidences of AHC and HCV-related cirrhosis 
in reproductive-age women increased by 46.45 and 72.74%, respectively. The ASIR 
of AHC was highest in low sociodemographic index regions but showed a declining 
trend. Conversely, the ASIR of HCV-related cirrhosis displayed unfavourable 
trends in low, low-middle, and high sociodemographic index regions. Special 
attention is necessary for sub-Saharan Africa, high-income North America, 
Eastern Europe, and Central Asia due to their high incidence rates or increasing 
trends of AHC and HCV-related cirrhosis. Notably, the age-period-cohort model 
suggests a recent resurgence in AHC and HCV-related cirrhosis risk.
CONCLUSIONS: The current study is the first to thoroughly evaluate the trends of 
AHC and HCV-related cirrhosis among reproductive-age women, shedding light on 
previously unexplored aspects of HCV epidemiology. Our findings identify 
critical areas where health care systems must adapt to the changing dynamics of 
HCV infection. The detailed stratification by region and nation further enables 
the development of localised prevention and treatment strategies.

Copyright © 2024 by the Journal of Global Health. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.7189/jogh.14.04077
PMCID: PMC11026988
PMID: 38638097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of interest: The authors have 
completed the ICMJE Disclosure of Interest Form (available upon request from the 
corresponding author) and disclose no relevant interests.