---
reference_id: "PMID:37365177"
title: Impaired AIF-CHCHD4 interaction and mitochondrial calcium overload contribute to auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder in patient-iPSC-derived neurons with AIFM1 variant.
authors:
- Qiu Y
- Wang H
- Fan M
- Pan H
- Guan J
- Jiang Y
- Jia Z
- Wu K
- Zhou H
- Zhuang Q
- Lei Z
- Ding X
- Cai H
- Dong Y
- Yan L
- Lin A
- Fu Y
- Zhang D
- Yan Q
- Wang Q
journal: Cell Death Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41419-023-05899-6
keywords:
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- "Mitochondrial Precursor Protein Import Complex Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Hearing Loss, Central"
- "Leukocytes, Mononuclear/metabolism"
- Calcium/metabolism
- Neurons/metabolism
- "Apoptosis Inducing Factor/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Child
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impaired AIF-CHCHD4 interaction and mitochondrial calcium overload contribute to auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder in patient-iPSC-derived neurons with AIFM1 variant.
**Authors:** Qiu Y, Wang H, Fan M, Pan H, Guan J, Jiang Y, Jia Z, Wu K, Zhou H, Zhuang Q, Lei Z, Ding X, Cai H, Dong Y, Yan L, Lin A, Fu Y, Zhang D, Yan Q, Wang Q
**Journal:** Cell Death Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41419-023-05899-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41419-023-05899-6)

## Content

1. Cell Death Dis. 2023 Jun 26;14(6):375. doi: 10.1038/s41419-023-05899-6.

Impaired AIF-CHCHD4 interaction and mitochondrial calcium overload contribute to 
auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder in patient-iPSC-derived neurons with AIFM1 
variant.

Qiu Y(#)(1), Wang H(#)(2), Fan M(1)(3), Pan H(1), Guan J(2), Jiang Y(1), Jia 
Z(1), Wu K(2), Zhou H(1), Zhuang Q(1), Lei Z(1), Ding X(1), Cai H(1), Dong Y(1), 
Yan L(1), Lin A(1), Fu Y(4), Zhang D(5), Yan Q(6)(7)(8), Wang Q(9).

Author information:
(1)College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310058, 
China.
(2)Senior Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Chinese PLA 
Institute of Otolaryngology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, 100853, 
China.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310003, China.
(4)The Children's Hospital of Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang, 310052, China.
(5)College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310058, 
China. zhangd_iqb@zju.edu.cn.
(6)College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310058, 
China. qfyan@zju.edu.cn.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310003, China. 
qfyan@zju.edu.cn.
(8)Key Laboratory for Cell and Gene Engineering of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang, 310058, China. qfyan@zju.edu.cn.
(9)Senior Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Chinese PLA 
Institute of Otolaryngology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, 100853, 
China. wqjavm301@sina.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder (ANSD) is a hearing impairment caused by 
dysfunction of inner hair cells, ribbon synapses, spiral ganglion neurons and/or 
the auditory nerve itself. Approximately 1/7000 newborns have abnormal auditory 
nerve function, accounting for 10%-14% of cases of permanent hearing loss in 
children. Although we previously identified the AIFM1 c.1265 G > A variant to be 
associated with ANSD, the mechanism by which ANSD is associated with AIFM1 is 
poorly understood. We generated induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) via nucleofection with episomal 
plasmids. The patient-specific iPSCs were edited via CRISPR/Cas9 technology to 
generate gene-corrected isogenic iPSCs. These iPSCs were further differentiated 
into neurons via neural stem cells (NSCs). The pathogenic mechanism was explored 
in these neurons. In patient cells (PBMCs, iPSCs, and neurons), the AIFM1 
c.1265 G > A variant caused a novel splicing variant (c.1267-1305del), resulting 
in AIF p.R422Q and p.423-435del proteins, which impaired AIF dimerization. Such 
impaired AIF dimerization then weakened the interaction between AIF and 
coiled-coil-helix-coiled-coil-helix domain-containing protein 4 (CHCHD4). On the 
one hand, the mitochondrial import of ETC complex subunits was inhibited, 
subsequently leading to an increased ADP/ATP ratio and elevated ROS levels. On 
the other hand, MICU1-MICU2 heterodimerization was impaired, leading to mCa2+ 
overload. Calpain was activated by mCa2+ and subsequently cleaved AIF for its 
translocation into the nucleus, ultimately resulting in caspase-independent 
apoptosis. Interestingly, correction of the AIFM1 variant significantly restored 
the structure and function of AIF, further improving the physiological state of 
patient-specific iPSC-derived neurons. This study demonstrates that the AIFM1 
variant is one of the molecular bases of ANSD. Mitochondrial dysfunction, 
especially mCa2+ overload, plays a prominent role in ANSD associated with AIFM1. 
Our findings help elucidate the mechanism of ANSD and may lead to the provision 
of novel therapies.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-023-05899-6
PMCID: PMC10293272
PMID: 37365177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.