---
reference_id: "PMID:8571951"
title: "Atelosteogenesis type II is caused by mutations in the diastrophic dysplasia sulfate-transporter gene (DTDST): evidence for a phenotypic series involving three chondrodysplasias."
authors:
- Hästbacka J
- Superti-Furga A
- Wilcox WR
- Rimoin DL
- Cohn DH
- Lander ES
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1996'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atelosteogenesis type II is caused by mutations in the diastrophic dysplasia sulfate-transporter gene (DTDST): evidence for a phenotypic series involving three chondrodysplasias.
**Authors:** Hästbacka J, Superti-Furga A, Wilcox WR, Rimoin DL, Cohn DH, Lander ES
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1996)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1996 Feb;58(2):255-62.

Atelosteogenesis type II is caused by mutations in the diastrophic dysplasia 
sulfate-transporter gene (DTDST): evidence for a phenotypic series involving 
three chondrodysplasias.

Hästbacka J(1), Superti-Furga A, Wilcox WR, Rimoin DL, Cohn DH, Lander ES.

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, USA. johanna.hastbacka@helsinki.fi

Atelosteogenesis type II (AO II) is a neonatally lethal chondrodysplasia whose 
clinical and histological characteristics resemble those of another 
chondrodysplasia, the much less severe diastrophic dysplasia (DTD). The 
similarity suggests a shared pathogenesis involving lesions in the same 
biochemical pathway and perhaps the same gene. DTD is caused by mutations in the 
recently identified diastrophic dysplasia sulfate-transporter gene (DTDST). 
Here, we report that AOII patients also have DTDST mutations, which lead to 
defective uptake of inorganic sulfate and insufficient sulfation of 
macromolecules by patient mesenchymal cells in vitro. Together with our recent 
observation that a third even more severe chondrodysplasia, achondrogenesis type 
IB, is also caused by mutations in DTDST, these results demonstrate a phenotypic 
series of three chondrodysplasias of increasing severity caused by lesions in a 
single sulfate-transporter gene. The severity of the phenotype appears to be 
correlated with the predicted effect of the mutations on the residual activity 
of the DTDST protein.

PMCID: PMC1914552
PMID: 8571951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]