---
reference_id: "PMID:10617907"
title: The myocilin (MYOC) gene expression in the human trabecular meshwork.
authors:
- Takahashi H
- Noda S
- Mashima Y
- Kubota R
- Ohtake Y
- Tanino T
- Kudoh J
- Minoshima S
- Oguchi Y
- Shimizu N
journal: Curr Eye Res
year: '2000'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The myocilin (MYOC) gene expression in the human trabecular meshwork.
**Authors:** Takahashi H, Noda S, Mashima Y, Kubota R, Ohtake Y, Tanino T, Kudoh J, Minoshima S, Oguchi Y, Shimizu N
**Journal:** Curr Eye Res (2000)

## Content

1. Curr Eye Res. 2000 Feb;20(2):81-4.

The myocilin (MYOC) gene expression in the human trabecular meshwork.

Takahashi H(1), Noda S, Mashima Y, Kubota R, Ohtake Y, Tanino T, Kudoh J, 
Minoshima S, Oguchi Y, Shimizu N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.

PURPOSE: We previously reported a novel cytoskeletal protein with a myosin-like 
domain which is localized in the ciliary rootlet and basal body of connecting 
cilium of photoreceptor and hence we named it 'myocilin'. It was soon realized 
that myocilin is identical to a protein called TIGR (trabecular meshwork 
inducible glucocorticoid response protein) which was found to be responsible for 
the pathogenesis of juvenile open angle glaucoma. In this study, we employed in 
situ RNA hybridization to examine the myocilin (MYOC)/ TIGR gene expression in 
the trabecular meshworks of glaucomatous and nonglaucomatous eyes.
METHODS: The glaucomatous specimens were obtained by trabeculectomy from the 
patients with primary open angle glaucoma (POAG), chronic angle closure glaucoma 
(CACG) and steroid glaucoma, respectively, and the nonglaucomatous specimens 
were obtained from a victim of traffic accident at autopsy and from a patient 
with maxillary sinus carcinoma at enucleation for the operation. The in situ RNA 
hybridization was carried out with digoxigenin-labeled sense and antisense RNA 
probes.
RESULTS: In all cases, hybridization signals were detected primarily in the 
trabecular meshwork cells and secondarily in the fibroblast-like cells of 
corneoscleral wall.
CONCLUSIONS: Myocilin gene is expressed clearly in the trabecular meshwork cells 
of both glaucomatous and nonglaucomatous eyes.

PMID: 10617907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]