---
reference_id: "PMID:17222357"
title: Noonan syndrome.
authors:
- van der Burgt I
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Noonan syndrome.
**Authors:** van der Burgt I
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-2-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-2-4)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2007 Jan 14;2:4. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-4.

Noonan syndrome.

van der Burgt I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Centre st Radboud, PO Box 
9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands. i.vanderburgt@antrg.umcn.nl

Noonan Syndrome (NS) is characterised by short stature, typical facial 
dysmorphology and congenital heart defects. The incidence of NS is estimated to 
be between 1:1000 and 1:2500 live births. The main facial features of NS are 
hypertelorism with down-slanting palpebral fissures, ptosis and low-set 
posteriorly rotated ears with a thickened helix. The cardiovascular defects most 
commonly associated with this condition are pulmonary stenosis and hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy. Other associated features are webbed neck, chest deformity, mild 
intellectual deficit, cryptorchidism, poor feeding in infancy, bleeding tendency 
and lymphatic dysplasias. The syndrome is transmitted as an autosomal dominant 
trait. In approximately 50% of cases, the disease is caused by missense 
mutations in the PTPN11 gene on chromosome 12, resulting in a gain of function 
of the non-receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2 protein. Recently, 
mutations in the KRAS gene have been identified in a small proportion of 
patients with NS. A DNA test for mutation analysis can be carried out on blood, 
chorionic villi and amniotic fluid samples. NS should be considered in all 
foetuses with polyhydramnion, pleural effusions, oedema and increased nuchal 
fluid with a normal karyotype. With special care and counselling, the majority 
of children with NS will grow up and function normally in the adult world. 
Management should address feeding problems in early childhood, evaluation of 
cardiac function and assessment of growth and motor development. Physiotherapy 
and/or speech therapy should be offered if indicated. A complete eye examination 
and hearing evaluation should be performed during the first few years of 
schooling. Preoperative coagulation studies are indicated. Signs and symptoms 
lessen with age and most adults with NS do not require special medical care.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-4
PMCID: PMC1781428
PMID: 17222357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]