---
reference_id: "PMID:3788973"
title: The incidence and gene frequency of ataxia-telangiectasia in the United States.
authors:
- Swift M
- Morrell D
- Cromartie E
- Chamberlin AR
- Skolnick MH
- Bishop DT
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1986'
keywords:
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/epidemiology, ethnology, genetics"
- Ethnicity
- Gene Frequency
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Pedigree
- Racial Groups
- United States
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The incidence and gene frequency of ataxia-telangiectasia in the United States.
**Authors:** Swift M, Morrell D, Cromartie E, Chamberlin AR, Skolnick MH, Bishop DT
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1986)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1986 Nov;39(5):573-83.

The incidence and gene frequency of ataxia-telangiectasia in the United States.

Swift M, Morrell D, Cromartie E, Chamberlin AR, Skolnick MH, Bishop DT.

Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive neurological syndrome of 
considerable interest because homozygotes are highly predisposed to cancer. 
Vigorous casefinding in the United States in 1970-72 and 1980-84 identified 231 
white, 29 black, and three Oriental A-T cases that provide information about the 
incidence and gene frequency of A-T. White patients identified in this study 
were born at the rate of 3.0 per million live births in the U.S. in the years 
1965-69. The highest observed incidence was in the state of Michigan for 
1965-69, where identified white A-T patients were born at the rate of 11.3 per 
million births. Based on the incidence data, the minimum frequency of a single 
hypothetical A-T gene in the U.S. white population was estimated to be .0017. 
Pedigree analysis, which estimates the gene frequency from the proportion of 
affected close blood relatives of homozygous probands, estimated the most likely 
gene frequency to be .007 on the assumption that A-T is a single homogeneous 
genetic syndrome, with 95% confidence limits of .0012-.02. Given that 
complementation analysis has demonstrated the genetic heterogeneity of A-T, the 
A-T heterozygote frequency will probably fall between 0.68% and 7.7%, with 2.8% 
being the most likely estimate.

PMCID: PMC1684065
PMID: 3788973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]