---
reference_id: "PMID:35142290"
title: A novel gene ZNF862 causes hereditary gingival fibromatosis.
authors:
- Wu J
- Chen D
- Huang H
- Luo N
- Chen H
- Zhao J
- Wang Y
- Zhao T
- Huang S
- Ren Y
- Zhai T
- Sun W
- Li H
- Li W
journal: Elife
year: '2022'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.66646
keywords:
- Cell Proliferation
- Down-Regulation
- Female
- "Fibromatosis, Gingival/genetics, pathology"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Gene Knockdown Techniques
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genetic Testing
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- RNA Interference
- "Sequence Analysis, RNA"
- Up-Regulation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel gene ZNF862 causes hereditary gingival fibromatosis.
**Authors:** Wu J, Chen D, Huang H, Luo N, Chen H, Zhao J, Wang Y, Zhao T, Huang S, Ren Y, Zhai T, Sun W, Li H, Li W
**Journal:** Elife (2022)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.66646](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.66646)

## Content

1. Elife. 2022 Feb 10;11:e66646. doi: 10.7554/eLife.66646.

A novel gene ZNF862 causes hereditary gingival fibromatosis.

Wu J(#)(1), Chen D(#)(2), Huang H(#)(2), Luo N(1), Chen H(2), Zhao J(1), Wang 
Y(2), Zhao T(1), Huang S(2)(3), Ren Y(1), Zhai T(2), Sun W(1), Li H(1), Li W(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nanjing Stomatological Hospital, Medical School 
of Nanjing University, Nanjing, China.
(2)BGI Genomics, BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China.
(3)Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University, Beijing, 
China.
(#)Contributed equally

Hereditary gingival fibromatosis (HGF) is the most common genetic form of 
gingival fibromatosis which is featured as a localized or generalized overgrowth 
of gingivae. Currently two genes (SOS1 and REST), as well as four loci (2p22.1, 
2p23.3-p22.3, 5q13-q22, and 11p15), have been identified as associated with HGF 
in a dominant inheritance pattern. Here, we report 13 individuals with 
autosomal-dominant HGF from a four-generation Chinese family. Whole-exome 
sequencing followed by further genetic co-segregation analysis was performed for 
the family members across three generations. A novel heterozygous missense 
mutation (c.2812G > A) in zinc finger protein 862 gene (ZNF862) was identified, 
and it is absent among the population as per the Genome Aggregation Database. 
The functional study supports a biological role of ZNF862 for increasing the 
profibrotic factors particularly COL1A1 synthesis and hence resulting in HGF. 
Here, for the first time we identify the physiological role of ZNF862 for the 
association with the HGF.

© 2022, Wu et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.66646
PMCID: PMC8856651
PMID: 35142290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JW, NL, JZ, TZ, SH, YR, WS, HL No competing 
interests declared, DC, HH, HC, YW, TZ, WL is employee of BGI Genomics