---
reference_id: "PMID:30461532"
title: The many faces of asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease overlap.
authors:
- Boulet LP
- Hanania NA
journal: Curr Opin Pulm Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000547
keywords:
- "Asthma-Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Overlap Syndrome/diagnosis, epidemiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Biomarkers
- Comorbidity
- Humans
- Phenotype
- Quality of Life
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The many faces of asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease overlap.
**Authors:** Boulet LP, Hanania NA
**Journal:** Curr Opin Pulm Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MCP.0000000000000547](https://doi.org/10.1097/MCP.0000000000000547)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2019 Jan;25(1):1-10. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000547.

The many faces of asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease overlap.

Boulet LP(1), Hanania NA(2).

Author information:
(1)Québec Heart and Lung Institute, Laval University, Québec, Canada.
(2)Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are 
common diseases that often overlap. The term asthma-COPD overlap (ACO) has been 
used to define this entity but there remain several speculations on its exact 
definition, impact, pathophysiology, clinical features, and management. We 
reviewed recent publications on ACO to obtain more insight of current knowledge 
and outline future needs.
RECENT FINDINGS: Criteria for ACO vary from one publication to another and the 
many variable features of these patients underline the need to reconsider the 
evaluation and approach of patients with overlapping features based on clinical 
traits and underlying biological mechanisms. Epidemiological studies reveal that 
ACO patients have generally an increased burden of illness and healthcare use in 
addition to poorer quality of life (QoL) compared with asthma and higher or 
equal to COPD. However, their long-term outcome seems better than patients with 
COPD alone. Various methods have been proposed to evaluate these patients but 
their usefulness compared to 'classical' investigation of obstructive lung 
diseases remains speculative and needs further evaluation. Furthermore, there 
are no formal studies that examined and compared the different treatment 
strategies of well-characterized patients with ACO as such patients are usually 
excluded from clinical trials.
SUMMARY: ACO is a common condition with variable features and a high burden of 
disease. There is no consensus on its definition, diagnostic, and clinical 
features and more research should be done on its optimal management and 
long-term outcomes.

DOI: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000547
PMID: 30461532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]