---
reference_id: "PMID:28087438"
title: "Dopa-responsive dystonia in Chinese patients: Including a novel heterozygous mutation in the GCH1 gene with an intermediate phenotype and one case of prenatal diagnosis."
authors:
- Zhang W
- Zhou Z
- Li X
- Huang Y
- Li T
- Lin Y
- Shao Y
- Hu H
- Liu H
- Liu L
journal: Neurosci Lett
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2017.01.019
keywords:
- Asian People/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- China
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Dystonic Disorders/genetics
- Female
- GTP Cyclohydrolase/genetics
- Genotype
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Pregnancy
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- Tyrosine 3-Monooxygenase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dopa-responsive dystonia in Chinese patients: Including a novel heterozygous mutation in the GCH1 gene with an intermediate phenotype and one case of prenatal diagnosis.
**Authors:** Zhang W, Zhou Z, Li X, Huang Y, Li T, Lin Y, Shao Y, Hu H, Liu H, Liu L
**Journal:** Neurosci Lett (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neulet.2017.01.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2017.01.019)

## Content

1. Neurosci Lett. 2017 Mar 22;644:48-54. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2017.01.019. Epub
2017 Jan 10.

Dopa-responsive dystonia in Chinese patients: Including a novel heterozygous
mutation in the GCH1 gene with an intermediate phenotype and one case of
prenatal diagnosis.

Zhang W(1), Zhou Z(1), Li X(1), Huang Y(1), Li T(1), Lin Y(1), Shao Y(1), Hu
H(2), Liu H(3), Liu L(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Endocrinology, Guangzhou Women and Children's
Medical Center, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(2)Pediatrics Research Institute, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(3)Department of Radiology, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(4)Department of Genetics and Endocrinology, Guangzhou Women and Children's
Medical Center, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. Electronic address:
liliuxia@hotmail.com.

Dopa-responsive dystonia (DRD) is a rare inherited disorder characterized by
childhood-onset dystonia with diurnal fluctuation and dramatic response to
levodopa. DRD is caused by the mutations in the genes encoding the enzymes
involved in the dopamine and tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) biosynthesis, including
the GTP cyclohydrolase 1 (GCH1) gene and the tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) gene. In
order to improve the diagnosis and expand the knowledge of the disease, we
collected and analyzed relevant data of clinical diagnosis and molecular
mutational analysis in five Chinese patients with DRD. The patients presented
with heterogenous symptoms of neurologic disorders. One novel mutation
p.Leu117Arg was identified in GCH1 gene with an intermediate phenotype which was
predicted in sillico to have a deleterious effect on the GCH1 protein function.
Seven different mutations were identified in TH gene including four known
mutations: p.Arg233His, p.Gly315Ser, p.Gly247Ser, p.Arg153X, and three novel
mutations: p.Arg476Ser, IVS6-34G > C, p.Arg328Gln. The mutation p.Arg233His was
predicted to link to the second type of TH deficiency (dopa-responsive infantile
parkinsonism with delayed motor development). The mutation p.Arg153X may link to
the first type of TH deficiency (typical DRD). The three novel mutations were
predicted to be damaging in sillico. A prenatal diagnosis was made in the fourth
pregnancy of the parents of patient 2 and proved to be a carrier of a
heterozygous mutation. Our study expands the spectrum of genotype of DRD in
China, provides new insights into the molecular mechanism of DRD and help to the
diagnosis and treatment of this disease.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2017.01.019
PMID: 28087438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
