---
reference_id: "PMID:36179757"
title: Diagnosis and classification of optic neuritis.
authors:
- Petzold A
- Fraser CL
- Abegg M
- Alroughani R
- Alshowaeir D
- Alvarenga R
- Andris C
- Asgari N
- Barnett Y
- Battistella R
- Behbehani R
- Berger T
- Bikbov MM
- Biotti D
- Biousse V
- Boschi A
- Brazdil M
- Brezhnev A
- Calabresi PA
- Cordonnier M
- Costello F
- Cruz FM
- Cunha LP
- Daoudi S
- Deschamps R
- de Seze J
- Diem R
- Etemadifar M
- Flores-Rivera J
- Fonseca P
- Frederiksen J
- Frohman E
- Frohman T
- Tilikete CF
- Fujihara K
- Gálvez A
- Gouider R
- Gracia F
- Grigoriadis N
- Guajardo JM
- Habek M
- Hawlina M
- Martínez-Lapiscina EH
- Hooker J
- Hor JY
- Howlett W
- Huang-Link Y
- Idrissova Z
- Illes Z
- Jancic J
- Jindahra P
- Karussis D
- Kerty E
- Kim HJ
- Lagrèze W
- Leocani L
- Levin N
- Liskova P
- Liu Y
- Maiga Y
- Marignier R
- McGuigan C
- Meira D
- Merle H
- Monteiro MLR
- Moodley A
- Moura F
- Muñoz S
- Mustafa S
- Nakashima I
- Noval S
- Oehninger C
- Ogun O
- Omoti A
- Pandit L
- Paul F
- Rebolleda G
- Reddel S
- Rejdak K
- Rejdak R
- Rodriguez-Morales AJ
- Rougier MB
- Sa MJ
- Sanchez-Dalmau B
- Saylor D
- Shatriah I
- Siva A
- Stiebel-Kalish H
- Szatmary G
- Ta L
- Tenembaum S
- Tran H
- Trufanov Y
- van Pesch V
- Wang AG
- Wattjes MP
- Willoughby E
- Zakaria M
- Zvornicanin J
- Balcer L
- Plant GT
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(22)00200-9
keywords:
- Humans
- Retrospective Studies
- Optic Neuritis/diagnosis
- Neuromyelitis Optica/diagnosis
- Multiple Sclerosis/complications
- Autoantibodies
- Aquaporin 4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and classification of optic neuritis.
**Authors:** Petzold A, Fraser CL, Abegg M, Alroughani R, Alshowaeir D, Alvarenga R, Andris C, Asgari N, Barnett Y, Battistella R, Behbehani R, Berger T, Bikbov MM, Biotti D, Biousse V, Boschi A, Brazdil M, Brezhnev A, Calabresi PA, Cordonnier M, Costello F, Cruz FM, Cunha LP, Daoudi S, Deschamps R, de Seze J, Diem R, Etemadifar M, Flores-Rivera J, Fonseca P, Frederiksen J, Frohman E, Frohman T, Tilikete CF, Fujihara K, Gálvez A, Gouider R, Gracia F, Grigoriadis N, Guajardo JM, Habek M, Hawlina M, Martínez-Lapiscina EH, Hooker J, Hor JY, Howlett W, Huang-Link Y, Idrissova Z, Illes Z, Jancic J, Jindahra P, Karussis D, Kerty E, Kim HJ, Lagrèze W, Leocani L, Levin N, Liskova P, Liu Y, Maiga Y, Marignier R, McGuigan C, Meira D, Merle H, Monteiro MLR, Moodley A, Moura F, Muñoz S, Mustafa S, Nakashima I, Noval S, Oehninger C, Ogun O, Omoti A, Pandit L, Paul F, Rebolleda G, Reddel S, Rejdak K, Rejdak R, Rodriguez-Morales AJ, Rougier MB, Sa MJ, Sanchez-Dalmau B, Saylor D, Shatriah I, Siva A, Stiebel-Kalish H, Szatmary G, Ta L, Tenembaum S, Tran H, Trufanov Y, van Pesch V, Wang AG, Wattjes MP, Willoughby E, Zakaria M, Zvornicanin J, Balcer L, Plant GT
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(22)00200-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(22)00200-9)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2022 Dec;21(12):1120-1134. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(22)00200-9. 
Epub 2022 Sep 27.

Diagnosis and classification of optic neuritis.

Petzold A(1), Fraser CL(2), Abegg M(3), Alroughani R(4), Alshowaeir D(5), 
Alvarenga R(6), Andris C(7), Asgari N(8), Barnett Y(9), Battistella R(10), 
Behbehani R(11), Berger T(12), Bikbov MM(13), Biotti D(14), Biousse V(15), 
Boschi A(16), Brazdil M(17), Brezhnev A(18), Calabresi PA(19), Cordonnier M(20), 
Costello F(21), Cruz FM(22), Cunha LP(23), Daoudi S(24), Deschamps R(25), de 
Seze J(26), Diem R(27), Etemadifar M(28), Flores-Rivera J(29), Fonseca P(30), 
Frederiksen J(31), Frohman E(32), Frohman T(32), Tilikete CF(33), Fujihara 
K(34), Gálvez A(35), Gouider R(36), Gracia F(37), Grigoriadis N(38), Guajardo 
JM(39), Habek M(40), Hawlina M(41), Martínez-Lapiscina EH(42), Hooker J(43), Hor 
JY(44), Howlett W(45), Huang-Link Y(46), Idrissova Z(47), Illes Z(48), Jancic 
J(49), Jindahra P(50), Karussis D(51), Kerty E(52), Kim HJ(53), Lagrèze W(54), 
Leocani L(55), Levin N(56), Liskova P(57), Liu Y(58), Maiga Y(59), Marignier 
R(60), McGuigan C(61), Meira D(62), Merle H(63), Monteiro MLR(64), Moodley 
A(65), Moura F(66), Muñoz S(67), Mustafa S(68), Nakashima I(69), Noval S(70), 
Oehninger C(71), Ogun O(72), Omoti A(73), Pandit L(74), Paul F(75), Rebolleda 
G(76), Reddel S(77), Rejdak K(78), Rejdak R(79), Rodriguez-Morales AJ(80), 
Rougier MB(81), Sa MJ(82), Sanchez-Dalmau B(83), Saylor D(84), Shatriah I(85), 
Siva A(86), Stiebel-Kalish H(87), Szatmary G(88), Ta L(89), Tenembaum S(90), 
Tran H(91), Trufanov Y(92), van Pesch V(93), Wang AG(94), Wattjes MP(95), 
Willoughby E(96), Zakaria M(97), Zvornicanin J(98), Balcer L(99), Plant GT(100).

Author information:
(1)The National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, University College 
London, London, UK; Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, UK; Neuro-ophthalmology 
Expert Centre, Amsterdam University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. 
Electronic address: a.petzold@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(4)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, Al-Amiri Hospital, Kuwait 
City, Kuwait.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(6)Department of Neurology, Universidade Federal do Estado do Rio de Janeiro 
(UNIRIO), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(7)Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital Liege, University of Liège, 
Liège, Belgium.
(8)Department of Neurology, Slagelse and Institute of Regional Health Research, 
and Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, 
Denmark.
(9)Department of Neuroradiology, St Vincent's Hospital, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(10)Department of Neuro-Ophthalmology, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, 
Brazil.
(11)Neuro-Ophthalmology Unit, Ibn Sina Hospital, Kuwait City, Kuwait.
(12)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(13)Ufa Eye Research Institute, Ufa, Russia.
(14)Unité de Neurologie Inflammatoire B4, CHU Pierre-Paul Riquet/Purpan, 
Toulouse, France.
(15)Neuro-Ophthalmology Unit, Emory Eye Center, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, 
USA.
(16)Department of Head and Neck, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, 
Belgium; Department of Ophthalmology, Cliniques Universitaires Saint Luc, 
Brusseles, Belgium.
(17)Department of Neurology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic; St Anne's 
University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic.
(18)Department of Ophthalmology, Kursk State Medical University, Kursk, Russia.
(19)The Solomon H Snyder Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(20)Department of Ophthalmology, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Bruxelles, 
Belgium.
(21)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, 
Canada.
(22)College of Medicine, University of the Philippines-Philippine General 
Hospital, Manila, Philippines.
(23)Surgery Department of Juiz de Fora Medical School, Federal University of 
Juiz de Fora, Juiz de Fora, Brazil.
(24)Department of Neurology, University Mouloud Mammeri de Ttizi Ouzou, Ttizi 
Ouzou, Algeria.
(25)Department of Neurology, Hospital Foundation Adolphe de Rothschild, Paris, 
France.
(26)Department of Neurology, Hopitaux Universitaires Strasbourg, Strasbourg, 
France.
(27)Department of Neurology, University Clinic Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(28)Department of Neurosurgery, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, 
Iran.
(29)Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Instituto Nacional de Neurología y 
Neurocirugía, Centro Médico ABC, Mexico City, Mexico.
(30)Department of Ophthalmology, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, 
Coimbra, Portugal; Coimbra Institute for Biomedical Imaging and Translational 
Research (CIBIT), University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
(31)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark; Department of Neurology, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(32)Department of Neurology, Laboratory of Neuroimmunology, Stanford University 
School of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA, USA.
(33)Lyon Neurosciences Research Center, Lyon I University, Lyon France; 
Neuro-Ophthalmology Unit, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France.
(34)Department of Multiple Sclerosis Therapeutics, Fukushima Medical University 
School of Medicine, Koriyama, Japan.
(35)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Alberta, AB, Canada.
(36)Department of Neurology, Razi University Hospital, University of Tunis El 
Manar, Tunis, Tunisia.
(37)Department of Neurology, Hospital Santo Tomás, Panama City, Panama; 
Instituto Conmemorativo Gorgas de Estudios de la Salud, Universidad 
Interamericana de Panama, Panama City, Panama.
(38)Department of Neurology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, 
Greece.
(39)Servicio de Oftalmología, Facultad de Medicina, Clínica Alemana Universidad 
del Desarrollo, Santiago, Chile.
(40)Department of Neurology, University of Zagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb, 
Croatia; Department of Neurology, University Hospital Center Zagreb, Zagreb, 
Croatia.
(41)Eye Hospital, University Medical Centre, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(42)Department of Neurology, Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; 
Institut d'Investigacions Biomediques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, 
Spain.
(43)Aga Khan University Hospital, Nairobi, Kenya.
(44)Department of Neurology, Penang General Hospital, Penang, Malaysia.
(45)Department of Neurology, Kilimanjaro Christian Medical Center (KCMC), Moshi, 
Tanzania.
(46)Department of Neurology, Linköping University Hospital, Linköping, Sweden.
(47)Department of Neurology, Asfendiyarov Kazakh National Medical University, 
Almaty, Kazakhstan.
(48)Department of Neurology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark.
(49)Clinic of Neurology and Psychiatry for Children and Youth, Faculty of 
Medicine University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
(50)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(51)Multiple Sclerosis Center, Sheba Medical Center, Sackler School of Medicine, 
Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
(52)Department of Neurology, Oslo University Hospital, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, 
Norway.
(53)Department of Neurology, National Cancer Center, Goyang, South Korea.
(54)Eye Center, Medical Center, Medical Faculty, University of Freiburg, 
Germany.
(55)Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Experimental Neurophysiology Unit, 
Institute of Experimental Neurology-INSPE, Scientific Institute San Raffaele, 
Milan, Italy.
(56)Department of Neurology, Hadassah Medical Center and Faculty of Medicine, 
Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel.
(57)Department of Paediatrics and Inherited Metabolic Disorders, and Department 
of Ophthalmology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General 
University Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
(58)Department of Radiology, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China.
(59)Department of Neurology, Gabriel Touré University Hospital, Bamako, Mali.
(60)Service de Neurologie, Sclérose en Plaques, Pathologies de la Myéline et 
NeuroInflammation, and Centre de Référence des Maladies Inflammatoires Rares du 
Cerveau et de la Moelle, Hôpital Neurologique Pierre Wertheimer, Bron, France.
(61)School of Medicine, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland; Department 
of Neurology, St Vincent's University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(62)Centro Hospitalar de Vila Nova de Gaia/Espinho, Portugal.
(63)Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital of Martinique, Martinique, 
French West Indies, France.
(64)Division of Ophthalmology, University of São Paulo Medical School, São 
Paulo, Brazil.
(65)Department of Neurology, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa.
(66)Department of Neuro-Ophthalmology, Instituto Paulista Da Visão, 
Higienópolis, Brazil.
(67)Department of Ophthalmology, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, 
L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.
(68)Department of Neurology, Prime Healthcare Group, Dubai, United Arab 
Emirates.
(69)Department of Neurology, Tohoku Medical and Pharmaceutical University, 
Sendai, Japan.
(70)Department of Ophthalmology, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain.
(71)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine UDELAR, Montevideo, Uruguay.
(72)Department of Ophthalmology, College of Medicine, University of Ibadan, 
Ibadan, Nigeria.
(73)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Benin, Benin City, Nigeria.
(74)Center for Advanced Neurological Research, Nitte University, Karnataka, 
India.
(75)Experimental and Clinical Research Center, Max Delbrueck Center for 
Molecular Medicine and Charité- Universiätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(76)Department of Ophthalmology of Ramon y Cajal Hospital, and Alcala University 
Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(77)Sydney Neurology, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(78)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland.
(79)Department of General and Pediatric Ophthalmology Medical University of 
Lublin, Lublin, Poland.
(80)Grupo de Investigación Biomedicina, Faculty of Medicine, Fundacion 
Universitaria Autonoma de las Americas, Risaralda, Colombia.
(81)Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, 
France.
(82)Department of Neurology, Centro Hospitalar Universitário São João and 
Faculty of Health Sciences, University Fernando Pessoa, Porto, Portugal.
(83)Department of Ophthalmology, Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(84)Department of Ophthalmology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(85)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, School of Medical Sciences, 
Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kelantan, Malaysia.
(86)Department of Neurology, Istanbul University-Cerrahpasa, Cerrahpasa School 
of Medicine, Istanbul, Türkiye.
(87)Neuro-Ophthalmology Unit at Rabin Medical Center, Sackler School of 
Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
(88)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Mississippi Medical Center, 
Jackson, MS, USA.
(89)Department of General Planning, Ho Chi Minh City Eye Hospital, Ho Chi Minh 
City, Vietnam.
(90)Department of Neurology, National Paediatric Hospital Dr Juan P Garrahan, 
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(91)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine, Ho Chi Minh City 
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, and Hai Yen Vision Institute, Ho Chi Minh 
City, Vietnam.
(92)Department of Neurology and Reflexology, The Shupyk National Healthcare 
University of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine.
(93)Department of Neurology, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc Brussels, 
Belgium; Neurochemistry Unit, Institute of Neuroscience, UCLouvain, Brussels, 
Belgium.
(94)Department of Ophthalmology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, National 
Yang-Ming Chiao-Tung University School of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(95)Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Neuroradiology, Hannover Medical 
School, Hannover, Germany.
(96)Department of Neurology, Auckland City Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand.
(97)Department of Neurology, Ain Shams University Hospitals, Cairo, Egypt.
(98)Department of Ophthalmology, University Clinical Center Tuzla, Tuzla, Bosnia 
and Herzegovina.
(99)Department of Neurology, Department of Population Health, and Department of 
Ophthalmology, New York University Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY, 
USA.
(100)Department of Brain Repair and Rehabilitation, UCL Institute of Neurology, 
Faculty of Brain Sciences, London, UK.

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2022 Dec;21(12):1066-1068. doi: 
10.1016/S1474-4422(22)00334-9.
    Lancet Neurol. 2023 May;22(5):375. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(23)00111-4.
    Lancet Neurol. 2023 May;22(5):375-376. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(23)00112-6.
    Lancet Neurol. 2023 May;22(5):376-377. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(23)00110-2.
    J Neurol. 2023 Jun;270(6):3278-3279. doi: 10.1007/s00415-023-11738-7.

There is no consensus regarding the classification of optic neuritis, and 
precise diagnostic criteria are not available. This reality means that the 
diagnosis of disorders that have optic neuritis as the first manifestation can 
be challenging. Accurate diagnosis of optic neuritis at presentation can 
facilitate the timely treatment of individuals with multiple sclerosis, 
neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder, or myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein 
antibody-associated disease. Epidemiological data show that, cumulatively, optic 
neuritis is most frequently caused by many conditions other than multiple 
sclerosis. Worldwide, the cause and management of optic neuritis varies with 
geographical location, treatment availability, and ethnic background. We have 
developed diagnostic criteria for optic neuritis and a classification of optic 
neuritis subgroups. Our diagnostic criteria are based on clinical features that 
permit a diagnosis of possible optic neuritis; further paraclinical tests, 
utilising brain, orbital, and retinal imaging, together with antibody and other 
protein biomarker data, can lead to a diagnosis of definite optic neuritis. 
Paraclinical tests can also be applied retrospectively on stored samples and 
historical brain or retinal scans, which will be useful for future validation 
studies. Our criteria have the potential to reduce the risk of misdiagnosis, 
provide information on optic neuritis disease course that can guide future 
treatment trial design, and enable physicians to judge the likelihood of a need 
for long-term pharmacological management, which might differ according to optic 
neuritis subgroups.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(22)00200-9
PMID: 36179757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests AP received grant 
support for remyelination trials in multiple sclerosis to the Amsterdam 
University Medical Centre, Department of Neurology, MS Centre (RESTORE trial), 
and UCL, London RECOVER trial; received grant fees from Fight for Sight 
(nimodipine in optic neuritis trial); received royalties or licenses from 
Up-to-Date (Wolters Kluwer) for a book chapter; received speaker fees for the 
Heidelberg Academy; participates on advisory board for SC Zeiss OCTA 
Angi-Network, and the SC Novartis OCTiMS study; holds leadership roles for 
governing board IMSVISUAL; was chairman of ERN-EYE Neuro-ophthalmology (until 
Oct, 2020); is board member of National Dutch Neuro-ophthalmology Association; 
received equipment from OCTA from Zeiss (Plex Elite); and received medical 
writing support from Novartis for a manuscript 
(https://doi.org/10.1002/acn3.51473). CF received consulting fees from Invex 
Therapeutics; received speaker honoraria from University of Dunedin; and holds 
leadership as Director of Royal Australian and New Zealand College of 
Ophthalmologists. VB received personal fees as consultant for Gensight and 
Neurophoenix. PC obtained grants from Annexon, Biogen, Genentech; received 
royalties from Cambridge Press for an OCT book; received consulting fees from 
Disarm Therapeutics, Nervgen, Biogen, Avidea; received honoraria from NY Academy 
of Sciences; and received equipment from Myelin Repair Foundation, Academic CME, 
Neuraly, and Landos. FC received speaker honoraria from Alexion, Accure 
Therapeutics, and the Sumiara Foundation. RDe obtained consulting fees from 
Alexion. JdS received consulting fees from Biogen, Teva, BMS Celegen, Roche, 
Novartis, Janssen, Merck, Alexion, CSL Behring; and honoraria from Biogen, Teva, 
BMS Celegen, Roche, Novartis, Janssen, Merck, Alexion, and CSL Behring. JFR 
received consulting fees from Roche, and Sanofi. EF holds honoraria from 
Alexion, Genzyme, Biogen, Novartis, and Janssen. TF holds honoraria from 
Alexion. CFT received honoraria from Novartis; and received support for 
attending meetings and travel from Novartis and Teva. KF obtained grants from 
Ministry of Education, Science and Technology of Japan as well as the Ministry 
of Health, Welfare and Labor of Japan; received consulting fees from Alexion 
Chugai-Roche Mitsubishi Tanabe, Novartis, Biogen, Eisai, Takeda, Teijin, Viela 
Bio, UCB, Merck, Japan Tobacco Pharma, and Abbvie; received honoraria from 
Alexion, Chugai-Roche, Mitsubishi Tanabe, Novartis, Biogen, Eisai, Takeda, Asahi 
Kasei Medical, Teijin, and Bayer; participated on a data safety monitoring board 
or advisory board from Alexion, Chugai, Mitsubishi Tanabe, Novartis, Biogen, 
Eisai, Takeda, Asahi Kasei Medical, Teijin, UCB, and Viela Bio; and received 
medical writing support from Oxford PharmaGenesis and Apothecom. RG acquired 
personal fees for participation on data safety monitoring boards, and served on 
the advisory boards for Biogen, Hikma, Merck, Roche, and Sanofi as well as 
receiving a grant from Roche. FG received grants or contracts from Roche (NMO 
epidemiologic studies) and Novartis (MS epidemiologic studies); received 
honoraria from for lectures from Roche, Novartis, Stendhal, and Merck; received 
support for attending meetings from the European Charcot Foundation, and 
ECTRIMS; and reports leadership of FOCEM (Foro Centroamericano y del Caribe de 
la Esclerosis Múltiple y otras enfermedades desmielinizantes del Sistema 
Nervioso Central) and Academia Panameña de Medicina y Cirugía (both unpaid). 
MHab obtained honoraria from Biogen, Sanofi Genzyme, Merck, Bayer, Novartis, 
Pliva-Teva, Roche, and Zentiva; received support for attending meetings from 
Biogen, Sanofi Genzyme, Merck, Bayer, Novartis, Pliva-Teva, and Roche; and 
participated on advisory board for Biogen, Sanofi Genzyme, Merck, Bayer, 
Novartis, Pliva-Teva, and Roche. ZIl obtained grants or contracts from Biogen 
and Alexion; received honoraria from Biogen, Novartis, Roche, Merck, and 
Alexion; received payment for expert testimony from Roche; received support for 
attending meetings and travel from Biogen and Sanofi; and participated on a data 
safety monitoring board or advisory board from Biogen, Novartis, Merck, Sanofi, 
Roche, and Alexion. HJK received grants or contracts from National Research 
Foundation of Korea, Aprilbio, and Eisai; received consulting fees from 
Aprilbio, Daewoong, HanAll BioPharma, MDimune, Roche, Sanofi Genzyme, 
Teva-Handok, UCB, and Viela Bio; and received honoraria from Alexion, Biogen, 
Celltrion, Eisai, GC Pharma, Merck Serono, Novartis, Sanofi Genzyme, and 
Teva-Handok. RM received consulting fees from UCB, Alexion, Merck, Viela Bio, 
Novartis, and Roche; and participated on an advisory board for Viela Bio and 
Roche. FP obtained research support from Alexion; received grants or contracts 
from German Ministry for Research Support Recipient Charité Education and 
Research (BMBF), Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), Einstein Foundation, 
Guthy Jackson Charitable Foundation, EU FP7 Framework Program, Biogen, Genzyme, 
Merck, Serono, Novartis, Bayer, Roche, Parexel, and Almirall; received honoraria 
from the Guthy Jackson Foundation, Bayer, Biogen, Merck Serono, Sanofi Genzyme, 
Novartis, Viela Bio, Roche, UCB, Mitsubishi Tanabe, and Celgene; received 
support for attending meetings from Guthy Jackson Foundation, Bayer, Biogen, 
Merck Serono, Sanofi Genzyme, Novartis, Alexion, Viela Bio, Roche, UCB, 
Mitsubishi Tanabe, and Celgene; participated on an advisory board for Celgene, 
Roche, UCB, Merck; and reports leadership as academic editor for Plos One, and 
associate editor for Neurology, Neuroimmunology, and Neuroinflammation. MBR 
received support for attending meeting from Novartis. BSD received consulting 
fees from Chiesi; received honoraria from Chiesi and Sanofi; received support 
for attending meetings from Bausch + Lomb; participated on an advisory board for 
Chiesi; and has stock options from Accure Therapeutics. DS received grants or 
contracts from National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS), 
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), American Academy of Neurology (AAN), 
National Institute of Aging (NIA), National Multiple Sclerosis Society (NMSS), 
and United States Department of State; and was a committee member for Multiple 
Sclerosis International Federation (MSIF) and American Neurological Association 
(ANA). AS received grants or contracts from the Turkish MS society, and Istanbul 
University Research Support Grants; received consulting fees from Roche, Merck 
Serono, Biogen, Gen Pharma of Türkiye, Sanofi Genzyme, and Novartis; received 
honoraria from Sanofi Genzyme, Novartis, Roche, and Teva; and received support 
for attending meetings from Sanofi Genzyme. VvP obtained grants or contracts 
from Biogen; received consulting fees from Biogen, Merck, Sanofi, BMS, Novartis, 
Janssen, Almirall, and Roche; received honoraria from Biogen, Merck, Sanofi, 
BMS, Novartis, Roche; and received support for attending meetings from Biogen, 
Roche, and Almirall. MPW received royalties from Springer Healthcare and 
Elsevier; received consulting fees from Biogen, Roche, Biologix, Novartis, 
BMS-Celgene, Imcyse, Merck Serono, Sanofi Aventis, IXICO, and Icometrix; 
received honoraria from Bayer, Biogen, Biologix, Genilac, Novartis, Medison, 
Merck Serono, Roche, Sanofi Aventis, and BMS-Celgene; and participated on a data 
safety monitoring board for VU University Medical Center. LB received consulting 
fees as editor for the Journal of Neuro-Ophthalmology. GTP is an Emeritus editor 
for Neuro-ophthalmology. All other authors declare no competing interests.