---
reference_id: "PMID:38807655"
title: "LIBRETTO-431: Confirming the Superiority of Selpercatinib to Chemotherapy and the Lack of Efficacy of Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors in Advanced RET Fusion-Positive (RET+) NSCLC, Another Unique Never-Smoker Predominant Molecular Subtype of NSCLC."
authors:
- Lee ATM
- Ou SI
journal: Lung Cancer (Auckl)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.2147/LCTT.S460147
content_type: abstract_only
---

# LIBRETTO-431: Confirming the Superiority of Selpercatinib to Chemotherapy and the Lack of Efficacy of Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors in Advanced RET Fusion-Positive (RET+) NSCLC, Another Unique Never-Smoker Predominant Molecular Subtype of NSCLC.
**Authors:** Lee ATM, Ou SI
**Journal:** Lung Cancer (Auckl) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.2147/LCTT.S460147](https://doi.org/10.2147/LCTT.S460147)

## Content

1. Lung Cancer (Auckl). 2024 May 23;15:75-80. doi: 10.2147/LCTT.S460147.
eCollection 2024.

LIBRETTO-431: Confirming the Superiority of Selpercatinib to Chemotherapy and
the Lack of Efficacy of Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors in Advanced RET
Fusion-Positive (RET+) NSCLC, Another Unique Never-Smoker Predominant Molecular
Subtype of NSCLC.

Lee ATM(1), Ou SI(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California Irvine School of Medicine,
Orange, CA, 92868, USA.
(2)Chao Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, Orange, CA, 92868, USA.

Selpercatinib, a potent and highly selective RET kinase inhibitor with
significant CNS activity, has recently gained US approval for the treatment of
NSCLC harboring RET fusions (RET+) based on a large-scale single-arm study. The
LIBRETTO-431 trial was the global pivotal registration phase 3 trial comparing
selpercatinib to platinum-based chemotherapy with or without pembrolizumab as
the first-line treatment of patients with advanced RET+ NSCLC. Never-smokers
constituted 67.4% of the RET+ NSCLC patients enrolled. KIF5B-RET made up the
vast majority (77%) of the RET+ fusion variant with known fusion partner. The
results of this study demonstrated significant improvement in progression-free
survival (PFS) benefit as well as impressive intracranial disease response in
participants treated with selpercatinib as compared to those treated with
chemotherapy, with a HR [hazard ratio] of 0.46 (95% CI 0.33-0.70; P < 0.001) for
the intention-to-treat (ITT)-pembrolizumab group and HR of 0.46 (95% CI
0.31-0.70, P < 0.001) for the overall ITT-group of patients. The addition of
pembrolizumab to platinum/pemetrexed chemotherapy resulted in numerically
identical PFS (11.2 months). These results point to selpercatinib's superiority
to traditional chemotherapy regimens in the treatment of NSCLC harboring RET
fusions and add to literature on the salience of targeted precision oncology and
lack of efficacy of immune checkpoint inhibitor in NSCLC patients with
never-smoker predominant actionable driver mutations. RET+ NSCLC should be added
to the list of molecular subtypes (EGFR+, ALK+, ROS1+) of NSCLC to be excluded
in chemoimmunotherapy trial.

© 2024 Lee and Ou.

DOI: 10.2147/LCTT.S460147
PMCID: PMC11130712
PMID: 38807655

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Sai-Hong Ou reports grants and personal fees
from Pfizer, JNJ/Janssen, Daiichi Sankyo, DAVA oncology LLP, OncLive; personal
fees from Bayer, BMS; grants from Mirati and Revolution Medicine; stock
ownership from Nuvalent, MBrace Therapeutics, BlossomHill Therapeutics, Turning
Point Therapeutics; grants, personal fees, and stock ownership from Elevation
Oncology, outside the submitted work. The authors report no other conflicts of
interest in this work.k.
