---
reference_id: "PMID:33051219"
title: Update οn the diagnosis and management of systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Fanouriakis A
- Tziolos N
- Bertsias G
- Boumpas DT
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2020-218272
keywords:
- "Anemia, Hemolytic, Autoimmune/physiopathology, therapy"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/therapeutic use"
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- Azathioprine/therapeutic use
- Calcineurin Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Cardiovascular Diseases/epidemiology
- Cyclophosphamide/therapeutic use
- Disease Management
- Female
- Glucocorticoids/therapeutic use
- "Heart Valve Diseases/physiopathology, therapy"
- Humans
- Hydroxychloroquine/therapeutic use
- "Hypertension, Pulmonary/physiopathology, therapy"
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/diagnosis, immunology, physiopathology, therapy"
- "Lupus Nephritis/physiopathology, therapy"
- "Lupus Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/physiopathology, therapy"
- "Macrophage Activation Syndrome/physiopathology, therapy"
- Methotrexate/therapeutic use
- Mycophenolic Acid/therapeutic use
- "Myocarditis/physiopathology, therapy"
- "Outcome Assessment, Health Care"
- "Pericarditis/physiopathology, therapy"
- Phenotype
- Pregnancy
- "Pregnancy Complications/epidemiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Prognosis
- "Purpura, Thrombocytopenic, Idiopathic/physiopathology, therapy"
- Quality of Life
- Recurrence
- Rituximab/therapeutic use
- Severity of Illness Index
- Survival Rate
- Uterine Cervical Neoplasms/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update οn the diagnosis and management of systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Fanouriakis A, Tziolos N, Bertsias G, Boumpas DT
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1136/annrheumdis-2020-218272](https://doi.org/10.1136/annrheumdis-2020-218272)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2021 Jan;80(1):14-25. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2020-218272.
Epub  2020 Oct 13.

Update οn the diagnosis and management of systemic lupus erythematosus.

Fanouriakis A(1), Tziolos N(2), Bertsias G(3)(4), Boumpas DT(5)(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, "Asklepieion" General Hospital, Athens, Greece.
(2)4th Department of Internal Medicine, "Attikon" University Hospital, Athens,
Greece.
(3)Rheumatology, Clinical Immunology and Allergy, University of Crete School of
Medicine, Iraklio, Crete, Greece.
(4)Laboratory of Autoimmunity-Inflammation, Institute of Molecular Biology and
Biotechnology, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
(5)4th Department of Internal Medicine, "Attikon" University Hospital, Athens,
Greece boumpasd@uoc.gr.
(6)Joint Rheumatology Program, Medical School, National and Kapodistrian
University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(7)Medical School, University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus.
(8)Laboratory of Autoimmunity and Inflammation, Biomedical Research Foundation
of the Academy of Athens, Athens, Cyprus.

Clinical heterogeneity, unpredictable course and flares are characteristics of
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Although SLE is-by and large-a systemic
disease, occasionally it can be organ-dominant, posing diagnostic challenges. To
date, diagnosis of SLE remains clinical with a few cases being negative for
serologic tests. Diagnostic criteria are not available and classification
criteria are often used for diagnosis, yet with significant caveats. Newer sets
of criteria (European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR)/American College of
Rheumatology (ACR) 2019) enable earlier and more accurate classification of SLE.
Several disease endotypes have been recognised over the years. There is
increased recognition of milder cases at presentation, but almost half of them
progress overtime to more severe disease. Approximately 70% of patients follow a
relapsing-remitting course, the remaining divided equally between a prolonged
remission and a persistently active disease. Treatment goals include long-term
patient survival, prevention of flares and organ damage, and optimisation of
health-related quality of life. For organ-threatening or life-threatening SLE,
treatment usually includes an initial period of high-intensity immunosuppressive
therapy to control disease activity, followed by a longer period of less
intensive therapy to consolidate response and prevent relapses. Management of
disease-related and treatment-related comorbidities, especially infections and
atherosclerosis, is of paramount importance. New disease-modifying conventional
and biologic agents-used alone, in combination or sequentially-have improved
rates of achieving both short-term and long-term treatment goals, including
minimisation of glucocorticoid use.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. No commercial re-use. See rights and
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2020-218272
PMID: 33051219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.
