---
reference_id: "PMID:36291074"
title: The Effect of a Pex3 Mutation on Hearing and Lipid Content of the Inner Ear.
authors:
- Kochaj RM
- Martelletti E
- Ingham NJ
- Buniello A
- Sousa BC
- Wakelam MJO
- Lopez-Clavijo AF
- Steel KP
journal: Cells
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/cells11203206
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Effect of a Pex3 Mutation on Hearing and Lipid Content of the Inner Ear.
**Authors:** Kochaj RM, Martelletti E, Ingham NJ, Buniello A, Sousa BC, Wakelam MJO, Lopez-Clavijo AF, Steel KP
**Journal:** Cells (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells11203206](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells11203206)

## Content

1. Cells. 2022 Oct 13;11(20):3206. doi: 10.3390/cells11203206.

The Effect of a Pex3 Mutation on Hearing and Lipid Content of the Inner Ear.

Kochaj RM(1), Martelletti E(1), Ingham NJ(1), Buniello A(1), Sousa BC(2), 
Wakelam MJO(2), Lopez-Clavijo AF(2), Steel KP(1).

Author information:
(1)Wolfson Centre for Age-Related Diseases, King's College London, Guy's Campus, 
London SE1 1UL, UK.
(2)Lipidomics Facility, The BBSRC Babraham Institute, Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK.

Peroxisome biogenesis disorders (due to PEX gene mutations) are associated with 
symptoms that range in severity and can lead to early childhood death, but a 
common feature is hearing impairment. In this study, mice carrying Pex3 
mutations were found to show normal auditory development followed by an 
early-onset progressive increase in auditory response thresholds. The only 
structural defect detected in the cochlea at four weeks old was the disruption 
of synapses below inner hair cells. A conditional approach was used to establish 
that Pex3 expression is required locally within the cochlea for normal hearing, 
rather than hearing loss being due to systemic effects. A lipidomics analysis of 
the inner ear revealed a local reduction in plasmalogens in the Pex3 mouse 
mutants, comparable to the systemic plasmalogen reduction reported in human 
peroxisome biogenesis disorders. Thus, mice with Pex3 mutations may be a useful 
tool to understand the physiological basis of peroxisome biogenesis disorders.

DOI: 10.3390/cells11203206
PMCID: PMC9600510
PMID: 36291074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.