---
reference_id: "PMID:11733564"
title: "MPDU1 mutations underlie a novel human congenital disorder of glycosylation, designated type If."
authors:
- Schenk B
- Imbach T
- Frank CG
- Grubenmann CE
- Raymond GV
- Hurvitz H
- Korn-Lubetzki I
- Revel-Vik S
- Raas-Rotschild A
- Luder AS
- Jaeken J
- Berger EG
- Matthijs G
- Hennet T
- Aebi M
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1172/JCI13419
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Chromosome Mapping
- Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/genetics
- Female
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Glycosylation
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Oligosaccharides/biosynthesis
- "Repressor Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MPDU1 mutations underlie a novel human congenital disorder of glycosylation, designated type If.
**Authors:** Schenk B, Imbach T, Frank CG, Grubenmann CE, Raymond GV, Hurvitz H, Korn-Lubetzki I, Revel-Vik S, Raas-Rotschild A, Luder AS, Jaeken J, Berger EG, Matthijs G, Hennet T, Aebi M
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI13419](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI13419)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2001 Dec;108(11):1687-95. doi: 10.1172/JCI13419.

MPDU1 mutations underlie a novel human congenital disorder of glycosylation, 
designated type If.

Schenk B(1), Imbach T, Frank CG, Grubenmann CE, Raymond GV, Hurvitz H, 
Korn-Lubetzki I, Revel-Vik S, Raas-Rotschild A, Luder AS, Jaeken J, Berger EG, 
Matthijs G, Hennet T, Aebi M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Microbiology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zurich, 
Switzerland.

Erratum in
    J Clin Invest. 2003 Mar;111(6):925.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2001 Dec;108(11):1579-82. doi: 10.1172/JCI14498.

Deficiencies in the pathway of N-glycan biosynthesis lead to severe multisystem 
diseases, known as congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG). The clinical 
appearance of CDG is variable, and different types can be distinguished 
according to the gene that is altered. In this report, we describe the molecular 
basis of a novel type of the disease in three unrelated patients diagnosed with 
CDG-I. Serum transferrin was hypoglycosylated and patients' fibroblasts 
accumulated incomplete lipid-linked oligosaccharide precursors for N-linked 
protein glycosylation. Transfer of incomplete oligosaccharides to protein was 
detected. Sequence analysis of the Lec35/MPDU1 gene, known to be involved in the 
use of dolichylphosphomannose and dolichylphosphoglucose, revealed mutations in 
all three patients. Retroviral-based expression of the normal Lec35 cDNA in 
primary fibroblasts of patients restored normal lipid-linked oligosaccharide 
biosynthesis. We concluded that mutations in the Lec35/MPDU1 gene cause CDG. 
This novel type was termed CDG-If.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI13419
PMCID: PMC200989
PMID: 11733564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]