---
reference_id: "PMID:37142896"
title: "Thromboprophylaxis for Coagulopathy Related to COVID-19 in Pediatrics: A Narrative Review."
authors:
- Sahrai H
- Hemmati-Ghavshough M
- Shahrabi M
- Jafari-Rouhi AH
- Solduzian M
journal: Paediatr Drugs
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s40272-023-00566-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thromboprophylaxis for Coagulopathy Related to COVID-19 in Pediatrics: A Narrative Review.
**Authors:** Sahrai H, Hemmati-Ghavshough M, Shahrabi M, Jafari-Rouhi AH, Solduzian M
**Journal:** Paediatr Drugs (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40272-023-00566-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40272-023-00566-x)

## Content

1. Paediatr Drugs. 2023 Jul;25(4):443-452. doi: 10.1007/s40272-023-00566-x. Epub 
2023 May 4.

Thromboprophylaxis for Coagulopathy Related to COVID-19 in Pediatrics: A 
Narrative Review.

Sahrai H(1), Hemmati-Ghavshough M(1), Shahrabi M(2), Jafari-Rouhi AH(3), 
Solduzian M(4).

Author information:
(1)Student research committee, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, 
Iran.
(2)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Tuberculosis and Lung Disease Research Center, Tabriz University of medical 
Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(4)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Tabriz University of 
Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran. solduzianm@tbzmed.ac.ir.

In addition to harming the respiratory system, COVID-19 can affect multiple 
organs. Children may develop a specific complication of COVID-19 called 
multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) which could influence the 
vascular system of children and cause multiple coagulopathies in the body. 
Information on the use of thromboprophylaxis in this condition was collected via 
the review of various articles. In general, different factors in immune system 
responses can trigger the initiation of thrombotic events. Studies have shown 
that starting anticoagulant prophylaxis, which contributes to decreased 
thrombotic events, is dependent on the patient's condition and D-dimer levels. 
However, further studies on pediatric populations are needed to establish the 
role of anticoagulants in children with this condition.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40272-023-00566-x
PMCID: PMC10158690
PMID: 37142896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Hadi Sahrai, Mahdi Hemmati-Ghavshough, Marzieh 
Shahrabi, Amir Hossein Jafari-Rouhi and Mohammad Solduzian declare that they 
have no conflicts of interest.