---
reference_id: "PMID:37971937"
title: Fatal Occupational Asthma in Cannabis Production - Massachusetts, 2022.
authors:
- Weaver VM
- Hua JT
- Fitzsimmons KM
- Laing JR
- Farah W
- Hart A
- Braegger TJ
- Reid M
- Weissman DN
journal: MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.15585/mmwr.mm7246a2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fatal Occupational Asthma in Cannabis Production - Massachusetts, 2022.
**Authors:** Weaver VM, Hua JT, Fitzsimmons KM, Laing JR, Farah W, Hart A, Braegger TJ, Reid M, Weissman DN
**Journal:** MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.15585/mmwr.mm7246a2](https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7246a2)

## Content

1. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2023 Nov 17;72(46):1257-1261. doi: 
10.15585/mmwr.mm7246a2.

Fatal Occupational Asthma in Cannabis Production - Massachusetts, 2022.

Weaver VM, Hua JT, Fitzsimmons KM, Laing JR, Farah W, Hart A, Braegger TJ, Reid 
M, Weissman DN.

Multiple respiratory hazards have been identified in the cannabis cultivation 
and production industry, in which occupational asthma and work-related 
exacerbation of preexisting asthma have been reported. An employee working in a 
Massachusetts cannabis cultivation and processing facility experienced 
progressively worsening work-associated respiratory symptoms, which culminated 
in a fatal asthma attack in January 2022. This report represents findings of an 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration inspection, which included a 
worksite exposure assessment, coworker and next-of-kin interviews, medical 
record reviews, and collaboration with the Massachusetts Department of Public 
Health. Respiratory tract or skin symptoms were reported by four of 10 coworkers 
with similar job duties. Prevention is best achieved through a multifaceted 
approach, including controlling asthmagen exposures, such as cannabis dust, 
providing worker training, and conducting medical monitoring for occupational 
allergy. Evaluation of workers with new-onset or worsening asthma is essential, 
along with prompt diagnosis and medical management, which might include 
cessation of work and workers' compensation when relation to work exposures is 
identified. It is important to recognize that work in cannabis production is 
potentially causative.

DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.mm7246a2
PMCID: PMC10684356
PMID: 37971937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have completed and submitted the 
International Committee of Medical Journal Editors form for disclosure of 
potential conflicts of interest. Jeremy T. Hua reports support from the Reuben 
M. Cherniack fellowship award at National Jewish Health. Wigdan Farah reports 
support from the Mayo Clinic. Trapper J. Braegger and Anne Hart report support 
from the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. James R. Laing reports 
support from the U.S. Department of Labor’s Bureau of Labor Statistics for 
documentation of workplace fatalities for the Census of Fatal Occupational 
Injuries, unrelated to the current work. No other potential conflicts of 
interest were disclosed.