---
reference_id: "PMID:32502444"
title: "Lenvatinib in patients with advanced or metastatic thymic carcinoma (REMORA): a multicentre, phase 2 trial."
authors:
- Sato J
- Satouchi M
- Itoh S
- Okuma Y
- Niho S
- Mizugaki H
- Murakami H
- Fujisaka Y
- Kozuki T
- Nakamura K
- Nagasaka Y
- Kawasaki M
- Yamada T
- Machida R
- Kuchiba A
- Ohe Y
- Yamamoto N
journal: Lancet Oncol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30162-5
keywords:
- Aged
- "Antineoplastic Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Humans
- Japan
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Phenylurea Compounds/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Progression-Free Survival
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Quinolines/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Thymoma/drug therapy, enzymology, mortality, secondary"
- "Thymus Neoplasms/drug therapy, enzymology, mortality, pathology"
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lenvatinib in patients with advanced or metastatic thymic carcinoma (REMORA): a multicentre, phase 2 trial.
**Authors:** Sato J, Satouchi M, Itoh S, Okuma Y, Niho S, Mizugaki H, Murakami H, Fujisaka Y, Kozuki T, Nakamura K, Nagasaka Y, Kawasaki M, Yamada T, Machida R, Kuchiba A, Ohe Y, Yamamoto N
**Journal:** Lancet Oncol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30162-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30162-5)

## Content

1. Lancet Oncol. 2020 Jun;21(6):843-850. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30162-5.

Lenvatinib in patients with advanced or metastatic thymic carcinoma (REMORA): a 
multicentre, phase 2 trial.

Sato J(1), Satouchi M(2), Itoh S(2), Okuma Y(3), Niho S(4), Mizugaki H(5), 
Murakami H(6), Fujisaka Y(7), Kozuki T(8), Nakamura K(9), Nagasaka Y(9), 
Kawasaki M(9), Yamada T(9), Machida R(10), Kuchiba A(10), Ohe Y(11), Yamamoto 
N(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, National Cancer Center Hospital, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Hyogo Cancer Center, Hyogo, Japan.
(3)Department of Thoracic Oncology and Respiratory Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan 
Cancer and Infectious Diseases Center, Komagome Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital East, Chiba, 
Japan.
(5)First Department of Medicine, Hokkaido University Hospital, Hokkaido, Japan.
(6)Division of Thoracic Oncology, Shizuoka Cancer Center, Shizuoka, Japan.
(7)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Thoracic Oncology/Clinical Research 
Center, Osaka Medical College Hospital, Osaka, Japan.
(8)Department of Thoracic Oncology and Medicine, National Hospital Organization 
Shikoku Cancer Center, Ehime, Japan.
(9)Clinical Research Support Office, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(10)Biostatistics Division, Center for Research Administration and Support, 
National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(11)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(12)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, National Cancer Center Hospital, 
Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: nbryamam@ncc.go.jp.

BACKGROUND: Thymic carcinoma is a rare malignant disease and standard treatment 
for advanced or metastatic thymic carcinoma previously treated with 
platinum-based chemotherapy has not been established. Lenvatinib is a novel 
multi-targeted inhibitor of VEGFR, FGFR, RET, c-Kit, and other kinases. The aim 
of this trial was to assess the activity and safety of lenvatinib as a 
second-line treatment in thymic carcinoma.
METHODS: This single-arm, phase 2 trial done in eight institutions in Japan 
(five cancer centres, two medical university hospitals, and one public hospital) 
enrolled patients with pathologically confirmed unresectable advanced or 
metastatic thymic carcinoma that progressed following at least one 
platinum-based chemotherapy. Key inclusion criteria were age 20 years or older, 
at least one measurable lesion as defined by the Response Evaluation Criteria in 
Solid Tumors version 1.1, and an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance 
status of 0 or 1. Patients received 24 mg of lenvatinib orally once daily in 
4-week cycles until disease progression or occurrence of unacceptable adverse 
events. The primary endpoint was objective response rate evaluated at the data 
cutoff date (Feb 22, 2019), by independent central review in the 
intention-to-treat population. This trial is registered on JMACCT, JMA-IIA00285, 
and on UMIN-CTR, UMIN000026777.
FINDINGS: Between April 21, 2017, and Feb 22, 2018, 42 patients were enrolled 
and all patients were included in the activity and safety analysis. The median 
follow-up period was 15·5 months (IQR 13·1-17·5). The objective response rate 
was 38% (90% CI 25·6-52·0, p<0·0001). 16 (38%) of 42 patients had a partial 
response and 24 (57%) had stable disease. The most frequent grade 3 
treatment-related adverse events were hypertension (27 [64%]) and palmar-plantar 
erythrodysaesthesia syndrome (three [7%]). No patient died from adverse events.
INTERPRETATION: The activity and safety of lenvatinib in patients with advanced 
or metastatic thymic carcinoma was confirmed. These results suggest that 
lenvatinib could become a standard treatment option for patients with previously 
treated advanced or metastatic thymic carcinoma.
FUNDING: Center for Clinical Trials, Japan Medical Association.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30162-5
PMID: 32502444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]