---
reference_id: "PMID:28984650"
title: Diagnosis and clinical management of long-QT syndrome.
authors:
- Steinberg C
journal: Curr Opin Cardiol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1097/HCO.0000000000000465
keywords:
- Adrenergic beta-Antagonists/therapeutic use
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac/prevention & control"
- "Defibrillators, Implantable"
- Electrocardiography
- Exercise
- Exercise Test
- Genetic Testing
- Heart Transplantation
- Humans
- "Long QT Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- Phenotype
- Risk Assessment
- Stellate Ganglion/surgery
- Sympathectomy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and clinical management of long-QT syndrome.
**Authors:** Steinberg C
**Journal:** Curr Opin Cardiol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1097/HCO.0000000000000465](https://doi.org/10.1097/HCO.0000000000000465)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2018 Jan;33(1):31-41. doi: 10.1097/HCO.0000000000000465.

Diagnosis and clinical management of long-QT syndrome.

Steinberg C(1).

Author information:
(1)Quebec Heart and Lung Center, Laval University, 2725, chemin Sainte-Foy,
Quebec, QC G1V 4G5, Canada.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To give an overview over the substantial advances in the
diagnosis and management of Long-QT syndrome since its first description 60
years ago.
RECENT FINDINGS: LQT syndrome remains the most common inherited arrhythmia and
is a leading cause for sudden unexplained death accounting for up to 20-25% of
cases. Rapid progress of genetic technology over the past 2 decades has
significantly improved our understanding of molecular and genetic mechanisms of
LQT. Despite all those novel insights, phenotype assessment and appropriate risk
stratification in LQT remains challenging - even for the expert.
SUMMARY: This review outlines our current understanding and approach to the
clinical diagnosis and management of LQT as well as recent insights into
genotype-phenotype correlations. Genetic testing has evolved beyond a pure
diagnostic tool and is in addition increasingly integrated as complementary
prognostic marker. With regard to the management of LQT, there is now evidence
that the protective effect of beta-blockers is rather substance-specific than a
class effect. Novel approaches - in conjunction with standard beta-blockers -
are emerging including gene-specific treatment for certain subtypes of LQT. A
specialized inherited arrhythmia clinic is the preferred resource for the
complex risk stratification and individualized management of individuals with
LQT.

DOI: 10.1097/HCO.0000000000000465
PMID: 28984650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
