---
reference_id: "PMID:21296825"
title: Cone photoreceptor abnormalities correlate with vision loss in patients with Stargardt disease.
authors:
- Chen Y
- Ratnam K
- Sundquist SM
- Lujan B
- Ayyagari R
- Gudiseva VH
- Roorda A
- Duncan JL
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1167/iovs.10-6538
keywords:
- ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics
- Adolescent
- Adult
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Electroretinography
- Female
- Fluorescein Angiography
- Genotype
- Humans
- Lipofuscin/metabolism
- "Macular Degeneration/congenital, diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Ophthalmoscopy
- Retinal Cone Photoreceptor Cells/pathology
- "Retinal Dystrophies/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- "Retinal Pigment Epithelium/metabolism, pathology"
- "Scotoma/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Stargardt Disease
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Visual Acuity/physiology
- Visual Field Tests
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cone photoreceptor abnormalities correlate with vision loss in patients with Stargardt disease.
**Authors:** Chen Y, Ratnam K, Sundquist SM, Lujan B, Ayyagari R, Gudiseva VH, Roorda A, Duncan JL
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1167/iovs.10-6538](https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.10-6538)

## Content

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011 May 17;52(6):3281-92. doi:
10.1167/iovs.10-6538.

Cone photoreceptor abnormalities correlate with vision loss in patients with 
Stargardt disease.

Chen Y(1), Ratnam K, Sundquist SM, Lujan B, Ayyagari R, Gudiseva VH, Roorda A, 
Duncan JL.

Author information:
(1)University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

PURPOSE. To study the relationship between macular cone structure, fundus 
autofluorescence (AF), and visual function in patients with Stargardt disease 
(STGD). METHODS. High-resolution images of the macula were obtained with 
adaptive optics scanning laser ophthalmoscopy (AOSLO) and spectral domain 
optical coherence tomography in 12 patients with STGD and 27 age-matched healthy 
subjects. Measures of retinal structure and AF were correlated with visual 
function, including best-corrected visual acuity, color vision, kinetic and 
static perimetry, fundus-guided microperimetry, and full-field 
electroretinography. Mutation analysis of the ABCA4 gene was completed in all 
patients. RESULTS. Patients were 15 to 55 years old, and visual acuity ranged 
from 20/25-20/320. Central scotomas were present in all patients, although the 
fovea was spared in three patients. The earliest cone spacing abnormalities were 
observed in regions of homogeneous AF, normal visual function, and normal outer 
retinal structure. Outer retinal structure and AF were most normal near the 
optic disc. Longitudinal studies showed progressive increases in AF followed by 
reduced AF associated with losses of visual sensitivity, outer retinal layers, 
and cones. At least one disease-causing mutation in the ABCA4 gene was 
identified in 11 of 12 patients studied; 1 of 12 patients showed no 
disease-causing ABCA4 mutations. CONCLUSIONS. AOSLO imaging demonstrated 
abnormal cone spacing in regions of abnormal fundus AF and reduced visual 
function. These findings provide support for a model of disease progression in 
which lipofuscin accumulation results in homogeneously increased AF with cone 
spacing abnormalities, followed by heterogeneously increased AF with cone loss, 
then reduced AF with cone and RPE cell death.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.10-6538
PMCID: PMC3109028
PMID: 21296825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]