---
reference_id: "PMID:26001652"
title: "Hepatic glycogen storage disorders: what have we learned in recent years?"
authors:
- Burda P
- Hochuli M
journal: Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1097/MCO.0000000000000181
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cardiomyopathies/complications, diet therapy, physiopathology"
- "Diet, Carbohydrate-Restricted"
- "Diet, High-Fat"
- "Dietary Carbohydrates/administration & dosage"
- "Dietary Fats/administration & dosage"
- "Dietary Proteins/administration & dosage"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Glycogen/metabolism
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type I/complications, diagnosis, diet therapy, physiopathology"
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type III/complications, diagnosis, diet therapy, physiopathology"
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type VI/complications, diagnosis, diet therapy, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Liver/physiopathology
- "Liver Cirrhosis/complications, diet therapy, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatic glycogen storage disorders: what have we learned in recent years?
**Authors:** Burda P, Hochuli M
**Journal:** Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MCO.0000000000000181](https://doi.org/10.1097/MCO.0000000000000181)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2015 Jul;18(4):415-21. doi:
10.1097/MCO.0000000000000181.

Hepatic glycogen storage disorders: what have we learned in recent years?

Burda P(1), Hochuli M.

Author information:
(1)aDivision of Metabolism and Children's Research Center, University Children's
Hospital bDivision of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Clinical Nutrition,
University Hospital Zurich cradiz - Rare Disease Initiative Zurich, Clinical
Research Priority Program for Rare Diseases, University of Zurich, Switzerland.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Glycogen storage disorders (GSDs) are inborn errors of
metabolism with abnormal storage or utilization of glycogen. The present review
focuses on recent advances in hepatic GSD types I, III and VI/IX, with emphasis
on clinical aspects and treatment.
RECENT FINDINGS: Evidence accumulates that poor metabolic control is a risk
factor for the development of long-term complications, such as liver adenomas,
low bone density/osteoporosis, and kidney disease in GSD I. However, mechanisms
leading to these complications remain poorly understood and are being
investigated. Molecular causes underlying neutropenia and neutrophil dysfunction
in GSD I have been elucidated. Case series provide new insights into the natural
course and outcome of GSD types VI and IX. For GSD III, a high protein/fat diet
has been reported to improve (cardio)myopathy, but the beneficial effect of this
dietary concept on muscle and liver disease manifestations needs to be further
established in prospective studies.
SUMMARY: Although further knowledge has been gained regarding pathophysiology,
disease course, treatment, and complications of hepatic GSDs, more controlled
prospective studies are needed to assess effects of different dietary and
medical treatment options on long-term outcome and quality of life.

DOI: 10.1097/MCO.0000000000000181
PMID: 26001652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
