---
reference_id: "PMID:34628380"
title: IMPAIRMENT OF PEROXISOME BIOGENESIS IN THE SPECTRUM OF ZELLWEGER SYNDROME (CLINICAL CASE).
authors:
- Horlenko O
- Lenchenko A
- Pushkarenko O
- Kossey G
- Tomey A
journal: Georgian Med News
year: '2021'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IMPAIRMENT OF PEROXISOME BIOGENESIS IN THE SPECTRUM OF ZELLWEGER SYNDROME (CLINICAL CASE).
**Authors:** Horlenko O, Lenchenko A, Pushkarenko O, Kossey G, Tomey A
**Journal:** Georgian Med News (2021)

## Content

1. Georgian Med News. 2021 Sep;(318):60-67.

IMPAIRMENT OF PEROXISOME BIOGENESIS IN THE SPECTRUM OF ZELLWEGER SYNDROME 
(CLINICAL CASE).

Horlenko O(1), Lenchenko A(1), Pushkarenko O(1), Kossey G(1), Tomey A(1).

Author information:
(1)State Higher Educational Establishment «Uzhgorod National University», 
Ukraine.

The incidence of rare diseases is approximately two cases per 10,000 people. 
Today, in most cases, orphan diseases are caused by genetic disorders, less 
often - some forms of oncological, oncohematological, infectious disorders. 
These conditions have a severe and chronic course, accompanied by a decrease in 
quality and a reduction in the life expectancy of patients. Aim - describe a 
clinical case of an rare disease that is referred to as Zellweger spectrum 
disorders. Literature review and analysis of clinical-anamnestic and 
laboratory-instrumental methods of research of a 6.5 years old girl. The given 
clinical case, namely Zellweger spectrum disorders (ZSD), is a hereditary 
autosomal recessive disease characterized by nonspecific clinical manifestations 
and phenotype, which complicates timely diagnosis and delays symptomatic, and in 
some cases prognostically favorable treatment. Molecular genetic research makes 
it possible to finally confirm this disease. Therefore, at the slightest 
suspicion of this pathology, it is worth investigating the level of long-chain 
fatty acids, plasmalogen of erythrocytes, intermediate metabolites of bile acid 
synthesis, or carrying out genetic sequencing. Further studies of this condition 
are carried out in the world in order to obtain new methods of treatment and 
improve the quality of life of patients. The presented clinical case of a rare 
disease, which belongs to ZSD, confirms the need for alertness of family doctors 
and pediatricians in order to timely diagnose and correct rare diseases in 
children.

PMID: 34628380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]