---
reference_id: "PMID:15109588"
title: Tick-borne rickettsioses in international travellers.
authors:
- Jensenius M
- Fournier PE
- Raoult D
journal: Int J Infect Dis
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2003.06.004
keywords:
- Humans
- Internationality
- "Rickettsia Infections/diagnosis, drug therapy, microbiology, prevention & control"
- "Tick-Borne Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy, microbiology, prevention & control"
- Travel
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tick-borne rickettsioses in international travellers.
**Authors:** Jensenius M, Fournier PE, Raoult D
**Journal:** Int J Infect Dis (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijid.2003.06.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2003.06.004)

## Content

1. Int J Infect Dis. 2004 May;8(3):139-46. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2003.06.004.

Tick-borne rickettsioses in international travellers.

Jensenius M(1), Fournier PE, Raoult D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Aker University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
mogens.jensenius@ioks.uio.no

BACKGROUND: Tick-borne rickettsioses are of emerging importance in today's
travel medicine but have until recently received little attention. We describe
the current knowledge of tick-borne rickettsioses as they relate to
international travel, their microbiological diagnosis, treatment, possible
prevention, and future prospects.
METHODS: Literature-based review and personal observations.
RESULTS: During the last decade, some 400 cases of tick-borne rickettsioses have
been reported in international travellers, the vast majority being African tick
bite fever caused by Rickettsia africae and Mediterranean spotted fever caused
by Rickettsia conorii. Only a minority of infected travellers can recall a
preceding tick bite. Most patients present with a mild-to-moderately severe
flu-like illness typically accompanied by a cutaneous rash and an inoculation
eschar at the site of the tick bite, but potentially life-threatening disease
with disseminated vaculitis is occasionally seen. Definite microbiological
confirmation of tick-borne rickettsioses by isolation or antigen detection is
only available at reference laboratories and diagnosis must in most cases rely
on clinical and epidemiological data supported by serology. Doxycycline is the
recommended treatment for tick-borne rickettsioses and prevention is based on
personal protective measures against tick bites when travelling in endemic
areas.
CONCLUSION: Tick-borne rickettsiosis should be suspected in febrile returnees
from endemic areas, especially in cases with skin eruptions. Travellers to
endemic areas should be encouraged to use personal protective measures against
tick bites.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2003.06.004
PMID: 15109588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
