---
reference_id: "PMID:36428683"
title: "BRAF V600E Mutation in Ameloblastoma: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Mamat Yusof MN
- "Ch'ng ES"
- Radhiah Abdul Rahman N
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/cancers14225593
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BRAF V600E Mutation in Ameloblastoma: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Mamat Yusof MN, Ch'ng ES, Radhiah Abdul Rahman N
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers14225593](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers14225593)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2022 Nov 14;14(22):5593. doi: 10.3390/cancers14225593.

BRAF V600E Mutation in Ameloblastoma: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Mamat Yusof MN(1)(2), Ch'ng ES(1), Radhiah Abdul Rahman N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, Advanced Medical and Dental Institute 
(AMDI), Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kepala Batas 13200, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur 56000, Malaysia.
(3)Department of Dental Science, Advanced Medical and Dental Institute (AMDI), 
Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kepala Batas 13200, Malaysia.

The discovery that ameloblastoma has a high mutation incidence of BRAF V600E may 
enable a better investigation of pathophysiology. However, there is inconsistent 
evidence regarding this mutation occurrence and its association with clinical 
information. This systematic review and meta-analysis aim to pool the overall 
mutation prevalence of BRAF V600E in reported ameloblastoma cases and to 
determine its association with patient demographic and clinicopathological 
features. Following the PRISMA guidelines, a comprehensive article search was 
conducted through four databases (Scopus, Google Scholar, PubMed, and Web of 
Science). Seventeen articles between 2014 and 2022 met the inclusion criteria 
with 833 ameloblastoma cases. For each included study, the significance of BRAF 
V600E on the outcome parameters was determined using odd ratios and 95% 
confidence intervals. Meta-analysis prevalence of BRAF V600E in ameloblastoma 
was 70.49%, and a significant meta-analysis association was reported for those 
younger than 54 years old and in the mandible. On the contrary, other factors, 
such as sex, histological variants, and recurrence, were insignificant. As a 
result of the significant outcome of BRAF V600E mutation in ameloblastoma 
pathogenesis, targeted therapy formulation can be developed with this handful of 
evidence.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers14225593
PMCID: PMC9688909
PMID: 36428683

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.