---
reference_id: "PMID:38287166"
title: "Iatrogenic Alzheimer's disease in recipients of cadaveric pituitary-derived growth hormone."
authors:
- Banerjee G
- Farmer SF
- Hyare H
- Jaunmuktane Z
- Mead S
- Ryan NS
- Schott JM
- Werring DJ
- Rudge P
- Collinge J
journal: Nat Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41591-023-02729-2
keywords:
- Young Adult
- Humans
- Child
- Alzheimer Disease/pathology
- Growth Hormone
- Amyloid beta-Peptides/metabolism
- "Creutzfeldt-Jakob Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy
- Brain/pathology
- Prions/metabolism
- Cadaver
- Iatrogenic Disease
- Biomarkers
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Iatrogenic Alzheimer's disease in recipients of cadaveric pituitary-derived growth hormone.
**Authors:** Banerjee G, Farmer SF, Hyare H, Jaunmuktane Z, Mead S, Ryan NS, Schott JM, Werring DJ, Rudge P, Collinge J
**Journal:** Nat Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41591-023-02729-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-023-02729-2)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2024 Feb;30(2):394-402. doi: 10.1038/s41591-023-02729-2. Epub 2024
Jan  29.

Iatrogenic Alzheimer's disease in recipients of cadaveric pituitary-derived 
growth hormone.

Banerjee G(1)(2), Farmer SF(3), Hyare H(4)(5), Jaunmuktane Z(6)(7), Mead 
S(1)(2), Ryan NS(8)(9), Schott JM(8)(9), Werring DJ(10)(11), Rudge P(1)(2), 
Collinge J(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)MRC Prion Unit at UCL and UCL Institute of Prion Diseases, London, UK.
(2)National Prion Clinic, National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, 
London, UK.
(3)Department of Neurology, National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, 
London, UK.
(4)UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London, UK.
(5)Lysholm Department of Neuroradiology, National Hospital for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, London, UK.
(6)Department of Clinical and Movement Neurosciences and Queen Square Brain Bank 
for Neurological Disorders, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London, UK.
(7)Division of Neuropathology, National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, 
London, UK.
(8)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, Dementia Research Centre, UCL Queen 
Square Institute of Neurology, London, UK.
(9)UK Dementia Research Institute at UCL, London, UK.
(10)Stroke Research Centre, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London, UK.
(11)Stroke Service, National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, London, 
UK.
(12)MRC Prion Unit at UCL and UCL Institute of Prion Diseases, London, UK. 
jc@prion.ucl.ac.uk.
(13)National Prion Clinic, National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, 
London, UK. jc@prion.ucl.ac.uk.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized pathologically by amyloid-beta (Aβ) 
deposition in brain parenchyma and blood vessels (as cerebral amyloid angiopathy 
(CAA)) and by neurofibrillary tangles of hyperphosphorylated tau. Compelling 
genetic and biomarker evidence supports Aβ as the root cause of AD. We 
previously reported human transmission of Aβ pathology and CAA in relatively 
young adults who had died of iatrogenic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (iCJD) after 
childhood treatment with cadaver-derived pituitary growth hormone (c-hGH) 
contaminated with both CJD prions and Aβ seeds. This raised the possibility that 
c-hGH recipients who did not die from iCJD may eventually develop AD. Here we 
describe recipients who developed dementia and biomarker changes within the 
phenotypic spectrum of AD, suggesting that AD, like CJD, has environmentally 
acquired (iatrogenic) forms as well as late-onset sporadic and early-onset 
inherited forms. Although iatrogenic AD may be rare, and there is no suggestion 
that Aβ can be transmitted between individuals in activities of daily life, its 
recognition emphasizes the need to review measures to prevent accidental 
transmissions via other medical and surgical procedures. As propagating Aβ 
assemblies may exhibit structural diversity akin to conventional prions, it is 
possible that therapeutic strategies targeting disease-related assemblies may 
lead to selection of minor components and development of resistance.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41591-023-02729-2
PMCID: PMC10878974
PMID: 38287166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J.C. is a shareholder and director of D-Gen, 
Ltd., an academic spin-out company working in the field of prion disease 
diagnosis, decontamination and therapeutics. D-Gen supplied the ICSM35 antibody 
used for PrP immunohistochemistry. The other authors declare no competing 
interests.