---
reference_id: "PMID:29923087"
title: Apparent Acetaminophen Toxicity in a Patient with Transaldolase Deficiency.
authors:
- Lee-Barber J
- English TE
- Britton JF
- Sobreira N
- Goldstein J
- Valle D
- Bjornsson HT
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/8904_2018_116
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Apparent Acetaminophen Toxicity in a Patient with Transaldolase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Lee-Barber J, English TE, Britton JF, Sobreira N, Goldstein J, Valle D, Bjornsson HT
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/8904_2018_116](https://doi.org/10.1007/8904_2018_116)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2019;44:9-15. doi: 10.1007/8904_2018_116. Epub 2018 Jun 20.

Apparent Acetaminophen Toxicity in a Patient with Transaldolase Deficiency.

Lee-Barber J(1)(2), English TE(3), Britton JF(2), Sobreira N(1)(2), Goldstein
J(4), Valle D(1)(2), Bjornsson HT(5)(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Russell H. Morgan Department of Radiology and Radiological Science, The Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)Pavilion Pediatrics, Lutherville, MD, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
hbjorns1@jhmi.edu.
(6)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. hbjorns1@jhmi.edu.
(7)Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavík, Iceland.
hbjorns1@jhmi.edu.
(8)Landspitali University Hospital, Reykjavík, Iceland. hbjorns1@jhmi.edu.

Transaldolase deficiency (MIM#: 606003) is a rare autosomal recessive defect in
the pentose phosphate pathway. Affected individuals are at risk for progressive
liver failure and hepatocarcinoma. In the transaldolase-deficient mouse model
(Taldo1 -/-), these hepatic complications are accentuated by oxidative stress
related to acetaminophen administration. We report a 13-month-old
transaldolase-deficient male who developed mild liver failure after receiving
standard doses of acetaminophen during a febrile respiratory syncytial virus
infection. He was admitted for respiratory distress with neutropenia and
thrombocytopenia, but developed an enlarged nodular liver with accompanying
splenomegaly and rising alpha-fetoprotein which peaked 2 weeks after
acetaminophen exposure. Whole exome sequencing revealed compound heterozygous
variants c.512_514delCCT (p.Ser171del) and c.931G > T (p.Gly311Trp) in TALDO1
(HGNC:11559), which encodes transaldolase (EC 2.2.1.2), a key enzyme in ribose
metabolism. Urine polyols and plasma metabolomics confirmed the diagnosis of
transaldolase deficiency. Studies on the Taldo1 -/- mouse model demonstrate
acetaminophen-induced liver failure can be prevented by administration of the
antioxidant N-acetylcysteine. Moreover, a published report showed treatment of a
transaldolase-deficient patient with N-acetylcysteine was associated with a
decrease in alpha-fetoprotein levels. After discontinuation of acetaminophen and
prior to initiation of N-acetylcysteine treatment, our patient demonstrated
resolving alpha-fetoprotein levels suggesting acetaminophen incited the liver
failure. Conclusion: Our observations support the conclusion from mouse model
studies that transaldolase-deficient patients are uniquely sensitive to
acetaminophen and should avoid this antipyretic. Recognition of this
individualized toxicity and avoidance of acetaminophen are essential for
management of these patients.

DOI: 10.1007/8904_2018_116
PMCID: PMC6323034
PMID: 29923087
