---
reference_id: "PMID:22735372"
title: "[The role of hereditary and environmental factors in autoimmune thyroid diseases]."
authors:
- Balázs C
journal: Orv Hetil
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1556/OH.2012.29370
keywords:
- Arginine
- Autoantibodies/blood
- Gene-Environment Interaction
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Graves Disease/genetics, immunology"
- "HLA-DRB1 Chains/genetics, immunology"
- "Hashimoto Disease/genetics, immunology"
- Humans
- "Hyperthyroidism/genetics, immunology"
- "Hypothyroidism/genetics, immunology"
- "Iodide Peroxidase/genetics, immunology"
- "Major Histocompatibility Complex/genetics, immunology"
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- "Receptors, Thyrotropin/genetics, immunology"
- "Thyroglobulin/genetics, immunology"
- Thyroid Gland/immunology
- "Thyroiditis, Autoimmune/genetics, immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [The role of hereditary and environmental factors in autoimmune thyroid diseases].
**Authors:** Balázs C
**Journal:** Orv Hetil (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1556/OH.2012.29370](https://doi.org/10.1556/OH.2012.29370)

## Content

1. Orv Hetil. 2012 Jul 1;153(26):1013-22. doi: 10.1556/OH.2012.29370.

[The role of hereditary and environmental factors in autoimmune thyroid 
diseases].

[Article in Hungarian]

Balázs C(1).

Author information:
(1)Budai Irgalmasrendi Kórház Belgyógyászati-Endokrin Osztály Budapest Frankel 
L. út 17-19. 1029.

Autoimmune thyroid diseases are the most common organ-specific autoimmune 
disorders affecting 5% to 10% of the population in Western countries. The 
clinical presentation varies from hyperthyroidism in Graves' disease to 
hypothyroidism in Hashimoto's thyroiditis. While the exact etiology of thyroid 
autoimmunity is not known, the interaction between genetic susceptibility and 
environmental factors appears to be of fundamental importance to initiate the 
process of thyroid autoimmunity. The identified autoimmune thyroid disease 
susceptibility genes include immune-modulating genes, such as the major 
histocompatibility complex, and thyroid-specific genes, including TSH receptor, 
thyroglobulin and thyroid peroxidase. The majority of the anti-TSH-receptor 
antibodies have a stimulating capacity and are responsible for hyperthyroidism. 
The anti-thyroglobulin- and anti-thyroid peroxidase antibodies belonging to the 
catalytic type of antibodies destroy the thyrocytes resulting in hypothyroidism. 
The appearance of anti-thyroid peroxidase antibodies precedes the induction of 
thyroiditis and the manifestation of hypothyroidism. The molecular analysis of 
thyroglobulin gene polymorphism is important in the mechanism of autoimmune 
thyroiditis. The autoantigen presentation by major histocompatibility complex 
molecules is a key point of the autoimmune mechanism. It has been shown that a 
HLA-DR variant containing arginine at position 74 of the DRβ1 chain confers a 
strong genetic susceptibility to autoimmune thyroid diseases, Graves' disease 
and Hashimoto's thyroiditis, while glutamine at position DRβ1-74 is protective. 
Human thyroglobulin 2098 peptide represents a strong and specific DRβ1-Arg74 
binder, while a non-binding control peptide, thyroglobulin 2766 fails to induce 
this response. Moreover, thyroglobulin 2098 stimulated T-cells from individuals 
who were positive for thyroglobulin antibodies, demonstrating that thyroglobulin 
2098 is an immunogenic peptide capable of being presented in vivo and activating 
T-cells in autoimmune thyroid diseases. Taken together these findings suggest 
that thyroglobulin 2098, a strong and specific binder to the disease-associated 
HLA-DRβ1-Arg74, is a major human T-cell epitope and it participates in the 
pathomechanism of the autoimmune thyroid disease. The exact nature of the role 
of environmental factors in the autoimmune thyroid disease is still not well 
known, but the importance of several factors such as iodine, drugs and 
infections has been reported. Further knowledge of the precise mechanisms of 
interaction between environmental factors and genes in inducing thyroid 
autoimmunity could result in the development of new strategies for diagnosis, 
prevention and treatment.

DOI: 10.1556/OH.2012.29370
PMID: 22735372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]