---
reference_id: "PMID:16941080"
title: "Comparison of CMT1A and CMT2: similarities and differences."
authors:
- Bienfait HM
- Verhamme C
- van Schaik IN
- Koelman JH
- de Visser BW
- de Haan RJ
- Baas F
- van Engelen BG
- de Visser M
journal: J Neurol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-006-0260-6
keywords:
- Action Potentials/physiology
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- "Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease/classification, genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Median Nerve/physiopathology
- Middle Aged
- Neural Conduction/physiology
- "Statistics, Nonparametric"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparison of CMT1A and CMT2: similarities and differences.
**Authors:** Bienfait HM, Verhamme C, van Schaik IN, Koelman JH, de Visser BW, de Haan RJ, Baas F, van Engelen BG, de Visser M
**Journal:** J Neurol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-006-0260-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-006-0260-6)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2006 Dec;253(12):1572-80. doi: 10.1007/s00415-006-0260-6. Epub 2006
Aug 28.

Comparison of CMT1A and CMT2: similarities and differences.

Bienfait HM(1), Verhamme C, van Schaik IN, Koelman JH, de Visser BW, de Haan RJ,
Baas F, van Engelen BG, de Visser M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, H2-222, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, PO box 22660, 1100, DE, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

To evaluate the clinical and electrophysiological similarities and differences
between two large groups of patients with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, i.e.
CMT1A and CMT2, we performed a post hoc comparison of clinical and
electrophysiological data. Most CMT1A and CMT2 patients had the classical CMT
phenotype. Age of onset was significantly later in CMT2. Total areflexia was
present in approximately half of the CMT1A patients whereas it was rare in CMT2.
Foot deformities and weakness of knee extensor and foot dorsal flexor muscles
were more frequent in CMT1A. Median nerve motor nerve conduction velocities
(MNCV) were always less than 38 m/s in CMT1A patients, whereas this was also the
case in 16% of the CMT2 patients. Sensory nerve conduction velocities showed
less overlap. In both CMT1A and CMT2 CMAP and SNAP amplitudes were often reduced
or not obtainable in the legs. In CMT1A, SNAP amplitude was more reduced and
SNAP duration more prolonged than in CMT2. We conclude that there are no robust
clinical signs or symptoms that differentiate between CMT1A and CMT2 patients.
Electrodiagnostical studies show a length-dependent motor and sensory axonal
dysfunction in both CMT-types. Additional SNAP and SNCV evaluation may be
helpful in focusing molecular genetic analysis in the occasional case of CMT2
showing slow motor nerve conduction velocities overlapping with CMT1A values.
The reduction of CMAP and SNAP amplitudes in CMT1A is probably a combined effect
of demyelination and axonal dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-006-0260-6
PMID: 16941080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
