---
reference_id: "PMID:39572944"
title: Comparison of Recovery Rate of Otomycosis using One-Percent Gentian Violet and One-Percent Clotrimazole Topical Treatment.
authors:
- Dhakal S
- Bagale G
- Nepal A
- Yadav D
- Khadka C
- Joshi D
journal: J Nepal Health Res Counc
year: '2024'
doi: 10.33314/jnhrc.v22i02.4885
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparison of Recovery Rate of Otomycosis using One-Percent Gentian Violet and One-Percent Clotrimazole Topical Treatment.
**Authors:** Dhakal S, Bagale G, Nepal A, Yadav D, Khadka C, Joshi D
**Journal:** J Nepal Health Res Counc (2024)
**DOI:** [10.33314/jnhrc.v22i02.4885](https://doi.org/10.33314/jnhrc.v22i02.4885)

## Content

1. J Nepal Health Res Counc. 2024 Oct 3;22(2):269-273. doi: 
10.33314/jnhrc.v22i02.4885.

Comparison of Recovery Rate of Otomycosis using One-Percent Gentian Violet and 
One-Percent Clotrimazole Topical Treatment.

Dhakal S(1), Bagale G(2), Nepal A(3), Yadav D(3), Khadka C(3), Joshi D(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of ENT-HNS, Bharatpur Hospital, Chitwan, Nepal.
(2)Department of ENT-HNS, Mechi Zonal Hospital, Jhapa, Nepal.
(3)Department of ENT-HNS, Patan Academy of Health Sciences, Lagankhel, Lalitpur, 
Nepal.
(4)Department of ENT-HNS, National Academy of Medical Sciences, Kathmandu, 
Nepal.

BACKGROUND: Otomycosis is a fungal infection of external auditory canal with 
worldwide prevalence of 9% to 30%. Treatment includes elimination of 
predisposing factor, thorough canal cleaning and topical or systemic antifungal 
agents. Clotrimazole is a specific topical antifungal agent with effectiveness 
varying from 95% to 100%. Gentian violet is an aniline dye and its use as 
antifungal has been mentioned in literature with effectiveness up to 80%. This 
study was aimed at comparing the effectiveness of these two commonly used 
treatments in otomycosis.This is a conducted in Department of ENT-HNS, Patan 
Academy of Health Sciences, Lalitpur, Nepal over one-year period after approval 
from institutional review committee. Patients with otomycosis were randomized 
into arm A and arm B group. Arm A patients were treated with one percent 
clotrimazole topical drops. Patients in Arm B were treated with application of 
one percent Gentian Violet paint. Effectiveness was measured on the basis of 
clinical response and recovery at end of second week. Data analysis was done 
with Epi Info application. Chi-square test was used and p-value less than 0.05 
was considered significant.
RESULTS: Total 90 patients were treated for otomycosis over one year. Recovery 
was better in clotrimazole group at second week i.e., 86.84% vs 71.43%.
CONCLUSIONS: Clotrimazole was more effective in treatment of otomycosis compared 
to Gentian Violet paint, though the result was not statistically significant.

DOI: 10.33314/jnhrc.v22i02.4885
PMID: 39572944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]