---
reference_id: "PMID:10851256"
title: Tietz syndrome (hypopigmentation/deafness) caused by mutation of MITF.
authors:
- Smith SD
- Kelley PM
- Kenyon JB
- Hoover D
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.37.6.446
keywords:
- Adolescent
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- "Deafness/genetics, physiopathology"
- Female
- "Genes, Dominant/genetics"
- Genetic Linkage/genetics
- Humans
- "Hypopigmentation/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Microphthalmia-Associated Transcription Factor
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Pedigree
- Syndrome
- Transcription Factors
- Waardenburg Syndrome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tietz syndrome (hypopigmentation/deafness) caused by mutation of MITF.
**Authors:** Smith SD, Kelley PM, Kenyon JB, Hoover D
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.37.6.446](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.37.6.446)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2000 Jun;37(6):446-8. doi: 10.1136/jmg.37.6.446.

Tietz syndrome (hypopigmentation/deafness) caused by mutation of MITF.

Smith SD(1), Kelley PM, Kenyon JB, Hoover D.

Author information:
(1)Center for Hereditary Communication Disorders, Boys Town National Research
Hospital, 555 North 30th Street, Omaha, NE 68131, USA. ssmith@unmc.edu

Patients with Tietz syndrome have congenital profound deafness and generalised
hypopigmentation, inherited in a fully penetrant autosomal dominant fashion. The
pigmentary features and complete penetrance make this syndrome distinct among
syndromes with pigmentary anomalies and deafness, which characteristically have
patchy depigmentation and variable penetrance. Only one family has been reported
with the exact features described in the original report of this syndrome. This
family was reascertained and a missense mutation was found in the basic region
of the MITF gene in family members with Tietz syndrome. Mutations in other
regions of this gene have been found to produce Waardenburg syndrome type 2
(WS2), which also includes pigmentary changes and hearing loss, but in contrast
to Tietz syndrome, depigmentation is patchy and hearing loss is variable in WS2.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.37.6.446
PMCID: PMC1734605
PMID: 10851256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
