---
reference_id: "PMID:37916743"
title: Tularemia - a re-emerging disease with growing concern.
authors:
- Sharma R
- Patil RD
- Singh B
- Chakraborty S
- Chandran D
- Dhama K
- Gopinath D
- Jairath G
- Rialch A
- Mal G
- Singh P
- Chaicumpa W
- Saikumar G
journal: Vet Q
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1080/01652176.2023.2277753
keywords:
- Humans
- Animals
- Rabbits
- "Tularemia/diagnosis, epidemiology, veterinary"
- Zoonoses/microbiology
- Francisella tularensis
- Anti-Bacterial Agents
- Mammals
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tularemia - a re-emerging disease with growing concern.
**Authors:** Sharma R, Patil RD, Singh B, Chakraborty S, Chandran D, Dhama K, Gopinath D, Jairath G, Rialch A, Mal G, Singh P, Chaicumpa W, Saikumar G
**Journal:** Vet Q (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1080/01652176.2023.2277753](https://doi.org/10.1080/01652176.2023.2277753)

## Content

1. Vet Q. 2023 Dec;43(1):1-16. doi: 10.1080/01652176.2023.2277753. Epub 2023 Nov 
18.

Tularemia - a re-emerging disease with growing concern.

Sharma R(1), Patil RD(2), Singh B(1), Chakraborty S(3), Chandran D(4), Dhama 
K(5), Gopinath D(1), Jairath G(1), Rialch A(1), Mal G(1), Singh P(1), Chaicumpa 
W(6), Saikumar G(5).

Author information:
(1)Disease Investigation Laboratory, ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research Institute, 
Regional Station, Palampur, Himachal Pradesh, India.
(2)Department of Veterinary Pathology, DGCN College of Veterinary and Animal 
Sciences, CSK HPKV, Palampur, Himachal Pradesh, India.
(3)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, College of Veterinary Sciences and 
Animal Husbandry, R.K. Nagar, West Tripura, India.
(4)Department of Animal Husbandry, Palakkad, Kerala, India.
(5)Division of Pathology, ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, 
Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(6)Center of Research Excellence in Therapeutic Proteins and Antibody 
Engineering, Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, 
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Tularemia caused by Gram-negative, coccobacillus bacterium, Francisella 
tularensis, is a highly infectious zoonotic disease. Human cases have been 
reported mainly from the United States, Nordic countries like Sweden and 
Finland, and some European and Asian countries. Naturally, the disease occurs in 
several vertebrates, particularly lagomorphs. Type A (subspecies tularensis) is 
more virulent and causes disease mainly in North America; type B (subspecies 
holarctica) is widespread, while subspecies mediasiatica is present in central 
Asia. F. tularensis is a possible bioweapon due to its lethality, low infectious 
dosage, and aerosol transmission. Small mammals like rabbits, hares, and 
muskrats are primary sources of human infections, but true reservoir of F. 
tularensis is unknown. Vector-borne tularemia primarily involves ticks and 
mosquitoes. The bacterial subspecies involved and mode of transmission determine 
the clinical picture. Early signs are flu-like illnesses that may evolve into 
different clinical forms of tularemia that may or may not include 
lymphadenopathy. Ulcero-glandular and glandular forms are acquired by arthropod 
bite or handling of infected animals, oculo-glandular form as a result of 
conjunctival infection, and oro-pharyngeal form by intake of contaminated food 
or water. Pulmonary form appears after inhalation of bacteria. Typhoidal form 
may occur after infection via different routes. Human-to-human transmission has 
not been known. Diagnosis can be achieved by serology, bacterial culture, and 
molecular methods. Treatment for tularemia typically entails use of quinolones, 
tetracyclines, or aminoglycosides. Preventive measures are necessary to avoid 
infection although difficult to implement. Research is underway for the 
development of effective live attenuated and subunit vaccines.

DOI: 10.1080/01652176.2023.2277753
PMCID: PMC10732219
PMID: 37916743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).