---
reference_id: "PMID:29474918"
title: Dissecting the Causal Mechanism of X-Linked Dystonia-Parkinsonism by Integrating Genome and Transcriptome Assembly.
authors:
- Aneichyk T
- Hendriks WT
- Yadav R
- Shin D
- Gao D
- Vaine CA
- Collins RL
- Domingo A
- Currall B
- Stortchevoi A
- Multhaupt-Buell T
- Penney EB
- Cruz L
- Dhakal J
- Brand H
- Hanscom C
- Antolik C
- Dy M
- Ragavendran A
- Underwood J
- Cantsilieris S
- Munson KM
- Eichler EE
- Acuña P
- Go C
- Jamora RDG
- Rosales RL
- Church DM
- Williams SR
- Garcia S
- Klein C
- Müller U
- Wilhelmsen KC
- Timmers HTM
- Sapir Y
- Wainger BJ
- Henderson D
- Ito N
- Weisenfeld N
- Jaffe D
- Sharma N
- Breakefield XO
- Ozelius LJ
- Bragg DC
- Talkowski ME
journal: Cell
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.02.011
keywords:
- Alternative Splicing/genetics
- Alu Elements/genetics
- Base Sequence
- CRISPR-Cas Systems/genetics
- Cohort Studies
- Dystonic Disorders/genetics
- Family
- Female
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics"
- Genetic Loci
- "Genome, Human"
- Haplotypes/genetics
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- "Histone Acetyltransferases/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism
- Introns/genetics
- Male
- Minisatellite Repeats/genetics
- "Models, Genetic"
- "Nerve Degeneration/genetics, pathology"
- Neural Stem Cells/metabolism
- Neurons/metabolism
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, metabolism"
- Short Interspersed Nucleotide Elements
- "TATA-Binding Protein Associated Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- "Transcription Factor TFIID/genetics, metabolism"
- Transcriptome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dissecting the Causal Mechanism of X-Linked Dystonia-Parkinsonism by Integrating Genome and Transcriptome Assembly.
**Authors:** Aneichyk T, Hendriks WT, Yadav R, Shin D, Gao D, Vaine CA, Collins RL, Domingo A, Currall B, Stortchevoi A, Multhaupt-Buell T, Penney EB, Cruz L, Dhakal J, Brand H, Hanscom C, Antolik C, Dy M, Ragavendran A, Underwood J, Cantsilieris S, Munson KM, Eichler EE, Acuña P, Go C, Jamora RDG, Rosales RL, Church DM, Williams SR, Garcia S, Klein C, Müller U, Wilhelmsen KC, Timmers HTM, Sapir Y, Wainger BJ, Henderson D, Ito N, Weisenfeld N, Jaffe D, Sharma N, Breakefield XO, Ozelius LJ, Bragg DC, Talkowski ME
**Journal:** Cell (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2018.02.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.02.011)

## Content

1. Cell. 2018 Feb 22;172(5):897-909.e21. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.02.011.

Dissecting the Causal Mechanism of X-Linked Dystonia-Parkinsonism by Integrating 
Genome and Transcriptome Assembly.

Aneichyk T(1), Hendriks WT(2), Yadav R(1), Shin D(2), Gao D(1), Vaine CA(2), 
Collins RL(3), Domingo A(4), Currall B(5), Stortchevoi A(5), Multhaupt-Buell 
T(2), Penney EB(2), Cruz L(2), Dhakal J(2), Brand H(5), Hanscom C(5), Antolik 
C(5), Dy M(2), Ragavendran A(5), Underwood J(6), Cantsilieris S(7), Munson 
KM(7), Eichler EE(8), Acuña P(2), Go C(9), Jamora RDG(10), Rosales RL(11), 
Church DM(12), Williams SR(12), Garcia S(12), Klein C(13), Müller U(14), 
Wilhelmsen KC(15), Timmers HTM(16), Sapir Y(17), Wainger BJ(17), Henderson D(2), 
Ito N(2), Weisenfeld N(18), Jaffe D(18), Sharma N(2), Breakefield XO(2), Ozelius 
LJ(2), Bragg DC(19), Talkowski ME(20).

Author information:
(1)Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 
02114, USA; Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Program in Medical and Population 
Genetics and Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02114, USA; The Collaborative Center for X-linked 
Dystonia-Parkinsonism, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129, 
USA.
(3)Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 
02114, USA; Program in Medical and Population Genetics and Stanley Center for 
Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(4)Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 
02114, USA; Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Program in Medical and Population 
Genetics and Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; The Collaborative Center for X-linked 
Dystonia-Parkinsonism, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129, 
USA.
(5)Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 
02114, USA; Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(6)Pacific Biosciences, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA; Department of Genome 
Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(7)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(8)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, WA 98195, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(9)Jose Reyes Memorial Medical Center, Manila, Philippines.
(10)Philippine General Hospital, Manila, Philippines.
(11)University of Santo Tomas Hospital, Manila, Philippines.
(12)10X Genomics, Pleasanton, CA 94566, USA.
(13)Institute of Neurogenetics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(14)Institut für Humangenetik, Justus-Liebig-Universität, Giessen, Germany.
(15)University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
(16)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) partner site Freiburg and Department of 
Urology, University Medical Center, Freiburg, Germany.
(17)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(18)10X Genomics, Pleasanton, CA 94566, USA; Genome Sequencing and Analysis 
Program, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(19)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02114, USA; The Collaborative Center for X-linked 
Dystonia-Parkinsonism, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129, 
USA. Electronic address: bragg@helix.mgh.harvard.edu.
(20)Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 
02114, USA; Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Program in Medical and Population 
Genetics and Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; The Collaborative Center for X-linked 
Dystonia-Parkinsonism, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129, 
USA; Departments of Psychiatry and Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, MA 02114, USA. Electronic address: mtalkowski@mgh.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Cell. 2018 Feb 22;172(5):889-891. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.02.022.
    Mov Disord. 2018 Jul;33(7):1095. doi: 10.1002/mds.27458.

X-linked Dystonia-Parkinsonism (XDP) is a Mendelian neurodegenerative disease 
that is endemic to the Philippines and is associated with a founder haplotype. 
We integrated multiple genome and transcriptome assembly technologies to narrow 
the causal mutation to the TAF1 locus, which included a SINE-VNTR-Alu (SVA) 
retrotransposition into intron 32 of the gene. Transcriptome analyses identified 
decreased expression of the canonical cTAF1 transcript among XDP probands, and 
de novo assembly across multiple pluripotent stem-cell-derived neuronal lineages 
discovered aberrant TAF1 transcription that involved alternative splicing and 
intron retention (IR) in proximity to the SVA that was anti-correlated with 
overall TAF1 expression. CRISPR/Cas9 excision of the SVA rescued this 
XDP-specific transcriptional signature and normalized TAF1 expression in 
probands. These data suggest an SVA-mediated aberrant transcriptional mechanism 
associated with XDP and may provide a roadmap for layered technologies and 
integrated assembly-based analyses for other unsolved Mendelian disorders.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.02.011
PMCID: PMC5831509
PMID: 29474918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests J.U. is employed by 
Pacific Biosciences, Inc. D.M.C., S.R.W., S.G., N.W., and D.J. are employed by 
10X Genomics. E.E.E. is on the scientific advisory board of DNAnexus, Inc. The 
authors declare no other competing interests.