---
reference_id: "PMID:39016057"
title: "Real-world data on ALK rearrangement test in Chinese advanced non-small cell lung cancer (RATICAL): a nationwide multicenter retrospective study."
authors:
- Li L
- Li W
- Wu C
- Xi Y
- Guo L
- Ji Y
- Jiang L
- Li J
- Yun J
- Chen G
- Li Y
- Liu Y
- Mu D
- Han Y
- Sun L
- Xia Q
- Teng X
- Che N
- Wu W
- Qiu X
- Liu C
- Yan X
- Li D
- Zhang Z
- Wang Z
- Li Y
- Wang Z
- Guo L
- Nie X
- Geng J
- Zhou J
- Ying J
journal: Cancer Commun (Lond)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/cac2.12593
keywords:
- Humans
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/genetics
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Gene Rearrangement
- Female
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Middle Aged
- China
- Aged
- Adult
- Immunohistochemistry
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Young Adult
- East Asian People
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Real-world data on ALK rearrangement test in Chinese advanced non-small cell lung cancer (RATICAL): a nationwide multicenter retrospective study.
**Authors:** Li L, Li W, Wu C, Xi Y, Guo L, Ji Y, Jiang L, Li J, Yun J, Chen G, Li Y, Liu Y, Mu D, Han Y, Sun L, Xia Q, Teng X, Che N, Wu W, Qiu X, Liu C, Yan X, Li D, Zhang Z, Wang Z, Li Y, Wang Z, Guo L, Nie X, Geng J, Zhou J, Ying J
**Journal:** Cancer Commun (Lond) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cac2.12593](https://doi.org/10.1002/cac2.12593)

## Content

1. Cancer Commun (Lond). 2024 Sep;44(9):992-1004. doi: 10.1002/cac2.12593. Epub
2024 Jul 17.

Real-world data on ALK rearrangement test in Chinese advanced non-small cell
lung cancer (RATICAL): a nationwide multicenter retrospective study.

Li L(1), Li W(2), Wu C(3), Xi Y(4), Guo L(1), Ji Y(5), Jiang L(6), Li J(7), Yun
J(8), Chen G(9), Li Y(10), Liu Y(11), Mu D(12), Han Y(13), Sun L(14), Xia Q(15),
Teng X(16), Che N(17), Wu W(18), Qiu X(19), Liu C(20), Yan X(21), Li D(22),
Zhang Z(23), Wang Z(24), Li Y(25), Wang Z(26), Guo L(27), Nie X(28), Geng J(29),
Zhou J(30), Ying J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, National Cancer Center/National Clinical Research
Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, P. R. China.
(2)Department of Pathology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, Henan, P. R. China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, School of Medicine,
Tongji University, Shanghai, P. R. China.
(4)Department of Pathology, Cancer Hospital Affiliated to Shanxi Medical
University, Shanxi Province Cancer Hospital, Shanxi Hospital Affiliated to
Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Taiyuan, Shanxi, P. R.
China.
(5)Department of Pathology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, P.
R. China.
(6)Department of Pathology, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu,
Sichuan, P. R. China.
(7)Department of Pathology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, P. R.
China.
(8)Department of Pathology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center; State Key
Laboratory of Oncology in South China; Collaborative Innovation Center for
Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou, Guangdong, P. R. China.
(9)Department of Pathology, Fujian Cancer Hospital, Fujian Medical University
Cancer Hospital, Fuzhou, Fujian, P. R. China.
(10)Department of Pathology, Department of Oncology, Fudan University Cancer
Center, Shanghai Medical College of Fudan University, Shanghai, P. R. China.
(11)Department of Pathology, The Fourth Hospital of Hebei Medical University,
Shijiazhuang, Hebei, P. R. China.
(12)Department of Pathology, Shandong Cancer Hospital, Jinan, Shandong, P. R.
China.
(13)Department of Pathology, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, P. R. China.
(14)Department of Pathology, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and
Hospital, Tianjin, P. R. China.
(15)Department of Pathology, the Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Henan Provincial Cancer Hospital, Zhengzhou, Henan, P. R. China.
(16)Department of Pathology, the First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, P. R. China.
(17)Department of Pathology, Beijing Chest Hospital, Capital Medical University,
Beijing Tuberculosis and Thoracic Tumor Research Institute, Beijing, P. R.
China.
(18)Department of Pathology, Cancer Hospital of the University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences (Zhejiang Cancer Hospital), Hangzhou, Zhejiang, P. R. China.
(19)Department of Pathology, the First Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang, Liaoning, P. R. China.
(20)Department of Pathology, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital, Guangdong
Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, Guangdong, P. R. China.
(21)Institute of Pathology, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University (Army Medical University), Chongqing, P. R. China.
(22)Department of Pathology, the Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan, P. R. China.
(23)Department of Pathology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, P. R. China.
(24)Department of Pathology, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, P. R. China.
(25)Department of Pathology, the Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University,
Qingdao, Shandong, P. R. China.
(26)Department of Pathology, Beijing Hospital, National Center of Gerontology,
Beijing, P. R. China.
(27)Department of Pathology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou, Jiangsu, P. R. China.
(28)Department of Pathology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, P. R. China.
(29)Department of Pathology, Harbin Medical University Cancer Hospital, Harbin,
Heilongjiang, P. R. China.
(30)Department of Pathology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan, P. R. China.

BACKGROUND: Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) test in advanced non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) can help physicians provide target therapies for patients
harboring ALK gene rearrangement. This study aimed to investigate the real-world
test patterns and positive rates of ALK gene rearrangements in advanced NSCLC.
METHODS: In this real-world study (ChiCTR2000030266), patients with advanced
NSCLC who underwent an ALK rearrangement test in 30 medical centers in China
between October 1, 2018 and December 31, 2019 were retrospectively analyzed.
Interpretation training was conducted before the study was initiated. Quality
controls were performed at participating centers using immunohistochemistry
(IHC)-VENTANA-D5F3. The positive ALK gene rearrangement rate and consistency
rate were calculated. The associated clinicopathological characteristics of ALK
gene rearrangement were investigated as well.
RESULTS: The overall ALK gene rearrangement rate was 6.7% in 23,689 patients
with advanced NSCLC and 8.2% in 17,436 patients with advanced lung
adenocarcinoma. The quality control analysis of IHC-VENTANA-D5F3 revealed an
intra-hospital consistency rate of 98.2% (879/895) and an inter-hospital
consistency rate of 99.2% (646/651). IHC-VENTANA-D5F3 was used in 53.6%,
real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in 25.4%, next-generation
sequencing (NGS) in 18.3%, and fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH) in
15.9% in the adenocarcinoma subgroup. For specimens tested with multiple
methods, the consistency rates confirmed by IHC-VENTANA-D5F3 were 98.0%
(822/839) for FISH, 98.7% (1,222/1,238) for NGS, and 91.3% (146/160) for RT-PCR.
The overall ALK gene rearrangement rates were higher in females, patients of ≤
35 years old, never smokers, tumor cellularity of > 50, and metastatic specimens
used for testing in the total NSCLC population and adenocarcinoma subgroup (all
P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: This study highlights the real-world variability and challenges of
ALK test in advanced NSCLC, demonstrating a predominant use of IHC-VENTANA-D5F3
with high consistency and distinct clinicopathological features in ALK-positive
patients. These findings underscore the need for a consensus on optimal test
practices and support the development of refined ALK test strategies to enhance
diagnostic accuracy and therapeutic decision-making in NSCLC.

© 2024 The Author(s). Cancer Communications published by John Wiley & Sons
Australia, Ltd on behalf of Sun Yat‐sen University Cancer Center.

DOI: 10.1002/cac2.12593
PMCID: PMC11492361
PMID: 39016057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no competing interests.
