---
reference_id: "PMID:41233526"
title: "Huntington disease: somatic expansion, pathobiology and therapeutics."
authors:
- Donaldson J
- Hensman Moss D
- Ciosi M
- Usdin K
- Balmus G
- Monckton DG
- Tabrizi SJ
journal: Nat Rev Neurol
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1038/s41582-025-01159-7
keywords:
- Humans
- "Huntington Disease/genetics, therapy, pathology"
- Huntingtin Protein/genetics
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion/genetics
- Animals
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Huntington disease: somatic expansion, pathobiology and therapeutics.
**Authors:** Donaldson J, Hensman Moss D, Ciosi M, Usdin K, Balmus G, Monckton DG, Tabrizi SJ
**Journal:** Nat Rev Neurol (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41582-025-01159-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41582-025-01159-7)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Neurol. 2026 Jan;22(1):5-21. doi: 10.1038/s41582-025-01159-7. Epub
2025  Nov 13.

Huntington disease: somatic expansion, pathobiology and therapeutics.

Donaldson J(#)(1)(2), Hensman Moss D(#)(1)(2), Ciosi M(3), Usdin K(4), Balmus 
G(5)(6)(7), Monckton DG(3), Tabrizi SJ(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Huntington's Disease Centre and Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL 
Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London, UK.
(2)UK Dementia Research Institute, University College London, London, UK.
(3)School of Molecular Biosciences, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life 
Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(4)Laboratory of Cell and Molecular Biology, National Institute of Digestive and 
Diabetes and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(5)UK Dementia Research Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(6)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(7)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, Transylvanian Institute of 
Neuroscience, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(8)Huntington's Disease Centre and Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL 
Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London, UK. s.tabrizi@ucl.ac.uk.
(9)UK Dementia Research Institute, University College London, London, UK. 
s.tabrizi@ucl.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

Expansion of simple DNA repeats causes over 45 human, predominantly 
neurodegenerative, inherited disorders. Huntington disease is a fatal, 
inherited, neurodegenerative disease caused by a CAG repeat expansion in the 
huntingtin gene (HTT), resulting in a toxic polyglutamine tract in the 
huntingtin protein. The disease leads to progressive motor, cognitive and 
psychiatric decline, primarily resulting from loss of medium spiny neurons in 
the striatum. Although Huntington disease has long been viewed as a consequence 
of age-dependent toxicity from mutant huntingtin, genome-wide association 
studies have identified genetic modifiers, mostly DNA repair genes, that 
significantly influence disease onset and progression. These findings point to 
somatic CAG repeat expansions in affected tissues as a key pathological 
mechanism. This emerging paradigm suggests that disease progression is not 
solely protein-driven but also shaped at the DNA level, a mechanism that is 
shared among other repeat expansion disorders. Therapeutically, this discovery 
opens new opportunities: interventions to limit somatic repeat expansion might 
be effective across multiple repeat expansion diseases and, when combined with 
disease-specific approaches, such as huntingtin lowering in Huntington disease, 
might offer more effective and longer-lasting clinical benefits than either 
strategy in isolation. This approach also poses challenges, determining the 
optimal point for therapeutic intervention and how best to establish phenotypic 
improvement in clinical trials when the target tissue is the brain.

© 2025. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41582-025-01159-7
PMID: 41233526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: S.J.T. reports research 
grant funding over the past 3 years from the CHDI Foundation, the NIHR Clinical 
Research Network, UK Medical Research Council (MR/X008029/1), UK Dementia 
Research Institute (principally funded by the UK Medical Research Council), and 
the Wellcome Trust (223082/Z/21/Z). S.J.T. also reports that over the past 
3 years consultancy fees for advisory services were paid to University College 
London Consultants, a wholly owned subsidiary of University College London from 
the following companies: Alchemab, Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Annexon Bioscience, 
Arrowhead, Atalanta Therapeutics, Catapult, Design Therapeutics, EcoR1, F. 
Hoffman-La Roche, Harness Therapeutics, Ipsen, Iris Medicine, Latus Bio, 
LifeEdit, Novartis Pharma, Pfizer, Prilenia, Prime Global, PTC Therapeutics, 
Rgenta Therapeutics, SkyHawk, Takeda Pharmaceuticals, Triplet Therapeutics, 
UniQure Biopharma, Vertex Pharmaceuticals, Vico Therapeutics, and Wave Life 
Sciences. S.J.T. has also consulted for Abingworth, Andera Partners, Ascidian 
Therapeutics, EQT, Cure Ventures, FunctionRX, Harrisson & Star, IQVIA and 
LifeLink through the office of Celtic Phenomenon. In the past 3 years, in 
University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust host clinical 
institution S.J.T. has received funding to run clinical trials for Alnylam 
Pharmaceuticals, F. Hoffman-La Roche, Novartis Pharma, PTC Therapeutics, and 
UniQure Biopharma. Within the past 36 months, D.G.M. has been a scientific 
consultant and/or received an honoraria or research contract from AMO Pharma, 
Dyne, F. Hoffman-La Roche, Function Rx, LoQus23, MOMA Therapeutics, Novartis, 
Ono Pharmaceuticals, Pfizer Pharmaceuticals, PTC Therapeutics, Rgenta 
Therapeutics, Sanofi, Sarepta Therapeutics Inc, Script Biosciences, Skyhawk 
Therapeutics, Triplet Therapeutics, and Vertex Pharmaceuticals. D.G.M. also had 
research contracts with AMO Pharma and Vertex Pharmaceuticals. D.G.M. is on the 
Scientific Advisory Board of the Myotonic Dystrophy Foundation and EuroDyMA 
(European Dystrophia Myotonica Association), is a scientific adviser to the 
Myotonic Dystrophy Support Group, and is a vice president for research of 
Muscular Dystrophy UK. G.B. is the founder and chief executive officer (part 
time) of Function Rx ltd. The authors declare that they have no other competing 
interests.