---
reference_id: "PMID:36099972"
title: "CRB1-Associated Retinal Dystrophies: Genetics, Clinical Characteristics, and Natural History."
authors:
- Daich Varela M
- Georgiou M
- Alswaiti Y
- Kabbani J
- Fujinami K
- Fujinami-Yokokawa Y
- Khoda S
- Mahroo OA
- Robson AG
- Webster AR
- AlTalbishi A
- Michaelides M
journal: Am J Ophthalmol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2022.09.002
keywords:
- Humans
- Genotype
- Retrospective Studies
- Mutation
- "Retinal Dystrophies/diagnosis, genetics"
- Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics
- Phenotype
- Eye Proteins/genetics
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CRB1-Associated Retinal Dystrophies: Genetics, Clinical Characteristics, and Natural History.
**Authors:** Daich Varela M, Georgiou M, Alswaiti Y, Kabbani J, Fujinami K, Fujinami-Yokokawa Y, Khoda S, Mahroo OA, Robson AG, Webster AR, AlTalbishi A, Michaelides M
**Journal:** Am J Ophthalmol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajo.2022.09.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajo.2022.09.002)

## Content

1. Am J Ophthalmol. 2023 Feb;246:107-121. doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2022.09.002. Epub
2022  Sep 12.

CRB1-Associated Retinal Dystrophies: Genetics, Clinical Characteristics, and
Natural History.

Daich Varela M(1), Georgiou M(2), Alswaiti Y(3), Kabbani J(4), Fujinami K(5),
Fujinami-Yokokawa Y(6), Khoda S(7), Mahroo OA(1), Robson AG(1), Webster AR(1),
AlTalbishi A(3), Michaelides M(8).

Author information:
(1)Moorfields Eye Hospital (M.D.V., M.G., K.F., S.K., O.A.M., A.G.R., A.R.W.,
M.M.), London, United Kingdom; UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University
College London (M.D.V., M.G., K.F., Y.F.-Y., O.A.M., A.G.R., A.R.W., M.M.),
London, United Kingdom.
(2)Moorfields Eye Hospital (M.D.V., M.G., K.F., S.K., O.A.M., A.G.R., A.R.W.,
M.M.), London, United Kingdom; UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University
College London (M.D.V., M.G., K.F., Y.F.-Y., O.A.M., A.G.R., A.R.W., M.M.),
London, United Kingdom; Jones Eye Institute (M.G.), University of Arkansas for
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas, USA.
(3)St John of Jerusalem Eye Hospital group, Jerusalem, Palestine (Y.A., A.A.).
(4)Imperial College London (J.K.), London, United Kingdom.
(5)Moorfields Eye Hospital (M.D.V., M.G., K.F., S.K., O.A.M., A.G.R., A.R.W.,
M.M.), London, United Kingdom; UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University
College London (M.D.V., M.G., K.F., Y.F.-Y., O.A.M., A.G.R., A.R.W., M.M.),
London, United Kingdom; Laboratory of Visual Physiology, Division of Vision
Research, National Institute of Sensory Organs, National Hospital Organization
Tokyo Medical Center (Y.F.-Y.), Tokyo, Japan.
(6)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London (M.D.V., M.G.,
K.F., Y.F.-Y., O.A.M., A.G.R., A.R.W., M.M.), London, United Kingdom; Laboratory
of Visual Physiology, Division of Vision Research, National Institute of Sensory
Organs, National Hospital Organization Tokyo Medical Center (Y.F.-Y.), Tokyo,
Japan; Department of Health Policy and Management, School of Medicine, Keio
University(Y.F.-Y.), Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Moorfields Eye Hospital (M.D.V., M.G., K.F., S.K., O.A.M., A.G.R., A.R.W.,
M.M.), London, United Kingdom.
(8)Moorfields Eye Hospital (M.D.V., M.G., K.F., S.K., O.A.M., A.G.R., A.R.W.,
M.M.), London, United Kingdom; UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University
College London (M.D.V., M.G., K.F., Y.F.-Y., O.A.M., A.G.R., A.R.W., M.M.),
London, United Kingdom. Electronic address: michel.michaelides@ucl.ac.uk.

PURPOSE: To analyze the clinical characteristics, natural history, and genetics
of CRB1-associated retinal dystrophies.
DESIGN: Multicenter international retrospective cohort study.
METHODS: Review of clinical notes, ophthalmic images, and genetic testing
results of 104 patients (91 probands) with disease-causing CRB1 variants.
Macular optical coherence tomography (OCT) parameters, visual function, fundus
characteristics, and associations between variables were the main outcome
measures.
RESULTS: The mean age of the cohort at the first visit was 19.8 ± 16.1 (median
15) years, with a mean follow-up of 9.6 ± 10 years. Based on history, imaging,
and clinical examination, 26 individuals were diagnosed with retinitis
pigmentosa (RP; 25%), 54 with early-onset severe retinal dystrophy / Leber
congenital amaurosis (EOSRD/LCA; 52%), and 24 with macular dystrophy (MD; 23%).
Severe visual impairment was most frequent after 40 years of age for patients
with RP and after 20 years of age for EOSRD/LCA. Longitudinal analysis revealed
a significant difference between baseline and follow-up best-corrected visual
acuity in the 3 subcohorts. Macular thickness decreased in most patients with
EOSRD/LCA and MD, whereas the majority of patients with RP had increased
perifoveal thickness.
CONCLUSIONS: A subset of individuals with CRB1 variants present with mild,
adult-onset RP. EOSRD/LCA phenotype was significantly associated with null
variants, and 167_169 deletion was exclusively present in the MD cohort. The
poor OCT lamination may have a degenerative component, as well as being
congenital. Disease symmetry and reasonable window for intervention highlight
CRB1 retinal dystrophies as a promising target for trials of novel therapeutics.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajo.2022.09.002
PMCID: PMC10555856
PMID: 36099972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
