---
reference_id: "PMID:39743596"
title: Dysregulation of mTOR signalling is a converging mechanism in lissencephaly.
authors:
- Zhang C
- Liang D
- Ercan-Sencicek AG
- Bulut AS
- Cortes J
- Cheng IQ
- Henegariu O
- Nishimura S
- Wang X
- Peksen AB
- Takeo Y
- Caglar C
- Lam TT
- Koroglu MN
- Narayanan A
- Lopez-Giraldez F
- Miyagishima DF
- Mishra-Gorur K
- Barak T
- Yasuno K
- Erson-Omay EZ
- Yalcinkaya C
- Wang G
- Mane S
- Kaymakcalan H
- Guzel A
- Caglayan AO
- Tuysuz B
- Sestan N
- Gunel M
- Louvi A
- Bilguvar K
journal: Nature
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-08341-9
keywords:
- Humans
- TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases/metabolism
- Signal Transduction
- "Organoids/pathology, metabolism"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17/genetics"
- "Classical Lissencephalies and Subcortical Band Heterotopias/genetics, pathology, metabolism"
- Male
- Female
- Mutation
- "Cerebral Cortex/pathology, metabolism"
- Mechanistic Target of Rapamycin Complex 1/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dysregulation of mTOR signalling is a converging mechanism in lissencephaly.
**Authors:** Zhang C, Liang D, Ercan-Sencicek AG, Bulut AS, Cortes J, Cheng IQ, Henegariu O, Nishimura S, Wang X, Peksen AB, Takeo Y, Caglar C, Lam TT, Koroglu MN, Narayanan A, Lopez-Giraldez F, Miyagishima DF, Mishra-Gorur K, Barak T, Yasuno K, Erson-Omay EZ, Yalcinkaya C, Wang G, Mane S, Kaymakcalan H, Guzel A, Caglayan AO, Tuysuz B, Sestan N, Gunel M, Louvi A, Bilguvar K
**Journal:** Nature (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-024-08341-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-08341-9)

## Content

1. Nature. 2025 Feb;638(8049):172-181. doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-08341-9. Epub 2025
 Jan 1.

Dysregulation of mTOR signalling is a converging mechanism in lissencephaly.

Zhang C(1)(2), Liang D(3)(4), Ercan-Sencicek AG(5)(6), Bulut AS(5)(7), Cortes 
J(5), Cheng IQ(5), Henegariu O(5), Nishimura S(5), Wang X(8), Peksen AB(5), 
Takeo Y(5), Caglar C(5)(9), Lam TT(10)(11), Koroglu MN(12), Narayanan A(13), 
Lopez-Giraldez F(13), Miyagishima DF(2)(14), Mishra-Gorur K(5), Barak T(5)(6), 
Yasuno K(5)(6), Erson-Omay EZ(5)(15), Yalcinkaya C(16), Wang G(13)(17), Mane 
S(13)(14), Kaymakcalan H(5)(18), Guzel A(19)(20), Caglayan AO(5)(6)(21)(22), 
Tuysuz B(23), Sestan N(3)(14)(24)(25)(26), Gunel M(27)(28)(29)(30)(31)(32)(33), 
Louvi A(34)(35)(36), Bilguvar K(37)(38)(39)(40)(41)(42)(43)(44)(45).

Author information:
(1)Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
(2)MD-PhD Program, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(4)Bexorg, Inc., New Haven, CT, USA.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(6)Yale Program on Neurogenetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(7)Department of Genome Sciences, Health Sciences Institute, Acibadem 
University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(8)Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(9)Department of Molecular Biology, Beykoz Institute of Life Sciences and 
Biotechnology, Bezmialem Vakif University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(10)Keck MS and Proteomics Resource, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 
USA.
(11)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT, USA.
(12)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Health Sciences Institute, 
Acibadem University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(13)Yale Center for Genome Analysis, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
(14)Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(15)Department of Biomedical Informatics and Data Science, Yale School of 
Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(16)Department of Neurology, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Istanbul University 
Cerrahpasa, Istanbul, Turkey.
(17)Keck Microarray Shared Resource, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 
USA.
(18)Department of Translational Medicine, Health Sciences Institute, Acibadem 
University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(19)Department of Neurosurgery, Faculty of Medicine, Bahcesehir University, 
Istanbul, Turkey.
(20)Department of Neurosurgery, Medical Point Hospital, Gaziantep, Turkey.
(21)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Dokuz Eylul University, 
Izmir, Turkey.
(22)Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Health Sciences, Dokuz Eylul 
University, Izmir, Turkey.
(23)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Istanbul 
University Cerrahpasa, Istanbul, Turkey.
(24)Department of Comparative Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 
USA.
(25)Department of Psychiatry, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(26)Kavli Institute for Neuroscience, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 
USA.
(27)Department of Neuroscience, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. 
murat.gunel@yale.edu.
(28)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. 
murat.gunel@yale.edu.
(29)Yale Program on Neurogenetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. 
murat.gunel@yale.edu.
(30)Yale Center for Genome Analysis, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. 
murat.gunel@yale.edu.
(31)Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. 
murat.gunel@yale.edu.
(32)Yale Program in Brain Tumor Research, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, 
CT, USA. murat.gunel@yale.edu.
(33)Yale Cancer Center, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. 
murat.gunel@yale.edu.
(34)Department of Neuroscience, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. 
angeliki.louvi@yale.edu.
(35)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. 
angeliki.louvi@yale.edu.
(36)Yale Program on Neurogenetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. 
angeliki.louvi@yale.edu.
(37)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. 
kaya.bilguvar@yale.edu.
(38)Yale Program on Neurogenetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. 
kaya.bilguvar@yale.edu.
(39)Department of Genome Sciences, Health Sciences Institute, Acibadem 
University, Istanbul, Turkey. kaya.bilguvar@yale.edu.
(40)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Health Sciences Institute, 
Acibadem University, Istanbul, Turkey. kaya.bilguvar@yale.edu.
(41)Yale Center for Genome Analysis, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. 
kaya.bilguvar@yale.edu.
(42)Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. 
kaya.bilguvar@yale.edu.
(43)Department of Translational Medicine, Health Sciences Institute, Acibadem 
University, Istanbul, Turkey. kaya.bilguvar@yale.edu.
(44)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Acibadem University, 
Istanbul, Turkey. kaya.bilguvar@yale.edu.
(45)Rare Diseases and Orphan Drugs Application and Research Center-ACURARE, 
Acibadem University, Istanbul, Turkey. kaya.bilguvar@yale.edu.

Cerebral cortex development in humans is a highly complex and orchestrated 
process that is under tight genetic regulation. Rare mutations that alter gene 
expression or function can disrupt the structure of the cerebral cortex, 
resulting in a range of neurological conditions1. Lissencephaly ('smooth brain') 
spectrum disorders comprise a group of rare, genetically heterogeneous 
congenital brain malformations commonly associated with epilepsy and 
intellectual disability2. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying disease 
pathogenesis remain unknown. Here we establish hypoactivity of the mTOR pathway 
as a clinically relevant molecular mechanism in lissencephaly spectrum 
disorders. We characterized two types of cerebral organoid derived from 
individuals with genetically distinct lissencephalies with a recessive mutation 
in p53-induced death domain protein 1 (PIDD1) or a heterozygous chromosome 
17p13.3 microdeletion leading to Miller-Dieker lissencephaly syndrome (MDLS). 
PIDD1-mutant organoids and MDLS organoids recapitulated the thickened cortex 
typical of human lissencephaly and demonstrated dysregulation of protein 
translation, metabolism and the mTOR pathway. A brain-selective activator of 
mTOR complex 1 prevented and reversed cellular and molecular defects in the 
lissencephaly organoids. Our findings show that a converging molecular mechanism 
contributes to two genetically distinct lissencephaly spectrum disorders.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-024-08341-9
PMCID: PMC11798849
PMID: 39743596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: N.S. is a co-founder and 
shareholder of Bexorg, Inc. All the other authors declare no competing 
interests.