---
reference_id: "PMID:7581365"
title: A large deletion together with a point mutation in the GALC gene is a common mutant allele in patients with infantile Krabbe disease.
authors:
- Rafi MA
- Luzi P
- Chen YQ
- Wenger DA
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/4.8.1285
keywords:
- Alleles
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Cell Line
- Child
- DNA Primers/genetics
- "DNA, Complementary/genetics"
- "Galactosylceramidase/deficiency, genetics"
- Gene Expression
- Heterozygote
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- "Leukodystrophy, Globoid Cell/enzymology, genetics"
- Middle Aged
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Point Mutation
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- Sequence Deletion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A large deletion together with a point mutation in the GALC gene is a common mutant allele in patients with infantile Krabbe disease.
**Authors:** Rafi MA, Luzi P, Chen YQ, Wenger DA
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/4.8.1285](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/4.8.1285)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 1995 Aug;4(8):1285-9. doi: 10.1093/hmg/4.8.1285.

A large deletion together with a point mutation in the GALC gene is a common 
mutant allele in patients with infantile Krabbe disease.

Rafi MA(1), Luzi P, Chen YQ, Wenger DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (Medical Genetics), Thomas Jefferson University, 
Jefferson Medical College, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

Galactocerebrosidase (GALC) activity is deficient in all patients with globoid 
cell leukodystrophy (GLD). While most patients have the severe infantile form of 
this autosomal recessive disorder (Krabbe disease), patients up to 50 years of 
age have been diagnosed in this laboratory. With the cloning of the GALC cDNA 
and availability of information regarding the gene organization, patients can be 
evaluated for their disease-causing mutations. We now report that a large 
deletion, together with a polymorphic C to T transition at position 502 of cDNA 
(counting from the A of the initiation codon), is responsible for a large number 
of disease-causing alleles in patients with Krabbe disease. Of 48 patients 
evaluated, 10 were found to be homozygous for the 502/del allele, five patients 
were heterozygous for this allele, 21 patients were heterozygous for the 502 
mutation (presence of the deletion could not be confirmed), and one infantile 
patient was homozygous for the 502 mutation but at least one allele was not 
deleted. No patient was found to have the deletion without the 502 polymorphism. 
The delineation of mutations causing infantile Krabbe disease will provide new 
information regarding structure-function relationships in this multi-subunit 
enzyme and will improve the identification of patients and carriers in some 
families.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/4.8.1285
PMID: 7581365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]