---
reference_id: "PMID:20800292"
title: Sex and autoantibody titers determine the development of neuropsychiatric manifestations in lupus-prone mice.
authors:
- Gao HX
- Sanders E
- Tieng AT
- Putterman C
journal: J Neuroimmunol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2010.07.020
keywords:
- Analysis of Variance
- Animals
- Autoantibodies/blood
- "Behavior, Animal"
- Behavioral Symptoms/etiology
- Cardiolipins/immunology
- Cognition Disorders/etiology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Exploratory Behavior/physiology
- Female
- "Lupus Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/blood, complications, immunology"
- Male
- Maze Learning/physiology
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred MRL lpr"
- "Pattern Recognition, Visual/physiology"
- Photic Stimulation/methods
- Psychomotor Performance/physiology
- "Receptors, N-Methyl-D-Aspartate/immunology"
- Sex Factors
- Social Behavior
- Swimming/psychology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sex and autoantibody titers determine the development of neuropsychiatric manifestations in lupus-prone mice.
**Authors:** Gao HX, Sanders E, Tieng AT, Putterman C
**Journal:** J Neuroimmunol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jneuroim.2010.07.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroim.2010.07.020)

## Content

1. J Neuroimmunol. 2010 Dec 15;229(1-2):112-22. doi:
10.1016/j.jneuroim.2010.07.020. Epub 2010 Aug 25.

Sex and autoantibody titers determine the development of neuropsychiatric
manifestations in lupus-prone mice.

Gao HX(1), Sanders E, Tieng AT, Putterman C.

Author information:
(1)The Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Emotional disturbances are among the most common neuropsychiatric manifestations
of SLE, a systemic autoimmune disease with a strong female predominance. In this
study, we evaluated young MRL/lpr mice, directly comparing males and females.
MRL/lpr females exhibited significant depression as early as 5 weeks (at which
time elevated levels of autoantibodies were already present), as compared to
MRL/lpr males, where depression was noted only at 18 weeks. Depression was
significantly correlated with autoantibodies against nuclear antigens, NMDA
receptor, and ribosomal P. Our results are consistent with a primary role of
autoantibodies in the pathogenesis of early neuropsychiatric deficits in this
lupus model, which translate into gender-based differences in clinical
phenotype.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2010.07.020
PMID: 20800292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
