---
reference_id: "PMID:27196584"
title: Integrative microRNA profiling in alcoholic hepatitis reveals a role for microRNA-182 in liver injury and inflammation.
authors:
- Blaya D
- Coll M
- Rodrigo-Torres D
- Vila-Casadesús M
- Altamirano J
- Llopis M
- Graupera I
- Perea L
- Aguilar-Bravo B
- Díaz A
- Banales JM
- Clària J
- Lozano JJ
- Bataller R
- Caballería J
- Ginès P
- Sancho-Bru P
journal: Gut
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2015-311314
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Integrative microRNA profiling in alcoholic hepatitis reveals a role for microRNA-182 in liver injury and inflammation.
**Authors:** Blaya D, Coll M, Rodrigo-Torres D, Vila-Casadesús M, Altamirano J, Llopis M, Graupera I, Perea L, Aguilar-Bravo B, Díaz A, Banales JM, Clària J, Lozano JJ, Bataller R, Caballería J, Ginès P, Sancho-Bru P
**Journal:** Gut (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1136/gutjnl-2015-311314](https://doi.org/10.1136/gutjnl-2015-311314)

## Content

1. Gut. 2016 Sep;65(9):1535-45. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2015-311314. Epub 2016 May
10.

Integrative microRNA profiling in alcoholic hepatitis reveals a role for 
microRNA-182 in liver injury and inflammation.

Blaya D(1), Coll M(1), Rodrigo-Torres D(1), Vila-Casadesús M(1), Altamirano 
J(2), Llopis M(1), Graupera I(1), Perea L(1), Aguilar-Bravo B(1), Díaz A(3), 
Banales JM(4), Clària J(5), Lozano JJ(6), Bataller R(7), Caballería J(8), Ginès 
P(8), Sancho-Bru P(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 
Barcelona, Spain Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades 
Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd), Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 
Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Department of Pathology, Hospital Clínic, IDIBAPS, University of Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y 
Digestivas (CIBERehd), Barcelona, Spain Department of Liver and Gastrointestinal 
Diseases, Biodonostia Research Institute-Donostia University Hospital, 
University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Ikerbasque, San Sebastian, Spain.
(5)Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 
Barcelona, Spain Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Hospital 
Clínic and Department of Physiological Sciences I, University of Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y 
Digestivas (CIBERehd), Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 
Barcelona, Spain Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Departments of 
Medicine and Nutrition, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina, USA.
(8)Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 
Barcelona, Spain Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades 
Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd), Barcelona, Spain Liver Unit, Hospital Clínic, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Comment in
    Gut. 2016 Sep;65(9):1400-1. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2016-312101.

OBJECTIVE: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are well-known regulators of disease pathogenesis 
and have great potential as biomarkers and therapeutic targets. We aimed at 
profiling miRNAs in alcoholic hepatitis (AH) and identifying miRNAs potentially 
involved in liver injury.
DESIGN: MiRNA profiling was performed in liver samples from patients with AH, 
alcohol liver disease, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, HCV disease and normal 
liver tissue. Expression of miRNAs was assessed in liver and serum from patients 
with AH and animal models. Mimic and decoy miR-182 were used in vitro and in 
vivo to evaluate miR-182's biological functions.
RESULTS: MiRNA expression profile in liver was highly altered in AH and 
distinctive from alcohol-induced cirrhotic livers. Moreover, we identified a set 
of 18 miRNAs predominantly expressed in AH as compared with other chronic liver 
conditions. Integrative miRNA-mRNA functional analysis revealed the association 
of AH-altered miRNAs with nuclear receptors, IGF-1 signalling and cholestasis. 
Interestingly, miR-182 was the most highly expressed miRNA in AH, which 
correlated with degree of ductular reaction, disease severity and short-term 
mortality. MiR-182 mimic induced an upregulation of inflammatory mediators in 
biliary cells. At experimental level, miR-182 was increased in biliary cells in 
mice fed with 3,5-diethoxycarbonyl-1,4-dihydrocollidine (DDC) diet but not 
upregulated by alcohol intake or fibrosis. Inhibition of miR-182 in DDC-fed mice 
reduced liver damage, bile acid accumulation and inflammatory response.
CONCLUSIONS: AH is characterised by a deregulated miRNA profile, including 
miR-182, which is associated with disease severity and liver injury. These 
results highlight the potential of miRNAs as therapeutic targets and biomarkers 
in AH.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

DOI: 10.1136/gutjnl-2015-311314
PMID: 27196584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]