---
reference_id: "PMID:27889859"
title: Chronic high-dose glucocorticoid therapy triggers the development of chronic organ damage and worsens disease outcome in systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Tarr T
- Papp G
- Nagy N
- Cserép E
- Zeher M
journal: Clin Rheumatol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s10067-016-3492-6
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/chemically induced, complications"
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Glucocorticoids/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Humans
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/complications, drug therapy, mortality"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Nervous System Diseases/chemically induced, complications"
- Rheumatology/methods
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic high-dose glucocorticoid therapy triggers the development of chronic organ damage and worsens disease outcome in systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Tarr T, Papp G, Nagy N, Cserép E, Zeher M
**Journal:** Clin Rheumatol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10067-016-3492-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10067-016-3492-6)

## Content

1. Clin Rheumatol. 2017 Feb;36(2):327-333. doi: 10.1007/s10067-016-3492-6. Epub
2016 Nov 26.

Chronic high-dose glucocorticoid therapy triggers the development of chronic
organ damage and worsens disease outcome in systemic lupus erythematosus.

Tarr T(1), Papp G(1), Nagy N(1), Cserép E(1), Zeher M(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen,
Móricz Zs. str. 22, Debrecen, 4032, Hungary.
(2)Division of Clinical Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen,
Móricz Zs. str. 22, Debrecen, 4032, Hungary. zeher@iiibel.dote.hu.

Long-term survival of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) improved
worldwide; thus, prevention of cumulative organ damage became a major goal in
disease management. The aim of our study was to investigate the chronic organ
damages and their influence on disease outcome in SLE. We evaluated clinical
conditions, laboratory findings and medications of 357 consecutive SLE patients
and assessed their impact on Systemic Lupus Collaborating Clinics
(SLICC)/American College of Rheumatology (ACR) Damage Index (SDI) and disease
outcome. We detected one or more SDI scores in 77.87% of patients. Patients with
disease duration of more than 10 years and subjects diagnosed at age above 40
had significantly higher SDI values. The most frequent damages were
valvulopathies, cognitive dysfunction, angina pectoris and venous thrombosis.
Higher cumulative glucocorticoid dose increased SDI, while chloroquin treatment
was favourable for patients. Male gender, elevated SDI scores and higher
cumulative doses of glucocorticoids increased mortality risk. Our data confirmed
that disease duration, age at diagnosis and chronic high-dose glucocorticoid
therapy have significant effects on the development of chronic organ damage.
Higher SDI score is characterized with worse survival ratios. The most common
chronic organ damages affected the cardiovascular or neuropsychiatric system. As
long-term survival in SLE improves, it becomes increasingly important to
identify the determinants of chronic organ damage. Most of the chronic organ
damage occurs in the cardiovascular and the neuropsychiatric systems; thus,
regular follow-up, screening and adequate therapy are essential for the best
clinical outcome.

DOI: 10.1007/s10067-016-3492-6
PMID: 27889859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
