---
reference_id: "PMID:34479244"
title: Hematologic parameters and biomarkers predictors of severity in Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in children associated with SARS-CoV-2.
authors:
- Verdugo P
- Álvarez P
- Aroca P
- Montes V
- Poli C
- Tapia L
- Cofré F
- Soto V
- Mackenney J
- Carvajal C
- Acevedo V
journal: Andes Pediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.32641/andespediatr.v92i3.3316
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hematologic parameters and biomarkers predictors of severity in Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in children associated with SARS-CoV-2.
**Authors:** Verdugo P, Álvarez P, Aroca P, Montes V, Poli C, Tapia L, Cofré F, Soto V, Mackenney J, Carvajal C, Acevedo V
**Journal:** Andes Pediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.32641/andespediatr.v92i3.3316](https://doi.org/10.32641/andespediatr.v92i3.3316)

## Content

1. Andes Pediatr. 2021 Jun;92(3):382-388. doi: 10.32641/andespediatr.v92i3.3316.

Hematologic parameters and biomarkers predictors of severity in Multisystem 
Inflammatory Syndrome in children associated with SARS-CoV-2.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Verdugo P(1), Álvarez P(1), Aroca P(1), Montes V(2), Poli C(1), Tapia L(3), 
Cofré F(1), Soto V(1), Mackenney J(3), Carvajal C(1), Acevedo V(1).

Author information:
(1)Hospital Roberto del Río, Santiago, Chile.
(2)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad del Desarrollo, Santiago, Chile.
(3)Departamento de Pediatría, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Chile, 
Santiago, Chile.

Comment in
    Andes Pediatr. 2021 Dec;92(6):980-981. doi: 
10.32641/andespediatr.v92i6.4001.

INTRODUCTION: The multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children associated with 
SARS-CoV-2 (MIS-C) is cha racterized by a hyperinflammatory state resulting from 
a cytokine storm, evidenced by alterations in laboratory blood testing and 
acute-phase proteins.
OBJECTIVE: to describe the clinical and labora tory characteristics of patients 
hospitalized due to MIS-C and identify predictive markers of severity.
PATIENTS AND METHOD: Retrospective study of 32 patients. The group was divided 
into critical and non-critical according to clinical presentation and therapy 
used. Clinical and laboratory aspects were studied, including complete blood 
count, coagulation tests, and biomarkers.
RESULTS: 18/32 were males, with a median age of 6.8 years. The most frequent 
manifestations were cardiovascular (84.3%), digestive (84%), and mucocutaneous 
(59%). The group of critical patients included 15 patients, 12 were males with a 
median age of 8.9 years, and the non-critical group included 17 patients, 6 were 
males with a median age of 5.4 years. The laboratory parameters at the admission 
in the global group showed increased C-reactive protein, D-dimer, leukocytes, 
neutrophils, ferritin, and fibrinogen. In contrast, albumin and blood sodium 
levels were decreased. At admission, the critical group was cha racterized by 
presenting thrombocytopenia, hypoalbuminemia, prolonged prothrombin time, and 
elevated ferritin. At the time of deterioration, there was an intensification of 
thrombocytopenia, in creased C-reactive protein together with increased 
neutrophils level.
CONCLUSION: The blood count, C-reactive protein, and albuminemia at admission 
proved to be significantly important in the identi fication of patients at risk 
of clinical deterioration.

DOI: 10.32641/andespediatr.v92i3.3316
PMID: 34479244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]