---
reference_id: "PMID:35846153"
title: Insights Gained From Zebrafish Models for the Ciliopathy Joubert Syndrome.
authors:
- Rusterholz TDS
- Hofmann C
- Bachmann-Gagescu R
journal: Front Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.939527
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Insights Gained From Zebrafish Models for the Ciliopathy Joubert Syndrome.
**Authors:** Rusterholz TDS, Hofmann C, Bachmann-Gagescu R
**Journal:** Front Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2022.939527](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2022.939527)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2022 Jun 30;13:939527. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.939527.
eCollection  2022.

Insights Gained From Zebrafish Models for the Ciliopathy Joubert Syndrome.

Rusterholz TDS(1)(2), Hofmann C(1)(2), Bachmann-Gagescu R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schlieren, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zürich, 
Switzerland.

Cilia are quasi-ubiquitous microtubule-based sensory organelles, which play 
vital roles in signal transduction during development and cell homeostasis. 
Dysfunction of cilia leads to a group of Mendelian disorders called 
ciliopathies, divided into different diagnoses according to clinical phenotype 
constellation and genetic causes. Joubert syndrome (JBTS) is a prototypical 
ciliopathy defined by a diagnostic cerebellar and brain stem malformation termed 
the "Molar Tooth Sign" (MTS), in addition to which patients display variable 
combinations of typical ciliopathy phenotypes such as retinal dystrophy, 
fibrocystic renal disease, polydactyly or skeletal dystrophy. Like most 
ciliopathies, JBTS is genetically highly heterogeneous with ∼40 associated 
genes. Zebrafish are widely used to model ciliopathies given the high 
conservation of ciliary genes and the variety of specialized cilia types similar 
to humans. In this review, we compare different existing JBTS zebrafish models 
with each other and describe their contributions to our understanding of JBTS 
pathomechanism. We find that retinal dystrophy, which is the most investigated 
ciliopathy phenotype in zebrafish ciliopathy models, is caused by distinct 
mechanisms according to the affected gene. Beyond this, differences in 
phenotypes in other organs observed between different JBTS-mutant models suggest 
tissue-specific roles for proteins implicated in JBTS. Unfortunately, the lack 
of systematic assessment of ciliopathy phenotypes in the mutants described in 
the literature currently limits the conclusions that can be drawn from these 
comparisons. In the future, the numerous existing JBTS zebrafish models 
represent a valuable resource that can be leveraged in order to gain further 
insights into ciliary function, pathomechanisms underlying ciliopathy phenotypes 
and to develop treatment strategies using small molecules.

Copyright © 2022 Rusterholz, Hofmann and Bachmann-Gagescu.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.939527
PMCID: PMC9280682
PMID: 35846153

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.