---
reference_id: "PMID:22555899"
title: Flow-injection chemiluminescence and electrogenerated chemiluminescence determination of escitalopram oxalate in tablet form.
authors:
- Alarfaj NA
- Aly FA
- Al-Qahtany AA
journal: Luminescence
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1002/bio.2372
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Flow-injection chemiluminescence and electrogenerated chemiluminescence determination of escitalopram oxalate in tablet form.
**Authors:** Alarfaj NA, Aly FA, Al-Qahtany AA
**Journal:** Luminescence (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/bio.2372](https://doi.org/10.1002/bio.2372)

## Content

1. Luminescence. 2013 Jan-Feb;28(1):84-92. doi: 10.1002/bio.2372. Epub 2012 May
4.

Flow-injection chemiluminescence and electrogenerated chemiluminescence 
determination of escitalopram oxalate in tablet form.

Alarfaj NA(1), Aly FA, Al-Qahtany AA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, College of Science, King Saud University, PO 
Box 22452, Riyadh 11495, Saudi Arabia. nalarfaj@hotmail.com

Rapid, simple and highly sensitive flow-injection (FI) chemiluminescence (CL) 
and flow-injection electrogenerated chemiluminescence (ECL) methods were 
developed for the determination of escitalopram oxalate (ESC), a selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitor used as an antidepressant drug. The CL method was 
based on the CL reaction of ESC with acidic cerium(IV) and 
tris(2,2'-bipyridyl)ruthenium(II) (Ru(bipy)(3)(2)+). Various experimental 
parameters affecting CL intensity were carefully studied and optimised. The 
method enabled the determination of 0.001-50 µg/mL of ESC in bulk form with a 
correlation coefficient r = 0.9999. The limit of detection (LOD) was 0.01 ng/mL 
(S/N = 3). The ECL method was based on the ECL reaction of Ru(bipy)(3)(2)+ with 
the drug in an acidic medium, permitting the determination of ESC in the range 
of 0.00001-70 µg/mL with r = 0.9999 and LOD of 1 x 10(-4) ng/mL. The proposed 
methods were applied to the determination of ESC in commercial tablets. The 
results were compared statistically with those obtained from a published method 
using t- and F-tests.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/bio.2372
PMID: 22555899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]