---
reference_id: "PMID:35814395"
title: "Clinical Characteristics, Co-Mutations, and Treatment Outcomes in Advanced Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer Patients With the BRAF-V600E Mutation."
authors:
- Qu J
- Shen Q
- Li Y
- Kalyani FS
- Liu L
- Zhou J
- Zhou J
journal: Front Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.911303
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Characteristics, Co-Mutations, and Treatment Outcomes in Advanced Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer Patients With the BRAF-V600E Mutation.
**Authors:** Qu J, Shen Q, Li Y, Kalyani FS, Liu L, Zhou J, Zhou J
**Journal:** Front Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fonc.2022.911303](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2022.911303)

## Content

1. Front Oncol. 2022 Jun 22;12:911303. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.911303. eCollection
 2022.

Clinical Characteristics, Co-Mutations, and Treatment Outcomes in Advanced
Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer Patients With the BRAF-V600E Mutation.

Qu J(1)(2), Shen Q(1)(2), Li Y(3), Kalyani FS(1), Liu L(4), Zhou J(1)(2), Zhou
J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Disease, Thoracic Disease Center, The First
Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(2)The Clinical Research Center for Respiratory Diseases of Zhejiang Province,
Hangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Respiratory Disease, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou, China.
(4)Lung Cancer and Gastroenterology Department, Hunan Cancer Hospital,
Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Xiangya Medical School of Central South University,
Changsha, China.

BACKGROUND: Limited treatment outcome data is available for advanced non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with BRAF V600E mutations. In this multicenter
study, we describe therapeutic options and survival outcomes for patients with
mutated BRAF V600E.
METHOD: This was a retrospective study in which BRAF V600E-mutated advanced
NSCLC patients were retrospectively recruited between January 2015 and December
2021 and had their clinical characteristics, co-mutations, and treatment
efficacy assessed.
RESULTS: Fifty-three patients with BRAF V600E-mutant advanced NSCLC were
included in the study, of which 64.2% were non-smokers, and the BRAF V600E
mutation was more prevalent in men (52.8%). In addition, 96.2% of the patients
had adenocarcinoma, and most (96.2%) received first-line therapy (23.5%
anti-BRAF), with a progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) of
10.0 [95% confidence interval (CI): 1.5-36.0 months] and 24.0 months [95% CI:
3.0-53.0 months], respectively. Twenty-three patients (43.4%) received
second-line treatment (39.1% anti-BRAF), and PFS and OS were 5.0 [95% CI:
1.0-21.0 months] and 13.0 months [95% CI: 1.5-26.0 months], respectively. BRAF
and MEK-targeted therapy (dabrafenib plus trametinib) produced longer PFS
compared with that of chemotherapy with or without bevacizumab as a first-line
(NA vs. 4.0 months, P = 0.025) or second-line therapy (6.0 vs. 4.6 months, P =
0.017). NSCLC patients harboring driver oncogene mutations such as BRAF V600E,
EGFR, or ALK should be treated using targeted therapies. Concurrent TP53
mutations were the most common, affecting 11.3% (n = 6) of the patients,
followed by EGFR 19 Del (n = 5). Patients with concurrent mutations had shorter
PFS (9.0 vs. 10.0 months, P = 0.875) and OS (14.0 vs. 15.0 months, P = 0.555)
than those without these mutations.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that combined BRAF- and MEK-targeted therapy
is effective in BRAF V600E-mutated advanced NSCLC patients. Dabrafenib and
trametinib re-challenge is also an option for patients with BRAF V600E-mutated
NSCLC.

Copyright © 2022 Qu, Shen, Li, Kalyani, Liu, Zhou and Zhou.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2022.911303
PMCID: PMC9257040
PMID: 35814395

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
