---
reference_id: "PMID:7782284"
title: A 30-amino acid truncation of the microsomal triglyceride transfer protein large subunit disrupts its interaction with protein disulfide-isomerase and causes abetalipoproteinemia.
authors:
- Ricci B
- Sharp D
- "O'Rourke E"
- Kienzle B
- Blinderman L
- Gordon D
- Smith-Monroy C
- Robinson G
- Gregg RE
- Rader DJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.24.14281
keywords:
- "Abetalipoproteinemia/etiology, metabolism"
- Base Sequence
- "Carrier Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Line
- Cholesterol Ester Transfer Proteins
- DNA Primers
- Glycoproteins
- Humans
- Isomerases/metabolism
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Nucleopolyhedroviruses/genetics
- Protein Disulfide-Isomerases
- Structure-Activity Relationship
- Triglycerides/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A 30-amino acid truncation of the microsomal triglyceride transfer protein large subunit disrupts its interaction with protein disulfide-isomerase and causes abetalipoproteinemia.
**Authors:** Ricci B, Sharp D, O'Rourke E, Kienzle B, Blinderman L, Gordon D, Smith-Monroy C, Robinson G, Gregg RE, Rader DJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.270.24.14281](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.270.24.14281)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jun 16;270(24):14281-5. doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.24.14281.

A 30-amino acid truncation of the microsomal triglyceride transfer protein large
subunit disrupts its interaction with protein disulfide-isomerase and causes
abetalipoproteinemia.

Ricci B(1), Sharp D, O'Rourke E, Kienzle B, Blinderman L, Gordon D, Smith-Monroy
C, Robinson G, Gregg RE, Rader DJ, et al.

Author information:
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical
Research Institute, Princeton, New Jersey 08543-4000, USA.

The microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP) is a heterodimer composed of
the multifunctional enzyme, protein disulfide-isomerase, and a unique large, 97
kDa, subunit. It is found as a soluble protein within the lumen of the
endoplasmic reticulum of liver and intestine and is required for the assembly of
very low density lipoproteins and chylomicrons. Mutations in MTP which result in
an absence of MTP function have been shown to cause abetalipoproteinemia. Here,
the gene encoding the MTP 97-kDa subunit of an abetalipoproteinemic subject,
which we have previously demonstrated lacks MTP activity and protein (Wetterau,
J. R., Aggerbeck, L. P., Bouma, M.-E., Eisenberg, C., Munck, A., Hermier, M.,
Schmitz, J., Gay, G., Rader, D. J., and Gregg, R. E. (1992) Science 258,
999-1001), was isolated and sequenced. A nonsense mutation, which predicts the
truncation of the protein by 30 amino acids, was identified. To investigate if
this apparently subtle change in MTP could explain the observed absence of MTP,
protein disulfide-isomerase was co-expressed with either the normal or mutant
MTP 97-kDa subunit in Sf9 insect cells using a baculovirus expression system.
Although there were high levels of expression of both the normal and mutant
forms of the MTP 97-kDa subunit, only the normal subunit was able to form a
stable, soluble complex with protein disulfide-isomerase. These results indicate
that the carboxyl-terminal 30 amino acids of the MTP 97-kDa subunit plays an
important role in its interaction with protein disulfide-isomerase.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.24.14281
PMID: 7782284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
