---
reference_id: "PMID:17618543"
title: The neurobiology of epilepsy.
authors:
- Scharfman HE
journal: Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1007/s11910-007-0053-z
keywords:
- Action Potentials/physiology
- Animals
- "Brain/pathology, physiopathology"
- Cortical Synchronization
- "Epilepsy/complications, pathology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Neurons/pathology
- "Seizures/etiology, pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The neurobiology of epilepsy.
**Authors:** Scharfman HE
**Journal:** Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11910-007-0053-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11910-007-0053-z)

## Content

1. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2007 Jul;7(4):348-54. doi:
10.1007/s11910-007-0053-z.

The neurobiology of epilepsy.

Scharfman HE(1).

Author information:
(1)Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, 140 Old Orangeburg Road, 
Building 35, Orangetown, NY 10962, USA. hscharfman@nki.rfmh.org

Epilepsy is a complex disease with diverse clinical characteristics that 
preclude a singular mechanism. One way to gain insight into potential mechanisms 
is to reduce the features of epilepsy to its basic components: seizures, 
epileptogenesis, and the state of recurrent unprovoked seizures that defines 
epilepsy itself. A common way to explain seizures in a normal individual is that 
a disruption has occurred in the normal balance of excitation and inhibition. 
The fact that multiple mechanisms exist is not surprising given the varied ways 
the normal nervous system controls this balance. In contrast, understanding 
seizures in the brain of an individual with epilepsy is more difficult because 
seizures are typically superimposed on an altered nervous system. The different 
environment includes diverse changes, making mechanistic predictions a 
challenge. Understanding the mechanisms of seizures in an individual with 
epilepsy is also more complex than understanding the mechanisms of seizures in a 
normal individual because epilepsy is not necessarily a static condition but can 
continue to evolve over the lifespan. Using temporal lobe epilepsy as an 
example, it is clear that genes, developmental mechanisms, and neuronal 
plasticity play major roles in creating a state of underlying hyperexcitability. 
However, the critical control points for the emergence of chronic seizures in 
temporal lobe epilepsy, as well as their persistence, frequency, and severity, 
are questions that remain unresolved.

DOI: 10.1007/s11910-007-0053-z
PMCID: PMC2492886
PMID: 17618543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]