---
reference_id: "PMID:26925610"
title: Growth Pattern in Paediatric Crohn Disease Is Related to Inflammatory Status.
authors:
- Ley D
- Duhamel A
- Behal H
- Vasseur F
- Sarter H
- Michaud L
- Gower-Rousseau C
- Turck D
journal: J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1097/MPG.0000000000001177
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Analysis of Variance
- "Anti-Inflammatory Agents/administration & dosage"
- Body Height
- Body Mass Index
- C-Reactive Protein/analysis
- Child
- Child Development
- "Crohn Disease/complications, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Female
- Growth
- "Growth Disorders/etiology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- Orosomucoid/analysis
- Registries
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Growth Pattern in Paediatric Crohn Disease Is Related to Inflammatory Status.
**Authors:** Ley D, Duhamel A, Behal H, Vasseur F, Sarter H, Michaud L, Gower-Rousseau C, Turck D
**Journal:** J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MPG.0000000000001177](https://doi.org/10.1097/MPG.0000000000001177)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2016 Dec;63(6):637-643. doi: 
10.1097/MPG.0000000000001177.

Growth Pattern in Paediatric Crohn Disease Is Related to Inflammatory Status.

Ley D(1), Duhamel A, Behal H, Vasseur F, Sarter H, Michaud L, Gower-Rousseau C, 
Turck D.

Author information:
(1)*Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Department of 
Paediatrics, Lille University Jeanne de Flandre Children's Hospital 
†Biostatistics Unit, Lille University Hospital, EA 2694 ‡Department of Public 
Health, Epidemiology and Economic Health, Epimad Registry, Lille University 
Hospital, University of Lille §Lille Inflammation Research International Centre 
LIRIC UMR 995, University of Lille, Inserm, CHU Lille, Lille, France.

OBJECTIVES: The respective role of disease activity and steroid therapy in 
growth impairment in paediatric-onset Crohn disease (CD) is still debated. Our 
aim was to investigate whether the growth pattern of children with CD was 
correlated with the inflammatory status during the disease course, regardless 
the cumulative duration of steroid therapy.
METHODS: One hundred and seven patients with a diagnosis of CD <17 years, 
followed during ≥2 years and for whom ≥2 height measures were available during 
follow-up, were identified between 1998 and 2010. Height, C-reactive protein 
(CRP), orosomucoid, and steroid therapy duration were collected at each visit. 
The relationship between the evolution of growth velocity and inflammatory 
status during follow-up was investigated using a linear mixed model with random 
coefficients.
RESULTS: Median age at diagnosis was 11.7 years (Q1-Q3: 9.8-13.5). Mean height 
for age (H/A) z score was 0.14 ± 1.29 at diagnosis and 0.05 ± 1.23 among the 75 
patients who had reached their final height at maximal follow-up (median: 4.9 
years; Q1-Q3: 3.8-6.4). Growth failure (H/A z score <-2) was present in 7 (8%) 
patients at diagnosis and 5 (5%) at maximal follow-up. Growth velocity was 
negatively correlated with the evolution of CRP (P < 0.0001) and orosomucoid 
(P < 0.0001) during follow-up. After adjustment for the cumulative duration of 
steroid therapy, these 2 correlations remained significant (CRP: P = 0.0008; 
orosomucoid: P < 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Children with CD with uncontrolled inflammatory status have a lower 
growth velocity. The inflammatory status should be kept as close to normal as 
possible in paediatric-onset patients with CD to optimize their growth pattern.

DOI: 10.1097/MPG.0000000000001177
PMID: 26925610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]