---
reference_id: "PMID:22267503"
title: A Boolean network model of the FA/BRCA pathway.
authors:
- Rodríguez A
- Sosa D
- Torres L
- Molina B
- Frías S
- Mendoza L
journal: Bioinformatics
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts036
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Boolean network model of the FA/BRCA pathway.
**Authors:** Rodríguez A, Sosa D, Torres L, Molina B, Frías S, Mendoza L
**Journal:** Bioinformatics (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bioinformatics/bts036](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bts036)

## Content

1. Bioinformatics. 2012 Mar 15;28(6):858-66. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts036. 
Epub 2012 Jan 20.

A Boolean network model of the FA/BRCA pathway.

Rodríguez A(1), Sosa D, Torres L, Molina B, Frías S, Mendoza L.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Investigación en Genética Humana, Instituto Nacional de 
Pediatría, Posgrado en Ciencias Biológicas, México.

MOTIVATION: Fanconi anemia (FA) is a chromosomal instability syndrome originated 
by inherited mutations that impair the Fanconi Anemia/Breast Cancer (FA/BRCA) 
pathway, which is committed to the repair of DNA interstrand cross-links (ICLs). 
The disease displays increased spontaneous chromosomal aberrations and 
hypersensitivity to agents that create DNA interstrand cross-links. In spite of 
DNA damage, FA/BRCA-deficient cells are able to progress throughout the cell 
cycle, probably due to the activity of alternative DNA repair pathways, or due 
to defects in the checkpoints that monitor DNA integrity.
RESULTS: We propose a Boolean network model of the FA/BRCA pathway, Checkpoint 
proteins and some alternative DNA repair pathways. To our knowledge, this is the 
largest network model incorporating a DNA repair pathway. Our model is able to 
simulate the ICL repair process mediated by the FA/BRCA pathway, the activation 
of Checkpoint proteins observed by recurrent DNA damage, as well as the repair 
of DNA double-strand breaks and DNA adducts. We generated a series of 
simulations for mutants, some of which have never been reported and thus 
constitute predictions about the function of the FA/BRCA pathway. Finally, our 
model suggests alternative DNA repair pathways that become active whenever the 
FA/BRCA pathway is defective.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts036
PMID: 22267503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]