---
reference_id: "PMID:25796467"
title: Abdominal pain and syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion as clinical presentation of acute intermittent porphyria.
authors:
- Valle Feijóo ML
- Bermúdez Sanjurjo JR
- González Vázquez L
- Rey Martínez M
- de la Fuente Aguado J
journal: Rev Clin Esp (Barc)
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.rce.2015.02.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abdominal pain and syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion as clinical presentation of acute intermittent porphyria.
**Authors:** Valle Feijóo ML, Bermúdez Sanjurjo JR, González Vázquez L, Rey Martínez M, de la Fuente Aguado J
**Journal:** Rev Clin Esp (Barc) (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rce.2015.02.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rce.2015.02.004)

## Content

1. Rev Clin Esp (Barc). 2015 Aug-Sep;215(6):349-51. doi:
10.1016/j.rce.2015.02.004.  Epub 2015 Mar 18.

Abdominal pain and syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion as
clinical presentation of acute intermittent porphyria.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Valle Feijóo ML(1), Bermúdez Sanjurjo JR(2), González Vázquez L(2), Rey Martínez
M(3), de la Fuente Aguado J(2).

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital Povisa, Vigo, Pontevedra, España.
Electronic address: lvalle@povisa.es.
(2)Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital Povisa, Vigo, Pontevedra, España.
(3)Unidad de Cuidados Intensivos, Hospital Povisa, Vigo, Pontevedra, España.

Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) is a rare condition characterized by
abdominal pain and a wide range of nonspecific symptoms. We report the case of a
woman with abdominal pain and syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone
secretion (SIADH) as clinical presentation of AIP. The diagnosis was achieved
through the etiologic study of the SIADH.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier España, S.L.U. y Sociedad Española de Medicina Interna
(SEMI). All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rce.2015.02.004
PMID: 25796467
