---
reference_id: "PMID:28685788"
title: "C-Peptide replacement therapy in type 1 diabetes: are we in the trough of disillusionment?"
authors:
- Pinger CW
- Entwistle KE
- Bell TM
- Liu Y
- Spence DM
journal: Mol Biosyst
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1039/c7mb00199a
content_type: abstract_only
---

# C-Peptide replacement therapy in type 1 diabetes: are we in the trough of disillusionment?
**Authors:** Pinger CW, Entwistle KE, Bell TM, Liu Y, Spence DM
**Journal:** Mol Biosyst (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1039/c7mb00199a](https://doi.org/10.1039/c7mb00199a)

## Content

1. Mol Biosyst. 2017 Jul 25;13(8):1432-1437. doi: 10.1039/c7mb00199a.

C-Peptide replacement therapy in type 1 diabetes: are we in the trough of 
disillusionment?

Pinger CW(1), Entwistle KE(2), Bell TM(1), Liu Y(2), Spence DM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Michigan State University, 578 S. Shaw Ln, East 
Lansing, MI 48824, USA. spenceda@msu.edu and Department of Biomedical 
Engineering, Institute for Quantitative Health Science and Engineering, Michigan 
State University, 775 Woodlot Drive, East Lansing, MI 48824-6962, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Michigan State University, 578 S. Shaw Ln, East 
Lansing, MI 48824, USA. spenceda@msu.edu.

Type 1 diabetes is associated with such complications as blindness, kidney 
failure, and nerve damage. Replacing C-peptide, a hormone normally co-secreted 
with insulin, has been shown to reduce diabetes-related complications. 
Interestingly, after nearly 30 years of positive research results, C-peptide is 
still not being co-administered with insulin to diabetic patients. The following 
review discusses the potential of C-peptide as an auxilliary replacement therapy 
and why it's not currently being used as a therapeutic.

DOI: 10.1039/c7mb00199a
PMCID: PMC5796410
PMID: 28685788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]