---
reference_id: "PMID:33632934"
title: PIGA Mutations Can Mimic Neonatal Hemochromatosis.
authors:
- Flores-Torres J
- Carver JD
- Sanchez-Valle A
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1542/peds.2020-0918
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PIGA Mutations Can Mimic Neonatal Hemochromatosis.
**Authors:** Flores-Torres J, Carver JD, Sanchez-Valle A
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.2020-0918](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2020-0918)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2021 Mar;147(3):e20200918. doi: 10.1542/peds.2020-0918.

PIGA Mutations Can Mimic Neonatal Hemochromatosis.

Flores-Torres J(1), Carver JD(2), Sanchez-Valle A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, University of South Florida 
Morsani, Tampa, Florida jflorest@usf.edu.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, University of South Florida 
Morsani, Tampa, Florida.

Neonatal hemochromatosis (NH), one of the most common causes of liver failure in 
the neonate, often causes fetal loss or death during the neonatal period. Most 
cases are thought to be due to gestational alloimmune disease; however, other 
rare causes have been reported. NH is generally considered congenital and 
familial but not heritable. We present an infant diagnosed with NH whose 
clinical course differed significantly from that of most NH cases: at 11 months 
of age he had normal levels of liver enzymes, ferritin, and bilirubin, and 
normal neurodevelopment. This term male infant was born with a history of 
intrauterine growth restriction, oligohydramnios, and pericardial effusion. On 
day of life 1, he had hyperbilirubinemia and transaminitis; on day of life 3, 
ferritin was elevated; and on day of life 9, an MRI revealed iron deposits in 
the liver and renal cortex. Phenotypic features prompted a genetics consult. 
Whole-exome sequencing revealed a variant in the phosphatidylinositol glycan 
biosynthesis class A protein (PIGA) gene. Germ-line PIGA mutations are generally 
thought to be lethal in utero; however, there are reports of infants with PIGA 
mutations associated with dysmorphic features, neurologic manifestations, 
biochemical perturbations, and systemic iron overload; development can be normal 
up to 6 months of age. Because of the differences between infants with NH versus 
PIGA germ-line mutations in inheritance, prognosis, and natural history of 
disease, we propose that PIGA gene testing should be considered when evaluating 
newborns who present with NH.

Copyright © 2021 by the American Academy of Pediatrics.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2020-0918
PMID: 33632934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: POTENTIAL CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The authors have 
indicated they have no potential conflicts of interest to disclose.