---
reference_id: "PMID:36192130"
title: "Real-world clinical and molecular management of 50 prospective patients with microphthalmia, anophthalmia and/or ocular coloboma."
authors:
- Harding P
- Gore S
- Malka S
- Rajkumar J
- Oluonye N
- Moosajee M
journal: Br J Ophthalmol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/bjo-2022-321991
keywords:
- Humans
- "Anophthalmos/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- "Microphthalmos/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- "Coloboma/diagnosis, genetics"
- Prospective Studies
- Eye Abnormalities/diagnosis
- Eye Proteins/genetics
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Real-world clinical and molecular management of 50 prospective patients with microphthalmia, anophthalmia and/or ocular coloboma.
**Authors:** Harding P, Gore S, Malka S, Rajkumar J, Oluonye N, Moosajee M
**Journal:** Br J Ophthalmol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bjo-2022-321991](https://doi.org/10.1136/bjo-2022-321991)

## Content

1. Br J Ophthalmol. 2023 Nov 22;107(12):1925-1935. doi: 10.1136/bjo-2022-321991.

Real-world clinical and molecular management of 50 prospective patients with 
microphthalmia, anophthalmia and/or ocular coloboma.

Harding P(1), Gore S(2)(3), Malka S(2), Rajkumar J(2), Oluonye N(2)(3), Moosajee 
M(4)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London, UK.
(2)Moorfields Eye Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(3)Great Ormond Street Hospital For Children NHS Trust, London, UK.
(4)Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London, UK 
m.moosajee@ucl.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Microphthalmia, anophthalmia and coloboma (MAC) are clinically 
and genetically heterogenous rare developmental eye conditions, which contribute 
to a significant proportion of childhood blindness worldwide. Clear 
understanding of MAC aetiology and comorbidities is essential to providing 
patients with appropriate care. However, current management is unstandardised 
and molecular diagnostic rates remain low, particularly in those with unilateral 
presentation. To further understanding of clinical and genetic management of 
patients with MAC, we charted their real-world experience to ascertain optimal 
management pathways and yield from molecular analysis.
METHODS: A prospective cohort study of consecutive patients with MAC referred to 
the ocular genetics service at Moorfields Eye Hospital between 2017-2020.
RESULTS: Clinical analysis of 50 MAC patients (15 microphthalmia; 2 
anophthalmia; 11 coloboma; and 22 mixed) from 44 unrelated families found 44% 
had additional ocular features (complex) and 34% had systemic involvement, most 
frequently intellectual/developmental delay (8/17). Molecular analysis of 39 
families using targeted gene panels, whole genome sequencing and microarray 
comparative genomic hybridisation identified genetic causes in, 28% including 
novel variants in six known MAC genes (SOX2, KMT2D, MAB21L2, ALDH1A3, BCOR and 
FOXE3), and a molecular diagnostic rate of 33% for both bilateral and unilateral 
cohorts. New phenotypic associations were found for FOXE3 (bilateral 
sensorineural hearing loss) and MAB21L2 (unilateral microphthalmia).
CONCLUSION: This study highlights the importance of thorough clinical and 
molecular phenotyping of MAC patients to provide appropriate multidisciplinary 
care. Routine genetic testing for both unilateral and bilateral cases in the 
clinic may increase diagnostic rates in the future, helping elucidate 
genotype-phenotype correlations and informing genetic counselling.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published 
by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bjo-2022-321991
PMCID: PMC10715525
PMID: 36192130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.