---
reference_id: "PMID:37032731"
title: "Mitochondrial carnitine palmitoyltransferase-II dysfunction: A possible novel mechanism for nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in hepatocarcinogenesis."
authors:
- Yao M
- Zhou P
- Qin YY
- Wang L
- Yao DF
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v29.i12.1765
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial carnitine palmitoyltransferase-II dysfunction: A possible novel mechanism for nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in hepatocarcinogenesis.
**Authors:** Yao M, Zhou P, Qin YY, Wang L, Yao DF
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.v29.i12.1765](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v29.i12.1765)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2023 Mar 28;29(12):1765-1778. doi: 
10.3748/wjg.v29.i12.1765.

Mitochondrial carnitine palmitoyltransferase-II dysfunction: A possible novel 
mechanism for nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in hepatocarcinogenesis.

Yao M(1), Zhou P(2), Qin YY(2), Wang L(3), Yao DF(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Immunology, Medical School of Nantong University & 
Research Center of Clinical Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University, 
Nantong 226001, Jiangsu Province, China.
(2)Department of Medical Immunology, Medical School of Nantong University, 
Nantong 226001, Jiangsu Province, China.
(3)Research Center for Intelligent Information Technology, Nantong University, 
Nantong 226019, Jiangsu Province, China.
(4)Research Center of Clinical Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong 
University, Nantong 226001, Jiangsu Province, China. yaodf@ahnmc.com.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) or metabolic-associated fatty liver 
disease has been characterized by the lipid accumulation with injury of 
hepatocytes and has become one of the most common chronic liver diseases in the 
world. The complex mechanisms of NAFLD formation are still under identification. 
Carnitine palmitoyltransferase-II (CPT-II) on inner mitochondrial membrane (IMM) 
regulates long chain fatty acid β-oxidation, and its abnormality has had more 
and more attention paid to it by basic and clinical research in NAFLD. The 
sequences of its peptide chain and DNA nucleotides have been identified, and the 
catalytic activity of CPT-II is affected on its gene mutations, deficiency, 
enzymatic thermal instability, circulating carnitine level and so on. Recently, 
the CPT-II dysfunction has been discovered in models of liver lipid 
accumulation. Meanwhile, the malignant transformation of hepatocyte-related 
CD44+ stem T cell activation, high levels of tumor-related biomarkers (AFP, 
GPC3) and abnormal activation of Wnt3a expression as a key signal molecule of 
the Wnt/β-catenin pathway run parallel to the alterations of hepatocyte 
pathology. This review focuses on some of the progress of CPT-II inactivity on 
IMM with liver fatty accumulation as a possible novel pathogenesis for NAFLD in 
hepatocarcinogenesis.

©The Author(s) 2023. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v29.i12.1765
PMCID: PMC10080702
PMID: 37032731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All the authors 
report no relevant conflicts of interest for this article.