---
reference_id: "PMID:36253513"
title: Retrospective detection of monkeypox virus in the testes of nonhuman primate survivors.
authors:
- Liu J
- Mucker EM
- Chapman JL
- Babka AM
- Gordon JM
- Bryan AV
- Raymond JLW
- Bell TM
- Facemire PR
- Goff AJ
- Nalca A
- Zeng X
journal: Nat Microbiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41564-022-01259-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retrospective detection of monkeypox virus in the testes of nonhuman primate survivors.
**Authors:** Liu J, Mucker EM, Chapman JL, Babka AM, Gordon JM, Bryan AV, Raymond JLW, Bell TM, Facemire PR, Goff AJ, Nalca A, Zeng X
**Journal:** Nat Microbiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41564-022-01259-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-022-01259-w)

## Content

1. Nat Microbiol. 2022 Dec;7(12):1980-1986. doi: 10.1038/s41564-022-01259-w. Epub
 2022 Oct 17.

Retrospective detection of monkeypox virus in the testes of nonhuman primate 
survivors.

Liu J(1), Mucker EM(1), Chapman JL(1)(2), Babka AM(1), Gordon JM(1), Bryan 
AV(1), Raymond JLW(1), Bell TM(1), Facemire PR(1), Goff AJ(1), Nalca A(1), Zeng 
X(3).

Author information:
(1)United States Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases, Fort 
Detrick, Frederick, MD, USA.
(2)Labcorp Early Development Laboratories Inc., Chantilly, VA, USA.
(3)United States Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases, Fort 
Detrick, Frederick, MD, USA. xiankun.zeng.civ@health.mil.

Close contact through sexual activity has been associated with the spread of 
monkeypox virus (MPXV) in the ongoing, global 2022 epidemic. However, it remains 
unclear whether MPXV replicates in the testes or is transmitted via semen to 
produce an active infection. We carried out a retrospective analysis of 
MPXV-infected crab-eating macaque archival tissue samples from acute and 
convalescent phases of infection of clade I or clade II MPXV using 
immunostaining and RNA in situ hybridization. We detected MPXV in interstitial 
cells and seminiferous tubules of testes as well as epididymal lumina, which are 
the sites of sperm production and maturation. We also detected inflammation and 
necrosis during the acute phase of the disease by histological analysis. 
Finally, we found that MPXV was cleared from most organs during convalescence, 
including healed skin lesions, but could be detected for up to 37 d 
post-exposure in the testes of convalescent macaques. Our findings highlight the 
potential for sexual transmission of MPXV in humans.

© 2022. This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the 
US; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1038/s41564-022-01259-w
PMID: 36253513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]