---
reference_id: "PMID:30947215"
title: Renovascular Hypertension Aggravates Atherosclerosis in Cholesterol-Fed Rabbits.
authors:
- Chen Y
- Waqar AB
- Yan H
- Wang Y
- Liang J
- Fan J
journal: J Vasc Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1159/000498897
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Renovascular Hypertension Aggravates Atherosclerosis in Cholesterol-Fed Rabbits.
**Authors:** Chen Y, Waqar AB, Yan H, Wang Y, Liang J, Fan J
**Journal:** J Vasc Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000498897](https://doi.org/10.1159/000498897)

## Content

1. J Vasc Res. 2019;56(1):28-38. doi: 10.1159/000498897. Epub 2019 Apr 4.

Renovascular Hypertension Aggravates Atherosclerosis in Cholesterol-Fed Rabbits.

Chen Y(1), Waqar AB(1), Yan H(1), Wang Y(2), Liang J(3), Fan J(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Graduate School of 
Medical Sciences, University of Yamanashi, Yamanashi, Japan.
(2)Department of Pathology, Xi'an Medical University, Xi'an, China.
(3)Research Center for Vascular Biology, School of Medicine, Yangzhou 
University, Yangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Molecular Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Graduate School of 
Medical Sciences, University of Yamanashi, Yamanashi, Japan, 
jianglin@yamanashi.ac.jp.
(5)School of Biotechnology and Health Sciences, Wuyi University, Jiangmen, 
China, jianglin@yamanashi.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Hypertension is a major risk factor for atherosclerotic disease. 
However, it is still not clear whether mechanical stress caused by hypertension 
directly affects the atherosclerotic development in the aorta and coronary 
arteries.
OBJECTIVES AND METHODS: We generated a hypertensive (HTN) rabbit model by 
surgical removal of the left kidney and partial ligation of the right renal 
artery. After a 16-week cholesterol diet, we compared aortic and coronary 
atherosclerosis of HTN rabbits with those of normotensive rabbits.
RESULTS: Hypertension did not affect lipid and apolipoprotein levels in plasma 
but led to a 3.0-fold increase in aortic atherosclerosis and a 1.7-fold increase 
in coronary atherosclerosis compared with control rabbits. Enhanced 
atherosclerosis in HTN rabbits was caused by significant increases in 
macrophages and smooth muscle cells in the lesions. Furthermore, oxidized LDL 
contents in the lesions were significantly increased in HTN rabbits. In 
addition, HTN rabbits exhibited prominent hyaline arteriolosclerosis in coronary 
arterioles.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that hyper tension not only enhances 
atherosclerosis in large arteries including the aorta and coronary arteries but 
also affects hyaline arteriolosclerosis in small arteries.

© 2019 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000498897
PMID: 30947215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]