---
reference_id: "PMID:38812815"
title: "Diagnosis and management of non-CAH 46,XX disorders/differences in sex development."
authors:
- Yavas Abalı Z
- Guran T
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2024.1354759
keywords:
- Humans
- "Adrenal Hyperplasia, Congenital/genetics, diagnosis, therapy"
- "46, XX Disorders of Sex Development/genetics, diagnosis"
- Female
- Male
- "Disorders of Sex Development/genetics, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and management of non-CAH 46,XX disorders/differences in sex development.
**Authors:** Yavas Abalı Z, Guran T
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2024.1354759](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2024.1354759)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2024 May 15;15:1354759. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2024.1354759. eCollection 2024.

Diagnosis and management of non-CAH 46,XX disorders/differences in sex 
development.

Yavas Abalı Z(1), Guran T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, School of Medicine, 
Marmara University, Istanbul, Türkiye.

Prenatal-onset androgen excess leads to abnormal sexual development in 46,XX 
individuals. This androgen excess can be caused endogenously by the adrenals or 
gonads or by exposure to exogenous androgens. The most common cause of 46,XX 
disorders/differences in sex development (DSD) is congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
(CAH) due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency, comprising >90% of 46,XX DSD cases. 
Deficiencies of 11β-hydroxylase, 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, and 
P450-oxidoreductase (POR) are rare types of CAH, resulting in 46,XX DSD. In all 
CAH forms, patients have normal ovarian development. The molecular genetic 
causes of 46,XX DSD, besides CAH, are uncommon. These etiologies include primary 
glucocorticoid resistance (PGCR) and aromatase deficiency with normal ovarian 
development. Additionally, 46,XX gonads can differentiate into testes, causing 
46,XX testicular (T) DSD or a coexistence of ovarian and testicular tissue, 
defined as 46,XX ovotesticular (OT)-DSD. PGCR is caused by inactivating variants 
in NR3C1, resulting in glucocorticoid insensitivity and the signs of 
mineralocorticoid and androgen excess. Pathogenic variants in the CYP19A1 gene 
lead to aromatase deficiency, causing androgen excess. Many genes are involved 
in the mechanisms of gonadal development, and genes associated with 46,XX 
T/OT-DSD include translocations of the SRY; copy number variants in NR2F2, 
NR0B1, SOX3, SOX9, SOX10, and FGF9, and sequence variants in NR5A1, NR2F2, 
RSPO1, SOX9, WNT2B, WNT4, and WT1. Progress in cytogenetic and molecular genetic 
techniques has significantly improved our understanding of the etiology of 
non-CAH 46,XX DSD. Nonetheless, uncertainties about gonadal function and gender 
outcomes may make the management of these conditions challenging. This review 
explores the intricate landscape of diagnosing and managing these conditions, 
shedding light on the unique aspects that distinguish them from other types of 
DSD.

Copyright © 2024 Yavas Abalı and Guran.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2024.1354759
PMCID: PMC11134272
PMID: 38812815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationship that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.