---
reference_id: "PMID:33587040"
title: Bardet-Biedl syndrome 3 protein promotes ciliary exit of the signaling protein phospholipase D via the BBSome.
authors:
- Liu YX
- Xue B
- Sun WY
- Wingfield JL
- Sun J
- Wu M
- Lechtreck KF
- Wu Z
- Fan ZC
journal: Elife
year: '2021'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.59119
keywords:
- "ADP-Ribosylation Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- "Chlamydomonas reinhardtii/enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- "Cilia/genetics, metabolism"
- "Flagella/enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- "Phospholipase D/genetics, metabolism"
- Protein Transport
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bardet-Biedl syndrome 3 protein promotes ciliary exit of the signaling protein phospholipase D via the BBSome.
**Authors:** Liu YX, Xue B, Sun WY, Wingfield JL, Sun J, Wu M, Lechtreck KF, Wu Z, Fan ZC
**Journal:** Elife (2021)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.59119](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.59119)

## Content

1. Elife. 2021 Feb 15;10:e59119. doi: 10.7554/eLife.59119.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome 3 protein promotes ciliary exit of the signaling protein 
phospholipase D via the BBSome.

Liu YX(#)(1), Xue B(#)(1), Sun WY(1), Wingfield JL(2), Sun J(1), Wu M(3), 
Lechtreck KF(2), Wu Z(4), Fan ZC(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Food Nutrition and Safety, Institute of Health 
Biotechnology, Tianjin University of Science and Technology, Tianjin, China.
(2)Department of Cellular Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, United States.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Albany Medical College, 
Albany, United States.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition, China Agricultural University, 
Beijing, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Certain ciliary signaling proteins couple with the BBSome, a conserved complex 
of Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) proteins, to load onto retrograde intraflagellar 
transport (IFT) trains for their removal out of cilia in Chlamydomonas 
reinhardtii. Here, we show that loss of the Arf-like 6 (ARL6) GTPase BBS3 causes 
the signaling protein phospholipase D (PLD) to accumulate in cilia. Upon 
targeting to the basal body, BBSomes enter and cycle through cilia via IFT, 
while BBS3 in a GTP-bound state separates from BBSomes, associates with the 
membrane, and translocates from the basal body to cilia by diffusion. Upon 
arriving at the ciliary tip, GTP-bound BBS3 binds and recruits BBSomes to the 
ciliary membrane for interacting with PLD, thus making the PLD-laden BBSomes 
available to load onto retrograde IFT trains for ciliary exit. Therefore, BBS3 
promotes PLD exit from cilia via the BBSome, providing a regulatory mechanism 
for ciliary signaling protein removal out of cilia.

© 2021, Liu et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.59119
PMCID: PMC7963478
PMID: 33587040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: YL, BX, WS, JW, JS, MW, KL, ZW, ZF No competing 
interests declared