---
reference_id: "PMID:20817137"
title: Exome sequencing identifies WDR35 variants involved in Sensenbrenner syndrome.
authors:
- Gilissen C
- Arts HH
- Hoischen A
- Spruijt L
- Mans DA
- Arts P
- van Lier B
- Steehouwer M
- van Reeuwijk J
- Kant SG
- Roepman R
- Knoers NV
- Veltman JA
- Brunner HG
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.08.004
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Apoptosis Regulatory Proteins/genetics
- Base Sequence
- Child
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics
- Exons/genetics
- Humans
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- RNA Splice Sites/genetics
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA/methods"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exome sequencing identifies WDR35 variants involved in Sensenbrenner syndrome.
**Authors:** Gilissen C, Arts HH, Hoischen A, Spruijt L, Mans DA, Arts P, van Lier B, Steehouwer M, van Reeuwijk J, Kant SG, Roepman R, Knoers NV, Veltman JA, Brunner HG
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.08.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.08.004)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Sep 10;87(3):418-23. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.08.004.

Exome sequencing identifies WDR35 variants involved in Sensenbrenner syndrome.

Gilissen C(1), Arts HH, Hoischen A, Spruijt L, Mans DA, Arts P, van Lier B, 
Steehouwer M, van Reeuwijk J, Kant SG, Roepman R, Knoers NV, Veltman JA, Brunner 
HG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Institute for Genetic and Metabolic Disorders, 
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, The Netherlands.

Sensenbrenner syndrome/cranioectodermal dysplasia (CED) is an 
autosomal-recessive disease that is characterized by craniosynostosis and 
ectodermal and skeletal abnormalities. We sequenced the exomes of two unrelated 
CED patients and identified compound heterozygous mutations in WDR35 as the 
cause of the disease in each of the two patients independently, showing that it 
is possible to find the causative gene by sequencing the exome of a single 
sporadic patient. With RT-PCR, we demonstrate that a splice-site mutation in 
exon 2 of WDR35 alters splicing of RNA on the affected allele, introducing a 
premature stop codon. WDR35 is homologous to TULP4 (from the Tubby superfamily) 
and has previously been characterized as an intraflagellar transport component, 
confirming that Sensenbrenner syndrome is a ciliary disorder.

2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.08.004
PMCID: PMC2933349
PMID: 20817137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]