---
reference_id: "PMID:34180388"
title: Novel pathogenic variant of MYBPC3 responsible for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Yang X
- Li Z
- Wang Q
- Zhang Y
- Zhao C
journal: Cardiol Young
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1017/S1047951121002468
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel pathogenic variant of MYBPC3 responsible for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Yang X, Li Z, Wang Q, Zhang Y, Zhao C
**Journal:** Cardiol Young (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S1047951121002468](https://doi.org/10.1017/S1047951121002468)

## Content

1. Cardiol Young. 2022 Apr;32(4):539-544. doi: 10.1017/S1047951121002468. Epub
2021  Jun 28.

Novel pathogenic variant of MYBPC3 responsible for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Yang X(1)(2), Li Z(1), Wang Q(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhao C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yidu Central Hospital of Weifang, Weifang, 
Shandong, China.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, 
Shandong, China.

OBJECTIVES: This study aims to investigate the pathogenic gene variant in a 
family with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy by using whole-exome sequencing and to 
explore the relationship between the gene variant and clinical phenotype.
METHODS: Peripheral blood was collected from a family with hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy, and deoxyribonucleic acid was extracted. The possible pathogenic 
genes were detected by whole-exome sequencing, and the variant was verified by 
Sanger sequencing. Functional change in the variant was predicted by 
bioinformatics software. Clinical data of the family members are analysed 
simultaneously.
RESULTS: The proband carries a novel heterozygous nonsense variant of 
MYBPC3:c.2731G > T (p.E911X). The analysis of amino acid conservation suggests 
that the variation is highly conserved. The three-dimensional protein structure 
shows that the variant in MYBPC3 results in the incompleteness of the 
fibronectintype-III2 (p872-967) domain and deletion of Ig-like C2-type 6 
(p971-1065) and fibronectin type-III 3 and Ig-like C2-type 7 (p1181-1274) 
domains, in which p1253-1268 is predicted to have a transmembrane helix 
structure. Clinical data indicate that the phenotypes of variant carriers with 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy are diverse, suggesting the functional damages to 
the protein of MYBPC3.
CONCLUSION: The phenotypes of variant carriers with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 
caused by the novel variant in MYBPC3: c.2731G > T (p.E911X) exhibit variable 
severity and clinical manifestations. Whole-exome sequencing can be used to 
comprehensive screen hypertrophic cardiomyopathy genes and provide a strong 
basis for early screening and accurate diagnosis and treatment of hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy in children.

DOI: 10.1017/S1047951121002468
PMID: 34180388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]