---
reference_id: "PMID:15580984"
title: Review of ACR hematologic criteria in systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Kao AH
- Manzi S
- Ramsey-Goldman R
journal: Lupus
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1191/0961203304lu2025oa
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Review of ACR hematologic criteria in systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Kao AH, Manzi S, Ramsey-Goldman R
**Journal:** Lupus (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1191/0961203304lu2025oa](https://doi.org/10.1191/0961203304lu2025oa)

## Content

1. Lupus. 2004;13(11):865-8. doi: 10.1191/0961203304lu2025oa.

Review of ACR hematologic criteria in systemic lupus erythematosus.

Kao AH(1), Manzi S, Ramsey-Goldman R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, 
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, PA, USA.

We have conducted a thorough literature review to evaluate the relative value of 
the hematologic criterion in making a diagnosis of systemic lupus erythematosus 
(SLE), its clinical relevance, and its prognostic significance. In the updated 
1982 ACR criteria, the presence of one or more of the four elements: 1) 
hemolytic anemia (with reticulocytosis); 2) leukopenia (<4000/microL on two or 
more occasions); 3) lymphopenia (< 1500/microL on two or more occasions); or 4) 
thrombocytopenia (< 100,000/microL in the absence of offending drugs) is now 
considered as a single hematologic disorder. The sensitivity and specificity of 
the individual elements of the hematologic criterion range from 18 to 46% and 89 
to 99%, respectively. The accuracy of the hematologic criterion requires proper 
interpretation. For example, many studies reported the presence of anemia that 
was not clearly defined and likely included anemia from etiologies other than 
hemolytic anemia, thereby causing an overestimation of the prevalence. In 
addition, medications such as corticosteroids and cytotoxic agents, and viral 
infections, can also contribute to a reduction in lymphocyte count. Despite 
these limitations, the SLICC committee recommends no change in the elements of 
the hematologic criterion when this criterion is properly interpreted and other 
causes of cytopenia are excluded.

DOI: 10.1191/0961203304lu2025oa
PMID: 15580984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]