---
reference_id: "PMID:36925418"
title: "Frontotemporal dementia: Addressing the scattered harbingers of genetics and its relationship with glucose metabolism, bipolar disorder, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis."
authors:
- Prajjwal P
- Shashank S
- Al-Ezzi SMS
- Sharma B
- Aubourg O
- Kaushish A
- Marsool MDM
- Nagre A
- Asharaf S
journal: Dis Mon
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.disamonth.2023.101545
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frontotemporal dementia: Addressing the scattered harbingers of genetics and its relationship with glucose metabolism, bipolar disorder, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
**Authors:** Prajjwal P, Shashank S, Al-Ezzi SMS, Sharma B, Aubourg O, Kaushish A, Marsool MDM, Nagre A, Asharaf S
**Journal:** Dis Mon (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.disamonth.2023.101545](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.disamonth.2023.101545)

## Content

1. Dis Mon. 2023 May;69(5):101545. doi: 10.1016/j.disamonth.2023.101545. Epub
2023  Mar 14.

Frontotemporal dementia: Addressing the scattered harbingers of genetics and its 
relationship with glucose metabolism, bipolar disorder, and amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis.

Prajjwal P(1), Shashank S(2), Al-Ezzi SMS(3), Sharma B(4), Aubourg O(5), 
Kaushish A(6), Marsool MDM(7), Nagre A(8), Asharaf S(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Bharati Vidyapeeth University Medical College, Pune, 
India.
(2)Department of Neurology, Shadan Institute of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad, 
India.
(3)Physician, Doctor of Medicine, Lugansk State Medical University, Lugansk, 
Ukraine.
(4)Medical Student, Department of Medicine, Medical College, Baroda, Vadodara, 
Gujarat, India.
(5)Doctor of Medicine, University of Montreal, QC, Canada.
(6)MSc Biochemistry, Dolphin Institute of Biomedical and Natural Sciences, 
Dehradun, India.
(7)Medical Student, Al-kindy college of medicine/University of Baghdad, Baghdad, 
Iraq. Electronic address: Mohammed.diaa1800e@kmc.uobaghdad.edu.iq.
(8)Medical Student, Department of Medicine, Topiwala National Medical College, 
Mumbai, India.
(9)Department of Neurology, Travancore Medical College, Kollam, Kerala, India.

Frontotemporal Dementia, also known by the name Pick's disease, is a rare form 
of dementia that can run for several generations. The two key characteristics 
are argyrophilic, spherical intraneuronal inclusions, which most frequently 
impact the frontal and temporal poles, and localized cortical atrophy (Pick 
bodies). Although personality decline and memory loss are frequently more severe 
than the visuospatial and apraxia disorders that are common in Alzheimer's 
disease, clinical overlap with other non-Alzheimer degenerative disorders is 
being increasingly recognized. The limbic system, which includes the 
hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, and amygdala, typically experiences the greatest 
levels of neuronal loss and degeneration. In the hippocampus's dentate fascia, 
several Pick bodies are frequently seen. Leukoencephalopathy and inflated 
cortical neurons are less specific symptoms (Pick cells). In this paper, we 
review the factors leading to Picks disease along with its pathophysiology, 
clinical manifestations, diagnosis, imaging, treatment, prognosis, and a 
comprehensive discussion on the same. We have also discussed the relationship of 
frontotemporal dementia with glucose metabolism, bipolar disorder, and 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, all of which are emerging fields of interest and 
need more studies.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.disamonth.2023.101545
PMID: 36925418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare no 
conflict of interest, financial or otherwise.