---
reference_id: "PMID:30535218"
title: Effect of Mexiletine on Muscle Stiffness in Patients With Nondystrophic Myotonia Evaluated Using Aggregated N-of-1 Trials.
authors:
- Stunnenberg BC
- Raaphorst J
- Groenewoud HM
- Statland JM
- Griggs RC
- Woertman W
- Stegeman DF
- Timmermans J
- Trivedi J
- Matthews E
- Saris CGJ
- Schouwenberg BJ
- Drost G
- van Engelen BGM
- van der Wilt GJ
journal: JAMA
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1001/jama.2018.18020
keywords:
- Adult
- Bayes Theorem
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Mexiletine/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Models, Statistical"
- Myotonia/drug therapy
- Myotonic Disorders/drug therapy
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Rare Diseases
- "Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel Blockers/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of Mexiletine on Muscle Stiffness in Patients With Nondystrophic Myotonia Evaluated Using Aggregated N-of-1 Trials.
**Authors:** Stunnenberg BC, Raaphorst J, Groenewoud HM, Statland JM, Griggs RC, Woertman W, Stegeman DF, Timmermans J, Trivedi J, Matthews E, Saris CGJ, Schouwenberg BJ, Drost G, van Engelen BGM, van der Wilt GJ
**Journal:** JAMA (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.2018.18020](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2018.18020)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2018 Dec 11;320(22):2344-2353. doi: 10.1001/jama.2018.18020.

Effect of Mexiletine on Muscle Stiffness in Patients With Nondystrophic Myotonia
Evaluated Using Aggregated N-of-1 Trials.

Stunnenberg BC(1), Raaphorst J(1)(2), Groenewoud HM(3), Statland JM(4), Griggs
RC(5), Woertman W(3), Stegeman DF(1), Timmermans J(6), Trivedi J(7), Matthews
E(8), Saris CGJ(1), Schouwenberg BJ(9), Drost G(10), van Engelen BGM(1), van der
Wilt GJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain Cognition and Behaviour,
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Neurology, Amsterdam University Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Health Evidence, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Neurology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester,
New York.
(6)Department of Cardiology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the
Netherlands.
(7)Department of Neurology and Neurotherapeutics, UT Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas.
(8)MRC Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases, UCL Institute of Neurology and
National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, London, United Kingdom.
(9)Department of Pharmacology-Toxicology, Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(10)University of Groningen, Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery,
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1001/jama.2018.17977.

IMPORTANCE: In rare diseases it is difficult to achieve high-quality evidence of
treatment efficacy because of small cohorts and clinical heterogeneity. With
emerging treatments for rare diseases, innovative trial designs are needed.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effectiveness of mexiletine in nondystrophic
myotonia using an aggregated N-of-1 trials design and compare results between
this innovative design and a previously conducted RCT.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: A series of aggregated, double-blind,
randomized, placebo-controlled N-of-1-trials, performed in a single academic
referral center. Thirty Dutch adult patients with genetically confirmed
nondystrophic myotonia (38 patients screened) were enrolled between February
2014 and June 2015. Follow-up was completed in September 2016.
INTERVENTIONS: Mexiletine (600 mg daily) vs placebo during multiple treatment
periods of 4 weeks.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Reduction in daily-reported muscle stiffness on a
scale of 1 to 9, with higher scores indicating more impairment. A Bayesian
hierarchical model aggregated individual N-of-1 trial data to determine the
posterior probability of reaching a clinically meaningful effect of a greater
than 0.75-point difference.
RESULTS: Among 30 enrolled patients (mean age, 43.4 [SD, 15.24] years; 22% men;
19 CLCN1 and 11 SCN4A genotype), 27 completed the study and 3 dropped out (1
because of a serious adverse event). In 24 of the 27 completers, a clinically
meaningful treatment effect was found. In the Bayesian hierarchical model,
mexiletine resulted in a 100% posterior probability of reaching a clinically
meaningful reduction in self-reported muscle stiffness for the nondystrophic
myotonia group overall and the CLCN1 genotype subgroup and 93% posterior
probability for the SCN4A genotype subgroup. In the total nondystrophic myotonia
group, the median muscle stiffness score was 6.08 (interquartile range,
4.71-6.80) at baseline and was 2.50 (95% credible interval [CrI], 1.77-3.24)
during the mexiletine period and 5.56 (95% CrI, 4.73-6.39) during the placebo
period; difference in symptom score reduction, 3.06 (95% CrI, 1.96-4.15; n = 27)
favoring mexiletine. The most common adverse event was gastrointestinal
discomfort (21 mexiletine [70%], 1 placebo [3%]). One serious adverse event
occurred (1 mexiletine [3%]; allergic skin reaction). Using frequentist
reanalysis, mexiletine compared with placebo resulted in a mean reduction in
daily-reported muscle stiffness of 3.12 (95% CI, 2.46-3.78), consistent with the
previous RCT treatment effect of 2.69 (95% CI, 2.12-3.26).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In a series of N-of-1 trials of mexiletine vs placebo
in patients with nondystrophic myotonia, there was a reduction in mean
daily-reported muscle stiffness that was consistent with the treatment effect in
a previous randomized clinical trial. These findings support the efficacy of
mexiletine for treatment of nondystrophic myotonia as well as the feasibility of
N-of-1 trials for assessing interventions in some chronic rare diseases.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02045667.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2018.18020
PMCID: PMC6583079
PMID: 30535218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Statland
reported receiving grants from the National Institute of Neurological Disorders
and Stroke and the FSH Society and receiving personal fees from Acceleron,
Sarepta, Fulcrum, and PTC. Dr Griggs reported receiving grants (during the
conduct of the study) from the National Institutes of Health, Muscular Dystrophy
Association, and Parent Project for Muscular Dystrophy and receiving personal
fees from Strongbridge Pharmaceuticals, Sarepta Pharmaceuticals, Marathon
Pharmaceuticals, and Stealth Pharmaceuticals. Dr Matthews reported receiving
compensation, after the research and manuscript were completed and submitted,
for attending a scientific advisory meeting at the request of LUPIN
pharmaceuticals, which is seeking European Medicines Agency approval for
mexiletine. Dr van Engelen reported receiving grants from European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (Murab), European FP7 programme
(OPTIMISTIC), Association Francaise contre les Myopathies, Global FSH, The
Netherlands Organisation for Health Research and Development (ZonMw), Prinses
Beatrix Spierfonds, Stiching Spieren voor Spieren, Dutch FSHD Foundation, and
The Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research and receiving personal fees
from Fulcrum. No other disclosures were reported.
