---
reference_id: "PMID:28370561"
title: Wnt/β-Catenin Signaling Activates Expression of the Bone-Related Transcription Factor RUNX2 in Select Human Osteosarcoma Cell Types.
authors:
- Vega OA
- Lucero CMJ
- Araya HF
- Jerez S
- Tapia JC
- Antonelli M
- Salazar-Onfray F
- Las Heras F
- Thaler R
- Riester SM
- Stein GS
- van Wijnen AJ
- Galindo MA
journal: J Cell Biochem
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/jcb.26011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wnt/β-Catenin Signaling Activates Expression of the Bone-Related Transcription Factor RUNX2 in Select Human Osteosarcoma Cell Types.
**Authors:** Vega OA, Lucero CMJ, Araya HF, Jerez S, Tapia JC, Antonelli M, Salazar-Onfray F, Las Heras F, Thaler R, Riester SM, Stein GS, van Wijnen AJ, Galindo MA
**Journal:** J Cell Biochem (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcb.26011](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcb.26011)

## Content

1. J Cell Biochem. 2017 Nov;118(11):3662-3674. doi: 10.1002/jcb.26011. Epub 2017 
May 18.

Wnt/β-Catenin Signaling Activates Expression of the Bone-Related Transcription 
Factor RUNX2 in Select Human Osteosarcoma Cell Types.

Vega OA(1)(2), Lucero CMJ(1)(2), Araya HF(1)(2), Jerez S(1)(2), Tapia JC(1), 
Antonelli M(1), Salazar-Onfray F(2)(3), Las Heras F(4)(5), Thaler R(6), Riester 
SM(6), Stein GS(7), van Wijnen AJ(6), Galindo MA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Program of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences 
(ICBM), Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile, Santiago, 8380453, Chile.
(2)Millennium Institute on Immunology and Immunotherapy, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Chile, Santiago 8380453, Chile.
(3)Program of Immunology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences (ICBM), Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Chile, Santiago 8380453, Chile.
(4)Department of Anatomical Pathology, University of Chile Clinical Hospital, 
Santiago 8380456, Chile.
(5)Department of Pathology, Clinica Las Condes, Santiago 7591018, Chile.
(6)Departments of Orthopedic Surgery and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester 55905, Minnesota.
(7)Department of Biochemistry and University of Vermont Cancer Center, The 
Robert Larner College of Medicine, University of Vermont, Burlington 05405, 
Vermont.

Osteosarcoma is the most common malignant bone tumor in children and 
adolescents. Metastasis and poor responsiveness to chemotherapy in osteosarcoma 
correlates with over-expression of the runt-related transcription factor RUNX2, 
which normally plays a key role in osteogenic lineage commitment, osteoblast 
differentiation, and bone formation. Furthermore, WNT/β-catenin signaling is 
over-activated in osteosarcoma and promotes tumor progression. Importantly, the 
WNT/β-catenin pathway normally activates RUNX2 gene expression during osteogenic 
lineage commitment. Therefore, we examined whether the WNT/β-catenin pathway 
controls the tumor-related elevation of RUNX2 expression in osteosarcoma. We 
analyzed protein levels and nuclear localization of β-catenin and RUNX2 in a 
panel of human osteosarcoma cell lines (SAOS, MG63, U2OS, HOS, G292, and 143B). 
In all six cell lines, β-catenin and RUNX2 are expressed to different degrees 
and localized in the nucleus and/or cytoplasm. SAOS cells have the highest 
levels of RUNX2 protein that is localized in the nucleus, while MG63 cells have 
the lowest RUNX2 levels which is mostly localized in the cytoplasm. Levels of 
β-catenin and RUNX2 protein are enhanced in HOS, G292, and 143B cells after 
treatment with the GSK3β inhibitor SB216763. Furthermore, small interfering RNA 
(siRNA)-mediated depletion of β-catenin inhibits RUNX2 expression in G292 cells. 
Thus, WNT/β-catenin activation is required for RUNX2 expression in at least some 
osteosarcoma cell types, where RUNX2 is known to promote expression of 
metastasis related genes. J. Cell. Biochem. 118: 3662-3674, 2017. © 2017 Wiley 
Periodicals, Inc.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.26011
PMID: 28370561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]