---
reference_id: "PMID:15342014"
title: The genetics of HLA-associated disease.
authors:
- Larsen CE
- Alper CA
journal: Curr Opin Immunol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2004.07.014
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The genetics of HLA-associated disease.
**Authors:** Larsen CE, Alper CA
**Journal:** Curr Opin Immunol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.coi.2004.07.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coi.2004.07.014)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Immunol. 2004 Oct;16(5):660-7. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2004.07.014.

The genetics of HLA-associated disease.

Larsen CE(1), Alper CA.

Author information:
(1)The CBR Institute for Biomedical Research, 800 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA 
02115, USA.

Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1D) remains the most intensively studied, and thus 
the best paradigm, of MHC-associated diseases. Accumulating evidence suggests 
that MHC susceptibility for T1D is recessive, with susceptibility alleles more 
common than protective alleles. Updated allele-level and nucleotide sequence 
analysis of MHC class II T1D susceptibility markers of conserved extended 
haplotypes underscore the uncertainty surrounding the actual T1D MHC 
susceptibility locus. Recent studies have established that disease concordance 
in dizygotic twins is the same as that in siblings generally, for both T1D and 
the MHC-associated autoimmune disease gluten-sensitive enteropathy, leaving 
little room for a differential environmental trigger. Epigenetic mechanisms are 
probably involved in many MHC-associated phenomena, including autoimmunity, and 
appear to be the best explanation for incomplete penetrance.

DOI: 10.1016/j.coi.2004.07.014
PMID: 15342014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]