---
reference_id: "PMID:18481261"
title: Tumor lymphangiogenesis and melanoma metastasis.
authors:
- Rinderknecht M
- Detmar M
journal: J Cell Physiol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1002/jcp.21494
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tumor lymphangiogenesis and melanoma metastasis.
**Authors:** Rinderknecht M, Detmar M
**Journal:** J Cell Physiol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcp.21494](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcp.21494)

## Content

1. J Cell Physiol. 2008 Aug;216(2):347-54. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21494.

Tumor lymphangiogenesis and melanoma metastasis.

Rinderknecht M(1), Detmar M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, 
ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Malignant melanomas of the skin primarily metastasize to lymph nodes, and the 
detection of sentinel lymph node metastases serves as an important prognostic 
parameter. There is now compelling evidence that melanomas can induce 
lymphangiogenesis (growth of lymphatic vessels), mainly at the tumor-stroma 
interface, and that the level of tumor lymphangiogenesis is correlated with the 
incidence of sentinel lymph node metastases and with disease-free survival. 
Thus, tumor lymphangiogenesis can serve as a novel prognostic predictor in 
melanoma. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-C, released by melanoma 
cells and by tumor-associated macrophages, likely represents the major 
lymphangiogenic factor in melanoma, although other members of the VEGF family 
might also be involved. The recent discovery that tumors can induce a 
premetastatic niche, by inducing lymphatic vessel growth in sentinel lymph nodes 
even before metastasis, and that lymph node lymphangiogenesis enhances 
metastatic spread, indicates that activated lymphatic vessels represent novel 
targets for the detection and/or therapy of melanoma metastases.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.21494
PMID: 18481261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]