---
reference_id: PMID:33186086
title: Complicating Infections Associated with Common Endemic Human Respiratory Coronaviruses.
authors:
- Cimolai N
journal: Health Secur
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1089/hs.2020.0067
keywords:
- "COVID-19/complications, epidemiology"
- "Coronavirus Infections/complications, epidemiology, virology"
- Disease Outbreaks
- Endemic Diseases
- Genetic Drift
- Humans
- Prevalence
- "Respiratory Tract Infections/epidemiology, virology"
- SARS-CoV-2/genetics
- Seasons
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Complicating Infections Associated with Common Endemic Human Respiratory Coronaviruses.
**Authors:** Cimolai N
**Journal:** Health Secur (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1089/hs.2020.0067](https://doi.org/10.1089/hs.2020.0067)

## Content

1. Health Secur. 2021 Mar-Apr;19(2):195-208. doi: 10.1089/hs.2020.0067. Epub 2020
 Nov 11.

Complicating Infections Associated with Common Endemic Human Respiratory 
Coronaviruses.

Cimolai N(1).

Author information:
(1)Nevio Cimolai, MD, FRCPC, is a Professor, Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia; he is 
also Medical Staff, Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's and Women's 
Health Centre of British Columbia; both in Vancouver, Canada.

Coronaviruses OC43, 229E, NL63, and HKU1 are endemic human respiratory 
coronaviruses that typically cause mild to moderate upper respiratory 
infections, similar to the common cold. They also may cause simple and 
complicated lower respiratory infections, otitis media, asthma exacerbations, 
gastroenteritis, and a few systemic complications. These viruses are usually 
seasonal (with winter dominance) and affect nearly all age groups. The seasonal 
and annual variation in virus prevalence has implications for understanding the 
concept of acquired immunity and its persistence or diminution. Coronaviruses 
generally have outbreak potential in susceptible populations of any age, 
particularly in patients with comorbidities, who tend to have increased clinical 
disease. These 4 coronaviruses are often found in the context of what appears to 
be coinfection with other pathogens, but especially other viruses. If 
coronaviruses are not specifically tested for, the sole detection of a viral 
copathogen would suggest the pathogen is the causative agent, when a coronavirus 
may be culpable, or both. The detection of these viruses in circumstances where 
respiratory viruses are generally sought in clinical samples is, therefore, 
justified. These pathogens can be chronically shed from the respiratory tract, 
which is more likely to occur among immunocompromised and complicated patients. 
These viruses share the potential for genetic drift. The genome is among the 
largest of RNA viruses, and the capability of these viruses to further change is 
likely underestimated. Given the potential disease among humans, it is justified 
to search for effective antiviral chemotherapy for these viruses and to consider 
uses in niche situations should effective therapy be defined. Whereas SARS-CoV-2 
may follow the epidemiological pattern of SARS-CoV and extinguish slowly over 
time, there is yet concern that SARS-CoV-2 may establish itself as an endemic 
human respiratory coronavirus similar to OC43, 2299E, NL63, and HKU1. Until 
sufficient data are acquired to better understand the potential of SARS-CoV-2, 
continued work on antiviral therapy and vaccination is imperative.

DOI: 10.1089/hs.2020.0067
PMID: 33186086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]