---
reference_id: "PMID:17766718"
title: High normal testosterone levels in infants with non-mosaic Klinefelter's syndrome.
authors:
- Aksglaede L
- Petersen JH
- Main KM
- Skakkebaek NE
- Juul A
journal: Eur J Endocrinol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1530/EJE-07-0310
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High normal testosterone levels in infants with non-mosaic Klinefelter's syndrome.
**Authors:** Aksglaede L, Petersen JH, Main KM, Skakkebaek NE, Juul A
**Journal:** Eur J Endocrinol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1530/EJE-07-0310](https://doi.org/10.1530/EJE-07-0310)

## Content

1. Eur J Endocrinol. 2007 Sep;157(3):345-50. doi: 10.1530/EJE-07-0310.

High normal testosterone levels in infants with non-mosaic Klinefelter's 
syndrome.

Aksglaede L(1), Petersen JH, Main KM, Skakkebaek NE, Juul A.

Author information:
(1)University Department of Growth and Reproduction GR, Rigshospitalet, 
University of Copenhagen, Section 5064, Blegdamsvej 9, DK-2100, Copenhagen Ø, 
Denmark. lise.aksglaede@rh.regionh.dk

OBJECTIVE: Klinefelter's syndrome (KS) is associated with hypergonadotrophic 
hypogonadism in adulthood. However, limited information exists about the age at 
which hypogonadism occurs. The hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis is 
transiently activated during the first months of life, offering the opportunity 
to study testicular function by spontaneous, basal hormone levels. The aim of 
this study was to evaluate the HPG axis in KS infants.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional study.
METHODS: Ten KS infants aged 3.1 months (range 1.8-3.8) and 613 healthy controls 
aged 3.0 months (range 2.0-4.5). Serum levels of total and free testosterone 
(T), LH, FSH, inhibin B and sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) were determined.
RESULTS: KS infants had significantly higher concentrations of total T (5.0 
(2.2-11.2) vs 3.4 (0.7-8.3) nmol/l, P = 0.02), free T (31.6 (18.2-61.8) vs 22.1 
(4.3-48.4) pmol/l, P = 0.01), LH (3.3 (1.3-4.6) vs 1.7 (0.6-4.3) IU/l, P = 
0.005) and FSH (1.7 (1.1-4.1) vs 1.2 (0.4-3.0) IU/l, P = 0.007) than controls. 
SHBG and inhibin B did not differ from controls. LH/T and LH/free T ratios were 
normal, whereas the FSH/inhibin B ratio was elevated (6.5 (2.7-16.9) vs 3.0 
(0.78-11.4), P = 0.005) when compared to controls. The majority of KS infants 
had normal bivariate hormonal combinations.
CONCLUSION: We found increased FSH/inhibin B ratio as a possible sign of Sertoli 
cell dysfunction. However, serum levels of T were high normal suggesting an 
altered pituitary-gonadal set point.

DOI: 10.1530/EJE-07-0310
PMID: 17766718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]