---
reference_id: "PMID:16916323"
title: "Epidemiology of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: health effects of air pollution."
authors:
- Viegi G
- Maio S
- Pistelli F
- Baldacci S
- Carrozzi L
journal: Respirology
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2006.00886.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: health effects of air pollution.
**Authors:** Viegi G, Maio S, Pistelli F, Baldacci S, Carrozzi L
**Journal:** Respirology (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1440-1843.2006.00886.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1440-1843.2006.00886.x)

## Content

1. Respirology. 2006 Sep;11(5):523-32. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2006.00886.x.

Epidemiology of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: health effects of air 
pollution.

Viegi G(1), Maio S, Pistelli F, Baldacci S, Carrozzi L.

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Environmental Epidemiology Unit, CNR Institute of Clinical 
Physiology, Via Trieste 41, 56126 Pisa, Italy. viegig@ifc.cnr.it

COPD is one of the leading causes of morbidity and mortality in the 
industrialized and the developing countries. According to the prediction of the 
World Health Organization, COPD will become the third leading cause of mortality 
and the fifth cause of disability in 2020 worldwide. In epidemiology, distinct 
phenotypic entities converge on the term COPD, so that prevalence and mortality 
data may be inclusive of chronic bronchitis, emphysema and asthma; moreover, the 
assessment of prevalence rates may change considerably according to the 
diagnostic tools used. Thus, a considerable problem is to estimate the real 
prevalence of COPD in the general population. COPD is determined by the action 
of a number of various risk factors, among which, the most important is 
cigarette smoking. However, during the last few decades, evidence from 
epidemiological studies finding consistent associations between air pollution 
and various outcomes (respiratory symptoms, reduced lung function, chronic 
bronchitis and mortality), has suggested that outdoor air pollution is a 
contributing cause of morbidity and mortality. In conclusion, epidemiological 
studies suggest that air pollution plays a remarkable role in the exacerbation 
and in the pathogenesis of chronic respiratory diseases. Thus, respiratory 
physicians, as well as public health professionals, should advocate for a 
cleaner environment.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2006.00886.x
PMID: 16916323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]