---
reference_id: "PMID:30287093"
title: Nuclear Factor One X in Development and Disease.
authors:
- Piper M
- Gronostajski R
- Messina G
journal: Trends Cell Biol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.tcb.2018.09.003
keywords:
- Animals
- Hematopoiesis
- Humans
- Muscle Development
- "Muscular Dystrophies/metabolism, pathology"
- NFI Transcription Factors/metabolism
- "Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology"
- "Neural Stem Cells/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nuclear Factor One X in Development and Disease.
**Authors:** Piper M, Gronostajski R, Messina G
**Journal:** Trends Cell Biol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tcb.2018.09.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcb.2018.09.003)

## Content

1. Trends Cell Biol. 2019 Jan;29(1):20-30. doi: 10.1016/j.tcb.2018.09.003. Epub 
2018 Oct 1.

Nuclear Factor One X in Development and Disease.

Piper M(1), Gronostajski R(2), Messina G(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, 
Queensland 4072, Australia. Electronic address: m.piper@uq.edu.au.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Genetics, Genomics & Bioinformatics Graduate 
Program, New York State Center of Excellence in Bioinformatics and Life 
Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14203, USA.
(3)Department of Biosciences, University of Milan, via Celoria 26, 20133, Milan, 
Italy. Electronic address: graziella.messina@unimi.it.

The past decade has seen incredible advances in the field of stem cell biology 
that have greatly improved our understanding of development and provided 
important insights into pathological processes. Transcription factors (TFs) play 
a central role in mediating stem cell proliferation, quiescence, and 
differentiation. One TF that contributes to these processes is Nuclear Factor 
One X (NFIX). Recently, NFIX activity has been shown to be essential in multiple 
organ systems and to have important translational impacts for human health. 
Here, we describe recent studies showing the contribution of NFIX to muscle 
development and muscular dystrophies, hematopoiesis, cancer, and neural stem 
cell biology, highlighting the importance of this knowledge in the development 
of therapeutic targets.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tcb.2018.09.003
PMID: 30287093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]