---
reference_id: "PMID:26115789"
title: Discrete Global but No Focal Gray Matter Volume Reductions in Unmedicated Adult Patients With Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder.
authors:
- Maier S
- Perlov E
- Graf E
- Dieter E
- Sobanski E
- Rump M
- Warnke A
- Ebert D
- Berger M
- Matthies S
- Philipsen A
- Tebartz van Elst L
journal: Biol Psychiatry
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2015.05.012
keywords:
- Adult
- "Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- Female
- Gray Matter/diagnostic imaging
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- Middle Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Discrete Global but No Focal Gray Matter Volume Reductions in Unmedicated Adult Patients With Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder.
**Authors:** Maier S, Perlov E, Graf E, Dieter E, Sobanski E, Rump M, Warnke A, Ebert D, Berger M, Matthies S, Philipsen A, Tebartz van Elst L
**Journal:** Biol Psychiatry (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biopsych.2015.05.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2015.05.012)

## Content

1. Biol Psychiatry. 2016 Dec 15;80(12):905-915. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsych.2015.05.012. Epub 2015 May 27.

Discrete Global but No Focal Gray Matter Volume Reductions in Unmedicated Adult
Patients With Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder.

Maier S(1), Perlov E(2), Graf E(3), Dieter E(1), Sobanski E(4), Rump M(1),
Warnke A(5), Ebert D(6), Berger M(6), Matthies S(6), Philipsen A(6), Tebartz van
Elst L(7).

Author information:
(1)Section for Experimental Neuropsychiatry, Clinic for Psychiatry and
Psychotherapy, Freiburg, Germany.; Freiburg Brain Imaging, Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Section for Experimental Neuropsychiatry, Clinic for Psychiatry and
Psychotherapy, Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Clinical Trials Unit, Medical Center-University of Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany.
(4)Central Institute for Mental Health, Mannheim, Germany.
(5)Department for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University
of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(6)Clinic of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Medical Center-University of
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(7)Section for Experimental Neuropsychiatry, Clinic for Psychiatry and
Psychotherapy, Freiburg, Germany.; Freiburg Brain Imaging, Freiburg, Germany..
Electronic address: tebartzvanelst@uniklinik-freiburg.de.

Comment in
    Biol Psychiatry. 2016 Dec 15;80(12):e95-e97. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsych.2016.10.010.

BACKGROUND: Gray matter reduction mainly in the anterior cingulate cortex, the
basal ganglia, and the cerebellum has been reported in
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Yet, respective data remain
contradictory and inconclusive. To clarify if structural alteration in these
brain areas can be verified in a large cohort of adult patients and if a history
of stimulant medication has an effect on brain structure, magnetic resonance
imaging was performed in the context of a clinical trial on the efficacy of
group psychotherapy, clinical management, methylphenidate, and placebo
(Comparison of Methylphenidate and Psychotherapy in Adult ADHD Study Trial).
METHODS: Between January 2007 and August 2010, 1480 patients from seven study
centers across Germany, aged 18 to 58, were prescreened; 518 were assessed for
eligibility; 433 were randomized; and 187 were eligible for neuroimaging. The
control group included 121 healthy volunteers. Structural magnetic resonance
imaging data sets were acquired. Following strict quality control, 131 patient
and 95 control data sets could be analyzed. All patients were unmedicated for at
least 6 months. The established method of voxel-based morphometry (VBM8
segmentation and diffeomorphic anatomical registration through exponentiated lie
normalization) was used to assess global and regional brain volumes.
RESULTS: Patients displayed subtle global cerebral volume reductions. There was
no evidence of regional gray matter volume abnormalities. The inattentive ADHD
subtype was linked to smaller volumes in the left dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex. A history of previous medication did not modulate brain volumes.
CONCLUSIONS: ADHD in adulthood is associated with global rather than regional
volumetric abnormalities. Previous use of stimulant medication does not seem to
modify subsequent brain volumes in a significant way.

Copyright © 2015 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2015.05.012
PMID: 26115789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
