---
reference_id: "PMID:39826790"
title: Jiawei Yanghe Decoction alleviates pulmonary sarcoidosis by upregulating NR1D1/2 and suppressing Th17 cells.
authors:
- Cui J
- Hu Z
- Jiang Y
- Wang Y
- Li C
- Zhang S
- Chen L
- Zhang Z
- Yang D
- Shen H
- Zheng P
- Qiu L
- Lu Z
journal: J Ethnopharmacol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2025.119372
keywords:
- Animals
- "Drugs, Chinese Herbal/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Th17 Cells/drug effects, immunology, metabolism"
- Mice
- Up-Regulation/drug effects
- "Sarcoidosis, Pulmonary/drug therapy, immunology, metabolism"
- Molecular Docking Simulation
- Male
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Lung/drug effects, pathology, immunology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Jiawei Yanghe Decoction alleviates pulmonary sarcoidosis by upregulating NR1D1/2 and suppressing Th17 cells.
**Authors:** Cui J, Hu Z, Jiang Y, Wang Y, Li C, Zhang S, Chen L, Zhang Z, Yang D, Shen H, Zheng P, Qiu L, Lu Z
**Journal:** J Ethnopharmacol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jep.2025.119372](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jep.2025.119372)

## Content

1. J Ethnopharmacol. 2025 Feb 27;342:119372. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2025.119372. Epub
 2025 Jan 16.

Jiawei Yanghe Decoction alleviates pulmonary sarcoidosis by upregulating NR1D1/2
and suppressing Th17 cells.

Cui J(1), Hu Z(1), Jiang Y(1), Wang Y(1), Li C(1), Zhang S(1), Chen L(1), Zhang
Z(1), Yang D(1), Shen H(1), Zheng P(1), Qiu L(2), Lu Z(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Respiratory Diseases, Longhua Hospital, Shanghai University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, 200032, China.
(2)Institute of Respiratory Diseases, Longhua Hospital, Shanghai University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, 200032, China. Electronic address:
dr_qiulei@shutcm.edu.cn.
(3)Institute of Respiratory Diseases, Longhua Hospital, Shanghai University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, 200032, China. Electronic address:
Dr_luzh@shutcm.edu.cn.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Jiawei Yanghe Decoction (JWYHD) is a modified
version traditional Chinese medicine formula Yanghe Decoction which has been
used to treat various autoimmune diseases. However, the effect of JWYHD on
pulmonary sarcoidosis remains unclear.
AIM OF THE STUDY: This study aimed to determine the therapeutic efficacy and
potential mechanism of action of JWYHD in pulmonary sarcoidosis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A murine model of sarcoidosis was established by
intravenous injection of inactivated Propionibacterium acnes and mature
dendritic cells to assess the efficacy of JWYHD. Lung tissue mRNA sequencing was
conducted to identify the targets of JWYHD's action. Molecular docking verified
of the interaction between identified compounds and key targets.
RESULTS: JWYHD treatment alleviated the formation of granulomas in the lung
tissue of sarcoidosis model mice. JWYHD significantly attenuated the pulmonary
accumulation of macrophages and CD4+T lymphocytes in sarcoidosis mice, and
effectively suppressed the proportion of Th17 cells and the levels of IL-17A and
TNF-α in BALF, which are pivotal in the pathogenesis of granuloma formation and
progression. The therapeutic efficacy of JWYHD was found to be equivalent to
that of prednisone. RNA-seq revealed that JWYHD upregulated Nr1d1/2 expression
in the lung tissue. Nr1d1/2 is highly expressed in Th17 cells and regulates
their differentiation. The NR1D1/2 agonist SR9009 could inhibit Th17 cell
proportion and reduce the formation of pulmonary granuloma, exhibiting effects
similar to those of JWYHD. Molecular docking result showed that Cyclocephaloside
II, Epimedin B, Glycyrrhetic acid, Glycyrrhizic acid, Uralsaponin B, and
Uralsaponin U may be key compounds in JWYHD for the treatment of pulmonary
sarcoidosis, which had a strong binding ability for NR1D1/2.
CONCLUSIONS: JWYHD might exert a therapeutic benefit in pulmonary sarcoidosis
through upregulating NR1D1/2 and suppressing Th17 cells. NR1D1/2 might serve as
a therapeutic target for the treatment of pulmonary sarcoidosis.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2025.119372
PMID: 39826790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
