---
reference_id: "PMID:38891021"
title: Updates on Disease Mechanisms and Therapeutics for Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.
authors:
- Nguyen L
journal: Cells
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cells13110888
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Updates on Disease Mechanisms and Therapeutics for Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.
**Authors:** Nguyen L
**Journal:** Cells (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells13110888](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells13110888)

## Content

1. Cells. 2024 May 21;13(11):888. doi: 10.3390/cells13110888.

Updates on Disease Mechanisms and Therapeutics for Amyotrophic Lateral 
Sclerosis.

Nguyen L(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, College of Medicine, 
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.
(2)Center for NeuroGenetics, College of Medicine, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, College of Medicine, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.
(4)Genetics Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), or Lou Gehrig's disease, is a motor neuron 
disease. In ALS, upper and lower motor neurons in the brain and spinal cord 
progressively degenerate during the course of the disease, leading to the loss 
of the voluntary movement of the arms and legs. Since its first description in 
1869 by a French neurologist Jean-Martin Charcot, the scientific discoveries on 
ALS have increased our understanding of ALS genetics, pathology and mechanisms 
and provided novel therapeutic strategies. The goal of this review article is to 
provide a comprehensive summary of the recent findings on ALS mechanisms and 
related therapeutic strategies to the scientific audience. Several highlighted 
ALS research topics discussed in this article include the 2023 FDA approved drug 
for SOD1 ALS, the updated C9orf72 GGGGCC repeat-expansion-related mechanisms and 
therapeutic targets, TDP-43-mediated cryptic splicing and disease markers and 
diagnostic and therapeutic options offered by these recent discoveries.

DOI: 10.3390/cells13110888
PMCID: PMC11172142
PMID: 38891021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest.