---
reference_id: "PMID:39095059"
title: O-glycosylation of IgA1 and the pathogenesis of an autoimmune disease IgA nephropathy.
authors:
- Novak J
- King RG
- Yother J
- Renfrow MB
- Green TJ
journal: Glycobiology
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwae060
keywords:
- Humans
- "Glomerulonephritis, IGA/immunology, metabolism, pathology"
- Glycosylation
- "Immunoglobulin A/immunology, metabolism"
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- Animals
content_type: abstract_only
---

# O-glycosylation of IgA1 and the pathogenesis of an autoimmune disease IgA nephropathy.
**Authors:** Novak J, King RG, Yother J, Renfrow MB, Green TJ
**Journal:** Glycobiology (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/glycob/cwae060](https://doi.org/10.1093/glycob/cwae060)

## Content

1. Glycobiology. 2024 Sep 30;34(11):cwae060. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwae060.

O-glycosylation of IgA1 and the pathogenesis of an autoimmune disease IgA
nephropathy.

Novak J(1), King RG(1), Yother J(1), Renfrow MB(2), Green TJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 845 19th
Street South, Birmingham, AL 35294, United States.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, 720 20th Street South, Birmingham, AL 35294, United States.

IgA nephropathy is a kidney disease characterized by deposition of immune
complexes containing abnormally O-glycosylated IgA1 in the glomeruli.
Specifically, some O-glycans are missing galactose that is normally β1,3-linked
to N-acetylgalactosamine of the core 1 glycans. These galactose-deficient IgA1
glycoforms are produced by IgA1-secreting cells due to a dysregulated expression
and activity of several glycosyltransferases. Galactose-deficient IgA1 in the
circulation of patients with IgA nephropathy is bound by IgG autoantibodies and
the resultant immune complexes can contain additional proteins, such as
complement C3. These complexes, if not removed from the circulation, can enter
the glomerular mesangium, activate the resident mesangial cells, and induce
glomerular injury. In this review, we briefly summarize clinical and
pathological features of IgA nephropathy, review normal and aberrant IgA1
O-glycosylation pathways, and discuss the origins and potential significance of
natural anti-glycan antibodies, namely those recognizing N-acetylgalactosamine.
We also discuss the features of autoantibodies specific for galactose-deficient
IgA1 and the characteristics of pathogenic immune complexes containing IgA1 and
IgG. In IgA nephropathy, kidneys are injured by IgA1-containing immune complexes
as innocent bystanders. Most patients with IgA nephropathy progress to kidney
failure and require dialysis or transplantation. Moreover, most patients after
transplantation experience a recurrent disease. Thus, a better understanding of
the pathogenetic mechanisms is needed to develop new disease-specific
treatments.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/glycob/cwae060
PMCID: PMC11442006
PMID: 39095059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
