---
reference_id: "PMID:1751370"
title: Diagnostic criteria and classification of clinical subtypes of adult T-cell leukaemia-lymphoma. A report from the Lymphoma Study Group (1984-87).
authors:
- Shimoyama M
journal: Br J Haematol
year: '1991'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.1991.tb08051.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic criteria and classification of clinical subtypes of adult T-cell leukaemia-lymphoma. A report from the Lymphoma Study Group (1984-87).
**Authors:** Shimoyama M
**Journal:** Br J Haematol (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2141.1991.tb08051.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2141.1991.tb08051.x)

## Content

1. Br J Haematol. 1991 Nov;79(3):428-37. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.1991.tb08051.x.

Diagnostic criteria and classification of clinical subtypes of adult T-cell 
leukaemia-lymphoma. A report from the Lymphoma Study Group (1984-87).

Shimoyama M(1).

Author information:
(1)Haematology-Oncology and Medical Oncology Division, National Cancer Center 
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

The following diagnostic criteria are proposed to classify four clinical 
subtypes of HTLV-1 associated adult T-cell leukaemia-lymphoma (ATL): (1) 
Smouldering type, 5% or more abnormal lymphocytes of T-cell nature in PB, normal 
lymphocyte level (less than 4 x 10(9)/l), no hypercalcaemia (corrected calcium 
level less than 2.74 mmol/l), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) value of up to 1.5 x 
the normal upper limit, no lymphadenopathy, no involvement of liver, spleen, 
central nervous system (CNS), bone and gastrointestinal tract, and neither 
ascites nor pleural effusion. Skin and pulmonary lesion(s) may be present. In 
case of less than 5% abnormal T-lymphocytes in PB, at least one of 
histologically-proven skin and pulmonary lesions should be present. (2) Chronic 
type, absolute lymphocytosis (4 x 10(9)/l or more) with T-lymphocytosis more 
than 3.5 x 10(9)/l, LDH value up to twice the normal upper limit, no 
hypercalcaemia, no involvement of CNS, bone and gastrointestinal tract, and 
neither ascites nor pleural effusion. Lymphadenopathy and involvement of liver, 
spleen, skin, and lung may be present, and 5% or more abnormal T-lymphocytes are 
seen in PB in most cases . (3) Lymphoma type, no lymphocytosis, 1% or less 
abnormal T-lymphocytes, and histologically-proven lymphadenopathy with or 
without extranodal lesions. (4) Acute type, remaining ATL patients who have 
usually leukaemic manifestation and tumour lesions, but are not classified as 
any of the three other types. A total of 818 ATL patients with a mean age of 57 
years, newly diagnosed from 1983 to 1987, were analysed by this criteria. There 
were 448 males and 370 females, and 253 were still alive with a median follow-up 
time of 13.3 months from diagnosis, while 565 were dead with a median survival 
time (MST) of 5.4 months. MST was 6.2 months for acute type, 10.2 months for 
lymphoma type, 24.3 months for chronic type, and not yet reached for smouldering 
type. Projected 2- and 4-year survival rates were 16.7% and 5.0% for acute type, 
21.3% and 5.7% for lymphoma type, 52.4% and 26.9% for chronic type, 77.7% and 
62.8% for smouldering type, respectively. Distinct clinical features and 
laboratory findings of each clinical subtype are described.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.1991.tb08051.x
PMID: 1751370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]