---
reference_id: "PMID:26541895"
title: Targeted exome sequencing profiles genetic alterations in leiomyosarcoma.
authors:
- Agaram NP
- Zhang L
- LeLoarer F
- Silk T
- Sung YS
- Scott SN
- Kuk D
- Qin LX
- Berger MF
- Antonescu CR
- Singer S
journal: Genes Chromosomes Cancer
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/gcc.22318
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Exome
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genetic Variation
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- "Leiomyosarcoma/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA/methods"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeted exome sequencing profiles genetic alterations in leiomyosarcoma.
**Authors:** Agaram NP, Zhang L, LeLoarer F, Silk T, Sung YS, Scott SN, Kuk D, Qin LX, Berger MF, Antonescu CR, Singer S
**Journal:** Genes Chromosomes Cancer (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/gcc.22318](https://doi.org/10.1002/gcc.22318)

## Content

1. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2016 Feb;55(2):124-30. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22318. Epub
2015 Nov 6.

Targeted exome sequencing profiles genetic alterations in leiomyosarcoma.

Agaram NP(1), Zhang L(1), LeLoarer F(1), Silk T(2), Sung YS(1), Scott SN(1), Kuk
D(3), Qin LX(3), Berger MF(1)(4), Antonescu CR(1), Singer S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
NY.
(2)Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY.
(4)Marie-Josée and Henry R. Kravis Center for Molecular Oncology, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY.

Leiomyosarcoma (LMS) belongs to the class of genetically complex sarcomas and
shows numerous, often non-recurrent chromosomal imbalances and aberrations. We
investigated a group of LMS using NGS platform to identify recurrent genetic
abnormalities and possible therapeutic targets. Targeted exome sequencing of 230
cancer-associated genes was performed on 35 primary soft tissue and visceral
(extra-uterine) LMS. Sequence data were analyzed to identify single nucleotide
variants, small insertions/deletions (indels), and copy number alterations. Key
alterations were further investigated using FISH assay. The study group included
patients with median age of 64 years and median tumor size of 7 cm. The primary
sites included retroperitoneal/intra-abdominal, extremity, truncal, and
visceral. Thirty-one tumors were high grade LMS, while four were low grade.
Losses of chromosomal regions involving key tumor suppressor genes PTEN (10q),
RB1 (13q), CDH1 (16q), and TP53 (17p) were the most frequent genetic events.
Gains mainly involved chromosome regions 17p11.2 (MYOCD) and 15q25-26 (IGF1R).
The most frequent mutations were identified in the TP53 gene in 13 of 35 (37%)
cases. FISH analysis showed amplification of the myocardin (MYOCD) gene in 5 of
25 (20%) cases analyzed. None of the four low grade LMS showed losses or
mutations of PTEN or TP53 genes. Genetic complexity is the hallmark of LMS with
losses of important tumor suppressor genes being a common feature. MYOCD, a key
gene associated with smooth muscle differentiation, is amplified in a subset of
both retroperitoneal and extremity LMS. Further studies are necessary to
investigate the significance of gains/amplifications in the development of these
tumors.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/gcc.22318
PMCID: PMC4715662
PMID: 26541895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
