---
reference_id: "PMID:19541609"
title: mTOR and HIF-1alpha-mediated tumor metabolism in an LKB1 mouse model of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.
authors:
- Shackelford DB
- Vasquez DS
- Corbeil J
- Wu S
- Leblanc M
- Wu CL
- Vera DR
- Shaw RJ
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0900465106
content_type: abstract_only
---

# mTOR and HIF-1alpha-mediated tumor metabolism in an LKB1 mouse model of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.
**Authors:** Shackelford DB, Vasquez DS, Corbeil J, Wu S, Leblanc M, Wu CL, Vera DR, Shaw RJ
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0900465106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0900465106)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Jul 7;106(27):11137-42. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0900465106. Epub 2009 Jun 18.

mTOR and HIF-1alpha-mediated tumor metabolism in an LKB1 mouse model of 
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.

Shackelford DB(1), Vasquez DS, Corbeil J, Wu S, Leblanc M, Wu CL, Vera DR, Shaw 
RJ.

Author information:
(1)Dulbecco Center for Cancer Research, The Salk Institute for Biological 
Studies, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is a familial cancer disorder due to inherited loss 
of function mutations in the LKB1/ STK11 serine/threonine kinase. PJS patients 
develop gastrointestinal hamartomas with 100% penetrance often in the second 
decade of life, and demonstrate an increased predisposition toward the 
development of a number of additional malignancies. Among mitogenic signaling 
pathways, the mammalian-target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) pathway is 
hyperactivated in tissues and tumors derived from LKB1-deficient mice. 
Consistent with a central role for mTORC1 in these tumors, rapamycin as a single 
agent results in a dramatic suppression of preexisting GI polyps in LKB1+/- 
mice. However, the key targets of mTORC1 in LKB1-deficient tumors remain 
unknown. We demonstrate here that these polyps, and LKB1- and AMPK-deficient 
mouse embryonic fibroblasts, show dramatic up-regulation of the HIF-1alpha 
transcription factor and its downstream transcriptional targets in an 
rapamycin-suppressible manner. The HIF-1alpha targets hexokinase II and Glut1 
are up-regulated in these polyps, and using FDG-PET, we demonstrate that LKB1+/- 
mice show increased glucose utilization in focal regions of their GI tract 
corresponding to these gastrointestinal hamartomas. Importantly, we demonstrate 
that polyps from human Peutz-Jeghers patients similarly exhibit up-regulated 
mTORC1 signaling, HIF-1alpha, and GLUT1 levels. Furthermore, like HIF-1alpha and 
its target genes, the FDG-PET signal in the GI tract of these mice is abolished 
by rapamycin treatment. These findings suggest a number of therapeutic 
modalities for the treatment and detection of hamartomas in PJS patients, and 
potential for the screening and treatment of the 30% of sporadic human lung 
cancers bearing LKB1 mutations.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0900465106
PMCID: PMC2708689
PMID: 19541609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.