---
reference_id: "PMID:39814448"
title: Epidemiology of Antisynthetase Syndrome and Risk of Malignancy in a Population-Based Cohort (1998-2019).
authors:
- Coffey CM
- Hulshizer CA
- Crowson CS
- Ryu JH
- Ernste FC
journal: J Rheumatol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3899/jrheum.2024-0945
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- Neoplasms/epidemiology
- "Myositis/epidemiology, complications"
- Retrospective Studies
- Incidence
- Prevalence
- Minnesota/epidemiology
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of Antisynthetase Syndrome and Risk of Malignancy in a Population-Based Cohort (1998-2019).
**Authors:** Coffey CM, Hulshizer CA, Crowson CS, Ryu JH, Ernste FC
**Journal:** J Rheumatol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3899/jrheum.2024-0945](https://doi.org/10.3899/jrheum.2024-0945)

## Content

1. J Rheumatol. 2025 Mar 1;52(3):280-284. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.2024-0945.

Epidemiology of Antisynthetase Syndrome and Risk of Malignancy in a 
Population-Based Cohort (1998-2019).

Coffey CM(1), Hulshizer CA(2), Crowson CS(3), Ryu JH(4), Ernste FC(5).

Author information:
(1)C.M. Coffey, MD, Division of Rheumatology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine 
and Science, and Rheumatology Section, Minneapolis Veterans Affairs Medical 
Center, Minneapolis; Caitrin.coffey@va.gov.
(2)C.A. Hulshizer, BA, Division of Clinical Trials and Biostatistics, Department 
of Quantitative Health Sciences, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science, 
Rochester.
(3)C.S. Crowson, PhD, Division of Rheumatology, and Division of Clinical Trials 
and Biostatistics, Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Mayo Clinic 
College of Medicine and Science, Rochester.
(4)J.H. Ryu, MD, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Mayo Clinic 
College of Medicine and Science, Rochester.
(5)F.C. Ernste, MD, Division of Rheumatology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine 
and Science, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

Erratum in
    J Rheumatol. 2025 Jun 1;52(6):627. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.2024-0945.C1.

OBJECTIVE: Population-based epidemiology studies about antisynthetase syndrome 
(ASS) are lacking. Our aims were to determine the incidence and prevalence of 
ASS and assess malignancy risk among patients following ASS diagnosis.
METHODS: A retrospective, population-based cohort of adults with incident ASS 
residing in Olmsted County, Minnesota, in 1998-2019, was assembled. Fulfillment 
of Solomon classification criteria for ASS and clinical data were collected by 
manual chart review. Patients were followed until death, migration from the 
area, or December 31, 2019. Malignancy was defined by physician diagnosis in the 
medical record. Incidence rate was age- and sex-adjusted to the 2010 US White 
population. Point prevalence rate was obtained on January 1, 2015.
RESULTS: Thirteen patients with ASS were identified (7 [54%] female, 13 [100%] 
White, median age 44.9 [IQR 41.9-58.3] years). The age- and sex-adjusted 
incidence of ASS was 0.56 (95% CI 0.25-0.87) per 100,000 population. Incidence 
was highest in the 50-59 age group. Age- and sex-adjusted prevalence was 9.21 
per 100,000 (95% CI 3.44-14.98). Two of 13 (15%) were diagnosed with malignancy 
within the follow-up interval and none within 3 years of ASS diagnosis. At 
median 11.9 (IQR 7.0-13.4) years of follow-up, 12/13 (92%) of patients were 
alive.
CONCLUSION: ASS is rare, with an incidence of 0.56 per 100,000 population and 
prevalence of 9.21 per 100,000. In this cohort, incidence was similar between 
male and female individuals, and was highest in persons aged 50-59 years. None 
of the patients developed malignancy within 3 years of ASS diagnosis.

Copyright © 2025 by the Journal of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.3899/jrheum.2024-0945
PMCID: PMC11882374
PMID: 39814448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.